SmallAnimal
Toxicology
Essentials
Robert H. Poppenga
and Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant
ebsi
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Small Animal
Toxicology
Essentials
Small
Animal
Toxicology
Essentials
Editors
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, DABVT, PhD
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inic., Publication1
This edition first published 2011 @ 2011 by John Wiley
and are not intended and should not be relied upon as
and Sons, Inc.
recommending or promoting a specific method,
diagnosis, or treatment by practitioners for any
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons,
particular patient. The publisher and the author make no
formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
representations or warranties with respect to the
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work
Publishing
and specifically disclaim all warranties, including
without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a
Registered office:
John Wiley & Sons Ltd,The Atrium,
particular purpose. In view of ongoing research,
Southern Gate, Chichester, West
equipment modifications, changes in governmental
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
regulations, and the constant fow of information
relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices,
Editorial offices:
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa
the reader is urged to review and evaluate the
50014-8300, USA
information provided in the package insert or
The Atrium, Southem Gate,
instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for,
Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
among other things, any changes in the instructions or
8SQ, UK
 indication of usage and for added wamings and
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford,
precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist
0X4 2DQ, UK
where appropriate. The fact that an organization or
Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer
potential source of further information does not mean
services and for information about how to apply for
that the author or the publisher endorses the information
perrmission to reuse the copyright material in this book
the organization or Website may provide or
please see our website at www.wiley.com/
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should
wiley-blackwell.
be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work rmay
have changed or disappeared between when this work
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal
was written and when it is read. No warranty may be
use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
created or extended by any promotional statements for
granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base
this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be
fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
liable for any damages arising herefrom.
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
by CCC, a separate system of payments has been
Small animal toxicology essentials / editors,
arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional
Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
Reporting Service are ISBN-13:
p. ; cm.
978-0-8138-1538-1/2011.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1538-1 (pbk. : alk.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their
paper) 1. Veterinary toxicology.  2. Pet
products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
 medicine. I. Poppenga, Robert H. II. Gwaltney-
names and product names used in this book are trade
Brant, Sharon.
names, service marks, trademarks or registered
[DNLM:
1. Poisoning-therapy.
2.Poisoning-
 trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is
veterinary. 3. Pets. SF 757.5]
not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in
SF757.5.S63 2011
this book. This publication is designed to provide
636.089'59—dc22
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
2010049403
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding
that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
 professional services. If professional advice or other
British Library
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Set in 9.5/12 pt Times by Toppan Best-set Premedia
Limited
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general
scientific research, understanding, and discussion only
12011
Dedication
A special thank-you to my wonderful family (Amy, Mia, and Zoe), to all the pets
who depend on us to provide them with a safe and healthy environment, and to
 all of the dedicated veterinary technicians who enrich the veterinary profession.
-Robert H.Poppenga
This book is dedicated to my husband, Tom Brant, who provides unwavering
support to all of my endeavors.
-Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
Preface
xi
Contributors
xii
Section 1: Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
3
General Toxicologic Principles
5
Sharon Gwattney-Brant and Robert H.Poppenga
2
Incidence of Poisoning in Small Animals
17
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
Toxicology Information Resources
21
Sharon Gwatney-Brant
Taking a Toxicologic History
27
Carrie Lohmeyer
Essential Calculations
33
Camille DeClementi
6
Initial Management of Acute Intoxications
43
Elisa Petrollini-Rogers and Bridget McNally
7
Decontamination Prmcedures
51
Lisa Murphy
8
Antidotes
57
Tina Wismer
9
Investigating Fatal Suspected Poisonings
71
Safdar A.Khan
10
 Toxicologic Testing and Using Diagnostic Laboratories
77
Lisa Murphy
Section 2: A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
81
11
Nervous System
8
Tina Wismer
12
Cardiovascular System
68
Karla R.Smith
13
Pulmonary Systerm
95
John A.Pickrell,Kiran Dhakal,and Sharon Gwattney-Brant
vii
vili
Contents
14
Hepatobiliary System
99
Sharon Gwattney-Brant
15
Urinary System
105
Erin Freed
16
Other Systems
109
Sharon Gwattney-Brant
Section 3:
Specific Toxicants
115
17
Rodenticides
117
Eric Dunayer
18
Insecticides
127
Petra A. Votmer
19
Other Pesticides
137
Robert H. Poppenga
20
Plants
147
Joanna Delaporte and Charlotte Means
21
 Dietary Supplements and Herbs
161
Charlotte Means
22
Zootoxins
171
Tamara Foss
23
Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
189
Joyce Eisold and MichelleMostrom
24
Food-Associated Intoxications
207
MindyBough
25
 Drugs of Abuse
221
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
26
OTC Drugs
231
Mary M.Schell and Sharon Gwattney-Brant
27
Prescription Drugs
241
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
28
Household and Industrial Toxicants
253
Rhian Cope
29
 Metals and Minerals
273
Robert H. Poppenga
30
Miscellaneous Toxicants
285
Michelle Mostrom
Appendices
301
Appendix 1: Drugs Used in Toxicology
303
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
Contents
1x
Appendix 2: Additional Toxic Plants and Associated System-Based Effects
311
JoannaDetaporte andCharlotteMeans
Appendix 3: Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
321
JoannaDetaporteandCharlotteMeans
Index
329
This book is accompanied by a companion website at www.wiley.com/go/poppenga.
The website includes review questions and answers and color images available for download in PowerPoint.
preface
As vital mermbers of their veterinary medical teams, vet-
for you. We have enlisted the help of veterinary toxicolo-
erinary technicians are routinely involved in managing
gists,emergency service technicians,and animal poison
potential or real animal poisonings in several ways. In
control specialists to help make this textbook as useful as
many cases, veterinary technicians are asked for informa-
possible. Our focus is on pet animals and the most common
tion about the safety of a product, food, orplant. They may
poisons that they are likely to encounter. Because of their
be the first to talk to a distraught client on the telephone
inquisitive natures, pets may be exposed to a wide variety
and make initial decisions regarding the severity of a situ-
of agents with varying levels of toxicity. However, only a
 ation and the need for immediate action. They may perform
small fraction of exposures have the potential to cause
the initial triage of a poisoned animal or initiate decon-
clinically significant effects, and an even smaller fraction
tamination procedures when a poisoned patient is pre-
 of exposures require extensive medical intervention. In
sented to a veterinary hospital. They may provide initial
order to assist in differentiating between significant and
stabilization of a critically ill patient or collect samples to
insignificant exposures, it is imperative that veterinary
submit to a laboratory for confirmation of exposure or
technicians have a handy resource available to provide
intoxication. For all of these reasons, veterinary techni-
information and guidance when needed. This is our objec-
cians need to have a resource to help them in these tasks.
tive in forrmulating and compiling Small Animal Toxicology
Although several textbooks pertaining to veterinary toxi-
Essentiats.
cology have been published over the last several years,
none were specifically targeted to veterinary technicians.
Robert H. Poppenga
Small Animal Toxicology Essentials is a valuable resource
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
Xi
ontributors
Mindy Bough, CVT, BA
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Veterinary Information Network
Urbana, IL, USA
Mahomet, IL, USA
Rhian Cope, BVSc, BSc, PhD, DABT
Safdar A. Khan, DVM, PhD, DABVT
ERMA New Zealand
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
New Zealand
Urbana, IL, USA
Camille DeClementi, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Carrie Lohmeyer, CVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Urbana, IL, USA
 Joanna Delaporte, CVT
Bridget McNally, CVT, VTS
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
University of Pennsylvania
Urbana, IL, USA
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Kiran Dhakal
Irina Meadows, DVM, DABT
 Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology
ASPCA Animal Poison Contrml Center
The University of Iowa
Urbana, IL, USA
Iowa City, Iowa, USA
Charlotte Means, DVM, MLIS, DABVT, DABT
Eric Dunayer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
St. Matthews University School of Veterinary Medicine
Urbana, IL, USA
Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands
Michelle Mostrom, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Joyce Eisold, DVM
North Dakota State University
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Fargo, ND, USA
Urbana, IL, USA
Lisa Murphy, DVM, DABT
Tamara Foss, CVT
University of Pennsylvania
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Kennett Square, PA
Urbana, IL, USA
Elisa Petrollini-Rogers, CVT, VTS
Erin Freed, CVT
University of Pennsylvania
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Urbana, IL, USA
John Pickrell, DVM, PhD, DABT
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA
xii
xiv
Contributors
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, DABVT, PhD
Petra A. Volmer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
CAHFS Toxicology Laboratory
Summit VetPharm
Davis, CA, USA
Champaign, IL, USA
Mary M. Schell, DVM, DABT, DABVT
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABT, DABVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Urbana, IL, USA
Karla R. Smith, DVM
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Section
Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology
General Toxicologic Principles
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant and Robert H. Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
organism by its own inherent qualities (toxicity) without
 Toxicology is the study of the nature, effects, and detection
acting mechanically and irrespective of temperature.
of poisons and the treatment of poisoning. Although the
broad definition of toxicology encompasses "clinical"
Toxin
toxicology, for the purposes of this textbook, we define
A poisonous material that is synthesized or derived from
clinical toxicology as the diagnosis and treatment of the
an animal or plant; also referred to as a biotoxin. Zootox-
poisoned patient. Many of the basic principles of toxicol-
ins, bacterial toxins, and phyto (or plant) toxins are sub-
ogy, such as the inherent toxicity of various forms of a
categories of toxins.
chermical, variations in dose-response curves, different
mechanisms of toxic action, variations in individual and
Toxicity
species sensitivities to chemicals, and how differences in
The poisonous characteristics of a substance; the degree
kinetics of chemicals (sometimes referred to as "toxicoki-
to which something is poisonous. Perhaps the best known
 netics") need to be applied to the successful diagnosis and
measure of toxicity of a chemical is its lethal dose or LDg
treatment of poisoning. In addition, in many instances, in
(Table 1.1).
clinical toxicology there is a need for the application of
good critical care and medical practices (e.g-, stabilizing,
Acute Toxicity
 monitoring, and treating a patient) to achieve a successful
outcome.
Intoxication that results from the effects of a single dose
 or multiple doses of a toxicant given during a 24-hour
DEFINITIONS
period (e.g., dog got into a box of chocolates or dog was
All special areas of study have unique terminology that is
left in a room contaminated by chemical fumes ovemight).
irmportant to master in order to fully appreciate the disci-
The LDso of a chermical is most often deterrmined during
pline. The following definitions provide some needed ter-
acute exposure studies in which a single dose ofa chemical
minology in order to more effectively utilize this
is given.
textbook.
Subacute Toxicity
Toxicant
Exposure to multiple doses of a toxin or toxicant given
A poison or poisonous agent; an intoxicant; any solid,
    o n u t n  
liquid or gas that, when introduced into or applied to the
(e.g-, animal owner administers ibuprofen to dog for
body, can interfere with the life processes of cells or the
a week)
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
5
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Table 1.1. Classification scheme for relative
or a dosage; its meaning is dependent on the context of
toxicity
its use.
Classification
Toxicity (LDso in mg/kg
Parts per million (ppm), parts per billion (ppb), and
body weight)
parts per trillion (ppt) are the most cormmonly used terms
to describe very small amounts of contaminants in our
Extremely toxic
<1mg/kg
Highly toxic
1 to 50mg/kg
amount of one material in a larger amount of another mate-
Moderately toxic
50 to 500 mg/kg
rial; for example, the weight of a toxic chemical in a
0.5 to 5.0g/kg
certain weight of food. The following example might help
Slightly toxic
Practically nontoxic
5 to 15g/kg
conceptually. If you divide a pie equally into 10 pieces,
each piece would be one part per ten or one-tenth of the
Relatively harmless
>15g/kg
total pie. If, instead, you cut this pie into a million pieces,
each piece would be very small and would represent a
millionth of the total pie or one part per million of the
Subchronic Toxicity
original pie. If you cut each of these million pieces into a
 Repeated or continuous exposures to toxicants for a dura-
thousand little pieces, each of these new pieces would be
tion of 1 to 3 months (e.g-, patient on weekly chemo-
one part per billion of the original pie. To give you an idea
therapy for cancer).
of how litle this would be, a pinch of salt in ten tons of
potato chips is also one part (salt) per billion parts (chips).
Chronic Toxicity
In the pie example, the pieces of the pie are made up of
Intoxication that results from prmolonged exposure, with the
the same material as the whole. However, if there were a
duration of exposure being 3 months or longer (e.g-,
contarminant in the pie at a level of one part per billion,
repeated exposure of a cat to low levels of lead as a result
one of these invisible pieces of pie would be made up of
of environmental contamination and grooming of contami-
the contaminant and the other 999,999,999 pieces would
nated paws or hair).
be pure pie. Similarly, one part per billion of an impurity
in a biological or environmental sample represents a tiny
Dose
fraction of the total amount of the sample (e.g., water,
The quantity of drug or toxicant administered at one time
food, whole blood, urine, or tissue).
irrespective of body weight.
Hazard (Risk)
Dosage
The likelihood that a chemical will cause harm under
The regimen goverming the size, amount, frequency, and
certain conditions. The hazard can vary forthe same chem-
number of doses of a therapeutic agent to be administered
ical. For example, the hazard or risk of intoxication is
to a patient.
greater if a potentially toxic product or chermical is not
stored properly and thereby the chance for accidental
Lethal Dose (LD)
exposure is increased due to greater accessibility.
The lowest dose that causes death. An LD can be expressed
Other relevant definitions are provided below (ie.,toxic
as a percentage of individuals dying (e.g, an LDjo, or,
dose, effective dose, margin of safety).
most commonly, an LDso)
CLASSIFICATION OF TOXICANTS
Median Lethal Dose (LDso)
Toxins and toxicants are classified in a variety of ways; no
The quantity of an agent that will kill 50% of the test
one way is better than another and a combination of clas-
subjects to which it is administered.
sification schemes is used in this textbook. Poisons can be
classified based upon the organ systems that are primarily
udd
affected (e.g-, hepatotoxicants, neurotoxicants, nephro-
 Abbreviation for parts per million; a weight-for-weight 
toxicants, etc.). The lirmitation to this scheme is that many
(w/w) concentration equal to 1 mg/kg or 1g/tonne. Used
toxins or toxicants affect more than one organ system.
most commonly to express the concentration of toxicants
Alternatively, poisons can be classified based upon their
or trace elerments in water, feeds, solvents, and tissues.
chermical structure. For example, alkaloids are cyclic com-
Note that mg/kg can refer to either a concentration
 pounds that contain a nitrogen molecule within the ring.
Chapter 1/ General Toxicologic Principles
Toxic alkaloids are common in plants (e.g-, nicotine in
tissues, such as nervous tissue, which has much more
Nicotiana spp. or coniine in Conium maculatum). A third
limited regenerative capacity. However, it is irmportant to
classification scheme categorizes poisons according to
point out that even highly regenerative tissues such as the
their use or location. For example, pesticides are subcat-
liver can suffer irreversible damage, particularly as a result
egorized into rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides, fungi-
of fibrosis in response to chemically induced damage.
cides, avicides, parasiticides, etc. based upon the type of
target organism for which they were developed. Poison
Local vs. Systemic Effects
categories based upon location might include those found
Local effects of a chemical are those that typically occur
in hormes, yards, or industrial sites. Within each of these
at the site of first contact between the biological system
categories are chemically diverse compounds with quite
and the chemical. Good examples of chemicals with pri-
distinct target organs or mechanisrms of toxic action.
marily local effects include acid and alkali corrosives.
Finally, poisons can also be categorized according to their
Systemic effects require the absorption and distribution of
mechanism of toxic action. For example, some poisons
a chemical to a distant site where damage occurs. Most
cause damage via free radical formation or lipid permoxida-
chemicals discussed in this textbook have systemic effects.
tion of cellular membranes and others inhibit protein
It is possible for some chemicals to have both local and
synthesis.
systermic effects. A good example of this occurs following
exposure to iron salts. The reactivity of iron damages
SPECTRUM OF UNDESIRED EFFECTS
mucosal cells along the gastrointestinal tract; systemic
Toxicants cause damage through a variety of rmechanisms
absorption of iron results in more systemic and widespread
including altering cell and organelle membrane integrity,
damage.
altering cell energy production, inhibiting protein synthe-
sis or enzyme activity, or damaging DNA (Osweiler 1996).
INTERACTION OF CHEMICALS
Other undesired effects that need to be considered are
Because animals and people are exposed to multiple chem-
discussed below.
icals at any given time, it is necessary to consider how
different chemicals might interact with each other to
Idiosyncratic Reactions
modify toxic responses. Chemical interactions occur by a
Idiosyncratic reactions to chemicals are defined as geneti-
number of mechanisms that can include alterations of
cally deterrmined abnormal reactivity to a chemical (Eaton
absorption, biotransformation, protein binding, orelimina-
and Gilbert 2008). Most commonly, this is caused by an
 tion (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). An example of two chemi-
cals interacting to affect toxicity of one involves the
 toxicant frorm being processed properly. In some cases, the 
combination of piperonyl butoxide and pyrethrin/
reason for an idiosyncratic reaction is unknown. See the
pyrethroid insecticides. Piperonyl butoxide interferes with
discussion on Genetic Polymorphisms below.
the metabolism, and therefore the detoxification, of the
insecticides (Volmer 2004).
Immediate vs. Delayed Reactions
In general, types of interactions between chemicals that
Immediate effects can be defined as those that occur
can infuence the toxicity of one or more of the chemicals
rapidly after a single exposure to a chemical. In contrast,
are classified as additive, synergistic, or antagonistic.
delayed toxic effects are those that occur after some period
Additive interaction means the effect of two chemicals is
of time (often, but not always, following repeated expo-
equal to the sum of the effect of the two chemicals taken
sures). For example, many chemicals can induce cancer,
separately (e.g-, 2 + 3 = 5). This is usually due to the two
but only after a long latency period of years (Osweiler
chemicals acting on the body in the same way. An example
1996) (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). The focus of this textbook
of additive toxicity would be exposure to two different
is on immediate adverse effects.
organophosphorus insecticides at the same time. Both
have the same mechanism of toxic action (ie., inhibition
Reversible vs. Irreversible Damage
of acetylcholinesterase activity). Synergistic interaction
If a chemical damages a tissue, the ability of that tissue to
means that the effect of two chemicals taken together is
regenerate largely determines whether the effect is revers-
 greater than the sum of their separate effect at the same
ible or irreversible. Tissues such as the gastrointestinal
doses (e.g-, 2 + 2=20). One example of synergism is
tract and the liver, which have high regenerative capabili-
 simultaneous exposure to the hepatotoxicants ethanol and
ties, are less likely to suffer irreversible damage than other
carbon tetrachloride. In this case the damage to the liver
8
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
is greater than that expected from summing the toxicities
important factors that must be considered in determining
of each individual chemical. Antagonistic interaction
whether a toxicosis will develop are those surrounding the
means that the effect of two chemicals is less than the sum
introduction of toxicant to host: the exposure. Without an
of the effect of the individual chemicals (e.g., 4 + 6 = 8).
exposure to a poison, there will be no poisoning, so it is
This can be due to the second chermical increasing the
important to understand the characteristics of exposures to
excretion of the first or perhaps as a result of the first
toxicants that help to determine whether a toxicosis will
directly blocking the toxic actions of the second. Antago-
develop.
nism forms the basis for many antidotal drugs. For
example, atropine blocks cholinergic receptors that are
stimulated following exposure to organophosphorus or
Route and Site of Exposure
carbamate insecticides.
When a poisoning occurs, most people autormatically
One other term, potentiation, is used to describe chemi-
assume that the exposure was via ingestion (gastrointesti-
cal interactions. Potentiation occurs when one substance
nal tract), and, indeed, the gastrointestinal tract is the site
does not have a toxic effect on a certain organ or system
of exposure for the majority of toxicoses dealt with in a
but, when added to another chemical, makes the second
veterinary setting. However, exposures to toxicants can
chemical much more toxic (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). For
occur via other routes, including inhalation (lungs), trans-
example, isopropanol is not hepatotoxic. However, when
dermal (skin), injection, ocular, and other minor parenteral
combined with carbon tetrachloride, the hepatoxicity of
routes (intramammary, etc.) Toxicants injected intrave-
carbon tetrachloride is greatly enhanced.
nously produce the most rapid response, with inhalation,
Finally, tolerance is another term worth noting. It is
intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, intramuscular, intradermal,
defined as the state of decreased responsiveness to the
 oral, and dermal following in descending order of speed
toxic effect of a chemical as a result of prior exposure to
of response (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). Not all poisons are
that chemical or to a structurally related chemical (Eaton
toxic by all routes of exposure; in fact most toxicants have
and Gilbert 2008). Tolerance can occur either as a result
a narrow range of routes by which they can gain access to
of a decreased amount of a chemical reaching its site of
the body. For instance, elemental mercury (quicksilver) is
toxic action or as a result of reduced responsiveness of a
virtually nontoxic by dermal or oral routes; however, inha-
target to the chemical. The former can occur, for example,
lation of the vapors can result in respiratory irritation as
when a chemical induces metabolic enzymes in the liver
well as systemic absorption of mercury vapors via the
that results in enhanced metabolism and detoxification of
lungs, which can, over time, result in central nervous
that chemical with subsequent exposures. The latter can
system dysfunction from mercury toxicosis (Merrill et al.
occur as a result of down-regulation of receptor numbers
2008).
for chermicals that cause adverse effects due to receptor
stimulation.
Duration and Frequency of Exposure
Some toxicants can cause clinical effects with a single
CHARACTERISTICS OF EXPOSURE
exposure, but others may require repeated exposures over
Every day, animals (including humans) are exposed to
time before a toxicosis develops; the clinical syndromes
poisons in the air they breathe, the food they eat, and the
of each of these types of exposures may be quite different.
water they drink. Even agents necessary for life such as
In small animal medicine, most toxicoses that present to
oxygen, water, and sodium can be toxic under certain
the veterinary hospital are acute because they are most
circumstances. The fact that we don't all develop signs of
often due to a single exposure to a toxicant.
poisoning on a daily basis underscores the basic concept
There can be significant differences between clinical
of toxicology: the dose makes the poison. However, many
syndromes demonstrated by patients, depending on
factors are involved in determining whether a sufficient
whether the exposure was acute or chronic. For example,
dose of a poison reaches its site of action in order to invoke
acute arsenic toxicosis causes severe gastrointestinal hem-
a toxicosis. Agent factors to consider include the toxicant,
orrhage, shock, and, often, death in dogs, whereas chronic
its physical properties (ie., liquid vs. solid vs. gas, pH,
toxicosis is expected to cause renal failure.
tc.), its chemical structure, and its stability or reactivity.
The frequency of exposure also can dictate the degree
Host factors to consider include species and/or breed of
and severity of a toxicosis. For instance, a cat given 10 mg/
animal, age, weight, and general health status. The most
kg of aspirin on a daily basis will quickly develop a
Chapter 1/ General Toxicologic Principles
toxicosis, but if the same dose is given every third day,
25% 
toxicosis is unlikely.
20%
DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP
Responding
As mentioned, the basic concept in toxicology is *the dose
15%
 makes the poison." This concept is essential in assessing
the risks of exposures to toxicants, and it is often over-
10%
looked by the lay public, who typically perceives sub-
%
 stances as either “toxic" or “nontoxic." Vintually any
Sensitive
Normal
Resistant
5%
substance can be toxic under the appropriate circum-
stances. A veterinary technician who understands and is
0%
able to apply the basic concepts of toxicology to clinical
0
4
6
R
10
12
14
16
182
20
Dose
situations will be able to provide objective and rational
input into development of risk assessments for patient
Figure 1.1. llustration of dose-response curve.
exposures to potential toxicants.
The majority of responders fall into the "Normal"
The dose-response relationship is the correlation
range, but a small percentage of "Sensitive"
between the characteristics of the exposure with the spec-
individuals will respond at lower doses and
 trum of toxic effects that a particular toxicant can produce.
another small percentage of "Resistant"
Knowing the dose-response relationship allows us to
individuals will not respond until the dose is
 predict what type of reaction might be expected frorm a
much higher.
potential exposure. For example, methylxanthines in choc-
olate can cause serious clinical effects if sufficient amounts
for these individual variations will be discussed later in
 are ingested (Gwaltney-Brant 2001). A patient ingesting
the chapter.
chocolate equal to 5mg/kg of methylxanthines is not
expected to have any serious clinical prmblems, but a
Therapeutic Index
dosage of 50mg/kg could put the dog at risk for serious
Medications provide an excellent example of the dose-
cardiovascular effects.
response relationship. If too small a dose of medication
There are two components to the dose-response rela-
is taken, it will not have the desired therapeutic effect,
tionship: the population component and the individual
and if too high a dose is taken, signs of toxicosis may
component. Most dose-response relationships are made by
be seen. The goal is to find a dose that is effective and
 grouping the responses of individuals to develop a popula-
yet carries a low risk of intoxication. When comparing
tion dose-response curve. As with all statistical studies of
the relative safety of two similar drugs, a measurement
 populations, the curve is bell-shaped, and the majority of
called the fherapeutic index is often used. This index is
 individuals (the “normal' population) fall underthe middle
a ratio of the dose known to produce a toxic effect in
area of the curve. However, there are always individuals
50% of the population (TDso) to the dose known to
on the lower or upper limits of the curve (i.e., outliers),
produce a desirable therapeutic dose in 50% of the popu-
meaning they are more or less sensitive, respectively, to
lation (EDso) (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). The larger the
the toxicant and they will respond at lower or higher levels
ratio, the greater the relative safety.
than the “"normal" population (Figure 1.1). For instance,
Another parameter that also cormpares a toxic dose
most dogs ingesting 20-30 mg/kg of methylxanthines from
(TD; the dose at which 1% will experience toxic effect)
chocolate will develop agitation, restlessness, polydipsia,
with an effective dose (ED,y; dose that is effective in 99%
and
gastrmintestinal upset (Gwaltney-Brant
2001).
of the population) is the margin of safety. A drug with a
However, at this dose, some dogs will show none of these
wide margin of safety will have low risk of adverse effects
clinical effects and appear clinically norrmal (less sensi-
in the vast majority of patients.
tive), while other dogs may develop signs at doses below
20mg/kg (more sensitive). So, while knowing the dose-
Variation in Toxic Responses
response relationship for a toxicant, it is important to also
 In discussing dose-response, one must keep in mind that
realize that there will be occasions when an individual
there will always be individuals who do not respond to a
patient fails to "read the same book"' as the rest of us and
xenobiotic in the same fashion as the majority of the
responds differently than the norm. Some potential reasons
population. An individual may show a higher or lower
10
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
sensitivity to toxicosis than expected or may not show a
et al. 2009). This defect results in a faulty "pump" that
therapeutic effect from a medication. Some reasons for 
normally excludes certain xenobiotics (including macro-
these individual variations have been elucidated, but
lides) entering from the central nervous system. As a
others still remain to be discovered (see idiosyncratic
result, macrolide agents are able to enter the CNS and
definition above).
cause clinical signs of intoxication at dosages that are not
toxic to dogs without this defect. Likewise, other drugs
Species Differences
that are normally excluded from the CNS by this pump but
Response to toxicants can vary tremendously between dif-
can gain access to the CNS in P-glycoprotein-defective
ferent species, with cormpounds that are relatively nontoxic
dogs include digoxin, doxorubicin, and vincristine (Mealey
to one species being quite toxic in a different species.
2006).
 These species differences can be the result of differences
in physiology or toxicant absorption, metabolism, and/or
Age
elimination. For instance, cats evolved as true camivores
Age-related responses to toxicants must be considered
that did not need to metabolize plant-derived compounds
when dealing with pediatric and geriatric patients, because
such as phenols, and they did not evolve the necessary
behavioral, physiological, and pathological differences in
enzymes required to eliminate phenolic compounds from
these special populations can have a profound infuence
the feline body. As a result, cats have diminished ability
on sensitivity to toxicants. When assessing the risk of an
to metabolize certain phenolic compounds, making them
exposure to a toxicant, pediatric and geriatric animals
more susceptible to toxicosis from xenobiotics (such as
should be considered at increased risk, and treatment
acetaminophen) that contain phenols. Cats are also highly
should be considered at lower levels of exposure than
susceptible to developing methemoglobinemia and Heinz
would occur with a young adult animal.
body anemia because their hemoglobin contains & reactive
sulfhydryl groups (compared to 4 in dogs and 2 in humans),
Pediatric Patients
which can bind to oxidative agents that can denature
Nursing puppies and kittens may be exposed to toxicants
hemoglobin. Additionally, a relative deficiency of methe-
not only through ingestion or inhalation of toxicants in
moglobin reductase in their red blood cells makes it dif-
their environments but are also subject to exposure to
ficult forthem to reverse the hermoglobin damage (Osweiler
toxicants that the nursing dam may have ingested if these
 2006). Because species differences are common and many
toxicants are passed through the milk (Boothe and Peter-
are not fully elucidated, care must be taken when attempt-
son 2006). By their inquisitive nature, young animals are
ing to extrapolate toxicity data from one species and apply
more inclined to be exposed to toxicants in their environ-
it to another.
ment that adult animals have leamed to avoid (e.g-, skunk
spray). Younger animals have a variety of physiological
GeneticPolymorphisms
differences making therm more susceptible to toxicosis,
The infuence of genetics on an individual's response to
including
xenobiotics is the subject of much study in the human
pharmaceutical world. Genetic polymorphism is the term
· Increased intestinal perrmeability to some toxicants (e.g--
for hereditary differences in a single gene that occur in
lead)
more than 1% of the population (Eaton and Gilbert 2008).
· Increased gastric pH, which enhances the absorption of
Genetic polymorphisms are significant causes of individ-
some toxicants
ual variation in response to toxicants. Although a large
·Decreased intestinal motility, which allows toxicants to
number of genetic polymorphisms relating to xenobiotics
stay in the gastrointestinal tract longer and prmvides
have been identified in humans, less study has been done
more opportunity for absorption of toxicants
 in cormpanion animals. Perhaps the best known toxicology-
· Decreased plasma prmotein concentrations to bind toxi-
related genetic polymorphism in the veterinary world is
cants, allowing more free toxicant in the blood to reach
the sensitivity of dogs to macrolide antiparasitic agents
target tissues
(e.g-,ivermectin,moxidectin,etc.). Individuals within
· Less body fat to sequester lipid soluble toxicants
certain genetic lines of collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Old
· Decreased glomerular filtration rate, which results in
English sheep dogs, and several other related breeds carry
decreased excretion of toxicants and their metabolites
an autosomal recessive defect in a gene that codes for a
· Decreased hepatic function and metabolic enzymes to
blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein (Mealey 2006; Lanusse
detoxify toxicants
Chapter 1/ General Toxicologic Principles
11
Geriatric Patients
Whether a toxicant has a direct effect on the fetuses will
As animals age, they experience physiological and meta-
depend on several factors. Most importantly, in order for
bolic changes that can alter the way that they respond to
a toxicant circulating in the blood to directly impact the
toxicants. Additionally, these animals may be on medica-
fetus, it will need to cross the placenta in sufficient quanti-
tions for degenerative disorders typical of elderly animals
ties to cause fetal damage. Whether a toxicant can pass
(e.g., arthritis), and interaction with the medication and
the placenta will depend on the physical and biochemical
toxicant may occur. Aging results in decreased renal and
 properties of the toxicant as well as the structure of the
hepatic function. Because these two organ systems are the
placenta, which varies according to species. Toxicants
predominant means of toxicant elimination, the aging
reaching the fetuses can result in fetal death, fetal mal-
animal has a decreased capacity to efficiently remove toxi-
formation (teratogenesis), or functional abnormalities
cants from the body. Geriatric animals share some of the
(e.g-, behavioral abnorrmalities), depending on the toxi-
same metabolic derangements seen in pediatric animals,
cant, species involved, and stage of gestation when the
including decreased intestinal motility, decreased plasma
exposure occurs. Throughout gestation, there are peak
protein production, decreased glomerular filtration rate,
times of susceptibility for organ malforrmation, generally
and decreased hepatic function. Additionally, elderly
coinciding with organogenesis. Organ-specific teratogens
animals may have decreases in cardiovascular function,
introduced prior to or after organogenesis may have
making them less able to handle the stresses of intoxica-
little or no impact on the developing fetus, (Rogers and
tion. Concurrent disease processes are more common in
Kavlock 2008). Toxicants administered during gestation
older patients and may increase the susceptibility to organ
may cause a wide range of fetal defects. For example,
damage by toxicants (e.g-, preexisting renal dysfunction
feeding carbaryl (Sevin@) to dogs during gestation
may make a patient more susceptible to the toxic effects
resulted in abdominal-thoracic fissures, intestinal agene-
of NSAIDs) or compromise the animal's ability to respond
sis, brachygnathia, and a variety of appendicular skeletal
to a toxicant. The behavior of a geriatric patient on some
abnormalities (Smalley et al. 1968).
medications might be altered such that there is an increased
Unfortunately, the potential effects of many toxicants
risk for toxicant exposure (e.g-, dogs on corticosteroid
on pregnant animals or their offspring are not known.
therapy often experience polyphagia and may ingest some-
When presented with a pregnant patient who has been
thing they normally would avoid).
exposed to a potential toxicant, it is always safest to err
on the side of caution and attempt decontamination when
it can be performed safely.
DEVELOPMENTAL AND
REPRODUCTIVE TOXICITY
TOXICOKINETICS
Pregnant animals exposed to toxic agents represent a
Toxicokinetics refers to the movement of a toxicant through
special case when doing a risk assessment. Not only do
the body. The principles of toxicokinetics are the same as
the immediate needs of the patient need to be considered,
pharmacokinetics (the movement of drugs in the body)
but the potential effects of the toxicant (and any agents
with the exception that the agent moving through the body
used to treat the mother) on the fetuses must be taken into
is considered a toxicant rather than a therapeutic agent.
account before a treatment plan is initiated. Pregnancy
The ultimate disposition of a toxicant in the body depends
itself can cause some physiological changes in the mother,
on the four components of toxicokinetics: absorption, dis-
including decreased intestinal motility, decreased plasma
tribution, metabolism (also called biotransformation), and
protein concentrations, and alterations in renal and hepatic
elimination (Evans 2006). These components are often
function (Kutzler 2006). These changes can impact the
abbreviated as ADME for ease of use. The ADME char-
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination of
acteristics will vary with the toxic agent, species, and
toxic compounds, making the dam more or less susceptible
individual.
to a particular toxicant. Pregnant animals may spontane-
ously abort their pregnancies due to stress, direct effects
of toxicants on the reproductive organs, or fetal death from
Absorption
hypoxia secondary to hypotension or other hemodynamic
Other than caustic and corrosive agents that infict their
aberrations.
damage locally, most toxicants must enter the body to
Toxicants may have minimal effect on the pregnant
exert their effects (Evans 2006). Absorption is the process
female but result in significant harm to the fetuses.
by which toxicants pass through the various barriers to
12
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
enter the systemic circulation. The degree and extent to
proximal small intestine. Absorption of toxicants across
which a toxicant will be absorbed is dependent upon the
the skin requires that the toxicant pass through the lipo-
physical and chemical characteristics of the toxicant
philic stratum cormeum (the major barrier to absorption of
(molecular weight, pH, lipid solubility, etc.), the route of
toxicants via the skin) and then through the hydrophilic
exposure, and species of animal. With the exception of
dermis to reach the bloodstream. Solvents such as dimethyl
intravenous injection, it is unlikely that 1oo% of a toxicant
sulfoxide (DMSO) greatly enhance absorption of topically
to which an animal is exposed will be absorbed. Bioavail-
applied agents by increasing the permeability of the
ability is a term that refers to the fraction of a toxicant that
stratum corneum.Absorption of toxicants (primarily gases,
is actually absorbed.
vapors, and aerosols) via the lungs is second only to intra-
The passage of toxicants into the body requires trans-
venous injection in regard to the speed and efficiency of
port across cellular membranes to reach the general
absorption. Toxicants reaching the alveoli have only a thin
circulation; this transport can be passive (e.g-, simple
wall to pass through in order to reach the systemic circula-
diffusion) or active, requiring energy to facilitate absorp-
tion. Fortunately, the structure of the respiratory tract can
tion (Evans 2006). Passive transport mechanisms do not
filter out many toxicants and prevent them from reaching
require energy expenditure and include simple diffusion
the alveoli
and filtration across membranes. Both of these processes
Some toxicants undergo what is terrmed a first pass
require a concentration gradient for the toxicant to move
effect whereby toxicants absorbed from the gastrointesti-
along. The rate of toxicant movement is determined by
nal tract are taken via portal circulation to the liver, where
the degree of difference in concentration between the
a fraction of toxicant is removed from the blood prior to
two sides of the membrane, ie., the larger the concen-
reaching the systemic circulation. The first pass effect can
tration differential, the faster the rate of movement. Simple
dramatically decrease the bioavailability of toxicants. For
 diffusion is the primary means of toxicant passage across
example, a dog ingesting its owner's nitroglycerine sub-
cell membranes, and it is most effective with small,
lingual tablets will be at low risk of toxicosis as long as
lipid-soluble, nonionized molecules. Filtration is the
the dog swallows all of the tablets. The nitroglycerine
movement of molecules through pores in cellular mem-
absorbed from the stomach will be largely removed by the
branes and is dependent upon the size of the pores and
liver and will not enter the systemic circulation. However,
size of the toxicant molecule.Facilitated diffusion is
if the dog has one or more tablets that remain in the oral
mediated by carrier molecules, which assist in carrying
cavity (e.g-, adhered to the oral mucosa), absorption across
molecules across membranes. Active transport processes
the oral mucosa will allow the nitroglycerine to enter the
systemic circulation and the dog will develop signs of
tion gradient; in fact, most active transport mechanisms
hypotension because compounds absorbed from the oral
work against concentration gradients (ie., take a molecule
cavity do not enter the portal circulation.
from an area of low concentration to an area of high
concentration). Examples of active transport "pumps"
Distribution
include the Na'-K+ ATPase transporter in nerve cell
Once a toxicant enters the body it may remain within the
 membranes and the P-glycoprotein-dependent multidrug-
systemic circulation, or it may distribute to organs and
     , i
tissues. Distribution is the translocation of the toxicant to
is another active transport system that involves internal-
various organs and tissues throughout the body. The degree
ization of molecules through the “pinching off" and
and extent to which a particular toxicant will distribute to
engulfment of fragments of cell membranes.
tissues is dependent upon a variety of toxicant properties,
Absorption can be influenced by a variety of factors
including lipid solubility, molecular weight, and the affin-
including route of exposure and the chemical and physical
ity of the toxicant for various tissues (Evans 2006;
 properties of the toxicant. The route of exposure plays a
Lehman-McKeeman 2008). The body has several physi-
major role in determining how and to what extent a toxi-
ologic barriers that may limit the distribution of certain
cant will be absorbed. In the gastrointestinal tract, the
xenobiotics, such as the blood-brain barrier, which
majority of molecules are absorbed by passive diffusion
excludes a large number of molecules from the central
or carrier-mediated prmcesses (Lehman-McKeeman 2008).
nervous system. The distribution characteristics of a toxi-
Gastrointestinal absorption is highly dependent on the pH
cant are important in determining the clinical effects that
of the toxicant, with weak acids being better absorbed in
a toxicant will produce. For example, the herbicide para-
the stomach and weak bases being better absorbed in the
quat selectively concentrates in the lungs, where it is con-
Chapter 1/ General Toxicologic Principles
13
verted into toxic metabolites that induce severe lung
formation, which more correctly refers to the metabolic
damage and fibrosis. A related compound, diquat, has a
 processes involved in creating a rmore water-soluble forrm
similar mechanism of action, but does not selectively
of xenobiotics (Evans 2006). In order to prepare toxicants
locate to the lung and therefore does not cause the pulmo-
for elimination from the body, they must be converted into
nary lesions that are seen with paraquat.
forms that are excretable. In most circumstances, this
The storage of some toxicants within the body can actu-
entails making the toxicant more water-soluble so that it
ally aid in decreasing the acute toxicity of the compound.
can be eliminated by the kidneys; less commonly,com-
Some common storage depots for toxicants include bone
pounds are made more lipid-soluble and eliminated via the
(e.g., lead, cadmium), fat (e.g-, organochlorine pesticides
bile into the feces. The body has a limited range of meta-
such as DDT), liver (e.g-, copper) and kidney (e.g,
bolic enzymes that can act on a wide range of substrates.
cadmium). The toxicants in these storage depots are in
These enzymes are present in most tissues but are most
equilibrium with the plasma, but certain metabolic situa-
concentrated in organs with highest exposure to xenobiot-
tions can sometimes disrupt the equilibrium. For example,
ics, including the liver, gastrmintestinal tract, kidneys, and
in chronic, low-level exposure to lead, much of the lead is
lung.
stored in the bones, which may protect the animal from
There are two levels of biotransformation, termed Phase
manifestations of acute toxicosis; blood lead concentra-
I and Phase Il reactions, used to make toxicants more
tions may be only slightly above the normal range in these
excretable. Not all toxicants undergo both reactions; some
cases. However, any condition that causes an increase in
toxicants are eliminated with little or no metabolism, and
bone remodeling (e.g., lactation, fracture) may result in a
others undergo one of the two reactions. Phase I reactions
generally involve hydrolysis, oxidation, or reduction and
tate an acute toxicosis.
are designed to make a compound more water-soluble and/
Plasma proteins are a special storage depot for toxicants
or expose a functional group for a subsequent Phase II
and are important in determining the toxicity of an agent.
reaction. Phase I reactions include the oxidation reactions
There are a large number of proteins in the blood that can
mediated by cytochrome P450 enzymes, which are the
bind toxicants, but alburmin is the major protein respon-
basis for much of the individual variation in susceptibility
sible for the binding of xenobiotics (drugs and toxicants).
to adverse drug reactions (Parkinson and Ogilvie 2008).
Because only a free (unbound) toxicant can reach its site
 Phase II reactions involve attachment (conjugation) of a
of action, plasma proteins essentially "bind up" the toxi-
functional group (sulfate, glucuronide, amino acid, gluta-
 cant, preventing it from exerting its toxic effect. Toxicants
thione, methyl group, acetyl group) to a parent compound
that are highly protein-bound have a lower level of toxicity
or one of its metabolites that results in a compound that
than similar toxicants, which have poor protein binding.
has greatly increased water solubility. Species differences
Species differences in types and amounts of plasma pro-
in Phase II reactions include the defective glucuronidation
teins are one reason for species differences in toxicity of
in cats that makes them sensitive to phenolic compounds
various toxicants. An important consideration when
such as acetaminophen.
dealing with a highly protein-bound compound is the
potential interaction that may occur with other highly
Bioactivation
protein-bound agents. For instance, a dog that is on car-
Although biotransformation is generally thought of as a
profen (a highly protein-bound drug) for arthritis is
detoxifying process, allowing the body to eliminate poten-
exposed to a warfarin-based rodenticide. Because warfarin
tial toxicants, in some instances Phase I or Phase II reac-
is also highly protein-bound, the two xenobiotics are in
tions might result in a compound that is more toxic than
competition for plasma proteins, resulting in higher
the parent compound. This conversion of a low or nontoxic
unbound concentrations of both, which may result in clini-
parent compound to a toxic metabolite is termed bioactiva-
cal signs of warfarin toxicosis at doses lower than those
fion. Examples include the conversion of ethylene glycol
norrmally associated with warfarin. Additionally, there also
to metabolites that induce acidosis and renal failure and
might be increased risk of adverse effects from the carpro-
the conversion of acetaminophen to a highly reactive inter-
fen (ie., gastrointestinal upset or bleeding).
mediate that causes liver damage.
Metabolism
Elimination
Metabolism refers to the fate of a toxicant within the body
Elimination is the process of removing toxicants and their
and is often used synonymously with the terrm biotrans-
metabolites from the body. As has been mentioned, most
14
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
biotransformation reactions are geared toward making
extensive enterohepatic recirculation and has a half-life of
toxicants more water-soluble so that they can be excreted
74 hours, whereas in humans naproxen does not undergo
via the kidneys. Renal excretion is the most common
enterohepatic recirculation, is eliminated primarily via the
means by which the body eliminates waste. Other elimina-
urine, and has a half-life of 6 hours (Frey and Rieh 1981;
tion pathways include fecal (via bile), exhalation (via
Lees 2009; Talcott 2006).
lungs), saliva, sweat, and milk. Toxicants and their metab-
Toxicants that must be metabolized through enzyme-
 olites can be eliminated by more than one route (e.g., fecal
 mediated processes can have their half-lives increased if
and urinary).
the dose of toxicant exceeds the capacity of the enzyme
The elimination half-life of a toxicant is the amount of
system to catalyze the conversion of toxicant to metabo-
time it takes for the original absorbed dose to be reduced
lite. In these situations, the toxicant “backs up' as the
by one-half. Compounds with shorter half-lives will be
enzyme system becomes saturated with substrate. For toxi-
eliminated from the body more quickly than those with
cants that can be eliminated as parent compound as well
longer half-lives. Two processes that can prolong half-
as metabolites (e.g., ethanol), saturation may only mildly
lives of a toxicant include enterohepatic recirculation and
affect half-life, but for compounds that cannot be elimi-
saturation of metabolic enzymes. Enterohepatic recircula
nated without first being converted to metabolites, the
tion is the repeated cycling of a toxicant between the liver
half-life can be significantly impacted. An example is
and the gastrointestinal tract. The toxicant passes from the
aspirin, which requires glucuronidation for elimination. In
systemic circulation into the liver, where it is excreted via
cats, the half-life of aspirin ranges from 22 to 45 hours
the bile duct into the small intestine from where it is
depending on the dose administered. As the dose increases,
reabsorbed to reenter the systermic circulation. This con-
the half-life increases due to saturation of the cat's defec-
tinued cycling can greatly prolong the amount of time that
tive glucuronidation system. This is why the dosing inter-
a toxicant stays in circulation. For example, in dogs, the
val of aspirin for cats is every 48 to 72 hours compared to
nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drug naproxen undergoes
every 8 to 12 hours for dogs.
CHAPTER 1 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Banjo, a 2-year-old, 25-pound, neutered male dachs-
medication after several days. A call back to the
hund mix ingested a 25mg propranolol tablet that
his owner accidentally dropped on the foor. When
acting groggy after receiving his phenobarbital.
researching this drug, which of the following infor-
Ranger's
decreased
sensitivity
to
the
mation would be LEAST helpful to you in determin-
sedative effects of phenobarbital over time is an
ing whether Banjo is at risk for serious clinical
example of
effects?
a. Potentiation
a. The minimum toxic dose for dogs
b. Tolerance
b. The maximum tolerated dose for dogs
C. Synergism
C. The LDso for dogs
d. Antagonism
d. The minimum lethal dose for dogs
e.Additivity
e. The therapeutic index for dogs
3. The fundamental principle of toxicology is "the dose 
2. Ranger, a 3-year-old golden retriever, was just pre-
makes the poison." When determining whether the
scribed phenobarbital to control his epilepsy. Rang-
dose of a particular compound poses a risk of toxi-
er's owner called later that day to say that Ranger
cosis to an animal, which of the following must be
was acting groggy and wants to know whether this
taken into account?
is expected with the phenobarbital. Ranger's veteri-
a. Physical properties of the compound (e.g-, physi-
narian tells you to relay to the owner that this is an
cal state, pH, reactivity, etc.)
expected event and that Ranger should adapt to his
b. Species exposed to the compound
Chapter 1/ General Toxicologic Principtes
15
C.Route of exposure
8. In cats, organogenesis is complete in the first
d. Age, sex, and weight of the patient 
trimester (first 3 weeks) of pregnancy. At week 8 of
e. All of the above must be considered.
pregnancy, a queen was exposed to a medication
4. In general, the most rapid response to a toxicant will
known to adversely affect fetuses. Which of the fol-
occur if it is administered
lowing would NOT be a potential outcome of this
a. Intravenously
exposure?
b. Intradermally
a. Anencephaly
c. Orally
b.
Abortion
d. Intramuscularly
C. Stillborn kittens
e.Subcutaneously
d. Mumrmified fetuses
 5. The dose-response curve represents the characteris-
e. Premature parturition
tics of a xenobiotic within a
but
9. The percentage of an ingested toxicant that is
variation
can
result
in
absorbed into the circulation is a measure of its
increased or decreased response at a particular dose.
a. Toxicity
a. Species, normal
b. Distribution
b. Population, individual
C. Metabolism
C.
Species, individual
d. Teratogenesis
d. Population, normal
e. Bioavailability
e. Class, statistical
10. Select the incorrect statement.
6. When compared to humans, the increased suscepti-
a. Distribution refers to the movement of xenobiot-
bility of cats to acetaminophen toxicosis is related
ics throughout the body and includes binding of
primarily to species differences in which of the
 xenobiotics to plasma proteins and storage of
following:
 xenobiotics in various tissues including bone,
 a. Absorption of acetaminophen
liver, and kidney.
b. Distribution of acetaminophen
b. The "first pass effect'" refers to the inability of
c. Metabolism of acetaminophen
some toxicants to cross the
gastrointestinal
d.Elimination of acetaminophen
mucosal
barrier
and
enter
the
systemic
e. Bioavailability of acetaminophen
circulation.
7. Some Doberman pinschers have an increased sus-
c. Metabolic activity that results in a metabolite that
ceptibility to liver injury when they receive sulfon-
is more toxic than the parent compound is referred
amide antibiotics at therapeutic doses. Because
to as bioactivation.
this susceptibility in Doberrman pinschers is familial
d. The predominant goal of metabolism is to make 
(i.e., runs in families), it is suspected that this trait
xenobiotics more water-soluble so that they can
is inherited. If so, this would be an example of
be more easily excreted via the urine.
a.
 Species difference
e.
Enterohepatic recirculation of a xenobiotic
b. Genetic polymorphism
can result in prmolongation of the xenobiotic's
C。
Age-related response
half-life.
d. Gender difference
e. Fetal toxicity
bital, the enzymes that metabolize the drug are
-sod aq nuau yeap yoym ne asop isao auino
(or a similar chemical). In the case of phenobar-
be expected to develop (minimum toxic dose),
chemical due to prior exposure to that chemical
 ated dose), the dose at which clinical signs may
 Tolerance is the reduced responsiveness to a
2. b.
without showing clinical signs (maximum toler-
LDso
the dose at which dogs can tolerate propranolol
 the risk following an acute exposure than is the
dogs will die but does not give an indication of
 parameters are far more helpful in determining
1. c. The LDso identifies the dose at which 50% of
      
ANSWERS
Continued
16
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicotogy
xenobiotic can reach the systemic circulation.
acetaminophen into nontoxic compounds and
absorbed into the portal circulation before the
 g sza (ssa  s 
09
of a fraction of a xenobiotic that has been
10. b. The first pass effect refers to the hepatic removal
individual variation can result in increased or
9. e. Bioavailability
teristics of a xenobiotic within a population, but
organogenesis).
5. b. The dose-response curve represents the charac-
brain had formed (ie., after completion of
of action in the body.
occur because the exposure occurred after the
most rapid distribution of a toxicant to its site
8. a. Anencephaly (absence of brain) would not
4. a. Intravenous administration will produce the
'soiqouax o asuodsal un saouaap un nnsal
the risk of toxicosis from a toxicant.
 Genetic polymorphisms are inherited traits that 
7. b.
 All ofthese factors are important in determining
3.e.
doses of acetaminophen.
and decreased adverse effect.
reactive, resulting in toxicosis at relatively low
phenobarbital metabolism, lower blood levels,
   s  
induced in the liver, resulting in increase in
REFERENCES
Curtis D. Klaasen, pp. 131-159. New York: McGraw-Hil1
Boothe, Dawn M. and Peterson, Michael E. 2006. Consider-
Medical.
ations in pediatric and geriatric poisoned patients. In Smalf
Mealey, Katrina L. 2006. Ivermectin: Macrolide antiparasitic
Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peter-
agents. In Small Animat Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by
son and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp. 165-177. St. Louis:
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 785-794.
Saunders.
St. Louis: Saunders.
Eaton, David L. and Gilbert, Steven G. 2008. Principles of
Merrill, Jill C., Morton, Joseph, and Soileau, Stephen D.
toxicology. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology, the Basic
2008. Metals. In Principles and Methods of Toxicology, 5th
Science of Poisons, 6th edition, edited by Curtis D. Klaasen,
edition, edited by A. Wallace Hayes, Pp. 841-896. New
Pp. 11-43. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
York: Informa Health Care.
Evans, Tim J. 2006. Toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics. In
Osweiler, Gary D. 1996. Toxicotogy. The National Veterinary
Smalf Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael
Medical Series, Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins.
E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 18-28. St. Louis:
2006. General toxicological principles. In Small
Saunders.
Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E.
Frey, H.H. and Rieh, B. 1981. Pharmacokinetics of naproxen
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp. 2-17. St. Louis:
in the dog American Journal of Veterinary Research
Saunders.
42(9):1615-1617.
Parkinson, Andres and Ogilvie, Brian W. 2008. Biotransfor-
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2001. Chocolate intoxication.
mation of xenobiotics. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology.
Veterinary Medicine 96(2):108-110.
the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th edition, edited by
Kutzler, Michelle A. 2006. Considerations in pregnant or lac-
Curtis D. Klaasen, pp.161-304. New York: McGraw-Hil1
tating patients. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition,
Medical.
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp.
Rogers, John M and Kavlock, Robert J. 2008. Developmental
178-190. St. Louis: Saunders.
toxicology. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology, the Basic
Lanusse, Carlos E., Lifschitz, A.L., and Imperiale, F.A. 2009.
Science of Poisons, 6th ed.,edited by Curtis D.Klaasen,
Macrocyclic lactones: endectocide compounds. In Veteri-
Pp.415-451. New York: McGraw-Hil1 Medical.
nary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edition, edited
Smalley, H.E., Curtis, Jack M., and Earl, F.L. 1968. Terato-
by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp. 1119-1144.
genic action of carbaryl in beagle dogs. Toxicotogy and
Ames,Iowa:Blackwell.
Applied Pharmacology 13(3):392-403.
Lees, Peter. 2009. Analgesic, antinflammatory, antipyretic
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antinfammatories. In
drugs. In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th
Small Animat Toxicotogy, 2nd edition, edited by Michael
edition, edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, Pp.
E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933. St. Louis:
457-492. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell
Saunders.
Lehman-McKeeman, Lois D. 2008. Absorption, distribution,
Volmer, Petra A. 2004. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In Clinicaf
and excretion of toxicants. In Casarett and Doufl's Toxicof-
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by K.H. Plumlee, Pp. 188-
ogy, the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th edition, edited by
190. St. Louis: Mosby.
Incidence of Poisoning in
2
Small Animals
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
DEMOGRAPHICS
Animals are exposed to potentially toxic products every
Demographic information on companion animal poison-
day, yet the actual incidence of poisoning in animals is 
ings has largely come from calls to human or animal
relatively low when compared to other causes of illness,
poison control centers contacted about exposures of the
such as infectious and metabolic diseases, allergy, trauma,
 animal to potentially toxic agents (Forrester and Stanley
neoplasia, etc. Animals presenting with signs that pet
 2004; Haliburton and Buck 1983; Hornfeldt and Murphy
aq on paau sujuosjod cn pane[al ane poadsns Aeu siauo
1992, 1997, 1998; Hornfeldt and Borys 1985) or frorm
fully evaluated in order to rule out the possibility of an
surveys of veterinary emergency centers or teaching hos-
unrelated illness. Veterinary technicians can assist in
pitals (Cope et al. 2006; Osweiler 1975). In all these
sorting out the cause of illness by obtaining thorough
reports, dogs and cats are the species for which assistance
details on the suspected exposure as well as a complete
is most commonly sought regarding potential poisonings,
medical history of the patient (see Chapter 4). With this
accounting for 95%-98% of all reported calls (Forrester
information and the results of a thorough physical exami-
and Stanley 2004; Guiliano Albo and Nebbia 2004; Xavier
nation, the determination as to the likelihood of a poison-
et al. 2002; Hornfeldt and Murphy 1998). These percent-
ing can be made.
ages have changed considerably since 1983, when dogs
Recall from Chapter 1 that the fundamental tenet of
and cats accounted for only 44% of calls to an animal
toxicology is "the dose makes the poison," meaning that
poison control center (Trammel et al. 1985).
only when a sufficient amount of a toxicant is involved
Dogs account for up to 80% of animal-related calls to
will a poisoning take place. Obviously the dose required
human poison control centers (Hornfeldt and Murphy
to induce a poisoning will depend on a variety of factors,
2006) and up to 85% of calls to animal poison control
including the agent in question, route of exposure, and
centers (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center unpub-
species, age, and weight of the animal. Most of the infor-
lished data, 2009). Calls regarding cats comprise another
mation on animal poisonings comes from human and
12%-15% ofthe total, with the remaining cases involving
animal poison control center data; because there is no
food animals, horses, birds, pocket pets, wildlife, etc.
reporting requirement nor is there a central reporting
(Gwaltney-Brant 2007). Exposures of animals to poten-
agency for animal poisonings, the actual incidence of
tially toxic agents are more common in the summer,
animal poisonings is not known. However, information
although peaks around the winter holiday seasons have
from poison control centers is still helpful in understand-
been noted (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). The majority of poi-
ing the most cormrmon features of animal poisonings,
sonings are accidental in nature and occur at or near the
which can aid in instituting measures that may help in
animal owner's home (Hornfeldt and Murphy 1992, 1998;
minimizing exposures of animals to toxicants.
Khan et al. 1999). Malicious poisonings are relatively rare,
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
17
18
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
accounting for less than 1% of all exposures to potentially
AGENTS
- ()   ( n)  
There is a virtually unlimited nurmber of agents to which
sonings of dogs and cats, the route of exposure is due to
animals may be exposed, and the potential for an exposure
ingestion of the toxicant, with dermal exposures account-
to tum into an actual poisoning depends on a number of
ing for 4%-15% (Hornfeldt and Murphy 1997). Less than
factors, including the inherent toxicity of the agent, the
1% of exposures are by routes other than oral or dermal,
sensitivity of the animal to the effects of the agent, the
including inhalation, bites/stings, injection, or ocular.
amount of the agent to which the animal is exposed, and
Ninety-nine percent of reported exposures are acute in
the route of exposure (e.g, ingestion vs. dermal). The
nature and 97% involve a single toxicant (Hornfeldt and
Murphy 1998).
time of the year; for instance, chocolate exposures increase
Dogs are inquisitive creatures with a propensity for
around holidays where chocolate is traditionally featured
investigating the world with their mouths, which makes it
and pesticide exposures are more frequent during the
easy to understand why dogs far outrank other species in
spring and summer, when use of these products increases.
reports of exposures to potentially toxic agents. There is
Based on reports from human and animal poison control
no gender predisposition to poisoning exposures, with
centers, the most frequent exposures of companion animals
males and females being equally represented (Gwaltney-
tend to involve rodenticides, chocolate, and pharmaceuti-
Brant 2007). The average age for cases involving dogs is
cals (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). The most common pharma-
approximately 4 years, suggesting that young adults are
ceutical agents to which pets are exposed include analgesics
most often involved in potential poisonings. Some breeds,
(especially nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents) and
particularly Labrador retrievers, are considered to be more
central nervous system drugs (e.g-, antidepressants, seda-
"poison-prone" than others, and a review of over 68,000
tives, stimulants, etc.) Exposures to pesticides, once the
animal poison control center cases involving purebred
most common cause of animal-related calls, have declined
dogs showed that cases involving Labrador retrievers were
significantly, possibly due to the introduction of newer,
three times higher than the next most common breed
less toxic products and better public awareness of the
(Gwaltney-Brant 2007). However, the overall percentage
potential hazards of pesticides to pets. Plant exposures are
of cases involving Labradors (17.6%) was not significantly
also common both inside and outside the house. House-
different than the overall popularity of Labradors based on
hold cleaning agents, automotive prmoducts, and food prod-
American Kennel Club registrations (15%). In other
ucts are other common causes of animal-related calls to
words, it may very well be that there are three times more
poison control centers.
cases involving Labradors because there are three times
more Labradors in the population. Some breeds that do
SIGNS AND OUTCOMES
appear to be overrepresented in these poisoning cases
In spite of the wide range of potentially toxic agents to
compared to their overall popularity include cocker span-
which animals may be exposed, the vast majority of
iels and bichon frises (Gwaltney-Brant 2007).
exposures result in no signs for the patient, based on
Unlike dogs, cats have discriminating habits and appe-
poison control center data (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). In
tites, making them less likely to ingest things that are not
many cases, the animal may not have been exposed to
 good for them. Calls to poison centers involving cats occur
a sufficient amount to cause toxicosis, while in other
at less than onethird the rate of calls involving dogs (Horn-
cases successful decontamination by animal caretakers
feldt and Murphy 2006), even though cat ownership
may have prevented the development of clinical signs.
exceeds dog ownership in the United States, with over 81
Mild signs that develop are expected to be self-lirmiting
million owned cats vs. 72 million owned dogs in 2007
and generally do not require treatment (e.g-, mild vomit-
(AVMA 2007). There are no gender or age differences
ing), and they occur in -25% of poison contrml center
reported in cat poisoning cases (Gwaltney-Brant 2007),
cases involving animals. Moderate signs occur in about
and the most commonly reported purebreds were Siamese,
7% of exposures; these signs generally require some form
Persians, Maine coon, and Himalayan. Because of their
of treatment (e.g-, antiemetics for persistent vomiting),
grooming habits, cats are more at risk than dogs from
but are not expected to be life threatening. Major signs
agents that come into contact with their fur. For example,
are those in which life-threatening conditions occur or
many ethylene glycol exposures in cats are thought to
there is potential for significant residual disability or
occur when cats walk through or lie in puddles and then
disfigurement following recovery; fortunately, toxicoses
groom the ethylene glycol off their hair.
associated with major signs generally account for about
Chapter 2/ Poisoning in Small Animals
19
1% of animal poisoning cases. The overall mortality rate
does not appear to be waning, although the agents to which
for animal cases reported to human poison contml centers
animals are exposed does appear to change with time.
ranges from 2%-3% (Hornfeldt and Murphy 2006).
While significant pesticide exposures may be on the
Agents most commonly associated with severe signs and
decline due to the development of newer and less toxic
 deaths include rodenticides, pesticides, pharmaceuticals,
pesticides, exposures to other agents, such as chocolate
plants, and ethylene glycol.
and pharmaceutical agents, may be on the rise. Knowing
what agents have the potential to be involved in serious
CONCLUSION
toxicoses should allow veterinary technicians to better
 Poisoning is a serious cause of morbidity and mortality in
educate clients on means of preventing animal poisonings
animals, particularly in dogs and cats. Based on informa-
through the appropriate use of household products and the
tion obtained by veterinary clinics and human and animal
removal of potential hazards from the animals'
poison control centers, the incidence of animal poisoning
environments.
CHAPTER 2 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Which of the following best characterizes the most
c. Toxicants most commonly associated with mortal-
common scenario for animal poisonings with regard
ity in dogs and cats include pharmaceuticals,
to species involved, time of year, location of expo-
mdenticides, and ethylene glycol.
sure, intent, and route of exposure?
d. The incidence of poisoning due to exposure of pets
a. Feline, fall, veterinary clinic, malicious, intramus-
to pesticides has increased dramatically over the
 cular injection
past 25 years.
b. Canine, summer, home, accidental, oral ingestion
e. According to cases reported to poison control
C. Feline, sumrmer, home, malicious, oral ingestion
centers, deaths occur in less than 5% of all reported
d. Canine, fall, home, malicious, oral ingestion
animal poisonings.
e. Canine, spring, accidental, dermal exposure
2. Which one of the following includes toxicants most
often involved in pet poisonings?
a. Pool chemicals, insecticides, and chocolate
b. Plants, chocolate, and lawn chemicals
C. Antifreeze, rodenticide, and chocolate
d. Rodenticides, pharrmaceuticals, and chocolate
e. Pharmaceuticals, autormotive products, and lawn
has declined significantly.
chemicals
3. d. The incidence of pesticide poisoning of pets
3. Which of the following staterments is incorrect?
2. d.
a. The majority of exposures of animals to poten-
ingest poisons in or near the home.
tially toxic agents result in no clinical signs.
involve dogs that most commonly accidentally
 b. Most animals developing clinical signs following
1. b. Most poisonings occur in the summer and
exposure to potentially toxic agents develop mild
ANSWERS
effects only.
REFERENCES
spective analysis at a Portland veterinary emergency centet.
AVMA (American Veterinary Medical Association). 2007.
Journal of VeterinaryPharmacologyand Therapeutics
U.S.Pet Ownership & Demographics Sourcebook,Scha-
29:233-236.
umburg: AVMA.
Forrester, Mathias and Stanley, Sharilyn K. 2004. Patterns of
Cope, Rhian, White, K.S., More, E., Holmes, K., Nair, A.
animal poisonings reported to the Texas Poison Center
Chauvin, P, and Oncken, A. 2006. Exposure-to-treatment
Network: 1998-2002. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
interval and clinical severity in canine poisoning: a retro-
46:96-99.
20
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Guiliano A1bo, A. and Nebbia C. 2004. Incidence of poison-
Journalof theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association
ings in domestic carnivores in Italy. Veterinary Research
212(3):358-361.
Communications 28:83-88
 2006 Summary of small animal poison exposures. In
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2007. Epidemiology of animal
Small Animal Toxicology, Second Edition, edited by
poisonings. In Veterinary Toxicology: Basics and Clinicat
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 563-577.
Principles, edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 67-73. New
St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
York: Academic Press Elsevier
Khan, Safdar A., Schell, Mary M., Trammel, Harold L.,
Haliburton, John C. and Buck, William B. 1983. Animal
Hansen, Steven K., and Knight, Michael W. 1999. Ethylene
poison control center: summary of telephone inquiries
glycol exposures managed by the ASPCA National Animal
during the first three years of service. Journal of the Ameri-
Poison Control Center from July 1995 to December 1997.
can Veterinary Medical Association 182(5):514-515
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 41(6):403-406.
Hornfeldt Carl S. and Borys, Douglas J. 1985. Review of
Osweiler, G.D. 1975. Sources and incidence of small animal
veterinary cases received by the Hennepin Poison Center in
poisoning. Veterinary Clinics of North America 5(4):
1984.Veterinary and Human Toxicology 27(6):525-528.
589-604.
Hornfeldt, Carl S. and Murphy, Michael J. 1992. 1990 report
Trammel, Harold, Buck, William, and Beasley, Val. 1985.
of the American Association of Poison Control Centers:
National Animal Poison Control Center: Seven years of
Poisonings in animals. Journat of the American Veterinary
service. 29th Annual Proceedings of the American
Medical Association 200(8):1077-1080.
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, Pp.
. 1997. Poisonings in animals: The 1993-1994 report
183-191.
of the American Association of Poison Control Centers.
Xavier, F.G. and Kogika, M.M., de Sousa, Spinosa H. 2002
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 39(6):361-365.
Common causes of poisoning in dogs and cats in a Brazilian
1998. American Association of Poison Control
veterinary teaching hospital from 1998 to 2000. Veterinary
Centers report on poisonings of animals, 1993-1994.
and Human Toxicology 44,115-116.
Toxicology Information Resources
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
Computer-based resources, such as bibliography
In the past several years, the amount of toxicology infor-
searches (e.g., Medline, offered by the National Institutes
mation has grown tremendously, as has the ability to
of Health) can be extremely valuable and reliable, whereas
access this information, whether through peer-reviewed
personal or corporate web pages may be fraught with inac-
publications, textbooks, or computer-based resources. The
curate, outdated, biased, or outright damaging inforrma-
primary challenge is deterrmining which sources provide
tion, depending on the agenda of the page owner. Because
the most up-to-date, accurate, and reliable information.
anyone can post a well-designed website full of misinfor-
Additionally, diagnostic laboratories and poison control
mation, close scrutiny of the source of the information is
centers can provide invaluable information when dealing
imperative. In general, sites sponsored by reputable gov-
with a toxicological problerm. This chapter provides an
ernmental, educational, and institutional agencies will
overview of toxicology information resources that are
contain information that is up-to-date, is accurate, and
 available to assist in dealing with toxicology questions.
tends to provide balanced views, even on controversial
subjects. Sites that engage in polarized, emotional, or dog-
EVALUATION OF RESOURCES
matic discourse should be read with skepticisrm; in these
When choosing a toxicology information resource, it is
cases, attempting to verify the staterments made on these
important that the veterinary technician be aware of any
sites through other independent resources is highly
potential issues regarding quality or bias of the informa-
recommended.
tion. In general, peer-reviewed resources (e.g., veterinary
 Items to consider in evaluating the information avail-
journals) that outline the methods by which conclusions
able on websites include
are reached are more reliable than non-peer-reviewed
· The author's credentials and institutional affiliations
resources (lay journals, nonfiction literature, the Intemet)
· The date the material was posted
which tend to summarize data, often adding personal
· The clarity and comprehensiveness of the information
opinion to, or in place of, scientific theory or facts. Even
provided
peer-reviewed resources may show some bias, because the
· The relevance of hyperlinks to other sites
research may have been sponsored by a corporation or
· The inclusion of clear references, preferably peer
group with a particular agenda. It is wise to check the
reviewed
institutions from which the author(s) came to determine
whether there might be some confict of interest. That is
"Intermet rumors" are reports with little to no basis in fact,
o o Ansnu q papy yasan [e ye Aidui on nou
often with outrageously exaggerated claims, and they have
interest groups is suspect; the reader should keep an open
the unfortunate tendency to become widely disseminated,
mind while reading the material critically.
usually via email, in a very short period of time.Not surpris-
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
21
22
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
ingly, many of these rumors involve poisonings of humans
Table 3.1. Journals with veterinary toxicology
 orpets, often by seemingly innocuous agents, such as sham-
articles
poos, household cleaners, and the like. An example of an
AmericanJournal ofVeterinary Research
Internet rumor that has had wide dissemination (and several
Canadian Journat of Veterinary Research
resurrections overthe years) is the 2004 rumor that Swiffer
CanadianVeterinary Journat
Wetlet cleaning solution poses a hazard to dogs because it
Clinicat Techniques in Small Animat Practice
contains an ingredient that is “one molecule away from
Compendium:Continuing Education for Veterinarians
antifreeze" and has caused liver failure in dogs and deaths
Journalof theAmerican Animal Hospital Association
in cats. The ingredient in question, propylene glycol
Journal of the American Association ofVeterinary
n-propyl ether, is of low toxicity especially at the concentra-
Laboratory Diagnosticians
tions present in cleaning agents (it is present in a large
Journat of theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association
number of common household cleaners) and it will not
Journal of Medical Toxicology
cause liver injury. The rumor has been discredited by a
JournalofSmall AnimalPractice
Journal ofVeterinary Emergency and Critical Care
(Oehme and Hare 2009). In general, a good rule of thumb is
JournalofVeterinary InternalMedicine
to treat unsolicited warnings received via email or fax with
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
skepticism until further research can be done to verify their
Journal of Zoo and WitdlifeMedicine
authenticity. The Urban Legends References Page
North American Veterinary Conference Clinician's Brief
(www.snopes.com) is a good first stop in the search for the
Preventive Veterinary Medicine
truth of a particular story. This website has compiled and
Veterinary Clinics of North America,Small Animat
researched thousands of rumors, Internet or otherwise, and
Practice;ExoticAnimal Practice
rates them on their veracity as true, false, or undetermined.
Veterinary and Human Toxicology (discontinued 2005)
Veterinary Journat
TYPES OF RESOURCES
Veterinary Medicine
Peer-Reviewed Journals
VeterinaryPathology
Peer-reviewed journals prmvide detailed accounts of recent
Veterinary Quarterly
studies being done in a variety of specialized areas. They
Veterinary Record
have the advantage of providing the most up-to-date infor-
mation as well as describing the study in detail, allowing
the reader to assess the conclusions drawn from the work.
abbreviated information due to limited space, some infor-
One disadvantage to this type of resource is that the infor-
mation may be outdated by the time the text is published,
mation is new and may be revised over time based on the
and newer discoveries must await the publication of newer
results of subsequent studies or scientific review.
editions. Table 3.2 provides a short list of some currently
There are no veterinary toxicology journals currently
available toxicology textbooks applicable to small animal
being published; however, animal toxicology information
veterinary medicine.
may be found in a variety of human toxicology journals
as well as select veterinary journals. See Table 3.1 for a
Computer Databases and Internet Sites
listing of some journals that publish clinically relevant
A large number of computer databases exist that can
toxicology articles.
provide quick access to a wide variety of toxicology infor-
mation. Some of these are more geared toward human
Textbooks
toxicology, but there often will be some animal informa-
In the past several years, the number of available veteri-
tion included. At the very least they can give the reader a
nary toxicology texts and toxicology-related chapters in
rough estimate of potential for toxicity based on how haz-
veterinary medical texts has expanded greatly. In general,
ardous some products are for humans. Proprietary data-
these resources focus on the most commonly encountered
bases such as Poisindex@or Tomes@ (both by Micromedex)
toxicology issues, making them useful and convenient for
are available by subscription and would be of minimal
those in clinical practice who lack the time to do detailed
availability to those working in veterinary practice.
searches on individual topics. Textbooks are an economi-
However, Poisindex@ is used by all U.S. poison control
cal and effective means of having toxicology information
centers, so the information would be available through a
readily available. On the downside, texts may present
regional poison control center.
Chapter 3 / Toxicology Information Resources
23
Table 3.2. Veterinary toxicology textbooks
Poison Control Centers, an organization that oversees the
Title,Author/Editor, Year
Publisher
education and training of poison control specialists and
provides public education by promoting awareness of the
Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary
Wiley-
importance of poison prevention. Individuals can reach
Consult Clinical Companion: Small
their regional poison control center by calling 1-800-222-
Blackwell
1222 from anywhere in the United States; callers using
Animal Toxicology, Osweiler,
Hovda, Brutlag and Lee, 2011.
land lines (not cell phones) will automatically be routed to
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology,
Mosby
the appropriate poison control center for their region.
Plumlee, 2003
Human poison contrml centers can be of assistance to
veterinary staff in helping to identify unknown human
Field Guide to Common Animal
Iowa State
 Poisons, Murphy, 1996
Press
medications through their database of imprint codes.
Handbook of Small Animal Toxicology Mosby
Although some centers permit their staff to manage animal
 and Poisonings, Gfeller, 2003
cases, most lack the information and financial resources to
 be primary resources for veterinary patients. Extrapolation
Handbook of Toxic Plants of North
Blackwell
of information from the human poison database to animals
America, Burrows and Tyrl, 2006
Natural Toxicants in Feeds, Forages
Interstate
can sometimes result in erroneous treatment recommenda-
and Poisonous Plants, Cheeke,
tions and is not generally recommended.
Publishers
1998
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison Control Center (APCC)
Small Animal Toxicology, Peterson and Saunders
Talcott, 2006
was the first animal oriented poison control center in the
United States. The Center provides 24-hour/7-day assis-
Toxicology (National Veterinary
Williams &
Medical Series), Osweiler, 1996
Wilkins
tance and is staffed by 30 veterinarians, 15 of whom have
Toxic Plants of North America,
Iowa State
achieved specialty-board certification in general and/or vet-
Burrows & Tyrl, 2001
Press
erinary toxicology. In addition to their extensive experience
Veterinary Toxicology, Gupta, 2007
Academic Press
in dealing with animal toxicology emergencies, the veteri-
Veterinary Toxicology, Roder, 2001
Butterworth-
nary staff at the APCC has access to a database that incor-
Heinemann
porates over 30 years of cases of animal poisonings to assist
them in managing animal toxicoses. The APCC is a member
Other accurate and up-to-date databases are accessible
of the American Association of Poison Control Centers and
via the Internet, and many of these are provided for low
works with human poison contrml centers, governmental
to no cost. Other websites maintained by government
agencies, zoos, and other organizations to provide accurate
agencies, academia, and organizations can provide a
and up-to-date information on newly discovered hazards to
wealth of toxicology information, and most are available
animals. The ASPCA-APCC can be contacted by telephone
at no cost to the web surfer. As stated earlier, the veracity
at 1-888-426-4435; in most cases a per-case consultation
of the information available on websites can be in ques-
fee will apply, but there is no cost if the product involved
tion, so some degree of healthy skepticism is merited when
is covered by the manufacturer through the Animal Product
browsing information on websites maintained by individu-
Safety Service division of the APCC.
als or organizations that may have underlying agendas
 Pet Poison Helpline is another 24-hour/7-day animal
(e.g-, selling a product). Table 3.3 includes some websites
poison control center in North America. This poison
 providing reliable toxicology information.
control center is staffed by a large group of veterinarians 
Poison Control Centers
internal medicine (ACVIM) and emergency and critical
There are approximately 66 poison centers in the United
care (ACVECC) with the added benefit of having experts
States that provide 24-hour/7-day assistance to the public
in human toxicology (PharrmDs). Pet Poison Helpline is
and health care providers in cases of human exposures to
operated by SafetyCall Intemational, the world's largest
potentially toxic agents (McNally et al. 2006). These
industry poison control center providing poison control
services to consumers of veterinary and human pharma-
 many with specialized training in toxicology (Specialists
ceuticals, household goods, pesticides, personal care prod-
in Poison Information or SPIs), and are funded through tax
ucts, agricultural products and dietary supplements; it is
dollars. Most are members of the American Association of
also affiliated with the University of Minnesota. Pet Poison
Table 3.3. Internet websites with toxicology information
Name
URL
 Description
General Search Engines
 Utilize a variety of indexing programs to
search and return websites based on
keywords.
AllTheWeb
www.alltheweb.com
Alta Vista
www.altavista.com
Ask.com
www.ask.com
Bing
www.bing.com
Dogpile
www.dogpile.com
Goodsearch
www.goodsearch.com
Google
www.google.com
Hotbot
www.hotbot.com
Lycos
www.lycos.com
MetaCrawler
www.metacrawler.com
WebCrawler
www.webcrawler.com
Yahoo
www.yahoo.com
Toxicology Information
American Academy of Clinical
www.clintox.org
Multidisciplinary organization uniting
Toxicology (AACT)
scientists and clinicians in the
advancement of research, education,
 prevention and treatment of diseases
caused by chemicals, drugs, and toxins
American Association of Poison
www.aapcc.org
Provides oversight and coordination of U.S.
Control Centers (AAPCC)
poison control centers
American Board of Veterinary
www.abvt.org/public/
Certifying body for veterinary toxicologists
Toxicologists (ABVT)
 index.html
American Board of Toxicologists
www.abtox.org
Certifying board for general toxicology
(ABT)
Agency for Toxic Substances &
www.atsdr.cdc.gov
Health agency of the U.S. Department of
Disease Registry (ATSDR)
Health and Human Services (USDHHS)
 providing public health information on
science related to toxic substances
National Toxicology Program (NTP)
ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov
Evaluates agents of public health concern by
developing and applying tools of modern
toxicology and molecular biology
Division of National Institutes of Health
Veterinary/Medical Information
Centers for Disease Control and
www.cdc.gov
Primary U.S. federal agency for conducting
Prevention (CDC)
 and supporting public health activities
within the U.S.
PubMed
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
Search engine for biomedical literature from
gov/PubMed
MEDLINE, life science journals, and
online books
Veterinary Information Network
www.vin.com
 Online cormrmunity of veterinarians with
(VIN)
board-certified specialist consultants,
diagnostic tools, and research materials
Veterinary Support Personnel
www.vspn.org
Online community for veterinary support
Network (VSPN)
staff providing expert consultants and
continuing education
24
Chapter 3 / Toxicology Information Resources
25
Table 3.3. Continued
Name
URL
Description
WHO
www.who.org
Directing and coordinating authority for
health within the United Nations System
Pesticide Information
Extension Toxicology Network
extoxnet.orst.edu
Collaborative effort by several U.S.
(ExToxNet)
universities to provide objective, science-
based information about pesticides,
written for nonexperts
National Pesticide Information
npic.orst.edu
Provides objective, science-based inforrmation
Center (NPIC)
about pesticides and pesticide-related
topics; operates toll-free telephone service
for questions related to pesticides
US Environmental Protection
www.epa.gov
U.S. agency charged to protect human health
Agency
and the environment by working for a
cleaner, healthier environment
Food/Drug Information
Food Animal Residue Avoidance
www.farad.org
Computer-based decision system designed to
Databank (FARAD)
provide
information on avoiding drug, pesticide, and
environmental contaminant residue
problems in food animals
Intermet Drug Index(RxList)
www.rxlist.com
Provides information on prescription drugs
US Food and Drug Administration
www.fda.gov
USHHS agency charged with overseeing
safety of food, drugs, and medical devices
FDA Safety Portal
www.safetyreporting.
Portal for reporting safety issues regarding
hhs.gov
foods (human or pet), animal drugs, or
 NIH gene-transfer research
 Dietary Supplerments Labels
http://dietarysupplements.
Offers information about ingredients in
Database
nlm.nih.gov/dietary/
>3000 selected brands of dietary
supplements
Plant/Mushroom Information
ASPCA Animal Poison Control
www.aspca.org/pet-care/
Searchable site that outlines plants that are
Center plant list
poison-contml/plants/
toxic and nontoxic to animals
MushroomExpert.Com
www.mushroomexpert.
Website listing information on toxic and
com/index.html
nontoxic mushrooms
Helpline's toxicologists have been serving the veterinary
laboratories,often associated with veterinary colleges.
community for over 30 years and have managed 2.5
Many are staffed with veterinary toxicologists, who can
million poisonings. The Pet Poison Helpline can be con-
assist in case management (treatment, prognosis, etc.) as
sulted by telephone at 1-800-213-6680. All consultation
well as offer suggestions on which tests to perform and
fee of $35 per case may apply; this consultation fee
samples to submit in order to obtain a diagnosis of toxicant
includes unlimited follow-up. The website for Pet Poison
exposure or intoxication. Even if the diagnostic laboratory
Helpline is www.petpoisonhelpline.com.
within a particular state is unable to perform a specific
toxciologic analysis, samples often can be sent to other
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
state laboratories for testing. Typically there are fees that
Veterinary diagnostic laboratories are invaluable tools
are charged for such analytical tests, but in general they
in dealing with animal poisonings (Galey and Talcott
are relatively modest compared to the actual expense to
2006). Most states have their own veterinary diagnostic
the diagnostic laboratory perforrming the test.
26
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Contrary to popular belief, there is no one "poison
most appropriate testing for that case. The veterinary tech-
screen" that will test for all known toxic agents. Because
nician can assist in this regard by ensuring that the subrmis-
there are a variety of tests available to detect various
sion forms are filled out as completely and legibly as
 toxicants, it is important that the most appropriate test be
possible.
selected in order to minimize the time and cost associated
with testing. When presented with a sample for testing,the
Summary
toxicologist will weigh all of the available information,
A wide range of toxicology information resources is avail-
including history, clinical signs, and any physical charac-
 able to assist veterinary staff in the identification, diagno-
teristics of the agent in question in order to determine
sis, and management of animal poisonings. Judicious care
which analysis is most appropriate. For this reason, the
should be taken to confirm the reliability of information
more information provided to the toxicologist the more
sources, particularly those found in the lay literature or on
likely it will be that he/she will be able to determine the
the Internet.
CHAPTER 3 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A dog owner calls to say that Sarge, her 70-pound
animal and human poison control centers ermploy
German shepherd dog, has just ingested an herbal
veterinary professionals and use inforrmation from
supplement containing valerian. Which of the follow-
the same databases.
 ing would be the LEAST desirable source of informa-
c. Poison control centers can assist in the identifica-
tion on this supplement?
tion of unknown medication through their database
a. Peer-reviewed veterinary journal article on vale-
of imprint codes.
rian use in dogs
d. The National Poison Control Hotline number is
b. Veterinary herbal medicine text book
1-800-222-1222 and will route land line callers to
c. Animal poison control center
their appropriate regional poison control center.
d.Internet website selling valerian for use in dogs
e. Veterinary diagnostic laboratory toxicologist
2. Which of the following would be the least reliable
source of information on potential toxicants for pets?
a. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website
databases.
b. U.S. Food and Drug Administration website
technicians and use their own animal-oriented
C. Medline literature search
a    
d. University website
e. Pet owner's personal website
veterinary professionals and use a human-
3. Poison control centers can provide vital, life-saving
3. b. Human poison control centers rarely employ
information in cases of animal poisonings. Which of
2.e.
the following is false regarding the use of poison
overdose.
control centers by veterinary professionals?
10
information
a. In the U.S., there are currently two animal poison
a product. In addition, such sites rarely have
control centers staffed by veterinary professionals
state benefits and downplay risks in order to sell
on a 24-hour/7-day basis.
-o  snd us ssqm a p "l
b. Human poison control centers are just as capable
ANSWERS
of managing animal poisonings because both
REFERENCES
ogy, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia
Galey, Francis D. and Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Effective use
A. Talcott, pp. 29-37. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
of a diagnostic laboratory. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd
Oehme, Fred W. and Hare, William R. 2009. Urban legends
edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
of toxicology: Facts and fiction. In Current Veterinary
Talcott, pp. 154-164. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Therapy X7V, edited by John D. Bonagura, pp. 109-111. St.
Louis:Elsevier Saunders.
McNally, Jude, Boesen, Keith, Tong, Theodore G. 2006. Toxi-
cological information resources. In Smalf Animal Toxicof-
Taking a Toxicologic History
CarrieLohmeyer
INTRODUCTION
presents. Some toxicants can act very quickly; therefore,
Obtaining a thorough history is critical in effectively treat-
time plays a key role in treatment implementation. Patients
ing patients that have been or are suspected of being
that present with clinical signs need to be assessed and
exposed to a toxic agent. The history-taking process begins
stabilized as needed. Identifying ahead of time which staff
from the moment the client walks through the front door
member will assist in emergent patient care and which will
of the veterinary hospital or calls in on the telephone. The
obtain the historical inforrmation can save time and confu
 most important reason for obtaining a thorough history
sion. Having a predetermined protocol established for
though is to provide the safest and most appropriate care
toxicological exposures enables the hospital staff to stabi-
for the patient (Fitzgerald 2006). It is the veterinary techni-
lize and treat the patients efficiently and effectively.
cian's responsibility to acquire a reliable and accurate
history to prevent the loss of money, time, energy, and
MEDICAL RECORD
resources in the hospital setting. This chapter offers guide-
The medical record for a toxicology case is composed of 
lines to assist veterinary technicians in developing the
six sets of required data: client information, patient infor-
skills necessary to be successful in obtaining a toxicologi-
mation, clinical status, agent information, exposure infor-
cal history.
mation, and implemented treatment. The first three
categories are usually a component of any history-taking
PATIENT PRESENTATION
process, whether a poisoning is involved or not. Agent
Depending on the circumstances, the technician may not
information, exposure information, and implemented
know that the patient has been exposed to a toxic agent
treatment are going to be additional elements. A written
upon its presentation to the veterinary hospital. When
 protocol can be very helpful in guiding veterinary techni-
dealing with toxic exposures the case will reffect one of
cians through the history-taking process to avoid over-
four situations: the agent is known and the patient is
 looking important information relating to a toxicological
asymptomatic, the agent is known and the patient is symp-
exposure. Each protocol is going to vary from veterinary
tomatic, the agent is not known and the patient is symp-
hospital to veterinary hospital due to individual prefer-
ences, but the six key components of a toxicological
and the patient is asymptomatic. The general history-
history should be incorporated into the prmtocol and docu-
taking process will be the same for all four cases but may
mented in a medical record. Once a written prmotocol is
need adjustment according to the current situation at hand.
developed, it should be readily available to everyone in
As with any medical emergency, it is important to be
the hospital setting; this will prevent miscommunication
prepared and organized in the event a toxicology case
when a toxicity case presents.
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
27
28
Section 1 IFundamentais of Veterinary Clinicat Toxicology
Client Information
cide will not pose a toxic hazard for an 8olb dog, but the
The first component of any medical record is the client
same bar ingested by a 5lb dog has potential to cause
information. This should include the name of client, a
marked clinical signs if treatment is not implemented.
billing address, and a telephone number where the client
Obviously, a current, accurate weight of the patient is criti-
can be reached. If the client is not the owner of the patient
cal for calculating doses of active ingredients of toxicants
(e.g., extended family member or pet sitter), the contact
 as well as for calculating appropriate medication dosages.
information for both parties should be obtained. When
The patient's vaccination status, date of last veterinary
obtaining contact information, it is important to ensure that
visit, current medications and supplements, diet, and pre-
the record includes all possible means of contacting the
existing health conditions can be grouped into the general
client to assure that veterinary staff will be able to com-
category of overall health. Knowing the vaccination status
municate changes in clinical status in a timely fashion.
of the patient gives the veterinary technician an idea of
how well the patient is cared for and may aid in ruling in
Patient Information
or out infectious causes of a patient's clinical signs. For
Patient signalment is the second component of the medical
example, a 5-month-old, unvaccinated puppy presents to
history. The patient's name, breed, age, reproductive
the veterinary hospital with severe vomiting and diarrhea.
status, and weight should all be noted in the medical
A toxicological history was obtained, but the vaccination
record. The vaccination status, environment, date of last
status of the patient was not asked. According to the
veterinary visit, current medications and supplements
owners, the dog ingested a few crystals from a silica gel
(including dosage), diet, and preexisting health conditions
packet that came out of a shoebox a few hours before the
should also be included. Each item of patient signalment
signs began. Silica gel is a minimally toxic agent that may,
has a purpose. Breed identification is important because
at worst, cause mild and self-limiting stormach upset.
some breeds can be more or less sensitive to certain agents.
Without knowing that silica gel exposures do not cause
A dose of ivermectin considered nontoxic for a Labrador
serious toxicosis, the assumption may be made that the
retriever could potentially be problematic for a collie
 puppy's signs are related to the ingestion of the silica gel
because some collies possess a defective P-glycoprotein
while overlooking a more serious potential cause, such as
in the blood-brain barrier that makes them more sensitive
parvoviral enteritis.
to ivermectin. Similarly, the age of the patient is going to
The date of the patient's last veterinary visit also pro-
play a role in determining toxicity and recommended treat-
vides information on the patient's prior health care. The
ments. Very young or very old patients may have limited
prior health of patients that have not been examined by
organ function, which can infuence absorption, metabo-
veterinarians for many years is going to be relatively
lism, and elimination of toxicants.For instance,a dog that
unknown compared to patients that receive regular veteri-
is 14 years old may be at higher risk of developing kidney
nary care. The results of any prior clinical pathology eval-
failure from an overdose of naproxen than a healthy
uations may be useful to determine whether any significant
3-year-old dog ingesting the same dose. The reproductive
changes have occurred that may be attributable to the
status of a patient is also an essential element in a toxico-
current exposure. Conversely, the lack of prior clinical
logical history. Pregnant or lactating females exposed to
pathology information may make it difficult to determine
toxic agents may require additional or alternative treat-
whether, for example, an elevation in liver enzyme values
ment than males or nonpregnant, nonlactating fermales.
is due to the patient's current issue or whether preexisting
The potential effects of the toxicant, as well as any drugs
liver disease is present.
used to treat the toxicosis, on the fetuses must be consid-
Current medications and preexisting health conditions
ered when the case involves a pregnant animal. Some
are two other components of a toxicological history that
toxicants (e.g-, some anticoagulant rodenticides) can be
should not be overlooked. Medications that the patient is
passed to offspring through the milk; an important consid-
eration when dealing with lactating animals is whether
Some medications may increase sensitivity to certain toxi-
pasodxa gueq cn suanbasqns gunoa naun pasinu saeu Aa
cants. For instance, a dog that is being treated with a
to the toxic agent.
nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drug for arthritis pain and
The basic tenet of toxicology is "the dose makes the
then ingests ibuprofen may be at a higher risk for the
development of gastrointestinal ulcers and acute renal
toxic consequences because a toxic dose is not achieved.
failure. Medications may also infuence the treatment plan
For instance, a 0.5 oz bar of a 0.01% bromethalin rodenti-
for a given case, because possible interaction of the medi-
Chapter 4/ Taking a Toxicologic History
29
cation with a drug in a treatment protocol may result in
any toxic exposure that may have occurred and is certain
the need to alter the protocol for that patient. Although less
that the dog was not exposed to anything inside the home.
common, it is also possible that the patient's clinical signs
When questioned more thoroughly, the owner remembers
that the dog was unattended in the yard for apprmximately
a prescribed medication. Preexisting health conditions also
6 hours on the previous day. The owner has a wide variety
come into play when deciding what treatment to imple-
of plants in the yard as well as occasional mushrooms
 ment. A patient that has a heart murrmur, megaesophagus,
growing in the grass. The plant varieties in the yard include
or seizure disorder may require different or additional
juniper, sago palm, daffodils, rosebushes, and tulips. From
treatment and monitoring than a healthy patient. Decon-
this information, the possibility that the sago palm or a
tamination is indicated in many exposures to toxicants;
hepatotoxic mushroom may be the cause of the dog's signs
however, emesis may be contraindicated in a patient that
must be considered. Without questioning the owner about
has a history of seizures, heart problems, or megaesopha-
possible exposures that may have occurred outside the
gus. Patients with histories of prior organ dysfunction may
home, the potential exposure to sago palm or mushrooms
be at increased risk from toxicants affecting those organs,
would have been overlooked.
and may therefore require more aggressive treatment at
For indoor animals, information that may be useful
lower dosages than would healthy animals.
includes the areas of the house to which the animal has
access, including recent access to areas the pet does not
Clinical Status
normally go (e.g-, attic). The types of medications/herbal
Some patients may present to the hospital showing no
products (human and veterinary, prescription, illicit and
clinical signs, but signs may have occurred prior to the
OTC) in the household, and whether there have been
presentation. Careful questioning of the client can help
identify the signs that the patient has developed, when the
important queries to make. It is best to ask for a list of all
signs began, and their severity. For example, a 10lb dog
medications/herbals that are in the household, even if the
ingested 3oz of semisweet chocolate approximately 1.5
client is sure that the patient did not have access to it. The
hours prior to presentation to the veterinary hospital. Upon
types of houseplants in the home should be listed; and it
presentation the dog is BAR and the physical exam is
is best to try to obtain the scientific name of the plant
unremarkable. Since the dog is asymptomatic, the veteri-
whenever possible because many different plants share
nary staff wishes to initiate treatment by administering a
common names. The presence of children or teenagers in
dose of apomorphine to induce emesis. However, the
the household is important to know, because the young-
history indicates that the patient had already vomited 5
sters may have left items in the pet's reach or allowed the
times at home, recovering a large amount of chocolate.
pet access to a toxicant; sometimes children on medication
Since the patient has already spontaneously vomited,
will feed the medication to a pet to avoid taking it them-
induction of emesis is not indicated because additional
selves. The presence of rodenticides or insecticides in the
vomiting is unlikely to result in significant further
home is an important bit of historical information. Recent
decontamination.
redecorating or renovation may expose toxicants (e.g-, old
bags of rmodenticide, lead in paint chips or fakes) that were
Environmental Information
not previously accessible to the animal. The presence of
The environment in which the patient lives is important
other pets and whether the other pets in the house appear
when identifying possible contributing causes of clinical
normal should also be ascertained.
signs a patient has developed. A domestic animal that is
For outdoor animals confined by fences or other means,
indoor/outdoor or strictly outdoors will have additional
identification of potentially toxic agents in outbuildings,
opportunities to be exposed to toxic substances, infectious
garages, or sheds to which the pet may have access is
agents, trauma, and other hazards when compared to
important. Other potential hazards found in yards include
 patients that live strictly indoors. Environmental inforrma-
compost piles, plants, and yard treatments (especially
tion is especially essential in determining the cause of a
some systermic insecticides and crabgrass killers). For free-
patient's clinical signs when dealing with an unknown
roaming animals, the challenge is much greater because
toxicant. For example, a previously healthy 2-year-old
the number of potentially toxic agents available is quite
German shepherd presents to a veterinary hospital with
large. Determining whether the animal is in an urban,
severe vomiting and lethargy. Diagnostic testing indicates
suburban, or rural environment and identifying the nature
that the dog is in liver failure. The owner is unaware of
of the animal's irmmediate surroundings (e.g., wooded
30
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
areas vs. parks and lawns) may help in narrowing down
Exposure Information
the agents to which the roaming animal may have been
Once the identity of an agent has been confirmed, the
exposed. The presence of livestock in the pet's environ-
next step in the history-taking process is to obtain a
ment should stimulate questioning to deterrmine the pet's
detailed account of events surrounding the exposure.
access to the barns or feed bins; whether medicated feeds,
Knowing only the name of the agent, or the active ingre-
fly baits, or feeds with growth promoters (e.g., ionophores)
dients, may not provide sufficient information to deter-
in them are present; whether the livestock have recently
mine whether an exposure is likely to result in problems
been medicated or dewormed; or whether any livestock
for the patient. The veterinary staff needs to have an
have recently been euthanized and buried on the
accurate picture of what occurred before, during, and after
property.
the exposure. Information to be documented in the medical
record includes armount of the agent ingested (count,
Agent Information
volume or weight); physical form of the agent; calculated
The next data set required for the toxicological medical
doses of active ingredients in mg/kg body weight; route,
record is the toxic agent, if known. The trade name of
time, and location of the exposure; location of the owner
the prmoduct or medication, active and inactive ingredients,
when the exposure occurred; reason that the agent was
ingredient concentrations, scents or favors, EPA registra-
administered (if applicable); original source of the agent;
tion numbers, and manufacturer contact information
person(s) responsible for administering the agent (if appli-
should all be documented in the medical record. This
cable); and potential for other animals to be exposed.
 information is easy to obtain if the packaging (prescription
Many clients may initially feel they have "no idea" as to
bottles, containers, boxes, etc.) is brought to the veterinary
the amount of toxicant to which the patient may have
hospital with the patient. In many cases, clients may not
been exposed, but patient questioning can sometimes help
have that information with them because the package may
 to get an apprmximation. For medication, if the original
have been ingested, discarded, or destroyed or may never
prescription amount is known, remaining pills (if any)
have been available. In some cases it may be necessary
can be counted out and subtracted frorm the original pre-
to send clients back home or to the store where the agent
scribed amount; calculating the dose taken and the number
was purchased to obtain package information. Imprint
of days from the time that the prescription was filled may
codes from individual medication tablets or capsules can
enable the veterinary technician to estimate the maximum
be used to identify a drug in cases where prescription
number of pills that may be missing. For other products
bottles are not available. A copy of Physician's Desk Ref-
(e.g-, rodenticide pellets, granulated material, liquids,
erence can help to decipher imprint codes; if a PDR is
etc.), information be gleaned by asking how much might
 not available, there is a variety of Intermet resources (e.g--
be missing from the original and subtracting out a worst-
drugs.com) to obtain this information, or a poison control
case-scenario amount: "Complete this question: I know
center could be contacted. Rodenticide exposures provide
it could not have been more than (blank)." Narrowing
excellent examples of why ingredient information is
down the amount with questions (i.e., "Was it as much
essential. There are three main types of commonly used
as a tablespoon? Less? How about a teaspoon? More?
mdenticides, and each has a different level of toxicity
Maybe two teaspoons?") can sometimes help to get an
and treatment protocol. Bromethalin exposure and bro-
idea of how much might have been ingested. When esti-
madiolone exposures will not be managed in the same
mating in this way it is important to err on the side of
manner, because these rodenticides have different mecha-
caution, so slightly overestimating the amount is better
nisms of action and toxic dosages (bromethalin affects
than underestimating.
the central nervous system, but bromadiolone inhibits the
Other questions to consider for “mystery poisonings"
normal blood coagulation process). Knowing the name
include:
brand of the product is often not sufficient to determine
the active ingredient, because products with the same
How long has it been since the last time the animal
brand name may have different active ingredients (e.g-,
appeared normal?
Rampage@ rodenticide may contain either cholecalciferol
Was the onset of signs gradual or sudden?
or bromethalin as an active ingredient). Rodenticide
What was the location of the animal in the last few hours
pellets and bars come in a variety of colors, but, unfor-
prior to the development of clinical signs?
tunately, there is no way to identify the active ingredient
Is there any history of administration of medications/
by color or shape.
herbal products/fea or tick control products to this
Chapter 4/ Taking a Toxicologic History
31
animal or other animals in the household in the past 24
owners are unaware of or lack the equipment to accurately
hours?
obtain these vital statistics.
Another disadvantage to taking a history over the phone
The answers to these questions may assist in narrowing
is determining the reliability of the owner; indeed, this can
down the possible toxicants to which the patient might
often be a challenge when dealing with clients in person.
have been exposed
When speaking with a client over the phone, the veterinary
technician has to rely solely on verbal communication.
Implemented Treatment
Observing a client's body language can at times pmvide
Once the where, how, and why of the exposure is known,
more information about a particular situation than what is
the next step for the history-taker is to deterrmine whether
communicated verbally. Reliability can be poor due to a
the owner had already implemented any treatment at home
 number of reasons. Clients may purposely withhold perti-
before calling the vet hospital or bringing the patient into
nent inforrmation as a result of feeling ashamed that their
the hospital setting. Implemented treatment may include
animal was exposed to a potentially toxic agent, whether
induction of emesis, bathing the patient for dermal expo-
by accident or simply due to a lack of knowledge as to
sures, or giving over-the-counter medications to help
what might be toxic. Clients may also feel they might be
prevent the development of signs or to treat current signs.
reprimanded by veterinary professionals for applying a
Some owners will be knowledgeable about treatment that
product incorrectly or by attempting to treat a condition at
can be implemented at home, such as inducing emesis. If
home by giving over-the-counter human medications to
 an owner has already been successful at inducing vormit-
their animal. Clients sometimes withhold information
ing, this is an important piece of information to note in the
merely to avoid having to bring their patients into a vet-
medical record. What the owner gave to induce vormiting,
erinary hospital due to finances or inconvenience. When
how rmuch, when it was given in relation to time of expo-
illicit substances are involved, clients may be reluctant to
sure, and the results (including what was observed in the
provide information due to fear of being ^turned in"to law
vomitus) also need to be documented. In certain instances
enforcement by veterinary staff. Tactful questioning and
the agent administered as treatment by an owner can com-
reassurance that the primary concern of the veterinary staff
plicate the case. For example, salt and syrup of ipecac are
is the well-being of the patient can sometimes help to elicit
sometimes used to induce vomiting at home. Administra-
truthful answers. A gentle reminder that knowing what the
tion of salt can cause serious electrolyte abnormalities, and
toxicant is will allow the patient to be treated much more
large doses of syrup of ipecac can cause prolonged gastro-
effectively and cheaply, because knowing the toxicant may
intestinal upset and possible cardiac effects.
well reduce the number of diagnostic tests that may need
to be performed. Veterinary technicians should be aware
TELEPHONE TRIAGE
of reasons that client information may be less than accu-
Some clients may call seeking advice about a toxicologi-
rate and use their common sense and instinct to try to
cal exposure before bringing the patient into the veterinary
determine whether the historical information provided
hospital. In these cases, having a telephone questionnaire
does not seem to fit the circumstances.
for obtaining a toxicological history may help to determine
which patients need to be treated at a veterinary hospital
CONCLUSION
 and which patients can be monitored at horme. The largest
It is a veterinary technician's responsibility to provide an
disadvantage to taking a history over the phone is that
accurate history to their veterinarians so that appropriate
the clinical status of the patient may be unknown or
treatment decisions can be made. Taking an accurate
inaccurate. Unlike when a patient is presented to the
history requires patience and attention to detail. In situa-
hospital, the cormponents of a physical exam cannot be
tions where aggressive patient care is required, it is some-
implemented over the phone. To the owner, the patient
times tempting to skip parts of the history-taking process.
may look normal, and subtle clinical signs such as mydria-
However, if details in the history are overlooked, the
sis or abnormal mucous membrane color can be over-
patient's overall welfare could be compromised, and that
looked. Heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and
key piece of inforrmation that could be vital to the case
respirations are generally unavailable, as many animal
may be overlooked.
32
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
CHAPTER 4 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. The veterinary medical record is composed of basic
3. Give three reasons why the patient's age and prior
data sets, including client information, patient signal-
health history are important information to obtain
ment, and clinical status of the patient. When dealing
when dealing with a poisoning case.
with a suspected poisoning case, additional data that
4.
Sparky, a 5-year-old, neutered male, 12-pound Jack
should be obtained for the medical record include
Russell terrier presents to the emergency clinic with
which of the following?
a history of vomiting. According to the owner, Sparky
a.
Agent information
a 'oan m a aa, go y e s
b.
Exposure history
was not witnessed ingesting anything out of the ordi-
C
Implemented treatments
nary by the owner In spite of his history of dietary
 a and b only
indiscretion, the owner reports that Sparky has never
a, b, and c
been ill and is current on his vaccination and heart-
2. Patient signalment includes all of the following
worm status. What questions that should be asked
except:
about Sparky's clinical status?
a. Breed
5. Referring to the patient in Question 4, what questions
b. Age
should be asked about Sparky's environment?
C.1
Reproductive status
d. Vaccination history
e.Weight
insecticides used in the house or yard?
Aue uaaq aeu aanu pue eip [ou synds
than household cohorts? Are any rodenticides or
24-hour period before he became ill? What is
mally? Does Sparky have access to animals other
 Can you please outline Sparky's activities over the
the household; if so, are any of them acting abnor-
to vomit?
 sd o  aa ia so  s aa
uegaq ay anojaq orhieual neadde au pia tluaedde
any medications/supplements, paintballs, sugar-
been any other clinical signs that are not currently
there any children in the house; if so, do they have
How long has Sparky been vomiting? Have there
herbals/supplements are in use in the house? Are
cant affects the patient.
and
products,
over-the-counter 
medications,
  ao    A sh n
 ad a i a u o naq so
response to certain toxicants; medications that the
in Sparky's environment? Have any new weeds or
 boarded in the past week? What type of plants are
 induced); patients may be more or less susceptible
 no pan Aeds s to iusa 
Has he been allowed access to any areas that he
 yard, and neighborhood does Sparky have access?
history.
indoor or outdoor dog? To what areas of the house,
[opau apnoul jou saop mq juaned aun uo uon
supplements, or herbal products? Is Sparky an
2.d. Signalment includes all of the "personal" informa-
vation, etc.)? Is Sparky on any medications,
medical record.
hold changes in the past few days (visitors, reno-
1.e. All of the listed data should be obtained for the
ANSWERS
REFERENCE
Fitzgerald KT. 2006. Taking a toxicological history. In Smalf
Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peter-
son and Patricia A. Talcott PA, Pp. 38-44. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Essential Calculations
Camille DeClementi
INTRODUCTION
 Determining the dosage helps one decide howto proceed
 Dosage calculation is critical to clinical veterinary toxicol-
with the case and to answer the following questions:
ogy. This process allows one to answer two very important
questions about an exposure. First, is the exposure going
Is any treatment needed?
to cause adverse effects? And second, if adverse effects
What, if any, method of decontamination should be
develop, how serious will they be? The relationship
performed?
between the dosage and the effect or response to a poison
 Should this patient be hospitalized for monitoring?
is a crucial concept in toxicology (Osweiler 1996). Dosage
What clinical signs may develop?
is the most important factor in determining response
 Is there an antidotal therapy and if so,is this patient a good
(Osweiler 2006). As the amount or dosage of the toxicant
candidate?
increases, the toxic response is also expected to increase
What are the likely costs associated with treatment?
in degree or severity (Osweiler 1996)
Philipus Aureolus Theophrastus
Bombastus
DEFINITIONS
Hohenheim (Paracelsus), a sixteenth-century physician-
Understanding a few definitions will make it easier to
alchemist said "All substances are poisons; there is none
comprehend the concepts and examples presented in this
which is not a poison. The right dose differentiates a
chapter.Doseis the total amount oftoxicant that is received
poison from a remedy" (Osweiler 2006). Water illustrates
per animal, whereas dosage is the amount of toxicant per
this concept well. Having adequate water is a requirement
unit of body weight (Spoo 2004). For example, if a 131b
for animals; however, ingesting too much water leads to
dog is given a 25mg pill of antibiotic, the dose is 25 mg
water intoxication and can be deadly. Another example is
and the dosage is 25 mg/13lb or 1.9mg/lb. In most cases,
carprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-infammatory (NSAID)
dosage will be expressed in mg/kg, so in this example, the
medication commonly used in veterinary medicine.At
dosage is 4.2mg/kg.
therapeutic doses, this medication improves the quality of
A few additional commonly used definitions in toxicol-
life of dogs suffering from osteoarthritis (Jenkins and
ogy are toxicity, threshold dose, LDso and NOEL. Toxicity
Kanara 1998). But if a dog receives an overdose, one needs 
is the amount of a toxicant that, under a specific set of
to determine whether the dosage can cause the adverse
conditions, causes toxic effects or results in detrimental
effects potentially associated with an overdose of any
biologic changes. (see Chapter 1, Table 1.1 for classifica-
NSAID. These include gastrointestinal irritation and ulcer-
tions of relative toxicities.) The fhreshold dose is the
ation and adverse renal effects (Talcott 2006).
highest dose of a toxicant at which toxic effects are not
SmatlAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
34
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
observed (Spoo 2004). The lethal dose 50% (LDso) is the
If these questions are not effective, it is sometimes useful
dose at which 50% of the animals die during an acute
to ask a question to help narrmow down the possible amount.
toxicity study (Spoo 2004). This value is used to cormpare
For example, is the amount likely to be closer to 100 or
the toxicity of compounds with one another (Osweiler
10? Once they answer that question, one can attempt to
2006). The no observable adverse effect levet (NOAEL)
narrow it down further. These types of questions are also
is the highest dose at which significant effects could not
helpful with other products including candies, gum, granu-
be found (Spoo 2004).
lar baits, fertilizer, insecticides, and pesticides. If the
product is a liquid, ask whether it was spilled. If it was
DETERMINING EXPOSURE AMOUNTS
spilled, ask whether the spill was on a soft surface like a
Taking a thorough history is an important step in effec-
carpet or bedding that would absorb the liquid making it
tively calculating the dosage of an exposure. Find out
less available for ingestion, whether the area is still wet,
when the exposure occurred and the largest amount to
and, if the liquid spilled on a hard surface, whether there
which the patient may have been exposed. It can some-
is any liquid on the surface now. All these questions will
times be difficult for owners to determine the worst
help determine a worst case amount that can be used to
case scenario when they are upset and worried about
calculate a possible dosage.
their pet. One can be of assistance by asking certain
questions. It may be helpful to ask them to read the
SAMPLE AND PRACTICE CALCULATIONS
label to determine the amount originally in the container.
In the following boxes some sample dosage calculations
This is especially helpful with over-the-counter medica-
are shown. There will be an example that has been solved
tions. If it can be determined how many were originally
followed by a practice question. The answers to the prac-
in the container, how many have been taken previously
tice questions can be found at the end of the chapter. It
and how many are left, one can come to a good
will be tempting just to read the samples, but to get the
approximation of the largest possible amount of the
most from this chapter work through the practice ques-
exposure.
tions. When following along with the examples and
If the agent is a prescription medication, the following
working through the practice questions, refer to Table 5.1,
questions are also often helpful:
which contains commonly used conversions.
Calculating dosages involving medication in tablet or
When was the prescription flled?
capsule form is fairly straightforward as long as the dose
How often are the pills taken?
in each tablet/capsule is known and a worst case scenario
Are they taken as scheduled or are doses sometimes
can be determined as to the number of tablets/capsules
missed?
ingested.
Sample Calculation 1
 An owner contacts you on the phone and is frantic. Her
25 pills x 20 mg/pill = 500 mg
Pomeranian ingested some of her Adderall capsules 1
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
hour ago and now is racing all over the house and is
500mg/6.8kg = 73.6 mg/kg
 hyperactive. She just had the prescription refilled a few
days ago and has used 5 capsules from the 60 capsules
Discussion
originally prescribed. She is able to count out 30 intact
Adderall is a combination medication containing four
capsules on the foor and in the bottle. The capsules are
amphetamines. It is used for the treatment of attention-
20 milligrams each and the dog weighs 15 pounds. Cal-
deficit hyperactivity disorder in humans. Clinical signs,
 culate the dosage in mg/kg.
including cardiovascular and central nervous systerm
(CNS) stimulation, can be seen at doses at or below
 Determine dog's weight in kilograms:
0.5 mg/kg (Youssef 2006). Since the dosage is very high
151bs/2.2kg = 6.8kg
and the patient is symptomatic, you advise the owner to
 Determine the total milligrams ingested:
bring her dog in immediately for treatment.
60 capsules in original prescription minus 5 taken by
owner minus 30 found capsules = 25 capsules
missing
Chapter5/Essential Calcutations
35
Table 5.1. Useful conversion factors
Unit
Abbreviation
Equivalent
Unit
Abbreviation
Equivalent
1cup
C
8oz
Concentration
1 teaspoon
tsp
5g
1 part per
ppm
1 mg/kg or 1 μg/g (solids)
1 tablespoon
T
15g
million
1 mg/l (liquid)
1 percent
10,000 ppm
Liquid
%
1 fuid ounce
10mg/g (solid)
foz
29.6 ml
1 quart
b
0.946L
10mg/ml (liquid)
0.5%
1 gallon
gal
4qt
1 proof
&pt
(alcohol)
5 mg/ml
128foz
Dry
28.35 g
3785 ml
1 ounce
Z0
3.785 liter
1 gram
g
15.43 grains
1000 mg
8.531b_
1 cup
65 mg
C
237 ml
1 grain
8fl oz
1 pound
1b
454 g
0.454kg
16T
1 liter
L
1.057qt
16 oz
1 teaspoon
tsp
5 ml
1 kilogram
kg
2.21b
1 tablespoon
T; Tbsp
1000g
15 ml
1 milliliter
ml
0.034oZ
1 milligram
0.001g
1000μ
1g
Sources: Osweiler 2006; Spoo 2004.
Practice Calculation 1
 acetaminophen is a concern in a cat. Doses of 10 mg/kg
 An ownerbrings her cat into your clinic. She had dropped
have produced toxicosis in cats (Richardson 2000a).
 1 500 mg acetaminophen tablet and her cat ran over and
Potential clinical effects include depression, weakness,
ingested it before the owner could get the pill from the
 methemoglobinemia, dyspnea, and facial or paw edema.
 cat. The cat weighs 12 pounds. The exposure happened
Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. Will this cat need
only 10 minutes ago. You are aware that any dosage of
treatment?
When dealing with solid toxicants such as foods, it
is best to try to get an estimate of how many ounces
chocolate types, use the darkest form in the mix and
were ingested. In the case of exposures to chocolate,
calculate the dosage using the worst case scenario.
it is important to know what type of chocolate was
Although this will somewhat overestimate the dosage
ingested because the various forms of chocolate (white,
of methylxanthines, it is definitely better to err on the
milk, dark, etc.) have different amounts of chocolate
side of caution.
in them, with the darker forms of chocolate being more
Sample Calculation 2
It is the day after Halloween and an owner calls your
seems fine now. The dog weighs 90 pounds. The candy
clinic for assistance. Her rottweiler ingested 2 candy bars
bars are solid milk chocolate and weigh 1.5 ounces
and she has heard that chocolate is poisonous for dogs.
each. Chocolate contains two methylxanthine stimulants:
 The ingestion occurred up to 3 hours ago and the dog
Continued
36
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
caffeine and theobromine. Although the exact amounts
dosage is <5 mg/kg, no treatment is warranted at this
of the methylxanthines vary in different types and brands
time. You advise the owner to monitor the dog at home
of chocolate, a good estimate of the methylxanthine
for gastrointestinal upset and signs of pancreatitis.
content in milk chocolate is 64mg/oz (58 mg theobro-
 mine and 6mg caffeine). Calculate the dosage in mg/kg.
Practice Calculation 2
On a weekend, a dog is presented to your hospital for
 Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
treatment. The dog is pacing, panting, and agitated on
901bs/2.2kg = 41kg
presentation and the owners believe he may have ingested
 Determine the total milligrams of methylxanthines
some semisweet chocolate morsels a few hours ago.
ingested:
Twenty-four ounces of the morsels are missing. The dog
3oz x 64 mg/0z = 192 mg
weighs 42 pounds. Although the exact amounts of the
 Deterrmine the mg/kg dosage:
methylxanthines vary in different types and brands of
192 mg/41kg = 4.7mg/kg
chocolate, a good estimate of the methylxanthine content
in semisweet chocolate is 160mg/oz (138mg theobro-
Discussion
mine and 22 mg caffeine) (Gwaltney-Brant 2001). Calcu-
Mild signs of methylxathine intoxication can occur at
late the dosage in mg/kg. Could the chocolate be causing
dosages of 20 mg/kg and severe effects can occur at 40-
the signs the dog is exhibiting?
50mg/kg (Gwaltney-Brant 2001). Since this patient's
With exposure to rodenticide pellets or bars, it is impor-
on the packaging. If the ingestion was witnessed, attempt
tant to try to estimate the amount ingested as closely as
to get the person who witnessed the exposure to estimate
possible. Again, it is better to slightly overestimate the
how much may have been ingested (e.g., 1 tsp vs. 1
exposure than to underestimate.Bars of rodenticide can
Tbsp vs. 1/4 cup. etc.). Packets or bars brought into the
be examined to determine how much of the bar is missing,
veterinary clinic can be weighed if no packaging is
and pellets often come in packets with the amounts stated
available.
Sample Calculation 3
 One hour ago, a 16lb pug chewed on two small packages
Discussion
of a pelleted rodenticide containing 0.01% bromethalin.
Bromethalin is a neurotoxin. Signs of intoxication are
Each package originally contained 0.75oz. The owner
most pronounced in the CNS and can include hindlimb
 brought in the remains of the packages, and the remain-
weakness, ataxia, depression, tremors, paralysis, sei-
ing pellets weighed 0.5oz. Calculate the dosage in mg/
zures, and death. In canine patients ingesting dosages
kg. Will this patient require decontamination?
between 0.1-0.49 mg/kg emesis or one dose of activated
charcoal is recommended (Dunayer 2003). In this case,
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
emesis is recommended with 3% hydrogen peroxide
161bs/2.2kg = 7.3kg
and is very successful. The dog vomits up many pellets,
Calculate the amount ingested:
which weigh 1.2oz. The extra weight is likely due to
(0.75 oz/packet x 2 packets) = 1.5 oz
absorption of liquid by the pellets while they were in
1.5oz minus 0.5 oz (weighed) = 1oz missing
the stomach. No additional treatment is required.
Convert to amount ingested to grams:
1 oz × 28.35 g = 28.35 g
Practice Calculation 3
Convert rodenticide % to mg/g by moving the decimal
A 751b Labrador retriever is observed ingesting 4 ounces
point one place to the right:
of a rodenticide bait containing 0.o05% brodifacoum.
0.01% = 0.1mg/g
The dog has had no previous access to the bait. Calculate
Determine the milligrams ingested:
the dosage in mg/kg. Will this patient require decontami-
0.1 mg/g x 28.35 g = 2.84 mg
 nation if a toxic dose of brodifacoum for dogs is 1 mg/kg
 Determine the mg/kg dosage:
2.84 mg/7.3kg = 0.39 mg/kg
Chapter 5/Essential Calcutations
37
Sample Calculation 4
An owner calls your clinic and informs you her 321b
tachycardia, hyperesthesia, mydriasis, hypersalivation,
 mixed breed dog ingested approximately 1/2 cup of snail
vormiting, ataxia, metabolic acidosis, tremors, seizures,
bait containing 2.75% metaldehyde 15 minutes ago. Cal-
and hyperthermia (Dolder 2003). Since the exposure was
culate the dosage in mg/kg. Is decontamination required?
recent and the owner lives 30 minutes from the clinic,
emesis was recommended at home but the owner was
 Determine the weight of the dog in kilograrms:
instructed to bring the dog in immediately if the dog
321bs/2.2kg = 14.5kg
began to act anxious or excited. Emesis was successful
Convert % to mg/g by rmoving the decimal point one
at home. Since the dosage was so large, the owners
place to the right:
brought the dog in for activated charcoal and overmight
2.75% = 27.5 mg/g
monitoring.
 Convert amount ingested to grams:
1/2 cup = 4oz x 28.35g =113.4g
Practice Calculation 4
Determine the milligrams ingested:
Your dog is at work with you and finds one ant bait
27.5 mg/g x 113.4g = 3118.5 mg
station in the bathroom. You find her chewing the bait.
 Determine the mg/kg dosage:
She has ripped open the bait and ingested the contents.
3118.5 mg/14.5kg = 215 mg/kg
She weighs 60 pounds and the bait is 1.98g and contains 
0.01% fipronil. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. What
Discussion
treatments, if any should be considered?
The dosage for this dog is well above the LDso in dogs
 of 100 mg/kg. The clinical signs that may develop include
Calculating dosages for topical (dermal, ocular, otic)
although the risk for intoxication is dependent on
exposures is done in the same manner as oral exposures
bioavailability.
Sample Calculation 5
A 2-year-old, 7lb neutered male domestic short-haired
Discussion
 cat presents at your clinic with muscle fasciculations and
Even a small amount of a concentrated permethrin
tremors. The owner applied a dermal fea spot-on product,
product applied dermally to a cat can cause significant
labeled for dogs, 10 hours earlier. The active ingredient
effects including tremors and seizures. Methocarbamol is
in the product is 45% perrmethrin and the applicator con-
very helpful in controlling these adverse effects. This cat
 tained 2 ml. Calculate the dermal dosage in mg/kg. Is this
was admitted to the hospital and given methocarbamol
 exposure the likely cause of the cat's clinical signs? What
intravenously. The tremors resolved and then the cat was
treatments should be performed?
decontaminated by bathing with a liquid dishwashing
detergent (Richardson 2000b).
Determine the weight of the cat in kilograms:
71bs/2.2kg = 3.2kg
Practice Calculation 5
 Convert liquid % to mg/ml by moving the decimal point
A cat in your practice is being treated for ear mites with
one place to the right:
ivermectin. The cat is to receive a subcutaneous dose of
45% = 450mg/ml
0.1 ml of a 1% ivermectin injectable product. The cat
 Deterrmine the milligrams placed on the skin:
weighs 12 pounds. By mistake, the cat is given 1 ml
2 ml × 450mg/ml = 900mg
instead. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. What decontami-
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
nation methods should be considered if any?
900 mg/3.2 kg = 281 mg/kg
For some toxicants, toxic doses have been determined
most toxic doses for iron are based on elemental iron, and
for a reference compound, and toxicants that are similar
iron containing compounds must be converted to an ele-
need to be converted to an equivalent in order to determine
 mental iron equivalent before calculating a dosage so that
the risk based on the reference cormpound. For instance,
comparison with known toxic dosages of iron can be
38
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
made. Table 5.2 lists the elemental iron level of various
sure. Table 5.3 lists conversion factors for vitamins. Other
iron-containing compounds. Similarly, vitamins are fre-
toxicants
requiring conversion include salicylate-
quently listed as international units (IU) rather than rmil-
containing compounds such as bismuth subsalicylate,
ligrams and a conversion to milligrams will need to be
which are converted to “aspirin-equivalent" dosages to
perforrmed in order to determine the risk of a given expo-
determine the risk.
Sample Calculation 6
An owner brings her 651b boxer into your clinic. He has
Convert ferrmus sulfate to elemental iron =
vomited twice but is normal on presentation. Earlier in
1814 mg x 37% (0.37) = 671 mg
the day the owner was gardening and was using a fertil-
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
izer. Her dog was outside with her and she caught him
671 mg/29.5kg = 22.7mg/kg
playing with the fertilizer bag. The contents were spilled
 all over the ground but she estimates 2 cups are missing
Discussion
and is concerned the dog may have ingested them. His
 Doses of elemental iron apprmximately 20mg/kg can
vomit contained material that looked like the fertilizer.
cause mild clinical effects including  vomiting and
The fertilizer contains 0.4% ferrous sulfate (anhydrous).
anorexia; therefore, the vomiting is likely due to the
Calculate the elemental iron dosage in mg/kg (see Table
exposure (Albretsen 2004). The treatment plan should
 5.2 for conversion factor). Is the vomiting expected with
 include managing the vormiting if needed and preventing
this ingestion? What is the best treatment plan?
dehydration. Life-threatening signs are not expected.
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
Practice Calculation 6
651bs/2.2kg = 29.5kg
A 451b basset hound got into his owner's vitamins and
Convert % to mg/g by moving the decimal point one
ingested up to 85 of each of the following: emulsified
place to the right:
vitamin A capsules (25001U/capsule), vitamin D cap-
0.4% = 4mg/g
sules (10001U/capsule), and vitamin E capsules (1000IU/
 Convert amount ingested to grams:
capsule). Calculate the dosages in mg/kg by using the
2 cups = 16oz x 28.35 g = 453.6g
conversion factors in Table 5.4. What clinical signs may
Deterrmine the milligrams ingested:
develop? What treatments should be considered?
4mg/g x 453.6g = 1814 mg
Not all calculations in toxicology relate to calculating
Most frequently, this entails diluting solutions to a given
exposure dosages. Often, calculations need to be done
concentration prior to administration to the patient.
when administering symptomatic or antidotal medications.
Sample Calculation 7
A veterinarian needs 7% ethanol solution to treat a cat
X ml = 233 ml
for ethylene glycol exposure. The veterinarian has 60
Remove 233 ml from a liter bag of fuids and replace it
proof ethanol (30%) available for dilution. Calculate the
with 233 ml of the ethanol.
"recipe" for mixing the ethanol with the fuids to produce
1 L of 7% solution (Plunkett 2001).
Practice Calculation 7
A 70lb dog has been admitted to your hospital for treat-
Discussion
ment of acetaminophen toxicosis. The dog will be receiv-
Use the following equation: Concentration, x Volume, =
ing a loading dose of 140mg/kg of a 5% solution of
Volume2 x Concentrationz
n-acetylcysteine (NAC) followed by seven additional
(% stock ethanol solution)(X ml) = (1000 ml)(7%) where
doses of 70mg/kg given every 6 hours (Plumb 2005).
X ml is how much ethanol needed
You are starting with 20% NAC and will be diluting it
(%L)（[40001) =([4  X)(%0)
.10
(0.3)(X
ml) =
with 5% dextrose. How much 20% NAC will you need?
(1000 ml)(0.07)
How much 5% dextrose will you mix it with?
Solve for X: X ml = ((1000ml)(.07))/(.3)
Chapter 5/Essential Calcutations
39
Table 5.2. Percentage of elemental iron in
Table 5.3. Conversion of vitamin International
various iron salts
Units to milligrams
Iron Form
% Elemental Iron
Vitamin
Milligrams (mg)
International Units (IU)
Ferric Hydroxide
63
Vitamin A
1
3333
Ferrous Carbonate (Anhydrous)
48
Vitamin D3
1
40,000
Ferric Phosphate
37
Vitamin E
0.67
Ferrous Sulfate (Anhydrous)
37
Source: Debraekeleer 2000.
Ferric Chloride
34
Ferrous Fumarate
33
Ferric Pyrophosphate
30
Ferrous Lactate
24
Ferrous Sulfate (Hydrate)
20
 Peptonized Iron
17
Ferroglycine Sulfate
16
Ferric Ammonium Citrate
15
Ferrous Gluconate
12
Ferrocholinate
12
Source: Albretsen 2004.
CHAPTER 5 REVIEW EQUATIONS
Max, an 80-pound Labrador retriever ingested the
4A. Billy and Banjo are bloodhounds. Billy is a neu-
entire contents of a 6.8g tube of horse dewormer
tered male, 9 years old, and 90 pounds; Banjo is
paste. The concentration of ivermectin in the
an intact male, 18 months old, and 95 pounds. Billy
paste is 1.87%. Calculate a dosage (mg/kg) of
is on chewable carprofen for arthritis. The dogs
ivermectin.
owner came home to find Billy's carprofen bottle
2
Mrs. Garner is concerned because the report from
chewed up on the foor and all of the tablets
the county extension office indicated that the level
missing. What information do you need to know
of the herbicide atrazine in her well water, which
to help deterrmine whether this exposure is serious?
was measured at 0.010ppm, exceeds the EPA rec-
4B. The owner is sure that Banjo is the culprit because
ommended upper limits of .003 ppm. She wants to
Billy's arthritis would not have allowed him to get
know if this level will be a problem for her 45-
to the medication, which was on the kitchen
pound, female spayed German shorthaired pointer
 counter. Which of the following is the best way to
named Sissy. We know that the no observable
handle this situation?
adverse effect level (NOAEL) of atrazine for dogs
a. Assume Banjo got all of the medication since
Aexadde yup shop ne pue Aepylug s!
the owner thinks he is the most likely culprit.
30 ml/lb/day. Does the level of atrazine in the water
Calculate a dose for Banjo only, assuming he
pose a hazard for Sissy?
 got all of the tablets.
3
Theo, a 12-pound domestic shorthair cat was given
b. Assume the dogs shared the medication and
1 tablet of Percocet by its owner. The medication
calculate a dosage for each dog based on each
contains 5 mg of oxycodone and 500 mg acetamin-
eating Iz of the missing tablets.
ophen per tablet. What is the dosage in mg/kg for
C. Assume each dog may have ingested the medi-
each of the ingredients? What types of clinical
cation and calculate dosages as if each dog got
signs might be expected frorm each ingredient in
the entire amount of medication.
the Percocet? (Hint: see Chapter 25, "Drugs of
4C. Seventy-five days ago, Billy's owner refilled his
Abuse," and Chapter 26, "OTC Drugs.")
carprofen prescription and received 180 100mg
Continued
40
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
tablets. The owner has administered 1 tablet twice
What is the approximate dosage of methylxan-
daily since the refill, and there are now no remain-
thines that the dog ingested? (Hint: Cocoa beans
ing tablets. Calculate a worst-case-scenario dosage
contain from 0.5%-0.85% theobromine.)
for each dog.
8
Buddy, a 25-pound beagle mix ingested 1.5oz of
Bailey, a 3-year-old, 16-pound Cavalier King
an unknown rodenticide. Calculate the dosage if
Charles spaniel chewed up three ant baits, ingest-
the rodenticide was:
ing the contents. The ant baits contained abamectin
0.01% bromethalin
b, at 0.01% and the package indicates each bait
0.005%bmdifacoum
station contains 0.07oz of bait. Calculate a dosage
0.075% cholecalciferol
(mg/kg) for Bailey's exposure.
9.
Two miniature schnauzers,(
Click and Clack,
A veterinarian needs 585 ml of 7% ethanol solution
ingested no more than 3 Tbsp of fire ant killer
to treat a cat for ethylene glycol exposure. The
granules containing 0.04% lambda cyhalothrin.
veterinarian has 60 proof vodka available for
Calculate the dosages if the dogs weigh 14 and 17
dilution. Calculate the “recipe" for mixing the
pounds, respectively.
ethanol with fuids to produce 585ml of 7%
10.
Mara is an 8-pound, 12-year-old Siamese cat
solution.
whose owner applied 5% minoxidil solution to an
Hooch, a 62-pound golden retriever got into the
area of alopecia on Mara's back. Now the owner
owner's garden shed and was found eating out of
is concemed that she should not have done that.
the bag of cocoa bean mulch. The owner estimates
She estimates she used no more than 1/10 tsp of
that no more than 1-2 cups of mulch could have
liquid. The area where the minoxidil was applied
been eaten based on what's left in the bag and the
is an area that Mara cannot reach to groom. Cal-
amount of time the dog was alone in the shed.
culate a topical dosage of minoxidil.
maximum level for drinking water for humans.
For Billy: 3000mg/41 kg = 73 m/kg
even though it exceeds the EPA's recommended
 B1 0o0 = aq/8 001 x s1aq10
zine in the well water will not pose a hazard to Sissy.
150 = 30 tablets missing
(5 mg/kg/day) shows us that this concentration of atra-
180tablets minus 75 daysworth (150tablets) = 180 
Comparing our results to the known NOAEL for dogs
 Calculate the maximum number of tablets ingested:
Discussion
Banjo: 951b/2.2kg/1b = 43 kg
Billy: 901b/2.2kg/lb = 41kg
kg/day
4C. Calculate the weight of each dog in kilograms:
/Bw 99000' = 8x s'0z Aq papIA1p Xep/8u se10'0
suspect is the guilty party.
     s  n a t
0.0135mg/day
have.
Ap/uge100 = Apa se'1 x [/8w0100
tablets missing, and any health issues the dogs
0.010ppm = 0.010mg/l
4A. Milligram strength of the carprofen, the number of
Determine the daily exposure to atrazine:
cause any life-threatening issues.
day
oxycodone could cause sedation, it is not likely to
30ml/lb x 451b = 1350ml per day = 1.35 liter/
hemoglobinemia and liver injury in Theo. Although the
2. Determine Sissy's daily water intake:
127.16mg/36.4kg = 3.49 mg/kg
Discussion
 Calculate the dosage ingested:
6.8 g x 18.7 mg/g = 127.16mg
5 mg oxycodone/5.5kg = 0.9 mg/kg
1.87% = 18.7mg/g
Bx/u 16 = Sx S's/uaydouueaon bwoos
Calculate the dose of ivermectin ingested:
Calculate the dosages for each ingredient:
t9g = punod/8xz'z/spunod 0g
121b/2.2kg/lb = 5.5kg
1. Convert Max's weight to kilograms:
3. Convert the cat's weight to kg:
ANSWERS
Chapter 5/Essential Calcutations
41
3588.6mg/28.2kg = 136.7 mg/kg
Clack: 18 mg/7.3kg = 2.5 mg/kg
Calculate Hooch's dosage of theobromine:
Click: 18 mg/6.4 kg = 2.8 mg/kg
8.5 mg/g × 453.6 g = 3855.6mg theobromine
Calculate dosages for each dog:
Calculate mg theobromine ingested:
45 g x 0.4 mg/g = 18 mg
0.85% = 8.5mg/g
 Calculate milligrams ingested
Convert 0.85% to mg/g:
3Tbsp x 15g/tbsp. = 45g
2cups = 16oz; 16oz X 28.35g/oz = 453.6g
Convert 3 tablespoons to grams
Convert 2 cups to grams:
0.04% =0.4mg/g
621b/2.2kg/lb = 28.2kg
Convert percent lambda cyhalothrin to mg/g:
 Convert Hooch's weight to kilograms:
Clack: 17 pounds/2.2kg/pound = 7.3kg
theobromine.
Click: 14 pounds/2.2kg/pound = 6.4kg
7. Assume a worst-case scenario of 2 cups and 0.85%
9. Convert weight from pounds to kilograms:
obtain 585 ml of 7% ethanol.
mia the levels elevate.
Add 136.5 ml of vodka to 448.5 ml stock fuids to
Buddy should be started on treatment for hypercalce-
X ml = (7 × 585 ml)/30 = 136.5 ml
should be monitored every 12-24 hours for 4 days and
30% (×ml) = 7% (585 ml)
becomes elevated. Serum calcium and phosphorous
60proof vodka is 30% ethanol
hours and the dog placed on vitamin K if the PT
Volumez X Concentrationz
should be obtained. PT can be repeated in 48 and 72
6. Use this formula: Concentration, x Volume =
bin time (PT), serum calcium, and serum phosphorus
dose is unlikely to cause any serious problems.
charcoal administration is needed. Baseline prothrom-
P-glycoprotein deficiency has been documented, this
would be sufficient, but for the other two activated
three types. For bromethalin, induction of emesis alone
P-glycoprotein deficient (e.g-, collies, Shetland sheep-
known, Buddy should be managed as if he ingested all
 a ssan son u sd  a
kind of bait it was. Since the type of rodenticide is not
mectin is within the therapeutic range and would not
This ingestion merits decontamination regardless of the
about 0.326mg/kg of ivermectin, This dose of iver-
Discussion
assume it is well absorbed, this dose is equivalent to
lacking to determine how well it is absorbed. If we
2.8mg/kg
potent as ivermectin, although kinetic information is
Cholecalciferol: (0.75 mg/g X 42.5 g)/11.4kg =
and moxidectin. It is thought to be about 4 times as
mg/kg
related to compounds such as ivermectin, milbemycin,
Abamectin b, is a macrolide antiparasiticidal agent
mg/kg
Discussion
= ×) 
Calculate dosages:
0.595 mg/7.3kg = 0.082 mg/kg
0.075% cholecalciferol = 0.75 mg/g
ingested
0.005% brodifacoum = 0.05 mg/g
b
abamectin
Bw 56S'0 = 8/8u 1'0 x 856'9
0.01% bromethalin = 0.1 mg/g
0.01% = 0.1mg/g
Convert percentages to mg/g:
56=×86
1.5 oz x 28.35g/oz = 42.5 g
1 1q 1 8861 = 8 9587 × (20 20'0)
Convert 1.5 ounces to grams:
 Calculate the amount of abamectin b, ingested:
251b/2.2kg/lb = 11.4 kg
161b/2.2kg/lb = 7.3kg
 8. Convert Buddy's weight to kilograms:
 5. Convert Bailey's weight to kilograms:
symptomatic care for any signs that develop.
treatment.
Hooch will need decontamination, monitoring, and
dogs. Both Billy and Banjo need to come in for
cardiovascular and central nervous system effects.
cause gastrointestinal ulceration and renal injury in
Doses of theobromine over 60mg/kg can cause serious
Doses of carprofen over 40 mg/kg have the potential to
Discussion
Discussion
Continued
42
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
seg 9'0 = dsi01/1 0s 'swa g = ds11
application and monitor Mara for hypotension.
Convert 1/10 tsp to grams:
safest course of action would be to bathe the area of
5% =50mg/g
absorption carries a risk of systemic involvement, the
Convert percentage minoxidil to mg/g:
established for cats, and it is not clear whether dermal
8pounds/2.2kg/pound = 3.6 kg
effects in cats. Although toxic doses have not been
10. Convert Mara's weight to kilograms:
growth, but it can also have profound cardiovascular
would be prudent to prevent diarhea.
Minoxidil is a drug that is used for increasing hair
would occur with this exposure, decontamination
   s ao sis 
Discussion
resulted in neurological signs. Although it is unlikely
25 mg/3.6kg = 6.9mg/kg
Aep/ay/bu g'e :eauueip pasneo Aep/ayysu g'z 'shop u!
 Calculate Mara's topical dosage:
moderate degree of toxicity. In chronic feeding studies
0.5 g × 50mg/g = 25 mg
Calculate the dose of minoxidil:
Discussion
REFERENCES
and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp. 2-17. St. Louis: Elsevier
 Albretsen, Jay C. 2004. Iron. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicol-
Saunders.
ogy, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 202-204. St. Louis:
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Acetylcysteine. In Plumb's Veteri-
Mosby.
nary Drug Handbook, 5th ed, Pp. 9-10. Ames, Iowa:
Debraekeleer, Jacques. 2000. Appendices. In Small Animal
Blackwell Publishing Professional.
Clinical Nutrition, 4th ed., edited by Michael S. Hand,
Plunkett, Signe J. 2001. Ethylene glycol intoxication. In
Craig D. Thatcher, Rebecca L. Remillard and Philip Roude-
Emergency Procedures for theSmall Animat Veterinarian,
bush, p. 1001. Topeka: Mark Morris Institute.
 2nd ed., Pp. 319-326. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Dolder, Linda K. 2003. Metaldehyde toxicosis. Veterinary
Richardson, Jill A. 2000a. Management of acetaminophen
Medicine 98(3):213-215.
 and ibuprofen toxicoses in dogs and cats. Jourmat Veteri-
Dunayer, Eric K. 2003. Bromethalin: The other rodenticide.
nary Emergency and Critical Care 10(4):285-291.
Veterinary Medicine 98(9):732-736.
. 2000b. Permethrin spot-On toxicoses in cats. Journat
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2001. Chocolate intoxication. Vet-
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 10(2):103-106.
erinary Medicine 96(2):108-111.
Spoo, Wayne. 2004. Concepts and terminology. In Clinica!
Jenkins, C.C. and Kanara, E.W. 1998. First-year clinical expe-
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp.
rience with Rimadyl (carprofen): Assessment of product
2-7. St. Louis: Mosby.
safety.Pfzer Animal Heaith Technical Bulletin,May 1998
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. General nonsteroidal antinflam-
Exton, Pennsylvania.
matories. In Small Animal Toxicotogy, 2nd ed., edited by
Osweiler Gary D. 1996. Toxicology. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933.
Williams & Wilkens.
St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
. 2006. General toxicological principles. In Small
Youssef, Hany. 2006. Hyperactivity and disorientation in a
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson
cat. NAVC Clinican's Brief 4(12):49-56.
Initial Management of
Acute Intoxications
Elisa Petrollini-Rogers and Bridget McNally
TELEPHONE TRIAGE
HOSPITAL PRESENTATION
The initial contact with a patient client is often over the
 telephone. It is imperative that reception asks the appropri-
Triage and History
ate questions to better instruct the client on what further
An emergency can be described as any situation that
steps need to be taken. One of the first queries should be
arises suddenly and unexpectedly resulting in a sudden
to obtain the animal's signalment: species, breed, age, and
need for action. Upon presentation to the hospital/clinic,
approximate body weight. The information obtained from
a member of the medical team should triage the patient.
this question can greatly impact the course of treatment.
Triage refers to an initial, brief assessment of the ermer-
A toxicant that may not affect a 100-pound Great Dane
gency patient. It is performed immediately on presentation
could greatly harrm a 5-pound Devon Rex. Other inforrma-
and should take less than 5 minutes. Triage involves a
tion that should be obtained includes the type of exposure
cursory evaluation of the four major organ systems (car-
or ingestion, the length of time elapsed since the said
diovascular, respiratory, neurological, and renal) while
exposure or ingestion, and the amount of potential toxj-
simultaneously obtaining an abbreviated history. Conver-
cant. It is also important for reception to ask about the
sation should be limited to significant points only, avoid-
patient's mental state (ie., alert, disoriented, reduced
ing unrelated details. The history should include the
responsiveness, unresponsive). Although a client's estima-
primary complaint, duration of the problerm, and any
tion ofthe pet's mentation may not be cormpletely accurate,
current drug therapy. The basic principles of emergency
a general idea about the pet's level of consciousness can
patient assessment should be applied even in the face of
be forrmulated. After this information is obtained, recep-
a potential poisoning.
tion can then ask a veterinary medical staff member on
The goal of triage is to deterrmine whether the patient
duty whether the patient should seek medical attention. If
can be categorized as stable or unstable, allowing appro-
there is a doubt on the patient's stability, the client should
priate prioritization of care. A stable patient is one that
be advised to seek medical attention immediately.
is not in an immediate life-threatening condition. An
Clients should be advised to bring any material or pack-
unstable or emergent patient is one that is experiencing
ages to which the patient may have had access. It is also
life-threatening signs and requires quick judgment and
advised that any vomitus from the patient be collected in
timely action. If any of the major body systems are sig-
a sealed container and brought into the hospital.
nificantly abnormal, the patient should immediately be
SmatlAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
43
44
Section 1 1 Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
taken to the main treatment room of the emergency room
veterinarian. Other abnormal findings include labored
to be assessed by the veterinarian.
inspiration and/or labored expiration or paradoxical respi-
 In the emergent patient who has been exposed to a toxi-
ration (chest wall and abdominal wall do not move syn-
cant, the history is one of the most valuable pieces of
chronously). Postural adaptations associated with
 information (Fitzgerald, 2006). Acquiring a detailed history
respiratory distress may be seen is distressed patients as
can be the most difficult step, and further information on
well (e.g-, standing rather than sitting, abducted elbows,
history-taking is found in Chapter 4. It is not uncommon
abdominal effort, extended neck, head lifted, etc.).
for clients to be unaware that the patient was exposed to
atoxicant. Recognizing clinical signs of common toxicants
CardiovascularSystem
is an important skill in emergency medicine. The diagnosis
Assessment of the cardiovascular system includes deter-
of toxicant ingestion is generally based on a history of a
mination of mucous membrane color, capillary refill time,
witnessed exposure and/or suspicious clinical signs exhib-
heart rate, and rhythm and pulse quality.
ited by the patient. It is not an uncommon occurrence for
Normal mucous membrane color should be pink. Muddy
clients to believe that the patient has been poisoned in the
 or gray color suggests poor perfusion. Pale or white color
face of an acute illness. Common diseases may imitate
suggests anemia, shock or pain; brick red mucous mem-
toxicant ingestion,and vice versa
brane color (hyperemic) is seen in situations including
If a toxic substance is known or suspected, but treatment
sepsis, hyperdynamic states, and hyperthermia. Dark blue
options are not known or are immediately unavailable, a
(cyanotic) mucous mermbranes suggest hypoxemia frorm a
poison control center should be contacted. The ASPCA
variety of causes (cardiac dysfunction, pulmonary insuffi-
Animal Poison Control Center (1-800-548-2423) has the
ciency, etc.). Yellow or icteric mucous membranes occur in
largest accumulation of veterinary toxicologists special-
cases of hepatic dysfunction, hemolysis, or biliary obstruc-
izing in the effects of toxicants in animals (rather than
tion. Brown mucous membranes and blood are seen in
people). Pet Poison Helpline (800-213-6680) is staffed
cases of methemoglobinemia, which in companion animals
with an array of board specialized veterinarians (toxicol-
is most commonly seen with acetaminophen toxicosis.
ogy, critical care, intemal medicine) as well as toxicolo-
Normal capillary refill time (CRT) is 1-2 seconds. If the
gists specializing in human toxicology (PharmDs). Both
CRT is prolonged, this indicates poor perfusion. Rapid
poison control centers charge consultation fees. More
CRT indicates a hyperdynamic state or hemoconcentration.
information on this and other toxicology information
Normal pulse rates for canines are 80-120 beats per
resources can be found in Chapter 2. Treatment can then
 minute (bpm) with <70bpm suggesting bradycardia and
be initiated in accordance with the recormmendations pro-
>140bpm suggesting tachycardia (Plumb 2005). For
vided for the specific toxicant.
felines, normal pulse rates range from 130-140bpm with
<100bpm suggesting bradycardia and >180bpm suggest-
Initial Assessment
ing tachycardia. When assessing heart rate, it is important
The initial assessment should include assessment of the
to consider the animal's mental status, because excitement
major organ systems and vital signs, obtaining vascular
from being transported and handled may spuriously elevate
access, and an initial database followed by development
the rate, and sleeping or comatose animals may have lower
of the emergency plan.
heart rates.
The pulse quality should be strong and synchronous
Respiratory System
with heart rate. Weak pulses indicate poor perfusion. Pulse
One always determines the patency of the airway first.
quality feels "tall and thin" when associated with anemia;
Ideally, patent and clear breath sounds should be heard. If
"bounding" pulses suggest hypertension.
the patient is in distress, upper airway noise (stridor/
stertor) and/or distress with inspiration associated with
Central Nervous System
stridor may be noted. This can be assessed without the use
The patient's central nervous system can initially be
of a stethoscope.
assessed by the evaluation of its gait (ataxia, loss of motor
The respiratory rate should be also be noted; normal for
function), level of consciousness, and pupil size and posi-
dogs and cats is considered to be 12-32 respirations per
tion. Muscle twitching may be observed with some toxic
minute (rpm). If tachypnea (increased respiratory rate);
exposures such as pyrethroid, chocolate, orethylene glycol
slow, prolonged breathing; or apnea (no respiration) is
 toxicoses. The following levels of consciousness can be
noted, the patient should be immediately assessed by a
observed:
Chapter 6 / Initial Management of Acute Intoxications
45
Alert: Normal
determined, the direct effects and any secondary conse-
Depressed: Quiet,
, unwilling to perform normally;
quences of it can be predicted. In situations where the
responds to environmental stimuli
toxicant is not known, the diagnostic approach must be
Obtunded: Minimally responsive to auditory or tactile
based upon clinical signs, a thorough history, and response
stimuli
to symptomatic therapy.
Stuporous: Unresponsive to
environmental
1stimuli;
Once the patient has been appropriately triaged and vital
responds to painful stimuli
signs stabilized, a systematic approach to diagnostics
Comatose: No response to environmental and painful
should be taken. If possible, during venous access, blood
stimuli
samples should be collected. A serum chemistry/
electmolytes, blood gas, and complete blood cell count
Renal System
(CBC) should be analyzed as a baseline assessment.
On triage, the renal system is assessed with abdominal
Depending on the history and clinical signs, ECG, blood
palpation when urinary blockage is suspected. Other ermer-
smear, coagulation panel, and urinalysis may also reveal
gencies affecting the renal systerm are identified while
further evidence of a toxicosis. Other diagnostics that may
assessing the patient's cardiovascular status.
provide useful information include radiographs, illicit
drug screening, or ethylene glycol testing.
VASCULAR ACCESS AND
THE EMERGENCY DATABASE
Blood Gases
Intravenous access should be obtained in any critically ill
patient for administration of fuids and drugs. The most
patient's acid-base status. Many intoxicated patients will
common vessels used for intravenous catheterization are
present with a history of vomiting, diarrhea, respiratory
the cephalic or lateral saphenous veins. Central venous
distress, or seizures. Although these clinical signs may be
access the medial fermoral or jugular vein allows for a
 secondary, patients will likely present with sorme degree
larger diameter catheter to be placed, which is ideal for
of acid-base derangement. The rapid evaluation of blood
allowing achievement of higher drug concentrations in the
gas parameters is highly useful and can provide great
coronary vessels as well as rapid fuid administration.
insight to the patient's acid-base status.
These vessels are not as accessible as the peripheral
Metabolic acidosis is characterized as a pH of <7.2 with
vessels. In neonates, the easiest and most expeditious way
a base excess of <4 (Waddell 2004). Mild acidosis may be
to obtain vascular access is via intraosseous catheter place-
corrected with intravenous Huid therapy and management
ment. Ideally, at this time a blood sample may be collected
of the underlying disease, whereas more severe metabolic
and stored for future toxicological analysis, because some
acidosis may require sodium bicarbonate therapy.
medications that may subsequently be administered may
Respiratory acidosis may be present in the intoxicated
interfere with diagnostic tests (e.g, propylene glycol in
patient, this is characterized by a pH of <7.2 and PCO, of
diazepam injectable solutions will cause a false positive
>45 (Waddell 2004). Respiratory acidosis may be due to
on ethylene glycol tests (Thrall et al. 2006)).
the effect of the toxicant on the respiratory center in the
After the patient has been stabilized and decontami-
central nervous system (CNS) as well as interference with
nated (if appropriate) and vascular access obtained, a
innervation of the intercostal muscles. There is also the
medical problem list should be generated in the order of
potential for respiratory acidosis to occur with the use of
most to least life-threatening. Each problem should then
medications causing respiratory depression, resulting in
be addressed in that order. Categories that should be
hypoventilation. This is especially important with patients
covered include fuid therapy, medications, diagnostics,
treated with high doses of anticonvulsants or opioids.
and treatment orders.
Lactic acidosis is due to the large amounts of lactic acid
produced in response to excessive muscle activity. This
Emergency Database
can occur with seizure activity or with toxicants causing
Most moderm veterinary hospitals are well equipped and
tremorgenic activity such as pyrethroid toxicosis or trem-
have the ability to provide in-house diagnostics. Using
orgenic mycotoxin ingestion. This type of acidosis will
these tools, rapid evaluation of the poisoned patient's
generally resolve on its own once the seizures or trermors
metabolic and hydration status can be perforrmed. This
have been controlled. In other situations, hypoperfusion
information will aid in the overall approach to and outcome
may result in lactic acidosis, requiring intravenous fuid
for these patients. If the exact toxicant has already been
therapy to resolve.
46
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
If a patient presents with severe vomiting or diarrhea, a
glycemia can occur due to conditions such as sepsis, liver
blood gas may reveal a metabolic alkalosis (pH >7.4, base
dysfunction, neonatal/juvenile hypoglycemia, insulin or
excess >4). In the case of ongoing gastrointestinal losses
insulin-like factor secreting tumors, xylitol ingestion
(i.e., potassium, chloride), it is important to treat the under-
(dogs) or alpha-lipoic acid ingestion. A transient hypergly-
lying cause and provide appropriate therapy for the vomit-
cemia can occur in overly stressed patients (particularly
ing and diarrhea to resolve the metabolic alkalosis.
felines). True hyperglycemia is most commonly due to
Hyperventilation can cause a respiratory alkalosis.
diabetes mellitus.
Based on a blood gas, this can be defined as a PCO, of
<35 rmmHg. This type of disturbance is most comrmonly
Blood Urea Nitrogen
seen in patients presenting hypoxemic or who have
Determination of the BUN provides an estimate of renal
ingested something causing excitement, therefore stimu-
and hepatic function as well as hydration status. Low BUN
lating the respiratory system. Respiratory alkalosis can
concentration may be the result of fuid diuresis. Other
also result from excessive ventilation in the patient that is
causes can be polydipsia/polyuria or decreased production
being mechanically ventilated.
of BUN due to liver disease or a portal-caval vascular
shunt. BUN can be elevated due to prerenal, renal, or
Hematocritand TotalSolids
postrenal mechanisms, and all of these should be consid-
The packed cell volume (PCV; aka hematocrit [Hct]) and
ered when an increase in BUN is detected.
total solids (TS) are generally interpreted in conjunction
The amount of information obtained from the emer-
with each other. The changes in the two parameters often
gency database in regard to the patient's status should not
parallel each other in situations of free water loss or hem-
be underestimated.This information combined with a
orrhage. Decrease in both PCV and TS suggests hemor-
solid history and thorough physical exam can often assist
rhage. Acute blood loss will not immediately affect PCV
in confirrming a diagnosis or providing direction for further
and TS because it takes time for interstitial fuid to move
investigation.
into the vascular space and dilute out the remaining red
blood cells and proteins. In canines, splenic contractions
Serum Chemistry and Electrolytes
secondary to catecholamine release may actually cause a
Serum chemistry and electrolyte panels are important to
transient increase in PCV in the face of acute hemorrhage.
assess because some alterations in these measurements
The changes in packed cell volume will become immedi-
may be a direct result of the toxicant. Many toxicants
ately apparent with intravenous fuid replacement. Because
affect renal function (i.e., ethylene glycol). If there is evi-
of this phenomenon, some consider TS to be a more sensi-
dence of azotemia or acute renal failure, one then can
tive indicator of blood loss than PCV. A decreased PCV
 move forward with diuresis and other appropriate therapy.
with normal TS indicates red blood cell destruction or
Some toxicants (e.g-, xylitol) may result in acute hepatic
decreased red blood cell production. Anemia of chronic
failure or necrosis, which will be reflected in the liver
disease is characterized by a decreased PCV with normal
enzymes. Blood glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, or
TS. The foremost clinical significance to a decreased PCV
chloride concentrations can also be altered by various toxi-
is reduced oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood.
cants, such as calcium channel blockers, digitalis, or
Decreased total solids may occur due to loss from hemor-
vitamin D-based rodenticides. Evaluation of serum chem-
rhage, protein loss into third spaces, or extermal loss
istry and electrolyte results can provide clues into the
through the intestines or kidneys. Hypoproteinemia results
original cause of the abnormalities and provide feedback
in decreased intravascular oncotic pressure. This may
on response to therapy.
result in loss of fuid from the intravascular space and
decreased ability to maintain vascular volume and blood
Hematology
pressure. Increases in both TS and PCV are most com-
Complete blood cell count (CBC) and peripheral blood
monly due to dehydration.
smear analysis are useful tools in diagnosing hematologi-
cal abnormalities. The CBC provides information on the
Blood Glucose
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood by measuring red
Blood glucose readings are an essential portion of the
blood cell parameters. The CBC helps classify anemia as
emergency data base. Normal blood glucose ranges from
acute or chronic as well as deterrmine whether regeneration
80-120g/dl, and severe aberrations (either elevations or
is occurring, all of which can assist in formulating a list
depressions) can be life-threatening to the patient. Hypo-
of differential diagnoses. Measurement of white blood cell
Chapter 6 / Initial Management of Acute Intoxications
47
parameters can assist in identifying and characterizing
tion of clotting factors, which results in uncontrolled hem-
infammatory or infectious mechanisms.
orrhage. Because most animals have a "reserve"'of clotting
Peripheral blood smear analysis is performed to evalu-
factors, exposure to these rodenticides generally will not
 ate the appearance of the cellular components of the blood
result in prolongation of PT or aPTT until 36-48 hours
(red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets), identify the
postingestion.
presence of hematologic infectious agents (e.g-, Dirof-
 Illicit drug screening has become an invaluable tool
laria orBabesia) and identify any other changes thatmay
used in cases where illicit drug ingestion is suspected.
assist in diagnosis. For example, the presence of Heinz
There are several types of these tests available at most
bodies and methemoglobinemia can put acetaminophen
pharmacies, designed for home monitoring of drug use.
toxicosis on the list of differential diagnoses. During acute
The tests are easy to perform, inexpensive, require only a
toxicosis, some changes may not be evident in the first
small amount of urine, and pmovide results within a matter
24-48 hours and it may be necessary to reevaluate a CBC
of minutes. The kits can screen for two to ten substances
at a later time. For patients who may need a transfusion,
including amphetarmines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
blood typing should be performed and potential appropri-
cocaine, methadone, methamphetamine, nicotine, opiates,
ate donor animals identified. If blood typing is unavailable,
phencyclidine, and tricyclic antidepressants. Most of the
the “universal donor" blood may be administered (DEA
tests for amphetamines will cross-react with sympathomi-
1.1 Negative in dogs and Type A in cats).
 metic drugs such as pseudoephedrine or ma huang, so they
can sometimes be helpful if ingestion of these legal drugs
Urinalysis
is suspected. Based on clinical experience, in many kits,
Urine should be collected for a baseline screening in the
the test for marijuana apparently does not give consistent
toxic patient, especially in patients who have ingested or
results (ie., gives false negatives), possibly due to differ-
have been exposed to nephrotoxic substances such as eth-
ences in the metabolites excreted between humans and
ylene glycol or lilies. A complete urinalysis will provide
 dogs. Other than the issue with marijuana, the kits appear
useful information in deterrmining the ability of the kidneys
to work very well in a clinical setting. These tests have not
to concentrate urine. The presence of hemoglobinuria, glu-
been validated in nonhumans, meaning they would not
cosuria, proteinuria, cellular or granular casts, pigments,
stand up in a court of law, but they have great utility in
and crystals can aid in narrowing down the cause of renal
assisting veterinary staff in diagnosis of suspected drug
dysfunction. For example, patients with ethylene glycol
ingestion. Keep in mind that any positive result based upon
toxicosis may develop calcium oxalate crystalluria within
the use of a drug screening kit is not considered confirma-
68 hours of exposure; however, absence of oxalate crys-
tory, and false positive or negative results can occur. If
tals does not rule out ethylene glycol as a potential toxi-
 someone wishes to pursue a case legally following a posi-
cant, because not all patients will develop detectable
tive on an OTC test kit (i.e., suspected malicious poison-
crystalluria.
ing), blood and urine should subsequently be submitted to
a validated diagnostic laboratory for analysis that will be
AdditionalTesting
acceptable in a court of law. Some clients may be reluctant
During the course of patient management, additional
to have the test performed for fear of police authority
testing may be indicated based on the clinical status of the
 involvement. As an animal care provider, it is very impor-
patient or changes in historical information received from
tant to reassure clients that the only concern is for appro-
clients. Tests such as coagulation profiles, illicit drug
priate therapy for their pet. The cooperation of the client
screening, other drug or chemical screening, radiography,
 and the ability to provide illicit drug screening allows for
electrocardiography, and ultrasound can assist in identify-
a targeted treatment plan that can greatly improve the
ing causes and measuring response to therapy.
overall outcome of these patients.
Coagulation profiles are used to detect changes in the
Ethylene glycol testing is used in detecting the presence
clotting pararmeters of the blood, especially prolonged pro-
of high serum concentrations of ethylene glycol. Ethylene
thrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time
glycol (EG) is the major component found in many com-
(aPTT). These profiles (or individual tests) are often per-
mercial antifreeze products. This test is most reliable in
formed at the clinic and are helpful in diagnosing coagu-
the first 4 hours after ingestion; however, based on the
lopathy from a variety of causes, including anticoagulant
amount of EG ingested, levels may be detectable in excess
mdenticide toxicosis. Anticoagulant rodenticides interfere
of 12 hours postingestion. False negatives and false
with recycling of vitamin K in the body, leading to deple-
positives can occur with the existing tests available for
48
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
in-house use in veterinary clinics. Details of these issues
Electrocardiography (ECG) may help detect arrhyth-
can be found in the discussion on ethylene glycol in
mias a patient may be experiencing. Many patients intoxi-
Chapter 28.
cated
with substances such as methylxanthines,
Human hospital laboratories may be helpful in deter-
amphetamines, cocaine, or albuterol will present with
mining exposure to a variety of toxicants, including EG
sinus tachycardia or ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Brady-
and acetaminophen. When in-house EG testing is not
cardia and bradyarrhythmias may present in patients
available, or there is concern that the test result may be a
exposed to substances such as organophosphorous insec-
false positive, human hospital laboratories can run an EG
ticides, pharmaceuticals (e.g., beta-adrenergic blockers),
test that will give a specific level of EG in the blood. For
and alcohol. Bradyarrhythmias can also occur in patients
dogs, the level of concern is 50mg/dl or greater and for
with severe electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hyperkalemia)
cats the level of concern is 20mg/dl or greater. Tests run
secondary to a toxicosis (e.g-, digitalis toxicosis). The use
in human hospitals for EG are very sensitive and specific.
of appropriate antiarrhythmic medication will be dictated
so the false positives and negatives seen in the in-house
by the veterinarian based on the type and severity of the
veterinary EG tests are not an issue. In many situations,
abnorrmal rhythm. Continuous ECG monitoring is recom-
there is concern that a cat or dog may have been exposed
mended when treating these patients.
to acetaminophen. In these cases, human hospitals can
analyze blood for acetaminophen levels, which can tell
CONCLUSION
whether the animal was exposed; unfortunately, nomo-
 There are a variety of reasons that animals may present to
 grams do not exist for dogs and cats to deterrmine subtoxic
an ermergency service, including infectious, infammatory,
doses from toxic doses, but these test can help with the
metabolic and toxic processes. In many circurmstances
question “Did he/she eat it?
involving poisoning, the cause of the animal's condition
Radiography may be useful in providing evidence of a
may not be known, particularly in cases where exposure
metallic foreign body. Common radiopaque materials
to a toxicant was not witnessed. Having a systematic
include batteries, screws, galvanized metal, and coins.
approach to these patients is paramount to identifying the
Sorme heavy metals are proven to be highly toxic. For
major health issues present. Patient stabilization is essen-
example, a patient presenting with acute hemolytic anemia
tial to keeping the patient alive while the underlying
should have radiographs taken to look for coins (pennies 
problem is diagnosed and treated. Evaluation of the
minted after 1982) to rule out zinc toxicosis. If radiographs
patient's clinical status and detailed historical information
are diagnostic, an endoscopy or a gastrotomy will be
are often necessary to identify the inciting cause and
required after patient stabilization.
pmovide prompt and appropriate treatment.
CHAPTER 6 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Initial triage of a poisoning patient includes quick
closing) or to being touched by lifting her head and
assessment of the function of which of the following
jerking slightly. Her level of consciousness is best
systems?
assessed as
a. Neurmlogic
a. Alert
b. Renal
b. Depressed
c. Cardiovascular
c. Obtunded
d. Respiratory
d.Stuporous
e. All of the above
e. Comatose
2. List the four parameters that are used during the
4. Tiffany has a heart rate of 70bpm, capillary refill time
assessment of cardiovascular function.
of 5 seconds, gray mucous mermbranes, and thready
3. Tiffany, a 10-week-old female intact Siamese kitten
pulses. Which of the following assessments best
presents 3 hours after the owner applied a spot-on
 rmatch Tiffany's cardiovascular status?
 canine fea control product containing amitraz to the
a.1
 Bradycardic, hypertensive
kitten's skin. During the initial assessrment, Tiffany is
b. Bradycardic, hypotensive
found to be recurmbent and drooling. She appears
c. Norrmal heart rate, hypotensive
minimally aware of her surroundings but does react
d. Tachycardic, hypertensive
to sudden noises (such as the sound of a cage door
e. Tachycardic, hypotensive
Chapter 6 / Initiat Management of Acute Intoxications
49
5. Tiffany's body temperature is 96°F and her blood
c. Give Tiffany some insulin to drop the blood
glucose (via quick enzymatic strip test) is >200mg/
glucose.
dl. Which of the following is the correct assessment
d. Insert intravenous catheter and initiate IV fuid
for Tiffany?
therapy using warmed fuids.
 a. Hyperthermic, hyperglycemic
e. Bathe the flea product off of Tiffany.
b. Hypertherrmic, hypoglycemic
7. Tiffany is stabilized, bathed, and placed in a cage with
C. Hypothermic, hyperglycermic
 a heating pad. What parameters should be monitored
d. Hypotherrmic, normoglycemic
closely over the next several hours?
e. Hypothermic, hypoglycemic
a. Heart rate
 6. What is the most appropriate next step to take after
b. Capillary refill time
Tiffany's initial assessment?
C.
Fluid ins and outs
a. Obtain a detailed history from Tiffany's owner.
d. Body temperature
b. Put Tiffany in a cage with a hot water bottle.
e. All of the above
are consistent with hypotension.
Aenb as[nd jood pue lo[oo auaiquau snoonu 
closely.
dia, and the prolonged capillary refill time,
paoou aq prnous samnd aan jo  
7.e.
A heart rate of <100bpm in a kitten is bradycar-
4.b.
done after the kitten is stabilized.
tactile and auditory stimuli.
Obtaining a history and bathing the cat should be
 0l aisuodsn Auu ane seue papo
3.C.
indicated to help manage the hypotension.
quality.
stabilize the patient. In this case, fuid therapy is
lary refill time, heart rate and rhythm, and pulse
 Following assessment, steps should be taken to
6.d.
hyperglycemia.
 patient triage.
levels   >120mg/dl  indicate
blood  glucose  1
Sunp passassn aq isnu sansss asa yo 
1.e.
Body temperature <100°F is hypothermia, and
5.c.
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Thrall, Mary A., Connally, Heather E., Grauer, Gregory F,
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook,
and Hamar, Dwayne. 2006. Zinc phosphide. In Small
Sth ed Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed, edited by Michael E. Peterson
Fitzgerald, Kevin T. 2006. Taking a toxicological history. In
and Patricia A. Talcot, pp. 38-44. St. Louis: Saunders.
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed, edited by Michael E.
Waddell, Lori S. 2004. Evaluation and Interpretation of Blood
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcot, Pp. 38-44. St. Louis:
Gases. Proceedings of the Western Veterinary Conference,
Saunders.
RenoNevada
Antidotes
Tina Wismer
INTRODUCTION
CHEMICAL ANTIDOTES
Antidotes are remedies to counteract poisons. They can
prevent, reverse, or decrease the action of a toxicant.
Chelators
While many clients “just want the antidote, there are
Chelators, from the Greek word for claw, bind toxicants
some very real obstacles to this in many situations (Post
(usually metals) in a ring structure to increase their water
and Keller 1999). First, the vast majority of toxicants have
solubility and excretion (Bateman and Marrs 1999). Che-
no specific antidote, so treatment is symptomatic and sup-
lators decrease levels of free toxicant in the blood,decrease
portive. Second, even in situations where an antidote
tissue concentrations, and increase elimination. A chelator
exists,there are often obstacles to its use (cost, availability,
should be chosen that is resistant to biotransforrmation, is
etc.). Many manufacturers do not produce antidotes
able to reach sites of toxicant storage, forms nontoxic
because there is litle profit to be made. Third, antidotes
complexes with toxic substances, has a low affinity for
themselves can cause intoxication or adverse reactions.
essential metals, and is easily excreted from the body.
Unfortunately, there is no universal antidote and choices
Unfortunately, no chelators can fulfill all of these
must be made depending on the specific situation. Almost
requirements.
all antidotes are off-label use in veterinary patients.
There are three major classifications of antidotes: chem-
Calcium Disodium EDTA (Riker, Versenate?)
ical, pharmacological, and functional (Bateman and Marrs
Calcium disodium EDTA (CaEDTA, sodium calcium
1999). The chemical antidotes include the chelators, com-
edentate, calcium disodium edathamil, calcium disodium
mercial antibodies, and enzyme inhibitors. Chemical anti-
edetate, calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetra-acetate,
 dotes act directly on a toxicant to decrease toxicity or to
calcium disodium versenate, disodium calcium tetrace-
increase excretion. Pharmacological antidotes antagonize
mate) is used to chelate many heavy metals. It is used
or compete with the toxicant at its receptor site or through
mostly in the treatment of lead and zinc toxicoses, but it
other macrormolecules. They can bind to the toxicant itself
can also chelate cadmium, copper, cobalt, iron, nickel,
or to the target to prevent the toxicant from binding. Func-
chromium, manganese, plutonium, thorium, uranium,
tional antidotes treat the symptoms caused by the toxicant
yttrium, and possibly vanadium (Chisolm 1992). The diva-
(symptomatic care). Antidotes can be in different classifi-
lent or trivalent metal displaces the calcium in CaEDTA
cation groups depending on which toxic substance they are
to form a water-soluble complex that is excreted in the
treating-
urine.
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
57
58
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
All metal should be removed from the Gl tract before
and thrombocytopenia. Animals treated with deferox-
administration, because CaEDTa will increase absorption
amine are at risk to develop certain infections. Deferox-
of metal from the GI tract. It is recommended that CaEDTA
amine supplies the iron siderophore growth factor needed
 is given slowly IV, because IM injections are very painful.
by both Yersinia bacteria and Rhizopus fungus to grow
Calcium disodium EDTA therapy is not benign. It can
(Melby et al. 1982). Humans have reported cataracts,
cause nephrotoxicity (renal tubular necrosis) and Gl irrita-
retinal abnormalities, night blindness, and hearing loss
tion. Maintaining hydration will help decrease the renal
after treatment (Levine et al. 1997). Although these effects
toxicity. Calcium disodium EDTA can also chelate essen-
have not yet been reported in dogs and cats, the potential
tial metals (e.g., zinc, iron), resulting in deficiency; this is
for their development should be taken into consideration
especially problematic when chelation is required for an
when choosing this compound for use in companion
extended period of time (Plumb 2008). Chronic use of
animals.
CaEDTA may lead to zinc and iron deficiency and supple-
mentation should be implemented.
Dimercaprol (Taylor, BAL in Oil?)
Monitor animals closely when starting CaEDTA therapy
Dimercaprol (BAL, British anti-Lewisite, dimercaptopro-
because initially blood lead levels will increase due to
panol, dithioglycerol) provides sulfhydryl groups to
removal from body stores; this may worsen clinical signs
chelate heavy metals. It was originally developed during
or precipitate signs in asymptomatic animals with high
WWII as an antidote to the blistering agent Lewisite
body burdens of lead. Calcium disodium EDTA and BAL
(Kosnett 2005a). Dimercaprol can be used to chelate lead,
may be used together in severe cases. Do not use sodium
arsenic,gold, inorganic mercury, antimony, bismuth, chro-
EDTA (edentate disodium); it chelates calcium and can
(esoo nauso) uaish pue z addoo jaonu un
cause severe hypocalcemia (Plumb 2008).
In veterinary medicine, BAL is most commonly used to
treat arsenic toxicosis and occasionally lead, mercury, and
Deferoxamine(Ciba,Desferal@)
gold intoxications. It should not be used with iron,
Deferoxamine (DFO, desferoxamine mesylate) is a chelat-
cadmium, and selenium poisoning, because the chelated
 ing agent approved for use in humans for the treatment of
complex is more toxic than the metal alone.
acute and chronic iron poisoning and aluminum overload
Dimercaprol can remove lead from the brain and red
in patients on chronic dialysis (Westlin 1971). It has also
blood cells and may be the recommended chelator in small
been used to treat doxorubicin, paraquat, aminoglycoside.
animal cases where severe CNS signs are present. Binding
 and acetaminophen poisonings. Deferoxamine has been
to dimercaprol is not irreversible and metals can dissociate
used off-label to treat iron toxicosis in animals (Plumb
in an acidic environment. Alkalinizing the urine will
2008).
increase excretion and decrease renal toxicity.BAL is
 Deferoxamine chelates free iron, which is then excreted
nephrotoxic and is extremely painful on injection. Hyper-
in the urine and bile.Early administration,within the first
tension, hyperpyrexia, tachycardia, vomiting, and seizures
24 hours, is most effective. The dose is given IM every
can occur with higher dosages (Kosnett 2005a).
48 hours. If using the IV route, the animal should be
monitored for development of pulmonary edema and
Intravenous LipidSolutions (Intralipid@,Lipsosyn@)
hypotension (loannides and Panisello 2000). Pink to
Intravenous lipid solutions (ILS) are intravenous fat emul-
orange-red urine ("vin rose') indicates excretion of che-
sions used to provide parenteral nutrition. These emulsions
lated iron (Plumb 2008). Excretion of deferoxamine can
can be used to treat systemic drug toxicoses. Highly fat-
be increased by giving ascorbic acid after the gut has been
soluble drugs will bind to the lipids and be removed from
cleared of iron. Therapy may be stopped if asymptomatic
the blood stream similar to chylomicrons (Waitzberg et al.
and the urine is clear. Deferoxamine will artificially elevate
2006). Intravenous lipid solutions have been used to treat
lbcal anesthetics, bupropion, barbiturate, propranolol,
     d   
verapamil, tricyclic antidepressants, and avermectin toxi-
surements during treatment (Gevirtz and Wasserman
coses (Turner-Lawrence and Kerns 2008).
1966).
One advantage of using deferoxamine includes the lack
D-penicillamine (Merck, Cuprimine?;
of chelation of other trace metals (except aluminum).
Wallace, Depen?)
Adverse effects include pain at the injection site, vomiting,
D-penicillamine
(D-3-mercaptovaline,
beta,beta-
and diarrhea; chronic high doses can cause hypocalcemia
dimethylcysteine) is a hydrolytic product of penicillin, but
Chapter 8/ Antidotes
59
has no antimicrobial action. It is used to chelate a variety
GI tract may not be free of metal. Succimer is more expen-
of heavy metals such as copper, cadmium, mercury, iron,
sive than penicillamine or CaEDTA. Succimer can be used
and lead (Lyle 1981). D-penicillamine is used most com-
alone or following CaEDTA or BAL. Concurrent use with
monly in veterinary medicine to treat copper-storage hepa-
other chelating agents is not recommended. Succimer can
topathies (dogs), but can also be used in lead poisoning.
cause a sulfurous odor to the breath, saliva, feces, or urine
D-penicillamine is less effective than other chelating
(Kosnett 2005b).
agents (CaEDTA or dimercaprol) for the treatment of
Trientine (Merck, Syprine?)
severe lead poisoning, but it has the benefit of being given
Trientine (TETA, triethylenetetramine) is an oral copper
orally. Penicillamine should be given on an empty stomach 
because food decreases the bioavailability. Vomiting is a
chelator. It is used in the treatment of copper-associated
common side effect that may be minimized by splitting
hepatopathies in dogs (Plumb 2008). Trientine is more
doses or pretreating with dimenhydrinate (Plumb 2008).
expensive than penicillamine and may need to be com-
Penicillamine should not be given if metal is still present
pounded into srmaller dosages, but it has fewer adverse
in Gl tract because it will increase absorption. Penicilla-
effects (vomiting). It does need to be administered in a
mine will also chelate essential metals, including zinc,
capsule since topical exposure to trientine causes derrma-
cobalt, and manganese. Pyrexia, depression, anorexia,
titis. Trientine also chelates zinc and iron and so supple-
diarrhea, proteinuria, lymphadenopathy, immune-complex
mentation may be needed during treatment.
glomerulonephropathy, and blood dyscrasias are rare but
Commercial Antibodies
can be seen
Commercial antibodies include antitoxin-specific serum
Protamine suffate (Various,Generic)
and monoclonal antibodies. These prmducts decrease the
free form of the toxicant, decrease tissue concentration,
Protamine sulfate combines with acidic glycosaminogly-
and increase elimination.Commercial antibodies are
cans and is used in the treatment of heparin overdosage.
dosed depending on plasma concentrations of the agent to
Protamine and heparin bind to form an inactive stable salt
be removed, not the patient's body weight. Commercial
(Plumb 2008). Protamine can also be used in the treatment
of low molecular weight heparins (dalteparin, enoxaparin),
antibodies also do not penetrate tissue so they need to be
given early in the syndrome while there is still circulating
but it does not completely inhibit their activity (Plumb
toxicant. New technology employing Fab fragments has
2008). Protamine begins to neutralize heparin within 5
minutes after IV administration (Plumb 2008). Protamine
decreased the antigenicity (allergic reactions) seen with
should be given over 1-3 minutes because too rapid
commercial antibodies, but it also increases their excre-
tion. Fab fragment products may require a larger volume
administration of protamine can cause hypotension, bra-
due to this short half-life (Sevcik et al. 2007).
dycardia, and dyspnea (Plumb 2008).
Antivenin, Black Widow (Merck, Sharp,and
Succimer (Sanofi-Synthelabs, Chemet?)
Dohme; Lyovac@)
Succimer (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid, DMSA) is an oral
Black widow antivenin neutralizes Latrodectus mactans
heavy metal chelator used primarily in the treatment of
(black widow spider) venom. Antivenin is used only to
childhood lead poisoning (Kosnett 2005b). It has also been
treat patients with severe signs because most cases will
used to treat arsenic and mercury poisoning in humans
recover with just supportive care. Antivenin administra-
(Kosnett 2005b). Succimer is used off-label to treat lead
tion is recommended if severe hypertension is present, or
poisoning in dogs, cats, other small mammals, and birds
if pain is not controlled (Clark et al. 1992). Antivenin will
(Plumb 2008). It can be given orally or per rectum if the
reverse muscle cramping, pain, central nervous system
animal is vomiting. Dosing for caged birds is critical
effects, and hypertension (Clark et al. 1992). With most
because overdoses have caused death in cockatiels (Denver
veterinary patients, usually one vial is suffcient. As with
et al. 2000).
any antivenin of equine origin, anaphylactic reactions may
The advantages of succimer include less nephrotoxicity
occur.
than BAL, oral administration, and lower incidence of GI
upset, and it is also less likely than the others to induce
Antivenin, Crotalidae Potyvalent (Equine)
zinc, iron, calcium, or magnesium deficiency. Unlike other
(Boehringer Ingelheim)
chelators, succimer will not increase the absorption of lead
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent is apprmoved for use in
from the GI tract, so it can be used in situations where the
dogs. It is used to neutralize the venom of crotalids (pit
60
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
vipers) native to North, Central, and South America. It
Antivenin,North American Coral Snake(Wyeth-Ayrst,
can be used to treat envenomations from Crotalus (dia-
Elapid Polyvalent,Horse,Antivenin@
mondback rattlesnake, Cascabel), Bothrops (fer-de-lance),
Antivenin (Micrurus fulvius) neutralizes the venom of
Agkistrodon (copperhead, cottonmouth), and Lachesis
Eastern (M. futvius futvius) and Texas (M. fuivius tenere)
(bushmaster). Early use (within 4 hours) is recormmended
coral snakes, fer-de-lance, and Central and South Ameri-
but if clinical signs are present, antivenin therapy should
can rattlesnakes. This antivenin is NOT effective for
be implemented. The antivenin should be reconstituted in
Arizona or Sonoran coral snakes (M. euryxanthus) enven-
sodium chloride or 5% dextrose and given intravenously.
omations. There are many factors involved in the potential
As this product is from equine origin, monitor closely for
seriousness of a coral snake bite (size of victim, bite site,
anaphalytic reactions.
number of bites, species of snake, etc.). Bites in which the
snake "hangs on'" and “chews" result in a higher venom
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab (Ovine)
exposure (Kitchens and Van Mierop 1987). Early admin-
(Protherics, CroFab@)
istration of antivenin is recommended because once clini-
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab (Ovine) is
cal signs appear it is not always possible to stop the
 approved in hurmans for the management of North Ameri-
progression. The antivenin is expensive. Wyeth Pharma-
can crotalid snake envenomation (Sevcik et al. 2007),
ceuticals has recently stopped manufacturing of Elapid
animal use is off-label. The antivenin can be used to treat
Antivenin, and there is currently no alternative FDA-
envenomation by ten different North American crotalid
approved supplier of this product.
species (see Table 8.1). Early use (within 6 hours of snake-
bite) is best, but if coagulation abnormalities exist, admin-
Digoxin Specific Antibody Fragments
istration of antivenin can still be beneficial after this time
(GalaxoSmithKline,Digibind@)
period. Crotalid Fab has good efficacy in dogs although
Digoxin-immune Fab will bind directly to digoxin or digi-
sorme did require more than 1 vial (average dosing was
toxin and inactivate it. Antidigitoxin Fab fragments can
1.25 vials) (personal communication, Michael Peterson).
also be effective against bufotoxins from Bufo toads and
However, there are fewer reactions to this product when
against cardiac glycosides from plants (see Table 8.2)
compared to the IgG antivenin. The biggest drawback to
using this antivenin is the cost.
Table 8.2. Cross-reactivity of antidigoxin Fab
fragment with plant cardiac glycosides
Table 8.1. Cross-reactivity of Crotalidae
Scientific Name
Common Name
polyvalent immune Fab
Scientific Name
Common Name
Acokanthera oblongifolia
Adenium sp
Desert Rose
Agkistrodon picivorus
Cottonmouth, water
Adonis microcarpa
Pheasant's eye
moccasin
Asctepias sp
Milkweed
Agkistrodon contortrix
Copperhead
Byrophyllumtubiflorum
Mother of millions
contortrix
Calotropis procera
King's crown
Crotaius adamanteus
Eastern diamondback
Carissa laxiflora
rattlesnake
Cerbera manghas
Sea mango
Crotalus atrox
Western diamondback
Convallaria majalis
Lily of the valley
rattlesnake
Crytostegia grandiofora
Rubber vine
Crotalus horridus atricaudatus
Canebrake rattlesnake
Digitalis sp
Foxglove
Crotalus horridus horridus
Timber rattlesnake
Helleboros sp
Crotalus molossus molossus
Northern blacktail
Nerium oteander
Oleander
rattlesnake
Ornithogalum sp
Star of Bethlehem
Crotalus scutulatus
Mojave rattlesnake
Scillta hyacinthoides
Scilla hyacinth
Crotalus viridis helteri
Southern Pacific
Strophanthus sp
Corkscrew Flower
rattlesnake
Thevetia neriifolia, T. peruviana
Yellow oleander
Sistrurus malarius barbouri
 Pygmy rattlesnake
Urginea maritima
Squill
Chapter 8/ Antidotes
61
(Binder and Lewander 1998). Patients who fail to
Fomepizole (Paladin Labs,Antizol-vet@)
respond to supportive care should be given antidigitoxin
Fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole, 4-MP) is approved for use
Fab fragments, which are expensive but can be life-
saving (Ward et al. 1999). They can reverse severe ven-
inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase. By inhibiting this
tricular arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, ventricular
enzyme, EG is excreted unchanged in the urine, without
fibrillation), progressive bradyarrhythmias (severe sinus
being biotransformed into the more toxic metabolites
bradycardia), and second- or third-degree heart block
responsible for metabolic acidosis and renal tubular necro-
not responsive to atropine (Megarbane et al. 2005).
sis. The benefits of using fomepizole rather than ethanol
Monitor potassium closely because reactivation of
are that it does not induce CNS depression, hyperosmolal-
ATPase may lead to hypokalemia (Megarbane et al.
ity, or diuresis (Gaddy 2001). While immediate treatment
2005).
holds the best prognosis, dogs may be treated as late as 8
hours postingestion and can still have a favorable progno-
Enzyme Inhibitors
sis. Fomepizole slows down the metabolism of EG and so
Enzyme inhibitors inhibit formation of toxic metabolites
serum EG levels may still be detectable at 72 hours after
by either competitive inhibition or irreversible inhibition.
ingestion. Continue treatment if the EG test is still posi-
They are used to treat substances that become toxic
tive. Fomepizole is expensive, but each vial will treat a
through in vivo metabolism by decreasing the amount
60lb dog. Fomepizole is not labeled for use in cats but can
of toxic metabolite. They may increase the time needed
be used off-label at high doses (Connally et al. 2002). Cats
for elimination of the parent drug and need to be dosed
will become ataxic and depressed at these high doses. With
 before excessive toxic metabolites are produced (Dalefield
EG poisoned cats, therapy must be started within 3 hours
2004).
or the prognosis is grave.
Ethanol (Various, Generic)
PHARMACOLOGICAL ANTIDOTES
Ethanol (etoh, ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol) may be used
to treat ethylene glycol (EG; antifreeze) toxicosis. Ethanol
Atipamezole (Pfizer, Antisedan@)
is a competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase. By
Atipamezole is an c2-adrenergic antagonist approved for
competing for this enzyme, ethanol delays the breakdown
use in dogs as the reversal agent for medetomidine
of EG to its more toxic metabolites (Dalefield 2004;
(Domitor?). It can also be used off-label to treat several
Mathews 2006). Ethylene glycol is then excreted in the
toxicoses. Atipamezole will reverse other c2-adrenergic
urine unchanged. Ethanol sources include medical or labo-
agonists (amitraz, xylazine, imidazoline decongestants,
ratory grade alcohol or clear commercially available
bromonidine, clonidine, and tizanidine) (Gwaltney-Brant
liquors (Everclear@, vodka).
2004). Atipamezole quickly reverses the sedation, hypo-
Ethanol is well absorbed orally, but is administered
tension, and bradycardia seen in these toxicoses. It can be
intravenously for management of EG toxicosis. Ethanol
given IM or IV. Atipamezole reversal lasts about 2-3 hours
can be dosed in boluses or as a constant-rate infusion
and may need to be repeated (Plumb 2008).
(Plumb 2008). Ethanol must be given very early after
ingestion of EG for it to be effective. In dogs it should be
Atropine (Various, Generic)
given within the first 68 hours, in cats, before 3 hours
Atropine
(tropine
tropate,  dl-tropyl tropate,  dl-
(Connelly et al. 2002). Ethanol is inexpensive and readily
hyoscyamine) may be used to treat the muscarinic signs
available, but it can worsen metabolic acidosis and CNS
caused by anticholinesterase pesticides (OPs, carbamates)
depression.
(see Table 8.3), physostigmine excess, antimyasthenic
Table 8.3. Selected organophosphates and carbamates
Aldicarb
 Bromophos
Carbaryl
Chlofenvinphos
Chlorpyrifos
Diazinon
Dicrotophos
Dioxathion
Disulfoton
 Fensulfothion
 Fenthion
 Fumarate
Malathion
Methidathion
 Methiocarb
Methomyl
Parathion
Paraxon
Profenphos
mxodold
Terbufos
Tetraethyl pyrophosphate
62
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
agents, nerve gas agents (sarin, soman, tabun, VX), syn-
Table 8.4. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular
thetic choline esters, cholinergic agonists, and clitocybe
blocking agents
and inocybe mushrooms (Balali-Mood and Balali-
Atracurium
Mood 2005). Atropine blocks the effects of accumulated
Curare
acetylcholine at the synapse. Atropine is also used as
Gallamine 
an adjunct in treating bradyarrhythmias. Muscarinic
Metocurine
(SLUDDE) signs include salivation, lacrimation, urina-
Pancuronium bromide
tion, defecation, dyspnea, and emesis. Atropine sulfate
Tubocurarine
does not control nicotinic signs (muscle tremors, muscle
Vecuronium
weakness).
 Atropine should be used to treat bradycardia and dry up
excess bronchial secretions; patients not experiencing
either of these signs do not require atropine. Atropine is
ing the enzymes needed for this reaction. By administering
not indicated if drooling or miosis are the only clinical
the active form, these enzyme blockades are bypassed.
signs. Atropine may be given IV, IM, SQ, endotracheally,
Folinic acid should be given as soon as possible for the
or intraosseously (Prete et al. 1987). Atropinization may
best results.
need to be maintained for hours to days, depending on the
toxicant. Overdoses of atropine can cause CNS stimula-
Flumazenil (Roche, Romazicon@)
tion, seizures, sinus tachycardia, hypertension, and ileus
Flumazenil (fumazepil) is a competitive blocker of ben-
(Plumb 2008).
zodiazepines and reverses sedation and respiratory depres-
Atropine can also be used as a diagnostic test for poison
sion within 1-2 minutes (Gwaltney-Brant 2002). The dose
 ing by cholinesterase inhibitors (e.g-, organophosphorus or
may need to be repeated because the half-life for fumaze-
carbamate insecticides). The heart rate is measured before
nil is about 1 hour Flumazenil is usually limited to animals
and after a preanesthetic dose of atropine is given. If the
at risk of respiratory depression. Flumazenil is contraindi-
heart rate increases, it is not a cholinesterase inhibitor
cated in animals with tricyclic antidepressant overdoses
toxicosis, because it takes about ten times this amount to
because it can cause seizures (Plumb 2008).
raise the heart rate in poisoned patients (Fikes 1990).
Glucagon (Bedford, GlucaGen@)
Calcium Salts (Various, Generic)
Glucagon (HGF) is a hormone with glycemic and inotro-
Calcium salts (calcium chloride, calcium gluconate,
pic actions. It is used in beta adrenergic blockers, calcium
calcium borogluconate, calciurm lactate, calcium phos-
channel blockers, and tricyclic antidepressant overdoses
phate) can be used in veterinary toxicology for treating
that produce severe bradycardia, AV block, or hypotension
various toxicoses. Calcium salts can be used in treating
(Love and Howell 1997). Glucagon can also be used to
fuoride, hydrofuoric acid, ethylene glycol, calcium
treat hypoglycemia from insulin and oral hypoglycemic
channel blocker (verapamil, diltiazem, etc.), beta blocker,
agents (sulfonylureas, etc.) because it stimulates hepatic
and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent poi-
glycogenolysis. Glucagon is administered as an IV bolus,
sonings (see Table 8.4) (el Saadi et al. 1989; Roder 2004b).
followed by a CRI. Patients should be monitored for
They can also be used to reverse hypocalcermia, hyperka-
hyperglycemia with secondary hypokalemia (Plumb
lemia, hypermagnesemia, oxalic acid, and oxalate poison-
2008).
 ing. Calcium salts can also be helpful in relieving muscular
spasrm associated with black widow spider bites (Hen-
Hydroxocobalamin (EMD, Cyanokit@)
ninger and Horst 1997; Roder 2004a).
Hydroxocobalamin (vitamin B12a, alpha-cobione) is a
vitamin B12 precursor. It is used to treat cyanide toxicosis.
Folinic Acid (Lederle, Leucovorin?)
Hydroxocobalamin combines with cyanide to forrm cyano-
Folinic acid (calcium folinate, citrovorum factor) is the
cobalamin (vitamin B12) (Hall and Rumack 1998). Cya-
reduced active form of folic acid. It is used to treat metho-
nocobalamin is eliminated through the urine. Cyanide
trexate, trimethoprim, pyrimethamine, and Gyromitra
 poisoning can be seen secondary to nitroprusside, aceto-
esculenta mushroom ingestions (Lambie and Johnson
nitrile, cyanogenic glycoside plant (see Table 8.5) inges-
1985; Leathem and Dorran 2007). These toxins stop con-
 tion, and hydrogen sulfide inhalation. Hydroxocobalamin
version of folic acid to folinic acid (active form) by block-
does not produce either methemoglobinemia or hypoten-
Chapter 8 / Antidotes
63
Table 8.5. Cyanide-containing plants
nation of other toxicants. Hyperbaric chambers may be
Scientific Name
Common Name
available at larger veterinary referral centers.
Methylene Blue (Various, Generic)
Acacia
Acacia
Alocasia
 Elephant's Ear
Methylene blue (tetramethylthionine chloride trihydrate)
Ametanchier
Serviceberry, Shadebush, Juneberry
is an oxidation-reduction agent that helps convert methe-
moglobin (Fe?t) to hemoglobin (Fe2t) (Plumb 2008).
Canavalia
Wonder Bean
Cercocarpus
Mountain Mahogany
Methylene blue is used in small animal medicine to treat
Chenopodium
Goosefoot, Wormseed
methemoglobinemia from aniline dyes, nitrites, nitrates,
Contoneaster
Contoneaster
naphthalene, and local anesthetics (benzocaine, etc.)
Cynodon
Stargrass, Bermudagrass
(Plumb 2008). Methylene blue should not be given unless
Sundew
methemoglobinemia is evident, especially in cats, because
Drosera
Eucatyptus
Eucalyptus
methylene blue can induce methemoglobinemia in normal
Mannagrass
animals. The new methylene blue found in laboratory dyes
Glyceria
Heterometes
can NOT be substituted for methylene blue, because new
Christmas Berry, Califomia Holly
Hydrangea
Hydrangea
methylene blue can be toxic if injected.
Juncus
Rushes
N-acetylcysteine (Apothecon, Mucomyst@;
Lotus
Bird's-foot Trefoil, Nevada Deer
Cumberland Pharmaceuticals, Acetadote?)
Vetch
Cassava
N-acetylcysteine (NAC, rmercapturic acid) is a mucolytic
Manihot
Nandina
Bamboo
that can also reduce the extent of liver injury and methe-
Panicum
moglobinermia after ingestion of acetarminophen. NAC is
Switchgrass, Kleingrass, Millet
Canarygrass
a precursor of glutathione, provides organic sulfate needed
Phalaris
for the sulfation pathway and directly binds with acet-
Prunus
Apricot, Cherry, Plum, Chokecherry,
aminophen metabolites to enhance elimination (Plumb
Peach, Almond, Mock Orange
2008). N-acetylcysteine has been used in high doses to
Pyracantha
Firethorn
Buttercup
treat Amanita phalloides (death cap mushroom) poisoned
Ranuncutus
Rhodotypos
people. It was effective in preventing perrmanent hepatic
Jetbead
Sambucus
Elderberry
injury in 10 of 11 people (Montanini et al. 1999). NAC
 can also be used to treat white/yellow phosphorus, cyclo-
Sorghum
Sorghum, Sudangrass
Sorghastrum
Indiangrass
phosphamide, and carbon tetrachloride toxicoses. NAC
Spirea
 Spirea, Bridal Wreath
may be given orally (use a taste masking agent) or slow
IV. Oral administration can cause vomiting. When treating
Suckteya
Suckleya
Stillingia
Stillingia
acetaminophen toxicosis, especially in cats, it is recom-
Trifolium
mended that acetylcysteine be dosed before the activated
Clovers
charcoal.
Triglochin
Arrowgrass
Naloxone (DuPont, Narcan@)
Naloxone (N-allylnoroxymorphone hydrmochloride) is an
sion, as sodium nitrite does. Administration of hydroxoco-
opioid antagonist that competes with and displaces narcot-
balamin can interfere with AST, total bilirubin, creatinine,
ics from their receptor sites (mu, kappa, and sigma) (Plumb
magnesium, and iron measurements (Curry 1992).
2008). Naloxone is most commonly used to reverse opiates
(buprenorphine, butorphanol, codeine, fentanyl, hydroco-
Hyperbaric Oxygen
done, hydromorphone, methadone, morphine, oxycodone,
Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy can be used in the
oxymorphone, tramadol, etc.). It can also be used to
treatment of carbon monoxide, methylene chloride, carbon
reverse CNS depression associated with dextrometho-
tetrachloride, cyanide, and hydrmgen sulfide toxicosis to
rphan, benzodiazepines, ACE inhibitors, alpha2-agonists,
reverse methemoglobinemia (Tomaszewski and Thom
imidazoline decongestant overdoses, and ethanol (Jefferys
 ssd n ux 1  6 66
and Volans 1983). Naloxone may be administered IV, IM,
than 1 atmosphere, it displaces CO and increases the elimi-
SQ, intraosseous, and even sublingual. Naloxone acts
64
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
within minutes and has a duration of action from 45-90
mine, etc.) can also be used to treat these toxicoses, but
minutes (Plumb 2008). When treating long-acting sub-
they have a much shorter duration of action.
stances, naloxone may need to be repeated.
Pyridoxine (Various, Generic)
Pralidoxime (Wyeth-Ayerst, Protopam@)
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) is used in the management of
Pralidoxime (2-PAM, 2-pyridine aldoxime methylchlo-
coma and seizures associated with overdoses of isoniazid
ride, 2-formyl-1-methylpyridinium chloride oxime) is an
or hydrazines, seizures due to Gyromitra mushroom (false
oxime used to control the nicotinic signs (muscle and
morel) poisoning, penicillamine-induced seizures, and as
 diaphragmatic weakness, fasciculations, rmuscle cramps,
an adjunct therapy for EG toxicosis (Dyer and Shannon
dtc.) seen in organophosphate toxicoses (Fikes 1990).
2005).
2-PAM is a cholinesterase reactivator, which displaces the
Silymarin (Various, Generic)
acetylcholinesterase enzyme from its receptor site. It binds
with the insecticide and is excreted in the urine. 2-PAM
Silymarin (milk thistle) is a nutraceutical that can be used
works best if administered as soon as possible; however,
as a hepatoprotectant agent. It has been shown to be effec-
this can vary with some compounds (Vale 2005). Once the
tive as an adjunct in the treatment of cyclopeptide mush-
organophosphate receptor bond "ages," oximes are no
rmoom (Amanita) and acetaminophen toxicoses (Jahn et al.
longer effective. Since "aging" varies with the compound,
1980; Fakurazi et al. 2008).
oximes may be effective even hours to days after exposure
Silymarin should be started within the first 48 hours and
(Vale 2005). Oximes are generally not recommended for
continued for several weeks. Oral silymarin can cause
use in carbamate poisoning, due to the lack of “aging" in
vormiting but is otherwise well tolerated. Because silyma-
these compounds (Vale 2005)
rin is considered a nutritional supplement by the FDA,
quality and content can vary between different formula-
Pyridostigmine (ICN, Mestinon?; Various, Generic)
tions. Choose a product that states the concentration
(usually 70%-80%) of silymarin contained in the product.
Pyridostigmine is an anticholinesterase. Pyridostigmine
 competes with acetylcholine for binding to acetylcholin-
Yohimbine (Lloyd, Yobine @)
 esterase so acetylcholine accurmulates in the synapse. It is
Yohimbine (aphrmdine hydrochloride) is an α2-adrenergic
agents (see Table 8.4) and botulisrm. It may also be used
antagonist approved as a reversal agent for xylazine in
dogs, but it can also be used to treat other α2-adrenergic
in the treatment of atropine, avermectin, Coral (Micrurus)
agonist toxicoses (amitraz, clonidine, etc). The onset of
and Cobra (Naja) snake bites, tetrodotoxins (Porcupine
action is within minutes, and yohimbine has a short half-
fish [Diodon]), and anticholinergic alkaloid plants poison-
life (1.5 to 2 hours), so repeated dosing may be required
ings (see Table 8.6) (Martinez and Mealey 2001). Other
(Jernigan et al. 1988). Dogs receiving five times the rec-
drugs in this group (neostigmine, edrophonium, physostig-
ommended dose developed muscle tremors and seizures
(Plumb 2008).
Table 8.6. Anticholinergic alkaloid plants
FUNCTIONAL ANTIDOTES
Scientific Name
Common Name
Acepromazine (Ft. Dodge, PromAce?;
Atropa
Belladonna
Vetus, Aceproject@)
Cestrum
Jasmine
Acepromazine (ace, acetazine, acetopromazine, acety]-
Datura
 Jimsonweed
promazine) is a neuroleptic phenothiazine. It is approved
Hyoscyamus
Henbane
for use in dogs and cats (Plurmb 2008). Aceprormazine is
Lycium
 Boxthorn
used to decrease the CNS stimulation associated with
Lycopersicon
Tomato
amphetamine, methamphetamine, serotonergic drugs,
Mandragora
Mandrake
4-methylimidazole, and metaldehyde toxicosis (Andrews
Physalis
Ground Cherry
and Humphries 1982). Intravenous injection will have the
Solanum
Nightshade, Bittersweet
quickest onset, but acepromazine can be given IM, SQ, or
Various mushrooms
orally. Acepromazine can cause hypotension at high
Chapter 8/ Antidotes
65
doses, and blood pressure should be monitored after
excitation or depression, and hyperesthesia. Serotonin
administration.
syndrome is seen secondary to the ingestion of drugs
that increase brain serotonin levels (selective serotonin
Bicarbonate, Sodium (Various, Generic)
reuptake inhibitors, amphetamines, tricyclic antidepres-
Sodium bicarbonate (sodium hydmgen carbonate, mono-
sants, 5-hydroxytryptophan, etc.) (Gwaltney-Brant 2002).
sodium carbonate, sodium acid carbonate, baking soda)
The dose may be given PO or per rectum (if vomiting or
has many uses in veterinary toxicology. It is a systermic
activated charcoal already given). Discontinue if no effect
alkalinizer, which can be used to correct metabolic acido-
after the second dose (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000).
sis, QRS prolongation, and rhabdomyolysis and to alkalin-
ize urine in poisonings (Kolecki and Curry 1997).
Dantrolene (Procter and Gamble, Dantrium)
Administration of sodium bicarbonate to a serurm pH of
Dantrolene is used in veterinary toxicology to treat the
7.45-7.55 will help decrease the cardiac toxicity of tricy-
malignant hypertherrmia-like syndrome seen in dogs after
clic antidepressants (amitriptyline, doxepin, imipramine,
ingestion of hops (Humulus lupulus) (Duncan et al. 1997).
nortriptyline, etc.) and type 1 antidysrrhythmics (quini-
It is a direct acting muscle relaxant that reverses muscle
dine) (Kolecki and Curry 1997)
rigidity and associated hyperthermia. Dantrolene can be
Urinary alkalinization with sodium bicarbonate traps
given orally or IV (injectable is expensive). Hepatotoxic-
weak acids and enhances the elimination of salicylates,
ity has been seen in humans with high dose chronic
phenobarbital, chlorpropamide, and chlormphenoxy herbi-
therapy (Plumb 2008). It is unknown if this occurs in
cides (Wax 2011). Oral sodium bicarbonate may decrease
animals.
the absorption of anticholinergics, histamine 2 blockers
(cimetidine, ranitidine, etc.), iron, ketoconazole, and tetra-
Dapsone (Wyeth-Ayerst, Avlosulson?;
cyclines, but increase the amount of naproxen absorbed
Jacobus, Dapsone?)
and reduce the efficacy of sucralfate (Plumb 2008). Urinary
Dapsone (diaminodiphenylsulfone,  diphenylsulfone)
alkalinization will decrease excretion of some drugs (e.g-
decreases neutrophil chermotaxis, cormplerment activation,
quinidine, amphetamines, ephedrine).
lysosomal enzyme synthesis, and antibody production
(Plumb 2008). Because of these leukocyte inhibitory
Chlorpromazine (SmithKlineGlaxo, Thorazine@;
effects, dapsone is used for adjunctive treatment of
Various, Generic)
Brown recluse spider (Loxosceles sp.), Wolf spider (Lyco-
Chlorpromazine (aminazine) is a phenothiazine used in the
sidae sp.), and Funnel Web spider (Dipluidae sp.) bites
treatment of monamine oxidase inhibitor, amphetamine,
(Hansen and Russell 1984). It is thought to decrease
and metaldehyde toxicoses (Grantham et al. 1964; Kisse-
the tissue necrosis seen after these envenomations.
berth and Trammel 1990). It is used to decrease the
Dapsone should be used cautiously in cats due to the
stimulatory signs. Chlorpromazine is less potent than
possibility of neurotoxicity and hemolytic anermia. All
acepromazine, but has a longer duration of action. Chlor-
patients should be monitored for hepatotoxicity, anemia,
promazine can be given orally, IV or IM. Do not admin-
thrormbocytopenia, neutropenia, gastrointestinal effects,
ister IM in rabbits because it causes severe muscle pain
neuropathies, and cutaneous drug eruptions (photosen-
and swelling (Plumb 2008). Do not use chlorpromazine
sitivity) (Plumb 2008).
with physostigmine or paraquat toxicoses because it may
increase the toxicity (Plumb 2008).
Dextrose (Various, Generic)
Dextrose is used in the treatment of hypoglycermia, which
Cyproheptadine (Merck, Periactin@;
may result directly from toxicants (alpha lipoic acid, bigu-
Various, Generic)
anides, insulin, sulfonylureas, xylitol) or indirectly (cloni-
Cyproheptadine has been used traditionally in veterinary
dine, ethanol, salicylates, organophosphates, Ackee
medicine for its antihistaminic and appetite-stimulant
[Blighia], Sneezeweed [Helenium], Desert Marigold
effects (cats) but is now being used to help treat
Baileya], Paperfowers [Psilostrophe], Sartwellia Sarf-
serotonin syndrome (Gwaltney-Brant 2002). Serotonin
wellia], Periwinkle [Catharanthus], Balsam Apple and
syndrome is caused by excess serotonin within the
Pear [Momordica], Castor Bean [Ricinus], Bitterweed and
CNS and can be characterized by tremors, seizures, hyper-
Rubberweed [Asteraceae]) (Browning et al. 1990). Mul-
thermia, ataxia, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain,
tiple bolus doses or a CRI may be required.
66
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Methocarbamol (Fort Dodge, Robaxin@, Robaxin@V)
blockers, ergot alkaloids, lily of the valley [Convallaria],
Methocarbamol (guaiphenesin carbamate) is approved in
periwinkle [Vinca], phenothiazines, quinine sulfate, tetro-
animals as a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant. It is
dotoxins, tricyclic antidepressants, Yew [Taxus]) (Brent et
used in toxicology to treat tremors associated with perme-
al. 2005). Norepinephrine must be given IV because
thrin, metaldehyde, strychnine, tetanus (Clostridium),
extravasation causes severe necrosis.
White Snakeroot (Eupatorium), ergot alkaloids (Clavi-
Pamidronate (Novartis, Aredia@; Various, Generic)
ceps), Penicillium, and other tremorgenic mycotoxins
(Richardson 2000; Richardson et al. 2003; Gwaltney-
Pamidrmnate (ADP sodium) is a synthetic bisphosphonate
Brant 2002; Schell 2000). Methocarbamol depresses path-
that binds to the hydroxyapatite found in bone. It inhibits
ways in the spinal cord without interfering with muscle
osteoclastic bone resorption and is used in veterinary toxi-
function. It may be given intravenously, orally, or rectally
cology to treat hypercalcemia secondary to vitamin D and
(crush tablets in saline).
its analogs (cholecalciferol, calcipotriene, calcitriol)
(Pesillo et al. 2002). Pamidronate is administered as a slow
Nitroprusside (Various, Generic)
IV infusion over 2-4 hours. It has an advantage over
Nitroprusside—(OC-6-22)-pentakis(cyano-C)nitrosylfer-
salmon calcitonin in that it has long-lasting effects (may
rate dihydrate, sodium nitroferricyanide dehydrate—is
need to repeat once in 5-7 days). Do not use in combina-
used for treatment of severe hypertension secondary to
tion with calcitonin, because it increases mortality (Rum-
poisonings (phenylpropanolamine, etc.). It causes periph-
beihaet al. 1997). Pamidronate can cause hypomagnesemia,
eral arterial and venous vasodilation. Nitroprusside has an
renal toxicity, and arrhythmias (Kadar et al. 2004).
immediate onset and short duration of action, which allows
accurate titration of blood pressure (Plumb 2008). Blood
Salmon Calcitonin (Sandoz, Calcitonin Micalcin?;
 pressure should be rmonitored closely because it will return
Lennod, Salmonine@)
to pretreatment levels within 1-10 minutes once the CRI
Calcitonin is a hormone used to control hypercalcemia. It
is stopped. Prolonged use may lead to potential cyanide
inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption and reduces tubular
 toxicosis, especially in patients with hepatic orrenal insuf-
reabsorption of calcium (Plumb 2008). Calcitonin is used
ficiency. Metabolic acidosis and delirium are early signs
to treat vitamin D analog toxicoses (see pamidronate).
of cyanogen toxicosis (Plumb 2008).
Calcitonin's use is limited by expense, availability, fre-
quent dosing schedule, pain at injection site, and develop-
Norepinephrine (Sanofi-Sybthelabo, Levophed?)
ment of resistance to its effects after several days.
Norepinephrine (noradrenalin) is an alpha-adrenergic
Bisphosphonates are frequently used instead.
ss saoun Aq uisunoday asaaan cn pesn isuo
and diastolic blood pressure through vasoconstriction. It is
SAMe (Nutramax, Denosyl@; Vetoquinol, Zentonil@)
used to treat alpha adrenergic blockers (see Table 8.7) and
SAMe (S-Adenosyl-Methionine, ademetionine) is a nutra-
other toxicants that cause acute hypotension (Amanita
ceutical used as a treatment for acetaminophen toxicity in
mushrooms [Amantia], beta blockers, calcium channe]
small animals (Plumb 2008; Wallace et al. 2002). It has
also been used for liver support in chronic hepatitis,
hepatic lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, feline triad disease,
Table 8.7. Alpha-adrenergic blockers
and osteoarthritis. SAMe is formed from the amino acid
methionine and ATP. It plays an essential role in major
Generic Name
Trade Name
biochemical pathways (transrmethylation, transsulfuration,
and aminopropylation). Thrmough these pathways SAMe
Atipamezole
Antisedan@
provides compounds (sulfur, glutathione) important in
Doxazosin
Cardura?
liver support (Plumb 2008).
Phenoxybenzamine
Dibenzyline@
SAMe should be given on an ermpty stomach, because
Phentolamine
food will greatly reduce the amount of drug absorbed.
Prazosin
Minipress@
SAMe is well tolerated and adverse effects are rare.
Tamsulosin
Flomax@
Because SAMe is considered a nutritional supplement by
Terazosin
Hytrin@
the FDA, there are no standards for potency, purity, safety,
Tolazoline
Tolazine@
or efficacy. Due to this lack of oversight, a well-known
Yohimbine
Yobine@
brand name should be used.
Chapter 8/ Antidotes
67
Vitamin K1 (Merck, Mephyton@; Various, Generic)
K1 can be given PO, IM, or SQ. IV use is not recom-
Vitamin K1 (phytonadione, phylloquinone, phytomenadi-
mended due to a high incidence of anaphylactoid reac-
one) is used to treat anticoagulant rodenticides, coumarin,
tions. Giving vitamin K1 with a fatty meal will increase
and sulfaquinoxaline toxicoses (Plumb 2008). Vitamin K1
bioavailability (Plumb 2008). Because vitamin K1 does
is needed for the regeneration of blood clotting factors II,
not accumulate in the liver and it may take several weeks
VII, IX, and X. After administration it takes about 6-12
to eliminate some of the anticoagulant rodenticides from
hours for new clotting factors to be synthesized. Vitamin
the body, the drug must be dosed daily.
CHAPTER 8 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Functional antidotes differ from chemical or pharma-
c. Coral snake venom
cological antidotes in that
d. Fire ant venom
a. They increase the excretion of toxicant from the
e. Black widow spider venom
body.
5. When treating ethylene glycol toxicosis, fomepizole
b. They decrease the absorption of the toxicant from
has all of the following advantages over ethanol
the gastrointestinal tract.
except that
c. They treat the clinical signs caused by the
a. Fomepizole
does not cause significant CNS
toxicant.
depression.
d. They increase the metabolism of the toxicant.
b. Fomepizole does not cause hyperosmolality and
e. They decrease the metabolism of the toxicant.
diuresis.
2. Which of the following best describes the mechanism
c. Fomepizole is less expensive than ethanol.
of action of chelators?
d. Fomepizole administration and monitoring are
 a. They bind to target-organ receptors to prevent the
less labor-intensive than ethanol.
toxicant from binding.
e. Fomepizole is FDA-approved for use in dogs.
b. They bind to a toxicant to increase the toxicant's
water solubility and enhance excretion.
c.They enhance excretion of a toxicant by increasing
toxicant metabolism.
d. They bind to a toxicant to decrease absorption of
 the toxicant from the gastrointestinal tract.
e. They bind to a toxicant and cause the toxicant to
be sequestered with a specific organ (e.g., spleen).
significant.
3. When using chelators to treat heavy metal toxicoses,
make the difference in cost much less
it is necessary that the gastrmintestinal tract be free of
fuids, the cost of nursing care for ethanol may
any metal or the chelator will actually increase the
monitoring and constant administration of IV
further absorption of metal from the gastrointestinal
obtain; however, because ethanol requires more
tract into the bloodstream. This staterment is true for
 Fomepizole is more expensive than ethanol to
5.c.
all chelators and metals with which exception?
fire ants.
a. Use of calcium disodium EDTA to treat lead
 No antivenom exists to treat envenomation from
4.d.
poisoning
lead from the gastrointestinal tract.
b. Use of deferoxamine to treat iron poisoning
3.e.
c. Use of dimercaprol to treat lead poisoning
bility and enhance excretion.
 d. Use of d-penicillamine to treat lead poisoning
Chelators bind toxicants to increase water solu-
2.b.
e. Use of succimer to treat lead poisoning
level of toxicant in the body.
4. Antibodies have been developed to treat intoxication
caused by the toxicant but have no impact on the
from all of the following except
1.c. Functional antidotes help manage clinical signs
a. Rattlesnake venom
ANSWERS
b. Digitalis
68
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
REFERENCES
the Critically Poisoned Patient,edited by Jeffrey Brent,
Anthony H. Andrews, David J. Humphreys. 1982. Poisoning
Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J.
in Veterinary Practice, 2nd ed. pp. 76-77, 112. Middlesex:
Ward Donovan, Pp. 1537-1538. Philadelphia: Mosby.
National Office of Animal Health Ltd.
Magdi S. el Saadi, Alan H. Hall, Priscilla K. Hall, Betty S.
Kia Balali-Mood, Mahdi Balali-Mood.
.2005.Atropine.
Riggs, W. Lynn Augenstein, Barry H. Rumack. 1989.
In Critical Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management
Hydrofuoric acid dermal exposure. Vet Hum Toxicof
of the Critically Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey
Jun;31(3):243-247.
Brent, Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phil-
Sharida Fakurazi, Ithnin Hairuszah, U. Nanthini. 2008.
lips, J. Ward Donovan, Pp. 1517-1521. Philadelphia:
Moringa oleifera Lam prevents acetaminophen induced
Mosby.
liver injury through restoration of glutathione level. Food
Chem Toxicot Aug;46(8):2611-2615.
Nicholas Bateman, Timothy Marrs. 1999. Antidotal studies.
In Generat and Applied Toxicology, vol. 1, 2nd ed., edited
James D. Fikes. 1990. Organophosphorus and carbamate
by Bryan Ballantyne, Timothy C. Marrs, Tore Syversen, Pp.
insecticides.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:
425-435. New York: Nature Publishing Group.
353-367.
W.D. Binder, William J. Lewander. 1998. Digoxin. In
Jonathan Gaddy. 2001. Pharm profle fomepizole. Compend
Emergency toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Peter Vicellio,
Contin Educ Pract Vet X 1073-1074.
Tod Bania, Pp. 707-722. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
 Norman R. Gevirtz, Louis R. Wasserman. 1966. The measure-
Raven.
 ment of iron and iron-binding capacity in plasma containing
Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D.
deferoxamine. J Pediatr 68:802-804
Phillips, J. Ward Donovan. 2005. Critical Care Toxicology
Julie Grantham, W. Neel, R.W. Brown. 1964. Toxicity
Diagnosis and Management of the Critically Poisoned
reversed: Reversal of imipramine-monamine oxidase inhib-
Patient. pp. 35, 410, 421, 1258. Philadelphia: Mosby.
itor induced toxicity by chlorpromazine.J Kans Med Soc
Randall G. Browning, David W. Olson, Harlan A. Stueven,
65:279-280.
James R. Mateer. 1990. 50% Dextrose: Antidote 0r toxin?
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant. 2004. Amitraz. In Clinical Veteri-
Ann Emerg Med 19(6):683-687.
nary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 177-
J. Julian Chisolm Jt. 1992. BAL, EDTA, DMSA, and DMPS
178. St. Louis: Mosby
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, Jay Albretsen, Safdar Khan. 2000.
in the treatment of lead poisoning in children. Clin Toxicof
30:493-504.
5-hydroxytryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases (1989-
R.F. Clark, S. Wethern-Kestner, M.V. Vance, R. Gerkin. 1992.
1999). JAVMA 216:1937-1940.
Clinical presentation and treatment of black widow spider
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, Wilson Rumbeiha. 2002. Newer
envenomation: A review of 163 cases. Ann Emerg Med
antidotal therapies. In The Veterinary Clinics of North
Jul;21(7):782-787
America Smalf Animal Practice, edited by Robert H.
Heather E. Connally, Dwayne W. Hamar, Mary Anna Thrall.
Poppenga, Petra A. Volmer, Pp. 323-339. Philadelphia:
2002. Safety and efficacy of high dose fomepizole as
Saunders.
therapy for EG intoxication in cats (Abstract). 8th IVECCS,
Alan H. Hall, Barry H. Rumack. 1998. Cyanide and related
San Antonio, TX. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:191.
compounds.In Clinicat Management of Poisoning and
Steven C. Curry. 1992. Hydrogen cyanide and inorganic
Drug Overdose, 3rd ed., edited by Lester M. Haddad,
Michael W. Shannon, James F. Winchester, Pp. 899-905.
salts.In Hazardous Material Toxicology: Clinical Princi-
ples of Environmental Health, edited by John B. Sullivan,
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Gary R. Krieger, Pp. 698-709. Baltimore: Williams and
Ronald C. Hansen, Findlay E. Russell. 1984. Dapsone use for
Wilkins.
Loxosceles envenomation treatment. Vet Hum Toxicof
Rosalind Dalefield. 2004. Ethylene glycol. In Clinicat Veterri-
26:260.
nary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 150-
Richard W. Henninger, J. Horst. 1997. Magnesium toxicosis
154. St. Louis: Mosby.
in two horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc Jul1;211(1):82-85.
M. Denver, Lisa A. Tell, Frank D. Galey, J.G. Trupkiewicz,
Adonis S. Ioannides, Jose M. Panisello. 2000. Acute respira-
Philip H. Kass. 2000. Comparison of two heavy metal che-
tory distress syndrome in children with acute iron poison-
lators for treatment of lead toxicosis in cockatiels. Am J Vet
ing: The role of intravenous desferrioxamine. Eur J Pediatr
Res 61:935-940.
159:158-159.
Karen L. Duncan, William R. Hare, William B. Buck. 1997.
Wolfgang Jahn, Heinz Faulstich, Thomas Wieland. 1980.
Malignant hyperthermia-like reaction secondary to inges-
Pharmacokinetics of (3H)-methyl-dihy droxymethyl-amani -
tion of hops in five dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc Janl;
tin in the isolated perfused rat liver, and the infuence of
210(1):51-54
several drugs. In Amanita Toxins and Poisoning, edited by
K. Sophia Dyer, Michael Shannon. 2005. Pyridoxine. In
Heinz Faulstich, Burkhard Kommerell, Thomas Wieland,
Critical Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of
Pp. 80-85. Baden-Baden, Germany: Witzstrock.
Chapter 8/ Antidotes
69
David B. Jefferys, Glyn N. Volans. 1983. An investigation of
Bruno Megarbane, Stephen W. Borron, Frederic J. Baud.
the role of the specific opioid antagonist naloxone in clini-
2005. Anti-Digitalis fab Fragments. In Critical Care Toxi-
cal toxicology. Hum Toxicol Apr;2(2):227-231.
cology Diagnosis and Management of the Critically Poi-
Antoinette D. Jernigan, Robert C. Wilson, Nicholas H. Booth,
soned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace,
Roger C. Hatch, Ali Akbari. 1988. Comparative pharmaco-
Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward Donovan, Pp.
kinetics of yohimbine in steers, horses and dogs. Can J Vet
1575-1579. Philadelphia: Mosby
Res Apr;52(2): 172-176.
Kjetil Melby, Sofie Slordahl, Tore Jarl Gutteberg, Svein Arne
Elissa Kadar, John E. Rush, Lois Wetmore, Daniel L. Chan.
Nordbo. 1982. Septicemia due to Yersinia enterocolitica
2004. Electrolyte disturbances and cardiac arrhythmias in
after oral overdoses of iron. Br Med J 285:467-468.
a dog following pamidronate, calcitonin, and furosemide
S. Montanini, D. Sinardi, C. Pratico, A.U. Sinardi, G. Trimar-
administration for hypercalcemia of malignancy. J Am
chi. 1999. Use of acetylcysteine as the live-saving antidote
Anim Hosp Assoc Jan-Feb;40(1):75-81.
in Amanita phalloides (death cap) poisoning. Case report
Willam C. Kisseberth, Harold L. Trammel. 1990. llicit and
on 11 patients. Arzneimittelforschung 49:1044-1047.
abused drugs. In The Veterinary Clinics of North America
S.A. Pesillo, Safdar A. Khan, Elizabeth A. Rozanski, John E.
Small Animat Practice, edited by Val R. Beasley, Pp. 405-
Rush. 2002. Calcipotriene toxicosis in a dog successfully
418. Philadelphia: Saunders.
treated with pamidronate disodium. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
Craig S. Kitchens, Lodewyk H.S. Van Mierop. 1987. Enven-
12:177-181.
omation by the Eastern coral snake (Micrurus fulvius
Donald C. Plumb. 2008. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook,
fulvius). A study of 39 victims. JAMA Sep25;258(12):
Sixth Edition. pp. 3-5, 10-12, 79-80, 83-86, 121-122,
1615-1818
186-187, 240-241, 250-253,256-257, 334-335, 365-366,
Paul Francis Kolecki, Steven C. Curry. 1997. Poisoning by
396, 425-426, 597-599, 641-642, 659-661, 734-736,
sodium channel blocking agents. Crit Care Clin Oct;13(4):
783-784, 809-810, 822-824, 839-840, 868-870, 906-907,
829-848.
938-939. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Michael J. Kosnett. 2005a. Dimercaprol (BAL). In Critical
Lynn O. Post, W.C. Keller. 1999. An update of antidote avail-
Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of the Criti-
ability in veterinary medicine. Vet Hum Toxicol 41:258-
cally Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L
261.
Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward
M.R. Prete, C.J. Hannan, F.M. Bunce. 1987. Plasma atropine
Donovan, pp. 1499-1501. Philadelphia: Mosby.
concentrations via intravenous, endotracheal, and intraos-
2005b. Succimer (DMSA). In Critical Care Toxicol-
seous administration. Am J Emerg Med 5:101-104.
ogyDiagnosis and Management of the CriticallyPoisoned
 Jill A. Richardson. 2000. Permethrin spot-on toxicoses in cats.
Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace, Keith
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 10:103-106.
K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward Donovan, pp. 1505-
Jill A. Richardson, Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, Joel D.
1507. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Huffman, Marcy E. Rosendale, Sharon L. Welch. 2003.
D.G. Lambie, R.H. Johnson. 1985. J Rheumatol Supp!
Metaldehyde toxidoses in dogs. Compend Contin Educ
Jan-Feb;7:96-99.
Pract Vet 25:376-379.
Anne M. Leathem, Thomas J. Dorran. 2007. Poisoning due
Joseph D. Roder. 2004a. Black Widow. In Clinicat Veterinary
to raw Gyromitra esculenta (false morels) west of the
Toxicotogy, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 111-112. St.
Rockies. CJEM Mar;9(2):127-130.
Louis: Mosby.
Jon E. Levine, Aaron Cohen, M. MacQueen, M. Martin, Patri-
 2004b. Calcium Channel Blocking Agents. In Clini-
cia J. Giardina. 1997. Sensorimotor neurotoxicity associ-
cal Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee,
ated with high-dose deferoxamine treatment. J Pediatr
Pp. 308-309. St. Louis: Mosby.
Hematol Oncol Mar-Apr;19(2):139-141.
Wilson K. Rumbeiha, J. Kruger, S. Fitzgerald, J. Render, R.
Jeffrey N. Love, John M. Howell. 1997. Glucagon therapy in
Nachreiner, J. Kaneene, R. Vrable, M. Richter, C. Chi-
the treatment of symptomatic bradycardia. Ann Emerg Med
apuzio. 1997. The use of pamidronate disodium for treat-
Jan;29(1):181-183.
ment of vitamin D toxicosis in dogs. Proceedings 40th
W.H. Lyle. 1981. Penicillamine in metal poisoning. J Rheu-
Annual Meeting AAVLD, Louisville, Kentucky. Pp. 71.
matol Suppl Jan-Feb;7:96-99.
Mary M. Schell. 2000. Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication.
Elizabeth A. Martinez, Katrina A. Mealey. 2001. Muscle
Vet Med95:283-286.
relaxants. In Small Animal Clinical Pharmacotogy and
Carlos Sevcik, Victor Salazar, Patricia Diaz, Gina D'Suze.
Therapeutics, edited by Dawn Merton Boothe, Pp. 473-
Initial volume of a drug before it reaches the volume of
481.Philadelphia: Saunders.
distribution: Pharmacokinetics of F(ab')2 antivenoms and
Karol A. Mathews. 2006. Ethylene Gycol Intoxication. In
other drugs. Toxicon 2007 Oct;50(5):653-665.
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Manual, edited by
Christian A. Tomaszewski, S.T. Thom. 1994. Use of hyper-
Karol A. Mathews, Pp. 655-659. Guelph, Ontario: Life-
baric oxygen in toxicology. Emerg Med Clin North Am
learnInc.
12(2):437-459.
70
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
D.E. Turner-Lawrence, li W. Kerns. 2008. Intravenous fat
(SAMe) for the treatment of acetaminophen toxicity
emulsion: A potential novel antidote. J Med Tox
in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc May-Jun;38(3):246-
4(2):109-114.
254.
J.Allister Vale.2005. Oximes. In Critical Care Toxicology
Daniel L. Ward, S. Dru Forrester, T.C. DeFrancesco, Gregory
Diagnosis and Management of the Critically Poisoned
C. Troy. 1999. Treatment of severe chronic digoxin toxico-
Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace, Keith
sis in a dog with severe cardiac disease, using ovine
K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward Donovan, pp. 1523-
digoxin-specific immunoglobulin G Fab fragments. JAVMA
1530. Philadelphia: Mosby
215(12):1808-1812.
Dan L. Waitzberg, Raquel Susana Torrinhas, Thiago Manzoni
Paul M. Wax. 20l1. Sodium bicarbonate. In Goldfrank s Toxi-
Jacintho. 2006. New parenteral lipid emulsions for clinical
cofogic Emergencies, edited by Lewis S. Nelson et al., PP.
use.J Parenter Enteral Nutr 30:351-367.
520-527. China: McGraw-Hill.
Kevin P Wallace, Sharon A. Center, Fiona H. Hickford, Karen
W.F. Westlin. 1971. Deferoxamine as a chelating agent. Clin
L. Warner, Scott Smith. 2002. S-adenosyl-L-methionine
Toxicol 4:597-602.
Investigating Fatal
9
Suspected Poisonings
Safdar A. Khan
INTRODUCTION
In cats, however, poisoning has not been listed as a
Veterinary staff may encounter situations where they are
cause of acute sudden death (Table 9.3) (Olsen and Allen
asked to investigate cause of death of a companion animal
2001).
that was apparently healthy when observed last but was
Investigation of sudden death in a dog or a cat is no
later found dead by the owner. In many such situations,
different than investigation of any other disease condition.
the animal may have had clinical signs that went unno-
 Nontoxicologic rule-outs including infectious, metabolic,
          
nutritional, physical, and miscellaneous causes must be
observed during the time of illness. Investigating sudden
considered along with poisoning when investigating
death in dogs and cats in the absence of clinical signs
sudden death in a pet.
can be quite challenging. The definition of sudden death
It is important to realize that the effects of a toxicant on
in terrms of time may vary from person to person. For
the body are dose-dependent. Many of the toxicants listed
the purpose of this discussion, sudden, unattended, or
 in the rule-out list from Table 9.1 may not be expected to
unexplained death is defined as death occurring in an
cause acute sudden death with srmall exposures. However,
apparently healthy animal within a 12- to 24-hour period
the list includes the most common/likely toxicants that
with no premonitory clinical signs or with minimal clini-
possess the potential to cause acute sudden death with the
cal signs (Casteel and Turk 2002). The purpose of this
right amount (dose) of exposure. The reader is encouraged
chapter is to outline the approach to take in the inves-
to review more detail about a particular topic or agent
tigation of sudden death and to provide some common
listed in this text once a reasonable cause of death has been
toxicologic rule-outs that should be included for inves-
narrowed down.
tigating sudden acute unattended death in dogs and cats
(Table 9.1).
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
CAUSES OF SUDDEN DEATH
History
 A list of common causes of acute sudden death is available
The investigation of acute sudden death involves close
for large animals. However, for small animals, limited
cooperation between client, veterinary staff, and diagnos-
information is available on this topic. Animal poisoning
tic laboratory personnel. A cormplete and thorough case
(accidental or malicious) in dogs, according to one 10-year
history is essential for such investigations. A good case
retrospective study, is the second most cause of sudden
history can help expedite the process of putting together
death in dogs after heart diseases (Table 9.2) (Olsen and
all the pieces and eliminate several unnecessary steps
Allen 2000)
early. Obtaining a recent case history from the client may
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
71
Table 9.1. Common toxicants that can cause sudden death in dogs and cats
Agent
Comments
5-Flurouracil
Topically used anticancer medication; seizures, vomiting, cardiac
arrhythmias; acute death possible with large ingestion
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP)
Used as OTC sleep aid and antidepressant; seizures, hyperthermia;
acute death with large ingestions possible
Acetaminophen
Death due to methemoglobinemia within hours with large ingestion;
cats more sensitive
Albuterol
Prescription bronchodilator for asthma; acute death with large
ingestion possible; cardiac arrhythmias, hypokalermia
Amphetamines
Recreational or human prescription; hypertherrmia, hyperactivity,
circling, hypertension, tachyarrhythmias; acute death with large
ingestion possible
Anticoagulant rmdenticides
Internal bleeding 3-5 days postingestion; acute death due to
pulmonary hemorrhage possible
Antidepressants
Common human prescription medications; acute death possible with
large ingestion; CNS and cardiac effects
Arsenic
Toxicosis uncommon; watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, shock, acute
death possible
Baclofen
Prescription drug; coma, hypothermia, respiratory depression; death
with large ingestion
Barbiturates
Cormmon anticonvulsant, accidental ingestion of large doses; farm
dogs eating fesh/carcass of anirmals euthanized by barbiturates;
coma, hypothermia, and death
Blue-green algae
History of drinking from a lake/pond; algae on the muzzle; collapse,
shock, seizures, liver failure, death
Botulism
Acute death rare; ingestion of preformed toxins from eating a carcass;
progressive weakness, paralysis, death
Brunfetsia spp ingestion
Strychnine-like signs (seizures, rigidity); dogs attracted to fruit/seed
pods/fowers; acute death possible with large ingestion
Bufo toad
Common in Florida and other Southerm states; acute collapse,
salivation, cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, death
Caffeine
Ingestion of chocolate or caffeine pills; acute death with large
ingestion possible; vomiting, CNS signs, cardiac arrhythmias
Carbon monoxide
Uncommon; bright red mucous membranes
Cardiac glycosides-containing plants
Acute death uncommon; evidence of plant ingestion
Castor beans
Acute death unlikely; only possible if several seeds have been ingested
Cocaine
Recreational drug; acute death possible
 Ethylene glycol
Acute death with large ingestions possible; cats more sensitive
Garbage poisoning
History of eating garbage; acute death possible with some Salmonella,
E. coli toxins; vormiting, progressive shock and death
Hepatotoxic mushrooms
Vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, shock, liver failure, death
Hops (used for beer favoring)
Malignant hyperthermia-like syndrome in dogs; acute death possible
Ionophores (e.g-, monensin, lasalocid)
Eating cattle feed; farrm dog; acute death with large ingestion (premix)
possible
Iron
Multivitamins; large ingestions, acute death uncormmon, vomiting,
shock, liver damage
Isoniazid ingestion
Antituberculosis drug; seizures, acute death possible
72
Chapter 9/ Investigating Fatal Suspected Poisonings
73
Table 9.1. Continued
Agent
Comments
Lidocaine and other local anesthetics
Uncommon toxicosis; CNS, and cardiovascular effects
Metaldehyde
Used mostly as slug bait; seizures, hyperthermia, acute death with
large ingestion possible
Moldy food ingestion (tremorgenic
History of ingestion of moldy food; seizures, hyperthermia, vomiting,
mycotoxins)
 acute death possible
Nicotine
Acute death with large ingestion possible; Gl, CNS and cardiac effects
Organochlorine type pesticides
Lindane, eldrin, dieldrin; use not common anymore; cats more
sensitive; seizures, tremors, and acute death
Organophosphates/Carbamate insecticides
Some highly toxic OPs/carbamates like methomyl, aldicarb (tres
pasitos), disulfoton; usually SLUD signs present; acute rapid death
possible
Paint ball ingestion (glycols)
Ingestion of large amounts; acute death not common, seizures due to
hypematremia possible
Pseudoephedrine
OTC decongestant; amphetamine-like signs; acute death with large
overdose possible
Pyrethrins/pyrethroids (permethrin in cats)
Cats more sensitive to concentrated products; tremors, seizures, death
Sago palm
Acute death unlikely; only possible if several seeds have been
ingested; seizures, liver failure
Salt (sodium chloride)
Homemade play-dough ingestion; some use for inducing emesis;
seizures, hypernatremia, death possible
Smoke inhalation
History of pet trapped in the house during fire
Snake bite
Mohave rattle snake, eastern rattle snake; acute death possible
Strychnine
Used as a rmdenticide bait; rapid onset, seizures, hyperthermia, rigidity,
death, rapid onset rigor mortis
Tetrodotoxins
Acute death rare; ingestion of dried puffer fish, pet salamander;
paresis, respiratory failure, death
Water intoxication
 History of being on the beach/swimming; hyponateremia,
hypochloremia, polydipsia
Xylitol ingestion
Acute death due to severe hypoglycemia possible; acute liver failure
possible 1-3 days after ingestion
Zinc phosphide
Available as gopher bait; vomiting, CNS effects; acute death with large
ingestion possible
sometimes be difficult, especially in situations where the
in the household; timeline of death (i.e., when the pet was
animal was unsupervised immediately prior to death.
last seen alive, where and when the pet was found dead);
Clients may be too distraught to have good recollection of
where pet had been in the hours/days prior to death (e.g-,
recent events, and it is not uncommon for them to focus
traveling, beach, park, neighbors, pet sitter, party); evi-
on one particular event (e.g-, herbicide recently applied to
dence of clinical signs (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, seizure);
lawn) as the potential cause of death. Patient and tactful
number of affected animals (i.e., any other sick animals in
questioning is paramount to getting a history that is as
the household); inforrmation about the animal's environ-
accurate as possible.
ment (indoor vs. outdoor, free-roaming vs. fenced), loca-
Important historical questions must include animal sig-
tion (urban vs. rural), time of the year (summer vs. winter);
nalment (breed, sex, weight, and age); previous medical
recent renovations, construction or updates; availability of
history, vaccination history, and any medications the pet
recreational drugs (amphetamines, cocaine) or human
was taking; information regarding other animals present
medications in the animal's environment (antidepressants,
74
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Table 9.2. Underlying causes of sudden and
Table 9.3. Underlying causes of sudden and
unexpected deaths in 151 dogs as reported in
unexpected deaths in 79 cats as reported in the
the literature
literature
General Cause of Death
Number
% of
General Cause of Death
Number
% of
of Cases
Total
of Cases
Total
Heart disease
33
21.9
Trauma
31
39.2
Toxicosis
25
16.6
 Heart disease
16
20.3
Gastrointestinal disease
20
13.2
Intestinal disease
6
7.6
Trauma
19
12.6
Respiratory disease
5
6.3
Hemorrthage not associated
10
6.6
Urinary tract disease
4
5.1
with trauma
Feline leukemia virus-
3
3.8
Malnutrition or dehydration
8
5.5
related disease
Respiratory disease
6
4.0
Menengioencephlitis
1
1.3
 Urogenital disease
5
3.3
 Hepatic necrosis
1
1.3
Central nervous systerm disease
2
1.3
Sepsis
1
1.3
Peritonitis
2
1.3
 Hemorrhage not associated
1
1.3
Pancreatic disease
2
1.3
with trauma
Undetermined
19
12.6
Undetermined
10
12.7
Total
151
100
Total
79
100.2a
Source: Olsen and Allen 2000.
Source: Olsen and Allen 2001.
Exceeds 100 due to rounding.
painkillers, stimulants, nutritional supplements, overnight
visitors taking prescription medications); the presence of
laboratory on ice or dry ice through an express mail.
insecticides, fea/tick control products, herbicides, or
Inforrm the diagnostic laboratory about the shipment before
mdenticides in the house or yard; recent visits by pest
shipping. Avoid shipping over the weekends or holidays.
control or lawn care companies; and information about
Talk to the shipping carrier before shipping the animal to
presence of indoor or outdoor plants and lawn/garden fer-
discuss packaging and labeling requirements.
tilizers or chemicals) (Cote and Khan 2005). Information
Unfortunately, in many situations the options for a com-
about disputes involving the neighbors, coworkers, family
plete necrmpsy may not be feasible due to economics,
 members, or others may help deterrmine if the death could
animal size, or shipment constraints. In such circum-
be malicious.
stances, appropriate postmortem samples should be
obtained from the animal and the environment. Collection
Sample Collection
 of inappropriate type or amount of samples, and inade-
The best way to investigate acute sudden death is by
quate preservation techniques are some of the most
having a complete necropsy (gross and histopathologic
common errors that hinder investigation by diagnostic
examination) performed, preferably by a board certified
laboratories. To avoid cross-contamination, all samples
veterinary pathologist (Volmer and Meerdink 2002). After
should be collected in separate containers, properly labeled
obtaining an initial history, multiple digital pictures of the
with the patient's and owner's name, and dated. For his-
 dead animal with any lesions (hemorrhage, mucous mem-
topathologic examination, a full set of tissues from all
brane color, broken skin/bones etc.) along with incriminat-
major organ systerms should be cut 45 mm thick and
ing agent (if any) and surrounding environment (plants,
placed in 10% formalin.
chewed-up container, bait, feed, water etc.) should be
Most toxicologic analyses require frzen or refrigerated
taken. Stringent written documentation and chain of
samples. Important samples for toxicologic investigations
custody protocols should be followed for all potential
include liver, kidney, stomach contents, urine, abdominal
medicolegal cases; if necessary, contact local animal
fat, brain, heart clot blood and serum, hair, feed, water, or
contml or law enforcement for details on securing poten-
suspected bait (if available). The preferred anticoagulant
tial legal evidence. For shipment to a diagnostic labora-
for storage of whole blood is EDTA, although heparin is
tory, triple-bag the dead animal and ship it to a diagnostic
also acceptable in some case. Whole blood, serum, or urine
Chapter 9/ Investigating Fatal Suspected Poisonings
75
samples should be refrigerated or chilled until analyzed.
detail sample submission requirements. Discuss cost, turn-
The amount of samples should be reasonable. Generally,
around time, limitations of analytical methods if any, and
the larger the amount, the better it may be. You can always
interpretations of results with the diagnostic toxicologist
discard the excessive amount or extra samples later if not
if needed. The latter is especially important, because with
needed. Larger amounts can allow the toxicologist to
modern analytical equipment it is possible to detect a wide
repeat an analysis, test for additional potential toxicants,
variety of compounds at levels far below those that would
and confirm the results with a different method if neces-
have clinical significance. The toxicologist can assist in
sary. An entire set of samples must be collected for toxi-
deterrmining whether the levels found are consistent with
cologic analysis even when the diagnosis may be obvious
a toxicosis.
or apparent (Casteel and Turk 2002; Volmer and Meerdink
2002).
CONCLUSION
The sudden death of a companion animal can be an emo-
Sample Submission
tionally challenging time for animal owners and veterinary
A concise history of events should be submitted to the
staff. It is important that the veterinary staff understand the
diagnostic laboratory along with your request for analyses.
steps that need to be taken to investigate the cause of death
For a completed necropsy or toxicologic analysis an
so that the right questions can be answered and the appro-
accredited diagnostic laboratory should be utilized when-
priate samples are collected.
ever possible. Most laboratories now have websites that
CHAPTER 9 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A client brings a dead adult male cat into the hospital.
3. A necropsy is performed and samples are taken for
What is the first step in dealing with this case?
histopathology. Additional samples are collected for
a. Collect samples for toxicology.
toxicology, but are kept at the clinic pending the
b. Perform a necropsy.
results of the necropsy and histopathology. What is
C. Obtain a history.
the preferred means of storage of these samples until
d. Take radiographs.
they are ready to be submitted to the toxicology
e. Draw some blood for a chemistry profile.
laboratory?
 2. The client says that the cat was a stray that she and
a. Frozen
several neighbors had been feeding for several
b. Refrigerated
months. One neighbor had taken the cat to be neu-
c. Fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution
tered and vaccinated 2 months ago, and the cat
d. a and b
 appeared generally healthy. The client had fed the cat
e. a, b, and c
last night and he seemed fine; this morning he was
4.
The necropsy and histopathology on the cat were
lying dead on her porch. The client called the neigh-
highly suggestive of ethylene glycol (antifreeze) toxi-
bors who were helping to feed the cat; no one saw
cosis. What is the next step?
anything out of the ordinary in the past 24 hours, and
a. Call the diagnostic laboratory to determine which
none had administered medication or fea control to
sample(s) to subrmit for ethylene glycol.
the cat within the past week. The client is suspicious
b. Call animal control to report a malicious
that the cat has been maliciously poisoned and wants
poisoning.
to know why the cat died. A cursory external exam
C. Call the neighbors to see whether they suspect
of the shows no lesions or evidence of why the cat
anyone of poisoning the cat.
may have died. What is the next step?
5. The toxicologic analysis of the submitted samples
a. Collect samples for toxicology.
confirmed the presence of ethylene glycol in the
b. Perform a necropsy.
cat's stomach contents, fat, and kidney. Is this proof
C. Take radiographs.
that the cat was maliciously poisoned? Why or
d. Draw some blood for a chemistry profile.
why not?
Continued
76
Section 1 I Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
laboratory.
al on humqns on hond uazoy no pae
 Samples fortoxicology can be stored either refrig-
3.d.
malicious or accidental.
why the cat died.
sem ansodxa au jaqaum anns oy Aes on anqis
 2.b. A necropsy holds the best chance of determining
No. Without a witnessed exposure it is not pos-
course of investigation.
Kioenoqel onsouaeip au Aq pazaeue wa
1.c. Obtain a history to determine the most appropriate
4.a. Determine which samples to submit and have
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
 2001. Causes of sudden and unexpected death in
cats:A 10-year retrospective study.Canadian Veterinary
Casteel S.W., Turk JR. 2002. Collapse/sudden death. In
Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd edition, edited by B.P
Journal 42:61-62.
Smith, pp. 246-253. St. Louis: Mosby-Elseviet.
Volmer PA., Meerdink G.L. 2002. Diagnostic toxicology for
Cote E., Khan S.A. 2005. Intoxication versus acute, non-
the small animal practitioner. Veterinary Clinics of North
toxicologic illness: Differentiating the two. Ettinger and
America SmallAnimal32:357-365.
Feldman's Text Book of Veterinary Internal Medicine,6th
edition, Pp. 242-245. St. Louis: Elsevier-Saunders.
Olsen T.F., Allen A.L. 2000. Causes of sudden and unex-
pected death in dogs: A 10-year retrospective study. Cana-
dian Veterinary Journal 41:873-875.
Toxicologic Testing and
10
Using Diagnostic
Laboratories
Lisa Murphy
SOURCES
tents, tissues, food, baits, water, and plant material. Each
Toxicologic testing may be available at many levels: in the
distinct sample type may require its own specific type of
veterinary clinic (for example, ethylene glycol testing), at
 processing and analysis to detect the same toxic substance.
a local or regional commercial veterinary diagnostic labo-
 Not all sample types may be appropriate for obtaining
ratory, or at a veterinary diagnostic laboratory associated
reliable results for all toxicologic tests. Diagnostic labora-
with a veterinary school or state department of agriculture.
tories should be able to recormmend which sample types
When selecting a diagnostic laboratory the following cri-
 are best or preferred for specific toxicologic tests.
teria should be considered: cost, turnaround time, experi-
Detection limits refer to the minimum amount of a toxic
ence with the sample type, available detection limits for
substance that must be present to reliably produce a posi-
the toxicant of concern, quality assurance and quality
tive test result. Detection limits will often be listed on a
control programs, and assistance in the interpretation of
diagnostic report as the MDL, the minimum detection
results (Galey 2004).
limit or method detection limit. When a toxic substance is
The use of specialized instruments and highly trained
either not found in a sample or appears to be present at a
 personnel will often make toxicologic testing quite expen-
very low level below the MDL that is not confirmable, the
sive compared to other diagnostic tests routinely per-
result may be reported as either "none detected" or less
formed for small animal patients. Many laboratories also
than the MDL. If a specific level of detection of a toxicant
charge additional fees for samples that are sent from
is needed for either diagnostic or treatment purposes it is
another state, so be sure to ask about any additional fees
probably worthwhile to contact the veterinary toxicology
that may apply.
laboratory ahead of time to be sure that its method is able
Turnaround time refers to how long it will generally
to adequately provide the desired information.
take to receive test results once samples arrive at the labo-
Quality assurance and quality control are the practices
ratory. Since some toxicologic tests may take several days
laboratories use to ensure that the results they report are
or sometimes more than a week to complete, it will still
consistent and accurate. This reliability is typically accorm-
be necessary to stabilize, decontaminate, and begin to treat
plished by the use of standard reference materials, stan-
the patient while waiting for results. Since some analyses
dard data curves, spiked samples, regular use of check
can be completed more quickly, especially if the labora-
samples, and participation in multilaboratory proficiency
tory receives prior notice, it is important to contact the
tests. When using an unfamiliar laboratory for the first
laboratory directly before submitting sarmples for critically
time, it may be prudent to inquire about its quality assur-
ill patients.
ance and quality control program.
Common sample types submitted for toxicologic testing
Once a test has been completed, interpretation of the
in veterinary medicine include blood, urine, stomach con-
results by a trained professional such as a veterinary
Smatt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H.Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
77
78
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
Table 10.1. Environmental sample types and amounts for toxicologic testing
 Sample Type
Amount
Collection/Storage Method
Human or animal foods
500 grams (approximately 2 cups)
Refrigerate or freeze in a well-sealed
plastic bag or container.
Baits
Entire amount present up to 500
Refrigerate or freeze in a well-sealed
grams (approximately 2 cups)
plastic bag or container.
Plants
Whole green plant including the roots;
Press or wrap in newspaper, place in
a fresh tree, or shrub branch with
a sealed plastic bag, and then
leaves (and fowers if present);
send to the diagnostic laboratory
entire nut, fruit, berry, or other
either fresh or frozen.
characteristic part of the plant
Mushrooms
Whole mushroom or as much as
Keep relatively cold and dry in a
possible if the only remaining
paper bag to reduce moisture
source is from the animal's
 accumulation and subsequent
vomitus or stomach contents
spoilage.
Water
0.5-1L (approximately 2-4 cups)
Ideally, collect into a new, unused,
clean, and dry glass container that
is free of any detergent, chemical,
food, or beverage residues.
Other unidentified substances
Representative amount of what is
Refrigerate or freeze in a well-sealed
or medications
present up to 500 grams
 plastic bag or container.
(approximately 2 cups)
toxicologist, can be critical in determining its significance
Environmental Samples
to the case as a whole and may be used to direct additional
Many toxicants cannot be successfully detected in animal
patient care or diagnostic testing. To determine whether a
tissues or bodily fuids, so the collection and submission
patient's result is abnormal or diagnostically significant,
of environmental samples may be critical to identifying an
something should be known about what "normal" results
animal's access to a potentially toxic substance. Common
are expected to be for an animal of a particular species,
environmental samples that could represent sources of
age, or gender. As an example anticoagulant rmdenticides
intoxication to small animals include foods, baits, plants,
would not be expected to be present in the blood of an
mushrooms, water, and other unidentified substances or
unexposed animal, while a low level of lead in the same
medications. For a description of typical sample amounts
animal's blood could be considered normal and not
and how they should be collected, stored, and submitted
expected to be associated with signs of lead toxicity.
for toxicologic testing, see Table 10.1.
An experienced veterinary toxicology laboratory will be
 able to provide reliable, accurate, and useful results in a
Antemortem
timely matter.
Common sample types that can be obtained from a live
patient for toxicology testing include whole blood, serum,
DIAGNOSTICS
urine, vomitus, stomach contents, feces, biopsy speci-
The appropriate selection of diagnostic tests in cases of
mens, and hair. Samples should be obtained preferably at
suspected intoxications will rely heavily on obtaining a
the earliest feasible opportunity after the animal arrives at
 good case history. Based on the historical information
the clinic. If specimens cannot be collected before exten-
provided, a veterinary toxicology laboratory's professional
sive medical treatments are instituted, any drugs adrminis-
staff should be able to assist veterinary clinics with ques-
tered or treatments given should be noted as part of the
tions about which tests should be selected for a given case,
case history when submitting toxicology samples for
the best and appropriate sarmple types to submit, and the
testing. Suggested sample amounts and how they should
desirable sample quantities needed to run the requested
be stored and transported are described in Table 10.2. The
analyses.
sample size that can be safely collected from tiny patients
Chapter 10 / Toxicologic Testing and Diagnostic Laboratories
79
Table 10.2. Suggested antemortem samples for toxicologic testing
Sample Type
Amount
Collection/Storage Method
Whole blood
 2-4 ml
Refrigerate in calcium EDTA or heparin tube.
Serum
2-4 ml
Spin and refrigerate or freeze the serum in a plain glass or plastic
blood tube to separate from the red blood cells.
Use a special all-plastic royal blue top for accurate zinc levels.
Urine
At least 10-20 ml
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic container
Vomitus or stomach
At least 10-20 ml
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
contents
Feces
At least 100 grams
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
 Biopsy specimens
At least 25 grams
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Hair
5-10 grams
 Place in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Table 10.3. Postmortem samples for toxicologic testing
Sample Type
Amount
Storage Method
Stomach contents
At least 10-20 ml
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Liver
At least 5-10 grams
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Kidney
At least 5-10 grams
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Brain
Half of the brain
Cut in half sagittally, leaving the other half and the midline intact for
histopathology.
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container
Body fat
At least 5-10 grams
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
Eye
One globe
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container;
allows testing of either ocular fuid or retina
Injection site
Surrounding tissue
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or container.
such as neonates and exotic species may be limited. Some
poisoning. Common postmortem sample types are
form of toxicologic testing can still be performed in most
described in Table 10.3.Rarely, collection of other post-
cases, though the number and types of tests along with the
mortem sample types may be necessary for the detection
ability to verify any positive results may be severely
of some compounds, such as lung tissue for paraquat. This
limited.
kind of special testing information can be obtained by
consulting with the toxicology laboratory.
Postmortem
When patients have died as a result of a suspected toxico-
MANAGEMENT OF EXPOSURES
sis it may be beneficial to refrigerate or freeze samples for
Diagnostic testing should not be substituted for general
potential toxicologic testing while awaiting results of other
patient care and case management. All patients should be
diagnostic tests such as complete blood counts, serum
evaluated as individuals and life-threatening signs such as
chemistries, gross necropsies, and histopathology. These
respiratory distress, cardiovascular compromise, and
results may provide valuable information about possible
central nervous system abnormalities such as seizures
cause(s) of death and subsequently what specific toxico-
should be addressed first. Once the patient has been stabi-
logic analyses should be pursued. One exception may be
lized, diagnostic tests can be perforrmed and specific care
if other animals in the same household or neighborhood
can be provided. Even in the event that diagnostic toxico-
are sick or at risk. In these cases toxicologic testing may
logic testing is not readily available, most intoxicated
be pursued more quickly when the history and clinical
animals can recover if close monitoring, symptormatic
signs observed are strongly supportive of or suspicious for
treatment, and good nursing care are provided.
80
Section 1 I Fundamentats of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
CHAPTER 10 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Manny, a 6-year-old, intact male, 65-pound German
c. Refers to the minimum amount of a toxic sub-
shepherd dog, presents to the veterinary hospital with
stance that must be present to reliably produce a
a history of vomiting and muscle tremors that began
positive test result
about 2 hours ago. Prior to development of signs,
d. Refers to the lowest level of toxicant that will be
Manny had been roaming free on the owner's farm.
toxic to a particular animal
The owners are concerned that Manny may have
e. Refers to the smallest amount of a nontoxicant
 gotten into the shed that houses the farm pesticides.
(ie., contaminant) that will give a false positive
They also noted that Manny was seen digging in the
result
 compost pile in the pasture. Besides blood or serum,
5. The appropriate selection of diagnostic tests in cases
list two other sarmples frorm Manny that might be
of suspected intoxications will rely heavily on the
helpful to aid in diagnosis.
diagnostic laboratory obtaining
2. For each of the two samples selected in Question 1,
a.
 An adequate blood sample
indicate the amount to collect and the best method of
b.
A good case history
storage/handling of the sample for submission to a
c. A freshly dead animal
diagnostic laboratory.
d. Frequent calls from the veterinary clinic asking for
3. Which of the following is not correct regarding diag-
results
nostic toxicology samples?
e. Payment in advance
a. Freezing or refrigeration is an acceptable means of
preserving samples prior to submission to the diag-
nostic laboratory.
b. Veterinary diagnostic laboratory personnel can
for a particular case.
assist the veterinary technician in determining the
best test and sample for a particular suspected toxi-
5. b. A good case history is essential in knowing
cology case.
c. When deterrmining whether a laboratory result is
cants to analyze for.
clinically significant, the diagnostic toxicologist
 in order to help narrow down the potential toxi-
will compare the result with a range of "normal"
thology, clinical pathology) results are obtained
values.
formed after other testing (necropsy, histopa-
d. Toxicology testing should always be the first step
3. d. In most cases toxicology testing should be per-
in attempting to diagnose the cause of death in a
sealed plastic container.
suspected poisoning case.
submit refrigerated or frozen in a clean, tightly
e. Environmental samples that may be submitted in
 o na  s 'soh a
 a suspected toxicology case include animal foods,
erated or frozen in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
plants, mushrooms, and water.
-n ns pu h o  o-01 isa ne n 
4. Which of the following is true regarding the MDL
plastic container Vomitus (stomach contents),
(minimum detection limit)?
refrigerated or frozen in a clean, tightly sealed
a. Refers to the minimum amount of toxicant in an
Urine, collect at least 10-20ml and submit
animal that will cause a toxicosis
Urine, vomitus (stomach content), feces.
b. Refers to the highest amount of toxicant that the
ANSWERS
diagnostic test can detect in a sample
REFERENCE
Galey, Frank D. 2004. Diagnostic Toxicology. In Clinicaf
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp.
22-27. St. Louis: Mosby.
Section
2
A Systems-Affected Approach
to Toxicology
Nervous System
11
TinaWismer
INTRODUCTION
soma, and is often covered by myelin, a fatlike substance
The nervous system is a target for an extremely large
that increases the speed of impulse conduction (Spencer
number of toxic agents including drugs, environmental and
2000). Nervous impulses cross the synapses between
industrial chemicals, and "natural" products such as bacte-
neurons by the release of chemicals termed neurotransmit-
rial toxins and animal venoms (Tables 11.1-11.4). Many
ters (Anthony et al. 2001). Neurotransmitters include ace-
of these agents are able to bypass the nervous system's
tylcholine, catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine,
protective blood-brain barrier and cause neurologic dys-
epinephrine), amino acid derivatives (serotonin, garmma
function. Many agents that affect the nervous system, espe-
amino butyric acid or GABA, glycine, histarmine, aspartic
cially psychotropic drugs, exert their effects through
acid, glutamic acid), and various other neuropeptides
biochemical mechanisms that do not leave any telltale
(substance P, orexins, endorphins, vasopressin, thyroid-
clinical pathologic changes or anatomic lesions to aid in
releasing hormone) (Beasley 1999; Spencer 2000).
diagnosis in animals experiencing a toxicosis. Because the
 Neurotransrmitters can be excitatory and/or inhibitory.
nervous system has a limited number of responses to injury,
Excitatory neurotransmitters stimulate postsynaptic mem-
the clinical effects of toxicoses affecting nervous systerm
branes, and inhibitory neurotransmitters decrease (or make
function will resemble effects from other causes of neuro-
less likely) the transmission of an impulse. Acetylcholine
logic dysfunction such as infectious, metabolic, traurmatic,
is both excitatory and inhibitory. It has inhibitory effects
and neoplastic injury. Definitive diagnosis of nervous
 on the heart but stimulatory effects on other organs. The
system toxicosis can therefore be quite challenging.
catecholamines are horrmones that are released by the
adrenal glands in reaction to stress. Epinephrine and nor-
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
epinephrine are associated with the sympathetic nervous
The nervous system encompasses both the central nervous
systerm (fight or flight response). Doparmine is found in the
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
brain and affects muscle control and autonomic functions.
The CNS coordinates the activity of all parts of the body
GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter. GABA
and consists of the brain and spinal cord. The PNS con-
regulates neuronal excitability throughout the nervous
nects the CNS with the limbs and organs.
system. Glycine is also an inhibitory neurotransmitter
The basic functional unit of the nervous system is the
found in the spinal cord, brainstem, and retina.
neuron. Neurmons initiate and conduct nerve stimuli. The
The major protective mechanism in the CNS is the
basic structure of a neuron contains the body (soma), den-
blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier forms a "wall"
drites, and axons. The dendrites are short branches off the
between capillaries in the brain and the nervous tissue. The
body that receive stimuli from other neurons and transmit
tight junctions allow small molecules and lipid soluble
it to the soma. The axon carries impulses away from the
molecules to enter easily, but keep other substances out of
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
E8
Table 11.1. Pesticides
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
4-aminopyridine (Avitrol@)
Stimulation, tremors, seizures
Amitraz
Depressant
 Anticholinesterase insecticides (organophosphates, carbamates)
Seizures
Avermectins (ivermectin, moxidectin)
Weakness,ataxia,tremors,seizures,coma
Bromethalin
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
3-chloro-p-toluidine hydrochloride (Starlicide@)
Depressant, weakness, paralysis
DEET (diethyltoluamide)
Seizures
Metaldehyde
Seizures, tremors
Organochlorine insecticides (lindane, DDT)
Seizures
Pyrethrins
Tremors
Sodium fuoroactate (1080)
Intermittent seizures, stimulation
Strychnine
Seizures
Zinc phosphide
Ataxia, seizures
Table 11.2. Biologic agents
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
Asctepias spp. (Milkweed)
Weakness, tremors, seizures
Atropa belladonna (Deadly nightshade, Belladonna)
Tremors, paralysis, hallucinations
Black widow spider envenomation
Flaccid paralysis
Blue-green algae (anatoxin-a, anatoxin-a[s])
Tremors, seizures
Botulism
Flaccid paralysis
Brunfelsia spp. (Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow)
Tremors (can last for weeks), seizures
Catycanthus spp. (Bubby bush)
Seizures
Cannabis sativa (Marijuana)
Depressant, ataxia, coma; possible agitation
Cicuta spp. (Water hemlock)
Seizures
Conium spp. (Poison hemlock)
Initial stimulation, followed by depressive signs
 Coral snake envenomation
Ataxia, tremors, paralysis
Datura spp. (Jimsonweed, Angel's trumpet)
Tremors, paralysis, hallucinations
Essential oils
Depressant, ataxia, weakness, trermors; seizures with large doses
Eupatorium rugosum (White snakeroot)
Tremors, ataxia,stiff gait,weakness
Ipomoea spp. (Morning glory)
Stimulation, hallucinations
Lobelia spp. (Lobelia)
Initial stimulation, followed by depressive signs
Lupinus spp. (Lupine)
Initial stimulation, followed by depressive signs
Macadamia nuts
Weakness, tremors (dogs only)
Mushroorms, isoxazole
Altermating CNS stimulation and depression
Mushrooms, monomethylhydrazines
Tremors, seizures, coma
Mushrooms, psychedelic
Ataxia, tremors, hallucinations
Nerium oleander(Oleander)
Tremors, seizures
Nicotine (cigarettes, Nicotiana spp.)
Initial stimulation, followed by depressive signs
Tetanus
Muscle rigidity
Tick paralysis
Weakness, paralysis
Tremorgenic mycotoxins (Penitrem A, roquefortine)
Tremors, seizures
84
Table 11.3. Pharmaceuticals
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
Amphetamines (Ritalin@, Adderall@, crack, methamphetamine,
Stimulation
MDMA)
Antihistamines (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, loratadine)
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Atropine
Seizures with high doses
Barbiturates (phenobarbital)
Depressant
Benzodiazepines (diazepam, alprazolam)
Depressant, ataxia; rarely agitation
Bromide
Depressant, weakness, ataxia
 Bupropion (Wellbutrin@)
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Buspirone
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Cocaine
Stimulation
Cyproheptadine
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Decongestants (pseudoephedrine, phenylephrine, Ma huang,
Stimulation
ephedra)
5-fuorouracil (Efudex@)
Seizures
General anesthetics (isofurane, halothane, propofol)
Depressant
Ibuprofen
Seizures, coma with high doses
Isoniazid
Seizures
Lithium
Seizures
Local anesthetics (lidocaine, benzocaine)
Seizures with high doses
LSD
Stimulation, hallucinations
MAO inhibitors (Anipryl@)
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Methylxanthines (caffeine, theobromine, theophylline)
Stimulation
Mirtazepine (Remeron@)
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Nefazadone, trazodone
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Opiates (hydrocodone, morphine, codeine, butorphanol, tramadol)
 Depressant; rarely agitation and seizures
Phenothiazines (acepromazine, chlorpromazine)
Depressant
Piperazine
Ataxia, tremors
Salicylates
Seizures with high doses
Serotonergic drugs (Prozac@, Paxil@, 5-hydroxytryptophan,
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Effexor@)
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, clomipramine)
Stimulant at high doses; depressant at low doses
Table 11.4. Nonmedicinal agents
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
Alcohol
Depressant
Carbon monoxide
Depressant, weakness, ataxia
 Ethylene glycol
Depressant effect, ataxia, tremors, seizures
Lead
Intermittent stimulation and depression
Liver toxicants
Secondary to hepatic encephalopathy
 Organic alkyl mercury
Blindness, ataxia, paralysis, coma
Phenol
Tremors, seizures with large doses
 Propylene glycol
Depressant effects, ataxia, seizures
Sodium
Tremors, seizures
Thiaminase (raw fish)
Depression, ataxia, paresis 
Thallium
Tremors, weakness, seizures
Turpentine
 Depressant, weakness, ataxia, coma
85
86
Section21ASystems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
the brain. The PNS is not protected by the blood-brain
species of animal. To make diagnosis more difficult, toxi-
barrier, leaving it exposed to toxicants.
cants can cause a progression of clinical signs (e.g., initial
CNS depression, followed by CNS stimulation).
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
Many neurotoxicants effect neurotransmission and
In small animal toxicology, most toxicants work directly
leave no obvious lesions. Functional neurotoxicants can
on the neurons or affect the release and/or binding of
affect the CNS, PNS, and autonomic nervous system
neurotransmitters. Toxicant-induced alteration of neu-
(ANS). They act by preventing synthesis, storage, release,
mtransmitters can result in stimulation or inhibition of
binding, reuptake, or degradation of neurotransmitters.
 postsynaptic neurons, resulting in excitatory or depressive
Functional neurotoxicants may also interfere with axonal
clinical effects depending on the type of neurotransmitter
transmission via sodium, potassium, chloride or calcium
affected, type of postsynaptic neuron, and amount of neu-
channels, and alter action potentials (Spencer 2000).
rmotransmitter and receptors involved. For instance, CNS
There are a few structural changes caused by neurotoxi-
stimulation (manifested as hyperactivity, agitation and/or
cants. These include neuronopathy, anoxopathy, and
seizures) may be caused by increasing the synaptic levels
myelinopathy. In neuronopathy, neurotoxicants directly
of an excitatory neurotransmitter (e.g-, stimulation of ace-
target the cell body, causing cell death and secondary
tylcholine release by organophosphorus insecticides) or
axonal degeneration. The response to the loss of neurons
by decreasing the synaptic levels of an inhibitory neu-
is gliosis, proliferation of astrocytes, and/or microgilial
mtransmitter (e.g-, strychnine-induced decrease in glycine
cells (Anthony et al. 2001). Neuronopathies can be selec-
neurotransmission).
tive or diffuse.
The brain is very susceptible to injury because it requires
In axonopathy, in contrast to neuronopathy, the neuronal
a continual high level of oxygen. It has a high percentage
cell body remains intact, but the portion of the axon distal
of blood fow for an organ of relatively small mass.
to the lesion degenerates (Wallerian degeneration) (Man-
Hypoxia is a common cause of neuronal injury. It may be
della 2002). Histologic changes can be seen in the Nissl
secondary to systemic hypotension, cerebral infarction,
substance. These changes include chromatolysis (dissolu-
vascular injury, or oxygen deprivation. Respiratory com-
tion of the Nissl substance) as well as movement of the
promise leading to hypoxia is the primary life-threatening
nucleus to the periphery of the cell body. Neurons with
issue in many toxic exposures causing alterations of con-
axons of the greatest length are most susceptible to axonal
sciousness (Anthony et al. 2001). Brain damage can also
damage.
occur secondary to hypoglycermia. During periods of low
Myelinopathy occurs when toxicants cause a loss of
blood sugar, neuronal damage to dentate and granule cells
myelin (demyelination) or edema in the myelin sheath and
occurs. Hypoglycemia can result in either cerebral cortex
subsequent separation of myelin layers. This slows down
or brainstem deficits. Other mechanisms of toxicologic
nerve transmission.
injury to the nervous system include ion balance disruption
(excessive intracellular accumulation of calcium), cyto-
HEALING AND REPAIR
skeleton damage, decreased protein synthesis (loss of
Damage to the nervous system is frequently irreversible
mugh endoplasrmic reticulum), and glial cell damage
because the adult neuron does not divide. With peripheral
(Anthony et al. 2001).
neuronopathies the prognosis for at least partial regenera-
Disruption or dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier
tion is good. However, this is not true in the CNS. Central
may result in normally excluded compounds entering the
neuronopathies, with few exceptions, are not reversible.
CNS, resulting in neurologic injury and/or dysfunction.
In axonopathies, glial cells debride the area. The cell
body undergoes central chromatolysis which may lead to
PATTERNS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
cell death. If the cell body does not die, axonal regrowth
Toxicological insults to the nervous system produce a wide
may occur slowly (approximately 1 mm per day). Second-
 o on po  sis   
ary demyelination can be seen with axonal injury (Man-
systerms. Toxicants can affect multiple areas of the nervous
della 2002). Remyelination can occur in some cases, more
system depending on the dose, route of exposure, and
often in the PNS than in the CNS.
Chapter 11 / Nervous System
87
CHAPTER 11 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Many psychotropic drugs alter nervous system func-
c. Repels negatively charged compounds, keeping
tion by changing the brain biochemistry through
them from entering the nervous system
 alterations of
d. Is readily traversed by inflammatory cells
a.Hormones
e. Is composed of tight junctions that allow the
b. Neurotransmitters
 passage of small molecules and lipid-soluble corm-
C. Cytokines
 pounds but prevent passage of other substances 
d. Tight junctions
5. Which of the following is not a potential cause of
e. Glial cells
 brain injury?
2. The functional unit of the nervous system is the
 a. Hypoglycemia
composed of
that receive
b. Hypoxia
stimuli from other cells,
that carry
C.1
 Blood-brain barrier disruption
irmpulses away frorm the cell body, and the cell body,
d. Disruption of ion balance
also known as the
e. All of the above are potential causes of brain
a. Soma, dendrites, axons, neuron
injury.
b. Dendrites, soma, axons, neuron
C. Neuron, axons, dendrites, soma
d.Neuron, dendrites,axons, soma
e. Soma, axons, dendrites, neuron
3. GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter within the
 CNS. The most significant effect of inhibition of the
action of GABA would be expected to be
a. CNS depression and coma
b. CNS stimulation and seizures
CNS stimulation and, potentially, seizures.
C. Fight or fight response
such as GABA and glycine commonly cause
d. Corticosteroid release
3. b. Inhibition of CNS inhibitory neurotransmitters 
e. Immunosuppression
and the soma, or cell body.
4. The blood-brain barrier
receive stimuli, axons that transmit impulses,
a. Keeps all foreign compounds out of the CNS
2. d. The neuron is composed of dendrites that
regardless of size
1. b. Neurotransmitters
b.Protects the CNS and PNS from entry of poten-
ANSWERS
tially damaging compounds
REFERENCES
Rosemary C. Mandella. 2002. Applied neurotoxicology. In
Douglas C. Anthony, Thomas J. Montine, William M. Valen-
Handbook of Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael J.
tine, Doyle G. Graham. 200l. Toxic responses of the
Derelanko, Mannfred A. Hollinger, Pp. 371-399. Boca
Raton: CRC Press.
nervous system." In Casarett & Doull's Toxicology: The
Basic Science of Poisons, 6th ed., edited by Curtis D.
Peter S. Spencer. 2000. Biological principles of chemical
Klassen, pp. 535-563. New York: McGraw-Hill.
neurotoxicity. In Experimental and Clinical Neurotoxicol-
Val R. Beasley. 1999. Veterinary Toxicology. International
ogy, 2nd edition, edited by Peter S. Spencer, Herbert H.
Schaumburg, Pp. 3-54. New York: Oxford University
Veterinary Information Service. www.ivis.org/advances/
Beasley/toc.asp.
Press.
Cardiovascular System
12
Karla R. Smith
INTRODUCTION
ventricles via the AV bundle and Purkinje fibers (Fox
Cardiovascular toxicity can be broadly defined as adverse
et al. 1999)
effects on the heart and blood vessels following exposure
The cardiac muscle (myocardium) does the work of the
to toxic agents. These toxicants can produce direct or
heart. The myocardium is a type of involuntary striated
indirect effects on the heart and/or vascular system. Agents
muscle found only in the walls of the heart. It shares some
that affect the heart may increase the force of contraction
similarities with skeletal muscle but is unique in many
(cardiotonic or positive inotropic effect), may increase the
ways. The striations observed in cardiac muscle are due to
rate of contraction (positive chronotropic effect), or may
alternating thick (myosin) and thin (actin) prmotein fila-
have cardiac depressant effects (negative inotropic or
ments. It is the sliding of actin filaments past myosin fila-
chronotropic effects).
ments that causes contraction of the myocardium. This
action requires both ATP and an adequate concentration of
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
sodium and calcium (Kittleson and Kienle 1998).
The cardiovascular system can be divided into two cat-
The blood vessels make up the circulatory system,
egories: the heart and the blood vessels. The heart is
which transports blood throughout the body. The arteries
made up of two large pumps; the right and left ventricle.
transport blood away from the heart, the capillaries are
which work in concert to pump blood through the blood
small vessels that allow the exchange of oxygen and nutri-
vessels.
ents and connect the arterial and venous sides of the vas-
The right ventricle pumps blood through the lungs
cular system, and the veins transport blood back toward
where it is oxygenated. The left ventricle pumps blood
the heart. The blood vessels have limited ability to con-
through the systemic circulation. The smaller pumps, the
tribute to forward blood fow. Arteries can regulate their
right and left atria, move blood into their associated ven-
inner diameter by contraction or relaxation of the vascular
tricles. The right atrium houses the sinoatrial (SA) node,
smooth muscle layer. This vasoconstriction or vasodilation
which is responsible for initiating cardiac impulses.
can be an important mechanism in cardiovascular toxicity,
Electrical impulses begin in the SA node and are trans-
contributing to hypertension or hypotension. All blood
mitted throughout the atria, causing them to contract and
vessels are lined with endothelial cells that interface
force blood into the ventricles. When the electrical impulse
between circulating blood and the vessel wall. The endo-
reaches the atrioventricular (AV) node, there is a slight
thelial cells have multiple functions, including helping to
delay in conduction, which allows complete flling of the
control blood pressure and forming specialized barriers,
ventricles before the impulse is transmitted throughout the
such as the blood brain barrier.
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
89
90
Section 2 I A Systems-Afected Approach to Toxicology
MECHANISMS OF TOXIC INJURY TO
Abnormal impulse initiation may occur when there is
THE HEART
increased automaticity of the atrial or ventricular myocar-
Toxicologic injury to the cardiovascular system may
dial cells unassociated with the SA or AV nodes. This area
develop by either direct or indirect means. Direct means
is generally referred to as an ectopic focus. If the firing
include those that have a primary effect on the functional
rate of the ectopic focus is greater than the SA node, the
or biomechanical properties of the heart and vascular
ectopic focus will become the predominant pacemaker of
system. An example would be the tricyclic antidepressant
the heart. The drugs digitoxin and digoxin are digitalis
clomipramine, which inhibits myocardial sodium chan-
glycosides, which are used in both human and veterinary
nels, leading to cardiac dysrhythmias. Indirect toxicity
medicine to treat congestive heart failure and atrial fibril-
arises when the cardiovascular system is secondarily
lation. They act by depressing the rate of cardiac impulses
affected by toxicosis to another body system. For example,
initiated by the SA node, and increasing intracellular
ingestion of bromodialone, an anticoagulant rmdenticide,
calcium, leading to slower and more forceful cardiac con-
can cause significant blood loss leading to hypovolemic
traction. While they are effective drugs used in treating
shock. The fall in blood volume causes a drop in systermic
atrial fibrillation commonly seen with dilated cardiomy-
blood pressure. Reflex vasoconstriction causes splenic
opathy, they have a narrow margin of safety, with both
contraction in an effort to increase the circulating blood
acute and chronic toxicity being observed. Toxic doses
volume, and the heart rate elevates as the heart attermpts
cause marked slowing of conduction through the AV node,
to move the remaining blood through the circulatory
potentially allowing an ectopic focus to take over as the
system more rapidly.
prorminent pacemaker of the heart. Increased intracellular
calcium can also cause cardiac arrhythmias to develop.
Clinical signs typically include ventricular tachycardia and
PATTERNS OF TOXIC INJURY TO THE HEART
preventricular contractions.
Abnormal triggered rhythms occur from either potas-
Direct Myocardial Injury
sium channel blockade or intracellular calcium overload.
Sorme toxicants can cause degeneration and necrosis of the
Barium salts, which are used to create green colors in
myocardium, either by direct injury to the myocardial cells
fireworks, cause intracellular trapping of potassium along
or by hemodynamic alterations resulting in ischemic
with cardiac dysrhythmias, including preventricular con-
injury. Depending on the toxicant, the pattem of injury on
tractions, ventricular tachycardia, or bradycardia.
the heart can vary from small areas of necrmosis to massive
Abnormal impulse conduction occurs when electrical
necrosis of the myocardium, resulting in congestive heart
impulses traveling through the myocardium reach an area
failure (CHF), cardiomyopathy, conduction disturbances,
that, due to ischemia, disease, or toxicant exposure is not
or death. Areas of myocardial necrosis will appear as pale
appropriately able to conduct these impulses. When these
spots or streaks in the heart muscle; older lesions may be
impulses are completely blocked, bradyarrhythmias may
more pronounced due to fibrosis or mineralization. Agents
occur. Slow conduction may trigger a reentry circuit,
that can cause this type of myocardial injury in dogs and
causing either supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia.
cats include doxorubicin, thallium, sodium fuoroacetate
The sympathomimetic drug phenylpropanolamine has
(a pesticide also known as 1080), and minoxidil (DeCle-
been shown to cause myocardial necrosis when ingested
menti et al. 2004).
at toxic doses. This myocardial necrosis may be partially
responsible for arrhythmias seen following toxicity (Pentel
Conduction Disturbances
et al. 1987).
It is important to recognize when specific cardiac arrhyth-
mias and ECG findings may be related to exposure to a
CARDIOTOXIC AGENTS
cardiotoxic agent. Three mechanisms contribute to pro-
Many substances cause cardiac toxic responses directly or
duction and maintenance of arrhythmias: (1) abnormal
indirectly. However, the next section will focus on drugs
impulse initiation, (2) abnormal triggered rhythms, and (3)
that have primary cardiac toxicity.
abnormal impulse conduction. Toxicants causing myocar-
dial conduction disturbances leave few to no lesions in the
Calcium Channel Blockers
heart unless significant cardiac ischemia occurs during the
There are several classes of calcium channel blocking
toxicosis, in which case areas of myocardial necrosis may
drugs that are currently in use in both human and veteri-
be identifiable.
nary medicine. The forrmulations most likely to be encoun-
Chapter 12 / Cardiovascuiar System
91
tered in a clinical veterinary medicine setting are verapamil,
tachycardias. The glycosides act by increasing intracel.
amlodipine, nifedipine, and diltiazem. These drugs are
lular calcium concentrations, leading to increased rmyo-
used to treat angina, supraventricular arrhythmias, and
cardial contractility. They also decrease conduction
myocardial infarction in humans and supraventricular
through the AV node, slowing the heart rate and allow-
arrhythmias, hypertension, and hypertrophic cardiomy-
ing for more complete filling of the ventricles. Digoxin
opathy in domestic pets. The calcium channel blockers
and digitoxin have narrow therapeutic indices,meaning
affect both the myocardium and cardiac pacemaker cells.
that the therapeutic dose and toxic dose are very close
Ultimately there is slowing of impulse initiation by the SA
together. In a clinical setting patients may be seen with
node, conduction through the AV node, and decreased
either chronic or acute toxicity from these agents. Clini-
cardiac contractility. Clinical signs of overdose may
cal signs may include those related to the cardiovascular
include hypotension, bradycardia or tachycardia, heart
system, such as heart block, tachycardia, or preventricular
block or other arrhythmias, electrolyte imbalances, vomit-
contractions. Other clinical signs may include gastroin-
ing, and lethargy.
testinal upset, depression, and electrolyte changes.
Beta-adrenergic Blocking Agents
Pimobendan
The beta-blocking drugs act by inhibiting catecholamine
Pimobendan is a selective phosphodiesterase (PDE) III
binding to beta receptors in the heart, kidneys, and vascu-
 inhibitor currently approved only to rmanage CHF in dogs.
lar smooth muscle. They are common drugs, used to treat
It has positive inotropic and vasodilator effects, leading to
hypertension, tachycardia, congestive heart failure, and
increased cardiac output and reduction in systemic vascu-
glaucoma. Formulations include atenolol, esmolol, meto-
 lar resistance. Pimobendan appears to have a wide margin
prolol, and propranolol. Overdose of a beta-blocking agent
of safety, with tachycardia, lethargy, and hypotension
is most likely to cause hypotension, bradycardia and meta-
being the most common clinical signs associated with
bolic acidosis.
overdose.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
(ACE Inhibitors)
Sympathomimetics
The ACE inhibitor enalapril is often one of the first drugs
The sympathomimetics have been available as a drug
administered to dogs suffering from CHF, hypertension, or
class since the 1st century AD when Pliny used ephed-
valvular disease. The ACE inhibitors work by blocking
rine to treat bleeding. Sympathomimetics currently used
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor
in veterinary medicine include phenylpropanolamine
and mediator of sodium reabsorption in the kidneys. Ulti-
(PPA), albuterol, dopamine, ketamine, and terbutaline
mately this leads to increased blood volume and blood
Pet owners may have sympathomimetics in their houses
pressure. By blocking angiotensin II the ACE inhibitors
either legally in the form of methylphenidate (Ritalin@),
lower blood pressure. In an overdose situation the primary
dextroamphetamine (Adderall@), pseudoephedrine and
concern is for hypotension.
phenylephrine or illegally in the form of cocaine or
methamphetamine.
Angiotensin II Antagonists
Sympathomimetics are defined as catecholarmine-like
The angiotenisn II antagonists are very similar to the ACE
substances that have physiologic actions similar to those
inhibitors but are not used in veterinary medicine. They
observed with activation of the sympathetic nervous
are used to treat hypertension by blocking the vasocon-
system. They have an overall excitatory effect on the heart,
stricting effects of angiotensin II. Clinical signs in small
and those formulations that cross the blood brain barrier
animal patients are not expected to be severe, but they may
cause CNS stimulation. In general signs of overdose
include hypotension and reflex tachycardia. The angioten-
include mydriasis, tachycardia, hypertension, and
sin II antagonists will also act synergistically with ACE
agitation.
inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and beta blockers to
 In large overdoses, phenylpropanolamine may cause
cause hypotension.
such significant hypertension that a reflex bradycardia may
develop rather than the expected tachycardia (Hoffman
Cardiac Glycosides
and Nelson 2005). Phenylpropanolamine has also been
Digoxin and digitoxin are used in veterinary medicine
shown to cause focal cardiac necrosis when administered
to treat CHF, atrial fibrillation, and supraventricular
to rats at doses greater than 4 mg/kg (Pentel et al. 1987)
92
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
Methylxanthines
analogues) can be found in rodenticides, vitamins, and
Theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine are naturally
prescription creams for the treatment of psoriasis. Chole-
occurring plant alkaloids. They are found in food (choco-
calciferol overdose causes an increase in serum calcium
late) and drinks (colas) for human consumption, over- the-
and phosphorus levels due to increased renal tubular reab-
counter medications that promote wakefulness, and as
sorption of calcium, increased intestinal absorption of
therapeutic agents to treat asthma. Clinical signs of meth-
calcium, and increased release of calcium from bone. This
ylxanthine overdose may include tachycardia, premature
excess calcium and phosphorus in the blood causes deposi-
ventricular contractions, and hypotension. Ingestion of
tion of these minerals within the vascular wall. The vessel
medications containing both caffeine and ephedrine (a
then becomes hard and rigid, and sudden death may result
sympathomimetic) can cause hemorrhagic myocardial
(Weddle and Morgan 2004).
necrosis (Nyska et al. 2005).
Carbon Monoxide
MECHANISMS OF TOXIC INJURY TO THE
 Srmall animal patients may be exposed to carbon monoxide
VASCULAR SYSTEM
due to accidental exposures to automobile exhaust or
The potential for toxic injury to the vascular system may
household fires. Short-term exposure to carbon monoxide
be underestimated in veterinary medicine when it is con-
can cause direct damage to vascular endothelial cells and
sidered that all toxicants, following absorption, contact the
smooth muscle cells. Carbon monoxide also causes a
vascular system. The vascular endothelial cells are fre-
direct vasodilatory response on coronary circulation. The
quently the immediate target of toxic agents, followed by
primary toxic effect of carbon monoxide is due to its
the vascular srmooth muscle cells. Both of these cells types
reversible interaction with hemoglobin. It binds preferen-
are metabolically active, and systems present in these cells
tially to hemoglobin, impairing oxygen delivery, which
may bioactivate some toxicants. Oxygen-derived free radi-
leads to cellular hypoxia (Ramos et al. 2001). Clinical
cals formed during bioactivation may injure endothelial
signs in the pet may include tachycardia, dyspnea, leth-
cells, leading to changes in permeability. Toxicants can
argy. and coma.
 also cause alterations in the structure of the vessels. Hyper-
tonic intravenous solutions can cause the endothelial cells
to shrink, leading to increased permeability (Weddle and
CONCLUSION
Morgan 2004).
   
the cardiovascular system, and an important aspect of
Cholecalciferol
managing toxicosis is providing support to the cardiovas-
Cholecalciferol or vitamin D, is the most common agent
cular system. This typically includes intravenous fuid
seen in veterinary medicine that does significant, lasting
therapy and appropriate drugs to regulate heart rate and
damage to the vascular system. Cholecalciferml (or its
blood pressure.
CHAPTER 12 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A cardiac drug that increases the rate of heart contrac-
c. Submandibular node
tion and decreases the strength of heart contraction
d. Atrioventricular node
would be classified as
e. Popliteal node
a. Negative chronotrope, positive inotrope
3. Missy, a 12-pound, 2-year-old, spayed female Maltese
b. Negative chronotrope, negative inotrope
presents with lethargy, vomiting, and weakness. Her
C. Positive chronotrope, positive inotrope
body temperature is 98°F, her heart rate is 65, and her
d. Positive chronotrope, negative inotrope 
mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) is 55 mmHg.
e. Cardiotonic
Missy's condition is best described as
2. Cardiac electrical impulses stimulate the coordinated
a.
Hypothermic, bradycardic, hypotensive
contraction of myocardial cells. These impulses are
b. Hyperthermic, bradycardic, hypertensive
initiated by the
C. Hypothermic, tachycardic, hypotensive
 a. Interventricular node
d. Hyperthermic, tachycardic, hypertensive
b. Sinoatrial node
e. Hypotherrmic, tachycardic, normotensive
Chapter 12 / Cardiovascular System
93
4. Missy's owner is concerned that the dog may have
5.C.
ingested one of the husband's heart medications. She
hypertension and tachycardia.
is able to tell you the general class of drugs that her
husband takes. Which of the following is LEAST
4. d. Sympatomimetics are cardiovascular stimu-
likely to be responsible for Missy's condition.
      
a.Beta blocker
3. a. Missy's body temperature, blood pressure, and
b. Calcium channel blocker
tiation of myocardial contraction.
C. Cardiac glycoside
2. b. The sinoatrial (SA) node is responsible for ini-
d. Sympathormimetic
inotropes).
e. ACE inhibitor
increase the force of contraction (ie., positive
5. Cholecalciferol rodenticides affect the cardiovascular
refers to force of contraction. Cardiotonic drugs
system by
1. d. Chronotropy refers to heart rate and inotropy
a. Causing massive blood loss through disruption of
ANSWERS
normal blood coagulation.
b. Causing direct myocardial necrosis and fibrosis.
C. Causing mineralization within the walls of blood
vessels.
d. Causing necrosis of pulmonary endothelial cells,
resulting in pulmonary ederma.
e. Causing dilation of peripheral vessels, resulting in
hypotension.
REFERENCES
Abraham Nyska et al. 2005. Acute hemorrhagic myocardial
Camille DeClementi, Keith L. Bailey, S.C. Goldstein, and
necrosis and sudden death of rats exposed to a combination
of ephedrine and caffeine. Toxicotogicat Sciences 83(2):
M.S. Orser. 2004. Suspected toxicosis after topical admin-
istration of minoxidil in 2 cats. Journal of Veterinary Emer
388-396.
gency and Critical Care 14(4):287-292.
 Paul R. Pentel, Jeffrey Jentzen, and Jenny Siever. 1987. My0-
Philip R. Fox, David Sisson, and N. Sydney Moise. 1999.
cardial necrosis due to intraperitoneal administration of 
Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiotogy Principles and
phenylpropanolamine in rats. Fundamental and Applied
Clinical Practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
Toxicology 9:167-172.
Company.
Kenneth S. Ramos, J. Kevin Kerzee, Napoleon F. Alejandro,
Robert J. Hoffman and Lewis S. Nelson. 2005. Sympathomi-
and Kim P. Lu. 200l. Vascular toxicity: A cellular and
molecular perspective.
In Cardiovascular Toxicology,
metic agents. In Critical Care Toxicology Diagnosis and
Management of the Critically Poisoned Patient,edited by
edited by Daniel Acosta Jt. pp. 479-524. London: Taylor
Jeffrey Brent et al. pp. 465-473. Philadelphia: Elsevier
and Francis.
Mosby.
Diann L. Weddle and Sherry J. Morgan. 2004. Cardiovascular
Mark Kittleson and Richard D. Kienle. 1998. Small Animat
System. In Clinica! Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie
Cardiovascular Medicine. St. Louis: Mosby.
H. Plumlee. pp. 48-54 St. Louis: Mosby.
Pulmonary System
13
John A. Pickrell, Kiran Dhakal, and Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
Conducting airways consist of trachea, bronchi, and
 Inhalation toxicology refers to the pulmonary route of
progressively smaller generations of bronchioles as the
exposure; pulmonary toxicity refers to toxicity to the lung.
airways extend deeper into the lung. Animals perforrm-
Lung toxicity is most commonly caused by inhaling air-
bome poisons, but some toxicants can locate primarily in
to accormrmodate additional needed airfow. Some toy
the lung frorm other exposure routes (e.g-, paraquat from
and brachycephalic dogs may have hypoplastic and/or
oral exposure) and cause lung toxicity. In addition to the
collapsing tracheas that limit airfow and contribute to
lung, inhaled toxicants can cause injury in other areas of
respiratory compromise (Dupre 2009). Terminal bron-
the respiratory tract such as the nasal cavity or conducting
chioles lead to alveoli, where gas exchange with blood
airways.
occurs. All of the airways but the alveoli are lined
with ciliated and nonciliated pseudostratified columnar
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
epithelial cells with a few goblet cells interspersed
(Dungworth 1993). Mucus secreted by these cells traps
Anatomy of the Respiratory Tract
 inhaled particulates, and ciliary action propels the mucus
The nares are the external openings into the nasal cavity.
and particulates upward toward the pharynx, where they
The nares lead to the nasal cavity, which is largely filled
are coughed up or swallowed. The most important of
with the nasal turbinates, which moisten and warm inhaled
the alveolar epithelia are type II epithelial cells, which
air as well as filter out larger particulates. The nasal cavity
make the surfactant that forms a single layer and keeps
is lined by ciliated and olfactory epithelium. Air passes
the alveoli open and functioning. Release of significant
through the nasal cavity into the nasopharynx. The naso-
serum protein will food the alveoli (ederma), reduce
pharynx is lined by pseudostratified columnar ciliated epi-
surfactant function, and allow the alveoli to stick together
thelium with goblet cells (Dungworth 1993). The
(atelectasis).
eustachian tubes extend from the middle ear to the nasal
cavity (Dungworth 1993). Many animals, especially
Deposition of Inhaled Particulates
horses and small laboratory rodents, are obligate nose
breathers. Other animals, such as dogs and cats, can
deposit in the nasopharyngeal region and larger conduct-
breathe with either their nose or mouth. Brachycephalic
ing airways (Witschi et al. 2008). Smaller particles are
dog breeds have a variety of upper respiratory abnorrmali-
transported to the deeper airways and alveoli; those depos-
ties that can result in respiratory compromise, including
ited in bronchioles are phagocytized by bronchiolar rmac-
stenotic nares, elongated soft palate, and hyperplastic
rophages, which travel via the mucociliary escalator to the
tongue (Dupre 2009).
pharynx, whereas those entering the alveoli are removed
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
95
96
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affcted Approach to Toxicotogy
by pulmonary macrophages and isolated in the interstitium
Table 13.1. Respiratory toxicants
or local lymph nodes.
Mechanism
Toxicant
MECHANISMS AND PATTERNS OF
Displacement
Carbon dioxide
RESPIRATORY TRACT INJURY
asphyxiation
Methane
Respiratory toxicants can exert their adverse effects to the
Natural gas
respiratory tract in a variety of ways (Woods and Wilson
Nitrogen gas
2004). Displacerment asphyxia results when gases such as
Oxygen transport
Carbon monoxide
methane, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen displace oxygen in
asphyxiation
Cyanide
the immediate environment, resulting in hypoxia and
Airway irritation
Ammonia
hypoxemia. Gases that interfere with oxygen transport in
Chlorine
the blood or oxygen release to tissues, such as cyanide or
Phosphine (zinc/aluminum
carbon monoxide, cause asphyxia in the presence of ade-
phosphide)
quate environmental oxygen. Many inhaled toxicants exert
Increased bronchial
Anticholinesterase insecticides
their effect through irritation of the respiratory mucosa,
secretions
Muscarinic mushroorms
resulting in damage to respiratory epithelium. Inhalation
(<i>Clitocybe, Inocybe</i>)
of respiratory irritants can result in loss of mucosal cells
Pneumonia, aspiration
Hydrocarbons
 and breakdown of the protective barriers (e.g., mucociliary
Iatrogenic (e.g., barium,
escalator) within the airways. Respiratory irritants that
activated charcoal)
reach the alveoli can damage alveolar epithelium, resulting
Pulmonary edema
Chlorine
in loss of surfactant and atelectasis; in severe cases, necro-
Cisplatin (cats)
sis of alveolar cells can result in leakage of serum or blood
Paraquat
into alveoli and lower airways. Loss of alveolar surface
Phosphine (zinc/aluminum
area results in decreased oxygen exchange and hypoxia.
phosphide)
Some toxicants enter the lung via the blood and may cause
Pine oil
damage to the alveolar capillaries, resulting in noncardio-
Sulfuryl fuoride (Vikane@)
genic pulmonary edema. Other bloodbome toxicants cause
Pulmonary fibrosis
Paraquat
damage to alveolar epithelial cells. Damage to alveolar
epithelium or alveolar capillary endothelium may not
manifest until several hours after the toxic insult, resulting
in a delay in the onset of pulmonary edema of up to 24
taneously (e.g-, with high levels of paraquat), fibroblasts
hours following exposure to the toxicant (Smith 2005).
will attermpt to fill the void caused by death of the alveolar
Table 13.1 lists some respiratory toxicants and their action
epithelial cells. Fibroblast proliferation impairs gas
on the respiratory tract.
exchange, making a portion of the lung volume less func-
tional than normal. If minimal to moderate alterations in
HEALING AND REPAIR
pulmonary architecture are present the lung will spontane-
ously resolve (Pickrell et al. 1983). If greater alterations
Epithelial Hyperplasia
have been made to pulmonary architecture in response to
Healing by epithelial hyperplasia (primary intent) is quite
high levels of alveolar damage, the interstitial fibrosis may
frequently the norrmal course of events following lung
become irreversible and form dense fibrous scars (Pickrell
microinjury. In the smallest of these injuries, epithelial
et al. 1983). The clinical implication of this change
rearrangement is so successful that the tissue seems
depends on the amount of lung tissue that is lost. In the
entirely norrmal. Function is norrmal and no veterinary
case of paraquat, for example, the pulmonary injury tends
intervention is needed.
to be progressive and ultimately the patient dies of
asphyxia as fibrous connective tissue replaces functional
Fibrosis
lung tissue.
Healing by secondary intent, often called “pulmonary
fibrmosis," may be either reversible or irreversible depend-
Emphysema
ing on the degree of injury to the lung. When lung injury
Emphyserma has been defined as enlarged air space with
is too high, or intense or persists too long to heal spon-
tissue destruction (Pickrell 2007; Witschi et al. 2008). Loss
Chapter 13 / Puimonary System
6
of gas exchange membrane, specifically alveolar capillary
et al. 2008). Dogs are companion animals that live with
membrane, causes a reduction in the gas exchange area;
their owners over long periods of time. The most frequent
as the alveoli collapse, air spaces become distended and
tumors in dogs are mammary tumors, which may metas-
irregular, and the possibility of trapping air increases. This
tasize to the lung. Spontaneous lung tumors in companion
 makes it difficult to get enough airto exchange (sometimes
animals such as dogs are much less frequent. Although
infrequent, some dogs have developed either nasal or lung
place in these alveoli. It is even more diffcult to expel the
turmors after being exposed to their owner's second-hand
air once it is in the distended alveoli. Clinically, dyspnea
cigarette smoke (Reif et al. 1992). These tumors were
with forced expirations will be present. Emphysema is
carcinomas, which are epithelial in origin and malignant.
usually a progressive, ultimately terminal, condition as the
Dogs with long noses (dolichocephalic breeds) deposit the
airways continue to deteriorate over time.
tumor-causing (carcinogenic) particles in the nasal cavity
and develop nasal carcinomas. Dogs with shorter noses
LUNG CANCER
(brachycephalic breeds) allow the cigarette smoke parti-
In humans, it has been estimated that 80%-90% of all lung
cles to deposit in the upper airways and develop broncho-
tumors are caused by inhaling cigarette smoke (Witschi
genic carcinomas (Reif et al. 1992).
CHAPTER 13 STUDY QUESTI0NS
1. The function of the mucociliary escalator of the respi-
C. Dysfunction of rmucociliatory escalator
ratory tree is to
d. Displacement asphyxia
 a. Filter out particulates to prevent them from enter-
e. Atelectasis
ing deeper into the lung.
 4. Alterations to the respiratory system following injury
 b. Move trapped particulates up the respiratory tree 
may be reversible or perrmanent. Which of the follow-
to the pharyngeal area where they are coughed up
ing is a reversible change?
or swallowed.
a.Nasal carcinoma
 C. Move particulate matter deeper into the bronchi,
b. Epithelial hyperplasia
where the particulates are engulfed by bronchiolar
C.1
Pulmonary fibrosis
macrophages.
d. Emphysema
 d. Move particulates to the rostral nasal area, where 
e. Tracheal stricture
they are sneezed out.
e. Prevent aspiration pneurmonia by moving inhaled
ingesta out of the lungs.
2. Small particulates entering the pulmonary alveoli
undergo which fate?
a. The particulates are moved up the respiratory tree
via the mucociliary escalator.
cinoma are permanent changes.
b. The particulates crmss the alveolar wall and enter
 or tracheal stricture), emphysema, and nasal car-
the bloodstream.
reversible change. Fibrosis (pulmonary fibrosis
c. The particulates are translocated to the alveolar
caused by irritation or inflammation and is a
interstitium, where they reside for the life of the
4.b. Hyperplasia is an increase in cell numbers
animal.
hypoxic environment.
d. The particulates are coughed up out of the lung to
b u susan 'uaxo sdsi a 
the pharyngeal area where they are swallowed.
 3.d. Displacement asphyxia occurs when a gas such
e. The particulates are engulfed by pulmonary
macrophages.
macrophages.
 intraalveolar
 pulmonary
Aq paaowal an
 3. Direct injury to the respiratory tissues can result in all
2.e. Particulates that manage to reach the alveoli
of the following except
1.b.
a. Loss of alveolar surfactant
ANSWERS
b.Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
98
Section 2 1 A Systems-Afected Approach to Toxicology
REFERENCES
Reif, J.S., Dunn, K., Ogilvie, G.K., and Harris, C.K. 1992.
 Dungworth, D. 1993. The respiratory system. In Pathology of
 Passive smoking and canine lung cancer risk. American
Domestic Animais, 4th ed., edited by K.V.F. Jubb, PC.
Journal of Epidemiology 135(3):234-239.
Kennedy, and N. Palmer, Pp. 539-699. New York: Aca-
Smith, Dorsett D. 2005. Iritant and toxic respiratory injuries.
demic Press.
In Critical Care Toxicofogy, edited by Jeffrey Brent et al.,
Dupre, G.P. 2009. Brachycephalic obstructive syndrome:
pp. 1011-1028. Philidelphia: Mosby-Elseviet.
diagnosis and underlying pathology. Proceedings of the
Witschi, HansPeter, Pinkerton, Kent E., Van Winkle, Laura
S., and Last, Jerold A. 2008. Toxic responses of the respira-
British Small AnimalVeterinary Congress.Vienna,Austria.
Pickrell, J.A. 2007. Respiratory toxicity. In Veterinary Toxi-
tory system. In Casarett and Doufl's Toxicology the Basic
Science of Poisons, 6th ed.,edited by Curtis D. Klaasen,
cology Basic and Clinicat Principles, edited by Ramesh C.
Gupta, pp. 193-205. New York: Elseviet.
Pp. 609-630. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
Pickrell, John A., Diel, J.H., Slauson, D.O., Halliwell, W.H.,
Woods, Leslie W. and Wilson, Dennis W. 2004. Respiratory
and Mauderly, J.L. 1983. Radiation-induced pulmonary
System. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie
H. Plumlee, Pp. 80-88. St. Louis: Mosby.
fibrosis resolves spontaneously if dense scars are not
formed. Experimental and Molecular Pathology 38(1):
22-32.
Hepatobiliary System
14
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
model of the liver, the lobule is divided into three areas:
The liver is situated in the proximal-most area of the peri-
the centrilobular region surrounding the central vein, the
toneal cavity immediately distal to the diaphragm and is
periportal region at the periphery of the lobule that incor-
divided into grossly distinguishable lobes. Closely associ-
 porates the portal triads, and the midzonal region between
ated with the ventral aspect of the liver in the dog and cat
 the centrilobular and periportal regions. Pathology reports
is the gall bladder. The liver plays a critical role in a variety
on liver histology frequently use these terrms associated
of functions including nutrient homeostasis, filtration of
with the lobular model of the liver.
 particulates, protein synthesis, bioactivation, and detoxifi-
From a functional point of view, the hepatic lobule can
cation, formation of bile and biliary secretion (Jaeschke
be divided differently based on the fow of blood as it
2008). Hepatic injury due to chemicals and drugs is the
passes through the liver. Blood enters the liver lobule
most common cause of acute liver failure in humans in the
through branches of the hepatic artery (carrying oxygen)
United States and is the leading cause of regulatory action
 and the portal vein (carrying nutrients and other absorbed
against drugs (Watkins and Seef 2006). Epidermiologic
compounds, including toxicants, from the gastrointestinal
studies into the incidence of drug- and chemical-induced
tract) of the portal triads. The blood then filters within the
liver injury in animals is lacking, but as the number of
sinusoids along the cords of hepatocytes until emptying
pharmaceuticals, neutraceuticals, and “natural" remedies
into the central vein, giving up oxygen and picking up
for our companion animals increases, it is likely that the
wastes as it passes frorm triad to central vein. Using the
incidence of drug-induced liver injuries in companion
acinar model of the liver, the acinus is centered on a line
animals will also increase.
from portal triad to portal triad. The area immediately
Understanding the toxicologic changes that can occur
around this line is termed Zone I and is equivalent to the
in the liver requires understanding of its structural and
periportal region. Zone 2 is equivalent to the midzonal
functional anatomy. When viewed microscopically, the
region and Zone 3 is equivalent to the centrilobular region.
liver appears to be composed of hexagonal lobules sur-
Zone 1 receives blood with the highest oxygen and nutri-
rounding a central blood vessel (central vein) and bordered
ent content, and Zone 3 is relatively oxygen and nutrient
by six portal triads at the outer edge of each lobule; each
depleted. For instance, blood in Zone 1 contains approxi-
portal triad consists of a branch from each of the hepatic
mately 9%-13% oxygen compared to 4%-5% in Zone 3
artery, portal vein, and bile duct (Figure 14.1). Between
(Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007).
the portal triads and central vein are single-cell-wide cords
From a toxicological perspective, the acinar model
of hepatocytes arranged radially around the central vein.
 tends to be more relevant because it can help predict where
Between the hepatocellular cords, sinusoids carry blood
in the liver toxicant-induced damage may occur (Table
from the portal triads to the central vein. In this lobule
14.1). Toxicants that are directly injurious to cells (e.g--
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
99
100
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicotogy
Portal Triad:
Hepatic Artery
Central Vein
 Portal Vein
Bile Duct
(Centrilobular)
Zone 2 (Midzonal)
Zone 1
(Periportal)
Figure 14.1. Schematic illustration of the microanatomy of the liver. Each hexagon represents a hepatic lobule centered
around a central vein with portal triads at the periphery. The portal triads are each composed of a portal vein, hepatic artery,
and bile duct. The central lobule is divided into the three anatomic and functional zones: Zone 1 or periportal region, Zone 2
or midzonal region, and Zone 3 or centrilobular region.
iron salts, white phosphorus) will cause damage to the first
complex mixture of bile acids, phospholipids, proteins,
hepatocytes they encounter, thus injury frorm these types
and other compounds that is important in the uptake of
 of toxicants appears primarily in Zone 1 (periportal). Zone
lipids from the small intestine, protection of the small
3 contains a higher level of cytochrome P450 metabolic
intestine from oxidative injury, and the excretion of endog-
enzymes, making this area most prone to injury from com-
enous and xenobiotic compounds (Jaeschke 2008). Biliary
punds that are bioactivated by these enzymes (e.g-, acet-
excretion is an important route of elimination for certain
aminophen). Some toxicants can produce hepatocellular
xenobiotics (e.g., ivermectin, naproxen in dogs) that are
injury so severe that zonal patterns are lost as the entire
poorly excreted through the urine. Compounds excreted
lobule undergoes massive necrosis, with necrosis extend-
through the bile may undergo enterohepatic recirculation
ing from portal triads to central veins.
whereby the compound that is excreted into the duodenum
In contrast to blood fow through the hepatic acinus, bile
from the bile duct is then reabsorbed and reenters the
fows from the canaliculi between hepatocytes into chan-
portal and systemic circulations. Compounds that undergo
nels that ermpty into the bile ducts within the portal triad;
enterohepatic recirculation tend to have half-lives that are
these bile ducts in tum empty into the gall bladder, which
measured in days ratherthan hours.Forexample, naproxen
stores and concentrates bile prior to emptying the bile into
in humans is eliminated primarily through the kidneys and
the duodenum (Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007). Bile is a
has a half-life of about 6 hours. In dogs, naproxen is elimi-
Chapter 14 / Hepatobiliary System
101
Table 14.1. Patterns of hepatotoxicity
injury is a dose-dependent, predictable reaction to a toxi-
Causes of Nonzonal Hepatic Injury
cant and it is the most cormmon type of liver injury in
NSAIDs
animals (Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007). There is frequently
Cyclophospharmide
a predictable latent period between exposure to the toxi-
Phenobarbital
cant and the development of clinical signs of liver insuf-
ficiency. Intrinsic liver injury is often caused by highly
Phenytoin
Sulfonamides
reactive by-products of xenobiotic metabolism, especially
Ketoconazole
free radicals and electrophiles. Idiosyncratic liver injury is
 an unpredictable response to a xenobiotic. Idiosyncratic
Causes of Zone 1 (Periportal) Hepatic Injury
reactions are rare and non-dose-dependent and may be
Aflatoxin
associated with extrahepatic lesions. Idiosyncratic reac-
Iron salts
tions frequently occur following unremarkable initial
Organic arsenic
exposure (sensitization) and manifest upon reexposure to
White phosphorus
the xenobiotic. With idiosyncratic drug reactions, it is not
Causes of Zone 2 (Midzonal) Hepatic Injury
uncommon for there to be a delay of a few weeks to
Cisplatin
several months between the time of initial exposure and
development of liver injury. Extrahepatic changes may
Hexachlorophene (cats)
include fever and dermal erythema or rash.
Causes of Zone 3 (Centrilobular) Hepatic Injury
Acetaminophen
Free Radical-Induced Injury
Aflatoxin
The generation of free radicals within hepatocytes can
 Blue-green algae
occur during xenobiotic biotransformation, normal meta-
Castor bean (Ricinus)
bolic processes involving oxidation/reduction reactions,
Chloroform
 on     ss 
Cycad palms (Cycas, Zamia)
exposure to ionizing radiation (Bischoff and Ramaiah
Diazepam (cats)
2007). Free radicals have unpaired electrons, which make
Hepatotoxic mushrooms (e.g., Amanita phalloides)
them highly susceptible to binding to other macromole-
Naphthaene
cules, including lipoprmoteins of cell membranes, enzy-
NSAIDs (e.g., carprofen, ibuprofen)
matic proteins, and DNA. Binding of free radicals to
Phenols
cellular macromolecules generates even more free radical
Xylitol
production, resulting in an escalating effect. Normally
Causes of Massive Hepatic Necrosis
cells have scavenger molecules (e.g-, glutathione) to react
Acetaminophen
with and detoxify free radicals, but excessive free radical
Cisplatin
production can result in depletion of scavenger stores,
Cycad palms (Cycas, Zamia)
resulting in increased binding of free radicals to vital cel-
Diazepam (cats)
lular structures. Free radical damage can cause alterations
Iron
of cell membrane permeability, inactivation of membrane-
Mebendazole (dogs)
associated proteins, and loss of polarity to mitochondrial
Microcystin LR (Microcystis aeruginosa)
membranes. Inactivation of enzymatic proteins can inter-
fere with normal cellular metabolism, leading to cellular
Sources: Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007, Haschek et al.
degeneration or necrmsis. Free radical-induced DNA
2007.
damage can result in interference with transcription or
translation, resulting in decreased protein synthesis.
nated through the bile, undergoes entermohepatic recycling
and has a half-life of 74 hours (Frey and Rieh 1981; Talcott
Calcium Homeostasis Disruption
2006).
Within the cell, calcium is sequestered within organelles
such as mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, which
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
maintain a relatively low level of calcium within the
The mechanisms behind hepatic injury can be divided into
cytosol. Xenobiotics that interfere with the pumps that
two categories: intrinsic and idiosyncratic. Intrinsic liver
maintain calcium balance can result in increased release
102
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
of calciurm into the cytosol. The released calcium ions  This mechanism has been postulated, but not proven, as
of cytosolic enzymes including ATPases, phospholipases  drug carprofen causes idiosyncratic liver injury in dogs
and proteases. Subsequently, mitochondrial membrane  (McPhail et al. 1998). The exact mechanisms of other
permeability increases, which causes induction of necrosis
types of idiosyncratic liver injury await further study to be
and apoptosis (programmed cell death) (Bischoff and
elucidated.
Ramaiah 2007).
PATTERNS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
Mitochondrial Injury
Toxic hepatic injury can manifest as hepatocellular degen-
Mitochondria are the source of energy production within
eration, hepatocellular necrosis, immune-mediated injury,
the cell, and toxicants that disrupt mitochondrial function
biliary disorders, and sinusoidal disorders.
can result in cell death. Toxicants induce mitochondrial
injury by altering mitochondrial DNA, interfering with
Hepatocellular Degeneration
oxidative phosphorylation, damaging mitochondrial mem-
Hepatocellular degeneration is a common, nonspecific
 branes, or inactivating rmitochondrial enzymes.
response of the liver to toxic insult. Hepatocellular
degeneration represents a sublethal insult to the liver
Cytoskeletal Disruption
that can often resolve if the inciting cause is removed.
The cytoskeleton of the cell is vital to maintaining normal
Although some cellular processes may be altered, the
shape and position of hepatocytes. Agents that damage
degenerative hepatocyte still retains sorme degree of
cytoskeletal structure result in cellular deforrmation and
functional integrity. Degenerating hepatocytes are gener-
detachment. The blue-green algae toxin microcystin-LR,
ally swollen and may accumulate various compounds,
produced by Microcystis aeruginosa causes hepatocellular
 including metals, pigments, water, and lipids. It is impor-
tant to realize that in most situations the accumulation
al. 2007).
of these compounds is a resut of some form of hepa-
tocellular dysfunction rather than the primary cause of
Cholestasis
hepatocellular degeneration.
Toxicants that interfere with bile transport can result in
cholestasis, leading to injury to biliary ducts and hepato-
HepaticLipidosis
cytes. Bile duct hyperplasia and biliary fibrosis may result.
Hepatic lipidosis (steatosis, fatty liver) is a form of hepa-
Cholestasis can also occur secondary to hepatocellular
tocellular degeneration characterized by accumulation of
swelling due to degeneration or lipidosis. Clinically, cho-
lipid within the hepatocyte cytosol. Lipidosis can be the
lestatic disorders can result in dermal photosensitization,
result of transient disruptions in lipid metabolism, or it can
whereby areas of skin exposed to the sun develop burns
refect a more serious metabolic condition. Severe lipid
similar to sunbum. Epidermal and dermal burns from pho-
accumulation can result in sufficient hepatocellular swell-
tosensitization are rapid in onset and occur following
ing to cause cholestasis.
exposure to wavelengths of light that would cause no
injury in normal animals. Animals with white areas on
Hepatocellular Necrosis or Apoptosis
their haircoats and upigmented skin are most susceptible
Both hepatocellular necrosis and apoptosis represent death
to photosensitization. In veterinary medicine, photosensi-
of hepatocytes with the difference being that apoptosis
tization is more commonly seen in large animals grazing
is a controlled, orderly “shutdown" of cellular processes
plants that cause bile stasis, but it has occasionally been
leading to death of the cell. Necrosis occurs when cells
reported in dogs with hepatic injury.
are subject to insurmountable insults resulting in loss
of cellular membrane integrity and disruption of cellular
Idiosyncratic Reactions
machinery. What follows is cellular swelling, leakage
Many idiosyncratic drug reactions are considered to be
of cellular contents into the adjacent environment, dis-
immune-mediated, triggered by the formation of adducts
integration of nuclear material and an infux of inflam-
of reactive drug metabolites with cellular macromolecules.
 matory cells to remove cellular debris (Jaeschke 2008).
These adducts are identified by the immune system as
Because the necrotizing insult is generally locally intense,
death of individual hepatocytes ("piecemeal necrosis").
tures, may be affected. In contrast, apoptosis results
Chapter 14 / Hepatobiliary System
103
when enzymes termed caspases trigger the activation
erate sufficient hepatic parenchyma to have normal liver
of various cytosolic and nuclear enzymes that compart-
function. As with most organs that have regenerative
mentalize cellular structures and proceed to shut down
ability, the capacity to regenerate is dependent upon the
cellular activity. Apoptotic cells are shrunken, with con-
retention of the basic tissue scaffold. Conditions that result
densed cytosol and fragmented nuclei that pinch off
in loss of this scaffold can result in hepatic healing via
along with the cell membrane (which has remained intact)
fibrosis instead. Fibrosis occurs most commonly along the
to forrm apoptotic bodies. Apoptotic bodies are then
terrminal plates at the edges of the hepatic lobule and sur-
phagocytized by hepatic macrophages (Kuppfer cells)
rounding the central vein. Fibrous tissue that bridges
or are taken up into adjacent hepatocytes without incit-
between portal triad and central vein can result in loss of
ing an infammatory response. Apoptosis is the means
functional integrity of the acinus. Regenerative nodules of
by which normal tissues eliminate unneeded or senescent
hepatocytes within bands of fibrous tissue are often dis-
cells, and it generally affects single cells. Apoptosis can
connected from access to central veins and are minimally
be triggered by a variety of external stimuli, including
functional. Cirrhosis is the term in human medicine for
ionizing radiation, drugs (NSAIDs, corticosteroids), and
the end-stage forrm of liver injury, with irregular patches
physiologic conditions such as stress.
of fibrous tissue surrounding rounded nodules of
hepatocytes.
HEALING AND REPAIR
Although the liver has a high regenerative capacity,
The liver has a tremendous capacity for regeneration—so
massive acute loss of hepatocytes can result in death from
much so that human liver transplants can be done from
liver failure if insufficient hepatocytes remain to allow the
liver lobes donated by living donors. Following successful
patient to survive long enough for regenerated hepatocytes
transplant, both recipient and donor will eventually regen-
to begin to function.
CHAPTER 14 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Milo, a 2-year-old, 135-pound, neutered male St.
c. Rare in animals
Bernard dog has been successfully treated for acute
d. Often caused by free radicals and electrophiles
 hepatic insufficiency. A liver biopsy had been taken
e. Predictable clinical course 
and the pathology report indicated that there was sub-
4. Blue-green algae induce liver injury by which of the
stantial centrilobular necrosis. All of the following
following mechanisms?
 toxicants are potential causes for Milo's liver injury
a. Free radical formation
except
b. Disruption of calcium homeostasis
a.Iron
C. Cytoskeletal damage
b. Blue-green algae
d. Immune-mediated mechanisms
C.Acetaminophen
e. Cholestasis
d. Hepatotoxic mushrooms
e. Xylitol
 2. In what way does enterohepatic recirculation alter the
kinetics of a xenobiotic?
of hepatocytes resulting in cytoskeletal failure.
 a. Increases elimination
joddns amonns au ndnsip aegg uaane-ana 
b. Increases absorption
liver injury identified in animals.
c. Shortens the half-life
d. Lengthens the half-life
life of a xenobiotic.
e. Enhances metabolism
 Enterohepatic recirculation increases the half-
2.d.
 3. Intrinsic liver injury is characterized by all of the fol.
 in the liver.
lowing except
1.a.
a. Dose-dependent
ANSWERS
b. Predictable latent period
104
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicotogy
REFERENCES
toxicosis associated with administration of carprofen in 21
Bischoff, Karen and Ramaiah, Sashi K. 2007. Liver toxicity.
dogs.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Associa-
In Veterinary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles,
tion 212(12):1895-1901.
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 145-160. New York:
Moeller, Robert B. 2004. Hepatobiliary system: Toxic
Elseviet.
response of the hepatobiliary system. In Veterinary Clinica!
Frey, H.H. and Rieh, B. 1981. Pharmacokinetics of naproxen
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 61-68. St.
Louis: Mosby
in the dog American Jourmal of Veterinary Research
42(9):1615-1617.
 Plumlee, Konnie H. 2004. Hepatobiliary system: differential
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig,
diagnosis. In Veterinary Clinical Toxicology, edited by
Matthew A. 2007. The liver. In Fundamentals of Toxico-
Konnie H. Plumlee, p. 61. St. Louis: Mosby.
logic Pathology, 2nd ed., Pp. 197-235. San Diego: Aca-
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antinfammatories. In
demic Press-Elsevier.
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E.
Jaeschke, Hartmut. 2008. Toxic responses of the liver. In
 Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Casarett and Doull's Toxicology the Basic Science of
Watkins, PB., Seef, L.B. 2006. Drug-induced liver injury:
Poisons, 6th ed., edited by Curtis D. Klaasen, pp. 557-582.
New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
summary of a single topic clinical research conference.
McPhail, C.M., Lappin, M.R., Meyet, D.J., Smith, S.G.,
Hepatology 43:618-631.
Webster, C.R., and Armstrong, PJ. 1998. Hepatocellular
Urinary System
15
Erin Freed
INTRODUCTION
initial filtrate fowing into Bowman's space surrounding
This chapter focuses on the basic anatomy and physiology
the glomerulus and progressing into the proximal tubule.
of the urinary system, the mechanisms and patterns of
The renal tubules reabsorb 60%-80% of the filtered solute,
toxicological injury including common toxic substances
including water, electrolytes, glucose, amino acids, small
that affect the urinary system, and the healing and repair
 peptides, and organic acids. In the medulla, the loops of
after toxicological damage.
Henle play a major role in the concentration of urine and
maintenance of the blood's electrolyte balance. The filtrate
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
then passes into collecting ducts, which control the excre-
The urinary system of dogs and cats consists of the
tion rates of electrolytes and urea as well as further main-
kidneys, ureters, bladder, and the urethra. The function of
tain acid/ base and water balances. The renal papilla
the urinary system is to filter blood, reabsorb important
empties the urine through the renal pelvis into the ureters.
nutrients, and eliminate wastes in the form of urine. The
From the ureters the urine passes into the bladder where
kidneys regulate the amount of water reabsorbed and
it is stored until it is excreted through the urethra.
excreted, maintain the pH of the blood, and control the
Renal function is largely measured clinically by the
concentration of electrolytes (Na, K, Ca, and Cl), proteins,
serum renal markers blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and cre-
and hormones in the blood. Additionally, the kidneys
atinine; due to reserve capacity of the kidney, approxi-
secrete hormones that regulate blood pressure, water
mately 50%-75% of nephrons must be damaged before
balance, red blood cell prmoduction, and calcium homeosta-
these values become significantly elevated. Azotemia, the
sis (Haschek et al. 2007).
term for elevations of serum BUN and creatinine, can
 The kidneys receive approximately 25% of the cardiac
occur due to prerenal, renal, and postrenal causes. Prerenal
 output and can be divided into three main parts: the outer
azotemia is most commonly the result of dehydration and
cortex, which receives 90% of the renal blood fow; the
occurs without renal insufficiency. Renal azotemia is
medulla, which receives 6%-10% of blood fow; and the
caused by kidney dysfunction, generally due to injury by
renal papilla, which receives 1%-2% of the total renal
infectious, metabolic, toxic, or neoplastic processes.
blood fow.
Postrenal azotemia is usually associated with obstruction
The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron, which
of urine outfow (e.g., bladder “stones"), resulting in a
is composed of a glomerulus, proximal convoluted tubule,
back pressure of urine within the kidney that decreases
loop of Henle, distal tubule, and collecting duct. The glom-
glomerular filtration. Determination of whether azotemia
erulus is composed of an anastomosing tuft of fenestrated
is prerenal, renal, or postrenal is essential to aid in diag-
endothelial cells that form a filter for the blood, with the
nosis and therapeutic management of the patient. When
SmatlAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
105
106
Section 2 I A Systems-Afected Approach to Toxicology
azotemia is present along with the clinical signs associated
glandin levels within the kidney, decreasing prostaglandin-
with renal failure (vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, gas-
mediated vasodilation and resulting in vessel constriction
tritis, oliguria/anuria/polyuria), the condition is termed
(Sebastian et al. 2007). Other agents (e.g-, the antifungal
uremia.
amphotericin B) induce vasoconstriction by direct interac-
tion with renal arterioles (Sawaya et al. 1995).
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGICAL INJURY
Injury to renal tubules impairs water and solute reab-
Renal tubular injury is the most common form of nephro-
sorption, resulting in dilute urine (isosthenuria) due to loss
toxic insult in animals (Haschek et al. 2007). Tubular
of concentrating ability, as well as spillage of amino acids,
damage may result frorm direct injury to the epithelial cells
glucose, small peptides, and other solutes into the urine.
by the toxicant or its metabolites, from mechanical obstruc-
Polyuria will occur unless the tubules become obstructed
tion of the tubules, from mineralization of the basement
by swollen tubular epithelium, crystals, sloughed epithe-
membrane, or from ischemia due to vasoconstriction of
lial cells, pigments, or other debris; in these instances
renal blood vessels. Toxicants such as lead, arsenic, ami-
oliguria or anuria can occur. When blockages occur,
noglycoside antibiotics, and many anticancer drugs cause
increased tubular pressure counteracts the capillary hydro-
direct injury to the tubular epithelium. Renal epithelium,
static pressure in the glomerulus, resulting in further
particularly in the proximal tubules, contains high levels
decrease in glomerular filtration. A nephron that has
of metabolic enzymes that can detoxify some compounds 
damaged tubules can leak filtrate into the systemic circula-
present in the filtrate. However, other compounds (e.g--
tion, contributing to azotemia as BUN and creatinine are
diquat, acetaminophen) can be bioactivated into toxic
reintroduced into the bloodstream from the damaged
metabolites by these same enzymes and result in injury to
tubules.
the epithelial cells. Pigments such as hemoglobin (e.g., due
 to intravascular hemolysis from zinc toxicosis) or myoglo-
PATTERNS OF TOXICOLOGICAL INJURY
bin (e.g., due to muscle damage from monensin toxicosis
 Nephrotoxic agents can cause renal insufficiency that may
in dogs) are also directly injurious to renal tubular
progress to acute renal failure (ARF) or chronic renal
epithelium.
failure (CRF) depending on the toxicant involved, dose,
Some toxicants will result in the precipitation of crystals
and duration of exposure. ARF often results from exposure
into the urine as the tubular filtrate becomes more concen-
to a relatively high dose of a nephrotoxic agent, causing
trated. Overdoses of drugs such as penicillins, cephalospo-
sudden loss of kidney function, whereas CRF tends to
rins, and acyclovir may result in transient crystalluria, and
occur more insidiously and may be the result of repeated
the crystals can cause mild epithelial damage, which is
insults to the kidney (e.g-, from repeated exposures to
usually reversible. Tubular obstruction by calcium oxalate
nephrotoxins over time) or it may refect progression of
crystals is a major cause of renal injury in ethylene glycol
acute disease. An individual may be more or less suscep-
intoxication; however, direct tubular epithelial injury due
tible to toxic renal damage due to genetic factors, age,
to acidosis also contributes to lesions seen in ethylene
prior renal disease, general overall health, or concurrent
glycol toxicosis. Mineralization (deposition of calcium) of
medication administration. Patients with CRF oftentimes
renal tubules can result from hypercalcemia associated
with some toxicoses (e.g., cholecalciferol rodenticide toxj-
normal clinical appearance for quite some time in spite of
cosis) and can also occur as a sequel of uremia. Mineral-
fairly high elevations of serum BUN and creatinine (com-
ization along the tubular basement membrane, within
pensated CRF). Generally, these patients display polyuric
epithelial cells, and within renal blood vessels (impeding
renal failure and are able to maintain thermselves, provided
blood fow) results in degeneration and necrosis of tubular
they have access to adequate fresh water in order to com-
epithelial cells, cell sloughing, and decreased tubular
pensate for the increased fuid losses. However, with pro-
regenerative ability.
gression of the renal disease or sudden change in hydration
Agents that cause vasoconstriction can impede glomer-
status, these patients may suddenly decompensate and
ular filtration as well as cause ischermic damage to the renal
present with clinical signs similar to an ARF patient.
tubules. The renal papilla is especially susceptible to isch-
Because of its high blood flow, high metabolic activity
ermic injury because it normally receives only 1% of total
and concentration of wastes, the kidney is especially sus-
renal blood fow, but any portion of the nephron may be
ceptible to toxic injury. While the glomeruli and proximal
affected. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs;
tubules are exposed to large amounts of bloodborne toxi-
e.g-, ibupmfen, aspirin, phenylbutazone) decrease prosta-
cants, the more distal aspects of the nephron and lower
Chapter 15 / Urinary System
107
urinary tract are exposed to higher concentrations of toxi-
shrink and slough. Cellular debris from damaged tubules
cants for a greater period of time as a result of accumula-
manifests as granular casts in the urine sediment.
tion of toxicants within tubular lumens.
 Damage to the renal papilla can disrupt loops of Henle,
Renal toxicants may cause glomerular damage, result-
resulting in loss of urine-concentrating ability as well as
ing in a decrease in glomerular filtration and resulting
electrolyte imbalances.
in azotemia, or increasing the “pore' size of the glo-
Toxic damage to the distal areas of the urinary tract-
merular filter resulting in the leakage of proteins into
renal pelvis, ureters, urethra, and bladder—is relatively
the urine. Renal toxicants affecting glomeruli are rare in
uncommon. The rapid fushing of urine through the pelvis,
animals,although some rattlesnake venoms have been
ureters, and urethra may explain their relative resistance
associated with glomerular injury (Fitzgerald and Rum-
to toxicologic injury. The urinary bladder, because it stores
beiha 2004).
urine, has occasionally been associated with syndromes
Their relatively high metabolic activity, high content of
arising from toxicants (e.g-, cyclophosphamide-induced
metabolic enzymes, and closer proximity to glomerular
cystitis).
filtrate make the proximal tubules more susceptible to a
wider range of toxicants than the rest of the nephron
HEALING AND REPAIR OF THE
(Sebastian et al. 2007). In domestic animals, the proximal
URINARY SYSTEM
renal tubules are most commonly affected by nephrotoxi-
Because much of the nephron is cormprised of epithelial
cants, although the distribution of tubular lesions can vary
cells there is potential for cellular regeneration following
depending on the toxicant involved. For exarmple, tubular
toxic injury, provided the tubular basement membrane has
injury from melamine:cyanuric acid crystals, the lesion
remained intact and adequate residual epithelial cells are
seen in kidneys of animals affected by melamine-
present. Regeneration of tubular epithelium is usually
contaminated pet foods in the U.S. in 2007, tends to occur
visible microscopically within 3 days of insult, but it can
 in the distal tubules and collecting ducts, whereas calcium
take up to 3 weeks for the tubules to return to normal
oxalate crystals from ethylene glycol metabolism tend to
structure (Haschek et al. 2007) and up to several more
affect primarily the proximal tubules (Puschner et al.
weeks for retum to full renal function. The glomerulus
2007). In nephrons undergoing degeneration necrosis,
tends to be less forgiving, and glomeruli damaged by toxic
affected tubular cells will swell (degeneration) and then
insults may be permanently dysfunctional (Table 15.1).
Table 15.1. Nephrotoxicants
Lesion
Toxicant
Species
Nephrosis (renal tubular
Metals (lead, mercury, arsenic, cadmium)
Dogs, cats
 degeneration and necrosis)
Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs (e.g., ibuprofen,
Dogs, cats
aspirin, phenylbutazone, carprofen, deracoxib)
Lilies (Lilium or Hemerocallis)
Cats only
Grapes/raisins/Zante currants/Sultanas ( Vitis spp.)
 Dogs, (cats anecdotal only)
Antineoplastics (e.g., cisplatin)
Dogs, cats
Diquat/paraquat
Dogs, cats
Ethylene glycol
Dogs, cats
Zinc phosphide
Dogs, cats
Melamine
Dogs, cats
Amphotericin B
Dogs, cats
Mineralization
Cholecalciferol and analogues (vitamin D3,
Dogs, cats
cholecalciferol rodenticides, calcitriol,
calcipotriene)
Glomerular injury
Rattlesnake venom
Dogs, cats
Bladder injury
Cyclophosphamide
Dogs, cats
108
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicotogy
CHAPTER 15 STUDY QUESTI0NS
1. The most common form of renal injury in animals is
4. The ability of renal tubular epithelium to regenerate
a. Glomerular injury
depends on the presence of sufficient residual cells
b. Renal tubular injury
and on the integrity of the
c. Interstitial injury
a. Renal papilla
d. Tubulointerstitial injury
b. Interstitium
e. Papillary necrosis
C. Glomerular mesangiurm
 2. In renal tubular injury, the most common manifesta-
d.Renal tubular basement membrane
tion is
except when massive necro-
e. Vascular endothelium
sis of tubular epithelial cells results in occlusion of
the lumens
of renal tubules, in which case
or
may occur.
a. Anuria, polyuria, oliguria
b. Oliguria, polyuria, anuria
injury.
C. Oliguria, anuria, polyuria
tubular epithelium can regenerate following an
d. Polyuria, oliguria, anuria
is considered an essential factor in whether
e. Anuria, oliguria, polyuria
4.d. The integrity of the tubular basement membrane
3. Cellular debris from damaged renal tubules can be
Granular casts.
3.c.(
seen in the urinary sediment in the form of
a. Hyaline casts
 2.d. Polyuric renal insuffciency is the most common
b. Oxalate crystals
injury in animals.
c. Granular casts
1.b. Tubular injury is the most common form of renal
d. Struvites
ANSWERS
e. Dhole bodies
REFERENCES
melamine and cyanuric acid toxicity in cats. Journal of
Fitzgerald, S.D. and Rumbeiha, W.K. 2004. Urinary system.
Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 19(6):616-624.
In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H.
Sawaya, B.P, Briggs, J.P, and Schnemann, J. 1995. Ampho-
 Plumlee, pp. 91-96. St. Louis: Mosby.
tericin B nephrotoxicity: The adverse consequences of
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig,
altered membrane properties. Jourmal of the American
Society of Nephrotogy 6(2):154-164.
Matthew A. 2007. Kidney and lower urinary tract. In Fun-
damentals of Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp. 261-371.
Sebastian, M.M., Baskin, S.1., Czerwinski, S.E. 2007. Renal
San Diego: Academic Press.
toxicity. In Veterinary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Prin-
Puschner, Birgit, Poppenga, Robert H., Lowenstine, L.J., Fili-
ciples, edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 161-176. San
genzi, M.S., and Pesavento, PA. 2007. Assessment of
Diego: Elsevier.
Other Systems
16
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant DVM, PhD
ALIMENTARY TRACT
calcium oxalate crystals) cause discomfort and possibly
Making a diagnosis of alimentary tract toxicosis is difficult
 mild erythema but do not compromise the integrity of the
because, in dogs and cats, there are numerous conditions
oral mucosa. Corrosive agents (acids, alkalis, cationic
that can cause gastrointestinal signs (nausea, hypersaliva-
detergents) cause chermical burns to the tissues of the oral
tion, vomiting, abdominal discormfort, and diarhea) that
cavity which can result in severe pain, extensive tissue
are not toxic in nature. When presented with a patient
damage and, potentially, sloughing of oral tissues (e.g-,
displaying gastrointestinal signs, the list of potential dif-
tongue). In severe cases, damage to pharyngeal and/or
ferential diagnoses is quite long and not easily shortened;
esophageal tissues may also occur.
 one must avoid the temptation to decide "it must be toxic"
just because an obvious answer is not immediately forth-
Gastrointestinal Tract
corming. Patients presenting with gastrointestinal signs
Toxic injury to the gastrointestinal tract can occur through
should be worked up thoroughly to rule out other potential
several mechanisms (Haschek et al. 2007). Mild gastro-
etiologies. Infectious, inflammatory, metabolic, nutri-
intestinal irritation can occur from agents such as hydro-
tional, neoplastic, and mechanical (e.g-, foreign body) dis-
carbons, household detergents, and insoluble calcium
eases need to be considered in addition to toxic agents.
oxalate containing plants. These agents will cause local
Table 16.1 lists toxicants that have a primary effect on the
irritation, leading to nausea (often manifested by hyper-
gastrointestinal tract.
salivation), vomiting, and/or diarrhea, but they are not
Many agents that damage the alimentary tract do so by
appreciably absorbed and are not expected to cause any
causing erosion or ulceration to the tissues (Haschek et al.
systermic signs (note: volatile hydrocarbons such as gaso-
2007). Erosion is the loss of integrity of the superficial
line have a high risk of aspiration if vomiting occurs,
mucosal (epithelial) layer of the alimentary tract. Ulcer-
which can result in aspiration pneumonia; see Chapter 28,
ation occurs when the lesions extend deeper into the
"Household and Industrial Toxicants"). Intense vomiting
tissues, penetrating into the blood vessels and tissues of
caused by these agents may result in rupture of gastric
the submucosa. Perforation is a full thickness defect in the
blood vessels, leading to blood-tinged vomitus. Corrosive
wall of the gastrointestinal tract leading to leakage of
injury resulting in erosion, ulceration, and/or perforation
ingesta into the pleural (esophageal perforation) or perito-
of the gastrointestinal tract can occur through ingestion
neal cavity.
of corrosive agents such as acids or alkalis (e.g., leaking
alkaline batteries), resulting in gastrointestinal hemor-
Oral Cavity
rhage. Agents that alter blood supply to the gastrointestinal
The most common toxicological injuries to the oral cavity
mucosa (e.g-, nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs,
are direct irritation or corrosion. Irritants (e.g-, insoluble
arsenic) can cause injury due to hypoxia, resulting in
Smatt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H.Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
109
Table 16.1. Toxicants affecting the gastrointestinal tract
Mechanism (Clinical Effects)
Toxicant
Comment
 Irritation (hypersalivation,
Bleach
Household bleaches are irritants; industrial/
nausea, vomiting,
commercial strength may be corrosive
diarrhea, abdominal
Boric acid
Ant baits, borax powder
discomfort)
Cycad palms
Primary concem is liver injury
Detergents
Household cleaners, shampoos, and soaps 
Fertilizers
Other ingredients (e.g., insecticides,
herbicides) may pose other risks
Hydrocarbons/petroleum
Risk of aspiration of volatile hydrocarbons
products
Ice melts
See corrosive injury
Insoluble calcium oxalate-
Aglaonema,Alocasia,Colocasia,Anthurium,
containing plants
Arisaema,Arum,Caladium,Calla,
Dieffenbachia,Epipremnum,Monstera,
Philodendron,Scindapsius,Spathiphyllum.
Symplocarpus,Syngonium,Xanthosoma,
Zantedeschia and others
Ornamental bulb plants
Amarylius, Crocus, Hyacinthus, Iris,
Narcissus, Tulipa, and others
Zinc
U.S. pennies minted after 1983 (also cause
hemolysis), zinc oxide ointments
Corrosive injury (similar to
Acids
Car/boat batteries, drain openers, oven
 irritants but more severe;
cleaners, etching compounds, gun barrel
can see oral, pharyngeal,
cleaners, pool sanitizers, rust removers
or esophageal burns;
Alkalis
Anhydrous lime, cement, drain openers, fabric
gastric ulceration,
softeners, industrial strength bleaches,
hematemesis, melena, or
liquid dishwasher detergents, low
hematochezia)
phosphate laundry detergents, pool
chemicals
Batteries
Car/boat batteries contain acid; alkaline and
disk batteries contain alkali
Calcium chloride ice melts
Corrosive to GI tract and skin
Cationic detergents
Disinfectants, sanitizers, pool algicides
Essential oils
Concentrated forms can be corrmsive
Phenols
Concentrations <5% are corrosive;lower
concentrations are found in household
cleaners, sore-throat lozenges, gargles,
ointments, mouthwashes
Altered mucosal blood fow
Arsenic
Damages endothelium of gastrointestinal
(leads to gastrointestinal
mucosa causing submucosal hemorrhage
hemorrhage)
Cadmium
 Inhibition of prostaglandin formation,
resulting in decreased blood fow
NSAIDs
 Inhibition of prostaglandin formation,
resulting in decreased blood fow
110
Chapter 16/ Other Systems
111
Table 16.1. Continued
Mechanism (Clinical Effects)
Toxicant
Comment
Epithelial cell necrosis
5-Fluorouracil
Topical treatments for skin cancers,
(hemorrhagic
dermatosis
 gastroenteritis, ±rmucosal
Abrus precatoris
Damage to seed coat (e.g., chewing) allows
shreds)
(precatory pea, rosary
toxin release
pea)
Colchicine
Pharmaceutical, autumn crocus (Colchicum),
glory lily (Gloriosa)
Corrosives
See above.
Iron salts
Vitamins,fertilizers,hand warmers
Methotrexate
Rheumatoid arthritis medications,anticancer
therapy
Quercus spp. (Oak)
Tannins are toxic principle precipitate proteins
Ricinus communis (Castor
Damage to seed coat (e.g-, chewing) allows 
bean)
toxin release
Impeded nutrient or water
Cadmium
Inhibits calcium absorption, alters fat and
 absorption
protein metabolism
(weight loss, dehydration)
Ethanol
Reduces absorption of B vitamins and
carbohydrates
Laxatives
Increases gastrointestinal transit time resulting
 in decreased time for nutrient absorption;
osmotic laxatives can decrease free body
water stores
Altered motility
Hypomotility (constipation,
Opioids
Decreases gastric emptying and gut
obstipation, ileus)
contractility through local and central
effects
Hypermotility (watery
Organophosphorus or
Overstimulation of cholinergic receptors
diarrhea, ±blood)
carbamate insecticides
enhances Gl smooth muscle contraction
necrosis, ulceration, and/or perforation. Toxicants that
 organophosphorous insecticides) motility by altering the
damage the rapidly dividing cells of the mucosal crypts
neuromuscular activity of the gastrmintestinal tract.
(e.g-, colchicine, 5-fuorouracil) can result in villous
atrophy and loss of absorptive capacity of the gastrmin-
HEMATOPOIETIC
testinal tract; this type of injury is sometimes termed
Alteration in the number, structure, or function of hematic
radiomimetic because the lesion resembles that seen fol-
cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets) can
lowing exposure to ionizing radiation. Some gastrointes-
occur from a variety of toxicants (Haschek et al. 2007a).
tinal toxicants alter the absorption of water or nutrients
Some agents (e.g., estrogen, 5-fuorouracil) can result in
without causing significant physical derangement of gas-
suppression of bone marrow with decreased red and/or
trointestinal tissues. For example, cadmium can alter the
white blood cell production. Other agents (e.g., lead) can
absorption of calcium  from  the gastrointestinal tract
cause anemia by inhibition of enzymes that allow normal
(Haschek et al. 2007), while compounds having a laxative
red blood cell maturation. Certain oxidative compounds
effect (e.g-, high viscosity hydrocarbons) can result in
(e.g-, acetaminophen metabolites, garlic) can denature
decreased nutrient absorption due to rapid gastrointestinal
hemoglobin to form methemoglobin within red blood
transit time as well as increased water loss due to diarrhea.
cells. Other oxidants (e.g-, zinc, naphthalene) cause non-
Other toxicants can reduce (e.g., opioids) or increase (e.g-,
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.Platelet function can
112
Section 2 1 A Systems-Affcted Approach to Toxicotogy
Table 16.2.Toxicants affecting the hematopoietic system
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Hemolytic anemia
Allium spp.
Onions, garlic, etc.; powdered, concentrated forms
more toxic
Crotalid snake venom
Direct RBC membrane damage
Naphthalene
Mothballs, urinal disks, toilet bowl blocks
 Propylene glycol
Heinz body anemia in cats
Zinc
U.S. pennies rminted after 1983; other zinc-
containing hardware; zinc oxide ointments
Methemoglobinemia
Acetaminophen
Primarily cats; dogs with high doses
Benzocaine/idocaine
Primarily cats
Chlorates
Matches, fireworks, gunpowder
Phenols
Primarily cats
Decreased forrmation of RBC,
5-fuorouracil
 Bone marrow suppression; primarily WBC ± RBC
WBC, and/or platelets
Estrogen
Suppresses bone marrow formation of RBC and
platelets
Methotrexate
 Bone marrow suppression
Lead
Interferes with RBC maturation
Coagulopathy
Anticoagulant rodenticides;
 Prevents vitamin K recycling resulting in clotting
Warfarin
factor deficiency
Aspirin
Inhibits platelet function
Crotalid snake venom
 Contains platelet aggregation inhibitors and
inhibitors of fibrin formation
Asphyxiants
Carbon dioxide
Displacement of oxygen
Carbon monoxide
Interference with oxygen delivery to tissues
Cyanide
 Uncoupling of cellular respiratory chain
Hydrogen Sulfide
Paralysis of respiratory center in CNS
Methane
Displacement of oxygen
be altered by toxicants such as aspirin, and platelet numbers
sulfhydryl groups are highly reactive areas of the molecule
can be reduced through the action of toxicants such as
and interact with oxidants such as the acetaminophen
estrogen. Alteration of coagulation factors can result in
metabolite para-aminophenol, which denatures the hemo-
umcontrolled hemorrhage, such as that seen with antico-
 globin molecule to form methermoglobin (McConkey et al.
agulant rodenticides Anticoagulant rodenticides inhibit
2009). Additionally, compared to other species, cat red
vitarmin K epoxide reductase, preventing the recycling of
blood cells are relatively deficient in methemoglobin
vitamin K and the forrmation of vitamin K-dependent clot-
reductase, resulting in a diminished ability to convert met-
ting factors. When existing clotting factor stores are
hemoglobin back to hemoglobin (Bischoff 2007).
depleted, hemorrhage occurs. Some toxicants inhibit the
ability of the blood to carry oxygen or to deliver oxygen
INTEGUMENTARY
to tissues (e.g-, carbon monoxide, cyanide). Table 16.2
The skin is the largest organ in the body and acts as a
lists some common hematopoietic toxicants.
barrier against exogenous injury and excessive water loss
The sensitivity of the feline red blood cell to oxidative
(Haschek et al. 2007b). The skin has an outer epidermis
injury is well known, and it is no surprise that cats are
composed of an outer stratum corneum that consists of
 more sensitive to oxidant-induced hemoglobin damage. A
keratinized epithelium and an inner basal layer of prolif-
large part of this sensitivity is due to the fact that cats have
erating epithelial cells that replenish the stratum corneum
8 sulfhydryl groups on each hemoglobin molecule, com-
as they mature into keratinocytes. The thickness of the
pared to 4 in dogs and 2 in humans (Bischoff 2007). These
epiderrmis varies significantly between species and is rela-
Chapter 16/ Other Systems
113
Table 16.3. Toxicants affecting the skin
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Direct injury (irritation, erosion
Acids
Car/boat batteries, drain openers, oven cleaners,
or ulceration of skin)
etching compounds, gun barrel cleaners, pool
sanitizers, rust removers
Alkalis
Anhydrous lime, cement, drain openers, fabric
softeners, industrial strength bleaches, liquid
dishwasher detergents, low phosphate laundry
detergents, pool chemicals
Cationic detergents
Disinfectants, sanitizers, pool algicides
Essential oils
Concentrated d-limonene, tea tree oil, eugenol
Hydrocarbons (e.g. motor
Volatile hydrocarbons (e.g., kerosene, mineral
oil, mineral spirits)
spirits) very damaging to canine and feline skin
Immune-mediated
Essential oils
D-limonene
Medications
Idiosyncratic; penicillins, cephalosporins,
levamisole, thrimethoprim-sulfa, others
tively thin in dogs and cats compared to many other
involving the immune system, immune-mediated skin
species. The dermis is the tissue immediately under the
injury requires prior sensitization before an immune reac-
epidermis and is composed of fibrous connective tissue,
tion will occur. Phototoxic injury is a direct immediate
blood vessels, and adnexal structures such as hair follicles
interaction between light and photosensitizing compound
and sebaceous glands. Beneath the dermis is the subcuta-
within the dermis. The photosensitizing compound may be
 neous adipose tissue.
a toxicant or its metabolite, and it interacts with certain
Toxicants that are lipophilic can more readily penetrate
wavelengths of light to produce free radicals in the skin,
the outer layers of the epidermis to reach the more meta-
resulting in damage to cellular structures. The net effect
bolically active cells in the lower epidermis (Haschek
resembles a severe sunburn. Phototoxicity is less com-
et al. 2007b). These cells have the ability to metabolically
monly seen in dogs and cats than humans or grazing
deactivate many potential toxicants, preventing them from
animals due to their protective hair coats and lack of expo-
reaching the derrmis. Compounds reaching the derrmis rmay
sure to the types of compounds (plant toxins, some phar-
be removed through the blood or lymphatics. In this way,
maceuticals) that cause photosensitization. Table 16.3 lists
the skin serves as an effective barrier against a large
toxicants that affect the skin.
number of potential toxicants. Some highly lipophilic
organic solvents (e.g-, dimethyl sulfoxide) have the ability
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
to penetrate these layers and can be used as “carriers" to
The musculoskeletal system is composed of bones, joints,
aid other molecules in passing through the integument.
and skeletal muscle (Plumlee 2004). Bones and joints are
There are three basic mechanisms of toxic skin injury:
relatively spared from the effects of acute toxic insults and
(1) direct injury to the skin, (2) irmmune-mediated injury,
most toxic changes are due to chronic exposure to toxi-
and (3) phototoxic injury (Haschek et al. 2007b). Direct
cants. Toxicants affecting bone or cartilage can alter their
injury from a topically applied agent results in irritation
formation or remodeling. Skeletal muscle is similar to
that can range from mild dermatitis to severe corrosive
cardiac muscle in structure and function, and many toxi-
injury depending on the toxicant and degree of exposure.
cants that affect the myocardium will also affect skeletal
Immune-mediated skin injury results from stimulation of
muscle cells. Skeletal muscle toxicants can alter neuromus-
the immune system by exposure to a compound that is
cular action, interfere with myofiber biochemical pro-
ingested, inhaled, or injected; only rarely is this reaction
cesses, or cause direct myofiber degeneration or necrosis.
seen due to topical exposure. As with any other reaction
Table 16.4 contains a listing of musculoskeletal toxicants.
114
Section 2 1 A Systems-Afected Approach to Toxicology
Table 16.4. Toxicants affecting the musculoskeletal system
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Alteration of cartilage formation
Fluoroquinalones (e.g-, enrofoxacin)
Growing animals
Muscle weakness, paralysis
Ionophores (e.g, monensin)
Dogs
Macadamia nuts
Dogs
Muscle tremors, fasciculations
Tremorgenic mycotoxins
Dogs most cormmonly affected
Pyrethroids
Concentrated pyrethroids, especially in cats
REFERENCES
.2007b. Skin and oral mucosa. In Fundamentais of
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of over-the-counter drugs. In
Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., Pp. 135-162. San Diego:
Veterinary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles,
Academic Press-Elsevier.
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 363-390. San Diego:
McConkey, S.E., Grant, D.M., and Cribb, A.E. 2009. The role
Elseviet.
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig,
globinemia in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Phar-
Matthew A. 2007. Gastrointestinal tract. In Fundamentals
macology and Therapeutics, 32(6):585-595.
Plumlee, Konnie H. 2004. Musculoskeletal system. In Clini-
cal Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, p.
Academic Press-Elsevier.
. 2007a. Hematopoietic system. In Fundamentals of
69. St. Louis: Mosby.
Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp.491-512. San Diego:
Academic Press-Elsevier.
Section
3
Specific Toxicants
Rodenticides
17
Eric Dunayer
INTRODUCTION
converted the harmless chemical coumarin into the toxic
Rodenticides are pesticides that are intended to kill rodents
metabolite dicoumarol. Chronic ingestion of the infected
and other small mammals. Frequently, however, dogs,
hay led to coagulopathy and death in cattle (Knight and
cats, pet rodents, and other “nontarget"' animals ingest the
Walter 2001). Warfarin, the first commercially available
agent either unintentionally or due to malicious poisoning.
anticoagulant rodenticide, was developed in the 1940s as
At the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (APCC),
a derivative of dicoumarol; it was named for the Wisconsin
rodenticides were the fourth most common ingestion in
Alumni Research Foundation (WARF), the organization
dogs (Meadows and Gwaltney-Brant 2006) while antico-
that uncovered the link between dicourmarol and coagu-
agulant rodenticides (AR) were the ninth most common
lopathy (Merola 2002; Murphy 2007). Warfarin is also
exposure reported in cats (Merola and Dunayer 2006).
used therapeutically as an anticoagulant in human and
There are several different rodenticides currently avail-
veterinary medicine.
able. They come in various forms including pellets, blocks,
While warfarin was the original anticoagulant rodenti-
dust, and place packs (paper packages left out for the
cide, others were soon synthesized. Warfarin requires
rodents to chew open). Some rodenticides are mixed with
 many days of ingestion to cause signs. Also, rodents devel-
seeds or grain to attract the rmodents. Many rodenticides are
oped resistance to warfarin's effects. To overcome these
dyed green or blue, but other colors such as red, tan, and
drawbacks, second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides
white are also common. Rodenticides cannot be identified
were developed. These are capable of being lethal with a
by their color or form; they can be identified only by locat-
single feeding (Murphy 2007). The various compounds are
ing their active ingredient or the Environmental Prmotection
listed in Table 17.1.
Agency (EPA) registration number (EPA Reg. no.) on the
AR are sold in various forms (as discussed in the intro-
packaging. Properly identifying the agent is necessary for
duction) and under dozens of trade names. Warfarin baits
deterrmining the appropriate treatment for the ingestion.
generally contain 0.025% of active ingredient or 7 mg of
However, even if the agent cannot be identified, treatment
warfarin per ounce of bait. Second-generation anticoagu-
should not be delayed while trying to obtain the
lant rodenticides come as a 0.005% bait (1.4 mg of active
information.
ingredient per ounce of bait) with the exception of difethi-
alone, which is 0.0025% (0.7 mg of difethialone per ounce
ANTICOAGULANT RODENTICIDES
of bait).
Due to the unintended poisoning of children, pets, and
Sources/Formulations
wildlife by rodenticides, the EPA in 2008 announced a
Anticoagulant rmdenticides (AR) were originally derived
regulation to ban the over-the-counter sale of second-
from studying the effects of moldy clover on cattle. Mold
 generation anticoagulant rodenticides directly to consum-
infecting sweet clover (Melilotus offcinalis and M. alba)
ers. The use of AR will be restricted to licensed Pest
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
117
118
Section 3 I Specific Toxicants
Table 17.1. Anticoagulant rodenticides
begins, signs depend on where the hemorrhage has
First-Generation
Second-Generation
occurred.For instance,hemorrhage into the chest can lead
to signs of dyspnea. Heavier dogs, due to pressure on their
Warfarin
Bmdifacoum
joints, might bleed into joint spaces and subsequently
Chlorophacinone
Bromadiolone
develop lameness. Hemorrhage under the skin can cause
Diphacinone
Difenacoum
swelling of limbs. Bleeding into the brain and spinal cord
Pindone
Difethialone
can cause a sudden onset of paralysis and seizures. Most
pleural or peritoneal cavities. Some dogs die suddenly
without any obvious signs. Bleeding generally will not
Control Operators, and the rmdenticide must be in a tam-
start until 3-7 days after the exposure due to the require-
perproof bait station. Other rodenticides will still be avail.
ment that existing vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors
able for direct purchase by consumers, but they can only
be consumed. Younger animals, which have less of a
be sold in a bait station; loose pellet baits are banned
reserve of coagulation factors, potentially start to develop
(USEPA 2008).
coagulopathy sooner. Also, animals with preexisting liver
disease are also more susceptible to intoxication (Merola
Kinetics
2002).
Most AR are well absorbed after ingestion. Once absorbed,
a large percentage is bound to plasma prmoteins. Ingestion
Laboratory
of other highly protein-bound drugs (such as NSAIDs,
Depending on the length of time bleeding has occurred,
thyroid supplements, and corticosteroids) can increase the
the animal might be anemic with a decreased hematocrit.
toxicity of the anticoagulant by displacing it from the
Platelet counts are often slightly decreased as platelets
protein. The half-lives of the agents vary but, in general,
are consumed to try to stop the bleeding. Increases in
first-generation agents have a much shorter half-lives (14
the coagulation parameters prothrombin time (PT) and
(sep g cn dn) sonpad uoniauaa-puooas uen (snnou
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) are the most consistent
(Mermla 2002).
findings. Factor Vll (critical for the extrinsic coagulation
pathway) has the shortest half-life in dogs (6.2 hours)
Mechanism of Action
and as it is depleted, the PT (which assesses both the
AR interfere with the ability of the liver to recycle vitamin
extrinsic and common coagulation pathways) will become
K, which is necessary for the production of the active
abnormal first, generally by 48-72 hours (Murphy 2007).
forms of clotting factors II, Vll, IX, and X. Without con-
A second test known as PIVKA (proteins induced by
tinuous production of new factors, the animal depletes
vitamin K; antagonism) can be used instead of the PT
those that are present in the blood. When the factors are
to monitor the patient but it may not be as readily
depleted (generally 3 to 7 days or more after ingestion),
available.
spontaneous hemorrhage begins (Merola 2002).
Differential Diagnoses
Toxicity
Differential diagnoses include naturally occurring bleed-
The toxicity of these products varies greatly by compound
ing defects such as hemophilia, von Willebrand disease,
and by forrm (Murphy and Talcott 2006). Often, when the
and other inherited or acquired clotting disorders. Because
chemical is incorporated into bait, its toxicity is greatly
the liver produces the clotting factors, liver failure can lead
increased. Warfarin requires a much higher single dose to
to spontaneous bleeding. Finally, bleeding due to trauma
cause toxicosis compared to repeated daily ingestions.
should be ruled out.
Because of the wide variation in toxic doses in the litera-
ture, the APCC recommends using 0.02 mg/kg as a dosage
Diagnostics
of concern for all second-generation agents.
Antemortem
A diagnosis of AR toxicosis is based on history and results
Clinical Effects
of coagulation testing. In sorme cases, particularly where
Signs
there is no history of exposure, analysis of whole blood or
The initial signs of AR toxicosis are generally vague and
 serum for the presence of a specific AR can confirrm expo-
 include anorexia, weakness, and lethargy. Once bleeding
sure (Murphy 2007)
Chapter 17 / Rodenticides
119
Postmortem
since vitamin K, takes 6-12 hours before new clotting
Typically, no microscopic lesions are noted. The animal
factors can be produced, the patient should receive a fresh
will have widespread hemorrhage into body cavities,
frozen plasma an/or whole blood transfusions to supply
joints, skin, CNS, or other tissues. AR can be detected,
clotting factors until the body manufactures a sufficient
most typically in liver tissue, to confirm exposure (Murphy
quantity on its own (Murphy and Talcott 2006). Strict cage
2007).
rest should be enforced. For animals that are dyspneic due
to bleeding into the pleural cavity, the chest can be care-
Management of Exposures
fully tapped to relieve pressure (Merola 2002). Blood from
In animals with recent exposures (<4 hours), emesis should
a thoracocentesis can be autotransfused back to the patient
be performed. This can be followed with a single dose of
especially if anemia is present.
activated charcoal; multiple doses of activated charcoal
have not been shown to be beneficial. Next, one of two
Prognosis
courses should be followed (Merola 2002). Vitamin K, can
For asymptomatic animals, vitamin K, therapy is effective
be started at a dose of 3-5 mg/kg divided twice a day. The
and should prevent signs from developing. If bleeding has
length of treatment depends on the agent ingested. For
begun, the prognosis is more guarded, depending on extent
warfarin, a minimum of 14 days is recommended; for
and location of the hemorrhage. However, most symptom-
bromadiolone, the recommended treatment period is 21
atic animals can recover with appropriate therapeutic
days; and for all other first and second-generation agents,
intervention.
at least 30 days of treatment should be done. Injections of
vitamin K, should not be used if possible as this increases
BROMETHALIN
the risk of allergic or anaphylactic reactions. Oral vitamin
K, should be given with a small, fatty meal, such as canned
Sources/Formulations
dog or cat food, because this enhances absorption. For
Bromethalin was developed to kill AR-resistant rodents.
rodents and small puppies or kittens, the injectable vitamin
Despite its name being similar to some of the AR (broma-
diolone, brodifacoum), it is not an anticoagulant; it is
tablets are not available. Approximately 48 and 72 hours
neurotoxic. As with AR, bromethalin is sold in various
 after stopping the vitamin K), a PT should be run to see if
forms and under many different brand names. It generally
additional treatment is necessary (Merola 2002).
comes as a 0.01% concentration (2.84 mg bromethalin per
Alternatively, instead of starting vitamin K, immedi-
oz of bait) (Dunayer 2003). For mole control, it is also sold
ately, the patient's PT can be monitored. A baseline PT
in the form of a “worm" bait. In these products, the bro-
level should be obtained and then rechecked at 48 and 72
methalin concentration is 0.025%.
hours after the exposure. If the PT becomes prmolonged,
vitamin K, therapy, as indicated above, should be insti-
Kinetics
tuted (Merola 2002). As mentioned above, the PIVKA test,
Bromethalin is rapidly absorbed after ingestion and plasma
if available, can be used instead of the PT to monitor the
levels peak in about 4 hours. In the liver, bromethalin is
patient.
converted to a toxic metabolite desmethylbromethalin.
A study done at the University of Pennsylvania showed
Bromethalin is excreted in the bile and undergoes entero-
that over 90% of dogs decontaminated with emesis and/or
hepatic recirculation. The half-life of bromethalin is about
activated charcoal after anticoagulant ingestion did not
6 days in rats (Dunayer 2003; Gupta 2007).
need treatment with vitamin K, when their PT was moni-
tored; none of the animals developed signs during the
Mechanism of Action
 period that the PT was being run (Pachtinger et al. 2008).
Bromethalin and its metabolite desmethylbromethalin
Therefore, waiting to monitor PTs rather than immediately
uncouple oxidative phosphorylation. This leads to
starting vitamin K, is an acceptable treatment plan.
decreased production of energy in cells so levels of ATP
In patients that are actively bleeding, emesis should not
fall. Without ATP, Na-K ATPase pumps in the cell mem-
be performed as exposure likely occurred several days
brane are unable to pump sodium out of the cell. Because
before presentation. The animal should be stabilized for
sodium builds up inside the cell, water is pulled in and the
shock with fuids. If the anemia is severe, a blood transfu-
cell swells. Nerves cells are the most sensitive tissue and
sion should be performed (Merola 2002). Vitamin K,
so signs of neurotoxicity are seen. In the CNS, myelin
therapy should be started as soon as possible. However,
sheaths that surround nerve cells swell and vacuoles form
120
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 17.2. Toxicity of bromethalin in various
Laboratory
species
There are no significant laboratory changes expected with
Species
Oral LDso (mg/kg)
bromethalin toxicosis. (Dorman et al. 1990b).
Rat
2.0
Differential Diagnoses
Mouse
5.3
For the paralytic form of bromethalin toxicosis, toxic dif-
Rabbit
13.0
ferentials include botulism, ivermectin toxicosis, and iono-
Guinea pig
<1000
 phore toxicosis. In seizing patients, differentials include
Dog
4.7
metaldehyde (snail bait), strychnine, zinc phosphide, and
Cat
1.8
sodium fuoroacetate (Compound 1080) intoxications.
Source: Van Lier and Cherry 1988.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
within the nerve cell. As the cells and the myelin sheaths
swell with fuid, intemal pressure increases; there is also
Antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and
an increase in cerebrospinal fuid pressure. Together, these
occurrence of compatible clinical signs. Although blood
changes cause nerve dysfunction (Dunayer 2003, Gupta
can be tested for the presence of bromethalin, this is not a
standard test and results are typically not available prior
2007).
to the need to institute treatment.
Toxicity
For most species, the toxicity of bromethalin is very
Postmortem
similar (see Table 17.2). However, cats are much more
 Brormethalin can be detected in various organs including
sensitive to the effects of bromethalin than dogs. Guinea
the brain and liver. Histopathology of the CNS shows
pigs are relatively insensitive to brormethalin as they are
spongy degeneration of the white matter with an accu-
unable to produce the toxic metabolite desmethylbro-
mulation of fuid within the myelin sheaths (Dunayer
methalin (Dunayer 2003). Interestingly, if guinea pigs are
2003).
fed desrmethylbrormethalin, the toxic dose is similar to bro-
methalin (Van Lier and Cherry 1988). Based on cases
Management of Exposures
reported to the APCC, dogs have died at dosages of
 There is no antidote for brormethalin, so the managerment
0.95 mg/kg and cats have developed signs at 0.24 mg/kg
of exposure is focused on decontamination. Decontamina-
(Dunayer 2003).
tion recommendations vary depending on the species,
dosage, and time since ingestion. Tables 17.3a and b sum-
Clinical Effects
marize the APCC's recommendations for decontamination
Signs
(Dunayer 2003). Since bromethalin is not an anticoagu-
In dogs, the onset of signs depends on the dose ingested.
lant, vitamin K, is not indicated as a treatment.
At lower doses, the onset is slow, taking from 2486 hours
Once signs begin, treatment is supportive and symptom-
to be seen. Initial signs include hindlimb weakness, which
atic. Recumbent animals should be well padded to prevent
can progress to paresis and paralysis. CNS depression also
pressure sores. Seizures should be controlled as needed.
Mannitol, furosermide, and corticosteroids have been sug-
develops. Once signs develop, they may last for days to
weeks before they resolve (Dorman et al. 1990b). In dogs
gested to treat the cerebral edema. Although these might
ingesting doses at or above the LDso, the onset of signs is
slow progression of signs, they do not prevent their occur-
more rapid, from 4-36 hours. In these dogs, hyperexcit-
rence. In addition, when the treatment is stopped, the
animal may deteriorate rapidly (Dunayer 2003).
ability develops followed by tremors, seizures, and death
(Dorman et al. 1990b).
In cats, the most common sign is ataxia. Other signs
Prognosis
include focal rmotor seizures, recumbency, abdorminal dis-
Prompt decontamination can often prevent signs from
tension, decreased conscious proprioception, and a decer-
occurring. In mild cases, recovery is possible but full
ebrate posture. Onset of signs occurs from 3-7 days after
recovery can take weeks. Animals who are paralyzed or
exposure. As noted with dogs, higher ingested doses gen-
having seizures have a guarded prognosis, although even
erally lead to earlier onset of signs (Dorman et al. 1990a).
these animals can recover with intensive care.
Chapter 17 / Rodenticides
121
Table 17.3a. Decontamination recommendations
Table 17.3b. Decontamination recommendations
for bromethalin ingestion: Recommendations
for bromethalin ingestion: Recommendations
for dogs
for cats
Time since Dosage Ingested
Time since Dosage Ingested
Exposure
(mg/kg)
Action
Exposure
(mg/kg)
Action
<4 hours
0.1-0.49
Emesis or one dose of
<4 hours
0.05-0.1
Emesis or one dose of
activated charcoal
activated charcoal
>4 hours
0.1-0.49
One dose of activated
>4 hours
0.05-0.1
 One dose of activated
charcoal
charcoal
<4 hours
0.5-0.75
Emesis and three doses of
<4 hours
0.1-0.3
Emesis and three doses of
activated charcoal
activated charcoal over
over 24 hours
24 hours
>4 hours
0.5-0.75
Three doses of activated
>4 hours
0.1-0.3
Three doses of activated
charcoal over 24 hours
charcoal over 24 hours
<4 hours
>0.75
Emesis and three doses of
<4 hours
>0.3
Emesis and three doses of
activated charcoal a
activated charcoal a day
day for 48 hours
for 48 hours
>4 hours
>0.75
Three doses of activated
>4 hours
>0.3
Three doses of activated
charcoal a day for 48
charcoal a day for 48
hours
hours
Source: Dunayer 2003.
CHOLECALCIFEROL
cholecalciferol is transported to the liver on vitamin
Sources/Formulations
 D-binding proteins. In the liver, cholecalciferol is metabo-
Cholecalciferol is a form of vitamin D;. It is generally
lized to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol, also known as calcife-
found in a 0.075% bait (21.3mg cholecalcifeml per 0z
diol. Calcifediol circulates in the blood and, in the kidneys,
of bait). As with other rodenticides, it is available in
is further metabolized to 1,25-dihdroxycholcalcerifol or
different forms and from different manufacturers (Morrow
cacitriol, which is the most active form of vitamin D
2001). Vitamin D toxicosis can also occur due to chronic
(Morrow 2001; Rumbeiha 2006).
overdosing with vitamin D supplements or as a result
of irmproperly forrmulated dog or cat foods. Although
Mechanism of Action
over-the-counter daily multivitamins contain vitamin D,
Calcitriol increases blood calcium and phosphorus levels
it is generally present in such low concentrations
via various mechanisms: increased gastrointestinal absorp-
(<l0oo1U per capsule) that vitamin D toxicosis from
tion of calcium, increased calcium reabsorption by the
acute overdoses of these prmducts is rare. However, pre-
kidneys, and increased bone resorption and release of
scription products containing between 5,000 and 50,000 1U
phosphorus and calcium into the blood (Morrow 2001;
per capsule may result in toxicosis if sufficient numbers
Rumbeiha 2006). The overall effect is to increase blood
 are ingested. Additionally, certain medications that contain
phosphorus and calcium levels. When the calcium X phos-
vitamin D analogs such as calcipotriene, a topical cream
phorus product exceeds 60, soft tissue mineralization may
for treating psoriasis, can cause toxicosis similar to cho-
occur. Mineralization of the kidneys can lead to acute renal
lecalciferol (Rumbeiha 2006).
failure although any tissue can be affected. (Morrow
2001).
Kinetics
Cholecalciferol is rapidly absorbed after ingestion. It is
Toxicity
mainly excreted by the liver and undergoes enterohepatic
 In dogs dosages of 10mg/kg have been fatal (Gupta 2007).
recirculation (Morrow 2001). Vitamin D, is highly fat-
Based on experience at the APCC, dosages of 0.5 mg/kg
soluble so it can be stored in body fat. After absorption,
can cause signs (Morrow 2001). Therefore, the APCC
122
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
recommends that decontamination and monitoring for
hours) might increase clearance. Baseline levels of
signs be performed on dogs ingesting more than 0.1 mg/
calcium, phosphorus, BUN, and creatinine should be
kg-
obtained and monitored daily for at least 4 days (Morrow
2001).
Clinical Effects
 In patients with elevated calcium and phosphorus con-
Signs
centrations, intensive therapy is indicated to prevent renal
Onset of signs is usually within 12 to 36 hours of inges-
failure and other signs. The animal should receive 0.9%
tion. Initial signs include vomiting and diarrhea (possibly
saline IV at twice maintenance rates; sodium competes for
bloody). The animal will then show depression, polyuria,
reabsorption with calcium in the kidney and increases
and polydipsia. Acute renal failure can occur in as little as
calcium loss. Furosemide should be administered as it
24 hours (Morrow 2001).
increases calcium excretion by the kidneys. Corticoste-
rmids such as prednisone will decrease bone resorption and
Laboratory
decrease intestinal absorption while increasing renal
After ingestion, serum phosphorus usually increases first,
excretion of calcium. In addition, alowcalcium/phosphorus
 generally around 12 hours. The serum calcium increases
diet should be fed and phosphate binders, such as alumi-
by about 24 hours. Increases in BUN and creatinine con-
num or magnesium hydroxide, can be given (Morrow
sistent with renal failure can begin shortly after the phos-
2001; Rumbeiha 2006).
phorus and calcium product exceeds 60 (Morrow 2001).
If these measures are not successful in reducing calcium
levels, other treatments should be initiated. Salmon calci-
Differential Diagnoses
tonin is a hormone that lowers calcium levels. However,
Any condition that increases serum calciurm levels should
it must be given several times a day and some animals
be considered as a differential. This includes primary
develop a tolerance to it. The preferred treatment is pami-
hyperparathyroidism in which the parathyroid gland pro-
dronate, a bisphosphonate used to lower serum calcium in
duces excessive levels of parathormone (PTH), usually
 people with hypercalcemia due to malignancy. Parmidro-
due to a tumor of the gland. In addition, certain tumors,
nate is given in normal saline by slow IV infusion over 2
such as lymphoma and anal gland carcinomas can secrete
to 4 hours. Its effects can last up to a week. It can be
a protein that acts like PTH. In these syndromes, unlike
 repeated as needed. Other bisphosphonates such as clodro-
cholecalciferol toxicity, phosphorus levels are usually
 nate also appear to be effective (Ulutas et al. 2006). Cal-
normal (Rumbeiha 2006).
citonin and pamidronate (or other bisphosphonates) should
not be used together (Morrow 2001).
Diagnostics
Treatment should be continued until the calcium X phos-
Antemortem
phorus product is less than 60. At that point, treatments
 In addition to measuring serum calcium, phosphorus, and
can be slowly reduced while the calcium and phosphorus
assessing renal function, vitamin D; and calcitriol levels
values are watched closely for signs of recurrence over the
can be measured in blood. In cholecalciferol toxicosis,
course of several weeks (Morrow 2001)
these are markedly elevated. In addition, PTH levels
should be deterrmined since they will be reduced (Rum-
Prognosis
beiha 2006).
The prognosis is good with prompt decontamination and
if no signs develop. The prognosis is guarded once signs
Postmortem
develop because mineralization is poorly reversible.
Lesions on postmortem examination include mineraliza-
Chronic renal failure can be a permanent sequela. Sudden
tion of soft tissues, especially the kidneys. However, this
deaths have occurred weeks later, probably due to cardiac
can occur with any condition that causes hypercalcemia.
arrhythmias from calcified heart muscle or the rupture of
The bile and kidneys can be tested for calcifediol levels to
a major artery like the aorta (Morrow 2001).
confirm toxicity (Rumbeiha 2006).
STRYCHNINE
 Management of Exposures
 If ingestion is within 6-8 hours, ermesis can be perforrmed.
Sources/Formulations
Since cholecalciferol undergoes enterohepatic recircula-
 Strychnine is an alkaloid obtained from the seeds and bark
Chapter 17/ Rodenticides
123
ignatti). These trees grow in Southeast Asia and Australia
Laboratory
(Gupta 2007). Strychnine is one of the oldest rodenticides;
There are no specific changes associated with strychnine
it was first used in the 16th century (Talcott 2006). Strych-
toxicosis (Talcott 2004).
nine is sold in various forrmulations, usually mixed with
grain. It is often dyed red or green. Formulations contain
Differential Diagnoses
0.5%-3% strychnine. It is intended for killing rodents as
Many toxicants and conditions can cause severe trermors
well as porcupines, rabbits, and pigeons (Talcott 2004).
similar to strychnine. These include metaldehyde, bro-
Strychnine is labeled for use underground in animal
methalin, tremorgenic mycotoxins, zinc phosphide,
burrows (Talcott 2004).
tetanus, organochlorine insecticides, anticholinesterase
insecticides, and Brunfelsia spp. (Talcott 2006).
Kinetics
Strychnine is rapidly absorbed from the small intestine
Diagnostics
(Gupta 2007). It is metabolized in the liver, but up to 20%
Antemortem
of the dose may be excreted in the urine unchanged
Strychnine can be detected in urine and stomach contents
(Talcott 2004). It rapidly distributes to many different
from gastric lavage (Gupta 2007; Talcott 2004). However,
tissues and has a half-life of about 6 hours (Gupta 2007).
sorme animals die so quickly that strychnine can't be
detected in their urine (Beasley et al. 1999). In addition,
Mechanism of Action
the results of the tests are not likely to be available before
Strychnine competitively blocks the effects of the
the patient has either died or recovered.
amino acid glycine, an inhibitory neurotransmitter in
the spinal cord. Normally, glycine prevents repetitive
Postmortem
nerve activity that stimulates muscle contractions. Without
There are no specific lesions associated with strychnine
this inhibition, the nerve continues to fire rapidly and
toxicosis. Strychnine can be detected in stomach contents,
leads to muscle spasms. Eventually, the animal develops
urine, bile, liver, and kidney to confirm exposure (Talcott
muscle rigidity (tetanic spasms) (Talcott 2004; Gupta
2004).
2007). Because extensor muscles are stronger than fexor
muscles in the limbs and neck, an extensor rigidity
Management of Exposures
develops.
Emesis can be induced before the animal is symptomatic;
however, due to rapid onset of signs in most cases, this
Toxicity
may not be practical. Activated charcoal may be useful
Strychnine is considered extremely toxic. In dogs, the
but care should be taken to avoid aspiration (Talcott
minimum lethal dosage is about 0.75 mg/kg (Gupta 2007);
2004). In general, treatment is aimed at controlling the
this is about 0.15 g/kg of a 0.5% bait or about 0.5 teaspoon
tremors and seizures. Barbiturates, methocarbamol, pro-
in a 351b (16kg) dog. In cats, the LDso is about 2mg/kg
pofol, and gas anesthesia may be used to control signs.
(Talcott 2004).
In severe cases, the patient may need to be kept under
anesthesia for 2448 hours. IV fuids to support hydra-
Clinical Effects
tion should be administered. Sensory stimulation should
Signs
be kept to a minimum to prevent worsening of the
Signs can occur from 10 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion
signs. Treatment should be continued until signs have
depending on when the stomach empties since strychnine
resolved, which may take 24-72 hours (Talcott 2004;
is better absorbed in the intestines (Talcott 2004). Vomit-
Gupta 2007).
ing is uncommon (Gupta 2007). Initially, the animal may
be anxious, tachypneic, and salivating heavily. Signs then
Prognosis
 progress to ataxia followed by collapse with violent mus-
Prognosis is guarded once signs have begun
cular seizures. The legs will be extended and rigid and the
neck may be arched. Stimulation by noise or lights typi-
ZINC PHOSPHIDE
cally causes signs to worsen. The animal can be hyperther-
mic due to extreme muscle activity. Death is likely due to
Sources/Formulations
respiratory arrest from paralysis of the diaphragm (Talcott
Zinc phosphide is an inorganic rodenticide that has been
2004; Gupta 2007).
available for over 70 years (Albretson 2004). It is sold as
124
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
a 2% bait (566mg zinc phosphide per oz of bait). Zinc
Laboratory
 phosphide can be found in several different forms such as
 There are no specific clinical laboratory changes noted
in pellets, in place packs, and mixed with grains. In addi-
(Albretson 2004).
tion to mice and rats, it is also used to kill voles, moles,
rabbits, and other rodents (Gupta 2007).
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses are similar to those for strych-
Kinetics
nine. These include metaldehyde, bromethalin, tremor-
After ingestion, zinc phosphide reacts with acids in the
genic mycotoxins, zinc phosphide, tetanus, organochlorine
stomach to produce phosphine gas, which can be absorbed
insecticides, anticholinesterase insecticides, and Brunfel-
from the stomach or may be inhaled as it escapes the
sia spp.
stomach (Albretson 2004). Intact zinc phosphide may be
absorbed as well from the gastrointestinal tract.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Mechanism of Action
Diagnosis is based on history and the presence of the
The exact mechanism of zinc phosphate and phosphine gas
characteristic smell of phosphine gas. Stomach contents
 intoxication is not known. It is thought that phosphine gas
samples can be tested for the presence of phosphine.
blocks the enzyme cytochrome oxidase, which decreases
energy production by cells. Without energy, cell are
Postmortem
unable to maintain normal function and cell death occurs
Diagnosis can be made by the detection of phosphine in
(Albretson 2004; Gupta 2007). Phosphine gas is also
stomach contents.
thought to be directly irritating, especially to the lungs
Management of Exposures
(Albretson 2004).
In addition to its immediate effects, zinc phosphide can
If exposure was recent, the patient should be given oral
cause delayed liver and kidney failure. It is not known
liquid antacids to neutralize stomach acid and reduce the
whether this is due to phosphine gas or the absorption of
production of phosphine gas. Emesis can be performed
intact zinc phosphide.
early but a centrally active emetic such as apomorphine
should be used rather than hydrogen peroxide, which
could increase the production of phosphine gas (Albretson
Toxicity
2004). Emetics are not indicated in animals that have
The LDs of zinc phosphide is about 40 mg/kg in dogs and
already vomited. In patients who are seizuring, gastric
cats. The LDso in rats is 12 mg/kg. Because zinc phosphide
lavage can be considered. Activated charcoal has been
is a strong emetic, dogs and cats are less sensitive to zinc
recommended, but there is no proof of efficacy (Knight
phosphide than rodents because they can vomit and par-
2006). In vomiting animals, activated charcoal may
tially decontaminate themselves after ingestion (Albretson
increase the risk of aspiration and it may delay healing of
2004).
gastric erosions.
There are no antidotes for zinc phosphide toxicosis.
Clinical Effects
Treatment should be directed to providing support and
Signs
controlling signs such as fuids for shock, seizure control,
The onset of signs varies from 15 minutes to 4 hours.
and correcting acid-base imbalances. Liver protectants
Rapidity of onset appears to be infuenced by whether or
such as n-acetylcysteine, B-vitamins, SAMe, and dextrose
not the animal has food in its stomach. The presence of
may be useful but proof of efficacy is lacking (Albretson
food increases the production of hydrochloric acid, which
2004; Knight 2006).
 in turn increases the production of phosphine gas (Albret-
When presented with a poisoned animal, there is a real
son 2004). Vomiting, often bloody, is common. The ani-
risk to attending medical staff. Phosphine gas coming from
mal's breath or its vomitus can have a garlicky or rotten
the patient's stomach or vomitus can affect human person-
fish smell from the phosphine gas (Knight 2006). Severe
nel in the room. The odor of phosphine gas can be detected
gastrointestinal pain can develop. CNS signs include
by the human nose at about 2ppm. However, levels of
anxiety, initial depression progressing to increased activ-
1 ppm or less, depending on the length of exposure, can
ity, tremors, and seizures. Increased respiratory sounds and
be toxic (Knight 2006). If possible, induction of emesis
rate are common (Knight 2006)
should be performed outdoors or in a well-ventilated
Chapter 17/ Rodenticides
125
room. Vomitus or gastric lavage material should be cleaned
Merola, Valentina. 2002. Anticoagulant rodenticides: Deadly
up rapidly and placed in an airtight bag. If the smell of
to pests, dangerous to pets. Veterinary Medicine. 10l(6):
phosphine gas is detected, personnel should be evacuated
339-342.
and the room aired out thoroughly.
Merola, Valentina and Dunayer, Eric. 2006. The 10 most
common toxicoses in cats. Veterinary Medicine 101
Prognosis
(10):905-911
Morrow, Carla. 2001. Cholecalciferol poisoning. Veterinary
 In asymptomatic animals, the prognosis is good. If signs
Medicine 96(12):905-911.
do develop, the prognosis is guarded especially for the first
Murphy, Michael. 2007. Anticoagulant rodenticides. In
48 hours. Even those animals that survive the initial period
Veterinary Toxicology:Basics and Clinicat Principles,
 may develop acute renal and hepatic failure over the next
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 525-547. New York:
2 weeks.
Elsevier.
Murphy, Michael J. and Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Anticoagu-
REFERENCES
lant Rodenticides. In Smafl Animal Toxicofogy, 2nd ed,
Albretson, Jay C. 2004. Zinc phosphide. In Clinical Veteri-
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp.
nary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 456-
563-577. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
458. St. Louis: Mosby
Pachtinger, Garret E., Otto, Cynthia M., and Syring, Rebecca
Beasley, Val R., Dorman, David C., Fikes, James D., Diana,
S. 2008. Incidence of prolonged prothrombin time in dogs
Stephen G., and Woshner, Victoria. 1999. A Systems
following gastrointestinal decontamination for acute anti
Affected Approach to Veterinary Toxicology. St Louis:
coagulant rodenticide ingestion. Journal of Veterinary
Mosby.
Emergency and Critical Care 18(3):285-291.
Dorman, David C., Parker, Alan J., Dye, Janice A., and Buck,
Rumbeiha, Wilson K. 2006. Cholecalciferol. In Small Animaf
William B. 1990a. Bromethalin neurotoxicosis in the cat.
Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Progress in Veterinary Neurology 1(2):189-196
Patricia A. Talcott, Pp. 629-642. St. Louis: Elsevier
Dorman, David C., Parker, Alan J., and Buck, William B.
Saunders.
1990b. Bromethalin toxicosis in the dog: Part I: Clinical
Talcott, Patricia A. 2004. Strychnine. In Clinical Veterinary
effects.Jourmnalof the American Animal Hospital Associa
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 454456. St.
tion 26:589-594.
Louis: Mosby.
Dunayer, Eric. 2003. Bromethalin: The other rodenticide. Vet-
：2006. Strychnine. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd
erinary Medicine 98(9):732-736.
ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott,
Gupta, Ramesh C. 2007. Non-anticoagulant rodenticides. In
pp. 1076-1082. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Veterinary Toxicology: Basics and Clinical Principles,
Ulutas, B., Voyvoda, H., Pasa, S. and Alingan, M.K. 2006.
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 548-563. New York:
Clodronate treatment of vitamin D-induced hypercalcemia
Elsevier.
in dogs.Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Knight, Anthony P. and Walter, Richard G. 2001. A Guide to
16(2):141-145.
Plant Poisoning of Animats in North America. Jackson,
USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2008.
Wyoming: Teton New Media.
Final Risk Mitigation Decision for Ten Rodenticides.
Knight, Michael W. 2006. Zinc Phosphide. In Small Animal
Accessed at http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/
Toxicology, Second Edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson
rodenticides/finalriskdecision.htm#proposed on December
and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 1101-1118. St. Louis: Elsevier
20,2008.
Saunders.
Van Lier, Robert B.L., Cherry, Linda D. 1988. The toxicity
Meadows, Irina and Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2006. The 10
and mechanism of action of bromethalin: A new single-
most common toxicoses in dogs. Veterinary Medicine 101
feeding rodenticide.Fundamentat and Applied Toxicology
(3):142-148
11:664-672
Insecticides
18
Petra A. Volmer
AMITRAZ
Toxicity
Amitraz is classified by the EPA as slightly toxic to
Sources/Formulations
mammals if ingested orally. The oral LDso for amitraz in
Amitraz is a formamidine acaricide with activity against
rats is 523-800mg/kg and for mice is greaterthan 1600 mg/
ticks, mites, and lice. It is used in veterinary medicine for
kg. The dermal LDso for rats and rabbits is greater than
the control and eradication of demodex mites and for the
1600mg/kg and greater than 200mg/kg, respectively
 prevention of tick infestations. For small animals amitraz
(Extoxnet 1995). Cats tend to be more sensitive than dogs
is commercially available underthe trade names Mitaban@
to the effects of armitraz.
dip (19.9% for dilution), Preventic@ collar (9.0%), and
ProMeris@ topical solution (15%). It is also available as
Clinical Effects
an emulsifiable concentrate (12.5% for dilution) for use on
Signs
pigs and cattle.
Signs of amitraz toxicosis can begin within 1 to 4 hours,
Kinetics
but can be delayed as long as 12 hours. Intoxicated dogs
and cats exhibit vomiting, depression, somnolence, ataxia,
Amitraz is rapidly absorbed following oral administration
disorientation, ileus, bradycardia, hypertension, or hypo-
of technical material. Clinical signs can be seen by 1 hour
tension, coma, hypothermia, and seizures. Some of the
of ingestion and peak plasma concentrations occur by 5
hours. The elimination half-life is approximately 23.4
neurological signs might be attributed to the xylene carrier
found in dip formulations. Equids may display similar
hours (Hugnet et al. 1996). Absorption and duration of
effects following ingestion of amitraz-impregnated collars
neurological signs and are at risk of developing life-
threatening ileus and impaction.
tend to be prolonged due to slow release of the active
ingredient from the collar. Although dermal absorption is
Laboratory
low, intoxication has been reported following topical
application in dogs (Paradis 1999).
Biochermical changes include hyperglycemia and elevated
hepatic enzymes.
Mechanism of Action
The alpha-2 adrenergic agonist characteristics of amitraz
Differential Diagnosis
account for its sedative and hyperglycemic effects. The
Toxicants causing central nervous systerm depression
effects on blood glucose are thought to be due to alpha-
should be considered. These include ethanol, methanol,
2- mediated inhibition of insulin release (Plumb 2005).
isopropanol, the avermectins, rmarijuana, ethylene glycol,
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20l1 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
127
128
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opioids, and antidepres-
ingested. However, if surgery is required to remove collar
sants. Other differentials include CNS trauma and primary
pieces, activated charcoal can obscure the surgical field.
CNS disease.
Yohimbine and atipamezole might hasten passage of
collar fragments from the gastrointestinal tract by revers-
Diagnostics
ing depressed Gl motility. Saline cathartics can also
Antemortem
enhance elimination.
Amitraz can be detected in stomach contents, urine, feces,
and skin, although laboratories performing the analysis are
Prognosis
limited.
Animals receiving prompt, aggressive treatment have a
good prognosis. Animals exhibiting severe signs such as
Postmortem
coma or seizures, have a guarded to poor prognosis.
No specific gross or histopathological lesions are expected
on necropsy. Tissue analysis for the presence of the com-
ORGANOCHLORINES
pound can confirm exposure.
Sources/Formulations
Management of Exposures
The organochlorine insecticides (OCs) (also referred to as
The most common routes of exposure are dermal and oral.
“chlorinated hydrocarbons") reached the height of their
In either case, patients should be stabilized if necessary,
popularity as insecticides from approximately the 1950s
clinical signs treated, and further exposure prevented.
to the 1970s. They were prized because of their effective-
For dermal exposures, the animal should be stabilized
ness as insecticides and relatively low acute mammalian
according to clinical signs and then bathed in a liquid dish
toxicity (compared to the organophosphorus and carba-
detergent to rermove any product remaining on the skin.
 mate compounds at the time). Additionally they were lipo-
Care should be taken to prevent the development of hypo-
 philic and slow to degrade, requiring fewer applications.
thermia subsequent to bathing. Mild signs following label
These characteristics, however, also contributed to their
use often do not require treatment and resolve in 24-72
environmental persistence and biomagnification through
hours. For more severe signs, yohimbine and atipamizole
the food chain. Because of this, the OCs have been replaced
are alpha-2 adrenergic antagonists that effectively reverse
by newer and safer insecticides. However, old containers
bradycardia, CNS depression, hyperglycemia, and ileus
may resurface from storage in sheds, barns, and other
(Plumb 2005). Atipamezole is thought to have fewer car-
structures, thus posing a hazard.
diorespiratory effects than yohimbine (Andrade and Sakate
There are three main categories of OCs based on chemi-
2003). Atropine should not be used in the treatment of
cal structure. The diphenyl aliphatic compounds include
amitraz-induced bradycardia, because it can potentiate
agents such as DDT, methoxychlor, perthane, and dicofol.
hypertension and ileus (Hsu et al. 1986). Seizures can be
The aryl hydrocarbons include lindane, mirex, kepone, and
treated with diazepam or a barbiturate. Animals should be
paradichlorobenzene. The cyclodiene insecticides include
closely monitored for severe CNS depression following
aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, chlordane, heptachlor, and toxa-
use of these drugs. In all cases exhibiting clinical signs,
phene. Although DDT and most of the other OCs have
symptomatic and supportive care including IV fuids and
been banned from use in the United States, lindane topical
thermoregulation is indicated.
products are still available as "second line" treatments for
Oral exposures are usually the result of ingestion of
scabies and head lice in humans if “first line" treatments
either spot-on or concentrated dip formulations contain-
are not effective. Lindane-based dips for dogs, though not
ing volatile hydrmcarbons, or from ingestion of an amitraz-
popular, continue to be available.
containing collar. The induction of emesis should be
avoided or done with care for products containing
Kinetics
solvents due to the risk of aspiration and subsequent
The OCs are well absorbed through most exposure routes.
chemical pneumonitis. Emesis is recommended for
Blood concentrations initially increase following absorp-
asymptomatic animals that have ingested a collar. Acti-
tion, but then they decline rapidly as distribution takes
vated charcoal binds amitraz; however, administration
place to liver, kidney, brain, and lipid-rich tissues such as
o p s ns   a os 
adipose where OCs are stored. Body fat may serve as a
vomiting and possible aspiration. Activated charcoal is
source of OC poisoning if weight loss occurs and stored
more suitable for cases in which a collar has been
OCs are released into the general circulation. Because of
Chapter 18/ Insecticides
129
their lipophilicity, OCs will be secreted into milk and
Diagnostics
eliminated from the body via this rmoute. Some OCs are
 Confirmation of an OC poisoning is based on history of
excreted through the bile and reabsorbed (enterohepatic 
exposure and appropriate clinical signs along with detec-
recirculation), contributing to persistence in the body.
tion of the compound in tissues. Samples for OC analysis
should be collected and submitted in clean glass containers
Mechanism of Action
or wrapped in aluminum foil (dull side toward sample) to
The OCs exert their effects through two main mechanisms.
prevent contamination frorm plasticizers which can inter-
In general, the diphenyl aliphatics interfere with sodium
fere with analysis.
channel kinetics, resulting in partial depolarization. The
aryl hydrocarbons and cyclodienes act to inhibit the
Antemortem
binding of GABA (an inhibitory neurotransmitter) to
Blood, milk, or adipose tissue (from a biopsy), or suspect
GABA receptors. For both of these mechanisms, clinical
feed or product can be analyzed. However, finding OC
signs refect nervous stimulation. DDT metabolites also
residues is not alone diagnostic because of the widespread
cause selective necrosis of the adrenal gland zona fasci-
persistence of these compounds in the environment.
ulata and zona reticularis. The OCs have demonstrated
potent estrogenic and enzyme-inducing properties, which
Postmortem
interfere with fertility and reproduction in wildlife and
Liver, brain, adipose tissue, and ingesta collected during
laboratory animals.
necropsy can be analyzed.
Toxicity
Management of Exposures
The acutely toxic dose varies depending upon the OC, but
Treatment is aimed at controlling neurological signs and
 in general the group is less toxic than the organophospho-
preventing further exposure. No specific antidote exists,
rus or carbamate insecticides. The one exception is endrin
so therapy is largely symptomatic and supportive. Neuro
with a rat acute oral LDso of 3 mg/kg (Buck et al. 1976).
logical stimulation can be addressed with antiseizure med-
ications (e-g-, diazepam, barbiturates, gas anesthetics,
Clinical Effects
propofol, etc.) but rmay be difficult to control. For dermal
exposures animals should be bathed with a liquid dish
Signs
detergent.Activated charcoal is recommended for oral
Signs can occur anywhere from minutes to days following
exposures. Personnel should use protective measures to
exposure. Initial signs include salivation, nausea, vomit-
prevent self-exposure.
ing, followed by agitation, apprehension, hyperexcitabil-
ity, incoordination, nervousness, and tremors. These can
Prognosis
 progress to clonic-tonic seizures, opisthotonus, paddling.
The prognosis is dependent upon the OC involved, the
and clamping of the jaw. Seizure activity can persist for
dose, and how quickly treatment is initiated. Those animals
 2-3 days (due to lipophilicity and enterohepatic recircula-
with few or mild signs and that receive prompt treatment
tion). Coma and death are possible.
have a good prognosis. Animals with prolonged or severe
signs, or for which treatment has been delayed have a
Laboratory
guarded prognosis.
No diagnostic or suggestive changes occur. Although per-
forming CBC and chemistry profiles will not rule in or out
ORGANOPHOSPHORUS AND
a diagnosis of an OC toxicosis, they are recommended to
CARBAMATE INSECTICIDES
determine the overall health of the poisoned patient.
Sources/Formulations
Differential Diagnosis
This group of compounds is characterized by their ability
Any agent or disease process causing neurological stimu-
to inhibit the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. There are a
lation should be included in the differential diagnosis
number of organophosphorus (OP) and carbamate insecti-
list. Such conditions include infectious encephalitis,
 cides developed for use on animals and crops, as well as
lead poisoning, rabies, eclampsia, canine distemper,
  sdns s ns sns un o sn nan
strychnine, metaldehyde, 4-aminopyridine, methylxan-
planes. The development of newer and safer insecticides
thines, and other toxicants causing seizures.
has limited the use of this class of compounds to some
130
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
extent, but many of these products are still available and
The cholinesterase inhibitors are metabolized primarily
in use. Older formulations can tum up from storage in old
 in the liver. In most cases the metabolic process detoxifies
outbuildings such as sheds and barns. Most OP and carba-
the compound but some organophosphorus insecticides
mate insecticides are applied topically to the animal or
 may be activated or have an increase in activity following
plant, but some are designed to be absorbed and act sys-
metabolism. In particular, phosphorothioates and phos-
temically. The OPs and carbamates can be found in various
phorodithioates (sulfur-containing cormpounds) undergo
formulations including dusts, wettable powders, and ermul-
oxidative desulfuration reactions to forrm the oxon deriva-
sifiable concentrates. They have been used in dips, sprays,
tives that have increased potency. General oxidation and
fea collars, shampoos, flea foggers, and ant and roach
hydrolysis reactions, in particular the cleavage of the ester
baits.
linkage, markedly reduce toxicity (Taylor 2001). Most
The organophosphorus insecticides are aliphatic carbon,
OPs and carbamates are excreted as degradation products
cyclic, or hetermcyclic phosphate esters. They can be iden-
in the urine.
tified by the presence of the terms phosphate, phosphoro-
thioate,phosphoramidate,phosphonate,phosphoryl,or
Mechanism of Action
phosphorothiolate somewhere in their long chemical
The OP and carbamate insecticides inhibit the enzyme
name. Carbamates are derivatives of carbamic acid and
acetylcholinesterase (AChE). AChE functions to break
generally have the terms carbamate, or carbamoyl, some-
down the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) into
where in their long chemical name. Tables 18.1 and 18.2
acetate and choline, which are then recycled to form more
pmvide common and chemical names of some representa-
acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter found
tive OPs and carbamates, and their acute oral LDso-
between preganglionic and postganglionic neurons of the
autonomic nervous system; at the junction of postgangli-
Kinetics
onic parasympathetic neurons in smooth rmuscle, cardiac
Ultimately, absorption is dependent upon lipid solubility
muscle, or exocrine glands; at neuromuscular junctions of
and carrier formulation, but in general, the cholinesterase
the somatic nervous system; and at cholinergic synapses
inhibitors tend to be well absorbed from any exposure
in the CNS. AChE is also found on the surface of red blood
 mute. They are rapidly distributed to tissues throughout
cells, although its function there is uncertain. Inhibition of
the body.
AChE results in excess ACh at the postsynaptic receptor,
Table 18.1. Common organophosphorus compounds
Compound
Chemical Name
Acute Oral LDso (mg/kg; rat)
Chlorpyrifos
O,O-diethyl O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridy1) phosphorothioate
135
Diazinon
O,O-diethy1 O-(2-isopropyl-4-methyl-6-pyrimidyl) phosphorothioate
300
Dichlorvos
2,2-dichloro-vinyl dimethyl phosphate
25
Disulfoton
O,O-diethyl S-2-[(ethylthio) ethyl] phosphorodithioate
2
(aka Disyston)
Phosmet
O,O-dimethyl S-phthalimidomethyl phosphorodithioate
147
Terbufos
S[(tert-butylthiomethyl] O,O-diethylphosphorodithioate
1.6
Trichlorfon
Dimethy1 (2,2,2-trichloro-1-hydroxyethyl) phosphonate
630
Table 18.2.
. Common carbamate compounds
punoduop
Chemical Name
Acute Oral LDso (mg/kg; rat)
Aldicarb
2-rmethyl-2-(methylthio)propionaldehyde-O-(methylcarbomoyl)oxime
0.9
Carbaryl
1 -naphthyl methylcarbamate
307
Carbofuran
2,3-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-7-benzofuranyl methylcarbamate
8
Methomyl
S-methyl N-(methylcarbamoyloxy) thioacetimidate
17
Propoxur
O-isopropoxyphenyl methylcarbamate
95
Chapter 18/ Insecticides
131
and thus exaggerated stimulation. Normally, depolariza-
tion, diarrhea, dyspnea, and emesis). In addition, animals
tion and transmission of the action potential occurs with
can exhibit miosis and/or bradycardia. Altermatively, due
temporary binding of acetylcholine and ends upon degra-
to sympathetic override, mydriasis or tachycardia can be
dation. When AChE is phosphorylated (due to binding of
seen. Dyspnea is the result of excess bronchial secretions.
OPs) or carbamylated (due to binding of carbamates) ACh
Nicotinic signs are related to effects at the neuromuscular
binds to the postsynaptic membrane but is not broken
junction and can manifest as muscle fasciculations or
down. Continued stimulation and depolarization of the
trermors, generalized tetany, and paralysis. CNS signs,
though less common, can include depression or hyper-
repolarization cannot occur.
stimulation, and seizures.
The OPs and carbamates occupy the anionic and este-
A delayed neuropathy syndrome (Organophosphorus
ratic sites of AChE. The binding of OPs to AChE is con-
Induced Delayed Neuropathy, OPIDN) was described in
sidered "irreversible" since the phosphorus atom of the OP
humans during prohibition following ingestion of Jamai-
attached to the esteratic site of AChE is a fairly strong
can Ginger tainted with triorthocresylphosphate ("Ginger
bond with a half-life of hours or days. The binding of the
Jake paralysis"), with signs starting 1 week to 1 month
carbonyl structure of carbamates to the esteratic site is
later and resulting in permanent disability. A similar syn-
considered a “reversible” bond because of its relatively
drome (intermediate syndrome) has been reported in cats
shorter half-life of 30 to 40 minutes. The phenomenon of
exposed to chlorpyrifos, with signs accompanied by per-
"aging" can occur with some OPs but not with carbamates.
sistently depressed blood cholinesterase activity, starting
Aging occurs when the phosphorus atom attached to the
within days of exposure.
esteratic site is demethylated or deethylated, resulting in a
stable, unbreakable bond. (Sultatos 1994; Fukuto 1990)
Laboratory
The rate at which aging occurs varies with the OP. Once
No diagnostic changes are noted on routine CBC or chem-
aging has occurred, the enzyme will no longer be active
istry evaluations. Although perforrming CBC and chemis-
and the body must synthesize new enzyme over days to
try profiles will not rule in or out a diagnosis of OP or
weeks. Reexposure to a cholinesterase-inhibiting com-
carbamate toxicosis, they are recommended to determine
pound during this time will cause further depression of
the overall health of the poisoned patient.
already compromised AChE activity with potentially dev-
astating results.
Differential Diagnosis
Differential diagnoses include agents causing neuromus-
Toxicity
cular effects as well as those producing muscarinic-
The acute oral toxicity of this class of compounds varies
type signs including tremorgenic mycotoxins, amitraz,
widely, from highly toxic (<1 mg/kg) to practically non-
pyrethrins/pyrethroids, pancreatitis, and
garbage
toxic (>5gm/kg) depending upon formulation, route, and
intoxication.
species. Cats and fish tend to be very sensitive to the cho-
linesterase inhibitors. The minimum oral lethal dose of
Diagnostics
chlorpyrifos in cats is 10-40mg/kg (Fikes 1992). Informa-
Confirmation of an OP or carbamate poisoning is based on
tion on toxicities of specific insecticides can be found on
MSDSs, other product data literature, and reputable web-
tion of the compound in tissues, and suppression of
sites. In most cases, acute toxicosis is the most likely
cholinesterase activity. Samples for cholinesterase deter-
problem encountered. Tables 18.1 and 18.2 prmvide acute
mination should be chilled, not frozen.
oral LDso for some commonly encountered OPs and
carbamates.
Antemortem
A test dose of atropine can be used to help differentiate an
Clinical Effects
OP/carbamate toxicosis from another cause of signs.
Signs
Administration of a preanesthetic dose of atropine
Clinical signs can be related to either muscarinic or nico-
(0.02mg/kg IV) will not produce signs of atropinization
tinic effects, and the predominance of a particular sign as
in these cases. A much higher dose is required (see below
well as the rate of its progression can vary with the OP
 in treatment).
and species involved. Muscarinic signs are the classic cho-
 Appropriate samples for chermical detection are ingesta,
linergic or SLUDDE signs (salivation, lacrimation, urina-
bait, urine, and hair (if dermal exposure is suspected)
132
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Whole blood should be collected in the clinical patient for
with caution following oral exposures (see Chapter 7,
determination of cholinesterase activity. Whole blood
"Decontamination Procedures"). Gastric lavage might be
should be refrigerated, not frozen. Depression of cholin-
preferable in some cases. Activated charcoal is effective
esterase activity of 50% to 80% of normal is typical and
in binding OP and carbamate insecticides.
is consistent with exposure and intoxication.
 In all cases of exposure, animals should be monitored
  e   
Postmortem
necessary.
Liver, ingesta, hair, urine, and any suspect bait should be
 collected on necropsy for chemical identification. In addi-
Prognosis
tion, collect retina (collect entire globe of eye), and brain
The prognosis is dependent upon the OP or carbamate
(entire brain or hemisphere) for cholinesterase determina-
involved, the dose and time of exposure, formulation, and
tion. Retina and brain should be chilled, not frozen.
species. The more potent AChE agents can produce clini-
cal signs and death within minutes to hours. For these
 Management of Exposures
cases, the prognosis is guarded even with prompt and
The clinical course of many OP and carbamate intoxica-
aggressive intervention.
tions progresses rapidly and requires immediate and inten-
         
PYRETHRINS AND PYRETHROIDS
support respiratory and cardiovascular function, control
nervous stimulation, and eliminate further exposure
Sources/Formulations
through decontamination.
Because of concern for toxicity and environmental persis-
Respiratory compromise is the most common cause of
tence of the organochlorine and organophosphorus insec-
death from this class of compounds due to bronchocon-
ticides, there was a shift toward greater use of pyrethrins
striction, increased bronchial secretions, and bradycardia.
and pyrethroids in the 1970s. Recent estimates state that
Oxygen therapy should be instituted. Atropine is indicated
pyrethrins and pyrethroids currently make up more than
for life-threatening muscarinic signs (Mensching and
25% of the world insecticide market (Vais et al. 2001).
Volmer 2008). Give to effect, but do so cautiously, because
This class of insecticides is effective against a number of
atropine toxicosis can occur with overzealous administra-
insect pests and products are marketed as sprays, dusts,
tion. Atropine is not effective against nicotinic signs.
dips, shampoos, spot-ons, gels, foggers, ear tags, pour-ons,
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM; Protopam chloride), a
back rubbers, and face rubbers.
cholinesterase reactivator, at 10-15mg/kg IM or SC twice
Pyrethrurm is a mixture of six active insecticidal com-
daily is indicated forthe treatment of neuromuscular (nico-
pounds terrmed pyrethrins: pyrethrin I and II, cinerin I and
tinic) signs (Plumb 2005). Pralidoxime binds to the OP
II, jasmolin I and II. Pyrethrum occurs naturally in the
AChE complex, liberating the enzyme. It is not effective
fowers of Chrysanthemum species. Chemically, pyre-
for treatment of muscarinic signs, or if aging has occurred.
thrins are esters of alcohols and acids. Synthetic modifica-
However, because the aging process varies with the OP,
tion of the basic pyrethrin structure has resulted in a series
administration of 2-PAM is worthwhile. If no improve-
of "pyrethroids," which tend to have greater insecticidal
ment is seen after 3 consecutive doses, 2-PAM should be
potency and are more environmentally stable than the
discontinued, because at high doses (150 mg/kg)it can also
pyrethrins. Potency is enhanced with the addition of a
inhibit AChE. Diazepam or another anticonvulsant medi-
cyano group, leading to the classification of the type I
cation is indicated for seizures.
(lacking a cyano group) and type II (containing a cyano
The goal of decontamination is to prevent further
group) pyrethroids.
absorption. Care should be taken to protect personnel from
exposure. Animals exposed dermally should be bathed in
Kinetics
a liquid dish detergent. Care should be taken to maintain
The pyrethrins and pyrethroids tend to have poor dermal
normal body temperature. Insecticide collars should be
absorption (>2% in humans) (Woollen et al. 1992).
removed. Clipping may be necessary for animals with long
However, the groorming behavior of animals results in oral
or matted hair.
exposure even when products are applied dermally. Carri-
Because clinical signs can develop rapidly with some
ers and solvents can also infuence absorption. Pyrethrins
agents, and the carriers for some products may be
and pyrethroids are incompletely absorbed following oral
hydrocarbon-based, induction of vomiting should be done
exposure, with approximately 40%-60% of an oral dose
Chapter 18/ Insecticides
133
absorbed (ATSDR 2001). Once absorbed they are rapidly
Signs generally begin within minutes to hours postapplica-
distributed and because of their lipophilicity will accumu-
tion, and resolve with minimal treatment by 24-48 hours
late in nervous tissue (Anadon 2009). Pyrethrins and pyre-
(Volmer 2004). Hypersalivation can occur from grooming
throids are hydrolyzed in the Gl tract and metabolized by
soon after application. This might be due to the unpleasant
taste or to a tingling sensation on the tongue and mouth.
and parent compounds are eliminated via bile and urine.
Dermal reactions might also be due to a tingling sensation
(paresthesia) produced by the product.
Mechanism of Action
Cats mistreated with concentrated permethrin spot-on
The primary mode of action of the pyrethrins and pyre-
products (36%-65% permethrin) intended for dogs can
throids is through disruption of normal sodium channel
develop life-threatening seizures. Cats can also develop a
function, resulting in a prolongation of sodium channel
toxicosis following grooming of freshly treated dogs
opening, a less polarized membrane, and ultimate repeti-
before the product has dried. Signs develop within 12-18
tive firing of action potentials. Differences in type I and
hours and include initial apprehension and agitation,
type II mechanisms have been identified with type II pyre-
hypersalivation, and vocalization, progressing to tremors
throids more likely to cause depolarization, but this has
and seizures by 18-24 hours. Convulsions are severe and
little significance in either the occurrence of clinical signs
can be difficult to control. Death can occur in untreated
or the treatment of the poisoned patient. Pyrethrins also
cats (Volmer 2004).
act on GABA receptors at high doses, but this mechanism
Dogs can also develop signs associated with dermal
also appears to be of little clinical significance (Anadon
hypersensitivity. They act uncomfortable, lick or chew at
2009).
their skin, rmoll on the floor, or rub their backs. Occasionally
an episode of vomiting or diarrhea occurs, and is not con
Toxicity
sidered a true toxic effect but a nonspecific stress effect.
Toxicity varies widely and is dependent upon the indi-
vidual pyrethrin or pyrethroid, species of animal, forrmula-
Laboratory
tion, and route of exposure. In general, the pyrethroids are
No specific clinical pathological alterations are associated
considered less acutely toxic than the OP and carbamate
with exposure to the pyrethrins and pyrethroids. However,
insecticides. Adverse effects are often the result of extral-
for animals with severe signs, a CBC and chemistry is
abel use, but can also occur from individual hypersensitiv-
recommended to assess the overall health of the poisoned
ity reactions and genetic-based idiosyncratic reactions
patient.
(Hansen 2006). Animals that are weak or debilitated from
a large fea burden or from other causes are at increased
Differential Diagnosis
risk. Fish are highly sensitive to this class of compounds.
The differential diagnosis list should include any toxic
Care should be taken to avoid contamination of water
agents or other conditions that cause nervous stimulation.
bodies when using these compounds outdoors. Indoor
Toxic agents include strychnine, metaldehyde, methylxan-
aquaria should be protected when using foggers or sprays
thines, illicit drugs (cocaine, amphetamines), and organo-
in the home. The air pump intake should be tumed off and
phosphorus or carbarmate insecticides.
the tank and intake covered during application. The home
must be well ventilated before retuming to use (Volmer
Diagnostics
2004). Cats are exquisitely sensitive to concentrated per-
 Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and appropriate
methrin products, likely because of their reduced ability to
clinical signs.
metabolize perrmethrin.
Antemortem
Clinical Effects
Analysis for pyrethrins and pyrethroids is limited to a few
Signs
laboratories. Preferred samples include whole blood,
Because the pyrethrins and pyrethroids are applied via the
serum, and urine. Unfortunately, concentrations are not
dermal route, most signs are attributed to skin sensitivity.
well correlated to clinical signs. Hair samples can be ana
lyzed for permethrin to verify exposure in cats suspected
paw shaking, ear twitching, ficking of the tail, and twitch-
ing of the skin on their backs. Some cats hide or are
 cation should be considered if a greasy or oily area is noted
reluctant to move or walk, holding a leg out to the side.
on the animal's fur.
134
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Postmortem
permanent sequelae are not expected. Fine muscle tremors
Hair, brain, and liver can be used for chemical analysis.
may linger for several days. However, this should not
Because analyses for pyrethrins and pyrethroids are not
preclude releasing the patient to the owners as long as the
widely available, consultation with a diagnostic labora-
animal is able to eat, drink, and use the litter box. Atropine
tory is recommended prior to submission. No pathog-
is not indicated.
nomonic lesions are expected on gross necropsy
.10
histopathology.
Prognosis
Most animals experiencing a pyrethrin or pyrethroid toxi-
Management of Exposures
cosis are expected to have an excellent prognosis. Cats
Treatment is aimed at controlling excess neurological
exposed to concentrated perrmethrin products have a good
stimulation and preventing further exposure. For mild
prognosis if timely and intensive treatment is initiated.
effects such as hypersalivation, ear twitching, and paw
Cats exhibiting severe or prmolonged signs, or for which
shaking that are often associated with use of a pyrethrin
timely treatrment is denied, have a guarded prognosis.
spray, no treatrment is usually required. Ofering a tasty
treat such as milk or tuna juice can alleviate hypersaliva-
NEONICO TINOIDS
tion. If mild signs persist the animal can be bathed in a
liquid dish detergent and kept warm. Rinsing alone will
Sources/Formulations
not remove most topical products. Clinical signs usually
Neonicotinoids, the only major new class of insecticides
resolve rapidly following bathing. Animals with moderate
developed in the past 3 decades, have been synthesized for
to severe discomfort may require treatment with an anti-
use against insect pests on crops and companion animals.
histamine. In addition, vitamin E oil applied to the applica-
Worldwide annual sales of neonicotinoids account for
tion site might help to alleviate the irritation.
11%-15% of the total insecticide market (Tomizawa
Cats mistreated with a permethrin product intended for
2005). Of the 7 neonicotinoids in use today, only 3 are of
dogs should be considered a medical emergency. If the
primary significance to companion animals: imidacloprid
exposure was recent and the animal is not exhibiting clini-
(Advantage@), nitenpyram (Capstar@), and dinotefuran
cal signs, the cat should be thoroughly bathed in a liquid
(Vectra@). Imidacloprid and dinotefuran are used in
dish detergent, dried well, and kept warm. The animal
topical formulations, and nitenpyram is the active ingredi-
should be monitored for the next 12-18 hours for the
ent in an oral prmduct. Imidacloprid and nitenpyram are
development of clinical signs. If the cat is already exhibit-
chloronicotinyl compounds developed based on the struc-
ing tremors or seizures, hospitalization is required. Metho-
ture of nicotine. Dinotefuran is a furanicotinyl compound
carbamol, a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant, is
developed using acetylcholine as the lead compound. The
effective in controlling the tremors and seizures. One-third
chloronicotinyl compounds are considered first generation
to one-half of the dose is administered as a bolus (not
neonicotinoids, and the furanicotinyl compounds are third
exceeding 2ml/min). As the cat begins to relax the admin-
 generation. The second generation neonicotinoids are thi-
istration is paused, and the remainder is given to effect.
anicotinyl compounds and are used primarily for crop
Methocarbamol can be repeated as needed to a maximum
protection (Wakita 2003).
daily dose of 330mg/kg. Complete termination of the
      
Kinetics
1998a,b) Diazepam alone is ineffective in controlling
The neonicotinoids tend to be rapidly absorbed following
severe signs. Barbiturates, gas anesthetics, and propofol
oral exposure. There are a number of pathways for metab-
have also been used with varying results to control the
olism depending upon the specific neonicotinoid and
signs.
species. Elimination is primarily via urine with some fecal
Once stabilized the cat should be bathed in liquid dish
excretion. The neonicotinoids tend to have short half-lives
detergent to remove any residual perrmethrin, dried well,
in the body and thus pose little risk for bioaccumulation.
and kept warm. Activated charcoal is not indicated unless
the perrmethrin product was administered orally to the cat.
Mechanism of Action
General supportive care should be instituted including IV
The neonicotinoids are considered neurotoxins that bind
Huids, blood glucose monitoring and correction, and ther-
to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). They
moregulation. For most cats receiving appropriate treat-
 have a much higher binding affinity to the nAChR of
ment, recovery is achieved by 24 to 72 hours, and
insects than mammals (Tomizawa and Casida 2005).
Chapter 18/ Insecticides
135
Table 18.3. Toxicological profiles of
Management of Exposure
neonicotinoid insecticides
 For most clinical cases the signs are transient and require
Rat
Bird
no treatment. Bathing and administration of an antihista-
Acute Oral
NOAEL
Acute Oral
mine may be required for some cases of dermal discom-
fort. Oral exposures can be treated by diluting with milk
punoduo
LDso (mg/kg)
(mg/kg/day)
LDso (mg/kg)
or water. If vomiting occurs, food and water should be
450
5.7
removed for a brief period (1-2 hours) to allow the GI tract
Imidacloprid
31
Nitenpyram
1628
>2250
to settle down.
Dinotefuran
2400
127
>2000
Prognosis
Source: Tomizawa 2005
Because of their exceptional safety profiles, rapid metabo-
lism, and their availability only in limited quantities
for companion animals, exposures carry an excellent
prognosis.
Dinotefuran is thought to bind to a unique location on the
receptor compared to imidacloprid and nitenpyram (Wakita
REFERENCES
et al. 2005). In normal nerve tissue, the neurotransmitter
Anadon, A., Martinez-Latranaga, M.R., and Martinez, M.A.
acetylcholine is rapidly broken down by AChE to end the
2009. Use and abuse of pyrethrins and synthetic pyrethroids
synaptic transmission and retum the membrane to its
in veterinary medicine. The Veterinary Journal 182:7-20.
norrmal resting state. The neonicotinoids bind at or near
Andrade, S.F. and Sakate, M. 2003. The comparative efficacy
the site where nicotine binds, producing unregulated stim-
of yohimbine and atipamezole to treat amitraz intoxication
ulation and ultimately death of the insect.
in dogs,
Veterinary
and Human Toxicotogy 45(3):
124-127.
Toxicity
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry).
 2001. Toxicological profle for pyrethrins and pyrethroids:
Because of their low affinity for mammalian nicotinic
draft for public comment, Washington, D.C., U.S. Depart-
receptors and rapid metabolism, the neonicotinoids in
ment of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
general have a wide margin of safety. Table 18.3 lists some
Buck, William B., Osweiler, Gary D., Van, Gelder, and Gary,
toxicity values of the 3 common neonicotinoids.
A. 1976. Organochlorine insecticides. In Clinical and
Diagnostic Veterinary Toxicofogy, 2nd edition, edited by
Clinical Effects
Gary A. Van Gelder, pp. 191-204. Dubuque: Kendall Hunt 
Signs
EXTOXNET. Pesticide information profile for amitraz, 1995,
Because of their wide margin of safety, toxic effects from
Oregon State Uni versity, http://extoxnet.orst.edu/pips/
irmidacloprid, nitenpyram, and dinotefuran are rare and are
amitr az.htm
likely due to other components of the formulation. Oral
Fikes, J.D. 1992. Feline chlorpyrifos toxicosis. In Current
exposures can result in self-lirmiting vomiting. Dermal
Veterinary Therapy Xl: Small Animal Practice, edited by
Robert W Kirk and John D Bonagura. p. 188. Philadelphia:
exposures can result in erythema, pruritus, and alopecia.
W.B. Saunders.
Fukuto, T.R. 1990. Mechanism of action of organophospho-
Laboratory
Tus and carbamate insecticides. Environmental Health Per-
No clinical laboratory changes are expected from the
spectives 87:245-254
neonicotinoids.
Hansen, Steve R. 2006. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In Small
Animal Toxicology, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Diagnostics
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 1002-1010. St. Louis: Saunders.
Antemortem
Hsu, W.H., Lu, Z.X., and Hembrough, F.B. 1986. Effect of
There are no routine diagnostic tests for the neonicotinoids
amitraz on heart rate and aortic blood pressure in conscious
dogs: Influence of atropine, prazosin, tolazoline, and
in tissues. Consultation with a diagnostic laboratory is
yohimbine. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 84(2):
recommended prior to submission.
418-422.
Hugnet, C., Buronrosse, F, Pineau, X., Cadore, J.L, Lorque,
Postmortem
G., and Berny, PJ. 1996. Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz
No lesions
areexpectedongrossnecropsy
Or
in dogs, American Journal of Veterinary Research 57(10):
histopathology.
1506-1510.
136
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Mensching, Donna, Volmer, Petra A. 2008. Insecticides and
ticides with insect and mammalian sodium channels. Pest
Molluscicides. In Handbook of Small Animal Practice,
Management Science 57(10):877-888.
edited by Rhea V. Morgan, Pp. 1197-1204. St. Louis: Saun-
Volmer, PA., Kahn, S.A., Knight, M.W., and Hansen, S.R.
ders Elsevier.
1998a. Warning against use of some permethrin products in
Paradis, M. 1999. New approaches to the treatment of canine
cats.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Associa
demodicosis.Veterinary Clinics of North America Small
tion 213(6):800-801.
Animal Practice 29(6):1425-1436.
. 1998b. Permethrin spot-on products can be toxic in
Plumb, D.C. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3d ed. Ames,
cats. Veterinary Medicine 93(12): 1039.
Iowa: Blackwell Publishing.
Volmer, Petra A. 2004. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In Clinical
Sultatos, LG. 1994. Mammalian toxicology of organophos-
Veterinary Toxicology. edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp.
phorus pesticides. Journal of Toxicology and Environmen-
188-190. St. Louis: Mosby.
tal Heaith 43(3):271-289.
Wakita T., Kinoshita, K., Yamada, E., Yasui, N., Kawahara,
Taylor, Palmer. 2001. Anticholinesterase agents. In Goodman
N., Naoi, A., Nakaya, M., Ebihara, K., Matsuno, H., and
and Gilman's the Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics,
Kodaka, K. 2003. The discovery of dinotefuran: A novel
10th edition, edited by Joel G. Hardman, Lee E. Limbird,
neonicotinoid. Pest Management Science 59(9):1016-
and Alfred G. Gilman, Pp. 175-192. New York: McGraw-
1022.
Hill.
Wakita, T., Yasui, N., Yamada, E., Kishi, D. 2005. Develop-
Tomizawa, Motohiro, Casida, John E. 2005. Neonicotinoid
ment of a novel insecticide, dinotefuran. Journal of Pesti-
insecticide toxicology: Mechanisms of selective action.
cide Science 30(2)122-123.
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 45:
Woollen, B.H., Marsh, JR., Laird, W.J., Lesser, J.E. 1992.
247-268.
The metabolism of cypermethrin in man: Differences in
Vais, H., Williamson, M.S., Devonshire, A.L., Usherwood,
urinary metabolite profiles following oral and dermal
PN. 2001. The molecular interactions of pyrethroid insec-
administration.Xenobiotica 22(8):983-991.
Other Pesticides
19
Robert H. Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
sonings, 5th edition, is a valuable source of information
A pesticide is defined as any substance or mixture of sub-
regarding the toxicology and general treatment approaches
stances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or
for a large number of pesticides typically not discussed in
mitigating any pest. A pesticide may be a chemical sub-
veterinary textbooks (Riegart and Roberts 1999). The
stance, a biological agent (such as a virus or bacterium),
 entire manual is available from http://npic.orst.edu/ rmpp.
an antimicrobial, a disinfectant, or a device used against
htm. It is important to keep in mind that there is limited
any pest. Pests include insects, plant pathogens, weeds,
species-specific toxicity data for many pesticides and that
molluscs, birds, mammals, fish, parasites, and microbes
for the majority of pesticides discussed below, treatment
of poisoned animals involves appropriate and timely
that destroy property, spread disease, or are a vector for
disease or cause a nuisance. Pesticides can be categorized
decontarmination along with symptomatic and supportive
based upon the type of pest they are intended to control
 care; specific antidotes are typically not available.
(i.e., insecticides, rmdenticides, herbicides, fungicides, avi-
cides, etc.). There are literally hundreds of different chemi-
MISCELLANEOUS INSECTICIDES
cals used as pesticides with diverse chemical structures,
AND REPELLANTS
formulations, and toxicities. Although there are obvious
 Boric Acid and Borates
benefits to the use of pesticides, there are also potential
risks such as potential toxicity to humans and other
Sources and Formulations
animals.
Boric acid is formulated as tablets and powders to kill
Insecticides and rodenticides are commonly involved in
insect larvae in livestock confinement areas and cock-
animal intoxications and are discussed in separate chap-
roaches, ants, and other insects in residences. Powders and
ters. This chapter is intended to discuss several other
tablets scattered on foors present a hazard for pets; cats
diverse pesticides that have been associated with pet intox-
can be exposed by grooming paws after contact with
 ication; it is not intended to be comprehensive in its scope.
powders spread on foors.
Interested readers are referred to an excellent website
under the auspices of the National Pesticide Information
Kinetics and Toxicity
Center (NPIC) that has a wealth of inforrmation on various
Absorption of boric acid from the GI tract is rapid (Welch
pesticides: http://npic.orst.edu/index.html. This website
2004). Following absorption it is found at highest concen-
has numerous pesticide fact sheets and toxicity informa-
trations in the brain, liver, and kidneys. It is eliminated
tion and a section specifically addressing pesticide use on
unchanged by the kidneys with a half-life of 5 to 21 hours.
or around animals. The USEPA-sponsored publication
The acute oral LDso reported for rats range from 2 to
entitled Recognition and Management of Pesticide Poi-
approximately 5g/kg. Thus, it is considered slightly toxic.
SmatlAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
137
138
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
However, chronic exposure to lower doses is a potential
Prognosis
problem.
Most exposures result in rather rmild Gl signs; in such
cases the prognosis is good. With large acute ingestions or
Mechanism ofAction
chronic exposures, the prognosis is more guarded.
The mechanism of action of boric acid is unknown, but it
is considered to be cytotoxic.
Diethyltoluamide (DEET)
SourcesandFormulations
Chinical Effects
DEET is a widely used liquid insect repellant suitable for
The GI tract, vascular systerm, brain, and kidneys are
application to skin or fabrics. Products contain a range of
primary target organs. In acute, single-dose, oral expo
concentrations from 5% to 100%.
sures, signs include hypersalivation, vomiting, depression,
anorexia, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Depending on the
Kinetics and Toxicity
dose ingested, weakness, ataxia, trermors, focal or general-
DEET is well absorbed following dermal or oral exposures
ized seizures, oliguria or anuria, renal tubular nephrosis,
(Dorman 2004). The amount absorbed increases with
and liver damage may occur, although the latter is uncom-
increasing concentrations, and the solvents used in many
mon (Welch 2004). Seizures can be followed by metabolic
products enhance absorption as well (Riegart and Roberts
acidosis, depression, coma, and death. Chronic, toxic
1999). The clearance of absorbed DEET is rapid with a
exposures cause anorexia, weight loss, vomiting, loose
half-life measured in hours. It is primarily eliminated via
stools, rashes, alopecia, anemia, and death.
the urine. The toxicity of DEET is low with rat oral LDso
ranging from 1.8 to 2.7 g/kg body weight. Dermal toxicity
Diagnostics
is also low based on studies in rabbits where single appli-
Antemortem
cations of 2 to 4g/kg did not cause any clinical signs
A history of exposure, occurrence of compatible clinical
Mechanism ofAction
signs, and possibly the detection of elevated levels of
The mechanism of toxic action of DEET is unknown.
boron in blood, plasma, or urine support a diagnosis.
Signs
Postmortem
Repeated topical exposures can cause dermal and ocular
Significant lesions can be found in target organs such as
irritation. Clinical signs observed in dogs and cats with
the GI tract, kidneys, brain, liver, and skin. No lesions are
suspected acute DEET intoxication include vomiting,
umique to boric acid, but a constellation of lesions might
tremors, excitation, ataxia, and seizures (Dorman 1990).
support a diagnosis. Measurement of boron in kidneys and
There are no characteristic laboratory findings associated
liver might also be helpful to confirm exposure.
with DEET intoxication.
ManagementofExposures
Diagnostics
Standard decontamination pmcedures should be followed
Antemortem
with suspected exposures. Exposed hair and skin should
An antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of exposure
be washed with mild soap or shampoo and water followed
(perhaps noticing a residue on skin or hair). Testing for
by thorough rinsing. Emetics or cathartics might not be
DEET is not widely available, although contacting a vet-
 indicated if an animal has already vomited or exhibited
erinary diagnostic laboratory might be helpful; detection
diarrhea. Activated charcoal is generally not administered
of residues on hair or in biological specimens only con-
due to poor adsorption of boric acid. Symptomatic and
firms exposure and not necessarily intoxication.
supportive care is often needed. Intravenous balanced
electrolyte solutions and glucose are administered as
Postmortem
needed. Gl protectants and antiemetics might be indicated.
There are no characteristic postmortem findings.
Maintaining urine fow is important to prevent or correct
kidney damage. Although dialysis (hemo- or peritoneal
Management of Exposures
dialysis) might be indicated if renal failure occurs, it does
Treatment involves standard dermal, ocular, and GI decon.
not appear to increase borate clearance. Benzodiazepines
tamination procedures including induction of emesis if
can be given to control seizures.
early after an oral ingestion, washing skin and hair with
Chapter 19/ Other Pesticides
139
mild soap and water followed by a thorough rinse, and
Table 19.1. Breeds known to carry the MDR1
fushing eyes following an ocular exposure. Initially, sei-
P-glycoprotein genetic polymorphism
zures should be treated with a benzodiazepine such as
Collie
Waller
diazepam. Other symptormatic and supportive care is pro-
Longhaired whippet
White Swiss shepherd
vided as needed.
Shetland sheepdog
Old English sheepdog
Miniature Australian shepherd
Border collie
Prognosis
Australian shepherd
German shepherd dog
Most animals with mild DEET intoxication recover
uneventfully in several days.
Macrocyclic Lactone Parasiticides
Sources andFormulations
A genetic polymorphism in some breeds of dogs causes a
Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides (also known as macro-
defect in the P-glycoprotein of a multidrug resistant pump
lides) are compounds used to treat or prevent a variety of
(coded for by the MDR1, or ABCB1, gene) in the blood-
parasitic diseases in domestic animals and humans. These
brain barrier. As a consequence of this defect, the blood-
products are derived from fermentation products of Strep
brain barriers of affected dogs do not exclude certain
tomyces avermitilis and S. cyaneogriseus. They are often
xenobiotics (including the macrolides) from the brain.
referred to as endectocides due to their ability to kill both
Additionally, the same P-glycoprotein acts within the
internal (endo) and external (ecto) parasites (Lanusse et al.
intestine to limit absorption of macrolides, so dogs with
2009). Macrolides include ivermectin, abamectin, dora-
the MDR1 defect may absorb more drug after ingestion
mectin, eprinomectin, milbemycin oxime, moxidectin, and
and attain higher blood concentrations of macrolides
selamectin. These products are used for prevention of
(Lanusse et al. 2009). Higher blood and CNS concentra-
heartworms in dogs and cats, treatment of feline ear mites,
tions of macrolide put MDR-1 defective dogs at risk for
prevention of internal nematode infestation, and manage-
toxicosis at dosages of macrmlides that are well tolerated
ment of a variety of other parasitic diseases such as scabies
by dogs without this genetic polymorphism. However, the
and infestations oflice (Mealey 2006). Several macrolides
doses of macrolides commonly used for heartworm pre-
are used in food animals and horses for the prevention and
ventative are well below the levels expected to cause clini-
treatment of intermal and extemal parasites. Abamectin b,
cal signs in MDR-1 defective dogs, and no problems are
 is a macrocyclic lactone that is present in some household
expected with the monthly heartworm treatments even in
insecticides, in ant and roach bait stations, and in agricul-
affected dogs. Table 19.1 lists the dog breeds that to date
tural insecticides. Products containing macrolides include
have had the MDR1 defect confirrmed through genetic
tablets, chewable tablets, spot-on products, gels, pour-on
testing. Because this defect is an autosomal recessive trait,
liquids, injectable solutions, otic solutions, premixes, and
only a fraction of dogs within these breeds would be
granules.
 expected to be affected.
The minimum toxic dose of ivermectin in MDR1-
Kinetics and Toxicity
defective dogs is 100 mcg/kg, which is approximately 16
In general, macrolides are well absorbed orally and some
times higher than the monthly heartworrm preventive dose;
(e.g-, selamectin) are also well absorbed dermally (Mealey
moxidectin toxicosis has been reported in a collie at
2006). Many ofthese compounds are lipophilic, with mox-
90 mcg/kg (30 times the monthly heartworm preventive
idectin being the most lipophilic of the group (Lanusse
dose); milbemycin toxicosis has been reported in MDR1-
et al. 2009). The macrolides have relatively long half-lives
defective collies at 5 mg/kg (10 times the monthly heart-
due to their wide tissue distribution, lipophilicity (fat
worm preventive dose); and selamectin caused ataxia
storage), extensive biliary, and intestinal secretion and
when administered orally to MDR1-defective collies at 2.5
enterohepatic recycling (Lanusse et al. 2009).
times the therapeutic dose. In contrast, dogs without the
The macrmolides have a wide margin of safety in
MDR1 defect can generally tolerate ivermectin dosages up
mammals due to the fact that they do not cross the blood-
to 600 mcg/kg and milbemycin dosages up to 1.6mg/kg
brain barrier under normal circumstances (Lanusse et al.
for treatment of ectoparasites (Mealey 2006). Based on
2009). Animals with blood-brain barrier defects are at
results in laboratory dogs, the minimum toxic dosage of
increased risk for toxicosis from doses of macrolides that
ivermectin had been reported to be 2.5 mg/kg. A recent
would not affect animals with intact blood-brain barriers.
review of iverrmectin toxicosis in dogs revealed that some
140
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
individuals are intolerant of dosages as low as 0.2 mg/kg
helpful in identifying dogs that are at increased risk for
in spite of them belonging to breeds not associated with
macrolide toxicosis.
the MDR1 defect (Merola et al, 2009), so the potential for
 individual sensitivity to macrolides needs to be considered
ManagementofExposures
whenever treatment with higher doses is contemplated.
The goals of managing exposures to macrolides are patient
stabilization, decontamination, and supportive care for
Mechanism of Action
recumbent animals. In recent ingestions with no serious
The macrolides cause death of parasites by paralyzing
clinical signs, induction of emesis should be considered.
nematodes and arthropods through actions on chloride
Because of the rapid absorption of macrolides from liquids
channels of the pharyngeal pump and somatic musculature
and gels, if more than 30 to 60 minutes have elapsed from
of the parasites. As a result, the parasite loses the ability
ingestion, it may be more beneficial to administer acti-
to obtain nutrients and its muscular movements are inhib-
vated charcoal. Repeated doses of activated charcoal
ited. Macrolides also may stimulate some parasite GABA
should be administered to all animals showing more than
receptors.
mild signs in order to try to reduce the half-lives of the
Mammals are largely protected from the actions of mac-
macrolides. Animals that become comatose will need
mlides on the nervous system, as the target receptors exist
intensive nursing care to prevent hypotherrmia, decubital
only within the central nervous system in mammals, and
ulcers, and aspiration. Recently, intravenous lipid solution
the macrolides are excluded from the CNS by the
infusions (ILS) have been used to successfully manage
P-glycoprotein pump of the blood-brain barrier (Gramer
severe macrolide toxicosis (Crandell 2009), although
2010). Animals with defects in the blood-brain barrier due
anecdotally not all animals appear to respond to this treat-
to infammation, anatomic anomaly or trauma can be at
ment modality.
increased risk of macrolide toxicosis. Additionally, the
MDR1 pump can be overwhelmed in cases of macrolide
Prognosis
overdose, allowing excessive amounts of macrolide into
The prognosis depends on the dosage ingested, the MDR1
the CNS and resulting in toxicosis. Once in the CNS, the
status of a dog, and the availability of good nursing care
macrolides alter chloride channels and GABA activity,
to manage comatose animals. Comatose animals surviving
resulting in CNS depression.
more than 24 hours have a reasonable chance of recovery
if adequate nursing care is provided.
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs associated with macrolide toxicosis include
FUNGICIDES
mydriasis, ataxia, CNS depression, hypersalivation, vom-
Fungicides constitute a chemically diverse group of pesti-
iting, clinical blindness, coma, tremors and seizures (Roder
cides. The risk of intoxication from fungicides is low given
2004). Hypothermia may develop secondarily in recum-
use restrictions, available formulations, and low bioavail-
bent animals. Signs generally occur soon after an over-
ability of these compounds (Osweiler, 1996; Riegart and
dose, but in animals being treated with daily doses signs
Roberts 1999). Many fungicides are formulated as suspen-
may not develop until several days of treatment have
sions of wettable powders or granules, which prevent rapid
passed. Additionally, dogs being treated with injectable
and efficient absorption from sites of exposure. Most pets
macrolides may have a delay in onset and delay in peak
 are likely to be exposed to fungicides as a result of their
effect as the macrmolide is slowly absorbed from the sub-
application to lawns. The reader is referred to several
cutaneous injection site.
sources for additional information (Gerken 1995; Osweiler
1996; Riegart and Roberts 1999; and Yeary 2000; the
Diagnostics
NPIC website).
Macrolides can be detected in various body tissues, but the
Toxicity
cases is minimal. Diagnosis is based on history of expo-
Fungicides vary in terms of their acute toxicity. Many
sure and consistent clinical signs. There are no expected
are almost nontoxic with rodent LDso greater than 0.5 g/
consistent postmortem lesions in animals succumbing to
kg body weight (Osweiler 1996). However, some have
macrolide toxicosis.
relatively low rodent oral LDso (e.g-, cyclohexamide with
A DNA test is available to detect dogs with MDR1
a rat LDso of 2mg/kg). The four fungicides listed by
polymorphisms. The test uses cheek swabs and can be
Yeary (2000) for lawn use—futolonil, iprodione, propi-
Chapter 19/ Other Pesticides
141
conazole and thiophanate-methyl—have rat oral LDso of
toxicity is dependent on the chemical form. Also, products
>5000 mg/kg, >2000 mg/kg, 1517 mg/kg, and 6640mg/kg,
containing 2,4-D can be in liquid, dust, or granular
respectively.
formulations.
Clinical Effects
Kinetics and Toxicity
Clinical signs are most often nonspecific and include
Following ingestion, 2,4-D is rapidly absorbed; the degree
anorexia, depression, weakness, and diarrhea (Osweiler
of dermal absorption varies with the formulation of 2,4-D
1996). Many fungicides are irritating to skin, eyes, and
and species (Yeary 2006). Absorbed 2,4-D is widely dis-
mucous membranes. There are no characteristic laboratory
tributed throughout the body, but it does not accumulate
findings.
 in fat. Elimination is via the renal anion transport system
of the kidney; this system is not as efficient in dogs as
Diagnostics
other species, making dogs more susceptible to exposures
A diagnosis of intoxication primarily relies on a history of
to 2,4-D. In dogs, oral dosages of 2,4-D exceeding 175 mg/
exposure. Testing for specific fungicides in biological
kg resulted in toxicosis, characterized primarily by myo-
samples is typically not available.
exposed to very concentrated solutions, at the concentra-
Management of Exposures
tions used in residential areas (<l%) exposure of dogs to
Treatment involves standard decontamination procedures.
toxic levels of 2,4-D is extremely unlikely. A NOAEL of
For known exposures to fungicides that have low toxicity,
1 mg/kg/day has been established for dogs in a chronic
Gl decontamination is probably not necessary due to the
study (Yeary 2006).
unlikely occurrence of clinical signs. There are no anti-
dotes, so in the unlikely event of intoxication, symptom-
Chinical Effects
atic and supportive care is indicated.
Signs
Chlorophenoxy herbicides are moderately irritating to skin
HERBICIDES
and mucous membranes. Inhalation of sprays can cause a
Herbicides are widely used around farms and homes and
burning sensation in the nasopharynx and chest and result
constitute a diverse group of chemicals. They come in a
in coughing. Manifestations of systemic toxicity of these
variety of formulations that are designed to prevent plants
herbicides are known mainly from deliberate, suicidal
from growing (preemergent herbicides) or kill plants that
exposures in people (Riegart and Roberts 1999). Most
are already growing(postemergent herbicides). Preemer-
reports of fatal outcomes involve acidosis, electrolyte
gent herbicides are typically incorporated into soil to
imbalances, renal failure, and multiple organ failure. Early
prevent gerrmination, and postemergent herbicides are
signs following exposure include vomiting, diarrhea, con-
 applied directly to the growing plant. Several major cate-
fusion, behavioral changes, and tachycardia. Muscle
gories of herbicides include chlorophenoxy herbicides
weakness, moderate increases in body temperature, hyper-
(e.g-, 2,4-D), nitrophenolic and nitrocresolic herbicides
ventilation, and seizures can also occur, but they are less
(e.g-, dinitrocresol, dinitrophenol, dinocap, and dinoseb,
common. Laboratory changes include low arterial pH and
 among others), triazine herbicides (e.g-, atrazine and sima-
bicarbonate, elevated serum CPK concentrations due to
zine), and bipyridyls (e.g-, paraquat and diquat). An exten-
muscle damage, elevated BUN and creatinine, and elec-
sive list of other herbicides with associated toxicity
trolyte disturbances (hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia).
information can be found in Riegart and Roberts (1999).
Mild leukocytosis and liver enzyme elevations have also
Only chlorophenoxy and dipyridyls are discussed below.
been noted.
Clinical signs of 2,4-D toxicosis in dogs include vomit-
Chlorophenoxy Herbicides
ing, anorexia, reluctance to move, muscle rigidity, ataxia,
Sources andFormulations
CNS depression, and muscle weakness (Yeary 2006).
These compounds are used alone or mixed into commer-
Spastic movements or clonic spasms may occur in severe
cial fertilizers to control broadleaf weeds. There are
cases.
numerous commercial prmoducts that contain chlorophe-
noxy herbicides; 2,4-D is one of the most commonly used
Diagnostics
herbicides around the home. 2,4-D is available in several
A diagnosis relies on a history of recent exposure. Depend-
chemical forms including salts, esters, and an acid form;
ing on the nature of the exposure, a peculiar odor might
142
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
be noted on the hair or breath of an exposed animal.
experience in humans provides a rough dose-response
Although antemortem or postmortem analysis of biologi-
scale associated with the severity of intoxication. Dosages
cal specimens is possible, such testing is not widely
of <20mg/kg body weight are associated with mild GI
available.
signs and likely recovery. Dosages of 20 to 40 mg/kg are
associated with pulmonary fibrosis and death within 2 to
ManagementofExposures
3 weeks postexposure. Dosages >40 mg/kg are associated
 Initial management should include consideration of stan-
with multiple organ damage with mortality within 1 to 7
dard skin and gastrointestinal decontamination procedures.
days (before the delayed pulmonary damage occurs)
Significant vomiting prior to presentation would make
(Riegart and Roberts 1999).
induction of emesis contraindicated. Other treatment is
largely symptomatic and supportive. Antiemetics should
Mechanism ofAction
be used as needed to control vomiting. Dogs presenting
Paraquat forms free radicals that can damage cell mem-
with myotonia may benefit from the use of muscle relax-
branes. In the lung, one of the major target tissues, para-
ants such as methocarbamol. Intravenous fuid administra-
quat undergoes repeated redox cycling that increases
tion to induce diuresis is warranted. Forced alkaline
diuresis has been used successfully in the management of
ions (O2) while decreasing important intracelluar reduc-
 attempted suicides in people (Riegart and Roberts 1999).
ing species such as NADPH (Oehme and Pickrell 2004).
Alkalinizing the urine with sodium bicarbonate dramati-
Supermxide radicals are converted to hydrogen peroxide
cally accelerates excretion of 2,4-D.
by superoxide dismutase. Both superoxide radicals and
hydrogen peroxide damage epithelial cell membranes and
Prognosis
cause pulmonary damage. Paraquat is also an irritant and
The prognosis is typically good. However, in people, myo-
vesicant and can cause significant localized damage upon
tonia and muscle weakness can persist for months after
contact with skin, eyes, or mucous membranes.
acute poisonings.
CLINICAL EFFECTS
Dipyridyl Herbicides
SIGNS
Paraquat
Dermal contact can result in erythema and blistering. Eye
Sources and Exposure
contact results in significant corneal damage. Systemic
Paraquat is widely used as an herbicide for weed and grass
signs following exposure typically occur in three phases.
control. In the U.S., paraquat is available primarily as a
Phase one reflects the corrmsive action of paraquat and the
liquid in various strengths. It is classified as "restricted
 development of gastrointestinal signs including vomiting,
use," which means that it can be used only by people who
dysphagia, and abdominal pain. The second phase is mani-
are licensed applicators.
fested by renal and liver damage; this occurs 2 to 3 days
Paraquat is one of the more common agents used in
after exposure. The third phase is characterized by devel-
suicidal attempts. Because paraquat is highly poisonous,
opment of pulmonary fibrosis, which is ultimately respon-
the form marketed in the U.S. has a blue dye to keep it
sible for most fatalities.
from being confused with beverages such as coffee, a
sharp odor to serve as a warning, and an added agent to
LABORATORY
cause vomiting if ingested. Paraquat has also been used to
There are no specific laboratory findings noted with para-
 maliciously poison pets (Bischoff et al. 1998; Cope et al.
quat poisoning. Radiographic evidence of pulmonary
2004).
edema or other pulmonary abnorrmalities is present if the
animal survives for a sufficient length of time for lesions
Kinetics and Toxicity
to develop.
Paraquat is poorly absorbed from the Gl tract (only 5 to
10%), although it can persist in the GI tract for many hours
Diagnosis
(Oehme and Pickrell 2004). It is primarily excreted via the
ANTEMORTEM
kidneys. Paraquat has a unique affinity for lung tissue and
accumulates in alveolar epithelial cells. In animals, para-
occurrence of compatible clinical signs. Detection of para-
quat has oral LDso ranging from 22 to 262mg/kg. Clinical
quat in serum/plasma or urine samples is possible.
Chapter 19/ Other Pesticides
143
POSTMORTEM
of the malignant lymphoma study refuted an association
Postmortem detection of paraquat in tissues or urine is
with the use of 2,4-D because of numerous limitations
possible. Because paraquat accumulates in the lungs,
to the original study design (Carlo et al. 1992). An epi-
samples of this tissue are often positive for paraquat when
demiologic study of household dogs reported an increased
other tissues are negative. Pathologic changes in the lungs
risk of bladder cancer with topical insecticide use (Glick-
are also rather unique.
man et al. 1989). Studies have also associated an increase
in transitional cell carcinomas in Scottish terriers with
Management ofExposures
the use of topical spot-on fea contrl products and expo-
There are no antidotes for paraquat intoxication. If an
sure of lawns to herbicides (Glickman et al. 2004; Ragha-
animal is known to have just ingested paraquat, the
van et al. 2004). Unfortunately, there are not enough
goal is removal from the stomach of as much of the
       
toxicant as possible as quickly as possible to prevent
exposure and cancer or other chronic disease processes
absorption. Emesis should be induced or gastric lavage
in animals.
should be performed. The administration of activated
charcoal or Fuller's earth should be started immediately
Molluscicides
and continued every 4-6 hours for 3-7 days following
Metaldehyde
ingestion. Intravenous fuids and furosemide should be
Sources and Formutations
administered to create a forced diuresis, increasing the
Metaldehyde is found in a number of snail and slug baits
rate of excretion of paraquat via the kidneys (Cope et
that are commonly used in and around gardens. Baits are
al. 2004). Diuresis is most useful in the first 72 hours
available in liquid, powder, pellet, and granular formula-
after ingestion. Hemodialysis is another useful modality
tions. The concentration of metaldehyde in these products
in the treatment of paraquat ingestion, but it also must
ranges from 2% to 4%. Some states require that certain
be performed within the first 72 hours to improve out-
formulations be designed so that they are unattractive to
 comes. The lack of availability of hemodialysis to rmost
nontarget species such as dogs (Talcott 2004).
veterinarians makes this treatment option more theoreti-
cal than practical.
Kinetics and Toxicity
Once an animal presents with clinical signs of respira-
In the stomach, metaldehyde undergoes acid hydrolysis to
tory distress, treatment is limited to supportive care. Inter-
acetaldehyde, which is rapidly absorbed (Richardson et al.
estingly, oxygen therapy is not recommended as part of
2003). Metaldehyde is also absorbed from the stomach
the initial stabilization or treatment of paraquat ingestion.
intact. Metaldehyde is rapidly metabolized in the liver by
This is because oxygen increases the amount of O, formed
cytochrorme P450. Acetaldehyde is also rapidly metabo-
and O, forrmation is one of the main causes of pulmonary
lized to carbon dioxide. Less than 10% of absorbed met-
damage.
aldehyde is eliminated in the urine as parent compound.
The half-life of metaldehyde is unknown for dogs and cats,
Prognosis
but is approximately 27 hours in people.
The prognosis, as mentioned earlier, is dependent on the
degree of exposure. The prognosis is good if only gastro-
Mechanismof Action
intestinal signs occur. However, the prognosis is poor in
The mechanism of toxic action is unknown, but likely
patients developing multiple organ failure or pulmonary
involves alterations of neurotransmitters such as GABA,
impairment.
serotonin, and norepinephrine in the brain (Richardson
et al. 2003).
Herbicide Exposure and Cancer
The association between pesticide exposure and the occur-
Clinical Effects
rence of various human cancers has long been debated
SIGNS
and studied. Studies linking the occurrence of malignant
A comrmon presentation of intoxicated animals is termed
lymphoma in dogs with the owner's use of 2,4-D and
of seminomas in military working dogs in Vietnam to
 minutes postexposure. The most common clinical signs in
pesticide exposure raised the issue of an association in
dogs include tachycardia, nystagmus, hyperpnea, ataxia,
veterinary medicine (Hayes et al. 1990, 1991). A review
seizures, acidosis, cyanosis, diarrhea, dehydration, and
144
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
hypertherrmia (Richardson et al. 2003). Uncontrolled
Prognosis
hyperthermia can lead to DIC and multiple organ failure.
The overall prognosis is good with appropriate decontarmi-
Temporary blindness has been reported in dogs (Talcott
nation and control of muscle tremors and seizures.
 2004). Heightened sensitivity to noise, light, and touch is
also commonly noted. Signs are similar in other intoxi-
AVICIDES
cated species.
4-aminopyridine
LABORATORY
Sources and Formulations
There are no characteristic laboratory changes. Hemocon-
4-aminopyridine (4-AP) is registered as Avitrol@ by the
centration, alterations of renal and liver function (possibly
EPA for use against red- winged blackbirds, grackles, and
secondary to uncontrolled hyperthermia), and mild meta-
blackbirds in agricultural fields, pigeons, and sparrows in
bolic acidosis have been reported.
public buildings, and various birds around livestock
feeding pens. It is usually formulated as a grain (e.g., corn)
Diagnosis
bait with 0.5 to 3% active ingredient; it is also available
ANTEMORTEM
as a powder. It is a restricted use pesticide that can be used
A diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and occurrence
only by certified applicators. 4-AP repels birds by poison-
of compatible clinical signs. Laboratory detection of met-
ing a few individual members of a fock of birds, causing
aldehyde in stomach contents, serum/plasma and urine can
them to become hyperactive and to utter distress calls,
confirm exposure; such tests are commonly available in
which signal other birds to leave the site. Only a small
areas where metaldehyde-containing products are fre-
number of birds need to be affected to cause alarm in the
quently used.
rest of the fock. After one alarming exposure, birds will
usually not return to treated areas.
POSTMORTEM
There are no characteristic lesions noted. Analysis of GI
Kinetics and Toxicity
contents or urine can confirm exposure.
The chemical is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract. It is
rapidly metabolized by the liver and metabolites are
Management of Exposures
excreted via the kidneys (Schell 2004). 4-AP is highly
Treatment is directed toward decontamination, controlling
toxic for mammals and birds with LDsos ranging from
muscle tremors and seizures, correcting hyperthermia, and
3.7mg/kg for dogs to 20mg/kg for rodents. Horses have
 providing adequate cardiovascular and respiratory support
been intoxicated with as little as 3 mg/kg.
(Talcott 2004).
Standard decontamination protocols are recommended.
Mechanism of Action
 In asymptormatic animals, emetics can be used. In symp-
4-AP blocks potassiurm ion channels, which causes an
tomatic animals they are not recommended due to the risk
increased release of acetylcholine within synapses and
of aspiration. Alternatively, gastric lavage might be con-
enhanced nerve transmission.
sidered, particularly if the animal is anesthetized to control
muscle tremors or seizures. Activated charcoal with or
Clinical Effects
without a cathartic is indicated.
 Reported clinical signs include salivation, hyperexcitabil-
n ao  n  a s g  
ity, tremors, incoordination, tonic-clonic seizures, and
or seizures including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, gas
cardiac arrhthymias. Signs can begin within 15 minutes of
anesthetics, propofol, and methocarbamol. Methocarba-
exposure, refecting rapid absorption of the chemical from
mol is likely to be effective and should be tried first (Rich-
the gastrointestinal tract. Laboratory changes are nonspe-
ardson et al. 2003). Hyperthermia usually resolves one
cific and include alterations consistent with metabolic aci-
muscle trermors are controlled. If not, evaporative cooling,
dosis and possibly mild liver dysfunction.
cool water baths, or cool water enemas might be indicated.
Other treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Regular
Diagnosis
monitoring of blood gas concentrations, anion gap, and
An antemorterm or postmorterm diagnosis relies on a history
urine pH is recommended to identify metabolic acidosis if
of exposure and the occurrence of compatible clinical
present. Metabolic acidosis also tends to resolve once
signs and detection of 4-AP in suspect bait samples, GI
muscle tremors are controlled.
contents, liver, kidney, or urine.
Chapter 19/ Other Pesticides
145
ManagementofExposures
ChinicalEffects
Treatment involves minimizing absorption and controlling
Signs
CNS signs, along with other necessary symptomatic and
Signs appear rapidly in intoxicated animals (as soon as 30
supportive care. Standard and timely decontamination pro-
minutes after exposure). Signs are primarily related to
cedures are indicated. Benzodiazepines or barbiturates are
CNS stimulation: anxiety, frenzied behavior, hyperesthe-
recommended to contml seizures. Monitoring of acid-base
sia, and seizures. Vomiting, salivation, urination, defeca
status and ECGs are recommended. Tachyarrhythmias are
tion, tenesrmus, and hyperthermia also can occur. Seizures
controlled with β-blockers such as propanolol.
are tonic-clonic in nature and seizure episodes are inter-
spersed with periods of relative normalcy. Anoxia associ-
Prognosis
ated with continuous seizing leads to respiratory failure,
Animals surviving beyond 4 hours postexposure report-
corma, and death. Cardiac arrhthyrmias are reported in cats.
edly have a good prognosis.
Animals exposed to sublethal doses of fuoroacetate
exhibit severe depression, anorexia, listlessness, teeth
LARGE PREDATOR CONTROL
grinding, and weakness.
Laboratory
Sodium Fluoroacetate (Compound 1080)
Sources
cemia, hypocalcemia (ionized), acidosis, and elevations of
Sodium fuoroacetate is a naturally occurring compound
citrate. Cardiac arrhthymias in cats might be secondary to
found in several plant species in Africa, Australia, and
hypocalcemia.
South America. In the U.S., it has been used for predator
control (particularly coyotes) under strict guidelines. Its
Differentials
use is limited to inclusion in livestock protection collars
Diseases associated with seizures and CNS stimulation
(LPCs) primarily used on sheep and goats in several states
should be strongly considered as differentials. These
registered with the EPA (an EPA-approved certification
include numerous intoxications: strychnine, chlorinated
and training program is required) (Parton 2004). LPCs
hydrocarbon insecticides, bromethalin, lead, metaldehyde,
used on sheep and goats contain 30ml of 1% sodium fuo-
methylxanthines, prescription and illicit drugs (e.g--
   ) 
amphetamines, cocaine), cyanide, and tremorgenic
mycotoxins.
Kinetics and Toxicity
 Fluoroacetate is readily absorbed from the GI tract, lungs,
Diagnosis
and mucous membranes. The parent compound is consid-
A diagnosis is based upon a history of exposure to the
ered to be nontoxic, but it is metabolized to monofuoro-
cormpound, compatible clinical signs, and detection of the
acetic acid by hydrolysis. The monofuoroacetic acid
toxicant in source material or vomitus. Analysis of tissues
reacts with coenzyme A (CoA) to form fuoroacetyl CoA.
is possible, but the parent compound is typically present
Parent compound and metabolites are eliminated primarily
at very low levels and few laboratories offer sufficiently
via the kidneys.
sensitive tests. Postmortem findings are nonspecific
Fluoroacetate is highly toxic. Oral lethal dosages have
although rapid onset of rigor mortis is reported (Parton
been deterrmined for a number of animal species and range
2004).
from 0.06 to 0.2 mg/kg for dogs to 10 to 30mg/kg forbirds
(Parton 2004).
Management of Exposures
The rapidity of onset of clinical signs often precludes
Mechanism ofAction
institution of decontamination procedures. Administration
Fluoroacetyl CoA combines with oxaloacetate in the tri-
of activated charcoal is recommended, but this might
carboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and is converted to fuo-
require control of seizures first.
rocitrate. Fluorocitrate inhibits the enzyme aconitase and
Perhaps the most critical intervention is the IV admin-
the oxidation of citric acid, resulting in blockage of the
istration of sodium bicarbonate (Parton 2004). Although
cycle. This results in cellular energy depletion, increases
sodium bicarbonate administration might worsen hypocal-
in citrate and lactate concentrations and adecrease in
cemia and cause hyperkalemia, the benefits outweigh the
blood pH.
risks. Frequent monitoring of electrolytes is warranted
146
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Prognosis
pounds. In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th
ed., edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp.
The prognosis is typically poor.
1119-1144. Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.
McCurnin, D.M. and Richardson, R.C. 1991. Case-control
REFERENCES
study of canine malignant lymphoma: positive association
Bischoff, K., Brizzee-Buxton, B., Gatto, N. et al. 1998. Mali-
with dog owner's use of 2,4-dichlorophenyoxyacetic acid
cious paraquat poisoning in Oklahoma dogs. Vet Hurm
herbicides. J Natl Cancer Inst 83:1226-1231
Toxicol40(3):151-153
Mealey, Katrina L. 2006. Ivermectin: Macrolide antiparasitic
Carlo, G.L., Cole, P, Miller, A.B., Munro, IC., Soloman,
agents. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by
K.R., and Squire, R.A. 1992. Review of a study reporting
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 785-794.
an association between 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and
St. Louis: Saunders.
canine malignant lymphoma: report of an expert panel.
Merola, Valentina M., Khan Safdar A., and Gwaltney-Brant,
Regul ToxicolPharmacol 16:245-252
Sharon M. 2009. Ivermectin toxicosis in dogs: A retrospec-
Cope, R.B., Bildfell, R.J., Valentine, B.A. et al. 2004. Fatal
tive study. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Asso-
paraquat poisoning in seven Portland, OR dogs. Vet Hum
ciation 45(3):106-111.
Toxicol 46(5):258-264
Oehme, F. and Pickrell, J.A. 2004. Dipyridyl herbicides. In
Crandell, D.E., Weinberg, G.L. 2009. Moxidectin toxicosis in
Plumlee, K.H., ed. Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, Pp.
a puppy successfully treated with intravenous lipids. J Vet
146-148. St. Louis: Mosby.
Emerg Crit Car 19(2):181-186
Osweiler, G.D. 1996. Toxicology: The National Veterinary
Dorman, D.C. 1990. Diethyltoluamide (DEET) insect repel-
Medical Series, Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins.
lant toxicosis.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Parton, K.H. 2004. Sodium fuoroacetate. In Plumlee, K.H.,
20:387-392.
ed. Clinicat Veterinary Toxicology, Pp. 451-454. St. Louis:
2004.
Diethyltoluamide. In Plumlee, K.H., ed.
Mosby.
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, Pp. 180-182. St. Louis:
Raghavan, M., Knapp, D., Dawson, M.H., Bonney, PL.,
Mosby.
and Glickman, L.T. 2004. Topical fea and tick pesticides
Gerken, D.F. 1995. Lawn care products. In Bonagura, J.D.,
and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
ed.Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xll:Smalt Animat
bladder in Scottish terriers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 225:
Practice, Pp. 248-249. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
389-394.
Glickman, L.T., Raghavan, M., Knapp, D.W., Bonney, PL.,
Richardson, J.A., Welch, S.L., Gwaltney-Brant, S.M. et al.
and Dawson, M.H. 2004. Herbicide exposure and the risk
2003.Metaldehyde toxicosis in dogs.Compend Contin Edu
of transitional cell carcinoma in Scottish Terriers. J Am Vet
Vet 25(5):376-380.
Med Assoc 224: 1290-1297.
Riegart, JR. and Roberts, J.R. 1999. Recognition and Man-
Glickman, L.T., Schofer, F.S., McKee, L.J., Reif, JS., and
agement of Pesticide Poisonings, EPA 735-R-98-003.
Goldschmidt, M.H. 1989. Epidemiologic study of insecti-
Roder, Joseph D. 2004. Antiparasiticals. In Veterinary Clini-
cide exposures, obesity, and risk of bladder cancer in house.
cal Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 302-305.
hold dogs. J Toxicol Environ Heaith 28:407-414.
St.Louis: Mosby.
Gramer, I., Leidolf, R., Doring, B., Klintzsch, S., Kramer,
Schell, M.M. 2004. 4-aminopyridine. In Plumlee, K.H., ed.
E.M., Yalcin, E., Petzinger, E., and Geyer, J. 2010. Breed
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, Pp. 443-442. St. Louis,
distribution of the nt230(del4) MDR1 mutation in dogs.
Mosby.
Veterinary Journal, in press.
Talcott, PA. 2004. Metaldehyde. In Plumlee, K.H., ed.
Hayes, H.M., Tarone, R.E., Cantor, D.M., Jessen, C.R.,
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, Pp. 182-183. St. Louis,
McCurnin, D.M., and Richardson, R.C. 1991. Case-control
Mosby.
study of canine malignant lymphoma: Positive association
Welch, S. 2004. Boric acid. In Plumlee, K.H., ed. Clinicaf
with dog owner's use of 2,4-dichlorophenyoxyacetic acid
Veterinary Toxicology, pp. 143-145. St. Louis, Mosby
herbicides. J Natl Cancer Inst 83:1226-1231.
Yeary, R.A. 2000. Lawn care products. In Bonagura, J.D., ed.
Hayes, H.M., Tarone, R.E., Casey, H.W., and Huxsoll, D.L.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll: Small Animal
1990. Excess of seminomas observed in Vietnam service
Practice, Pp. 221-222. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
U.S. military working dogs. J Natf Cancer Inst 82:
Yeary, Roger A. 2006. Miscellanerious herbicides, fungicides,
1042-1046.
and nematocides. In Smalf Animal Toxicofogy, 2nd ed.,
Lanusse, Carlos E., Lifschitz, Adrian L., Imperiale, and Fer-
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, Pp.
nanda A. 2009. Macrocyclic lactones: Endectocide com-
732-743. St.Louis: Saunders.
Plants
20
Joanna Delaporte and Charlotte Means
INTRODUCTION
anthraquinone glycosides, which are potent purgatives
This chapter covers common household and yard plants
concentrated in the latex of the leaves. Chewing on Aloe
that might cause household pet intoxication. There are a
vera leaves can result in severe diarrhea. Fluid and elec-
few details to keep in mind when managing a plant expo-
trolyte imbalances may need to be managed if dehydration
sure. First, the plant must be positively identified. Potential
develops.
sources of identification include local plant nurseries,
garden stores, university extension offices, or veterinary
Asparagus spp.
diagnostic laboratories. If the whole plant cannot be trans-
Also called asparagus ferm, these plants contain steroidal
ported, a small branch with leaves, fruit, fowers, or nuts
saponins, with the highest concentration being present in
should be obtained. Ideally, the scientific name of the plant
 the berries. These plants are considered a contact allergen
rather than the common name should be sought, because
and can cause irritation after dermal contact. After inges-
common names can be shared among totally unrelated
tion, signs such as salivation, vormiting, and diarrhea can
plants. Next, it is important to keep in mind that even
occur Symptomatic treatment for gastrointestinal signs
nontoxic plants can cause signs of digestive upset such as
may be needed.
vomiting, diarrhea, and mild nausea or drooling ifthey are
ingested. Also, the toxicity of plant material can vary tre-
Begonia spp.
 mendously depending on growing conditions. Finally, in
 In contrast to plants that contain only insoluble calcium
cases where signs have already developed, decontamina-
oxalate, Begonia (Figure 20.2) contains both insoluble
tion by induction of ermesis may be contraindicated.
calcium oxalates and soluble oxalates (soluble salts of
There are several plant-related intoxications that are
oxalic acid such as sodium, potassium, ammonium, and
discussed in Chapter 24, "Food-Associated Intoxications,"
acid potassium oxalates). The oxalate crystals are espe-
including Allium spp. (onions, garlic), Persea americana
cially concentrated in the tubers and stems. Insoluble
(avocado), grapes and raisins, and macadamia nuts. Addi-
calcium oxalate crystals may cause dermal and mucous
tional plant-related intoxications are discussed in Chapter
membrane irritation. Signs that develop can include saliva-
21, "Dietary Supplerments and Herbs."
tion and vomiting.
Soluble oxalate intoxication is poorly documented in
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
[au ue[d jo Anuenb ael au on anp adoad no siad
required to induce toxicosis; livestock poisonings are more
Aloe spp.
commonly reported. In animals, nausea, rapid respiration,
Aloe vera (Figure 20.l) is also known as A. barbadensis.
and stupor occur early followed by vomiting, bloody diar-
This plant is different from American aloe. Aloe contains
rhea, coma, and tetany due to hypocalcemia. Oliguria,
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
147
148
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Figure 20.1. Aloe (A/oe vera)
Figure 20.3. Ornamental Pepper (Capsicum sp.)
(photo courtesy TD Brant).
Capsicum spp.
Capsicum spp. (Figure 20.3) includes chili peppers and
other pepper plants that are usually grown in gardens for
food or as ornamental plants. The toxin in pepper plants
is capsaicin. The highest concentration is found in the
fruits, especially in the seeds. Hot peppers are irritating,
causing a burning sensation and possibly oral blisters
when ingested. Large exposures can cause vomiting and
diarrhea. In experiments using rats, very high doses have
caused convulsions. Effects of capsaicin are transient and
 may be relieved by dilution with water or milk or fushing
the mouth with water. Demulcents and pain control might
also be indicated.
Chrysanthemumspp.
Figure 20.2. Begonia (Begonia sp.) (photo courtesy
Chrysanthemum plants (Figure 20.4) contain a toxin called
TD Brant).
arteglasin A, a sesquiterpene lactone. Plant ingestion is
associated with hypersensitivity and allergic contact
dermatitis.
oxaluria, albuminuria, or hematuria can occur due to for-
mation of calcium oxalate crystals in the kidney. Treat-
Clematis spp.
 rment of suspected intoxications has included administration
Clematis is also known as virgin's bower and traveler's
of parenteral calcium salts to correct hypocalcemia as well
joy. These plants cause intense GI irritation, vomiting, and
as intravenous fuid support. These plants are rarely associ-
diarrhea. Protoanemonin, which is related to the blister
ated with poisonings in companion animals.
beetle vesicant cantharidin, is the toxin. Protoanemonin is
Chapter 20/ Plants
149
Figure 20.4. Chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum sp.)
Figure 20.5. Hosta (Hosta sp.) (photo courtesy TD
(photo courtesy TD Brant).
Brant).
a subepidermal vesicant, so plants can cause profound
or 500-600 leaves, to surpass levels that have been toxic
dermal irritation on contact. When ingested, plants are
in animal experiments.
bitter and iritating. Excessive salivation, vomiting, and
Poinsettia plants do contain an irritating milky sap. Pets
diarhea are expected signs. Dried plant material contains
that chew on the plants develop hypersalivation, vomiting,
a polymerized form of protoanemonin, called anemonin,
anorexia, and depression. Signs are usually self-limiting
which is not considered to be toxic. Thus, dried plants are
and require minimal treatment. Further GI irritation may
considered nontoxic. Treatment includes gastrointestinal
be reduced by limiting food and water intake for 1 to 2
 protectants, antiemetics, and other symptomatic and sup-
hours.
 portive care.
Gypsophilia paniculata
Cyclamen spp.
Gypsophilia panicutata is commonly known as Baby's
Cyclamen species are native to the Mediterranean and may
breath, and is often used in foral arrangements. Gypso-
be known as Persian violet or sow's bread. The toxin
philia exposures can case dermal irritation due to contact
contained in Cyctamen is a triterpenoid saponin. The
allergen. Ingestion of the plant may lead to vomiting and
saponin is found mainly in the roots, with a small amount
diarrhea.
 in leaves. Ingestion of this plant may lead to nausea, vom-
iting, and diarrhea. If larger quantities are ingested, the
Hosta spp.
saponin may be absorbed, causing convulsions, seizures,
Members of the Hosta genus are also known as hosta lily
cardiac dysrhythmias, and paralysis. Supportive treatment
or August lily (Figure 20.5). Some species contain sapo-
is typically all that is needed to ensure recovery.
nins, which can cause vomiting, diarrhea, depression, and
anorexia. They are likely to cause a problem only if con-
Euphorbia pulcherrima
sumed in quantity.
Euphorbia pulcherrima is commonly known as poinsettia.
The toxicity of poinsettia has been greatly exaggerated. In
Hlex spp.
one study using rats, ingestions of up to 15 g/kg for 1 week
Holly (Figure 20.6) grows as a small shrub outdoors or
did not cause behavior changes, clinical signs, or postrmor-
can be brought indoors for holiday decoration. A variety
tem lesions. However, one group of rats in the study
 of biologically active compounds have been identified in
showed a significant increase in thyroid weight. As an
 Hlex spp. including tannins, caffeine, theobromine, triter-
estirmate of toxicity, human poison experts have calculated
 penes, and a hemolytic saponin, among others. With small
that a 50-pound child would need to ingest about 1.251b,
ingestions vomiting and diarrhea can occur. Anorexia,
150
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Figure 20.6. American Holly (llex opaca); insert:
Closer view of leaves and berries (photo courtesy
TD Brant).
Figure 20.7. Dieffenbachia (Dieffenbachia sp.).
head shaking, and lip smacking can also occur. Flushing
the oral cavity with water will reduce mucosal irritation.
Insoluble Calcium Oxalate-containing Plants
A number of plants including Dieffenbachia spp. (Figure
20.7), Zantedeschia spp.,Epipremnun aureum,Philoden-
dron spp., and Spathiphyllum spp. (Figure 20.8) contain
insoluble calcium oxalate crystals (Spoerke and Smolinske
1990). Chewing on calcium-oxalate containing plants
causes mechanical irritation to mucous membranes of the
GI tract. As the plant cells are crushed or broken open,
needlelike crystals called raphides are released and sur-
munding tissues are penetrated by the crystals. The reac-
tion may be rapid, causing oral pain and swelling of the
lips and tongue. The iritation may extend to the esophagus
and stomach. However, since the plant cells must be
brmken open, effects beyond the oral cavity are unlikely
with small ingestions. The animal may be inappetent for
several days following exposure due to oral discomfort.
Vomiting and diarrhea occur rarely. Treatment for insolu-
ble calcium oxalate crystal ingestion is often not needed.
Dairy products have been recormmended to ease the oral
discomfort (Means 2004). In rare severe cases, a soft diet,
pain control, NSAIDs, or sedation may be useful.
Ornamental Bulbs
Ornarmental bulb plants include tulips (Tutipa spp., Figure
Figure 20.8. Peace Lily (Spathiphyllum sp.) (photo
courtesy TD Brant).
20.9), daffodils (Narcissus spp.), hyacinth (Hyacinthus
Chapter 20/ Plants
151
Figure 20.9. Tulip (Tulipa sp.).
Figure 20.10. Castor Bean plant (Ricinus communis):
insert: Castor beans (photo courtesy TD Brant).
orientalis), spring-blooming crocus (Crocus spp., not to be
sis of mucosa of stomach and small intestine. However,
confused with autumn-blooming crocus, Colchicum, see
 castor bean intoxication is associated with multiple organ
below), and iris (Iris spp.). All parts of the bulb, especially
effects: heart, stomach, lungs, liver, kidneys, and pancreas
the roots, fesh, and seed capsules contain pentacyclic ter-
can be affected.
penoids, which are irritating and cause gastroenteritis.
If the seeds are chewed and swallowed, the most
Clinical signs include salivation, abdorminal pain, profuse
common sign is severe diarrhea within about 6 hours
diarrhea with or without blood, and oral lesions.Signs may
(Albretson et al. 2000). The diarrhea may be hemorrhagic.
last hours to days. Treatment includes correction of fuid
Other signs include hypotension, depression, weakness,
and electrolyte imbalances and possibly gastrointestinal
trembling, sweating, vomiting, abdominal pain, anorexia,
protectants.
hyperthermia, ataxia, hypersalivation, recumbency, and
tachycardia. Signs can be delayed as long as 24 to 48 hours
Ricinus communis
after exposure. Death is attributed to hypovolermic shock.
Ricinus communis (Figure 20.10) is also known as castor
Treatment involves early decontamination in animals
bean or castor oil plant. The principal toxins are ricinine
 not exhibiting clinical signs. Symptomatic animals need to
(or ricin) and toxalbumin. The seeds, when well-chewed
be stabilized first. Diazepam may be used to control sei-
and ingested in amounts as low as 0.01% of body weight,
zures. Intravenous fuid therapy, such as Ringer's lactate
can cause severe intoxication (Albretson et al. 2000).
solution, is recommended to prevent or treat hypovolemia
Intact seeds are expected to pass through the gastrointes-
and to maintain hydration and electrolyte balance. Gastro-
tinal tract with no negative effects. Leaves or pericarps of
intestinal protectants such as sucralfate, famotidine, and
fruits require about 2% of body weight (ricin) ingested to
kaolin-pectin might be indicated to protect and promote
cause intoxication. Ricin is water-soluble and is not found
healing of the gastrointestinal tract. Antiemetics and pain
in castor oil (Mouser et al. 2007). Heat and aging reduce
management might also be needed. Frequent CBC, serum
its toxicity. When ingested, ricin is poorly absorbed and
chermistry, and electrolytes rmonitoring is recormmended to
its main site of action is the digestive epithelium. Ricinine
assess the extent of organ damage.
appears to have some action on neuroreceptors, since sei-
Schlumbergera spp.
zures and muscular weakness have been seen in some
animals that have chewed and swallowed castor beans
These plants are cormmonly called Christmas cactus.
(Albretson et al. 20o0). The toxins cause edema and necro-
Ingestion may result in mild gastrointestinal upset although
152
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
they are considered to be nontoxic for cats and dogs. If
mild gastrmintestinal signs occur, withholding food and
water for 1 or 2 hours should be sufficient.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Cardiac Glycosides
Several plants contain cardiac glycosides. Cardiac glyco-
side inhibit cell mermbrane sodium-potassium ATPase,
resulting in decreased electrical conductivity. This can
result in the occurrence of a variety of cardiac arrhythmias,
both tachy- and bradyarrhythmias, along with abdominal
pain and diarrhea. Death can be rapid or delayed for up to
2 days. In general, standard decontamination protocols
should be followed when possible and appropriate. Treat-
ment of cardiac arrhythmias varies depending on the spe-
cific arrhythmia noted. The electrmlytes status of affected
animals should be monitored and fuids and electrmlytes
Figure 20.11. Lily-of-the-Valley flowers (Convallaria
adrministered as needed. Treatment with digoxin immune
majalis).
Fab (Digibind@) might be helpful but should be adminis-
tered as soon as possible after exposure for maximum
efficacy. Further information on the effects of cardiac gly-
cosides can be found in Chapter 12, “Cardiovascular
System," and Chapter 27, "Prescription Drugs.'
Adeniumobesum
This plant is known as desert rose and mock azalea. About
30 cardiac glycosides have been isolated from this plant.
The plant has been a source for an arrow poison in Africa.
There have been no reported cases of animal intoxications.
However, the plant is toxic enough to warrant caution if
exposure occurs. If sufficient amounts of the plant are
ingested, cardiac arrhythmias, heart block, and death may
develop. Treatment would be similar to other cardiac gly.
coside intoxications.
Convallaria majalis
Lily-of-the-valley is the cormmon name for Convallaria
majalis (Figure 20.11), which contains approximately 38
cardenolides and various saponins. All parts of the plant
are toxic, with the greatest toxin concentration in the rhi-
zomes. Signs are as one would expect from cardiac glyco-
Figure 20.12. Foxglove (Digitalis sp.).
sides: vomiting, diarrhea, cardiac arrhythmias, and death.
Treatment considerations are as outlined above.
where the fowers are kept can be a risk if ingested. The
Digitalis purpurea
earliest signs of intoxication include marked weakness,
Foxglove is the common name for Digitalis purpurea
stupor, and diarrhea with or without blood. The heartbeat
(Figure 20.12). The plant contains the cardenolides digoxin
at first may be loud and strong, but then later become faint
and digitoxin. All plant parts are toxic, especially the
 and barely perceptible, eventually regressing to ventricular
seeds. The dried plant is also toxic. Even water from vases
fibrillation. Vomiting, increased salivation, and more fre-
Chapter 20/ Plants
153
Figure 20.13. Oleander (Nerium oleander).
Figure 20.14. Azalea (Rhododendron sp.)
quent urination can occur. Treatment is as for other cardiac
glycoside-containing plants.
tain rosebay; red laurel; and great laurel, among others),
Nerium oleander
Katmia spp. (mountain laurel), and Pieris japonica (Japa-
Nerium oleander (Figure 20.13) is a shrub that is used as
nese pieris). These plants contain diterpenoid grayanotox-
a landscaping plant in warmer parts of the United States,
ins, which are present in all parts of the plant, although
such as Califomia. Oleander is extremely toxic; ingestion
their concentrations vary between plants. Grayanotoxins
of as little as 0.005% body weight can be fatal. Oleander
increase sodium channel permeability, which opens cells
is highly poisonous to birds. Both fresh and dried plant are
to sodium instead of calcium. The channels are slow to
toxic.
close and the cell remains depolarized. Significant effects
Oleander contains the cardenolides oleandrin, which is
occur in the heart, skeletal muscles, and CNS. Increased
concentrated in the leaves, fowers, and seeds. The plant
reflexes, increased vagal tone, hypotension, and cardiac
also contains terpenoids. The terpenoids may be respon-
arrhythmias occur. Signs include profuse salivation,
sible for the gastrointestinal irritation seen. Weakness,
anorexia, repeated swallowing, persistent retching or vom-
depression, anorexia, vomiting, abdorminal pain, hyper-
iting (possibly projectile), severe abdominal pain, and
salivation, and diarrhea are likely in cats and dogs. Patients
bloat. Severe cases may exhibit weakness and inability or
might exhibit signs for many hours and then recover.
reluctance to stand. Less frequent cardiac effects include
However, patients can die suddenly from cardiac arrest
bradycardia and AV block. Acute effects last about 24
with few preliminary signs. Patients should be monitored
hours. Weakness and other neurologic effects can last 2 to
closely with particular attention paid to heart rate and
3 days. Treatment includes appropriate and timely decon-
rhythm and electrolyte concentrations. Hyperkalemia and
tamination and symptomatic and supportive care.
hypocalcemia may develop. Treatment considerations are
as outlined above. Intravenous fuids and electrolytes are
Kalanchoe spp.
provided as needed.
Kalanchoe (Figure 20.15) may also be called by another
scientific name, Bryophyllum. Mother-of-millions is one
Grayanotoxins
common name. The significant toxin in Kalanchoe is
Several plants contain cardiotoxins called grayanotoxins.
lanceotoxin A, which is a bufadienolide cardiotoxin.
These include Rhododendron (azalea, Figure 20.14; moun-
These cardiotoxins are similar to the cardiac glycosides
154
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Melia azedarach
This plant is known by rmany common names, including
chinaberry, Persian lilac, Texas umbrella tree, among
others. The plant is native to Asia, but has become wide-
spread as a landscape plant across the southem United
States. Several meliatoxins are present in all parts of the
plant, but especially in the fruit. Only the berries have been
known to cause intoxication; toxicity of the berries varies
by location and species of plant. The toxic dosage is
approximately 0.2-0.3 % body weight (Hare et al. 1997).
Five to six fruits were lethal to a young dog within 48
hours (Barr 2006). Clinical signs are variable and include
hyperthermia, hypotherrmia, tachycardia, bradycardia,
dyspnea, stranguria, muscle rigidity, mydriasis, and miosis.
Early signs include hypersalivation, vormiting, anorexia,
and diarrhea. If large enough quantities of berries have
been ingested, muscle weakness, ataxia, seizures, and
paralysis develop. Excitement occurs early, with paralysis
developing later. It is possible for sudden death to occur
Figure 20.15. Kalanchoe (Kalanchoe sp.) (photo
as the only clinical sign. For a recent exposure where signs
courtesy SM Gwaltney-Brant).
have not yet developed, emesis helps to remove berries
from the stomach followed by activated charcoal admin-
istration. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive,
because no antidote exists. In severe cases, sedatives and
fuid-electrolyte therapy should be used. Animals that
found in foxglove, oleander, and lily-of-the-valley Inges-
recover usually do so within 24-48 hours.
tion of as little as 1% body weight can cause intoxication.
The fowers are especially toxic. Natural poisonings are
Taxus spp.
most commonly reported during the plants’ fowering
Members of Taxus spp. (Figure 20.16), also called yews,
season. Known intoxications have occured in dogs and
are shrubs found throughout the United States. Bark,
rabbits.
leaves, and seeds are toxic, but not the red fesh of the fruit.
Signs include vormiting, diarrhea, ataxia, trembling, and
The principal toxins are taxines, which cause cardiac con-
sudden death due to cardiac failure. Other signs that have
duction disturbances due to interference to the ion chan-
been reported include tachycardia, hypertension, dilated
nels of cardiac muscle. All domestic animals and birds are
pupils, nystagmus, delirium, weakness, tetany, mild sei-
at risk for intoxication.
Zures, depression, anorexia, hypersalivation, and mucoid
The plant seems to be more toxic in winter Ingestion
to bloody diarrhea. The diarrhea may persist several days
of as little as 1 ounce of leaves can be lethal to a dog (Barr
without other signs. Cardiac effects typically require a
2006). Both fresh and dried leaves are dangerous. Signs
larger ingestion and signs include increased or decreased
exhibited by intoxicated dogs include vomiting, muscle
heart rate, labored respiration or grunting, arrhythmias,
tremors, seizures, panting, dilated pupils, and significant
heart block, severe weakness. Serum chemistry abnormali-
tachycardia. Stressing the patient can cause sudden col-
ties include increased BUN, creatinine, and glucose
lapse and death. Sudden death can occur even days after
concentrations.
ingestion. Once signs develop it is usually too late for
Treatment of Kalanchoe exposures includes appropriate
effective treatment due to the peracute nature of the intoxi-
 and timely decontamination and symptomatic and sup-
cation. However, early decontamination and administra-
 portive care. Digibind@ has not been evaluated for treat-
tion of atropine to reverse bradycardia and heart block
 ment of Kalanchoe intoxications. Atropine or propranolol
should be considered. Syrup of ipecac should not be used
can be used to increase the heart rate and reverse heart
to induce emesis due to the potential for vagal nerve stimu-
block.
lation to exacerbate the cardiac effects of yew.
Chapter 20/ Plants
155
Figure 20.16. Japanese yew (Taxus sp.).
Figure 20.17. Sago Palm (Cycas revoluta) (photo
courtesy TD Brant).
LIVER
care. The latter might include the use of hepatoprotectants
Cycas spp. and Zamia spp.
such as N-acetylcysteine, silimaryin or SAMe, although
Members of Cycas and Zamia are referred to as cycad
the efficacy of such therapy is unknown.
palms, which include common names such as sago palm
(Figure 20.17), false sago palm, and fem palm. There
Lantanaspp.
are two types of toxins present in cycads: cycasin and
Members of Lantana (Figure 20.18) are also known as
macrozamin. The seeds, leaves, and pulp of the cones
shrub verbena, yellow/red/wild sage, and bunchberry. The
are primarily hepatotoxic, but the digestive and neuro-
toxins are triterpenes. There are some varieties much less
muscular systerms can also be affected. Prolonged con-
toxic than others because their triterpene structure is dif-
sumption of the seeds can cause neurologic signs and
ferent. All parts of the plants, especially the unripe berries,
lesions. The fruits and seeds of some species remain
are toxic, but not all species are toxic. Fully ripe fruits are
toxic even after being cooked. The fruits seerm to be
not toxic, but partially ripe berries can be. All animal
especially enticing to dogs. In some reported intoxica-
species are at risk with ingestions of as little as 1% body
tions, parts of the plant have been inappropriately used
weight causing intoxication. Signs associated with intoxi-
as an altemative medicine.
cation include Gl irritation, vomiting, diarrhea, weakness,
Signs that develop after cycad ingestion include
ataxia, depression, cholestasis, hyperbilirubinemia, hepatic
persistent vomiting, hypersalivation, excessive water con-
damage, lethargy, cyanosis, labored breathing, depressed
sumption, anorexia, diarrhea or constipation, icterus,
tendon reflexes, photophobia, coma, and death.
thrombocytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, increase of liver
Triterpenoids cause damage to the bile canaliculi with
enzymes, elevations of BUN and creatinine, and coagu-
subsequent development of obstructive cholangitis. They
lopathy. Hepatic necrosis and subsequent fibrosis can
also irritate the Gl mucosa and cause diarrhea or consti-
develop. Treatment primarily involves appropriate and
pation. Subacute or chronic exposures are associated with
timely decontamination and symptomatic and supportive
photosensitization. The second or third day after exposure,
156
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Figure 20.19. Easter Lily (Lilium longiflorum)
Figure 20.18. Lantana (Lantana sp.) (photo
courtesy TD Brant).
icterus and photosensitization may be noticed as well as
diarrhea with or without blood. Deaths from Lantana
toxicoses are mainly due to hepatic and renal failure.
 Treatment includes appropriate and timely decontamina-
tion, fuids, and glucose and electrolyte administration.
Symptomatic and supportive might include the use of
hepatoprotectants such as N-acetylcysteine, silimaryin, or
SAMe although the efficacy of such therapy is unknown.
Once signs of liver damage are present, treatment of
animals is usually not successful.
URINARY SYSTEM
Liliumspp.
Figure 20.20. Tiger Lily (Lilium tigrinum).
Lilium species including L pardalinum, L. candidum, L.
speciosum, L. tancifolium (rubrum or Japanese showy
lilies), L. longiforum (Easter lily, Figure 20.19), L. tigri-
within 2 hours of exposure (Langston 2002). Vormiting
num (Tiger lily, Figure 20.20), and Hemerocallis (day
may resolve, but anorexia and depression continue as
lilies, Figure 20.21) are nephrotoxic to cats. Peace lily
BUN, creatinine, potassium, and phosphorus concentra-
(Spathiphylium, Figure 20.8) and calla lily (Zantedeschia)
tions rise 24 to 72 hours after exposure. Epithelial casts
 are not true lilies and are not associated with renal issues,
and glucose may be detected in the urine within 18 hours.
although they do contain insoluble calcium oxalate crys-
Renal failure is due to an unknown mechanism causing
tals (see earlier discussion). All true lily plant parts are
renal tubular necrosis. Fortunately, in cats surviving the
toxic to cats, and cats are the only species known to be
acute crisis, affected renal tubular epithelial cells can
sensitive to lily ingestion. Ingestion of less than one leaf
 regenerate since the basement membrane remains intact.
can cause severe toxicosis. Clinical signs include early
Treatment involves early decontamination. Fluid diuresis
vomiting, anorexia, and depression; these signs can begin
using LRS at twice maintenance rates (approximately
Chapter 20/ Plants
157
30ml/kg/day) should be started as soon as possible and
continued for at least 48 hours. Baseline BUN and creati-
nine should be obtained and rechecked daily. Creatinine
levels are often disproportionately high when compared to
SUN
BUN. As long as BUN and creatinine are high, Huid diure-
sis is continued. If treatment is delayed, there is an
increased risk for renal failure and death. Anuric cats have
a grave prognosis, but renal function has been restored
after peritoneal or hemodialysis dialysis in some cases
(Langston 2002).
Soluble Oxalate-Containing Plants
Rhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum, Figure 20.22) contains
anthraquinones and soluble oxalates in small quantities
(about 0.28% dry weight of leaf material) (Peterson 2006).
Oxalis spp. (sorrel, wood sorrel, shamrock, soursob,
Berrmuda buttercup, and Irish shamrock) can contain up to
16% of dry matter as soluble oxalates.
Most of the signs associated with rhubarb leaf ingestion
Figure 20.21. Day Lily (Hemerocallis sp.) (photo
can be attributed to the cathartic action of anthraquinones.
courtesy SM Gwaltney-Brant).
In theory, the soluble oxalates can precipitate within the
renal tubules causing kidney damage. However, renal oxa-
losis is unlikely to occur unless very large amounts of plant
material are ingested. If a quantity large enough is ingested,
the oxalates can cause hypocalcemia in addition to renal
oxalate precipitation. Signs typically are limited to vomit-
ing although hypocalcemic tetany and signs related to
renal failure are possible.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Brunfelsia spp.
There are a number of species in the Brunfeisia genus
(Figure 20.23) and a variety of common names. B. pauci-
fora is known by the common names of yesterday-
today-tomorrow, morning-noon-and-night or yesterday-
and-today.Brunfelsia americana is called lady-of-the-
night or Franciscan rain tree. These are primarily outdoor
ornamental plants but are sometimes used indoors. Dogs
seem to find the fruits appealing and as a result have a
higher risk of exposure. The toxin in the plant has not been
identified but neuroexitatory and neurodepressant agents
are present. Typical signs include anxiety and exciterment
followed by coughing, gagging, sneezing, and nystagrmus.
Initial signs are followed within a few hours by trermors
and tetanic or paddling seizures, which can be precipitated
by external stimuli. Tremors and seizures can last hours to
days with full recovery taking up to a week or longer.
Treatment involves appropriate and timely decontarmina-
Figure 20.22. Rhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum)
tion and symptomatic and supportive care. Control of
158
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Figure 20.23. Yesterday-Today-Tomorrow
Figure 20.24. Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
(Brunfelsia sp.).
(photo courtesy SM Gwaltney-Brant).
With small ingestions, treatment might not be needed.
central nervous system excitation is achieved with diaze-
If signs do occur symptormatic and supportive care is
pam or pentobarbital.
needed to contml vomiting and abdominal pain. Cleft
palate and arthrogryposis are possible teratogenic effects
Laburnum anagyroids
in pregnant animals exposed to the plant more
This plant is also known as golden rain tree, golden chain
chronically.
tree, scotch laburnum, and alpine golden chain. It contains
quinolizidine alkaloids, some of which are teratogenic
Lycopersicon lycopersicum and Solanum spp.
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001). The greatest concentration of the
The toxins found in tomatoes (L. lycopersicum, Figure
 alkaloids is found in the seeds, but the toxins are present
20.24) and Sotanum spp. (many species and cormmon
throughout all parts of the plant. The leaves, seed pods,
names, but many are referred to as nightshades) are ste-
and seeds are toxic. Ingestion of plant material equaling
rmidal glycoalkaloids. These include C-solanine and C-
0.1%-1% body weight is toxic. Horses appear to be the
chaconine. Although for most species all plant parts are
most sensitive species to intoxication, but poisonings have
considered potentially toxic with the exception of ripe
been reported in dogs as well.
fruits, the immature fruits typically contain the highest
The main toxins are rapidly absorbed and excreted and
toxin concentrations. However, even the ripe fruits are
clinical signs would be expected to develop rapidly after
poisonous for some Solanum spp. Uncooked sprouted or
a toxic dose of the plant has been consumed. The most
green potatoes are also toxic.
cormmon signs seen in dogs are a centrally mediated vom-
The glycoalkaloids are irritating to the gastrointestinal
iting and abdominal pain, and occasionally weakness,
tract and large ingestions can cause dilated pupils, tachy-
depression, ataxia, and tachycardia. Sweating, delirium,
cardia, and central nervous systerm depression, and respira-
excitation, tonic-clonic convulsions, and death are
tory difficulty. In severe cases, dilated pupils, muscle
reported. The signs are usually short-lived due to rapid
tremors, and incoordination may develop. Treatment
excretion of the alkaloid, cystisine. If a large quantity of
involves appropriate and timely decontamination and
seeds has been consumed, myocardial degeneration and
symptormatic and supportive care. Solanine can cause mild
death can occur.
cholinergic effects due to cholinesterase inhibition, and
Chapter 20/ Plants
159
atropine can be used to reverse such effects in severe
thiosulfate (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Amyl nitrite, which
cases.
is used in intoxicated humans, is not recommended for use
in animals. Nitrite forms methemoglobin, which combines
Nicotiana spp.
with cyanide to form cyanmethermoglobin. Thiosulfate
 Nicotiana spp., include tobacco and tree tobacco. These
acts as a sulfur donor for the conversion of cyanide to
plants contain the pyridine alkaloids nicotine and nomico-
thiocyanate by the action of the enzyme rhodanese, which
tine. The alkaloids are rapidly absorbed across skin,
is then rapidly excreted in the urine. Hydrmxycobalamin
mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract. All parts of
(vitamin B12a) has also been used as an effective
the plant are toxic. Nicotine directly affects the brain and
antidote.
muscles initially causing stimulation followed by paralysis
due to a depolarizing blockade. The minimum lethal dose
MULTISYSTEMIC EFFECTS
in dogs and cats is 20-100mg. The cardiovascular, urinary,
and reproductive systems can also be affected.
Colchicumautumnale
Initial signs include excitement, bradycardia, and a slow
Colchicum autumnaleis known as autumn crmcus, meadow
respiration rate. Subsequent signs can include depression,
saffron, and naked lady, and should not be confused with
hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea, rapid and labored
spring-blooming crocuses (Crocus spp, see earlier discus-
breathing, ataxia, tremors, severe weakness, muscle
sion). Colchicum autumnale contains the toxin colchicine,
twitching or trembling (beginning at the shoulders and
which is present in all parts of the plant with the greatest
then extending to the whole body), stiff-legged gait, and
concentrations in the fowers and seeds. Glory lily (Glo-
protrusion of the third eyelid. Death is most typically from
riosa superba) is also known to contain colchicine and
respiratory failure. Signs are typically short-lived and last
other alkaloids similar to those in Colchicum autumnale.
5-6 hours; the prognosis is good if an animal survives the
Colchicine is quite toxic. Ingestion of as little as 08 mg/kg
first 12 hours after onset of signs. Treatment involves
body weight of colchicine, 1.5 to 2.0 grams of plant mate-
appropriate and timely decontarmination and symptomatic
rial, 2 to 3 seeds, or 1/2 fower can be fatal (Burrows and
and supportive care. Antacids should not be given; they
Tyrl 2001). Colchicine is an antimitotic and is used in
increase the absorption of nicotine. Patients should be
human medicine to treat a number of diseases including
 closely monitored. Oxygen, positive pressure respiration,
gout. Thus, animals can be intoxicated following the
and sedatives might be needed.
ingestion of both the plant and prescription medication.
 Intoxication results in multiple organ failure impairing
Prunus spp.
cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal, metabolic, and neuro-
There are a number of Prunus species that contain cya-
muscular function.
nogenic glycosides. High concentrations are found in the
 Initial signs of toxicosis are related to effects on the
kermels of the seeds. As a result of damage to the plant
digestive tract and include vomiting, abdominal pain, and
or following ingestion, cyanogenic glycosides are broken
severe hemorrhagic diarrhea. Soon after, the patient
down to hydrocyanic acid (cyanide). Although many
becomes weak and disoriented, and develops seizures and
 Prunus spp. contain cyanogenic glycosides, most do not
cardiac abnormalities. Additional signs developing within
present a significant intoxication hazard. The ingestion
2-12 hours and include dysphagia, paralysis, and hypovo-
of intact seeds does not release cyanide, and many seed
lemic shock. If the animal survives for 4 to 5 days, bone
kermels would need to be crushed and ingested for a
marrow depression may occur. Death is attributed to respi-
toxicosis to occur. In intoxicated animals, signs include
ratory failure. Treatment involves appropriate and timely
sudden onset of apprehension and distress, weakness,
decontamination and symptomatic and supportive care. In
ataxia, labored breathing, collapse, and lateral recum-
people, colchicine poisoning has been treated successfully
bency. Paddling and tetanic seizures may occur. Due to
using colchicine-specific Fab fragments.
rapid metabolism of cyanide following absorption, signs
usually last only 5-15 minutes; animals either die or
Humulus lupulus
recover quickly. The rapidity of onset of clinical signs
Also known as hops, beer hops, European hops, and
and possibly death make timely initiation of treatment
lupulin. The plant is native to Europe and Asia and con-
problematic.
tains a number of biologically active constituents includ-
Antidote kits for cyanide poisoning are available and
ing essential oils, phenolic compounds, resins, and
include a nitrite salt such as sodium nitrite and sodium
proteins. Spent hops from beer brewing are a significant
160
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
concem in dogs, because they will readily eat them. A cup
Burrows, George E. and Tyrl, Ronald J. 2001. Toxic Plants of
 of spent hops has been reported to cause malignant hyper-
North America. Ames, Iowa State University Press.
thermia in greyhounds (the responsible compound is not
Hare, W.R., Schutzman, H., Lee, B.R., and Knight, M.W.
known). Hops also can affect the estrus cycle, since they
1997. Chinaberry poisoning in two dogs, Journal of the
contain phytoestrmgens, although chronic exposure would
American Veterinary Medical Association 210:1638-
1640.
probably be necessary to interfere with reproduction.
Langston, C.E. 2002. Acute renal failure caused by lily inges-
Acute signs reported within 1 hour of consumption by
tion in six cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220(1):49-52.
greyhounds include hyperthermia, restlessness, panting,
Means, Charlotte. 2004. Insoluble calcium oxalates. In Vet-
vomiting, abdominal pain, and seizures. Creatinine phos-
erinary Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee,
phokinase (CPK) levels become markedly elevated and
Pp. 340-341. St. Louis: Mosby.
urine becomes dark brown, suggesting muscle necrosis.
Mouser, P, Filigenzi, M.S., Puschner, B., Johnson, V., Miller,
Treatment includes standard decontarmination procedures.
M.A., and Hooser, S.B. 2007. Fatal ricin toxicosis in a
Fluids should be administered to maintain renal function.
 puppy confrmed by liquid chromatography/mass spec-
Sedatives such as benzodiazepines can be used to control
trometry when using ricinine as a marker. J Vet Diagn
excitement or seizures.
Invest 19:216-220.
A list of other potentially toxic plants and the
Peterson, M.E., Talcott, PA., eds. 2006. Small Animal Toxi-
cology, 2nd ed., pp. 345-410. St. Louis: Saunders
 general signs typically attributed to them is provided in
Elsevier.
Appendix 2.
Spoerke, D.G. and Smolinske, S.C. 1990. Toxicity of House-
plants, Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc.
NONTOXIC PLANTS
Although it is important to know whether a particular plant
Internet Resources
is potentially toxic or not, it is equally important to know
ASPCA Poison Control Center: http://www.aspca.org/pet-
which plants, when ingested, are considered to be non-
care/poison-control/
toxic. Appendix 3 provides a list of nontoxic plants. Keep
Canadian Poisonous Plants Information System: http://
in mind that mild Gl upset and perhaps vomiting is not
unusual even when nontoxic plants are ingested.
Cornell Department of Animal Science, Poisonous plants
affecting dogs: http://www.ansci.cornell.edu/plants/dogs/
REFERENCES
index.html
Albretson, J.C., Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., and Khan, S.A. 2000.
Humane Society of the United States: http://www.humane
Evaluation of castor bean toxicosis in dogs: 98 cases. J Am
society.org/animals/resources/tips/plants_poisonous_to_
Anim Hosp Assoc 36:229-233.
pets.html
ASPCA National Animal Poison Control Centet 1998
Pet Poison Helpline, Plants that are toxic to cats: http://
Household Plant Reference. New York: ASPCA.
 petpoisonhelpline.com/IsThatPoisonous/plants-toxic-
Bart, A.C. 2006. Household and garden plants. In Peterson,
to-cats/
M.E., Talcott, PA., eds. Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed.,
Poisonous plants of North Carolina: http://w w w.ces.ncsu.edu/
Pp. 345-410. St. Louis: Saunders Elseviet.
depts/hort/consumer/poison/poison.htm
Dietary Supplements
21
and Herbs
Charlotte Means
INTRODUCTION
unreasonable risk of illness or injury under the conditions
The sales of herbal dietary supplements in 2007 totaled
 of use recormmended or stated in labeling. The rule applies
 approximately 4.8 bilion dollars. Because of the popular-
to all dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids,
ity of herbal supplements, dogs and cats (as well as other
such as ephedra, ma huang, Sida cordifolia, and pinellia
household pets) are exposed by accidental overdoses or by
At this time, the FDA is monitoring supplements marketed
owner administration. Adverse effects can occur because
as substitutes for ephedra, such as Citrus aurantium.
of dosage, species differences in metabolism, or drug-herb
(FDA.
222.fda.gov/oc/initiatives/ephedra/February2004/
interactions.
qu_020604.html). Because the rule does not include tradi-
tional Chinese herbal medicines, the potential for exposure
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
to ephedra still exists.
Citrus aurantium, also known as the Seville orange, or
Sources and Formulations
bitter orange, is used to make orange marrmalade. The
Herbs that contain sympathomimetics include ma huang
unripe peel contains synephrine, neohesperidien, and five
(Ephedra sinica), Indian common mallow (Sida cordifo-
other adrenergic amines. Proponents for bitter orange use
lia), and bitter orange (Citrus aurantium). Historically.
claim that bitter orange stimulates only beta-3 receptors in
these herbs were used to treat asthma, cough, and colds.
the adipose tissue and liver. They claim that bitter orange
Today, these herbs are most commonly sold as weight loss
will not increase blood pressure or heart rate and thus is
aids, decongestants, and also for illicit recreational use
safer and a substitute for ephedra. However, a study using
(such as herbal ecstasy) or to improve athletic performance
healthy volunteers showed that bitter orange elevated sys-
(such as weightlifters). Supplerments containing ma huang
tolic and diastolic blood pressure and heart rate following
were among the first widely marketed and advertised
a single dose (Bui et al. 2006).
herbal products. When used as a weight-loss aid, fre-
The potential for adulterated products must be kept in
quently caffeine-containing plants are included in the for-
mind when evaluating a patient. On January 9, 2009, the
mulation, which can increase toxicity (Means 1999). The
FDA released a press release naming 69 different weight
active components of Ephedra sinica and Sida cordifolia
loss products adulterated with various drugs, including
are alkaloids, including ephedrine and pseudoephedrine.
sibutramine (a controlled IV drug found in the weight loss
Bitter orange contains synephrine (Der Marderosian 1996;
pharmaceutical Meridia@), phenytoin, phenolphthalein,
Means 1999).
rimonabant, and bumetadine. Most of the products claimed
In 2004,the FDA issued a final rule summary declaring
to be natural or only herbal ingredients. (FDA Expands
dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids adul-
Warning to Consumers About Tainted Weight Loss Pills.
terated under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosrmetic Act.
http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/2008/
The FDA stated that these supplements presented an
NEW01933.html. Accessed Feb 28, 2009).
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
161
162
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Mechanism of Action
administration of diazepam. Serotonin syndrome may be
Pharmacologically, ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are
present, and cyproheptadine is a sermtonin antagonist that
sympathomimetic alkaloids.The alkaloids stimulate
may aid in management of serotonergic signs (disorienta-
alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors, causing the release
tion, vocalization, hypertherrmia). Propranolol or another
of endogenous catecholamines at synapses in the brain and
beta-blocker can be used to control tachycardia. Support-
heart. This stimulation results in peripheral vasoconstric-
ive care includes administration of intravenous fuids and
tion and cardiac stimulation. This results in increased
monitoring the patient. Baseline blood tests, including
blood pressure, tachycardia, ataxia, restlessness, tremors,
serum potassium and glucose concentrations, should be
and seizures (Gurley et al. 1998).
obtained and any abnormalities corrected.
Kinetics
METHYLXANTHINES
Pseudoephedrine is excreted in urine as an unchanged drug
Sources
(Means 1999). In humans, the elimination half-life varies
between 2-21 hours, depending on the urine pH.
Caffeine is obtained from guarana (Paullinia cupana) a
plant containing high levels of caffeine. Guarana may
Toxicity
contain 3%-5% caffeine by dry weight compared to coffee
Clinical signs have been seen in dogs at 5-6mg/kg and
beans (1%-2% caffeine) and tea (1%4% caffeine).
deaths have occurred at 10-12mg/kg. Dogs have a narrow
Common names include Brazilian cocoa and Zoom. Theo-
margin of safety compared to other species (Means 1999).
bromine and theophylline have also been found in the
Toxicity can be increased if other sympathormimetic sub-
plant. Historically, guarana was used to provide energy
stances (such as phenylpropanolomine) are taken at the
during fasting, as an aphrodisiac, and to prevent malaria
same time. Underlying disease can also increase an ani-
and dysentery. Guarana is frequently found in herbal
mal's susceptibility to toxicosis. Some of these conditions
weight loss aids (with or without ma huang) and in prod-
include heart disease, diabetes, and seizure disorders
ucts promising increased energy (Der Marderosian 1996;
(Brinker 1998).
PDR 1998). Because guarana contains methylxanthines, it
produces a clinical syndrome similar to chocolate, coffee,
Clinical Signs
or over-the-counter stimulant products, which contain
Effects are generally limited to the cardiovascular and
caffeine.
central nervous systems. Initial signs usually begin with
restlessness, pacing, and agitation. Vocalization may occur.
Mechanism of Action
Dogs may exhibit hallucinogenic behavior. On clinical
Caffeine is a methylated xanthine. It increases cyclic AMP,
examination, mydriasis, tachycardia, hypertension, muscle
releases catecholamines, and increases muscular contrac-
tremors, and seizures may be present. Death is usually due
tility. The net effect is a positive inotropic and chrono-
to cardiovascular collapse. Hypertension can cause pulmo-
tropic effect on the heart, cerebral vasoconstriction, renal
nary edema, although it is rare. Once an animal becomes
vasorelaxation, and smooth muscle relaxation in the gas-
symptomatic, clinical signs may last for 36-48 hours
trointestinal tract (Beasley 1997).
(Means 1999).
Kinetics
 Management of Exposures
Caffeine is well absorbed orally. The plasma half-life in
For a recent ingestion (15 minutes or less) in an asymp-
the dog is 4.5 hours. Caffeine is metabolized in the liver
tomatic animal, emesis may be induced followed by
and undergoes enterohepatic recirculation. Caffeine is
 administration of activated charcoal with a cathartic. Agi-
excreted through the urine (Beasley 1997; Kisseberth and
tation, nervousness, and tremors are best controlled by
Trammel 1990). Caffeine has caused birth defects in
acepromazine maleate, chlorpromazine, or if seizures
animals (Brinker 1998).
develop, a barbiturate such as phenobarbital is recom-
mended (Plumb 1999). For acepromazine and chlorproma-
Toxicity
zine, start at the low end of the dosage range and increase
The LDso of caffeine in dogs is reported to be 140 mg/kg.
as needed. Dissociative effects of benzodiazepines are fre-
However, serious toxicity and death have been reported at
doses much lower than the LDso Signs of acute caffeine
sis; dogs may actually become more agitated after the
toxicity in humans appear at 15 to 30mg/kg and the lethal
Chapter 21 / Dietary Supplements and Herbs
163
dose is estimated to be 100 to 200 mg/kg (Kisseberth and
 coli, and potatoes. It is used in alternative veterinary prac-
Trammel 1990; Shannon 1998). For combinations of ma
tices to treat diabetic polyneurmpathy, cataracts, and
huang and guarana, the minimum dose at which clinical
glaucoma. In toxicology, it has been used to treat amanita
signs were reported in dogs is 1.3mg/kg ma huang and
mushroom poisoning. However, the doses used in human
4.4 mg/kg guarana. The minimum dose at which death was
medicine for mushroom toxicity can cause toxicity in
reported was 5.8 mg/kg ma huang and 19.1 mg/kg guarana.
dogs.
These doses were obtained from cases reported to the
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (Ooms et al. 2001).
Toxicity
There are multiple drugs that can interact with caffeine.
ALA is taken orally, usually in 100 or 300mg capsules.
Besides pseudoephedrine and ma huang, monoamine
The reported LDs in dogs is 400-500 mg/kg. However,
oxidase inhibitors, aspirin, and cimetidine are commonly
suspicious deaths have been reported at doses below
used medications that should not be combined with caf-
100mg/kg, and confirmed deaths at 330mg/kg (ASPCA
feine. The sedative effects of benzodiazepines may be
2010). Cats are about 10 times more sensitive than dogs
decreased by caffeine (Brinker 1998). As with ma huang,
(Hill et al. 2004). The minimum toxic dose in cats is
there are several medical conditions, which may enhance
13 mg/kg and at 30 mg/kg neurologic signs and hepatotox-
icity develop.
and ulcers.
The therapeutic dose for cats is 1-5mg/kg, with a
maximum dose of 25 mg/day. For dogs, the therapeutic
Clinical Effects
dose is up to 200mg/day. Decontamination is recom-
 Clinical signs include vormiting, restlessness and hyperac-
 mended for all cats if the calculated dose is >5 mg/kg and
tivity, polydipsia, and polyuria. Tachycardia and other
dogs if the dose is >30 mg/kg-
cardiac arrhythmias such as premature ventricular contrac-
tions (PVCs) are possible. Clinical signs progress to
Clinical Effects
muscle tremors and seizures, and finally death (Beasley
Clinical signs include hypersalivation, vomiting, ataxia,
1997; Ooms et al. 2001).
tremors and seizures, and death. Serum chemistry abnor-
malities include profound hypoglycemia and increased
Management of Exposure
liver enzymes. Acute renal failure has occurred in some
Treatment consists of early decontamination. Induce
patients. The onset of clinical signs is within 30 minutes
emesis in an asymptomatic animal or perform gastric
up to several hours postingestion.
lavage. Because enterohepatic recirculation occurs in caf-
feine toxicosis, repeated doses of activated charcoal are
Management of Exposure
beneficial. Cardiac function should be monitored. Tachy-
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Treat hypogly-
cardia can be treated with a beta-blocker such as metopro-
cemia, if present, with dextrose; support liver function;
lol or propranolol. The dose is the same as in ma huang
correct dehydration and control vomiting; and control
toxicosis.Premature ventricular contractions can be treated
tremors and seizures. Monitor blood glucose as well as
with lidocaine. Lidocaine is dosed as an initial bolus
renal and liver enzymes. See the section “Xylitol” in
slowly intravenously, followed by an IV drip. Muscle
Chapter 24 for specific treatment.
tremors and seizures are treated with diazepam or a barbi-
turate can be used (dose as per ma huang). Intravenous
Cinnamon
fuids may enhance excretion. A urinary catheter should be
Sources andFormulations
placed because methylxanthines can be absorbed through
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum cassia and Cinnamomum zeyl-
the bladder wall (Beasley 1997; Ooms et al. 2001).
anicum) is currently touted as an adjunct therapy in the
treatment of type II diabetes (Chase and McQueen 2007;
HYPOGLYCEMICS
Baker et al. 2008). Cinnamon can be purchased in capsular
form at natural food stores or wherever vitamins and sup-
Alpha Lipoic Acid
plements are sold. Most of the clinical trials reported at
Sources
this time have had a small number of patients, or used rats,
Alpha lipoic acid (ALA), also known as thioctic acid, is  and some studies had conflicting results.
considered a "vitaminlike" antioxidant. ALA is found in
 Cinnamon is NOT the same as cinnamon oil. Cinnamon
yeast, liver, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, spinach, broc-
  n     
164
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
They report a rush or sensation of warmth, facial fushing,
tonin (5-hydroxytryptamine). Serotonin is important in the
and oral an burning sensation (Klepser and Klepser 1999;
regulation of sleep, cognition, behavior, temperature regu-
Lee et al. 2000; Libster 1999; McGuffin and Hobbs 1997;
lation, and other functions.
Means 1999).
In dogs, the minimum toxic dose reported is 23.6 mg/kg
and the minimum lethal dose reported in dogs is 128 mg/
MechanismofAction
kg (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000). There is not necessarily
The mechanism of action is generally described as an
a good correlation between severity of signs and dose
insulinlike effect. Cinnamon contains an active constituent
ingested. Signs have been reported from 10 minutes up to
classed as a methylhydroxychalcone polymer (MHCP)
4 hours postingestion. Signs can last up to 36 hours
that may be linked to the effect. This substance, when
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000).
 combined with insulin, has synergistic effects. People are
advised to monitor blood glucose carefully when taking
Clinical Effects
cinnamon, especially when concurrent diabetic medica-
Clinical signs resemble serotonin syndrome in humans.
tions are used.
Signs include seizures and tremors, depression, ataxia,
If a dog ingests large quantities of cinnamon, the poten-
disorientation, vocalization, and hyperesthesia. Gastroin-
tial for hypoglycemia exists. Cinnamon is also reported to
testinal effects including vomiting, diarrhea, and drmooling
cause hypotension in dogs. Cinnamon does have an emetic
are common. Severe hyperthermia and blindness have
effect in large quantities, so many dogs will self-
been reported (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000).
decontaminate after ingestion.
Some concerns with long-term usage do exist. Some
Management of Exposures
sources of cinnamon may have significant pesticide con-
tamination, and there have been reports of hepatic injury
Treatment includes early decontamination. Seizures,
tremors, and other neurologic signs usually respond well
with long-terrm use. Cinnamon also contains coumarin and
can have drug interactions.
to diazepam or barbiturates. Fluid therapy should be initi-
ated. Hyperthermia can be managed with cool water baths
Management of Exposures
and fans. Baseline blood and chemistry panels should be
In asymptomatic animals, ermesis should be induced fol-
obtained. Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist and can
lowing large ingestions. Home care will be appropriate in
be used PO or rectally until signs resolve (Gwaltney-Brant
many cases. Owners can monitor and feed small frequent
et al. 2000)
 meals and transport to a veterinary clinic if clinical signs
develop.
Echinacea purpurea
Sources and Formulations
MISCELLANEOUS HERBS
 This herb is one of the most popular supplerments in use
today. The common names of Echinacea include purple
Griffonia simplicifolia
coneflower, comb fower, scurvy root, and others. Echina-
Sources andFormulations
cea is indigenous to the United States and cultivated else-
Seeds frorm this plant are used as a source of
where. The plant is a perennial herb with narrow leaves
5-hydrmoxytryptophan (5-HTP). This extract is generally
 and can grow up 3 feet. It is not unusual to have echinacea
used to treat depression, headaches, obesity, and insomnia
confused with Parthenium integrifolium, a member of the
in humans. 5-HTP is reported to increase serotonin in
same family, but one that contains no pharmacological
the CNS. Label information may list 5-HTP, 5-
activity. Historically, echinacea was used by Native Amer-
hydroxytryptophan, or griffonia seed extract as an ingredi-
icans and adopted by settlers. Uses ranged from "blood
ent. Drug interactions with MAOinhibitors, antidepressants,
purifiers" to dizziness to rattlesnake bites. Extracts were
and herbs such as St. John's Wort can occur (Gwaltney-
widely used as anti-infectives until antibiotics were dis-
Brant et al. 2000).
covered (Der Mardermosian 1996; PDR 1998).
Echinacea contains essential oils, as well as glyco-
Kinetics and Toxicity
proteins, alkamides, and favonoids. All parts of the plant
5-HTP is rapidly and well absorbed frorm the gastrointes-
are used in various herbal preparations. Echinacea is
tinal tract. 5-HTP readily crossed the blood-brain barrier.
 taken as a tincture and in capsular form, and is applied
Once target cells are reached, 5-HTP is converted to sero-
locally to wounds. Echinacea is typically used as an
Chapter 21 / Dietary Supplements and Herbs
165
immune stimulant and as supportive therapy for the
 ground apple, and whig plant. The plant is indigenous to
common cold or coughs, urinary tract infections, and
Europe and northwest Asia and naturalized in America.
stomatitis. Echinacea is recommended for chronic skin
German chamomile is an annual, and Roman chamomile
ulcers or poorly healing wounds. Because echinacea is
is a slow-growing perennial. The plant is erect and grows
suspected of being an immunostimulant, it should not
to about 20-40cm. Flowers are white with yellow centers
be taken for more than & consecutive weeks. Echinacea
(Eisenberg 1997; Klepser and Klepser 1999). Chamomile
is contraindicated in progressive diseases such as AIDS
has been used medicinally since the Roman Empire. It was
or multiple sclerosis, and tuberculosis (Der Marderosian
used as an antispasmodic and sedative. In folk medicine,
1996; Brinker 1998).
chamomile is used for rheumatism and intestinal parasit-
ism. Chamomile has also been used as a hair tint and
Toxicity
cigarette favoring (Der Marderosian 1996; Brinker 1998).
Echinacea has a wide margin of safety. Arabinogalactan,
In veterinary medicine, the most common uses are as
a purified compound found in E. purpurea, has been dosed
a natural deworrmer, sedative and as a treatment for
at 4gm/kg IP and IV with no toxic effects. People have
aggression.
reported a variety of adverse effects including hypoten-
Chamomile contains essential oils, favanoids, and
sion, dizziness,fever, chills, nausea and vomiting, dyspnea,
hydroxycoumarins. Both fresh and dried fower heads are
and dermatological effects. At least some of the effects are
used. Some preparations will use the entire plant. Chamo-
probably due to hypersensitivity and allergic reactions
mile is most frequently taken as a tea. Ointments, gels, and
(Der Marderosian 1996; Brinker 1998; PDR 1998).
bath salts are also available. Chamomile is used as a seda-
tive and gastrmintestinal antispasmodic. It may also be
Signs
taken to treat colds, bronchitis, and fevers. In one study
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control Center has
using rats, the development of gastrointestinal ulcers
received 45 calls involving echinacea since 1992. In many
 caused by indomethacin (a nonsteroidal anti-infarmmatory)
cases, multiple herbal trades were ingested, orthe capsules
was prevented by chamormile (Der Marderosian 1996).
contained multiple ingredients. The most common clinical
Topically, chamomile is used to treat wounds and burns.
signs when echinacea was the only trade ingested were
Chamomile is contraindicated in pregnancy (especially
vomiting and drooling. In 2 cases, the animal developed a
early pregnancy) ((McGuffin and Hobbs 1997; Brinker
mild cough, possibly associated with retching. Both hyper-
1998).
activity and lethargy were reported. Erythema was reported
in 1 case. In 25 cases, no clinical signs developed (ASPCA
Toxicity
2010).
Bisaldolol, which accounts for 50% of the essential oils
found in chamomile, has an acute LDso of 15 ml/kg in rats
ManagementofExposures
and mice. In a 4-week subacute toxicity study, 1-2ml/kg
 A small ingestion of echinacea generally does not require
given orally to rats produced no significant effects Der
 medical intervention. Any gastrointestinal upset is gener-
Marderosian 1996)
ally self-lirmiting and the pet owner will be able to treat
with supportive care (NPO, kaolin/pectin). It is imperative
Chinical Effects
to determine whether the animal ingested other herbal
Hypersensitivity and anaphylaxis has been reported.
products or medications. Large recent ingestions can be
Contact dermatitis occurs in people sensitive to other
treated with gastric decontamination. If an animal devel-
plants in the family, such as ragwort. Ingestion of large
ops severe vomiting, symptomatic treatment with IV fuids
quantities of the fower heads produces vomiting. The
and other supportive care should be initiated.
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center has had 6 cases of
ingestion in cats (ASPCA 2010). Three cases involved
Chamomile
gastrointestinal upset (vomiting and/or diarrhea), 4 cases
Sources
reported depression and lethargy, and 2 cases reported
Chamomile refers to both German chamomile (Matricaria
epistaxis. Of the two cats with epistaxis, one also devel-
recutita) and Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile).
 oped hematomas. Epistaxis and hematoma development is
Common names for German chamomile include wild
probably due to the hydroxycoumarin content. One cat
chamomile and pin heads. Common names for Roman
developed no clinical signs. The majority of dogs devel-
chamomile include garden chamomile, sweet chamomile,
 oped no clinical signs. Vomiting and hypersalivation
166
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
were the most commonly reported clinical signs in dogs
taken as an infusion or as dried herb. The most common
(ASPCA 2010).
preparation is a standardized 300mg capsule. St. John's
wort can interact with several medications. It decreases
ManagementofExposures
the activity of protease inhibitors, antagonizes reserpine,
Management of recent ingestions includes gastric decon-
 and increases stupor when consumed with alcohol. Mono-
tamination. In cases of large ingestions, activated charcoal
amine oxidase inhibitors (MAO) such as seligiline
can be given. Treatment for gastric irritation is symptom-
(Anipryl@) are potentiated when taken concormitantly.
atic and supportive (NPO, gastrointestinal protectants,
Serotonin syndrome is possible if St. John's wort is taken
Huid therapy if severe vomiting or dehydration occurs). If
with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) due
anaphylaxis occurs, standard therapy with epinephrine,
to synergistic activity. Common SSRIs include fuoxetine
steroids, and antihistamines should be initiated. For cats,
(Pmozac@) and sertraline (Zoloft@). Sermtonin syndrome
or dogs with bleeding disorders such as von Willebrand's
has also been noted when St. John's wort is taken with
disease, a packed cell volume and activated clotting time
dextrometorphan  and  meperidine.  Sympathomimetics
or coagulation profile may be required. If necessary, a
combined with St. John's wort may lead to a hypertensive
blood transfusion could be administered.
crisis (Shannon 1999).
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Clinical Effects
Sources and Formulations
Adverse effects occur commonly. In humans, the most
St. John's wort is also known as goatweed, rosin rose, and
frequently reported signs include gastrointestinal upset,
Klamath weed. It is a perennial native in Europe, Canada,
allergic reactions, and agitation. Photosensitization has
and the United States. This plant can be found throughout
occurred, generally after large doses or long-term usage.
much of the United States, but northwestern states have
Prior to 1994, the only cases in the ASPCA National
had the greatest livestock economic losses due to Hyperi-
Animal Poison Control Center databanks involved live-
cum. There are several Hypericum species, some with
stock and photosensitization. Almost all cases involving
overlapping ranges, but the most important is Hypericum
herbal products involve dogs (35 out of 38 cases). In
perforatum. The plant grows aggressively in roadside
almost half the cases, no signs were reported. The most
areas and ditches, meadows, and woods. The height is
commonly reported clinical signs were depression, vomit-
usually 2 feet. Yellow fowers bloom from June through
ing, and diarrhea. Tremors and/or seizure were reported in
Septermber. The plant must be harvested between July and
three cases. Two cases developed increased liver enzymes
August and dried immediately to retain pharmacological
(ASPCA 2010),
properties.
St. John's Wort has been used since the Middle Ages.
Management of Exposures
Traditionally, this herb is used as an antidepressant and
Recent ingestions are best treated by decontamination.
to treat diarrhea and gastritis. It was also used to treat
Gastrointestinal disorders are generally easily managed
insomnia and cancer. Topically, the herb is mixed with
with symptomatic and supportive care. In large ingestions,
olive oil to create “red oil" and used for infammation
or unknown quantities, especially if early decontamination
(Der Marderosian 1996; PDR 1998). In veterinary medi-
is not possible, baseline liver enzymes should be obtained.
cine, this plant is well known for causing photosensitiza-
If evidence of serotonin syndrome develops (tremors, sei-
tion in livestock and horses. St. John's wort has been
zures, hyperthermia, vomiting, and diarrhea), standard
responsible for devastating economic losses to livestock
therapy as discussed in the section Griffonia simplicifolia
producers.
is initiated. If evidence of photosensitization occurs, keep
the animal out of sunlight, and provide supportive care for
Mechanism of Action
hepatic damage.
The major active constituents are anthraquinone deriva-
tives, hypericin, and pseudohypericin, as well as fava-
Valerian Root ( Valeriana officianalis)
noids. The concentration varies considerably depending
SourcesandFormulations
on harvest time, drying process, and storage. St. John's
Valerian root is one of the most popular herbs on the
wort is used primarily as an antidepressant and sedative.
market. Common names include all-heal, heliotrope,
Studies have shown that St. John's wort inhibits serotonin
Vandal root, and Capon's tale. It is an herbaceous peren-
uptake, accounting for the antidepressant effects. It is
nial found widely over the United States. The dried
Chapter 21 / Dietary Supptements and Herbs
167
rhizome contains a volatile oil with an odor many find
ESSENTIAL OILS
offensive. The fresh drug does not have an odor. The plant
grows to about 50 to 100cm high and is erect without a
Sources and Formulations
branching stem. Flowers are bright pink to white. The fruit
is yellow with a tuft of white hair. Valerian is sometimes
(Wolfe 1999). The oils are a mixture of terpenes and other
confused with Veratrum album, which is a toxic plant.
chemicals. Essential oils are used from food favorings to
There are over 200 species of valerian, with various
perfumes to medications. The most commonly used essen-
degrees of pharmacologic activity. Valeriana offcianalis
tial oils in veterinary medicine include Melaleuca or tea
is considered the standard genus and species used in herbal
tree oil (Melaleuca alternifolia), pennyrmyal oil (Mentha
medicine (Der Marderosian 1996; PDR 1998).
putegium), D-limonene and linalool (Citrus spp.), Citro-
The primary active ingredients are volatile oils,alka-
nella (Cymbopgum nardus), Thuja (Thuja occidentalis),
loids, and most importantly, valepotriates. The root is the
and wormwood or absinthe (Artemisia absinthium).
only part of the plant that is used. Valerian is classed as
In veterinary medicine, essential oils are most com-
generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for food use. The
monly used to treat flea infestations, hot spots or other
volatile oils are used as favoring in some food products.
dermatological conditions, or as wormers. Oils may be
Valerian is used primarily as a sedative and as a sleeping
found in shampoos, dips, liniments, teas, tinctures, syrups,
aid. It has also been used in epilepsy, headaches, colic,
or other formulations (Villar et al. 1994; Bischoff and
and numerous other minor ailments. Valerian is frequently
Gaule 1998; Wolfe 1999).
taken as a tea or as an extract. Valerian increases the
length of sedation induced by pentobarbital and length of
Kinetics
anesthesia produced by thiopental. Valerian has helped
Essential oils are rapidly absorbed both orally and der-
ease the effects of withdrawal from benzodiazepines due
mally. They are metabolized by the liver to glucuronide
to similar receptor sites, but it increases the effects of
and glycine conjugates. Repeated exposure can cause
sedatives if taken concomitantly (Der Marderosian 1996;
inductions of the hepatic enzyme systems cytochrome
PDR 1998).
P450 and UPD-glycuronyl transferase systems. Thus,
 preexisting liver disease can increase the risk of toxicity.
Toxicity
Most reports of adverse effects of valerian in human litera-
Toxicity
ture occur after chronic use. These effects include head-
Cats appear to be more sensitive to essential oils than dogs
ache, cardiac arrhthymias, and agitation. In one case
(Villar et al. 1994; Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Wolfe 1999).
report, 200 mg in a human caused fatigue, tremors, abdom-
The acute LDso varies significantly between various essen-
inal pain, and mydriasis (Shannon 1999). Animal studies
tial oils. Formulations mixed with an organic solvent, such
 included injections of 50 mg/kg intravenous in cats, which
as alcohol, can allow increased absorption and toxicity.
caused a drop in heart rate and blood pressure. Another
Generally, a greater volume of fresh product is required to
study found no pharmacological effect in cats at 250mg/
produce the same effects as a concentrated essence. The
kg. Mice given up to 4600mg/kg orally produced mild
basic mechanism of action is unknown (Villar et al. 1994).
clinical effects. Signs of toxicity included ataxia, hypo-
thermia, and muscle relaxation (Der Marderosian 1996).
Chinical Effects
The most common clinical signs after dermal exposures
Clinical Effects
include ataxia, muscle weakness, depression, and behav-
The ASPCA Animal Poison Contrml Center has had only
joral abnormalities. Severe hypothermia and collapse have
a few calls on valerian ingestion. Most produced no clini-
occurred in cats. A transient paresis can occur in small
cal effects, although lethargy and sedation were seen in a
breed dogs when melaleuca oil is applied down the spine
cat (ASPCA 2010).
as a topical fea treatment (Villar et al. 1994; Kaluzienski
2000). Cats have developed scrotal dermatitis after expo-
ManagementofExposures
sure to d-limonene or linalool (Power et al. 1988; Hooser
Generally, significant treatment would be unnecessary. The
1990). Liver failure has been associated with essential oils,
sedative effects are generally short-lived and can be
especially pennyrmyal and melaleuca (Villar et al. 1994;
managed by an owner at home. Large ingestions in an
Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Kaluzienski 2000; Sudekum
asymptomatic animal could be treated by decontamination.
et al. 1992).
168
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Oral ingestions cause vomiting and diarrhea. Central
stances to be drugs or assume “if natural, it is harmless."
nervous system depression may occur, and seizures are
Clients should be encouraged to learn about the herbal and
possible with large doses. Aspiration pneumonia can occur
nutriceutical products they are taking or giving their pets.
when essential oils are inhaled. Death can occur with suf-
Clients need to be encouraged to discuss proper use of
ficient doses. Signs usually develop from almost immedi-
herbal products in pets with their veterinarian. Clients can
ately up to 8 hours postexposure (Villar et al. 1994;
be encouraged to discuss altemative therapies by discuss-
Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Der Marderosian 1996).
ing a pet's diagnosis and suggested treatments thoroughly.
Discuss the client's expectations and opinions of both
Management ofExposures
altermative and conventional medicine. Issues of safety and
Recent derrmal exposures should be treated by bathing
efficacy must be explained to clients. They should be
using a hand dishwashing liquid. Activated charcoal is
encouraged to report potential adverse reactions or to
effective in oral exposures. Emesis should not be induced
discuss different routes of therapy if a pet's medical condi-
due to the potential for aspiration pneumonia. Intravenous
tion is not improving. Clients who want to use alternative
Huids help correct hypotension and aid in renal elimina-
medical treatments should be encouraged to obtain a good
tion. Body temperature should be monitored and regulated
medical workup in order to obtain a correct diagnosis and
as needed, and electrolytes, cardiac, and respiratory func-
be referred to a veterinarian trained in alternative medi-
tion should be monitored. Seizures and tremors usually
cine. In choosing an alternative medicine practitioner, the
respond to diazepam. Aspiration pneumonia may require
same criteria would be used as for any other specialist:
oxygen and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Hepatic damage
education, training, and professionalism (Libster 1999).
usually responds to good supportive care, although
REFERENCES
N-acetylcysteine has been used experimentally in humans
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center Databanks, unpub-
diagnosed with pennyrmoyal toxicosis (Poisindex@ 2001)
lished data, 2010.
Signs usually resolve over a few hours up to a few days.
Baker, W.L., Guiterrez-Williams, G., White, C.M., Kluger, J.,
Most animals do have a good prognosis with appropriate
and Coleman, C.1. 2008. Effect of cinnamon on glucose
treatment. Many mild cases require only mild home treat-
control and lipid parameters. Diabetes Care 3l(1):
ment and observation (Villar et al. 1994; Bischoff and
41-43.
Gaule 1998; Poisindex@ 2001; Plumb 1999).
Beasley, V.R. 1997. A Systems Affected Approach to Veteri-
nary Toxicology, Pp. 116-120. Urbana: Umiversity of
HERBS AND PETS
 Illi nois.
One of the most important considerations in treating herbal
Bischoff, K. and Gaule, F. 1998. Australian Tea Tree (Mela-
ingestions is product quality assurance. Although most
leuca alternifolia) oil poisoning in three purebred cats. J Vet
herbal companies are reputable, there are numermous reports
Diagn Invest 10:208-210.
Brinker, F. 1998. Herb Contraindications and Drug
of adulterated products (addition of substances not noted
Interactions, 2nd ed. Sandy, Oregon: Eclectic Medical
on the label). This has been particularly true of Chinese
Publications.
herbal products, which frequently contain pharmaceuti-
Bui, L.T., Nguyen, D.T., and Ambrose, PJ. 2006. Blood pres-
cals. Plant identification errors occur, and entire batches
sure and heart rate effects following a single dose of bitter
of product have been mixed using the wrong herb. In some
orange.Ann Pharmacother 40:53-57.
cases, labels are written in a foreign language or contain
Chase, C.K. and McQueen, C.E. 2007. Cinnamon in diabetes
directions only for mixing, making interpretation difficult.
mellitus. Am J Health Syst Pharm 64(10):1033-1035.
In cases where a known ingestion prmduces unexpected
Der Marderosian, A., ed. 1996. The Review of Naturaf
clinical signs, the potential for adulteration or other errors
Products. St. Louis: Facts and Comparisons Publishing
should be considered. When a product is not standardized,
Group.
Eisenberg, E.M. 1997. Advising patients who seek alternative
a consumer can not be sure what dosage of active constitu-
ents or how bioavailable the product may be. Standardiza-
medical therapies. Ann Interm Med 27(1):61-69.
Gulla, J. and Singer, A.J. 2000. Use of alternative therapies
tion also provides assurance that the actual herb is in the
among emergency department patients. Ann Emer Med
product (Winslow and Kroll 1998).
35(3):226-228
Clients who use herbal products should be advised to
Gurley, B.J., Gardner, S.F., White, L.M., and Wang, P.L. 1998.
treat them as a medication, and keep them away from pets.
Ephedrine pharmacokinetics after the ingestion of nutri
Specifically ask clients if they take or use any natural or
tional supplements containing Ephedra sinica (ma huang).
herbal prmducts. Many people do not consider these sub-
Ther Drug Monit 20:439-445.
Chapter 21 / Dietary Supplements and Herbs
169
Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., A1bretson, JC., and Khan, S.A. 2000.
herbal supplement containing guarana and ma huang in
5-hydroxytryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases (1989-
dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 218(2):
1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(12):1937-1940
225-229.
Hill, A.S., Werner, J.A., Rogers, Q.R. et al. 2004. Lipoic acid
PDR for Herbal Medicines. 1998. Montvale, New Jersey:
is 10 times more toxic in cats than reported in humans,
Medical Economics Company.
dogs, Or rats. J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr (Berf) 88:
Plumb, D.C. 1999. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3rd ed. Ames:
150-156
Iowa State University Press.
Hooser, S.B. 1990. D-limonene, linalool, and crude citrus oil
Poisindex@ Editorial Staff. 2001. Essential oils. In POISIN-
extracts.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):
DEX@ System, edited by L.L. Toll and K.M. Hurlbut
383-385.
Englewood, Colorado: Micromedex, Inc. (Edition expired
Kaluzienski, M. 2000. Partial paralysis and altered behavior
2001.)
in dogs treated with melaleuca oil. Clin Tox 38(5):
Power, K.A., Hooser, S.B. et al. 1988. An evaluation of the
518-519.
acute toxicity of an insecticidal spray containing linalool,
Kisseberth, W.C. and Trammel, H.T. 1990. Illicit and abused
D-limonene, and piperonyl butoxide applied topically to
drugs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):405-417.
domestic cats. Vet Human Tox 30(3):206-210.
Klepser, T.B. and Klepser, M.E. 1999. Unsafe and potentially
Shannon, M. 1999. Alternative medicines toxicology: A
safe herbal therapies. Am J Heatth Syst Pharm 56:125-138.
review of selected agents. Clin Tox 37(6):709-713.
Lee, K.W, Yamato, O., Tajima, M. et al. 2000. Hematologic
Shannon, M.W. 1998. Theophylline and caffeine. In Clinicaf
changes associated with the appearance of eccentrocytes
Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 3rd ed.,
after intragastric administration of garlic extract to dogs.
edited by L.M. Haddad, M.W. Shannonm, and JF. Win-
Am J Vet Res 61(11):1446-1450.
chester, Pp. 1102-1104. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Libster, M. 1999. Guidelines for selecting a medical herbalist
Sudekum, M., Poppenga, R.H., Raju, N. et al. 1992. Penny-
for consultation and referral: Consulting a medical herbal-
royal oil toxicosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
ist.JAttern Complement Med 5(5):457-462.
200(6):817-818
McGuffin, M. and Hobbs, C. 1997. In Botanical Safety Hand-
Villar, D., Knight, M.J., Hansen, S.R. et al. 1994. Toxicity of
book, edited by R. Upton andA. Goldberg. New York: CRC
melaleuca oil and related essential oils applied topically on
Press.
dogs and cats. Vet Human Tox 36(2):139-142.
Means, C. 1999. Ma huang: All natural but not always innocu-
Winslow, L.C. and Kroll, D.J. 1998. Herbs as medicines. Arch
ous. Vet Med 94(6):511-512.
Intern Med 158:2192-2199.
Ooms, T.G., Khan, S.A., and Means, C. 2001. Suspected caf-
Wolfe, A. 1999. Essential oil poisoning. Clin Tox 37(6):
feine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting from ingestion of an
721-727.
Zootoxins
22
TamaraFoss
HYMENOPTERA: BEES, WASPS, AND HORNETS
behind in the victim, so a lone vespid has the ability to
sting multiple times.
Sources
Solenopsis invicta, the red imported fire ant, a member
The Order Hymenoptera includes three medically impor-
of the Formicidae family, is the primary species of concern
tant families of insects: bees of the family Apidae, wasps
in regard to envenomation of animals (Gwaltney-Brant et
and hornets of the family Vespidae, and fire ants of the
al. 2007). There are unique clinical signs that develop with
family Formicidae. Bees, wasps, and hornets are credited
fire ant envenomation, as discussed later.
with being responsible for more human deaths than any
Toxicity
(1   1) ( so a
The family Apidae includes European honeybees, Afri-
The amount of venom delivered to a victim does not deter-
canized honeybees, bumblebees, and carpenter bees. All
mine whether an anaphylactic reaction will result. A single
Apids feed on nectar and pollen and can sting only once
sting can result in anaphylaxis. Cases involving multiple
because they are eviscerated and die after their barbed
stings result in higher venom doses delivered to the victim
stinger is left behind. European honeybees, although pro-
and a greater toxic reaction (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006).
tective of their hives, are considered to be less aggressive
The estimated lethal dose is approximately 20 stings/kg
than their Africanized honeybee relatives and Vespids.
for most mammals (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006).
When honeybees, especially Africanized honeybees, sting,
they release an alarm pheromone that alerts and attracts
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
other bees (Diaz 2007). Africanized honeybees are more
Only female bees and wasps are able to sting. The stinger
easily agitated, experience more pmolonged agitation and
is associated with venorm glands within the modified ovi-
defend a greater distance of area around their hives than
positor (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Hymenoptera
their Eurmpean counterparts (Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999).
venoms contain proteins (which are largely responsible for
 Although bigger than honeybees, bumblebees and carpen-
allergic responses), peptides, and enzymes (which are
ter bees do not receive as much discussion in the literature
made up of proteins). The two major enzymes implicated
and are considered less aggressive than honeybees (Diaz
 in allergic responses in Apid envenomations are phospho-
2007).
lipase and hyaluronidase (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
The family Vespidae includes yellow jackets, hormets,
Phospholipase A2 is a major allergen and is regarded as
and wasps. Vespids are predatory carnivores; they feed on
the most lethal peptide in honeybee venom (Gwatney.
other insects and are attracted to sweet foods and meats.
 Brant et al. 2007). Mellitin, which is unique to honeybee
Vespid stingers are not barbed and are therefore not left
venom, is responsible for the local pain associated with a
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
171
172
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
sting. Apamin peptide is also unique to honeybee venom
hematuria, leukocystosis, intravascular hemolysis,
 and may have neurotoxic effects on the peripheral nerves
increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and elevated alanine
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
transaminase (ALT) (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Cats
Vespid venoms contain serotonin, kinins, and acetylcho-
can develop hepatic injury following homet envenomation
line, all of which are believed to play a rmle in prmduction
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
of the intense pain that follows envenormation (Fitzgerald
and Flood 2006). Antigen 5 is the major allergenic com-
Laboratory
ponent of vespid venom (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006;
When systemic reactions or anaphylaxis occur, it is impor-
Merck 2008). Mastoparans are peptide toxins found in
tant to monitor laboratory values including urinalysis and
wasp venom, which are similar to but less potent than mast
various blood chemistries such as alanine amino transami-
cell degranulation peptide 401 found in Apid venom
nase (ALT), total bilirubin, electrolyte levels, blood urea
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006)
nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, arterial blood gases, and
serum creatine kinase. Urine can be red or brown and
Clinical Effects
might contain granular casts (Cowell and Cowell 1995).
Signs
Blood hemograms refect an infammatory leukogram: leu-
 A localized reaction including pain and swelling will gen-
kocytosis with a left shift. Anemia may occur with marked
erally occur in all victims of envenomation. Erythema can
spherocytosis (Cowell and Cowell 1995). Rhabdomyoly-
be seen and embedded stingers can result in abscess for-
sis and acute renal failure can occur. Electrocardiograph
mation. Local reactions can go unnoticed since the reac-
monitoring may be necessary.
tion often does not progress in severity and resolves
without treatment within 24 hours (Fitzgerald and Flood
Differential Diagnoses
2006).
In cases that develop anaphylaxis, it is prudent to rule out
Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions can also occur
other potential toxicological causes such as spiders or
and vary in their severity. They can be relatively moderate
other insects. Rule-outs to keep in mind include infection,
on the continuum of allergic reactions and present as
abscess, trauma, neoplasia, allergy, abscessed tooth, or
more regional swelling of an area in which a sting was
foreign object (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006). Another possi-
received (Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999), or they can be as
ble differential diagnosis is heatstrmke (Cowell et al. 1991).
severe as an anaphylactic response and result in death.
Differential diagnoses for animals presenting with respira-
Anaphylaxis occurs fairly infrequently in animals, but if
tory distress should also include acute lung injury/acute
it is going to occur, signs typically develop within 10-15
respiratory distress syndrome, aspiration pneumonia,
rminutes (Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999; Fitzgerald and
interstitial pneumonia, congestive heart failure, and pul-
Flood 2006). Anaphylactic signs include urticaria, pruritis,
monary thromboermbolism (Walker et al. 2005). A poten-
angioedema, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, hematuria,
tial diagnosis for sudden unexplained death is insect sting,
laryngeal edema, dyspnea, hyperpnea, tachycardia, possi-
bly hypotension in dogs and cats, ataxia, syncope, sei-
especially when death occurs outdoors (Diaz 2007).
zures, and death (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006; Akre and
Diagnostics
Reed 2002; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Rodriguez-Lainz
et al. 1999). Anaphylactic reactions in cats can involve
Antemortem
salivation and collapse (Cowell and Cowell 1995).
Evidence of stingers is diagnostic of Apid envenomation.
Nonanaphylactoid systermic or toxic reactions typically
Stingers will not be present with Vespid envenormation.
are delayed for 6 to 24 hours, or even up to several weeks
Areas most commonly stung in animals include the head
or months (Akre and Reed 2002). Reactions seen include
and neck, oral cavity, and limbs and paws (Oliveira et al.
serum sickness, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, neuropa-
2007).
thy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and arthritis
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006). Other possible conditions
Postmortem
include acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syn-
Postmortem findings include facial edema, gastric hemor-
drome (Walker et al. 2005) and immune-mediated hemo-
rhage, petechiation of the epicardium, and red-black urine
lytic anemia (Noble and Armstrong 1999). Specific signs
(Noble and Armstrong 1999). Facial cellulitis, lung and
 include ataxia, prostration, convulsions, CNS depression,
liver congestion, and pulmonary hemorrhage might also
shock, hyperthermia, bloody diarrhea, bloody vomiting,
be noted (Noble and Armstrong 1999). Bees and wasps
Chapter 227 Zootoxins
173
can be found in the gastrointestinal tract (Rodriguez-Lainz
that experience anaphylaxis or develop severe reactions
et al. 1999).
from multiple sting envenormation if treatrment is sought
immediately.
Management of Exposures
Single sting envenomations can cause pain and swelling.
HYMENOPTERA: IMPORTED FIRE ANTS
In most cases, treatment will not be necessary (Fitzgerald
and Flood 2006). If the incident is witnessed and a stinger
Sources
is located, it can be removed by scraping away from the
Fire ants belong to the order Hymenoptera in the family
injection site. The pet should be monitored for anaphylaxis
Formicidae. Two species of imported fire ants, Solenopsis
for the first 10-15 minutes following an envenomation.
richteri (black imported fire ants) and Solenopsis invicta
Anaphylaxis must be treated intensively. Epinephrine
(the red imported fire ant), are the most problematic and
should be administered subcutaneously (Cowell and
dangermous formicids to humans, agriculture, companion
Cowell 1995). Cardiac monitoring and respiratory support
animals, livestock, and wildlife. Due to its greater distribu-
are vital. Intubation and administration of oxygen may be
tion as compared to Solenopsis richteri, Solenopsis invicta
needed. Fluid administration with a crystalloid solution is
is the primary species of concern.
important to avoid vascular collapse (Fitzgerald and Flood
2006).Antihistamine and corticosteroid administration is
Toxicity
recommended (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Diazepam
Anaphylaxis can occur after fire ant envenomation and is
can be used for convulsions (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007))
not predictable based on dose or the number of stings
Cases involving more severe regional reactions and
received (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006). Although uncommon
multiple stings should be hospitalized and closely moni-
overall, human fatalities associated with fire ant envenom-
tored.  Corticosteroid   administration  of  prednisolone
ation are largely due to anaphylaxis (Fitzgerald and Vera
sodium succinate followed by prednisolone orally and
2006). However, there are no known reports of animal
then tapered over 3-5 days may be beneficial in alleviating
deaths from fire ant stings as a result of anaphylaxis
progression of an envenomation syndrome (Fitzgerald and
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Conceicao et al. 2006). Since
Flood 2006). If hypotension develops, an intravenous
fire ant envenomations generally occur en masse due to
bolus of normal saline should be given (Fitzgerald and
their aggressive and swarming nature, multiple stings
Flood 2006). Since hymenopterid venom can be nephro-
leading to systemic toxicity is possible. There is no estab-
toxic, it is important to provide continuous Huid adminis-
lished lethal number of stings for mammals.
tration to ensure normal urine output (Fitzgerald and Flood
2006). Additionial treatment including continued fuid and
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
electrolyte therapy and prevention of vascular stasis will
Formicid venom is unique compared to bee, wasp, and
be required if signs progress. Toxic reactions, most often
hornet venom. It is comprised of 95% water insoluble
associated with massive envenomations, also require
alkaloids (Akre and Reed 2002).The alkaloid
closer monitoring of major systems including hematologic
portion includes solenopsin A (trans-2-methyl-6-n-
profiles, cardiac and respiratory function and renal suffi-
undecylpiperidine), which is a piperidine alkaloid deriva-
    s  
tive (Conceicao et al. 2006). The dermal necrmsis that
 more rapidly a patient can be stabilized and provided with
occurs with envenomation is attributed to the alkaloid
supportive care, the better chance for a positive outcome.
portion of the venom (Akre and Reed 2002; Rakich et al.
Even after resolution of signs, monitoring should continue
1993). The alkaloid component is also the cause of most
for 24 hours in patients suffering anaphylactic or massive
of the local sting reactions that occur (Akre and Reed
envenomation responses (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006).
2002). The alkaloids have cytotoxic,hemolytic, fungi-
cidal, insecticidal and bactericidal properties (Gwaltney-
Prognosis
Brant et al. 2007; Rakich et al. 1993). Unlike the high
Most animals that are victims of single-sting Hymenoptera
protein content in bee, wasp, and hormet venom, only
envenomation will not develop serious signs, so overall,
approximately 1%-5% of fire ant venom is proteinaceous
prognosis is very good. Patients that develop anaphylaxis
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Akre and Reed 2002; Cowell
have a better chance of full recovery if they survive the
and Cowell 1995; Elgart 1990). The prmoteinaceous com-
first 60 minutes of the initial envenomation (Fitzgerald and
 ponent of fire ant venom includes hyaluronidase and phos-
Flood 2006). The chance of recovery increases for animals
pholipase, and is the cause of allergic and anaphylactic
174
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
responses that occur (Rakich et al. 1993; Akre and Reed
suggested that rather than developing pustules, dogs
2002)
develop erythematous pruritic papules that commonly
 Fire ants bite and sting their victims. The stingers are
resolve within 24 hours (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
not barbed, so they are capable of delivering multiple
stings. Fire ants initially bite and then rotate about their
Postmortem
fixed heads in a circular fashion as they repeatedly sting
No postmortem diagnostics are specifically described for
(Fitzgerald and Vera 2006).
fire ant evenomation.
Clinical Effects
Management of Exposures
Signs
Generally, fire ant exposures involving a small number of
Clinical signs range from mild dermatologic reactions to
stings will not require treatment. Multiple sting envenom-
anaphylaxis and possibly death. It is unclear as to the
ations involving neonatal or geriatric patients may require
 annual incidence of bites involving pets or livestock. Gen-
veterinary treatment. Severe systemic reactions or anaphy-
erally, signs in dogs are associated with local sting reac-
laxis, should they develop, are treated as noted in the
tions and may include erythema, pruritis, pain, swelling,
previous bees, wasps, and homets discussion. If live fire
and dermal necrosis. It is debatable as to whether pustules
ants are observed when an animal is presented for treat-
develop in dogs, but pustule forrmation is characteristic and
ment, they should be removed as soon as possible to limit
diagnostic in humans (Akre and Reed 2002; Gwaltney-
 further venom delivery. A soapy water bath or application
Brant et al. 2007; Rakich et al. 1993; Conceicao et al.
 of a low-toxicity insecticide (e.g-, pyrethrin) might be
2006; Fowler 1993).
required (Drees et al. 2002).
There are no reported deaths in animals attributed to
Fire ants target areas on animals with minirmal hair
anaphylaxis secondary to fire ant stings (Gwaltney-Brant
growth and/or moist areas including the muzzle, eyes,
et al. 2007). An anaphylactic reaction is associated with
ears, ventral abdomen, and perineum (Drees et al. 2002).
urticaria, cutaneous and laryngeal edema, bronchospasm,
Animals lick or bite at areas where fire ants congregate
and vascular collapse and is mediated by IgE (Fitzgerald
and Vera 2006). Typically, anaphylaxis will develop a
 ants and potentially suffer stings in the oral cavity or gas-
short time after an envenomation, whereas systemic tox-
 trointestinal tract (Drees et al. 2002). Gastrointestinal pro-
icity from massive envenomations can result in death
tectants and nutritional supplementation might be indicated
    s t  
(Drees et al. 2002).
2006).
 If the eyes are bitten, excessive lacrimation, blepharo-
spasm, and mucopurulent exudates can be observed (Drees
Laboratory
et al. 2002). Focal necrotic ulcers can be present on the
 There are no laboratory tests that will confirm or determine
comea and conjunctiva (Drees et al. 2002). Topical oph-
fire ant exposure (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006).
thalmic antibiotic solutions should be administered. Cor-
ticosteroids should be avoided in cases involving corneal
Differential Diagnoses
ulcers (Drees et al. 2002).
Primary diagnoses to keep in mind are similar to those
noted in the earlier discussion of bees, wasps, and hornets.
Prognosis
Other differential diagnoses to consider include subcor-
Overall, the prognosis is very good. In most cases, a local
neal pustular dermatosis, pustular psoriasis, and other
reaction involving mild swelling and pain may be the
skin diseases manifested by pustules (Conceicao et al.
extent of clinical signs. In many cases, owners will not be
2006).
aware that their pet was stung.
Diagnostics
BUFO TOADS
Antemortem
In humans, the unique circular pattern of stings and the
Sources
resulting wheal and fare that develop are diagnostic
Bufo marinus (cane toad, giant toad, or marine toad)
(Elgart 1990). Typically, the wheals progress into papules
gained access to the United States from Puerto Rico
that fill with fuid, which then develop into pustules within
via Hawaii. It now additionally resides in the southern
24 hours (Elgart 1990; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). It is
tip of Florida and Texas (Eubig 2001). Bufo alvarius
Chapter 22 / Zootoxins
175
(Colorado River toad) inhabits southern Arizona, south-
echolamine activity in the secretions (Eubig 2001). Indole-
eastem California and southwestem New Mexico (Eubig
alkylamines, along withserotonin and 5-hydroxytryptophan,
2001).
have hallucinogenic effects (Beasley 1999; Peterson and
Toads have mucous and granular glands that aid in
Roberts 2006; Reeves 2004).
defense against predators. Bufo toads have a pair of parmtid
glands, which begin caudal to the tympanum and continue
Clinical Effects
over the shoulders (Fowler 1993; Palumbo 1983; Eubig
Signs
2001). The parotid glands serve as the primary release site
Initial signs after oral exposure include profuse salivation,
of a thick, creamy, poisonous secretion through pinhole
deep red mucous membranes, pawing at the rmouth, and
orifices on the surface of the skin (Fowler 1993; Palumbo
vocalizing (Peterson and Roberts 2006). Vomiting and
1983; Eubig 2001). Bufo alvarius, although considered
 anxiety can also be noted (Roder 2004a). Commonly, signs
less toxic than Bufo marinus, is equipped with an addi-
include ataxia,seizures,stupor,coma,nystagmus,recum
tional pair of poison glands on the forelimbs and several
bency or collapse, and tachypnea (Eubig 2001; Roberts
pairs on the hindlimbs (Eubig 2001).
et al. 2000; Roder 2004a). Signs can worsen quickly and
death can occur within 15 minutes (Eubig 2001; Roder
Toxicity
2004a). Various arrhythmias and hyperthermia or hypo-
Bufo marinus that reside in Florida are equipped with a
thermia can develop (Eubig 2001). Although exposures
more potent toxin than those residing in Hawai; the mor-
to Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius are more likely to result
tality of dogs exposed to Bufo marinus in Florida that
in development of serious signs, exposure to any Bufo
subsequently receive no treatment is almost 100% com-
species is potentially toxic, especially for smaller, older
pared to about only 5% for those exposed to Bufo marinus
pets or those with underlying health conditions (Eubig
in Hawaii (Palumbo 1983; Beasley 1999). The entire
2001).
equivalent to 0.1g of venom, is considered a potentially
Laboratory
lethal oral dose fora dog (Reeves 2004). However, toxicity
Serum potassium may be elevated (Peterson 2000; Morgan
varies (Peterson and Roberts 2006). The size of the animal
1997). Elevated packed cell volume, hemoglobin, blood
exposed and size of the toad delivering the venom, coupled
glucose, serum urea nitrogen, and serum calcium might be
with the length of time subjected to the venom, will largely
observed (Palumbo 1983; Reeves 2004). Serum sodium
impact the outcome of exposure (Peterson and Roberts
and chloride concentrations drop minimally while serum
2006). Typically, a bite and release exposure is not as
inorganic phosphorus dramatically decreases (Palumbo
severe as one involving holding and chewing, or ingestion
1983).
of a toad (Peterson and Roberts 2006). Clinical signs are
expected in exposures involving a dose of 1 mg/kg (Peter-
Differential Diagnoses
son and Roberts 2006).
Signs associated with Bufo toad exposures are similar
to those assicuated with seizure disorders, ataxic condi-
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
tions, heat stroke, and trauma (such as hit by car)
Bufo toad secretions contain two primary components:
(Eubig 2001). Exposure to insecticides in organophospho-
bufogenins and bufotoxins (Peterson and Roberts 2006;
rous, carbamates, pyrethroids, metaldehyde or chlorinated
Fowler 1993; Eubig 2001). The secretions also contain
bufotenines (serotonin and 5-hydroxytryptophan), cate-
pathomimetic, methylxanthine, B-blocker, β-agonist and
cholamines (dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine),
various antidepressant medication exposures should be
and indolealkylamines (Peterson and Roberts 2006; Eubig
ruled out (Eubig 2001). Ingestion of outdoor plants such
2001). Bufogenins are similar in activity to cardiac glyco-
as rhododendron (Rhododendron sp.), oleander (Nerium
sides and, along with bufotoxins, are responsible for
oteander), and foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) can result in
arrhythmias such as ventricular fibrillation that develop
development of signs seen in Bufo exposures. Addition-
(Eubig 2001; Beasley 1999; Fowler 1993). Bufotenines
ally, exposure to caustic agents such as liquid potpourri
are associated with vomiting, diarrhea, depression, tremors,
and various cleaning agents, orally irritating agents such
seizures, hyperthermia and hypersensitivity to sensory
as topical fea and tick products, and plants containing
stimuli (Eubig 2001). Tachycardia, hypertension, anxiety,
insoluble calcium oxalates such as Diffenbachia and
and respiratory distress can develop as a result of the cat-
Philodendron, can cause copious salivation (Eubig 2001;
176
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Peterson 2000). Seizure disorders to rule out include
abnorrmalities are detected or if severe neurologic signs
idiopathic epilepsy, infammatory meningoencephalitis 
or shock develop (Eubig 2001; Roder 2004a). Electrolytes
(secondary to an infection, immune-mediated reaction, or
should be monitored and corrected as needed (Eubig
neoplasm), and internal masses (Peterson and Roberts
2001).
2006). Ataxia is often reported in peripheral and central
 Patients experiencing severe toxicosis should receive
vestibular diseases (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
intensive symptomatic support. Diazepam or a barbiturate
may be administered to control seizures, tremors, and agi-
Diagnostics
tation (Eubig 2001). Electrolytes, especially potassium,
Antemortem
should be monitored, and corrected as needed (Gwaltney-
Since Bufo toad toxicosis is similar in presentation to a
Brant et al. 2007; Eubig 2001). Intravenous fuids should
variety of other potential exposures ranging frorm insecti-
be given to provide additional cardiovascular support
cidesto various medications, the only truly beneficial ante-
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Atropine is contraindicated
 mortem diagnostic information is a witnessed exposure to
for treatment of hypersalivation due its potential to con-
a Bufo toad (Fowler 1993).
tribute to arrhythmias; however, it is indicated to treat
severe bradycardia (Eubig 2001; Roder 2004a). Arrhyth-
Postmortem
mias (such as tachycardia, ventricular and supraventricular
No specific postrmortem diagnostics are suggested.
arrhythmias) that do not respond to fuids may be treated
However, necrmopsy might reveal pulmonary edema and, if
using propranolol or esmolol (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007;
ingested, toad parts can be identified in stomach contents
Eubig 2001). Body temperature should be continuously
(Fowler 1993).
monitored in those patients with severe signs since it is
cormmon for secondary hypothermia to develop (Eubig
Management of Exposures
2001).
If a toad exposure is suspected or was witnessed, and the
 Digoxin-specific antigen-binding fragrments (digoxin
pet is showing no or only minor signs (such as excessive
immune Fab) have prmoven to be valuable in the treatment
salivation and gagging), the mouth should be irrigated
of humans exposed to Bufo species glandular toxins (Eubig
with large volumes of water (such as with a garden hose)
2001). This treatment is especially beneficial for those
to minimize any further secretion absorption via the
patients experiencing severe arrhythmias, significant
mucous membranes. If more severe signs are present,
hyperkalemia, and marked neurologic signs (Eubig 2001;
initial decontamination should take place under the care of
Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Fab is expensive and might
a veterinarian, following stabilization and preferably intu-
not be readily available, so its use might not be a feasible
bation of the pet (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Eubig
option in many veterinary cases (Eubig 2001; Gwaltney-
2001). It is best to fush the mouth rostrally, to avoid inges-
Brant et al. 2007).
tion of the water (Eubig 200l). In areas in which Bufo
marinus resides, especially Florida, it is important to seek
Prognosis
veterinary care immediately.
The prognosis is good when early decontamination and
Ingestion of an entire toad warrants inducing emesis
symptomatic treatrment is effectively administered in cases
under the direct supervision of a veterinarian (Eubig
involving Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius exposure (Roder
2001). For those pets with more serious signs, it might
2004a; Eubig 2001). However, death is more likely in
be necessary to remove the toad endoscopically or surgi-
cases involving advanced signs where treatment is delayed
cally after stabilizing the patient (Eubig 2001). Another
(Eubig 2001). Generally, exposure to Bufo species other
option is to administer multiple doses of charcoal with
than Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius involve only mild
a cathartic (Eubig 2001). Activated charcoal has not spe-
signs that respond to oral decontamination and resolve
cifically been assessed for its effectiveness in adsorbing
without veterinary assistance (Eubig 2001).
Bufo toxins but it is nonetheless indicated in situations
 involving serious signs or observed ingestion of a toad
ARACHNIDS-LATRODECTUS AND
(Eubig 2001).
LOXOSCELES
Pets presented in areas in which Bufo marinus or
Bufo alvarius reside should be thoroughly examined,
Sources
including auscultation of the heart. Continuous monitor-
There are more than 20,000 species of spider that live in
ing of an electrocardiogram is indicated if any cardiac
the United States (Graudins 2007). Although most spiders
Chapter 22 / Zootoxins
177
are venomous, they are not all physically able to deliver
powerful mammalian neurotoxin (Peterson and McNalley
the venom to humans or pets or the venom may not be
2006a).
potent enough to be of medical concern (Graudins 2007;
Mullen 2002; Fowler 1993). Spiders belonging to the Lat-
Chinical Effects
rodectus (widow spiders) and Loxosceles (recluse spiders)
Signs
genera are of primary veterinary importance in the United
Latrodectism is the syndrome associated with black widow
States (Graudins 2007).
spider envenomation (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). The
signs are generally central nervous system or muscular in
LatrodectusWidow Spiders
origin due to the neurotoxic nature of the venom (Roder
Only female black widow spiders have the characteristic,
2004b). The bite itself may not be felt and local reactions
well-rounded abdomen. Males have an oval-shaped
such as swelling and tissue changes are uncommon (For-
abdomen that is fatter than the females. The species gener-
rester and Stanley 2003; Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
ally prefers outdoor living. Latrodectus mactans (black
Clinical signs develop within & hours of envenomation and
widow) seems to be the most common species found
are generally serious (Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
indoors (Mullen 2002). With its prmclivity for unheated
Dogs may display progressive muscle pain and fascicula-
indoor areas such as barns, sheds, and garages, there is a
tion (Peterson 1997). A rigid abdomen without noted ten-
greater potential for human and animal interaction (Mullen
derness is a unique clinical sign associated with black
2002).
widow spider bites (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). The
pain associated with the condition worsens with the sever-
Toxicity
ity of the envenomation (Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
Restlessness and other signs associated with severe pain
A single bite can deliver enough venom to cause death in
such as contortions and writhing may develop (Peterson
domestic animals (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Latro-
1997). Excessive production of runny nasal secretions,
dectus geometricus, with a median lethal dose (LDso) of
hypersalivation, hyperesthesia, regional numbness and
0.43 mg/kg body weight, has the most potent venom of the
facial swelling may be noted (Peterson 1997). Hyperten-
five native Latrodectus species in the U.S. (Peterson and
sion and tachycardia commonly develop and seizures can
McNalley 2006a). Comparatively, Latrodectus mactans
occur (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Muscle cramping
has an LDso of 1.39 mg/kg of body weight (Peterson and
might be evident and can result in major respiratory dif-
McNalley 2006a). Cats are very sensitive to black widow
ficulty (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). When death
spider venom (Peterson and McNalley 2006a; Gwaltney-
occurs, it is due to respiratory or cardiovascular failure
Brant et al. 2007). Dogs are considered more resistant but
(Peterson and McNalley 2006a)
often develop severe clinical signs (Peterson and McNal-
Cats might develop early and severe signs of paralysis
ley 2006a). The prevalence of Latrodectus envenomation
(Peterson 1997). Howling and other loud vocalizations are
of domestic animals is not known (Peterson and McNalley
common and hypersalivation, restlessness, diarrhea, and
2006a).
vomiting may 0ccur (Peterson 1997). Muscle tremors,
cramping, ataxia, and difficulty standing due to muscle
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
weakness may be noted and often occur prior to paralysis.
Both males and females are venomous but only the
Respiratory collapse often precedes death (Peterson 1997).
Laboratory
The venom is supplied from two venom glands located
Complete blood cell count and a serum chemistry panel is
behind the eyes. Venom is delivered via the paired fangs
recommended. A leukocytosis is often noted A (Peterson
at the terminal ends of the chelicera (Fowler 1993). Not
and McNalley 2006a). Creatine kinase can be elevated,
all bites are associated with venom transfer to the victim;
black widows are capable of controlling the amount of
1997). Hyperglycemia, oliguria, albuminuria, and elevated
venom they deliver (Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
specific gravity might be noted.
Approximately 15% of the bites inficted in humans are
nonenvenomating (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). The
DifferentialDiagnoses
venom of black widow spiders is made up of 5 or 6
Acute abdomen, intervertebral disk disease, and bro-
proteinaceous toxins, most notably alpha-latrotoxin,a
methalin toxicosis are the primary differential diagnoses
178
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
to consider (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Additionally,
Loxosceles-Brown Recluse Spiders
in cats, rabies should be considered.
The Loxosceles genus includes an estimated 70 species, 14
of which reside in the United States (Mullen 2002). Lox-
Diagnostics
osceles spiders are also known as violin or fiddle-back
There are no specific tests to confrm black widow spider
spiders. The most distinguishing feature of this genus is
bite.
the violin shape located on the dorsal cephalothorax. They
are more likely to be found indoors than black widow
Antemortem
spiders. They are reclusive and prefer dark, warrm, dry,
A rigid abdomen without tendermess and accompanied by
undisturbed areas (Mullen 2002). The most notorious and
medically irmportant is Loxosceles rectusa (Gwaltney-
markedly severe pain in cases of severe envenomation is
a unique clinical sign associated with black widow spider
Brant et al. 2007; Mullen 2002).
bites (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Cats might vomit
Brown recluse spiders do not inhabit the Pacific North-
the spider (Peterson 1997).
west. However, Tegenaria agrestis, the hobo spider or
aggressive house spider, resides in that area and its bite
Postmortem
can result in similar skin lesions as those seen following
brown recluse envenormation (Peterson and McNalley
No postmorterm diagnostics are characteristic for
latrodectism.
2006b).
ManagementofExposures
Toxicity
Treatment is focused on alleviation of clinical signs
Male Loxosceles spiders have a smaller venom capacity
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Graudins 2007; Roder
than do females (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Lethal
2004b). Diazepam and methocarbamol are recommended
envenomation can occur as the result of a single bite
to alleviate muscular effects as well as seizures. Opioids
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). An estimated 40 mcg of
are best utilized for pain management (Gwaltney-Brant
venom-proteins are delivered per bite (Roder 2004b). Less
αt al. 2007).
than 5mcg of venom may potentially result in clinical
There is a specific antivenin of equine origin (Lyovac@,
lesions (Poppenga 2002). The bigger and more mature a
available from Merck and Co.) that can be administered.
spider is, the larger the venom volume (Peterson and
 It is generally reserved for use in high-risk patients (neo-
McNalley 2006b).
natal or geriatric or those with underlying health condi-
tions) or in those that are not responding to symptomatic
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
treatment (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). If needed, it might
Brown recluse venom contains a number of necrotizing
be available from a hospital pharmacy or a regional poison
enzymes, most notably, sphingomyelinase D (Gwaltney-
control center (Roder 2004b).Although the risk is gener-
Brant et al. 2007; Graudins 2007). Other enzymes include
ally low, anaphylaxis can develop upon administration of
hyaluronidase, which acts as a spreading factor for the
antivenin (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). It is best to give
venom, lipase, proteases, esterases, and alkaline phos-
it slowly, and administration of diphenhydramine might
phatases (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Roder 2004b).
prmvide a calming effect and potentially prevent an allergic
Sphingomyelinase D binds to cell membranes and causes
reaction (Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
damage to small blood vessels and aggregation of plate-
lkts (Roder 2004b).Serum hemolytic complement is
Prognosis
inactivated, which results in intravascular coagulation,
The prognosis is difficult to determine because patients
small capillary occlusion, and tissue necrosis (Gwaltney-
may not fully recover until weeks after envenomation
Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley 2006b; Beasley
(Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Due to their increased
1999). Activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is
sensitivity to black widow spider bites, cats generally will
prolonged, and clotting factors VIll, IX, XI, and XII
have a guarded prognosis even with adrministration of anti-
are exhausted (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and
venin (Peterson and Roberts 2006). The average survival
McNalley 2006b). In the presence of serum C-reactive
time reported for 20 of 22 felines that died subsequent to
protein and calcium, sphingomyelinase causes hemolysis
envenomation was 115 hours (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007;
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
Peterson and McNalley 2006a)
2006b). Free lipids in the blood, caused by the lipases,
Chapter 227 Zootoxins
179
serve as inflammatory intermediaries and cause embo-
count, and fibrinogen is recommended (Peterson and
lization (Peterson and McNalley 2006b; Gwaltney-Brant
McNalley 2006b)
et al.2007).
DifferentialDiagnoses
Clinical Effects
Differential diagnoses include pyoderma (such as Staphy-
Signs
lococcus spp.) or mycobacterial infection, decubital ulcer,
and third-degree bum; all are potentially present with a
Loxoscelism is the syndrome associated with brown
recluse spider envenomation (Mullen 2002). There are two
necrotizing wound (Peterson and McNalley 2006b; Peter-
general manifestations of loxoscelism: tissue necrosis
son 1997). Causes of hemolytic anemia, such as immune-
mediated conditions, zinc poisoning, and onion poisoning,
(most common) or systemic effects (which are rare but can
be life-threatening)(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Dogs
should be considered (Peterson and McNalley 2006b).
are especially sensitive to brown recluse bites. The sever-
Other rule-outs for the systemic manifestations are snake-
ity of a bite is dependent on the amount of venom injected,
bite, insect sting, erlichiosis, jaundice, unexplained fever,
the size of the bite, and the immune status of the victim
and red blood cell parasitism (Peterson 1997; Peterson and
McNalley 2006b).
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b).
The bite might not be felt or a mild stinging sensation
Diagnostics
might be evident for up to & hours (Peterson and McNalley
There are no specific tests available in the United States
2006b).Blood vessels constrict, resulting in diminished
to confirm brown recluse spider bite (Peterson and McNal-
supply of blood to the bite area, and pruritus and soreness
ley 2006b).
may develop. Swelling of the bite area and a characteristic
bull's-eye lesion, with a dark necrotic center, develops
Antemortem
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Gravity can displace
There is a characteristic bull's-eye lesion,with a dark
venom further and result in irregular expansion of the
necrotic center, that develops in association with brown
lesion (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). A scab forms that
recluse spider envenomation (Peterson and McNalley
sloughs in 2 to 5 weeks and results in a slow-healing ulcer
2006b).
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Generally, ulcers will not
extend into muscle but if they extend into fatty tissue, they
Postmortem
can become extensive and take months to heal while
No postmortem findings are characteristic for loxoscelism.
potentially leaving a deep scar (Peterson and McNalley
2006b).
Management of Exposures
 Loxoscelism with systemic signs is generally uncom-
Treatrment is primarily symptomatic and supportive
mon. Systemic signs, when they occur, typically develop
because there is no specific antidote for loxoscelism (Pop-
24-72 hours postenvenomation and can be serious
penga 2002). Necrotic wound care involves measuring and
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
monitoring the size of the wound, debridement with alu-
2006b). The most predominant systemic sign is hemolytic
minum acetate or hydrogen peroxide, and bandaging
anemia with prominent hemoglobinuria (Peterson and
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Dapsone, a leukocyte inhibi-
McNalley 2006b). Other potential but infrequent systemic
tor, might reduce the severity of dermal lesions and also
signs include tachycardia, fever, muscle pain, vomiting,
has antibacterial properties, although its efficacy is ques-
difficulty breathing, disseminated intravascular coagula-
tionable (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNal-
tion, and coma (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
ley 2006b; Hahn and Lewin 2006). If pain is evident,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications or opioids
Laboratory
may be given (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). If dapsone is
Assessment of a complete blood cell count (CBC) and a
not being administered and infection is suspected, broad-
serum chemistry panel with electrolytes is recommended
spectrum antibiotics should be given (Gwaltney-Brant et
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). The CBC may indicate
al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Pruritis may be
leukocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytopenia (Peterson
treated with diphenydramine (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
1997). Urinalysis may reveal hemoglobinuria (Peterson
1997). A Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia may be
Prognosis
noted (Roder 2004b). A coagulation profile to monitor
The prognosis for patients with advanced systermic signs
prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, platelet
is guarded (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Patients with
180
Section 3 I Specific Toxicants
dermonecrotic lesions generally recover but typically
Clinical Effects
endure an extended healing prmcess of weeks to months.
Signs
The occurrence of localized reactions is dependent on the
ARACHNIDS-SCORPIONS
scorpion species. If they occur, localized reactions include
immediate pain at the injection site and edema that may
Sources
or may not be associated with discoloration (Goddard
2003). Envenomation by C. scuipturatus is typically not
Of the approximately 45 species of scorpions worldwide
that are considered health risks, only Centruroides scuip-
associated with localized reactions. However, a tap test,
which involves lightly tapping on the envenomation site,
furatus, or the Arizona bark scorpion, is of great concern
to people and pets in the United States (Thomas et al.
can cause increased pain in human victims of Centruroides
2007; Mullen 2002). Although Centruroides sculpturatus
scutpturatus stings (Mullen 2002).
is considered the most dangerous scorpion in the United
Additional signs include enlargement of regional lymph
States, it is mostly a threat to young children (Mullen
nodes, pruritis, atypical skin sensation such as numbness
2002).
and tingling, fever, nausea, and vomiting. A systemic
anaphylactic reaction can occur but is rare (Goddard
Toxicity
1993). Systemic signs associated with neurotoxic venoms
include difficulty swallowing, salivation, nystagmus,
sweating, difficulty breathing, hypertension, cranial nerve
conditions (Bryson 1996). With the less toxic scorpions,
dysfunction, tremors, myocardial failure, and pulmonary
signs beyond those associated with a local reaction are
ederma (Fowler 1993). Ferrets and cats can develop
uncommon. The risk of anaphylaxis does exist, but does
 not often occur (Goddard 2003). With the more dangerous
seizures.
scorpions such as Centruroides scuipturatus, local effects
Laboratory
are not typically noted. More severe, systemic signs asso-
ciated with the neurotoxins in the venom are more preva-
Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia might be noted (Fowler
lent. The venom composition varies among species as well
1993).
as by the age and health of the scorpion and the time of
year (Thomas et al. 2007). The size of a scorpion does not
Differential Diagnoses
correlate with its toxicity; therefore, larger scorpion
Rule-outs for painful local reactions include other insect
species are not automatically more toxic than smaller ones
stings (Fowler 1993; Mullen 2002; Heard 2000). When
(Thomas et al. 2007; Mullen 2002).
neurologic signs are present, rule-outs should include
acute dystonic reaction, central nervous system (CNS)
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
stimulants, cholinergic agents, strychnine toxicosis, head
Scorpions generally sting once but are capable of stinging
trauma, CNS infections, botulism, and tetanus (Mullen
multiple times (Mullen 2002). Proteins are common con-
2002).
stituents of all scorpion venoms and include phospholipase
A2 (Fowler 1993). Other enzymes like hyaluronidase and
Diagnostics
 u q ss aos un nsnd a as
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests
others. Serotonin may also be present and is typically
available in the United States to confirm scorpion enven-
associated with the pain felt after envenomation (Mullen
omation. The only test that is useful for the diagnosis of
2002). The Hemiscorpius genus is equipped with a cyto-
Centruroides sculpturatus envenomation in humans is the
toxic venom that can cause serious tissue injury upon
tap test (Trestrail 1981).
evenomation (Mullen 2002).
All scorpions are equipped with chelicerae and pedi-
Management of Exposures
palps with pincers that are utilized to capture their prey
Treatment of the majority of scorpion stings in the United
(Thomas et al. 2007; Fowler 1993). Scorpions with more
States involves local wound management and administra
slender pedipalps are generally more toxic than those with
tion of analgesics for pain (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
thicker pedipalps. The stingeris supplied with venom from
Narcotic analgesics are contraindicated due to their appar
the telson, both of which are located in the terminal end
ent enhancement of scorpion venom effects (Trestrail
of the tail.
1981). Treatment of systemic signs is symptomatic and
Chapter 22 / Zootoxins
181
supportive. Special attention should be given to cardiovas-
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
cular monitoring and management of hypertension and
Coral snake venom is primarily neurotoxic. The venom
neurologic signs (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
consists of polypeptides and enzymes including hyal-
uronidase, proteinase, ribonuclease, desoxyribonuclease,
Prognosis
phosphodiesterase, phospholipase A, and cholinesterase
The prognosis is generally good for most pets envenom-
(Peterson 2006a; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Poppenga
ated by scorpions. Pet fatalities are not cormmon and signs
2002). The peptides in coral snake venom have similar
typically impmve within 24 hours of the envenomation
effects in humans and dogs as does curare in that they
(Fowler 1993).
create a nondepolarizing, postsynaptic neuromuscular
block (Peterson 2006a; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Chris-
SNAKES-ELAPIDS
man et al. 1996). Phospholipase A is believed to play a
rmole in the hemolysis and hemoglobinurea that are often
Sources
noted in dogs following coral snake envenomation (Peter-
Coral snakes belong to the family Elapidae. There are two
son 2006a). Paralysis, central nervous system depression,
genera of coral snake indigenous to the United States:
and vasomotor effects are also common.
Micruroides and Micrurus (Peterson 2006a). Coral snakes
of the Micrurus genus are more clinically significant
Clinical Effects
(Peterson 2006a).
Signs
All species of coral snakes in the United States have a
Clinical signs are not the same for all species. Signs
similar color pattern that starts with a black snout and
consists of small yellow (may be vibrant yellow or pale,
associated with coral snake bites in dogs include acute
almost white) bands, and larger red and black bands
depression, vomiting, hypersalivation, quadriplegia
(Peterson 2006a). Sayings such as "red on yellow, kill a
involving diminished spinal reflexes in all the limbs, and
fellow" or "if caution (yellow) touches danger (red)” can
respiratory paralysis (Peterson 2006a; Chrisrman 1996).
Anermia, intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinuria, mor-
prove to be helpful in the identification of poisonous coral
snakes in the United States versus nonpoisonous snakes
phologic red blood cell effects, hypotension, and ven-
tricular tachycardia with or without pulse deficits may
that have the same colors but in a different pattern (Peter-
son 2006a). The saying “red touches black, friend of Jack'
also be noted (Peterson 2006a; Chrisman 1996). Other
can be helpful in identification of the similarly colored,
signs noted in dogs include difficulty breathing, diffculty
nonpoisonous snakes in the United States.
swallowing, and muscle fasciculations (Gwaltney-Brant
Coral snakes have round (generally black) eyes, small,
et al. 2007).
nontriangular heads, and small mouths (Peterson 2006a).
Signs associated with coral snake envenomation in cats
They have short, fixed fangs that are not as efficient and
include acute, ascending, faccid quadriplegia, depression,
streamlined for venom delivery as pit viper fangs. Coral
reduced spinal refexes, and inhibited recognition of
painful stimuli (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson
snakes often employ a chewing action to deliver their
venorm (Peterson 2006a). Victims of coral snake bites may
2006a). Other signs include unequal pupil size, hypother-
have to shake or pull the snake off, or it may still be
mia, hypotension, respiratory depression, and lack of cuta-
attached upon presentation.
neous trunci reflex (Peterson 2006a; Chrisman 1996).
Unlike with dogs, no clinical evidence of hematuria or
Toxicity
hermoglobinuria has been observed in cats (Peterson
The toxicity of a coral snake bite is dependent on the
2006a; Chrisman 1996).
size of the coral snake involved, the volume of venom
injected, and the size of the victim (Peterson 2006a).
Laboratory
Larger snakes are capable of delivering larger volumes
It is recommended that baseline data be obtained froma
of venom. Up to 20 mg of venom may be delivered from
CBC, serum electrolytes, and serum chemistries (Peterson
a large coral snake; 4 to 5mg of venom may be lethal
and Roberts 2006). Abnormalities that might be noted
to a human (Peterson 2006a). Coral snakes deliver non-
include hyperfibrinogenemia, moderate leukocytosis, and
envenormating bites about 60% of the time. Hurman fatality
early and high increases in creatine kinase (Peterson
percentages from coral snake bites are believed to be
about 10% (Peterson 2006a).
suggestive of coral snake envenomation are an early
182
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
increase in creatine kinase and burring and spherocytosis
and additional doses be given as required based on pro-
of canine red blood cells (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
gression of signs. Since coral snake antivenin contains
equine prmteins, an allergic reaction is possible, albeit rare
Differential Diagnoses
(Peterson 2006a). Anaphylaxis, an anaphylactoid reaction
Rule-outs for coral snake bite include tick-associated
or delayed serum sickness may occur in response to an
paralysis, macadamia nut exposure in dogs, botulism,
allergic reaction. Anaphylaxis is generally treated by ces-
bromethalin toxicosis, ionophore toxicosis, acute poly-
sation of antivenin administration and administration of
neuritis, myasthenia gravis, polyradiculoneuritis, organo-
epinephrine, corticosteroids, and crystalloid fuid infusion.
phosphate toxicosis, and various drugs that might be
 More cormrmonly experienced anaphylactoid reactions are
associated with neurologic signs (Peterson 2006a; Chris-
best treated by ceasing antivenin administration and giving
man 1996).
intravenous or subcutaneous diphenhydramine, waiting
five minutes, and restarting antivenin infusion at a slower
Diagnostics
rate (Peterson 2006a). Delayed serum sickness usually
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests to
develops 7 to 14 days postantivenin treatment and is best
confirm coral snake envenomation (Peterson 2006a).
treated with antihistamines and/or corticostermoids. There is
no known predilection of development of an allergic reac-
Management of Exposures
tion in patients with a history of having received antivenin
Although development of signs can be delayed 10-18
therapy in the past (Peterson 2006a).
hours after envenomation, it is important to seek medical
treatment as soon as possible once signs develop. Anti-
Prognosis
venin is suggested in animals showing evidence of
Overall, the prognosis is guarded. It is dependent on vari-
puncturing fang marks or in which an exposure to coral
ables such as where the bite occurred, the severity of
snakes other than the Sonoran coral snake (for which
envenomation, and the time at which treatment is initiated
the antivenin is ineffective) have been witnessed (Peter-
(Peterson 2006a). Some pets have recovered without
son 2006a). Unfortunately, production of antivenin has
administration of antivenin. Smaller pets are at greater risk
been discontinued so it may not be available (Peterson
due to their smaller body weight and therefore higher
2006a).
dosage of venom.
Hospitalization for at least 48 hours, with special atten-
tion given to preventing aspiration pneumonia and respira-
SNAKES-PIT VIPERS
tory collapse is of utmost importance (Peterson 2006a). It
Sources
is prudent to take radiographs to monitor development of
aspiration pneumonia (Peterson 2006a). Endotracheal
The family Viperidae includes three genera of snakes that
intubation is recommended at the onset of respiratory dif-
are collectively referred to as pit vipers. These include
ficulty to prevent aspiration. Maintenance intravenous
rattlesnakes, water moccasins, cottonmouths, and copper-
fuid administration is recommended.
heads. All three genera are indigenous to the United States
In the absence of antivenin (or in cases involving
and include Crotalus, Sistrurus, and Agkistrodon (Peterson
Sonoran coral snakes, since no antivenin is available),
2006b). The only states in the United States that are not
treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive and
home to a venomous snake of some kind are Maine,
may require respiratory support (Peterson 2006a). Assisted
Alaska, and Hawaii (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
mechanical ventilation may be necessary for up to 48 to
All pit vipers are similar in appearance. They have heat-
72 hours. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended
sensing pits located between their vertical pupil and
because pathogenic bacteria are prevalent in the mouths of
nostril, triangular-shaped heads, retractable fangs, and a
snakes.
single row of subcaudal scales distal to the anal plate
Antivenin administration is the only definitive treatment
(Peterson 2004). Rattlesnakes in the United States all have
for coral snake envenomation (Peterson 2006a). Antivenin
hollow, dried skin segments at the end of their tails that
is most effective when administered as soon as possible
rattle when the snakes vibrate their tails (Peterson 2004).
following envenomation. The amount required to treat a
Rattlesnakes are most responsible for deaths in humans
patient is generally higher in smaller pets since the dose
and animals (Peterson 2006b). Pit vipers are believed to
of venom per kilogram of body weight is higher. It is
be involved in 99% of snakebites delivered to animals in
recommended that 1 to 2 vials be administered initially
North America (Peterson 2004)
Chapter 22/Zootoxins
183
Toxicity
consists of enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins, pep-
There is significant variation of venom toxicity both
tides, cytotoxins, myotoxins, cardiotoxins, neurotoxins,
between and within various species of pit vipers (Peterson
coagulants and anticoagulants, lipids, nucleosides and
2006b). Some rattlesnake venoms can be toxic at less than
nucleotides, organic acids, and cations (Peterson 2004,
2 mg/kg body weight, whereas copperhead venom toxicity
2006b; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Venom makeup varies
requires a dose of greater than 10 mg/kg (Poppenga 2002).
among species but generally consists of at least 10 of the
The three main types of pit vipers arranged in order of
previously named components (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
greatest toxicity to least are rattlesnakes, water moccasins,
2007). Rattlesnake envenomation typically results in one
and copperheads (Peterson 2006b). The Eastern diamond-
of three presentations. Diamondback rattlesnake venom is
back rattlesnake is the most dangermous snake in the United
representative of the classic syndrome of significant tissue
States based on its size, strength, and long fang length,
destruction, coagulopathy, and hypotension (Gwaltney-
which all contribute to its high venom volume delivery
Brant et al. 2007). Mojave A rattlesnake venom contains
(Meerdink 1983).
neurotoxins and does not impact tissues or result in coagu-
Venom cormposition varies considerably among rattle-
lopathy (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Other venoms
snakes. The venom from 9 species and 12 subspecies con-
contain a combination of both classic and neurotoxic
tains proteins that are similar to those found in mojave
venom components (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
toxin, which is a powerful neurotoxin (Peterson 2006b).
Clinical Effects
During the hotest summer months, when the daylight
hours are at their maximum, snakes are more active and
Signs
aggressive and contain the highest venom yields compared
 Dogs most commonly receive bites to their front legs or
to other times during the year (Peterson 2006b). A nonen-
head (Peterson 2004). In contrast, cats most commonly
venomating bite occurs about 25% of the time (Peterson
 are presented with bites to their torso (Gwaltney-Brant et
2004).
al. 2007). Cats often present later for treatment due to their
The amount of venom delivered can be controlled by
tendency to run and hide following injury (Gwaltney-
pit vipers (Peterson 2006b). Bites initiated in response to
Brant et al. 2007). Signs will vary because they are depen-
 pain are the most deadly because the maximum amount of
dent on dose of venom, bite location, age, health status
venom available is delivered(Peterson 2006b).Toxicity is
and species of victim, and the physical activity of the
also dependent on the number of strikes and the depth of
victim following envenomation (Poppenga 2002). Com-
fang penetration per bite (Meerdink 1983). It is possible
 monly, signs will include severe pain in the area of the
for multiple fangs to be present per side; so a bite might
bite, fang marks, swelling, possibly profuse bleeding in
have two fang marks or up to six. Older snakes might have
the bite area, salivation, abnormally deep or rapid breath-
more potent venom and larger snakes typically have a
ing, tachycardia, and mydriasis (Poppenga 2002). Second-
larger amount of venom to deliver (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
ary infection can develop. Additional signs that might be
2007).
noted include petechiae, ecchymoses, cyanosis, discolored
Species vary in their sensitivity to pit viper venoms; cats
skin and possibly sloughing tissue, hypotension, shock,
are considered more resistant (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, nausea, muscle fascicula-
2007). The size and health status of the victim, the site of
tions, reduced alertness, and enlarged 1ymph nodes (Paul
the bite and the immediacy with which treatment is sought
2007;Peterson 2004).Serious signs can be delayed over
 also impact the severity of the envenomation (Gwaltney-
a few hours postenvenomation (Peterson 2004). Local
Brant et al. 2007). Bites to the thoracic area result in more
tissue response cannot be the sole predictor of severity of
rapid venom uptake, bites to the tongue are equivalent to
envenomation; severe systemic signs can develop with
intravenous envenomation, and bites to the muzzle area
only mild tissue effects, and neurotoxic venom typically
are capable of inducing life-threatening facial swelling and
has little tissue effect (Peterson 2004). More severe, sys-
airway obstruction (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
temic developments include hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,
thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy (Gwaltney-Brant
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
et al.2007).
Pit viper venom is delivered from venom glands via rmus-
cular contractions that force the venom through the hollow
Laboratory
fangs and into the victim (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Baseline data including a CBC with differential and plate-
The venorm is 90% water while the remaining portion
let count, serum chemistries, urinalysis, and coagulation
Table 22.1. Snakebite severity score
Pulmonary System
0
Signs within normal limits
1
Minimal: slight dyspnea
2
Moderate: respiratory compromise, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles
3
Severe: cyanosis, air hunger, extreme tachypnea, respiratory insuffciency or respiratory
arrest from any cause
Cardiovascular System
0
Signs within normal limits
1
Minimal: tachycardia, general weakness, benign dysrhythmia, hypertension
2
Moderate: tachycardia, hypotension (but tarsal pulse still palpable)
Severe: extreme tachycardia, hypotension (nonpalpable tarsal pulse or systolic blood
pressure <80 mmHg), malignant dysrhythmia or cardiac arrest
Local Wound
0
Signs within normal limits
1
Minimal: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erytherma limited to bite site
2
 Moderate: pain, swelling, erytherma involves less than half of extremity and may be
spreading slowly
3
Severe: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema involves most or all of one extrermity and
is spreading rapidly
4
Very severe: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema extends beyond affected extrermity,
or significant tissue slough
Gastrointestinal System
0
Signs within normal limits
1
Minimal: abdominal pain, tenesmus
2
Moderate: vomiting, diarrhea
Severe: repetitive vomiting, diarrhea, or hematemesis
Hematologic System
0
Signs within normal limits
1
 Minimal: coagulation parameters slightly abnormal, PT < 20sec, PTT < 50sec, platelets 
100,000-150,000/mm
2
Moderate: coagulation parameters abnormal, PT 20-50sec, PTT 50-75 sec, platelets
50,000-100,000/mm
3
Severe: coagulation parameters abnormal, PT 50-100sec, PTT 75-100sec, platelets
20,00050,000/mm
4
Very severe: coagulation parameters markedly abnormal with bleeding present or the
threat of spontaneous bleeding, including PT unrmeasurable, PTT unmeasurable,
platelets <20,000/mm²
Central Nervous System
0
Signs within normal limits
1
Minimal: apprehension
2
Moderate: chills, weakness, faintness, ataxia
Severe: lethargy, seizures, coma
Total Possible Score
0-20
184
Chapter 22/ Zootoxins
185
profiles should be obtained (Peterson 2006b). Red blood
so that they can be closely monitored. A severity score
cell morphology should be examined; transient echinocy-
 sheet should be initiated upon presentation and periodi-
tosis may be evident within 48 hours in dogs and is indica-
cally updated (Peterson 2006b) (Table 22.1). The severity
tive of pit viper envenomation (Peterson 2006b). Urinalysis
score is a more objective method for assessing the patient's
should include free pmotein, hemoglobin, and myoglobin
condition at any given point in time or assessing trends
evaluation (Peterson 2006b). Coagulation profile tests
over time. In addition, it is important to take circumfer-
should include activated clotting times (ACT), prothrom-
ential measurements at, above, and below the bite area so
bin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT),
development of swelling can be methodically tracked
fibrinogen, and fibrin degradation products. Animals with
(Peterson 2006b).
severe envenomations might require electrocardiogram
Administration of a crystalloid fHuid drip via intrave-
monitoring (Peterson 2006b). These tests should be
nous catheter should be initiated. Corticosteroids are con-
repeated on a periodic basis to follow progression of
traindicated. Broad-spectrum antibiotic  therapy
is
envenomation and provide feedback regarding treatment
recommended in veterinary patients due to the plethora of
success (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
pathogenic bacteria that may be introduced during the bite
Complete blood counts often show hemoconcentration,
(Peterson 2006b).
leukocytosis, or thrombocytopenia (Paul 2007). Increased
Antivenin therapy is the only proven therapy for pit
creatine phosphokinase and myoglobinuria might be noted
viper envenomation. Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab
as a result of rhabdomyolysis from rattlesnakes equipped
Ovine is the antivenin of choice because it is FDA
with neurotoxins (Peterson 2006b). Hematuria can be
approved (Peterson 2006b). This antivenin is less likely
noted as well (Paul 2007). Transient hypokalermia that
to produce an allergic response, it efficiently and effec-
responds to intravenous fuid and antivenin treatment may
tively penetrates tissues, and it has a high affinity for
be evident following pit viper snake envenomation (Peter-
venom antigens (Peterson 2006b). Repeated administra-
son 2006b). Coagulation prmofiles often reveal increased
tion may be required.
ACT, PT, and PTT as well as increased fibrinogen degra-
dation products (Paul 2007).
Prognosis
Although pit viper envenomation varies in severity, most
Differential Diagnoses
dogs and cats treated promptly and aggressively, generally
Rule-outs for pit viper snake bite include trauma, insect
recover (Peterson 2006b; Paul 2007). Administration of
bites or stings, animal bites, draining abscess, and pene-
antivenin increases the likelihood of recovery but does not
trating wound (Peterson 2006b; Paul 2007).
ensure recovery; some pets have died despite antivenin
treatment (Paul 2007). Smaller pets are at greater risk. The
prognosis is poor in animals receiving high-volume enven-
Diagnostics
 omation or in those that experience shock, severe cardiac
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests to
arrhythmias, hematologic effects, and infection (Paul
confrm pit viper snake envenomation (Peterson 2006b).
2007).
Management of Exposures
REFERENCES
Development of significant signs, other than the immedi-
Akre, R.D. and Reed, H.C. 2002. Ants, wasps, and bees
ate pain felt at the time of bite, can be delayed. It is
(Hymenoptera). In Medical and Veterinary Entomotogy.
imperative that treatment be sought as soon as possible
edited by G. Mullen and L. Durden, Pp. 383-409. New
because major irreversible complications can develop if
York: Academic Press.
too much time has elapsed (Peterson 2006b). It is impor-
Beasley, V.R. 1999. A Systems Affected Approach to Veteri-
tant to keep the animal calm after being bitten because
nary Toxicology. Urbana: University of Illinois College of
physical activity and anxiousness could promote more
Veterinary Medicine.
rapid uptake of the venom. Additionally, if possible, the
Bryson, PD. 1996. Scorpions. In Comprehensive Review in
Toxicology for Emergency Clinicians, 3rd ed., pp. 736-738.
bite site should be kept below heart level and the animal
Washington, D.C.: Taylor and Francis.
should be transported to a veterinary medical facility as
Chrisman, C.L., Hopkins, A.L., Ford, S.L. et al. 1996
soon as possible so that treatment, including antivenin
Acute faccid quadriplegia in three cats with suspected
coral snake envenomation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:
victims should be hospitalized for a minimum of & hours
343-349.
186
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Conceicao, L.G., Haddad Jt,V,and Loures, FH. 2006.
Merck Online Medical Library for Healthcare Professionals
Pustular dermatosis caused by fire ant (Solenopsis
accessed September 23, 2008, at http://www.merck.com/
invicta) stings in a dog. Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 17:453-
mmpe/print/sec2 1/ch325/ch325c.html.
455.
Morgan, R.V. 1997. Toad poisoning. In Handbook of Small
Cowell, A.K. and Cowell, R.L. 1995. Management of bee
Animal Practice, 3rd ed.,p. 1288. Philadelphia: W.B.
and other hymenoptera stings. In Kirk's Current Veterinary
Saunders.
Therapy Xll: Small Animal Practice, edited by J.D. Bona-
Mullen, G.R. 2002. Spiders. In Medical and Veterinary Ento-
gura, pp. 226-228. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
mology, edited by G.R. Mullen and L. Durden, Pp. 427-
Cowell, A.K., Cowell, R.L., Tyler, R.D. et al. 1991. Severe
444. Philadelphia: Academic Press.
systemic reactions to hymenoptera stings in three dogs.
Noble, S.J. and Armstrong, PJ. 1999. Bee sting envenom-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 198(6):1014-1016.
ation resulting in secondary immune-mediated hemolytic
Diaz, J.H. 2007. Hymenopterid bites, stings, allergic reactions
anemia in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214(7):1026-
and the impact of hurricanes on Hymenopterid-inflicted
1027.
injuries. J La State Med Soc 159: 149-157.
Oliveira, E.C., Pedroso, PM.O., Meirelles, A.E.W.B. et al.
Drees, B.M., Jensen, J.M., Joyce, J.R. et al. 2002. Diagnosing
2007. Pathological findings in dogs after multiple African-
and treating animats forred imported fire ant injury.Avail-
ized bee stings. Toxicon 49:1214-1218.
able at: http://fireant.tamu.edu/materials/factsheets_pubs/
Palumbo, N.E. 1983. Toad poisoning. In Kirk's Current Vet-
pdf/FAPFS022.2002rev.pdf
erinary Therapy Vlll Smalf Animal Practice, edited by J.D.
Elgart, G.W. 1990. Ant, bee and wasp stings. Dermatol Clin
Bonagura, Pp. 160-162. Tokyo: W.B. Saunders.
229-236.
Paul, A. 2007. Snakebite. In Clinicat Veterinary Advisor Dogs
Eubig, PA. 2001. Bufo species toxicosis: Big toad, big
and Cats, edited by E. Cote and E. Rozanski, pp. 1012-
problem.Vet Med 96(1):595-599.
1014. St Louis: Mosby Elseviet.
Fitzgerald, K.T. and Flood, A.A. 2006. Hymenoptera stings.
Peterson, M.E. 1997. Spider venom toxicosis—Brown recluse
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 21:194-204.
family. In 5-Minute Veterinary Consut, edited by L.P
Fitzgerald, K.T. and Vera, R. 2006. Insects—Hymenoptera.
Tilley and F.W.K Smith Jt., p. 1207. Philadelphia: Williams 
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peter-
and Wilkins.
son and PA. Talcott, pp. 744-767. St. Louis: Elsevier
. 2000. Toad venom toxicosis. In 5-Minute Veterinary
Saunders.
Consut Canine and Feline, 2nd ed., edited by L.P. Tilley
Forrester, M.B. and Stanley, S.K. 2003. Black widow spider
and F.W.K. Smith Jr., Pp. 1252-1253. Philadelphia: Lip-
and brown recluse spider bites in Texas from 1998 through
pincott Williams and Wilkins.
2002. Vet Hum Toxicol 45(5):270-273.
. 2004. Reptiles: Pit vipers. In Clinical Veterinary
Fowler, M.E. 1993. Veterinary Zootoxicology, Pp. 41-46;
Toxicology, edited by K.H. Plumlee, pp. 106-111. St Louis:
69-80; 81-86. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc.
Mosby.
Goddard, J. 2003. Scorpions. In Physician's Guide to Arthro-
.2006a. Snake bite: Coral snakes.In Small Animal
pods of Medical Importance,4th ed.,pp.301-308.Wash-
Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson and PA.
ington, D.C.: CRC Press, Inc.
Talcott, pp. 1039- 1047, St Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Graudins, A. 2007. Venomous arthropods. In Haddad and
 2006b. Snake bite: North American pit vipers. In
Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug
Small Animal Toxicotogy, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson
Overdose, 4th ed., edited by M. W. Shannon et al., Pp. 433-
and PA. Talcott, Pp. 1017-1038. St Louis: Elsevier
439. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Saunders.
Gwaltney-Brant, S., Dunayer, E.K., and Youssef, H.J. 2007.
Peterson, M.E. and McNalley, J. 2006a. Spider evenomation:
Terrestrial zootoxins. In Veterinary Toxicology Basic and
Black recluse. In Small Animat Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited
Clinical Principles, edited by R.C. Gupta. pp. 794-807.
by M.E. Peterson and PA. Talcott, Pp. 1063-1069. St.
New York: Academic Press.
Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Hahn, 1., Lewin, N.A. 2006. Arthropods. In Goldfrank's Toxi-
. 2006b. Spider evenomation: Brown recluse. In Small
cologic Emergencies, edited by N.E. Flomenbaum et al.,
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson
Pp. 1603-1622. New York: McGraw-Hill.
and PA. Talcott, Pp. 1070-1075. St. Louis: Elsevier
Heard, K. 2000. Scorpion envenomation. In 5-Minute Toxi-
Saunders.
cology Consult, edited by R.C. Dart, pp. 624-625. Phila-
Peterson, M.E. and Roberts, B.K. 2006. Toads. In Smaff
delphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson
Meerdink, G.L. 1983. Bites and stings of venomous animals.
and PA. Talcott, Pp. 1083-1093. St. Louis: Elsevier
In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Vlll Small Animat
Saunders.
Practice, edited by JLD. Bonagura, Pp. 160-162. Philadel-
 Poppenga, R.H. 2002. Zootoxins, Western Veterinary Confer-
phia: W.B. Saunders.
ence, February, Las Vegas, Nevada.
Chapter 22/ Zootoxins
187
Rakich, PM., Latimer, K.S., Mispagel, M.E. et al. 1993.
Rodriguez-Lainz, A., Fritz, C.L., and McKenna, W.R.
Clinical and histologic characterization of cutaneous reac-
1999. Animal and human health risks associated with
tions to stings of the imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta)
Affricanized honeybees. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215(12):
in dogs. Vet Path 30:555-559.
1799-1804.
Reeves, M.P. 2004. A retrospective report of 90 dogs with
Thomas, JD., Thomas, K.E., Kazzi, Z.N. 2007. Scorpions
suspected cane toad (Bufo marinus) toxicity. Aust Vet J
and stinging insects. In Haddad and Winchester's Clinical
82(10):608-611.
Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose,4th ed.,
Roberts, B.K.et al. 2000.Bufo marinus intoxication in dogs:
edited by M.W. Shannon et al., Pp. 440-447. St. Louis:
94 cases (1997-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(12):
Elsevier Saunders.
1941-1944.
Trestrail IH1, J.H. 198 1. Scorpion envenomation in Michigan:
Roder, J.D. 2004a. Biotoxins: Toads. In Clinicat Veterinary
Three cases of toxic encounters with poisonous stowaways.
Toxicology, edited by K.J. Plumlee, Pp. 113. St. Louis:
Vet Hum Toxicol 23(1):8-11.
Mosby.
Walker, T., Tidwell, A.S., Rozanski, E.A., DeLaforcade, A.,
2004b. Biotoxins: Spiders. In Clinicat Veterinary
and Hoffman, A.M. 2005. Imaging diagnosis: Acute lung
Toxicology, edited by K.J. Plumlee, pp. 111-113. St. Louis:
injury following massive bee envenomation in a dog Vet
Mosby.
Radiol Ultrasound 46(4):300-303.
Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
23
Joyce Eisold and Michelle Mostrom
INTRODUCTION
cholinergic signs (SLUDD); isoxazole- and psilocybin-
Mushroom poisonings are common in dogs and infrequent
containing mushrooms, which cause hallucinogenic signs;
 in cats. Poisonings probably occur more frequently because
and amanitin- and gyromitin-containing mushroorms,
ingestions may not be observed by owners and few ana
which are hepatotoxic (Table 23.1). Each category of
lytical laboratories can confirm mushroom toxicosis.
mushroom, their mechanisms of action, their associated
Therefore, many mushroom-induced toxicoses are likely
clinical signs, and medical management of intoxications
attributed to other causes. According to the ASPCA Animal
will be covered separately because they have widely
Poison Control Center, most of the documented cases of
varying symptoms and degrees of toxicity.
mushroom poisonings occur in California. Of 700 cases
reported to the ASPCA between 2002 and 2007, 11% were
MUSHROOMS CAUSING
from California (Puschner 2007)
GASTROINTESTINAL SIGNS
When dealing with a possible mushroom toxicosis, it is
important to verify whether the mushroorm was purchased
Sources
from a store for medicinal or ingestion purposes or if it
A large number of mushrooms cause gastrointestinal
was obtained from mushroom hunting. If the owner sus-
upset in animals. The species involved are members of
pects mushrooms, request a description of the mushroom
the genera Agaricus, Albatrellus,Armillaria, Boletus,
(size, color) and whether the dog or cat ate the cap or sterm.
Chlorophylium,Entotoma,Gomphus,Hebetoma,Lacca-
Whenever possible, the mushroom should be positively
ria, Lactarius, Laetiporus,Lampteromyces,Meripitus,and
identified as to genus and species. If the owner has access
Omphalotus. The specific toxins for many of them have
to the mushroom it should be placed in a paper bag and
not been identified. Some possible toxins include illuden S
refrigerated. The best way to bag it is to place the mush-
(Omphalotus illudents, Omphalotus olearuis,and Lam-
room with the cap down on a white sheet of paper that has
pteromyces japonica), monoterpenes (Albatrelius spp.),
the site and the conditions written on it. It is sometimes
 norcaperatic acid (Gomphus spp.), hebeleomic acid A
important to include known trees in the environment
(cytotoxic triterpene, Hefeloma crustuliniforme), cucurbi-
because certain mushrooms are associated with specific
tane triterpene glycosides (Hebetoma vinosphyltum),
trees (Spoerke 2006).
lectins (Laccaria amethystine), marasmane/lactarane ses-
There are many different types of mushrooms contain-
quitrpenes (Russula spp. and Lactarius spp.), and phenole-
ing a variety of toxins that cause differing clinical signs.
thylamines (Lactiprus suiphureus, and Meripilus spp.)
The mushrooms that will be covered in this chapter include
(Spoerke 2001; Tegzes and Puschner 2002a). These mush-
the mushrooms affecting the gastrointestinal system;
rooms are widely distributed throughout the United States
muscarine-containing mushrooms, which cause classic
and grow in a variety of substrates and environments.
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
189
Table 23.1. Mushrooms of veterinary importance in North America
Mushroom
Toxin
Clinical Signs
Agaricus, Atbatreltus, Armillaria,
No specific toxin identified
Gastrointestinal irritation
Botetus,Chtorophyltum,Entotoma,
Vomiting
Gomphus,Hebeloma, Laccaria.
Abdominal pain
Lactarius,Lampteromyces,
Diarrhea
Omphalotus,Rhodophyllus,
Lethargy
Ramaria,Suiltus
Weakness
Dizziness
Inocybe spp.
Muscarine
Salivation
Clitocybe spp.
Lacrimation
Entoloma
Urination
Diarrhea
Miosis
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Bronchoconstriction
Vomiting
Amanita muscaria (fy agaric)
Isoxazole: ibotenic acid,
Behavioral changes (disoriented, agitated,
Aminata pantherina (panther or warted
muscimol
depression)
agaric)
Somnolence/ coma
Lethargy
Vomiting
Ataxia/paresis
Dyspnea
Hyperactivity
Salivation
Diarrhea
Miosis
Tremors/seizures
 2nd-degree atrioventricular block
Psilocybe
 Psilocybin
CNS derangement
Psilocin
Altered behavior
Gymnopilus,Panaeotus
Agitation
 Stropharia (hallucinogenic or magic
Aggression
mushrooms)
Vocalization
Weakness/ataxia
Tachycardia
Hyperreflexia
Mydriasis
Seizures
Hyperthermia
Hypertension
Drowsiness
190
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
191
Table 23.1.
Continued
Mushroom
Toxin
Clinical Signs
Gyromitra spp. (false morels)
Monomethylhydrazine
Vomiting
Hetvella spp.
Watery diarrhea
Verpa bohemica
 Dehydration
Abdominal pain
Lethargy
Fever
 Liver and renal damage
Hemolysis
Methemoglobinemia
Hypoglycemia
Seizures
 Amanita spp. (A.phalloides or death cap)
Cyclopeptides:
Irreversible cytotoxicity of liver and kidney
Galerina
amatoxins
Severe hypoglycemia
Lepiota
(Q-, β-,, E-amanitins),
Gastroeneteritis
phallotoxins, virotoxins
Death
Kinetics
death. Onset of signs is within 15 minutes to several hours
Kinetic inforrmation on these species has not been estab-
and the duration is a few hours to a couple of days. If the
lished because the toxic principle of most GI irritant mush-
onset of gastrointestinal signs is 6-24 hours after ingestion
rooms is not known.
there is a possibility that the animal ingested an amanitin-
containing mushroom, which is a much more serious
Mechanism of Action
intoxication.
A variety of mechanisms are thought to be responsible for
Differential Diagnoses
causing clinical signs, including hypersensitivity, local
irritation, and enzyme defiencies (Spoerke 2001).
The differential diagnoses for the GI class of mushrooms
includes bacterial or viral gastroenteritis, dietary indiscre-
Toxicity
tion, pancreatitis, hepatotoxic mushroom ingestion, irritant
The toxicity of these mushrooms varies. One-half of a cap
plant ingestion, or tremorgenic mycotoxin ingestion.
from an Agaricus spp. caused foaming, vomiting, diarrhea,
and disorientation in a 1-year-old cat (Spoerke 2001).
Diagnostics
Ingestion of one Scteroderma citrinum in a 7-month-old
 In a live animal the vomitus should be examined for evi
potbellied pig resulted in persistent vomiting, depression,
dence of mushrooms, and at a necropsy mushrooms may
weakness, recumbency, hypothermia, abdorminal splinting,
be found in the gastric contents. Fragments of mushrooms
and death within 5 hours despite treatment with dexa-
found in vomitus or gastric contents might be suitable for
methasone and fuids. An unknown species of Russula was
identification purposes. If the client can provide fresh,
eaten by a cat that subsequently developed hematemesis
fairly intact samples ofthe suspected mushrooms, they can
(Spoerke 2001). Precise toxicity information specific to
be sent to qualified mycologists for identification.
pet animals or livestock is not available.
Management of Exposures
Clinical Signs
 The medical management of a GI toxin mushroorm consists
The most common clinical effect seen is gastrointestinal
of inducing ermesis if vomiting has not already occured.
upset, including vomiting and diarrhea (possibly bloody),
Emesis can be achieved by having the owners use 3%
salivation, abdominal discomfort, and lethargy. The gas-
hydrogen peroxide at home with the dose based on the
trointestinal effects can result in dehydration and rarely
weight of the animal, or a veterinarian can induce emesis
cause electrolyte imbalances, hypovolemia, collapse, and
using conjunctival or injectable apormorphine. After
192
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
calming the GI tract, activated charcoal should be admin-
carine. Cat and mouse cardiovascular systems are particu
istered. A complete blood count, liver/renal panels, elec-
larly sensitive to muscarine. In cats, as little as 0.01 mg/kg
trolytes, and acid/base evaluation should be obtained if
IV can cause hypotension (Benjamin 1995).
hepatotoxic mushroom ingestion has not been ruled out.
Parenteral fuid administration to combat dehydration due
Clinical Signs
to excessive vomiting may be needed along with stomach
The clinical signs are typically cholinergic signs (e.g-,
protectants and antiemetics. Symptomatic and supportive
salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, and dyspnea
care should be pmvided as needed.
or SLUDD) without nicotinic or significant CNS effects.
The most cormrmon signs seen are hypersalivation (with
Prognosis
thick ropy saliva), vomiting, diarrhea, lacrimation, and wet
Ingestion of these mushrooms is rarely fatal, but it is
bronchial sounds. There is frequently abdominal pain,
essential to differentiate GI-toxic mushrooms from hepa-
urinary incontinence, and anxiety; occasionally, tachycar-
totoxic ones.
dia, miosis, hypotension, and dyspnea; and rarely, animals
exhibit respiratory and cardiac arrest. Onset of signs is
MUSCARINIC MUSHROOMS
usually within 5-30 minutes of ingestion and almost never
beyond 2 hours (Benjamin 1995). Signs can persist for
Sources
several hours if not treated, but they quickly subside when
atropine is administered. There are no laboratory abnor-
The agent in muscarinic mushroorms is muscarine, which
malities expected.
is heat stable; only the L(+) isomer is active. Inocybe spp.
and Clitocybe spp. species of mushrooms contain this
Differential Diagnoses
agent and are nondescript small brown mushrooms. Very
The differential diagnoses include organophosphorus
low concentrations of muscarine can be found in many
or carbamate insecticide, anatoxin-a, or slaframine
other genera including Entoloma and Mycena. These
intoxications.
mushrmooms are found throughout the United States and
Canada and prefer to grow in hardwood and coniferous
Diagnostics
forests, parks, lawns, and gardens. They fruit in late fall
Muscarine can be detected in urine and this has been used
and early winter.
to confirm exposure, but the best diagnostic parameter is
response to treatment (ie., administration of atropine)
Kinetics
The oral absorption of muscarine is poor, but some species
Management of Exposures
(e.g-, rabbits) have negligible absorption of muscarine
Induction of ermesis is advised if the animal has not already
(Benjamin 1995). Muscarine is not affected by digestive
vomited and the time from ingestion to presentation is not
enzymes. It does not cross the blood-brain barrier, so any
prolonged. Emesis can be achieved by having the owners
CNS signs are attributed to secondary effects from hypoxia
use 3% hydrogen peroxide at home with a dose based on
due to hypotension.
body weight of the animal, or a veterinarian can induce
emesis using conjunctival or injectable apomorphine.
Mechanism of Action
 Gastric emptying is followed by activated charcoal without
Muscarine binds to muscarinic (acetylcholine) receptors
a cathartic since muscarine causes increased peristalsis
 in the parasympathetic nervous system, stimulating post-
and diarrhea in rmany patients (Spoerke 2006). Syrmptorm-
synaptic neurons. It is not degraded by acetylcholines-
atic and supportive care is always needed. Oxygen can be
terase so the action is prolonged. The specific target
administered if dyspnea is noted. Intravenous fuid therapy
organs are gland cells, cardiac nodal muscle fbers and
can be administered for possible hypotension. The specific
smooth muscle. Effects are peripheral, not central
antagonist for muscarine is atropine. Atropine competi-
(Spoerke 2006).
tively dislodges muscarine from receptor sites without
stimulating postsynaptic neurons. A preanesthetic atropine
Toxicity
dose should be administered and, if no signs of atropiniza-
Species differ in their sensitivity to intoxication. Rabbits
tion occur, additional atropine may be given to effect. The
starting dose is 0.04 mg/kg (1/4 IV with the remainder IM).
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
193
The end point is not mydriasis, but cessation of secretions
Toxicity
(Spoerke 2006).
Doses of about 4-8 mg psilocybin/2g of dried mushrooms
or 20 fresh mushrooms can prmoduce signs. In humans the
Prognosis
initial signs consist of relaxation and detachment and can
The prognosis is usually good since ingestions are rarely
occur at a psilocybin dose of 4 mg. In humans, 6-12mg
fatal.
psilocybin results in perceptual alteration and visual dis-
tortions. Greater than 12mg psilocybin or 1 to 4 large fresh
HALLUCINOGENIC MUSHROOMS
mushrooms can cause hallucinations in humans (Benjamin
1995).
Sources
Clinical Signs
Hallucinogenic mushrooms or “magic mushrooms"
contain psilocybin and psilocin. Psilocin is the dephos-
The most common clinical effects from ingestion of these
mushrooms are alteration of behavior and mentation,
phorylated form of psilocybin and can be the primary form
present in the bloodstream. It is a methyltryptamine deriv-
ataxia, and vocalization. Frequently, there will also be
ative and is heat stable and resists drying. Psilocybe spp.,
mydriasis and hyperthermia and possibly tachycardia, sei-
Panaeolus spp., Conocybe spp., Gymnophilus spp. and
zures, and muscle weakness. Rarely, death has occurred.
some Stropharia spp. also contain this type of toxin. Stems
There are no specific laboratory abnormalities expected.
of some psilocybin-containing mushrooms will turm blue
Differential Diagnoses
when handled.
These mushrooms are found in North America, espe-
Differentials include serotonergic/psychotropic drug,
cially in the Pacific Northwest and Gulf Coast. They thrive
alcohol, marijuana, or LSD intoxications.
 in manure although some prefer mulch and rotting wood.
(Benjamin 1995). They will grow in lawns, gardens, parks,
Diagnosis
rmadsides, and open woods. These mushrmooms are used
Tests are available to detect psilocybin, but the signs will
recreationally for hallucinogenic effects. Their sale and
probably have subsided by the time test results are
use is illegal in the United States, but the sale of the
obtained. No specific laboratoryor necropsy/histopathologic
mycelia of the "magic mushrooms" is not illegal. The
alterations are expected.
 mushrooms have been put in capsules in a powdered forrm
and added to soups, stews, milkshakes, and other edible
Management of Exposures
products in order to mask the bitter taste (Benjamin 1995).
Decontamination via emesis and lavage can be performed
and activated charcoal given for recent ingestions. Emesis
Kinetics
can be induced by having the owners use 3% hydrogen
The bioavailability of pysilocybin is -50% in rats (Benja-
 peroxide at home with a dose based on the weight of the
min 1995). It is widely distributed throughout the body
animal, or a veterinarian can induce ermesis using conjunc-
and it crosses the blood-brain barrier and concentrates in
tival or injectable apomorphine. Aspiration is a risk that
the liver and adrenals. Within 4 hours of ingestion it cannot
needs to be taken into consideration in animals showing
be detected in blood, but it remains in the liver and adre-
neurologic signs. Gastric emptying is followed by admin-
 nals forup to 48 hours (Benjamin 1995). It does not appear
istration of one dose of activated charcoal. Seizures can be
to be metabolized via monoarmine oxidase. Approximately
controlled with diazepam or, if no response, barbiturates,
66% is excreted in urine within the first 24 hours while the
propofol, or isofurane can be used as needed. The body
remainder in the liver and adrenals is gradually eliminated
over 7 days (Benjamin 1995).
needs to be kept to a minimum. Cyproheptadine, while not
an antagonist, can block the effects of serotonergic drugs
Mechanism of Action
and may also be helpful for hyperthermia.
The chemical acts as a serotonin agonist. It is thought to
stimulate serotonin receptors (e-g-, 5-HT2A) within the
Prognosis
CNS and PNS. The mechanism may also involve
The prognosis is generally good and most animals survive
norepinepherine-mediated pathways (Beasley 1999).
with supportive and symptomatic care.
194
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
IBOTENIC ACID AND
cause neuronal necrosis. Tricholomic acid from Tri-
MUSCIMOL-CONTAINING MUSHROOMS
choloma muscarium has a similar structure and mecha-
nism of action as ibotenic acid.
Sources
Ibotenic acid and muscimol are isoxazoles. Muscimol is
Toxicity
the decarboxylation pmoduct of ibotenic acid (Benjamin
The toxicity of these mushrooms can be difficult to quan-
1995).
tify because it depends on many factors. Six mg of mus-
Amanita gemmata, Amanita muscaria (fy agaric
cimol causes CNS effects in adult humans (Benjamin
mukhomor, woodpecker-of-Mars), Amanita pantherina
1995). This amount is found in a single cap of A. panthe-
(panther mushroom),Amanita smithiana, Amanita strobil-
rina and some A. muscaria. A lethal dose (human) is
formis, and Trichotoma muscarium. A. muscaria and A.
approximately 15 caps. Spring and summer fruiting caps
pantherina are responsible for most animal and human
may have higher levels of toxins. Ibotenic acid is 5 to 10
poisonings (Benjamin 1995).
times less potent than muscimol in humans (Benjamin
A. muscaria has a cap that ranges from bright orange to
1995). Drying mushrooms containing ibotenic acid results
bright crimson (looks like a candy apple with a bad case
in spontaneous decarboxylation to muscimol. Dried mush-
of dandruff") (Benjamin 1995). It grows from summer to
rooms are more toxic than fresh, but prolonged storage
fall and fruiting most commonly occurs in fall and early
results in degradation of the toxins so they become less
winter. In the eastern United States it can fruit in the
toxic over time (>l year).
summer and again in late fall. It is found primarily in
coniferous and deciduous forests, but can also be found on
Clinical Signs
madsides, in parks and open forests, and on edges of pas-
The most common clinical signs are vomiting, ataxia, and
tures (Benjamin 1995; Spoerke 2001). It is abundant in the
disorientation. Frequently one can see hallucinations,
Pacific Northwest in association with Douglas fir trees and
vocalizations, alternating lethargy and agitation, hyperes-
 is widespread throughout the United States and Canada. It
thesia, recumbency, somnolence, and fasciculations. There
is often found in association with beech and aspen. A.
is also the possibility of tremors, seizures, bradycardia,
muscaria has been used as a fy attractant/poison (Benja-
hypotension, and hypothermia. Rarely, one can see respi-
min 1995) and as an inebriant for recreational and reli-
ratory depression and death. The onset of signs is almost
gious purposes.
always within 30 minutes to 2 hours, but can sometimes
A. pantheris is found more commonly in the western
be delayed for up to 6 hours. The duration of signs can be
 United States, especially the westerm coastal plain (Benja-
for 8-24 hours. There are no long-term sequela expected
min 1995). It fruits in the spring and early summer and
and no laboratory abnormalities expected, but if the vomit-
again in the fall and is associated with conifers and some-
ing and diarrhea are prolonged there can be electrolyte
times hardwoods.
abnormalities.
Kinetics
Diagnosis
Muscimol and ibotenic acid cross the blood-brain
There are no diagnostic tests available and there are no
barrier
diagnostic lesions that develop.
Mechanism of Action
Differential Diagnoses
Isoxazoles cause fuctuating CNS excitation and depres-
Differential diagnoses include ethylene glycol, alcohol,
sion due to opposing effects of muscimol and ibotenic
marijuana, serotonergic or dopaminergic drug, opiate, bar-
acid. The mechanism of action for the cholinergic-like
biturate or other CNS depressants intoxications, and viral
effects is not known. Muscimol is formed by the decar-
or bacterial encephalitis.
boxylation of ibotenic acid, which binds GABA receptors
in the central nervous system. This binding is irreversible
Management of Exposures
and leads to prolonged activity, which results in central
Decontamination is useful in asymptomatic animals and
nervous system depression. Ibotenic acid acts on gluta-
consists of inducation of emesis if ingestion has been
mate receptors in the brain, which results in CNS stimula-
within 4 hours. Emesis can be achieved as previously
tion. It may also have direct neurmotoxic effects, which can
discussed followed by activated charcoal. Symptomatic
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
195
and supportive care is required. Intravenous fuids are
icity varies. Monomethylhydrazine precursor varies from
needed for cardiovascular support. If seizures develop,
50-300 mg/kg and gyrormitrin varies from 0.06-1.6g/kg in
diazepam and barbiturates can be used. Injectable metho-
fresh mushrooms. Cooking removes over 99% of the
carbamol is best for tremors. Providing an environrment
gyromitrin and drying also removes it. Five mg of mono-
that minimizes external stimuli can reduce the tendency to
methylhydrazine caused vomiting in monkeys and 7mg
seizure or tremor. Thermoregulation is needed and anti-
caused death (Benjamin 1995).
emetics and GI protectants are part of the supportive care
needed. Atropine is contraindicated because it may worsen
Clinical Signs
the clinical effects of isoxazoles (Benjamin 1995).
The mushrooms cause a gastrointestinal effect followed by
neurologic, hepatoarenal, and/or hemolytic syndromes.
Prognosis
Onset of signs can be delayed from 6-24 hours after inges-
The prognosis is generally excellent provided good sup-
tion, but in some cases the signs occur as late as 53 hours
portive care is provided.
postingestion. In one dog vomiting began 3 hours follow.
ing ingestion (Beasley 1999). There is a 2-8-hour latent
GYROMITRIN-CONTAINING MUSHROOMS
period following spore inhalation. Onset of Gl signs is
 often sudden and may last for 2 days (Spoerke 2006). The
GI phase involves nausea, vomiting, watery and possibly
Sources
bloody diarrhea, along with abdorminal discornfort, leth-
Gyromitrin is heat-labile, volatile, and water soluble
argy, and possibly fever No additional signs might occur
(Tegzes and Puschner 2002s). Cooking the mushroom
and there may be spontaneous recovery in a few days to
causes a decrease in toxicity, although the cooking liquid
 is toxic. Species containing gyromitrin include Gyromitra
a week.
For the hepatorenal syndrome, signs may develop by
spp. (false morels), Helvella crispa and H. lacuose. These
36-48 hours and consist of icterus, hepatomegaly, and
mushrooms grow throughout North America, usually near
possibly splenomegaly. Rarely renal failure develops sec-
conifers, aspens, and melting snow banks. They are com-
monly found in the spring.
ondary to hypotension, dehydration, and hemolysis.
The hemolytic syndrome occurs rarely and appears to
be more prevalent in dogs, who appear to be more suscep-
Kinetics
tible to hemolysis and methemoglobinemia (Benjamin
Gyromitrin is metabolized to methyl-formylhydrazine and
1995). Sometimes there is methemoglobinemia without
then to monomethylhydrazine (Poisindex@ 2003). The
hemolysis.
mushrooms contain a monomethylhydrazine precursor
There can be a neurologic syndrome that is a terminal
that is toxic (Spoerke 2006). Monomethylhydrazine inhib-
phase. This phase consists of delirium, fasciculations,
its -aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis with decreased
mydriasis, stupor that progresses to coma, circulatory col-
GABA inhibition. The monomethylhydrazine also reacts
lapse, and respiratory arrest. Rabbits intoxicated with
with pyridoxal 5-phosphate to form a hydrazone. Deple-
gyromitrin developed loss of activity, seizures, anorexia,
tion of tissue pyridoxal 5-phosphate results in decreased
hemoglobinuria, and weight loss (Spoerke 2001). In one
glutamic acid decarboxylase inhibition and GABA synthe-
case a dog developed vomiting 2-3 hours after chewing
sis. Decreased GABA synthesis predisposes to seizures.
on Gyromitra esculenta and in the course of 6 hours devel-
The inhibition of a diamine oxidase in the intestinal
oped lethargy, followed by coma and death.
mucosa may be responsible for the GI signs. The mecha-
The most common signs are vomiting, diarrhea, and
nism of hepatic damage is hypothesized to involve inhibi-
abdominal pain with fever. More severe signs can occur,
tion of certain mixed function oxidases in the liver,
but are very rare and occur mainly in dogs. The duration
resulting in the formation of free radicals and causing lipid
of signs varies. The GI effects can last for up to a week;
peroxidation. The mechanism of hermolysis is not clearly
hepatic and renal signs can last for weeks before recovery
 defined but rmight be secondary to other metabolic disrup-
or, conversely, deterioration and death. Hemolytic and
tions (Benjamin 1995).
liver and kidney effects can be chronic.
Toxicity
Differential Diagnoses
There is a wide variation of gyromitrin in individual mush-
Differential diagnoses include amanitin, zinc, iron, and
rooms and species of mushrooms and thus mushroom tox-
acetaminophen toxicosis.
196
Section 3 / Specifc Toxicants
Diagnosis
January in Califormia and from August to November in the
Diagnostically one has to rely on the history of ingestion
easterm states. A. phalloides requires tree roots to grow, so
of mushrooms and any clinical signs consistent with expo-
it is not often found in grassy areas unless they contain
sure (i.e., latent period followed by Gl, and/or hepatic and
mature trees with an extensive root system (Tegzes and
renal signs and hemolysis). Clinical pathology tests can
Puschner 2002a). A. phalloides mushrooms are most often
show elevations in PT, AST, ALT, BUN, serum bilirubin,
associated with birch and oak trees and can be in wood-
and creatinine (Spoerke 2006). On postmortem, histopa-
lands, parks, and golf courses. This mushroom species is
thology can show renal tubular necrosis, periacinar hepatic
the most toxic of the amatoxin-containing mushrooms and
degeneration and necrosis, and cerebral edema (Benjamin
responsible for about 90%-95% of human deaths frorm
1995; Tegzes and Puschner 2002a).
mushroom poisonings worldwide (Donnelly and Wax
2005).
Management of Exposures
Amanita bisporigera (destroying angel) can be found
Management starts with early decontamination using
acrmss the northern tier states and in eastern Canada (Ben-
emesis and activated charcoal. Emesis can be achieved as
jamin 1995). It is found in hardwood forests and mixed
specified previously. It is necessary to correct fuid and
woodlands and is associated with oaks, birches, and
electrolyte imbalances, so it is important to monitor elec
aspens.
trolytes, acid/base balance, hydration, PCV, and renal and
Amanita verna (spring destroying angel, spring amanita,
liver function. Hermolysis and methermoglobinemia can
white death cap, fool's mushroom) is associated with oak
also be factors and need to be monitored (Spoerke 2006).
trees and fruits in spring, summer, and early fall
Antiermetics can be used to control vomiting and antisei-
Amanita virosa is found throughout southeast Canada
zure medications, such as diazepam, for control of seizures
and eastem coastal United States and is especially abun
(Tegzes and Puschner 2002a). Intravenous fuid therapy at
dant along Lake Ontario shores. It is found in hardwood
twice a maintenance rate might be required; a blood trans-
and mixed forests.
fusion might be required for patients experiencing hemo-
Amanita ocreata is found primarily along the coast of
lysis. For liver and renal damage, antibiotics, lactulose,
California, fruits in the spring, and is associated with oak
and SAMe (S-adenosylmethionine) can be employed.
 trees. The remaining Amanita spp. are found primarily in
Pyridoxine (vitamin Bo) is a specific antagonist (Tegzes
southem and southeastern United States.
and Puschner 2002a). It is used to counter the neurologic
signs caused by gyromitrin (Spoerke 2001)
Kinetics
The bioavailability of amanitins in dogs and cats ranges
Prognosis
from 10 to 20% (Benjamin 1995). Amanitins are taken up
The prognosis is guarded in patients progressing beyond
by epithelial cells of the Gl tract and by hepatocytes,
Gl effects.
where they cause injury to GI mucosa and liver, respec-
tively. Uptake into the hepatocytes can be blocked by bile
HEPATOTOXIC MUSHROOMS
salts, prednisolones, antanamide, and silibinin. There is no
evidence of the amanitins crossing the placental barrier.
Sources
They undergo extensive enterohepatic recirculation, and
Hepatotoxic mushrooms, Amanita, Galerina and Lepiota
excretion occurs in dogs via the urine. Within 6 hours 90%
genera, contain amanitins. There are nine armatoxins of
of the amanitins are eliminated via the kidneys. The con-
which C-, β- and -amanitins are of major importance
centration of amanitins may be 100-150 times higher in
(Puschner 2007). The highest concentration of toxin is in
the urine than in the blood (Benjamin 1995). Urinary
the gills (46%) followed by the stems (23%) and cap
excretion can continue for up to 72 hours due to the per-
(23%).
sistence of the mushrooms in the Gl tract and extensive
The most frequently reported poisoning results from
enterohepatic recirculation.
ingestion of A. phalloides (Tegzes and Puschner 2002a).
A. phalloides (death cap, deadly amanita) is found in
Mechanism of Action
Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Virginia,
Amanitins inhibit nuclear RNA polymerase II and inter-
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Califormia, Oregon, and
fere with DNA and RNA transcription (Benjamin 1995),
Washington. The Midwest, Southeast, and mountain states
which results in inhibition of ribosomal protein synthesis.
appear to be free of A. phalloides. It fruits from August to
Cells that have a high rate of metabolism are affected the
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
197
Table 23.2. Typical clinical phases of cyclopeptides or Amanita phalloides toxicosisa
Description
Time Period
Clinical Effects
Initial
Latent period
6 to 12 (to 24)hours after
exposure
Phase I
Gastroenteritis (can detect
±12 to 24 hours duration
Nausea
amanitins in serum and
Vomiting
urine)
Bloody diarrhea
 Abdominal pain
Lethargy
Twitching
Dehydration
Phase II
Severe gastroenteritis
±18 to 24 hours duration
Bloody diarrhea
Hemolysis
Electrolyte imbalance
Hyperthermia
Tachycardia
Bradycardia
Latency
 Latent period
2 to 48 hours duration
Apparent recovery
(continue monitoring liver
and kidney function)
Phase IHI
Final/terminal
Begins 36 to 84 hours
Liver, kidney, and multiorgan failure
after exposure
Severe hypoglycemia
Icterus
Coagulopathy
Encephalopathy
Seizures
Azotemia
Anuria
Metabolic acidosis
Cerebral edema
Coma
Sepsis
Death
 Note that with large amanintin ingestions or ingestions by puppies, death may occur within 2 hours postexposure.
 most, such as hepatocytes and intestinal crypt cells, but all
Clinical Effects
cells in the body are susceptible. Blocking uptake by the
Signs
hepatocytes might predispose other cells to damage
Signs typically occur in phases (Puschner 2007). Fol-
through increased circulating amanitin concentration. The
lowing a latent period of 6-12 hours, there is a triphasic
kidneys can be damaged in a similar way.
syndrome (Table 23.2). Phase 1 consists of GI signs:
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, dehydration, and
Toxicity
lethargy. Anorexia may also be seen. Phase 2 is char-
Toxicity varies with species. Rodents and rabbits seem to
acterized by severe GI upset manifested as nausea, vom-
be unaffected by ingestion of the amanitins. The oral LDso
iting, bloody diarrhea, and severe abdorminal pain. In
for a dog is approximately 1mg amanitin (Benjamin
this phase there is hepatotoxic damage with signs and
1995). This is about equivalent to one “decent-sized"
lab values that point to liver failure leading to coagu-
mushroorm cap. The IV LDso for C-armanitin is 0.1 mg/kg-
lopathy. These signs can include icterus, tachycardia,
198
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 23.3. Treatment of mushroom ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
Emesis
Apomorphine
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or subconjunctival
sac in the dog
3% hydrmgen permxide
1 to 5 ml/kg PO (generally do not exceed
50 ml for dogs or 10 ml total for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Gastric lavage
Water at body temperature
10 mg/kg body weight
Adsorbent
Activated charcoal
2 to 5g/kg body weight PO (1g activated
charcoal in 5 ml water); repeat dose every
4 to 6 hours; may be used to up 48 hours
Cathartic
Sorbital
3ml/kg (70%) PO
Gastroeneteritis
 GI protectants: kaolin/pectin
1 to 2ml/kg every 6 to 12 hours
Sucralfate
Dogs: 0.5 to 1g PO every 8 to 12h cats:
0.25g PO every 8 to 12h
Dehydration
Crystalloid fuids
As needed
Glucose
Hepatic damage
Acetylcysteine
140mg/kg P0 followed by 70 mg/kg PO
every 6hr
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 2mg/kg IV
Phenobarbital
6mg/kg IV to effect
Propofol
0.1 mg/kg/min IV constant rate infusion
Dyspnea
Oxygen
Mechanical ventilation
Sepsis
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Parenteral as needed
Severe hemorrhage
Vitamin K,
2.5 to 5mg/kg daily
Packed red blood cells
As needed
Whole blood
Amatoxin hepatic damage
Penicillin G
300,000 to 40 million U/day (human dose)
Silymarin (herbal milk thistle—check
1.4 to 4.2g/day PO for 4 to 5 days
label for concentration)
Cholinergic stimulation
Atrmopine
0.2 to 2mg/kg; give 50% of dose IV and 50%
IM or SC to effect of drying secretions
Tremors
Methocarbamol
50mg/kg IV q 8hr
Hydrazine
Pyridoxine
25 mg/kg by slow IV infusion over 15-30 min
(vitamin B)
acidosis, hypotension, and hypoglycemia. This can be
signs is generally 6 to 12 hours for Gl signs and 24 to
followed by another latent phase in which the animal
72 hours for hepatic failure. The duration of signs can
appears to have recovered. This latent period requires
be a few days for mild cases and in severe cases death
diligent monitoring of liver and renal values to determine
in 4-10 days. In beagles experimentally given sublethal
whether damage is being done and to assess liver and
doses of amanitins, vormiting, and diarrhea began in 16
kidney function. Phase 3 involves hemorrhages, seizures,
hours and subsided 60 hours later. In beagles given lethal
fulminant hepatic failure, and renal failure leading to
doses, an initial hyperglycemia was followed by hypo-
death in 4 to 7 days (Enjalbert et al. 2002). Fifty percent
glycemia. Glucose was administered, which culminated
of dogs given amanitins in lethal doses died frorm hypo-
in hepatic dystrophy and was fatal in 1-2 days (Spoerke
glycemia within 1 to 2 days of exposure. The onset of
2006).
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
199
Laboratory
elevate and peak within 72-96 hours, with severe eleva
Significant elevations in serum AST, ALT, alkaline phos
tion evident within 72 hours. Supportive and symptomatic
phatase, and bilirubin are commonly observed. Severe
care is needed consisting of fuid therapy (diuresis without
hypoglycermia is also characteristic (Tegzes and Puschner
use of diuretics), temperature management, GI protectants,
2002b). Coagulopathy as evidenced by prolonged clotting
vitamin K, blood replacement therapy, special dietary
times occurs in a high percent of affected dogs.
food, and diazepam for seizures.
Liver protectants are recommended. N-acetylcysteine
Differentials
and silibinin (or silymarin, an herbal milk thistle protec-
Differentials include blue-green algae, acetarminophen,
tant) appear to be equally efficacious. N-acetylcysteine
cycad, iron, afatoxin, and phenolic compounds intoxica-
and silibinin are free radical scavengers (Benjamin 1995).
tions, leptospirosis, infectious hepatitis, and hepatic
SAMe has also been recommended because it acts as a
neoplasia.
membrane stabilizer, hinders amatoxins penetration of
cell, scavenges free radicals, and favors regeneration of
Diagnosis
damaged livers (Enjalbert et al. 2002).
Both silibinin and penicillin G interfere with enterohe-
Antemortem
patic recirculation of amatoxins. Cephalosporins may also
Liver biopsies can be done to detect evidence of hepatic
be as, or even more, effective. (Enjalbert et al. 2002). Table
injury; hepatic necrosis would be the expected finding.
23.3 lists some of the therapeutic agents and dosages used
Urine samples can be tested for the presence of
for mushroom toxicosis in pets.
amanitin.
Prognosis
Postmortem
The prognosis is poor, especially if there is a short
On necropsy one would expect to find evidence of hepatic
latent period with an early rise in liver enzyme concen-
necrosis, gastrointestinal mucosal injury, and renal tubular
trations, presence of a coagulopathy, and persistent
necrosis. Acute tubular necrosis is believed to the result of
hypoglycemia.
reabsorption of the toxins by renal tubules after glomerular
filtration (Puschner 2007). Liver and kidney samples can
MYCOTOXINS
be tested for amanitin to confirm exposure (Puschner
Mycotoxins are secondary chemical metabolites produced
2007).
by various species of fungi in numerous commodities,
foods, and feed. These compounds have diverse chemical
Management of Exposures
structures and may cause biological and pathological
Early detection appears to be critical because survival rates
changes in animals. Numerous fungi do not produce
were greatly improved with prompt therapeutic interven-
mycotoxins, and the presence of mold in feed or food does
tion (Tegzes and Puschner, 2002b; Puschner 2007). Stan-
not guarantee that mycotoxins were or will be produced.
dard decontamination is recommended if initiated soon
Once produced, mycotoxins are fairly stable compounds,
after exposure. Emesis can be achieved as previously
are not readily destroyed by processing, and can be found
specified. After gastric emptying, activated charcoal
in cereal by-products (e.g-, com and wheat gluten, dis-
should be administered. Giving repeated doses every 2 to
tiller's grains, etc.) and pet foods. Three genera of fungi—
6 hours for 2 to 3 days is recommended to decrease entero-
Fusarium, Penicillium, and Aspergillus—are primarily
hepatic recirculation (Puschner 2007). With this frequency
responsible for invasion of crops, particularly cereal
of activated charcoal administration, serum sodium levels
grains, in the field and during harvest, transportation, pro-
should be monitored because there is a high probability
cessing, and storage of foods and feeds. Each fungus has
for hypematremia.
specific requirements for matrix, oxygenation, tempera-
Baseline serum chemistries, CBC, acid/base, and elec-
ture, and moisture for mold growth and subsequent myco-
trolytes, especially Na, should be obtained, and glucose,
toxin development.
liver enzymes, renal values, and coagulation pararmeters
Mycotoxins frequently associated with pet food con-
should be monitored. Coagulation abnormalities have
tamination include afatoxins, Fusarium mycotoxins
occurred in animals that develop Gl signs within 24-48
particularly vomitoxin or deoxynivalenol (DON)—and
hours of ingesting mushrooms. Levels are expected to be
ochratoxin A (Table 23.4). The tremorgenic mycotoxins
norrmal for the first 24 hours. ALT and AST begin to
associated with moldy food (bread, walnuts, cream
200
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 23.4. Mycotoxins in pet food (adapted from CAST, 2003)
Environment for Mold
Mycotoxin
Fungi
Growth
Commodity
Effects in Animals
Afatoxins
Aspergillus flavus and
Warm days and nights
Corn
Liver damage
(B,B, G, G2,
A. parasiticus
(78 to 90°F), high
Rice
Liver tumors
M, M)
grain moisture (16
Peanuts/nuts
Hemorrhage
to 28%), drought
Cottonseed
Death
stress, insect
damage
Vormitoxin
Fusarium spp.
Altemating warm days
Cereals (wheat,
 Digestive disorders
(trichothecene
and cool nights (40
corn, barley,
(vomiting, feed refusal,
mycotoxin)
to 80°F), and humid
oats)
diarrhea)
Zearalenone
Fusarium graminearum
Moderating temps (45
Cereals (wheat,
 Estrogenic effects
(primarily)
to 70°F) and high
corn, barley)(
(edema of vulva, vagina,
grain moisture (22
uterus)
to 25%)
Fumonisin
Fusariumveriticilliodes
 Drought during growing
Corn
Liver insult
(syn. Moniliforme)
season followed by
Com screenings
Note: Horses are very
cool, wet weather
sensitive to fumonisins
during pollination
and can develop brain
necrosis
(leukoencephalomalacia)
 and die
Ochratoxin A
Aspergillus ochraceus
Cooler weather (54 to
Corn
Kidney tubular necrosis
Penicillilum
77°F) and grain
Wheat
verrucosum
moisture >16%
Dried beans
Dried fruits
 Roquefortine
Penicilium roqueforti
Walnuts
Penitrem A
and others
Cream cheese
Incoordination
(tremorgens)
Penicillium crustosum
Bread
Death
Rice
Cheese
Garbage
cheese, and garbage), such as penitrem A and roque-
In a worldwide review of the prevalence of mycotoxins
fortine, are discussed in Chapter 24, “Food-Associated
in pet foods, a majority of reported mycotoxin outbreaks
Intoxications."
in pets were related to aflatoxins, a few cases were related
Cereal grains, cereal by-products, and nuts are often
to tremorgenic mycotoxins, and several in Europe and the
incorporated into commercial food for dogs, cats, birds,
United Kingdom were associated with ochratoxin A
rabbits, and other companion animals. These commodities
(Leung et al. 2006). No natural outbreaks of afatoxicosis
can be contaminated with mycotoxins and may be diverted
have been reported in cats (Bohm and Razzazi-Fazeli
from use in human food to use in animal feeds. A majority
2005). This chapter focuses on two mycotoxins-aflatoxins
of larger pet food companies test commodities for myco-
and vomitoxin.
toxins prior to incorporation into pet food; however, devia-
tions in testing protocols may not detect mycotoxins and
AFLATOXINS
smaller, local mills may not test pet food ingredients prior
Aflatoxins are polycyclic furan compounds produced by
to use. The end result can be pet food contamination with
Aspergillus molds both in the field prior to harvest and in
mycotoxins.
storage. Afatoxins are hepatotoxic and potent liver car-
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
201
cinogens. Cases of fatal hepatitis in dogs during the 1950s
forming adducts, which can result in cellular damage and
and turkeys in 1960, termed "hepatitis X" and "X disease,'
hepatic necrmosis. As mentioned earlier, aflatoxin M, is
respectively, were likely caused by aflatoxins.
formed from hydrmxylation of afatoxin B1 and is the
major excretion product in several species via urine and
Sources
milk (Meerdink 2004).
Aspergillus favus,A.parasiticus, and A. nomius can
produce a number of aflatoxins. Aflatoxins identified
Mechanism of Action
include B, and B2 (fuoresce blue in ultraviolet light), G)
The epoxide of afatoxin B, binds cellular macromole-
 and Gz (fuoresce green in ultraviolet light, and M, and M2
cules, nucleic acids, subcellular organelles, and regulatory
(animal metabolites from hydroxylation of afatoxins B)
proteins that disrupt normal cellular processes and organ
and B2, respectively). Afatoxin B1 is the most toxic myco-
function. The outcome may result in cellular necrosis,
toxin in this group, generally found at the highest concen-
cancer, immunosuppression (both humoral and cell-
tration, and the most important member of the afatoxins
mediated immunity), mutagenesis, and teratogenesis.
for analytical purposes in feeds. Afatoxins M, and M, can
be found in tissues, meat, milk, and eggs. Fungal growth
Toxicity
and afatoxin production are favored when grain moisture
In naturally occurring cases, the concentration of aflatoxin
is >15%, relative humidity is >75%, and temperatures are
in the feed (dose) and the duration of exposure may not
warrm (78 to 90+°F). Afatoxins may occur in corn, nuts,
be known. It is very important to retain a sample of the
cottonseed, rice, and other crops during years of drought,
 suspect pet food that the animals have been consurming and
warm-to-hot termperatures, and insect damage to crops.
test for afatoxins in an analytical laboratory. Dogs are
Large portions of crops in a region can be affected with
considered sensitive to aflatoxins, with a LDso from 0.5 to
widespread aflatoxin contamination in animal feeds.
1.0 mg/kg body weight, and death may occur within 3 days
after exposure. The LDs of aflatoxins in cats ranges from
Kinetics
0.3 to 0.6mg/kg body weight and in rabbits is approxi-
Aflatoxin absorption is by passive diffusion from the small
mately 0.4 mg/kg body weight. Mice, rats, and hamsters
intestine (Meerdink 2004). Absorption is rapid and com-
are more resistant to afatoxins, with a single-dose oral
plete in numerous animal species, with a higher rate of
LDso greater than 5mg/kg body weight. Following con-
absorption in young animals. Afatoxins are eliminated
sumption of afatoxin contaminated food, dogs can show
from the body through the bile, urine, and feces, and into
peracute to acute, subacute, and chronic clinical signs. In
 milk and eggs. Aflatoxins can undergo enterohepatic cir-
a subacute study, young beagle dogs were orally dosed
culation. Generally, most of the toxin is excreted within
with an afatoxin mixture (37.5% B, 5.4% B2, 17.1% G,
 24 hours after exposure. Dogs given a single oral 100 μg
and 1.0% G) at dosages of 1, 5, and 20μg/kg body weight,
aflatoxin B/kg body weight dose in com oil showed some
with the duration of dosing lasting for 10 weeks at 5 days
vomiting postdosing, but no additional adverse effects, and
a week (Armbrecht et al. 1971). Clinical signs of icterus,
over 90% of total aflatoxin M1 was found in the urine 12
inappetence, yellow-orange colored urine, and increased
hours postdosing; by 48 hours postdosing afatoxin M1
prothrobin time were noted in dogs at the high dosage of
was almost undetectable in urine (Bingham et al. 2004).
20 μg/kg body weight. Histological changes were observed
Aflatoxins do not accumulate in body tissues,but repeated
in only the high-dosed group and consisted of moderate
exposure may result in lasting adverse effects in tissues.
bile duct proliferation, bile pigment accumulation in the
A majority of afatoxin is biotransforrmed in the liver,
liver portal areas, and multiple vascular channels around
with smaller amounts biotransformed in the kidney and
central and portal liver veins. Therefore, the toxic dose for
small intestine. A critical metabolic step is the transforma-
aflatoxins in dogs is estimated to be less than 20μg/kg
tion of aflatoxin B, to a reactive epoxide intermediate by
body weight.
the cytochrome P450 system. Rapid formation of the reac-
tive 8,9-epoxide of aflatoxin B1 can overwhelm detoxif-
Clinical Signs
cation mechanisms by depleting intracellular glutathione
Clinical features of aflatoxicosis in dogs are not unique to
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). Dogs as a species have low liver
this condition and may not be recognized antermortem.
glutathione concentrations, compared with other species.
Pathological changes in the liver are more indicative of
The unstable aflatoxin expoxides can bind covalently to
aflatoxicosis, and analytical detection of elevated aflatox-
intracellular molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins
ins B, in the feed and M, in hepatic tissue can confirm
202
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
afatoxicosis. Sudden deaths in kennel dogs fed a similar
toxicosis in dogs may induce disseminated intravascular
pet food may serve as sentinels of aflatoxicosis (Dereszyn-
coagulation that can deplete coagulation factors.
ski et al. 2008). Dogs may be reluctant to eat the contami-
Good early markers of afatoxicosis in dogs are hypo-
nated food (aflatoxins are considered odorless and
cholesterolemia and lower plasma protein C and anti-
tasteless), but may consume noncontaminated feeds. The
thrormbin activities (Dereszynski et al. 2008). Cormrmonly,
clinical signs of afatoxicosis are related to liver damage
dogs have coagulopathies, such as prolonged activated
and failure, which may be acute or chronic in nature. In a
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)and prothrombin time
retrospective case study of dogs exposed to aflatoxin-
(PT), and lower fibrinogen concentrations and plasma
contaminated pet food in 2005 to 2006, the order of onset
coagulation factor VIl (FVIl:C). Because of vormiting,
of clinical signs was anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, jaun-
diarrhea, or abnormal body fuid distribution (i.e., abdomi-
 dice, diarrhea frequently associated with melena progress-
nal effusion), electrolyte disturbances occur, such as lower
ing to hematochezia, abdominal effusion (usually
a
serum concentrations of sodium and calcium and elevated
transudate), peripheral edema, and terminal encephalopa-
serum phosphate. Dogs also had lowered serum albumin
thy associated with hemorrhagic diathesis (Table 23.5)
and total protein, and increased liver enzyme activities
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). Dogs may develop polyuria and
and hyperbilirubinemia. The magnitude of liver enzyme
polydipsia and show depression. The severity of clinical
activities did not correlate with the severity of hepatocel-
signs can vary among dogs, probably related to differences
lular damage noted at necropsy (Dereszynski et al. 2008).
 in dose and duration of aflatoxin exposure, biotransforma-
No significant differences were observed in urine specific
tion of aflatoxins, nutritional status, and preexisting health
gravity, (between survivor and nonsurvivor dogs), but
conditions. Poor survival of dogs affected by aflatoxins in
dogs with granular casts, specifically with cylindruria
pet food was linked with severe enteric hemorrhage. Afa-
(renal casts or tiny, tube-shaped particles) died from
afatoxicosis, while few of these dogs were azotemic
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). The presence of granular casts
Table 23.5.Clinical signs and clinicopathologic
in the urine of dogs dying from aflatoxicosis could be
changes in dogs associated with aflatoxin
related to aflatoxin adduct injury to tissue, altered redox
exposure (adapted from Dereszynski et al.,2008)
status, or impaired renal perfusion from systemic effects
of aflatoxins; the cause-effect relationship is only
Clinical Signs
Clinicopathologic Changes
speculated.
Needle aspirates of liver from dogs that died from afla-
Sudden death
Coagulopathic disturbances:
toxicosis were processed for cytology examination and
low plasma
revealed diffuse hepatocyte lipid vacuolation, hepatocyte
 anticoagulant proteins
degeneration, and minor infammatory cell infiltrates.
(protein C, antithrombin)
These findings are not pathognomonic for afatoxins and
Anorexia
Hypocholesterolermia
 a full necropsy is recommended.
Lethargy
Hypoproteinemia (↓total
protein and albumin)
Diagnosis
Vomiting
 serum liver enzyme
Diagnosis is based on compatible clinical signs and clini-
activities
cal pathology changes, particularly related to liver failure
Jaundice
Hyperbilirubinermia
or sudden death. A complete necropsy is recommended in
Diarrhea (melena,
↓ serum electrolytes (Na*,
suspect aflatoxicoses. Histopathologic findings consistent
hematochezia)
Cat)
with aflatoxicoses include hepatic lipidosis; portal fibro-
Dehydration
Granular casts in urine
plasias; magelocytosis of hepatocytes; biliary hyperplasia;
(cylindruria or renal
and, in chronic hepatopathy cases, marked lobular atrophy,
casts)
bridging portal fibrosis, and regenerative hepatocellular
Abdominal effusion,
Liver needle aspirates cyto
nodules (Newman et al. 2007).
 peripheral edema
prep: diffuse hepatocyte
Suspect food consumed by the animal should be tested
lipid vacuolation
 in analytical laboratories for afatoxins, in particular affa-
Polyuria, polydipsia
toxin B,, for confirrmation of exposure to afatoxins. Afla-
Terrminal encephalopathy
toxins are notorious for occurring in localized hot spots
Hemorrhagic diathesis
in feeds; multiple samples of the suspect food should be
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
203
taken and can be held and frozen for future analysis. If
(afatoxin metabolites undergo entermohepatic circulation)
the animal has been consuming the suspect food recently,
and glutathione can be depleted in dogs with spontaneous
liver samples can be frozen for subsequent analysis for
liver disease (Dereszynski et al. 2008). Initial thiol replace-
aflatoxin M,; however, the half-life of aflatoxins in dogs
ment was by intravenous n-acetylcysteine but was changed
has not been determined and is thought to be very short.
to oral s-adenosylmethionine when the dogs could tolerate
Afatoxin M, may be cleared from the liver within 7 days
oral treatment. Dogs with persistent vomiting were given
after a suspect food has been discontinued in the diet, so
antiemetics,but gastric atony,detected in several affected
analysis of liver tissue may be of value only with recent
dogs, did not respond to antiemetic or prmokinetic treatment
exposure to a suspect food (Newman et al. 2007). Dog
and some dogs were euthanized.
foods associated with outbreaks of aflatoxicosis had
Dogs suspected of developing gastric ulcers and esoph-
greater than 60 μg aflatoxin/kg and from to 100 to 300+ μg
agitis secondary to protracted vomiting were treated with
aflatoxin/kg of food (Leung et al. 2006). Analysis of some
a histamine-2 receptor blocking agent famotidine and a
dog feed associated with afatoxicosis in the eastem United
gastric cytoprotective drug sucralfate. Silybin, considered
a hepatic protective favanoid from herbal milk thistle, was
of afatoxin B, in a range of 223 to 579μg/kg (ppb or
given to enhance glutathione-S-transferase activity and
parts per billion) of feed, and hepatic tissue of affected
promote glutathione synthesis (Dereszynski et al. 2008).
dogs contained high concentrations of aflatoxin M, from
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended to protect
0.6 to 4.4 μg/kg liver (Newman et al. 2007). The US Food
 against systemic infections from possible immunosuppres-
and Drug Administration's action level for maximum afa-
sion. L-camitine was provided to dogs to combat hepatic
toxin in feed for pets (dogs, cats, horses) is 20μg/kg or
lipidosis, which has been shown to be beneficial in experi-
ppb (FDA 1994).
mental aflatoxicosis in several species. Treated dogs fre-
quently deteriorated despite treatment (Dereszynski et al.
Differential Diagnoses
2008).
Differential diagnoses would include acetaminophen, cya-
nobacterial toxin—microcystins, iron, phenolic com-
Prognosis
pounds, Penicillium istandicum mycotoxinleutoskyrin,
The prognosis depends on the severity of liver damage.
and pyrrolizidine alkaloid intoxications, leptospirosis,
Severe liver damage suggests a guarded to poor prognosis.
infectious hepatitis, and hepatic neoplasia from other
Monitoring coagulation (particularly aPTT and PT, plasma
causes.
protein C, and antithrombin activity), serum liver enzyme
activities, serum biochermistry panel, and electrolytes can
Treatment
 be indicative of the hepatic damage. The presence of gran-
If aflatoxin is suspected from food exposure, identify the
ular casts, specifically for cylindruria, has been associated
with fatality. The finding of enteric blood has been associ-
further exposure. Ensure that possible contaminated food
ated with the onset of hepatic encephalopathy and terminal
sources are retained and frozen for analytical testing for
stages of aflatoxicosis and death.
aflatoxins. There is no antidote for aflatoxin.
There is no definitive treatment protocol for aflatoxico-
VOMITOXIN OR DEOXYNIVALENOL (DON)
sis in animals. General supportive treatment and care are
Fusarium rmolds invade a variety of cereal plants resulting
the main focus. Dogs may require intravenous fuids and
in widespread plant diseases, such as “Fusarium head
blood component treatment; vitamins K and E may be
administered to replenish the coagulation cofactor and to
rot'" of com. Moderate temperatures during flowering and
inhibit membrane lipid peroxidation, respectively (Dere-
higher humidity favor Fusarium growth in cereals and
szynski et al. 2008). The dose of vitamin E was limited to
mycotoxin production in the field (see Table 23.4). A group
≤10 U/kg/d (<4.5 U/lb/d) because of concerms that higher
of mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. are the tricho-
dosages may inhibit gamma-carboxylation of vitamin K
thecenes, sesquiterpenoid compounds with an epoxy ring
dependent coagulants. In the 2005/2006 outbreak of afla-
at C12-13 that is considered essential for toxicity. The
toxicosis in dogs, one therapeutic approach was to provide
trichothecenes include a number of mycotoxins, vomi-
hepatic supportive care with thiol donors for 2 months
toxin, 15- and 3-acetyldeoxynivalnol, nivalenol, scirpenol,
after the initial afatoxin diagnosis; glutathione was con-
T-2 toxin, HT-2 toxin, diacetoxyscirpenol, etc., with a
sidered important for aflatoxin detoxification mechanisms
broad range of toxicity. Reports of adverse effects in dogs
204
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
and cats are not common from trichothecene-contaminated
Table 23.6. Clinical signs in dogs associated
 pet food. This chapter is focused on vomitoxin, the most
withvomitoxin exposure
common trichothecene contaminant identified in grain.
Feed refusal
Vomiting
Sources
Weight loss
Trichothecenes are produced by several genera of fungi,
Diarrhea
including Fusarium,Stachybotrys,Myrothecium, Trichot-
Poor feed conversion
hecium, and others. Trichothecene production by Fusar-
Gastrointestinal irritation
ium fungi is heavily dependent on oxygen, environmental
pH, osmotic tension, and temperature. For example, vomi-
toxin is produced under conditions of low oxygen tension,
Clinical Signs
whereas zearalenone production by the same fungi requires
oxygen saturation, usually occurring after field crops
The predorminant clinical signs from vomitoxin exposure
senesce. F graminearum, the primary producer of vomi-
in pet food are feed refusal, vomiting, and weight loss in
toxin in North America, has an optimum temperature
dogs (Table 23.6). In a study of mature beagle dogs fed
range for growth of 78 to 82°F (26 to 28°C) at a water
Fusarium mycotoxin-contaminated diets (2.7 and 3.9 ppm
activity (aw) greater than 0.88. Vomitoxin is a stable chem-
vormitoxin  with  low  concentrations [<0.5ppm]  of
ical and is not destroyed by high temperatures and pressure
15-acetyldeoxynivalenol and zearalenone, and 8 to 10 ppm
treatments.
fusaric acid), rapid onset of reduced feed intake was
reported (Leung et al. 2007). Only one dog vomited on
Kinetics and Toxicity
these diets; however, weight loss was reported in dogs fed
The kinetics of vomitoxin have not been described in
the vomitoxin-contaminated diets. Vomitoxin has been
dogs and cats. In other monogastric animals, vomitoxin
reported to delay gastric emptying through peripheral
is rapidly and nearly completely absorbed in the stomach
action at serotonin receptors in rodents (Fioramonti et al.
and proximal small intestine after oral exposure. Distribu-
1993).Additional clinical signs from vomitoxin exposure
tion to all body tissues is fairly rapid, and most of the
could include gastrointestinal irritation and diarrhea, and
vomitoxin is eliminated in the urine and feces in less
poor feed conversion. Dogs can show individual suscepti-
than 24 to 48 hours. Vomitoxin is not accumulated in
bility to mycotoxins, and younger animals may be more
tissues. In a feeding trial with mature Brittany and beagle
susceptible to adverse effects at lower concentrations of
dogs and American shorthair cats, naturally contaminated
vomitoxin in food.
wheat was incorporated into pet foods at increasing con-
centrations of vomitoxin from 0 to 10 mg/kg or ppm (parts
Diagnosis
per million) (Hughes et al. 1999). Dogs previously
 The clinical signs associated with vomitoxin exposure are
exposed to vomitoxin-contaminated pet food preferen-
common to many conditions and generally no significant
tially selected uncontaminated food. When the vomitoxin
changes are observed in clinicopathologic parameters.
concentration in feed was >4.5 ±1.7mg/kg in dog food
Vomitoxin, and other trichothecene mycotoxins, can be
and >7.7 ±1.1 mg/kg in cat food, feed intake was reduced
analyzed for in pet foods by numerous veterinary diagnos-
in dogs and cats, respectively. Vormitoxin concentrations
tic labs. The FDA advisory levels for vormitoxin on grains
greater than 8 to 10mg/kg in the diet caused vomiting
and grain by-products for pets are not greater than 5 mg/
in dogs and cats.
kg (ppm) and not to exceed 40% of the diet or not to
exceed 2mg/kg (ppm) of their final diet (FDA 2010).
Mechanism of Action
Differential Diagnoses
Trichothecene mycotoxins have multiple effects on
eukaryotic cells, including inhibition of protein, RNA, and
Clinical signs of feed refusal, vomiting, weight loss, and
DNA synthesis, alteration of membrane structure and
diarrhea could be attributed to bacterial or viral intestinal
mitochondrial function, stimulation of lipid peroxidation,
infections and garbage or irritant plant ingestion.
 induction of programmed cell death or apoptosis, and acti-
vation of cytokines and chemokines. Typical effects from
Treatment
trichothecene exposure are anorexia,vomiting,gastroin-
As with any mycotoxin exposure in feed, the first recom-
testinal irritation, and immunosuppression.
mendation is to stop the exposure and switch to a diet with
Chapter 23 / Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
205
low or nondetectable concentrations of vomitoxin. Feed
tissue. No cases of ochratoxin A toxicosis in pets have
sarmples can be taken of the suspect pet food, frozen, and
been reported in North America.
submitted to veterinary diagnostic laboratories for analy-
sis. Generally, treatment is not required; if the animals are
REFERENCES
dehydrated from Huid loss through vomiting or diarrhea,
Armbrecht, B.H., Geleta, JN., and Shalkop, W.T. 1971. A
fuid therapy should be instituted.
subacute exposure of beagle dogs to aflatoxin. Toxicol Appt
Pharmacol18:579-585
Prognosis
Beasley, VR.1999. A Systems Affected Approach to Veteri-
After exposure to the vomitoxin-suspect diet is discontin-
nary Toxicology. Urbana: University of Illinois College of
ued, rapid recovery to normal status should occur. The
Veterinary Medicine.
Benjamin, D.R. 1995. Mushrooms: Poisons and panaceas.
prognosis is good for recovery.
New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
OTHERS
Bingham, A.K., Huebner, H.J., Phillips, T.D. et al. 2004. Iden-
tification and reduction of urinary afatoxin metabolites in
Numerous mycotoxins can be produced in natural infec-
dogs. Food Chem Toxicol 42:1851-1858.
tions of mold in grains, feed, and food. Zearalenone, a
Bohm, J. and Razzazi-Fazeli, E. 2005. Effects of mycotoxins
resorcyclic acid lactone, is a mycotoxin produced by
on domestic pet species. In The Mycotoxin Blue Book,
 Fusarium species in corn and other crops, and it is often
edited by Diaz, D., pp. 77-91. Nottingham, UK: Notting-
found with vomitoxin. Zearalenone, and related metabo-
ham University Press.
lites zearalenols and zearalanols, are estrogenic com-
CAST (Council for Agricultural Science and Technology).
pounds that can affect the reproductive system causing
2003. Mycotoxins: Risks in Plant, Animal and Human
edema of the vulva and uterus, enlargement of mammary
Systems. Task Force Report No. 139. Ames, Iowa.
Dereszynski, D.M., Center, S.A., Randolph, J.E. et al. 2008.
glands, and possibly ovarian dysfunction. The concern for
Clinical and clinicopathologic features of dogs that con-
adverse reproductive effects in dogs would be the breeding
sumed foodborne hepatotoxic afatoxins: 72 cases (2005-
bitches; however, no case reports of zearalenone toxicosis
2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 232:1329-1337.
have been adequately documented in dogs. Additional
Donnelly, M. and Wax, P. 2005. Cyclopeptide-containing
mycotoxins prmduced by Fusarium species are the fumo-
mushrooms: the deadly amanita mushrooms. In Criticaf
nisins, particularly fumonisin B,. Dogs and cats are not
Care Toxicology: Diagnosis and Management of the Criti-
considered sensitive to fumonisins and toxicoses have not
cally Poisoned Patient, edited by Brent, J., Wallace, K.L.,
been reported for dogs and cats; on the other hand, horses
Burkhart, K.K., Phillips, S.D., Donovan, J.W., pp. 1277-
are very sensitive to fumonisins and can develop brain
1285. New York: Elsevier Mosby.
 malacia and necrosis. All species have the potential to have
Enjalbert, F., Rapior, S., Nouguier-Soule, J. et al. 2002. Treat-
some liver damage from fumonisins. The FDA guidance
ment of amatoxin poisoning 20 year retrospective analysis.
levels for total fumonisins in corn and corn by-products
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 40(6):715-757.
intended for pets are not greater than 10 mg/kg (ppm) and
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1994. CPG Sec.
683.100 Action Levels for Aflatoxins in Animal Feeds.
/au1s paaoxa 0n nou 1o lap aun jo %0s paaoxa 0n 1ou
Revised 8/28/94. http://www.fda. gov/ICEC1/Compliance
(ppm) of their final diet (FDA 2001). The FDA guidance
Manuals/CompliancePolicyGuidanceManual/ucm074703
level for equids and rabbits is not to exceed 1ppm of the
htm.
final diet.
.2001. Guidance for Industry:Fumonisin Levels in
Particularly in Eurmpe and the United Kingdom, ochra-
Human Foods and Animal Feeds; Final Guidance. Revised
toxin A is an important nephrotoxin mycotoxin. The molds
11/9/2001. http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceCompliance
Aspergillus ochraceus and Penicillium verrucosum
Regulatory Information/GuidanceDocuments/ChemicalCo
produce ochratoxins in cereal grains under cooler weather,
ntaminantsandPestici des/ucm 10923 1.htm.
54 to 77°F, and moist conditions. Dogs are sensitive to
-. 2010. Guidance for Industry and FDA: Advisory
ochratoxin A and can develop anorexia, vomiting, poly-
Levels for Deoxynivalenol (DON) in Finished Wheat Prod-
ucts for Human Consumption and Grains and Grain By-
uria, polydipsia, bloody feces, paralysis, and die (Bohn
products Used for Animal Feed Revised 777/2010. http://
and Razzazi-Fazeli 2005). Daily oral doses of0.2 to 0.3 mg
www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInfor
ochratoxin A/kg body weight can be lethal to dogs within
mation/GuidanceDocuments/NaturalToxins/ucm 12018
10 to 14 days. Necropsy lesions related to ochratoxin A
4.htm.
exposure include necrosis of proximal renal tubules,
Fioramonti, J., Dupuy, C., Dupuy, J. et al. 1993. The myco-
mucohemorrhagic enteritis, and necrosis of lymphoid
toxin, deox ynivalenol, delays gastric emptying through
206
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
serotonin-3 receptors in rodents. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
Poisindex CD-ROM Editorial Staff. 2003. Mushrooms (Toxi-
266:1255-1260.
cologic Managements) Poisindex System Vol 114 Micro-
Hughes, D.M., Gahl, M.J., Graham, C.H. et al. 1999. Overt
medex, Englewood, Colorado. Expires 12-20-2003.
signs of toxicity to dogs and cats of dietary deox yni valenol.
Puschner, B. 2007. Mushrooms toxins. In Veterinary Toxicof-
J Anim Sci 77:693-700
ogy, Basic and Clinicat Principles, edited by Gupta, R.C.,
Leung, M.C., Diaz-Llano, G., and Smith, T.K. 2006. Myco-
Pp. 915-923. New York: Elsevier Academic Press.
Spoerke, D. 2001. Mushroom exposure In Small Animal
preventative strategies. J Agric Food Chem 54:9623-9635.
Toxicology, edited by Peterson, M.E., Talcot, PA., Pp.
Leung, M.C., Smith, T.K., Karrow, N.A. et al. 2007. Effects
571-592. St. Louis: Saunders.
of foodborne Fusarium mycotoxins with and without a
2006. Mushrooms. In Small Animal Toxicology,
polymeric glucomannan mycotoxin adsorbent on food
edited by Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., Pp. 860-888. St.
intake and nutrient digestibility, body weight, and physical
Louis:Saunders.
and clinicopathologic variables of mature dogs. Am J Vet
Tegzes, JH. and Puschner, B. 2002a. Toxic mushrooms. Vet
Res 68:1122-1129.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32:397-407.
Meerdink, G.L. 2004. Aflatoxins. In Clinical Veterinary Toxi-
. 2002b. Amanita Poisoning: efficacy of aggressive
cology, edited by Plumlee, K.H., pp. 231-235. St. Louis:
treatment of two dogs. Vet Hum Toxicof 11:96-99.
Mosby.
Newman, S.N., Smith, JR., Stenske, K.A. et al. 2007. Afa-
toxicosis in nine dogs after exposure to contaminated com-
mercial dog food. J Vet Diagn Invest 19:168-175.
Food-Associated
24
Intoxications
Mindy Bough
ALLIUM SPECIES
Mechanism of Action
When crushed or chewed, the sulfur compounds in Allium
Sources
 spp. are hydrolyzed to thiosulfinates that then decompose
There are a number of plants in the Allium genera. Some
to disulfides. These disulide compounds are oxidating
common examples include Allium cepa, cultivated onion;
agents, which can cause hemolysis of erythrocytes. The
Allium validum and Allium canadense,wild onion; Allium
most toxic disulfide is reported to be dipropenyl disulfide
sativum, garlic; Allium schoenoprassum, chives; and
also known as n-propyl disulfide (Cheeke 1998). These
Allium porrum, leek. These plants are frequently used by
disulfides oxidize erythrocyte membranes. The result is the
humans as food, favoring agents, and as medicinal herbs.
formation of Heinz bodies, methemoglobinemia, and
Cull onions have been used as livestock feed.
anemia (Ogawa et al. 1986). Cats are more sensitive to the
Companion animals may have access to Allium spp. in
effects of Allium spp. because their hemoglobin is more
the yard or garden, frorm the feeding of table food, from
sensitive to oxidative damage than other species. They
foods left unattended, or when pet owners give the food
have 8 free sulfhydryl groups on their hemoglobin, which
 or supplements to their pets directly. Regardless of the
is twice the amount that dogs have and four times the
source of exposure, dogs, and especially cats, may dem-
amount that humans have. In addition, feline hemoglobin
 onstrate signs of toxicosis.
dissociates into dimers 10 times more readily than other
species (Robertson et al. 1998).
Kinetics
A different mechanism of action may be involved with
The crushing or chewing of Allium spp. produces changes
sheep and other ruminants. Selim et al. (1999) reported
leading to the production of allicin; this compound has
 that rumen bacteria may be involved in the production of
pharmacologic and toxicologic properties and produces
toxic metabolites.
the characteristic garlic odor. The oil, which contains the
pharmacological and toxic components, is readily
Toxicity
absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. Garlic oil is
Pantoja et al. (1991) reported natriuresis, diuresis, and
eliminated both through the urine and through the lungs
hypotension in anesthetized dogs that were given 2.5 to
(Okuyama et al. 1989). The half-life of allin in rats who
15 mg/kg of encapsulated garlic powder Transient brady-
       m
cardia was present in dogs at doses of 15 and 20mg/kg of
et al. 1990).
encapsulated garlic. Erythrocyte effects and decreased
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
207
208
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
hemoglobin concentrations were seen in dogs that were
Diagnostics
given an extract equal to 5 g of whole garlic per kg of body
Antemortem
weight once a day for 7 days. Cats and some dog breeds,
Hematological testing should be performed with evalua-
particularly Japanese breeds such as Akitas, Shibas, and
tions for Heinz body hemolytic anemia, methemoglobin-
 Tosas, are at an increased risk for toxicosis to Allium spp.
emia, reticulocytes, icterus, and bilirubin, and chemistry
because their erythrocytes are more susceptible to oxida-
evaluation of renal values. Urine output and presence of
tive damage (Christopher et al. 1990).
hemoglobinuria should be evaluated.
Large animals can be affected by Allium spp. Beasley
(1999) reports sensitivity ratings among these animals,
Postmortem
with cattle being the most sensitive followed by horses,
If death occurs, postmortem findings can include onion
and then sheep, and then goats. Feeding more than 25%
odor in the gastrointestinal contents, hemoglobin in the
of the diet in the form of onions will be hazardous to cattle.
urine, pale or icteric tissues, and renal tubular degeneration
 Onion toxicosis has been reported in calves and yearling
and necrosis.
cattle. An average of 11.8kg/head per day was fed, and
signs developed in 26% of the animals within 5 days
Management of Exposures
(Verhoeff et al. 1985). Sheep have been fed cull onions
Small animals presenting with significant exposure to
without toxicity (Cheeke 1998). However, Selim et al.
Allium spp. should be decontarminated. Induction of vomit-
(1999) reported Heinz body hemolytic anemia when sheep
ing may be induced if the exposure was recent and the
were fed 50g/kg/day for 15 days.
animal is asymptomatic. However, caution should be exer-
cised in deterrmining whether contraindications to vomit-
Clinical Effects
ing exist and whether it is safe to have the pet owner
Signs
induce vomiting at home. Activated charcoal should be
Hematological changes may occur from 12 hours to 5 days
given once vomiting is controlled. A cathartic such as
postexposure. The primary concern, in Allium spp. expo-
sorbitol can be given with the first dose of activated char-
sure cases, is for Heinz body hemolytic anemia and met-
coal, but not with subsequent doses. When repeat doses of
hemoglobinemia. Secondarily, in serious cases renal
activated charcoal are used as part of decontamination,
damage occurs from hemoglobinuria. In dogs, the most
electrolyte values should be monitored, since electmlyte
common signs reported to the American Society for the
shifts can occur.
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison
Symptomatic treatrment should be provided and may
Control Center (APCC) are depression, decreased hema-
include administration of oxygen, blood transfusion(s) or
tocrit, vomiting, elevated WBC count, anorexia, hemoly-
Oxyglobin@, intravenous fuids, and contrml of gastroin-
sis, and weakness. Less commonly reported signs include
testinal signs. Selim et al. (1999) reported that Heinz body
salivation, diarrhea, ataxia, hemoglobinuria, Heinz bodies,
hermolytic anemia in sheep was less severe when animals
methemoglobinemia, abnormal breath, and abnormal
were fed ampicillin along with onions. Therefore, it may
feces. Cats most frequently exhibited vomiting, salivation,
be beneficial to treat sheep with oral antibiotics to reduce
and anorexia. Ogawa et al. (1986) reported that hemato-
oxidative damage. Treatment should continue until clinical
crits retumed to normal in 10-14 days after oral
signs are resolved.
exposure.
Prognosis
Differential Diagnoses
The prognosis is generally good for animals that are
If Allium spp. ingestion is suspected but specific evidence
decontaminated and treated early. However, the prognosis
is unavailable, other potential causes of hemolysis or
 may be comprormised in animals that develop renal damage
Heinz body anemia should be ruled out. Other toxicoses
secondary to hemolytic anemia.
that may produce similar signs include zinc, copper, pro-
pylene glycol in cats, red maple in horse, Brassica spp. in
AVOCADO
ruminants, phenothiazines, and mothballs. Additional dif-
ferentials may include auto immune hemolytic anemia,
Sources
blood parasites (e.g-, Haemobartonella felis, Babesia
Avocados are in the family Lauraceae. They originate from
canis, and Eperythrozoon suis), and hereditary diseases
southern Mexico to Central America but are now also
that affect red blood cells.
 grown in the warm climate of the southem United States.
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
209
The genus Persea includes approximately 150 species and
Mammary and cardiac signs have been reported to occur
is the only edible genus. Persea americana is the only
within 15 hours to 3 days of exposure (Hargis et al. 1989;
species known to have toxicological significance (Burrows
Craigmill et al. 1984; McKenzie and Brown 1991). Gas-
and Tyrl 2001). Persea americana includes 3 ecological
trointestinal signs in dogs and cats are expected to occur
races or varieties, Guatemalan, Mexican, and West Indian
within 1-3 hours of exposure.
or Columbian. Of the avocado races, there are a number
of hybrids.
Laboratory
Blood chemistries and electmlytes should be monitored in
Kinetics
these cases. Elevated creatine phosphokinase and alanine
The toxic compound in avocados, persin, is absorbed
aminotransferase are consistent with damage to the cardiac
quickly from the gastrointestinal system. The peak plasma
muscle (Pickrell et al. 2004). Hepatic enzymes may also
level of persin with oral ingestion is 1-2 hours. Elimina-
be elevated (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Electrolyte imbal-
tion of persin can occur through the milk in lactating
ances could occur due to the administration of activated
animals. Other forms of elimination are unknown, but
charcoal.
mice that were dosed orally with persin eliminated the
persin within 24 hours (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses and disease processes may produce similar
Mechanism of Action
signs and should therefore be considered, especially if
The mechanisrm of action for avocado toxicosis is unknown
there is no known history of Persea americana exposure.
(Pickrell et al. 2004).
Differentials include exposure to ionophones, gossypol,
cardiac glycosides, and Taxus spp. as well as primary
Toxicity
congestive heart failure and acute hepatic disease.
The Guatemalan avocado and its hybrids have been shown
to be toxic. Other races/varieties have not been implicated
Diagnostics
in toxicoses to date (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Mammalian
Antemortem
species that are known to be affected include cattle, goats,
A history of exposure along with expected clinical signs
horses, mice, rabbits, rats, and sheep. Lower doses are
provide adequate diagnostic evidence (Pickrell et al.
associated with mammary gland effects, and higher doses
2004).
are associated with cardiac effects, including acute cardiac
failure and chronic cardiac insufficiency (Pickrell et al.
Postmortem
2004). There are no reliable literature reports of mammary
Clots may be present in the mammary ducts. Edema may
gland or cardiac effects in dogs and cats. Persea ameri-
be present in tissues such as the subcutis and the lungs.
cana has also caused signs of toxicosis in caged birds,
Congestion is apparent in the lungs, liver, and spleen. Free
ostriches, and fish (Burger et al. 1994; Hargis et al. 1989).
Huid may be visible in the heart sac, thorax, and abdomen.
Persin doses of 60 to 100 mg/kg may cause mastitis and
The gallbladder and perirenal tissues may be edematous.
agalactia. Doses of persin over 100mg/kg may lead to
The heart tissue appears pale (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
cardiac effects (Oelrichs et al. 1995).
Management of Exposures
Clinical Effects
Emesis may be induced in dogs and potentially cats with
Signs
significant exposure if the exposure is recent, no signs are
Lactating sheep, horses, cattle, rabbits, goats, rats, and
present, and no other contraindications to emesis exist.
mice may show signs of mastitis and agalactia. Reported
Caution should be exercised in determining whether con-
signs include hard, swollen udders; a decrease in milk
traindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
production; and watery, cheesy, curdled milk. Cardiac
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Activated
effects may include edema of the head, neck, brisket, and
charcoal may be given to dogs and cats once vomiting is
chest; cough; weakness; depression; hesitancy to move;
controlled. Other animal species at risk for toxicoses may
respiratory distress; cardiac arrhythmias; acute cardiac
also be administered activated charcoal. A cathartic, such
failure; and chronic cardiac insufficiency. Sudden death
as sorbitol or mineral oil may be given with or after the
has also been reported in rabbits, caged birds, and goats
first dose of activated charcoal but not with subsequent
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001; Pickrell et al. 2004).
doses. When repeat doses of activated charcoal are used
210
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
as part of decontamination, electrolyte values should be
dosage leading to renal failure in dogs is 0.7oz/kg, and the
monitored, since electrolyte shifts may occur. In cattle,
lowest documented raisin dosage leading to renal failure
sheep, and goats, rumenotomy may be considered to
is 0.11 oz/kg.
remove plant material prior to the administration of acti-
Grapes and raisins frorm multiple sources have been
vated charcoal.
involved in the cases reported to the ASPCA Animal
 Treatrment is primarily symptormatic, because no spe-
Poison Control Center. Grapes from grocery stores as well
cific antagonist exists. Crystalloid or colloid fuid support
as homegrown and still-on-the-vine grapes have been
may be required. Administration of oxygen may be neces-
implicated alike. Commercial brands of raisins as well as
sary. Anti-infammatories and diuretics may be useful, and
homegrown and organic varieties have been involved.
antibiotics may help to control secondary infections of the
Fruits have been evaluated for pesticides, heavy metals
 mammary glands (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
and mycotoxins to determine whether these substances
could be a factor in the toxicities, and the results to date
Prognosis
have been negative. It is possible that individual animals
The risks will vary depending on the level of intoxication
may be more susceptible to toxicosis than other animals,
and the signs that develop. Animals with mastitis may fully
because reports from pet owners indicate that sorme dogs
recover; however, milk production may be reduced.
 never became ill with ingestions of grapes or raisins. More
Animals with cardiac effects have a more guarded prog-
research is needed to determine whether grape and raisin
nosis (Pickrell et al. 2004).
characteristics or animalcharacteristics or both are
involved in this syndrome.
GRAPES AND RAISINS
It is possible that other species of animals may also
experience toxicoses with ingestion of grapes and raisins.
Sources
The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center has had
The grape family contains 11-13 genera and 700-735
minimal reports on other species, so more evidence is
species. Most species grow on woody vines, but a few
needed.
species grow on shrubs or small trees. Grapes are an
important crop because they are eaten for food in whole
Clinical Effects
fresh form and are used for raisins, currants, juice, and
Signs
wine. In addition, some taxa are used as omamentals
The typical presentation involves vomiting within 12 to 15
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001)
hours of ingestion. The grapes and raisins are often seen
in the vomitus and may be seen in fecal material as well.
Kinetics
The dogs may exhibit lethargy, abdominal pain, anorexia,
Grapes and raisins are ingested orally. It is not known how
 and diarrhea. These signs may be present for a few days
the toxic component is absorbed, distributed, metabolized,
or, in some cases, weeks. The kidney damage may prog-
 or eliminated from the body.
ress leading to oliguria and finally to anuria.
Mechanism of Action
Laboratory
The mechanism of action for grapes and raisins is not
Blood chermistry panels may begin to show changes as
known.
early as 12 hours after exposure, but changes may not be
noted for several days. Elevations of calcium, blood urea
Toxicity
nitrogen, creatinine, and phosphorus have been docu-
A retrospective evaluation of cases, involving dogs that
mented. Elevations of pancreatic and liver enzymes have
ingested grapes or raisins, reported to the ASPCA Animal
been documented in some cases as well.
Poison Control Center indicated that a range of doses
may produce toxicosis. Raisin dosages that prmduced renal
Differential Diagnoses
effects ranged from 2.8 to 36.4 g/kg. Grape dosages ranged
from 19.6 to 148.4g/kg. In this study, there was not a
signs and should therefore be considered, especially if
statistically significant difference in survival rates in dogs
there is no known history of Vitis sp. exposure. Differen-
with varying dosages (Eubig et al. 2005).
tials include exposure to ethylene glycol, lilies in cats, and
Per unpublished information from the ASPCA Animal
aminoglycosides as well as leptospirosis, bacterial pyelo-
Poison Control Center, the lowest documented grape
nephritis, and chronic renal failure. Diseases that increase
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
211
the risk for acute renal failure may include pancreatitis,
 mia occurs, aluminum hydroxide may be beneficial. If
heat stroke, hepatic failure, Rickettsia, bacterial endocar-
uremia occurs, hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis may be
ditis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (Lane
beneficial. Treatment should continue until signs are
2001).
resolved.
Diagnostics
Prognosis
Antemortem
In the retrospective study mentioned above, ataxia,
A history of exposure along with consistent clinical signs
decreased urine output, and weakness were associated
provide adequate diagnostic evidence for a diagnosis.
with a negative prognosis. In the same study, 53% of the
dogs fully recovered or had mild residual azotema, 12%
relevant for determining the prognosis.
died, and 35% were euthanized (Eubig et al. 2005).
Postmortem
MACADAMIA NUTS
Histopathological evaluation of tissues in the retrospective
Sources
study demonstrated that the most consistent renal changes
involved diffuse renal tubular degeneration, particularly
Macadamia integrifolia and Macadamia tetraphylla trees
affecting the prmoximal renal tubules. Other renal lesions
produce macadamia nuts. These trees have been cultivated
were present in some cases. In addition, histopathology
in Hawaii since the late 1800s. These nuts are commonly
in some cases revealed congestion or edema of the liver,
eaten by humans. They may be eaten whole as snack
lungs, spleen, pancreas, and abdominal lymph nodes and
foods, but they are also used in baking and in a variety of
 occasional fibrinoid vasculitis or vascular necrosis (Eubig
recipes.
et al.2005)
Kinetics
Management of Exposures
Macadamia nuts are ingested orally. It is not known how
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested grapes
the toxic component is absorbed, distributed, metabolized,
or raisins if the exposure is recent, no signs are present,
or eliminated from the body.
and no other contraindications to emesis exist. Caution
should be exercised in determining whether contraindica-
Mechanism of Action
tions to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have the
The mechanism of action for macadamia nut toxicosis is
pet owner induce vomiting at home. Activated charcoal
unknown.
may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled in an
Toxicity
effort to bind any toxic principle remaining in the gastro-
intestinal tract. A cathartic, such as sorbitol may be given
Dogs are the only reported species to develop toxicosis
with or after the first dose of activated charcoal but not
from ingestions of macadamia nuts. Signs have been
with subsequent doses. When repeat doses of activated
reported with macadamia nut ingestions of 2.4g/kg of
charcoal are used as part of decontamination, electrolyte
body weight to 62.4g/kg of body weight. Signs may
values should be monitored, since electrolyte shifts may
develop within 2 to 12 hours of ingestion and generally
occur.
resolve within 48 hours (Hansen et al. 2000),
Baseline chemistries, complete blood count, electro-
Clinical Effects
lytes, and urinalysis should be performed and monitored
throughout the course of treatment. Treatment is primarily
Signs
symptomatic, because no specific antagonist exists. Vomit-
The most common signs from cases reported to the
ing may be treated with metoclopramide, H2 antagonists,
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center include weakness,
and/or sucralfate.
depression, vomiting, ataxia, tremors, and hyperthermia
Fluid support is required. Dehydration should be cor-
A laboratory study involving 4 dogs confirmed the syn-
rected and then fuid diuresis should be initiated. Hydra-
drome, which had been reported to the ASPCA Animal
tion status, lung sounds, body weight, and urine output
Poison Contrml Center. Weakness, stiffness, and ataxia
should be monitored. Diuretics such as mannitol and furo-
semide may be useful to treat oliguria. Dopamine has also
be reluctant to stand and have difficulty walking (Hansen
been used in the treatment of oliguria. If hyperphosphate
et al.2000)
212
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Laboratory
anti-emetics. Subcutaneous or intravenous fuid support
White blood cell counts were high for all 4 dogs listed in
 may be required if dehydration is present from vomiting
the study above. One dog maintained an elevated white
and oral fuids are not tolerated.
blood cell count 48 hours after ingestion. Numbers of
Close monitoring is required. Confinerment may be nec-
segmented neutrophils including immature forms were
essary to prevent injury in ataxic animals and to reduce
increased. A few toxic neutrophils containing vacuoles
sensory stimuli. Body temperature should be monitored,
were noted. The only other laboratory abnormality was
and thermoregulation provided if needed. Monitoring
alkaline phosphatase. Three of the dogs had high values
should continue until signs have resolved.
24 hours after ingestion, and the values were still elevated
Prognosis
48 hours after exposure (Hansen et al. 2000),
Dogs with macadamia nut toxicosis have a good progno-
Differential Diagnoses
sis. No deaths have been reported, and no sequelae have
Other toxicoses may produce similar signs and should
been noted.
therefore be considered, especially if there is no known
METHYLXANTHINES
history of Macadamia sp. exposure. Differentials include
exposure to ivermectin, milbemycin, moxidectin, or other
Sources
avermectins; ethylene glycol; 5-hydroxytryptophan; ben-
Methylxanthines are naturally occurring alkaloids. They
zodiazepines; barbiturate overdose; ethanol or other alco-
hols; and bromethalin.
occur naturally in some foods. They are also used as medi-
cations. Theobromine and caffeine are the methylxan-
Diagnostics
thines of toxicological significance in chocolate (Table
24.1). Caffeine is also naturally present in coffee and some
Antemortem
teas and is added to a number of cormmercial beverages.
History of exposure along with expected clinical presenta-
Pets are frequently attracted to these foods and beverages
tion provide adequate diagnostic evidence. Consistent
laboratory findings may help to confirm diagnosis.
Most methylxanthine toxicoses in dogs occur as a result
of chocolate ingestion, so this chapter will focus on choco-
Postmortem
late (Beasley 1999).
No deaths have been reported from Macadamia spp.
exposures.
Kinetics
Methylxanthines are well absorbed from the gastrointesti-
Management of Exposures
nal tract (Serafin 1995). Signs can develop within 2 hours
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested maca-
damia nuts if the exposure is recent, no signs are present,
Table 24.1. Approximate methylxanthine levels
and no other contraindications to emesis exist. Caution
in different forms of chocolate a
should be exercised in deterrmining whether contraindica-
tions to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have the
Total Methylxanthine
Chocolate
(mg/oz)
pet owner induce vormiting at home. Activated charcoal
may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled in an
White chocolate
1.1
effort to bind any toxic principle remaining in the gastro-
intestinal tract. A cathartic, such as sorbitol, may be given
Milk chocolate
9
Sermisweet chocolate chips
160
with or after the first dose of activated charcoal but not
Baker's chocolate (unsweetened)
440
with subsequent doses. When repeat doses of activated
Dry cocoa powder
800
charcoal are used as part of decontamination, electrolyte
values should be monitored, since electrolyte shifts may
Levels of methylxanthines in chocolates vary due
occur.
to natural variations in methylxanthine content of the
Most cases of macadamia nut toxicosis do not require
chocolate base, as well as differences in manufacturing
treatment. When treatment is needed, it is primarily symp-
processes.
tomatic and supportive, because no specific antagonist
Includes levels of theobromine and caffeine.
exists. If continued vomiting occurs, it may be treated with
Source: Gwaltney-Brant 2001.
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
213
of exposure but onset may be longer especially if the
occurs from heart rhythm disturbances or respiratory
animal ingests the wrappers.
failure (Beasley 1999).
Methylxanthines are distributed throughout the body,
Laboratory
cross the placenta, and are passed into the milk of lactating
females. The liver metabolizes methylxanthines (Beasley
Hypokalermia may coincide with diuresis and vomiting
1999). Enterohepatic recirculation and reabsorption from
(Beasley 1999). Chemistries associated with the pancreas
the urinary tract has been reported (Serafin 1995). The
may be elevated 1-3 days after the exposure indicating
half-life of caffeine and theobromine in dogs is 4.5 and
pancreatitis.
17.5 hours respectively (Beasley 1999). ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center data indicate that recovery gener-
Differential Diagnoses
ally occurs within 24-48 hours after exposure provided
Other toxicoses prmduce similar signs and should therefore
that the signs are controlled. Drugs that can affect meth-
be considered, especially if there is no known history of
ylxanthine elimination include propranolol, erythromycin,
chocolate exposure. Differentials include exposure to caf-
corticosteroids, and cimetidine (Serafin 1995).
feine tablets, other medications that contain methylxan-
thines, pseudoephedrine, amphetamines, antihistamines,
Mechanism of Action
cocaine, and other products that may cause seizures.
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified,
but clinical signs in animals are believed to be related to
Diagnostics
competitive inhibition of cellular adenosine receptors.
Antemortem
Other mechanism of actions may include cellular calcium
History of exposure along with expected clinical presenta-
reuptake inhibition and competition for benzodiazepine
tion provide adequate diagnostic evidence. Some labora
receptors (Serafin 1995; Beasley 1999).
tories can test for methylxanthines in the serum, plasma,
and urine.
Toxicity
Both caffeine and theobrormine are present in chocolate.
Postmortem
The darker chocolates contain higher levels of methylxan-
Stomach contents can be evaluated grossly for wrappers
thines than lighter chocolates such as milk chocolate. Toxi-
and may be collected and submitted for methylxanthine
cosis is possible with either type of product and is
testing. Special request for methylxanthine or other toxi-
dependent upon the dose of methylxanthines ingested.
cology testing is usually required (Hooser and Beasley
It is important to deterrmine the combined dose of meth-
1986).
ylxanthines ingested. The worst case scenario should be
utilized for dose calculations. At combined caffeine and
Management of Exposures
theobromine doses of 10-15 mg/kg or less, signs of toxi-
Emesis may be induced in dogs and cats that have ingested
cosis generally do not occur. However, chocolate often
chocolate if the exposure is recent, no signs are present,
contains a significant amount of fat, so gastrointestinal
and no other contraindications to emesis exist. Caution
upset and/or pancreatitis may occur with any chocolate
should be exercised in deterrmining whether contraindica-
exposure. Combined doses of caffeine and theobromine
tions to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have
that are greater than 15 mg/kg should be considered sig-
the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Gastric lavage
nificant and may require decontamination and/or treat-
may be indicated in some cases because chocolate may
ment. Doses of 50mg/kg or more may induce signs of
form a firm mass in the stomach, and lavage may break
cardiotoxicity.
than emesis. Activated charcoal may be given to dogs
Clinical Effects
once vomiting is controlled or may be given by stomach
Signs
tube after gastric lavage is performed. Activated charcoal
The most commonly observed signs associated with sig-
may bind any methylxanthines remaining in the gastro-
nificant chocolate ingestion in dogs and cats include vom-
intestinal tract. Multiple doses of activated charcoal over
iting, restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia and other
3 days may be required (Hooser and Beasley 1986;
cardiac arrhythmias, tachypnea, polyuria, hyperthermia,
Shannon 1998). A cathartic such as sorbitol may be given
tremors, and seizures. Weakness, coma, cyanosis, hyper-
daily if diarrhea is not present. When repeat doses of
tension, bradycardia, and ataxia may also occur. Death
activated charcoal are used as part of decontamination,
214
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
electrolyte values should be monitored, since electrolyte
of action is the interference of inhibitory neurotransmitters
shifts may occur.
such as glycine and GABA(Cole 1977; Pitt 1994; Beasley
Close monitoring and nursing care should be provided.
1999). Additional studies will be required to determine a
Intravenous fuid therapy should be initiated when signifi-
confirmed mechanism of action.
cant exposure has occurred. Other treatments should be
pmvided as needed based on signs that occur. Tremors
Toxicity
may be controlled with diazepam or methocarbamol. Sei-
Severe tremors have been reported in dogs with penitrem
zures may require diazepam, phenobarbital, or gas anes-
A exposure to dosages of 0.175 mg/kg of body weight
thesia.Beta blockers or lidocaine may be beneficial for
(Abramson 1997). In a clinical environment, dosage cal-
treating tachyarrhythmias, and bradycardias can be treated
culation may not be possible, so deterrmining the risk based
with atropine (Beasley 1999).
on dose may not occur.
Prognosis
Clinical Effects
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
Signs
decontamination and treatment.
Common signs reported to the ASPCA Animal Poison
TREMORGENIC MYCOTOXINS
Control Center include hypertherrmia, salivation, vomiting:
ataxia, tachycardia, fasciculation, tremors, seizures, and
Sources
death. Signs from exposure often begin within 15 minutes
Mycotoxins are secondary fungal metabolites, which are
to 2 hours after the exposure, but signs may occur after
toxic to species such as animals, plants, or other microbes.
this time frame. Young et al. (2003) reported on an 11-year-
old Labrador retriever exposed to moldy cream cheese
The effects of mycotoxins differ based upon the toxin
from the garbage. Signs were noted to occur the morning
and its chemical structure (Boysen et al. 2002). Approxi-
 rmately 20 mycotoxins have been identified as tremorgens.
after the dog ingested the food. In this case penitrem A
and rmquefortine C were identified by the laboratory when
The most frequently reported tremorgenic mycotoxins
affecting pets are petitrem-A and roquefortine C, both
cream cheese from the wrapper was analyzed. Signs in
of which are produced by Penicillium species (Schell
this case included: generalized muscle fasciculation
and hyperextension of the extrermities, blepharospasms,
2000).
vocalization, weakness, tachypnea, hyperexcitation, and
Reports of tremorgenic mycotoxin exposures have
involved moldy foods including dairy foods, moldy
tachycardia.
A second case documented in this report involved a
walnuts or peanuts, stored grains, and moldy pasta, as well
as compost material (Schell 2000; Boysen et al. 2002).
dog that developed status epilepticus associated with trem-
orgenic  mycotoxin  ingestion.  Further  complications
Dogs may ingest moldy food from the garbage or from
composting areas. Young et al. (2003) reported on two
occurred for this dog with the development of aspiration
pneumonia potentially associated with emesis or the
cases, one involving the ingestion of moldy cream cheese
gastric lavage procedure performed on the dog (Young,
and the other involving the ingestion of moldy macaroni
and cheese. Another report described an exposure that
et al. 2003). Signs from tremorgenic mycotoxins fre-
involved four dogs from one household that ingested mate-
quently resolve within 48 hours, but residual fasciculations
or intention trermors may persist for longer periods ( Young
rial from a compost pile (Boysen et al. 2002).
et al. 2003)
Kinetics
Tremorgenic mycotoxins are rapidly absorbed from the
Laboratory
 gastrointestinal tract, with onset of action occurring from
Diagnostic laboratories utilize chrormatography or mass
15 minutes to several hours after the exposure (Young
spectrometry to identify tremorgenic mycotoxins. Electro-
&t al. 2003). Reports on distribution and elimination are
lytes and other blood values should be monitored based on
not available.
presenting signs.
Mechanism of Action
Differential Diagnoses
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified,
Other toxicoses can produce similar signs and should
but several have been proposed. One potential mechanism
therefore be considered especially if there is no known
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
215
history of mold exposure. Differentials include exposure
Prognosis
to strychnine, metaldehyde, ethylene glycol, cholinester-
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
 ase inhibitors, methylxanthines, pseudoephedrine, amphet-
decontamination and treatment. Death may occur in
amines, and cocaine.
untreated animals.
Diagnostics
ALCOHOL
Antemortem
A tentative diagnosis can be made based upon the expo-
Sources
sure history and the resulting signs. Confirmation of the
Alcohol toxicosis most frequently occurs when animals
diagnosis is dependent on the results of laboratory tests.
are exposed to alcoholic beverages or raw yeast dough but
 Suspect food or vormitus may be collected and subrmitted
may also occur with ingestion of certain drug formulation
for tremorgenic mycotoxin evaluation. Food samples
or rubbing alcohol.
should be sent chilled; vomitus should be frozen.
Kinetics
Postmortem
Ethanol is fully and quickly absorbed from all parts of the
 No characteristic postmortem lesions are expected. Suspect
gastrointestinal tract generally within 30 to 60 minutes
food, vomitus, or stomach contents may be submitted for
(Ellenhom and Barceloux 1988; Osborn 1994; Rall 1990),
tremorgenic mycotoxin evaluation. Food samples should
 Absorption may be enhanced if the stomach is ermpty, the
be sent chilled; vomitus and stomach contents should be
concentration of the substance ingested is dilute, or the
frozen.
substance ingested is carbonated (Rangno et al. 1981;
Osborn 1994). Absorption may be delayed if there is food
Management of Exposures
in the stomach, gastrointestinal disease is present, certain
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested moldy
drugs are in the system, the concentration of alcohol is
food or compost if the exposure is recent, no signs are
high, or if there is decreased gastrointestinal motility (Lin
present, and no other contraindications to emesis exist.
et al. 1976; Osborn 1994). Peak plasma levels in humans
Caution should be exercised in determining whether con-
are 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion (Osborn 1994).
traindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
Ethanol is primarily metabolized in the liver. The remain-
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Gastric
der is excreted unchanged in the breath, urine, feces, and
lavage may be indicated in some cases. Activated charcoal
sweat (Ellenhom and Barceloux 1988; Osborn 1994).
 may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled or may
be given by stomach tube after gastric lavage is perforrmed.
Mechanism of Action
Activated charcoal binds organic compounds and is
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified,
expected to help prevent the absorption of toxins. Multiple 
but the mechanism of action is believed to be related to
doses of activated charcoal may be required. A cathartic,
dissolution of lipid membranes affecting ion channels and
such as sorbitol may be given with the first dose of acti-
their proteins, which causes depressant effects on the CNS
vated charcoal if diarrhea is not present. When repeat
Another potential mechanism of action suggests that
doses of activated charcoal are used as part of decontami-
ethanol can also augment GABA-mediated synaptic inhi-
nation, electrolyte values should be monitored, since elec-
bition as well as changes in chloride ions.
trolyte shifts may occur.
Toxicity
Close monitoring and nursing care should be prmovided.
The patient should be stabilized and signs should be
Any dose of alcohol has the potential to cause serious
managed. Intravenous Huid therapy should be initiated
effects in pet animals. Effects will vary based upon the
to prevent or treat dehydration associated with vomiting
amount ingested and the absorption rate. The minimum
and to help regulate electrolytes. Other treatrments should
lethal dosage in children is 3g/kg of body weight.
be provided as needed based on signs that occur. Trermors
may be controlled with diazepam or methocarbamol.
Clinical Effects
Seizures may require diazepam, phenobarbital, pheno-
Signs
barbital, or gas anesthesia (Boysen etet al. 2002; Young
Alcohol intoxication leads to central nervous system
et al. 2003). Body temperature should be monitored
(CNS) depression (Rall 1990). The signs most commonly
and thermoregulation provided.
reported to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
216
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
include ataxia, lethargy, vomiting, recurmbency, hypother-
and dextrose should be added if hypoglycemia occurs.
mia, disorientation, and vocalization. Signs that have been
Other treatments should be provided as needed based on
reported but are less common include tremors, tachycar-
signs that occur. Cardiac drugs that may be of benefit
dia, acidosis, diarrhea, dyspnea, coma, and seizures. Signs
include epinephrine, atropine, lidocaine, and yohimbine.
usually resolve within 12 hours of exposure.
Ventilation and seizure control may be required.
Laboratory
Prognosis
Abnormal laboratory values may occur. Complete blood
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
count, chemistry panel, and blood gases should be
decontamination, supportive care, and treatment.
performed.
YEAST DOUGH
Differential Diagnoses
 Other toxicoses produce similar signs and should therefore
Sources
be considered, especially if there is no known history of
Dogs may ingest raw yeast dough if it is available (Thrall
alcohol exposure. Differentials include exposure to iron,
et al. 1984; Suter 1992). A commonly reported scenario
isoniazid, lactic acidosis, diabetes, ethylene glycol, sali-
involves a dog ingesting yeast bread or roll dough left out
cylic acid, toluene, and marijuana. Additional differentials
to rise on a countertop. Two potential syndromes may
may include uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, or cardiovas-
occur independently or concurrently, the first being ethanol
cular accident.
intoxication and the second being foreign body obstruction
of the gastrointestinal tract (Means 2003).
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Kinetics
Diagnosis may be determined based upon the exposure
See Kinetics section for ethanol toxicosis
history and the resulting signs. Blood alcohol levels can
be obtained to confirm exposure.
Mechanism of Action
Foreign body obstruction may occur in the gastrmintestinal
Postmortem
tract due to dough that expands while in the stomach. See
Toxicology tests may be performed on blood or tissues to
Mechanism of Action section for ethanol toxicosis.
confirm exposure and cause of death.
Toxicity
Management of Exposures
See Toxicity section for ethanol toxicosis.
Emesis may be induced in dogs and cats that have ingested
Clinical Effects
ethanol if the exposure occurred within the previous 25
Signs
minutes, no signs are present, and no other contraindica-
tions to emesis exist. Caution should be exercised in deter-
See Clinical Effects section for ethanol toxicosis. In addi-
mining whether contraindications to vomiting exist and
tion to signs of alcohol intoxication, the ingestion of bread
whether it is safe to have the pet owner induce vomiting
dough has been theorized to cause foreign body obstruc-
at home. Activated charcoal may be given to dogs once
tion, gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV), or even gastric
vomiting is controlled. Care should be taken to avoid aspi-
rupture. The dough expands in the warm, moist environ-
ration of activated charcoal in inebriated animals. When
ment of the stomach. Vomiting, abdorminal pain, retching,
repeat doses of activated charcoal are used as part of
and recumbency may occur.
decontamination, electrolyte values should be monitored,
since electrolyte shifts may occur.
Laboratory
Close monitoring and nursing care including thermo-
See Laboratory section for ethanol toxicosis.
legulation should be provided. Confinement may be
required to prevent injury. Heart rate, blood pressure, and
Differential Diagnoses
electrocardiogram should be obtained. Intravenous fuid
See Differential Diagnoses section for ethanol toxicosis
and electrolyte therapy should be initiated. Sodium bicar-
Other potential causes of gastrointestinal signs and foreign
bonate should be included if metabolic acidosis occurs,
body obstruction should be evaluated.
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
217
Diagnostics
Mechanism of Action
Antemortem
Xylitol is metabolized intracellularly to D-xylulose, which
History of exposure along with expected clinical presenta-
is then metabolized via the Pentose-Phosphate Pathway
tion provide adequate diagnostic evidence. See Antemor-
(PPP). The PPP is believed to control insulin release
tem section for ethanol toxicosis.
(Kuzuya et al. 1969). The mechanism of action for liver
effects is not known, but has been theorized by Dunayer
Postmortem
and Gwaltney-Brant (2006) to be related to either deple-
See Postmortem section for ethanol toxicosis. Necropsy
tion of ATP during the metabolism of xylitol or to the
production of reactive oxygen species.
may reveal dough mass in the stomach, GDV, or gastric
rupture.
Toxicity
One report involved a dog that ingested 2.96g of xylotol/
Management of Exposures
kg of body weight. This dog showed signs of lateral
See Management of Exposures section for ethanol toxi-
recumbency, nonresponsiveness, and gas in the gastroin-
cosis. Emesis may be recommended with caution, because
testinal tract (Dunayer 2004). Unpublished data from
the stomach may rupture if the dough mass blocks the
the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center indicates that
signs of hypoglycemia may occur at doses of 0.1g/kg and
help expel gas within the stomach. A lavage with cold
greater. Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant (2006) report that
water may help to decrease ferrmentation and remove
1.4 to 2.0g of xylitol/kg of body weight has been associ-
sorme of the dough. Surgical removal of the dough may
ated with hepatic failure.
be required in severe cases. If bloat or GDV occurs,
stabilization and standard treatment should be provided
Clinical Effects
(Means 2003).
Signs
Reported signs include hypoglycemia, vomiting, lethargy,
Prognosis
and ataxia. The animal's condition may advance to include
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
recumbency, seizures, and coagulopathy (Dunayer 2004;
decontamination, supportive care, and treatment.
Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant 2006).
Laboratory
XYLITOL
Abnorrmal lab values may include low potassium, low
phosphate, elevated bilirubin, and elevated liver enzymes
Sources
(Dunayer 2004; Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant 2006).
Xylitol, a sugar alcohol, is a natural sweetener found in
Differential Diagnoses
plants. It is commonly obtained from birch bark. Xylitol
has comparable sweetness to table sugar (Dunayer 2004).
Additional differentials may include insulinoma, insulin
It is a nutritive sweetener that provides calories and is
overdose, oral hypoglycemic agents (e.g-, sulfonylureas),
found in many human and pet prmducts, e.g, sugar-free
hunting dog hypoglycemia, juvenile hypoglycemia, and
gum, dental spray, dental lozenges, and toothpaste. It is
prolonged starvation.
also used as a sweetener in products for diabetics, is
Diagnostics
found in some dietary supplements and chewable vita-
mins, and in other products designed to be low in
Antemortem
carbohydrates.
History of exposure along with expected clinical presenta-
tion provide adequate diagnostic evidence.
Kinetics
Postmortem
When ingested, xylitol is absorbed readily from the gas-
Xylitol is not expected to remain in the tissues, since it is
trointestinal tract with peak plasma levels occurring 30
metabolized quickly.
minutes after ingestion (Kuzuya et al. 1969). It may be
converted to glucose and then glycogen in the liver (WHO
Management of Exposures
1978). The liver is where 80% of xylitol metabolism
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested xylitol-
occurs (Froesch and Jakob 1974).
containing products if the exposure was within 15-30
218
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
minutes, no signs are present, and no other contraindica-
Craigmill A.L., Eide, R.N., Shultz, T.A., Hedrick, K. 1984.
tions to emesis exist. Caution should be exercised in deter-
Toxicity of avocado (Persea americana [Guatemalan var])
mining whether contraindications to vomiting exist and
leaves: Review and preliminary report. Veterinary and
whether it is safe to have the pet owner induce vomiting
Human Toxicology 26(5):381-384.
Dunayer, E.K. 2004. Hypoglycemia following canine inges-
at home.
tion of xylitol-containing gum. Veterinary and Human Toxi-
Close monitoring is required. Glucose should be moni-
cotogy 46:87-88.
tored every 2-4 hours for the first 12-24 hours, and blood
Dunayer, E.K. and Gwaltney-Brant, S.M. 2006. Acute hepatic
chemistries and electrolytes should be monitored. If liver
failure and coagulopathy associated with xylitol ingestion
enzymes begin to elevate, coagulation parameters should
in eight dogs.Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat
be monitored. Confinement may be necessary to prevent
Association 229:1113-1117.
 injury in ataxic animals. Symptormatic and supportive care
Ellenhorn, M.J. and Barceloux, D.G. 1988. Ethanol. In
should be provided and may include administration of
Medical Toxicology:Diagnosis and Treatment of Human
intravenous fuids with dextrose, nutritional support, and
Poisoning, edited by Elenhorn, M.J. and Barceloux, D.G.
potassium supplementation. Hepatoprmotective agents such
New York: Elsevier.
as SAM-e, silymarin (milk thistle), or n-acetylcysteine
Eubig, PA., Brady, M.S., Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., Khan, S.A.,
Mazzaferro, E.M., Morrow, C.K. 2005. Acute renal failure
may be given. Monitoring and treatment should continue
in dogs subsequent to the ingestion of grapes or raisins: A
until signs have resolved.
retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). Journal
Prognosis
ofVeterinary Intern Medicine 19:663-674.
Froesch, E.R. and Jakob, A. 1974. The metabolism of xylitol.
When treatment is prmvided and doses that affect the liver
In Sugars in nutrition, edited by Sipple, H.L., McNutt,
are not achieved, the prognosis is good. When hepatic
K.W., pp. 241-258. New York: Acadermic Press.
necrosis and coagulopathy occur, the prognosis is guarded.
Guo, Z.,Muller,D., and Pentz, R.1990.Bioavailability of
sulphur—containing ingredients of garlic in the rat. Planta
REFERENCES
Medica 56:692.
Abramson, D. 1997. Toxicants of the genus Penicillium.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2001. Chocolate intoxication. Vet-
In Handbook of Plant and Fungal Toxicants, edited by
erinary Medicine 96(2):108-111.
Felix, JP, pp. 303-317. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press,
Hansen, S.R., Buck, W.B., Meerdink, G., Khan, S.A. 2000.
Inc.
Weakness, tremors, and depression associated with maca-
Beasley, V.R.1999.A Systems Affected Approach to Veteri-
damia nuts in dogs. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
nary Toxicology, pp. 116-120. Urbana: Umiversity of Ili-
42(1):18-21.
nois College of Veterinary Medicine.
Hargis, A.M., Stauber, E., Casteel, S. 1989. Avocado (Persea
Boysen, S., Rozanski, E., Chan, D., Grobe, T., Fallon, M.,
americana) intoxication in caged birds. Journal of the
Rush, J. 2002. Tremorgenic mycotoxicosis in four dogs
American Veterinary Medical Association 194(1):64-66.
from a single household. Journal of the American Veteri-
Hooser, S.B. and Beasley, VR. 1986. Methylxanthines. In
nary Medical Association 221(10):1441-1444.
Current Veterinary Therapy IX, edited by Kirk, R.W., Pp.
Burger, W.P, Naude, T.W., Van Rensburg, I.B., Botha, C.J.,
191-192. Philadelphia: Saunders Co.
Pienaar A.C. 1994. Cardiomyopathy in ostriches (Struthio
Kuzuya, T, Kanazawa, Y., Kosaka, K. 1969. Stimulation of
camelus) due to avocado (Persea americana var Guate-
insulin secretion by xylitol in dogs. Endocrinofogy 84:
malensis) intoxication. Journal of the South African Veteri-
200-207.
nary Association 65(3):113-118.
Lane, I.F. 200l. Treatment of urinary disorders. In Smaf!
Burrows, G.E. and Tyrl, R.J. 2001. Toxic Plants of North
Animal Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,edited by
America, Pp. 744-747. Ames: Iowa State Press.
Boothe, D.M., Pp. 528-540. Philadelphia: Saunders Co.
Cheeke,P. 1998. Natural Toxicants in Feeds, Forages, and
Lin, Y.J., Weidler, D.J., and Garg, D.C. 1976. Effects of solid
Poisonous Plants, 2nd ed.Danville,Illinois:Interstate
food on blood levels of alcohol in man. Research Com
Publishers.
munications in Chemistry,Pathology.and Pharmacology
Christopher, M.M., White, J.G., Eaton, J.W. 1990. Erythro-
13:713-722.
cyte pathology and mechanisms of Heinz body-mediated
McKenzie, R.A. and Brown, O.P. 1991. Avocado (Persea
hemolysis in cats.Veterinary Pathology 27:299-310.
americana) poisoning of horses. Australian Veterinary
Cole, R.J. 1977. Tremorgenic mycotoxins. Mycotoxins in
Jourmal 68(2):77-78.
Human and Animal Heatth,Conference Proceedings,
Means, C. 2003. Bread dough toxicosis in dogs. Journaf
edited by Rodricks, Hesseltine, and Mehlman, pp. 583-595.
ofVeterinary Emergency and Critical Care 13(1):
Park Forest South, Illinois: Pathotox Publishers.
39-41.
Chapter 24 / Food-Associated Intoxications
219
Oelrichs, PB., Pearce, C.M., Zhu, J., Filippich, L.J. 1995.
Robertson, J.E., Christopher, M.M., Rogers, Q.R. 1998.
Isolation and identification of a compound from avocado
Heinz body formation in cats fed baby food containing
(Persea Americana) leaves which causes necrosis of the
onion powdet. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
acinar epithelium of the lactating mammary glad and the
Association 212:1260-1266.
myocardium.Natural Toxins 3(5):344-349.
Schell, M.M. 2000. Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication
Ogawa, E., Shinoki, T.,Akahori, F., Masaoka, T. 1986.
Veterinary Medicine 95(4):283-286.
Effect of onion ingestion on anti-oxidizing agents in dog
Selim, H.M., Yamato, O., Tajima, M., Maede, Y. 1999. Rumen
erythrocytes.Japanese Journal of Veterinary Science 48:
bacteria are involved in the onset of onion-induced hemo-
685-691.
lytic anemia in sheep.Journal of Veterinary Medicat
Okuyama, T, Fujita, K., and Shibata, S. 1989. Effects of
Science 61:269-374.
ed ueny uo uense, pue .eaix., sanp ssu
Serafin, W.E. 1995. Methylxanthines. In Goodman and Gil-
aggregation (Allium bakeri,A.sativum). Planta Medica
man's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 9h ed.,
55:242-244.
edited by Hardman, J.G., Limbird, L.E., Pp. 672-679. New
Osborn, H. 1994. Ethanol. In Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emer-
York: McGraw-Hil1.
gencies, 5th ed., edited by Goldfrank, L.R., Flomenbaum
Shannon, M.W. 1998. Methylxanthines. In Clinicat Manage-
N.E., Lewin, N.A., Pp. 813-824. Norwalk, Connecticut:
ment of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 3rd ed., edited
Appleton and Lange.
by Haddad, L.M., Pp. 1093-1106. Philadelphia: W.B.
Pantoja, C.V, Chiang, L.C., Norris, B.C., Concha, J.B. 1991.
Saunders Company.
Diuretic, natriuretic and hypotensive effects produced by
Suter, R.J. 1992. Presumed ethanol intoxication in sheep dogs
Allium sativum (garlic) in anaesthetized dogs. J Ethno
fed uncooked pizza dough. Aust Vet J 69(1):20.
pharmacol 32(3):325-331.
Thrall, M.A., Freemyer, FG., Hamar, D.W., Jones, R.L. 1984.
Pickrell, J.A., Oehme, F., Mannala, S.A. 2004. Avocado. In
Ethanol toxicosis secondary to sourdough ingestion in a
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Plumlee, K.H.,
dogJournalof the American Veterinary Medical Associa-
Pp. 424 425, St. Louis: Mosby.
tion 184(12):1513-1514.
Pitt, J1. 1994. Penicillium. In Foodborne Disease Handbook,
Verhoeff, J., Hajer, R., van den Ingh, T.S. 1985. Onion poison-
Vol. 2, edited by Hui, Y.H., Gorham, J.R., Murrell, K.D.,
ing in young cattle. Veterinary Record 117:497-498.
Cliver, D.O., Pp. 517-630. New York: Marce1 Dekker, Inc.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1978. WHO Food Addi-
Rall, T.W. 1990. Hypnotics and sedatives; Ethanol. In The
tives Series 12.Xyfitof. Retrieved December 30, 2008,from
Pharmacotogical Basis ofTherapeutics, edited by Goodman
http://www.inchem.org/documents/jecfa/jecmono/
and Gilman. New York: Pergamon Press.
v18je16.htm
Rangno, R.E., Kreeft, J.H., Sitar, D.S. 1981. Ethanol dose
Young, K., Villar, D., Carson, T., lerman, P, Moore, R.,
dependent elimination: Michaelis-Menten v classical
Bottoff, M. 2003. Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication with
kinetic analysis. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
penitrem a and roquefortine in two dogs. Journal of the
12:667-673
American Veterinary Medicat Association 221(1):52-53.
Drugs of Abuse
25
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ALCOHOL
systerm. They are metabolized in the liver and both parent
Ethanol is the most commonly abused drug, and accidental
compound and its metabolites are excreted in the urine.
ingestion of ethanol by pets is not an uncommon event. A
Elimination by the urine is enhanced in acidic urine.
complete discussion of ethanol toxicosis can be found in
Chapter 28.
Mechanism of Action
Amphetamines produce their stimulatory activity through
AMPHETAMINES
several neurotransmitters, including norepinephrine, dopa-
mine, and serotonin in the central nervous system and
Sources/Formulations
 through direct stimulation of α- and β-adrenergic recep-
Amphetamines encormpass a wide variety of drugs, both
tors in the peripheral nervous system (Bischoff 2007).
legal and illicit. The high level of dependency and abuse
Amphetamines also inhibit monoamine oxidase and inhibit
that these drugs can elicit has resulted in them being des-
 neuronal reuptake of catecholarmines, both of which can
ignated controlled substances by the U.S. Drug Enforce-
result in accumulation of excess neurmotransmitters such as
ment Agency. Amphetamines are prescribed legally for the
treatment of obesity, narcolepsy, and attention deficit dis-
Toxicity
order in humans (Volmer 2006). Methamphetamine does
have therapeutic uses, but is most infamous as the street
Although the oral LDso for amphetamine sulfate in dogs is
listed as 20-27 mg/kg, serious and life-threatening clinical
"glass." Pseudoephedrine, an over-the-counter deconges-
signs can occur at much lower levels.
tant, is a precursor to illicitly manufactured methamphet-
amine, and the features of pseudoephedrine overdose will
Clinical Effects
be similar to those seen with amphetamines. Companion
Signs
animals are generally exposed to amphetamines through
Signs associated with amphetamine intoxication include
the accidental ingestion of prescription or illicit
agitation, restlessness, hyperactivity, aggression, vocaliza-
medication.
tion, hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, ataxia, tremors,
and seizures.
Kinetics
Laboratory
Most amphetamines are quickly absorbed into the blood
stream, and clinical signs can occur very quickly after
No specific clinical pathology abnormalities are expected,
although acidosis, electrmlyte imbalances, and hypoglyce-
cross the blood-brain barrier to enter the central nervous
mia may be seen in severe cases.
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 20ll by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
221
222
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Differential Diagnoses
following the ingestion of delayed-release products (i.e.,
Other CNS stimulants such as cocaine, methylxanthines,
extended release, sustained release, controlled release
other sympathomimetics (e.g-, pseudoephedrine, phenyl-
products). It is important to realize that amphetamines can
propanolamine), metaldehyde, antidepressants, tremor-
cause a very rapid onset of signs, so close monitoring
genic
mycotoxins,  organochlorine  insecticides,
during and after decontamination is recommended.
organophosphorous and carbamate insecticides, 5-fuoro-
uracil, hypermatremia, ephedra (e.g-, ma huang/guarana
Prognosis
preparations), 5-hydroxytryptophan, or lead should all be
The prognosis for animals ingesting amphetamine depends
considered when presented with a patient with severe CNS
on the dose ingested, the severity and duration of clinical
and cardiovascular stimulation.
signs at presentation and the response to appropriate
therapy. Complications from severe cases can include
Diagnostics
injury due to hyperthermia, hypoxia, trauma, uncontrolled
Blood, saliva, and urine can be analyzed by most veteri-
seizure activity, or cerebral ederma.
nary diagnostic laboratories for the presence of amphet-
amine, although the tumaround time may make the
BARBITURATES
diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing
an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have the
Sources/Formulations
advantages of being inexpensive and readily available at
Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid that are used
most pharmacies, and providing rapid results (Teitler
therapeutically as anticonvulsants and sedatives. Barbitu-
 2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably
rates are also the primary component of most euthanasia
reliable for amphetamine exposures in dogs. These kits are
solutions. Most barbiturate poisonings in companion
not validated in nonhumans, so further testing by a veteri-
animals are the result of accidental ingestion of human or
nary diagnostic laboratory may be needed in legal cases.
veterinary prescription products, although ingestion of
illicit medications, iatrogetic overdoses, accidental injec-
Management of Exposures
tion of euthanasia solutions, and ingestion of meat from
The goals of managing amphetamine exposures are to
carcasses euthanized with barbiturate-based solutions are
stabilize the patient, manage clinical signs, decontaminate
other means of exposure (Bischoff 2007; Volmer 2006).
(if feasible), and provide supportive care. Agitation, hyper-
activity, and other stimulatory signs tend to respond well
Kinetics
to phenothiazine tranquilizers such as acepromazine or
Barbiturates are well absorbed orally. Barbiturates are
chlorpromazine. Benzodiazepines should be avoided,
classified according to their duration of action as ultra-
because paradoxical worsening of the neurologic effects
short-acting (less than 3 hours), short-acting (36 hours)
has been reported (Volmer 2006). Seizures are best con-
and long-acting (6-12 hours), which is related to their lipid
trolled with injectable anesthetics (pentobarbital or propo-
solubility (Volmer 2006). Highly lipid-soluble barbiturates
fol). Hypertherrmia should be managed by extemal cooling
rapidly distribute throughout the body, including the CNS,
measures (ice packs, fans, etc.). For tachycardia that per-
and then are very rapidly redistributed into fat and total
sists after sedation, a beta blocker such as propranolol
body water, which terminates their anesthetic effect. Bar-
should be used. Intravenous fuid therapy will aid in sta-
biturates undergo hepatic metabolism, and metabolites as
bilizing the cardiovascular system as well as enhancing
well as parent compound are eliminated in the urine.
elimination of amphetamine via the urine. Although acidi-
Chronic barbiturate use results in induction of their meta-
fication of the urine can increase urinary excretion of
bolic enzymes, which can result in accelerated metabolism
amphetamine, severely symptomatic animals may already
of barbiturates and other compounds that are normally
be acidotic, so urinary acidification is not recommended
biotransformed by those enzymes.
until it has been established that acidosis doesn't already
exist.
Mechanism of Action
In animals that have presented following recent expo-
In the CNS, barbiturates stimulate Y-aminobutyric acid
sure and are asymptomatic, induction of emesis and
(GABA), an inhibitory neurmotransmitter, receptors and
administration of activated charcoal is recommended. The
inhibit glutamate, a stimulatory neurotransmitter, recep-
patient should then be monitored in-hospital for a minimum
tors, causing CNS depression. Some of the CNS depres-
of 34 hours (prompt release products) or up to 12 hours
sive effects of barbiturates relate to their inhibition of the
Chapter 25/ Drugs of Abuse
223
release of other neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine
 reliable for rapid identification of barbiturates exposures
and acetylcholine. Very high doses of barbiturates depress
 in dogs in a clinical setting. These kits are not validated in
respiration and cardiac contractility, leading to respiratory
depression and hypotension.
laboratory may be needed in legal cases.
Toxicity
Management of Exposures
Barbiturates have a narrow margin of safety and even
The goals of rmanaging a patient exposure to barbiturates
small overdoses can result in significant CNS depression.
 are to minimize absorption of the drug and provide symp-
The lowest reported oral lethal dosage of phenobarbital
tormatic and supportive care to animals experiencing CNS
 in cats is 125 mg/kg (Volmer 2006). The oral LDso (dosage
depression. For exposures with no-to-minimal signs,
at which 5o% will die) for phenobarbital in dogs is
      
150mg/kg
activated charcoal and monitoring in-hospital for 46
hours. Animals that present with severe CNS depression
Clinical Effects
should not have vomiting induced due to the risk of
Signs
aspiration; in these patients, gastric lavage should be
The clinical effects of barbiturates relate to CNS depres
considered. Activated charcoal administration should be
sion, so the signs that can be seen include lethargy, ataxia,
repeated every 12 hours until the animals are ambulatory,
weakness, disorientation,recumbency, coma,respiratory
because redistribution of barbiturate after activated char-
depression, tachycardia or bradycardia, hypotherrmia, and
coal has been eliminated from the Gl tract may result in
death.
recurrence of severe depression. Activated charcoal has
been shown to act as a “sink" in enhancing movement
Laboratory
 of barbiturates from the circulation into the gastrointes-
Although a minimum database should be established for
tinal tract, and therefore it is of benefit even in cases
patients in order to deterrmine any preexisting conditions
where the barbiturate was administered parenterally
(e.g-, renal or hepatic insufficiency) that may interfere with
(Volmer 2006).
elimination of the drug, no specific clinical pathologic
Animals experiencing severe coma will need intensive
abnormalities are expected in patients with barbiturate
supportive care. Endotracheal tube placement may be indi-
overdose. Severely comatose animals with compromised
cated in those animals with severe coma and subsequent
respiration may develop respiratory acidosis.
respiratory depression; in some cases mechanical ventila-
tion may be necessary. Oxygen and intravenous fuids
Differential Diagnoses
should be administered, and standard nursing care for
Other agents that can cause CNS and respiratory
comatose animals (prevention of hypotherrmia and decubi-
depression resermbling barbiturate toxicosis include ben-
tal ulcers) is important in those animals experiencing
zodiazepines, macrolide antiparasiticides (e.g., ivermectin,
severe toxicosis. Depending on the lipid solubility of the
moxidectin), amitraz, ethanol and other alcohols, ethylene 
barbiturate involved, intravenous lipid solutions may
glycol, propylene glycol, other sedatives (opioids, pheno-
assist in removal of barbiturates from the circulation (see
thiazines, sleep aids such as zolpidem, etc.), and mari-
Chapter 8).
juana. Nontoxicologic rule-outs include hypoglycemia,
encephalopathy (infectious vs. metabolic), encephalitis,
Prognosis
CNS trauma, and cerebral vascular accident.
The prognosis of barbiturate intoxication depends on the
amount ingested and the severity and duration of signs at
Diagnostics
presentation. Comatose animals provided with prompt and
Blood, urine, stomach content, and feces can be analyzed
 appropriate supportive care have a reasonable expectation
by most veterinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence
of recovery, although it may take up to several days
of barbiturates, although the turnaround time may make
the diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnos-
BENZODIAZEPINES
ing an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have
the advantages of being inexpensive and readily available
Sources/Formulations
at most pharmacies, and providing rapid results (Teitler
 a pn nn  n a s
2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably
cine as sedatives, anxiolytics, and anticonvulsants. There
224
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
are a large number of different benzodiazepines that are
Laboratory
distinguished by their onset and duration of action. Ben-
No significant clinical pathological abnormalities are
zodiazepines can trigger dependency in human patients
expected with benzodiazepine overdose. With large expo-
and are widely abused in certain populations, especially
 sures, a baseline minimum database is recormmended.
psychiatric and substance-abuse patients (Longo and
Johnson 2000). Additionally, funitrazepam (Rohypnol?)
Differential Diagnoses
has been used illicitly as a “date rape"' drug.
Other CNS depressants that can cause signs similar to
those of benzodiazepines include barbiturates, opioids,
Kinetics
alcohols, ethylene glycol, marijuana, amitraz, xylitol, anti-
Benzodiazepines are well absorbed from the Gl tract and
depressants, centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants
are widely distributed throughout the body. They are
(e.g., baclofen), macrolide antiparasiticides (e.g., ivermec-
highly protein bound and highly lipophilic. Most are
tin), sleep aids such as zolpidem, and marijuana. Nontoxi-
metabolized in the liver via glucuronide conjugation.
cologic rule outs would include encephalopathy,
Some benzodiazepines have pharmacologically active
encephalitis, head trauma, hypoglycemia, and cerebral
metabolites with half-lives exceeding those of the parent
vascular accident.
compound (Volmer 2006).
Diagnostics
Mechanism of Action
Blood and urine can be analyzed by most veterinary diag-
Benzodiazepines act on GABA receptors, triggering inhib-
nostic laboratories for the presence of benzodiazepines,
itory impulses in the CNS and resulting in CNS
although the tumaround time may make the diagnostic
depression.
laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing an acute
toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have the advan-
Toxicity
tages of being inexpensive and readily available at most
Although benzodiazepines can prmduce intoxications that
pharmacies, and providing rapid results (Teitler 2009).
require veterinary care, they tend to have a wide margin
These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably reli-
of safety, and death is not common unless very large
 able for rapid identification of benzodiazepines exposures
amounts have been ingested or there is coingestion of
in dogs. These kits are not validated in nonhumans, so
other CNS depressants. However, even low doses can
further testing by a veterinary diagnostic laboratory may
cause sedation and ataxia. Dosages greater than or equal
be needed in legal cases.
to a dosage equivalent to 20 mg/kg of diazepam can cause
more severe clinical effects and will need veterinary inter-
Management of Exposures
vention (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, unpub-
Because benzodiazepines have wide margins of safety,
lished data)
animals ingesting small doses (e.g-, one tablet) generally
can be managed at home provided they can be kept in a
Clinical Effects
secure area away from obstacles (e.g-, fumiture or stairs)
Signs
to avoid accidental trauma. Owners should be instructed
Clinical effects of benzodiazepines can occur as rapidly as
to keep the animal in a quiet area to reduce the likelihood
10 to 15 minutes following exposure. The clinical signs
of paradoxical excitation. Mild ataxia can be dealt with at
associated with benzodiazepine toxicosis include sedation,
home, but if the animal becomes recumbent or develops
ataxia, and disorientation. Severely affected animals may
paradoxical excitation, it should be taken to the veterinary
become comatose, hypothermic, and hypotensive. Sei-
hospital for monitoring and further care.
zures are possible, although uncommon, in comatose
The goals of therapy in benzodiazepine exposures are
patients. Some animals exposed to benzodiazepines
to minimize absorption and provide symptomatic and sup-
present with paradoxical agitation and hyperactivity; in the
portive care. Because of the potential for rapid onset of
author's experience, this is most commonly seen with
signs, decontamination should be perforrmed in the veteri-
large ingested doses or with juvenile animals (dogs and
cats <6 months of age). Rarely, liver necrosis has been
disoriented animals may be at risk of aspiration if vomiting
reported following therapeutic use of diazepam in cats
is induced. For animals showing no or very mild signs,
(Volmer 2006); whether this is an issue with acute intoxi-
induction of emesis may be considered; otherwise, careful
cations is not known.
administration of activated charcoal is recommended.
Chapter 25/ Drugs of Abuse
225
Most animals do very well with decontamination and
Toxicity
careful monitoring. In the rare event that severe CNS
The LDso for cocaine in dogs is 3mg/kg IV, and it is
depression develops, respiratory function should be closely
reported that dogs can tolerate oral doses 2-4 times that
monitored, and fumazenil, a benzodiazepine antagonist,
level (Bischoff 2007).
 may be used for those patients experiencing respiratory
depression. Because fumazenil has a short duration of
Clinical Effects
action, animals must be closely monitored for return of
Signs
respiratory depression when the effects of fumazenil
Signs of cocaine intoxication occur quickly following
subside. Recumbent animals require careful nursing and
ingestion and include hyperactivity, hyperthermia, agita-
supportive care including IV fuid therapy, thermoregula-
tion, ataxia, mydriasis, vomiting, vocalization, tachycar-
tion (hypothermia is common in comatose animals), and
dia, tremors, and seizures. Severe seizures may result in
prevention of decubital ulcers. Animals experiencing para-
myoglobinemia or disseminated intravascular coagulopa-
doxical excitation should be given a very low dose of
thy secondary to hyperthermia.
acepromazine (0.01 to 0.02mg/kg) with the caveat that
once the excitation has resolved, the CNS depression may
Laboratory
be quite pronounced. Anecdotally, cyproheptadine has also
been effective in managing the paradoxical excitation of
Metabolic acidosis and electrmlyte abnormalities may be
benzodiazepines. The duration of signs will vary with the
seen with cocaine toxicosis. As with most intoxications, a
type of benzodiazepine, the dose ingested, and the effec-
minimum database should be established, including com-
tiveness of decontamination measure instituted.
plete blood count, serum chermistries, and electrolyte
status.
Prognosis
Differential Diagnoses
Most benzodiazepine overdoses have excellent outcomes,
provided patients receive prompt and appropriate care.
Other intoxications from CNS stimulants such as amphet-
amines, rmethylxanthines, other sympathormimetics (e.g-,
COCAINE
pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine), metaldehyde,
antidepressants, tremorgenic mycotoxins, organochlorine
Sources/Formulations
insecticides, organophosphorous and carbamate insecti-
Cocaine is an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the
cides, 5-fuorouracil, hypernatremia, ephedra (e.g-, ma
shrub Erythroxylon coca, which grows in Central and
huang/guarana preparations), 5-hydrmxytryptophan, or
South America as well as Indonesia and the West Indies.
lead should all be considered when presented with a
Therapeutically, cocaine is used as a topical local anes-
patient with severe CNS and cardiovascular stimulation.
thetic for oral and nasal mucous membranes. However, the
most common exposures to cocaine in companion animals
Diagnostics
occur when they are exposed to illicitly obtained cocaine.
Blood, stomach contents, and urine can be analyzed by
most veterinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence of
Kinetics
cocaine, although the tumaround time makes the diagnos-
Cocaine is very rapidly absorbed across all mucosal sur-
tic laboratory of lirmited usefulness in diagnosing an acute
faces, and clinical effects can be seen within minutes of
toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have the advan-
exposure. Cocaine is metabolized in the serum and liver
tages of being inexpensive and readily available at most
and is excreted as parent compound and metabolites in the
pharmacies, and prmoviding rapid results (Teitler 2009).
urine.
These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably reli-
able for rapid identification of cocaine exposures in dogs.
Mechanism of Action
These kits are not validated in nonhumans, so further
Cocaine is a potent sympathomimetic that blocks the reup-
       
take of norepinephrine and serotonin in the CNS, causing
needed in legal cases.
accumulation of these neurotransrmitters in the synapse
and resulting in prolonged stimulation of postsynaptic
Management of Exposures
neurons. It also sensitizes the myocardial cells to endog-
The goals of managing cocaine intoxications include sta-
enous catecholamines, resulting in tachycardia.
bilization of the symptomatic patient, decontamination
226
Section 3 I Specific Toxicants
(when feasible) and providing symptomatic and support-
inhalation of smoke from marijuana cigarettes intention-
ive care to minimize complications.
ally blown into their faces are possible (Janczyk et al.
Because of the potential for very rapid onset of severe
2004).
signs with cocaine ingestion, emesis should only be
induced in a veterinary setting and only in asymptomatic
Kinetics
animals. Attempting emesis in even mildly symptomatic
THC is rapidly absorbed after ingestion or inhalation, with
animals may trigger a seizure. Sedation and gastric lavage
onset of effects occurring within 6 to 12 minutes of inhala-
should be considered, especially if animals have begun to
tion and 30 to 60 minutes of ingestion (Donaldson 2002).
show clinical signs of intoxication. Activated charcoal
THC is highly lipid-soluble and highly protein-bound and
should follow emesis or lavage. Police dogs that have
undergoes a significant first pass effect when ingested.
ingested bags of cocaine or dogs with surgically implanted
Because of high levels of storage of THC in body fat, the
bags (cocaine "mules") should be anesthetized and the
half-life is relatively long (25-30 hours), with 80% to 90%
bags carefully extracted surgically or via endoscopy to
being eliminated by 5 days after exposure.
avoid rupture and spillage of cocaine onto tissues (Bischoff
2007).
Mechanism of Action
Diazepam should be used to manage existing seizures.
The cannabinoids in marijuana act on cannabinoid-specific
Barbiturates should be used for seizures refractory to diaz-
receptors within the CNS, which trigger most of the psy-
epam. Acepromazine or chlorpromazine may work better
choactive effects of marijuana. Cannabinoids also interact
than diazepam at managing agitation in nonseizing
with a variety of CNS neurotransmitters, stimulating the
animals. Cyproheptadine has been recommended by some
release of dopamine, enhancing GABA turmover, and
to block the effects of excess serotonin caused by cocaine;
enhancing the synthesis of norepinephrine, dopamine and
this often helps with disorientation, hyperthermia, and
serotonin (Donaldson 2002).
vocalization (ASPCA Animal Poison Contrml Center,
unpublished data). Severe tachycardia may be treated with
Toxicity
propranolol once the agitation and hyperactivity is under
control. Intravenous fuids will help with hyperthermia as
The minimum toxic dosage of marijuana in dogs is
wellasprovide cardiovascular support.
reported to be 84.7mg/kg of dry leaves, which is the
equivalent of approximately 1/2 teaspoon of dry leaves
Prognosis
in a 30kg dog (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). Although mari-
The prognosis will depend on the amount of cocaine
juana can produce significant clinical effects at low expo-
ingested and the duration and severity of signs at presenta-
sure levels, it does have a wide margin of safety with
the lethal dose being over 1000 times the behaviorally
tion. Animals experiencing seizures have a more guarded
effective dose (Volmer 2006). Doses of 3 to 28g/kg of
prognosis.
marijuana did not result in deaths in dogs. Deaths from
MARIJUANA
marijuana ingestion may be more likely the result of
accidental misadventure (e.g-, trauma) or leading to com-
Sources/Formulations
plications of preexisting serious health issues (e.g-, prior
cardiac dysfunction) than from a direct effect of the can-
Marijuana is the dried leaves, seeds, and stems of the Can-
 nabinoids in marijuana.
nibis sativa plant. The major active ingredient of mari-
juana is the cannabinoid delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC). Marijuana is most commonly used as an illicit
Clinical Effects
recreational drug, but it is also used medicinally in humans
Signs
to limit nausea in chemotherapy patients and to lower
The most common clinical effects seen in marijuana
intraocular pressure in glaucoma patients (Janczyk et al.
toxicosis in dogs and cats are depression, ataxia, and bra-
2004). Marinol@, a tablet form of synthetic THC has
dycardia. Other common signs include agitation, disorien-
tation, vocalization, vomiting, hyperesthesia, hypotherrmia,
 ing in chermotherapy cancer patients and assist with loss
mydriasis, hypersalivation, diarrhea, recumbency, coma,
of appetite in AIDS patients. Most companion animals are
and seizures, although the latter three signs are relatively
'eunfueu yol jo useis, e isaaun Aaun uaum pasodxa
uncommon (Bischoff 2007; Donaldson 2002; Gwaltney-
although exposures to medicinal agents or, rarely, through
Brant 2004). A single case of atopic derrmatitis in a dog
Chapter 25/ Drugs of Abuse
227
thought to be associated with marijuana has been reported
perature should be monitored and hypothermia corrected
(Evans 1989)
as needed. Intravenous fuids will assist in cardiovascular
support but will not enhance elimination of marijuana.
Laboratory
As with most intoxications, a baseline minimum database
Prognosis
       si
The prognosis in most uncomplicated cases of marijuana
is recommended to identify any concurrent disease issues.
intoxication is excellent and most patients will make full
Marijuana is not expected to cause any specific laboratory
recoveries within 2 to 5 days. Once the patient's disorien-
abnormalities.
tation has largely resolved and the patient is able to main-
  n  u  a  [u 
Differential Diagnoses
discharged from the hospital. Close supervision is recom-
Intoxication from other CNS depressants such as macro-
mended for 5 days after ingestion to avoid accidental
lide anitparasiticides (e.g., ivermectin), amitraz, benzodi-
injury from any residual ataxia.
azepines, barbiturates, opioids, alcohols, ethylene glycol,
centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants, sedatives, and
OPIATES AND OPIOIDS
isoxazole and hallucinogenic mushrooms should all be
considered in the differential list if marijuana exposure is
Sources/Formulations
suspected but cannot be confirrmed historically. Nontoxic
There are many opiates and opioids used in human and
differentials include head trauma, encephalopathy, enceph
veterinary medicine. Opiates are natural extracts derived
alitis, and hypoglycemia.
from the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum. Opioids are
semisynthetic or fully synthetic compounds that act on
Diagnostics
opiate receptors. Opiates include morphine and codeine,
Stomach contents and urine can be analyzed by most vet-
while semisynthetic opioids include oxymorphone, hydro-
erinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence of canna-
morphone, hydrocodone, oxycodone, heroin, etorphine,
binoids, although the turnaround time makes the diagnostic
and buprenorphine. Fully synthetic opioids include fen-
laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing an acute
tanyl, methadone, propoxyphene, and tramadol. For ease
toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits, which work so
of this discussion, the terrm opioid will be used to include
well on other drugs of abuse, appear to be less reliable in
both opiates and opioids.
the detection of marijuana exposures (Teitler 2009). It is
Opioids are used in veterinary and human medicine for
possible that the metabolite that many of these tests detect
their analgesic effects. Apomorphine is used in veterinary
is not one that is excreted by dogs in sufficient quantities
medicine as an emetic. Fentanyl suckers, lozenges, and
for the test to identify. However, some veterinary emer-
transdermal patches are becoming more frequently used in
gency clinics have reported to the author that they have
both human and veterinary medicine. The lozenges or
found some brands of test kits that do appear to work. So,
suckers contain fentanyl citrate in a sucrose and liquid
when using the kits it is important to remermber that a
glucose base and are attractive to animals. Companion
 negative test does not completely rule out rmarijuana expo-
animals are most commonly exposed when they ingest
sure and confirmation from an analytical laboratory should
their own or their owner's medication, lozenges, or dis-
be considered. The OTC kits are not validated in nonhu-
carded fentanyl patches.
mans, so further testing by a veterinary diagnostic labora-
tory may be needed in legal cases.
Kinetics
Most opioids are well absorbed from the GI tract. Although
Management of Exposures
fentanyl in transdermal patches has poor absorption from
Fortunately, marijuana exposures are rarely life-threaten-
the Gl tract due to first pass effect, significant amounts of
ing, and providing good supportive care and decontamina-
fentanyl can be absorbed transmucosally when animals
tion is generally all that is needed for successful recovery.
chew the patches. Metabolism varies, but opioids gener-
Emesis should be induced in animals with mild or no clini-
ally undergo hepatic metabolism with some form of con-
cal signs. Repeated doses of activated charcoal are recom-
jugation, hydrolysis, oxidation, glucuronidation, or
mended (monitor electrolytes for hypematremia) to
 dealkylation. The requirement for metabolism via gluc
attempt to reduce the duration of signs. Central nervous
uronidation may account for the relative sensitivity of cats
stimulation can be managed with diazepam. Body tem-
to op10ids.
228
Section 3 / Specifc Toxicants
Mechanism of Action
azepines, barbiturates, alcohols, ethylene glycol, centrally
Opioids are generally classified by their ability to exert
acting skeletal muscle relaxants, sedatives, and isoxazole
effects at the different opioid receptors (mu, kappa, delta,
and hallucinogenic mushrooms should all be considered
sigma), and by their agonist or antagonist effects on those
 in the differential list if opioid exposure is suspected but
receptors. Partial agonists act as agonists at one or more
cannot be confirmed historically. Nontoxic differentials
opioid receptors and as antagonists at others. Opioids act
would include head trauma, encephalopathy, encephalitis,
centrally to elevate the pain threshold and to alter the
and hypoglycemia.
psychological response to pain. Most of the clinically used
Management
ates analgesic effects, muz mediates respiratory depres
The goals in management of opioid overdoses include
sion). Opioids also can induce emesis through stimulation
stabilizing and decontaminating the patient, prmoviding
of the dopamine receptors in the chemoreceptor trigger
ventilatory support, and providing supportive care until
zone (Volmer 2006). Opioids can, paradoxically, some-
recovery. Treatment in an asymptomatic animal may
times cause CNS excitation in overdose situations. The
include emesis if the ingestion is recent. Activated char-
exact mechanism is not known but is postulated to involve
coal with cathartic should be administered and the patient
stimulation of dopaminergic, adrenergic, cholinergic, and/
monitored for up to 12 hours. If the animal becomes symp-
or serotonergic receptors, possibly associated with inhibi-
tormatic, respiratory support may need to be given. If
tion of GABA receptors (Kukanich and Papich 2009;
severe respiratory depression is seen, naloxone (a pure
Tashakori and Afshari 2010).
competitive antagonist with activity at the mu receptors)
can be administered to reverse respiratory effects. As the
Toxicity
duration of action of naloxone is much shorter than that of
the opioids, repeat dosages may be necessary. Naloxone
The toxicity of individual opioid compounds varies con-
siderably. The minirmum lethal dosage of morphine in lab-
may not result in the animal regaining full consciousness.
oratory dogs is between 110 and 210mg/kg (Bischoff
Partial agonists/antagonists (i.e., butorphanol) may be
2007). Heroin given at 0.20 mg/kg to dogs (route not speci-
used to partially reverse the effects of pure agonists if no
fied) caused sedation and respiratory depression. The
naloxone is available. Animals exhibiting signs of sero-
minimum lethal dosage of heroin is 25 mg/kg subcutane-
tonin syndrome (agitation, vocalization, disorientation)
ously in dogs and 20 mg/kg orally in cats. Oxymorphone,
may benefit from the use of cyproheptadine. Monitoring
fentanyl, and etorphine have approximately 10, 80, and
of temperature, cardiac function, and blood gases is impor-
tant. Treatment times will vary with the half-life of the
10,000 times the potency of morphine, respectively.
opioid.
Clinical Effects
Prognosis
Signs
If respiratory and cardiovascular function can be main-
In dogs, CNS signs include depression, ataxia, and sei-
tained, the prognosis is good. For those cases that experi-
zures. Respiratory depression, vomiting, bradycardia, and
ence seizures, prognosis is more guarded.
hypotension may also be seen. Cats may show excitatory
behavior and urinary retention. Some opioids, such as
REFERENCES
tramadol can result in serotonin syndrome in overdose
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of drugs of abuse. In Veteri-
situations (see Chapter 27 for further information on sero-
nary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles, edited by
tonin syndrome).
Ramesh C. Gupta, Ppp. 391-410. New York: Elsevier.
Donaldson, Caroline. 2002. Marijuana exposures in animals.
Laboratory
Veterinary Medicine 97(6):437-439.
As with most intoxications, a baseline minimum database
Evans, A.G. 1989. A1lergic inhalant dermatitis attributed to
consisting of serum chemistry and complete blood count
marijuana exposure in a dog. Journal of the American Vet-
erinary Medical Association 195:1588-1590.
is recommended to identify any concurrent disease issues.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2004. Ataxia and depression in
a Newfoundland dog, NAVC Clinician's Brief 2(10):
Differential Diagnoses
29-30.
Intoxication from other CNS depressants such as macro-
Janczyk, Pawel, Donaldson, Caroline W., and Gwaltney,
lide anitparasiticides (e.g-, ivermectin), amitraz, benzodi-
Sharon M. 2004. Two hundred and thirteen cases of mari-
Chapter 25 / Drugs of Abuse
229
juana toxicoses in dogs. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
Tashakori, A., and Afshari, R. 2010. Tramadol overdose as a
46(1):19-21
cause of serotonin syndrome: A case series.Clinical Toxi-
Kukanich, Butch, and Papich, Mark G. 2009. Opioid analge-
cotogy 45(4):337-341.
sic drugs. In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
Teitler, Joan B. 2009. Evaluation of a human on-site
9h ed., edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp.
urine multidrug test for emergency use with dogs. Journal
302-335. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
ofthe American Animal Hospital Association 45(2):
Longo, Lance P, and Johnson, Brian. 2000. Addiction: Part
59-66.
1. Benzodiazepines—Side effects, abuse risk and alterna-
Volmer, Petra A. 2006. Recreational drugs. In Small Animat
tives.American Academy ofFamily Physicians 61:2121-
Toxicofogy, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
2128.
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 273-311. St. Louis: Saunders.
OTC Drugs
26
Mary M. Schell and Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ACETAMINOPHEN
tive to its toxic effects. The serum half-life in dogs and
cats is dose-dependent, increasing as the ingested dosage
Sources/Formulations
increases.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol@, nonaspirin pain reliever,
APAP) is a synthetic nonopiate derivative of p-aminophenol.
Mechanism of Action
Acetarminophen is available as an over-the-counter drug
Pharmacologic Action
found in a variety of medications. When dealing with a
The exact mechanism of pharrmacologic action of acet-
 potential exposure to acetaminophen, it is important to
aminophen is unknown but it is believed to act primarily
verify the exact ingredients in a product, because many
in the CNS to increase the pain threshold through canna-
medications have nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs
binoid receptors, and it may also inhibit chemical media-
(e.g-, ibuprofen) rather than acetaminophen as their "non-
tors that sensitize the pain receptors to mechanical or
aspirin"' component. Additionally, many of the other ingre-
chemical stimulation (Ottani et al. 2006). The antipyretic
dients found in combination prmducts (e.g-, antihistamines,
 activity of acetaminophen is achieved by blocking the
decongestants) may also contribute to the toxicosis and
effects of endogenous pyrogens by inhibiting prostaglan-
their potential adverse effects need to be addressed. Acet-
din synthesis through inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 or 3
aminophen is used as an analgesic and antipyretic drug but
(Burke et al. 2005).
has little anti-inflammatory action. Most companion
animals are exposed through accidental ingestion of medi-
Mechanism ofToxicity
cation, although many cats are poisoned when owners are
Acetarminophen itself is of low toxicity. When normal
unaware of the hazards of administering acetaminophen to
hepatic sulfation and glucuronidation pathways are satu-
cats.
rated (e.g., in overdose situations), cytochrome P450
enzymes convert acetaminophen to the oxidative metabo-
Kinetics
lite, N-acetyl-para-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI). Intracel-
Acetaminophen is rapidly and almost completely absorbed
lular glutathione acts as a scavenger to conjugate and
from the GI tract (Roder 2004). Peak plasma levels are
neutralize NAPQl, but when glutathione stores are
seen at 10-60 minutes for regular release prmoducts and at
depleted, NAPQI binds to sulfhydryl groups on tissue
60-120 minutes for extended release forms. At therapeutic
macromolecules leading to hepatocellular necrosis. At
dosages, acetaminophen is metabolized in the liver by
very high doses, the same mechanism occurs in renal
sulfation and glucuronidation to nontoxic metabolites that
tubules, resulting in nephrotoxicity.
are eliminated in the urine. Because cats cannot effectively
Acetaminophen is also deacetylated to p-aminophenol
glucuronidate acetaminophen, they are particularly sensi-
(PAP), which causes oxidative damage to red blood cells
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20ll John Wiley and Sons, lnc. Published 20ll by John Wiley and Sons, lnc.
231
232
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
resulting in methemoglobinemia (McConkey et al. 2009).
Laboratory
Cats are rmore susceptible to acetaminophen-induced met-
Methemoglobinemia, Heinz bodies, hemolytic anemia,
hermoglobinemia because they are deficient in the enzyme
metabolic acidosis,hemoglobinemia,hemoglobinuria, and
that converts PAP back to acetaminophen, allowing
hyperbilirubinemia have been reported with acetamino-
buildup of high levels of PAP. Additionally, PAP causes
phen toxicosis in both dogs and cats. Changes consistent
methemoglobinemia by binding to sulfhydryl groups on
with liver damage include elevated alanine transaminase
hermoglobin. As cats have more sulfhydryl groups on
(ALT; the most reliable indicator of liver injury), elevated
their hemoglobin (8 -SH compared to 4 in dogs and 2
aspartate transaminase (AST), hyperbilirubinemia, biliru-
 in humans) and are deficient in methermoglobin reductase,
binuria, decreased serum cholesterml and albumin, ele-
they are inherently more susceptible to oxidative injury
vated prothrombin (PT), and elevated partial thromboplastin
to hemoglobin (Bischoff 2007).
times (PTT).
Toxicity
Differential Diagnoses
Hepatotoxicity has been reported in dogs at 100 mg/kg and
Other causes of methemoglobinemia and Heinz body
200mg/kg can cause clinically evident methemoglobin-
anemia include onions/garlic, naphthalene, hydroxyurea,
emia (Talcott 2006). In dogs, dosages of >40mg/kg have
chlorates, benzocaine, zinc, skunk spray, and propylene
resulted in keratoconjunctivitis sicca 72 hours after inges-
glycol (cats) toxicoses (Plumlee 2004; Stockham and Scott
tion (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, unpublished
2008).
data). In cats, methemoglobinemia has been reported at
Other causes of liver injury include hepatotoxic mush
 dosages as low as 10mg/kg and hepatotoxicity is possible
rmoms, blue-green algae, iron salts, xylitol, alpha lipoic
if dosages exceed 40 mg/kg-
acid, aflatoxin, cycad palms, castor beans, and idiopathic
NSAID hepatopathy (Moeller 2004).
Clinical Effects
Diagnostics
In cats, methemoglobin values increase within 14 hours
There are no in-house tests for acetaminophen for animals,
of ingestion, followed by Heinz body formation within 72
and diagnosis is often made based on history and clinical
hours. Methermoglobinemia in dogs may occur within
signs. Most human hospitals have the ability to measure
412 hours or may be delayed up to 48 hours following
acetarminophen levels in serum or plasma, and may be
exposure (Bischoff 2007). Liver injury may not become
helpful in determining whether an exposure has occurred
clinically apparent for 24-72 hours following exposure. In
if the turnaround time for obtaining the results is reason-
general, dogs typically develop liver injury while cats
ably short. Veterinary diagnostic laboratories can also
develop methemoglobinemia, although at acetaminophen
measure acetaminophen levels, but turnaround times can
doses over 200 mg/kg, dogs can develop both. Rare cases
be long, making them less useful for diagnosis of acute
binemia have been reported, but cats most often succumb
exposure.
to methermoglobinermia before liver injury develops.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing acetaminophen exposures include
Signs
stabilization, prevention of liver damage and methermoglo-
Clinical signs seen in patients with methemoglobinemia
binemia, decontamination (when feasible) and providing
can include depression, vomiting, weakness, hypersaliva-
supportive care. Symptormatic patients need initial stabili-
tion, chocolate brown mucous membranes, hyperventila-
zation, including oxygen if dyspneic. To aid in replenish-
tion, cyanosis, dyspnea, facial or paw edema, tachycardia,
ing glutathione stores, n-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst@,
hypothermia, hemolysis, shock, and death. Clinical signs
NAC) is used. Adverse effects of the oral route of NAC
of methemoglobinemia may last 3-4 days.
administration include nausea and vomiting; NAC at con-
Clinical signs associated with liver injury include vom-
centrations over 5% can be corrosive to oral and esopha-
iting, anorexia, depression, abdominal pain, icterus, tachy-
geal tissue. Recently, an IV formulation of NAC
cardia, tachypnea, and death. Other less common clinical
(Acetadote@) has become available. For hepatic injury, a
effects include renal insufficiency/damage, myocardial
new therapy that shows potential is s-adenosylmethionine
damage, hemolytic anemia and coma. Hepatic injury may
(SAMe, Denosyl-SD4?). Early studies and anecdotal
not resolve for several weeks.
reports show a positive effect for treatment of acetamino-
Chapter 26 / OTC Drugs
233
phen toxicosis. Over-the-counter formulations of SAMe
variety of antihistamines are available. These include first-
have variable potency and prescription quality, enteric
generation agents (FGAs) diphenhydrarmine, brompheni-
coated products are recommended (round the dose to
ramine, dimenhydrinate, and chlorpheniramine, and
nearest whole tablet and do not break tablet).
second-generation agents (SGAs) loratadine and cetiri-
Intravenous fuid therapy is used to correct dehydration
zine. Other ingredients in antihistamine medications (e.g-,
and for maintenance needs, but not for diuresis. Whole
pseudoephedrine) may pose higher risk for severe toxico-
blood transfusions or Oxyglobin@ may be necessary to
sis, so it is important to verify all of the active ingredients
increase oxygen-carrying capacity in patients with methe-
in a product when an exposure occurs.
moglobinemia. Ascorbic acid provides a reserve system
for the reduction of methemoglobin back to hemoglobin;
Kinetics
however, ascorbic acid has questionable efficacy and when
Antihistamines are absorbed rapidly when ingested, reach-
given orally may irritate the stomach. Cimetidine is an
ing peak blood levels within 1-3 hours (Gwaltney-Brant
inhibitor of the cytochrome P-450 oxidation system in the
2004). FGAs are small and lipophilic molecules are able
liver and may help reduce the metabolism of acetamino-
to cross the blood brain barrier and cause central nervous
phen, although its use is coming into question (Bischoff
system signs such as extensive drowsiness. Other central
2007). Cimetidine is not recommended for cats, because
effects are the result of increased cholinergic activity and
it may increase the accumulation of p-aminophenol
include dry mouth and decreased tear release.SGAs are
responsible for methemoglobinemia.
less lipophilic, less able to cross the blood-brain barrier,
Decontamination of asymptomatic patients includes
and thus less likely to cause CNS and cholinergic side-
induction of emesis and administration of activated char
effects (Gonzalez and Estes 1998).
coal (repeat doses with large exposures) and cathartic. In
most cases where overdose is expected to cause severe
 Mechanism of Action
signs and only oral NAS is available, the administration
Antihistamines are reversible, competitive inhibitors of
of a loading dose of NAC is recommended 30 to 40
the pharmacologic actions of histamine. Cetirizine and
minutes priorto the first dose of activated charcoal in order
loratadine also decrease histamine release from basophils
to achieve efficacious NAC concentrations as quickly as
(Boothe 2006). The mechanism of the adverse effects of
possible. A 2- to 2-hour interval between subsequent
antihistamine is an exacerbation of normal pharmacologic
activated charcoal and per os NAC is recommended,
action.
because activated charcoal could adsorb NAC as well as
acetaminophen.
Toxicity
Liver function and methemoglobin concentrations
should be monitored. Liver enzymes and bilirubin may
Antihistamines vary considerably in their toxicity, and
rise within 24 hours after ingestion and peak within 48 to
many can cause mild adverse effects (e.g., lethargy) at
72 hours.Serum albumin concentrations may decrease
therapeutic doses. Specific toxic doses have not been
established for companion animals, although most will
significantly after 36 hours and continue to decrease if
liver failure occurs (providing a true index of liver
tolerate twice therapeutic doses with little more than
function).
sedation.
Prognosis
Clinical Effects
The prognosis is good if the animal is treated promptly.
First-generation agents are more likely to cause sedation
Animals with severe signs of methemoglobinermia or with
within 30 minutes of ingestion (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). If
hepatic damage have a more guarded prognosis.
no clinical signs are apparent at 2 hours following inges-
tion, development of significant signs is unlikely. At higher
ANTIHISTAMINES
doses, especially in animals under 6 months, initial seda-
tion may progress to agitation, tremors, tachycardia, hypo-
Sources/Formulations
tension, and seizures.
Antihistarmines are found in many over-the-counter allergy
relief products, both as single drugs and in combination
Differential Diagnoses
with decongestants and/or analgesics. They are also mar-
Many conditions can cause signs similar to antihistamine
keted to prevent motion sickness and as sleep aids. A wide
toxicosis.Differentials include systemic infectious/
234
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
inflammatory disorders, ingestion of CNS depressants or
2001). Aspirin is metabolized in the liver and excreted
stimulants, ethylene glycol, alcohol, and marijuana.
through the urine. The elimination half-life increases with
the dosage. In dogs, the half-life at therapeutic doses is 8.6
Diagnostics
hours. Cats are deficient in glucuronyl transferase and
No specific biochemical alterations are expected with anti-
have prolonged half-lives due to decreased aspirin metab-
histamine intoxication. Diagnosis is based on a history of
olism. Feline dosages of 5-12mg/kg have a half-life of
exposure and development of consistent clinical signs.
22-27 hours; dosages of 25mg/kg have a half-life of
Antihistamine serum concentrations are not routinely mea-
 approximately 44 hours. Elimination is also slower in neo-
sured, although most veterinary diagnostic laboratories
nates and geriatric animals.
would be able to perform the analysis.
Mechanism of Action
Management of Exposures
Aspirin reduces pain and infammation by reducing pros-
 If the ingested dose is above suggested therapeutic ranges
taglandin and thromboxane synthesis through inhibition of
and exposure was within half an hour, induction of emesis
cyclooxygenase.  Decreased  prostaglandin  production
should be considered for decontamination. Activated char-
results in a decrease secretion of the protective mucous
coal is indicated in large ingestions. The patient should be
layer in the stomach and small intestine and causes vaso-
monitored for at least 2 to 3 hours following decontamina-
constriction in gastric mucosa. At very high dosages,
tion. Additional care, if needed, is supportive and includes
aspirin and other salicylates uncouple oxidative phosphor-
parenteral fuids for marked hypotension and diazepam for
ylation, leading to fever and seizures. Salicylates also
seizures or hyperactivity.
impair platelet aggregation. Unlike other NSAIDs, salicy-
late toxicosis does not commonly produce renal injury;
Prognosis
instead the liver is the target organ (Gwaltney-Brant 2001).
The prognosis for most exposures is good pmvided veteri-
nary care is provided. Clinical signs can persist for up to
Toxicity
72 hours in severe cases. Animals exhibiting seizures or
In dogs, toxicosis has occurred at dosages of 100-300 mg/
coma have more guarded prognoses.
kg/day PO for 1-4 weeks. Doses of 325 mg twice a day
were lethal to cats.
ASPIRIN AND OTHER SALICYLATES
Clinical Effects
Sources/Formulations
Clinical effects of salicylate overdoses include metabolic
Salicylates are found in rmany products. Aspirin (acetyl-
acidosis with respiratory alkalosis, gastrointestinal
salicylic acid, ASA) is available alone or in combination
ulceration, liver necrosis, and coagulopathy.
with other drugs as tablets, capsules, powders, effervescent
tablets, and oral liquid preparations. Bisrmuth subsalicylate
Signs
(Pepto-Bismol@, Kaopectate@) is used to treat and prevent
Signs may include vomiting (±blood), hyperpnea, abdomi-
diarrhea. Pepto Bismol? (bismuth subsalicylate) contains
nal pain, lethargy, weakness, pallor, diarrhea, pyrexia,
9mg/ml of salicylate. Thus 2 tablespoons of bismuth
increased bleeding times, dehydration, icterus, coma, and
subsalicylate is equivalent to 1 regular-strength aspirin.
seizures. Renal insufficiency is uncommon with salicylate
Salicylate ointrments are used for the anti-inflammatory
toxicoses but could develop secondary to rhabdomyolysis
effects in arthritis and for their keratolytic properties in
(from seizuring) or hypotension.
dermal conditions such as psoriasis. Topically applied
salicylic acid can be absorbed through the skin and cause
Laboratory
systemic problems. Oil of wintergreen is used as a fla-
Laboratory abnormalities expected with salicylate toxico-
sis include high anion gap metabolic acidosis, respiratory
salicylate. Salicylates are used in some teething oint-
alkalosis, anemia, hypoproteinemia, elevated liver
ments, sunscreens, and topical wart removal products.
enzymes, and elevated white blood cell count.
Kinetics
Differential Diagnoses
Aspirin is rapidly absorbed from the stomach and proximal
Differential diagnoses include ethylene glycol, alcohol,
small intestines in monogastric animals (Gwaltney-Brant
or metaldehyde toxicoses, inflammatory and infectious
Chapter 26 / OTC Drugs
235
disorders, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, viral enteritis,
redness. The most common decongestants in over-the-
hypoadrenocorticism, gastrointestinal foreign body, anti-
counter oral medications are the sympathomimetics pseu-
coagulant rodenticide toxicosis, and other causes of liver
doephedrine and phenylephrine. These compounds are
failure (acetaminophen, iron, or blue-green algae toxico-
often found in cormbination with antihistamines or analge-
sis, among others).
sics for cold and allergy relief. Because of the similarities
with amphetamine, the reader is directed to the amphet-
Diagnostics
amine discussion in Chapter 25, "Drugs of Abuse," for
Serum salicylate levels can be measured by veterinary
further information on these compounds.
diagnostic laboratories or human hospitals but tumaround
The most common active ingredients in ocular and nasal
times need to be considered when trying to confirm acute
decongestants are imidazoline compounds such as oxym-
toxicosis.
etazoline or tetrahydrozoline. These compounds work as
topical vasoconstrictives and are used to decrease ocular
Management of Exposures
redness associated with conjunctivitis and to decrease
The primary goals of treatment are to prevent or treat
nasal congestion due to colds, allergies, and sinusitis.
Companion animals are most commonly exposed by
gastric ulceration, acidosis, hepatopathy, and coagulopa-
thy. Decontamination of asymptomatic patients includes 
chewing on bottles of medication and ingesting the
induction of emesis and administration of activated char-
contents.
coal (repeat dosages with large exposures) and cathartic.
Peritoneal dialysis can be effective in removing salicy-
Kinetics
lates. Liver values, glucose, acid base status and electro-
Imidazoline decongestants are well absorbed from the Gl
lytes should be monitored. Gastrointestinal protectant
tract as well as across mucosal surfaces. It is thought that
therapy should be initiated to help manage and/or prevent
the imidazolines are metabolized in the liver, although
gastric ulcers and should include sucralfate and an acid
some fraction is excreted unchanged in the urine. In
reducer (H2 blocker or proton pump inhibitor). Misopro-
humans, the half-life is 2-4 hours.
stol could be considered in patients at higher risk for Gl
Mechanism of Action
bleeding (e.g, higher exposure levels, prior NSAID or
corticosteroid use). In the asymptomatic patient, gastric
In the central nervous system, imidazolines bind to alpha-
protectants should be continued for a rminirmum of 5-7
2-adrenergic receptors, which inhibits norepinephrine
days. Bismuth subsalicylate antacid formulations and cor-
release and decreases sympathetic effects. This results in
ticostermids are contraindicated. Assisted ventilation and
hypotension, bradycardia, and sedation (Means 2004).
supplemental oxygen may be required if the animal is
Peripherally, stimulation of alpha-2 receptors results in
comatose. Seizures should be treated with diazepam. Intra-
vasoconstriction and hypertension. With oral intoxications
venous Huids, whole blood, and electrolytes should be
the central effects usually predominate.
given as needed to contrml hypotension and hemorrhage,
Toxicity
manage acute bleeding ulcers, maintain hydration, and
correct electrolyte abnorrmalities. Acid base imbalances
Irmidazoline decongestants have very low margins of
should be corrected. Hyperpyrexia should be treated con-
safety, with even small exposures resulting in significant
servatively because ice baths or cold water enemas could
clinical signs.
result in hypothermia.
Clinical Effects
Prognosis
Clinical effects can be seen as quickly as 10 minutes after
exposure and include vomiting, lethargy or sedation,
In most cases of salicylate toxicosis, the prognosis is good
weakness, collapse, bradycardia, and coma. Hypotension
Aeddde pe Andd paa sh [e a 
is commonly seen, although occasionally hypertension
occurs, often accompanied by hyperactivity and muscle
DECONGESTANTS
tremors.
Sources/Formulations
Differential Diagnoses
Decongestants are found in cold and fu medications,
Other causes of hypotension and sedation include alpha-2
allergy products, and eyedrops intended to decrease
agonist (e.g-, amitraz, xylzine, medetomidine), calcium
236
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
channel blocker, cardiac glycoside, and beta adrenergic
highly (>90%) protein-bound (Burke et al. 2005). They
blocker toxicosis, and primary cardiac dysfunction.
exhibit a higher degree of toxicity when other highly
protein-bound drugs are coingested. Most  NSAIDs
Diagnostics
undergo liver metabolism, with metabolites excreted
 No laboratory tests to detect these drugs are readily avail.
primarily via the urine. One exception is naproxen, which
able and no specific clinical pathology changes are
is excreted via the bile in dogs, undergoes extensive
expected with imidazoline toxicosis.
enterohepatic recirculation, and has a long half-life (74
hours).
Management of Exposures
Decontamination following exposure is generally imprac-
Mechanism of Action
tical due to the rapidity of onset of signs and the small
NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by blocking the
volume of liquid medication that is involved. Exposed
conversion of arachidonic acid to various prostaglandins
 asymptomatic animals should be monitored for the devel-
through the inhibition of the enzyme cyclooxygenase
opment of signs for a minimum of 4 hours following
(COX). Although many modern NSAIDs are marketed as
exposure. Symptomatic animals should be administered
being specific for certain forms of COX (e.g., COX-2), the
intravenous fHuids. If needed, atropine, yohimbine, or ati-
fact that COX specificity is lost in overdose situations
pamezole may be used to increase heart rate and blood
minimizes the importance of this distinction (Talcott
pressure. The latter two drugs are preferred because they
2006). The NSAIDs decrease secretion of the protective
are alpha antagonists and can reverse many of the clinical
mucous layer in the stomach and small intestine and cause
effects.
vasoconstriction in gastric mucosa. Renal effects include
inhibition of renal blood fow, glomerular fltration rate,
Prognosis
tubular ion transport, renin release, and water homeostasis.
Animals receiving appropriate treatment have a good
Some NSAIDs also affect platelet aggregation and possi-
prognosis for recovery.
bly hepatic function, although unlike salicylates, serious
hepatotoxicosis does not appear to be a common problem
NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
with acute NSAID overdoses.
MEDICATIONS
This section covers the nonsalicylate NSAIDs. Aspirin and
Toxicity
other salicylates are discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
There is tremendous variation in the degree of toxicity
among the many NSAIDs, as well as significant species
Sources/Formulations
and individual variation in sensitivity to the different
 Nonsteroidal anti-infarmmatory medications (NSAIDs) are
NSAIDs (Table 26.1). Many over-the-counter NSAIDs
commonly used to treat pain and infammation and to
(e.g, naproxen and ibuprofen) pose risk for gastrointes-
reduce fevers. Many are also available in combination with
tinal injury at commonly suggested doses, especially when
antihistamines and/or decongestants in cold, fu, and
given repeatedly. Larger overdoses can result in renal
allergy products. It is important to verify the active ingre-
tubular injury. Ibuprofen can cause severe neurologic
dients in over-the-counter products because clients are
dysfunction when dosages exceed 400mg/kg (Dunayer
sormetimes confused as to which NSAID (e.g., ibuprofen
2004).
vs. naproxen) the product contains, and there may be addi-
A rough rule of thumb for dogs is that GI toxicity may
tional ingredients such as caffeine, antihistamines, or
be seen at 4-5 times the therapeutic dose of a given NSAID
decongestants that might contribute to adverse effects.
and renal injury may occur at doses 8-10 times the thera-
There are several NSAIDs apprmoved for use in veterinary
peutic doses. Cats are considered to be 2-4 times more
medicine. Most exposures to NSAIDs in companion
sensitive than dogs (Dunayer 2004).
animals are due to accidental ingestion of human or veteri-
nary formulations, although iatrogenic exposures through 
Clinical Effects
overzealous administration by pet owners are common.
The onset of Gl upset is generally within the first 2-6
hours after ingestion, with Gl hemorrhage and ulceration
Kinetics
occurring 12 hours to 4 days postingestion. In severe
In general, over-the-counter NSAIDs are well absorbed
 cases, gastrointestinal perforation may occur, causing
from the stomach and upper small intestine, and are
septic peritonitis and shock. The onset of renal failure
Chapter 26 / OTC Drugs
237
Table 26.1. Therapeutic and toxic dosages for selected NSAIDs in dogs and cats
NSAID
Therapeutic Dosage
Toxic Dosage (GI)
Toxic Dosage (Renal)
Ibuprofen
Dogs: 5 mg/kg q 24h
Dogs: >25 mg/kg
Dogs: >175 mg/kg(>400 mg/kg
associated with CNS signs)
Cats: None
Cats: >10mg/kg
Cats: Not known but thought to
be twice as sensitive as dogs
Naproxen
Dogs: 2mg/kg q 48h
>5mg/kg
>20 mg/kg
Cats: None
Carprmofen
Dogs: 4.4 mg/kg P0 q 24h or 2.2 mg/kg
Dogs: >20mg/kg
Dogs: >40mg/kg
PO q 12h
Cats: 1-2mg/kg SQ once or 2 mg/kg
Cats: >4 mg/kg
Cats: >8mg/kg
PO q 12h for 48h
Deracoxib
Dogs: 1-2 mg/kg q 12h
Dogs: 15mg/kg
Dogs: 30mg/kg
Cats: None
Cats: 4 mg/kg
Cats: 8mg/kg
These dosages are for young adult, healthy animals; pediatric animals, geriatric animals, or animals with prior health
issues may be more susceptible to the effects of NSAID overdose.
Sources: Plumb 2005; Dunayer 2004; Gwaltney-Brant 2010.
usually occurs within the first 12 hours after massive expo-
Diagnostics
sure to an NSAID but may be delayed for 3-5 days.
Antemortem
Serum measurements for many NSAIDs can be performed
Signs
at veterinary diagnostic laboratories and many human hos-
Clinical signs include vomiting, hematemesis, depression,
pitals, but tumaround time may be too long to assist in
anorexia, hyperthermia, melena, abdorminal pain, and
diagnosis of an acute case. Diagnosis is generally based
hematochezia. Polydipsia, polyuria, dehydration, lethargy,
on history of exposure and developrment of consistent
hermaturia, and oliguria have been reported in animals
clinical signs.
experiencing renal injury from NSAIDs. Central nervous
signs include depression, ataxia, tremors, seizures, coma,
Postmortem
and hypothermia.
 Lesions associated with ibuprofen overdose include perfo-
rations, erosions, ulcers, and hemorrhages in the upper
Laboratory
(stomach and duodenum) and, on occasion, lower (colon)
Complete blood counts may reflect Gl hermorrhage and
gastrointestinal tract. Renal damage includes renal tubular
inflammation, with elevations in white blood cell and seg-
necrosis and/or papillary necrosis.
mented neutrophil counts and decreases in hematocrit
noted. Patients with renal failure will have increases in
Management of Exposures
BUN and creatinine as well as isosthenuria. With larger
Decontamination includes emesis if it can be performed
overdoses of NSAIDs,transient elevations in liverenzymes
within an hour of ingestion and activated charcoal if within
(especially ALT) may be noted.
4 hours postingestion. Activated charcoal should not be
administered if there is evidence of gastrmintestinal bleed-
Differential Diagnoses
ing, because the charcoal may impede healing of ulcerated
 Other potential causes of gastrointestinal upset and hemor-
areas. Gastrointestinal protectants (H2 blocker or proton
rhage include hemorrhagic gastrmenteritis, hypoadrenocor
pump inhibitor, sucralfate, and misoprostol) should be
ticism, gastrointestinal foreign bodies, viral enteritis, and
maintained for 5-10 days or longer if evidence of GI
gastrointestinal neoplasia. Other causes of renal failure
bleeding occurs. For animals ingesting potentially nephro-
include leptospirosis and ingestion of grapes/raisins,
toxic doses, intravenous (IV) fuid therapy at 2x mainte-
lilies(cats), ethylene glycol, and heavy metals.
nance rate for a minimum of 48 hours (72 hours for
238
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
naproxen) is recommended to protect renal tubules.
 Differential Diagnoses
Animals with evidence of renal insufficiency should be
 Differential diagnoses include intoxication from other
managed as for any type of acute renal failure. Central
CNS stimulants such as other sympathomimetics
nervous system signs should be treated symptomatically
(e.g-, pseudoephedrine, amphetamine), metaldehyde,
(i.e., diazepam for seizures, oxygen and therrmoregulation
cocaine, ethylene glycol, albuterol, strychnine, and 5-
for coma).
hydroxytryptophan.
Prognosis
Diagnostics
The prognosis is dependent upon the dose ingested, species
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and history. Serum
 of animal involved, and promptness of treatment. Those
levels can be measured at a veterinary diagnostic labora-
with mild GI and renal effects can be expected to make
tory, but tumaround times may be too long to assist in
full recoveries; patients with gastrmintestinal perforation or
prompt diagnosis of an acute case.
severe renal insufficiency have more guarded prognoses.
Management of Exposures
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE
Because of the potential for rapid onset of signs, emesis
should be induced at the veterinary hospital and within 30
Sources/Formulations
minutes of exposure. Activated charcoal should be given
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA) is a sympathomimetic agent
if no contraindications exist. Heart rate and blood pressure
that has been withdrawn from the human market due to an
should be closely monitored. Phenothiazines (aceproma-
association with increased stroke risk, but it is still used in
zine or chlorpromazine) may be used to control agitation,
veterinary medicine for controlling urinary incontinence
and may also help to lower the blood pressure. Cyprohep-
in dogs. Chewable veterinary formulations are extremely
tadine has been found to be useful for alleviating some of
palatable, especially to dogs, which may increase the risk
the central nervous system signs. Nitroprusside or other
of accidental overdose.
pressor agents may be used to manage severe hyperten-
Kinetics
sion. Managing the blood pressure often results in correc-
tion of the refex bradycardia. Atropine is contraindicated
Phenylpropanolamine is quickly absorbed orally, although
in the management of bradycardia because it will worsen
extended release prmoducts may have a delayed onset of
the hypertension. Beta-blockers should not be used on
action (Means 2004).
bradycardic animals because they will worsen the brady-
Mechanism of Action
cardia. In tachycardic animals very low doses of metopro-
Sympathormimetics like PPA stimulate C- and β-adrenergic
lol (preferred due to beta-1 selectivity and short half-life)
or propranolol may be considered but should be used with
receptors, resulting in the release of endogenous catechol-
caution and only after CNS signs (agitation, hyperactivity)
amines in the brain and heart. This results in peripheral
have been controlled. Intravenous fuids are recommended
vasoconstriction, cardiac stimulation and bronchodilation
(Means 2004).
to promote excretion, protect renal function, and aid in
thermoregulation. Fluid rates should be adjusted accord-
Toxicity
ingly in hypertensive animals.
Signs can be seen at therapeutic doses in some dogs, and
   s    
Prognosis
2004).
The prognosis will depend on the dose ingested, severity
Clinical Effects
institution of therapy, and response to therapy. Animals
Signs normally start within 30-90 minutes and may con-
experiencing seizures have a more guarded prognosis.
tinue up to 72 hours, depending on the dose ingested.
Signs of PPA toxicosis include tachycardia, hyperten-
VITAMINS
sion, panting, agitation, hyperesthesia, piloerection, hyper
thermia, tremors, seizures, and secondary depression.
Sources/Formulations
Bradycardia may result in response to hypertension; there-
Vitamin supplements are widely available and include
fore, dogs may present either depressed, bradycardic, and
multivitamins as well as products containing single vita-
hypertensive OR agitated, tachycardic, and hypertensive.
mins as ingredients. Many vitamin supplements also
Chapter 26 / OTC Drugs
239
contain a variety of minerals (e.g-, iron, selenium, etc.)
Dunayer, Eric K. 2004. Ibuprofen toxicosis in dogs, cats,
Most products are designed to provide the minimum daily
fertrets. Veterinary Medicine 99(7):580-586
requirement (MRA) of vitamins, but some products have
Gonzalez, M.A., and Estes, K.S. 1998. Pharmacokinetic over-
higher potencies and contain several times the MRA in
view of oral second-generation H1 antihistamines. Interna-
tionat Jounal of Clinicat Pharmacology and Therapeutics
each tablet or capsule. For instance, most vitamin supple-
ments contain vitamin D; at 400 IU per serving, but high-
36(5):292-300
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2010. Toxicology of Pain Medi-
potency products containing 1000 to 50,0001U have
cation. Proceedings from the CVC Baltimore, Baltimore,
become available and these pose a higher risk of acute
MD, April 11, 2010.
toxicosis.
. 2004. Antihistamines. In Veterinary Clinical Toxicol-
ogy, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 309-311. St. Louis:
Toxicity
Mosby.
Ingredients of concem in vitamin supplements include
 2001. Salicylate toxicosis in dogs and cats. Standards
iron and vitamin D. Water-soluble vitamins (B vitamins,
of Care: Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 4(7):1-5.
vitamin C) are not likely to cause significant clinical
McConkey, S.E., Grant, D.M., and Cribb A.E. 2009. The role
effects because excess vitamins are eliminated through the
of para-aminophenol in acetaminophen-induced methemo-
urine. However, forrmulations with B vitamins can result
globinemia in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Phar-
macology and Therapeutics 32(6):585-595
in benign orange discoloration of the urine. High doses of
Means, Charlotte. 2004. Decongestants. In Veterinary Clini-
niacin (vitamin B3) can cause a self-limiting fushing of
cal Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 309-311.
the skin of the face and ear pinnas in some dogs (though
St. Louis: Mosby.
transiently uncomfortable, no serious harm will occur)
Moeller, Robert B. 2004. Hepatobiliary system: Toxic
Vitamin C can be irritating to the gastrointestinal tract and
response of the hepatobiliary system. In Veterinary Clinical
result in mild, transient vomiting, or diarrhea.
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 61-68. St.
Vitamin D is of concern if the ingested dosage exceeds
Louis: Mosby.
0.1 mg/kg (40001U/kg). (See to the cholecalciferol section
Ottani, A., Leone, S., Sandrini, M., Ferrari, A., and Bertolini
of Chapter 17 for inforrmation on risks and managerment
A. 2006. The analgesic activity of paracetamolis prevented
by the blockade of cannabinoid CB1 receptors, European
of vitamin D exposures.) Iron dosages above 20 mg/kg can
cause vomiting and diarrhea; dosages over 60mg/kg can
Journal of Pharmacology, 531(1-3): 280-281.
Plumb, Donald C.2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th
cause corrmsive injury to the intestinal mucosa and liver
edition. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
 injury. (see the iron section in Chapter 29 for further infor-
Plumlee, Konnie H. 2004. Hematic system. In Clinical Vet-
mation on iron toxicosis.)
erinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, p. 59. St.
Louis: Mosby.
REFERENCES
Roder, Joseph D. 2004. Analgesics. In Clinicat Veterinary
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of over-the-counter drugs. In
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 282-284. St.
Veterinary Toxicology:Basic and Clinicat Principles,
Louis: Mosby.
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, Pp. 363-390. San Diego:
Sellon, Rance K. 2006. Acetaminophen. In Small Animaf
Elsevier.
Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Boothe, Dawn M. 2006. Small Animal Pharmacology and
Patricia A. Talcott, Pp. 550-558. St. Louis: Saunders.
Therapeutics. St. Louis: Saunders.
Stockham, Steven L. and Scott, Michael A. 2008. Fundamen
Burke, Anne, Smyth, Emer, and FitzGerald, Garret A. 2005,
tals of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 2nd edition, p. 186.
Analgesic-antipyretic and antinfammatory agents: Phar-
Oxford: Blackwell.
macotherapy of gout. In Goodman & Gitman's The Phar-
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antinflammatories. In
macological Basis of Therapeutics, 1Ith edition,edited by
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael
Laurence Brunton, John Lazo, and Keith Parker, Pp. 671-
E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933. St. Louis:
716. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Saunders.
Prescription Drugs
27
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ALBUTEROL
atrioventricular block, etc. Stimulation of βB, receptors on
skeletal muscle results in muscle tremors.
Sources/Formulations
Toxicity
Albuterol (salbutamol) and albuterol sulfate are broncho-
dilators available as tablets (immediate- and extended-
Toxic doses for albuterol have not been established, but
release forms), oral syrups, liquids for nebulization, and
 adverse clinical effects can be seen in some dogs at thera-
aermsols for inhalation (Rosendale 2004). Brmnchodilators
peutic dosages (0.05 mg/kg for dogs) (Rosendale 2004)
are used for the management of airway diseases such as
Animals biting into inhalers could have the entire contents
asthrma. Companion animals are most commonly exposed
expelled into the oral cavity and pharynx, resulting in
when they accidentally ingest tablets or liquids or when
exposures many times the therapeutic levels (Mensching
they bite into pressurized inhalers.
and Volmer 2007).
Kinetics
Clinical Effects
Albuterol is rapidly absorbed via inhalation or ingestion.
Aerosolized products can have an almost immediate effect;
Albuterol crosses the blood brain barrier and placenta; it
tablets and liquids may have some delay in onset of clini-
is not known whether albuterol distributes into milk. Alb-
cal signs.
uterol is metabolized to inactive metabolites in the liver
and is excreted as metabolites and parent compound in the
Signs
urine.
Clinical signs of albuterol toxicosis include tachycardia or
other arrhythmia, weakness, lethargy, tachypnea, aggres-
Mechanism of Action
sion, agitation, hyperactivity, vomiting, and tremors (Men-
The pharmacologic action of albuterol is due to stimula
sching and Volmer 2007). Seizures, although uncormmon,
tion of β2 adrenergic receptors on bronchial smooth
can occur.
muscle, causing bronchodilation (Mensching and Volmer
2007). In overdose situations, the β2 selectivity is lost and
Laboratory
B, receptors are also stimulated resulting in increased rate
Hypokalermia and hypophosphatemia have been reported
and force of contraction of the heart. Peripheral vasodila-
in dogs with albutermol toxicosis (Mensching and Volmer
tion results in hypotension, potentiating the tachycardia
 2007). Although the hypophosphatemia generally resolves
and increasing the likelihood of more severe cardiac
on its own, hypokalemia may require potassium
arrhythrmias such as premature ventricular contraction,
supplementation.
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20ll John Wiley and Sons, lnc. Published 20ll by John Wiley and Sons, lnc.
241
242
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Differential Diagnosis
Table 27.1. Classes of antidepressants
Other central nervous systerm and cardiovascular stimu-
Tricyclic Antidepressants
lants such as methylxanthines, amphetamines, cocaine,
Amitriptyline (Elavil@)
antidepressants, ethylene glycol, metaldehyde, pseudo-
Clomipramine (Clomicalm@)
ephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine can cause signs
Doxepin (Sinequin@)
resembling albuterol toxicosis.
Imipramine (Tofranil@)
Nortriptyline (Pamelor@)
Diagnostics
Plasma albuterol levels can be measured but require sub-
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Citalopram (Celexa@)
mission to a specialty laboratory, so they would not be
Escitalopram (Lexapro@)
helpful in making a prompt diagnosis.
Fluoxetine (Prozac@)
Management of Exposures
Parmoxetine (Paxil@)
 The goals of management of albuterol toxicosis are control
Sertraline (Zoloft@)
of clinical signs, correction of electrolyte abnormalities,
 Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
 and supportive care until full recovery. Decontamination
Desvenlafaxine (Pristiq@)
is inadvisable, and likely to be unrewarding, in cases
Venlafaxine (Effexor@)
involving aerosol or liquid formulations due to the rapidity
of onset of clinical signs (Rosendale 2004). Intravenous
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
fuid therapy is key to providing cardiovascular support in
Phenylzine (Nardil@)
patients with albuterol toxicosis. In mild toxicosis, fuid
Selegiline (Eldepryl@, Anypril@)
therapy may be sufficient to manage hypotension; however,
Atypical Antidepressants
with more severe intoxications, more aggressive treatment
Bupropion (Wellbutrin@)
will be necessary. Diazepam should be utilized first to
Mirtazapine (Remeron@)
manage central nervous system stimulation, because some
Nefazodone (Serzone@)
tachycardia may be due to the agitated state of the patient.
Trazodone (Desyrell@)
Propranolol is the beta blocker of choice in treating tachy-
cardia that persists after central nervous system stimula-
tion has been managed; propranolol also often assists in
normalizing serum potassium. Once the heart rate is within
their inquisitive nature and often indiscriminate eating
reasonable levels, the serum should be analyzed for hypo-
habits, may ingest entire prescriptions of psychotropic
kalermia and potassium supplementation administered as
drugs in one sitting. Table 27.1 gives examples of the
needed.
various classes of psychotropic drugs used in human and
veterinary medicine.
Prognosis
Most animals receiving prompt and appropriate care will
Serotonin and Serotonin Syndrome
recover within 12 hours of exposure, but large overdoses
Early psychotropic drugs were nonselective and frequently
may result in signs that last for 2448 hours.
targeted a variety of areas of the central nervous system
(CNS). Over time, it became apparent that certain neu-
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
rotransmitters in the CNS were more influential in altering
undesirable behaviors, and drugs that more selectively tar-
Introduction
geted those neurotransmitters were developed. Serotonin
The use of psychotropic drugs to alter behavior of humans
is one neurotransmitter that appears to be extremely
and animals has dramatically increased in the last decade.
important in managing many CNS disorders and older
0 papuanur ane sinip jo sadai asaun ieu sionaeueq au
drugs that targeted a variety of neurmotransmitters (e.g-,
alter include depression, anxiety, obsessive/compulsive
tricyclic antidepressants) have, in human medicine, largely
behavior, and undesirable impulses such as smoking in
given way to drugs that more selectively alter CNS sero-
humans. With the increased usage of these drugs, the
tonin levels, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibi-
potential for accidental overdosage in companion animals
tors (SSRIs) and nonselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
has increased. This is especially true for dogs, who due to
(NSSRIs).
Chapter 271 Prescription Drugs
243
Table 27.2. Mechanism of action of serotonergic drugs
Increase Serotonin Synthesis
Inhibit Serotonin Reuptake
L-tryptophan
Tricyclic Antidepressants
5-hydroxytryptophan
Amitriptyline (Elavil@)
Clomipramine (Clomicalm@)
Increase Serotonin Release
Doxepin (Sinequin@)
Amphetamine
Imipramine (Tofranil@)
Cocaine
Nortriptyline (Pamelor@)
Fenfuramine (Pondimin@)
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Reserpine
Citalopram (Celexa@)
 Dextromethorphan
Escitalopram (Lexapro@)
 Decrease Serotonin Metabolism
Fluoxetine (Prozac@)
Amphetamine (metabolites)
Paroxetine (Paxil@)
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Sertraline (Zoloft@)
Phenylzine (Nardil@)
Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake
Selegiline (Eldepryl@, Anypril@)
Inhibitors
Venlafaxine (Effexor@)
Serotonin Receptor Agonist
Other Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Buspirone (Buspar@)
Amphetamine
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
Cocaine
Sumatriptan (Imitrex@)
 Dextrormethorphan
Meperidine (Demerol@)
Nefazodone (Serzone@)
Tramadol (Ultram@)
Trazodone (Desyrell@)
Source: Mills 2005.
Enhancing serotonin levels in the CNS can result in
aggression, vocalization, seizures, etc.), altered neuromus-
dramatic and favorable alterations in behaviors of humans
cular activity (rigidity, myoclonus, tremors, hyperreflexia,
and animals. However, excessive levels of serotonin can
ataxia, etc.), hyperthermia, autonomic derangerments, and
result in a severe and potentially life-threatening condition
diarrhea. Death can be due to hyperthermia, respiratory
termed serotonin syndrome. Many CNS stimulants that
compromise or disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.
primarily affect other neurotransmitters such as norepi-
nephrine and/or dopamine (e.g-, amphetamines and
General Management of Serotonin Syndrome
cocaine), also have some degree of serotonergic action, so
Management of serotonin syndrome includes managing
at least part of the clinical effects seen may be due to
any severe CNS effects with diazepam or a phenothiazine;
serotonin excess (Table 27.2). In humans, serotonin syn-
refractory seizures may require general anesthesia (Merola
drome is most commonly seen when two different seroto-
and Dunayer 2006; Gwaltney-Brant 2004; Wismer 2000).
nergic drugs are administered simultaneously, or when
 Due to its serotonin-blocking effects, cyproheptadine may
insufficient time has elapsed between discontinuation of
be beneficial in managing the agitation, hyperthermia, and
one class of serotonergic drug and institution of therapy
vocalization. Once animals have been stabilized and
with a different class of serotonergic drug. In dogs, sero-
severe signs managed (or in asymptomatic animals),
tonin syndrome has been associated with excessive inges-
decontamination should be attempted. If the animal has
tion of 5-hydroxytryptophan as well as a variety of
not already vomited, induction of emesis or gastric lavage
serotonergic drugs (Gwaltney-Brant 2004; Wismer 2000).
might be performed. Administration of activated charcoal
is recommended in most cases and is especially important
Clinical Effects
if extended- or sustained-release products have been
Serotonin syndrorme is characterized by a variety of effects
ingested. Severe tachycardia may be managed with beta-
including altered mental status (agitation or depression,
blockers such as propranolol. Fluid therapy is important
244
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
to provide cardiovascular support and protect the kidney
tyline at 15 mg/kg may be lethal to dogs. The oral lethal
from hypotension-related injury. Acid/base status should
dosage of clomipramine is 100mg/kg (Wismer 2000)
be monitored and managed as needed.
Clinical Effects
DifferentialDiagnosis
Signs of TCA intoxication may occur as soon as 30 minutes
Other agents that may cause signs resembling serotonin
following exposure and include initial lethargy and ataxia
syndrome (or have a sermtonergic component themselves)
that progresses to agitation, vocalization, hyperesthesia,
include amphetamines, cocaine, methylxanthines, pseudo-
hyperthermia, vomiting, tachycardia,hypotension, cardiac
ephedrine, albuterol, metaldehyde, ethylene glycol, strych-
arrhythmia, dyspnea, pulmonary edema, seizures, coma,
nine, organophosphorous or carbamate insecticides, and
and death.Death due to cardiac arrhythmia may occur as
zinc phosphide.
early as 2 hours of ingestion in untreated animals (Wismer
2000).
Diagnosis
Most human hospitals can run quick screens for antide-
Management
pressants and may be able to provide results on a STAT Management of TCA overdosage includes decontamina-
basis. Antidepressants can also be detected in blood and
tion of clinically stable animals (emesis or gastric lavage
urine by a veterinary diagnostic laboratory.
followed by activated charcoal with cathartic). Manage-
ment of clinical signs would be as above for sermotonin
Prognosis
syndrome, but cardiac arrhythmias in TCA overdoses may
The prognosis of serotonin syndrome is generally good if
be prmnounced and require further treatment. The use of
prormpt veterinary medical care is obtained. In cases
hypertonic saline has been recommended to manage severe
involving immediate-release products, signs of serotonin
cardiac arrhythmias, because the arrhythmias are thought
syndrome usually resolve within 12 to 36 hours, while
to be due to blockade of sodium channels within the
extended-release (including controlled- and sustained-
myocardium.
Z on dn nsisnad eun suais aaey Ae snpod (aseaal
hours (Gwaltney-Brant 2004).
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Mechanism of Action
Tricyclic Antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) are classed
Kinetics
by function rather than structure; this class of drugs blocks
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) are rapidly absorbed from
the reuptake of serotonin by the presynaptic neuron, result-
the Gl tract and widely distributed throughout the body.
ingin increased sermtonin levels at the postsynaptic
The half-lives of these drugs vary considerably between
receptors.
individuals, and half-lives can be extended during a toxi-
cosis. Delayed gastric emptying and enterohepatic recir-
Kinefics
culation are features of TCA intoxication that can also
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are well absorbed
prmlong the clinical effects (Wismer 2000)
orally and are highly protein-bound. They tend to have
rapid onsets of action, although delayed onset may occur
MechanismofAction
when extended- or controlled-release products are ingested.
Tricyclic antidepressants block the reuptake of norepi-
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004)
nephrine and serotonin by the presynaptic neuron, result-
ing in increased levels of these drugs within the CNS.
Toxicity
These drugs also have significant antihistiminic and
At therapeutic levels, SSRI have fewer histaminic, cardio-
cholinergic effects, as well as cardiac sodium channel
vascular, and sedative side effects compared to TCAs or
blocking action, resulting in significant cardiovascular
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOls); in overdose situ-
effects.
ations these effects, while present, tend to be less severe
than the other two classes of antidepressants. At therapeu-
Toxicity
tic and 1ow overdose levels (<5 times therapeutic), these
Many TCAs have narrow margins of safety, with signs of
drugs tend to cause sedation; at higher doses, more severe
toxicosis possible at 2-5 times therapeutic doses. Amitrip-:
 signs, including CNS stimulation, may be seen
Chapter 27/ Prescription Drugs
245
Management
BACLOFEN
Because these agents tend to exert primarily a direct sero-
tonin effect, the treatment outlined above for serotonin
Sources/Formulations
syndrome is the recommended management when over-
Baclofen is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant that
dosages occur Sustained- or extended-release products
is used to control spasticity and pain in humans with mus-
tend to have signs that may persist for up to 72 hours.
culoskeletal disorders and to treat urethral resistance in
dogs with urinary retention.
Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Nonselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (NSSRI) act
Kinetics
similarly to SSRI to block serotonin reuptake but also
Baclofen is well absorbed orally and can have a very rapid
block the reuptake of other armines, such as dopamine or
onset of action. Baclofen is lipid-soluble and crosses the
norepinephrine. Venlafaxine capsules appear to be appeal-
blood brain barrier in overdose situations (but not at
ing to cats, who will readily ingest them (Merola
therapeutic levels) (Gwaltney-Brant 2004a). Baclofen
and Dunayer 2006). Dosages of venlafaxine of 1 mg/kg
is excreted largely unchanged in the urine. The half-life is
can cause sedation, and tremors may be seen at 10mg/kg
dose-dependent and increases significantly in overdose
of immediate-release products (Wismer 2000). The clini-
situations.
cal effects of NSSRI overdose include serotonin syndrome
 as well as a potential cardiovascular stimulation, resulting
Mechanism of Action
in tachycardia or other cardiac arrhythmias. Management
At therapeutic levels, baclofen mimics GABA within the
is the same as for SSRl, but symptomatic treatment of
spinal cord, blocking excitatory responses to sensory input
cardiac arrhythmias may be needed.
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004a). In overdose situations, baclofen
enters the central nervous system where it inhibits sub-
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
stance P, a stimulatory compound within the brain stem.
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that breaks down
The mechanism of baclofen-induced seizures is thought to
various amines including epinephrine, dopamine, and
be due to decreased GABA release from presynaptic
serotonin. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOl) there-
neurons, causing excessive postsynaptic firing.
fore inhibit the breakdown of these amines, resulting in
an increase in their concentrations both within the pre-
Toxicity
synaptic neuron and at the synapse (Wismer 2000). Signs
In dogs, dosages of 1.3mg/kg have resulted in clinical
of MAOl overdose in companion animals include hypo/
signs, and deaths have occurred at dosages over &mg/kg
hypertension, tachycardia or other arrhythmias, depres-
(Wismer 2004).
sion, ataxia, agitation, hyperthermia, tremors, seizures,
corma, and respiratory depression. The onset of signs 
Clinical Effects
may vary from 2 to 24 hours depending on dosage
Clinical signs of baclofen toxicosis include vomiting,
ingested and the form of the drug (immediate- vs.
ataxia, vocalization, disorientation, depression, hypersali-
sustained-release). Management is as for serotonin syn-
vation, weakness, recumbency, coma, hypothermia, hypo-
drome. It is recommended that animals ingesting large
tension or hypertension, bradycardia, hyperactivity,
doses of MAOls have liver enzyme values monitored
agitation, tremors, mydriasis, dyspnea, respiratory arrest,
as elevations in these values can sometimes occur with
pulmonary edema, and death (Wismer 2004). Seizures and
MAOI overdose.
respiratory compromise secondary to paralysis of the
diaphragm and intercostal muscles are the most life-
Atypical (Novel) Antidepressants
threatening signs.
The atypical, or novel, antidepressants comprise a class of
drugs of varying structure and mechanism of action; essen-
Differential Diagnosis
tially, they do not fit well into the previous categories and
Other compounds that can cause signs similar to baclofen
are lumped together as "atypical"(Wismer 2000). Signs
include other central nervous system depressants (barbitu-
expected from this class of antidepressant vary, but still 
rates, benzodiazepines, sleep aids such as zolpidem, etc.),
tend to fall in line with signs seen with other antidepres-
ethylene glycol, isoxazole mushrooms, antidepressants,
sants. Similarly, treatment of toxicoses will be the same as
 macrolide antiparasiticides (e.g-, iverrmectin, moxidectin,
that of the other antidepressants outlined above.
etc.) and marijuana
246
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Diagnosis
30% to 40% (Plumb 2005). Some ACE inhibitors (e.g-,
Baclofen blood levels can be measured at a human hospital
enalapril and benazepril) are prodrugs that are converted
or veterinary diagnostic laboratory, although unless STAT
to an active metabolite following absorption. In dogs, the
results can be obtained, they may be of little value when
half-lives of benazepril and captopril are 3.5 hours and 2.8
dealing with the emergent patient.
hours. Enalapril has a slower onset of action (4-6 hours)
but longer duration of action (12-14 hours) compared to
Management
benazepril and captopril (Plurmb 2005). The half-life of
Treatment goals for baclofen exposures are managing
benazepril in cats is 16-23 hours. Half-lives of all are
clinical signs, maintaining respiration, decontarmination,
increased in patients with renal failure.
and supportive care. Patients developing respiratory com-
promise may need mechanical ventilation. Cormatose
Mechanism of Action
animals should be monitored closely for respiratory insuf-
ACE inhibitors prevent the conversion of angiotensin I to
ficiency and hypothermia. Seizures generally respond to
angiotensin II by competing with angiotensin I for the
diazepam, but the lowest dose necessary to control sei-
ACE enzyme. The ACE enzyme has a higher affinity for
zures should be used in order to prevent exacerbating the
ACE inhibitors than for angiotensin I. Decreased angio-
central nervous system depression that will follow seizure
tensin II levels result in decreased aldosterone secretion
contrmol. Intravenous fuid therapy is helpful in correcting
and increased renin secretion, causing peripheral
hypotension and providing cardiovascular support. Vocal-
vasodilation.
ization and disorientation sometimes respond to cyprohep-
Toxicity
tadine. Anecdotally, some clinicians have found the use of
intravenous lipid solutions to be helpful in managing
Compared to other cardiac drugs, ACE inhibitors have a
baclofen toxicoses. Decontamination (emesis and single
relatively wide margin of safety, with hypotension expected
dose of activated charcoal) can be considered in asymp-
only at high doses. Generally dosages equivalent to
tomatic animals, but patients displaying even mild central
<20 mg/kg of lisinopril are not likely to cause any serious
nervous system effects may be at risk of aspiration, so
clinical problems in healthy adult dogs (ASPCA Animal
decontamination should be done with care.
Poison Control Center, unpublished data).
Prognosis
Clinical Effects
Resolution of clinical signs can take up to several days in
The primary clinical effect of ACE inhibitor overdose is
severe cases. Patients provided with prompt supportive
hypotension, which can result in nausea, vomiting, and
care have a reasonable prognosis of recovery as long as
weakness.
adequate ventilatory support can be maintained. Patients
experiencing seizures have a more guarded prognosis
DifferentialDiagnosis
(Wismer 2004).
Other causes of hypotension include primary cardiovascu-
lar disease, cardiac glycosides (drugs, plants, Bufo toads),
calcium channel blockers, nitrmglycerine, alpha2 agonists
CARDIAC DRUGS
(e.g-, amitraz, xylazine), imidazoline decongestants, beta
blockers, and muscarinic mushrooms.
ACE Inhibitors
Sources/Formulations
Diagnosis
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors include
Serum or plasma levels of ACE inhibitors are not readily
drugs such as enalapril, lisinopril, benazepril, and capto-
available. Diagnosis of toxicosis is based on history and
pril. These drugs are used in human and veterinary medi-
clinical signs.
cine to manage heart failure or hypertension. These drugs
are available as tablets and capsules alone or combined
Management
with other medication (e.g-, diuretics).
Large ingestions of ACE inhibitors should be managed
with decontamination (emesis followed by activated char-
Kinetics
coal) and monitoring for hypotension. Patients developing
ACE inhibitors are well absorbed orally. Food in the gas-
hypotension should be treated with intravenous fuids to
trointestinal tract can reduce bioavailability of captopril by
assist in maintaining blood pressure.
Chapter 27/ Prescription Drugs
247
Prognosis
plants, Bufo toads), calcium channel blockers, nitroglycer
The prognosis for patients ingesting overdoses of ACE
ine, alpha2 agonists (e.g-, amitraz, xylazine), imidazoline
inhibitors is excellent because serious consequences are
decongestants, beta blockers, and muscarinic mushrooms.
rare.
Management
Calcium Channel Blockers
Prompt decontamination of recent ingestions is recom-
Sources/Formulations
mended, including induction of emesis and administra-
tion of activated charcoal. Patients should be monitored
Calcium channel blockers include verapamil, diltiazem,
a minimum of 6 hours following ingestion of immediate-
nifedipine, and nimodipine. These drugs have been used
release prmoducts and 12 hours following ingestion of
to manage a variety of cardiovascular disorders in human
sustained-, controlled- or extended-release products
and veterinary medicine.
with intravenous fuids alone, but more severe car-
Kinetics
diovascular effects need more intensive treatment,
Calcium channel blockers are rapidly absorbed from the
including administration of intravenous calcium salts.
gastrointestinal tract and undergo significant first pass
Treatment for refractory cases includes pressor agents
effect (Roder 2004a). These drugs are metabolized in the
(dopamine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol, etc.), atropine,
liver and metabolites are excreted through the urine. The
and cardiac pacing. Intravenous lipid solutions have
half-life of diltiazem in cats is 2 hours and the half-life of
been reported to be helpful in managing severe toxi-
verapamil in the dog is 0.8 to 2.5 hours (Plumb 2005).
cosis frorm calcium channel blockers (Cave and Harvey
2009).
Mechanism ofAction
Calcium channel blockers prevent the opening of voltage-
Prognosis
gated calcium channels within the heart, slowing the influx
Prognosis will depend on dose ingested, time to presenta-
of calcium into the myocardiocyte and inhibiting calcium-
tion for veterinary care, severity of clinical signs, and
dependent prmcesses in the myocardium (Miller and
response to therapy. Patients with poor response to appro-
Adams 2009; Roder 2004a). This results in coronary and
priate therapy have a guarded to poor prognosis.
peripheral vasodilation, decreased cardiac contractility,
and decreased activity of cardiac pacemaker nodes. The
 net effect is slowing of heart rate and lowering of blood
Cardiac Glycosides
pressure. These effects are exaggerated in overdose
Sources/Formulations
situations.
Cardiac glycoside drugs include digoxin and digitoxin.
Cardiac glycoside compounds are also found in a variety
Toxicity
of plants including foxglove (Digitalis purpura), oleander
Calcium channel blockers have a narrow margin of safety
(Nerium oleander),and lily of the valley (Convallaria
and doses 2-3 times therapeutic doses can cause adverse
spp.), as well as the secretions of several species of Bufo
reactions (Roder 2004a).
toads.
Clinical Effects
Kinetics
The clinical effects of calcium channel blockers include
Cardiac glycosides are well absorbed orally. Protein
bradycardia and hypotension resulting in weakness,
binding varies, with digitoxin being highly protein-bound
recumbency, coma, vomiting, depression, and disorienta-
and digoxin having low protein binding (Roder 2004a).
tion (Roder 2004a). Severe cardiac conduction distur-
These drugs are metabolized in the liver.
bances (e.g., second- and third-degree AV blockade) and
pulmonary edema are possible. Hyperglycemia may also
Mechanism ofAction
occur (Plumb 2005).
Cardiac glycosides interfere with normal functioning of
Na+/K+-ATPases, increasing intracellular sodium and
DifferentialDiagnosis
extracellular potassium. The final result is an increase in
Other causes of hypotension and/or bradycardia include 
force of contraction, increase in cardiac output, and
primary cardiovascular disease, cardiac glycosides (drugs,
decrease in heart rate.
248
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Toxicity
Prognosis
Cardiac glycosides have a very narrow margin of safety,
The prognosis will depend on the dose ingested, time to
and adverse effects with chronic therapeutic use are not
presentation for veterinary care, severity of clinical signs
uncommon.Doses 2 to 3 times therapeutic doses can cause
and response to therapy. Patients with poor response to
significant adverse cardiovascular effects (Roder 2004a).
apprmpriate therapy have a guarded to poor prognosis.
Clinical Effects
5-FLUOROURACIL
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of cardiac glycoside toxicosis include vom-
Sources/Formulations
iting and diarrhea as well as cardiac effects (Roder 2004a).
5-Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine analog in the class of anti-
 Cardiac effects can be seen without any initial gastrointes-
neoplastic dugs termed antimetabolites. 5-Fluorouracil is
tinal signs and can include just about any known arrhyth-
used to treat a variety of cancers in human and veterinary
mia. Clinical signs associated with the cardiovascular
medicine. Topical creams and solutions are used to treat
effects in acute intoxications include weakness, collapse,
dermal disorders such as solar keratosis in humans (Roder
 pale or gray mucous membrane color, hypotension, hypo-
2004).
thermia, coma, and death. Pulmonary edema and renal
failure may occur secondarily.
Kinetics
 5-Flurouracil is well-absorbed both orally and following
Laboratory
topical application.
Serum potassium should be monitored because hyperkale-
mia is commonly seen with cardiac glycoside toxicosis.
Mechanism of Action
5-Fluorouracil inhibits DNA synthesis, resulting in inter-
DifferentialDiagnosis
ference with cell division, so it is more toxic to rapidly
Other causes of cardiac dysfunction include primary
dividing cells of the gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow
cardiovascular disease, calcium channel blockers, nitro-
(Albretsen 2001). Metabolites of 5-fuorouracil are thought
glycerine, alpha2 agonists (e.g-, armitraz, xylazine), imid-
 to contribute to the seizures that are frequently seen with
azoline decongestants, beta blockers, and muscarinic
5-fuorouracil toxicosis in dogs (Yamashita et al. 2004).
mushrooms.
Toxicity
Diagnosis
The minimum lethal dosage of 5-fuorouracil in dogs is
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and clinical
20 mg/kg, although serious clinical effects can be seen at
signs. Most human hospitals can run serum digoxin levels
dosages well below this (Albretsen 2001). Any exposure
on a STAT basis.
should be considered potentially serious and merit evalu-
ation of the patient by a veterinarian.
Management
Prompt decontamination of recent ingestions is recom-
Clinical Effects
mended, including induction of emesis and administration
Clinical signs in dogs exposed to 5-fuorouracil include
of activated charcoal. Patients should be monitored a
vomiting, lethargy, tremors, seizures, cardiac arrhythmias,
minimum of 6 hours following ingestion. There is a wide
and respiratory depression (Albretsen 2001). Severe vom-
range of arrhythmias that can be seen with cardiac gly-
iting can begin within minutes of exposure; seizures may
coside toxicosis, so the cardinal rule of treatment is to
occur quickly or can be delayed up to several hours.
Patients surviving the acute crisis may develop evidence
mias symptomatically (e.g-, atropine for bradyarrhyth-
of bone marrow suppression and/or alimentary tract
 rmias). For patients that are not responding to appropriate
mucosal necrosis within days of exposure.
antiarrhythmic therapy, the use of digoxin immune Fab
 may be considered (for further inforrmation, see Chapter
Differential Diagnosis
8, “Antidotes"). Management of hyperkalemia may
Other toxicants that can cause acute onset of signs similar
include the use of potassium-free fuids and/or insulin
to 5-fuorouracil include CNS stimulant drugs (amphet-
therapy.
amines, cocaine, antidepressants, etc.), organophospho
Chapter 27/ Prescription Drugs
249
rous orcarbamate insecticides, strychnine, methylxanthines,
Included in this class are glimepiride, glipizide, glyburide,
ethylene glycol, nicotine, and zinc phosphide.
chlorpropamide, and tolazamide (Rosendale 2004a).
Diagnosis
Kinetics
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and clinical
Sulfonylureas are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointesti-
signs. Serum levels of 5-fuorouracil are not readily
nal tract and are highly protein-bound. They are metabo-
available.
lized in the liver and excreted via the urine. Half-life
information in nonhumans is not available but glimepiride
Management
and glyburide appear to have duration of action of approxi-
Management of 5-fuorouracil toxicosis entails managing
mately 24 hours in cats, while glipizide has a hypoglyce-
life-threatening clinical signs, seizure control, gastrointes-
mic effect in cats lasting less than 60 minutes at therapeutic
tinal protection, supportive care, and monitoring for bone
levels (Plumb 2005).
 marrow suppression. Decontarmination is indicated only in
recent, asymptomatic exposures. Once clinical signs
Mechanism ofAction
develop, decontarmination is less rewarding and may add
Sulfonylureas are thought to act by triggering the endog-
the risk of aspiration. Seizures are often refractory to diaz-
enous release of insulin and may enhance the binding of
epam alone, but a dose of pentobarbital followed by a
insulin to receptors (Rosendale 2004a).
constant-rate-infusion of diazepam has been found to be
helpful in managing seizures (ASPCA Animal Poison
Toxicity
Contml Center, unpublished data). Antiemetics should be
In normoglycemic animals, hypoglycemia can be seen at
used to manage vomiting, and gastrointestinal protectants
therapeutic doses (Rosendale 2004a).
should be provided. Cardiac arrhythmias should be
 managed as they occur. General supportive care includes
Chinical Effects
intravenous fuid adrministration, pain management
Clinical signs of sulfonylurea toxicosis are primarily those
(patients experiencing alimentary tract necrosis are quite
of hypoglycemia. Liver dysfunction has been reported
painful), thermoregulation, and antibiotics to prevent
with therapeutic use of sulfonylureas in cats, but whether
infection from the eroded GI mucosa. Serum chermistry,
liver injury would occur following acute overdose is not
complete blood count, acid/base, and electrolytes should
known.
all be monitored. Animals that survive beyond a few days
should have serial complete blood counts twice weekly for
Clinical Signs
4 weeks to detect evidence of bone marrow suppression.
Vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, ataxia, weakness, behavioral
Patients with bone marrow suppression may need to be
changes, seizures and coma can occur in patients experi-
treated with bone marrow stimulants (e.g, filgrastim for
encing hypoglycemia. Icterus, vomiting, and diarrhea
leukopenia).
were reported in cats experiencing adverse hepatic effects
from glipizide (Rosendale 2004a)
Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with 5-fuorouracil exposures
Laboratory
is guarded, and mortality rates of >50% have been reported,
despite intensive care (Albretsen 2001). Positive prognos-
Hypoglycemia is the primary laboratory abnormality
tic indicators include no seizures or seizures that respond
expected with sulfonylurea overdose.
well to therapy. Negative prognostic indicators include
DifferentialDiagnosis
being a cat and poor response to anticonvulsant therapy.
Other causes of hypoglycermia that should be considered
include juvenile hypoglycemia, xylitol (dogs), alpha-lipoic
ORAL DIABETIC MEDICATIONS
acid (dogs), primary liver disease, sepsis, iatrogenic insulin
overdose, and insulinoma.
Sulfonylureas
Sources/Formulations
Diagnosis
Sulfonylureas are oral hypoglycemic drugs used in the Sulfonylurea serum levels can be determined by a veteri-
treatment of diabetes in human and veterinary medicine.nary diagnostic laboratory but turnaround times can be
250
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
long, making determination of serum levels of little use
Toxicity
for diagnosing the acute patient.
No toxic doses exist for dogs or cats ingesting metforrmin;
doses ranging from 58 to 170mg/kg in dogs and cats did
Management
not result in hypoglycemia (Heller 2007). Unlike sulfonyl-
Management of sulfonylurea overdose should focus on
ureas, ingestion of metformin is not expected to cause
managing serious clinical effects (coma, seizures),
hypoglycemia in euglycemic animals (Rosendale 2004a).
normalization of serum glucose, decontamination, and
Animals with inadequate caloric intake or with recent
monitoring for return of hypoglycemia. Because of the
excessive exercise could be at risk for hypoglycemia.
potential for rapid onset of signs of hypoglycemia,
Although gastrointestinal signs have been seen with met-
emesis should only be induced in a hospital setting once
formin overdoses in animals, serious life-threatening signs
serum glucose levels have been determined and, if neces-
have not been reported.
sary, corrected. Monitoring of serum glucose should be
done for a minimum of 24 hours following exposure.
Clinical Effects
Small, frequent meals may help in rmanagement of mild
Clinical Signs
intoxications. As needed, intravenous dextrose solutions
Clinical signs of metforrmin are primarily related to gas-
should be administered to maintain blood glucose in
trointestinal upset: nausea, vomiting, abdominal bloating.
patients experiencing more severe hypoglycemia. Seizing
diarrhea, fatulence, and anorexia (Heller 2007).
animals may also require diazepam. Baseline liver values
should be obtained and repeated at 24 and 48 hours;
Laboratory
patients showing increasing liver values should continue
Hypoglycermia is not anticipated with metformin expo-
to have levels repeated every 24 hours until it is apparent
sures in most animals. Animals in a negative energy
that the enzyme values have leveled off or started to
balance or those with recent excessive exercise without
decline.
adequate food intake could develop hypoglycemia follow-
ing metforrmin exposure (Rosendale 2004a). Lactic acido-
Prognosis
sis has been reported in humans taking metformin and in
Most cases of sulfonylurea overdose will have a good
 severe overdose situations, but this condition has not been
prognosis provided prompt veterinary care has been
 reported in animals.
obtained. Patients with protracted hypoglycermia prior to
Differential Diagnosis
presentation have a more guarded prmgnosis.
Differential diagnoses for signs of metforrmin exposure
Metformin
include other causes of gastrointestinal upset such as
Sources/Formulations
dietary indiscretion, infectious gastroenteritis, gastrointes-
tinal foreign body, etc.
Metformin is a biguanide antidiabetic agent with the trade
name Glucophage@. Metformin is used to treat non-
Diagnosis
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in humans and cats
Metformin serum levels can be measured, but because
(Rosendale 2004a; Plumb 2005).
metforrmin is not expected to cause serious issues, measur-
Kinetics
Metforrmin is slowly absorbed in humans and variably
Management
absorbed in cats (Plumb 2005). Metformin is eliminated
Management of metformin overdoses primarily involves
unchanged in the urine (Rosendale 2004a). The half-life
managing gastrointestinal upset. Antiemetics can be uti-
of metformin in cats is 11.5 hours.
lized in vomiting patients. Decontamination is recom-
mended in large exposures, including induction of emesis
Mechanism of Action
if within 1 hour of exposure followed by administration of
Metforrmin is thought to lowerblood glucose by improving
 activated charcoal. Animals appearing to be in a negative
peripheral sensitivity to insulin and increasing insulin
energy balance (e.g-, emaciated, cachexic) should have
uptake by peripheral cells (Rosendale 2004a). Unlike sul-
blood glucose monitored; small frequent meals may help
fonylureas, metformin does not increase serum insulin
keep blood glucose within norrmal limits. With large inges-
levels.
tions, monitoring for lactic acidosis may be prudent.
Chapter 271 Prescription Drugs
251
Prognosis
Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp. 541-574. Ames, Iowa:
Most cases develop no more than gastrmintestinal upset
Wiley-Blackwell.
that is responsive to symptomatic care, so the prognosis in
Mills, Kirk C. 2005. Serotonin syndrome. In Critical Care
Toxicology, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace,
most cases is excellent.
Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, and J. Ward Donovan,
pp. 281-290. Philadelphia: Mosby.
REFERENCES
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed.
Albretsen, Jay C. 2001. 5-Fluorouracil toxicosis in dogs. Vet-
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
erinary Medicine 96(4):270-274.
Roder, Joseph D. 2004. Antineoplastics. In Veterinary Clini-
Cave, G. and Harvey, M. 2009. Intravenous lipid emulsion as
cal Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 299-302.
an antidote beyond local anesthetic toxicity: A systematic-
St. Louis: Mosby
review. Academic Emergency Medicine 16(9):815-824.
 2004a. Cardiovascular drugs. In Veterinary Clinical
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2004. Antidepressants. In Clini-
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 307-309. St.
cal Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee,
Louis: Mosby.
Pp. 286-291. St. Louis: Mosby.
Rosendale, Marcy. 2004. Bronchodilators. In Veterinary Clin-
 2004a. Muscle relaxants. In Clinical Veterinary Toxi
ical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 305-306.
cology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, Pp. 326-330. St.
St. Louis: Mosby.
Louis: Mosby.
 2004a Diabetes medications. In Veterinary Clinical
Heller, Jacqueline B. 2007. Metformin overdose in dogs and
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 311-319. St.
cats. Veterinary Medicine 102(4):231-234.
Louis: Mosby.
Mensching, Donna and Volmer, Petra A. 2007. Breathe easier
Wismer, Tina A. 2000. Antidepressant overdoses in dogs.
when managing betaz agonist inhaler toxicoses in dogs.
Veterinary Medicine 95(7):520-525
Veterinary Medicine 102(6):369-373.
Wismer, Tina A. 2004. Baclofen overdose in dogs. Veterinary
Merola, Valentina M. and Dunayer, Eric D. 2006. The 10 most
Medicine 99(5):406-410.
common toxicoses in cats. Veterinary Medicine 10l(6):
Yamashita, K., Yada, H., and Yariyoshi, T. 2004. Neurotoxic
339-342.
effects of alpha-fuoro-beta-alanine (FBAL) and fluoroace-
Miller, Matthew W. and Adams, H. Richard. 2009. Digitalis,
tic acide (FA) in dogs. Journal of Toxicologic Science
positive inotropes and vasodilators. In Veterinary Pharma-
29:155-166.
cofogy and Therapeutics, 9th edition, edited by Jim E.
Household and
28
Industrial Toxicants
Rhian Cope
ASPIRATION
lar oxygen leading to temporary transient hypoxia or in
some cases to asphyxia due to rapid displacerment of air.
Sources
In addition, many aspirated materials can damage pulmo-
Aspiration is the accidental introduction of liquid into the
nary capillaries directly, producing pathological findings
lungs. It may occur either directly or as a consequence of
ranging from chemical pneumonitis, hemorrhages, and
vomiting. It is a common complication of ingestion of
bronchopneumonia to grmss pulmonary edema.
 many low viscosity household products. Petroleurm distil-
lates with a kinematic viscosity of less than 19mm?/s @
CLINICAL EFFECTS
40°℃ (e.g., kerosene, diesel/gas oil fuels, gasoline, Stod-
dard cleaning solvent, light lubricating oils, light hydraulic
Signs
fuids), glycols, and many other low viscosity household
 It is wise to always assume that pulmonary aspiration has
products are significant aspiration hazards.
occurred following ingestion of low viscosity materials,
 In general, the potential for aspiration depends on the
even when there is no clinical history or signs of vomiting,
viscosity, surface tension and volatility of the ingested
coughing, or choking. Many patients who aspirate low
 material. Viscosity, however, provides the best estimate of
viscosity materials are often initially asymptomatic and
the aspiration potential of a material and determines the
may not be presented for treatment until significant respi-
rate and extent of penetration into deeper lung structures.
ratory cormpromise is present. In the majority of cases,
Any substance with low viscosity has low resistance to
aspiration is a quiet and insidious process that goes unrec-
fow and can readily spread in the respiratory tract. Con-
ognized until respiratory distress develops. In relatively
sequently, even a small volume may cause widespread
rare instances, patients may present with initial symptoms
tissue damage. The viscosity of baby oil is an approximate
such as gagging, choking, coughing, and dyspnea.
high cut-off viscosity for a high risk of aspiration.
Examination of the patient may show tachypnea, inter-
costal retractions, diminished breath sounds, tachycardia,
Mechanism
and fever. Some patients will show few or no signs until
Aspiration may occur silently and insidiously (most com-
 respiratory compromise becomes evident.
monly) or occur secondarily to vomiting. Aspirated hydro-
Patients with a history of ingestion of a potentially
carbons (and other potential aspirants) impair lung fuid
aspiratable material should always be monitored for aspi-
surfactant function, leading to alveolar instability, early
ration pneumonia/pneumonitis and other respiratory
distal airway closure, and ventilation/perfusion mis-
system complications by continuous monitoring of periph-
matches with subsequent hypoxemia. If the aspirated
eral hemoglobin oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry/
hydrocarbon is highly volatile, it may also displace alveo-
co-oximetry. It is important to use periodic diagnostic
SmatlAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
253
254
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
imaging of the thorax starting at 6 hours postingestion/
gross pulmonary edema. In some cases, it may be possible
aspiration and continuing for at least 48-72 hours
to smell petrmoleum distillates in the fuid present in the
postingestion.
airways and lungs.
A high proportion of patients with aspiration (particu-
Histopathological changes in the lung in these cases
larly of hydrocarbon distillates) will develop acute respira-
include interstitial infammation, brmonchial and bronchio
tory distress syndrome. Pulmonary involvement is usually
lar necrosis, intra-alveolar hemorrhage, and infammatory
 progressive during the first 24 48 hours. Reversible bron-
cell exudate.
chial hyperresponsiveness and restrictive ventilatory limi-
tation may be demonstrated.
Management of Exposures
If the patient survives, the pulmonary involvement often
In cases where the patient has ingested material and is at
gradually subsides over days to weeks. Other cormplica-
risk of aspiration, induction of vomiting and gastric lavage,
tions may include pulmonary edema, pneumomediasti-
even with a secure airway, are ineffective, increase the
num, emphysema, pneumatoriles, cysts, and secondary
morbidity and mortality, and are directly contraindicated.
infectious pneumonia. Nonpulmonary organ toxicity is
Insufficient data either to support or exclude the effec-
rare with simple petroleum distillate aspiration, but may
tiveness of simple small-bore nasogastric aspiration is
occur with other materials.
available. In cases where significant volumes of material
have been ingested and the animal presents for treatment
Laboratory Findings
within 30 to 60 minutes of ingestion, simple small-bore
Typically, a progressive decline in peripheral blood hemo-
 nasogastric aspiration may be of some benefit.
globin oxygen saturation (as measured by pulse oximetry/
Medical treatment of aspiration is symptomatic. Con-
co-oximetry) occurs. The lowered peripheral blood hemo-
 servative fuid management, avoidance of overaggressive
globin oxygen saturation is most commonly due to the
fuid therapy, and overhydration are critical in minimizing
development of a ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
the affects of the acute respiratory distress syndrome that
Bronchoalveolar lavage commonly demonstrates
may develop following aspiration. In humans, conserva-
inflammatory responses characterized by neutrophilia and
tive fluid management has been definitively shown to con-
foamy macrophages (foamy cytoplasmic vacuolization of
tribute to improved outcomes in patients with acute
macrophages)
respiratory distress.
Pharmaceutical interventions for acute respiratory dis-
Differential Diagnosis
tress syndrome have so far been proven ineffective and
Common and important differential diagnoses include
thus cannot be recommended. The use of high-dose corti-
paraquat poisoning, inhalation of superheated air, and
costeroids is controversial and large-scale trials in humans
acute viral and/or bacterial pneumonia.
have demonstrated a lack of effectiveness. Prophylactic
corticosteroids may increase the death rate among human
Diagnostics
patients at risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Antemortem
Because of the controversy and lack of data demonstrating
A history of exposure/ingestion is usually the most
clear benefit in animals, the use of corticostermids in the
important antemortem diagnostic clue. Occasionally, it
treatment of aspiration in domestic animals remains one
may be possible to smell petroleum distillates on the
of individual judgment.
animal's breath or the facial coat or paws. Aspiration
of stomach contents via small-bore nasogastric tube may
Prognosis
yield valuable diagnostic samples if performed within
The prognosis for confirmed cases of aspiration is
 about an hour following ingestion. Diagnostic imaging
always guarded, particularly if acute respiratory distress is
evidence of pneumonitis is usually present within 6-12
present.
hours. The most cormrmon radiographic pattern is pul-
monary edema, although various radiographic opacities
ALCOHOLS
may occur.
Ethanol
Postmortem
Synonyms include alcohol, ethyl; denatured alcohol; dis-
Gross findings of a necropsy range from frank chemical
tilled spirits; ethyl alcohol, undenatured; ethanol; ethyl
pneumonitis, hemorrhages, and brmnchopneumonia to
alcohol; ethylcarbinol.
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
255
Sources
converted to acetyl CoA that is consumed as an energy
Ethanol is a ubiquitous household and industrial chemical.
source via the citric acid cycle or for the synthesis of
A partial list of common sources of ethanol in households
lipids; and (3) conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde by
includes alcoholic beverages, fermenting organic waste
hepatic CYP 2E1. In domestic animals that are not nor-
materials (particularly fruit, food waste in garbage), bread
mally regularly exposed to ethanol, mechanisms (1) and
dough and related fermenting yeast doughs, automotive
(2) are usually the most important.
deicers, window cleaners, antifogging solutions, dental
Clearance of ethanol from the bloodstream is mostly via
mouthwashes, toothpastes, perfumes, fragrances, after-
hepatic metabolism, but small amounts of ethanol (<10%
shaves, cosmetics, paints, varnishes, polishes, shellacs,
of the ingested amount) are exhaled or excreted in urine.
sealers, degreasers, design and sketch art markers, paints,
Whole body elimination follows zermo order kinetics.
tinctures (e.g-, tincture of iodine), cough syrups, cosmet-
ics, adhesive removers, liquid detergents, stain removers,
disinfectants, deodorizers, shampoos, hair conditioners,
Mechanism ofAction
antiperspirants, thermometers, and insect repellents. An
Ethanol, particularly concentrated ethanol, is a skin, respi-
extensive list of U.S. household products that contain
ratory, eye, and gastrointestinal irritant. Its irritancy on the
ethanol can be found on the U.S. Department of Health
     s  
and Human Services' Household Products Database
to induce vomiting. Consumption of concentrated indus-
(Health and Safety Information on Household Products).
trial ethanol produces significant damage to the gastric
Alcohol content in household products can be surprisingly
mucosa and bleeding into the stomach.
high. It should be noted that the percentage of ethanol in
Within the CNS, ethanol and many of the anesthetics
distilled alcoholic beverages is half of its "proof value."
and narcotic hydrocarbon solvents appear to have a
Pungent fermenting fruits, grains, and vegetable matter
common site of action on CNS neurotransmitter receptors.
are often attractive to several domestic and wildlife
Ethanol has agonistlike effects on CNS GABA-A and
species and are commonly voluntarily consumed to
glycine receptors and inhibitory effects on glutamate
excess.
NMDA receptors (particularly in the hippocampus). These
In industrial situations, ethanol is an extensively used
mechanisms help to explain the CNS depressive, aestheti-
solvent and transported intermediate. Industrial-grade
clike effects and its amnesic actions. Importantly, the CNS
ethanol is typically high purity (>98% by mass). In the
depressive effects also include the loss of central
context of veterinary medicine, acute poisoning is the most
cardiovascular/respiratory drive and the loss of norrmal
common of the various ethanol toxidromes.
airway-protective reflexes. The loss of norrmal airway-
protective effects, plus the ethanol-induced decreased pul-
monary secretion clearance, plus ethanol's propensity for
Kinetics
 inducing vomiting creates a substantial risk of aspiration
The most common route of exposure in domestic ani-
pneumonia.
mals is via ingestion, although inhalation exposures can
Ethanol suppresses the release of antidiuretic hormone
occur under some rare circumstances (prolonged inhala-
(arginine vasopressin) by the posterior pituitary. This
tion of ethanol vapors). Ethanol is rapidly absorbed from
reduces water reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubules
the gastrmintestinal tract and the onset of clinical signs is
and collecting tubules in the nephrons of kidneys and
generally correlated with blood ethanol concentration.
increased urine production.
The presence of food in the stomach or small intestine
Doses of ethanol that produce inebriation typically sen-
delays systemic absorption, as can the type of formulation
sitize the myocardium to the effects of catecholamines and
containing the ethanol. However, the onset of clinical
fatal cardiac arrhythmias may develop. The hypothermia
signs will typically occur within an hour following
that is common in ethanol intoxication exacerbates these
ingestion.
effects and increases the difficulty of treating any cardiac
Ethanol is metabolized by three basic mechanisms: (1)
arrhythmias that develop. Hypotherrmia develops in ethanol
first-pass metabolism of ethanol to acetaldehyde by gastric
poisoning due to a combination of peripheral vasodilata-
alcohol dehydrogenase; (2) first-pass metabolism of
tion (increased heat loss), and a central loss of the ability
ethanol to acetaldehyde by liver alcohol dehydrogenase IB
to thermoregulate. Acute ethanol poisoning may also
followed by conversion of the acetaldehyde to acetic acid
trigger acute pancreatitis. Ethanol is a proven teratogen in
by liver aldehyde dehydrogenase, and acetic acid is then
animals.
256
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
With chronic exposure, ethanol has a myriad of other
Differential Diagnoses
effects. However, most of these are rarely of relevance to
The most critical differential diagnosis is ethylene glycol
veterinary medicine.
poisoning. Other alcohols (methanol, isopropyl alcohol),
hydrmcarbon solvents, chemsols, marijuana, macrolide
Toxicity
antiparasitics, and amitraz produce similar effects to
 The lowest dosage expected to produce death in dogs fol-
ethanol in domestic animals, as do most benzodiazepine,
barbiturate, antipsychotic, antiseizure, and antidepressant
lowing ingestion is around 5.5g/kg. However, clinical
human prescription drugs.
signs of toxicity may occur at much lower dosages.
Diagnostics
ClinicalEffects
Antemortem
Signs
The patient's history plus the presence of the typical clini-
Clinical signs of acute ethanol poisoning in companion
cal signs/laboratory findings of the ethanol toxidrorme are
animals resemble the classical signs in humans: vomiting,
usually the best diagnostic clues. Definitive diagnosis typi-
an initial period of paradoxical behavioral excitation fol-
cally requires the determination of whole blood or serum
lowed by CNS depression, ataxia, lethargy, and sedation.
ethanol. Alternatively, ethanol levels can be determined in
Significant ingestions are associated with coma and hypo-
most body fuids and in vomitus. Aspirating stomach con-
thermia. Signs of abdominal pain may be present due to
tents using a small-bore nasogastric tube can often yield
ethanol's irritant effects on the gastric mucosa and its
useful samples for ethanol testing if performed within
ability to trigger acute pancreatitis. Dehydration may
about 1 hour following ingestion. Samples of the material
occur because of an inability to concentrate urine due to
suspected of being ingested, preferably in the original con-
decreased antidiuretic hormone. Pupillary reflexes may be
tainer, are always particularly valuable.
variable in their response. Tachycardia or myocardial
depression and hypotension may be present. Death is typi-
Postmortem
cally from cardiovascular respiratory arrest combined
Ethanol levels can be measured in most body fuids and in
with hypothermia. Cardiac arhythmias are cormmon.
 the gastric contents. Detection of significant amounts of
Hypoglycemic seizures may occur, particularly in young
ethanol provides the most definitive diagnosis. Hyperermia
and inflamrmation of the gastric mucosa may be present.
animals.
 Importantly, many patients lose their airway protective
Inflammation of the esophagus and bleeding from the
refexes. Thus aspiration of vomitus is an important
gastric mucosa may be present if concentrated ethanol
delayed effect of ethanol poisoning. Sequential diagnostic
solutions have been ingested. The presence of pneumonia
imaging should be performed if aspiration is suspected.
is strongly suggestive of aspiration.
Management of Exposures
Laboratory Findings
Given that absorption of ethanol from the gastrmintestinal
Determination of whole blood or serum alcohol concentra-
tract is rapid, attempts at decontamination of the upper
tion is the most effective method of confirrming the diag-
intestinal tract are usually ineffective. Because of the
nosis. However, ethanol levels can be deterrmined in most
potential loss of airway refexes, induction of vomiting
body fuids and vomitus. Osmolar gap metabolic acidosis
should only be used with extreme caution in asymptomatic
is a common finding in acute ethanol poisoning. An ele-
patients with a history of very recent ingestion (within 15
vated anion gap may also be occasionally present in acute
minutes). Gastric lavage is no longer used in cases of
thanol poisoning. Hypoglycemia, serum electrolyte dis-
human ethanol poisoning since it has been shown to be
turbances, and evidence of hemoconcentration are
ineffective and to increase the risk of severe complica-
common. Blood pCO, measurement may be useful if
tions. Activated charcoal does not bind ethanol and is
respiratory depression is present. Evidence of acute pan-
ineffective. Evacuation of stomach contents using a small-
 creatitis such as elevated serum amylase and lipase may
bore nasogastric tube may be of some value if the patient
be present.
 presents within 1 hour of ingestion.
Because the early stages of ethanol poisoning and eth-
Intravenous fuid therapy should be used to correct/
ylene glycol poisoning are clinically similar, blood ethyl-
prevent dehydration, support kidney function, maintain
ene glycol levels should also be measured.
circulation and blood pressure, correct/prevent hypogly.
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
257
cermia (dextrose intravenous fuids), and correct any
Kinetics
electrolyte/acid base disturbances present. Treatrment of
The kinetics of methanol resemble that of ethanol. Impor-
acidosis may include sodium bicarbonate administration.
tantly, significant toxicoses have been reported following
Regular monitoring of the patient's blood pressure, serum
exposure of the skin, as well as following ingestion and
electrolytes, and acid base status is recommended. Vaso-
inhalation. Methanol is rapidly metabolized by alcohol
pressors, such as dopamine, and plasma expanders may
dehydrogenase to formaldehyde that is then oxidized to
be useful if significant hypotension is present.
formic acid by formaldehyde dehydrogenase. In all domes-
Regular monitoring of cardiac electrical activity, par-
tic nonprimate animals, formic acid rapidly converts to
ticularly if the patient is hypothermic, is recommended.
CO, and water. Formic acid is metabolized much more
Hypothermia is a common and serious problem in ethanol
slowly in humans, leading to blindness and other effects.
toxicoses and supplementary heat may be required. Given
 These effects do not occur in domestic companion or pro-
that animals with ethanol toxicoses have poor therrmo-
duction animals.
regulation, it is also important to avoid iatrogenic
hyperthermia.
MechanismofAction
Yohimbine has been recommended to treat CNS depres-
The mechanisms of action of methanol in the CNS in
sion in dogs with ethanol poisoning. Careful dose selection
nonprimates are presumed to be similar to those ofethanol.
is required to avoid producing overdose effects underthese
However, the methanol is generally a less potent inebriant
circumstances.
than ethanol. Methanol is generally more irritating to the
gastrointestinal tract than ethanol. Acute pancreatitis is
Prognosis
common in acute methanol poisoning. Methanol is a
Most cases in domestic animals are relatively mild and
proven teratogen.
involve consumption of relatively dilute alcoholic materi-
als. In this situation, most uncomplicated cases will recover
Toxicity
The minimum lethal dosage in dogs is between 5.0 and
portive care is available. The prognosis for patients with
11.25 mg/kg. Methanol is far more toxic to primates, where
severe CNS signs, significant hypothermia, significant car-
diovascular respiratory depression, or metabolic acidosis
blindness and neuronal necrmsis can occur after exposure
is rmuch more guarded. The presence of aspiration pneu-
to relatively small amounts.
monia always warrants a guarded prognosis.
Chinical Effects
Methanol
The effects of methanol in nonprimate companion animals
 essentially resermble those of ethanol. Importantly, metha-
Synonyms include alcohol, methyl carbinol, methyl
nol does not produce blindness in nonprimates. Unlike
alcohol, and wood alcohol
ethanol, an increased anion gap is typically present in
Sources/Formulations
methanol toxicoses.
Methanol is typically used in the same range of household
products as ethanol. It is no longer used in cosmetics or
Differential Diagnoses
personal care products in most jurisdictions. Any product
Important differential diagnoses are similar to those of
containing methanol is usually required to have a child-
ethanol, but also include other potential causes of anion
proof cap or closure. However, the lack of a childproof
gap metabolic acidosis. Common causes of anion meta-
bolic acidosis can be memorized using the following mne-
cap or closure on a product is not an absolute guarantee
that methanol is not present in it. An extensive list of US
monic AT MUD PILES: Alcohols, Toluene; Methanol,
household products that contain methanol can be found on
Uremia, Diabetic ketoacidosis (alcoholic ketoacidosis,
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Servicesi
starvation ketoacidosis; Paraldehyde (phenformin), Iron
Household Products Database (Health and Safety Informa-
(isoniazid), Lactic acidosis, Ethylene glycol and Salicy-
tion on Household Products). Most automotive windshield
lates (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
deicers contain from 20-86% methanol; dogs are com-
monly exposed when they chew on the plastic bottles. A
Diagnostics
potential cause of methanol poisoning is home brewing
Ante- and postmortem diagnostic techniques are essen-
and home distillation of alcohol.
tially the same as for ethanol.
258
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Management of Exposures
Diagnostics
In nonprimate companion animals, the management of
Ante- and postmortem diagnostic techniques are essen-
 methanol poisoning resembles that of ethanol poisoning.
tially the same as for ethanol.
Prognosis
Management of Exposures
In nonprimate domestic animals, the prognosis is similar
The management of isopropanol poisoning resembles that
to ethanol toxicoses.
of ethanol poisoning.
Isopropanol
Prognosis
Synonyms include 1-methylethanol; 2-hydroxypropane;
In nonprimate domestic animals, the prognosis is similar
2-propanol; 2-propyl alcohol; dimethylcarbinol; isopropyl
to ethanol toxicoses.
alcohol; isopropyl alcohol, rubbing alcohol.
Benzyl Alcohol (Benzoid Acid, Sodium Benzoate,
Sources/Formulations
Potassium Benzoate)
Isopropanol is typically used in the same range of house-
Synonyms include benzyl alcohol, benzenemethanol,
hold and industrial products as ethanol. Seventy percent
alphahydroxytoluene, phenol carbinol, phenyl carbinol,
aqueous isopropanol is extensively used in medicine as an
phenylmethanol, and phenylmethyl alcohol.
antiseptic and cleansing agent, and isopropanol is used as
Sources/Formulations
the base in alcohol-based flea and tick sprays.
Benzyl alcohol is most commonly encountered in veteri-
Kinetics
nary medicine as an excipient and antibacterial preserva-
Isopropanol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tive in pharmaceutical preparations, particularly those
tract:approximately 80% of an oral dose is absorbed
designed for intravenous delivery. Significant exposures
within 30 minutes. Except in the case of massive overdose,
may occur during repeated drug infusions or when bacte-
absorption is usually complete within 2 hours. Isopropanol
riostatic water or sodium chloride solutions are used to
is rapidly metabolized to acetone via alcohol dehydroge-
fush IV lines.
nase. Acetone is metabolized relatively slowly compared
Benzoic acid and its benzoate salts are common food
with the metabolites of ethanol and methanol.
additives/preservatives. Benzyl alcohol is a natural con-
stituent of a number of plants. It occurs, for example, in
Mechanism ofAction
some edible fruits (up to 5 mg/kg) and in green and black
Isopropanol is a potent CNS depressant and its metabolite,
tea (1-30 and 1-15 mg/kg, respectively). Benzyl alcohol
acetone,potentiates this effect.Acetone, by itself, is also
is added as a flavoring substance to some foods and bever
a CNS depressant. The mechanisms of action of isopropa-
ages at a level up to about 400mg/kg (chewing gum
nol in the CNS are assumed to be similar to that of ethanol.
1254mg/kg). Benzyl alcohol is extensively uses as a pre-
servative in cosmetics and personal care products.
Toxicity
Among domestic animals, toxicity has most commonly
Isopropanol is apprmoximately two times more toxic than
been reported in cats administered lactated Ringer's solu-
ethanol. This is due to a combination of the innate proper-
tion containing benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
ties of isopropanol, plus the potentiating effect and long
half-life of its main metabolite, acetone.
Kinetics
Benzyl alcohol is rapidly metabolized to benzyl aldehyde
ChinicalEffects
by alcohol dehydrogenase. Alcohol dehydrogenase then
Acute isopropanol toxicosis following voluntary con-
converts benzyl aldehyde to benzoic acid. In all domestic
sumption is relatively uncommon in domestic animals
species except cats, benzoic acid is either glucuronidated
because of its bitter taste. The clinical effects resemble
to form benzyl glucuronide or conjugated to glycine to
those of ethanol. Given an identical dose, CNS signs will
forrm hippuric acid. These metabolites are then largely
generally be more severe in isopropanol poisoning com-
excreted in urine.
pared with ethanol poisoning.
Mechanism ofAction
DifferentialDiagnoses
Domestic cats lack the ability to rapidly glucuronidate
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
benzoic acid and primarily slowly metabolize benzoic
Chapter 28/ Household and Industrial Toxicants
259
acid to hippuric acid. Under these circumstances, benzoic
cement, shellac, raincoats, and photographic films. They
acid accumulates, resulting in anion-gap metabolic acidosis.
are also used as fragrances and solvents in perfumes, cos-
Benzoic acid has been shown to be extremely toxic
metics, and personal care products.
to cats.
Kinetics
Toxicity
Generally speaking, the shorter-chain higher alcohols are
Benzyl alcohol is relatively toxic in cats. Lactated Ringer's
well absorbed through skin, the respiratory tract, and the
solution containing 1.5% benzyl alcohol can cause severe
gastrointestinal tract. Glucuronidation is a common
signs of toxicosis in this species
pathway of metabolism for many of these chemicals.
Excretion in urine is usually the major route of
Clinical Effects
excretion.
Antemortem
Clinical signs in cats include hyperesthesia, followed by
Mechanism ofAction
depression, coma, and finally death. In humans, respira-
The mechanism of action of the higher alcohols in the
tory distress (gasping syndrorme), CNS depression, sei-
CNS is assumed to be similar to that of ethanol and the
zures and hemolysis are regarded as highly suggestive of
hydrocarbon solvents. Given that glucuronidation is
benzyl alcohol poisoning. Surprisingly, hemolysis has not
important in the metabolism and excretion of these alco-
been reported in cats. The clinical chemistry picture is 
hols, it is likely that cats are significantly more sensitive
dorminated by the presence of anion gap metabolic
to toxicity (cats have relatively inefficient glucuronidation
acidosis.
of metabolites).
Butanols and amyl alcohols are irritants. Amyl alcohol
Postmortem
exposure results in hearing impairment in humans. All of
There are no specific findings.
the higher alcohols will produce defatting injuries to the
skin with repeated exposures. Most of these chemicals will
DifferentialDiagnoses
produce dyschromatopsias (alterations in color vision) in
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
humans.
Diagnostics
Toxicity
Apart from a history of exposure, the most effective
As a general rule, as the alcohol's carbon chain lengthens,
method of confirming the diagnosis is detection of ele-
its toxicity decreases. Branched chain alcohols are gener-
vated levels of benzyl alcohol, benzoic acid, and/or hip-
ally more toxic than the straight chained alcohols of
puric acid in blood, serum, urine, or aqueous humor.
similar carbon number. Longer chain alcohols are absorbed
more slowly, are less able to penetrate the skin, and are
ManagementofExposures
less likely to be inhaled.
Treatment resembles that of ethanol poisoning. Hemodi-
Importantly, many of the higher alcohols have kine-
alysis has been used in humans, but its effectiveness
matic viscosities less than 19mm? × s' and are thus sig-
remains unknown.
nificant aspiration hazards
Higher Alcohols
Chinical Effects
These include butanols, pentanols, hexanols, heptanols,
Antemortem
octanols, paraffinic alcohols, aliphatic alcohols, and amyl
Acute exposure to higher alcohols may result in CNS
alcohol (n-pentanyl alcohol), among others.
depression, hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Butanols and amyl alcohols are irritants. Most of these
Sources/Formulations
materials are significant aspiration hazards. If aspirated,
Higher alcohols are largely used in industrial settings as
hermorrhagic pneumonitis is cormmon. Other effects resem-
solvent for paints, lacquers and vamishes, natural and syn-
ble those of ethanol.
thetic resins, gums, vegetable oils, and dyes and alkaloids.
They are used as intermediates in the manufacture of phar-
Postmortem
maceuticals and chemicals and employed in industries
 Postmortem effects resermble those in ethanol poisoning.
producing artificial leather, textiles, safety glass, rubber
Chemical hemorrhagic aspiration pneumonitis is likely
260
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
DifferentialDiagnoses
HOCH,CH2OH
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
Ethylene Glycol
率
Diagnostics
HOCH2CHO
A history of potential exposure is the most important diag-
Glycoaldehyde
nostic tool. Tests for the presence of these materials in
HOCH,COOH
CHO-CHO
biological samples are not routinely available. The pres-
Glycolic Acid
Glyoxal
ence of chemical pneumonitis is strongly suggestive of
(urine)
postingestion aspiration.
CHO-COOH
ManagementofExposures
Glyoxylic Acid
General symptomatic managerment as per ethanol poison-
ing is recommended.
COOH-COOH
HCOOH
NH2 CH2COOH
 Oxalic Acid
Formic Acid
Glycine
(ouun)
Prognosis
Given their generally lower toxicity, for a given identical
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
dose, the prognosis can usually be expected to be better
(exhaledain)
than ethanol toxicity.
Figure 28.1. Metabolism of ethylene glycol.
GLYCOLS
Ethylene Glycol
Mechanism ofAction
Ethylene glycol poisoning has three basic mechanisms of
1,2-ethane-diol; 2-hydroxyethanol; ethylene alcohol; eth-
action: (1) CNS depression and inebriating effects that
resermble those of the alcohols; (2) the metabolism to gly-
ylene dihydrate; glycol; monoethylene glycol; MEG;
Lutrol-9; Dowtherrm Sr 1; Fridex; Norkool; Ramp; Tescol;
coaldehyde, glycolic acid, glyoxylic acid, oxalic acid,
Ucar 17.
malate, formate, and glycine results in an anion gap meta-
bolic acidosis; and (3) free calcium in the blood and tissues
reacts with oxalic acid to form calcium oxalate, which then
Sources
crystallizes out of solution in the proximal tubules of the
Ethylene glycol is a ubiquitous household chemical found
kidney and in and around srmall blood vessels (particularly
in adhesives, sealers, deicers, radiator coolants, hydraulic
in the brain). This results in kidney failure.
Huids, some brake fuids, cleaners, wood preservatives,
grouting mixtures, inks, caulks, and paints. One of the
Toxicity
most common sources of ethylene glycol poisoning in
The minimum lethal dosage of pure ethylene glycol in
domestic animals is automotive radiator coolant
dogs is around 6.6 ml/kg. Cats are significantly more sensi-
tive, with a rminimum lethal dosage of around 1.5 ml/kg.
Kinetics
 Ethylene glycol is rapidly and nearly completely absorbed
Clinical Effects
from the digestive tract. Peak blood concentrations occur
Signs
within about 1-4 hours following ingestion. Ethylene
The ethylene glycol toxidrome occurs in three sequential
glycol is oxidized by alcohol deydrogenase to glycoalde-
stages. Stage 1 is the CNS depression phase. CNS depres-
hyde and then subsequently converted to glycolic acid,
sion begins soon after exposure, and lasts up to 12 hours
glyoxylic acid, and oxalic acid (Figure 28.1). Glyoxylic
after ingestion. This depression appears similar to ethanol
 acid is metabolized in intermediary metabolism to malate,
intoxication but is typically more severe on a consumed
formate, and glycine. Ethylene glycol, glycolic acid,
volume-to-volurme basis compared with ethanol consump-
calcium oxalate, and glycine (and its conjugate, hippurate)
tion. The effects are due to unmetabolized ethylene glycol.
are excreted in urine.
Frequent urination and excessive thirst are common signs
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
261
in dogs during this early stage. Cats typically do not
LaboratoryFindings
develop this polydipsia.
Ethylene glycol test kits are available that will accurately
Stage 2 is the cardiopulmonary phase. It is characterized
detect blood ethylene glycol down to a level of 50 mg/dl.
by cardiorespiratory signs that typically consist of tachy-
Unfortunately, cats may become significantly poisoned at
cardia, tachypnea, and hypotension or hypertension. After
blood levels below 50mg/dl. Thus the test is not suffi-
the glycoaldehyde metabolite forms at 4-12 hours post-
ciently sensitive enough to conclusively rule out ethylene
consumption, anion gap metabolic acidosis develops and
glycol toxicosis in cats. Furthermore, in patients that
the following effects may occur: seizures, myoclonic jerks,
present in the late stages of the toxicosis, blood ethylene
cerebral edema (in some cases), and corma, gastrointestinal
glycol levels may fall below the limit of detection due to
irritation (vomiting). Cerebral ederma, deposition of
its catabolism. Two newer ethylene glycol test kits have
calcium oxalate crystals in the walls of small blood vessels
been introduced, but both of these kits can give false posi-
in the brain, and exposure of the metabolically active deep
tives in the presence of alcohols, so careful interpretation
grey rmatter nuclei of the brain basal ganglia to ethylene
of the results is needed.
glycol metabolites contribute to the CNS toxicity.
An osmolal gap, without metabolic acidosis, oran anion
Significant cardiac arrhythmias may occur during this
gap can be detected before significant metabolism of eth-
phase.
ylene glycol occurs. As ethylene glycol is metabolized, the
Significant pulmonary edema, pneumonitis, congestive
osmolal gap, if present, will decrease and an anion gap
heart failure, and circulatory shock may develop during
metabolic acidosis evolves. Patients who present late may
this phase.
have renal failure with normal osrmolal and anion gaps and
 Metabolisrm of the glycoaldehyde to oxalic acid often
no acidosis or measurable ethylene glycol levels.
results in the appearance of calcium oxalate crystal pre-
Isosthenuria, due to an osmotic diuresis produced by
cipitates in the meninges, blood vessel walls, lung, myo-
urinary excretion of unmetabolized ethylene glycol is
cardium, and associated tissue injury. The formation of
cormmon in the early stage of the toxicosis in dogs.
calcium oxalate crystal precipitates in tissues may be asso-
Decrease in urine specific gravity may also occur in cats
ciated with hypocalcemia. Death may occur during this
during this stage, but isosthenuria rarely develops. Calcium
stage in some cases.
oxalate monohydrate crystals (clear, six-sided, prismlike
Stage 3 is the renal failure phase. Kidney damage due
crystals) can be detected within 3-6 hours postingestion
to formation of calcium oxalate crystals in the renal tubules
in dogs. Urinary crystals can take many forms such as
usually develops 24-72 hours after exposure. The subse-
dumbbells, envelopes, and needles (most commonly).
quent decline in kidney function and oliguria exacerbate
Importantly, the absence of urinary crystals, however, does
the anion gap metabolic acidosis and other serum chermis-
 not rule out poisoning. Urinary pH is usually decreased in
try disturbances.
ethylene glycol poisoning.
Classically, the formation of calcium oxalate crystals in
Many radiator fuid formulations that contain ethylene
the kidneys has been claimed associated with the develop-
glycol also contain fuorescine (a fuorescent green or
red dye, depending on pH). In occasional cases, the dye
renal medullary rim sign is detected by ultrasound and is a
(which fuoresces with UV light exposure) may be detect-
distinct hyperechoic line in the renal medulla parallel to the
able in the urine. It may also be useful to examine any
corticomedullary junction. However, more recent studies
vomitus, the mouth, the face, and the animal's paws
have demonstrated that the renal medullary rim sign is a
with a Wood's lamp to determine whether they appear
nonspecific ultrasonographic sign that is present in a high
fluorescent.
Once oliguric or anuric renal failure has developed
The following conditions characterize the third phase:
(typically 24-48 hours following ingestion), large increases 
fank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, and oliguric
in serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine will
renal failure. Prolonged, rarely permanent, kidney failure
occur. Elevated serum potassium usually develops during
is distinguished by proteinuria, hematuria, crystalluria,
this phase. About 5o% of patients will also have decreased
and increased serum BUN and creatinine. Calcium oxalate
serum calcium due to the formation of calcium oxalate.
crystals may appear in the urine as early as stage 1, but
Likewise, about 50% of patients will have elevated blood
absence of these crystals does not rule out the diagnosis
glucose.
of ethylene glycol poisoning. Myopathy and bone marrow
During the period of recovery from renal failure, patients
suppression may occur in some individuals
will typically be isosthenuric. Urinalysis during this phase
262
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
will typically reveal calcium oxalate monohydrate crys-
Histologically, calcium oxalate crystals are found in and
tals, hematuria, proteinuria, and glucosuria.
around the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidneys. In
animals that survive, regenerating renal tubules may be
Differential Diagnoses
seen. Similar crystals may be seen in the adventitia and
The most critical differential diagnosis in the early stages
perivascular spaces of the brain blood vessels.
of the toxidrome is poisoning by the various alcohols.
Hydrocarbon solvents, chemsols, marijuana, macrolide
ManagementofExposures
antiparasitics, and amitraz produce similar effects to the
Decontamination of the upper digestive tract either by
alcohols, as do most benzodiazepine, barbiturate, antipsy-
inducing vomiting or dosing with activated charcoal has
chotic, antiseizure, and antidepressant human prescription
been prmoven to be ineffective. Aspiration of stomach con-
drugs. During the later stages of the toxidrome, other causes
tents with a small-bore nasogastric tube may be of some
of renal failure are the major differential diagnoses.
benefit and may yield valuable diagnostic samples if per-
formed within about 30-60 minutes postingestion.
Diagnostics
There are three critical objectives in the treatment of
Antemortem
ethylene glycol poisoning: (1) prevention of conversion of
 The patient's history plus the presence of the typical clini-
ethylene glycol to its toxic metabolites, (2) correction
cal signs/laboratory findings of the ethylene glycol toxi-
of the anion-gap metabolic acidosis and maintenance of
drome plus detection of ethylene glycol in vomitus, urine,
renal glomerular filtration rate, (3) adjunctive and sup-
or blood are usually the best diagnostic clues. The level of
portive care. Except for hemodialysis, which is rarely
ethylene glycol or its metabolites can be measured in most
available in veterinary practice, the older practices of
body fuids and in the gastric contents. Definitive diagno-
increasing the excretion of ethylene glycol and its toxic
sis typically requires the determination of blood ethylene
glycol. Aspirating stomach contents using a small-bore
tion have been proved to be ineffective. Furthermore, these
nasogastric tube can often yield useful samples if per-
techiniques have been demonstrated to increase the serious
formed within about 30 to 60 minutes following ingestion.
complication rate and the death rate.
Samples of the material suspected of being ingested, pref-
The single most important factor associated with sur-
erably in the original container, are always particularly
vival and reduction of morbidity in ethylene glycol poison-
valuable. It is important to communicate other possible
ing is preventing conversion of ethylene glycol to its toxic
exposures to the testing lab since 2,3-butanediol, often
metabolites by the prompt administration of the specific
found in the plasma of following ethanol ingestion, can be
antidote fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole).  Fomepizole
mistakenly identified as ethylene glycol when the analysis
(loading dose of 15mg/kg IV followed in 12 hours by
10mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses) is the first choice
also interfere with some ethylene glycol assays.
antidote and is highly effective even in cases of massive
Recent studies have demonstrated usefulness of glycolic
poisonings and substantially reduces the risk of significant
acid analysis in ethylene glycol poisoning cases. Measur-
CNS and renal complications. Fomepizole is also highly
ing glycolic acid in ethylene glycol poisonings has certain
effective following oral dosing. Fomepizole acts as a com-
advantages: findings correlate better with ethylene glycol
 petitive inhibitor of the metabolism of ethylene glycol to
toxicity than ethylene glycol levels, findings determine
glycolaldehyde metabolite and thus limits the formation of
how much ethylene glycol has metabolized to glycolic
oxalate and associated tissue crystallization of calcium
acid, the presence of glycolic acid objectively indicates
oxalate. Fomepizole greatly reduces the severity of the
toxicity, and the test confirms that the metabolic acidosis
cardiopulmonary and renal failure stages of the poisoning.
was due to ethylene glycol poisoning rather than another
Fomepizole has a high therapeutic index and a very low
cause.
risk of serious side effects. Fomepizole will not prevent
the inebriation and CNS effects induced by unmetabolized
Postmortem
ethylene glycol (and any other alcohols present) and may
Signs of gastritis or enteritis (gastric and intestinal mucosa
 prolong this state in poisoned individuals.
is hemorrhagic and hyperemic) are typically present, as are
The second choice antidote is ethanol. Ethanol can
pulmonary edema and hyperemia. The kidneys are usually
be administered as a 5% aqueous solution intravenously.
swollen, tan-colored and have interrmittent gray or yellow
The intravenous solution is hyperosrmotic and can cause
streaks at the corticomedullary junction.
osmotic dehydration, hyponatremia, and venous irrita-
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
263
Table 28.1. Distilled alcoholic beverages and doses that can be administered by small-bore
nasogastric tube to treat ethylene glycol exposure
Name of 
Typical Grams of
Typical ml/kg of
Typical ml/kg of
Alcoholic
Typical
Typical Percent
Ethanol per 100ml
Beverage Required
Beverage Required
Beverage
Proof
Ethanol by Volume
of Beverage
for Loading Dose
for Maintenance Dose
Brandy
40-60
20-30%
15.8-23.7
3.2-4.7ml/kg
0.64-0.94 ml/kg
Cognac
80
40%
31.6
2.4
0.5 ml/kg
Gin
90-110
45-55%
35.6-43.5
1.7-2.1 ml/kg
0.3-0.4ml/kg
Grain alcohol
190
95%
75.0
1 ml/kg
0.2ml/kg
Rum
151
75.5%
59.6
1.3 ml/kg
0.25 ml/kg
Schnapps
30-100
15-50%
11.8-39.5
1.9-6.4 ml/kg
0.4-1.3ml/kg
Tequila
80-100
40-50%
31.6-39.5
1.9-2.4 ml/kg
0.4-0.5ml/kg
Vodka
80-100
40-50%
31.6-39.5
1.9-2.4 ml/kg
0.4-0.5ml/kg
Whisky
80-100
40-50%
31.6-39.5
1.9-2.4 ml/kg
0.4-0.5ml/kg
tion. Regardless of route of administration the objective
there is a high risk of vomiting, secure the airway using a
is to rapidly achieve and maintain a blood ethanol
cuffed endotracheal tube.
concentration of at least 100mg/dl in order to provide
If pharmaceutical-grade ethanol is not available, dis-
adequate competitive inhibition of ethylene
glycol
tilled alcoholic beverages can be administered by srmall
metabolism. To attain this goal, it is usual to administer
bore nasogastric tube as summarized in Table 28.1.
a loading dose of 0.6g/kg. A maintenance dose is chosen
Administration of thiamine hydrochloride (promotes
based upon the ethanol elimination rate (66-130mg/
the metabolism of ethylene glycol to ketoadipate), and the
kg/hour). Frequent blood ethanol determinations should
administration of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine; promotes the
be made. Any increase in the anion gap or decrease
metabolism of ethylene glycol to glycine and ultimately to
in blood bicarbonate concentration implies that the
hippuric acid) may be beneficial.
ethanol dose is insufficient to achieve competitive inhi-
Detailed discussion of the treatment of acute oliguric
bition of ethylene glycol metabolism. The disadvantages
renal failure and anion-gap metabolic acidosis is beyond
of ethanol include further disturbance of blood elec-
the scope of this chapter. However, reestablishment of
trolyte and glucose levels, increased CNS depression,
a near-normal renal glomerular filtration rate by the use
ethanol-related toxicity such as hepatitis, pancreatitis,
of intravenous crystalloids and/or diuretics, such as
hypoglycemia and disulfiam-like reactions,
increased
manitol, and/or vasopressors, such as dopamine, is often
cardiovascular/respiratory depression, and hypothermia.
the most effective method of correcting the anion-gap
Overly aggressive treatment with ethanol should be
metabolic acidosis and other electrolyte disturbances
avoided. Never administer ethanol to a hypothermic
associated with ethylene glycol poisoning. Care must be
patient. Never administer ethanol to a S
significantly
taken to avoid exacerbating electrolyte disturbances such
dehydrated patient or an animal in oliguric/anuric renal
 as hyperkalemia and/or hypernatremia. The administration
failure. Patients undergoing ethanol treatment require
of bicarbonate may be useful in the initial control of
intensive
monitoring,
particularly
for
exacerbated
metabolic acidosis.
cardiovascular/respiratory depression, hypotherrmia, dehy-
 Regular monitoring of the patient's electrocardiogram
dration and electrolyte disturbances.
and early correction of any arrhythmias that develop is
In extreme circumstances where ethanol infusion is not
recommended.
possible, pharmaceutical-grade material can be adrminis-
tered orally or by small-bore nasogastric tube. The oral
Prognosis
loading dose is 750mg/kg body weight administered
 The prognosis for ethylene glycol poisoning in domestic
slowly over the first hour, with a maintenance dose of
animals is always guarded. Early aggressive treatment,
150 mg/kg body weight per hour thereafter. Always admin-
particularly with fomepizole, is associated with an
ister the ethanol slowly to reduce the risk of vormiting. If
improved prognosis.
264
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Propylene Glycol
Prmopylene glycol is a common diluent for injectable
Synonyms include 1,2-dihydroxypropane; 1,2-propylene
medications, most notably phenytoin. Toxicity following
  
intravenous injection of pharmaceuticals containing high
propanediol; and trimethyl glycol.
levels of propylene glycol may cause hypotension and
cardiac arrhythmias.
Sources/Formulations
Propylene glycol is a ubiquitous ingredient in cosmetic
DifferentialDiagnoses
 and personal care products. It is also a “Generally Recog-
Important differential diagnoses are similar to those of
nized as Safe" food additive, except in cat foods. In food,
ethanol and ethylene glycol but also include other potential
it is primarily used as a humectant. It can also be found in
causes of anion gap metabolic acidosis.
paints, cleaning agents, sealants, inks, and caulking agents.
Propylene glycol is progressively replacing the use of
Diagnostics
ethylene glycol in radiator coolants, deicing solutions,
 A history of consumption and the presence of anion gap
and hydraulic fuids. It is also a ubiquitous excipient and
metabolic acidosis are key diagnostic pointers. Detection
solvent in pharmaceutical preparations.
of propylene glycol in vomitus or sarmples obtained by
small-bore nasogastric aspiration, and/or in blood or other
Kinetics
body fuids is usually conclusive. As always, samples of
the ingested material are always particularly useful.
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Propylene glycol
undergoes metabolic oxidation to pyruvic acid, acetic acid,
ManagementofExposures
lactic acid, and propionaldehyde. These metabolites are
Antidotal therapy with fomepizole or ethanol is not
then consumed, primarily by the citric acid cycle. Propyl-
required. Care is largely supportive. Intravenous bicarbon-
ene glycol is rapidly converted to proprionic acid, a vola-
ate and fuid therapy may be necessary to correct the aci-
tile fatty acid, in the rumen. The volatile fatty acid is then
dosis and prevent dehydration.
rapidly absorbed and converted to glucose via gluconeo-
genesis. For this reason, administration of propylene
Prognosis
glycol via an ororumen tube has been used as an emer-
Propylene glycol is normally unpalatable to domestic
 gency energy supplement in debilitated sheep and cattle.
animals. Thus voluntary ingestions usually result in mild
Mechanism ofAction
intoxication. Sere anion gap metabolic acidosis is indica-
The CNS is the main target organ in acute propylene
tive of a more guarded prognosis.
glycol toxicoses. The effects are similar to ethanol and the
Butylene Glycol
other alcohols. The rapid metabolism of propylene glycol
to lactic acid may also result in metabolic acidosis.
Synonyms include 1,3-butanediol and 1,3-butylene glycol.
 A high level of dietary propylene glycol produces oxida-
Sources/Formulations
tive damage to erythrocytes and decreased red cell lifespan
 in cats. For this reason, propylene glycol is no longer used
Butylene glycol is commonly used in cosmetics and per-
in cat feeds.
sonal care products. Butylene glycol is a relatively common
drug of abuse and has been sold in health food stores as a
Toxicity
"supplement."
The median lethal dosage in dogs is about 9ml/kg. Horses
appear to be more sensitive to the toxicoses than dogs with
Kinetics
poisoning being reported at dosages around 6ml/kg.
Butylene glycol is rapidly and nearly completely absorbed
from the gastrointestinal tract. It is rapidly metabolized to
Clinical Effects
acetoacetate and gamma-hydmxybutyrate.
CNS depression is the primary manifestation of acute
propylene glycol poisoning. Other effects include anion
Mechanism of Action
gap metabolic acidosis and blood hyperosmolality and
Gamma hydroxybutyrate is a CNS GABA agonist and this
frequent urination due to osmotic dieresis. Propylene
produces pronounced CNS depression and anesthetic/
glycol does not cause direct damage to the kidneys.
narcoticlike effects.
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
265
Clinical Effects
Accidental skin contact is unlikely to cause significant
The primary effects resemble those of alcohol intoxication.
irritation, although prolonged or repeated contact may
cause dermatitis.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses are similar to ethanol.
unlikely because of the low vapor pressure of these prod-
ucts, but heating of the products may result in vapors
Diagnostics
capable of causing irritation of the respiratory tract.
Detection of the material in the ingested substance,
Ingestion of small amounts is unlikely to cause systemic
stomach contents or body fuids, plus a history of exposure
toxicity; transient gastrointestinal effects may, however, be
are the key diagnostic steps.
experienced. Swallowing of larger amounts may result in
nausea, vomiting and possibly signs of central nervous
Management of Exposures
system depression. Kidney damage may also occur with
Management is largely supportive and is similar to ethanol
some products, due to the presence of diethylene glycol.
poisoning
The viscosity of the products is such that aspiration of
product into the lung is unlikely.
Prognosis
Brake fuids contain small amounts of additives.
The prognosis is dependent on the severity of the CNS
Although some of these may be hazardous in their own
depression. The presence of unconsciousness or significant
right, the amount of each present, typically less than 1%,
is unlikely to contribute significantly to the acute toxicity
with a more guarded prognosis.
of the product.
BRAKE FLUID AND CLUTCH FLUIDS
Clinical Effects
Signs
Sources
Following ingestion, the main clinical signs will most
Brake fuid is a common household item. The main chemi-
commonly relate to gastrointestinal upset, ie., salivation,
cal constituents are high boiling point and high molecular
vomiting, and diarrhea. If ingestion of large amounts has
weight polyalkylene glycol ethers. Some brands may also
occurred, there is a possibility of central nervous system
contain small amounts of ethylene and/or diethylene
depression and/or kidney damage. In rare cases, kidney
glycol. These products also contain small amounts of addi-
failure and death rmay result.
tives (e.g., corrosion inhibitors, antioxidants). These mate-
rials are usually mobile, water miscible liquids. Color
Laboratory Findings
ranges from colorless to amber; in some cases it may also
contain dyes.
Laboratory findings (if any) will most commonly reflect
hermoconcentration. In very rare cases, evidence of kidney
Kinetics
failure may be present (ie., elevated blood urea nitrogen
 and creatinine, oliguria). Occasionally, the brake fuid may
The main routes of exposure are ingestion and skin contact.
In general, these materials are relatively poorly absorbed
be visually detectable in the feces.
from the intestinal tract. Ingestion of large amounts can
Differential Diagnoses
result in systemic effects.
The most common differential diagnoses will be virtually
Mechanism of Action
any cause of acute diarrhea. If CNS depression is present,
In general, brake fuids are considered to be of low toxic-
differential diagnoses are similar to those listed in the
ity, following oral and dermal exposure. Since these prod-
section on ethanol.
ucts are based on synthetic, polyalkylene glycol ethers,
their acute toxicological properties are usually similar to
Diagnostics
those of the polyglycol ethers except that they do not
A history of exposure and consumption is the most
produce damage to erythrocytes.
cormrmon method of diagnosis. Aspiration of stomach con-
Brake fuids may cause eye irritation on accidental
tents via small-bore nasogastric tube may yield valuable
contact. The effects are likely to be only transient, however,
 diagnostic samples if performed within about an hour fol-
and serious/permanent damage is considered unlikely.
lowing ingestion.
266
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Management of Exposures
polyether suphates, alcohols or sulfonates, polyglycol
Managerment of ingestions is rmost cormrmonly symptorm-
ethers, polyethylene glycol, and sorbitan monostearate.
 atic and supportive. If the diarrhea is severe, fuid therapy
Common household sources of these materials include
may be required.
soaps, laundry detergents, and dishwashing detergents.
Contamination of the skin and coat is best managed by
Cationic Detergents
gentle washing in a body-temperature solution of dilute,
The detergency of these materials is dependent on its
mild, neutral hand-dishwashing detergent followed by
rinsing with clean water. Several rinse/wash cycles over a
cationic properties. However, these have poor detergency
 5-10 minute period may be required. Altematives to dish-
and are more commonly used as gerrmicides, fabric soft-
eners, and specialist emulsifiers; liquid potpourri products
washing detergents include pharmaceutical-grade PEG
are also sources of cationic detergents. Typically, these
400, PEG 300, and polyvinyl pyrrolidone solutions.
Due to their skin barrier disruptive effect, the use of
materials are large halogenated (i.e., contain bromine,
iodide, or chlorine) molecules. Common examples include
solvents, petroleum distillates (such as baby oil, Stoddard
benzethonium chloride, benzalkonium chloride, methyl
solvent, engine degreasers, naphthas, kerosene, petrol,
diesel etc), mechanic's hand degreasers, strong cationic
benzethonium, cetylpyridinium chloride, and holgenated
detergents, strong anionic detergents and abrasive materi-
quarternary ammonium compounds.
als is contraindicated in dermal decontamination. These
Amphoteric Detergents
materials are known to be ineffective and to increase sys-
 These contain both acidic and basic groups in their mol-
temic absorption.
ecule and can act as cationic or anionic detergents, depend-
ing on the pH of the solution. These materials are
Prognosis
commonly found in shampoos, skin cleaners, and carpet
Prognosis is usually good.
shampoo. They are very stable in strong acidic conditions
and often used in conjunction with hydrofuoric acid in
DETERGENTS
industrial settings.
Kinetics and Mechanism of Action
Sources
The main site of action of most of these materials is local
Detergents are ubiquitous materials in most households.
i.e., at the site of contact. In most cases, this means the
There are four basic types.
skin, the oral mucous mermbranes or the gastrointestinal
tract. The systemic toxicity of most domestic detergents is
Anionic Detergents
usually relatively low. The notable exceptions to this gen-
The detergent property of these materials is due to its
eralization are the cationic detergents and those detergents
anionic properties. The anion is neutralized with an alka-
that contain citronella extract (fragrance), pine oil extracts
line or basic material to produce full detergency. There are
(fragrance), or phenol-based disinfectants (see relevant
three main groups: the alkyl aryl sulphonates, the long-
sections of this text).
chain (fatty) alcohol sulphates, and other sulphonates
(olefine sulphates and sulphonates, alpha olefine sulphates
Toxicity
and sulphonates, sulphated monoglycerides, sulphated
In most circumstances, detergents forrmulated for general
ethers, sulphosuccinates, alkane sulphonates, phosphate
household use are specifically designed to have a low toxic
esters, alkyl isethionates, sucrose esters).
potential. The exception to this is often machine dishwash-
These materials commonly contain water-softening
ing detergents, which are notoriously alkaline and capable
agents such as sodium phosphate, sodiurm carbonate, and
of producing serious caustic burns to mucous membranes
sodium silicate. Laundry detergents (liquid and powdered)
and the gastrmointestinal tract.
and shampoos are the most common sources of these
As a general rule, ionic detergents are more irritating than
materials in the home.
nonionic detergents and anionic detergents are less irritat-
ing than cationic detergents. Household anionic detergents
Nonionic Detergents
are rarely irritant or toxic, even following ingestion. Cat-
The materials are ionically inert and are the largest and
ionic detergents (particularly quarternary ammonium com-
most chemically diverse member of the detergent chemical
pounds) are irritating to the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and
family. Typical nonionic detergents include alkyl and aryl
mucous membranes and may be potent systemic toxicants.
Chapter 28 / Household and Industrial Toxicants
267
Clinical Effects
Management of Exposures
Signs
Splash injuries to the eyes should be initially treated by
Repeated exposure of the skin to detergents results in a
copious fushing of the affected eye(s) with water or a
cumulative irritant dermatitis, typically due to defatting
specialist eye fush solution for 10 to 15 minutes. Special-
injury to the skin. Relevant clinical signs include thicken-
ist treatment may be required, particularly for eye injuries
ing of the skin with weeping, cracking, scaling, and pos-
due to cationic detergents or machine dishwashing
sibly blistering.
detergents.
Splash injuries to the eyes with nonionic or anionic
Washing with hand soaps (technically a mild anionic
detergents usually produce transient signs of irritation.
detergent) are generally effective at neutralizing and
Splash injuries of the eyes by cationic detergents are
removing cationic detergents on the skin.
 potentially serious and may result in significant damage to
Administration of milk, egg whites, or water as dilu-
the comea and surrounding eye structures.
ents has been recormmended for treatment of ingestion
Ingestion of many ionic detergents often results in signs
of anionic and cationic detergents provided there is no
of gastrointestinal disturbance i.e., salivation, vomiting,
corrosive injury to the gastrointestinal tract. Induction
nausea, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal distension.
of emesis is generally contraindicated because of the
Quarternary ammonium compounds are frequently cor-
potential corrosive action of these materials. Activated
rosive to the mouth, and gastrointestinal tract and inges-
charcoal use is also commonly recommended, although
tion may result in serious vomiting (including vomiting of
its efficacy is unknown. Simple aspiration of stomach
blood (appears like “coffee grounds" due to partial diges-
contents using a fine-bore nasogastric tube may also be
tion in the stomach), diarrhea, vascular shock, collapse,
beneficial if performed within about 60 minutes
and possibly death.
postingestion.
Ingestion of cationic detergents, particularly those
Management of ingestions is most cormrmonly symptom-
containing quarternary ammonium compounds, is associ-
atic and supportive. If the diarrhea is severe or if vascular
ated with a systemic toxidrome consisting of CNS
shock is present/likely, intravenous fuid therapy may be
and respiratory depression, fever, seizures, collapse,
required. If significant damage to the mouth and/or esoph-
and coma.
agus has occurred, placement of a percutaneous esopha-
 Ingestion of anionic detergents may result in intravas-
geal gastric tube may be required for adequate nutritional
cular red cell hemolysis in patients with impaired liver
support.
function.This is thought to be due to the reduced metabo-
lisrm and excretion of the detergent.
Prognosis
With ingestion of nonionic and anionic detergents, prog-
Laboratory Findings
nosis is usually good. With ingestion of cationic deter-
Since most of the effects of detergent are local, few labora
gents, prognosis is often guarded.
tory signs can be expected in most cases. Clinical pathol-
ogy signs that reflect dehydration may occur in cases
ESSENTIAL OILS
where significant diarrhea is present. Alkaline dishwash-
Essential oils (see also herbal toxicities in Chapters 21)
ing detergents will cause coagulative to liquefactive necro-
 are fragrant hydrophobic plant extracts produced by distil.
sis at the sites of contact.
lation or solvent extraction of plant material. Common
alternative names include "volatile oils," "votive oils,"
Differential Diagnoses
"ethereal oils," or simply as the "oil of" the plant material
The most common differential diagnoses will be virtually
from which they were extracted, such as oil of clove.
any cause of acute diarrhea or cumulative skin irritation.
These oily plant extracts are considered “essential" if they
carry a distinctive scent or essence, of plant source. These
ternary ammonium cormpounds) may resermble several
materials do not have any specific chemical properties
types of pesticide poisoning.
other than their characteristic fragrances.
Diagnostics
Sources and Toxicity
A history of exposure and consumption is the most
Common essential oils found in many household products
common method of diagnosis.
and herbal medicine products are listed in Table 28.2.
Table 28.2. Common essential oils found in many household and herbal medicine products
Name of Essential Oil
Plant of Origin
 Chemical Properties
Key Toxic Effects
 Camphor oil
Cinnamomumcamphora
Camphor, a terpinoid
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Local irritant to skin, eye, and gastrointestinal
tract; CNS manifestations may range from
an altered mental status to seizures to coma.
Cardamom oil
Elelttariacardamomum
1,8-Cineole (eucalyptol) and alpha-
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
terpinyl acetate
Low potential for toxicity.
 Camation oil
Dianthus caryophyllus
Eugenol, phenethyl alcohol, linalool,
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
benzyl benzoate, (Z)-3-hexenyl
Low potential for toxicity.
benzoate and benzyl salicylate
Carrot seed oil
Daucus carota (carrot)
50% carotol, a sesquiterpene alcohol
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Like most sequiterpene-containing materials it
 is an irritant to the gastrointestinal tract,
respiratory tract, skin. and eyes. Possibly
CNS effects may occur at high doses.
268
Cedar oil
Cedar wood oils: Juniperus spp,
30 % (+)-cedrol, alpha-cedrene, and other Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Cupressus spp.
sesquiterpenes
Skin, eye, and gastrointestinal irritant.
Cedar leaf oil: Thuja occidentalis
Long-term high exposure to vapor may result in
lung and liver damage.
Cedrol is a sedative.
Citral (syn = lemonal) Present in the oils of several plants,
Bi-terpenoid
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
including lemon myrtle (90-98%),
Low toxicity in lab animal studies.
Listsea citrata (90%),Litsea
 May produce contact hypersensitivity in some
cubeba (70-85%), lemongrass
individuals.
(65-85%), lemon tea-tree (70-
80%), Ocimum gratissimum
(66.5%), Lindera citriodora
(approx. 65%), Catypranthes
parricutata (approx. 62%),
petitgrain (36%), lemon verbena
(30-35%), lemon ironbark (26%),
lemon balm (11%), lime (6-9%),
lemon (2-5%), and oranges
DL-Limonene
Purified chemical substance from
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
orange or lemon oils
Can have a phototoxic effect on bare skin.
Citrus oil fea dips have been associated with
poisoning in cats—clinical signs include
hypersalivation, muscle tremors, ataxia,
coma,and death.
Eucalyptus oil
Eucatyptus globutus
1,8-cineole and alpha-pinene (bicyclic
Poisoning affects the nervous system (loss of
terpene)
consciousness, hypoventilation, depression 
 of refexes, and convulsions), the
 gastrointestinal system (abdominal pain,
vomiting, and diarrhea) and the respiratory
system (respiratory depression, dyspnea,
pneumonitis, and bronchospasm).
Gastrointestinal effects are frequently the
initial effects, although drowsiness may
occur in a few minutes and coma within 10
minutes. The patient may vomit while
drowsy or unconscious and aspiration is a
269
major risk. Tachycardia and weak irregular
pulse has been noted. Muscle weakness and
ataxia may occur. Nephritis is rare but has
been recorded. Both miosis and mydriasis
can occur (miosis being more common).
Central nervous system (CNS) depression or
vomiting have been delayed up to 4 hours.
Recovery or death is often within 24 hours.
It is a mild skin irritant.
Lemon oil
Citrus limon (Lemon tree)
>90% d-limonene (a cyclic terpene).
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Can have a phototoxic effect on bare skin.
Citrus oil fea dips have been associated with
 poisoning in cats—clinical signs include
hypersalivation, muscle tremors, ataxia,
coma, and death.
Menthol
Purified chemical substance from
Aromatic alcohol
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
pepperrmint or spearmint
Has low toxicity.
Pure material is a moderate skin, eye, and
 gastrointestinal irritant.
Continued
Table 28.2. Continued
Name of Essential Oil
Plant of Origin
 Chemical Properties
Key Toxic Effects
Oil of citronella
Cymbopogon sp. (Citronella grasses)
Ceylon type: (obtained from
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Cymbopogon nardus Rendle) consists Skin irritant in some individuals.
of geraniol (18-20%), limonene
(%11-/) [oun0s! [e (%116)
citronellol (6-8%), and citronellal
(5-15%)
Java type: (obtained from Cymbopogon
winterianus Jowitt) consists of
citronellal (32-45%), geraniol
(11-13%), geranyl acetate (38%),
limonene (1-4%)
Oil of cloves
Syzygium aromaticum
60-90% eugenol, eugenyl acetate,
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
caryophyllene
Large oral doses may produce vomiting, sore
throat, seizure, sedation, pulmonary edema,
vomiting of blood, decreased blood clotting,
270
kidney failure, and liver damage or failure.
May produce hypoglycemia.
 Undiluted clove oil has a high risk of causing
contact dermatitis, skin irritation, and burns.
Allergic reactions to clove, its component
eugenol, have been reported, including
possible severe reactions (anaphylaxis).
 Oil of spearmint
Mentha spicata
R-Carvone, a terpinoid
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Considered nontoxic.
May be a gastrointestinal irritant.
Oil of wintergreen
Gaultheria procumbens
Menthyl salicylate and gaultherilene
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
See salicylate poisoning in the relevant section
of this book.
Orange oil
Citrus sinensis (sweet orange tree)
>90% d-limonene (a cyclic terpene)
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
(syn = sweet orange)
Can have a phototoxic effect on bare skin.
Citrus oil fea dips have been associated with
poisoning in cats—clinical signs include
hypersalivation, muscle tremors, ataxia,
coma, and death.
 Pennyroyal oil
Mentha putegium
 Pulegone, menthone, iso-menthone, and
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
neomenthone
Causes abortion in humans.
Produces acute liver damage.
 Peppermint oil
Mentha X piperita, a cross between
Menthol, an aromatic alcohol
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
the watermint (Mentha aquatica)
Carvone, a terpinoid
Peppermint oil is nontoxic and nonirritant in
and spearmint (Mentha spicata)
low concentrations.
Pure material is irritant to the skin, mucous
membranes, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract.
Pine oil
Pinus sytvestris
 Mainly bicyclic terpene alcohols, but
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
may also contain terpene
Skin irritant at high concentration.
hydrocarbons, ethers, and esters
Potential for contact hypersensitivity.
Sandalwood oil
Santalum sp.
Alpha and beta santalol, aromatic
 Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
271
alcohols
Considered nontoxic and not irritating.
Sassafras oil
Brazilian sassafras oil, obtained from
>80% safrole, 5-menthoxy-eugenol,
Pure material is an aspiration hazard..
the trunkwood of Ocotea pretiosa,
asarone, coniferaldehyde, camphone,
Safrole is carcinogenic and hepatotoxic.
and Chinese sassafras oil from
and traces of thujone, anethole, apiol,
 Irritant to skin, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract.
Cinnamomum camphora
and eugenol
CNS effects such as depression, hallucinations,
and coma may occur.
Tea tree oil
Melateuca atternifolia
Mixture of terpenoids and
 Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
sesquiterpenoids, with terpinene-4-ol
Can produce anaphylaxis in some individuals.
(36 %), gamme-terpinene (20 %),
Can be toxic in cats and dogs following topical
alpha-terpinene (8 %), and 1,8-
exposure and ingestion. Toxidrome consists
cineole (4 %) as the major
of ataxia, CNS depression, muscle tremors,
components
coma. Evidence of liver damage has been
reported in cats.
Toxidrome following oral exposure resembles
that of eucalyptus oil.
272
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
DIPHENYLMETHANE DIISOCYANATE
and diarrhea. Sodium chloride can produce serious hyper-
ADHESIVES
natremia (muscle tremors, acidosis, seizures), and osmotic
diuresis. Muscle weakness and cardiac rhythm/electrical
Sources
abnormalities can result from ingestion of potassium chlo-
Gorilla glue is the most common brand name. Similar
ride or magnesium chloride.
products are marketed as polyurethane glues.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
Toxicity and Treatment
REFERENCES
As the glue dries, it will expand to 34 times its original
Dart, R.C., Editor. 2003. Medical Toxicofogy, 3rd ed. Phila-
volume. Thus, when the glue is swallowed, it will poten-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
tially cause an acute gastric obstruction. Surgical removal
Gfeller, R.W. and Messonnier, S.P. 2003. Handbook of Small
Animal Toxicology and Poisonings. St Louis: Mosby.
of the gastric foreign body is usually required.
Gupta, R.C., Editor. 2007. Veterinary Toxicofogy. Basic and
DEICING SALTS
Clinical Principles. Amsterdam: Elseviet.
Osweiler, G.D. 1996. Toxicology. The National Veterinary
Medicat Series. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Sources
Wilkins.
Common deicing salts may contain one or other of the
Peterson, M.E. and Talcott, PA. 2006. Small Animal Toxicof-
following: calcium carbonate, calcium magnesium acetate,
ogy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
urea, potassium chloride, magnesium chloride, and sodium
Rossoff, 1.S. 2001. Encyclopedia of Clinical Toxicology. The
chiloride.
Parthenon Publishing Group. Boca Raton,Florida: Boca
Raton Group.
Toxicity and Treatment
Calcium carbonate, calcium magnesium acetate, and urea
are primarily gastric irritants and will produce vomiting
Metals and Minerals
29
Robert H. Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
mercury such as methyl mercury are highly bioavailable.
Metals are intrinsic to nature and are ubiquitous in the
The interaction of metals also plays an important role in
 environment of animals. While the form or valence of any
the deterrmination of toxicity. For example, high dietary
given metal can be changed, metals themselves cannot be
calcium can decrease absorption of lead because lead uses
 destroyed. The activities of man have resulted in the large-
 calcium transport mechanisms for its uptake into the body.
scale redistribution of metals in the environment. Perhaps
Other factors that can infuence toxicity include animal
the best example of this relates to lead, which originates
-sunq oy niu e jo Aode a pue apu sg
as lead ore that is processed for numerous uses. The prior
formation of a metal.
use of lead as an antiknock compound in gasoline and
The distribution and accumulation of metals in certain
pigment in paints contributed to widespread environmen-
tissues in the body can mitigate damage. Lead can
tal contamination before such uses were banned. Despite
accumulate in bone where it is not available to affect
curtailment of lead use, it still poses significant risks for
target tissues such as the CNS. Also, metals can be
intoxication. Lead in old paints continues to cause adverse
sequestered in the body by cystine-rich proteins called
health effects in people and pets.
metallothioneins. Metallothioneins are highly inducible
 Metals can be categorized as those that play an essential
by metals and are essential for metal homeostasis and
role in biological processes (e.g., those that are nutrition-
detoxification of metals (Liu et al. 2008). The interac-
ally necessary such as iron, copper, zinc and selenium,
tion of metals with sulfhydryl-containing groups like
among others) and those that do not (e.g., lead and
cystine is the basis for the efficacy of metal chelators,
mercury). It is important to point out that disease syn-
such as succimer or dimercaprol, which contain numer-
dromes caused by deficiencies of nutritionally important
ous sulfhydryl groups.
metals are different in pathogenesis and clinical manifesta-
 Although the periodic table is full of potentially toxic
tions than those caused by exposure to excessive amounts
metals, the following discussion is limited to those few
of the same metal.
metals that most commonly intoxicate, or pose an intoxi-
The toxicity of metals is sometimes harder to define
cation risk for, companion animals. We do not discuss
than for other toxicants. One reason for this is that the forrm
metals that are more frequently involved in livestock or
of a metal plays a critical role in how readily it is systemi-
wildlife intoxications such as selenium and mercury nor
cally absorbed resulting in intoxication. For example,
discuss copper accurmulation in susceptible dog breeds.
elemental mercury, when ingested, is essentially unavail-
However, keep in mind that rmost metals, under appropri-
able for systemic absorption. In contrast, organic forms of
ate circumstances, can poison animals and people.
SmattAnimatToxicotogy Essentiats,First Edition.EditedbyRobertH.Poppenga,Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
273
274
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Arsenic
olized in the liver by the addition of methyl groups prior
Sources/Formulations
to its elimination.
Historically, various forms of arsenic have been used
Toxicity
 as herbicides, insecticides, wood preservatives, growth
prormotants, and therapeutic agents. Arsenic is found in
The toxicity of arsenic is quite variable and depends on its
various valences and forms. There are trivalent and
form, purity, solubility, particle size, valence, and species
exposed, and the condition of the exposed individual
pentavalent inorganic and organic arsenic forms. The tri-
valent inorganic arsenic trioxide was formerly used as an
(Neiger 2004). For example, trivalent arsenicals are 4 to
insecticide and herbicide and as a source for other arseni
10 times more toxic than pentavalent arsenicals. The cat
is considered to be one of the more sensitive species. A
cals (Ensley 2004). Pentavalent (arsenate, HsAsO4) and
trivalent (arsenite, HsAsO) forms of arsenic include
lethal oral dose of sodium arsenite is reported to be less
sodium, potassium, and calcium salts. Paris green (copper
than 5mg/kg body weight. More generally, the range of
lethal oral doses for sodium arsenite is 1 to 25 mg/kg body
acetoarsenite) and lead arsenate have been used as insec-
ticides, and trivalent inorganic arsenic forms such as
weight. Weak and debilitated animals are more susceptible
monosodium methanarsentate (MSMA) and disodium
to intoxication (Neiger 2007).
methanearsonate (DMSA) are used as herbicides. Pentava-
MechanismofAction
lent organic arsenicals such as sodium arsenilate and
The mechanism of toxic action is dependent on the form
3-nitro, 4-hydroxyphenylarsonic acid are used as feed
additives for some livestock species.
of arsenic. Trivalent inorganic arsenicals (ie., arsenites)
Although arsenic is still utilized in some products, it is
inhibit cellular respiration. They bind to sulfhydryl com-
pounds, especially lipoic acid and cα-keto oxidases. Lipoic
not as ubiquitous as it once was due to restrictions on its
use and the availability of newer, more targeted pesticides.
acid, a tissue respiratory enzyme cofactor, plays an essen-
For example, its use as a wood preservative in the form of
tial role in the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA). Tissues with
high oxidative energy requirements (e.g., actively dividing
chromated copper arsenic (CCA) has been banned for resi-
dential use by the USEPA (http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/
cells such as those of the intestinal epithelium, kidney,
reregistration/cca/). Thiacetarsarmide, a phenylarsenoxide
liver, skin, and lungs) are more severely affected. Trivalent
 previously used as a heartworm adulticide, is no longer
arsenic affects capillary integrity by an unknown mecha-
commercially available in the U.S. although another
nism. The gastrointestinal tract is most affected; capillary
dilatation is followed by transudation of plasma into the
organic arsenical, melarsomine, is available (Plumb 2005).
gastrointestinal tract resulting in submucosal congestion 
According to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center,
the highest number of arsenic-related calls involves the
and edema.
exposure of dogs and cats to ant or roach baits, which are
In contrast, pentavalent inorganic arsenicals (ie., arse-
typically inorganic forms of arsenic (Neiger 2004).
nates) appear to substitute for phosphate in oxidative phos-
phorylation. Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation
produces a cellular energy deficit. Elevated body tempera-
Kinetics
ture is not characteristic of pentavalent arsenical poisoning
As for most metals, the bioavailability of arsenic is vari-
 as it is in poisonings by other oxidative uncouplers (e.g-,
able and depends on its forrm (organic vs. inorganic, solu-
nitrophenols).
tion vs. powder). The arsenic in solutions of organic
The organic arsenicals also vary in terms of their mech-
arsenicals is almost completely absorbed from the GI tract
anisrm of toxic action. Trivalent organic arsenicals appear
(Neiger 2004). Alternatively, arsenic compounds of low
to have a mechanism of toxic action similar to the inor-
solubility such as arsenic trioxide are absorbed less effi-
ganic arsenicals. However, pentavalent organic arsenicals
ciently. Once absorbed, arsenic is widely distributed in the
(e.g-, used as livestock feed additives) act on nerves by an
body and reaches its highest concentrations in the liver,
unknown mechanism. They produce demyelination and
spleen, kidney, lungs, and GI tract. Persistent residues are
eventual axonal degeneration, leading some researchers to
found in keratinized tissues such as skin, hair, and nails.
believe that pentavalent organic arsenicals interfere with
Clearance of arsenic from the blood is multiphasic with
the B vitarmins essential for maintenance of nervous tissue.
the first phase having a 1- to-2 hour half-life. Forty to 70%
Although chronic arsenic exposure has been associated
of an absorbed dose is eliminated via the urine within the
with various cancers in people, its ability to cause cancer
first 48 hours. To a large extent, inorganic arsenic is metab-
is animals is uncertain (Neiger 2004). In humans, chronic
Chapter 29 / Metals and Minerals
275
exposure to arsenic induces characteristic changes in
early as possible an important consideration. Most veteri-
the skin including hyper- or hypopigrmentation and
nary diagnostic laboratories can test for arsenic. It is
hyperkeratosis.
important to point out that low-level concentrations of
arsenic in blood or urine are not unusual and do not indi-
ClinicalEffects
cate arsenic intoxication. The interpretation of a given
Typically, arsenic intoxication in small animals is an acute
concentration of arsenic depends on an evaluation of the
illness. Signs can occur within minutes of exposure, with
entire case and the timing of sample collection in relation
death occurring within several hours. Intoxication from
to exposure.
chronic arsenic exposure is not well described in compan-
ion animals. However, there is one case report describing
Postmortem
dermatitis in a German shorthaired pointer chronically
Postmortem analysis of stomach contents, liver, kidney, or
exposed to arsenic (Evinger and Blakemore 1984). The
urine can confirrm exposure. Again, the significance of
source of exposure was from a container of 44% sodium
detected concentrations, especially relatively low concen-
arsenate that had been leaking into the dog's house.
trations, needs to be interpreted in conjunction with other
case variables. Postmortem lesions might be absent in
Signs
cases of rapid death. Otherwise, severe gastrointestinal
Signs associated with acute arsenic intoxication generally
lesions consisting of reddening of the gastric mucosa and
develop in the following progression: intense abdorminal
proximal small intestine, watery Gl contents, and blood
pain, salivation, vomiting, staggering gait, diarrhea (often
and sloughed mucosa in the feces are commonly noted
bloody), rapid and weak pulse, hypothermia, collapse, and
 Other organ lesions are not specific for arsenic.
death. Experimentally, long-term exposure of dogs to inor-
ganic arsenic caused nonspecific signs such as anorexia
ManagementofExposures
and weight loss secondary to reduced food consumption
The rapidity of onset of clinical signs such as vomiting
(Neiger and Osweiler 1989).
often precludes initiating decontamination procedures.
Activated charcoal is unlikely to adsorb significant
Laboratory
amounts of arsenic, although with significant exposures its
There are no specific abnormalities noted from CBC or
administration is recommended (Ford 2006). Symptomatic
serum chemistry tests. Because arsenic can damage mul-
animals need to be stabilized first. This might entail treat-
tiple organs, changes associated with liver or kidney dys-
ment for circulatory shock and hypotension and mainte-
function can be present if the animal survives for several
 nance of body temperature. Renal and liver failure and
days. Prmtein, red blood cells, and casts can be noted in
electrolyte abnormalities might need to be addressed.
the urine.
Glucose and glycogen stores should be maintained paren-
terally with dextrose or parenteral alimentation solutions
DifferentialDiagnoses
(Ford 2006).
Other disease etiologies to consider include intoxication
Chelation therapy is typically indicated. Historically,
from other metals or metal salts (e.g., lead, copper, or zinc
dimercaprol (BAL or British anti-Lewisite) was the rec-
salts), ingestion of acid or alkaline caustics, ingestion of
ommended chelator It is a sulfhydryl-containing chelator
iritating plants (e.g., those containing insoluble calcium
that binds to arsenic and allows the arsenic-chelator
oxalates, castor bean), and infectious agents such as
complex to be eliminated. An altemative chelator, suc-
parvovirus.
cimer, has several theoretical advantages over dimer-
caprol, including less toxicity and oral (vs. injectable)
Diagnostics
dosing forrm. It has been theorized that because succimer
Antemortem
is hydrophilic it might not remove arsenic that has
An antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of ingestion
escaped the extracelluar space as efficiently as dimer-
of arsenic, the occurrence of consistent clinical signs, and
caprol (Neiger 2004). However, available studies suggest
the detection of toxic concentrations of arsenic in vomitus
or stomach contents, whole blood, or urine. Suspect
 in increasing arsenic elimination (Ford 2006). If dimer-
sources of exposure can also be tested to confirm the pres-
caprol is used, monitoring for adverse reactions included
ence of arsenic. The rapid elimination of the metal from
 pain at the injection site, vomiting, trermors, and seizures
the body makes the collection of appropriate samples as
is required.
276
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 29.l. Percentages of elemental iron found
products, possibly as a result of enhanced absorption of
in common iron formulations
the chelated iron.
Iron Formulation
% Elemental Iron
Kinetics
The kinetics of iron absorption are cormplex. Iron body
lonic Forms
Ferrous chloride
28%
stores are regulated at the site of absorption from the Gl
Ferrous fumarate
33%
tract because the body is not able to actively excrete iron.
12%
From the GI tract, iron must first enter duodenal mucosal
Ferrous gluconate
Ferrous lactate
19%
cells, possibly by a carrier-mediated prmcess. Next the iron
is either lost as the mucosal cells slough into the GI lumen
 Ferrous sulfate
20%
Nonionic Forms
or is bound to ferritin for later transfer to transferrin, a
Carbonyl iron
98%
serum iron-binding transport protein. Serum transferrin
Iron polysaccharide
46%
concentrations greatly exceed amounts necessary to bind
iron under normal physiological processes(normal binding
capacity is 3 to 4 times the serum iron concentration).
However, during intoxications the binding capacity is
Although the administration of B-complex vitamins and
exceeded, allowing free iron to cause cell damage.
amino acids has been recommended, the evidence for
their efficacy is lacking. Parenteral antibiotic administra-
Toxicity
tion might be considered to prevent secondary bacterial
The toxicity of iron for dogs is believed to be similar to
infections of the GI tract. The use of GI protectants might
that for humans. Ingestion of less than 20mg/kg body
also be indicated. Hemodialysis is not recommended in
weight of elemental iron is not considered to cause rmore
the absence of renal impairment (Ford 2006). Recovering
than mild gastric upset. Dosages of 20 to 60mg/kg body
animals should be fed a high-quality diet in small por-
weight cause mild to moderate intoxication, and dosages
tions, which can be increased as time and circumstances
in excess of 60 mg/kg are associated with severe intoxica-
permit.
tion. Without early intervention, dosages of 100 mg/kg are
potentially fatal. It is important to determine the dose or
Prognosis
dosage of elemental iron ingested by approximating how
The prognosis in symptomatic animals is always guarded,
much of a product was ingested, knowing the form and
particularly in the absence of early intervention and inten-
amount of iron per unit of product weight, and then mul-
sive monitoring and treatment.
tiplying the total by the percentage of elemental iron based
upon the form (see Table 29.1).
Iron
Sources/Forms
Mechanism ofAction
Iron is an element essential for life. Sources for readily
Free iron can cause direct or indirect tissue and cell
ionizable iron include rmultivitamins and dietary mineral
damage. Iron acts as a free radical and can also generate
supplements (for geriatric use or use during pregnancy)
free radicals. Free radicals have one or more unpaired
(Hall 2007a). In humans, the most commonly reported
electrons, which can initiate lipid permoxidation resulting in
iron intoxication occurs in children ingesting iron
cell membrane damage. Tissues that have first contact with
supplements.
free iron are primarily affected although all tissues are
There are a number of iron salts and formulations. The
susceptible to damage if exposed. The primary targets are
more common formulations and their respective percent
the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and hepatic tissues.
elemental iron concentrations are provided in Table 29.1.
Iron also damages mitochondria, leading to loss of oxida-
Some insoluble forms of iron such as elemental iron and
tive metabolism (Hall 2007a). Iron might have a direct
ferric oxide (ie., rust) are not hazardous when ingested
negative inotropic effect on the myocardium (Perrone
due to low bioavailability. One newer source of iron, a
2007).
chelated iron called iron phosphate EDTA, is found in
some slug and snail baits, which are advertised as being
Clinical Effects
nontoxic to pets. However, there are many anecdotal
Classically, the signs associated with iron intoxication
reports of illness in dogs following ingestion of these
follow rmore or less well-defined stages.
Chapter 29 / Metals and Minerals
277
Signs
larly with large ingestions, emergency gastrotomy has
Initial clinical signs are due to GI upset (within 6 hours
  a     s 
after ingestion). Bloody vomitus or stool can occur during
veterinary medicine currently, in human exposures, whole
this stage. The next stage (approximately 6 to 24 hours 
bowel irrigation using polyethylene glycol electrolyte
lavage solution has shown some promise for removing
subside. The apparent recovery stage is followed by a
iron tablets or pills. Activated charcoal does not bind iron
worsening of signs that include vomiting, diarrhea, depres-
and is not indicated.
sion, GI hemorrhage, abdominal pain, circulatory shock,
Patient stabilization is a priority in symptomatic animals.
tremors, metabolic acidosis, coagulopathy, and in some
Treating circulatory shock and metabolic acidosis is criti-
cases, death. The last stage, 2 to 6 weeks after exposure,
cal. Sucrafate might be useful in order to provide some GI
is characterized by Gl obstruction secondary to fibrosing
protection.
repair of prior GI damage.
Deferoxamine mesylate is an effective iron chelator. It
combines with iron to form ferrioxamine, which is subse-
Laboratory
quently eliminated via the kidneys (Perrone 2007)
Leukocytosis, hyperglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and
Defermxamine given intravenously too rapidly can
normal-to-high AST, ALT, ALP, and serum bilirubin con-
cause cardiac arrhthymias; it is a teratogen and should be
centrations can occur. Iron-containing tablets or pills
used in pregnant animals only if the potential benefits
might be visualized by abdominal imaging.
outweigh the risks.
Differential Diagnoses
Prognosis
A variety of diseases with a significant Gl involvement
 The prognosis is variable depending on the dosage ingested
needs to be considered. Such diseases include garbage
 and availability of appropriate monitoring. In animals that
intoxication, toxic plant ingestion (e.g-, castor bean)
recover from acute intoxication, owners should be
gastric torsion, caustic ingestions, snake bite, heat prostra-
instructed to watch for evidence of GI obstruction several
tion, and infectious (bacterial or viral) enteritis.
weeks after discharge.
Diagnostics
LEAD
Antemortem
The true incidence of lead intoxication of household pets
A diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and occurrence
is unknown but is likely to be of decreasing prevalence
of compatible clinical signs. Serum iron in excess of the
due to curtailment of lead paint use and resulting decreases
total serum iron-binding capacity (TIBC) is consistent
in exposure. At least historically, a higher prevalence of
with exposure to excessive iron (Hall 2007b). If possible,
intoxication is reported during warmer months. There is
TIBC should be deterrmined at 2 to 3 hours and again at 5
also a higher prevalence in young animals, most likely due
to 6 hours postexposure. Analysis of vomitus or stomach
to their increased susceptibility as a result of greater bio-
contents might suggest a high iron exposure.
availability of lead and a more permeable blood-brain
barrier (Poppenga 2007). Additionally, the prevalence is 
Postmortem
higher in pets housed in older homes or buildings. Low
Postmortem tissue iron concentrations might help support
socioeconomic status of a pet-owning family is more
a diagnosis of iron intoxication. Lesions in the liver tend
likely to be associated with a high blood-lead concentra-
to have a rather distinct periportal distribution because
tion in pets, although housing undergoing renovations in
 periportal regions of the liver are the first to be exposed to
urban areas of "gentrification" is potentially hazardous. In
excessive free iron absorbed from the Gl tract.
one review of lead intoxication in cats, 84% of the cases
involved exposure of the cats to old paint, most often as a
ManagementofExposures
result of home renovations (Knight and Kumar 2003).
Early after exposure (within the first 2 hours), ermesis can
be induced or gastric lavage considered. Keep in mind that
Sources/Forms
pill bezoars can forrm that makes gastric evacuation more
 Lead is used in an impressive array of products including
tank linings, piping, radiation shielding, paint pigments,
prior vomiting; in such cases induction of emesis is not
inks, lead ammunition (shot and bullets), ballast and
warranted. In cases where pill bezoars might form, particu-
weights, solder, linoleum, wine bottle foil, lubricants.
278
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
bearings, alloys, storage batteries, ceramics, plastics, elec-
long-term storage site. The half-life of lead is multiphasic
tronic devices, leaded glass, stained-glass framing, fishing
due to redistribution within various compartments of the
gear, jewelry and small toys (Casteel 2004; Poppenga
body (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). For example, the half-life of
2007). Wrappers used for imported candies have been
lead in whole blood is approximately 35 days, whereas in
found to contain high concentrations of lead as a result of
brain it is approximately 2 years. Lead can persist in bone
the use oflead-contaminated inks (Medlin 2004).Animals
for years. Enhanced bone remodeling can release lead into
can be intoxicated from lead-contaminated soils. For
the blood and cause adverse effects. Elimination of
example, cats and birds can ingest lead-contarminated soil
absorbed lead can occur via sloughing of renal tubular
via grooming or foraging behavior, respectively. Pet and
epithelial cells, via the bile or via pancreatic secretions
aviary birds are unlikely to be exposed to many sources of
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004).
lad due to their being kept in home or cage environments.
The more common sources of exposure for such birds are
Toxicity
likely to be from paint (either from direct ingestion of
Few studies have determined the acute or chronic toxicity
lead-based paint fakes or secondary to paint dust contami-
of lead for many species, especially for pet birds. The risk
nating the environment) or from ingestion of small lead-
for lead intoxication is infuenced not only by the amount
containing objects.
and form of lead ingested (see "Kinetics"), but species
Because of the toxicity oflead for children and wild bird
exposed, dietary factors, size of ingested lead particles
species, several former uses of lead have been eliminated
and, in birds, the amount of grit in the ventriculus. The
or curtailed (e.g., in paints, gasoline, and ammunition).
length of retention of lead particles in the Gl tract varies
Lead has not intentionally been added to most paint since
among individuals within a given species and between
1978, although it has been estimated by the Centers for
species. Given the large number of variables that can affect
Disease Control that 74% of privately owned housing in
the toxicity of lead, the availability of precise toxic or
the United States built before 1980 still contains hazardous
lethal doses is limited.
quantities of lead paint (Casteel 2004). Thus, animals kept
in older homes have an increased risk of lead exposure
Mechanism of Action
from paint.
Most cellular damage due to lead is caused by the ability
of lead to substitute for a variety of polyvalent cations,
Kinetics
especially calcium and zinc, in their binding sites (Garza
As for other metals, the bioavailability of lead following
et al. 2006). The role that metal ions play in biological
ingestion depends on its forrm. Elemental lead is less bio-
systems are numerous and diverse. They serve as charge
available than inorganic lead salts such as lead acetate or
carriers, intermediates in catalyzed reactions, and struc-
organic lead such as tetraethyl lead. Elemental lead is
tural elements in the maintenance of protein conforrmation.
relatively insoluble in hard, basic water, but more soluble
Metal transport, energy metabolism, apoptosis, ionic con-
in acidic water. Therefore, elemental lead is more soluble,
duction, cell adhesion, inter- and intracellular signaling,
and therefore more bioavailable, in the acidic fuids of
diverse enzymatic processes, protein maturation, and
the proventriculus or ventriculus of birds and the stomach
genetic regulation can all be affected. Lead produces oxi-
of mammals. Lead is actively transported across the GI
dative damage to lipids and proteins as a result of release
tract using the same transport mechanisms used for
of iron, disruption of antioxidant mechanisms, and direct
calcium absorption. This absorption mechanism explains
oxidative damage.
the greater bioavailability of lead in immature, rapidly
The neurotoxicity of lead is most likely due to such
growing animals with an increased need for calcium. Irre-
diverse mechanisms as lipid peroxidation, excitotoxicity
spective of the form of lead, a significant amount of
(ie., cell damage secondary to receptor overstimulation
ingested lead is excreted in the feces without being
due to excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate),
absorbed.
alterations in neurotransmitter synthesis, storage and
Approximately 90% of absorbed lead is found in red
release, alterations in expression and functioning of recep-
blood cells, with small amounts bound to albumin or found
tors, interference with mitochondrial metabolism, interfer-
in plasma as free lead. Within red blood cells, lead is
ence with second messenger systerms, and damage to
associated with the cell membrane, hemoglobin and pos-
astroglia and oligodendroglia.
sibly other cell components (Liu et al. 2008). Lead is
The mechanism of lead-induced altered GI motility is
widely distributed in soft tissues and bone serves as a
Chapter 29/ Metats and Minerals
279
effect of lead on peripheral nerves or calcium fux. Lead-
polychromasia, poikilocytosis, target cells, hypochroma-
induced relaxation may be due to stimulation of adenylate
sia, and basophilic stippling. The latter is often difficult to
cyclase activity resulting in an increase in intracellular
detect. A neutrophilic leukocytosis might be noted. In cats,
cyclic AMP (Boyer et al. 1985).
elevated AST and ALP values are reported. Urinalysis can
Lead causes anemia by increasing erythrocyte fragility,
reflect mild nonspecific renal damage, glucosuria, and
delaying erythrmcyte maturation, and inhibiting heme
hemoglobinuria.
synthesis. Heme synthesis is impaired as a result of
aminolevulinic acid synthetase, &-aminolevulinic acid
Diagnostics
dehydratase (ALAD), coproporphyrinogen decarboxylase,
Antemortem
and ferrochelatase inhibition (Henritig 2002).
As mentioned, clinical signs associated with lead intoxica-
tion can be nonspecific, making a diagnosis more difficult.
Clinical Effects
Radiographs might identify metallic objects in the GI tract.
Signs
Obviously, detecting a metal density does not identify it
As discussed, the primary organ systems affected are the
as to type of metal. The absence of metal densities does
 gastrointestinal, nervous, and hematopoietic. The most
not rule out metal exposure, because metal objects may
obvious and common signs refect GI and CNS effects.
have been passed or exposure to lead was from a nonra-
Gastrointestinal signs often precede CNS signs and are
diodense form.
predominant with chronic, low-level exposure. CNS signs
Diagnosis of lead exposure or intoxication is most
are more frequently observed following acute exposures
directly made by measurement of lead in whole blood
 and are more common in younger animals. Cormrmon signs
samples. In contrast to the diagnosis of zinc intoxication,
include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, abdominal pain,
serum or plasma are not appropriate samples for lead
regurgitation due to megaesophagus, lethargy, hysteria,
analysis, because lead associates with the red blood cell.
seizures, and blindness. In intoxicated cats central vestibu-
Lead analyses are widely available through veterinary
lar abnormalities such as vertical nystagmus and ataxia are
diagnostic laboratories. Fortunately, small sample sizes
reported (Poppenga 2007). In a review of lead intoxication
can be used; blood samples as small as 20pl are often
of cats, the most common clinical signs reported were
suitable. This is important when obtaining blood from
anorexia, vomiting, and seizures (Knight and Kumar 2003).
small animals such as many caged birds. In general, any
In pet birds, signs of intoxication can be nonspecific and
anticoagulant, including EDTA can be used to prevent
limited to anorexia, weakness, and weight loss. Signs
samples from clotting, although there may be exceptions
related to nervous systerm impairment include lethargy,
to this general rule; it is best to consult with the laboratory
weakness manifested as wing droop, leg paresis or paraly-
conducting the testing prior to sample collection. Whole
sis, changes in phonation, head tilt, ataxia, blindness, cir-
blood lead concentrations consistent with lead exposure
cling, head tremors, and seizures (Locke and Thomas
1996). Gastrointestinal signs include regurgitation and
(20μg/dl or greater). There are no "normal" background
decreased motility of the upper Gl tract (esophagus, pro-
blood lead concentrations in animals. Measurement of
ventriculus, and ventriculus) resulting in impaction and
ALAD activity, blood zinc protoporphyrin, or free eryth-
greenish diarrhea, which stains feathers around the vent
rocyte protoporphyrin concentrations are also good bio-
(Locke and Thomas 1996; Dumonceaux and Harrison
markers of lead exposure, but these tests are not widely
1994).
available.
It is important to note that blood lead concentrations do
not correlate with the occurrence or severity of clinical
Postmortem
signs.
Postmortem diagnosis relies on an antemortem history of
compatible clinical signs, detection of metallic particles or
Laboratory
other forms of lead in the GI tract, and measurement of
Diagnostic laboratory abnormalities are noted most fre-
liver or kidney lead concentrations. Reported diagnostic
quently when the hematopoietic system is affected. The
liver or kidney concentrations are variable, but values of
presence of 5 to 40 nucleated RBCs/100WBCs without
 4 ppm wet weight or greater in either tissue are likely to
anemia strongly suggests lead exposure. However, the
be significant. There can be significant differences in liver
absence of nucleated RBC changes does not rule out the
and kidney tissue concentrations in the same animal; as a
diagnosis. Red blood cell changes include anisocytosis,
consequence it is often advisable to test both tissues.
280
Section 3/ Specific Toxicants
Necropsy findings can include the observation of paint
If animals present with neurologic symptoms such as
chips or lead objects in the gastrointestinal tract. Intranu-
seizures, control with a benzodiazepine can be tried.
clear inclusion bodies in hepatocytes or renal tubular epi-
Seizure activity might suggest the presence of cerebral
thelial cells (intracellular storage form of lead) are
ederma. This should be treated using mannitol and
considered highly suggestive. Cerebrocortical lesions can
dexamethasone.
include spongiosis, vascularhypertrophy, gliosis, neuronal
Chelation therapy is universally recommended. The two
necrosis, and demyelination.
chelators most commonly used are calcium disodium
EDTA (CaNaEDTA) and succimer. In human medicine,
Differential Diagnoses
succimer has largely replaced the use of CaNaEDTA due
With the exception of CBC changes, clinical signs associ-
to its efficacy, lack of adverse side effects and ability to
ated with lead intoxication are nonspecific and a number
be given orally.
of differential diagnoses need to be considered. In dogs,
If using EDTA, only the calcium salt should be used to
the following diseases can mimic lead intoxication: canine
avoid calcium chelation and resulting hypocalcemia
distemper, infectious encephalitides, epilepsy, bromethalin,
(Casteel 2004; Poppenga 2007). There are several signifi-
methylxanthine or tremorgenic mycotoxin toxicoses,
cant disadvantages to the use of CaNa,EDTA. It is poten-
NSAID toxicosis, heatstroke, intestinal parasitism, intus-
tially nephrotoxic, which can either induce renal
susception, foreign body, pancreatitis, and infectious
dysfunction or exacerbate concurrent lead-induced renal
canine hepatitis. In cats, degenerative or storage diseases
impairment. It has to be administered parenterally because
hepatic encephalopathy, infectious encephalitides, and
oral administration of CaNa,EDTA enhances the absorp-
organophosphorous/carbarmate, brormethalin, or methylx-
tion of lead from the GI tract. Repeated IM injections in
anthine toxicoses need to be considered.
birds can cause significant muscle damage. Additionally,
CaNa,EDTA chelates important endogenous minerals such
Management of Cases
 as zinc. Prolonged use of CaNazEDTA is generally inter-
Case management focuses on evacuation of the GI tract,
rupted by intervals of no therapy to avoid adverse effects.
stabilization of the patient, and reduction of lead body
Treatment periods of 5-10 days followed by a 3-5-day
burden. Typically, animals intoxicated by lead have not
"rest" period are recommended. Assessment of renal func-
been exposed to a single dose of lead or developed signs
tion every 2-3 days during chelation therapy is also
immediately after a single exposure. Thus, gastric evacu-
recommended.
ation is not always indicated. The exception would be in
Succimer (DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid) is a
those cases in which a metallic object is detected in the
newer chelating agent that has several advantages over
stomach. In those cases, gastric lavage or endoscopy can
CaNaEDTA.It can be given orally,which avoids the
be considered. Because a significant amount of lead might
need for repeated IM injections and potentially allows
remain in the Gl tract beyond the stomach, decontamina-
for in-home treatment, it does not increase elimination
tion of the Gl tract can be useful. This is accomplished
of other essential minerals such as zinc and it is not
using saccharide or saline cathartics such as sorbitol or
nephrotoxic. Succimer is more effective at removing
sodium or magnesium sulfate. The advantage of using
lead from soft tissues compared to CaNaEDTA. Suc-
sodium or magnesium sulfate lies in the potential to form
cimer decreases CNS lead concentrations more rapidly
lead sulfate, which has relatively low bioavailability.
than CaNazEDTA (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). In pet birds,
However, use of sodium sulfate in combination with chela-
tors such as CaNaEDTA or succimer has not been shown
means, although it has been effective when sprinkled
to be more effective than using a chelator alone. In pet
on food (Hoogesteijn et al. 2003). As with CaNazEDTA
birds, decontarmination approaches include the use of
use, the length of treatment should be based on clinical
emollient laxatives such as mineral oil, bulk laxatives such
improvement and determination of blood lead concentra-
as psyllium, or cathartics such as sodium sulfate. Admin-
tions. Whole blood lead should be determined following
istration of 3 to 5 appropriately sized pieces of grit has
chelation to assess the need for additional chelation
been reported to aid in the passage of metal objects from
therapy. However, 3 to 5 days should be allowed for
the ventriculus (Dumonceaux and Harrison 1994). Saline
remaining lead to reequilibrate to obtain an accurate
lavage has been successful in removing lead particles from
assessment of lead status. Succimer has been used suc-
the proventriculus or ventriculus of lead-intoxicated birds
cessfully in dogs and cats (Ramsey et al. 1996; Knight
(Loudis 2004).
et al. 2001)
Chapter 29 / Metals and Minerals
281
Table 29.2. Comparison of CaNa,EDTA and succimer for the treatment of lead and zinc intoxications
CaNa,EDTA
Succimer
Tradenames
Calcium DisodiumVersenate (3M)
Chemet (Sanofi-Synthelabo) 100mg
200 mg/ml
capsules
Routes of administration
Slow IV infusion, IM or SQ injection;
Oral
dilutionwith saline or 5% dextrose
needed if given IV
Advantages
Rapid absorption
Oral administration
Can chelate lead and zinc
Not nephrotoxic
Does not chelate essential minerals such
as zinc, manganese, and copper
More rapid clinical impmovement in lead
intoxication
More effective at removing lead from
soft tissues
Disadvantages
Need for repeated IM injections
Less effective chelation of zinc; efficacy
Pain at injection site
uncertain in zinc intoxication
Potential nephrotoxicity and therefore
Regurgitation noted in cockatiels
need to monitor renal function
regularly
Chelation of essential minerals such as
zinc, manganese, and copper with
long-term use
Potential to worsen CNS signs as a
result of lead redistribution
Clinical imprmvement is likely to be more rapid (within
There is evidence in mammals that the efficacy of chela-
24 hours)following succimeruse compared to CaNa,EDTA.
tion is improved when thiamine or antioxidants such as
 Neurologic signs may initially worsen in animals treated
ascorbic acid are used in conjunction with chelators. Such
with CaNaEDTA. This is most likely due to CaNaEDTA-
combinations have not been investigated in birds.
induced mobilization of lead from bone in animals with
chronic lead exposure, since acutely intoxicated animals
Prognosis
would be expected to have lower bone lead concentrations.
 The prognosis is favorable with treatrment, although it is
Combining CaNaEDTA and succimer does not appear to
guarded in animals presenting with uncontrollable sei-
be more efficacious than CaNaEDTA or succimer alone.
zures. Signs should improve significantly within 24 to 48
A comparison between CaNa,EDTA and succimer is pro-
hours of initiating chelation therapy.
vided in Table 29.2.
Irrespective of what chelator is used, assessment of blood
Zinc
lead concentrations at the end of each rest period should
 Zinc intoxication is most commonly reported in small dogs
dictate the length of time needed for chelation therapy. The
and caged birds. Although cats are occasionally intoxi-
goal is to chelate for the minimum amount of time neces-
cated based upon anecdotal reports, intoxication appears
sary to resolve the intoxication (based upon resolution of
to be relatively uncommon in this species.
clinical signs and a decline in blood lead concentrations).
D-penicillamine has also been used to chelate lead in
Sources/Forms
animals, but its use is associated with a number of possible
Metallic zinc is commonly used to galvanize metals, such
adverse effects and is currently not recommended for use
as iron and steel, to provide protective coating. Until 1982,
in people (Van Alstine et al. 1993; Henritig 2002)
pennies consisted mainly of copper (95%) and zinc (4%),
282
Section 3 / Specifc Toxicants
but the copper-clad pennies minted after 1982 contain 97%
cells, and brain, although specific mechanisms for many
zinc and 2.5% copper (Barceloux 1999). Additionally, zinc
 of these effects have not elucidated. In acute cases of zinc
is found in soil and may be present at high enough con-
poisoning, particularly when zinc salts are ingested, local
centrations to result in avian poisonings. Zinc is also used
corrosive effects occur in the gastrointestinal tract fol-
in a variety of medical formulations, pigments, wood pre-
lowed by damage to the liver, kidney, and pancreas. The
servatives, insecticides, and rubber. Zinc oxide ointments
hemolytic anemia associated with zinc intoxication might
and creams can be licked from the skin following topical
be due to a direct damaging effect of zinc on red blood
application or cause intoxication if the products are chewed
cell membranes. In birds, a major concem is chronic zinc
and the contents swallowed (Talcott 2004).
toxicosis with resulting anemia. Anemia might be second-
ary to functional iron or copper deficiencies. Zinc has been
Kinetics
shown to cause acute pancreatic, hepatic, and renal failure,
The rate of absorption depends on the amount and form of
although underlying specific pathophysiological mecha-
ingested zinc. The acidity of the stomach pmvides an
nisms have not been described. Zinc toxicosis has been
excellent environment for the quick release and dissolu-
associated with brain damage that is most likely a combi-
tion of zinc from metallic objects (Talcott 2004). Once
nation of hypoxic and direct toxic effects.
absorbed, zinc is distributed widely to tissues, including
pancreas, liver, kidney, bone, muscle, brain, retina, and
ClinicalEffects
skin. In tissues, especially the pancreas, liver, kidney,
Signs
intestinal mucosa, and brain, zinc is bound to metallothio-
In intoxicated dogs, the most common signs include
nein. Metallothionein is a low molecular weight, cysteine-
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, depression, pale
rich protein that has potent metal-binding capabilities.
mucous membranes, icterus, and orange-tinged feces.
Zinc has a high binding affinity for metallothionein, which
Often metallic objects are noted on abdominal radio-
may play an integral role in zinc metabolism. The major
graphs, although the absence of such findings does not rule
mute of excretion of zinc is via the feces.
out zinc intoxication. Arrhythmias and ST-segment abnor-
malities have been reported (Talcott 2004).
Toxicity
In birds clinical signs of intoxication are variable and
Zinc is an essential metal, and animals and humans have
nonspecific. They include lethargy, anorexia, regurgita-
the ability to regulate zinc effectively. Zinc is relatively
tion, polyuria, polydipsia,hematuria, hematochezia, pallor,
nontoxic in mammals as judged by their tolerance to
dark or bright green diarrhea, foul-smelling feces, paresis,
dietary concentrations greater than 100 times the minimum
seizures, and sudden death (Puschner and Poppenga 2009).
recommended daily zinc requirement (Leonard and Gerber
However, zinc toxicosis was associated with sudden death
1989). If dietary exposure is excessive and homeostatic
in 7 of 21 psittacine birds evaluated in one study (Puschner
mechanisms fail, zinc toxicity can occur. Definite data on
et al. 1999). Therefore, any acute death in a caged bird
the toxicity of zinc in caged birds is lacking, although there
needs to be evaluated for possible zinc poisoning. Exces-
is limited information available for certain avian and mam-
sive zinc exposure as a cause of feather picking is
 malian species. In dogs, the ingestion of one or two pennies
questionable.
is likely sufficient to cause intoxication. One report esti-
mated that the toxic dose of zinc in the form of zinc oxide
Laboratory
for dogs was 108 grams of zinc (Breitschwerdt et al. 1986).
In dogs, findings indicative of an oxidant-induced hemo-
lytic anemia predominate. These include Heinz body for-
Mechanism ofAction
mation, target cells, spherocytosis, hemoglobinemia,
Zinc is required for a large number of physiological pro-
hemoglobinuria, and bilirubinemia. Regenerative changes
cesses including bone formation, immunity, keratogenesis
such as nucleated RBCs, basophilic stippling, and poly-
reprmoduction, growth, vision, wound healing, brain devel-
chromasia might be noted.
oprment, normal functioning of the central nervous system,
and many other physiological processes (Talcott 2004).
Diagnostics
Major pathophysiological mechanisms of zinc intoxica-
Antemortem
tion are attributed to direct and indirect toxic effects on the
Antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of ingestion of
 gastrointestinal tract, liver, kidney, pancreas, red blood
zinc, the occurrence of compatible clinical signs (e.g-,
Chapter 29/ Metats and Minerals
283
hemolytic anemia in conjunction with a metallic object in
Prognosis
the GI tract), and measurement of zinc in serum samples.
The prognosis is good to guarded. In one retrospective
Serum zinc concentrations typically exceed 5 ppm and are
study in dogs (N = 19), 17 dogs receiving treatment
often much higher (for dogs and cats a serum zinc refer-
survived (one was euthanized without treatment and one
ence range is 0.7 to 2.0ppm). Because many rubbers can
was discharged but returned the next day in severe respi-
leach zinc, it is important to use appropriate serum tubes
ratory distress) (Gurnee and Drobatz 2007). Rapid
(ie., royal blue top) for sample collection and submission
removal of the source of zinc should result in progres-
or scrupulously avoid contact of the blood/serum samples
sive improvement over 2 to 3 days. The mean hospital
with rubber (e.g-, a plastic-capped vial can be used to store
stay in the retrospective study was 2 days. Multiple organ
and ship serum). Once exposure to zinc is stopped, follow-
failure, DIC, pancreatic disease, renal failure, and car-
up determinations of serum zinc concentrations might be
diopulmonary arrest are potential complications (Talcott
useful.
2004).
Postmortem
REFERENCES
A postmortem diagnosis relies on antemortem findings and
measurement of zinc concentrations in appropriate tissue
Barceloux, D.G. 1999. Zinc. J Toxicol—Clin Toxicof
37:279-292.
samples. Liver is the most commonly tested sample,
Boyer, L.J., Cory-Slechta, D.A., DiStefano, V. 1985. Lead
although kidney and pancreatic tissue samples can also be
induction of crop dysfunction in pigeons through a direct
used.
action on neural or smooth muscle components of crop
tissue. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 234:607-615.
DifferentialDiagnoses
Breitschwerdt, E.B., Armstrong, PJ., Robinette, C.L. 1986.
Differential diagnoses include immune-mediated hemo-
Three cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs. Vet Hum Toxicot
lytic anemia, Babesia, onion/garlic, naphthalene mothball,
28:109-117.
Casteel, S.W. 2004. Lead In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A.,
some mushroom and acetaminophen intoxications, snake
eds. Smalf Animal Toxicofogy, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders
and brown recluse spider bites, caval syndrome, overhy-
Elsevier, pp. 795-805.
dration, skunk spray, and numerous causes of gastrointes-
Dumonceaux, G. and Harrison, G.H. 1994. Toxins. In Ritchie,
tinal signs.
B.W., Harrison, G.J., Harrison, L.R., eds. Avian Medicine:
Principles and Appfication. Delray Beach, Florida: Wingers
ManagementofExposures
Publishing, Pp. 1030-1052.
The most important intervention is rapid removal of
Ensley, S. 2004. Arsenic. In Plumlee, K.H., ed. Clinicaf Vet-
erinary Toxicotogy. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 193-195.
any identified zinc object by endoscopy or laparotomy.
Evinger, J. V. and Blakemore, JC. 1984. Dermatitis in a dog
Severe hemolytic anemias might require blood transfu-
associated with exposure to an arsenic compound J Am Vet
sions. In one case series of 19 dogs with zinc intoxica-
Med Assoc 84(10):1281-1282.
tion, all animals received either packed red blood cells 
Ford, M. 2006. Arsenic. In Flomenbaum, N.E., Howland,
or an oxygen-carrying solution (Oxyglobin@) (Gurnee
M.A., Goldfrank, L.R. et al., eds.Gotdfrank's Toxicologic
and Drobatz 2007). Fluid therapy and diuresis are impor-
Emergencies. New York, McGraw-Hill, pp. 1251-1264.
tant to both maintain hydration and minimize renal
Garza, A., Vega, R., Soto, E. 2006. Cellular mechanisms of
damage from hemoglobinuria. Although CaNazEDTA and
lead neurotoxicity. Med Sci Monit 12:RA57-65.
D-penicillamine can chelate zinc, their routine use is
Gurnee, C.M., Drobatz, K.J. 2007. Zinc intoxication in dogs:
questionable, given the relatively rapid elimination of
19 cases (1991-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 230(8):
zinc. Once exposure to zinc is stopped, tissue and serum
1174-1179
Gwaltney-Brant, S. 2004. Lead. In Plumlee, K.H., ed. Clini-
zinc concentrations drop rapidly. H-receptor blockers
cal Veterinary Toxicology Mosby, St. Louis, Pp. 204-210.
might help reduce stomach acidity and the rate of release
Hall, J.O. 2007a. Iron. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, PA., eds.
of zinc from zinc objects, although rapid removal of
Small Animal Toxicofogy, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders Else-
the zinc object might make their use unnecessary.
vier, pp. 777-784.
Frequent evaluation of PCV and ECGs is warranted.
2007b. Iron toxicity. In Tilley, L.P, Smith, F.W.K.,
Periodic assessment of renal function might also be
eds.Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consuft,4th ed.
prudent.
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing, p. 771.
284
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Henritig, F.M. 2002. Lead. In Goldfrank, L.R., Flomenbaum,
Neiger, R.D. and Osweiler, G.D. 1989. Effect of subacute low
N.E., Lewin, N.A., eds., Goldfrank's Toxicotogic Emergen-
level dietary sodium arsenite on dogs. Fund Appt Toxicol
cies. Mew York: McGraw-Hill pp. 1200-1238.
13:439-451.
Hoogesteijn, A.L., Raphael, B.L., Callem P. et al. 2003. Oral
Perrone, J. 2007. Iron. In Flomenbaum, N.E., Howland, M.A.,
treatment of avian lead intoxication with meso-2,3-
Goldfrank,L.S.et al.,eds.Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emer-
dimercaptosuccinic acid J Zoo Wildl Med 34:82-87.
gencies. New York, McGraw-Hill, pp. 629-637.
Knight, TE., Kent, M., Junk, J.E. 2001. Succimer treatment
Plumb, D.C. 2005. Thiacetarsamide sodium. In Plumb's Vet-
of lead toxicosis in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
erinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed.Ames,Blackwell Publish-
218(12) :1946-1948.
ing, pp. 747-749.
Knight, T.E., Kumar, M.S.A. 2003. Lead toxicosis in cats—A
Poppenga, R.H. 2007. Lead poisoning. In Tilley, L.P., Smith,
review.J Feline Med and Surg 5:249-255.
FW.K., eds. Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consult,
Leonard, A.,Gerber, G.B. 1989.Zinc toxicity—Does it exist?
4th ed. Ames, Blackwell Publishing, pp. 796-797.
J Am Colf Toxicol 8:1285-1290.
Puschner, B. and Poppenga, R.H. 2009. Lead and zinc intoxi-
Liu, J., Goyer, R.A., Waalkes, M.P. 2008. Toxic effects of
cation in companion birds. Compend Contin Educ Vet
metals. In Klaassen, C.D., ed. Casarett and Doull's Toxicof-
31(1):E1-12
ogy: The Basic Science of Poisons. New York: McGraw
Puschner, B., St. Leger, J., Galey, F.D. 1999. Normal and
Hill, pp. 931-979.
toxic zinc concentrations in serum/plasma and liver of psit-
Locke, L.N., Thomas, N.J. 1996. Lead poisoning of water-
tacines with respect to genus differences. J Vet Diagn Invest
fowl and raptors. In Fairbrother, A., Locke, L.N., Hoff,
11:522-527.
G.L., eds. Noninfectious Diseases of Wildlife. Ames: Iowa
Ramsey, D.R., Casteel, S.W., Fagella, A.M. et al. 1996.
State University Press, Ames, pp. 108-117.
Use
of
orally
administered
succimer (meso-2,3-
Loudis, B. 2004. Endoscope assisted gastric lavage for foreign
dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment of lead poisoning in
body retrieval. Association of Avian Veterinarians 83-88.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208(3):371-375.
Medlin, J. 2004. Sweet candy, bitter poison. Environ Heatth
Talcott, P.A. 2004. Zinc. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., eds).
Perspect 112:A803.
Small Animat Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders Else-
Neiger, R.D. 2004. Arsenic. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott,
vier, pp. 1094-1100.
PA.(eds). Small Animat Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
Van Alstine, W.G., Wickliffe, L.W., Everson, R.J. et al. 1993.
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 592-602.
Acute lead toxicosis in a household of cats. J Vet Diagn
2007. Arsenic. In Tilley, L.P., Smith, F.W.K., eds.
Invest 5:496-498.
Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consutt,4th ed.Ames,
Blackwell Publishing, p. 101.
Miscellaneous Toxicants
30
Michelle Mostrom
INTRODUCTION
PETROLEUM-BASED PRODUCTS
This chapter discusses clinical signs and suggested treat-
ments for a diverse group of cormpounds. In many cases,
Sources
animals may not be observed consuming the toxic agent
Animals can be exposed to petrmleum-based hydrocarbon
and owners report clinical signs with no known toxicant
products through inhalation, oral, ocular, or dermal routes
exposure. In other cases, an exposure may be recognized
in the house, hobby or work areas, garage, or outdoor
but a dose and the potential for intoxication is unknown.
environrment. Generally pets will be exposed to refined
In a number of these instances, the veterinary clinical staff
petroleum products, such as fuels (gasoline, diesel, kero-
must treat the animal and developing clinical signs and not
sene), paint thinners or pesticide carriers (petroleum distil-
a textbook description of toxicity and therapy. Sorting
lates), degreasing and dry-cleaning compounds, and
through a complete history and evaluating the animal,
solvents. Petroleum products are complex chemical mix-
particularly as clinical signs develop, may be the only
tures produced from the distillation of crude oil. Petroleum
approach available for a treatment regime and establishing
distillates are comprised of aliphatic and aromatic hydro-
a plausible diagnosis. A presumptive diagnosis can often
carbons and are usually liquids with a strong characteristic
be based on findings from the history and clinical observa-
odor (e.g., diesel, gasoline, paint solvent, barbecue lighter
tions (i.e., observing a toxicant in the vomitus or gastric
fuids). Some petroleum products are in the form of fam-
lavage; smelling a hydrmcarbon on animal breath, urine, or
mable gases, such as methane, ethane, propane, and
skin; history of training on plastic explosives and animals
butane, which act more as simple asphyxiants. The aro-
displaying seizures). The confirmatory diagnosis may be
 matic hydrocarbons, benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, and
difficult to achieve due to lack of analytical testing proce-
xylene (BTEX), are found in glues, quick-drying paints,
dures for a particular toxic agent. Contact your local state
lacquers, etc., and they are associated with more neuro-
diagnostic laboratory or check on the American Associa-
logical signs and potential bone marrow toxicity. Although
tion of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD)
most hydrocarbons are of petroleum origin, some are
website (http://www.aavld.org) and "Accreditation" link
wood-based such as turpentine and pine oil. Petroleum
for diagnostic lab contact information to assist in veteri-
hydrocarbon-based products may contain additional com-
nary toxicology analytical testing.
pounds, such as surfactants, metals, and insecticides.
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
 2011 John Wiley and Sons, lnc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, lnc.
285
286
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 30.1. Petroleum hydrocarbon products
Table 30.2. Clinical signs related to petroleum
listed by relative viscosity {lower to higher)#
hydrocarbon product ingestion
Saybolt Universal
Inhalation
Aspiration pneumonia
Seconds (SUS) at
Dyspnea
100°F
Coughing
Bronchospasms
Lighter fuid (naptha)
<32
Fever
Degreasers
<32
Cyanosis
Carburetor cleaner
<32
 Depression
Kerosene
32
Dermal/ocular
Blisters
Gasoline treatment
35
(grooming can lead to
Burns
Diesel fuel 2D
32-45
oral exposure)
Infammation
Fuel oil 2
33-40
Corneal ulcers
Mineral seal oil
36-42
Oral
Salivation
 Fumiture polish 
40
Pawing at mouth/shaking head
Turpentine
<60
Oral irritation/ulceration
Baby oil
70
Severe vomiting
No. 4 Fuel oil
80
Abdominal tenderness
Paint thinners
<100
Diarrhea
Stoddard solvent (white spirits)
Anorexia
Transmission fuids
<138
Systemic
Tachycardia/dysrhythrmias
Heavy mineral oil
180
Ataxia
Machine Lubricant #10
160-235
Tremors
Motor oil (10w30)
325
Weakness
Tar, pine
200-300
Depression
Tar, road RT-6
250-400
Agitation
Seizures
Adapted in part from 16 CFR Part 1700: http://
Aspiration pneumonia
www.cpsc.gov/businfo/frnotices/fr97/frpetdis.html
 Dyspnea/tachypnea
Hepatic insult 
Renal degeneration
Mechanism
The dose or amount of exposure is generally difficult if
 not impossible to estimate unless observed. Petroleum
and central nervous systems. Diverse clinical effects may
products with lower viscosity (resistance to fow) and
occur. Some hydrocarbons may sensitize the myocardium
higher volatility (ability to vaporize) are more likely to
to catecholamines and result in cardiac arrhythmias.
result in inhalation or aspiration into lungs. Aspiration of
Benzene, an aromatic hydrocarbon and carcinogen, can
a small amount of refined petroleum distillation products
cause bone marrow depression and pancytopenia.
(<5 ml or 1 tsp) can lead to fatal aspiration pneumonia in
pets. In general hydrocarbons with a viscosity of <35 SUS
Clinical Effects
(Saybolt Universal Seconds, a measure of viscosity) pose
a severe aspiration hazard because volatile products with
a low surface tension diffuse into distal airways even when
SIGNS
small quantities of fuid are ingested (see Table 30.1).
Clinical effects in animals generally occur 1 to & hours
Products with a viscosity of 35 to 100 SUS pose a moder-
postexposure (see Table 30.2). When animals inhale petro-
 ate aspiration hazard. These products can cause vomiting
leum products in enclosed spaces or while walking through
and subsequent aspiration pneumonia. Products with a vis-
spills, respiratory signs of coughing, aspiration pneumo-
cosity >100 SUS present a minimal aspiration hazard.
nia, fever, cyanosis, and depression may occur. Hydrocar-
Exposure to petroleum products results in clinical signs
bons can penetrate deep into the lung, causing
involving the respiratory, gastrointestinal, integumentary,
bronchospasms, inflammation, and oxygen displacement
Chapter 30/ Miscellaneous Toxicants
287
Table 30.3. Therapy recommendations for petroleum hydrocarbon product exposure
 Clinical Sign
Recommendation
Dose
Respiratory
Oxygen
Based on blood gas data
Positive end-expiratory pressure ventilation
Antibiotics
As needed
Chest radiographs
Bronchospasm
 Beta-2 selective agonist (avoid epinephrine)
 Dogs: 0.003 to 0.005mg/kg SC every 4h
e.g., terbutaline
Cats: 0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg SC every 4h
Cardiac dysrhythmia
Electrcardiogram
Dehydration
Crystalloid Fluids
As needed
Gastrointestinal irritation
Famotidine
0.25mg/kg PO every 12h
Sucralfate
Dogs: 0.5 to 1g PO every 8 to 12h
Cats: 0.25g PO every 8 to 12h
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 2mg/kg IV
Dermal contact
Mild detergents/cool water
Topical antibiotics
in the alveolus leading to hypoxia. Direct contact with
information and proven treatment regimens. If the expo-
alveolar surfaces may cause hemorhage, edema, and
sure involves small amounts of petroleum products with a
thrombosis leading to hypoxia, atelectasis, and pneumoni-
high viscosity, sometimes just cage rest and observation
tis. Cats and dogs breathing large amounts of petroleum
for 12 to 24 hours is required.
solvents for several hours can suffer seizures and
Following ingestion of petroleum hydrmcarbon prod-
bronchitis.
ucts, avoid inducing emesis and perforrming gastric lavage
Dermal contact can cause skin blisters and burns, severe
to reduce the risk of aspiration. The use of an endotracheal
buccal irritation, reduced respiratory function, and abdom-
tube cuff is not thought to be protective against aspiration.
inal tenderness. Cats and dogs can be exposed to petro-
Administration of adsorbents (activated charcoal) is gener-
leum products through dermal contact and subsequent oral
ally not effective in adsorbing hydrocarbons and can
ingestion via grooming. After a heavy dermal exposure to
increase the risk of aspiration of petroleum product.
hydrocarbons of lower viscosity (e.g-, paint thinners, kero-
However, if an animal ingested a large amount of petro-
sene, Stoddard solvent, gasoline), systemic and dermal
leum product containing additional toxicants (insecticides,
clinical signs may occur. Petroleum products can irritate
metals, chloride-containing compounds), the risk of
the eyes producing infammation, corneal damage, and
gastric lavage and possible aspiration should be balanced
ulcers.
against the toxicity. Do not use rmineral oil to dilute the
Oral exposure in animals from direct contact with petro-
petrmoleum product. Treatment for aspiration pneumonia
leum products may cause salivation, severe vomiting, oral
may be necessary, including monitoring chest radiographs,
ulcerations, abdominal tendemess, diarrhea, and anorexia.
blood gases, and performing a CBC and serum biochem-
Systermic toxicity associated with petroleurm exposures
istries for hepatic and renal damage.
include tachycardia and dysrhythmias (originating from
Animals with aspiration pneumonia should be hospital-
hypoxia or myocardial sensitization to catecholamines),
ized with intravenous fuids, oxygen therapy if needed,
ataxia, tremors, weakness, central nervous system (CNS)
and cage rest (Table 30.3). In severe inhalation cases
stimulation (agitation, seizures) or depression, tachypnea,
consider the use of positive end-expiratory pressure ven-
fever, aspiration pneumonia, cyanosis, and hepatic and
tilation with caution because pneumothorax and pneu-
renal damage.
momediastinum could occur. Use of antibiotics may be
indicated for secondary infections and bronchospasms
Management of Exposures
treatment may be required using a beta-2 selective agonist
Treatrment of petroleum hydrocarbon exposures is chal-
(avoid epinephrine). Perform chest radiographs initially
lenging because of a general lack of dose and toxicity
(preferably within 2 hours postexposure) and 2 to 4 days
288
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
postexposure to check for pulmonary damage. Monitor
mucous membranes. The most severe clinical signs are
a complete blood count (CBC) for hemoconcentration
associated with aspiration pneumonia, and the more vola-
(increased packed cell volume and hemoglobin concentra-
tile or highly refined products the greater the risk of aspira-
tions) and inflammatory responses and perform serum
tion and developrment of pulmonary ederma.
biochemistry to check for elevated blood urea nitrogen
Diagnosis will be based on history of exposure to petro-
and hepatic enzyme levels associated with systemic toxic-
leum products and compatible clinical signs. The charac-
ity. Check for hypoglycemia and monitor blood gases
teristic odor of petroleum hydmcarbons can sometimes be
and oxygen saturation for pulmonary performance. Rapid
detected in vomitus, gastrointestinal contents, urine, skin
progression of respiratory problems is a guarded prog-
secretions, and on the breath. Although few diagnostic labs
nosis. Respiratory signs may take days to almost two
perforrm testing for petroleum hydrmcarbons in gastrointes-
weeks or longer to resolve.
tinal contents, it is recommended to save gastrointestinal
With evidence of buccal irritation, animals can be pro-
contents in airtight, clean, glass containers and tissue
vided oral egg whites or milk. Oral protectants, such as
samples (lung, liver, kidney) in aluminum foil and airtight
sucralfate or famotidine, may be needed. Follow up with
containers; freeze samples. Contact a veterinary diagnostic
intravenous fuids and bland diets pmviding adequate
laboratory for location of a lab to perform analysis, or
nutrition. It is recommended that animals with abnormal
cormmercial environmental labs may perform petroleum
cardiac rhythms should be monitored with electrocardio-
testing depending on the matrix.
grams and treated appropriately. Seizures in animals can
A quick test for hydrocarbons in stomach contents
be treated with diazepam or barbiturates.
involves mixing the contents vigorously with warm water
Dermal exposure to petroleum hydrocarbons should be
and observing for petroleum products to rise to the surface
treated by washing the animal with mild, nonsolvent-based
as oily bubbles or oil film. This is not a definitive test
detergents; note that petroleum distillates are not very mis-
because fatty acids can produce an oil film.
cible with water. Topical ointments or antibiotics may be
required depending on skin irritation. Exposure to heavier
Differential Diagnoses
chain hydrocarbons (asphaltenes or tar) may require clip-
Differential diagnoses for clinical signs include organo-
ping the hair coat. Animals may need an Elizabethan collar
to prevent grooming and oral exposure. Flush eyes with
phosphates, caustic compounds, and trauma.
warm water or saline for 15 minutes and stain for corneal
leum product containers in the home, garage, and hobby
ulcers if ocular exposure has occurred. Observe animals
areas. Where hydrocarbon spills occur, clean up immedi-
for at least 12 hours postexposure, particularly for respira-
ately and prevent animal access to spill area.
tory effects, which may require oxygen supplementation
and cage rest.
FERTILIZERS
Diagnostics
Postmortem lesions may involve pulmonary congestion
Sources
and edema, hepatic fatty change, renal degeneration, and
Fertilizers are typically based on N-P-K or nitrogen-
necrosis (see Table 30.4). Ulcerations and the presence of
phosphorus-potassium compounds  and reported
las
an oily substance may be noted on oral and tracheal
numbers "5-10-5." These numbers represent percent by
weight of ingredients in the fertilizer—for example. 5%
nitrogen and potassium and 10% phosphorus. Fertilizers
Table 30.4. Postmortem lesions reported
are used for agricultural, lawn and garden, and household
following ingestion or aspiration of petroleum
plants. Formulations can be as granules, powders, liquids
hydrocarbons
(concentrated or diluted), and solid sticks. The source of
nitrogen is varied, including ammonium or potassium
Ulcerations in oral, gastrointestinal, or tracheal mucosa
nitrate, urea, or organic in the form of blood meal (about
Oily contents in gastrointestinal tract or lung
12% to 13% nitrogen), canola meal, and fish powder.
 Pulmonary ederma and congestion (lesions generally
Phosphorus sources can be inorganic, ammonium or potas-
bilateral and caudoventral in lung)
sium phosphate, or organic in the form of bone meal (con-
Hepatic fatty change and centrilobular necrosis
taining about 12% phosphorus) or fish emulsions. Often
Renal degeneration and necrosis
potassium is added as potassium chloride or potash (salts
Chapter 30 / Miscellaneous Toxicants
289
of potassium carbonate, potassium oxide, or potassium
should not be induced in animals with a history of vomit-
chloride). Minor trace nutrients such as magnesium, boron,
ing. Often no additional therapy is required. If the animal
copper, molybdenum, cobalt, zinc, and iron, can be incor-
is dehydrated or in shock, Huid therapy is recommended.
porated. Fertilizers with high iron concentrations (>1%)
Depending on clinical signs, additional therapy may be
 can cause iron intoxication and severe gastrointestinal irri-
necessary for managing the animal. The appearance of
tation (see Chapter 29).
congested mucous membranes and chocolate brown blood
 Fertilizers can include epsom salts (magnesium sulfate)
can indicate rmethemoglobinemia requiring oxygen therapy
and cocoa bean hulls and be incorporated with pesticides,
and methylene blue or ascorbic acid treatment. Check
herbicides, and fungicides. A history on ingestion of the
particular product and listed ingredients is needed to eval-
uate exposure.
Table 30.5.Fertilizer clinicalsigns
Clinical Effects
Reported
Vomiting
Signs
Salivation
Clinical signs are dependent on the ingredients in the
Diarrhea
product. Typically, fertilizers are of low toxicity, and only
Abdominal tenderness
gastrointestinal irritation is reported with ingestion (Table
 Polydipsia
30.5). Dogs are generally involved in exposures. Clinical
Lethargy
signs of salivation, vormiting, diarrhea, and lethargy gener-
Less frequently reported
Urticarial rash
ally develop within 2 to 10 hours postexposure. Recovery
Pruritis
occurs in 12 to 24 hours. Less common clinical signs
Seizures
reported are rash, pruritis, stiffness, tremors, and muzzle
Stiffness
swelling in dogs. Dogs can be attracted to ingest large
Tremors
amounts of blood or bone meal and could develop severe
Swollen muzzle
 gastroenteritis and possible pancreatitis. Fertilizers con-
Methemoglobinemia
taining nitrates as the main nitrogen source may cause
Pancreatitis
methemoglobinemia. The elimination half-life for nitrate
Calcium cyanamide ingestion
Skin irritation/ulceration
in dogs is relatively long, 44.7 hours, with most absorbed
Gastritis
 nitrate eliminated in urine. In rmonogastrics, use of ammo-
Rhinitis
nium salts and urea as the nitrogen source produces gas-
Tracheobronchitis
trointestinal irritation. Death is not commonly reported
Tachypnea
with fertilizer ingestions in monogastrics.
Pulmonary edema
Ataxia
Management of Exposures
Hypotension and shock
Animals with recent fertilizer ingestion and no clinical
signs should be induced to vomit (Table 30.6). Emesis
Table 30.6. Treatment of fertilizer ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
Emesis
Apomorphine
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or subconjunctival sac
3% hydrogen peroxide
1 to 5 ml/kg PO (generally do not exceed 50ml for dogs or 10ml
total for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Cathartic
Sorbital
3ml/kg (70%) PO
Dehydration/shock
Crystalloid fuids
 Methermoglobinemia
 Oxygen therapy
Methylene blue
1.5 mg/kg IV as a 10% solution in saline (monitor for Heinz bodies)
Ascorbic acid in cats
30 mg/kg PO 4 times daily (slow in action)
290
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
appropriate chapters in this book for treatment of iron,
Table 30.7. Clinical signs in dogs consuming
herbicide, or insecticide toxicosis.
cocoa bean mulch
One compound used as a fertilizer is calcium cyanamide
Commonly reported
Vomiting
(CCaN,). It can also be applied as a pesticide, defoliant,
Muscle tremors
and fungicide. The compound is irritating to skin, eyes,
Less frequently reported
Tachycardia
and respiratory tract. Clinical signs can be skin irritation
Hyperactivity
and ulcers, rhinitis, tracheobronchitis, and gastritis. Acute
Diarrhea
oral exposure may result in erythermatous reaction in the
face, dizziness, lethargy, vormiting, rapid breathing, pul-
monary edema, hypotension, ataxia, shock, and possible
found in some chocolates. Unless "significant" amounts
hepatic insult.
of cocoa bean mulch are ingested, many animals have
no clinical signs. When large amounts of cocoa bean
Prognosis
mulch are ingested by an animal, vomiting and muscle
The prognosis for recovery is generally good with fertil-
tremors can occur similar to signs from a methylxanthine
 izer ingestion and treatment. However, additional ingredi-
toxicosis (Table 30.7).
ents of iron, herbicides, and insecticides may cause more
severe clinical signs. Several of the Veterinary Diagnostic
Management of Cases
Laboratories are capable of testing stomach contents or
Treatment depends on the amount of mulch (particularly
product samples for fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides.
 cocoa bean mulch) ingested, time elapsed since ingestion,
Nitrate analysis can be performed on serum, feed, and
and clinical signs observed. If a small amount was
ocular fuids by many veterinary labs.
ingested, the animal should be observed for up to 24
Following application of fertilizer to plants, lawn,
hours for clinical signs. When larger amounts of cocoa
garden, or agricultural area, animals should be kept from
bean mulch are ingested within a few hours of discovery
contacting the area until dry or product has been incorpo-
(<3 to 4 hours), vomiting has not occurred, and the animal
rated into the soil. Fertilizers should be kept in containers
and animals prevented access to the containers or storage
has normal mentation, emesis can be induced with 3%
hydrgen peroxide or apormorphine (Table 30.8). If the
areas.
dog is hyperexcitable or has seizures, gastric lavage should
be performed with an endotracheal tube cuff in place.
MULCHES
Hyperactivity or seizures can usually be controlled with
diazepam. Repeated doses of activated charcoal should
Sources
be given every 3 to 6hr for up to 72hr. Use a cathartic
A variety of mulches are used in gardens or landscapes.
with the first dose of activated charcoal. Intravenous fuid
Inorganic mulches include lava rock, river stones, geo-
therapy can increase urinary excretion of methylxanthines.
textile fabrics, and pulverized rubber. Organic mulches
Consider urinary bladder catheterization, which may
include shredded wood, bark or wood chips, conifer
reduce reabsorption of theobromine. Heart function should
needles, leaves, grass clippings, newspapers, and straw,
be monitored in dogs, particularly for premature ven-
which are generally nontoxic unless consumed in large
tricular contractions and persistent tachyarrhythmias;
amounts and could cause gastrointestinal irritation or
treatment with lidocaine (without epinephrine and not in
obstruction. With ingestion of organic mulches, consider
cats) and beta-blockers may be required. Bradycardia is
exposure to possible pesticides or molds and mycotoxins.
not reported as commonly as tachyarrhythmias. Death is
A popular mulch or organic fertilizer is cocoa bean mulch,
not common with ingestion of cocoa bean mulches (see
which can be toxic to animals, particularly dogs attracted
Chapter 24). Contact your state veterinary laboratory or
to the sweet, chocolate aroma. Cocoa bean mulch is
the AAVLD website for information on diagnostic con-
made of cocoa bean shells and reportedly contains
firmation of theobromine in cocoa bean mulch or gastric
between 0.19 to 2.98% theobromine (approximately
contents.
860 to 13,500mg theobromine/lb or 54 to 850mg
Prevention includes recommending use of alternative
theobromine/oz). The concentrations of theobromine in
mulches, such as pine or cedar mulches, where dogs have
cocoa bean mulch can be higher than concentrations
access to roam or exercise.
Chapter 30 / Miscellaneous Toxicants
291
Table 30.8. Treatment of mulch/cocoa bean mulch (theobromine) ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
Emesis
Apomorphine
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or subconjunctival sac
3% hydrogen peroxide
1 to 5 ml/kg PO (generally do not exceed 50ml for dogs or 10ml
total for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Adsorbent
Activated charcoal
2 to 5 g/kg body weight PO(1g activated charcoal in 5 ml water)
Cathartic
Sorbital
3ml/kg (70%) PO
Tremors
Diazepam
0.5 to 2mg/kg IV
Methocarbamol
50 to 220 mg/kg IV slowly
Seizures
 Diazepam
0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV
Phenobarbital
2 to 6mg/kg IV slowly
Tachyarrhythmia
Propanolol
0.02 to 0.06mg/kg IV slowly
Metoprolol
0.04 to 0.06 mg/kg IV slowly
Lidocaine
1 to 2mg/kg IV slowly, and then infuse at 30 to 50 mcg/kg/min
Bradycardia
Atropine
0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg IV
COMPOST PILES
Table 30.9. Clinical signs of compost ingestion
Bacterial
Vomiting
Sources
Diarrhea
Compost piles may contain decomposing lawn, garden,
Dehydration
and food products, especially fruit and vegetable wastes,
Fever
leaves, and paper products. Generally meat, bones, dairy,
Depression
and fat prmducts are not added to compost but cannot be
Shock
eliminated from consideration with ingestion of compost
Botulism
Drooling
by pets. Dogs, as compared with cats, are more prone to
Limb and tail weakness
scavenging and ingesting decaying products such as
 Poor refexes of eyes and throat
compost. A succession of bacterial populations occurs
Respiratory paralysis
 during composting,including growth of Bacillus spp. and
Death
perhaps Staphylococcus and Streptococcus,which could
Tremorgenic
Irritability
cause clinical signs of gastroenteritis. Yeast and mold
mycotoxins
Salivation
populations aid in decomposition of compost materials.
(roquefortine and
Vomiting
Mold growth of Penicillium, Aspergillus, and Claviceps
penitrem A)
Ataxia
on dairy, grain, bread, pasta, and walnut products could
Tachycardia
release tremorgenic mycotoxins that cause muscle tremors
Muscle tremors
and seizures (see also Chapter 23). Chemicals may be
Panting
added to compost to imprmve decomposition, such as nitro-
Hyperthermia
 gen (inorganic as ammonium nitrate or organic as manure
Nystagmus
or blood meal) and lime (alkalinize the compost pile).
Seizures
Death
Toxicity
Expect typically low toxicity with ingestion of compost.
a small amount of compost material may require only
Clinical Effects
monitoring and treatment of clinical signs over 12 to 24
Clinical signs of gastroenteritis, vomiting, diarrhea, dehy-
hours. Depending on the contents of the compost pile,
dration, and fever may occur within a few hours after
Satmonella spp., Escherichia Coli, and Clostridium spp.
consumption of compost (Table 30.9). Animals ingesting
(including Clostridium botulinum) could contribute to
292
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 30.10. Treatment of compost ingestion (with potential of tremorgenic mycotoxins and botulism
exposure)
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
Emesis
Apomorphine
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or subconjunctival sac in the dog
Gastric lavage
Water at body temperature
10 mg/kg body weight by gravity installation; continue until
lavage fuid runs clear
Adsorbent
Activated charcoal
2 to 5g/kg body weight PO (1 g activated charcoal in 5 ml water)
Cathartic
Sorbital
3ml/kg (70%) PO
Dehydration
Crystalloid fuids
As needed
Acid base imbalance
Sodium bicarbonate
As needed
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 5mg/kg IV (can be repeated at 10min intervals up to 3
times)
Phenobarbital
6mg/kg IV to effect
Pentobarbital
3 to 15 mg/kg IV slowly to effect
Muscle tremors
Methocarbamol
 55 to 220mg/kg IV to effect at a rate of no more than 2ml/min
Botulism
Antitoxin
Artificial respiration
As required
more severe clinical signs of bloody diarrhea,endotoxic
gastric lavage with a cuffed endotracheal tube in place
shock, and depression. Botulinum toxin ingestion may
to prevent aspiration pneumonia. Follow gastric lavage
result in drooling; limb and tail weakness; poor refexes in
with activated charcoal and cathartic administration. Mul-
the eyes, throat, and legs; respiratory paralysis; and death.
tiple doses of activated charcoal every 4 to 6 hours for
 Dogs and cats are reported less sensitive to botulism than
up to 3 days may be necessary with tremorgenic myco-
cattle, horses, and birds.
toxin ingestion due to excretion of toxins in bile with
The tremorgenic mycotoxins, roquefortine and penitrem
enterohepatic circulation. Monitor the animal with a com-
A, are readily absorbed following ingestion and within 30
plete blood count, serum biochermistry panel, determina-
minutes to several hours can cause irritability, muscle
tion of serum anion gap (increased lactate production from
tremors (initially in the head and neck regions), weakness,
muscle trermors), urinalysis, and arterial blood gas
panting, and eventually seizures, nystagmus, opisthotonus,
measurements.
recumbency, and death.
Animals with dehydration should be given fuids in
conjunction with monitoring of electrolyte balance. With
Management of Exposures
an acid-base imbalance sodium bicarbonate should be
Clinical signs of trermors or central nervous systerm stimu-
administered. Corticosteroids may be indicated for animals
lation should be treated first. Tremors may be controlled
in shock.
by methocarbamol, a centrally acting muscle relaxant
 Body temperature should be rmonitored for hyperther-
(Table 30.10). Diazepam may not be effective alone for
mia and body temperature regulated with the onset of
treatment of seizures and phenobarbital may be needed.
tremors and seizures. In tremorgenic mycotoxin exposure,
Pentobarbital is also effective controlling tremor and sei-
methocarbamol oral dosage may be required for several
zZures in dogs with tremorgenic mycotoxin ingestion.
days to control tremors. The prognosis is good for recov-
Treatment may include emesis if the animal has not
ery if gastric decontamination occurred and clinical signs
already vomited and has normal CNS function. If animals
are aggressively treated over the first 24 to 48 hours. If the
exhibit tremors, induction of emesis is not recommended
animal had no gastrointestinal decontamination and
because vomiting may trigger seizures. Gastric lavage is
ingested a large ingestion of tremorgenic material, the
recormmended in large ingestions of compost, where vorm-
 prognosis is poor.
iting has not occurred, and when animal is exhibiting
If botulism is suspected, appropriate gastric lavage and
clinical signs (tremors and central nervous system signs)
activated charcoal therapy should be given soon after
A recommendation is use of a short-acting anesthesia for
ingestion. Antitoxin treatment should be considered early
Chapter 30/ Miscellaneous Toxicants
293
in the course of therapy if a diagnosis of botulism is made
chemicals in firelogs are oxidizing agents such as perbo
based on clinical signs. Animals will require supportive
rates and persulfates to improve viscosity and burming.
care and possible artificial respiration. Prognosis is poor
nonporous extenders (silica, clay, coal dust), and fre retar-
to guarded in animals showing clinical signs of botulism.
dants to extend burning time.
Firelog ingestion can cause gastroenteritis (see Table
Diagnostics
30.11). Dogs may chew on logs when bored or can be
A tentative diagnosis of cormpost pile ingestion is based on
attracted to the odor of wax-impregnated logs. Clinical
the history and compatible clinical signs. Stomach con-
signs of gastrointestinal irritation, such as vomiting, diar-
tents and suspect moldy material can be submitted for
rhea,and constipation can occur. Animals may show
analysis of tremorgenic mycotoxins and botulism at a vet-
depression, hypotension, and, rarely, renal failure. Treat-
erinary diagnostic laboratory. Contact the lab for submis-
ment may consist of oral decontarmination including
sion information.
emesis if ingestion is within 2 to 3 hours, vomiting has not
occurred, and the animal has normal mentation. The use
Differential Diagnoses
of activated charcoal and a cathartic are recommended.
Differential diagnoses include methylxanthines, strych-
Depending on clinical signs, fuids and monitoring renal
nine, bromethalin rodenticides, metaldehyde, illicit drug
function should be considered. Prevention recommenda-
ingestion, tetanus toxoid, and a variety of human or vet-
tion is to store firelogs in an area where animals have no
erinary drug ingestion. Prevention is through adequate
access.
enclosure of compost piles and decaying food material and
restraint of animals from these areas.
MATCHES
Match heads are made from potassium chlorate and
CHARCOAL BRIQUETTES
regarded as having low toxicity with ingestion (see Table
Charcoal briquettes are of low toxicity and pose primarily
 30.11). Potassium chlorate is an oxidizing agent that can
a foreign body obstruction risk if swallowed. The solid
cause methemoglobinemia. If animals ingest a box or
cubes contain char dust that after ingestion could act as a
books of matches, clinical signs may develop including
gastrointestinal irritant causing vomiting. Clinical signs
vomiting, abdominal pain, CNS depression, hypotension,
 generally are self-limiting. Inhalation of charcoal dust can
cyanosis, hemolysis, and possibly methemoglobinemia. If
irritate ocular mucous membranes, nose, and throat (Table
treatment is required and ingestion has occurred within
30.11). Gently fush the eyes with saline or warm water
several hours, recommend oral decontamination with
and remove animals from the source of irritation. Quick
emesis. Supportive therapy may include gastrointestinal
lighting charcoal briquettes contain 10 to 20% hydrocar-
protectants (e.g., egg whites, milk) and fuids. If methe-
bon solvent, char dust, and limestone (<15%). Ingestion
moglobinemia develops, treatment with oxygen and meth-
of the hydrocarbon-containing briquettes may cause vom-
ylene blue (1% at 4 mg/kg in dogs or once at 1.5 mg/kg in
iting, diarrhea, ataxia, lethargy, and possibly seizures if
cats IV) should be considered. The effective use of ascor-
large amounts are ingested (see the section on petroleum-
bic acid treatment in cats (30 mg/kg PO 4 times daily) may
based products for therapy recommendations). Store
be too slow for practical therapy.
product in a location where animals have no access.
FIREWORKS AND FLARES
FIRELOGS
Fireworks can contain oxidizing agents (potassium nitrate
Firelogs contain combustible products such as reclaimed
or chlorates), potassium perchlorates, heavy metal salts,
sawdust, wood four, paper pulp, and ground nut shells
and black powder (potassium nitrate or salt peter, charcoal,
 pressed into a log shape. The cellulosic material may be
and sulfur) (see Table 30.11). Sparklers can contain potas-
combined with petroleum-based wax (up to 65%) for
sium nitrate on a thin metal wand. Flares are made from
metal nitrates or sodium nitrate, sulfur and hydrocarbons.
ble or plant-based wax that dogs may be attracted to ingest
The toxicity from ingestion of these products is generally
in large amounts. Colorful firelogs can contain particulates
low. Primarily gastrointestinal iritation is reported as
mixed with a variety of chemicals (calcium or sodium
vomiting (sometimes severe), abdominal pain, and saliva-
chloride, potassium nitrate, copper sulfate, boric acid, or
tion. Occasionally ulcerations may occur in the gastroin-
metals such as lead, arsenic, antimony, selenium). Chemi-
testinal tract and bloody feces are reported. Reports of
cals such as coffee waste can be in java logs. Additional
hemolysis and seizures in affected animals are rare.
294
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
Table 30.11. Products involving ignition
Product
Chemical
Clinical Signs
Charcoal briquettes
Char dust (wood, coal, starch, lime)
Vomiting
10-20% hydrocarbon solvent
Diarrhea
Mucous membrane irritation
Lethargy
Firelogs
Cellulose/lignin: sawdust, wood four,
Vomiting (severe)
coal dust, ground nut shells, silica
Diarrhea
Petroleum-based wax
Constipation
Vegetable/plant wax
 Depression
Potassium nitrate
Renal failure (rare)
Sodium chloride
Heavy metals
Match head
Potassium chlorate
Methemoglobinemia
Striking surface
Red phosphorus
Cyanosis
Powdered glass
Vomiting
 Hypotension
Depression
Hemolysis
Sparklers
Potassium nitrate
Gastroenteritis
Fireworks
Oxidizing agents (potassium nitrate,
Vomiting (severe)
chlorates)
Abdominal pain
Potassium perchlorates (produces white
Bloody feces
fash and noise)
Shallow breathing
Methemoglobinemia
Colors produced by heavy metal salts
 Additional signs could be associated
(mercury, antimony, copper, strontium,
with heavy metals
lithium, barium, phosphorus)
Black powder:
75% potassium nitrate
Vomiting
15% charcoal
Diarrhea
10% sulfur
Methemoglobinermia
Watusi or dancing firecracker
Yellow phosphorus
Acute liver toxicity and organ failure
Signaling or Illuminating Flares
Metal nitrates or sodium nitrate
Gastroenteritis
Hydrocarbons
Methemoglobinemia
Provide symptomatic care for clinical signs. If signs of
into the country. Reported clinical signs in humans fol-
methermoglobinemia occur (cyanosis, dyspnea, ataxia),
lowing ingestion of these fireworks are acute hepatic
treatment with oxygen and methylene should be
injury and hepatic failure, upper-gastrointestinal hemor-
considered.
rhage, disseminated intravascular coagulation, bone-
Yellow phosphorus fireworks found in "dancing fire-
marrow depression, cerebral edema, and death. Treatment
cracker”or "Watusi" fireworks made in Asia are extremely
includes aggressive early decontamination of the gas-
toxic. Yellow phosphorus is readily absorbed from the
trointestinal tract, monitoring hepatic function and acid-
gastrointestinal tract and is a general protoplasmic poison
base balance, and providing fuids, glucose, and fresh
affecting multiple organ systems. While the United States
frozen plasma.
The administration of intravenous
restricts the use of yellow phosphorus in matches and
 N-acetylcysteine did not appear to affect survival rates
fireworks, some of these products could find their way
in human exposures.
Chapter 30 / Miscellaneous Toxicants
295
EXPLOSIVES
hyperesthesia, salivation, vomiting, tremors, and seizures
that can become prolonged.
Plastic Explosives
Sources
ManagementofExposures
Plastic explosives (e.g., RDX, C-4, PE-4) are generally
Because of the rapid onset of seizures, use of emetics
(such as apomorphine) is controversial. Emesis is not
malleable solids that burn without exploding and are rela-
tively insensitive to friction or impact; therefore, they are
indicated if the animal is showing neurological signs
easily transported without undue precautions. Ingestion is 
because of the potential for aspiration pneumonia, and
vomiting may have already occurred following ingestion.
 a A  n l so  
and accidental. In one report, a working dog ingested a
Cyclonite appears to have a long retention time in the
small fragment of C-4 (the size of a grain of rice) and was
stomach; it is strongly recommended that gastric lavage
treated with emesis of gastric contents but still developed
be performed, preferably within several hours postexpo-
systemic effects including generalized seizures.
sure and with an endotracheal tube cuff in place (see Table
The chemical cyclonite or cyclotrimethylenetrinitra-
30.13). Activated charcoal should be given following
lavage, either orally or by an orogastric tube. To protect
mine is a component in many plastic explosives (Table
30.12). Cyclonite crystals are colorless and insoluble in
against potential C-4 caustic action, gastrointestinal pro-
water. It has been reported that during manufacturing of
tectants were recommended during and after hospitaliza-
tion. If the animal is salivating profusely consider using
cyclonite, human workers breathing the dust for several
days developed "tonic-clonic spasms" that lasted for 5 to
atrmopine.
10 minutes, occurred intermittently, and did not readily
Seizures may have durations of several minutes sepa-
 w  jo s o o oi jo sd q p
stop when the worker was removed from the work
environment.
 progresses to hyperesthesia and trermors. Convulsions can
be controlled with sedatives such as diazepam and pheno-
barbital (which may be necessary for up to 6 hours). In the
Kinetics
From experimental studies, plastic explosives appear to be
case of severe convulsions deep anesthesia may be needed
slowly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. In a rat
for up to 6 to 8 hours. An oral maintenance phenobarbital
therapy may be required for a period of days afterthe acute
experiment, RDX was rapidly cleared frorm the plasma
clinical signs abate to help control seizures and possibly
following absorption and distributed to tissues. C-4 is dis-
stimulate cytochrome P450 enzyme activity and cyclonite
tributed widely to tissues, with kidneys having the highest
 concentration, followed by brain, heart, and lung.
metabolism. If animals go into respiratory arrest, mechani-
cal ventilation may be required for a period of time. Dogs
should be allowed to recover consciousness gradually, but
Toxicity
resume anesthesia if convulsions reoccur. In one canine
An experimental estimate of a fatal dosage of PE-4 in a
case, transient blindness and lack of menace response was
dog is 14 to 34 mg/kg body weight. Postmortem lesions
reported for 12 hours after hospitalization; thiamine (8 mg/
are listed in Table 30.12. The lethal dosage of RDX for
kg IM) was administered every 24 hours to help protect
cats was reported to be 100 mg/kg. It appears from reported
the CNS from insult.
Fluids (such as lactated ringers and dextrose saline
plastic explosive ingestion.
drips) should be used to maintain hydration and for aci-
dotic patients. In one case the dog developed facial and
Clinical Effects
appendicular edema within 8 hours after hospitalization
Signs
and was treated for hypoproteinemia with intravenous
 Clinical signs appear within minutes to several hours after
fresh frozen plasma followed by hydroxyethyl starch
ingestion. Animals that are clinically norrmal after a poten-
(1 ml/kg/hr). To help prevent pulmonary edema it is rec-
tial exposure to plastic explosives should be observed for
ommended to tum the dog every few hours while under
a minimum of 4 to 6 hours. Clinical effects can be serious
sedation or anesthesia. Monitor a complete blood count for
and severe, with early recognition of the ingestion and
 anemia and serum biochermistries for hepatic and renal
rapid treatment improving the outcome. Following inges-
functions and elevations in liver enzymes, bilirubin, and
tion of plastic explosives with cyclonite, clinical signs can
 blood urea nitrogen. In one report, the blood biochermistry
appear rapidly and include lethargy, ataxia, confusion,
Table 30.12. Explosives and clinical signs
Name
Chemical
Clinical Signs
RDX (syn. royal defense explosive)
Cyclonite
Confusion
(cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine)
Hyperesthesia
Hyperventilation
C-4
91% cyclonite
Lethargy
5.4% plasticizer
2.1% polyisobutylene
Ataxia
Tremors/facial twitches
1.6% motor oil
Seizures
PE-4
88% RDX (cyclonite)
Transient blindness
12% plasticizer paraffin
Hyperthermia
Hematuria
Oliguria
Proteinuria
Salivation
Vomiting
 Pale or congested mucous membranes
Petechial rash
Hepatic injury
Anemia
Urinary incontinence
Renal damage
Death
PETN (penthrite)
 Pentaerythrityl tetranitrate
Vomiting
Ataxia
Collapse
Bradycardia
Dysrhythmia
Depression
Disorientation
TNT
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene
Methemoglobinermia
Anemia
Hepatic injury
Splenomegaly
Anorexia
Skin irritation (skin yellow-orange color)
Mucous membrane irritation
Death
Dynamite
Nitroglycerin (glyceryl trinitrate)
Methemoglobinermia
Nitrate salts
Dyspnea
 Diatomaceous earth or sawdust
Hypotension
 Depression
Muscle weakness
Anorexia
Convulsions
Death
Chapter 30 / Miscellaneous Toxicants
297
Table 30.13. Treatment for explosive ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
Emesis
Apomorphine
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or subconjunctival sac in the dog
Gastric lavage
Water at body temperature
10 mg/kg body weight
Adsorbent
Activated charcoal
2 to 5 g/kg body weight PO (1g activated charcoal in 5 ml water)
Seizures
 Phenobarbital
4mg/kg, IV every 4hr, 4 times for a total of 16mg/kg total dose
3mg/kg PO, every 12hr as maintenance dose, and then tapering
dose
Diazepam
0.28 mg/kg rectally
0.34 mg/kg/hr, IV
Propofol
0.4 mg/kg IV
Gastrointestinal
 Famotidine
0.57 mg/kg P0 every 12hr
protectant
Sucralfate
28.5 mg/kg PO every 8hr
 Omeprazole
1.15 mg/kg PO every 12hr
Respiratory arrest
Oxygen
As needed
 Positive pressure ventilation
Fluids
Isotonic crystalloid
68.5 ml/kg/day IV reduced to 48 ml/kg/day IV
Hypoproteinermia
 Fresh frozen plasma
10ml/kg IV as a rate of
 5 ml/kg /hr
Diuretic
 Furmosemide
1 mg/kg
Liver insult
Vitamin K
2mg/kg PO every 24hr
Multivitamins
IM
Salivation
Atropine
30 to 50 μg/kg subcutaneously
Methemoglobinermia
Oxygen therapy
Methylene blue
1.5 mg/kg IV as a 10% solution in saline (monitor for Heinz
bodies)
RDX and indicated a prolonged recovery. With hepatic
Table 30.14. Postmortem lesions reported
damage, the dog was supplemented with vitamin K, and
following ingestion of plastic explosives
multivitamins. Urine protein and output should be moni-
Generalized congestion
tored. Following rehydration the use of a diuretic is recom-
Pulmonary edema
mended to help accelerate elimination of metabolites in
 Petechial hemorrhages in the pancreas
urine.
Hepatic congestion and enlargement
 Renal congestion and hydropic degeneration
Diagnostics
Fragments of plastic explosives may be identified visually
in gastric contents to help confirm exposure (Table 30.14)
Recovery occurs in about 48 hours. Prognosis is generally
good with early detection of exposure and treatment,
although renal toxicity was associated with one canine
Prognosis
exposure. In this case of a 2-year-old Labrador dog ingest-
Although clinical signs can be severe, with prompt treat-
ing cyclonite (C-4), the dog responded to treatment for
 ment death is not cormrmon following accidental exposure.
seizures but subsequently developed polyuria/polydipsia
298
Section 3 / Specific Toxicants
and renal insufficiency characterized by a 70% reduction
serum using a method based on ion mobility spectrometry
in glomerular filtration rate.
detected fragments characteristic of PETN.
Pentaerythrityl Tetranitrate (PETN or Penthrite)
Dynamite
Sources
The primary ingredients of dynamite are nitroglycerin and
nitrate salts. Potential effects of nitroglycerin ingestion
PETN is a nitroglycerin compound and high explosive.
include vomiting, bradycardia, dysrhythrmia, and ataxia.
Dogs can be exposed to PETN during training in military
The treatment is similar to exposure to PETN. Methemo-
or police work.
globinemia may result from the nitrate salts in dynamite.
Treatment for methemoglobinemia includes oxygen and
Chinical Effects
methylene blue (see Table 30.13).
Signs
 Initial clinical signs in a dog that chewed on a wrapped
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene or TNT
PETN container were gastrointestinal irritation, repeated
TNT or 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene is classified as a secondary
vomiting, depression, mild disorientation, miosis, weak-
explosive because it requires an initiating explosive for
ness, and ataxia (see Table 30.12). Depending on the
ignition. TNT is a crystalline substance with good chermi-
time postingestion and clinical signs, gastric lavage may
cal and thermal stability; it is practically insoluble in water
be effective; the animal may have vomiting frequently
and not affected by acids. It is affected by alkalis becoming
prior to hospitalization. In one report, a clinical exam
a pink, red, or brown color and more sensitive. TNT may
of a dog following PETN ingestion revealed a slight
be mixed with other explosives such as RDX or HMX
bradycardia and blood pressure within normal range. The
(high melting explosive). Workers handling TNT devel-
dog showed conscious proprioceptive deficits in the
 oped a canary yellow discoloration to their skin. Ingestion
hindlimbs.
of TNT can cause methemoglobinermia, hepatic damage,
irritated mucous membranes, sneezing, coughing, cyano-
Laboratory
sis, muscular pain, dysrhythmia, erythema, and pruritis
It is recommended to monitor serum biochemical changes
(see Table 30.12). More chronic exposures in workers
for mild hepatic damage, including elevated bilirubin and
have resulted in anemia, peripheral neuritis, and splenic,
 increased levels in AST, ALT, ALP, and gamma glutarmyl
hepatic, and renal damage. Treatment following ingestion
transferase (GGT). Monitor the heart rate with an electro-
includes oral decontamination, activated charcoal, and
cardiogram; an affected dog displayed a slight bradycardia
cathartic use (see Table 30.13). Monitor the CBC and
and dysrhythrmia (described as sinus arrhythmia with
serum biochemical panel for hepatic damage. If methemo-
periods of sinus arrest).
globinermia develops use oxygen and methylene blue with
supportive therapy.
ManagementofExposures
Treatment may include Huids, the antiemetic metoclo-
REFERENCES
pramide (0.5mg/kg IV,IM, PO q 6 to 8h), and suppression
Albretsen, Jay C. 2004. Fertilizers. In Clinical Veterinary
of gastric acid production (e.g-, omeprazole or rantidine
Toxicology, edited by Konnie Plumlee, pp. 154-155. St.
(2 mg/kg q 12hr). Multiple vitamins, particularly thiamine,
Louis: Mosby.
 B1, B6, and B12 were recommended. In a reported case
Bruchim, Y., Saragusty, J., Weisman, A., and Sterneim, D.
of PETN ingestion, the dog was hospitalized for 7 days
2005. Cyclonite (RDX) intoxication in a police working
and showed gradual improvement of ataxia, normal heart
dog. Vet Rec 157:354-356.
rate, and incidence in nausea/vomiting. The bradycardia
Cope, Rhian B. 2007. Mushroom poisoning in dogs. Vet Med
observed in this case was thought to be related to nitro-
February:95-100.
glycerin induced increased vagal tone.
De Cramer, K.G.M. and Short, R.P. 1992. Plastic explosive
poisoning in dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 63(1):30-31
Diagnostics
Fishkin, Randi A., Stanley, Skye W., and Langston, Cathy E.
2008. Toxic effects of cyclonite (C-4) plastic explosive
Veterinary diagnostic laboratories do not routinely analyze
ingestion in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18(5):537-540.
for plastic explosives; the presumptive diagnosis is based
Naude, T.W. and Berry, W.L. 1997. Suspected poisoning of
on a history of exposure to plastic explosives and compat-
puppies by the mushroom Amanita pantherina. J S Afr Vet
ible clinical signs. In one case report, analysis of the dog's
Assoc 68(4) :154158
Chapter 30 / Miscellaneous Toxicants
299
Oehme, Frederick W. and Kore, Anita M. 2006. Miscella-
the explosive pentaerythrityl tetranitrate. J Smalf Anim
neous indoor toxicants. In Smafl Animal Toxicology, 2nd
Pract 49(6):314-318
ed., edited by Michal Peterson and Patricia Talcott, Pp.
Raisbeck, Merl F. and Dailey, Rebecca N. 2006. Petroleum
986-995.St.Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
hydrocarbons. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited
Osweiler, Gary D. 1996. The National Veterinary Medicat
by Michal Peterson and Patricia Talcott, pp. 986-995. St.
Series. Toxicology, pp. 324-325. Media,Penns ylvania: Wil-
Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
liams & Wilkins.
Potocnjak, D., Baric-Rafaj, R., Lemo, N., Matijatko, V., Kis
1., Mrljak, V., and Harapin I. 2008. Poisoning of a dog with
Appendices
pendix
Drugs Used in Toxicology
Drug
 Indication
Species
Dosage
Acepromazine
Sedation for agitation caused by
Dogs:
0.025-0.2mg/kg IM or IV (Start with
psychotropic drugs (e.g-,
low dose and titrate up to effect)
amphetamines,
Cats:
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC
phenylpropanolamine,
pseudoephedrine)
N-acetylcysteine
Management of acetarminophen
Dogs and Cats:
Mucomyst@: Dilute to 5% solution;
(Mucomyst@,
toxicosis
140 mg/kg PO loading dose, and
Acetadote@)
then 70mg/kg q 4-6h for 7
treatments; if hepatic enzymes
elevated, continue for additional 10
treatments
Acetadote@: 150mg/kg in 3ml/kg
diluent IV over 1h; and then 50 mg/
kg IV in 7ml/kg diluent over 4h,
and then 100mg/kg in 14ml/kg
diluent over 16hh
Activated charcoalb
Adsorption of toxicants (poor
Dogs and Cats: 1-3g/kg PO
adsorption of many metals
and minerals, small
molecules [e.g., alcohols]).
Generally administered with
a cathartic—when
administering multiple doses,
cathartic is given every third
dose
Aluminum hydroxide
Antacid
Dogs:
5-15 ml P0 q 12-24h
Cats:
2-10ml PO q 24 h
Antivenin Crotalidae
Management of crotalid snake
Dogs and Cats:
Administer 1-5 rehydrated vials IV
Polyvalent, Equine
envenomation (rattlesnake,
depending on severity of bite
Origin
copperhead, water moccasin)
Continued
Smatlt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 20ll John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 201l by John Wiley and Sons, lnc.
303
304
Appendices
Drug
 Indication
Species
Dosage
Antivenin Crotalidae
Management of crotalid snake
Dogs and Cats:
Dilute 1 vial in 250 ml sterile saline
Polyvalent Immune
envenomation (rattlesnake,
and infuse over 1h; monitor for
FAB, Ovine origin
copperhead, water moccasin)
anaphylaxis; repeat as necessary
(CroFab@)
Antivenin
Management of envenomation
Dogs and Cats:
Contents of 1 vial diluted in 2.5 ml of
Lactrodectus
by Lactrodectus (black
horse serum IM or further dilute in
(Lyovac)c
widow spider)
10-50ml of sterile saline and
administer IV over 15 minutes
Apomorphine
Induction of emesis; may not be
Dogs:
0.03mg/kg IV or 0.04 mg/kg IM
effective in cats: because
Alternatively a portion of tablet may be
they have few opioid
crushed in a syringe and dissolved
receptors within their emetic
with few drops of water and
center in the CNS
administered into the conjunctival
sac. After sufficient vomiting
occurs, rinse conjunctival sac free
 of unabsorbed apomorphine.
Cats:
0.04mg/kg IV or 0.08 mg/kg SC or IM
Atipamizole
 Reversal of bradycardia,
Dogs:
50mcg/kgIM
hypotension, and sedation
from alpha agonists (e.g-,
amitraz, xylazine), imidazole
decongestants
Atropine
Test dose for suspected
Dogs and Cats: TD: determine heart rate, and then
organophosphorus (OP) or
administer 0.02 mg/kg IV; recheck
carbamate toxicosis (TD)
heart rate—if rate increases >5 bpm,
not an OP or carbamate toxicosis
Treatment of bradycardia or
Dogs and Cats:
XD: 0.2-0.5 mg/kg, give %4 dose IV,
excessive bronchial
rest IM or SC
secretions from
 organophosphorus or
carbamate toxicosis (XD)
Treatment of bradycardia from
Dogs and Cats:
0.022-0.044 mg/kg IM, IV, SC prn
cardiac depressant drugs
(e.g-, digoxin) (CD)
Bicarbonate, Sodium
Management of acidosis
Dogs and Cats:
mEq required = 0.5x body wt
(kg) × (desired total CO, minus
measured total CO); give %2
calculated dose over 34h, and then
recheck blood gases
Appendix 1 / Drugs Used in Toxicology
305
Drug
Indication
Species
Dosage
Blood, whole
 Replacement therapy for anemia
Dogs and Cats:
10-20 ml/kg IV
(transfusion)
Buprenorphine
 Management of pain
Dogs and Cats:
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q 6-12 h
Calcitonin, Salmon
Treatment of hypercalcemia
Dogs:
4-61U/kg SC q 8-12h
caused by cholecalciferol
toxicosis
Calcium EDTA
 Heavy metal chelator
Dogs and Cats: 2
 25 mg/kg SC qid for 5 days
Chlorpromazine
Antiemetic
Dogs and Cats:
0.5 mg/kg IV, IM or SC q 6-8h
 Sedation for agitation caused by
Dogs:
3mg/kg PO q 12h
psychotropic drugs (e.g-,
0.5 mg/kg IM or IV q 12h
amphetamines,
 phenylpropanolamine,
Cats:
3 mg/kg PO q 24 h
pseudoephedrine)
0.5 mg/kg IM or IV q 24h
Cyproheptadined
Assistance in managerment of
Dogs:
mg/kg PO or per rectum q 6h
serotonin syndrome and
Cats:
2-4 mg per cat PO q 12-24h
serotonergic effects of
psychotropic drugs
Dantrolene
Management of Lactrodectus
Dogs:
1-5 mg/kg PO q 8h or 1 mg/kg IV
(widow) spider bites;
Cats:
0.5-2mg/kg P0 q 8h or 1 mg/kg IV
management of malignant
hyperthermia from hops
Dapsone
 Management of derrmal necrosis
Dogs and Cats:
1 mg/kg PO q 8-24h
from Loxoscetes bits (recluse
spiders)
Deferroxamine
Chelator of iron
Dogs and Cats:
15 mg/kg/hour IV or 40mg/kg IM q
4-8h
Diazepam
Sedation for CNS stimulation;
Dogs:
0.1 mg/kg slow IV
CAUTION: avoid use or use
with caution with
syrmpathomimetic (e.g-:
amphetamine) intoxication
because paradoxical
excitation may occur
 Management of seizures
Dogs and Cats:(
0.2-5 mg/kg IV to effect
Continued
306
Appendices
Drug
 Indication
Species
Dosage
Digibinde
 Management of cardiac
Dogs and Cats:
 Dosage based on serum digoxin levels
glycoside toxicosis (drugs,
or amount of digoxin ingested
plants, toads) where life-
(formulas on insert); if unknown
threatening arrhythmias have
exposure level, start with 1-2 vialsf
not resolved with
symptomatic therapy or
serum potassium levels
>5 mmol/l in the setting of
severe digitalis intoxicatione
 Dimercaprol (BAL)
Heavy metal chelator
Dogs and Cats:
2.5 mg/kg IM; repeat q 4h for 2 days, q
8h on 3rd day, and then q 12h for
10d;
Diphenhydramine
 Management of acute allergic
Dogs:
2-4 mg/kg PO q 8-12 h
reactions; antiemetic
1 mg/kg IM, SC, IV q 8-12h
Cats:
0.5 mg/kg PO q 12h
2mg/kg IM q &h
 Epinephrine
Systemic treatment of acute
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IV, IM or SC
 anaphylaxis
Esmolol
Management of ventricular
Dogs and Cats:  Loading dose of 200-500mcg/kg IV
 arrhythmias;
over 1 minute followed by constant
ultra-short-acting
rate IV infusion of 25-200 mcg/kg/
minute
Ethanol
 Management of ethylene glycol
Dogs:
As 20% solution, administer 5.5 ml/kg
toxicosis; prevents formation
IV q 6h for 5 treatments, and then
of toxic metabolites
q 8h for 4 treatments
Cats:
As 20% solution, administer 5 ml/kg IV
q 6h for 5 treatments, and then q
8h for 4 treatments
 Flumazenil
Benzodiazepine antagonist used
Dogs and Cats:  0.01 mg/kg IV
to aid in severe
benzodiazepine overdose
Fomepizole
Management of ethylene glycol
Dogs:
20mg/kg IV, and then 15 mg/kg IV at
toxicosis; prevents formation
12 and 24h, and then 5 mg/kg at
of toxic metabolites 
36h and q 12h until no detectable
EG in blood
Cats:
125 mg/kg slow IV; then 31.25mg/kg at
12, 24 and 36h
Appendix 1 / Drugs Used in Toxicology
307
Drug
Indication
Species
Dosage
Furosemide
 Diuretic for use in management
Dogs:
Up to 7.7mg/kg IV or IM q 1-2h as
of pulmonary edema
needed
secondary to inhalation
Cats:
Up to 4.4mg/kg IV or IM q 1-2h as
toxicity
needed
Diuretic to enhance calcium
Dogs and Cats:2
 2-4 mg/kg q PO, IV or IM 8-12h
excretion in hypercalcemia
(e-g., cholecalciferol
toxicosis)
Glucagon
Manages severe cardiac
Dogs and Cats: 5-10mg IV
arrhythmias (bradycardia, AV
block) due to beta adrenergic
blocker, calcium channel
blocker, and tricyclic
H,blockers
 Reduces gastric acid secretion
Dogs and Cats:
Cimetidine: 5-10 mg/kg PO, SQ, IM,
IV q 6-8h
Dogs:
Famotidine: 0.5-1mg/kg PO, IM, SQ,
IV q 12-24 h
Cats:
0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM, IV q 24h
Anecdotal reports of intravascular
hemolysis when used IV in cats
Dogs:
Ranitidine: 0.5-2mg/kg PO, IV, IM q
8-12 h
Cats:
2.5 mg/kg IV q 12h or 3.5 mg/g PO q
12h
3% Hydrogen
Induction of emesis
Dogs and Cats:
1 ml/lb to maximum of 45-50ml; can
peroxide
repeat once
Hydroxocobalamin
Management of cyanide
Dogs:
75-150mg/kg IVk
toxicosis
Intravenous Lipid
 Management of intoxication by
Dogs and Cats:
1.5 ml/kg IV administered over 10-20
Solution (20%;
highly lipid soluble
minutes followed by 0.25 ml/kg/min
Liposyn@,
cormpounds (e.g., ivermectin,
IV for 1 hour; repeat dosing can be
 Intralipids@)
moxidectin, baclofen,
given at 3-4 hour intervals (or
calcium channel blockers);
when serum no longer lipemic)
emerging modality that some
consider experimental;
should be reserved for severe
cases that are poorly
responsive to other therapy
Continued
308
Appendices
Drug
 Indication
Species
Dosage
 Kaolin-pectin
 Demulcent and putative
Dogs:
1-5ml/kg PO q 4-12h
adsorbent; CAUTION: many
Cats:
1-2ml/kg PO q 4-12h
formulations now contain
bismuth subsalicylate
Lactulose
Laxative and reduces blood
Dogs:
15-30 ml PO q 6h
 ammonia levels; helpful in
Cats:
0.25-1 ml PO q 8h
cases of liver insufficiency
Lidocaine
 Management of ventricular
Dogs:
Bolus 2mg/kg slow IV up to 8mg/kg;
arrhythmias
or rapid IV 0.8 mg/kg/minute, and
then CRI of 25-80 mcg/kg/min
Cats:
Bolus 0.25-0.5 mg/kg slowly; repeat at
0.15-0,25 mg/kg in 5-20 minutes;
CRI at 0.01-0.02mg/kg min
Magnesium hydroxide
Reduces gastric acid
Dogs:
5-30ml q 12-24 h
Cats:
5-15ml q 12-24h
Mannitol
Osmotic diuretic for management
Dogs and Cats:
0.25-0.5 gm/kg IV over 15-20 minutes
of oliguric renal failure
Treatment of cerebral edema
Dogs and Cats:
0.5-1.5 g/kg IV over 10-20 minutes
Maropitant
Antiemetic
Dogs:
1 mg/kg SC q 24hh
2 mg/kg PO q 24h
Methocarbamol
Managerment of muscle tremors,
Dogs and Cats:
55-220mg/kg IV; administer half
rigidity, convulsive activity
rapidly, wait for the animal to relax,
(e.g., Perrmethrin,
and then administer remainder to
 metaldehyde toxicoses)
effect; do not exceed 330 mg/kg/day
Methylene Blue
Treatment of
Dogs:
4 mg/kg slow IV once
 methemoglobinermia; use
Cats:
1-1.5 mg/kg IV once
with extreme caution,
especially in cats:
Metoprolol
Management of tachycardia
Dog
5-50mg PO q 8-12h or
0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO q 12h
Cats:
2-15mg per cat PO q 12h
Naloxone
 Reversal of opioid toxicosis
Dogs:
0.04mg/kg IV, IM or SC
Cats:
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV
Appendix 1 / Drugs Used in Toxicology
309
Drug
Indication
Species
Dosage
Nitroprusside
Treatment of hypertension
Dogs:
 Initial dose 1-2mcg/kg/minute;
increase incrementally q 3-5 min
until desired BP attained
Cats:
Initial dose 0.5mcg/kg/minute; increase
incrementally q 3-5 min until
desired BP attained
Pamidronate
Management of hypercalcermia
Dogs:
0.65-2 mg/kg in 0.9% NaCl slow IV
(Aredia@)
due to intoxication by
over 2-3 hours; may repeat in 4-7
vitamin D or analogues
days if needed
D-Penicillamine
Copper or lead chelator 
Dogs:
110 mg/kg/day PO divided qid for 1-2
weeks
Cats:
125 mg q 12h PO for 5 days
Pentobarbital
Management of seizures
Dogs:
3-15 mg/kg slow IV to effect
Phenobarbital
 Management of seizures
Dogs and Cats:3
 3-6 mg/kg IV to effect
Pralidoxime Chloride
Treatment of organophosphorous 
Dogs and Cats:
20mg/kg IM, IV, SC q 8-12h if no
insecticide intoxication
response after 3 doses, discontinue
Prednisone
Adjunct therapy in
Dogs and Cats:  1-2mg/kg PO q8-12h
hypercalcemia due to vitamin
 D or analogue toxicosis
Propanolol
Management of tachycardia or
Dogs and Cats:(
0.02 mg/kg slow IV
other cardiac arrhythmias
Propofol
Management of seizures
Dogs and Cats:
0.1-0.6 mg/kg/minute
3-6mg/kg IV followed by CRI
8-12 mg/kg/h
Protamine Sulfate
 Management of heparin
Dogs and Cats:
Administer 1-1.5 mg to antagonize
overdoses
each mg (100 units) heparin; slow
IV
Pyridostigmine
Management of toxicosis from
Dogs:
0.5-3 mg/kg PO q 8-12h
non-depolarizing
neurormuscular blocking
Cats:
0.25 mg/kg/day
agents, botulism, atropine,
averrmectin, coral snake
envenomation, and
anticholinergics
Continued
310
Appendices
Drug
 Indication
Species
Dosage
Pyridoxine
Used in managerment of seizures
Dogs:
Administer milligram for milligram the
from penicillamine,
dose of isoniazid/hydrazine; if not
Gyromitra mushroom,
known, initial dosage 70mg/kg IVi
isoniazid, and hydrazines;
adjunct therapy for ethylene
glycol toxicosis
SAMe
Hepatoprotectant
Dogs:
17-20mg/kg/ day PO
Cats:
200mg/day PO
Silymarin
Hepatoprotectant
Dogs and Cats:
20-50 mg/kg/day PO
Succimer
Heavy metal chelator
Dogs and Cats:
10mg/kg PPO q 8h for 10 days; can be
given rectally if patient is vomiting
Trientine
Chelator for copper
Dogs:
10-15 mg/kg PO q 12h before meals
hepatotoxicity
Vitamin K,
Treatment of anticoagulant
Dogs and Cats:
3-5mg/kg PO divided B1D; treat for 7,
(Phytonadione)
rmodenticide coagulopathy
21, or 28 days according to type of
rodenticide; check prothrombin
time 48h after last vitamin K
Xylazine
Emetic
Cats:
0.44mg/kg IM
Yohimbine
Reversal of bradycardia,
Dogs:
0.11 mg/kg IV
hypotension and sedation
from alpha agonists (e.g-,
amitraz, xylazine), imidazole
decongestants
Sources:
*Unless otherwise indicated, dosages come from Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed.
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing Professional.
DeClementi, Camille. 2007. Prevention and treatrment of poisoning. In Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Ramesh C.
Gupta, pp. 1139-1158. San Diego: Acadermic Press-Elsevier.
*Merck & Co, Inc. 2005. Antivenin (Lactrodectus mactans), Equine origin, product insert.
dGwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2004. Antidepressants. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
286-291. St. Louis: Mosby.
*Smithkline Beecham Corporation. 2009. Digibind product information.
Dalefield, Rosalind R. and Oehme, Frederick W. Antidotes for specific poisons. In Small Animat Toxicology, 2nd ed.,
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 459-474. St. Louis: Saunders.
Cumberland Pharmaceuticals. 2008. Acetadote package insert.
'Savage Labs. 2008. CroFab package insert.
jVillar D, Knight MW, Holding J, Barret GH, Buck WB. 1995. Treatment of acute isoniazid overdose in dogs. Veterinary
and Human Toxicology 37(5):473-477.
Borron, Stephen W, Stonerook, Michael, Reid, Frances. 2006. Efficacy of hyroxocobalamin in the treatment of acute
cyanide poisoning in adult beagle dogs. Clinical Toxicology 44(Suppl 1):5-15.
Appendix 2
Additional Toxic Plants and Associated
System-Based Effects
GASTROINTESTINAL
African milk bush (Synadenium grantii)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Ageratum, foss-fower (Ageratum spp)
Candelabra aloe, octopus plant, torch plant, Barbados aloe,
Alder buckthorn (Rhamnus spp)
medicinal aloe (Aloe spp)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
Anemone, Pasque fower, windfower, meadow anemone,
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
crowfoot (Anemone spp)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
(Prunus spp)
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Chenille plant, red-hot cattail (Acatypha hispida)
Aucuba, Japanese aucuba, Japanese laurel, spotted laurel
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
(Aucuba japonica)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp)
Baby's breath (Gypsophilia paniculata)
Chinese lantem, winter cherry, Cape gooseberry (Physalis
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
alkekengi)
Bird-of-paradise (Caesatpinia spp)
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine (Dioscorea batatas)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
Christmas rmse, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
dulcamara)
Common bean (Phaseolus vuigaris)
Black bryony (Tamus communis)
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Com plant (Dracaena spp)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Crinum lily, spider lily, swamp lily (Crinum spp)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, stag-
Croton (Codiaeum variegatum)
gerweed (Dicentra spp)
(Croton tiglium)
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus muttiforus)
Cmown of thorns (Euphorbia milii)
Blue cohosh (Cautophyllum thalictroides)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
Bluebell (Hyacinthoides non-scripta)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
Broom (Cytisus spp)
(Epipremnum aureum)
Buttercup, meadow buttercup, crowfoot, lesser spearwort
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Diefenbachia spp)
(Ranuncutus spp)
Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocynum cannabium)
Caladium (Caladium spp)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Liium spp, hyb)
Continued
Smalt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 2011 John Wiley and Sons, lnc. Published 20ll by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
311
312
Appendices
GASTROINTESTINAL Continued
Elder, dwarf elder, Danewort (Sambucus ebuius)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp)
maculatum)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Eucalyptus, blue gum, cider gum, silver dollar, Australian
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
fever tree (Eucaiyptus spp)
Male-fern (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonymus spp)
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog mari-
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
gold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
European mistletoe (Vscum album)
Marsh marigold, kingcup (Caltha palustris)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
May apple, mandrake (Podophyllum spp)
Firethorn (Pyracantha spp)
May lily (Maianthemum bifolium)
Fishtail palm (Caryota mitis)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Flamingo fower (Anthurium spp)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
Four o'clock (Mirabilis jalapa)
(Sophora spp)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne spp)
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Milkweed, butterfy weed (Asctepias spp)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Mock azalea,rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Katmia spp)
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Netted vriesea (Vriesea fenestralis)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
(Syngonium spp)
spp, Tragia spp)
Greater celandine (Chelidonium majus)
Night-blooming jessamine, Chinese inkberry (Cestrum
Green earth star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
nocturnum)
Guelder-rmse, high-bush cranberry (Viburnum spp)
Nightshade (Solanum spp)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Oak (Quercus spp)
Holly, yaupon, possurm-haw (llex spp)
Old man's beard, traveler's joy, virgin's bower (Clematis
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp)
spp)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Hyacinth, garden hyacinth, Dutch hyacinth (Hyacinthus
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
orientatis)
Ornamental pepper (Capsicum annuum)
Hydrangea, hills of snow, French hydrangea, hortensia
Oyster plant, boat lily, Moses in a boat (Rhoeo spathacea)
(Hydrangea macrophylta)
Peace lily, white sails, white anthurium, spathe fower,
Iris, crested iris, dwarf iris, feur-de-lis, blue fag, butterfy
Mauna Loa (Spathiphyllum spp) very low toxicity
iris, poison fag, yellow iris (Iris spp)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, fnger
Jack-in-the-pulpit (Arisaema triphylium)
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
Periwinkle (Vinca spp)
cherry (Solanum pseudocapsicum)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclamen spp)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williamsii)
Kalanchoe,Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant ear,
Pheasant's eye (Adonis spp)
devil's backbone, lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Philodendron, sweetheart plant, panda plant, parlor ivy
Kingcup, marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)
(Philodendron spp)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana
Physic nut (Jatropha curcas)
camara)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Larkspur (Deiphinuim spp)
Pineapple, pineapple tree (Ananas comosus)
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay (Laurus nobilis)
Pink quill (Tillandsia cyanea)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
Plumbago, Cape plumbago, Cape leadwort, Ceylon lead-
spp)
wort (Plumbago spp)
Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis)
Poinsettia, Christmas star (Euphorbia pulcherrima) very
Lobelia, cardinal fower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
low toxicity
Appendix 2 / Additionat Toxic Plants and Associated Effects
313
Pokeweed, pokeberry, pokesalad (Phytolacca americana)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla, Cuban
Potato(Solanum tuberosum)
lily, Peruvian jacinth,hyacinth of Peru, bluebell (Scilla spp)
 Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose (Primula 
Star-of-Bethlehem, summer snowfake, dove's dung, nap-
spp)
at-noon (Ornithogalum spp)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp)
Sweet-fag (Acorus calamus)
Pulsatilla (Putsatilla spp)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Tuberous begonia (Begonia tuberhybrida)
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
(Rheum rhubarbarum)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Rosary pea, prayer bean, jequerity, precatory bean (Abrus
Um plant (Aechmea fasciata)
precatorius)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
Rowan, mountain ash, service tree, whitebeam (Sorbus
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjarmin tree, small-leaved
(dds
rubber plant (Ficus benjamina)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
revotuta, Cycas spp)
White mustard, charlock (Sinapis spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Savin (Juniperus sabina)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera
Wild rosemary (Ledum patustre)
(dds
Wisteria, Chinese kidney bean (Wisteria sinensis)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Worrmwood, sagewort, sagebrush (Artemisia spp)
Sensitive plant, shame plant, touch-me-not, action plant,
Yellow allamanda, Nani Ali'i, Hor de barbero (Allamanda
humble plant (Mimosa pudica)
cathartica)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Yellow oleander, Mexican oleander (Thevetia spp)
Solomon's seal (Potygonatum spp)
Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow (Brunfetsia catycina)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Spider lily, crown-beauty, sea daffodil, basket fower, alli-
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
gator lily (Hymenocallis spp)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fairy lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp)
Spurge, creeping spurge, donkeytail (Euphorbia myrsinites)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
 Pinpoint pupils
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
dulcamara)
 Califomia poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
Kaffr lily (Clivia miniata)
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Katmia spp)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Com plant (Dracaena spp)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
(Croton tiglium)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Wild msemary (Ledum paiustre)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Dilated pupils
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia, gera-
nium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias spp)
Jimsonweed, thom-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Continued
314
Appendices
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Continued
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asctepias spp)
Trembling, ataxia, weakness, depression
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia,
Peyote, mescal, mescal button (Lophophora williamsii)
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Potyscias
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Azalea(Rhododendron spp)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
spp)
dulcamara)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Black nightshade (Sotanum nigrum)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, stag-
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
gerweed (Dicentra spp)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Hyperexcitability, muscle twitches
Bluebell (Hyacinthoides non-scripta)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Coffee (Coffee arabica)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Corn plant (Dracaena spp)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Lilium spp)
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aescuius spp)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Jimsonweed,
 thorn-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
stramonium)
fitweed,fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp)
Mock azalea, rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Horsetail (Equisetum spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
cherry (Sotanum pseudocapsicum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Kalanchoe, Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant
Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow (Brunfetsia calycina)
ear, devil's backbone, lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe
spp)
Hallucination, behavioral changes
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
camara)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Larkspur (Detphinuim spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Lobelia, cardinal fower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
Jimsonweed, thom-apple, moonfower (Datura stramonium)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus rocus)
(Sophora spp)
Male-fern (Dryopteris flix-mas)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Milkweed,butterfly weed (Asctepias spp)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
Mimosa, silk tree (Albizia julibrissin)
(Sophora spp)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kaimia spp)
Nutmeg (Myristica fragrans)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williamsii)
spp, Tragia spp)
Appendix 2 / Additionat Toxic Plants and Associated Effects
315
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Sage palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese ferm palm (Cycas
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp)
revotuta, Cycas spp)
(Croton tiglium)
Scheffera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
spp)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
Wild rosemary (Ledum patustre)
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Yesterday-today-and tomorrow (Brunfeisia calycina)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Mediterranean thistle (Atractylis gummifera)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fairy lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Mimosa, silk tree (Albizia julibrissin)
Paralysis
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyctamen spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus muttiforus)
revotuta, Cycas spp)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera
Coyotilla, tullidora (Karwinskia humboldtiana)
(dds
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
False hellebore, black hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Spurge,
creeping
spurge,
donkeytail
(Euphorbia
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
myrisinites)
Kaffr lily (Clivia miniata)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla,
Larkspur (Detphinuim spp)
 Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth, hyacinth of Peru, bluebell
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
(Scilla spp)
(dds
Snowdrop (Gatanthus nivalis)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Katmia spp)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyctamen spp)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Pieris (Pieris spp)
Yellow jessamine,
Carolina jessamine 
(Gelsemium
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
sempervirens)
Wild rmsemary (Ledum patustre)
Yesterday-today-and-tormorrow (Brunfelsia catycina)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Convulsions
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Unconsciousness/coma
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia,
Ageratum, foss-flower (Ageratum spp)
 geraniurm-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
(dds
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, stag-
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
gerweed (Dicentra spp)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Continued
316
Appendices
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Continued
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
English ivy, Irish ivy, cormmon ivy (Hedera helix)
revotuta, Cycas spp)
Hemlock(Conium maculatum)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Spurge (Euphorbia spp)
Jimsonweed, thom-apple, moonfower (Datura stramonium)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calamus)
Lobelia, cardinal fower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
(Sophora spp)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum patustre)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Katmia spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
CARDIOVASCULAR
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia.
(dds
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis)
(dds
Lobelia, cardinal fower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Lupin, lupine,bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Avocado (Persea americana)
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
Azalea(Rhododendron spp)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Black laurel,mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Katmia spp)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscotus
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
spp, Tragia spp)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Night-bloorming jessamine (Cestrum nocturnum)
(Croton tiglium)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Common bean (Phaseolus vuigaris)
Periwinkle (Vinca spp)
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Potato(Solanum tuberosum)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
Saffron crocus, rmeadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
 Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocynum cannabium)
Scheffera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
spp)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonymus spp)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Silk vine (Periploca graeca)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla,
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth, hyacinth of Peru, bluebell
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
(Scilla spp)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Star-of-Bethlehem, summer snowfake, dove's dung, nap-
Jimsonweed, thom-apple, moonfower (Datura stramonium)
at-noon (Ornithogatum spp)
Kalancho, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone,
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
Appendix 2 / Additionat Toxic Plants and Associated Effects
317
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
Yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana)
spp, Tragia spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Philodendron,sweetheartplant(Philodendron spp)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fair lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
spp)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea votubilis)
Respiratory depression or paralysis
Respiratory
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Dyspnea, cyanosis
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Sotanum
(Prunus spp)
dulcamara)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, stag-
Broom (Cytisus spp)
gerweed (Dicentra spp)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Caladium (Catadium spp)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
 Califomia poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
superba)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Hemlock, poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Jimsonweed,
thorn-apple,
moonfower
(Datura
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
stramonium)
(Epipremnum aureum)
Larkspur (Deiphinium spp)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp)
Meadow
saffron,
autumn
crocus
(Colchicum
False hellebore, white hellebore ( Veratrum spp)
autumnate)
Flamingo fower (Anthurium spp)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arowhead vine
 Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
(Syngonium spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
maculatum)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Yew,Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
RENAL
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Saffron crocus, meadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Lilium spp)
Calcium oxalate crystalluria
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa
Caladium (Catadium spp)
superba)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
 philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp)
Continued
318
Appendices
RENAL Continued
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
Hematuria, azotemia
(Epipremnum aureum)
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
(Syngonium spp)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Lord-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
Garlic (Allium spp)
maculatum)
Onion (Allium spp)
Scheffera, umbrella plant, rubber plant, starleaf (Schef-
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
fera spp)
Rosary pea (Abrus precatorius)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
Sweet-fag (Acorus calamus)
LIVER DAMAGE
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Oak (Quercus spp)
Borage (Borago oficinalis)
Purple viper's-bugloss, calamity Jane, Patterson's curse
Comfrey (Symphytum officinate)
(Echium lycopsis)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant
Crmotalaria (Crotataria spp)
(Rheum rhubarbarum)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
Day-bloorming jessarmine (Cestrum diurnum)
revoluta, Cycas spp)
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy,
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp)
(Solanum malacoxylon)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Hound’s-tongue (Cynoglossum officinate)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana
camara)
EMACIATION, ASCITES, EDEMA OF DEPENDENT EXTREMITIES; JAUNDICE:
HEPATOENCEPHALOPATHY
Borage (Borago offcinalis)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp)
Comfrey(Symphytum offcinalis)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum offcinate)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp)
Purple viper's-bugloss, calamity Jane, Patterson's curse
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy,
(Echium lycopsis)
Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp)
CONTACT DERMATITIS, EYE IRRITANTS, ALLERGENS
African blue lily, blue African lily (Agapanthus
Baby's breath (Gypsophilia paniculata)
orientalis)
Black bryony (Tamus communis)
African milk bush (Synadenium grantii)
Buttercup, meadow buttercup, crmwfoot, lesser spearwort
Anemone, Pasque fower, windfower, meadow anemone,
(Ranuncutus spp)
crowfoot (Anemone spp)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia,
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree ( Polyscias
bones (Euphorbia tactea)
spp)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
Arnica (Arnica spp)
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Appendix 2 / Additionat Toxic Plants and Associated Effects
319
Chenille plant, red-hot cattail (Acatypha hispida)
Oyster plant, boat lily, Moses in a boat (Rhoeo
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp)
spathacea)
Chinese lantern, winter cherry, Cape gooseberry (Physalis
Peace lily, white sails, white anthurium, spathe fower,
akekengi)
Mauna Loa (Spathiphyllum spp)
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine (Dioscorea batatas)
 Pencil tree, rmilkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
Chrysanthemum, marguerite, ox-eye daisy (Chrysanthe-
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia firucalli)
mum spp,hyb)
Peruvian lily, lily of the Incas (Alstroemeria spp)
Croton, ornamental (Codiaeum variegatum)
Philodendron, sweetheart plant, panda plant, parlor ivy
(Croton tigtium)
(Philodendron spp)
Crown of thoms (Euphorbia milii)
Piggyback plant, pickaback plant, thousand mothers,
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
youth-on-age (Totmiea menziesii)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
Pink quill (Tiltandsia cyanea)
(Epipremnum aureum)
Plurmbago, Cape plumbago, Cape leadwort, Ceylon lead-
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp)
wort (Plumbago spp)
 Dog-tooth violet, trout lily, avalanche lily (Erythronium
Poinsettia, Christmas star (Euphorbia pulcherrima)
(dds
Poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac (Rhus spp)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose (Primula
Eucalyptus, blue gum, cider gum, silver dollar, Australian
spp)
fever tree (Eucatyptus spp)
Pulsatilla (Putsatilla spp)
Euphorbiurm (Euphorbia resinifera)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
European mistletoe (Viscum album)
Sneezeweed (Helenium spp)
Garlic, onion (Allium spp)
Spurge,
creeping
spurge,
donkeytail
(Euphorbia
Geranium, zonal geranium, ivy geranium (Pelargonium
myrsinites)
spp)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
Great lettuce, garden lettuce (Lactuca spp)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Green earth star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
Um plant (Aechmea fasciata)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjarmin tree, small-leaved
Iris, yellow iris, crested iris, dwarf iris, feur-de-lis, blue
rubber plant (Ficus benjamina)
fag, poison flag (Iris spp)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay (Laurus nobilis)
Yellow allamanda, Nani Ali'i, Hor de barbero (Allamanda
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
cathartica)
macutatum)
Male-fern (Dryopteris flix-mas)
Primary photosensitization
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog mari-
Bishop's weed, Queen Anne's lace (Ammi majus)
gold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
Dahlia (Dahlia spp)
Netted vriesea (Vriesea fenestralis)
Dutchman's breeches (Thamnosma texana)
 Old man's beard, traveler's joy, virgin's bower (Clematis
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog mari-
spp)
gold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
Ornamental pepper (Capsicum annuum)
St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
SUDDEN DEATH
False hellebore, white hellebore ( Veratrum spp)
Laburnum, golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Hemlock, poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Yellow oleander, Mexican oleander (Thevetia spp)
Kalanchoe, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone,
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Appendix 3
Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
Achira (Canna edulis)
Bitternut (Carya spp.)
Achyranthes Verschaffelti (Iresine herbstii)
Black Haw (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Acorn Squash (Curcurbita pepo cv acorn)
Black Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha)
African Violet (Saintpaulia ionantha)
Blaspheme Vine (Smilax laurifolia)
Algamba (Ceratonia sUiqua)
Bloodleaf Plant (tresine herbstii)
Aluminum Plant (Pilea cadierei)
Blooming-Sally (Epilobium angustijloium)
Alumroot (Heuchera sanguinea)
Blue Bead (Clintonia borealis)
American Rubber Plant (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Blue Daisy (Felicia amelloides)
Anthericum Comosum (Chlorophytum comosum)
Blue Echeveria (Echeveria derenbergii)
Antirrhinum Multiforum (Antirrhinum glandutosum)
Blue-Dicks (Brodiaea capitata)
Apple Leaf Crmton (Polyscias balfouriana marginai)
Blue-Eyed Daisy (Arctotis grandis)
Arabian Gentian (Exacum affine)
Bluebottle (Centaurea cyanus)
Aregelia (Neoregelia carolinae)
Blunt-Leaved Peperomia (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Artillery Plant (Pilea callitrichoides)
Blushing Bromeliad (Neoregelia carolinae)
Aspidium Falcatum (Cyrtomiumfalcatum)
Bold Sword Fem (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensi
Aubepine (Crataegus oxyacantha)
compacta)
Autumn Olive (Elaeagnus spp.)
Boston Fern (Nephrolespis exalta bostoniensi compacta)
Baby Rubber Plant (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Boston Sword Fern (Nephrolespis exaltata)
Baby Tears (Helxine soleirolii)
Bottle Palm (Beaucarnea recurvata)
Bachelors Buttons (Centaurea cyanus)
Bottlebrush (Calistemon spp.)
Ball Fern (Davallia buliata mariesii)
Brazilian Orchid (Sophronitis spp.)
Ball Fern (Davallia fojeensis plumosa)
Bride's-Bonnet (Clintonia unifora)
Bamboo (Phylostachys aurea)
Bristly Greenbrier (Smilax hispida)
Bamboo Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Brodiaea Pulchella (Brodiaea capitata)
Bamboo Vine (Smilax laurifolia)
Broom Hickory (Carya spp.)
Banana (Musa acuminata)
Bullbrier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Banana Squash (Curcurbita maxima cv banana)
Bur Gourd (Cucumis anguria)
Begonia Species
Burro's Tail (Sedum morganianum)
Belmore Sentry Palm (Howeia spp.)
Buttercup Squash (Curcurbita maxima cv buttercup)
Big Shellbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
Butterfy Ginger (Hedychium coronarium)
Bignonia (Jacaranda procera)
Butterfy Iris (Spuria spp.)
Bitter Pecan (Carya spp.)
Butterfy Lily (Hedychium coronarium)
Smatt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 2011 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 20ll by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
321
322
Appendices
Butterfy Orchid (Oncidium spp.)
China Root (Smilax glabra)
Butterfly Tulip (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Chinese Plumbago (Ceratostigma wilimottianum)
Button Fern (Pellaea rotundifolia)
Chlorophytum Bichetii (Anthericum bichetii)
Caeroba (Jacaranda procera)
Chlorophytwn
Calathea Insignis (Maranta insignis)
Sternbergianurm (Chtorophytum comosum)
Calathea Lancifolia (Maranta insignis)
Chocolate Solider Plant (Episcia dianthifora)
California Cobra Plant (Darlingtonia californica)
Christrmas Dagger Fern (Polystichym spp.)
California Pitcher Plant (Darlingtonia californica)
Christmas Orchid (Cattleya trianaei)
Callistemon Bradyandrus (Callistemon spp.)
Christmas Palm (Veitchia merrillii)
Callistemon Citrinus (Callistemon spp.)
Cinnamon Jasmine (Hedychium coronarium)
Callistemon Viminalis (Callistemon spp.)
Cinquefoil (Potentilla spp.)
Calochortus Nuttalli (Calochortus gunnisoni)
Cirrhopetalum
Camellia (Camellia japonica)
Appendeculatum (Butbophyllum appendeculatum)
Canada Hemlock (Fsuga canadensis)
Clearweed (Pilea pumila)
Canary Date Palm (Pheonix canariensis)
Cliff Brake Fern (Pellaea rotundifolia)
Candle Plant (Plectranthus coleoides (Marginatus)
Club Moss (Selaginelia kraussiana)
Candycorn Plant (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Cocks Comb (Celosia cristata)
Canna Lily (Canna generalis)
Cocktail Orchid (Cattleya forbesii)
Cantebury-Bell (Gloxinia perennis)
Coffee Plant (Coffea arabica)
Cape Jasmine (Fabernaemontana)
Collinia Elegans (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Cape Primrose (Streptocarpus spp.)
Color-Band Cryptanthus (Cryptanthus “It")
Carob (Ceratonia siliq)
Columnar Cactus (Cephalocereus)
Carob Tree (Ceratonia sUiqua)
Common Camellia(Camellia japonica)
Carob Tree (Jacaranda procera)
Common Catbrier(Smilax rotundifolia)
Camba (Jacaranda procera)
Common Garden Canna (Canna generalis)
Carobinha (Jacaranda procera)
Common Greenbrier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Carolina Hermlock (Tsuga spp.)
Common Snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus)
Carrion Flower (Smilax herbacea)
Common Staghom Fern (Platycerium bifurcatum)
Carrot Fern (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Confederate Jasmine (Trachelospermum jasminoides)
Carrot Fern (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Coolwort (Pilea pumila)
Casaba Melon (Cucumis melo)
Copper Rose (Echeveria derenbergii)
Cast Iron Plant (Aspidistra elatior)
Copperlead (Acalypha wilkesiana macafeana)
Cat Brier (Smilax glabra)
Coral Ardisia (Ardisia crenutata)
Cat Ear (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Coral Bells (Heuchera sanguinea)
Cattleya Labiata (Cattteya trianaei)
Coral Berry (Ardisia crispa)
Cattleya Labiata Var Mossiae (Catteya mossiae)
Cornfower (Centaurea cyanus)
Cattleya Labiata Var Mossiae (Cattteya trianaei)
Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia spp.)
Celosia Globosa (Celosia cristata)
Crataegus Phaenopyrum (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Celosia Plumosa (Celosia cristata)
Crataegus spp. (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Chamaedorean Humilis (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Creeping Charlie (Lysimachia nummularia)
Chaparral Snapdragon (Antirrhinum coulteranum)
Creeping Charlie (Pilea nummularifolia)
Chenille Plant (Echeveria derenbergii)
Creeping Charlie (Plectranthus australis)
Chestnut (Castanea spp.)
Creeping Gloxinia (Asarina erubscens)
Chicken-Gizzard Plant (tresine herbstii)
Creping Gloxinia (Maurandia spp.)
Chickens and Hens (Echeveria agavoides)
Creeping Mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Chickens and Hens (Echeveria elegans)
Creeping Pilea (Pilea depressa)
Chicks and Hens (Echeveria imbricata)
Creeping Rubus (Rubus pedatus)
Chicks and Hens (Echeveria secunda)
Creeping Zinnia (Sanvitalia spp.)
Chin-Lao-Shu (Smilax glabra)
Crepe Myrtle (Lagerstroemia spp.)
China Aster (Catllistephus spp.)
Crimson Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.)
Appendix 3 / Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
323
Crimson Cup (Neoregelia carolinae)
Fairy Fountain (Celosia cristata)
Crisped Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exatta bostoniensis
Fan Tufted Palm (Rhapis spp.)
compacta)
Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Crossandra (Crossandra undulifolia infundibuliformis)
Feathered Amaranth (Celosia cristata)
Cucumber (Cucumis sativus)
Fiery Reed Orchid (Epidendrum cochteasrum)
Cushion Aloe (Hawthoria spp.)
Fig-Leaf Gourd (Cucurbita ficifolia)
Cushion Moss (Setagenella kraussiana brownii)
Figleaf Palm (Fatsia japonica)
Cushon Aloe (Haworthia subfasciata)
Fingermail Plant (Neoregelia carolinae)
Cyrtudeira Reptans (Episcia reptans)
Fire Weed (Epilobium angustifoium)
Dainty (Davallia bullata maries;i)
Fish Tail Fern (Cyrtomium falcarum)
Dainty (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Flame African Violet (Episcia reptans)
Dainty Rabbits-Foot Fern (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Flame of the Woods (Ixora coccinea)
Dainty Rabbits-Foot Fern (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Flame Violet (Episcia reptans)
Dallas Fern (Nephrotepis exatta bostoniensis compacta)
Florida Butter-Fly Orchid (Epidendrum tampense)
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium jlexuosum)
Fluffy Ruffes (Nephrolepis exalta 6 bostoniensis
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium lanceanum)
compacta)
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Forster Sentry Palm (Betmoreana howea Jorsteriana)
Davallia Bullata Mariessi (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Fortunes Palm (TrachycarpusJortuneij)
Davallia Trichomanoides (Davallia bullata mariesii),
Freckle Face (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Desert Trumpet (Eriogonum umbellatum)
Friendship Plant (Pilea invotucrata)
Dichelostemma Pulchellum (Brodiaea capitata)
Frosty (Episcia reptans)
Dichorisandra Reginae (l'radescantia reginae)
Garden Marigold (Calendula offcinalis)
Dinteranthus Vanzylii (Lithops vanzylii)
Garden Snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus)
Duffi Fern (Nephrolepis exatta)
German Violet (Exacum afine)
Duffy Fern (Nephrolepis exatta)
Gherkins (Cucumis sativus)
Dwarf Boston Fern (Nephrotlepis exalta bostoniensis
Ghost Leafless Orchid (Potyrrhiza lindenii)
compacta)
Ghost Plant (Graptopetalum paraguayense)
Dwarf Date Palm (Pheonix roebelenii)
Giant Aster (Townsendia sericea)
Dwarf Feather Fern (Nephrotepis exatta bostoniensis
Giant Holly Fern (Polystichum munitum)
compacta)
Giant White Inch Plant (Tradescantia albifora “Albo-
Dwarf Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
vittata")
Dwarf Rose -Stripe Star (Cryptanthus rose us pictus)
Gibasis Geniculata (Tradescantia multifora)
Dwarf Royal Palm (Veitchia merrillii)
Globe Thistle (Echinops spp.)
Dwarf Whitman Fern (Nephrotepis exalta bostoniensis
Gloxinia (Sinningia spp.)
compacta)
Gold Bloom (Calendula ofcina/is)
Earth Star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
Gold-Fish Plant (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Easter Cattleya (Cattleya mossiae)
Golden Aster (Callistephus spp.)
Easter Daisy (l'ownsendia sericea)
Golden Bells (Forsythia spp.)
Easter Lily Cactus (Echinopsis muttiplex)
Golden Lace Orchid (Haemaria discolor)
Easter Orchid (Cattteya mossiae)
Golden Shower Orchid (Oncidiumfexuosum)
Edible Banana (Musa acuminata)
Golden Shower Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Edible Canna (Canna edulis)
Good Luck Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Elephant-Ear Begonia (Begonia scharfii)
Grape Hyacinth (Muscari armeniacum)
Emerald-Ripple Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
Grape Hyacinth (Muscari spp.)
English Hawthorn (Crataegus oryacantha)
Grape Ivy (Cissus rhombifolia)
Epidendrum Atropurpeum (Epidendrum cocholeastum)
Great Willow-Herb (Epilobium angustiforium)
Epidendrum Ibaguense (Epidendrum cochioeastum)
Green-Ripple Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
Epidendrum Prismatocarpum (Epidendrum cochieastum)
Greenbrier (Smilax glabra)
Episcia spp. (Episcia dianthiflora)
Hagbrier (Smilax hispida)
False Aralia (Dizygotheca elegantissima)
Hardy Baby Tears (Nertera grandensis)
324
Appendices
Hardy Gloxinia (Incarvillea spp.)
Kahali Ginger (Hedychium gardneranum)
Haw Apple (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Kenilworth Ivy (Cybataria muralis)
Haworthia (Haworthia subJasciata)
KentiaPalm (Howeia spp.)
Haws (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Kenya Violet (Saintpaulis spp.)
Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Kharoub (Ceratonia siliqua)
Hedgehog Gourd (Cucumis dipsaceus)
King Nut (Carya spp.)
Hellfetter (Smilax hospida)
King of the Forest (Anoectochilus setaceus)
Hemlock Tree (Tsuga spp.)
King-and-Queen Fern (Asplenium bulbiferum)
Hen-and-Chickens Fern (Asptenium butbiferum)
Kuang-Yen pa-Hsieh (Smilax glabra)
Hens and Chicks (Echeveria imbricata)
Lace Flower Vine (Episcia dianthiflora)
Hens and Chicks (Echeveria secunda)
Lace Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
Hens and Chickens (Echeveria agavoides)
Lace Orchid (Odontoglossum grande)
Hens and Chickens (Echeveria elegans)
Ladies Ear Drops (Fuchsia spp.)
Hickory (Carya spp.)
Lady Lou (Episcia reptans)
Hindu Rope Plant (Hoya carnosa “compacta")
Lady Palm (Rhapis fabelliformis)
Holligold (Calenduta officinalis)
Ladys Ear Drops (Fuchsia spp.)
Holly Fern (Cyrtomium jalcatum)
Lagerstroemia Indica (Lagerstroemia spp.)
Hollyhock (Althaea rosea)
Lance Dracaena (Pleomele thaliodes)
Honey Locust (Glenditsia triacanthos)
Lance Pleumele (Pleomele thalioides)
Honey Plant (Hoya carnosa “compacta")
Large Lady Palm (Rhapsis exceisa)
Honeydew Melons (Cucumis melo)
Laurel-Leaved Greenbrier (Smilax laurifolia)
Honeysuckle Fuchsia (Fuchsia triphylla)
Leather Peperormia (Peperomia crassifolia)
Hookera Pulchella (Brodiaea capitata)
Leng-Fen Tu'an (Smilax glabra)
Horse Brier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Leopard Lily (Lachenalia spp.)
Hoya Carnosa “Exotica" (Hoya carnosa “compacta")
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium flexuosum)
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium lanceanum)
Hoya Carnosa ,Variegata, (Hoya carnosa “compacta")
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Hoya “Mauna Loa"(Hoya spp.)
Lesser Snapdragon (Antirrhinum orontium)
Hubbard Squash (Curcurbita maxima cy hubbard)
Lily of the Valley Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
Hypocyrta spp. (Hypocyrta nummuiaria)
Lily of the Valley Orchid (Oncidium tanceanum)
Ice Plant (Aptenia cordifolia)
Linden (filia americana)
Ice Plant(Lampranthus spp.)
Lipstick Plant (Aeschynathus pulcher)
Imbricata sword fern (Polystichum munitum)
Little Zebra Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Irish Moss (Helxine soleirolii)
Little Zebra Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Iron Cross Begonia (Begonia masoniana)
Little-Fantasy Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
Iron Tree (Ixora coccinea)
Living Rock Cactus (Pleiospilos butusii)
Ivy Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Living Stones (Lithops vanzylii)
Ivy-Leaf Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Locust Pods (Ceratonia siliqua)
Jackson Brier (Smilax lanceolata)
Lou-Lang-T'ou (Smilax glabra)
Jacob's Ladder (Smilax herbacea)
Luther (Harald)
Japanese Aralia (Fatsia japonica)
Madagascar Jasmine (Stephanotis foribunda)
Japanese Holly Fern (Cyrtomium jaicatum)
Magnolia Bush (Magnolia stellata)
Japanese Moss (Helxine soleirolit)
Mahonia Aquifolium (Mahonia acquifolium)
Japanese Pittosporurn (Pittosporum tobira)
Malabar Gourd (Cucurbita ficilolia)
Jasmine (Jasminium rex)
Malaysian Dracaena (Pleomele reflexa)
Jewel Orchid (Haemaria discolor)
Manila Palm (Veitchia merrillii)
Joseph's Coat (Alternanthera amoena)
Mapleleaf Begonia (Begonia cleopatra)
Joseph's Coat (lresine herbstii)
Maranta (Prayer plants)
Jungle Geranium ((xora javanica)
Marbled Fingernail (Neoregelia carolinae)
Kaempferis (Kaempferia putchra)
Mariposa Lily (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Appendix 3 / Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
325
Maroon (Echeveria derenbergit)
Ossifragi Vase (Neoregelia carolinae)
Mary-Bud (Catenduta offcinalis)
Paddy's Wig (Hetxine soleirolii)
May Bush (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Painted Lady (Echeveria derenbergii)
Measles Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Palm Lily (Yucca elephantipes)
Melons (Cucumis melo)
Pampus Grass (Cortaderia selloana)
Metallic Leaf Begonia (Begonia metallica)
Panamiga (Pilea involucrata)
Mexican Firecracker (Echeveria spp.)
Pansy Orchid (Miltonia roezlii alba)
Metallic Peperomia (Peperomia metallica)
Paradise Palm (Howea spp.)
Mexican Rosettes (Echeveria spp.)
Parlor Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Mexican Snowball (Echeveria spp.)
Parlor Plant (Hoya carnosa)
Miniature Date Palm (Phoenix roe belen;;)
Parsley Fern (Asptenium butbiforum)
Minature Fish Tail (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Peace Begonia (Begonia rex “Peace")
Minature Maranta (Calathea micans)
Peacock Plant (Kaempferia putchra)
Miniature Marble Plant (Neoregelia carolinae)
Pearl Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Mistletoe Cactus (Thipsalis cassutha)
Pearl Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Mockernut Hickory (Carya spp.)
Pearly Dots (Haworthia subfasciata)
Mosaic Plant (Fittonia verschaffettii)
Pearly Dots (Hawthoria spp.)
Mosaic Vase (Guzmania lingulata)
Peperomia Fosteri (Peperomia dahistedtii)
Moss Agate (Episcia reptans)
Peperomia Hederifolia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Moss Campion (Silene acaulis)
 Peperomia Peltifolia (Peperomia argyreia)
Moss Fern (Selaginella spp.)
Peperomia Rotundifolia (Peperomia nummutarifolia)
Moss Phlox (Phlox subutata)
 Peperomia Sandersii (Peperomia argyreia)
Moss Rose (Portulaca spp.)
Pepper-Face (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Mossy Campion (Silene acaulis)
Persian Violet (Exacum affine)
Mother Fern (Asplenium buibiferum)
Pheasant Plant (Cryptanthus zonatus)
Mother Spleenwort (Asptenium bulbiferum)
Piggy-Back Plant (Totmiea menziesii)
Mother-of-Pearl Plant (Graptopetalum paraguayense)
Pigrmy Date Palm (Pheonix roebeleni)
Mountain Camellia (Stewartia)
Pignut (Carya spp.)
Mountian Grape (Mahonia spp.)
Pignut Hickory (Carya spp.)
Mulberry Bush (Morus spp.)
Pilea Microphylla (Pilea callitrichoides)
Mulberry Tree (Morus spp.)
Pilea Mucosa (Pilea callitrichoides)
Musa Paradisiaca (Musa acuminata)
Pink Brocade (Episcia “Pink Brocade")
Muscari Armeniacum (Muscari spp.)
Pink Pearl (Begonia semperforens "Pink Pear!")
Muscari spp. (Muscari armeniacum)
Pink Polka Dot Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Muskmelon (Cucumis meio)
Pink Starlite (Crypthanthus rose us pictus
“Pink
Narrow-Leaved Pleomele (Pleomele angustifolia)
Starllite")
Natal Plum (Carissa grandiflora)
Pirliteiro (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Neanthe Bella Palm (Chamaedorea etegans “"Bella")
Pitaya (Hylocereus undatus)
Neanthebella (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Plantanus Orientalis (Plantanus acerifolia)
Nematanthus spp. (Hypocyrta nummutaria)
Plantanus Occidentalis (Plantanus acerifolia)
Neoregelia (Neoregelia carlinae)
Platinum Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Nepbrolepsis (Nephrotepis exalta)
Platycerium Alicicome (Platycerium bifurcatum)
Nerve Plant (Fittonia verschaffettii)
Plumbago Larpentiae (Ceratostigma plumbaginoides)
New Silver & Bronze (Pilea sp. “Silver Tree")
Plush Plant (Echeveria derenbergii)
Night-Blooming Cereus (Hylocereus undatus)
Polka Dot Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Odontoglossum spp. (Odontoglossum grande)
Polystichum Falcatum (Crytomium falcatum)
Old Man Cactus (Cephalocereus senilis)
Pony Tail (Beaucarnea recurvata)
Old World Orchid (Bulbophyllum appendeculatum)
Orange Star (Guzmania lingutata)
Sego Lily (Calochortus gunnisoni)
Oregon Grape (Mahonia acquifolium)
Shagbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
326
Appendices
Shan Ku'ei-Lai (Smilax glabra)
Texas Sage (Salvia coccinea)
Shellbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
Thea Japonica (Camellia japonica)
Shiny Leaf Smilax (Smilax glabra)
Thimble Cactus (Mammillaria fragilis)
Shrimp Cactus (Schiumbergera russelliana)
Thorn Apple (Carateagus oxyacantha)
Silver Bell (Ralesia carolina)
Ti Hu-Ling (Smilax glabra)
Silver Berry (Elaeagnus spp.)
Tiger Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
Silver Heart (Peperomia maremorata)
Tiger Orchid (Odtongolossum grande)
Silver-Leaf Peperomia (peperomia griseoargentea)
Toad Spotted Cactus (Stapelia variegata)
Silver Nerve Plant (Fittonia verschaffelti argyroneura)
Torch Lily (Kniphofia spp.)
Silver Pink Vine (Hoya purpureafusca)
Tous-Les-Mois (Canna edulis)
Silver Star (Cryptanthus lacerdae)
Trailing Peperomia (Peperomia “nummutarifoliaj")
Silver Table Fern (Pteris ensiformis “virtoriae")
Tree Cactus (Cephalocereus)
Tree Gloxinia (Kohteria lindeniana)
Slender Deutzia (Deutzia gracilis)
Tropical Moss (Setaginella spp.)
Small-Fruited Hickory (Carya spp.)
True Cantelope (Cucumis melo)
Smilax Tamnoides Vas
TuFu-Ling (Smilax glabra)
Hispida (Smilax hispida)
Tulip Poplar (Liriodendron tulip/era)
Speckled Wood Lily (Clintonia umbeliutata)
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron tulip/era)
Spice Orchid (Epidendrum cochteastum)
Turban Squash (Cucurbita maxima cv turbaniformis)
Spider Ivy (Chlorophytum comosum)
TurfLily (Liriope muscari)
Spider Plant (Chlorophytum comosum)
Umbrella Plant (Eriogonum umbellatum)
Spotted Laurel (Aucuba japonica variegata)
Urbinia Agavoides (Echeveria agavoides)
Squarenut (Carya spp.)
Usambara Violet (Saintpaulia confusa)
Squirrels Foot Fern (Davallia spp.)
Variegated Laurel (Aucuba japonica variegata)
Star Jasmine (Frachetospermum jasminoides)
Variegated Oval Leaf Peperomia (Peperomia obtusifolia
StarLily(Leucocrinum montanum)
"Variegata")
Star Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Variegated Philodendron Leaf Peperormia (Peperomid
Star Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
scandens)
Star Tulip (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Variegated
WanderingJ
Jew
(Tranescantia jiuminsis
Star Window Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
"Variegata")
Star Window Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Variegated Wax Plant (Hoya carnosa variegata)
Strawberry (Fragaria spp.)
Velvet Plant (Gynura)
Striped Blushing Bromeliad (Neoregelia carolinae)
Venus Fly Trap (Dionaea musciputa)
Sugar-Pods (Ceratonia siliqua)
Verona Fern (Nephrolepis exatt a bostoniensis compacta)
Sulfur Flower (Eriogonum umbeliatum)
Verona Lace Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
Summer Hyacinth (Galtonia spp.)
compacta)
Sunfower (Helianthus annuus)
Vining Peperomia (Peperomia dahistedtii)
Swamp Hickory (Carya spp.)
Violet Slipper Gloxinia (Sinningia spp.)
Swedish Ivy (Plectranthus australis)
Waftle Plant (Hemigraphis exotica)
Sweet William (Phlox diuaricata)
Walking Anthericum (Chtorophytum comosum)
Sweetheart Hoya (Hoya kerui)
Washington Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Sweetheart Peperomia (Peperomia verschaffeltii)
Water Hickory (Carya spp.)
Sword Fern (Nephrotepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Watermelon Begonia (Pellionia daveauana)
Swordfern (Polystichum munitum)
Waternelon Begonia (Peperomia argyreia)
Tahitian Bridal Veil (Tradescantia multifora)
Waternelon Peperomia (Peperomia argyreia)
Tailed Orchid (Masdevallia veichiana)
Waternelon Pilea (Pilea cadierei)
Tall Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
Wax Plant (Hoya carnosaz “compactsz")
compacta)
Wax Rosette (Echeveria derenbergii)
Tall Mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Weeping Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.)
Teasel Gourd (Cucumis dipsaceus)
Weeping Sargent Hermlock (Fsuga canadensis penduta)
Appendix 3 / Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
327
Weisdornbluten Osaycantha (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Wild Buckwheat(Eriogonumumbellatum)
West Indian Gherkin (Cucumis anguria)
Wild Hyacinth (Brodiaea capitata)
Western Sword (Potystichum munitum)
Wild Lantana (Abronia fragrans)
White Ginger (Hedychium coronarium)
Wild Sarsaparilla (Smilax glauca)
White-Edged Swedish Ivy (Plectranthus coteoides
Wild Strawberry (Fragaria spp.)
"Marginatus")
Willow-Herb (Epilobium angustifoium)
White-Heart Hickory (Carya spp.)
Windmill Palm(FrachycarpusJortuneij)
Whitman Fern(Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Winter Cattleya(Cattleya trianaei)j
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol, 121
Allium spp., 112t, 147, 207-208
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 163, 166,
2,4-D, 141-142, 143
Atoe barbadensis, 147
242t, 243t, 244,245
2-PAM, see pralidoxime chloride
Atoe vera, 147, 148f
nonselective serotonin reuptake
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol, 121
Alphahydroxytoluene, see Benzyl alcoho]
4-Aminopyridine, 84t, 144-145
Alpha lipoic acid, 46, 65, 163
selective serotonin reuptake ilnhibitors,
5-Fluorouracil, 72t, 85t, 111, 11lt, 112t,
Alpine golden chain, see Laburnum
65, 166, 242, 242t, 243t, 244-245
164, 248-249
anagyroids
serotonin syndrome and, 242-245
5-Hydroxytryptophan, 65, 72t, 164, 175,
Amanita spp., see also Mushrooms
tricyclic antidepressants, 47, 58, 62, 65,
243, 243t
Amanita bisporigera, 196
66, 85t, 90, 242t, 243t, 244
Amanita muscaria, 190t,194195
Antidotes
Abamectin, 139; see aiso Macrocyclic
Amanita ocreata, 196
Acepromazine, 64
lactone parasiticides
Amanita pantherina,190t, 194
Antibodies, 59
ABCB1 gene, see Macrocyclic lactone
Amanita phattoides, 63,64, 66, 101t,
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab,
 parasiticides, MDR1 P-glycoprotein
163, 191t, 196-199, 197t,
09
and
Amanita smithiana,194
Cross reactivity, 60
Absinthe, see Artemisia absinthium
Amanita strobitformis,194
Digoxin specific antibodies, 60
ACE inhibitors, 246-247
Amanita verna,196
Cross reactivity, 60
Acetaminophen, 231-233
Amanita virosa,196
Antivenin
Acetylcholine (ACh),7, 62,64, 83, 86,
Amanitin, 189, 191, 195, 196, 197, 198,
Black widow spider, 59
129, 130-131, 135, 144, 172, 180,
199
Coral snake, 60
192, 223
Amitraz, 48q, 61, 64,84t, 127128
Crotalidae, 59
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 7, 64, 129,
Amitriptyline, 65, 85t, 242t, 243t;, see also
Atipamezole, 61
130-131,132, 135, 180, 192
Antidepressants; Tricyclic
Atropine, 61
Acute renal failure: see Kidney, failure,
antidepressants
Bic arbonate, sodium, 65
acute
Amphetamines,34e,47,48,64,65,72t,
Calcitonin, salmon,66
Adenium obesum,60t,152
73, 73t, 85t, 91, 221-222, 243,
Calcium salts, 62
Afatoxin, 101t, 199, 200-203, 232
243t
Chelators
clinical signs in dogs, 202t
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
Calcium disodium EDTA, 57
Agkistrodon spp., 182-185
inhibitors, 91, 246-247
Deferoxamine, 58
Albuterol, 48, 72t, 91, 238, 241-242
Anemia, 10, 44, 46, 65, 119, 138, 172,
Dimercaprol, 58
Alcohol, 48, 85t, 166, 167, 215-216,
179,234,279, 295,296t, 298
D-penicillamine, 58
254-260
Heinz body, 10, 232
Succimer, 58
antidotal usage, 61
hemolytic, 48, 65, 111, 112t, 172, 179,
Trientine,58
higher alcohols, 259-260
181, 207, 208, 232,282, 283
Chlorpromazine, 65
proof, conversion, 35t
Anticoagulant rodenticides, 28, 47, 67, 72t,
Cyproheptadine, 65
Aldicarb, 61t, 130t
78, 90, 112, 117-119
Dantrolene, 65
Aldrin, 128
toxicosis, 118-119
Dapsone, 65
Alimentary system, 109
Antidepressants, 18, 47, 58, 62, 65, 66,
Dextrose, 65
gastrointestinal tract, 109
72t, 73, 85t, 90, 164, 166, 175,
Ethanol, 61
toxicants affecting, 1l0-111
242-245
Fumazenil,62
oral cavity, 109
atypical antidepressants, 242t, 242, 245
Functional, 64
Smatt Animat Toxicotogy Essentiats, First Edition. Edited by Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
@ 201l John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
329
330
Index
Folinic acid, 62
in isoxazole mushroom toxicosis, 195
C-4 explosive, 295, 296t
Fomepizole, 61
in phenylpropanolamine toxicosis, 23
Caffeine, 36, 72t, 85t, 92, 149, 161,
Gluc agon, 62
in pyrethroid toxicosis,134
162-163, 212-214, 236
Hydroxycobalamin, 62
test dose, 131
Calcifediol, 12l,122
Hyperbaric oxygen, 63
toxicosis, 85t, 131
Calcipotriene, 66, 107t, 121
Methocarbamol, 66
Atypical antidepressants, see atso
Calcitonin, salmon, 121
Methylene blue, 63
Antidepressants, 242t, 242, 245
Calcitriol, 12l, 122
N-acetylcysteine, 63
August lily, see Hosta spp.
Calcium channel blockers, 46, 62, 90-91,
Naloxone,63
Australian shepherd dogs, MDR1
247
Norepinephrine, 66
Pglycoprotein genetic
Calcium cyanamide, 289t, 290
Pamidronate, 66
polymorphism,139t
Calcium homeostasis, 101
Pharmacologic, 61
Avitrol, see 4-aminopyridine
Calcium oxalate crystalluria, 47, 106, 107,
Pralidoxime, 64
Avocado, see Persea spp.
148,260, 261, 262
Protamine sulfate, 59
Azalea, see Rhododendron spp.
Calcium, x phosphorus product, 122
Pyridostigmine, 64
Calculations, 33
Pyridoxine, 64
Baby's breath plant, see Gypsophitia
Calla lily, see Zantedeschia spp.
S-adenosy]-methionine, 66
panicutata
Camphor oil, 268
SAMe, 66
Baclofen, 72t, 245-246
Cancer,201,274
 Silymarin, 64
Barbiturates,47,53,58,72t,85,222-223
herbicide exposure and, 143
Vitamin K, 67
for managing toxicoses, 123, 128, 129,
lung cancer, 97
Yohimbine,64
134, 144, 145, 162, 163, 164176,
Cane toad, 174
Antifreeze,22,47,61,75q；
193, 194, 288
Capsaicin, 148
see atso Ethylene glycol;
Bee sting, see Hymenepteran insects;
Capsicum spp., 148, 148f
Propylene glycol
Venom,apid (bee)
Captopril,246
Antihistamines, 134, 135, 166, 173, 182
Begonia spp, 147, 148f
Carbamate insecticides, 8, 61, 6lt, 62, 64,
toxicosis, 85t, 231, 233-234,235, 236
Benazepril, 246
73t, 84t, 111t, 128, 129-132, 130t,
Antivenin/antivenom
Benzenemethanol, see Benzyl alcoho]
133
black widow spider, 59, 178
Benzodiazepines, 47, 62, 63, 85t, 138, 162,
Carbaryl, 130t
coral snake, 59, 182
163 167,222, 223-225
Carbofuran, 130t
pit viper, 59-60, 185
Benzoid acid, 258
Carbon monoxide,92
Apotosis, hepatic, 102
Benzyl alcohol, 258-259
Cardamom oil, 268t
Atipamezole,53, 61, 236
Bermuda buttercup, 157
Cardiac glycoside
in amatraz toxicosis, 128
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents, 91
drugs, 91, 247-248
Arsenic, 8, 58, 59,72t, 101t, 106, 107,
Bisaldolol, 165
plants, 60, 60t, 72t, 152-153
109, 110t, 274276, 293
Bismuth subsalicylate, 38, 234, 235
Cardiovascular system
Arteglasin, 148
Bitter orange,see Citrus aurantium
Anatomy, 89
Artemisia absinthium,167-168
Black widow spider, 59, 84t, 177-178
Injury
Asctepias app., 60t, 84t
Borates, 137-138
Mechanisms, 90
Aspiration of toxicants, 253-254
Border collie dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein
Patterns, 90
Aspirin,8, 14, 38, 106, 107, 112, 163,
genetic polymorphism, 139t
Physiology, 89
234235
Boric acid, see Borates
Toxic ants affecting, 90
Asparagus spp,.147
Brake fuid, 265-266
Angiotensin ll antagonists, 91
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, 23,
Bread dough, raw, 216-217, 255
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents, 91
25t, 44, 117, 118, 120, 121, 160,
Brodifacoum, 36q, 40 q, 41e, 118t, 119
Calcium channel blockers, 90
163,165,189, 208,210,211,213,
Bromadiolone, 30,118t,119
Carbon monoxide, 92
214,215, 217, 274
Bromethalin, 28, 30, 36, 84t, 119-121
Cardicac glycosides, 91
Atropa bettadonna, 64t, 84t,
decontamination recommendations, 12 1t
Cholecalciferol, 92
Atropine, 8
desmethylbromethalin, 119, 120
Methylxanthines, 92
antidotal use, 61-62, 159, 214, 216,
LDso, 120t
Pimobendan, 91
236, 247, 248, 2911, 295, 297t
toxicosis, 120, 121t
Sympathomimetic agents, 91
in Bufo toxicosis, 176
Brompheniramine, 233
Carnation oil, 268t
in Katanchoe toxicosis,154
Brown recluse spider, 65, 178-180
Carprofen, see also Nonsteroidal anti-
in muscarinic mushroom toxicosis,
Brunfetsia americana, 72t, 84
inflamimatory drugs
192,198t
Brunfetsia americana,157
toxic dosages, 13, 33, 101t, 102, 107t,
in organophosphorus and carbamate
Brunfetsia pauciftora, 157,158f
237t
insecticide toxicosis, 132
Bryophyttum, see Katanchoe spp.
Carrot seed oil, 268t
in toxicosis from cardiotoxic plants,
Bunchberry, see Lantana spp
Castor bean plant, see Ricinus communis
154
Bufo spp., 72t, 247, 174176
Castor oil plant, see Ricinus communis
contraindications
Bupropion, 58, 85t, 242t
Cats,
in amitraz-induced bradycardia, 128
Butylene glycol, 265-265
amitraz toxicosis, 127
Index
331
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis, 117
Clomipramine, 242t; see also Tricyclic
hematology, 46
bromethalin toxicosis, 120-121
antidepressants
radiography, 48
decontamination recommendations,
Clotting factors, 47, 67, 112, 112t, 118,
serum chemistry,46
121t
119, 178
total solids, 46
LDso, 120t
Clove, oil of, 270t
urinalysis, 46
dermal reaction to pyrethrin-based
Clutch Huid, 265-266
Day lily, see Hemerocatlis spp.
sprays,133-134
Coagulation tests,47, 118,119, 161, 202
DDT, 13, 84t, 128, 129
lily toxicosis, 156157
Coagulopathy, 47, 112t, 155, 118, 172,
Decongestant, 85t, 221, 231, 233,
organophosphorus toxicosis,131
179,183,197,199,202,217,218,
235-236; see aiso Pseudoephedrine
poisoning statistics, 17-18
225, 234, 235, 243, 277, 294
imidazoline, 61, 63, 73t, 235-236
perrmethrin toxicosis, 133-134
Cocaine, 47, 48, 72, 72t, 85t, 91, 225-226,
Decontamination
sodium fuoroacetate toxicosis, 145
243,244,243t
activated charcoal, 53
species differences,10,13,14,15, 16,
Cocoa bean shell mulch, 40q, 289, 290,
contraindications, 52
61,73t, 96t, 112t, 120, 127, 131,
29 1t
emesis,52
156,177,208,227,231,258
Colchicine, 11l, 11lt, 159
apomorphine, 53
strychnine toxicosis,
Cotchicum autumnate,151,159
contraindicated emetics,53
zinc phosphide toxicosis, LDso, 124
Collie dogs,
hydrogen peroxide, 53
Cedar oil, 268t
macrolide sensitivity, 139
xylaxzine, 53
Centruroides spp., 180-181
MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
enemas,54
Cetirizine,233
polymorphism, 10, 38, 139, 139t
dermal, 54
Chamaemetum nobite, see Chamomile
Colorado River toad, 175
dilution, 53
Chamomile,165
Compost, 29, 80q, 214, 215, 291-293
cathartics
Charocal briquette, 293
Compound 1080, see Sodium
bulk, 54
Chemical,interaction
fluoroacetate
osmotic
additive, 7
Convatlaria majatis, 60t, 66, 152, 152f,
sorbitol, 54
antagonistic,7
247
saline
potentiation,8
Conversion factors, 35
magnesium sulfate, 54
synergistic,7
Copperheads, 60t, 182-185
sodiurm sulfate, 54
Chinaberry, see Metia azedarach
Coral snakes, 60, 84t, 181-182
gastric lavage, 54
Chinese herbal medicine, 161
Corticosteroids, 11,87,103, 118, 213, 235,
 inhalation, 54
Chlordane, 128
254
ocular, 54
Chlorinated hydrocarbons,
 In anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis,
intravenous lipids, 58
see Organochlorine insecticides
118
DEET, see Diethyltoluamide
Chlorophacinone, 118
in bromethalin toxicosis,120
Definitions
Chlorpheniramine, 233
in cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis,
acute toxicity,5
Chlorphenoxy herbicides, see Herbicides,
122
chronic toxicity, 6
chlorphenoxy
in Hymenopteran stings, 173
dosage, 6, 33
Chlorpyrifos, 6lt 
Coumarin, 67, 117, 164, 165
dose, 6, 33
intermediate syndrome in cats, 131
Crocus spp, 110t,11lt, 151, 159
hazard, 6
toxicity of, 130t, 131
Crocus, autumn-blooming, see Cotchicum
LDso, 34
Chocolate,see Methylxanthines
autumnate
Jethal dose 50%, 34
Cholecalciferol, 66, 92, 121
Crocus, spring-blooming, see Crocus spp.
Jethal dose, 6
in rodenticides,30, 106, 107t,
Crotatus spp., 60, 60t, 182-185; see also
median lethal dose, 6
121-122
Snakes, pit viper; Venom, pit viper 
no observable effect level, 34
in vitamin supplements, 239
Cyanide
NOEL, 34
toxicosis, 121-122
plants, 63
parts per million, 6
Cholestasis, 102
Cyanogenic glycosides, 62 66, 159
subacute toxicity, 5
Christmas cactus plant, see Schtumbergera
Cycas revotuta, 155, 155f
subchronic toxicity, 6
spp.
Cycas spp., 101t, 155
threshold dose, 33
Chrysanthemum spp., 132, 148, 149f
Cycasin,155
toxicant,5
Cinnamon, 163-164
Cyctamen spp., 149
toxicity, 5, 33
Cinnamonmum spp., 163
Cymbopgum nardus, see Citronella
toxin, 5
Citalopram,242t, 243t; see atso Selective
Cytoskeletal disruption, 102
Deicing salts, 272
serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Delayed reaction, 7
Citral,286t
Daffodil plant, see Narcissus spp.
Deoxynivalenol (DON), 203-205
Citronella, 167-168, 270t
Database, emergency
Deracoxib, toxic dosages, 107t, 237t;
Citrus spp., 167
blood gases, 45
see atso Nonsteroidal anti-
C.aurantium,161
blood urea nitrogen, 46
infammatory drugs
d-limonene, 113t, 167, 269t
glucose, blood, 46
Desert rose, see Adenium obesum
Ctematis spp., 148
hematocrit, 46
Desmethylbromethalin, 119, 120
332
Index
Desvenlafaxine, 242t;, see atso
Easter lily, see Liium tongiforum
Fire ants, 173-174
Nonselective serotonin reuptake
Echinacea purpurea, 164-165
Firelogs, 293, 294t
inhibitors
EDso, 9
Fireworks, 293-294, 294t
Detergents, 52, 53, 54, 56, 109, 110t, 113t,
Edema, 151, 172,202, 202t, 209,211, 295
sparklers, 294t
128,129, 132, 134,255,266-267.
brain, 120, 196, 197t, 222, 261, 280,
Watusi (dancing) firecracker, 294,294t
287t, 288
294
Flare, signaling or illuminating, 293-294,
Developmental toxicity, 11
facial and paw, 35q,172, 232
294t
Diazinon, 6lt, 130t
lung, 58, 93, 95, 96, 97, 142, 162, 176,
Fluoxetine,166, 242t,243t; see atso
Dichlorvos, 61t, 130t
244, 245, 247, 248, 253, 254, 288,
Selective serotonin reuptake
Dicofol, 128
289, 290, 297
inhibitors
Dicoumarol, 117
myelin, 86,
Food and Drug Administration (US FDA),
Dieffenbachia spp., 110t, 150, 150f
Efudex, see 5-Fluorouracil
25t, 64, 66, 67, 161, 185, 204
Dieldrin, 73t, 128
Eapids, 60, 181-182
Free radicals, 101
Diethyltoluamide (DEET), 84t, 138-139
Enalapril, 91, 246
Fungicides, 140-141
Difenacoum, 118t
Endectocide, 139
Furosemide, 143, 21l, 297t
Difethialone, 117, 118t
Endrin, 128, 129
in bromethalin toxicosis, 120
Diisocyanate adhesives, 272
Enterohepatic recirculation, 14, 53, 100
in cholecalciferol toxicosis, 122
Digitatis purpurea, 60t,152, 152f, 247
101, 119, 121, 122, 129,139, 162,
False sago palm, see Cycas spp.
Digitoxin, 60, 90, 91, 152, 247
196, 201, 213, 236, 244, 292
Fern palm, see Cycas spp.
Digoxin, 60, 90, 91, 152, 247
Environmental Protection Agency(EPA,
Foxglove plant, see Digitatis purpurea
Digoxin immune Fab, 60, 152, 176, 248
US EPA, USEPA), 25, 144, 145
Franciscan rain tree plant, see Brunfetsia
Diltiazem, 62, 91, 247
Information on pesticide poisonings, 137
americana
Dimenhydrinate, 59, 233
registration number, 117
Fumonisin, 205
Dinotefuran, 134, 135, 135t
EPA, see Environmental Protection
Diphacinone, 118t
Agency
GABA, 83, 87, 129, 133, 140, 143, 194,
Diphenhydramine, 233
Ephedra, 161
195,214,215,222,224,226,228,
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy,
Ephedra sinica, 161
245, 255, 264
see Coagulopathy
Ephedrine, 16l, 162
Garlic, see Allium spp.
Disulfoton (disyston), 130t 
Epipremnun aureum, 150
German chamomile, see Chamomile
D-limonene, see Citrus spp.
Eprinomectin, 139; see also Macrocyclic
German shepherd dogs, MDR1
Dogs
lactone parasiticides
Pglycoprotein genetic
2,4-D, 141, 142
Escitalopram, 242t; see atso Selective
polymorphism, 139t
amitraz toxicosis, 127
serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Genetic polymorphism, 10
 anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis, 117,
Essential oils, 84t, 167-168, 267-271
Genetic testing, 140
118, 119
Ethylene glycol, 13, 18, 19, 38e, 44, 45,
Geriatric patients, 11
bromethalin toxicosis, 120-121
46, 47, 61, 62, 67, 72t, 75q, 77,
Glimepiride, 249
decontamination recommendations,
86t, 106, 107, 256, 260-263
Glipizide, 249
121t
Ethanol (ethy] alcohol), 7, 14, 38e, 109,
Gtoriosa superba, 159
LDco. 120t
215-216, 254-257
Glory lily, see Gtoriosa superba
Brunfetsia toxicosis, 157-158
for treatment of ethylene glycol
Glue,expanding, see disocyanate
cancer, herbicides and, 143
toxicosis, 61, 263t
adhesives
cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis, 121
Eucalyptus oil, 269t
Glyburide,249
dermal hypersensitivity to pyrethroids,
Eucalyptus sp.,63t,269t
Glycine, 83, 86, 87, 123, 214, 255, 258,
133
Euphorbia putcherrima,149
260
grape & raisin toxicosis, 210-211
Explosives,295-298,296t
antagonism in strychnine toxicosis, 123
macrocyclic lactone parasiticide
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), 296t, 298
Glycols, 260-266; see also Ethylene
susceptibility, 139,139t
dynamite, 296t, 298
glycol; Propylene glycol
MDR1-defective, 139, 139t
pentaerythrity] tetranitrate (PETN), 296t,
Glycosides,
metaldehyde toxicosis, 143
298
anthraquinone,147,157,166
poisoning statistics, 17, 18
plastic explosives,296, 297t, 298t
cardiac, 60, 72, 91, 93, 152-153, 175,
strychnine toxicosis, 123
Exposure
247248
xylitol toxicosis,46, 217-218
amount, 34
cyanogenic,62 66,159
Doramectin, 139; see aiso Macrocyclic
duration, 8
Golden chain tree, see Laburnum
lactone parasiticides
frequency, 8
anagyroids
Dose-response
route, 8
Golden rain tree, see Laburnum
individual, 9
site, 8
anagyroids
population,9
Gorilla glue, 272
Doxepin, 65, 242, 242t; see atso Tricyclic
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 161
Grapes, 107t, 210-211
antidepressants
Fentanyl, 63, 227
GRAS (generally regarded as safe), 167
Dynamite, see Explosives
Fertilizers, 34, 288-290
Grayanotoxins, 153
Index
333
Griffonia simplicifotia,164
in sodium fuoroacetate toxicosis, 145
Isopropanol (isopropy] alcohol), 8, 256,
Guarana, see Pauttinia cupana
Hypericum perforatum, see St. John's Wort
258; see also Alcohol
Guinea pigs
Hyperkalemia, 62, 141, 145,
Jvermectin, 139; see also Macrocyclic
 desmethylbromethalin and toxicity, 120
In cardiac glycoside toxicosis, 48, 153
lactone parasiticides, 10, 28, 37e,
LDso, 120t
Hyperphosphatemia, 92, 121, 122, 156, 210
39q, 53, 55q, 84t, 100, 139,
Cypsophitia panicutata,149
Hyperthermia, 44, 65, 72t, 73t, 154, 162,
Gyromitra spp, 62,64, 191t, 195-196
164, 166, 172, 175, 211, 213, 214,
Japanese pieris plant, see Pieris japonica
221,222, 225, 226,237,238, 291,
Japanese showy lily, see Litium tancifotium
Hemerocallis spp., 107t, 156
292,296
Japanese Yew, see Taxus
Half-life, 14
in castor bean toxicosis, 151
Hematopoietic system
in fluoroacetate toxicosis, 145, 146
Katanchoe spp., 153-154, 154f
toxicants affecting, 112
in hops toxicosis, 160
Katmia spp., 153
Heptachlor, 128
in metaldehyde toxicosis, 144
Kepone, 128
Hepatobiliary System
in mushroom toxicosis, 170t, 193, 197t
Kidney
anatomy, 99
in serotonin syndrome,243,244,245
failure, acute, 28,46, 106, 124,138,
healing and repair, 103
Hypocalcemia, 58, 62, 141, 145, 147, 148,
163, 172, 195, 198, 237, 248, 265,
cirrhosis, 103
153, 157, 261, 280
270, 282, 283, 293, 294t
mechanisms of toxicologic injury
Hypoglycemia, 46, 62, 65, 217, 71t, 86,
in cholecalciferol toxicosis, 121,122
calcium homeostasis disruption, 101
163, 164, 191t, 197t, 198, 216, 217,
in ethylene glycol toxicosis, 13, 260,
cholestasis, 102
218, 221, 223, 224, 227,228, 249,
261, 262, 263
cytoskeletal disruption, 102
250, 256, 257, 270, 288
in grape/raisin toxicosis, 210,211
free radical injury, 101
Hypoglycemic drugs, 163-164, 249-251
in lily toxicosis, 156-157
idiosyncratic reactions, 102
metformin, 250-251
in NSA1D toxicosis, 237-238
mitochondrial injury, 102
sulfonylureas, 249-250
in ochratoxin toxicosis, 205
physiology, 99
in paraquat toxicosis, 142
patterns of injury, 99
lbuprofen, toxic dosages, 5, 28, 85t, 101t,
failure, chronic, 8, 106
apotosis,102
106, 107t, 231, 236, 237, 237t;
mineralization,106,107
hepatic lipidosis, 102
see atso Nonsteroidal anti-
in cholecalciferol toxicosis, 121, 122
hepatocellular degeneration, 102
infammatory drugs
tubules, injury to, 106, 107, 156, 205,
necrosis, 102
ldiosyncratic reaction, 7, 102
211, 231, 238
zones, 99, 101t
llicit drug
from oxalate crystals, 148, 157, 260,
toxicants affecting, 101
testing, 47
261, 262
Herbicides, 7, 12, 65,73, 74, 110t, 137,
Hex spp., 63t, 149, 150f
tubules, regeneration of, 107
141-143, 274, 289, 290
Immediate reation, 7
2,4-D, 141-142, 143
Imidacloprid, 134, 135, 135t
Laboratory
chlophenoxy herbicides, 141-142
Imipramine, see atso Tricyclic
diagnostic, 77
paraquat, 142-143
antidepressants, 65, 68, 242t, 243t
testing
History taking
Information resources
toxicant, 77
agent information, 30
computer databases, 22
sample types, 78
client information, 27
diagnostic laboratories, 23
antemortem, 78
clinical status, 29
internet sites, 22
postmortem,79
environmental information,29
peer-reviewed journals, 22
Laburnum anagyroids, 158
exposure information,30
poison control centers, 23
Lady-of-the-night plant, see Brunfetsia
medical records, 27
textbooks, 22
americana
patient information, 27
Indian common mallow, seeSida cordifotia
Lantana spp 155, 156f
patient presentation,27
Inhalation, 95
Latrodectus spp., 177-178
sudden death, 71
lnsoluble calcium ox alates, see oxalates,
Lead, 6, 10, 13, 27, 33, 57, 58, 59, 61,66,
Holly, see Itex spp.
insoluble
78,85t, 106, 107t, 111, 273, 274,
Hops plant, see Humutus tuputus
 Integumentary system
277-281,293
Hosta spp., 149, 149f
toxicants affecting, 113
Lemon oil, 269
Humutus tuputus,72t,159
lntoxication
Lepiota spp., 190t, 196
Hyacinthus spp, 110t, 151
Incidence,17
Hydroxycoumarins,165
Iris spp., 11ot, 151
L candidum,156
Hymenopeteran insects, 171-174
Intermediate syndrome in
Ltancifotium,156
Hypercalcemia, 106
organophosphorus toxicosis, 131
L tongiftorum, 156
in cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis,
Intravenous lipids, 58
L pardatinum, 156
121, 122
Iron, 7, 37, 38, 39, 57, 58, 59, 63, 65, 67,
L speciosum, 156
Hyperglycemia, 46, 62, 198, 247, 277
68, 72t, 101t, 111t, 239, 273,
L tigrinum,156
in amitraz toxicosis, 127,128
276-277, 278, 281, 282, 289, 290
Linalool, see Citrus spp.
in black widow spider envenomation, 177
percentage determination，39
Lindane, 73t, 81t, 128
334
Index
Lipidosis, hepatic, 102
Mentha puteguim, see Pennyroyal oil
Mycotoxins, 199-205, 210, 290, 291, 291t,
Lisinopril, 246
Menthol, 269t
292, 292t, 293
Liver, see Hepatobiliary System
Metabolism, see Toxicokinetics
pet food associated, 200t
damage, acute, 72t, 99, 101t, 102, 125,
Metaldehyde, 37q, 73t, 84t, 143-144
nephrotoxic,205
138, 142, 156,172, 200t, 202, 203,
Metallothionein, 273
tremorgenic,45,73t, 84t, 114t, 214-215
205, 209, 249, 271, 276, 280, 282,
Metformin, 250-251
286t, 287, 290, 294, 296t, 297,
Methanol, 256,257-258
N-acetylcysteine,38e,63,124,155,156,
298
Methemoglobinemia,
168, 198t, 199, 218, 232, 294
jn acetaminophen toxicosis, 13, 232
Methocarbamol
Naphthalene, 63, 11l, 112t,
in cycad toxicosis, 155
in 2,4-D toxicosis, 142
Naproxen, 14, 28, 65, 100, 236, 237t, 238;
in lantana toxicosis, 155-156
in feline permethrin toxicosis, 134
see also Nonsteroidal anti-
in mushroom toxicosis, 195, 196-199,
in metaldehyde toxicosis, 144
inflammatory drugs
198t
Methomyl, 130t
Narcissus spp., 1l0t, 150
in paraquat toxicosis, 142
Methoxychlor, 128
National Pesticide Information Center
in xylitol toxicosis, 217-218
Methyl alcohol, see Methano]
(NPIC), 25t, 137
dysfunction, 44, 66, 85t, 10lt, 164,
Methylxanthines, 9, 35-36e, 48, 85t, 92,
Nefazodone, 242t, 243t
268t
162-163,212-214,290
Neonicotinoid insecticides, 134135, 135t
in 4-aminopyridine toxicosis, 144
toxicosis, 163,211-212,290t
Nerium oteander,60t, 84t,153,153f,247
in metaldehyde toxicosis, 144
Micruroides envenomation, 60,
Nervous system
Jipidosis, 66, 102, 202, 203, 288, 288t
181-182
anatormy, 83
mechanisms of injury, 101-102
Micrurus envenomation, 60,181-182
healing and repair, 86
necrosis, 46, 74t, 101t, 155, 199, 201
Mineralization, soft tissue, 90, 93, 106,
injury
patterns of injury, 101t, 102-103
107t, 120, 121, 122
mechanisms, 86
Livestock protection collar (LPC), 145
Miniature Australian shepherd dogs,
patterns, 86
Longhaired whippet dogs, MDR 1
MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
Physiology, 83
Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism, 139t
toxicants affecting, 8485
polymorphism, 139t
Milbemycin oxime, 139;see atso
Nicotiana spp., 7, 84t, 159
Loratadine, 233
Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Nicotine, 47, 73t, 84t, 134, 135159
Loxoscetes spp., 178-180
Mirex,128
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR),
Lung fibrosis in paraquat toxicosis,
Mirtazapine, 242t
134
142-143
Mitochondrial injury, 102
Nicotinic signs, 62, 64, 131, 132
Lycopersicon lycopersicum,158,158f
Mock azalea, see Adenium obesum
Nightshade plant, see Sotanum spp.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOl),
Nilfedipine, 91, 247
Macadamia spp.,84t, 114t, 211-212
163,221,166, 2421, 243t, 245;
Nimodipine, 247
Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
see aiso Antidepressants
Nitenpyram, 134, 135t
(macrolides), 10, 139-140
Monomethylhydrazine, 84t, 191t
Nonselective serotoin reuptake inhibitors
dog breed sensitivity to, 139, 139t
Morning-noon-and-night plant, see
(NSSRl), see atso Antidepressants,
MDR1 P-glycoprotein and, 139
Brunfetsia pauciftora
242t, 243t, 245
mechanism of action, 140
Morphine,63,85t,227,228
Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs
toxicosis,140
Mother-of-millions plant, see Katanchoe
(NSAIDs), 11, 33, 101t, 103, 106,
Macrolides,see macrocyclic lactone
spp.
110t, 118, 150, 234, 235,236-238
parasiticides
Mountain laurel plant, see Katmia spp.
Nortryptyline, 65, 242t, 243t; see atso
Macrozamin, 155
Moxidectin, 10, 84, 139; see also
Tricyclic antidepressants
Ma huang, 47, 85t, 161, 162, 163
Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
NSAlD, see Nonsteroidal anti-
Malignant hyperthermia, 65, 72t, 160
Mulch, 193, 290, 291t
infammatory drugs
Management
Muscarinic signs, 61, 62, 96t, 131, 132,
initial assessment
192
Ochratoxin, 205
central nervous system, 44
Musculoskeletal systerm
 Old English sheepdogs, MDR1
renal system, 44
toxicants affecting, 114
Pglycoprotein genetic
respiratory system, 44
Mushrooms, 25t, 29, 32, 62, 63, 64, 64t,
polymorphism, 139, 139t
testing, toxicologic, 77
66, 78, 84t, 189-199
Onions, see Attium spp.
triage, telephone, 31, 43
gastrointestinal irritant, 189-192, 190t
Opioids (0piates), 45, 63, 111, 11lt, 178,
Mannitol, 211, 280
gyromitrin, 84t, 101t, 195-196
179, 227-228
in bromethalin toxicosis, 120
hallucinogenic, 84t, 190t, 193
Oran ge, oil of, 270t
Marijuana, 47, 84t, 226-227
hepatotoxic,72t,101t,163,191t,
Organochlorine insecticides (OCs), 13, 73t,
Matches, 293, 294t
196-199, 197t
84t, 128-129
Matricaria recutita, see Chamomile
isoxazole, 84t, 190t, 194-195
Organophosphorus and carbamate
Metateuca atternifotia,see Melaleuca
muscarinic, 96t, 190t, 192-193
insecticides, 7, 8, 48, 61t, 62, 64,
Melaleuca, 113, 167-168, 268t, 271t
muscimol, 190t, 194195
65, 73t, 84t, 86, 111t, 128,
Metia azedarach, 154
 treatment of ingestion, 198t
129-132, 130t, 133
Index
335
Organophosphorus induced delayed
Poinsettia plant, see Euphorbia
toxicologic testing
neuropathy (OPIDN), 131
putcherrima
environmental, 78
Ornamental peppers, see Capsicum spp.
Poisoning
antemortem,79
Oxalates;, see also Ethylene glyco]
incidence,17
postmortem,79
insoluble, 109, 110t, 147, 150, 156
Potassium benzoate, see Benzy] alcohol
Sandalwood oil, 27 1t
soluble, 147, 157
Potassium chlorate, 112t, 293, 294t
Saponins, 147,149,152
Oxatis spp., 157
Potatoes, green, 158
Sassafras oil, 271t
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM, protopam
Schtumbergera spp., 151
Pamidronate (pamidronic acid), 66, 122
chloride), 32, 64, 132,
Scorpions, 180-181
Paradichlorobenzene,128
Propoxur, 130t
Scotch laburnum,see Laburnum
Paralysis, 36e, 72t, 84t, 114t, 118, 120,
Propylene glycol, 45, 85t, 112t, 260, 262,
anagyroids
123, 131, 149, 154, 159, 177, 181,
264
Scottish terrier dogs, bladder cancer, 143
205, 245, 279, 291t, 292
Proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism
Seizures, 29, 45, 52t, 58, 62, 64, 72t, 79,
Paroxetine, 242t, 243t; see also
(PIVKA), 118, 119
84t, 85t, 86, 87, 172, 175, 176,
Selective serotonin reuptake
Prothrombin time (PT), 47, 118, 119, 184t,
177, 178, 180, 190-191t, 193, 194,
inhibitors
185, 196, 202, 203, 232
195, 196, 197t, 198, 199
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT), 47, 118,
Protoanemonin, 148-149
in drug/herbal toxicoses, 221, 222, 224,
178, 184t, 158, 202, 203, 232
Protopam chloride, see pralidoxime
225,226,228, 233,234, 235, 237,
Pauttinia cupana, 162-163
chloride
238,241,243, 244,245,246,249,
PE-4 explosive, see Explosives
Prunus spp., 63t, 159
250,256,259,267,268,270,285,
Pediatric patients, 10
Pseudoephedrine, 47, 73t, 85t, 91,
287, 288, 289t, 290, 291t, 292, 293,
Pennyroyal oil, 167-168, 271t
161-163, 212
295, 296t, 297
Penthrite, see Explosives
Psitocybe spp., 190t
in food toxicoses, 207, 213, 214, 216,
Permethrin, 37e, 66, 73t, 133-134
Psilocybin, 190t
217
Peppermint oil, 271t
Pulmonary fibrosis, see Lung, fibrosis
in herbal toxicoses, 162, 163, 164, 166,
 Peppers, chili, see Capsicum spp.
Pulmonary system
168
Peppers, ornamental, see Capsicum spp.
in insecticide toxicoses, 127, 128, 129,
Persea spp, 147, 208-210
cancer, 97
131, 132, 133, 134
Persian lilac, see Metia azedarach
healing and repair, 96
in metal or mineral toxicosis, 279, 280,
Persian violet, see Cyctamen spp.
emphysema, 96
281, 282
Perthane, 128
fibrosis, 96
in pesticide toxicoses, 118, 120, 123,
Pesticide, definition of, 137
hyperplasia, epithelial, 96
124, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 144,
PETN explosive, see Explosives
injury
145
Pet Poison Helpline, 23, 160
mechanisms,96
in plant toxicoses, 149, 151, 154, 157,
Petroleum-based products, 110t, 253, 254,
patterns, 96
159, 160
266, 285-288
particle deposition, 95
Selamectin, 139; see atso Macrocyclic
P-glycoprotein, see Macrocyclic lactone
toxicants affecting, 96
Jactone parasiticides
 parasiticides, MDR1 P-glycoprotein
Pyrethrins, see Pyrethroid insecticides
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
and
Pyrethroid insecticides, 7, 44, 45, 73t, 84t,
(SSRl) see atso Antidepressants,
Phenol carbinol, see Benzyl alcohol
114t, 132-134, 174
65, 166, 242t, 243t, 244-245
Phenyl carbinol, see Benzyl alcohol
Pyrethrum, 132
Selegiline, 242t, 243t; see atso Monoamine
Phenylmethanol, see Benzyl alcoho]
Raisins, 107t, 210-211
oxidase inhibitors
Phenylmethylalcohol, see Benzyl alcoho]
Rattlesnakes, 60t, 107, 107t, 182-185
Serotonin syndrome,65, 162, 166, 228,
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA), 66, 90, 91,
Rats, 91, 119, 120t, 124, 127, 137, 148,
242-244, 245
93, 238-239
149, 163, 165, 193, 201, 207, 209,
Serotonin, 65, 83, 143, 164, 166, 172, 175,
Phenylzine, 242t, 243t; see atso
RDX explosive, see Explosives
180,193, 204, 206, 221, 225,226,
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Recluse spiders, 65, 178-180
242, 243, 243t, 244, 245
Phenytoin, 10lt, 161, 264
Red sage, see Lantana spp.
Sertraline, 166; see also Selective
Phitodendron spp, 1l0t, 150
Reproductive toxicity, 11
serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
Phosmet, 130t
Rheum rhabarbarum,157,157f
Seville range,see Citrus aurantium
Phosphine gas, 53, 96t, 124, 125
Rhododendron spp., 153, 153f
Sharmrock, 157
Phosphorus,
Rhubarb, see Rheum rhabarbarum
Shetland sheepdogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein
serum,92, 121,122, 156, 210
Ricin, 151
genetic polymorphism, 139,139t
yellow, 63, 294
Ricinus communis,65,10lt, 11l, 151,151f
Shrub verbena, see Lantana spp.
Pieris japonica, 153
Roman chamomile, see Chamomile
Sibutramine, 161
Pimobendan, 91
Rubrum lily, see Litium lancifotium
Sida cordifotia, 161
Pindone, 118t
Sistrurus spp., 60t, 182-185
Pine oil, 96t, 271t, 285
Sago palm, see Cycas revotuta
SLUDDE signs, 131
PIVKA see Proteins induced by vitamin K,
Salicylates, 38, 65, 85t, 234-235, 236
Snakes, 73t, 84t; see also Venom
antagonism
Samples
elapids, 60, 84t, 181-182
336
Index
envenomation,112t,164,183-185
Tomato plant, see Lycopersicon
Verapamil, 58, 62, 91, 247
pit vipers, 60, 60t, 84t, 107,
tycopersicum
Virgin's bower, see Ctematis spp.
184-185
Toxaphene, 128
Vitamin
snakebite severity scoresheet, 184t
Toxicant
ingestion, 72t, 217, 238-239
Sodium benzoate, see Benzyl alcohol
classification, 6
unit conversion, 39
Sodium Huoroacetate, 90, 145-146
Toxicokinetics
Vitamin D see Cholecalcifero]
Sotanum spp, 64t, 158
absorption, 11
Vitamin K, 47, 67, 112, 118, 119, 198t,
Sotenopsis spp., 173-174
distribution, 12metabolism, 13
199, 203, 297, 297t
Sorrel plant, 157
bioactivation, 13
Vomitoxin, 203-205
Sow's bread, see Cyclamen spp.
elimination, 13
Sparklers, 294t
Phase l, 13
Waller dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
Spathiphytum spp, 110t, 150, 150f
Phase 1l, 13
polymorphism, 139, 139t
Spearmint, oil of, 270t
Traveler's joy, see Ctematis spp.
Warfarin, 13, 112, 117, 118, 119
Spiders, 176-180
Trazodone, 242t
Wasp sting, see Hymenopteran insects;
SSRl, see Selective serotonin reuptake
Tree tobacco, see Nicotiana spp.
Venom; Vespid
inhibitors
Triage
Water moccasin, 60t, 182-185; see also
St. John's Wort, 164, 166
telephone, 31, 43
Snakes; Venom
Strychnine, 73t, 84t, 86, 120, 122-123
Trichlorfon, 130t
Watusi (dancing) firecracker, 294t
Sudden death
Trichotoma muscarium,194
White Swiss shepherd dogs, MDR1
investigation, 71
Tricyclic antidepressants, 47, 58,
Pglycoprotein genetic
sample collection, 74
62, 65, 66, 90, 242, 242t, 243t,
polymorphism,139t
sample submission, 75
244; see also
Widow spiders, 177-178; see also Venom
toxicants causing, 72
Antidepressants
Wild sage, see Lantana spp.
Sulfonylurea diabetic medications, 62, 65,
Triterpenoids, 149, 155
Wintergreen, oil of, 270t
249250
Tutipa spp., 29, 110t, 150, 151f
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation,
Sweet clover, moldy, 117
117
Sympathomimetics,47, 90,91,92,161,
Urinary system
Working dogs, and explosives, 143,
162, 166, 225, 235, 238-239
anatomy, 105
295298
healing and repair, 107
Taxines, 154
injury
Xylitol, 46, 65, 73t, 101t, 217-218
Taxus spp., 66, 154, 155f
mechanisms, 106
TDso, 9
patterns,106
Yellow sage, see Lantana spp.
Tea tree oil, see Metateuca
physiology, 105
Yesterday-and-today plant, see Brunfetsia
Terbufos, 61,130t
US EPA, see Environmental Protection
pauciftora
Testing, see Laboratory
Agency
Yesterday-today-tomorrow plant, see
Texas umbrella tree, see
Brunfetsia pauciftora
Metia azedarach
Valerian root (Valerian), 166
Yew, see Taxus
Theobromine, 36e, 85t, 92, 149, 162-163,
Venom, 83, 171
Yohimbine, 53,64,66t,128,216, 236,
212, 213, 290, 291; see also
Apid (bee), 171, 172
257
Methylxanthines
elapid snakes, 84t, 181
Therapeutic index, 9
Fire ant, 173-174
Zamia spp., 10lt, 155
Thuja occidentatis, 167-168,268t
Mojave A rattlesnake, 183
Zantedeschia spp., 110, 156
Tiger lily, see Lilium tigrinum
pit viper, 59, 60, 107t, 112t, 183
Zearalenone, 205
TNT explosive, see Explosives
recluse spider, 65, 178
Zinc, 48, 57, 58, 59, 79, 106, 110t, 111,
Toads, 60, 72, 173-176
scorpion,180
112t, 273, 275, 278,279, 280,
Tobacco, see Nicotiana spp.
Vespid (wasp), 172
281-283, 289
Tolazamide, 249
widow spider, 59, 84t, 177
Zinc phosphide, 53, 73, 84t, 96, 107t,
Tolerance,8
Venlafaxine, 242t, 243t, 245
123-125