FIFTH EDITION
Noordsy's
FOOD ANIMAL
SURGERY
N. Kent Ames
WILEY Blackwell
Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Fifth Edition
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttaha.taobao.co m
Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Fifth Edition
N. Kent Ames
WILEY Blackwell
 This edition first published 2014 @ 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
First edition, @ 1978 Department of Surgery and Medicine, Kansas State University,
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Second edition, @ 1989 Veterinary Medicine Publishing Company
Third edition, @ 1994 Veterinary Learning Systems
Fourth edition, @ 2006 Veterinary Learning Systems
Editorial offices: 1606 Golden Aspen Drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK 
For details of our global editorial offices, For customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is 
granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base Fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy 
license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional 
Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-1-1183-5260-1/2014.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names 
o sap palasial do syp 'sy as 'sau ap a yoo s ui pan sau inpod pu
their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
The contents of this work are intended to Further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion
only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method,
 make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warrantfies ofitness for α
and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the readeris
urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine,
equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for
added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an 
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or α potential source of Further information
does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make.Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was writen and when it is read. No warranty
may be created or extended by any promotional staterments for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author
 shall be liable for any darmages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ames, N. Kent, author.
 Noordsy's food anirnal surgery / N. Kent Ames. - Fifth edition.
pages cm
Food anirmal surgery
Preceded by: Food animal surgery / John L. Noordsy and N. Kent Ames. 4th ed.
Veterinary Learning Systems, c2006.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-35260-1 (pbk. : alk. paper - ISBN 978-1-118-40382-2 epub) -
ISBN 978-1-118-40383-9 (ermobi - ISBN 978-1-118-40385-3 - ISBN 978-1-118-77034-4
1. Veterinary surgery-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Food animals-Surgery-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Noordsy, JI. L. (lohn L. Food animal surgery. Preceded by (work]: Il. Title.
Ill. Title: Food animal surgery.
[DNLM: 1. Catle-surgery.
2. Goats-surgery. 3. Sheep-surgery.
4. Surgical Procedures, Operative-veterinary. 5. Swine-surgery. SF911.N66 2014]
SF911.N66 2014
636.089'7-dc23
2013024787
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
 ou au uud u saddo u uaus aos s sala jo Aau o ui sog s sysnd osn a m
dvailable in electronic books.
Cover image: iStockphoto - rtyree l, Bobbi Gathings, Olga Khoroshunova, urbancow,
Buillume Dube
Cover design by Jen Miller Designs
Set in Futura Std 9/12.5pt by Aptara@ Inc., New Delhi, India
12014
Contents
Preface
ix
About the Companion Website
xi
General Surgical Consideration
1
Preoperative Procedures
1
Preparing the Surgical Site
3
Postoperative Care
5
 Suggested Reading
8
Surgical Restraint
11
General Considerations
11
Techniques That Divert the Animal's Attenlion
11
Methods That Prevent Kicking
12
Methods for Raising a leg in Caltle
13
Methods for Restraining the Tail in Caltle
15
Methods for Casling Caltle
15
Oher Restraints
16
Mechanical Restraint
17
Suggesled Reading
18
Local and Regional Anesthesia
19
General Considerations for Local and Regional (Nonepidurall Anesthesia
19
Abdominal Wall Anesthesia in Cattle
19
Anesthesia of the Distal Limb Via Vascular (IV) Infusion in Catle
24
Anesthesia of the Horn (Cornual Nerve Block)
25
Eye and Eyelid Aneshesia in Caltle
27
Teat Aneslhesia in Cale
30
Sacral and Subsacral Paravertebral Blocks
33
 Suggested Reading
37
二
Epidural Anesthesia
39
Principles of Epidural Anesthesia
39
Administering Epidural Aneshesia 
41
Suggested Reading
50
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia
51
Introduction and General Considerations
51
Seleched Drugs Used for Sedalion, Tranquilization, Analgesia,
Anesthesia, and Muscle Relaxation
54
Inhalation Anesthesia
59
Suggested Reading
63
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats
65
Basic Cornuectomy in CatHe
65
Cosmetic Cornuectomy in Cattle
66
 Cornuectomy in Goats
67
Trephination of Frontal Sinuses in caltle
68
vi ■ Contents
Dentistry in Catle
69
Tracheotomy in calle
70
Esophagostomy in Caltle 
71
 Suggested Reading
73
7 Surgical Treatment of Ocular Squamous Cell
Carcinoma and Corneal Dermoids in Cattle
75
 Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma
75
 Corneal Dermoid Surgery
80
Surgery for Entropion 
80
Suggested Reading
81
 8 Hernias and Umbilical Masses
83
Introduction
83
Surgical Procedures in CatHe
84
 Surgical Procedures in Pigs
92
Herniorrhaphy in Sheep and Goars
95
Suggested Reading
95
9 Laparotomy in Cattle
97
 Abdominal Surgery in calle
97
Exploratory Laparotomy
100
Suggested Reading 
103
10 Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and
Pericardiotomy in Cattle
105
Rumenotomy
105
 Creation of a Temporary Rumen Fistula
108
 Permanent Rumen Cannulation
112
 Pericardiotomy: Surgically Correching Traumatic Pericarditis
113
 Suggested Reading
116
11 Abomasal Surgery
119
General Consideralions
119
Surgical Techniques for Trearing Leff Displaced Abomasum
119
 Surgical Procedures for Treating Right Displaced Abomasum
127
Surgical Technique for Trealing Abomasal Volvulus (RTA)
128
Conclusion
130
 Suggested Reading
130
12 Surgical Treatment of Intestinal Obstruction
133
Introduction
133
Common Clinical Signs of Intestinal Obsruclion in Catle
133
 Using Resection and Anastomosis to Treat Intussusception
 of the Jejunum in Catle 
134
in Pigs and Calves
135
Spermatic Cord-Induced Intestinal Incarceralion Surgery in Steers 
135
Trealing Typhlectasis with or without Torsion
136
 Suggested Reading
138
13 Rectal Prolapse Repair
139
Factors That Can Predispose Animals to Rectal Prolapse
139
Types of Rectal Prolapse
139
Contents
■ wi
Surgical Repair
139
Common Sequelae to Rectal Prolapse and Repair
143
 Suggested Reading
143
14 Surgery of the Female Reproductive System
145
 Oophorectomy in Caltle 
145
Cesarean Seclion in Cows and Other Procedures ho Aid Delivery
150
Cesarean Seclion in Sheep and Goats 
161
Cesarean Seclion in Sows
163
Repair of Chronic Vaginal Prolapse in Cows
167
Third-Degree Perineal Laceration Repair
175
Urethral Extension to Control Urine Pooling
177
 Suggested Reading
179
15 Surgery of the Male Reproductive System
183
Castration
183
Surgery for Cryptorchidism, Ectopic Testicle, and Scirrhous Cord
188
Surgical Correchion of Penile and Preputial Conditions in Bulls
192
Extirpation of the Preputial Diverticulum in Boars
207
Surgical Preparation of Teaser Bulls, Boars, and Rams
210
 Suggested Reading
218
16 Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated
with Urolithiasis
221
General Considerations 
221
Urethrostomy
221
Tube Cystostomy
225
Urethral Catheterization
227
Urethral Repair in Breeding Bulls
228
Surgery for Subcutaneous Abdominal Inflammalion and
Edema Caused by Urethral Rupure
230
Surgical Removal of the Urethral Process in Wethers and Rams
230
 Suggested Reading
230
17 Mammary Surgery
233
Teat Surgery
233
Udder Surgery
246
 Suggested Reading
252
18 Ligament and Tendon Surgery
253
Tendon Surgery
253
Ligament Surgery
256
 Suggested Reading 
260
19 Foot and Claw Surgery
261
General Considerations 
261
Amputatlion of the Claw in Catle
261
Excision of Interdigital Fibromas (Corns)
263
 Removal of Interdigital Foreign Bodies or
 Foreign Bodies Surrounding the Claw
265
 Subsolar Abscess Surgery
265
Trimming of Claws, especially in Catle
266
Amputation of the Forelimb and Hindlimb in Catle, Especially Calves
267
ili 
Contents
Amputation of Medial Dewclaws of the Rear Feet in Heifers
268
Suggested Reading
268
 20 Joint Surgery
271
General Consideralions related to Joint Effusion
271
Arhrocentesis
271
Joint Flushing
272
Arthroscopy
273
Arthrodesis
273
Treatment of Meniscal Tears
274
 Suggested Reading
274
21 Common Fractures and Dislocations
275
General Considerations
275
Specific Fractures and Dislocations
276
Suggested Reading
280
Sudy Question Answers
283
Index
293
Preface
It is my pleasure to present the 5th edition of Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery It is my
desire to conlinue Dr. Noordsy's tradirion of providing a readily accessible, updated,
source of detailed surgical techniques for catle, pigs, sheep, and goars. The book
is in ouline form to create a step by step approach and quick reference for over
 100 surgical procedures seen by praclicing veterinarians.
The book is intended to be a field manual and is not a classic extbook with detailed
references and statislical charts. If assumes the reader has basic surgical skills including
sterile technique, lissue handling, surgical anatomy, knot ying, suure patterns and 
surgical judgment. Without application of the basic surgical principles, a successful
surgical outcome may be in question and animal welfare may be compromised.
John Noordsy often used the axiom "fime is trauma." It is imperalive the veterinary
surgeon be efficient and minimize surgery fime. However he quest to shorten surgery
time should not preclude the qualiry and precision required to successfully complete the
procedure.
In the past decade, food animal veterinarians have become more aware of surgical
anesthesia, pain mitigation and postoperative analgesia. Calm animals with minimal
movement and pain allow the surgeon to complete he procedure in he shortest amount
of fime with the greatest chance of success. Chapter 5 has been revised to provide the
prachirioner information on aneshetic and analgesic protocols that can be incorporated
into he surgical and post surgical plan.
 It is important to recognize hat many of the aneshetics and analgesics described
Juuo po ui asn jo paoddo vah lou ao oins puu poo s,Asproy u!
species. It is therefore imperative hat the veterinary surgeon completely understands
and adheres ho he guidelines set forth in the Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarificalion
Act (AMDUCA) including Extra Label Use of Drugs (ELUD). It is our duy as food animal
veterinarians to insure no violative drugs enter the food chain in order to insure the
most wholesome food supply in the world.
Wih the widespread use of A.l., embryo fransfer, gene manipulation, cloning.
and the potenlial value of show animals, the food animal practitioners willikely be
faced with a dilemma of performing surgery to enhance he appearance or lo correct
α genetic defect for exhibirion purposes. The AVMA Policy on Ethics contains the
 following statement regarding surgical correclion of genetic defecis.
Vll Genetic Defects
A. Performance of surgical or other procedures in all species for he purpose of
concealing genelic defects in animals to be shown, raced, bred, or sold, as breeding
animals is unehical. However, should the health or welfare of the individual palient
require correclion of such genelic defects, it is recommended that the patient be
Veterinary-Medical-Ethics-of-the-AVMA.aspx).
 You may nolice the file of the book has been changed to Noordsy's Food Anima!
Surgery to honor John L. Noordsy. It was Dr. Noordsy that originally published this
book as a compilation of the notes he presented to the veterinary students at Kansas
State Universily.
I was a dislinct honor to have Dr. Noordsy as my major professor, friend, colleague
and mentor. I have experienced Firsthand his willingness to share he techniques
presented in this book, knowledge, experience, surgical skill, and wisdom. In rerurn
and as past president of the American Association of Bovine Practilioners (AABP),
■Preface
I traveled to Kansas State to present Dr. Noordsy a hand carved wooden bull as the
recipient of the Amstutz-Williams Award, the most prestigious award of the AABP. If is
he highest honor that can be bestowed by the AABP.
 During the presentation, I described John Noorday the Surgeon with the following 
words: qualified, confident, skilled, calm, fast, and proficient. John Noordsy, the
Teacher, was described with these words: dedicated, stimulaling, respecfful, ethical,
prepared, encouraging, approachable, pracrical, and organized. John Noordsy,the 
person, has hese descriptors: kind, generous, gracious, reverent, jolly, thoughtful, and
a friend wih a winkle in his eye.
John Noordsy is a special person who has and will continue ho enrich the lives of
veterinarians, veterinary shudents, clients, and surgical patients for many years.
About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
The website includes:
■ PowerPoints of alFigures from he book for downloading 
■Questions and answers
Chapter 1
General Surgical Consideration
Preoperative Procedures
History
reatment.
Physical Examination and Clinical Tests
■ Under common field condirions, which are offen emergencies, a physical
Note
examinalion may be all that fime will allow.
If possible, perform quickly applied clinical tests (e.g., hemoglobin levels, fecal
Highly valued animals are commonly
occult blood, or urine dipstick), which may provide perlinent information not
insured. Permission to operate from
obtained via physical examination. Detailed clinical pathologic and radiologic
he insurance company is offen
 evaluation may not be feasible.
essential, especially in cases of
■ In cases of eleclive surgery, relevant diagnostic procedures are strongly
elective surgery.
recommended to complement the physical examination and history.
Monitoring and Assessment
Cattle
■ Obtain a detailed history.
■ Pulse and cardiac auscultation
■ Respiration: rale, deph, rhythm, and sounds
■ Mucous membranes
■Temperature
■ General appearance:
●Hydration starus
● Condition of hair coat
● Coordination and gait
●Body symmetry
● Evidence of abnormal discharges from body orilices
● Atiude [e.g., lethargy or excitement)
Rectal examination
■ Oral examination
■ Clinical rests (which may be relevant in elective surgery):
●Hemogram
● Blood gas analysis
● Serum chemistry assays
● Urinalysis
● Fecal examination for occult blood and parasites
● Peritoneal cytology (e.g., neoplasia or peritonis)
● Biopsy [e.g., lymph node)
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
2
■Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Pigs
■ Obtain a detailed history.
Note
■ Physical examination is commonly limited to:
Extremely muscular pigs may be 
● Temperature
● General appearance
prone to the stress syndrome and
● Respiration: rate, deplh, and rhythm
malignant hyperthermia.
● Coordination and gait
■ Observation of discharges from body orifices
Sheep and Goats
■ Obtain a detailed history.
■ Physical examination is similar ho that for catle, except for limitations related to size
 of he species.
■ Perform clinical tests, such as those recommended for catle, if hey are perlinent and
economically feasible.
Surgical Facilities
 In a farm selting, a properly selected surgical location willimprove the surgical outcome.
■ The ideal surgical faciliry should take into account:
● Accessibiliry of the patient and surgical personnel
● Patient restraint
● Footing for the standing patient
●lighing
● Access to water and drainage
● Protection from environmental conditions:
●Rain
 Temperature extremes
·Wind
+Dust
Flying insects
Restriction of Food and Water in Elective Surgery
■ Ruminants placed in lateral or dorsal recumbency should have resricted intake:
● Roughage for 48 hours
● Concentrate for 24 hours
● Water for 12 hours
■ Neonates or animals fed exclusively a milk diet require no food or water restriction.
 Monogastric patients should have restricted intake:
Note
● Feed for 24 hours
● Water for 12 hours
Bringing an animal to a state of
quietness and complacency before
Preoperative Medications
surgery is valuable— it may produce
Antibiotics
a smoother recovery.
● Preoperative antibiolics are indicated for patients with likely surgical
contamination (e.g., umbilical abscess and open wounds).
■ Sedatives and tranquilizers
● Be careful, over sedated livestock may lie down
Rx
● Acepromazine maleate (see dosage Chapter 5)
 Drug Information
● Effect depends on dose and route of administration
Xylazine is marketed in hwo
 Effect is predictable
concentrations: 20 and
Not as effective in excited patienrs
100 mg/ml. Precise dosages are
May be administered using IV, IM, SC, or PO
more easily obtained wih the 20-
● Xylazine hydrochloride (see dosage Chapter 5)
● Effect is dose dependent
mg/ml product
+ Somewhat unpredictable in is effect
General Surgical Consideration  ■  3
● Ruminant species are more sensitive to xylazine than are horses, so use caution
to ensure he proper dose, especially in sheep, goats, and calves.
● May cause urerine contraclions in pregnant animals
Mild analgesic effect
● May be used as an epidural agent when mixed wih 2% lidocaine or sterile
water (see Chapter 4)
■ Anticholinergics
● Aropine
 Commonly used in monogastric animals
 Of questionable value in ruminants, where it may reduce the flow of saliva but 
has the disadvantage of making secrelions more viscid and thus more difficult to
remove from he respiratory frach.
Analgesics
● Butorphanol tartrate
● May be used alone or in combination with sedatives and tranquilizers
◆ Not approved by FDA for food animals 
● May cause excitement and a rough recovery from general anesthesia
●Flunixin meglumine
· Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug (NSAID)
· A good analgesic at he label dose
 Also has antipyretic and antitoxemic effecrs
◆ May be ulcerogenic at high doses or with prolonged use
● Does not have FDA approval for all food animal species
 Presently only labeled for IV use in cattle
● Aspirin
+ Dosage and short duration of effect may be problematic.
● May be ulcerogenic at high doses or with prolonged use
◆ Has not gone through the approval process, so some agencies have called for a 
ban on its use
● Phenylbutazone (bute)
NSAID
 Prohibited from extra label usage in dairy calle 20 months of age and older
Preparing the Surgical Site
Note
Cleaning
■ Wih a sof brush and comb, remove all loose debris from the animal.
A client's interpretation of surgery is
■ Remove he hair mass with a large animal clipper followed by a #10 or #40 head
 often based on he appearance (i.e.,
clipper.
 he neatness) of the surgical site and 
■ Remove hair at least 6 inches around the surgical incision site, with removal being
sutures.
neat and uniform.
Preparation of the Proposed Surgical Site
 of three scrub and rinse cycles is recommended.
■ Complete a Final scrub with alernating scrub and alcohol solutions. Start at the
proposed surgical site, and work in circles of increasing diameter to he edge of the
clipped area.
Surgical scrub solution may be iodophor scrub, chlorhexidine, or mild detergenl.
4Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
 Final preparation is completed with iodophor or other appropriate disinfectant
placed on the proposed surgical site by using a method similar to that used for the
Final scrub or by means of a spray botle.
Draping
■ Because many surgical procedures in cattle involve local or regional anesthesia
and standing restraint, complete draping may be difficult or impossible.
Thus, regional draping—covering the field of surgery adequately— is 
recommended.
■ Use moisture-resistant drapes: Abdominal fluid spillage followed by
 capillary contamination of cloth drapes is a common break in sterile
technique.
■ Draping (masking) of eyes may faciliate restraint techniques.
Tail Restraint
■ Restrain the ail to prevent switching and surgical site contamination
[Figures l-l and 1-2).
FIGURE l-1. Tail rope used for restraint in obstelric procedures
FIGURE 1-2. Tailto-leg ie used for resraint in standing abdominal surgery.
General Surgical Consideration    5
Postoperative Care
Nutrition
■ Palatable grass or alfalfa hay is a good First choice for catle, sheep, and
goars.
■ Entice a palient to resume normal eating behaviors postoperatively.
Note
● This task can be very frustraring.
 Animals require good postoperative
● Changing the character of food by moistening it with water or molasses
nutrilion for optimal recovery and
may help.
return to normal funchion.
● Feeding a variely of feedstuffs in a smorgasbord fashion may be beneficial.
● Make certain the feed is fresh and is changed on a regular basis.
● Small porions are generally belter than large portions.
 For catHe, using a stomach rube with a slurry of alfalfa meal or pellers in water with
eleclrolytes added increases the ill of the gastrointestinal (Gll tract and stimulates
animals to resume eating.
● Use 0.5 to 1 kg (1l to 2 Ib) of alfalfa meal in 12 to 15 L [(3 to 4 gallons) of water
 pumped into the rumen.
● Keep stirring the slurry or it may clog the stomach pump.
● Do not add dexrose, rumen bacteria will utilize added dextrose.
● Many pracrilioners have a favorite mixrure for oral nutritional supplementation for
cows.
■ Electrolytes may need to be provided as a supplement.
● Sodium, potassum, and chloride are the most commonly supplemented 
electrolytes.
● 30 g of KCl + 50 g of NaCl in 20 liters (5 gallons] of water will offen be
 consumed voluntarily by cows wih low serum chloride levels commonly seen in
IDA, RDA, and volvulus of the abomasum.
● Cows commonly refuse feed that is top dressed with sal.
● Consider placing a small salt block in the manger for the patient to lick.
■Water
● Maintain a clean, fresh water supply
● Consider providing water orally via a stomach hube and pump; 20 to 40 liters (5
lo 10 gallonsl is generally sufficient for adult dairy animals.
● Hypertonic saline (7%), 1 L IV, will stimulate cows to drink.
■ Transfaunation
● Postoperative appelite of ruminants may be improved by inoculating the rumen
with fresh flora obtained from the rumen of a healthy cow.
 Rumen Flora is collected from a herd mate, an animal from a slaughter faciliry,.
 Caution!
or a cow fited with a rumen cannula.
 Fresh undiluted rumen liquid, 2 to 4 L (0.5 to 1 gallon), pumped into he palient
Using rumen content from a cow in a
different herd may breach biosecuriry
will repopulate the rumen wih normal bacteria and prolozoa.
●Maintain he temperature of the rumen fauna as the bacteria and protozoa are
protocols.
heat/cold sensitive.
 Parients willeat more if hey feel good.
● Treat all concurrent disorders, including ketosis, dehydralion, and infection
●Manage pain
● Conlrol fever
● House in a clean, dry environment preferably in sight of herd mates.
Wound Care
■ The speed of wound healing is rarely increased, but factors that slow wound healing
can be controlled.
 Principles of wound healing include:
● Conrolling contamination and infection
6 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Controlling inflammation
●Avoiding desiccation
● Avoiding disruplion of normal cellular function
●Minimizing tension and movement of the wound
■Wound dressings and skin antiseprics, especiall powder preparalions, can act as
 foreign materials and thereby delay healing.
■ In case of mass contamination during surgery, sterile isolonic solurions with or
without antiseptics are recommended for Flushing the wound.
● Solurions should be warmed but not to temperatures exceeding 40%℃.
● Use large volume plus low pressure (<15 psil.
■ Bandage lypes:
Wet-to-dry
● Adherent
● Semiocclusive nonadherent
■ Bandage materials:
●Gauze
+ Soft, nonirritating, and very absorbent 
+ Permirs rapid evaporation
● May adhere to the wound unless coated with some bype of ointment (e.g., triple
antibiotic oinhment, or povidone jodine)
● Absorbent cotton
● Available as sterile or nonsterile colton and in various grades
+ Should be sterile and of a high-qualiry grade
lot bussap quaquosqo aayoaod o so aznoe jo apisno au uo pasn Auos 
wounds
 Should be used with caulion when applied directly to wounds
Absorbs moisture rapidly, but evaporafion is very slow, which resulrs in a wet
bandage that supports bacterial growth.
● Nonadherent wound dressing 
Caution!
+Many oplions are available.
Do not create excessive pressure on
Packaged sterile
 he blood vessels of the pastern.
Somewhat expensive
● Poorly absorbent
● Muslin (heavier than gauze)
● Should be considered when additional tension or pressure is desirable
●Adhesive tape
● Elastic bandage [Ace)
● Stockinette
● Elastic adhesive (Elastikon)
●Nonadhesive (Verwrap)
● Spray-on bandage
■ Use of bandages and proper application:
● Use bandages to keep a dressing in posilion and to exert the desired amount of
 pressure on the wound.
● Apply the bandage to maintain its placement but without excessive pressure
(Figure 1-3).
● Elastic bandages are offen used when pressure is required temporarily.
● Esmarch's bandage is a rubberized bandage.
◆ Begin bandaging at the distal end of a limb. Blood is forced up and away from
he extremiry.
 May facilitate relatlively bloodless surgery when applied preoperatively to an
extremily
FIGURE 1-3. Bandaging he bovine foot
papuaixe uo joj pasn aq Aow ynq abopuoq Aioiodual o so pasn Auowuoy 
 in a figureeight pattern.
period (e.g., 72 hours on a prolapsed prepuce)
General Surgical Consideration 
● Manytailed bandages may be used to support the abdomen in food animals with
abdominal wounds.
Made from heavy burlap or canvas
● Bandage he bovine foot in a figure-eight paltern. Include an interdigital
dressing.
Postoperative Medication
Antibiotics
● Antibiorics are generally indicated in food animals.
● Use FDA-approved antibiotics.
● Use appropriate drug, dose, duration, route, and wihdrawal time.
● Should not be used as a crutch for poor sterile technique
● The IP use of antibiorics, although controversial, can be effective when used during
abdominal surgery of food animals.
 Use an antibiotic with minimal inflammatory response.
● Dilute he drug with 500 to 1,000 ml of sterile isotonic solution, and pour
directly into he abdominal cavily.
Fluids
● Five to 10 gallons of sterile isotonic Fluids administered IV during a period of 24
hours is effective for eliminaring dehydration and beginning convalescence in 
adult catfle.
● If sterile fluids are not available, distilled water or clean filtered tap water with
added electrolytes can be effeclive. The risk of complicalions increases with the
use of non-sterile fluids.
● Scours, loxemia, shock 
→ metabolic acidosis → hyperkalemia
● Abomasal volvulus, vomiting → metabolic alkalosis → hypokalemia 
● The amount of NaHCOg required to replace a deficit is determined by the
following equations for all livestock species:
 0.3 × Adult body weight (kg) × Base deficit = Deficiency (mEq)
 0.5 × Neonatal body weight (kg) x Base deficit = Deficiency (mEq)
● Hypertonic saline 7%.
+ One liter contains 70 g of NaCl.
 One liter contains nearly 1,200 mEq of sodium and 1,200 mEq of chloride.
First-Aid
 Hypertonic saline will stimulate the palient to drink water.
 Conversion to mEq.
 Do not give hypertonic saline without access to water.
■lg NaCl= 17 mEq
 Pain control
■1 g KCl = 14 mEq
● Pain in ruminants is difficult to evaluate.
■1 g NaHCO3= 12 mEq
● Flunixin meglumine
 Given at the label dose, it effectively controls visceral pain.
Not as effechive for musculoskeletal pain
● Do not use continuously for more han 5 days because of possible abomasal
ulcers.
TABLE 1-1
Isotonic
Amount to be added
Amount to be added
Solutions
to each Liter
 to each Gallon 
Dextrose 5%
50 g
200 g
NaCl 0.9%
9g
36 g
KCI 1.1% 
11 g
44 g
NaHCO3 1.2%
12 g
48 g
8 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
●Follow ELDU (Extra Label Drug Use) guidelines
 Currently only approved for IV use in cattle 
● Meloxicam
+ Approved food animal drug in other countries but not in the United States.
+ Typical dose 0.5 mg/kg of BW
Follow ELDU guidelines
● Aspirin
An NSAID
● Has not gone hrough the approval process, so FDA discourages its use for food
animals
 Use and precautions are similar to those for flunixin meglumine.
● Phenylbutazone
● Prohibited from exra label usage in dairy cale 20 months of age and older.
+ Oral dosage requires a large loading dose (1Omg/Kg) followed by 5 mg per kg 
of body weight every 48 hours.
●Butorphanol
●An effective analgesic
● May require concurrent franquilizalion for optimal effect
● Follow ELDU guidelines
● Morphine
● A powerful analgesic
+ Conrolled drug with the potenial for abuse
● Follow ELDU guidelines
■ Drugs to increase Gl motiliy
● Neostigmine
 Has α questionable effect in ruminanrs 
● Stimulation of smooth muscle may not be well organized, with Gl spasms rather
 han organized propulsive movement being he resull.
● Bethanechol
Preliminary shudies indicate that bethanechol may increase contractiliry of the
small intestine.
● Indicalions exist that a synergistic response occurs when given in combination
wih metoclopramide.
● Metoclopramide
● Has been used (at O.1 mg/kg) to treat abomasal empring defect in sheep
● Ils greatest effect appears to be in forestomachs and abomasums.
● Has been used in selected cases of vagal indigestion
●Erythromycin
●An antibiolic with Gl stimulation as a side effect (l.0 mg/kg in l L of saline
infused for 60 minutes every 6 hours has been used to freat postoperative ileus
in horsesj.
 Pain is a possible negative side effech.
Suggested Reading
Auer JA, Stick JA, (eds). Equine Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1999.
Belknap EB, Navarre CB. Differenlialion of gastrointeslinal disease in adult catle. Vet
Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 16(l): 59-86, 2000.
Exra-label drug use in animals: Final rule. Fed Regist61:57732-57746, 1996.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 45-123.
Hall LW. Wright's Veterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia, ed 7. London: Bailliere Tindall
1971, p 151.
General Surgical Consideration
■9
Noordsy JL. Methods of sururing skin incisions in calle: Special consideralions. Vet
Med Smalf Anim Clin 74(10): 1501-1507, 1979.
Riebold TW, Goble DO, Geiser DR. large Animal Anesthesia, Principles and
Techniques. Ames, IA: State Universily Press, 1982.
Riviere JE, Webb Al, Craigmill Al. Primer on eslimating withdrawal rimes after
exiralabel drug use. JAVMA 213(7): 966-968, 1998.
Roussel Al, Constable PD. Fluid and electrolyte therapy. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
Pract 15(3): 447-468,1999
Steiner A, Roussel A, Martig J. Effect of bethanechol, neostigmine, metoclopramide,
and propranolol on myoelectric activiry of the ileocecal area of cows. Am J Vet Res
56(8): 1081-1086,1995.
Upson DW. Handbook of Clinical Veterinary Pharmacology, ed 2. Lenexa, KS,
Veterinary Medicine Publishing, 1985
Van Amstel Sarel R, Shearer J. Manual for Treatment and Control of Lamness in Caltle.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing. 2006, pp 141-146.
Westhues M, Frirsch R. Animal Anaesthesia (General). Translated by Weaver AD.
Philadelphia, Lippincolt, 1965.
The United States Pharmacopeial Convenlion. hp:/ /vetmed.tamu.edu/common/docs/
public/aavpt/phenylbutazone.pdf, 2004.
Answers Key
Answers to study questions can
Chapter 1 Study Questions
be found staring on page 283
1. Should alleviation of pain be a major priority in food animal practice?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
2. Is it prachical to do "field surgery" on food animals?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
Chapter 2
Surgical Restraint
General Considerations
■ Surgical procedures can be performed on food animals that are either standing 
or lying down. Decide whether you want the animal to remain standing or to lie
down, then design the restraint to keep the animal in the desired position.
■ Do not over restrain the animal. The average patient is unfamiliar with techniques
used for surgical procedures and will react adversely to excessive restraint.
 Chemical resraint used in combinalion with mechanical resraint is often the most
effective technique.
 Covering the eyes of the patient often facilitates restraint.
■ If possible, approach the patient in a wellightred environment. Approaching the
 animal in the dark will offen unnecessarily scare if.
 Never allow restraint methods to interfere significantly with normal physiologic
processes [e.g., respiration, rumination, or regurgitation].
■ Use a nonirritating colton rope wih a relalively large diameter in casting procedures.
Techniques That Divert the Animal's Attention
Cattle
Using a Tail Restraint (Figure 2-1)
■ An alternative name is a tail jack.
Caution!
■ Commonly used to control kicking during:
● Minor surgical procedures
 Excessive pressure on the tail of
● Injeclions
immaure patients may damage
● Udder examinations
 coccygeal vertebrae.
● Castration
Using a Tail Jack
 Tail must be straight up and not to the side.
Using a Nose Lead (Figures 2-2 and 2-3)
■ An excellent altention-diverting restraint for:
● V medication administration
●Minor surgery
● Examination of the head and other pars of the body
 In general, avoid extreme fraction on he nose lead.
● Preferred use is with a halter.
● If a halter is not used, be cautious when anchoring he rope to stalionary objects
because an animal, especially a hypersensilive one, may tear its nostril.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
11
12  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 2-1. Tail restraint.
 Nose lead without halter
 Nose lead with halter
(use with caution)
(preferred method)
FIGURE 2-2. Nose lead.
FIGURE 2-3. Methods of using a nose lead.
Grasping the Nasal Septum with Thumb and Forefinger
 Excellent temporary restraint for immature animals
■ Not as effective in larger, older catle compared wirh younger animals.
■ The attendant usually stands alongside he subject.
Pigs
Using a Snubbing Rope and Hog Holder (Figure 2-4)
■ Excellent standing restraint for:
● Injections
● Minor surgical procedures
● Obtaining blood samples from the jugular vein or anterior vena cava
■ The rope should be around the upper jaw, behind the fusks.
 FIGURE 2-4. Snubbing rope.
Methods That Prevent Kicking
Cattle
Using a Hock Twitch (Figure 2-5)
■ Efficient restraint to control rear leg kicking without causing trauma to the udder.
■ Use a rope about 15 to 20 inches long with an eye at both ends. Place the
 rope around he leg and above the hock, insert a 6- to 8-inch bar into the
'uopua sallyoy a o paddo si anssaid paow un ysim pun 'adoi a jo sasa
■ Adequate rope rwisted around itself willsecure he witch around the leg.
Surgical Restraint ■ 13
FIGURE 2-5. (A) Hock witch. (B) Hock rwitch in posilion.
FGURE 2-6. Rope squeeze resraint aka flanking rope
Using a Rope Squeeze Restraint (Figure 2-6)
■Also known as a Hlanking rope
 Generally controls kicking and straining 
■ Must be applied wih considerable tension, but excessive tension will cause the
palient to lie down.
Calves, Sheep, and Goats
Flanking the Anima!
■ Grasping the fold of skin in the lank and lifting up offen controls kicking.
Methods for Raising a Leg in Cattle
Using a Front Leg Hobble
■ Restrain the subject in a chute to prevent falling and possible injury.
14   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Raising the Front Leg Manually
bal ay dsoin no so jowjuo ay isuiobo uoal puo mos au jo jpadso jopnos ay aooy 
above the pastern, and concurrently liff and flex the carpus.
o anuuos no so Aqois aoooy o bal paxay s,mos au apisui bal jno asold 
lean against he animal.
■ For procedures lasting more han 5 to 10 minutes, place the patien's carpus on a
board that is placed on a bale of hay or straw.
Raising the Rear Leg Manually
■ Apply a halter and nose lead to the cow.
■ Preferably, place the cow in a stanchion with its head pulled toward the side
 opposite the leg to be manipulated.
■ Face the caudal aspect of the cow and push your shoulder tighly into he cow's
Flank, which forces the weight of the cow onto its opposite rear leg.
■ Grasp he leg to be lifted in the region of the pastern hen lift laterally and posteriorly
until the leg is almost fully extended.
■ Cradle the extended leg on your knee while you proceed wih the desired
examination or treatment.
 Keeping the pastern flexed facilirates restraint.
 This technique is effeclive with docile dairy animals, but some cows resist it and kick 
violently, which places he veterinarian at considerable risk of injury.
Using the Beam Hook Method with the Rear Leg (Figure 2-7)
■ Restrict sideto-side movement of the cow so that the animal does not fall after irs rear
leg is exlended.
■ Preferably, place the cow in a stanchion.
■ Apply a halter and nose lead to the cow.
 Pullthe cows head toward the side opposite the leg to be manipulated.
■ Tie a quick-release knot with the rope in case the cow struggles excessively or throws
irself.
■ Attach the hook to a sturdy rafter that is slightly posterior to the rear quarters of the
cow.
FIGURE 2-7. The beam hook method.
Surgical Restraint    15
Methods for Restraining the Tail in Cattle
Caution!
Using a Tail Rope
■ Ideal for keeping the tail from rectal and vulvar areas during obstetric
 Always tie the hail to a portion of
procedures.
he palient's body and not to any
■ Tie he tail to the cow's neck or to the front leg opposite the side on which the tail is
stalionary object such as a chute or
bo be restrained.
stanchion.
■ Always use quick-release knors in case fast and efficient release is required.
Using a Tail-to-Leg Tie
■ Use for standing abdominal surgery.
■ Prevents switching of the tail and contamination of the surgical area.
Cross-Reference
■ Stabilize the tail to the hock by wrapping the tail and leg with adhesive
Refer ho Figure 1-2.
tape.
Methods for Casting Cattle
Burley Method (Figure 2-8)
■ Also known as the Hlying W technique
■ Tie the patient loosely wih a halter to a solid post or gate.
■ Place he center point of a 20 to 30-foot soft coton rope over he neck of the
patient.
■ Cross he free ends of the rope berween the forelegs under the sternum and again
Over the dorsum in the thoracolumbar region.
■ Pass the rope belween the rear leg and the udder (cows) or scrotum (bulls), and
place continuous traction sraight back on he rope ends.
 Efficient casling method 
■ Does not place pressure on he frachea, penis, or mammary veins.
■ Enables the operator to use the rope ends to tie the rear legs in a flexed
position.
FIGURE 2-8. Burley method.
16Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Rope anchored to horns or head
Rope anchored under forearm
FIGURE 2-9. Reuff's melhod.
Reuffs Double Half-Hitch Method (Figure 2-9)
■ Also known as the rope squeeze method 
Note
■ Recommended more for use with immature rather than mature subjects.
■ Rope may be anchored in either of hwo posirions to avoid pressure on the trachea:
 The patient usually falls toward the
● To the horns or he head
side where the rwo half-hitches are
● Under the forearm
placed.
■ Maintain tracrion on the haler and the rope to keep the animal in the correct 
posiltion.
Other Restraints
Sideline Restraint (Figure 2-10)
■ May also be used as an external tourniquet to dilate the jugular vein for venipuncture
 or infusion.
Surgical Restraint   17
FIGURE 2-10. Sideline restraint.
Lateral Recumbency Restraint in a Young Calf
 May be used during IV infusions
■ May be used during he postoperative period (recovery) after lumbosacral or high
Recommendation
caudal epidural anesthesia
Young calves may be temporarily
aosand dn buuas wy poalqns au suaaid 
resrained in lateral recumbency by
placing the down forelimb over the
neck and behind the head.
Mechanical Restraint
Chutes for Cattle
 Mechanical chutes with head gales are he best reslraint for unruly catfle.
■ Used properly, mechanical resraint is safe for both operator and patient.
 Many chutes are designed to allow access to he body and limbs of a patient.
 Injury or death of he patient can occur if he chute is used improperly.
■ Chutes that are too wide or cannot be squeezed may allow the patient to turn upside
down, possibly resuling in serious injury or death.
Cage or Rotary Tables
■ Used to place animals in lateral recumbency.
 ssaooo jood jauoi nq poay puo 'sbal seaj oi ssaoe quallaxa aie sal abo 
the body.
■ The table design may provide good access to udders (cows) and external genitalia
[bulls).
■ Many foot trimmers choose cage tables for good portabiliry and restraint of the
animal.
Flat Tables
■ Flat tables are less common in the field but do have a place in the surgical
suite.
■ Flat tables tend to be rather expensive and less portable than rotary tables.
■ Straps and ropes are required to secure an unanesthetized patient on
the table.
 Bloat and regurgitation are complicalions associated with use of flat tables.
18   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Radial nerve paralysis can also be a complication of placement on Flat tables.
● Minimize radial paralysis by:
shoulder.
· Pad the down shoulder adequately.
● If the animal is under general aneshesia, pull the down front limb cranially
[extend the shoulder] as far as possible
Suggested Reading
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
2004, pp 51-57.
Grandin T. Behavioral principles of handling catHe and oher grazing animals under
extensive conditions. In Grandin T (edj: Livestock Handling and Transport, ed 2.
New York: CABI Pub, 2000, pp. 63-86.
Leahy JR, Barrow P. Restraint of Animals, ed 2. lthaca, NY: Cornell Campus Store,
1953.
Reibold TW, Goble DO, Geiser DR. large Animal Anesthesia: Principles and
Techniques, ed 2. Ames, IA: lowa State Universiry Press, 1995.
Chapter 2 Study Questions
 Answers Key
1. What are inherent dangers when casting adult cale?
Answers to study questions can
2. Name three methods to control kicking in catle.
3. What can be done to prevent radial nerve paralysis in catle placed on a Hlat
be found staring on page 283 
bable?
or online ar www.wiley.com/go/
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. Why should the tail be restrained during surgery, and where should you secure
he tail and why?
 5. How can you keep a cow from lying down during a standing surgical
procedure?
Chapter 3
Local and Regional Anesthesia
General Considerations for Local and Regional (Nonepidural)
Anesthesia
Introduction
■ Regional anesthesia may promote better rissue healing han a local block. It
produces less hrauma and scar tissue.
■ Regional anesthesia is more efficient than a local block. Less total rissue is involved
and less aneshetic solution is needed.
■ Regional anesthesia blocks specific nerves and dermatomes.
■ Local anesthetics are less costly than are inhalation gases commonly used in general
anesthesia.
■ Providing regional anesthesia requires less assistance than administering general
[inhalation] anesthesia.
■ Ideally, regional anesthesia is combined with preanestheric sedation or
analgesia.
Prerequisites for Applying Regional Anesthesia
Adequate patient restraint
 Caution!
■ Adequate preparation of the injeclion site:
● Remove hair (strongly recommended)
Lidocaine Toxicity
● Cleanse the site and apply skin antiseptic.
 Animals— especially small
■ Adequate knowledge of neuroanatomy
ruminants— injected with more than
■ Sharp, optimal-size injechion needles
6 mg/kg (3 mg/lb) lidocaine may
■High-qualiy syringes large enough to accommodate he total amount of anesthetic
exhibit cenlral nervous system signs
solution are required per injection site.
with generalized rwitching and
■ Prudent use of preanesthetic sedatives or analgesics
recumbency. Example: 15-Ib goat
 Sterile, fresh anesthetic solution
kid × 3 mg/lb = 45 mg = 2.25 ml of 
The addition of 1 ml of sterile bicarbonate solution in 20 ml of 2% lidocaine will
2% lidocaine. Be careful!
decrease the "sting" of the lidocaine solution.
Abdominal Wall Anesthesia In Cattle (Figure 3-1)
Proximal Lumbar Paravertebral Nerve Block
Indication
■ Surgery on a standing animal, with a right or left side approach to the abdomen.
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Thoroughly prepare the injection site
 Provide preanesthetic sedation or analgesia as needed (IV route suggested).
■ Excessive sedalion may cause the animal to lie down.
■ If sedation or analgesia is inadequate, anesthetize proposed injection sites with 2%
lidocaine.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
19
 20 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Proximal paravertebral
Lumbar epidural
needle
infusion needle
Skin
Spinous process -
Distal
paravertebral
needles
Peritoneum
Viscera
Sympathetic ganglion
FIGURE 3-1. Regional anesthesia in the bovine lumbar area.
Materials
■ 4 to 5-inch, 16- to 18-gauge spinal needle
■l-inch, 14-gauge guide needle to act as α cannula hrough the skin (preferred} or a
 bayonet-tip (Bard-Parker No. 1 l) blade to make a small stab incision in the skin to
facilitate needle insertion
■ 20-ml plastic syringe
■ 2% lidocaine (wih or without epinephrine)
Basic Technique (Figures 3-2 to 3-5)
■ The objective of the technique is to inhibit nerves T13, Ll, and L2 just ourside the
intervertebral foramen where both dorsal and ventral branches of the nerves will be
blocked.
■ Make a posirive identification (via palpatlionj of the ransverse process of the [1
vertebra. Count backward from L-5 (the last palpable ransverse process) to locate L1
■ Block the nerve.
● Tl13 along he cranial edge of transverse process L1
● ll along the caudal edge of transverse process Ll
● L2 along the caudal edge of transverse process L2
■ The needle should be nearly vertical for correct placement of the anesthetic agent to
block these nerves.
Specific Techniques for Individual Nerves
Nerve T13
● Place he l-inch, 14-gauge guide needle through the skin at the anterior edge of
he L1 transverse process, 4 ho 5 cm (2 to 2.5 inches) lateral to he dorsal midline 
on the side of the animal to be anesthetized.
● Inject about 5 ml of 2% lidocaine through the 1-inch needle to anesthetize the skin
adequately.
● The infusion needle is passed through the guide needle and "walked off" the
cranial edge of the Ll transverse process until the point of the needle is slighly
 Caution!
ventral to the process and penetrating the intertransverse ligament.
● Infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine into an area about 1 cm (0.5 inch) above
 Proper positioning of the needle to
and 1 cm (O.5 inch) below the cranial edge of the transverse process of Ll.
■ Nerve L1
block T13 is critical. The sites for
blocking Ll and L2 are based on the
● Insert the guide needle about 3 cm (1.5 inches) caudal to the needle inserlion site
 posilion of his needle.
for nerve T13, and 4 to 5 cm (2 to 2.5 inches lateral to the dorsal midline. Inject
approximately 5 ml of 2% lidocaine.
Local and Regional Anesthesia   21
FIGURE 3-2. Lateral view of the lumbar
FIGURE 3-3. Dorsal view of the bovine
nerves and transverse processes in catle.
lumbar region. Note the relationship of
spinal nerve pathways ho he transverse
processes.
FIGURE 3-4. Proximal lumbar paravertebral
HGURE 3-5. Proximal lumbar paravertebral
 anesthesia in catle (lateral view).
 aneshesia in calle [dorsal view).
● Pass the infusion needle hrough the guide needle and "walk it off" he caudal
edge of the Ll transverse process until the point of he needle is slightly venlral to
he process and penetrating he intertransverse ligament.
● Infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine into an area about 1cm (0.5 inch) above and
Recommendation
I cm (O.5 inch) below the caudal edge of the transverse process of Ll.
Inject slowly as you move the needle
Nerve L2
up and down, and along the front
● Insert the guide needle about 6 to 7 cm (3 inches) caudal to the needle inserlion
edge of the transverse process. Do
site for nerve L1, 4 to 5 cm (2 to 2.5 inches) lateral to he dorsal midline. Inject
not inject quickly. The object is to 
approximately 5 ml of 2% lidocaine.
spread out the lidocaine and thereby
● Pass he infusion needle hrough the guide needle and "walk it off" the caudal
block the nerve. Allow 10 to 15
edge of the L2 transverse process until the point of the needle is slighly venlral to
minutes for proper anesthesia.
he process and penetrating the intertransverse ligament.
22  ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine into an area about 1 cm (0.5 inch) above and
1 cm (0.5 inch) below he caudal edge of the fransverse process of Ll.
● Inject slowly as you move the needle up and down along the edge of the
Iransverse process.
Common Causes of Failure of the Paravertebral Block
■ Inabiliry ho identify he tip of lateral process of L1
■ Having the infusion needle at an angle raher han straight up and down
■ Injeching too quickly and not spreading out he aeshelic solution
Expected Results of a Successful Technique
■ Allow 10 to 15 minutes for proper anesthesia.
■ The blocked area initially becomes warm.
■ Optimal desensiltizalion will include both ventral and dorsal rami of spinal nerves
T13, Ll, and L2 and will effeclively anesthetize he skin, muscle, and peritoneum of 
 he abdominal wall of the paralumbar fossa.
■ Scoliosis of the spine should be evident with optimal aneshesia. Scoliosis is the result
 of unilateral desensilization of the longissimus dorsi muscle.
Distal Lumbar Paravertebral Nerve Block (Figures 3-6 and 3-7)
indications
■ Surgery on a standing animal, wih a right or left side approach to the abdomen [as
with proximal paravertebral anesthesiaj.
■ Possibly preferred to proximal lumbar paravertebral or lumbar segmental epidural
 anesthesia in animals that exhibit ataxia or general body weakness.
Advantages Compared with Proximal Anesthesia
■ Because spinal nerve rami are blocked distal to longissimus dorsi muscle innervation,
 scoliosis and concurrent interference with locomolion are unlikely problems during
anesthesia.
■ Some surgeons Find he distal paravertebral nerve block easier fo perform with more
consistent resulrs.
Disadvantages Compared with Proximal Anesthesia
■ Provides less specificily for nerve pathways, with a possible sequela of less efficient
anesthesia
FIGURE 3-6. Distal lumbar paravertebral
FIGURE 3-7. Distal lumbar paravertebral
anesthesia in calle (lateral view).
anesthesia in calle (dorsal view).
Local and Regional Anesthesia ■  23
 More costly because more anesthelic solution is required
 Landmarks are difficult to identify in overly fat beef animals.
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Same as for proximal lumbar paravertebral anesthesia.
Materials
■ 2.5-inch, 16- to 18-gauge needle
■ A l-inch, 14gauge guide needle ho act as a cannula through the skin (preferred) or
a bayonetip (Bard-Parker No. 1l) scalpel blade for skin stab incisions)
 20-ml syringe
■ 2% lidocaine
Basic Technique
■ Identify anatomic landmarks.
● Distal aspecrs of transverse vertebral processes L1, L2, and L4
 Popularilry of this technique is directly related to relarively easy palpation of
 these landmarks in most subjecis.
Specific Techniques for Iindividua! Nerves
■ Nerve T13
  o d s a no s a s u n  a s s
process of Ll.
● Inject 3 to 5 ml of lidocaine lo aneshelize the skin.
● Pass he 18-gauge needle through he guide needle.
● Altach a syringe (containing anesthetic solurion) and immediately infuse the
solution just ventral to the process.
● Continue infusion as the needle is direcled full length, below the Iransverse process.
● Infuse approximately 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine (epinephrine optional).
●Wihout removing the needle from the skin incision, withdraw the needle fo a
point where it can be redirecled dorsally to the transverse process (emphasis is
on the dorsocaudal aspect), and infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine in α similar
 manner as the ventral approach infusion. This infusion blocks the dorsal rami of 
nerve T13.
 Nerve L1
● Repeat the infusion process for the Tl3 nerve on he transverse process of lumbar
vertebra L2.
■ Nerve [2
● Repeat the infusion process as performed for Tl3 and Ll nerves on ransverse
 process of L4. Nerve L2 is more accessible on he ransverse process of L4 than L3.
Inverted L Paralumbar Anesthesia (Figure 3-8)
■May be considered a quasi-regional block
■ A local block in tissue bordering he caudal aspect of the 13th rib and the ventral
Note
aspect of transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae
It can be difficult to desensifize
■ Difficult to obtain desensirization of the peritoneum wih this technique
the peritoneum with inverted L
■ Muliple injeclion sites cause more pain, increase possible abscessalion at needle
paralumbar anesthesia 
inserlion sites, and may interfere with normal healing if excess aneshetic solurion is
Used.
■Advantages:
● Generally thought to be very simple
● Does not interfere with the patienl's locomotion
● Does not require in-deph knowledge of anatomic nerve innervation
 Emphasis on infusion should be on he dorsocranial aspect of the paralumbar fossa
[region of innervalion of nerves Tl3 and L1}
24■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Multiple
infusion sites
13th rib
Tuber coxae
FIGURE 3-8. Inverted L paralumbar infusion anesthesia.
Anesthesia of the Distal Limb Via Vascular (Iv)
Infusion in Cattle
Indications
■ Surgery of the structures distal to the pastern joint of either the front or rear limbs
■ Invasive foot surgery and claw amputalion, for which excellent anesthesia can be
provided
Preinfusion Procedures
 Lateral recumbency restraint is desirable.
 Positive leg restraint is required.
■ Standing resraint in a squeeze chute may be adequale if positive leg restraint is
available.
■ Preanesthetic sedalion or analgesia is indicated.
■ Adequately cleanse the area proximal to he fetlock joint.
■ Remove the hair over the dorsolateral aspect of the foot via a No. 40 clipper
head.
■ Prepare he area by scrubbing wih water and an iodophor formulation.
Materials
■ Tourniquet of rubber lubing of adequate tensil strength to conrol vasculariry of the
distal limb
■1- to 1.5-inch, 20 to 22-gauge sterile disposable needle
 20-ml syringe
■ 2% lidocaine (no epinephrine)
Technique
■ Apply the tourniquet to the midmetatarsal or midmetacarpal regions of he diseased
foot; apply marked tension.
Local and Regional Anesthesia   25
■ Allow adequate fime for venous engorgement and identification of a surface vein
such as he dorsal common digital vein. (Addirional rubbing and cleansing of the
prepared skin area will make the vein more obvious.)
■ Insert the needle, with no syringe altached, into the vein. Blood should fillthe needle
hub when he needle is in the vein. Attach the syringe and aspirate slightly to ensure
he IV posilion.
■ Infuse 15 to 20 ml of anesthetic solurion (suggested dose for maure catle) rather
slowly.
■ Remove the needle from the vein. Apply pressure on the inserlion point to reduce
leakback and until bleeding stops.
■ Remove the hourniquet on complerion of surgery.
Characteristics of the Anesthesia
■ Occurs quickly, usually within 3 to 5 minutes
■ The exact pharmacodynamics of the aneshelic process are not clear. Nevertheless,
aneshesia is generally excellent.
 Sensation returns to the distal limb rather rapidly compared with direct rissue infusion
anesthesia.
Anesthesia of the Horn (Cornual Nerve Block)
Cattle
Indication
■ Cornuectomy
Preinfusion Procedures
 Good standing restraint is required.
 Positive head restraint is required.
■ Removal of hair from the base of horn is suggested for mature subjects.
Materials
 bo 1.5-inch, 16- to 18-gauge sterile needle
10-ml syringe
■ 2% lidocaine (epinephrine optional
Technique
■ Palpate he lateral edge of the frontal crest. The point halfway berween the
lateral canthus of the eye and the base of the horn is the needle insertion point
(Figure 3-9).
■ Inser the needle (without the syringe altached) through the skin just under he frontal
dn oy sioalqns lous u (sayus s'oi wo I woy Aioa Aow uasu! jo ydap aui isan
bo 3 cm (1.5 inches) in large bulls
■ Altach the syringe and infuse 5 ho 10 ml of 2% lidocaine.
■ Continue infusing while direching the needle in a venral and medial direclion; keep
as close ho he frontal bone as possible.
■ Repeat the procedure on the opposite cornual nerve.
■ Allow 5 to l0 minutes for anesthesia.
Skin Block
■ The cornual block does not effectively anesthelize the skin adjacent to the base of the
horn.
 During cornuectomy, he skin, in addition to he cornual nerve, must be blocked locally.
26■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Crest of
frontal bone
Cornua!
Cornual
artery
nerve
 Superficial temporal
artery
External carotid
artery
FIGURE 3-9. Arterial blood and nerve supply of the bovine horn.
Goats
Indication
Note
■ Cornuectomy.
Goats are hought of as companion
animals, so owners commonly
Preinfusion Procedures
request hat dehorning be performed
■ Restraint should be adequate.
with the animal under general
■ Preferably, the animal should be placed in a crate with an opening for head
anesthesia.
exposure.
■ Sedation and analgesia are indicated.
■ Remove hair from he base of the horn
■ Prepare he skin (with alcohol or iodophor) for infusion needle insertion.
Materials
■ l-inch, 20-gauge needl suggested 
■ Orherwise, basically he same as for cornual block in cattle
Technique
■ Two nerves and hwo sites must be blocked for each horn: cornual branches of the
lacrimal and infratrochlear nerves (Figure 3-10).
■ Cornual branch of the lacrimal nerve
● Insert the needle as close as possble to he caudal edge of the root of the
supraorbital process to a depth of 1 to 1.5 cm (0.5 to 0.75 inches).
● Infuse 2 to 3 ml of lidocaine. Beware of lidocaine toxicity in small goats
■ Cornual branch of the infratrochlear nerve.
● Insert the needle through he skin at the dorsomedial margin of the orbit. [The
nerve may be palpated in some goats.j
● Insert the needle as close as possible to the margin of the orbit and to a depth of
about 0.5 cm (0.25 inches).
● Infuse about 2 to 3 ml of 2% lidocaine. Beware of lidocaine toxicily in small goars
Local and Regional Anesthesia   27
Cornual branch of
infratrochlear nerve
Cornual branch of
lacrimal nerve
FIGURE 3-10. Cornual nerve block in goats.
Eye and Eyelid Anesthesia in Cattle
General Considerations
 No altempt should be made to desensitize he optic nerve.
 The optic nerve conhains few if any pain-conductring fibers.
The nerve is large enough to serve as a direct pathway for the anesthetic solution to
the brain.
■ Corneal neoplasms, dermoids, are best handled surgically if the eyeball is
proptosed.
■ Anesthesia of the eyelids (for eyelid surgery) may be accomplished by using local
 infusion of he surgical area.
Anesthesia of the hird eyelid is usually accomplished by local infiltralion at the base
of the membrana nictitans.
■ Anesthesia for enucleation (commonly used as surgical reatment in advanced
squamous cell carcinoma in catle) is best achieved by regional anesthesia rather
han local infiltration of inflammatory fissue.
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Standing restraint is recommended for most eye surgeries in cattle.
Note
 Lateral recumbency may be an option.
 Positive head restraint (halter plus nose lead) is required.
If standing restraint is urlied during
■ Judicious use of IV sedatives or analgesics is advised.
eye surgery, a blinder placed over
■ Thoroughly cleanse the orbital area with water and iodophor solution; be careful not
he normal eye ofen helps quiet 
bo irritate the cornea with chemical disinfectants.
the patient during administration of
 For eye enucleation, remove hair from the orbital area with a No. 40 clipper
 anesthesia and surgery.
head.
■ Liberal use of a topical anesthelic on the cornea as a preaneshelic for a regional
block is advised.
28 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Peterson Eye Block
■ Commonly used for enucleation in catle
■ Blocks cranial nerves Ill, IV, V, and Vl as they emerge from the foramen
orbitorotundum, and the auriculopalpebral nerve (a branch of cranial nerve Vll).
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Adequately restrain the subject in standing position with the head positively
resrained in a natural position.
■ Preanesthetic sedation or analgesia is recommended.
■ Remove the hair over he orbital area with a No. 40 clipper head, and thoroughly
cleanse he area with water and an iodophor solution.
Materials
■ 3- to 4-inch, 18-gauge needle
■ 20-ml syringe
■ 2% lidocaine (epinephrine optionall
Technique I
■ Curve the infusion needle to form an arc with a radius of approximately 25 cm
[10 inches).
■ Insert he needle through he skin in the depression just posterior ho he point where
 the supraorbital process meets the zygomatic arch. With the concavily of the
curvature of the needle directed posteriorly and wih the hub of the needle held at
α point slightly higher han he point of insertion, insert the needle unil ir strikes the
coronoid process of the mandible.
■ Walk he point of the needle off the anterior border of the coronoid process, and, by
holding the hub slightly above the horizontal plane, insert the needle until it hirs the
bony plate forming the floor of the pterygopalarine fossa.
■ Retract the needle approximately 0.5 cm. (0.25 inch).
■ The deph of insertion will vary from 7 to 12 cm (3 to 4.5 inches), depending on the
size, breed, and sex of he patient.
 The point of the needle should be just anterior to the foramen orbitoroundum.
If the point of the needle strikes the pterygoid crest at a depth of 5 to 6 cm (2 to
2.5 inches), redirect it slightly craniad.
■ Atach an empry syringe and aspirate slightly to ascertain whether the point of the
 needle is in a blood vessel jinternal maxillary artery). If blood is present, retract the
needle slightly.
■ Atach the syringe with the anesthetic solution, and infuse a minimum of 15 ml of 2%
lidocaine (no epinephrine).
■ Retract the needle until he point is just beneath he skin, and infuse about 3.5 ml of
 2% lidocaine just laterally over the zygomalic arch for 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches) (to
block the auriculopalpebral branch of cranial nerve Vll and prevent eyelid rwitchingl.
Technique l!
■ Retract the needle from the earlier foramen orbitorolundum infusion site and redirect
it about 3 to 5 cm (l to 1.5 inches) dorsocraniad (retrobulbar).
■ Infuse an addirional 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine.
■ Retract he needle until the point is just beneath he skin and block the
auriculopalpebral branch of cranial nerve Vll as just described.
Summary
■ Peterson block provides anesthesia of:
● Maxillary and ophthalmic branches of cranial nerve V (sensory)
● Cranial nerves Ill, IV, and Vl (motor)
● Auriculopalpebral branch of cranial nerve Vll (facial, motor)
Local and Regional Anesthesia   29
Retrobulbar and Auriculopalpebral Nerve Anesthesia
Ventral or Lower-Lid Approach
■ Preinfusion procedures
● Standing restraint and posilive head restraint are required.
· Preanesthetic sedation or analgesia is recommended.
● Prepare the injeclion area by washing it with clean water (or very dilute iodophor
preparationsj.
recommended).
■Materials:
● 3 to 4-inch, 18-gauge spinal needle
●20-ml syringe
● 2% lidocaine [without epinephrine)
Technique
● Use the forefinger to apply pressure on the lower lid against the malar bone to
 force the eyeball dorsally (protects the eyeballfrom the needle).
● Insert the infusion needle through the lower lid and direct it caudally, dorsally, and
slightly medially until the point of the needle is retrobulbar.
● Infuse about 20 ml of 2% lidocaine into the retrobulbar area.
● Allow a minimum of 5 minutes for anesthesia. Anesthelized muscles of the eye
should markedly relax.
Lateral and Medial Canthus Approach (Figure 3-1l)
■ This melthod is preferred to the venral lid approach. It allows more conlrolled direclion 
of the eyeballby decreasing the infusion dose on either the medial or the lateral canthus.
(Example: For α medial corneal lesion, reduce the lateral canthus infusion dose.)
Preinfusion procedures
● Same as for the ventral lid approach
■Materials:
● 3 to 4inch, 18-gauge spinal needle with a slight curve
● 20-ml syringe
● 2% lidocaine (no epinephrine)
● Topical aneshetic solurion
Technique
● Administer muliple applications of topical aneshetic solution to anestherize he cornea
● Insert the forefinger belween he eyeball (to protect he eyeball from the needle
pointj and the lateral canthus.
Surgeon's finger placed
Surgeon's finger placed between
between third eyelid and eyeball
eyeball and lateral canthus to
protect eyeball
 Needle inserted
between third eyelid
and surgeon's finger
Third eyelid
Medial canthus approach
 Lateral canthus approach
FIGURE 3-11. Bovine relrobulbar anesthetic infusion technique (medial canthus and
lateral canthus approachj.
30 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Position the infusion needle berween the finger and the lateral canhus. Direct the
 needle caudally and medially through the fornix conjuncriva until he needle point
is in he relrobulbar area.
● Infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine and then remove he needle.
● Insert he forefinger at the medial canthus belween the eyeball and the third eyelid.
● Position he infusion needle berween the Finger and the underside of the third
eyelid. Direct the needle caudally and medially through the fornix conjunctiva until
he needle point is in the retrobulbar area.
● Infuse 10 to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine and then remove he needle.
● Allow a minimum of 5 minutes for anesthesia.
Block of the Auriculopalpebral Nerve (Branch of Cranial Nerve Vll)
■ Anesthesia of this (motor) nerve aids in immobilizing he eyelids but may provide
only incomplete paralysis because lids have additional innervalion by oculomotor
and buccal nerves.
Indications
 In combination with other regional nerve blocks (e.g., Peterson nerve block,
retrobulbar blocks)
■ Alone, for corneal or eyelid manipulations
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Standing resraint and positive head reslraint are required.
■ Preanesthelic sedation or analgesia is recommended.
■ Surgical preparation of he infusion site is recommended.
Materials
■ to 1.5-inch, 18- to 20-gauge needle.
■10-ml syringe.
■ 2% lidocaine (epinephrine optionall.
Technique
■ On a line about halfway berween the base of the ear and he angle behween the
supraorbital and zygomatic arches, palpate the superficial remporal vessels as they
these vessels.
■ Insert he needle at his point and infuse 5 ml of 2% lidocaine.
■ Several addirional milliliters may be infused caudad and craniad on the lateral
aspect of the zygomatic arch as an adjunct.
 Allow a minimum of 5 minutes for anesthesia.
Teat Anesthesia in Cattle
General Considerations
■ Because dairy cow are normally accustomed to handling and restraint associated
with modern miking procedures, restrain only as is absolutely necessary.
Unwarranted resraint may lead to udder and teat trauma.
■ Adequate standing resraint prevents udder and teat frauma associated with casting
and lateral recumbency restraint.
■ Theoretically, desensiltizalion of L2 and L3 nerves effechively aneslhelizes foreteals on
 he side of the nerve block, but it may achually not give salisfactory foreteat anesthesia.
■ Nerve L3 and a branch of nerve L2 form the genitofemoral nerve. Blocking his nerve 
may influence he integrily of the shifle muscles (relaxationj, which would cause aaxia.
Local and Regional Anesthesia ■  31
 Sedalion and analgesia, preferably by the IV route, are recommended.
 local nerve block is suggested for extensive foreteat surgery.
 Individual teat anesthesia is suggested for most surgeries under common field condirions.
■ General aneshesia is recommended for extensive teat or udder surgery under
clinical condifions.
Ring Block of the Teat Base (Figure 3-12)
Genera! Considerations
 Perhaps the most commonly used anesthetic technique under field condirions
■ All eat surgeries should be preceded by adequate removal of udder hair.
 anape ym pu Aop au u a Aans poa aala wad agissod fl 
FIGURE 3-12. Ring block of he bovine
 supply available.
tear.
Materials
■ 0.25- to 0.5-inch, 22- to 24-gauge needles
■ 5 to 10-ml plastic syringes
■ 2% lidocaine (epinephrine optional)
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Standing restraint is preferred.
■ IV sedalion or analgesia is indicated.
■ Apply a tail tie to keep he tail from he surgical area. The tail may be anchored to the leg
 Rear leg restraint (a hock rwitch) is optional.
● A tail jack effectively controls kicking.
 Thoroughly cleanse the surgical area wih an iodophor scrub.
Lines of infusion
Laceration
Technique
■ Encircle the base of the leat with an infusion of several milliters of 2% lidocaine into
both the skin and the deeper muscularure.
■ Allow a minimum of 5 minutes for anesthesia.
FIGURE 3-13. Inverted V teat anesthesia
Inverted V Block Over the Surgical Area (Figure 3-13)
in he cow.
General Considerations
 Used primarily when the teat lesion is specific.
■ Perhaps more readily applied han a ring block because it usually does not involve
infusing the medial aspect of the teat.
Materials
■ Same as for the ring block
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Same as for the ring block
Technique
 Perform a field block infusion of both the skin and musculature in an inverted V
 paltern dorsal to the teat defecr.
■ Be careful to infuse he lidocaine in normal—not inflammatory—rissue, far enough
 from the teat defect.
■ Allow a minimum of 5 minutes for anesthesia
Teat Cistern Infusion (Figure 3-14)
General Considerations
Will not desensilize musculahure or skin
FIGURE 3-14. Teat cistern infusion
 Use 2% lidocaine (without epinephrine), which anesthetizes intact mucous
lechnique for anesthesia of the mucous
 membranes on contact.
membranes.
32 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Materials
■ Heavy rubber band or other suitable device to be used as a tourniquet
■ Sterile teat tube
■ 2% lidocaine (wihout epinephrine)
■10 to 20-ml syringe
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Same as for the ring block and inverted V block
Technique
■ Place a tourniquet on the base of the teat. Apply adequate tension to prevent
leakage berween the udder and teat cisterns.
 Remove milk from teat cistern.
 Thoroughly cleanse he teat orifice with alcohol or iodophor solution.
■ Insert a sterile teat tube via the streak canal.
■ Infuse approximately 10 ml of 2% lidocaine (or enough to il teat cisternj.
■ Remove the teat tube.
■ Allow approximately 5 minutes for anesthesia.
■ Milk out the 2% lidocaine.
Perform surgery
■ Remove the tourniquet.
Vascular (Local) Infusion
General Considerations
■ A recently described technique
■ All rissues of he leat will be desensitized.
■ Success of this technique may be limited because of the need for adequate teat
size and environmental conditions conducive to optimal blood circulation (warm
weather).
Preinfusion Procedures
■ Same as for the ring block
Materials
■ Tourniquet (heavy rubber band preferred)
■ 0.25- to 0.5-inch, 22- to 24-gauge needle
■ 5- to 10-ml plastic syringe
■ 2% lidocaine [wihout epinephrine)
Technique
■ Place a lourniquet on the base of the teat (to provide marked tension).
■ Allow adequate fime for venous engorgement (venous plexus) just distal to
tourniquet
● A needle punchure and slight aspiration can determine the IV status.
■ Infuse approximately 3 to 5 ml of 2% lidocaine IV (into the venous plexus).
■Anesthesia will occur in several minutes.
Perform surgery
 Remove the tourniquet.
Effectiveness
■ The technique will not be effective if a teat lesion (e.g., laceration of the teat wall)
interferes with normal circulation.
■ The technique should be applied only when surgical procedures can be achieved in
a short hime (e.g., teat orifice surgery).
Local and Regional Anesthesia    33
Sacral and Subsacral Paravertebral Blocks
Sacral Paravertebral Alcohol Block in Ruminants
General Considerations
■ Advocated as an adjunct lo surgical and medical treatment in cases in which rectal or
vaginal prolapse or both stimulate chronic tenesmus in bovine, ovine, and caprine species.
■ May be modified for use in porcine species
 May also serve as an adjunct reatment of rectal, vaginal, and urinary tract irritations
without concurrent rectal or vaginal prolapse
Cattle
■ Nerves to be blocked:
Recommendation
● In both males and females, the S4 nerve is the critical nerve to be blocked
Use for:
[Figures 3-15 to 3-17).
● In females, block S3, S4, and S5 nerves via dorsal foramina (bilateral).
■Vaginal prolapse
■ Rectal prolapse
nerve in males is questionable because of branches involving the pudendal nerve
Cystifris
 and the possible unfavorable sequela of penile or prepurial prolapse.
 Proctitis
■ Desired effecis:
Enterifis
● Effeclive nerve block shimulates nerve necrosis and desensitizes a dermalome of the
Vaginal urine pooling
Xauad you j! pojad pabuod p jo wnauuad posop au jo uood nolou 
 Shudies indicate some nerve regeneration at 6 weeks after injection.
Mol o ym paoduos yooa loioosqns paddo Auadod o jo abquoapo jolow au 
caudal alcohol epidural is hat the tail remains fully functional.
Sacrum
A—Sciatic nerve
B—Pudendal nerve
C—Middle hemorrhoidal nerve
D-Caudal hemorrhoidal nerve
FIGURE 3-15. Leff-side view of the sacral plexus
S3foramina
S3 foramina
S4foramina
S4 foramina
S5 foramina
S5foramina
FIGURE 3-16. Dorsal view of the bovine
FIGURE 3-17. Ventral view of the bovine
sacrum.
sacrum.
34■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● levator, conslrictor, and retractor muscles of the vulva and vagina relax
● This phenomenon may aid in partial alleviation of the clinical condition of
vaginal urine pooling and its related interference with reproduction.α
+ Caslick's surgery may also be warranted.
■ Concurrent sequelae:
● Relaxalion of anal sphincter (of minor consequence)
● Relaxation of lips of vulva (of minor consequence)
● No clinical evidence of interference with urination
■ Preinfusion procedures
● Place he patient in standing restraint.
● Optimal control of anterior/posterior and lateral movement is essential
● Thorough skin preparalion over the dorsal sacrum is essenial; removal of hair is
optional but encouraged.
● Induce preanesthesia [sedation or analgesia] IV in hypersensitive subjects
● A low caudal (lidocaine) epidural is advocated when preaneshetic analgesia
is nor used or is inadequate for dorsal sacral skin desensirization of the area of
 needle insertions for the paravertebral technique.
■Materials:
● 2- to 3-inch, 16- to 18-gauge spinal needle[s] with stylette
● 5 to 10-ml plastic syringe
● 70% isopropy or 95% ethyl alcohol
● Sterile saline and/or 2% lidocaine for dilution of alcohol
◆Mix he alcohol and lidocaine in 1:1 ratio
■Technique
● Identify the general anatomic sites of S3, S4, and S5 nerve foramina
(Figures 3-18 and 3-19).
● Nerve S5 is at the junction of the S5 and Cl vertebrae, and is the suggested
 point of orientation. Flexing the tail up and down helps identify this junction.
● Dorsal S5, S4, and S3 foramina (bilaterally) are about 2 to 3 cm [1 inch) lateral
b the dorsal midline and are spaced about 3 cm (1.5 inches) apart anteriorly
and posteriorly in adulrs.
● Venral foramina may be palpated via rectal examination, provided a marked
rectal prolapse does not preclude this method.
● S3 and S4 ventral and dorsal foramina communicate directly.
● A l-inch, 14-gauge needle placed through he skin works well as a cannula in
a similar fashion as for the proximal paravertebral nerve block; the use of spinal
 needles is also effective.
● Nerves S4 and S3
● From a directly verlical posilion, insert the needle ventrally with one hand and
continue the penelration until the needle enters the osseous ring of the specified
foramen. The penetration should stop just as he needle enters he sof fissue
[localion of the nerve); the needle point may be palpable via he dorsal rectal
wall with the other hand.
● Infuse at each site bilaterally approximately 5 ml of the 1:1 mixrure of alcohol
and lidocaine.
● Nerve S5: optional nerve block
 It is exiremely important to insert the needle verlically belween S5 and C1
vertebrae on a line basically parallel to dorsal foramina of S4 and S5 bilaterally.
 The specific inserlion position must be determined by walking the point of the
needle belween S5 and C1.
Harike GT: Personal communication, Deparment of Anatomy/Physiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Kansas State Universily, Manhallan, KS, 1993.
Local and Regional Anesthesia  35
Infusion sites for
nerves S3, S4, and S5
S5foramen
S4 foramen
S3foramen
FIGURE 3-18. Infusion needle sites for sacral paravertebral alcohol block (dorsolateral
view of the bovine sacrumj.
● An improperly inserted needle (directed medially) may penetrate the spinal
canal, thus crearing an epidural block and possibly stimulating the unfavorable
FIGURE 3-19. Sacral paravertebral
sequela of a flaccid tail or a wry tail.
alcohol block (side view of the bovine
● Infuse he minimal dose over a dorsal or venlral area beginning immediately
 affer dorsal penelration of the needle belween S5 and Cl vertebrae (bilaterally).
pelvis).
● Desired effecis:
Long-term desensiltizalion of dorsal perineal region
 Fully viable tail
◆Absence of tenesmus
Sheep and Goats
■ Introduction and general considerations
● Many anatomic, physiologic, and pahologic considerations associated with
bovine species can also be relevant for ovine and caprine species 
● However, the anatomic landmarks are smaller, he tail is either less developed
or less important, and rectal palpation of the ventral vertebral fossa is limited to
Finger palpation.
m paoduos walqoid o yoan so qou si salsads auudos puo auo jo quiosy 
bovine restraint.
chronic rectal tenesmus associated with rechal or vaginal disturbances.
 Field reporrs affrm its effectiveness for treating prolapsed vagina in pregnant 
ewes, ofen without other surgical interventlion; however, vaginal retention
techniques are suggested.
● Litle or no affercare is required.
Administration
● Nerves to be blocked:
● In males and females, the nerve to be emphasized is S4 (middle
hemorrhoidall.
● In females, block S3, S4, and S5 bilaterally via dorsal vertebral foramina.
● In males, blocking the S3 nerve is not advocated because of the nerve's 
association with the pudendal nerve and possible unfavorable sequela of penile
or preputial prolapse.
36■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
●Dose
● Eiher 95% ethyl alcohol or 70% isopropyl alcohol may be used in a 1:1
mixture with 2% lidocaine.
+ Suggested dose is I to 2 ml per injechion site.
● Increased doses are not recommended.
● Desired effects
Similar to those in bovine species
■ Preinfusion procedure
● Standing restraint with oprimal control over anterior/posterior and lateral
movement is recommended .
● V sedation or analgesia may be considered for hypersensilive subjecis; however,
 sheep usually respond well to good physical restraint.
● Low-caudal epidural aneshesia at a minimal dose may also be considered before
he subsacral block.
● Removal of wool or hair on the dorsal sacral area and adequate skin preparation
 for asepsis are suggested.
● Fecal material should be removed from the rechum to faciliate palpation of ventral
 sacral foramina.
● Cleanse prolapsed rissues (vagina and rechum] with water and an iodophor product.
■Materials:
 3-ml plastic syringe
● 1.5-to 2-inch, 22-gauge hypodermic needles
● Eiher 70% isopropyl alcohol or 95% ethyl alcohol alone or mixed wih 2% lidocaine 
● Latex surgical gloves or form-irting, high-qualiry plastic gloves
■ Technique:
● Insert index and middle Fingers into the rechum and palpate the caudal and ventral
aspect of the sacrum, with emphasis on ventral sacral foramina.
● Simultaneously, move the tail dorsally and ventrally to ascertain the junction of the
last sacral and First coccygeal vertebra. Nerve S5 emerges from he spinal canal
at this junction.
● Move he fingers forward 1 to 2 cm (O.5 to 1 inch). While placing one finger in he
Note
rechum, palpate the ventral vertebral foramina (right and left) lateral to the midline.
● After locating the foramina, nerve S4 may be palpated emerging from the
 Research and clinical experience
foramen and passing under the transverse process.
have indicated hat simple blocking
● Wih the other hand, direct the hypodermic needle (with a syringe containing 1 to
of the S4 nerve bilaterally controls 
2 ml of alcohol lidocaine mixture] ventrally through he skin located directly dorsal
most rectal tenesmus syndromes.
bo he S4 foramen.
Blocking the S3 nerve in the female
● Continue penetration through the S4 dorsal foramen (dorsal and ventral
may be considered but is usually
 foramen connect) until he needle is in contact wih the S4 nerve.
unwarranted.
+ Do not penetrate the rectal wall.
Use of prolapse retenlion
● Infuse 1 to 2 ml of alcohol into an area close to the S4 nerve
lechniques (e.g., purse-string) may be
● Repeat the infusion procedure on the S4 nerve on the opposite side to stimulate
considered after the nerve block.
bilateral nerve degeneration.
 Postoperative treatment
● Ofen, no addirional treatment is necessary after use of the nerve block, but
observalion is prudent.
● Loosening of vaginal rissues as a sequela to the primary condirion of vaginal and/
or rectal prolapse and the potential for parturition complicalions continue to exist.
Subsacral Paravertebral Nerve Block in Pigs
Introduction and General Considerations
■ This block is advocated as an adjunct procedure to aid in surgical correclion of
rectal prolapse.
● It effecrively desensifizes the rissue involved while conlrolling rechal renesmus.
Local and Regional Anesthesia ■  37
■ Lidocaine (2% solurion) is the product of choice for this block.
● Very small amounts of alcohol may be added to he lidocaine (i.e., 1:10 dilution]
Ib prolong the block if deemed prudent.
 Subsacral infusion is obtained by needle inserion via the ischiorechal fossa (bilaterally).
● Degree of hypodermic needle penetration depends on judgment of the surgeon
and assessment as ho location of the venlral foramina of S4 and S3 nerves as
related to the size of the subject.
Dosage
■ Dosages of anesthelic solurion will vary according to he size of the palient: 3 to 5 ml
per injeclion for 10- to 35-kg subjecis is suggested.
Technique
 Infusion of anesthetic should commence immediately after skin penetralion and cover
an area close to (immediately ventral to sacrumj the S4 and S3 ventral foramina
(bilaterally).
Desired Effects
■ Successful nerve block produces both desensiltizalion of the rechal and/or vaginal
Fissue and alleviation of tenesmus.
 Provides optimal anesthesia for surgical correction of rectal amputations
 Has the advantage of retaining rear leg viabiliry, compared with the immobiliry
associated with an epidural block
Suggested Reading
Adeyanju JB. Alcohol block of the distal ventral sacral nerves of the bovine species as a
melhod of controlling rechal renesmus [Master's thesis]. Manhalan, KS: Kansas State
Universily, 1975.
Boulsset S, Davlaud L, Giron H. Blocage des nerfs sacres chez les ruminants. lePoint
Veterinaire 15:73, Mai-Juin 1983.
Bowen JS. Dehorning he maure goat. JAVMA 171(12): 1249-1250, 1977.
Getty R. Atlas for Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Ames, IA: State Universily Press, 1964.
Habel RE. Applied Veterinary Anatomy, ed 2. Ithaca, NY, Robert E. Habel, 1981.
Hall IW. Wright's Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia, ed 7. London: Bailliere
Tindall, 1971.
htp:/ /www.cvm.okstate.edu/courses/vmed5412/lect13.htm, Anesthesia 5412
Course notes, Stillwater, OK: Oklahoma State Universily College of Veterinary
Medicine, 2004.
Jones LM, Booth NH. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, ed 3. Ames, IA: State
Universily Press, 1965, pp 252-261.
Lumb WV, Jones EW. Veterinary Anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1973,
pp 261-267.
Muir WW, Hubbell JAE, Skarda RT, Bednarski R. Local aneshesia in catle, sheep,
goats, and pigs. In Muir WW (ed): Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia, ed 3.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2000, pp 57-81.
Noordsy Jl. Sacral paravertebral alcohol nerve block as an aid in controlling chronic
rectal tenesmus in cattle. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 7(5): 797-801, 1982.
Papich MG. Drug residue considerations for anesthesia and adjunclive drugs in food-
producing animals. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 12(3): 693-706, 1996.
Riebold TW, Goble DO, Geiser DR. large Animal Anesthesia: Principles and
Techniques. Ames, IA: State Universily Press, 1982.
Dtsch Tierarzt Wochenschr 87(9): 333-335, 1980.
38■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Trotter DM, Lumb JW. Mcloed's Bovine Anatomy, ed 2. Minneapolis: Burgess
Publishing Co, 1958.
Tufvesson G. Local Anaesthesia in Veterinary Medicine. Asra, Sweden: Astra
International, 1963.
Walker B, Modransky P. Performing anesthesia of the paralumbar fossa in ruminants.
Vet Med 89(2): 163-169, 1994.
Weaver AD. Intravenous local aneshesia of the lower limbs in catle. JAVMA 160: 55,
1972.
Westhues M, Fritsch R. Animal Anaesthesia (local). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincolt, 1965.
Chapter 3 Study Questions
Answers Key
Nerve Blocks for Abdominal Surgery in Cattle
Answers to study questions can
1. If you performed a successful proximal paravertebral block on spinal nerves 
be found staring on page 283
T13, Ll, and L2, what might be your first observable clinical sign of anesthesia?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
Nerve Blocks for the Limbs of Cattle
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
2. During use of the vascular (IV) infusion technique for surgery of the distal limb,
what would be the expected anesthesia rime?
3. In the case of surgical removal of an interdigital corn (infected) in a mature
bull, why is a regional nerve block advocated rather han local infusion of the
lesion wih 2% lidocaine?
Anesthesia of the Horn
4. In accordance with a clienl's request for a currently popular method, what
 anestheric rechnique would you suggest for removal of horns from a young
female goar?
Eye and Eyelid Anesthesia
5. Why is he optic nerve not pinpointed for anesthesia in the commonly used 
techniques for anesthesia of the eyeball?
6. During infusion of 2% lidocaine deep into the orbital caviry, the patient
suddenly has α cardiac or respiratory arrest. What could you conclude is the 
causalive factor?
7. Why might retrobulbar anesthesia and subsequent prolapse of the eyeball
stimulate temporary blindness?
Teat Anesthesia
mature Hereford range cow?
9. A common lesion in dairy caMe is alresia of he streak canal, and a common
surgical procedure is a cruciate incision of he teat sphincter. What aneshesia to
prepare for surgery would you suggest to a dairy client who has excellent cows?
10. if you have used an inverted V nerve block on a teat hat exhibits a teat
cistern laceralion or Fistula, can you expect complete anesthesia of he mucous
membranes of hat teat?
11. What aneshesia would you recommend for removal of a supernumerary teat 
in a 4-month-old dairy heifer?
Subsacral Paravertebral Nerve Block
12. Would a properly applied sacral paravertebral alcohol block in an adult 
pregnant cow keep her from calving normally?
13. Should a veterinarian alert a client as to possible inheritance tendencies in the
case of muliple vaginal prolapses in a purebred beef herd?
14. Should α veterinarian shudy he possibility of eiher management or nutrition in 
 he case of multiple rectal prolapses in a swine feeding establishment?
Chapter 4
Epidural Anesthesia
Principles of Epidural Anesthesia
Anatomic Considerations
■ The spinal cord, which lies within the spinal canal, is covered by three membranes:
dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater (Figure 4-1)
● Dura mater (dense)
● Arranged in rwo layers in the cranial caviry
★ Periosteum: Outer layer that lines the inner surface of the cranial bones and
 the verebral canal of the spine.
* Investing layer: Continues from the cranium into he spinal canal; Firmly adherent
at the margins of the foramen magnum, where it blends wih the periosteum.
 These rwo layers are firmly adherent except where they split to enclose venous
sinuses.
● Because of the adhesion belween the investing layer and he periosteum at the
foramen magnum, solurions placed correchly in he spinal epidural space cannot 
enter he cranial cavily or produce a nerve block higher than the First cervical nerve.
 The dorsal and ventral nerve roots issuing from the spinal cord penelrate the
investing layer of he dura mater and carry tubular prolongations calld dura 
cuffs, or ink cuffs, hat blend with the perineurium of he mixed spinal nerve.
● Berween he periosteum and the investing layer in the spinal canal lies the
epidural, or exiradural, space, which comprises:
★ One pair of ventral venous plexuses
★ A single dorsal venous plexus
★ Regional arterial branches, chiefly in the lateral parts of the epidural space
★ Spinal nerve branches
★ Fatfy tissue (the amount of which corresponds to the adiposily of the subject)
●Arachnoid mater
● Pia mater [delicate)
Dura mater
Epidural space and fat
Arachnoid mater
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
(spinal fluid)
Dorsal root
Ganglion
Dorsal ramus
Ventral ramus
Communicating ramus
Body of vertebra
FlGURE 4-1. Cross-section of a vertebra from the level of the intervertebral foramen.
Noordsy's Food Anirmal Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
68
40   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
White matter-
Grey matter
Dorsal root
Dorsalroot
Dorsal branch
ganglion
of ramus
Ventral branch 
oframus
Communicating branch
Spinal nerve
Ventral ganglion
(sympathetic)
Splanchnic nerve
Vertebral trunk
Ventralroot
(sympathetic)
FIGURE 4-2. Cross-seclion of the spinal cord.
■ The spinal canal, a tube-like canal Flaltened dorsoventrally, has hwo enlargements.
● One enlargement is in the posterior cervical region.
● The other enlargement is in the posterior lumbar region.
 The spinal cord and the dura mater end at the lumbar enlargement.
■ The wall of the spinal canal is formed by:
● Vertebral arches and bodies
● Intervertebral disks
● Intervertebral ligaments
■ In each vertebral segment, he canal has lateral openings, or intervertebral foramina,
 belween he vertebral arches. Blood vessels and spinal nerves pass hrough these 
 openings (Figure 4-2).
■ Spinal nerves
● Formed from the union of wo roots
Dorsal ganglionic, or sensory, root 
+Ventral motor root
● The union of these wo roots varies with body regions and possibly among 
 species. This variation is of praclical significance in epidural anesthesia and is
effect on vasomotor fibers emerging from the ventral root.
● In cervical, thoracic, and anterior lumbar regions, roots pass through separate
openings in the dura mater and unite in the intervertebral foramen.
dog and horse.
Action of Epidural Anesthesia
■ Sensory fibers are desensiltized more rapidly than are motor fibers because
nonmyelinated fibers are more easily penetrated by aneshetic agents.
 Sympaheric fibers of the ventral root (spinal nerve roots) are more susceptible to
blocking han are fibers of he motor nerves and are therefore always blocked.
● Anesthesia leads ho vasodilatlion, loss of vasotonia (hypotension], and possibly
Note
increased vascularily. Clinical experience has shown hat loss of blood pressure
Wih high epidural anesthesia,
[usually within safe limits) offen resulls in reduced hemorrhage in he operatlive field.
● With high epidural anesthesia, associated hypotension should be monitored
associaled hypotension should be
carefully and counteracted wih vasoconstrictor drugs if deemed necessary (e.g.,
checked carefully and counteracted
with vasoconslrictor drugs if deemed
in lumbosacral epidural anesthesia in sheep and goats).
 Most absorplion of aneshelic solution apparently occurs in the area of the dura cuffs.
necessary (e.g., in lumbosacral
● Absorplion through the dura mater is questionable.
epidural anesthesia in sheep and
● The presence of aneshetic solution in the cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) is of litle
goatsj.
consequence but may stimulate some general sedation, especially at higher doses.
Epidural Anesthesia     41
Types of Epidural Anesthesia Classified According to Effect
■ High caudal epidural aneshesia: Affecis nerves S2, S3, S4, and S5.
■ Low caudal epidural anesthesia: Affects nerves S3, S4, and S5.
 Segmental epidural anesthesia: Affects only certain segments of the body (i.e.,
specific spinal nerves). Smallquanies of anestheric are placed epidurally
[see Table 4-1].
Indications for Epidural Anesthesia
■ In principle, all surgeries posterior to the diaphragm can be performed wih epidural
anesthesia.
Contraindications to Epidural Anesthesia
Previous damage to lumbar or sacral vertebrae
■ Previous damage to the spinal cord or its meninges
■ Any stenotic process in he vertebral canal
■ Infective processes near the injection site or within he vertebral canal
■ Congenital or acquired deformities in the lumbosacral region
 Paresis or lameness of the hindquarters of nervous origin
Very low blood pressure or circulatory collapse
Administering Epidural Anesthesia
Types of Anesthesia According to Site of Injection
Caudal Epidural (Figures 43 to 4-5)
Cattle
■Administration
● High caudal epidural: Insert he needle berween the last sacral and the First
coccygeal vertebrae (S5, Cl) (preferred site).
● low caudal epidural: Insert the needle berween the first and second coccygeal
vertebrae (C1, C2).
■ Desired effects:
● Low caudal epidural anesthesia: Desensitizes nerves S3, S4, and S5.
● High caudal epidural anesthesia: Desensitizes nerves S2, S3, S4, and S5. As the
Note
 anesthelic dose increases, nerves cranial to S2 will be affected.
Adding epinephrine to the lidocaine
Materials:
● 10-ml, plastic or glass syringe; α free-moving plunger is preferred
is not recommended for epidural
● 1.5-inch, 18-gauge, sterile needle
infusions.
● 2% lidocaine
● Xylazine: 20 to 30 mg
 2 to 4 ml of 2.0% lidocaine is commonly added to the xylazine for a xylazine
epidural.
● The response with a xylazine epidural may be delayed 15 to 20 minutes.
◆ A xylazine epidural produces excellent anesthesia in a larger area compared
wih a lidocaine epidural.
 A xylazine epidural produces mild sedation along with the anesthesia.
■ Technique
● Remove hair from he injection site. If hair cannot be removed, clean he area well
wilh alcohol or another skin antiseptic.
● With he cow in standing restraint, the surgeon should stand alongside its pelvic
region and move the tail up and down to locate the fossa berween the last sacral
vertebra and the first coccygeal vertebra (preferred site) or berween the First and
second coccygeal vertebrae.
42
 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Reclum, vagina, and bladder 
emplying of bladder possible]
Vagina, reclum, and bladder
increcsed peristalsis of anterior
aalssasxa jo asnpaq uolbal
Reclum and vagina dilate by
sympathelic tonus; bladder 
relaxes but sphincter is tonic
completely relax; no slrelch
sympathelic slimulation
sphincler relax (passive
colon and small ntestine,
 Straining in anorectal
Telaxedileocecalvalve
Action
Prolapse of penis
reflex 
Extent of Autonomic Innervation
Sympathetic
Innervation
of rectractor
splanchnici
Further nn.
splanchnici
splanchnici
of penis
lumbales
umbales
lumbales
[parl]  
All nn.
Nn.
Parasympathetic
reclales caudales
pelvici, plexus
hypogaslricus
Fibers in n.
N. rectales 
caudales
[Relaxalion of abdominal wall 
M. constrictor vulvae [vagina
 Extent and Action of Epidural Anesthesia*
Flexors of slifle, flexors and
extensors of hock and digit
[swaying, knuckling of hind
Felocks, ataxia], flexors and
Aductors and flexors of hip
Ancal sphincter [incomplele
 paresis of hindquarters]
Abdominal musculature
Motor
Coccygeal muscles 
abductors of hip 
closure of anus]
TABLE 4-1
relaxes] 
 Extent of Anesthesia
Male: prepuce and caudodorsal scrolum, 
Hip, upper thigh over m. semitendinosus
Male: back of scrolum, medial thigh, skin
Posterior flank, scrolum and prepuce, or
Whole abdominal wall except venlurally. 
jjunio puo ssaooid so io dnois jaa0
 Slifle inguinal region, caudal part of 
Posterior and dorsal abdominal wall
Anal region, ail folds, ailbae
Mate: perineum, posterior croup
Female: vulva without clitoris
Sensory
portion of sacrum to hock 
Female: back of udder 
fibularis and ibialis
 cnterior lo umbilicus
pepuce, or udder 
Femafe: clitoris
lateral thigh
penis
udder
More cranial = paralysis of intercostal muscles.
Plexus ischiadicus [n.
N. hemorrhoidales 
n. gluteus craniales]
N. culcaneus femoris 
N. iliohypog ashricus
N. hemorrhoidales 
Nerve(s) Blockedt
cuta neous temoris
N. genitofemoralis
N. coccygeus
N. obluralorius
N. lioing unalis
 shpuapnd N 
temoralis
caudalis
lateralis 
medii
z
Spinal Cord 
S4, S3, S2
Th12, Th13
S2, S1, L6 
S4 [S3]
L6, L5 
7
Epidural Anesthesia    43
Lumbar epidural
Lumbosacral epidural
(segmental)
infusion site
infusion site
 Caudal epidural
infusion sites
FIGURE 4-3. Epidural anesthesia infusion sites in catHle
Sciatic
-(LI) lliohypogastric
Pudendal
(L2) llioinguinalis
Saphenous
(L3) Genitofemoris
Perineal
Obturator
Tibial~
Femoral
FIGURE 4-4. Nerves of the bovine pelvis.
● Insert the needle [no syringe attached) ventrally and cranially at a 15-degree
angle until the skin is penetrated. Place a drop of anesthetic solution on
Caution!
the hub of the needle (hanging drop method). Slowly advance the needle
If blood appears in the lumen of the 
until the anesthetic solution is drawn into the epidural space by negative
 needle after inserion, presumably the
pressure. Attach a syringe to the needle and slowly inject the anesthetic
needle was inserted too ventrally and
solution.
invaded the ventral venous plexus.
● Altach the syringe wih he estimated optimal dose of anesthetic solurion to the
Consider hwo options: Retract the
needle and start the infusion. If the needle is properly situated, he plunger should 
needle slighly, disregard the blood,
and infuse he anesthetic solution (no
● Optimal dose for a 1,000-lb cow: 4 to 6 ml of 2% lidocaine.
serious sequelae usually resultj.
● Increase or decrease the dose according to the patient's size and
Remove he needle, clean it,
condition.
reinsert it to the proper deph, and
 Obesily, which may influence the amount of spinal canal adipose fissue, offen
infuse he anesthetic.
dictates lower doses.
44 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Optimal area of
Area of high caudal
low caudal epidural
(anterior) epidural
(S2 involved)
FIGURE 4-5. Caudal epidural in catle
● Detach the syringe from the needle; the needle may be retained in the inserted
posilion during surgical procedures [only a small possibiliry of spinal nerve
damage exists) for addirional infusion of anesthetic solution, if indicated.
Note
● Protect he needle hub from contamination.
Epidural anesthesia is not commonly
Sheep and Goats
used in pigs.
■ Indications: not extensively used but may be indicated under the same condirions as
in catfle
Materials:
● 1.0- to 1.5-inch, 18-gauge needle is recommended 
● The dose for the optimal low caudal epidural in sheep and goats is 2 to 3 ml of
2% lidocaine.
■Technique
● Similar to that used for catle.
Lumbar Segmental Epidural in Cattle
Indications
■ Recommended for any abdominal surgery performed with standing restraint in which
 the fissues are innervated by spinal nerves Tl3, Ll, and L2.
■ Not recommended for teat surgery
Materials
■ Glass or good-qualiry plastic syringe with free-moving plunger
■ 5- to 6-inch, 16- to 18-gauge needle with stylet (spinal needle)
■ 2% lidocaine
Technique
■ The palient should be well restrained in a standing position.
■ The usual site of injection is the intervertebral foramen berween the first and second 
lumbar vertebrae (Figures 4-6 and 4-7). (A less commonly used site is belween the
13th thoracic and 1 st lumbar vertebrae.)
Epidural Anesthesia   45
FIGURE 4-6. Lumbar segmental epidural
FIGURE 4-7. Lumbar segmental epidural
in catle.
 in catle (dorsal aspect).
■ Remove he hair and prepare the skin in the area covering the second lumbar dorsal
spinous process. If the left paralumbar area is to be desensifized, concentrate the
skin preparation on the right side of the dorsal spinous process. Similarly, if a right 
paralumbar incision is proposed, he infusion site should be leff of the spinous
process.
■ Produce α skin wheal with 2 to 4 ml of 2% lidocaine.
■ Make a pilot hole in the skin with a 14-gauge needle or a No. 1l Bard-Parker
blade.
cranially, and medially at an angle of approximately 10 degrees from the vertical
 until he needle penetrates the intervertebral foramen (about O.8 cm long, 0.5 cm 
wide, and l cm deep in the adult Jersey cow). For desensitizalion of the leff side
of the abdomen, insert the needle 1 cm [O.5 inch] caudal and lateral to the cranial
aspect of the second dorsal spinous process [l2).
 Continue cautious insertion of the needle through the ligamentum Flavum. Subsequent
lack of resistance indicates penetration. A pain reflex commonly occurs.
■ Remove the stylet from the needle; air may be heard entering the needle in
certain cases. No CSF should Hlow from the needle; if CSF is present, the needle
has punctured the arachnoid layer. Moreover, no blood should be visible in the
needle.
 Atach an empty syringe with a free-moving plunger to he needle. Aspirate for
deteclion of CSF. No resistance will be felt with the plunger of the syringe if the tip of
 the needle is in the epidural space.
■ Altach a syringe containing the calculated optimal dose of 2% lidocaine to
the needle and rapidly infuse the anesthetic solurion into the epidural space.
The optimal dose desensitizes the dura cuffs of spinal nerves Tl3, Ll, and L2
(Figures 4-8 to 4-12). The optimal dose and correct technique produce unilateral
 desensilization; higher doses produce a belt around the abdomen.
● Optimal dose for a 1,000-lb cow: 8 to 10 ml
● Reduce the dose for smaller cows; increase the dose for larger subjecis.
● Remove he spinal needle immediately to avoid possible spinal cord injury if the
cow moves.
46 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Innervation ofT13
(dorsal ramus)
I3h rib
Tuber coxae
ofT13
(ventralramus)
FIGURE 4-8. Average dermatome of spinal nerve T13
Innervation of L1
Cranial innervation of
(dorsal ramus)
T13 (dorsal ramus)
13th rib
Tuber coxae
ofL
(ventralramus)
FIGURE 4-9. Average dermatome of spinal nerve L1
Innervation of Ll
(dorsal ramus)
Innervation ofT13
Innervation of L2
(dorsal ramus)
/ (dorsal ramus)
13th rib
Tuber coxae
Inner
rvationofL2
(ventral
FIGURE 4-10. Average dermalome of spinal nerve L2.
Epidural Anesthesia     47
Dermatome ofT13,
Innervation of L3
LI, and L2
(dorsal ramus)
13ch rib
Tuber coxae
Innervationof L3
(ventral ramus)
FIGURE 4-11. Average dermatome of spinal nerve L3 in catle.
Proximal paravertebral infusion needle
Epidural infusion needle
Dorsal ramus of nerve
Skin
,Distal paravertebral
Spinous process
needles
Ventral ramus
Peritoneum
Sympathetic ganglion
Viscera
FIGURE 4-12. Lumbar regional anesthesia in caMe (cross seclion through he lumbar area).
Lumbosacral Epidural
Administration
■ Insert the needle berween the last lumbar and the first sacral vertebrae (l6, Sl).
Desired Effects
■ Complete anesthesia of spinal nerve Tl3 (dose dependent) and all spinal nerves
caudally.
■Animal will lose innervation to he rear limbs and lie down.
Catle
■ Materials:
Note
● 3- to 4-inch, 16- to 18-gauge needle for 300- to 400-lb subjects is
recommended; use a shorter needle for smaller subjecis, α larger needle for 
Lumbosacral epidural anesthesia in
larger subjecrs.
calle is commonly limited to younger,
● 2% lidocaine: Use about 10 to 15 ml for 100- to 200-lb subjects and 25 to 35 ml
immature subjects.
for 300- to 600-lb subjecis.
48   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Technique
● The subject should be thoroughly resrained in eiher standing restraint or sternal
recumbency to ensure bilateral desensilizalion. Do not elevate the rear quarters
much for this procedure because elevation may allow anesthetic solution to
migrate to he horacic nerve area.
● Remove hair from he injechion site. If hair cannot be removed, clean the area well 
wilth alcohol or another skin antiseptic.
● Insert the needle cranially and ventrally through he fossa; stop immediately
when the ligamenrum Flavum is penelrated. Deeper penetrarion may invade the
subarachnoid space.
● Altach an empry syringe ho he needle and aspirate. If CSF is present, withdraw
he needle slighly until it is in the epidural space (the syringe should move freely
with no evidence of CSF).
●Infuse he 2% lidocaine.
● Remove he needle immediately affer infusion to eliminate the possibiliry of spinal
cord damage.
● Keep the subject in standing restraint or sternal recumbency as long as possible to
 ensure bilateral desensiltizalion.
Sheep and Goars
■ Materials:
Note
● 1.5-to 2-inch, 18-gauge needle
●Free-moving, plaslic or glass 5-to 10-ml syringe
Lumbosacral epidural is the most 
commonly used epidural anesthesia 
● 2% lidocaine
■Technique
 in sheep and goars.
● Place the subjec in lateral recumbency and bring the front and rear legs togelher ho
 open the lumbosacral fossa. (This can be successfully completed on a shanding animal.)
● Remove hair from the injection site. If hair cannot be removed, clean he area well
wilth alcohol or another skin antiseptic.
● Insert the needle into he lumbosacral fossa using he precautions taken in calle to
avoid penelrating the subarachnoid space. (Refer to the bovine infusion echnique
and  This figure placed with 4-8 thur 4-12.
● A dose of about 3 to 4 ml of 2% lidocaine should be sufficient for adulls.
● Remove he needle from he subject before releasing lateral restraint. The subject
should then be allowed to stand or should be placed in sternal recumbency until
 he desired anesthesia is obtained.
Pigs (Figures 413 and 414)
■ Only epidural recommended for pigs
 Indicated for surgery on he caudal abdominal region and extremities:
● Testectomy (marure boars)
● Scrotal and inguinal hernial repair
● Scirrhous cord removal
● Prolapsed recrum repair
● Claw amputation
● Cesarean section
■ Anatomic considerations
● It is almost impossible to inject into he subarachnoid space at the lumbosacral
articulation because of the limited depth of the subarachnoid space at this point.
● The conus medullaris terminates in the region of he first and second sacral vertebrae.
● The spinal cord ends at the junchion of the Fifth and sixh lumbar vertebrae, and the
spinal meninges continue.
● The filum terminale terminates on he sixth or seventh coccygeal vertebra.
● The tuber coxae is located opposite he dorsal spinous process of the next-to-last
lumbar vertebra (fifth).
Epidural Anesthesia   49
Last lumbar process
Tuber coxae
FIGURE 4-14. Lumbosacral epidural in
 he pig. In he adult animal, he needle is
inserted in he midline, 2 to 5 cm (l to
 2 inches) caudal to he imaginary
Iransverse line.
FIGURE 4-13. Lumbosacral epidural in he pig. The junchure of an imaginary transverse 
line conneching he crests of the ilia and an imaginary vertical line running from he fold 
of the flank to he huber coxae is the site of injection.
● The crest of the wing of the ilium is opposite the dorsal spinous process of the last
[(sixth) lumbar vertebra.
● Lumbosacral aperture size:
100- to 200-lb hog: anterior-posterior, 1 cm; lateral, 2 cm; depth, 1 cm.
● 400 Ib or more: anteriorposterior, 1.5 to 2 cm; lateral, 2 to 3 cm; deph, about
I cm.
Materials:
● 3 to 6-inch, 16- to 18-gauge needle
● A glass syringe or high-qualiry plastic syringe with a free-moving plunger. Both will
aid in ascertaining the proper location of the needle point in he epidural space.
● 2% lidocaine:
shid mows jeyo puo sbujuoam jo lybiam Apoq jo ql Ol Jed qu 1 
+ 6 ml is usually advised for an 80- to 100-lb pig.
◆Maximum of 20 ml for an adull pig
● Sedatives or tranquilizers may be indicated as preaneshetics.
■Technique
● Because complete reslraint is difficult, injeclions are usually done rapidly.
Note
● As with sheep and goars, swine may be in lateral recumbency for infusion;
The crest of the ilium is difficult to
however, adequate restraint is often difficull, and the pig should be allowed to
palpate in most hogs.
stand immediately affer infusion. Do not place he pig's hindquarters higher than
 he forequarters after infusion because the thoracic nerves may be anesthetized.
● An imaginary transverse line connecting the crests of the ilia pinpoints the site of
lumbosacral arriculation. The crest of the ilium is difficult to palpate in most hogs.
● An imaginary vertical line that runs from the fold of the Flank to the tuber coxae
and hen over the back to connect with a comparable vertical line on the opposite
side will establish a landmark for the injection site.
● Anesthetic solution may be locally infiltrated into the skin before the spinal needle
is inserted.
● Insert the needle in the midline, 2 to 5 cm (1 to 2 inches) caudal to the imaginary
Iansverse line in the adul pig. Direct the needle ventrally and slightly craniad
[with the pig in shanding restraint). Insert the needle several inches until the
lumbosacral osseous foramen and the ligamentum Flavum are penetrated.
50 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Pigs usually jerk or display a pain reflex when the needle penelrates the
ligamentum Flavum. Be prepared for a sudden movement by an animal.
● CSF should not Flow from the needle. If CSF is present, withdraw the needle
 slighly and redirect it until he proper posilion is determined.
● The tail should relax l to 2 minutes after injection; this response is usually the first
 indication of a normal reaction.
Suggested Reading
Caron JP, LeBlanc PH. Caudal epidural analgesia in caltle using xylazine. Can J Vet Res
53(4): 486-489, 1989.
Frank ER. Veterinary Surgery, ed 7. Minneapolis: Burgess Publishing Co, 1964, p 7.
Getty R. Epidural anesthesia in the hog: Its technique and applications. AVMA Sci Proc
100th Annu Meet 88-98, 1963.
Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ. Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine, and xylazine/
lidocaine for caudal epidural analgesia in horses. JAVMA 201(8): 1187-1190, 1992.
Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ. Evalualion of lidocaine, xylazine, and a 
combination of lidocaine and xylazine for epidural analgesia in llamas. JAVMA
203(10): 1441-1444, 1993.
Habel RE. Applied Veterinary Anatomy, ed 2. lrhaca, NY: Robert E. Habel, 1981.
Hall LW. Wright's Veterinary Anaeshesia and Analgesia, ed 7. London: Bailliere
Tindall, 1971.
Hardenbrook Hl, Sr. Clair LE. Lumbar epidural anesthesia in calle. JAVMA 129(9):
405-409, 1956.
Jones LM, Booh NH. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, ed 3. Ames, IA: State
Universily Press, 1965, pp 252-261.
Lumb WV. Jones EW: Veterinary Anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1973,
pp 261-267.
Tufvesson G. local Anaesthesia in Veterinary Medicine. Astra, Sweden: Astra
Internalional, 1963.
Westhues M, Fritsch R. Animal Anaesthesia (locall. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincolt, 1965.
Chapter 4 Study Questions
Answers Key
1. List several common indications for application of a caudal epidural in cattle.
2. May alcohol be substiuted for 2% lidocaine in a low caudal epidural in the
Answers to study questions can
be found staring on page 284
cow?
3. In a cow, will an optimal dose of a low caudal epidural stop tenesmus 
or online at www.wily.com/go/
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. Will a lumbar segmental epidural in the cow produce a Flaccid tail?
5. Should you hesitate to administer a low caudal epidural to a dairy cow that
 must continue fo stand in a stanchion or gulter rype of housing with cement
foors?
6. Would you be able to perform a painless testectomy (in a bullin standing
restraintj with he use of a low caudal epidural?
7. What surgical procedures can be performed in a practical manner in pigs
under lumbosacral epidural anesthesia? In catle? In sheep? In goats?
8. Under what condirions would you consider using a low caudal epidural with
95% ethyl alcohol in the range cow?
 9. Should you hesitate to administer an optimal dose of a caudal epidural to a
cow that must walk for a short distance on wet, slippery concrete floors after
surgery?
Chapter 5
General Anesthesia and
Postoperative Analgesia
Introduction and General Considerations
General Anesthesia
Cattle
■ Many surgical procedures are performed in calle hat are standing under local or
Recommendation
regional anesthesia. However, general anesthesia has become more rouline due fo:
Inhalation general anesthesia is
● Increased awareness of patient comfort
recommended only after use of
● Improved anesthetic agenrs, analgesics, and equipment
 presurgical starvation and water
● Increased experience and knowledge of veterinarians, veterinary
limitation.
anesthesiologists, and veterinary technicians
■ Lung capacily of caltle is small compared to horses and may be further reduced by
 he bulk of abdominal organs when the animal is in dorsal or lateral recumbency.
 The cardiac sphincter relaxes during anesthesia in calle allowing ruminal contents to
reflux into the pharynx and be aspirated if no endotracheal rube is in place.
 Rumen rympany may be a significant problem.
Pigs
 ud anso no qsaixa pun qesdn ais si wass snou souano a 
induce fatal collapse, especially in heavily muscled and obese swine.
● This syndrome is often referred to as the porcine stress syndrome, or malignant
hyperthermia.
● Stress and anesthetic gasses (specifically Halothane} may trigger malignant
hyperthermia.
Sheep and Goats
 Small lung capacily, abdominal bulk, regurgitarion with aspiralion, and ruminal
lympany concerns are similar to hose of cattle.
 The desired level of anesthesia may be difficult to monitor in sheep.
First Aid
Injectable Anesthesia
For irritating drugs infused 
Advantages
extravascularly:
■ The induction time is usually short when the intravenous route of administration is
 Inject the following solution freely
pracliced.
into the perivascular area:
■ V products are administered with minimal assistance compared with inhalation
● Aqueous base steroid: 5 ml
aneshetics.
● local anesthetic (procaine HCl
 Small volumes are generally required.
preferred): 20 to 30 ml
 Some products can be administered intramuscularly when intravenous injections are
■Inject an addirional 100 ml of 
imprachical.
 saline solution if deemed prudent.
 Producrs are often combined to maximize the positive effect of mulriple drugs.
 Massage area well.
■ Drug mixtures offen decrease the dose and the negative effect of individual drugs.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanirmalsurgery
51
 52  ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Anesthesia Terminology
Analgesia: Relief from pain
 Analgesic agent: Substance hat temporarily abolishes pain 
 Anesthesia: 1. The loss of sensation, usually by damage to a nerve or 
receptor; called also numbness. 2. Lloss of the abiliy to feel pain, caused by
 administration of a drug or by other medical interventions.
 Anesthetic agent: Substance hat produces, in a controlled manner, both loss of
 consciousness and absence of motor response to noxious stimuli
Ataractic: Substance that produces sedation without causing drowsiness;
 popularly known as a ranquilizer
Electronarcosis: Passage of electricily through the brain to produce anesthesia 
General anesthesia: State of unconsciousness produced by controlled, reversible
intoxication of the cenral nervous system; causes decreased sensitiviry and 
diminished moror response to shimuli 
Hypnotic: Narcolic agent hat is used to induce sleep [a state of unconsciousness
 from which the subject can be easily awakened by a wide variery of shimulij
Local analgesic: Substance applied to nerve terminals or nerve fibers that
temporarily prevents conduction of impulses by nerve fissue
Local anesthesia: Loss of sensation in a limited body area 
 Narcotic: Substance that depresses the achivily of the central nervous system;
Regional anesthesia: Insensibiliry in a limited body area, but one that is larger
 han the area specified for local anesthesia
 Sedative: Narcotic agent used to calm a nervous, vicious, or excied subject; most
sedatives cause drowsiness
Surgical anesthesia: Unconsciousness accompanied by muscular relaxalion fo
such a degree that surgery can be performed painlessly and without struggling
by the patient
Disadvantages
■ The deplh of anesthesia is more difficult to control as compared with the inhaled
anesthetic agents.
■ Slow recovery is often observed with injectable agenrs especially when administered
IM or SQ.
■ Few if any of he commonly used injechable agents are labeled for use in food
producing animals.
● Drugs are used in an extra label manner.
● A valid veterinary client patient relationship (VCPR) is required.
● Milk and slaughter withdrawal rimes must be established by the prachilioner
 Respiratory support is difficult to perform without inubation.
Other Considerations
■ Accurate weight of the patient is required for accurate dose administration
Caution!
■ Rate and dosage of aneshelic are governed by many patient-related factors:
● Excitement of the patient
The subcutaneous abdominal vein
has minimal rissue around it and is
● Renal or hepatic disease
●Metabolic rate
more likely to form hematomas than
● Advanced pregnancy
is the external jugular vein. Use a 
smaller gauge needle han the one
■ Proper restraint and vein accessibiliry may be difficult in some patients, i.e., pof
used for the jugular vein.
bellied pigs.
■ Subcutaneous abdominal vein (milk vein} may be advantageous in the recumbent cow.
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia   53
■Tail veins
pasan uood si lnalgns au uum pasn uao 
Caution!
● Tail vein injeclions should be limited to administration of 10 ml or less and
nonirritating solutions.
When administering drugs via
tail veins, be aware of possible
IV injections in Swine
intraarterial infusion and adverse
 Most common route: auricular vein (marginal vein) (Figure 5-1)
drug reactions. Perivascular injections
yuipusau buspunis poob aplaoid o mol jaddn ay uo japloy boy p asn ●
 of irritating solutions could cause the
● Pace a tourniquet (a heavy rubber band or a Doyen intestinal clamp) on the base
tail to slough.
of the ear lo restrict venous flow.
● Rub the ear briskly and clean it to facilitate dilation of the vein; dilation aids in
observalion of the vein.
● Thread well into he vein. The ear and needle are held in place berween the thumb
 and forefinger.
Note
● Remove he intestinal clamp or rubber band before infusion.
● Infuse the estimated optimal dose rapidly. The palient will seldom allow slow,
Once a larger needle is placed into 
prolonged infusion without shaking he head.
an ear vein, it is less likely than a
■ Anterior vena cava or external jugular vein 
smaller needle to slip our.
● Use a hog holder or a rope loop on the upper jaw to restrain the head 
 in an upward and anterior direclion. Stretch the neck muscles to a tense
position.
● Fill syringe with the calculated optimal dose of aneshetic
● Insert the needle (attached to syringe) into the fossa at the ventral right side of the
Note
neck in a straight line loward he fip of the leff scapula. Inserlion site: right side
jugular fossa (slighly cranial and lateral to the point of he breasibone). The vagus
 For IV injections in hogs, use good 
nerve is said to be more protected and less ikely to be damaged on he right side
shanding reslraint with adulrs (smaller
han it is on the leff.
pigs may be restrained by using
● As the needle is inserted, apply slight negative pressure on the syringe plunger
dorsal recumbency).
until a free flow of blood appears in the syringe.
 Preferred needle sizes:
● Infuse he anesthetic rapidly because an adequate restraint posiltion is difficult to
■ 3 to 5-inch, 14 to 18-gauge
maintain.
needle for anterior vena cava 
1.5-to 2-inch, 18-gauge needle for
external jugular vein
 Tourniquet around
the base of the ear
Marginal ear vein
18- to 20-gauge disposable
hypodermic needle
FIGURE 5-1 Ear vein infusion in the pig.
 54 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Selected Drugs Used for Sedation, Tranquilization, Analgesia,
Anesthesia, and Muscle Relaxation
Phenothiazine-Based Tranquilizers
■Acepromazine
● Produces mild ranquilization in food animal species
● May be given IM, IV, SQ, or PO (slightly higher doses are required for effect when
given PO).
● Wait a minimum of 15 minutes for effect.
● Excitable calle may overpower the effect of acepromazine.
● IV dose will give a faster, more profound effect.
● More time is required for oplimal effect when given IM, SQ, or PO.
● Commonly used dose
+ Calle sedalion
+ IV 0.01 to 0.02mg/kg (0.0045 to 0.009 mg/lb)
+ IM 0.03 to 0.05 mg/kg (0.014 to 0.0225 mg/lb)
 Swine IM, IV, SQ 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg (0.045 to 0.09 mg/lb)
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
● Consistent dose response from animal to animal
 Chlorpromazine: Thorazine?
● No veterinary labeled product
● Requested for use in show catfle
● Good tranquilization effects
● Minimal sedation or drowsiness
● Catle dose up to 1.0 mg/kg (0.45 mg/lb) IM as pre-med for standing
procedures
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
● Less potent but longer aching han acepromazine
 Diazepam
● Used as a franquilizer, muscle relaxant, and controlling seizures
● CatHle dose
● Tranquilizalion 0.55 to 1.1 mg/kg ( 0.25 to 0.5 mg/lb) IM
● Seizure control 0.55 to 1.1 mg/kg ( 0.25 to 0.5 mg/lb IV
● Controlled Drug
● Potential for abuse
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
Alpha2 Agonist
Xylazine
● Possess potent sedative and analgesic effecis
● Catle are considered l0 times more sensitive to xylazine han horses.
● May be given IV, SQ, or IM
● Dose and response caltle depends on:
● Temperament and demeanor of he patient
●Route of adminislration
● Desired sedative effect
● More excited animals require higher doses
● Higher dose commonly resulrs in recumbent patient
● IM and SQ injections require longer time for optimal effect (15 minutes
minimumj.
● Catle xylazine doses
● Mild to moderate sedalion: 0.022 to 0.066 mg/kg (0.01 to 0.03 mg/lb)
●Heavy sedarion, possible recumbency: 0.11 to 0.165 mg/kg (0.05 to
0.075 mg/lb)
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia   55
● Swine xylazine Dose: 2.2 mg/kg (1.0 mg/lb) IM or IV; duration of aclion is shorf
[less han 10 minutes]
Note
● Often used in combination with other drugs for injectable anesthesia
● Some reports of spontaneous aborlions when used in cattle during late gestation.
For more accurate dosing, the
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
 20 mg/ml concentration of xylazine
● May cause pulmonary edema in sheep and goars
is recommended.
 Detomidine
● More potent than xylazine
● Causes more cardio and respiratory depression than xylazine
● Should not be used in cases to cause recumbency
● Horse and cow dose is similar.
● Dosage not well determined in catle
● V dose range in catle: 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg (0.45 to 0.9 mg/100 Ib)
● IM dose range in Cattle: 0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg (0.9 to 2.25 mg/100 Ib)
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
■ Alpha2 Antagonist
●Yohimbine
 May be given IV: 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg (0.045 to 0.09 mg/lb)
 If administered IV during anesthesia recovery while the patient is under the
influence of butrophanol or kelamine, if could lead to CNS excitement and a
rough anesthesia recovery.
● IM administration decreases possible CNS excitement and rough recovery from
anesthesia.
● Tolazoline
 May be given IV 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg (0.45 to 0.9 mg/lb)
Anesthetic Agents
 Guaifenesin
● Centrally acling muscle relaxant and expectorant
 Caution!
● Rarely used alone
Concenration of >5% guaifenesin
● Sold as a powder; 50 g mixed wih l L of warm sterile saline produces a 5% 
may cause hemolysis in ruminants.
solution.
● Used as a 5% solurion in combination wih ketamine, xylazine, or an ulra-shor-
aching barbiturate given to effect IV
● Very irritating to tissues; must be given IV
● Recommended to be given hrough an IV catheter placed in a large veir
● Catle dose: 55 to 110 mg/kg (25 to 50 mg/lb)
 Tiletamine HCl and Zolazepam Combination (Telazol@)
● Works well in swine
● Swine dose: 2.2 mg/kg (l mg/lb) IM.
● Commonly used in combination with Ketamine and Xylazine [TKX)
● Gives good shor-aching anesthesia for minor procedures
● Not approved by the FDA for use in food animals
● Class Ill controlled substances
 Barbiturates
● Pentobarbital sodium:
· Short-acting anesthetic agent
● Dose: 12.5 to 20 mg/kg (5 to 10 mg/lb) IV
+ Long recovery period 
● Commonly used for eulhanasia at high doses
 ClassIIl drug
● Thiopental Sodium:
 Ultra-shor-acting anesthetic agent
● Commonly used as an induction agent for inhalation anesthesia
56 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
+ Doses:
+ Catle: 8 to 15 mg/kg (3.6 to 7 mg/lb) IV
+ Sheep and goats: 8 to 15 mg/kg (3.6 to 7 mg/lb) IV
+ Pigs: 5.5 to 11 mg/kg (2.5 to 5 mg/lb) IV
 May be used in combination wih guaifenesin to reduce he dosage
 Use of a catheter in a large vein is recommended.
 Do not administer via the tail vein.
+ Ketamine
Dissociative anesthetic
● Potent analgesic effect when administered in a subanesthetric dose
● Caltle dose: 2.2 mg/kg (l mg/lb) IV after sedation
● Swine dose: 4.4 mg/kg (2 mg/lb) IV after sedation
 Commonly used in combination with xylazine, Telazol?, and/or guaifenesin as
 an injectable anesthetic or induction agent
● Dose may be reduced when used in combination
 Recovery may include spasic jerking movements, tremors, emesis, or
hypersalivation
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
●Butorphanol
· Opiate
●Analgesic
● Does not produce anesthesia 
 Catle dose: 0.02 to 0.025 mg/kg (0.009 to 0.01 mg/lb), 30 to 40 mg total dose
 Best when used in combination wih tranquilizer or sedative
★ Caltle may become excitable with butorphanol alone.
 Can be used in caltle in combination with xylazine and ketamine
● During surgery on standing animals, local anesthetics [lidocaine) must be used.
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals 
●Flunixin Meglamine
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID)
+ Used as:
★Anti-inflammatory
★Analgesic
★ Anti-pyretic
★ Anti-endotoxin
● May cause Gl ulcers with prolonged use
 Camle dose 1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg (0.5 to 1.0 mg/lb) 
+ 1 ml/100 Ib IV of 100 mg/ml solution
★ FDA requires IV administration in cattle
●Meloxicam
◆Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) 
● Used in calle as analgesic
● Up to 3 days duration of action when administered orally
Typically supplied as 15 mg tablers 
● Oral route of administration is practical and economical
 Catle dose 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg (0.45 to 0.9 mg/lb) orally
●May cause Gl ulcers with prolonged use
● Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
● Morphine
Opiate Agonist
● Used as an analgesic in catle
 Epidural in catle is the major use 
* Morphine 0.1 mg/kg (0.045 mg/lb) added to 2% lidocaine plus 15 mg
xylazine
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia   57
★ Given in epidural space bo adult catHe for prolonged [8 to 12 hr) analgesia
* Beneficial in conrolling tenismus in cattle
 Control substance
← Potential for abuse
◆ Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
Commonly Used Drug Combinations
Double Drip
● 5% guaifenesin + 1 mg/ml ketamine
● Used as an induction solurion or constant rate infusion (CRlj in ruminants
● Commonly used in small ruminants
●Minimal analgesia
· Consider local analgesia, i.e., lidocaine 
 Consider butorphanol or morphine systemically for analgesia
● Use double drip with caurion in pafienrs with cardio-respiratory compromise
 Ruminant Triple Drip
● 5% guaifenesin + 1mg/ml ketamine + 0.1 mg/ml xylazine
● Aneshetic induclion generally requires 1.0 to 1.5 ml/kg (0.5 to 0.75 ml/lb) IV
● Aneshesia can be maintained in normal patients wih 2.5 ml/kg/hr
(1.1 ml/lb/hr)
● Palients recover more slowly due to the xylazine.
● Xylazine may be reversed after the palient is awake to speed the recovery.
If the Xylazine is reversed while the patient is under the influence of ketamine,
 the animal could have a rough recovery.
 elazol@ Ketamine Xylzine (TKX)
● First used in swine
● Telazol? 500 mg (l vial) + 250 mg (2.5 ml)j Ketamine + 250 mg (2.5 ml) Xylazine
● 1 ml TKX IM / 35 kg (75 Ib)
● Pigs are recumbent in about 5 minutes.
 Provides up to 30 minutes of anesthesia
◆Lower initial dose (1lml/45 kg) may be used with local lidocaine anesthesia
 TKX-Ru for Ruminants with Less Xylazine
● TKX-Ru; Telazol? 500 mg (I vial) + 250 mg (2.5 ml) Ketamine + 100 mg (1.0 ml)
Xylazine
● Dose is 1ml /110 to 115 kg (240 to 250 Ib) IM
●Animals become recumbent in approximately 5 minutes.
● Palient recovers slowly achieving sternal rebumbency in 40 to 60 minutes and
stand in an addirional 20 to 40 minutes.
· Recovery is generally smooth.
■ Ketamine Stun or K-Stun
● Inirially developed at The Ohio State Universiry in the late 1990s and early 2000s
by Dr's. Eric Abrahamsen, Matt Meisner, and David Anderson
● Palients appear awake but seem oblivious to mild pain
● Makes palients much more cooperalive for handling and surgical procedures
● Divided into standing and recumbent techniques
 Standing techniques developed for large ruminants
● Recumbent techniques developed for small ruminants
● Effect depends upon:
●Dose
●Route of adminislration
● Temperament of the patient
● May be administered IV, IM, or SQ
● IV provides rapid onset, higher intensily of analgesia and sedation
 SQ provides the longest duration of effect
58■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● IV Recumbent Stun
+ Inject IV a combination of:
+ Butorphanol 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg (2.2 to 4.4 mg/100 Ib)
+ Xylazine 0.025 to 0.05/kg (1.1 to 2.2 mg/100 Ib)
+ Ketamine 0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg (14 to 23 mg/ 100 Ib)
+ Onset is approximately I minute.
 Provides approximately 15 minutes recumbency and analgesia
 Patients stand in approximately 20 to 25 minutes.
●Use of local lidocaine block is recommended
● IM or SQ Recumbent Stun
● Provides longer duration with less analgesia
● Use of lidocaine block is recommended
+ Inject IM or SQ a combination of:
+ Butorphanol 0.025 mg/kg (1.1 mg/100 Ib)
* Xylazine 0.05/kg (2.3 mg/100 Ib)
★ Ketamine 0.1 mg/kg (4.5 mg/100 Ib)
● SQ provides slightly longer duration than IM
 Onset approximately 5 minutes
 SQ administration provides up to 45 minutes of recumbency
● IV Standing Stun
◆ Used to improve patient cooperation 
● Inject IV a combination of:
+ Butorphanol 0.02 to 0.1 mg/kg (0.9 to 4.5 mg/100 Ib)
+ Xylazine 0.02 to 0.0275/kg ( 0.9 to 1.25 mg/100 Ib)
+ Ketamine 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg (2.3 to 4.5 mg/100 Ib)
● Provides 15 to 20 minutes of sedate behavior to allow examinalion, etc.
● IM or SQ Standing Stun
 Used for standing procedures in cattle, i.e., cesarean or laparotomy
+ Inject IM or SQ a combination of:
★ Butorphanol 0.01 mg/kg (0.45 mg/100 Ib)
* Xylazine 0.02 mg/kg (0.9 mg/100 Ib)
* Ketamine 0.04 mg/kg (1.8 mg/100 Ib)
● 5-10-20 Technique
● Injec IM or SQ into an adult cow 365 kg to 682 kg (800 to 1500 Ib)
* Butorphanol: 5 mg
+ Xylazine: 10 mg
★ Ketamine: 20 mg
● Repored to work well over a wide range of weights wilhout producing
recumbency
+ SQ injection is lesslikely to produce recumbency
 Onset is 5 to 10 minutes.
+ Duration of effect is 60 to 90 minutes.
+ Local lidocaine anesthesia is required.
● Ketamine - Diazepam
◆ Good in compromised palients 
+ Produces shortterm anesthesia
● Inject IV equal volumes of Ketamine 100 mg/ml and diazepam 5 mg/ml
● Dose rate = 1 ml/18 to 22 kg (40 to 50 Ib) of the ketamine/diazepam
mixture.
+ Onset is approximately I minute.
● Duration is approximately 15 to 20 minutes.
● Extend the duration by repeated doses of one-third to one-half the original
dose
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia   59
Inhalation Anesthesia
■Advantages
● Provides complete immobilizalion of the palient
● Provides analgesia during surgery
● Provides patient restraint without movement for procedures requiring complicated
and precise surgical technique
Teat surgery
→Intestinal surgery
● Provides restraint and aneshesia for a procedures in which local or regional
anesthesia is difficult or impossible.
● Inguinal hernia repair performed through the inguinal ring
Thoracic surgery
● Provides a means of ventilation support with oxygen
● Provides accurate control of aneshetic depth
■Disadvantages
● Requires sophisticated equipment
● Requires a knowledgeable assistant
● Requires constant monitoring of patienrs
● Requires equipment that is difficult to use in a farm setting 
● Involves a health hazard for personnel exposed to anesthetic waste gases
 Equipment
●Vaporizer used to deliver measured amounts of anesthetic gas
● Oxygen source
● Endotracheal ubes with multiple sizes
● Rebreathing system:
· Standard circle machine
 To-and-fro device (portable and inexpensive)
● Oxygen delivery systems:
 Closed (oxygen Flow rate about 4.4 ml/kg (2.2 Ib)/min)
● Semiclosed (oxygen Flow rate > 4.4 ml/kg (2.2 Ib)/min)
●Respirator
 Preanesthesia
● Before anesthesia, the palient should be evaluated for evidence of disease, with
special attention given to respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
● Food and water should be withheld from the patient before surgery to
minimize:
●Bloat
 Regurgitation with possible aspiration
● In calle withhold:
● Roughage for 24 to 48 hours
+ Concentrate for 12 to 24 hours
+Water for 6 to 12 hours
● In small ruminants and monogastrics withhold:
◆ Roughage for 12 to 24 hours
+ Concentrates for 6 to 12 hours
Caution!
+Water for 6 to 12 hours
● In neonates:
 Beware of possible hypoglycemia in
 Pre-ruminants do not require fasting.
neonates.
+ Caution: be aware of possible hypoglycemia.
● Preanesthetic tranquilizers are recommended to:
● Decrease he amount of induction agents
◆ Provide for a more cooperative patient
 Provide α safe environment for staff and patients 
60   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Atropine is not indicated to decrease salivary flow.
● Patients should have an IV calheter for adminislration of induction solutions and fluids.
 Induction
● Injectable induction
● Guaifenesin solution (5%) IV at a dose of 55 to 110 mg/kg (25 to 50 mg/lb)
 Followed by an IV bolus dose of ketamine at 4 mg/kg (1l.8 mg/lb)
● Usually administered through an IV catheter and not a needle to minimize the
risk of perivascular injections
★ Precautions must be taken to avoid injury to patients during induction. Patiens
may be reslrained on a surgical table or allow to fall on a well-padded floor.
● Inhalation induction
● Used in younger, smaller patients that can be manually restrained such as
calves and small ruminanrs
Isoflurane is administered via face mask.
● May require more fime, which would result in wasted anesthetic agents.
● May allow anesthetic gas fo escape into the area, thus exposing personnel to gas
 Isoflurane 3% to 5% in oxygen 8.8 to 17.6 ml/kg/min (5 to 10 ml/lb/min) is
commonly used.
 Nitrous oxide is rarely used in ruminants, because it accumulates in the rumen
 and may cause ruminal distention.
 Intubation
● It is advisable to inubate any palient under general aneshesia to:
Note
●Maintain a patent airway
+Avoid aspiration of regurgitated material
It is advisable to intubate any
 Naso tracheal hube may be placed in patients with injectable anesthesia
patient under generable anesthesia 
● Intubalion may be accomplished in several ways:
in order to:
● Blindly, with the patient's head placed in extreme extension
■ Maintain a patient airway
◆ Manually, by hand carrying the tube into the animal's mouth, depressing the
 Avoid aspiralion of regurgitated
epigloltis, and inserling he endolracheal hube into he trachea
material
Visually, with the aid of a long-blade laryngoscope in calves, smallruminants,
and swine
● The use of a mouth speculum is highly recommended when inubating patients.
● Avoids injury to the person inhubating he animal
● Avoids damage to the endotracheal tube
● Intubalion of swine presents special problems:
 Esophageal diverliculum may present a problem.
+ The larynx is quite sensirive and prone to spasm.
● Anatomy makes access very difficult because of the small oral opening and
 upwardly protruding tongue.
■Maintenance
● Halothane and Isoflurane are bypically delivered through a precision vaporizer
outside the circle, at setlings belween 1% and 3%.
● Temperaure may affect he percentage of delivered anesthetic gas.
 Cold remperaures require higher seltings to deliver he same amount of anesthelic.
● Similar vaporizers can be used for halothane and isoflurane because of their
nearly identical vapor pressures.
● Isoflurane has rapid onset and recovery times.
■Monitoring
● Depth of aneshesia can be monitored by variations from the normal for:
+Heart rate
● Pulse strength as palpated via the:
★ Facial artery
* Auricular artery
★ Palmar common digital artery
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia    61
TABLE 5-1
Common Concerns with the Use of General Anesthetics
Common Concerns in General Anesthesia
Complication
Management
Prevention
 Regurgitation
Keep patient's head 
Withhold feed and water
down
Aspiration
 See Prevention 
Use endotracheal inubation with a
cuffed tube; keep the head down 
Bloat
Insert stomach ube
Withhold feed and water
and place in sternal recumbency
Radial
 Provide rest and use
 Pad shoulder and elbow plus extension
paralysis
 antinflammatory
of shoulder Ipull the down side front
drugs
limb forwardj
Moving
 Increase level of 
Check anesthetic level in vaporizer, 
patient 
anesthesia
oxygen Flow rates, placement of 
endotracheal tube, leaks in the system
Apneic
Turn down vaporizer
 Maintain lighter plane of anesthesia by
patient
 selting; ventilate
 decreasing the percentage of inhaled 
manually
 anesthetic agent
★ Respiration rate
★ Blood pressure:
> Direct measurements can be made from a catheter placed in he auricular
Note
artery.
Normal blood pressure in a cow is
> Indirect measurements can be made with a blood pressure cuff placed
100 to 120 mm Hg in adull calle.
either immediately below the carpus or at the base of the tail.
> Perfusion time
> Mucous membrane color
★ Position of he eye (in ruminants):
> Eye in the middle of the orbit indicates surgical anesthesia
> Eye looking down indicates light plane of anesthesia
+ Indicators of the plane of anesthesia:
> Ocular reflexes are not a good indicator of the plane of anesthesia.
> Swallowing reflex may be present in calle during a surgical plane of
anesthesia.
> Passive regurgitation indicates a light plane of anesthesia.
★ Pulse Oximetery is useful to monitor many parameters during anesthesia
including:
Note
> EKG
> PaO2 levels
 Food animal patients generally have
> Heart Rate
a smooh recovery.
> PCO2 levels
Recovery
● Begin reducing the percentage of inhaled anesthetic gases near the end of the
surgical procedure.
● Place the animal in a quiet, dark area with excellent footing.
Caution!
● Assist the palient into sternal recumbency as soon as possible.
● Remove he endolracheal lube after the laryngeal reflex has rerurned and the
Patients can easily chew holes in
animal begins to swallow. Pull the tube to the level of the larynx to clear the
endotracheal tubes.
rachea of fluid and ingesta before deflating the cuff and removing the fube.
62    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Be prepared to assist the patient to its feet when it attempts to stand.
● Most ruminant patients recover smoothly as compared to the horse and attempt to
stand only after they are fully awake.
Pain Management in Surgical Patients
■ General Considerations
● Postoperalive pain management has come to he fore front of animal care and
welfare in the past decade.
● Food animal veterinarians are rising to he challenge of providing analgesia to
surgical patienrs and postoperative protocols.
● Food animal veterinarians have historically lagged behind in providing post
operative analgesia for multiple reasons including:
 Difficully assessing pain response in cale
 Shortage of available products labeled for use in livestock with published
wihhold rimes
 The impracticaliry of follow up analgesia on large groups of livestock
+ Concerns of expense
uod au lao Adoau uiod a louadns si quauo uiod aauaaid *
occurs.
■ Commonly Used Analgesics
● NASIDs
Aspirin
★ Never FDA approved 
★ Adult dosage 240 to 480 grains orally q12 hr
★ May cause or exacerbate Gl ulcers
Phenylbutazone
★ Not in dairy catle 20 months of age or older
★ Requires high initial dose up to 22 mg/kg (10 mg/lb)
+ low dose to maintain blood levels 4.4 mg/kg (2 mg/kg) orally q48 hr
★ May cause or exacerbate Gl ulcers
Flunixin Meglumine
★ Only NASID with FDA approval in food animals 
★ Only to be administered to caltle IV
+ Dose 1mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) IV q12 to 24 hr
★ May cause or exacerbate Gl ulcers
Meloxicam
* Longer duration than Flunixin meglumine
* Dose 1 mg/kg (0.5 mg/lb) orally q48 to 72 hr
★ 15 mg tabs cost effeclive
Opioids
★Morphine
> Epidural in caltle is the major use
> Morphine 0.1 mg/kg (0.045 mg/lb) added to 2% lidocaine plus 15 mg 
xylazine
> Given in epidural space to adult catle for prolonged (8 to 12 hr)
 analgesia
> Beneficial in conrolling tenismus in cattle
> May be given IV or IM at q4 to 6 hr
> Control substance
> Potential for abuse
> Not approved by FDA for use in food animals.
★ Butorphanol
> Catle dose: 0.02 to 0.025 mg/kg (0.009 to 0.01 mg/lb)
> Best when used in combination with a tranquilizer or sedative
General Anesthesia and Postoperative Analgesia   63
> Catle may become excitable with butorphanol alone
> Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
Alpha2 Agonist
★ Xylazine
> Common xylazine dose in catle
> 0.022 to 0.066 mg/kg (1 to 3 mg/100 Ib); produces mild to moderate
sedation
> 0.11 to 0.165 mg/kg (5 to 7.5 mg/100 Ib); produces heavy sedation
with possible rebumbency
> Not approved by FDA for use in food animals
★ Detomidine
> Horse and cow dose is similar
> Dosage not well determined in catle
 V dose in cattle: 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg (0.45 to 0.9 mg/100 Ib)
± IM dose in CatHe: 0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg (0.9 to 2.25 mg/100 Ib)
> Not approved by FDA for use in food animals 
 Dissociative aneshetic
★ Ketamine
> Provides good analgesia at sub anesthetic dose
> Dose 0.04 mg/kg (1.8 mg/100 Ib)
> Consider using in combination with xylazine
Local Anesthetic Agents
+ lidocaine
> Used locally to effect
> Do not administer more than 6.6 mg/kg (3 mg/lb) for toxic concerns
> Maximum effect of 3 hours
★ Procaine
> Used locally to effect
> Do not administer more than 6.6 mg/kg (3 mg/lb) for toxic concerns
> Maximum effect of 3 hours
Suggested Reading
Anderson DE, Rings DM. Current Veterinary Therapy: Food Animal Practice, ed. 5,
St Louis, MO: Elsevier, Seclion Xll Abrahamsen El, pp 544-574.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
2004, pp 103-111.
Gray PR, McDonnell WN. Anesthesia in goars and sheep. Part Il. General anesthesia.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet8(3): S127-S132, S134-S135, 1986.
Hall W. Wright's Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia, ed 7. London: Bailliere
Tindall, 1971.
Plumb DC. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, ed 7. Stockholm, Wisconsin: Pharma
Vet Inc. 2011, pp 131-135, 291-293, 304-308, 438-441, 488-490, 568-573,
643-646,711-715, 982-985.
Riebold TW, Goble DO, Geiser DR. large Animal Anesthesia: Principles and
Techniques, Ames, IA: State Universily Press, 1982.
Soma LR. Textbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. Ballimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1972.
Upson DW. Upson's Handbook of Clinical Veterinary Pharmacology, ed 2. Lenexa, KS,
Veterinary Medicine Publishing, 1985.
Weshues M, Fritsch R. Animal Anaesthesia (Generai). Translated by Weaver AD.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, 1965.
64■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Chapter 5 Study Questions
 Answers Key
1. Should succinylcholine commonly be used in catle?
 2. Under common field condirions (emergency surgery], is the cow a good subject
Answers to study questions can
for deep general anesthesia?
be found starting on page 284
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
 3. How can personnel exposure to waste anesthetic gases be minimized?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. Why does extreme extension of the head facilitate placement of the
endotracheal tube?
5. How does the position of the eye within the orbit indicate he plane of
anesthesia?
Chapter 6
Surgery of the Head and Neck
in Cattle and Goats
Basic Cornuectomy in Cattle
Note
Indications and General Considerations
■ Prevents horn-induced bruising of herdmates, especially in confined animals and
Head and neck surgical procedures
calle being moved to market
include:
■ Aids in safery of personnel. The possibiliry of injury is a concern when hormed catle
■ Cornuectomy
are handled.
● Basic
■ Increases market value, especially in feedlot cattle
● Surgical (cosmelic)
 Improves appearance in most instances
■ Trephination of frontal sinus 
■ Removal of horns by 2 weeks of age is strongly recommended.
 Bovine dentistry
● Procedure is much simpler.
■Tracheotomy
● Palient sustains less frauma and stress.
Esophagostomy
● Serious hemorrhage is less likely.
Anesthesia
■ Strongly recommended for dehorning procedures
■ Blocking he cornual nerve is he preferred option
Note
 In all but mature animals, blocking of the cornual nerve is adequate.
● In marure animals, α ring block of the horn is suggested as an adjunct to the 
 All surgical insruments used in a
cornual nerve block.
 cornuectomy should be kept sharp
■ General anesthesia is seldom used for cornuectomy in catle.
and in optimal operaring condirion 
for rapid, efficient transeclion of 
Materials
 the horn. Be alert to possible bone
■ For newborn calves up lo about 2 weeks of age:
●A disbudding tube
splintering and frachure at he base of
 he horn; these sequelae may occur
◆ A hot iron dehorner (preferred)
with dull or improperly condirioned 
● Caustic paste
guillotine-ype instruments, especially
 For young calves up to yearlings:
in mahure animals with large horns.
● SmallBarnes dehorner for younger calves
● large Barnes dehorner for older calves 
 For yearlings and older:
● Surgical (hand} saw
● Obstetric wire saw
● large Barnes dehorner (may be used if base of horns is small)
 Caution!
● Guillorine-lype instrument (hydraulic or manual)
Check with the personnel at the bull 
● Electric saw
sud before dehorning a bull. Some
bull studs prefer that horns on bulls
Presurgical Procedures
■ Review he animal's recent nutrilional background and recognize irs influence on 
be left intach.
excessive hemorrhage. For example, molds found in sweet clover hay have a marked
influence on clolting fime (decreased prothrombin level, with dicoumarin toxiciby).
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
65
66
6 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Note the fime of year: Dehorning calle or goats during fly season is not
 punom uado uo salpano ainpanoid au jl papuawuosal 
Cross-Reference
■ Use of standing chure restraint is srongly recommended, except in very young
Refer to Chapter 3 (corneal nerve
calves.
 Use posilive head control; many chutes have head bars, nose bars, or a head table
block).
lo assist with head restraint.
■ Clip hair from the surgical area on maure subjects
■ Administer anesthesia (cornual nerve block)
● Meloxicam given 12 to 24 hours during and after the procedure is reported to
control pain.
Surgical Technique
■ The angle of the transeclion should produce a uniform contour of the head. It should 
expose he cornual artery for easy access for fraclion or torsion and yet should not
excessively expose the frontal sinuses.
■ Remove about O.5 cm (O.25 inches) of skin at the base of the horn to ensure
adequate removal of rissue related to horn growth or regrowth.
■ Apply traclion or torsion or both on the cornual artery and satellie branches to
ensure adequate hemostasis.
■ Eleclrocauterizalion or cauterization wih a hot iron may be used to conrol hemorrhage.
Postoperative Care
■ Postoperative analgesia is indicated.
■ Apply hemostalic powder to he wound surface (optional.
◆May stimulate hemostasis
● Avoid powder in open frontal sinuses
■ Applicalion of protecrive gauze pads is a questionable procedure. Pads should 
 protect the wound from debris yet allow fre movement of air through the gauze.
■ Do not feed patients from elevated hayracks or round bale feeders, which willead
to contamination of open wounds and sinuses.
■ Beware of environmental elements, such as dust and rain, that may precipitate
sinusitis.
Surgical Cornuectomy in Cattle
Indications and General Considerations
■ Indicated to enhance cosmeric appearance in animals with exhibiion potential
● Creates less scarring han routine cornuecomy
■ Commonly performed on more maure subjects
■ Dehorning wound heals more quickly
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use standing chute restraint.
■ Use posilive head restraint: Reslraint must allow limited maneuvering of the head for
Note
belter access to the surgical site.
■ Adequately remove hair from around the base of the horn and poll; a No. 10 or
Some clients prefer to leave he hair
No. 40 clipper headis recommended
unclipped over the poll.
■ Prepare the horns and poll as described in Chapter I for sterile surgery.
Materials
■ Basic surgical pack [e.g., scalpel, hemostats, towel clamps, or needle holder) 
● Sterile 60 to 90 cm (2 to 3 ft) obstetric wire with handles or a Barnes dehorner
■ Very clean or sterile small Barnes dehorners can be used to remove small horns and
to shape the poll
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats
67
■Heavy, synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material
■Fenesrated, moisture-resistant drape. Also used to cover both eyes to facilitate
restraint.
Preanesthesia
■ V sedation or analgesia may be used, but the patient may lie down if sedation is
excessive.
Anesthesia
■ Cornual nerve block with 2% lidocaine (see Chapter 3]
■ local infilration of he proposed incision site fo aneshetize the skin
Surgical Technique
■ Apply a fenesrated drape and anchor it to surrounding skin with towel clamps.
Incisions at base of horn with
emphasis on dorsal extension
 Make hwo elliplic incisions around he base of the horn (Figure 6-1)}.
● Begin each incision equidistant from the midline of the poll to maintain symmetry
FIGURE 6-1. Elliptic incisions used in a
of the head.
surgical cormuectomy.
● Incisions should include the full thickness of the skin and contact the skull.
● The incision line should include about O.5 cm (0.25 inches) of skin at the base
 of the horn. Excessive skin should not be removed with the horn; adequate fissue
 should be retained for sururing.
● The dorsal end of the incisions should extend 5 to 7 cm (2 to 3 inches) from the
base of the horn (toward the poll.
● The ventral end of the incision should extend 2 to 3 cm [l to 2 inches) ventrally
from he base of he horn.
■ The skin should be undermined to separate the skin from underlying tissues. The
Note
auricular muscles in this area should not be transected.
■ Place an obstetric wire in the incision at the base of the horn and begin the
 Sterile technique is suggested.
Iransechion. Direct he wire toward the poll.
● The depth of franseclion should ensure adequate removal of he corium at the base
of the horn to preclude furher horn growth.
 The cornual artery should be adequately exposed for hemostasis.
● Hemostasis is best achieved by applying traclion and torsion to all bleeding
arteries.
■ Use he same procedure to remove the opposite horn.
■ The frontal bone may be shaped and/or smoohed with a small, sharp Barnes
 dehorner or rongeur for a good cosmelic appearance.
 Remove bone dust and oher debris with moistened gauze pads.
Suturing
■ Use heavy, synthetic nonabsorbable suure material (#3 or heavier)
 Skin may be trimmed to create a smooth incision line
■ Simple interrupted surures are suggested.
 A far-near-near-far surure paltern works well if considerable tension is required to
close he incision.
■ Bring the incision edges into direct apposifion for rapid sealing.
 Undermining the skin allows mobiliry of the skin and decreases tension.
■ Suhure a parial roll of sterile gauze over the incision for proteclion from
environmental contamination (Figure 6-2).
Bandage is sutured over the
■ A bandage also may be used to protect the wound and to apply pressure for control
incision line
of hemorrhage.
● The gauze or bandage may be removed in 48 to 72 hours.
FIGURE 6-2. Proteclive bandage used in
■ Remove surures in about 2 to 3 weeks.
α surgical cornuectomy.
68   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Cornuectomy in Goats
Caution!
General Considerations
■ The ideal lime to disbud kids is when hey are 7 to 14 days old.
Barnes dehorners are not
■ Removal of scent glands, which are in the skin folds caudomedial to he base of the horn,
recommended for goats because
of he small distance from the base
saw youi uo uo auop aq pinous ynq Aains quanu o so papisuo aq o 
● Removal of glands at this fime is a questionable procedure. It is thought to cause
of the horn to he brain. Hot lron
decreased libido as subjects mature.
dehorners can traumalize the brain
● Removal of glands from females and casrated males is unnecessary.
in young goars if they are held on
■ When using hot iron dehorners in kids, remove he center horn bud within the
 the head for extended periods
(>5 seconds).
 cauterized ring with a scalpel to preclude additional horn growth.
■ Because of the triangular shape of the caprine horn, regrowh is common.
Anesthesia
■ Review the discussion of anesthesia of the horn in goats in Chapter 3.
■ Although cornual nerve block is effecrive, general anesthesia with a ketamine/
xylazine combination is now popular.
■ Gas anesthesia administered via a mask or tracheal tube works well
● Postoperative analgesia is indicated.
Surgical Technique and Considerations
■ The line of transection should be horizontal to the head.
■ Except for he contour of the ranseclion, cornuecomy in goals is similar to hat in calle.
● Use of a hand saw or obstelric wire is recommended in older goars wih large horns.
● Transection should include α small amount of skin (about 0.5 cm/0.25 inch) al
he base of he horn.
● Hemostasis primarily involves the cornual artery and other satellite vessels.
■ In goats older than 2 months, the procedure often resulls in exposed sinuses, which
 should be protected wih a bandage.
Early Clinical Signs of
Sinusitis
'sixydoid o so pasabins Auouuoo si urxouo snuolal 
■ Anorexia and lethargy
Trephination of Frontal Sinuses in cattle
 Extending the head forward and
hilting the head slightly toward
Indications and General Considerations
he affected side (if unilaterall]
 This procedure is often indicated for treatment of sinusitis and empyema.
Fever
● Sinusitis and empyema may be α sequalae ho cornuectomy if the frontal sinuses
Foul Smelling Nasal discharge
■ Sinus drainage through a 
are open and exposed ho dust, hay, straw particles, rain, or snow.
● Sinusitis and empyema may also occur in horned bulls as a result of fracures at
dehorning wound
he base of the horn (from fighting).
Anatomic Considerations
 Cattle have an extremely complex system of sinuses.
Clinical Signs of Chronic
● Sinuses are made up of irregular partial partitions (honeycombed).
● Sinuses extend anteriorly to a transverse plane hrough the middle of the orbirs.
Empyema
● Sinuses extend posteriorly (deeply) in the region of the poll.
 Swelling of the frontal bone in 
● Laterally, a deep pocket lies medial to the supraorbital fossa.
 the region of the postorbital
● Mediall, hwo frontal sinuses are separated by a median bony parion.
diverticulum
● Frontal sinuses extend into he horn core in mature catle.
 Occasionally exophthalmos,
 Normally, frontal sinuses communicate with the nasal cavily through the ethmoid
usually unilateral
regions. In an animal with sinusitis, the mucous membranes are inflamed and
 Possible central nervous system
swollen, so litHe or no communication exists.
disturbances in bolh acute and
 chronic sinusitis and empyema
Presurgical Procedures
syndromes
 Use either standing or lateral restraint.
 Use posilive head restraint.
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats  ■  69
Administer sedalion or analgesia as indicated.
■ Remove hair from the proposed surgical area with a No. 40 clipper head.
 Scrub he skin thoroughly with an iodophor solurion and water.
Anesthesia
■ Infuse 2% lidocaine into he skin over the proposed trephining area (area
 predetermined as best for sinus drainage).
■ In cases of frontal sinus empyema of a horned palient, a cornual nerve block is
 indicated along with a bilateral cornuectomy.
Surgical Technique
 Immediately before surgery:
FIGURE 6-3. Trephination sites.
● Draw a rectangle on the patient's head with the corners of the rectangle at the
base of he horns and the medial canthus of the eyes (Figure 6-3).
● Trephination may be done at any place on he lines forming the rectangle.
Apply a fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape fo he entire head so that eyes are
covered (to facilitate restraint).
 Use clean surgery; sterle surgery may be unaltainable in this sihuation because of
 the presence of exudate.
 Wih a scalpel, remove a circular plug of skin (2.5 to 3 cm in diameter; 1 to
1.5 inches) over he proposed trephination site.
■ Use a trephine to remove he bony plate and open the sinus.
+ A Gall trephine is suggested.
■ Muliple rephinalions per sinus are suggested for better access to the sinus and
lb faciliate lushing of the open (trephined} sinuses. This may include reopening a
cornuectomy scar.
■ Fush the open sinus adequately with tepid water and an anibiolic solution, a dilue
iodophor solution 
 For excessive hemorrhage, insert a remporary gauze plug in he rephine opening.
■ Allow to heal as an open wound
 Repeat flushing as indicated.
 Systemic antibiorics may be indicated (primarily if fever exists).
Dentistry in Cattle
General Considerations
■Veterinarians should have horough knowledge of he normal tooh eruption schedule
and be alert to odontopahy associated with abnormal eruplions and shedding of caps.
Clinical Signs of
■ FHloaring of teelh is indicated in specific cases.
Odontopathy
● Primarily required in maure breeding catle under range condirions
● May be associated with inheried tendencies or improper alignment of molars
 Excessive salivation and
● Hoating of teelth in catle is similar to hat in horses.
abnormal chewing. Beware of 
 Tooth extraclion may be needed in cases involving gum abscesses.
similar signs associated with
● Maxilary sinus infection with Actinomyces species (lumpy jaw), commonly involves
rabies!
he teeth.
 Abnormal extension of the
● Trephination and removal of an affected tooth may be indicated, but the prognosis
bongue
for clearing he area of the bacterial agent is guarded to unfavorable.
 Loss of body condition
 Capping incisors with stainless steel caps has been successful in cases of:
■ Abnormal swelling of the upper
● Premature tooth wear, as observed in animals living in sandy soil pastures.
or lower jaw
Capping relieves sensitiviry to cold water.
 Signs of a foreign body inspect 
● Decreased body condirion caused by sensilive incisors and thus altered ealing habils.
 he oral cavily for the presence 
● Decreased reproduclive performance, where poor leeth cause debilitalion and
 of a foreign body!
limit breeding efficiency.
70 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Surgical Technique
■ Use standing or lateral recumbency restraint and posilive head control, with blinders
for the patienl's eyes to facilitate restraint.
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as indicated.
 Use a dental speculum lo expose teeth.
 Molars should be floated, as for equine species (e.g., rough edges should be
smoothed, high points should be reduced, loose caps should be removed).
■ Tongue and cheeks should be carefully examined for lesions caused by abnormal teeth.
■Extraction of molars is seldom warranted.
Tracheotomy in cattle
Indications and General Considerations
■ Treatment of condirions or diseases that resul in temporary or permanent obstruction
 of he larynx or nasal passage:
●Necrotic laryngilis
● Actinobacillosis
● Neoplasms of the pharyngeal or nasal region
● Foreign bodies in he upper respiratory tract
● laryngeal spasms
● Flaltened racheal rings related to trauma
■ As adjunctive reatment of surgical condirions in which hemorrhage occurs in the
lachea and aspiration of blood may be a problem:
● Reseclion of nasal septum (uncommon lechnique)
● Removal of granulation tissue that may be associated wih actinobacillosis
● Removal of neoplasms from the pharyngeal region
Restraint
■ Standing resraint is strongly recommended.
 Be aware of an already slressed respiratory system; do not resort to unnecessary reslraint.
■ Use a relatively loosely applied rope halter with a chin rope inserted in the mouth as
a basic head restraint, with addirional restraint and attention diversion achieved by
using a nose lead.
● Attach both the halter rope and the nose lead rope to the lop of the head gate or chute.
● This setup extends the head dorsally and renders the ventral, cranial, and cervical
areas of the neck available for surgery.
● Place only moderate tension on the halter and nose lead ropes.
● Use quick-release knors in case of a respiratory emergency.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer sedation or analgesia with caution because of the possibiliy of 
fo asnj ysu od o u u axa aq yalgs au ss s
 general anesthesia.
 Remove hair from the ventralcervical area (he cranial one-hird of the neck) with a
No. 10 or No. 40 clipper head.
■ Scrub the surgical area adequately wih water and an iodophor solution.
■ Have oxygen available
Anesthesia
Note
■ Administer a local infusion on he ventral midline with 2% lidocaine.
 Surgical gloves are indicated but
Surgical Technique (Figure 6-4)
draping of the standing animal is not
■ With the animal's head extended upward so hat the loose skin over the trachea is
taut, orient and stabilize the frachea with your fingers. (Use surgical gloves; draping
warranted.
is not recommended with an animal in standing restraint.)
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats   71
■ Incise the skin about 7 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inches) on the midline over he tracheal
Plastic tube
rings (commonly he fourth to sixth tracheal rings).
 Spread he skin incision with retractors, if necessary (opening he jaws of a hemostat
may be sufficient).
 Punchure the annular ligament berween hwo racheal rings by using a scalpel at a
right angle to the trachea. This opens he trachea bo outside air to a limited extent
and offen relaxes an oxygen-deprived palient.
■ On the basis of the size of the tracheal tube ho be inserted, cut one or hwo rings with
 scissors or remove a sechion from wo adjacent tracheal rings.
 Insert and stabilize he hube in the rachea. The tube should be plastic, elongated,
and small enough to fit inside he frachea (slightly smaller than the inside diameter of
Ihe trachea], and ir should have a tapered end.
Adhesive tape
● An elongated tube has he advantage of a reduced tendency ho clog with debris 
and mucus compared with a commercial racheotomy instrument or a short tube.
Therefore, less postoperative attention is needed.
Suture
● Insert the tube several inches into he rachea.
● Wih heavy, synthetic nonabsorbable suure material, anchor the tube in position 
FIGURE 6-4. Plastlic endotracheal ube in
with simple interrupted surures hrough the incision edges and the rube.
 posirion after bovine tracheotomy.
● The tapered end should point ventrally.
 Anchor the anterior end of he racheal hube (preferably long enough to be coiled) to
 the head and neck with adhesive tape.
● Direct the anterior opening anteriorly or dorsally.
● Be careful that he hube opening is not in a posilion at which he palien's ear
could act as a shutoff valve.
 Caution!
Postoperative Care
If tracheal rings are splir during
■ Check the tracheal tube periodically for optimal patency. Retain the ube in posifion 
surgery, the lumen size of the
for α period adequate to alleviate the primary disease condition. Long-term or
rachea may be reduced because of 
semipermanent tracheal fubes may be considered in some cases.
subsequent flaltening of the tracheal
● Periodic cleaning of he tube will be necessary.
rings. To prevent this reduclion, it is
■ Administer antibiotics and antinflammatory agents as needed.
important hat the size of the fracheal
 At the proper fime (variable), remove the anchor sulres and tracheal tube.
ube be roughly equivalent to the
● Debride necrolic fissue at he incision edge.
inside diameter of the trachea and
● Use syntheric nonabsorbable material and a simple interrupted suure pattern to
hat he tube be in posifion long
close the skin incision. (lncision wounds, if small, may be leff unsulured; they will
enough for cicalrizalion to occur
heal by normal granulation wilhout serious consequences.)
[a minimum of 5 days).
 Retain suures until the wound has adequately healed.
Esophagostomy in Cattle
Indications and General Considerations
 Esophagoslomy is rarely warranted; limit use lo removing obstruclions in the cervical area.
 Consider surgery only afer other methods of reducing esophageal choke have failed.
■ Often, an esophageal obstruction leads to severe necrosis, with a very guarded to
 poor prognosis.
 Esophageal shrichure is a common sequela to choke or oher severe inflammalion necrosis.
Anatomic Considerations
■ The suggested incision site is in the region of the junction of the middle and caudal
 one-third of the neck (at about the sixih cervical vertebra); the esophagus is normally
situated immediately to the left of the trachea.
■ Surrounding struchures in the lateral to medial jugular groove are:
● Skin
● Cutaneous muscle
72   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● External jugular vein
● Common carotid artery (somewhat dorsolateral]
●Esophagus
■ The exact surgical site is determined by he location of the foreign body, which is
usually palpable.
■ In many cases, the obstruclion causes an enlargement of the esophagus that
displaces the jugular vein and carotid artery to he side of the obsruchion.
Restraint
■ Right lateral recumbency reslraint with positive head control
Presurgical Procedures
■ Marked IV sedation or analgesia (rather than general anesthesia) is usually salisfactory.
■ Remove hair from the surgical area with a No. 40 clipper head.
■ Thoroughly scrub the area with water and an iodophor solution.
Anesthesia
■ Administer a local line infusion with 2% lidocaine [with epinephrine).
Surgical Technique
■ Use aseplic technique; drape he area with a fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape.
■ Cover he eyes of he palient to facilitate reslraint.
■ Make a longitudinal incision through only the skin.
● Pull the skin fightly and raise it somewhat to preclude incising deeper tissues.
● The incision should be long enough to easily expose the obstruction.
■ Bluntly dissect the fissue to fully expose the esophagus.
■ Open the esophagus by longiudinally incising the fisue over the caudal half of the
obstruction; this fissue is likely to be the least necrotic and inflamed. Because the
caudal rissue is more viable, the potential for healing is greater.
■ Extend the incision slightly further caudally if indicated; a groove director may be
used to extend the incision.
■ Carefully remove he obsruction; strive for cleanliness and avoid contamination of
 surrounding fissues.
■ Pass a large-diameter stomach ube (previously placed via he mouh in the cranial
cervical area} beyond the incision area in the esophagus. This ube will maintain the
 esophageal lumen size and facilitate sururing.
Suturing
Esophagus
■ Use No. 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable suture material and a swaged atraumatic needle
■ Apposifional sulures are suggested.
Musculature and Subcutaneous Tissue
■ Use No. O or l-0 medium chromic catgut or comparably sized syntheric suture
material and a swaged, fully curved, araumatic needle.
■ Place simple interrupted surures.
Skin
■ Use medium to heavy synthelic nonabsorbable suture material.
 Place simple interupted surures or interrupted matress surures (vertical or horizontall.
■ A small opening in the ventral (caudalj aspect of the incision may be leff unsutured
for fissue drainage if deemed prudent.
Postoperative Procedures
■ Provide a bland diet with no roughage for 3 to 5 days.
● Avoid pelleted feed.
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats   73
■ Administer systemic antibiofics as necessary.
■ Remove skin surures in 14 to 21 days if the skin has adequately healed
 Observe the palient carefully for clinical signs of esophageal stricrure.
Suggested Reading
Andrews AH. The use of dentilion to determine age in British cale. Bovine Pract 10:
95-97, 1975.
Baker JS. Dehorning goars. Bovine Pract2(1): 33-39, 1981.
Cropsey L Mac. Show ring determination: Art, not an exact science. Bovine Pract8:
61-62, 1973.
Cropsey L Mac. Technical aspecis of determining over-age in beef cale. Bovine Pract
2(1): 33-39, 1981.
Faulkner PM, Weary DM. Reducing pain after dehorning in dairy calves. J Dairy Sci
83(9): 2037-2042, 2000
Frank ER. Veterinary Surgery, ed 7. Minneapolis, MN, Burgess Publishing, 1964,
pp 159-161.
Greenough PR, Johnson L. The integumentary system, in Editor X ed): large Anima!
Surgery. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1974, pp 199-205.
Guard WR. Surgical Principles and Technics. Ann Arbor, Ml: WF Guard, 1953, p 156.
Meuten D] (ed). Tumors in Domestic Animals, ed 4. Ames, IA: State Universily Press, 2002.
Radostis OM, Gay CC, Blood DC, Hinchcliff KW (eds). Veterinary Medicine, ed 9.
London: WB Saunders, 2000.
Turner AS, Mclwraith CW. Techniques in Large Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Lea
& Febiger, 1982, pp 297-300.
Wallace CE. Dehorning, in Amshutz HE (ed): Bovine Medicine and Surgery, ed 2.
Santa Barbara, CA, American Veterinary Publications, 1980, pp 1241-1242.
Ward JL, Rebhun WC. Chronic frontal sinusitis in dairy calle: 12 cases (1978-1989).
JAVMA201:326-328,1992.
Wright Hl, Adams DS, Trigo FJ. Meningoencephaliris affer hot-iron disbudding of goat
kids. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78(4): 599-601, 1983.
Chapter 6 Study Questions
Answers Key
1. What is the ideal rime for cornuectomy in dairy calves? In kid goats?
2. When would you consider cosmetic dehorning in calfle? Would you ever
Answers to shudy questions can
consider refusing a clien's request for cosmetic dehorning? Why?
be found staring on page 284
3. What is a disadvantage of using α guillotine-fype dehorner on a mature cow or
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
bull? What could be an unfavorable sequela?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. Why should you hesitate to place a respiratory-distressed calf under general
anesthesia before performing a racheotomy?
5. What disease is commonly associated with mandibular enlargement and
diseased reeth in calfle? State he prognosis with successul reatment.
6. Under what condirtions would you consider trephination of a frontal sinus in
catfle?
7. Why is bandaging a goar's head recommended affer cornuectomy in a mature
animal?
8. What infeclious zoonolic disease may be included in a differential diagnosis
of suspected choke in catle? Is ir important to wear gloves during oral 
examinalion of such animals?
9. Would you expect as much free hemorrhage from a cornuectomy involving 
obstetric wire transection as from a guillotine-type dehorning?
Chapter 7
Surgical Treatment of Ocular
Squamous Cell Carcinoma and
Corneal Dermoids in Cattle
Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma
General Considerations
■ The highest incidence of ocular squamous cell carcinoma is in calle with litle or no
pigment around the eye, but any breed wih or wihout pigment and other species
may also be affected.
■ Typically seen in three locations:
● On the globe, a lesion usually starts as a smallslow-growing plaque on the limbus 
hat enlarges and invades the deeper structure of the cornea. These lesions are
mildly invasive and easily treatable by early excision and Cryotherapy.
● On the lids, an initially raised red, inflamed lesion becomes ulcerative and
if the patient can maintain normal lid funchion to protect and lubricate the eye
without excessive lacrimation.
● On the third eyelid, a lesion begins with a reddened rough edge and rather
quickly invades the deeper sruclure of the medial canthus. Early excision of the
hird eyelid wih cryotherapy is necessary to control he spread of he neoplasm.
Enucleation may be required to control he spread of this tumor.
■Most bovine ocular squamous cell carcinomas develop from nonmalignant precursor
lesions such as epidermal plaques and lesions histologically referred to as squamous 
metaplasia.
 Factors affecling neoplastic development:
● Dark pigmentarion of the lids apparently inhibits but does not prevent neoplasia.
● Ultraviolet B radiation may be an initiating factor in neoplasia.
Note
● Heredily, associated with eye pigmentation, may be a predisposing factor for
The highest incidence of neoplasia is
neoplastic development.
in catle 6 to 9 years of age.
● Certain ocular plaques regress spontaneously.
● Keratifis and trauma caused by tall, rough grasses and insects may stimulate
increased vascularization, which may increase susceptibiliry to neoplasia
■ Metastasis to regional lymph nodes may occur. Animals to be slaughtered for meat
should be horoughly examined by an experienced meat inspector or veterinarian
for evidence of metastasis to local and regional lymph nodes, which would require
condemnalion of the carcass.
■ The eyes of breeding catle (especiall those 6 years of age and older should be
checked once or rwice a year. Early treatment is highly successful.
■ Present therapy for squamous cell carcinoma in caile includes:
● Surgical excision and/or enucleation
● Cryosurgery or cryotherapy
● Elecrothermal treatment
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
75
76■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
●Immunotherapy
● Radiotherapy with or without surgery
Surgery on the Membrane Nictitans or Third Eyelid
General Considerations
■ Squamous cell carcinoma of the third eyelid generally grows rapidly and is
extremely invasive.
■ Removal of he entire hird eyelid is usually advisable. Exceplions include:
● An early isolated lesion on the conjunctiva
● When excision of the lesion will not expose hyaline carilage
Restraint
■ Standing chute restraint is suggested, but lateral recumbency may be used.
■ Optimal head restraint is imperative.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer IV sedalion if necessary plus analgesics
■ Thoroughly cleanse he orbital area
 Protect the eye from irritating soap and solutions.
 Flush the eye with sterile saline or tepid water.
Anesthesia
■ Apply a topical anestheric agent to the cornea as needed for adequate anesthesia.
■With α small [1-inch, 22- ho 24-gauge] needle, infuse 2% lidocaine locally at the
base of the third eyelid.
Surgical Technique
 Grasp the hird eyelid wih forceps.
Recommendation
■ Place hwo forceps berween the lesion and the base of the third eyelid.
● Make sure hat there is normal rissue berween the forceps and the lesion.
Clean surgery is recommended.
■ Wih a scissors or scalpel, remove the lesion by culing along the edge of the forceps.
■ Use a cryoprobe cooled in liquid nitrogen to freeze fissue along the cut edge of the
hird eyelid.
● Use at leas three freeze-thaw cycles for cryotherapy.
■ Remove the forceps; some minor hemorrhage may occur.
■ If an early neoplasm involves a small, circumscribed area on he edge of the hird
eyelid (soft rissue and conjuncliva), use scissors to surgically remove he neoplasm and
a small amount of normal rssue surrounding it. Minor hemorrhage is inconsequential.
 he entire hird eyelid at he base. Control hemorrhage with a pressure pack.
Postoperative Care
 Flush the eye with sterile solutions to remove blood and debris.
■ Apply an antibiotic ointment.
■ Shield the palient from wind, dust, and bright sunlight for several hours to prevent
keratifis.
● Consider postoperative analgesics
Surgery on the Upper and Lower Eyelids
General Considerations
 lesions of the upper and lower eyelids are often of a relatively low-grade
malignancy or are precursors to squamous cell carcinoma.
 of he skin; however, pathologis commonly refer to these lesions as squamous
metaplasia, which is considered to be a precursor to squamous cell carcinoma.
 Small lesions may readily be excised from the skin.
Surgical Treatment of Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Corneal Dermoids in Cattle   7
Restraint
■ Standing chute restraint is suggested but lateral recumbency may be used.
■ Optimal head restraint is imperative.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Cleanse the orbital area with an emphasis on horough preparation of the affected
lid or lids.
Anesthesia
■Wih a l-inch, 20 to 22-gauge needle, infuse 2% lidocaine locally.
Surgical Technique
 With a scalpel (Bard-Parker No. 15 blade), excise he lesion and a small portion of
normal rissue by making elliptic incisions around he lesion.
 Noninvasive lesions may involve only the skin.
 Invasive lesions may include other tissue (e.g., conjunchiva).
Suturing
 Interrupted surures are recommended.
■ Synthelic absorbable suture material is suggested.
 If the conjuncliva is involved, do not place surure knors in contact wih he cornea.
■ Take care ho maintain funclion of the lids to prevent exposure keratitis.
Postoperative Care
 Apply antibiotic ointment to he eye.
 Shield he eye from adverse environmental elements for several hours
● Consider postoperative analgesics
Keratectomy: Surgery to Remove Noninvasive Corneal Plaques
General Considerations
 Corneal plaques are usually of relatively low-grade malignancy, but they should be
considered precursors fo squamous cell carcinoma.
 Surgical removal with or without cryotherapy is very effeclive freatment during early
developmental stages of corneal plaques.
Restraint
■Standing chute restraint is suggested but lateral recumbency may be used.
 Optimal head restraint is imperative.
Presurgical Procedures
Cross-Reference
■ Administer IV sedation if necessary plus analgesics
■ Thoroughly cleanse the orbital area; prevent iritating soaps from reaching the
 Refer to Chapter 3 (retrobulbar
infusionj.
cornea.
■ Apply topical aneshetic to the eye, especially if the relrobulbar anesthelic infusion
lechnique is ho be used.
Anesthesia
■ Use a retrobulbar infusion.
Technique
Surgical Technique
 The eyeball should be proptosed
■ Proptose he eyeball.
for optimal exposure of the corneal
■ Use a sharp scalpel blade (e.g., Bard-Parker No. 15) held in a flat position.
neoplasm and optimal eyeball
■ Pace he blade flat on he surface of the cornea at he dorsal aspect of he mass and 
resraint. Keep the eyeball moist with
incise hrough the base of the neoplasm. It is advisable not to use he point of the scalpel
sterile saline.
because a sudden movement of he palien's head may cause corneal penelralion.
78   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Include a thin layer of normal cornea when incising the base of the neoplasm to
ensure total excision of the lesion.
■ Cryotherapy with a probe cooled in liquid nilrogen and applied to the area wih at
least hree freeze-thaw cycles may aid in control of lesion regrowth.
■ Flush the cornea with sterile saline.
■ With the Fleshy portion of your fingers and thumb, force the eyeballback into its
normal position within he socker.
Postoperative Care
■ Apply antibiolic ointment to he cornea.
 Warn he owner that the patient may experience general weakness of he eye,
temporary blindness, and a susceptibility to keratitis for a few hours or until
the anesthetic wears off. Advise the owner to protect he patient from harsh
environmental elements.
Enucleation of the Eye
Indications and Genera! Considerations
■ Indicaled for extensive neoplaslic involvement of the cornea (invasion of the anterior
Note
chamber) and the upper, lower, or third eyelid.
■ Not indicated if neoplasia involves the bony orbit or has metastasized to regional
 The one-step rechnique is ideal for
lymph nodes; it is nearly impossible to remove the tumor successfully in such cases.
surgery on range catle because it
■ Before surgery, determine the palienl's age and pregnancy status, which
requires minimal aftercare.
nonpregnancy may negate the merits of surgery.
■ From a humane standpoint, never remove both eyes. Even a one-eyed animal may
have social problems in a herd, especially in a herd in close confinement.
● Beef range bulls wilh only one eye may be at a disadvantage in defending
 themselves against other bulls
 Sale value for breeding purposes may decrease after enucleation.
Restraint
■ Use standing chute restraint
■ Use posiltive head control, with the head rurned to he side (use a halter with nose
lead).
■ Advise he owner to protect the patient from harsh environmental elements.
■ Consider postoperalive analgesics
Presurgical Procedures (Figure 7-1)
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as deemed prudent for standing surgery (e.g.,
xylazine/butorphanol combinationj.
■ Remove hair in the orbital area wih a No. 40 small animal clipper head.
■ Scrub he area with an iodophor solurion and tepid water.
■ Trim excess neoplasia with scissors lo aid enucleation.
Anesthesia
■ Use a Peterson block or a retrobulbar infusion with an auriculopalpebral nerve
block.
■ Retrobulbar anesthesia with local infiltration of the lid margins is acceptable.
Surgical Technique (Figures 7-2 to 7-6)
Hair removed
■ Drape the palien's head with a fenestrated, moishure-repellent drape. Draping the
 entire head facilitates restraint.
FIGURE 7-1. Sie preparalion for
■ Assess he proposed incision lines. Include the entire lesion but retain adequate
enucleation.
normal rissue for optimal skin closure.
Surgical Treatment of Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Corneal Dermoids in Cattle ■  79
Incision
Proposed skin incisions
Incision
FIGURE 7-2. In an enucleation, the
FIGURE 7-3. Side view of proposed
FIGURE 7-4. Towel clamps applied to lid
elliptic incisions should include all
 periconjunctival incisions.
edges.
neoplaslic fissue. Adequate normal fissue
on the upper and lower lids should be
left for optimal closure.
FIGURE 7-5. Traclion applied to lids
FIGURE 7-6. Traction applied in α 
while skin and periconjunctival tissue are
postglobal transection.
being incised.
 Grasp the upper and lower lids with rwo fowel clamps.
■ Make elliptic skin incisions near the margin of the eyelid. Retain as much skin as
Note
possible ho facilitate suuring. Continue through the subcutaneous fissue down to
he orbit. Do not incise he conjunctiva [ihus invading the conjunctival sac]; the
This surgery is notbloodless.
 conjunclival sac is a source of conhaminalion to the surgical field.
 Hemorrhage is controlled by the 
■ While applying traction with towel clamps use curved, serrated scissors to free the
suture line in the skin. Work quickly
orbital contents from the bony orbir. See Figures 7-4 and 7-5.
yet carefully to avoid excessive
■ Release Iraction on the eyelids and grasp the eyeball within the conjunctival sac.
hemorrhage.
Remove he lid margins, conjunctival sac, and globe as a single mass by transecting
direcly behind the globe. It is important hat the transeclion be close to the eyeball.
See Figure 7-6.
● The potential for excessive hemorrhage is thereby reduced.
● The optimal remaining fissue mass within the bony orbit will aid healing.
■ Palpate the remaining orbital rissue and orbital bones for addirional evidence of 
Technique
neoplasia.
Temporarily pack the orbital socket with sterile 4 X 4-inch gauze pads. Note the
Periconjunctival incisions should help
number of pads used.
ensure a sterile enucleation.
 Check the enucleated eye and conjunclival sac; here should be no break in the
conjuncliva if proper technique was employed. Periconjunctival incisions should help
ensure a sterile enucleation.
  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Suturing (Figures 7.7 and 7-8)
■ Use No. 3 medium chromic catgut or comparably sized synthetic absorbable surure
material.
 Use a medium-sized, curved culing needle.
 Use an inrerrupted horizontal mattress pattern with double strands of surure material.
■ Begin the First suure at he ventral commissure of the incision. The filt of the head will
determine the ventral commissure of the incision (it may be either medial or lateralj.
■ Include adequate skin in the suure and apply marked tension.
■ Before placing the last surure, remove he temporary 4-inch by 4inch sterile gauze
pack with a hemostat. Count the number of 4-inch by 4-inch pads removed. Be sure
 that you remove them all.
 Insert or inject antibiotics into the orbit.
■ Place the final mattress sulures. The sutures should seal the orbit to control
FIGURE 7-7. Interrupted horizontal
hemorrhage and prevent entry of contaminatling bacteria.
mattress surures in a double strand for
shabiliry.
 If hemorrhage continues through the suture line, place a row of simple continuous
 surures along the free edge of the incision.
Postoperative Care
■ Wipe the orbital area free of blood.
■ Administer a one-time dose of systemic antibiotics if deemed prudent. Tetanus
antitoxin may be considered.
■ Protect the patient from harsh environmental elements and from other caltle for at
Side view
least several days.
of sutures
■ Postoperative analgesics are indicated.
Corneal Dermoid Surgery
General Considerations
 Surgery may be warranted if associated keralitis problems (e.g., pain and irritation)
FIGURE 7-8. Marked tension applied to
exist.
sutures.
 Follow procedures for keratectomy to remove corneal plaques.
Surgery for Entropion
General Considerations
■ Primarily a disease of the lower eyelids of lambs younger than 2 weeks of age.
 May be unilateral or bilateral.
■ Some inherited tendencies but may also acquired.
■ Seen in overweight adult potbellied pigs.
■ Objeclive of surgery is to eliminate corneal trauma by rolling the bottom eyelid away
from the cornea.
Anesthesia
■ None or a very small amount of lidocaine injected locally
Clinical Signs of Entropion
■ Older pot bellied pigs will likely require general anesthesia due to the extensive
 Epiphora
naure of the problem and the surgical repair.
Blepharospasm
 Corneal edema and ulceration in
Surgical Technique
 Technique I: Remove a semilunar piece of skin from under the affected eye.
severe cases
● May be left open to heal or sutured or stapled.
 Technique 2: Crush he skin under he affected eye with forceps.
● No other reatment is necessary because this will correct the problem.
Surgical Treatment of Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Corneal Dermoids in Cattle   81
■ Technique 3: Inject I to 2 ml of solution subcutaneously under the affected eye.
● Saline or procaine penicillin G has been used successfully.
● This "filling" technique will often alleviate the problem.
● lodine or olher caustic material has been used but is not recommended.
Technique 4: Place staples, clips, or suures in the skin under the affected eye to
apply traclion to a fold of loose skin, thus pullng he skin away from the eye.
Postoperative Care
 Typically, very liHe affercare is necessary.
■ Recheck he eye in 2 to 3 days to monitor improvement and recovery.
Suggested Reading
Doss JD. Electrothermal treatment of cancer eye. los Alamos Sci Lab (LASl) Mini-Rev
77(14), 1977.
Farris HE. Cryosurgery. Proc AABP: 68-69, 1978.
Farris HE. Cryosurgical freatment of bovine ocular squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Clin
North Am 10(4): 861-867, 1980.
Grier RL, Brewer WG Jr, Paul SR, Theilen GH. Treatment of bovine and equine ocular
squamous cell carcinoma by radiofrequency hyperthermia. JAVMA 177(1): 55-61,
1980.
Kainer RA, Stringer JM, Leuker DC: Hyperthermia for Ireatment of ocular squamous cell
umors in catHle. JAVMA 176(4): 356-360, 1980.
Kopecky KE, Pugh GW, Hughes DE, et al. Biological effect of ultraviolet radialion on
Lehrman C. VMO update. ldaho Vet Med Assoc Newslet, March 1986.
Meuten D] (ed). Tumors in Domestic Animals, ed 4. Ames, lowa State Press, 2002.
Ribi E, Ward JK, Schawatzman SM, Cantrell JL. Immunolherapy of ocular squamous
cell carcinoma in catle using a mycobacterial biologic. Mod Vet Pract 67(5):
451-453, 1986.
Spradbrow PB, Hoffman D. Bovine ocular squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Bull 50(6):
449- 459, 1980. [Author's note: This is a comprehensive aricle about bovine
ocular squamous cell carcinoma with an extensive reference listing.]
Chapter 7 Study Questions
1. What criteria are used to determine the method of treahnent of cancer of the 
Answers Key
eye?
Answers to study questions can
2. Are speciic breeds susceplible to cancer of the eye? Is here a sex relationship?
be found staring on page 284
A geographic relationship?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
 3. Should the optic nerve be desensilized before enucleation?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. Are radiotherapy, thermal treatment, and immunotherapy ofen used to freat
cancer of the eye?
5. How could proptosing the eyeball for corneal surgery stimulate temporary
blindness? Could retrobulbar anesthesia without prolapsing the eyeball cause α
similar problem?
Chapter 8
Hernias and Umbilical Masses
Introduction
Anatomic Parts of a Hernia
■ Hernial opening or ring:
● Accidental ruprure of the abdominal wall
● Persistent prenatal opening (i.e., the umbilicus)
● A normal passage (i.e., he inguinal canal)
Hernial sac:
● Tissue layers:
●Skin
 Limited number of muscle fibers
Fibrous tissue
 Parietal peritoneum: The peritoneal layer may be absent in certain ventral
abdominal hernias because of a ruprure. Some authors confine the term sac to
 the peritoneal layer when present.
 Hernial contents:
● Loop of intestine (enterocele)
● Omentum (omentocele)
● Stomach (gastrocele)
● Urinary bladder (vesicocele)
Varieties of Hernias
■ According to site:
● Umbilical hernias [omphalocele)
● Inguinal hernia (bubonocele)
● Scrotal hernia [oscheocele)
 According to condition of the contents:
● Reducible hernia: one in which he contents can be relurned to the abdomen
 hrough the hernial ring.
● Irreducible hernia: one in which he contents cannot be completely returned to the
 abdomen by manipulation through the hernial ring.
● Incarcerated hernia: one in which contents are too voluminous to pass through the
hernial ring.
● Strangulated hernia: one in which circulation is compromised, lumen of he bowel
is obsructed, and necrosis is likely to occur.
● Hernia with adhesions: one in which inflammatory adhesions joined the contents
of the hernia to the lining of the sac.
Predisposing Conditions
■ Genelic disorder
■ Seplic omphalitis
■ Wound dehiscence after surgery
Noordsy's Food Anirmal Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
83
84 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Increased inraabdominal pressure (e.g., in advanced pregnancy and hydrops allantois)
■ Violent impact (e.g., gouging with a horn)
General Considerations
■ Hernias associated with hereditary defects should not be repaired in animals to be
bred, sold as breeding animals, or exhibited is unethical. If the healh or welfare of a
palient requires correction of a genetic defect, it is recommended that he patient be
rendered incapable of reproduction.
■ Hernial repair to preserve market value and allow meat salvage [e.g., correching
umbilical hernias in barrows) is acceptable.
■ Correcting funclional dishurbances or acquired hernias is acceptable.
 Surgeries for inguinal hernias in catle are often emergencies, but those for ventral
 and umbilical hernias are usually elective.
■ Umbilical masses are offen associated with navel abscesses.
● Hot, hard, painful nonreducible masses of the umbilicus are lypically associated
with abscesses.
● Careful diagnostictesting to differentiate an abscess from a hernia before surgery
is important.
● Umbilical abscesses are offen best treated by drainage and lavage wih tepid
water or saline.
■ Small umbilical hernias in young animals occasionally resolve spontaneously or affer
conservative therapy.
■Venral abdominal herniorrhaphy in food animals is usually a challenging surgery.
Maximal success depends on mericulous surgical Ireatment including:
◆ Adequate evaluation of he patient (failure of passive transfer in neonatal patients)
● Aseptic technique
● Abdominal closure
● Postoperalive care
Surgical Procedures in Cattle
Umbilical (Ventral) Herniorrhaphy
Genera! Considerations
 Umbilical hernias may be associated with herediry (e.g., in Holsteins). Unforhunately,
 no simple method exists for differentiaring acquired hernias from inheried hernias.
■ Surgery should be performed before the animal is 6 months of age, if possible.
Restraint and Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is recommended.
■ Heavy sedalion with local anesthesia is acceptable.
● Movement of the palient during the procedure may jeopardize a surgical success.
■ Place the palient in dorsal recumbency on a basically level plane. The palien's head
may be placed at a slightly lower level to preclude he possibiliry of aspiration of
regurgitaled material if an endolracheal lube is not used.
■ Consider placing a nasolracheal hube in heavily sedated calves to maintain a patent
airway.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Deprivation of food and water
● Similar to that used for general anesthesia
● Decreases bulk and bloat during surgery
● Calves given an all-milk diet should not have milk withheld.
AVMA Principles of Veterinary Medical Ethics, 1985 revision.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses
 Consider preoperalive use of antibiotics if an abscess or infeclion is suspected.
Anterior
■ Skin preparation
● Remove all debris from the ventral abdominal area.
● Remove hair over a liberal ventral abdominal area around the hernia via a
Umbilical
No. 40 clipper head.
mass
● Thoroughly scrub the skin with water and an iodophor solurion and complete
 normal surgical preparation.
Surgical Technique
■ Skin incision
● A standard elliplic incision encompassing he hernia is effechive.
● A doubleV incision can be used with a good cosmelic resull (Figure 8-1).
■ Dissechion of the fissue
● The lateral edges of the skin incision require separation from the hernial sac to
Posterior
expose the junction of the hernial sac and abdominal wall.
● Significant hemorrhage offen occurs during this stage.
FIGURE 8-1. DoubleV incision in the
● Blunt disseclion with scissors helps control hemorrhage and incising abscesses or
ventral abdomen of a calf with an
infected tissue.
umbilical mass.
● Manual blunt disseclion with a 4 × 4-inch gauze pad gives the quickest result with
least hemorrhage.
 Technique in he absence and presence of abscess
● For a relatively small, abscess-free hernia:
 Invert the hernial sac into the abdominal cavily.
"Freshen" (scarify) he edges of the hernial ring.
 Close he hernial ring with simple interrupted sutures.
 This technique does not require an open abdominal caviy and is preferred when
surgery is performed in a location hat is less han ideal e.g., barn, oudoors).
● For a present or suspected abscess or umbilical infection:
Make α small incision— large enough to insert one Finger--into the abdominal
 Caution!
caviry at the base of the hernial sac on the lateral side.
 Digitally examine the contents of the hernial sac.
Beware of accidentally breaking or
+ An empty hernial sac may be removed and discarded.
incising he abscess as this could
 If adhesions are present within the hernial sac:
result in wound contamination.
★ Extend the abdominal incision to allow separation of the adhesions and 
abdominal contents (usually omentum).
★ Return contents to the abdominal caviry.
★ Remove and discard the hernial sac.
● When evidence of an abscess or infection is found in umbilical arteries, vein or
urachus:
 Carefully expose infected slruclures and remove them.
+ Extending the incision posteriorly may be required.
+ Occasionally, he urinary bladder will be involved.
● When evidence of an abscess or infection is found in he umbilical vein:
●Marsupialization of he stalk of he umbilical vein through the abdominal wall
and skin anteriorly and to he right of the midline allows drainage and lavage to
remove he infection.
Closure
■Hernial ring 
● For a hernial sac and abdominal cavilry hat are not open:
+ Freshen the edges of the hernial ring by scariflication.
+ Invert the hernial sac.
 Close the abdominal wall over the sac via simple interrupted sutures.
 Use large surure bites with a sufficiently strong, sterile surure material to allow
healing.
86■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● For an open hernial sac and abdominal cavily:
 Close the abdominal wall with simple interrupted surures.
Use large surure bites in a one-layer closure with suffciently slrong, (#2 or #3)
sterile surure material to allow healing.
● An alternative is to dissect the abdominal wall into hwo layers and close each
layer separately. The interior layer is primarily peritoneum, and the outer layer is
fibrous connective fissue.
●Two layers allow he use of smaller diameter (#O or #l) sulure material and
increase the slrength of he suure line.
● For a nearly round defect in the abdominal wall, extend the incision both
anteriorly and posteriorly to facilitate closure.
● To avoid excessive tension in the incision:
Use a far-near-near-far sulure pattern.
● Use surgical mesh incorporated into the incision, although the high cost of mesh
must be considered.
+ Do not put mesh into a contaminated or infected wound.
'pasn aq ou (,squod-jao-isa, uanod ainns buiddouaao u 
● Recent evidence indicates that this pattern may cause ischemia of the incision 
site, with an increased possibiliry of dehiscence.
 To reduce concern about dehiscence, place a simple continuous suhure at the
 fee edge of the overlapping fissue.
■ Subcutaneous Fissue
● Subcutaneous tissue is generally closed via a continuous surure paltern with an
absorbable material.
● The objeclive of closure is lo decrease dead space, which reduces fluid
 accumulation and swelling.
■Skin
● Heavy synthetic nonabsorbable noncapillary suure material (#1 or #2) is ypically
Used in a simple interrupted or interrupted horizontal mattress pattern.
Postoperative Care
■ Systemic antibiotics, intraperitoneal antibiotics, or boh are suggested.
Caution!
■ Protective bandaging is recommended.
● Use a many-tailed (also called many-ties bandage or a canvas girdle for
Elastic adhesive tape may also be
 5 to 7 days to reduce stress on the incision and postoperarive swelling.
Used as a bandage, but beware of 
■ Remove surures after adequate healing, usually 14 to 21 days.
excessive pressure.
■ Postoperative analgesia may be considered.
Inguinal Herniorrhaphy After Castration
Genera! Considerations
 Herniorrhaphy is offen an emergency surgery for a hernia that was an unfavorable
sequela following castration.
■ The hernia may be result from a hereditary tendency for herniation or from excesive 
rauma during casration.
■ A lypical silualion is evisceration of a porlion of the small intestine with or without
marked intestinal trauma.
■ Marked wound contaminalion is common
■ May be seen in calves, lambs, piglers, and kids.
Restraint and Anesthesia
■ A minimal dose of IV sedalion or analgesia is suggested
■ Place the patient in dorsal recumbency.
■ Elevate he rear quarters.
■ Extend and restrain the rear limbs.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses     87
Presurgical Procedures
 Thoroughly wash and rinse the exposed intestines wih cool to tepid water. Do not
use harsh antiseptics.
 Thoroughly cleanse the inguinal region with an iodophor solurion and water.
Surgical Technique
 Examine he eviscerated intesline for excessive trauma, slrangulation, or tears. If
warranted, perform an intestinal transection and end-to-end anastomosis.
■ Maneuver the intestine back into the peritoneal caviry via the inguinal canal and
scrotum.
■ An incision of the craniolateral aspect of the inguinal ring may be indicated to
facilitate replacement of he viscera. An incision of the cranial aspect of the scrotum
may also be indicated.
 Antibiolics are strongly recommended, given systemically or directly into the
 peritoneal caviry.
Suturing
■Inguinal ring
● Absorbable surure material of sufficient strengh (No. I or larger) is recommended.
● Heavy, synthelic, sterile nonabsorbable suure or O.25-inch cotton tape may be
substituted if excessive abdominal stress is expected.
 Due to the wicking properties of cotton tape, abscessation may occur.
aq Aou uaod snonuuo alduis p ynq 'pasabhns si uanod padnaui elduis y o
satisfactory.
 Skin and subcutaneous fissue
● Use synthetic absorbable suure material in the subcutaneous fissue.
● Use a simple interrupted or interrupted horizontal mattress suture paltern.
● Allow an adequate opening in the incision for drainage.
Postoperative Care
 Administer systemic antibiotics as deemed prudent.
 Restrict exercise
■ Give the patient a laxative diet in case surgery involving intestinal resechion or
anastomosis is required.
Inguinal (Scrotal) Herniorrhaphy in Mature Bulls
Genera! Considerations
 No evidence of an inheritance paltern exists for these hernias.
 The highest incidence (estimated at 90%) of hernias are on the leff side.
 Clinical records indicate that the average age of affected bulls is 4 years.
 Inguinal hernias are theorized to be acquired conditions related to:
● General obesily and inguinal ring atony
●Breeding
● The weight of the rumen on the leff side
● Compact body conformation
● Increased pressure on or rauma to he inguinal region, as might occur during
procedures involving placement on tables.
Common Clinical Signs
 Scrotal enlargement wih emphasis on the dorsum, predominantly left unilateral.
■ Failure of the bull to mount properly: The bull will mount, but it will usually dismount
(perhaps a pain reflex) before thrusting.
■ Inferiliy: The resticle on the affected side is markedly soff; circulatory pressure and
he presence of intestine in he scrorum may influence scrotal temperarure and cause
infertiliry.
88  ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Other body systems may become involved as a result of incarceralion and
srangulation of small intestine in he inguinal canal; necrosis may lead to severe
toxemia and death.
■ Lameness: A bull will occasionally exhibit moderate rear leg lameness on the side of 
the hernialion, perhaps because of inguinal pain.
Anatomic Considerations and Differentia! Diagnosis (Figures 8-2 and 8-3)
■ The inguinal hernia usually involves a loop of small intestine migrating into
the vaginal ring; a scrotal hernia involves an intestinal loop extending into the
scrotum.
● Intestine herniated through a tear in the peritoneum or vaginal hunic of the scrorum
is referred to as a direct hernia.
● Intesline within the vaginal hunic is referred to as an indirect hernia.
■ The medial aspect of he internal abdominal inguinal ring (aponeurosis of the 
 internal oblique muscle) becomes weakened, which allows formalion of a cuplike
 opening, hus faciliaing migration of a loop of intestine into the vaginal canal.
■ Minor hernias (reducible) usually reduce spontaneously and hen recur in an off-on
paltern. They offen involve only a portion of he omentum.
mounting).
■ Excess fat deposition at the base of the scrotum may be mistakenly diagnosed as a
 scrotal hernia.
● In cases of scrotal hernia, ouhward palpation of he affected side of the scrotum
usually reveals a soft movable mass hat is reducible.
● In cases of excess fat, the mass is offen more localized at the base of the scrotum
and is irreducible.
External
pudendal
artery
Spermatic
Rectum
cord
Cremaster
muscle
Left inguinal canal
FIGURE 8-2. The left internal abdominal inguinal ring and its relationship to
surrounding sructures.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses    89
Caudal medial aspect of internal 
abdominal inguinal canal
External pudendal artery
Internal
oblique muscle
Inguinal ligament
(Poupart's)
Small intestine
Spermatic cord
Lateral cranial aspect
of internal abdominal
 inguinal ring
FIGURE 8-3. Left side inguinal hernia in the bull.
Standing Herniorrhaphy
■Advantages:
● Allows for direct, posilive sururing of the internal abdominal inguinal ring.
Caution!
● Places minimal stress on the patient
Surgery to repair strangulated 
● Requires minimal surgical rime
and necrotic hernias should not be
● Wih proper feed restriction before surgery, involves minimal interference with
altempted via this approach; dorsal
viscera.
recumbency is recommended.
● Produces minimal postoperative scrotal edema and fissue inflammation.
● Salvages normal function of the affected teslicle, with reurn of normal tone usually
in 3 to 5 days.
■Disadvantages:
● Blind surgery, so the surgeon must have horough knowledge of the anatomy of the
bovine pelvic area.
● Requires optimal manual dexteriry.
● Scrotal adhesions may present a marked challenge, but they can usually be 
reduced wih effort and concentration.
Restraint and analgesia
● Use standing chute restraint.
● Administer sedation or analgesia IV or via a caudal epidural.
Presurgical procedures
● Deprive the patient of bulky feed such as hay 48 hours before surgery and of
concenrates 24 to 48 hours before surgery. Limit water intake for 12 hours.
● Administer l to 2 Ib of magnesium hydroxide in 1 to 2 gallons of warm water via
stomach ube 48 hours before surgery.
● Prepare he surgical site- he left Flank or paralumbar fossa (for a left side
hernia)— for aseptic surgery.
Anesthesia
● Proximal paravertebral nerve block of Tl3, Ll, and L2 (preferred methodj.
● Distal paravertebral nerve block of Tl3, L1, and L2 (preferred method for obese
subjects or for spinal landmarks hat are difficult to palpate).
 Surgical technique
● Sterile technique is advocated.
● Use regional fenesrated draping of the paralumbar area.
● Make a verical skin incision about 7 to 8 inches long; start just ventral to he third
and fourth lumbar transverse processes.
● Do not incise the abdominal muscle; use he muscle-spreading technique.
90 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Punchure he peritoneum at the dorsal commissure of the incision, and lenghen ib
ventrally with scissors.
● Remove he hernial contents by trachion. Grasp the mass of intestines within the
vaginal canal and apply moderate, steady traclion. Concurrenly, a surgical
asstant should force the scrorum and hernial contents dorsally into the inguinal
region. Nonincarcerated hernias may be readily reduced in this manner.
● When testicular adhesions are present (incarcerated hernia), maneuver your
Fingers via he internal abdominal inguinal ring into the vaginal canal while
he surgical assistant applies dorsal pressure fo the hernial contents. Peel the
adhesions from the testicle and scrorum (similar to peeling placenta from a uterine
cotyledonj.
● After breakdown of the adhesions (which renders he hernia reducible], contlinue
b grasp he porlion of the intestine that previously adhered to he testicle and
maneuver it out through the abdominal incision. Assess the intesline for trauma
at this stage, if needed.
● After a favorable assessment, place he intestine back into he peritoneal caviry.
 Sururing the internal inguinal ring (Figure 8-4).
● Use a sterile single strand of 0.25-inch cotton (umbilicall tape or a double strand
of 0.125-inch cotton tape on a 4inch curved, reverse cutting-edge needle. Colton
bape is recommended because it produces he desired inflammatory response
Technique
(inflammation srimulates strong Fibrous adhesions in the vaginal ring) and has
excellent fissue-holding power, produces stable knors, and has good handling
Addirional oplions: The suture
qualities.
material may be layered in your
● Thread about 4 feet of suure material onto the needle. Double he material and tie
palm and the knotted end placed
Over your thumb for later orientation,
he ends firmly.
 or the knolted end may be retained
● Place he hreaded needle in the palm of your left hand, and, while proteching the
 outside the abdominal incision.
needle point, insert your gloved arm into the region of the inguinal ring.
● Palpate he inguinal ring again to ensure that no intestine has reherniated.
Left paralumbar
incision
 Surgeon's arm
Double suture
strand
FIGURE 8-4. Standing herniorrhaphy. Technique for suhuring a left inguinal
herniorrhaphy via the peritoneal caviry.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses    91
● Force the spermatic cord toward the lateral or cranial angle of the inguinal ring
and insert your thumb into the vaginal ring caudal to the spermatic cord. The
breadth of he humb serves as a measure for proper placement of the first surure,
which ensures adequate space for the spermalic cord wilhout exerting excess
pressure on the vessels of the cord.
● Wih the fingers of the left hand holding he suhure needle, place he first surure
caudal to the thumb by insering the needle through the peritoneum and the
internal oblique muscle about 2 cm ventral to he free border. Then carry the suture
hrough the peritoneum of the anterior medial porion of the vaginal ring, across
he vaginal canal, through the peritoneum of the posterior lateral border of the
ring, and into the inguinal (Pouparl's) ligament.
● Take a 2- to 3-cm surure bite into the inguinal ligament. The bite should be on a
basically vertical plane.
● Bring the needle back through the loop created when the free ends of the surure
were knolted.
● Apply traction to the suhure until he internal oblique muscle is in direct and firm
 Caution!
of the suture concurrent with traction.)
● With he needle outside the abdominal incision, cut or untie he knot and retain
Do not include any viscera in the
one subure strand in the needle for additional suluring while maintaining the
suture.
second strand ourside the abdomen under moderate tension.
● Reintroduce he needle and a single strand of surure into the peritoneal cavily.
Insert a second surure, oriented similarly to the first, about midway berween the
First surure and he medial caudal aspect of he internal abdominal inguinal ring.
When placing he second suhure, be careful not to interfere with circulation of
he external pudendal arery, which passes through the vaginal ring close to the
posterior medial border of the ring. [The pudendal artery is readily palpated.)
● After the second surure is in place, apply tension to bring the edges of the ring into
direct apposilion by placing moderate frachion on the needle and surure (which
are now exteriorized via the abdominal incisionj. Remove he needle from the
suhure tape.
● Make a first throw of a surgeon's knot outside the abdominal incision, and slide
he knot intraperitoneally to the inguinal ring. Addirional throws are then made
and carried intraperitoneally to form a knot.
● With traction on the rwo suture srands, carry a scalpel blade (protected by the
surgeon's Fingers) intraperitoneally, and cut the knolted ends about I inch long.
● Palpate he suures, internal abdominal inguinal ring, and spacing berween the
Swelling and edema of the affected
First surure and the spermatic cord to make sure that the technique was performed
side of the scrotum are usually
properly (Figure 8-5).
of no major consequence; their
■ Suuring he abdominal wall
severily depends on the extent
● A routine three-layer closure is recommended.
of presurgical adhesions and the
■ Postoperative care
manipulations necessary to reduce
● Antibiotics are indicated for several days beginning before or during surgery.
 the hernia. Swelling usually subsides
● Remove abdominal incision surures in 14 to 21 days.
 spontaneously in I to 3 weeks.
● Allow adequate exercise, and restrict breeding for about 2 months
Diaphragmatic Herniorrhaphy
General Considerations
■ Diaphragmatic hernias are uncommon in catle but may be diagnosed in:
● Newborn calves, affer dystocia and unwarranted raction affer a posterior
presentation.
● A fracured rib cage may be a concurrent condition.
● Bulls, after bull fighrs
● Dams, during advanced pregnancy (extreme fetal size) and dystocia.
92■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Caudomedial aspect of inguinal ring
External pudendal artery
Singlesuture strand
Double suture strand
Suture knot
Spermatic cord
FIGURE 8-5. Reduced, surured left internal abdominal inguinal ring in the bull
[craniolateral aspect).
■ Alhough personal observation of admited cases at Kansas State Universilty's
Veterinary Hospital involved primarily hiatal herniation, oher authors reported tears
Note
of both muscle and tendon.
■ The techniques used in dogs are advised (i.e., dorsal restraint, abdominal approach,
Common clinical signs of hiatal
hernias include abnormal regurgiation 
 and inhalation anesthesiaj.
 Positive pressure respiratlion must be maintained during surgery.
and aspiralion pneumonia.
Surgical Procedures in Pigs
Umbilical (Ventral) Herniorrhaphy
Genera! Considerations
■ These hernias are commonly associated with umbilical abscesses. Prophylaxis against
abscesses (i.e., iodine treatment of the navel of newborn piglets) is strongly recommended.
■ The influence of herediry on herniation is questionable; however, total disregard for
α possible inheritance factor is unwarranted. All male pigs with hernias should be
 neutered, and all females with hernias should be earmarked for early meat salvage.
■ Herniorrhaphy should be performed early in the life of pigs (before the body weight
reaches 50 Ibj.
Restraint and Anesthesia
■ Restrain patient in dorsal recumbency wih legs extended.
■ General anesthesia is preferred 
■ Maintenance with gas anesthesia is desirable.
■ A lumbosacral epidural with 2% lidocaine may be used and is effeclive.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Thoroughly scrub he skin with water and an iodophor solution.
■ Spray he area with an iodophor solution.
■ Use of a fenestrated, moisure-resistant regional drape is suggested.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses
■93
Surgical Technique in Males (Figure 8-6)
Prepuce
■ Make a semicircular incision, staring on the abdominal midline cranial to he hernial
ring, and proceed laterally around the hernia and prepuce ho converge on the
abdominal midline, caudal to the hernia.
● Do not incise the preputial divericulum.
■With traclion on the prepuce and blunt disseclion, move the prepuce-preputial
diverliculum lateral to the surgical field.
 Isolate the hernial sac; when an abscess is present, remove he abscess (intact].
● Use a technique similar to the one described for cattle.
 'sapa bu liay a uaysn puo 'oos py ioui au aaai jo lau 
hernial ring may be incised cranially and caudally to enhance sururing.
 Wih heavy, synthetic absorbable suhure material, surure the hernial ring via a simple
interrupted suhure pattern.
● Far-near-near-far and overlapping suhure patterns can also be used.
● Dehiscence is more common in pigs than in calves.
 Suure of subcutaneous fissue is indicated if he wound is relalively extensive.
■ Reposilion the prepuce and the preputial divericulum. Suture the skin in a simple
Sutured incision
interrupted or interrupted horizontal mattress pattern with synthetic nonabsorbable
suhure material.
FIGURE 8-6. Umbilical herniorrhaphy in
■ A subcuticular surure works well in pig skin as an alternalive fo skin surures.
a male pig.
Surgical Technique in Females (Figure 8-7)
 Make hwo elliptic skin incisions around the hernia. Retain adequate skin for optimal
suuring, appearance, and healing.
■ Wih blunt dissection, isolate he hernial sac down to the hernial ring.
■ Remove he skin from he hernial sac and discard; also remove he abscess (intact], if
present.
■ Hernial sac manipulation and suhuring in females are identical to those in males.
Other Hernia Reduction Techniques
■ Application of caustic agentrs (e.g., nilric acid and butter of antimony) to button
hernias in newborn pigs
ns a bu pay u u uae puo aui sod pnba jo uos 
inflammalion and reduclion of the hernial ring. This technique is recommended for
small hernias only.
 Taping of a small ball (e.g., Ping Pong, ball, or tennis ball on an umbilical hernia to
keep it reduced and allow the hernia to close spontaneously.
 Not recommended: Application of a rubber band to he hernia (females only).
Prevention of Hernia
 outgrown. The incidence of abdominal hernias increases, along with he incidence
Elliptic incisions
of back problems.
(remove excess
skin tissue)
Inguinal (Scrotal) Herniorrhaphy
General Considerations
■ Gils may occasionally have an inguinal hernia, with evidence of:
Umbilicus
● A rudimentary lesticle and spermatic cord in he unica vaginalis communis.
(abscess?)
● Incomplete female genital development
■ Inguinal hernias occasionally reduce in size spontaneously with age.
■ These hernias are often detected during or after castration.
■ Beware of a so-called Floating or loose testicle in he scrolum; it is a visible indication
of a tendency toward herniation.
FIGURE 8-7. Reduclion of α large
 Head-down resraint as used for casralion is suggested as an aid to hernia deteclion.
umbilical hernia in a female pig.
94■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Differenlial diagnosis:
●Hydrocele
● Scirrhous cord
● Hematoma of the testicle
■ Intestinal incarceration may occur in pigs wih marked hernias.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Marked sedalion or analgesia is preferred because it enhances good surgery by
eliminating patient movement and squealing.
■ Restrain the patient in dorsal recumbency wih is rear quarters elevated or with the
palient in a head-down posifion.
■ Thoroughly cleanse he inguinal and scrotal area with water and an iodophor solution.
 Prepare for clean surgery.
Surgical Technique (Figures 8-8 and 8-9)
■ Make an oblique incision over the affected inguinal ring.
a u anssad poaxa snd no sy 'anssg snoaunrans a noass un 
Caution!
scrotum, isolate and apply traction on the intact tunica vaginalis until the entire
hernial sac, including the resticle and hernia contenls, is exposed through the
To simplify the procedure, avoid
inguinal incision.
opening the tunica vaginalis.
■ Grasp he testicle wihin he hernial sac and rwist the intact runica vaginalis to force
 the intestines into the peritoneal caviry.
■ Apply traclion on the rwisted hernial sac and place a transfixation suture close ho the
 inguinal ring.
● No. 1l-0 or 20 absorbable suture material may be used.
● Anchor the ransfixation suhure into the inguinal ring with the free end of the suhure.
● This maneuver prevents the suture from slipping off the lunica vaginalis and
allowing reherniation.
+It closes he inguinal ring.
Note
● Check the success of the herniorrhaphy by applying external pressure on the
abdomen. The surgeon's elbows are suggested for applying this pressure.
Although rare, bilateral scrotal 
● Remove he testicle by transecting the hernial sac distal to the anchor surure.
hernias may occur.
● Remove he second testicle as in a normal castration.
Anchor suture
Testicle
Drainage incision
Herniorrhaphy
Twisted tunic
incision
Inguinal incision
FIGURE 8-8. Lef-side scrotal
FIGURE 8-9. Technique for suturing 
herniorrhaphy in the pig.
during scrotal herniorrhaphy in the pig.
Hernias and Umbilical Masses    95
Suturing the Skin
■ The skin is commonly apposed with one or hwo simple interrupted or horizontal
mattress surures with an absorbable surure material.
■ Place sutures very loosely to allow drainage.
 Skin suhures are not removed but are left to slough spontaneously.
Postoperative Care
 Administer systemic antibiotics as indicated.
■ Place pigs in a quiet, welbedded, warm area until hey have recovered from the
effecrs of sedation or analgesia.
■ Do not place unweaned sedated pigs with dams until he pigs have fully recovered
from sedation.
■ This individual pig and all oher litermates should be identified and removed from
 the breeding program.
Herniorrhaphy in Sheep and Goats
■ Similar to hat used for catle
Suggested Reading
Deshpande KS, et al. Diaphragmatic hernia in bovines I: Incidence. Indian Vet J 59:
642-646,1982.
Edwards RB 3rd, Fubini Sl. A one-stage marsupialization procedure for management of
infected umbilical vein remnants in calves and foals. Vet Surg 24(l): 32-35, 1995.
Fretz PB, Hamilton GF, Barber SM, Ferguson JG. Management of umbilical hernias in
catle and horses. JAVMA 183(5): 550-552, 1983.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 477-484.
Noordsy JL. Inguinal herniorrhaphy in the bovine male: A summary of clinical cases.
Vet Med Smalfl Anim Clin 6(2): 147-150, 1966.
Singh J, Kumar R, Kohli RN, et al. Postxiphoid surgical approach for repair of bovine
diaphragmaric hernia. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(1): 106-109, 1980.
Chapter 8 Study Questions
1. Are inguinal (scrotal hernias in bulls usually bilateral or unilateral? If unilateral,
: Answers Key
which side is more offen affected?
Answers to study questions can
2. What pahologic condition often exists concurrenly with umbilical hernias in
be found staring on page 285
swine? Could this condirion be prevented or controlled by good management
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
practices?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
3. Are umbilical hernias in Holstein catHe known to be heritable?
4. What are he common contents of an umbilical hernia in swine? In catfle?
 5. What might excessive pressure on the spermatic cord as a sequela to internal
abdominal inguinal ring suuring stimulate?
6. How could a scrotal hernia cause inferility in a bull?
7. At what age should scrotal hernias in pigs be repaired?
8. How would you advise a client to handle grapefruit-sized umbilical hernias in a
group of 75 to 100-lb feeder pigs?
Chapter 9
Laparotomy in Cattle
Abdominal Surgery in cattle
General Considerations
Characteristics of an
■ Can be performed effeclively in the field
Optimal Incision
■ Typically performed on standing catle 
 Provides adequate access for
■ Can be considered an extension of the physical examination
 exploration of he peritoneal 
 Exploratory laparotomy is a cost-effective, time-efficient diagnostic tool.
 cavily and performance of 
surgery such as rumenotomy.
Restraint
■ Optimal standing restraint is indicated.
 Resulrs in minimal
hemorrhage
Presurgical Procedures
 Requires minimal suturing 
■ Administer sedarion or analgesia IV or via a caudal epidural.
 Situated anatomically so that
■ Administer regional anesthesia: lumbar segmental, proximal paravertebral, or distal
stress on the incision line is
 minimal during healing.
paravertebral
 Thoroughly prepare the skin from he dorsal midline to the level of the Flank and from
 Promotes first-intention healing
he 12th rib to the tuber coxae (Figure 9-1).
with minimal scarring
■ Clip and prepare the skin for aseptic surgery.
Incision Technique (Left or Right Paralumbar Region) (Figures 9-2 to 9-7)
■ Start the skin incision just ventral to the lateral edge (caudal aspect) of the transverse
process L2, and proceed ventrally parallel to he 13th rib for about 20 cm (8 inches).
■ Incise the subcutaneous fascia ho a lengh equal to that of he skin incision, lo expose
he external oblique abdominal muscle.
■ Start at he dorsal commissure of the skin incision and incise he external oblique
abdominal muscle ventrally for a distance of about one-hird to one-half of the skin
incision.
Surgically prepared area
13hrib
Note
Simple spreading of the three layers
of the abdominal wall muscles
in his area does not create an
 adequate opening for performing
such operalions as rumenotomy or
abomasopexy; however, simple
muscle spreading can be used for
performing oophorectomy, biopsy,
and so forth.
FIGURE 9-1. Surgically prepared area for left paralumbar exploratory laparotomy incision.
Noordsy's Food Anirnal Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
97
98■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Tuber coxae
I3rib
Incision
FIGURE 9-2. Laparotomy incision in the left paralumbar fossa for exploratory surgery
and rumenotomy.
Incised skin
Incised skin
Incised
external
oblique
 abdominal
muscle
External
oblique
Internal
oblique
abdominal
abdominal
muscle
muscie
FIGURE 9-3. Skin and subcutaneous
FIGURE 9-4. External obligue abdominal
fascia incised, which exposes the
muscle incised — dorsal aspect of 
external obligue abdominal muscle.
laparorumenotomy incision. The internal
oblique abdominal muscle is exposed.
■ From the dorsal commissure of the skin incision, incise ventrally the internal oblique
abdominal muscle for a distance of about onehalf to hwo-thirds hat of he external
oblique abdominal muscle incision.
 Then incise he exposed transverse abdominal muscle and the closely associated
peritoneum to a length comparable to hat of the internal oblique abdominal muscle
incision.
■ By carefully starting the incision at the most dorsal aspect, accidental incising of
 organ serosa is usually avoided.
● Scissors may be used to lengthen he incision ventrally.
● The rumen serosa commonly separares from he peritoneum afer puncrure of the
peritoneum, which allows air to enter the peritoneal cavilry.
■ Insert your thumbs into the incision at the dorsal and ventral commissures and, as
you apply pressure dorsally and ventrally, open the incision the entire lengih of the
skin incision.
● The opening of the incision is primarily for muscle spreading; however, minor
muscle tearing may occur.
● Hemorrhage is generally minimal.
Laparotomyin Cattle ■ 99
Incised skin
Incised skin
Incised
Incised
external
external
oblique
oblique
Incised
abdominal
Internal
abdominal
internal
muscle
oblique
muscle
oblique
abdominal
 abdominal
muscle
muscle
Incised
Transverse
transverse
abdominal
abdominal
muscle
muscle
Peritoneal cavity
FIGURE 9-5. External and internal
FIGURE 9-6. Skin, three muscle layers,
oblique abdominal muscles incised,
 and peritoneum incised. The view into
which exposes he transverse abdominal
 he incision suggests a funnel, with a
muscle in the dorsal aspect of the
narrowing of the incision as it deepens.
laparorumenotomy incision.
Rumen
Liver
nsewo
(medical aspect)
(tipped dorsally)
Heart
Pylorus
Reticulum
Abomasum
FIGURE 9-7. Right Lateral View of he Bovine Abdomen.
Suturing
 The incision is closed via a three-layer surure pattern.
●Layer l
Recommendation
 Suure he peritoneum and transverse and internal oblique abdominal muscles
Topical application of wound
bgether.
powders is not advised because they
Use a simple continuous pattern.
may delay healing.
+ Use monofilament absorbable or catgut suure No. 2 or 3.
●Layer 2
● Suture the external oblique abdominal muscle and subcutaneous
rissue.
● Place an occasional bite into the internal oblique muscle to close dead
space.
+ Use a simple continuous pattern.
+ Use monofilament absorbable or catgut suure No. 2 or 3.
100   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
●Layer 3
+Close the skin.
 A continuous interlocking suure pattern is suggested, but other surure patterns
also work well.
 Use synthetic nonabsorbable, noncapillary suture material No. 3.
 Pace appositional sulures fo promote first-intention healing.
Exploratory Laparotomy
General Considerations
■ Laparotomy can be an excellent adjunct diagnostic procedure. Research indicates
pasoubo!pun sasos jo %oz ol %l jo sisouaoip jof uoyowoju! apiaoid Aow ul you
 Properly performed, laparotomy causes the animal litle stress.
■ Standing restraint is preferred.
[osop ul jowjuo uo ul asou ylm panoduos uosod joou o ul ao suobio ●
recumbency (Figures 9-8 to 9-12).
● Facilitates intraabdominal exploration and manipulation.
■ Always perform manual explorarion of the abdomen before incising any abdominal
organ.
Recommendation
● The potential for peritoneal caviry contamination is greater if organ incision
precedes manual exploralion.
Learn to palpate with either hand
■ In general, avoid breaking adhesions if encountered.
and alternate hands when you
■ The approach may be from the left or right paralumbar fossa.
palpate specific organs or fissues.
 The incision site may be chosen on the basis of he suspected disease e.g..
abomasal torsion, cecal torsion, pyloric neoplasiaj.
Common Indications
■ Use as a diagnostic aid when pathology is suspected in the following:
● Abdominal digestive tract
● Peritoneum
● Intraabdominal portion of the rib cage
● Spleen
● Diaphragm (hiatus esophagus, ruprure)
Spleen
13ch rib
Rumen
Heart
Reticulum
FIGURE 9-8. Left laleral view of the cow's abdomen.
Laparotomy in Cattle   101
Dorsal curvature of rumen
Spleen,
Dorsal sac of rumen
Rumen
Reticulum
Ventral curvature
Ventral sac of rumen
Abomasum
ofrumen
FGURE 9-9. Bovine stomach compartments (leff lateroventral view).
Rumen
Small
intestine
Esophagus
Rumen
Omasum
Reticulum
(lifted)
Rumen
Abomasum
FIGURE 9-10. Bovine rumen compartments (right side view).
● Kidney, ureters, and urinary bladder
●Inguinal rings
●Omentum
● liver and gallbladder
● Mesentery and associated lymph nodes
● Internal genitalia 
● Skeleton (e.g., vertebral and pelvic abnormalities)
Restraint
■ Standing restraint is recommended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer sedalion or analgesia IV or via a caudal epidural.
● Excessive sedalion encourages the patient to lie down.
■ Surgically prepare either he left (preferred) or the right side, depending on the
 SUspected disease.
102
Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Left
Left
Right
Right
kidney
Right paralumbar
kidney
incision
Access point to and
from right compartment
Urinary
Omasum
bladder
Rumen
Anterior
Posterior
Omasum
Rumen
Uterus
and
ovaries
Spleen
Left
Abomasum
Pylorus
paralumbar
incision
FIGURE 9-11. Section through the
FIGURE 9-12. Bovine abdominal cavily (dorsal view).
abdominal caviby (at about the 1lth
horacic verlebra) of a normal cow.
Anesthesia
■ Regional nerve block
■ Proximal lumbar paravertebral 
■ Distal paravertebral
Surgical Technique
■Make α 15- to 20-cm muscle-spreading incision parallel and approximately 5 cm
caudal to he I 3th rib on the dorsal aspect of the paralumbar fossa.
Recommendation
■ Peritoneal cavilry exploration should proceed in a planned, consistent manner.
■ Review the topographic anatomy of the bovine abdomen.
 Regional, fenestrated moisture-
● Divide the abdomen into four comparments: right, center, leff, and caudal.
 resistant drape is recommended.
● The right compartment contains or has access to he right kidney, liver,
 The surgeon should wear sterile 
gallbladder, abomasum, duodenum, right side of omasum, right abdominal wall,
plastic or rubber shoulder-length
and right side of diaphragm.
 gloves on both arms.
● The center compartment contains or has access to the left kidney, major abdominal
Wash powder from the sleeve. If α
vessels (aorta, mesenteric arteries, leff gastric artery), small intestine, medial side
plastic sleeve is used, considered
of rumen, and omasum.
 covering it with a latex surgery
● The left compartment contains or has access to the left abdominal wall, left side of 
glove ho increase he sensitiviry of
 umen, spleen, reliculum, and leff side of diaphragm.
he fingers.
● The caudal compartment contains or has access to internal genitalia,
urinary bladder, ureters, cecum, spiral colon, inguinal rings, colon, and 
rectum.
● The left kidney is the key organ for maintaining orientation in the bovine
abdomen. It hangs approximately 6 inches from the dorsal midline and is
encased in relroperitoneal fat. Affer the left kidney is located, the surgeon can
systematically evaluate the entire abdomen.
■ To move from the right compartment to the center or left compartment, the
surgeon must manipulate past the caudal edge of the omental sling. This edge
Caution!
usually lies against the right abdominal wall at the level of the wing of the ileum.
Beware of rupturing an abscess
■ Assess [and palpate) each organ and surrounding fissue for localion, texure, size,
 during palpation.
and appearance (if it can be seen or exteriorized).
■ Note abnormal odors, color, consistency, and volume of the peritoneal fluid 
Laparotomy in Cattle ■ 103
Suturing
 Follow the three-layer closure outlined earlier in this chapter.
Postoperative Care
■ An antibiotic is generally recommended.
● Presurgical administralion is preferred.
● Intraperitoneal antibiotics also work well.
● Give antibiolic reatment for 3 to 5 days postoperatively.
 Provide supportive nutritional care.
 Give other medicalions as needed.
Suggested Reading
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Anima! Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 75-82.
Noordsy JL. A modified muscle-spreading incision for laparorumenotomy in the bovine
species. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(3): 447-455, 1980.
 Noordsy JL. Diagnostic and prognostic considerations related to exploratory
laparorumenotomy in he bovine species. Vet Med Smafl Anim Clin 75(5): 862-865,
1980.
Noordsy JL. Methods of sururing skin incisions in catle: Special consideralions. Vet
Med Smalf Anim Clin 74(10): 1501-1507, 1979.
Noordsy JL. Selection of an incision site for cesarean sechion in he cow. Vet Med Small
Anim Clin 74(4): 530-537, 1979.
Stober M. The diagnostic value of exploratory laparo-rumenotomy in catle. Vet Med
Rev213: 186-208, 1967.
Chapter 9 Study Questions
: Answers Key
1. Is the finding of muliple Setaria labiatopapillosa worms in the peritoneal caviry
of an adult cow of major significance to the general healh of he animal?
 Answers to study questions can
2. Should any consideration be given to the pH of the medication introduced
 be found staring on page 285
intraperitoneally after laparotomy?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
3. A dairy cow is suspected of having faty liver syndrome. Would palpation via 
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
an exploratory laparotomy help confirm he diagnosis?
4. Is the body of the external oblique abdominal muscle involved to a significant
degree in the prescribed laparotomy incision?
5. Norwihstanding he common recommendation that abdominal exploratory
surgery be performed via either a right or a left paralumbar incision, could 
α vaginal approach (via a supracervical incisionj be considered? Give some
advantages to this approach and some organs that could be readily palpated 
via this approach in he adult cow.
6. What restraint and what anesthesia would be satisfactory for performing a
vaginal approach exploratory surgery?
Chapter 10
Rumenotomy, Fistulation,
Cannulation, and
Pericardiotomy in Cattle
Rumenotomy
Indications
■ To diagnose ruminal-reticular disease (e.g., rumeniris, ruminal parakeratosis,
Recommendation
actinobacillosis)
It is strongly suggested that
■ To remove a foreign body associated with raumalic reliculitris or Iraumatic
 α complete peritoneal cavily
reliculoperitonitis
exploratory operation precede all 
 To remove impacted ingesta when reating rumen impaction
rumenotomy procedures.
 To remove ruminal contents when freating toxic indigestion.
● Surgery is basically limited to cases in which the causalive material is centralized
in the rumen.
● Finely ground feed will readily pass into the omasal-abomasal region, but
coarser, more fibrous feed willremain in the rumen longer.
● Rumenotomy for toxic indigeslion involving Finely ground concenrates ingested
12 hours or more previously is questionable in a moribund and toxic animal.
Intensive medical treatment may be more beneficial.
 To remove ruminal contents in the following siuations:
● Treating omasal impaction
● Reducing a ruminal mass to aid in peritoneal cavily exploration
● Before α pericardiotomy in cases of raumatic pericarditis, removing a foreign
body from the reticulum and assessing the direction and degree of penetration
Restraint
■ Standing restraint is preferred.
Note
 Lateral or dorsal recumbency may be acceptable for weak animals.
Rubberized rumen shrouds may
Presurgical Procedures
complement a fenesrated regional
■ Administer sedalion or analgesia systemically as needed.
drape, or, if it is large enough, α
 Prepare the left paralumbar fossa for sterile surgery.
shroud may take the place of a
drape. A praclical rumenotomy
Anesthesia
shroud may be improvised with
■ Proximal paravertebral nerve block is preferred
plastic sheering and an embroidery
■ Distal paravertebral nerve block or local block is acceptable anesthesia.
hoop (variable size) of adequate
Laparotomy
diameter fo allow easy passage of
 Apply a feneslrated moisture-resistant drape of adequate size to the paralumbar region.
 the surgeon's arm.
● Anchor the drape to the hide with towel clamps.
 Wear sterile plastic or rubber shoulder-length gloves on both arms.
■ A rubberized "rumenotomy shroud" or "board" should be available along with a
usual array of surgical instrumenrs.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
105
106   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Window
Metal ring
Stay
sutures
Rumen
incision
Fenestrated
drape
Rubberized cloth
FGURE 10-1. Stay suture technique for exposing the rumen
FIGURE 10-2. Rubber rumenotomy shroud.
Rumen content
Flexiblering
FIGURE 10-3. Shroud in position.
FIGURE 10-4. Self-retaining rumenotomy
shroud.
■ Sterile surgery should be attempted, but it may have to be compromised to some
 extent to perform a clean surgery.
Cross-Reference
■ Make a modified muscle-spreading incision in the abdominal wall.
■ Complete a laparotomy exploralion of the abdominal cavily.
Refer to Chapter 9.
Surgical Technique (Figures 10-1 to 10-6)
■ The major objeclive is to open, examine he content, and close the rumen with
minimal or no contamination of the abdominal caviry.
■ Anchor the dorsal aspect of the rumen to the abdominal wall or otherwise stabilize
 he rumen wih one or more of the following techniques:
● Use a towel clamp to altach the rumen to the skin
● Suure he rumen to the skin (preferred method)
● Use heavy, monofilament noncapillary suure material 
 Use continuous or interrupted horizontal mattress surures
 The object is to form a seal belween he rumen serosa and he underside of the
skin to avoid contamination of the muscle and the abdominal caviry.
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  107
00
A—Gabel's rumenotomy plate
B一
-Self-retaining rumenotomy shroud (Jorgenson Labs)
C-- Weingarth's rumenotomy instrument
FIGURE 10-5. Commercial rumenotomy sers.
FIGURE 10-6. Gabel's rumenotomy plate in posirion.
● Incise he rumen wall just long enough to allow he metal ring of the shroud to be
inserted into the rumen.
+ Put the scalpel aside because it is contaminated.
+ Control hemorrhage from the rumen wall.
poan a suangsui alls woy uawnu uado au uo pesn quawnsui Auo andag 
cross-contamination.
● Pace he ring of the shroud into the rumen or use a rumenotomy board to protect
he surgical site from contamination.
Suggested Procedure After Rumen Is Open
■ Evaluate ingesta for appearance, odor, and consistency, and determine the state of
impachion and rype of feed ingested.
 If moderate to marked impaction exis, remove the ingesta unfil Fluid is visible and 
irs consistency allows you to reach the reliculum easily.
■If acidosis is apparent, manually remove most of he ingesta. A largediameter
 Kingman stomach tube may be used to siphon fluids.
108  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Evaluate the contents of all compartments of the rumen and reliculum for foreign
bodies and disease.
Note
● Before removing relicular foreign bodies, ascertain the area of penelralion and the
degree and direction of peneration. This information helps establish a prognosis:
 Considerations related to adhesions
 Simple ventral penetralion: favorable prognosis.
and abscesses palpated within the 
reticulum:
● Deep anterior penetration: unfavorable prognosis (potential for pericardiris).
● Shallow cranial medial penetration: guarded prognosis (potential for vagus
 Chronic adhesions [abscess free)
indigestion].
may be reduced (and normal
● It is suggested that a rumen magnet be used to sweep the reliculum as a Final phase
relicular action reestablished} by
of foreign body removal. Examination of he reticulum in a large animal may be
lifting the Floor of the reticulum,
 alhough using this procedure
facilitated by having he patient stand with its forequarers higher than its hindquarers,
is queslionable because it may
 stimulate diffuse peritoniris and
 promote adhesion development.
Suggested intraruminal Medication As Needed
■ Alkalizers (e.g., magnesium hydroxide preparations) 
 Palpable abscesses should not
 be disturbed by manipulation
 Rough hay to stimulate ruminalion
Water with or without electrolytes
lest they ruprure and cause gross
■ Mineral oil
contamination of the peritoneal
cavilry. Rarely, specific abscesses
Suturing
may be reduced by aspiration via
Rumen
a syringe and needle through the
■ After removal of the rumenotomy shroud or board but before removing the
 rumen or reticular wall. Antibiotics
umen-fo-skin sutures:
are then infused directly into the
● Flush the area with large volumes of warm sterile saline to clean it and avoid
abscess.
 perioneal contamination.
● Close the rumen incision with No. 2 or 3 absorbable suhure material.
 Use a continuous invering pattern (Cushing, Lembert, or Guard palternj.
■ Remove the rumen-to-skin sutures.
■ Oversew the ruminal incision with a second layer in a fashion similar to the First.
Abdomina! Wal!
■ Use the three-layer closure described in Chapter 9.
Postoperative Care
Note
■Antibiotics are indicated.
● Presurgical or inraperitoneal administration
Most postoperative complications will
begin within 5 days of surgery.
● Ancillary therapy to treat existing and concurrent diseases
Creation of a Temporary Rumen Fistula
General Considerations
 The fishula provides temporary relief from chronic rumen lympany.
Note
■ Ideally, the Fishula funchions for about 2 to 3 weeks and then heals spontaneously.
A rumen fishula is advocated as an
● This period is usually adequate for return of normal rumen function and microflora
balance.
 adjunct to nutrirional therapy.
■ Temporary rumen Fishulas are not recommended for fympany associated with:
● Genelic abnormalies (e.g., dwarf syndrome)
● Acute frothy bloat
●Vagal indigestion
■ The typical eligible patient is anatomically normal:
● Animals wih a history of chronic rumen fympany after extensive medication.
● Feedlot animals that do not adapt to high-concentrate rations
● Confined nursing calves
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  109
Anatomic Considerations
Anatomy
■ The Fistula is siluated dorsally (paralumbar) in the region where rumen gas usually
The direction of the fibers of the
accumulates and is large enough to allow release of gas.
 three abdominal muscle layers
(mainly the internal oblique and
Presurgical Procedures
external oblique abdominal
■ Standing restraint with adequate access to the left paralumbar fossa is required.
muscles] conributes to a natural
■ Administer sedalion or analgesia as needed 
valve-like fistula.
 Surgically prepare a relatively small area (e.g., 12 to 15 cm in diameter)
in the dorsomedial aspect of the fossa. (The size of the area prepared is 
 small so that visible evidence of surgery, which may affect sale value, is 
minimal.)
■ Do not reduce rumen fympany (via stomach tube) at this stage because paralumbar
fossa convexily facilitates hair removal, surgical preparation, and administralion of
local anesthesia.
Recommendation
Anesthesia
■ Administer 2% lidocaine locally in the area of the surgery.
It is essential that the rumen not be
ympanic while the abdominal wall is
Gas Removal and Draping
being incised. The dorsal rumen wall 
■ Pass a stomach ube to remove rumen gas. Ofen only one pocket of gas exists
 should be free from he peritoneum, 
[dorsal rumen].
as this precludes the possibiliry of
 A regional fenestrated drape is suggested.
 penetralion of he rumen by surgical
instruments during the muscle-
Surgical Technique (Figures 10-7 to 10-12)
spreading or peritoneal puncture 
Remove a circular area of skin (2 to 3 cm in diameter).
technique.
■ Place he incision in the dorsal aspect of the left paralumbar fossa midway berween
he last rib and the wing of the ileum.
● Hemorrhage is usually not a problem and can be controlled with hemostatic
forcipressure.
 With a straight hemostatic forceps or scissors, punchure the three layers of the
Recommendation
abdominal muscle and the peritoneum.
 Do not insert a nongloved finger into
■ Spread the muscles (and peritoneumj by opening he hemostat or scissors.
 the incision because of the potential
● The muscle opening should be about the same size as the skin opening.
 for peritoneal cavily contamination.
● The dorsal, Flaccid wall of the rumen may be visible through the incision.
Temporary rumen fistula
FIGURE 10-7. Posilion of a temporary rumen fishula in the lef paralumbar fossa.
110   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Skin
Abdominal muscle
Peritoneum
Rumen
Rumen wall
FIGURE 10-8. Penetralion of he abdominal musculature and peritoneum. Grasp the
rumen wall before extraching a porlion of the rumen.
Ochsner hemostat
Horizontal mattress
sutures.--rumen to skin
Transection line
Skin
Muscle
Peritoneum
Rumen
FIGURE 10-9. Extraction of the rumen. *A towel clamp may be subslituted for the
Ochsner hemostat to maintain exposure of he rumen.
Pyramid-shaped exposed rumen
Abdominal wall musculature
Circular skin incision
Horizontal mattress suturesanchor
the rumen to the skin 
FIGURE 10-10. Dorsal view of four horizontal matress sutures.
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  111
Mattress sutures
Paralumbar skin
Transected edge of the rumen
FGURE 10-1l. Position of mattress sulures anchoring he rumen edge to the skin
Rumen edge overlapped on
edge of abdominal skin
Simple interrupted sutures
Mattress
suture
Valve-likefistula
Exposed rumen lining
FIGURE 10-12. Dorsolateral view of completed rumen fistula
■ Grasp a portion of the rumen wall that is direcly ventral to the paralumbar incision.
 Draw this portion of the rumen up through abdominal incision.
■ Expose approximately 3 to 5 cm of a pyramid-shaped porion of he rumen.
■ Anchor the rumen wall to the skin with four horizontal mattress sutures (placed at
quarter positions).
● Heavy nonabsorbable suture material is suggested.
■ Transect the dorsal rwo-thirds of the protruding rumen wall (about I cm above the 
skin line). Leaving l cm of rumen wall above the skin line is very important for
postoperative funclion of the Fishula and the desired delay in healing.
 Suhure he transected edge of the rumen wall to the skin in a manner that covers the
exposed skin of the circular incision.
● Use a full-curved needle and nonabsorbable suure material.
● Make simple interrupted surures (about 8 to 12 surures).
Caution!
● Suluring the rumen wall over the skin incision edge:
· Prevents intraperitoneal leakage of rumen ingesta 
Do not involve abdominal muscles in
 Contributes to a favorable delay in granulation healing from the skin edges,
the surures!
which helps ensure a 2- to 3-week patency of the Fistula
112   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ The finished fishula will appear closed or almost closed; he abdominal muscle fibers
give the isula a valve-ike appearance fand functionj.
Note
■ A cylinder 1 to 2 cm in diameter (blood tube] may be used to test the patency of the
■ Granulation healing stemming
Fistula.
 from he circular incision edges 
Postoperative Care
usually seals the fishula in 2 to
■ Oral or intraruminal rumen transfaunation may be considered
 3 weeks. Larger circular skin
● Usually, the patient is immediately placed among normal animals and exposed to
incisions take longer to heal.
α common watering device, which resulls in natural rumen bacteria inoculation.
 Surures slough spontaneously.
■ Good nurition and normal exercise are also recommended.
 Postoperalive adhesions of rumen
Occasionall, the Fisula may seal slightly during periods of rest (e.g., overnight), and 
bo body wall are usually limited to
 the rumen may be fympanic until exercise opens the Fistula.
 he dorsal sac of the rumen and
apparently do not hinder rumen
 funcrion or produce clinical signs
Permanent Rumen Cannulation
 of digestive dysfunction.
General Considerations
■ Primary uses are:
● In research, especially nutritional research
sasodind sunadoau jof bioy uawn ysay apoid ol ●
■ Major complication is leakage of rumen fluid.
● Occasionally, to reduce leakage, veterinary surgeons inifially place a smaller
3-inch cannula and then in a few weeks replace it with a larger 4-inch cannula.
 Cows should remain produclive members of he herd.
Presurgical Procedures
Selection characteristics of
■ Restrict feed for 24 to 36 hours
ideal cows
 Restrict water for 12 hours
■ Consider use of presurgical antibiofics.
Healthy, docile, easy to handle
 2 to 3 years of age
■ Sterilizing the cannula is not necessary.
 Moderate body condirion (overly
■ Remove the cannula plug, and place the cannula and plug in very hot water to
fat or hin cows are not ideall
increase pliabiliy and facilitate placement.
 Excellent feet and legs
■ Perform surgical preparation as described for rumenotomy.
Restraint
■Shanding chute restraint
Anesthesia
■ Proximal paravertebral nerve block is preferred.
Surgical Technique
■ Drape the silte wih a large, fenestrated moisture-resistant cloth, anchored to the skin
with large towel clamps.
■ Mark the proposed incision site with needles.
● The dorsal point of the incision is marked with a needle placed in the skin in the
dorsal center porlion of the paralumbar fossa.
● The ventral point of he incision is marked with a second needle 17 to 19 cm
ventral to the first when inserling a 4-inch cannula.
● It is important to measure the proposed incision to minimize leakage.
● A 3-inch cannula requires a 15-cm incision.
Note
● The skin incision is made needle to needle.
Source of cannula: Bar Diamond
■ Spread the fibers of the three abdominal muscle layers; do not incise them.
 Spreading he muscles creates α nalural valve-like opening around the cannula,
Lane, P.O. Box 60, Parma, Idaho
which facilitates a tight fir and stabiliry.
83660-0060. www.bardiamond.com
 Punchure the peritoneum and then enlarge he peritoneal incision.
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  113
 Grasp the dorsal sac of the rumen with rwo vulsellum forceps in an area that will
allow exteriorizalion without undue tension on he rumen wall.
 Expose about 1 to 1.5 inches of rumen wall through the abdominal incision.
 Suhure the rumen wall to the skin.
Interrupted or continuous horizontal mattress suures with No. 3 medium chromic
catgut works well.
● The objective is to form a circumferential seal berween he serosa of the rumen
and he skin, as in a rumenotomy.
● Take care to form a good seal at the dorsal and ventral commissures of the
incision without decreasing the size of the opening.
 Incise the rumen wall the lengih of the incision
 Control hemorrhage by pulling rumen vessels, as in dehorning.
 Place he cannula in the fistula.
● Remove he cannula from the hot water bath.
◆ Reach through the Fistula from he outside, grasp he inner Flange, and pull the
inner Flange hrough the Fistula. This maneuver starrs to lurn the cannula inside out.
● Lubricate the cannula and push it into the fistula.
● Push the inner Flange back through the fistula and into the rumen.
● Make sure that the inner Flange lies Flat against he rumen wall.
 Wash he blood and rumen contents from belween the skin and cannula.
■ Check that he incised edge of the rumen is visible under the cannula and not folded
back into he rumen.
 Insert the plug into the cannula.
Postoperative Care
■ Antibiotics are indicated for 3 to 5 days.
■ Keep the area berween the cannula and the skin clean.
■ Reurn the animal to a normal diet and activiry level.
Pericardiotomy: Surgically Correcting Traumatic Pericarditis
Feasibility of Surgerya
Note
 Animals can withstand stress of surgery and make an excellent recovery if:
● The condirion is diagnosed early and surgery follows shorly thereafter.
Indicalions include:
● The animal is younger than 5 years of age.
 To reduce pericardial infusion.
● The animal has relatively normal body functions and body condirion.
 To remove a foreign body.
● The animal maintains a relatively normal appetie.
■ To drain and treat infection caused
● The animal can ambulate normally, although it may have subnormal endurance.
by a penetrating object.
 Economics may markedly limit the number of surgeries performed on an animal. For
valuable, high-potenlial genelic stock, however, pericardiotomy is a viable procedure.
■ The degree of jugular distention and brisket edema apparently has litle effect on
outcome of surgery.
■ Advanced pregnancy and other marked stresses [e.g., mastis and meritis) may
affect surgical success.
Note
■ Surgeons should have horough knowledge of thoracic and cardiac anatomy so that
 they can operate wihout being apprehensive.
 An exploratory laparorumenotomy
 should result in only minor stress.
Initial Evaluation
Moreover, it can greatly shorten the
■ Perform an exploratory laparorumenotomy before (suggest 24 hours or more)
fime needed for pericardiotomy and
pericardiotomy (standing restraint; regional anesthesia).
hereby reduce the stress associated
● Accurately determine lhe position of foreign body.
with this operation.
● Recover the foreign body if it is still present in the reticulum.
As based on John Noordsy's experience
114   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Unless intake of feed is excessive (unlikely), do not starve the animal. Intake of bulky
and gas-forming forage may be reduced if indicated.
■Deprive he animal of water for at least 12 hours. With the ideal animal,
dehydration is not common.
■ Perform a thorough physical examination; ascertain any concurrent disease
 condirions that may aler the prognosis.
■ Perform appropriate clinical pathology tests, especially a complete blood cell count.
antibiotic sensitivily.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Walk he animal or place it in an ambulatory cart (standing restraint), and position it
alongside the large animal surgery table. Do not cast or otherwise stress the patient.
■ Administer IV drugs for mild to moderate sedation or analgesia. The animal should
 continue to be able to stand.
With the animal in standing restraint (e.g., sideline:
● Remove he hair over the left ventral thoracic area (third to seventh rib) with a No.
Caution!
40 small animal clipper head.
● Scrub he skin (and elbow] with water and an iodophor solution.
Avoid placing the animal in total
■ Posirive head resraint is recommended.
lateral recumbency (90 degrees),
■ Apply towel-wrapped bellybands wih enough tension to hold the animal to the table.
which tends to stress the respiratory
-Avoid marked rension thar would stress he diaphragm and thorax.
and circulatory systems.
 Apply leg resraints fied to the table (very essentliall. Reslrain he leff foreleg in an anterior
extended posilion, which keeps he horacic surgical site free from elbow interference.
■ Tilt the table at about a 30 to 40-degree angle.
■ Remove the thoracic bellyband and loosen he abdominal bellyband.
■ Complete the surgical preparation of the thoracic area by thorough scrubbing with 
water and iodophor solution followed by spraying with a residual iodophor soluion.
■ IV fluid therapy may be initiated.
● A respiratory or cardiac stimulant may be added to IV Fluids.
● Be alert to increased jugular pressure and its effect on IV flow.
Anesthesia
■ Inverted L regional anesthesia dorsal (about 6 to 8 inches to he costochondral
 junction} and cranial (parallell to the fourth rib.
● Also infuse he skin and inracostal rissues
● Use of 2% lidocaine is suggested.
■ Inhalation (positive pressure) general aneshesia may be subsiruted for a regional
nerve block.
● Use of a respirator is encouraged.
Materials
■ Several feer of sterile obstetric wire with clamps
 Four to six large towel clamps to help bring intercostal rissue in apposilion for
pospericardiotomy suturing
■ Basic instrument pack wih an adequate supply of hemostats and towel clamps
■ Adequate supply (minimum of several liters) of sterile saline for flushing the
pericardial cavily, wound surface, and so forth
■ Antibiotics of choice to add to Fluids
Draping
■ Apply a regional, moisture-resistant drape anchored to the skin by a sufficient 
number of towel clamps
● The drape should be fenestrated over the ventral aspect of the fifh rib.
● Draping he animal's head is also suggested as an aid to restraint.
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  115
Surgical Technique
■Incision
1
 Caution!
● Skin incision should be 6 to 8 inches long over the Fifth (or sixth) rib and should 
 extend dorsally from the costochondral junction.
 Alempt to use a sterile surgical
● Continue he incision through the periosteum to the cortex of the rib.
 lechnigue; wound contamination
● Elevate the periosteum from the rib until the rib is bare (ventral and dorsal
from pericardial effusion is α
surfaces).
major challenge.
 Pass he sterile obstelric wire berween the rib and the periosteum at the dorsal
■ Surgery should proceed rapidly
commissure of he incision.
and efficiently to minimize stress.
 Apply wire clamps and transect the rib.
Time is trauma!
■ Grasp the free end of he rib and retract away from the horax while disariculating
 Because rapid surgery is urgent,
he ventral aspect from he costochondral junction. Discard he dissected rib (about
do not ligate vessels; hemostatic
4 to 6 inches of rib is removed).
 forcipressure is advised for
 The pleural surface (including the periosteum of the rib) should now be evident;
prominent bleeders.
palpation should reveal the expanded pericardial sac and the left ventricle of the
heart.
 The pericardial sac often contains extensive amounts of effusion; rapid
removal of rhis Fluid may cause a cardiac arrest. To minimize the risk of cardiac
arrest:
● Insert a 1.5- to 2-inch, 12- to 14-gauge hypodermic needle through the
periosteum, pleura, and pericardial lining and into the pericardial sac
 Caution!
to allow escape of effusion at a relatively slow, conrolled rate; tubing may
be attached to the hub of the needle to guide effusion away from surgical
Reduction of the pericardial effusion,
possible removal of a foreign body,
area.
and exploration of the pericardial 
● Reposition the needle occasionally because fibrin may interfere with proper
caviry are periods of high stress
drainage.
and may induce cardiac arrest. Be
● Drain the effusion only long enough to reduce marked pressure.
asso jy wuad o paodad
 With a scalpel, incise the outer tissues lo expose he pericardial sac.
■ Make a smallstab incision into he pericardial cavily, and allow addirional effusion
and use cardiac stimulants.
to flow (surgical table restraint at an angle of 30 to 40 degrees will facilitate
drainage of effusion away from surgical fieldj.
● Ventral thoracic wound packing is also suggested.
● Effusion offen has a very unpleasant odor.
■ Enlarge he pericardial incision with scissors to allow insertion of your hand into the
pericardial caviry.
 Manually enter the pericardial cavily and explore
● If the foreign body was recovered via the prepericardiotomy surgery exploratory
laparorumenotomy), no extensive exploration is warranted. If the object was nob
recovered, altempt to locate and remove it.
● The foreign body may be in the pericardial caviry or it may be penelrating the left
ventricular wall.
● If the adhesions are minor and involve only the apical area, no further
manipulation is indicated (favorable prognosis).
● If the adhesions are extensive and/or involve extensive "bread and butter"
effusion, he prognosis for recovery after surgery becomes very guarded fo
unfavorable.
● Do not attempt to break down extensive adhesions because coronary blood vessel
upure is common and can lead to a rapid death.
 Fush the pericardial cavily with I to 2 L of sterile saline (with antibiotics or a very
dilute iodophor solutionj by using an IV set and manually manipularing the distal end
 so ping busng ssaxa au uuis a poad au um bugn au o
pericardial cavily.
■ Concentrated aqueous antibiofics (penicillin or a specific antibiolic, determined on
 the basis of sensivilty tests) are indicated at this stage.
116   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Suturing
Pericardial Tissue
Note
■ The pericardial lining and pleura should be combined for sururing. (This fissue is
usually pathologic and fragile and has poor holding potential.)
Placement of a drainage fube from
■ Use absorbable No. 2-0 surure.
he pericardial cavily is optional.
■ Place surures in a simple interrupted or a simple continuous pattern.
Good resulrs have been achieved
without further drainage, provided
Periosteum and intercostal Muscle
he cavily has been reasonably
■ Use large towel clamps to appose incised rissues.
 cleared of debris and efficiently
■ Use No. 2 or 3 absorbable suture.
Flushed.
■ Place simple interrupted sutures; tension sutures are often indicated to bring fissues
into adequate apposition.
Skin
■ Use No. 3 synhetic nonabsorbable suhure material.
■ With moderate bo marked tension, place an interrupted horizontal mattress pattern;
seal the entire lengh of the incision, unless α drainage fube is placed in the ventral
commissure.
Postoperative Care
Note
■ Immediately after completion of the skin sutures, remove all drapes, reslraints, and IV
ubing.
 Because bovine species have
 Return the operating table to an upright posilion.
a complete mediastinum, do
■ Urge the patient to assume standing position.
not attempt to establish positive
■ Administer systemic antibiotics (high dosages] for a minimum of 7 days.
 pressure in the left lung.
■ Systemic vitamin E and selenium are also recommended.
 The lef lung usually starts to
■ Additional IV fluid therapy is queslionable because dehydralion is usually not a
 funclion normally in about 5 to
problem. Provide good qualily, tempered drinking water in adequate amounts. A salt
 7 days. Normal function in he right
 or mineral block may also be indicated.
lung provides adequate respiration 
■ House he animal in a quiet, wellbedded, somewhat darkened surgical recovery stall.
during his recovery period.
■ Otherwise reat the animal like a normal palient; monitor temperarure daily and
do an occasional complete blood cell count as a check for control of pericardial
infection.
■ Continue milking lactating cows.
■ Exercise the animal as indicated and provide good qualiry hay (unlimited) and grain
Note
concentrate as deemed prudent.
 Remove skin sutures affer 14 days (minimum].
Complete recovery (normal breeding
and lactationj has been observed in
many animals affer pericardiotomy.
Suggested Reading
Via auscultation indexing, complete
recovery is associated with infection-
 fee, complete pericardial layer
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004,
adhesions.
pp 184-195.
Jordan FW. Management of persistent bloat in young bovine. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
57(2): 134, 1962
xa a pa supisus ssd puo ssua tspio
laparorumenotomy in the bovine species. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(5): 862-865,
1980.
Noordsy JL. Pericardiotomy in the ftreatment of raumalic pericarditis in he bovine.
Haverlockhart Messenger 44: 6-8 and 20, 1964.
Noordsy JL, Trotter DM. A modified rumen Fistula technic for chronic fympanitis. Vet
Med Small Anim Clin 58(6): 498-501, 1963.
Noordsy JL, et al. The cardiovascular system, in Oehme FW, Prier JE (eds): Textbook of
large Animal Surgery, ed 2. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1988, pp 379-382.
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and Pericardiotomy in Cattle  117
Ring DM. Surgical Ireatment of pleuritis and pericarditis. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
Pract 11(1): 177-182, 1995.
Roberts WD. Surgical management of chronic bloat. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 57(1 1):
978-981, 1962.
Chapter 10 Study Questions
1. Do cows have a complete mediaslinum? Of what significance is this when a
Answers Key
 pericardiotomy is performed?
Answers to study questions can
2. Why is jugular distention a common clinical sign associated wih traumatic
be found staring on page 286
pericardiris? What oher diseases may be listed in a differential diagnosis 
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
associated with jugular distention?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
3. Is a discernible jugular pulse in a high-produclion, lactaring dairy cow
considered normal or abnormal?
4. When would one consider pericardial effusion drainage simply by
paracentesis? List some advantages and disadvantages of this technique.
5. What would α fypical white blood cell count--differenlial and total- be in α 
palient with acute traumatic reticuloperitonitis?
6. Would you expect normal rumen contraclions in a palient with acute fraumatic
reticuloperitonitis?
 7. What complications would you expect when you perform a rumenotomy on a 
palient that previously had a trocar used for rumen ympany?
 lreament of esophageal obstruction?
9. If, while performing a laparorumenotomy, you did not recover any metallic
object from he reticulum but did palpate rather extensive adhesions 
belween the reliculum and the diaphragm, which extended just ventral to
the esophageal orilice and ventrally, would this influence your prognosis for
complete recovery? What rather common clinical syndrome (jindigestion) may
be associated with this lesion?
10. Can liver abscesses be palpated during a laparotomy?
11. Would you normally expect to be able to palpate the reticulo-omasal orifice
during a rumenotomy?
12. In what aspect of the rericulum and approximately what length (average)
 of metallic object would you commonly Find as the causative agent of acute
raumatic reticuloperitonitis in a patient that was exhibiting bypical clinical
signs?
13. Why should rumen rympany be reduced via a stomach ube just before rumen
Fistula surgery?
14. Do chronic rumen-to-peritoneum adhesions as a sequela to a successful fistula
operation normally curtail rumen funclion?
awnu ym anaaui sainos jo apisno a osahun uawnu bussoxa saoa 'sl
digestion?
16. Why are rumen inoculations with fresh ingesta advocated? Why is it
suggested that hese inocula come from donors from comparable feedlot
conditions?
17. What could be a disadvantage of this surgery in the summer months? In
extremely cold weather?
Chapter 11
Abomasal Surgery
General Considerations
■ Abomasal dilalion or displacement is presumed to be a consequence of modern 
Note
management programs.
 The condition is common, with he earliest recorded diagnosis in the United States in
 There are many ways to correct a
 he 1940s; however, he condirion was observed earlier in Europe.
displaced abomasum. This chapter
 It is diagnosed primarily in lactating dairy cows, occasionally in confined calves,
 intends to describe the techniques 
and less offen in males and other fypes of catle.
plus advantages and disadvantages
● Essentially all dairy cows in modern dairy production units are at risk.
of each. The success of α procedure
● It is rarely diagnosed in beef cattle.
will depend on the veterinarian's
■ The condition apparently has a complex etiology, but it usually occurs in dairy cows
diagnostic skill, evaluation of the 
under the following condirions:
clinical situation, surgical experience,
● In the first month of lactation
application of the technique, and 
● In confined housing systems wih limited exercise
confidence.
●When cale are given a high-concentrate, low-roughage diet
● Offen a herd problem, with oulbreaks traced to a ralion or feed change
 Most affected cows have at least one concurrent disease (e.g., mastilis, metritis,
ketosis).
■ Leff displaced abomasum (LDA), right displaced abomasum (RDA), and right side
lorsion of the abomasum (RTA) may be manifestations of gaseous dilation with
accompanying migration and/or fluid sequestration (Figures 1l-1 to 11-4).
● IDA is usually insidious; beginning wilh decreased appelite, decreased milk
have similar clinical signs.
● RTA produces acute signs, including anorexia, severely diminished milk
producrion, elevated heart rate (commonly in excess of 100 bpm), dehydration
and shock; death may occur if the condition is not quickly corrected.
● RTA has a classic metabolic profile of hypochloremic hypokalemic metabolic
alkalosis
● RTA is commonly associated with marked sequestering of Fluid, whereas LDA is
usually associated wilth gaseous distenlion of the abomasum.
● IDA, RDA, and RTA each have a characteristic "ping and splash" upon percussion
and balloltement over he area of the displacement.
Surgical Techniques for Treating Left Displaced Abomasum
Left Side Abomasopexy
Advantages
 Good visualization of the abomasum
 Good access to the rumen and reticulum
 Secure fixation
■ Can be done on a standing cow
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanirmalsurgery
119
120    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Left
Right
Abomasal displacement
Abomasum
Omasum
Rumen
 FIGURE 11-1. Leff displaced abomasum
FIGURE 1l-2. Degrees of LDA.
cross-section rear view.
Right
Thorax
Xiphoid
cartilage
costalarch
Abomasum and abomasal dilation
Liver
Reticulum
Rumen
Omasum
Abomasum
FIGURE 11-4. RDA and abomasal dilation
Left costal arch
FIGURE 11-3. Normal posilion of bovine
Disadvantages
 stomach compartments (ventral view).
■ If at he fime of surgery the abomasum is in he normal position (not displaced to the
The abomasum may migrate right or lefft
left), access ho he abomasum is extremely limited.
from the normal position in the cranial 
■Requires assistance
ventral abdominal area because of lack
■ Requires a long reach
of firm ventral altachment.
Restraint
■ Standing restraint
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed
■ Surgically prepare the left paralumbar fossa 
ybu ysnl puo pioydix au ol joualsod (sayou! 0l x g] wo c× Sl bano uo aiodaid ●
of the midline. Note the location of the subcutaneous abdominal vein.
● The abomasal surures will exit from this area.
Abomasal Surgery
■121
Diaphragm
13h rib
Spleen
Lung
Reticulum
sutures
FIGURE 1l-5. Abomasopexy (left paralumbar approach). Note he abomasum has
been repositioned and anchored.
Anesthesia
■ Proximal lumbar paravertebral nerve block (preferred)
■ Optional anesthesia:
● Distal lumbar paravertebral nerve block
● Local infiltration or inverted "l" technique
Surgical Technique (Figures 11-5)
■ Use a regional, fenestrated, moishure-repellent sterile drape. Stabilize the drape f0
 the left paralumbar area with towel clamps.
■ Make a modified muscle-spreading abdominal incision.
 Explore he peritoneal cavity horoughly before the abomasopexy.
 Prepare he suhure material.
● Use heavy, No. 3 synthelic nonabsorbable material 180 to 200 cm (6 to 7 feetj long.
● Thread a straight 4-inch trocar point needle on each end of he suhure material.
● locate and mark the center of the sulure material.
■ Place sutures in the abomasum.
● Grasp one of he wo needles while maintaining he second needle ourside the
body.
● While you cradle and protect the needle, carry the needle and suture material
intra-abdominally to the dorsocranial aspect of the displaced abomasum. [This
area of he displaced abomasum should conslitute the venral, cranial, and fundic
porlion of the abomasum when it is in its normal position.)
● Place running suures in he abomasum for a distance of approximately 8 cm
[(3 inches).
+ Sulures bites should be at least 2 cm (l inch) long.
 The sulure patern may be simple coninuous, Ford interlocking, or zig-zag 
(preferred).
+ Pull about half the suure material through he abomasal wall to the previously
marked center of the material.
● The completed line of sutures will be about 8 cm (3 inches) long in the
abomasal wall, and a long strand of suure material will be at each end of the
suhure line.
122    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Placement of sutures through the ventral abdominal wall
● Each end of the abomasal suure material will exit the ventral abdominal wall.
● These ends are fied oulside he abdominal wall to secure the abomasum to the
ventral abdominal wall.
● While you protect the needle point in the palm of your hand, insert your arm
along the lateral body wall belween he peritoneum and the displaced abomasum
until you palpate he xiphoid area.
● Force the point of the anterior needle ventrally through the body wall (the
area previously preparedj. A surgical assistant should guide you to the proper
Recommendation
location.
The proper exit site of the needle and 
● A surgical assistant should grasp the needle outside the body wall and exert slight
suure is caudal to he xiphoid and
lb moderate traction.
slightly right of the midline.
● Repeat the process with he second (caudall needle and suhure, placed about 8 cm
[3 inches) caudal to the first.
■ Remove the gas from the distended displaced abomasum wih a largegauge
[12 to 14 gauge) needle altached to hubing leading out of the abdominal caviry with
or without suction.
u snson a sausnd uoains  sans a uo uosu sid gusiss a s 
 itrs normal position by using a kneading-like motion.
Caution!
■ Palpate carefully to ensure hat no other slructures (e.g., small intestine) are 
enrapped by the sutures under he abomasum.
Avoid penetraling he subcutaneous
■ Tie the suhure slrands with a surgeon's knot. Leave he cut ends at least 8 cm [3 inches)
abdominal vein.
long.
● You can place your hand berween the abomasum and ventral abdominal wall and
berween the abomasal sutures to ensure that the suture material has he correct
allow displacement of the abomasum to recur.
■ Perform α routine three-layer closure of the abdominal incision.
Postoperative Care
■ Give systemic medications as needed
● Fluids and electrolytes
● Dexrose, for ketosis
● Antibiotics
■ Remove ventral abdominal sutures in 5 to 7 days.
■ Remove paralumbar skin suures in 14 to 21 days.
Omentopexy and Pyloro-omentopexy
Advantages
■ Can be performed on a standing cow
■ IDA, RDA, and RTA can be corrected from he righ-side approach.
■Assistant not necessary
■ Pyloro-omentopexy can serve as prophylaxis in a normal animal.
Disadvantages
■ Fat cows occasionally have displacement again after omentopexy.
■ A long reach is required to correct LDA.
 Blind technique: The abomasum is not visualized.
Restraint
■ Standing restraint
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed
 Prepare the right paralumbar incision site.
Abomasal Surgery  ■  123
Anesthesia
■ A proximal lumbar paravertebral nerve block with 2% lidocaine is preferred.
■ A distal lumbar paravertebral nerve block may be an oplion.
■ Local infilration or inverted "l" technique may be effechive.
Surgical Technique
■ Drape the region with a fenestrated moishure-repellent drape anchored in posilion
with towel clamps.
■ Make a verlical skin incision in the right paralumbar fossa (slightly venral to lumbar
Iransverse processes L3 and L4) of adequate length 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 inches) for
easy arm insertion.
● A slightly lower incision is made for pyloro-omentopexy to achieve adequate
exposure of the pylorus.
■ Use a modified muscle-spreading lechnique on the abdominal wall to expose the
peritoneal caviry.
■ Exploralion of the peritoneal cavily before abomasal manipulatlion is strongly
recommended.
■ Wih a 2- to 3-inch, 14-gauge needle with attached tubing, deflate the abomasum.
Insert the needle into the dorsal aspect of the abomasum. Removing excess gas is
 often needed to facilitate movement of the abomasum under he rumen and into irs
normal position.
■ Place your leff hand on the dorsal aspect of he displaced abomasum. With a
combined sweeping motion of the abomasum and a liffing of he rumen, bring the
abomasum under he rumen and into its normal position.
 Identify the greater omentum and relract it dorsally and caudally through the
abdominal incision until you see and idenfify he pylorus. Grasp the pylorus with
Iwo vulsellum forceps.
■ While holding the pylorus with the forceps, start at the ventral commissure of the
incision and begin closing the first layer of the abdominal wall with No. 3 gut in a
simple continuous paltern.
■ Incorporate at least three bites of the pylorus and the omenum into he First layer of
he abdominal wall.
● For securiry, the suture bites into the omentum should be large but should not
 penetrate the lumen of the pylorus or the duodenum.
■ Close the second layer of he abdominal wall with No. 3 gut in a simple continuous
paltern, and close the skin with heavy nonabsorbable synheric surures in a Ford 
interlocking pattern.
Basic Omentopexy Suturing via the Dirkson Method
(Figure 11-6 and Figure 11-7}
■ With No. 3 medium chromic gut, place hwo mattress surures, one caudal and one
cranial to the abdominal incision. They should include the internal oblique muscles,
ransverse muscles, peritoneum, and both layers of the greater omenhum (previously
identified).
■ Suhure he perioneum and ransverse and internal oblique muscles in a continuous
paltern that incorporates a large bite of the greater omenrum in each surure.
 The second layer and skin are routinely sutured.
Recommendation
Postoperative Care
As part of the total treatment
■ Give systemic medicalions as needed
regimen, evaluate the ration and
● Fluids and electrolytes
management of the herd, which can
● Dextrose, for ketosis
help reduce or prevent addirional
● Antibiotics as deemed necessary
problems.
 Remove paralumbar subures in 14 to 21 days
124 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Incision
Liver
Omentopexy
Omasum
(Dirkson
method)
Rumen
Pylorus
Pyloro-
omentopex
sutures
Abomasum
FGURE 11-6. Pyloro-omentopexy (right paralumbar approach), the abomasum is
FIGURE 11-7 Omentopexy
returned to irs normal posifion and secured in the first layer of the abdominal wall with
(righiparalumbar approach).
surures passing through the pylorus and omentum.
Ventral Abomasopexy
Advantages
■ Good visualization of the abomasum
■ Very secure fixation
■ Spontaneous uterine drainage with the animal in dorsal recumbency
Disadvantages
■ With a down cow: possible injury, bloat, regurgitation, or aspiration pneumonia
■ Incisional complicalions, especially in cows housed in filhy conditions
■ Assistant required
Restraint
■ Dorsal recumbency wih legs extended
■ Marked sedation or analgesia will facilitate casling into dorsal recumbency
Presurgical Procedures
 Deprive the patient of water for a minimum of 12 hours before surgery.
Deprivation decreases the potential for regurgitation during dorsal recumbency
restraint.
■ Restriction of feed intake is usually unnecessary because the subject is commonly
anorectic.
■ Identify and mark the subcutaneous abdominal veins so that hey can be avoided
 during surgery.
■ Administer (marked] IV sedation and analgesia.
Surgical Site Preparation
■ Prepare the ventral right paramedian area just caudal to the xiphoid for
surgery.
■ The prepared area should be 35 to 45 cm (15 to 18 inches) square.
Anesthesia
■ Administer a local line infusion anesthesia with 2% lidocaine along the proposed
incision line.
Abomasal Surgery
125
Xiphoid
Incision
Sutures
Reticulum
Rumen
Omasum
Abomasum
FIGURE 11-8 Incision site for ventral
FIGURE 11-9 Suture placement in ventral
abdominal abomasopexy.
abdominal abomasopexy.
Surgical Technique (Figures 1l-8 and 1l-9)
■ Use a regional, fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape [size adequate to cover most of
Caution!
 the ventral abdomenj.
■ Make an incision 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 inches) long between the pectoral muscles
 Incise rissue carefully. Avoid incising
 cranially and he cutaneous truncus muscle caudally.
 the dilated abomasum, which may be
■ Incise in sequence:
in direct contact with he abdominal
● Skin and subcutaneous tissue
wall.
● External rechus sheath and the aponeurosis of the external and internal oblique muscles 
● Rectus abdominis muscle
● Transverse muscle and peritoneum
■ Hemostalic forcipressure is usually adequate to control hemorrhage associated with
he incision; however, ligation may be indicated in specific cases.
 If the abomasum has not reurned to irs normal position (as a result of the animal's
dorsal recumbency), a sweep of your arm berween he rumen and the peritoneum 
should correct the displacement.
 Thorough abdominal exploration, with emphasis on the abomasum, is indicated.
● Observe and palpate for abomasal ulcers; surgical repair may be indicated.
● Examine the pylorus.
● Check for neoplasia.
■ Wih No. 3 medium chromic gut, make four to six matress surures hrough the
musculaure of the abdominal wall and the peritoneum, including the ventral fundic
area of the abomasum.
● Each mattress surure should involve a 1- ho 2-cm (O.5 to 1 inch) bite (withouf
penetraring the lumen) of the abomasal wall and placed abour 2 to 3 cm (1.5 to
2 inches) to he right lateral edge of the incision.
● Use an adequate number of sulures to Fix the abomasum to the perioneum along
he total lengh of the abdominal incision.
Closure of Abdominal wall
■ The ventral abdominal wall is generally closed in 3 layers.
■ A double strand of No. 3 medium chromic gut is suggested to close the peritoneum
and internal rectus sheath.
● Use a simple interrupted surure pattern.
● Interrupted horizontal mattress surures are suggested for the external rectus sheath.
126  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Use heavy, synthetic nonabsorbable surure material for the skin.
● Use a horizontal mattress suure patern or a paltern hat will allow quick sealing
of the skin.
Postoperative Care
■ Roll the animal on its left side and then into sternal recumbency. Allow it to stand.
● Putting the animal on irs right side immediately after surgery may place undue
stress on he abomasal fixation surures from the weight and mass of the rumen.
■ Give systemic medications as needed
● Fluids and electrolytes
●Dexlrose, for ketosis
● Antibiolics as deemed necessary
■ Remove skin surures in 14 to 21 days.
Closed Suture Techniques to Treat Left Displaced Abomasum
Genera! Considerations
Note
■ Two basic methods:
● Bar or toggle suure technique
 IDAs can often be temporarily
● Blind or closed suture technique
corrected by casting the cow on her
■ Good alernative to surgery
right side, rolling her into dorsal 
■ Effective therapy for economically marginal cows
recumbency, manipulating the
abdomen, rolling her lo her leff side,
Advantages
and allowing her to stand. The LDA
■No surgery
ypically rerurns in 2 to 3 days.
■ Quick
■ Success rale of >80%
■Economical
Disadvantages
■ Down cow with possible complicalions
■ Some cows cannot be reated.
Toggle Pin or Bar Suture Method
Restraint
 Place the cow in dorsal recumbency.
■ Minimal leg restraint is typical.
● Beware of rear limbs and the possibiliry of being kicked.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Evaluate cows for concurrent disease.
■ Sedation may be indicated.
■ Identify and mark the subcutaneous abdominal veins so that they can be avoided
during the procedure.
■ Withholding feed and water for I2 hours is advised.
■ Remove gross contamination from the ventral cranial right paramedian area of the
abdomen.
Anesthesia
■ Typically, no anesthesia is used.
Technique
■ This procedure must be performed quickly. If the posirion of the abomasum cannot be 
Note
determined, the procedure cannot and should not be attempted.
If the ping cannot be found or clearly
■ After he cow is in dorsal recumbency, auscultate with percussion to listen for the
ypical LDA ping. If he ping cannot be found or clearly heard, do not attempt the 
heard, do not altempt the procedure.
procedure.
Abomasal Surgery    127
■ After you hear the ping and the abomasum is in an anatomically normal
position, insert the trocar with a cannula through the abdominal wall into the
abomasum.
■ Remove he rocar, and listen for and smell the escaping abomasal gas wih is
characteristic odor.
■ After you confirm that the cannula is in the abomasum, insert the toggle into
the abomasum through the cannula while maintaining a secure hold on the
surure.
 Remove he cannula by sliding it over he exposed surure. Altach forceps to he end
of the bar surure.
■ Repeat the procedure for he second toggle surure, which should be placed 6 to 8
cm (3 to 4 inches) caudal to the first.
 Tie he ends of the wo toggle surures securely yet loosely
Postoperative Care
 Roll the cow onto her leff side and allow her to stand.
 Treat concurrent diseases appropriately.
 Cut surures in 7 to 10 days postoperatively.
● Allow toggles to pass down the digestive trach.
Closed Suture Method
■ This technique is identical to the toggle pin method until he abomasum has been
identified.
■ Prepare a 15 to 20 cm (6- to 8-inch) curved needle with coon tape or heavy
nonabsorbable surure.
 Pass he needle hrough the abdominal wall, into he abomasum, and back hrough
he abdominal wall.
 The suture should run in a cranial to caudal direction in the right cranial paramedian
 portion of he abdomen to secure the abomasum to he ventral abdominal wall in an 
anatomically normal position.
 Tie the ends of he suure securely yet loosely.
■ Postoperative care is identical to hat for the toggle pin method.
Surgical Procedures for Treating Right Displaced Abomasum
General Considerations
■ Signs of RDA are very similar to those of LDA except:
● The ping and splash sounds are heard on the right side of the abdomen.
● More Fluid rends to accumulate in an animal wih RDA compared with gas that
Note
accumulates in an animal with LDA.
■ An RDA cannot be repaired via
 The incidence of RDA is much less than the incidence of LDA.
 the left paralumbar approach.
■ RDA is occasionally diagnosed in calves.
■ The ventral approach can be used
■ The most favorable surgical approach is hrough the right paralumbar fossa.
 for adults and is the preferred 
● An RDA cannot be repaired via the left paralumbar approach.
approach for calves.
● The ventral approach can be used for adults and is the preferred approach for
calves.
Surgical Technique
 Follow the procedure for pyloro-omentopexy for LDA.
 Gas must be removed so that the RDA can be reposilioned.
■ Fuid generally does not need to be removed.
■ An RDA is moved into a normal posilion by pushing he abomasum cranially and
ventrally.
● This maneuver offen requires muliple altemprs
128   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ After you correct the RDA, perform α pyloro-omentopexy.
■ In calves, use the venlral abomasopexy technique.
Postoperative Care
■ Identical to thar for an LDA
Surgical Technique for Treating Abomasal Volvulus (RTA)
General Considerations
Common Clinical Signs
■ Abomasal volvulus is a serious acute disease of dairy cattle.
 Sudden onset
● Predisposing factors for RTA are similar to those for LDA and RDA.
 Complete anorexia
● There is some evidence that an RTA begins as an RDA.
 Complete cessalion of lactation
● Laboratory findings include:
Dehydration of 10% to 12%
+Metabolic alkalosis
 Increased heart rate, to
+Hypochloremia 
>100 bpm
Hypokalemia
 Large ping and splash heard in 
● Prognosis is guarded to poor
he right side of the abdomen 
+ A significant number of cases develop:
●Vagal indigestion
Peritoniris
● Immediate surgery is indicated.
Restraint
■ Standing restraint
Presurgical Procedures
 IV fluid and elecrolyte therapy is srongly recommended.
 Perform surgery as soon as possible
■ Sedation is not recommended.
Anesthesia
■ Right paravertebral lumbar nerve block.
Surgical Technique
■ Use a right paralumbar fossa incision.
■ Quickly perform an exploratory laparotomy to ascertain the condirtion or evaluate
 the abomasum and visceral organs.
● large areas of devitalized abomasum require reassessment of he case and
possible euthanasia.
■ With a needle and tube, remove he gas from he abomasum.
■ Replace the abomasum without removing fluid if possible.
● To replace the abomasum, place your left hand under the abomasum, hen liff and
push anteriorly and dorsally.
● This maneuver may require repeated attempis. Use a rocking motion ho assist in
liting and pushing he abomasum.
replacement of the abomasum.
● The omasum may need to be replaced or reposilioned before you replace the
abomasum.
■ Remove abomasal fluid only after many unsuccessful attempts at correcling the RTA
with the Fluid remaining in the abomasum.
● The prognosis worsens and the occurrence of complicarions increases affer
removal of abomasal fluid.
 Abomasal Surgery
TABLE 11-1
Advantages and Disadvantages of Common Surgical Procedures for
Treating LDA, RDA, RTA, and Moderate Dilation Not Associated with Torsion 
Procedure
Advantages
Disadvantages
 Left paralumbar 
● Performed with the palient in standing restraint
· Abomasal fixation is less exact compared 
abomasopexy
● Standing resraint produces less stress on the
with ventral abdominal abomasopexy. It also 
palient and the surgeon
produces less adhesion stabiliry.
● Produces secure abomasoperitoneal adhesions that
 Assistant required
 tend to prevent recurrence.
● The surgeon may encounter difficully returning 
● Firstintention healing of the paralumbar incision is
he abomasum to irs normal position. Orher
expected. The incision is unlikely to be associated
organs and rissues, such as the greater
with abdominal herniation.
omentum and small intestine, may interfere 
with the manipulation.
Ventral
● Possibly the most exact and secure treatment
· Casting and dorsal recumbency resraint may
abdominal
currently available
cause undue stress in a markedly weakened
paramedian
● Probably produces the least chance for recurrence
patient.
abomasopexy
● Is an excellent approach for reating concurrent 
· Presurgical condirioning (e.g., water
abomasal ulcers 
deprivationj is warranted to preclude
● Allows spontaneous drainage of uterine contents
regurgitation.
● May require more surgical assistance than is
 required in standing resraint procedures
● In many modern dry lots, which have
excessive dust and manure, venral abdominal
incisions become contaminated, which leads 
bo healing problems.
● The surgeon may prefer to stand to operate.
Right
● Performed with the patient in standing restraint 
· Securily of omentoperitoneal adhesions are 
paralumbar
 Standing resraint produces less stress on the
questionable.
omentopexy
patient and surgeon
● Research data indicate α higher recurrence
ym uoabins p jof annpesod sasba au Aqssod ●
of LDA with this procedure than with
limited assistance
abomasopexy.
● Unnatural posirioning of the pylorus and 
abomasum because of improperly placed 
Fixation sutures may lead to abnormal 
abomasal function.
● Remove the Fluid with a large tube through an incision into the abomasum.
● Control contamination of the abdominal caviry by packing the area with moist 
towels and the use of purse-string sutures in the abomasal wall around the
hube.
■ After correction of the RTA, follow he procedure for pyloro-omentopexy.
Postoperative Care
■ Maintain Fluid and electrolyte therapy
■ Antibiolics are indicated.
■ Begin feeding an all-hay diet
■ Postoperative diarrhea for 24 to 36 hours is a good sign.
■ Consider rumen transfaunation.
■ Monitor cows closely for 5 to 7 days for signs of vagal indigestion and peritonitis.
130   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Conclusion
There appears to be no best approach for surgical treatment of abomasal disease in
adult animals (Table 11-1). Select the most appropriate rechnique for each patient. The
selection should be based on clinical data, personal judgment, and experience. Do nol
forget to listen to the client's comments about he value and signalment of the animal
Suggested Reading
 Bartlett PC, Kopcha M, Coe PH, et al. Economic comparison of the pyloro-omentopexy
vs. he roll-and-toggle procedure for reatment of leff displacement of the abomasum
in dairy catHle. JAVMA 206(8): 1156-1162, 1995.
Buckner R. Surgical correction of left displaced abomasum. Bovine Pract 27: 43-46,
1993.
Dirkson G. Leff displacement of the abomasum. Point Vet 15(75): 391-396, 1983.
Dirkson G, Doll K. lleus und Subileuszustande beim jungen Rind. Vol 1. Proc 14th
World Congr Dis Catle Dublin: 3-13, 1986.
Doll K. Tympany and torsion of he abomasum in calves. Bovine Pract 26:96-99, 1991.
Donawick Wl. Gastrointestinal surgery in catHe with special reference to the
abomasum, cecum and spiral colon. Proc Postgrad Committee Vet Med, Univ
Sydney, Australia: 113-124, 1981.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 196-239.
Grohn YF, Fubini SL, Smith DF. Using muliple logistic regresson model fo predict
Pract26: 133-134, 1991
Grymer J, Sterner KE. Percutaneous fixalion of leff displaced abomasum using a bar
suture. JAVMA 180(12): 1458-1461, 1982.
Jubb TF et al. Leff-side displacement of the abomasum in dairy cows on pasture in
Australia. Bovine Pract26: 84-87, 1991.
Lagerweij E, Numans SR. The Utrecht procedure in the surgical reatment of
displacement of he abomasum in catle. Netherlands J Vet Sci 1 (2): 155-165
1968.
 Massey CD, Wang C, Donovan GA, Beede DK. Hypocalcemia at parurition as a
risk factor for leff displacement of the abomasum in dairy cows. JAVMA 203(6):
852-853,1993.
Noordsy JL. Surgical pre-condirioning of potentially high-producing dairy heifers. Vet
Med Small Anim Clin 76(12): 1777-1779, 1981.
Noordsy JL et al. Metabolic disturbances in he dairy cow influenced by modern
praclices. ProcVl nt Conf Dis Cale: 1 16-121, 1974 (also in Bovine Pract, 9; pp.
38-42,1974)
Olson JD. Relationship of nutrition to abomasal displacement and parhurient paresis.
Bovine Pract26: 88-91, 1991.
Parker JE, Fubini Sl. The causes and surgical correchion of bovine abomasal fistulas.
Vol 1. Proc 14th World Congr Dis Catle Dublin:36-41, 1986.
Rutgers LJE, Vander Velden MA. Complications following the use of the closed sururing
echnique for correction of leff abomasal displacement in cows. Vet Rec 1l3(1 1):
255-257,1983
Saint Jean GD, Hull BL, Hoffsis GF, Rings MD. Comparison of he different surgical
echniques for correclion of abomasal problems. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
9(11): F377-F382, 1987.
Sterner KE, Grymer J. Closed suuring techniques using a bar-suhure for correclion of leff
displaced abomasum: A review of 100 cases. Bovine Pract 17: 80-84, 1982.
Abomasal Surgery
Chapter 11 Study Questions
 Answers Key
1. Which surgical technique do you consider to be he most secure and
permanent?
Answers to study questions can
be found staring on page 286
marked LDA with severe metabolic disturbance?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
3. What clinical pahologic tests would you conduct to determine specific Fluid
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
herapy in a markedly debilitated animal wih LDA?
 4. What visual clinical sign best serves as an indicator of the need for Fluid
therapy?
5. Is penetralion of he abomasal wall with a suure bite considered a serious
Hlaw in the abomasopexy technique? What is the normal pH of abomasal
Fluid, and how can pH affect he suture?
6. How would you release the gas from a dilated abomasum before performing
an omentopexy?
7. Why is the prognosis for many patients wih RTA guarded to unfavorable?
 8. If you were faced with LDA in a high-produclion 4-year-old purebred cow,
and ir was imperative that surgery be performed on a modern dairy farm with
only the client available as an assistant, which surgical procedure would you 
altempt? Why?
9. The owner of an average-produclion dairy cow wih LDA and concurrent
chronic mastiris desires to salvage he cow for meat as soon as possible.
Which repair technique would you suggest? Why?
10. Should cows successfully reated for LDA, RDA, and RTA be culled from the
herd?
Chapter 12
Surgical Treatment of Intestinal
Obstruction
Introduction
Surgery for intestinal obslruclion in food animals is not as common as that for companion
animals. Because emergencies involving food animals ofen occur in the Ffield, praclicaliy
must supersede sophishication in surgical echnique. Post casration herniation (including
evisceralion and laceralionj in pigs and steers is a prime example of this ype of emergency.
Common Clinical Signs of Intestinal Obstruction in Cattle
■ The inilial altack of acute abdominal pain causes kicking at the stomach, stretching,
 and tail raising. These signs are primarily observed in the first 8 to 12 hours.
■ Lethargy and anorexia follow the acute signs. Lethargy commonly occurs for 6 to
8 days but may last as long as 2 weeks.
 In cases of intusussusception bloody feces may be observed.
■ Abdominal rympany and or abdominal distention is generally evident.
■ Heart and respiration rates increase
■ Toxemia is common.
Terminology
 Incarceration: Abnormal confinement or entrapment of he intestine. Incarceration
[with or without srangularion) is occasionally seen in the steer. It may be
associated with a Flaccid right spermatic cord remnant.
Intussusception: Invagination, or telescoping, of α portion of the inteshine into an 
adjacent portion. Intussusception is most common in the jejunum.
Strangulation: Mechanical constriclion (or compressionj of vessels, which causes 
an impaired blood supply to a body part. Strangularion is ofen associated 
with hernias.
■ Umbilical hernias in pigs (usually enteroceles are common and rypical
 of strangulation. Small so-called button hernias may be more deadly than 
hernias with larger hernial rings.
 In calves, umbilical hernias (usually gastroceles, but occasionally
 enteroceles are less often associated with slrangulation.
Torsion: A hwishing of the bowel on is own, or long, axis. The large intestine is
most offen affected.
Volvulus: A rwisting of the bowel on its mesenteric axis. This obsruction is most
common in the small intestine and abomasum.
Iyphlectasis: Distension of the cecum.
Noordsy's Food Aninal Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Anes. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
133
134   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
 Rectal palpation offten reveals gas flled intestines, a dilated cecum (lyphlectasis), or
an enlarged, displaced abomasum.
■ Typhlectasis must be differenliated from a right displaced abomasum
● A rectal examination is key to diagnosis.
● Typhlectasis usually has a 8 to 10 inch blunt ended mass in he pelvic area.
 Diarrhea usually occurs with (nontorsion] typhlectasis.
■ In intussusceplion of the small intestine, α firm, elongated mass siuated in the
ventromedial abdomen may be palpated rectally and can be readily moved within
he abdomen.
■ In spermatic cord-induced intestinal incarceration, a taut, fibrous band may be
sanou puo bann pounbui au ui saousbuo punq aul uoibal slad au ui paodiod
 gas distended intestines.
Using Resection and Anastomosis to Treat Intussusception of
the Jejunum in Cattle
Initial Evaluation
■ Carefully assess all clinical signs (e.g., foxemia, weakness) to determine the proper
ype of restraint, aneslhesia, and analgesia for each palient.
Restraint
■ Standing resraint is advocated for mahure animals (providing the palient willstand 
Note
hroughou surgery).
Standing restraint lessens abdominal
■ Dorsal recumbency is recommended for calves.
pressure compared with dorsal or
Presurgical Procedures
 lateral recumbency.
■ Administer moderate sedation or analgesia to patients able to tolerate it.
■ Animals may be in a toxic shate and weak, so further sedation may be conraindicated.
 Prepare he right paralumbar area (prefered site) for surgery.
● The left paralumbar area may be considered and has he advantage that the
rumen acts as a barrier to intestinal evisceralion during surgery; however, the leff
side may be less accessible to he jejunum.
■ If a ventral abdominal incision is to be used, prepare the area adequately in the
same manner as for other sites.
Note
Anesthesia
While exposing the intestine, the
■ A proximal paravertebral lumbar nerve block is recommended.
surgeon should be alert to the
■ However, in weak, toxic animals, inverted L anesthesia may be preferred.
palient's reaction to rension on the
 mesentery. Patients may lie down if
Surgical Technique
tension is marked.
■ Make a 20 to 22 cm (8 to 9 inch) verical incision in the midparalumbar fossa, and 
Use he modified muscle-spreading technique. Adequate access to he blockage is
imperative, and ease in exposing the blockage outside the body wall during surgical
repair is crucial.
 Grasp and carefully expose he intussusceplion ourside he body.
■ Resect nonviable fissue and additional rissue if needed, but allow an adequate blood
supply for healing.
 Perform anastomosis of viable intestinal ends.
● The end+to-end technique is recommended.
+ Absorbable No. O0 or O00 suure material is recommended.
A crushing suture technique is recommended.
● The use of intestinal clamps and other inslrumentation usually advised for intestinal
surgery is encouraged.
■ Close the hole leftin the mesentery (Figure 12-1)
Surgical Treatment of Intestinal Obstruction   135
Suturing
 Use a rouline hree-layer closure for the abdominal incision.
Postoperative Care
Medication
 Give injectable antibiotics daily for 3 to 5 days.
■ Administer fluid therapy if the palient is dehydrated.
FIGURE 12-1. A soluble antibiotic or
 sulfonamide bolus or a gelatin capsule
■ Inteslinal lubricants (e.g., mineral oill may be considered to promote passage of
helps maintain the lumen size and
ingesta.
facilitates apposion of fissue ends in 
Additional Care
anastomosis.
■ Provide the palient with a laxative diet (e.g., bran, molasses, moist silage, or alfalfa
leaves).
■ Allow moderate exercise
■ Remove the abdominal skin incision surures in 14 to 21 days.
Emergency Repair of Intestinal Laceration or Evisceration
Trauma in Pigs and Calves
 In cases of intestinal reseclion, an end-to-end anastomosis is recommended, provided
adequate instrumentation and assistance are available.
■ Emergency field surgery may be satisfactorily accomplished with end-fo-end
Spermatic Cord-Induced Intestinal Incarceration Surgery in Steers
Etiology
he peritoneum and the flaccid remnant of the right spermatic cord.
■ Itis theorized that a raumatic casration technique (e.g., exaggerated, abrupt spermalic
cord raclionj may loosen he spermatic cord from the normal inguinal region, thus
allowing space behween he peritoneum and he remnant of the Flaccid cord. The
peristalic action of he bowel stimulates migration, which leads fo enlrapment.
■ The rumen apparently prevents involvement of the left side spermatic cord.
Clinical Signs
 lehargy and scanry feces. Signs are similar o hose seen in other intestinal
 obstructions and may be observed for several days.
■ Moderate abdominal distention.
■ A rectal examination usually reveals distended intestines in he pelvic area that
are incorporating a taut fibrous band originating (ventral aspect) from the internal
inguinal ring.
Restraint
■ Standing restraint is advised.
Presurgical Procedures
 preferred, but a left paralumbar incision may be considered.
Anesthesia
 Proximal paravertebral lumbar nerve block (preferred).
■ General anesthesia is a viable option.
136   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Surgical Technique
■ Use of a regional, fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape is recommended.
 Technique
■ Make a verical incision in the midparalumbar fossa and use he modified muscle-
spreading technique.
■ One franseclion at the origin of the
fibrous band may be adequate;
Concentrate palpation in he area of the inguinal ring to determine the origin of the
however, additional transechions 
fibrous band.
may be advisable if the band
■ Simply transect a free porion of the fibrous band with surgical scissors.
Firmly adheres to various areas of
 Examine he involved intestines thoroughly.
intestine.
● Strangulation and gangrene are seldom observed.
■ Band removal is not indicated.
● Reseclion and anastomosis are usually unwarranted.
■ Ligation is not needed because 
 the spermatic cord remnant is
Suturing
commonly avascular.
■ Use a rourine hree-layer closure for the abdominal incision.
Postoperative Care
■ Systemic antibiotics are usually warranted for 3 to 5 days.
Allow unlimited exercise.
 Prognosis is favorable wih early diagnosis and treatment.
Treating Typhlectasis with or without Torsion
General Considerations
■ Typhlectasis is becoming more common in the high-production dairy cow (although it
has also been diagnosed in males and in catle of other fypes and agesj. In the dairy
cow, the predisposing conditions (e.g., dry lot confinement, high milk production,
and a high-concentrate, low-fiber diet are offen similar to those associated with
abomasal problems.
■ Definirive diagnosis depends on rectal palpation of the dilated or displaced cecum
preceded by observation of dorsal right abdominal distention.
■ Right side abomasal displacement (dilation} may complicate he differential
diagnosis.
diarrhea, relatively normal blood gas values, and moderate ketosis.
■ A ping in the right paralumbar fossa is common and must be diferentiated from a
 rectal or abomasal ping.
 If the clinical signs for ryphlectasis are prominent:
● Medicinal reatment is unlikely to succeed.
● Cecotomy and drainage are indicated.
● Although a parial cecectomy reduces he potential for recurrence; complications
including peritonitis and sepsis are common.
■ If torsion is present, even for a shor fime, ischemia may occur in the area of the
ileocecal valve.
● If devitalization due to ischemia exisrs, the prognosis for recovery is unfavorable.
● Total resechion and anastomosis may be altempted; however, these procedures are
difficult and result in a guarded to unfavorable prognosis.
Restraint
■ Standing resraint is recommended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ IV sedation or analgesia as deemed necessary.
■ Surgical preparation of the right paralumbar fossa.
Surgical Treatment of Intestinal Obstruction ■  137
Cecum
Incisic
Incision to
drain the
cecum
FIGURE 12-3. Parial cecectomy affer
FIGURE 12-2. Right paralumbar incision for cecotomy or cecectomy.
cecotomy and drainage.
Anesthesia
■ Proximal paravertebral nerve block
■ Distal lumbar paravertebral nerve block
■ An inverted L block may be considered in highly toxic, ataxic patienis.
Surgical Technique for Cecotomy or Partial Cecectomy
[Figures 12-2 and 12-3)
 Caution!
■ Make a verlical skin incision in the midparalumbar fossa, and use the modified
 muscle-spreading technique. Be extremely careful when incising the peritoneum;
 Be extremely careful when incising
avoid incising the cecum, which may be pressing against he peritoneum because of 
he peritoneum. Avoid incising the 
dilation.
cecum, which may be pressing 
 Insert your arm intraperitoneally and carefully place the cecum against the
against the peritoneum because of
abdominal incision if it is not already in hat position.
dilation.
 If cecal fissue appears viable:
● Palpate to determine whether torsion exists
● Exteriorize the free end of he cecum
 Perform the cecotomy outside he abdomen
 Large volumes of ingesta may be removed from the cecum.
 Close the cecal incision with a double row of a continuous inverting suture
pattern.
Flush he end of the cecum thoroughly with sterile saline.
 Place he cecum back into the peritoneal cavily.
 Make sure hat the cecal volvulus has been corrected by using your arm in the
abdominal cavity in a sweeping stirring action ("herapeutic shir").
Suturing
■ Routine three-layer closure of the abdominal incision is recommended
Postoperative Care
■ Systemic antibiotics are indicated.
 Administer luid therapy to correct dehydration.
 Provide a low-concenrate, moderate- to high-fiber diet.
 Encourage moderate exercise.
■ Remove skin surures in 14 ho 21 days.
138    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Suggested Reading
Constable PD, St Jean G, HullBL, et al. Intussusception in catHe: 336 cases 
(1964-1993). JAVMA 210(4): 531-536, 1997.
 Donawick Wl. Gastrointestinal surgery in cae with special reference fo the
abomasum, cecum and spiral colon. Proc 54 Sof Tissue Surg Sydney: 113-124,
1981.
Fubini SL et al. Cecal volvulus in dairy cows. Proc 14h World Congr Dis Cale Dublin:
24-29, 1986.
Fubini SL. Surgery of the bovine large intestine. Agri-Pract 14(7): 40-42, 1993.
Maala CP, Smith DF, Hintz HF, Sack WO. Removal of he cecum, including the
ileocecocolic junction, and its effects on digestibiliy in catle. Am J Vet Res 44(12):
2237-2243, 1983.
Richardson DC: Intestinal surgery: A review. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 3(3):
259-271, 1981.
Steiner A, Roussel Al, Martig J. Effect of bethanechol, neosligmine, metoclopramide,
and propranolol on myoelectric activily of the ileocecocolic area in cows. J Am Vet
Med Res 56(8): 1081-1086, 1995.
Chapter 12 Study Questions
Answers Key
1. What clinical signs would you usually Find in a steer with a bowel incarceration
caused by a Flaccid remnant of the spermalic cord?
Answers to study questions can
be found starring on page 286 
2. What would your surgical approach be to a high-produclion dairy cow with 
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
marked yphlectasis?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
 3. Compared with bacteria in the abomasum, would bacteria in the cecum usually
have greater potential for stimulating severe peritonitis?
4. Why might you hesitate to cast a palient with marked abdominal rympany for
surgery? Why is such a patient not a good prospect for general anesthesia?
5. Is intestinal intussusceplion in catle usually diagnosed early enough so hat it 
can be corrected surgically simply by raction reduction?
Chapter 13
Rectal Prolapse Repair
Factors That Can Predispose Animals to Rectal Prolapse
Nutrition
■ Feed with a high estrogen content can relax the rectal or vulvar region, which may
lead to prolapse.
High-protein diets may cause enteritis (proctifis).
 Antibiolic in the feed may cause anal irritation (pruritus).
Environment
 Frigid weather appears to increase the incidence of rectal prolapse, especially in
pigs. Thermal iritation of an already relaxed rechum may be an aggravating factor.
■ Dry, dusty condirions, may cause coughing and sneezing.
Management
 Overcrowding in confinement areas (pigs and lambs)
■ Narrow passageways through which animals must squeeze
 Limited exercise (perhaps decreases muscle tone)
■ Influence of buller steers and multiplebull housing (homosexual achivity)
 Shor-docking tails of lambs (major problem) 
 Young bull calves mounting adult cows in heat.
Disease Conditions
Edematous
■ Rabies
mucosal layer
■ Urolithiasis
■ Coccidiosis
■ Respiratory disease with coughing
Mucosal prolapse
Types of Rectal Prolapse (Figure l3-1)
 Mucosal prolapse: prolapse limited to mucosal layer with edema
Mucosal layer
 Complete prolapse: invagination of the rectum, with serosal surfaces of the rectum in
contact
Surgical Repair
Serosal layer
Presurgical Procedures
Restraint
Cattle
 Use standing restraint except for very young calves
Complete prolapse
■ Mechanical chute resraint is ideal.
Pigs
FIGURE 13-1. Two types of rectal
■ Use the head-down posilion for young pigs.
prolapse.
■ Restrain adulrs in the standing position
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
139
140   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Sheep and Goats
■ Use standing restraint or sternal recumbency for adulrs
■ Use he head-down posifion or sternal recumbency for kids and lambs
Anesthesia
Cattie
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed
■ Administer a caudal epidural
Pigs
■ Administer sedation or analgesia to all pigs
Note
 Preferred options:
When you evaluate aneshetic
● General anesthesia
+Mask induclion
options for treating rectal prolapse
● Injectable anesthesia
in pigs, not only should you consider
factors such as adequate restraint, 
● Standing restraint
● Sedalion plus subsacral paravertebral lidocaine block in adulrs
desensilizalion of tissues, and
● Sedalion plus lumbosacral epidural in adulrs
possible unfavorable postoperalive
sequelae, you must also factor in the 
Sheep and Goats
usually disturbing pig squeal.
■Administer sedation or analgesia
■ Administer a caudal epidural
■ Primarily for adult sheep and goats when a caudal epidural is difficult to
administer, give a perianal local infusion of 2% lidocaine with emphasis on the
subsacral area.
Site Preparation
■ Remove debris
■ Scrub and rinse the area as horoughly as possible with water and an iodophor
 scrub solution.
Simple Replacement
■ Not commonly recommended because he rendency for recurrence of prolapse affer
Note
the procedure is relatively high.
■ Recommended only for simple, fresh mucosal prolapses or when early meat salvage
Application of a sacral paravertebral
 of he animal is expected.
alcohol nerve block to S4 and S5 is
■ Retain he rechum in is normal position with a purse-string suture.
an excellent adjunclive treatment for
● Use nonirritating suure material. Place he suure 1 to 2 cm (O.5 to l inch) outside
control of rectal renesmus.
he anal sphincter. Tie he suure strands with a knot that allows loosening (similar
method to hying shoelaces) of the suture if necessary.
● The anal opening should allow adequate fecal passage yet restrict prolapse.
● The suture should remain in posiltion only long enough— usually several days— to
 control additional prolapse.
Mucosal Layer Resection (Figure 13-2)
■ To stabilize the prolapse, place αa 3 ho 4 inch, 18 to 20 gauge spinal needle
crosswise through the prolapse close lo the anus.
Recommendation
■ Make wo incisions around the circumference of the prolapse.
 Mucosal layer resection is generally
● The first incision is at the proximal portion of he prolapse. Incise the mucosal layer
recommended for mucosal or
only.
● The second incision is at he distal portion of the prolapse [junclion of normal and
 marginally complete prolapse and
abnormal rissue). Again, incise the mucosal layer only.
for cases in which the mucosa lacks
■ Connect the wo incisions wih a dorsal longiudinal incision. Incise he mucosal layer
viabiliry or is moderately lacerated.
only.
Rectal Prolapse Repair ■ 141
Rectal anchor pin
Circumventing incisions
Peeling mucosal layer
Longitudinalincision
Rectal orifice
Step 1
Rectal anchor pin
Sutureline—normal mucosa
Step 2
FIGURE 13-2. Resection of the mucosal layer.
 Peel and remove the mucosal layer.
● The mucosa may be necroric and friable but may have an extensive blood supply.
● Ligation of larger blood vessels may be indicated; however, complete hemostasis
is not prudent.
● With No. O or O0 absorbable sulure material, bring viable mucosal edges into
apposilion with the interrupted sutures. Sururing is recommended for bovine
prolapse but is unnecessary in immahure pigs.
 Place he sulured rechum back into its normal posifion.
● A purse-string surure in the anus is recommended for catle.
● Simple replacement without he retaining subure is commonly satisfactory in pigs.
Rectal Amputation (Figure 13-3)
 Stabilize he prolapse by inserting fine steel pins or 8 tol0 cm (3- to 4-inch} needles
at the proximal point of the prolapse near he anus. The pins should be long enough
Recommendation
 for he ends to be exposed for 2 ho 5 cm (l to 2 inchesj on the lateral aspecis of the
Amputation is recommended for
extensive prolapses and severely
reseclion. This technique is used primarily in catle, but it may be used in all food 
animals.
lacerated or necrolic rectums.
A plastic tube (e.g., plastic syringe
■ A plastic tube placed into the lumen of the rechum will facilitate sururing.
 Suturing:
case] inserted rectally enhances
surgery.
● Use No. l or 2 absorbable suure material
● Pace interrupted horizontal mattress suures around the circumference of the
prolapse.
 The surures should include the full hickness of the wall of the rectum. Apply
moderate to marked tension on the surures.
● Place the emphasis on he dorsal aspect of the prolapse for complete hemostasis
of the major vascularure (branches of the internal pudendal artery or vein)
supplying the anus.
142   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Interrupted
Interrupted
mattress suture
mattress sutures
Plastic
syringe case
Transection line
Lateral view
Cross-section
FIGURE 13-3. Amputation of he rectum (lateral and cross-seclional views).
● Transect the rectum with a circumferential incision distal to the suture line
● Retain adequate fissue to ensure suture stabiliry.
● Remove the stabilizing pins, and allow the rectum to return to its normal
position.
● A purse-string surure may be considered for improved retention of the rechum.
Other Techniques for Prolapse Repair
Rectal Rings (Figure 13-4)
■ Insert a firm-walled, open cannula (ube) into the lumen of the prolapse.
● Anchor the rectal ring (cannula) with α circumferenlial ligaure outside the anus at
 he most proximal position of the prolapse.
● The cannula and suture willstimulate sloughing of the distal porlion of the
prolapse.
● The cannula is simple to insert and inserion requires no anesthesia.
 The use of rectal rings is most popular for pigs, but these rings may be used for other
food animals as well.
 Types of rings:
● Commercially produced plastic rectal rings of various sizes may be used. Plastic
ubing or syringe cases may be considered.
● Rubber elastrator rings or surgical hubing may be substiuted for surure material in
some cases.
Emasculatome for Simple Mucosal Prolapses in Pigs
■ When properly used the emasculatome technique constiutes a mucosal
resection.
Caution!
 Do not use the emasculotome
Techniques to Alleviate Rectal Tenesmus
■ Shortterm methods:
lechnique in cases of complete 
● Infuse mineral oil into the recrum (repeat several rimes daily if necessary). The
prolapse.
mineral oil soothes and lubricates.
● Apply topical anesthetric jelly.
● Use a tracheotomy or nasotracheal tube.
■ Llong-term methods:
● Sacral nerve paravertebral alcohol block
● Low caudal alcohol epidural (not recommended)
Rectopexy
■ Rectopexy via a paralumbar incision may be considered in extreme cases of rectal
 prolapse involving a valuable animal
■ Rarely done
Rectal Prolapse Repair  ■  143
Ligature
Anchorgroove
Rectalring
 Rectal ring
Rectal ring in position
FIGURE 13-4. A rectal ring used to repair rectal prolapse.
Common Sequelae to Rectal Prolapse and Repair
Note
 Rectal sricture
■ Constricted anal sphincter
 These condirions may be more 
Suggested Reading
common in pigs than in other food
animals.
Filipov MM. A surgical technique for excision of prolapsed rechum in swine [lelter]. Can
VetJ 22(11): 362, 1981.
Frank ER Veterinary Surgery, ed 7. Minneapolis, MN: Burgess Publishing, 1964,
pp 280-283.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Anima! Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 258-262.
Hofmeyr CFB. The digestive system, in Oehme FW, Prier JE (2 ed): Textbook of large
Animal Surgery. Ballimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1974, pp 467-495.
Ivascu I et al. Therapeutical research work on rectal prolapse in swine. Vol 3. Proc Int
Pig Vet Soc Ames, lowa: Z-15, 1976.
Kersjes AW, Memelth F, Rutgers JE (eds). Atlas of Large Anima! Surgery. Balfimore, MD:
Williams & Wilkins, 1985.
Kjar HA. Amputation of prolapsed rechum in young pigs. Vol 3. Proc Int Pig Vet Soc
Ames, lowa: Y-6, 1976.
Vonderfecht HE. Amputation of rectal prolapse in pigs (a photographic essay). Vet Med
Small AnimClin73(2):201-206,1978.
Chapter 13 Study Questions
1. What are he major consideralions when determining he best melhod to fix α
Answers Key
rectal prolapse?
Answers to study questions can
2. Do environmental temperatures appear to have any influence on the incidence
be found staring on page 287
of rectal prolapse in food animals?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
3. What nuritional conditions may be present in a feedlot hat could influence the
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
incidence of rectal prolapse?
4. Are vaginal prolapses often associated with rectal prolapses?
5. Can rechal renesmus and rectal prolapse be clinical signs of a central nervous
system disurbance?
6. Should pigs suffering from or Ireated for rectal prolapse be isolated from other
 pigs unil he rechum and anus are normal?
7. Is perianal edema a common sequela to placement of a purse-string suure for
prolapse retention?
8. Is it common for a cow with a prolapsed rectum to be conslipated?
Chapter 14
Surgery of the Female
Reproductive System
Oophorectomy in Cattle
Indications and General Considerations
Heifers
 Recommended primarily for feedlot heifers but may also be indicated for heifers in
pastures. Nonpregnant heifers weighing 160 to 240 kg (350 to 530 Ib) are best
suited for rourine surgery.
■ Prevenrs pregnancy
Reduces social problems related ho he estrous cycle
 Improves average daily weight gain when accompanied by growth hormone implanls
■May be considered as an adjunct treatment in disease control programs such as
brucellosis management
Adult Cows
■ May be used as α surgical treatment of ovarian disease:
● Cystic ovaries
● Ovarian tumors
■ May be used as an adjunct reahment when preparing teaser cows for arificial
insemination programs
Surgical Approaches
Heifers
■ Paralumbar fossa (flank) approach: An approach from the left side is recommended,
but an approach from the right side may be considered.
 Vaginal approach: The Kimberling-Rupp method is recommended.
■ Ventral abdominal approach:
● Recommended for small, immaure heifers
● Nor commonly used
Adult Cows
 left paralumbar fossa approach is recommended.
■ Vaginal approach:
● Make a supracervical incision (copotomy)
● Use a chain écraseur
Left Paralumbar Fossa Approach Oophorectomy
Presurgical Procedures
 Fasting for 24 hours before surgery is recommended.
 Standing chute restraint is preferred.
 Right lateral recumbency with the palient's legs in an extended posilion may also be
considered.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
145
146
 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 14-1. A farrier's duckbill tongs.
FIGURE 14-2. Two lypes of écraseurs.
FIGURE 14-3. Apair of 12-to 16-inch
 serrated curved spaying scissors.
■ Moderate IV sedalion and analgesia is suggested.
■ Prepare he skin of the left paralumbar fossa for surgery.
Note
● Clip the hair.
● Scrub the skin and spray it with an iodophor solution.
Although aseptic surgery is highly
 desirable, clean surgery may be the
best alternative for multiple animals
Anesthesia
■ Distal lumbar paravertebral nerve block (preferred)
under field conditions.
■ Local infiltration wih 2% lidocaine is commonly used.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a verlical skin incision over the midparalumbar fossa long enough for insertion
Note
 of your arm.
■ Use uterine forceps to spread the muscles.
 Sterile surgery is suggested. The
 Punchure the peritoneum with the forceps or your thumb.
 surgeon should wear sterile, shoulder-
length rubber gloves.
● A farrier's duckbill tongs can be used to spread the muscles and puncture the
peritoneum (Figure 14-1).
● The objechive is to safely, quickly, and efficiently open the abdomen with minimal
 Irauma and to shorten the healing time.
 Insert your arm into the peritoneal cavily.
■ Grasp he ovaries individually and apply raclion to isolate them from surrounding
lissue. Surgically remove each ovary via a chain écraseur or a pair of 12- to l6-inch
serrated curved spaying scissors (Figures 14-2 and 14-3).
● Keep the jaws of the scissors closed when you insert them into the peritoneal
cavily. This precludes possible laceration of the intestines.
● Open the jaws only to transect a stretched ovarian stump.
● After removal of each ovary, examine it carefully to determine the ype of frissue
[lymph nodes may be accidentally removedj.
● A chain écraseur is used primarily for adult catle
 Intraperitoneal or systemic antibiotics is suggested.
 Suture the abdominal wall.
● Using he muscle-spreading technique minimizes surure time.
● Two tension sutures in the muscle is usually adequate.
● Use heavy, nonabsorbable synthelic suhure material in the skin.
Postoperative Care
 Administer systemic antibiotics as deemed prudent.
 Allow animals to rest affer the procedure.
■ Do not altempt to move these calle hrough a chute system or otherwise disturb them
 for 7 to 10 days.
■ Excitement of these animals may cause excessive hemorrhage from the ovarian
shump and possible death.
● Most common cause of deah is blood loss.
● A 3 to 5% death loss from hemorrhage has been reported.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System■ 147
A
FIGURE 14-4. The KR spay instrument used in the Kimberling-Rupp method. The trocar
point is used to penetrate the vaginal wall. The ovary is excised by rotating the inner
culting tube. The plunger is used to store the first excised ovary in the inner tube.
A. Trocar point plunger
B. Inside view of cuting tube
C. Trocar point plunger depressed into cutfing tube
Vaginal Approach Oophorectomy
Kimberling-Rupp (K-R) Technique in Heifers (Figure 14-4)
General Considerations
First described in 1982
■ Developed as a quick method for spaying heifers that did not require an abdominal
incision
Advantages
preparation.
■ Properly performed, oophorectomy may be accomplished quickly and efficiently with
a minimum of unfavorable sequelae.
Disadvantages
 Heifers must be large enough to allow placement of your arm into the recrum.
■ Above average-sized ovaries are difficult to remove, and ovarian remnants offen
remain.
● Signs of estrus may occur.
· Pregnancy has been observed in rare cases.
 An inexperienced surgeon may lacerate the intestines during he operation.
Presurgical Procedures
Caution!
 Fast heifers for 24 to 30 hours before surgery. Reducing the gaslrointestinal mass
 makes ovaries more accessible.
Post operatlive peritonitis is possible if
 Use good head and side-to-side reslraint. Do not squeeze he abdomen.
an unclean procedure is performed.
spaying groups of heifers.
148   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 14-5. Instrument placement before entry through he vaginal wall (From Rupp
GP, Kimberling DV. A new approach for spaying heifers. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
77(4): 561-565, 1982.)
FIGURE 14-6. Instrument placement after entry into the peritoneal cavilty. (From Rupp
GP, Kimberling DV. A new approach for spaying heifers. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
77(4): 561-565, 1982.)
■ Although anesthesia was not suggested in the original description of his technique, a
low caudal epidural may be easily applied to induce aneshesia of he perineal region.
■ Remove fecal material from the recum.
 Do not allow excessive air into he rectum.
■ Cleanse the vulva and perineum with a dilute antiseptic solution.
Surgical Technique (Figures 14-5 to 14-7)
Recommendation
■ An assistant places the chemically sterilized K-R instrument through the vulva and into
 the anterior vagina.
For a more detailed description of
■ Introduce your gloved arm into he rechum and direct the cervix ventrally while
this technique, see he article by
Rupp and Kimberling listed under
situating the point of the K-R instrument at the cranial extent of the vagina and about
Suggested Reading. A videotape of
2.5 cm [l inch) dorsal to the cervix.
 he technique is also available from
■ The assistant pushes he K-R instrument through the vaginal wall and into the
he authors.
 peritoneal cavily.
■ With the KR instrument located, direct the ovary into the culting chamber.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   149
FIGURE 14-7. The ovary is manipulated into the cutting chamber. (From Rupp GP,
 Kimberling DV. A new approach for spaying heifers. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 77(4):
561-565, 1982)
 Transect the ovarian shalk by rotating he cutting chamber.
■ After transeching the First ovary and storing it in the chamber, manipulate and
ransect the second ovary in the same manner.
 Remove he K-R instrument from the vagina and carefully examine the ovaries:
● The complete ovaries should be included.
● No intrestinal rissue should be involved. Immediate laparotomy with intestinal
repair is indicated if intestinal tissue is observed.
Postoperative Care
■ No affercare is commonly necessary.
 Spayed heifers seldom exhibit abnormal behaviors immediately after surgery. A
slight stiffness of the gait and transient elevalion of he tail may occasionally be seen.
Procedure in Adults
Advantages
 Compared with the paralumbar approach, the vaginal approach markedly reduces
 he time needed for surgical preparation.
Note
■ Properly performed, oophorectomy may be accomplished quickly and efficiently with
Unilateral oophorectomy may be
a minimum of unfavorable sequelae.
prescribed for markedly cystic
Disadvantages
 ovaries and ovarian neoplasia (e.g.,
 granulosa cell tumorj.
and rissues by palpation.
■ Laceration of intestinal rissue, rauma to a major blood vessel, or both may be
unfavorable sequelae.
■ A large ovarian tumor may limit this approach.
Restraint
 Use good head and side-to-side standing resraint (chute preferredj.
Presurgical Procedures
 Administer IV sedalion and analgesia (moderate dose).
 Place a tail tie on he animal's tail (see Chapter I, Figure l-1).
 Thoroughly cleanse the perineum with water and an iodophor solution.
150   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Thoroughly Flush the vagina with 4 to 8 liters [1 to 2 Gallons) of an iodophor solution
diluted in warm water.
● A stomach tube atached to a stomach pump works well for Flushing.
● Manually massage inravaginally while Flushing to aid the cleaning process.
● Remove all fluid from he vagina before beginning surgery.
Anesthesia
■ Use a caudal epidural wih lidocaine or lidocaine plus xylazine.
Surgical Technique
■ Cradle α scalpel (e.g., αa Bard-Parker No. 22) in the palm of your hand, and 
 introduce it into he anterior vagina.
● Knives with retractable blades have been used successfully
■ Make a supracervical stab incision through he vaginal wall at either the 1 l-o'clock
 or the I-o'clock position.
■ Retract the scalpel from the vagina.
until the vaginal wall is penetrated and the incision is large enough to allow insertion
 of your hand into the peritoneal cavily.
■ Palpate and isolate he ovary to be removed
ay ui s! doo uouo uado ay jyun wo jno buojo oujboa ay qui nasoiog uo jesul 
 cranial aspect of the vagina.
■ Bring the affected ovary into the vagina through the vaginal incision, (if
possible). Place the chain loop of the écraseur around the ovary at the ovarian
attachment. If the ovary cannot be brought into the vagina, apply the écraseur
intraperitoneally.
■ Tighten the écraseur carefully while continuing to keep he ovary isolated and under
tension to ensure that no foreign tissue is involved.
■ After being assured hat only ovarian altachment rissue is involved in the écraseur
loop, lighten the chain to fransect the fissue and free the ovary.
■ In most cases, ligation of the ovarian stump is unnecessary; écraseur transeclion
usually creates adequate hemostasis. However, a ligature placed around
the ovarian pedicle in a transfixation technique may help control excessive
hemorrhage.
■ No suturing of the vaginal incision is indicated.
■ Healing is rapid and a complete seal of a properly placed vaginal incision occurs in
24 to 48 hours.
Postoperative Care
 Systemic antibiotics are suggested.
■ Systemic clotting agents, calcium, or both are suggested.
■ Serial measurements of packed cell volume may be taken to determine whether
 excessive hemorrhage is occurring.
Cesarean Section in Cows and Other Procedures to Aid Delivery
Indications and General Considerations
■ To terminate pregnancy in cases of mismaling, impending dystocia, and
hydrallantois or hydramnios hydrops allontois and hydrops amnion.
■ To manage dystocia associated with:
f i il a m s  sy ai 
● Emphysematous feuses, especially when the dam has a small pelvic diameter,
which would make fetotomy difficult
● Urerine lacerations and torsions
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   151
 Cesarean Section compared with fetotomy
 Cesarean Section
● Maintains fetal viabiliry
● May be accomplished more easily than fetotomy in small, immature heifers
 because pelvic size limits maneuvering by the surgeon 
Fetotomy
● In the hands of a skilled surgeon, may be readily and efficiently
accomplished in large, welldeveloped dams.
● Desirable if the dam is a feedlot heifer to be marketed early.
● Preferred for obese feedlot heifers that are unlikely to survive the stress of a
cesarean section.
 The veterinarian's experience and preferences and he client's attiude also play
important roles in deciding berween a cesarean seclion and a fetotomy.
● Pelvic injuries in the dam
● Fetal monsters and fetal anomalies
● Irreducible malpresentations
● Severely prolapsed vaginas
 To perform research
Deciding to Perform a Cesarean Section
 Can be a very difficull decision 
 Fachors to consider when contemplating a cesarean section:
● Viabiliry of the calf
● Degree of contaminalion of he uterus 
● Time required for vaginal delivery versus fime required for cesarean
section
● Probabiliry of delivering a viable uninjured calf vaginally compared with delivery
by cesarean section
● Value of the calf (the higher the potential value, the sooner you perform a
cesarean sectionj
● Value of the dam
● Faciliries and assistance available for performing a cesarean sechion
● Confidence and experience of he surgeon
With unfamiliar clients, it is advisable to discuss:
● Overall prognosis
● Surgical risks
Aftercare
●Fees
Restraint Positions and Related Abdominal Incision Sites
(Figures 14-8 to 14-10)
■ Evaluation of the condirion of the cow and assessment of the sibuation are imperative
when determining the restraint position and incision site.
Standing Restraint
■ Requires less assistance than recumbency positions
■ Requires reasonable assurance that the cow will remain standing for the procedure
Caution!
● Heifers delivering their first calf are more likely to lie down during surgery.
If the dam cannot stand throughout
■ Contamination of the peritoneal caviry with uterine contents is likely to occur.
he surgery, do not start this
 Requires physical strength deliver the fetus
procedure!
■ Good for adult dairy cows because it avoids the udder and associated vasculature.
152  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Flank
Oblique
Extreme paramedian
Paramedian
Median
FIGURE 14-8. Cesarean section incision sites wih the cow reslrained in right or leff
lateral recumbency, dorsolateral recumbency, or dorsal recumbency.
Incision
13h
FIGURE 14-9. Leff paralumbar (flank] cesarean section incision site. (A comparable site
exists in the right paralumbar area for a right side approach.)
■ Causes minimal tension on the subure line, with excellent healing potenfial.
■ Left paralumbar fossa approach:
● Excellent for right uterine horn pregnancy.
● Rumen inhibirs evisceration of intestine hrough incision.
■ Right paralumbar fossa approach:
● Excellent for left uterine horn pregnancy
Dorsal Recumbency Restraint
■ Requires assistance to position he cow
■ May be associated with bloat and regurgiation in he dam
● Induces a tendency for cows lo strain, which forces the rumen through the incision
●Best controlled wih a caudal epidural before surgery
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   153
Subcutaneous abdominal vein
Xiphoid
Umbilicus-
Incision
Subcutaneous abdominal vein
FIGURE 14-10. Incision site for a right ventral abdominal paramedian cesarean
section.
■ Ventral midline and right and left paramedian incisions:
● Excellent for beef catle, especially heifers 
● Allows excellent exposure of uterus and fetus
● May result in postoperative incisional complications
Right and Left Lateral Recumbency Restraints
Caution!
 Table restraint is effective.
● Requires assistance to position the cow
Remember, most drugs cross the
● May be associated with bloat and regurgitation in the dam
placenta and enter he calf. If the
 Low flank or oblique incision:
cow is heavily sedated, the calf will
● Excellent for cows with a contaminated urerus to minimize peritoneal
be sedated when delivered.
contamination
● Provides excellent exposure of urerus and fetus
● May lead to postoperative incisional complications
Anesthetic Techniques Recommended for Restraint Positions
Standing Restraint
 Caudal epidural with lidocaine and/or xylazine to control tenesmus
Caution!
■ IV sedalion and analgesia as indicated
■ Lumbar paravertebral (proximal or distall preferred 
Cows may lie down if sedated.
 Lumbar epidural in selected cases
■ Inverted L or field block of the paralumbar fossa 
Dorsal and Lateral Recumbency
■ IV sedalion and analgesia as indicated
Note
■ Field block infusion of the proposed incision site is generally effective with ventral
abdominal incisions.
 In cases of general anesthesia and 
 General IV or inhalation anesthesia may be used in controlled environments
in cases of marked sedation, it is
 A high caudal epidural or lumbosacral epidural may be used for all dorsal and
important that the cow be placed in
lateral recumbency incision sites if indicated.
sternal recumbency shortly affer the
● Cows willbe unable to stand immediately affer surgery.
surgery is completed. Regurgitation 
● A high caudal epidural or lumbosacral epidural is often limited to younger
and rumen fympany should be
animals and range catle when a quiet environment and nonslippery floors are
avoided if possible.
available.
154   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Left and Right Paralumbar Procedure with Standing Restraint
Presurgical Procedures
■ Standing restraint
■ Perform a horough reproductive examination, including rectal and vaginal exam to
determine:
● Physical state of the fetus
◆ Posirion, presentation, and posture of the ferus 
● Relative size of the ferus compared with dam size
● Presence and direclion of a uterine torsion
● The uterine horn that has he fetus
■ Derermine he need for and initiate supporive reatment (e.g., Fluid therapy)
■ Administer α caudal epidural
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed
Surgical Site Preparation
 Prepare he paralumbar area for sterile surgery.
 Most standing cesarean seclions are performed from the left side.
■ A calf in the leff horn with irs spine toward the leff side of he cow and irs feet toward
the right side of the cow can be more easily delivered with a right paralumbar fossa
approach.
Other Presurgical Checks
 Check the instrument tray for:
● A sterile pack
● A scalpel blade
● Obstelric chains and handles (sterilized by either heat or chemicals)
● A moisture-repellent, fenestrated drape large enough to cover the entire surgical
area of the cow
● Sterile gloves, shoulder or elbow length
● Suure material
 No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut (or similarly sized synthetic absorbable suture
materiall
★ No. 2 gut is available with a swedged on taper needle, which is excellent for
suuring the uterus
 Extra-heavy synthetic nonabsorbable surure material for the skin
● Sterile saline
■ Check the availabiliry of pharmaceuricals:
● Respiratory and cardiac stimulants for both dam and fetus
● Urerine antibiotics (bolus preferred)
● Diluted soluble tetracycline for intraperitoneal dosing
● lodine for lhe calf's navel
● Oxylocin to induce milk letdown if necessary.
● Respiratory stimulants for he calf 
Caution!
Anesthesia
Do not administer oxytocin until the
■ Lumbar regional aneshesia of T13, Ll, and L2 nerves 
uterus has been closed. Oxytocin will
● Proximal lumbar paravertebral nerve block preferred 
cause conractions of he uterus and
■ Inverted L techniques
complicate the closure.
■ Field or line block
■ A caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine helps conlrol tenesmus during surgery.
Surgical Technique
■ Drape the palient with a regional, fenestrated, moisure-resistant material; anchor if
 horoughly wih towel clamps.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   155
■Make he abdominal incision.
● Start a vertical skin incision at he midparalumbar site and extend it ventrally far
enough to allow delivery of the fetus
 The size of he ferus was eslimated during the presurgical examination.
● Use a modified muscle-spreading incision. Avoid cutfing the main body of the
external oblique muscle located in lhe ventral aspect of incision.
● Puncure the peritoneum at the dorsal commissure of the incision and extend the
incision ventrally with scissors or a protected scalpel.
n  '  jo is p s a a  d  ag 
lone, and whelher laceralions exist. Locate he fip of the pregnant uterine horn
● Grasp the leg of the fetus within the tip of the uterine horn and bring he fip of the
horn into the abdominal incision.
● Do not grasp the ip of he horn without including the foot of he felus or you
may tear the uterus.
 This maneuver may take some efforf; rocking or swinging the uterus may
facilitate exposure.
● In general, a calf in posterior presentation is more difficult to move into position
into the abdominal incision.
■ Make the uterine incision.
● It is imperalive that he uterine incision be placed in the greater curvature of the
Technique
pregnant horn and be suffciently long to allow removal of the calf wihout tearing
he uterus.
If the ferus is extremely large and
● A few minutes lo ensure he correct location and length of the uterine incision
viable or if the fip of the uterine
will save many minutes during suturing of the uterus and greatly improve the
horn cannot be brought into the
reproductive prognosis of the dam.
abdominal incision, carry a scalpel 
● With the ip of the uterine horn (including the fetal foot siluated in the abdominal
blade intraabdominally (shield the 
incision, incise the uterus over the greater curvarure; start at the lip of the horn
edge of the blade with your fingers!
and extend he incision toward he cervix. Make the uterine incision long enough
and make a blind incision on the
bo bring the rear legs (anterior presentationj or the front legs and head (posterior
greater curvarure of the uterus as
presentation) through the abdominal incision.
near the fip of the pregnant horn as
● A second oplion to ensure an incision of adequate lengh in the uterine horr
possible. Then, grasp a fetal leg and,
is to make a 10 to 15 cm (4- to 5-inchj incision in the greater curvaure that
as you apply marked tension, bring
begins at least 25 to 30 cm (10 to 12 inches) from he fip of the horn. Start a
he leg and the fip of the uterus into
second incision closer to he lip of the horn, and connect the wo incisions.
he proper position.
● The uterine incision may be lengthened during delivery if necessary to avoid
uterine tears.
 Deliver the fetus.
● Anterior fetal presentation
◆ Apply obstetic chains to he rear legs [double loop one above and one below
he fetlock), and pull in a dorsal and lateral direclion unfil he pelvic area is
brought through the abdominal incision. Then apply lateral traction until the calf
is delivered.
◆ Make sure that the tail of the calfis in a down posilion and not up over the
back, which increases the diameter of he calf and the size of the incision
required for delivery.
* Extend the uterine incision if indicated during delivery.
★ Extend the skin incision ventrally if indicated to accommodale a large fetus.
● Posterior fetal presentation
● Apply obstelric chains to he forelegs (double loop one above and one below
he felock), but do not apply raclion until he fetal head is brought through the
abdominal incision. (A head snare may be used if needed.) 
● After the fetal head is exposed, place frachion on the forelegs in a dorsal and
lateral direction to bring he shoulders through the abdominal incision. Then use
lateral traction to deliver the calf.
156   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Suturing
Uterus
Note
■ Grasp the lip of the uterine horn immediately after delivery of the calf and bring the
uterine incision outside the abdominal incision.
While suturing ideally an assistant or
■ Avoid or at least minimize intraperitoneal spillage of uterine Fluids; however, Fluid
he client altends to the calf as you
spillage associated with a viable, noncontaminated calf is usually inconsequential.
altend to the cow.
■ Remove the placenta if it is loose. Ifit is fight, trim he tags and place he placenta 
back in he uterus.
 Administer uterine antibiotics, preferably in bolus form.
■ Use No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut or comparably sized synthelic absorbable
surure material.
■ Close the uterine incision with an invering suhure pattern (Cushing, Connell, Lembert,
Utrecht, or Guard).
● Start suluring at he end of the incision nearest the cervix. Involution may cause
rapid retraclion of he uterus into the peritoneal caviry.
● One efficient row of surures is adequate if uterine involution is rapid. A double
row of surures is preferred.
● The objeclive is to seal the uterine incision completely.
■ Remove all blood clots from the uterine wall to avoid adhesion formation.
■ Place the uterus back in its normal posilion in the peritoneal caviry and check it for
lacerations.
■ Administer intraperitoneal medication (e.g., soluble tetracycline diluted in sterile
saline) if desired.
Abdomen
Cross-Reference
■ Suture the abdominal wall in a routine three-layer closure.
Refer to Chapter 9.
Postoperative Care
■ Do not apply wound powder or antiseplics to normal skin incisions, as hey tend to
slow healing.
■ Administer medication and luids:
● Oxytocin (stimulates further urerine conlractions and milk letdown)
● Intravenous fluids
Note
● Systemic antibiotics
A common but minor complication
● Calcium herapy if indicated
bo standing cesarean section is 
 The placenta is generally passed within 24 hours of surgery.
 subcutaneous emphysema.
● Retained placenta occasionally occurs.
This disorder can be prevented
■ Check he health of the calf.
by forcing the excess air out of the
● Treat irs navel with iodine.
abdominal cavity before sealing the
● Ensure that the calf receives adequate high-qualiry colostrum.
 interior abdominal layer.
 Check he patency of he dam's teats and the potential milk supply, especiallyif a 
 Subcutaneous emphysema resolves
live calf was delivered or the cow is to be used for nursing.
 spontaneously in days or weeks.
■Remove skin sutures in 14 ho 21 days.
Ventral Abdominal Paramedian Cesarean Section
Presurgical Procedures
■ Perform a horough vaginal exploration to determine the physical state of the fetus
and irs position and presentation. A rectal examinalion may also be indicated to
assess condirions hat cannot be evaluated via vaginal examination. An efficient,
short general physical examinalion of the animal is also suggested.
■ Determine the general healh of the dam and whether Fluid therapy or other reatment
is needed.
 Discuss the prognosis, surgical risk, and fees with the owner.
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia using a moderate dose hat will facilitate casting
the cow.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   157
■ Administer a caudal epidural to control tenesmus during surgery (very
important).
■ Cast the patient (Burley method preferred) in dorsal recumbency with legs
extended.
● Identify the subcutaneous abdominal vein before casting the cow.
■ Perform other presurgical checks, the same as those used for a standing
procedure.
Surgical Site Preparation
■ Clip long hair with large animal clippers (remove excess debris with a curry comb
before clipping).
■ Use a No. 40 clipper head to remove addirional hair.
 Surgically scrub the skin with a soff nylon brush, water, and an iodophor solution.
● Three 2- to 3-minute scrubs are suggested.
■ Rinse horoughly.
■ Spray the incision area with an iodophor solution for additional antisepsis.
Anesthesia
■ Infuse a field block of 2% lidocaine (epinephrine can be used] along he proposed
incision line.
Surgical Technique
■ Drape the patient with large, regional, fenesrated, moisture-resistant material and 
anchor it adequately to the skin with towel clamps.
 Incise the skin, subcutaneous fissue, muscle, and perioneum.
■ The paramedian incision should extend from just cranial to he udder to the umbilicus
 berween the midline and the right subcutaneous abdominal vein.
■ Grasp the caudal edge of the omentum and pull it craniad to expose the
Technique
uterus.
● Do not incise the greater omentum.
 The paramedian incision may
be lengthened cranially past the
● An intact greater omentum will help seal and protect he ventral abdominal
incision (peritoneum) afer the surgery.
umbilicus, if necessary, ho deliver
he calf. Avoid cutting large veins if
 Explore the peritoneal caviry.
● Determine the viabiliry of the uterine fissue and he size and shape of he fetus
possible; ligate or use forcipressure
within he uterus.
for hemostasis.
● locate he lip of the pregnant horn.
● Manipulate the lip of the pregnant horn into the abdominal incision.
● To manipulate the uterus and avoid tears, always include an appendage of the
ferus within your grasp.
■ Make he uterine incision.
● Incise along the greater curvature; start at the tip of he horn and extend the
incision toward the cervix as needed to remove he calf.
● Avoid cutting the colyledons.
 Deliver the calf.
● In cases of anterior presentation, grasp the rear legs and apply obstetric
chains.
● In cases of posterior presentalion, expose the forelimbs and the head, and bring
 he head through the urerine and abdominal incisions before applying traclion to
 the forelegs.
● With steady, controlled traction on the legs, deliver he calf.
● Enlarge the uterine or abdominal incision or boh if indicated.
● During delivery, grasp the uterine lissue. Preferably, keep he uterine incision 
outside the abdominal incision to preclude spillge of uterine Fluids into the
 peritoneal cavily.
158   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● In the case of a dead calf or to avoid spillage of heavily contaminated uterine
 Fluids into the abdominal cavily:
 Pack around the uterine incision site with wet towels before you incise the uterus
bo avoid peritoneal contamination.
You may have assistanrs roll the cow from dorsal recumbency to lateral
recumbency just before you incise the uterus. This change allows uterine fluid to
escape ourside the peritoneal cavily and avoids contaminatlion.
■ Administer uterine antibiotics, preferably as a bolus.
Suturing
Uterus
■ Ideally, an assistant or the client will work with the calf while you attend to the
cow.
■ Grasp the lip of the uterine horn immediately after delivery of the calf and bring the
uterine incision ourside the abdominal caviry.
■ Avoid or at least minimize intraperitoneal spillage of uterine Fluids.
● Fluid spillage associated with a viable, noncontaminaled calf is usually
inconsequential.
■ Remove the placenta if it is loose. If it is firmly atached, trim the tags and place the
placenta back in the uterus.
 Administer uterine antibiotics, preferably as a bolus.
■ Use No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut or comparably sized synhelic absorbable
 surure material.
■ Close the uterine incision with an invering suhure pattern (Cushing, Connell, Lembert,
Utrecht, or Guardj.
Technique
■ Remove all blood clots from the uterine wall to avoid adhesion formation.
■ Place the uterus back in its normal position, and check it for lacerations.
Start suuring at the end of the
■ Administer intraperitoneal medication (e.g., soluble tetracycline diluted in sterile
incision nearest the cervix. Involution
saline) if desired.
may cause rapid retraclion of the
■ Place the greater omenum back in its normal position.
uterus into the peritoneal cavily and
complicate closure.
Abdomen
 One efficient row of sutures to seal
■ Peritoneum and aponeurosis of the muscles
he uterus is adequate. A double row
● This suhure line is under significant tension. Use a suture material that is strong and
of sutures is preferred
will not cut or tear the fissue.
● Use sterile suture material.
● Cotton umbilical tape 3 to 4 mm (0.25 inches) wide that is doubled and
tape 5 to 7 mm (0.375 inches) wide in a single strand have been used
successfully.
★ Cotton tape has excellent fissue-holding power and is nonabsorbable. These
sterile colton may be buried without serious consequence.
★ Oher absorbable and nonabsorbable heavy suture material may be used.
● Simple interrupted sutures are recommended; however, a simple continuous
 pattern may be employed.
● Place he suures with moderate to marked rension.
● Tighten he suure knors and cur he ends of he material so that a l-to 1.5-cm (O.5
inches) length remains.
■ Subcutaneous tissue
● Use No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut or comparably sized synthetic absorbable
suhure material.
intermittenly to the abdominal tunic to preclude dead space, which can
produce a seroma.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   159
Skin
● Use exra heavy (#3 or heavier) synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material.
● An interrupted horizontal mattress or Ford interlocking suhure pattern is
recommended.
● Anchor the surures intermittently to the subcutaneous fissue
● Place marked tension on the sutures to evert skin edges and provide a skin seal.
● Pace a minimum of three throws on each knot and cur lhe ends of he material so
hat a minimum lengh of 1 cm (0.5 inch) remains.
Postoperative Care
■ Remove he restraining ropes, place he cow in lateral recumbency for a short
period, and hen place it in sternal recumbency. Allow he cow to altain α standing
 position on its own volirion.
 Consider use of medication and fluids:
● Oxytocin (stimulates further uterine contraclions and milk letdown)
● Intravenous or oral fluids
● Systemic antibiotics
● Calcium therapy if indicated 
■ The placenta is generally passed wihin 24 hours of surgery.
· Retained placenta occasionally occurs.
 Check the health of the calf.
● Treat irs navel with iodine.
● Ensure that he calf receives adequate high-qualily colostrum.
■ Check the patency of the dam's teats and the potential milk supply, especially if a 
live calf was delivered or he cow is to be used for nursing.
■ Remove skin surures in 14 to 2ldays.
Cesarean Section for Treatment of Advanced Hydrallantois or
Hydramnios Hydrops Ammantois or Hydrops Amnion 
General Considerations
■ Surgery is given prime consideration in advanced cases in which inducing abortion
is not feasible.
● In rupure of the prepubic tendon, often concurrent with advanced hydrops, an
 induced aborion is not feasible because he dam is incapable of abdominal press.
 The prognosis is guarded to unfavorable in all cases.
Note
● Shock and sepric meritis are common sequelae of boh cesarean seclion and
 In cases of general debilitation, an
induced abortion.
● In surgery, lessen the potenial for shock by reducing the uterine mass in stages.
 induced aborion may create too
● After surgery, reat metritis and shimulate uterine involution.
great α stress over fime. Alhough
surgery is also stressful, it may be 
Presurgical Procedures
less successful.
 Standing restraint is preferred.
■ Use either the right or left paralumbar approach.
■Administer minimal sedation
■ Prepare the incision site as in a leff or right paralumbar approach cesarean section.
■ Administer a distal lumbar paravertebral or inverted L nerve block
Surgical Technique
■ Use a rouline paralumbar approach (terminal gestation) cesarean section with
variations as noted in the following:
● Drain he uterine luid via one or hwo paracentesis needles of 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inch)
long, wih 10 to 12 gauge, inserted into he urerus through the right venral abdomen 
Reduce the total volume by about one-third immediately before the cesarean
section.
160   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● After rouline abdominal incision and uterine orientation, incise he dilated uterus
on the dorsal aspect as far craniad as possible. Make the incision long enough to
Note
remove he fetus.
● No altempt should be made to bring he uterus out through the abdominal
The spilling of uncontaminated
incision.
uterine fluid into the peritoneal
● Grasp the legs of the calf hrough the uterine incision and deliver the calf.
cavily is not considered a serious
The calf is commonly quite small for this stage of pregnancy and can easily be
consequence; in fact, absorption
of intraperitoneal Fluid may counter
delivered.
 Delivery generally reduces the uterine mass by an addirional onethird.
simultaneous dehydration.
By using a dorsal uterine
● No altempt should be made to remove the placenta via he uterine incision.
 incision and allowing retentrion of 
● Administer uterine medication; a bolus is preferred.
● Maneuver the uterine incision into the abdominal incision and suture with a
considerable fluid (about one-third
 continuous inverring pattern.
of the total massj in he uterus, the
●Inraperitoneal anibiotics [e.g., soluble tetracycline in sterile saline) is
danger of shock associated with 
 eiher too rapid or too great a
suggested.
● Perform a rourine abdominal closure.
reduction of uterine mass is lessened
Postoperative Care
■ Postoperative medication is primarily aimed at preventing seplic metritis and surgical
shock (immediately afer surgery). Administer uterine stimulans at marked dosages.
 Repeat daily if indicated.
■ Remaining uterine Fluids are usually discharged in 24 to 48 hours. Passage of the
placenta may be delayed for several days or longer. Repeated uterine medication
via the cervix may be indicated.
■ Marketing the patient for meat salvage after recovery is advisable.
Other Surgical Procedures Used to Aid Delivery
Symphysiotomy
■ Commonly known as splitting the pelvis
■ Should be altempted only on heifers younger than 30 months of age (before
permanent fusion of the symphysisj
● Used primarily on feedlot heifers
 Although symphysiotomy has been used successfully, serious animal welfare issues
exist. Disadvantages include:
● The procedure is considered painful; no efficient means of aneshesia is available
for the pafient maintaining the required standing position.
● The technique produces posterior incoordination, which could be harmful if
 slippery floors or icy conditions exist.
● Puncture of the peritoneum during the procedure may result in
peritonitis.
● Formation of an osteogenic ridge on the floor of the pelvis may limit fuhure natural
parturitions.
Episiotomy
■ Increases he diameter of the vaginal orifice
● Recommended if the size of the vaginal orifice hinders delivery
 Indicated primarily for immaure heifers 
■ Dorsolateral incisions are recommended.
● Make one or hwo incisions at the I l-o'clock or l-o'clock posilion.
■ Suture the incisions after the delivery with No. O or l medium chromic
gut or other synthetic absorbable material in a simple interrupted suture
pattern.
● Sutures will slough spontaneously.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   161
Cesarean Section in Sheep and Goats
Indications and General Considerations
 Indications are similar to those in other species:
● To aid delivery and to manage dystocia in cases of a relatively oversized fetus, an
emphysematous ferus, or a small pelvic passageway in the dam.
● Occasionally to terminate pregnancy when he ewe suffers from pregnancy
loxemia or ketosis ("lambing fever").
● To aid delivery when the ewe has ringwomb (failure of the cervix to dilate).
 Ewes are more easily restrained than are other large domestic animals
Success of ovine cesarean seclion depends on early observalion of dystocia by the client.
● Ewes respond well to cesarean seclion when dystocia is freated early.
Restraints and Incision Sites
Dorsal Recumbency and Ventral Abdominal Paramedian incision
 This approach is preferred under most conditions.
■ Compared with the Hlank approach, less wool needs ho be removed and less 
 abdominal muscularure must be penetrated.
 It also provides more space for he incision and easier access to the uterus.
Dorsal Recumbency and Ventral Abdominal Incision in a Denuded Flank
■ Similar to he supramammary oblique incision described for catle.
 This site can also be used with dorsolateral restraint.
■ By using a naturally denuded area, less wool needs to be removed from the surgical
Field.
Lateral Recumbency and Paralumbar incision
 Not preferred because large amounts of wool must be removed.
Standing Left or Right Paralumbar Fossa Incision
 Often overlooked as a viable oplion for cesarean seclion in the ewe and doe.
 Goats will resist dorsal or lateral reslraint.
● An assistant must help restrain the animal.
■ A milking stand or blocking shand works well.
■ If the animal will not remain standing hroughout the procedure, do not use his approach.
Anesthesia
Caution!
■ Muliple options exist for anesthesia in sheep and goars.
Be aware of lidocaine overdose.
● Local infitration of 2% lidocaine in a field, line, or inverted L block.
● A lumbosacral epidural is also a good aneshelic for this procedure, but be alert
Do not inject more than 3 mg of 
for possible shock.
lidocaine per pound of body weight.
● General anesthesia is also an option.
■ If the patient is to remain down throughout the procedure, give a moderate sedalion
dose.
Ventral Abdominal Paramedian Cesarean Section
Recommendation
Presurgical Procedures
 Administer moderate sedation or analgesia
 Perform surgery under aseptic
■ Use dorsal restraint with the palien's legs extended.
conditions or, in cases where
■ Remove wool or hair wih appropriate clippers or by carefully plucking he wool.
aseptic surgery is impossible,
■ Scrub he skin several rimes with warm water and an iodophor scrub; each rime
under extremely clean conditions.
scrub 2 to 3 minutes. Use colton for scrubbing because the skin is sensitive.
Wear sterile elbow or shoulder
■ After scrubbing, spray the skin with the residual iodophor solution.
length rubber gloves.
■ Administer a local line infusion with 2% lidocaine at the proposed incision site.
162   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Surgical Technique
■ Cover the patient with a fenestrated, moishure-repellent regional drape.
■ Incise the right paramedian area from just cranial to the udder anteriorly to the
level of he umbilicus midway berween the linea alba and the right subcutaneous
abdominal vein.
● The skin and abdominal wall are very hin and are readily incised. Be careful not
lb penetrate too deeply; identify the tissue layers while you incise.
● The peritoneum is best incised by grasping he rissue, puncruring it, and then
 enlarging the incision wih a protected scalpel or scissors.
● Do not incise the greater omenum beneath the peritoneum.
+ The omenrum in sheep is very hin and lacy, so it tears easily.
■ Grasp he ip of a uterine horn and expose the horn through the abdominal incision.
If fetuses are present in bom horns, expose one horn at a time.
 Make he uterine incision. Start at the ip of the horn and incise over the greater curvalure
Recommendation
as you avoid he colyledons. The lengh of the incision should be adequate for delivery.
An assistant, if available, should
■ Grasp he lamb or kid by the rear legs or by he forelegs and head, and use traction
care for he live lambs by:
for delivery.
 Srimulating respiration
● Occasionally, a second fetus may be removed through the first uterine incision
 Clearing mucus from the 
by maneuvering the fetus around the uterine bifurcation. However, more often a
respiratory tract
second incision in the opposilte horn is required.
 Shortening he umbilical cord and 
■ Remove the placenta ifit is loose. If it is fight, trim he hags and place it back in its
 applying a strong tincrure of iodine
 normal posilion.
bo he cord
■ Administer uterine antibiotics
 Drying the body with towels
Suturing
and placing the lamb in warm
Uterus
surroundings
■ Use No. O or 1 medium chromic gur or comparable synthelic absorbable surure
 Ensuring adequate colostrum
material swedged onto an alraumatic needle.
intake
■ Surure in a continuous invering pattern. Add a reinforcing row if deemed prudent.
 Check the uterine horns for rears. If present, suture.
 Remove all blood clots from the uterus.
■ Place the uterine horns back in the peritoneal cavily in their normal position.
■ Administer intraperitoneal medication (e.g. soluble tetracycline in sterile saline)
Abdomen
Note
■ Peritoneum and abdominal musculature:
 Surures rightened by pulling parallel
● Use No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut or comparably sized synthetic suure material
wih a curved culingedge needle.
or down he line of the incision are 
● Sterile nonabsorbable sutures may be considered for he peritoneum and muscles
less likely to tear han tightening
 as added insurance against potential herniation.
surures by pulling perpendicular or
● A simple interrupted surure paltern is suggested; however, α simple continuous
across the incision line.
pattern may be used if surure ends are adequately knotted.
■ Skin:
● Use heavy synthetic nonabsorbable suure material and a curved culting-edge needle.
● Use a continuous horizontal maltress sulure paern with adequate tension for eversion.
Postoperative Care
■ Administer oxytocin for milk letdown in the case of viable lambs.
Recommendation
■ Check the udder and teats for normal function.
 If lumbosacral epidural anesthesia
■ Administer systemic antibiotics as deemed prudent.
is used, place he ewe in a quiet,
 Treat the lambs and kids by:
well-bedded, nonslippery area until it
● Dipping umbilical stumps in a strong incture of iodine
● Giving an adequate dose of selenium and vitamin E
can stand.
● Providing adequate colostrum
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   163
Vertical incision
Walker'sincision
Wright's incision
FIGURE 14-11. Porcine cesarean section with the patient in lateral recumbency.
Incisions may be placed on either the right or the leff side of he abdomen.
Cesarean Section in Sows
Indications
Note
 To deliver relatively oversized fetuses in small, immalure dams
■ To deliver emphysematous fetuses. The dam is usually hypotensive and toxic and will
 Commonly, under Field condirions,
not be able to deliver normally.
cesarean sechions will be attempted
uq a loau paois snay snouasydua uo Aq pasnns piasp aouo oh 
after the sow has been in labor for a
canal affer a normal delivery of viable fetuses but an incomplete passage of the 
minimum of 6 to 12 hours.
placenta
 The prognosis for the piglets and
● To manage dystocia caused by an emphysematous fetus 24 to 48 hours afer an
he dam is guarded to unfavorable
apparenly normal delivery of viable feluses with the passage of a large amount of
when dystocia lasts 12 hours or
placenta. Owners ofen mistake his condifion for agalactia or inappetence in the dam.
more.
To deliver fetal monsters associaled with dystocia
 It has been suggested that clients
■ To aid delivery complicated by lacerations of the vaginal canal as a result of
observe sows more closely so that
improper manual atempts to alleviate the dystocia. The subsequent inflammatory
cesarean seclion can be performed 
response reduces the diameter of the birth canal and precludes normal delivery.
earlier in labor.
■ To aid delivery complicated by uterine ineria. This condifion is often associated with
deep-sided sows and a hyperthermic environment.
■ To deliver fetuses in pathogen-free pig production programs.
Restraints and Incision Sites
Right or Left Side Lateral Recumbency Restraint (Figure 141 1)
 A verlical incision in either he right or the leff paralumbar flank.
● The choice berween the right or left side is that of the surgeon and is often dictated
by the surgeon's dexieriry.
 A horizontal incision in the venral paralumbar area about 7 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inches)
 dorsal, lateral and parallel to heavily developed mammary lissue (Wrigh's incision).
 A horizontal incision in the ventral paralumbar area about 5 to 7 cm (2 to 3 inches)
dorsal to Wrighr's incision and corresponding to he area just dorsal and lateral
b he rectus muscle (Walker's incisionj. This incision prevents he weight of the
mammary gland from pulling directly on he edge of the incision.
164     Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Umbilicus-
Mammary glands
Incision
FIGURE 14-12. Porcine cesarean section with the patient in dorsal recumbency. The
venral abdominal incision runs from the pubic area to he umbilicus.
Dorsal Recumbency Restraint with a Ventral Midline Incision
(Figure 14-12)
■ A longitudinal incision berween the rows of mammary glands from he pubis to the
umbilicus
■ Allows for excellent access to both uterine horns and the vaginal ract
■ A properly made incision involves a minimum of rissue and vasculature compared
with flank incisions.
Anesthesia
General Considerations
psape ou si uoissaidap ioal sasos iou oisausaue iosihins dea 
■ Aneshesia hat allows the dam to nurse immediately after surgery has a high priorily.
■ Anesthesia that can be easily administered with a minimum of assistance is
suggested.
■ Llight sedation with a local block to remove the piglets followed by a deeper plane of
 anesthesia for suburing has worked well.
Lumbosacral Epidura!
■ 15 to 20 ml of 2% lidocaine (maximum 20 ml; no epinephrine) for an average
120-to 145-kg (250 to 400 pound) sow
Field Block Infusion
■ May be considered, especially for toxic sows
■ May be combined with light to moderate sedarion or analgesia if deemed prudent
Surgical Procedures
Right or Left Flank Incision
Presurgical Procedures
■ Restrain in lateral recumbency.
■ Prepare the incision site.
● Remove hair with a No. 10 clipper head (shaving is not warranted and is difficull.
● Thoroughly scrub the area with a nylon brush, an iodophor scrub and warm
water. After scrubbing, spray with the iodophor solution.
● Do not scrub the skin aggressively because it is sensifive and can easily be
irritated.
 If using Field block anesthesia, infuse he area at this time.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   165
Surgical Technique
■ Apply an adequately sized, feneslrated, moisture-resistant drape to the surgical
Note
area.
 In the midparalumbar region, make a vertical skin incision large enough to allow
■Although complete capping and 
inserlion of your arm.
 gowning are often impractical
■ Use he modified muscle-spreading technique. This technique may involve considerable
 under field condirions, emphasis
adipose lissue. The peritoneum will usually bulge ourward when exposed.
 should be placed on adhering to
 Grasp the peritoneum with he forceps and puncture and incise it carefully. The
sterile technique.
 peritoneum is often in close contact with the abdominal viscera.
 Sterile elbow or shoulder
● Spillage of considerable peritoneal Fluid is common affer the peritoneal incision,
length gloves for both arms are
especially if the dam has been in labor for an extended period.
recommended.
● The urinary bladder is often distended; use caution to avoid incising he bladder.
■ Explore he peritoneal cavily and locate he bifurcation of the uterus. Check for
uterine tears and possible exirauterine fetuses.
■ Grasp a ferus within the uterus just beyond the bifurcation and bring he fetus
(enclosed in the uterus) through the abdominal incision.
■ Repeat the above procedure unil the majorilty of one horn of the uterus is outside the
body.
■ Make a longiudinal uterine incision on the greater curvature of the uterus.
● Deliver as many piglets as possible through one incision.
● The number of incisions required will depend on he size of the fetuses and
heir maneuverabiliry inside the uterine horns. One incision in the region of the
bifurcation is ideal, but as many as one incision per feus may be necessary.
● Either observe or palpate the entire uterine horn
 Keep the uterine fissue moist during surgery. A sterile saline solurion, which may
include soluble antibiotics, is suggested.
Recommendation
 Remove he placenta if it is loose. If it is tight, do not dishurb it.
■ Administer uterine antibiofics before sururing.
Always explore the vaginal canal for
feruses.
 Suhure he uterine incision.
 Repeat the procedure on the opposite uterine horn.
 Suhuring he uterine incision
● The uterus in sows hat have been in labor for a number of hours is very friable.
● Use caution to avoid tearing he uterine wall with the sutures.
● Always tighten he suhures by pulling down the incision line. If you pull across
he incision line, you increase the risk of pulling he suhure through the uterine
wall.
● Use No. l or 2 absorbable suure material and a swedged on alraumatic needle
● Use an invering suure pattern, as described for cows
●If mulriple incisions are needed, surure the First incision before additional incisions
are made.
 Remove blood clots from the uterine wall.
 Situate the uterine horns in the peritoneal cavily in their normal position.
■ Make a Final check for undetected piglers, especially in the pelvis and birth canal.
 Intraperitoneal medicalion is recommended. Administer a herapeutic dose of soluble
etracycline diluted in sterile saline.
Suturing the Abdomen
 Peritoneum: Use No. O or 1 absorbable sulure material swaged on a curved
 Caution!
araumatic needle
Muscle layers:
Remove excess adipose fissue
● Use No. 2 absorbable suure material on a curved atraumalic needle
from the incision line and do not
● Use a simple continuous suture paltern. Place moderate tension on the suure line,
incorporate adipose fissue into the
and triple tie the surure knot.
surure line.
Cut the sulure material so that he ends are 1 cm (O.5 inch) long
166    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Skin:
● Use extra-heavy synthetic nonabsorbable suture material on a large, curved
cuting-edge needle hat can easily penetrate tough pigskin without bending.
● Use a continuous interlocking suture pattern.
● Apply moderate to marked tension on the sutures. The incision edges should be in
direct apposition to stimulate a rapid, adequate incision seal.
Postoperative Care
■Medication:
Recommendation
● Oxytocin given intramuscularly to stimulate uterine contractions and milk letdown
● Drugs to prevent or correct shock and toxemia
Strongly consider fostering the
●Addirional systemic antibiotics if necessary
piglets onto a surrogate dam. It is
very common for a sow fo develop
● Repeat oxytocin and systemic antibiotics as indicated
agalactia affer cesarean section and
■ Addifional care:
he piglets may die of hypoglycemia
iodine.
 or hypothermia.
● Check the dam's mammary gland for viable teats and available milk.
● Provide the patient with a laxative diet and adequate water.
● Remove skin sulures in 14 ho 21 days.
Ventral Abdominal Midline Incision
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use dorsal recumbency restraint, wilh the legs extended
■ Removal of hair is unnecessary
■ Scrub he incision area several times, 2 to 3 minutes each, with warm water
and an iodophor scrub and colton. Do not use a harsh hand brush in this area.
Concentrate on the ventral midline from he pubis to the umbilicus, but include
all mammary glands. A residual spray of the iodophor solution after scrubbing is
suggested.
Anesthesia
■ Llight general anesthesia is suggested until he piglers are removed, followed by a
 deeper plane of anesthesia.
● This procedure requires additional local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine.
■ Lumbosacral epidural anesthesia 
● In addition to the epidural, moderate sedation is required
Surgical Technique
■ Cover he patient with a regional, fenestraled, moisture-resistant drape.
■ Incise the skin on the midline from the pubic area to the umbilicus. The midline has
only minor vascularure; forcipressure is usually adequate for hemostasis.
■ Separate he mammary chain by blunt dissechion and traclion. Expose he linea alba
■ Carefully incise the abdominal tunics (linea alba] and peritoneum.
● These fissues are relatively thin.
● The abdominal viscera are usually in direct contact with the peritoneum.
● Excessive periloneal fluid is commonly associated wih prolonged dystocia.
● Beware of incising the bladder
■ Explore he peritoneal caviry and check the uterine horns for tears. Assess the
viabiliry of uterine fissue and the placement of fetuses.
■ Incise the uterus longiudinally on the greater curvature. (Delivery of the piglets
is often achieved more easily with the midline incision han with other incisions
because of excellent access to he uterus.)
● The number of incisions required will depend on the size of the fetuses and their
maneuverabiliry inside he uterine horns. One incision in he region of bifurcation
is ideal, but as many as one incision per ferus may be necessary.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System  167
● Eiher observe or palpate each uterine horn for feruses
● Always explore the pelvis and birth canal for feruses
 Keep the uterine fissue moist during surgery. A sterile saline solurion, which may
include soluble antibiotics, is suggested.
 Remove he placenta if irt is loose. If ir is fight, do not dishurb ir.
 Administer uterine antibiotics
 Suuring he uterine incision
● Use No. 1 or 2 absorbable suure and a swedged on atraumalic needle.
● Use an invering suure pattern as described for cows.
● If multiple incisions are used, suure the first incision before making additional
incisions.
● The uterus in sows that have been in labor for a number of hours is very
friable.
+ Use caulion to avoid tearing he uterine wall with the surures.
◆ Always ighten the suures by pulling down the incision line. If you pull across
he incision line, you increase he risk of pulling he suure through the uterine
wall.
■ Place the uterine horns in he peritoneal caviry in their normal posilion.
■ Intraperioneal medication is recommended. Administer a therapeutic dose of soluble
letracycline diluted in sterile saline.
Suturing the Abdomen
■ Abdominal tunics and peritoneum:
● Use No. 2 or 3 absorbable suhure material with α swedged on, curved cuingedge
needle.
● A simple interrupted suhure pattern is suggested; however, a simple continuous
paltern may be adequate ifit is properly placed and he knots are adequately
fied.
■ Skin:
● Use medium to heavy synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material on a medium-sized,
curved culing-edge needle. Do not use an irritating suure material because it may
interfere with nursing.
● Use an interrupted horizontal mattress paltern. Apply moderate tension.
● Cut the sulure material ends short to prevent piglers from sucking on the ends.
Postoperative Care
Medication:
● Oxytocin given intramuscularly to stimulate uterine contractions and milk
letdown
● Drugs to prevent or correct shock and toxemia
● Additional systemic antibiotics if indicated
● Repeat oxytocin and systemic antibiotics as indicated
■Additional care:
● Remove excess umbilical cord from viable piglets and treat navel stumps with
iodine.
● Check the dam's mammary gland for viable teats and available milk.
● Provide the palient wih a laxalive diet and adequate water.
● Remove skin suures in 14 ho 21 days.
Repair of Chronic Vaginal Prolapse in Cows
Indications and General Considerations
 Beef cows are primarily affected.
 Excessive deposition of perivaginal fat may be a predisposing factor.
168  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ The tendency toward vaginal prolapse may be inherited (possibly related to
perivaginal fat deposilionj.
Note
● Vaginal prolapse is seen in all breeds, with the Hereford most often affected.
 After surgical correcrion of the
■ Vaginal fissue relaxation, which leads to prolapse, may be associated with
hyperestrogenic agents such as:
prolapse, the cow should be
 permanently identified and salvaged
● Growth stimulants
● Certain molds
for meat when possible. A marked
■ Research in Herefords shows an associated enlargement of he pudendal nerve.
 chance for recurrence of the
■ Excessive fraclion on he fetus to relieve dystocia may contribute bo vaginal instabiliry
condition exists:
During estrus
by loosening and stretching the normal anatomic altachments.
■ Increased intraabdominal pressure associated wih advanced pregnancy may
■In advanced pregnancy
■Postparrum
precipitate prolapse
 Selection of the most feasible repair method depends on:
● Stage of pregnancy or parurition
● Condirion of prolapse
● Postoperatlive observalion by the client or veterinarian
● Marketing potential
● Furure breeding potential
■ Standing resraint and low caudal epidural anesthesia are suggested for most repair
techniques
■ Many methods for repair of vaginal prolapse are available. Most are effective; none
is perfect.
 Many vaginal retenlion echniques shimulate moderate tenesmus.
● Consider a sacral paravertebral alcohol block to control tenesmus 
Note
Vaginal Retention Techniques
Techniques involving vaginal or
Modified Minchev Method
General Considerations
vulval rissues usually stimulate
■ Advocated for use primarily in late pregnancy
postoperative tenesmus.
■ Suturing may stimulate perivaginal adhesions, which prevenrs recurrence of vaginal 
prolapse in some instances.
■Most effeclive when the dorsal vaginal wall is prolapsed, less effective when the
Floor of the vagina is prolapsed.
■ Possible to use for ewes, does, and sows
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use standing restraint
■ Administer a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine.
Modified Minchey
■ Apply a tail rie to expose the vaginal area.
method
Minchev
■ Thoroughly cleanse he vaginal tissue and perineal area.
stay suture
method
■ Debride excessive necrotic fissue.
stay suture
 Carefully relurn the vagina to is normal posiltion.
Surgical Technique (Figure 14-13)
■ For suuring, use a double slrand of 1O-mm (0.5 inch) cotton umbilical tape about
 30 cm (12 inches) long.
■ Role five to 10 gauze pads (4 X 4 inches into a single roll about 5 cm (2 inches) in
diameter and 10 cm (4 inches) long
a louy pun uayau loi aznoa au jo jaua au punoo ada poslqn ay dom ●
suhure material.
● Soak the gauze roll and coton suure in iodophor or povidone-iodine solution.
+ The agent will act as an antiseptic.
FIGURE 14-13. Suture placement in the
 lodine will act as an irritant to stimulate inflammation and adhesions.
 Minchev method and modified Minchev 
■ Thread the distal ends of he cotton suure material onto a straight 4-inch needle with
method.
a rocar point.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   169
 Carry he iodine-soaked gauze roll, sulure, and needle manually into he vagina.
 Push the vagina craniad.
 While you maintain the dorsal vaginal wall in this position, push the suture needle
 through the dorsolateral vaginal wall and perivaginal rissue slighly lateral and
cranial to the lesser sciatic foramen.
● Insert the needle:
· Dorsal to the internal iliac artery
Caudal to the sciatic nerve
 Continue advancing the needle until it penetrates the skin in an imaginary line from
he huber ischi to the tuber sacrale. A small skin incision made with the scalpel will
facilitate this penetration.
■ Grasp the needle outside the skin, and apply dorsal traclion to bring the intravaginal
roll of gauze into contact with the dorsal vaginal wall.
● The roll of gauze should be situated parallel to he internal iliac artery. This
position is essenfial to avoid pressure on he artery.
 Remove surure material from the needle.
■ Place a second roll of gauze against he skin and beween the surure strands.
 Apply marked tension to the suture srands and knot the suture.
● The second roll of gauze is in direct contact wih the skin.
● The outside gauze roll protecis the skin penetration point from environmental
contamination.
● Both rolls of gauze stabilize he dorsolateral wall of the vagina in α cranial
posiltion.
stabilization.
Postoperative Care
■ Administer systemic antibiorics as deemed prudent
■ Surures may stay in posilion for up to 6 to 8 weeks or unil parhurilion and the
Note
immediate poslparhum period, if necessary.
 Damage to the pudendal nerve
 Remove he sutures affter parlurition or within 6 to 8 weeks lo avoid complications.
is a possibiliry using the modified
■ Consider a sacral paravertebral alcohol block of nerves S3, S4, and S5 to control
Minchev technique; however, such
tenesmus
damage is not serious and may
Possible Unfavorable Sequeiae
even be advantageous and produce
 Abscess formation in the area of the sciatic nerve, which may result from inadequate
an effect like that of a surgical
suhure tension or surure contamination
neurectomy.
ans au jo bujuouisod jadoidui Aq pasnoo abouop aanau soios 
 Postoperative tenesmus is common with this rechnique as well as with other
lechniques that involve vaginal rissue innervated by nerves S3, S4, and S5. Trauma
and irritation to the fissue stimulate tenesmus.
● A low caudal epidural with lidocaine or procaine controls tenesmus only
temporarily.
● Marked tenesmus may stimulate tearing of he vaginal wallif an inadequately
sized roll of gauze or other lype of device was used intravaginally.
● Vaginal prolapse may recur affer surgery if the rissue of he vaginal wall is
 excessively loose and flaccid.
Button and Pin Technique
 Commonly referred to as a Johnson button
Very similar to the Minchev technique
 Commercially available kit:
● Plastic buttons replace gauze rolls
● A pin replaces the needle
● A plastic tube connects the inside and ourside bultons
170   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Vagina
Cervix
Suture
Uterine forceps
Pubis
Urinary bladder
FIGURE 14-14. Cervopexy by means of the modified Winkler method. Knowles uterine
forceps are used to stabilize he cervix via the vaginal canal. A paralumbar incision is
Used.
■ The technigue is quick and efficient, with clear instructions included.
■ The kit is inexpensive.
■ The risk of infechion with his technique may be slighly higher than with the modified
Minchev technique.
Cervopexy: Modified Winkler Method (Figure 14-14)
General Considerations
Recommendation
■Advocated for long-term treatment
■ The original Winkler cervopexy was performed strictly via he vaginal canal.
Cervopexy should be used only
for cows with noninherited chronic
Noordsy modified the technique by using the paralumbar incision to facilitate
placing the cervical or prepupic tendon suture.
vaginal prolapse.
■ Cervopexy appears to be the most posirive and permanent technique described to
 Do not perform a cervopexy to
date to control vaginal prolapse in cows.
 perperuate α genetic weakness.
■ Use sterile, noncapillary, nonabsorbable suhure material; capillary suhure material
 Thoroughly assess breed lines
 has the potential for vaginato-peritoneal contamination that could lead o
 and families if you suspect a herd 
problem.
abscessalion and peritonitis.
■ Cervopexy is not advocated for pregnant cows.
Advantages
■ No postoperalive tenesmus occurs because the vagina is not irritated.
■ Does not involve tissues innervated by nerves S3, S4, and S5
 There is no marked interference with breeding or calving potential.
■ The modified technique is performed relatively easily via a paralumbar laparotomy
incision.
■ The treatment is permanent, if properly applied.
Restraint
■ Standing resraint (in a chute with access to the leff paralumbar area)
Presurgical Procedures
■ Light to moderate intravenous sedalion or analgesia is indicated
 Apply a tail fie.
 Thoroughly prepare the left paralumbar fossa for surgery
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   171
Prepubic tendon
Knot
Triangular
spaces
Suture
Suture
location
Prepubic
tendon
FGURE 14-16. Knot placement in the
lliopectineal eminences
modified Winkler method. A knot is
placed in the perioneal cavily (anterior
FIGURE 14-15. Suture placement in the
viewi.
modified Winkler method (dorsal view).
 If the vagina is prolapsed:
● Low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine
● Debride the excessive necrolic fissue
● Wash he vagina thoroughly with warm water and an iodophor scrub.
● Replace he vagina in its normal position.
 If the vagina is in its normal position:
● Flush he vaginal canal thoroughly with an iodophor solurion diluted into several
 gallons of warm water via a stomach tube, shomach pump, and manual massage.
● Remove all water from the vagina.
Anesthesia
■ Administer a distal lumbar paravertebral nerve block (preferred for obese patients)
or α proximal lumbar paravertebral nerve block of T13, L1, and L2 with 2%
lidocaine (epinephrine optional).
 A low caudal epidural is also recommended.
Surgical Technique (Figures 14-15 and 14-16)
 Cover the leff paralumbar area with a large, fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape
 and adequately anchor it to the skin wilh towel clamps.
 Make a verlical skin incision in the midparalumbar fossa.
 Use he musclespreading technique, which is usually adequate for inserlion of your arm.
■ With the jaws of a large Knowles uterine forceps clamped to the ventral lip of the
cervix [via he vagina], an assistant should apply pressure in a cranial direclion to
fully extend the vagina and stabilize the cervix.
■Wih about 2 m (6 feet of extra-heavy synhetic, noncapillary, nonabsorbable suture
material on α large, full-curved, cuting-edge needle, carry the needle (protected in
he palm of your hand) intraperitoneally into the region of the cervix.
 Take α substantial sulure bite into the venlral cervix [which is shabilized by an assistant)
Caution!
via he vagina. The distal end of the suure material remains oulside he incision.
 Carry he suure needle ventrally, and take a substantial bite of 2 to 3 cm (1 inch)
 Do not involve more of the cervix
 into he lateral aspect of the prepubic tendon.
than the ventral portion. Preferably,
■ Bring the needle and sulure material back out through he abdominal incision, and
do not invade the cervical canal.
remove the needle.
■ At this stage, palpate he area of the surure placement thoroughly to ascertain whelher
the urinary bladder or any other undesignaled slructure or fissue is involved in the suure.
■ Tie a surgeon's knot oulside he abdominal incision. Carry one end of he suure 
you hold the end of the second suure slrand taut oulside he abdominal incision.
172    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Apply tension on the knot to bring he cervix close to he prepubic tendon. The distance
may vary: The cervix and prepubic tendon may be apposed or may be several
centimeters apart. Whatever he distance, it is imperalive hat he suure be taut.
 Tie the suure with at least hree throws on a surgeon's knot.
■ Carry a scalpel blade or scissors into the peritoneal cavily, and cut he ends of the
suture material to be 2 to 5 cm long (1 to 2 inches).
■ Again, check the surure for any foreign tissue or organ involvement. If abnormalifies
exist, remove he suhure and repeat the sururing.
■ Use of intraperitoneal antibiolic medication is suggested.
Suturing the Abdomen
■ A routine three-layer closure is advocated.
Postoperative Care
 Administer systemic antibiotics as deemed prudent
■ Remove abdominal skin sutures in 14 to 2l days.
Techniques to Prevent Vaginal Prolapse
General Considerations
■ Numerous methods are available to maintain the vagina in place by restricting
 passage through the vulva.
■ Marked tenesmus is commonly associated with suturing of the vulva.
● In general, the closer the sutures are placed to the lips of the vulva, the greater the
Caution!
lendency for renesmus.
● Placing suures in the hairline around the vulva can reduce the occurrence of tenesmus.
Close observation for impending
■ Most techniques require careful monitoring and removal to allow parhurition.
parturition is essential if the
■ These techniques are not indicated for nonpregnant cows running with bulls. Severe
lechniques are used prepartum.
penile injury could result from natural service.
Shoelace Method (Figure 1417)
General Considerations
■ Usually effective both pre- and poslpartum.
Advantages
 Surures are easy to apply.
■ Sutures are easily removed by the client, if needed.
■ Sutures may be kept in place for extended periods.
Disadvantages
■Offten associated with marked tenesmus
■ Surures must be properly placed and surure tensile strength must be adequate fo
 ensure optimal success.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use standing restraint
■ Administer a low caudal epidural wih 2% lidocaine.
■ Apply a tail rie to expose the vaginal area.
■ Thoroughly cleanse he vaginal tissue and perineal area.
■ Debride excessive necrotic fissue
■ Carefully place the vagina back in its normal posiltion.
Surgical Technique
■ Place three or four (depending on the length of the vulva) skin anchor sutures on 
each side of the vulva via 5- to 8-mm (0.25 to 0.375 inches) cotton umbilical tape
on a large, stable, full-curved, cuting-edge needle. [This needle is essential for taking
FIGURE 14-17. Shoelace mehod.
suture bites through cowhide.)
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   173
■ Place hese sutures in the hairline, which is less sensitive than he area close to the
vulva and has greater holding potential.
● Dorsal sulures should be at he level of or slightly dorsal to the dorsal commissure
of the vulva.
● Ventral sutures should be at the level of or slightly ventral to the ventral commissure
of the vulva.
● Pace one or hwo sutures [depending on he length of the vulva] on a vertical line
berween the dorsal and ventral sutures.
● It is essential that all suhures incorporate an adequate bite of skin and hat all knots
are well tied.
 Cross-lace he anchor suures with a material of adequate tensile strength cotton or
nylon tape. A sash cord or hwine may be considered, but ir must have enough tensile
strengih to withstand he stress associated with tenesmus.
● Each cross-lace may be knotted to increase the efficiency of the technique by
precluding total loss of restraint should one anchor surure fail.
● The lension of the crosslaces should be adequate to prevent protrusion of the
vagina through the vulva.
● The crosslaces may be removed for parturition with the skin anchor suhures left in
place. Cross-laces may be replaced pospartum if necessary.
■ A sacral paravertebral alcohol block is recommended for conrol of postoperative 
tenesmus.
Buried Purse-String Method
General Considerations
 Advocated primarily as postpartum treatment
 Suhure encircles the vulva
 Commonly known as he Palton or Buhner method
Advantages
Technique
■ An excellent posipartum technique. It may also be used advantageously prepartum;
however, strict altention must be given to the release of sutures for parturition and the
A noncapillary synthetic suture tape
passing of the placenta.
should be used in this technique:
■ When properly inserted the surures stay in posirion for extended periods.
It is long lasing and nonirritaring
■Sutures are almost invisible; herefore, the animal is marketable without common
and reduces chances of infection or 
price deductions.
abscessation.
Presurgical Procedures
Use standing restraint
■ Administer a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine.
■ Apply a tail tie to expose the vaginal area.
 Thoroughly cleanse the vaginal rissue and perineal area.
 Debride excessive necrotic fissue
■ Carefully place he vagina back in its normal posirion.
Surgical Technique: Patton or Buhner Needle (Figure 14-18)
 Start lateral to he ventral commissure of the vulva, and insert a Patton or a Buhner
needle [without suture tape) subcutaneously. (Small skin incisions made with a
scalpel at the sites of needle inserlion will facilitate suturing.) Direct the needle
dorsally around the vulva, and exit at a point dorsal to the dorsal commissure of the
vulva.
■ After you expose the needle's eye at he dorsal aspect, thread the needle with 45 to
60 cm (18 to 24 inches) of synthetic tape (Buhner]. While you hold one end of the
subre lape, retract the needle and pull the opposite end of the suhure fape through
FIGURE 14-18. Palton melhod in which a
he subcutaneous ract.
buried purse-shring surure is used.
174   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Perform a similar maneuver on the opposile side of the vulva with the oher end of
 he tape. Thus, the wo ends of he buried tape are now exposed ventral and lateral
to he ventral commissure of the vulva.
■ Reinsert the needle into one of he ventral incisions and direct it laterally unfil the
 point exis through the corresponding incision.
■ Thread the end of the tape emerging from the incision into the needle and retract it
through the subcutaneous tunnel until both ends of the fape emerge from one of the
incisions. This completes he subcutaneous circumferential (purse-string) surure.
● The objeclive is to place a suure that is buried subcutaneously around the vulva.
Only the knot is exposed.
■ Apply tension on the rwo suture ends. Tighten the sulures so hat the vagina does not
prolapse, but allow for normal urinarion. An orifice with a diameter of 5 to 7 cm
[2 to 3 inches) is suggested.
■ Knot the ends. A reefer's knot or bow is recommended.
FIGURE 14-19. Buried purse-string
● This knot allows for postoperative relaxation or ightening of the surure as needed.
wnuodisod jo Aods o buisn anbiuyoa m
● A surgeon's knot may be used and buried subcutaneously if permanency is
essential in specific cases.
needle.
Surgical Technique: Spay or Postpartum Needle (Figure 14-19)
 Thread the needle with syntheric tape
■ Begin at the 5- or 7-o'clock position and 2 to 5 cm [1 to 2 inches) from he lips of the
vulva, and place a purse-string suure subcutaneously around the vulva.
● The 5- or 7-o'clock posilion gives good access to he knot and avoids conslant
urine or fecal contamination.
 The key ho burying the suture is to enter he skin hrough the exit hole from the
previous suture.
■ Apply tension ho he suure ends. Tighten the sutures so that the vagina does not
prolapse, but allow for normal urination. An orifice wih a diameter of 5 to 7 cm
(2 to 3 inches) is suggested.
■ A bow or reefer's knot is suggested to allow for adjustment of suhure tension.
Modified Caslick's Method (Figure 14-20)
General Considerations
■ Recommended primarily for postpartum vaginal prolapse
■ Recommended for correction of pneumovagina
■ May be used to prevent vaginal contaminalion in cows with a tipped vulva
Presurgical Procedures
■Use standing restraint
■ Administer a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine.
■ Apply a tail rie to expose the vaginal area.
■ Thoroughly cleanse he vaginal issue and perineal area.
■ Debride excessive necrotic tissue
 Carefully place the vagina back in irs normal posiltion.
Surgical Technique
■ With scissors or a scalpel, remove 1 to 2 cm (0.5 to 75 inches) of vaginal mucosal
 Fissue from the dorsal rwo-thirds (minimumj of the inner aspects of he lips of the vulva
■ Suture the denuded vaginal rissue with interrupted vertical mattress sutures; use
 synihetic nonabsorbable suure material.
● Closing the vulva in 2 layers may improve he success of he procedure.
● Using verlical mattress sutures places the knots to one side of the incision and
avoids fecal contamination of the knots, which would increase he possibiliry of
FIGURE 14-20. Modified Caslick's
infection and failure of the procedure.
method.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   175
Postoperative Care
 Surures may be left in posilion for 2 to 3 weeks.
■ No affercare is usually indicated.
Other Techniques for Treating Vaginal Prolapse
 The quill suure method (Figure 14-21}
 One large mattress suture across the vulva
■ Cross-pinning with prolapse pins
Third-Degree Perineal Laceration Repair
General Considerations
 Most ofen resuls from a calving injury.
■ Perineal laceration allows fecal contaminalion of the vagina, which is a cause of inferiliy.
■ Prognosis is good affer healing of the repaired laceration.
FIGURE 14-21. Quill suture method.
■ Failure may follow poor technique, occasionally with inadequate healing.
 Repair may be done immediately after injury or after waifing 30 to 60 days until
inflammation has subsided.
 Weakness of the healed fissue may lead to reinjury during the next parlurition.
● Although the surgical area is contaminated, every precaution should be made to
maintain a clean, noncontaminated surgical field.
Keys to Successful Repair of
 Perineal Laceration
Presurgical Procedures
Wihhold feed for 24 to 48 hours ho reduce fecal volume
 Suture the ventral rectum and
 Use standing restraint with limited sideto-side movement.
 dorsal vagina separately.
■ Place a tail lie, to expose he surgical area.
 Invert the rectal incision into the
 Thoroughly cleanse the perineal area.
rectum and he vaginal incision 
■ Fashion a "tampon" from roll cotton, and place it in the rechum anterior to the 
into he vagina.
laceration to minimize fecal contamination during surgery.
 Avoid leakage of feces through 
 Flush the recum and vagina with warm water lo remove fecal material.
 the rectal incision line.
■ Remove excess water from the vagina.
Anesthesia
 Low caudal epidural wih 2% lidocaine and xylazine (preferred method)
■ Extremely deep lacerations may require dorsal restraint and general anesthesia for
adequate exposure and repair.
Surgical Technique
 Place towel clamps or sutures in the vulva and pull the vulva open to visualize the
laceration.
■ Begin at he mucocutaneous junction of the vulva and make a horizontal incision 
along the laceralion site.
● The incision should follow the laceration site and end at he vulva on he opposite
side or he vagina.
● The incision will effectively divide the rectum and the vagina.
 Dissect the fissue along the incision line lo create enough rissue to place a row of
sulures in he ventral rechum and dorsal vagina (Figure 14-22).
■ Suuring he incision.
● Use No. O0 or O absorbable noncapillary subre with a taper needle
● To form the Hloor of the rechum, surure he dorsal edge of the incision on he right to
he dorsal edge of the incision on the leff.
◆ Begin at the most anterior point of the incision and place an interrupted Lembert
suure from right to leff to creale he ventral floor of the rectum.
★ The sulure should invert the incision into he lumen of he rectum.
+ The knot should be outside the rectal lumen.
176   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 14-22. Disseching he area berween the rectum and vagina.
● Avoid penetraling the lumen of the rechum with the surure, which could allow
leakage of fecal material and failure of he incision line.
● To form the dorsal wall of the vagina, suhure he ventral edge of he incision on the 
right to he ventral edge of the incision on he leff.
● Begin at the most anterior point of the incision and place an
interrupted Lembert suture from right to left to create the dorsal vaginal
wall.
* The suure should inver the incision into the lumen of the vagina.
★ The knot should be outside the vaginal lumen.
● Continue fo suure the Hloor of the rechum and the dorsal wall of he vagina
concurrenly.
● The rectal incision will end at the anus.
● The vaginal incision will continue as a modified Caslick method to close he dorsal
one-third of he vulva.
 Digitally check the Floor of the rectum for gaps, openings, or exposed suures that
will allow fecal contaminalion. Repair as needed.
pasodxa jo 'sbuuado sdoe jof ouib au jo lom losiop au yoayo Aoulbia 
sufures.
● A good seal of the dorsal vaginal wall is not as critical as good seal of the floor of
he rechum.
■ Remove the cotton tampon from the rectum.
Postoperative Care
■ Observe the cow for tenesmus.
● If sraining occurs, consider:
● Xylazine epidural
+Sacral paravertebral alcohol block
■ Return the cow to a normal diet, housing, and environment.
■ Avoid natural service for 4 to 6 weeks.
■ Avoid artificial inseminalion service for 2 to 3 weeks.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System    177
FIGURE 14-23. Catheter ube placed in the urethra for urethral extension surgery.
Urethral Extension to Control Urine Pooling
General Considerations
■ Urine pooling is a cause of infertiliry.
 Urine pooling is most often seen in older dairy cows that:
● Are generally thin
● Commonly have a lipped pelvis
● May also have a tipped vulva, with fecal contaminalion of he vagina that will
require a Caslick procedure
■ The conformation of the cow allows he urine lo drain into he vagina instead of
through the vulva.
 By exlending the urethra 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches), pooling of urine in the vagina
can be prevented.
Presurgical Procedures
 Wihhold feed for 24 hours to decrease fecal volume.
 Use standing restraint with limited side-to-side movement.
■ Apply a tail tie and secure the tail away from the vulva.
■ Cleanse the vaginal and perineal area with mild soap and warm water.
■ Evacuate urine and Fluid from he vagina.
■ Flush he vagina with warm water and evacuate the water and Fluid.
Anesthesia
■ Low caudal epidural anesthesia wih 2% lidocaine plus xylazine
● Xylazine is optional but preferred.
Surgical Technique
■ Place towel clamps or surures in the vulva, and spread the vulva for visualization of
 the urethral opening.
■ Place a sterile or disinfected tube into the urethra (Figure 14-23).
● The ube acts as a form around which to surure.
● The minimal ourside diameter (o.d.) of the fube should be I cm (O.5 inches).
178   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 14-24. Suturing the urethral extension.
■ Make the incision.
● Begin the incision anterior to the urethral opening.
● Confinue the incision caudad in he floor of the vagina on each side of the
preplaced hube.
● Key: The incisions along he ube must be separated by a distance hat will
allow the incision ho be surured comfortably over the top of the tube.
A 1-cm-diameter tube will require a 3.5 cm distance berween the incisions.
● Extend the incisions for 5 to 7 cm (2 to 3 inches) or for the lengih of the urethral
extension that you want to create.
 Suturing (Figure 14-24)
● Use No. O or I syntheric absorbable suture material with a swedged on taper needle.
● Suure he incision in rwo layers over the urethral tube.
 The first layer:
★ Begin anterior to he urethra.
★ Suure the medial edge of the incision to the right of the fube to the medial
edge of the incision to he leff of the ube.
★ The sulure line should bury the tube.
+ Use simple interrupted apposifional surures.
+ The second layer:
★ Begin anterior to the urethra
★ Suure the lateral edge of the incision to the right of he ube to the lateral
edge of the incision to the leff of the ube.
★ The suhure line should bury the first suture line.
* Use simple interrupted apposilional surures.
● Make sure hat the most anterior aspect of the suture line is sealed to avoid urine
leakage.
■ Remove the urethral tube (Figure 14-25).
 Remove and flush blood and debris from the vagina.
Postoperative Care
 A cow may show discomfort during urination for the first 24 hours.
FIGURE 14-25. Finished urethral
■ Antibiotics are generally not indicated, alhough bacterial cystifis could occur.
extension.
■Return the cow lo a normal diet, housing, and environment.
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   179
Suggested Reading
Oophorectomy in Cattle
Cain DV Jr, Milliken G. Do different spay techniques and growth implant
frequencies affect weight gain in heifers? Vet Med 81(5): 464-468,
1986.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 379-382.
Noordsy JL. Oophorectomy in catle. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:
1392-1394,1997
Riddell MG. Ovariectomy, in Wolfe DF, Moll HD (eds). Large Animal Urogenital
Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Llippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
Rupp GP, Kimberling CV. A new approach for spaying heifers. Vet Med Small Anim
Clin 77(4): 561-565, 1982.
Cesarean Section
Armstrong KR, Janzen ED, Adams WM. Procedure decisions in bovine dystocia. AABP
Proc: 108-111, 1978.
Frazer GS, Perkins NR. Cesarean section. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract l l(1}:
19-35,1995.
seclion on he standing cow. Vet Q 19(2): 88-92, 1997.
Noordsy JL. Surgical aborions in catle. Bovine Pract 4: 10-1l, 1969.
Noordsy JL. Selection of an incision site for cesarean sechion in the cow. Vet Med Smalf
Anim Clin 74(4): 530-537, 1979.
Noordsy JL. A modified muscle-spreading incision for laparorumenotomy in the bovine
species. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(3): 447-455, 1980.
Noordsy JL, Huston K, Oberst F, Smith ST. Successive preterminal cesarean
sections in the cow: Surgical studies. Am J Vet Res 25(107): 1027-1031,
1964.
 Palterson DJ, Bellows RA, Burfenin PJ. Effects of caesarean seclion, retained placenta 
and vaginal or uterine prolapse on subsequent fertilily in beef catle. J Anim Sci
53[4): 916-921, 1981.
Wenzel JGW, Baird AN, Wolfe DF, et al. Surgery of the uterus, in Wolfe DF, Moll HD
(eds): Large Animal Urogenital Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1998.
Chronic Vaginal Prolapse Repair in the Cow
Alacam E, Ucan J. Vagino-pelvic suhure for handling chronic prolapse of the vagina:
Clinical and anatomical shudy. hdian Vet J50(6): 397-403, 1982.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 395-399.
Gilbert RO, Wilson DG, Levine SA, Bosu WT. Surgical management of urovagina and
associaled infertilily in a cow. JAVMA 194(7): 931-932, 1989.
Misra SS, Angelo S]. Vaginopexy technique for he management of recurrent utero
vaginal prolapse in he bovine. Indian Vet J58: 576-580, 1981.
Noordsy JL. Bovine surgery. Proc 9h Int Congr Dis Cattle Paris: 21-30, 1976.
Noordsy Jl. Cervopexy as a treatment for chronic vaginal prolapse in the cow. Proc
12th World Congr Dis Cattle Amsterdam: 1091-1094, 1982.
Pierson RE. A review of surgical procedures for correclion of vaginal prolapses in
caltle. JAVMA 139(3): 352-356, 1961,
Winkler JK. Repair of bovine vaginal prolapse by cervical fixation. JAVMA 149(6):
768-771, 1966.
180    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Perineal Laceration Repair
Dreyfuss Dl, Tulleners EP, Donawick WJ, Ducharme NG. Third-degree perineal
lacerations and rectovestibular fistulae in catle: 20 cases [1981-1988). JAVMA
196(5): 768-770, 1990.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 399-403.
Wenzel JGW, Baird AN. Female urogenital surgery, in Wolfe DF, Moll HD (eds):
Large Animal Urogenital Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Lippincolt Williams &
Willkins,1998.
Wolfe DE. Surgery of the recrum, perineum, and vulva (farm animall, in Wolfe DF, Moll
HD (eds): large Animal Urogenital Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Lippincoft Williams
& Wilkins, 1998.
Wolfe DE, Baird AN. Female urogenital surgery in calle. Vet Clin North Am Food 
Anim Pract9(2): 369-388, 1993.
Urethral Extension
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 390-394.
Large Animal Urogenital Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1998.
Chapter 14 Study Questions
 Answers Key
Oophorectomy in Cattle
1. Will a bilateral oophorectomy in a heifer hat is 3 months pregnant stimulate
Answers to study questions can
be found starring on page 287
an abortion?
 or online at www.wiley.com/go/
2. Why are clinical signs of estrus more common in a heifer spayed via the
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
Kimberling-Rupp method than in a heifer spayed via a Flank incision?
3. How might a spayed heifer be prepared as a teaser animal in an artificial
insemination program?
 4. Name an ovarian neoplasm hat may warrant unilateral oophorectomy in a
valuable cow.
 5. Would unilateral oophorectomy render a cow sterile? Might this cow carry a
pregnancy in the uterine horn associated with the oophorectomy?
 6. In rourine oophorectomy, why should each ovary be examined after
ransection from its attachment?
 7. How would you freat a cow hat you suspect is bleeding from he ovarian
pedicle?
Cesarean Section in Cows
 8. What is the major indicalion for a cesarean seclion in cows?
 9. What prime advantage does a cesarean secrion have over a fetotomy?
10. What are the advantages of a cesarean seclion performed in he leff
paralumbar lank area compared with one performed in the same area on the
right side?
1l. What rypes of anesthesia may be used for a standing cesarean sechion?
12. What incision localion may be important to a feedlot operator? Is a similar
incision site as important to a dairy client?
13. Can uterine Fluids contaminate the peritoneal cavily? Does the viabiliry of the
fetus affect he potential for contamination?
Surgery of the Female Reproductive System   181
14. How should he placenta be handled after a cesarean section?
15. Should a cow be retained for further breeding affer a cesarean sechion?
16. What are some precaurions that should be taken when using general
anesthesia for a cesarean section?
17. Why is starting the suture line at he caudal aspect of the uterine incision
recommended?
18. Why should the uterine incision be made on the greater curvature?
19. What pharmaceuticals would you use to induce an abortion?
 20. Why should a veterinary surgeon be adept at performing a cesarean seclion 
on catHe via various incision sites and restraint positions?
Cesarean Section in Sheep and Goats
 21. Should a veterinarian consider cesarean section in an ewe to reat toxemia of 
pregnancy?
 22. Would vaginal or rectal prolapse in a pregnant ewe dichate α cesarean seclion?
23. Review the procedure for a lumbosacral epidural in he ewe. What
unfavorable sequelae (other than a locomotion problemj might occur?
 24. Why do goats have α greater potential for abdominal herniation after venral
abdominal cesarean section?
Cesarean Section in Sows
25. If only one incision in the uterine horn is indicated, what is its suggested localion?
 26. For a commonly encountered field-rype dystocia hat requires a cesarean 
sechion, what are some precautions to take in handling the uterine tissue?
27. After piglets are removed from the uterine horns, the Final examination of the
genital tract should emphasize which area or areas?
28. Is excessive peritoneal fluid common in prolonged dystocia?
 29. Why is he suure material important when suhuring he skin in a ventral
abdominal midline cesarean seclion in the sow?
30. Should viabiliry of piglets delivered via cesarean seclion be a consideration in
choosing an aneshelic agent?
31. Is he postoperative abiliry of the sow to nurse piglets a consideration
following a cesarean sechion?
Vaginal Prolapse
32. Is here a tendency for a relarively higher incidence of vaginal prolapse in 
specific lines of breeding? In specific breeds?
33. Is an overly fat pregnant cow at higher risk for developing a vaginal prolapse?
34. Is vaginal prolapse common in dairy breeds?
35. What is your advice to the owner of a cow suffering from chronic vaginal
prolapse?
 36. What technique for correction of chronic vaginal prolapse would you consider
using for a cow in the preparum period?
37. What anesheric technique is offen employed to facilitate surgical treatment of
chronic vaginal prolapse?
38. What are the advantages of cervopexy?
39. Does vaginal prolapse usually precipitate rectal prolapse?
40. What is the advantage of a sacral paravertebral alcohol block over an
alcoholinduced low caudal epidural?
41. Why might you hesitate to associate pigs wilh a cow that has chronic vaginal
prolapse? Orher than trauma, is there a disease potential?
42. With regard to presurgical procedures, would you consider including a
sedative or analgesic drug in he low caudal epidural along with 2% lidocaine
rather than administering sedation or analgesia intravenously?
182   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Perineal Laceration Repair
43. When is the best fime to repair a perineal laceration?
44. How would you repair a rectovaginal fistula?
 45. Is catgut the material of choice for perineal laceralions?
46. What is the major negative consequence of leakage and fecal contamination 
of the incision line?
47. Is there a tendency to develop rectal stricures after perineal laceration repair?
48. Where are he weak areas of the suure line?
49. How soon after this procedure can a cow be bred?
Urethral Extension
50. What is the major indication for urethral extension?
51. Is there a genetic predisposition for urine pooling?
 52. What are the major difficulties associated wilth the surgery?
Chapter 15
Surgery of the Male
Reproductive System
Castration
Indications and General Considerations
Cattle
■ Caslration is usually performed in bulls weighing less han 225 Kg (500 Ib).
■ Influence of castration
● Intact males:
Note
● Will have a higher daily rate of weight gain
In calle, pigs, sheep, and goats,
+ Will produce a leaner carcass
castration is recommended to alter
● Castrated males:
 the sexual behavior of he animal. It 
+ Will lead to a falter carcass
 is considered when sexes are mixed
★ Higher fat content resuls in juicier, more Hlavorful beef
in he feedlot because intact males 
Pigs
tend to dominate the social pecking
■ Casration, by lestectomy, is recommended during the First 2 ho 5 weeks of life.
order and thereby interfere with the
 Casration is considered when sexes are mixed in the feedlot.
desired growh rate of females.
 Influence of castration
Intact males:
● Will cause a higher daily rate of weight gain
●Will produce a leaner carcass
● Castrated males:
· Will not lead to unfavorable meat Flavor or odor associated with intact boars
● Will cause loss of lypical male behaviors
Sheep
■ Caslration is commonly performed in the first 2 or 3 weeks of life.
 Casration is recommended to alter the sexual behavior of the animal.
 Casration is considered when sexes are mixed in the feedlot.
 The influence of casration on the qualiry of meat is minimal.
 Intact males will have a higher rate of weight gain than will castrated males.
■ Recent consideration has been given to forcing the testicles into he abdominal caviry
via the inguinal canalj at an early age, this procedure is not recommended.
● Wih his procedure, he effect of androgen on body growth is retained (faster growh).
● Body temperature precludes ferliliry.
Goats
■ Casration early in life (at 2 to 3 weeks) is recommended.
 It is recommended to aller the sexual behavior of the animal.
 Casration is considered when sexes are mixed in the feedlot.
 Because castration arrests the development of scent glands, scent gland removal is
unwarranted in castrated males.
 Goats casrated at an early age are more likely to have urethral obstruchion due to
urolithiasis
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
183
184   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Common Castration Methods
Cattle
■Testectomy
u o Addns onssoa ay shousap ypum (judnh sbal auoonssoua uo jo asn  
testicle.
■ Elasration, which interrupts the vascular supply to the scrolum and tresticle and 
allows the testicles and scrotum to slough off (used for both young and adult bullsl.
Pigs
 Testectomy is recommended.
■ Immuno castration has been approved outside the United States.
Sheep and Goats
Testectomy
■Elasration
Anesthesia
■ Tradifionally, no anesthesia is used for castration, but concerns have been raised
about pain and suffering of animals caslrated without anesthesia.
■ General anesthesia:
●Time-consuming
● Expensive
● May pose a higher risk of death than other methods of anesthesia or no 
anesthesia
■ Local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine:
● Increases hemorrhage because of vasodilation
● Difficult to administer safely
● Increases the total stress on he animal
● Opinions of veterinary shudents who compared calves younger lhan 3 weeks hat
were castrated with or without local anesthesia:
 Calves castrated wilhout anesthesia experienced less total stress than calves
castraled affer locally administered 2% lidocaine.
 This is a nonscientific poll of third-year veterinary students in an elective surgical
lechnique class.
Testectomy
Cattle
Recommendation
Presurgical Procedures
■ Restrain small calves in lateral recumbency
 Basics for a Successful Testectomy
■ Restrain larger calves in standing restraint; use a squeeze chute and a tail
To ensure optimal postoperative
restraint.
 drainage, incise at the proper site
■ Anesthesia is not usually used; however, α field block of the scrotum and spermatic
 and make he incision he correct
cord with 2% lidocaine may be used for animals whose malurily and advanced size
length.
increase he risk of stress or for animals for which pain is a consideration. Calves
Adequately remove all testicular
up to 3 weeks of age and large groups of calle are commonly castrated wilhout
tissue. Removing excess adipose
anesthesia.
tissue may also be needed.
Surgical Technique
Provide optimal hemostasis.
 Provide good postoperalive care
■ Scrotal incision options:
and environmental control (e.g.,
● Option I : Transect the ventral one-third of the scrolum with a scalpel (e.g., Bard-
Parker) or a commercial castration knife.
put the patient in a clean, dus-
● Option 2: Use anterior, posterior, or lateral vertical scrotal incision over each
free environment at a moderate
temperature and allow adequate
testicle with a scalpel.
● Oplion 3: Wih a commercial caslration instrument (e.g., Newberry), make lateral
exercise).
and vertical scrotal incisions.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   185
■ Testectomy options:
● Oplion 1: Placing traclion on he testicles while allowing the common vaginal
unics ho remain intact (closed castrationj is suggested for bulls weighing less than
90 kg (200 Ib).
+ Grasp each testicle individually.
◆ Apply raction on he intact resticle, and bluntly separate fascia from the
spermaric cord.
● Continue controlled, steady raction until the cremaster muscle ruptures and the
spermalic vasculaure are exposed.
Wrap he loop of spermatic vessels around your finger and apply steady
rachion to force spontaneous rupure high in the scrotal base (in the ventral
inguinal regionj. The elashicity of the artery will cause it to retract its open
end into the inguinal region, which produces natural hemostasis. Do not jerk
region will cause excessive hemorrhage (and possibly death).
 Transechion of spermatic vessels with a scalpel may be substiuted for traction
rupture.
★ More hemorrhage occurs affer sharp (scalpel ransaclion of the vascularure.
+ Plastic vascular clips may be applied to the spermatic artery before
 Iranseclion. (Use of hemostatic clips is controversial because they may
eventually adulterate processed meat products.)
★ One mass ligahure placed on the spermalic cord with absorbable surure
 material will conrol most hemorrhages.
● Option 2: Placing traclion on he lesticles and incising he common vaginal tunics
(open castralion) is suggested for bulls weighing more han 225 kg (500 Ib).
● Grasp each testicle individually and isolate it from the surrounding fascia.
● Incise he common vaginal tunic over he lesticle and concentrate traclion on the
testicle unfil the spermalic vessels are isolated. Continue pulting traclion on the
spermatic vessels until they ruphure in the venral inguinal region.
+ Plastic vascular clips may be applied to he spermatic artery before
 Iranseclion. (Use of hemostatic clips is controversial because they may
eventually adulterate processed meat products.)
★ One mass ligaure placed on the spermalic cord with absorbable suture
 material will conlrol most hemorrhages.
◆ Grasp the dangling testicular hunics, apply raction, and transect hem high in
he scrotal area.
● Oplion 3: Using an emasculator.
● An emasculator may be used in either an open or a closed testectomy.
+ It is commonly used for bulls of various body weights (i.e., from newborn to
maturily).
 The use of an emasculator may be combined with ligalion of the spermalic vasculalure.
 Isolate each testicle from the surrounding fascia.
+ Apply raction on each testicle to isolate the spermatic cord.
 Use an emasculator lo transect the cord at the dorsal aspect of he scrorum.
★ Keep he emasculator in posiltion for a short fime (i.e., 30 seconds) to
stimulate hemostasis.
● It is important to remove excess adipose fissue from the scrorum for optimal
 drainage and healing.
Piglets and Young Boars
Presurgical Procedures
■ Restrain piglets with a body weight of less than 20 kg (45 Ib) by holding the rear
limbs with the body in a vertical (head-down] posilion.
■ Commonly, no anesthesia is required for piglers and young boars.
186    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Anesthesia
■ Boars weighing more han 20 kg (45 Ib):
● TKX (combination of riletamine, zolazepam, ketamine, and xylazine] solution:
1 ml/75 Ib of body weight, given intramuscularly. See Chapter 4.
●TKX solution is made by combining one vial (500 mg) of Telazol (tiletamine plus
zolazepam) reconsliuted with 250 mg (2.5 mll of ketamine + 250 mg (2.5 ml)
of xylazine.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a single ventral scrotal incision on the midline (preferred} or a ventral incision
Note
 over each resticle (rwo incision technique).
● Many people prefer a no.12 Bard-Parker scalpel.
The incision length should be
■ Express each resicle through the fascial and skin incision, preferably with common
adequate for easy removal of the
vaginal runic intact; however, complete removal of the funics in piglers is not
teslicle. If the length is less than
optimal, blood and serum will not
required.
■ Grasp he testicle and, while you apply traclion, transect the spermalic cord close to
drain properly but will instead 
 he inguinal region.
pocket.
■ A rough cut by scraping the spermatic cord wih α scalpel until divided will aid
hemostasis.
Mature Boars
Presurgical Procedures
■ General anesthesia should be considered.
● For the safery of he surgeon
● For the welfare of he boar
■ Lumbosacral epidural anesthesia and other resraints may also be considered.
■ Standing reslraint with a hog holder, limited sideto-side movement, and local
 anesthesia is possible.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a ventral incision over each teslicle. In boars weighing 135 kg (300 Ib) or
Note
more, remove he medial septal skin after removing the testicles.
■ Bluntly dissect (with your Finger) to isolate the spermatic cord just cranial to the
In large boars, the option of incising 
testicle.
he common resticular tunics before 
■ With traction and manipulation, free the esticle (with intact common vaginal tunics)
 Iransection may be considered.
 Open casration before spermatic
from the scrorum.
■ Grasp he testicle wihin the common hunics, and apply traclion to isolate the
cord transeclion may aid hemostasis
 of the spermatic artery.
 spermatic cord and to stretch it taut.
■ Apply one or rwo ligalures on the spermalic cord to conlrol hemorrhage.
■ Use an emasculator near the inguinal region, distal to the ligatures, and transect the 
spermatic cord.
■ Keep he emasculator in position for a short fime (i.e., 30 seconds] to aid
hemostasis.
Sheep
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place the patient in a head-down position.
■ A lamb is usually restrained by an assistant to give he surgeon access to the
scrotum.
■ Anesthesia is usually not attempted in young lambs.
Surgical Technique
 Remove the distal one-third of the scrotum.
■ Grasp each resticle individually. Free the testicle and spermatic cord (with tunics 
 intach) from the fascia by rachion and blunt dissechion.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   187
Avoid contaminalion of the interior or the scrotum.
● Do not allow the resticle to slip back into the scrorum affer being contaminated by
your fingers and the environment.
 Continue to apply controlled raclion until he cremaster muscle and hunics rupture.
Apply addirional traction on the spermatic vasaculaure to cause vessels to ruplure in
he inguinal region. Place he Fingers of your olher hand on the inguinal area while
you apply traclion on the vessels fo prevent excessive rauma to inguinal rissues.
Ligation of the spermatic vessels is generally unnecessary in the young lamb.
Goats
■ The procedure is similar to that in sheep, except:
● Anesthesia (sedation or analgesia) may be considered.
● Lligation of the spermatic vessels is suggested.
FIGURE 15-1. Emasculatome with a
knee bracket.
Use of the Emasculatome (Hauptner) (Figure 15-1)
General Considerations
■ This method is a bloodless castration.
■ Basically eliminates the potential for infection
■ Recommended for young bulls and rams; use only on immalure males. Not
recommended for boars.
 It is imperative that the emasculatome be in optimal working condition.
● Occasionally check irs tension and adjust it if necessary.
■ Tell he client that a variable amount of fime (3 to 6 weeks) is required for complete
regression (atrophy) of the testicle.
■ Properly used, the emasculatome can be an efficient, praclical instrument for
castration.
● The emasculatome will crush the vasculaure of the spermatic cord and result in
avascular necrosis of he testicle.
Presurgical Procedures
 Most calves remain standing in a chute with adequate tail restraint.
 Anesthesia is usually not attempted with this technique.
Surgical Technique
■ As you work belween he rear legs of the calf, force the spermatic cord to he lateral
side of the scrorum.
Caution!
■ Apply the instrument to only one spermatic cord at a time; the spermatic cord should
Never involve the entire scrotum in
be in the lateral aspect of scroum when you apply the instrument.
he instrument. The blood supply to 
 Apply the emasculatome to the spermatic cord dorsal to all testicular fissue.
he scrorum will be destroyed and the 
● Beware and avoid inclusion of the flexure of the penis.
scrotum will slough off.
 Close the emasculatome completely.
■ Repeat the procedure on the opposite testicle.
■ The addirion of a knee bracket to the handle greatly facilitates the use of the
instrument.
■ A smaller instrument is available for use in sheep.
● Beware of breaking the skin, which is delicate compared wih hat of cattle.
Elastration
General Considerations
 A rubber band is placed at the base of the scroum above he testicles.
The rubber band restricts the blood supply to the scrotum and testicles.
 The scrotum and teslicles atrophy.
 Cases of tetanus have been associated with this technique.
Tetanus prophylaxis is srongly recommended when elastrator bands are used.
188    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Rubber can deteriorate with age. If the bands are old, replace them.
Poor resulrs are obtained with rubber bands hat break or lose elasticily.
■ This procedure was initilly recommended for only young lambs and calves younger
han 2 weeks of age.
● With recent improvements in equipment, the procedure is now used in older bull
calves.
■ It is essential that the band be placed above the testicles.
Presurgical Procedures
Castration Sequelae
■ Most calves remain standing in a chute with adequate tail restraint.
Acute hemorrhage, which may be
■ Anesthesia is usually not attempted with this rechnique.
■ Give tetanus prophylaxis
associated with:
 Improper hemostasis
Surgical Technique
 Blood-cloting disease (possibly
■ Young lambs and calves
caused by intake of coumarin,
which may be present in spoiled
● Force the testicle to he boltom of the scrotum.
● Place he rubber band over the scrorum and posilion it above he testicles.
sweet clover hay!
Vitamin K deficiency
● After placement of the rubber band, check hat both testicles are below the band.
■ Older bulls and ram lambs
Infection:
● Force the testicle to the boltom of the scrotum.
 Acute phlegmonous lype
● Position he loop of the rubber band over he scrolum above the testicles.
 Chronic abscess formation
● Tighten he rubber band by following the insructions of he manufacturer of the
 Scirrhous cord
banding device.
Tetanus (commonly associated with
α dusly environment!
Immuno Therapy in Pigs to Manage Boar Odora
Herniation, which is heritable and
■ A hwo dose subculaneous injeclion in pigs
■ First dose affer 9 weeks of age
most common in pigs
 Porcine stress syndrome
■ Second dose at least 4 weeks after the primary dose
 Bovine aneurysmal varix
■Produces a temporary immunological castration
■ Effect lasts up ho l0 weeks after the last dose
Surgery for Cryptorchidism, Ectopic Testicle, and Scirrhous Cord
Cryptorchidism
Introduction
 Cryptorchidism is more common in swine and horses han in olher domestic species;
Terminology
it is least often seen in bulls. When it is observed in bulls, it is usually in the form of
echopic testicles, which are out of the scroum and usually found in he subcuraneous
Cryptorchidism: The failure of a
lissue of the inguinal region.
testicle to descend into the scrotum.
■ The testicles of domestic animals normally pass from the abdomen to the scroum at
 the following times:
● Catle: 3.25 to 4 months of gestalion
● Sheep: 80 days of gestation
● Pigs: 90 days of gestation
● Horses: 9 to 1l months of gestation
● Dogs: 5 days after birth
 Cryptorchidism, which is genelically determined, is probably due to abnormal
endocrine secrelion. Androgens are thought to promote testicular descent and
estrogens to inhibit it.
■ Surgery may not be indicated if early markeling is feasible; meat qualiry is
unaffected by cryptorchidism in young animals.
almprovesk? Pfizer Animal Healih Inc. Kalamazoo, Ml.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   189
Typical animals are 4-H steers and other animals scheduled for exhibition.
Occasionally the retained testicle is not found or does not exist. Serum testosterone
levels are beneficial in determining the presence of absence of testicular tissue.
Standing Technique
■ Used for bulls
Presurgical Procedures
 Place he animal in standing restraint.
 Prepare he surgical site by using aseptic technique.
● The abdominal approach may be either right or leff paralumbar.
● The incision site is based on a previous rectal examination in which the site of the 
retained testicle was determined.
● A lef paralumbar incision is made in the case of left side retention, a right
paralumbar incision in right side retention.
 Give sedation or analgesia as indicated.
 Proximal or distal lumbar paravertebral anesthesia is recommended.
 Drape the animal. Regional rubberized or plastic draping is suggested.
 The surgeon should wear sterile plastic or rubber shoulder length gloves on both
arms.
Surgical Technique
 Make a modified muscle-spreading incision in he paralumbar fossa.
■ Identify and isolate he testicle.
■ Wih an emasculator, transect (within the peritoneal cavily in most cases) the
spermatic cord. I is unlikely that he testicle can be exteriorized before transecting
 he spermatic cord.
■ Intraperioneal medication is suggested.
■ Close the incision via a three-layer suture pattern.
Postoperative Care
■ Give systemic antibiotics as needed
■Remove skin surures in 14 ho 21 days.
Dorsal Position (Preferred)
■ Used for bulls and boars
Presurgical Procedures
■ Wihhold feed for 24 hours and water for 12 hours.
■ General aneshesia is recommended.
● Heavy sedation is acceptable to keep he animal in a dorsal position.
■ Prepare the ventral abdominal wall for sterile surgery.
Surgical Technique
■ Make an 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inch) paramedian incision on the side of he retained
testicle.
● The incision should be near the inguinal canal.
■ After you open the abdominal wall, explore the abdomen with one or rwo fingers.
● The retained testicle is offen located at the inguinal opening or just inside the
abdominal wall.
■If you do not locate the retained testicle, extend the length of the incision and explore
Note
he abdomen with your hand until you locate and identify the testicle.
 Once you find the retained testicle:
The retained testicle may be difficult
● Exteriorize the testicle
 to locate. It could be anywhere in the
● Lligate the blood supply to the testicle, and remove the testicle
abdominal cavily.
■ Close the abdominal incision in three layers.
190    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Postoperative Care
■ Give antibiotics as indicated
■ Remove skin sutures in 14 to 2l days.
Surgery for Ectopic Testicle in Bulls
■ Beware of genetic weaknesses; thoroughly assess breeding lines and families.
■ Improper elasration may create a comparable condition.
■Most commonly seen in bulls
■ Typically the ectopic testicle is found subcutaneously cranial to the scrorum and
lateral to the penis.
■ Although rare it can occur bilaterally
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place the palient in lateral or dorsal recumbency with the legs extended.
■ Give moderate IV sedation or analgesia
■ Remove the hair and use water and an iodophor scrub to clean the skin over the
 incision site, which is usually directly over the testicle
■ With 2% lidocaine, administer a field block over he testicle.
Surgical Technique
■ Incise the skin over the testicle.
■ Bluntly dissect to isolate the testicle.
■ Remove the testicle by transeching the spermatic cord with an emasculator (similar fo
a routine testectomy).
● A ligalure of absorbable material may be placed around vasculahure of the testicle
Io control hemorrhage.
■ Suture the skin incision loosely or leave it unsutured to heal as an open wound.
Postoperative Care
■ Give systemic antibiotics as indicated. No further freatment is usually indicated.
Scirrhous Cord Removal
General Considerations
■ Scirrhous cord is a chronic hyperplastic inflammation resuling from untoward
operative injury or infeclion.b
Steers
■ Scirrhous cord is less common in steers han in pigs. (Sheep are seldom affected
with scirrhous cords or cryptorchidism; if affected, they are seldom freated
surgically.)
■ In steers, scirrhous cord is offen associated with he retenlion and infection of
testicular unics after an improperly performed testectomy.
■ Scirrhous cord must be differentiated from scrotal hernia.
Scirrhous cord differential
 Scirrhous cord must also be differentiated from aneurysmal varix:
diagnosis in steers
● Scirrhous cord is cold and firm.
 Scrotal hernia
● Aneurysmal varix is normally warm (normal body temperalure) and soff.
 Aneurysmal varix
● Arterial pulsations may be detected at the proximal (inguinall aspect.
Abscess
● Paracentesis wih a smallgauge needle will confirm the diagnosis.
 No surgery is indicated and early marketing is recommended.
bSmith HA, Jones EC. Veterinary Pathology, ed 3. Philadelphia: lea & Febiger, 1968, p 1057.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   191
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place the animal in standing restraint or lateral recumbency. Tail restraint is
commonly used with standing restraint.
 Moderale sedalion or analgesia is recommended.
 Thoroughly cleanse the scrotal rissue
■ Local anesthesia is advised.
Surgical Technique
 Place a verlical skin incision in the scrorum.
■ Undermine the skin lateral to the incision and bluntly dissect unil the scirrhous cord
is isolated. Apply traction to expose the normal spermatic cord close to the inguinal
canal.
■ Ligate he spermatic cord if necessary, but this is usually unwarranted.
■ Transect the normal spermatic cord with either an emasculator or an écraseur
[Figure 15-2).
■ Let the scrorum heal as an open wound.
Postoperative Care
■ Give systemic antibiotics as needed
 FIGURE 15-2. Chain écraseur.
Pigs (Barrows)
■ Many acute scirrhous cord condirions in small pigs respond to direct injeclions of
penicillin.
■ Scirrhous cord in mature animals may enlarge to a considerable size
[ji.e., 5 to 10 Ib) and may dictate at least a guarded surgical prognosis because 
hemorrhage and shock are associated wih removal.
■ Scirrhous cord must be differentiated from scrotal hernia and hydrocele
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place he patient in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
■ Administer sedation or analgesia
■ Scrub the skin wih water and an iodophor scrub.
 Prepare for clean surgery.
 General anesthesia is indicated.
● A lumbosacral epidural may be substiuted.
Surgical Technique
■ Place vertical elliptic skin incisions over the fissue mass; avoid incising fistulous fracts
if present.
■ Bluntly dissect and undermine the skin lateral to each incision. It may be necessary to
ligate large blood vessels.
■ Continue blunt dissection until the entire mass is isolated and normal spermatic
cord is evident in the proximal (inguinal] aspect. Avoid incising the septic mass.
 With traclion on the spermatic cord, place an anchor ligature on the cord.
ecraseur.
● For relatively small scirrhous masses, simple emasculation without ligation is
sUggested.
 Relatively small wounds should heal as open wounds.
■ Pack large wounds for hemostasis, if indicated. Retain the packing for 24 to
48 hours.
● Suhuring large wounds may be indicated, but ventral drainage should always be
available.
Postoperative Care
 Give systemic antibiotics as needed
192 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Surgical Correction of Penile and Preputial Conditions in Bulls
Classifications of Penile and Preputial Conditions
Endogenous (Produced from Within)
■ Arrested development: Surgery is not indicated.
Note
■ Ventral deviatlion (bent, or rainbow, penis): Ventral deviation occurring after a
 successful natural breeding period was probably caused by rauma to the erect
 Before you operate to correct any
 penis. Surgery may be indicated; heritability is queslionable.
 endogenous condition, assess the 
■ Spiral, or corkscrew, penis: The penis usually spirals ho he leff. The condirion is
possibiliry of heritabiliy, and see the
AVMA Code of Ethics concerning
have a history of successful breeding and are aggressive breeders. Surgery may be
 surgery for patients with generic
 indicated; heritabiliy is questionable.
defects.
■ Epispadias: A congenital defect in which he upper wllofthe urethra is absent. This
rare condirion is definitely heritable. No surgery is indicated.
■ Hypospadias: A congenital defect in which the urethra opens on the underside of
 he penis.
Exogenous (Resuiting from Extermal Causes Such as Infection, Trauma,
Virus, and Frostbite)
Note
■ Hematoma of the penis (broken or frachured penis)
■ Laceration of he penis
Exogenous condirions constitute the
■ laceration of the prepuce 
majorily of penile abnormalities.
■ Paraphimosis and phimosis: These conditions are associated with trauma and
Surgical correclion may be indicated
infection.
in many instances.
■ Urethral calculi
■ Fibropapilloma of the penis: The success of trearing this condition with surgical
excision may be enhanced wih the use of an autogenous vaccine.
Cross-Reference
Phallorrhaphy: Correction of Ventral and Spiral Deviations
General Considerations
Refer to How to Prepare Autogenous
■ The emphasis in corrective surgery for bolh rypes of deviations is on manipulating
Vaccine, page 206.
the dorsal ligament.
■ Spiral deviarion may result when he free end of an erect penis rotates wihin the
Fibrous and elastic coats. Surgery aims to eliminate the rotation.
■ This procedure is a modification of Walker's open penis surgical procedure to
Note
correct spiral deviation.
Any deviation of the penis may-
Restraint
 and offen does—prevent natural
 Lateral restraint on a large animal surgery table; positive leg restraint.
breeding.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use intravenous tranquilizalion to relax the retractor penis muscles; relaxation
facilitates penile extension.
■ A pudendal nerve block may be considered but is not strongly recommended
 Intravenous analgesia (e.g., butorphanoll is oplional.
■ Remove hair from the prepurial orifice with a No. l0 clipper head.
■ Manually extend the penis, and place a rubber tourniquet around it near the
prepurial orifice at the junclion of he skin and prepuce. The tourniquet facilitates
 continued extension of he penis and provides hemostasis for surgery.
■ Thoroughly cleanse he penis and prepuce with colton, water, and an iodophor
scrub. Avoid rauma to the sensirive penile epithelium.
■ With caution, apply a Backhaus towel clamp to the glans penis; avoid trauma to the
urethra. Do not place undue raclion on the towel clamp. Simultaneously grasp the
glans region with a sterile gauze pad. The towel clamp facilitates manipulation of
the extended penis.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  193
Free end of penis
Preputial mucosa
Drape
Drape
Line of incision
Dorsal view
Dorsal longitudinal ligament
Tunica albuginea
Corpus cavernosum
penis
Urethra
 Corpus cavernosum
urethra
Cross-section
FIGURE 15-3. The incision site in phallorrhaphy.
Incised and reflected integument
Drape
Dorsal ligamentof thepenis
Drape
FIGURE 15-4. Exposing he unica albuginea (dorsal view).
Anesthesia
■Wih 2% lidocaine and a 0.5-inch, 22- to 24-gauge hypodermic needle, infuse the
proximal aspect of the penis slightly distal to the rubber tourniquet (this is a ring
block). Emphasis should be placed on the dorsal aspect of the penis and the area of
dorsal nerve ramification.
Surgical Technique for Ventral Penile Deviation
■ Provide regional draping
■ Make a dorsal midline incision in the penile epithelium extending from abour 5 cm
Note
(2 inches) proximal to the prepulial altachment to wilhin 2 cm (1 inch) of the distal
end of the penis (Figure 15-3).
Aseptic surgical trechnique is the
■ Make the incision deep enough to split the dorsal ligament entirely and to expose the
goal.
unica albuginea along the entire lengh of the incision (Figure 15-4).
■ Make longitudinal curs in the dorsal ligament from the distal to the proximal
commissure of he incision (Figure 15-5). Make curs about 1 cm [0.5 inch) wide on
both sides of the original midline incision.
 With scissors, cut he ligamentous slrips ransversely at the distal (nearest ho the glands
 penis) commissure (Figure 1 5-6). Do not detach the slrips from the proximal commissure.
194  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Towelclamp
Drape
Drape
Midline andparamedine
ligament incisions
Dorsal ligament
of the penis
Dorsal view
Incised and
reflected integument
Incised dorsal
longitudinal ligament
Tunica albuginea
Corpus cavernosum
penis
Urethra
Cross-section
FIGURE 15-5. Longiudinal curs in the dorsal ligament of he bulls penis.
Free end of the
ligamentstrip
Drape
Tunica
albuginea
Intact dorsal
Free end of the
ligament
ligament strip
Dorsal view
Dorsal ligament strips
Dorsal ligament
Integument
FIGURE 15-6. Cuting he ligamentous strips.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   195
Traction-fixation sutures
(1.5 to 2 cm from free end)
Dorsal ligament
Drape
Fixation point
Drape
FIGURE 15-7. Reattaching the ligamentous strips in a palient with a venlral deviation
[dorsolateral view).
Dorsal ligament
Traction-fixation sutures
(5 to 10 mm from
strips
free end)
Drape
Drape
Fixation
Sideview
point
Drape
Drape
Fixation
Ligamentous
sutures
Dorsal ligament
strips
of penis
Dorsal view
FIGURE 15-8. Reataching the ligamentous strips in a palient with a spiral deviation.
 To correct ventral deviation (Figure 15-7):
● Shorten the ligamentous srips by removing 1 to 2 cm (0.5 to 0.75 inch) of rissue to
compensate (or even overcompensate) for the deviation when hey are realtached.
● Wih No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut (or comparably sized synthetic absorbable
suhure material), reattach he free (shortened} ends of the strips to the dorsal
ligament at the glans penis with an overlapping suhure; he technique is similar to
hat used in tendon surgery.
 This maneuver creates a "lifr" to straighten the ventral deviation (slight
 overcompensation may be advantageous).
Surgical Technique for Spiral Penile Deviation
■ To correct spiral deviation (Figure 15-8):
● Less emphasis is placed on shortening the free ends of the ligamentous strips.
Reattachment wih he overlapping surure may provide adequate shortening.
196   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Drape
Drape
Sutures
Dorsal view
Suture
Integument
Cross-section
FIGURE 15-9. Sutures affixing the dorsal ligament to the tunica albuginea.
Drape
Drape
FIGURE 15-10. Completed surure pattern affixing the dorsal ligament to the funica
albuginea [dorsal view].
● Wih the penile epihelium relracted from the Field of surgery and using No. 1
-2 medium chromic gut (suggested for is stimulation of he desired inflammatory
Note
reachionj, place a simple interrupted suure in the dorsal ligament at the proximal
end of he incision.
This suhuring technique is aimed at
reinforcing the dorsal ligament and 
● Insert the surure needle in a transverse direclion. Take a bite of the dorsal ligament
lateral to the incision. Then direct the needle ventromedially and take a small bite
crealing adhesions belween the
of the funica albuginea (Figure 15-9). Include only a very small porlion of the 
ligament and the funica albuginea 
bo preclude rotalion of the corpus
unica albuginea in each suure. Bring he needle out through the intact dorsal
ligament on the opposite side of the incision.
cavernosum penis within the fibrous
● The surure includes the ligamentous strips.
hunics.
● As you place and tie the sulures, try lo bury the strips under the apposed intact ligamenl.
aa au buoe uodo (youi s'oi ws g noqo pasods sans pouoo ald ●
length of the incision (Figure 15-10).
● Apply marked tension to the surures. Knot them adequately and cut them so that
 the ends are short.
 Suture the penile epithelium (integument) (Figure 15-1 1):
● Use No. 1 medium chromic gut or comparably sized synthetic absorbable surure
material and a swedged on atraumatic needle.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■ 197
Drape
Drape
Integument suture
Dorsal view
Dorsal ligament suture
Integument sutures
Cross-section
FIGURE 15-1l1. Sururing the epithelium of the bulls penis.
● Place simple interrupted surures spaced about 5 mm (0.5 inch) apart.
● Do not surure the penile epithelium to he penis; if is imperative that the penile or
 preputial fold be free of the penis.
■ Remove the tourniquet and check the penis for freedom of normal retraction into the
 prepuce and penile sheah. Handle he penis careful to avoid suure breakdown.
 Apply antibiotic ointment to he sulure line for protechion and lubrication.
■ Force the penis back into the prepuce; recheck it for normal reflection of preputial
rissue.
■ Insert several sterile 4 X 4-inch gauze pads into he preputial orifice and anchor
hem in posifion with a preputial mattress suhure. This suture will maintain the penis in
a retracted posifion, which will protect if until ataraxia subsides.
Postoperative Care
 Remove he preputial suture and gauze pads in 24 hours.
■ Judiciously administer steroid therapy for 24 hours to control an excessive
inflammatory reaction.
■ Give systemic antibiotics for 3 to 5 days.
 Fush the preputial orifice with sterile saline 3 to 5 days after surgery; use a bulb
syringe and flush gently.
■ Do nor allow the patient to breed for about 6 weeks.
Surgery to Correct Persistent Frenulum
General Considerations
 It is defined as a "band of rissue" linking the glans penis to the penile sheath.
● However, it tends to persist in castrates.
● This condirion may also be observed in boars and other food animals.
 The penis arches on altempted extension.
 The frenulum fissue is basically avascular.
■ Surgery (transection] is recommended
198    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Restraint
■ Either standing or lateral recumbency restraint may be used
Presurgical Procedures
 Extend the penis by means of manual manipulation or electrostimulation.
■ Cleanse the surgical area (optional).
■ A moderate dose of intravenous sedative or analgesic is recommended.
 Do not use franquilizers to relax the retractor penis muscles. It is advantageous fo
have he bull relract is penis into the sheath after surgery because retraction protecs
 the penis and reduces the possibiliry of hemorrhage.
Anesthesia
■ Infuse 2% lidocaine at the base of the frenulum
■ Anesthesia is optional.
Surgical Technique
■ Transect the fibrous band with scissors.
■ Use hemostatic measures [e.g., eleclrocautery) if indicated, but they are commonly
unwarranted.
Postoperative Care
■ Infection is usually not a problem; however, infusion of the penile sheath with
antibiotic ointment (i.e., via a mastitis ube) may be considered.
■ Delay breeding until the transection has healed.
Surgery to Correct Hematoma of the Penis in Bulls
General Considerations
■ Various vascular etiologies have been observed:
Note
● Rupture of the hunica albuginea with resultant hemorrhage from the corpus 
cavernosum penis; he hemorrhage may or may not involve dorsal blood vessels.
Hematoma of the penis primarily
● Ruprure of major dorsal blood vessels with no involvement of the lunica albuginea.
 occurs in young, aggressive bulls that
● Rupture of relaively minor peripenile blood vessels.
are used in uncontrolled siuations 
■ Treatment (surgical and nonsurgicall and prognosis for normal breeding depend on 
such as range breeding. It is caused
the cause.
by trauma.
● The deeper he source of hemorrhage, the less favorable he prognosis for fotal recovery
● The deeper or more extensive the hemorrhage, the greater the need for surgical
intervention
■ Surgery is not recommended unil 7 to l0 days after he injury has occurred.
●It is desirable to have normal, aseplic clolting of blood.
● There is less chance for addirional hemorrhage associated with surgery done at
hat point.
■ Surgery is not warranted in all cases of hematomas. Surgery is recommended when:
● The hematoma is thought to involve about I L of blood or more.
● The source of the hemorrhage or adhesions markedly restricts penile extension.
puo jsal ponxas ym paaoidui si sisouoid wafbuol u lu aopui sodai aos 
antibiorics to prevent abscess formation without surgery.
● Abscess formation at the hematoma site willikely preclude future natural mating.
Presurgical Procedures
Caution!
■ With the patient in standing restraint (under ataraxia), horoughly examine the penile
extension potential; also palpate the hematoma to assess he probable source of
Beware of diagnostic paracentesis
hemorrhage.
hat might inlroduce sepsis. Use
■ Penile extension is α good prognostic indicator.
 steroids and antibiotics judiciously
● Full extension: Excellent prognosis, with nearly all bulls return to funclion.
before surgery.
● 50% extension: Fair prognosis, with abour 50% of bulls rerurn to function.
● O% extension: Poor prognosis, few bulls relurn to function
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  199
 Phimosis and edema of he prepuce often occur concurrently.
● Treat hese conditions before surgery
Restraint
■ Restrain the patient in lateral recumbency on a large animal surgery table [wih the
major portion of he hematoma dorsall.
 Use posilive leg restraint
Presurgical Procedures
■ Wih a No. 40 clipper head, remove hair on a liberal area over he hematoma,
 penile sheah, and prepuial orifice.
■ Thoroughly scrub the area with water and an iodophor scrub. Then spray the area
with the iodophor solution.
■ Administer inlravenous sedation or analgesia.
■ Administer inlravenous tranquilizers bo relax retractor penis muscles.
Anesthesia
 General anesthesia may be considered in specific cases.
■ local anesthesia is suggested.
● Infuse 2% lidocaine on an oblique line staring at the dorsal aspect (near the
rudimentary teats) and extending ventrally and cranially on an oblique line over
 he mass of the hematoma.
Surgical Technique
 Use a large, regional, fenestrated, moisture-repellant drape
Recommendation
■ Make a 15 to 18 cm (6 to 7 inchj oblique incision extending ventrally and 
cranially from the rudimentary teats and over the greater mass of the
Aseptic surgical technique is strongly
hematoma.
recommended.
● The oblique incision allows ready access to he sigmoid region.
● Better healing appears to be associated wih an oblique incision rather than a
verlical or horizontal incision because apparently less stress is placed on the
incision line.
■ Continue incising until the hematoma is fully exposed.
 Carefully remove all cloted blood wilh sterile, moistened gauze pads; avoid causing
additional hemorrhage if possible.
■ Grasp the penis at the sigmoid Flexure and expose the sigmoid region through the
skin incision.
● Carefully examine he dorsal aspect for the source of hemorrhage.
● Remove organized clots ("lags") from the penis.
● look for penile adhesions; do not break them down at this fime.
■ Treat the cause of he hemorrhage.
● Hemorrhage resuling from a tear in the funica albuginea:
+ A transverse rent has an unfavorable prognosis.
★ Suture it with synthetic absorbable (noninflammatory) material to unite the
lacerated edges.
★ Oprimal healing without suturing is unlikely.
● A linear rent has a guarded to unfavorable prognosis.
★ Sururing is not recommended.
★ Sutures should be thought of as foreign bodies capable of stimulating further
adhesions and of restricting penile extension.
★ Suturing may further damage dorsal nerve innervation.
★ Experience reveals excellent healing without suuring in most cases.
+ Debriding the fissue edges is contraindicated because it stimulates additional
hemorrhage.
 200    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Hemorrhage of the dorsal penile vasculalure (major vessels):
● May be caused by ruplure of a vein or artery or both
 Commonly involves a simultaneous rent of fibrous and elastic fissues
●Allowing the bull to breeding after the injury may increase the size of the
hematoma
+ Suhring is contraindicated.
+ The prognosis for a full recovery is often favorable.
● Hemorrhage of the peripenile (satellite) vessels:
 Limit surgery to draining the hematoma if it is extensive.
+ No suuring is indicated.
+ The prognosis for a full recovery is favorable.
■ After you have freated he underlying cause, place he penis in the sheath and 
altempt manual extension. The surgical assistant should grasp he glans penis via the
 prepurial orifice and apply raction.
 Determine the extent and restricliveness of the adhesions.
■ Transect restrictive adhesions if indicated.
■ Sponge the penile sheath wih moistened sterile gauze pads.
■ Infuse several million unirs of aqueous penicillin solution (20 to 30 ml) into the
hematoma capsule.
Suturing
■ With No. 2 or 3 medium chromic gut (or comparably sized synthetic absorbable
suture materiall, suhure he combined hematoma capsule and subcutaneous fissue
with simple interrupted surures.
■With heavy, synthelic nonabsorbable surure material, close the skin with simple
interrupted surures.
Postoperative Care
■ Judiciously give systemic steroids for 24 to 48 hours to reduce he inflammatory
response to surgery.
■ Give systemic antibiolics for 5 to 7 days.
■ Either 3 or 4 days after surgery, tranquilize the patient and manually extend
the penis to assess its extension and break down any minor postoperative
adhesions.
● Repeat the procedure daily hereaffer for several days if possible.
● Do not extend the penis by eleclrostimulation.
● Forced ereclion may cause addirional hemorrhaging.
■ Do not allow the patient to breed for about 6 weeks.
● Then proceed with caurion (allow pen breeding) for I or 2 weeks before allowing
unlimited breeding
● Penile adhesions may be a common sequela to hematomas; normal breeding will
offen  break down less severe adhesions.
● Transient, localized swelling may occur with adhesion breakdown; temporary
sexual rest may be appropriate in these cases.
Circumcision
Indications and Genera! Considerations
■ A procedure for correclion of laceralions of the penis and prepuce
● Lacerations of the prepuce are more common than lacerations of the
penis.
● These lacerations are commonly observed in bulls that have a tendency to relax
 he penis and prepuce, which subjecs the penis and prepuce to rauma. Herediry
may be a fachor in this tendency.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   201
Nonsurgical Treatment of Penile and Preputial Lacerations
 In most cases, place he patient in standing restraint (use a chute). Lateral
recumbency may also be used.
 Administer intravenous sedation or analgesia.
 Debride and thoroughly cleanse the fissues involved.
 Put the fisues back into the penile sheath to enhance healing.
 Pace a matress or purse-string suture in he prepuce to hold the penis in the
 penile sheath.
 In some cases, use α plastic retention tube to keep adhesions from forming
berween the penis and prepuce and to maintain prepurial lumen size. (The
plastic rube is similar to that used affer a circumcision.j
 If the penis cannot be placed back in its normal posilion, soak he area in
magnesium sulfate and give systemic steroids to reduce inflammalion. A
 proteclive wrap will reduce edema and protect the area. Apply antibiotic
ointments to protect and soften the tissue.
 Flush the area daily and apply topical medication.
 Treat paraphimosis similarly. Beware of possible coexising hematoma of the penis.
Examine he penis for hair rings or foreign objecs (e.g., cockleburs in the prepuce.
● Indications:
● Marked necrosis or laceration of the prepuce and penis.
● Hypothermia (froslbite) and mechanical irritation may also cause necrosis and
laceration.
 Preputial stenosis: a common sequela to preputial trauma.
Restraint
■ Use lateral recumbency on a large animal surgery table
■ Use positive leg restraint
Presurgical Procedures
■ Remove debris from around he surgical site.
■ Remove hair from around the prepurial orifice with a No. 10 or 40 clipper head.
■ Thoroughly cleanse the surgical site wih water and an iodophor scrub, and spray
 the area with he iodophor solution.
■ Debride necrotic fissue
■Administer IV sedation or analgesia
Anesthesia
■ Consider general anesthesia
■ Local infusion ring block proximal to the preputial orifice (healthy tissue) with 2%
lidocaine (epinephrine oplionall.
● The area of infusion is commonly in he distal hairline of the prepuce.
Surgical Technique
■ A large, fenestrated, moisture-resistant drape is recommended, wih he prepuce
 exposed via the fenestration.
Recommendation
■ Place a rubber hube tourniquet on he proximal aspect of the prepuce; force the glans
Aseptic surgical technique is
penis proximal to the tourniquet before you apply marked tension.
 Altach rwo Backhaus towel clamps ho he distal end (the necrotic portion) of the
 suggested.
prolapsed prepuce (Figure 15-12).
● The towel clamps stabilize the fissue during incision.
● Apply traction to enhance the diagonal incision.
202■Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Normal tissue
Circumventing incision
Necrotic tissue
FIGURE 15-12. The incision line for circumcision in the bull. Towel clamps stabilize the
preputial tissue.
Normal external preputial lamina
Diagonal transection
incision
Necroticprepuce
reputiallamina
Hairline
Diagonal transection
incision
FIGURE 15-13. Transeclion of he prepuce.
■ Make the circumferential incision in normal fissue of the external prepurial lamina at
 the junction of the normal and necroric tissue.
■ As you apply raclion on the towel clamps, conlinue incising depth-wise and angle
the incision diagonally to salvage as much normal internal preputial lining as
possible. Salvaging normal rissue should enhance penile extension potential.
■ Continue incising unil transeclion occurs (Figure I5-13).
■ Hemorrhaging is usually inconsequential if the tourniquet is oplimally siruated.
● No ligation surures are needed for hemostasis. Moreover, hey may cause an
inflammatory response and undesirable scar tissue [thereby limiting he elasticity of
he healed prepurial orifice).
■ Grasp he incised edges of he normal internal and external preputial laminae
[aligned in proper symmetry to each other) with rissue forceps (e.g., Alis) at the
quarter-hour positions. Wih No. 1 or 2 synthetic nonabsorbable suure material,
place interrupted horizontal mattress suures at these posiltions (Figure 15-14).
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  203
External lamina
of the prepuce
Glans penis
Internal lamina
Preputial tissue edges
of the prepuce
ZL.
FIGURE 15-14. The initial suture paltern in a circumcision. Quarter-hour positions
ensure symmetry of the prepuce (end view).
Interrupted horizontal
mattresssutures
Glans penis
Incisioned
Internal lamina of the prepuce
Externallaminaoftheprepuce
FIGURE 15-15. Completed surure paltern in a circumcision (end view).
 Add interrupted matress sutures berween the original four suures to complete
the circumferential paltern of the orifice. Place suures closely to involve all fissue
[Figure 15-15].
● Apply marked tension to stimulate spontaneous sloughing of he fissue distal to the
suhures. The surures will also slough off.
■ Remove the tourniquet and check for normal extension of he penis.
Pll sanyl onuuns ssid p jasus pun andaid a ou yoq suad au aid 
and 15-17).
● The cannula should have a minimal inside diameter of 3 to 4 cm (1l.5 inches).
● The cannula should have a stable, relatively inflexible wall.
● The proximal end of he cannula should approach, but not press against, the
penile or prepurial altachment; the glans penis may siuate itself inside the lumen
of the cannula.
● Anchor the cannula in the prepuce with an anchor surure of heavy, synthetic
nonabsorbable surure material, which will penetrate boh the preputial fisue and 
he cannula.
● Transect the distal end of the cannula about 2.5 cm [l inch) distal to the suture
line. The cannula wil maintain he lumen size of the preputial orifice during early
healing (5 to 7 days).
204 Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Hairlineof theprepuce
Mattressanchorsuture
Mattress suture
Incisionedges
Penis
cannula
FIGURE 15-16. Plastic cannula inserted after circumcision (side view).
Glans penis
Incisionedges
Internal lamina of the prepuce
Plastic cannula
FIGURE 15-17. Plastic cannula inserted after circumcision (end view).
■ Wrap the prepurial orifice fissue with elaslic adhesive tape (Figure 15-18).
● Elastic adhesive wrap acis as a hemostatic device.
● The wrap prevents postoperative preputial edema and protects the wound.
● Start at the distal end of the plastic cannula and circle proximally to the junction of
he prepuce and abdomen.
■ Use only moderate tension on the bandage as you wrap.
● Tissue necrosis is a sequela to marked tension.
 Place at least rwo simple interrupted sutures of synthetic nonabsorbable suture
material at the dorsal (proximall end of the wrap. Anchor the wrap with tape to the
abdominal skin so the wrap will stay in place during healing.
Postoperative Care
■ Leave he preputial bandage in position for 72 hours, which should be long enough
Note
 to ensure hemostasis and to control edema.
■ Remove the cannula 5 to 7 days after surgery. Addirional days may be indicated if
Sutures will slough off spontaneously.
healing is inadequate.
■ Systemic steroids may be administered for 24 to 48 hours to control
inflammation.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System    205
Suture
Ventral abdominal wall
Circumventing elastic
adhesive bandage
 Plastic cannula
FIGURE 15-18. After he circumcision, he prepuce is bandaged (by using Esmarch's
bandaging echnique) and is anchored with a suture.
■ Give systemic antibiorics for 3 to 5 days.
Wih a bulb syringe, careful flush the prepuce with sterile saline for several days
affer removing the cannula.
■ Do not allow breeding for at least 6 weeks.
Surgery to Correct Phimosis
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place he patient in lateral recumbency.
Note
 Administer inlravenous sedation or analgesia. The patient should be sedated so hat
 Phimosis is a common sequela to
the retractor penis muscles will be relaxed.
preputial laceration or other rauma.
 Carefully examine the penis for fibropapillomas, especially in bulls 2 years of age
and younger.
■ Thoroughly cleanse the prepulial orifice with an iodophor scrub and water.
■ Infuse the prepurial rissue with 2% lidocaine.
Surgical Technique
 If circumcision is not warranted:
Note
● Make a conservative V-shaped incision at the ventral aspect of the preputial
 orifice. Direct the incision proximally (caudally) far enough to allow for penile
You may want to perform a
exlension and erection.
circumcision if scar tissue is
● Wih No. I or 2 synthelic absorbable sulure material and a swedged on alraumalic
extensive.
 needle, sew together the incised prepulial layers with simple interrupted suures.
Postoperative Care
■ Apply topical antibiolic ointment for several days.
■ Do not allow breeding until the incision has completely healed.
Fibropapilloma Excision
General Considerations
aunos pun aho jo sioan z sllnq u Auowud punoy ao siuad au jo sowolldodoq! 
 Degeneration of tumors may be spontaneous in older bulls.
■ Tumors have a viral origin.
■ Fibropapillomas are often a herd problem when young bulls are housed in groups.
■ Surgery is indicated when:
● Phimosis or paraphimosis is observed.
● Excessive bleeding occurs with erection and penile extension.
 206 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
How to Prepare Autogenous Vaccine
 As aseptically as possible, excise he umor at or near he penile integument
 junction. Trim any desiccated or cornified exterior material.
 In a household blender, mix he umor fissue and sterile saline at about a 1:10
ratio for 1 to 2 minutes. Alternatively, mince the fissue with scissors and grind it
with a mortar and pestle.
 Srain he homogenate through several layers of sterile gauze or cheesecloh to
remove larger pieces of rissue.
 Add sufficient formalin to yield a Final concentration of 0.5% (e.g., 5 ml of 10%
formalin added to 95 ml of fltered homogenate yields 100 ml of filtrate with
0.5% formalinj.
Incubate at 37°C for about 24 hours. Do not refrigerate--refrigeration hampers
he action of the formalin.
 After 24 hours, aseptically remove 0.5 ml and plate the sample on blood agar.
Also place a few drops in nutrient broth.
 Incubate for 24 hours to make sure that he samples are sterile. If the product is
not sterile, add formalin and recheck after incubation (i.e., O.5 ml on the blood 
 agar plate and in nutrient brothj.
If the product is sterile, remove 5 ml aseptically and carefully measure the
 amount of a weak solurion of ammonium hydroxide needed to bring the
product to a neutral pH. Use bromthymol blue as an indicator; he solurion turns
yellow when acidic, blue when alkaline, and green when neutral. Exrapolate 
 from this filration to determine he total amount needed to neutralize the
 remaining filrate (usually only a few drops].
 Refrigerate until used.
 Inject the sample subcutaneously (about 5 ml per animal).
 Vaccine prepared by using humor material from one animal may be used to
treat other animals in a closed herd.
 Although anaphylaxis is not a common sequela, be prepared to treat it.
Dr. V. D. Folse's Procedure for Wart Vaccine
Clean the warts wih equal parts of alcohol, ether, and physiologic saline. Inject
1% procaine hydrochloride USP into the base of the warts. Surgically remove the
warts. Grind hem in a mortar with physiologic saline. Let the mixure stand at 
room temperature for 24 hours. Passi through a Berkefeld ilter. Heat it to 50°C
 for 1 hour. Add phenol to make a 0.5% solurion.
● Tumors involve the urethral orifice
● Tumors inhibit breeding.
■ Autogenous vaccines may be used for prevention and in reatment
[see page 206).
Presurgical Procedures
■ Use standing chute restraint in most cases.
● Fibropapilloma involving the urethra may require table restraint.
■ Give moderate intravenous sedation or analgesia.
 Extend the penis manually or by electrostimulation.
■ Tie he tourniquet around the prepurial orifice. The tourniquet aids in hemostasis and 
in maintaining penile extension.
■ Carefully but thoroughly cleanse he penis with water and an iodophor scrub.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System  ■  207
Anesthesia
■ A fibropapilloma with a small base or stalk may be removed without anesthesia.
■ With a 22- or 24-gauge needle, infuse 2% lidocaine at the base of the tumor.
Surgical Technique
 With a scalpel, carefully dissect the tumor from penile fissue.
 Elechrocautery may be used to excise and may be used for hemostasis.
If the rumor involves the urethral orifie, a plastic caheter (infusion pipette) is advised
 for orientation.
■ In cases of extensive papilloma growh, surgical removal of all or porions of the
glans penis is not advised. Cauterization, he use of systemic autogenous vaccines,
or both should be considered.
 The epithelium of the glands penis may be surured with 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable surure 
material to close defecis created by papilloma removal.
 Apply protective antibiotic ointment to he penis.
 Remove the tourniquet and allow the penis to retract normally into the penile
sheath.
 Do not use the bull for breeding until the penis heals.
Extirpation of the Preputial Diverticulum in Boars
General Considerations
■ The erect penis of the boar may enter the prepurial diverliculum instead of passing
normally through the preputial ostium. The following sequelae may result:
● Incomplere maring: The penis enters the prepurial diverticulum instead of extending
normally through the ostium.
· Dilution and contamination of semen.
● During ejaculation, urine that has acumulated in he enlarged preputial 
divericulum dilutes the semen and contaminates it with bacteria. This lowers the
qualiry of the semen.
● Poor conception rates: Dilurion and contamination are especially detrimental to
artificial insemination.
● Reduced exhibition qualiy: An abnormally large preputial divericulum diminishes
 exhibition qualiy.
● Marked sexual odors that are commonly associated with boars are present.
Anatomy of the Diverticulum (Figures 15-19 and 15-20)
■ The preputial divericulum has a pear shape, with a dislinct neck opening on the
dorsal aspect of the prepuce and 3 to 5 cm [1 to 2 inches) caudal to he prepurial
opening.
 The size of the neck varies, but it will usually admit one or hwo Fingers.
 The caudal diverliculum (the widest part) is divided longiudinally by the seplum into
wo pouches dorsolateral to the prepuce.
 The capacily of the preputial diverliculum is 20 to 30 ml, alhough a capacily of as
much as l00 ml may be found in a mature boar.
Physiology of the Diverticulum
 Normal contents:
●Urine
●Semen
● Desquamated epithelial cells
● An occasional concretion
● Bacteria (levels vary considerably)
208
Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Abdominal
Preputial
Preputial
muscle
diverticulum
diverticulum
Neck of the
diverticulum
Preputial
Penis
cavity
Penis
Orifice of the
Preputial
FIGURE 15-20. Cross-seclion of he
preputial diverticulum
ostium
preputial diverticulum, prepuce, and penis.
FIGURE 15-19. Longitudinal section through the prepuce of the boar.
Actions:
● The diverliculum is normally washed out somewhat during urination, which may
influence he bacterial level.
● When an animal mounts, preputial muscle contraclions express the divericulum's
contents, which contaminate the semen.
● This contamination occurs during natural maling or when an artificial vagina is
used.
 The diminished qualiry of the semen can cause serious problems for artificial
inseminalion because only some of the ejaculate is used.
Indications for Extirpation
 Boars hat mount but have the penis diverted into the preputial diverliculum.
■ Boars with poor conceplion rates because of semen contamination.
■ Boars with a large preputial diverticulum consistently full of urine and 
secretions.
Restraint
■ Lateral recumbency with the legs extended
Presurgical Procedures
■ Remove hair from he prepuce and he junction of the prepuce and abdomen with a
No. 10 small animal cliper head.
■ Manually express the diverticulum and thoroughly Flush it with a dilute iodophor
solution.
 You may pack the diverticulum wih dyed gauze (e.g., with methylene blue) to
enhance he visualization of fissues during surgery.
■ Thoroughly scrub the area with water and an iodophor scrub with a soft nylon brush.
 Then spray he area with the iodophor solurion.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is preferred.
■ Other options:
● Marked intravenous sedation or analgesia along with a Field block of 2%
lidocaine dorsal to the prepuce at the junction of the prepuce and
abdomen.
● lumbosacral epidural
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  209
Longitudinal
Dissected
septum
preputial diverticulum
Preputial
diverticulum-
Prepuce
Cranial aspect
Transection incision
of the prepuce
FIGURE 15-21. Excised prepuce with
diverticulum in the boar.
Ventral
abdominal wall
Skin incision
Preputial orifice
FIGURE 15-22. The diverticulum dissecied from the prepuce.
Surgical Technique
Removal of the Diverticulum by Incision and Blunt Dissection
 Use a regional, fenestrated, moisture-resishant drape
■ Make α 5- to 8-cm (2 to 3 inches incision parallel to the prepuce and about 5 cm 
caudal to he preputial ostium (cranial aspect of the incisionj at the dorsal aspect of
he prepuce (at about the junclion of the prepuce and body wall.
 Bluntly dissect and separate the diverliculum (Figures 15-2l and 15-22).
● Isolate the diverliculum, including he neck. If you did not pack the divericulum,
a surgical assistant can insert α Finger through he neck of the diverliculum to
determine he extent of the sac or can cause distention of the preputial diverticulum
with a colored solution.
● Take care to avoid laceraring or opening the diverticulum and grossly
 contaminating the surgical Field.
● Minor hemorrhage can usually be controlled by forcipressure; ligation may be 
used if necessary.
● With forceps, grip he diverliculum at he junchion of the neck and prepuce.
● Transect the neck just dorsal to (above) the forceps.
Suturing
■ Neck:
● Wih No. O or 1l medium chromic gut or comparably sized synthelic absorbable
sulure material, anchor the neck with α purse-string ligalure placed berween the 
 forceps and prepuce. Do not lie he suure at this time.
● Remove he forceps, invert the fissue edges, and tie the suture.
● The neck shump may be inverted into he prepuce, and more sutures may be
added to the inverted area to ensure stabiliy.
■ Subcutaneous fissue may be sulured if indicated; keep dead space o a minimum.
■ Skin: Use heavy, synthetic nonabsorbable suure material in a simple interrupted 
 paltern or an interrupted maress pattern.
Removal of the Diverticulum through the Preputial Orifice
 FHlush the prepurial diverticulum and express any residual fluid.
 With grasping forceps (Allis fissue forceps), work through the prepurial orifice and 
enter he prepulial diverticulum.
 210   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 15-23. Everted preputial diverliculum.
■ Grasp the wall of the diverticulum and gently evert it through the preputial orifice
(Figure 15-23).
■ Ensure hat both sacs of the divericulum are exposed.
■ Ligate he neck of the preputial diverliculum wih No. O or 1 absorbable suture
material at the juncrion of the neck and the dorsal wall of the prepuce.
■ Transect he neck of the diverliculum and discard.
■ Rerurn the area of the prepurial ligature to the normal localion within the prepuce.
■ No olher suures are required.
Postoperative Care
■ Give systemic antibiotics if needed.
■ Remove skin surures in 10 to 14 days.
 Surgical complicaltions are usually rare.
■ Boars may be maled about I week after surgery.
■ The qualiy of the semen (collected via an artificial vagina) commonly improves:
Bacteria, debris, and urine dilution decrease, and the ypical odor of boars, which
permeates housing areas, is greatly reduced
Surgical Preparation of Teaser Bulls, Boars, and Rams
General Considerations
marked demand for accurate deteclion of estrus.
● A convenient, effeclive reliable deteclion method involves he use of teaser
animals.
● Sexually maure, young virgin bulls are he best candidates for teaser animals.
● Females and casrated males have also been used as teasers by allering their
sexual behavior with hormones.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   211
 The ideal teaser animal should:
● Be free of transmissible diseases
● Be incapable of impregnaring females
● Have a high degree of libido
● Be small enough to use for immalure females yet large enough to use for mature
females
● Have a distinct color or color pattern that is different han he majoriry of he herd
● Be docile and nonaggressive
 Procedures to create teaser animals are divided into wo lypes:
● Procedures that block the flow of semen:
Vasectomy
Note
Epididymectomy
● Procedures that prevent penile peneration:
Teaser animals rypically work for 1
 Preputial translocation
bo 3 years and hen are salvaged for
 Penopexy (penis is surured or altached to prevent extension)
meat.
● Penectomy (part of the penis is removed)
 Common reasons for salvaging
 Preputial block (prepuce is mechanically blocked to prevent extension of the
teaser animals include:
penis}
■ Decreased libido
● Procedures of either lype are effective.
 Excessive size
 Often, both ypes of procedures are used together to ensure that animals are not
■ Aggression
impregnated.
■ The ideal teaser procedure should:
● Be simple and rapidly completed.
● Not induce pain, lto maintain libido
● Produce minimal postoperalive complications 
● Require a minimal postoperative recovery period 
Selected Surgical Procedures to Prevent Penile Extension
Translocation of the Penis and Prepuce (Figures 15-24 and 15-25)
■ This procedure has been used successfully wih bull, rams, and boars.
Note
Restraint
The techniques chosen for description
■ Place the patient in dorsal recumbency wih the legs extended.
here are some more common
techniques.
Presurgical Procedures
 Many others are praclical and may
 Use marked sedation or analgesia.
be used successfully.
■ Wihhold feed for 24 hours and water for 12 hours.
■ Prepare the ventral abdominal area for surgery from the umbilicus to the base of the
scrorum, with an emphasis on the midline (he penile sheah), he prepurial orifice,
 and the flank area to be used for translocation of the prepuce.
● When hair is abundant (or there is dried manure), clip the hair with large animal
clippers. Finish removing the hair with a No. 10 or 40 clipper head.
● Thoroughly scrub the area with water and an iodophor scrub with a soft nylon
hand brush.
■ Flush the prepuce wih a dilute iodophor solurion and then spray the area with more
iodophor solution.
■ Consider packing he prepuce wih 4 X 4-inch gauze sponges to:
● Aid in identification of the prepuce 
● Prevent contamination of he surgical site by preputial secretions
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is preferred.
■ Local infiltration with 2% lidocaine is acceptable.
Surgical Technique
 Drape the patient with a regional, fenestrated, moisture-resistant cloth.
212 ■Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Paired retractor
penis muscle
Penis
 Sigmoid flexure
Vas deferens
Head of the epididymis
Preputial
Preputial
attachment
Testicle
orifice
of the penis
Tail of the epididymis
FIGURE 15-24. Genital organs of he bull.
Proposed
Translocated
translocation
penis and prepuce
Sutured midline
incision
FIGURE 15-25. Translocation of he penis and prepuce in he bull.
■ Make a circular skin incision 8 to 10 cm [3 to 4 inches] in diameter around the
 preputial orifice.
● Continue the incision caudally on the ventral midline for 30 to 38 cm
(12 to 15 inches) toward the base of the scrorum.
 Dissect the prepuce and penis free from the abdominal wall.
● Take care to avoid laceraring the prepuce. (Packing will help identify the prepuce.)
●Control hemorrhage
● Hemorrhage may be substanial during this phase of the surgery.
 Postoperative swelling and edema will be reduced if the hemorrhage is controlled.
Avoid incising major dorsal penile vessels.
 Cover the distal preputial rissue with a sterile glove.
■ Choose he site in he cranial flank region where he prepufial skin is to be ranslocated.
● The site should be approximately lateral to he original site of the preputial orifice.
● The site should be just ourside he fold of the flank.
■ Make a circular skin incision in the Flank about hree-fourths of the size of the circular
incision around the preputial orifice.
■ Remove the skin on he inside of he circle from the subcutaneous fissue and discard it.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  213
Common Techniques Used to Produce Teasers
Epididymis
Epididymectomy: The epididymis is ligated and resected.
 Use of an emasculatome to stimulate necrosis.
Vas deferens
Wasectomy: The vas deferens is ligated and a section is removed.
 Penis
 Penostomy: The penis is transected and exposed in he perineal and posterior
croup region or through the ventral penile sheath (perineal urethrostomy).
Penopexy: The penis is fixed to the abdominal wall to prevent extension, or the
sigmoid region of he penis is Fixed to he ventral perineal region.
Penectomy: The penis is shortened by amputalion of the distal end and
basically retains its position in the penile sheath.
Translocation of the penis and prepuce
Corpus cavernosal acrylic block: The block prevenls ereclion.
Prepuce
 Induced preputial stenosis: A stainless-steel ring is held in posirion by a
 nonabsorbable purse-shing suture.
 Translocation of the prepuce and penis
Blocking of the preputial orifice with a prostheric device.
 Combinations of these techniques may be used (e.g., epididymectomy plus 
penectomy, or prepulial stenosis plus epididymectomy).
Note: Bold type indicates techniques described in this chapter.
Penostomy
Penectomy
(perineal
Preputial blockage
urethrostomy)
Vasectomy
Translocation of
the penis and
Penopexy
prepuce
Epididymal
transection
and resection
 Force α large uterine forceps [e.g., Knowles), with is jaws closed, subcutaneously
 from the circular Hlank incision to the cranial base of the scrorum.
● Expose the forceps in he previous midline incision.
● Open the jaws slighhy, and retract the forceps to the point of insertion.
● This maneuver produces α subcutaneous lunnel for translocalion of the prepuce
and penis.
 214 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
  sy a a pu s a o q a aui sa  i 
 prepurial orifice, which is encased in he sterile glove.
Caution!
● Check the prepucial orifice for anteriorposterior orientation; make sure that the
Be careful not to rwist the prepuce-
prepuce is not hwisted.
■ Retract he forceps via he unnel, so hat the prepuce and penis are translocated.
hwisting could stimulate stenosis.
● The sterile glove helps ensure sterile transfer.
● After the transfer, discard the glove.
■ Siruate the ransferred prepurial orifice in the opening of the circular incision.
■ An aqueous solution of anibiotics [e.g., penicillin} may be used subculaneously
before suturing if indicated.
Suturing
■ Suture the skin around the preputial opening to the skin of the flank incision.
● Use heavy (No. 3) synthelic nonabsorbable suture material in an interrupted
horizontal matress paltern on a cutting needle.
 Suture the midline abdominal incision.
● Close subcutaneous tissue with absorbable suure material.
● An effort should be made to obliterate dead space and reduce the potential for
seroma formation.
● Close the midline skin incision with heavy (No. 3) syntheric nonabsorbable surure
material.
◆ As you close, anchor an occasional surure to the abdominal wallto obliterate 
 dead space and furher reduce seroma formation potential.
Postoperative Care
■ Administer systemic antibiorics for 3 to 5 days.
■ Remove sutures in 14 to 2l days.
■ Wait for 4 to 6 weeks before allowing he patient to be used as a teaser.
Variation in the Technique for Boars
■ Remove the preputial diverticulum before translocation.
Penectomy
General Considerations
■ This technigue has been used frequently since 2001.
Note
■ Quick and effective with minimal complications
■ An epididymectomy is rourinely used in combination with penectomy.
 Penectomy is effective because:
■ Although penectomy is performed on different breeds, the longhorn appears to be
It decreases the bulls abiliry to
 the breed of choice.
achieve an erechion.
● Dehorning is strongly recommended.
Loss of innervation of the glans
penis makes penetration and 
Restraint
ejaculation unlikely.
■ Table restraint is recommended.
PresurgicalProcedures
■ The penile or prepurial attachment must be separated before the procedure.
● Naturally completed by 10 to 12 months of age in most breeds.
● Younger bulls require manual separalion.
■ Tranquilization is indicated.
● Acepromazine, I mg/l00 Ib IM or IV.
● This allows relaxation and easier exposure of the penis.
 Clip the hair around he prepuce.
■ Wash the area around the prepurial orifice.
Anesthesia
■ Local ring block of he penis after it is exposed.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System ■  215
Surgical Technique
■ Manipulate and extend the penis hrough he prepuce.
● A 4 X 4-inch gauze pad will aid in grasping the penis.
● Pace wo towel clamps in he glans penis to maintain penile extension.
■ With a l-inch, 22-gauge needle, infuse 2% lidocaine as a ring block just proximal to
 the altachment of the prepuce to the glans penis.
■ Place a third towel clamp in the penis at the site of he ring block.
 With a scalpel, amputate he glans penis.
 Sever he glans penis I cm (O.5 inch) distal to he altachment of the prepuce.
● Do nor dishurb he attachment of lhe prepuce to the penis.
● The lengh of he amputated porion of the penis averages 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inches).
■ Maintain extension of the penis with the third towel clamp.
■ Control hemorrhage by ligation or cautery.
● Typically, vessels exist at he 3- and 9-o'clock posilions.
■ Insert α precut of 10 to 12 cm by 0.5 cm (4 to 5 inches by 0.25 inches) caheter into
he urethra.
● The catheter maintains urethral patency during the healing period.
● Suhure he catheter in place wih one or wo simple interrupted absorbable (No. 0
or l) surures.
◆ Allow he catheter to extend 1I to 2 cm (0.5 to 1.0 inch) beyond the end of the
 amputated penis.
● The catheter will be lost when the absorbable suure material fails in a few days.
 Caution!
■ Suure he penile epithelium over he shump of the penis with No. O or l absorbable
suhure material.
Insufficient healing may result in
 Remove the lowel clamp, and allow the penis to return to the sheath.
bleeding from the penis when cows 
are mounted, which could become a
Postoperative Care
 persistent problem.
 Allow 6 to 8 weeks of healing before allowing contact with cows.
Procedures to Block Semen Flow
Epididymectomy in Bulls, Boars, and Rams
General Considerations
■ This technique should render the animal incapable of impregnating females.
■ Normal mating or copulation behavior will occur.
■ An annual semen examinalion is highly recommended to ensure hat the semen
 contains no sperm cells.
 Commonly used in combinalion with penectomy procedures
Restraint
■ Lateral recumbency restraint is suggested, but shanding chute restraint may be
satisfactory.
Presurgical Procedures
 Administer moderate intravenous sedation or analgesia.
 Clip the scrotal hair if present.
 Thoroughly scrub he scrolum with water and an iodophor scrub
Anesthesia
■ Infuse 2% lidocaine locally in he scrotal skin direchly over the epididymis.
 Oplion: While the resticle is stabilized, an infusion of 2% lidocaine direcly into the
epididymis may be considered for addifional anesthesia.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a skin incision in the scrorum over he tail of the epididymis.
 Carefully open the vaginal tunic with scalpel or scissors to expose he epididymis.
● Take care to avoid incising the epididymis or lhe testicle.
 216   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ After exposure of the epididymis, bluntly dissect the tail of he epididymis from the
testicle.
■ Ligate he epididymis wih absorbable suture material.
 Transect and remove the tail of the epididymis.
Hemorrhage is generally minimal unless he hunic surrounding the testicle is incised.
■ Suture the skin loosely with synthetic absorbable suture material in a simple
 interrupted or interrupted horizontal maress pattern.
■ Allow drainage of the incision.
■ Repeat the procedure on the opposite epididymis.
● Some surgeons prefer to remove the opposite testicle.
Postoperative Care
 Allow skin surures lo slough out.
■ Allow 6 weeks or six ejaculates to evacuate viable semen before using the animal as
a teaser.
■ Ideally, have α semen evaluation before exposing the bullto nonpregnant females.
Vasectomy
General Considerations
saowa, buyoubaidu jo alqodou jowjuo au japuai pnous anbiuya s!ul 
■ Normal mating or copulalion behavior willoccur.
■ An annual semen examination is highly recommended to ensure that the semen
 contains no sperm cells.
 Commonly used in combination with prepucial translocalion technique.
Restraint
■ Dorsal recumbency is recommended, with the rear legs exlended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Consider withholding feed for 24 hours and water for 12 hours.
■ Use sedalion as indicated.
 Prepare the scrorum and surrounding area for surgery.
● Clip hair if necessary.
● Use a surgical scrub and preparation.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is good but may be impractical.
■ Infuse 2% lidocaine in a Field block of the proposed incision site.
● Infusion of 2% lidocaine in the spermatic cord willenhance aneshesia but may
make identificalion of he vas deferens difficult.
Surgical Technigue
■ Pull the scrolum back belween the rear legs.
 Force the testicles to the boltom of the scrotum.
■ Make a 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches) incision over the spermalic cord berween the
testicle and the inguinal ring.
■ Isolate and exteriorize the spermalic cord.
■ Identify he vas deferens within the spermatlic cord by palpalion and visual inspection
(Figure 15-26)
■ Stabilize the vas deferens within the spermalic cord, and make a l-cm (O.5 inch)
 incision through the vaginal hunic to expose he vas deferens.
● Isolate about 3 cm (1.5 inch) of the vas deferens with hemostars
(Figure 15-27).
● Place rwo ligaures of No. 000 silk approximately 3 cm [1.5 inch) apart on the
exposed vas deferens.
● Remove the seclion of the vas deferens berween the ligatures.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   217
FIGURE 15-26. Identify the vas deferens before opening he tunic.
FIGURE 15-27. Isolation of he vas deferens.
● Replace he ends of the vas deferens into the spermalic cord.
● Alternatively, cauterize he ends of he vas deferens before replacing the vas
into the spermalic cord.
 Alternatively, replace one end of the vas deferens into the cord and surure the
opposile end ourside the cord.
★ This procedure is used in men to ensure that recanalizalion of the vas
deferens will not occur.
■ The spermalic cord may be closed with one subure of absorbable material or may be
replaced without suturing.
 The skin incision is generally closed in hwo layers.
● The subcutaneous layer is closed with a simple continuous suture of absorbable material.
● The skin is closed with multiple palterns of nonabsorbable surure material.
 Repeat the procedure on the opposite vas deferens.
● Some surgeons prefer to remove the opposite resticle.
218   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Postoperative Care
■ Allow 6 weeks or six ejaculates to evacuate viable semen before using the animal as
a teaser.
ishoauuods yonois a wa moo no sop I o tl ui sanns uys aowy 
Suggested Reading
Castration, Cryptorchidism, Ectopic Testicle, and Scirrhous Cord
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 355-359.
Braid AN, Wolfe DF. Castration of the normal male, in Wolfe DF, Moll HD (eds): Large
Animal Urogenital Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
Heath AM, Braid AN, Wolfe DF. Unilateral orchidectomy in bulls: A review of eight
cases. Vet Med 8: 786-792, 1996.
Hull Bl: Male reproductive surgery. Proc Soc Theriogenol: 117-122, 2001.
Penile and Preputial Conditions in Bulls
Ashdown RR. Persistence of the penile frenulum in young bulls. Vet Rec 74:
1464-1468, 1962.
Ashdown RR, Pearson H. Studies on "corkscrew penis" in he bull. Vet Rec 93: 30-35,
1973.
Bone JF. Disorders of the bovine penis: Diagnosis and treatment. Mod Vet Pract 45[8):
38-42, 1984.
Fitzgerald TC. A study of he deviated penis of the bull. JAVMA 58(2): 130-138,
1963.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Anima! Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 359-379.
Gray B. The ultrastruchure of the nerve endings of the penis. Anat Rec 193(3): 553,
1979.
Honselka DV. Bovine penile deviation-A review. Southwestern Vet26: 265-271,
1973.
Ladds PW. Pahology of the external genitalia of the bull. Australia, Department of
Tropical Veterinary Medicine, James Cook Universily of North Queensland, 1979
[syllabus] .
Larsen LD, Bellenger CR. Surgery of the prolapsed prepuce in the bull: Irs complications
and dangers. Aust Vet J 47:349-357, 1971.
Long SE, Hignett PG. Preputial eversion in the bull: A comparative study of prepuces
from bulls which evert and those which do not. Vet Rec 86(4): 161-163, 1970
Milne FJ. Penile and preputial problems in the bull. JAVMA 124(922): 6-11, 1954.
Noordsy JL. Hematoma of the bovine penis: A technique for predicting successful
surgical correclion. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 76(11): 1581-1590, 1981
9th Int Congr Dis Catle Paris: 101-103, 1976.
Noordsy JL, et al. Etiology of hematoma of the penis in beef bulls-A clinical survey.
Proc AABP:333-338, 1972.
Pearson H. Penile neoplasia in bulls. Vet Ann 17: 40-43, 1976.
Peyton LC. The reefing operation in large animals. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75[1):
112-117, 1980.
Walker DF. Devialion of the bovine penis. JAVMA 145(7): 677-682, 1964.
Walker DF. Vaughn JT: Bovine and Equine Urogenital Surgery. Philadelphia: Lea &
Febiger, 1980.
Wheat JD. Diseases of the penis and prepuce of the bull requiring surgery. JAVMA
118(890): 295-298, 1951.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System   219
Preputial Diverticulum in Boars
Aamdal J, Hogset l, Filseth O. Extirpalion of the preputial diverticulum of boars used in
artificial insemination. JAVMA 132(12): 522-524, 1958.
Dunne HW, Leman AD. Diseases of Swine. Ames, lowa State Universily Press, 1975,
p1082.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 569-570.
Kross SB, Ames NK, Gibson C. Extirpation of the prepulial diverliculum in a boar. Vet
Med Small Anim Clin 77(4): 549-553, 1982.
Surgical Preparation of Teaser Bulls, Boars, and Rams
 Aanes WA, Rupp G. lalrogenic preputial stenosis in preparation of teaser bulls. JAVMA
184(12): 1474-1476, 1984.
Frazer JW: Phallectomy. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 68(8): 863-870, 1973.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 363-372.
Jochle W, Gimenez T, Esparza H, Hidalgo MA. Preparation of teaser bulls, rams and
boars by penis and prepuce deviation. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 68(4): 395-400,
1973.
Lofstedt RM. Vasectomy in ruminants: A cranial midscrotal approach. JAVMA 181(4):
373-375,1982.
McDonald TJ. Preparation and performance of teaser animals and performance of 
commercially available aids to estrus deteclion [Thesis] . Ithaca: Cornell Universiby;
1978.
Noordsy JL. Procedures used to produce teaser bulls, in Amstutz JE (ed]: Bovine
Medicine and Surgery, ed 2. Santa Barbara, CA, American Veterinary Publications,
1980, pp 1195-1202.
Walker DF, Vaughn JE. Bovine and Equine Urogenita! Surgery. Philadelphia: Lea &
Febiger, 1980.
Chapter 15 Study Questions
Answers Key
Castration, Cryptorchidism, Ectopic Testicle, and Scirrhous Cord
1. Is cryptorchidism in pigs commonly corrected?
Answers to study questions can
2. Is cryptorchidism common in catle (compared with pigs)?
be found sharling on page 289
3. Is scirrhous cord in pigs associated wih faully testectomy procedures?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
4. What might be the consequences if a case of aneurysmal varix was
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
diagnosed as a chronic scrotal abscess and a liberal scrotal incision was
made to drain ir?
5. If a client were going to sellfiffy 400 to 500-lb bulls in about 3 weeks at the
local sales barn, would you advise castration with an emasculatome?
6. List some of the behavior raits hat might be observed in a bovine male that
you purchased as a steer bur hat now appears to have cryptorchidism.
7. The head-down position is recommended for casraring small pigs. What
clinical signs of inguinal or scrotal herniation might be observed wih the pig
 in this posirion?
8. Why is traction by irself not recommended for removal of resticles affer a
scrotal incision in the pig?
Penile and Preputial Conditions in Bulls
9. What is the cause of fibropapilloma of the penis in bulls? Does here appear
to be an agerelated immunily?
 220 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
10. How would you stimulate immunily against fibropapilloma of the penis in
bulls?
11. Why is total removal of the glans penis (amputation] as α surgical treatment
for extensive neoplasia (fibropapilloma) usually contraindicated?
12. Is persistent frenulum of the penis a pathologic condirion in young male
calves?
13. Is it common for the penis of the bullto form a corkscrew during copulation?
14. Is surgery warranted in all cases of hematoma of the penis in bulls?
15. A common synonym for hematoma of the penis of bulls is fractured penis. Is 
any osseous tissue involved?
16. Can a persistent frenulum be a problem in the marure boar?
17. Why should you as a veterinarian make a complete examination of the bull's
penis when he client's complaint is a prolapsed, edematous prepuce?
Preputial Diverticulum in Boars
18. Under what circumstances is extirpation of the prepulial diverliculum in boars
commonly indicated?
19. Does he preputial diverliculum contribute to the odor commonly associated
with boars?
20. Is the prepurial diverticulum of concern when semen is collected in an arificial
vagina? If normal anatomically, is it of concern in naural breeding?
21. What restraint position and what anesthesia are suggested for performing this
surgery?
22. Is ir likely that a persistent frenulum in a boar would lead to the same clinical
signs as an abnormal preputial diverticulum?
Surgical Preparation of Teaser Bulls, Boars, and Rams
 23. What is the ideal age for a bull to become a teaser?
 24. Would you consider using a steer or a female as a teaser?
25. What four basic anatomic structures are commonly manipulated to produce a 
teaser bull?
 26. What specific postoperarive orders should be given to the client concerning
 he use of teaser bulls hat have had surgery on the epididymis or vas
deferens?
27. Should the epididymis or vas deferens be ligated as well as having a section
removed?
28. What is the major advantage of a teaser bull that cannot perform
intromission?
Chapter 16
Surgical Treatment of
Conditions Associated with
Urolithiasis
General Considerations
 Pathologic conditions caused by urolithiasis include:
● Obstructed or ruplured urethra
● Ruptured urinary bladder
● Urethral inflammalion, necrosis, and stenosis, which are sequelae lo passage of calculi
● Urinary bladder distention and atony (paralysis), which are sequelae to urethral
obstruction
■ Most calculi found in the urelhra of steers and bulls are solitary stones and are lodged
 in he sigmoid Hlexure. Less often, calculi are located just caudal to he glans penis.
 In wethers, rams, and goars, calculi are usually mulliple [sand-like) and pack the
urethral orifice.
■ The chemical composilion of calculi varies and is usually related to feed. Calculi
 found in feedlot steers and wethers are offen composed of phosphates. Oxalate and
silicate calculi are more offen associated with paslure feeding.
 Surgery to correct urolithiasis in food animals is for temporary relief only. Markering
animals for meat salvage is strongly recommended. Cyshitis and chronic urolithiasis
 are common sequelae lo surgery.
■ Urolithiasis in pet ruminant and pig species are commonly diagnosed.
● The objechive of treatment in these species is to create a permanent repair.
Urethrostomy
General Considerations
■ Yypically thought of as a salvage procedure
Terminology
 Can be used as a permanent repair
■ Can be a very rechnical and demanding surgery
Cystostomy: Formation of an opening
 Often leads to postoperative complicalions:
● Hemorrhage
into he bladder.
Urethrectomy: Surgical removal of a 
● Urine scald of the skin
 portion or all of the urethra.
● Urethral slricture
Urethrostomy: Formation of a
Restraint
permanent opening berween the
■ Use standing restraint (chute preferred) for cattle
urehra and skin.
Urethrotomy Incision of he urethra.
 Use ventral recumbency for smaller species such as sheep and goats
● General anesthesia is recommended.
● Usually with rear limbs extended over the edge of a wellpadded table
Restrain to keep the tail away from the surgical site.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
221
222 ■Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Rectum
Rectum
Bladder
Urinary
bladder.
-Rubber
catheter
High
urethrostomy
High
Low
urethrostomy
urethrostomy
Low urethrostomy
Scrotum
FIGURE 16-1. Incision sites for
FIGURE 16-2. Sites for urethral drainage
 urethrotomy or urethrostomy in the male
in the male bovine patient.
bovine patient.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Remove hair from the perineal region with a No. 10 or 40 clipper head.
■ Thoroughly scrub he perineum with water and an iodophor solution. Then apply a
residual iodophor spray.
Anesthesia
In Standing Animals
■ Low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine
In Animals Not Standing
■ Low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine
■ lumbosacral epidural anesthesia
 General anesthesia in small ruminants is preferred.
Surgical Technique
■ One of rwo sites may be chosen for the incision (Figure l6-l): high or low.
Note
High Peritoneal Urethostomy
 Sterile surgical rechnique is often
● Make an 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inchj incision high on he perineal midline. The
impractical under common field 
condirions. Clean surgery (including 
ventral commissure of this incision will be at the level of the sigmoid flexure.
● The chief advantage of a high incision is that it allows the penis to be directed
 gloving) is recommended.
 so that urine is expelled caudally and away from he inner aspecis of the legs,
which prevens urine scald of the rear limbs (Figure 16-2).
● Bluntly dissect the subcutaneous fissue on the midline until you identify the penis.
● Isolate the penis from the surrounding fissue.
● Expose a loop if the penis at he level of or just below the ishium.
 Note hat the urethra starts to get wider at this point and therefore is lesslikely
lb reobstruct.
● Wih heavy non-absorbable suure material anchor the loop of penis to the skin.
Take care to avoid obslrucling he urethra.
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with Urolithiasis   223
● An incision is made into the urethra.
A urethral catheter makes he urethra easier to identify.
 The incision should be at least hwice as long as you would like the inal opening 
as it is common to get 50% reduction in lhe size of he opening over fime.
●Wih 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable surure material, suure the mucosa of the urethra to the
skin.
● Marked hemorrhage from the corpus cavernosum urethra is common and must be
controlled.
 A high incision may expose calculi lodged in the urethra.
Low Peritoneal Urethostomy
● Make an 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inch) incision low in the perineal midline just ventral
bo the sigmoid flexure and caudal and dorsal to the base of the scrotum.
 The advantage of the low incision is greater accessibiliy to he penis and
Urethra.
● Bluntly dissect the subcutaneous rissue on he midline until you identify the penis.
+ Differenliate belween the penis and the paired retractor penis muscles.
 Isolate the penis from the surrounding fissue.
● While you apply rachion caudally, straighten the Hlexure and expose a loop of
 the penis through the skin incision.
● After you expose he loop of the penis, you may consider hree options.
'doo aluad pasodxa au jo uooasuoi saloaui uoudo shy aul :l uoudo 
★ Create a 2 to 3 cm [1 inch) shump with the proximal end of the penis.
★ ligate the dorsal artery and vein of the penis.
> The artery and vein are now situated ventrally on the exposed penile
stump.
* Altach ihe stump the penis to he skin with 1 to 2 cm of penis exposed
[depending on size and species of animall. See Figure 16-4.
★ With the penile shump in a relaxed state (no distal trachion), siluate it in the
Note
dorsal commissure of the skin incision.
 The surure accomplishes several
> Allow 2 to 3 cm (1 inch) of space berween the dorsal aspect of the penile
hings:
stump and he dorsal commissure of he skin incision lo accommodate
■Anchors the penile stump to the
postoperalive swelling of the penile shump without pressure on the urethra.
skin.
> With nonabsorbable suture material (he size depending on the size of 
 Controls hemorrhage in the corpus
the animal and the structures to be sutured), place a horizontal mattress
cavermosum penis and the dorsal
surure starting in the lateral skin flap, and pass through the body of
 penile artery and vein.
he penile shump just ventral to the urethra and dorsal to the corpus
 Tilts the exposed penile stump
 dorsally, hereby direcling urine
rerurn surure penetrates the skin and passes under the penile shump and
posteriorly and away from the
through the skin.
medial aspecis of he legs, which 
★ Apply marked tension to he sulure before knolfing it securely.
 reduces the potenlial for urine
★ Incise the subcutaneous fissue vertically just inside the dorsal commissure of
scald.
he skin incision to preclude pressure on the urethra when he penile stump is
permanently suhured to the perineal skin.
★ The urethra of the exposed penile shump may be spli and irs edges sutured
 in a Hlared posirion to enhance urine Flow and to reduce the potential for
urethral stricture.
> With 3-0 or 4-0 syntheric absorbable sulure material, suure he mucosa of
 the urethra open to form α permanent opening 
> Significant hemorrhage from the corpus cavernosum urethra may occur at 
he stage
★ Addirional simple interrupted sutures of medium-sized synthetic
nonabsorbable material may be used to close the ventral aspect of the skin
incision.
 224 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Dorsal aspect of
Corpus
the skin incision
cavernosum
penis
Dorsal blood
vessels
Corpus
Urethr
cavernosum
penis
Corpus
cavernosum
urethra
Urethra
Suture
FIGURE 16-3. Cross seclion of he bovine
FIGURE 16-4. Fixalion or ligation suture
penis (sigmoid region].
anchoring the penile shump to the skin.
● Option 2: The olher option is to place continuous, marked traclion on the ventral
entire distal penis can be extended backward through the perineal skin incision.
(Removing the enfire distal penis may be difficult in mature steers and bulls.)
+ Transect the exposed penis.
● Create a 2 to 3 cm (l inch) stump with he proximal end of the penis.
'I uydol anbuupa paqusap Aisnaand a ui so papuoy uau si duns auad aul 
● Discard the distal penis after a thorough examination of the urethra via a
longitudinal urethral incision.
★ Evidence of calculi and necrosis and inflammation resulting from calculi
migralion suggests a good recovery.
 Removing the distal penis is not usually associated with marked adverse
reaction of the penile sheath; however, in some cases, he ruprured prepuce
may prolapse and require amputation at he prepurial orifice.
+ Transect the retractor penis muscles at their most proximal exposure.
● Anchor the penile shump to the skin (Figures 16-3 and 16-4).
● The urethra of the exposed penile stump may be split on he dorsum and its 
edges sutured in a flared posilion to enhance urine flow and to reduce the
potential for urethral stricture.
 Addirional simple interrupted surures of medium-sized synthetic nonabsorbable
material may be used to close he ventral aspect of the skin incision.
■ Option 3: Urelhostomy without penile transechion as described in the high peritoneal
ureostomy.
Postoperative Care
 Give systemic antibiotics if necessary
■ Observe he patient for passage of urine
● It is unlikely hat the animal will express urine while affected by he caudal epidural.
● Artempling fo pass a catheter to determine urethral patency is not recommended,
especially if the proximal urethral lining appears necrotic. Urethral blockage may resull.
● Addirional ligation may be indicated to control hemorrhage from the corpus
cavernosum urethra.
■ Market the patient for meat salvage at the earliest opportunily. Urolithiasis sequelae
[e.g., chronic cystitis] are common.
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with Urolithiasis   225
-Common area of necrosis
A
and rupture in the urinary
bladder
B
-Mushroom-head catheter
in the bladder (top removed)
C,D --Purse-string suture
anchoring the catheter in
the bladder
Cutoffviewofcatheter
in position in the
Sideview
urinary bladder
F
-Urinary bladder (distal end
view)
D
End view
FIGURE 16-5. Cystostomy and caheterization in the male bovine patient (close-up of 
the urinary bladderj.
-Urinary bladder
B
-Mushroom-head
rubber catheter
A
Catheter
 penetrating and
B
anchored to the
abdominal wall
C
D:
Floor of the pelvis
Penile stump after
E
urethrostomy
HGURE 16-6. Cystostomy and calheterizalion in the male bovine palient (full lateral view).
 After this procedure, some pet animals have survived for many years.
● Discuss diet to prevent calculi formation.
● Discuss the use of urinary acidifiers fo prevent calculi formation.
● Striclure of the urethra with reobstruction is a common long-term complication.
Tube Cystostomy (Figures 16-5 and 16-6)
General Considerations
■ Tube cystostomy:
● A lemporary procedure to establish urine low while allowing a urethral
Note
obstruclion and bladder ruplure to be repaired and resolved.
After resolurion of he urethral
● A hube is placed surgically or blindly into the urinary bladder with the use of
obstruction, the procedure may be
ultrasound-guided technology.
reversed and the patient can resume
 Placement is relatively simple.
normal urination.
+ Maintenance of the ube within the urinary bladder is problematic.
 226 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
● Is recommended for:
● Steers wih a ruprured urinary bladder of a chronic nature (i.e., lasting several
days or more) or of a more acute nature in which the urinary bladder tear is
located in he ventrocaudal aspech.
● Intact males in which reproductive performance must be maintained after
 urethral obstructlion and/or injury.
 Pet animals in which urethrostomy are undesirable.
 Research animals, for direct collecrion of urine.
● Often, urinary bladder rupure willbe on the dorsocranial aspech.
● Most of these tears heal spontaneously if the urelhral obstruction is corrected
before bladder tear necrosis or chronic fistulation occurs.
+ Altempt to treat the patient wihin 24 hours of bladder ruprure.
 Normal urinary bladder involution will siluate the common tear in the dorsal
aspect; therefore, quick healing is common.
■ Ventrocaudal rears will not heal spontaneously; chronic fistulation and necrosis are
common sequelae.
Restraint
 Use dorsal recumbency.
■ Elevate rear quarters slightly to force the intestines craniad and away from the
urinary bladder.
■ Extend and restrain the palien's legs.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Sedation is usually unwarranted, although it may be indicaled in some cases, such
as in hyperaclive animals.
■ Clip the hair on the ventral abdominal wall from he pubis to he umbilicus.
 Prepare he paramedian site for sterile surgery.
■ Animals hat have urelhral rupures and an accumulation of urine in the subcutaneous
fissue at he incision site complicate he surgical procedure.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is preferred.
● Beware of toxemia and elevated serum potassium levels, which can pose serious
anesthesia risks.
■ Local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine is acceptable
Surgical Technique
■ Make an 8-10 cm (3-4 inch) paramedian incision on either the right or the leff side.
Note
 Incise through the abdominal wall and carefully open the peritoneal cavilry.
■ Provide hemostasis as indicated; ligation is usually unwarranted
In animals with marked waterbelly
 If free urine was not previously drained from the peritoneal cavily, allow the urine to
and abdominal distenlion: Place one
Flow from the abdominal incision.
bo hree 10-to 12-gauge needles
● A small amount of urine may be left intraperitoneally without serious consequences
in the ventral right Flank and drain
s s ap q n p pu s uu  d!
 he urine from the abdominal caviry.
■ Grasp and expose the urinary bladder through he abdominal incision. Examine if
Most of the urine can be removed in
closely for tears and necrosis.
15 ho 30 minutes.
■ With a scalpel, make a stab incision in the ventrocranial urinary bladder (viable
fissue).
■ Inser the mushroom head of the catheter (trop removed) through the incision and 
into he urinary bladder. (Remove he lop of the catheter to reduce he potential for
clogging with mucus from the urinary bladder.)
■ With synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material and a swedged on needle, anchor the
catheter in the urinary bladder by placing a purse-string surure around he catheter.
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with Urolithiasis   227
 Pass the distal end of the catheter through the abdominal wall (previously prepared)
lateral to the laparotomy incision.
Note
● Separate incisions are recommended so hat the catheter will not delay healing of
he laparotomy incision.
Ventrocaudal tears may require
● Leave an adequate length of he catheter in he abdominal cavily to allow for
sururing. Use a synthetic absorbable
dilatation, movement, and any other hension placed on the catheter and urinary
suture material.
bladder.
■If necessary, debride he bladder
● Anchor the catheter to the abdominal wall(at he point of exposure) wilh a simple
 of necrolic rissue before sururing.
suure of synthetic nonabsorbable material.
 Suure in an inverting pattern
 If excess catheter exists, transect he exposed catheter (outrside the abdominal wall)
 without penetrating the lumen of
about 5 cm (2 inches) from the body. This ransechion prevents the patient from
he bladder.
accidentally pulling out the catheter by, for example, stepping on it.
● Dorsocranial lacerations
● A finger from a surgical glove with both ends open may be suured to the end
 commonly do not require
of the exposed catheter to act as a valve and prevent gross contaminalion of the
sururing.
catheter.
Suturing Abdomen
■ Use absorbable sulure material, the size derermined by the size of the palient.
 Include peritoneum and musculature in one layer
 Suure subcutaneous fissue to eliminate dead space
Skin
■ Use synthelric nonabsorbable surure material.
 Use an interrupted horizontal mattress suture pattern.
● Simple interrupted sutures are also acceptable.
 Anchor skin surures to subcubaneous muscle to preclude dead space and reduce the
 potential for seroma formation.
Postoperative Care
Administer systemic medications
● Systemic antibiotics as indicated
Note
● IV fluid therapy in toxic cases
 Shorly affer the animal attains α
shanding posiltion, urine will drain,
 clinical signs are a marked rise in body temperarure and a poor response ho
 perhaps constantly, from the catheter.
systemic treatment.
 Consider therapy to acidify the urine and resolve the urinary calculi.
■ Clamp the catheter's end after 2 to 3 days.
●Allow the bladder to Fill, and watch for urination through he penis.
● If no urination occurs in a few hours or the palient exhibis signs of urinary
obstruclion, remove the clamp and allow urine to drain.
 Once normal urination begins (up to 10 to 14 days after surgery), surgically remove
he caheter.
Urethral Catheterization
General Considerations
 This procedure, relatively new, was described by western Kansas veterinarians for
feedlot steers.
■ The procedure can be accomplished relatively quickly wih the animal in a standing
 chute restraint; excellent resulrs are common.
recently ruptured.
 228 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Restraint
■ Use standing restraint
■ Chute resraint is recommended.
■ Apply a tail rie to keep he perineal area clear.
Presurgical Procedures
■ IV sedation or analgesia may be indicated for hypersensitive patients
■ Thoroughly scrub he dorsal perineal area (usually hairless) with water and an
iodophor scrub.
■ Spray he prepared area with iodophor solution.
Anesthesia
■ Use a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine with or without xylazine.
Surgical Technique
■ Make an 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inchj incision in the skin on the midline at the pelvic
floor level.
■ Bluntly dissect the subcutaneous fissue until the penis is exposed.
 Incise longiudinally into the dorsal urethra.
 Lubricate a 28-Fr rubber catheter with pelroleum jelly.
■ Insert he catheter into the urethral incision and force it craniad until he lip is in the
urinary bladder.
● A metal stylet placed inside he catheter will facilitate threading he calheter into
he urethra.
● The caheter is offen fully inserted into he urinary bladder, although the depth of 
inserlion should be determined on a case-by-case basis.
■ With synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material, anchor the suture through he skin
 margins and he calheter to keep the catheter in a stable posilion.
■If more than 2.5 cm (1 inch) of caheter is outside he skin incision, remove the
excess to prevent the patient from pulling the caheter out wih its tail movement.
■ Leave he caheter in the urethra until the palient is marketed or unfil he caheter
is spontaneously sloughed. If the caheter is sloughed off, α fibrous reaclion to the
rubber catheter will usually stimulate a patent urethral fistula.
Urethral Repair in Breeding Bulls
Caution!
General Considerations
 Surgery should be performed only
 Urethral stricure is a common sequela to surgical intervention.
when there is complete blockage and
■ Medicinal treatment should be chosen instead of surgery in most cases because of
impending urinary bladder rupture 
 he guarded to unfavorable prognosis associated wih urethral surgery.
or when there is no response to
● Surgery should be performed only when there is complete blockage and
impending urinary bladder ruplure or when here is no response fo medicarion.
reatment.
● Medicalions that may be considered for relief of urethral calculi:
+ Smooth muscle relaxants
· Sedalion or analgesia
Urinary acidifiers
★ Oral ammonium chloride: give bulls as much as 3 oz (oral ammonium
chloride is provided in I-oz capsules) daily for several days.
★ Ammonium chloride may also be used as a feed addirive for Irealment of herds.
Restraint
■ Standing chute restraint is advocated.
● Avoid placing additional pressure on the distended urinary bladder by casting the
patient.
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with Urolithiasis■  229
 Table restraint for lateral recumbency may be used.
oao jos buns pasodoid ay woy Aomo 4 daay a l au all 
Presurgical Procedures
 V sedation is usually unwarranted.
■ Remove the hair on the perineal midline with a No. 10 or 40 clipper head.
■ Thoroughly scrub the proposed surgical area wih water and an iodophor scrub.
■ Spray addifional iodophor solution on the area.
Anesthesia
 Optimal: a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine with or without xylazine.
■ An addirional field block for total desensifization (ventral perineal region} may be
indicated.
■ General anesthesia should be considered.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a low perineal incision.
■ With care, bluntly dissect fissue in he sigmoid area.
● To preclude adhesions, confine he incision to he midline and avoid cutting blood
vessels if possible.
■ Palpate the urethra for calculi
● This step may be he most dificult one of the surgery.
● A solitary calculus is generally found in the sigmoid flexure of the bull penis.
● Solitary calculi are not as common in rams and bucks as in the bulls and thus
his procedure is not as common in hese animals
If the site of he urethral obsruclion can be located, the surgical procedure is
completed as described.
■ Through he skin incision, expose he penile or urethral sechion in which the calculus
is lodged.
 Incise the urethra slightly cranial to he calculi. (lncise viable fissue that has no
inflammation and necrosis.)
■ Extract the calculus through the urethral incision.
Suturing
Urethra
 Use No. 000 or 0000 suhure material (preferably absorbable and synhetic) and a
swedged on taper needle.
 Place interrupted suures in he external layers of the urethra; avoid penetrating the
lumen.
Incision
■ Wih absorbable suture material, close the subculaneous fissue to obliterate the dead
space.
Wih nonabsorbable suure material, close he skin.
● Any apposifional suure paltern is acceptable.
Postoperative Care
■ Systemic antibiotics are recommended for several days.
 Anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids may be used for the short term.
 Urine acidifiers (e.g., ammonium chloride orally) may be used to dissolve certain
ypes of calculi.
■ Observe the palien's urine passage.
●It is unlikely the animal will express urine while affected by he caudal epidural.
especill if he proximal urethral lining appears necrohic. Urethral blockage may resull.
 230  ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Postoperative hemorrhage may be marked in some cases.
● Hemorrhage is associated with urelhral arteries or well-developed corpus
cavernosum urelhra fissue in bulls and older steers.
■ Carefully analyze the palien's diet and management, and correc any problems.
● Check and correct he calcium: phosphorus ratio.
Surgery for Subcutaneous Abdominal Inflammation and
Edema Caused by Urethral Rupture
■ Establish urine Flow via urethrotomy or urethrostomy
■ Establish drainage in subcutaneous abdominal rissues
● Radical longiudinal skin incisions are recommended.
● Avoid subcutaneous abdominal vessels
● Give antibiotics if indicated
● Include antihistamines in he medicinal regimen
■ This procedure may lead to serous complicalions if performed during fly season.
 Necrosis of the skin is a common sequela to rupture of he urethra.
Surgical Removal of the Urethral Process
in Wethers and Rams
Note
 This procedure is often the First after diagnosis of urinary obstruction.
The urethral process in male sheep 
■ Placing the palient on its rump and flexing its back will offen cause prolapse of the 
is often the location of urethral
penis hrough the preputial orifice.
blockage (calculij. Surgical 
■ Grasp he glans penis manually and simply snip the urethral process at the junchion
amputalion of he process often
of the glans penis with scissors.
alleviates he blockage.
 Observe and palpate the end of the penis for the presence of calculi.
● If present, physically remove them.
■ This simple procedure will occasionally correct he immediate problem.
■ No afercare is suggested, but observe the palient for normal urination.
■ Evaluate the diet and the calcium: phosphorus ratio, and correct as necessary.
Suggested Reading
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Anima! Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
pp 420-421, 534-547.
Hooper RN, Taylor TS. Urinary surgery. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1l (1):
95-121, 1995.
 Prasad B, Sharma N, Kohli RR. Surgical repair and management of bladder rupure in
bullocks. Indian Vet J55: 905-911, 1978.
Noordsy JL, Trotter DM. Cystostomy and catheterization in the reatment of urolithiasis
in steers. Vet Med Smal Anim Clin 58(5): 422-426, 1963.
Singh KB. Pelvic urethrotomies in bulls. Vet Rec 105(7): 137-141, 1979.
Van Metre DC, Divers TJ. Ruminant renal system, in Smith BP (ed): Large Animal
Internal Medicine, ed 2. St. Louis, Mosby, 1996, pp 975-987.
Walker DF. Penile surgery in the bovine: Part 1. Mod Vet Pract 60(10): 839-843,
1979.
Wolfe DF. Urolithiasis, in Wolfe DF, Moll HD [eds): Large Animal Urogenita!
Surgery, ed 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998,
pp 349-354.
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with Urolithiasis   231
Chapter 16 Study Questions
1. At what anatomic localion is a urinary bladder ruprure usually found?
Answers Key
2. If patency of the urethra is established shorly afer urinary bladder ruplure,
Answers to study questions can
what commonly occurs in the bladder?
be found staring on page 289
3. Where do urethral calculi usually lodge in the bovine male? In the ovine male?
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
 4. With regard to a urolithiasisrelated condirion in the bovine male,if the
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
subcutaneous abdominal rissue is markedly swollen, has he urinary bladder
or the urethra likely ruptured? If the steer exhibits α marked pear-shaped
abdomen, what urinary struchure has commonly ruprured?
5. How would you handle he case of a 5-year-old purebred bull that has just 
Finished the exhibition circuit and hat exhibirs a sign of urethral obstrucrion (jir
spasmodically voids a small amount of urinel3 The owner greatly values this
animal as a breeder.
6. What anatomic structure is associated with the penis of sheep hat is not found
 in calle? Is this sruchure associated with urethral obshruclion?
7. Are cystostomy and catheterization of the feedlot steer used for long-term
 feeding or for short-term meat salvage?
8. Is it common for a steer with a ruptured urinary bladder of several days'
duratlion to have fibrinous peritonitis?
9. Why would you hesitate to cast a steer with urolithiasis and a markedly
distended urinary bladder?
10. Can palpation of preputial hairs reveal an indicalion of urolithiasis?
11. Can urine pH be readily allered in calle via PO medication?
Chapter 17
Mammary Surgery
Teat Surgery
General Considerations
■ Teat surgery must be very precise, parly because of the very small teats on the
modern dairy cow (Figures 17-1 and 17-2). Therefore, aneshesia and resraint are
crifical.
■ Surgery to enhance or improve milk flow is best accomplished during lactation.
■ Surgery to restrict or decrease milk flow is best accomplished during the dry period.
 Mashiris is a serious complication hat must be considered when teat surgery is
performed.
 Milk Flow must be maintained in lactaing cows during the recovery period.
Teat Laceration Repair
General Considerations
■ If the laceration does not penetrate he reat cistern, consider reating as an open
wound.
Basics Required for Successful Teat Surgery
Thorough knowledge of teat anatomy and the physiology of milk produclion.
Exiremely clean surgery, with an aim toward aseptic technique. Mastitis is a
common sequela of teat surgery unless proper precaurions are taken.
In-deph knowledge of milking machines and management procedures.
Prompt altention by he client to discover all abnormal teat conditions, and prompt
communicalion with he veterinarian.
Proper first aid (administered by the client) for teat lacerations and other
injuries.
care.
 Performance of elective teat surgery preferably early in he day wih the udder
unmilked to allow periodic milking and observation, which may be necessary
in many cases.
Treatment of teat fishula repair preferably during he dry period, which allows
ample fime for healing before the next lactalion, and so that teat cistern
pressure will not interfere with healing.
If possible, repair injuries within 6 hours after hey occur. All serious teat injuries
 should be reported to a veterinarian as soon as possible.
Advise clients that machine milking of injured teats may be more appropriate
 han hand milking: however, hemorrhage and antibiotic residues should be
consideralions if the cow is milked via machine.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
233
234■Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
A—Inguinal nerve
B-
-Anterior
inguinal nerve
C
Posterior
inguinal nerve
D-
-External
inguinal nerve
E.
—Perinealnerve
FIGURE 17-1. Nerves of the bovine udder. Adapted from Getty R: Atlas for Applied
Veterinary Anatomy. Ames, IA: lowa State Universily Press, 1964, p 20.
Gland
sinus
Annularring
Teat
sinus
Mucous membrane
Muscle-connective
tissue layer
Rosette of
Skin
Furstenberg
Streakcanal
FIGURE 17-2. Normal anatomy of the cow's teat (cross-sectionj.
■ If a degloving wound is present, consider trimming he skin Flap and lelting heal as
an open wound.
■ Closure of a lacerated teat cistern is indicated or risk formation of a reat fistula.
Restraint
■ Standing resraint is recommended because it eliminates the possibiliry of furher teat
 and udder trauma associated wih casting.
■ Lateral or semilateral recumbency on a tilted surgical table is recommended for
intensiveteat surgery.
Mammary Surgery    235
First Aid for Teat Injuries
 Apply a cold pack as soon as possible to the traumatized teat to reduce
swelling. Use crushed ice in a large plastic cup. Suspend he cup by α
cord placed over the back of the cow (put holes on each side of he cup to
accommodate the cord). Place the teat in the cup, and surround it with the 
crushed ice.
 Use large adhesive bandages and adhesive tape to protect teat wounds until
 surgery can be performed.
 If possible, repair injuries within 6 hours after they occur. All serious teat
injuries should be reported to a veterinarian as soon as possible.
 Advise clients hat machine milking of injured teats may be more appropriate
 han hand milking; however, hemorrhage and antibiotic residues should be 
considerations if the cow is milked via machine.
■ Sideline restraint, tail restraint, a halter plus nose lead, and antikicking equipment
may be useful in certain cases.
■ The use of foot and claw trimming chutes with belly bands and positive restraint of
 he rear leg are very useful.
■ Do not over-restrain cows.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as needed 
■ Thoroughly cleanse the teat and surrounding udder
 If a tail jack is not necessary for restraint, place a tail rope fo prevent wound
contamination.
■ Consider placing a rubber band or rubber tubing at he base of he teat for
hemostasis.
 Carefully examine the laceralion, and develop a plan to repair ir.
Anesthesia
■ A local ring block with 2% lidocaine is generally effective.
Surgical Technique
 Thoroughly debride he involved tissues.
● Straighten the edges
● Remove all devitalized rissue and foreign material.
■ Control hemorrhage
● Hemostalic forcipressure is usually adequate.
● Remove all blood clots from the teat cistern.
■ Bring the mucosa and muscularure into apposirion by using No. 0oO or 0000
synthelic absorbable suture material or medium chromic gut and a swedged on taper
needle.
● Place simple interrupted surures 2 to 3 mm (/s inch) apart or simple continuous
suhures in he submucosal fissue only (Figure 17-3).
● Do not penetrate the mucosa because milk leakage or polyp development may
occur if he teat cistern (mucosal layer) is penelrated.
I The completed suure line should seal the leat cistern.
● Dry he sulure line, place one or wo drops of fissue adhesive into he incision, and
hold the incision closed to allow the adhesive to dry and set.
● Place a row of staples in the skin 3 to 5 mm (0.25 inch) apart.
236 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Vertical mattress sutures
Interrupted or
continuous sutures
Muscle-connective
tissue layer
Mucous membrane
Teatcistern
FIGURE 17-3. Suhure patterns for teat cistern laceration repair in the cow.
■ A second oplion:
With relatively fine, synthetic nonabsorbable sulure material and a swedged on
culting needle, close he skin in a verical maress surure paltern.
● Place suures about 3 to 5 mm (0.25 inch) apart.
● Include some of the muscle layer along with he skin
● Apply considerable tension to the sutures.
● The resultant slight elevation of he subure line is satisfactory.
Note
■ Remove he hourniquet from the base of the teat to allow milk to flow into he teat cistern.
Teat Injury Prophylaxis: Removing the
■ Check for a complete seal of the suture line.
 Insert α sterile self-retaining plastic teat hube in the streak canal.a
Medial Dewclaws of the Rear Feet in
Heifers
● Remove he cap of he teat tube.
A high percentage of 
● leave the uncapped hube in place 3 to 5 days ho prevent increased milk pressure,
 self -traumatized teats in adult cows
which stresses the suture line, in the teat cistern.
● The teat tube may be surured in position to ensure teat drainage during the
are associated with he medial
dew claws of the rear feet. Auto-
early healing period.
 Suhure he hube in posirion with fine synthetic nonabsorbable surure material in a
fraumatized teats are said to occur
Figure-eight pattern.
most often under condirions of loose
housing. Surgically removing the
Postoperative Care
medial dewclaws will reduce the
 Administer anibiotics to prevent mashitis.
occurrence of this condirion. See
■ Local infusion of an antibiotic may be administered through the teat hube after
Chapter 19.
 adequate preparation.
 Begin machine milking on day 2 or 3 after surgery.
● Machine milking produces less pressure on he incision line than does hand
milking.
Objectives in cows with
● The massage phase of the milking machine will reduce and prevent swelling.
 teat obstruction
 Remove skin surures or staples in about 14 days.
 Remove the obsruction to return
+ Do not remove the staples or sutures too soon.
and maintain milk flow.
 Maintain the integrily of the
Obstructed Teat Treatment (Figure 17-4)
mucosal wall of the teat to 
General Considerations
 prevent future obstructions.
■ Teat obsruction has mulliple causes.
■ Correct diagnosis willimprove the outcome of correclive procedures.
 Doctor larson's TM Teat Tube.
Mammary Surgery    237
Annular ring obstruction
("spider teat")
Fibrosis
Papilloma or polyp
Calculus
Sphincter injury
"Black spot"
FIGURE 17-4. Common causes of teat obstructions.
 Physical examinalion and ulrasonography are hwo common diagnoslic tools.
● A sterile teat infusion needle passed through the teat end and palpated through
 the teat wall willidentify the location and size of the altachment of a polyp.
■ Theloscopy or endoscpy of the teat has been shown to be an asset in diagnosing
and evaluating the teat and gland sinus.
Polyp Removal via the Teat (Streak) Canal
General Considerations
 Polyps are caused by trauma to the mucous membranes of the teat.
 Intermittent milk Flow is a sign of polyps.
Hloaring polyps may offen seal the orifice near he roselte of Furstenberg by creating
a ball-valve effect.
Restraint
 Appropriate standing restraint is required
 Milking parlor or stanchion restraint may be sufficient.
 A tail jack to divert the palien's altention may supplement the restraint.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Sedation or analgesia is oplional but recommended.
■ Determine he location of the polyp.
 Determine whether the polyp is free floating or attached
Note
● If the polyp is altached, determine the localion and size of the attachment.
An altached polyp with a large
Anesthesia
base may require open teat surgery
■ Anesthetize by using the teat cistern infusion melhod (Chapter 3).
to correct the mucosal wall defect
created by removal of he polyp.
Surgical Technique
■ Pass an alligator (preferred) or mosquito forceps hrough the slreak canal.
■ Grasp and extract the polyps hrough the teat (streak) canal.
● Take your time and tease the fissue through the streak canal.
● Polyps are fypically removed in pieces rather than intact.
+ Smaller pieces may be "milked" our.
● Hug's or Guard's umor exiractor may be used.
● Alhough effechive in some cases, hese extractors may cause significant teat
wall trauma.
 238   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Postoperative Care
■ Milk out any blood and debris
● Do this repeatedly (every 2 to 4 hours) throughout the next 24 hours.
■Administer antibiotics to control mastiris.
Surgical Removal of Polyps Via Open Teat Surgery
Restraint
■ Appropriate shanding restraint is required 
 Milking parlor or stanchion restraint may be sufficient.
 A tail jack to divert the patienl's attention may supplement the restraint.
■ Table restraint should be considered.
■ A chute with positive rear leg restraint is recommended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Sedation or analgesia is optional but recommended.
■ Determine the location of the polyp.
■ Determine whelher the polyp is free floating or attached.
● If the polyp is altached, determine the localion and size of he altachment.
■ Prepare he teat and base of he udder for sterile surgery.
Anesthesia
■ Anesthetize by using he leat cistern infusion method.
■ With a tourniquet in place at the base of the teat, infuse 2% lidocaine as a ring
block or an inverted V block.
 Extensive surgery may require general anesthesia.
Surgical Technique
■ Make a 2.4 cm (l inch) longitudinal incision through he teat wall opposite the
 altachment of the polyp.
■ With your finger on the outside of the teat, over the base of the polyp, push the
polyp hrough the incision.
● It is often possible to expose the polyp through the incision.
● The base of the polyp and irs attachment can thereby be visualized.
 Remove the polyp wilh a scalpel or sharp scissors.
● Retain as much of the teat wall mucosa as possible.
■ Control hemorrhage wih forceps, pressure, cautery, or ligation
● Minimize he amount of suure and inflammalion inside the tear.
■ Repair any defect in the mucosa of the teat wall.
● This repair can be time consuming and fruslrating.
● With small (No. OooO) absorbable synthetic suure material, repair the defect in
he mucosa.
● Bury the knots and the suture material.
 This lechnique is similar to a subcuticular skin surure.
■ Close the teat wall as described for teat laceration repair.
 Insert a sterile self-retaining plastic teat hube in he streak canal.
● Remove he cap of he teat tube.
● leave the uncapped hube in place for 3 to 5 days to prevent increased milk
pressure, which stresses the surure line, in the reat cistern.
● The teat tube may be surured in position to ensure teat drainage during the
 early healing period.
 Suure it in posifion with fine synthetic nonabsorbable suure material in a figure-
eight pattern.
Postoperative Care
■Administer antibiotics to prevent mastilis.
■ Local infusion of an antibiotic may be administered through the teat hube after
adequate preparation.
Mammary Surgery  ■  239
■ Begin machine milking on day 2 or 3 after surgery.
● Machine milking produces less pressure on the incision line than hand
milking
● The massage phase of the milking machine will reduce and prevent swelling.
■ Remove skin sutures or staples in about 14 days.
● Do not remove he staples or sutures too soon.
Removal of Calculi and Lactoliths
General Considerations
 Calculi and lactolirhs are offen associated with chronic mastitis.
● Check and possibly treat he patient for chronic mastilis.
■ Calculi and lactoliths offen act as ball valves in he teat, with intermitent obstruction
 of milk flow.
■ Calculi tend to recur.
Restraint
■ Appropriate standing restraint is required
 Milking parlor or stanchion restraint may be sufficient.
 A tail jack to divert the patien's altention may supplement the restraint.
 A chute with positive rear leg restraint is recommended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Determine he size, consistency, shape, and location of the calculi and lactoliths.
 Sedalion or analgesia is optional but recommended.
Anesthesia
■ Anesthetize by using the reat cistern infusion melhod.
Surgical Technique
 The surgical rechnique is similar to that used for removing polyps.
■ Wih the aid of an alligator or mosquito forceps, via the teat canal, calculi can be
broken down within the teat cistern and then milked our.
Postoperative Care
 Milk out any blood and debris.
● Do this repeatedly throughout the next 24 hours.
■ Administer antibiotics ho control mastilis
Treatment of Spider Teat
General Considerations
 This condition may be caused by trauma to the base of the teat and may be related
bo the pressure of the teat cup on the base of the teat.
Terminology
■ The excessive vacuum of the milking machine is also suspected of initialing trauma
Spider Teat: Spider teat is the
and fibrosis.
development of fibrous Fissue or
 The greatest occurrence of spider leat is during the dry period; consequently, most
bands within the teat cistern.
client complaints relate to recently freshened cows.
Closed Surgical Technique
■ Use an insrument with small metal balls on he end of a 15 cm (6-inch) metal shaff 
[e.g., spider teat remover).
 Place marked pressure on the fibrotic annular ring at he base of he teat (skin
surface) to rupure he stenolic area and enlarge the orifice behween the gland and
leat cisterns.
 This technique produces erralic and often unsuccessful resuls.
■ After apparently successful treatment, it is difficult to maintain a patent orifice.
 240 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Treatment of Blind Quarters and Blind Teats
General Considerations
■ These disorders are among he most common teat or udder problems in modern dairies.
 In general, prognosis is poor.
 Disorders are usually diagnosed at freshening, with litle or no milk from one quarter.
● In older cows afer a normal lactation, blind quarters and tears are thought to be
due to fibrous fissue resuling from chronic mastifis, most commonly caused by
 Staphylococcus spp or trauma.
+ Always culure these quarters and reat appropriately.
 Do not attempt surgical repair in he presence of infection.
● In heifers, blind quarters and teats are heorized to be due lo rauma to he teat
and/or udder during growh and development.
● Ultrasonography of the affected teat compared with the normal teats will quickly
demonstrate the extent of the fibrous tissue.
■ Theloscopy may also be beneficial in diagnosing he source and extent of the
obstruction.
■ Probe he teat and udder with a slerile bitch caheter or teat infusion needle. If
normal flow of milk cannot be established hrough the needle or catheter, the
 prognosis is grave and treatment should not be altempted.
■ Treatment is bypically successful for only a single lactation.
Restraint
■ Use lateral recumbency with a well-padded surgical table
Presurgical Procedures
Note
■ Discuss the prognosis and outcome with the client.
■ Marked sedalion or analgesia may be used.
Mastitis is extremely difficult to treat
when a prosthetic device is in he teat
■ Prepare the teat and base of the udder for asepric surgery.
and udder
■ One of the most common complications is mastifis.
psn aq o si bisaysaun loauae j lam pun paf plom 
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is preferred.
■ A ring block of the teat with 2% lidocaine may be used.
Surgical Technique
■ Make α liberal verlical incision through the teat wall, with emphasis on the dorsal
aspech of he teat. Expose the fibrolic annular ring.
● Beware of the venous sinus at the base of the teat, which may be a source of
hemorrhage.
■ Dissect fibrous fissue until an orifice about l cm (O.5 inch) in diameter exists berween
the gland and teat cistern. Hemorrhage may be a problem; cautery and hemostatic
forcipressure are usually adequate hemostasis.
● Ensure hat the teat sinus and roselte of Furstenberg are patent and clear of fibrous
Note
lissue.
■ Place the prosthetic insert through the annular ring and into he gland cistern.
The Proshetic Device
■ Place the other end of the prosthelic hube into he teat cistern, with the opening of the
■ The prosthetic device most often
hube over or near the roselte of Furstenberg.
used is 1 cm (0.5 inch) O.D.
 Suture the ube in place with nonabsorbable sterile suture material.
silastic ubing, 10 to 12 cm (4 to
■ Close the teat incision in the normal fashion.
 5 inches) long.
■ Insert α sterile, disposable, selfretaining reat rube into the streak canal.
■ Thick tubing walls prevent collapse
● Remove the cap to allow free drainage of millk.
of the tube.
■ Holes in the tube allow drainage
Postoperative Care
of milk.
■Administer antibiotics to prevent mastitis
■ Remove the teat tube in 24 to 48 hours.
Mammary Surgery  ■  241
■ Relurn to machine milking
●Machine milking is less fraumatic han hand milking.
● With the prosthetic tube in place, it is very difficult to milk by hand
 Observe the animal for evidence of mastitis.
 Observe the animal for normal milk flow.
■ Remove he skin suures or staples in 14 to 21 days.
● Do not remove he sulures too soon.
Procedures to Correct Abnormal Milk Flow
Treatment of Stenosis of the Teat Orifice
General Considerations
 A cow with this disorder is called a hard milker or slow milker.
Note
 Stenosis of the teat orifice can be congenital or a sequela to teat orifice
 Surgery is required in cases of severe
rauma.
● Common etiologies include frostbite, chemical irritation (e.g., harsh teatdipping
stenosis.
chemicals and irritaring chemicals used in Floor sanirizers), prolapse of the feat
 canal caused by trauma or excessive vacuum of the milking machine, and nursing
by penmates.
 Slight to moderate stenosis is treated nonsurgically.
● Manually roll the end of he teat berween your fingers to dilate and relax the teat
orifice.
● Teach the client this technique, which is also used postoperatively to maintain the
patency of the orifice.
Restraint
 Use adequate standing restraint, which may include tail restraint.
Presurgical Procedures
 Perform surgery early in the morning
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed 
■ Thoroughly cleanse the end of the leat by using aseplic technique; topical alcohol is
advised.
■ Wear sterile surgical gloves and use sterile or well disinfected, rinsed
instrumenrs.
Anesthesia
■ Teat cistern infusion (of questionable effecliveness because it may not produce
adequale anesthesia of the streak canal.
■ Ring block at the base of he teat
■ Ring block near the tip of he teat just proximal to the streak canal.
Surgical Technique
 Insert a sharp or blunt teat bistoury into the teat orifice.
● A No. ll Bard-Parker blade may be used instead of a teat bistoury.
 Incise the teat orifice with a teat bistoury.
● Incise he orifice at quarter-hour (12, 3-, 6, 9-o'clock) posilions.
● The result is a small X or cruciate incision of the orifice.
■ After each incision, check he ease of milking.
● The oprimal incision willallow a slow spontaneous dripping of milk.
Postoperative Care
 Milk the teat every few hours.
 If the orifice seals, gently roll the end.
 Teat dilators are not recommended.
■Antibiotics are indicated to control mastiris.
 242   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Surgical Treatment of Atresia (imperforate Teats)
General Considerations
■ Surgery is recommended only if: 
● The milk gland is functional.
+ The degree of fibrosis in the teat cistern is slight or nil.
● Atresia appears to be confined to the reat canal or teat orifice.
● Milk is present in the teat cistern.
Restraint
■ Use adequate standing restraint, which may include fail restraint.
Presurgical Procedures
 Perform surgery early in the morning.
■ Administer sedalion or analgesia as needed
■ Thoroughly cleanse he end of the teat by using aseplic technique; topical alcohol is
advised.
■ Wear sterile surgical gloves and use sterile or well disinfected, rinsed instruments.
Anesthesia
■ Teat cistern infusion (of questionable effectiveness because it may not produce
adequale aneshesia of the sreak canalj.
■ Ring block at he base of he teat.
 Ring block near the tip of he teat just proximal to the slreak canal.
Surgical Technique
■ Same as that used for stenosis of the teat orifice and canal
Postoperative Care
■ Same as that used for stenosis of the teat orilfice
Treatment of Partial Prolapse of the Teat Canal Resuiting in Reduced
Milk Flow
General Considerations
■ This condition is caused by individual teat trauma from:
● Stepping on he teat
● Excessive vacuum of the milking machine
Restraint
■ Use adequate standing restraint, which may include tail restraint.
Presurgical Procedures
 Perform surgery early in the morning.
■ Administer sedalion or analgesia as needed
■ Thoroughly cleanse he end of the teat by using aseplic technique; fopical alcohol is
advised.
■ Wear sterile surgical gloves and use sterile or well disinfected, rinsed instrumenrs.
Anesthesia
■ Teat cistern infusion (of questionable effectiveness because it may not produce
adequale aneslhesia of the sreak canalj.
■ Ring block at the base of the teat
■ Ring block near the tip of the teat just proximal to the sltreak canal
Surgical Technique
■ With scissors, surgically transect the entire prolapse.
Postoperative Care
■ Use soft, sterile medicated teat dilators to maintain the orifice and allow healing.
■ Replace the dilator after each milking.
● Observe for signs of mastitis
Mammary Surgery  ■  243
Treatment of Leaky Teats
General Considerations
■ Causes of leaky teats include:
● Trauma to the teat orifice
● Desruction of the sphincter
● Possibly a genetic predisposilion
Restraint
 Use adequate standing restraint, which may include tail restraint
Presurgical Procedures
 Perform surgery early in the morning
■ Administer sedation or analgesia as needed 
 Thoroughly cleanse the end of the teat by using aseplic technique; topical alcohol is
advised.
■ Wear sterile surgical gloves and use sterile or well disinfected, rinsed instruments.
Anesthesia
■ Teat cistern infusion [of questionable effecliveness because it may not produce
adequate anesthesia of the streak canall.
Ring block at the base of the teat
■ Ring block near the tip of the teat just proximal to the streak canal
Nonsurgical Technique
 Use a tuberculin syringe and a 0.5-inch, 23- ho 24-gauge needle.
 Inject inflammatory agents in minute quantities around the reat orifice.
● Use a dilute iodine solution (e.g., Lugol's solurionj or equal parrs of glycerin and
iodine.
● Injeclions may be repeated in 7 to 10 days.
Surgical Technique
 Place a buried purse-sring surure of No. OoO gut (stimulates inflammalion) around
 he teat orifice.
 Tighten he suure to allow free passage of milk when the animal is hand milked, with
no spontaneous leakage.
Postoperative care
 Observe for signs of mastifis
■ Minimal postoperative care required
Chronic Teat Fistula Repair
General Considerations
 Note
 The condition is commonly a sequela to teat laceralion involving the leat cistern.
 Il may be congenital or a sequela of supernumerary teat removal.
 Chronic teat Fistula is commonly a 
 aq oso  ain loa ado l buy aaou 
sequelae to teat laceration involving
 The ideal fime to repair fistulas is during the dry period.
the teat cistern
● Milk and associated intracistern milk pressure should be minimal or nil during this
period.
Nonsurgical Treatment: Cauterization
■ Use local applications of carbolic acid or bulter of antimony.
 Inject minute quanties of iodine around the fistula.
 Electrocautery may be attempted for stimulation of a tissue reaclion (closure) of the
Fistula.
■ Prognosis for success of cauterization is guarded to unfavorable if the isula is well
developed and surrounded by significant scar tissue.
 244 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Restraint
■ Standing reslraint is recommended because it eliminates the possibiliry of furher teat
and udder rauma associated wih casting.
■ Lateral or semilateral recumbency on a riled surgical table is recommended for
 intensive teat surgery.
■ Sideline restraint, tail restraint, a halrer plus nose lead, and antikicking equipmenh
may be useful in certain cases.
■ A chute wih posilive rear leg restraint is recommended.
■ Do not over-restrain cows.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as needed.
■ Thoroughly cleanse the teat and surrounding udder.
■ If a tail jack is not necessary for restraint, place a tail rope to prevent wound
contamination.
■ Consider placing a rubber band or rubber hubing at the base of he teat for hemostasis.
■ Carefully examine the Fistula, and develop a plan to repair ir.
Anesthesia
■ A local ring block with 2% lidocaine is generally effeclive.
Surgical Technique
■ Make elliptic incisions around the fistula.
● Include all scar tissue
■ Continue incising into the teat cistern
 The sururing technique is identical to hat used in open teat surgery and for deep
lacerations.
■ To close the leat mucosal layer, it may be necessary to dissect he mucosa free from
 Hhe underlying fissue.
 In many cases, only fissue glue and skin shaples or subures are necessary.
● When skin suures are used, synthetic nonabsorbable suture material and a
swedged on cutting needle are recommended.
Postoperative Care
 Prophylaxis of mashis (e.g., systemic injechions of antibiotic) is recommended.
■ Remove skin surures or shaples in 10 to 14 days.
 If surgery is of an emergency nature during lactalion, use of a plastic drainage tubes
is recommended for the first 3 to 5 days after surgery.
Teat Amputation
Supernumerary Teat Removal (Figure 17-5)
General Considerations
 Classificalion of supernumerary teats:
Note
● Caudal and intercalary: May be associated with aclive mammary fissue. There is
a potential for maslitis.
 Supernumerary teats are heritable.
● Ramal: Altached ho normal teats.
■ Supernumerary teats occur in 40% of all calle and may occur in 50% of certain
breeds of catfle.
■ Surgical removal is warranted because supernumerary ears interfere with milking
and are associated with masliris in caudal and intercalary teats and glands.
■ Remove supernumerary teats during the patien's first monh of life.
● Simultaneous surgical removal of the medial dewclaws of the rear legs is
recommended as a prophylactic herd health measure.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Place the patient in dorsal recumbency
Mammary Surgery ■  245
Intercalary teat (if
between quarters)
Caudal teat (if caudal
to the rear quarter)
Teat
fistula
FIGURE 17-5. Types of supernumerary teats.
■ A complete view of the udder is needed to dishinguish berween normal and
supernumerary tears. Beware of removing a normal teat by mistake.
■ Sedation or analgesia may be indicated, especially if surgery is combined with
dewclaw removal and cornuectomy.
■ Infuse 2% lidocaine into he base of he teat.
■ Cleanse the udder and teats; surgical preparation may be indicated.
Surgical Technigue
■ Remove isolated (caudal and intercalary) teats with an emasculatome and/or
scissors.
■ Hemorrhage is uncommon.
 Suuring is required in most adult cows, but suuring the wound is usually
unnecessary in heifer calves.
 Remove altached (ramall tears with an emasculatome and/or scissors
● Because the supernumerary teat and the normal teat probably share a common
leat cistern, removing he accessory teat may establish a fishula in the normal reat.
● Therefore, suture the fistula with inflammatory suure material (e.g., gut) o
stimulate scarring and ensure closure.
■ Beware of an active mammary gland associated with supernumerary teats in
adult cows and he possibiliry of masliris in hat gland. Chemical destruclion of the
accessory gland may be considered in some cases.
 The use of elastic bands to remove supernumerary teats is not recommended.
Amputation of Nonaccessory Teats
Indications
 Chronic pyogenic mastiris, primarily in range cows.
Note
■Acute gangrenous mastitis
 Distal-third amputation provides
 Extreme laceralion or trauma of the teat that is considered irreparable.
adequate drainage and less
Restraint
hemorrhage compared with a more 
 Use standing restraint and tail restraint.
 proximal amputation.
Presurgical Procedures
 Administer IV sedation or analgesia as deemed prudent.
■ In the case of viable tears, wash thoroughly.
 246 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Anesthesia
■ Apply a ring block at he base of the teat with 2% lidocaine.
 With gangrenous tears, no preparation or anesthesia is usually warranted.
Surgical Technique
■Viable teats:
● Ampuhate the teat with an emasculator or an emasculatome and scissors.
● Amputate only he distal third of the teat.
● Distal-third amputation provides adequate drainage and less hemorrhage
compared with a more proximal amputation.
● Hemostalic measures are usually unnecessary.
■ Gangrenous teats:
Recommendation
● Amputate at the proximal portion of the teat near the udder.
● Amputation allows drainage and exposure of the gland cistern to air, which
 In grangrenous teats anesthesia is not
reduces the potenlial for growih of anaerobic bacteria.
indicated.
Udder Surgery
Amputation of the Udder or Portions of the Udder
■ Historically, amputalion of a portion of the udder was recommended as α surgical
 reatment of gangrenous mastitis.
■ Amputation is now uncommon because of he tendency for marked hemorrhage,
shock, and death.
■ Because of the large number of cows per herd and the lack of sufficient rime and
o paziuna uao ao sioun asau 'ao aadosad aonbapr apiaoid a lol
■ Ligalion of udder vasculature wih subsequent sloughing of affected quarters has
 generally supplanted surgical amputalion.
Ligation of Udder Vasculature (Figure 17-6)
General Considerations
Jappn au jo uoyuod o buyhnojs moo jappn au buAiddns sjassaa jo uoyob 
■ This technique is less raumatic than surgical amputation, with minimal stress on the
palient.
 It eliminates further absorplion of toxins from gangrenous tissue via the bloodstream.
 Vascular ligation requires minimal fime and effort.
■ Alhough gangrenous mastitis is often confined to an individual quarter of the udder,
ligalion involves vessels supplying blood to half the udder (right or lft half. From
Recommendation
an anatomic standpoint, it is impractical to atfempt vascular ligation of an individual
Only the vasculalure involved
quarter.
■ Vasculature involved:
with the half of the udder wih the
● External pudendal artery and vein (greatest importance)
 gangrene is ligated. Should he entire
● Subcutaneous abdominal vein
udder be targeted, both pairs of
vessels should be ligated.
● Perineal artery and vein (oplional)
■ Field veterinarians report a greater than 50% recovery rate when treating
 gangrenous masitis. The mortaliry rate is usually high for untreated cases.
■ Recovering patients frequently start eating 12 hours after ligation.
■ Tissue slough is expected in 10 days to 3 weeks.
■ Commonly, the cow may be marketed in 4 to 6 weeks or when adequate healing
has occurred.
Restraint
■ Restrain the patient in lateral recumbency, wih the gangrenous fissue siruated
dorsally. lift the rear leg and extend it posteriorly for greater exposure of the udder.
Mammary Surgery ■  247
External pudendal
Ligatur
arterty and vein
External
Perinealartery
inguinal ring
Ligatures
and vein
Subcutaneous
abdominal vein
FIGURE 17-6. ligalion of the vessels of the udder (a prelude to sloughing of the udder).
Presurgical Procedures
 Communicate he following points with he client:
● Characterized as a salvage procedure
● Timeline for sloughing and salvage
● Pahogenesis of avascular necrosis, including the negalive aspecis of drainage.
odor, and likely infestation with flies and maggots if completed during Fly season.
● Prognosis and cost
 Administer marked IV sedation or analgesia.
 Wihhold feed and water to decrease he possibiliry of bloat.
 Remove hair over he inguinal area [the dorsal portion of the udder] and the
subcutaneous abdominal veins (milk veins).
 Prepare the incision sites for sterile surgery.
● The perineal artery and vein are located dorsal to the udder altachment, about 
halfway beween the udder and vulva and slightly paramedian.
Anesthesia
■ Consider high caudal epidural anesthesia
● If α high caudal epidural is given, restrain he patient's rear legs in an anterior
Note
posirion postoperatively.
■ General aneshesia is an option.
Amputation of a gangrenous teat 
■ Local anesthesia infused at the incision site is an option.
 is an important adjunct to vascular
ligation. It provides drainage of
Surgical Technique
mammary exudate and toxins, and it
Extemal Pudendal Artery and Vein
allows air to enter the udder cistern,
■ Make a 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 inch) longitudinal incision parallel and about 2 to 3 cm
which deters growth of anaerobic
[1 inch) dorsal to the base of the udder at the junchion of the forequarters and rear
bacheria commonly associated with
quarters.
gangrene.
● Make he incision hrough the skin only.
 248   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Bluntly dissect and isolate the external pudendal artery and vein, which can be
traced entering the inguinal canal.
● Recognize that he external pudendal artery divides into the anterior and posterior
mammary arteries. Make sure that you are proximal to the bifurcation.
● Apply a double ligahure to he combined artery and vein wih 1/8-inch colton
kape.
● Leave 2 to 3 cm [1 inchj belween the rwo ligatures
+ Apply marked tension to the ligahures, and rie with a surgeon's knot.
 Sururing the skin incision is oplional in light of the expected sloughing of the udder.
Subcutaneous Abdominal Veins
■ Without making a skin incision and isolating he vein, place a double ligaure on the
vein and surrounding skin just cranial to the dorsally positioned forequarter.
● Use a fullcurved cuting needle and 1 /8-inch colton tape.
● Space the ligatures I inch apart.
■ Apply marked rension to the ligarures and rie with a surgeon's knot.
Perineal Artery and Vein
 Ligating the perineal artery and vein is optional; ligating these vessels is of
minor importance compared with ligating the pudendal artery and vein and the
subcutaneous abdominal vein.
■ Approach through a vertical skin incision via blunt dissection.
■ Apply double ligahures with medium-sized synthetic nonabsorbable suture material to
 the combined artery and vein.
■ Sururing of the skin is suggested but optional.
Postoperative Care
 Administer supporlive treatment:
● Systemic antibiotics
● Antihistamines
● Hluid therapy as indicated 
● Steroids
 Allow restricted exercise until the patient's appetite returns.
■ Provide normal nutriltion; pasture grazing is advised.
 Control flies in the summer months.
■ Beware of contaminating he environment with bacteria.
An Alternative to Ligating Udder Vessels
General Considerations
(vaginal wall incision.
■Advantages:
● Ligations are performed with the cow in standing restraint.
● The subcutaneous abdominal vein and the perineal artery and vein are also
ligated wih he cow in standing restraint.
● The pudendal artery and vein are ligated via a vaginal incision.
● The total procedure is performed with minimal stress to the animal, which is usually
weak and toxic.
■ Disadvantages (compared with ligation with the palient in lateral recumbency
resraint) :
● The surgeon must have adequate knowledge of the internal anatomic structure of
he inguinal and pelvic region and be able to recognize organs and rissue via 
palpation.
● The surgeon must be able to insert ligations properly and, when ligating the
 pudendal artery and vein, be able to lie knots blindly.
Mammary Surgery  ■  249
Restraint
■ Use good standing restraint (e.g., a head gate) and secure the tail to the side of the
cow and away from he vulva.
Presurgical Procedures
Administer slight to moderate IV sedation or analgesia
 Wih a No. 10 clipper head, remove hair from a 10 to 15 cm [4 to 6 inch) area
over the subcutaneous abdominal vein and just cranial to he forequarter to be
sloughed. Also remove hair from the dorsal altachment of the targeted porlion of
udder ho he vulva. Surgically prepare the skin of both areas.
 Thoroughly flush the vaginal canal with an iodophor solution and several liters
of warm water. A stomach pump and hose are suggested for this procedure.
Completely remove the solution before making he vaginal incision.
Anesthesia
■ Administer a low caudal epidural with 2% lidocaine. The low caudal epidural wil
desensitize the perineal skin area.
■ Administer a Ffield block of 2% lidocaine in a 7 to 8 cm (3 inchj horizontal area 
just dorsal to he subcutaneous abdominal vein and cranial to the forequarter to be
sloughed.
Surgical Technique
 Use elbow-length sterile rubber gloves along with sterile instrumenls and surure
material. Aseptic surgery (e.g., draping and gowning) is unwarranted.
■ Make a stab incision into he vaginal wall with a No. 1l Bard-Parker scalpel blade
(held berween your thumb and forefinger).
● Make he incision dorsally and laterally to he cervix at the 10-o'clock or 1-o'clock
position on the side to be ligated.
■ Enlarge he incision by placing your fingers into it and alernately spreading and
forcing your fingers craniolaterally (off the edge of the wing of the ileum until
your hand enters the peritoneal cavily. Your hand should be free of any tissue.
oa au laue Aau so paodiod apoai aq uos siassaa popapnd poaxa au
abdominal inguinal ring.
 Retract your hand from the peritoneal cavily.
■ Thread about 2 M (2 yards) of 2 to 3 mm (1/8-inch) colton (umbilical) suture tape
onto a fully curved 4-inch cuing needle to create a complete double strand with a
net lengih of I M (l yard).
 Cradle and shield the needle in your hand. Carry it via the vaginal incision to the
internal inguinal ring while you hold the ends of the suture outside the vulva.
■ Direct he needle laterally just dorsal to he inguinal ring. Take a 1 to 3 cm (0.5
bo l inchj bite of abdominal wall lateral to he pudendal vessels. This bite, which
should include the pudendal artery and vein, is not deep but is adequate for suture
stabilization. Take care not to lacerate he vessels with the cuting edge of the
needle.
■ Bring the needle out of the abdominal caviry, thereby exposing both ends of the 
material. Remove the needle from the suture slrands either by culting the rwo strands
[leaving α double strand for the ligaure) or by pulling one strand free from the
Note
abdominal cavily and eye of the needle. You may use eiher a single or a double
A triple throw knot with colton tape
strand for ligatures.
will usually maintain good tension if
■ Start he surgeon's knot (triple throw) outside the vulva. While you hold one end of
one strand stays taut. Continue the
he suture strand(s) under moderate tension outside he vulva, slide the knot via the
knot outside he vulva and move it to
vaginal incision to the pudendal vessels. Apply marked tension to the surure strands.
he vessels until he surgeon's knot is
● Thoroughly palpate the ligaure to determine whether placement is proper and
lension is adequate.
completed.
 250 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Carry the scalpel blade intraabdominally beween your thumb and forefinger. While
you apply rension on the suure strands from outside he vuva, transect the suture
ends about 2.3 cm (l inch) distal to he knot.
■ A second ligature, about 2 to 3 cm [1 inch) dorsal to the knot, placed similarly to the
First suure, will enhance disruption of circulation to half of the udder.
■ The vaginal incision requires no further trearment or suuring. Healing commonly
occurs in 24 to 48 hours without complications.
■ The subcutaneous abdominal vein is ligated with the cow in standing restraint.
Double ligatures of cotton tape are placed similarly to those placed with the
patient in lateral recumbency. The perineal artery and vein are also ligated
similarly.
Postoperative Care
 Administer supporive freatment, which comprises:
● Systemic antibiotics
● Antihistamines
● Hluid therapy as indicated
● Sreroids
●Analgesics
■ Allow restricted exercise unil the patien's apperite rerurns.
■ Provide normal nutrition; pasture grazing is advised.
■ Control flies in the summer months
■ Beware of contaminaling he environment with bacteria.
Mammectomy in Does and Ewes
General Considerations
■ This procedure is usually done for pet dairy and pigmy goats.
■ Indications include:
● Chronic mastitis
●Pseudopregnancy
● large udder that drags on the ground
■ Always be cognizant of saving skin to close the large open wound crealed with
mammectomy.
Restraint
 Use dorsal recumbency
Presurgical Procedures
■ Complete physical examination is indicated to ensure hat the animal is healthy.
● Treat any systemic disease before attempting the surgery.
■ Laboratory blood work to evaluate he patienl's state of healh is indicated.
■ Withhold feed and water for general anesthesia.
 Clip and prepare he entire udder and surrounding fissue for sterile surgery.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is indicated.
Surgical Technique
■ Begin by making a 5 to 7 cm (2 to 3 inch) longiudinal incision over the inguinal ring.
■ With blunt dissection, identify, isolate, and ligate the external pudendal artery and
vein.
● Use No. I or 2 nonabsorbable surure material.
● Double ligate the vessel.
■ Repeat he isolation and ligation for the opposite external pudendal artery and vein.
Mammary Surgery    251
 Connect he wo inguinal incisions around the front of the udder.
● Leave as much skin as possible to facilitate closure.
 Isolate and ligale he subcutaneous abdominal veins.
● Often muliple subcutaneous abdominal veins exist.
■ Place posterior raction on the udder.
■ Bluntly separate the udder from the ventral abdominal wall.
● Avoid laceraing he mammary gland 
● Control hemorrhage as you go
● Typically, there is lile hemorrhage at this point if you have carefully ligated the
external pudendal vessels and the subcutaneous abdominal veins.
■ As you approach the posterior part of the udder, identify, isolate, and ligate the
perineal artery and vein.
 Remove he udder by cutfing he skin around the posterior part of the udder.
● Salvage and save as much skin as possible.
■ Control hemorrhage wilh ligation or cautery
 Close the skin
● Begin by placing subcutaneous sulures in a walking style to decrease dead space
 and to bring the skin margins into apposition.
● The skin can generally be closed with No. O or I surure material.
● The sulure line is commonly transverse.
● Tension surures may be needed.
Postoperative Care
■ Analgesics are indicated 
■Antibiolics are indicated
 Pressure bandages help minimize swelling and seroma formation.
 Rehurn he animal to a normal diet.
■ Remove sutures in 14 to 2l days.
Chemical Destruction of Glandular Tissue
Indications
 Chronic purulent mastitis
■ Excessively raumatized teats that leak chronically and cannot be repaired 
 Desruclion of mammary glands associated wih caudal or intercalary accessory teals
Udder infusions
Option 1
a yo sud o p au ls jo uos i jo sd ay a 
■ Infuse 5 ml via he teat canal for small quarters.
■ Massage the udder well.
 Increase the dose slightly for larger quarters, but do not infuse large doses.
● Gangrene of the udder may be a sequela if the dose is too large.
 Milk daily for about 2 weeks to remove necrolic material.
Option 2
■ Use 20 ml of 5% copper sulfate
 Use he same procedure, caulions, and aftercare as with the silver nitrate solution.
Option3
■ Use 100 to 300 ml of 1:500 acriflavine solution or 4% acriflavine
 This treatment is not quite as drastic as silver nitrate or copper sulfate.
■ The same aftercare is recommended.
Option 4
 Lugol's solution (full strengh) has been used with some success.
 252 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Suggested Reading
 Brewer RL. Mammary vessel ligation for gangrenous mastis. JAVMA 143(1l): 44-45,
1963.
Espersen KG. Udder Surgery. Copenhagen, Instiute of Surgery, The Royal Veterinary
 and Agriculural Universiry, 1976.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 403-419
Hirsbrunner G, Metzger L, Steiner A. Implantalion of a reinforced
polytetrafluoroethylene vascular graff for treatment of obstruclions of the teat and
mammary gland cisternae in cale. JAVMA 212(9): 1432-1435, 1998.
Hull Bl. Teat and udder surgery. Vet Clin Norh Am Food Anim Pract 1 l(1l): 1-17, 1995.
Kerfoot M. Ligation of the external pudendal artery and vein for the reatment of
gangrenous mashiris. Proc AABP: 151, 1983.
Mammary gland and milk produclion, in Smith MC, Sherman DM (eds): Goat
Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1994.
Modransky P, Welker B. Management of teat laceralions and Fistulae. Vet Med 88:
995-1000, 1993.
Noordsy JL. Surgical precondirioning of potentially high-producing dairy heifers. Vet
Med Small Anim Clin 76(12): 1778-1779, 1981.
Rathod S, Khodwe P, Vyavahare RRaS. Theloscopy - The Advancement in treat surgery
and Diagnosis. Ver World. 2009; 2(l): 34-37.
Rebhun WC: Diseases of the teats and udder, in Rebhun WC (ed): Diseases of Dairy
Cattle. Media, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1995.
Trosle SS, O'Brien RT. Ultrasonography of the bovine mammary gland. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet20(suppl: S64-S71, 1998.
Weaver AD. Teat surgery in catfle. Vet Ann, ed 22. Lileton, MA: PSG, 1982.
Chapter 17 Study Questions
Answers Key
1. Ar what age is surgery to remove supernumerary teats usually advocated?
 2. What surgical procedures might you perform concurrently as part of a herd
Answers to study questions can
healh program?
be found staring on page 290
 3. When is chemical destruction of a mammary gland indicated?
or online ar www.wiley.com/go/
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
4. What are advantages of standing resraint for teat surgery?
 5. What are disadvantages of standing restraint for teat surgery?
6. When would you recommend lateral or semilateral recumbency restraint for
teat surgery in the dairy cow?
7. For teat cistern infusion anesthesia, what anesthetic would you recommend?
 8. What suure material and what suture paltern are recommended for sururing
deep layers of the teat after open teat surgery?
9. What sulure material and what surure paltern are recommended for closure of
he skin?
10. When are teat dilators indicated?
11. When might you consider the use of plastic teat ubes?
12. Does chemical destruclion of one quarter of the cow's udder necessarily
reduce total milk produclion by one-fourth?
13. Would you recommend elective teat surgery in a cow with acute masilis?
14. What rime of he day would you recommend for eleclive teat surgery on a
lactating cow with stenosis of the teat orifice?
15. Would you advise surgery for chronic teat fistula in a 3-yearold cow with a
history of recent parturition?
Chapter 18
Ligament and Tendon Surgery
Tendon Surgery
Contracted Tendons
Etiology
■ This condirion is usually heritable; it is associated with a complex inheritance pattern
ralher than a simple recessive one.
■ May also be related to nutrition, size of the fetus in relation to he dam, and position
of the ferus in utero
■ Occurs in all breeds
 Most commonly noted in he forelimbs, but may affect rear limbs as well.
Note
Prognosis
Minor contraction will improve
■ Prognosis for recovery with or without treatment is often guarded to favorable,
 spontaneously if the calf can stand on
depending on the:
its toes and subsequently sretch irs 
● Degree of contraction
Flexor tendons. Altaining a standing
● Degree of rotation of the carpal joint
posiltion for even a short rime is a
● General health of the calf and irs abiliry to nurse
favorable sign.
● Age of the calf: the earlier the reatment, the better
Splinting Without Surgery
Objectives
■ Restrain the leg in an extended posilion and allow the calf to stand on its foes.
■ Allow the calfto ambulate, exercise, and nurse normally.
■ Provide tension on the contracted tendons unil they are slrong enough to maintain a
normal position without splints.
● Splinting fo provide tension, ralher han cashing, is recommended because splints are:
Usually lighter
 Easier to apply
 Easier lo remove
+ Less expensive
● Splints can be fightened every few days to maintain tension on the tendons.
Splint Application
■ Place adequate padding around the limb, especially on the pressure points:
● End of the splint
● Accessory carpal bone (forelimb)
● Point of the hock (rear limb)
 Use a sturdy metal, wood, or plastic splint (e.g., a polyvinyl chloride pipe cut in half
lengthwise).
 Length of the splint:
● From the joint proximal to the affected joint to the joint distal to the affected joint
● From the coronary band to he elbow of the forelimb
● From he coronary band to he hock of the rear limb
■ Place he splint on he anterior or posterior surface of the affected limb
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/armesfoodanimalsurgery
253
 254   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Anchor the splint in position with adhesive tape
● Il is important to keep the limb extended.
Note
● Do not allow the splint to slide or rotate to the side of he limb.
Walking on the toes is necessary to
■ Fully expose he loes of the limb so that the calf will walk on its toes rather than on
he splint.
stretch he tendons.
Splint Care
 Observe the splint rwice daily at a minimum.
 The splint must be replaced if it:
● Becomes loose
● Becomes wet or excessively soiled
● Slips down the leg
● Rotates to the side of the limb
 The splint may require fightening on a daily basis for the first few days.
 The calf may require several days ho adjust to shanding on splinted limbs, but it will
Usually ambulate very well after this period.
Removing the Splint
■ Leave he splint on until he limb can be kept in a normal or nearly normal position
[commonly about 10 days).
■ After splint removal, he limbs may be weak and will flex readily for about I day
until the calf adjusts.
 Standing normally for a short period is a favorable sign.
 Support of the limb wih bandages may be necessary for a few days.
Surgery and Splinting
General Considerations
 Cases hat require surgery have a much poorer prognosis.
■ In severe cases, contrachure includes the tendons plus the joint capsule of the affected
joints.
Presurgical Procedures
 Place the patient in lateral recumbency.
■ Give mild to moderate sedation or analgesia.
■With a No. 40 clipper head, clip he hair over the posterior aspect of the
metacarpal region (over the flexor tendons).
■ Thoroughly scrub he area with water and an iodophor scrub. Then spray the area
with the iodophor solution.
Anesthesia
■ Consider general anesthesia, especially when multiple limbs are affected.
■ local anesthesia is an oplion.
● Infuse 2% lidocaine locally over the midmetacarpal region. Infuse the skin
only.
Surgical Technique
■ Use a bayonettip Bard-Parker No. ll blade.
■ While you apply trension to extend he limb, make a small stab incision through the
skin in the midmetacarpal region, parallel and close to the taur superficial and deep
Flexor tendons.
■ Direct the scalpel at a right angle to the tendons.
■ While holding the limb in extension, cautiously incise (nick) the superficial flexor
tendon and then the deep flexor tendon, if indicated.
■ Stop incising when the limb is extended enough to apply a splint.
■ Once he toes can be placed in a relatively normal posilion, further incision is
unwarranted.
Ligament and Tendon Surgery
255
Apply a suitable antibiolic wound dressing to the incision area and bandage lighily
Hemorrhage should not be a serious problem i the Iransverse incision was properly made.
● If hemorrhaging is severe, employ moderate-pressure bandaging.
Note
 Place a splint on the leg as previously described.
In some cases of marked rendon
Postoperative Care
contraclion, both flexor tendons
 The calf may require several days to adjust to standing on splinted limbs, but it will
[superficial and deep] plus the 
usually ambulate very well affer a period of adjustment.
suspensory ligament may contribute
 Leave he splint on for about l0 days. After splint removal, the limbs may be weak
to the problem.
and will flex readily for about I day until he calf adjusts.
■ Standing normally for a short period is a favorable sign.
■ A support bandage may be necessary for a few days affer the splint removal.
Tendon Laceration
First-Aid
General Considerations
 Tendon lacerations in food animals:
■ Clean he wound and cover with a
● Are nearly all traumatic injuries
 sterile dressing as soon as possible
● Involve the flexor tendon of the rear limb
lb prevent a contaminated wound
● Are highly contaminated with environmental pathogens
from becoming an infected wound.
● Carry a guarded to poor prognosis
If a flexor tendon is cut, place a 
Aiddns pooq jood ayal o aoy suopual 
heavy support bandage, splint,
 The healed tendon is generally weak and tends to stretch.
 or cast for transport to a faciliry
equipped to treat the animal.
Treatment
Objectives
■ Control infection
 Immobilize limb to allow he tendon to heal
Anesthesia
■ General aneshesia is indicated.
Restraint
■ Use lateral recumbency with access to he wound.
Pretreatment Procedures
■ Clip the hair around the wound.
 Prepare the area for sterile surgery.
■ Start giving the patient antibiotics.
■ Delay surgery unfil a wound infection is controlled.
Nonsurgical Procedure
■ Thoroughly debride the wound
● Use sterile technique
 Flush with warm saline.
 Place a sterile dressing on he wound.
 Immobilize the limb, including he joint above and he joint below he laceration, in
a cast.
● A hole (window) may be placed in the cast over lhe wound to monitor and treal
he wound.
 Cast the limb in a Flexed posifion to minimize tension on the tendon.
Surgical Technique
■ Thoroughly debride he wound
● Use sterile technique
● Flush with warm saline.
■ Extend he incision over the lacerated tendon for a total length of 12 to 15 cm [5 to
6 inchesl.
■ Isolate the ends of he lacerated tendons.
 256 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Oppose the tendon ends with sterile large (No. 2 or 3) nonabsorbable monofilament
suture material.
■ Carbon fiber may be placed into the lacerated tendon to act as a template to align
collagen-producing Fibroblasts.
● Moderale success has been shown with carbon fiber.
● Carbon fiber must be rinsed with methyl ethyl ketone for 2 minutes and then rinsed
Ib remove the sizing.
+ The sizing is cytotoxic.
● Carbon fiber supporrs infechion in the fissue.
● Consider delaying placement of carbon iber until infeclion is controlled.
■ Immobilize the limb, including he joint above and the joint below he laceration, in
a cast.
■ Cast the limb in a flexed position to minimize tension on the tendon.
Postoperative Care
 Allow the tendon and wound to heal by second intention.
■ Maintain antibiofic therapy.
■ Restrict exercise with stall rest.
Caution!
■ Ensure good fooring.
Commonly, he wound and leg will
■ Maintain a clean, dry environment.
appear normal after removal of the
■ Remove the cast in 6 to 8 weeks.
cast only to have the tendon slretch
■ Replace the cast wih a splint or heavy support bandage for l to 2 weeks affer
or ruprure within a few days, which
removing the cast.
resultrs in a dysfunctional limb.
■ Maintain exercise restrictions for 3 to 4 weeks after the casts and bandages have
been removed.
Ligament Surgery
Medial Patellar Ligament Prosthesis and Joint Capsule Imbrication
in Newborn Calves
General Considerations
■ Lateral luxation of the patella in the newborn may resulf from trauma to the femoral
Note
nerve. Femoral nerve trauma may be a sequela to dystocia involving a relatively
 Oversized felus in anterior presentation and /or hiplock.
The prognosis for the femoral nerve
■ Surgery shabilizing the patella in its normal position enhances ambularion and
lo reurn to funchion is difficult to
markedly reduces lameness. No altempt is made fo perform surgery on the femoral
 nerve. Femoral nerve funcrion can be determined by checking skin sensiriviry on the
predict
medial side of the rear limb at the level of the proximal ribia.
Clinical Signs
 Only one rear limb is usually involved.
 Instabiliry of the leg is evident very early in the life of the calf.
● Close observation willreveal lateral luxalion of the patella when the calf attempts
ho walk.
● Commonly, the calf will not fully extend is leg, and the sifle joint will flex or dip
when weight is applied.
■ Arophy of the quadriceps muscle is a prominent clinical sign of femoral nerve paralysis.
Presurgical Procedures
 Restrain the patient in dorsal recumbency.
● Moderately shabilize the affected leg in an exiended posiltion.
■ Remove hair over Ihe medial aspect of the stifle joint (affected leg) with a No. 40
 clipper head.
■ Thoroughly prepare the skin with water and an iodophor solutrion, and then spray
 the prepared area wih he iodophor solurion.
Ligament and Tendon Surgery ■  257
Patella
Ligament of
Medial femoral
 patellar ligament 
the patella
 3-inch incision 
(skin only)
Intermediate
Caudal cruciate
 medial ligament
ligament
Medial collateral
ligament
Tibia
FIGURE 18-2. A skin incision is made
FIGURE 18-1. Anatomic parrs of the bovine shifle joint (medial view).
over the medial femoropatellar ligament 
in the bovine stifle joint (medial view).
Anesthesia
■ Consider general anesthesia
■ Marked IV sedation or analgesia may be used with local anesthesia
Surgical Technique
■ Use regional draping
■ Make an oblique incision about 7 to 8 cm (3 inches) in lengih over the medial
Recommendation
femoropatellar ligament (Figures 18-1 and 18-2).
● Incise he skin only; do not incise the joint capsule.
Aseptic surgery is recommended.
■ Wih a double slrand of extra heavy synthetic nonabsorbable sulure on a fully
curved culting-edge needle, create α prosthelic medial patellar ligament.
■ Take adequate needle bites into the patellar carilage and the femoral periosteum (in
 he area of normal medial patellar inserlion) (Figure 18-3).
● Pace the patella into a normal position.
● Apply marked tension on the suture.
 Hold the suture with a hemostat to maintain marked tension.
● Tie a triple-throw knot.
● Cut the ends of the surure material relatively short; bury the surure beneath the
skin.
● In he same fashion, place a second, "insurance" suure close and parallel ho the
First.
■ Flex he leg at his point to test flexibiliry of he joint and freedom from locking of the
exishs.
■ Imbricate he joint capsule (Figure 18-4). (Previously placed prosthetic ligament
Note
sutures usually cause puckering of he joint capsule medial to the sutures.)
Gut suture is recommended to
● Place simple interrupted Lembert suures of No. 3 medium chromic gut into the
ensure tissue inflammation and the
joint capsule longitudinally on he anteromedial joint capsule.
subsequent efficiency of imbrication;
● Place a second row of Lembert surures over the lop of the firsl.
tightening of the joint capsule is the
● Pace 5 to 10 suures depending on the length of the area.
■ Check the mobiliry of the joint: The joint should move freely; if not, repeat prosthetic 
desired resulr.
ligament suturing.
■ Wih heavy syntheric nonabsorbable suure material and as you apply moderate 
tension (incision edges should be apposed], place interrupted matress suhures in the
skin (Figure 18-5).
 258 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Simple interrupted
sutures
A-—-Insertion point in the
patellar cartilage
B
Insertion point in the
femoral periosteum
of the medial patellar
ligament
FIGURE 18-3 Two surures are placed in the patellar cartilage
FIGURE 18-4. Imbrication of the medial aspect of the joint
and the femoral periosteum (medial view).
capsule.
Postoperative Care
■ Administer systemic antibiorics for 3 to 5 days.
 Place with the dam after complete recovery from anesthesia.
■ Moderately restrict exercise for I to 2 weeks.
Interrupted horizontal
■Remove skin surures in 14 ho 21 days.
mattress sutures
Recovery Observations
■ The calf will ypically ambulate more efficiently after I or 2 days and clinical signs of
lameness will be less evident.
■ If the femoral nerve rerurns to normal function, quadriceps muscle atrophy will slowly
disappear in 2 or 3 months.
Joint Capsule Imbrication in Suspected Cases of ACL Rupture
Genera! Considerations
■ ACL rupture is occasionally diagnosed in catle.
FIGURE 18-5. Skin closure.
 The etiology of ACl rupture is most often trauma.
■ The prognosis for ACl ruplure repair is guarded.
Restraint
■ Use lateral restraint on a table with the affected leg up and extended.
Presurgical Procedures
 Ensure hat there is no joint infection.
 Clip and prepare he entire stifle region for sterile surgery.
■ Start presurgical administration of antibiorics.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is recommended.
Surgical Technique
■ For an adult cow or bull, make an 20 to 25 cm (8 to 10 inch) longitudinal skin
 incision over the anterolateral portion of the joint.
 Expose but do not open the joint capsule of the shifle joint.
Ligament and Tendon Surgery  ■  259
 Imbricate he joint capsule
● Place a row of simple interrupted Lembert sulures of heavy synthetic sterile
nonabsorbable surure material into the capsule on the anterolateral joint capsule.
● Place a second row of Lembert surures over the lop of the first.
● Pace 5 to 10 sulures depending on he length of the area.
 Check the mobiliry of the joint.
● The joint should be difficult to flex.
+ The joint will loosen over time.
● The procedure can be repeated on the medial side of the joint.
 Close the incision in a routine manner.
Postoperative Care
 Use strict stall rest for 4 to 6 weeks.
● Dry, wellbedded stll with excellent foring.
 Keep bulls at sexual rest for 6 months.
 Remove skin surures in 14 to 2l days.
■ The heavier the animal, the poorer the prognosis 
Medial Patellar Desmotomy for Treatment of Upward Fixation
of the Patella
General Considerations
 Upward fixation of the patella is occasionally diagnosed in catfle.
It may be bilateral or unilateral.
 Upward fixation of the patella involves the medial patellar ligament.
 Heritabiliry factors in caltle have not been determined.
Restraint
■ Standing chute restraint, with access to he stifle joint
■ A tail jack may be indicated to divert the animal's altention.
Presurgical Procedures
 Clip and prepare he medial side of the affected sifle joint.
● Prepare boh joints if the condifion is bilateral.
■ Sedation and analgesia are suggested.
Anesthesia
 Provide local anesthesia of the skin and area of the medial patellar ligament.
Surgical Technique
 Palpate the space berween the middle and medial patellar ligament.
 Make a l cm (O.5 inch) incision through the skin.
 Pass a blunt, curved tenotomy knife (a scalpel may be used with great care) into the
incision belween he middle and medial patellar ligaments.
● Rotate he tenotomy knife and place the cutfing edge on the medial side of the
medial patellar ligament.
■ With a slow sawing molion, transect the medial patellar ligament as you cut from
 inside out.
Note
● Typically, you willfeel a slight pop or release when he ligament has been
Resulrs are immediate. The cow
ransected.
 should walk normally.
■ One suure may be placed in the skin, or the area may be bandaged.
Postoperative Care
■ Postoperative concerns should be minimal.
 Reurn he cow to normal housing and diet.
Avoid contaminalion of the surgical wound.
 260 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Acknowiedgment
Surgery Staff, KSU College of Veterinary Medicine, Manhattan, KS) is gratefully
acknowledged.
Suggested Reading
Ferguson JG. Luxating patell and femoral nerve degeneration, in Greenough PR,
Weaver AD (eds): Lameness in Cattle, ed 3. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997,
pp 270-271
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 336-350, 497-501.
Greenough PR, Weaver AD, Broom DM, et al. Basic concepts of bovine lameness,
in Greenough PR, Weaver AD (eds): Lameness in Cattle, ed 3. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1997, pp 3-13.
Hobbs MT, Kenward JK. Surgery for luxating patella in a calf. Vet Rec 133(24):
602-603, 1993.
Chapter 18 Study Questions
Answers Key
1 . Is deep surgical anesthesia indicated to cut and split tendons?
2. Why is ir important not to include he toes in the splint?
Answers to study questions can
 3. Should exercise be encouraged in calves with tendon contraclion?
be found starting on page 290
4. Should inheritance be considered when freating a calf wih contracted Hlexor 
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
tendons?
 5. Should conracted tendon surgery be suggested for a calf wih breeding potenlial?
6. What is the suspected etiology of lateral luxalion of he patella in the newborn calf?
7. Would you suspect this clinical syndrome to be commonly associated with α 
calf delivered by cesarean seclion?
8. Alhough usually only one leg is involved, might this condition be bilateral?
 9. Is the clinical syndrome considered heritable?
10. What information should you give the owner regarding the long-term 
 prognosis, muscle regeneration, nerve regeneralion, and normal ambulatlion?
—........................................
Chapter 19
Foot and Claw Surgery
General Considerations
The 90% rule for dairy cow
Lameness
■ The incidence and cost of bovine lameness are areas of concern.
lameness
● The incidence of lameness is highest in confined dairy catle.
 90% of lameness is in he foot.
● Metabolic disease and environmental condirions lead to a significant occurrence
 90% of foot lameness is in the
of lameness.
rear foot.
■ Factors that predispose calle to lameness include:
 90% of rear foot lameness is in
● Inheritance of struchural weaknesses
 the lateral claw.
●Nutritional influences:
+ High-energy diers promote:
★ Maximal milk production
★ Rumen acidosis
★ Laminitis
● Environmental influences:
 Confined housing
+ Concrete [or a similar type) floors
Wet, filthy condirions 
● Infeclious agenrs:
 Infeclious pododermatis (footrot)
● Digital dermatitis (heel wart)
+ Subsolar abscess
■ Common resuls of lameness:
● Obvious lameness
● Poor milk production
● Loss of body condition and weight
● Suboptimal reproductive performance
● Direct effect on a range bull's abiliry to breed (rear leg lameness)
Footrot in Sheep
■ May reach epidemic proporlions in infected herds
Adjunctive Treatment
 Wooden, rubber, or plastic devices cemented on a normal claw:
● Reduce pressure on a pathologic claw
● Reduce lameness
● Are often successful adjuncts to surgery
Amputation of the Claw in Cattle
General Considerations
Preferably, amputalions are made distal to the middle of the first phalanx (Pl).
Healing is hought to be more rapid and complete if amputalion is not made at the joint.
● Continued joint Fluid production associated with the aricular surface may deter healing.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
261
 262 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Amputations will reduce he exhibirion qualiry of animals.
Arthrodesis
■ Longevily wihin the herd is general decreased following claw amputation
 Arthrodesis [surgical fusion of
 the bovine distal interphalangeal
Principal indications
joint is an alternative to
■ As α salvage procedure
● Most animals can remain in the herd to:
amputation in:
● Cases of suppurative arhritis
+ Complete a lactation
 and extensive infection of
+Wean a calf
● Produce a calf or embryos
he deep flexor tendons and
● There is a strong potenial for breakdown of the remaining claw in:
associated structures.
Heavy calle
● Breeding bulls
● Mature heavy catle
+ The rear foot of breeding bulls
● Exhibition cattle
■ Extensive sole abscesses and seplic claw cracks in pigs, goars, and sheep
 Arthrodesis requires extensive
■ Chronic suppurative arthritis (especially in cattle)
● Claw amputation is indicated only if the coffin joint or pastern joint is involved.
reatment and time
 Arthrodesis is associated with
● Amputation is contraindicated if the feHock joint is infected.
 prolonged lameness and pain.
Restraint
■ Lateral recumbency after rope casting may be used (he Burley method is satisfactory
in field situationsj.
■ Shanding restraint with a squeeze chute with adequate access to the foot may be
considered.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as indicated
■ Withhold feed and water if the patient will be placed on a surgical table or under
 general anesthesia.
 Consider using preoperalive antibiorics
■ Consider tetanus protection
■ Clip hair with a No. 10 small animal clipper head 
■ Thoroughly scrub he area with warm water and an iodophor solurion. Then spray
 the area with the iodophor solurion.
Anesthesia (Figure 19-1)
Cross-Reference
■ Regional anesthesia with an IV block is preferred.
■ General anesthesia is an option.
IV Nerve Block of the Foot
 Ring block of the foot may work if specific nerves to the deep struchures are blocked.
Refer to Chapter 3.
Surgical Technique (Figure 19-2)
■ Apply a tourniquet to he midmetacarpal or midmetatarsal region to aid in
hemostasis during surgery.
 Transect he soft fissue and bone with an obstetric wire.
● Not only is obstetric wire transection efficient, it also contibutes to hemostasis.
■ Start from the interdigital space, and angle dorsally hrough the first phalanx at the
junchion of he distal and middle third of Pl (Figure 19-3).
● Disariculation at the pastern joint is not recommended.
■ Forming a skin Flap to close he wound may be considered; however, he skin in the
area is often necrotic.
● Necrotic skin is not conducive to suuring and healing.
■ Lligate and/or cauterize he exposed digital artery.
■ Remove excess adipose tissue from the exposed area.
 Place sterile gauze over the wound (antibiotics or antiseptic ointment may be applied
under the gauze paddingl.
Foot and Claw Surgery 
■263
Skin-flap procedure
Metacarpalbone
Oblique incision
through the
first phalanx
Proximal
sesamoid bones
First phalanx
Amputation line
Surgically
prepped area
Transverse incision
Second phalanx
(disarticulation at the pastern joint)
Vein
Distal
sesamoid
Incision through
bone
tissue and the
second phalanx
Third phalanx
FIGURE 19-1. local vascular infusion.
FGURE 19-2. The volar aspect of the
FIGURE 19-3. Two claw amputation
distal forefoot of the ox.
mehods.
■ Apply pressure as you wrap the surgical area.
● Elastic adhesive tape may be placed over he gauze fo ensure prolonged 
 durabiliry of the wrapping.
● Pine tar or olher water-resistant material may be applied over the bandage.
■ Remove he tourniquet.
Postoperative Care
Antibiolics are indicated
 Reapply the dressing to the site in 2 to 5 days.
■ Remove bandages in 10 to 14 days.
 Consider box stall housing to minimize walking distances to food and water.
■ Keep the bandage dry.
Excision of Interdigital Fibromas (Corns)
General Considerations
■ These lesions appear to be a proliferation of skin and subcutaneous fissue berween
he claws.
 Histologically, many nerve fibers are evident.
 Corns are observed in the feet of catle that carry he most weight:
+ Front feet of bulls
● Rear feet of cows
● In heavy breeding bulls, often all feet
 Lesions are commonly associated with poor foot conformation.
● Excessive spread of the claws
Note
● Excessive fat deposilion in he coronary region
 Limit surgery to treat patients that are lame.
Corns are usually more prominent
 Examine corns for evidence of inflammalion and renderness, which are indications
on the anterior surface, but they may
for surgery.
be extensive and include the entire
 Marked inflammalion of an interdigital growth concurrent with lameness of the rear
 interdigital space.
 foot or feet will reduce breeding potential.
 264 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Digital
nerve block
Injection site
infusion site
Wedge-shaped
Interdigital
incisions
fibroma
-Interdigital
fibroma
Holes in claw for wiring
FIGURE 19-4. Digital nerve block of
FIGURE 19-5. Excision of interdigital
 he bovine foot (dorsal approach). The
fibroma.
injeclion site on the plantar surface is
comparable.
Restraint
 Lateral recumbency on a surgical table is preferred.
Presurgical Procedures
Note
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as indicated
A 2- to 3-foot piece of gauze soaked
■ Consider tetanus protection
■ Withhold feed and water when table reslraint or general anesthesia will be used.
in an iodophor scrub used to "floss"
■ Trim claws to correct foor conformation. Emphasis should be placed on the foot with
berween the claws is an effective
method of cleaning the interdigital
corns; however, claws on the olher feet may also be trimmed if deemed prudent.
■ Thoroughly clean the area with an iodophor solution and water scrub. After the
area.
 scrub, spray the area wih the residual iodophor solurion.
Anesthesia
■ Administer a regional IV nerve block (preferred).
■ A local interdigital block uilizing a 3-inch, 14-gauge needle is effeclive (Figure 19-4).
● Insert the entire needle into he interdigital space from the anterior side of the foot.
● Infuse 20 ml of 2% lidocaine as you slowly withdraw the needle.
● Repeat the procedure on the posterior side of the interdigital space.
■ A metatarsal or metacarpal nerve block may also be used.
Surgical Technique (Figure 19-5)
■ Apply a tourniquet to the midmetacarpal or midmetatarsal region for hemostasis.
■ Grasp he anterior aspect of the corn wih a towel clamp, and apply traction.
■ Make wedge-shaped incisions on the anterior interdigital area (include the abnormal
Note
fissue).
● Continue incising berween the claws while you apply conlinued traclion wih the
Remove excess interdigital adipose
lissue if present
towel clamp.
● Beware of incising interdigital cruciate ligaments.
q  u w y n s o li  a p jed 
■ Ligation of blood vessels is usually unwarranted in lieu of adequate wound packing.
■ Antiseplic ointment may be applied to the wound before bandaging.
■ Apply a pressure bandage to the foot and interdigital area.
● Pack five to 10 sterile 4inch by 4-inch gauze pads berween the digirs.
● Although the bandage must be very fight to control interdigital hemorrhage, it must 
 not compromise the blood supply to the digir.
● Waterproof the bandage if the animal will be in a wet environment.
Foot and Claw Surgery ■ 265
Postoperative Care
 Systemic antibiotics are not commonly administered.
■ Ideally, change he bandage in 3 to 5 days.
● This rarely occurs
● Allow the bandage to wear off or remove it in about 2 weeks.
Removal of Interdigital Foreign Bodies or Foreign Bodies
Surounding the Claw
Common Causes of Claw
Foreign Bodies
Clinical Signs
Bailing wire
■ Lameness in one foot
sbu!-0
■ Swelling of the foot in he coronary band region
Gaskets
■ Swelling of he foot with a definite line of demarcation in the case of a foreign body
■ Plastic beverage packaging 
surrounding the claw.
Diagnostic Procedures
● Careful examination of the foot is paramount.
Caution!
● Many foreign bodies are not evident on radiographic or ulrasound sudies.
■ Suspecied foreign body (wire) surrounding the claw:
For every diagnosis missed for lack
● Administer IV sedation or analgesia as indicated.
of knowledge, you wi miss 10 for
● Use standing chute restraint or lateral recumbency restraint as indicated.
lack of looking.
● Probe for the suspected wire primarily on he flexure surface of the pastern.
● The foreign body may appear on he surface in this area, but it is usually buried
more deeply in the anterolateral areas.
Anesthesia
■ Anesthesia is indicated for removal of the foreign body.
 Local anesthesia is generally adequate.
■ V block may be required in some cases.
Surgical Technique
■ Remove he foreign body; make sure that the entire mass is removed.
■ Clean and debride the lesion.
■ Bandage the area, and give systemic medicarion as indicated.
 This freatment is usually satisfactory without resorting to amputation of the claw.
Subsolar Abscess Surgery
Clinical Signs
■ Chronic or acute lameness in one foot
● Subsolar abscess is one of the most common causes of lameness in confined dairy
cows.
■ Usuall, no abnormal swelling is seen in the coronary region.
Often intermiltent lameness as:
● The abscess opens, which decreases the pressure and relieves the pain.
● As the pressure builds, the pain rerurns.
■Visible necrotic areas in he sole of the claw are offen presenl.
Restraint
■ Table restraint (preferred)
■ Standing restraint in a chute
 Sideline restraint
■ Lateral recumbency restraint
266    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer IV sedation or analgesia as indicated
Anesthesia
■ No anesthesia is usually required.
■ Local vascular infusion (IV block) is preferred when deeper painful structures are
involved.
Surgical Technique (Figure 19-6)
■ Thoroughly explore all cracks and devitalized areas of he sole of the foot.
 When you discover an abscess, completely remove irs ventral wall.
■ Leave no edges on which bacteria and/or debris can accumulate.
FIGURE 19-6. Open and drain subsolar
abscesses, and leave no edges.
Postoperative Care
■ Bandaging is rarely indicated.
● Use only to protect open bleeding wounds.
■ Antibiotics are rarely indicated.
● Use only if systemic disease is present.
■ Consider placing a commercial or wood block on he normal digit to elevate the
affected digit above he ground and minimize discomfort.
Note
■ Debride he necrotic trissue
Trimming of Claws, especially in Cattle (Figure 19-7)
■ Establish adequate drainage
leave no edges
General Considerations
■ Claw trimming has become increasingly important in dairy caile management
programs.
■ Foot problems may be associated with:
● Diets formulated for maximal milk production.
● Confinement, which limirs exercise and normal claw wear.
● Wet concrete floors.
■ Range bulls should be carefully observed for elongated claws (especially of the rear
feet).
● Abnormal feet may affect reproductive capabiliry.
■ Hereditary patterns of foot and claw conformation should be recognized and
 considered in breeding programs.
■ Satisfactory foot trimming in the bovine species is a learned skill
● Faully trimming may cause more harm than good.
● Good equipment and optimal restraint are essential.
● Prophylactic trimming performed regularly helps maintain herd health
Objectives
3
■ Remove excessive claw growth
■Maintain normal functional foot anatomy
■ Correct and treat any disease condifion of the foot.
Restraint
■ Standing or lateral recumbency (operator's preference)
■ Positive foot restraint, with visualization of the foot, including the boltom
FIGURE 19-7. Lines indicate common
trimming points. (Courresy of Drs.
Surgical Technique
Douglas Hostetler Universily of Nebraska 
■ Clean and examine he foot for cracks, drainage, devitalized areas, and disease.
and Bruce Hull Professor Emertis,
■ Remove excess claw length.
The Ohio State Universily College of
● Typically, the anterior claw lengh is 2.5 to 3.5 inches, depending on age, sex,
Veterinary Medicine.]
and weight of the animal.
Foot and Claw Surgery ■  267
 Remove excess sole of the foot in a plane parallel with the bottom edge of P3.
● This is difficult to estimate.
Note
● A common mistake is to remove too much hoof from he heel area.
■ Ensure hat both claws of a foot are trimmed evenly.
Thorough knowledge of normal foot
●Typically, the lateral claw on he rear foot must be trimmed to match the mediol
anatomy is required.
claw.
■ Make he sole of the hoof slightly concave.
Amputation of the Forelimb and Hindlimb in Cattle,
Especially Calves
General Considerations
■ All amputations of the limbs in caltle should be regarded as measures to relieve
 suffering and to render the animal i for eventual meat salvage.
 Confine amputations to young, lighweight animals.
● Marure animals are usually incapable of effectively walking on three legs.
Good client education is required to emphasize risks and possible negative
outcomes.
Indications
 Severe fractures of the lower limbs that will not heal and cannot be reduced.
■ Irreparable trauma to distal extremities hat may or may not involve fractures. Such
Irauma may result from grass mower accidents.
Note
Transection Sites
 In the forelimb, transect at the upper and middle one-third of the radius.
Higher amputations are possible in
● This site is proximal enough so that he remaining stump will not shrike terrain.
calle but are more difficult and are 
● Adequate muscle is available lo cushion he stump.
associated with more complications.
 In the hindlimb, transect where the upper and middle onethird of the libia meel.
Remember, this is α salvage 
● It is proximal enough so that the remaining stump will not strike terrain.
procedure.
● Adequate muscle is available to cushion the shump.
Presurgical Procedures
 Consider administering preoperative antibiotics.
 Clip the hair and prepare the limb for sterile surgery.
■ The distal limb to be amputated should be bandaged or covered with a sterile drape
 lo allow manipulation during surgery.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is preferred.
● For a hindlimb amputation, a lumbosacral epidural could be substiuted for
 general anesthesia.
Surgical Technique
■ Place a tourniquet well above the proposed surgical site.
■ Make an incision in the midribial or midradial area to expose the bone.
 Ligate the major vessels hat supply blood to the lower limb.
● The tourniquet may need to be loosened to identify the major vessels.
 Cut the bone at least 5 cm (2 inches) proximal to the incision to allow adequate
muscle mass to remain to cushion he bone stump.
 Suure he muscle over he end of he bone stump.
 Close the skin with heavy (No. 3) synthetic nonabsorbable suhure material.
● Various suture palterns are acceptable.
 268 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Postoperative Care
■ Place a padded bandage on the incision.
■ Remove the tourniquet.
Administer systemic antibiotics.
 If the proper surgical technique was used, addirional therapy is usually unwarranted.
■ In an orphaned or weaned animal, restrict exercise. In an unweaned animal, allow
normal dam and offspring exercise.
■ Remove sutures after adequate healing (i.e., in 2 to 3 weeks). Before removing all 
the surures, drainage may be necessary if serum has accumulated in the distal stump
 om jo auo buaosai Aq uroia (abins buunp sisoisouay aonbapou jo asnooaal
sutures.
■ Market the patient for meat salvage as soon as possible. Do not allow the animal to
 grow to maluriry.
Amputation of Medial Dewclaws of the Rear Feet in Heifers
General Considerations
■ Advocated as teat injury prophylaxis
● A high percentage of auto-traumalized reats in adult cows are associated wih the
medial dewclaw of he rear feet.
 Surgically removing the medial dewclaws will reduce the incidence of this
condition.
● Auto+raumatized reats are said to occur most ofen in animals in loose housing.
 This procedure is best completed in heifers younger than 6 months of age.
● It can be accomplished in mahre cows, but he potential for complicalions greatly
increases.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Administer moderate IV sedation or analgesia.
■ Place the patient in dorsal or lateral restraint with the legs extended.
■ Adequately clean the dewclaw area and remove excess hair.
Anesthesia
■ If sedation or analgesia is not adequate, administer a local ring block or regional
anesthesia.
 Surgical Technique
■ Force the dewclaw to be amputated proximally by applying pressure on he apex.
Caution!
■ Remove the dewclaw with a Barnes dehorner or heavy-gauge surgical scissors in 
Be careful not to amputate too deeply
young calves.
 and not to include major posterior
■ Remove a seclion of softrissue at the base of the dewclaw along with the dewclaw.
metacarpal vasculature.
Avoid the major vessels under he dewclaw.
Postoperative Care
■ Suturing the wound is usually not indicated.
■ Apply a proteclive bandage for I to 2 weeks.
Suggested Reading
Arkins S. Lameness in catfle. Irish Vet J35(6): 135-140, 1981.
Farrow CS. Digital infections in calle: Their radiographic spectrum. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 15(2):411-423,1999.
Foot and Claw Surgery ■  269
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 283-289, 323-336.
Greenough PR. Arthrodesis of he bovine distal interphalangeal joint. Proc AABP 1l:
112-115, 1978.
Greenough PR, MacCallum FJ, Weaver AD. Lameness in Cattle. Philadelphia:
Lippincot, 1972.
Greenough PR, Weaver AD, Broom DM, Esslemont Rl, Galindo FA. Basic concepts of 
bovine lameness, in Greenough PR, Weaver AD (eds): lameness in Cattle, ed 3.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997, pp 3-13.
Meier C: Procedure in purulent arthritis of adult catle and clinical experience with joint
lavage. Praktische Tierarztl 78: 893-906, 1997.
Surborg H. Aspects of treatment of severe claw diseases in a large animal practice.
Bovine Pract 19: 227-230, 1984.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orthopedic problems. Part I. Fractures. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet8(2): S69-S79, 1986.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orthopedic problems. Par Il. Coxofemoral 
luxalions, soff fissue problems, sepsis and miscellaneous skull problems. Compend 
Contin Educ Pract Vet8(3): S117-S125, 1986.
Weaver AD. Advances in bovine digital diseases. Bovine Pract. 23-27, 1993.
Chapter 19 Study Questions
 Answers Key
1. Is there an inherited tendency for corns?
2. Do bovine corns have a tendency ho recur affer surgical excision?
 Answers to study questions can
3. What might a definite line of incision on the coronary band region indicate?
be found staring on page 290
4. What lype of cale would most likely be affected with digital dermatitis of the
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
heels and pastern?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
5. Are corns usually sensilive?
6. Is nutrition associated with subsolar abscess formation?
7. Is fauly foot trimming with a mechanical grinder associated with lameness?
8. Is amputation of the claw a feasible treahnent for suppuralive arthritis of the
rear leg pastern joint in a 3-year-old Hereford range cow? Would the answer
be different if the fetlock joint were involved?
9. Should amputaling he rear claw of a heavy Hereford range bull be
considered for reatment of suppuralive arthritis of he lateral pastern joint?
10. When is amputation of the forelimb or hindlimb indicated? Should eiher of
hese amputations be considered in malre catle?
11. Would you advise prophylaclic claw trimming in a dairy herd healh program?
Chapter 20
Joint Surgery
General Considerations related to Joint Effusion
Very common
● Often found in young animals
 Usually very painful
■ Typically septic
● Extension of naval infection (joint ill)
● Result of trauma
● Commonly seen in carpus, hock, felock, and stile jointrs
● Aggressive therapy is most rewarding for septic arhritis.
Diagnosis of Joint Effusion
■ Occasionally blood in joint
●Resul of trauma
 Arthrocentesis
● Because of damaged carilage
 Radiography/Ultra sound 
 Osteochondritis dissecans lesions
Arthroscopy
● Lacerated cartilage
Arthrocentesis
General Considerations
■ Excellent diagnostic tool
■ Can be accomplished as a field procedure
Restraint
■ Standing chute restraint is recommended.
■ Table restraint is acceptable.
■ Young calves may be placed in lateral recumbency.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Clip the hair and prepare the affected joint for a clean, if not sterile, procedure.
■ Administer sedation and analgesia as needed.
Anesthesia
■ Simple arhrocentesis generally requires no anesthesia.
Surgical Technique
 Use sterile surgical gloves and sterile technique.
■ Thrust a 1.5-inch, 14- or I6-gauge sterile needle into the joint.
● The site of penetration is the protruding, swollen joint capsule.
● Posifion the needle until a free flow of joint fluid occurs.
● Observe the joint fluid.
Note
● Collect hwo samples of fluid in sterile vials for analysis.
+ One vial should contain an anticoagulant.
If you suspect sepsis, aggressively
■ Remove excess Fluid from the joint.
treat the infection.
● Multiple sites may be lapped.
Noordsy's Food Anirmal Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
271
 272 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Postoperative Care
■ A clean pressure bandage may be placed on the joint to control further joint
effusion.
 Postoperative complications are rare.
Joint Flushing
General Considerations
 Commonly used as freahnent of seplic arthritis.
● Aggressive therapy is most rewarding for septic arthritis.
 Effecrive unless he exudates within the joint have coagulated into a rubbery mass.
● If the joint contains masses of fibrin and debris consider:
 Surgically opening the joint to remove debris
+ Arthroscopy to Flush and remove debris
Restraint
 Table restraint is generally necessary.
■ Distention of the joint may be painful.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Clip the hair, and prepare the joint for a sterile procedure.
■ Withholding of food and water may be required if general anesthesia is to be
Used.
■ Presurgical antibiotics are usually indicated.
■ Use sedation and analgesia as indicated.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is recommended, especially when muliple joint are affected.
 Local anesthesia is generally insufficient.
■ Regional anesthesia of the affected limb is an option.
Surgical Technique (Figure 20-1)
■ Use sterile technique with sterile equipment, gloves, and fluids.
■ Place a 1.5-inch, 14- or l6-gauge sterile needle into he affected joint in α similar
 fashion as described for arthrocentesis.
 Collect sterile samples for culrure and analysis.
 With a large syringe (60 ml) or Fluid pump, inject warm sterile saline into the
joint.
■ As the joint distends, place rwo or three needles into the joint to allow joint fluid and
 Flushing solution to escape.
■ Massage the joint.
■ Infuse solution into different needles placed into the joint.
● This reverses the direclion of solution flow.
 Continue to flush the joint until the solution obtained from the joint is clear.
■ Discontinue infusion of saline.
■ Allow the excess fluid to drain.
■ Remove all needles.
Postoperative Care
■ Postoperative antibiotics are indicated.
■ Apply a pressure wrap to the joint.
■ In severe cases, joint support with a splint or heavy bandage is indicated.
FIGURE 20-1. Flushing of he felock joint.
■ Consider postoperative analgesics.
Joint Surgery
273
Arthroscopy
■Very effechive for freating joint disease in food animals
Note
■ Highly specialized procedure requiring:
For best resulrs in septic arthritis,
● Special equipment 
repeat the joint Flushing three fimes in
●Training
a week.
■ Generally performed in referral hospitals
Arthrodesis
General Considerations
 The joint berween the first and second phalanx (P1-P2) and berween P2-P3 are the
 most common joint arthrodesed in catle.
● Used for treatment of suppurative arthritis of Pl-P2 and P2-P3
■ Successful outcomes require:
● Infeclion control
● Deslruclion of articular cartilage
● Immobilization to allow arthrodesis
■ Moderate to severe pain must be controlled for extended lengih of time.
 Provide clear client educalion and communication to review:
● Prognosis
●Final outcome
Note
●Time line
●Possible complications
Arthrodesis requires prolonged
convalescence.
● Cost
Restraint
■ Table restraint is recommended.
Presurgical Procedures
■ Consider presurgical antibiotics
■ Wihhold food and water if general anesthesia is ho be used.
 Clip the hair, and prepare he area for sterile surgery.
 Use sedation and analgesia as indicated.
Anesthesia
■ General anesthesia is recommended.
■ Regional IV nerve block of the foot may be adequate.
Surgical Technique
■ Place a tourniquet on he limb in he midmetatarsal or midmetacarpal area.
■ Use sterile technique.
 Incise the skin to expose the lateral side of he Pl-P2 joint.
 Wih a drill or curelte, remove the arlicular cartilage of the joint.
● The P2-P3 joint can be accessed from the medial side of the hoof.
 Make sure that the subchondral bone is exposed and hat the ends of the bone are
in physical contact.
 The skin may be closed or leff open in the case of seplic arthritis.
■ Heavily bandage the foot.
 Remove he tourniquer.
 Consider immobilizalion with a cast and walking bar.
Postoperative Care
 Postoperative antibiotics are indicated.
■ Postoperative analgesia is indicated.
 274 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ Change he bandage in 3 to 5 days and as needed thereafter
■ Healing (complete arthrodesis) may require up to 6 months.
 Confine the animal to a wellbedded box stall.
Treatment of Meniscal Tears
■ Meniscal tears are commonly seen in breeding bulls.
 Diagnosis may be dificull.
● Diagnosis of exclusion
● One clinical sign is stifle lameness with an audible click as he palient walks.
 Surgical correclion is possible.
Suggested Reading
Arkins S. Lameness in catle. Ir Vet J35(6): 135-140, 1981.
Farrow CS. Digital infections in caltle: Their radiographic spectrum. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 15: 411-423, 1999.
Fubini SL, Ducharme NG. Farm Animal Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
pp 325-336.
Greenough PR: Arthrodesis of the bovine distal interphalangeal joint. Proc AABP 1 l:
112-115, 1978.
Greenough PR, MacCallum FJ, Weaver AD. lameness in Cattle. Philadelphia,
Lippincot, 1972.
Greenough PR, Weaver AD, Broom DM, Esslemont RJ, Galindo FA. Basic concepts of
bovine lameness, in Greenough PR, Weaver AD (eds). lameness in Catfle, ed 3.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997, pp 3-13.
Meier C. Procedure in purulent arthritis of adult catle and clinical experience with joint
lavage, Praktische Tierarztl 78:893-906, 1997.
Surborg H. Aspecis of treatment of severe claw diseases in a large animal praclice.
Bovine Pract 19:227-230, 1984.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orhopedic problems. Part I. Fractures. Compend 
Contin Educ Pract Vet8(2): S69-S79, 1986.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orhopedic problems. Par ll. Coxofemoral
luxalions, soft rissue problems, sepsis and miscellaneous skull problems. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet8(3): S117-S125, 1986.
Van Amstel Sarel R, Shearer J. Manual for Treatment and Control of Lamness in Cattle
Ames IA: Blackwell Publishing. 2006, pp 92-124
Weaver AD. Advances in bovine digital diseases. Bovine Pract23-27, 1993.
Chapter 20 Study Questions
 Answers Key
1. How would you treat a I-week-old calf with multiple swollen joints?
Answers to study questions can
2. Would you culure the joint Fluid?
be found staring on page 291
3. How would you control joint pain and lameness?
4. How helpful is arthroscopy in food animals?
or online ar www.wiley.com/go/
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
5. Would you recommend arhrodesis for seplic arhritis in the coffin joint of a
range cow?
Chapter 21
Common Fractures and
Dislocations
General Considerations
Therapy
Principles of Food Animal
Uitraconservative
Fractures
■ Stall rest
 Reduction
■ Natural immobilization:
Immobilization 
● Muscle mass in shoulder and high provides immobilization
 Use least invasive procedure 
●Works belter for comminuted frachures
● May be an alternalive for fractures of the:
Femur
· Scapula
Factors to Consider When
Humerus
Confronted with a Fracture
Pelvis
 Fracture: lype and location 
● Patient must maintain normal body functions.
● Pain management is necessary.
Patient:
● Size and temperament
● Function: production or 
Intermal Fixation
breeding
■ Works well in select cases
■ Inadequate strengh in some applications
● Monetary value
● Abiliry to stand, eat, drink, or
■ Screws may loosen in the very soft bones of neonates
 Concerns include:
move
● Sepsis
● Cost of implants and equipment
● Limited experience of the surgeon
Casts
■Work well on distal limbs
 Must immobilize boh the joint above and the joint below the fracture
■ Must pad well
■ Walking bar (Figure 2l-1):
● Transfers weight from the ground to above fracrure
● Decreases concussive forces on fracture
● Strengthens cast
● Acts as a builtin crutch
● Must maintain l cm (O.5 inchj of space belween he boltom of the foot and the
walking bar
Avascular necrosis
● Occasionally seen in calves wih vascular damage ho he distal limb from use of
obstetric chains (Figure 21-2).
FIGURE 21-1. Cast with walking bar.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
275
 276 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
FIGURE 21-2. Avascular necrosis 6 weeks following an obstelric chain injury.
Externa! Fixation
■ Splints:
● Are effective in young, rapidly growing animals
● Must immobilize both he joint above and the joint below he fracture
● Require careful and consistent monitoring for:
Looseness
·Slippage
Rotation
■ Thomas splints:
● Generally custom-made
● Require careful monitoring 
● Do not work well for distal femoral fractures
Cross-pinning
 Can be very effective for distal limb fractures
External Fixator Bars
■ Can be very effeclive in young animals
■ May lack sufficient srengih for marure palienrs 
Specific Fractures and Dislocations
Fracture of a Vertebra
available.
 Vertebral fractures may occur in catle, during estrus as a result of mounting.
 They are also seen in pigs.
● Vertebral fraclures, which are frequently seen in sow during advanced lactation,
may be associated with improper mineral intake.
● lighming strike, a fracture of the last lumbar vertebra, is hought to be caused by a
sudden, massive lumbar muscle conraction that resulrs from electrical stimulation.
● Vertebral fraclures also occur when immalure pigs crawl under resrictive barricades.
Common Fractures and Dislocations   277
Fracture of a Rib
■ Rib fraclures occur primarily in cale as a resulf of jostling or fighting berween bulls
Note
or horned catle.
● Pleuritis and lung pathology may resull
 Calves with a collapsed rachea offen
● Be alert for concurrent diaphragmatic hernias.
have a concurrent fracture of the first
■ Rib fracures are also common in newborn calves and may occur during dystocia.
rib or ribs.
Fracture of the Pubic Symphysis
■ In caltle, frachures of the pubic symphysis are most commonly seen in heifers younger
han 30 months.
■ Clinical signs:
● Inabiliry to stand or dificully in standing wilhout assistance.
● Tendency for the rear limbs to splay.
● Marked pain and a disinclinalion to stand for long periods or to carry he weight
of the body when walking.
■ Diagnosis can be confirmed by rectal palpation.
 Prognosis is generallyfavorable if the heifer (either dairy or beefl is small.
■ Soft bedding should be provided, and nonslippery Floors are essential.
 Consider hobbles to prevent the legs from splaying.
■ Recovery usually occurs in 2 or 3 weeks.
Fracture of the Ischium
■ Undue raclion during dystocia in older cows may cause a fracure of the ischium.
 A clinical sign is limited rear leg mobiliry.
■ The heavier the cow, the more difficult it is for her to stand, move, obtain feed and 
water, and defend itself against oher animals.
● The prognosis for recovery is better for lighweight cale.
● In heavy caltle, meat salvage is recommended.
 Surgical treatment is generally considered impractical and unwarranted.
Fracture of the Shaft of the Ilium
 Concurrent damage to he iliac vessels may occur.
 Clinical signs are:
● Restricted locomotion
● Evidence of pain
■ Diagnosis can be confirmed by rectal palpation.
 The prognosis is good if iliac vessels are uninvolved, alhough gait may be
somewhat impaired and pelvic diameter may be reduced. (Such a reduction is
unfavorable for fulure parlurition.)
Fracture of the Tuber Coxae
■ Often referred ho as a "knocked down hip"
 Relatively common occurrence during estrus as a result of mounting
■ May occur from rauma as the animal passes hrough doorways, allys or hits its
luber coxae on posts
 The palient usually recovers without complications unless abscesses develop.
 Early extraclion of the bone chip may be indicated in extremely valuable animals,
 such as breeders wih good genetic potential.
 Produces a severe blemish in exhibirion cattle
■ Treatment is seldom altempted 
Fracture of the Scapula
■ Marked lameness of the affected front leg is a clinical sign.
● The leg is carried rather than normally extended and flexed.
 278 ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
■ This fracture is occasionally observed in caltle as a result of mounting, usually in
 the mounting animal: One leg remains straddled across the animal being mounted,
which causes undue stress.
■ In young, lighrweight animals, prolonged spontaneous healing may be expected.
Otherwise, frachures of the scapula are extremely difficult to treat.
+It is difficult to provide the imobilization required for healing.
Consider ultraconservative therapy or meat salvage.
Fracture of the Humerus
■ Cause marked lameness of the limb
■ The fracture is often oblique or spiral and may involve he radial nerve.
■ Definitive diagnosis is made via palpalion or radiography
■ Not a common fracure in catfle
■ Intramedullary pinning, bone plaing, and external Fixator bars may be indicated for
valuable animals.
 Ultraconservalive therapy has been effective for heavily muscled animals.
 Beware of radial nerve paralysis.
Fracture of the Radius and Ulna
 Causes marked lameness of the forelimb.
● Often a swinging (nonweightbearing leg lameness.
■ These frachures are occasionally open.
■ Bone plating, cross-pinning, and external fixator bars may be effective in selecied cases.
■ A Thomas splint may be indicated for smaller animals.
 Casts and ulraconservative therapy are generally unrewarding due fo unsatisfactory
immobilization.
Fracture of the Metacarpus and Metatarsus
■ One of the most common fractures seen in food animals.
Note
■ Commonly a result of misplaced chains (single loop) during dystocia
■ Evidence of fractures of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones:
Many metacarpal and metatarsal
● Lack of a straight line
 factures can be prevented during 
● Dangling foot
dystocia if rwo loops of chain are 
● Generally visible to the naked eye
placed on the leg, one above and
● Blood, which indicates an open fracture
 one below the fetlock joint.
 Multiple treatment options exist
● Splints, casts, external fixators, and cross-pinning are effeclive in selected cases.
● Follow the principles of fracure repair outlined earlier.
 Typically, the fracrure is overriding and very unstable.
+Apply traction on the foot to reduce the fracure.
● Do not attempt ulraconservative therapy.
Fracture of the Femur
Articular Head and Neck
■ Seen in catHe hat have fallen on slippery floors
■Frequenly occurs as a fracrure of the neck of the femur and is associated with
recumbent stages of hypocalcemia
■ Seen in l- to 2-year-old bulls in group housing 
■ Occasionally seen in calves as a capital physeal fracture (slipped femoral capital
epiphysisj.
 Diagnosis may be difficult
● Radiographs are needed for definitive diagnosis.
■ Therapy includes:
● Internal Fixation with cannulated screws
● Removing he head of the femur
Common Fractures and Dislocations   279
■ Avascular necrosis of the femoral head is common.
■ The prognosis is poor.
Trochanter Major
■ The frochanter major is more frequently fractured in catle than in other food animals.
 Causes severe lameness
 Patients often recover in several weeks with stall rest.
 The prognosis is relatively good unless the fracture becomes open.
Femoral Shaft
 Oblique fractures of the midshaft are common.
 This fracture is also seen often in calves and after dyshocia.
■ Diagnosis is confirmed via radiography.
 Therapy usually requires internal fixation.
● Bone plating is indicated for valuable animals.
 Angle blade plates give good resulrs.
● Bones are very soft in neonates, and screws tend to pull out.
● Intramedullary pinning (Figure 21-3)
● Because of the shape of the femur, i is difficult to fill the marrow cavily except in
midshaff fractures.
■ Prognosis is guarded.
Fracture of the Tibia
■ Characterized by he animal's holding a Flexed limb somewhat off the ground.
 In heavy bulls, the prognosis for healing with proper alignment is relatively poor. In
some cases, he frachure may heal well enough for the animal to be used in artificial
insemination programs.
 Therapy includes:
● Bone plating in calves and lighhweight calle may be successful.
● A well-designed and Fitted Thomas splint may be an effecrive treatment.
 Prognosis is fair.
Fracture of the Hock
■ Ofen involves he uber calcis in breeding bulls and is usually associated wilh mounting.
■ A patient will have severe lameness and will be unable to flex the rear leg.
■ Recovery to the point of compensated locomotion may be expected in some cases.
■ Abiliry to breed is commonly impaired
■ Prognosis is poor.
75.8
HGURE 21-3. Healing fracture of he femur in a calf after
inramedullary pin placement. Note he shape of the marrow 
cavily and the exremely thin cortex at the distal physeal region.
 280  ■  Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
Fracture Distal to the Fetlock
■ Not as common in cattle as in horses, but it should not be overlooked.
■ Fractures of P3 are occasionally diagnosed.
● Treatment is usually not attempted.
● A wooden block or rubber shoe may be placed on he sound toe keep affected
 Ibe off of the ground and decrease pain.
● Casts may also be used as deemed prudent.
■ Prognosis is generally guarded to fair.
Fracture of the Mandible
■ Usually has a traumatic origin
■ Clinical examination will reveal excessive drooling and inappetence.
■ The fracture is often open.
■ Diagnosis is by means of radiographic examination.
 Therapy includes:
● Intramedullary pins in the shaft of the mandible
● Screws or wire if the symphysis is separated
■ Prognosis is generally good, even with an open fracture.
Epiphyseal Separation
 In calle, epiphyseal fusion is usually complete at 2.5 to 3 years of age.
■ The line of contact may still be the weakest portion of the bone (e.g., the distal ribia
or he head of the femur). This line will separate, even in older animals. Prognosis is
 generally favorable for newborns if tissue trauma is minimal and no break in the skin 
has occurred.
■ Simple cashing in fractures of the lower limb for 2 to 3 weeks should be sufficient.
Coxofemoral Luxation
■ Coxofemoral luxalion is a common cause of downer cows.
■ Diagnosis is via physical examinarion and radiography.
■ Extremely difficult to reduce dislocalions in adult cattle
■ It is nearly impossible to maintain reduction of dislocation.
■ Prognosis is poor.
Metatarsal or Metacarpal Phalangeal Dislocation
■ Common in cattle
■ May be partial or complete
■ Prognosis is worse if the dislocation is open.
 Therapy includes:
● Traction on the limb
● Manipulation to return the limb to normal position
+ listen for hwo pops to completely reduce the dislocation.
● Place the limb in a cast for 4 to 6 weeks.
Suggested Reading
Adams SB, Fessler JF. Treatment of radial-ulnar frachures in calle using a modified
Thomas splint-cast combination. JAVMA 183(4): 430-433, 1983.
Ames NK, Belknap E, DeCamp C. Use of a frachure dislractor in hwo caltle. JAVMA
207(4): 478, 1995.
Colahan PT, Pascoe JR. Stabilization of equine and bovine mandibular and maxillary
facrures using an acrylic splint. JAVMA 181(10): 1117-1119, 1983.
Ferguson JG. Femoral frachures in the newborn calf: Biomechanics and etiological
considerations for practilioners. Can Vet J35[10): 626-630, 1994.
Common Fractures and Dislocations   281
Fessler JF, Adams SB. Decision making in ruminant orthopedics. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 12(1): 1-18, 1996.
Greenough PR, MacCollum FJ, Weaver DA. Lameness in Cattfe. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincol, 1972.
Hofmeyr CFB. Reconstruction of the ruprured anterior cruciate ligament in the stifle of a
bull. Veterinarian 5(2): 89-92, 1968.
Hull Bl. Frachures and luxations of the pelvis and proximal femur. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 12(1): 47-58, 1996.
Lischer CJ, Fluri E, Kaser-Holz B, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Auer JA. Pinless external
Fixalion of mandible fracrures in catle. Vet Surg 26(1): 14-19, 1997.
Rebhun WC, Pearson EG. Clinical management of bovine foot problems. JAVMA
181(6): 572-577, 1982.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orthopedic problems. Part Il. Fracures. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 8(2): S69-S79, 1986.
Tulleners EP. Management of bovine orthopedic problems. Par ll. Coxofemoral 
luxalions, soff rissue problems, sepsis and miscellaneous skull problems. Compend 
Contin Educ Pract Vet8(3): S117-S125, 1986.
Walker DF. Coaptation splinting of the bovine rear limb. Mod Vet Pract 60(8):
629-633, 1979.
Chapter 21 Study Questions
1. What are some common postoperative recovery problems related to fracture
 Answers Key
repair in mature catle?
Answers to study questions can
2. How would you treat α fracure of the hird phalanx in an adult bull? List other
be found starling on page 291
condirions hat might cause lameness similar to that observed wih fracture of
or online at www.wiley.com/go/
he third phalanx. How would you make a definitive diagnosis?
amesfoodanimalsurgery.
3. Would excessive fraclion on a fetal extractor (calf jack] stimulate fractures in a
calf?
4. Would you advise a swine breeder to breed very thin sows immediately after
hey wean piglets? What might be an unfavorable sequela in the sow?
aooy Aaddis o yim paoisoso si mos jaumop o u aooy uouuos youa 's
 6. Why is the prognosis for a fracture of he mandible generally good when the
fracure is open?
Study Question Answers
The answers, comments, and information in this appendix were compiled to provide
informalion, stimulate thought, and allow readers to draw on my 35 years of food
animal surgical experience. Although no one will agree with all of my comments, it
is my intent to share some wisdom and give back to the profession that has been a
rewarding career and a labor of love for me.
N. Kent Ames, DVM
CHAPTERI
he spine occurs, with the convex side of the curve being
General Surgical Considerations
toward the side of the block
 1. Absolutely. No one in our profession wants any animal to
suffer. However, it is difficult to determine if and how much
Nerve Blocks for the Limbs of Cattle
pain a cow is experiencing. A cow that has had recent surgery
 2. Anesthesia will last as long as the tourniquet is in place.
may show no signs of pain and in fact may be exhibiring
After removal of he tourniquet, sensation begins to rerurn.
normal behavior in every respect e.g., ealing, drinking,
 3. When a needle is pushed into or through infected rissue,
ruminatingl. As conscientious veterinarians, we should take all 
here is a risk of spreading infeclion to noninfected areas.
ava ilable steps to minimize pain and suffering in our patienis.
2. Certainly. However, field silualions are not the place to take
Anesthesia of the Horn
shortcurs and use poor surgical technique. Never think that
4. With some newer inhalation agents, masking down the kid
because the patient is a cow, she is resistant to infechion or
works quite well. The depth of anesthesia must be closely
 hat use of antibiotics is a substilute for poor lechnique.
monitored. There are a number of injectable combinalions
 hat work effectively. Beware of lidocaine toxicity (>3 mg.
CHAPTER 2
licocaine/pound) in small goats.
Surgical Restraint
1. Injury to you and the patient is a major concern. Bloating,
Eye and Eyelid Anesthesia
regurgitation with aspiralion and death may occur.
5. Accidental injeclion of lidocaine into he oplic nerve may
2. A tail jack is most commonly used for short procedures. You
have disasrous consequences, including death of the palient.
can also use a Flank rope or simply lift up on the Flank in
 6. Alhough a rare occurrence, it could result from the needle's
young animals. Commercial anikicking devices are available
penetrating the optic nerve and lidocaine being injected
hat place pressure on the flank or on the Achilles tendon
into he brain. The outcome would likely be fatal.
3. Pad the down shoulder adequately, extend the down side
7. As he anesthetic agent is absorbed into the oplic nerve,
leg as far forward as possible, and avoid pulling or lying
humans have reported "white blindness" after a retrobulbar
he top forelimb tightly to he table.
block.
4. The tail may be a source of contaminalion to the surgical
site. To avoid possible trauma ho the tail, fie the tail to the
Teat Anesthesia
animal's leg or neck- never ho he chute, post, or other
 8. Anesthesia is not rypically required because of the loss of
inanimate object.
sensalion from the disease process itself. If the teat to be
5. A simple trick is to place a hose under he animal and let it
amputated does have sensalion, a local ring block above
run slowly. Most animals do not want to lie down in water.
 the level of amputation is adequate.
 9. Infusion of the teat canal and local anesthesia of he teat
CHAPTER 3
end work well.
Local and Regional Anesthesia
10. The mucous membranes of the teat canal will probably not
Nerve Blocks for Abdominal Surgery in Cattle
be anesthetized. Local injection of lidocaine with a very
1. The first sign is rypically warming of the skin caused by
Fine needle (25 to 26 gauge) will work. Remember that
vasodilation. As sensitiviry to pain decreases, scoliosis of
lidocaine will be absorbed hrough a mucous membrane.
Noordsy's Food Anial Surgery, Fifth Edition. N. Kent Ames. @ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/amesfoodanimalsurgery
283
284   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
11. Local injection at the base of the supernumerary teat will
3. Before using the system, make sure there are no leaks and
give adequate anesthesia. A small supernumerary teat can
hat he scavenger system is working.
often be removed by means of scissors with no anesthesia.
4. Extension of lhe head forces he pathway from the mouth to
he larynx to become straighter and facilitates passage of
Subsacral Paravertebra! Nerve Block
he endotracheal tube.
12. No. A cow with a subsacral paravertebral nerve block will
5. If he globe is centered in the socket, the plane of
calve normally.
anesthesia is good. If the eye rolls down, the anesthesia is
13. Yes. The veterinarian has a dury to advise he owner about
lighr.
condirions hat would affect the wellbeing of the individual.
animals within the herd.
CHAPTER 6
14. Yes. Rectal prolapse in swine has muliple causes.
Surgery of the Head and Neck in Cattle and Goats
1. The earlier the belter. Calves and kids can be dehorned 
CHAPTER 4
within the first 2 weeks affer birth.
Epidural Anesthesia
2. For best resulrs, I like to surgically (cosmetically) dehorn
1. Rectal, vaginal, and uterine prolapse are all common 
calves at about 6 months of age. Naturally polled breeding
indicalions for use of a caudal epidural in caltle. Any
stock should not be surgically dehorned for exhibition
manipulation or painful stimulus of the peritoneal region
 purposes because hat animal is genetically not a purebred.
is an indicalion for administralion of a caudal epidural.
Steers can be dehorned for exhibition purposes without
Caudal epidural is used in dystocia and to control straining
issue.
during C-sections.
 3. Older catle tend to have horns and bones hat are more
2. I do not recommend alcohol epidural anesthesia. At one
britle than those in young animals. With a guillotine-fype
lime, alcohol was used in an epidural to prevent tenesmus
dehorner, the risk of spliting he horn and causing a skull 
 for extended periods. The complications related to a cow's
fracrure increases.
inabiliry to move irs tail to defecale and urinate and the
4. You risk respiratory embarrassment and death.
possibiliry of crealing a downer cow are reasons to avoid 
 5. Lumpy jaw, which has a guarded prognosis.
 he use of alcohol in an epidural.
6. Sinusis and empyema.
 3. No. The straining hat a cow experiences during parturition
 7. Because of the anatomy of the adult buck, the sinus is
is due to stretch receptors in the anterior vagina, which are
opened during dehorning. The head should be bandaged
 not lypically affected by the caudal epidural.
to prevent contamination and infection.
4. No. Only Tl3, Ll, or L2 should be blocked.
 8. Rabies. It is always a good idea to wear gloves to protect
 5. No. However, the effect depends on the dose, and an
your hands and arms from possible infechious agenrs.
excessive volume of anesthelic could cause the cow to lie
9. No. The trauma and heat created by the wire saw helps
down.
control hemorrhage.
 6. No. Innervation to the scrohum and spermalic cord are not
affected by a caudal epidural.
CHAPTER 7
7. The most common procedure performed with an animal
Surgical Treatment of Ocular Squamous Cell
under lumbosacral epidural aneshesia is cesarean section,
Carcinoma and Corneal Dermoids in Cattle
but any surgery can be performed caudal to the level
1. Many different criteria can be used to determine the
of the block. Be aware hat the animal is awake and
herapy for cancer of the eye. I look at he location and 
can move its head and forelimbs. Addirional restraint is
extent of the lesion. If evidence of spread to the bone of
necessary.
he orbit or regional lymph nodes exists, I generally do
 8. I would not use alcohol in a caudal epidural.
not recommend herapy, nor do I recommend salvage by
9. Wih he appropriate dose of lidocaine, α cow's abiliy to
 slaughter because this animal would not pass inspection
walk and/or maneuver on wet floors should be unaffected.
and should not enter he food chain. I also assess the
However, if the dose is excessive he cow may show
 general healh of the palient, age, and pregnancy status.
weakness and lie down on slippery floors.
Before enucleation, I carefully examine he opposite eye for
evidence of neoplasia. I do not recommend removing the
CHAPTER 5
eye if the opposite eye has a neoplastic lesion. I discuss the
General Anesthesia
case with the client and develop a plan of freatment that
1. No. My experience with succinylcholine in catle has been
considers the wellbeing of he palient, the wishes of the
disastrous. They stop breathing!
 dlient, and sound medical and surgical principles.
2. No. Bloat, regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia are
2. Breeds hat lack pigment in the skin around the eyes have
common complications in bovine patients that have not had
a higher incidence of squamous cell carcinoma. I do not
food wihheld before anesthesia.
see a sex predilection. Catle from areas with abundant
Study Question Answers ■  285
sunshine that have litle or no protection from the sun have
7. Repair scrotal hernias as early as possible, which reduces
a higher incidence of cancer of the eye.
stress in the pig and allows it to achieve normal growth and
3. No. The oplic nerve has few or no pain fibers.
market weight. All boars to be marketed for meat should be
4. Strontium-90 (beta radiation] was commonly used al
castrated at an early age to eliminate he undesirable flavor
one lime. A probe was placed direchly on the corneal
hat is characteristic of boar meat.
lesion after a cancerous mass was removed. The beta
8. Consider the cost of surgery, interference with daily weight
radiation penetrated only the thickness of one or wo
gain, prognosis for complere recovery, and market vale
cells, and I question he effectiveness of this treatment.
of the pigs. I would not repair these hernias. In economic
Cesium-137 needles were very strong, could be used 
lerms, repair is not feasible. This is a teachable moment:
puo uoos! panba puo 'jauuosiad paonb Kq uo
Explain to the client or owner that these hernias should
have been repaired earlier, the cost of proper repair is
with some success, although the source of he material was
prohibirive, and the prognosis for complete uncomplicated
α problem. Radiotherapy is an option but would most likely
recovery is guarded at best. There is also an animal
be carried out by a radiologist, not a clinician. Thermal
 adas aa a paau o sid asau anssi aoam
herapy, by means of a handheld unit that would pass an
 heir penmates to avoid complicalions from rauma to the
electrical current through the lesion, has also been used.
hernia and/or injury from other pigs.
The current produces heat and destroys cancerous cells.
Immunotherapy was developed to treat sarcoid in horses
CHAPTER 9
and was used for cancer of the eye in catle. A drug
Laparotomy in Cattle
injected into the lesion would induce an antigenic reaction
1. No. S. labiatopapillosa, commonly called he peritoneal
and cause regression of the humor. Alhough I have used 
worm, is an incidental Finding during abdominal surgery on
 his drug, treatment has not always been successful.
adult calle. These worms appear to be nonpahogenic, and 
5. Causing the eye to proptose would not likely cause
 their occurrence seems ho be decreasing.
blindness unless the optic nerve was stretched. However,
2. Absolutely. Solutions with a high or low pH can cause
a retrobulbar nerve block will cause temporary blindness
significant damage to the serosal surfaces of the visceral
because of the effect of lidocaine on the optic nerve.
organs. IP elracycline has been widely used as effective
antimicrobial therapy in cows for many years; 5 to 7 g was
CHAPTER 8
diluted in 500 to 1,000 ml of saline and poured directly
Hernias and Umbilical Masses
into the abdominal cavily. This technique has lost popularily
1. Inguinal hernias in bulls are fypically on the left side and
because of extralabel use drug (ELUD) concerns, and
are thought to be primarily acquired. The reason for their
research indicates hat presurgical treatment with a systemic
 appearance on the lef side has not been fully explained.
antibiolic is as effeclive.
2. Abscesses. Yes. Control can be obtained via good
3. Yes. A rough estimation of the size and fat content of the
sanitation at the lime of farrowing with proper disinfection
liver can be determined by palpating he liver during 
of the umbilicus.
exploratory laparotomy. Specifically, palpate the sharpness
3. Yes. Some umbilical hernias in calves are thought to be
of the edges and the contour of the liver. Rounded edges
inherited and some acquired, alhough no accurate method
with a bulging contour indicate infilrarion of fat into
exists to determine which are acquired and which are
the liver. A more specific diagnosis of fatfy liver can be
 inherited. A geneic disorder should not be perpeualed.
accomplished via liver biopsy.
I generally repair the hernia on request and try to educate
4. The answer depends on the incision. The external oblique
 the client or owner about the issue of inheritance.
abdominal muscle is he hickest muscle in he bovine
4. An umbilical hernia in caltle or swine is a specific diagnosis
abdominal wall. The more dorsal the incision on a
among disorders of umbilical masses. The most common
shanding cow, the thinner the muscle will be. If the incision
Findings in an umbilical mass are abscess and infected
is extended ventrally, as may be necessary in a cesarean
umbilical vessels. The most common contents in umbilical
 sechion, the body of the muscle will be encountered.
hernias in pigs is intestine and in calves is omentum.
5. A "copotomy" (accessing the abdominal cavily hrough
5. Pressure severe enough to restrict blood flow would cause
the vaginal wallj is an effeclive approach for the exreme
pain, swelling, and degeneration or necrosis of he testicle.
caudal porlion of the abdominal cavily. The major use of this
Minor pressure would cause pain, which would cause the
approach is for manipulation of the adul female reproductive
lesticle to be pulled up close to he body wall, which would
 system. Ovaries can readily be removed (oophorectomy) via 
in turn lead to increased temperature in the testicle and
 the technique. The advantages of his technique are minimal
in fertiliry.
hemorrhage and minimal time invesment.
6. Inferiliry would be caused by increased temperarure of the
6. Cows fypically stand in a chute; caudal epidural anesthesia
besticle from the presence of intestines in he scrotum.
is used.
286 ■ Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
CHAPTER 10
17. In summer, rumen leakage could draw flies to the area,
Rumenotomy, Fistulation, Cannulation, and
with subsequent fly strike (myiasis) and maggots. During the
Pericardiotomy in Cattle
winter, a significant amount of heat could be lost via rumen
1. Yes. The pleural cavily is not usually opened during a Ffifth
leakage.
rib resection or pericardiotomy, but if this cavily is opened 
 he cow can continue to breahe via he right lung.
CHAPTER 11
2. As he pericardial sac fills with Fluid and fibrin, increased
Abomasal Surgery
pressure causes generalized heart failure. One of the firsh
1. The most permanent fixation is ventral abomasopexy.
signs of right-sided heart failure is jugular vein distention,
2. Fluids and electrolytes: Add 30 g of KCl and 50 g of
 followed by brisket edema. Vegetative endocardiris and
NaCl to 5 gallons of water. Many cows drink this solution,
lymphoma of the heart should also be considered.
or you may pump irt into he animal via stomach tube and
 3. I consider a jugular pulse to be normal unless it is
pump.
 accompanied by jugular vein distention.
 3. A blood gas analysis gives information needed to treat
 4. Pericardiocentesis is an effective method for eliminating
electrolyte and acid - base imbalances.
pressure and removing Fluid from he pericardial sac.
4. Look at the eyes and pinch he skin of he upper eyelid as
However, a significant amount of fibrin is usually associated
an aid to assess hydration status.
wilh pericardis and offen clogs he drainage needle. This
5. Yes. The acid pH of the abomasum will weaken the gut
 reatment is ofen temporary.
suture and allow it to fail.
 5. The white blood cell count initially drops in he acute stage
6. Place α 14-gauge needle on he end of Simplex or other
 of the disease and then during the next few days increases
hubing. Carry the needle, protected with your hand,
bo about 15,000/ul with a leff shiff.
into he abdomen and insert it into he dorsal part of the
6. No. Rumen contraclions are weak, slow, and incomplete, if
abomasum. Smell the gas escaping from he ubing for
present at all.
 the characteristic abomasal gas odor. Place the end of
 7. Afer use of a rocar, anything from a small adhesion fo
 the rubing into a pan of water and watch the escaping 
massive peritonitis may occur.
 gas bubble, or connect he lubing to a vacuum to quickly
 8. As an emergency procedure to relieve he secondary
remove the gas.
bloat, and if I could remove he esophageal obstruction by
dp lm ( o dn pawsal a ym suaod Au / 
working through the rumen.
vagal indigestion. Predicting which animals will develop
9. I usually do not Find the offending wire or nail. Vagal
vagal indigestion is very difficulr.
indigestion could resul from adhesions in he abdominal
 8. The pyloro-omentopexy is effective for LDA and requires
cavily in and around the reticulum and esophagus
little or no assistance.
10. Yes. You can access the liver from a right-or leff-side
 9. I would roll the cow onto her back to replace the
laparotomy. A longer reach is required from the leff, and
abomasum but use no other treahment, or use the roll and
you must gain access to he right compartment of the
toggle procedure. The latter method is fast, economical,
abdominal caviry.
and effective.
11. Yes, alhough it can be difficult to locate. I find the
10. No. After successful treatment, minimal risk exists for
esophagus and then follow he esophageal groove about
recurrence.
10 to 12 cm (4 to 5 inches) to the reliculo-omasal orifice. I
once found a wire in the reticulo-omasal orifice.
CHAPTER 12
12. I usually find a wire hat is 7 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inches) long
Surgical Treatment of Intestinal Obstruction
and is located anterior, ventral, and medial, although I
1. Initially severe abdominal pain with rypical signs of colic;
have found wires in all parrs of the reticulum.
strerching; and up-and-down, swishing, or snapping
13. I prefer to have the rumen flaccid during he procedure to
motions of he tail; later in the disease, abdominal 
avoid puncturing it and to facilitate exposure of the rumen
distention, with lile or no feces.
Ihrough the incision.
2. These cows offen initially show signs of pain. lronically, the
14. No, not clinically.
blood gas analysis is remarkably normal until advanced
15. Yes. However, he temporary Fistula procedure does
disease. I would use a standing right paralumbar fossa 
not allow air to enter he rumen because of the positive
approach, exteriorize the free end of the cecum, open
pressure wilhin the rumen and he valve-like configuration of
and drain the cecal contents (which will offen contain
he muscle incision.
a significant amount of whole shelled cornj, close and 
16. An animal with chronic bloat will have an abnormal
replace he cecum, followed by a gentle therapeuric stir
population of rumen bacteria. The animal would be best
and close the incision.
served by inoculating he rumen wih normal microbes from
3. The very low pH of the abomasum destroys most bacteria.
animals given a similar diet.
The cecal content is rich in bacteria. Although bacteria
Study Question Answers   287
in boh areas can cause severe perionis, he abomasal
successful is 30 to 50 ml of formalin diluted with 500 ml of
content has a significantly lower bacterial count.
saline given slowly IV.
4. Abdominal pressure increases affer casting, which could
easily compromise respiration. General anesthesia is also
Cesarean Section in Cows
risky, but the risk can be reduced by placing the animal
 8. The major reason for performing α cesarean seclion is to
 on a respirator. This animal would do better by remaining
relieve dystocia caused by a relatively oversized fetus.
standing
9. Maintaining the viabiliy of the calf.
 5. Ihave never been able to reduce an intussusception
10. The rumen prevents the intestines from coming through the
during surgery. Rather, Ihave used intestinal resechion and
incision.
anastamosis.
11. Proximal or distal paravertebral lumbar, segmental
epidural, invered L, and Field or line block. For reasons
CHAPTER 13
unknown to me, α proximal paravertebral lumbar block 
Rectal Prolapse Repair
works exceptionally well to provide complete anesthesia to
1. The use of the animal and he severily, duration, and
he paralumbar fossa.
viabiliry of the prolapse. If the animal will be slaughtered
12. The ventral paramedian or midline incision works very
 and is near market weight, consider salvage.
well in heifers. The resraint and exposure are excellent in
2. In cold weaher, pigs tend to huddle in a pile for warmth,
uncooperative beef patienrs. The midline or paramedian
which may lead to rectal prolapse.
incision in dairy animals is more difficult because of the
3. Moldy feed may contain an increased amount of
large udder and subcutaneous abdominal veins found in
estrogen, which has been implicated as a cause of rectal
dairy animals.
prolapse.
13. It is difficult if not impossible ho avoid contamination of
4. Yes. The tenesumus caused by a rectal or vaginal prolapse
 the abdominal cavily with uterine Fluids when performing
may stimulate he development of the other fype of
a standing cesarean section. In the case of a heavily
prolapse.
contaminated fehus and uterine Fluids, I place the palient
5. Yes. Alhough the exact mechanism is unclear, some
in lateral recumbency on a able and use an oblique or
paramedian incision to allow the contaminated urerine Fluid
lenesmus and rectal prolapse.
to escape from the abdominal caviry.
6. Yes. In he presence of blood, confined pigs show
14. If the placenta is easily removed, as is occasionally
cannibalistic behavior toward a weaker or incapacitated
seen with a dead calf, I remove it. If the calf is alive, the
pen mate.
placenta will most likely stay in the uterus. Avoid sururing
7. Moderate perianal swelling does occur affer placement of
he placenta to the uterine wall during closure of the uterus
a purse-string suhure for treatment of a prolapse. The use of
and exposing the placenta through the uterine incision line.
nonirritating suure material will reduce the inflammation
Most placentas will pass vaginally within 24 hours of the
 and swelling.
surgery.
 8. I have not observed constipation as a problem in cows with
15. Cows can continue to be productive members of the
rectal prolapse.
breeding herd after a cesarean section, but the risk of
inferiliry increases affer this surgery. The old rule of "once
CHAPTER 14
α cesarean sechion, always a cesarean seclion" does not
Surgery of the female Reproductive System
apply.
Oophorectomy in Cattle
16. In addirion to the normal concerns of bloat, regurgitation,
1. Yes. Loss of the corpus luteum at this shage of pregnancy
and aspiration, the effects of aneslhesia on the calf must be
would likely cause an aborlion.
considered.
2. If the enire ovary is not in the cuting chamber, a portion
17. The key to good uterine closure is exposure. If you start fo
of an ovary may be left in the heifer hat may cause her to
surure at the end of the incision nearest the fip of he horn,
show signs of estrus.
by the time you get to the opposite end of the incision
3. Remove the ovaries and inject her wih restosterone. She
(nearest the cervix) he normal involution of the uterus will
will develop masculine characteristics and behavior.
make exposure and closure of the uterus difficult if not
Beware, however, because she may become aggressive.
impossible.
4. Granulosa cell tumor.
18. Most uterine vessels are in the lesser curvature,
5. No. It will not cause steriliy. Alhough pregnancy in this 
and exposure of the lesser curvature is much more
uterine horn is unusual, it can occur.
difficulf. These incisions are quite difficult to close, as
6. To determine whether he entire ovary has been removed.
evidenced by a uterine tear that goes around the horn
7. Calcium and vitamin K are often given to help blood
into the lesser curvarure or the bifurcation of the uterine
clotting. A nonapproved method hat has on occasion been
horns.
288   Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
19. For cale in early gestation, prostaglandin is the most
34. Vaginal prolapse occurs in dairy breeds, but it is not a
effective drug to induce abortion; later in gestation,
common problem.
dexamethasone.
35. Sell her!
20. Because the size, posirion, and condirion of the fetus can
36. I would use a technique hat would allow narural calving
vary, one single technique cannot serve in all cases. My
(Minchev or Johnson button]. If I chose a different method, I
routine cesarean seclion posiltion is standing from the left
but I modify my resraint and incision site on the basis of the
he cow for early signs of parhurition.
situation.
37. The low caudal epidural wih or without xylazine is the
standard.
Cesarean Section in Sheep and Goats
38. Cervopexy is an invasive procedure but a permanent
21. Yes. The major cause of the disorder is the energy demand
fixation. Cows hypically do not have signs of tenesmus after
 of the fetuses (nearly all ewes have rwo or more fetuses).
 the surgery. My biggest concern about cervopexy is that I
Until the feluses are removed, the toxemia is exceedingly
may be repairing a heriable rait and thus perperuating the
difficult to treat.
problem.
22. No. Cesarean sechion is indicated if the vagina is
39. Vaginal prolapse stimulates tenesmus, which can cause
prolapsed and the cervix is not dilated.
rectal prolapse. I occasionally see cows with concurrent 
23. Occasionally, ewes stop breahing and die as a resulf of
rectal and vaginal prolapses.
α lumbosacral epidural. Be prepared to give respiratory
40. With a sacral paravertebral alcohol block, innervation to
support when using this anesthesia. A severe drop in blood
the tail is nor affected and there is minimal risk of effects on
pressure may also result from lumbosacral aneshesia and
the motor funclion of the rear limbs.
can be life-threatening.
41. Pigs may become aggressive in the presence of blood, and
24. Goats are much more aclive than sheep-they climb and
could bite and chew on the prolapse. The biggest disease
jump and put a considerable amount of stress on he ventral
concern is pseudorabies, which may be passed from pigs
abdominal incision line.
bo catle.
42. Yes. I have had very good resulrs with 20 to 30 mg of
Cesarean Section Sows
xylazine added to he 2% lidocaine for a low caudal
25. Near he bifurcation of the uterine horns, to facilitate
epidural. Iind a mild degree of sedation and an expanded
removal of piglets from both uterine horns plus the body of
area of desensitization. Maximal effect occurs affer a delay
he uterus.
of 15 to 20 minutes.
26. The uterine tissue will be extremely friable. You must handle
he uterus very carefully to avoid tears. When you suture
Perineal Laceration Repair
he uterus, always fighten the surures by pulling in the
43. Immediately after injury (with a single row of surures),
direction of the incision line. If you pull across the incision
or after waiting 30 to 60 days until the wound has
line, you increase he risk of pulling he suure through the
healed and the infection and inflammation are under
uterine wall.
control.
 27. The pelvic inlet and birth canal.
44. If the fistula is small (<2 cm [1 inch]], freshen the edges and
28. Yes. It is generally clear and nonviscous.
repair in one or hwo layers. Exposure may be difficulr. For
29. It must be strong and nonirritating so that i does not
larger (>2 cm [1 inch]} fistulas, I cut the perineum, create a
interfere with nursing.
hird-degree perineal laceration, and correct it as described
30. Yes. Most aneshetic agenrs cross he placenta to the
for third-degree perineal laceratlion.
piglets. Piglers must recover from the anesthesia and
45. Gut suhure is irritating and capillary. I prefer a synthetic
sedation. If the agent has an effect on the central nervous
monofilament absorbable (noncapillary) surure material.
 system, piglets may not breathe on their own.
46. The development of a rectovaginal fishula, which will
 31. Yes. Many sows never start lachating affer surgery,
require surgical repair.
especially sows that are in shock, foxic, painful or
47. No. I have never had a patient develop a rectal stricture
depressed. Unless piglers are given adequate nulirion, they
after this procedure.
become hypoglycemic and die within a few hours.
48. The most critical area of the surure line is the first suure that
is placed to invert the tissue and seal the incision. Any part
Vaginal Prolapse
of he incision can fail.
32. Yes. Vaginal prolapse occurs in all breeds and in some lines
49. I usually recommend breeding on the second heat after
within specific breeds, but it appears to be most common in
he procedure. It is hoped that the first heat will eliminate
he Hereford breed.
infeclion and allow enough healing that the laceration will
33. Yes. Overly fat cows tend to have more vaginal prolapses,
not be damaged by the artificial insemination rechnician's
allhough the specific cause is unclear.
arm in the rectum.
Study Question Answers  ■  289
Urethral Extension
breaks down. Occasionally, the attachment does not
50. Urine pooling hat causes infertiliry.
completely break down, and a persistent frenulum forms.
51. Alhough a fipped pelvis is a conformational problem,
13. Yes. Shudies have shown that the bull penis often spirals at
strict genetic etiology is not recognized. This problem
the time of ejaculation.
has muliple causes, including conformation, age, and
14. No. Recent studies have shown that the prognosis may be
hormonal influences.
belter if bulls are treated with sexual rest and antibiotics to
52. If is difficult to place the first surures that bury the catheter
prevent abscess formalion at the site of the hematoma.
ube and form a seal to prevent urine from leaking at the
15. No. The bovine penis contains no osseous fissue.
anterior part of the incision.
16. Yes, just as it is in bulls.
17. A prolapsed prepuce has many causes. Treatment of the
prolapse without removal of a foreign body or other incifing
CHAPTER 15
cause would be futile and foolish.
Surgery of the Male Reproductive System
Castration, Cryptorchidism, EctopicTesticle, and
Preputial Diverticulum in Boars
Scirrhous Cord
18. The primary indication for extirpation of the preputial
 1. No. This surgery is not usually performed in pigs because
divericulum is the inabiliry to extend the penis because of
of economic factors.
entrapment within he divericulum. This problem may be
 2. No. Itis not as common in cale as it is in pigs.
α sporadic in boars. Once he penis is exlended, he boar
 3. Yes. Dirty techniques can lead to scirrhous cord in all
can breed normally.
species.
19. Yes. I would recommend wearing gloves when you examine
4. Severe life-threatening hemorrhage.
boars lo avoid contamination of your hands with the
5. Yes. Clamping or pinching these calves is an option.
unpleasant odor.
The larger calves are approaching he size limit of the
 20. A boar could easily contaminate an artificial vagina during
emasculatome; therefore, excess swelling and incomplete
colleclion of semen. If the semen is collected by hand with
castration may result. The advantage of the emasculatome
a mount dummy, the penis can be diverted into a collection
in this group of calves is the lack of scrotal wounds and
vessel with minimal contamination. No, the preputial
infection.
diverticulum is not a concern in nalural breeding.
6. Mounting other animals with protrusion of the penis and
21. Ihave used injectable and gas anesthesia and placed the
development of secondary sex characteristics.
boar in lateral recumbency.
7. Enlarged and dilated scrorum, even though there is no
22. It is feasible hat a boar with a persistent frenulum would
intestine in the scroum in this position.
 mount a sow but would be unable to extend the penis.
 8. The pig could develop an inguinal hernia if the inguinal
ring were damaged or enlarged by excessive raction on
Surgical Preparation of Teaser Bulls, Boars, and Rams
he spermatic cord.
23. I suggest creaing teaser bulls from 12 monh-old healthy
bulls. The older and larger the bull, the more complications
Penile and Preputia! Conditions in Bu!ls
are likely to occur.
 9. A papilloma virus is he cause. Fibropapilloma of the penis
 24. Yes. Steers and cows can be used as teasers if they are
is generally seen in young bulls and rarely in bulls older
injected wih male hormones. Be careful! These animals
han 3 ho 4 years of age, which suggests that bulls develop
may become aggressive, as any bull.
immunily.
25. Penis, prepuce, vas deferens, and epididymis.
10. Commercial wart vaccines are available. I have
26. Have he semen checked for he presence of sperm cells
had variable resulrs with these commercial vaccines.
before puting the bull with the cows. Check the semen 
 Development of an autogenous vaccine is another
annually therea fter.
option. I am very concerned about the liabiliry
27. Yes. I rypicall ligate, sechion, and cauterize the area. I
associated with use of an autogenous vaccine. However,
always have he vas deferens checked histologically to
my limited use of autogenous vaccines has produced
ensure that I have removed a section of the correct fissue.
positive resulrs.
28. These bulls will not spread sexually transmilted diseases.
11. The majoriry of nerve endings that allow intromission and
ejaculation are in the glans penis.
CHAPTER 16
If the glans is removed, the bull will probably be unable fo
Surgical Treatment of Conditions Associated with
breed naturally. This is why the penectomy technique for
Urolithiasis
leaser bull is effective.
 1. Dorsocranial part of he bladder.
12. No. In the bull calf, the prepuce is attached to the glans
 2. A dorsocranial bladder rupure fypically heals without
penis. When the bull reaches pubery, he attachment
freahment if urine drainage is established.
290    Noordsy's Food Animal Surgery
3. Calculi commonly lodge in the sigmoid Flexure of bulls and
milking and to adequately disinfect the teat end before
in the urethral process of rams. However, calculi can be
insertion.
found in any part of he urethra.
11. I use teat rubes more than dilators. I use them after any
4. Ventral subcutaneous swelling generally indicates a
procedure in which the teat wall has been opened. The
ruptured urelthra. A pear-shaped abdomen generally
teat lube minimizes pressure on he incision line and allows
indicates Fluid in he abdomen that may be a resulf of a
optimal healing. I ypically remove he ube in 48 to 72
ruprured bladder.
hours, simultaneously freat lhe quarter for mastitis, and 
 5. I would use ranquilizers, analgesics, and smooth muscle
always leave the cap off of the tube.
relaxants to get the stone to pass and avoid surgery if
12. No. Typically, this cow will produce about 90% of her
possible.
potential milk.
 6. The urethral process. Yes. This is a common site for urinary
13. Absolutely nor. These animals are very poor surgical
calculi to lodge and obstruct urine Flow. Simply removing
candidates, and the potential for complicalions is very high.
he process with scissors will often alleviate he obsruction.
14. Complete he surgery in the morning, fllwed by periodic
 7. Most procedures to allviate urinary obslruclion in food
stripping of that quarter throughout he day.
animals should be considered salvage procedures.
15. You can repair the fisula at this fime but with a high risk of
8.Yes.
failure. It is best to wait until he cow is dry or at least until
 9. The increased abdominal pressure could rupture the
udder edema has subsided.
bladder.
10. Occasionally, urinary calculi form on preputial hairs.
CHAPTER 18
11. Yes. Ammonium chloride will acidify he urine, alhough
Tendon and Ligament Surgery
some animals become refractory to its effect. The urine pH
1. I prefer general aneshesia. It allows me to modify my
initially decreases and then begins to rise despite continued
approach and complete the technique on muliple limbs.
reatment.
2. One of the objectives is to maintain tension on the tendons.
With the calf standing on its toes, tension on the tendon is
maintained.
CHAPTER 17
 3. Yes. As long as the foes are on he ground, exercise is
Mammary Surgery
beneficial for stretching the contracted rendons.
 1. Supernumerary teats are commonly removed when the
4. Yes, although he inheritance pattern has not been
animal is 4 to 6 months of age. At his age, it is rather easy
completely elucidated.
bo identify the normal tears.
5. I ry to educate he client to the risks of using such an
 2. Removal of the rear medial dewclaws to minimize the
animal in a breeding program. Unforunately, it is
potential for teat frauma, dehorning (if young calves were
impossible to determine which cases of contracted rendons
not disbudded], and vaccinations can be accomplished in
have a genetic origin and which are acquired.
his fime frame.
6. One cause is femoral nerve paralysis. Femoral nerve
3. When there is functional glandular fissue associated with
damage is thought to occur during parluririon as a calf in
 supernumerary teats or afer teat amputation.
anterior presentation passes through he dam's pelvis.
4. The cow does not require fasting, with lifle or no risk of
 7. No. The femoral nerve is unlikely to be damaged during a
bloat. Castring is associated with a risk of injury.
cesarean section.
 5. Danger lo and discomfort of the operator, with restricted
 8. Yes, femoral nerve damage can be bilateral.
vision and poor light.
9. No.
 6. When performing open eat surgery or suuring a severely
10. The quadriceps muscles in a calf with femoral nerve
lacerated teat.
paralysis will alrophy within a few days. If the nerve is
7. Lidocaine is absorbed through he intact mucous
severely damaged, the quadriceps muscles may never
 membrane, whereas procaine is poorly absorbed.
rerurn to full funclion and the animal will walk with an
8. I prefer a small (No. 000 to 0000) monofilament
abnormal gait. Wihout a funclional quadriceps muscle
absorbable nonreactive suhure material. I use a simple
group, it is very dificult to keep the patella in he normal
continuous paltern, without penetrating the mucous
 position for extended periods.
membrane of the eat cistern.
9. I prefer staples, but if staples are not an oplion, I use 
CHAPTER 19
No. 1 synthetic nonabsorbable surure material in a vertical
Foot and Claw Surgery
mattress pattern placed 3 to 5 mm apart.
1. There is no direct inheritance of interdigital fibromas.
10. Alhough I rarely use teat dilators, I occasionally place them
However, predisposing conformalion factors may be inherited.
in α teat after a procedure ho increase he diameter of the
 2. My clinical experience indicates hat corns may recur
leat orifice. I emphasize the need to change hem at every
occasionally but not usually.
Study Question Answers   291
 3. Look for a foreign body wrapped around a toe. A wire and 
3. Joint effusion with distenlion of the joint capsule can be
an O-ring are common culprits.
extremely painful. Pain can be reduced significantly by
4. Confined dairy animals.
removing joint Fluid and decreasing the joint distention.
 5. Small corns are generally mildly sensitive. Larger corns that
Also, support the joint with a support bandage or splint to
may be pinched belween the toes or that are traumalized
alleviate pain.
by the ground are often quite sensitive and cause lameness.
4. Arthroscopy is a viable option for joint disease in cale,
 6. Subsolar abscesses have been theorized to resul from
and my experience with this procedure has been very
laminitis caused by high-energy diets in dairy cattle.
positive. Because of the cost, arthroscopy is not indicated
7. Excessive heat buildup in he claw from the use of grinders
for all cases. The demand for the surgery is relatively low,
may cause lameness.
and herefore I have limited arthroscopic experience.
8. Claw amputation is feasible, although experience
5. Alihough a number of techniques have been described
indicates that the produchive life of this cow will diminish.
for removing or destroying he aricular carilage, I use 
I never amputate a claw of a cow with an infected fetlock
arthrodesis as a last resort. My experience has been fair
 joint because the fetlock joint is common to both digits.
to poor. A major concern is he prolonged convalescence 
Therefore, the infecrion would still be present, and I would
and severe lameness; cows offen remain three-legged lame
most likely make he condition worse.
for months afer he procedure. Many cows are reluctant
 9. In general, his scenario would not indicate amputation of 
to stand, lose considerable weight, and develop decubitus
he claw. The long-term prognosis for a range bull walking
sores from lying down for prolonged periods.
and breeding with a rear toe removed is relatively poor. In
certain silualions, he toe could be amputated to allow semen 
CHAPTER 21
collechion or hand mating of a few cows to a superior sire.
Common Fractures and Dislocations
10. Amputalion is generally a salvage procedure in food
1. It may be difficult for the animal to stand and move to
animals to eliminate pain and suffering on a shor-term
 food and water affer fracture repair. It is also imperative
basis.
to control postoperative pain in caltle after orlhopedic
11. Absolutely.
procedures.
2. I would place a wooden block or shoe on the sound toe
CHAPTER 20
 of the affected foot. I have observed cae with subsolar
Joint Surgery
abscesses hat had frachure-like lameness. Perform a
1. I would derermine the immune status of the calf and the
horough examination of the foot, and take radiographs if
source of the infeclion. The most likely source is an infected 
necessary.
navel. Many calves with navel infeclion also have failure of
3. Yes. Besides he frachure of the metatarsal and metacarpal
passive transfer of immunily. Discuss the prognosis and cost
bones from he chains, fracrures of the femur can occur
of treatment with he owner. First reat the naval or other
in a calf during delivery, even if the calf is in an anterior
source of infechion. Shart systemic antibiotic therapy. I would
 presentatlion and no raction is placed on the rear limbs.
consider muliple Flushings of he joints with the calf under
4. No. Following lactalion, sows may suffer from osteoporosis.
 general anesthesia. My experience dictates very aggressive
The act of breeding may cause frachures of the femur or
herapy for the best resulrs.
vertebrae in these sows.
2. Yes. I would collect joint fluid for analysis and culture
5. Cows hat fall on slippery Floors offen dislocate α hip or
before antibiotic therapy. Remember that the joint Fluid
fracrure the neck of the femur.
has bacteriostatic properfies. It is relatively common fo
6. The blood supply to the head is apparently sufficient to
 see no growth on culure plates when an infection is
contol infeclion. I have had very good resuls wih repair of
present.
mandibular fracrures.
nd
ex
Abdominal surgery, in catle, 37f, 97,
lumbar segmental epidural, 44-45,
 cornual nerve block
98f, 99-100, 99f
45f, 46f, 47f
catHle,25,26f
abdominal wall, anesthesia for, 21
lumbosacral epiduaral, 47-50 
goars, 26, 27f
abnormal milk Flow
pigs, 48-50
eye and eyelid, 27-30
alresia (imperforate teats), 242
 sheep and goats, 44
auriculopalpebral nerve block, 30
chronic teat fisula repair, 243-244
ype, 44
general considerations, 27
leaky teats, 243
general (see chapter 5}
 Peterson eye block, 28
partial prolapse of reat canal, 242
aneshelic agents, 55-57
 preinfusion procedures, 28-29
stenosis of teat orifice, 241
barbituates, 55
relrobulbar, auriculopalpebral
abomasum
 guaifenesin, 55-57, 60
nerve aneshesia, 29-30, 29f
abomasal surgery
iletamine hcl and zolazepam
 general considerations, 19
 general considerations, 119, 120f
combination (relazol@)], 55
V block for distal limb, 24-25
abomasal surgery, leff displaced
common concerns, 61
lidocaine toxicily, 19 
abomasum
 commonly used drug combinations, 
prerequisites for use, 19
closed surure technique, 127
55-59
sacral, subsacral paravertebral
left side abomasopexy, 119-122,
drugs
blocks
121f 129t
acepromazine, 54
calHle, 33-35, 33f, 35f
omentopexy, pyloro-omentopexy,
chlopromazine, 54
pigs, 36-37
122-123,124f
detomidine, 55
sheep, goars, 35-36
loggle pin, bar surure method,
diazepam, 55
leat anesthesia, catfle 
126-127
Flunixin meglamine, 56
 general considerations, 30-31
venral abomasopexy, 124-126, 129t
meloxicam, 56
 inverted V block over surgical
abomasal surgery, righr displaced
morphine,56
area, 31, 31f
abomasum,127-128, 129t
bolazoline, 55
ring block of teat base, 31, 31f
abomasal volvulus (rta), 128-129
xylazine, 54
leat cistern infusion, 31-32, 31f
abscess
yohimbine, 55
vascular (locall infusion, 32
subsolar, 265-266
 drugs, phenothine-based
leminology, 52
umbilical, 2, 84, 92
ranquilizers, 54
antibiorics, postoperative, 71-72,
acepromazine, 54
 general condiserations 
80, 86-87,91, 96,103,
ampulation
catle, 51
108,113,116,122-123
claw,261-263,263f
pigs, 51
126,129,135-137,146
declaw, 268
sheep and goats, 51
150,156, 159, 162, 166,
limb,267-268
inhalation aneshesia, 59-62
169, 178, 190, 197-198,
penile, 213, 224
injectable anesthesia, 51
200,214,248, 250-251,
rechal, 37, 141-143
advantages, 51
258,263, 265-266, 268,
eat, 244-245, 247
disadvanhages, 52
272-273
udder, 246
drug combinations, 57-58
arthritis, septic
urethral process, 230
5-10-20 technique, 58
arthrodesis for, 262, 279
analgesics
double drip, 57
joint Flushing for, 272
drugs for, 56
im or sq recumbent stun, 58
arthrocentesis, 271-272
butorphanol, 56 
iv recumbent shun, 58
arhroscopy, 271-273
Flunixin meglamine, 56
iv standing stun, 58
atresia, teat, 242
ketamin, 56
ketamine - diazepam, 58 
auricular vein, anesthesia 
meloxicam, 56
ketamine stun or k-shun, 57
administration in, 53, 53f
morphine, 56
swine, in, 53
auriculopalpebral nerve block, 28-30, 78
preoperalive, 3, 77
telazol ketamine xylazine
anesthesia
[kx), 57
bandages, 6-7, 67-68, 86, 204-205,
epidural (see chapter 4)
kx-ru for ruminanrs, 57
235,251,254-256,259,
action, 40, 42f
local and regional (see chapter 3]
263-265,267, 268,
administering, 45
abdominal wall in cattle, 21
272-273, 274
anatomy, 39-40, 39f, 40f
distal paravertebral, 19-22, 20f,
banding technique, for caslration,
catlle, 47-48
21f
204-205
caudal epidural, 45
inverted L block, 23, 24f
bar surure method, for displace 
contraindications, 41
proximal paravertebral, 21
abomasum,126-127
293
294  lndex
barbiuates, 55
indications, general considerations,
postoperalive care, 209-210
beam hook restraint, 14, 14f
200-201
presurgical procedures, 208
bistoury, teat, 241
 penile, preputial lacerations, 201
resraint, 208
bladder
postoperalive care, 204-205
surgical rechnique, 209, 209f
ruphre of, 221,225-226,228
presurgical procedures, 201
diverring animal's altention techniques
hube cystostomy of, 225-227, 225f
restraint, 201
nasal seprum grasping, 11
blind quarters, blind tears, 239-240
surgical rechnique, 202-204, 202f,
nose lead, 1l, 12f
buhner buried purse-string method,
203f, 204f, 205f
snubbing rope, hog holder, 12, 12f
173-174, 174f
claw amputation, cale
tail jack, 111
burley restraint method, 15, 15f
anesthesia, 262, 263f
dystocia [see cesarean section]
butophanol, 56
general consideralions, 261-262
bulton and pin technique, for vagina
postoperalive care, 263
ecraseurs, for oophorectomy, 146, 146f
prolapse, 169-170
presurgical procedures, 262
ectopic resticle, bulls, 189-190
principle indications, 262
elasration, 187
calculi
restraint, 262
emasculatome
lactoliths removal, 239
surgical rechnique, 262-263, 263f
for castralion, 203-204
unrinary calculi (see urolithiasis)
claw irimming, calmle, 266, 266f
for rechal prolapse, 152
casting cattle
conlracted tendons
for teat amputation, 269
burley mehod, 15, 15f
eliology, 253
emasculator
reuff's double half hitch, 16, 16f
prognosis, 253
for castration, 203
castralion, 183-188 (see chapter 15]
splinting without surgery, 253-254
 emphysematous feruses, cesarean section
aneshesia, 184
surgery and splining, 254-255
for, 150, 161, 163
common casration mehods, 184
corneal dermoid surgery, 80
empyema, frontal sinus trephination for,
elastralion, 187
cornvectomy
68-69
emasculatome [Hauptner) use, 187, 188f
anethesia, 65, 67-68
endotracheal intubation
 indicalions, general considerations, 183
basic, 65-68
for aneshesia, 81
lestectomy, 184-187
surgical (cosmetic), 66-68, 67f
racheotomy for, 71, 71f
cecal torsion, 136-137
cryptorchidism
 entropion surgery, 80-81
 cesarean seclion, procedures to aid
dordal position (preferred), 189-190
enucleation, 27-28, 75-79,78f
delivery in cows
introduction, 188-189
epididymectomy, 211, 213-215
aneshetic techniques, 153
standing technique, 189
epidural anesthesia (see anesthesia,
compared to fetotomy, 151
surgical technique, 189
epiduaalj
decision making, 151
cystostomy
 epiphyseal separation, 280
dorsal recumbancy restraint, 152
anesthesia, 226
episiotomy, 160
episiotomy, 160
general consideralions, 225-226, 225f
epispadias, 192
hydrops ammantois, hydrops amnion,
postoperalive care, 227
esmarch's bandage, 6, 206f
159-160
presurgical procedures, 226
exploratory laparotomy, 97, 97f, 100, 128
indications, general considerations,
restraint, 226
external fixaion, for fractures, 275
150-151
surgical techniques, 226-227
extraclion, of reeth, 69
 right and left lateral paralumbar 
sururing abdomen, 227
eye and eyelid
standing procedure, 154-156
anesthesia for, 27-30, 29f
right and left lateral recumbancy
dehorming (see cornuectomy)
corneal disorders of, 77-78
restraint, 153
dental surgery (see head and neck 
dermoid of, 80
standing restraint, 153
surgery, dentistry in cattle)
entropion of, 80-81
symphsiotomy, 160
dermoid, corneal, 80
enucleation of, 78 
ventral abdominal paramedian,
desmotomy, medial patellar, 259 
membrane nictitans carcinoma of, 76
156-159
 dewclaw amputation, rear feet in heifers,
squamous cell carcinoma of, 75-80,
cesarean seclion, sheep and goats
268
78f 79f
aneshesia, 161
dislocalions [see also fraclures, dislocations]
restraint, incision sites, 161
coxofemoral luxation, 280
female reproductive system, surgery (see
ventral abdominal paramedian,
epiphyseal separation, 280
chapter 14)
161-162
metatarsel, metacarpal phalangeal 
 cesarean sechion, procedures to aid
cesarean seclion, sows
discloalion, 280
delivery in cows
aneshesia, 164
diverticulum, prepucial 
anesthetic techniques, 153
reslraints, incision sites, 163-164, 164f
anesthesia, 208
compared with fetotomy, 151
surgical procedures, right or left
diverliculum anatomy, 207, 208f
decision making, 151
incision, 164-166
diverliculum physiology, 207-208
dorsal recumbancy restraint, 152
surgical procedures, ventral abdominal
diverliculum removal, through preputial
 episiotomy, 160
midline incision, 166-167
orifice, 209-210
incision sites, 151-153, 152f 153f
circumcision
 general considerations, 207
indications, general considerations,
aneshesia, 201
indications, 208
150-151
Index  295
right and lateral paralumbar standing
femoral nerve, injury of, in patellar
 presurgical procedures, 267
procedure, 154-156
luxation, 256
surgical technique, 267
right and lateral recumbency
fetlock, frachure distal to, 280
ransaclion sites, 267
restraint, 153
fetotomy vs. cesarean seclion, 151
fractures, dislocations 
symphsiotomy, 160
fibropapilloma of penis, 205
casts, 275, 275f, 276f
ventral abdominal paramedian,
aneshesia,206
coxofemoral luxation, 280
156-159
 autogenous vaccine preparalion, 206
cross-pinning, 276
cesarean section, sheep and goats
general consideralions, 205-206
epiphyseal separalion, 280
anesthesia, 161
presurgical procedures, 206
external fixation, 275-276
restraint, incision sites, 161
surgical technique, 206
 femur fracture, articular head and
ventral abdominal paramedian,
Fistula
neck, 278-279
161-162
rumen, 108-112
femur frachure, femoral shaft, 279, 279f
cesarean section, sows
eat, 243
femur fracture, trochanter major, 279
anesthesia, 164
Flushing joint, 272
fetlock fracure, 280
restraints, incision sites, 163-164,
foot and claw surgery (see chapter 19]
 general considerations
164f
claw amputation, cattle 
internal Fixation, 275
 surgical procedures, right or leff 
aneshesia, 262, 263f
 herapy, ultraconservalive, 275
incision, 164-166
 general considerations, 261-262
hock fracture, 279
surgical procedures, ventral
postoperative care, 263
humerus frachure, 275, 278
abdominal midline incision,
presurgical procedures, 262
ilium shaff frachure, 277
166-167
principle indications, 262
ischium fracture, 277
oophorectomy in catle
restraint, 262
mandible fracure, 280
 indications, general considerations,
surgical technique, 262-263, 263f
metacarpus, metatarsus fracure, 278
145
claw frimming, cattle, 266, 266f
metatarsel, metacarpal phalangeal
left paralumbar fossa approach,
forlimb/hindlimb amputation in catle,
dislocalion, 280
145-146, 146f
 especially calves
pubic symphysis fracure, 171, 277
surgical approaches, 145
aneshesia, 267
radius, ulnar fracture, 278
vaginal approach, 147-150, 147f,
 general considerations, 267
rib frachure, 277
148f 149f
indicalions, 267
scapula fracure, 277-278
 hird-degree perineal laceration repair
postoperative care, 268
tibia frachure, 279
anesthesia, 175
presurgical procedures, 267
uber coxae fracture, 277
 general considerations, 175
surgical rechnique, 267
ulnar, 278
postoperative care, 176
transaction sites, 267
vertebra fracture, 276
presurgical procedures, 175
 general considerations 
frenulum, penile persistent, 197-198
surgical rechnique, 175-176, 176f
adjunclive treatment, 261
frontal sinuses, rephinalion of, 68-69
urine pooling, urethral exlension lo control
footrot in sheep, 261
anesthesia, 177
lameness, 261
general anethesia (see chapter 5)
 general considerarions, 177
interdigital fibromas (corns) excision
 general surgical considerations
postoperative care, 178
anesthesia,264, 264f
 postoperative care
presurgical considerations, 177
 general considerations, 263
First aid, 7
surgical rechnique, 177-178, 178f
postoperative care, 265
medication, 7-8, 7t
vaginal prolapse, cows
 presurgical procedure, 264
nutrition, 5
bulton and pin technique, 169-170
restraint, 264
wound care, 5-7
 cervopexy, modified Winkler melthod,
surgical trechnique, 264, 264f
preoperative procedure
170-171, 170f, 171f
interdigital foreign bodies, foreign
 food, water restriction in elective
 indications, general consideralions,
bodies surrounding claw
surgery, 2
167-168
removal, 265
monitoring, assessment, 1-2
modified Caslick's method, 174, 174f
 medial dewclaw amputation, rear feet 
physical examination, clinical tests, 1
other techniques, 175
in heifers
preoperalive medications, 2-3
 prevention techniques, buried purse
anesthesia, 268
surgical faciliries, 2
sring mehod, 173-174, 174f
general considerations, 268
surgical site preparation
prevention techniques, Palton
postoperative care, 268
 cleansing, 3-4
method, 173, 173f
presurgical procedures, 268
draping.4
 prevention rechniques, shoelace
surgical technique, 268
tail reslraint, 4, 4f
method, 172, 172f
subsolar abscessurgery, 265-266,6f
 genitofemoral nerve block, 30
quill surure method, 175, 175f
forlimb/hindlimb amputation in cattle,
guaifenesin, 55-57,60
vaginal retention rechniques,
 especially calves
modified Minchev method,
aneshesia, 267
head and neck surgery (see chapter 6]
168-169,168f
general considerations, 267
cornuectomy, catle
femoral fracture, 178-279, 279f
indications, 267
aneshesia,65
femoral nerve block, 30
postoperative care, 268
indicalions, general considerations, 65
296 ■ lndex
head and neck surgery (continued!
 inguinal herniorrhaphy after
intestinal laceration, evisceration
materials,65
castralion, 86-87
hauma,135
presurgical procedures, 65-66
umbilical (ventral) herniorrhaphy,
resection and anastomosis for
surgical technique, 66
84-86
 intussupsception of jehunum
cornuectomy, goats
hernia variations, 83
in calle
anesthesia,68
 pigs, surgical procedures
aneshesia, 134
 general considerations, 67-68
 nguinal scrotall herniorrhaphy,
iniial evaluation, 134 
surgical techniques, considerations,
93-95, 94f
postoperative care, 135
68
umbilical (ventral) herniorrhaphy,
presurgical procedures, 134
esophagostomy
92-93, 93f
restraint, 134
 anatomic considerations, 71
predisposing condirions, 83
surgical rechnique, 134, 135f
aneshesia,72
sheep and goats, herniorrhaphy, 95
suhring,135
indications, 71
hindlimb/forlimb amputation in cattle,
spermalic cord-induced incarceralion
 presurgical procedures, 72
 especially calves
surgery, steers
restraint, 72
anesthesia, 267
aneshesia, 135
surgical technique, 72
general considerations, 267
clinical signs, 135
suuring,72
indications, 267
eliology, 135
 general considerations, 69
postoperalive care, 268
postoperative care, 136
musculahure, subcutaneous fissue, 72
presurgical procedures, 267
presurgical procedures, 135
odontophy, clinical signs, 69
surgical technique, 267
restraint, 135
surgical cornuectomy, catle 
transachion sites, 267
surgical technique, 136
aneshesia, 67
hip, knocked-down (uber coxae
suuring, 136
indications, general considerations,
fracture), 277
terminology, 133
66
hock fracture, 279
lyphlechasis, with/without torsion
materials, 66
hock rwitch, 12, 12f, 31
aneshesia, 137
 preanesthesia, 66
hog holder, 12, 12f, 53, 186
 cecectomy, parial cecectomy, 137,
presurgical procedures, 66
horn, nerve block for removal of (see
137f
surgical rechnique, 67, 67f
cornvectomy)
 general considerations, 136
suuring, 67, 67f
humeral fracture, 275, 278
postoperative care, 137
surgical technique, 69
hydrops allantois or amnion, cesarean 
presurgical procedures, 136
racheotomy
section for, 150, 159
restraint, 136
aneshesia, 70
suuring, 137
indicalions, general considerations,
ilial shaff frachure, 277
 intravenous anethesia, 51
70
immobiliztion, for fractures, 275, 278
intubation
postoperative care, 71
immunotherapy, for warrs,
 endotrachael for anethesia, 81
 presurgical procedures, 70
206
hracheotomy for, 71, 71f
resraint, 70
imperforate teat, 242
intussusceplion, intestinal, 133-134
surgical technique, 70-71, 71f
incarceralion, intestinal, 88, 94,
 inverted L palalumbar nerve block, 23, 23f
Irephination of frontal sinuses, catle 
133-136
ischial frachure, 277
 anatomic considerations, 68
induction, of anelhesia, 51, 55-57,
isoflurane, 60
aneshesia, 68
59-60,140
indicalions, general considerations,
infratrochlear nerve block, 26
jejunum, intussuception of, 133-134
68
 inguinal hernia
johnson bulton and pin technique, for
presurgical procedures, 68
 in cattle
vaginal prolapse, 169-170
surgical rechnique, 69
after castralion, 86-87
 joint capsule imbrication, suspected ACL
hematoma of penis, bulls
maure, 87-91,88f, 89f 90f
rphure cases, 258f
anesthesia, 199
 in pigs, 92-83, 93f
anesthesia, 258
 general considerations, 198
inhalarion anesthesia, 59-62 [see
 general considerations, 258
postoperative care, 200
chapter 5)
postoperative care, 259
presurgical procedures, 198-199
interdigital fibromas [corns) excision
presurgical procedures, 258
restraint, 199
anesthesia, 264, 264f
resraint, 258
surgical rechniques, 199-200
general consideralions, 263
surgical rechnique, 258-259
suhring,200
postoperalive care, 265
joint surgery
hernias, umbilical masses (see chapter 8]
presurgical procedure, 264
arihrocentesis, 271-272
anatomical parrs, hernia, 83
restraint, 264
arihrodesis, 273-274
calle, surgical procedures
surgical rechnique, 264, 264f
general consideralions, join effusion, 271
diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy,
interdigital foreign bodies, foreign
joint Flushing, 272
91-92
bodies surrounding claw
meniscal tears, 274
inguinal (scrotal) herniorrhaphy,
removal, 265
mature bulls, 87-91, 88f,
intestinal obstruction, surgical treatment
keraclectomy for corneal plaques, 77-78
89f, 90f, 92f
common clinical signs, 133-134
ketamine, 57-58
Index  297
kicking prevention
general condirions, 256
fibropapilloma excision
hock rwitch, 12, 13f, 31
postoperative care, 258
anesthesia,206
rope squeeze restraint, 13, 13f
presurgical procedures, 256
 autogenous vaccine preparation, 206
kimberling-rupp technique, for
recovery observations, 258
 general considerations, 205-206
oophorectomy
lechniques, 257, 257f
presurgical procedures, 206
knocked-down hip (uber coxae fracture),
medial patellar desmotomy, upward 
surgical technique, 206
277
 Fixation reatment
hematoma of penis, bulls
aneshesia, 259
aneshesia, 199
lacerations
 general considerations, 259
 general considerations, 198
intestinal,135
postoperative care, 259
 postoperative care, 200
 penile and preputial, 201
presurgical procedures, 259
presurgical procedures, 198-199
perineal, 175-176, 176f
restraint, 259
restraint, 199
eat,233-236,234f,236f
surgical technique, 259
surgical rechniques, 199-200
endon, 255-256
penile dorsal ligament reattachment for
suuring, 200
lactoliths, 239
deviation, 193, 193f 194f,
penile, preputial condirions in bulls 
lameness, 261
195-196
endogenous, 192
laparotomy, cale
lendon laceration
exogenous, 192
abdominal surgery
 general considerations, 255
persistent frenulum
 general considerations, 97
postoperative care, 256
anesthesia, 198
incision technique (leff or right
reatment, 255-256
 general considerations, 197
 paralumbar region), 97, 97f, 
local and regional anesthesia [see
postoperative care, 198
98f, 99f
anesthesia, local and 
restraint, 198
presurgical procedures, 97
regional; chapter 3)
surgical technique, 198
restraint, 97
lumbar paravertebral nerve blocks
phallorhapy, venral and spiral
suhuring, 99-100
distal,22,22f
deviations correction
exploratory laparotomy
proximal, 19-20, 21f
aneshesia, 193
anesthesia, 102
lumbar segmental epidural anesthesia, 22
 general considerations, 192
common indications, 100-101
lumbosacral epidural anesthesia, 40,
postoperative care, 197
 general considerations, 100, 100f,
178, 186, 234
 presurgical procedures, 192
101f102f
restraint, 192
postoperative care, 103
 male reproductive system, surgery
surgical rechnique, spiral, 195-197,
 presurgical procedures, 101
(see chapter 15)
196f
restraints, 101
castration
surgical rechnique, ventral, 193,
surgical technique, 102-103
anesthesia, 184
193f, 194f, 195f
suuring,103
common methods, 184
suuring, 196, 197f
leaky tears, 243
emasculatome (Haupmer) use, 187,
phimosis
left side abomasopexy
188f
postoperative care, 205
advantages, 119, 129t
indicalions, general considerations,
presurgical procedures, 205
aneshesia, 121
183
surgical rechnique, 205
disadvantages, 120, 129
lestectomy, cate, 184-185
prepufial divericulum extirpation, boars
postoperative care, 122
lestechomy, goals, 186-187
aneshesia, 208
presurgical procedures, 120
lestectomy, maure boars, 186
divericulum anatomy, 207, 208f
restraint, 120
 lestectomy, piglers and young boars,
diverliculum physiology, 207-208
surgical technique, 121-122, 121f
185-186
diverticulum removal, through
ligament, tendon surgery
lestectomy, sheep, 186-187
prepurial orifice, 209-210
contracted tendons
circumcision
 general considerations, 207
etiology, 253
 anesthesia, 201
indications, 208
prognosis, 253
 indications, general considerations,
postoperative care, 209-210
splinting without surgery, 253-254
200-201
presurgical procedures, 208
surgery and splinting, 254-255
penile, prepuial lacerations, 201
restraint, 208
joint capsule imbricalion, suspected
postoperative care, 204-205
surgical rechnique, 209, 209f
ACL rupure cases, 258f
 presurgical procedures, 201
scirrhous cord removal, pigs (barrows],
anesthesia, 258
restraint,201
191
 general considerarions, 258
surgical technique, 202-204, 202f,
scirrhous cord removal, steers, 190-191
postoperative care, 259
203f 204f, 205f
leaser bulls, boars and rams surgical
 presurgical procedures, 258
cryptorchidism
preparation
restraint, 258
dordal posilion (preferred], 189-190
common techniques, 213
surgical rechnique, 258-259
introduction, 188-189
 general consideralions, 210-211
ligament surgery
standing technique, 189
penectomy, 214-215
anesthesia, 257
surgical technique, 189
penile extension prevention, selected 
clinical signs, 256
ectopic testicle, bulls, 189-190
surgery, 211-214, 212f
298 ■ lndex
male reproductive system, surgery
metacarpal joint disclocalions, 280
left paralumbar fossa approach,
[continued!
metatarsal dislocation, 280
145-146, 146f
semen Hlow blocking,
metatarsal frachures, 278
surgical approaches, 145
epididymectomy, 215-216
metatarsophalangeal joint dislocations, 280
vaginal approach, 147-150, 147f,
 semen Flow blocking, vasectomy,
modified Minchev method, 168-169, 168f
148f, 149f
216-218, 217f
mucosalar layer reseclion lechnique, for
ophihalmic nerve block (Peterson block), 28
rectal prolapse, 140-141, 141f
abnormal milk flow
pain control, posloperalive, 56 [see also
alresia (imperforate tears), 242
 neck surgery (see chapter 6)
analgesics)
Fisula repair, 243
cornuectomy in goats, 68-70
paralumbar cesarean seclion, 154-156
leaky tears, 243
esophagostomy in cate, 71-72
paralumbar fossa approach, lo
parlial prolapse of teat canal, 242
surgical cornuectomy in catle, 65-66
oophorectomy, 145-146, 146f
stenosis of reat orifice, 241
suburing,72
paravertebral nerve blocks
blind quaters, blind teats, 239-240
hracheotomy in catle, 72
distal lumbar, 19-22, 20f, 21f
calculi, lactolith removal, 239
Irephinalion of frontal sinuses, 68-69
 proximal lumbar, 21
 general considerations, 233
nerve blocks
sacral, 33-35, 33f 35f
obslructed teat treatment
auriculopalperal, 30
subsacral, 33-35, 33f, 35f
general considerations, 236-237,
cornual, 25-26, 26f, 27f
parlial prolapse of teat canal, 242
236f237f
distal limb, 24-25
patella 
polyp removal via teat (streak) canal,
femoral, 30
upward fixation of, medial patellar
237-238
genitofemoral, 30
desmotomy for, 259
spider eat treatment, 239
hemorrhoidal, 35, 42
patellar ligament, medial, prosthesis
sUccessful teat surgery, basics, 233
iliohypogastric, 42t
256-257
 surgical removal of polyps via open
infratrochlear, 26
 Palton method, for vaginal retention,
leat surgery, 238-239
obturalor, 42
173,173f
beat amputation
paralumbar inverted L, 23, 23f
pelvis
nonaccessory tears, 245-246
paravertebral
fractures of, 309
supernumerary teat removal,
distal lumbar, 19-22, 20f, 21f
spliting of (symphysiotomy), 171, 277
244-245,245f
proximal lumbar, 21
penile, preputial conditions in bulls
eat laceration repair
Peterson,28
endogenous, 192
anesthesia,235
pudendal, 33, 35, 192
exogenous, 192
general consideralions, 233-234, 234f
retrobulbar, 29-30, 29f
penis
postoperative care, 236
sacral, 33-35, 33f, 35f
amputation of, 215, 220
presurgical procedures, 235
subsacral, 33-35, 33f, 35f
circumcision of, 201-205, 202f
restraint, 234-235
nose lead, 11
203f, 204f, 205f
surgical technique, 235-236, 236f
deviation of, 194-195
leat injuries, First aid, 235
obstruction
fibropapilloma of, 192, 301
mechanical restraint
intestinal, 141-147
hematoma of, 192, 301
cage, rotary tables, 17
respiratory tract, 72-74
lacerations of, 201
chutes for catle, 17
eat,236-237,236f,237f
persistent frenulum of, 197
Flat tables, 17-18
urinary lract [see urolithiasis, surgical 
phallorrhaphy of, 192-193
lateral recumbency restraint, young
reatment)
phimosis of, 205
calf, 16, 17f
oburator nerve block, 42#
 iranslocation of, for teaser preparation,
sideline restraint, 16, 17f
ocular squamous cell carcinoma
211-212
medial dewclaw amputalion, rear feet in
enucleation, 78-80, 78f, 79f, 80f
pericardiotomy, traumalic pericardiris
heifers
general considerations, 75
correction
aneshesia, 268
keratectomy, noninvasive corneal
anesthesia, 114
 general considerations, 268
plaques removal, 77-78
draping, 114
postoperative care, 268
 membrane nicitans, hird eye, 76
initial evaluation, 113-114
presurgical procedures, 268
upper, lower eyelids surgery, 76-77
materials, 114
surgical technique, 268
odontopahy, 69
postoperalive care, 116
medial patellar desmotomy, upward
presurgical procedures, 114
fixation reatment
advantages, 122
surgery feasibiliry, 113
anesthesia, 259
anesthesia, 123
surgical rechnique, 115
 general considerations, 259
disadvantages, 122
sururing, 116
postoperarive care, 259
postoperalive care, 123
perineal artery and vein,ligation of, forudder
presurgical procedures, 259
presurgical procedures, 122
sloughing, 175-176, 176f
restraint, 259
restraint, 122
perineal lacerarion, 175-176, 176f
surgical technique, 259
surgical technique, 123
 persistent frenulum
 membrane nichitans carcinoma of, 76
sururing, Dirkson method, 123, 124f
anesthesia, 198
meniscal tears, 274
oophorectomy in cattle
 general consideralions, 197
metacarpal fractures, 278
 indicalions, general considerations, 145
postoperalive care, 198
Index ■ 299
restraint, 198
rectal rings, 142, 143f
squamous cell carcinoma of eye, 75-80
surgical technique, 198
rectal tenesmus alleviation, 142
stenosis of teat orifice, 241
Peterson eye block, 28
rectopexy, 142
subsacral paravertebral nerve blocks,
phallorrhapy, ventral and spiral 
restraint, 139-140
33-37, 33f, 35f
deviations correction
simple replacement, 140
subsolar abscess surgery, 265-266, 266f
aneshesia, 193
site preparation, 140
successful teat surgery, basics, 233
 general considerations, 192
ypes, 139, 139f
supernumerary teat removal, 244-245,
postoperative care, 197
retrobulbar nerve block, 29-30, 29f
245f
presurgical procedures, 192
reuff's double half hitch, 16, 16f
surgical removal of polyps via open teat
restraint,192
rib fracrures, 277
surgery, 238-239
surgical technique, spiral, 195-197, 196f
ring block, 31, 31f
surgical restraint
surgical technique, ventral, 193, 193f,
ring, rechal, for prolapse, 142, 143f
 casting caltle melhods, Burley, double
194f 195f
rope squeeze restraint, 13, 13f
half hirch, 15, 15f
suuring, 196, 197f
rubber bands, for castration, 187-188
divering animal's attention techniques
phimosis
 rumen cannulation, permanent 
nasal seprum grasping, 11
postoperative care, 205
anesthesia, 112
nose lead, 1l, 12f
presurgical procedures, 205
 general considerations, 112
snubbing rope, hog holder, 12, 12f
surgical rechnique, 205
postoperative care, 113
ail jack, 111
polyp removalvia leat [streak] canal, 237-238
presurgical procedures, 112
 general considerations, 11
prepuce
restraint, 112
kicking prevention
circumcision, 200, 203, 203f
surgical rechnique, 112-113
hock witch, 12, 13f, 31
endogenous condions of, 192
rumen Fistula, creation of temporary
rope squeeze restraint, 13, 13f
exogenous condirions of, 192
anatomic consideralions, 109
mechanical restraint
lacerations of, 200
anesthesia, 109
cage, rotary tables, 17
phimosis of, 192
 gas removal, draping, 109
chutes for catHe, 17
Iranslocation of, for teaser preparation,
 general considerations, 108
flat tables, 17-18
211-214, 212f, 216
presurgical procedures, 109
other restraints 
preputial diverticulum extirpation, boars
surgical technique, 109, 109f, 110f,
lateral recumbency restraint, young
aneshesia, 208
111-112,111f
calf, 16,17f
diverticulum anatomy, 207, 208f
rumenotomy
sideline restraint, 16, 17f
anesthesia, 105
raising leg, cale
diverliculum removal, through prepurial
 indications, 105
front leg hobble, 13
orifice, 209-210
laparotomy, 105-106
raising front leg manually, 14 
general consideralions, 207
postoperarive care, 108
raising rear leg manuall, 14
indications, 208
presurgical procedures, 105
resraining tail, cale
postoperative care, 209-210
restraint,105
ail rope, 15
presurgical procedures, 208
surgical fechnique, 106-108, 106f, 107f
bailto-leg fie, 15
restraint, 208
sururing, 108
symphysiotomy, 171, 277
surgical technique, 209, 209f
prolapse
sacral paravertebral nerve blocks,
table reslraints, 17-18
rectal, 140-141, 141f
33-35,33f 35f
tail restraint, 4, 4f, 15, 111
eat canal, 142
scapular fracrure, 310
teaser bulls, boars and rams surgical
vaginal, 168-175, 174f, 175f
scirrhous cord removal
preparation
prothesis
pigs (barrows), 191
common techniques, 213
for blind teat, 240
steers,190-191
general consideralions, 210-211
for medial patellar ligament, 256-257
scrotal hernia
penectomy, 214-215
affer castration, in calle, 96-87
penile extension prevention, selected 
quill suure mehod, 175, 175f
in pigs, 93-95, 94f
surgery, 211-214, 212f
semen, blockage of, in teaser animals,
 semen Flow blocking, epididymectomy.
radial frachure, 275-280
215-218,217f
215-216
raising leg, catle
septic arthritis
 semen Flow blocking, vasectomy,
front leg hobble, 13
arthrodesis for
216-218, 217f
raising front leg manually, 14
joint Flushing, 272
teat amputation
raising rear leg manually, 14 
shoelace method, for vaginal prolapse,
nonaccessory teals, 245-246
rectal prolapse repair
172, 172f
 supernumerary teat removal,
predisposing factors, 139
sinuses, frontal, trephination of, 68-69
244-245,245f
surgical repair
spider teat treatment, 239
teat atresia (imperforate teats), 242
common sequelae, 143
spinal aneshesia [see aneshesia, epidural]
teat injuries, First aid, 235
emasculatome, simple mucosal
spinal fracrures, 276
teat laceration repair
 prolapses in pigs, 142
splinrs
anesthesia, 235
mucosallayer reseclion, 140-141, 141f
for contracted tendons, 253
general consideralions, 233-234, 234f
rectal amputation, 141-142, 142f
for frachures, 253
postoperalive care, 236
300 ■ lndex
teat laceration repair (continued)
postoperative care, 251
low parlial urethrostomy, 223-224,
presurgical procedures, 235
presurgical procedures, 250
224f
restraint, 234-235
restraint, 250
postoperative care, 224-225
surgical technique, 235-236, 236f
surgical rechnique, 250-251
presurgical procedures, 222
eat injuries, First aid, 235
vasculaure ligation
restraint, 221
teat, leaky, 243
aneshesia, 247
surgical technique, 222, 222f
teat obstruclion, 236-237, 236f, 237f
 general considerations,
blind rears, 240
246,247f
vagina
calculia and lactolih removal, 239
postoperative care, 247-248
episiotomy of, 160
polyp removal, 237-238
 presurgical procedures, 247
laceration of, 175-176, 176f
spider teat, 239
restraint, 246
oophorectomy approach through,
lear stenosis, 241
surgical rechnique, 247-248
147-150, 147f, 148f,
teat surgery, basics for success, 233
vasculaure ligation, alternative
149f
tendon laceration
anesthesia, 249
vaginal prolapse, cows
general consideralions, 255
 general considerations,
bulton and pin technique, 169-170
postoperative care, 256
248-249
 cervopexy, modified Winkler method,
postoperative care, 250
170-171,170f,171f
reatment, 255-256
tendon surgery [see chapter 13]
presurgical procedures, 249
indications, general considerations,
laceralions of, 255-256
restraint, 249
167-168
tenesmus
surgical rechniques, 249-250
modified Caslick's method, 174,
rectal, 142
ulnar fractures, 278
174f
vaginal, 35, 168
umbilical masses [see chapter 8]
 oher techniques, 175
testicle(s)
caltle, 84-86
 prevention techniques, buried purse-
chemical desruclion of
pigs, 92-93, 93f
slring method,
ectopic, 189-190
urethra
173-174, 174f
removal of (trestectomy), 184-187
caheterizalion, 227-228
 prevention techniques, Patton method,
undescended (cryptochidism), 188-190
repair of, rupure of, 228-230
173,173f
hird eyelid (membrane nichitans),
urethral process, removal of, 230
 prevention techniques, shoelace
squamous cel cancer of, 76
urethrostomy, 221-225,222f, 224f,
method, 172, 172f
 third-degree perineal laceration repair
quill suure method, 175, 175f
243-247
urine pooling, urethral extension to
vaginal retention techniques, modified 
aneshesia, 175
general consideralions, 175
control
Minchev method, 168-169,
postoperative care, 176
anesthesia, 177
168f
presurgical procedures, 175
 general considerations, 177
vasechomy, 216-218, 217f
ventral abomasopexy
surgical technique, 175-176, 176f
postoperalive care, 178
abdominal wall closure, 125-126
fibial fracture, 279
presurgical considerations, 177
filetamine, 55
surgical technique, 177-178, 178f
advantages, 124, 129t
loggle pin method, for displace
urolithiasis, surgical treatment
anesthesia, 124
abomasum, 126-127
general considerations, 221
disadvantages, 124, 129t
subcutaneous abdominal inflammation,
postoperalive care, 126
torsion
abomasum, 100, 128
edema caused by urethra 
presurgical procedures, 124
cecum, 100,137
rupure, 230
resraint, 124
intestinal, 136-137, 137f
terminology, 221
surgical rechnique, 125, 125f
tracheotomy [see head and neck surgery,
urethral calheterization
vertebral frachures, 276
racheotomy)
aneshesia, 228
volvulus
Irephination, of frontal sinuses, 68-69
 general considerations, 227
abomasal, 128-129
trimming claws, 266, 266f
 presurgical procedures, 228
inteshinal, 133
ube cystostomy, 225-227, 225f
restraint, 228
walker's incision, for cesarean sechtion,
uber coxae fracture, 277
surgical rechnique, 228
163
ympany, rumen Fistula for, 108
urelhral process removal, wethers and
warrs, vaccine for, 206
yphlectasis, 136-137, 137f
rams,230
Winkler method, modified, for vaginal
urethral repair, breeding bulls
prolapse, 170-171, 170f,
udder surgery
 general considerations, 228
171f
amputalion, 246
postoperative care, 229-230
wound care, 5-7
blind quarters, 239-240
presurgical procedures, 229
wrighr's incision, for casarean section,
chemical desruction, glandular fissue
restraint, 228-229
163
indicalions, 251
surgical rechniques, 229
udder infusions, 251
suhring,229
xylazine, 54, 57
mammeclomy, does and ewes
urelhrostomy
yohimbine, 55
anesthesia, 250
 general considerations, 221
general considerations, 250
high partial urethrostomy, 222-223
zolazepam, 55