Essentials of
ORTHOPEDICS
RM Shenoy
Ripped b
JAYPEE
M chortain Petey
Essentials of
ORTHOPEDICS
Essentialsof
ORTHOPEDICS
RM Shenoy
D Orth, MS Orth
Professor and Unit Head
 Department of Orthopedics
Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore
(A constituent of Manipal University)
Karmataka, India
JAYPEE BROTHERS MEDICAL PUBLISHERS(P) LTD
Chennai · Hyderabad · Kochi· Kolkata · Lucknow · Mumbai · Nagpur
Published by
Jitendar P Vij
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd
Corporate Office
Registered Office
B-3 EMCA House, 23/23B Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi - 110 002, India
Phones: +91-11-23272143, +91-11-23272703, +91-11-23282021
e-mail: jaypee @jaypeebrothers.com, Website: www.jaypeebrothers.com
OfficesinIndia
+Ahmedabad, Phone: Rel: +91-79-32988717, e-mail: ahmedabad@jaypeebrothers.com
·Bengaluru, Phone: Rel: +91-80-32714073, e-mail: bangalore@jaypeebrothers.com
· Chennai, Phone: Rel: +91-44-32972089, e-mail: chennai@jaypeebrothers.com
  
+Kochi, Phone: +91-484-2395740, e-mail: kochi@jaypeebrothers.com
+Kolkata, Phone: +91-33-22276415, e-mail: kolkata@jaypeebrothers.com
+Lucknow, Phone: +91-522-3040554, e-mail: lucknow @jaypeebrothers.com
●Mumbai, Phone: Rel: +91-22-32926896, e-mail: mumbai@jaypeebrothers.com
· Nagpur, Phone: Rel: +91-712-3245220, e-mail: nagpur@jaypeebrothers.com
Overseas Offices
· North America Office, UsA, Ph: 001-636-6279734, e-mail: jaypee@jaypeebrothers.com, anjulav@jaypeebrothers.com
·Central America Office, Panama City, Panama, Ph: 001-507-317-0160, e-mail: cservice@jphmedical.com
Website: www.jphmedical.com
Essentials of Orthopedics
@ 2010, Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers
All rights reserved. No part of this publication should be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means:
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the author and the publisher.
This book has been published in good faith that the material provided by author is original. Every effort is made to ensure accuracy of
material, but the publisher, printer and author will not be held responsible for any inadvertent error (s). In case of any dispute, all legal
 matters are to be settled under Delhi jurisdiction only.
First Edition: 2010
ISBN 978-81-8448-838-8
Typeset at JPBMP typesetting unit 
Printed at Ajanta Offset
WithEternalBlessingsof
Shree Guru Nithyanandam
This book is dedicated to my parents
DearFather LateMr.Mohan R Shenoy,
who encouraged me constantly during my endeavor but
unfortunately did not live to see the release of this book
and
To my mother Mrs Padma Shenoy
who always inspires me
Foreword
It was a pleasure going through the pages of this highly informative well-presented book entitled
*Essentials of Orthopedics” written by Dr Ravindra M Shenoy whom I had the pleasure of knowing
him since his childhood and later as a student and now a revered colleague.
He has a inborm dominant gene of a writer and a leader. His mother an award winning writer
this work to his parents.
I am sure this book will be a beacon of light and guide for undergraduates to understand
orthopedics and the postgraduates to have their basics well forwarded and to the practicing surgeons 
as a ready reckoner.
I am sure this book will find a place in the shelf of every Orthopedic Surgeon.
I wish Dr Ravi all the best in his endeavors and may the good God bless him in all his
endeavors.
Prof M Shantharam Shetty
President -lOA & AO Trustee from lndia
Vice Chancellor Nitte University
 Chairman, Tejasvini Hospital
Mangalore, Karmataka, India
Good Wishes
Professor RM Shenoy is a teacher par excellence and committed to his profession. His dedication
to academic activities is worth appreciating. He is an innovative Orthopedic Surgeon who is
highly disciplined and meticulous in his work. He likes to improve the current status of medicine,
always aiming at perfection. He expects the same from his pupils too. His original research of
developing a single incision for exposure of forearm fracture speaks of his capabilities. This
was published in the Jourmal of Bone and Joint Surgery 1995 British: 77B. No 4-568-570. I find
it to be an extremely good and a cosmetic exposure. The book "Essentials of Orthopedics" written
by him is his latest venture. It is going to be a boon for both undergraduates and postgraduates
as well as practicing Orthopedic Consultants. As a teacher, I am thrilled to see one of my pupils Prof RM Shenoy, reaching
great heights and carving out a niche for himself among the Orthopedic Surgeons. I wish him good luck and expect many
more inmovative things from him in future.
Prof PK Usman
Former Professor
Department of Orthopedics
Kasturba Medical College
Mangalore, Karmataka, India
Emeritus Professor and HOD
AJ Institute of MedicalSciences
Mangalore, Karmataka, India
Preface
Medicine today is a highly specialized science. Innovations are too many and what was held good yesterday becomes obsolete
today. Newer and newer concepts continue to evolve and to keep abreast with these one should have a sound basic knowledge
of the subject. The subject orthopedics has very few books which impart this basic knowledge to a medical student. The book
*Essentials of Orthopedics' is written keeping this fact in mind. It aims at imparting basic orthopedic knowledge to a student
of medicine who has acquired basic knowledge of pre- and para-clinical subjects. The original concepts have been highlighted
and the persons who put forth these concepts have been duly recognized. Every attempt has been made to narrate the concepts
in a simplified manner keeping the originality. Wherever possible illustrations have been placed to help the reader to understand
the subject. Radiographs have been used wherever required so that the learming process becomes easy because of the visual
effect they impart. The essential topics have been covered methodically and adequately. On the whole this book is a complete
book which imparts essential basic orthopedic knowledge to a medical student. Questions have been provided at the end of
each chapter for revision as well as preparation for the examination. Suggestions are most welcome
RMShenoy
Acknowledgments
The author being honored by the revered Chancellor of Manipal
University Dr Ramdas M Pai for completing 25 years of meritorious
service.
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge my alma mater Kasturba Medical College which nurtured me for 39 long years
first as an undergraduate student, then as a postgraduate and finally now as its faculty. I am thankful to the illustrious Chancellor
of Manipal University, Dr Ramdas M Pai who guided me and gave me an opportunity to buildup my career as a young
Orthopedic surgeon. The guidance and encouragement which I had received then has put me on a sound footing today.
I am indebted to my teachers Professor M Shantharam Shetty, the Vice Chancellor of Nitte University and President of
Indian Orthopedic Association and Professor PK Usman, the two living legends who shaped my career as a teacher and an
Orthopedic surgeon.
I am grateful to my innumerable colleagues, interaction with whom considerably improved my knowledge and to the
inmumerable umdergraduate and postgraduate students whom I have taught during the past 27 years and in the process learnt a lot.
I am extremely grateful to my present colleagues Dr Deepak Pinto, Dr Vivek Mahajan, Dr Saurabh Bansal and
Dr Harshvardhan who helped me in many ways during the preparation of this book.
I acknowledge the inspiration given by my mother Smt Padma Shenoy, a State Award winning novelist, whose literary talents
perhaps I have inherited, my wife Renu for kindling the spark within me to write a book for the benefit of the students thereby
enabling me to transmit this scientific, pure and unsullied knowledge to the future generation and my daughter Archana for
 helping me in the proofreading and correction, as well as giving all possible help and support during completion of this task.
I also acknowledge my younger brother Dr Surendra Shenoy and sister-in-law Dr Shalini Shenoy for the help they have
renderd in the preparation of this book.
And last but not the least I acknowledge the efforts of M/s Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd., and its enterprising
Chainman and Managing Director Shri Jitendar P Vij, the dedicated team of staff at Delhi office and Mr Venu Gopal the
Branch Manager of Bengaluru office who have worked with me promptly and efficiently in bringing out this book in a grand
manner.
Contents
1. Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
2. Fractures in the Upper Limb.
17
3. Fractures in the Lower Limb
56
4. Dislocations
100
5. Fractures of the Pelvis.
112
6. Spinal Injuries.
118
 7. Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
.130
 8. Bone and Joint Infections .
152
9. Bone Tumors
176
10. SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
193
11. Intervertebral Disc Prolapse/Herniation .
208
12. Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
216
13. Congenital and Developmental Anomalies ...
230
14. Miscellaneous Conditions .
251
15. Fractures in Children
263
16. Gait .
269
17. Amputations
272
18. Implants and Instruments
276
19. Arthroscopy and Total Joint Arthroplasty
287
Index
291
1
Introductionto
Fractures and
Dislocations
Definition of a Fracture, Types, Healing, and Treatment of
Fractures
二
Complications and their Treatment
Recent Concept of Fracture Healing
 Definition of Dislocation, Types, Management in General and
Complications
Fractures and dislocations are among the most common
D. The treatment protocol is based on the nature of the failure
injuries seen in day to day practice. It is important to
 pattem and follows a definite path which is consistent, with
remember the following basic facts to understand these
minor variations.
injuries.
E. Healing is indirectly proportional to the severity of the
A. A force of considerable magnitude is necessary to cause
injury.
these injuries (Unless the bone is already weak or the
 F.Complications that develop with these injuries are related
structure of a joint is already disturbed due to disease).
to the severity of the deforming force, the resultant failure
B. The resultant failure patterm (defonmation) is directly
patterm and the site and multiplicity of the injury.
proportional to the nature, magnitude and direction of the
G. Though the terms ^ Fracture and Dislocation' refer to the
force.
bone and joint pathology, one should always remember
C. It is possible to classify these failure patterms with certain
that in a skeletal injury, there is considerable damage to
limitations.
the soft tissue envelope that surrounds the bones and the
2
Essentials of Orthopedics
joints. Namely the periosteum and the muscles. This soft
IMI. Depending on the nature of the fracture line (Figs 1.2
tissue injury has an inverse relation to the normal healing
to 1.8)
process.
a.Transverse fracture.
b. Oblique fracture.
Fractures
Long oblique
Short oblique
Definition
c. Spiral fracture.
Fracture is a break in continuity of a bone or loss of normal
Long spiral
anatomical continuity of a bone.
Short spiral
d. Comminuted fracture: In this type, there are more
Types of Fracture
than two fragments at one fracture site.
1.1
 Depending on basic nature
e. Segmental fracture: In a single bone, fracture
a. Closed or simple.
occurs at two different levels.
b. Open or compound (Figs 1.1A to F).
f.Intra-articular fracture: A fracture that involves
 II1. Depending on the displacements
(extends into) the articular surface of a joint.
 Avulsion fracture: This is a fracture occurring due
a. Displaced fracture
g.
to a pull by a muscle, tendon or a ligament at its
b. Undisplaced fracture.
insertion to the bone, e.g. mallet finger, fracture
 Incomplete fracture
of the olecrenon process of the ulna.
Complete fracture.
Type
Typell
Type llla
TypeIllb
Type Illc
/ascularrepai
Figure 1.1
Classification of open fractures—based on the classification by Gustilo and Anderson
Criteria for classification: Extent of injury to skin, soft tissue, bone, vessels and the degree of contamination.
Type I: Wound smaller than 1 cm in diameter, no skin crushing with no or little contamination. Fracture pattern is not complex
Type Il: A lacerated wound larger than 1 cm but without significant soft tissue crushing, no degloving, or contusion with moderate contamination.
Fracture pattern may or may not be complex.
Type Ill: An open injury with extensive soft tissue crushing and contamination, fracture pattern is single or complex. Injury is further subdivided
into three types:
a.
Adequate soft tissue coverage of the fracture can be acquired at closure.
b.
 Periosteal stripping is seen.lnadequate soft tissue coverage at closure. Hence, soft tissue reconstruction is necessary.
C.
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
Figure 1.4
Figure 1.2
Radiograph showing a short spiral fracture of the tibia and the fibula,
Radiograph showing fracture of radius and ulna. Note the transverse
in the lower third.
nature of the fracture line.
A
B
Figures 1.5A and B
Radiograph showing fracture of upper and lower humerus respec-
tively and comminution at the fracture site with many fragments of
bone which are displaced.
Figure 1.3
Radiograph showing a short oblique fracture at the neck of the 5th
metacarpal bone of the left hand.
h. Multiple fractures: Many bones are fractured in the
same individual.
Figure 1.6
Deforming Forces
Radiograph of an open seg-
 mental fracture of tibia and
The deforming forces causing fractures can be classified as:
fabula with secondary infection
a.Direct
and changes of chronic osteo-
myelitis. Bone resorption is
b. Indirect
seen at the fracture site. Both
Direct impact causes severe injuries, e.g. open fractures,
the fracture sites are showing
features of nonunion.
comminuted fractures, etc.
4
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 1.9
Radiograph showing greenstick fracture of both, the radius and the
ulna. Note the gross deformity.
Figure 1.7
Radiograph showing fracture of the head of the femur. This is a very
rare injury and generally associated with a dislocation of the hip. In
this case, there was posterior dislocation which was reduced. The
reduction achieved is obviously not congruous.
Figure 1.10
Radiograph showing a compression fracture of L2 vertebra. Note the
Figure 1.8
decrease in anterior height of the vertebral body.
Radiograph of an avulsion fracture of the base of distal phalanx. The
resultant deformity is a 'Mallet finger'. The patient is a goal keeper
Specific Types of Fractures
goal kick. Avulsion force is exerted by the lateral slips of the extensor
Greenstick Fracture (Fig. 1.9)
expansion.
It is called so because the bone breaks like a greenstick branch
 of a tree. Only a part (one side) of the bone breaks and rest
 Indirect impact causes less severe injuries and is classified
of the bone bends. It is an incomplete break occurming in the
as follows:
bone and seen in children whose bones are more elastic, soft
i. A bending force—produces a transverse fracture.
amd pliable. There is no abnormal mobility.
ii. A torsional force—produces a spiral fracture.
ji. A combination of both bending and torsional force-
Compression Fracture (Fig. 1.10)
It is seen in the vertebral column wherein the height of the
fragment/fragments.
vertebral body decreases following fracture.
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
5
Figure 1.12
Radiograph showing 'March fracture' at the neck of 2nd metatarsal.
Note the healing response by formation of abundant callus.
Figure 1.11
Radiograph showing a Giant cell tumor arising from the upper end
of tibia with multiple pathological fractures due to thinning of the
sign of a fracture and further examination to ascertain the
cortex. Pathological fracture is a late feature of a Giant cell tumor
fracture is unnecessary.)
Healing of a Fracture
Pathological Fracture (Fig. 1.11)
Healing takes place in stages and over a period of time
It is a fracture occurring as a result of pre-existing pathology.
(approximately 4 weeks minimum). Four distinct stages are
The pathology softens the bone considerably and this soft bone
recognized (Fig. 1.13).
yields to a very trivial trauma and fractures, e.g. malignancy,
osteomyelitis, etc.
Ist Stage: Stage of Hematoma Formation
This is an important stage of fracture healing. During the
Stress Fracture (Fig. 1.12)
process of fracture the blood vessels are tom and hence
It is a type of pathological fracture due to unaccustomed stress 
bleeding occurs almost immediately. Hematoma acts as a
 getting concentrated on one part of the bone, e.g. March
vehicle delivering required material for union and clearing the
fracture seen in soldiers after a long route march.
unwanted material by a process of chemotaxis of cells. If this
stage of hematoma is deficient as seen in cases of open
Signs and Symptoms of a Fracture
fractures, healing is interfered with and fracture fails to unite.
1. Pain and Swelling
(Hence open fractures are to be converted into closed
2. Defonmity.
fractures as early as possible to promote healing. Many a
3. Loss of continuity.
times this is not possible and nonunion is accepted and treated
4. Irregularity.
accordingly at a later date.)
5. Crepitus.
6. Bony tendemess.
2nd Stage: Stage of Cellular Proliferation
7. Loss of function.
Within 8 hours of the fracture there is inflammation resulting
8.Abnommal mobility.
im subperiosteal and endosteal cellular proliferation. These
(Abnormal mobility is a sign to be observed and not a
I cells surround the broken ends of the bone. At the same time
sign to be elicited in a fresh fracture. It is very painful because the clotted hematoma progressively gets absorbed and new
the movement is taking place at the fracture site. It is the sure capillaries start infiltrating these cellular masses.
6
Essentials of Orthopedics
1st stage:Stageof
2nd stage:Stageofsubperiosteal
hematoma formation
andendostealcellularproliferation
3rd stage:Stage of
4th stage:Stage of
Final stage:Stageof
primarywovenboneformation
lamellarboneformation
remodeling
Figure 1.13
Stages of healing of fracture
3rd Stage:Stage of PrimaryWoven Bone Formation
fractured bone or in other words to restore its preinjured status.
(Soft Callus)
Remodeling is rapid in children and in growing bones and
slow in adult bones and almost nil in osteoporotic bones.
The proliferating cells which are mainly osteogenic and
chondrogenic start to get incorporated into the fibrogenic
Note: Healing of a fracture in a cancellous bone does not
matrix under the influence of Bone Morphogenic Proteins
follow these stages. Cancellous bone heals by direct
(BMP), Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGF-β) and
formation of osteoblastic new bone.
 Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF), thus forming primary woven
Factors Influencing Healing
bone. This bone is soft as it is not fully mineralized. This is
supposed to occur during 2nd and 3rd week.
a. Factors not (at all) in control of the treating doctor
 Nature of the trauma
4th Stage: Stage of Lamellar Bone Formation
High velocity trauma.
(Hard Callus)
Low velocity trauma.
Mineralization occurs and this primary woven bone is
Nature of the fracture.
transformed into lamellar bone. This is supposed to occur
Vascularity of the bone.
between 3 and 6 weeks
·Age of the patient.
This is hard bone and is seen as a bridge or a cuff across
b. Factors in control (some control) of the treating doctor.
the fracture site. It indicates early stage of fracture union.
 Proper reduction.
 Adequate fix ation.
Stage of Remodeling
Adequate immobilization.
This stage is better not considered as one of the stages of
Prevention of distraction.
fracture healing because remodeling takes place only after the
Prevention of infection.
fracture unites (heals) and takes months and years. Here the
Maintaining adequate nutrition.
body attempts to give the normal shape and strength to the
Adequate management of other comorbid conditions.
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
7
Management of a Fracture
The treatment begins at the site of injury. The first step is to
apply a splint to the injured part and look for other associated
injuries. Namely, the vascular, the visceral and the neurolo-
gical, by doing a thorough general and systemic ex amination.
Visceral injuries when present may be life-threatening, e.g.
liver laceration, splenic rupture, hemopneumothorax, etc.
Early repair of these structures is of paramount importance.
In polytrauma maintaining the airway, the breathing and the
blood pressure and treatment of shock and hemorrhage is
essential. A skilled paramedical team should be available to
transport a severely injured patient to the specialized center
where definitive treatment is instituted. Delay is detrimental.
Basic Methods of Treating a Fracture
Figure 1.14
   a nn     
1. Immobilization in a cast.
secondary to abadly displaced fracture of the lower third of the shaft
 2. Closed reduction and immobilization in a cast.
of the femur (Vascular injury in a fracture is an emergency.
 3. Open reduction and intemal fixation.
Hemorrhage, shock and compartment syndrome is common. It has
to be treated immediately to save the limb and the life of an
4. Closed reduction and intermal fixation (with the help of
 individual) .
C-Arm imaging).
5. Extemal fixation.
6. Tractions.
B. Systemic and general complications.
1. Shock and hemorrhage.
All theabove methods arepractised and can be employed
2. Fat embolism.
to treat a fracture depending on the indication. All these
3. Crush syndrome.
methods help to enhance the biological process of healing
4. Pulmonary embolism.
by maintaining the anatomical alignment and providing the
necessary stability at the fracture site. Every method has its
A. Specific Complications
own merits and demerits and to be chosen carefully.Aim of
fracture treatment is to minimize the confinement to bed,
Nonunion
achieve union at the earliest andmake thepatient toregain
When a fracture fails to show progressive signs of union at
his activity as early as possible.
review both clinically and radiologically for a consecutive
Complications
period of three months after the specified time expected for
umion it is known as nonunion.
 Following are the complications that can occur after a fracture.
Clinically, it is diagnosed by painless abnormal mobility.
A.Specific and local complications
Radiologically, it shows rounding of the ends of the bones,
1. Nonunion.
sclerosis of the margins and poor callus. The fracture site is
 2. Delayed union.
not viable and the biological response at union has ceased.
3. Malunion.
4. Sudecks atrophy.
Nonunion is seen commonly in following fractures because
 5. Associated nerve injuries.
of damage to the vessels resulting in loss of / poor blood
6.
Associated vascular injuries (Fig. 1.14).
supply.
7.
Associated visceral injuries.
a.
Fracture of the waist of the scaphoid
8. Infection leading to osteomyelitis and pyogenic
b.
Fracture of the neck of the femur
arthritis.
C.
Fracture of the neck of the talus
(as a consequence of open fracture or surgical sepsis.)
d.Fracture of the lower 1/3 of the tibia fibula
8
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 1.15
Radiograph showing lateral view of wrist and hand showing malunited
Colles' fracture with a classical “Dinner fork' deformity.
Delayed Union
Angleisabout110
A fracture is said to have gone in for delayed union when there
Figure 1.16
is undue delay at union
Radiograph showing malunion of a comminuted intertrochanteric
This is so because the attempt at umion for some reason
fracture.
Note the neck shaft angle. It is reduced. Hence, there is Coxa
vara deformity at the hip.
union is not strong enough or adequate enough to progress
(Left alone most of the intertrochanteric fractures unite in coxa
towards complete union
vara.This happens because of the cancellous nature of the bone that
Clinically, it is diagnosed by painful abnormal mobility
is present at the fracture site).
Radiologically, it shows callus but callus formation is not
adequate enough to bridge the fracture site and cause complete
Classification of Delayed and Nonunions
union. The fracture site is viable and there exists a biological
Basically, fractures which do not unite and need a secondary
response at the fracture site (but inadequate).
procedure for achieving union are considered as the ones that
Abnormal mobility is a sign to be elicited in nonunions
have gone in for delayed or nonunion. They show both clinical
anddelayedunions.
and radiological features of the same.
Malunion (Figs 1.15 and 1.16)
Depending on Strontium &5 uptake at the ends of the
fracture site the vascularity (viability) is assessed and classi-
When a fracture unites in anatomical malaligmment it is known
fied as hypervascular (hypertrophic) and avascular (atrophic).
as malunion. These malalignments are angulation, rotation
(Based on Description by Weber BG and Cech, O Pseud-
and over-riding. Single or malalignment in one plane is rare
Usually, there is combination of two or all the three mal-
arthrosis, Berne Switzerland 1976, Hans Huber Medical
Publisher)
alignments. Angulation causes angular deformity, rotation
causes rotational malalignment and over-riding causes
Hypervascular nonunions(true delayed unions)(Fig.1.17A)
shortening.
a.
Elephant foot type: Presents with exuberant expansile
Clinically, it is diagnosed by the presence of deformity
callus and the picture resembles the foot of an elephant.
with no abnonmal mobility. Radiologically, it shows deformity
It is the result of movement occurring at the fracture site
amnd malalignment with adequate bridging callus.
 before union has occurred, e.g. premature weight-bearing.
b. Horse hoof type: Presents with little callus and picture
The normal Neck shaft angle' between the head, neck
resembles a horse hoof. Perhaps, this is the result of
and shaft of the femur varies from 117-137", average
instability at the fracture site following inadequate
being 127*. If it is less than 117', it is known as C0XA
VARA and more than 137", it is known as COXA VALGA.
reduction or fixation.
An intertrochanteric fracture malunites in Coxa Vara.
c. Oligotrophic type: These are hypervascular but are not
hypertrophic and do not show callus.
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
9
A
a.Elephantfoot
b.Horse hoof
c.Oligotrophic
a.Torsion wedge
b.Comminutedc.Defectived.Defective and Atrophic
Figure 1.17
(A) Hypervascular type (B) Avascular type
(Ref: Based on description by Weber BG and Cech O; Pseudarthrosis, Berne Switzerland 1976, Hans Huber Medical Publisher)
They are considered to be the result of major displace-
To conclude the role of cortical graft is to bridge the
 ment/distraction persisting after treatment.
defect. The role of cancellous graft is to induce osteo-
genesis. Hence, when the need is osteogenesis only,
Avascular nonunions (true nonunions) (Fig. 1.17B)
cancellous bone grafting is the procedure of choice. When
a. Torsion wedge type: Seen when there is an intermediate
the need is to bridge the defect as well as to induce
fragment with poor blood supply. It unites on one side but
osteogenesis both cortical and cancellous bone grafting
 does not unite on the other.
(corticocancellous grafting) procedure is to be chosen.
b. Comminuted type: Is the result of many intermediate
fragments with poor blood supply.
The procedure needs immobility at the site for the
d. Defect type: Seen when there is bone loss.
incorporation of the graft and the union to take place. Thus
intemal fixation/extemal immobilization is necessary.
e. Atrophic type: Seen when intermediate fragments are
small and are missing. The defect is replaced by scar
Sources of bone graft
tissue.
a.Allo/Homograft from the same species, e.g. bank bone,
( See the X-ray pictures in the Figs 1.18A to G in the next
matermal fibula.
page).
b. Auto/Isograft from the same individual.
Source of cancellous graft: Iliac crest, excised ribs, excised
Treatmentof Delayedand Nonunions
head and neck of femur.
Standard methods: Cancellous bone grafting is the procedure
Source of cortical graft: Upper 2/3 of the fibula, anteromedial
of choice to achieve union. Cancellous bone grafting is done
tibia.
 only after confirming good apposition of the ends of bone
without any soft tissue interposition. Freshening the edges of
SpecializedMethodsfor theTreatmentofDelayed
Unions and Nonunions
the fractured bone is a must. Cortical grafting is done in cases
of defect non unions to bridge the defect, prior to the
a. Distraction/compression osteogenesis based on the
placement of cancellous graft.
principle of Illizarov; It is proved by Illizarov that cont-
(In delayed union with exuberant callus and when the
rolled progressive distraction and/or compression leads to
cause is certain that it is the movement taking place at the
tissue regeneration. This principle is of immense use when
fracture site which is preventing union, rigid fixation and
the skin condition does not permit open bone grafting
immobilizationalone mayresult in union).
procedures (Figs 1.19A and B).
10
Essentials of Orthopedics
A.Elephantfoot
B.Horse hoof
C.Oligotrophic
D.Torsion wedge
E.Comminuted
F.Defective
G.Defective and
atrophicboth
Figures 1.18A to G
Radiographs showing the different types of pseudarthrosis based on the description by Weber BG and Cech O. Figure 1.18G shows a bone
distraction (transportation) procedure in an attempt to salvage the limb, being carried out in a combined, both defective and atrophic nonunion,
employing Illizarov methodology.
b. Bone marrow grafting procedure; in this the bone marrow
corrected accordingly. The alignment thus obtained is
is aspirated and injected into the site of nonunion/delayed
maintained by internal fixation devices and appropriate
union. The sample may be injected de novo before clotting
extermal immobilization (very rarely with only extermal cast).
 Or may be injected in a concentrated form with
Immobilization is continued till healing takes place.
anticoagulants after centrifuging and obtaining the
Osteoclasis: This is a closed procedure wherein the
concentrate under aseptic precautions (Figs 1.20A and B).
malunited bone is broken manually, reduced and aligned
and immobilized in appropriate cast. This procedure is
TreatmentofMalunions
indicated in early cases of malunion and in children when
 Malunions are treated by the help of a surgical procedure
the bridging callus has just fonmed and the callus fonmed
known as corrective osteotomy. In this procedure, the site of
is soft. Osteoclasis should never be attempted after
malunion is osteotomized surgically and the deformity is
consolidation of callus.
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
11
Siteofnonunionwhich
isundergoing progressive
compression
Siteofcorticotomy
undergoingprogressive
distractionforthe
correction of shortening
Figures 1.19A and B
(A) Nonunion of fracture shaft femur associated with shortening of the limb, (B) Procedure of compression/ distraction osteogenesis
B
Figures 1.20A and B
Radiographs showing union in a 12 weeks old ununited type ll open fracture tibia fibula after 2 injections of de novo bone marrow grafting
at 6 weekly intervals
12
Essentials of Orthopedics
b. Skin temperature changes (warm initially, cold later).
c. Skin color and texture changes.
d. Alteration in nail and hair growth.
e. Swelling and stiffness of joints.
f. Impairment of function of extremity.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is made by clinical signs, X-ray (shows deminerali-
zation) and nuclear bone scan (shows increased uptake).
Treatment
Treatment aims at reducing sympathetic overactivity.
Drug therapy is given using following drugs as per need:
 Opiates.
A
 Anti-inflammatory analgesics.
Antidepressants.
Antiepileptics.
Calcitonin.
·Corticosteroids.
Interventional therapy as follows
 Physical and exercise therapy.
 Psychotherapy to relieve anxiety and depression.
Sympathetic nerve block.
Spinal cord stimulation.
 Intrathecal drug pump.
B. Systemic and General Complications
Shock and Hemorrhage
Figures 1.21A and B
Hemorrhagic shock: This is the most common complication
Radiograph showing a normally united Colles' fracture with Sudeck's
of a severe injury. Inadequate oxygenation of tissues leads to
Osteodystrophy. Note the severe nature of demineralization and
 a chain of events resulting in hypotension, multi organ failure
rarefaction in the cancellous areas of the bones of the forearm wrist
 and death.
and the hand.
Measures to be adopted include
a. Adequate oxygenation of tissues by maintaining the
Sudeck's Atrophy (Figs 1.21A and B)
airway and administration of oxygen (important and
Synonyms are Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy, Complex
to be employed in all types of shock).
Regional Pain Syndrome, Causalgia, Shoulder hand Syndrome.
b. Immediate stoppage of bleeding.
It is a chronic condition characterized by pain and stiffness
c. Treatment of lost volume by infusing Saline/Ringer
in the extremity as a result of dysfunction of central or
lactate and Blood.
peripheral nervous system.
Diagnosis of hemorrhagic shock is made by cold and
Pathogenesis is thought to be due to
clammy feeling of the body, hypotension (initially diastolic
a. Activation of pain pathways by the release of catechola-
amd later both systolic as well as diastolic). Tachycardia.
mines, e.g. norepinephrine following injury.
tachypnea and poor urine output. Loss of more than 40% of
b. Exaggerated inflammation and immune response
the blood volume will pose grave danger to life.
following injury.
Signs and symptoms
Neurogenic shock: This type of shock is commonly seen in
a. Buming pain.
spinal cord injury. The disturbance in sympathetic innervation
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
13
causes decrease in the heart rate, dilatation of peripheral
CrushSyndrome
vessels and as a result fall in blood pressure. Monitoring the
First described by a British physician Eric Bywaters in the
central venous pressure and infusion of plasma expanders help
year 1914. It is a traumatic rhabdomyolysis occuring because
in the management of this difficult problem.
of crushing. Also known as reperfusion injury it occurs in
Cardiogenic shock: This type of shock is the result of chest
those whose limbs are compressed for a long-time, e.g. limb
injuries, e.g. tension pneumothorax impeding venous returm,
 trapped in a vehicular collision or buried in a land slide, etc.
Myocardial contusion, etc. should be managed promptly
Such a limb is deprived of blood flow for quite a long-time
depending on the underlying cause.
and the tissues release toxic metabolites because of cell death.
Septic shock: This type of shock is seen as a result of septi-
When the compression is released and reperfusion occurs
 myoglobin from the dead muscle and the toxic metabolites
It is characterized by increased warmth of the body, tachy-
are released into the bloodstream.
cardia, hypotension (little fall in systolic but marked fall in
The flow of oxygenated blood through the damaged area
diastolic pressure) tachypnoea. Multiorgan failure is common.
causes formation reactive oxygen metabolites resulting in
further damage to the tissues. The resultant hyperkalemia,
body warmth.
hypocalcemia and metabolic acidosis may cause cardiac
Aggressive antibiotic therapy along with all other
 i       
supportive measures is essential for the recovery.
amd blocks the renal tubules.
Management: Large amount of fluid infusion to dissolve the
FatEmbolism
metabolites and simultaneous forced diuresis with help of
In a long bone fractures always,there is dissemination of fat
diuretics is the treatment of choice till myoglobinuria becomes
 negligible. Crushed tissues should be radically debrided and
globules from the marrow into the bloodstream. This can also
happen from a spongy bone. At times these fat globules block
a tight compartment when present should be adequately
the capillaries of the pulmonary and the cerebral vessels
decompressed. Dialysis may be necessary when renal failure
causing the fat embolism syndrome. The syndrome is more
is observed.
common in a young patient with multiple fractures
Diagnosis of the fat embolism is difficult. But the
Pulmonary Embolism
following features developing after a fracture should arouse
the suspicion.
are confined to bed for a prolonged period after the fracture
a.  Confusion and restlessness.
and in those elderly high-risk patients who present with major
 b. Increased body temperature and tachycardia in a patient
fractures. Heparinization of blood with the help of low mole-
who is otherwise normal and not in a state of shock.
cular weight heparin and prevention is the treatment of choice.
c. Breathlessness.
d. Petechiae over the chest, back, axilla, the conjunctival
Recent Concept of Fracture Healing
folds and the retina.
Regenerative Medicine
In severe cases of pulmonary embolism, there can be
blood tinged frothy secretion which is coughed out by the
Regenerative medicine is an evolving branch which tries
patient or in case of cerebral embolism patient may become
 to restore the normalcy from a diseased state, by going
except supportive measures of giving high concentration of  fracture healing is analysed, it is found that the healing
oxygen and maintaining capillary perfusion. Low molecular  process begins with inflammation. As a result of this a
weight dextran may help in maintaining capillary perfusion.
. series of events follow, bringing to the site of fracture an
 If the oxygen saturation falls severely, intubation and
I outflow of chemical mediators, cells and growth factors
ventilation is the treatment of choice. If there is blood loss 
(TGF, ete). This in turn initiates a chain of reactions
and hemoglobin is low, blood tansfusion is to be given. Good
1 resulting in fracture healing (Flow chart 1.1).
quality blood is essential for maintaining the oxygen
Thus, after understanding the exact process of healing,
saturation.
these days, methods which are different from conventional
14
Essentials of Orthopedics
Flow chart 1.1
 Schematic representation of a chain of events occurring at the cellular level which is responsible for the healing of the fracture.
INFLAMMATION
Repairbeginswith inflammation
Chemotaxis
Inflammatory cells
Platelets,Lymphocytes
Polypeptide
TGF;
macrophages
PDGF;
growthfactors
VEGF
Cell division
Target cell(receptor)
Cell differentiation
Kinase cascade
DNA synthesis
Celltransportation
Celldivisionandproliferation
Angiogenesis
Collagen
Stimulation
Celladhesion
synthesis
ofstemcells
Osteoblasts
HEALING
HEALING
ones have evolved. Bone marrow grafting, Stem cell
the major segment gives the name for the dislocation as
injection alone or insertion of a Scaffold mixed with Stem
mterior, posterior, medial, lateral, central, etc.
cells are some of the methods currently practiced. In the
When thereis afracture involving the articularsurface
years to come this concept is going to revolutionize the
ofajoint along with dislocation ora fracture of the
treatment of fractures and nonunions.
adjoining part of the bone along with dislocation the term
fracture dislocation is used to describe the injury (Figs
Dislocations
1.23A and B).
Definition of Dislocation and Subluxation
Diagnosis
When the two articular surfaces are totally out of contact it is
Clinical diagnosis is simple because of the classical attitude
known as dislocation.
amd the signs. Total loss of joint movement is characteristic
(Total loss of contact between the two articular surfaces)
and any attempted movement results in severe pain.
When the two articular surfaces are partly in contact and
partly out of contact it is known as subluxation. Subluxation
is also known as partial dislocation.
Treatment
(Partial loss of contact between the two aritcular surfaces).
Any dislocated joint has to be reduced under anesthesia as
early as possible. Delay poses difficulty in reduction. This is
Types of Dislocation (Figs 1.22A to D)
because of re organization of muscles and soft tissue structures
a. Traumatic.
around the joint. Irreducibility under anesthesia with adequate
b. Pathological, e.g. pyogenic arthritis
muscle relaxation indicates entanglement of the dislocated part
C.
 Paralytic, e.g. poliomyelitis
in the surrounding tissues, e.g. joint capsule, muscles and
d.
Congenital, e.g. DDH
tendons and rarely vessels and nerves.
In a dislocation, the part which loses contact with the rest
Following successful reduction, immobilization for a
of the body is considered as minor segment. The position
minimum period of three weeks is essential. This is necessary
which this part, i.e. minor segment occupies in relation to
for healing of the damaged soft tissues. Poor healing of
Introduction to Fractures and Dislocations
15
B
Figures 1.22A to D
Radiographs showing different types of
dislocations.(A) Traumatic Anterior
dislocation of the Hip. (B) Pathological
dislocation secondary to Tuberculosis of
the Hip joint. (C) Paralytic dislocation
secondarytoPostpolioResidual
Paralysis. Note a recent fracture in a thin
femur. (D) Neglected Developmental
Dysplasia of the Hip.
D
Figures 1.23A and B
Radiograph, AP view of the hip joint showing
(A) Fracture of the Acetabulum with poste-
rior subluxation of the hip joint. (B) Commi-
nuted Intertrochanteric fracture with
posterior dislocation of the hip joint. Both are
B
fracture dislocations.
damaged soft tissues increases the chance of recurrent disloca
nerve injury in posterior dislocation of the hip, Popliteal
tion and subluxation.
artery in posterior dislocation of the knee, etc.
ii. Recurrent dislocation.
Complications of Dislocation
iii. Habitual dislocation.
i. Injury to the neighboring nerves and vessels, e.g. Sciatic
iv. Avascular necrosis.
16
Essentials of Orthopedics
Revision Questions
4. Gustilo RB, Anderson JT. Prevention of infection in the
treatment of one thousand twenty-five open fractures of long
Q. Define a fracture. How do you classify fractures? Add a
bones: Retrospective and prospective analysis. J Bone Joint
note on fracture healing.
Surg 1976;58A:453-8.
Q. Define and classify non unions. Discuss the management.
5. Gustilo RB, Mendoza RM, Williams DN. Problems in the
Q. Enumerate the complications of a fracture. Discuss their
management of type IlI (severe) open fractures; A new classi-
fication of type I1l open fractures. J Trauma 1984;24:
management.
742-6.
Note: For questions on dislocations refer Chapter 4.
6. Knapp TP, et al. Comparison of intravenous and oral antibiotic
therapy in the treatment of fractures caused by low-velocity
Further Reading
gunshots. A prospective, randomized study of infection rates.
J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78A:1167-71.
1. Orr HW, Nicolas Andry. Founder of the orthopaedic specialty.
7. Zalavras CG, Marcus RE, Levin LS, Patzakis MJ. Management
Clin Orthop 1954;4:3-9.
of open fractures and subsequent complications. J Bone Joint
Surg Am 2007;89(4):884-95.
Open Fracture Management
2. Dedmond BT, Kortesis B, Punger K, Simpson J, et al. The
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
use of negative-pressure wound therapy(NPwT) in the
(Sudeck's Atrophy)
temporary treatment of soft-tissue injuries associated with
high-energy open tibial shaft fractures. J Orthop Trauma
8. Oaklander AL, Fields HL. Is reflex sympathetic dystrophy/
2007;21:11-7.
complex regional pain syndrome type I a small-fiber
3. Fischer MD, Gustilo RB, Varecka TF. The timing of flap
neuropathy? Ann Neurol 2009;65(6):629-38.
coverage, bone-grafting, and intramedullary nailing in patients 
6
 Schwartzman RJ, Erwin KL, Alexander GM. The natural
who have a fracture of the tibial shaft with extensive soft tissue
history of complex regional pain syndrome. Clin J Pain
injury. J Bone Joint Surg 1991;73A:1316-22
2009;25(4):273-80.
2
Fractures in the
Upper Limb
General Information, Diagnosis, Treatment and Complications are
dealt with in the following order:
C Fractures Around the Wrist
 Fractures in the Forearm
 Fractures Around the Elbow Joint
CFractures in the Arm and theShoulder
Fractures of the Scapula
Fractures Around the Wrist
Bennett's and Rolando's Fracture
The common fractures that occur around the wrist joint are:
General Information
1. Bennett's Fracture.
Benmett's and Rolando's fracture are the intra-articular
2. Rolando's Fracture.
fractures involving the base of the thumb metacarpal.
3. Scaphoid Fracture.
Restoration of articular surface congruity is of utmost
4. Colles' Fracture.
importance while treating these fractures. Persistent
5. Smith's Fracture.
 articular surface incongruity results in painful limitation
6. Barton's Fracture.
of movements and later carpometacarpal degenerative
7. Essex-Lopresti Fracture.
arthritis which may require treatment in the form of
8. Chauffeur's Fracture.
 arthrodesis or arthroplasty for restoration of useful function
These are Eponyms (except Scaphoid fracture) and are
Of the thumb.
named after the persons who described the fracture.
18
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figures 2.1A to C
(A and B) Radiograph of Bennett's fracture showing classical displacements, (C) Line diagram of the same showing the fracture and the
displacement occurring due to the pullof Abductor pollicis longus tendon.
Bennett's Fracture
Treatment
Definition
A. Nonoperative: Fractures with < 1-2 mm disruption of
It is an oblique fracture occurring at the base of the lst
articular surface and with minimal displacement are treated
metacarpal bone (thumb metacarpal) with subluxation of the
by closed manipulation, reduction and maintaining the
reduction in thumb spica cast for a period of 6-8 weeks.
carpometacarpal joint.
B. Operative: Closed reduction / Open reduction and K-wire
Who Described this Fracture?
fixation and immobilization in thumb spica for a period
of 6-8 weeks.
It was described by Edward Hallaran Bennett, MD, an Irish
Gradual mobilization is to be followed after removal
surgeon in the year 1882 and hence known as Bennett's fracture.
Note: He suggested that early diagnosis and treatment of
of spica cast.
this fracture is absolutely necessary to prevent complications
Complications
ofhighlymobilecarpometacarpal jointof thethumb.
1. Osteoarthritis of carpometacarpal joint (due to joint
Mechanism ofInjury
incongruity and articular surface injury).
The mechanism of injury is an axial loading of partially flexed
 2. Stiffness and loss of mobility of carpometacarpal joint of
 thumb metacarpal, e.g. Delivery of a punch with a clenched
the thumb (result of prolonged immobilization).
fist (Figs 2.1A to C).
3. Loss of reduction and recurrent subluxation and instability.
4. Surgical complications of infection and injury to sensory
Displacements
branch of the radial nerve.
The two fragments are placed as follows.
The ulnar fragment remains in place and the radial
Revision Questions
fragment is displaced.
Q. Define Bennett's fracture.
The volar ulnar triangular fragment- is held firmly in
Q. Who described Bennett's fracture?
place by the volar oblique ligament.
Q. What is the mechanism of injury?
The radial distal fragment- is displaced radially, dorsally
Q. What are the displacements?
 amd proximally by the pull of the abductor pollicis longus
Q. Describe the management of Bennett's fracture.
tendon.
Q. What are the Complications of Bennett's fracture?
Fractures in the Upper Limb
19
Essay Question
Prognosis
Q. Define Bennett's fracture. Discus the mechanism of injury,
Prognosis is generally poor. Carpometacarpal degenerative
diagnosis and management of Bennett's fracture.
Enumerate its complications.
Revision Questions
Rolando's Fracture
Q. Define Rolando's Fracture.
Definition
Q. Why it is known as "Rolando's Fracture"?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury?
It is a three way intra- articular fracture involving the base of
Q. How is this fracture treated?
the thumb metacarpal in the shape of T or Y with sublux ation
Q. What is the prognosis in Rolando's fracture?
of carpometacarpal joint.
Who described this fracture?
Scaphoid Fracture
It was described by Silvio Rolando in the year 1910 and hence
General Information
known as Rolando's fracture.
The word Scaphoid is derived from Greek language.
Mechanism of Injury
"Skaphos" in Greek means boat.
Scaphoid is a boat shaped bone. Scaphoid bone is also
It is a combination of axial loading and abduction injury of
known as navicular. The articular cartilage covers 80% of
the thumb, e.g. a sporting event, impaction of a steering wheel
the bone surface. It is placed at 45° to the longitudinal axis
or a handle bar (Figs 2.2A and B).
of the wrist. It articulates with capitate, trapezium, and
trapezoid distally, distal radius proximally and lunate
Treatment
medially.
A. Badly comminuted fractures are treated in thumb spica
 Fracture Scaphoid accounts for 60% of carpal injuries.
immobilization followed by gradual mobilization.
 Commonly seen in young adults. Rare in children and
B. Three way fractures are treated by open reduction and
elderly because of relative weakness of lower radius and a
 intermal fixation using K-wires or mini T plates and screws
fall on an outstretched hand results in fracture of the lower
and immobilization in thumb spica. Later followed by
radius and not the scaphoid.
 gradual mobilization depending on the stability of fixation.
B
Figures 2.2A and B
20
Essentials of Orthopedics
1. Radial compression and dorsiflexion occurring at the wrist
during a fall on an outstretched hand: generally results in
Onevesselenters through
am undisplaced fracture.
thescaphoidridgeonthe
 2. Hyperextension occurring at the wrist during a fall on an
dorsum
outstretched hand: generally results in displaced fracture
Theotherentersmoredist-
scaphoid.
allynear thetuberosityon
thelaterovolaraspect
Classification
Fractureofthewaistof the
scaphoidrendersproximal
A. Based on Mayo's Classification (Fig. 2.5):
poleavascular
1. Fracture of the tuberosity.
 2. Fracture of the distal body.
Figure 2.3
3. Fracture of the waist.
The blood supply to the scaphoid (Right : PA view). Note that the
vessel enters the bone distally and runs proximally. These are
4. Fracture of the proximal pole.
 branches arising from superficial branch of radial artery.
5.Osteochondral fracture.
B. Based on Russe classification, the fracture scaphoid is
Unlike other fractures it does not produce severe
classified as
i. Stable
symptoms. Hence, there is a chance of delay in diagnosis.
ii. Unstable
This delay when significant can result in a variety of
adverse outcomes such as delayed union, nonunion,
All displaced scaphoid fractures irrespective of the nature
avascular necrosis, decrease in grip strength, limitation of
of the fracture line are considered as unstable scaphoid
joint movements and radiocarpal degenerative arthritis. So
fractures.
timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment is absolutely
Horizontal oblique and transverse fractures are considered
essential to prevent these complications.
as stable fractures when undisplaced (Figs 2.6A to C).
Clinical signs that help in diagnosing the fracture (Figs 2.7A
Blood Supply of Scaphoid
to D)
See Figure 2.3.
1.Tendemess in the anatomical snuff box.
2.
Tendermess over the scaphoid tubercle (Freeland 1989).
Mechanism of Injury (Figs 2.4A and B)
3. Scaphoid compression test (Chen 1989).
4. Painful limitation of movements of wrist and thumb.
Two mechanisms are described.
Typical cycling compression
Hyperextension injuries
injuriesand fractures
Radius
Fracture
Scaphoid
Scaphoid
fracture
A
B
Figures 2.4A and B
Pictures show typical (A) Radial compression and (B) Hyperextension injury.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
21
1.Fracture of the tuberosity.
Investigations
2.Fractureofthedistalbody.
3.Fractureof thewaist.
Ninety percent of the fractures are diagnosed by the standard
4.Fractureof theproximalpole.
views for the scaphoid. Those which are not seen radio-
5.Osteochondral fracture.
logically are either incomplete or undisplaced fractures and
are diagnosed by repeat X-ray after 15 days.
MRI is indicated when in doubt after the repeat X-ray or
to assess the extent of avascularity and carpal malalignment
 as a consequence of nonunion and avascular necrosis.
Radiological views taken to diagnose fracture scaphoid
1.
 Standard PA view of the wrist (with wrist in dorsiflexion
5
 amd ulnar deviation after making a fist)
2.
Standard lateral view.
Figure 2.5
Showing different sites of fracture based on Mayo's classification.
3.
 Radioulnar oblique view in midprone position.
Osteochondral fracture is difficult to identify radiologically and may
4.
 Stress views only if needed (Stress view opens up the
need an MRl.
fracture site).
Note:Normally Scaphoid is placed atan angle of 459
volar to the longitudinal axis of the radius. Thus making a
A
B
Horizontaloblique
Transverse
Verticaloblique
Figures 2.6A to C
fractures when undisplaced. Whereas vertical fractures whether displaced or undisplaced are unstable.
Anatomical snuffbox
A
C
D
Scaphoid tubercle tenderness
Compression test (Chen)
Picturesshowing anatomical snuffboxtenderness
(Freeland)
Figures 2.7A to D
Note: Tenderness varies depending on the site and type of the fracture. Hence, it is advisable to make use of all the above signs in combination
for a proper diagnosis.
22
Essentials of Orthopedics
PA
X-ray
A
LAT
B
Figures 2.8A and B
(A) PA (Posteroanterior) and Lateral view, (B) Normal volar tilt of the scaphoid is negated by dorsiflexion of the wrist.
A
B
C
Figures 2.9A to C
(A) A thin lucent line, (B) Distinct break in a cortical continuity (C) A step
fist in PA view brings it in alignment with the radius and is
MethodsofTreatingFractureScaphoid
parallel to the X-ray plate (Figs 2.8A and B).
A. Nonoperative: It is employed in undisplaced and incomp-
Interpretation of the radiograph: Scaphoid fracture is
lete fractures. By immobilizing in a cast, a special cast
generally identified as (Figs 2.9A to C and 2.10A and B)
known as Scaphoid Cast with wrist in 15° of dorsiflexion
a. A clear lucent line across the bone.
and 5° of radial deviation. The position of immobilization
b. A distinct break in continuity.
 is sometimes described as glass holding position (Some
c. A distinct sharp step.
studies show that a standard below elbow cast is sufficient
Fractures in the Upper Limb
23
A
B
Figures 2.10A and B
(A) Standard PA view. (B) Standard radioulnar oblique view. Fracture of the Scaphoid is seen here as (A) a distinct break in cortical continuity,
(B) A sharp radiolucent line.
to immobilize these fractures and scaphoid cast is
fracture site (Avoids tension stress leading to opening up of
unnecessary).
the fracture site).
B. Operative: Is employed in displaced fractures. Closed/
Open reduction and intermal fixation done using special
Complications of Fracture Scaphoid
screws, e.g. Herbert screws, Acutrak, AO scaphoid
1. Nonunion.
screws, etc. This helps in early mobilization and functional
2.Avascular necrosis (Figs 2.11A and B).
recovery.
3.Radiocarpal degenerative arthritis (Fig. 2.12).
Needfor immobilizationin15°ofdorsiflexion and 5°radial
deviation: This is because of the mechanism of injury which
is radial compression and dorsiflexion. Hence, immobilization
 in a position of dorsiflexion and radial deviation relaxes the
Figure 2.12
RadiographsshowingScaphoidnonunionwithAvascularnecrosis
of proximal pole which has shrunk and almost on the verge of
Figures 2.11A and B
disappearing. This happens because of repetitive stress on the
MRI showing nonunion of fracture Scaphoid and Avascular necrosis.
avascular bone over long period of time. Also note the evidence of
Note the lack of density at the avascular portion of the scaphoid
radiocarpal arthritis which is shown by narrowing of the joint space
observed in both T1 and T2-weighted images.
and osteophyte formation.
24
Essentials of Orthopedics
Cause for Avascular Necrosis
Q. What are the complications of fracture scaphoid?
Q. What is the cause for avascular necrosis?
Avascular necrosis occurs because of peculiarity in blood
Q. How do you treat complications of fracture scaphoid?
supply which is from distal to proximal (Fig. 2.3). It depends
Q. Why these fractures are often missed?
On the type of fracture and the degree of displacement which
is directly proportional to the nature and severity of the injury.
Q. What is the course of action when fracture scaphoid is
suspected clinically but there are no signs radiologically?
Treatment of theComplications of FractureScaphoid
Essay Questions
Nonunion with avascular necrosis is treated by means of
Q. Describe the mechanism of injury of fracture scaphoid.
intermal fixation and bone grafting. Several types of bone
grafting techniques are described (including vascularized bone
Discuss the diagnosis and management of fracture
graft).
scaphoid. Enumerate its complications.
Radiocarpal degenerative arthritis is treated by wrist
Q. Discuss the complications of fracture Scaphoid, their
arthrodesis in 15° of dorsiflexion and 5°-10° of ulnar
diagnosis and management.
deviation.
Fall on an Outstretched Hand
Other procedures
1. Excision of avascular proximal pole.
Fall on an outstretched hand has a definite mechanism of
2. Excision of the whole of scaphoid.
 injury. Many injuries can occur with a fall on an outstretched
3. Excision of proximal row of carpus.
hand. It depends on the magnitude and direction of the force.
4. Replacement of the scaphoid.
the age and quality of the bone as well as the position of the
5. Wrist arthroplasty.
wrist, elbow and shoulder at the time of fall.
 In the order from distal to proximal direction they are
Reason as to why thesefractures are commonly missed
as follows.
1. Mistaken for minor injury, sprain, by the patient because
1. Scaphoid fracture.
they do not cause severe symptoms.
2. Colles' fracture.
2. Improper X-rays.
 3. Fracture of the radius and ulna.
3. Incomplete and undisplaced fractures are difficult to
4. Posterior dislocation of the elbow joint
diagnose by X-rays.
 5. Supracondylar fracture.
6. Fracture shaft of the humerus.
Treatment of Suspected Cases of Fracture Scaphoid
7. Fracture neck of the humerus.
When suspected the injury should always be immobilized in
8. Fracture of the clavicle.
scaphoid cast for a period of two weeks. Cast is removed at
If there are associated forces such as valgus and varus
the end of two weeks and patient is re- examined. If signs are
stress, tortional stress, hyperpronation, hyperextension, etc.
persistent a repeat X- ray / MRI is done for confirmation and
 along with the fall on an outstretched hand other injuries
treated accordingly.
occur (other than already mentioned).
Revision Questions
Q. What is the other name for Scaphoid?
Colles' Fracture
Q. What are the two mechanisms of injury?
Definition
Q. How do you classify fracture scaphoid?
(Based on original description by
Q. What are the clinical signs that help in diagnosing this
Sir Abraham Colles)
fracture?
Q. What are the radiological views taken to diagnose fracture
It is a fracture occurring approximately within an inch and
scaphoid?
half of the inferior articular surface of the radius, with or
Q. What are the methods of treating fracture scaphoid?
without fracture of the ulnar styloid process, with or without
Q. Why immobilization in 15° of dorsiflexion and 5° radial
subluxation/dislocation of the inferior radioulnar joint
deviation preferred?
(Figs 2.13 and 2.14).
Fractures in the Upper Limb
25
Figures 2.13A and B
Radiograph (A) PA (postero
anterior) and (B) Lateral view
showing Colles' fracture. Note
the classical site, displace-
 ments, dislocation of inferior
radioulnar joint, fracture of the
ulnar styloid process and the
soft tissue shadow showing
the typical ‘Dinner fork
B
deformity':
Distal radiusfracture-based onFrykmanclassification
IV
VI
VII
M
Figure 2.14
Type Ill and IV are fractures that involve radiocarpal joint. Type V and Vl are fractures that involve radioulnar joint. Type Vll and Vll are
those involving both radiocarpal and radioulnar joint. Type I, Ill, V and Vll are not associated with ulnar styloid process fracture. Type Il,IV,Vl
andVlll are associated with ulnar styloid process fracture.
26
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 2.15
Colles' fracture is usually due to a slip and fall on the outstretched
hands in elderly females.
Who Described Colles'Fracture?
It was described by Sir Abraham Colles' in the year 1814.
Hence, it is known as Colles' fracture.
Mechanism ofInjury
Mechanism of injury is by means of a fall on an outstretched
hand (Fig. 2.15).
Common Age Group
This injury is commonly seen in elderly, especially in women
Figures 2.16A and B
with osteoporosis.
 Note: In the young a fall on an outstretched hand causes 
Radiograph AP and Lat views showing malunited Colles' fracture.
Note the subluxation of the inferior radioulnar joint as seen by the
 an Epiphyseal injury and not a Colles' fracture.
proximal migration of the radial styloid process and the classical
'Dinner fork deformity.
Classical Deformity
The classical deformity is known as ‘Dinner Fork' defonmity
projectsoutthroughthewoundanddistalradiusrotatesinto
(Figs 2.16A and B).
supination.
Displacements Seen in Colles'Fracture
Treatment
The classical displacements seen in Colles' Fracture are dorsal,
A. Nonoperative: It is treated by closed manipulation and
reduction under general anesthesia and immobilization in
lateral, and proximal. In addition this displaced fragment can
plaster of Paris or fiber below elbow cast moulded in 5°
rotate, angulate or tilt either dorsally (dorsal rotation,
angulation or tilt) or laterally (lateral rotation, angulation or
flexion and 5° ulnar deviation (Figs 2.18A and B).
tilt). Impaction and Supination are the other displacements
Why below elbow cast is preferred and not above elbow cast?
seen in some cases (Figs 2.17A and B).
1. Fracture remains stable once the cast is moulded in
Note:Supination is an extreme form of displacement and
5 degrees of flexion and 5 degrees of ulnar deviation. So
is seen in Compound Colles'Fracture, when proximal radius
there is no need to immobilize the joint above.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
27
B
Figures 2.17A and B
Clinical picture and line drawing showing the classical Dinner fork' deformity of a Colles' fracture. Normally the radial styloid process is at
a lower level than the uinar styloid process by about 1/2 an inch or 1.25 cm. In a Cofles' fracture both are at the same level or the radial
styloid is at a higher level than the uinar styloid process.
Note: When Sir Abraham Colles'described the fracture in
the yearl8l4 the injury was of low velocity in nature.
Therefore, comminuted fractures were unlikely to occur Further
there was no X-ray facility available to know the exact nature
of the injury.Hence,these days it is recommended that
comminutedarticularfracturesofthelowerradiusarenotto
be considered as Colles'fractures.
B. Operative: Surgery is done in the form of closed Kirschner
wire fixation under ^C' anm image intensifier control when
there is certain degree of comminution and articular surface
involvement is seen.
Note:Strictly speakingfractures with articular surface
involvement are not to be considered as Colles' Fractures.
These are ‘Intra-articular fractures of the lower radius'
Mechanism of injury is somewhat different in these fractures.
Aseparate classificationsystemexistsforfracturesof the
B
lower radius (for clarification refer'Fernandezand Jupiter
mechanistic classification).
Figures 2.18A and B
Pictures showing the position of moulding of below elbow cast /Colles'
Complications
cast in 5° flexion and 5° ulnar deviation.
1. Malunion.
 2. To avoid stiffness of the elbow as a consequence of
2. Delayed union.
immobilization.
3. Nonunion (rare).
4. Sudeck's atrophy.
Indication for Above Elbow Cast
 5. Shoulder hand syndrome.
Above elbow cast is indicated when comminution is observed
6. Carpal tunnel compression of median nerve.
and loss of reduction is suspected.
7. Rupture of extensor pollicis longus tendon.
28
Essentials of Orthopedics
Treatment of Complications
Q. When do you see Supination?
Malunion: Is treated by:
Q. How do you treat Colles' fracture?
1. Corrective osteotomy: By an instrument known as
Q. Why is below elbow cast preferred and not above elbow
Osteotome the bone is cut at the site of deformity, the
cast?
deformity is corrected, stabilized intermally by means of
Q. When do you do surgery in Colles' fracture?
an implant (plates and screws or K-wire) or extermally by
Q.
When an above elbow cast is preferred in Colles' fracture?
means of a plaster cast. Thus cosmesis is achieved.
Q.
What are the complications of Colles’ fracture?
2. Darrach's procedure (for improving movement): Six cm
Q. How will you manage fracture complications of Colles'
skin incision is made over the lower third ulna , 4 cm
fracture?
incision in the periosteum and 2 cm of lower ulna is
Essay Questions
excised. The procedure does not correct the deformity but
Q. Define Colles' fracture. Discuss the mechanism of injury,
masks the deformity. A false joint develops which allows
full range of pronation and supination.
signs and symptoms, diagnosis and management of Colles'
fracture.
Delayed Union and Non Union: Managed by means of ^Bone
Q. What are the complications of Colles' fracture? Discuss
Grafting’ with or without intermal fixation.
their management.
Sudeck's Atrophy and Shoulder Hand Syndrome: Managed
by physiotherapy and adequate drugs for ‘Sympatholysis'
Smith's Fracture
Prevention of this complication is always better (refer
Definition
Chapter 1).
Smith's fracture is defined as transverse fracture of the lower
Carpal Tunnel Compression of Median Nerve: Carpal Tunnel
radius within an inch of the articular surface with volar
Decompression is the treatment advocated.
displacement of the fractured fragment (Also known as reverse
Extensor Pollicis Longus Tendon Rupture: Reconstruction.
"Colles'Fracture") (Figs 2.19A to C)
Using Extensor Indicis as a donor tendon for Tendon transfer.
Who Described Smith's Fracture?
Revision Questions
It was described by Robert William Smith (1807-1873) an
Q. Define Colles' fracture.
Irish surgeon in the yearl841.
Q. Why it is called "Colles' fracture"?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury?
Mechanism ofInjury
Q. In which age group this injury is commonly seen?
The mechanism of injury is by means of a fall on the flexed
Q. What is the injury occurring in the young by a similar fall
wrist.
On an outstretched hand?
Q. What is the classical deformity seen in Colles' fracture?
Classical Deformity
Q. What are the classical displacements seen in Colles?
It is the "Garden Spade" deformity (reverse of "Dinner Fork"
fracture ?
defonmity).
A
B
C
Figures 2.19A to C
Radiographs showing (A and B) classical volar displacement of the lower radius carrying along with it the carpus, metacarpals and phalanges.
This gives rise to a classical 'Garden spade' deformity. Also see (C) the clinical photograph of the deformity.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
29
Treatment
A. Operative: This is an unstable fracture. Hence treated by
open reduction and intermal fixation using a specific type
of plate known as "Buttress Plate" (Ellis Buttress Plate).
B. Nonoperative: Employed only in minimally displaced
fractures. Following manipulation and reduction, an above
elbow cast is given for immobilization which is continued
for a period of 6 weeks with a periodic check for loss of
reduction. If loss of reduction is observed an open reduction
and intermal fixation is done (at earliest, within 2 weeks).
Complications
1. Malunion.
2. Sublux ation of inferior radioulnar joint.
3. Sudeck's atrophy.
Treatment of Complications
Figures 2.20A and B
Radiographs PA and Lat views showing a dorsal Barton's fracture.
The complications are treated in a similar manner as described
in Colles' fracture.
Mechanism of Injury
Revision Questions
Dorsal Barton's fracture: The mechanism of injury is an
Q.What is the definition of Smith's fracture?
extreme dorsiflexion occurring at the wrist accompanied by
Q. Who described "Smith's fracture"?
a pronating force resulting in shear and dorsal articular
Q. What is the mechanism of injury?
marginal fracture (Figs 2.20A and B).
Q. What is the classical deformity seen?
Volar Barton's fracture: The mechanism of injury is an
Q. How do you treat "Smith's fracture"?
extreme palmar flexion occurring at the wrist accompanied
Q. Is there a role for closed manipulation, reduction and a
by supinating force resulting in shear and volar articular
plaster of Paris or fiber cast immobilization?
marginal fracture (Figs 2.21A to D).
Q. What are the common complications?
Note: Clinical diagnosis is dificult. It can be easily
Essay Question
mistaken for Colles'fracture (Dorsal Barton's) or Smith's
fracture (Volar Barton's). X-ray is confirmatory.
Q. Define Smith's fracture. Discuss the mechanism of injury.
clinical signs, diagnosis and management of Smith's
Treatment
fracture.
A. Operative: This fracture is treated by open reduction and
Barton's Fracture
intermal fixation using special plate known as Buttress
plate (Ellis Buttress plate, Jupiter plate).
Definition
B. Nonoperative: No role for nonoperative method except
Barton's fracture is defined as an articular marginal fracture
 in very selected cases of incomplete fracture. Complete
involving the dorsal 1/3 or volar 1/3 articular surface of the
 fractures invariably get displaced sooner or later because
lower radius with subluxation or dislocation of the carpus.
 of the pull of carpal ligament.
Who Described "Barton's Fracture"?
Complications
It was described by John Rhea Barton an American surgeon
 Following are the complications seen:
in the year 1814.
 1. Malunion with angulation and radial shortening.
Note: Original article describes only dorsal Barton's
 2.  DRUJ subluxation (Distal radioulnar joint subluxation)
fracture.VolarBarton's fracture was recognized later.
3. Sudeck's atrophy.
30
Essentials of Orthopedics
4. Rupture of Extensor Pollicis Longus tendon (Dorsal
Barton's).
 5. Radiocarpal degenerative arthritis.
RevisionQuestions
Q. Can Barton's fracture be clinically diagnosed?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury for a volar Barton's
fracture?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury for a dorsal Barton's
fracture?
Q. Why it is called "Barton's fracture'?
B
Q. Define Barton's fracture.
Q. How will you treat Barton's fracture?
Q. Is there any role for nonoperative method with casts?
Essay Question
Q. Define Barton's fracture. Discuss the diagnosis and
management of Barton's fracture. Enumerate its complica-
tions.
Essex-Lopresti Fracture
Definition
It is a comminuted fracture of the radial head with dislocation
C
Figures 2.21A to D
of the inferior radioulnar joint due to longitudinal compression
Radiographs showing volar Barton's fracture pre- and postoperative.
force (DRUJ subluxation). Described by Essex- Lopresti in
Note classical displacements. A T-buttress plate has been used to
1951 (Figs 2.22A and B).
fix the fracture.
Figures 2.22A and B
Radiographs showing Essex-
Lopresti injury as a result of
severe form of axial loading
resulting in inferior radioulnar
subluxation, comminuted fracture
of the head of the radius as well
as comminuted articular fracture
of the lower radius.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
31
Mechanismof Injury
to start the car kicked back and hit the thenar side of the wrist
thereby causing the fracture. Shearing force by the carpus
Mechanism of injury is by means of a fall from a height on
causes this fracture (Fig. 2.23).
an acutely dorsiflexed wrist resulting in axial loading of the
radius. This disrupts the interosseous membrane.
Treatment
ClinicalImportance
This fracture is usually unstable because of the pull of the
brachioradialis and strong radiocarpal ligament. Hence,
1. Always suspect this injury when a radial head fracture is
am r, susn ax aa
seen and examine the inferior radioulnar joint both
Note: "Kirschner Wire" also known as K-wire in short is
clinically and radiologically.
2. Never excise the head in these injuries immediately
a thin stainless steel wire with a sharp-pointed tip designed
by Martin Kirschner 1909.
without stabilization of the inferior radioulnar joint as it
will aggravate the subluxation of the inferior radioulnar
joint.
Fractures in the Forearm
Treatment
General Information
 A fracture of the single bone of the forearmm rarely occurs
1  Inferior radioulnar joint reduction is achieved primarily
without subluxation or dislocation of a joint above or joint
by supinating the forearm and if needed stabilized with
K- wire (Interosseous membrane takes about 6 weeks for
below. So it is a must to examine the superior and inferior
healing).
radioulnar joint in a patient with a forearm fracture and
 2. Fractured head of the radius is managed next by ORIF or
take X-rays including elbow and the wrist in accordance
ex cision depending on the nature of injury.
with the findings.
Fracture of both the bones, that is fracture of radius and
Essay Question
ulna more commonly occurs than a single bone fracture.
Q. Define Essex-Lopresti fracture. Discuss the mechanism
The common fractures occurring in the forearm are
of injury and management.
1. Fracture of the radius and the ulna.
2. Monteggia Fracture.
Chauffeur's Fracture
3. Galeazzi Fracture.
It is a fracture of the radial styloid process, which used to
Fracture of the Radius and the Ulna
occur among Chauffeur's in olden days, when the crank used
Mechanism of Injury
Is by means of a
1. Direct blow onto the forearm.
 2. Fall on an outstretched hand with forearm pronated.
Deforming Forces (Figs 2.24A to C)
a.Proximal 1/3 fractures (Above the insertion of pronator
teres). The proximal fragment is flexed and supinated
because of the unopposed action of biceps brachii and
supinator and distal fragment is pronated because of the
action of pronator teres and pronator quadratus.
b. Middle 1/3 fractures and lower 1/3 fractures (below the
insertion of pronator teres). The proximal fragment is in
Figure 2.23
midprone position because the action of supinator and
Picture showing the mechanism of injury of a Chauffeur's fracture.
 pronator teres balance and neutralize each other. The distal
32
Essentials of Orthopedics
A,Upper 1/3fracture
B,Middle 1/3fracture
C,Lower 1/3 fractrue
Figures 2.24A to C
Radiograph showing classical deformity at different levels.
fragment is in pronation because of the action of pronator 
closed reduction and plaster cast immobilization. Open
quadratus.
reduction and intermal fixation using plates and screws or
An understanding of the deforming forces is important in
intramedullary nails in selected cases is the treatment of
planning the treatment of these fractures. It dictates the
choice.Special attention must bepaid to maintain the radial
alignment of distal fragment in relation to proximal fragment.
bow and the interosseous space so as to get back the
 In proximal 1/3 fractures the distal fragment is aligned in
movement of pronation and supination (Fig.2.25).
supination. In middle 1/3 fracture and lower 1/3 fractures, the
Complications
distal fragment is aligned in midprone position.
1. Malumion
2. Nonunion
Treatment
3. Cross union (synostosis) because of single hematoma
These fractures are highly unstable. Except in children and
formation.
in undisplaced fractures (in adults with a check on
displacement during closed treatment) there is no role for
Revision Questions
Q. What is the mechanism of injury for fracture of both bones
of the forearm?
Q. What are the deforming forces responsible for
displacement and what is their importance?
Q. What is the treatment of this fracture?
Q What are the complications of the fracture of both the
bones of the forearm?
Monteggia Fracture
Monteggia fracture was described first by an Italian surgeon
Giovanni Batista Monteggia in Milan in the year 1814, i.e in
the pre Roentgen era without the help of X-rays.
Definition
Monteggia fracture is defined as the fracture of the proximal
Figure 2.25
ulna with subluxation or dislocation of the superior radioulnar
joint. Not only the superior radioulnar joint gets dislocated
Radiograph showing internal fixation of fracture of both the bones of
the forearm using DCP. Note the presence of old malunited Colles'
but also the radiohumeral component of the elbow joint, i.e
fracture with subluxation of the distal radio-ulnar joint.
the radio capitular articulation also gets dislocated.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
33
Figures 2.26A and B
The maintained relation of superior
radioulnar and radiocapitular joint as
proved by a line drawn along the long
axis of the radius which is continued
through the elbow.
Note: Because of this Monteggia fracture is considered
to be more unstable than Galleazzi fracture.
Diagnosisofsuperiorradioulnarjointdislocation/subluxa
tion: It is diagnosed by the help of a line drawn along the
 long axis of the radius and continued through the elbow joint.
It should cut the lateral condyle in any view. If it does not, it
indicates subluxation or dislocation of superior radioulnar
(Figs 2.26A and B).
Mechanism of Injury (Fig. 2.27)
By means of a:
1. Fall on an out stretched hand with forced pronation.
2. Direct forceful blow to the forearm.
Classification
Figure 2.27
Diagrammatic representation of a hyperpronation injury which is
It is classified by the help of "Bado's" classification as
 responsible for Moteggia fracture.
follows.
Type I  Fracture of the upper or midle third of the ulna with
Hume'sFracture
anterior displacement of the head of the radius (Figs
It is nothing but a high Monteggia fracture commonly
2.29A and B).
 Occurring in children and one of the Monteggia variants.
Type I Fracture of the upper or middle third of the ulna with
Hume's fracture is a high Monteggia fracture (Fig. 2.28).
posterior displacement of the head of the radius.
On the left (A) it is a recent injury. On the right (B) old
Type Ml Fracture of the ulnar metaphysis with lateral
negelected injurywith malunionandwithsuperiorradioulnar
displacement of the head of the radius.
joint dislocation.It needs osteotomy of the malunion of the
Type IV Fracture of upper or middle third of radius and ulna
ulna,reduction of the superiorradioulnar joint dislocation
with anterior displacement of the head of the radius.
andstabilizationalongwith internalfixationof theosteotomy.
34
Essentials of Orthopedics
3
S
B
C
Figure 2.28
Radiograph showing (A and B) Hume's fracture (pediatric). On the right hand side (C and D) diagrammatic representation of the same
injury.
Figures 2.29A and B
Radiograph showing an extension type of Monteggia fracture in an adult and the diagrammatic representation (C and D) of the same.
Note that the direction of angulation of the ulna shows the direction of the displacement of the head of the radius. In this case the radius
displaced anteriorly and medially (Bado's Type I)
Treatment
Operative: The fracture is invariably treated by open reduction
amd intermal fixation. The fracture of the ulna is always fixed
in a stable manner. Due attention is given to the stable
amatomical reduction of superior radioulnar joint. If needed
a ligament repair/reconstruction is done primarily (Fig. 2.29).
Figure 2.30
Complications
Radiograph showing an old
unreduced Hume's fracture
1.Malumion (Fig. 2.30).
dislocation. Note the persistent
2. Nonunion.
dislocation of the superior
3. Redislocation.
radioulnar joint, atrophy of the 
4. Radioulnar synostosis.
head of the radius and the
malunion at the upper 1/4th of
5. Chronic pain.
the ulna.The patient has
6. Nerve injuries.
adapted so well for the changed
structure at the elbow and but
Revision Questions
for cosmesis does not complain
 of any other problem.
Q. Who described Monteggia Fracture?
Fractures in the Upper Limb
35
Q. What is Monteggia fracture?
Q. In a Monteggia fracture, which other joint gets dislocated 
along with superior radioulnar joint dislocation ?
Q. How will you diagnose superior radioulnar joint
subluxation or dislocation radiologically?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury of a Monteggia
fracture?
Q. How do you classify Monteggia fracture?
Q. What is "Hume's fracture' ?
Q. What is the treatment of Monteggia fracture ?
Q. What are the complications of Monteggia fracture?
Essay Question
Figure 2.31
Q. Define Monteggia fracture. Discuss the mechanisms of
Radiograph showing malunited Galeazzi fracture with distal radio-
injury, diagnosis and treatment of Monteggia fracture.
ulnar joint (DRUJ) subluxation with radial deviation of the carpus.
Enumerate the complications.
For the very same reason William Campbell called it as a fracture of
necessity and advocated surgery.
Galeazzi Fracture
treatment in 18 cases. In 1941, William Campbell called
The Galeazzi injury pattern was first deseribed by Sir
this as a fracture of necessity because surgery is necessary
Astley Cooper in the year 1842 exactly 92 years before
for the treatment of this fracture and also named it as
Ricardo Galeazzi( 1934) an Italian Surgeon at the
 Galeazzi fracture This fracture is also called as reverse
Instituto de Rachitici Milan described the results of the
Monteggia fracture (Fig. 2.31).
A,Galeazzifracture
B,ORIFwithDCP
Figures 2.32A and B
Radiographs of Galeazzi Fracture pre and postoperatively. Note the anatomic reduction of the fracture which in turn reduces the inferior
radioulnar joint subluxation automatically.
36
Essentials of Orthopedics
Complications
1. Malunion.
Pronator
2. Nonunion.
teres
3. DRUJ instability.
Revision Questions
Q. What is Galeazzi fracture?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury of a Galeazzi fracture?
Q. What is the treatment of a Galeazzi fracture?
Q. What are the complications?
Brachioradialis
Pronator
Essay Question
quadratus
Q. Define Galeazzi fracture. Discuss the mechanism of injury,
diagnosis and treatment of Galeazzi fracture. Enumerate
the complications.
Fractures Around the Elbow Joint
Figure 2.33
 Picture showing the muscular forces responsible for the displacement
General Information
in a Galeazzi fracture.
 Elbow is a hinge joint with a radiohumeral and radioulnar
articular component. Before skeletal maturity, trauma
Definition
causes epiphyseal injuries and after skeletal maturity,
It is a fracture of the lower third or lower fourth of radius
ossified components get fractured and derive their names
with subluxation or dislocation of inferior radioulnar joint
accordingly.
(DRUJ-distal radioulnar joint) (Figs 2.32A and B).
Among the medial epicondylar and lateral epicondylar
Note: This fracture can occur anywhere in the radial shaft
fractures, it is the medial epicondyle which is commonly
at a site between the bicipital tuberosity and approximately
fractured because medial epicondyle fuses with the shaft
5 cms from the distal articular surface of the radius. More
as a single epiphysis, separately at skeletal maturity.
proximal the fracture, lesser is the DRUJ instability. More
whereas other components that is trochlea, capitulum and
distal the fracture, greater is the DRUJ instability.
lateral epicondyle form a single centre at puberty and fuse
with the shaft collectively. For the same reason lateral
Mechanism of Injury
condylar fractures are common and not the fractures of
The mechanism of injury is an axial loading of radius in a
the medial condyle. A fracture which occurs above the
hyperpronated forearm (Fig. 2.33).
condyles is known as supracondylar fracture. A fracture
which splits the condyles into two is known as inter-
condylar fracture.
Treatment
The common fractures around the elbow joint are:
In children: Closed manipulation, reduction and immobili-
1. Radial head fracture.
sation in POP cast is the treatment.
 2. Olecrenon fracture.
Because the periosteum is thick and bones are elastic, the
3. Capitulum and trochlear fracture.
reduction is maintained.
 4. Medial epicondyle fracture.
In adults: Open reduction and intermal fixation using plates
 5. Lateral epicondyle fracture.
and screws, e.g. LCDCP, DCP. Distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ)
6. Medial condyle fracture.
 has to be reduced always during the procedure of open
7. Lateral condyle fracture.
reduction and intermal fixation by closed methods and rarely
8. Supracondylar fracture.
by open methods.
9. Intercondylar fracture.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
37
Radial Head Fracture
Mechanism ofinjury
Classification (Figs 2.34 to 2.36)
Is by a fall on an outstretched arm with elbow in extension.
The compression stress is transmitted along the axis of the
Based on Mason's classification classified as:
radius and the radial head hits the capitulum of the humerus
Type I
Undisplaced.
thereby causing the fracture.
Type II
 Displaced, single fragment fracture less than 1/3rd
 of the articular surface.
Treatment
Type III
Displaced, involving more than 1/3rd of the
Undisplaced and incomplete fractures are managed by
articular surface or comminuted fracture.
immobilization in a plaster cast or a slab for a period of three
weeks followed by removal and mobilization.
A
B
Figures 2.34A and B
Radiograph showing Type ll and Type Ill fracture of the head of the radius based on Mason's classification.
Figures 2.35A and B
38
Essentials of Orthopedics
Typel
TypeIl
Type lll
Figure 2.36
Classification of radial head fractures as classified by Mason.
Comminuted, displaced fractures are managed by excision
of the head of the radius. Displaced noncomminuted fractures
are managed by open reduction and internal fixation
Figure 2.37
depending on the size of the fragment or by excision of the
Radiograph showing an oblique fracture of the olecrenon process of
head of the radius.
the ulna.
Rule of Three: Less than I/3 involvement, Less than 30*
Classification
angulation, Less than 3 mm displacement is to be treated
Based on Schatzker classification:
non-operatively.
Type A
Simple transverse fracture.
Complications
Type B
Transverse impacted fracture.
Type C
Oblique fracture.
1. Avascular necrosis of the head of the radius.
Type D
Comminuted fracture.
2. Malunion with restriction of pronation and supination.
Type E
More distal fracture, extra-articular.
3. Painful limitation of pronation and supination.
Type F
Fracture dislocation.
Revision Questions
Treatment
Q. How do you classify radial head fracture?
Q. What is the mechanism of injury of fracture head of the
Operative:
radius?
Noncomminuted and transverse fractures(Figs 2.38A and B)
Q. How is this fracture managed?
Treatment of choice is open reduction and intemal fixation
Q. Name the complications of Radial head fracture.
using the technique of tension bandwiring, which converts the
 distraction force of triceps pull into a compression force and
Olecrenon Fracture
 promotes healing.
General Information
Olecrenon fractures are seen in a diverse group of injuries
 ranging from a simple undisplaced fracture to a complex
 fracture dislocation of elbow joint.
Mechanism ofInjury
Three mechanisms are identified
1. Avulsion fracture. That occurs when triceps contracts
against the resistance of a fall on a semiflexed elbow and
A
B
supinated forearm (Fig. 2.37).
2. Direct impact onto the olecrenon by a fall on the point of 
Figures 2.38A and B
the elbow or by a direct blow.
 Diagrammatic representation of Tension band wiring of fracture
3.A hyperextension injury.
olecrenon.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
39
Altermately long AO cancellous bone screw can also be
Medial and Lateral Condylar Fractures
used.
General Information
Comminutedfractures:
Lateral half of trochlea with capitulum and lateral
Fixation using plates and screws, e.g. Hookplate.
epicondyle is known as lateral condyle.
 Medial half of trochlea with medial epicondyle is known
Revision Questions
as medial condyle.
Q. What are the mechanisms of injury of Olecrenon fracture?
Stimson in 1883 was the first to describe the lateral
Q. Classify Olecrenon fractures
condyle fracture in his book Treatise on fractures. Milch
Q. What is the treatment of Olecrenon fracture ?
 in 1955 recognized the significance of these fracture
 patterms to elbow stability and classified them.
Capitulum and Trochlear Fractures
Mechanism of Injury
These are rare fractures involving the articular surface of the
lower humerus. Hence need open reduction and intemal
The lateral and medial condylar fractures are avulsion
fixation to restore articular surface congruity. Mini screws,
fractures (pull off by common extensor and common flexor
origin respectively) occurring as result of a severe varus or a
Herbert screws and sometimes Kirschner wires are used to
valgus stress respectively.
fix these fractures.
The other mechanism for lateral condyle fracture is by
Medial and Lateral Epicondylar Fractures
means of a compressive impact of the radial head onto the
lateral condyle (push off theory) as a result of a fall on an
These are avulsion fractures which occur due to the pull of
extended hand.
common flexor and extensor muscle origin respectively. They
The other mechanism for a medial condyle fracture is by
have to be fixed firmly and immobilized in a cast or a slab till
means of a direct blow onto the posteromedial aspect of the
union occurs. In adults sometimes the medial epicondylar
epicondyle by a fall on the point of the elbow.
  passn s a n  asxa sh 
Since they are commonly seen in children, involve the
children medial epicondylar fracture is considered as a type of
articular surface of the lower humerus and are considered as
epiphysial injury and is always fixed anatomically (Fig. 2.39).
epiphysial injuries they need open/closed reduction and
 intermal fixation in order to restore articular surface congruity
and prevent growth disturbance.
Classifications (Figs 2.40A to C)
Lateral Condyle fracture:Based on Milch anatomical
classification(1964)
Type I
Extends through the ossification center, exits at the
radiocapitular groove with intact lateral crista of
trochlea (Salter and Harris Type IV Epiphyseal
Injury). The elbow is relatively stable.
Type II
Extends across the physis, exits through the
trochlea fracturing the lateral crista of trochlea
(Commonly Salter and Harris Type II. Can
sometimes be Type IV Epiphyseal Injury ). Results
in unstable elbow.
Based on Jakob's classification (1975) (Figs 2.40A to C)
Stage I
Nondisplaced with intact articular surface.
Stage II
 Moderate rotational displacement with fractured
Figure 2.39
articular surface.
Radiograph showing medial epicondylar fracture. It is an avulsion
Stage III
 Complete displacement with rotation and elbow
fracture occurring because of the pull of common flexor origin.
instability.
40
Essentials of Orthopedics
A,Stage-l
B,Stage-ll
C,Stage-ll
Figures 2.40A to C
Radiographs showing three stages of lateral condylar fracture according to Jakob's classification.
MedialCondyleFracture
Complications of Lateral Condyle Fracture
Milch anatomical classification(1964)
1. Nonunion.
Type I
Splits the trochlear groove, lateral trochlear ridge
2. Malunion with deformity.
intact.
3. Limitation of movement of the elbow.
Type II
Spilts the capitotroc hlear sulcus; trochlear ridge is
4. Tardy Ulnar Nerve Palsy.
 part of the fracture.
"Tardy Ulnar Nerve Palsy" means, delayed ulnar nerve
paralysis. Nonunion of the lateral condyle causes a
Treatment
 progressive valgus deformity at the elbow. This stretches
the ulnar nerve gradually, resulting in a progressive ulnar
Operative: Both medial and lateral condyle fractures are
nerve palsy.
treated by open reduction and intermal fixation using K-
Treatment: Treatment for "Tardy Ulnar Nerve Palsy" is
wires, plates and screws, etc. as per indication (Figs 2.41A
and B).
amterior transposition of the ulnar nerve. At the same time
lateral condyle is fixed in the best possible manner.
A
B
Figures 2.41A and B
Radiograph showing (A) grossly displaced Lateral condylar fracture. Note that the fractured surface is rotated and is facing outwards. Accurate
reduction is necessary to restore function. (B) After open reduction and internal fixation with the help of two *Kirschner wires'.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
41
Revision Questions
Displacements: Displacements seen are as follows
Extension type: Posterior, medial/ lateral and rotation.
Q. What is a Lateral and a Medial Condyle ?
Flexion type: Anterior, medial/ lateral and rotation.
Q. In which age group these fractures are commonly seen ?
Q. Who described Lateral Condyle fracture first ?
Nature of thefracture line anditsimportance
Q.What are the mechanisms of injury of a Lateral Condyle
·In extension type, it is directed obliquely upwards and
fracture ?
backwards.
Q. What are the mechanisms of injury for Medial Condyle
· In flexion type, it is directed obliquely downwards and
fracture ?
forwards. The nature of the fracture line is of importance
Q. What is the treatment for Lateral and Medial Condyle
in the treatment of supracondylar fracture.
fracture ?
  s a  g a sa 
Q. Name the complications of Lateral Condyle fracture
flexion and hence after reduction, it is immobilized in
Q. What is "Tardy Ulnar Nerve Palsy" ?
flexion. It is unstable in extended position of the elbow.
Q. What is the treatment for "Tardy Ulnar Nerve Palsy" ?
 A flexion type of supracondylar fracture is stable in
extension and hence after reduction, it is immobilized in
Supracondylar Fracture of the Humerus
extension. It is unstable in flexed position of the elbow.
This fracture occurs just above the two condyles of the lower
The Role of Triceps and Brachialis Muscle
 humerus. Hence, derives the name supracondylar fracture. The
fracture is commonly seen in children between the age of
These muscles play a role in maintaining the reduction of this
5-10 yrs.
fracture.
Two types are described (Figs 2.42A to C).
The triceps muscle acts as an intermal splint and helps in
1. Extension type.
maintaining the reduction in extension type of supracondylar
2. Flexion type.
fracture when the elbow is immobilized in flexion. The
It is the extension type which is commonly seen. Flexion
brachialis muscle acts as an intermal splint and helps in
type is not very common.
maintaining the reduction in flexion type of supracondylar
fracture when the elbow is immobilized in extension.
Mechanism ofInjury
a. Extension type: By means of a fall on an out stretched
Classification
hand wherein the elbow is in extension or minimal flexion.
Based on Gartland classification, supracondylar fractures is
The force is transmitted through the supracondylar portion
classified as follows:
of the humerus (Fig. 2.43).
Type I
Undispaced.
b. Flexion type: By means of a fall on the point of the fully
Type II Displaced with intact posterior cortex.
flexed elbow.
Type Iff   Displaced with no cortical contact.
A
B
C
Figures 2.42A to C
Note the site of the fracture and direction of the fracture fine.The site of the fracture is just above the condyles.The direction of the fracture
forwards.
42
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 2.43
The mechanism of injury of an extension type of supracondylar
fracture.
Figure 2.44
Showing diagrammatic representation of treatment of supracondylar
fracture by traction with help of a Balcon beam.
Treatment
A.Nonoperative:
vascular insufficiency (Generally employed when the
i. Closed manipulation and reduction and maintenance
patient comes late after undergoing oil massage)
 of reduction in a plaster splint.
(Fig. 2.44).
ii. Skeletal traction: A K-wire is passed through the
B. Operative: Closed / Open reduction and intemal fixation
olecrenon process and an overhead traction is applied.
using 'Kirschner Wires'.
It is indicated when there is gross swelling at the elbow
Note: A ‘K-Wire' fixation is done for a badly displaced
 and unstable closed supracondylar fracture as well as for an
and manipulation and surgical methods of fixation are
 contraindicated due to poor skin condition or ensuing
 open and complicated supracondylar fracture with vascular
Gartland TypeIll
Figure 2.45
Radiographs AP and Lat view showing badly displaced extension type of supracondylar fracture of the humerus. The chances of having
neurovascular complication is very high.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
43
Complications of Supracondylar Fracture and
their Management
100°
1.Volkmann's Ischemia
It is a compartmental syndrome occurring in the compart-
 ment of the extremities due to sudden loss of blood supply.
It was first described by Dr Richard von Volkmann (1830-
1889), a German doctor in a paper on *noninfective ische-
mic conditions of various fascial compartments in the
extremities"'.
If the ischemia is left untreated leads to classical
contracture known as Volkmann's ischemie contracture.
 This ischemic phenomenon passes of in three stages or
Normal is around80°
Angle increases invarus
phases.
Figure 2.46
The three stages or phases of "Volkmann's ischemic
The Baumann's angle normal and abnormal.
phenomenon are:
i. Stage of impending ischemia (also known as stage of
deficit which needs both wound care and vascular repair
threatened
ishemic
contracture)
lasts
from
(Fig. 2.45).
24-48 hrs.
In closed fractures this fixation can be done by a closed
 method using image intensifier or by minimally opening the
3 weeks.
fracture site medially and laterally. It is not advisable to split
ii. Stage of established ischemic contracture, seen after
the triceps muscle for exposing the fracture.
3 weeks.
 The treatment of these three stages is different. Hence it is
Baumann's Angle (Fig. 2.46)
important to identify the stages of "Volkmann's ischemic
In children, it is difficult to assess the accuracy of reduction
phenomenon" by examining the patient and identifying the
of varus. The Baumann's angle helps to determine the
signs.
accuracy. It is an angle formed by a line along the long axis
Signs of impending ischemia: The five cardinal signs of
of the humerus and the line along the coronal axis of the
impending ischemia are the "Five P's".
capitular physis. Normal angle is around 80°. If the angle
i. Pain.
increases it indicates the varus position of the fragment.
ii. Pallor.
ii. Pulselessness.
Complications
iv. Parasthesia.
The complications seen in supracondylar fractures are
v. Paralysis.
classified as
(There is a 6th *P' that is increased pressure in the
a. Immediate
compartment which is an investigation and needs a
b. Late
manometer for measurement).
Immediate
'Stretch pain’and ‘Stretch sign: Seen in the stage of
1
 Injury to brachial artery resulting in "Volkmann's
impending ischemia. With advancing ischemia, the flexor
ischemia"
muscles become edematous and go into contraction in order
· Injury to median, ulnar and radial nerves.
to reduce their muscle mass and accommodate themselves in
Late
a tight compartment.This results in progressive flexion of
Volkmann's ischemic contracture.
fingers.
Malunion. Results in cubitus varus and "Gun Stock
This ischemic episode is painful and results in ‘Stretch
Defonmity".
pain', when the flexed fingers are stretched and extended
Myositis ossificans.
passively by the examiner (thereby stretching the contracted
Limitation of movements.
muscles). The sign is called the ‘stretch sign'
44
Essentials of Orthopedics
Sign of established ischemia: The hand remains paralyzed
2. Repair of the laceration, when a laceration is detected on
with no or presence of a flicker of movement. Sensory
exploration
impairment also develops.
3. End-to-end anastomosis, in a cut vessel.
Note: Paralysis occurring in Volkmann's ischemia is
4. Resection and a vein graft, in a crushed vessel.
mostly due to the ischemia of themuscles involved than the
Indicators for returm of circulation: The indicators for retum
ischemiaof the nerves.
of circulation are:
Signofestablished contracture
Clinical
"Volkmann's Sign': It is a sign seen in *Volkmann's Ischemic
a. Returm of pulse.
Contracture', and is described as follows, i.e. flexion of the
b. Retum of capillary filling.
wrist allows passive extension of the fingers and dorsiflexion
Confirmatory (employing gadgets)
does not.
a. Pulse oxymeter shows good saturation of oxygen
above 90%
Pathomechanics of *Volkmann's Sign': When there is ischemic
b. Doppler probe picks up a good signal of blood flow.
contracture, the muscles are fibrosed and shortened. Hence
dorsiflexion of the wrist does not allow passive extension of
the fingers. Whereas, when the wrist is flexed these contracted
 treatment in the 2nd stage is to improve the circulation by
and fibrosed muscles are relaxed, there is relative lengthening
decreasing the compartmental pressure.
of the fibrosed muscles. This allows passive extension of the
Surgical procedure employed in the 2nd stage:The surgical
fingers.
procedure employed is a wide fasciotomy of dividing the tight
deep fascia, dividing the aponeurosis and the septae, excising
Treatment
the dead and devitalized tissue and leaving the wound open
TheprincipleoftreatmentintheIststageofimpending
         
ischemia: Is to restore the circulation back to normal so that
 procedure. This procedure of decompression is supposed to
the damage is reversed and no further progression takes place.
 open up the collaterals, perfuse the remaining tissues and
It is an emergency.
 minimize the contracture, when the limb is protected in an
appropriate splint.
Methods employed to restore the circulation back to normal
 Note: The paralysis occurring in Volkmann's ischemia is
The methods employed are as follows in a sequential order.
1. Split the tight plaster or cut the tight bandage, if any.
mainly because of ischemic muscles and not due to nerve
paralysis.
2. Emergency closed reduction of fracture with or without
If in transition phase between the 1st and the 2nd stage,
'K wire' fixation.
3. Open reduction and intemal fixation of fracture using
both vascular repair and fasciotomy may have to be done
(i.e. vascular repair is followed by fasciotomy).
‘K wires', along with exploration and repair of the
damaged vessel.
Principle of treament in the 3rd stage: The principle of
Note: At every step of treatment look for the returm of
treatment in the 3rd stage is to restore some useful function
pulse and capillary filling. At any point of time, if the
in the contracted hand.
circulation comes back the next step in the sequential order
Restoration of useful function: This is accomplished by means
to restore the circulation is not carried out.
of plastic and reconstructive procedures in the form of release
Vascular procedures employed to restore the circulation: The
of contractures, muscle-sliding procedures, lengthening of
vascular procedures selected to restore the circulation depend
tendons, tendon transfers, shortening of the bones, fusion of
  a  nm Ann sa a go au a u
joints, etc. as per the merit of the case.
spasm, a laceration, a cut vessel, to a crushed vessel (e.g. Open
2. Nerve Injuries
fracture) and are as follows.
1. Injection of 1% Lignocaine or Papaverine into the vessel
In the order of frequency as observed in this country it is as
wall if only a spasm of the vessel is detected and there is
follows:
 In extension type of supracondylar fracture, median nerve
no damage. This will relieve the spasm and restore the
circulation.
followed by the ulnar nerve and then the radial nerve.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
45
In flexion type of supracondylar fracture, ulnar nerve
followed by the median nerve and then the radial nerve.
Note: There is difference of opinion regarding the order
of frequency of nerve involvement in a supracondylar fracture.
Some of the books mention that the radial nerve is the one
that is commonly involved followed by median nerve and the
ulnar nerve.
Type of nerve injury: In closed fractures, it is either neuro-
praxia or axonotmesis. Hence proper splinting and later
supervised physiotherapy, results in normal functional
recovery.
In open fractures however, there is a possibility of a
Neurotmesis. In such a case a nerve repair is needed, i.e
Figure 2.47
Neurorraphy. Recovery depends on severity of neurotmesis
A photograph showing a classical 'Gun stock deformity' of a malunited
supracondylar fracture.
amd quality of repair.
At times, there is a third possibility of a nerve getting
When this ‘Carrying Angle' reverses it is said that the
adhered in the callus or myositis mass. This needs release of
elbow is in Cubitus varus and when this ^Carrying Angle'
a nerve and neurolysis. Recovery is slow and results are
increases it is said that the elbow is in Cubitus valgus.
unpredictable.
Note:If there isaflexion deformity at the elbow carrying
3. Malunion
anglecannotbemeasured.Thisanglealwaysismeasured
Malunion results in cubitus varus and ‘Gun Stock' deformity.
with the elbow in extension.
Rarely Cubitus valgus.
Surgical procedure for correction of deformity: The
Note: Malunion in cubitus varus with intermal rotation
deformity is corrected by means of a corrective osteotomy.
results in a ^Gun Stock' deformity (Fig. 2.47).
French osteotomy corrects both varus and intermal rotation
Definition of Carrying Angle, Cubitus Varus and Cubitus
malalignment of a ^Gun Stock'deformity. It is a lateral closed
Valgus: The angle made by the long axis of the arm with the
wedge derotational type of osteotomy, fixed intermally with
long axis of the forearm in extended position of the elbow is
"fig of 8' SS wires wound round the screws which are passed
known as ^Carrying Angle'. Normal angle is 5-10° in males
proximal and distal to the site of osteotomy prior to osteotomy
amd 10-15° in females.
in a specific manner (Figs 2.48A to C).
C
Figures 2.48A to C
appropriately marked wedge of bone to be removed, the placement of screws and binding them with SS wires. The lower screw is placed
anterior to the upper screw. So when the wedge is closed and the screws are aligned, along with correction of varus deformity internal
rotation deformity also gets corrected.
46
Essentials of Orthopedics
Rare deformity of ^Cubitus Valgus' is corrected by medial
Q. What is the surgical procedure indicated in the second
closed wedge osteotomy.
stage of ischemia?
Q. What is the principle of treatment in the 3rd stage of
Myositis Ossificans
ischemia?
It is an ossification or calcification occurring within a muscle
Q. What are procedures indicated in the 3rd stage of ischemia
following injury. Brachialis muscle is the commonly affected
for restoration of useful function?
muscle.
Q. Name the nerves that may get injured in a Supracondylar
Treatment: When in the acute and active phase no intervention
fracture.
should be attempted. Intervention in any form will aggravate
Q. What is the nature of nerve involvement in a Supra-
the condition. When the acute phase subsides and the mass
condylar fracture?
lies dormant surgical removal followed by adequate gradual
Q. What is the prognosis of nerve injury in a Supracondylar
fracture?
Q. What are the deformities seen in a malunited Supra-
Revision Questions
condylar fracture?
Q. What is ^Carrying Angle' at the Elbow?
General
Q. What is Cubitus varus and Cubitus valgus?
Q. What is the age group for Supracondylar fractures?
Q. How do you correct the deformity in malunited supra-
Q. What are the types of Supracondylar fractures of the
condylar fracture?
humerus?
Q. What is Myositis Ossificans?
Q. Which type of Supracondylar fracture is common?
Q. Which muscle is commonly affected in Myositis
Q. What is the mechanism of injury?
Ossificans?
Q. What is the nature of the fracture line?
Q. What is the treatment of Myositis Ossificans?
Q. What is the importance of knowing the nature of the
fracture line in a Supracondylar fracture?
Essay Questions
Q. What is role of the muscle triceps and brachialis in the
treatment of Supracondular fracture?
Q. What are the types of Supracondylar fractures of the
Q. When do you do ‘K-Wire' fixation of a Supracondyar
humerus? Discuss the mechanism of injury, diagnosis and
fracture?
treatment of Supracondylar fracture. Enumerate the
complications.
Complications
Q. What are the complications of Supracondylar fracture?
Q. What are the complications seen in supracondylal
Discuss the management.
fracture?
Q. What is Volkmann's Ischemic phenomenon? Discuss the
Q. What is "Volkmann's Ischemia" and Ischemic
management of Volkmann's Ischemia and contracture.
Contracture?
Q. What is Gun Stock deformity? Discuss the management
Q. What are the 3 stages of " Volkmann's Ischemic
of Gun stock deformity.
Phenomenon" ?
Q. What is importance of understanding the 3 stages?
Intercondylar Fracture
Q. What are the cardinal signs of impending ischemia?
Q. What is ‘Stretch pain' and Stretch sign'?
These are the fractures seen at the lower end of the humerus
Q. What is *Volkmann's sign'?
as a result of severe trauma. The fracture line runs between
Q. What is the principle of treatment in the 1st stage of
the condyles and hence the name intercondylar fracture is
ischemia?
derived.
Q. What are the methods employed to restore the circulation
Mechanism ofInjury
back to normal at earliest possible moment?
Q. What are the vascular procedures employed to restore the
As a result of severe impact on the point of the elbow the
circulation?
olecrenon process is finmly driven upwards splitting the
Q. What is the principle of treatment in the 2nd stage of
condyles into two. Comminution is seen when the impact is
ischemia?
severe.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
47
C
Figures 2.49A to C
Radiograph showing (A) Intercondylar fracture AP view, (B) Intercondylar fracture lateral view, (C) Line diagram showing fixation of a “Y"
type of non comminuted intercondylar fracture using cancellous and cortical screws.
Types
Operative: Surgical treatment definitely gives better results
with respect to union and function.
A. ‘T’ typeIn this the humeral fracture line is transverse
Seniority and skill of the surgeon has direct bearing on the
 and the intercondylar fracture line is vertical resembling
functional out come. Surgery aims at restoring the medial and
the letter T.
the lateral column. Though congruity of the articular surface is
B.‘Y' type—-In this both humeral as well as the intercondylar
restored limitation of movements of flexion and extension in
fracture line are obliquely placed resembling the letter Y.
terminal degrees is common. This is attributed to the severity
of surrounding soft tissue injury. 1/3 tubular plates, Recon plates
Diagnosis
 and screws (both cortical and cancellous) are the implants used
Proper X-rays are essential for clear definition of the injury.
to stabilise these fractures (Figs 2.49A to C).
Total elbow replacement is an option which may be
Treatment
considered in elderly when the elbow is reduced to a bag of
Non-operative: There is limited role for nonoperative
bones.
treatment. It is indicated only in patients who are not fit for
surgery or the injury is so severe and the elbow is reduced
Complications
to a bag of bones. In such cases the elbow is initially splinted
Early
and later, after the initial swelling subsides a hinge brace is
1. Injury to the brachial artery.
given and movements of the elbow is encouraged as much
 2. Injury to the median/ulnar/radial nerve.
as feasible.
 Skeletal traction for a limited period is the other option
Late
available.
1. Limtation of joint movements.
2. Myositis ossificans.
48
Essentials of Orthopedics
Fractures in the Arm and the Shoulder
b.  A tortional force produces a spiral fracture.
c. A combination of both bending and tortional force
Fracture Shaft of the Humerus
 produces a comminuted fracture with a butterfly fragment/
fragments.
General Information
Direct mechanism
This fracture is also known as a diaphyseal fracture of the
Is by means of a blow on to the arm which results in a shattered
humerus. The shaft of the humerus bone is an ared
displaced fracture of the shaft of the humerus, e.g. assault by
extending from the upper border of pectoralis major
a stick, a high velocity injury etc.
muscle in the region of the shoulder to supracondylar
ridge at the elbow. The shape of the bone is cylindrical in
Treatment
its proximal half but changes to triangular or prismatic in
its distal half. The two intermuscular septae, namely the
A. Nonoperative: The nonoperative methods of treatment of
medial and the lateral divide the area into two compart-
this fracture are:
ments, i.e anterior and posterior. The anterior compartment
a.  By closed reduction and maintenance in a ‘U' slab or
contains the muscle biceps brachi, coracobrachialis,
a cast (Fig. 2.51B).
 brachialis, brachial artery and vein, the median, musculo-
b. By maintaining the fracture reduction in a ‘Hanging
 cutaneous and ulnar nerves. The posterior compartment
Cast' (Fig. 2.51A).
contains the triceps and the radial nerve. Although these
B. Operative (Figs 2.51C and D):
fractures are inherently unstable, nonoperative method is
Indications
the treatment of choice except when definite indications
1. Noncompliance.
for surgery exist.
2. Unacceptable reduction (failure of closed reduction).
3. Displaced, comminuted or segmental fracture.
Mechanisms of Injury of theFracture Shaft Humerus
4. Multiple fractures (Polytrauma, ipsilateral ulna or
(Figs 2.50A to C)
radius fracture).
5.
 Open fractures.
Indirect mechanism
 6. Fractures associated with neurovascular injury.
Is by means of a fall on an out stretched hand.
7. Fractures with intra-articular extension.
a.A bending force produces a transverse fracture.
A.Transverse #-Mid1/3
B.Spiral#-Upper 1/3
C.Comminuted#-Lower1/3
Figures 2.50A to C
Radiographs showing transverse, spiral and comminuted fracture of the humerus at different levels.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
49
A.Hanging cast
B.U-slab
C
D
Figures 2.51A and B
Figures 2.51C and D
Showing different non-operative treatment methods of fracture shaft 
Radiographs showing (C) A delayed union of fracture shaft of
of humerus
humerus. (D) Internal fixation using LCDCP and cancellous bone
grafting from the iliac crest.
Implants used for surgery: Various plates and screws, DCP,
LCDCP, LCP. Intramedullary nails including interlocking
nails. Other nails include flexible nails like Enders, AO, etc.
Extermal fixators are used in open fractures.
Complications
1. Injury to the Radial nerve (Incomplete or Complete)
2. Delayed union.
3. Nonunion.
TreatmentofComplications
Radial nerve injury: The radial nerve gets injured because of
its close relation to the bone in the radial groove. The type of
nerve injury is generally neuroparaxia/axonotmesis. Patient
Figure 2.52
develops wrist drop which generally recovers on its own over
a period of time. Drug therapy splints and physiotherapeutic
Diagrammatic representation of radial nerve entrapment in a fracture
shaft humerus as a result of its close relation to the shaft of the
ai  xa  i   d s
humerus in the radial groove.
needed (Fig. 2.52).
Delayed union and nonunion: The delayed union and
Fractures of the Proximal Humerus
nonunion of fracture shaft of humerus is treated by means of
General Information
 intermal fixation and cancellous bone grafting.
 In the year 460BC, it was Hippocrates who documented a
case of fracture neck humerus first and treated it by using
Questions
traction. Codman, in 1934 divided the proximal humerus
Q. What are the mechanisms of injury of fracture shaft
into four parts based on epiphyseal lines. The head (the
humerus?
 articulating surface with anatomical neck), the greater
Q. Discuss the treatment of fracture shaft humerus.
tuberosity, the lesser tuberosity and the shaft. The surgical
Q. Enumerate the complications of fracture shaft humerus and
 neck is distal to both the tuberosities and it is that portion
 discuss their management.
Of bone between the tuberosities and the shaft. According
50
Essentials of Orthopedics
 to Codman, fractures of the proximal humerus produce a
 combination of the four segments.
The blood supply is from the branches of the axillary
artery running in a distal to proximal direction. Hence,
fracture of the anatomical neck may result in loss of blood
supply to the head of the humerus and avascular necrosis
of the head of the humerus.
Shoulder is an important ball and socket type of a joint
linking the upper extremity to the thorax. Because of an
arc of movement taking place at the shoulder joint an
individual is able to perfonm explosive activities involving
Typel
TypeIl
power, e.g. throwing an object, as well as activities that
are refined such as playing a violin. So, fracture of the
 proximal humerus can cause severe disability in the upper
extremity by limiting the function of the shoulder.
Mechanisms ofInjury
1. Common mechanism—by a fall on an outstretched hand
from a standing height.
2. Other mechanism—a direct blow on to the proximal
humerus.
TypeIll
TypeIV
Classification
Figure 2.53
The commonly accepted classification is ^ Neer's' classi-
Showing radiographs of different types of surgical neck fractures
based on Neer's classification. Note that type one is undisplaced or
fication (Fig. 2.53).
displacement is less than a mm and type Il ,Ill and IV are displaced
This system of classification includes four segments.
and refer to 2 part, 3 part and 4 part fracture respectively with regards
·
The head of the humerus.
to number of fragments.
 The greater tuberosity.
Treatment
The lesser tuberosity.
·The shaft of the humerus.
A. Nonoperative: Undisplaced or minimally displaced
According to Neer, a fracture is displaced when there is
fractures are managed nonoperatively and immobilized in
more than 1 cm of displacement and 45° of angulation of any
plaster slab or by Velpeau bandage and strapping
techniques.
one fragment with respect to the others.
Displacements occur because of the muscle pull.
B. Operative: Displaced fractures and fractures that pose
a. The supraspinatus and the Infraspinatus pull the greater
dlifficulty for closed manipulation are managed by surgical
tuberosity superiorly.
intervention.
b. The Subscapularis pulls the lesser tuberosity medially
Methods employed: The surgical methods employed are
c.The Pectoralis Major adducts the shaft medially
1. Closed reduction and percutaneous fixation.
p s t an jo Aue aanoan sany pd-om, a
 2. Open reduction and intermal fixation using plates and
include 1 fragment that is displaced.
screws, e.g. T' plates, proximal humerus locking plates
The “Three-part fractures′ include a displaced fracture of
(Fig. 2.54).
 as  r  se  au p a
3. Minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis.
tuberosity or lesser tuberosity fracture.
4. Primary arthroplasty (3 part and 4 part fractures and
The ^Four-part fractures' include displaced fracture of the
fractures involving head especially in middle aged and
surgical neck and both tuberosities.
elderly).
Fractures in the Upper Limb
51
Q. How do you manage this fracture?
Q. What are the surgical methods employed to treat this
fracture surgical neck of the humerus?
Q. What are the complications seen?
Q. How are these complications managed?
Fracture of the Clavicle
General Information
Also known as collar bone, clavicle is the only bone which
connects shoulder girdle to the trunk (connects the breast
 bone i.e stermum to shoulder blade, i.e scapula.)
 It is a curved subcutaneous bone which changes its shape
Figure 2.54
from round and somewhat cylindrical medially to flat and
Method of fixation of proximal humeral fracture with T-plate and
screws
quadrilateral laterally. It protects the underlying vessels,
lungs and brachial plexus.
Complications
Though this fracture is seen in all age groups it is most
1. Malunion.
2. Non union.
commonly seen in neonates (following a difficult delivery)
amd in children.
3. Avascular necrosis of the head of the humerus.
Treatment of Complications
Mechanisms of Injury (Fig. 2.56)
Malunion: The scapulothoracic movement compensates to a
1. By means of fall on an outstretched hand
certain instant, the limitation of movement that occurs at the
2. By means of a fall on the point of a shoulder.
glenohumeral joint secondary to malunion, corrective
3. By a direct blow on to the clavicle.
Osteotomy is rarely indicated.
Non union and AVN are managed by shoulder arthroplasty
Common Site and Classification (Fig. 2.55)
using prosthesis, e.g. Neer's prothesis.
·80% occur in the middle 1/3 (Class A)
Resotoration of useful shoulder movement is the principle
·15% occur in the lateral or distal 1/3 (Class B)
involved in these surgeries.
 5% occur in the medial or proximal 1/3 (Class C)
Note: Class B is further classified as
Revision Questions
 I. Non displaced with intact supporting ligaments.
Q. What are the mechanisms of injury of fracture surgical
 II. Displaced because of coracoclavicular ligament rupture
neck of humerus?
and pull of the stermocliedomastoid muscle
Q.Which is the commonly accepted classification of fracture
Ill.Articular fracture involving the aromioclavicular joint.
neck humerus?
ClassA
ClassB
ClassC
Figure 2.55
Radiographs showing different types of clavicular fracture Class A fracture, i.e. in the middle 1/3. Class B fracture, i.e. in the lateral end or
distal 1/3 and Class C fracture, i.e. in the medial 1/3.
52
Essentials of Orthopedics
Complications and Treatment (In Brief)
1.Life threatening and limb threatening complications may
be associated with fracture clavicle, e.g. hemothorax,
pneumothorax, hemopneumothorax, injury to subclavian
Sternocleidomastoid
vessels, injury to brachial plexus, etc. These are surgical
emergencies and need specialized care.
2. Delayed union and non union. Only if symptomatic the
surgical procedures for achieving union in the form of
intermal fixation and bone grafting are done. If asympto-
matic and no disability is observed they are left alone.
3. Malunion. Generally left alone.
Pectora
major
Revision Questions
Q. What are the mechanisms of injury of fracture Clavicle?
Weight
Q. What is the acceptable classification of fracture Clavicle?
ofthearm
Q. What is the treatment?
and
gravity
Q. What are complications associated with fracture Clavicle?
How do you manage them?
Figure 2.56
 Showing various displacing forces in fracture clavicle
Essay Question
Q. Discuss the mechanism of injury, diagnosis and manage-
Treatment
ment of fracture clavicle. Enumerate the complications.
In infants and children fracture invariably heals with simple
strapping or even with an arm sling immobilization.
Fractures of the Scapula
In adults treatment depends on the Class of the fracture
(Fig. 2.57).
Mechanism of Injury
Class A fractures-May need immobilization in a Fig of
1. A direct blow on to the scapula, e.g. assault (Fig. 2.58).
8 bandage and a sling. with or without reduction as per the
displacement of the fragments.
2.  Axial loading through the glenohumeral joint.
Class B fractures-
Type I needs only supportive strapping
Sites of the Fracture (Figs 2.59A and B)
and a sling for the arm and fracture heals without any problem.
 In the order of frequency the fracture sites are as follows:
Type II and IMI need surgical methods for reduction and
a. Fracture of the Body.
stabilization.
b. Fracture of the Neck.
Class C displaced fractures—May need surgical reduction.
c. Fracture of the Glenoid.
d. Fracture of the Acromian.
e. Fracture of the Coracoid.
Incidence
Other Injuries AssociatedwithFractureScapula and
theirIncidence
The incidence of associated injuries is around 80-90%. The
Figure 2.57
following injuries are commonly seen:
Methods of conservative treatment of fractures clavicle:
1. Pulmonary contusion and Pneumothorax (23%)
(A) Collar and cuff sling, (B) Strapping and sling suspension
 2. Clavicle fracture resulting in “Floating Shoulder' (23%)
(C) Figure of 8 bandaging
3. Anterior or posterior dislocation of the shoulder.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
53
Classification of the Scapular Neck Fractures
The scapular neck fractures are classified as follows:
Type I—Nondisplaced and non angulated 
Type IIa—Shortened/displaced >1 cm.
Type IIb—Angulated > 45°.
Treatment of Scapular Neck Fracture
Type I—are treated nonoperatively and yield good functional
results.
Type Ila and IIb fractures need surgical treatment as they
are displaced and angulated.
Classification of the Fractures of the Glenoid
Figure 2.58
Most common mode of injury causing scapular fracture is a direct
Based on Ideberg classification classified as:
impact on the scapula. The diagram shows a direct impact by the
Type I—-Anterior avulsion fractures.
branch of a tree falling on to the shoulder blade.
Type I—Transverse, inferior glenoid fractures.
4. Brachial plexus and axillary artery injury.
Type IMI—Transverse superior glenoid fractures.
5.Rib fracture.
Type IV——Transverse fractures through the body
Type V—-A combination of Type II and Type IV.
Note: Scapular body fractures heal without any problem
in about 6 weeks. A simple immobilization in a sling is
Indications for surgery in glenoid fractures: Those fractures
sufficient. Similarly fracture of the acromion process of the
which are likely to cause instability are definite indicators of
scapula unless it causes compression of the rotator cuff is
surgery. These are
treated nonoperatively.
Fractureof theacromion
Fractureof theglenoid
Acromion
Spine
Fractureof the
coracoid
Glenoid
Body-
Fractureof theneck
Lateralborder
Medial
border
Fracture of thebody
A
B
Inferiortip
Figures 2.59A and B
Showing (A) bony anatomical features of scapula (B) different types of fracture scapula
54
Essentials of Orthopedics
1. Rim fractures with > 1cm displacement / involving > 25%
dislocations: Questionnaire, clinical, and radiographic
of the auricular surface.
evaluation. J Hand Surg [Am] 2000:25(6):1069-79.
 2. Intra-articular fractures with subluxation of the head of
8. Kreder HJ, Agel J, McKee MD, Schemitsch EH, Stephen D,
Hanel DP. A randomized controlled trial of distal radius
the humerus.
fractures with metaphyseal displacement but without joint
3. Glenoid fossa fractures which are displaced > 5 mm.
incongruity: Closed reduction and casting versus closed
reduction, spanning external fixation, and optional percuta-
Surgical approaches used: Anterior fractures are exposed by
neous K wires. J OrthopTrauma 2006;20:115-21.
 means of anterior exposure to the shoulder and posterior
9. Kreder HJ, Hanel DP, Agel J, McKee M, Schemitsch EH,
fractures are exposed through the posterior exposure.
Trumble TE, et al. Indirect reduction and percutaneous fixation
versus open reduction and internal fixation for displaced intra-
Implants that are used to fix these fractures: The various
articular fractures of the distal radius. J Bone Joint Surg
implants used are 3.5 mm cortical and 4.0 mm Cancellous
2005:87B:829-36
screws (for lag effect) and 1/3 tubular plate (for buttress
10. MacKenney PJ, McQueen MM, Elton R. Prediction of
effect).
instability in distal radial fractures. J Bone Joint Surg
2006;88A:1944-51.
Questions
11. McQueen MM. Redisplaced unstable fractures of the distal
radius. A randomised, prospective study of bridging versus
Q. What are the sites of the fracture of the scapula bone?
non-bridging external fixation. J Bone Joint Surg Br
1999;80(4):665-9
Q. What are the injuries associated with fracture Scapula and
12. Peltier LF. Fractures of the distal end of the radius. An
their incidence?
historical account. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1984;(187):18-22.
Q. How do you classify scapular neck fractures?
13. Rayan GM. Scaphoid fractures and nonunions. Am J Orthop
Q. What is the treatment of scapular neck fracture?
1995;24(3):227-36
Q. How do you classify the fractures of the glenoid?
14. Ruch DS, Papadonikolakis A. Volar versus dorsal plating in
Q. What are the indications for surgery in glenoid fractures?
the management of intra-articular distal radius fractures. J
Hand Surg [Am] 2006;31:9-16.
Q. What are the surgical approaches used?
15. Trumble TE, Gilbert M, Murray LW, Smith J, Rafijah G,
Q. What are the implants that are used to fix these fractures?
McCallister WV. Displaced scaphoid fractures treated with
open reduction and internal fixation with a cannulated screw.
Further Reading
J Bone Joint Surg 2000;82A:633-41.
Fractures Around the Wrist
Forearm Fractures
1. Carlsen BT, Moran SL. Thumb trauma: Bennett fractures,
16. Anderson LD, Sisk DT, Tooms RE, Park W1. Compression
Rolando fractures, and ulnar collateral ligament injuries. J
plate fixation in acute diaphyseal fractures of the radius and
Hand Surg Am 2009;34(5):945-52.
ulna. J Bone Joint Surg 1975;57A:287-97.
2. Chung KC, Kotsis SV, Kim HM. Predictors of functional
17. Moed BR, Kellam JF, Foster RJ, et al. Immediate internal
outcomes after surgical treatment of distal radius fractures. J
fixation of open fractures of the diaphysis of the forearm. J
Hand Surg [Am] 2007;32:76-83
Bone Joint Surg 1986;68A:1008-17.
3. Colles A. On the fracture of the carpal extremity of the radius.
18. Schemitsch EH, Richards RR. The effect of malunion on
Edinb Med Surg J 1814;10:181. Clin Orthop Relat Res
functional outcomes after plate fixation of fractures of both
1984;(187):18-22
bones of the forearm in adults. I Bone Joint Surg 1992;74A:
4. Gregory J, Mohil RS, Ng AB, Warner JG, Hodgson SP.
1068-78.
Comparison of Herbert and Acutrak screws in the treatment
of scaphoid non-union and delayed union. Acta Orthop Belg
Fractures and Injuries about the Elbow
2008;74(6):761-5.
5.Herbert TJ,Fisher WE,Leicester AW. The Herbert bone screw：
19. Beingessner DM, Dunning CE, Gordon KD, Johnson JA, King
A ten year perspective. J Hand Surg Br 1992;17(4):415-9.
GJW. The effect of radial head excision and arthroplasty on
6. Herzberg G, Comtet JJ, Linscheid RL, Amadio PC, Cooney
elbow kinematics and stabilty. J Bone Joint Surg 2004;86A:
WP, Stalder J. Perilunate dislocations and fracture-
1730-9.
dislocations: A multicenter study. J Hand Surg [Am]
 20. Dubberley JH, Faber KJ, Macdermid JC, Patterson SD, King
1993;18:768-79.
GJ. Outcome after open reduction and internal fixation of
7. Hildebrand KA, Ross DC, Patterson SD, Roth JH, MacDermid
capitellar and trochlear fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am
JC, King GJ. Dorsal perilunate dislocations and fracture-
2006;88(1):46-54.
Fractures in the Upper Limb
55
21. Ikeda M, Sugiyama K, Kang C, Takagaki T, Oka Y. Commi-
35. Ring D, Chin K, Jupiter JB. Radial nerve palsy associated with
nuted fractures of the radial head. Comparison of resection
high-energy humeral shaft fractures. J Hand Surgery
and internal fixation. J Bone Joint Surg 2005;87A:76-84.
2004;29A:144-7.
22.
Jackson JD, Steinmann SP. Radial head fractures. Hand Clin
36. Sarmiento A,Zagorski JB,Zych GA, et al. Functional bracing
2007;23(2):185-93.
for the treatment of fractures of the humeral diaphysis. J Bone
23.1
Khalfayan EE, Culp RW, Alex ander AH. Mason type II radial
Joint Surg 2000;82A:478-86.
head fractures: Operative versus nonoperative treatment. J
Orthop Trauma 1992;6:283-9
Proximal Humerus Fracture
24. Mason ML. Some observations on fractures of the head of
the radius with areview of one hundred cases. Br J Surg 1954:
37. Koval KJ, Gallagher MA, Marsicano JG, et al. Functional
123-32.
outcome after minimally displaced fractures of the proximal
25.1
Ring D, Jupiter JB, Sanders RW, et al. Transolecranon
part of the humerus. J Bone Joint Surg 1997;79A:203-7.
fracture-dislocation of the elbow. J Orthop Trauma 1997;11:
38. Mighell MA, Kolm GP, Collinge CA, Frankle MA. Outcomes
545-50.
of heimarthroplasty for fractures of the proximal humerus. J
26. Ring D, Jupiter JB, Zilberfarb J. Posterior dislocation of the
Shoulder E1bow Surg 2003;12:569-77.
elbow with fractures of the radial head and coronoid. J Bone
39. Neer Cs. Displaced proximal humerus fractures. Part I.
 Joint Surg 2002;84A:547-51.
Classification and evaluation. Part I1. Treatment of three-part
27.
 Tejwani NC, Mehta H. Fractures of the radial head and neck:
and four-part displacement. J Bone Joint Surg 1970;52A: 1077-
Current concepts in management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
103.
2007;15(7):380-7.
Fracture clavicle and Shoulder injuries
Distal Humerus Fracture
40. Robinson CM, Court-Brown CM, et al. Estimating the risk
of nonunion following nonoperative treatmentof a clavicular
28. Kundel K, Braun W, Wieberneit J, et al. Intraarticular distal
fracture. J Bone Joint Surg 2004;86A:1359-65.
humerus fractures, factors affecting functional outcome. Clin
41. Robinson CM, Cairns DA. Primary nonoperative treatment
Orthop 1996;332:200-8
of displaced lateral fractures of the clavicle. J Bone Joint Surg
29. McKee MD, Wilson TL, Winston L, et al. Functional outcome
2004;86A:778-82
following surgical treatment of intraarticular distal humeral
42. Bostman O, Manninen M, Pihlajamaki H. Complications of
fractures through a posterior approach. J Bone Joint Surg
plate fixation in fresh displaced midclavicular fractures. J
2000:82A:1701-7.
Trauma 1997;43:778-83
30.Frankle MA,Herscovici D,DiPasquale TG, Vasey MB
43.Canadian Orthopedic Trauma Society. Nonoperative treatment
Sanders RW. A comparison of open reduction and internal
compared with plate fix ation of displaced midshaft clavicular
fixation and primary total elbow arthroplasty in the treatment
fractures. A multicenter, randomized clinical trial. J Bone Joint
of intraarticular distal humerus fractures in women older than
Surg 2007;89A:1-10.
age 65. J Orthop Trauma 2003;17:473-80.
44. Egol KA, Connor PM, Karunakar MA, et al. The floating
shoulder: Clinical and functional results. J Bone Joint Surg
2001;83A:1188-94
Humerus Shaft Fracture
Scapula Fracture
31. Chapman JR,Henley MB,Agel J, et al. Randomized,
prospective study of humeral shaft fracture fixation: intra-
45.Gosens T, Speigner B, Minekus J. Fracture of the scapular
medullary nails versus plates. J Orthop Trauma 2000;14:162-
body: Functional outcome after conservative treatment. J
6.
Shoulder E1bow Surg 2009;18(3):443-8.
32.Foster RJ,Swiontkowski MF, Bach AW, et al. Radial nerve
46. Herrera DA, Anavian J, Tarkin IS, Armitage BA, Schroder LK,
palsy caused by open humeral shaft fractures. J Hand Surg
Cole PA. Delayed operative management of fractures of the
1993;18:121-4
scapula. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2009;91(5):619-26.
33.1
Holstein A, Lewis GB. Fractures of the humerus with radial-
47. Ideberg R, Grevsten S, Larsson S. Epidemiology of scapular
nerve paralysis. J Bone Joint Surg 1963;45A:1382-8.
fractures. Incidence and classification of 338 fractures. Acta
34. Jawa A, McCarty P, Doornberg J, Hatris M, Ring D. Extra-
Orthop Scand 1995;66(5):395-7
articular distal third diaphyseal fractures of the humerus. A
48. Lapner PC, Uhthoff HK, Papp S. Scapula fractures. Orthop
comparison of functional bracing and plate fixation.
Clin North Am 2008;39(4):459-74.
3
Fracturesin the
Lower Limb
Introduction, General Information, Diagnosis, Treatment and
Complications are dealt with as follows:
 Fractures of the Foot
 Injuries Around the Ankle
Tibial DiaphysealFractures
C Injuries Around the Knee
 Fracture Shaft of Femur
 Fractures Around the Hip
Fractures of the Foot
The foot is generally divided into (Fig. 3.1):
A. Hind foot consisting of calcaneus and talus.
Introduction
 B. Mid foot consisting of navicular, cuboid and the three
The foot has a very important role in locomotion. It is
cuneiforms.
C. Fore foot consisting of metatarsals and phalanges.
subjected to constant stress of weight bearing. Loss or
 impairment of anatomy of the foot following injury may thus
The Hind Foot
lead to serious disability and malfunction. Hence, a super
speciality of Foot and ankle surgery has evolved and
The articulation between the talus and the calcaneus is known
meticulous foot and ankle surgery is being performed these
as subtalar joint. The movement of inversion and eversion
days.
takes place at this joint.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
57
of body weight during push off phase of gait cycle. Hence,
any disturbance in anatomy following injury will affect the
push off phase of gait cycle.
The important injuries occurring in the foot are:
1. Chopart's injury.
2. Lisfranc's injury.
3. Jones' fracture.
4. Pseudo-Jones' fracture.
5. Talus fracture.
A
B
6. Calcaneus fracture.
C
Figure 3.1
Chopart's Injury
Lateral radiograph of a normal foot showing (A) The fore foot: portion
(B) The mid foot: portion (C) The hind foot.
Definition
It is a fracture dislocation involving the talonavicular and the
The talus articulates with the ankle mortise formed by the
calcaneocuboid joint (Mid Foot)
lower end of tibia and fibula. The movement of dorsiflexion
amd plantar flexion takes place at the ankle joint.
Mechanism
The Mid Foot
Common mechanism of injury (80%): Is by means of a severe
twisting injury on a plantar flexed and inverted foot causing
The tarsal bones are connected together with multiple
medial and upward displacement of distal fragments.
articulations and movement in these articulations occurs in a
very unique way as a unit. When inversion/eversion takes
Rare mechanism of injury: Is an ^Eversion injury’ which
place at the subtalar joint the tarsal bones lock themselves
causes lateral displacement of distal fragments. (In both the
amd move together only to get unlocked when the movement.
talus always remains in the ankle mortise.)
occurs in the opposite direction (eversion/inversion).
Fractures associated with Chopart's injury
It is this effective, constant and multidirectional
1. Calcaneus fractures.
adjustment of the tarsus, makes the foot to adapt itself to
2. Talus fractures.
any terrain for a smooth propulsion. Thus, loss or
3. Navicular fractures.
impairment of this mechanism following injury to the
tarsal bones/articulation results in severe disability.
Management
The articulation between the hind foot and the mid foot
Prompt and early accurate reduction and stabilization is the
is known as mid tarsal joint also known as Chopart's Joint
treatment of choice. Hence, nonoperative methods have only
named after Francois Chopart (1743-1795) who performed
a limited role to play. They are useful only in minor grades
amputations at the level of calcaneocuboid and talonavicular
of injury.
joint. This procedure removes almost all the insertions of
tendons around the ankle and renders the ankle joint unstable.
Prognosis
The articulation between the mid foot and fore foot is
known as Lisfranc's joint named after Jacques Lisfranc a
Poor prognosis is seen in those cases which are associated
French surgeon in Napolean's army. An amputation at this
with severe soft tissue injury, malalignment, other bone
fractures and present late.
level is known as Lisfranc 's amputation as he used to perform
amputations at this level for frost bite on soldiers at the
Lisfranc's Injury
Russian front.
The Fore Foot
Definition
The articulations between the metatarsals and phalanges are
By definition this is a fracture or a dislocation or a fracture
more finm and regular and do not allow multidirectional
dislocation occurring at the junction between the tarsal bones
adjustments. These joints are more involved in transmission 
of the mid foot and the metatarsal bones of the fore foot
58
Essentials of Orthopedics
named after Jaques Lisfranc, a French surgeon in Napolean's
army.
Note:It is also said that apart from performing
amputationat this levelforfrost biteLisfranc described this
injuryinsoldierswhen theyfelldownfrom their horse,when
their foot did not get released from the stirrup.
Mechanism
Mechanism involves severe plantar flexion of the foot, e.g.
stepping into a small hole, sports-related injuries, motor
vehicle accidents, falling from a height, down stairs or off a
curb.
Note: Instability on weight bearing can occur with
ligamentous injuries alone, even without fracture or
dislocation.
Figures 3.2A and B
Lisfranc ligament diagonally connects the 1st (medial)
Radiographs of the foot showing (A) Homolateral and (B) Divergent
cuneiform with the base of the 2nd metatarsal. If it remains
types of Lisfranc's injury. Note the direction of displacements of the
intact, either an avulsion of the lateral border of the 1st
1st metatarsal and the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th metatarsals.
cuneiform or an avulsion of the base or medial border of the
2nd metatarsal occurs. If it tears, these fractures may not occur.
imaging
Conventional radiographs are usually sufficient to demonstrate
Types
the injury. Normal alignment of the cuneiforms and the bases
Two basic types are described.
of the metatarsals are as follows:
Homolateral (Fig. 3.2A)
Lateral border of 1st metatarsal is aligned with lateral
border of 1st (medial) cuneifonm in AP view.
· All of the metatarsals are dislocated to the same side
More common than divergent.
Medial border of 2nd metatarsal is aligned with medial
·
border of 2nd (intermediate or middle) cuneifonm in AP
Usually involves the 2nd through 5th metatarsal with
view.
dislocate laterally.
· Medial and lateral borders of the 3rd (lateral) cuneiform
May involve all 5 metatarsals.
should align with medial and lateral borders of 3rd
Divergent (Fig. 3.2B)
metatarsal in oblique view.
Usually more severe than homolateral.
· Medial border of 4th metatarsal is aligned with medial
May be associated with a fracture of the lst cuneiform.
border of cuboid in oblique view.
Usually involves medial displacement of the Ist metatarsal
· Lateral margin of the 5th metatarsal may project lateral
 and lateral displacement of 2nd-5th metatarsals.
to cuboid by as many as 3mm in oblique view.
Occasionally medial displacement of only the 1st
· In lateral view, a line drawn along long axis of talus should
metatarsal may be seen.
intersect long axis of the 5th metatarsal.
Fractures associated with Lisfranc dislocations
Any loss of this pattem of alignment is an indicator of
Base of 2nd metatarsal fracture.
this injury.
Cuboid fracture.
Management
Fractures of shafts of metatarsals.
 Dislocations of the 1st (medial) and 2nd (middle) and
Restorationof anatomical alignment at theearliest is thekey
cuneonavicular joints.
for successful result. Hence, closed methods of reduction/
Fractures of the navicular bone.
fixation and immoblization have a role to play only in less
Fractures in the Lower Limb
59
A
Figures 3.3A and B
Radiographs showing successful reduction and stabilization of a Lisfranc's injury (Homolateral type) by closed reduction and pinning.
severe forms of injury. Severe forms are always treated by
7. How do you manage Lisfranc's and Chopart's injury?
 open reduction and fixation (Figs 3.3A and B).
8. What are the complications of Chopart's and Lisfranc's
injury?
Complications
9. What is the prognosis of Chopart's and Lisfranc's
injury?
a. Compartmental syndrome involving the foot compartment
(immediate).
Fracture of the Fifth Metatarsal Bone
b. Malalignment with foot deformities resulting in chronic
pain and degenerative arthritis involving tarsal joints (late).
 The proximal fifth metatarsal fracture is the most common
 injury among the mid foot fractures. The distal and the mid
shaft fractures are not common.
Prognosis
Severe soft tissue injury, persistent malalignment, associated
Types:
fractures, late presentations results in poor prognosis.
A. Jones Fracture.
B.Pseudo-Jones Fracture (Tennis Fracture).
Revision Questions
Jones’ Fracture
1. What is Chopart's and Lisfranc's joint? Why it is named
This injury was first described in 1902 by Sir Robert Jones
so?
2. What is Chopart's and Lisfranc's amputation?
in an article titled "Fractures of the Base of the Fifth
 3. What is Chopart's and Lisfranc's injury?
Metatarsal Bone by Indirect Violence." He himself is said to
have suffered from this fracture after dancing.
 4. What is the mechanism of Chopart's and Lisfranc's injury?
 5. What is Lisfranc's ligament? What are the types of
Lisfranc's injury?
Definition
6. What are the fractures associated with Chopart's and
 It is a transverse fracture occurring at base of the fifth
Lisfranc's injury?
metatarsal 1.5-3.0 cm distal to the tuberosity (Fig. 3.4).
60
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 3.5
 Radiograph showing pseudo-Jones fracture.
Figure 3.4
Radiograph of a Jones fracture.
mainly by bony and ligamentous support. Superiorly it
Diagnosis and Treatment
articulates with the inferior articular surface of the ibia,
 Inferiorly with the superior articular surface of the
1. Pain in the region of the fifth metatarsal after an indirect
violence.
calcaneus, medially with the medial malleolus, laterally
 2. Difficulty in walking.
with the lateral malleolus and anteriorly with the navicular
3.X-ray confinming the diagnosis.
Hence plays an important role in the function of the ankle
and the foot being responsible for 90% of the movement
Always treated by a non-weight bearing cast for the fear
of the ankle and foot.
of becoming displaced and causing nonunion at a later period.
 Nonunion may need bone grafting.
History
 In athletes and in displaced fractures surgical stabilization
is considered.
It was Sir Astley Cooper 1832 who gave a first hand account
of a case of dislocated Talus which he treated. (Mr. Downes
Pseudo-Jones Fracture
20th July 1820,who fell down from his horse....)
Anderson 1919 gave the name “Aviators Astragalus'
Definition
because he found these injuries occurring in aviators when
they crashed with their machine. The foot resting on the rudder
It is an avulsion fracture of the base of the the fifth metatarsal
with a lateral ankle strain occurring as a result of the pull of
bar took the impact of extreme dorsiflexion, plantar flexion
 Peroneus brevis tendon (Fig. 3.5).
Or inversion thereby causing injuries of the talus. Namely
fractures, dislocations and fracture-dislocations.
Treatment
Blood Supply (Figs 3.6 and 3.7)
Heals well with a compression bandage or a walking cast in
G.L Mulfinger and J Trueta have described in detail the blood
about 3 weeks without complications.
supply of the talus (J Bone Joint Surgery 1970;52B.).
Fracture of the Talus
Three main arteries of the leg supply the Talus through
periosteal network and through two discrete vessels. They are:
General Information
1. Posterior Tibial artery—through calcaneal branches.
Talus also known as Astragalus is a unique bone which
2.
 Anterior Tibial artery—through anterolateral/anteromedial
has no muscle or tendon attachments and held in place
malleolar branches or through medial tarsal artery.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
61
Dorsalis
Deltoid
Posteriortubercle
paedis artery
branches
branches
Branchesofdorsalis
paedisartery
Branchesof the artery
Arteryof the
Posteriortibial
of the tarsal sinus
tarsalcanal
artery
Tarsalsinus/
Deltoid
branches
branch
Figure 3.6
Arteryofthe
Posterior
Showing blood supply to the talus. Note that the important supply is
tarsalcanal
tibialartery
Figures 3.7
artery of the sinus tarsi.
 Showing blood supply of the talus in coronal plane.
3. Peroneal artery—through perforating branches.
4.
 Artery of the Tarsal Canal, a branch of Posterior Tibial
artery.
Undisplaced
Loss of
 5. Artery of the Sinus Tarsi, a branch of dorsalis pedis artery.
/fractureofneck
bloodsupply
talus
Two plexus are formed by anastomosis.
i. In the region of the posterior tubercle.
ii. In the region of the sinus tarsi.
Thus ^vascular slings' are formed all round the talus.
(The calcaneal branches of posterior tibial artery fonm
plexus in the region of posterior tubercle and the anterolateral
A
B
malleolar branches of anterior tibial artery along with branches
Figures 3.8A and B
from dorsalis pedis artery form plexus in the region of sinus
Showing that (A) fracture of the neck of the talus alone does not
tarsi. Thus, there is formation of ^vascular slings' all around
disturb the blood supply without displacement of the body. (B) When
the talus in the form of anastomosis between different vessels).
the body is displaced the blood supply is lost.
An undisplaced fracture of the neck disturbs the blood supply
the least. Hence, the incidence of AVN is low. (Intact ^vascular
Classification of the Fractures/Dislocations and
slings').
Fracture-Dislocations of the Talus
A displaced fracture neck of the Talus is likely to disturb
Following injuries are seen in the talus
the blood supply to the body and causes avacular necrosis.
A. Talar neck fracture.
Similarly afracture of the body of the talus impairs the blood
B. Talar body fracture.
supply to the body and causes avascular necrosis. (Damage
C.
Talar head fracture (rare).
to ^vascular slings') (Figs 3.8A and B).
D. Subtalar dislocation.
E. Total talar dislocation.
Mechanism ofInjury
Classification of talar neckfracture
Talar neck fractures:Extreme dorsi flexion of the ankle or
Based on Hawkins’ classification (1970) it is classified as
direct axial loading causes rupture of the posterior capsule
follows (Figs 3.9 and 3.10)
and impaction of the talar neck against the distal tibia resulting
1. Undisplaced vertical fracture.
in a vertical fracture of the neck. Subsequently one of the
ⅡI. Displaced fracture with subtalar joint subluxation/
two things can happen. Either the foot subluxates forwards
dislocation.
with talar body adapting a position of equinus or the body of
I. Displaced fracture with both subtalar and ankle
the talus is pushed backwards out of the ankle mortise and
dislocation.
lies between the medial malleololus and Achilles tendon.
(Canale and Kelly, proposed a IV Group)
62
Essentials of Orthopedics
Typel
Typell
Type-1
Type-ll
TypeIll
TypeIV
Type-lll
Type-IV
Figure 3.9
Figure 3.10
Diagrammatic representation of different types of fracture of talus
Radiographs showing the different fractures based on Hawkins,
base on Hawkin's classification modified by Canale and Kelly.
classification and modification by Canale and Kelly. Type-l:
Undisplaced fracture. Type-ll: Displaced fracture with subtalar
subluxation/dislocation. Type-Ill: Displaced fracture with both subtalar
IV. Displaced fracture with subtalar, ankle and talonavicular
and ankle subluxation/dislocation. Type- IV: Displaced fracture with
dislocation.
subtalar,ankle and talonavicular dislocation.
Classification of talar body fracture
Treatment
Based on Sneppen classification (1977) it is classified as
A. Nonoperative: Undisplaced (displacement less than Imm)
follows:
fractures are immobilized in plaster cast.
I. Osteochondral dome fracture.
II. Coronal, sagittal, horizontal shear fractures.
B. Operative:
Intermal fixation: Displaced fractures (Type I, Type III,
IIl. Posterior process fractures.
Type IV Neck fractures; Coronal, sagittal and horizontal
IV. Lateral process fractures (Snowboarders fracture)
shear fractures of the body) are openly reduced and
V. Crush fractures.
intermally fixed.
Talar head fractures are rare and generally associated
Arthroscopy: Arthroscopic procedures are done for
withtalo-naviculardislocation/subluxation.
removal of loose body, management of osteochondral
Complications
lesions and in early degenerative arthritis of ankle.
 Arthrodesis: Indicated in secondary complication of non-
a. Osteochondral fracture may cause loose body inside the
umion, avascular necrosis and degenerative arthritis.
joint with persistent pain and limitation of movement.
Total joint arthroplasty: Indicated in secondary degene-
b.
Non-union (Neck of the talus)
rative arthritis (without AVN).
C.
Avascular necrosis of the body of the talus.
Talectomy or Astragalectomy: Rarely done as it renders
d. Degenerative arthritis of the ankle.
the ankle highly unstable.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
63
Essay Questions
Hence, those fractures which involve the articular
surfaces produce complex articular surface irregularities
Q. Describe the blood supply of Talus. Discuss the mecha-
and need to be managed accurately in order to reduce the
nism of injury, diagnosis and management of fracture neck 
functional disabilityafterrecovery.
of Talus and its complications
Q. Classify fractures of the Talus. Discuss the management
Mechanismsofinjury
of the fractures of the Talus. Enumerate their compli-
a. Axial loading and shear: Occurs when a person falls from
cations.
a height and lands on the heel. The Talus is driven down
Calcaneus Fracture
onto the calcaneus causing articular surface fracture there
by disturbing the subtalar joint anatomy.
Also known as " Lover's Fracture"and" Don Juan
b. Direct impact by blunt force: Results in extra articular
Fracture".
fractures of the plantar tuberosity and the body.
c. Twisting injuries: Results in avulsion fractures of the
Functional Importance of the Calcaneus
calcaneus because of the pull of tendons and ligaments.
E.g. posterior tuberosity fracture due to the pull of tendo-
a.  It acts as a lever anm for Gastrosoleus Complex.
achillis.
b. Transmits the body weight.
Note: When a person presents with calcaneus fracture,
C. Supports and maintains the lateral column of the foot.
always there is a need to examine the pelvis, spine and the
Hence, when its anatomy is not restored after a fracture.
other limb especially when there is a history of fall from a
not only these functions are impaired but also the gait is
height or high velocity injury, to rule out other more serious
affected.
fractures such as Fracture of the pelvis and the spine. Also
Surgical Anatomy
it is very important to note whether there is developing
Compartmental Syndrome involving the central compart-
There are three articular facets on the superior surface of the
ment of the foot.
calcaneus
1. The convex posterior facet.
Classification of Fracture Calcaneum
 2. The concave middle facet.
Essex Lopresti Classification (Figs 3.11A to C and 3.12):
 3. The concave anterior facet.
a.Extra-articular
The middle facet lies over sustentaculum tali. Between the
b. Intra-articular
 middle and the posterior facet is the calcaneal groove. The
Tongue type.
anterior articular surface is saddle shaped and articulates with
 Joint depression type.
the cuboid bone.
The calcaneum is subjected to two deforming forces which
are transmitted through the talus.
A,Extra-articulartype
B,Tongue type
C,Joint depression type
Figures 3.11A to C
 Radiographs showing different types of calcaneal fractures based on Essex Lopresti classification.
64
Essentials of Orthopedics
Typel:Fracturesinvolving thetuberosity
the sustentaculum tali,orthe
anteriorprocesswithoutsubtalar
jointinvolvement
Typell:Beakfractures(Avulsion fractures)
The tongue type fracture
The depression type fracture
duetopullofAchillestendon
Thefracture linesextend
Thefracturelinesextend
backwardstotheposterior
acrossthebodyofthe
aspect of the tuberosity.
calcaneum.
Typel:Fracturesof the bodynot involving
the subtalarjoint
Figure 3.12
Diagrammatic representation of Essex Lopresti classification of
fracture involving the joint.
Type IV:Fracturesof thebody involving
thesubtalarjoint
a.
Shearing force.
b.
Compression force.
As the sharp edge of the lateral process of the talus is
TypeV:
ComminutedFractureswithsubtalarjoint
driven into the angle of the calcaneus a primary fracture
depression
develops extending from the lateral cortex to sustentaculum
Figure 3.14
tali which is a medial structure. This gets sheared from the
 Diagrammatic representation of calcaneal fractures based on Rowe
body of the calcaneus along with the medial 1/3 or 1/2 of the
dassification.
posterior facet of the subtalar joint.
The secondary fracture line that develops as a result of
Type 3—-Depressed fractures and/or 3 part split fractures.
continuation of the deforming force may either be a toungue
Type 4—4 part/Comminuted fractures.
type or a joint depression type.
Accordingly patients with type 1 injuries do well with non-
operative treatment; patients with injuries of types 2 and 3
Sander's classification: Developed in 1992, based on coronal
may be treated effectively with open reduction and intermal
and axial CT scans of the calcaneus. This classification is
fixation; and type 4 injuries defy operative reduction.
useful in the treatment for decision making as well as in the
reporting of results. This system defines 4 types of fractures
Rowe Classification
(Fig. 3.13).
Based on this classification the fracture is classified into
Type 1—Undisplaced fractures.
5 types as described (Fig. 3.14).
Type 2—2 part split fractures.
Type l a— Tuberosity fracture medial or lateral
Type lb—- Fracture of the sustentaculum tali
TypeI:Undisplacedoccurring
Type lc— Fracture of the anterior process of the
throughanyof the threelines
calcaneus
Type 2a— Beak fracture of the posterior calcaneus
Typell:2Part fracture,occurring through
 Type 2b—— Avulsion fracture involving the insertion of the
anyof thethreefracturelines
tendo-Achillles
Type 3—
 Oblique fracture of the body not involving the
subtalar joint
Type Ill:3Part fractures
Type 4—-
 Body fracture involving the subtalar joint
Type 5-
 Body fracture with subtalar joint depression
 and comminution.
TypeIV:4Part/comminuted
fractures
Radiology in Fracture Calcaneum
Figure 3.13
Following views are necessary for a detailed evaluation.
Diagrammatic representation of calcaneal fractures based on
Lateral view——for assessment of ‘Bohler tuber angle' and
Sander's classification.
"Crucial angle of Gissane' (Fig. 3.15).
Fractures in the Lower Limb
65
20°-40°
-130°
A.Bohler 20-40 degrees
B. Gissane 100-130 degrees
Figures 3.15A and B
   js a a  s     e p ss       a  s 
posterior facet to the superior margin of the tuberosity. The angle decreases or at times may get reversed in posterior facet collapse. (B)
the anterior process. It increases in posterior facet depression.
Axial view (Harris view)—for assessment of subtalar joint
Closed / Open and intermal fixation using ,K- wires or special
involvement.
plates, e.g. H-plates.
Anteroposterior view—for assessment of calcaneocuboid
Avulsion fractures are treated by closed/ open reduction
joint and avulsion fractures at the anterior and lateral part
and intermal fixation (Figs 3.16A and B).
of the calcaneus.
Severely comminuted and complex fractures are generally
Oblique view (Anthonsen view and Borden view)—for
treated by arthrodesis of subtalar joint (secondary procedure
assessment of articular extension of fractures
rarely primary).
CT scan in complex and comminuted fractures for detailed
and 3D evaluation.
Revision Questions
1. Discuss briefly the surgical anatomy and the functions of
Treatment
the calcaneum.
 2. What is the mechanism of injury of fracture calcaneum?
Aim of treatment of fracture calcaneum is to maintain the
3. Classify fracture calcaneum.
"Crucial angle of Gissane' and ‘Bohler joint tuber angle'.
4. Draw the “Bohler joint tuber angle' and ‘Cruial angle of
Maintain the anatomy of calcaneo-cuboid articulation when
Gissane' and discuss their clinical importance.
indicated.
5. How will you proceed with the investigations in a case of
 Undisplaced fractures and fractures which do not involve
fracture calcaneum?
of well padded bandages, plasters slabs, casts and splints
Essay Question
depending on severity of injury and immobilized for a period
of 2-4 weeks. This is followed by gradual mobilization.
Classify fracture calcaneum. Discuss the mechanism of injury.
Displaced fractures and fractures involving articular
surface and subtalar joint are treated by anatomical reduction,
discuss the prognosis.
66
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
Figures 3.16A and B
fixation. A pin is driven through the fractured bone. With the pin as the lever the fracture is manipulated and reduced with the foot in plantar
flexion. The wire is driven further through the fracture site and the fracture is firmly transfixed. Next the cancellous screw is passed to
achieve firm fixation.
Injuries Around the Ankle
 fact is that Sir Percival Pott had a more serious compound
fracture of the femur.
A. Ligament injuries.
Hence, the term is to be considered as a misnomer. Sir
B. Bony injuries.
 Percival Pott, neither described these injuries completely
Ligament Injuries
nor suffered from this fracture.
The common injuries are the lateral ligament injury, the medial
Definition
or the deltoid ligament injury and the syndesmotic ligament
injury (the ligament binding the inferior tibiofibular
Pott's fracture is defined as a uni, bi or trimalleolar fracture
syndesmosis).
with or without subluxation or dislocation of the ankle joint.
· Grade 1—Stretching of the ligaments.
PointstoRemember
· Grade 2—Partial tear of the ligaments
· Grade 3—-Complete tear of the ligaments.
Ankle joint is a beautiful hinge joint which allows only the
movement of dorsi-flexion and plantar flexion. This
Management
movement takes place in a mortise known as ankle mortise
Complete and severe tears require surgical repair. Less severe,
formed by medial, lateral and posterior malleolus (posterior
strains and sprains heal well with adequate immobilization.
1/3 of the inferior articular surface of the lower tibia is known
 Physiotherapy and gradual mobilization is always essential
as posterior malleolus). The ligaments that support the mortise
for a good recovery.
are the deltoid ligament medially, the lateral ligament laterally
and the syndesmotic ligament superiorly. (which binds the
Bony Injuries (Pott's Fracture)
lower tibia and fibula, i.e. the tibiofibular syndesmosis).
Any other movement occurring in the ankle joint other
Bony injuries of the ankle are grouped under one heading.
than dorsiflexion and plantar flexion is abnormal and tends
i.e *Pott's Fracture' because it was Sir Percival Pott
to injure the supporting bony and ligamentous structures
(1714- 1788) who first made an attempt to describe the
leading to deformation of the joint. Failure patterms thus seen
various injury patterms occurring at the ankle.
are several because the ankle joint is amenable for a variety
It was also thought that Sir Percival Pott had this fracture.
of abnonmal stresses. These failure pattems are similar and
after he fell down from his horse in the year 1756. The
are reproducible for a specific type of stress. This has been
Fractures in the Lower Limb
67
accurately described by Lauge and Hansen in their 'Genetic
Pathomechanics
Classification.’which they derived after experiments on
Abduction Injuries: In these, the Talus abducts in the ankle
cadavers. They used a wrench and subjected the cadaver ankle
to a variety of stresses and documented the results. It was
mortise. Abduction occurs in the long axis of the Talus. The
foot is in pronation when this occurs. Hence, the term
worth noting that a particular type of stress produced a
pronation-abduction injuries is used. It exerts traction force
particular failure patterm.
on the medial structures and compression force on the lateral
Lauge-Hansen's Genetic Classification
structures.
Based on this classification the injuries are classified as
Complete Failure Pattern
follows:
a   s as a   
1. Abduction Injuries (pronation abduction)
pull-off fracture of the medial malleolus or a rupture of the
2. Adduction Injuries (supination-adduction)
deltoid ligament (depending on the strength of the ligament
 3. Pronation Extermal Rotation Injuries.
 4. Supination Extermal Rotation Injuries.
and the bone) thus resulting in failure of the medial structures.
(medial support)—Stage 1
 5. Vertical Compression Injuries.
The talus which is now free of its medial tether abducts
6. Unclassifiable.
further and hits the lateral malleolus thereby exerting
Note: All the terms used in the classification refer to the
compression force on the lateral structures causing oblique
(abnormal) movement of the talus in the ankle mortise.If
 Or comminuted fracture of the lateral malleolus—Stage 2
the ligament is stronger than the bone, the bone fractures
(Fig. 3.17).
and if the bone is stronger than the ligament, the ligament
Adduction injuries: (Mechanism is exactly opposite to that
ruptures. It is also essential to remember certain Keywords'
of the abduction injuries). In these, the talus adducts in the
in order to understand the mechanism of ankle injuries.
ankle mortise. Adduction occurs in the long axis of the Talus.
The foot is in supination when this occurs. Hence, the tenm
Keywords
supination- adduction injuries is used. It exerts traction force
Traction force-Pulling
on the lateral structures and compression force on the medial
Compression force—Direct impact
Partial failure—Action of the force is incomplete
structures.
Complete failure—Action of the force is complete
Complete Failure Pattern
Failure pattem—End result
Traction on the lateral structures causes either a transverse
Diastasis-Separation
pull-off fracture of the lateral malleolus or a lateral ligament
Pronation-abduction
eeloel
Stage1
Stage2
Figure 3.17
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of events in a pronation-abduction injury.
68
Essentials of Orthopedics
Supination-adduction
Stage1
Stage2
Figure 3.18
Diagrammatic representation of sequence of events occurring in a supination-adduction injury.
rupture (depending on the strength of the ligament and the
an oblique/spiral fracture which can occur in a similar
bone) thus resulting in failure of the lateral structures. (lateral
manner as low as lower 1/3 of the fibula to as high as
support)—Stage 1.
fibular neck. This is known as Maisonneuve Injury-
The Talus which is now free of its lateral tether adducts
Stages 2 and 3. (Named after Jules Germain Francois
further and hits the medial malleolus thereby exerting
Maisonneuve who described the mechanism.)
compression force on the medial structures causing oblique
At this juncture when partial diastasis has occurred if the
fracture of the medial malleolus—Stage 2 (Fig. 3.18).
subject is running, e.g. in an athletic event , the talus is
Completefailure pattermnofboth Abduction andAdduction
vertically pushed upwards between the tibia and the fibula,
injuries isaBi-malleolarfracture dislocation/subluxation of
rupturing the intact posterior tibiofibular ligament and
the ankle joint(except when ligament rupture occurs instead
causing complete diastasis of inferior tibiofibular
ofmalleolar fracture),the subluxation being lateral in
syndesmosis thereby causing a comminuted fracture of the
Abduction injuries and medial in adduction injuries.
the lower 1/3 of the fibula. This is known as Dupuytren's
Incomplete failure pattern presents either with isolated
fracture (Fig. 3.20)—Stage 4.
ligamentruptureoruni-malleolarfracturewithorwithout
(Named after Guillaume Dupuytren who described the
subluxation of the ankle joint.
mechanism in 1816.)
Pronation-external rotation injuries: In these the talus
Tillauxfracture(Named afterPaul Jules Tillaux who
pronates and rotates extermally (Fig. 3.19).
described the fracture in 1848).It is a fracture occurring
a. The medial failure pattem is the same as in abduction
during the diastasis of inferior tibiofibular syndesmosis. If the
injuries, i.e. either there is a medial malleolar fracture or
a deltoid ligament rupture. (The medial malleolar frag-
strength of the tibiofibular ligament is more than that of the
ment is generally smaller when compared to that occurring
bone there develops an avulsion fracture at the anterior/
 in abduction injury—Stage 1).
posterior lip of the inferior fibular facet of the tibia (Anterior
b. The talus which is free of its medial tether springs
Tillaux Fracture,see diagram marked(Fig.3.19)Stage 2
B and Posterior Chaput- Tillaux Fracture described by
forwards and out of the ankle mortise. This exerts stress
on the syndesmotic ligaments which bind the inferior tibio
Chaput. See diagram marked (Fig. 3.19)—Stage 4 D.
Complete failure pattern in pronation exteml rotation
fibular syndesmosis. The first one to fail is the anterior
tibio-fibular ligament followed by interosseous tibiofibular
injury is either Maisonneuve or Dupuytren's fracture
ligament. This failure causes partial diastasis of inferior
dislocation.
tibiofibular syndesmosis. Thus, the fibula starts rotating
Incomplete failure pattern presents with only a portion
on the intact posterior tibiofbular ligament using it as a
of the sequence of the failure pattern.(Deltoid ligament
pivot. The resultant stress on the fibula may be as low as
rpture, Medial malleolar fracture, diastasis of syndesmosis
lower 1/3 to as high as fibular neck and failure results in
etc).
Fractures in the Lower Limb
69
Pronation-externalrotation
Stage1
Post
CorD
Posf
Stage2
Stage3
Stage4
Figure 3.19
of anterior tibio fibular ligament and B indicates Anterior Tillaux fracture. Similarly In Stage 4 mark C indicates Posterior tibio fibular ligament
rupture and mark D indicates Posterior Tillaux fracture.
Uncommon and variablepattern can present with only
ruptureofligamentsoracombinationofruptureofligaments
and fractures.
Supination-external rotation injuries:In these the Talus
supinates and rotates extermally. When the Talus supinates and
rotates extermally,it springs backwards and out of theankle
mortise. Hence, the failure occurs as follows (Fig. 3.21):
a. First structure to fail is the lateral malleolus—Stage 1
b. Next is the posterior malleolus—Stage 2
c. Last is the medial malleolus—Stage 3
The fracture is known as a Tri malleolar fracture or a
"Cotton's fracture'. The direction of the fracture line in these
fractures is obliquely upwards and back wards.
Complete failure pattern is a Tri malleolar fracture or a
Figure 3.20
'Cotton's fracture'described by Cotton FJ.in the year
Radiographs AP and Lat views showing a Dupuytren's fracture
1915.Incompletefailure pattermmay manifestwith any of the
dislocation. Presence of foreign bodies in the X-rays indicate the
isolated fractures or any two of them together.
compound nature of the injury.
Direction of thefracture line gives the clue.
70
Essentials of Orthopedics 
Supination-externalrotation
above"
at
below
Stage1
Stage2
Stage3
Figure 3.21
Diagrammatic representation of sequence of events occurring in supination-external rotation injury.
2
Vertical
compression
Stage
Figure 3.23
 Radiograph of an ankle joint involved in a high velocity injury of a
road traffic accident. The injury is a compound fracture dislocation.
 Mechanism is simply unclassifiable.
Stage2
Stage3
Stage4
Figure 3.22
 Diagrammatic representation of the stages of a vertical compression
Always these injuries are compound/open injuries
injury.
resulting in severe morbidity.
Vertical compression injuries: Occurs when a person falls
Management (Figs 3.24A to C)
from a height. The talus is violently pushed upwards into the
Undisplaced and incomplete fractures: They are managed with
 inferior articular surface of the tibia, shattering the articular
immobilization in plaster/fibre below knee or above knee cast
surface. Extent of disruption is directly proportional to the
 as per indication.
severity of the impact. The term Pilon fracture is given for
 Displaced fractures: They are managed by open reduction
these injuries (Fig. 3.22).
and intermal fixation with emphasis on restoration of articular
Unclassifiable injuries: Nature of injury is unclassifiable
surface congruity.
becauseavariety of forcesacting simultaneously or in
Mobilization of the joint is to be started at earliest after
succession have caused the failure (Fig. 3.23).
wound healing.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
71
A
B
Figures 3.24A to C
Radiographs showing different methods of
fixation of ankle fractures. (A) An isolated
fracture of the medial malleolus fixed internally
using a malleolar screw. (B) Another malleolar
fracture where the malleolar fragment was
small. This was fixed using tension band
Pilon fracture internally fixed using malleolar
screws, cancellous screws and cortical screws.
The fibular fracture is fixed using 1/3 tubular
C
plate and screws.
Implants used: Malleolar screws, cannulated cancellous
Revision Questions
screws, 1/3 tubular plates, 3.5 mm DCP, rush nails, K-wires
1. Define Pott's fracture.
amd SS wires. (for tension band wiring.)
2. What is Maisommeuve injury?
Biodegradable screw is the latest among the implants.
3. What is Dupuytren's fracture?
Complications:
4. What is Cotton's fracture?
 Nonunion - seen when the injury is neglected.
5. What is Tillaux fracture?
 Improper restoration of articular congruity by neglect or
6. What are various implants used to fix the fracture
otherwise (e.g. Pilon fracture) results in painful limitation
dislocation of the ankle?
of movement and degenerative arthritis at a later date.
Treatment:
Essay Question
 Nonunion is treated open reduction intermal fixation and
Bone grafting.
Discuss the classification, mechanism of injury, diagnosis and
 Degenerative arthritis is treated by arthrodesis of the ankle
management of fracture dislocation of ankle otherwise called
joint or total joint replacement.
 as Pott's fracture. Enumerate its complications.
72
Essentials of Orthopedics
Tibial Diaphyseal Fractures
 Almost 1/3 of the tibia is subcutaneous, i.e its anteromedial
border (known as shin) and the flat medial surface. Hence,
this bone is predisposed for open fractures. The nutrient
artery which arises from posterior tibial artery enters the
bone just distal to the origin of soleus muscle and runs
distally (from the knee I flee.) Hence, chances of delayed
union and non union increases especially in more distal
fractures because of poor blood supply
Mechanism of Injury
 Direct: This mechanism operates in a high energy trauma, e.g.
Figures 3.25A to C
Road traffic accidents, and penetrating injuries. Open,
Radiographs showing (A) Type ll open fracture with bone loss.
comminuted, displaced fractures and crush injuries (injury to
Initially stabilized by an intramedullary interlocking nail to save the
the bone and soft tissue) are commonly seen.
 m  s a a pa  e pann p 
soft tissue cover had been obtained and infection controlled. (B and
Indirect: This mechanism operates in a low energy trauma,
e.g. slip and fall. The resultant torsional stress causes oblique,
sliding cortical graft from the same tibia to bridge the defect and
spiral and minimally displaced fractures, with minimal soft
cancellous grafts from the iliac crest to induce osteogenesis. Note
the sound union with adequate new bone formation.
tissue damage.
The injury is considered as more severe when the fracture
pattern is comminuted or spiral than when it is transverse.
Complications and their Management
a. Compartmental syndrome.
Management
b. Delayed union.
C. Nonunion.
Methods employed are Nonoperative and Operative.
Compartmental syndrome is managed by immediate
NonoperativeMethods
adequate decompression of leg compartment along with
appropriate skeletal stabilization as per indication. (Extermal/
Nonoperative method are used in less severe form of fractures.
Intermal).
These are in the form of closed reduction and maintaining
 Delayed unions and nonunions are treated by bone grafting
the reduction in an above knee plaster of Paris or fibre cast
techniques (cancellous/cortico-cancellous grafting) along with
PTB cast and the Sarmiento tec hnique of cast bracing (Refer)
stabilization by means of intermal fixation or immobilization
is employed to enhance healing when delayed union is
im plaster/ fibre cast (Figs 3.25A to C).
observed at follow up.
 In difficult cases with bone loss and bad scarring, the
method of corticotomy and bone transportation is employed
Operative Methods
Closed/ Open reduction and intermal fixation is the procedure
(Figs 3.26A to E).
 of choice in more severe, displaced, comminuted and segmen-
Open tibial fractures should always to be converted into
tal fractures. Generally Ender nails, Interlocking nails are the  closed fractures as early as possible in order to prevent
implants that are used. Plates are also used employing the  (a) leak of fracture hematoma, (b) devitalization of exposed
technique of MIPPO (minimally invasive percutaneous plate
bone, and (c) secondary infection; thereby facilitating
osteosynthesis). Extermal fixator application after thorough
 normal healing process and preventing the complication of
wound debridement is indicated in open fractures to save the
delayed union,nonunion and osteomyelitis. Many a times,
limb and facilitate good postoperative wound care and
it is not possible to achieve an early soft tissue cover and
undertake secondary flap coverage procedure.
nonunion and delayed unions are common. This
Fractures in the Lower Limb
73
Injuries Around the Knee Joint
Injuries around the the knee joint include:
a.  Ligament injuries.
b. Meniscal injuries.
c.Fractures.
A
Ligament Injuries
The principal ligaments which stabilize the knee joint are the
Medial and Lateral collateral ligaments and the Anterior and
Posterior cruciate ligaments.
Types ofLigamentDisruptions
a.Medial collateral ligament: Extends from medial femoral
condyle to medial tibial condyle. Has two components: A
superficial and a deep. The deep component is attached
to the medial meniscus and divided further into the
menisco-femoral and menisco-tibial ligament. It is the
C
main stabilizer of the knee in 30° of flexion. It resists
valgus stress. Hence, an excessive valgus stress tears or
ruptures the ligament (Fig. 3.27).
Thus, the test employed to diagnose the ruptured
medial collateral ligament is known as "Valgus stress test"
(Fig. 3.28)
b.Lateral collateral ligament: Extends from lateral femoral
condyle to the head of the fibula.It is not attached to the
lateral meniscus and is separated from it by the tendon of
popliteus muscle.
E
Figures 3.26A to E
(A) Picture showing the result after sural flap cover for a grade Ill
open fracture. (B) Radiograph showing persistent defect secondary
to bone loss. (C to E) Radiographs showing distraction and
compression osteogenesis by bone transportation technique using
uniplanar fixator. Because of bad scarring over the anteromedial and
lateral aspect of the tibia it was decided to employ this technique.
Note the successful result (E).
1st degree sprain.
2nd degree sprain.
3rd degree sprain.
complication is expected in open tibial diaphyseal fractures
Localized jointpain
Localized jointpain
severetenderness
and tenderness
and tendernesswith
and markedjoint
and is treated accordingly.
without laxity con-
evidenceof jointlaxity,
laxitybecauseof
tusionno disruption
Minimal orpartial
total disruption
Essay Question
of ligaments
disruptionof ligament
of ligaments
Classify open fractures. Discuss the management of an open
Figure 3.27
Showing the different types of ligament disruptions that can occur
diaphyseal fracture of the tibia and its complications.
following valgus stress.
74
Essentials of Orthopedics
Jointopens up
Joint opensup
medially
laterally
Figure 3.29
Figure 3.28
 Showing performance of a varus stress test.
Showing the performance of valgus stress test.
It resists varus stress. Hence an excessive varus stress
of the tibia on thefemur.Lachmann test is more sensitive
tears or ruptures the ligament.
Meniscus may sometimes block the anterior translation
Thus the test employed to diagnose the ruptured lateral
of the tibia in Anterior Drawer Test (Figs 3.31 and 3.32).
collateral ligament is known as " Varus Stress Test'
Posterior cruciate ligament: Extends from the posterior
(Fig. 3.29).
c. Anterior cnuciate ligament: Extends from the anterior
intercondylar eminence to the inner aspect of the medial
femoral condyle. Imparts posterior translational stability
intercondylar eminence of the tibial plateu to the inner
 during flexion and extension of the knee. It also prevents
aspect of the lateral femoral condyle. Because the ligament
twists on itself before getting attached to the femur, its
femur from sliding anteriorly on the tibia and limits lateral
rotation when the foot is on the ground. It gets injured
anerior fibres are posterior at insertion and posterior fibers
when there is a posterior thrust on a hyperextended knee,
are anterior. It is thus divided into two components. The
e.g. stepping into a pot hole or a direct blow on to the
anteromedial and the bulk. The anteromedial portion
becomes taut in flexion and the bulk becomes taut in
upper tibia (Fig 3.33).
The test employed to diagnose the posterior cruciate
extension thus imparting anterior translational stability
during flexion as well as during extension of the knee joint.
trates posterior translationof the tibia on thefemur
It also prevents the femur from sliding posteriorly on the
(Fig.3.34).
tibia, prevents hyperextension of the knee and limits
medial rotation when the foot is on the ground. It gets
Terrible Triad of O'Donoghue (Unhappy Triad)
injured when subjected to a twisting force on a hyper-
extended knee (Figs 3.30A and B).
It is a combination of injuries of Medial Meniscus, Medial
Thetestsemployed to diagnoseanterior cruciate
Collateral and Anterior Cruciate Ligaments. Results in a highly
ligament injury are the“Anterior Drawer Test"and the
 unstable knee. Needs highly skilled, professional management
"Lachmann Test."They demonstrate anterior translation
(Fig. 3.35).
Fractures in the Lower Limb
75
Posterior
cruciate
ligament
(Intact)
Anterior
cruciate
ligament
(ruptured)
B
ACLinjury
Usual cause
istwistingof
hyperextended
knee,as in
landing after
basketball
jumpshot
Figures 3.30A and B
Showing the mechanism of injury of an anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL).
Lachmann'stestperformedin20°-30°of
flexionshowsanteriortranslation
Figure 3.32
Figure 3.31
 Showing the performance of Lachmann's test.
Showing the Anterior Drawer Test being performed.
Management of Ligament Injuries
 the tom ligaments e.g semitendinosus, bone patella bone
a. Primary repair: Repair is done as an immediate procedure
 graft, fascia lata. Some times even artificial ligaments are
within 24-48 hrs after the injury. The limb is immobilized
used. The limb is immobilized in a cast or a knee brace
in cast for a period of 3-6 weeks followed by gradual and
 and mobilized gradually.
 active mobilization and muscle strengthening exercises.
Both the above procedures can be done by means of an
b. Secondary reconstruction: It is done as a secondary
open and arthroscopic assisted techniques depending on the
procedure. Tendon and fascial grafts are used to substitute
indication and proficiency of the operating surgeon.
76
Essentials of Orthopedics
Stepping intoa pothole
Knee goes intohyperextension
Directblow
Figure 3.33
Showing mechanism of injury of a posterior cruciate ligament (PCL).
Figure 3.35
Showing the 'terrible/unhappy triad' of O'Donoghue.
Essay Question
Discuss ligament injuries of the knee joint and their
management.
Meniscal Injuries
'Meniskos' in Greek means Crescent.
The meniscus is a fibrocartilagenous semilunar
(C-shaped) structure situated within the knee joint and is
moulded according to the shape of the tibial and femoral
condyle, being convex on its undersurface and concave on
Posteriordrawer
testshowing
its upper surface, thicker at periphery and thinner at the
posteriortranslation
center. It is attached to the tibia along its anterior (anterior
hom) lateral and posterior (posterior hom) margins but is
free in its medial margin. The blood supply to the meniscus
 is more towards the periphery than at the center and as it
Figure 3.34
 approaches the center it thins out. (Hence, peripheral tears
Showing the performance of Posterior Drawer Test.
 heal better when compared to central tears).
Revision Questions
Functions of the Meniscus
1. Valgus stress test.
 During the movements of the knee and weight bearing the
 2. Varus stress test.
meniscus:
3. Anterior drawer test.
1. Prevents friction by cushioning effect.
4. Posterior drawer test.
 2. Helps in the distribution of synovial fluid.
5. Lachmann test.
3. Helps in the distribution body weight.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
Posteriormeniscofemoralligament
Arcuatepopliteal
Semimembranosustendon
ligament
Obliquepopliteal ligament
Fibularcollateral
ligament
Posteriorcruciateligament
Bursa
Tibialcollateralligament
Popliteustendon
(deeppartbound to
medialmeniscus)
Medial meniscus
Lateralmeniscus
Synovial membrane
(shown inredcolor)
Superior articularsurface
Superior articularsurface
of tibia(medialfacet)
of tibia(lateral facet)
Joint capsule
lliotibialtractblended
Anteriorcruciateligament
intocapsule
Infrapatellarfatpad
Ligamentumpatellae
Figure 3.36
Diagrammatic representation of the structures on the tibial plateau.
Attachmentof
medial meniscus
Transverseligament
Anteriorcruciate
Posterior
ligament
Attachmentsof
cruciateligament
lateral meniscus
Deepfibersof tibial
Popliteus
Tibial spines
collateral ligament
Lateralmeniscus
Medial meniscus
Fibularcollateral
Lateral meniscus
Semimembranosus
ligament
Medialmeniscus
Attachmentof
medial meniscus
Superficial fibersof
Anterior
tibialcollateralligament
cruciateligament
Posterior cruciate
ligament
Figure 3.38
Figure 3.37
 Showing the attachment of the deep layer of the medial collateral
Line diagram showing the structures attached to the upper surface
ligament to the medial meniscus and how the tendon of popliteus is
of the tibia.
inbetween and separates the lateral meniscus from the lateral
ligament.
Thus,loss/removal of the meniscus results in uneven
Lateral Meniscus is smaller in diameter,wider in body
distributionof bodyweightandpredisposes to degenerative
and more mobile because it is not attached to the lateral
arthritis.
An injured meniscus too leads to derangement in the
collateral ligament but separated from it by the tendon of
popliteus.
congruity of the joint, interferes with the normal movement
For these reasons, medial meniscus is injured more
and promotes uneven distribution of stress thus promoting
commonly than the lateral meniscus (Figs 3.36 to 3.38).
degenerative changes even faster.
Medial meniscus is larger in diameter, narrower in body
MechanismofInjury
and less mobile because it is attached to the deep portion of
the medial collateral ligament through the menisco-femoral
During normal flexion and extension of the knee joint the
and menisco-tibial ligaments.
menisci follow the femoral and the tibial condyle and allow a
78
EssentialsofOrthopedics
smooth gliding. But when there is an abnormal stress of
rotation instead of following the condyles they start moving
on the condyles. Thus, they are drawn into the center of the
joint where they get trapped, pinched and torm. Flexion,
Abduction, Extermal rotation stress at the knee causes intermal
rotation of femur on the tibia and draws the medial meniscus
into the center and injures it. The reverse, i.e. Flexion,
Longitudinal(vertical)tear
Radialtear
Horizontal tear
Adduction, Intermal rotation stress causes extermal rotation of
femur on the tibia and draws the lateral meniscus into the
Mayprogress
Mayprogressto
Mayprogressto
center of the joint and injures it. The site of tear is related to
to
the degree of flexion. In more flexion, more posterior part of
the meniscus (posterior horm) is involved. In more extension
(lesser degrees of flexion) more anterior part is involved. Thus,
the tear begins posteriorly and extends from posterior to
anterior direction as the knee extends from a flexed position.
Types of tear (Fig. 3.39)
A. Longitudinal tear - May proceed to become a ‘Bucket
Bucket handletear
Parrotbeaktear
Flaptear
handle tear'.
B. Radial tear - May proceed to become a ‘Parrot beak tear'.
Figure 3.39
C. Horizontal tear - May proceed to become a *Flap tear'.
Showing different types of meniscal tears.
D. Combined tear - A combination of different tears,
generally seen in a degenerative meniscus (in elderly).
and the knee is gradually extended.A click is
Diagnosis
appreciated when the torn portion of the medial
Signs and symptoms
meniscus comes in contact with the femur.
a.Constant pain in the knee aggravated by movement.
 b. For lateral meniscus: With the patient lying supine on
b. Tendermess in the joint line. (Medial/Lateral)
the examination table the knee is completely flexed.
c. Swelling when effusion is present.
To check the lateral meniscus the examiner palpates
d. Sensation of giving way.
the posterolateral joint withone hand and holds the
(Other causes for Sensation of giving way are Loose
foot with the other. The leg is then intermally rotated
bodies, Chondromalacia patella, Weakness of quadriceps,
and the knee is gradually extended.A click is
 Instability due to ligament injury.)
appreciated when the torn portion of the lateral
e.  Pathological locking. This is seen only in ^Bucket handle
meniscus comes in contact with the femur.
tear'. Pseudo locking is seen in acute injuries of the knee
The Medial meniscus is more commonly injured
with hemarthrosis.
than the lateral meniscus.The click appreciated is not
Note: Sensation of giving way and pathological locking
only felt but can be audible at times. The tear of the
occurs when the torn portion of the meniscus comes in contact
posterior portion of the meniscus produces a click in
with the articular surface of the femur during movement.
0°-90°of movement as the knee is extended from a
completely flexed position. The tear involving the
Clinical Diagnostic Tests
middle and anterior portion of the meniscus produces
a click beyond 90°of movement.
1.McMurray's test
a. For medial meniscus: With the patient lying supine on
2. Apley's grinding test: With the patient prone the knee is
the examination table the knee is completely flexed.
flexed to 90° and the thighis fixed against the examination
 To check the medial meniscus the examiner palpates
table. The leg is then held, pulled upwards and a rotational
theposteromedialjoint with one hand and holds the
strain is given. When ligaments are torm this part of the
foot with the other. The leg is then externally rotated
test is painful.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
79
Next the leg is pushed downwards and rotated while
Current research is towards meniscal replacement using
the joint is slowly flexed and extended. When the meniscus
meniscusobtainedeitherfromabraindeadcadaverorusing
is injured, pain is observed in the joint.
an artificial meniscus.
3. Squat test: This test is performed by asking the patient to
Revision Questions
take full squats with the leg and the feet together, alter-
1.McMurrays test.
nately in intermal and extermal rotation. Pain in the joint
2. Apley's grinding test.
in intermally rotated position (extermal rotation of femur
 3. Discuss the mechanism of meniscal injury.
on the tibia) suggests injury to the lateral meniscus and
   d  x un 
Essay Question
femur on the tibia) suggests injury to the medial meniscus.
1. Discuss the anatomy of the knee joint. Classify the
 meniscal injury and discuss its management .
Note: Presence of pain and click are diagnostic of
meniscal injury. But absence doesn't rule out tears of the
2. Discuss meniscal injury with reference to the mechanism.
meniscus.
classification, diagnosis and management
Fracture of the Patella
Investigations
General Information
a. Plain X-ray: It is done mainly to identify associated
fractures. It is useful in long standing injuries to look for
Patella is a sesamoid bone within the quadriceps muscle. It
was thought to be a phylogenetically inherited bone without
degenerative changes in the knee joint.
any function. (Brooke-1937). This theory made the people
b. Diagnostic arthroscopy: It is an ideal and confirmatory
 to remove the fractured patella and patellectomy became the
investigation. Other associated injuries, e.g. osteochondral
treatment of choice until Haxton (1945) proved beyond
fractures are also identified. (If necessary to be followed
doubt that patella certainly has a definite function. He
immediately with arthroscopic surgery in the same sitting
quoted the Law of von Schwann which says that the tension
as this is an invasive investigation and is done under
of contraction decreases as the musclefibershortens.This
anesthesia.)
is true at the elbow and for triceps. Thus a boxer delivers a
c. MRl: It is a noninvasive procedure. It needs a good
punch in flexion to generate maximum power. But this is
sensitive machine as well as accurate interpretation to
not true at the knee and for quadriceps. A football player
avoid false-negative and false positive reports.
kicks the ball with the knee in full extension (and not in
d. Arthrography: After the advent of arthroscopy, arthro-
flexion) to generate maximum power. Thus quadriceps
 graphy has a very limited role and not done routinely.
behaves against the Law of Von Schwann and the muscle
 power (tension) in the quadriceps increases as the muscle
Management
fibre shortens. The patella acts as the fulcrum and augments
the power of the quadriceps and increases it. This is the
Absence of meniscus does not compromise the function of
function of the patella. Much of this power is lost after
the knee markedly. It only leads to late degenerative changes.
 patellectomy and quadriceps behaves like triceps in accor-
But an injured/ tom meniscus severely compromises the
dance with the Law of Von Schwann. This results in
function of the knee and as this is directly proportional to the
quadriceps lag (Quadriceps stops short of terminal 5° of
severity of injury needs immediate attention.
extens1on.)
When possible the torm meniscus is repaired, e.g. smaller
tears. The procedure is known as meniscorraphy.
Mechanism of Injury (Fig. 3.40)
When repair is not possible the tom meniscus is excised
a.Direct: In this there is direct impact on the patella, e.g.
either partially, e.g. in larger tears involving posterior hom,
dash board injury, direct blow in assault.
bucket handle tear, etc. or completely, e.g. in tears with a
The type of fracture is a comminuted (shattered into
degenerate meniscus, complete tear, etc. The procedure is
pieces) fracture . The classical variety is known as a ^Stel-
known as meniscectomy. (partial/complete.). It is usually done
late fracture.
by arthroscopic surgery. It can also be done by open surgical
 b.  Indirect: In this mechanism the force acts indirectly and
methods.
causes the fracture, e.g. slipping while walking. When a
80
Essentials of Orthopedics
FractureofPatella
Nondisplaced transverse
Displaced transverse
Transverse fracture
with comminution of
Severely comminuted
fracturewithintact
fracturewithtears
fracture
retinacula
inretinacula
distalpole
Undisplaced
Transverse
Loweror
Comminuted
Comminuted
Vertical
Osteochondral
upperpole
undisplaced
displaced
Figures 3.40A and B
Showing different types of fracture patella.
person slips on a slippery surface one limb is off the
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
 ground and the limb which is on the ground goes into
1.
 All the classical signs of a fracture are present.
 progressive flexion at the knee. If this flexion continues
2.
 Presence of hemarthrosis, resulting in acute swelling.
it results in a fall.Thus it is the reflex mechanism that
 Broken patellar fragments can be felt by the palpating
operates to avoid a fall wherein the flexed limb tries to
hand.
straighten out and maintain balance. This straightening
 4. Hand can be insinuated between the fragments and
occurs against gravity and the body weight. Thus patella
palpation of femoral condyle is possible.
breaks.The type of fracture that occurs is transverse in
5.
Loss of active extension at the knee (suggesting injury to
nature.
the quadriceps mechanism).
C.
Combined mechanism: The major fragment remains non-
comminuted and the fracture is transverse and the other
Investigation
fragment is comminuted (minor fragment).
X-ray of the Knee joint, standard AP and Lat views give
d. Avulsion: It occurs due to the pull of quadriceps muscle
accurate diagnosis .
 Or patellar tendon and results in an isolated fracture of
Management
the superior or inferior pole.
Note: Whenever a comminution is observed it suggests
Patellectomy: This procedure is to be considered as the treat-
that a direct mechanism has operated in causing a fracture
ment of yesterday. Rarely done these days. Only indication—
and vice versa.
perhaps is in elderly patients with osteoporotic bone, severe
Fractures in the Lower Limb
81
A
Typeofpatellarfixation:a-modified tensionbandwiring,b-LotkeLabwiring,
c-Magnusonwiring,d-Circlagewiring
B
Techniqueof interfragmentaryfixation andtensionbandwiring
Figure 3.41
Figures 3.42A and B
Radiographs showing pathologic ossification, a complication of
Showing someof thetechniquesemployed inthefixationoffracture
patellectomy.
patella.
degenerative changes in the joint and the fracture is badly
1. Circlage wiring of Martin.
comminuted. Never done in the young.
2.
Figure of 8 tension band wiring.
 3. Interfragmentary screw fixation combined with one of the
Disadvantages
above techniques (Figs 3.43 and 3.44).
a.  Nonmal protection to the knee is lost.
b. Quadriceps lag develops.
Advantages
C. Permanent atrophy of the quadriceps.
a. Nonmal protection to the knee is preserved.
d. Prolonged immobilization.
b. No quadriceps lag.
c. No permanent atrophy of quadriceps.
e.Pathologic ossification (Fig. 3.41).
d.  No prolonged immobilization.
Open reduction and internal fixation:
e.  No pathologic ossification is possible.
This procedure is the treatment of choice. Methods used
Disadvantage
consist of (Figs 3.42A and B)
a.  Possibility of a late patellofemoral osteoarthritis (rare).
Figure 3.43
Radiographs of a Transverse Fracture Patella fixed by a single Cancellous screw and SS Circlage Wiring. Note the displacement of the
fractured proximal fragment because of the pull of the Quadriceps muscle.
82
Essentials of Orthopedics
A,Type1
B,Type Il
Figure 3.44
Radiographs AP and Lat view showing a Stellate Fracture Patella
internally fixed with the help of multiple Inter-fragmentary screws and
 Circlage wiring.
Revision Questions
1. Stellate fracture.
2. Patellectomy.
C,Type I
D,Type IV
Essay Question
Discuss the function of the patella. Describe the mechanism
of injury of Fracture Patella and discuss its management.
Fractures of the Tibial Condyle (Tibial Plateau)
General Information
Tibial plateau fractures commonly occur as a result of axial
loading. They are known as bumper or fender fractures
8
because they occur as a result of an impact of the bumper
on the knee in a road traffic accident. They are often
E,TypeV
F,TypeVI
associated with ligamentous disruption of the knee. Also
Figures 3.45A to F
injury to the nerves and vessels and compartment syndrome
Radiographs showing classification of tibial plateau fractures based
is quite common with these injuries. Hence they demand a
on Schatzker. (A) Type I-A cleavage or split. (B) Type Il-Clevage or
 careful evaluation and efficient management. Being
split with depression (C) Type Il-Pure central depression. (D) Type
 articular fracture secondary degenerative changes are
IV-Medial condyle fracture.(E)TypeV-Bicondylar fracture (F)Type
common and osteoarthritis may develop at a later period
Vl-Associated with metphyseal and diaphyseal fractures.
however well the fracture is treated.
Classification
Mechanism of Injury
Based on Schatzker classification—Tibial plateau fractures
These fractures occur as a result of a direct impact onto the
are classified into VI types (Figs 3.45A to F).
condyles of the tibia from the side, e.g. a vehicle striking the
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
pedestrian. As a result of this the knee is subjected to a severe
varus or a valgus stress when there is axial loading. The tibial
a. All the signs of a fracture are present.
condyle is split or crushed by the opposing medial / lateral
b.
 In addition knee may be swollen due to hemarthrosis.
condyle of the femur.
c. Instability at the knee may be present.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
83
A
B
Figures 3.46A and B
Diagnosis
under C-arm image intensifier guidance, e.g. MIPPO
technique.
An X-ray gives the diagnosis of these fractures. Complex
 b. Open reduction and reconstruction of articular surface,
fractures demand detailed evaluation by CT with 3D recons-
truction and MRI which reveals the exact nature of bony and
 intermal fixation and repair of soft tissue injury. At times
bone grafting may be necessary (Figs 3.46A and B).
soft tissue injury, respectively.
Treatment
Complications
Aim of the treatment: The treatment aims at maintaining the 
 a. Compartment syndrome.
earliest to restore the joint function. Hence demands accurate
 c. Injury to the lateral Popliteal nerve.
reduction and fixation. Surgery is the treatment of choice to
d.Skin necrosis.
achieve this goal.
e.  Malunion with deformity and restricted joint movement.
When defect is observed at reduction bone grafts are used
 f. Secondary degenerative arthritis.
to bridge the same, especially in those fractures with
depression and extensive comminution.
Essay Question
Nonoperative treatment:
Classify Tibial plateau fractures. Discus the mechanism of
a.Immobilization in plaster casts: This is instituted only in
 injury, diagnosis, management and the complications of tibial
minor degrees of fractures which are undisplaced and the  plateau fractures.
articular surface involvement is not extensive.
b. Low tibial traction. This is an excellent altermative method.
Fractures of the Femoral Condyles
Is indicated when the skin condition or the general
Fracture involving the femoral condyles consists of-
condition of the patient does not penmit surgical inter-
a. Those extra-articular fractures which occur just above the
vention, e.g. blistering and threatened compartmental
condyles and hence are known as Supracondylar.
syndrome, associated head injury, etc.
b. Those intra-articulr fractures which involve the medial or
Operative:
the lateral condyle and hence are known as Unicondylar
a. Closed manipulation, reduction and fixation using cannu-
fractures.
lated cancellous screws only for less severe fractures;
 c. Those fractures which split the condyles and hence are
canmulated cancellous screws along with plates and screws
kmown as Intercondylar fractures. The split may occur in
for more severe fractures. Plates fixation may be done
the fonm of "T'or 'Y'.
84
Essentials of Orthopedics
Lateralcondylar
Medialcondylar
Group A-Extra-articular fractures, i.e. Supracondylar
fracture
fracture
fractures.
Group B-Intra-articular fractures involving one condyle.
either lateral (common) or medial.
Group C-Bicondylar intra-articular fractures. These are
 basically intercondylar fractures with supracondylar extension.
"T'and 'Y' fractures.
Supracondylar
fracture
Medialcondylarfracture
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
a. All the signs of a fracture.
b. Swelling around the knee due to hemarthrosis. (If there
is break in the capsule the hemarthrosis spreads into the
soft tissues).
C.All the movements at the knee are lost.
Diagnosis
川I
Intercondylarfractures'T'and'Y
X-ray-AP and Lat views give the diagnosis. Always keep in
Figure 3.47
mind a coronal plane fracture, i.e. the Hoffa fracture.
 Showing the three groups of condylar fractures based on Muller's
Classification.
Treatment
Mechanism ofInjury
Though nonoperative treatment in the form of reduction and
These fractures can occur as a result of a direct injury or a
skeletal traction may result in union in less severe fonms of
fall from a height by means of tibia being driven finmly into
fracture, open reduction and intermal fixation is the treatment
the condyles of the femur.
of choice. Surgery aims at achieving a sound stabilization so
that early mobilization is begun to avoid disabling stiffness
Classification (Fig. 3.47)
of the knee joint. The principle of treatment in Group C
Based on Muller's classification supracondylar fractures are
fractures is to convert it first into a supracondylar fracture
divided into three groups:
and then fix it to the main fragment. When there is bad
A
B
C
D
Figures 3.48A to D
a Dynamic Condylar Screw. Note that the insertion of a K-wire has converted it into a Supracondylar fracture. Interfragmentary screw fixation
has been done for comminuted fragments in the supracondylar region. Then the Dynamic Condylar Screw and a Barrel plate is inserted. At
times interfragmantary screw fixation may be necessary to hold the split condyles in position prior to the Dynamic Condylar Screw.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
85
metaphyseal comminution wherein restoration of skeletal
assessment of the bone is absolutely essential before the
amatomy is not possible, a primary bone grafting procedure
 treatment is planned).
is undertaken (Figs 3.48A to D).
Treatment
Essay Question
a. Immediate immobilization of the fracture in a splint and
Classify condylar fractures of the femur. Discus the mecha-
traction to prevent complications.
nism of injury diagnosis management and the complications
b. Administration of IV fluids and blood
of condylar fractures.
c. Treatment of other associated injuries if any.
Fracture of the Shaft of the Femur
C. Definitive treatment of the fracture is considered only after
the patient is stabilized.
General Information
Definitive Treatment of Fracture Femur
The fracture of the shaft of the femur is one of the major
 long bone fractures. The portion of the bone extending
Fracture femur in adults is always treated by reduction and
from about 7.5 cm below the lesser trochanter to about 5
intemal fixation. Several methods are described. Closed
cm proximal to the supracondylar portion of the femur is
methods are preferred to open methods. The methods are:
known as the shaft of the femur. The narrowest portion of
i. Open reduction and intermal fixation using plates and
the shaft is known as isthmus. The bone is highly vascular
screws or open nailing (Figs 3.49A and B).
and surrounded all round by strong muscles of the thigh.
ii. Closed reduction and intermal fixation, e.g intramedullary
Heavy blood loss up to 1.5 liters can occur and if not
interlocking nail, MIPPO technique, etc.
i. Reduction and extermal fixation (Only in case of open
shock. The accompanying soft tissue injury too is
fractures).
considerable and adds on to the insult.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Closed and
Mechanism of Injury
Open Methods
A force of considerable magnitude either bending or direct
Closed method
Advantages:
impact is necessary to break the femur. Hence the fracture
shaft femur occurs as a result of severe trauma
a. Retains the fracture hematoma and facilitates the process
of union.
Types of Fracture Femur
b. No further soft tissue damage.
a. Transverse fracture.
Disadv antages:
b. Oblique fracture.
a.  Anatomical reduction is not possible (Acceptable align-
c. Spiral fracture.
ment is possible).
d. Comminuted fracture.
e. Segmental fracture.
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
The clinical diagnosis is easy as the fracture invariably gets
displaced and abnormal mobility develops immediately. The
thigh is swollen considerably because of heavy bleeding and
associated muscle injury. Deformity and shortening of the limb
is always present.
Investigations
a. Hb%, PCV and blood grouping and cross-matching is a
Figures 3.49A and B
 Radiographs showing (A) A badly comminuted fracture of the shaft
must.
of the femur. It is not possible to achieve good apposition of fractured
b. X-rays help in identifying the type and level of fracture
fragments by closed methods. (B) Showing fracture union after open
as well as the diameter of the medullary canal (Proper
reduction and internal fixation by Interlocking nailing procedure.
86
Essentials of Orthopedics
Fractures Around the Hip
The fractures seen around the hip are:
a.Fracture of the head of the femur. (Very very rare. Usually
associated with hip dislocation).
b. Fracture of the neck of the femur (True intracapsular
fracture).
c. Intertrochanteric fracture (True extracapsular fracture)
d. Subtrochanteric fracture.
Fracture of the Neck of the Femur
General Information
This fracture commonly occurs in elderly in the 7th decade
and in women with osteoporosis (after menopause),
Figure 3.50
 following a very trivial torsional trauma (slipping). Sir Astley
Radiograph of a fracture shaft femur lower 1/3 with an arteriogram
showing transection of the femoral artery. Junction of the upper
Cooper was convinced about this fact way back in 1800's
2/3 and lower 1/3 is the site where the femoral artery enters the
and said "A patient sustains a fracture and then falls and
popliteal fossa through the opening in the Adductor magnus muscle.
not that he falls and then sustains this fracture." Though
This is the vulnerable area for injury.
this is true in elderly patients, in the young more severe
 trauma is necessary to produce a fracture neck of the femur.
Open method
Thus it is natural to conclude that more than one mechanism
Advantage:
operates to cause a fracture neck of the femur.
a.  Anatomical reduction is possible
This fracture even today poses several problems to the
Disadvantages:
treating surgeon. Hence is known as a problem fracture,
a. Fracture hematoma is lost and union depends on secondary
unsolved fracture and some call this (out of frustration)
fracture hematoma.
as an unsolvable fracture.
b. Dissection of soft tissues causes a second insult (One has
Problems Associated with the Fracture
to be meticulous in dissection).
Good appositionof the fragments with at least more than
1. There is no role for non-operative treatment. Surgery is
75% contact is essential for union.When this is not achieved
the treatment of choice.
by closed methods do not hesitate to do an open reduction
Whitman spica given in the yester years was a failure
and intermal fixation.
amd also associated with all the problems of prolonged
confinement to bed, e.g. bed sore, hypostatic pneumonia.
deep vein thrombosis, etc.
Complications
 2. Difficulty at reduction because of spherical nature of the
Apart from routine complications like Delayed union, Non-
head which when broken is free to rotate within the aceta-
umion and Malunion, fracture shaft femur poses some serious
 bulum (To achieve reduction, a fracture table is necessary
 life threatening and limb threatening complications. They are:
and different methods of reduction are to be employed).
a. Shock and Hemorrhage.
3. No design of the implant, currently available satisfies all
b. Fat Embolism.
the criteria necessary for a secure fixation of the proximal
c. Injury to Femoral artery (Fig. 3.50).
fragment (This is true because of the small size and
d. Injury to Sciatic Nerve.
spherical shape of the proximal fragment. The entire
variety of implants designed so far from Smith Peterson
These complications have to be identified and dealt with
Nail, Moores pins, Knowels pins, Deyreles pins, Asnis
efficiently to avoid disastrous outcome.
screws, Garden's screws to cannulated cancellous screws
justifies this fact).
Essay Question
 4. Precarious blood supply may cause avascular necrosis of
Discuss the mechanism of injury diagnosis management and
the head and nonunion of the fracture. (Retinacular
complications of femoral shaft fractures.
vessels pass along the neck of the femur. These retinacular
Fractures in the Lower Limb
87
A
Anteriorview
B
Posteriorview
C
Cross section view
Retinacular
[Superior-
Foveolarartery
Foveolarartery
arteries
Anterior-
SuperiorRetinacular
Acetabularlabrum
(subsynovialLinferior-
-inferior(subsynovial
-Posterior>
arteries
Synovial
membrane
Ligamentsand
jointcapsule
Anastomosis
betweenmedial
andlateral
circumflex
Ischiofemoral
Foveolar
femoralarteries
ligament
artery
andjoint
-lliopsoas
capsule
Obturator
lliofemoral
Medial
artery
ligamentand
tendon
joint capsule
-Medialcircumflex
circumflex
femoralartery
femoralartery
Ascending
Lateral
circumflex
Retinacular
Transverse
Deepfemoral
artery
femoral artery
arteries
Descending
Femoralartery
Epiphyseal
branchesof
plate
femoralartery
lateralcircumflex
Medialcircumflex
femoralartery
Figures 3.51A to C
Showing the blood supply to the head and neck of the femur. From the Anastomotic Vascular Ring, formed at the base of the neck by the
medial and the lateral circumflex femoral vessels, arise the anterior and posterior retinacular vessels which run along the neck of the femur
towards the head and supply it. Also note the the area supplied by the foveolar artery which is very negligible when compared to the area
supplied by the retinacular vessels. When the neck is fractured the retinacular vessels are invariably damaged. More so if the fracture is
displaced.
vessels break when the neck is fractured. Artery through
C.Axial loading (high energy trauma): The force is transmit-
the ligament of the head of the femur supplies approxi-
ted along the long axis of the femur with or without
mately 10% of the head) (Figs 3.51A to C).
rotational component. This is the commonest mechanism
operating in the young.
Problems of Old Age Associated with the Fracture
Classification
During old age a person is susceptible for multiorgan failure
amd perhaps lives with compromised vital organs. Thus the
Depending on the site (Figs 3.52A to C)
diseases of old age like diabetes, hypertension, CNS compro-
A.Subcapital（
(constitute about 70% of the fractures.
 mise and stroke, renal compromise, increased incidence of
 Fractures occur just below the caput or the head of the
DVT, poor lung function, etc. all complicate the ensuing
femur/at the site where the epiphyseal plate existed.)
surgical procedure.
B. Transcervical (constitute about 20% of the fractures.
Because of the above reasons, the name problem, umsolved
Fractures occur through the neck of the femur.)
 and unsolvable fracture is fully justified even today.
C. Basal (Constitute about 10% of the fractures. Fractures
occur at the base/ origin of the neck.)
Mechanisms ofInjury
Depending on the displacements
a.Indirect mechanism (torsional stress,low energy trauma):
IV stages are identified based on Garden's classification
This is the most common mechanism operating in elderly
 depending on the displacements.
patients when they slip. It is postulated that if the hip is
Garden's classification (Figs 3.53 and 3.54A to D)
in extension, the head of the femur remains fixed in the
Stage-I-Incomplete fracture (or valgus impaction).
acetabulum so that the extermal rotation stress of the slip
Sage-I-Complete fracture without displacement.
falls on the neck of the femur and breaks it. More distal
Sage Il-Complete fracture with minimal displacement.
fractures occur if the hip is in flexion during the extermal
Stage IV-Complete fracture with marked displacement.
rotation stress.
b.Direct mechanism: This is the result of a fall on the
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
trochanter. The force is transmitted to the neck directly
1.
 Following trivial/severe trauma a patient develops severe
and the neck breaks.
 pain in the hip and unable to stand and walk.
88
Essentials of Orthopedics
Subcapital
Transcervical
Basal
Figures 3.52A to F
Diagrams and radiographs showing different types of fractures of the neck of femur.
2. The involved limb is in flexion, abduction external
Management
rotation. (Helpless attitude of the limb)
 3. Minimal shortening is observed.
fractures. Procedures employed are:
 4. There is tendermess over the mid inguinal point.
a. Intemal fixation.
 5. The greater trochanter is normal and non-tender.
b.Arthroplasty (Fig. 3.55).
c. Reconstructive procedures.
Diagnosis
Factors to be considered before intermal fixation:
 Radiography: Views suggested are X-ray pelvis with both hips
a. Age of the patienr: In younger age, attempt should always
AP with the limb in maximum intemal rotation (to visualize
be made to preserve the head and neck of the femur. Hence
the neck and to assess the quality of the bone) and cross-table
the fractures are to be anatomically reduced and intermally
lateral view (to visualize the anterior and posterior portion of 
fixed. (Closed reduction and intermal fixation. The fracture
the neck and also to look for posterior comminution).
site is not opened).
Bone scan and MRI in late presentations are useful to
b.
Type and nature of the fracture: Displaced and commi-
diagnose AVN.
nuted fracture indicates severe trauma and they are more
prone for complications of AVN and nonunion even if
Bigelow's Dictate: In 1864, Bigelow remarked that "While
intermal fixation is done. Hence to be treated at earliest as
the impacted fracture of the base of the femoral neck unites
 an emergency procedure to achieve secure bony contact
by bone, if at all, there seems to be a decreasing tendency
amd minimize the risk of AVN and nonunion.
to osseous union as we approach the smaller portion of the
c. Duration of the fracture: Longer the duration of the
neck near its head.""
fracture the incidence of AVN and nonunion is more.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
89
Normalfemur
Stage-ll
Trabeculaeof theacetabulum
Anglebetweenthetrabeculae
Alignmentof thetrabeculae
andtheheadandneck
of theheadandneckof
of thehead and theneckis
of thefemurareinalignment
thefemurisdisturbed(>180°angle)
maintainedincompletefracture
inincompletefracture
Stage-lI
Stage-Iv
Fractureisminimallydisplaced
Fractureismarkedlydisplaced,Heads
Head isrotatedinferiorly.Alignment
rotatedbacktonormal.Alignmentbetween
betweenthetrabeculaeoftheacetabulum
thetrabeculaeof theacetabulumandthehead
andthehead isdisturbedaswellasthose
hasreturnedtonormalbutthosebetween
between theheadandtheneck
theheadandtheneckregaintheiralignment.
Figures 3.53A to E
Showing the trabecular pattern along the head and neck of the femur in different types of fractures. The red arrrows represent the direction
shaft for Stage I and Stage Il fractures and trabecular pattern of the neck with the acetabulum for Stage Ill and Stage IV fractures. Break
in continuity and loss of relation is observed.
Hence the fixation is to be augmented with vascularised
Factors to be considered before replacement hemi-
bone grafting techniques, e.g. Meyer's muscle pedicle
arthroplasty.
graft.
a.Age of the patient: Elderly whose life expectancy is limited
d.
Quality of bone (Singh index). The quality of the bone
and who cannot tolerate prolonged confinement to bed and
has a direct relation to quality of healing. Osteoporotic
limited activity till the fracture unites are considered for
bone of an old person heals poorly when compared to a
arthroplasty.
nonosteoporotic bone of the young.
b.
Type of the fracture: All fractures other than incomplete
Implants used for intermal fixation:Canulated cancellous
fractures and impacted fractures are suitable for
screws, Garden's screws, Moore's pins and Knowel's pins.
arthroplasty.
90
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figure 3.55
 Radiograph showing a bilateral Hemiarthroplasty using Austin Moore
prosthesis done for a case of bilateral fracture neck femur. First the
patient sustained the fracture in the right hip and an year later in the
left hip.
Figures 3.54A to D
b. With resorption of the neck of the femur—uncemented
Radiographs showing all the four stages of fracture neck of femur
Total hip arthroplasty (Fig. 3.56B).
based on Garden's classification. Note the trabecular disruption
between the head and neck of the femur and the acetabulum which
helps in classifying these fractures.
Relationship between Senile Osteoporosis and
Fracture Neck Femur
c. Duration of the fracture: Duration has no relation to
1.
 It acts as a predisposing factor for a fracture to occur with
arthroplastic procedures. It can be done at any period of
a trivial trauma (Not among black Americans and Bantu
presentation with good preoperative evaluation and
choosing the appropriate prosthesis.
race in whom osteoporosis is uncommon)
2. It is responsible for comminution of the neck.
When Calcar femorale is sufficient Austin Moore's
3. It is responsible for poor healing.
prosthesis is used.When calcar femorale is insufficient
 4. It does not allow firm purchase of the implant in the bone,
Thomson's prosthesis is used with bone cement.
causes loosening of the implant and failure of fracture
(Cemented bipolar prosthesis and primary Total hip
fixation.
arthroplastyare alsothetreatmentmodalitiestobe
considered in selected cases).
d. Treatment modalities depending on status and
SinghIndex of Osteoporosis'and its Importance in
Fracture Neck of Femur
vascularity of the neck and head of the femur:
Singh Index (For more information Ref: Singh. et al JBJS
Management of AVN with or without nonunion:
1970;52-A:457-67).
a.  In the older age group, cemented total joint arthroplasty
This index is based on the nature of the bony trabeculae
is the procedure of choice.
of the Proximal Femur. They are grouped as follows:
b. In the young,uncemented total joint arthroplasty is the
a. Ward's Triangle.
 procedure advocated.
b. Greater Trochanteric Group.
Management of nonunion in young without AVN:
C. Secondary Compressive Group.
a.
Without resorption of the neck of the femur—recons-
d. Secondary Tensile Group.
tructive procedure in the form of vascularized muscle
e. Principal Tensile Group.
pedicle graft (Figs 3.56A and 3.57A, B).
f. Principal Compressive Group.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
91
A
Figures 3.56A and B
 Showing diagrams and a radiograph of (A) Quadratus femoris vascularized muscle pedicle grafting procedure and (B) an uncemented Total
hip replacement.
(thinned out and reduced but no break is
Grade IMl · There is a break in the continuity of the
principal tensile trabeculae opposite the greater
trochanter (break in continuity observed).
· This grade indicates definite osteoporosis.
Grade II
· Only principal compressive trabeculae stand
out prominently.
· Remaining trabeculae have been essentially
absorbed. (absence of tensile trabeculae and
thinning of compression trabeculae)
Grade I
· Principal compressive trabeculae are markedly
 reduced in number and are no longer promi-
Figures 3.57A and B
nent. (few compressive trabeculae are left).
(A) Showing radiographs of—Quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone
grafting procedure done for a 3-month old ununited fracture neck of
Singh index helps in the fixation of fracture neck of femur
femur. (A) Immediate postoperative X-ray (B) X-ray at 3 months follow
in the following way:
up. Note that the fracture has soundly united and there is no evidence
of AVN. The arrow points out at the resultant defect at the donor
1. It gives the physiological age of the bone. (physiological
site.
age is different from chronological age.)
2.
 Helps in taking a decision whether to fix or not to fix.
Depending on the texture they were assessed and graded
Grade VI to Grade IV are acceptable indices for fixation.
into VI Grades, Grade VI being normal and Grade I suggests 
Grade IlI to Grade I are poor indices for fixation.
severe osteoporosis.
3. Helps in placement of the implant in non-osteoporotic
Grade VI · All normal trabecular groups are visible
inferior part of the neck (low insertion to prevent cut
Upper end of femur seems to be completely
through).
occupied by cancellous bone.
Grade V
· Principal tensile and principal compressive
Relationship of Garden's Alignment Index to
trabeculae is accentuated (thinned out).
FractureNeckofFemur
Ward's triangle appears prominent.
Grade IV
·
 Principal tensile trabeculae are markedly
Garden's alignment index: It is an index derived from the
reduced but can still be traced from lateral
 angle formed by the primary compression trabeculae on the
cortex to upper part of the femoral neck.
AP view with the longitudinal axis of the femoral shaft and
92
Essentials of Orthopedics
Intertrochanteric Fracture
Intertrochanteric fractures are those fractures occurring in
the extracapsular portion of the proximal femur, i.e. in the
portion between the greater and the lesser trochanter of the
femur. These fractures, like fracture of the neck of the femur,
occur in elderly people in the 7th decade perhaps at a little
later age, 3-5 yr later than fracture neck of the femur. The
capsule of the hip joint is attached anteriorly at the
intertrochanteric line and posteriorly stops short about a
centimeter before the intertrochanteric crest. These fractures
A
160°B
180°
Occur beyond the attachment of the capsule of the hip joint.
Figures 3.58A and B
The bone in this region is cancellous in nature and hence the
Radiographs AP and Lateral views of hip joint showing satisfactory
union rate in these fractures is higher when compared to the
index after reduction as per Garden's Alignment index. (Refer text
for details)
fracture neck of femur. Also these fractures are encountered
with less complications.
primary compression trabeculae on the lateral view with the
longitudinal axis of the femoral shaft. The ideal angle is 160°
Mechanisms of Injury
in the AP view and 180° in the lateral view. This varies from
a.Indirect mechanism (torsional stress, low energy trauma).
individual to individual. The range is between 155°-180°. This
It is postulated that a torsional stress occurring in an
index helps in assessing the reduction of the fracture as
elderly individual with osteoporotic femur can cause this
acceptable within this range. < 155° and > 180° increases the
fracture. The hip should be in some degree of flexion for
risk of AVN by almost 50%. Nonunion is also commonly seen
the torsional force to act on the intertrochanteric portion
when the angle of reduction is beyond this acceptable range.
of the femur.
b. Direct mechanism: A direct impact on the trochanter
Lowell's Alignment Theory
resulting in intertrochanteric fracture.
Radiographically the outline of the femoral head is convex and
C.Axial loading (High energy trauma): Commonly seen in
the outline of the femoral neck is concave. At the point where
 young patients, e.g. vehicular accidents, fall from a height.
they meet it produces an image of S (right hip) or reversed S
Classifications
(left hip) curve. Instead of S if an unbroken C curve is seen
after reduction, the reduction is considered as unacceptable.
Based on Evans’classification (1949) classified as follows
(See Fig. 3.58A at the place where the arrow is pointing. The
(Fig.3.59)
curve is 'S' shaped and smooth suggesting acceptable reduction.
Type I-Undisplaced 2-fragment fracture.
On the left side the curve formed would take the shape of a
Type II-Displaced 2-fragment fracture.
reverse 'S').
Type IM-3-fragment fracture without posterolateral support.
Revision Questions
Type IV-3-fragment fracture without medial support.
1. Classify fracture Neck of femur.
Type V-4-fragment fracture without posterolateral and medial
 2. Discuss complications of fracture neck of femur.
support.
Type VI—-Reversed obliquity fracture.
3. Garden's Alignment index.
4. Singh index.
(Type I is a stable fracture. Type II, IL,IV and V when
remain displaced afterattemptedreduction are considered
Essay Questions
wnstable.When reduced satisfactorily they are considered
stable.Type VI-Always unstable).
1. Discuss the mechanism of injury, classification, diagnosis
and management of fracture neck of femur.
Based on Boyd and Griffin's classification (1949) classified
 2. Fracture neck of femur an unsolved fracture. Discuss.
as follows (Figs 3.60 and 3.61)
 3. Enumerate the complications of fracture neck of femur.
Type ILinear intertrochanteric fractures (without commi-
Discuss their management.
nution)
Fractures in the Lower Limb
93
VI
Figure 3.59
Showing Evans classification of intertrochanteric fracture diagrammatically represented.
Type II-Intertrochanteric fractures with comminution.
Management
Type IHI-Intertrochanteric fracture with Subtrochanteric
a. Operative: Results are far superior to nonoperative
extension.
 methods and fractures invariably unite when fixed by
 proper techniques using appropriate implants. Risks of
Type IV-Fractures of the trochanteric region and the proximal
surgery in elderly patients and poor quality of bone do
shaft (fracture in two planes).
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
Stable Intertrochanteric fractures: The fracture is
reduced on a fracture table and intermal fixation is done
1. History of a trivial trauma (in young severe trauma).
using a Sliding hip screw and a Barrel plate. Failure to
 2. Gross shortening of limb.
reduce by closed reduction on a fracture table necessitates
3. Flexion abduction extermal rotation deformity.
 open reduction of the fracture before intermal fixation.
4. Tendermess and irregularity over the greater trochanter.
Unstable Intertrochanteric fractures: Medial arch
involvement with fracture of the calcar and posterior
Diagnosis
comminution are the causes for instability. These have to
be well reduced and intermally fixed by providing addi-
By means of standard AP view of the pelvis with both hips
and cross table lateral view (Fig. 3.62).
tional support. Buttress plate, trochanteric hook plate,
94
Essentials of Orthopedics
Typel
TypelIl
Typel
TypeIl
TypeIl
Type IV
Figure 3.60
Type Ill
Type IV
Showing Boyd and Griffin classification of Intertrochanteric fracture.
Figure 3.61
Intertrochanteric fractures. Radiographs showing IV types of fractures
based on Boyd and Griffin classification.
interfragmentary screws are some of the additional
implants that are useful. Modified internal fixation
techniques too are employed in certain fractures, e.g.
 Dimon- Houston technique: Sammiento technique, etc.
b. Nonoperative: Not desirable in elderly as chances of
succumbing to problems of prolonged confinement to bed
are very high.
 Nonoperatively managed by upper tibial skeletal
traction on a supportive splint for 6-8 weeks with
appropriate weights.
Factors affecting union:
1. Poor quality of bone.
2. Poor quality of muscles.
3. Unstable fractures.
 4. Inappropriate technique of fix ation.
Figure 3.62
Essay Question
Radiograph showing union of an intertrochanteric fracture after
Dynamic Hip Screw fixation. Note the central placement of the screw
Discuss the mechanism of injury, classification , diagnosis and
in the head and neck of the femur in the AP view. The same is
 management of intertrochanteric fracture of femur.
desirable in lateral view too for a stable fixation.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
95
Subtrochanteric Fracture
(Because this area is the one subjected to maximum stress
during activities of daily living, the bone too is quite strong
The part of the bone from the lower end of the lesser
 and does not break easily).
trochanter to about 5-7.5 cms below the lesser trochanter
Following fracture the muscles attached to the proximal
(depending on the height of the individual) is considered as
femur displace the fractured fragments (Fig. 3.63).
the subtrochanteric portion of the femur. A fracture occurring
 The gluteus medius and minimus abduct the greater
in this portion of the femur is known as Subtrochanteric
trochanteric (proximal)segment.
fracture.
b. The iliopsoas flexus the lesser trochanteric (proximal)
These fractures are considered to be one among the most
segment.
difficult fractures to treat for following reasons
c.The adductors ,adduct the shaft (distal) segment.
i. The bone involved is cortical. Hence takes a longer time
As this area is highly vascular heavy bleeding also is
to heal when compared to a cancellous bone.
ii. This area is subjected to greater stress when compared
common.
to rest of the femur. Hence failure of treatment is
Classification
common.
Based on Seinsheimer classification (Ref: J Bone and Joint
Mechanism ofInjury
Surgery Am 1978;60:300-6) (Figs 3.64A to H).
Type I
Non displaced fractures/fractures < 2 mm displace-
a. Direct—a direct impact onto the lateral thigh by a fall.
ment.
This mechanism is common in elderly.
Type II
Two-part fracture.
b. High velocity injury, e.g. Road traffic accident. This
A. Transverse fracture.
mechanism is common in the young wherein a force of
B. Spiral fracture with lesser trochanter in the
considerable magnitude breaks this portion of the bone.
 proximal fragment.
PROXIMALFRACTURE
Anterior
Lateral
Gluteus
Adductor
medius
brevis
andlongus
Illiopsoas
Gluteus
muscle
medius
Flexion
Illiopsoas
muscle
Adductor
Biceps
Adductor
longus
magnus
femoris
External
muscle
muscle
rotation
Rectus
Semiten-
femoris
dinosus
muscle
Figure 3.63
Picture showing displacing forces in a subtrochanteric fracture.
96
Essentials of Orthopedics
A
Typel
B
Type lla
E
Type Illa
F
Type Illb
C
Typellb
D
Type llc
G
TypeIV
H
TypeV
Figures 3.64A to H
Radiograph of subtrochanteric fractures—based on Seinsheimer classification. Refer text for details.
C. Spiral fracture with lesser trochanter in the
The treatment consists of skeletal traction on a supportive
distal fragment.
splint which is maintained till the fracture unites.
Type IMI  Three-part fracture.
Operative: Surgical stabilization is the treatment of choice.
A. With lesser trochanter a separate fragment.
Implants used currently are cephalomedullary and
B. The third part is a butterfly fragment other than
centromedullary interlocking nails.
lesser trochanter.
Surface implants such as locking compression plates,
Type IV
 Four-part (or more) comminuted fractures.
Type V
Subtrochanteric with intertrochanteric fracture.
dynamic hip screw, dynamic condylar screw, etc. are also used
(fracture through the greater trochanter.)
in selected cases. As far as the decision with respect to choice
of the implant required for the fixation of subtrochanteric
Treatment
fracture two major variables are to be considered.
 Non-operative: There is no role for nonoperative treatment
Whether the fracture is extending into the greater
unless the patient is not fit for surgical procedure.
trochanter posteriorly and involving the Pirifonmis fossa
Differences
Inter- trochanteric fracture
Fracture neck of the femur
Attitude of the limb
Marked external rotation
Minimal external rotation
Shortening
Marked
Minimal
Tenderness
Over the trochanter
 Over the hip joint
Irregularity
Over the trochanter
Trochanter, normal
Swelling
Considerable,in the trochanteric
Minimal, around the hip only
region and in the upper1/3 thigh
Fractures in the Lower Limb
97
because it is one of the most commonly used nail entry
Ankle Fracture
portal.
14. Franklin JL, Johnson KD, Hansen ST Jr. Immediate internal
Whether there is continuity of the lesser trochanter.
fixation of open ankle fractures. Report of thirty-eight cases
(Refer Russell-Taylor Classification for guidance in
treated with a standard protocol. J Bone Joint Surg
selecting the appropriate implant).
1984;66A:1349-56.
15. Harper MC. Ankle fracture classification systems: A case for
integration of the Lauge-Hansen and AO-Danis-Weber
Further Reading
schemes. Foot Ankle 1992;13(7):404-7.
16. Lindsjo U. Classification of ankle fractures: The Lauge-Hansen
Lisfranc Fracture
or AO system? Clin Orthop Relat Res 1985;(199): 12-6.
17. Pettrone FA, Gail M, Pee D, et al. Quantitative criteria for
1. Kuo RS, Tejwani NC, DiGiovanni CW, et al. Outcome after
the prediction of the results after displaced fracture of the
open reduction and internal fixation of Lisfranc joint injuries.
ankle. J Bone Joint Surg 1983;65A:667677.
J Bone Joint Surg 2000;82A:1609-18.
18. Phillips WA, Schwartz HS, Keller CS, et al. A prospective,
2. Richter, et al. Fractures and fracture-dislocations of the
randomized study of the management of severe ankle fractures.
mi dfoot, occurrence, causes, long-term results. Foot Ankle Int
J Bone Joint Surg 1985;67A:67-78.
2001;22:392-8
19. Sirkin M, Sanders R, DiPasquale T, et al. A staged protocol
for soft tissue management in the treatment of complex pilon
Calcaneus Fracture
fractures. J Orthop Trauma 1999;13:78-84.
20. Weening B, Bhandari M. Predictors of functional outcome
3. Buckley R, Tough S, McCormack R, Pate G, Leighton R,
following trans-syndesmotic screw fixation of ankle fractures.
Petrie D, et al. Operative compared with nonoperative
J Orthop Trauma 2005;19:102-8.
treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures. J
21.
Shariff SS, Nathwani DK. Lauge-Hansen classification—a
Bone Joint Surg 2002;84A:1733-44.
literature review. Injury 2006;37(9):888-90. Epub 2006 Aug 8.
4. Essex-Lopresti P. The mechanism, reduction technique and
results in fractures of the os calcis. (reprinted from Br J Surg
Tibial Plafond Fracture
1951). Clin Orthop 1993;290:3-16.
5. Harvey EJ, Grujic L, Early JS, Benirschke SK, Sangeorzan
22. Ruedi T. Fractures of the lower end of the tibia into the ankle
BJ. Morbidity associated with ORIF of intra-articular
joint: Results 9 years after open reduction and internal fixati on.
calcaneus fractures using a lateral approach. Foot Ankle Int
Injury 1973;5:130-7.
2001;22:868-73.
23.
 Teeny SM, Wiss DA. Open reduction and internal fixation of
6. Sanders R, Fortin P, Dipasquale T, et al. Operative treatment
tibial plafond fractures. Variables contributing to poor results
in 120 displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures: Results
and complications. Clin Orthop 1993;292:108-17.
using a prognostic computed tomography scan classification.
24. Wyrsch B, McFerran MA, McAndrew M, et al. Operative
Clin Orthop 1993;290:87-95.
treatment of fractures of the tibial plafond. A randomized
7. Thornton SJ, Cheleuitte D, Ptaszek AJ, Early JS. Treatment
prospective study. J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78A:1646-57.
of open intra-articular calcaneal fractures: Evaluation of a
treatment protocol based on wound location and size. Foot
Tibial Shaft Fracture
Ankle Int 2006;27(5):317-23.
25. Audige L, Griffin D, Bhandari M, Kellam J, Riedi TP. Path
Talus Fracture
analysis of factors for delayed healing and nonunion in 416
operatively treated tibial shaft fractures. Clin Orthop Relat Res
8. Canale ST, Kelly FB Jr. Fractures of the neck of the talus:
2005;438:221-32
Long-term evaluation of seventy-one cases. J Bone Joint Surg
26. Henley MB, Chapman JR, Agel J, et al. Treatment of type II,
1978;60A:143-56.
IIIA, and IIIB open fractures of the tibial shaft: A prospective
9. Early JS. Management of fractures of the talus: Body and head
comparison of unreamed interlocking intramedullary nails and
regions. Foot Ankle Clin 2004;9(4):709-22.
half-pin external fixators. J Orthop Trauma 1998;12:1-7.
10. Haliburton RA, Sullivan CR, Kelly PJ, Peterson LFA. The
27. Ilizarov GA. The tension-stress effect on the genesis and
extra-osseous and intra-osseous blood supply of the talus.
growth of tissue: Part I. The influence of stability of fixation
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1958;40-A(5):1115-20
and soft-tissue preservation. Clin Orthop 1989;238:249-62.
11. Hawkins LG Fractures of the neck of the talus. J Bone Joint
 28. Ilizarov GA. The tension-stress effect on the genesis and
Surg 1970;52A:991-1002.
growth of tissue: Part Il. The influence of the rate and
12. Mulfinger Gl, Trueta J. The blood supply of the talus. J.Bone
frequency of distraction. Clin Orthop 1989;239:263-85.
Joint Surgery Br 1970;52-B(1):160-7.
29. Kakar S, Tornetta P 3rd. Open fractures of the tibia treated
13. Vallier HA, Nork SE, Barei DP, Benirschke SB, Sangeorzan
by immediate intramedullary tibial nail insertion without
BJ. Talar neck fractures: Results and outcomes. J Bone Joint
:(5)17o0 en doo  pms agodsod y :uum
Surg 2004;86A:1616-24.
153-7.
98
Essentials of Orthopedics
30. Littenberg B, Weinstein LP, Lebanon MM, et al. Closed
43. Carpenter JE, Kasman RA, Patel N, Lee MA, Goldstein SA
fractures of the tibial shaft. A meta-analysis of three methods
Biomechanical evaluation of current patellar fracture fixation
of treatment. J Bone Joint Surg 1998;80A:174-83.
techniques. J Orthop Trauma 1997;11:351-6.
31. McQueen MM, Court-Brown CM. Compartment monitoring
44. Fortis AP, Milis Z, Kostopoulos V, Tsantzalis S, Kormas P,
in tibial fractures. The pressure threshold for decompression.
Tzinieris N, et al. Experimental investigation of the tension
J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78B:99-104.
band in fractures of the patella. Injury 2002;33(6):489-93.
32. Parrett BM, Matros E, Pribaz JJ, Orgill DP. Lower extremity
45. Patel VR, Parks BG, Wang Y, Ebert FR, Jinnah RH. Fixation
trau ma: Trends in the management of soft-tissue reconstruction
of patella fractures with braided polyester suture: A
of open tibia-fibula fractures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006;
biomechanical study. Injury 2000;31(1):1-6.
117(4):1315-22.
46. Scilaris TA, Grantham JL, Prayson MJ, Marshall MP,
33.
Sarmiento A, Sharpe FE, Ebramzadeh, et al. Factors
Hamilton JJ, Williams JL. Biomechanical comparison of
influencing the outcome of closed tibial fractures treated with
fixation methods in transverse patella fractures. J Orthop
functional bracing. Clin Orthop 1995;315:8-24.
Trauma 1998;12(5):356-9.
34. Swiontkowski MF, Aro HT, et al. Recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-2 in open tibial fractures. A subgroup
Femur Fracture
analysis of data combined from two prospective randomized
studies. J Bone Joint Surg 2006;88A:1258-65.
47.Bhandari M, Guyatt GH, Khera V, et al. Operative manage-
ment of lower extremity fractures in patients with head
Distal Femur Fracture
injuries. CORR 2003;407:187-98.
48. Bone LB, Johnson KD, Weigelt J, et al. Early versus delayed
35. Bolhofner BR, Carmen B, Clifford P The results of open
stabilization of femoral fractures: A prospective randomized
reduction and internal fixation of distal femur fractures using
study. J Bone Joint Surg 1989;71A:336-40.
a biologic (indirect) reduction technique. J Orthop Trauma
1996;10:372-7.
49. Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ, Reimer BL, et al. Adult respiratory
distress syndrome, pneumonia, and mortality following
36. Kregor PJ, Stannard JA, Zlowodzki M, Cole PA. Treatment
thoracic injury and a femoral fracture treated either with
of distal femur fractures using the less invasive stabilization
system: Surgical experience and early clinical results in 103
intramedullary nailing with reaming or a plate: A comparative
fractures. J Orthop Trauma 2004;18:509-20.
study. J Bone Joint Surg 1997;79A:799-809.
50. Brumback RJ, Ellison PS, Poka A, et al. Intramedullary nailing
of open fractures of the femoral shaft. J Bone Joint Surg
Tibial Plateau Fracture
1989:71A:1324-31.
37. Barei DP, Nork SE, Mills WJ, Henley MB, Benirschke SK.
51.Brumback RJ, Ellison TS, Poka A, et al. Intramedullary
Complications associated with internal fixation of high-energy
nailing of femoral shaft fractures: Part I1. Long-term effects
bicondylar tibial plateau fractures utilizing a two-incision
of static interlocking fixation. J Bone Joint Surg 1992;
74A:106-12.
technique. J Orthop Trauma 2004;18:649-57.
38. Benirschke SK, Agnew SG, Mayo KA, et al. Immediate
52. Brumback RJ, Reilly JP, Poka A, et al. Intramedullary nailing
internal fixation of open, complex, tibial plateau fractures:
of femoral shaft fractures: Part I. Decision-making errors
Treatment by a standard protocol. J Orthop Trauma 1992;6:78-
with interlocking fixation. J Bone Joint Surg 1988;70A: 1441-
86.
52.
 Rademakers MV, Kerkhoffs GMMJ, Sierevelt IN, Raaymakers
53. Brumback RJ, Uwagie-Ero S, Lakatos RP, et al. Intramedullary
39.1
ELFB, Marti RK. Operative treatment of 109 tibial plateau
nailing of femoral shaft fractures; Part I1. Fracture-healing with
fractures: Five- to 27-year follow-up results. J Orthop Trauma
static interlocking fixation. J Bone Joint Surg 1988;70A:1453-
2007;21:5-10.
62.
40. Schatzker J, McBroom R, Bruce D. The tibial plateau fracture.
54. Ostrum RF, Agarwal A, Lakatos R, et al. Prospective
The Toronto experience 1968-1975. Clin Orthop 1979;138:94-
comparison of retrograde and antegrade femoral intramedul-
104.
lary nailing. J Orthop Trauma 2000;14:496-501.
41.
Stannard JP, Wilson TC, Volgas DA, Alonso JE. The less
 55. Ricci WA, Schwappach J, et al. Trochanteric versus piriformis
invasive stabilization system in the treatment of complex
entry portal for the treatment of femoral shaft fractures. J
fractures of the tibial plateau: Short-term results. J Orthop
Orthop Trauma 2006;20:663-7.
Trauma 2004;18(8):552-8.
56. Starr AJ, Hunt JL, Chason DP, et al. Treatment of femur
fracture with associated head injury. J Orthop Trauma
Patella Fracture
1998;12:38-45.
57. Winquist RA, Hansen ST Jr, Clawson DK. Closed intra-
42. Smith ST, Cramer KE, Karges DE, et al. Early complications
medullary nailing of femoral fractures: A report of five
in the operative treatment of patellar fractures. J Orthop
hundred and twenty cases. J Bone Joint Surg 1984;66A:529-
Trauma 1997;11:183-7.
39.
Fractures in the Lower Limb
99
Femoral Neck Fracture Biomechanics
64. Calder SJ, Anderson GH, Jagger C, et al. Unipolar or bipolar
prosthesis for displaced intracapsular hip fractures in
58. Baitner AC, Maurer SG, Hickey DG, et al. Vertical shear
octogenarians: A randomized prospective study. J Bone Joint
fractures of the femoral neck. A biomechanical study. Clin
Surg 1996;78B:391-4.
Orthop 1999;367:300-5.
65.
Garden RS.Low-angle fixation in fractures of the femoral
59. Blair B, Koval KJ, Kummer F, et al. Basicervical fractures of
neck. I Bone Joint Surg 1961;43B:647-63.
the proximal femur. A biomechanical study of 3 fixation
66.
 Jain R, Koo M, Kreder HJ, Schemitsch EH, Davey JR,
techniques. Clin Orthop 1994;306:256-63.
Mahomed NN. Comparison of early and delayed fixation of
60. Stankewich CJ, Chapman J, Muthusamy R, et al. Relationship
subcapital hip fractures in patients sixty years of age or less.
of mechanical factors to the strength of proximal femur
J Bone Joint Surg 2002;84A:1605-12.
fractures fixed with cancellous screws. J Orthop Trauma
67. Keating JF, Grant A, et al. Randomized comparison of
1996;10:248-57.
reduction and fixation, bipolar hemarthroplasty, and total hip
arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg 2006;88A:249-60.
Hip Fracture: Intertrochanteric and
68. Koval KJ, Skovron ML, Aharonoff GB, et al. Ambulatory
Fracture Neck of Femur
ability after hip fracture: A prospective study in geriatric
patients. Clin Orthop 1995;310:150-9.
61. Adams CJ, Robinson CM, Court-Brown CM, McQueen MM.
69. Parker MJ, Khan RJK, Crawford J, et al. Hemiarthroplasty
Prospective randomized controlled trial of an intramedullary
versus internal fixation for displaced intracapsular hip
nail versus dynamic screw and side plate for intertrochanteric
fractures in the elderly. J Bone Joint Surg 2002;84B:1150-5.
fractures of the femur. J Orthop Trauma 2001;15:394-400.
70. Swiontkowski MF, Winquist RA, Hansen ST Jr. Fractures of
62.
Aharonoff GB, Koval KJ, Skovron ML,et al. Hip fractures
the femoral neck in patients between the ages of twelve and
in the elderly: Predictors of one year mortality. J Orthop
forty-nine years. J Bone Joint Surg 1984;66A:837-46.
Trauma 1997;11:162-5.
71. Singh M, Nagrath AR, Maini PS, Changes in trabecular pattern
63. Baumgaertner MR, Curtin SL, Lindskog DM. The value of
of the upper end of femur as an index of osteoporosis. J Bone
the tip-apex distance in predicting failure of fixation of
Joint Surgery 1970;52A:457-67.
peritrochanteric fractures of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg
1995;77A:1058-64.
4
Dislocations
Specific Dislocations in the Upper Limb, their
Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Management
二
Specific Dislocations in the Lower Limb,their
Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Management
Dislocation of the Acromioclavicular
Joint
General Information
The acromioclavicular joint is a diarthrodial joint between
the lateral end of clavicle and the acromian. A
fibrocartilaginous disc is interposed between the two
articular surfaces preventing them from coming into direct
contact. The stability of the joint depends mainly on the
capsule and the ligaments binding the joint.
The acromioclavicular joint dislocates only when the
STOP
coracoclavicular and the acromioclavicular ligaments are
completely tom.
Delhi
5
Mechanism of Injury (Fig. 4.1)
miles
Fall on the point of an adducted shoulder causes strain on the
acromioclavicular ligaments first which results in sublux ation
Figure 4.1
of the acromioclavicular joint. If the force continues to act
Showing the most common mechanism of injury of Acromioclavicular
further it ruptures the conoid and trapezoid part of the
pint.
Dislocations
101
Type-Ml: Rupture of both acromioclavicular and the coraco
clavicular ligament occurs.
In Type I there is no joint subluxation or dislocation. In
Type-lI there is subluxation of the acromioclavicular joint.
In Type IlI there is dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint.
Clinical Features
A
a.Pain in the region is the only feature in Type I and Type
II injuries.
b. Dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint with promi-
 nence of the lateral end of the clavicle is seen in Type II
injuries.
Diagnosis
X-ray-A normal AP view of the shoulder may be deceptive
D
at times. For better diagnosis, a stress view with the patient
Figure 4.2
standing and holding a 5 kg weight in the hand with the hand
 Showing (A) A normal joint with intact acromioclavicular and coraco-
by the side of the body, is useful. This demonstrates the
clavicular ligaments. (B, C and D) Varying grades of injury classified
subluxation/dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint.
as Type-l, Type-ll, Type-Ill respectively.
coracoclavicular ligament and a complete dislocation of the
Management
acromioclavicular joint results.
Type I and Type II are treated nonoperatively in a shoulder
arm sling. Type IMI is treated surgically by the repair of the
Classification (Fig. 4.2)
conoid and trapezoid part of the coracoclavicular ligament
(Figs 4.3A and B). At the same time the joint is transfixed
 i   a I a o is si  a
with ‘K'wires.
Type-I: It is an acute sprain (contusion) of the acromio-
In old unreduced acromioclavicular dislocation which is
clavicular ligaments.
umtreated the projecting lateral end of the clavicle may be
Type-II: Rupture of the acromioclavicular ligament occurs.
excised.
Repairof
coracoclavicular
ligaments
B
Figures 4.3A and B
Radiograph showing (A) Type ll acromioclavicular dislocation with disruption of both coracoclavicular and acromioclavicular ligaments.
the red arrow.
102
Essentials of Orthopedics
Revision Questions
Q. Discuss the anatomy of the acromioclavicular joint.
Q. What are the stabilizing structures of the acromioclavi-
cular joint?
Q. Classify the acromioclavicular dislocation.
Q. Discuss the treatment of acromioclavicular dislocation.
Q. Discuss the complication of acromioclavicular joint
dislocation.
Essay Question
Discuss the pathoanatomy of the acromioclavicular joint.
How do you classify the acromioclavicular joint dislocation?
Outline the diagnosis and management.
Figure 4.4
Dislocation of the Shoulder
Radiograph showing a subglenoid type of anterior dislocation of
shoulder.
When the head of the humerus loses its articulation with the
glenoid cavity of the scapula, a dislocation of the shoulder
 Occurs. (Dislocation is defined as total loss of contact between
If the patient is unable to touch the opposite shoulder
the two articular surfaces).
the test is positive.
 If the patient is able to touch the opposite shoulder
Types
the test is negative.
a. Anterior 98%
A negative test in a case of anterior dislocation of
 the shoulder suggests the presence of a fracture of the
b. Posterior  2%
surgical neck of the humerus.
AnteriorDislocationoftheShoulder
b. Hamilton ruler test: When the head of the humerus is in
Mechanism: Occurs as a result of a hyperabduction and
the glenoid cavity, the bulging contour of the deltoid
muscle prevents one from placing a ruler touching both
extermal rotation strain.
acromion and lateral condyle of the humerus. In
Types
dislocation this contour is lost and it is possible to place
a. Subcoracoid
a ruler straight across the shoulder touching both, the
b. Subglenoid
acromion and the lateral condyle of the humerus. The test
c. Subclavicular
is said to be positive.
d. Intrathoracic (rare)
 associated with
c. Bryant's sign: Positive sign is shown by lowering and
e. Superior (very rare)  complications
 prominence of the anterior axillary fold.
Diagnosis
d. Callaway's test/sign: Increase in girth of the shoulder.
Signs and symptoms: Patient always presents with the injured
Investigation: X-ray of the shoulder to know the type of
 limb held and supported by the help of other upper limb.
dislocation and to ascertain the presence or absence of
a. Severe pain in the shoulder.
fracture. Commonest fracture associated with the anterior
b. Loss of all the movements of the shoulder.
dislocation is fracture of the greater tuberosity of the humerus
c. Loss of (prominence) contour of deltoid muscle bulge.
(Fig. 4.4).
d.  A hollow is appreciated at the shoulder.
e. Tendermess.
Management: Always by closed reduction and immobilization
f. Head of the humerus is palpable in a place other than the
in arm-chest bandage. Open reduction is indicated in late
glenoid.
presentation (after three weeks) and when the dislocation is
irreducible by closed methods.
Tests
a. Duga's test: Patient is asked to touch the opposite
Kocher's method: Patient under anesthesia, lies supine on the
shoulder.
examination table. Traction is given with the elbow flexed and
Dislocations
103
Recurrent anterior dislocation: If recurrent episodes of
dislocation occurs following the first episode it is known as
recurrent dislocation.
Pathology: Triple deformity (lesion) is responsible for these
episodes.
a. Bankart's lesion: It is tear of the anterior inferior glenoid
labrum (2 o' clock to 6 o' clock right shoulder: 6 o' clock
to 10 o' clock left shoulder).
A
Diagnosis is established by MRI with contrast.
b. Hill- Sach's lesion: A defect in the posterolateral part of
the head of the humerus.
 Diagnosis is established by special view known as
Stryker notch view (Refer for details) if in doubt MRI
to be done for confirmation.
C.A defect in the anterior inferior capsule.
Management: By surgical stabilization in which the defects
are attended to and the shoulder is stabilized, e.g. Putti- Platt
procedure, Bankart procedure, Helfet-Bristow procedure
These days stabilization procedures are done through shoulder
B
arthroscopy too. (Refer for more details regarding arthro-
scopy).
Figures 4.5A and B
Pictures showing (A) Kocher's method and (B) Hippocrates method
PosteriorDislocation of theShoulder
of reduction of anterior dislocation of the shoulder. Note that in
Hippocrates method the patient is on the floor.The foot of the surgeon
Mechanism: A powerful adduction intermal rotation strain, e.g.
is used as a lever and not to apply counter force.
im seizures,electric shock or sometimes a direct posterior
impact on the shoulder.
 counter traction is given in the axilla with the help of folded
towel. Both traction and counter traction is given along the
Types
a. Subacromial
axis of the humerus. The limb is slowly abducted and
b. Subglenoid
extermally rotated. When the position is attained which the
c. Supraspinous
head of the humerus had occupied just after the dislocation,
the dislocation gets reduced almost spontaneously because of
Diagnosis
the counter force. Once reduced then the shoulder is intermally
Symptoms and signs
rotated, adducted and flexed and immobilized in anm chest
a.
History of sustaining electric shock or an episode of seizures
position.
followed by severe pain and inability to move the shoulder.
b. Prominence of the coracoid process.
Hippocrates method (Figs 4.5A and B): Patient under
c. Limb is in a position of adduction and intermal rotation.
anesthesia, lies supine on the floor. The dislocated limb is held
d.Attempted abduction and extemal rotation is painful.
fimmly by the surgeon at the wrist and traction is given. With
the foot in the axilla the head of the humerus is gently
Investigation: X-rays-A standard AP view is taken. This gives
 maneuvered into the glenoid cavity.
oblique profile of the glenoid. Following signs are seen:
Hippocrates method is a safer method when compared to
a. Loss of elliptical overlap: Normally there is an overlap
Kocher's method. If not carefully executed, in Kocher's
of at least 1/3 of the head over the posterior glenoid
method there is a possibility of a fracture of the surgical neck
(obliquely profiled glenoid). This overlap becomes less
of the humerus occurring during the attempt. Especially if the
or absent.
patient is elderly and the bone is osteoporotic or when there
b. Empty (vacant) glenoid sign: The glenoid cavity is void
is an occult fracture.
of articulating head of the humerus (Fig. 4.6).
104
Essentials of Orthopedics
Q. Bankart's lesion.
Q. Hill-Sach's lesion.
Essay Questions
Q. Discuss the pathoanatomy , mechanism of injury diagnosis
 and management of anterior dislocation of the shoulder.
Q. Define recurrent dislocation of the shoulder joint. Discuss
the pathomechanics and management of recurrent anterior
dislocation of the shoulder.
Q. Discuss the clinical features diagnosis and management
 of posterior dislocation of the shoulder. Enumerate the causes
of recurrence.
Figure 4.6
Dislocation of the Elbow
Radiograph showing the loss of elliptical overlap as well as 'Empty
The elbow joint is a hinge joint which is inherently stable
fact, this patient is a known epileptic and sustained the injury in an
 because of the design and does not depend much on ligaments
episode of seizure.
amd other soft tissue structures surrounding it for its stability.
Hence considerable force is necessary to dislocate an elbow
Management: Reduction is achieved under anesthesia by
joint. Thus in about 1/3 of the cases of elbow dislocation
 giving gentle longitudinal as well as lateral traction followed
fractures are commonly seen. Without fractures the elbow
by extemal rotation and abduction. Limb is immobilized in
dislocation is termed as simple and with associated fractures
extermal rotation and extension for a period of 3-4 weeks.
it is termed as a complex dislocation.
Recurrent posterior dislocation: Occurs as aresult of posterior
Iypes
lesions.
a. Reverse Bankart's lesion.
a.Posterior - 90% (Figs 4.8A and B)
b. Reverse Hill- Sach's lesion.
b.Anterior -10% (Fig.4.7B)
c. Posterior glenoid deficiency.
Note-Figure 4.7A showing old unreduced posterior
d. Increased retroversion of the head and the glenoid.
dislocation.
Mechanism of Injury
Mc Laughlin procedure. (Refer for details)
Posterior-Fall on an out-stretched hand with arm in abduc-
Luxatio erecta-It is an exaggerated form of infraglenoid type
tion and extension, e.g. falling backwards after slipping.
of dislocation of the shoulder.Patient presents with raised
(Commonest fracture associated is the fracture of the medial
upper limb with an inability to bring it down.
epicondyle).
Revision Questions
Anterior-A powerful blow to the posterior aspect of the elbow.
(Complication of median nerve and brachial artery injury is
Q. What are the different types of shoulder dislocation?
common in anterior dislocation of the elbow. Commonest
Q. Discuss the mechanism of shoulder dislocations.
fracture associated is the fracture of the olecrenon process.)
Q. What are the clinical signs of anterior dislocation of the
shoulder?
Diagnosis
Q. Duga's test.
Q. Empty glenoid sign.
The posterior dislocation is diagnosed by clinical examination
Q. What are the lesions responsible for recurrent anterior
which shows loss of triangular relationship of three bony
dislocation of the shoulder?
points at the elbow and severe restriction of movements. Also
 Dislocations
105
A
Figures 4.7A and B
(A) Radiograph showing an old unreduced posterior dislocation of the elbow with medial epicondylar fragment in the joint. When this fragment
is in the elbow, the elbow becomes irreducible unless the fragment is dislodged. (B) Radiograph showing fracture of the olecrenon process
of the ulna with anterior dislocation of the elbow. Carefully note the loss of articulation between the head of the radius and the capitulum,
the coronoid process of the ulna and the coronoid fossa of the humerus as well as in situ position of the olecrenon, which is articulating with
the humerus in the flexed position of the elbow.
causing anterior dislocation. The fracture of the olecranon process is not an avulsion fracture which generally occurs because of the pull of
triceps.
Management
a.Simple dislocations are managed by closed manipulation
under anesthesia, reduction and immobilization for a
period of three weeks. This is followed by gradual
mobilization.
Posterior dislocations are immobilized in flexion.
Anterior dislocations are immobilized in extension.
 b. Complex dislocations are managed by open reduction and
stabilization.
Associated fractures are anatomically reduced and fixed.
Revision Questions
B
Q. Discuss the clinical diagnosis of posterior dislocation of
the elbow joint.
Figures 4.8A and B
Q. Classify dislocations of the elbow.
Radiograph LAT and AP view of the elbow showing traumatic
Q. Discuss the mechanisms of injury of different elbow
posterior dislocation of the elbow joint.
dislocations.
there is shortening of the forearm component of the limb. The
Essay Question
 arm component is nonmal.
X-ray proves conclusively and also determines the
Q. Discuss the mechanism of injury, clinical features
presence or absence of fracture.
diagnosis and management of different elbow dislocations.
106
Essentials of Orthopedics
Dislocation of the Hip Joint
Anterior
Hip joint is a ball and socket joint in which the spherical
head of the femur articulates with the cup, i.e. the
acetabulum. Inherent stability is imparted through this
articulation. The strong ligaments and the tough capsule
which surround the joint and the powerful muscles impart
additional stability. Among the ligaments the Y ligament
of Bigelow (the iliofemoral ligament) and the Ligamentum
Capitis Femoris namely the ligament of the head of the
femur are the important stabilizers. Among the muscles
it is the Gluteus medius and liopsoas which are the
important stabilizers. Considerable force is necessary for
a hip dislocation to occur (Trauma of severe magnitude).
Bigelow's Ligament—other names are Ligamentum Hliofemo-
rale,'Y' ligament, Bertin's ligament and Hipsiloid ligament.
Figure 4.10
Radiograph showing obturator type of anterior dislocation of the hip.
It isa Y shaped ligament with the apex attached to the
It is known as obturator type because the femoral head is in the
anterior inferior iliac spine and the base diverges into a
region of obturator foramen.
medial and lateral band and getsinserted to theintertro-
chanteric line,thus imparting aY shape to the ligament.The
Mechanism of Injury
medial part is attached to the lower part of the intertrochante-
ric line and the lateral part is attached to the tubercle at the
Anterior Dislocation
upper part (Fig. 4.9).
It is the hyperabduction and the extermal rotation strain which
Types of Dislocation
causes the the anterior dislocation of the hip joint. In olden
days when sea voyage was common the classical mechanism
a. Anterior.
was that of having one leg on the boat and the other leg on
·Obturator type (Fig. 4.10)
the shore and the boat moves. The leg on the shore (the one
·Pubic type
which is more fixed) used to dislocate. These days skidding
·Perineal type
of a speeding two wheeler imparts a similar stress. Also in a
b. Posterior.
landslide occumring in a mine where the miner is stooping
Gluteal type
forwards and working and on whose back a heavy mass of
Sciatic type
 mud falls. In these circumstances the hip goes into hyper
Ilial type
abduction and extemal rotation and dislocates (Fig. 4.11).
c.Central (Fracture dislocation).
Posterior Dislocation
Classical mechanism is a ^Dash board injury'. In a road traffic
accident, when there is head on collision the dash board hits
Anteriorinferior
the knee. The position of the lower limb at the time of impact
Ilium
iliacspine
Iliofemoral ligament or'Y
is that of flexion,adduction and intemal rotation.Thus an
ligamentofBigelow
amterior impact of the crashing dash board on to the knee
Intertrochantericline
 pushes the head of the femur out of the acetabulum in a
posterior direction (Figs 4.12A and 4.13).
Femur
CentralDislocation
Figure 4.9
The classical mechanism is a side impact over the trochanter
Showing ligaments supporting the hip joint
of the femur in an adducted limb (Fig. 4.12B).
Dislocations
107
 Type 1-Dislocation with or without minor fracture.
Type 2-Dislocation with a single, large, fracture of
 posterior acetabular rim.
Type 3-Dislocation with comminuted fracture of rim of
acetabulum, with or without major fragments
Type 4-Dislocation with fracture of the floor of the
acetabulum.
Type 5-Dislocation with femoral head fracture.
Steward and Milford classification:
This classification is based on functional hip stability.
 Type 1-Dislocation with no fracture or an insignificant
fracture.
 Type 2-Dislocation with a single or comminuted posterior
wall fracture, but a functionally stable hip.
 Type 3-Associated with gross instability of the hip joint
secondary to loss of structural support.
 Type 4-Associated with femoral head fracture.
Diagnosis
Figure 4.11
 Diagnosis is made by clinical signs and X-ray.
Diagram showing mechanism of injury for anterior dislocation of hip
Classical clinical attitude of the lower limb in various
joint.
types of dislocation is as follows:
 Anterior dislocation: Flexion, abduction and extermal
Classification
rotation with apparent lengthening (Fig. 4.14A).
Thompson-Epstein Classification
 Posterior dislocation: Flexion, adduction and intemal
rotation with apparent shortening (Fig. 4.14B).
 This classification system is based on radiographic findings .
Central dislocation: Adduction and neutral/ extemal
Based on this classification, the posterior dislocation of the
rotation with signs of fracture pelvis. Shortening is
hip is classified into 5 types.
mimimum.
Posterior
Central
A
B
Figures 4.12A and B
Hence it is known as Sciatic type (B) Radiograph of pelvis with both hips showing fracture of the pelvis with central dislocation of the hip.
 Note that the distance between the symphysis pubis and the greater trochanter is decreased when compared to the opposite side.
108
Essentials of Orthopedics
femoralhead for detailedevaluation and planningof
appropriate treatment.Theygive valuableinformationabout
theshape andvascularity of theheadof thefemur.
Management
Most of the simple dislocations without fracture are reducible
by closed methods except when the head is entrapped in the
torm capsule or muscle mass. All the closed maneuvers are
done under general anesthesia. The basic principle is to
provide a counter force after achieving that position of the
limb immediately after the dislocation. If the force in one
direction in a particular position ofthe limb has driven the
headofthefemuroutofthesocket(acetabulum)theforcein
opposite direction, when the limb is in the same position as
it was immediately after the dislocation should bring it back
into the sockect. Following reduction the limb is immobilized
Figure 4.13
 in a Thomas’ splint for a period of three weeks in order to
Mechanism of injury for posterior dislocation of hip joint. The picture
achieve good soft tissue healing.
shows the classical impact of a dashboard in a head on collision.
Anterior Dislocation
Allis' method: The position of the patient is supine. The hip
and the knee is flexed, as it is, in the same abducted extermally
rotated position and traction is given along the long axis of
the femur with assistant giving counter traction at the pelvis.
Next a second assistant gives lateral traction to the thigh
(femur) and the surgeon slowly intermally rotates and adducts
the limb. Finally when the dislocation is reduced he extends
the limb (Fig. 4.15).
B
Figures 4.14A and B
Diagram showing the classical attitudes in anterior and posterior
dislocation of the hip joint. (A) Anterior dislocation (B) Posterior
dislocation (refer text).
In addition to these classical attitudes,there will be severe
painful restriction of all the movements of the hip joint.
 Radiograph confirms the diagnosis. The classical attitude
of the limb is also made out in the AP view. Hence there
is no need to take a lateral view unless an irregular dis-
location is suspected.
Figure 4.15
CT and MRI are the other investigations that are
Showing the Allis' method of reducing the anterior dislocation of the
recommendedwhenthereisfractureof theacetabulumorthe
hip. The arrows show the direction of the pull.
Dislocations
109
Figure 4.17
Figure 4.16
 Showing Allis method of reduction for posterior dislocation of the
Showing the reverse Bigelow's method for reduction of anterior
hip joint.
dislocation of the hip.
Reverse Bigelow's method
In this circumductory movement is given at the hip in an exactly
opposite mamner to that of reducing a posterior dislocation of
the hip. That is the limb is circumducted in an inward direction.
The assistant stabilizes the pelvis and the surgeon does
the maneuver beginning from the same flexed abducted and
extemally rotated position of the limb (Fig. 4.16).
PosteriorDislocation
Allis’ method: Position of the patient is supine. Longitudinal
traction is given along the axis of the limb in the same
dislocated position of the limb with assistant stabilizing the
pelvis( counter traction) and next with the traction force acting
the limb is gently abducted, extermally rotated and extended
(Fig. 4.17).
Bigelow's method: The pelvis is stabilized by the assistant.
The surgeon does the maneuver. The hip is gently flexed to
Figure 4.18
 90°, rotated extemally in a circumductory manner in an
Showing Bigelow's method of reduction for posterior dislocation of
 outward direction till reduction is achieved (Fig. 4.18).
the hip joint.
Stimson's method: Considered to be the least traumatic method
hand the head of the femur is gently maneuvered into the
as gravity is made use of in this method. With patient prone
acetabulum with the help of rotary movement of the limb by
amd the limb hanging out of the table with hip and the knee
the assistant (Fig. 4.19).
flexed to 90° traction force is applied just distal to the knee
Note -‘y’ ligament of Bigelow acts as an anchor and
(over the upper third of the leg) by the assistant. The surgeon
helps in the reduction of dislocation.When theY ligament of
gives counter traction by stabilizing the pelvis by applying
Bigelow is torm the hip dislocation is known as irregular.The
pressure over the sacrum with the hand. Then with the other
dislocation becomes highly unstable.
110
Essentials of Orthopedics
4.  Associated fractures, e.g. fracture of the head, acetabulum,
neck of the femur, etc.
 5. Fractures around the knee e.g. patella
6. Myositis ossificans (common after open reduction)
7. Recurrent dislocation (rare).
Revision Questions
Q. What are the basic types of dislocation?
Q. Write notes on-
(a) Pathological dislocation (b) Paralytic dislocation
(c) Traumatic dislocation.
Q. What is Bigelow's ligament ? Discuss its role in hip
disloc ation.
Q. Discuss the pathoanatomy of the hip joint and classify hip
dislocations. Explain in detail the different mechanisms
responsible for hip dislocations.
Q. Discuss the different methods of reduction of posterior
Figure 4.19
dislocation of the hip joint.
Showing Stimson's method of reduction for posterior dislocation of 
Q. Discuss the attitudes of the lower limb in different
the hip joint.
dislocations of the hip joint.
Complications
Essay Questions
1. Irreducible dislocation (Figs 4.20A and B).
Q. Discuss the mechanisms of injury, diagnosis and
2. Avascular necrosis of the head of the femur and late 
management of posterior dislocation of the hip joint.
degenerative arthritis (Figs 4.20A and B).
Enumerate the complications.
3. Sciatic nerve palsy (about 10%)
Q. Discuss the mechanisms of injury, diagnosis and
management of anterior dislocation of the hip joint.
B
Figure 4.20A and B
Showing the CT image of an old unreduced anterior dislocation (4 months old) of the hip. Note the articular degeneration and the incongruity
which is not in favor of open reduction.
Dislocations
111
Q. Discuss the role of CT scan in the evaluation of a hip
Note: Management of vascular injury and compartmental
dislocation. Discuss the management of a fracture dislocation
syndrome is discussed in Chapter 2 under Volkmann's
of hip joint. Enumerate the complications.
ischemia.
Q. Discuss the mechanism of injury, the clinical features
diagnosis and management of a central fracture dislocation
Further Reading
of hip joint.
Shoulder Dislocation
Dislocation of the Knee
1. Bedi A, Ryu RK. The treatment of primary anterior shoulder
One of the very serious injuries which is the result of a direct
dislocations. Instr Course Lect 2009;58:293-304.
 2. McNeil NJ. Postreduction management of first-time traumatic
impact onto the front of the knee by a force of considerable
:  g    
magnitude. The cruciate ligaments are torm and so are one or
811-3. Epub 2009 Jan 23.
both of the collateral ligaments. As a result the femur is pushed
3. Moratalla MB, Gabarda RF. Images in emergency medicine.
 in a posterior direction over the tibia and a dislocation of the
Posterior shoulder dislocation with reverse Hill-Sachs
deformity.Emerg Med J 2009;26(8):608
knee occurs.
4. Ochoa E Jr, Burkhart SS. Glenohumeral bone defects in the
Clinical Features
treatment of anterior shoulder instability. Instr Course Lect
2009;58:323-36.
a. Bruising and contusion around the knee.
b. Presence of neurological and vascular deficit in the lower
Hip Dislocation
limb.
c.  Signs of acute compartmental syndrome may be present
5. Selvey D. Classification of posterior fracture dislocation of
the hip joint: A modification of Thompson and Epstein
Diagnosis
classification. Injury, Volume 32(3):217-9.
6. Stuart JM, Milford LW. Fracture-dislocation of the hip: An
X-ray-gives a clear cut diagnosis. Always look for associated
end result study. J Bone Joint Surg 1954;36A:315-42.
7. Thomas VP, Epstein HC. Traumatic dislocation of the hip: A
fractures, e.g tibial spine.
Jo poued e suuaoo soseo noy pue pipuny oml jo Aoains
Treatment
twenty-0ne years. J Bone Joint Surg 1951;33A:746-78
8. Trueta J, Harrison MHM. The normal vascular anatomy of
It is an emergency. The dislocation has to be reduced as early
the femoral head in adult man. J Bone Joint Surg 1953;35B:
442-61.
as possible. Always keep a watch on vascular status of the
9. Yue J, Wilber JH, Lipuma JP, et al. Posterior hip dislocations:
limb. Insufficiency can develop any time within a week.
A cadaveric angiographic study. J Orthop Trauma 1996;
Plaster immobilization is to be avoided. Also the knee
10:447-54.
should never be immobilized in extension. If stability is
essential, external fixator application is a better option.
Knee Dislocation
Ligament repair is not indicated in closed injuries. However,
in open injuries repair of cruciates ligaments may be considered
10. Green NE, Allen BL. Vascular injuries associated with
dislocation of the knee. J Bone Joint Surg 1977;59A:236-41.
Essay Question
11. Johansen K, Lynch K, Paun M, Copass M. Noninvasive
vascular tests reliably exclude occult arterial trauma in injured
Q. Discuss the mechanism of injury diagnosis and
extremities. J Trauma 1991;31:515-22.
management of a traumatic knee dislocation.
12. Mills WJ, Tejwani N. Knee dislocation, heterotopic ossifica
Q. What are the complications related to acute traumatic
tion after knee dislocation: The predictive value of the injury
dislocation of the knee joint? Discuss their management.
severity score. J Orthop Trauma 2004;17:338-45.
5
Fractures of
the Pelvis
Structures Imparting Stability to the Pelvis
 Deforming Forces Responsible for Failure
Classification
Clinical Features and Investigations
Treatment
Formation of Pelvis
 The pelvis has an inlet and an outlet and thus allows entry
and exit of structures at the same time protecting them. It has
The pelvis is formed by the sacrum articulating with a pair
 room for accommodating viscera too.
of ilium ischium and pubis (united together to form
 For these reasons the injuries of the pelvis have to be
hemipelvis) on either sides. Stability to the pelvis is imparted
considered very seriously as there can be associated vascular,
anteriorly by the pubic symphysis, with its strong fibrocartila-
visceral and neurological compromise leading to serious
 genous cuff and ligament. Posteriorly by the sacral articula-
complications.
tion, with its strong ligaments, i.e. the anterior, interosseous
Further the acetabulum may also get involved in pelvic
fractures. Failure to evaluate and treat these injuries
Additional stability is imparted by the muscles and soft tissues
adequately may result in serious impairment of the functions
that are attached to the pelvis, (e.g. sacrospinous and sacro-
of the hip joint.
tuberous ligament postero-inferiorly, gluteal muscles
posteriorly, iliopsoas anteriorly) (Figs 5.1A and B).
The pelvic girdle is formed by 5th lumbarvertebra, the coxal
Thus it is an established fact that though the pelvis is the
bones, the sacrum and coccyx bound firmly by capsule-
only link that connects the axial and the appendicular skeleton,
ligamentous complex.
it has poor inherent stability and its stability entirely depends
on integrity of soft tissues surrounding it and the strong
The pelvic ring is formed by the anterior arch and the
ligament complex.
posterior arch.
Fractures of the Pelvis
113
Posterior
Iliolumbar
Posterior
Posterior
sacroiliac
ligament
sacroiliac
superior
ligament
ligament
iliacspine
Anterior
sacroiliac
ligament
Interosseous
sacroiliac
ligament
Sacrospinous
Anterior
Sacrotuberous
ligament
ligament
sacroiliac
A
B
ligament
Figures 5.1A and B
 s n s i n   s  a  a a s n  s    
of the sacroiliac articulation.
The anterior arch comprises of the pubic symphy-
Compression Force
sis,theilioischiopubicramiandtheobturator
Anteroposterior
foraminae.
(Analyzed taking into consideration posterior failure, i.e.
The posterior arch comprises of the sacrum, the two iliac
sacroiliac joint, as the final event.)
wings and the acetabulae.
i. Without resistance from the opposite side, e.g. direct
The anterior and the posterior arch together form The
vehicular impact.
radiographic U'
The failure starts from anterior to posterior.
Anterior failure patterm: Anteroposterior compression
Mechanisms of Injury (Figs 5.2A to C)
occurring in the midline central plane results in bilateral
open book injury (rare).
The injurious forces responsible are four in number.
The posterior failure pattem: Is similar to open book
a.Extermal rotation force.
injury. As a first step of failure it results in disruption of
b. Compression force.
the sacrospinous ligament. Next it leads to opening of
 Anteroposterior
the sacroiliac joint/sacral crushing which is the final
·
Lateral
event in the ensuing failure.
.Vertical shear.
ii. With resistance from the opposite side, e.g. caught
C.
d. Combined.
between the wall and the vehicle.
Results in very severe injuries. Visceral and vascular
External Rotation Force
injuries are common. When there is resistance, antero-
posterior compression occurring in midline central plane
Forced extemal rotation stress on the lower limb causes
 results in Butterfly like fragment comprising of all the
disruption to occur in an orderly manner from anterior to
four rami anteriorly and bilateral involvement of sacro-
 posterior described as follows.
iliac joint in the form of crushing/disruption, posteriorly.
ans jo suuado t shqnd sissuaas go uogdass
'uus snoudsoons jo uonnsp pue suuans < suo
Lateral
(Open book injury): Open book injuries are unstable in
i. Without resistance from the opposite side, e.g. direct
external rotation.
vehicular impact.
114
Essentials of Orthopedics
(A)Anteroposteriorcompression
(B)Lateralcompression
(C)Verticalshear
Figures 5.2A to C
Diagrams showing the nature of the fracture as per the direction of the force.
Anteriorly, results in closed book type of injury which
iv. Displacement occuring through fractured ilioischio-
manifests either as overlapping of symphysis pubis or
pubic ramus anteriorly and fractured ilium posteriorly.
ipsilateral/contralateral bucket handle bi-ramal fracture
Any of these four patterms may be seen depending on the
of the ilioischiopubic rami. Ipsilateral fracture of the
direction of the force.
ilium may also occur.
 Posteriorly, results in either crushing of the sacrum or
Combined
disruption of interosseous and posterior sacroiliac
It is the result of mutiplanar stress causing high degree of
 ligament occurs.
instability (total instability). Shear, rotation, compression,
These closed book injuries are unstable in internal
 translation, etc. more than one mechanism act together or in
rotation.
succession.
ii. With resistance from the opposite side, e.g. caught
Classifications
between wall and the vehicle, fall of a tree or a heavy
object over the pelvis in lying down posture.
Based on Tile's Classification (1995) as Follows
Very severe crushing occurs involving opposite hemipelvis.
A. Rotationally and vertically stable fractures. These are
Visceral, vascular and neurological injuries are common.
subdivided into-
Compression impact with resistance results in very severe
A1. Avulsion fractures that do not interrupt the pelvic ring
(Fig. 5.3).
with life because of associated vascular and visceral injuries.
Hemorrhage is severe resulting in death even if timely
medical aid is given. Morbidity rate is also quite high.
Vertical Shear
Results in vertical displacement of ipsilateral pelvic bone.
These are unstable in both vertical and horizontal planes.
Patterms of injury may be as follows:
i. Displacement occurring through disrupted symphysis
pubis anteriorly and disrupted sacroiliac joint posteriorly
(ligamentous disruption).
ii. Displacement occurring through disrupted symphysis
pubis anteriorly and fractured ilium posteriorly.
i1.1
 Displacement occurring through fractured ilioischiopubic
Figure 5.3
ramus anteriorly and disrupted sacroiliac joint posteriorly
Radiograph showing Tile's A1 fracture.
Fractures of the Pelvis
115
B
Figures 5.4A to C
Radiographs showing Tile's B1, B2, B3 fracture.
Sacral Fracture Classification
Based on Denis’ classification, these fractures are classified
according to their zone of injury.
Zone I
 Involvement of alar region of sacrum. (Neurologic
complication least 6% approx).
Zone II
Involvement of sacral foramina. (Neurologic
complication moderate 30% approx).
Zone III
 Involvement of central canal. (Neurologic compli-
cation rate 60% approx. Also known for bowel and
bladder involvement and sexual dysfunction).
Clinical Signs of Importance
1. Destot's sign: A large hematoma seen in the inguinal
Figure 5.5
Radiograph showing Tile's C3 fracture. Note the presence of sacral
region or the scrotum.
fracture on the opposite side which classifies this as Type C3.
2.
 Roux sign: Distance between the greater trochanter and
Associated comminuted intertrochanteric fracture was an open
the pubis is decreased.
fracture.
3.
 Earle sign: A tender bony prominence or a large hematoma
felt on per rectal examination.
A2.Stable iliac wing fractures or minimally displaced
4.
Bleeding through urethra vagina and rectum indicate
pelvic ring fractures with minimal instability.
visceral complications.
A3. Transverse fractures involving sacrum and
coccyx.
Investigations
B. Rotationally unstable, vertically stable fractures.
Subdivided into (Figs 5.4A to C)-
It is very important to assess a pelvic fracture both qualita-
B1. Open book (due to anteroposterior compression).
tively and quantitatively. Hence proper radiological views are
B2. Closed book (due to lateral compression).
absolutely essential with special attention to know the
B3. Bilateral type B injuries.
disturbance in *Radiographic U'.
C. Rotationally and vertically unstable. Subdivided into-
a. Standard AP view
C1. Unilateral.
Identifies fractures.
C2. Bilateral with one side type B and contralateral side
b. Pelvic inlet view, discloses
type C.
AP displacement of pelvis
C3. Bilateral with both sides type C (Fig. 5.5).
 Inward/outward rotation of iliac wing
116
Essentials of Orthopedics
Sacral impaction or alar fractures
 g. Displaced sacral fractures with associated neurologic
·
Avulsion fracture of the ischial spine.
injury.
c.Pelvic outlet view, discloses
Some of the contraindications for the surgical procedure:
 Superior displacement of pelvis
a. Patients who are unstable and critically ill with multiple
·
 Sagittal plane rotation
associated injuries.
·
True AP view of the sacrum
 b. Badly contaminated open fractures with inadequate wound
Avulsion fracture of L5 transverse process.
debridement.
d. Oblique views
c.  Crush injuries.
·Evaluates hemipelvis.
d. Morel-Lavalle lesion (closed degloving).
In complex fractures CT scan and 3D reconstruction is
The lesion is diagnosed by fluctuation (fat necrosis)
necessary to plan accurate treatment.
occurring under the skin of the involved area as a result of
shearing of the subcutaneous tissue from the underlying
Principles of Management
fascia. It is associated with high rates of bacterial
contamination.
a. Carefully evaluate the mechanism of injury to know
Hence debridement and drainage before operative inter-
whether they are stable or unstable.
 b. Immediate assessment of general condition of the patient
vention is a must.
and administration of resuscitative, life saving measures
when necessary.
Complications of Fracture Pelvis
c. Emergency management of shock and hemorrhage and
stabilization of other associated fractures when present.
Early
d. Multidisciplinary approach when vascular, visceral and
a. Visceral, e.g. injury to bladder, bowel and urethra, other
 abdominal organs and chest.
neurological injuries are associated.
b. Vascular, e.g. intermal iliac artery, superior gluteal artery.
e. Early reduction and stabilization of pelvic fractures to
 prevent further complications.
C.
 Neurological, e.g. sacral fractures.
d.Shock and hemorrhage.
(Wrapping firmly in bed sheet: Pneumatic Antishock
Garments PASG: Military antishock trousers MAST: Thera-
Late
peutic embolization are some of the measures undertaken to
Malunion with disrupted pubic and sacroiliac articulation
stop hemorrhage).
resulting in severe morbidity and impainment of physical
function.
Uncomplicated stable injuries (not involving the pelvic ring)
are managed nonoperatively. Skin and skeletal traction are
employed to reduce and immobilize the fracture or after
Malgaigne Fracture (Fig. 5.6)
reduction of the fracture under anesthesia.
It is a vertical shear fracture described by Malgaigne in the
Complicated and unstable injuries (involving and disrupting
year 1885. It is highly unstable and characterized by anterior
the pelvic ring) are stabilized surgically either by open
failure occurring through both the rami or through the
reduction and intermal fixation using reconstruction plates and
symphysis pubis and posterior failure (with a massive
screws or by using extermal fixator frames after reduction.
disruption) occurring through the sacrum or the sacroiliac joint
Some of the indications for the surgical procedure:
 Or the ilium consequent to severe trauma. Inadequate treatment
a. Diastases of pubic symphysis greater than 2.5 cm.
results in significant late complications which are as follows:
b. Sacroiliac joint dislocations.
a.Paresthesias in the ipsilateral lower extremity.
c. Displaced sacral fractures.
b. Gait disturbances with significant limp.
d. Posterior or vertical displacement of the hemipelvis
c.Severe low back pain.
(>1 cm).
d. Groin pain.
e.
Rotationally unstable pelvic ring injuries.
e. Neurologic abnormality.
f.
 Sacral fractures in patients with unstable pelvic ring
f. Leg length discrepancy.
injuries.
g.Pelvic obliquity.
Fractures of the Pelvis
117
7. Phieffer LS, Lundberg WP, Templeman DC. Instability of the
posterior pelvic ring associated with disruption of the pubic
symphysis. Orthop Clin North Am 2004;35(4):445-9.
8. Routt ML Jr, Kregor PJ, Simonian PT, Mayo K. Early results
of percutaneous iliosacral screws placed with the patient in
the supine position. J Orthop Trauma 1995;9:207-14.
9. Routt ML Jr, Simonian PT, Ballmer F. A rational approach to
pelvic trauma: resuscitation and early definitive stabilization.
Clin Orthop 1995;318:61-74.
10. Routt ML, Simonian PT, Defalco AJ, Miller J, Clarke T.
Internal fixation in pelvic fractures and primary repairs of
associated genitourinary disruptions: a team approach. J
Trauma 1996;40(5):784-90.
11. Sharma OP, Oswanski MF, Rabbi J, Georgiadis GM, Lauer
SK, Stombaugh HA. Pelvic fracture risk assessment on
admission. Am Surg 2008;74(8):761-6.
12. Stambaugh LE 3rd, Blackmore CC. Pelvic ring disruptions
Figure 5.6
in emergency radiology. Eur J Radiol 2003;48(1):71-87.
Radiograph showing a malunited Malgaigne fracture. Note the
13.Tile M.Pelvic ring fractures: should they be fixed? J Bone
displacement as a result of vertical shear and malunion in the
 Joint Surg 1988;70B:1-12.
displaced position.
14. Tile M. Pelvic fractures: operative versus nonoperative
treatment. Orthop Clin North Am 1980;11(3):423-64.
Further Reading
Acetabular Fracture
15. Brumback RJ, et al. Acetabular depression fractures
Pelvic Ring Injury
accompanying posterior fracture dislocation of the hip.J
Orthop Trauma 1990;4:42-8.
1. Burgess AR, et al. Pelvic ring disruptions: effective
16. Judet R, Judet J, Letournel E. Fractures of the acetabulum:
classification system and treatment protocols. J Trauma
classification and surgical approaches for open reduction. J
1990;30:848-56.
Bone Joint Surg 1964;46A:1616-46.
2. Denis F, Davis S, Comfort T. Sacral fractures: an important
17. Letournel E. The treatment of acetabular fractures through the
problem. Retrospective analysis of 236 cases. Clin Orthop
ilioinguinal approach. Clin Orthop 1993;292:62-76.
1988;227:67-81.
18. Matta JM. Fractures of the acetabulum: accuracy of reduction
3. Dujardin FH, Hossenbaccus M, Duparc F, Biga N, Thomine
and clinical results in patients managed operatively within
JM. Long-term functional prognosis of posterior injuries in
three weeks after the injury. J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78A: 1632-
high-energy pelvic disruption. J Orthop Trauma 1998;12(3):
45.
145-50.
19. Moed BR, Willson Carr SE, Watson JT. Results of operative
4. Latenser BA, et al. Improved outcome with early fixation of
treatment of fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum.
skeletally unstable pelvic fractures. J Trauma 1991;31:28-31.
J Bone Joint Surg 2002;84A:752-8.
5.1
McKinney BI, Nelson C, Carmion W. Apophyseal avulsion
20. Olson SA, Matta JM. The computerized tomography
fractures of the hip and pelvis. Orthopedics 2009;32(1):42.
subchondral arc: a new method of assessing acetabular
6. Pennal GF, Tile M, Waddell JP, Garside H. Pelvic disruption
assessment and classification. Clin Orthop 1980;151:12-21.
Orthop Trauma 1993;7:402-13.
6
Spinal Injuries
 Structure and Functions of the Spinal Column
 Mechanisms of Injury and Concepts
 Specific Types of Fractures and Incomplete Cord Injury
Syndromes
 Management
C Signs of Grave Prognosis and a Ray of Hope
Spine is a marvel of creation. It has many functions, yet
intervertebral disc which binds the bodies of the adjacent
remains stable during the process and protects the vital
vertebrae. The posterior arch consists of a spinous process,
structures throughout.
two transverse processes and a lamina. The arch is attached
to the body by two pedicles. Between the body and the
Structure of the Spinal Column
posterior arch is the central canal which harbors the spinal
cord and the nerve roots. The articular facets on the posterior
The basic unit of this structure is a vertebra. At birth there
arch help in the articulation of the adjacent vertebrae. Thus,
are 33 vertebrae, 7 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral
the spinal column is formed.
and 4 coccygeal. In adults there are only 24 vertebrae because
Additional support and stability is given to the spinal
of the fusion occurring in the sacral and coccygeal region
column by the ligaments. They are from before backwards,
resulting in the formation of the bone sacrum and coccyx. The
the anterior longitudinal ligament binding the vertebral body
curvature of the spinal column too changes from straight at
anteriorly, the posterior longitudinal ligament binding the
birth to S-shaped one in adulthood.
vertebral body posteriorly, ligamentum flavum binding the
Each vertebra consists of a body and a posterior arch. The
adjacent laminae, interspinous ligament extending between the
body is made up of a block of spongy bone and between the
spinous processes and binding them and the supraspinous
bodies of the two vertebrae is the fibrocartilagenous
 ligament extending over the spinous processes and binding
Spinal Injuries
119
Structures that Impart Stability to
the Spinal Column
Anterior Interbody Synarthrosis
Comprises of the intervertebral disc binding the adjacent
bodies of the vertebra, and the anterior and posterior
longitudinal ligaments.
A
Posterior Ligament Complex
The posterior ligament complex, binds the posterior elements
(posterior arch) and consists of the supraspinous ligament, the
 interspinous ligament and the ligamentum flavum.
The Facetal Joints (Figs 6.1A and B)
The direction of thefacet joint is almost transverse in the
cervical spine, anteroposterior in the thoracic spine and in
B
the lumbar spine, it is facing mediolateral. Thus, the facetal
Figures 6.1A and B
articulation in the cervical spine is less stable when compared
Showing the direction of facetal joint in (A) cervical and (B) thoracic
to thoracic and lumbar articulation.
vertebra.
Functions of the Spinal Column
them. (The names themselves describe their location)
1. Provides protection of the spinal cord and associated
(Fig. 6.2).
nerves.
Anteriorlongitudinal ligament
Intervertebraldisc
Posteriorlongitudinal ligament
Ligamentumflavum
Interspinousligament
Supraspinousligament
Bodyof thevertebra
Figure 6.2
The picture shows the ligamentous structures which impart stability to the the spinal column.
120
Essentials of Orthopedics
 2. Supports the body frame in an upright position.
3. Supports vital organs.
 4. Provides a structural foundation for the shoulder girdle
and the pelvic girdle.
 5. Acts as shock absorber on load-bearing.
6. Provides attachment to the thoracic cage.
7. Provides attachment to the muscles.
8. Allows movement.
Hence, spinal injuries result in serious disability, as it
 affects several functions.
Spinal Injury
The spinal injury has two components.
a.  Injury to the spinal column. Bony injury.
b. Injury to the spinal cord and nerve roots. Neural injury.
Figure 6.3
It is possible to have spinal column injury without spinal
Showing the Dennis' three column concept.
cord injury and vice versa, i.e. spinal cord injury without
column injury orboth spinal column and spinal cord injury.
Indirect Mechanism
Dennis' Three Column Concept (Fig. 6.3)
 Injuries as a result of this are classified as:
The spine is divided into three columns namely anterior,
a.Flexion injury.
middle and posterior by Dennis. Failure of one or more
b. Flexion rotation injury.
column occurs in spinal injury when deforming forces act by
C.
 Hyperextension injury.
causing axial compression, axial distraction or translation.
d.
Vertical compression injury.
Anterior column: Consists of anterior longitudinal ligament,
e. Shearing.
anterior half of the vertebral body and the anterior portion of
f.Flexion distraction.
amnulus fibrosus.
Flexion Injury
Middle column: Consists of posterior longitudinal ligament,
 posterior half of the vertebral body and the posterior portion
In this is the deforming force is unidirectional. It exerts
of annulus fibrosus.
compression stress (closing stress) on the anterior structures
Posterior column: Consists of the posterior elements (neural
amd results in a wedge compression fracture of the body of
the vertebra. The posterior elements do not fail. The injury is
arch) with ligamentum flavum, interspinous and supraspinous
diagnosed as unstable when there is evidence of compression
ligament, facetal joints and the capsule.
fracture which is more than 50% of height of the body
Otherwise the injury is considered as stable (Figs 6.4A to D).
Mechanisms of Spinal Injuries
Flexion RotationInjury
Several mechanisms can disrupt the spinal column causing
fracture, dislocation or fracture dislocation. Depending on the
Ih this the force is multidirectional. Thus in addition to fracture
severity of injury and the compromise of stabilizing structures
of the body of the vertebra and injury to the posterior elements,
the injuries are diagnosed as stable or unstable (Nicoll's
(posterior ligament complex) the torsional stress in this
classification).
mechanism disrupts the facetal articulation and causes
Basically these injury mechanisms are classified based on
dislocation. This results in fracture dislocation. Injury is highly
the deforming effect of an indirect impact, direct impact or a
unstable and incidence of spinal cord injury is high (Figs 6.5A
traction force on the spine.
to D).
Spinal Injuries
121
to anterior interbody synarthrosis. Sometimes a small
triangular fragment of bone is avulsed from the inferior
vertebra due to the pull of the anterior longitudinal ligament.
This feature is considered as a tell tale evidence of a hyper-
extension injury (Figs 6.6A and B).
Vertical Compression Injury
In this the force is axially transmitted and between the two
A
B
vertebrae the involved vertebra gets compressed axially and
 bursts into fragments. The disc material and fragments of bone
are retropulsed into the spinal canal. Burst fractures are
umstable fractures and even if immediate neurological deficit
is not observed, they tend to cause chronic instability pain.
The risk of ensuing neurological deficit always exists (Figs
6.7A and B).
Shearing Injury
Ih this the force is transmitted transversely through the anterior
 interbody synarthrosis and posterior ligament complex causing
dislocation at the level of injury. Fracture of the pedicles and
C
facetal joint also is observed. Highly unstable and spinal cord
injury is common.
Figures 6.4A to D
Pictures and radiographs showing pure flexion injury of the spine
FlexionDistraction Injury
resulting in wedge compression of the vertebra. If the compression
is less than 50%of the original height of the vertebra the injury is
considered as stable.
In this the fulcrum of flexion is anterior to the body of the
vertebra. The force may pass entirely through the bone
Hyperextension Injury
(Chance fracture) or through the posterior ligament complex.
Chance fracture (injury entirely through the bone) is stable
In this too the force is unidirectional. It exerts distraction stress
after reduction. Injury through the ligament complex need
on the anterior structures. Thus, the failure is mainly limited
surgical stabilization (Figs 6.8A and B).
A
B
D
Figures 6.5A to D
Showing pictures and radiographs of flexion rotation injury resulting in a fracture dislocation. The rotational element in the mechanism
122
Essentials of Orthopedics
A
B
Figures 6.6A and B
Showing the hyperextension injury. Note the direction of forces and 
Figures 6.8A and B
 snn is a isan p s  a
e de, ai puanes (ane auy ynel aine eouu, bumus 
avulsed from the upper vertebral body when seen in the radiograph,
Belt' injury.
indicates hyperextension injury.
Specific Types of Spinal Column Injury
Jefferson's Fracture
A
B
Named after Goeffrey Jefferson, a British neurosurgeon who
reported four cases in the year 1920.
It is a four part burst fracture of the C1 (the Atlas) vertebra
involving the anterior and the posterior arch as a result of axial
compression. The variant can occur as two or three part
fracture, e.g. diving into a shallow pool, impact of the head
against the roof of a vehicle, fall on the vertex, etc.
The patient presents with pain in the neck.
Neurological deficit is rare except when vertebral artery
is involved which results in Wallenberg's syndrome
characterized by ipsilateral involvement of cranial nerves,
Homer's syndrome, ataxia and loss of contralateral pain and
Figures 6.7A and B
temperature sensation.
 Showing the burst fracture due to a vertical compression injury. The
Treatment depends on whether the injury is stable or
classical example is a vertical fall from a ladder or a heavy object
unstable. This is evaluated by the amount of injury to the
falling on the vertex.
anterior arch and the intactness of the transverse ligament.
Stable injury needs prolonged immobilization in collar or halo
traction (at least for 3 months). Unstable injury is treated by
Direct Mechanism
fusion of the first three cervical vertebrae (Fig. 6.9).
Direct penetrating injury, e.g. fire arms and knives.
Hangman's Fracture
This fracture traditionally occurs after judicial hanging with
Traction Injuries
the noose being placed below the chin. Hence, this name is
In this the muscle and ligaments pull the bone and result in
given.
avulsion fracture, e.g. transverse process fracture, spinous
It is fracture of both the pedicles or the pars interarticularis
process fracture.
of C2 (the Axis) vertebra as a result of distraction that occurs
Spinal Injuries
123
good union is seen. Detailed evaluation for stability by taking
flexion/ extension radiographs, CT, MRI is necessary when
the fracture involves multiple vertebrae, the laminae and the
facetal joints and should not be loosely branded as Clay
Shoveller's fracture on the basis of spinous process fracture.
Chance Fracture (Lap Seat Belt Injury)
It was described by GQ Chance in 1948. It was common in
motor vehicle accidents, when the vehicle was involved in a
 head on collision and the passenger was wearing a lap seat
 belt. The incidence has sharply fallen since the implementation
of shoulder restraint system. The injury occurs as a result of
Figure 6.9
violent forward flexion. The posterior elements namely the
Picture showing the Jefferson's fracture.
spinous process, lamina, the pedicle and the posterior part of
the vertebral body fail as a result of distraction force resulting
in characteristic transverse fracture whereas the anterior
portion of the vertebral body fractures as a result of compres-
sive force. This injury, when the entire component is bony
amd stable, heals uneventfully with immobilization.
But if the posterior injury is that of failure of posterior
ligament complex even though the anterior injury is bony, the
mjury is unstable. So also is pure ligamentous disruption.
 Incidence of cord involvement is high in these injuries which
occurs as a variant of classical Chance fracture. These unstable
mjuries need surgical stabilization (Figs 6.8A and B).
Whiplash Injury
Common in road traffic accidents when there is rear impact
(rear- end collision). The neck is violently hyperextended and
flexed. If the impact is less severe it results in only soft tissue
injury. If the impact is severe it results in injury to
intervertebral disc, the facetal joints, ligaments, the muscles
Figure 6.10
and the nerve roots. Concussion injury to the brain is also
Picture showing the Hangman's fracture.
common. Depending on the severity, the patient may present
with following symptoms.
i. Pain and stiffness in the neck.
 a pxa re i yu a u d a 
ii. Limitation of movements.
weight of the body. The common sign is constricted pupil on
ii. Headache, dizziness, nausea, (result of concussion).
the ipsilateral side due to injury to the sympathetic trunk
 iv. Hoarseness of voice, (involvement of recurrent laryngeal
(Homer's syndrome) (Fig. 6.10).
nerve).
v. Difficulty in swallowing, (stretching and contusion of
Clay Shoveller's Fracture
esophagus).
First seen among Australian Clay Shoveller's who used to lift
vi. Pain in the back and the shoulder, (radiating pain).
heavy loads of Clay. The mechanism is avulsion injury. As a
vii. Pain and paresthesia (due to involvement of nerves).
result avulsion fracture of the spinous processes occurs from
Symptoms may develop as early as within 2 hours to as
C6 to T1. Treatment is to immobilize the area with collar till
late as 8 days.
124
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
Figures 6.11A and B
Pictures showing the mechanism of an hyperextension/ whiplash injury.
 Radiographic evaluation is a must and in patients having
Anterior Cord Syndrome
symptoms of severe injury CT; MRI is indicated.
Soft tissue whiplash injury invariably heals in 2-3 weeks
In this the anterior portion of the spinal cord is involved due
with immobilization in collar. Severe forms may cause
to direct injury by a bony fragment of a fractured vertebra.
intervertebral disc or at times injury to the anterior spinal
residual, mild degree of pain to remain (Figs 6.11A
artery (loss of blood supply). Neurological involvement
and B).
manifests withcompletemotor loss,loss of painand tempera-
turediscriminationbelow thelevelof injurypreserving
Spinal Cord Injury
(intact) deep touch, position and vibration sense. Prognosis
Spinal cord injury can be complete or incomplete. Complete
is poor. Some sensory recovery can occur but motor paralysis
transection of the cord results in Quadriplegia in cases of
is generally permanent.
cervical spine injury and Paraplegia in cases of thoracic
spine injury and is characterized by complete sensory loss,
Central Cord Syndrome
motor paralysis and paralysis of urinary bladder and
In this the central portion of the spinal cord is involved due
bowels.
to pinching of the cord between the vertebral body anteriorly
Because the spinal cord ends at the lower border of L1
and the ligamentum flavum posteriorly. Hematomyelia occurs
vertebra any injury at or below the level of Llwill result in
followed by destruction of the grey matter of the central
Conus medullaris and/or'Cauda Equina'lesion.
spinothalamic and pyramidal tract. Upper extremities are
For the same reason the level of the column injury does
more involved than the lower. Common in elderly with
not correspond with the level of cord injury. Hence, a formula
degenerative changes in the cervical spine (spondylotic spine).
 is derived to determine the level of cord injury.
Mechanism of injury is hyperextension.Around 50% of the
In the cervical spine add one to the level of the column
patients show functional recovery (Figs 6.12A and B).
injury, to determine the level of cord injury. In the upper
thoracic spine add two and in the lower thoracic add three
Brown-Sequard's Syndrome
to determine the level of cord injury.
Incomplete transection of the cord results in various types
In this one-half of the cord is involved. Manifests with
of syndromes.
complete paralysis of the ipsilateral side and hypoesthesia
Spinal Injuries
125
A
Posterior
B
Posterior
5
6
4
③
1）
2
Anterior
Anterior
Figures 6.12A and B
Showing cross-section of the spinal cord and the position of the different tracts in the spinal cord; and their involvement in different types
4- Lateral corticospinal tract; 5- Fasciculus cuneatus; 6- Fasciculus gracilis. (Upper limb portion is the most medial part nearer to the midline
followed by the trunk and then the lower limbs).
of the contralateral side. Functional recovery generally occurs
iv. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy to prevent infection.
amnd patients become ambulant.
v. Methylprednisolone injection as a bolus dose of 1.5-2.0
gm is given at earliest if spinal cord injury is suspected
Management of Spinal Injuries
to reduce the cord edema and further compromise.
vi. Assistance of breathing when required.
Emergency Management
vii. Transportation to a center having facilities for the
At the Site of the Incident
treatment of spinal injuries, at earliest.
Attempt should immediately be made to immobilize the spinal
Definitive Management
column. If collars, braces and jackets are available to be made
use of immediately. If not the patient may be strapped to a
The definitive management starts only after initial stabili-
wooden plank, e.g. a detached door or a board and camied or
zation of the general conditionof the patientand aftertaking
transported on a stretcher. Sand bags may be kept on either
appropriate X-rays to assess the spinal column injury and
side of the neck during transportation if cervical spine injury
MRI to assess in detail the nature of both column and the
is suspected, to prevent rotation of the neck
cord injury. Dynamic flexion extension X-rays may be
Medical Management
necessary when the static X-rays are normal but there is high
degree of suspicion of ligamentous disruption and presence
To be instituted as early as possible. Patient is advised not to
 of instability.
take any thing orally.
 Definitive management depends on two factors:
Measures
a.
Whether the injury is stable or unstable.
i. Treatment of spinal shock with adequate intravenous
b. Whether there is cord injury or no cord injury.
fluids and vasopressors.
Loss of height of the vertebral body which is more
ii. Treatment of pain by giving analgesic injections.
than 50%, injury to posterior ligament complex
iii. Catheterization of the bladder and recording of urine
and facetal joints and presence of malalignment are
output.
the indicators of instability.
126
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figures 6.13A and B
 Showing the picture of skull traction. Note that the sharp point of the tongs engage in the diploe and do not penetrate the inner table of the
skull.
Figure 6.15
Radiograph after fixation of a fracture dislocation at L1-L2 with
pedicular screws.
Figure 6.14
 Showing the picture of halo body orthosis.
Operative Management (Fig. 6.15)
Indicated in all unstable spinal injury with or without cord
 Non-operative management: Indicated only in stable spinal
imjury. Aim is not only to stabilize the spine immediately but
column injury with irrecoverable cord injury or without cord
also to take away the compressive pathology on the cord and
injury. Measures include immobilization in various forms of
help in its recovery. Early mobilization is possible after
plaster jackets, spinal braces and in cervical spine injuries
surgical stabilization which prevents all the complications of
skull traction (Figs 6.13A and B), halo-pelvic traction
 prolonged confinement to the bed, e.g. bed sores, hypostatic
(Fig. 6.14), etc.
 pmeumonia, thromboembolism, etc.
Spinal Injuries
127
Procedures
Inhibitory
 Posterior decompression and instrumentation and fusion.
impulsefromthe
Anterior decompression and fusion.
brain to S2,S3,S4
S2
S2,S3,S4lower
Combined posterior and anterior instrumentation and
S3
centersof
Lesion above
micturition
fusion.
S2,S3,S4resulting
S
inautomaticbladder
Motorefferent
Sensory
impulsesfrom
Management of Established Paralysis
afferentimpulse
S2,S3,S4reach
(Quadriplegia and Paraplegia)
toS2,S3,S4
thebladder
Lesionof nerve
Basic principles involved are to take care of:
rootsresulting
Detrusormuscleof
inautonomous
urinarybladder
a. The paralyzed bladder and the paralyzed bowel.
bladder
In the stage of spinal shock there is flaccid paralysis of
Sphincter
the bladder. Hence needs catheterization for emptying of
Figure 6.16
urine. Once, the spinal shock passes off a neurogenic
bladder develops.
Diagram showing the normal mechanism of voiding of urine and the
level of lesions responsible for the development of automatic and
Types of neurogenic bladder (Fig. 6.16)
autonomous bladder.
i. Automatic bladder: This type of bladder is seen in
complete transection of the spinal cord. In this the
bladder is devoid of inhibitory or facilitatory control
from the higher centers in the brain. Hence, behaves
imdependent of the higher centers. When the bladder
is filled with urine it sends afferent sensory signals to
lower centers of micturition situated in the S2, S3, S4
segments of the spinal cord which responds by sending
efferent motor signals to the detrusor muscle in the
Figure 6.17
bladder wall. The reflex arc becomes complete and
 Showing the picture of Crede's maneuver. Firm suprapubic pressure
the detrusor contracts powerfully resulting in complete
is applied to express the urine from the bladder.
emptying of the bladder. No residual urine is left in
the bladder. Hence, there is less chance of developing
complications and sequale of urinary tract infection.
Patient has to be taught to empty the bladder by
ii. Automatic bladder: This type of bladder is seen when
"Crede's Maneuver” i.e. by applying gentle supra-
the lesion is affecting the nerve roots after the spinal
pubic pressure or by intermittent catheterization (Fig.
cord ends at lower border of L1, e.g. conus medullaris
6.17).
amd cauda equine lesion.
Bowels remain paralyzed in the stage of spinal shock
The bladder is cut off from the lower centers of
and later start functioning autonomously. Frequent
micturition situated in the S2, S3, S4 segments of
spontaneous small quantity emptying is seen. Should be
spinal cord. No pathway is available for transmission
taken care of by good nursing care.
 of afferent sensory signals to lower centers when the
b.
 To prevent other complications of prolonged confinement
bladder is filled with urine. Hence, emptying has to
to bed, e.g. pressure sore hypostatic pneumonia, thrombo-
occur only with the help of local myoneural stretch
embolism, etc.
reflexes situated in the detrusor muscle. Emptying is
 Back care is a must to prevent pressure sore. Good
less forceful and is incomplete. There is always
nursing care, use of water bed or different types of pressure
residual urine in the bladder. Dribbling may occur.
relieving mattresses will help in preventing pressure sores.
High chance of developing all the complications and
These complications can also be prevented by early
sequel of urinary retention and recurrent urinary tract
mobilization (Wheel chair) and exercise therapy by a good
infection.
trained physiotherapist.
128
Essentials of Orthopedics
Spinalcord
S-2andS-3
Figure 6.18
Glanspenis
Analsphincter
compression
contraction
Diagrammatic representation of testing perianal anesthesia.
Persistence of anesthesia is an indicator of complete cord injury.
Figure 6.19
Descrimination between sharpness and dullness when present
 Diagrammatic representation of bulbocavernous reflex.
indicates incomplete injury.
Compression of glans penis will cause contraction of anal sphincter.
Return of this cord mediated reflex indicates the termination of spinal
shock and grave prognosis.
Signs of Grave Prognosis
If the cord transection is complete the prognosis is poor.
During the stage of spinal shock there is flaccid paralysis with
absence of perianal sensation and complete lumbar and sacral
areflexia which may last for 24 hours to 7 days. Retum of
bulbocavermous reflex and anal wink which are normal cord
mediated reflexes signifies the termination of the stage of
spinal shock and indicates grave prognosis.
Bulbocavernous Reflex (Fig. 6.18)
Figure 6.20
Showing diagrammatic representation of anal reflex. Return of this
It is a polysynaptic reflex mediated through S1, S2, S3
reflex after termination of spinal shock in a person who remains as
segments of the spinal cord. The reflex is elicited by applying
a quadriplegic indicates grave prognosis.
indwelling catheter at the same time monitoring reflex
Interpretation
contraction of anal sphincter (Fig. 6.19).
i. Absence of the reflex-stage of spinal shock.
ii. Retum of the reflex-spinal shock has passed of and
Anal Wink
prognosis is grave.
 Otherwise known as anal reflex, perineal reflex, anocutaneous
ii. If spinal shock does not exist/ not suspected but the
reflex is mediated through S1, S2, S3, segments of the spinal
reflexes are absent, these tests indicate that there can be
cord. The pudendal nerve carries these signals to the spinal
conus medullaris or cauda equina lesion.
centers.
The reflex is elicited by using a sharp pin and inducing a
Rehabilitation
noxious tactile stimulus on the skin around the anal sphincter.
This results in reflex contraction of the sphincter indicating
Centers for rehabilitation play a great role in helping
the intactness of the reflex arc (Fig. 6.20).
paraplegics to lead an independent life and assistance should
Spinal Injuries
129
cervical spinal cord injuries. J Spinal Disord 2003;16(3):229
breadwinner for the family becomes a dependent for rest of
35.
2. Cline JR, Scheidel E, Bigsby EF. A comparison of methods
his life!. Psychological trauma is tremendous. Economic status
is shattered. Hence, a paraplegic needs in addition to medical
of cervical immobilization used in patient extrication and
transport. J Trauma 1985;25(7):649-53.
3. Daffner SD, Wang JC. Anterior cervical fusion: the role of
members but also from the medical team treating the patient.
anterior plating. Instr Course Lect 2009;58:689-98.
Rehabilitation of a quadriplegic is more challenging than a
4. Denis F The three column spine and its significance in the
paraplegic. There is no greater satisfaction than to see these
classification of acute thoracolumbar spinal injuries. Spine
paralyzed people become vocationally rehabilitated,
1983;8(8):817-31.
economically independent and emotionally stable.
5. Harris MB, Shi LL, Vacarro AR, Zdeblick TA, Sasso RC.
Nonsurgical treatment of thoracolumbar spinal fractures. Instr
A Ray of Hope for Paraplegics and Quadriplegics
Course Lect 2009;58:629-37
6. Kerwin AJ, Frykberg ER, Schinco MA, Griffen MM, Arce CA,
On Friday the 23rd January 2009 FDA of United States
Nguyen TQ, et al. The effect of early surgical treatment of
of America, is said to have given permission for the first
ever clinical trial on Embryonic Stem cell therapy for
2007;63(6):1308-13.
7. Krassioukov A, Eng JJ, Warburton DE, Teasell R. Spinal Cord
irrecoverable spinal cord injury.
Although animal experiments on rats had promising
Injury Rehabilitation Evidence Research Team. A systematic
review of the management of orthostatic hypotension after
results as early as 2005, Stem cell therapy had acted as a
spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabi1l 2009;90(5):876-
double edged sword. On one hand it had improved motor
85.
function below the level of the lesion. On the other hand
8.McCormack T, Karaikovic E, Gaines RW. The load sharing
the rats developed greater pain sensitivity superior to it.
classification of spine fractures. Spine 1994;19(15):1741-4.
Also there existed a predictable possibility of stem cells
9. Mirza SK, Krengel WF 3rd, Chapman JR, Anderson PA,
growing into a tumor.
Bailey JC, Grady MS, et al. Early versus delayed surgery for
After much research, experimental study (multicentric)
acute cervical spinal cord injury. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1999;
359:104-14.
is currently being done on human beings by injecting Stem
cells 14 days after the injury because of the possibility of
10. Nicholas JS, Selassie AW, Lineberry LA, Pickelsimer EE,
Haines SJ. Use and determinants of the methylprednisolone
stem cells getting destroyed in the process of inflammation
protocol for traumatic spinal cord injury in South Carolina
occurring after injury if injected early. Too late an injection
acute care hospitals. J Trauma 2009;66(5):1446-50.
may not be effective because of degeneration occurring
11. Rihn JA, Anderson DT, Sasso RC, Zdeblick TA, Lenke LG,
in the spinal cord and formation of scar tissue. The role
Harris MB, et al. Emergency evaluation, imaging, and
of growth factors and other chemical mediators are also
classification of thoracolumbar injuries. Instr Course Lect
found to be crnucial.
2009:58:619-28
Approximately 2 millions of stem cells are to be injected
12. Schinkel C, Frangen TM, Kmetic A, Andress HJ, Muhr G
in an attempt to generate oligodendrocyte progenitor cell
German Trauma Registry. Timing of thoracic spine stabili-
that could ultimately form new myelin and develop
capability to transmit signals from the brain down the
outcome. J Trauma 2006;61(1):156-60
spinal cord.
13. Schlegel J, Bayley J, Yuan H, Fredricksen B. Timing of
surgical decompression and fix ation of acute spinal fractures.
Experiments of transfusing human embryonic cord blood
J Orthop Trauma 1996;10(5):323-30.
in spinal cord transected rats has also shown promising
14. Vaccaro AR, Lehman RA, Hurlbert J, et al. A new classi-
results.
However, concrete concepts are yet to be established and
morphology, the integrity of the posterior ligamentous
every one hopes that this dream turns out to be a reality
complex and neurologic status. Spine 2005;30(20):2325-
in future.
33.
15. Walker J. Spinal cord injuries: acute care management and
Further Reading
rehabilitation. Nurs Stand 2009;24-30;23(42):47-56.
16. Zdeblick TA, Sasso RC, Vaccaro AR, Chapman JR, Harris
1. Brodke DS, Anderson PA, Newell DW, Grady MS, Chapman
MB. Surgical treatment of thoracolumbar fractures. Instr
JR. Comparison of anterior and posterior approaches in
Course Lect 2009;58:639-44.
7
Peripheral Nerve and
Brachial Plexus Injuries
Introduction
Structure of a Peripheral Nerve
Response of a Nerve to Injury
C
Classification of Nerve Injury
C
Clinical Symptoms, Signs and Tests Useful in Diagnosis
Electrodiagnosis
 Management
Pathomechanics of Paralytic Deformities and Clinical Signs
C
Formation of Brachial Plexus
Different Injuries of Brachial Plexus
 Signs, Symptoms, Diagnosis and Management
PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURY
nerves arise. Hence peripheral nerve consists of components
from several nerve roots.
Introduction
Structure of a Peripheral Nerve
Every peripheral nerve is a mixed nerve (Unlike cranial nerves
which are purely sensory, motor or mixed). Hence injury of a
The basic unit of a peripheral nerve is an axon. Axon is a
peripheral nerve results in disturbance of sensory, motor and
direct extension of a nerve cell either from anterior horm cell,
autonomic function. As the spinal nerves exit through the
a dorsal root ganglion or a regional sympathetic ganglion.
spinal foramina they form plexus, i.e.the cervical, the brachial,
Each axon is covered by myelin and Schwann cell sheath.
the lumbar and the sacral plexus from which these peripheral
These axons with their sheaths are enclosed further in a
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
131
Axons
Endoneurium
Epineurium
Matchingof thefuniculi isessential foragood
A
Perineurium
B
repairaswellasprognosis
Allthreefuniculiarematchinginthediagram.
Figures 7.1A and B
Showing the structure of a peripheral nerve.
delicate fibrous sheath known as endoneurium. A group or
Classification of Nerve Injury
cluster of axons with their endoneurial tubes is known as a
fasciculus or funiculus. This funiculus is enclosed in another
Based on Seddon's Classification (1943)
sheath known as perineurium. Thus a bundle is formed. These
bundles of groups of axons are surrounded by a fairly thick
Neuropraxia
fibrous sheath known as epineurium. Thus each axon is
In this the injury is either contusion or compression of the
covered and protected by three sheaths, namely the endo
nerve. There is a physiological block in conduction of the
neurium (the innermost), perineurium (the intermediate) and
nerve impulse but the anatomical continuity is preserved. It
epineurium (the outermost).
 is the result of transient ischemia. No Wallerian degeneration
The number and disposition of the axons as well as the
is observed. Recovery is complete, e.g. Saturday night palsy.
fasciclesvary from nerve to nerve.So is the thickness and the
Crutch palsy.
amount of neural sheath.Also,in the same nerve the structure
varies at different levels. This is because the nerve branches
Axonotmesis
out and the number of fibers become progressively less and
less towards the terminal end of the nerve (Figs 7.1A and B).
In this the axons break but the endoneurial tube (the sheath)
is preserved. Occurs as a result of traction and stretching of
the nerve. Though wallerian degeneration occurs, good
Response of a Neuron to Injury
functional recovery is possible because of the intact nerve
The neuron disintegrates and degenerates following an injury.
sheath, e.g. Birth injury (except avulsion injury) Tardy Ulnar
nerve palsy.
The time required is different in sensory and motor fibers and
depends also on the size and myelination of the nerve. The
change that occurs distal to the injury is known as secondary
Neurotmesis
Or antegrade, (Wallerian degeneration) and the change that
It is complete division of the nerve. Both nerve fibers and
occurs proximal to the injury is known as primary or
sheath are disrupted. May be partial or complete. Recovery
retrog rade degeneration. Distal degeneration manifests in the
is impossible without repair. Failure to recover and poor
form of clearing the dead tissue and emptying the tube and
recovery is not uncommon. At times needs secondary
 preparing it to receive sprouting axonal buds. Where as the
reconstructive procedures to gain useful function.
changes taking place proximally is to recoup and prepare the
neuron to regenerate and grow. These changes take place over
Based on Sunderland Classification (1951):
a period of 15 to 30 days (Fig. 7.2).
(In brief)
Lesser the disruption, greater is the recovery and return
of function. Greater the disruption, lesser is the recovery
I Degree: Conduction of the nerve is
Neuropraxia of
and return of function.
 interfered.
JSeddon's
132
Essentials of Orthopedics
Enlargementof
nervecellbody
Anteriorhorncell
ofthespinalcord
Swollencut
nerveends
Axonal
sprouting
Muscle
Sharplycut
Phaseof
Phaseof
nerve
neuronal
neuronal
Severalmonths
recoupment
regeneration
afterinjury
(Day0)
(day0-14)
(From15-30
showinga
days onwards)
regeneratednerve
Figure 7.2
Showing response of a nerve to injury. Note the Wallerian degeneratipn occurring distal to injury, proximal or retrograde degeneration
 occurring proximal to the injury. The process of regeneration begins only after a period of 14-21 days following injury.
II Degree: Continuity of the axon is
Diagnosis
 These represent
interfered.
varying grades
Diagnosis is done on the basis of clinical evaluation of
III Degree: Continuity of the endoneurial
of Axonotmesis
autonomic disturbance, sensory changes, motor changes
tube and its contents is interfered.
of Seddon's
amd by performing relevant special tests. Sensory and motor
IV Degree: Continuity of the funiculus
loss develops immediately after injury. Autonomic
and its contents is interfered.
disturbance though present after injury, takes some time
V Degree: Continuity of the entire nerve
Neurotmesis
to establish. Certain changes develop progressively over a
trunk is interfered (Disruption of the
of Seddon's
period of time and are seen after a few weeks, e.g muscle
entire nerve).
wasting.
VI Degree of MacKinnon Dellon(1988): A combination of
A Scar/ penetrating wound along the course of the nerve
varying grades of Sunderland which co-exist in the same
especially at right angles indicates the possibility of
nerve. It means a part of the nerve may have neuropraxia.
neurotmesis.
Other part may have axonotmesis.
Furtherasharp object can cause partial cut injury to the
Autonomic and Sensory Changes
nerve,i.e.partial neurotmesis considered as IV Degree of
Sunderland'sclassification.ThusIV degreeofSunderland's
a.
 Smoothness and dryness of the skin.
could be either axonotmesis or partial neurotmesis.
b.
 Atrophy of the pulp and conical tapering of the digits.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
133
c.Brittle nails.
Sensory loss over theautonomouszone is a sure signof
d. Loss of callosities and creases.
a particular peripheral nerve injury.Of immense help in a
e. Absence of sweating.
quick diagnosis especially in a case of polytrauma.
f. Trophic ulcers.
 g. Loss of sensation over the sensory area supplied by the
Diagnostic Tests
peripheral nerve especially in the autonomous zone (Figs
Electromyography (EMG)
7.3A to E).
The action potential generated in the muscle is recorded
Motor Changes
graphically both at rest and during activity (voluntary motor
action potentials) by the insertion of a needle electrode. It is
a. Paralysis of the muscles supplied by the peripheral nerve
done at early and late intervals, as well as before and after
resulting in loss of function.
repair and interpreted.
b. Pathognomonic deformities as a result of muscle
Denervation potentials: Every muscle is inherently vibrant
imbalance.
Median nerve: Injury at a higher level, results in both ape
with an electrical potential. This electrical potential remains
thumb and pointing index deformity.
masked as long as the muscle has an intact nerve supply. This
Injury at a lower level, results in only ape thumb
is because the impulse generated by a peripheral nerve is much
greater than the resting inherent electrical potential of the
defonmity
Unar nerve: Ulnar claw hand.
muscle. When there is denervation no impulse is transmitted
Combined Ulnar and Median nerve: Simian hand (hand
through the peripheral nerve. Thus it is possible to record this
of an Ape)
imherent electrical potential of the muscle. This is recorded
Radial nerve: Wrist drop
initially as sharp positive waves and later as fibrillatory waves
 Posterior interosseous nerve: Finger drop and thumb drop.
and are known as denervation potentials (Figs 7 .4A to C).
Sciatic nerve: Flail foot.
Thus following conclusions are drawn.
a.  Presence of fibrillation potentials indicate denervation.
Posterior tibial nerve: Claw toes
Lateral popliteal nerve: Foot drop.
b. Absence of denervation potentials as late as 3 weeks
These pathognomonic deformities when present are
indicate intactness of nerve.
diagnostic of a peripheral nerve injury.
c.  Absence of voluntary motor unit potentials indicate
paralysis of the nerve.
Special Tests
d. Presence of voluntary motor unit potentials indicate
intact functional nerve.
a. Oschner's clasp test.
e. Polyphasic motor unit potential developing after
b. Pen test.
denervation indicate reinnerv ation.
c. Card test.
d. Book test.
Strength Duration Curve
e. Igawa's sign.
Uses the motor conduction property to assess the status of the
f.
Tinel's sign.
injured nerve. As the name indicates this is a curve plotted on
a graph for different strengths and different durations of
Sensory Zones of a Peripheral Nerve
electrical stimulation within a physiological limit (Galvanic/
Faradic current). The surface electrodes are used for stimulation.
Three zones are recognized. They are the maximal zone, the
The physiological limit of stimulation is expressed in terms
intermediate zone, and the autonomous zone.
of rheobase and chronaxie.
Inte rmediate zone: Is the area of overlap of the maximal zone
Rheobase
of the different peripheral nerves.
It is the minimal strength of the current of infinite duration
Autonomous zone: Area exclusively supplied by a particular
required to stimulate a muscle (e.g. 300 milliseconds/long
peripheral nerve.
duration).
134
EssentialsofOrthopedics
A
B
C
E
Figures7.3A to E
d  (a u  ( u  a u  () su g   s sn a 
nerve (E) Sciatic nerve.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
135
A
B
C
Figures 7.4A to C
Showing action potential during EMG study. (A) Electromyogram showing normal insertional activity (B) Electromyogram showing positive
sharp wave of denervation potential (C) Electromyogram showing spontaneous fibrillation potentials of denervation.
Starch lodine Test (Tests Autonomous Function)
In starch iodine test the area in question is first painted with
jodine and kept dry. Then starch powder is sprinkled and
sweating is induced (covering with cloth or making the patient
drink a cup of hot coffee). If sweating is present the color
gth
changes to purple indicating intactness of autonomous
innervation. If absent, no color change is observed indicating
loss of autonomous function.
Duration(milli-seconds)
Management
Figure 7.5
Neuropraxia and Axonotmesis
Showing changes in the SD curve during denervation as well as at
These injuries invariably recover and hence need only
regeneration. Strength duration curve (A) A normal nerve curve (re
inervation) (B) A curve seen in denervation (shift to the right)
supportive measures. For example, Saturday night palsy,
(C) Partial denervation (regeneration.) Showing a kink in the curve.
 Traction injury (not avulsion) of brachial plexus or any other
peripheral nerve.
Chronaxie
The management is always nonoperative.
It is the duration required to stimulate a muscle with the
Measures undertaken are:
current strength of twice the rheobase. Chronaxie in a human
a.
 Drug therapy to relieve the edema and improve
skeletal muscle varies from 0.08 to 0.32 milliseconds.
vascularity, e.g. anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, etc.
 A muscle with intact nerve responds to any strength and
b. Rest to the part by means of static splinting (prevents
any duration of current within this physiological limit. The
stretching) to facilitate healing.
contraction is directly proportional to the strength and duration
 Later, preventing contractures by means of dynamic
of the stimulus. Where as a paralyzed muscle does not respond
splinting and exercise therapy.
to a stimulus of low strength of short duration (faradic). But
responds only to a stimulus of high strength and long duration
Neurotmesis
(galvanic). So the response is absent for a faradic stimulation
but is present for a galvanic stimulation. Hence the curve 
Is always treated by nerve repair, i.e. neurorrhaphy. Repair is
plotted, smoothly ascends to the right of the nonmal curve.
done either immediately after the injury which is known as
As regeneration takes place or in a partially injured nerve,
primary repair Or at a later period after the initial wound
the curve starts shifting to the left and a kink develops in the
heals which is known as secondary repair.
curve. And finally when the regeneration is complete the curve
 Nerve grafting is done only when there is loss of nerve
descends, becomes flatter and near normal (Fig. 7.5).
tissue and when end to end repair by any means is not possible.
136
Essentials of Orthopedics
Saphenous.
Suralnerve
vein
Lateral
malleolus
Straight
longitudinal
incision
A
Figure 7.7
 Showing the method of obtaining sural nerve for nerve grafting 
procedure.
Sural nerve is used as the donor nerve. Cadaveric nerve
transplants are also in practice to bridge large defects
(Fig. 7.7).
Types of NerveRepair(Neurorrhaphy)
a. Epineurial repair—epineurium is used for placement of
sutures (Figs 7.6A and 7.8).
b.  Perineurial repair—perineurium is used for placement of
sutures (Figs 7.6B and C)
B
C
Accuratematchingof thefuniculiand suturingofthe
Figure 7.8
corresponding funicufus is absofutely essential for a successfu!
Showing primary repair of an ulnar nerve injury at the elbow. The
repair. Also the sutured site shouid be free of tension.
nerve has been transposed anteriorly. Approximation of the fasciculi
and epineurial nerve repair Using 6-0 poly propylene sutures has
Figures 7.6A to C
grade of motor power with sensory recovery almost up to S3.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
137
c. Combined epi-perineurial repair—both are used for
Sensory Grading:
placement of sutures.
S0
No Sensation.
S1
Presence of pain sensation.
Factors Influencing Nerve Repair
S2
 Presence of pain and some touch.
a.  Age of the patient—younger the age better is the result
S3
Presence of pain and touch with no over
and vice versa.
reaction.
b. Duration of the injury—-longer the duration poorer is the
S 3+
Presence of pain touch with two point
discrimination.
result and vice versa.
S4
Complete recovery (Normal).
c. Level of the injury—more proximal the injury poorer is
the chance of recovery and vice versa.
d. Loss of the nerve tissue with defect—larger the defect
Reconstructive Procedures in
Irrecoverable Nerve Injuries
poorer is the result and vice versa.
e. Nature of the cut ends——cleaner the cut ends better is the
Tendon Transfers (Dynamic Procedure)
result when compared to ragged and lacerated cut ends
 Experience and skill of the surgeon.
Tendon transfer is one among the reconstructive procedures.
f.
g.
Technique employed—epineurial repair is always better
When origin of a tendon is left intact and the insertion is
than perineurial except when perineurial repair is better
detached and shifted to a new location the procedure is known
than epineurial. Direct end to end repair is better than
as tendon transfer. Tendon transfers are done in peripheral
nerve grafting except when nerve grafting is more
nerve injuries when there is no motor recovery. Transferred
desirable.
tendon substitutes the action of paralysed musculotendinous
umit and provides some useful function.
Methods of Closing the Gaps While Repair
Static Procedures
a. Mobilization of the nerve.
b. Positioning of the joints.
Basic principle in these procedures is to achieve a fixity at
c. Transposition or translocation.
the site of deformity in a functional position (desirable position
d. Shortening of the bone (e.g. during reimplantation)
to facilitate the function). This fixity is achieved by shortening
the soft tissue and causing contracture or by fusing the joints.
Critical Limit ofDelay
 The procedures are as follows:
Is that period within which if a nerve is repaired some useful
a. Dermodesis
functional recovery can be expected. Beyond this period no
b.
 Tenodesis
functional recovery is possible. This is because of irreversible
C.
Capsulodesis
fibrotic changes taking place in the tissues distal to the injury
d.
Arthrodesis
and no functional tissue is available either for recovery or for
Only capsulodesis and arthrodesis are successful and are
action.
done when indicated. Denmodesis and tenodesis stretch and
The critical limit of delay varies from nerve to nerve and
fail over a period of time.
ranges from 6 to 15 months.
Correction of Claw Hand
 Motor and sensory grading in nerve injuries
Motor Grading:
 Disability in a claw hand and the need for claw correction:
Among the three basic hand functions, namely the grasp,
Grade 0
No movement.
pinch and the hook the grasp is severely affected in claw hand.
Grade 1
A flicker of movement.
Movement possible when  gravity is
Pinch is affected to certain extent. The hook function is
Grade 2
 preserved.
eliminated.
 Movement possible against gravity
In a normal grasp, the hand first opens up fully thereby
Grade 3
Grade 4
 Movement possible against gravity and
deepening the cup in order to accommodate an object which
is to be grasped in the palm of the hand. Then the fingers flex
resistance.
Grade 5
Normal power (Complete recovery).
amd close over the object. The flexion occurs first at the
138
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figures7.9AtoE
(A and B) Pictures showing normal grasp. The hand opens up. The
dup of the hand deepens to accommodate the object. Next the
flexion takes place and the object is firmly grasped. (C to E) Showing 
up of the hand instead metacarpophalangeal joint hyperextends.
Hence the object is not accommodated in the hand. On closing.
interphalangeal joint flexion occurs first followed by metacarpo-
phalangeal joint flexion. So the object slips out of a closed hand.The
grasp function is affected.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
139
joints. Thus the fingers close over the object and the object
Tendon transfers for claw correction:Following tendons may
is firmly grasped in the palm of the hand.
be taken for claw correction
In a claw hand when a person opens up the hand for
Extensor carpi radialis brevis/longus; Paul Brand's
procedure.
hyper-extension and the interphalangeal joints go into flexion.
Extensor indicis and Extensor digiti minimi; Fowler's
Thus in the hand instead of a concavity developing at MCP
procedure.
joint in order to deepen the cup, a convexity develops. Because
 Flexor digitorum superficialis of middle or ring finger:
of this the object does not come into the palm of the hand
Sterling Bunnel's procedure.
Further when the person tries to close the hand over the object
Re-routing of the tendon (Fig. 7.10): Always re-routed volar
in order to grasp the object, the interphalangeal joints flex first
 to the transverse metacarpal ligament, through the lumbrical
followed by the metacarpophalangeal joint and the object slips
canal and attached to the extensor hood.
out of an already closed hand (Figs 7.9A to E).
Static procedure for claw correction: Capsulodesis or
Principle of claw correction: The basic principle of claw
Capsuloplasty of Zancolli. In this a flap of volar capsule of
correction is to prevent hyperextension at the metcarpo-
the metac arpophalangeal joints of the involved finger is raised
phalangeal joint. This makes the long extensor i.e. extensor
with a base distally. Then with the finger in about 30° of
digitorum to act on the interphalangeal joints through its
flexion the capsular flap is pulled and sutured more proximally
attachment to the extensor hood and extend them.
on itself. This produces a flexion contracture at the metacarpo-
Transverse
phalangeal joint of about 30° and prevents hyperextension.
metacarpalligament
Altematively, a small elliptical portion of the capsule is
excised and the capsule shortened and sutured to produce a
30° flexion contracture (Fig. 7.1l). Thus the extensor
digitorum is now free to act on interphalangeal joints and bring
Intraosseous
about extension.
muscles
Theslipof thetendontobe
transferredisbeingrouted
throughthelumbricalcanal,
deeptothetransverse
Lumbrical
metacarpalligament.
muscle
Graftbeingsutured
tothesideof
extensormechanism
Figure 7.11
Diagrammatic representation of Zancolli's capsulodesis. A portion
of the capsule of the MCP joint has been excised as shown in the
Figure 7.10
diagram.When the remaining capsule is sutured it produces a flexion
Showing the re-routing of the tendon for correction of claw deformity.
contracture at the metacarpophalangeal joint and prevents extension.
140
Essentials of Orthopedics
Radialnerve
Branchesattheelbowto.
Brachioradialis
Extensorcarpiradialislongus
Superficialterminalbranch
Extensorcarpiradialisbrevis
Supinator
BranchesaftersupplyingSupinator.
Posteriorinterosseousnerve
Short branches to:
Extensor digitorum
Extensordigitiminimi
Extensorcarpiulnaris
Extensorpollicislongusand
Extensorindicis
Abductorpollicislongusand
Extensorpollicisbrevis
Figure 7.12
Terminationof thenerve
 Showing the opponens plasty based on Riordan's technique. Note a
behindwristjoint
pulley is made at the flexor carpi ulnaris and the method of
attachment at the thumb to APB,EPL and hood of the thumb MCP
joint.
Figure 7.13
Showing the muscles supplied by the radial nerve and the posterior
Opponens Plasty (Fig. 7.12)
interosseous nerve (dotted line).
Note that the Brachioradialis, Extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis
This is a reconstructive procedure to restore opposition in
receive their nerve supply from radial nerve and so are spared from
irrecoverable median nerve injury. Following tendons may be 
being paralyzed when posterior interosseous nerve is injured.
taken.
 Flexor digitorum superficialis of middle or ring finger;
Royle-Thompson procedure and Sterling-Bunnel
c. Thumb extension: Flexor digitorum superficialis (iv)/
procedure.
Palmaris longus to Extensor pollicis longus.
Extensor indicis proprious.
Tendon Transfer for Finger and Thumb Drop
Re-routing of the tendon: This is done by withdrawing the
(Low Radial Nerve Injury)
donor tendon proximally to the level of the wrist crease and
then making use of the distal part of palmar fascia or carpal
a. Finger extension: Brachioradialis/Flexor digitorum
ligament or flexor carpi ulnaris as a pulley, it is passed
superficialis (ii)
subcutaneously to the thumb. The attachment is to the neck
 Thumb extension: Palmaris longus/flexor digitorum
of the metacarpal and the extensor pollicis longus or to the
superficialis (iv).
abductor pollicis brevis, hood of the thumb MCP joint and
 extensor pollicis longus.
Tendon Transferfor Foot Drop
a. Ober's procedure: Tibialis posterior is tranferred and
TendonTransferforWristDrop
(High Radial Nerve Injury)
inserted to base of the third metatarsal/ ll cuneiform
(subcutaneous tunnel)
Functional deficit and substitution options (Fig. 7.13):
b. Barr's procedure: Tibialis posterior is transferred and
a. Wrist extension: Pronator teres to Extensor carpi radialis
inserted to IMl cuneifonm (Interosseous route).
 longus and brevis.
Tendon transfers for foot drop are non phasic transfers
b. Finger extension: Flexor digitor superficialis (i)/Flexor
and need accurate post op management for phasic
carpi ulnaris/Flexor carpi radialis to extensor digitorum.
conversion.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
141
As it supplies the supraspinatus, infraspinatus and the teres
minor and gives an articular branch to the shoulder joint.
Injury results in paralysis of these muscles manifested by
wasting and limitation of the movement of the shoulder.
Long Thoracic Nerve C5 C6 C7
B jo sueau Aq o Ainfui sunenauad e ui paunfu Aiuouuon
traction force in the angle of the shoulder and the neck
As it supplies the serratus anterior muscle the classical
winging of the scapula is seen. This is demonstrated by asking
the patient to push the wall with both upper limbs raised
forwards.
Axillary Nerve C5 C6
Figure 7.14
It is injured by direct penetrating injury, as a result of fractures,
Picture demonstrating the method of assessing the power of tibialis
dislocations and fracture dislocation around the shoulder
is made to cross the limb over the other and asked to invert the foot
 Results in weakness of abduction because of the paralysis
against resistance which is applied by the examiner at the fore foot.
of the deltoid muscle. Sensory loss when present is over the
The tibialis posterior stands out prominently just behind and little
above the medial malleolus.
Musculocutaneous Nerve C5 C6
Prerequisites for a Tendon Transfer
oaue ui pun sanfun sunnauad ioaip Aq pannfun si
a.The tendon chosen for transfer should have power of grade
dislocation shoulder. Often missed though supplies the biceps
IV or more (Fig. 7.14).
brachii, coracobrachialis and brachioradialis. Only biceps is
 amenable for testing.
b. Agonists are preferred to antagonists.
C. Joints on which the tendon acts should be supple.
d. Range of excursion of the transferred tendon should be
Femoral Nerve L2 L3 L4
almost similar to that of paralyzed tendon.
 Is commonly injured by means of a penetrating injury.
e. Line of action should be as straight as possible.
Often missed because of
a.  Alarming hemorrhage due to associated vascular
Injuries of the Other Peripheral Nerves
injury.
Spinal Accessory Nerve
b. Presence of extension because of active functioning
tensor fascia lata, gracilis, gluteus maximus and
Gets injured as a result of penetrating injury and accidental
gastrocnemius.
injury during surgical procedures.
c. Small autonomous zone whichis situated superior and
It is a motor nerve supplying trapezius muscle. Hence
medial to patella.
 paralysis results in rotation of the scapula in a distal and lateral
direction drawing the inferior angle closer to the midline. This
Sciatic Nerve
results in not only in the weakness of the shoulder girdle but
Injured by penetrating injury, fracture dislocations around the
also in the inability to lift the shoulder beyond 90°. The
winging of the inferior angle seen in this disappears on raising
hip and fracture shaft of femur. Autonomous zone includes
almost the entire foot except a small area on the medial aspect
the arm anteriorly unlike the winging seen in serratus anterior
im the mid foot region. Functional loss is severe as there is
paralysis which remains.
paralysis of all the muscles of the posterior compartment of
the thigh and muscles of the leg and the foot. The results of
Suprascapular Nerve
         
Commonly involved in penetrating injuries
beyond 12 to 15 months, i.e. beyond critical limit of delay.
142
Essentials of Orthopedics
flexion at the interphalangeal joints. If only ulnar nerve is
mvolved the deformity of ulnar claw hand or partial claw
hand develops. If both ulnar and median nerves are involved
(low ulnar and low median; high ulnar and low median) the
deformity of total or combined claw hand, otherwise called
the ‘Simian hand’' develops.
At every joint in the hand there is a balance, maintained
by the action of flexors on one side and the extensors on the
other. If one is paralyzed, the joint moves in the other
direction. At the metacarpophalangeal joint the flexor is the
lumbrical and extensor is the extensor digitorum. At the
proximal interphalangeal joint the flexor is the flexor
digitorum superficialis and extensor is the extensor expansion
(the dorsal digital expansion, extensor hood, extensor
joint the flexor is the flexor digitorum proundus and the
extensor is the extensor hood (Figs 7.16 and 7.17A, B).
In ulnar nerve injury there is paralysis of all the interossei
and the medial two lumbricals. Therefore at the interphalan-
geal joint, extension is lost and the joint is subjected to
unopposed action of flexor digitorum superficialis/profundus.
Whereas at the metacarpophalangeal joint flexion is lost and
action of extensor digitorum resulting in hyperextension of
Figure 7.15
the joint. Hence deformity of ulnar claw develops (Fig. 7.15).
Picture showing a classical "Ulnar claw' hand with hyperextension at
the metacarpophalangeal joints and flexion at the interphalangeal
Ulnar Paradox
joints of ring and little finger only. Hypothenar muscle atrophy is
pronounced. Note the scar at the elbow along the course of the nerve
Higher the lesion lesser is the deformity. Lower the lesion
greater is the deformity. This because in high ulnar nerve
the nerve.
injury both flexors namely flexor digitorum superficialis and
flexor digitorum profundus are paralyzed. Hence, deformity
Management
is less. Whereas in low ulnar nerve lesion the flexor digitorum
profundus is spared. Hence the deformity is more.
Principle of management of these nerve injuries remain the
In combined low ulnar and low median nerve injury, there
same.
is paralysis of lateral two lumbricals in addition. Hence, the
As the injury involving the above nerves is not very
deformity of combined claw hand develops. The only extensor
common and the functional loss is not very severe (except
muscle acting is the extensor digitorum which hyperextends
sciatic nerve) and patients generally accept the resulting deficit
the metacarpophalangeal joints. The flexors which are not
easily, no much information is available regarding the repair
paralyzed are the flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor
of these nerves. However reconstructive procedures are
digitorum profundus. These cause flexion of the inter-
described when deficits warrant intervention.
phalangeal joints. The thumb remains by the side of other
fingers. Hence, the hand resembles the hand of an ape and is
Pathomechanics of Various Deformities and Signs
kmown as ‘simian hand'.
Claw Hand (Intrinsic Minus Deformity) (Fig. 7.15)
In combined high ulnar and median nerve injury, all the
flexors are paralyzed. Hence classical claw deformity is not seen
Claw hand is defined as a dynamic defonmity characterized
except for hyperextesion at the metacarpophalangeal joints. The
by hyperextension at the metacarpophalangeal joints and
flexion deformity at the interphalangeal joints is minimum.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
143
Lateralband
Insertionofextensortendon
Dorsal expansion(hood)
tobaseofmiddlephalanx
Central band
Longextensortendon
Insertionofextensortendon
tobaseofdistalphalanx
Metacarpalbone
Collateral
Flexordigitorum
Vinculum
Vincula
Interosseousmuscles
ligaments
profundustendon
breve
longa
Flexordigitorum
Lumbrical muscle
superficialistendon
Figure 7.16
 Picture showing how the balance at the joints of the hand is maintained by the flexor muscles on one side and the extensor muscle on the
other.
Extensor
Extensor
slip-central
slip-lateral
Extensor
expansion
Interossei
Extensor
expansion
Lumbrical
V
muscle
Deeptransverse
metacarpal
ligament
Interosseous
Deeptransverse
muscle
Flexor
Extensor
metacarpal
tendons
Lumbrical
tendon
ligament
A
B
Figures 7.17A and B
at the level of the MCP joint.
This classical pathomechanics is true only in
ApeThumbDeformity
low uinar as well as in combined low uinar and low
Normally the thumb is placed at right angles to other fingers.
median and and not true when there is a combi-
When there is median nerve injury the thumb remains in line
nation of high median along with high ulnar nerve
with other fingers, resembling the thumb of an ape. This is
injury.
because of the unopposed action of adductor pollicis and
144
 Essentials of Orthopedics
Wrist Drop (Fig. 7.19A)
It is the inability to dorsiflex the wrist, fingers and the thumb.
Results because of paralysis of all the extensor muscles
of the forearm as a result of radial nerve injury. The muscles
paralyzed are:
a.Abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis
b. Extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis
c.  Extensor pollicis longus
d. Extensor digitorum and extensor indicis
e.Extensor digiti minimi
f. Extensor carpi ulnaris
g. Brachioradialis
h. Supinator.
Finger Drop and Thumb Drop
radialis, supinator, extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis
Figure 7.18
all the other muscles of the extensor compartment of the fore
Picture showing normal hand on the left side where the thumb is
arm are paralyzed. Hence wrist extension is possible but not
placed at right angles to the other fingers and the hand with thumb
the finger and the thumb extension (Fig. 7.19B).
deformity, on the right side where the thumb is remaining by the
side of the other fingers.
Flail Foot
Seen in sciatic nerve injury because of paralysis of both
extensor pollicis brevis which are supplied by ulnar and radial
dorsiflexors and plantar flexors of the foot. (All the muscles
nerve respectively (Fig. 7.18).
im the leg and in the foot are paralyzed).
A
B
Figures 7.19A and B
Picture showing the classical attitude of (A) Wrist drop and (B) Finger drop.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
145
Claw Toes
 Is seen in posterior tibial nerve injury in the region of the
ankle. Deformity occurs because of paralysis of the intrinsic
muscles of the foot.
Foot Drop
Seen in lateral popliteal nerve injury because of paralysis of
 dorsiflexors of the foot. The muscles paralyzed are:
a. Tibialis anterior
b. Flexor digitorum longus
c. Flexor hallucis longus
Figure 7.20
d. Peroneus longus and brevis
 Showing a positive Oschner's clasp test and the pointing index sign.
e. Peroneus tertius
f.Extensor digitorum brevis.
The classical gait seen in foot drop is the "High stepping
gait'". Normal gait is heel to toe gait whereas the high stepping
gait is a toe to heel gait. This is because of the paralysis of
the dorsiflexors. In this gait the heel strike of stance phase of
gait cycle is lacking. Hence to avoid injury patient lifts the
leg up and brings it down. Thus, toes touch the ground before
the heel resulting in a high stepping gait.
Oschner's Clasp Test
Figure 7.21
This is a test employed to diagnose high median nerve injury.
 Picture showing a negative pen test. The person is able to touch the
It is performed by asking the patient to clasp the hands. When
pen using his abductor pollicis brevis.
there is high median nerve injury the index finger remains
straight and points forwards (pointing index) indicating
paralysis of flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum
This is a test employed to test the interossei muscle. The
profundus. The test is positive when there is pointing index.
function of the palmar interossei is adduction and the dorsal
Though median nerve supplies the lateral two profundi
interossei is abduction. The test is performed by asking the
the middle finger does not point. This is because the middle
patient to hold a card inserted between the two fingers. During
finger profundus takes origin from a common aponeurosis for
the process, first the finger abducts and then while gripping
medial two profoundi which are supplied by the ulnar nerve.
the card it adducts. The test is said to be positive when the
Hence, when the medial two profundi contract to some extent
patient is not able to grip the card between the fingers and
the middle finger profundus also contracts (Fig. 7.20).
card is easily pulled out by the examiner who uses a similar
grip to pull out the card (Fig. 7.22).
Pen Test
This is a test employed to test the abductor pollicis brevis
muscle. The test is done by asking the patient to place the
hand flat on the table with the palm facing upwards and
keeping a pen at some distance over the thumb. Next he is
asked to touch the pen with his thumb. If the patient is able
to touch the pen with his thumb abducted the test is negative.
Figure 7.22
If the patient is not able to touch the pen the test is positive.
 Showing card test being performed. Note that both the examiner and
The test is positive both in high and low median nerve
the subject to be examined should use the same grip, i.e. inter digital
injury (Fig. 7.21).
clasp.
146
Essentials of Orthopedics
Tinel'sSign
This sign was described by Jules Tinel a French physician
(1879-1952). The test is performmed by percussion of the nerve
along its course from distal to proximal there by causing
stimulation. At the site where the nerve is irritable patient
experiences pins and needles/ tingling down the course of the
nerve. It is a useful sign after nerve repair when done at
 intervals and the findings are recorded.
Three types of responses are observed.
a.  Strong response at the site of injury not progressing
distally - indicates poor prognosis (recovery).
b. Fading response at the site of injury progressing
Figure 7.23
distally - indicates good prognosis (recovery).
Showing the book test being performed and the Froment's sign. Note
C.
 Persistent response at the site of injury as well as
the flexion of the IP joint of the thumb which is brought about by the
Flexor pollicis longus.
progressing distally-unpredictable prognosis
(recovery).
Note: The Tinel's sign does not predict the quality or quantity
Book Test and Froment's Sign
of regeneration. So also it does not predict the retum of
It is a test employed to test the adductor pollicis muscle. The 
function. It only suggests the type of nerve regeneration, i.e
patient is asked to hold a book in the lst web space. The
whether the regeneration is proceeding in an orderly manner
examiner holds the same book in a similar manner and tries
or not. Functional recovery is dependent on several other
to pull out the book. When adductor pollicis is paralyzed the
factors such as status of the muscle,status of the joint,
patient uses flexor pollicis longus to hold the book and prevent
presence of associated tendon injury,age of the patient, type
it from slipping out of the hand. This results in flexion of the
of the nerve,etc.
thumb and a positive test (Fig. 7.23).
Revision Questions
Igawa'sSign
Q. Describe the structure of a peripheral nerve.
This is a quick test to assess the interossei. The patient is made
Q. What are the clinical deficits that arise after a peripheral
to place the hand on the table and asked to raise the middle
nerve injury?
finger and move it side to side. If the interossei are paralyzed
Q. Classify nerve injuries.
he is not able to do so (Fig. 7.24).
Q. Discuss the following
a. Neuropraxia.
b. Axonotmesis
c. Neurotmesis.
Q. What is Wallerian degeneration?
Q. What is electrodiagnosis?
Q. Write notes on
a. Rheobase
b. Chronaxie
c. Nerve conduction velocity
d. Strength duration curve
Q. Write notes on
a. Claw hand
Figure 7.24
b. Ulnar paradox
Picture showing the Igawa's test being performed. Note how the other
c. Simian hand
fingers are stabilized and the middle finger is made to move sideways
d.Ape thumb deformity
both medially and laterally, testing both palmar and dorsal interossei
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
147
e.
Wrist drop and finger drop
Q. What is tendon transfer? Discuss the tendon transfers for
f. Foot drop
a. Claw hand
g. Flail foot
b. Wrist drop
Q. Write notes on
c. Median nerve injury
a. Card test
d. Foot drop.
b. Book test
Q. Classify the reconstructive procedures designed for claw
c.1
Pen test
hand correction. Discuss the merits and demerits of the
d. Igawa's sign.
same.
e.1
High stepping gait.
Q. Discuss the methods of repair of a peripheral nerve.
BRACHIALPLEXUS
Q. Discuss nerve grafting.
Formation of Brachial Plexus
Essay Questions
Q. Discuss the pathoanatomy, clinical features, diagnosis and
Brachial plexus is formed by the union of anterior rami of
C5, C6, C7, C8 and T1. When C5 receives contribution from
Q. Discuss the response of a nerve to injury. Describe in detail
C4 it is known as pre fixed and when T1 receives contribution
 the clinical features, diagnosis and management of a case
from T2 it is known as post fixed. The plexus comprises of
of ulnar nerve injury.
trunks, divisions, cords and branches (Figs 7.25 and 7.26).
(The same question can be applied for other peripheral
C5 and C6 unite to form the upper trunk, C7 alone
nerves.)
continues as middle trunk, C8 and T1 unite to form the lower
trunk. Each trunk divides into an anterior division and a
C5
Erb'spoint
C6
C7
Dorsal scapularnerve
C8
Suprascapularnerve
Long thoracic
Subscapularnerve
nerve
Anteriorthoracic
nerve
Axillarynerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Thoracodorsalnerve
-Radialnerve
Mediannerve
Ulnarnerve
Medialcutaneousnervetoarmandforearm
Figure 7.25
trunk. The circled area in red shows the Erb's point, a point of origin of five nerves.
148
Essentials of Orthopedics
 posterior division. The anterior division of the upper and the
middle trunk unite to form the lateral cord, the anterior
division of the lower trunk continues as medial cord and
 posterior divisions of all the trunks unite to fonm the posterior
cord. The branches of the cord are as follows.
Lateral cord
Lateralcord
C6
a. Lateral pectoral.
b. Musculocutaneous.
Posteriorcor
C. Lateral root of the median nerve.
Medial cord
Medialcord
a.  Medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm
b. Medial cutaneous nerve of the arm.
c. Medial pectoral.
CordsDivisionsTrunks
Roots
d. Medial root of the median nerve.
e. Ulnar nerve.
Figure 7.26
Posterior cord
Showing the diagrammatic representation of brachial plexus with
a. Upper subscapular.
roots trunks, divisions and cords. The plexus shown here is prefixed
b. Lower subscapular.
with contribution from C4.
c. Thoracodorsal.
Signs of Preganglionic Lesions
d. Radial.
e. Axillary.
a. Intractable burming pain in a sensationless, paralyzed
Nerves arising from the roots
extremity.
b. Presence of spinal fractures.
a. Long thoracic nerve -fonm C5, C6, C7 roots
c. Horner's syndrome: It is characterized by ptosis,
b. Dorsal scapular nerve - from C5
amophthalmos, myosis and anhydrosis.
Nerve arising from the upper trunk
d.Cutaneous axon reflex: This reflex is elicited by inducing
a.  Suprascapular nerve.
irritation by placing a drop of histamine over the skin
along the distribution of the nerve to be examined and
Injuries of Brachial Plexus
scratching the site (may also be done by injecting
histamine intradermally). Normal reaction is vasodilation
 Brachial plexus can get injured either by direct penetrating
followed by wheel and a flare (triple response). This reflex
wounds, e.g. assault, bullet and missile injuries or by traction
 is absent in postganglionic lesions where the response is
force, e.g. vehicular accidents, birth injuries in which the angle
 only a wheel. No flare response is seen.
between the shoulder and the neck widens (increases).
e. Posterior cervical electromyography may show dener-
A thoroughknowledge of anatomy is essential for an
vation potentials in posterior cervical paraspinal muscles
accurate diagnosis with reference to the level of lesion.
indicating the lesion is preganglionic.
The lesion can be at the level of the roots,trunk,divisions
f.Presence of long tract signs in the lower limbs indicating
or cord. The functional loss is directly related to the
the involvement of the spinal cord and the proximal nature
paralysis ofthe corresponding nerveswhich take origin
of the injury.
from these.Examination ofvarious muscles helps in the
conclusion.
indicating root avulsion and the lesion is preganglionic.
Further, it is necessary to distinguish between pre and
Unreliable during the early phase as dural tears can also
postganglionic type of injury. The prognosis in preganglionic
give a false picture of pseudomeningocele.
type is better as repair is possible. Absence of 'Hormer's
Upper Plexus Injury Erb's Paralysis (Fig. 7.27)
syndrome'and absenceof cutaneousaxonreflexindicates that
It is characterized by involvement of C5, C6 nerve roots. (C7
the lesion is postganglionic.
mvolvement may or may not be present).
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
149
Porter'stipattitude
ofErb'spalsy
Figure 7.27
Picture showing the characteristic attitude of ‘the Porter's tip hand' of Erb's palsy.
Functional loss results in a typical attitude of the upper
Whole Plexus Injury
limb. The limb remains by the side of the trunk with shoulder
It is characterized by complete flaccid paralysis of the entire
in adduction intermal rotation, elbow in extension, foreanm in
upper limb. Considered as one of the most serious injuries as
pronation and wrist in flexion and ulnar deviation. This is
chance of recovery is very poor.
because of the paralysis of abductors namely the deltoid and
Injuries of the trunks: Injuries of the upper trunk manifests
supraspinatus and extermal rotators namely infraspinatus and
with similar deficits as their rami. But the long thoracic and
teres minor at the shoulder; paralysis of flexors namely the
dorsal scapular nerve escape paralysis.
biceps, brachialis and the brachoiradialis at the elbow;
Injuries of the lower trunk manifests with similar deficits
paralysis of the supinator at the forearm.
as their rami. But there is no sympathetic involvement and
As the limb hangs by the side of the body and resembles
Homer's syndrome is not seen.
porter's tip hand".
Injuries of the divisions: Injuries of the divisions of the plexus
Sensory loss over the deltoid, lateral aspect of the forearm
is extremely rare and it is difficult to distinguish from trunk
amd hand is seen.
and cord injuries.
Paralysis of the serratus anterior supplied by long thoracic
Injuries of the cords: Injuries of the cords manifest with
nerve, rhomboids and levator sapulae muscle supplied by
paralysis of the nerves which take origin from the respective
dorsal scapular nerve indicates that the lesion is proximal to
cords. Paralysis of the muscles supplied by these nerves and
the origin of these nerves (these nerves take origin from the
sensory loss in the corresponding autonomous zones are the
roots, before the plexus is formed) and may be preganglionic.
diagnostic features.
Lower Plexus Injury, Klumpke's Paralysis
Management
It is characterized by involvement C8 T1 nerve roots. C7
Methods available for the management are:
 involvement may or may not be present.
Functional loss is sensory and motor deficits involving C8
Nonoperative
T1. Hence, there is paralysis of intrinsic muscles of the hand
It is to be followed only after confirming that the injury is I
along with wrist and finger flexors. The sensory deficit is on
or II degree according to Sunderland classification. It should
the medial aspect of the hand, forearm and arm.
never be followed in more severe disruptions
150
Essentials of Orthopedics
Appropriate splints are given as per the deficit to give rest
Q. Whole anm paralysis
to the paralyzed part and prevent contractures, e.g. shoulder
Q. Erb's point
 abduction splint, spica cast, etc.
Drug therapy is given to reduce edema and increase
Essay Question
vascularity. Electrical stimulation and exercise therapy is given
Q. Discuss the pathoanatomy of the brachial plexus. Describe
during the phase of recovery.
in detail the mechanism of injury, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of brachial plexus injury.
Operative
i. Repair—It is done when there is partial or complete
Further Reading
neurotmesis.
1. Adams J, Wood VE. Tendon transfers for irreparable nerve
i. Interfasciculus nerve grafting—-It is done when there is
damage in the hand. Orthop Clin North Am 1981;12(2):403-
loss of nerve tissue.
32.
ii. Neurolysis—This is done when there is scarring around
2. Amrani A, Dendane MA, El Alami ZF. Pronator teres transfer
the plexus.
to correct pronation deformity of the forearm after an
iv. Neurotization and nerve transfer—This is done in root
obstetrical brachial plexus injury.
avulsion where repair is not possible. It is a highly
3. Bennett JB, Allan CH. Tendon transfers about the shoulder
and elbow in obstetrical brachial plexus palsy. Instr Course
specialized procedure and to be done by trained
Lect 2000;49:319-32.
 personnel.
4. Berger A, Becker MH. Brachial plexus surgery: our concept
of the last twelve years. Microsurgery 1994;15(11):760-7.
Some of the recommendations are as follows:
5. Berger A, Brenner P. Secondary surgery following brachial
Avulsion of C5 C6 roots:
plexus injuries. Microsurgery 1995;16(1):43-7.
Spinal accessory nerve to suprascapular nerve; two or
6. Blaauw G, Slooff AC. Transfer of pectoral nerves to the
three intercostals nerves to musculocutaneous nerve.
musculocutaneous nerve in obstetric upper brachial plexus
If C5 root is available this is grafted to lateral cord to
palsy. Neurosurgery 2003;53(2):338-41.
7. Brandsma JW, Brand PW. Claw-finger correction. Considera-
provide elbow flexion, finger flexion and sensation along the
tions in choice of technique. J Hand Surg Br 1992;17(6):615-
radial side of the hand.
21.
 If C5 C6 roots are available they are grafted to posterior
8. Brandsma JW, Ottenhoff-De Jonge MW. Flexor digitorum
and lateral cords.
superficialis tendon transfer for intrinsic replacement. Long-
Results of neurotization will be evident only after a period
term results and the effect on donor fingers. J Hand Surg Br
1992;17(6):625-8
of 2 to 3 years. Good postoperative care and regular follow
9. Brown JM, Mackinnon SE. Nerve transfers in the forearm and
up is essential for successful outcome.
hand. Hand Clin 2008;24(4):319-40.
10. Cardenas-Mejia A, O'Boyle CP, Chen KT, Chuang DC.
Reconstructive Procedures
Evaluation of single-, double-, and triple-nerve transfers for
shoulder abduction in 90 patients with supraclavicular brachial
Procedures such as tendon transfers with available tendons,
plexus injury. Plast Reconstr Surg 2008;122(5):1470.
can restore some useful function. Corrective osteotomies to
11. Chase RA. Reconstructive procedures after irreversible nerve
correct rotational deformities, if any are indicated in cases
damage in the upper extremity. Clin Neurosurg 1970;17:142-
where recovery is poor.
59.
12. Dahlin LB, Lundborg G. Use of tubes in peripheral nerve
Note: The treatment of brachial plexus injury is challenging.
repair. Neurosurg Clin N Am 2001;12(2):341-52.
A highly specialized care is necessary for useful functional
13.
de Ruiter GC, Spinner RJ, Yaszemski MJ, Windebank AJ,
recovery. Detailed description is beyond the purview of this
Malessy MJ. Nerve tubes for peripheral nerve repair.
book and hence not described. The description limits itself to
Neurosurg Clin N Am 2009;20(1):91-105.
14. Dunnet WJ, Housden PL, Birch R. Flexor to extensor tendon
basic principles to be followed in the treatment.
transfers in the hand. J Hand Surg Br 1995;20(1):26-8.
15. El-Gammal TA, El-Sayed A, Kotb MM. Surgical treatment of
Revision Questions
brachial plexus traction injuries in children,excluding
obstetric palsy. Microsurgery 2003;23(1):14-7.
Q. Erb's paralysis
16. Frykman GK, Waylett J. Rehabilitation of peripheral nerve
Q. Klumpke's paralysis
injuries. Orthop Clin North Am 1981;12(2):361-79.
Peripheral Nerve and Brachial Plexus Injuries
151
17. Grossman JA, Di Taranto P, Alfonso D, Ramos LE, Price AE.
 27. Omer GE. Tendon transfers for combined traumatic nerve
Shoulder function following partial spinal accessory nerve
palsies of the forearm and hand. J Hand Surg Br 1992;17(6):
transfer for brachial plexus birth injury. J Plast Reconstr
603-10
Aesthet Surg 2006;59(4):373-5.
28.
 Omer GE. Timing of tendon transfers in peripheral nerve
18. Groves RJ, Goldner JL. Restoration of strong opposition after 
injury. Hand Clin 1988;4(2):317-22.
median-nerve or brachial plexus paralysis. J Bone Joint Surg
29.
 Piatt JH Jr. Birth injuries of the brachial plexus. Pediatr Clin
Am 1975;57(1):112-5
North Am 2004;51(2):421-40.
19. Haerle M, Gilbert A. Management of complete obstetric
30. Richards RR. Tendon transfers for failed nerve reconstruction.
brachial plexus lesions.
Clin Plast Surg 2003;30(2):223-45.
20. Hudson TW, Evans GR, Schmidt CE. Engineering strategies
31. Robinson D, Aghasi MK, Halperin N. Restoration of pinch
for peripheral nerve repair. Orthop Clin North Am 2000;31(3):
485-98.
and extensor indicis. J Hand Surg Br 1992;17(6):622-4.
21. Ichihara S, Inada Y, Nakamura T. Artificial nerve tubes
32. Sammer DM, Chung KC. Tendon transfers: part I. Principles
and their application for repair of peripheral nerve injury:
of transfer and transfers for radial nerve palsy. Plast Reconstr
an update of current concepts. Injury 2008;39(Suppl
Surg 2009;123(5):169e-177e.
4):29-39.
33.
 Smith RJ. Indications for tendon transfers to the hand. Hand
22.
.Lee YH, Chung MS, Gong HS, Chung JY, Park JH, Baek GH.
Clin 1986;2(1):235-7.
Sural nerve autografts for high radial nerve injury with nine
34.Strauch B. Use of nerve conduits in peripheral nerve repair.
centimeter or greater defects. J Hand Surg Am 2008;33(1):83-
Hand Clin 2000;16(1):123-30
6.
35. Terzis JK, Kostopoulos VK. The surgical treatment of brachial
23. Mackinnon SE, Colbert SH. Nerve transfers in the hand and
plexus injuries in adults. Plast Reconstr Surg 2007;119(4):73e-
upper extremity surgery. Tech Hand Up Extrem Surg
92e.
2008;12(1):20-33.
36. Trevett MC, Tuson C, de Jager LT, Juon JM. The functional
24.1
 Malessy MJ, Pondaag W. Obstetric brachial plexus injuries.
results of ulnar nerve repair. Defining the indications for
25. Merle M, Foucher G, Dap F, Bour C. Tendon transfers for
tendon transfer. J Hand Surg Br 1995;20(4):444-6.
treatment of the paralyzed hand following brachial plexus
37.
Trumble TE, McCallister WV. Repair of peripheral nerve
injury. Hand Clin 1989;5(1):33-41.
defects in the upper extremity. Hand Clin 2000;16(1):37-52.
26.0
Omer GE Jr. Reconstruction of a balanced thumb through
Winfree CJ. Peripheral nerve injury evaluation and manage-
tendon transfers. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1985;(195):104-16.
ment. Curr Surg 2005;62(5):469-76.
8
Bone and Joint
Infections
Introduction
Etiopathogenesis of Nonspecific Bone and Joint Infections
(Osteomyelitis and Pyogenic Arthritis)
Clinical Features and Diagnosis
Treatment and Outcome of Treatment
二
Complications and Treatment of Complications
Etiopathogenesis of Specific Bone and Joint Infections:
Bone and Joint Tuberculosis, Mycotic Infection, Syphilitic Infection, etc
 Clinical Features and Diagnosis of Specific Bone and Joint Infections
Treatment and its Outcome
Introduction
Nonspecific Infections
When the medical fratermity got convinced that microbes were
Osteomyelitis
responsible for bone and joint infections, a new era began.
This changed the scenario in mid-19th century and the 20th
The word osteomyelitis is derived from Osteon (bone) myelo
century witnessed the invention of several antibiotics staring
(marrow) itis (inflammation). It is said to be coined by Nelaton
from penicillin and sulfa to the more recent, the generations
in the year 1834. Hence osteomyelitis is defined as inflam-
of cephalosporins, imepenam, etc. Inspite of this even today
mation of the bone and the bone marrow. This word
the bone and joint infection poses a challenge to an
osteomyelitis has become synonymous with infection of the
orthopaedic surgeon. Effective control of infection is many a
bone and the bone marrow because most of the time it is the
times not possible especially when bacterial resistance is
infection that causes this inflammation (Other causes for
encountered or if the patient is immunocompromised
inflammation such as thermal and chemical burms, mechanical
Bone and Joint Infections
153
trauma and radiation exist in less than 1% of cases) and
ACUTE
CHRONIC
secondary bacterial infection invariably follows.
Route of Entry of Microorganism
SUBACUTE
Endogenous: In this type, the organism enters the bone from
Etiopathogenesis
an infective focus existing elsewhere in the body. Two modes
of spread have been identified.
Predisposingfactors
i. When the infective focus is present in the vicinity of
Age: Common in children and in young. Less common in
the bone, the infection spreads to the bone by direct
adolescents and adults (adult risk factors are immuno-
extension, e.g. abscess in the soft tissue.
compromised status, diabetics, drug addiction).
ii. When the infective focus is a distant one, e.g. a septic
Sex: M:F ratio is 5:1.
tooth (caries tooth), septic tonsil, chronic otitis media,
Trauma: Trauma may cause a hematoma which may get
etc the infection spreads through blood stream. This is
secondarily infected and result in osteomyelitis.
Location: Metaphysis of a long bone
Exogenous: In this type, a break in the soft tissue should occur.
Presence of septic focus: A septic tonsil, septic tooth, chronic
This allows direct entry of the organisms from the
otitis media, enteric fever septicemia, etc.
en vironment, e.g. penetrating wound, open fracture, etc.
Poor nutritional status: General debility and malnutrition.
Organisms responsible: Staphylococcus aureus,being the
Specific Osteomyelitis
so uo yso au st uoud uenu sana iso
When the bone is infected with those organisms which cause
that causes acute hematogenous osteomyelitis (>95% of
specific features of a disease, e.g. tuberculosis, syphilis, 
 cases). Other organisms include H. influenzae, Streptococcus,
mycotic infection, etc. it is known as specific osteomyelitis.  E. coli, Proteus, etc. (< 5% of cases). Salmonella typhi
The terminologies such as tuberculosis of the bone, mycotic  infection is more common among patients with sickle cell
infection of the bone, etc. are also used to describe the
 anemia
pathology.
Pathology
Nonspecific Osteomyelitis
The pathology begins with entrapment of an infective embolus
When the bone is infected with those microorganisms which
in the metaphysis of a long bone. It is said to get entrapped
produce general features of infection in the bone (without
 in this region because of the following reasons:
specific features) it is known as nonspecific osteomyelitis.
·Metaphysis is more vascular.
· Most of the arteries are end arteries.
Hematogenous Osteomyelitis
· Vessels show a hairpin bend.
(Nonspecific Osteomyelitis)
·Lumen is of a narrower caliber.
This is a progressive infection of the bone and the bone
 Relative lack of phagocytosis.
 marrow resulting in destruction.
Avascular necrosis occurs distal to the block . The dead tissue
Simultaneously the body reacts by extruding the dead and
acts as a good media for the bacteria to multiply. At the same
devitalized tissue and fonming new bone. This reaction is
time the body defense mechanisms try to overcome the
considered as a part of natural process of healing. Many a
infection. Hence the ensuing antigen antibody reaction results
times it is not possible to eradicate the focus of infection
 in the formation of an exudate. At this stage, if the body
completely and a persistent discharging sinus remains suggest-
 defense mechanisms overcome the infection a small exudate
ing chronicity.Thus the infection starts as an acute process
 forms which subsequently gets absorbed. The clinical
and progresses to remain as subacute or chronic when total
 symptoms subside and no further destruction takes place. But
eradication of infection is not achieved. Reactivation of this
if the organism is of high virulence and body defense mecha-
persistent subacute or chronic focus of infection into acute
misms fail to overcome the infection, the process of destruction
form is also possible.
continues and a large exudate, a bone abscess forms. This large
154
Essentials of Orthopedics
Involucrum
Acrownsequestrum
Sequestrum
Figures 8.1A and B
(A) Showing the sequestrum, (B) Types of sequestrum.
exudate exerts pressure on the surrounding vessels and causes
which cannot be absorbed are thrown out by the body through
compression, further ischemia and necrosis. Thus, a vicious
the sinus (Hence the classical history of a discharging sinus
cycle sets in. This causes all the systemic signs of acute
with bony spicules is obtained in chronic osteomyelitis). Still
infection to develop and persist.
 larger sequestra which can neither be absorbed nor be thrown
The bone abscess thus formed has to find its way out. Its
 out remain and contribute for a persistent discharging sinus
path is blocked proximally by the epiphysis and the growth
with sprouting granulation tissue at its mouth (Fig. 8.2).
plate. Its spread into the joint is prevented by the attachment
At the same time the periosteum forms the new bone from
of capsule at the epiphysiometaphyseal region. So the only
its deeper cambial layer. This is visible radiologically as a
layer of new bone formation and is known as involucrum.
way it can flow is down the medullary canal. It can also come
out and lie in the subperiosteal region through the normal
Sequestrum is defined as ‘a dead bone in situ'or a dead
bone within a living bone or a dead bone surrounded by
Openings in the bone, the Haversian and the Volkmann's canal
granlulation tissue within a living bone (Figs 8.IA and B).
as well as the openings of the nutrient vessels. Thus there
Involucrum is defined as a reactive periosteal new bone
develops a subperiosteal and intramedullary abscess. This
formation in osteomyelitis (Fig. 8.1A).
subperiosteal abscess ultimately finds its wayout by breaking
 A sequestrum is identified by its dusky naked eye appear-
thefascia subcutaneous tissue and skin and a sinus of chronic
amce. The margins of the sequestrum are always irregular. It
osteomyelitis develops. The whole process takes about 14-21
is always found in a cavity and is surrounded by unhealthy
days. And upon development of this draining sinus, all the
granulation tissue.
acute signs of infection subside.
Sequesrum is always identified radiologically by:
That part of the bone between the intramedullary and the
i. Its increased density than the surrounding normal bone.
subperiosteal abscesses loses the blood supply (the subperio-
ii. A parasequestral clear zone of unhealthy granulation
steal abscess cuts off the periosteal blood supply and the
tissue which casts a radiolucent shadow.
intramedullary abscess cuts off the endosteal blood supply).
ii. Its irregular margins.
This results in the formation of a sequestrum. Smaller
iv. It is being surrounded by involucrum (at times not
sequestra are absorbed by the body and the larger sequestra
always).
Bone and Joint Infections
155
Cancellousboneinvaded
 Presence of focus of infection elsewhere in the body.
byinflammatorycells
 Presence of local trauma.
· Abrupt onset of high grade fever.
Lowerendoffemur
·Signs of systemic toxicity.
Meniscus
·Swollen, tender, edematous, limb with refusal to move
Jointcapsule
(Pseudoparalysis).
Epiphysis
· Effusion may be present in neighboring joints.
Cancellousbone in themetaphysis
Hairpinbendof the vessels
Exudate.Boneabscess
Investigations
Boneabscesstracking downinto
themedullary canal
Blood investigations
Subperiosteal abscess
Hb%—may be low.
Sequestrum
TC—leukocytosis, DC- increase neutrophils, ESR
Involucrum
elevated
Breakinthefasciasubcutaneoustissue
CRP—elevated levels.
and the skinandformation of sinus
Figure 8.2
Blood culture—-positive for the organism.
Diagrammatic representation of the pathology and progress of acute
Other investigations X-ray does not show any signs of
hematogenous osteomyelitis.
infection early in the disease. The first positive radiological
sign is periosteal elevation which takes 2-3 weeks (Figs 8.3A
Types of Sequestrum
to C). Hence not of use in early diagnosis (Fig. 8.4A).
Ivory—seen in syphilitic osteomyelitis
Sequestrum and involucrum are seen around 4-6 weeks only
Black—in fungal osteomyelitis
when the infection establishes and becomes chronic.
Sandy or rice grain—tuberculosis
Bone scan, MRI (Fig. 8.4B), CT are of use in the order
Diaphyseal—in children
of preference. These help to confinm the clinical diagnosis
 Crown—in amputation
and delineate the extent of inflammation.
Ring—-infected pin track
Feathery—tuberculosis involving the ribs.
Treatment
Clinical Features
Acute osteomyelitis: Aim of the treatment is to eradicate the
May present with following features:
infection and prevent the development of chronic osteomye-
B
Figures 8.3A to C
Serial radiographs of different stages of osteomyelitis in children showing the outcome following drainage of pus, protection with splint and
Since in children the periosteum is loosely attached, the spread is extensive along the diaphysis. So is the periosteal reaction. (B) Radiograph
at 6 weeks showing a large diaphyseal sequestrum, pronounced periosteal reaction and formation of involucrum following drainage of pus.
(C) Showing complete resolution at 3 months following drainage of pus and adequate antibiotic therapy. Note that no sequestrectomy has
been done.
156
Essentials of Orthopedics
(Since Staphylococcus aureus is the common pathogen
for acute hematogenous osteomyelitis, Penicillin group of
drugs are the best ones to begin with. Later on according
to the blood culture or pus culture reports, appropriate
drugs can be started).
e.  Eradication of infection: Administration of prolonged,
adequate and appropriate antibiotic therapy eradicates the
focus of infection (Fig. 8.5).
Complications
General
i. Septicemia, pyemia, multiple pyemic abscesses, Death.
ii.Amyloidosis.
A
Local
Figures 8.4A and B
i. Chronic/subacute osteomyelitis/pyogenic arthritis.
(A) Radiograph of the femur at the end of 3 weeks after the onset of
i. Pathological fracture.
the disease showing periosteal new bone formation. (B) MRl done
ii. Limb length discrepancy.
at the same time showing that there is collection of fluid around the
iv. Squamous cell carcinoma of the sinus tract.
femur. This collection of fluid lifts the periosteum. Hence, the new
bone formation occurring in the cambial layer of periosteum becomes
v. Deformity.
visible (Involucrum).
Chronic Osteomyelitis
litis. So, once the diagnosis is made the treatment should be
carried out on an emerg ency basis. More the time lapses, more
When the infection is established in the bone it results in
is the spread of infection and more is the difficulty in
chronic osteomyelitis.
achieving total eradication. The systematic approach to be
Clinical features
followed is as follows:
Persistent discharging sinus fixed to the bone.
a.Antibiotics: Broad spectrum antibiotics are to be
·
Bony thickening.
administered immediately after drawing the sample for
Bony irregularity.
blood culture.
 Bony tendermess may be present.
b. Drainage of pus: The pus inside the bone (bone abscess)
Deformity may be present.
has to be drained. The drainage procedure is known as
Limb length discrepancy may be present.
decompression. This can be accomplished by making
multiple drill holes or cutting a large window in the
Radiological features
involved bone for the drainage of pus. The pus which is
Bony irregularity.
under tension is drained out by this procedure. It is done
 Increased density.
under broad spectrum antibiotic cover and later followed
 Presence of cavities.
+
up with specific and adequate antibiotic therapy depending
 Presence of sequestrum.
 On culture and sensitivity report.
Presence of involucrum.
c.Control of infection: Locally the method of continuous
Investigations
irrigation and suction (i.e. infusing fluid containing
a.
 Routine blood investigations. Hb%, TC, DC, ESR, CRP,
appropriate antibiotics can be employed to achieve the
etc.
eradication of infection.
b. Pus for culture sensitivity.
d.Immobilization: The limb is always immobilized and
 X-ray of the involved bone shows typical features. (Ref:
protected with the help of extermal splint. Long-term
X-ray- in acute osteomyelitis).
antibiotic therapy is necessary for total eradication. The
potential hazards of long-term therapy have to be
Treatment
considered and observed during the period.
 Adequate and specific long-term antibiotic therapy.
Bone and Joint Infections
157
Figures 8.5A to F
Radiographs showing the natural course of acute osteomyelitis, presented late for treatment: (A) Though there was pus inside the bone
X-ray did not show any abnormality. (B) Three weeks after decompression and adequate drainage of pus. (C and D) Sequestrum formation
(F)  Successful results after sliding bone graft and cancellous grafting along with attempted tibialization of fibula. Procedure was done after
completeeradicationofinfection.
158
Essentials of Orthopedics
Sequestrectomy and saucerization:
Age—5-15 yr
Removal of the sequestrum is done only when the
Sex—M:F ratio 2:1
sequestrum is fully separated as confirmed by a
Site—Diaphysis common. Metaphysis next common site.
parasequestral clear zone and presence of a healthy
Rare in the epiphysis.
involucrum. The deep cavity which contained the
Clinical features: Mild to moderate pain. A hard swelling may
sequestrum is made shallower in the form of a saucer
be appreciated.
to facilitate the drainage by lymphatics and the
venules.
Radiological features: The disease presents with variable
Continuous irrigation and suction system may be
features. Classically, a cystic lesion with surrounding sclerotic
employed (Figs 8.6A and B).
bone is the feature. But in some instances onion skin periosteal
bone resembling Ewing's, cortical hyperostosis resembling
Subacute Osteomyelitis
osteoid osteoma, etc. are observed (Figs 8.7A and B).
It is a distinct form of bone infection wherein the organisms
Treatment Once the diagnosis is established long-term
though they are present in the bone, do not cause symptoms
antibiotic therapy is started taking into consideration the
of either acute or chronic osteomyelitis. This can occur either
bacteriological culture sensitivity report from the sample
primarily, when the virulence of the organism is low or the
obtained from the cavity.
host resistance is high or secondarily when acute osteomyelitis
Surgery of draining the cavity under antibiotic cover is
following treatment tums to subacute.
considered only when nonoperative treatment fails.
Brodie's Abscess
Sclerosing Osteomyelitis of Garre
 It was described by Sir Benjamin Brodie a surgeon in St
It is a nonsuppurative ossifying periostitis which occurs as a
George's Hospital, London, in 1832.
response to low grade infection and ensuing iritation.
He came to a conclusion of a subacute infection from a
 Radiograph shows sclerosis all round the bone.
specimen of an amputated limb which he did for intractable
Bone scan and PET scan may be useful in the diagnosis.
pain. He observed a cavity filled with dark colored thick
Treatment consists of adequate antibiotic therapy and when
 pus and the wallof the cavity consisted of hard white bone.
feasible and indicated excision of the focus.
Saline+Antibiotic
Drip chamber
Clip
Negative
suction
A
pump
H
Figures 8.6A and B
Showing the application of continuous irrigation and suction in an attempt to achieve control of infection.
Bone and Joint Infections
159
Age of onset—common in infants and children can occur
at any age.
Sex—M:F ratio 5:1
Site—Any joint. Common in hip and knee.
Mode of Spread
·Exogenous, e.g. penetrating injury.
· Endogenous, e.g. hematogenous form a distant foci ; local
extension form the vicinity.
Organism
日
Saphylococcus aureus 90%, Streptococcus, H. influenzae,
Figures 8.7A and B
E. coli, Proteus, etc. are responsible in remaining 10% of the
Radiograph showing Brodie's abscess in the diaphysis of tibia. The
patients
 Focus of infection—spreads from the synovium or from
acute inflammation and constitutional symptoms were absent.
the bone.
Revision Questions
Pathology
Q. Define osteomyelitis.
Once the infection gets into the joint there is seropurulent
Q. What are the organisms responsible for acute hemato-
exudate fonmation. The articular cartilage gets destroyed very
genous osteomyelitis?
rapidly due to the enzymatic degradation resulting from the
Q. Discuss the mode of spread of infection to the bone in
enzymes released from the bacteria as well as from the
 Osteomyelitis.
inflamed synovium and inflammatory cells. The subchondral
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis of chronic osteomyelitis.
bone gets exposed and later gets eroded too. If the pus is not
Q. Define sequestrum.
drained surgically, a sinus develops.
Q. Define involucrum.
Sequel depends on the speed at which the infection is
Q. Write notes on
controlled. If the infection is controlled before the destruction
a. Decompression.
of the cartilage, the joint becomes normal. No residual
b. Sequestrectomy and saucerization.
deformity is seen. After some destruction of cartilage, the joint
C. Brodie's abscess.
goes in for fibrous ankylosis. After considerable destruction
d. Sclerosing osteomyelitis of Garre.
of cartilage, the joint goes in for bony ankylosis. If the
Q. What are the complications of acute hematogenous
infection takes natural course then bony ankylosis with
osteomyelitis?
deformity is the result.
Essay Question
Diagnosis
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management
Diagnosis is mainly on clinical grounds. It is not difficult
of acute hematogenous osteomyelitis. Enumerate the compli-
because the patient presents with all the signs of acute
 cations and discuss in detail the management.
infection, i.e. calor, rubor, dolor, tumor with painful immobile
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis of chronic osteomyelitis, its
joint. Signs of systemic toxicity such as high grade fever with
clinical features, diagnosis, complications and management.
delirium may also be present. Investigations such as TC, DC,
ESR, CRP, ultrasound, X-ray, MRI are useful and should be
Acute Suppurative Arthritis
done as per indication.
This is known by various names as acute pyogenic arthritis,
Treatment
acute septic arthritis, acute pyoarthrosis and acute infective
arthritis. It refers to presence of pus in the joint secondary to
 Emergency surgical drainage of the joint of pus and debris
infection of the joint.
umder cover of systemic antibiotics is the treatment of choice.
160
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figures 8.8A and B
 y d p u a s n  ae   s z e s ss h e o g    ()s
 s  s t  n e e   s sn    s  s   
treated aggressively and control of infection was achieved, note the hypoplastic change in the left femur and pathologic dislocation of the
and dislocation. This results in gross shortening and exaggerated movements in the hip. The hip is painless
achieving good control of infection. Immobilization is
Q. Define septic arthritis.
essential till control of infection is achieved. This is followed
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis of acute septic arthritis.
by gradual mobilization as early as possible to avoid stiffness
Q  Discuss the treatment and sequel of acute pyogenic arthritis.
of the joint. Systemic antibiotics are used for considerable
 period to get rid of any residual focus of infection depending
Essay Questions
 On the organism isolated in culture and its antibiotic sensitivity.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis,
Arthrodesis is the treatment of choice for unsound
management and complications of acute pyogenic arthritis.
ankylosis. In selected cases of hip and knee ankylosis with
Q. What is Tom Smith's arthritis? Discuss the diagnosis and
no reactivation of the disease, total joint arthroplasty can be
management of Tom Smith's arthritis and its sequel.
considered. This procedure considerably reduces the
morbidity.
Specific Infections
Tom Smith's Arthritis of Infancy and Childhood
Tuberculosis of bones and joints
This is a type of pyogenic arthritis occurring due to
The disease tuberculosis is as ancient as mankind.
Osteomyelitis of the upper femoral metaphysis. The focus of
Hippocrates during his period recorded this disease as
infection can also start from the synovium. Since the capsular
phthisis or consumption. In Charaka and Sushrutha
 attachment is beyond the physis the infection directly spreads
Samhitha in ancient India it is identified as Yakshma.
 into the joint causing pyogenic arthritis. The epiphysis
Studies on Egyptian mummies (2050 BC) have shown
 invariably gets destroyed and the hip dislocates. Prompt and
positive results for M. tuberculosis, M. africanum and M.
early attention with an accurate diagnosis followed by
bovis. Hippocrates was able to differentiate pyogenic
drainage of pus under antibiotic cover may reduce the
abscesses from tubercular cold abscesses and to point out
morbidity. Delay causes severe destruction of the joint due to
the fact that paraplegia in tuberculosis of the spine
lysosomal enzymes and increase in pressure within the joint,
improved once the cold abscess pointed over the back
which further disturbs the vascularity (Figs 8.8A and B).
 (natural decompression).
Bone and Joint Infections
161
The tuberculosis of bones and joints is always secondary
· Tissue samples showing positive PCR (polymerase chain
to a primary focus elsewhere in the body. Many a times this
reaction), presence of bacilli in the smear, and classical
primary focus is not detectable. The bacilli enter the bone
histopathological picture is confinmatory.
(dissemination occurs) through the bloodstream and get
lodged in different areas. Thus, the lesion may be found in
Treatment
the synovium or in the bone. It is said that it takes almost 18-
Standard medical therapy in an adult comprises of using a
24 months after the development of primary lesion to cause
 combination of minimum three of the following drugs.
bone and joint tuberculosis. Poor nutrition, malnutrition, poor
*Streptomycin (0.75-1.0 G).
sanitation and poor resistance are the predisposing factors for
INH (200-300 mg).
the infection. Age is not a bar for bone and joint tuberculosis.
·Rifampicin (300-450 mg), INH (300 mg).
It can occur at any age. But when it occurs at a young age,
·Ethambutol (800-1200 mg).
the destruction of the growing bone results in severe
Pyrazinamide (750-1250 mg).
deformities. This is specially true in the spine.
The 3 stages of the disease were identified in the pre-
Drugs are used as per body weight and continuation of
 antitubercular drug therapy era as follows:
therapy for a minimum period of 18 months is absolutely
necessary for cure. Daily regimen ensuring regular intake of
I Early or stage of onset.
II Florid or stage of active destruction.
drugs gives the best results. DOTS trial is yet to prove its
IIIStage of repair or stage of healing or stage of ankylosis.
efficacy and so are short-term therapies. It is authors
(Was seen only in those who survived. More than 70%
experience that reactivation of the lesion and manifestation
died of the disease).
as some other fonm of tuberculosis is common with DOTS
The typical lesion of tuberculosis histopathologically, is
 amd short-term antitubercular therapy in spite of taking drugs
known as a tubercle. It is a granuloma. It consists of a central
as per the schedule.
area of caseation necrosis surrounded by epitheloid cells,
Good sanitation and good nutrition plays a great role in
macrophages, lymphocytes and Langhans' type of giant cells.
the recovery.
It indicates that granuloma is a defensive response to bacterial
Role of surgery in active tuberculosis is to debride the
invasion. It not only cordons off the bacteria but also allows
 tuberculous debris and repair the bone loss by adopting a
the immune system to kill the bacteria. The T lymphocyte 
 stabilization procedure. It aims at rendering a subject totally
(CD4+) secrete cytokines (interferon gamma) which activates
 disease free at the same time attempting to restore the
macrophages to destroy the engulfed bacteria, T lymphocyte
functional capacity to the best possible extent. Also aims at
(CD8+) also directly kills the infected cell.
preventing future complications.
Surgery is always done under cover of antitubercular drug
Investigations
 uaaa pnuunn si Ada sp au (i) Adnra
surgery as per schedule. Role of surgery in a burnt-out case
· Hb% - low; TC- moderate increase; DC- predominantly
 is reconstruction, thereby attempting to restore maximum
lymphocytes; ESR-elevated.
function.
X-ray—always shows narrowing of the joint space as
Injection streptomycin has a disadvantage of adminis-
earliest feature followed by destruction of the adjacent
tration by intramuscular route and over a period of time
bones. Surrounding area of rarefaction is a striking feature.
patient may become uncooperative.But till suchtime it is
Soft tissue shadow of cold abscess may also be seen.
guaranteed that he cannot become a defaulter.Autotoxicity
· CT, MRI—dilineate extent of soft tissue and bone
imvolvement better than X-rays.
is a common complication in elderly patients; hence, to be
used with caution.
 Mantoux test—when positive tells that the patient has or
has had tuberculosis
Essay Question
The test is negative in milliary tuberculosis.
· IgA and IgG—immunoglobulin assay may be useful as an
 Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and drug therapy of
additional evidence.
bone amd joint tuberculosis in general.
162
Essentials of Orthopedics
Tuberculosis of the Spine
Vertebral Lesion
It was popularly known as Pott's disease in the 18th century
a. Paradiscal——Involving adjacent vertebra, intervertebral
 named after Sir Percival Pott a successful British surgeon. The
disc involvement is a late feature. Presents with narrowing
name still continues.
of the disc space radiologically (>90%). Vertebral body
(5-7%) (Figs 8.9A to C and 8.10).
Development of Vertebral Column
b. Central—Involvement of the body. Presents with cavity
By about 4th week in an embryo, paired cubical masses called
formation, no collapse of the body is seen radiologically
somites start developing in the primitive mesenchyme. These
but a cystic lesion is seen.
somites differentiate into dermatome, myotome and sclerotome.
c. Lateral—Lateral segments of the body are involved.
Sclerotome surrounds the notochord. Each sclerotome starts
Shows lateral collapse of the body radiologically.
segmentation and condenses into a cephalic mass and a caudal
d. Anterior—— Anterior segments are involved. Shows anterior
mass and a posterior element. The formation of the vertebra
collapse of the body radiologically.
thus begins. Blood supply also follows this embryonic pattem.
e. Posterior elements—Articular facets, posterior spinal
 Thus each segmental artery in the vertebral column supplies
disease and spinal tumor syndrome (<5%).
the lower half of the one, the upper half of the other caudal
f.  Lesions involving multiple vertebrae and skipped lesions.
and cephalic mass respectively. The notochord ultimately
disappears in the region of the sclerotomes except in the region
ClinicalFeatures
of the intervertebral disc, where it remains as nucleus pulposus.
a. Pain which is dull and vague initially becomes progres-
Nucleus pulposus along with fibrous annulus fibrosus, makes
an intervetebral disc.
the spine particularly jarring.
Clinical importance of this embryonic blood supply is
b. Loss of weight. Loss of appetite.
shown by the classical lesion of tuberculosis of the spine.It
c. Fever and malaise with evening rise of temperature and
involves the lower half or the upper half of the vertebra.
Manifests radiologically as narrowing of the disc space,(one
might sweats.
d.Paraspinal spasm.
of the earliest radiological signs). This also proves the
e. Presence of gibbus (angular, knuckle and round kyphosis).
fact that dissemination of focus occurs through theblood-
f. Tendemess over the spine
stream.
g. Presence of cold abscess.
Batson's Plexus of Veins
 h. Aldermanic gait—small steps with straight back to avoid
jarring.
These are veins that connect pelvic veins with internal
i. In cervical spine patient supports the chin over the palm
vertebral venous plexus. They do not have valves.
of the hand.
Hence dissemination of focus from the genitourinary tract
i.
 Neurologic symptoms may be present.
amd abdomen to the vertebra can occur easily.
Involvement of adjacent portions of thevertebra will result
Spinal tuberculosis is the most common type among
in angular kyphosis (Figs 8.1lA and B).
skeletal tuberculosis and accounts for about 50% of bone and
Involvement of more than two but less than three will
joint tuberculosis. It affects males and females equally and
result in knuckle kyphosis (Figs 8.12A and B).
does not show any predilection to age. Though it is common
Involvement of more than three vertebrae will result in
in the first three decades of life it can occur at any age. Lesion
rund kyphosis.
is common in lower thoracic spine followed by upper thoracic
cervical, lumbar and sacral spine.
Cold Abscess
Probable reasons for lower thoracic spine as common site:
Batson's plexus of veins
It is collection of fluid and debris in tuberculosis. It is called
Cysterma chyli begins at lower border of T12.
cold because it is devoid of signs of acute inflammation such
Close relation of thoracic duct.
as heat, redness, and pain. In the cervical spine, radio-
Continuous movement with respiration which helps in
 logically, the soft tissue shadow of a cold abscess appears
dissemination.
like a bird's nest and in the mediastinum it is heart-shaped
· More spongy bone.
or fusiform.
Bone and Joint Infections
163
A
B
Figures 8.9A to C
space which is the earliest classical sign of spinal tuberculosis. (B and C) Radiographs show progressive narrowing of the joint space as
well as development of bony lesions which are visible . Healing occurs in the form of interbody fusion.
In the cervical region
a. Retropharyngeal abscess (cervical prevertebral abscess).
Acute pyogenic abscess is in front of the prevertebral
fascia and one side of the mid line.
 b. In the mediastinum, tracking down from the prevertebral
region.
c. At the back of the neck, tracking along the posterior
division of the spinal nerves.
d. At the posterior border of the sternomastoid muscle
tracking laterally.
e.  In the axilla, through the open mouth of axillary sheath.
In the thoracic region
a. May remain as prevertebral abscess in the posterior
mediastinum.
Figure 8.10
b. Through the openings in the diaphragm, namely the lateral
Showing the CT scan of the L5 vertebra taken in the 1 st month itself
lumbocostal arch, the medial lumbocostal arch and median
at presentation. Note that the lesions are spotted much before the
X-ray evidence.
 arcuate ligament tracks distally out of the thorax.
· Lateral lumbocostal arch:
Position and Course of Cold Abscess in
i. Traversing between the lumbodorsal fascia and
Spinal Tuberculosis (Figs 8.13 to 8.15)
quadratus lumborum muscle may remain behind
In any region
the kidney.
a. Within the prevertebral fascia as prevertebral abscess in
ii. Traversing along the 12th thoracic, iliohypogastric
front of the vertebral body
and ilio inguinal nerves to the anterior abdominal
b. Within the spinal canal compressing the spinal cord.
wall.
164
Essentials of Orthopedics
A
B
Figures 8.11A and B
partially destroyed. T12 has subluxated posteriorly following T1 1. Altogether two vertebrae are involved resulting in an angular kyphosis. In
the AP view note that the 11th rib is free of its attachment to the vertebral body because the vertebral body is destroyed almost completely.
Mandible
Retropharyngeal
lymphgland
Carotid
sheath
Sterno-
A
B
mastoid
Figures 8.12A and B
 Showing a knuckle kyphosis.
Cold abscess
trackinglaterally
Investinglayer
Prevertebralfascia
Medial lumbocostal arch:
offasciacolli
It is the open mouth of psoas sheath. It can track down
Trapezius
to the insertion of psoas muscle into the thigh.
Median arcuate ligament:
Figure 8.13
 The median arcuate ligament crosses over the aorta.
Showing the paths of spread of cold abscess in the cervical spine.
 So the abscess may spread along the aorta and its branches.
c. Along the intercostal nerves in the anterior middle or
In thelumbarregion
posterior axillary lines in the chest wall.
 Along the aorta and its branches, internal pudendal,
d.In the rectus sheath over the anterior abdominal wall.
superior gluteal, etc.
Bone and Joint Infections
165
Anteriorcutaneousnerve
Diaphragm
Aorticorifice
withaorta
Psoas
Sternum
/muscle
Medial lumbo-
Quadratus
costalarch
lumborum
Lateral
Lateral lumbo-
Twelfthrib
cutaneous
costal arch
Vertebra
nerve
Medianarcuate
Firstlumbar
ligament
vertebra
Figure 8.14
Spinalcord
Showing the paths of spread of the cold abscess in the thoracic
Posteriorramusof
Pleura
region.
thoracicnerve
Intercostal
nerve
b.Along the sheath of psoas or quadratus lumborum.
Figure 8.15
C.
 Along the lumbar, femoral and obturator nerves into the 
Showing the lateral path for the spread of the thoracic cold abscess
thigh.
along the intercostal nerve.
d. Into the lumbar triangle of Petit, through the flat muscles
of the abdominal wall.
bladder and bowels also are involved. This is known as Pott's
 paraplegia named after Sir Percival Pott.
Investigations
Sequential events of paralysis:
Hb% low; TC—moderate increase; DC—predominantly
a.
Muscle weakness.
lymphocytes; ESR—raised
b.Awkward gait.
X-ray—shows picture of destruction of the vertebra as per
C.
 Incoordination.
involvement. Narrowing of the intervertebral space.
d.
Spasticity.
anterior collapse, lateral collapse, cavity formation, soft
e.
 Paraplegia in extension.
tissue shadow of cold abscess, etc. may be seen.
 Paraplegia in flexion.
CT, MRI—done for better evaluation of bone and soft
tissue involvement.
Types of Pott's Paraplegia
Confirmatory tests
As proposed by Sorrel-Dejerine and later by Seddon.
 Identifying presence of bacteria in the pus. Smears are
A. Early onset paraplegia: This is the paralysis occurring
made and stained for acid-fast bacilli.
during the florid phase of the disease, i.e. within 2 years.
Classical tubercle seen histopathologically under
 B. Late onset paraplegia: This is the paralysis occurring many
microscope.
years after the disease when the disease has become
PCR (Polymerase chain reaction), positive for tuber-
quiescent and sometimes even without reactivation.
culosis.
Pus culture and guinea pig inoculation. Takes long time
Causes for Paraplegia as Put forth by Seddon
 and not done regularly.
(Based on)
Early onset
Pott's Paraplegia
i.Inflammatory
When the thoracic spinal cord is involved in tuberculosis it
a. Abscess, inflammatory tissue or a caseating mass.
results in paralysis of the lower limbs. In severe and late cases
b. Spinal tumor syndrome.
166
Essentials of Orthopedics
c. Posterior spinal disease.
4. Watch on signs of improvement (if no improvement is
d. Infective thrombosis of the cord.
observed surgical treatment is indicated).
ii. Mechanical
Surgical line of treatment: Single most important indication
a. Pathologic dislocation.
for surgery in tuberculosis is presence of paralysis. This is
b. Compression by sequestra, loose fragments of bone
further analyzed and indications are formulated.
Or disc, pressure of the granulation tissue and debris
Indications for surgery (based on indications as put forth
Late onset
by Griffiths and Seddon):
i. Inflammatory: Persistent activity or reactivation of the
Absolute indications:
disease.
1. Paraplegia developing when the patient is on adequate
ii. Mechanical: Progressive stretching of the cord ultimately
medical line of treatment.
 jeopardizing its circulation.
 2. Paraplegia not showing improvement with adequate
In brief the cause for paralysis is either the active disease
medical line of treatment.
3. Paraplegia progressing even with adequate medical
process itself which damages the cord or the sequestrated
line of treatment.
material and structural abnormality which mechanically
interferes with the function of the cord.
4. Complete paraplegia with no improvement with
adequate medical line of treatment.
Treatment
5. Severe spastic paraplegia.
6. Paraplegia of rapid onset.
Medical line of treatment Always indicated when there is no
7. Long standing paraplegia >6 months, paraplegia in
neurological involvement. Drainage of the cold abscess is the
flexion, flaccid paraplegia, etc.
only surgical procedure that may be necessary. It is chosen
Relative indications:
when investigations and initial assessment do not lead to the
1.
 Recurrent paraplegia.
absolute indications for surgery (indications for surgery as
2. Paraplegia in old age.
proposed by Griffths and Seddon are described in surgical
3. Painful paraplegia.
line of treatment)
4. Paraplegia with complications such as urinary
1. Antitubercular drug therapy has to be started at earliest.
infection and stones.
It is author's firm belief that one should not hesitate to
Rare indications:
use injection streptomycin 0.75-1.0 gm daily at least for
1. Posterior spinal disease.
60-90 days whenever indicated. A minimum of three if
 2. Spinal tumor syndrome.
needed four drugs have to be used to achieve an early
3.
 Cervical spinal tuberculosis.
effective control of the disease. The site of injection has
4. Severe cauda equina paralysis.
to be rotated daily (on four limbs) for maximum comfort.
The toxicity of the drugs should always be bome in mind
SurgicalProcedures
during therapy and the therapy should be modified
1. Drainage of abscess: An abscess large enough for drain-
accordingly. Patient is to be evaluated on a daily basis and
age is drained under cover of antitubercular drugs and
if necessary liver enzyme study (SGOT/ALT, SGPT/AST,
antibiotics. Smaller abscesses resolve with adequate ATT.
Gamma GT) and renal function tests may have to be done.
2. Costotransversectomy: It is a surgical procedure for
Secondary infection if any should be taken care of by
drainage of a large paravertebral abscess. The drainage is
appropriate antibiotics.
accomplished by excising the ribs , the transverse process
 2. Improve the nutritional status by giving good attention to
and corresponding pedicle. A minimum of one and
the food intake.
maximum of two ribs and transverse processes are excised
3. Immobilize the spine by appropriate brace or even a
(Fig. 18.16A).
plaster of Paris jacket when rigid immobilization is
3. Anterolateral decompression: It is a surgical procedure
indicated. This helps not only in giving comfort to the
which decompresses the anterolateral portion of the spinal
patient but also prevents development of severe
cord by ex cising posterolateral part of the vertebral body.
deformities. Also helps in early consolidation of the
corresponding ribs, transverse processes and pedicles. This
diseased bone.
is indicated when costotransversectomy does not yield pus
Bone and Joint Infections
167
2. General condition: Good general condition better is the
prognosis and vice versa.
 3. Duration: Shorter the duration better is the prognosis and
vice versa.
4. Severity: Incomplete paralysis without bladder and bowel
involvement and sensory loss better is the recovery and
vice versa.
5. Type: Early onset better is the prognosis and vice versa.
6. Speed of onset: Slow onset better is the prognosis than
rapid onset.
A,Costotransversectomy
7. Kyphotic deformity: More than 60° poorer is the prognosis
and vice versa.
Revision Questions
Q. Discuss the development of the vertebral column.
Q. Which is the most common site for spinal tuberculosis and
why?
Q. What are the types of lesions found in the tuberculosis of
the spine?
Q. What is a cold abscess? Discuss the natural mode of spread
 of cold abscess in different regions of the spine.
B,Anterolateral decompression
Q. Discuss the management of cold abscess.
Q. Write short notes on
Figures 8.16A and B
a. Bird's nest abscess.
Showing the portion of the bone removed (the shaded portion) in
costotransversectomy and anterolateral decompression.
b. Vertebral lesions in tuberculosis
c. Battson's plexus of veins.
d. Pott's paraplegia.
under tension. The tubercular debris and granulation tissue
is cleared by this procedure (Fig. 18.16B).
e. Posterior spinal disease.
Minimum of three or maximum of four ribs and
f.
 Spinal tumor syndrome.
corresponding transverse processes are excised.
Q. Write notes on
4. Anterior decompression and fusion: It is a procedure
a.Anterolateral decompression.
employed when the lesion is anterior and more anterior
b. Costotransversectomy.
portion of the vertebral body is destroyed. Spinal fusion
c.  Anterior decompression.
always follows decompression.
5. Laminectomy: Done only in cases of posterior spinal
Essay Questions
disease and spinal tumor syndrome.
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis, clinical features diagnosis and
Order of recovery of paralysis The recovery of paralysis
management of tuberculosis of the spine.
always takes place in the following order irrespective of
Q. Classify Pott's paraplegia. Discuss the management of
modalities of treatment.
Pott's paraplegia in detail and its prognosis.
1. Vibration and joint sensation.
 2. Temperature, touch, pain.
Tuberculosis of the Hip
3. Voluntary motor activity.
Tuberculosis of the hip is next common site after tuberculosis
4. Sphincter functions.
of the spine. The disease is common during 1st 3 decades.
5. Wasting of muscles.
The foci of infection may get lodged as a solitary or as
Factors goverming prognosis:
multiple deposits during the phase of dissemination. They get
1. Age: Younger the age better is the prognosis and vice
lodged in the synovium or in the bones of the hip. In the bone
versa.
the order of frequency starts from the roof of the acetabulum
168
Essentials of Orthopedics
Roofof theacetabulum
Superiorsubchondral
portionof thefemoralhead
Babcock'striangle
Greatertrochanter
Capsule and synovium
of the hip joint
Primarycompressiontrabeculae
Intertrochantericlineshowingthe
attachmentof thecapsule.
posteriorlystopsshortabout%acm
beforetheintertrochantericcrest
Figure 8.17
 Diagram showing common sites of origin of foci of tuberculosis in
the hip joint.
Figure 8.18
followed by superior subchondral portion of the femoral head,
 Radiograph showing narrowing of the joint space with a lesion in 
Babcock's triangle and finally the greater trochanter. In the
the Babcock's triangle. Patient was a known case of pulmonary
bone it begins as tuberculous osteomyelitis (Fig. 8.17). From
tuberculosis and was not taking regular treatment. Also note the soft
both the foci the infection subsequently spreads to the joint
tissue swelling around the joint.Skeletal tuberculosis is almost
always secondary to a primary lesion elsewhere in the body.
and the articular cartilage gets destroyed. Thus, osteoarticular
tuberculosis developes.
ClinicalFeatures
Babcock's triangle is a triangular area at the inferomedial
 portion of the neck of the femur identified radiologically.
Low grade fever with evening rise of temperature and
Medially it is bounded by the epiphyseal plate or by stress
night sweats.
trabeculae, laterally by primary compression trabeculae and
 Night pains.
inferiorly by the neck of the femur (Fig. 8.18).
 Loss of weight and appetite.
Stage-l
Stage-ll
Stage-ll
Figure 8.19
of the joint.
Bone and Joint Infections
169
 Progressing painful limp and antalgic gait.
Stage II - Stage of deformity (True shortening) In this the
Development of deformities.
defonmity of second stage becomes fixed. Destruction is
pronounced and the joint goes into a state of fibrous ankylosis.
Stages of the Disease (Fig. 8.19)
The classical deformity is that of fixed flexion, adduction and
imtermal rotation. But if the Y ligament of Bigelow is destroyed
Stage I- Stage of synovitis (Apparent lengthening) In this
im the process of infection it is possible to get a deformity of
stage the focus of infection (whether in the synovium or in
flexion, abduction and extermal rotation.
the bone) irritates the joint. Hence, there is collection of fluid
in the joint. In order to accommodate the fluid the joint adopts
a position which increases its capacity. Hence, the limb is in
Radiological Classification
flexion, abduction and extemal rotation.
An excellent classification is suggested by Prof
Stage II - Stage of arthritis (Apparent shortening) In this
Shanmugasundaram, Chennai (1983), India (Figs 8.20A to C).
stage the osteoarticular spread of infection has occurred. The 
eNonmal hip type
 joint destruction has begun and progressing. Thus, intensity  Perthes' hip type
Seen in children
of pain is severe and patient sleeps in a lateral position   Dislocated hip type
opposite to that of the involved hip. Hence, the deformity of   Atrophic hip type
Seen in adults
flexion, adduction intemal rotation develops. Night pain is
 Traveling acetabulum type
common in this stage.
 Mortar and pestle type
Seen both in children
Protrusio acetabuli type
and adults
Night pain/Night cries: Patient gets up from sleep at night
Functional outcome is different in different types.
with severe and excruciating pain. Once he is awake the pain
gradually decreases. This is known as night pain. It occurs
because of the denuded articular sufaces (denuded of its
Treatment
articular cartilage) coming into contact with one another and
、 General Adequate ATT till the disease is cured is absolutely
the exposed subchondral bone rubbing against its counterpart.
 During daytime the protective muscle spasm prevents this
 necessary. Immobilization in a splint or a plaster cast only
for the required period is a must. This will help to restore the
contact. But at night in sleep when the muscles are relaxed
^ functional position of the joint and prevent unacceptable
the contact develops. Again when the patient gets up from
deformities. As soon as possible depending on the recovery
sleep the protective muscle spasm keeps the denuded articular
patient has to be mobilized. This will avoid all the
surfaces away and the pain decreases. This phenomenon is
complications of unnecessary prolonged immobilization.
known as night pain.
Figures 8.20A to C
and pestle type, (B) Traveling acetabulum type, (C) Atrophic type.
170
Essentials of Orthopedics
Surgical Procedures
Similar to any other bone and joint tuberculosis the
dissemination occurs through the blood stream. The foci of
Clearence procedure This procedure is indicated early in the
disease when the response to medical line of treatment is poor
infection get enlodged in the synovium or in the subchondral
bone of the distal femur, proximal tibia or patella.
because of the presence of large amount of debris. It aims at
Unlike other joints since the knee joint has the largest joint
salvaging the joint by extensive debridement of the infected
space and has large amount of synovial covering, the disease
material and dead tissue thereby facilitating the action of drugs
of ATT. At the same time the joint is immobilized in desirable
remains as synovial for a considerable time before it becomes
functional position. So healing takes place in a position which
osteoarticular. Synovium studded with nodules are visible for
the naked eye during surgery. Hence, it is thickened because
restores maximum function.
of invasion by tuberculous granulation tissue. The synovial
Arthrodesis It is indicated in a case of unsound ankylosis of
fluid which is serous initially becomes seropurulent and turbid
the hip, where stability is of prime concerm. Functional position
later and may contain fibrinous flakes.
of arthrodesis is about 5-10° of flexion, about 10° of abduction
The synovial disease becomes osteoarticular by the
and 0-5° of extermal rotation. Disadvantage is the inability to
formation of pannus which starts eroding the bone at the
squat in future. Hence, all those activities which involve
 junction of the synovial membrane and the articular cartilage,
squatting have to be modified. The procedure gives a painless
the capsule and the ligaments. The pannus can extend over
stable hip. Procedure should never be done in children.
the articular cartilage as well as under the cartilage thereby
Osteotomy This procedure is done in a case of bony ankylosis
separating it from the subchondral bone. This results in flakes
which has occurred in a functionally poor position. The osteo-
of cartilaginous debris being present within the joint.
tomy is done as close to the deformity as possible in the femur
When the disease starts as osteoarticular the pathology is
(just distal to the deformity) and the deformity is corrected.
that of tubercular osteomyelitis.
Excision arthroplasty The procedure involves excising all the
Generally, the location of the lesion is epiphyseal in adults
diseased components including the head of the femur in an
 and metphyseal in children. The cold abscess thus formed
attempt to provide a painless mobile hip. Postoperatively
 destroys the bone and the articular cartilage, and finally, enters
skeletal traction is employed for a period of 6-12 weeks for
the joint.
organization of a false joint. Exaggerated painless movement,
instability and gross shortening are the disadvantages. This
Pathology
procedure is known as Girdlestone procedure. It was being done
Early lesions in synovium and bone (Figs 8.21A to 8.22)
in the past in patient who preferred a painless mobile hip and
did not mind shortening. This procedure is rarely done these
Tuberculous arthritis (Fig. 8.23)
days.
Fibrous Ankylosis (Fig. 8.24)
Joint replacement surgery Total joint replacement is the
Triple deformity Whether synovial or osteoarticular total
preferred option these days. At times, the acetabulum may have
destruction of the joint along with its capsule and ligaments
to be reconstructed. The procedure is well accepted by the
(the cruciates and the collaterals, which is a late feature) leads
patient and it gives a painless stable hip. Patient should be totally
to classical triple deformity, i.e. flexion, posterior subluxation.
free of infection which is the prerequisite before surgery.
lateral sublux ation, rotation and abduction.
Prognosis Early presentation, diagnosis and adequate control
Initially flexion deformity develops because the knee
 of the disease give better prognosis than late presentation and adopts a position of flexion to accommodate the debris and
delay in the treatment, i.e. Stage of synovitis has better prognosis
s the fluid. If it remains in flexion for a long time posterior
than stage of arthritis and fixed deformities. Once the 
 subluxation develops. The powerful pull of the iliotibial band
destruction occurs in the joint the end-result is fibrous ankylosis.
amd the hamstrings causes rest of the displacements, i.e. lateral
subluxation, rotation and abduction.
Tuberculosis of the Knee
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
Tuberculosis of theknee is the third common site after spine
· Low grade fever with evening rise of temperature and
and hip.
might sweats
Bone and Joint Infections
171
B
Figures 8.21A and B
 Showing synovitis with effusion. Note the horse-shoe shaped swelling in the suprapatellar pouch obliterating the normal hollows around the
knee joint. This is one of the earliest signs seen in TB knee (arrows).
Pannus
Intraosseousleisionto
begin with;becoming
articularsubsequentlyby
destroying the
articular cartilage.
Synovial lesionto
begin with;becoming
articularsubsequently
by eroding the bone.
(Pannusformation)
Figure 8.22
Diagram showing how an osseous/synovial lesion subsequently
destroys the joint and causes tubercular arthritis. The end result is
Figure 8.24
fibrous ankylosis. Only if secondary infection sets in the joint goes
Diagram showing the end result. The joint space is narrowed. The
in for bony ankylosis.
area of denuded articular surfaces are opposed with a bridge of
fibrous tissue.
Loss of weight and appetite.
 Progressing painful limp and antalgic gait.
●
Effusion and synovial thickening.
Wasting of the muscles around the knee mainly the
quadriceps.
Night pains.
Development of defonmities (late feature).
Pannus
Investigations
Figure 8.23
Blood and other investigations are similar to any other bone
Diagram showing the destruction of articular cartilage and the
and joint tuberculosis and give positive indications of the
involved bone. This results in loss of joint congruity.
disease.
172
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
Figures 8.25A and B
(A) Clinical picture and (B) Radiograph showing the classical triple displacement which developed secondary to pyoarthrosis. Note the
classical displacements of flexion, lateral rotation and posterior subluxation.
from soft tissue prominence to narrowing joint space,  for arthrodesis.
destruction of the articular surface, osteolytic cavities,
Total joint arthroplasty Is the best accepted procedure and
sequestrum and triple deformity (Figs 8.25A and B).
to be considered in adults and elderly. It gives a painless
CT and MRI gives more useful information for treatment
mobile joint and gives considerable function when muscle
amd planning surgery.
atrophy is not very severe. Patient's disease free status should
Treatment
be confirmed before surgery to avoid flaring-up of the
disease.
Medical management is indicated only in very early cases
which are diagnosed and confirmed by biopsy. (Arthroscopy
Tuberculosis of the Ankle and the Foot
and biopsy/trochar biopsy). In these cases the synovial
Uncommon. Focus of infection may be synovial or bony, i.e.
involvement is not extensive. ATT and adequate immobili-
lower tibia and talus calcaneum are the other commonly
zation result in cure. In children whose growth and remodeling
imvolved bones. Infection can spread to the ankle joint from
calcaneal tuberculosis after involving subtalar joint. Diagnosis
to be kept in mind before planning surgery.
and treatment follow the general principles as discussed
Surgical Procedures
before.
Synovectomy Done in cases with grossly thickened synovium.
Tuberculosis of the Shoulder and Elbow
It aims at removing the diseased synovium and clearing the
Synovial type of tuberculosis of the shoulder is very rare. So
joint of tubercular debris. Though total synovectomy is aimed
at, practically it always results in subtotal synovectomy. This
is the formation of cold abscess and draining sinus. The variety
of tuberculosis of the shoulder is a dry one and is known as
is because some areas are inaccessible surgically.
caries sicca'. It is commonly seen in adults and is considered
Arthrodesis Done for a destroyed, deranged and deformed
 as an atrophic variety of tuberculosis. Pain, limitation of
joint which is painful. The position of arthrodesis is 180° of
 movement and marked wasting of the muscles will draw
extension. Charnley's compression arthrodesis using
 attention. Radiologically destruction of the articular surfaces
Bone and Joint Infections
173
amd cavities are seen. Management follows the the general
Q. Write notes on:
principles as discussed before.
a. Spina ventosa
The focus of infection in tuberculosis of the elbow is
b. Triple displacement
mostly bony and rarely synovial.
c.Fibrous ankylosis
The disease is commonly seen in older children and adults.
d.Clinical features of tuberculosis of the knee joint.
The signs and symptoms are similar to any other bone and
joint tuberculosis. Diagnosis and treatment follow the general
Essay Questions
principles.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis,
  d a  sin g  
Tuberculosis of the Wrist
sequel.
It is rare and commonly seen in adults. May start as a synovial
Q. What is triple displacement? Discuss the etiopathogenesis.
or a bony focus. The common site is capitate and lower end
diagnosis and mangement of tuberculosis of the knee.
of radius. Whether originates as synovial or bony, the
dissemination to neighboring structures is rapid. The flexor
Mycotic infections of the Bone
The mycotic infections of the bone are classified as superficial
symptoms are similar to any other bone and joint tuberculosis.
 a) d (o)
Diagnosis and treatment follow the general principles.
Superficial Mycoses
Involve skin and mucous membrane as a primary infection
Spina, means short bones, Ventosa means air. Thus the
and then spread to adjacent soft tissue and bone, e.g.
meaning is short bone filled with air. Also known as
Maduramycosis, Candida, etc.
tuberculous dactylitis. Commonly seen in children and in short
 tubular bones, the metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges. The
Deep Mycoses
blood supply is very rich and point of entry of the nutrient
artery is in the center. Hence, the focus of infection is lodged
Do not generally affect the bone except in immunocompro-
 in the center. Central destruction occurs initially. This gives
mised patients, e.g. Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Blastomyces,
the picture of bone filled with air. Later layers of subperiosteal
etc.
new bone fonmation occurs. This cause a spindle shaped
expasile lesion. Sinus formation can lead to secondary
Maduramycosis
infection and the picture changes. Adequate ATT with
First identified in Madurai, India in the year 1842. Thus named
antibiotics in case of secondary infection leads to complete
as Madura foot.
resolution.
Caused by Madurella mycetomi, and Madurella grisea.
Agricultural workers and those who walk on bare foot are
Revision Questions
more susceptible. Causes nodular lesions once infection gets
Q. Discuss the onset and progress of lesions in tuberculosis
established in the tissues. Hence derives the name mycetoma.
 of the hip.
Q. Write notes on Babcock's triangle
Subcutaneous nodules
Q. Discuss the types of deformities in tuberculosis of the hip
joint.
Q. Discuss the different radiological types of tuberculosis of
the hip joint.
Q. Discuss the management of the tuberculosis of the hip
joint.
Q. What is the sequel of the tuberculosis of the hip joint?
Tumorlikelesions
Multiple discharging sinus
Q. Discuss the pathology of tuberculosis of the knee joint.
174
Essentials of Orthopedics
Route of entry is through skin following a cut wound.
 blood stream may get enlodged in the bone leading to hydatid
Spreads through subcutaneous tissue the fascia and the tendon
 cysts. The common bones affected are the pelvis, vertebrae,
sheath and later gets established in the bone and joint. It
 ribs and femur. The cyst goes on destroying the bone. The
evokes a granulomatous reaction in the tissue involved which
 growth plate does not form a barrier for destruction and the
breaks up causing multiple ulcerations and formation of 
destruction may extend even to the epiphysis.
multiple sinuses. The surrounding area is indurated and gives
Radiologically solitary or multiloculated cystic lesions are
a woody feel.
seen with extensive destruction of cortex and medulla. In case
Diagnosis is established by identification of the organism
in the biopsy specimen and discharge.
signs. CT and MRI help in diagnosing by identifying para-
Drug therapy with trimethoprim-sulphamethoxozole,
skeletal cysts. Needle biopsy and Casoni's complement
ketoconozole, dapsone, etc. are effective only in early cases.
fixation test are confirmatory.
Severe forms of involvement necessitate amputation.
Albendazole is the drug of choice and is to be given at
four weekly intervals at least for 6-8 weeks. Protection may
Syphilitic Infection of Bone
be necessary to avoid pathological fracture. Once the control
is established the bone cysts may need excision and bone
Seen in infants as well as in adults as tertiary lesion. In infants
grafting. Irrigating the cavity with hypertonic saline helps in
it manifests after several weeks of birth though infestation has
preventing recurrence.
occurred during pregnancy in the womb. Trepenoma pallidum
crosses the placental barrier in the later months of pregnancy
amd infects the fetus. An irritable infant with symmetrical
Revision Questions
skeletal swelling in the long bones, painful and refuses to
Write notes on
move the limb should raise the suspicion. The pathology is
a. Mycotic infections of the bone
either syphilitic periostitis or metaphysitis. Periostitis
b. Hydatid bone disease
manifests radiologically in fonmation of new bone either
C. Sabre tibia.
diffuse or in layers. Metaphysitis shows trabeculer erosion and
frank destruction.
 In older children and adults, gummatous lesions develop
Further Reading
 in the bone. Radiologically seen as lytic punched out areas in
1. Adjard A, Martini M. Tuberculosis of the hip in adults. Int
the medulla surrounded by thick sclerotic bone. In tibia the
Orthop 1987;11:227-33.
syphilitic osteitis causes diffuse thickening of the cortex and
2. Ambekar AP, Joshipura JCN. Classification and treatment of
bending/bowing of the tibia which is classical. The resultant
tuberculosis of the hip joint: analysis of 104 cases. Ind J Surg
deformity is known as ‘Sabre tibia'.
1973;35:309-15.
3. Bosworth DM, Wright HA. Streptomycin in bone and joint
tuberculosis. J Bone Joint Surg 1952;34-A:255-66.
Parasitic Infestation of Bone
4. Crenshaw AH Edi VlII (Eds). Cambell's Operative Ortho-
paedics. CV Mosby Company, St. Louis, Missouri USA 1987.
5. Citron KM. Tuberculosis chemotherapy. Br Med J 1972;1:
Hydatid Cysts in the Bone
426-8.
The dog tape worm Echinococcus granulosus (5 mm long
6. Cleveland M, Bosworth DM. Pathology of tuberculosis of
spine. J Bone Joint Surg 1942;24:527-46.
with 3 segments) is responsible for hydatid cysts in the bone.
7. Duraiswami PK, Tuli SM. Five thousand years of orthopedics
Dog is the definitive host and the tape worm harbors in the
in India. Clin Orthop 1971;75:269-80.
bowel. The scolices are excreted in the feces. Man, sheep and
8.
Dutt AK, Moers D, Stead WW. Short course chemotherapy
cattle are intermediate hosts and get infested by ingesting food
for ex tra pulmonary tuberculosis: nine years experience. Ann
contaminated with dog feces. Infested meet when consumed
Intern Medicine 1986;104:7-12.
by dog continues the life cycle and new generation of tape
9. Evans ET. Tuberculosis of bones and joints: with special
worms evolve.
radical surgical techniques to certain effects and
The scolices when ingested, hatch into larvae and through
complications of tuberculous lesion. J Bone Joint Surg
the portal system enter the blood stream. And through the
1952;34-A:267-78
Bone and Joint Infections
175
10. Girdlestone GR. Tuberculosis of Bone and Joint. 3rd edition.
14. Shepherd MM. A further review on the results of operations
Revised by Somerville EW and Wilkinson MC 1965 Oxford
on the hip joint. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1960;42-B:177-204.
University Press, London.
15. Tuli SM, Mukherjee SK. Excision arthroplasty for tuberculous
11. Harris RI, Coulthard HS, Dewar FP. Streptomycin in the
and pyogenic arthritis of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg 1981;
treatment of bone and joint Tuberculosis. J Bone Joint Surg
63-B:29-32.
Am 1952:34:279-87
16. Wilkinson MC. Tuberculosis of hip and knee treated by
12. Robert W, Jhonson Jr, John W Hillman, Wayne O Southwick.
chemotherapy, synovectomy and debridement: a follow up
The importance of direct surgical attack upon lesions of the
study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1969;51-A:1343-59.
vertebral bodies, particularly in Pott's disease. J Bone Joint
17. Yusof MI, Hassan E, Rahmat N, Yunus R. Spinal tuberculosis:
Surg Am 1953;35:17-114.
the association between pedicle involvement and anterior
13. Shanmugasundaram TK. Bone and Joint Tuberculosis,
column damage and kyphotic deformity. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
Kothandaram and Co, Madras (Chennai) 1983.
2009;34(7):713-7.
9
Bone Tumors
二
Evaluation of Bone Tumors in General with Relevant Investigations
Classification
Common Benign Bone Tumors, their Clinical Features, Diagnosis and
Treatment
二
Common Malignant Bone Tumors,their Clinical Features,Diagnosis and
Treatment
 Bone tumors basically belong either to benign or to
Evaluation of a Bone Tumor
malignant nature and can arise from any tissue present in
Clinical
the bone. [Namely bone and cartilage progenitor cells
(most common), periosteal cells, hemopoietic cells,
Apart from age, sex, location and the bone from which the
lipocytes, nerve and schwann cells, fibroblasts, endothelial
tumor arises following are to be considered for primary
cells, perithelial cells, epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells,
evaluation.
notocordal cells, histiocytic cells, etc.]. They have a
specific predilection to age, specific bones and in the bones
Onset: Benign tumors onset is insidious in benign tumors.
to specific sites. The nature of the lesion is either to fonm
The first sign is either development of a well demarcated
swelling with or without accompanying tenderness, i.e.
neoplastic new bone or to destroy the nonmal bone, i.e.
neoplastic new bone forming variety. It can also be an
either tumor osteogenesis or tumor osteolysis (Figs 9.1A
accidental discovery with no symptoms. At times presentation
 a  s  i sis   s
tumor arises from elements other than bone and cartilage
is a pathological fracture with pain, i.e. osteolytic variety.
 Further constitutional symptoms are uncommon in benign
progenitor cells. Predilection to sex is also seen and
generally males are more susceptible when compared to
tumors unless secondary complications develop.
females. All these points are to be kept in mind during
Malignant tumors: In malignant tumors pain always precedes
evaluation of a bone tumor.
 Other symptoms like swelling and most of the time associated
Bone Tumors
177
A,Geographic
B,Motheaten
C,Permeated
Figures 9.1A to C
(B) Moth-eaten (C) Permeative.
with constitutional symptoms like malaise, low grade fever,
malignant lesions it is irregular and consistency is variegated.
loss of appetite, weight, etc. Tumor related pain is constant
Consistency varies from soft, finm and hard depending on the
amd not relieved by rest.
 predominance of the tissue involved as well as the amount of
tissue destruction/formation which has resulted on account of
Plane and consistency of the swelling: Plane of the swelling
the tumor.
is always deep to the muscle and arising from the bone. The
Rate of growth: Rapid in malignant bone tumor. Slow in
swelling is smooth and uniform in benign lesions, whereas in
benign bone tumor.
178
Essentials of Orthopedics
A General Classification of Bone Tumors
in flat bones and axial skeleton, e.g. osteosarcoma is
(Depending on Tissue of Origin)
commonly seen in long bones, multiple myeloma is
Nature
Benign
Malignant
commonly seen in flat bones and the vertebra.
c. Site in the bone
Epiphysis——Giant cell tumor.
Angiod tumors
Angioma, ABC
Angiosarcoma
Long Bone
Metaphysis—Osteosarcoma.
Glomus tumor
Diaphysis——Ewing's tumor.
B
Osteoma
Osteosarcoma
Bone forming
Osteoid osteoma
tumors
Osteoblastoma
Vertebra
Body—-Primary tumor.
Chondroma
[Appendages—Secondary deposits.
Osteochondroma
Chondrosarcoma
d. Nature of the lesion
Cartilage forming 
Chondroblastoma
Osteogenic—Osteoid Osteoma, Osteosarcoma
tumor
Osteolytic—Osteoblastoma, Multiple Myeloma
D
Odontogenic
Malignant
e.
 Specific characteristics
Dental and allied
cyst
odontoma
Soap bubble appearance—Giant cell tumor.
structures
Amelloblastoma
Onion skin appearance—Ewing's sarcoma.
Chordoma
 Speckled calcification—Chondrosarcoma.
Embryogenic
vestigeal tissue
Punched out appearance—Multiple Myeloma.
Fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Bone scan: Bone scan using Technetium 99 m diphosphonate
Fibroblastic tissue
(99 m Tc- HDP) is of immense help as it clearly shows the
 Dermoid
Adamantioma
hot spots in the skeleton. Even the smallest of the tumors can
H
Heterotropic tissue
of long bones
be diagnosed and so are the skipped metastasis.
N
Lipoma
Liposarcoma
CT scan: CT scan is not a substitute for radiographs or bone
Non osseous
Neurofibroma 
Myeloma
scan but it is an adjuvant to these investigations, when there
connective tissue
 Neurilemmoma
Leukemia, Ewings
is a need for clear delineation of tissues. It is useful to assess
Synovioma
Synovial sarcoma
the intra and extra osseous extension. Also helps in early
Synovial tissue
detection of tumors before radiological changes are seen.
Giant cell tumor
Malignant
Osteoclastoma
MRI: MRI delineates the soft tissues better than CT and
Undifferentiated 
useful in visualizing the soft tissue extension and invasion of
the tumor into the neighboring structures, e.g. muscles, vessels
Extension to surrounding soft tissue: Present in malignant
 and nerves. This helps in staging of the tumor and planning
bone tumor. Absent in benign bone tumor.
of the surgery
Regional lymph node: Lymph nodes enlarged and firm/hard
Laboratory Investigations
  s    
spread. Lymph nodes are not enlarged in benign tumors.
Hb%, TC, DC, ESR and serum alkaline phosphatase, serum
calcium, serum phosphorus are nonspecific investigations.
Radiological
Mainly help to differentiate tumors from other bone
pathologies.
A radiograph picture is viewed as follows:
Serum electrophoresis, Bence Jones proteins, help to
a.  Age of the patient: Certain tumors are common in certain
diagnose Multiple Myeloma.
age groups, e.g.Ewings tumor 5-15 years, Osteosarcoma
Serum acid phosphatase help to diagnose Prostatic
15-25 yrs, Giant cell tumor 20-30 yrs, etc. Hence attempt
should be made to ascertain the age of the patient
Carcinoma. These days PSA essay is more widely used.
radiologically.
Biopsy: Most useful investigation to establish the diagnosis
b. Bone involved: Certain tumors are common in long bones
auq e jo diay aun Aq auop si Asdoig srom au apuis pue
and in appendicular skeleton, while others are common
 biopsy needle or sometimes an open biopsy.
Bone Tumors
179
Management
Total eradication of the lesion is the treatment for bone tumors.
In benign tumors this is possible by surgical excision and
reconstruction (when necessary). In malignant tumors
chemotherapy and radiotherapy is necessary in addition to
surgical excision and reconstruction. This is to eradicate the
tumor from the system and prevent metastasis. Prognosis in
those malignant tumors which are radioresistant and
chemoresistant is grave. And so is the prognosis when the
patient presents late in the course of the disease.
Figures 9.2A and B
Radiograph (A) and CT scan (B) showing the nidus of osteoid
Different applications of chemotherapy
surrounded by an exaggerated zone of sclerosis.
a. Adjuvant chemotherapy: Is the therapy which follows after
primary treatment of malignant tumor. It aims at taking
care of the risk of recurrence and spread of the tumor
Types
b. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy: Is the chemotherapy which
 Cortical variety is most common
is administered prior to ablative procedure. It aims at
 Cancellous variety less common.
shrinking the size of the tumor and preventing the spread
 Subperiosteal variety rare.
of tumor during the procedure as well as in the immediate
 postoperative period.
Clinical Symptoms
c. Radiosensitizing chemotherapy: It is the chemotherapy
Classical focal bone pain which is worse at night and relieved
given in conjunction with radiotherapy. It aims at
by small dose of aspirin (this forms the basis of a clinical test).
sensitizing the malignant cells to the effect of radiation
Focal tendermess may be present. Absence of constitutional
and facilitate destruction.
symptoms helps to rule out malignancy.
d. Curative chemotherapy: It is the therapy which aims at
curing the malignancy.
Investigations
e. Palliative chemotherapy: It aims at providing some
a. Radiograph: Shows a central round or ovoid nidus
comfort to the patient by lessening the symptoms of
surrounded by an exaggerated zone of sclerosis (Fig.
malignancy.
9.2A).
b. Bone scan using Technetium 99 m diphosphonate.
Radiotherapy: It is generally given by using linear accelerator
Most sensitive and may show positive results even before
(Ref: Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy). It aims at
radiograph shows signs of the tumor. Also helps in
killing the cancer cells using the safe limit of radiation. The
damage to the normal tissue is kept to a minimum.
complete removal of the tumor with the nidus with the
help of a hand held and operated radioactive detector.
c. CT scan is useful to localize the lesion precisely. Also
Common Benign Bone Tumors
useful in guiding the ablation probe when percutaneous
ablation technique is chosen (Fig. 9.2B).
Osteoid Osteoma (Figs 9.2A and B)
d. SPECT: Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography
This is a tumor consisting of osteoid and woven bone
is useful in detecting lesions involving spinal arch and
characterized by a central nidus of osteoid surrounded by an
spinous process.
exaggerated zone of sclerosis.
Treatment
 Age—Can occur at any age. Common between 10-30 yrs.
Rare below 5 yrs and above 45 yrs.
Total excision of the tumor with nidus gives permanent relief
Sex-M:F = 2:1.
 of symptoms.
Site—It is common in long bones and in the appendicular
Cause for pain in Osteoid Osteoma is said to be due to
skeleton. Rare in flat bones and axial skeleton. Ratio is
 presence of axons in the lesion as demonstrated by neural
about 2/3 to 1/3.
staining techniques as well as marked elevation of levels of
Size—Approximately 1.5 cm (0.5-2.0).
Prostaglandin E2.
180
Essentials of Orthopedics
Benign Osteoblastoma
This tumor shows features almost similar to that of Osteoid
Osteoma with formation of osteoid and primitive woven bone
in a fibrov ascular stroma but in a much bigger manner. Hence
the term Giant Osteoid Osteoma sometimes is used to describe
this tumor.
The neural elements namely the axons are absent. Hence
pain is not as disabling as in Osteoid Osteoma.
Unlike Osteoid Osteoma which have limited growth
potential, these tumors have a huge growth potential and attain
a big size.
 Age: Can occur at any age. It is common in younger age
group, between 20-30 yrs.
Figures 9.3A and B
Sex: M:F ratio is 3:1.
Radiograph showing (A) Pedunculated and (B) Sessile osteo-
 Site: Spine. Commonest site being sacrum followed by
chondroma respectively. Note the age. The presence of growth plate
diaphysis of long bones. Common in lower extremities.
indicates that the patients are adolescents.
Rare in other flat bones.
Clinical Features
(physis), growing away from the physis. Around the knee
Pain is constant. Not as intense as in Osteoid Osteoma but
is the commonest site. Next common site is around the
long standing and not relieved by salicylates. Painful Scoliosis
shoulder.
and neurological deficits may develop because of mechanical
Types
interference with spinal cord and nerve roots
a.Pedunculated—One with a stalk. Commonly seen in long
Investigations
bones and in appendicular skeleton. These are less prone
for malignant transformation (Figs 9.3A and 9.4).
Investigations are similar as in Osteoid Osteoma but the
b. Sessile—One without stalk. Commonly seen in flat bones
and in axial skeleton. These are more prone for malignant
study.
transformation (Fig. 9.3B).
Treatment
Pathogenesis
Total excision and bone grafting is the treatment of choice.
a. Theory of hemiation of the growth plate: Trauma or a
Incomplete excision will result in recurrence and the rate is
as high 20%.
of the physis. This hermiated physis starts growing like a
There is a variant of Osteoblastoma known as aggressive
 physis, producing bone in a manner similar to physis and
Osteoblastoma which behaves like an Osteosarcoma. Meta-
showing zones of different stages of bone formation,
stasis and recurrence after excision is very common.
starting from resting cartilage cell layer to proliferating,
hypertrophic and maturing layer.
Osteochondroma
b. Theory of genetic abnormality: This theory is yet to be
This tumor has both osseous and cartilaginous component and
conclusively proved.
hence derives the name Osteochondroma. The cartilaginous
Clinical Features
portion is generally radioluscent unless it is calcified.
 Age: Common in young adolescent age between 10-20 yrs.
The tumor is accidentally detected as an abnonmal swelling.
May be present at birth and develop in early childhood.
which draws attention of an adolescent who is more conscious
·Sex: M:F ratio 3:1.
about cosmesis.
Bone Tumors
181
B
Figures 9.5A and B
Showing a rare complication of fracture of the stalk of the
Osteochondroma. The incidence occurred during a soccer match
Figure 9.4
when the ball hit the tumor. Till then patient did not have any
Radiograph showing classical features of pedunculated
 symptoms before the injury.
Osteochondroma. Note the osseous stalk with a bulbous expansionat
the end, growing away from the epiphysis.
When neglected can cause pressure symptoms on
neighboring structures namely the muscles, vessels and nerves.
It can also cause mechanical obstruction of joint movements.
An adventitious bursa can develop with recurrent attacks of
bursitis. Trauma can cause pathological fracture of the stalk
with profuse bleeding. Long standing osteochondromas can
transfonm to chondrosarcomas and present with pain and
increase in size of the tumor.
Investigations
Radiograph shows the classical features of osteochondroma.
It shows a pedunculated or sessile tumor arising from the
epiphysiometaphyseal region and growing away. The
cartilaginous cap is not seen unless it is calcified.
Figure 9.6
Treatment
Radiograph showing Metaphyseal Aclasis. Note the presence of
Total excision of the tumor along with a good amount of
tibia.
normal bone around the osseous stalk. Recurrence is
uncommon after total excision. Ideal period for excision is
Osteoc hondromatosis is also known as Heriditary Multiple
after skeletal maturity and not before for the fear of recurrence.
Exostosis, Metaphyseal or Diaphyseal Aclasis (meaning of the
Indication for excision
word Aclasis is, a pathological outgrowth). First identified by
a. Cosmetic reasons.
 Johm Hunter (1786) is an autosomal dominant disorder running
b. Recurrent attacks of bursitis.
in families. M:F ratio l:l and detected as early as
C. Pressure symptoms.
3-4 yrs of age. Multiple bones are affected and results in
d. Mechanical obstruction.
 growth abnormalities and deformities. Malignant transforma
e.Fracture of the stalk (Figs 9.5A and B).
tion is also common when compared to Solitary Osteo-
f.Malignant transformation.
chondroma (Fig. 9.6).
182
Essentials of Orthopedics
Dysplasia Epihysialis Hemimelica, also known as Trevor's
Chondromyxoid Fibroma
disease is characterized by osteochondromas occurring in one
limb and on one side of the epiphysis. Medial side is twice
This is a tumor comprising of chondroid, myxoid and fibrous
tissue and hence derives the name. It was first described by
commonly affected than the lateral side.
Jaffe and Lichtenstein in 1948. It accounts for about 1% of
the tumors.
Chondroblastoma
·Age: 15-30 yrs.
This tumor was first identified by Codman in the year 1931
· Sex: M:F ratio 1:1 or 2:1 (a little more in men).
who termed it as Chondroblastic variant of Giant cell tumor.
· Site: In the metaphysis of a long bone extending on to
Henry Jaffe and Louis Lichtenstein a decade later gave the
epiphysis and diaphysis. Common site is upper end of tibia
name ‘Benign Chondroblastoma’ signifying the chondroblastic
followed by lower end of femur upper end of humerus.
origin of this tumor. It accounts for about 1% of all bone
tumors. Though considered as a benign local erosion, distant
ClinicalFeatures
metastasis to lungs is seen at times.
Many a times it is discovered accidentally. Not diagnosed till
·Age: 10-30 yrs.
tumor grows to a considerable size or causes pain. Limitation
·Sex: M:F ratio 3:1.
of joint movement is not seen.
·Site: Epiphysis of a long bone. Common site is around
the knee. Next common site is proximal femur and proxi-
Histopathology
mal humerus. Rare in pelvis, talus, calcaneum and patella
The tumor is supposed to arise from cartilage forming
connective tissue of the marrow. Comprises of chondroid.
ClinicalFeatures
myxoid and fibrous tissue. No atypism is seen. Malignant
Slow growing tumor. It may remain as ymptomatic for quite a
transformation is rare and when occurs it is difficult to
long period. Presents with swelling and pain. Joint effusion
distinguish from Primary Chondrosarcoma.
may be present. It may also present with a pathological
fracture.
Investigations
Radiograph: Shows an expansile, eccentric, lytic, metaphyseal
Histopathology
lesion with a regular or at times irregular sclerotic margin.
The tumor consists of primitive chondroblasts in a dense
CT and MRI help in better evaluation and planning
eosinophyllic matrix. Coarse calcification may be seen
surgery.
(Chicken-wire calcification). Atypism and mitotic figures are
not seen unless malignant transformation has occurred.
Treatment
Total excision and bone grafting is the treatment of choice.
Investigations
Enchondroma
· Radiograph: Shows a lytic area in the epiphyseal region
extending into the metaphysis. Speckled calcification may
It is a benign, solitary, intramedullary, cartilaginous neoplasm
be seen.
·Age: 20-40 yrs.
·CT: Delineates the tumor better and shows calcified areas.
·Sex: M:F ratio l:1.
· MRI: Helps in identifying transepiphyseal and transcorti-
· Site: Common in small bones of the hand and feet. Next
cal extension of the tumor.
common site is long bones and pelvis. The location is
diaphyseal in short tubular bones and metaphyseal in long
Treatment
tubular bones.
Total excision of the tumor with bone grafting to fill the defect.
Clinical Features
Incomplete excision may lead to recurrence of the tumor.
Recurrence rate is high 10-35%.
Early: Swelling is the only feature which draws attention.
Bone Tumors
183
Late: Swelling associated with pain due to
Etiology
a. Pathological fracture.
The etiology is unknown and thought to be multifactorial.
b. Malignant transformation. This tumor is prone for
a. De novo presentation because of AV malformation and
pathological fracture.
function.
b. Degeneration and destruction occuring secondary to
Histopathology
trauma and fonmation of hematoma.
The cartilaginous cell rests, get displaced during growth and
 c. Developing in already existing tumor (secondary aneuris-
rest elsewhere, and start multiplying. Thus, the normal bone
mal bone cyst), e.g. chondroblastoma, osteosarcoma, etc.
is replaced by mineralized or nonmineralized hyaline cartilage.
Presents under microscope as lobules of cartilage containing
Clinical Features
chondrocytes surrounded by a narrow rim of bone.
Pain, swelling and at times a pathological fracture.
Considerable time might have lapsed before the development
of symptoms developed. Involvement of the spine may cause
Investigations
neurologic symptoms.
·Radiograph: Shows a solitary lytic lesion in the bone
involved.
Histopathology
· CT scan: Helps to diagnose subtle calcification.
·MRI: Helps to differentiate bone infarct from enchon-
Thin walled blood filled cavities along with trabeculae of
droma.
Osteoid or septae with interspersed osteoclasts.
Four distinct phases of the behavior are recognized.
Treatment
a. Osteolytic phase.
b. Active phase of rapid destruction.
Excision of the tumor and bone grafting (care should be taken
c. Maturing phase/phase of stabilization.
to prevent spilling of tumor at the donor site of bone graft
d. Healing phase.
because the tumor can develop by seedling).
The osteolytic phase presents as a focal area of osteolysis.
Chondrosarcoma is a likely complication of Enchondroma
The active phase presents with occurrence of rapid destruc
Hence, it is important to have periodic follow up when surgery
tion, thinning of the cortex, bulging of the periosteum
is deferred.
(periosteal blow out).
Syndromes associated with Enchondromas are
The maturing phase presents with formation of distinct
a.  Ollier disease is nonhereditary and presents with multiple
peripheral bony shell and intermal septae. This gives rise to
Enchondromas.
soap bubble appearance.
b. Mafucci's Syndrome is nonhereditary and presents with
The healing phase presents with irregular new bone
multiple Enchondromas and multiple Hemangiomas.
formation as a result of progressive calcification and
c Metachondromatosis is a hereditary disorder, autosomal
ossification.
dominant and presents with multiple Enchondromas and
Osteochondromas.
Investigations
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst (ABC)
Radiograph, CT and MRI. The pictures vary depending upon
the phase of the cyst.
This is an expansile destructive (osteolytic) lesion consisting
Classical cases may show ‘Finger in the balloon' sign
of blood filled spaces separated by trabeculae of osteoid or
septae with interspersed osteoclasts. It was first described by
radiologically.
Jaffe and Lichtenstein in the year 1942. It accounts for about
6% of bone tumors.
Treatment
·Age: 10-20 yrs.
a. Intralesional injections like Phenol, liquid nitrogen, etc.
Sex: M:F ratio 1:1.5. Incidence is slightly more in females
have not gained popularity. Their results are uncertain and
Site: In the metaphysis of long bones. Sometimes occurs
 there is a great risk of injury to neighboring structures like
subperiosteally. Rare in the spine and flat bones.
vessels and nerves
184
Essentials of Orthopedics
Clinical Features
Always detected accidentally except in cases with pathological
fracture when patient presents with pain. When adjacent to
the growth plates it is considered as an active cyst and when
at a distance it is considered as a latent cyst.
Radiograph: Shows an osteolytic lesion in the metaphysis
extending to the diaphysis. At times may show loculations.
Evidence of pathological fracture may be present.
Treatment
As spontaneous resolution is seen, asymptomatic cysts when
detected accidentally are left alone with periodic follow up
Figure 9.7
till adulthood. Treatment is necessary only if no resorption is
lisse ym isho auog ieseweiun ahny e bumaus ydenba
observed. Pathological fractures are treated nonoperatively by
features of pathological fracture, localations and extension into the
immobilization. Healing invariably occurs.
diaphysis.
Percutaneous techniques
b. Arterial embolization has shown successful results in
a.  Steroid in the form of methyl prednisolone is injected into
the cyst. Results have been satisfactory.
selected cases (when there is extensive subchondral
involvement which may compromise joint function after
b. Bone marrow injection with about 25 ml of autologous
marrow aspirated form the iliac crest and injected
inaccessible for a complete excision).
immediately into the site. Resolution has been observed
This procedure is yet to be accepted as a universal
c. Surgical excision and bone grafting is the treatment of
choice whenever feasible.
procedure.
Operative procedures: Total excision and bone grafting done
Unicameral Bone Cyst (UBC)
Omly selectively. It is a highly morbid procedure for a young
It is a unique benign cystic lesion filled with fluid seen in
mdividual. Hence to be viewed critically.
children. Virchow recognized this lesion as early as 1870. In
1942 Henry Jaffe and Louis Lichtenstein published their
Common Malignant Bone Tumors
article about unicameral bone cyst (Fig. 9.7)
·Age: 5-15 yrs.
Giant Cell Tumor (GCT) (Figs 9.8A to G)
·Sex: M:F ratio 2:1.
Site: Proximal humerus followed by proximal femur
It is considered as a locally malignant tumor of the bone
(account for about 90%).
because local recurrence is more common (around 50%) when
compared to distant metastasis (occurs only in 5-10% of the
Etiology
cases). It is said to have been first reported by Cooper in 18th
Several theories have been put forth.
century. It accounts for about 5% of bone tumors.
a.
·Age: 20-40 yrs.
and rapidly remodeling cancellous bone—Cohen 1960.
·Site: Epiphyseal end of long bones. Upper end of tibia,
b. Congenital cell rest of synovial tissue as proved by 
 lower end of humerus, lower end of radius, proximal
presence of macrophage like Synovial type A and fibro-
 humerus. Rare in the vertebra and other spongy bones like
blast like type B cell in the lining of the cyst—suggested
 calcaneus and pelvis.
by Joseph M. Mira.
·Sex: A little higher predilection to female sex is seen.
Bone Tumors
185
B
Figures 9.8A to G
is present in tibial GcT. All the cases seen here are advanced and late presentation and are associated with pathological fractures.
Clinical Features
amd blood vessels is seen under microscope. The grading in
Presents as a slow growing. painful swelling arising from the
relation to aggressiveness is done by Jaffe (1940) into 3 grades
epiphyseal end of a long bone. Egg shell crackling may be
and by Netherlands committee on bone tumors into 4 grades.
present on palpation when thinning of the cortex and patho-
While grading, atypism shown by the stromal spindle shaped
logical fracture has occurred. Limitation of joint movement
cells alone is taken into consideration and not features shown
is a late feature.
by multinucleated giant cells. The more the atypism, i.e.
amisocytosis, anisonucleosis, hyperchromatinism, etc. the more
Histopathology
aggressive (malignant) is the tumor. The number and size of
A picture consisting of spindle shaped and rounded mono-
the multinucleated giant cells proportionately gets reduced as
nuclear cells with osteoclastic type multinuclear giant cells
the atypism of stromal cell increases.
186
Essentials of Orthopedics
Defectafterexcision
of theupper part of
thetibia
B
Fibula
Splitfemur
Figures 9.9A to E
insertedinto
Turned
(A) Radiograph showing a large GCT with
bed prepared
upsidedown
pathological fractures and with indications that
atthecondyle
180°
it has come out of its compartment (extra
ofthefemur.
compartmental). (B to D) are the steps of the
procedure of 'Turn plasty' showing total excision
of the upper part of the tibia along with the tumor
and reconstruction in the form of 'Turn plasty' and
(E) Radiograph showing the picture after the turn
D
 plasty procedure is complete.
Based on Jaffe's Grading (1940)
 in the course of the disease, points out to the aggressiveness
of the tumor.
Grade INo minimal atypism of stromal cells
CT and MRI helps in better delineation of the extent of
Giant cells are many and big sized.
Benign
in volvement.
Grade I—Moderate atypism of stromal cells.
Giant cells are a few and big sized.
Treatment
Grade IMI—Severe atypism of stromal cells.
Giant cells are a few small sized.
Borderline
Total excision and reconstruction (Figs 9.9A to E) either by
Netherlands committee on bone
malignant
filling with bone grafts, polymethyl methacrylate or both.
tumors has added one more grade.
When reconstruction and salvage of joint is not possible
Grade IV—Sarcomatous dedifferen-
arthrodeisis/total joint replacement with custom made
tiation. Very few small sized giant
Malignant
 prosthesis is to be considered.
cells (resembling malignant fibrous
 Pulmonary metastasis if any when detected is excised
histiocytoma).
locally.
 Radiotherapy is reserved as a palliative procedure for
Investigations
tumors that arise in surgically inaccessible area.
 Radiograph: Shows classical epiphyseal, eccentric, expansile,
lytic lesion which is loculated (soap bubble appearance) or
Osteosarcoma
 non-loculated in a mature skeleton (growth plate closed).
This is a highly malignant intramedullary bone tumor with
Cortex is thinned out. Pathological fracture and
high rate of mortality. Accounts for about 35% of bone
invasion into a joint is a late feature and when seen early
malignancies.
Bone Tumors
187
Clinical Features
Pain is the earliest presenting feature which becomes the cause
for concerm. The pain gets aggravated with activity but not
relieved by rest. Gradually limp/limitation of joint movement
develops as swelling appears. It may be associated with
constitutional symptoms.
Histopathology
This tumor is thought to arise from primitive mesenchymal
cells and is diagnosed by the presence of malignant stromal
cells laying down tumor osteoid (osteoblastic) alongwith areas
of hemorrhage and necrosis and spicules of destroyed bone
Depending on the predominant tissue can be chondroblastic.
fibroblastic, telangiectatic, etc.
Figures 9.10A and B
Investigations
Radiograph showing radiological features of osteosarcoma. Note the
Radiograph: Shows in typical cases, ‘Sun ray' or 'Sun burst'
 Codman's triangle indicating reactive new bone formation.
appearance with Codman's triangle. Cumulus cloud pattem
in Sclerosing variety and expansile, eccentric lysis in
Telangiectatic variety are the other radiographic features.
The term ^Osteosarcoma' was coined in the year 1805 by
Sun burst or Sun ray appearance is seen because of bone
Alexis Boyer, personal surgeon to Napoleon.
formation alongtheSharpey's fiberswhichfirmly bind the
periosteum to the bone (Figs 9.10A and B).
Types
Bone scan, CT and MRI are useful in detail evaluation
Primary
and planning the required treatment.
a. Osteoblastic.
Are the conventional types and the
Treatment
b. Chondroblastic.
name is given depending on the
c.Fibroblastic
predominant tissue.
 Primary objective of treatment is to have a long term disease
d. Sclerosing.
free survival. Limb salvaging is of secondary importance. Thus
e. Osteolytic.
the treatment aims at increasing the survival rate with
Telangiectatic (Figs 9.11A to C).
restoration of maximum function as feasible. Limb salvage
f.
g. Multifocal.
should always be attempted when possible but one should
h. Parosteal.
not hesitate to recommend amputation when needed.
i.Periosteal.
The approach is multidisciplinary. It varies depending on
the site, size, type, local extension and distant spread. Pre-
Secondary
operative chemotherapy has increased the 5 years survival rate
e.g. Osteosarcoma developing in Paget's disease, Fibrous
from 12% to 65-75%. Preoperative radiotherapy is given only
Dysplasia, etc.
when metastasis is detected.
· Age: 10-20 yrs (except in secondary osteosarcoma which
Enneking system of staging (1980):
is seen in older age group).
ILow-grade tumor
Sex: Incidence is slightly more in males.
A—-Intrac ompartmental
Site: Metaphysis of long bones. Common in lower end of
B——Extracompartmental
femur, upper end of tibia and upper end of humerus. It is
I—High grade tumor
rare in jaw and skull. Very rare in extra skeletal sites.
A—Intracompartmental
Multifocal origin is also seen rarely (either synchronously
B——Extracompartmental
or metachronously).
III—Either grade with distant metastasis.
188
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
C
Figures 9.11A to C
advised. (B and C) after 6 months of refusal of treatment and opting to take native medicine. Note the rapid increase in size, extensive
destruction and no new bone formation as seen radiographically with fungation and active bleeding seen clinically.
Preoperative chemotherapy: It is useful and effective in
Limb salvaging procedures when feasible should always
1 be done especially in early stage of the disease and when the
planning of the surgical procedure, i.e. feasibility of a limb
0 tumor is localized. The procedure involves radical excision
salvaging procedure. Also prevents the spread of the disease.
 of the tumor and reconstruction with auto/ allograft (fibula)
Drugs used are methotrexate, adriamycin and cisplatin
At times custom made prosthesis is implanted to substitute
(MAP regimen) in a cyclical manner. Expert evaluation is
lost bone and joint.
necessary to assess the physiological limit of tolerance of these
Amputation is to be reserved only for late presentations.
cytotoxic drugs for each individual. Careful monitoring of
 The procedure of rotation plasty is possible in lower limbs
heart, lungs, kidney, liver and hemopoietic system is a must.
where after resection of considerable length of distal femur
Poor response: If the response is poor, other drugs like
and proximal tibia, the limb is shortened and turmed to 180°
ifosfamide or etoposide are added.
so that the ankle becomes the knee. A suitable prosthesis gives
Good response: If the response is good, interferon is given
considerable function.
to get a cure.
Lung metastasis are treated by local resection.
5 years survival rate decreases in those who show poor
Postoperative chemotherapy is to be continued. Radio-
response and vice versa.
therapy if needed to be given.
Chondrosarcoma
Angiography
a.  Helps to localize the displaced vessels.
Chondrosarcomas are next common to osteosarcomas and
b. Tumor blush: Osteosarcoma is a tumor which promotes
account for about 25% of the primary malignant skeletal
neovascularization. Hence, there is enhancement of the
 noeplasms. Present with a highly varied behavior from slow
contrast medium. This is referred to as ^Tumor blush'.
    
After giving chemotherapy if this neovascularization is not sizing tumor. Histopathological features too vary accordingly.
seen (disappearance of vascularity) it infers that the
Apuooas pue Aeud sadii .
chemotherapy had been effective.
Central (intramedullary) and peripheral.
·Age
Primary occur above 40 yr
 Secondary occur 20-40 yr
Surgical Procedures
·Sex M:F ratio 2:1
Surgery should always be done with adequate planning and
· Site—Flat bones like pelvis and scapula. From the
metaphysis of long bones like femur, tibia and humerus.
Bone Tumors
189
ClinicalFeatures
Treatment
Presents with dull aching pain in the vicinity of a joint, aggrava-
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Local
ted by movement, worse at night. Joint effusion and limitation
recurrence is common by seedlings than distant metastasis
bloodstream. These are resistant to radiotherapy and chemo-
Histopathology
therapy. Hence, there is no role for radiotherapy and chemo-
Presents a varied picture of a well differentiated tumor
therapy.
producing normal hyaline cartilage to poorly differentiated
tumor producing atypical hyaline cartilage. Hence grading is
Ewing's Tumor
done. Grade I—low grade malignant; Grade II—moderately
Described by James Ewing in the year 1921. Hence derives
malignant; Grade MI—high grade malignant. Calcification
the name. It is a highly malignant primary bone tumor derived
 may be seen in areas. In addition, three specific types are
from the red marrow. Accounts for about 33% of primary bone
recognized histopathologically:
tumors and stands second among the common malignant bone
a.  Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma: Presents with bimorphic
tumors in the young.
picture of both low and high grade malignancy.Common
·Types
in spine, ribs and jaw.
a. Sclerotic
b. Clear cell chondrosarcoma: Is a low grade chondro-
b. Lytic.
sarcoma consisting of clear cells with vacuolated
·Age: 5-15 yr. Rare before 5 yr and after 30 yr.
cytoplasm. Matrix is significantly calcified. It is common
 Sex: M:F ratio 1.5:1
 in the epiphysis of the femur and the humerus.
 Site: Diaphysis of a long bone extending into metaphysis.
c.Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma: Is a highly malignant
It is rare in flat bones.
tumor presenting with features of other sarcomas like
osteosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, etc
Clinical Features
The 5-year survival in Grade I lesions is around 90% and
in Grade MI lesions is around 30%
Presenting feature is insidious onset of pain which is
imntermittent initially and then progresses to become continuous
Investigations
amd more severe. Next, a rapidly growing swelling develops.
If the axial skeleton is involved neurological deficits may be
X-ray shows an expansile tumor with speckled calcification
 observed. Constitutional symptoms such as fever, malaise, etc
(Fig. 9.12). CT, MRI help in further delineation of the tumor.
may be present.
Histopathology
Highly cellular tumor comprising of sheets of small round
neoplastic cells with large oval nuclei. Exhibits hyperchroma
tinism (stippled chromatin) and mitotic figures. Cytoplasm is
sparse with ill defined cytoplasmic membrane. Pseudo-rosette
formation may be present.
The tumor is considered to be arising from neural
elements. Electron microscopy reveals neural elements such
as neurites and dense core granules. The cells exhibit
following characters. They are PAS positive, reticulum stain
negative, stains for S-protein positive and stains against
neuron specific enolase expression.
Figure 9.12
Radiograph showing a huge secondary chondrosarcoma arising from
Investigations
an aclatic lesion in the ilium in a patient with metaphyseal aclasis.
X-ray shows a lytic, permeative lesion not well demarcated.
Being radioresistant and chemoresistant and in this instance
inoperable, it proved fatal.
The pattem of bone destruction varies from permeative pin
190
Essentials of Orthopedics
Solitary myeloma Also knowm as plasmacytoma, presents
with a solitary skeletal foci of proliferation (about 25%).
Myelomatosis Also known as generalized myeloma, presents
with a generalized and diffuse involvement of the skeleton.
Results in thinning of the skeleton, resembling osteoporosis
(About15%).
Plasma cell leukemia Malignant plasma cells in abundant in
the bloodstream (About 1%) rare.
Extraskeletal myeloma Very rare. It is a variant and presents
       s  
Age: Multiple myeloma 60-70 yr.
+Solitary myeloma 50-60 yr.
·Sex: M:F ratio is 3:1
Figure 9.13
· Site: Originates from bones containing red marrow. Hence
Showing layers of new bone formation giving rise to 'onion skin'
multiple myeloma is common in axial skeleton and flat
appearance. Note that the tumor is primarily intramedullary,
 bones than long bones.
diaphyseal and extending into the metaphysis.
Solitary myeloma is common in the diaphysis of long
bones and in the vertebral body.
head sized holes, moth eaten, rotten wood to pure lytic. Hence,
it can mimic a variety of bone tumors both benign and
Clinical Features
malignant. Periosteal reaction manifests with formation of a
It presents with aching type of pain which is intermittent to
typical ^onion skin' appearance (Fig. 9.13) and is identified
begin with. It is either generalized or localized and relieved
 as a late and advanced feature of the tumor. Codman's triangle
by bed rest. Later pain becomes more severe and constant.
may be present
Constitutional symptoms develop. Easy fatigue is seen due
CT and MRI help in better delineation of the tumor.
to ensuing anemia, bleeding tendency and recurrent infections
may develop because of the replacement of marrow by tumor
Treatment
cells. Renal failure (Myeloma kidney) and pathological
As occult metastasis is very common in these tumors, multi-
fracture can develop late in the disease.
drug chemotherapy and local control by means of radiotherapy
Histopathology
 Or surgery (only if local lesion is resectable) is the treatment
of choice. This improves the chances of survival. Thus the
Nodular or diffuse infiltrate of plasma cells with loss of marrow
approach is a multidisciplinary one.
fat and dissolution of bone is observed. These cells present with
The widely followed regimen is VAdriaC regimen/(VAC)
a single large ^clock face'or ^cart wheel' nucleus with abundant
i.e. vincristin, adriamycin and cyclophosphamide. Ifosfamide  basophilic cytoplasm with rich endoplasmic reticulum.
and etoposide are used when indicated to improve the
 Perinuclear halo is characteristic. Atypism with presence of
outcome. After this multidisciplinary approach the 5-year
two or more nuclei, loss of perinuclear halo, loss of clock face
survival rate has risen from 10% to almost 70%.
and presence of mitotic figures indicate malignancy.
Myeloma
Investigations
It is a tumor arising from neoplastic proliferation of plasma
a. Hb%, TC, DC, ESR
cells or myeloma cells. Depending on the site and nature of
Low Hb%, Low TC, granulocytopenia, raised ESR
proliferation several presentations are recognized.
b. Platelet count
Thrombocytopenia
Types
C. Serum Ca, PO4, ALP
Multiple myeloma Presents with multiple skeletal foci of
Raised serum Ca, ALP normal except in patients
proliferation (About 50%).
pathological fracture.
Bone Tumors
191
d. Electrophoresis for increased gamma globulin fraction.
 Unstable myeloma is treated by chemotherapy, radio-
Shows increase in gamma globulin fraction.
therapy and bone marrow transplantation. Treatment aims
e. Urine for Bence Jones' proteins.
at replacing the abnormal marrow with normal marrow by
Described by English physician Henry Bence Jones in the
means of peripheral stem cell transplantation.
year 1847.
Some of the chemotherapeutic regimens are as follows:
These are immunoglobulins produced by plasma cells.
i. Thalidomide/dex amethasone, vincristine
These light chain molecules precipitate at 60°C and
ii.Vincristine, adriamycin, dexamethasone
disappear on further heating at 90°℃.
ii. Melphalan, prednisone
Reappear on cooling to 60°℃
iv. Melphalan, prednisone, thalidomide
f.1
Bone marrow aspiration biopsy.
v. Cyclophosphamide, prednisone.
g. X-ray, CT, MRI
Radiograph shows solitary or multiple punched out lesions
Metastatic Bone Disease
Or generalized osteopenia with or without pathological
fracture (depending on presentation) (Figs 9.14A to D).
These are generally metastasis from adenocarcinomas.
CT and MRI help in detailed evaluation before instituting
 Following adenocarcinomas are known to cause secondaries
the therapy.
im the bone (Fig. 9.15).
i. Thyroid
Treatment
ii. Breast
iii.Lungs
 Myeloma cannot be cured. But can be controlled with
iv. Liver
treatment.
v. Kidneys
Stable otherwise known as ‘smoldering myeloma' does not
vi. Prostate
require treatment.
Of these all are lytic in nature except from the prostate
which is sclerotic. At times the primary tumor is not detectable
with routine investigations and bone scan is useful for
identification.
The treatment of metastatic bone disease is always
 palliative and aims at providing pain relief and increasing the
comfort of a terminally ill patient.
B
D
Figure 9.15
Figures 9.14A to D
 Radiograph of a missed diagnosis. A pathological fracture which was
 Radiographs showing generalized punched out lesions in the skull.
routinely fixed as a traumatic fracture. Patient was not relieved of
vertebrae, ribs and pelvic bones which are classical of multiple
pain even after surgery. An X-ray taken after 2 months confirms the
myeloma.
diagnosis of a secondary.
192
Essentials of Orthopedics
A summary of different radiological features seen in bone lesions and their probable diagnosis
Radiological features
Probable diagnosis
"Kissing" bones (lytic lesions in adjacent epiphysis)
GCT, Angiosarcoma, Pigmented villonodular synovitis, Infections 
Codman's triangle
Osteosarcoma, Osteomyelitis, ABC
Complete sclerotic rim, no break 
Benign lesion (95% accuracy)
Cumulus cloud appearence
Osteosarcoma, Stress fracture
Epiphyseal, solitary, eccentric lytic lesion with sclerotic margin
Chondroblastoma, Enchondroma, GCT
Epiphyseal, solitary, lytic lesion without sclerotic margin
GCT
Expansile lesion, poorly demarcated with windblown calcifications
Chondrosarcoma
Expansile lesion nontrabeculated lesion.
Benign tumor (majority of cases), Grade I sarcoma, Solitary
Myeloma, Metastasis (a small percent of cases)
Expansile, trabeculated lesion
Grade I sarcoma, GCT, Myeloma
Fallen fragment sign
Simple bone cyst
Finger-in-the-balloon appearance
ABC
Ground glass appearance
Fibrous dysplasia, Osteoblastoma, Grade I osteosarcoma
Onion-skinning
Ewing's sarcoma, Subacute Osteomyelitis, Eosinophilic granuloma
Ring-like to popcorn density
Enchondroma and secondary Chondrosarcoma
Revision Questions
Q. How will you evaluate a case of bone tumor? Discuss the
management of Giant cell tumor of the bone arising from
Q. Write notes on
the upper end of tibia.
Osteoid osteoma
Q. What are the types of Chondrosarcoma? Discuss the
b.
 Enchondroma
diagnosis and management of chondrosarcoma.
Benign chondroblastoma
C:
Further Reading
 Aneurysmal bone cyst
Unicameral bone cyst
1. Campanacci M. Bone and Soft Tissue Tumors: Clinical
Giant cell tumor
Features, Imaging, Pathology and Treatment. edn 2, New York,
 Osteochondroma
Springer, 1999;247-64.
2. Codman EA. Epiphyseal chondromatous giant cell tumors of
h.
Chondromyxoid fibroma
the upper end of the humerous. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1931;
i.
Osteosarcoma
52:543-8.
j.
Chodrosarcoma
3.Gitelis S,et al. Benign Bone Tumors, Instructional Course
Q. Write briefly on
Lectures, 1991;45:426-46.
4. Giudici M, et al. Cartilaginous Rone Tumors, Radiologic
a. Multiple myeloma
b. Myelomatosis
Clinics of North Amenica 1993;31(2):237-59.
5. Huvos, Andrew. Bone Tumors: Diagnosis. Treatment and
C.
 Bence Jones proteins
Prognosis, WB Saunders Co, 1991.
d.1
 Electrophoresis
6. Jaffe HL, Lichenstein L. Benign chondroblastoma of bone. A
e.F
 Plasma cells
reinterpretation of the socalled calcifying or chondromatous
giant cel1 tumor. Am J Pathol 1942;18:969-91.
Q. Write notes on
7. Kurt AM, Unni KK, Sim FH, McLeod RA. Chondroblastoma
a.
Codman's triangle
of bone. Hum Pathol 1989;20:965-76.
b.S
 Sun ray appearance
8. Mirra JM. Bone Tumors. General Aspects and Data on 6, 221
C.
 Onion skin appearance.
Cases, edn 3. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1978;52:543-
I'P
Metastatic bone disease
8.
e. Pathological fracture.
9. Monda L, Wick MR. S-100 protein immunostaining in the
differential diagnosis of chondroblastoma. Hum Pathol 1985;
16(3):287-93. Medline 2579018
Essay Questions
10. Mori K, Redini F, Gouin F, Cherrier B, Heymann D.
Osteosarcoma: current status of immunotherapy and future
Q. Discuss the clinical features, radiological features,
trends. Oncol Rep 2006;15(3):693-700.
diagnosis and management of osteosarcoma (The same
11.
Springfield DS, Capanna R, Gehrlizoni F, Picci P,
Campanacci M. Chondroblastoma. Areview of seventy cases.
question can be put for any other bone tumor).
J Bone and Joint Surg 1985;67-A:748-55.
10
SCFE,
Perthes'Disease and
OtherOsteochondritis
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis (SCFE)
Predisposing Factors, Etiopathogenesis and Pathology
Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Treatment
Complications and Treatment of Complications
Legg-Calve, Perthes'disease
History and Introduction
Predisposing Factors and Etiopathogenesis
Classification of Staging and Grouping
Head at Risk Signs
Investigations, Diagnosis and Treatment
Prognostic Factors and Outcome
Idiopathic Avascular Necrosis/Osteochondritis
Osteochondritis of Different Bones
Diagnosis and Treatment of Keinbock's and Kohler's Disease
Slipped Capital Femoral
seolisthesis. It refers to an idiopathic slipping of the
Epiphysis (SCFE)
capital femoral epiphysis which occurs commonly
during the period of rapid growth, i.e.between 12 and
This condition is known by various names as adole-
18 years. The slip may occur gradually, acutely or
scent coxa vara, epiphyseal coxa vara and epiphy-
 acute on a gradual slip.
194
Essentials of Orthopedics
Summaryofpathogenesis
Factors
Biomechanical
Biochemical
factors
factors
Large body mass,
Hormonal
increasedphyseal
alterationsthyroid,
obliquity.
sexhormones,
Relativeretroversion
growthhormone
"Weakened”physis
Slip
Figure 10.2
Figure 10.1
Showing the axis of femoral neck and axis of the transcondylar plane
Showing the flow chart of the possible factors in pathogenesis.
by which the ante/retroversion is measured.
Predisposing Factors (Fig. 10.1)
a. Male sex. M:F ratio 5:1 left hip commonly affected than
the right hip.
b. Obesity.
C.
Weakening and thinning of the physis.
Exact reason is not known. Thought to be due to malnutri-
tion and in some hormonal imbalance as characterized by
relative preponderance of growth hormone, resulting in
either Frohlich's type (sex hormone decrease) or Tall type
(growth hormone increase) of individuals with respective
growth abnonmality.
d. Altered inclination of the upper femoral physis.
Direction of the slip
During adolescence the inclination of the physis changes 
from horizontal to oblique.
Figure 10.3
e. Relative or absolute retroversion of the neck.
Diagrammatic representation of the slip which always occurs in
posterior and medial direction.
Anteversionand retroversion:Angle of inclination of the axis
femoral neck in relation to transcondylar plane isknown as
neck. And it is described that the slipping of the epiphysis
version.If the inclinationis in anteriordirectionit isknown
as,anteversion,antetorsion or anterior twist.If this angle of
occurs posteriorly and inferiorly.
inclination is in posterior direction and the neck points in
Pathology of the Slip (Figs 10.3 and 10.4)
or posterior twist.In a newborn anteversion is as high as
The slip occurs in the zone of hypertrophic cartilage, or in
30°.It progressively decreases in childhood and in an adult
some (rearely), in the zone of provisional calcification. In
it is around 10-15° (Fig. 10.2)
these zones, histopathologically, very few normal chondro-
Thus, it is postulated that even a normal stress can cause
cytes are seen along with some degenerated and dead
gradual displacement to occur at this weakened physis when
chondrocytes. The supportive collagenous matrix is also found
there is excessive anteversion. In fact, the femoral epiphysis
to be abnormal. Whether these changes are the cause of the
remains in contact with the acetabulum and it is the neck of
slip or the result of the slip is a debatable issue.
the femur which moves anteriorly and superiorly. But for some
 In other words whether biochemical/endocrinal factors
reason the slip is described, taking into account the
 have caused this change or the mechanical trauma of the slip
relationship of the epiphysis (minor fragment) to the femoral
has resulted in the change is being debated.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
195
Bonemarrowof
epiphysis
Bone ofepiphysis
Zone of resting
cartilage cells
A
B
Zone ofproliferating
cartilagecells
Zone of hypertrophic
cartilagecells
Zone ofcalcifying
cartilagecells
Trabeculae
C
D
ofmetaphysis
Figures 10.5A to D
Figure 10.4
Showing A and C the normal hip wherein the Trethoven's line cuts
Showing histopathologic section of the physis. Slip always occurs at
the upper part of the femoral epiphysis in AP view and in LAT view,
the zone of hypertrophic and maturing cartilage as shown by red
the line at the base of the epiphysis and the line bisecting the neck
arrow.
of the femur are at right angles. B and D showing the line passing
above the epiphysis in AP view and the angle is less than 90° in the
Clinical Features
LAT view. These changes are the early indicators of the slip.
Adolescent. Obesity should increase the suspicion
Lateral View
Pain in the hip of gradual onset (at times may present with
It is more reliable and identifies even the minor degrees of
knee pain).
the slip. Two lines are drawn .One bisecting the neck and the
 Progressive limp.
other at the base of the epiphysis. In a normal hip these lines
 Progressive limitation of movement.
are at right angles. An angle less than 90° indicates that the
 Progressive deformity of adduction and extermal rotation.
slip has occurred.
Axis deviation sign. (Flexion of the hip causes the
abduction and extemal rotation of the limb and the limb
Frog Leg View
falls away from the shoulder.)
A straight line drawn along the center of the femoral neck
Antalgic gait (indicates that the slip is unstable).
when continued proximally passes through the center of the
Investigations
epiphysis in Frog leg view. If it passes anteriorly it indicates
X-rays of both hips to be taken as the slip may be bilateral
SCFE.
 and if unilateral opposite hip is used for comparison. Standard
Radiological Classification of the Slip
AP, LAT and Frog leg views of pelvis with both hips are taken
(Figs 10.5A to D).
Type I slip—less than 33% displacement.
Type I slip—between 33% and 50% displacement.
APView
Type IMI slip—greater than 50% displacement (Figs 10.6A
Early sign of slip is indicated by Trethoven's line.
and B).
A line drawn along the superior border of the neck of the
In the long standing cases of SCFE secondary changes are
femur cuts the superior part of the epiphysis in normal hips.
 seen in the head and neck such as avasculariy of the epiphysis
 In SCFE it passes over the superior border of the epiphysis.
 and malunion of the slipped epiphysis.
196
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
Figures 10.6A and B
Radiograph showing Type Ill slip. Note the posteroinferior direction of the slip and anterosuperior projection of the neck of the femur.
Bone scanning, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
 Further slipping means that the stable slip has become
computed tomography (CT) scanning help in more accurate
unstable.
 assessment of the slip and the presence of any complications.
 In stable type I, the fixation is done in situ. It aims at
These also help in the accurate planning of the surgical
 preventing further slip.
procedure.
 In stable type I, choice is between fixation in situ only
or fixation with osteotomy.
Treatment
Aim
Throughthenecknearthe
epiphysis(e.g.Fish,Dunn)
The aim of the treatment is to:
a. Prevent further slip.
b. Achieve premature closure.
c. Reduce the risk of AVN and chondrolysis.
A preliminary traction helps significantly in decreasing
the degree of the slip.
Throughthebaseof theneck
(e.g.Kramer)
The Surgical Procedures
The procedures are based on the type and the nature of the
slip (i.e. the percentage of slip) and whether the slip is stable
or unstable. Those slips which present with pain and antalgic
gait are considered unstable and need immediate stabilization;
Throughthe trochantericregion
thus, preventing further progression.
（e.g.Southwick)
CannulatedScrewFixation andOsteotomies
In unstable Types I, II and III, by means of gentle manipulation
 on a fracture table the slip is reduced and then fixed using a
Figure 10.7
single cannulated screw. The screw fixation helps in premature
Diagrammaticrepresentationofthesitesofdifferentosteotomies
closure of the physis and prevents further slipping.
done for SCFE.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
197
A
B
Figures 10.8A and B
and then (B) insertion of sandwiched iliac crest graft for achieving epiphysiodesis followed by placing the bone block back in its place.
In stable type II, osteotomy/epiphysiodesis may be
Prophylactic Pinning of the Opposite Hip
considered.
Prophylactic pinning is indicated based on Oxford bone score.
Osteotomy aim: An osteotomy aims at restoring the
This score is based on the stages of development of ilium.
relationship of the head and the neck of the femur. The more
 triradiate cartilage, head of the femur, greater trochanter and
proximal is the osteotomy better is the correction but greater  lesser trochanter. A score around 16 shows 85% chance of
is the risk of AVN and vice versa.
slipping occurring in contralateral epiphysis.
Several osteotomies are designed through the apex of the
 Correction of residual deformity after closure of the physis
femoral neck, base of the femoral neck and intertrochanteric
 is not recommended. Because there is not enough proof that
area, along with or without fixation of the epiphysis to the
 it helps in preventing the late complications.
neck of the femur (Fig. 10.7).
Complications
Bone Peg Epiphysiodesis
Chondrolysis and avascular necrosis are the late complications
 of SCFE. When the pain is severe and functional limitation is
Aim: The procedure aims at achieving a premature closure of
troublesome the answer is either total joint arthroplasty or
the epiphysis.
arthrodesis.
Procedure: In this procedure, corticocancellous graft obtained
Revision Questions
from the iliac crest is sandwiched and driven through a
window created in the metaphysis of the neck of the femur
Q. What are the other names for slipped capital femoral
into a tunnel created in the physis. Lower incidence of AVN
epiphysis?
and absence of implant related complications are distinct
Q. How will you classify the SCFE?
advantages of this procedure (Figs 10.8A and B).
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis of SCFE
Q. Draw Trethoven' s line.What is its importance?
Prognosis: Stable slips have better prognosis following
Q. Discuss the management of SCFE.
treatment.
Q. What are the complications of SCFE? How will you
 Unstable slips have a higher risk of poor prognosis
manage them?
following treatment. This is because of the damage that
occurs to the blood supply of the epiphysis at the time of
Essay Question
acute slip and not because of the surgical procedure.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis of slipped capital femoral
Similarly early presentation and minor degree of slip have
 epiphysis. How will you investigate, diagnose and treat a case
better prognosis than late presentation and more severe
 of slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Enumerate its compli-
degree of slip.
cations.
198
Essentials of Orthopedics
Legg-Calve-Perthes' Disease
Ist stage—stage of synovitis: In this stage the synovium is
swollen, edematous and thickened. There is effusion into the
 It was Arthur Legg in 1909 who described the disease in
joint. But no inflammatory cells are found in the fluid.
the annual meeting of American Orthopaedic Association
2nd stage—stage of avascular necrosis: In this stage the
in Hartford, Connecticut, USA. At the time he published
 his work in 1910, Jacques Calve of France and George
trabeculae are crushed and compressed into a compact mass.
Clemens Perthes of Germany had published their cases too.
Debris filled spaces as well as vacant lacunae are seen.
Metaphyseal hypervascularity is evident. Articular cartilage
Hence the name is derived.
Though Henning Waldenstrom had first described the
remains intact and shape of the head is maintained.
radiological changes of this disease he thought this to be a
3rd stage—stage of (fragmentation) revascularization:In this
type of benign tuberculosis. The disease is also known by
stage highly vascular connective tissue invades the area and
different names as osteochondritis deformans juvenilis,
the necrotic tissue is replaced by osteogenic tissue. Occurs
pseudocoxalgia and coxa plana.
over a period of 11-3 yr.
It is a disease occurring in the young children between
4th stage—residual/healed stage: All the necrotic bone is
the age of 5-15 years characterized by varying degrees of
replaced by mature bone.
idiopathic avascular necrosis of the upper femoral epiphysis
The metaphysis also shows certain changes such as lytic
followed by spontaneous revascularization occurring over
areas with sclerotic margins, abundant fatty marrow,
α period of time, i.e I'/z-3 yr during which period the head
disarrayed ossification process, etc.
is exposed to the risk of deformation. Hence, needs
protection from deforming forces (Figs 10.16A and B).
Radiological Features
The pathological changes that occur produce certain
Predisposing Factors
characteristic radiological features.
The origin of the disease is considered to be multifactorial
Thus the disease has been staged by Elizabethtown staging
following are the factors observed.
into 4 stages and grouped by Catterall into 4 groups.
1. Genetic: The disease shows a male predominance with a
M:F ratio 5:1. Also incidence is higher among later
Based on Elizabethtown Staging (Figs 10.9A to D)
siblings. The Asians, Eskimos and Whites have a higher
Stage I (Initial): Shows condensation, compression and
incidence when compared to Australian aborigines,
increased density of the epiphysis with widening of the medial
Polynesians, American Indians and Blacks.
joint space (Waldenstrom's sign).
2. Abnormal growth and development: The bone age in
patients with Perthes' disease is found to be lower than
Stage I (Fragmentation): Further shrinkage and fragmen-
their chronologic age by 1-3 years.
tation of the epiphysis is seen. It indicates an intermediate
3.Environmental factors: Higher percentage of involvement
reparative phase.
is seen among the lower socioeconomic group.
Stage IHI (Regeneration): Shows more pronounced fragmen-
4.Trauma
tation along with new bone formation. It indicates healing
5.Transient synovitis
phase of the disease.
6.Passive smoking
7. Abnormal venous drainage: Normally venous blood flows
 Stage IV(Healed): Complete re-ossification. No fragmentation
through medial circumflex vein. Because of the increased
or increased density observed
pressure in Perthe's disease there is congestion in the
Based on Catterall Grouping
 metaphysis and the blood flows through the diaphyseal
(Figs 10.10A to D )
veins.
8.Arterial block and infarction.
The disease is grouped into 4 groups depending on
9.Increased viscosity of the blood.
· Extent of epiphyseal involvement
+ Presence of sequestrum.
Pathology
·Presence of collapse.
The pathology of idiopathic avascular necrosis followed by
 Metaphyseal abnormality
spontaneous revascularization passes of in 4 stages:
It is summarized in Table 10.1.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
199
Stagel
A
B
Stage Il
B
StageIli
A
B
StageIv
A
B
Figures 10.9Ato D
staging.
200
Essentials of Orthopedics
Table 10.1
 Showing the portion and nature of involvement of the epiphysis and metaphysis in different groups based on Caterall's classification
Group I
Group Il
Group IlI 
Group IV
Epiphyseal involvement
Anterior and 
More anterior
Entire epiphysis except
Entire
lateral part
part
a small posterior part 
epiphysis
Sequestrum
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Collapse
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Metaphyseal
No
Localised
Diffuse
Diffuse
abnormality
A
B
C
D
Figures 10.10A to D
X-ray picture AP and LAT view showing different groups according to extent of head involvement based on classification by Catterall.
A-Group I, B-Group Il, C-Group Ill, D-Group IV. Note the head within the head sign in Group Ill.
A
B
C
Figures 10.11A to C
of the epiphysis.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
201
Classifications Useful to Assess Prognosis
Clinical Features
Based on Herring's lateral pillar classification: In this the
Onset is insidious. Presenting features are as follows:
epiphysis is divided into three pillars; the medial, central and
1.
 Limp associated with or without dull pain.
lateral respectively (Figs 10.11A to C).
 2. Pain in the hip region. Medially in the groin, laterally in
The classification is based on the changes that occur in the
the region of the greater trochanter and anteriorly in the
lateral portion of the femoral head (lateral pillar) when early
inguinal region. At times radiates to the knee.
fragmentation begins. When the lateral pillar is intact it acts as
3. Pain is exaggerated by activity, relieved by rest.
a weight bearing support to protect the central avascular
4.
Classical limitation of abduction intermal rotation.
fragment. When lateral pillar is involved and collapsed the
 5. Trendelenburg gait.
Head at Risk Signs
Salter and Thomson classification: This is based on the
Clinical“Head at Risk"Signs
presence, location and extent of subchondral fracture. 4 groups
are identified. Prognosis is directly proportional to the
1.
 Older child.
chronological order.
2. Heavy child.
3. Progressive loss of movement.
4. Adduction contracture.
 5. Flexion with adduction deformity.
Radiological "Head at Risk" Signs (Fig. 10.12)
1.Gage sign (1933)
It is a *V' shaped radiolucent defect on the lateral side of
the epiphysis.
2. Calcification lateral to the epiphysis.
Occurs due to thickened and extruded epiphysis. Indicates
Gage's sign
Calcificationlateral
toepiphysis
epiphyseal enlargement.
3. Lateral subluxation.
4. Horizontal growth plate.
5. Diffuse metaphyseal lesion.
Among these the only pathology that is amenable for
treatment is the lateral subluxation (Fig. 10.12).
Investigations
1. X-ray: Shows avascular changes as per stage of the
Uncovering of the head,
Mataphysealchanges
disease.
Lateral subluxation
 2. Bone scan: Can diagnose the avascularity much before the
radiological changes develop. Also useful in differentiating
septic from aseptic inflammation.
 3. MRI: Delineates the changes in the cartilaginous epiphysis
and the joint much better than X-ray. Also useful to assess
vasculariy of the epiphysis.
4.  Arthrography: Useful in the assessment of joint congruity
and helps in planning the containment procedure.
Treatment
Horizontally oriented
growthplate
Aim: The aim of the treatment is to prevent the damage to the
Figure 10.12
vulnerable, avascular epiphysis by protecting it till it gets fully
Diagrammatic representation of head at risk signs.
vascularized.
202
Essentials of Orthopedics
A
B
C
Figures 10.13A to C
popular designs are: (A) Toronto brace, (B) Atlanta Scottish Rite Children's Hospital brace, and (C) Tachdjian abduction brace. Diagramatic
representation of the same is shown.
Such environment is created either non-operatively or
3. Stage of the disease:
operatively, whichever is found appropriate at the time of
In Elizabethtown stages I and II consider containment. In
 presentation. The procedure is known as containment. It
stages IMI and IV do not consider containment.
contains the epiphysis within the confines of the acetabulum
 Range of hip movement
and takes off the stresses to whichit is subjected, till complete
 If hip movements are normal consider containment. If hip
revascularization takes place.
movements are restricted do not consider containment.
An effective treatment prevents complications of growth
To summarize surgical containment is considered in a
disturbance and secondary degenerative arthritis as a sequel
vulnerable epiphysis, in a child of 7-12 years of age, with
of avascular necrosis.
no restriction of hip movements, the stage of the disease
according to Elizabethtown staging is Stage I or II and the
Factors to be Considered in Planning the Treatment
extent of involvement as per Catterall clasification is group
1. Age of the patient
II Ill or IV. (Ref: reference 41-45 for more information).
<5 yr—consider nonsurgical containment only if
sublux ation is observed
Nonsurgical Containment Methods
5-7 yr—consider nonsurgical/surgical containment only if
A.Nonambulatory
subluxation is observed
7-12 yr—consider nonsurgical/surgical containment
Bed rest and traction in abduction.
before lateral sublux ation occurs (when other head at risk
 Broom stick plaster.
signs are present).
Hip spica cast.
>12 yr—do not consider containment.
B.Ambulatory (Figs 10.13A to C)
 2. Extent of epiphyseal involvement:
 Newington abduction frame orthosis.
Consider containment if half or more than half of the
Toronto brace.
epiphysis is involved (Catterall group II, IMI and IV).
Scottish- Rite orthosis.
If less than half of the epiphysis is involved, do not
Tachdjian brace (Trilateral socket hip containment
consider containment.
orthosis).
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
203
Osteotomy is closed
Afterfixationtheneck
andascrewand
shaft angle hasbeen
plateisplaced in
reducedtoapproximately
Awedgeofbone
properposition
120degrees
isremoved in
osteotomy
Figure 10.14
Diagrammatic representation of medial closed wedge osteotomy for containment. (The same may be performed by opening wedge laterally).
Surgical Methods of Containment
A. Femoral varus derotation osteotomy (Fig. 10.14)
B. Salter's innominate osteotomy (Fig. 10.15).
Prognostic Factors
Age of onset.
Early onset has better prognosis than late onset.
 Female gender.
Said to have poor prognosis when compared to male.
 Remodeling potential.
Varies from person to person. Greater the remodeling
better is the prognosis.
 Protracted course.
If the course of the disease is protracted, the prognosis is
poor.
Growth disturbance (Figs 10.16A and B).
Premature closure of the physis leads to growth distur-
 bance and may affect the outcome.
Figure 10.15
 Stage at which the patient presents for treatment.
 Showing Salter's innominate osteotomy procedure for containment 
If the patient presents for treatment late the epiphysis
of the epiphysis of the femur. Note that the ostetomy is done just
abovetheroofof theacetabulumandopened.A triangularwedge
would already have been deformed. This results in poor
of bone from the iliac crest is taken and inserted at the opened site
prognosis.
and fixed.
204
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
Figures 10.16A and B
Radiographs AP and Frog leg view of pelvis with both hips showing late sequel of Perthes' disease. Note the irregularity and mushrooming
snnuoui ane yog peay aun jo azis pue adeus aui ai oeai un wningeane au ui sabueuo aadepe aun pue jnway aun jo peay aun jo
 free limp with shortening, i.e with a short limb gait. He is a candidate for secondary degenerative arthritis developing at a later period.
Revision Questions
is multifactorial and so is the treatment. It varies from simple
Q. Define Legg-Calve-Perthes' disease.
 stress relieving measures such as restricted weight bearing.
Q. Discuss the stages of Perthes' disease
abstaining from strenuous activities, protective splints, etc.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis of Perthes' disease.
to surgical methods. Few of the common disease are
Q. What are the head at risk signs? Enumerate them.
 discussed in this chapter.
Q. What is Waldenstrom's sign?
Q. Head within the head sign.
Bones involved commonly in Idiopathic avascular
necrosis/osteochondritis
Q. Write briefly on classification of Perthes' disease.
Bone involved
Name of the disease
Essay Question
Scaphoid
Preiser's disease
Discuss the etiopathogenesis diagnosis and management of a
Capitulum
Panner's disease
case of Perthes' disease. Enumerate the complications.
Lunate
Kienbock's disease
2nd metatarsal head
Freiberg's disease (infarction)
Idiopathic Avascular Necrosis/
Navicular
Kohler's disease
Calcaneal apophysis
Sever's disease
Osteochondritis
Tibial tuberosity
Osgood Schlatter's disease
Upper femoral epiphysis
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
 The exact etiology of these diseases is not known. Hence
Ring epiphysis of the vertebra
 Scheurmann's disease
they are grouped under Idiopathic Avascular Necrosis. The
Central epiphysis of the vertebra Calve's disease
various factors observed in different areas definitely indicate
the role of mec hanical factor in the origin and progress of
Kienbock's Disease
the disease. Abnonmal blood supply, increased viscocity of
 the blood, infarction and increased intraosseous pressure are
It is avascular necrosis of the carpal lunate. It was first
also some of the factors which are identified. Thus it is wise
described by Robert Kienbock in the year 1910. He called it
to conclude that the origin and the progress of these diseases
 as lunatomalacia.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
205
Etiology
(Nonoperative treatment in the form of prolonged
immobilization is known to cause progression of the disease).
Exact etiology is yet to be ascertained. It is considered as
multifactorial. Certain predisposing factors have been
Kohler's Disease
identified. These factors perhaps predispose lunate to
excessive/abnormal stresses, resulting in damage to the blood
It is avasculr necrosis (osteochondritis) of the tarsal navicular.
supply and avascular necrosis.
First described by Kohler in 1908, the disease is self-limiting
a. Ulnar variant (Hulten 1928)
amd invariably resolves over a period of time. The disease is
 Ulnar-neutral-the distal radius and ulna are at the same
more common in boys than girls. It is common between 2 and
level.
9 years (Figs 10.17A and B).
Ulnar-plus-the distal ulna is farther than the radius
Ulnar-minus-the distal ulna is shorter than radius.
Etiology
In Kienbock's disease ulnar-minus variant has been
a. Repetitive mechanical stress is thought to produce
commonly observed.
microfractures and avascularity.
b. Shape of the lunate (Antuna Zepico, 1966)
b. Abnormal vascularity of the navicular.
Type I—lunate with a proximal apex or crest.
Type I—-lunate is more squarish.
Type ImI—lunate is more rectangular or squarish.
In Kienbocks disease with Ulnar-minus variant, Type I
lunate is observed. Whereas
Type II and Type IMI lunates are seen in ulnar-neutral and
ulnar-plus variants.
c. Slope of the distal articular surface of the radius
(Mirabello, Wermer, Palmer)
In Kienbock's disease the normal inclination of the
articular surface of the lower radius is found to be
decreased.
d. Primary circulatory disturbances and increased intra-
osseous pressure are also considered as predisposing
factors.
A
Investigations
X-ray: Shows increased density of the lunate suggesting
avascularity. Fractures and fissuring, carpal collapse and
degenerative changes are seen as the disease progresses.
MRI: Delineates the abnormality more clearly.
Treatment
Treatment depends upon the age of the patient and the state
 of the lunate and the carpus.
Early: Early in the disease if mechanical variants are present
they are corrected by osteotomy and radial shortening
procedures.
Figures 10.17A and B
Late: In advanced cases where degenerative changes are
Radiograph B showing Kohler's disease. Note the increased density
present Scaphotrapezio-triquetral/scaphocapitate arthrodesis
and fragmentation and the small size of the navicular bone. A is the
or wrist arthrodeisis is indicated.
radiograph of normal foot placed for comparison.
206
Essentials of Orthopedics
Investigations
11. Crawford AH. Role of osteotomy in the treatment of Slipped
capital femoral epiphysis. J Paediatr Orthop B 1996;5:102.
X-ray and MRI if needed. These investigations confirm the
12. Gholve PA, Cameron DB, Millis MB. Slipped capital femoral
avascularity.
epiphysis update. Curr Opin Pediatr 2009;21(1):39-45
13.
Green DW, Mogekwu N, Scher DM, Handler S, Chalmers P,
Treatment
Widmann RF. A modification of Klein's Line to improve
sensitivity of the anterior-posterior radiograph in slipped
The disease should be treated by restricted weight bearing and
capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 2009;29(5):449-
 protection in cast and splint. Healing invariably occurs over
53.
a period of time.
14. Green DW, Reynolds RA, Khan SN, Tolo V. The delay in
diagnosis of slipped capital femoral epiphysis: a review of 102
patients. HSS J 2005;1(1):103-6
Revision Question
15. Jerre R, Billing L, Hansson G, Wallin J. The contralateral hip
Q. Write briefly on osteochondritis. Enumerate different
in patients primarily treated for unilateral slipped upper
osteoc hondritis.
femoral epiphysis. Long-term follow-up of 61 hips. J Bone
Q. How will you manage a case of osteochondritis?
Joint Surg Br 1994;76(4):563-7.
16. Kallio PE, Lequesne GW, Paterson DC, Foster BK, Jones JR.
 Ultrasonography in slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Further Reading
Diagnosis and assessment of severity. J Bone Joint Surg Br
1991;73(6):884-9
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
17. Kennedy JG, Hresko MT, Kasser JR, Shrock KB, Zurakowski
D,Waters PM, et al. Osteonecrosis of the femoral head
1. Agamanolis DP, Weiner DS, Lloyd JK. Slipped capital femoral
associated with slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr
epiphysis, A pathological study. I A light microscopic and
Orthop 2001;21(2):189-93.
histochemical study of 21 cases. J Paediatr Orthop 1985;5:40.
18. Kitadai HK, Milani C, Nery CA, Filho JL. Wiberg's center-
 2. Alexander C. The etiology of femoral epiphyseal slipping. J
Bone Joint Surg Br 1966;48:299.
J Pediatr Orthop 1999;19(1):97-105.
3. Aronson DD, Lorder RT. Treatment of the unstable (acute)
19. Loder RT, Starnes T, Dikos G, Aronsson DD. Demographic
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis Clin Orthop Relat Res
predictors of severity of stable slipped capital femoral
1996;322:99
epiphyses. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2006;88(1):97-105.
4. Ballard J, Cosgrove AP. Anterior physeal separation. A sign
20. Mirkopulos N, Weiner DS, Askew M. The evolving slope of
indicating a high risk for avascular necrosis after slipped
the proximal femoral growth plate relationship to slipped
capital femoral epiphysis.J Bone Joint Surg Br 2002;84(8):
capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 1988;8(3):268-73.
1176-9.
Review.
5.Barrios C, Blasco MA,Blasco MC, Gasco J. Posterior sloping
21. Murray AW, Wilson N1. Changing incidence of slipped capital
angle of the capital femoral physis: a predictor of bilaterality
femoral epiphysis: a relationship with obesity? J Bone Joint
in slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 2005;
Surg Br 2008;90(1):92-4.
25(4):445-9.
22. Parsch K, Weller S, Parsch D. Open reduction and smooth
 6. Billing L, Bogren HG, Henrikson B, Wallin J. Slipped capital
Kirschner wire fixation for unstable slipped capital femoral
femoral epiphysis. The mechanical function of the periosteum:
epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 2009;29(1):1-8.
new aspects and theory including bilaterality. Acta Radiol
23. Pritchett JW, Perdue KD, Dona GA. The neck shaft-plate shaft
Suppl (Stockholm) 2004;(431):1-27.
angle in slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Orthop Rev
7. Breaud J, Rubio A, Leroux J, Griffet J. Residual hip growth
1989;18(11):1187-92.
after pinning of slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatt
 24. Pritchett JW, Perdue KD. Mechanical factors in slipped capital
Orthop B 2009;18(1):7-9.
femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 1988;8(4):385-8.
8. Carney BT, Weinstein SL. Natural history of untreated chronic
 25. Rao SB, Crawford AH, Burger RR, Roy DR. Open bone peg
slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Clin Orthop Relat Res
epiphysiodesis for slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatt
1996;(322):43-7.
Orthop 1996;16(1):37-48.
9. Castafieda P, Macias C, Rocha A, Harfush A, Cassis N.
26. Scharschmidt T, Jacquet R, Weiner D, Lowder E, Schrickel
Functional outcome of stable grade Ill slipped capital femoral
T, Landis WJ. Gene expression in slipped capital femoral
epiphysis treated with in situ pinning. J Pediatr Orthop
epiphysis. Evaluation with laser capture microdissection and
2009;29(5):454-8.
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
10. Chung SM, Batterman SC, Brighton CT. Shear strength of
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2009;91(2):366-77.
the human femoral capital epiphyseal plate. J Bone Joint Surg
27.
 Steel HH. The metaphyseal blanch sign of slipped capital
Am 1976;58(1):94-103.
femoral epiphysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68(6):920-2.
SCFE, Perthes' Disease and Other Osteochondritis
207
28. John A Herring (Ed). Tachdjian's Paediatric Orthopaedics, 4th
36. Catterall A, Pringle J, Byers PD, et al. A review of the morpho-
edition, Saunders: Elsevier, Philadelphia 2008;1.
logy of Perthes' disease. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1982;64:269.
 29. Terjesen T. Ultrasonography for diagnosis of slipped capital
37. Catterall A. Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease. London, Churchill
femoral epiphysis. Comparison with radiography in 9 cases.
Livingstone 1982.
Acta Orthop Scand 1992;63(6):653-7.
38. Herring J. Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. A review of cufrent
30.
Weiner D. Pathogenesis of Slipped capital femoral epiphysis:
knowledge. Instr Course Lect 1989;38:309.
Cutrent concepts. J Paediatr Orthop B 1996;5:168.
39.
Herring JA, Neustadt JB, WilliamsJJ, et al. The lateral pillar
31.
Wong-Chung J, Strong ML. Physeal remodeling after internal
classification of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. J Paediatr
fix ation of slipped capital femoral epiphyses. J Pediatr Orthop
Orthop, 1992;12:143.
1991;11(1):2-5.
40. Herring JA, Williams JJ, Neustadt JN, et al. Evolution of
32.
Zupanc O, Krizancic M, Daniel M, Mavcic B, Antolic V, Iglic
femoral head deformity during the healing phase of Legg-
A, et al. Shear stress in epiphyseal growth plate is a risk factor
Calve-Perhes disease. J Paediatr Orthop 1993;13:41.
for slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop
41. Joseph B, Nair NS, Narasimha Rao KL, et al. Optimal timing
2008;28(4):444-51.
for containment surgery for Perthes′ disease. J Paediatr Orthop
2003;23:601
Perthes' Disease
42. Joseph B, Mulpuri K, Verghese G. Perthes’ disease in
33. Caffey J. Early roentgenographic changes in essential coxa
adolescent. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2001;83:715.
plana.Their significance in pathogenesis. Clin Orth Relat Res
43. Joseph B, Verghese G, Mulpuri K, et al. Natural evolution of 
1968;103:620.
perthes’ disease, A study of 610 children under 12 years of
34. Calve J. On a particular form of pseudocoxalgia associated
age at disease onset. J Paediatric Orthop 2003;23:590.
with a characteristic deformity of the upper end of the femur.
44.
 Joseph B. Morphological changes in the acetabulum in
Clin Orth Relat Res 1980;150:4.
Perthes' disease. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1989;71:756.
35. Catterall A.The natural history of Perthes disease. J Bone Joint
45. John A Herring (Ed). Tachdjian's Paediatric Orthopaedics, 4th
Surg Br 1971;53:37.
edition, Saunders: Elsevier, Philadelphia 2008;1.
11
IntervertebralDisc
Prolapse/Herniation
Structure and Function of the Disc
Pathomechanics of Disc Prolapse
Terminologies and Types
 Clinical Presentation: Symptoms, Signs and Diagnosis
C Investigations
Treatment
 Disc Replacement, its Current Status
Introduction
Pathomechanics of Intervertebral
Disc Prolapse
Intervertebral discs constitute approximately 1/4th of the
vertebral column. They are designed to absorb the shocks
When the nucleus pulposus invaginates through the annulus
when the spinal column is subjected to mechanical loading
fibrosus the condition is known as prolapsed intervertebral
during the activities of daily living. It has a central nucleus
disc. In milder forms this results only in a protrusion. But in
 pulposus made up of collagen, proteoglycans and water and
severe forms it extrudes into the spinal canal and later gets
its consistency is gel-like. It is placed somewhat like a
sequestrated. For a prolapse to occur there should be a
cushion between the cartilaginous end-plate of the adjacent
breach in the annulus.
vertebra. It is surrounded by annulus fibrosus made up of
A breach in the annulus can develop as a result of:
concentric sheets of collagen fibers which are connected
a.Severe and sudden trauma, e.g. lifting very heavy
to vertebral end-plates. These concentric sheets are held
loads: Bending and torsional forces of lifting heavy
firmly by radial fibers which are placed at intervals
loads causes sudden increase pressure within the disc
(Figs 11.1A to C).
and ruptures the annulus (Figs 11.2A and B).
Intervertebral Disc Prolapse/Herniation
209
Uppercartilageplate
Nucleus
pulposus
A
Lowercartilageplate
Concentric
Radialfiber
fibers
A
B
Figures 11.2A and B
Anterior
Posterior
Showing the diagrammatic representation of the pathomechanics of
longitudinal
longitudinal
disc prolapse: (A) Disc subjected to sudden trauma of lifting heavy
B
ligament
ligament
Nucleuspulposus
load, (B) Degenerative disc is more prone for prolapse when
Posterior
subjected to such stress.
longitudinalligament
Radialfiber
In lumbar region L4-L5 is the most common site for disc
prolapse followed by L5-S1. These are the areas prone for
maximum concentration of stresses during daily activities
related to loading of the spine.
In the cervical spine most of the disc prolapses are
Concentricfibers
C
Anteriorlongitudinalligament
degenerative. Purely traumatic disc prolapse is rare without
spinal column injury. C5, C6 and C6, C7 are the common sites.
Figures 11.1A to C
A prolapsed disc occupies various positions in relation to
Showing diagrammatic representation of the basic structure of an
intervertebral disc.
the nerve root and compresses the root.
a. It may remain central.
b.
Trivialtraumalike coughing and sneezing:Trivial
b. It may remain medial to the root.
trauma causes prolapse in a disc which is already
C.
 It may remain lateral to the root.
weakened by degenerative changes both in the annulus
 It may remain intraforaminal (rare).
fibrosus and nucleus pulposus as a result of repetitive
 Depending on the position the symptoms vary. Sometimes
stress (wear and tear fatigue) and advancing age.
disc prolapse can occur at multiple levels.
The different ways in which a prolapse takes place is as
follows (Figs 11.3A to C):
Diagnosis
a.Protrusion
b. Extrusion
Prolapse
Clinical diagnosis of intervertebral disc prolapse is based on
Sequestration
 the symptoms and deficits caused by the compression of the
c.
nerve roots.
A
B
C
Figures 11.3A to C
cord is more with extrusion and sequestration. So also the indication for surgery.
210
Essentials of Orthopedics
1 . When there is no neurological involvement: It manifests
order to prevent the impingement. So the tilt of the spinal
with acute onset of severe low backache and paraspinal
column indicates the position of the disc in relation to its nerve
spasm. Movements of the spine also may be restricted and
root. The presence of a tilt to the same side as that of
associated with pain. Patient may have difficulty in walking
symptoms indicates that the compression is occurring medial
too.
to the nerve root and the presence of tilt to the opposite side
 2. When there is neurological involvement: Along with
 as that of the symptoms indicates that the compression is
pain and limitation of movement, there is neurological
occurming lateral to the nerve root (Fig. 11.5).
deficit. Derivation is almost mathematical and corresponds
to the particular nerve root affected. Hence a thorough
Straight Leg Raising Test and
knowledge of the dermatomes and root values of the nerve
Well Leg Raising Test
supply to the muscles is necessary not only to make a
The straight leg raising test (SLRT) is also known as the
clinical diagnosis but also to ascertain the of the level of
Lasegue's test (1864).
the lesion.
The lower limb on the affected side is raised with the hip
In cauda equina lesions due to central hermiation of the
im flexion and knee in extension (i.e. with the leg in straight
disc, presentation is classic. Presents with leg pain, perianal
 position). This results in pain in the hip region, radiating down
anesthesia,weakness of the anal sphincter and urinary
to the leg along the course of the sciatic nerve.
retention.
The opposite lower limb when raised in a similar manner,
Tables 11.1 and 11.2 depict methodically the clinical
produces pain on the involved side. This is known as well
manifestations of a disc prolapse. Figure 11.4 gives the
leg raising test or the Fajersztajn's test (1901). The pheno-
 pictorial representation of different examination findings in a
menon is known as crossed sciatic phenomenon or sciatic
lumbar disc prolapse.
paradox phenomenon.
The symptoms can be exaggerated by dorsiflexing the
Presence of the List or Tilt of the Spinal Column
ankle or by asking the patient to flex the neck. These
When the extruded disc is medial to the nerve root and
maneuvers stretch the nerve root further.
compresses the nerve root from its medial side causing
The above tests are based on the principle of stretching
imitation and pain, in order to relieve this compression, the
the lumbar and sacral nerve roots. Cadaveric experiments have
spine tilts laterally on the same side. This posture prevents
demonstrated that the nerve roots start moving towards the
the impingement and relieves the pain. If the extruded disc is
foramina with as low as 30° flexion movement of the hip. In
lateral to the nerve root and compresses the nerve root from
a normal person the range of excursion of the nerve roots is
its lateral side the spinal column tilts to the opposite side in
about 2-5 mm. In disc prolapse when a leg raising test is
Table 11.1
Clinical features of cervical disc lesions
Levels of cervical
C-4, C-5 disc with
C-5, C-6 disc with
C-6, C-7 disc with
C-7, T-1 disc with
T-1, T-2 disc with
disc lesion and
C-5 root compression C-6 root compression(
C-7 root compression C-8 root compression T-1 root compres-
features
sion
Sensory changes
Lateral aspect of 
Lateral aspect of the
Usually middle finger
 Ring and little finger 
 Medial aspect of
(Deficit)
upper arm and elbow forearm thumb and 
but variable due to
and ulnar border of
the elbow
the index finger
cross over
the hand
Motor changes
Deltoid and biceps 
Biceps brachi,
Triceps, flexor carpi
Interossei and the
Interossei
(Weakness)
brachii
extensor carpi
radialis, flexor
finger flexors, flexor 
radialis longus and
digitorum super-
carpi ulnaris
brevis
ficialis and profundus
Reflexes
Absence of or
 Absence or sluggish
Absence or sluggish
No change
No change
sluggish biceps
biceps and 
triceps reflex
reflex
brachioradialis reflex
Intervertebral Disc Prolapse/Herniation
211
Clinicalfeatures
Levelofherniation
Pain
Numbness
Weakness
Atrophy
Reflexes
L4
L3-4disc;
Lowerback,
Anteromedial
Quadriceps and
Kneejerk
L4nerve
hipposterolateral
thigh,knee and leg
Quadriceps
kneeextension
diminished
root
thigh,anteriorleg
No change inknee
and anklejerk,
Diminishedor
Just
Not
absentTibialis
L5
above
prominent
posteriorreflex
L5
sacro-
iliac
joint,
Dorsiflexionof
hip,
great toe andfoot;
L4-5disc;
lateral
difficultyinwalking
L5nerve
thigh,
Alonglateralleg
onheels;foot drop
root
andleg
andfirst3toes
mayoccur
Plantar
Just
above
flexionof
sacro-
footand
iliac
great toe
joint,
and
difficultyin
hip,
walking
postero-
S1
lateral
ontoes
Anklejerk
thigh,
Alongback
diminished
L5-S1disc;
and
of the calf,
Gastrocnemius
orabsent
S1nerve
legto
lateralheel,
root
heel
footandtoe
andsoleus
Figure 11.4
A pictorial diagram showing the deficits observed at examination in intervertebral disc prolapse at various levels.
performed, this excursion takes place over the protruded disc
third of the cases of intervertebral disc prolapse, it has been 
thereby causing irritation of the root and pain (Fig. 11.6). In
found that the protruded disc is in the axilla or medial to the
a positive well leg raising test which is positive in about one-
opposite root, and never lateral.
212
Essentials of Orthopedics 
Table 11.2
Clinical features of lumbar disc lesions
Levels of the lumbar
Ruptured disc between
Ruptured disc between L-4
Ruptured disc between L-5
disc lesions and features
L-3 and L-4 with L4 root
and L-5 with L-5 root
and S-1 with S-1 root
compression ( L-4 component
compression (L-5 component
compression (S-1 component
of femora! and sciatic nerve)
of the sciatic nerve)
of the sciatic nerve)
Pain
Sl joint and hip region.
Sl joint and hip region.
Sl joint and hip region.
Posterolateral aspect of the
Posterolateral aspect of the
Posterolateral aspect of the 
thigh. Anterior aspect of the leg
thigh and leg.
thigh, leg, and heel.
Numbness
Anteromedial aspect of the leg.
Lateral aspect of the leg or
Lateral aspect of the leg foot
dorsum of the foot even over
and lateral three toes.
great toe.
Weakness
Extension of the knee.
 Dorsiflexion of great toe and 
 Not common. Occa sionally plantar
occasionally foot.
flexion of foot and great toe.
Sensory changes (Deficit)
Posterolateral aspect of the
Anterolateral aspect of the
Lateral malleolus, lateral aspect 
thigh, anterior aspect of knee
leg, dorsum of the foot and 
of the foot and heel and
and medial aspect of the leg.
great toe.
dorsum of lateral one and a
half toes including web.
Motor changes (Weakness)
In quadriceps and hip adductors
In extensor hallucis longus,
In Gastrocnemius and soleus,
extensor digitorum longus and 
peroneus longus and brevis
brevis and at the hip in gluteus&
 and at the hip gluteus
medius.
maximus.
Reflexes
Sluggish or absent knee jerk
No change both in knee and
Sluggish or absent ankle jerk.
ankle jerk (or sometimes
sluggish reflex). Never absent.
Tibialis posetrior reflex may be
sluggish/ absent.
DiscProtrusion
Nerveroots
Cord
Figure 11.5
Diagram showing the medial and lateral position of the extruded disc
in relation to the nerve root.To avoid irritation of the nerve root the
spine tilts accordingly. To the same side when the extrusion is medial
Figure 11.6
to the root and to the opposite side when the extrusion is lateral to
Photograph showing the straight leg raising test being performed. In
the root. The patient develops a list.
this it is negative and the leg can be raised up to 80%.
Intervertebral Disc Prolapse/Herniation
213
B
TI
Figures 11.7A and B
 MRI showing prolapsed and extruded intervertebral disc at L5 S1 compressing the S1 root.
Investigations
Myelogram was the standard investigation for inter-
vertebral disc prolapse before MRI was invented. Because of
X-ray may show loss of normal lordosis, presence of scoliosis
its invasiveness, the risks of spinal puncture and the side
and in cases of degenerative disc shows changes of
effects and complications of the dye used it is given up these
 degeneration with osteophyte formation in the spinal column.
days. The picture of myelogram is used here (instead of
MRI is the investigation of choice. It clearly shows the
diagrammatic representation) to show the exact nature of
nature and extent of prolapse and the site of nerve root
nerve root involvement in IVDP (Figs 11.8A to C).
compression (Figs 11.7A and B).
A
B
Figures 11.8A to C
Myelogram showing a midline disc herniation L4- L5 with bilateral L5 root cut off.
214
Essentials of Orthopedics
Treatment
Artificial disc replacement: Artificial disc replacement is
being done in those patients with degenerated discs who have
 The intervertebral disc prolapse can be treated nonoperatively
disabling back pain, who have not responded to nonoperative
or operatively. The decision is always taken in consideration
line of management and in whom arthrodesis is the option.
with clinical features and MRI findings.
The artificial disc is designed with ultrahigh molecular poly-
Nonoperative Management
ethylene core, sandwiched between cobalt chromium end-
plates and aims at restoring pain free movement at that level.
Is indicated in those cases with no or minimal neurological
Centers where these surgeries are being done have claimed
symptoms and MRI shows only protrusion and not extrusion.
successful results in the range of 60-90% at 7 yr follow-up.
Following are the measures taken.
Problem of degeneration of posterior elements and facetal
a. Bed rest and immobilization in traction.
joints, the polyethylene wear and the effect of its debris on
b.Anti-inflammatory drugs.
the spine and the cord and the salvage procedures adopted
c. Lumbosacral corsets for support during the period of
when the implant fails, are some of the problems which are
 gradual mobilization.
being closely studied at this point of time.
d. Spinal strengthening exercises to follow.
e. Advise to abstain from such activities which impart
Revision Questions
loading stress on the spine, e.g. lifting heavy weights,
uncomfortable travel, poor posture at work, etc.
Q. Write notes on:
a.SLRT
Operative Management
b. Well leg raising test.
It is indicated when the symptoms and neurological deficits
C.
List
are severe and MRI shows extrusion or sequestration of the
d. Sciatic scoliosis
disc. The more earlier is the decompression of the root, the
e. Disc prolapse.
faster is the relief and better is the recovery.
Q. Write briefly on
a. Laminectomy
Procedures
b. Hemilaminectomy
c. Fenestration
a. Laminectomy and discectomy.
d.Microlumbar discectomy.
 b. Hemilaminectomy and discectomy.
c. Fenestration/laminotomy and microdiscectomy.
Essay Question
d. Endoscopic discectomy.
Of the above procedures indications for (a) and (b)
Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis and
procedures are few. More commonly (c) and (d) proce-
management of a case of acute Intervertebral disc prolapse.
  aq n     sa
Enumerate its complications.
less invasive.
Further Reading
Chemonucleolysis: In this procedure the protruded disc which
is symptomatic is dissolved by injecting the enzyme
1. Acaroglu ER, Iatridis JC, Setton LA, Foster RJ, Mow VC,
chymopapain derived from the papaya into the disc space.
Weidenbaum M. Degeneration and aging affect the tensile
The technique needs expertise and skill. Also in USA specific
behavior of human lumbar anulus fibrosus. Spine (Phila Pa
1976) 1995;20(24):2690-701.
training and board certification is mandatory. On table
2. Choma TJ, Miranda J, Siskey R, Baxter R, Steinbeck MJ,
discogram is a must. If the dye leaks out into the epidural
Kurtz SM. Retrieval analysis of a ProDisc-L total disc
space the procedure is abandoned. The procedure is also
replacement. J Spinal Disord Tech 2009;22(4):290-6.
abandoned if there is dural puncture and spinal fluid leak
3. Crenshaw AH Edi VII (Ed). Cambell's Operative Orthopedics,
Anaphylaxis due to allergy for the enzyme and late
CV Mosby Company, St. Louis, Missouri USA 1987;IV
4. Denaro V, Papalia R, Denaro L, Di Martino A, Maffulli N.
development of transverse myelitis and its neurologic sequel
Cervical spinal disc replacement. J Bone Joint Surg Br
are the risks involved. The procedure is rarely done these days.
2009;91(6):713-9.
Intervertebral Disc Prolapse/Herniation
215
5. Epstein NE. Minimally invasive/endoscopic vs "open"
lumbar disc herniations. J Spinal Disord Tech 2009;22(3):
posterior cervical laminoforaminotomy: do the risks outweigh
202-6.
the benefits? Surg Neurol 2009;71(3):330-1. No abstract
12. Park C, Kim YJ, Lee CS, An K, Shin HJ, Lee CH, et al. An
available.
in vitro animal study of the biomechanical responses of anulus
6. Jonsson B, Stromqvist B. The straight leg raising test and the
fibrosus with aging. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2005;30(10):E259-
severity of symptoms in lumbar disc herniation. A preoperative
65.
evaluation. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 1995;20(1):27-30.
13. Natarajan RN, Williams JR, Andersson GB. Recent advances
7. Kawchuk GN, Kaigle Holm AM, Ekstrom L, Hansson T, Holm
in analytical modeling of lumbar disc degeneration. Spine
SH. Bulging of the inner and outer annulus during in vivo
(Phila Pa 1976) 2004;29(23):2733-41. Review.
axial loading of normal and degenerated discs.J Spinal Disord
14. Setton LA, Chen J. Mechanobiology of the intervertebral disc
Tech 2009;22(3):214-8
and relevance to disc degeneration. J Bone Joint Surg Am
8.Lee JH, An JH, Lee SH. Comparison of the effectiveness of
2006;88(Suppl 2):52-7. Review
interlaminar and bilateral transforaminal epidural steroid
15. Setton LA, Chen J. Cell mechanics and mechanobiology in
injections in treatment of patients with lumbosacral disc
the intervertebral disc. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2004;29(23):
herniation and spinal stenosis. Clin J Pain 2009;25(3):206-10.
2710-23.
9. Suk KS, Lee HM, Moon SH, Kim NH. Lumbosacral scoliotic
16. Smith LJ, Fazzalari NL. The elastic fibre network of the human
list by lumbar disc herniation. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2001;
lumbar anulus fibrosus: architecture, mechanical function and
26(6):667-71
potential role in the progression of intervertebral disc
10. Lurie JD, Doman DM, Spratt KF, Tosteson AN, Weinstein JN.
degeneration. Eur Spine J 2009;18(4):439-48. Epub 2009.
Magnetic resonance imaging interpretation in patients with
17. Supik LF, Broom MJ. Sciatic tension signs and lumbar disc
symptomatic lumbar spine disc herniations: comparison of
herniation. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 1994;19(9):1066-9
clinician and radiologist readings. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
18. Xin Shiqing, Zhang Quanzhi, Fan Dehao. Significance of
2009;34(7):701-5.
straight leg reaising test in diagnosis and clinical evaluation
11. Olivero WC, Wang H, Hanigan WC, Henderson JP, Tracy
of lower lumbar intervertebral disc protrusion. J Bone Joint
PT, Elwood PW, et al. Cauda equina syndrome (CES) from
Surg Am 1987;69:517.
12
Nutritional,Endocrine,
Degenerative and
Autoimmune
e Disorders
Rickets and Osteomalacia
二
Hyperparathyroidism
Osteoporosis
二
Osteoarthritis
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rickets and Osteomalacia
into biologically active forms of vitamin D by a process of
hydroxylationwhichoccursfirstin theliverand theninthe
Rickets and osteomalacia is an abnormality resulting in lack
kidneys,respectively.
of mineralization of the bone due to deficiency of vitamin D.
In the liver the enzyme 25-hydoxylase converts the
Vitamin D is the name given for a group of sterol molecules.
cholecalciferol into 25 hydroxycholecalciferol.
The two basic forms of vitamin D are vitamin D2 otherwise
 In the kidneys the enzyme 1-alpha hydroxylase converts
known as ergocalciferol derived from plants and D3 otherwise
the 25-hydroxycholecalciferol into 1,25-dihydroxy cholecal-
known as cholecalciferol derived from animals, e.g. egg yolk,
ciferol (Fig. 12.1).
 cod liver oil, etc. Cholecalciferol is also synthesized in the 
These are active forms of vitamin D which are important
skin of animals from 7 dehydrocholesterol by exposure to
for the regulation of calcium and phosphororus levels in the
sunlight. Ergocalciferol is synthesized exogenously from
blood and for mineralization of bone.
ergosterol by exposure to ultraviolet rays of sunlight. These
Biologically active vitamin D is fat-soluble and is
two forms ofvitamin D,namely D2 and D3 are converted
 transported through the blood stream by the help of a binding
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
217
Sunlight
Etiology and Nature of Rickets
(Pathogenesis ofnutritionalricketsis at this stage.)
A. Nutritional: Dietary deficiency of Vitamin D, calcium and
Skin
7Dehydrocholesterol
phosphorus or intestinal malabsorption of calcium results
toCholecalciferol
in this form of rickets. The condition is reversible when
attention is given to the diet. Not sex-linked and no
Liver
inheritance is observed.
Hydroxylation
25Hydroxy
B.Lack of exposure to sunlight.
Enzyme25-Hydroxylase
cholecalciferol
Semiactive
Calcidiol
C. Genetic causes: Vitamin D-dependant rickets
Kidney
a. Type I—In this type there is deficiency of the enzyme
1-alpha hydroxylase in the kidneys.
Thus deficiency of 1,25 dihyroxy vitamin D (Calcitriol)
(Pathologyof typeland typell
Hydroxylated
develops. Autosomal recessive inheritance is observed.
rickets is at this stage)
formsvitaminD
It is also known as pseudovitamin D deficiency rickets.
Hydroxylation
1,25Dihydroxy
Supplementation with active form of vitamin D, i.e.
cholecalciferol-Calcitriol-
Highlyactive
Calcitriol results in cure.
Enzyme 1a.hydroxylase
24,25Hydroxy
b. Type I——In this type the production of 1,25 dihydroxy
cholecalciferol
Non active
Enzyme 24-hydroxylase
vitamin D is normal. But the receptor is abnormal.
Hence there is defective interaction between the
Figure 12.1
vitamin D and the receptor resulting in resistance.
Picture showing the pathogenesis of various types of rickets.
 Increased level of Calcitriol in the blood helps in the
diagnosis. Autosomal recessive inheritance is seen.
Large doses of vitamin D is necessary for control. It
protein.1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D has a half-life of a few
cannot be cured.
hours. Whereas 25, hydroxy vitamin D has a half-life of
Vitamin D resistant rickets: (Hypophosphatemic in
several weeks. Thus the liver acts as a store house of
nature, also was known as phosphate diabetes)
vitamin D.It stores the vitamin D synthesized in the skin and
i. Familial—In this variety there is renal tubular
absorbed from theintestine，in 25,hydroxylated formand
abnommality which leads to decreased re-absorp-
releases it into the bloodstream. This form of vitamin D is
tion of phosphates. This results in phosphaturia
semiactive with a long half-life. It is provided to the kidneys
and hypophosphatemia. X-linked dominant inheri-
for 2nd hydroxylation process as per need. In the kidney it
tance is observed. Calcitriol levels are low. Hence,
gets converted into the highly active form, i.e. 1,25 dihydroxy
need supplementation of both, Calcitriol and
vitamin D (Calcitriol) which is responsible for the regulation
phosphates.
of calcium and phosphorous level. Once the calcium and
ii. Hereditary——In this variety there is hypercalciuria,
phosphorus level isregulated theformationof 1,25 dihydroxy
phosphaturia and hypophosphatemia because of
cholecalciferol stops and formation of nonactive 24,25,
decreased renal tubular re absorption of phos
hydroxyl cholecalciferol begins.Thus calcitriol has an
phates. But the serum levels of Calcitriol is
autoregulatory influence on the kidneys.
normal. Hence needs supplementation of
(Cod liver oil, Shark liver oil,Halibut liver oil are some
phosphorous only. Autosomal dominant/ recessive
of the richest sources of vitamin D. The polar bear liver is
inheritance is seen.
the richest source ofvitamin D among animals.It is so toxic
D. Chronic renal and liver diseases.
that ingestion results in death in humans.Hence Eskimos do
Renal osteodystrophy, cirrhosis, etc.
not eat the liver of the polar bear. The toxic property of
E.
Others
vitamin D is made use of in preparing rodenticide. Baits
Oncogenic, drug induced (phenytoin, antacids containing
smeared with vitamin D are available as rodenticide.)
aluminum), etc.
Thus in short for the vitamin D to become active, two
(It is perhaps ideal to consider type II rickets as true
hydroxylation processes are necessary. The first one taking
vitamin D resistant rickets and vitamin D resistant rickets as
 place in the liver and the second one in the kidney.
mentioned above as hypophosphatemic rickets)
218
Essentials of Orthopedics
Differences between nutritional rickets and
Stunted growth
vitamin D resistant rickets
Nutritiona!
Vitamin D resistant
Acquired
Inherited 
Largeforehead
Responds to adequate doses 
Responds only to large doses of
Kyphoscoliotic
of vitamin D
vitamin D. Supplementation of 
deformityspine
phosphorous may be necessary
Spontaneous resolution of
Spontaneous resolution of
Rachiticrosary
deformities is possible with 
deformities is not possible even
Wideningof
vitamin D
with large doses of vitamin D
elbowand
Protruberant
Growth becomes normal on
Growth never becomes normal
wristjoints
healing
abdomen
Always remains stunted.
Serum chemistry becomes
Serum chemistry remains
normal following vitamin D
abnormal even after adminis-
administration.
tration of large amounts of 
Widebones
vitamin D
Pathology
Pathology is defective mineralization. In children both, the
growth plate and bone get affected. Hence skeletal changes
Figure 12.2
of both rickets and osteomalacia develop. Whereas in adults
Picture of a child showing features of ricket.
vitamin D deficiency causes changes of osteomalacia only
because the growth plate is already fused.
In the growth plate the stages of bone formation proceeds 
Specific
Craniotabes (soft skull)
normally up to the stage of appearence of mature chondro-
Bossing of the skull
blasts leading to chondrocyte formation and laying down of
+
Pigeon chest.
cartilaginous matrix. At this stage, the process of calcification
 Rachitic rosary/rickety rosary (Costochondral beading)
 is deficient. Hence, poor mineralized osteoid formation occurs
Harrisons' groove—is a line observed at the place where
in the physis which results in accumulation of nonossified
the diaphragm attaches to the ribs.
cartilage. This leads to the classical radiological picture of
widening of the physis and cupping of the metaphysis.
Bowing or widening of the physis.
·
 Deformities in the lower limbs, e.g. genu valgum, genu
In the diaphyseal bone in children as well as in adults the
varum, wind swipe deformity (Figs 12.3B and C).
mineralization of the osteoid does not take place. Hence
 Deformities in the spine—-kyphoscoliosis.
osteomalacic changes develop.
 Radiologically, osteopenia with widening of the epiphysis
Thus the bones become soft because of lack of minerali-
and cupping of the metaphysis (Figs 12.4A to F).
zation and bend. Pathological fractures too can develop. This
 Pathological fractures due to softening of the bones.
results in classical defonmities, i.e. bow legs, knock knees,
wind swipe deformity, etc.
Osteomalacia
Clinical Features
Nonspecific features in early stages.
Rickets
 Bone pain may be the presenting feature.
Child may present with following features (Fig. 12.2):
Muscular weakness and easy fatigue.
Carpopedal spasm and facial twitching.
General
Pathological fractures (commonly seen in the spine).
 Irritable child.
Lethargy and hypotonia.
Investigations
Pot belly.
Delayed mile stones.
Investigations are done to confinmm the type of rickets so that
Stunted growth.
adequate treatment is instituted.
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
219
NutritionalRickets
Treatment
a. Serum calcium, phosphorous and alkaline phosphatase.
NutritionalRickets
Serum calcium and phosphorous is low alkaline
phosphatase is elevated.
a.  Adequate exposure to sunlight
Preventive
b. Urinary calcium is low.
(not excessive exposure)
and curative
c. Serum calcidiol and calcitriol is low.
b. Supplementation of vitamin D
measure
d. PTH is elevated.
in the diet.
e. Urinary phosphorous is elevated.
(Recommended even for breast-
fed babies after two months of age)
Vitamin D Resistant Rickets (Type-Il)
c. Treatment with therapeutic doses of vitamin D 200-600
a. Urinary calcium may increase.
umits/day or as a single intramuscular inj of 600,000 IU.
b. Serum calcitriol levels may show an increase.
May have to be repeated at 4-6 weekly intervals.
Radiological sign of healing:A sclerotic line developing in
X-rays Changes in Rickets
the metaphyseal region (Figs 12.5A to C).
Classical changes of widening of the physis and cupping of
In refractoryrickets this does not occurwith normal doses
the metaphysis is seen. These changes are more pronounced
of vitamin D.
in the region of the knee and the wrist. Further, rarefaction of
the bone is observed confirming osteomalacic changes.
FamilialandHereditaryRickets
Skull may appear square, known as Caput Quadratum.
These are refractory to usual treatment because of genetic
X-rays Changes in Osteomalcia
abnormality. Depending on the cause as discussed in the
etiology, the treatment varies. Large doses of vitamin D and
· The skeleton looks thinned out and casts a poor
radiological image.
 treatment may last life long.
Looser's zones may be seen. These are areas of pseudo-
fractures occuring at the sites of stress. Pubic rami, medial
Correction of Deformities in Rickets
cortex of neck of femur, axillary border of the scapula are
(Figs 12.6A and B)
some of the sites.These are the result of increased rate of
bone resorption and poor new bone deposition
In young the deformities get corrected with adequate supple-
· Protusio acetabuli may be seen in the pelvis.
mentation of vitamin D and splinting. Deformities which are
A
C
Figures 12.3A to C
Showing cupping of the metaphysis, widening of the physis and Genu valgum and wind swipe deformities. (A) Trumpetting of the metaphysis;
(B) Knock knee (C) Wind swipe deformity: Bow leg on one side and knock knee on the other.
220
Essentials of Orthopedics
E
Figures 12.4A to F
Radiographs showing classical changes of rickets at the ends of long bones. Note the presence of Harris growth lines in the metaphyseal
portion of the bone which indicate intermittent growth retardation. These lines are named after Henry Harris a Welsh anatomist. They are
A
Figures 12.5A to C
by the presence of sclerosis and physeal width becoming normal. Note the presence of Harris growth lines.
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
221
Types
Wedgeof
boneto
a. Postmenopausal (Estrogen lack)
be
removed
b Senile (Natural process)
Risk Factors
a.Advancing age.
Women >45 yr (after menopause); Men > 60 yr.
After
b. Low calcium and vitamin D in the diet.
closing
c.Lack of exercise.
the
d. Smoking.
wedge
e. Drug-induced, e.g. long-tenm steroids.
A
B
Pathology
Figures 12.6A and B
 Diagram showing Mac Evans medial closed wedge osteotomy for
The strength of the bone depends on proteins, collagen and
the correction of genu valgum. Note the angle of valgus deformity.
calcium. This inherent strength is acquired genetically in utero
This angle decreases after taking an appropriate wedge of bone with
 itself influenced by nutritional, hormonal and environmental
the base directed medially. The defect is closed after removing the
wedge of bone. The size of the wedge depends on the extent of
factors. The influence of these factors on bone mass continues
correction required.
through out life.
Bone is a dynamic structure. Throughout life there is a
of severe nature and are established need correction
continuous process of new bone deposition and bone
resorption and remodeling. In the normal course the deposition
Correction is always done when the serum parameters become
and resorption of bone balance each other and is responsible
normal after treatment with vitamin D.
The procedure of corrective osteotomy is undertaken to
for maintaining the standard quality of the bone. When the
correct the deformities, e.g. Mac Evan's osteotomy (medial
resorption of bone exceeds that of deposition thinning of bone
 close wedge osteotomy) for genu valgum.
occurs and osteoporosis develops, i.e. osteoclastic activity
> osteoblastic ativity. The osteoclastic activity is regulated by
Revision Questions
RANK ligand and the osteoblastic activity is regulated by
Q. Write notes on:
on the bone.
a.Active forms of vitamin D
b. Actions of vitamin D
Clinical Features
c.Rickets
d. Osteomalacia
Osteoporosis does not give rise to any clinical symptoms
e.1
 Radiological picture of rickets
umless a fracture develops (Fig. 12.7A) when a patient starts
f.
Vitamin D resistant rickets.
complaining of pain and inability to move the part. Generally
the injury is very trivial. The fracture can be incomplete or
Essay Questions
complete. In the spine compression fracture is common and
patient presents with backache and radiating pain. If the
Q. Classify rickets. Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis
fracture involves the pelvic bone, the patient complains of pain
and management of different type of rickets.
 im the groin and difficulty in walking.
Osteoporosis
Investigations
Osteoporosis may be defined as a generalized disorder
X-ray shows thinning of the the bony trabeculae and
involving the skeleton in which the bone density decreases,
 generalized rarefaction.
the fragility of bone increases and, as a result, the bone
 In the spinal column, osteoporotic compression fractures
becomes more susceptible for fractures.
may be seen in the vertebra (Fig. 12.7).
222
Essentials of Orthopedics
During this period it is advisable that the patient does
not lift any heavy object.
Long bone fractures are really problematic to treat. They
have to be treated by reduction and internal fixation
followed by protective immobilization. In severely
comminuted osteoporotic fractures bone grafting may be
necessary.
· Appropriate drug therapy is a must.
Essay Question
Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis and
B
 management of senile osteoporosis. What are the complica-
Figures 12.7A and B
tions of senile osteoporosis.
Showing a fracture in the intertrochanteric region and a wedge
compression of T-12 vertebra due to osteoporosis. The radiographs
Osteoarthritis
show marked thinning of both cortical and cancellous bones.
Degenerative arthritis, hypertrophic arthritis, chondromalacic
Bone densitometry by DEXA (Dual energy X-ray absorp-
arthrosis and osteoarthrosis are the other names for osteo.
tiometry) is more precise and can detect osteoporosis early.
arthritis. The condition is the result of degenerative changes
taking place in the joint. The articular cartilage and the
Trea tment
subchondral bone progressively degenerates. This results in
inflammation and mechanical derangement which promotes
Drug Therapy
further degeneration. Ultimately results in badly deranged
It is to be instituted when risk factors exist, especially after
joint, associated with deformity and ligamentous laxity.
45 yr of age, after confirming the diagnosis. Aim is to prevent
osteoporotic fractures.
Types
Two basic types of drugs are used to treat osteoporosis.
a. Primary osteoarthritis is the type where there is no pre-
a. Drugs that inhibit the osteoclast-induced bone
existing abnormality or damage (incongruity) as a cause
resorption, e.g. Residronate.
for progressive degeneration.
b. Drugs that promote osteoblastic induction of bone, e.g.
b. Secondary osteoarthritis is the type where there is a pre-
Teriparatide.
existing pathology or damage (incongruity) which is
Along with these drugs calcium and vitamin D are also
responsible for the progressive degeneration.
given in adequate doses.
The basic difference in joint destruction occurring in
Recent drug is a stable strontium compound. Strontium
Rheumatoid arthritis and Osteoarthritis is that,in rheumatoid
renolate which has dual action of increasing bone synthesis
arthritis,inflammation occursfirst.The joint destruction that
and decreasing bone resorption.Monoclonal antibodies that
follows is the result of inflammation.Whereas in Osteo
regulate osteoclasts at cytokine level are also being developed
arthritis,thejoint destructionoccursfirst and the inflamma
by recombinant technique.Hence in future there may be two
tion that follows is secondary to joint destruction.
more additional drugs—dual acting bone agents (DABA) and
cytokines.
Etiology and Pathogenesis (Fig. 12.8)
Treatment of Fractures
        
predispose the development of osteoarthritis.
Vertebral fractures involving single vertebra can be
a. Trauma: It is the minor degrees of trauma of repetitive
 managed by vertebroplasty using injection of bone cement.
nature occurring during activities of daily living which
This is followed by a protective brace at least for three
causes osteoarthritis. There is protective mechanism
months.
operating in the human body when it is subjected to an
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
223
Decrease in theproteoglycan
Secondary
↑
There is a joint incongruity which has developed due to some
Fissuringof the articularcartilage
disease in the past. Thus degeneration occurs secondary to a
I
pre-existing mechanical abnormality. This is secondary
Lysosomal release
Poorstresstoleranceanddegeneration
osteoarthrosis. (See Chapter 10 Figs 10.17A and B).
of enzymes
↑
Clinical Features
Alterationinjointstructure
a. Pain is the primary feature of osteoarthritis. It is gradual
in onset and slowly progressing in severity. There can be
Abnormal loading
pain free intervals too.
b. Swelling and joint effusion. Swelling in osteoarthritis is
due to effusion. This is commonly seen early in the course
Figure 12.8
disease and late in the course of the disease both swelling
Vicious cycle of idiopathic degeneration in primary osteoarthritis.
amd deformity is seen.
c.  Limitation of movement. Painful limitation of movement
is a late feature of osteoarthritis. In the early phase the
umprepared stress. For this reflex protective mechanism
to operate it takes a few milliseconds, e.g. when there is
joint movements are associated with pain but not limted.
d.Heberden's nodes and Bouchard's nodes. These are
a slip. In this the injury is avoided if the reflex protective
nodular formation occurmring in the DIP and PIP joints
mechanism operates by contraction of different muscles
which in turm averts the fall. But it is those degrees of
respectively in osteoarthrtis.
repetitive minor stress (trauma) occuming within those
Diagnosis
few milliseconds before the reflex protective mechanism
It is not difficult. Clinical features and X-rays confirm the
could operate, that causes injury to the joint structures
which (perhaps a microfracture) is thought to be
diagnosis.
responsible for most of the degenerative arthritis, e.g.
Radiological Findings (Figs 12.9A to D)
osteoarthrtis of the finger joints occurring in musicians
and typists, cervical spondylosis occurring in head load
Narrowing of the joint space (due to loss of articular
workers and sky divers of Acupulco in Mexico. (La
cartilage.)
Sclerosis of the subchondral bone.
Quebrada cliff where from ages sky divers dive into the
Subchondral cysts.
sea from a height of about 45 meters). Osteoarthrosis of
 Osteophytes (the bony excrescence or outgrowth, usually
the knee is common among sailors and people who stand
branched in shape)
for long hours at work.
b. Genetic factors: Osteoarthritis is known to occur among
·Defonmities.
many family members. It is especially common in identical
Management
twins. These factors support genetic predisposition.
Nonoperative Management
Pathology
Early in the stage of the disease treatment aims at providing
Primary
pain relief and slowing down the pace of progression of the
disease by taking care of the offending factors if any, e.g.
With advancing age the proteoglycan content of the articular
overweight and giving exercise therapy to strengthen the
cartilage decreases thereby reducing the water content of the
muscles. A good functioning muscle acts as a shock absorber
cartilage. Such a cartilage becomes less resilient and cracks
 and takes care of the stress which otherwise would have fallen
during activities of daily living. This is responsible for the
maximally on the joint
onset and progression of degenerative process. It starts
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs take care of the pain
innocuously in the beginning, progresses slowly over a period
and inflammation. Along with good physiotherapy gives
of time and then becomes severe.
considerable amount of pain relief.
224
Essentials of Orthopedics
B
C
D
Figures 12.9A to D
Radiographs of a 60 years old patient with severe osteoarthritis. Note the extensive degenerative changes suggestive of eburnation of the
articular surface. Osteophytes are seen in plenty. Joint space is narrowed and there is evidence of instability as seen by opening up of the
lateral joint space. This patient underwent total knee replacement and is totally symptom free.
Infiltration of hyaluronidase into the joint is known to give
Essay Question
sustained temporary relief.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, radiological
features, diagnosis and management of osteoarthritis.
Surgical(Operative) Management
It is done late in the course of the disease when the joint is
Rheumatoid Arthritis
degenerated and clinically associated with pain and deformity.
Total joint arthroplasty is the treatment of choice (Figs 12.9A
Definition
to D).
It is an autoimmune systemic disorder wherein the body defence
 In selective cases osteotomies can be done. Osteotomy
mechanism identifies the normal tissue as antigen and evokes
alters the line of weight bearing and distribution of stress
and is known to give relief, e.g. high tibial osteotomy.
Etiology
Arthroscopic lavage and excision of loose bodies is done
in high risk patients who are not fit for joint replacement
Exact cause is not known. Following factors are considered
surgery. This procedure gives temporary relief.
as triggering factors.
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
225
a. Chronic infection—-bacterial,fungal or viral.
DC—neutrophil increase in the early acute phase and in
 b. Environmental factors—polluted atmosphere, smoking,
chronic phase may show increase in lymphocytes.
etc.
ESR—elevated.
c. Genetic factors—HLA with DR4 specificity is observed.
CRP—elevated. It is nonspecific and only suggests that there
d. Endocrinal factors.
is active inflammation.
e. Poor quality food with constant assault on the gut.
ANA—when positive suggests sensitization has occurred and
autoimmunity has developed.
Joints, Organs and Tissues Involved
(Nonmal titer is 1:40. Higher titer indicates presence of
Mainly involves the joints. Joints of the wrist, hand, knee,
autoimmunity).
ankle and foot are commonly affected. Elbow, shoulder, hip
considered as positive.
and spine are not commonly affected. Monoarticular
CCP (Citruline antibody)—elevated. It is more sensitive than
involvement is rare.
RA factor. Can be positive even when RA factor is negative.
In volvement of soft tissue structures surrounding the joint
 too occurs, e.g the synovium, capsule, tendons, muscles, etc.
What is ANA (Antinuclear Antibodies)?
Lungs, pericardium, eyes, vessels and nerves are the other
Antinuclear antibodies are not the usual antibodies. They are
structures that can get involved.
·Age 20-40 yr.
autoantibodies. These have a capability of binding to the
nucleus of a normal cell, which it recognizes as an antigen
· M:F ratio is 3:1
and makes it vulnerable for destruction.
Pathology
What is RA Factor?
The disease process starts in the synovium as synovitis with
 infiltration by inflammatory cells; to begin with monocytes
RA factor is an autoantibody against the Fc portion of IgG
infiltrate the synovium. This is later followed by lymphocytes.
It is seen in about 80% of the patients with rheumatoid
As a result the synovium gets thickened. An effusion into the
arthritis. It is not 100% specific. False-positive results are
joint develops and as the disease progresses, the cytokines
possible.
 Hence the result is to be correlated with clinical symptoms.
released in the process, e.g. TNF o, interleukin-1 and inter-
leukin-6, histamine, etc destroy the articular cartilage, the
What is CCP Antibody?
bone, the capsule, the ligaments, the tendons and the muscles
The destruction occurs by the formation of a pannus of tissue
CCP stands for Cyclic Citrulinated Peptide Antibody. Citruline
at the junction of the synovium and the articular cartilage. This
antibody titre is a better diagnostic test than RA factor. When
pannus erodes the cartilage and the bone and destroys it. Thus
elevated, it not only helps to diagnose rheumatoid arthritis
arthritis develops.
but also indicates the possibility of the enhanced risk of joint
destruction.
Clinical Features
·Systemic features start insidiously with low grade fever,
X-rays (Figs 12.10B and C)
malaise, fatigue and joint pains.
In the early stages diffuse rarefaction is the only finding. Later
The joints are swollen edematous, warm, tender with
other changes develop such as
effusion and the movements are painful and limited.
 Narrowing of the joint space.
Early morming stiffness is characteristic
· Destruction of the articular surfaces.
 Synovial thickening is appreciable.
· Subchondral sclerosis
·Subcutaneous nodules may be palpable.
·Subchondral cysts.
Investigations
Treatment
Blood Investigations
Medical
Hb%—may be low.
Early in the disease medical line of treatment is followed.
TC—leukocytosis.
a.  Cold packs to reduce inflammation.
226
Essentials of Orthopedics
A
B
Figures 12.10A to C
Showing (A) classical swan neck deformity due to tightness of the intrinsic muscles as a result of inflammation and fibrosis. (B and C)
Radiographs showing ankylosis of the wrist joint in a burnt out case of rheumatoid arthritis. Note the extensive destruction that has occurred.
b. Rest to facilitate recovery.
b. Swan neck deformity
c.Drug therapy.
c. CCP
In the stage of active inflammation, anti-inflammatory
d. Pathology of rheumatoid arthritis.
drugs and steroids local as well as systemic is indicated.
These are the first line of drugs.
Essay Question
DMARD (Disease Modifying Anti-rheumatic Drugs) are
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, radiological
the second line of drugs which are given within 3 months
features, diagnosis and management of rheumatoid arthritis.
 of control of acute phase of the disease. Hydroxy
Enumerate its complications.
chloroquine, methotrexate, leflunamide, etanercept,
Q. Discuss the drug therapy of rheumatoid arthritis.
infliximab are some of the common drugs that are used.
These drugs act specifically by inhibiting the chemical
Hyperparathyroidism
maediators of inflammation, e.g. TNFo, interleukin-1, etc.
Surgical
Parathyroid glands are responsible for maintaining a fine
balance of levels of calcium in the human body (Fig. 12.11).
Total joint arthroplasty When considerable joint damage and
Normally they are 4 in number 2 on each side of the midline
fibrous/unsound ankylosis has occurred resulting in a painful
im the vicinity of the thyroid gland. But the number may vary
deranged joint, total joint replacement is the treatment of
between 2 and 6. The superior parathyroid glands lie on the
choice. It should always be done in the remission phase of
posterior surface of the middle 1/3rd of the thyroid and the
the disease and never in the active phase of the disease.
mferior parathyroid glands lie on the posterior surface of the
Arthrodesis It is the last option to give a painless, stable joint
lower pole of the thyroid.
when all other options have failed. The joint involved is fused
Classification
in functional position. Indications are more in wrist and hand.
Reconstructive procedures These are mainly done for
The hyperparathyroidism may be classified as:
deformities of the hand. Deformities like mallet finger,
A. Primary—due to adenoma of the parathyroid
boutonniere and swan neck are correctable by surgical release
B. Secondary—due to persistant hypocalcemia e.g renal rickets
amd suturing of the slips of the extensor expansion. Once the
C. Tertiary—the secondary hyperplasia remains and becomes
joints are damaged such reconstructive procedures are not
autonomous.
possible (Ref: For details of the procedures).
All types result in excessive secretion of parathormone.
Revision Questions
Pathology
Q. Write notes on:
Excess of parathormone enhances conservation of calcium
a.DMARD
directly through renal tubular absorption, and bone
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
227
Homeostasisofcalcium in the serum
DietaryCa,Penterthegut
Thyroid
Serumcalciumlevels
Calcitonin suppresses
regulatetheactivityof
Careleasebyinhibiting
theparathyroid
activityoftheosteoclasts
Extracellular
fluid
Ca
Absorbed fromthegutunder
Ca,P
the influence of vit D.
Bone
1,25（OH）D
releases Ca
frombone
Parathormoneregulates
1,25（OH)Dstimulates
conversionof25-OH-Dto
absorptionof Ca andP
1,25（OH)Din thekidney
fromthegut
Intermediate
Parathormoneincreasesreabsorption
Kidney
of CaanddecreasesabsorptionofP
Rapid↑
Figure 12.11
Showing the regulation of calcium in the human body. Note that the parathormone has a direct action on the bone and the kidneys and an
indirect action on the intestines through the active metabolite of vitamin D. Decrease in serum calcium stimulates the release of parathormone.
resorption and indirectly through intestinal absorption of
granulation tissue as well as fibrous tissue leads to a classical
calcium by its regulatory action on vitamin D synthesis.
change known as ‘osteitis fibrosa cystica'. Hemorrhage
Thus, there is hypercalcemia. Despite of augmented renal
Occurring in this fibrous tissue stroma leads to the formation
tubular absorption of calcium some amount of calcium is
of cysts with fluid with a brownish look.These are known as
excreted in the urine which results in calciuria.
'Brown tumors'.
The renal tubular absorption of phosphate is suppressed.
These changes of softening can cause pathological
Hence there is hypophosphatemia and phophaturia.
fracture.
This abnormality has generalized effect on the body and
Clinical Features
the organs.
Age:
 3rd to 5th decade
Effect on Kidneys
Male: Female Ratio 1:3
It results in calcinosis, nephrolithiasis, recurrent infection and
+
 Primary hyperparathyroidism may remain as ymptomatic.
impaired renal function.
Classical features are depicted as bones, stones, abdominal
groans and psychic moans and are due to hypercalcemia.
Effect on the Bone
Anorexia, fatigue,weakness, abdominal pain and
It results in loss of bone substance due to direct (resorption)
depression.
dissolution of bone. Classical subperiosteal erosion,endosteal
Nephrocalinosis and lithiasis,
cavitation and replacement of the marrow by vascular
·Pathological fractures.
228
Essentials of Orthopedics
Radiological Features
Essay Question
What is the role of parathyroid gland in calcium metabolism?
In the Hand
 Discuss hyperparathyroidism.
Classical subperiosteal cortical resorption of the middle
phalan ges.
Further Reading
In the Spine
Rickets Osteomalacia and Hyperparathyroidism
Biconcave vertebral body due to the bulging of the disc, ^Cod
1. Babayigit A, Dirik E, Bober E, Cakmakci H. Adverse effects
fish spine'.
of antiepileptic drugs on bone mineral density. Pediatr Neurol
2006;35(3):177-81
In the Long Bones
2. Balasubramanian K, Rajeswari J, Gulab, Govil YC, Agarwal
AK, Kumar A, et al. Varying role of vitamin D deficiency in
Generalised rarefaction with cystic lesions,osteitis fibrosa
the etiology of rickets in young children vs. adolescents in
cystica and brown tumors.
northern India. J Trop Pediatr 2003;49(4):201-6.
3. Cesur Y, Caksen H, Gundem A, Kirimi E, Odaba D.
In the Skull
Comparison of low and high dose of vitamin D treatment in
nutritional vitamin D deficiency rickets. J Pediatr Endocrinol
Stippling calcification. Pepper pot skull' (also known as salt
Metab 2003;16(8):1105-9.
pepper appearance).
4. Comparisons of oral calcium, high dose vitamin D and a
combination of these in the treatment of nutritional rickets in
Laboratory Investigations
children.
5. Cozzolino M, Gallieni M, Pasho S, Fallabrino G, Ciceri P,
Elevated serum calcium, low serum phosphorous
Volpi EM, et al. Management of secondary hyperparathyroi-
 Elevated serum alkaline phosphotase.
dism in the elderly patient with chronic kidney disease. Drugs
Aging 2009;26(6):457-68.
Elevated serum parathormone levels.
6. Dwyer JT, Dietz WH Jr, Hass G, Suskind R. Risk of nutritional
rickets among vegetarian children. Am J Dis Child 1979;
Treatment
133(2):134-40
7. Furlanetto TW. Etiology of hyperparathyroidism in McCune-
A. Primary hyperparathyroidism is treated nonoperatively
A1bright syndrome. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2009;67(9):2037,
8. Hellebostad M, Markestad T, Seeger Halvorsen K. Vitamin
D deficiency rickets and vitamin B12 deficiency in vegetarian
Indications for surgical removal
children. Acta Paediatr Scand 1985;74(2):191-5.
i. Marked and sustained hypercalcemia.
 9. Kruse K. Pathophysiology of calcium metabolism in children
ji. Progressive nephrocalcinosis and renal calculi.
with vitamin D-deficiency rickets. J Pediatr 1995;126(5 Pt
i1i.
Severe bone loss and rarefaction of bone.
1):736-41
Hungry bone syndrome: This is because of brisk new bone
10. Kutluk G, Cetinkaya F, Basak M. Comparisons of oral calcium,
formation that begins to occur after parathyroidectomy.
high dose vitamin D and a combination of these in the
treatment of nutritional rickets in children. J Trop Pediatr
Sudden drop in the levels of serum calcium is observed.
2002;48(6):351-3
This may cause severe tetany. Should be treated by active
11. Ott SM. Bone histomorphometry in renal osteodystrophy
forms of Vitamin D.
Semin Nephrol 2009;29(2):122-32.
 B. Secondary and tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Treatment
12. Pettifor JM. Nutritional rickets: deficiency of vitamin D,
should always be directed towards treating the primary
calcium, or both? Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80(6 Suppl):1725S-
9S.
pathology.
13.
 Ray D, Goswami R, Gupta N, Tomar N, Singh N, Sreenivas
C. Treatment of pathological/stress fractures. These are
V. Predisposition to vitamin D deficiency osteomalacia and
always treated by protection and immobilization. Once the
rickets in females is linked to their 25(OH)D and calcium
primary cause is treated, recalcification begins to occur
and the lesions heal.
Endocrinol (Oxf) 2008.
14. Sathe PA, Madiwale CV, Kandalkar BM, Bandgar TR, Shah
D. Treatment of deformities. Deformities are always treated
NS, Menon PS. Primary hyperparathyroidism: a clinico-
by corrective osteotomies after the serum levels of calcium
pathological experience. Indian J Pathol Microbiol 2009;
and alkaline phosphotase become nonmal.
52(3):313-20
Nutritional, Endocrine, Degenerative and Autoimmune Disorders
229
15. Soliman AT, A1 Khalaf F, Alhemaidi N, Al Ali M, Al Zyoud
polymorphisms in Asian Indians. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83(6):
M, Yakoot K. Linear growth in relation to the circulating
1411-9.
hormone, and 25-hydroxy vitamin D in children with
Rheumatoid Arthritis
nutritional rickets before and after treatment: endocrine
adaptation to vitamin D deficiency. Metabolism 2008;57(1):
19. Bergman MJ. Assessing adequate treatment response in
95-102.
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Ther 2009;3 1(6):1219-
16. Thacher TD, Fischer PR, Pettifor JM, Lawson JO, Isichei CO,
31.
Reading JC, et al. A comparison of calcium, vitamin D, or
20. Chatfield SM, Wicks IP, Sturgess AD, Roberts LJ. Anti-
both for nutritional rickets in Nigerian children. N Engl J Med
citrullinated peptide antibody: death of the rheumatoid factor?
1999;341(8):563-8.
Med J Aust 2009;190(12):693-5.
17. Tiosano D, Weisman Y, Hochberg Z. The role of the vitamin
 21. Esposito E, Cuzzocrea S. TNF-alpha as a therapeutic target
 D receptor in regulating vitamin D metabolism: a study of
in inflammatory diseases, ischemia-reperfusion injury and
vitamin D-dependent rickets, type I1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
trauma. Curr Med Chem 2009;16(24):3152-67.
2001;86(5):1908-12.
22. Radovits BJ, Kievit W, Laan RF. Tumour necrosis factor-alpha
18. Vupputuri MR, Goswami R, Gupta N, Ray D, Tandon N,
antagonists in the management of rheumatoid arthritis in the
Kumar N. Prevalence and functional significance of 25-
elderly: a review of their efficacy and safety. Drugs Aging
hydroxyvitamin D deficiency and vitamin D receptor gene
2009;26(8):647-64.
13
Congenital and
Developmental
Anomalies
Congenital Talipes Equinovarus
Congenital Vertical Talus
二
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH)
Skeletal Dysplasia and Other Conditions
Congenital Talipes Equinovarus
 and correction by the application of serial plaster of Paris 
 casts and later the use of Dennis-Brown splint are some of
 Popularly known abbreviation is CTEV. It is also known as
 Congenital Clubfoot. Hippocrates was the first to describe
the well established nonoperative methods.
the condition and mention the importance of gentle
manipulation and bandaging for successful correction. In
Etiology and Pathogenesis
ancient Mexico the Aztecs treated clubfeet with splints
 Etiology of clubfoot still remains unsolved and is thought to
prepared out of cactus and applied casts using flour, lime,
be multifactorial. Following factors are considered.
tar and cloth. Egyptian tombs have depictions of clubfeet.
a. Hereditary.
 Lorenz was the first one who advocated the principles of
 b. Increased intrauterine pressure and malposition (Dennis-
gradual correction. He emphasized the need for correcting
Brown 1933).
adduction defonmity first before correcting varus and
C.A
Arrest in development.
equinus. He was also the first one to perform Achilles tendon
d. Bony abnormalities.
tenotomy.
e. Tendon and ligament abnormalities.
 Since then several physicians have treated clubfoot
(The clubfoot secondary to neuromuscular disorders are
successfully using the method of gradual manipulation and
not included in the discussion as they are considered as
splinting. Kites and Ponsetti's technique of manipulation
teratologic).
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
231
None of the factors have been conclusively proved. But
Radiological assessment of clubfoot (Figs 13.2A and B)
it is understood that the deformity occurs in the territory
Angles in radiological views
Normal
CTEV
supplied by the posterior tibial nerve. Excessive collagen
AP view
synthesis leading to fibrosis of the muscles and the ligaments
Talocalcaneal angle-A
20-50°
15°
seems to be the cause for the development of deformity.
Talo-first metatarsal angle-B
0 to -15°
-20°
Lateral view
Talocalcaneal angle
35-50°
 20° to -10°
Deformities in Clubfoot
Tibiocalcaneal angle
40° ± 15°
>70°
(Maximum dorsiflexion angle)
The defonmities present are:
Talocalcaneal Index
a. Equinus,
b. Adduction.
The sum of talocalcaneal angle in AP and lateral views gives
c.Inversion.
the index
These deformities are present both in the forefoot and
40° and more
Excellent
in the hind foot. The combination of adduction and inversion
20°-40°
Good
results in varus deformity. The deformities are the result of
<20°
Poor
tight tendons and ligaments. All the ligaments of the ankle
(except on the lateral side) and tendons of the posteromedial
compartment of the ankle are contracted (Figs 13.1A and B).
Ligaments Involved
All the ligaments around the talus with the exception of lateral
side are contracted.
Medially
i. The deltoid ligament.
ii.The talonavicular ligament.
ii. The plantar calcaneonavicular ligament (Spring
ligament).
Posteriorly
i. Posterior talofibular ligament.
ii. Posterior calcaneofibular ligament.
Inferiorly
i. The interosseus talocalcaneal ligament.
In addition to this the posterior capsule of the ankle and
the subtalar joint and the plantar fascia are also contracted.
Tendons and Muscles Involved
i. Tibialis posterior.
ii. Flexor digitorum longus.
ii. Flexor hallucis longus.
iv. Tendoachilles.
v. Abductor hallucis brevis (in the foot).
Diagnosis
B
It is a straight forward diagnosis. In severe cases the foot is
 placed upside down. The size of the heel and the foot is small.
Figures 13.1A and B
Clinical photograph of bilateral clubfoot seen from (A) the front and
Always rule out other associated congenital anomalies and
(B) the back showing all the classical deformities. Note that the
teratological causes, e.g. spina bifida, menigomyelocele,
deformities are present both in the forefoot and the hind foot. Also
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, etc.
note the size of the heel which is small.
232
Essentials of Orthopedics
ness of the surgical procedure. Hence, treatment should always
 start with manipulation as the first step.
Itis author's opinion that themanipulation done under
anesthesia with relaxed muscles always gives a better
correction,especially when the foot is rigid and less flexible.
Nonoperative
Treatment starts at birth. Mother is taught how to manipulate
the deformity gently without inflicting injury, till such time
the child is fit for serial cast technique. Milder deformities
More severe deformities are managed by serial casts after
manipulation based on Ponsetti's method (Figs 13.3 and 13.4).
A
B
Ponsetti's method of manipulation(Ignatio Ponsetti,1940) In
Figures 13.2A and B
this method, the manipulation is done in the following order
Picture showing the angle (A) the talocalcaneal angle in AP view,
to correct the deformity. First cavus, next adductus, then varus
and (B) the talo 1st metatarsal angle in AP view in normal foot (A)
and (B) in clubfoot.
amd last equinus. Non-adherence to these principles may result
in poor correction or development of some other deformity.
e.g rocker bottom foot. Manipulation is done for 1-3 minutes
Treatment
amnd then the baby is given a feeding bottle while the plaster
Modalities of treatment are classified as nonoperative and
cast is applied. The cast is changed after 5-7 days and the
operative. The surgical procedures are further classified as:
 procedure repeated. Full correction can be achieved with 5-7
a. Procedures for early correction.
casts.
b. Procedures for correction of residual deformities.
1. Ist, correction of cavus: This is achieved by supinating
c. Procedures for recurrent clubfoot and for neglected
and abducting the fore foot which is in contradistinction
clubfoot.
to other methods which recommend pronation of the first
Age of presentation has an important bearing on the choice
metatarsal for correction of the cavus. The deformity
of the procedure. However, it is an established fact that an
always gets corrected with one manipulation.
attempted manipulative correction prior to planned surgery
2.2nd and 3rd, corrections of adductus and hind foot varus:
definitely lessens the deformity and decreases the extensive-
This is achieved simultaneously by abducting the foot
A
Figures 13.3A and B
Showing the manipulation being done to achieve gradual correction. (A) Shows the correction of fore foot varus. (B) Shows correction of
hind foot equinus.
Note: without correcting the forefoot varus and achieving some amount of valgus, correction of the hind foot equinus should never be
attempted as it may result in development of rocker bottom deformity.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
233
B
Figures 13.4A and B
Showing the position of immobilization after (A) full correction of forefoot varus and (B) overcorrected position of the foot after total correction.
The cast given should always extend above knee with knee in 90? of flexion to relax the gastrosoleus.
while pressure is applied over talar head. This corrects
Once the correction is achieved the foot is protected in a
the major portion of the deformity.
splint to prevent recurrence of the defommity. Follow up is
3.4th, correction of equinus:Correction should be attempted
always necessary till 5 years of age (Fig. 13.5).
only when the hind foot is neutral and the forefoot is in
70° valgus. Foot is always dorsiflexed by applying pres-
OperativeMethods
sure over the sole of the foot and never under the
Surgical procedure should be individualized and should
metatarsal (heel cord tenotomy facilitates the correction
limit itself to the release of tight structures only. This is
of equinus).
achieved either by dividing them or by lengthening them.
Bony correction is indicated in fixed and residual
deformities.
For early correction before 12 months The accepted methods
are:
a.Posteromedial soft tissue release, in which the ligaments
which are contracted and tight are released and the tendons
lengthened by the technique of Z-plasty. (Ref: Structures
that are tight as mentioned above). The alignment obtained
after the surgery is maintained in a plaster of paris cast
for a period of 6 weeks. Then protected with a splint.
b. Peritalar release and stabilization of talonavicular and
calcaneocuboid articulation with K-wire. A Cincinnati
 approach is used for the same. The K-wire is removed at
6 weeks. Postoperative care is same as above (Fig. 13.6).
(The Cincinnati approach is a transverse approach
centered at the level of the tibiotalar joint.It extends from
Figure 13.5
the anteromedial aspect at the naviculocuneiform joint and
Dennis Brown splint for maintaining the correction achieved. Note
how the heel rests on the footplate and is held firmly by the flap
then over the back of the ankle to the anterolateral aspect of
shoe with laces thereby maintaining the position of the foot in valgus.
the ankle just distal to sinus tarsi) (Fig. 13.7A).
234
Essentials of Orthopedics 
For residual deformity after4yr
a. Hind foot varus—a calcaneal lateral closed wedge or
medial open wedge osteotomy as suggested by Dwyer
(Fig. 13.7B).
Turco
b. Fore foot varus-
-a cuboidal close wedge and medial
incision
cuneiform open wedge into which the wedge of bone taken
from the cuboid is placed (Fig. 13.8).
For neglected clubfoot andrecurrent clubfoot between
4-12 yrs Mlizarov method or in the younger age group JESS 
fixator may be used. These methods not only correct the
 deformity but also have distinct advantage of lengthening the
foot.
Cincinnatiincision
Figure 13.6
 Picture showing surgical exposures for correction of CTEV.
Graftbeing
placedin
"opened”wedge
Neurovascular
bundleand
tendons
Division of
retracted
medialinsertion
ofAchillestendon
A
B
Laminectomyretractor
openingandholdingthewedgeapart
Figures 13.7A and B
Dwyer's osteotomy for the correction of residual heel varus.
Figure 13.8
Clinical photograph showing residual deformity of forefoot adduction
and supination. The child had undergone manipulation and cast
application for correction. This is perhaps due to the faulty manipulation
technique. It is likely that the first step of correction of cavus was not
achieved and the manipulation was carried further.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
235
C
A
D
Figures 13.9A to D
A neglected clubfoot showing a fixed deformity of talipes equinovarus.
Note the callosities developed on the pressure points on the
dorsolateral aspect of the foot due to weight-bearing stress. One of
the callosities is infected. Triple arthrodesis is indicated in such feet
for the correction of the deformities. (D) The three joints fused are
the Subtalar,the Talonavicular and the Calcaneocuboid. Hence the
name triple arthrodesis.
After 14 yrs In skeletally mature foot wedge osteotomy and
Definition
triple arthrodesis may be considered. These procedures fuse
the talonavicular, calcaneocuboid and subtalar joint (Figs 13.9A
It is a convex deformity of the plantar surface of the foot
to D).
occurring due to the vertical disposition of the talus and dorsal
dislplacement of the navicular secondary to dislocation of
Essay Question
talonavicular joint.
 Discuss the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of
Etiology
a case of congenital talipes equiovarus. Enumerate the compli-
 cations and discuss the management.
Exact etiology is not known. Following factors may
Congenital Vertical Talus
predispose the occurrence.
a. Muscular imbalance resulting in over action of tibialis
Synonyms
anterior.
 Rocker bottom flat foot.
b. Intrauterine compression.
Congenital convex pes valgus.
c. Autosomal dominant transmission.
 Teratological dislocation of talonavicular joint.
d. As a part of other associated congenital anomalies, e.g
·Heneken was the first one to describe this in 1914.
arthrogryposis DDH, etc.
236
Essentials of Orthopedics
Pathological Anatomy
foot, the valgus and equinus position of the heel are the
striking features.
Bone
Radiological Features (Figs 13.10A and B)
The talus is fixed in a vertical position with associated
hypoplasia of the talar head and the neck. The talonavicular
AP view (Fig. 13.11A)
joint is dislocated and the navicular bone is displaced dorsally
· Increased talocalcaneal angle
articulating with the dorsal aspect of the neck of the talus.
·Fore foot is in abduction.
There is varying degree of subluxation of the calcaneocuboid
Lateral view
joint. Thus there is elongation of the medial column and
· Calcaneus is in equinus.
shortening of the lateral column of the foot.
· Talus is vertically placed. (normal is horizontal).
·Navicular is displaced dorsally.
Ligaments
Lateral plantarflexionview
The tibionavicular and the dorsal talonavicular ligaments are
· To assess the talar metatarsal and calcaneal metatarsal
contracted. This prevents the reduction of the talonavicular
axis. Both are increased because of equinus position of
joint. Also the posterior capsule of the ankle is contracted.
the bones (Normal values are 3° and 10° respectively).
Muscles and Tendons
Lateral dorsiflexion view
· To assess the heel equinus.
The tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor 
 Note: The lines drawn for assessment of the position of the
digitorum longus, peroneus brevis and tendoachilles are
talus and the calcaneum in relation to the rest of the foot are
contracted. The tibialis posterior and the peroneal tendons are
all drawn along the long axis of the bones. In the AP view
displaced anteriorly and may act as dorsiflexors instead of
they are divergent and in the lateral views they are almost
plantar flexors.
vertical and nearly at right angles to the horizontal (except
Diagnosis
the line of the calcaneum). Hence they derive the names
tibiocalcaneal, tibiotalar, taloclcaneal, talohorizontal,
The condition is easily diagnosed at birth. The convex plantar
talometatarsal, calcaneometatarsal, etc (Figs 13.10A and B).
surface of the foot, severe dorsiflexion and abduction of the
A
B
Horizontal
Figures 13.10A and B
Radiographs (A) of an infant with Congenital Vertical Talus and and (B) an adult with neglected Congenital Vertical Talus with secondary
degenerative arthritis. (A) The soft tissue shadow shows the convexity of the pantar surface of the foot. The talus is near vertical and the
indicating the dorsal displacement of the navicular. (B) An adult with rocker bottom foot. Note that the tibio talar and the talo horizontal angle
are near 180° and 90° respectively.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
237
Differential Diagnosis
Congenital Oblique Talus
This resembles congenital vertical talus but with certain
differences as shown in Figures 13.11A to C.
Treatment
a. Nonoperative treatment starts at birth. Manipulation of the
foot into plantar flexion and inversion in an attempt to
reduce the dislocation is carried out. Rarely successful and
if successful the reduction is maintained with closed
pinning and subsequently removal of pin and application
of splints. Even if it is not successful it helps in future
A
surgery by stretching the soft tissues.
b. Surgical treatment consists of open reduction of dis-
location and maintaining the correction achieved. Done
in single stage or in stages. Ideal time for surgery is at 1
year. More severe the deformity more extensive is the
surgery.
One Stage Release
Ist step—-Reduction of talonavicular joint by release of tibialis
amterior, tibionavicular and talonavicular ligaments and the
capsule. Reduction is stabilized with pin.
2nd step—Lengthening of peroneals and toe extensors and
reduction of calcaneo cuboid joint.
B
 3rd step—Correction of equinus contracture, release of
Achilles tendon and capsule of the subtalar and the ankle joint.
Figures 13.11A to C
Figure 13.12
Radiographs of (A) congenital oblique talus. Note that it has all the
Radiograph showing the neglected Rocker bottom foot in a middle
features of a vertical talus except that (B) the talonavicular joint
aged person. Note the degenerative changes in the subtalar,
subluxates in neutral position of the foot and (C) gets reduced in 
equinus. The red arrow shows the same.
triple arthrodesis.
238
Essentials of Orthopedics
Appropriate cast is given postoperatively which is changed
may be bom with dislocated/sublux ated hip or bom with
periodically and maintained for at least 8-12 weeks.
dislocatable and relocatable/reducible hip. In either case
 Excision of the navicular bone and Grice Green arthro-
the hip is reducible with manipulation. According to Klisic
desis is indicated in older children and in resistant deformities.
(1989) “ developmental displacement of the hip is a
Alwayskeep awatch on recurrence during the follow-up
dynamic disorder potentially capable of becoming better
upto 8-10 yr of age.
or worse as the child develops". This statement is
Complication of a neglected rocker bottom foot is tarsal
absolutely true. If the hip remains dislocated for longer
degeneration resulting in degenerative arthritis. This occurs
periods structural changes develop and reduction becomes
because of altered biomechanics during stress loading
 progressively difficult. But if the hip is maintained in a
(Fig. 13.12).
position of reduction right from the age of infancy it
becomes nonmal with growth. So the statement supports
Essay Question
the fact that the posture has a great role to play in the origin,
progress and the regress of the pathology (Fig. 13.13).
 Discuss the pathomechanics, diagnosis and management of
Thus DDH is not only multifactorial in origin but also
Rocker bottom flat foot.
Developmental Dysplasia of
Predisposing Factors
the Hip (DDH)
a.Racial dominance: Commonly seen in Native Americans
The abbreviation CDH (congenital dislocation of the hip)
amd Caucasians. Not common in Asians and Africans.
is now replaced by DDH (developmental dysplasia of the
b.
Ligamentous laxity: Studies by Wynne-Davis suggests that
hip). DDH is more appropriate because there is no
there is a genetic predisposition for the ligamentous laxity.
congenital embryonic anomaly as such. The development
This is the most common pathology that causes the hip to
starts normally in an embryo and due to some extraneous
dislocate. However this does not explain unilateral hip
factors the head of the femur is not contained in the
dislocation. Also suggests the postural influence on the
acetabulum. The most common factor is the laxity of the
development of DDH.
capsule. Other factors like malposition of the femoral head
c. Prenatal positioning: A frank breech presentation has a
and the effect of abnormal stresses on the developing
higher incidence when compared to single footling breech
femoral head also play a part in the pathology. The child
and double breech presentation.
FF
Figure 13.13
 Showing the diagrammatic representation and the radiograph of a neglected DDH. FF—shows the acetabulum filled with fibro-fatty tissue,
L—the limbus is inverted and C—the capsule is stretched.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
239
A
B
Figures 13.14A and B
Picture showing tests of (A) Barlow and (B) Ortolani being performed to dislocate and relocate/reduce the hip.
d. Postnatal positioning: Incidence has been found high in
is made out by the fingers placed in the region of the greater
Native Americans who carry their babies wrapped up with
trochanter.
the hip in full extension in cradle board.
The release of pressure slips the head back into the
Considering these facts, it can be concluded that
 acetabulum.
relatively gentle factors appliedpersistently cause
Ortolani's Test (Fig. 13.14B)
deformation and dislocation/subluxation.
This is the reverse of Barlow's test. In this test the examiner
e. Primary acetabular dysplasias.
tries to reduce the dislocated hip. The test is performed with
f. Other associated anomalies: DDH may be a part of other
the baby in supine position as in Barlow's test. The babies
associated congenital anomalies, e.g. torticollis, congenital
thigh is grasped between the thumb and the index finger. With
dislocation of the knee, etc.
the other fingers the greater trochanter is gently lifted up.
 g. Sex: The incidence of DDH is more in females when
abducting the hip at the same time. The clunk of reduction is
felt. When the hip is adducted the head gently slips out
compared to males.
(Barlow's test).
Clinical Features
 These tests have to be repeated a couple of times to make
certain that there is DDH. Also should be performed on the
Up to 2-3 Months (the neonate)
other hip to assess the status of the other hip. .
The hip is always dislocatable and reducible. The classical
test of Barlow's and Ortolani's is always positive.
After 3-6 Months (the infant)
Barlow's Test (Fig. 13.14A)
 During this period the irreducibility becomes gradually
With the baby in supine position (on the couch or mother's
 established. As the hip remains in dislocated position other
lap) the examiner holds baby's both the knees and gives a
 physical findings appear.
gentle adduction push to one of the knees. If the hip is dislocat-
a.  Asymmetry of the thigh and gluteal folds (Figs 13.15A
able the feel of femoral head jumping out of the acetabulum
amd B).
240
Essentials of Orthopedics
In DDH because the trochanter is elevated this line passes
half way between the umbilicus and pubis.
After the Child Begins toWalk
a.The shortening becomes pronounced in unilateral cases
 b. Trendelenburg gait develops in unilateral cases and
waddling gait in bilateral cases.
c. Exaggerated lumbar lordosis secondary to flexion
contracture at the hip becomes noticeable (Fig. 13.18).
Note: Delay in milestones may or may not be observed.
However, if there is a delay in walking, the possibility of DDH
should be kept in mind.
Investigations
A
B
a. Ultrasound is a useful investigation in the newborm in
Figures 13.15A and B
whom X- ray imaging is of no use because of cartilaginous
Picture showing asymmetry of skin creases on the involved side in
nature of the bones. It should be used judiciously and
a unilateral DDH.
findings should be always be corelated with clinical
 findings to prevent overdiagnosis. (for more information 
b.
Shortening of the thigh.
refer α and β angle of Graf).
C.
 Superior location of the greater trochanter.
d. Positive telescopy.
b. MRI is a better investigation than ultrasound. But, it is
expensive and is accompanied by the disadvantage of
e.Limitation of abduction (Fig. 13.16B).
sedating the newborm.
f.Discrepancy in the levels of the knee(Allis',Perkin's or
c. X-ray gives useful information in an infant, only after
Galeazzi sign) (Fig. 13.16A).
3 months.
g.Klisic test (Figs 13.17A and B).
With the help of Hilgenreiner's and Perkin's line and
With the child supine the index finger is kept over the
the Shenton's line the location of the femoral head can be
anterior superior iliac spine and the middle finger over the
assessed. Also the center edge angle of Wilberg and the
greater trochanter. Next a imaginary line is drawn between
Acetabular index can be measured (Figs 13.19 to 13.20B).
the two. This line when extended upwards cuts through the
Hilgenreiner's and thePerkin's line divides the hip
umbilicus in a normal hip.
intofour quadrants.A normal hip lies usually in the lower
35°
80°
dooo
Oolobe
A
B
Figures 13.16A and B
(A) Showing asymmetry in the level of the knees which is known as Allis', Perkin's or Galeazzi Sign. On the involved side in a unilateral DDH
the knee will be at a lower level. (B) Showing limitation of abduction of the involved right hip.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
241
PL
HL
Figure 13.19
Picutre showing the following:
A
B
HL—Higenreiner's line. It is a horizontal line drawn passing through
the center of the triradiate cartilage.
Figures 13.17A and B
PL—Perkin's line. It is a line drawn perpendicularly down from the
Picture showing the Klisic test. Note the imaginary line cutting through
bony edge of the acetabulum.
the umbilicus in a normal hip and cutting midway between the
S—Shenton's line. It is a line along the neck of the femur to the
umbilicus and the pubis in a DDH.
inner margin of the pubic bone. It forms a smooth 'C' shaped curve.
BS—Broken Shenton's fine. This is seen in subluxation/dislocation
H—Dimension H. This is the height measured from the top of the
ossified femur to the Hilgenreiner's line.
D—Dimension D. This is measured from the inner border of the tear
drop to the center of the tip of the ossified femur.
Dimension H and D quantify proximal and lateral displacement of
the hip respectively. They are useful even at an age where the
epiphysis of the head of the femur is not ossified.
In neonates, infants and young children reducible hips are
treated by immobilization in reduced position with the help of
splints and plaster of Paris casts. Watched carefully for the possi-
bility of redislocation, avascular necrosis and nerve palsies,
e.g. femoral nerve in Pavlik harmess (Figs 13.21 and 13.22).
Figure 13.18
Picture showing exaggerated lumbar
OpenReduction
lordosis indicating the presence of flexion
deformity in a neglected bilateral DDH.
Surgery of open reduction is done in older children(6months
The child will have a waddling gait.
6 yr). In the young (<6 months) open reduction is done only
when closed reduction fails. Those hips which remain in
inner quadrant.A subluxated or dislocated hip moves
dislocated position for a considerable time are not amenable
towards the upper outer quadrant.
for closed methods of reduction. The adaptive changes which
d. Arthrography gives useful information regarding the
take place in the soft tissues and later in the bone prevent
concentric nature of reduction.
reduction. Preoperative traction in the desirable position has
proved its usefulness beyond doubt. It should always be given
Trea tment
before open reduction. This is known to reduce the risk of
avascular necrosis AVN (Fig. 13.23).
Nonoperative
When structural skeletal changes have not taken place
Treatment starts soon after birth. It aims at maintaining the
release of constricted/contracted soft tissues such as muscles
femoral head in the acetabulum till the relation gets organized
 and tendons, caspluse and ligaments, excision of the limbus
amd there is no risk of redislocation.
etc. will help in reducing the head into the acetabulum.
242
Essentials of Orthopedics
Linealongthe
roofofthe
Acetabular
Acetabular
index
acetbulm
index
(normal)
(abnormal)
Perkin'sline
27.5
Average
140°
Hilgenreiner's
line
Medialgap
Center-edgeangle
ofWilberg
B
Figures 13.20A and B
(A) Center-edge angle of Wiberg: It is an angle formed between the Perkin's line and the line drawn from the lateral lip of the acetabulum
This is an angle formed between a line drawn along the margin of the roof of the acetabulum and Hilgenreiner's line average angle in
newborn is about 27.5°. It decreases with age. Medial gap: This is the distance between the inner margin of the tear drop and the inner
margin of the neck of the femur. The gap increases in dislocation. Always compared with the the opposite hip. Not useful in bilateral cases.
Figure 13.21
Picture showing Craig splint and von Rosen splint.
Figure 13.23
Picture showing Bryant's traction/Gallows traction.
When structural skeletal changes have taken place,
femoral osteotomy and femoral shortening procedures for
containment or shelf operations and osteotomies of the ilium
Figure 13.22
for deepening the shallow acetabulum, are indicated. These
Picture showing the position of immobilization in spica cast after
procedures help in containing the head of the femur in the
closed manipulation and reduction.
acetabulum (Fig. 13.24).
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
243
The terminologies and the pattem of dysplasias have been
clearly explained by Rubin P through his dynamic classifica-
tion.
Dynamic Classification of Bone Dysplasias
DDH
(Based on Rubin P Dynamic Classification of Bone Dys-
plasias. Chicago year book medical publishers, 1964, p 82).
According to this dynamic classification, the dysplasia is the
result of either hypoplasia or hyperplasia of the specific cells
in different regions of the bone, i.e Epiphysis, Physis,
Metaphysis and Diaphysis. Hypoplasia is deficient or failure
and hyperplasia is stimulation and excess.
1. Epiphyseal dysplasias
A.Epiphysealhypoplasias
i. Articular cartilage, e.g. spondyloepiphyseal
Figure 13.24
dysplasia congenita and tarda.
Showing different types of containment procedures for DDH. A—Shelf 
ii. Ossification center, e.g. multiple epiphyseal
procedure; B—Chiari's osteotomy: C—Salter's osteotomy.
dysplasia congenita and tarda.
B.Epiphyseal hyperplasias
Reconstructive Procedures
i. Articular cartilage, e.g. dysplasia epiphysalis
In adults with unilateral dislocated hip, limb lengthening
hemimelica
procedures are considered. These procedures take care of the
 2. Physeal dysplasias
shortening and the limp. Those hips which become painful
A.Cartilage hypoplasias
(AVN) total hip replacement may be considered.
i. Proliferating cartilage, e.g. achondroplasia
congenita and tarda.
Revision Questions
ii. Hypertrophic cartilage, e.g. metaphyseal
dysostosis congenita and tarda.
Q. Write notes on
B.Cartilage hyperplasias
a.DDH
i.Proliferating cartilage, e.g. hyperchondroplasia.
b. Barlow's test
ii. Hypertrophic cartilage, e.g. enchondromatosis.
c. Ortolani's test.
 3. Metaphyseal dysplasias
d. Hilgenreiner's and Perkin's line
A.Metaphyseal hypoplasias
e.
CE angle of Wilberg.
i. In formation of primary spongiosa, e.g. hypophos-
f.Salter's imnominate osteotomy.
phatasia.
ii. In absorbtion primary spongiosa, e.g. osteopetrosis
Essay Question
congenital and tarda.
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management
ii. In absorbtion of secondary spongiosa, e.g. cranio-
of a case of DDH. Enumerate the complications and discuss
metaphyseal dysplasia congenita and tarda.
the management of complications.
B.Metaphyseal hyperplasias
i. Spongiosa, e.g. multiple exostosis.
Skeletal Dysplasia and Other Conditions
4.
 Diaphyseal dysplasias
A.Diaphyseal hypoplasias
Skeletal Dysplasias
i. Periosteal bone formation, e.g. osteogenesis
 imperfecta congenital and tarda.
Skeletal dysplasias are a group of disorders that result in
ii. Endosteal bone formation, e.g. idiopathic
disturbances in the normal growth of the skeleton. They are
osteoporosis congenita and tarda.
genetically determined. Most of them belong to autosomal
B.Diaphyseal hyperplasias
dominant type of inheritance. Few of them are autosomal
i. Periosteal bone formation, e.g. progressive
recessive and X-linked.
diaphyseal dysplasia.
244
Essentials of Orthopedics
Orthopedic care
The care is directed towards correction of angular limb
HYPERPLASIAS
HYPOPLASIAS
deformities. This possibly prevents the development of
Spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia
 degenerative arthritis at a later period.
Multiple epiphyseal
Odontoid hypoplasia may result in atlantoaxial instability.
dysplasia
When present it needs to be stabilized.
Hyperchondroplasia
Achondroplasia
Enchondromatosis
MultipleEpiphysealDysplasia
Metaphyseal
dysostosis
The condition was first described by Fairbank as Dysplasia
Hypophosphatasia
Familialexostosis
Osteopetrosis
Epiphysealis Multiplex.
Craniometaphyseal
 In this unlike spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, the spine,
dysplasia
skull and vertebra are not involved. The epiphysis of the long
Progressivediaphyse
Osteogenesis
bones and short tubular bones are involved. Transmission is
dysplasia-
imperfecta
autosomal dominant; rarely recessive. Delay in appearance
Osteoporosis
Hyperphosphatasemi
of epiphyseal ossification centers is observed radiologically
mainly in long bones and short tubular bones. When appears 
Figure 13.25
the epiphysis is small, flat and may have mottled appearance.
 Showing areas of bone responsible for skeletal abnormality and
different dysplasias.
Early diagnosis and correction of the deformity is indicated
to prevent early degenerative arthritis.
ii. Endosteal bone formation, e.g. hyperphospha-
Achondroplasia
tasemia.
It is the most common form of dwarfism. The incidence is
Important Skeletal Dysplasias (Fig. 13.25)
around 1.5-2.0 per 10,000 live births (Fig. 13.26).
SpondyloepiphysealDysplasia
This is characterized by generalized involvement of the
epiphysis of the spine and long bones resulting in dispropor-
tionate dwarfism.
Types
a. Congenita—severe fonm presents at birth. Dispropor-
tionate dwarfism is pronounced.
b.
Tarda—less severe form presents in early childhood with
less disturbance in growth. Loss of height is minimal.
Transmission: Autosomal dominant.
Clinical features
Wide set eyes
Short neck
Barrel chest
Exaggerated lumbar lordosis with protuberant abdomen
Coxa vara with waddling gait
Angular deformity in the lower limb, e.g genu valgum.
Radiologicalfeatures
Delay in the appearance of the epiphysis (is responsible
for the short stature)
Figure 13.26
Coxa vara in the hip
Pictures showing clinical features of an achondroplastic dwarf. Note
1
Genu valgum in the knee
the 'Starfish hand' on the right side hand and trident hand on the
Platyspondyly in the spine
left side hand. Also note the presence of a single transverse crease
Hypoplasia of the odontoid process.
in the palm.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
245
Types
Osteopetrosis
Spontaneous mutation occurring in patemal gene(more
This also also known as Albers-Schonberg disease (after
common than matermal) of normal parents. The offspring
Albers-Schonberg who described the disease in the year
is an Achondroplastic dwarf. Can expect normal life
1904), Marble bone disease and Chalk bone disease. Failure
expectancy.
of osteoclastic resorption leads to the formation of calcified
Homozygous Achondroplasia occurring in the offspring
cartilage and primitive osteoid. Thus there is increased
of achondroplastic parents.Generally the outcome is fatal
sclerosis and brittleness of bone with a tendency for easy
in the neonatal period.
fracture.
Transmission: Autosomal dominant with complete penetrance.
Histopathology identifies abundant osteoclasts.But these
osteoclasts do not respond to PTH because of inherent
Clinical features (Fig.13.26)
abnormality. No activation of macrophages andmonocytes
·Normal intelligence.
is observed. Thus calcified cartilage and primary woven bone
· Bossing of the skull.
is not replaced by lamellar bone and is found in abundance.
·
 Small maxillae with prominent mandibles.
This immature bone is tightly embedded into the coarse
·Deformities in the spine.
fibrous matrix.This increases the fragility of the bone and
 Short stubby hand with shortening of the middle finger
makes it susceptible for pathological fracture.
resulting in equal length of all the digits (Starfish hand).
Types
The middle and the ring finger is separated by a greater
·Malignant form in which there is obliteration of the
space which is referred as trident hand.
·Short upper and lower limbs.
megaly, easy bruising, bleeding abnormalities and delayed
·Protuberant abdomen.
dentition and caries teeth. Bony overgrowth leads to
Radiologicalfeatures
obliteration of the cranial foramina leading to nerve
Shortening of the tubular bones with increased diameter.
palsies. Blindness and deafness may develop. Patho-
V or U shaped growth plate of the distal femur.
logical fractures are common. The condition is lethal.
Widening of the metaphysis of long bone.
Bone marrow transplantation is the only hope.
Squared ilium with horizontal acetabulum.
Benign or tarda form in which the diagnosis is incidental.
No clinical signs are present. Patients have a normal life
· Posterior scalloping of the vertebral body.
span. Pathological fracture and premature osteoarthritis
· Narrow spinal canal with decreased interpedicular
distance.
can occur.
·Associated with renal tubular acidosis. In this form the
· Shortness of the base of the skull with small foramen
lack of carbonic anhydrase interferes with the acidification
magnum.
 of the bony surface and interferes with the resorption by
Orthopedic care
 Osteoclasts. Except anemia other features are same as that
Care is necessary for cervical spinal cord compression in
Of malignant form.
young infants and lumbar cord compression due to canal
Transmission
stenosis at a later age group.The treatment is decompression
Malignant form is transmitted as autosomal recessive.
of the foramen magnum/spinal canal.
Benign or tarda form is transmitted as autosomal
Shortening of the limbs may need limb lengthening
dominant.
procedures.
· Tubular acidosis form is transmitted as autosomal
recessive.
Hypochondroplasia
Clinicalfeatures
This is a less severe form of dwarfism resembling achondro-
·Features of malignant form (see above).
plasia. Transmission is autosomal dominant. The condition
· Pathological fractures and deformities
cannot be diagnosed at birth but presents itself at a later period
·Bone pain and back pain.
 of growth. Limb lengthening procedures are indicated to
·Premature osteoarthritis.
correct short stature.
·Osteomyelitis (mandible).
246
Essentials of Orthopedics
Radiologicalfeatures
b. Genetic: Paget's disease is seen among siblings which
Increased density of bone
proves the presence of a hereditary factor.
 Filling of inrtamedullary canal with bone.
Some genes have been identified, e.g. PDB2- 18q22.1
Endobone fonmation (bone within the bone).
RANK.
'Rugger jersy' spine (as a result of sclerosis near the end
Pathology
plates of the vertebra)
 Bones affected are the bones of the spine, pelvis skull, thigh,
Dense skull bone with shallow fossae.
and legs.
Orthopedic care
Generally, involvement is polyostotic. Very rarely mono-
Malignant form is treated by early bone marrow
ostotic. The basic pathology is that of a massive tumover of
transplantation.
bone with increased osteoclastic activity to begin with
 Benign or tarda form does not require any active treatment
followed by increased osteoblastic activity.
Three distinct stages are recognized.
unless pathological fracture occurs.
·Associated acidosis is treated by alkaline therapy.
i. Osteolytic or hypervascular phase. In this stage there is
increased osteoclastic activty followed by an intense
 Pathological fractures in the pediatric age group are treated
osteoblastic activity which ultimately results in disorga-
nised mass of primary woven bone formation in the areas
eventually.
affected. The blood flow increases to such an extent as to
Adult fractures need reduction and intermal fixation. The
form AV shunts in the bone there by causing significant
 procedure is technically highly demanding because drilling
increase in cardiac out put and strain on the heart.
and reaming is extremely difficult in these bones.
ii. Intermediate phase. In this phase there is mixed activity
 Joint replacement is done for premature degenerative
the predominant being the osteoblastic activity.
arthritis.
Deformities begin to develop in this phase of the disease.
Complication of cranial nerve impingement is treated by
iii. Burmt-out or quiescent phase. The exaggerated activity
foraminotomy and decompression
stops. The vascular fibrous tissue replaces the marrow..
 Anemia and thrombocytopenia is treated by administration
Absence of haversian system and development of
of erythropoietin.
sclerotic bone is characteristic.
· Interferon-gamma is used to allow bone resorption by
Remodeling is poor and the quality of bone changes
enhancing superoxide production.
Calcitriol in high doses can be given in an attempt to
Clinical signs and symptoms
Bone pain is the common feature.
promote osteoclastic resorption.
 Constitutional symptoms like headache and drowsiness
Medical treatment improves the condition but does not
 Neuritic pains along the nerves, e.g. in skull here the
cure it.
nerves get compressed in the foramina.
·Arthritis
Other Conditions
 Deformities in long bones
· Pathological fractures.
Paget's Disease
Investigations
Described by Sir James Paget a British surgeon in the year
·Laboratory
1877. Hence, the name is an Eponym.
i. Increased serum alkaline phosphotase with normal serum
It is considered as a disease, causing a disturbance in
calcium and phosphorous.
normal osteoclastic and osteoblastic activity of a bone there
ii. Increase serum and urinary hydroxyproline which is an
by causing weakening, deformities and pathological fractures
indicator of bone lysis.
Thus it is also known as ^osteitis deformans'.
·Radiology (Figs 13.27A and C)
i. The involved bones show areas of lysis and sclerotic new
Etiology
bone formation. In the skull focal areas of lysis known
a.  Viral: Viral cause is attributed to certain viruses. Some of
a osteoporosis circumscripta may be present
the viruses are paramy xovirus, canine distemper virus, etc
ii. Bowing and bending defonmities are common.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
247
B
Figures 13.27A to C
i ss  g  (a  s  ss  n  se   u  )
uptake of the neucleotide. (C) The characteristic bowing of both anterior and posterior cortices of the tibia seen in a mono-ostotic Paget's
disease.
Bone scan (Fig.13.27B)
subunit of a stimulatory G protein (Gs-o) located on
Shows increase uptake of the nucleotide in affected areas
chromosome 20. Due to this there occurs a substitution of
much before the radiological changes appear.
amino acid arginine for cysteine or histidine. Thus the
Histopathology
osteoblasts lay down fibrous tissue instead of osteoid. This
Shows excessive osteoclasts, irregular lamellar bone
results in a gradual replacement of bone by fibrous tissue
formation and replacement of the marrow by fibrous
(during physiologic remodeling) and development of fibrous
tissue.
dy splasia.
Treatment Consists of two parts:
Types of fibrous dysplasia
a.Treatment of the pathology: This is achieved by giving
a. Mono-ostotic; single bone is involved.
drugs to decrease the increased osteoclastic activity, e.g.
b. Poly-ostotic; many bones are involved.
Residronate at the same time by administering adequate
 McCune-Albright syndrome
amounts of calcium and vitamin D. Exposure to sunlight
Poly-ostotic fibrous dysplasia, precocious sexual puberty.
is advised. Cacitonin is the drug of choice in extensive
cafe au lait skin lesions.
disease as well as a preoperative adjuvant.
d. Mazabraud syndrome (Mazabraud and Girard 1957)
b.Treatment of complications
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia with skeletal muscle
i. Pathological fractures are fixed. Deformities are
myxomas.
corrected by osteotomies.
Clinical signs and symptoms
ii.Arthritis treated by total joint replacement when non-
i. Polyostotic variety presents early in childhood. Mono-
operative methods fail to give relief.
ostotic variety presents as late as at 30 yrs of age.
iii. Secondary osteosarcoma is treated with amputation
ii. Medical attention is sought for either bone pain,
 and necessary chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
pathological fracture or the deformity.
Fibrous Dysplasia
Diagnosis
Fibrous dysplasia is a nonhereditary condition. It occurs due
a.
 X-ray—Typical ground glass appearence is seen radio-
to a spontaneous mutation in the gene that encodes the
logically (Fig. 13.28).
248
Essentials of Orthopedics
The condition is a hereditary one characterized by fragile
bones, blue sclerae, deafness, laxity of joints and a tendency
towards improvement with age.
Pathology
The disease affects both endochondral and intramembranous
ossification.
The initiation of osteogenesis proceeds normally up to the
stage of infiltration by osteoblasts .
At this stage the invasion of the matrix takes place by
abnormal osteoblasts which are incapable of laying down
normal type-I collagen to form the osteoid suitable for
adequate mineralization. Very few osteocytes appear and the
bone that is laid down is thin and weak
The trabeculae formed are disorganized, sparse, thin and
delicate. Thus the stress tolerance is poor and there is a
tendency for easy fracture.
Figure 13.28
Classification
Radiograph of tibia and fibula of both the legs showing the ground
Based on Shapiro's classification following types are
glass appearence and bending deformity of fibrous dysplasia.
recognized depending on the age of presentation.
 1. Osteogenesis imperfecta congenita
b. Histopathology—shows the trabeculae of woven bone
A. Fractures occur in utero or at birth. The short broad
embedded with fluid filled cysts. The surrounding matrix
crumpled femora and ribs.
is largely fibrous.
 B. Fractures occur in utero or at birth. The long bone
Treatment
contours are nonmal. No chest deformities
II. Osteogenesis impefecta tarda
Drug therapy of fibrous dysplasia
A. Fractures occur after birth but before walking.
Bisposphonates by their inhibitory action on osteoclasts
B. Fracture occur after the child starts walking.
are found to be useful. Intravenous Pamidronate is being
used in pediatric age group. Supplementation of calcium
 Based on genetic abnonmality clinical features or both,
and vitamin D is a must.
IIV types have been described.
Operative treatment
Type I—Dominant with blue sclera (Autosomal dominant)
Those present with pathological fractures and deformities
Type II—Lethal perinatal (Autosomal recessive)
are treated surgically with intermal fixation and corrective
Type MI—-Progressive deformity. Sclerae become less blue
 Osteotomies. Intramedullay devices should be preferred
with age (Autosomal recessive.)
and used for intermal fixation.
Type IV—Dominant with normal sclerae (Autosomal
dominant).
Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Clinical features
This condition is also known by several names some are
The features vary depending on the severity of the condition.
synonyms and others are eponyms.
Fracture is the sign with which a child presents
·Periosteal dysplasia.
1. Fetal and prenatal form: This the severe fonm of the
·Fragilitas osseum.
disease. Stillbirth and death in the early newbom period
·Idiopathic ostopsathyrosis.
is common. Life expectancy is poor.
· Brittle bone disease.
2. Infantile form: This form is less severe when compared
.Vrolik's disease.
to foetal form. If the child survives the initial few weeks
·Lobsteins disease (1835).
may survive for long.
Congenital and Developmental Anomalies
249
3. Adolescent form: This is identified late in childhood and
Further Reading
adolescence when the child sustains a fracture with a
DDH
relatively trivial trauma.
On examination following findings are detected:
1. Acta Chir Scand 1939;35:65.
Blue sclera.
2.Barlow T, Early diagnosis and treatment of congenital
dislocation of the hip. JBone Joint Surg Br 1962;44:292.
Deafness.
3. Graf R. Fundamentals of sonographic diagnosis of infant hip
Laxity of joints.
dysplasia. J Paediatr Orthop 1984;4:735
Short stature.
4. Graf R. Classification of hip joint dysplasia by means of
·
Broad skull.
sonography. Arch Orhto Trauma Surg 1984;102:248.
·
 Dentigerous imperfecta (poor calcification of teeth).
5. Herring JA. Conservative treatment of congenital dislocation
of the hip in newborn and infant. Clin Orthop Relat Res
Investigations
1992:281:41
X-ray- shows
6. Kleinberg S, Lieberman J. The acetabular index in infants in
Thin bone with bulbous ends.
relation to congenital dislocation of the hip.Arch surg
Pencil line cortex.
1936:32:1049
7. Klisic P. Congenital dislocation of the hip- a misleading term.
Thin sparse trabeculae.
Brief report. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1989;71:136.
 Plastic bowing may be seen.
8. Mavcic B, Iglic A, Kralj-Iglic V, Brand RA, Vengust R.
 Fractures in various stages of healing may be seen.
Cumulative hip contact stress predicts osteoarthritis in
Kyphoscoliotic deformity in the spine may be present.
Popcorm calcification at the distal ends of long bones.
2008 Feb 21.
Laboratory investigations
9. Ortolani M. Congenital hip dysplasia in the light of early and
Calcium and phosphorous are normal. Alkaline
very early diagnosis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1976;119:6.
10. Ponseti Iv. Morphology of the acetabulum in congenital
phosphotase is elevated.
dislocation of the hip.Gross, histological and roentgenographic
Treatment
studies.J Bone Joint Surg Am 1978;60:586.
Following are the aims of treatment.
11. Ponseti IV. Growth and development of acetabulum in normal
child. Anatomical, histological, and roentgenographic studies.J
A. To strengthen the bone by giving Bisphosphonates.
Bone Joint Surg Am 1978;60:575.
B. To prevent the pathological fractures.
12. Terjesen T, Bredland T, Berg V. Ultrasound for hip assessment
C. To correct the defonmities.
in the newborn.J.Bone Joint Surg Br 1989;71:767.
13. Wilberg G. Studies on dysplastic acetabula and congenital
Prognosis
subluxation of the hip joint.
 In lethal variety there are no survivals. Stillbirth and perinatal
death are common.
CTEV
 In other less severe varieties, repeated fractures are
14. Abbas M, Qureshi OA, Jeelani LZ, Azam Q, Khan AQ, Sabir
common and the child will remain stunted in growth
AB. Management of congenital talipes equinovarus by Ponseti
Deformities are commonly seen.
technique: a clinical study.J Foot Ankle Surg. 2008 Nov-
Note: Any of the above conditions can be asked as a short
Dec;47(6):541-5.
notes or a long question.
15. Alldred AJ. Neonatal surgery for the correction of club foot.
J Bone Joint Surg 1966;48-B:597.
Short notes
16. Attenborough CG. Severe congenital talipes equinovarus.J
Write notes on:
Bone Joint Surg 1966;48-B:31.
17. Bastow. Complications of treatment of club foot .J Bone Joint
a. Skeletal dysplasias.
Surg 1961;43-A:96.
b. Achondroplasia.
18. Beatson TR, Pearson JR. A method of assessing correction in
c. Hypochondroplasia.
club feet. J Bone Joint Surg 1966;48-B:40.
d. Pagets diseae.
19. Bensahel H, Guillaume, et al. The intensity of club foot-Ways
e. Osteopetrosis.
of functional treatment. J Paediatr Orhtop 1994;3:155.
f. Fibrous dysplasia.
20.Besahel H, Dimeglio A, et al. Final evaluation of clubfoot.J
Paediatr Orthop 1995;4:137.
 g. Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
250
Essentials of Orthopedics
21. Betchol CO, Mossman HW. Club foot: An embryological
29. Kite JH. Conservative treatment of recurrent resistant club
study of associated muscle abnormalities. J Bone joint Surg
foot.Clin Orthop 1970;70:93
1950;32-A:827
30. Kite JH. Non Operative treatment of congenital club foot. Clin
22. Brougham Dl, Nicol RO. Use of the Cincinnati incision in
Orthop 1972;84:29.
congenital talipes equinovarus.J Pediatr Orthop. 1988 Nov-
31. Kite JH. Some suggestions on treatment of clubfeet by cast.J
Dec;8(6):696-8.
Bone Joint Surg 1963;45-A:406.
23.
Catteral A. A method of assessing clubfoot deformity. Clin
 32. Napiontek M. J Clinical and radiographic appearance
of
Orthop 1991;264:48.
congenital talipesequinovarus after successful nonoperative
24.(
 Chacko V, Mathew T. Some observations in the treatment of
treatment. Pediatr Orthop 1996 Jan- Feb;16(1):67-72.
congenital club foot.
33. Ponseti IV. Clubfoot management.J Paediatr Orthop
25.
Demeglio A, Bensahel H, Classification of clubfoot.J Paediatt
2000;20:699-700.
Orthop 1995;4:129.
34. Ponseti IV. Common errors in the treatment of congenital club
26. Duraiswamy PK. Experimental causation of congenital
foot. Int Orthop1997;21:137-41.
skeletal defects and its significance in orthopaedic surgery. J
 35. Ponseti IV. Treatment of congenital club foot. J Bone Joint
Bone Joint surg Br 1952;34-B:646.
Surg Am 1992;74:448-54.
Indian Journal of orthopaedics, 1976;10:127.
36. Turco VJ. Present management of idiopathic clubfoot J
27.1
 Irani RN, Sherman MS, Pathological anatomy of clubfoot. J
Paediatr Orthop 1994;3:149.
Bone Joint Surg 45-A:45.
37. Turco VJ. Surgical correction of the resistant clubfoot.J bone
28. Kampa R, Binks K, Dunkley M, Coates C. Multidisciplinary
Joint Surg 1971;53-A:477.
management of Clubfeet using the Ponseti method in a district
38.
Wynne- Davis R. Family studies and the cause of congenital
general hospital setting. J Child Orthop. 2008 Dec;2(6);:463-
clubfoot. J Bone Joint Surg 1964;46-B:445.
7.
14
Miscellaneous
Conditions
Mallet Finger
Boutonniere Deformity
Trigger Finger/Thumb
de Quervain's Disease
二
Dupuytren's Contracture
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Tennis Elbow
Golfer's Elbow
Supraspinatus Tendinitis
PeriarthritisShoulder
Calcaneal Spur
Congenital Torticollis or Wry Neck
Idiopathic Avascular Necrosis of the Head of the Femur
Spondylolisthesis
 Bursa and Bursitis
Mallet Finger
Etiology
Loss of continuity of the extensor mechanism at the distal
A direct blow to a finger tip which is rigidly held in
interphalangeal joint leads to a flexion deformity. This is
extension, causes a sudden flexion at the DIP joint of the
known as mallet finger.
finger causing:
252
Essentials of Orthopedics
Lateralband
Insertionofextensortendon
Dorsal expansion(hood)
tobaseofmiddlephalanx
Centralband
Longextensortendon
Insertionofextensortendon
tobase of distalphalanx
Metacarpalbone
Collateral
Vinculum
Vincula
Flexordigitorum
Interosseousmuscles
ligaments
longa
profundustendon
breve
Flexordigitorum
Lumbricalmuscle
superficialistendon
Figure 14.1A
Showing the insertion of the central slip and the lateral slips to the middle and the distal phalanx respectively.
a. The rupture of the lateral slips of the extensor mechanism.
which ultimately becomes thinner as a result of inflammation
b.
An avulsion fracture of the base of the distal phalanx, e.g a
and stretching and ultimately gets ruptured.
base ball or a volley ball injury (Fig. 14.1A and ref. Fig. 1.8).
Treatment
Treatment
Splinting is the first option in closed injuries as well as in
Soft tissue injuries are treated by mallet finger splints and
early rheumatoid pathology.
immobilized for a period of three weeks followed by gradual
Surgical repair and reconstruction is the option in total
mobilization. Different splits are available.
rupture.
Avulsion fractures are fixed by using K-wires/pull-out
sutures by an expert. Preferably by a surgeon who is trained
Trigger Finger/Thumb
in hand surgery.
It is known as tigger finger because a bent and locked finger
Boutonniere Deformity
opens with a snap, i.e. like a trigger, on straightening.
Loss of continuity of extensor mechanism at the PIP joint
Etiology
results in flexion deformity at the PIP joint and hyperextension
More common in women than in men and in diabetics. Those
 at the DIP joint. This is known as Boutonniere deformity.
who are involved in manual labor which involves grippng of
a hard object are at a greater risk of developing trigger finger.
Etiology
This is the result of inflammation of the tendon sheath of the
It occurs due to the rupture of the central slip of the extensor
flexor tendon of the finger. As the sheath gets thickened the
mechanism as a result of trauma or inflammation.
canal for the gliding of the tendon narrows and triggering
develops.
a.Trauma
In trauma it can occur as a result of a direct penetrating injury
Treatment
or a forcible flexion at the PIP joint in a finger held firmly in
Begins with nonoperative measures in mild and early cases.
extension or in a volar dislocation of the PIP joint.
If symptoms are not relieved surgical release is done.
a. Nonoperatively treated by anti-inflammatory drugs and
b.Rheumatoid Arthritis
steroid infiltration into the flexor tendon sheath
Rupture occurs because of the synovitis occurring in the PIP
b.
 Surgically treated by the release of the flexor tendon
joint. This slowly flexes the joint and stretches the central slip
sheath. This relieves the symptoms permanently.
Miscellaneous Conditions
253
de Quervain's Disease
Dupuytren's Contracture
Named after Fritz de Quervain a Swiss surgeon who described
It is the contracture of the palmar aponeurosis which results
it in 1895.
im the flexion defonmity of the fingers. Ring and the little
Also known as de Quervain's syndrome, Washerwoman's
fingers are commonly involved.
sprain, Mother's wrist, it is an inflammation of the tendon
Named after Baron Dupuytren who described the
sheath or the tunnel that surrounds the tendons of abductor
condition in 1831. He attributed it to holding the reins of the
pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis. Commonly seen
horse for many years. This was found not to be true.
in women and is thought to be due to greater radial styloid
Structure of the Palmar Aponeurosis
process angle.
The palmar aponeurosis (fascia) is nothing but thick conden-
Symptoms
sation of the deep fascia. It is triangular in shape and attac hed
Proximally—to the Flexor retinaculum and Palmaris longus
Pain swelling and tendermess on the radial side of the wrist
tendon.
with difficulty in griping the object.
Laterally——-covers the thenar muscles of the hand.
Medially—covers the hypothenar muscles.
Finkelstein's Test
Distally—divides into four major slips. Each of the major slip
The patient is asked to make a fist. The test is performed by
bifurcates into two and get attached to the Transverse meta-
passively ulnar deviating the fist. This results in exaggeration
carpal ligament , the Fibrous flexor sheath and to the sides of
of pain at the inflammed site.
the whole of the proximal phalanx and proximal part of the
middle phalanx of each digit. It is not attached to the distal
Treatment
phalanx at all (Figs 14.1B and C).
a. Nonoperatively treated by giving rest to the involved hand
(Hence in Dupuytren's contracture the distal interphalan-
using splints, administration of anti-inflammatory drugs
 geal joint does not develop flexion contracture but remains
and infiltration with steroids.
extended).
b. Surgically treated by release of the sheath. This gives
Etiology
permanent relief. Superficial branch of the radial nerve is
to be taken care of during the procedure.
It shows a genetic predisposition in some. Diabetes, epilepsy
and alcohol dependency are the other predisposing factors.
Vesselsandnervers
Flexor tendons
Flexortendons
Digital slips
Digitalslipof
Palmarfascia
palmarfascia
Palmarligament
of theMCPjoint
Palmarislongus
tendon
Deeptransverse
B
C
metacarpal ligament
Figures 14.1B and C
254
Essentials of Orthopedics 
Treatment
Palmarcutaneous-
Palmaris longus tendon
branchof ulnarnerve
Short muscles
Palmarcutaneous
Minor deformities are treated nonoperatively and patients are
oflittlefingerarising
branchofmediannerve
advised to take care of the predisposing factors, e.g. alcohol
fromligament
Shortmusclesof
intake to be reduced.
Sublimis tendons
In those cases where the contracture is severe and painful
Ulnarartery
Flexorretinaculum
andnerve
surgical excision of the contracted tissue is advised.
Volarcarpal-
Splitting of ligament
ligament
oallowpassageof
Pisiform
flexorcarpiradialis
Flexorcarpiradialis
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Carpal bones
Carpalbones
Flexorprofundus
It is the compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel
tendons
Flexorpollicislongus
in itssheath（radial bursa)
 causing numbness in the hand. If left untreated paralysis of
Sheath of profundus and
sublimis(ulnarbursa)
Mediannerve
the thenar muscles takes place over a period of time. Rarely
severe sensory disturbance and trophic ulcers can develop
Figure 14.2
(Fig. 14.2).
Showing the structures under the Flexor retinaculum and the
boundaries and the contents of the Carpal tunnel.
Attachment of Flexor retinaculum:
Medially
b.Malunited Colles’ fracture, degenerative and inflammatory
i. Pisifonm
arthritis of the wrist decrease the amount of space in the
ii. Hook of hamate
canal and cause the compression.
Laterally
c. Physiological cause is pregnancy. The compression is
i. Tubercle of scaphoid
 transitory. It becomes nonmal after delivery.
ii. Crest of trapezium.
Diagnosis
Etiology
 Patient presents with diminished sensation and pain along
For a compression to occur either the volume of the contents
the distribution of the median nerve in the hand. Starts
in the canal should increase or the amount of space in the canal
initially at night and then becomes more constant.
should decrease.
Interferes with daily activities.
a.
Space occupying lesions in the canal such as ganglion,
b. Phalen's test positive (Figs 14.3A and B).
tenosynovitis, lipoma, etc. increase the volume of the
c. Tinel's sign positive.
contents in the canal and cause compression.
d. Nerve conduction velocity shows delay in conduction.
B
Figure 14.3
Picture showing (A) Phalen's test (B) Reverse Phalen's test
Miscellaneous Conditions
255
A
B
C
Figures 14.4A to C
(A and B) Pictures showing supportive splints for carpal tunnel syndrome. (C) Picture showing steroid injection into the carpal tunnel.
Treatment
 Nonoperative treatment is indicated if the compression is not
due to space occupying lesions (Figs 14.4A to C).
Areaof
Extensormuscles
inflammation
Measures undertaken are rest to the part, supportive splints
thatoriginate
at thelateral
 and anti-inflammatory drug therapy. Infiltration of the tunnel 
from thelateral
epicondyle
with steroids can also be tried. If no relief is obtained surgical
epicondyle
decompression is undertaken by dividing the flexor
retinaculum at the wrist.
When space occupying lesions are detected the tumnel has
to be explored. The lesion has to be excised and the tunnel is
deroofed by not suturing the divided flexor retinaculum.
Tennis Elbow
Lateralviewof theleftelbow
It is also known as lateral epicondylitis. It occurs due to
Figure 14.5
repetitive stretch of the common extensor origin at the lateral
Showing the common extensor origin of muscles at the lateral
epicondyle. Common in tennis players especially during the
condyle.
back hand stroke. Hence the name is derived. It is also
common in manual laborers, e.g plumbers, gardeners, etc.
Diagnosis
Tennis elbow is diagnosed by a specific test known as Cozen's
Pathology
test (Fig. 14.6). The patient is asked to hold the limb with
Repetitive stretch causes microtears resulting in inflammation,
elbow in flexion and the forearm in full pronation. Then asked
degeneration and fibrosis of the common extensor origin there
to dorsiflex and radially deviate the wrist while resistance is
by making it less elastic. Extensor carpi radialis brevis is
applied. Severe pain is observed at the common extensor
commonly affected (Fig. 14.5).
onigin.
256
Essentials of Orthopedics
Golfer's Elbow
It is known as medial epicondylitis and commonly seen in golf
players. Hence the name. It results due to chronic repetitive
stretch of the common flexor origin at the medial epicondyle.
 Pathology is similar to that of tennis elbow.
Diagnosis
By asking the patient to hold the limb straight with the elbow
in extension. Then he is asked to make a fist and flex the wrist
while resistance is applied. Patient complains of severe pain
Treatment
Same manner as in tennis elbow.
Figure 14.6
Supraspinatus Tendinitis
 Picture showing Cozen test.
It is the inflammation of the supraspinatus tendon due to minor
degrees of trauma. Results in difficulty to initiate abduction.
Diagnosed by the presence of a tender spot over the tendon
and difficulty in initiation of abduction.
Treatment
It is treated by rest to the part anti-inflammatory drugs and
local cortisone injections.
Current belief is that the condition is a part of the shoulder
impingement syndrome and it is the impingement of the
supraspinatus tendon leads to inflammation.
Calcification
It was Codman who first identified calcification in the tendons
of the rotator cuff. The exact cause is not known. It is thought
Figure 14.7
that poor blood supply and attrition causes a conducive
Showing the tennis elbow strap.
atmosphere for calcification (Figs 14.8 and 14.9).
Symptoms
Treatment
 Patient presents with acute onset of pain, worse at night along
a.Avoid repetitive stretch by not doing such activities which
with limitation of abduction of the shoulder. X-ray confinms
cause pain and discomfort till healing occurs. This is 
the diagnosis.
followed by gradual resumption of activities.
b. Wearing supportive splints and straps for tennis elbow
Treatment
(Fig. 14.7).
a. Ice packs to the shoulder.
c. Ice packs for acute episode and heat therapy for chronic.
b. Anti-inflammatory drugs.
d.Anti-inflammatory drugs.
C.
Corticosteroid injections.
Corticosteroid injections.
d. Large deposits which do not respond to nonoperative
e.
f. Exercise therapy and occupation therapy.
 methods are excised by open/arthroscopic surgery.
Miscellaneous Conditions
257
Clinical Features
a. Pain of insidious onset. Worse at night. Increases on
movement.
b. Gradual onset of painful limitation of all the movements.
Abduction and extermal rotation in particular.
c. Tendermess all round the shoulder with more than one
tender spot.
X-ray—shows rarefaction of the head of the humerus.
Degenerative changes may be seen in acromioclavicular joint.
Treatment
a. Anti-inflammatory drugs.
b. Gradual and active mobilization of the shoulder.
c. Physiotherapeutic application of Moist heat therapy.
Figure 14.8
 Utrasound therapy etc.
Radiograph showing calcific supraspinatus tendinitis. The amorphous
d. Manipulation under anesthesia followed by exercise
nature shows resolution phase of the lesion.
therapy.
e. Infiltration with corticosteroids.
Calcaneal Spur
It is an ossification/ calcification occurring at the insertion of
the plantar fascia to the periosteum on the undersurface of
the calcaneus (Fig. 14.10).
Etiology
Repetitive stress especially unprepared for, results in stretch-
img of the plantar fascia and microtears. Ultimately, calcium
Figure 14.9
Radiograph showing uniformly dense deposit. This indicates the
acute phase of calcific supraspinatus tendinitis.
Periarthritis Shoulder
It is also known as Adhesive Capsulitis and Frozen Shoulder.
Also referred to as the shoulder of fifties because the condition
is very common around this age. It presents with gradual
L
painful restriction of all the movements of the shoulder.
Figure 14.10
Thought to be due to a retrograde and inflammatory degenera-
Radiograph showing bilateral calcaneal spur. See the sharp pointed 
tion of the shoulder joint capsule and the soft tissues
nature of the spur on the right side and amorphous appearance on
the left side. The spur on the right side was asymptomatic. It was
surrounding it.
the spur on the left side, which is just developing, that was painful.
258
Essentials of Orthopedics
gets deposited and a spur develops. Thus spur is the result of
the inflammation. The symptoms are due to the inflammation
and are present during the early process of spur formation and
not after the spur formation is complete. This is proved beyond
doubt because many spurs are found as an incidental finding.
They are totally asymptomatic. But heel pain can occur
without the presence of a spur.
Symptoms
a. Pain on the undersurface of the heel which is relieved by
rest and starts again at the initiation of activity.
b. Classically worst when a person gets up in the moming.
c.Aggravated by walking on a hard surface.
Treatment
a.Anti-inflammatory drugs.
b. Soft foot wear/ cushioned heel.
c.  Physiotherapeutic measures
Figure 14.11
d. Reducing unaccustomed stress.
Radiograph showing classical changes of Charcot's joint. Note
extensive degeneration and disorganization of ankle, subtalar,
tanonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints. Shape of the talus is totally
Neuropathic Joint
altered.
New bone formation seen is an attempt at healing of fractures.
Despite of such severe alterations the joint is totally painless.
Also known as Charcot's joint is named after Charcot who
first described this condition in a case of Tabes Dorsalis in
Destructive Atrophic phase of the pathology where there is
the year 1868. Steindler was the first person to observe the
hyperemia. Hyperemia is necessary to clear the debris. Since
Destructive Atrophic form and Hypertrophic Proliferative
patient does not experience pain there is a likely hood that
form of this disease (Fig. 14.11).
the initial injury is neglected and this injured hyperaemic joint
Etiology
is exposed to repetitive stress and further injury. Thus a vicious
cycle sets in. Thus the initial inflammatory reaction that had
The cause is neuropathia occurring secondary to:
set in becomes persistent and prolonged. This causes
i. Tabes dorsalis.
progressive degeneration and formation of debris. The joint
ii. Hansen's disease.
in this stage is badly swollen, shows increased warmth and
iii. Diabetic neuropathy.
redness. If the joint is not protected at this stage it leads to
iv. Syringomyelia.
total destruction and disorganization.
v. Peripheral nerve lesions.
If the joint is protected the process of repair begins. Repair
vi. Hereditary sensory neuropathy.
results in the formation of dense fibrous tissue in the
surrounding soft tissue and dense sclerotic bone on either side
Pathology
of the joint. Massive callus may form in the soft tissue. Lipping
The pathological process begins with an injury. A single injury
may develop at the margins of the joint. This is the
Hypertrophic Proliferative form of the disease which is the
heals uneventfully even in a neuropathic joint when diagnosed
amd treated adequately. Animal experiments have proved this
phase of repair. The signs of inflammation decrease and no
calor, rubor and tumor is observed during this phase.
fact beyond doubt. It is the repetitive trauma which is known
to initiate the degenerative process. Though the joint is
Clinical Features
senseless, it responds to injury by causing inflammation. The
joint shows all the signs of inflammation such as calor, rubor
 There is definite history of having neuropathic problem.
and tumor except dolor which is absent. This is the initial
a.A badly swollen joint due to hemarthrosis/effusion.
Miscellaneous Conditions
259
b. Signs of inflammation present in the acute phase.
If does not disappear within an year, fibrosis occurs which
c. Lack of pain is the classical feature
results in a fixed deformity.
d. Exaggerated movements and laxity is the feature in later
Clinical Features
stages.
e. Deformity and total disorganization is the feature in the
i. Inclination of the head to the same side and tuming of
final stage.
the face to the opposite side.
ii. Elevation of the ipsilateral shoulder.
Diagnosis
ii. Decrease in fronto-occipital diameter of the skull.
X-ray—shows classical features of a neuropathic joint with
Diagnosis
It is not difficult to diagnose Torticollis. Diagnosis is simple
symptoms (Fig. 14.11).
and is made by inspection, confirmed by palpation (stemo-
Treatment
mastoid tumor) and elicitating limitation of movements of the
neck.
The proverb Prevention is better than cure is very apt for
neuropathic joint. Inadequately protected injuries of the joint 
Treatment
are the ones which are responsible for destruction.
Treatment should start at birth. Up to 1 year of age the child
a. Protection of the joint is of great importance when
neuropathia is suspected in order to prevent the onset of
and maintaining the position in sleep.
the degenerative process
b. Once the changes have taken place the aim of treatment
Role of Surgery
is to prevent further degeneration and damage. This is
achieved through occupational guidance and advocating
Surgery is done only when the nonoperative treatment fails.
protective splints and calipers. Joint aspiration may be
indicated to empty the collected fluid. Protection should
in infancy as there is good chance of regression with growth
amd nonoperative treatment.
be continued till warmth and redness subsides. This is
followed by measures which prevent further injury during
activities of daily living.
Type of Surgeries
C. Arthrodesis is done for a totally destroyed and disorga-
i. Release of the clavicular end of the muscle.
nized joint.
ii. Release at both the clavicular and the mastoid end.
Arthrodesis should never be done during the acute
ii. ‘Z' lengthening.
inflammatory phase.It should always be attempted after
healing has occurred. X-rays help to confirm healing. The
Prognosis
dense sclerotic bone has to be excised till the raw bleeding
Prognosis is good. The deformity is fully correctable when
bone is reached, in order to achieve sound fusion.
the surgery is done early (at 1 year) before the deformity gets
When thejoint is badly infected amputation may have to
established.
be considered.
Idiopathic Avascular Necrosis of
Congenital Torticollis or Wry Neck
the Head of the Femur
It is a condition seen at birth due to fibromatosis of the
Other Names
stermomastoid muscle. The incidence of associated DDH is
· Aseptic necrosis.
reported to be from 7-20%
· Osteonecrosis.
· Ischemic bone necrosis.
Natural Course of the Fibromatosis
It is a condition of unknown etiology occurring between
It manifests as a palpable tumor at birth which attains a
the age of 20 and 40 years. Men are more commonly affected
maximum size within 1-2 months and then starts regressing.
than the women.
260
Essentials of Orthopedics
Clinical Features
Alcoholism
 Hypercortisonism/ steroid intake
i. Dull aching pain in the hip to begin with.
ii. Pain progressively becomes severe and painful limitation
Caison's disease
 Sickle cell disease
of movement develops.
Gaucher's disease
i. Fixed deformities in later stages.
 Infections
 Familial hyperlipidemias
Staging: Ficat and Arlet (1980)
(Based on this classification 4 stages were identified)
Stage I: Showed no X-ray changes and diagnosis was made
Spondylolisthesis
by measurement of intraosseous pressure and bone biopsy.
Spondy—means Spine. Olisthesis - means slipping in Greek
Stage II: The femoral head contour was still normal but there
were early signs of reactive changes in the subchondral area.
language .Thus the word Spondylolisthesis is derived which
Crescent sign (crescent-shaped area of increased density in
refers to slipping of one vertebra over the other. This condition
the subchondral region.)
was first described by a Belgian obstetrician Dr. Herbinaux
 in the year 1782, when he found a bone anterior to the sacrum
Stage Il: It was defined by clear cut X-ray signs of osteo
obstructing the vagina.
necrosis with evidence of structural damage and distortion of
 For a slip to occur a defect should develop in the stabiliz-
the bone outline.
 ing structures namely the aritcular facets, the neural arch or
Stage IV: There was collapse of the articular surface and signs
the normal bony structure. The lumbosacral area is the
of secondary OA.
common site where this slip occurs . The slip in majority of
These days MRI is used in the early diagnosis (a band
the cases is in a forward direction because of the lumbar
like low intensity signal on the Tl-weighted image).Also the
lordosis. When the slip is backwards it is known as
disease is staged based on MRI findings.
Retrolisthesis.
Radiological Features of AVN
Iypes: Based on Wiltse Classification (Fig. 14.12)
 Increased density of the subchondral bone.
i. Dysplastic (congenital).
 Maintenance of joint space until late period of the disease
ii. Isthmic (defect/spodylolysis in Pars interarticularis).
which is in contrast to osteoarthritis and rheumatoid
iii. Degenerative.
arthritis.
iv. Traumatic.
· Secondary osteoarthritic changes in advanced stage.
v. Pathologic.
Treatment
Etiopathogenesis
Stages I and I: Femoral core decompression with or without
Defect in any of the stabilizing structures can lead to listhesis.
fibular strut grafting.
Some times there can be more than one pathology.
Stages III and IV: Total hip replacement.
In dysplastic variety there is agenesis or hypoplasia of the
facets . This leads to the slip . It is one of the severe forms of
Known causes of AVN of femoral head.
listhesis.
Traumatie causes
 In the isthmic variety there is a defect in pars inter-
· Fracture neck of femur/ femoral head
 articularis.
 Dislocation around hip
Pars—means Part. Inter—means between and
 Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
articularis—means articular components (Facet.)
Nontraumatie causes
 It refers to the part between the superior and the inferior
Massive arterial occlusion
articular facets. When there is defect (which is also known as
Perthes' disease
spondylolysis) in this area two segments develop in the neural
Venous thrombosis
arch.
Miscellaneous Conditions
261
Dysplastic
Scott'sTerrier
Lamina
Pedicle
Isthmic
Degenerative
00%slip
Superior
acrticular
Pathologic
facet
Spondylolysis
Terrierwearing collar
Suggests Spondylolysis
Spinous
process
Decapitated Terrier
Traumatic
SuggestsSpondylolisthesis
Inferior
articular
Transverseprocess
A
B
facet
Figure 14.12
a.  A posterior segment consisting of the spinous process,
the severity of the slip. Flattening of the buttocks and
lamina and the inferior articular facet.
prominence of the loin crease are the local findings. The
b. An anterior segment consisting of the pedicle transverse
deformity becomes more pronounced as the severity
process and the superior articular facet.
 progresses and a step may be palpated at the site of listhesis.
With stress the anterior segment along with the vertebral
body and the column slips forwards whereas the posterior
Diagnosis
 segment remains connected to the sacrum.
X-ray—confinms the diagnosis.
In degenerative variety the degeneration involves the
facetal articulation and results in instability and slip.
there are neurological signs.
Traumatic type of slip results when there is trauma to the
facets or the fracture of pars interarticularis.
Treatment
Pathologic type is seen when the facets and the pars
interarticularis are involved in a neoplasia or infection like
Aim of treatment is to prevent further slip
tuberculosis and is destoyred.
Traumatic and pathologic types are very rare.
Nonoperative
Grading of the severity of the slip:
It is indicated only in minor grades of slip with little or no
Based on Meyerding grading system 4 grades are recognized
neurological signs.
Grade 1
0-25% slip
Measures include modification of activity, refraining
Grade 2
25-50% slip
from strenuous activity, back exercises, spinal corset for
Grade 3
50-75% slip
support, drug therapy and regular follow-up to monitor
Grade 4
75-100% slip.
progression.
Beyond 100% the word spondyloptosis is used to denote
total dissociation from the lower vertebra.
Operative
Clinical Symptoms and Signs
This treatment is always indicated in severe forms with
neurological deficit. Spinal fusion is achieved and further slip
Backache and varying grades of neurologic deficits are the
is prevented. In degenerative type decompression may be
main symptoms and signs. They are directly proportional to
necessary.
262
Essentials of Orthopedics
Bursa and Bursitis
Bursa is a sac of fibrous tisue lined by synovial membrane,
containing synovial fluid. Generally they are situated around
the joint between the bone and the insertion of a tendon. Some
times a bursa develops at a place which is subjected to
constant stress. This is known as adventitious bursa. e.g
dorsum of the foot in neglected CTEV. When the bursa gets
inflammed the condition is known as Bursitis.
Common sites of bursae in the human body:
A. Around the shoulder
i.
Subdeltoid.
A
ii.
 Subacromial.
Figures 14.13A and B
ii.
 Subscapular.
 Showing a infected infrapatellar bursitis (Clergy man's knee) and B
iv. Under the Infraspinatus.
prepatellar bursitis (House maids knee).
v.In the synovial sheath of the long head of biceps
B.Around the elbow
Other between the Tibial collateral ligament and
i.Two in realtion to triceps at its insertion. One at
the Semimembranosus.
the upper part of the olecrenon and the other at
iv. Lateral: There are three bursae laterally. One
the lower part .
between the Fibular collateral ligament and the
ii.Two in relation to the biceps at its insertion to the
 Biceps, the second between the Fibular collateral
radial tuberosity.
ligament and the Popliteus and the third is between
C. Around the hip
the Popliteus and the Lateral femoral condyle.
i.  Posterior - Four under the Gluteus maximus, one
Some of the names of commonly seen bursitis:
under the Gluteus medius and one under the
Housemaids kneePrepatellar bursitis (Fig. 14.13A).
Gluteues minimus.
Clergyman's knee—-Infrapatellar bursitis (Fig. 14.13B).
ni.
 Anterior - One under the Psoas tendon. (This
Tailor's ankle—-Advetitious bursitis in the region of lateral
might communicate with the hip joint)
malleolus.
D. Around the knee
Porter's shoulder—-Advetitious bursitis in the in the region
i. Anterior: There are four bursae anteriorly namely,
of lateral end of Clavicle and the skin.
a Suprapatellar, a Prepatellar and two Infra-
Weaver's Bottom—Advetitious bursitis between Gluteus
patellar. One between the patellar tendon and the
 maximus and Ischial tuberosity.
tibia and the other between the tibial tuberosity
Treatment of Bursitis
amd the skin.
ii.Posterior: There are two bursae posteriorly one
Treated with rest and supportive bandage along with anti-
each between the heads of the Gastronemius and
inflammatory drugs, if the cause is aseptic inflammation.
the capsule of the knee joint.
If the cause is sepsis along with anti-inflammatory drugs,
i.1
 Medially: Two bursae are present medially one
Adequte antibiotic therapy is necessary. This is followed by
between the Tibial collateral ligament and the
excision of the sac.
Sartorius,Gracilis and Semi tendinosus and the
Note: Any of the above can be asked as short notes.
15
Fractures in
Children
Introduction
Types of Injuries
Physeal Injuries
C
Structure of a Physis
C
Diagnosis and Management
Other Injuries
Common Fractures in the Lower Limb:
Diagnosis and Management
Introduction
which emphasizes the need for an early management of
these injuries.Delay in management, imcreases the difficulty
Pediatric skeleton is a growing skeleton. It is different from
 in reduction and promotes the possibility of development
an adult mature skeleton in many ways. Hence the response
of deformities and abnormalities in growth. So,it is
to injury is different from an adult bone with respect to
 absolutely necessary to understand these facts before a
nature of deformation and healing. Healing occurs faster
 pediatric fracture is managed.
Differences seen
Pediatric skeleton
Adult skeleton
Growth
Growing, with the presence of 
Growth is complete. Mature and fully ossified.
epiphysis, physis and metaphysis
Plasticity
Present
Absent
Periosteum 
Thick and loosely attached
Thin and firmly attached 
Healing 
Rapid and fast
 Steady and slow
 Remodeling capacity and speed
High and fast 
Low and slow. Capacity decreases with
advancing age
Plastic deformation 
Possible
Not possible 
264
Essentials of Orthopedics
Secondary
ossification
center
Epiphyseal
artery
Germinalzone
Proliferativezone
ZoneofRanvier
Hypertrophiczone
Zoneofendochondral
ossification
Type1
TypeIl
TypeIll
TypeIV
TypeV
Ring of La Croix
Metaphyseal
Figure 15.2
artery
Periostealsleeve
Harris classification.
cells and it blends smoothly with the metaphysis. This
 increases the inherent stability.
Thus, the weakest area of the physis is the zone of
hypertrophic cells through which most of the injuries occur.
Figure 15.1
The inner core of physis is surrounded by an outer
Diagrammatic representation of the structure of the physis
 perichondrial fibro-chondro-osseous ring which is sometimes
referred to as ‘Periphysis'. This ring is responsible for the
Types of Injuries
stability of the physis. The portion of the peiphysis in the
region of or adjacent to the physis is known as the ^Zone or
i. Physeal injuries.
ii. Plastic deformation.
Groove of Ranvier'. That portion which is adjacent to the
metaphysis is known as the *Ring of La Croix'.
ii. Buckle fractures.
The Zone of Ranvier is a wedge shaped structure consist-
iv. Green stick fractures.
 ing of cells contiguous with the epiphysis and is responsible
v. Complete fractures.
for the latitudinal (widening)growth of the physis.
Physeal Injuries
Epiphyseal arteries enter the physis and the terminal
branches end at the proliferative zone.
These injuries are also known as Growth plate injuries,
The diaphyseal nutrient artery with its loop like capillary
Epiphyseal plate injuries and Epiphyseal cartilage injuries. It
 network supplies the metaphyseal end of the physis (growth
is incorrect to identify these injuries as Epiphyseal injuries
plate).
because Physis is the growth plate and Epiphysis is the
secondary center of ossification. The two are different.
Classification of Physeal Injuries based on
Salter and Harris (Fig. 15.2)
Structure of a Physis (Fig. 15.1)
Type I:
 Shearing injury extending through the entire physis
The physis consists of chondrocytes placed longitudinally and
(Figs 15.3A and B).
extracellular matrix. Four zones are identified. From the
Type II:
Shearing injury extending through the portion of
epiphysis to the metaphysis they are arranged as follows:
the physis and exiting through the metaphysis.
·Genminal zone.
Type IIl: Shearing injury extending through the portion of
·Proliferative zone.
the physis and exiting through the epiphysis.
Hypertrophic zone.
Type IV: Injuries extending from the epiphysis through the
 Zone of endochondral ossification.
physis into the metaphysis.
Type V:
Crushing injury to the physis.
There is abundant extracellular matrix in the germinal zone
and the proliferative zone. Thus they are inherently strong to
Thurston Holland Sign
       i
(Shiny Corner Sign)
hypertophic cells with scanty matrix. Hence the inherent
strength is poor against the deforming force especially
nu a 'sanfu jeasud l ad u uaas uis e si s
shearing. The zone of endochondral ossification has calicified
metaphyseal fragment is the only indicator of this injury (Figs
Fractures in Children
265
B
Figures 15.4A and B
Radiograph showing the Salter and Harris type Ill physeal injury
involving the base of the proximal phalanx of the index finger. Note
the triangular metaphyseal fragment the Thurston Holland sign'
Figures 15.3A and B
which is the only indicator of type Ill physeal injury. When missed
Radiographs showing Type I Salter and Harris injury involving radial
may lead to malunion.
epiphysis. (A) Pre- and (B) Intraoperative.
15.4A and B). The force would have passed through the physis
Aims of management
and caused shearing of the rest of the physis. Hence, these 
· To anatomically reduce the physis.
injuries need attention like any other displaced typelI physeal
·  To stabilize the reduction obtained either extermally by cast
injuries.
 or intermally by closed pinning/open reduction and intermal
fixation.
Diagnosis of Physeal Injuries
· To protect and avoid damage to the germinal layer at any
cost during the procedures.
X-ray A good radiograph gives the diagnosis in majority of
the cases when ossific nucleus of the epiphysis has appeared.
In those cases which present late always consider
If not when the injury is suspected one has to resort to MRI.
secondary corrective procedures.
When the reduction is nonanatomic, following factors are
Management
helpful in assessing the outcome and making decisions.
Accurate management of these injuries is absolutely essential
Age of the patient: Younger the age greater is the remodeling
to avoid deformities and growth abnonmalities
capacity.
266
Essentials of Orthopedics
Type of the injury: Types I and II have better chance of
absorbs more energy and bends before the fracture occurs.
remodeling than IlI and IV.
This results in plastic defonmation. Foreanm is the common
site for plastic deformation and ulna is the common bone.
Some people have found the plastic deformation occurring
bearing joint is subjected to greater stress than an injury near
in the femur too.
a nonweight bearing joint when a nonanatomic reduction is
 Lesser degrees of deformation get remodeled with growth.
accepted.
But deformities in the foreanm more than 20° with limitation
Duration of injury: More the lapse of time poorer is the
a s t u no p e un uonuns p uond 
outcome of primary treatment procedures.
correction. Immobilization for a full period of 4-6 weeks is
essential for a good healing (Refer Fig. 1.9).
Complications
Inherent complications
Buckle Fractures (Figs 15.5A and B)
·Malunion
Also known as torus fractures because radiologically a ridge
Osteonecrosis
of bone (torus) is observed. These injuries are common at the
Growth arrest.
Associated complications
·Infections
·Neurovascular injury.
Management of inherent complications Complications of
 malunion and osteonecrosis are managed by taking into
consideration the resultant deformity and disability. Carefully
planned corrective osteotomies considerably improve the
function.
Growth disturbance Disturbance develops because of the
formation of a bony bridge or a bar across the physis or retar-
dation of growth because of injury. After careful assessment
of growth retardation and adequate planning, procedures like
resection of the bony bar, epiphyseodesis, etc. will help in
the correction of the discrepancy.
Management of associated complications These are managed
accordingly like any other cases of infection and neurovascular
injury.
Harris growth arrest lines:
These when present/ absent helpin determining nature
of the arrest.
Absence indicates no growth has occurred after total
physeal injury.
Transverse and parallel lines indicate normal growth
pattem.
Asymmetric growth line indicates partial injury to the
physis.
B
Plastic Deformation
Figures 15.5A and B
Borden first described the plastic deformation of bones in
Showing the radiographs of (A) a complete fracture with a buckle
(B) incomplete fracture with a buckle. The presence of thick
children. Immature bone is weaker in bending strength. Hence,
periosteum prevents displacements
Fractures in Children
267
transitional area of woven bone of the metaphysis and the
lamellar bone of the diaphysis. The fracture may present as:
a.A simple cortical break with a ridge (Fig. 15.5B).
b. A ridge with plastic deformation of the rest of the bone.
c. A ridge with complete break of the rest of the bone
(Fig. 15.5A).
A simple break with fonmation of a ridge can be managed
with a well padded splint and it heals uneventfully. More
severe forms of break get displaced over a period of time and
result in deformities. To pre vent this they need correction and
immobilization in a well moulded plaster cast.
Greenstick Fractures
This is the most common fracture seen in children. In these
the fracture is not seen as a complete break though the entire
bone is involved. A part of the bone breaks and the rest of the
bone bends like a Greenstick. Hence the name. The bone on
Figure 15.6
the tension side breaks completely. The bone on the
Showing the Bryant's otherwise known as Gallows traction. Note how
compression side bends and undergoes plastic deformation
the buttocks are lifted off the bed. This is essential for effective
traction.
because of thick periosteum. It is necessary to break the intact
cortex on the compression side to achieve good reduction
ii. The degree of comminution.
Reduction should be maintained for a full period of
ii. The degree of displacement, amount of over-riding and
approximately 6 weeks to avoid the risk of refracture due to
shortening.
premature removal.
iv. Open wounds with disturbed soft tissue envelop.
v. Presence of vascular injury.
Common Fractures in the Lower Limb:
vi. Presence of other associated injuries.
Diagnosis and Management
0-6 months of age Excellent results are obtained with non-
operative treatment. Strapping the thigh to the abdomen in a
Fracture Shaft of Femur
newbom, using the Pavlik hamess in an infant are some of
Mechanism of Injury
the methods employed. Compression of the femoral nerve
during the treatment is a possibility because of flexed position
The trauma should be of a severe nature for this fracture to
of the limb and should always be kept in mind.
occur. Fall from a height, motor vehicular accidents are some
6 months-2years
of the examples of severe trauma.
Bryant's traction.
In the younger age group child abuse must be suspected
· Closed reduction and spica cast application.
especially when there is delay in seeking the medical treatment
amd there are other injuries.
2-5 years Skin or skeletal traction (Fig. 15.6) on a splint
followed by protection in a spica cast or a brace. Spica cast
Diagnosis
gives better protection in children for the simple reason that
It is a straight forward diagnosis. X-rays help in assessing the
a child does not understand the importance of non-weight
nature of the fracture and planning the treatment.
bearing and tries to walk when the brace is given. Also,
children tolerate this extensive plaster very well.
Treatment
Closed reduction and flexible nailing, open reduction and
Following factors serve as a guide to decide the type of
flexible nailing may be necessary in selected cases, e.g. when
treatment to be instituted.
shortening is more than 3 cm and not amenable for manipu-
i. Age of the child
lative correction.
268
Essentials of Orthopedics
Transepiphyseal
Transcervical
Cervicotrochanteric
Intertrochanteric
Figure 15.7
Radiographs showing closed reduction and fixation of fracture shaft
femur using elastic nails
Figure 15.8
 Diagram showing different types of fractures of the neck of the femur
5-12 years Closed/ open reduction and flexible nailing is the
in children according to Delbet's classification.
treatment of choice (Fig. 15.7) except in those minimally
displaced and long oblique fractures which are amenable for
MRI may be necessary to evaluate the vascularity of the
closed treatment with traction.
femoral epiphysis at a later period after treatment. Use of
Minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis should be
titanium implants allows MRI to be done with implants in situ.
reserved for those cases with segmental comminution. These
fractures are best stabilised by bridge plate technique.
Treatment
Open fractures Extemal fixators are used in the treatment of
 Reduction closed/open and intermal fixation is the treatment
open fractures.
of choice
ciated injuries are dealt with accordingly, e.g. visceral injury.
Bigelow's Dictate In 1864, Bigelow remarked that While the
chest injury, head injury, etc.
impacted fracture of the base of the femoral neck unites by
bone, if at all, there seems to be a decreasing tendency to
Fracture Neck of Femur in Children
osseous union as we approach the smaller portion of the neck
near its head.
Mechanism of Injury
The above statement is found to be true even in pediatrics
Always as a result of high energy trauma or fall from a height.
femoral neck fractures. Worst prognosis is seen in trans-
Associated injuries are common.
epiphyseal fractures and best prognosis is seen in inter-
trochanteric fractures and the prognosis is found to become
Classification
better from type II to type IMI fractures.
Based on Delbet's classification 4 types are identified
(Fig. 15.8).
Further Reading
·Type I: Transepiphyseal fractures
· Type I: Transcervical fractures
1. Alan E Oestreich, Borhaan S Ahmad. The periphysis and its
· Type IMl: Cervicotrochanteric fractures
effects on the metaphysis: I Definition and normal
· Type IV: Intertrochanteric fractures.
radiographic pattern. Skeletal Radio1 1992;21:283-6.
 2. John A Herring (Ed). Tachdjian's Pediatric Orthopedics. 4th
Diagnosis
edition, Saunders: Elsevier, Philadelphia 2008;3.
3. Raymond T Morrissy, Stuart L (Eds). Weinstein Lovell and
X-rays give adequate information of the injury. Diagnosis is
Winter's Paediatric Orthopaedics. 6th edition, Lippincott,
straight forward.
Williams and Wilkins 2005.
16
Gait
Definition
Phases
Gait Cycle
Abnormal Gaits
Trendelenburg Gait
Definition
Gait Cycle
A normal gait is defined as a forward propulsion of the human
Gait cycle is defined as the cyclical movement taking place
body occurring as a result of rhythmic, sequential movements 
from heel strike of one limb to its next heel strike.
taking place in the lower limbs.
Thus to conclude for a normal gait a healthy support, i.e.
the bone; a healthy power, i.e. the muscle and a healthy stimulus
Phases (Fig. 16.1)
to initiate the action, i.e. the intact nervous system is necessary.
A. Stance phase
If any of these are affected it leads to abnormal gait.
Which is further divided into:
Heel strike
Abnormal Gaits
 Foot flat
 Mid stance
Due to Muscle Weakness, e.g. Poliomyelitis
·
Heel off
Gluteus Maximus Lurch
Toes off (push off)
B. Swing phase
Gluteus maximus muscle extends and laterally rotates the hip.
·
 Acceleration
To maintain the center of gravity the pelvis remains backwards
Mid swing
during the mid stance phase because of this action.
·Deceleration
 If the gluteus maximus is paralysed this maintenance of
It is the altermating patterm of movements taking place
hip in extension is not possible.
between the stance phase of one limb and the swing phase of
Instead the body swings backwards everytime when the
the other that makes propulsion (walking) possible.
weight is borme. Thus it results in a gluteus maximus lurch.
270
Essentials of Orthopedics
Stance phase
Swing phase
Weight acceptance
Single-limb support
Limb advancement
Heel strike
Footflat
Midstance
Heeloff
Toeoff
Acceleration
Midswing
Deceleration
60%
40%
Figure 16.1
Pictures showing various phases of gait and weight distribution during Stance and Swing phase.
QuadricepsLurch
the Swing phase of gait cycle he lifts the pelvis on that side
amd circumducts the involved leg. This results in a circum-
In quadriceps paralysis, there is loss of active extension of
ductory Stiff hip gait.
the knee. During the stance phase which begins with Heel
strike and ends with Heel off and Toes off, the knee has to
remain in extension. This is not possible because of paralysis
Stiff Knee Gait
of Quadriceps. So, a patient locks the knee in extension and
It is difficult to appreciate Stiff knee gait because the changes
bends forwards to support the front of the thigh with the hand.
that take place are subtle and needs careful observation. The
This results in Hand knee gait or Quadriceps lurch.
toe off phase is affected. To clear the ground for initiation of
swing and for heel strike after completion a lesser degree of
High Stepping Gait of Foot Drop
circumductory movement is required. This can be made out
A normal gait begins with Heel strike of Stance phase. In foot
only by careful observation.
drop because of the paralysis of the dorsiflexors, the Heel
strike is not possible and in order to clear the ground the
Short Leg Gait
patient lifts the leg high and when the foot is brought down,
When shortening of the limb is more than an inch, an appreci-
the toes touch the ground first before the heel. This results in
able limp develops. The shoulder on the opposite side dips
a toe to heel gait, which is exactly the opposite of the normal
down and lifts up because of upward and downward
heel to toe gait. This is known as High stepping gait.
movement of the pelvis during weight bearing.
Calcaneus Gait
Due to Abnormalities in the Nervous System
This occurs due to paralysis of the gastrosoleus. All the steps
of Stance phase except Heel strike are affected. During the
Scissors Gait
later part of stance the weight is borme by the calcaneum and
the foot rotates outwards in order to complete the Stance
 Due to the spasm of the adductors the legs get crossed in front
phase. This results in a Calcaneus gait.
of each other during walking resulting in classical Scissoring.
This is known as Scissors gait and is seen in spastic paralysis
Due to Changes in the Bones and Joints
of cerebral palsy.
ShiffHip Gait
Festinant Gait
This type of gait is seen in ankylosis of the hip. The patient is
Seen in Parkinsonism and is characterized by short strides.
 not able to flex the hip during the Swing phase. To complete
The feet barely clear the ground.
Gait
271
Stamping Gait
 Seen in conditions which result in sensory loss, e.g. Peripheral 
neuritis, Tabes dorsalis, etc.
 In this type of gait because of sensory ataxia patient stamps
the feet to the ground.
Drunkard's Gait
Lesions of the cerebellum result in motor ataxia. Patient is
not able to maintain motor balance and walks in an irregular
path. This results in a Drunkard's gait.
Hemiplegic Gait
This is a classical gait seen in hemiplegia. The shoulder is
adducted, the elbow and the wrist are flexed and the involved
lower limb is circmducted during the swing phase.
Antalgic Gait
Any painful condition in the limb which causes increase in
pain during weight bearing results in this type of gait. The
condition may vary from a small thorm prick in the foot to
Figure 16.2
tuberculosis of the hip. The stance phase is affected and on
Showing the changes occurring in the hip in Trendelenburg gait. In
weight bearing the patient immediately shifts the weight to
this illustration the Right hip is the involved hip.
the opposite normal limb because of pain. This results in a
Pathomechanics of Trendelenburg Gait
short and incomplete stance and an antalgic gait.
The abductor mechanism has two-fold function. Acting from
Trendelenburg Gait (Fig. 16.2)
above it abducts the limb. On weight bearing, the limb is fixed
amd it acts from below and this causes lifting of the pelvis.
This is a type of gait that occurs when the Abductor
 So when the pelvis is lifted up the anterior superior iliac spine
 Mechanism which is responsible for abduction at the hip is
 on the opposite side moves up. When the Abductor Mecha-
affected. The mechanism has three components:
nism is affected this lifting of pelvis does not take place.
a. The fulcrum which is the Head of the femur
Instead the pelvis sags on the opposite side when weight is
b. The lever which is the Neck of the femur
bome on the affected limb.
c. The power which is the Gluteus medius.
This causes the anterior superior iliac spine on the opposite
Any abnonmality of these, occurring alone or in combi-
side and the shoulder on the same side to dip down for
nation disturbs the function of Abductor Mechanism and 
 maintaining the balance. A characteristic lurch develops on
results in this type of gait. The fulcrum is disturbed in  the affected side resulting in Tredelenburg gait.
dislocation of the hip. The lever is disturbed in Fracture neck
When there is bilateral affection of the Abductor
of the femur. The power is disturbed in paralysis of Gluteus
 Mechanism a bilateral Trendelenburg gait or a Waddling gait
medius.
results.
17
Amputations
Definition
 Indications
C
Types of Amputations
 An Ideal Stump of Amputation
Definition
Types of Amputations (Fig. 17.1)
Amputation is one of the meanest yet one of the greatest
General Amputations
operations in surgery. Meanest when resorted to while better
things could have been done .Greatest when it is done to save
A ray amputation.
the life of an individual.
 Below knee amputation
Above knee amputation
Indications
Below elbow amputation
 Above elbow amputation.
i. A dead limb, e.g. vascular gangrene.
Disarticulation of hip, knee, etc.
ii. A dying limb, e.g. TAO, frost bite, etc.
·Hind quarter and Fore-quarter amputation
ii. A destroyed limb, e.g. crush injury.
iv. A denervated limb,e.g. hereditary sensory neuropathy,
Specific Amputation
whole arm type of brachial plexus injury.
v.A dangerous limb, e.g. malignant bone tumor, gas
 Gille's amputation
gangrene.
Lisfrank's amputation
vi. A deformed limb.
 Chopart's amputation
In all the above situations either the function of the limb
uogndue s aus
 is lost or the limb poses a threat to the life of an individual.
Pirogoff's amputation
Hence there is a need for amputation.
·Kruckenberg's amputation.
Amputations
273
Lowerlimb
Upper limb
BKamputated limb
Picture showing incisions
for ray amputation
25cmfrom
20cmfrom
greatertrochanter
acromion
Bones
20cmfrom
Socket
olecranon
10-12.5cmfrom
thetibialtuberosity
Shank
Ankleandfoot
assembly
SpecialShoeafter
Lowerlimb
Syme'sAmputation
Walking component
Showingcomponentsofabelow-kneeprosthesis.Ithasa
socket,shankandan ankle and footassembly.Different
designsof thesecomponentsareavailable
Footand Ankle
Incision for Syme's amputation
Incision formodifiedSyme's
Gritti-stokes
Levelofbonecutting
Levelofbonecutting-
（tibiaand fibula
（tibia andfibulajust
abovemalleoli)
abovemalleoli)
Differentamputationsinthelowerlimb
1.Ray's
2.Transmetatarsal(Gillies)
3.Tarsometatarsal(Lisfranc's)
4.Midtarsal(Chopart's)
Skinincision
5.Syme's
6.Below-knee(Burgess)
7.Transcondylar
8.Above-knee
Anteriorview
Fibula
Tibia
Muscle
SCfat-
Myocutaneousflap
Cutends
tibiafibula
Muscle-
Tibia
Nerve-
Incision
Heelflap
Incision
Vein
Muscle
Artery
Flap
Partofcalcaneum
Lineofcutting thebone
Below-knee amputation
Above-knee amputation
Pirogoffsamputation
Figure 17.1
 Different types of amputations, their levels, the ideal length of the stump and some of the prosthesis
274
Essentials of Orthopedics
Gille's Amputation
amd close in pronation and supination movements of the
It is a transmetatarsal amputation done in the foot. Preserves
forearm. The length of the pincers can be varied from
7-12 cm. Longer the pincer length greater is the interdigital
the function of weight bearing. Toes off phase of stance is
lost. Needs special shoes with toe inset filled for a good
defect and may necessitate a skin coverage procedure. Also
the strength of the grip decreases. The amputation is unsightly
cosmesis and to overcome the deficit of push off
but highly efficacious functionally with retained sensation.
Can be fitted with a cosmetic hand prosthesis.
Lisfrank's and Chopart's amputation
(Ref: Foot injuries in the text)
An Ideal Stump of Amputation
Deficit develops from the foot flat stage of stance phase of
gait. In fact Chopart's amputation can result in foot drop
It should fulfill the following criteria
because of lack of muscle and tendon attachments. Weight
 Long enough to fit a prosthesis
bearing function is preserved. Special shoes with anterior fill
· Good power
is used for cosmesis. Gait is affected.
· Good sensation
Good blood supply
Syme's Amputation
Good soft tissue cover
Named after James Syme , Professor of surgery in Edinburg.
Conical shape
 u th  an u u s ps o
 Proximal joint should be normal
amd Edinburgh Monthly Jourmal of Medical Science. It is an
No neuroma
excellent amputation through the ankle which retains the
No bad scarring
function of weight bearing because of intact heel pad. It results
·No infection.
in a bulbous stump. To reduce the mediolateral diameter and
the bulbous nature of the stump trimming of the malleoli
Recommended Ideal Length of the Stump
(Mazet 1968; Sarmiento 1972) and supramalleoar resection
(Elmslie 1924) has been reported.
· In below-knee amputations 10.0-12.5 cm from the Tibial
tuberosity
A classical Syme's amputation is performed by:
a. Subperiosteal dissection and excision of the calcaneus.
· In above-knee amputations 22.5-25.0 cm from the greater
b. Ligating the posterior tibial artery distally then by
trochanter.
 preserving the blood supply to the heel pad.
 In above and below elbow amputations 20.0 cm from the
c. Resection of the proximal tibia at the level of the
Acromion process and the Olecrenon process respectively.
dome.
These stump lengths recommended are not constant. The
(Some do not recommend this step of classical Syme's)
length varies dependingon the length of the limb.Basically
A special prosthetic shoe is necessary after Syme's
it gives a rough idea as to how much length of the stump is
amputation. Weight bearing fumction is preserved. But all the
desirable for fitting a prosthesis.
stages of stance phase of gait are affected.
Procedure of amputation and general principles to be
Pirogoff's Amputation
observed
i. Always use a toumiquet except in a case of vascular
In this modification the calcaneum is resected partly and
disease.
tumed 90° upwards towards the tibia. This increases the length
i. Mark the flaps properly and then make the skin
of the stump.
incision.
Kruckenberg's Amputation
ili. Equal antero-posterior flaps are desirable.
iv. Aim at an ideal stump towards the end of the procedure
This amputation was described by Kruckenberg and Putti .The
v. Skin division is the farthest, followed by fascia, muscle
amputation involves forcepisation of the amputated stump of
and the bone. Each of them is divided, a little more
the forearm into radial and ulnar pincers (Bifid forceps)
proximal, to the preceding tissue in the above mentioned
resulting in two antebrachial fingers. These two pincers open
order.
Amputations
275
vi. Proximal part of the flap should contain full thickness
 ix. The nerves to be pulled a little and then divided to
of the tissue,from skin to bone whereas the distal part
allow them to retract.
of the flap should contain only skin and the fascia to
x. The major vessels are to be perfectly ligated.
allow good closure of the wound.
 xi. Always release tourniquet before closure and achieve
vii. Do not strip the periosteum more than the required
hemostasis.
extent as this will result in formation of sequestrum at
xii. Close over a drain.
the end of the stump (crown sequestrum).
 xii. Good stump bandage for support to be given immobj-
vi. Take care of sharp spikes of bone and make them
lizing the joint above.
rounded.
18
Implants and
Instruments
C
Introduction
Surface Implants
Intramedullary Implants
C
Biodegradable Implants
General Instruments Used in Orthopedics
C
William Arbuthnot Lane
WilliamFerguson
Designs of Limb Lengthening Apparatus
Introduction
Materials Used for Orthopedic Implants
Instruments are the devices which are used to perform the
Alloys stainless steel 316 L and titanium and more recently
surgical procedures. Implants are the devices which are placed
 biodegradable materials like polyglycolic acid, polylactic acid
(planted) into the human body. When an implant is used to
and polydiox anone.
replace a diseased/damaged part totally or partially the term
Desirable Properties of an Implant
Prosthesis is used.
 Prosthesis is designed for permanent use. They are
1. The modulus of elasticity of the implant should be close
removed only when they fail.
to that of the bone. Titanium alloy is the closest among
Whereas implants other than prosthesis serve only as an
the alloys used. Biodegradable materials are still closer
intermal splint for a specified period within which the healing
(Fig. 18.1).
occurs and have no role to play afterwards. They may have
 2. Should be biocompatible.
to be removed. The implants once removed should not be
3. Should be chemically stable.
reused.
4. Should have good ductility.
Implants and Instruments
277
e. Quality of the bone.
Cobalt
f.Associated comorbid factors.
316L
stainless
g. Foreign body sensitivity.
steel
In pediatric age group unlike adults implants are used only
Titanium
with definite indications. Less traumatic and easily removable
Bone
implants are preferred, e.g. *K'-wires, titanium elastic nails, etc.
cortex
q iau ul paad an s ns a
PMMA
口
individuals. Senility, alcoholism, mental illness may lead to
 implant failure because of failure to adhere to postoperative
0
10
20
30
40
care. Associated comorbid factors may contribute to implant
Figure 18.1
Showing the modulus of elasticity of different materials. Titanium is
failure.
the closest when compared to other materials.
Demand of the situation dictates the type of the implant.
A transverse fracture is stable to axial compression but
5. High fatigue resistance.
unstable to torsion stress. An oblique fracture is stable to
6. High mechanical strength (Lacking in biodegradable
torsion stress but unstable to axial compression and bending.
materials).
A spiral fracture is unstable to both axial compression and
7. Nontoxic.
torsion. A comminuted fracture entirely depends on the
8. Noncarcinogenic.
strength of the implant to maintain stability. An open fracture
in addition to the nature of bony injury poses a challenge
Types of Implants
because of associated injury to soft tissue envelope.
Basically there are two types:
Further presence of other fractures and injury to the vital
a.
 Surface implants, e.g. plates and screws.
organs also have a bearing on selection of the implant. All
b. Intramedullary implants, e.g. nails.
these factors are to be taken into consideration when an
implant is chosen.
Types of Prosthesis
When the individual is sensitive to stainless steel, titanium
Two Types
implants are preferred. Also when MRI is indicated during
the postoperative and follow-up period, e.g. in spinal
a. Those which replace components of the bone, e.g.
stabilization, titanium implants are preferred.
 prosthesis used for joint replacement.
b. Those which are used to replace the whole structure, e.g.
Correct Handling of the Implant
intervertebral disc, scaphoid, lunate, etc.
Insertion of an implant is an art. Correct handling of the implant
Points to be observed while selecting the implant:
is an absolute must while inserting. This skill has to be acquired
It should always be reme mbered that the implants which
from the very beginning itself. Meticulous attention is to be
are used to stabilize the procedure, have a great role to
maintain the correction achieved by surgery. They have no
given to the use of proper instruments and the techniques of
role to play once the healing occurs.
implant and hence specialized instruments are provided.
Healing is a natural process and is dependant on several
Improper handling increases the failure rate and complications.
factors. Immobility at the site is one of the factors essential
for healing and implants take care of this factor by providing
Asepsis in the Operating Room
immobility at the site. None of the implants allow full weight
bearing or full activity immediately following surgery.
This is of utmost importance. There goes a popular saying
There is a postoperative protocol to follow. Failure to
observe this results in implant failure.
cannot breathe over the bone".Meticulous measures for
Following factors are to be taken into consideration while
asepsis is to be observed in the orthopedic operation theater.
selecting an implant.
Infection following an insertion of an implant is a disaster.
a. Age of the patient.
The implant gets rejected and the whole procedure is a failure.
b. Weight of the patient.
A center where the infection rate is less than 1% is an ideal
c. Mental status and intelligence.
set up for orthopedic surgery. 1-3% is acceptable. But above
d. Demand of the situation.
3% is to be considered as not suitable for orthopedic surgery.
278
Essentials of Orthopedics
A separate dedicated theater for orthopedic surgery is
ii. Shank with threads: This helps to gain purchase in the
 desirable.
object during gliding and helps in the firm fixation of
the screw after insertion.
Surface Implants
iii. The tip directs the screw.
These are placed on the surface and hence share the load of
The distance between the threads is called the pitch of the
axial stress.
screw and the distance which the screw moves during one
complete turm is the lead of the screw. The pitch and the lead
Screw (Used to Fix the Surface Implant to the Bone)
are equal, i.e. if the pitch is 1 mm the lead also is 1 mm.
A screw is an implement which converts a rotational force
The variation in the pitch of a cortical and cancellous
 into linear motion (Fig. 18.2). The design of the screw enables
screw is for the purpose of gaining good purchase in the
it to bring about this.
cortical and cancellous bone respectively. The cortical bone
is a compact bone and the cancellous bone is a spongy bone.
The Screw Design (Figs 18.3 to 18.7)
Hence, the difference in the pitch design (Figs 18.5 and 18.6).
i. Head of the screw: It gives attachment to the device that
The screws are available in different sizes and different
applies a rotational force (driver) and also it gives
diameters.
resistance when the insertion is complete and prevents
further motion.
11111111111
Figure 18.4
Showing picture of a cortical screw which has threads along the length
 of its shank and has a smaller pitch.
Figure 18.2
Showing the rotational force being converted into a linear movement
Figure 18.5
Showing pictures of cancellous screws. The bigger one is a 6.5 mm
and a smaller one is 4.0 mm. They have threads only at the tip and
length as well as in a fully threaded design.
Figure 18.6
 Showing the picture of a mallolar screw. This screw is used for
fixation of the malleolus and has a conical sharp cutting tip with
threads of a different pitch as well as width from that of a cortical or
Figures 18.3A to C
a cancellous screw. The extent of thread on the shank is more than
Showing different types of screw heads: (A) Torx head, (B) Philips
that of cancellous screw, extending almost to 1/2 the length of the
head, and (C) Hexagonal head.
 shank.
Implants and Instruments
279
A
B
Figure 18.7
Picture of Herbert screw used in the fixation of the fracture scaphoid.
These are headless screws having threads of different pitch at the
proximal and the distal ends.
Plates (Figs 18.8 to 18.11)
D
Plate is a surface implant with holes. They are placed on the
Figures 18.8A to D
surface of a bone and are fixed to the bone by means of screws
Showing the dynamic compression plate the semitubular plate and
a 1/3 tubular plate. Note the placement and the sloping nature of
(Figs 18.14 and 18.19). The outer surface is convex and the
the holes and the curvature which amounts to 1/8 of a circle in a
inner surface is concave to accommodate for the cylindrical
DCP (A and B). The curvature of the semitubular plate amounts to
structure of the bone. Different designs of plates are available.
1/2 the circumference of a circle (C). The curvature of a 1/3 tubular
plate amounts to 1/3 the circumference of a circle (D).
Dynamic Compression Plate (DCP)
1/3Tubular andSemitubularPlates
The curvature of this plate is equal to 1/8 of a circle. The
holes are distributed equidistant from a solid non-fenestrated
These are used mainly to fix the fractures in the supportive
center portion of the plate. The holes are oval in shape and
bones like ulna and fibula.
the distal edges of the oval hole have a slope towards the
Limited Contact, Dynamic Compression Plate:
center to bring about compression effect when the screws are
LC, DCP (Figs 18.9A and B)
tightened.
Very popular design of 1980's. Now not used. The
To overcome the disadvantages of the DCP, the design was
fractures were thought to unite early because of compression
changed. Grooves were designed on the concave under surface
force generated by the inherent design of the plate as well as
of the plate for the blood vessels to grow. The holes were
the method of insertion of the screws. Patients were mobilized
distributed evenly all along the plate to prevent concentration
 early and fracture disease was prevented. Now it is not used 
 of stress, without taking into consideration a central reference
because the principle of compression fixation of fractures
 point. Currently these plates are being used in place of DCP.
using DCP is known to cause secondary changes which are
Locking Compression Plate (LCP)(Figs 18.10A to C)
detrimental to the bone. Also union without callus is far
 inferior when compared to union with callus and remodeling
These are specially designed to fix fractures in osteoporotic
with respect to strength of the bone.
skeleton. The problem faced in an osteoporotic skeleton is
Some of the changes observed which proved to be
one of having firm purchase in the bone. Without firm
detrimental are as follows:
purchase the screws will become loose and failure of fixation
i. Union without callus formation in the fonm of direct
occurs. These plates have holes designed in such a way that
substitution by the creeping trabeculae caused refracture
it gives freedom to exercise locking or nonlocking option. At
after removal of the plate.
the same time options are given for placing the screws at right
ii. Stress fractures occurred at the ends of the plate.
angle to the surface of the bone or at an oblique angle. These
iii. On removal of the plate the bone under the plate was
options improves the firmness of fixation. In practice this plate
found to be avascular.
serves as an intemal fix ator.
280
Essentials of Orthopedics
Figures 18.9A and B
 Showing LC DCP. Note the changed design with grooves on the under surface of the plate and uniform distribution of holes for insertion of
screws. Also note that the changed design of the under surface of the plate allows limited contact with the bone.
A
B
Figures 18.10A to C
Showing (A and B) the different sizes of LCP. Note the option for locking as well as nonlocking for the head of the screw. (C) Proximal
Note that the screw in green color has a head with threads for locking.
SS wires
These are stainless steel wires used in the fixation of comminu-
ted fractures and in tension band wiring, circlage wiring, etc.
(Fig. 18.17).
Intramedullary Implants
Theseimplants are placed inthe medullary canal of a bone
B
mnd hence bear the stress of axial loading.
 Basically classified as rigid nails, hollow nails and elastic
nails (Figs 18.12 and 18.13).
Rigid Nails
These nails are solid rods and do not have a canal. They have
Figure 18.11
 Showing T' type Buttress plates for different injuries. (A) Thumb 
 a good tolerance for axial loading but poor bending property
metacarpal (Rolando'sfracture),(B) Lowerendof radius(Smith's
and easily break when subjected to bending stress, e.g.
fracture) (C) Tibial condyles (Fender fracture)
unreamed interlocking nails.
Implants and Instruments
281
Indicated in open fractures and badly comminuted
fractures.
Hollow Nails
These nails have a central canal. They are not as strong as
rigid nails. But have a good tolerance for bending stress and
 do not break easily when subjected to such a stress.
Indicated in all closed noncomminuted fractures.
Elastic Nails
These are thin solid rods and on their own do not have any
strength to resist axial stress but show excellent adaptiveness
for bending stress. Multiple nails have to be used to get
sufficiently rigid fixation and resist the stress of axial loading.
e.g. ender nails, titanium elastic nails, etc. Indicated in
pediatric long bone fractures and in elderly osteoporotic long
bone fractures.
Figure 18.13
Showing the three point fixation of the Kuntscher intramedullary nail.
Gerhardt Kuntscher knew that the nail did not give much rotational
Kuntscher Nail or K-nail
stability and came out with Detensornails withperforated ends for
This is an intramedullary nail designed by Gerhardt Kuntscher
locking bolts.This became the precursor of aff the interiocking nails
of today.
a German surgeon during II world war. It is a hollow slotted
nail which is clover leaf shaped in cross-section. It has
Rush Nail
extraction slots at either ends. It was used to fix the fracture
shaft femur based on the principle of three point fixation (Fig.
This is a rigid nail designed by Lesley Rush and Lowry Rush.
18.13). The three points being the cancellous portion of the
the American orthopedic surgeons in 1930's. These are rigid
intertrochanteric bone, the isthmus and the cancellous portion
nails having a beveled tip and a curved hook like head with a
of the intercondylar bone. It was in use till mid 80's for almost
bevel on it.
40 years until interlocking nails became popular. Even now
The direction of bevel on the head corresponds to the
they are selectively used.
direction of the bevel at the tip so that the surgeon knows the
direction of the bevel at the time of insertion of the nail after
its entry into the bone.
They were used to fix the fracture of the forearm bones
 amd supposed to work on the principle of trifocal buttressing.
A
i.e. according to Rush ^A vase of flower'.
B
Biodegradable Implants
These implants have a modulus of elasticity very close to the
C
bone . Even lesser than titanium. But they exhibit a very poor
strength to axial and bending stress. Hence currently they are
used only in fractures of minor nature, e.g. malleolar fracture,
metacarpal fracture lateral condyle fracture. Osteochondral
D
fracture, etc. The greatest advantage is that they get degraded
Figures 18.12A to D
and absorbed in 6 months to 1 year. Disadvantage observed
Showing (A) Kuntscher nail, (B) Tibial interlocking nail, (C) A rush
is that some patients react showing signs of inflammation at
nail (D) An ender nail.
the time of biodegradation process.
282
Essentials of Orthopedics
Dynamic Hip Screw and a Barrel Plate
(Fig. 18.15A)
This is an implant which is used to fix the intertrochantric and
some types of subtrochanteric fracture of the femur. The implant
consists of a cannulated hip screw, a barrel plate and a locking
screw. It works on the principle of rigid intermal fixation. Firm
 a s ms  a ua pe nq si uexg
screw and the barrel plate and is tightened. Compression is also
brought about when the patient starts bearing weight and screw
 begins to slide within the barrel plate.
Jewet Nail (Fig. 18.15B)
This is a fixed angle nail plate device used to fix the inter-
trochaneric fracture. It has a cannulated triflanged nail fixed
to a plate at a specified angle. These are available from
120-145° angles and chosen according to the angle desirable
A
B
at fix ation.
Figures 18.15A and B
(A) Dynamic hip screw and barrel plate (B) Jewet nail.
Cannulated Cancellous Hip Screw
Fixation of fracture neck of the femur started with the use of
Smith Peterson Nail. To begin with this was a solid implant
with 4 flanges. Later modified to a triflanged nail. Johanssen
 modified the nail by introducing a central canal into the nail.
And in current practice the canulated cancellous screw is the
standard implant that is used to fix the fracture neck femur.
Minimum two and a maximum of three screws are used
(Fig. 18.16).
Figure 18.16
 Cannulated cancellous hip screw for the fixation of fracture neck of
the femur.
A
B
C
Figures 18.14A to C
 Some of the instruments used for plating: (A) Bending template to
Figure 18.17
assess the curvature of the bone and bend the plate accordingly.
(B) Tap for cutting threads after drilling hole in the bone. (C) Drill bit
Stainless steel—SSwireused for Tensionband and Circlage wiring
 in fixation of fractures. Available in different gauges.
to drill a hole.
Implants and Instruments
283
Chisel
It is a sharp instrument having one edge beveled used to chip
the bone.
Osteotome
It is a sharp instrument having both the edges beveled. It is
used to cut the bone.
Bone Gouge
 It is a sharp instrument with a trough used to gouge out the
soft bone.
A mallet is necessary to drive these sharp instruments.
Figure 18.18
An Austin Moore's prosthesis, which is used in fracture neck of femur
for replacement hemiarthroplasty. Note the fenestrations in the stem 
for the bone growth and to initiate a self-locking process. This is to
be used when calcar femorale is sufficient. When calcar femorale is
deficient Thompson's prosthesis with bone cement is to be used.
B
C
回
Figure 18.19
The bending moment arm in a nail and a plate fixation. The moment 
arm of a plate is longer when compared to a nail. Hence the plate is 
subjected to greater stress when compared to a nail. Thus the plate
acts more as a load bearing device and the nail acts more as a load
sharing device.
General Instruments Used in Orthopedics
(Figs 18.20 to 18.29)
Mallet
A mallet is used to deliver a blow either to drive an implant
Figures 18.20A and B
or to drive an instrument, e.g. in the insertion of a nail or a
(A) a Mallet, a Chisel, an osteotome and a bone gouge from left to
right respectively. (B) The difference between the cutting edge of an
 prosthesis with the help of an impactor, in osteotomies to drive
osteotome and a chisel. An osteotome has beveling on both sides
an osteotome, in bone grafting to drive a chisel, etc.
(left) where as a chisel has a beveling on one side (right).
284
Essentials of Orthopedics
William Ferguson
He was a famous surgeon of 19th century. He designed this
forceps to hold the head of the femur during disarticulation
This forceps was also used to hold the jaw bones the mandible
amd maxilla
Figure 18.23
B
C
The picture of a periosteal elevator used to strip the periosteum from
Figures 18.21A to C
the bone note the serrated portion in the handle which is used to for
The three types of bone holding forceps. (A) Lane's bone holding
placing the thumb in order to have a firm grip.
forceps. (B) Ferguson's Lion toothed (or Jawed) bone holding forceps.
(C)Hey Groves bone holding forceps.
William Arbuthnot Lane
A brilliant surgeon who was working in Guy's hospital,
London in the beginning of 20th century. He popularized what
Figure 18.24
he called ‘No touch technique' as a safety measure against
A bone hook which is used to hook the bone and draw it up from
infection by operating from a distance using instruments with
within the soft tissue.
 long handles. All his instruments have long handles.
Figures 18.22A and B
The two types of bone levers. These are used to lever the bone free
Figure 18.25
of its soft tissue. (A) Bristow's type. Sir Walter Rowley Bristow devised
Two types of nail impactors. Note the slotted and the hollow design
this lever. Hence the name. (B) Trethowen's type. Sir William H
at one end and theknob at the other for delivering the blow with the
Trethowen devised this lever. Hence the name.
mallet.
 Implants and Instruments
285
Figure 18.26
Lowmann's Bone clamp which is used to hold the fracture reduction
along with the implant during plate fixation. Note the jaws and the
B
Figures 18.28A to C
(B) Smillie's meniscectomy knife. (A and C) Meiscectomy spike for
the medial meniscus of let and right side respectively. The same is
meniscus of left and right side respectively.
B
Figures 18.27A and B
Figure 18.29
Medullaryrasp which isused torasp the medullary canal of upper
the sharp cutting edge of a bone cutter and trough with a sharp edge
of a nibbler. The bone cutter is used for cutting small bone such as
Note the fenestration at the upper part for insertion of a tommy
the phalanges, ribs, etc. The bone nibbler is used to nibble off sharp
bar for extraction and a flat knob for delivering a blow for driving
the rasp in.
Designs of Limb Lengthening Apparatus
Next the Illizarov wires are passed through the bone, two at
the level of each ring preferably at right angles and fixed to
llizarov (Fig. 18.30)
the ring using wire fixation bolts and nuts (D) and tensionized
It is a ring fixator offering three-dimentional stability during
by an instrument known as tensionizer. Extra-wire is cut and
correction.
the cut end is bent flush with the ring.
Assembly is constructed by joining two 1/2 rings of equal
The Illizarov principle is that a controlled progressive
diameter chosen according to the size of the limb using ring
distraction and/or compression leads to tissue regeneration.
fixation bolts and nuts (E). A minimum of four rings are to be
This principle is made use of and accordingly a progressive
assembled.
distraction or compression stress (1 mm a day) is given at the
These rings are next connected by threaded rods (C) and
desirable site by loosening and tightening the nuts of the
the distance between the rings is adjusted as per requirement.
assembly (refer text Fig, 1.18G).
286
Essentials of Orthopedics
房
®
C
B
Figure 18.32
A Wagner type of Lengthening apparatus. It has a fixed clamp on 
Figure 18.30
one side, a turnbuckle device on the other and a gliding clamp in
 The basic components of Illizarov ring fixator. (A) Stainless steel
between. This clamp glides either way according to the rotation of
1/2 ring. (B) Carbon 1/2 ring. (C) Threaded rod, (D) Wire fixation
the turnbuckle at the other end. 1 mm translation occurs for a full
bolt and nut, (E) Ring fixation bolt and nut. Carbon in rings are lighter
turn.
and radiolucent when compared to stainless steel and being
radiolucent have distinct advantage while taking radiographs.
Orthofix Type (Fig. 18.31)
This is a uniplanar fixator device with an extemal compres-
sion-distraction (CD) unit. Has distinct advantage of ease
of application and manipulation. But gives less rigid
fixation (Refer text Figs 1.19A and B).
Wagner Type (Fig. 18.32)
This devise has a built in Tumbuckle mechanism for distrac-
tion or compression. One tum offers 1 mm movement.
Figure 18.31
Orthofix type fixator,Uniplanar withSchanzpins in situand CD devise
pointed at by the insertion of an Allen key. One full turn of the key
causes either distraction or compression by 1 mm.
19
Arthroscopy and
TotalJoint Arthroplasty
 Arthroscopy
Total Joint Replacement
Arthroscopy
Arthroscopes of different sizes and designs are available for
 all the joints. Techniques are also highly advanced.
Arthroscope is an instrument which allows viewing of the
interior of a joint. The procedure is known as diagnostic
Components of an Arthroscope
arthroscopy. When surgical procedures are performed under
the guidance of viewing through the scope the procedure is
The basic component of an Arthroscope is a Telescope with
called arthroscopic surgery.
a metal casing. The scope has varying degrees of viewing
angle of 0°, 30°, 70°, etc. at the distal end and an eye piece
(to which a video camera can be connected) at the proximal
Evolution of Arthroscopes
end. It has a portal for the attachment of a light source. The
It was Professor Kenji Takagi who first viewed the interior
imside of a scope consists of a series of lenses and optical
of a cadaveric knee in the year 1918 using a cystoscope and
fibers which transmit light from the light source to the interior
later developed a scope known as Takagi scope in the year
of the joint (Fig. 19.1).
1931. Dr Philip Kreuscher recommended the use of arthro-
Technique
scope for recognition and treatment of meniscal lesions in the
year 1925. Credit goes to Dr Masaki Watanabe for not only
The procedure is carried out under general anesthesia with
developing the first moderm arthroscope in the year 1958 but
full muscle relaxation. Muscle relaxation is necessary as it
also performing the first ever arthroscopic surgery of excising
allows good maneuverability of joints during the procedure.
a xanthomatous giant cell tumor as well as performing
 For proper visualization, the joint is distended with infusion
meniscectomy in the year 1962. In mid 80's the videoscope
of fluid. For the purpose of diagnosis a single portal generally
amd motorized arthroscopic instruments were developed and
 is sufficient. But for doing arthroscopic surgery additional
advanced techniques started evolving. These days many
portals for insertion of instruments are necessary. Insertion
surgeries are being performed using arthroscope .
 portals for the scope as well as for the instruments are planned
288
Essentials of Orthopedics
3. Early mobilization possible.
4. Direct visualization of the abnormality is possible.
 5. Dynamic picture of the joint is recordable.
6. Good cosmesis.
Limitation of the Arthroscopic Procedures
Not indicated in advanced involvement of a joint, e.g. osteo-
arthritis, infective conditions, major joint injuries, etc.
Complications
1. Infection.
2. Hemarthrosis.
3. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
Figure 19.1
4. Thrombophlebitis.
Picture showing the arthroscope along with some of the accessory
Common Arthroscopic Procedures
instruments used for surgical procedures.
Synovium
depending on the nature of the lesion (Fig. 19.2). The joint is
1. Synovial biopsy.
viewed in a systematic manner. At the end of the procedure
2. Synovectomy.
the joint is thoroughly irrigated the skin wounds are sutured
Articular cartilage
amd a pressure bandage is given.
1. Excision of loose bodies, e.g. osteochondritis desicans.
 2. Shaving of the degenerated cartilage, e.g. osteoarthritis.
Advantages of Arthroscopic Procedures
Bone
1. Less invasive, less morbid and less painful.
1. Correction of patellar tracking.
 2. Day care procedure with no hospital stay.
 2. Biopsy of an intra-articular lesion.
Ligaments
1. Primary repair, e.g. MCL.
CO
2. Secondary reconstruction. ACL.
Meniscus
EO
1. Partial or complete menisectomy.
OF
2. Meniscal repair.
Lavage
B
OA
Thorough irmigation and drainage, e.g. infective arthritis.
D
osteoarthritis.
Total Joint Replacement (Arthroplasty)
When both the articular surfaces of a joint are replaced by an
artificial joint (Prosthesis), the procedure is known as total
joint arthroplasty. A total joint arthroplasty converts a
destroyed, disorganized, painful joint which has lost function
Figure 19.2
imto a near normal, well organized, painless joint with good
Showing different portals of entry for knee arthroscopy. A, B, C are
function. This is achieved by clearing the damaged portion
standard portals D, E, F are additional portals. All are marked thus
 of the bone and inserting an appropriate artificial prosthesis.
O. (A) Anteromedial (B) Anterolateral (C) Superolateral (D)
Transpatellar (E) Midpatellar lateral (F) Mid patellar medial.
Adequate preoperative planning is necessary for this surgery.
Arthroscopy and Total Joint Arthroplasty
289
A
Figure 19.3
Evolution
 Success of joint replacement depends on preoperative
Sir John Charmley is considered as the pioneer of total joint
planning and accurate intraoperative execution of the
preoperative plan. The alignment of both the components of
replacement, especially hip. He popularized the concept of
a total joint prosthesis should be perfect.
low friction arthroplasty in 1960's by designing a metal
Computer assisted joint replacement surgery is also
femoral stem component and a polyethylene cup component
 practiced in some centers for more accuracy.
for the acetabulum. He did this work in the center for hip
surgery, Wrightington' England. He used polymethyl-
Complications
methacrylate, the bone cement which he initially borrowed
from his dental friends. Cement acted as a filler and helped
Some of the complications encountered during joint replace
in the finm fixation of the components. The procedure proved
ment are as follows:
to be very successful and subsequently many proshetic designs
1. Infection.
were developed. Because of the complications faced at the
2. Hemorrhage.
time of insertion of the cement and problems faced at the time
3. DVT and pulmonary embolism.
of removal of a failed prosthesis, uncemented prosthetic
 4. Loosening of the implant.
designs developed. These designs were later modified into
5.
Dislocation.
hydroxyapetite coated prosthesis aiming at firm fixation at
6. Nerve palsies.
 bone metal interface. Currently, the use of cemented prosthesis
is restricted to elderly people and uncemented prosthesis is
Postoperative Rehabilitaton after
 always preferred in a young individual.
Joint Replacement Surgery
The year 1968 was the year of development of a success-
1. The patient is mobilized on the bed (joint movements) as
ful knee prosthesis. A Canadian Orthopedist Frank Gunston
early as possible after the initial pain subsides.
from John Charmley's center replaced the knee with a metal
 2. Weight bearing in hip replacement surgeries is usually
and polyethylene component which were fixed to the bone
delayed when compared to knee replacement surgeries and
by bone cement. In 1972, John Insall, MD, developed a
is related to the type of prosthesis used (cemented and
design of total knee which became the prototype of all the
umcemented).
total knees available these days.
3.A
Always a walking aid is given during the initial period of
Total ankle, total shoulder and total elbow are the other
weight bearing.
prosthesis which are available these days, for other joint
4. Advise is given to avoid strenuous activities to increase
replacements.
the longevity of the prosthesis.
A
Arthroscopes 287
Blood investigations 225
 Arthroscopic procedures 288
Blood supply of scaphoid 20,60
Abnormal gaits 269
Arthroscopy 287
Bone 227,236
Acetabular fracture 117
advantages of arthroscopic procedures
Bone gouge 283
Achondroplasia 244
288
Bone peg epiphysiodesis 197
Acromioclavicular joint 100
common arthroscopic procedures 288
Bone tumor 176
Acute suppurative arthritis 159
complications 288
clinical 176
diagnosis 159
components of an arthroscope 287
evaluation of a bone tumor 176
mode of spread
159
evolution of arthroscopes 287
general classification 178
organism 159
limitation of arthroscopic procedures
laboratory investigations 178
pathology 159
288
management 179
treatment 159
technique 287
radiological 178
Amputations 272
Asepsis in operating room 277
Bones and joints 270
Bony injuries (Pott's fracture) 66
definition 272
Autonomic and sensory changes 132
general amputations 272
Avascular necrosis
24
complete failure pattern 67
Axillary nerve C5 C6 141
definition  66
ideal length of the stump 274
131
Lauge-Hansen's genetic classification 67
indications 272
Axonotmesis
management 70
specific amputation 272
B
pathomechanics 67
Gille's amputation 274
Book test and Froment's sign 146
Kruckenberg's amputation 274
Boutonniere deformity  252
Lisfrank's and Chopart's
Barton's fracture 29
etiology 252
amputation 274
complications 29
rheumatoid arthritis 252
Pirogoff's amputation 274
definition 29
trauma 252
Syme's amputation 274
mechanism of injury 29
treatment 252
stump of amputation 274
treatment 29
Brachial plexus 147
types of amputations 272
Basic methods of treating fracture 7
formation of brachial plexus 147
Anal wink 128
Batson's plexus of veins 162
injuries of brachial plexus 148
Aneurysmal bone cyst 183
Baumann's angle 43
lower plexus injury, Klumpke's
clinical features 183
Benign osteoblastoma 180
paralysis 149
etiology 183
clinical features 180
signs of preganglionic lesions 148
histopathology
183
investigations 180
upper plexus injury Erb's paralysis
investigations 183
treatment 180
148
treatment
183
Bennett's and Rolando's fracture 17
whole plexus injury 149
Aneurysmal bone cyst 183
Bennett's fracture 18
management 149
Ankle fracture 97
complications
18
nonoperative 149
Antalgic gait 271
definition
18
operative 150
Anterior cord syndrome 124
displacements 18
reconstructive procedures 150
Anterior dislocation of shoulder 102,106
mechanism of injury 18
Brodie's abscess 158
Anterior interbody synarthrosis
119
treatment
18
Brown-Sequard’'s syndrome 124
Anteroposterior
113
Biodegradable implants 281
Buckle fractures
266
Antinuclear antibodies 225
cannulated cancellous hip screw 282
Bulbocavernous reflex
128
AP view
195
dynamic hip screw and a barrel plate
Bursa and bursitis 262
Ape thumb deformity 143
282
treatment of bursitis 262
Arthroplasty 288
Jewet nail
282
Bursitis 262
292
Essentials of Orthopedics 
C
Chronaxie 135
Congenital vertical talus 235
Chronic osteomyelitis 156
definition 235
Calcaneal spur 257
Classical deformity 26,28
diagnosis 236
etiology 257
Classification of slip 195
radiological features 236
symptoms 258
Claw hand (intrinsic minus deformity) 142
differential diagnosis 237
treatment 258
Claw toes 145
congenital oblique talus 237
Calcaneus fracture 63, 97
Clay Shoveller's fracture 123
etiology 235
classification of fracture calcaneum 63
Clinical diagnostic tests 78
pathological anatomy 236
functional importance of the calcaneus
Clinical head at risk signs 201
bone 236
63
Closed and open methods 85
ligaments 236
 mechanisms of injury 63
Cold abscess 162
muscles and tendons 236
radiology in fracture calcaneum 64
investigations 165
synonyms 235
Rowe classification 64
position and course of cold abscess in
treatment 237
surgical anatomy 63
spinal tuberculosis
163
one stage release 237
treatment 65
Colles’ fracture 24, 26
Correct handling of the implant 277
Calcaneus gait 270
classical deformity 26
Correction of claw hand 137
Calcification 256
common age group
26
Correction of deformities in rickets 219
Cannulated cancellous hip screw 282
complications 27
Critical limit of delay
137
Cannulated screw fixation and osteotomies
definition
24
Crush syndrome 13
196
displacements seen in Colles’ fracture
CTEV 249
Capitulum and trochlear fractures 39
26
Card test 145
indication for above elbow cast 27
D
Carpal tunnel syndrome 254
mechanism of injury 26
etiology 254
treatment 26
DDH 249
diagnosis 254
treatment of complications 28
De Quervain's disease 253
treatment 255
Common age group
26
symptoms 253
Catterall grouping
198
Common arthroscopic procedures 2
288
Finkelstein's test 253
Ccp antibody 225
Common benign bone tumors 179
treatment 253
Cellular proliferation 5
Common fractures in lower limb 267
Deep mycoses
173
Central cord syndrome 124
Common malignant bone tumors
184
Deforming forces 3,31
Central dislocation 106
Common site and classification
51
Deformities and signs 142
Chance fracture 123
Complete failure pattern 67
Deformities in clubfoot 231
Chauffeur's fracture 31
Complex regional pain syndrome
Delayed union 8
treatment 31
(Sudeck's atrophy) 16
Dennis’ three column concept 120
Chisel 283
Compression force 113
 Designs of limb lengthening apparatus 285
Chondroblastoma
182
Compression fracture  4
Illizarov
285
clinical features 182
Congenital oblique talus 237
orthofix type 286
histopathology
182
Congenital talipes equinovarus 2
230
Wagner type 286
investigations 182
deformities in clubfoot 231
Desirable properties of an implant 276
treatment 182
diagnosis 231
Development of vertebral column 162
Chondromyxoid fibroma 182
talocalcaneal index 231
Developmental dysplasia of hip (DDH) 238
clinical features 182
etiology and pathogenesis 230
predisposing factors 238
histopathology 182
ligaments involved 231
investigations 240
investigations 182
tendons and muscles involved 231
treatment 241
treatment 182
treatment 232
nonoperative 241
Chondrosarcoma 188
nonoperative 232
open reduction 241
clinical features 189
operative methods 233
reconstructive procedures 243
histopathology
189
Congenital torticollis or wry neck 259
clinical features 239
investigations 189
clinical features 259
after the child begins to walk 240
treatment 189
diagnosis 259
up to 2-3 months (the neonate) 239
Chopart's injury 57
natural course of the fibromatosis 259
after 3-6 months (the infant) 239
definition 57
prognosis 259
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH)
management 57
treatment 259
238
mechanism 57
role of surgery 259
Diagnostic tests 133
prognosis 57
type of surgeries 259
Direct mechanism 122
Index
293
Dislocation 14,15 106
E
Fracture healing 13
Dislocation and subluxation14
Fracture neck femur 90
Dislocation of acromioclavicular joint 100
Elastic nails 281
Fracture neck of femur in children 268
classification 101
Elbow104
Fracture of pelvis
clinical features 101
Electromyography (EMG) 133
classifications 114
diagnosis 101
Elizabethtown staging 198
clinical signs of importance 115
management 101
Emergency management 125
combined 114
mechanism of injury 100
Enchondroma 182
complications of fracture pelvis 116
Dislocation of the elbow
104
clinical features 182
compression force 113
management 105
histopathology 183
anteroposterior 113
mechanism of injury 104
investigations 183
lateral 113
diagnosis 1
104
treatment 183
ex ternal rotation force
113
types 104
Essex-Lopresti fracture 30
formation of pelvis 112
Dislocation of the hip joint 106
clinical importance 31
investigations
115
classification
107
definition 30
mechanisms of injury
113
Tompson-Epstein classification 107
 mechanism of injury 31
principles of management 116
complications
110
treatment 31
sacral fracture classification 115
diagnosis 107
Ewing's tumor 189
Tile's classification (1995) 114
management 108
clinical features 189
vertical shear 114
anterior dislocation
108
histopathology 189
Fracture of the clavicle 51
posterior dislocation
109
investigations 189
common site and classification:
51
mechanism of injury 106
treatment 190
complications and treatment 52
anterior dislocation 106
External rotation force 113
mechanisms of injury  51
central dislocation 106
treatment 52
posterior dislocation 106
F
Fracture of fifth metatarsal bone 59
types of dislocation 106
Facetal joints 119
Fracture of neck of the femur 86
Dislocation of the knee 111
classification 87
clinical features 111
Factors influencing healing 6
clinical signs and symptoms 87
Fall on an outstretched hand 24
diagnosis 111
diagnosis 88
Familial and hereditary rickets 219
treatment 111
Garden’s alignment index
Fat embolism 13
91
Dislocation of shoulder 102
Lowell's alignment theory
Femoral neck fracture biomechanics 99
92
anterior dislocation of shoulder 102
Femoral nerve 12 - 14 141
management 88
posterior dislocation of shoulder 103
Femur fracture 98
mechanisms of injury 87
types 102
Festinant gait 270
problems associated with the fracture 86
Dislocations 14
Fibrous dysplasia 247
problems of old age associated with the
complex regional pain syndrome 16
Ficat and arlet (1980) 260
fracture 87
complications 15
Finger drop and thumb drop
senile osteoporosis and fracture neck
144
definition 14
Finkelstein's test 253
femur 90
diagnosis 14
Flail foot 144
Singh index of osteoporosis 90
 open fracture management 
16
Flexion distraction injury
121
Fracture of the patella 79
Sudeck's atrophy 16
Flexion rotation injury
120
 clinical signs and symptoms 80
treatment 14
Foot drop 140,145
investigation 80
types of dislocation 14
Fore foot 57
management 80
Displacements 18
Forearm fractures
54
mechanism of injury 79
Distal femur fracture 98
Fracture
2,5,52
Fracture of the radius and ulna 31
Distal humerus fracture 55
Fracture calcaneum 63,64
complications 32
Drug therapy 222
Fracture clavicle and shoulder injuries 55
deforming forces 31
Drunkard’s gait 271
Fracture femur 85
mechanism of injury 31
Dupuytren's contracture
253
advantages and disadvantages of closed
treatment 32
etiology 253
and open methods 85
Fracture of talus 60
structure of the Palmar aponeurosis 253
clinical signs and symptoms 85
blood supply
60
treatment 254
complications 86
classification of fractures/dislocations
 Dynamic classification of bone dysplasias
definitive treatment of fracture femur 85
and fracture-
-dislocations of talus
243
investigations 85
61
Dynamic compression plate (DCP) 279
treatment 85
complications 62
Dynamic hip screw and a barrel plate 282
types of fracture femur 85
history  60
294
Essentials of Orthopedics
mechanism of injury 61
Fractures around elbow joint 36
Fractures of the tibial condyle
treatment 62
classification 37
(tibial plateau) 82
Fracture pelvis 116
complications 38
classification 82
Fracture scaphoid 23
mechanism of injury 37
clinical signs and symptoms 82
Fracture shaft humerus
48
radial head fracture 37
complications 83
Fracture shaft of femur
267
treatment 37
diagnosis
83
Fracture shaft of humerus 48
 Fractures around the wrist 17,54
mechanism of injury 82
complications 49
Fractures in children 263
treatment 83
mechanisms of injury of fracture
buckle fractures 266
Fractures/dislocations and fracture-
shaft humerus 48
fracture neck of femur in children 268
dislocations of the talus 61
treatment 48
classification 268
Frog leg view 195
treatment of complications 49
diagnosis 268
Fractures 2
mechanism of injury 268
G
basic methods of treating a fracture 7
treatment 268
Gait 269
complications 7
fracture shaft of femur 267
abnormal gaits 269
classification of delayed and
diagnosis
267
abnormalities in the nervous system 270
nonunions8
mechanism of injury 267
antalgic gait 271
crush syndrome 13
Drunkard's gait 271
delayed union 8
greenstick fractures 267
festinant gait 270
fat embolism 13
physeal injuries 264
hemiplegic gait 271
malunion8
classification of physeal injuries
scissors gait 270
nonunion7
based on Salter and Harris 264
stamping gait 271
pulmonary embolism 13
structure of a physis 264
changes in bones and joints 270
shock and hemorrhage 12
plastic deformation 266
short leg gait 270
 specialized methods for the treatment
Thurston Holland sign
stiff hip gait 270
of delayed unions and nonunions
(Shiny corner sign) 264
stiff knee gait 270
complications 266
definition 269
specific complications 7
diagnosis of physeal injuries 265
gait cycle
：269
Sudeck's atrophy 12
management
265
muscle weakness 269
systemic and general complications
types of injuries 264
calcaneus gait 270
12
 Fractures in arm and shoulder 48
gluteus maximus lurch 269
treatment of delayed and nonunions
Fractures in forearm 31
high stepping gait of foot drop 270
9
Fractures of femoral condyles 83
quadriceps lurch 270
treatment of malunions 10
classification  84
pathomechanics of Trendelenburg gait
deforming forces 3
clinical signs and symptoms 84
271
factors influencing healing 6
diagnosis 84
phases 269
healing of fracture 5
 mechanism of injury 84
Trendelenburg gait
271
cellular proliferation
5
treatment 84
Gait cycle 269
hematoma formation  5
Fractures of glenoid
53
Galeazzi fracture
35
lamellar bone formation (hard callus)
Fractures of proximal humerus 49
complications 36
6
classification 50
mechanism of injury 36
primary woven bone formation
complications  51
treatment 36
(soft callus) 6
mechanisms of injury 50
Garden's alignment index 91
remodeling 6
treatment 50
General amputations 272
 General instruments used in orthopedics
management of a fracture 7
treatment of complications 51
recent concept of fracture healing 
Fractures of scapula 52
283
：13
bone gouge 283
regenerative medicine 13
classification of fractures of glenoid 53
classification of scapular neck
chisel 283
signs and symptoms of fracture
mallet 283
specific types of fractures  4
fractures 53
osteotome 283
compression fracture 4
incidence 52
Giant cell tumor 184
greenstick fracture 4
mechanism of injury 52
clinical features 185
pathological fracture 5
other injuries associated with fracture
histopathology 185
stress fracture 5
scapula and their incidence:
52
investigations 186
types of fracture 2
sites of the fracture 52
 Jaffe's grading (1940) 186
Fractures and injuries about elbow 54
treatment of scapular neck fracture 53
treatment 186
Index
295
Gille's amputation 274
other names 259
J
Gluteus maximus lurch 269
radiological features of AVN 260
Golfer's elbow 256
staging: ficat and arlet (1980) 260
981 (0t61) upe13 ser
diagnosis 256
treatment 260
Jefferson's fracture 122
treatment 256
Idiopathic avascular necrosis/
Jewet nail 282
Greenstick fractures 267
osteochondritis 204
 Joint replacement surgery 289
Igawa’s sign 146
Joints, organs 225
H
Illizarov 285
Jones’ fracture 59
Imaging58
diagnosis 60
Hangman's fracture 122
Implants 277
treatment 60
Hard callus 6
Implants and instruments 276
Head at risk signs
201
asepsis in operating room 277
Healing of fracture 5
K
correct handling of implant 277
Hematogenous osteomyelitis
153
desirable properties of implant 276
clinical features 155
Kidneys 27
materials used for orthopedic implants
complications 156
Kienbock's disease 204
276
etiopathogenesis
153
types of implants 277
etiology 205
investigations 155
investigations 205
types of prosthesis 277
pathology
153
treatment 205
two types 277
treatment 155
Klumpke's paralysis 149
Indirect mechanism 120
types of sequestrum 155
Knee 111
Injuries 264
Hematoma formation 5
Knee dislocation
111
Injuries of brachial plexus 148
Hemiplegic gait 271
Kohler's disease
 Injuries of the other peripheral nerves 141
205
High stepping gait of foot drop 270
etiology 205
 Injury complications and their management
Hind foot 56
investigations 206
72
Hip dislocation 111
treatment 206
 Injury management 72
Hip fracture 99
Kruckenberg's amputation 274
nonoperative methods
72
Hip fracture: intertrochanteric and fracture
Kuntscher nail or K-nail 281
operative methods 72
neck of femur 99
Intercondylar fracture
：46
Hip joint 106
complications 47
L
Hollow nails 281
diagnosis 47
Hume's fracture 33
mechanism of injury 46
Laboratory investigations 178
Humerus 41
treatment 47
Lamellar bone formation  6
Humerus shaft fracture 55
types 47
Lateral 113
Hydatid cysts in bone 174
Interpretation
128
Lateral condyle fracture 40
Hyperextension injury 121
Intertrochanteric fracture 92
Lateral view 195
Hyperparathyroidism 226
classifications 92
Lauge-Hansen's genetic classification  67
classification 226
clinical signs and symptoms 93
Legg-Calve-Perthes’ disease 198
clinical features 227
diagnosis 93
clinical features 201
laboratory investigations 228
mechanisms of injury 92
head at risk signs
pathology 226
201
Intervertebral disc prolapse 208
clinical 201
effect on kidneys 227
Intervertebral disc prolapse/herniation208
effect on bone 227
radiological  201
diagnosis 209
investigations 201
radiological features 228
in hand 228
investigations 213
pathology 198
in long bones 228
nonoperative management 214
predisposing factors 198
in skull 228
operative management 214
prognostic factors
203
in spine 228
procedures 214
radiological features 198
treatment 228
pathomechanics of intervertebral disc
catterall grouping
198
Hyperparathyroidism 226,228
prolapse
208
classifications useful to assess
Hypochondroplasia 245
treatment 214
prognosis
201
Intramedullary implants 280
Elizabethtown staging
198
I
elastic nails 281
treatment 201
kuntscher nail or K-nail 281
nonsurgical containment methods
 Idiopathic avascular necrosis of head of
rush nail 281
202
femur 259
hollow nails 281
surgical methods of containment 203
clinical features 260
rigid nails 280
Length of stump 274
296
Essentials of Orthopedics
Ligament disruptions 73
complications of lateral condyle
Neuropraxia and axonotmesis 135
Ligament injuries 66, 73, 75
fracture 40
Neurorrhaphy 136,137
management 66
mechanism of injury 39
Neurotmesis 131,135
management of ligament injuries 75
treatment 40
Nonspecific infections 152
terrible triad of O'Donoghue
74
Medial and lateral epicondylar fractures 39
Nonspecific osteomyelitis 153
types of ligament disruptions 73
Meniscal injuries  76
Nonsurgical containment methods 202
Lisfranc fracture 97
clinical diagnostic tests 78
Nonunion 7
Lisfranc's injury 57
diagnosis 78
Nutritional rickets 219
complications 59
functions of meniscus 76
imaging 58
investigations 79
0
management 58
management 79
mechanism 58
mechanism of injury 77
Olecrenon fracture 38
prognosis 59
Meniscus 76
classification 38
types 58
Metastatic bone disease 191
mechanism of injury 38
Lisfrank's and Chopart's amputation
274
Methods of closing the gaps while repair
treatment 38
Locking compression plate (LCP) 279
137
One stage release 237
Long bones 228
Methods of treating fracture scaphoid 22
Open fracture management 16
Long thoracic nerve C5 C6 C7 141
Mid foot 57
Open reduction 241
Lowell's alignment theory 92
Mode of spread 159
Opponens plasty  140
Lower plexus injury 149
Monteggia fracture 32
Orthofix type 286
classification 33
 Orthopedic implants
276
M
complications 34
Oschner's clasp test
145
Hume's fracture 33
Osteoarthritis 222
mechanism of injury 33
Maduramycosis 173
clinical features 223
treatment 34
syphilitic infection of bone 174
diagnosis 223
Motor changes 133
Malgaigne fracture 116
radiological findings  223
acetabular fracture 117
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia 244
etiology and pathogenesis 222
Muscle weakness 269
pelvic ring injury 117
management 223
Mallet 283
Muscles and tendons 236
nonoperative management 223
Musculocutaneous nerve C5 C6 141
Mallet finger 251
surgical (operative) management 224
Mycotic infections of bone 173
etiology 251
pathology 223
deep mycoses 173
treatment 252
superficial mycoses 173
primary 223
Malunion 8,10
secondary 223
Management of spinal injuries 125
Myeloma 190
types 222
definitive management 125
clinical features 190
histopathology
Osteochondroma 180
emergency management 125
：190
clinical features 180
investigations 190
at site of the incident
125
investigations 181
medical management 125
treatment
191
pathogenesis 180
 management of established paralysis 127
types 190
treatment 181
 operative management 126
Osteogenesis imperfecta 248
paraplegia 127
N
Osteoid osteoma 179
quadriplegia 127
clinical symptoms 179
Mechanisms of spinal injuries 120
Natural course of the fibromatosis 259
investigations 179
direct mechanism 122
Neonate 239
treatment 179
 indirect mechanism 120
Nerve injury  131
Osteomalacia 216 218
flexion distraction injury 121
Nerve repair 136,137
Osteomyelitis 152
flexion injury 120
Nervous system 270
nonspecific osteomyelitis 153
flexion rotation injury
120
Neuron to injury
131
Toute of entry of microorganism 153
hyperex tension injury
121
Neuropathic joint 258
specific osteomyelitis 153
shearing injury 121
clinical features 258
Osteopetrosis 245
vertical compression injury  121
diagnosis 259
Osteoporosis 221
traction injuries
122
etiology 258
clinical features 221
Medial and lateral condylar fractures 39
pathology 258
investigations 221
classifications 39
treatment 259
pathology 221
Index
297
risk factors 221
neuropraxia 135
Plates 279
treatment 222
neurorrhaphy 136
Poliomyelitis 269
drug therapy 222
neurotmesis 135
Posterior dislocation of the shoulder 103
treatment of fractures 222
reconstructive procedures in
Posterior ligament complex
119
types 221
irrecoverable nerve injuries 137
Pott's paraplegia 165
Osteosarcoma 186
types of nerve repair 136
causes 165
clinical features 187
response of a neuron to injury
131
surgical procedures
166
histopathology 187
Seddon's classification (1943) 131
treatment 166
investigations 187
axonotmesis 131
types of Pott's paraplegia
165
surgical procedures 188
 neuropraxia
131
Preganglionic lesions 148
treatment 187
neurotmesis
131
Primary woven bone formation 6
types 187
structure of peripheral nerve 130
Prophylactic pinning of the opposite hip
Osteotome 283
Sunderland classification (1951): 131
197
Outstretched hand 24
tendon transfers
137
Prosthesis 277
ape thumb deformity
143
Proximal humerus fracture 55
P
axillary nerve C5 C6 141
Pseudo-Jones fracture 60
book test 146
definition  60
Paget's disease 246
card test  145
treatment 60
Paralysis 127
claw hand 142
Pulmonary embolism 13
Paraplegia 127
claw toes 145
Paraplegics and quadriplegics 129
correction of claw hand 137
Q
Parasitic infestation of bone 174
femoral nerve 12 13 14 141
hydatid cysts in the bone 174
finger drop and thumb drop 144
Quadriceps lurch 270
Patella fracture 98
flail foot 144
Quadriplegia 127
Pathogenesis 180
dop100
145
Pathological anatomy 236
froment's sign 146
R
Pathological fracture
5
Igawa's sign
146
Pathomechanics 67
injuries of the other peripheral nerves
Ra factor 225
Pelvic ring injury 117
141
Radial head fracture 37
Pelvis 112
intrinsic minus deformity 142
Reconstructive procedures 150,243
Pen test 145
long thoracic nerve C5 C6 C7 141
Regenerative medicine 13
Periarthritis shoulder 257
management 142
Rehabilitation 128
clinical features 257
musculocutaneous nerve C5 C6 141
paraplegics 129
treatment 257
opponens plasty
140
quadriplegics 129
Peripheral nerve injury 130
Oschner's clasp test
145
Rheobase
133
classification of nerve injury
131
pathomechanics of various
Rheumatoid arthritis 224
diagnosis
132
deformities and signs 142
clinical features 225
autonomic and sensory changes 132
pen test 145
etiology 224
chronaxie 135
 prerequisites for a tendon transfer
investigations 225
diagnostic tests 133
141
ANA (antinuclear antibodies) 225
electromyography (EMG) 133
sciatic nerve 141
blood investigations 225
motor changes 133
spinal accessory nerve 141
CCP antibody 225
theobase
133
static procedures 137
RA factor 225
sensory zones of peripheral nerve
suprascapular nerve
141
X-rays 225
133
tendon transfer for finger and thumb
joints, organs and tissues involved 225
special tests 133
drop140
pathology 225
starch iodine test 135
tendon transfer for fot drop 140
treatment 225
strength duration curve 133
tendon transfer for wrist drop 140
medical  225
tests autonomous function 135
Tinel's sign 146
surgical 226
management 135
ulnar paradox 142
Rheumatoid arthritis 224,229,252
axonotmesis 135
wrist drop
144
Rickets 217-219
critical limit of delay
137
Perthes’ disease 207
Rickets and osteomalacia 216
factors influencing nerve repair 137
Physeal injuries 264
clinical features 218
 methods of closing the gaps while
Pirogoff's amputation 274
osteomalacia 218
repair 137
Plastic deformation  266
rickets 218
298
Essentials of Orthopedics 
etiology and nature of rickets 217
Shiny corner sign 264
Specific infections 160
investigations 218
Shock and hemorrhage 12
Specific osteomyelitis 153
nutritional rickets 219
Short leg gait 270
Specific types of fractures 4
vitamin D resistant rickets
219
Shoulder 102
Specific types of spinal column injury 122
X-rays changes in osteomalcia 219
Shoulder dislocation 111
chance fracture 123
X-rays changes in rickets 219
Signs of grave prognosis 128
Clay Shoveller's fracture 123
pathology 218
anal wink 128
Hangman's fracture 122
treatment 219
bulbocavernous reflex
128
Jefferson's fracture 122
correction of deformities in rickets
interpretation
128
lap seat belt injury 123
219
Singh index of osteoporosis 90
whiplash injury 123
familial and hereditary rickets 219
Skeletal dysplasia and other conditions 243
Spina ventosa 173
nutritional rickets 219
Skeletal dysplasias 243
Spinal accessory nerve 141
Rickets osteomalacia 228
achondroplasia 244
Spinal column
119 210
Rigid nails 280
dy namic
classification
ofbone
Spinal cord injury 124
Risk factors 221
dysplasias 243
anterior cord syndrome 124
Rolando's fracture 19
fbrous dysplasia 247
Brown-Sequard's syndrome 124
definition19
hypochondroplasia
245
central cord syndrome 124
 mechanism of injury 19
important skeletal dysplasias
Spinal injuries 118, 120
244
Dennis’ three column concept 120
prognosis 19
treatment 19
osteogenesis imperfecta 248
facetal joints 
119
functions of the spinal column
Role of surgery 259
osteopetrosis 245
119
structure of the spinal column 118
Route of entry of microorganism 153
other conditions 246
Rowe classification 64
structures that impart stability to the
Paget's disease 246
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 244
spinal column 119
Rush nail 281
Skull 228
anterior interbody synarthrosis 119
posterior ligament complex
119
S
Slip194
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis 206
Spine 228
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 244
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE)
Sacral fracture classification 115
Spondylolisthesis 260
193
Scaphoid fracture 19
clinical symptoms and signs 261
blood supply of scaphoid 20
clinical features 195
diagnosis
261
investigations 195
cause for avascular necrosis 24
etiopathogenesis
260
AP view 195
classification 20
treatment 261
fog leg view 195
complications 23
nonoperative
261
lateral view 195
investigations 21
operative 261
 mechanism of injury 20
pathology of the slip 194
types: based on wiltse classification 260
predisposing factors
 methods of treating fracture scaphoid 22
194
Stages of the disease
169
treatment of suspected cases of fracture
radiological classification of slip 195
Stamping gait 271
scaphoid 24
treatment 196
Starch iodine test
135
treatment of the complications of
aim 196
Static procedures 137
bone peg epiphysiodesis 197
fracture scaphoid 24
Stiff hip gait 270
Scapula fracture 55
cannulated screw fixation and osteo-
Stiff knee gait 270
tomies
196
fore foot 57
Straight leg raising test 210
hind foot 56
complications
197
Strength duration curve 133
prophylactic pinning of opposite
mid foot 57
Stress fracture  5
hip 197
Scapular neck fracture 53
Structure of peripheral nerve
130
surgical procedures 196
Sciatic nerve 141
Structure of physis  264
Smith's fracture 28
Scissors gait 270
Structure of Palmar aponeurosis 253
classical deformity
Sclerosing osteomyelitis of Gatre 158
28
Structure of spinal column 118
Screw 278
complications
29
Structures that impart stability to the spinal
Screw design 278
column 119
treatment 29
Subacute osteomyelitis 158
Seddon's classification (1943) 131
treatment of complications 29
 Senile osteoporosis 90
Subtrochanteric fracture 95
Sensory zones of a peripheral nerve 133
Soft callus 6
classification  95
Special tests 133
Sequestrum 155
mechanism of injury 95
Shearing injury 121
Specific amputation 272
treatment 96
Index
299
Sudeck's atrophy 12
Terrible triad of O'Donoghue 74
surgical procedures 172
Sunderland classification (1951) 131
Thompson-Epstein classification 107
treatment 172
Superficial mycoses 173
Thurston Holland sign 264
Tuberculosis of the shoulder and elbow
Supracondylar fracture 43
Tibial plafond fracture 97
172
Supracondylar fracture of the humerus 41
Tibial plateau fracture 98
Tuberculosis of the spine 162
Baumann's angle 43
Tibial shaft fracture
97
Batson's plexus of veins 162
classification 41
Tile's classification 114
clinical features 162
complications 43
Tinel's sign
146
development of vertebral column 162
mechanism of injury 41
Tom smith's arthritis 160
vertebral lesion 162
role of triceps and brachialis muscle 41
Tom smith's arthritis of infancy and child-
Tuberculosis of the wrist 173
supracondylar fracture and their
hood 160
spina ventosa 173
management 43
Total joint replacement 288
Tubular and semitubular plates 279
treatment 42,44
Total joint replacement (arthroplasty) 288
Suprascapular nerve
141
complications
289
U
Supraspinatus tendinitis
256
evolution
289
calcification 256
postoperative rehabilitaton
Ulnar paradox
142
symptoms 256
after joint replacement surgery 289
Unicameral bone cyst 184
treatment 256
 Traction injuries
122
clinical features 184
treatment 256
Trauma 252
etiology 184
Surface implants 278
Trendelenburg gait
271
investigation 184
plates 279
Triceps and brachialis muscle 41
treatment 184
dynamic compression plate (DCP)
Trigger finger/thumb 252
Unicameral bone cyst (UBC) 184
279
etiology 252
Upper plexus injury Erb's paralysis
limited contact, dynamic compres-
treatment 252
148
sion plate: LC, DCP
279
Tuberculosis
locking compression plate (LCP)
ankle and the foot 172
V
279
bones and joints 160
screw 278
hip 167
Vertebral lesion 162
design 278
knee 170
Vertical compression injury 121
Surgical (operative) management 224
shoulder and elbow 172
Vertical shear 114
Surgical anatomy 63
spine 162
Vitamin D resistant rickets 219
Syme's amputation 274
wrist 173
Syphilitic infection of bone 174
Tuberculosis of bones and joints 160
W
Systemic and general complications 12
investigations 161
treatment 161
Wagner type 286
Tuberculosis of the ankle and the foot 172
Well leg raising test 210
T
Tuberculosis of the hip 167
Whiplash injury 123
Talocalcaneal index 231
clinical features 168
Whole plexus injury 149
radiological classification 169
Talus fracture 97
William Arbuthnot lane
284
stages of the disease 
169
Tendon transfer 140, 141
William Ferguson 284
surgical procedures 170
Wiltse classification 260
Tendon transfer for wrist drop
140
treatment 169
Wrist drop 144
Tendons and muscles 231
Tennis elbow 255
Tuberculosis of the knee 170
clinical signs and symptoms 170
diagnosis 255
X
investigations 171
pathology 255
pathology 170
treatment 256
X-rays changes 219