Self-Assessment
ColorReview
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Small Animal
Cardiopulmonary
Medicine
WendyA.Ware
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Color Review
Small Animal
Cardiopulmonary
Medicine
Wendy A Ware
DVM, MS, DipACVIM(Cardiology)
Professor, Departments of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
and Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa, USA
MANSONPUBLISHING/THEVETERINARYPRESS
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to my colleagues who contributed cases and images to this book and to
Lori Moran for technical support, as well as to commissioning editor Jill Northcott,
Michael Manson, and the staff at Manson Publishing. All your help in developing and
creating this publication is truly appreciated. Also, and very importantly, I am indebted
to many others who, in various ways, contributed to this book, especially the pets and
their owners, referring veterinarians, and hospital staff with whom my contributors and
I worked and who made this collection of cases possible. Finally, but certainly not least,
I owe many thanks to my family - for your continuing love, support, and patience.
Disclaimer: Every effort has been made to eliminate inaccuracies but readers are advised
to confirm recommended doses in the drug data sheets before prescribing regimens. The
advice and information given in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the
time of going to press, but neither the editor nor the publisher can accept any legal
Copyright @ 2012 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-164-1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written
permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting
limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place,
London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Email: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.ma nsonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
 Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy editor: Peter Beynon
Design and layout: Cathy Martin
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Preface
This book brings together a wide variety of cases involving cardiac and pulmonary
diseases, or related clinical signs, that are relevant to the practicing veterinarian.
The collection is appropriate not only for general practitioners looking for a quick
review or reference for cardiac, respiratory, and other intrathoracic disorders, but
additionally for those studying towards a higher professional qualification.
professional examinations. The book is also appropriate for veterinary technicians
and nurses studying towards further qualifications. In addition, this collection is
intended to provide an enjoyable way for practicing veterinarians to “test’ and
expand their knowledge of canine and feline cardiothoracic problems.
The cases presented here largely focus on causes of respiratory distress, cough,
Or other signs that mainly relate to lower respiratory, cardiac, and intrathoracic
disorders. The decision to emphasize diseases of intrathoracic structures was
disorders clearly are important, their presenting clinical signs (e.g. nasal discharge,
stridor) are often different and tend to be more easily localizable. Many cases in
this book involve common diseases, with a focus on important principles of
diagnosis and management. Others are more challenging or unusual. Some cases
contained in this book reflect diseases (e.g. parasitic) that are common in some
geographical regions, but occur with low prevalence, or not at all, in others.
worldwide
distribution  of some  diseases
Te.g.
heartworm disease and
angiostrongylosis) appears to be increasing, it is hoped that readers living in
unaffected regions will forgive their inclusion.
The cases are ordered randomly throughout the book, as they are likely to occur
in clinical practice. The format is similar to other books in the “Self-Assessment'
series. The cases and related questions are presented on one page, so the reader is
encouraged to think about specific answers or management strategies before
turning the page to see the written explanations/answers (unless you peek!). A
Classification of cases, a Further reading list arranged by topic, an Appendix listing
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases, and an Index are included for
reference and to facilitate a review of specific problems and their management. It
is my hope that you, the reader, will find this book interesting and enjoyable, as
well as useful in your practice.
Wendy A Ware
3
Contributors
Luca Ferasin DVM, PhD, CertVC,
O Lynne Nelson DVM, MS,
DipECVIM-CA(Cardiology),
 DipACVIM(Internal Medicine and
MRCVS
Cardiology)
Specialist Veterinary Cardiology
Associate Professor of Cardiology
Consultancy Ltd
Staff Cardiologist, Veterinary Teaching
Newbury, Berkshire, UK
Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine
Shannon Jones Hostetter DVM, PhD.
Washington State University
DipACVP(Clinical Pathology)
Pullman, Washington, USA
Assistant Professor, Department of
Veterinary Pathology
Elizabeth Riedesel DVM, DipACVR
Staff Clinical Pathologist, Lloyd
Associate Professor, Department of
Veterinary Medical Center
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Staff Radiologist, Lloyd Veterinary
Iowa State University
Medical Center
Ames, Iowa, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine
Iowa State University
FA (Tony) Marn DVM, MS,
Ames, Iowa, USA
DipACVs, DipACVECC
Professor, Department of Veterinary
Wendy A Ware DVM, MS,
Medicine and Surgery
DipACVIM(Cardiology)
Director, Small Animal Emergency and
Professor, Departments of Veterinary
Critical Care Services
Clinical Sciences and
Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery
Biomedical Sciences
Service Chief
Staff Cardiologist, Lloyd Veterinary
Small Animal Surgery/Neurology
Medical Center
Instructional Leader
Iowa State University
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
Ames, Iowa, USA
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri, USA
Additional image acknowledgements
162a, c, 218a, b, c
Courtesy Dr. Oliver Garrdod
79a, b
Courtesy Dr. Phyllis Frost
103a,b,c
Courtesy Drs. Jessica Clemans and Krysta Deitz
151a, b, 195a, b
Courtesy Dr. JoAnn Morrison
8a, b
Courtesy Dr. Leslie Fox
2a, b, 116a, b
Courtesy Dr. Krysta Deitz
1
Abbreviations
A/Ao
aorta/aortic root
PaCO, partial pressure of carbon
AV
atrioventricular
dioxde in arterial blood
BAL
bronchoalveolar lavage
PAO2
partial pressure of O, in the
BP
blood pressure
alveolus
bpm
beats per minute
PaO2
 partial pressure of O2 in
CBC
complete blood count
arterial blood
CO2
carbon dioxide
PCO2
 carbon dioxide partial pressure
CRI
constant rate infusion
or tension
CT
computed tomography
PCR
 polymerase chain reaction
DLH
domestic longhair (cat)
PCV
packed cell volume
DSH
domestic shorthair (cat)
PO
per os
DV
dorsoventral
PRN
pro re nate (according to
ECG
 electrocardiogram
circumstances)
FS
fractional shortening
PT
prothrombin time
HCO,
bicarbonate
aPTT
 activated partial
HR
heart rate
thromboplastin time
IM
intramuscular
RA
right atrium/atrial
IV
intravenous
RNA
ribonucleic acid
IVS
interventricular septum
RV
right ventricle/ventricular
LA
left atrium/atrial
SC
subcutaneous
LV
left ventricle/ventricular
SG
 specific gravity
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
VD
ventrodorsal
02
oxygen
VHS
vertebral heart size
PA
pulmonary artery/arterial
Classification of cases
Airway diseases: 5, 9, 10, 15, 16, 21,
Cardiomyopathies: 18,32,35,36,47,
28,39,40,57,58,72,96,99,133,
67,90,110, 117, 148, 165, 170, 171,
151,164, 176, 195, 200
207,208
Cardiac arrhythmias: 4, 18, 36, 37, 38.
Cardiopulmonary tests: 20, 24, 29, 33,
49, 53, 54, 67,77, 87, 91, 113, 114,
43, 53, 54, 68,75,102, 152,159
115,130, 135,143, 145, 173,181,
183,204,217
Collapse or weakness: 112
Cardiac valvular disease, acquired: 48,
Congenital malformations: 13, 26, 31,
85,86,127,128,189,211,214,216
45, 50, 63, 79, 80, 88, 92, 118, 119,
120,121, 125,131, 139, 146, 149,
156,163, 174,175,186,188,203,
205,206
5
Congestive heart failure: 73, 117, 124,
Pericardial diseases: 46, 69, 140, 144,
157, 171, 187, 189, 190, 205
160, 161, 209, 219
Diagphragmatic hernia: 3, 74, 84, 98,
Physical examination abnormalities: 7,
140
12, 23, 26, 41, 51, 109, 120, 198
Esophageal abnormalities: 139, 191,
Pleural space abnormalities (effusion
200
or pneumothorax): 19, 25, 30, 59, 60,
61, 78, 123, 134, 155, 193
Foreign body: 103, 167, 179
 Pneumonias and other pulmonary
Hypertension, systemic or pulmonary:
diseases: 11, 22, 56, 62, 65, 81, 89,
83, 129, 131, 132, 156, 201, 211
101,105,106,126,134,150,153
166, 169, 177, 184, 191, 196, 197
Mediastinal diseases: 52,93,122,213
Respiratory signs: 1, 104, 137
Miscellaneous: 14, 56, 66, 92, 101,
142
Respiratory therapy: 42, 100, 215
Neoplasia: 2,6, 8, 17,70, 71, 76, 82,
Thromboembolic disease: 34, 97, 107,
93,94,109,111,116,122,123,134,
129, 180
141, 142, 158,168,172, 192, 209,
212, 213, 219
Toxicity: 65, 104, 138, 143
Parasitic diseases: 27, 55, 64, 108,
Trauma: 30, 81, 147, 178, 182, 194,
136, 137, 154, 162, 185, 199, 210,
202
218
Contributed cases
LF: 19, 36,47, 50, 53, 54, 59, 60, 72,
LN:5,13, 14, 15,21,34, 45, 77, 105,
90, 95,99, 123, 162, 165, 166, 177,
106, 111,114,115,126,129,138, 159,
198,200,211,218
163, 184, 204
SH:6, 10,25,61, 71, 78, 141, 169, 197
ER:3,9,11,16,17, 22,28,30,39,40,
56,62,65, 74, 81,89,93,94,98,101,
TM:42,57,58,66,69, 70, 84,118,
108, 122,142,147, 155,164, 167, 176.
119,134, 182, 213, 215
178, 179, 191, 192, 193, 196,202, 212
6
I, 2: Questions
1 A 4-year-old male Rottweiler (1} is
presented with a history of a chronic dry
cough. Lately he has become anorexic
 and he now is having trouble breathing.
You observe increased respiratory rate
 and effort. On auscultation you hear no
cardiac murmur, but notice increased
breath sounds and pulmonary crackles.
i. Describe characteristics of the dog's
appearance that indicate respiratory
distress.
ii. How can respiratory pattern help
suggest the location of disease in patients with respiratory distress?
2 A 13-year-old neutered male Shih Tzu has been
2a
coughing for the past 3 weeks, after he was at a
boarding facility for several weeks. Decreased
appetite and weight loss were noted recently.
Amoxicillin with clavulanate and hydrocodone
were prescribed elsewhere for
suspected
bronchitis, but the owner has had trouble
administering the medication. The dog is quiet,
but alert and responsive. Body temperature, HR.
 and respiratory rate are normal. Soft pulmonary
crackles are heard over the left hemithorax.
Tracheal palpation elicits a non-productive
cough. The rest of the physical examination is
normal. Chest radiographs show a moderate to
2b
severe bronchointerstitial pattern in the caudal
lung with alveolar infiltrates in the right cranial
lobe. Cardiac size and pulmonary vasculature are
normal. A hemogram shows mild thrombo-
cytosis, but is otherwise normal;
serum
chemistries and urinalysis are unremarkable.
Bronchoscopy (2a, b) and BAL are performed.
i. What findings are shown in the broncho-
scopic images?
ii. What differential diagnoses should be
considered?
ili. How would you proceed with this case?
I,2:Answers
1 i. His posture suggests severe respiratory distress (*orthopnea'). Dogs with
orthopnea stand or sit with their elbows abducted (allowing full rib expansion) and
neck extended, resist lateral or dorsally recumbent positions, and are reluctant to
eat and drink or even swallow saliva (note saliva hanging from this dog's mouth).
Dilated pupils also suggest anxiety (note tapetal reflection in photograph).
i. Respiratory rate and character can provide diagnostic clues. Reduced lung
compliance produces a resrictive’ (rapid and shallow) breathing pattern, which
minimizes the work of ventilating stiffer lungs. Exhalation or both phases may
appear labored. Pulmonary edema, other interstitial infiltrative disease (e.g. bacterial
pneumonia, as in this dog), and pulmonary fibrosis produce this pattern; inspiratory
pulmonary crackles are common. Partial lung collapse from pleural effusion or other
pleural space disease also decreases lung compliance, although large-volume effusion
can cause slow, labored inspiration with pronounced abdominal effort.
Airway narrowing causes an ‘obstructive' breathing pattern. Slower, deeper
breaths reduce frictional resistance and respiratory work, although respiratory rate
can be normal or increased with peripheral airway disease. The location of the
narrowing determines which phase is more labored and (often) prolonged. Lower
airway obstruction causes expiratory difficulty, sometimes with wheezing. Upper
airway obstruction produces slow or labored inspiration, with or without stridor.
2 i. The airways appear diffusely edematous with mild erythema consistent with
generalized bronchial inflammation. Small yellowish tan nodules are seen on some
surfaces (2b, from right cranial bronchus).
i. The radiographic pattern suggests pneumonia or an infiltrative inflammatory or
neoplastic disease. Given the history of boarding, infectious tracheobronchitis with
secondary pneumonia is a consideration. Small nodules within the airways most
often result from chronic inflammation and mucosal proliferation secondary to
chronic bronchitis, but neoplastic infiltration is another consideration. Nodules
found only near the carina may signal infection with the parasite Oslerus osleri in
endemic areas. This dog's systemic signs, along with the relatively recent onset of
coughing, are not typical for chronic bronchitis.
ii. In addition to BAL cytologic analysis and culture, airway brushings and pinch
biopsy of a nodule should be obtained during the bronchoscopic procedure. If
evaluation of these samples does not yield a definitive diagnosis, lung biopsy is
recommended. In this dog, cytologic evaluation revealed mild purulent
inflammation, mild chronic hemorrhage, and variably-sized cohesive clusters of
highly vacuolated cells thought to be carcinoma cells. BAL cultures yielded no
aerobic or anaerobic growth.
8
3, 4: Questions
3a
3b
3 A 3-year-old female DSH cat is presented for
1 week of lethargy and increased respiratory
effort. She is at 56 days of gestation. A similar
episode occurred with the previous pregnancy
and responded favorably to antibiotic therapy.
This episode seems to be worse. Right lateral
(3a) and DV (3b) thoracic radiographs are made.
i. What radiographic abnormalities are evident?
i. What is the radiographic diagnosis?
4 A 9-year-old female Dalmation is
presented because of a collapse
episode earlier in the day. She has
been less active lately and becomes
winded easily when on walks. The
dog appears anxious and slightly
 tachypneic. Mucous membranes are
pink, femoral pulses are weak and of
variable intensity, and the HR is rapid
MMNM
and irregular. There is a soft systolic
murmur heard best at the right apex,
but also heard at the left apex. Lung sounds are increased. You record an ECG.
Simultaneous leads I, II, and II at 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV are shown (4).
i. What is the ECG diagnosis?
ii. How would you initially manage this case?
ili. What do you recommend next?
9
3, 4: Answers
3 i. There is increased opacity in the ventral and right halves of the thoracic cavity.
Only a short dorsal segment of the left crus of the diaphragm is distinct; the
s si    i  e    r
the left. Only the left lung lobes are well inflated with well-defined vessels. The
increased thoracic opacity is a mix of solid soft tissue or fluid and mineralized
opacity of fetal skeletal structures. A fetal skull is evident ventrally at the 5th
intercostal space and a different fetal lumbar spine crosses the pleura-peritoneal
junction ventrally.
 p o rd n m  r ps-r 
and probably liver. The degree of fetal skeletal mineralization is consistent with
late-term gestation. No signs of fetal death are evident. Ultrasound would be
valuable to determine fetal viability. In several reports, the most common organs to
be herniated through a tear in the diaphragm are liver stomach, and small intestine.
Several case reports of diaphragmatic herniation of gravid uterus in dogs appear in
the literature.
4 i. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia (at 300 bpm) is seen at the beginning of the
strip, just after the middle, and at the right edge. Sinus tachycardia (at 180 bpm) is
evident intermittently. Single ventricular premature complexes also occur and are
easier to distinguish in leads I and IIl. The sinus complexes indicate a normal mean
electrical axis. P waves are slightly wide (0.05 second) consistent with LA
enlargement; sinus QRS complexes are also wide (~0.08 second), suggesting
myocardial disease and abnormal intraventricular conduction. Other complex
measurements are normal. Each 1 mm box = 0.04 second at 25 mm/s.
ii. IV lidocaine is the initial drug of choice for acute treatment of ventricular
tachyarrhythmias. An IV catheter is placed as soon as possible. Supplemental O, may
be helpful. The dog should be carried/carted if it must be moved; stress should be
minimized.
iii. Identify underlying abnormalities as soon as possible; screen for electrolyte or
other metabolic or hematologic abnormalities, obtain thoracic (and possibly
abdominal) radiographs, as well as an echocardiogram to assess cardiac structure
and function. Additional antiarrhythmic strategies are used if lidocaine is ineffective
and for long-term therapy (see Further reading). Additional therapy depends on
test results. This dog had dilated cardiomyopathy.
10
5, 6: Questions
5 The owner of a 12-week-old kitten
5
complains of “noisy breathing'. The
kitten was adopted 4 weeks ago from
the animal shelter and has always made
a lot of noise with normal breathing.
However, the sound has become more
pronounced as the kitten has grown.
Breathing is especially noisy when the
kitten plays or is excited. Occasionally
the kitten gags when eating, but
otherwise has been normal. High-
pitched inspiratory stridor and exag-
gerated inspiratory effort are the most
obvious physical findings. The image
was obtained with a
bronchoscope
camera after heavy sedation (5; 1 - swab lifting the soft palate, 2 - soft palate,
3 - epiglottis).
i. What abnormality is shown?
ii. What conditions could cause this?
ili. How would you manage this case?
 6 A 12-year-old spayed female Springer
Spaniel develops lethargy and respiratory
distress. Physical examination findings
include weakness, labored respiration,
muffled heart sounds, jugular vein
distension, and abdominal distension
with a pronounced fluid wave. Peri-
 cardial effusion with cardiac tamponade
iss
 suspected based on radiographic
findings and the electrical alternans
 evident on an ECG. Echocardiographic
examination is desired, but not readily available at present. In view of the patient's
urgent status, pericardiocentesis is done to relieve the tamponade. Approximately
Xooq Asso si p a paon si uisne piead pqrn ar jo qu oo
with a cell count of6110/μl, pH of 6.4, protein content of 57 g/l (5.7 g/dl), and PCV
 of 0.73 Il (73%). A cytospin preparation of the effusion is shown (6, Wright's stain,
50x oil).
i. What cytologic features reveal this to be pathologic rather than iatrogenic
hemorrhage?
i. What etiologies are most likely for the hemorrhagic pericardial effusion in this dog?
11
5, 6:Answers
5 i. This image of the larynx was taken during inspiration. It shows failure of the
laryngeal arytenoid cartilages and vocal folds to abduct. This finding is the hallmark
of laryngeal paralysis.
i. Laryngeal paralysis was suspected to be congenital in this case. Congenital
laryngeal paralysis has been most commonly reported in dogs, especially Siberian
Huskies, Bouvier des Flandres, and Bull Terriers. Paralysis could occur as a result
of trauma to the cervical region; the earlier history in this kitten was unknown.
Acquired laryngeal paralysis usually occurs in older animals and may be idiopathic
(such as with the Labrador Retriever) or secondary to a polyneuropathy (e.g.
myasthenia gravis, hypothyroidism), anterior thoracic neoplasia, or other mass
lesion. (Note: Other potential causes for upper airway obstruction in cats include
nasopharyngeal polyp, laryngeal lymphoma, or other mass lesions.)
ii. A unilateral arytenoid lateralization surgical procedure is the best method to
alleviate the upper airway obstruction. Good results are usually obtained.
Aspiration pneumonia can sometimes be a complicating factor after repair.
  i  s   s   
macrophages (erythrophagia) and lack of platelets in this sample are indicators of
pathologic hemorrhage. Hemosiderin (seen in the image as deep blue-black pigment
within the cytoplasm of macrophages) is an additional indicator of pathologic
hemorrhage. Hemosiderin is an intracellular iron storage complex resulting from
erythrocyte breakdown. Hematoidin, a yellow crystal that forms secondary to
hemoglobin degradation, is another indicator of pathologic hemorrhage.
With iatrogenic hemorrhage, platelets are present and erythrophagia is not
evident unless a prolonged time has occurred between sample acquisition and
analysis. Hemosiderin and hematoidin are not seen with iatrogenic hemorrhage.
i. Neoplastic effusion is most likely in a dog of this age. Hemangiosarcoma and,
less often, chemodectoma are the tumors most commonly associated with
pericardial effusion in the dog. A thorough echocardiographic examination often
reveals the mass lesion in such cases. Mesothelioma and occasionally other
neoplasms are other potential causes of pericardial effusion. Although idiopathic
pericardial effusion also occurs frequently in dogs, it usually affects younger
individuals. In this case, hemangiosarcoma involving the right auricle was found
at necropsy.
12
7, 8: Questions
7 A dog of unknown age is presented because the owner thinks its exercise
tolerance has decreased. Physical examination is unremarkable except for a
 murmur, which is loudest on the left side.
i. When a murmur is auscultated, what characteristics are the most important to
identify?
ii. What are the main causes of a systolic murmur heard best over the left chest
wall?
8 An 11-year-old spayed female Cocker Spaniel
B8
is presented for coughing episodes that began a
' a on dn  e re oe r
The cough is becoming more severe and is worse
 in the morning and after periods of rest. The dog
was referred for suspected congestive heart
failure, but initial furosemide treatment has not
improved the cough. F
Prior medical history
includes a patent ductus arteriosus (closed at
3 months of age), pyometra (resolved after spay
2 years ago), mammary gland adenocarcinoma
and
mammary
mixed-cell
fibrosarcoma
(removed 1.5 years ago, with no evidence of
metastasis), early degenerative AV valve disease,
8b
hypertension, and occasional second degree AV
block. She is being treated with oral cyclo-
phosphamide, piroxicam, and enalapril. A grade
1/6 systolic murmur is heard over the tricuspid
region and a clicking sound is noted “on
 inspiration; otherwise, the physical examination
is unremarkable. Thoracic radiographs reveal a
 singular pulmonary nodule in the periphery of
the right caudal lung lobe. The nodule appears
distant to the major lobar bronchus. No other
radiographic abnormalities are evident. Bron-
choscopy is performed to evaluate the airways and collct samples for cytology and
culture. Images are from the right caudal bronchus (Sa, b).
i. Would a single peripheral lung mass be expected to cause severe paroxysmal
coughing?
i. What other problems should be considered?
ii. What does bronchoscopy reveal?
13
7, 8: Answers
7 i. Timing (e.g. systolic, diastolic, continuous), point of maximal intensity (PMI),
and intensity (loudness) at the PMI. A murmur's timing within the cardiac cycle
helps identify its origin. Knowing what events generate normal heart sounds (S,
and Ss), and understanding the timing of systole (between S, and S) and diastole
(after S, until the next S,) in each patient is important. PMI is described by the
hemithorax and valve area (or terms “apex' or *base') where the murmur is loudest.
Murmur intensity is usually graded on a 1-6 scale.
Grade
Murmur
1
Very soft murmur; heard only in quiet surroundings.
2
Soft murmur, but easily heard.
3
Moderate intensity murmur.
4
Loud murmur, but no precordial thrill.
5
Loud murmur with palpable precordial thrill.
6
Very loud murmur with precordial thrill; also heard when
stethoscope lifted slightly away from chest wall.
The murmur's 'shape', radiation, quality, and pitch are other characteristics.
ii. Left basilar systolic murmurs usually are ejection-type (crescendo-decrescendo)
murmurs, often caused by ventricular outflow obstruction. Physiologic murmurs (as
with fever exercise, hyperthyroidism, anemia) occur from increased ejection
velocity or turbulence. Increased flow volume can cause a murmur of 'relative' valve
stenosis. A soft (innocent or functional) murmur sometimes occurs in structurally
normal hearts. Mitral regurgitation produces a holosystolic (or decrescendo)
murmur loudest near the left apex. Causes include mitral degeneration, infection,
congenital malformation, and LV dilation.
8 i. Given the peripheral location of this nodule, and its apparent distance from a
major airway, the dog's violent coughing episodes seemed unusual. Primary disease
involving a large airway was thought more likely. Therefore, bronchoscopic
n r  5 p  rd   o m 
lobectomy).
i. Major airway collapse, infectious or allergic bronchitis, airway foreign body
(such as inhaled plant material), as well as neoplastic invasion of the airways.
ii. A smooth fleshy bump is seen on the approach to the right caudal bronchus
(8a). The pale mass is seen more clearly within this bronchus (Sb). Although not
evident radiographically, the pulmonary nodule had invaded the right caudal
    n     
pathology of the surgically-excised mass revealed a poorly differentiated pulmonary
 n  s s   si  s
sarcoma was suspected, although a primary lung tumor could not be ruled out.
14
9, 10: Questions
9 A 16-year-old male Poodle
9a
is referred for evaluation of a
long-term intermittent cough
with excitement that has been
more persistent in the last
month. Over the last several
days the dog has developed
trouble breathing, and
on
presentation has dyspnea with
marked inspiratory effort and
cyanosis. An emergency lateral
radiograph is taken (9a).
i. Is a cause for the dyspnea
evident?
ii. What are the etiologic differential diagnoses?
ili. What is the explanation for the shape of the ventral thoracic-to-abdominal body
wall contour?
10 An 8-year-old intact male Basenji is
10a
presented for chronic coughing. A dry,
non-productive cough 
is  observed
during the physical examination and is
easily elicited with tracheal palpation.
Thoracic auscultation reveals normal
heart sounds and increased
1breath
sounds, with pulmonary crackles heard
ventrally. A diffuse bronchointerstitial
pattern is seen on thoracic radiographs.
BAL is performed. A cytospin prepar-
ation of bronchoalveolar fluid (10a,
Wright's stain, 100x oil) and a direct
smear from BAL fluid (10b, Wright's
10b
stain, 20x) are shown.
i. Describe the findings in 10a.
ii. Identify the structure visible in 10b
sample.
ii. Are additional diagnostic tests indi-
cated? If so, what would you recom-
mend?
1.5
9, I0: Answers
9 i. Yes. A soft tissue/fluid intratracheal
9b
opacity (mass effect), at the 1st intercostal
space, obliterates the dorsal tracheal
border and markedly narrows the lumen.
The ‘mass’ tapers at the dorsal tracheal
border suggesting either a mural or
broad-based luminal lesion. Lung infla-
tion is poor despite a wide tracheal dia-
meter caudal to the lesion. Because of the
diaphragmatic cupola's marked cranio-
dorsal shift and vertical xiphoid orien-
tation, the cranioventral abdominal wall appears to be pulled into the thoracic cavity.
i. Obstructive tracheal lesions include: mural mass (inflammatory [e.g. polyp,
granuloma] or neoplastic); intraluminal lesion (e.g. abscess, granuloma, tracheal
abscess, granuloma). In this dog, a thin-walled, fluid-filled tracheal cyst was excised
during emergency surgery. Postoperatively, thoracic contour is normal (9b).
iii. The diaphragm's position and ‘sucked-in’ appearance of the xiphoid and
abdominal wall during inspiration are consistent with severe upper airway
obstruction. As external intercostal muscle contraction pulls the ribs outward,
strong negative intrapleural pressure sucks the ventral diaphragm and xiphoid
craniodorsally and mimics pectus excavatum. Such paradoxical inspiratory
movement has been reported in English Bulldogs with sleep apnea. Dorsal sternal
deflection in patients with respiratory distress should prompt investigation for
10 i. This sample shows eosinophilic and neutrophilic inflammation. Additionally,
two ciliated columnar respiratory epithelial cells, two alveolar macrophages, and a
mast cell are present.
i. The structure in this image is a Curschmann's spiral. These form when
bronchioles become plugged with inspissated mucus. The presence of Curschmann's
spirals in BAL samples indicates small airway disease with increased mucus
production.
li. Yes. Microbiological culture of the BAL sample is warranted to rule out
infectious causes of bronchitis. Heartworm and lungworm testing is also indicated
to rule out a parasitic disease, especially because eosinophilic inflammation is
present. ECG and echocardiography are useful to rule out cardiac disease (none
seen in this case). A CBC, serum biochemistry panel, and urinalysis may also
provide helpful information. In this particular case, an underlying cause was not
determined and the patient was treated for chronic bronchitis.
16
II: Question
Ila
Ilb
Ilc
11  An 1l-year-old male Collie is presented for evaluation of a lump on the nose.
Over the course of a month the lump has gone from soft to firm. Due to the older age
of the patient, right lateral (11a, c) and DV (11b) thoracic radiographs are taken for
evaluation of potential metastasis.
i. Are there findings consistent with pulmonary metastasis?
i. How will you differentiate benign from malignant pulmonary nodules?
17
Il:Answer
PII
11 i. No. Although there is a diffuse small nodular pulmonary pattern, the nodules
are all similar in size and strikingly opaque, similar to regional bone opacity. The
red arrow heads in 11d (enlargement of the cranioventral thorax) point to two
small nodules that appear summated (superimposed) with the overlying rib opacity.
One nodule (small red arrow) has a peripheral mineral opaque ring. Also, some
nodules are not spherical, but mildly irregular in shape. This is the typical
appearance of mineralized pulmonary nodules, also known as pulnonary osteoma,
heterotopic bone formation (abnormal formation of true bone within extraskeletal
soft tissues), or mineralized inactive granulomas. Although this can be seen in many
dogs, it is not uncommon in the Collie breed. It is considered an incidental finding.
There are no variably sized soft tissue nodules typical of pulmonary metastases.
i. Without a biopsy, definitive differentiation between benign and malignant
pulmonary nodules is not possible. Repeat radiographs can be used to assess
changes in number or size of the nodules; generally, an increase in number and/or
size indicates biological activity. Malignant nodules are likely to progress more
rapidly than a benign process. Nodules static in size and number over several
months are likely inactive and benign. Untreated infectious granulomas are likely
to continue to progress. Ultimately,
,biopsy may be needed to make the
differentiation.
18
12, 13: Questions
2a
12b
12 A 6-month-old male Lilac Point Siamese cat is presented for tiring easily and
increased breathing effort. The kitten appears alert and anxious. HR is 200 bpm,
with a regular rhythm. On auscultation, a grade 3-4/6 systolic murmur is heard,
loudest at the right sternal border; breath sounds are fairly loud. The precordial
impulse is strong bilaterally. Femoral pulses are normal. Jugular veins appear
normal. Oral examination is shown (12a, b)
i. What abnormality is evident on the oral examination?
ii. What are the potential causes of this?
il. What tests would you do next in this case?
13 A routine physical examina-
13
tion is performed on a l-year-old
male DsH cat that was recently
adopted from the animal shelter.
The examination is normal except
for a loud holosystolic murmur
heard best at the left cardiac apex.
This ECG is obtained (13; leads I,
II, and III at 50 mm/s, 1 cm =
1 mV}.
i. Identify the HR and rhythm.
ii. Are abnormalities of ECG
complex size or configuration present? If so, what do they suggest?
ili. What are some potential differential diagnoses for the murmur based on the
information available?
19
I2, I3: Answers
12 i. Cyanosis. The oral mucous membranes and tongue appear bluish/grayish
('muddy').
ii. “Central cyanosis is associated with generalized hypoxemia; peripheral' cyanosis
refers to local hemoglobin desaturation caused by poor peripheral circulation (as
with arterial thromboembolism or cold exposure). Hypoxemia causes visible
cyanosis when desaturated hemoglobin exceeds 50 g/l (5 g/dl). Chronic arterial
hypoxemia stimulates erythropoiesis and erythrocytosis (polycythemia), which
increases blood O, carrying capacity. In animals with normal PCV, visible cyanosis
usually indicates severe hypoxemia (PaO, <45-50 mmHg). Polycythemic animals
can appear cyanotic with milder hypoxemia because of greater hemoglobin content.
Anemic animals may be severely hypoxemic without cyanosis. Hypoxemia and
cyanosis are difficult to detect with carbon monoxide toxicity or methemo-
globinemia because mucous membrane color is altered; even with a normal PaO,
total blood O, content is reduced.
Common causes of central cyanosis include severe pulmonary or pleural space
disease, airway obstruction, pulmonary edema, hypoventilation, and right-to-left
shunting congenital cardiac defects. Exercise increases right-to-left shunting and
cyanosis because peripheral vascular resistance decreases as skeletal muscle blood
flow increases.
ii. Thoracic radiographs are indicated next. If a primary respiratory cause is not
malformations. A PCV will detect erythrocytosis.
13 i. The HR is approximately 160 bpm and the rhythm is normal sinus rhythm.
i. The P waves appear normal in size (0.03 s x 0.2 mV) and the PR interval is
normal (0.08 seconds). The QRS is both prolonged (0.06 seconds) and tall (2.2 mV,
lead I), which suggests LV enlargement. The QT interval is normal (~0.18 seconds).
iii. Congenital mitral valve dysplasia is a leading differential considering the
signalment, murmur location, and criteria for LV enlargement. Early onset
hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy with secondary mitral regurgitation also
is possible, but is fairly uncommon at such a young age. Ventricular septal defect
(VSD) is a common congenital anomaly in the cat and usually causes LV
enlargement, but the VsD murmur typically is heard best at the right sternal border.
This cat was ultimately diagnosed with severe mitral valve dysplasia.
20
14, 15: Questions
14a
14b
14 The owner of a 14-year-old Scottish
Terrier requests removal of a small
eyelid growth on her dog. During the general physical examination a holosystolic
murmur is ausculted at the left cardiac apex consistent with mitral valve
regurgitation. Radiographs (14a, b) are taken to estimate the severity of mitral
regurgitation prior to anesthesia for eyelid growth removal. No cardiopulmonary
clinical signs have been noted.
i. What is your assessment in this case, and is there evidence for a mass lesion?
ii. How would you clarify this?
15
5The owner of a 9-year old male
15
Pomeranian-cross complains that his dog
has been coughing chronically, especially
with activity. The owner reports that the
dog is active and behaves normally. The
cough is described as a loud, hacking
sound. A grade 2/6 holosystolic murmur is
heard at the left apex, consistent with mitral
valve regurgitation. Thoracic radiographs
reveal mild LA enlargement and
no
evidence of congestive heart failure. Bron-
choscopy is done; the tracheal bifurcation
region is shown in the image (15).
i. Describe the bronchoscopic findings.
ii. What can cause this?
ii. How should this case be managed?
21
14,I5:Answers
14i. There is equivocal evidence of LA
14c
enlargement on these films. The cardiac
silhouette is primarily affected by the chest
conformation in this dog (short and wide
thoracic cavity) leading to an overall initial
appearance of a larger cardiac silhouette. The
VHS is only mildly increased (VHS 10.7 v).
The pulmonary vessels appear normal in size.
There is a mild increase in bronchointerstitial
markings that is often identified in older dogs.
The mitral regurgitation ausculted in this case
would be assessed as hemodynamically mild at
this time. There is a curious rightward bowing
of the distal trachea before the main bronchial
branches on the DV projection. The cranial mediastinum is slightly wide on this view,
which could be suspicious for a mass lesion. However the lateral view does not suggest
 tracheal deviation or an obvious increase in soft tissue opacity in this region.
ii. The trachea is a dynamic structure and its position will often shift rightward
with cervical ventroflexion in the dog. Repositioning the dog with the neck
extended while repeating the radiographs will often clarify ^dynamic trachea versus
mass lesion’ (14c).
15 i. The lumen of the left main bronchus appears narrower than the right. The
tissue appears undulating and redundant and it 'sags' into the bronchial lumen.
i. Bronchial ring weakening with mucosal membrane redundancy can occur as a part
of the tracheal collapse complex. Classically, the cervical and/or thoracic trachea are
affected; redundant membranes may be obvious on radiographs as the dorsal
rachealis membrane sags into the tracheal lumen. When bronchial airways are
affected (alone or with tracheal collapse), their radiographic appearance may be
normal. Bronchoscopy or fluoroscopy may be needed to diagnose bronchial collapse.
In some cases, airway collapse is caused by external compression from a mass lesion
compression in this dog.
ii. Airway collapse is usually managed medically. This often consists of a cough
suppressant to reduce coughing “fits' (which stimulate local inflammation), exercise
restriction, and weight reduction in obese patients (to reduce intrathoracic pressure
and compression). Bronchodilators, sometimes with short-term corticosteroid use,
can help, especially if small airway disease is concurrent. In severe cases, where
complete airway collapse leads to life-threatening hypoxia, stents may be implanted
to maintain airway patency.
22
I6: Question
16a
16b
16 A 2-year-old neutered male Brittany is presented after 4 weeks of productive
coughing. A 2-week course of antibiotic therapy for suspected pneumonia has had
no effect. CBC reveals 38,800/μl WBCs, with 24,900/μl neutrophils, 1,880/μl
lymphocytes, 287/μl monocytes, and 11,800/μl eosinophils. Thoracic radiographs
are made (16a, b).
i. What pulmonary pattern is present?
i. What are the etiologic differentials for this pattern in the dog?
ili. What additional diagnostic tests should be done?
23
16:Answer
16c
16 i. Mild diffuse bronchial pattern with a focal mass in the right dorsomedial
caudal lung lobe.
i. Evaluation of bronchial wall features is important when bronchial shadows are
prominent. In dogs, thin and well-defined walls are most likely related to
calcification, considered to be an aging change without clinical significance. If the
walls are thickened, with both inner and outer surfaces reasonably well defined,
chronic inflammation is most likely; etiologic differentials should include allergic
response, inhaled irritants (smoke), parasitic inflammation, and eosinophilic
infiltrates. Thickened bronchial walls with a well-defined internal border and a
hazy loss of the external border has been referred to as peribronchiolar cuffing
(arrow, 16c); differentials for this effect include edema, eosinophilic infiltrates, and
bronchopneumonia.
examination for parasites and heartworm testing should be done, although the
intensity of eosinophilia is unusual. If negative, bronchoscopy and BAL with
cytologic examination and culture should be considered. However, eosinophilic
bronchopneumopathy (pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophils) often remains of
undetermined etiology, as was the case with this dog. The mass effect in this dog
may represent an eosinophilic granuloma or abscess. Further evaluation was not
permitted.
24
I7: Question
17a
17b
17 A 10-year-old spayed female Toy Poodle is presented for a 1-month history of
a dry hacking cough throughout the day and night. She is otherwise healthy.
Physical examination is normal. Thoracic radiographs (17a, b) are made.
i. What is the major finding?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What would the relevance of CT imaging be for a patient such as this?
2.5
17:Answer
17c
PL
17 i. There is a spherical soft tissue/fluid opacity mass within the hilar region of the
left caudal lobe. It is approximately two intercostal spaces wide, with discrete
margins except for its cranioventral axial border. Other thoracic structures are
unremarkable.
ii. The most common cause of a single lung mass in the dog is primary lung tumor.
Other differentials include granuloma, abscess, and cyst.
ii. Although the tumor's histopathologic grade is important for making a prognosis,
so too is identification of regional lymph node enlargement and involvement of
other lung lobes. CT imaging has greater sensitivity for detecting both tracheo-
bronchial lymphadenomegaly and pulmonary metastasis than radiography. It can
also help with any surgical planning (17c, d). Bronchoalveolar carcinoma was
diagnosed in this case.
26
18, I9: Questions
18 A 3-year-old male Doberman Pinscher is
18
presented for anorexia, weakness, and
coughing of 10-day duration. The dog is
lethargic and tachypneic. Mucous mem-
branes are pale pink, with slightly slow
capillary refill time. The HR is irregular and
rapid. Pulses are weak and variable. The
jugular veins are normal. There is a soft
systolic murmur at the left apex. Thoracic
radiographs indicate cardiomegaly with a
moderate amount of pulmonary edema. An
ECG is recorded (18, simultaneous leads I,
II, and II at 25 mm's, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. Describe the ECG findings.
ii. What is your assessment of this dog's
problems?
ili. What are your initial therapeutic goals?
19 A 12-year-old male Greyhound has had recurrent respiratory distress episodes
u p aisn  mq  sde  a  isd a r
and lung sounds are heard on thoracic auscultation. Chest percussion reveals a
bilateral horizontal line of dullness. Jugular veins are distended. Brief thoracic
ultrasound indicates pleural effusion and mild pericardial effusion. Thoracocentesis
yields 400 ml of clear yellow fluid: SG, 1.020; total protein, 24 g/l (2.4 g/dl);
albumin 15 g/l (1.5 g/dl); globulin 9 g/l (0.9 g/dl); alb/glob ratio, 1.67; cytologic
examination, moderate cellularity (WBC count 60/μl) with excellent cell
preservation, mixed cell population with numerous small lymphocytes, occasional
neutrophils and a large population of foamy activated macrophages, scattered
erythrocytes are seen, many macrophages show erythrophagia; occasional reactive
mesothelial cells, but no overtly neoplastic cells are noted; there is a lightly
basophilic proteinaceous background; enrichment culture and Actinomyces/
Nocardia culture results are both negative.
Serum
biochemistry
1shows mildly increased cholesterol (8.2 mmol/l
[316.6 mg/dl]; normal 3.8-7.0 mmol/l [146.7-270.3 mg/dl]), urea (11 mmol/l
[30.8 mg/dl]; normal 2-9 mmol/l [5.6-25.2 mg/dl]), and creatinine (176 μmol/l
[2 mg/dl]; normal 27-124 μmol/l [0.3-1.4 mg/dl], and moderately low albumin
(15 g/l [1.5 g/dl]; normal 22-35 g/l [2.2-3.5 g/dl]); in-house *dipstick' urinalysis
(free-catch) shows marked proteinuria.
i. What type of fluid was drained from this patient?
i. What are the differential diagnoses for this type of effusion?
i. What additional tests would be indicated?
27
I8,19:Answers
18 i. The HR is 200 bpm. The rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AF). Mean electrical axis
is normal (~90°). Chaotic atrial electrical activation characterizes AF. There are no
P waves because organized atrial depolarization is absent. Irregular ECG baseline
undulations (fibrillation or *f') waves occur instead. The ventricular rate is always
irregular and often rapid, depending on AV conduction velocity and recovery time.
QRS complexes usually appear normal with AF (unless abnormal intraventricular
conduction coexists); minor variation in QRS amplitude is common.
i. Clinical signs suggest pulmonary congestion and low cardiac output. Dilated
cardiomyopathy is likely, although longstanding congenital disease affecting the
failure with underlying cardiac disease. Advancing heart disease increases
sympathetic activation, which accelerates AV conduction and ventricular rate. The
disorganized atrial activation of AF prevents effective atrial contraction, which is
especially important for optimal ventricular filling at high HRs. Therefore, onset of
AF with uncontrolled ventricular rate (and loss of the ‘atrial kick') impairs
ventricular filling, reduces cardiac output, and promotes congestion.
ii. Rapidly reduce HR to improve cardiac filling and output (IV diltiazem) and
improve oxygenation (IV furosemide, supplemental O,). Further assessment and
therapy should follow.
19 i. Fluid analysis suggests a longstanding transudate, which has attracted
inflammatory cells into the pleural space ('modified transudate').
i. Differential diagnoses include congestive heart failure, neoplasia, and thoracic
organ injury such as diaphragmatic hernia or lung lobe torsion. Hypoalbuminemia
(reduced oncotic pressure) exacerbates transudative effusions. Elevated central
venous pressure and distended jugular veins can occur with large-volume pleural
effusion as well as from right-sided heart failure or inflow obstruction.
i. Urine protein/creatinine ratio should be measured on a cystocentesis sample; it
was 2.7 in this case, indicating a protein losing nephropathy. Urine culture was
negative. Renal biopsy would provide histologic diagnosis. Post-thoracocentesis
radiographs and echocardiography are also advised to screen for cardiac or other
intrathoracicdisease.
28
20, 2l: Questions
20a
20b
20 A 9-year-old 6 kg (13.5 Ib) male neutered
mixed breed dog is presented for a routine geriatric examination. No problems are
 reported at home. Physical examination is normal except for a soft systolic murmur
heard best at the left apex. Early degenerative valve disease is suspected. Lateral
(20a) and DV (20b) chest radiographs are obtained.
i. What is a 'vertebral heart score' (VHS)?
i. How is VHS calculated?
ii. What is a normal VHS?
iv. Can the VHS be used in cats?
 21 An 11-year-old female DSH cat is presented for cough and intermittent open-
mouth breathing. The coughing began several months ago. During the coughing
and breathing 'spells', she would extend her head parallel to the ground. Otherwise,
the cat seems normal. An ECG is recorded (21; leads I, II, and IHI at 25 mm/s, 1 cm
= 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
i. Why do the QRS complexes occur irregularly?
ili. What is the clinical significance, if any?
29
20, 2I: Answers
20
i. VHS measures cardiac size
20c
compared to vertebral length. Because
correlation between body length and
heart size is good despite chest con-
formation, this relationship can help
identify and quantify cardiomegaly.
i. On the lateral radiograph, measure
cardiac long axis (1) from ventral border
of the carina (left mainstem bronchus
origin) to cardiac apex (20c). Measure
short axis (2) perpendicular to L within
the central one-third of the heart (at
greatest cardiac width). Compare both 1
and 2 lengths with the thoracic spine beginning at the cranial edge of T4. Estimate
each length to the nearest 0.1 vertebra (v); their sum is the VHS. In this dog, VHS
is 10.2 v.
ii. A VHS between 8.5 and 10.5 v is normal for most dogs, but some breed
variation exists. For example, in dogs with a short thorax (e.g. Miniature
Schnauzers) an upper limit of 11 v is considered normal; up to about 9.5 v is normal
in dogs with a long thorax (e.g. Dachshunds).
iv. Yes. Feline normal VHS on lateral view is 6.7 to 8.1 v (mean, 7.5 v). The DV/VD
view can also be used in cats: an S dimension up to 4 v is normal (measured from
T4 on lateral view).
21 i. The rhythm is sinus arrhythmia, with a HR of ~200 bpm. The mean electrical
axis and complex measurements are normal.
i. Sinus arrhythmia is the result of waxing and waning parasympathetic tone. Sinus
arrhythmia is a common finding in normal dogs, but is not usually seen in the
clinical setting in cats. Even though sinus arrhythmia may be noted in calm, resting
cats, its presence in an excited cat (e.g. in the clinic) is often a result of elevated
parasympathetic tone.
ii. Diseases that are associated with high parasympathetic tone generally involve the
respiratory, gastrointestinal, or central nervous systems. The sinus arrhythmia in
this cat is likely secondary to the respiratory disease (presumably feline asthma,
although hearrworm disease and pulmonary parasites would also be likely
differentials in some regions). The sinus arrhythmia itself is of no clinical concern.
This rhythm should be differentiated from other irregular heart rhythms such as
frequent premature beats or atrial fibrillation. (Note: Cough is rarely a sign of
congestive heart failure in cats.)
30
22, 23: Questions
22a
22b
22 A 2-year-old spayed female Shih Tzu from
the American midwest is presented for a
2-month history of intermittent lethargy,
anorexia, weight loss, and recent bouts of
vomiting and diarrhea. She appears depressed
and thin. Physical examination findings include fever (40°C [104°F]), mild
tachypnea (52 breaths/min), pale mucous membranes, multiple enlarged peripheral
o m () a p ( e n odsa pe 'so qd
the thorax are obtained.
i. Is there thoracic lymphadenopathy?
ii. Is there an abnormal lung pattern?
ii. What is your radiographic diagnosis?
23  A 4-year-old spayed female German Shepherd Dog has a recent history of
weakness, with a possible syncopal episode. The owners say she started slowing
down a couple weeks ago. She is taking no medications. The dog is alert and in
good body condition. Body temperature is normal, as are respiratory rate and effort.
The jugular veins are not distended, but occasional strong jugular pulsations are
seen at a rate slower than the HR. Thoracic auscultation is unremarkable except for
a slow, regular heart rhythm of 50 bpm. Femoral pulses are quite strong.
i. What differentials should be considered for the bradycardia?
ii. Would strong femoral pulsations be expected in this case?
ii. Does the intermittent jugular venous pulse provide a diagnostic clue? If so, how?
iv. What test should be done first?
31
22, 23:Answers
22 i. There is no increased soft tissue volume in the areas of the sternal, cranial
mediastinal, and tracheobronchial lymph nodes. Given the peripheral lymph node
enlargement, radiographic and ultrasonographic evaluations of the thorax and
abdomen are relevant to screen for other lymphadenomegaly.
i. There is a diffuse unstructured interstitial pattern. This increases the overall
opacity of the lung and makes the vascular edges less distinct as the contrast
between vessel border and aerated lung is decreased.
ii. The unstructured interstitial pattern is non-specific; etiologic differentials could
include lymphoma or other neoplasia, mycotic pneumonia, diffuse hemorrhage,
and fibrosis. Lymphoma is a strong consideration in view of the lymphadenopathy
and hepatosplenomegaly. However these signs, along with the fever, interstitial lung
pattern, gastrointestinal signs, and weight loss, suggest disseminated mycotic
infection. A fine needle aspirate of the popliteal lymph node revealed a reactive cell
23 i. Regular bradycardia at this HR is most likely an idioventricular escape
rhythm, which usually accompanies complete (third degree) AV block, although
sinus arrest or persistent atrial standstill are less common possibilities. Other causes
of bradycardia usually produce an irregular rhythm, either because of intermittent
AV block or fluctuations in sinus activation rate (e.g. sick sinus syndrome, markedly
increased vagal tone, or slow sinoventricular rhythm from hyperkalemia). Normal
dogs can have slow HRs at rest, but do not show clinical signs of low cardiac output
with activity.
ii. Yes. Perception of arterial pulse strength depends largely on the difference
berween arterial systolic and maximal diastolic pressure (the “pulse pressure'). A
longer time between heart beats allows diastolic pressure to fall lower and cardiac
filling to increase. This produces a greater stroke volume and wider (increased)
pulse pressure.
ii. Bounding jugular pulse waves associated with only intermittent heart beats occur
when atrial and ventricular contraction happens simultaneously (AV dissociation),
These so-called cannon “a' waves occur when the atria contract against closed AV
valves, causing retrograde flow (toward the vena cavae and jugular veins). Complete
AV block with a ventricular escape rhythm is the most common cause.
iv.An ECG.
32
24, 25: Questions
24 A 4-month-old female DSH kitten has exercise
24a
intolerance and respiratory difficulty. A loud systolic
murmur was found when the kitten was initially seen
by a veterinarian 2 months ago, but the murmur is
softer now. You suspect a congenital heart defect.
Among other tests, an ECG is recorded (24a, leads as
marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is the HR and cardiac rhythm?
i. Is the mean electrical axis (MEA) normal?
ili. What is a MEA?
iv. How is MEA determined?
25 A 7-year-old castrated male DSH cat
25
is presented for weight loss, lethargy,
and
breathing
 difficulty. Physical
examination findings include tachy-
cardia, mild depression, labored respir-
ation, and increased respiratory sounds
expiration. Pleural effusion is noted on
thoracic radiographs. Approximately
200 ml of milky white fluid is removed
via thoracocentesis. A sample of the
fluid is shown (25, cytospin preparation,
Wright's stain, 50x oil).
i. Based on the gross description and cytologic appearance, what type of pleural
effusion is suspected in this case?
ii. What laboratory tests would help confirm the diagnosis?
33
24, 25: Answers
24 i. 210 bpm, normal sinus rhythm.
24b
ii. No. The MEA is deviated right-
ward and cranial.
ii. MEA describes the average direc-
tion of  ventricular depolarization.
Major intraventricular conduction
disturbances or ventricular enlarge-
ment can cause an abnormal MEA.
iv. By convention, only frontal plane
Dog
Cat
leads are used to estimate MEA. The lead axis orientation is defined by degrees
(from 0 to ±180°} around a circle (24b). Note that the positive pole of leads aVR
and aVL lies on the 'negative' side of the circle. Highlighted sectors indicate normal
MEA ranges. MEA can be estimated by either of these methods:
● Identify the lead with the tallest R (positive) wave. The MEA points toward
the positive electrode of this lead.
●Identify the lead with the most isoelectric QRS (positive and negative
deflections). Find the perpendicularly oriented lead on the diagram. If the QRS
in this perpendicular lead is mostly positive, the MEA points toward this lead's
positive pole; if it is mostly negative, the MEA points toward the negative
 pole. If all leads appear isoelectric, the MEA is indeterminate.
25 i. This fluid appears to be chyle. Chylous effusions contain chylomicrons and are
classically milky white on gross examination; they may acquire a pink tinge if
hemorrhage has also occurred. Cytologically, chyle typically contains mostly small
lymphocytes, with varying numbers of non-degenerate neutrophils and large mono-
nuclear cells, which often contain clear cytoplasmic vacuoles from phagocytized
lipid. The fluid in this case also shows nucleated cells that are predominantly small
lymphocytes, with lesser numbers of non-degenerate neutrophils and macrophages
(containing numerous small, clear cytoplasmic vacuoles).
Chylous effusions can accumulate secondary to a variety of conditions, including
cardiac failure, trauma, thoracic neoplasia or infection, and chronic cough.
i. Confirmation that an effusion is chylous is based on comparison of the
triglyceride and cholesterol content of the effusion with the corresponding
   s  e  
exceeding those in serum by a factor of >3:1. The cholesterol:triglyceride ratio in
chylous fluid is <1.
Pseudochylous effusion also occurs and is defined as a milky white, turbid fluid
that lacks chylomicrons. The milky white appearance of pseudochylous effusion is
o t  e im  r jo  ai oi p
cholesterol but low concentration of triglyceride.
34
26, 27:Questions
26a
26b
26 A 7-year-old female DSH cat is
26c
presented for further evaluation of
pleural effusion. She is mildly tachypneic
with increased respiratory effort. Her
abdomen is distended with fluid. Lung
sounds are muffled ventrally. HR is
220 bpm. A grade 3/6 systolic murmur
is heard best at the right apex. After
130 ml of modified transudate are
withdrawn by   thoracocentesis  her
respiratory rate and effort improve;
abdominocentesis yields 250 ml of
similar fluid. An area over the jugular
vein is shaved before venipuncture
(26a). Echocardiography is done (26b,
M-mode, ventricular level; 26c, color
flow, right parasternal long axis in systole; 1 - RV, 2 - LV, 3 - RA, 4 - LA).
i. What is the significance of the physical finding shown in 26a?
ii. How would you interpret the echo images?
ii. What are your treatment recommendations at this time?
iv. How would you manage long-term therapy in this cat?
27 What is the recommended treatment for heartworm disease (HWD) in the dog?
3.5
26,27:Answers
26 i. Usually, increased right heart filling pressure causes jugular venous distension,
but venous obstruction from cranial vena cava thrombosis or a cranial mediastinal
mass can also cause distension. When both pleural and abdominal effusions of
modified transudate exist, jugular distension is a strong indicator of underlying
right heart failure, cardiac tamponade, or uncommonly, pericardial constrictive
disease.
ii. There is marked RV and RA dilation consistent with chronic volume overload;
include longstanding congenital tricuspid dysplasia or feline arrhythmogenic RV
cardiomyopathy, although arrhythmias or focal RV wall abnormalities were not
noted in this cat. Additional views would help further evaluate tricuspid apparatus
structure (thickened leaflets were observed here).
ii. Congestive heart failure therapy is indicated, including furosemide, an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and pimobendan; spironolactone may also
be helpful.
iv. Parameters to monitor include renal function, serum electrolytes, BP, respiratory
rate and effort, and cardiac rhythm. Drainage of recurrent pleural effusion and
intensified diuretic therapy may become necessary. Either atrial or ventricular
tachyarrhythmias are likely to develop and may require additional therapy. A diet
liked by the cat should be fed (ideally one reduced in salt).
      ,   
disease; PTE). However, an alternative protocol is currently advised for all HW-
positive dogs, not just those with more severe disease. The alternative protocol (one
dose initially, then 4-6 weeks later, 'standard’ adulticide therapy) reduces the risk
of fatal PTE from sudden heavy worm kill. Strict rest for 4-6 weeks after therapy
is important. If possible, prior treatment with a monthly HWD preventive drug and
doxycycline (10 mg/kg q12h for 4 weeks; for Wolbachia organisms) is also
suggested. Dogs with caval syndrome are not given adulticide until after worms are
surgically removed.
If Melarsomine is currently unavailable, the American Heartworm Society
recommends:
● Limit the infected dog's activity to reduce lung pathology.
 Carefully initiate preventative therapy.
●
 Administer doxycycline (protocol as above; repeat every 3 months until
adultcide is available) to reduce pathology and infective potential of the
worms.
See www.heartwormsociety.org for more information
36
28, 29: Questions
28a
28b
28 A 9-year-old neutered male DSH cat is
presented for respiratory distress. There is a
5-year history of open-mouth breathing when
the weather is hot and humid. The cat has not
been receiving any medications. This most recent episode of respiratory distress
appears to have responded to furosemide administration. A grade 2/6 systolic heart
murmur is heard best at the left sternal border and more softly on the right.
Thoracic radiographs (28a, b) are made.
i. What are the clinical differentials to be evaluated by the radiographic study?
ii. What radiographic changes are present?
ili. Are the radiographic changes more supportive of cardiac or pulmonary disease?
iv. What diagnostic procedure(s) should be done next?
29 A 10-year-old male neutered German
29
Shorthair Pointer (29) is presented
because of poor exercise tolerance when
hunting and recent abdominal swelling.
The dog is alert. Abnormal examination
findings include ascites,
ventrally
muffled lung sounds, a soft left-sided
systolic murmur and dental disease. It is
unclear whether jugular vein distension
is present. Chest radiographs show
equivocal cardiomegaly and moderate
pleural effusion.
1. Would central venous pressure (CVP) measurement be useful in this case?
ii. What is CVP, and how is it measured?
i. What can confound accurate CVP measurement?
37
28, 29: Answers
28 i. Clinical differential diagnoses involving the thoracic cavity in this patient
should include cardiac disease (e.g. hypertrophic or other cardiomyopathy, or
previously undiagnosed congenital malformation) with congestive heart failure,
feline asthma.
i. Moderate generalized cardiomegaly with a large LA is evident without associated
enlarged pulmonary vessels. A diffuse bronchial pattern is also present. Pleural
effusion is not evident.
i. The radiographic cardiomegaly (VHS ~9.3 v) indicates cardiac disease. However.
 s p  r    s d 
pulmonary edema of congestive heart failure.
iv. The cardiomegaly and murmur indicate the need for additional cardiac
assessment by echocardiography; in this case, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with
mild LV outflow tract obstruction was found. However, because of the diffuse
radiographic bronchial pattern, further assessment for airway disease by
hematology, heartworm testing, fecal examination, and BAL were recommended.
 ard n  r r e   pa  s ' 
(tamponade or constriction) underlies the effusions.
i. CVP measures systemic venous (and right heart filling) pressure. Intravascular
volume, venous compliance, and cardiac function influence CVP. Normal CVP is
0-8 (to 10) cmH,O; respiration causes minor fluctuations. To measure CVP,
aseptically place a jugular catheter that extends into or close to the RA. Connect it
with extension tubing and a three-way stopcock to a fluid administration set. Attach
(representing 0 cmH,O) at the (horizontal) level of the patient's RA. Turn the
stopcock off to the fluid reservoir, allowing fluid in the manometer to equilibrate
with CVP. Take repeated measurements, with manometer and patient in the same
position, during exhalation.
i. Large-volume pleural effusion raises intrapleural pressure and, thus, CVP. Such
effusions should be drained before measuring CVP. Inaccurate readings can also
              
stopcock is not at RA level, and body position varies.
38
30, 3I: Questions
30a
30b
30 A 5-year-old male Chihuahua is referred as an
emergency several hours after having been bitten
by a larger dog. The primary veterinarian
provided some initial stabilization including
placing a bandage over deep bite wounds on the
thorax. There is subcutaneous crepitus and the
dog is tachypneic, tachycardic, and has decreased breath sounds on the right side.
The body temperature is 37°C (99°F). Right lateral (30a) and DV (30b) thoracic
radiographs are taken.
i. Does this dog have a pneumothorax?
i. What are the types of pneumothorax?
ii. What are the mechanisms of pneumomediastinum?
31 A young dog is presented for surgical repair of
31
a patent ductus arteriosus. A left thoracotomy
 exposes the region of the heart base and proximal
 great vessels. The surgical field is shown before the
pericardium is incised (31). Cranial is to the left
in the image.
i. What is the dark elongated structure overlying
the heart?
i. Where does it terminate?
i. What clinical signs does it cause?
39
30, 3I: Answers
30 i. Yes. Soft tissue opacity in the right hemithorax, in the shape of collapsed lung
lobes, is displaced from the thoracic wall. There are no vascular shadows in the
right hemithorax. Radiographic detection of pneumothorax can be difficult with
concurrent pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema, as here, because of
the summation effect of subcutaneous air pockets. Look for increased lung soft
tissue opacity, with distinct separation from the thoracic wall, rather than only
regions of lucency.
i. Pneumothorax is classified as 'open' or 'closed’ and 'non-tension' versus 'tension'
With open pneumothorax, air enters the pleural space through a hole in the thoracic
wall. The thoracic wall is intact with closed pneumothorax; free air leaks from the
lung. Tension pneumothorax results from progressively increasing intrapleural
pressure, similar to a one-way valve allowing air into the pleural space with each
breath, without escape. Increasing intrapleural pressure compresses the lung and
vasculature, leading to critical cardiopulmonary compromise. Non-tension
pressure.
iii.
i. Pneumomediastinum develops from: pharyngeal, laryngeal, tracheal, or
esophageal disruption; wounds involving cervical fascial planes; and peri-
bronchiolar dissection of air within the lung to the pulmonary hilus. Pneumo-
mediastinum is usually secondary to trauma or, occasionally, to infection with
gas-forming organisms. Because the mediastinum communicates with cervical
fascial planes, air can dissect in either direction. Pneumomediastinum can lead to
pneumothorax if the mediastinal pleura ruptures; however pneumothorax does not
causepneumomediastinum.
31 i. A persistent left cranial vena cava. This vessel is a remnant of the embryonic
left cranial cardinal vein, which drains blood from the cranial part of the embryo
in parallel with the right cranial cardinal vein. During normal development, the left
cranial cardinal vein degenerates and disappears as an anastomosing vein (the left
brachiocephalic vein) develops to carry venous blood from cranial left structures to
the right cranial cardinal vein (which becomes the right brachiocephalic vein and
cranial vena cava).
i. The persistent left cranial vena cava courses lateral to the left AV groove and
eneo aui jo snus Areuoo an ou dura oi aepneo u seipres ieara aui suo
RA.
ii. It causes no clinical signs, but may complicate surgical exposure of other
structures at the left heart base.
40
32, 33: Questions
32a
32b
32 A 9-year-old spayed female Dobermann is
presented for poor exercise tolerance, inap-
petence, and recent respiratory distress. She
appears alert and well fleshed. HR is
160 bpm, sinus rhythm. A grade 2/6 systolic
murmur and S, gallop sound are heard at the left apex. Breath sounds are harsh, but
no crackles are heard. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. Lateral (32a)
and DV (32b) chest radiographs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. How would you proceed with this case?
33
33 A 6-year-old male DSH cat is examined for recent onset of poor appetite, hiding,
usual at the litterbox. The cat appears lethargic; mucous membranes are pink and
pulses strong. The abdomen is tense and painful on palpation; a large bladder is
noted. HR is 120 bpm. A lead II ECG is recorded (33, 25 mm/s, 2 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
ii. What is your assessment of this case?
il. How would you treat this cat?
41
32,33:Answers
32 i. The vertical orientation of the cardiac silhouette is typical for Dobermanns.
However cardiomegaly (VHS ~12.1 v), with moderate LA and LV enlargement, is
evident. Peribronchial and mild hilar interstitial pulmonary infiltrates are present.
i. Dilated cardiomyopathy, with early congestive heart failure (pulmonary edema).
i. Additional baseline data, to confirm the diagnosis and identify concurrent
abnormalities, would include an echocardiogram, ECG, BP measurement, serum
biochemistries, CBC, and urinalysis. Therapy with furosemide, pimobendan, and an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor is indicated. Furosemide dosage is tirated
as needed to control edema. Other therapy that may be helpful could include spirono-
lactone, a low-dose beta blocker (e.g. carvedilol; after pulmonary edema is resolved),
and fish-oil (omega-3 fatty acid) supplement. Although few Dobermanns show
marked clinical improvement to oral L-carnitine supplementation, a 3- to 6-month
therapeutic trial is reasonable. Monitoring patient cardiopulmonary and metabolic
status is important. Azotemia, hypotension, electrolyte disturbance, and refractory
pulmonary edema are comon. Cardiac arrhythmias, especially ventricular tachy-
arrhythmias and atrial fibrillation, often develop and require antiarrhythmic therapy.
Discussions with the owner about exercise and dietary salt restriction,
 monitoring resting respiratory rate, potential complications, and the relatively poor
long-term prognosis with strong possibility of sudden death are important.
33 i. HR is 120 bpm. P waves are absent, QRS complexes are wide (0.06-0.07
seconds), and T waves appear tented. Sinoventricular rhythm is most likely. Other
rhythm differentials could include either sinus arrest, sinoatrial block, or atrial
standstill with a ventricular (or junctional, with aberrant intraventricular conduc-
tion) escape rhythm.
i. Presumptive diagnosis is urethral obstruction with severe hyperkalemia-induced
ECG abnormalities; (K* was 10.2 mmol/l [10.2 mEq/l] in this cat). Hyperkalemia
slows conduction velocity and alters refractory period. Experimental studies
describe ECG changes associated with progressive hyperkalemia: T waves become
narrow and sometimes symmetrically peaked (tented; serum K+ z6 mmol/l); P waves
flatten (K+ ~7 mmol/l) then disappear (K* ≥8 mmoll), producing a so-called
sinoventricular rhythm; QRS complexes widen (K+ >6 mmol/l); abnormal rhythms
can occur (K' >10 mmol/l), with eventual asystole. However, with clinical
hyperkalemia, these changes occur inconsistently, perhaps because of additional
electrolyte derangements and acidosis.
i. Regular insulin (0.25-0.5 U/kg IV) with glucose (2 g/U insulin, diluted to a 10%
solution) is recommended for severe hyperkalemia from feline urethral obstruction.
Once the obstruction is relieved, subsequent fluid therapy should include 2.5-5%
dextrose. Sodium bicarbonate (1-2 mEq/kg, slow IV) could provoke hypocalcemia
in cats with urethral obstruction and hyperphosphatemia.
42
34, 35: Questions
34 An owner returned home to find her
34a
indoor cat 
breathingrapidly and
markedly lame in both hindlimbs. The
cat is an 8-year-old neutered male DLH
mix. The cat can advance the right
hindlimb, but cannot place the foot in a
plantar position. The left limb is dragged
behind. This image (34a) was taken
during examination of the hindlimbs
(right paw is to the left).
i. What condition is present?
ii. How could this lesion be confirmed?
ii. What underlying diseases are commonly associated with this?
35a
35b
35 An 8-year-old male neutered DSH cat is
brought in for routine health check and
vaccinations. No problems have been
noticed by the owner. Physical examination
is unremarkable except for a grade 2/6
systolic murmur at the cranial left sternal
border. Lateral (35a) and DV (35b) thoracic
radiographs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. What are your recommendations to the owner?
43
34, 35:Answers
34i. Feline arterial thromboembolism
34b
(ATE) or saddle thrombus of the
terminal aorta. The right hind foot pad
appears pink and the toes are splayed,
suggesting some residual motor activity.
The left hind foot pad is pale, from poor
perfusion. Such asymmetry in degree of
vascular compromise is not uncommon.
  e sqrg  m pr pn p  ng  o
hindlimb in this cat is likely to feel cooler than the right. Femoral pulses are usually
absent or markedly weak or asymmetric. Affected limbs also often have cyanotic
nail beds and ischemic muscle contracture. Acute ATE usually causes severe pain.
i. Ultrasonography may reveal a thrombus in the caudal abdominal aorta, as in
this case (34b; large and small thrombi [small arrows] within distal aortic lumen,
AO; UB, urinary bladder).
i. Feline myocardial disease, especially hypertrophic, restrictive, and “unclassified'
cardiomyopathies. ATE also has occurred with other cardiac diseases and with
systemic inflammatory conditions (e.g. neoplasia, viral infection, sepsis).
35 i. There is mild cardiomegaly (VHS ~10 v), with LV and atrial (especially left
silhouette (35b). The pulmonary parenchyma and vessels are unremarkable.
iji. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is strongly suspected. Other differentials for left
heart enlargement and murmur suggestive of LV outflow obstruction include
chronic
C hypertension,
,hyperthyroidism, previously undiagnosed congenital
(subjaortic stenosis, or another acquired ventricular outflow obstruction.
ii. An echocardiogram, BP measurement, and serum T4 are indicated. CBC, serum
biochemistries, and urinalysis are also recommended. In this case, BP and T, tests
    a s   
hypertrophy with dynamic outflow obstruction(
(hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy). Possible sequelae include arterial thromboembolism, congestive
heart failure, and arrhythmias (exacerbated by stress, tachycardia, and LV outflow
obstruction). Low-dose aspirin or clopidogrel is usually prescribed to reduce
thromboembolic risk. Benazepril is recommended for clinical disease, but is of
unclear benefit earlier. Atenolol may be helpful by reducing outflow obstruction
and slowing HR. The owner is advised to monitor the cat's resting respiratory rate
and effort, activity level, appetite, and attitude. Re-evaluation in 6-9 months is
suggested unless problems arise sooner.
44
36, 37: Questions
36a
12
36b
36c
DDYYYYYYTY.Y
YW.YYTW_YYTY
36 A 3-year old intact male Boxer began having syncopal episodes 3 weeks ago.
After a brief run, he suddenly stopped, looked tired as well as pale and
disorientated, and then collapsed unconscious after a few seconds. The dog
spontaneously regained full consciousness after 8-10 seconds. Since then, the owner
has observed four similar episodes, always during exercise. The dog is completely
normal between the events and in good body condition. Physical examination is
unremarkable. Hematology, serum biochemistry, and thyroid test results are
normal. Echocardiography (including Doppler), ECG, thoracic radiographs, and
abdominal ulrasonography are unremarkable.
A 24-hour (Holter) ECG recording is obtained to screen for episodic arrhythmias
(36a) as the owner records the dog's activity in a diary. Samples from when the dog
is alert (36b) and during another syncopal event (36c, red arrow) while exercising
are shown.
i. What ECG abnormality is shown in 36b?
i. What ECG abnormality is shown in 36c?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis in this patient?
iv. How would you manage this case as well as advise the owner about prognosis?
37A 14-year-old male Weimaraner is
LE
presented for recent abdominal swelling and
a collapse episode early this morning. Ascites
and a slow HR are identified on physical
examination. An ECG is recorded (37, leads
as marked, 25 mm/s, 0.5 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
i. What test can be done to assess autonomic
neural influence?
ii. How is this test done?
iv. If there is no response, what do you recommend?
4.5
36,37:Answers
36 i. Sinus rhythm (120 bpm) with uniform ventricular premature complexes in a
trigeminal pattern (ventricular trigeminy); that is, two normal complexes followed
by a ventricular ectopic complex (indicated by *V' in the top margin).
i. Sinus rhythm is interrupted by rapid ventricular tachycardia at 450 bpm. Syncope
occurred (red arrow) shortly after the onset of tachycardia.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, usually with an upright configuration in lead II, are
or show changes typical for dilated cardiomyopathy.
iv. ARVC is difficult to manage and no cure exists. Antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g.
mexiletine with atenolol, sotalol, or amiodarone) are used to reduce ventricular
 s ss p r p  p  
improve quality of life; however, antiarrhythmic therapy may not reduce the risk of
sudden death or increase life expectancy.
Some cases develop myocardial dysfunction and heart failure over time, so
cardiac size and function should be monitored. An implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator (ICD), used in people with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias,
could be considered in Boxer ARVC. However, the expense, programming
challenges, and risk of inappropriate and painful electroshocks make ICD therapy
problematic.
 The prognosis is guarded, although some affected dogs survive for years. Sudden
death is common. Affected animals should not be bred, as ARVC is thought to be
inherited.
37 i. HR is 30 bpm. Sinus P waves are seen, but complete (third degree) AV block
and a ventricular escape rhythm are evident. The slightly prolonged (0.05 second)
P waves suggest LA enlargement. QRS complex measurements and mean electrical
axis generally are not determined for idioventricular rhythms.
ii. The atropine response test. Atropine, a competitive muscarinic receptor
antagonist, has little to no effect on bradyarrhythmias caused by intrinsic sinus or
AV node disease.
ii. Record an ECG within 5-10 minutes after injection of atropine (0.04 mg/kg
IV). If the HR does not increase by at least 150% or AV conduction improve, repeat
  n     a re s   
over 5 minutes. Normal sinus node response is a rate increase to >135 bpm (usually
to 150-160 bpm). However, a positive response (increased sinus rate and AV
iv. When there is no response to atropine challenge, medical therapy is unlikely to
46
38, 39: Questions
38
38 A 9-year-old spayed female Miniature Schnauzer is presented for evaluation of
a heart murmur, cardiomegaly, and cough, which persists despite therapy with
furosemide, enalapril, and theophylline. A mild increase in respiratory rate and
effort is observed. A grade 3/6 murmur is heard at both left and right cardiac apical
areas. Soft pulmonary crackles are heard. Femoral pulses are strong, but with
occasional deficits. Systolic BP is 138 mmHg. Thoracic radiographs indicate marked
LA enlargement and mild pulmonary infiltrates consistent with edema. A
hemogram and serum chemistries are unremarkable. An ECG is recorded (38, lead
II at 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
i. How would you manage the case at this time?
i. What are your recommendations for follow-up?
39a
39b
39  A 2-year-old male Miniature Poodle is
presented for a history of coughing and
gagging, which began over a year ago.
Multiple medications have been used with no
resolution. Physical examination is unre-
markable except for a 2/6 systolic murmur
over the mitral region. Lateral (39a) and DV
(39b) thoracic radiographs are shown.
i. Is there radiographic evidence of heart disease?
ii. Are there any non-cardiac changes to account for the coughing and gagging?
47
38, 39: Answers
38 i. The HR is 130 bpm, with sinus rhythm. There are several atrial premature
complexes (APCs) preceded by negative P' waves (2nd, 5th, 9th complexes from the
right). The QRS complex configuration suggests a normal mean electrical axis.
Sinus P waves are wide (0.05-0.06 second), consistent with LA enlargement. QRS
complexes are slightly wide (0.07 second) with prominent Q and upper limit R
waves, suggesting LV enlargement. Chronic degenerative mitral valve disease
(MVD) is the likely underlying diagnosis.
i. The respiratory signs, LA enlargement, and pulmonary infiltrates are consistent
with unresolved pulmonary edema. Furosemide therapy should be intensified,
pimobendan added, and the enalapril dose optimized. Echocardiography is
recommended to further characterize cardiac structure and myocardial function.
APCs are common with MVD, but theophylline may be increasing their frequency.
Discontinuation of theophylline is advised unless it clearly is required to manage the
dog's cough. Exercise restriction, moderately-low salt diet, and monitoring of
respiratory rate and effort are indicated.
ii. Serum electrolytes, renal function, heart rhythm, and pulmonary status should
be monitored. Furosemide dosing is adjusted as needed to control edema.
Spironolactone may also be helpful. If atrial tachyarrhythmias worsen, digoxin with
or without diltiazem or a beta blocker is recommended.
39 i. There is no definitive cardiac enlargement, based on various methods of
cardiac mensuration. Likewise the cardiac shape is normal. The radiographic
interpretation is that the heart is within normal limits.
i. The airways, lung, and esophagus should be carefully scrutinized for either
primary or secondary changes. There is a small amount of air in the cranial thoracic
 a n nn in an  a i a  s so
intercostal space. Typical esophageal dilation is not evident in the DV view. The
gastric and intestinal shadows are moderately gas filled, but not abnormally
distended. The lung fields are normally radiolucent with the exception of a focal
interstitial opacity in the right caudal lobe around the primary bronchial path.
48
40, 4I: Questions
40a
40b
40 Further questioning regarding the dog in 39 reveals that the cough is much worse
after drinking. A liquid barium swallow is done; DV views are shown (40a, b).
i. What is the radiographic diagnosis following the contrast study?
i. Was it inappropriate to do the barium swallow?
41 A 7-year-old male DSH cat is
4l
presented for physical examination and
vaccinations. The owner is concerned
because a littermate has recently been
diagnosed with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. The cat is purring loudly
during attempts at thoracic auscultation.
i. How can purring
gbe discouraged
during auscultation?
ii. Which thoracic region(s) must be
auscultated carefully for possible presence of a murmur in cats?
ii. After purring is stopped, a soft extra sound is heard at the left apex. What is this
most likely to be?
49
40,4l:Answers
40 i. The simultaneous opacification of the distal thoracic esophagus and right
caudal and accessory lobe bronchi indicate an esophagobronchial fistula. Such
fistulae occur only rarely in dogs and cats. Most are thought to result from
esophageal foreign body penetration or chronic irritation. This diagnosis should be
suspected when coughing is closely associated with drinking and eating; other
considerations with this history include oropharyngeal dysphagia and esophageal
disease with aspiration.
i. No. Esophageal contrast radiography most consistently demonstrates the
whether communication with the lung only or with other thoracic regions, such as
the mediastinum, is suspected. Barium aspiration into the trachea and bronchi is
generally cleared effectively by coughing and normal mucociliary transport, with no
significant residual effect. Barium in bronchioles and alveoli is cleared more slowly
by macrophages and granuloma formation. Extensive alveolar deposition can
compromise respiration. Barium causes a granulomatous reaction in the
mediastinum.
ionic products induce severe acute edema and inflammatory response, while non-
ionic agents cause only a mild inflammatory response. An oral non-ionic product
that study is negative, a barium contrast study is then recommended to confirm the
negative study. Esophageal leaks visible only with barium contrast have occurred
in people. Esophagobronchial fistula is best treated by affected lung lobe removal
and esophageal closure.
41 i. Holding a finger over one or both nostrils; waving an alcohol-soaked cotton
ball near the cat's nose; gently pressing on the larynx (cricoid cartilage); turning on
   rn a   r  an r  r e
examination table and suddenly lowering (pretending to drop) him.
i. The feline heart lies more horizontally in the chest compared with dogs, so it is
important to auscultate the left and right sternal border regions, as well as left and
right apical (near the precordial impulse) and basilar regions.
i. An S4 gallop sound. This diastolic sound (as well as the S) is not normally
audible in cats (or dogs). The S, and S4 are lower in frequency and usually softer
a jo lq aun ssn reaq on raisa are aun i's pue 's) spnos ieau pou u
stethoscope (or light pressure with a single-sided chestpiece). An S, or S4 sound is
sometimes called a gallop rhythm, although it is unrelated to the heart's electrical
rhythm. Gallop sounds indicate ventricular diastolic dysfunction. The S is heard
myopathy). Heart failure and increased LA pressure intensify gallop sounds.
50
42, 43: Questions
42 An 11-year-old male Rhodesian
42
Ridgeback has a large intrathoracic
mass with severe pleural effusion. CT
reveals that the mass involves the left
cranial lung lobe and extends into the
right lung. The left cranial lung lobe,
which is torsed, is removed via left
lateral thoracotomy. Because the mass
also involves the right hemithorax, the
dog is repositioned for right lateral
thoracotomy. Partial lobectomy of the right middle and caudal lung lobes is
necessary to remove the mass. Mechanical ventilation is used postoperatively to
assist recovery (42).
i. What are the primary indications for ventilation therapy, especially in a case such
as this?
ii. Which general indication has the better prognosis for survival to hospital
discharge?
ii. Describe the mechanical ventilation mode that combines both spontaneous and
ventilator-initiated breaths, and its advantage.
iv. What parameters indicate when it is reasonably safe to begin weaning a patient
with pulmonary dysfunction from mechanical ventilation?
43 An 8-year-old male Great Dane is
43
presented for lethargy of 2-week dur-
ation and abdominal distension. The
dog is alert and normothermic. Mucous
m
membranes are pink, capillary refill time
is 3 seconds, femoral pulses are unre-
markable, and mild jugular distension is
seen. HR and rhythm and respirations
are normal. Ascites is evident. Heart
sounds are quite soft and lung sounds
are normal on auscultation. An ECG is
recorded (43, leads as marked, 50 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG diagnosis?
ii. Does the ECG provide an indication of the dog's underlying problem?
ii.If so, what is the explanation for this finding?
51
42,43:Answers
e  () a   r   ' 
(2) hypoxemia unresponsive to O, administration. This dog is likely to have both
hypoventilation (surgical pain) and hypoxemia (lung injury). Mechanical ventilation
can also be helpful by decreasing the work of breathing.
ii. Dogs treated with mechanical ventilation for hypoventilation have a better
li. With deep sedation and neuromuscular control, the ventilator initiates all
breaths. However, a more physiologic ventilator mode is intermittent mandatory
ventilation, where the patient can trigger breaths and the ventilator initiates
additional breaths to ensure delivery of the prescribed minute volume. Synchronized
intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is a variation where the ventilator is
programmed to override (not initiate) a mechanical ventilation cycle when the
 po o  n rd n s  o  d n 
work of breathing when able. Therefore, SIMV is commonly used to begin weaning
the patient from the ventilator.
iv. Positive end-expiratory pressure <4 cm H,0, normal minute volume and peak
airway pressure, inspired O, concentration <40%, arterial PO, >80 mmHg, and
arterial PCO, <50 mmHg are parameters evaluated in determining when to begin
weaning from the ventilator.
43 i. HR is 140 bpm, with normal sinus rhythm. Some baseline muscle tremor
artifact is evident. The electrical axis is normal. P wave duration is 0.05 second, but
this is acceptable in giant breeds. Other complex measurements are normal.
Electrical alternans is present.
ii. Yes. Electrical alternans occurs most often with large-volume pericardial effusion.
li. Electrical alternans is a recurring, beat-to-beat alteration in the size or
configuration of the QRS complex (and sometimes T wave). It results from the
heart's swinging motion, back and forth on alternating beats, within the pericardial
fluid. This motion changes the cardiac orientation within the torso, which affects
the ECG appearance. Electrical alternans may be more evident at HRs berween
90 and 140 bpm or in certain body positions (e.g. standing). Other ECG changes
sometimes seen with pericardial disease and effusion include diminished amplitude
QRS complexes (often less than 1 mV in dogs) and ST segment elevation suggesting
an epicardial injury current (not seen in this case). Sinus tachycardia is common
with cardiac tamponade. Various tachyarrhythmias also occur in some cases.
This dog had a large amount of pericardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade,
hemangiosarcoma involving the RA wall, and pulmonary metastases.
52
45, 46: Questions
45a
45b
45 A second opinion is sought by the owner of a 1-year-old male German Shepherd
Dog. A murmur was recently heard by a veterinarian when the dog was presented for
s  (at   t a   o 
i. Based on the information given, what abnormality is present?
ii. How can the severity of this be assessed?
ili. What are the management options for this case?
46 A 30 kg (66 Ib), young adult male
46a
German Shepherd Dog of unknown age
is presented for an enlarging abdomen
and
1 decreased activity of 3 weeks
duration. The owners note that the dog
His appetite is good. On physical
examination, a ballottable fluid wave is
present in the abdomen. Body tempera-
ture is 38.9°C (102°F). HR is 120 bpm
with a slightly irregular rhythm. Femoral pulses
and precordial impulses are weak. Jugular
46b
distension is evident. Heart sounds are very soft;
no murmur is heard and lung sounds are
normal. Lateral (46a) and DV (46b) thoracic
radiographs are obtained. Echocardiography is
not available.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ili. How would you manage this case?
53
45, 46: Answers
45 i. RV enlargement is seen (45a). Contrast
45c
injection into the RV reveals a thickened, fused
pulmonic valve (inverted “Y′ shape, 45b) typical
for valvular pulmonic stenosis. Mild RV hyper-
 trophy and main PA dilation are secondary to the
stenosis.
ii. By the systolic pressure difference (gradient)
between
RV and PA. RV systolic pressure
increases above normal because of increased resistance to RV emptying. The pressure
gradient (instantaneous) is estimated from peak PA outflow velocity (via spectral
Doppler echocardiography) and the Bernoulli equation (pressure gradient = 4 x peak
velocity2). Pressure gradient (peak to peak) can be measured directly during cardiac
catheterization; this is lower than that estimated by Doppler in the awake animal.
ii. Balloon valvuloplasty, recommended for severe valvular pulmonic stenosis, can
create a larger orifice by tearing valvular adhesions (45c; indentation of inflated
balloon from stenotic valve prior to tearing). Marked reduction in pressure gradient
is often achieved, although valvuloplasty is not helpful in some cases and even
contraindicated in others. Beta-blocker therapy may be prescribed to reduce HR
and myocardial O, requirement, as wellas increase diastolic filling and myocardial
 perfusion, if balloon valvuloplasty is unsuccessful or not pursued.
46 i. There is marked, generalized cardiomegaly with tracheal elevation (46a). The
heart has a round, globoid appearance on DV view. Pulmonary vessels and
parenchyma appear normal. Mild caudal vena caval dilation and ascites are evident.
i. Large pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade is likely considering the
globoid cardiac silhouette without identifiable heart contours. Other causes of a
large, rounded heart with signs of right-sided failure include dilated cardio-
myopathy and congenital tricuspid dysplasia with severe tricuspid insufficiency.
However, the muffled heart sounds, lack of murmur, and loss of caudodorsal
hernia is another differential, although the heart shadow appears distinct from the
diaphragm on DV and right heart failure would be unexpected.
ii. Clinical and radiographic signs are most consistent with cardiac tamponade.
Medications for congestive heart failure (e.g. furosemide, enalapril) are likely to further
impair cardiac filling and forward output. Pericardiocentesis is indicated and should be
done right away. Even if only partial removal of the effusion is accomplished, reduced
cardiography is indicated to identify the arrhythmia and to monitor rhythm during
pericardiocentesis. If possible, referral for echocardiography and further evaluation is
recommended.
54
47:Question
47b
47c
47 A 3-year-old male neutered DSH cat
is referred because of a heart murmur.
He is alert, in good body condition, and
has no clinical signs. Physical examin-
ation is normal, except for a systolic
grade 3/6 heart murmur heard best over
the left apex and radiating to the right
side.
Hematologic and serum biochemical
4.0
test results are unremarkable. Systolic
BP is normal (135 mmHg). Thoracic
radiographs show cardiomegaly, without venous engorgement or evidence for
pulmonary edema. Echocardiography is performed. M-mode image at the mitral
level (47a), color flow Doppler in systole from right parasternal LV outflow view
(47b, 1 - aorta, 2 - left ventricle, 3 - left atrium), and continuous wave Doppler
interrogation of the LV outflow tract from left apical position (47c) are shown.
Measurements from M-mode images are (reference values in brackets):
Diastole (mm)
Systole (mm)
IVS
6
(3-5.5)
9
(4-9)
LV chamber
15
(10-20)
7
(4-11)
LV wall
7
(3-5.5)
10
(4-10)
LA
23
(6-12)
Aorta
11
(7-12)
LV FS
53%
(40-66%)
i. Based on the echocardiographic examination, what is the working diagnosis?
ii. What echocardiographic abnormalities are shown?
i. What clinical management can be advised for this case?
5.5
47:Answer
47d
 47 i. M-mode measurements indicate mild/moderate LV and IVS hypertrophy, with
   e  o s a 
hypertension and hyperthyroidism are absent. The murmur and findings shown in
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM).
i. Mitral valve systolic anterior motion is seen (47a, d). The anterior (septal) mitral
leaflet is pulled toward the IVS (arrow), which contributes to dynamic LV outflow
obstruction in mid systole. Secondary mitral regurgitation (from mitral leaflet
displacement) and increased LV outflow turbulence (47b) explain the murmur.
Severity of dynamic obstruction can be estimated by Doppler peak LV outflow
velocity (47c), here ~4 m/s (pressure gradient of ~64 mmHg). When optimal
sh na asn ann an asen sn u s) aissod nou si e raddoa
underestimated. The LV
Ioutflow velocity spectrum's shape shows abrupt
for dynamic obstruction.
ii. Treatment for asymptomatic HOCM is controversial. Anecdotal improvement
in physical activity has occurred after beta blocker or diltiazem therapy. Beta
blockers can reduce LV outflow obstruction acutely, but controlled long-term
studies are lacking. The efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors is also
unclear. Furosemide is not indicated without congestive failure.
56
48, 49: Questions
48a
48b
48A
9-year-old male
Miniature
Schnauzer is reluctant to jump on and off 
48c
the furniture. The owner observes no
other abnormalities. The dog's HR is
100 bpm. A soft systolic murmur is heard
at the left apex. Mild lumbar pain is
detected, but no neurologic deficits. The
rest of the examination is normal. Chest
radiographs and ECG are unremarkable.
An echocardiogram is done; LV dimen-
sions from M-mode imaging are 3.44 cm
(end diastole) and 2.04 cm (systole).
Two-dimensional right parasternal short
axis views at mitral valve (48a) and aortic
(48b) levels, and a long axis 4-chamber
view in systole (48c) are shown
i. What are the echo findings?
ii. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you manage this case?
 49 How should AV reciprocating tachycardia, associated with ventricular pre-
excitation, be treated?
57
48, 49: Answers
48  i. There is moderate mitral valve thickening (arrows, 48a). Ventricular
proportions look normal. LA enlargement is minimal at this time. Color flow
examination demonstrates mild mitral regurgitation (48c). M-mode LV dimensions
and FS (40.7%) are normal. FS is calculated from the LV dimensions as (LV diastolic
- LV systolic)/LV diastolic x 100.
ii. Early degenerative mitral valve disease (endocardiosis).
ii. There are no clinical signs of heart failure and minimal to no evidence for
hemodynamic compromise (normal heart size and function). This dog would be
classified as stage B1 heart failure according to the modified American Heart
Association/American College of Cardiology staging system. Specific cardiac
medications are not clearly indicated at this time. Potential benefits of low-dose
beta blocker or other therapy are under investigation. Routine health maintenance
care, management of lumbar pain (in this case), avoidance of high salt intake, client
education about early signs of cardiac decompensation, and cardiac evaluation in
6-12 months are recommended.
49 If a vagal maneuver is not effective, drugs that slow conduction or prolong the
refractory period of the bypass tract, AV node, or both may terminate the
tachycardia. Diltiazem (or verapamil), procainamide, lidocaine, or a beta blocker
(slowly IV) can be tried; amiodarone or a class IC antiarrhythmic agent are
alternatives. However, if atrial fibrillation was pre-existing, amiodarone, sotalol,
or procainamide is recommended for the tachycardia. Although digoxin slows AV
conduction, it can decrease the accessory pathway's refractory period, so it is
avoided with ventricular pre-excitation. Intracardiac electrophysiologic mapping
with ablation of the accessory pathway(s) has successfully abolished refractory AV
reciprocating tachycardia in some dogs. (See also case 130.)
58
50, 51: Questions
50 A 5.5-year-old intact male Shih
50
Tzu is presented for episodes of
respiratory stridor and labored
breathing over the past 6 months.
The episodes involve sudden-onset,
noisy
('roaring')
inspiratory
sounds, with the dog appearing
uncomfortable, rigid, and slightly
cyanotic.
Theyoccur
unpre-
dictably and are often triggered by
exercise
or excitement.
The
respiratory distress is short lived;
complete resolution of clinical signs generally occurs within minutes.
On presentation, the dog is slightly overweight, alert, and fully responsive.
Physical examination is unremarkable. No facial deformities are observed, both
nostrils appear patent, and visual inspection of the throat and neck palpation are
unremarkable. Hematology, serum biochemistry, and arterial blood gas test results
are all normal. Thoracic radiographs are unremarkable. A lateral radiograph of the
laryngeal area is shown (50).
i. What differential diagnoses could cause the episodic inspiratory stridor and
cyanosis in this dog?
i. What abnormality can be observed on the radiograph of the neck region?
ili. Are there additional tests that can be recommended for a definitive diagnosis?
iv. What are the available therapeutic options?
51A 5-year-old male DSH cat is
51
presented for recent onset of anorexia,
lethargy, weight gain, and trouble
breathing. The cat's mucous membranes
are pink with normal capillary refill
time. The HR is 180 bpm with a regular
rhythm; no murmur is heard. Lung
sounds are somewhat muffled. Femoral
pulses are normal.
1. What physical abnormality is shown
[51)}?
ii. What can cause this?
i. What test(s) should you do next?
59
50,51:Answers
50 i. Stridor is a loud musical sound caused by turbulent air flow in the upper
airways, usually associated with obstruction. Sometimes, stridor is audible only
when the animal breathes deeply (e.g. with exercise or excitement). It usually occurs
during inspiration. Anatomic deformities that partially obstruct the upper airway,
common in brachycephalic dogs, can cause stridor. These include stenotic nares,
extended (elongated) soft palate, laryngeal deformities (including everted saccules),
and hypoplastic trachea. Functional abnormalities (e.g. tracheal collapse, laryngeal
paralysis), as well as upper airway obstruction from a foreign body, tumor abscess,
or severe mucosal edema, can also cause stridor.
ii. The radiograph shows an elongated soft palate, which impinges on the laryngeal
opening (aditus laryngis).
ii. Soft palate entrapment at the larynx can be seen by visual inspection of the
pharyngeal and laryngeal area during deep sedation or general anesthesia. The
examination should also include retrograde rhinoscopy to exclude potential
disorders in the nasopharyngeal area (e.g. choanal mass or foreign body) and careful
inspection of the pharynx and tonsillary crypts.
iv. Surgical resection of the elongated soft palate is the treatment of choice. Some
cases may require prior clinical stabilization (i.e. sedation, cage rest, O,
51 i. Marked jugular vein distension.
i. Jugular veins become distended when pressure within rises. Persistent jugular
distension, with the head in a normal erect position, is usually associated with right-
sided congestive heart failure, cardiac tamponade or rarely, constrictive pericardial
disease. When there is no obstructive lesion between jugular vein(s) and RA, the
appearance of the jugular veins provides an indication of right heart filling pressure.
Occasionally, jugular vein distension without pulsation occurs because of disease
that obstructs blood flow through the cranial vena cava, proximal jugular veins, or
RV inflow region. This can occur from thrombosis or other intravascular mass
lesion, or from external compression of the vena cava.
Although not well seen in the photograph, this cat also had subcutaneous edema
of the ventral jaw, thoracic inlet, and forelimbs. These findings comprise the ^cranial
caval syndrome', which is usually caused by venous obstruction within the cranial
thorax (e.g. cranial mediastinal mass or cranial vena caval thrombosis).
li. Thoracic radiographs are indicated to evaluate the cranial mediastinum as well
 o    ss rn r 5s
presence of a mediastinal mass or venous thrombosis. Needle aspirate of a mass
lesion or any pleural effusion may provide an etiology. (See also case 52.)
60
52, 53: Questions
52a
52b
52
Lateral (52a) and DV (52b) thoracic
radiographs are obtained on a S-year-old DSH
cat with anorexia, lethargy, respiratory
difficulty, marked jugular vein distension, and
cranial subcutaneous edema (see case 51).
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
ii. List the main differential diagnoses.
i. How would you proceed with this case?
53 A 6-year-old male intact
53a
English Bull Terrier is presented
after a 3-day history of lethargy
and episodic collapse during
daily walks. During
these
episodes the dog trembled but
53b
never lost consciousness or
sphincter control.
Previous
history is unremarkable. The
dog is slightly lethargic, but fully responsive and in good body condition. Physical
examination suggests mild dehydration, with tacky mucous membranes but normal
capillary refill time. Femoral pulses are strong and regular at a rate of 50/minute.
Thoracic auscultation is unremarkable. ECG recordings at 25 mm/s (53a) and
50 mm/s (53b) are shown.
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
ii. What are the possible underlying causes?
ii. What other tests would be indicated for this patient?
61
52,53:Answers
52 i. The cardiac silhouette is obscured by a moderate amount of pleural effusion.
The cranial thorax is filled with soft tissue/fluid opacity. The partially atelectic
cranial lung lobes are displaced caudally and the trachea is pushed dorsally,
indicating a cranial mediastinal mass lesion is present rather than pleural fluid
alone. The caudal lung lobes and vessels appear normal. A large amount of gas in
 the stomach (aerophagia) is consistent with respiratory distress.
ii. The most common causes of a cranial mediastinal mass lesion are lymphoma
and thymoma, although a granulomatous or other lesion is also possible. Large
cranial mediastinal masses compress the cranial vena cava, which raises venous
pressure in the cranial body and promotes the cranial subcutaneous edema as well
as jugular vein distension seen in this case. Pleural effusion is often concurrent.
ii. Definitive diagnosis is needed to guide specific therapy. Needle aspirate of the
mass and pleural fluid may yield a cytologic diagnosis. If not, a biopsy is indicated
(ultrasound-guided or surgical). Lymphoma was diagnosed in this cat.
53 i. The figures show a slow HR (60 bpm), flat baseline, no obvious P waves,
and slightly widened QRS complexes. These features suggest lack of atrial electrical
activity (atrial standstill). It is unclear if the QRSs are escape complexes. Atrial
fibrillation (AF) is another cause of absent P waves, but AF causes baseline
undulation (*f’ waves) and irregular AV conduction, which produces a chaotic
ventricular rhythm.
i. Moderate to severe hyperkalemia can cause atrial standstill by inhibiting atrial
muscle depolarization. However, sinus node activity generally persists and is
 an in  pn a a an n smd pn i pn
(sinoventricular rhythm).
Persistent atrial standstill (silent atria) results from atrial myocardial disease. It
is characterized by atrial mural fibrosis and thinning, conduction failure, and atrial
enlargement; an escape rhythm is required to stimulate the heartbeat. This disease
is most common in English Springer Spaniels. In other cases, atrial standstill can be
li. Serum electrolytes should be measured immediately and hyperkalemia, if
present, treated at once. Hypoadrenocorticism and urinary obstruction are common
causes of hyperkalemia; appropriate diagnostic tests are done as indicated. If serum
n    a    on
myocardial damage. (See also case 54.)
62
54, 55: Questions
54
54 After initial examination, the following serum biochemical results are obtained
 on the dog with collapsing episodes described in 53:
Parameter
Result
Reference range
Urea
13.1 mmol/l (36.7 mg/dl)
2.5-9.6 mmol/l (7-26.9 mg/dl)
Creatinine
189 μmol/ (2.1 mg/dl)
44-159 μmol/l (0.5-1.8 mg/dl)
Total protein
76.0 g/l (7.6 g/dl)
52.0-82.0 g/l (5.2-8.2 g/dl)
Albumin
38.0 g/l (3.8 g/dl)
23.0-40.0 g/l (2.3-4.0 g/dl)
Globulin
38.0 g/l (3.8 g/dl)
25.0-45.0 g/l (2.5-4.5 g/dl)
Albumin/globulin
1.0
0.50-1.50
ratio
Alanine transferase
32.0 U/l
10-100 U/l
Alkaline
phosphatase
81.0 U/l
23-212 U/l
Glucose
7.0 mmol/l (126 mg/dl)
4.1-7.9 mmol/l (74-142 mg/dl)
Sodium (Na)
135 mmol/l (135 mEq/l)
144-160 mmol/l
(144-160 mEq/l)
Potassium (K)
8.4 mmol/l (8.4 mEq/l)
3.5-5.8 mmol/l (3.5-5.8 mEq/l)
Na/K ratio
16.0
>27
Calcium
3.0 mmol/l (12 mg/dl)
1.90-3.0 mmol/l (7.6-12 mg/dl)
Phosphorus
1.7 mmol/ (5.3 mg/dl)
0.81-2.20 mmol/l
(2.5-6.8 mg/dl)
Cholesterol
8.4 mmol/l (324 mg/dl)
2.8-8.3 mmol/l (108-320 mg/dl)
Basal cortisol
<28 nmol/l (<1 μg/dl)
28-250 nmol/l (1-9 μg/dl)
Post adreno-
corticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
cortisol
<28 nmol/l (<1 μg/dl)
50-660 nmol/l (1.8-23.9 pg/dl)
An ECG (54, 25 mm/s) is recorded after initial therapy.
i. What caused the presenting clinical signs and ECG abnormalities in this dog?
ii. What initial treatment is indicated?
ii. What is your interpretation of the ECG shown here?
55 How is heartworm disease (HWD) severity graded?
63
54, 55: Answers
54 i. Hyperkalemia caused the relatively slow HR and lack of P waves on initial
ratio suggest hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease). This was confirmed by low
pre- and post-ACTH cortisol concentrations. Reduced circulating yolume
associated with this disease can cause dehydration, prerenal azotemia, and
weakness.
il. Initial therapy is aimed at correcting hypovolemia, electrolyte imbalances, and
adequate. However, for severe or non-responsive hyperkalaemia, concurrent
administration of regular insulin (0.5-1.0 U/kg) plus dextrose (2 g/U insulin used)
in the IV fluid is indicated. Alternatively, a slow IV bolus of Na bicarbonate
(1-2 mEq/kg) or 10% calcium gluconate (2-10 ml) can be given. Serum potassium
should be monitored closely. Once a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism is confirmed,
mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid therapy is initated.
ii. Sinus arrhythmia at a rate of 100 bpm is present. P waves are clearly seen now
and the QRS complex duration is shorter. This ECG was recorded 24 hours after
initiation of fluid therapy; serum K concentration was 6.1 mmol/l (6.1 mEq/l).
55 Class 1: Asymptomatic/mild HWD. Clinical signs: none or only occasional
cough, fatigue with exercise, or mildly reduced condition. No radiographic or
laboratory abnormalities.
Class 2: Moderate HWD. Clinical signs: as for class 1. Radiographic signs may
  s  e    
alveolar/interstitial infiltrates. Laboratory abnormalities may include mild anemia
(PCV 0.2-0.3 I/l [20-30%]), +/- mild (2+) proteinuria.
Class 3: Severe HWD. Clinical signs may include constant fatigue, persisent cough,
dyspnea, cachexia, or other signs of right-sided heart failure (ascites, jugular
distension and pulse). Radiographic signs include RV +/- RA enlargement, severe PA
enlargement, circumscribed to diffuse mixed patterns of pulmonary infiltrates,
+/- signs of pulmonary thromboembolism. Laboratory abnormalities include
anemia (PCV <0.2 I/l [≤20%]), other hematologic abnormalities, or proteinuria
(>2+). Class 3 dogs should be stabilized before adulticide treatment (use alternate
melarsomine protocol).
Class 4: Caval syndrome. Shock-like condition following RV inflow obstruction by
a mass of worms. Signs as for class 3 with acute collapse or weakness, often with
pallor, dyspnea, hemoptysis, hemoglobinuria, and bilirubinuria. Intravascular
hemolysis, azotemia, abnormal liver function with increased enzyme activity, and
dissemination intravascular coagulation are common.
64
56, 57: Questions
56a
56b
56
A 6-year-old neutered male West
Highland White Terrier was rescued from a
fire 5 days ago. At that time the dog showed
some difficulty breathing, but lung sounds and thoracic radiographs were normal.
He had been treated with supplemental O, for 4 days and seemed to be improving
clinically. However, thoracic auscultation now reveals increased breath sounds and
occasional crackles. Left lateral and DV radiographs are obtained (56a, b).
i. What radiographic changes are present, and what is the radiographic diagnosis?
57A4-year-old
castrated
male
57
Yorkshire Terrier is presented  for
episodes of respiratory distress. After
physical examination and other clinical
tests, a surgical treatment is recomm-
ended. This intraoperative photograph
(57) demonstrates the lesion responsible
for the respiratory distress. Cranial is to
the left in this photograph.
i.
What is the cause of the dog's
historical respiratory distress?
i. What preoperative diagnostic tests would be useful to document this diagnosis?
ii. Assuming that the lesion is present only in the location demonstrated in the
photograph, during what phase of respiration would the respiratory distress be
most prominent?
treatments should be done to stabilize the animal, and with what priority?
6.5
56,57:Answers
56 i. The right middle lung lobe demonstrates
56c
well-defined cranial and caudal lobar borders,
effacement with the mid-right cardiac border and
air bronchogram formation (56c, arrows). A small
yolume of air is in the mid-thoracic esophagus.
The radiographic diagnoses are right middle lobe
alveolar pattern and mild aerophagia. Differentials
to be considered include secondary bacterial
pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, and partial
atelectasis secondary to bronchial obstruction.
i. Thermal injury, gases, and irritant particulate
products generated by the fire damage the airways
of
inflammatory mediators, and, potentially, airway occlusion occur in variable
combinations related to the duration of exposure and the type of combustible
d pn   mn  a s doe a s
Thoracic radiographs are often normal at presentation. During the first 24-36
hours, pulmonary interstitial to alveolar radiographic patterns can develop. These
relate to the increased mucosal secretions, mucosal sloughing, and secondary
bacterial infection that are later sequelae.
57 i. Tracheal collapse. Weakened cartilaginous rings and/or redundancy of the
dorsal tracheal membrane usually underlie the narrowing of the tracheal lumen
that occurs. Cervical, intrathoracic, or both regions of the trachea can be involved.
i. The standard tests for diagnosing this condition are (1) cervicothoracic
radiographs taken during both inhalation and exhalation, (2) cervicothoracic
fluoroscopy, and (3) tracheoscopy.
ii. The image shows the cervical trachea from a ventral midline approach. Tracheal
collapse limited to the cervical trachea causes inspiratory dyspnea.
iv. If respiratory distress is severe on presentation, the dog should be sedated, placed
in a quiet O,-rich environment, and monitored closely. If sedation fails to reverse
the respiratory distress, deeper sedation or anesthesia should be employed for
endotracheal intubation. Oxygen is delivered through the endotracheal tube and
ventilation is provided as necessary. Once all vital parameters are stable under deep
sedation or anesthesia, the dog is allowed to recover slowly. If the dog cannot be
extubated without respiratory distress recurring, emergency surgical correction or
intraluminal stent placement may be necessary. A temporary tracheostomy tube
may be placed if definitive correction is not available; however, this technique may
complicate definitive correction.
66
58, 59: Questions
58 A 4-year-old Yorkshire Terrier
58
with episodic respiratory distress is
diagnosed with tracheal collapse (see
case 57). This intraoperative photo-
graph demonstrates the lesion and
the surgical treatment employed.
Cranial is to the left in this photo-
graph.
i. What diagnostic modality is used to
grade this condition, and what are
the four grades?
i. Of what biomaterial is the implant being employed in the photograph made?
ii. What muscle bellies are being retracted by the Weitlaner retracter?
iv. What iatrogenic complication can occur with this technique, and what can be
done to treat the complication?
59 An 8-year-old neutered female Ragdoll cat weighing
3.5 kg (7.7 Ib) is presented for labored breathing of
mainly indoors and is fed a commercial maintenance diet.
The cat appears distressed, with open-mouth breathing,
an extended neck, abducted elbows, and increased
abdominal effort. Thoracic percussion revealed a bilateral
horizontal line of dullness. The HR is elevated (250 bpm).
Systolic BP is 70 mmHg (normal 120-170 mmHg). Initial
thoracic imaging indicates pleural effusion is present.
Thoracocentesis yields 200 ml of fluid (59). The cat's
respiratory rate and pattern improve dramatically after
thoracocentesis.  Fluid
analysis:
tryglycerides,
16.96 mmol/l (1501 mg/dl); cholesterol, 3.6 mmol/l
(139 mg/dl); total protein, 39.8 g/l (3.98 g/dl); albumin,
21.8 g/l (2.18 g/dl); globulin, 18.0 g/l (1.8 g/dl); alb/glob
ratio, 1.21; macroscopic examination, white, opaque fluid; cytologic evaluation,
moderate cellularity (5.0 x 109/l) with good cell preservation, neutrophils (14%),
lymphocytes (56%), macrophages (30%); occasional mesothelial cells and plasma
cells seen; no evidence of neoplasia; no bacteria identified; results of both aerobic
and anaerobic culture, negative.
i. What type of fluid was aspirated from the chest of this patient?
i. List some abnormalities that can cause this.
ili. What additional diagnostic tests are indicated?
67
58,59:Answers
58 i. Tracheoscopy is used to grade the degree of collapse as 25% collapse
(grade 1), 50% collapse (grade 2), 75% collapse (grade 3), or near total collapse
(grade 4).
i. The prosthetic tracheal ring in the photograph was made from a polypropylene
syringe barrel; however, commercially manufactured polypropylene tracheal ring
prostheses are available in a variety of sizes. Prosthetic tracheal rings have also been
fashioned from polyvinyl chloride drip chambers of intravenous administration sets.
iii. Prosthetic racheal rings are applied to the cervical trachea via a ventral midline
surgical approach from the larynx to the manubrium. The sternohyoideus muscles
are separated on the midline, and these are the muscle bellies that are being retracted
d n  s n- a 
iv. The major iatrogenic complication of this surgical technique is damage to the
recurrent laryngeal nerves located in the peritracheal fascia. The resultant laryngeal
paralysis may be treated by cricoarytenoid laryngoplasty. Intraluminal tracheal
stenting avoids iatrogenic recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, but the cervical portion
of the trachea may be better served by extraluminal ring prostheses, while
intraluminal stenting is better for intrathoracic tracheal collapse.
59 i. The appearance of the pleural fluid, as well as its cytologic and biochemical
features, indicate a chylous effusion. Most effusions in cats and dogs are bilateral,
as in this case, because the right and left pleural cavities communicate through
mediastinal fenestrations.
ii. Increased pressure within (or permeability of) the thoracic duct system allows
chyle to leak into the pleural space. Mediastinal neoplasia (especially lymphoma in
cats) can cause lymphatic obstruction and inflammation and lead to chylous
effusion. Any process that increases systemic venous pressure (e.g. right-sided heart
failure from cardiomyopathy, dirofilariasis, or pericardial disease, as well as cranial
vena caval thrombosis) can result in chylothorax. Trauma is another potential cause
of chylothorax, especially in outdoor cats. Congenital lymphatic malformation can
also predispose to chylous effusion. When no underlying cause can be identified,
idiopathic chylothorax is diagnosed.
ii. Diagnostic tests should include thoracic radiographs (after thoracocentesis) to
evaluate cardiac size and shape, the lungs, cranial mediastinum, and other visible
structures. Echocardiography is useful to screen for underlying cardiac disease, and
may show evidence for cardiomyopathy, mediastinal or intrathoracic mass lesion,
or other abnormality. Routine hematologic, biochemical, and heartworm tests are
also recommended. Lymphangiography can demonstrate lymphangiectasia and
areas of obstruction.
68
60, 61: Questions
60a
60b
60 The cat in 59 developed chylothorax. It lived mainly indoors and there was no
history of trauma. A lateral chest radiograph taken after thoracocentesis is shown
(60a). An echocardiogram was also done; a right parasternal short axis view at the
level of the heart base is shown (60b). All other echo views were unremarkable;
concurrent ECG monitoring showed sinus rhythm at approximately 250 bpm.
Hematology and serum biochemistry test results were unremarkable. Tests for feline
immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia virus, and heartworm disease were
negative. 1 - aorta, 2 - left atrium.
i. What is the most likely cause of chylothorax in this case?
i. What are the treatment options and prognosis?
61 A 4-month-old female purebred cat
6
exhibits lethargy, fever weight loss,
respiratory difficulty, and constipation.
The kitten is thin, febrile (39.4°C
[103°F]], and tachypneic. Thoracic
radiographs reveal pleural effusion.
Thoracocentesis yields a turbid, yellow
fluid with a cell count of 8760/μl, protein
content of 45 g/l (4.5 g/dl), and pH of
6.0. A photomicrograph of a direct
smear of the fluid is shown (61, Wright's
stain, 500x oil).
i. How would you classify this fluid based on fluid characteristics as well as
cytologic findings?
i. Based on fluid evaluation, as well as the signalment and clinical findings, what
is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. What antemortem diagnostic tests are available to confirm this, and what are
their limitations?
69
60, 61: Answers
60 i. Mild residual pleural effusion, without venous congestion or pulmonary
edema, is present (60a). Normal atrial size (60b) and other normal echo findings
suggest a non-cardiac origin for the effusion. Lack of evidence for a mediastinal
mass, thrombus, or other cause of increased cranial vena caval pressure
or
lymphatic disruption, with no known trauma, suggests an idiopathic chylothorax,
although neoplasia cannot be fully excluded.
i. Medical management is attempted before considering surgery. Chylothorax of
identifiable and treatable cause may resolve. However, no treatment for idiopathic
chylothorax is consistently effective, although spontaneous resolution after several
weeks or months is reported rarely.
Thoracocentesis is repeated as necessary; a chest tube is placed in patients with
rapid fluid accumulation or traumatic chylothorax. Electrolytes are monitored with
frequent thoracocentesis. Medical therapy can include a low-fat diet (to reduce
lymph flow) and administration of rutin (a natural bioflavonoid that inhibits
inflammation and fibrosis and promotes macrophage activation). Octreotide, a
synthetic analogue of somatostatin, may reduce gastrointestinal secretions and
decrease thoracic duct lymphatic flow.
Surgical intervention (i.e. thoracic duct ligation, pericardectomy, and
omentalization of the thoracic cavity) is recommended in patients that do not
respond to medical management.
61 i. This fluid is classified as an exudate, based on both the high nucleated cell
 / 0'g<] 1 0t<) uia1d qe1 1 a p (/o00s<) nuno
examination also reveals a highly proteinaceous effusion (basophilic, stippled
background with protein crescents) with increased cellularity. Cells are composed
of a mixture of neutrophils and macrophages with a few small lymphocytes. The
cytologic diagnosis was therefore proteinaceous effusion  with moderate
neutrophilic, macrophagic inflammation.
i. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is the most likely cause, although this is a
difficult disease to diagnose definitively antemortem.
i. FIP is a feline corona virus (FCoV). Many other coronaviruses (including non-
pathogenic FCoV) are antigenically similar to the pathogenic FCoV. As a result,
antibody titers and even PCR tests are not specific for FIP. Results of these
diagnostic tests are therefore considered together with clinical and historical
findings in order to reach a presumptive diagnosis.
The best antemortem test for FIP is biopsy, where the diagnosis can be confirmed
by histopathology. The characteristic lesion in FIP (both effusive and dry form) is pyo-
granulomatous vasculitis. In this case the diagnosis of FIP was confirmed at necropsy.
70
62: Question
62a
62b
  os s o g a -ot i 
progresses to dyspnea over the course of 4 days. She is febrile. A hemogram reveals
a degenerative left shift with toxic neutrophils. Right lateral (62a) and DV (62b)
radiographs are taken.
i. Describe the radiographic abnormalities.
ii. What are your radiographic diagnoses?
ii. What, if any, is the correlation between the two major findings?
71
62:Answer
62c
62 i. A ventral bilateral soft tissue pulmonary opacity is present. Well-defined air
bronchograms of the left cranial lobe are summated (superimposed) with the
cardiac shadow in the lateral view. A strong lobar border sign is evident between
the right cranial and middle lobes in the DV view at the 6th intercostal space. The
soft tissue opacity is heterogeneous between the heart and diaphragm. The dorsal
portions of the caudal lobes are hyperinflated. The trachea is narower than normal,
with a tracheal diameter:thoracic inlet ratio of 0.06. The landmarks for the tracheal
diameter:thoracic inlet ratio are shown (62c). Bulldogs with a ratio less than 0.13
are likely to have a hypoplastic trachea.
i. Hypoplastic trachea and bronchopneumonia.
ii. Tracheal hypoplasia is a congenital anomaly reported most commonly in
Bulldogs. Although bronchopneumonia was the most common coexisting acquired
disease found in a study of 103 dogs with radiographically defined hypoplasia, it
was present in only seven of the dogs. It was thought that tracheal hypoplasia did
not predispose the dogs to bronchopneumonia. The authors concluded that tracheal
hypoplasia can be well tolerated when not coexisting with other respiratory or
cardiovascular disease.
72
63, 64: Questions
63a
Diastole
63b
Systole
63c
63d
1.1
CW:2.5MHz
63 A 6-year-old male neutered Wire Haired Fox
Terrier is presented for evaluation of a cardiac
murmur present since puppyhood, but possibly louder now. The dog has shown no
clinical signs and is bright and alert. Physical examination is normal except for a
grade 4/6 systolic murmur heard best at the left cardiac base. Echocardiography is
performed; images shown are M-mode at the ventricular level (63a), right
parasternal short axis close-up in diastole (63b) and systole (63c), and continuous
wave Doppler in the same position (63d). 1 - RV wall, 2 - IVS, 3 - LV wall, 4 - RV
outflow tract, 5 - PA.
i. What is evident from 63a?
i. Describe the findings in 63b-d.
ili. What are your recommendations to the owner?
64 What is angiostrongylosis, and how is it transmitted?
73
63, 64: Answers
63 i. Severe RV wall hyperrophy (1.2 cm, diastole, compared to LV wall of 0.8 cm)
is most striking. IVs thickening is present, but exaggerated by adjacent tricuspid
overload (e.g. severe pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension).
i. The abnormally thickened pulmonic valve (63b) exhibits systolic “doming' with
incomplete opening (63c) because of fused, malformed leaflets. Diagnosis is
congenital valvular pulmonic stenosis (PS). Maximal pulmonary systolic velocity is
5 m/s (63d); estimated RV to PA systolic pressure gradient (PG) is 100 mmHg
(modified Bernoulli relationship, PG= 4 x v2).
ii. PS with Doppler-derived gradient over 80-100 mmHg is considered severe. PS
sequelae can include RV and atrial enlargement, tricuspid regurgitation, myocardial
ischemia, arrhythmias, and right-sided congestive failure or sudden death, especially
with severe stenosis. However signs may not develop for several years. Balloon
valvuloplasty is recommended for moderate to severe PS and may improve clinical
signs and survival. This palliative procedure is most successful with simple pulmonic
with some dysplastic valves. Exercise is also restricted for moderate to severe PS.
Beta blocker therapy may help reduce myocardial ischemia and arrhythmias.
64 Nematodes of the genus Angiostrongylus can parasitize several species. A.
vasorum most often affects dogs as well as foxes, wild canidae, and other species.
This parasite is found in western Europe and the UK, eastern Canada
(Newfoundland), and portions of South America and Africa; its distribution
appears to be spreading. A. vasorum requires an intermediate host (slug or snail)
in which L, larvae mature to an infective L, stage. The final host becomes infected
by ingesting the intermediate or a paratenic (frog) host. L penetrate the host's
intestine, migrate to mesenteric lymph nodes where they mature to the L, stage,
then travel via lymphatic flow to the right heart and PAs. Adult worms are
~20-30 mm long. The prepatent period is about 1-3 months. The adult females'
eggs hatch in the pulmonary capillaries; L, larvae pass through alveolar and
bronchial walls, are coughed up, swallowed, and excreted in the feces. Infected
dogs may pass larvae for several years. Respiratory signs (cough, tachypnea,
dyspnea) usually predominate, but other common manifestations can relate to a
coagulopathy
ofvariable
severity,
pulmonary
hypertension, neurologic
abnormalities, as well as non-specific gastrointestinal signs, lethargy, or weight loss.
74
65: Question
65a
65b
65 A 2-year-old male mixed breed dog weighing 41 kg (90 Ib) was presented for
depression and hemoptysis of 1-day duration. Cephalic intravenous sedation was
following day, the limb used for injection is found to be swollen and bruised. Right
lateral (65a) and DV (65b) thoracic radiographs are taken.
i. What are the radiographic findings, and what is your diagnosis?
ii. What additional diagnostic tests will you use to confirm your diagnosis?
75
65:Answer
65c
65 i. The right cranial and middle lung lobes and the cranial segment of the left
cranial lobe are of increased soft tissue opacity. There is a distinct lobar border sign
between the right cranial and middle lobes, an air bronchogram (65c, arrow)
involving the right cranial lobar bronchus, and effacement of the right cranial
border of the heart. The ventral border of the cranial mediastinum shows a ventrally
directed convex contour, but there is no shift of the trachea in either view. The
radiographic diagnosis is cranial and middle lung alveolar-interstitial pattern with
etiologic differentials of pulmonary hemorrhage, bronchopneumonia, and
aspiration pneumonia.
i. With a history of acute hemoptysis and postvenipuncture ecchymosis there is
concern for an acquired coagulopathy, such as from anticoagulant rodenticide
toxicity. Tests for hemostasis are indicated. Prothrombin time was found to be
>120 seconds (normal 5-12 seconds) in this dog; partial thromboplastin time was
45 seconds (normal 9-19 seconds). Further questioning of the owner revealed
exposure to brodificoum.
76
66, 67: Questions
66a
66b
66  A 14-year-old spayed female Labrador
Retriever is presented about 9 hours after
water submersion and subsequent resuscita-
tion. Major clinical signs are generalized
depression and tachypnea. Wheezes and crackles are heard on thoracic auscultation.
Initial pulse 0ximetry reading is 85%. Lateral (66a) and DV (66b) thoracic
radiographs are taken approximately 36 hours after hospital admission; earlier
radiography was deemed unsafe based on patient instability.
i. What are the radiographic findings, and are these typical in drowning cases?
ii. What are the principal pathophysiologic differences between freshwater and
saltwater drowning?
ii. What is the principal therapeutic goal for drowning patients, and how is this
achieved?
iv. What is the role of antibiotic therapy in treating drowned patients?
v. What is the prognosis for dogs that submerge in freshwater?
67 A 7-year-old male Persian cat
67
with labored breathing and poor
appetite has a respiratory rate of
50 breaths/min, HR of 180 bpm with
an irregular rhythm, and a grade
2/6 systolic murmur at the cranial left
sternal border. You record an ECG
(67, leads as marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm
= 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG diagnosis?
i. Do these findings suggest any particular cardiac abnormalities?
ili. What would you do next for this case?
77
66,67: Answers
66 i. There is a widespread alveolar pattern with prominent air bronchograms.
This is typical in the early pathophysiologic stages post drowning, although
radiographic signs may lag behind clinical signs. A mixed interstitial-bronchial
i. Low-tonicity freshwater is rapidly absorbed from the airways, leading to
quickly, leading to pulmonary edema and hypovolemia with normal electrolyte
concentrations. High-tonicity saltwater draws fluid from the intravascular space
to increase pulmonary fluid accumulation. Freshwater interferes with surface
tension properties of pulmonary surfactant by altering its ionic composition.
Saltwater washes out some surfactant without changing the properties of
remaining surfactant.
ii. Hypoxemia must be reversed with O, therapy and, if necessary, positive end-
expiratory pressure or continuous positive airway pressure.
iv. Antibiotics do not affect survival in drowned animals and can lead to resistant
organisms if bacterial pneumonia develops; therefore, antibiotic use should be
restricted to documented infections.
failure does not ensue. Prolonged submersion and delayed resuscitation contribute
to poorer prognosis
67 i. The HR is 160 bpm. The rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AF); note the lack of P
waves and rhythm iregularity. There is a left axis deviation (approximately -60°).
The QRS complexes are slightly wide at 0.04-0.05 second.
i. Almost all cats that develop AF have serious underlying cardiac disease with
marked atrial enlargement. A certain ^critical mass' of atrial tissue is needed to sustain
AF, which generally requires atrial dilation in animals of small body size. The left axis
deviation of the QRS complexes (left anterior fasicular block pattern) suggests LV
hypertrophic or perhaps restrictive cardiomyopathy; other considerations include
longstanding congenital disease (e.g. subaortic stenosis or mitral dysplasia).
ii. Chest radiographs and echocardiography are recommended, along with BP
measurement and a routine laboratory database. This cat had hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with pulmonary edema. For cats with hypertrophic cardiomyo-
pathy and AF, diltiazem or a beta blocker is used without digoxin. Furosemide,
benazepril, and low-dose aspirin were also prescribed.
78
68, 69: Questions
68 A 4-year-old male Labrador Retriever from the central USA is presented for
persistent fever, despite antibiotic treatment, and chronic cough. The cough seems
to respond to prednisone, but returns once the prednisone is discontinued. The dog
is bright, alert, and responsive. Body temperature is 40°C (104.1°F). HR is 152 bpm
and respiratory rate is 60 breaths/min. Lung sounds are described as harsh.
Mandibular, right prescapular, and popliteal lymph nodes are somewhat enlarged.
Thoracic radiographs show a diffuse interstitial nodular pattern and a 4 x 4 cm
indistinct pulmonary mass in the left caudodorsal lung lobe. The cardiac silhouette,
pulmonary vasculature, and remaining structures are within normal limits. An
arterial sample is obtained for blood gas analysis (see below).
Test
Result
Normal
Urits
pH
7.483
7.31-7.42
PCO,
20.0
29-42
mmHg
PO2
56.8
85-95
mmHg
HCO,
14.7
17-24
mmol/
Base excess
-6.1
mmol/l
Total CO2
15.3
mmol/l
% Saturation
92.3
%
i. What is your interpretation of the blood gas results?
i. What is the alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient?
ii. What does this mean?
69 A 10-year-old spayed female Boston
69
LAp
Terrier is presented for signs of right-sided
heart failure; pericardial effusion with
Diastole
PERI EFF
cardiac tamponade is suspected.
An
echocardiogram is done (69, 1 - RV, 2 - LV,
3 - LA). A cardiac mass lesion is not
identified. Pericardiocentesis
1S
done;
definitive diagnosis of malignancy is not
possible based on cytologic characteristics.
Thoracotomy for subtotal pericardectomy
is planned.
i. Is cardiac tamponade present?
i. What are the likely causes of the
pericardial effusion?
ili. What intercostal space is preferred for open thorax pericardectomy, and why?
iv. What would be the advantages of thoracoscopy for treating this case?
v. What would be the disadvantages of thoracoscopy for treating this case?
79
68, 69: Answers
s p sise Aosn rd m ixo p '! 
metabolic acidosis.
i. The A-a gradient is the difference between the partial pressures of O, in the
alveolus (PAO,) and arterial blood (PaO,). PAO, is estimated as fraction of inspired
(O, uptake per CO, produced), which is assumed to be 0.8. For animals breathing
room air at sea level: PAO, = 150 mmHg - PaCO,/0.8. In this dog, estimated PAO,
is 125 and A-a gradient is 68.2 mmHg.
i. The A-a gradient helps separate the effect of hypoventilation on measured PaO,
In normal lungs, PAO, should essentially equal O, tension in the pulmonary
capillaries and, therefore, in arterial blood (PaO,). An A-a gradient ≤10 mmHg is
considered normal. Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) abnormalities, shunt, and impaired
gas diffusion increase the A-a gradient; hypoventilation does not increase the
gradient because PAO, is also decreased. A-a gradients >15 mmHg usually indicate
some degree of V/Q mismatch. The marked A-a gradient and hypoxemia in this dog
indicate severe pulmonary dysfunction.
iv. Systemic fungal disease, lymphoma, or other metastatic neoplasia would be most
likely. Blastomycosis was diagnosed in this dog.
69 i. Yes. Cardiac tamponade occurs when intrapericardial fluid pressure exceeds
normal right heart filling pressure. This is indicated by collapse of the RA wall
(arrow) in this diastolic image.
i. Pericardial effusion in dogs is usually caused either by neoplasia or idiopathic
pericarditis. Hemangiosarcoma, usually involving the right auricular appendage or
other right heart structure, is the most common cardiac tumor. Aortic body tumor
is second most common and more likely in brachycephalic dogs. Mesothelioma
occurs occasionally. Pericardial effusion also occurs secondary to right-sided heart
failure, LA tear coagulopathy, uremia, and infection from a migrating foreign body,
among other causes.
s r d si ds o   an   '
pericardectomy. This approach allows better visualization for identification and
possible excision or biopsy of a RA mass, compared with a left-sided approach.
d      s   
cardectomy. Major advantages, in the hands of an experienced operator, include
excellent visualization with less postoperative morbidity than with thoracotomy.
v. The major disadvantages to a thoracoscopic procedure include increased patient
risk with biopsy or excision of a RA mass, if encountered. Also, a smaller area of
pericardium is excised compared to a subtotal pericardectomy performed via
thoracotomy.
80
70, 71: Questions
70 A 10-year-old spayed female Boston
70
Terrier develops signs of right-sided
heart failure. Cardiac tamponade is
identified by echocardiography and
pericardiocentesis  is  performed.
.No
cardiac mass lesion  is visible
by
echocardiography. Further imaging by
CT also fails to identify a cardiac mass,
but demonstrates a 1.5 cm pulmonary
mass located peripherally in the left
cranial lung lobe, as well as sternal
lymphadenomegaly. A thoracotomy is
planned to biopsy the lung mass (70)
 and lymph nodes and to perform subtotal pericardectomy.
i. What are your differential diagnoses for the mass shown?
i. What finding would suggest a poor prognosis associated with this mass?
ili. Which intercostal space would be preferred for thoracotomy to access this mass?
71a
71b
71  A 10-year-old castrated male Golden Retriever is presented for weakness and
abdominal distension. Physical examination findings include ascites, muffled heart
sounds, and distended jugular veins. Thoracic radiographs show an enlarged,
slightly rounded cardiac silhouette. Pericardial effusion is documented by
 echocardiography. Pericardial fluid samples stained with Wright's stain are shown
(71a, direct smear, 50x oil; 71b, cytospin preparation,100x oil).
i. Based on the appearance of this fluid, list the most relevant cytologic differentials.
i. What additional tests would be useful?
81
70, 7l: Answers
70 i. The most likely diagnosis for this mass is primary pulmonary adeno-
carcinoma; other primary lung tumors include squamous cell carcinoma, anaplastic
as bronchogenic, bronchoalveolar, or alveolar. The histologic diagnosis in this case
was bronchogenic carcinoma.
Other considerations could include a metastatic pulmonary neoplasm or fungal
granuloma; however, multiple lung masses would be more characteristic of these
conditions than a single mass. Rarely, a pulmonary cyst or abscess could create a
similar appearance.
i. The most consistent predictor of remission and survival time for primary lung
tumors is the presence or absence of metastasis to tracheobronchial lymph nodes.
In this case, a tracheobronchial lymph node was positive for bronchogenic
carcinoma, although enlargement was more obvious in the sternal lymph nodes,
which also contained metastatic bronchogenic carcinoma.
ii. The left 5th intercostal space was chosen for the surgical approach here, because
this space allows convenient access to the base of the left lung lobes in case a
complete pulmonary lobectomy is required
71 i. Note the cohesive cluster of basophilic, pleomorphic, round to polygonal cells
in 71a, and the large mesothelial cell with macronucleolus in 71b. Segmented and
pyknotic neutrophils are also present (71b). Cells in this fluid display numerous
criteria of malignancy (marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, multinucleation,
increased and variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, and macronucleoli). Their
appearance is most consistent with mesothelial cell origin, making mesothelioma a
primary differential. However, another relevant differential is marked mesothelial
cell hyperplasia, which occurs secondary to chronic fluid accumulation within body
cavities. Reactive mesothelial cells also exhibit many criteria of malignancy, thereby
mimicking neoplasia. Finally, although many cells in this sample appear to be
mesothelial (large round cells with abundant basophilic cytoplasm and a pericellular
corona), cytologic appearance alone cannot differentiate malignant mesothelial
from malignant epithelial neoplasia. Therefore, metastatic carcinoma/adeno-
carcinoma must also be considered.
i. A thorough physical examination and careful imaging of the thorax and
abdomen are warranted to identify any discrete masses. A CBC, chemistry panel,
and urinalysis may help determine other organ involvement. Finally, histopathology
is likely the most useful diagnostic tool to distinguish between cytologic differential
diagnoses. In this case, malignant mesothelioma was diagnosed via histopathology
at necropsy.
82
72, 73: Questions
72
An 8-year-old neutered male
72a
Springer Spaniel is referred for a cough
of 3-month duration. Initially, the cough
was dry, harsh, and
1 occasionally
accompanied by retching. Two weeks
later the cough had become productive
and the dog appeared lethargic. One
week before referral, the dog rapidly
became depressed, dyspneic, and febrile
(39.8°C [103.6°F]). Amoxicillin-clavu-
lanate was prescribed and all clinical
signs except the cough improved greatly.
At presentation the dog is bright,
alert, fully responsive, and moderately
overweight.
Rectal temperature
is
normal. A cough can be elicited easily by
tracheal palpation. On auscultation,
rhonchi are heard occasionally during
coughing. No other abnormalities are
detected.
Hematology
and
routine
serum biochemistry tests are normal.
72b
 Fecal examination is negative for gastro-
intestinal parasites and lungworms.
Thoracic radiographs are （
 obtained
 under general anesthesia with the lungs
manually inflated (DV view shown,
72a).
Bronchoscopy (72b) and BAL are
preserved cells, including numerous well-differentiated ciliated columnar epithelial
cells, a large population of pyknotic neutrophils, numerous foamy activated alveolar
macrophages, and scattered goblet cells and small lymphocytes. Free cilia, mucus,
and mucin granules are noted in the background. No infectious agents are seen.
There is no significant aerobic or anaerobic bacterial growth.
i. What is the clinical interpretation of the radiographic abnormalities?
i. Which abnormalities are evident on the bronchoscopy image and BAL cytology?
ili. What is your diagnosis?
iv. How would you manage this case?
73
3What is the modified American Heart Association/American College of
Cardiologists (AHA/ACC) heart failure staging system?
83
72, 73: Answers
72 i. A diffuse bronchial pattern with some bronchiectasis is seen. The right middle
lung lobe appears consolidated. The caudal right lobe contains a mixed
interstitial/alveolar pattern. Bronchopneumonia is suspected based on history and
physical findings. The bronchial pattern is consistent with chronic bronchial disease,
which can predispose to secondary infection.
i. Bronchial mucosal edema and hyperemia, with excessive mucus production are
seen. Several mucus plugs were found in primary and secondary bronchi, especially
on the right (72b). BAL cytology indicates a neutrophilic bronchitis; prior antibiotic
therapy likely accounts for the negative culture results.
li. Chronic bronchitis (CB). An episode of secondary infection probably occurred,
although not confirmed. Other CB complications can include occult parasitism and
mycoplasmal infection. CB is often recognized only when advanced. Its causes are
poorly understood; bronchial damage from chronic environmental irritant
exposure, as well as genetic factors, may predispose to CB.
iv. Goals are to control coughing, relieve airway obstruction, and slow disease
minimized. Saline nebulization, coupage, and mild exercise help mobilize bronchial
mucus. Inhaled steroids (e.g. fluticasone) reduce local airway inflammation and
excessive mucus production, with minimal systemic side-effects. Secondary bacterial
infection is a potential complication with CB.
73 This method of heart failure (HF) staging is based on an AHA/ACC system. The
guidelines focus on the importance of early diagnosis and progressive nature of
cardiac disease. Because edema and effusions are not always clinically evident, this
classification does not emphasize the term *congestive', although patient fluid status
is important. The four stages are:
A Patient “at risk' for developing heart disease, but cardiac structural
abnormality is not yet apparent.
B Structural cardiac abnormality (e.g. murmur) is evident, but no clinical signs
of HF have occurred.
B1: Normal heart size (no or minimal signs of hemodynamic compromise).
B2: Cardiac remodeling and enlargement are now evident.
C Structural cardiac abnormality, with past or present clinical HF signs.
D Persistent or end-stage heart failure, signs refractory to standard therapy.
84
74, 75: Questions
74a
74b
 74  A 2-year-old neutered male mixed breed
dog weighing 8.6 kg (19 Ib) was hit by a car
2 days ago. Initial post-trauma evaluation
was unremarkable, but since then the dog
has vomited several times and appears un-
comfortable. Physical examination reveals a tense, painful abdomen, but no other
abnormalities. Combination thorax and cranial abdomen radiographs are made
(74a, b).
i. What are the radiographic findings?
i. What is the radiographic diagnosis?
75 A 13-year-old female Golden Retriever was
75
seen by another veterinarian for lethargy, labored
breathing, vomiting, and anorexia. Pleural effusion
was identified. Furosemide (50 mg q12h) and
enalapril (15 mg q24h) were prescribed. Today the
dog is bright, alert, and panting. Body temperature
is 38.5°C (101.4°F) and HR is 120 bpm. Lung
sounds are normal on auscultation; heart sounds
are soft, but no murmur is heard. Blood for CBC
and serum chemistries is obtained. Thoracic
radiographs indicate moderate cardiomegaly with
minimal pleural effusion. An ECG is recorded (75,
leads as marked, 25 mm/s, 0.5 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
il. Are any underlying abnormalities suggested by
the ECG?
ili. What test(s) do you recommend next?
8.5
74, 75: Answers
74 i. There is increased soft tissue/fluid opacity to the thoracic cavity. Additionally,
circular and tubular-shaped gas-filled structures are evident, particularly in the
cranioventral and right lateral regions, extending to the 3rd intercostal space. The
ventral and right half of the diaphragm, much of the cardiac border and the caudal
vena cava are effaced. Within the cranial abdomen is a gas shadow, located
cranioventrally, with poor delineation of the ventral hepatic border.
i. The radiographic diagnosis is traumatic right-sided diaphragmatic hernia with
intrathoracic displacement of small bowel and, probably, portions of the liver. The
radiographic appearance here is diagnostic for diaphragmatic hernia. No further
  sn so ssn  id sn   si  n
contrast to define the position of the gastrointestinal tract, abdominal ultrasound,
and positive-contrast celiography are additional diagnostic imaging procedures that
can be used to establish the diagnosis of diaphragmatic hernia.
75 i. The HR is 100 bpm, with sinus rhythm. The electrical axis and complex
measurements are normal. The ST segment is slightly elevated (~0.2 mV) in the
caudal leads.
i. The ST segment begins at the end of the QRS complex (’J' point) and blends into
the T wave (without clear demarcation) in dogs and cats. ST segment deviation
from the isoelectric baseline can result from abnormal ventricular repolarization
(from myocardial ischemia or other injury) or be secondary to abnormal
depolarization (from ventricular hyperrophy, aberrant conduction, or certain drug
sadp ro (si  A 1o<) sop  A 5h'o< e rs s '(si
>0.2 mV in dogs (>0.1 mV in cats) is considered abnormal. ST segment elevation
in the caudal leads (II, aVF, III) can occur with pericarditis, LV epicardial injury,
right ventricular ischemia/endocardial injury, transmural infarction, myocardial
hypoxia, and digoxin toxicity, or secondary to ventricular hypertrophy or
conduction disturbance.
ii. Echocardiography is indicated. Cardiac biomarker assay could be helpful, if
   s      
peptide, or its precursor NT-proBNP, is a non-specific functional marker of cardiac
disease, especially chronic ventricular dysfunction.
86
76, 77: Questions
76a
76b
 76 An echocardiogram is done on the dog in case 75. Images from the right
parasternal long axis (76a) and short axis (76b) views are shown. 1 - RV, 2 - RA,
3 - LV, 4 - LA, 5 - Ao.
i. What is shown in the images?
ii. What is the most likely etiology?
i. What are your recommendations?
cat would seem to be acting normally, then suddenly stop moving, appear dazed,
fall onto its side, and shortly thereafter jump upright quickly and appear normal
again. The owner is especially concerned because the cat has fallen off furniture,
stair rails, and from the top of the refrigerator. Physical examination is
unremarkable. A 24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter) is recorded (77). Two channels
s parea ue s (ia aisa um) aed doi aui isnoes paprn ane
from the longer time period shown at the bottom.
i. What ECG rhythms are seen on this Holter ECG?
i. Could the clinical signs be attributed to ECG events in this cat?
ili. What other tests would be helpful?
iv. What are the management options?
87
76, 77: Answers
76 i. A large, soft tissue mass has invaded the lateral right AV junction. The mass
may partially obstruct right ventricular inflow, contributing to the pleural effusion.
A small pericardial effusion is present.
i. Hemangiosarcoma (HSA) is the most common heart tumor in dogs. Cardiac
HSA usually involves right heart structures, most often the right auricular
appendage. Depending on location or size, cardiac tumors can cause impaired
cardiac filling from pericardial effusion and tamponade, inflow or outflow
obstruction, arrhythmias, myocardial dysfunction, or a combination. Middle-aged
rate. Spayed females appear to have greater risk than intact females. Golden
Retrievers have a higher risk for HSA than the general dog population.
ii. The prognosis is poor. Risks of metastasis and tumor bleeding with cardiac
tamponade are high. This mass's size and location preclude surgical excision; biopsy
might be possible. Most cardiac tumors are resistant to chemotherapy, but some
show temporary response. Subtotal pericardiectomy could prevent cardiac
tamponade, and secondary thoracic metastasis does not appear to affect survival
    e     
excessively if abraded during the procedure. Supportive care is given, with
pericardiocentesis for signs of tamponade.
77 i. The first four complexes in the upper strip are normal sinus complexes.
Nineteen non-conducted P waves follow without ventricular activity. This is high-
grade second degree AV block (multiple non-conducted P waves in succession).
A ventricular escape complex finally occurs, followed by a short paroxysm of
ventricular tachycardia. Intermittent second degree AV block follows (bottom strip).
i. High-grade second degree AV block, with prolonged ventricular asystole, can
cause syncope as cardiac output falls. Ventricular escape activity can be delayed
when AV block is sporadic, as in this case.
ii. Echocardiography is indicated to screen for organic heart disease. Hypertrophic
(or other) cardiomyopathy can be associated with heart block, as can myocardial
ischemia, infarction, fibrosis, and infiltrative disease.
iv. Pacemaker implantation is generally indicated for symptomatic AV block.
However, the transvenous approach has been associated with pleural effusion
development in cats. Anticholinergic drugs are often unhelpful. Diltiazem and atenolol
can worsen AV block. Interestingly, many cats with complete AV block are
asymptomatic because of a consistent ventricular escape rate high enough to sustain
normal (indoor) activity. This cat's owner refused further tests and treatment.
Eventually the cat stopped collapsing and was reportedly doing well several years
later when an ECG showed complete AV block with steady ventricular escape rhythm.
88
78, 79: Questions
78  A 4-year-old spayed female mixed
78
breed dog developed fever, anorexia,
greenish mucoid stools, and raspy lung
sounds approximately 36 hours follow-
ing a dental procedure. The dog is
febrile, tachycardic, and tachypneic on
physical examination. Thoracic radio-
graphs reveal pleural effusion and a
possible focal opacity in the left caudo-
dorsal lung field. Thoracocentesis is
attempted, but only about 2 ml of a red,
cloudy fluid is obtained. Samples are
submitted for cytologic evaluation (78, cytospin preparation using Wright's stain,
100x oil) and culture/sensitivity.
i. Give a cytologic diagnosis based on the findings in the figure.
i. In view of the patient's history, what considerations should be given to selection
of an antimicrobial agent(s)?
79a
79b
79 A newly adopted 5-month-old female
Australian Shepherd Dog is seen for routine
health examination. She has a loud cardiac
murmur. Chest radiographs are obtained
(79a, lateral; 79b, DV).
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ili. What are your recommendations?
89
78, 79: Answers
78 i. Increased numbers of neutrophils (predominantly degenerate in appearance)
with phagocytized bacteria of mixed morphology (short rods, chaining to
filamentous rods) are present, as well as some reactive large mononuclear cells. The
cytologic diagnosis is neutrophilic inflammation with bacterial sepsis.
i. The history of a recent dental procedure raises the concern for anaerobic bacterial
infection. Therefore, a broad-spectrum antibiotic and/or one with specific anaerobic
activity should be chosen while awaiting culture/sensitivity results. Antimicrobial
therapy can then be changed if necessary. In this particular case, both Escherichia
coli and Bacteroides spp. were isolated from the pleural fluid sample, and a
diagnosis of embolic pneumonia with secondary pyothorax was made.
79 i. Cardiomegaly (VHS ~13.7 v) with left heart prominence is seen. There is a
large “ductus bump' in the cranial descending aorta (large arrow, 79c), as well as a
left auricular (LAu) bulge (small arrow) and a small main PA (arrowhead) bulge.
The slight apex shift towards the right hemithorax is incidental. Enlarged
pulmonary lobar arteries and veins indicate pulmonary overcirculation.
i. Left-to-right shunting patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) without congestive heart
failure (CHF) at present. The triad of PA, aortic, and LAu bulges (sometimes
nicknamed *PAL') on DV view is a classic finding, but infrequently seen all together.
Dogs with PDA are often asymptomatic when first diagnosed, although reduced
exercise ability, tachypnea, or cough is sometimes reported. PDA prevalence is much
greater in females than males.
ii. Auscultation should confirm the characteristic continuous murmur; hyperkinetic
arterial pulses are also typical. Nevertheless, echocardiography is recommended to
screen for concurrent defects or valve insufficiency, confirm PDA diagnosis, estimate
pressure gradient across the ductus, and evaluate myocardial function. PDA closure
is recommended, either by a transcatheter occlusion procedure or open-chest
surgery. Without ductal closure, gradual myocardial function deterioration,
arrhythmias, and CHF are expected. After ductal closure, life span is usually
normal.
79c
90
80, 81: Questions
80 A 5-month-old Australian
80
Shepherd Dog is examined for
a loud cardiac murmur. An
ECG is recorded as part of the
diagnostic evaluation (80, leads
as marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm =
1 mV).
i. What is your ECG inter-
pretation?
ii. Are any enlargement criteria
evident?
li. What conditions are most
likely to cause these findings?
8la
81b
81 A 4-month-old female mixed breed dog
weighing 11.4 kg (25 Ib) was found hanging
unobserved for 15-30 minutes. The dog was
unconscious, but was resuscitated by the owner. On presentation, the dog is alert
and responsive. Lung sounds are increased on the right side. Right lateral (81a) and
DV (8ib) radiographs are made.
i. What is the concern relative to the thoracic cavity in this patient?
i. Are there radiographic abnormalities present, and if so, what are they?
91
80, 81: Answers
80 i. HR is 140 bpm, with sinus rhythm and atrial premature complexes in a
bigeminal pattern (a premature complex follows each sinus complex). The
premature P' waves are superimposed on preceding T waves. Sinus P waves
(0.05 second) and QRS complexes (0.08 second) are widened; markedly increased
R wave amplitude (4.8 mV) is seen in lead II. Other measurements and electrical
axis are normal.
i. Yes. Wide P waves suggest LA enlargement. Increased R wave amplitude with
normal electrical axis is the classic LV dilation pattern; QRS widening can occur
with ventricular enlargement or intraventricular conduction disturbance.
insufficiency would be most likely in young dogs. Acquired (degenerative) mitral
valve insufficiency is another common cause of markedly increased R wave
amplitude and widened P waves. Atrial tachyarrhythmias, including frequent
premature beats, atrial tachycardia, and atrial fibrillation, are more likely when
atrial enlargement develops. The arrhythmia was not specifically treated in this case
as it did not persist or worsen. More frequent atrial premature beats or paroxysmal
atrial tachycardia can be treated with diltiazem, a beta blocker (e.g. atenolol), or
digoxin, or a combination of digoxin and diltiazem or beta blocker.
 81 i. Strangulation causes fixed upper airway obstruction. This can result in the
strangulation, intense negative intrathoracic pressure develops. This leads to
increases in venous return, pulmonary blood volume, and pulmonary capillary
hydrostatic pressure, along with concurrent decreases in pulmonary interstitial
hydrostatic pressure. These changes culminate in increased fluid leakage across
pulmonary capillary membranes. A hypoxia-induced hyperadrenergic state may
further contribute to the increased pulmonary vascular volume and capillary
permeability.
 In addition to the air flow obstruction, compression of the cervical arteries and
veins further compromises central nervous system viability. If the strangulation is
associated with a fall or suspension from a substantial height, hyoid fracture,
laryngeal or tracheal injury, and cranial cervical spine injury may be possible and
complicate the clinical signs.
i. A bilaterally symmetric caudal dorsal alveolar pulmonary pattern is present. The
changes are most intense in the central and dorsal peripheral zones of these lobes.
The lateral and ventral peripheral regions are relatively spared. These findings are
typical of non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
92
82, 83: Questions
 82 A 2-year-old Springer Spaniel living
82a
on a farm developed an intermittent,
moist cough about 1 month ago.
Anorexia, lethargy, and a 10 kg (22 Ib)
weight loss have since occurred. Treat-
ment with cephalexin and enrofloxacin
were helpful, but not curative; those
antibiotics were discontinued yesterday.
The dog appears moderately depressed.
Body temperature, HR, and respirations
are within normal limits, but mucous
membranes are pale and capillary refill
time is slightly prolonged (~3 seconds).
Harsh lung sounds and pulmonary
crackles are heard bilaterally. Tracheal
palpation
elicits a moist
cough.
82b
Prescapular lymph nodes and the left
popliteal lymph node are moderately
enlarged.
A1
hemogram shows mild
anemia (hematocrit 0.33 1/l [33.5%])
and leukocytosis (WBC 39.26 x 10*/l
[103/μl]), with a mature neutrophilia
(34.55 × 109/l [103/μl]) and monocytosis
(1.96 x 10*/ [103/μl]). Serum bio-
chemistries and urinalysis are unremark-
able. Thoracic radiographs reveal mixed
bronchiolar-alveolar infiltrates, especi-
ally in ventral regions, with a concurrent
nodular interstitial pattern. There is a
pronounced increase in perihilar opacity and the dorsal tracheal margin appears
thick and undulating.
. The cardiac silhouette is normal (VHS 10.6 v). Needle
aspirates of the enlarged peripheral lymph nodes are non-diagnostic. Bronchoscopy
(82a, b) is performed. BAL cytology shows mostly degenerate and pyknotic
i. What findings are shown in the bronchoscopic images?
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ii. How would you proceed with this case?
83 What is sildenafil, and what are its cardiopulmonary indications?
93
82,83:Answers
 82 i. The airway mucosa appears diffusely thickened with areas of ulceration.
A mass-like thickening is present in the trachea. Thick mucoid secretions were also
seen.
ii. The weight loss, lymphadenopathy, and hemogram abnormalities suggest chronic
systemic inflammatory response. Given the radiographic findings, differentials
include fungal or parasitic pneumonia (in endemic regions) or neoplasia such as
lymphoma. The ventral alveolar pattern suggests possible concurrent aspiration
pneumonia. The tracheal thickening could represent a granuloma, abscess, polyp.
or neoplasia such as lymphoma. BAL cytology indicates purulent exudate of
unknown etiology; previous antibiotic therapy may have suppressed evidence of
bacterial cause.
antigen testing or fecal tests for pulmonary parasites may be helpful. Lung biopsy
may be necessary for definitive diagnosis. Supportive care would include broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy while awaiting culture results, nebulization to improve
airway hydration, and coupage to help mobilize secretions. In this dog, cultures for
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, mycoplasma, and fungal growth were negative.
necrotic cellular debris, many neutrophils, and no infectious agents. Stratified
squamous epithelium, atypical for the trachea, suggested a metaplastic/dysplastic
response. Although not clearly malignant, neoplasia was suspected. Lung biopsy
was not permitted.
83  It is a selective phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor that enhances nitric oxide-
dependent pulmonary vasodilation by increasing cyclic guanosine monophosphate
concentrations. Sildenafil has been used to treat severe pulmonary hypertension
(e.g. from chronic respiratory disease or congenital shunts); it may also be helpful
in managing dogs with pulmonary hypertension from chronic left-sided heart
failure. Doses of 0.5-2.0 (or even up to 3.0) mg/kg q12h or q8h appear to be well-
tolerated in dogs and have resulted in decreased Doppler-estimated PA pressures
as well as improved clinical signs and exercise tolerance. Adverse effects can include
cutaneous flushing and nasal congestion. Other adverse effects reported in people
include headache, priapism, and myalgia.
94
84, 85: Questions
84 A 7-year-old female mixed breed dog
84a
weighing 33 kg (72 Ib) is presented as an
emergency several hours after being hit by an
automobile. The major presenting signs are
increased respiratory effort and tachycardia.
Lung sounds are absent over the left caudal
lung field and there is abdominal pain on
palpation. Thoracic and abdominal radio-
graphs are consistent with the abnormality seen
in these intraoperative photographs (84a, initial
appearance; 84b, after tissue manipulation)
The dog was stabilized for approximately
36 hours prior to ventral midline celiotomy.
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. What is the rationale for waiting 36 hours
84b
before perforrming surgery? Should such a delay
be routine for dogs with this diagnosis?
il. What is the name of the retractor illustrated
in these photographs, and how does it help or
hinder the surgery?
iv. Should the edges of the damaged structure
be trimmed before repairing it with sutures?
Why or why not?
v. Why is this condition susceptible to re-
expansion pulmonary edema, and what is done
to minimize the chance of this complication?
85 A new client presents a 16-month-old spayed female Rottweiler for vaccination.
The owner thinks the dog's exercise tolerance is reduced lately. As a puppy, a soft
murmur had been noted, but it was thought of little concern. The dog is alert, with
a coarse haircoat and slight build. Body temperature is normal, HR is 120 bpm, and
respirations are 30/min. Mucous membranes are pink. Femoral pulses are slightly
weak. Precordial palpation and jugular veins are normal. On auscultation, a
murmur is heard in both systole and diastole; the point of maximal intensity is at
the left base. The systolic murmur is louder, but it seems to taper quickly and the
second heart sound (Ss) can be heard. Lung sounds are normal.
i. What is/are the likely cause(s) of the murmur?
i. What test(s) would you recommend next?
ili. Could the murmur noted when the dog was young be related to the present
condition?
9.5
84, 85: Answers
84 i. Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia (84a: omental fat and part of the liver lie
across the diaphragmatic tear; 84b: after abdominal contents are repositioned).
i. Surgical correction is indicated as soon as the animal is stable. It required
36 hours to stabilize this case for surgery, but this long a delay should not be
routine. Although older literature reports higher mortality rates when surgery
occurs within 12 hours of trauma compared with later, more recent literature
suggests that patient stability is the key factor.
ii. A Balfour retractor. While this instrument is helpful for abdominal exploration,
it can interfere with diaphragmatic repair.
iv. The rent edges should not be trimmed, except to excise obviously necrotic tissue.
Trimming causes unnecessary bleeding and re-initiates the inflammatory process.
Necrotic areas are excised to minimize inflammatory reaction and avoid placing
sutures in tissue that will not heal.
physically stresses the pulmonary microvasculature, which is relatively inflexible
due to lung collapse. Pulmonary capillaries become leaky from this iatrogenic
trauma and reperfusion injury may also ensue, leading to pulmonary edema.
Re-expansion pulmonary edema can be avoided by gently applying positive-
pressure ventilation and allowing the lungs to re-expand slowly and naturally.
85 i. A murmur heard in both systole and diastole is most often a 'continuous'
murmur, characteristic for patent ductus arteriosus. However, the rapidly tapering
systolic component and audible S, in this case is not typical for a continuous
murmur. Rather, it is the so-called ‘to-and-fro’ murmur, comprised of mid-systolic
(ejection) and diastolic decrescendo murmurs. With the to-and-fro murmur, the
ejection murmur component tapers in late systole, allowing the S, to be heard as a
distinct sound. The most common cause of a to-and-fro murmur is the combination
of subaortic stenosis (SAS) and aortic insufficiency. Continuous (machinery)
murmurs increase in intensity throughout systole and continue through S, into
diastole. They result from a continuous pressure gradient throughout the cardiac
cycle. Occasionally, holosystolic and diastolic decrescendo murmurs occur together
(e.g. with ventricular septal defect and aortic insufficiency).
i. Chest radiographs and Doppler echocardiography are indicated to assess cardiac
and pulmonary structures. Because infective endocarditis is a likely cause of aortic
insufficiency, CBC, serum chemistries, and other laboratory tests (e.g. cultures,
titers) are indicated to search for etiology and other sequelae of endocarditis.
li. Yes. Considering the dog's age and breed, congenital SAS with secondary aortic
endocarditis is likely
96
86, 87: Questions
86a
RPSSAX
86b
86 Chest radiographs and an echo-
86c
cardiogram are obtained on the dog in
case 85. Radiographs show moderate
cardiomegaly, with LA and LV promi-
nence. Echocardiographic findings from
the right parasternal position are shown
(86a, long axis in systole; 86b, short axis
in diastole; 86c, long axis in diastole).
1 - LV, 2 - RA, 3 - Ao, 4 - LA
i. Describe the abnormalities seen in the
figures.
i. What is your diagnosis?
li. What do you recommend to the
owner of this dog?
87A
3-month-old
Labrador
18
Retriever with a cardiac murmur is
weak and slightly tachypneic
on
presentation. Mucous membranes are
pale, HR is rapid, and pulses are
weak. An ECG is recorded (87, leads
as marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
ii. What would you do next for this
case?
ili. What congenital heart defect is
most likely in this case?
97
86, 87:Answers
86 i. LV hypertrophy suggests chronic systolic pressure overload. The subaortic
region is narrowed. Hyperechogenicity of the septum and subendocardial LV wall
is consistent with myocardial fibrosis. There are several bright nodules on the aortic
valve leaflets. The LA is moderately dilated
ii. Congenital subaortic stenosis (SAS), likely severe. The aortic leaflet nodules
suggest aortic valve endocarditis, probably chronic as there was no fever or history
of systemic illness. SAS predisposes to aortic valve endocarditis because of jet lesion
injury to the valve. Severe SAS often leads to compromised myocardial perfusion,
ischemia, and fibrosis. Concurrent aortic or mitral valve regurgitation also imposes
a volume overload on the LV. Complications include arrhythmias, syncope,
congestive failure, and sudden death.
ii. Exercise restriction and beta blockade (e.g. atenolol) are recommended with the
aim of reducing myocardial O, demand and arrhythmias. Prophylactic antibiotic
therapy is advised prior to procedures likely to cause bacteremia (e.g. dentistry).
A broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotic was recommended for 6-8 weeks in this
case because endocarditis was suspected. Therapy for heart failure may be needed.
Related dogs should be screened for SAS.
87 i. HR is 370 bpm, with sustained supraventricular tachycardia (SVT, note
narrow, upright QRS complexes). Underlying mechanisms can include re-entry
involving an accessory pathway and/or AV node, or an ectopic automatic focus in 
atrial or junctional tissue.
i. Rapid SVT compromises hemodynamic stability. Stress and activity should be
minimized. A vagal maneuver may slow or interrupt the tachycardia and aid in
identifying its mechanism. Vagal maneuvers involve carotid sinus massage (gentle
continuous pressure over carotid sinus region caudodorsal to larynx) or bilateral
contraindicated in animals with ocular disease. Although a vagal maneuver may
initially be ineffective, if the rhythm disturbance persists after antiarrhythmic drug
administration, repeating it may help. IV fluid administration helps support BP and
reduce sympathetic tone; caution is needed if congestive heart failure is suspected.
IV diltiazem is the drug of first choice for SVT. If ineffective, alternatives include
lidocaine (occasionally effective), propranolol or esmolol slowly IV (with caution
because of negative inotropic effect), IV procainamide, amiodarone or sotalol (PO),
or IV digoxin (not usually recommended).
ii. Tricuspid dysplasia (TD). Heritability has been shown in Labrador Retrievers.
Ventricular pre-excitation may be more prevalent with TD.
98
88, 89: Questions
88
8A 4-month-old female Chow
88a
Chow is presented for examination.
She had been acting normal and
eating well, but lately seems to be
geting out of breath more easily
when playing. The puppy is alert,
excited, and panting. A systolic heart
murmur, loudest at the cranial right
sternal border and increased breath
sounds are heard on auscultation;
otherwise the physical examination is
unremarkable. Among other pro-
cedures, a selective angiocardiogram
is done (88a).
i. Where is the catheter positioned?
i. What abnormality is shown in this image?
ii. Are the dog's physical examination findings consistent with this?
iv. What are the long-term consequences of this abnormality?
89a
89b
89 A 5-year-old neutered male DSH cat is
presented with a 2-week history of rapid
breathing that is becoming worse. A diagnosis
of feline asthma is suspected. Right lateral
(89a) and DV (89b) radiographs are shown.
i. Are the radiographic changes consistent
with feline asthma?
ii. What are other differentials for these
changes?
99
88, 89: Answers
88 i. The catheter was inserted into a
88b
carotid artery and passed through the
ascending aorta into the LV (88b).
1 - LV, 2 - Ao, 3 - RV outflow tract,
4 - PA.
i. Radiopaque dye injected into the LV
flowed to the aorta, but also into the RV
outflow tract and PA, indicating a left-
to-right shunting ventricular septal
defect (VSD).
ii. Yes. The usual VsD location is in the
membranous part of the septum, just
below the aortic valve and septal
tricuspid leaflet.Turbulent flow through
the VSD is thus oriented from left base
toward the right and ventrally.
iv. Smaller (restrictive) defects are often well tolerated and without clinical signs;
some even close spontaneously. Moderate- to large-size defects lead to left heart
yolume overload and, sometimes, pulmonary edema. Very large VSDs also cause RV
  n    s   
with shunt reversal is more likely with very large defects. Aortic regurgitation also
occurs with some VsDs, likely because of inadequate aortic root support. Aortic
regurgitation imposes an additional LV volume load.
89 i. The distribution and intensity of the pulmonary opacity in the hilar and
cranial regions are not typical of feline asthma. Common radiographic findings of
asthma are thickened bronchial walls, lung hyperinflation from air trapping, and
collapse of the right middle lung lobe. This patient has severe parenchymal disease
as evidenced by the air bronchogram summated (superimposed) with the heart in
the lateral view.
i. Pneumonia and pulmonary edema are more differentials. This patient did not
respond to diuretic therapy or antibiotics. The cat did not survive and was found
Lipid globules surrounded by inflammatory cells were randomly distributed in the
pulmonary parenchyma. Aspiration of lipid was the suspected cause.
100
90, 91: Questions
90 A 4-year-old male neutered DSH cat
e06
is presented for sudden development of
tachypnea with increased abdominal
effort. HR is 160 bpm, with a regular
rhythm. Bilateral jugular pulsation is
noted on examination. Both femoral
pulses are strong and regular. Wheezes
and crackles, loudest over the cranial
lung region, are heard 
on thoracic
auscultation. Cardiac auscultation and
other examination findings are normal.
Systolic BP is 125 mmHg. Serum bio-
chemical tests show mildly elevated
blood urea (10.3 mmol/l [28.9 mg/dl];
90b
normal
3.5-8.0
mmol/l
[9.8-
22.4 mg/dl]). Chest radiographs show
generalized cardiomegaly (VHS 9.5 v)
with mild pleural effusion, pulmonary
venous congestion, caudal vena cava
distension, and a patchy alveolar pattern.
An echocardiogram is obtained (2-D
right parasternal long axis view, 90a;
M-mode at ventricular level, 90b).
1 - RV, 2 - RA, 3 - LV, 4 - LA.
i. What is your interpretation of the radiographic findings?
ii. What abnormalities are shown on the echo images?
ii. What therapy would you use at this time?
91 What is sotalol, and when is it indicated?
101
90, 91: Answers
90 i. The radiograph findings are consistent with biventricular congestive heart
failure.
ii. The 2-D image shows biatrial enlargement (LA = 2.1 cm) and suggests
(LF1b). LV chamber size and systolic function are normal. Mild pericardial and
pleural effusions were also seen.
Echo measurements:
Diastole (cm)
Systole (cm)
IVS
0.9
0.9
LV chamber
1.4
0.7
LV wall
0.8
1.0
FS
50%
[40-66%)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is diagnosed when other causes of LV
hypertrophy (e.g. fixed LV outflow obstruction, hypertension, hyperthyroidism,
acromegaly) are absent. HCM, the most common feline myocardial disease, is
characterized by idiopathic LV hypertrophy (symmetric or asymmetric) without LV
dilation. Both ventricles are involved in some cases. Hypertrophy increases
ventricular stiffness and, consequently, filling pressure, which can lead to pulmonary
venous congestion and effusions.
ii. Congestive signs are treated with furosemide PRN. For long-term therapy, oral
furosemide is given at the lowest effective dose. Although angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor, diltiazem, or beta blocker therapy is often prescribed, convincing
 si an r  a   
recommended.
91 Sotalol HCl is a non-selective beta blocker with class III antiarrhythmic effects
at higher doses (via repolarizing K+ channel blockade). It is used mainly for
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Its beta-blocking effects (from the l-isomer) are
important to sotalol's antiarrhythmic effectiveness. Sotalol has minimal
hemodynamic effects, although it can cause hypotension or worsened myocardial
function. Sotalol can be proarrhythmic (as can all antiarrhythmic agents), although
clinically used doses in dogs may mainly produce beta-blocking effects. Other
adverse effects can include depression, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and bradycardia.
Occasional anecdotal reports exist of aggression that resolved after discontinuing
sotalol.
102
92, 93: Questions
92 A 2-year-old male Lhasa Apso is
92
presented for progressively worsening
exercise intolerance and weakness. The
dog's tongue appears bluish after mild to
moderate activity. No murmur is heard,
but right-sided heart enlargement is
evident radiographically. A sample of
the dog's blood spun in a hematocrit
(Hct) tube is shown (92).
i. What can cause such a high Hct
reading?
i. What are the consequences of erythrocytosis (polycythemia)?
ii. How could erythrocytosis be managed in this case?
iv. What adverse effects are common with this therapy?
93a
93b
 93 A 2-year-old male Beagle is presented for
a 5-day history of lethargy, gagging, and
coughing. The owner previously noticed
masses on the dog's neck and the medial right
thigh. On physical examination, temperature,
pulse, and respiratory rate are normal.
Thoracic auscultation is normal. No cough
can be elicited, although the dog gags several times during examination. The left
submandibular lymph node is prominent. Several subcutaneous masses are found
on various parts of the body. Both third eyelids are protruding. Right lateral (93a)
and DV (93b) radiographs are taken.
i. What are the causes of ventral deviation of the thoracic trachea?
ii. How can the radiographic changes be correlated with the history and physical
examination findings?
103
92,93:Answers
( t  d  o-  a)  
i. Mucous membranes may be bright red at rest, but readily become cyanotic with
hypoxemia. Erythrocytosis increases blood viscosity, which reduces turbulence, so
cardiac murmurs are softer or even inaudible. Increased viscosity and resistance to
flow can impair tissue perfusion despite a higher Oz-carrying capacity.
Manifestations of hyperviscosity include behavioral changes, seizures, and exercise
intolerance.
iii. Options are periodic phlebotomy (e.g. 5-10 ml blood/kg) or hydroxyurea
(40-50 mg/kg PO q48h or 3 times a week), with phlebotomy if necessary. Target
Hct is where hyperviscosity signs are minimized, usually ~60%. Systemic
vasodilating drugs should be avoided and exercise restricted. For tetralogy of Fallot
(the diagnosis in this dog), palliative surgery to increase pulmonary blood flow is
possible.
iv. Signs of hypoxia are exacerbated if Hct decreases too far. If phlebotomy causes
hypotension, isotonic fluid replacement helps. Hydroxyurea's adverse effects include
anorexia, vomiting, bone marrow suppression, alopecia, and pruritus; dose
reduction may help. CBCs should be monitored ql-2weeks initially, then
q4-8weeks.
93 i. The most common cause of ventral deviation of the thoracic trachea is a
dilated esophagus. This can develop for various reasons. The anatomic structures
racheobronchial lymph nodes, longus coli muscle, cervicothoracic ganglion, and
thoracic vertebrae. The esophagus is the structure most frequently affected by
disease that will cause sufficient enlargement to displace the trachea. However,
 Aq pasneo oia) eaoen aui on pesrop eare aun un sanssn rao jo suaren
abscess, granuloma, or tumor) may also displace the trachea.
i. The compressive effect of the craniodorsal mediastinal mass is the likely cause of
both the gagging and coughing. The thoracic tracheal diameter is visibly reduced
a number of conditions including Horner's syndrome. It is possible that the mass is
impinging on, or causing inflammation or entrapment of, the second-order neurons
of the thoracic sympathetic trunk.
104
94, 95: Questions
94a
94b
94  A cranial dorsal thoracic mass is identified radiographically in the dog in 93
These 2-dimensional ultrasound images (94a, b) of the cranial dorsal mediastinal
region are obtained.
i. What is your assessment?
i. What are the advantages of ultrasound evaluation in this patient?
95a
95b
95 A 7-year-old male intact Doberman Pinscher weighing 43 kg (95 Ib) is presented
for sudden onset of dyspnea. Previous history is unrermarkable. Physical examination
reveals weak femoral pulses and a systolic heart murmur grade 3/6, loudest over the
left apex. Systolic BP is 70 mmHg. Serum biochemical tests show mildly elevated BUN
(8.3 mmo/l [23.2 mg/dl]; normal 3.5-7.0 mmol/l [9.8-19.6 mg/dl]) and creatinine
(135 μmoll [1.5 mg/dl]; normal 0-130 μmol/l [0-1.47 mg/dl]). Urine SG is 1.050.
Thoracic radiographs show cardiomegaly (VHS 13 v; normal <10.7 v), pulmonary
venous congestion, and severe pulmonary edema. An ECG shows sinus rhythm with
a HR of 160 bpm and frequent polymorphic ventricular premature complexes.
Echocardiography is carried out (95a, b). 1 - LV, 2 - LA.
i. What echocardiographic abnormalities are seen in this dog?
i. What is your overall assessment of this case?
ili. What additional biochermical tests could be useful in assessing this case?
iv. Outline your initial management plan for this dog.
10.5
94, 95: Answers
94 i. The displacement of the lung from the thoracic wall creates an excellent
window for ultrasound assessment and guided sampling of the soft tissue/fluid mass
effect. The images show multiple round hypoechoic masses and a larger region of
heterogeneous echogenicity. Ultrasound sampling of both areas yielded cytology
consistent with lymphoma. This is an unusual radiographic presentation for
enlargement of either cranial mediastinal lymph nodes or thymus because of the
dorsal location of the mass effect.
i. In most patients, survey ultrasonographic evaluation can be done without
sedation or anesthesia. It allows characterization as to whether a mass is solid or
cavitary and fluid filled, as well as its adjacency to critical structures. For example,
the mass was very close to major thoracic vessels in this patient. Although the
sonographic features of masses uncommonly yield a definitive etiologic diagnosis,
the direct visualization of the mass allows guided sampling for cytology and culture
and harvest of tissue cores for histopathologic evaluation. Screening of the patient
on patient size and temperatment, as wellas the mass's size and proximity to critical
vessels or organs, sedation or anesthesia may be needed for guided sampling.
95 i. The LV is dilated and wall motion markedly reduced (LV FS = 9%, 95a),
indicating poor contractility. Other findings include ventricular rounding (reduced
sphericity index), LA dilation, and increased mitral E-point-septal separation
(12 mm; (normal <7 mm). Mild mitral regurgitation (95b) is likely secondary to
valve annulus dilation.
i. The most likely diagnosis is dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM); other differentials
include myocardial failure from chronic mitral regurgitation (although the valve is
not thickened), previously undiagnosed congenital shunt, dietary deficiency (i.e.
taurine,
, L-carnitine), tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy, or myocardial
ischemia/infarction. Congestive heart failure, systemic hypotension, prerenal
azotemia, and ventricular tachyarrhythmia are also present.
i. Although not necessary for diagnosis in this case, cardiac troponin I and NT-pro-
BNP can indicate active myocardial insult and ventricular distension, respectively.
Both parameters were elevated (cTnI: 0.78 ng/ml; reference range <0.15) (NT-pro
BNP: 2928 pmol/l; reference range 0-210).
iv. Supplemental O, and IV furosemide (bolus or CRI) are indicated for severe
pulmonary edema; dosing is guided by patient response. Dobutamine infusion will
help support myocardial contractility and systolic BP. Oral pimobendan and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor are given as soon as possible. BP and heart
rhythm should be closely monitored. Antiarrhythmic and other supportive therapy
may be needed.
106
96, 97: Questions
96
6A 2-year-old neutered male Persian cat
96a
acutely began open-mouth breathing about an
hour ago. He was normal prior to this. However.
about 9 months ago he had a similar episode.
The cat is alert and in good condition. Mucous
membranes are pink. Physical abnormalities
appear limited to the open-mouth breathing and
 a mild serous nasal discharge. Heart and lung
sounds
6are normal.
Supplemental(
1S
administered and an IV catheter is placed. After
a short time resting in an O, cage he appears
 comfortable and now has only mild tachypnea.
Thoracic radiographs are obtained and indicate
a mild, diffusely distributed bronchointerstitial
96b
pattern. Hemogram,  serum chemistry, and
urinalysis results are non-contributory. The cat is
briefly anesthetized for otic and oropharyngeal
examinations, which are normal, and bron-
choscopy. Images from the trachea (96a) and
right middle bronchus (96b) are shown.
i. Describe the bronchoscopic findings.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. Is BAL indicated in this case?
iv. What cytologic findings would you expect
with feline idiopathic bronchitis?
v. How would you manage this case?
97 A 5-year-old, male cat is presented
16
for acute hindlimb paralysis and crying
(97). On examination, his hindlimbs
were cool and femoral pulses were
absent. Palpation of his
1
hindlimbs
elicited a pain response. Hindlimb nail
beds were cyanotic and did not bleed on
trimming.(
Chest radiographs showed
normal lung fields and LA enlargement; echocardiography documented LV
i. What caused these clinical signs?
i. How would you manage this case initially?
ili. What is the prognosis?
107
96, 97: Answers
96 i. The trachea appears fairly normal. The bronchial mucosa (96b) is inflamed,
with patchy pale and slightly raised areas, thought to represent edema. Other
bronchi appeared similar.
i. Causes of airway inflammation generally include allergic, parasitic, and infectious
airway disease. Infiltrative disease is possible. but less likely.
iii. Yes. BAL, and bronchial brushing, samples should be examined cytologically
and cultured. BAL can aid in diagnosing small airway, alveolar, and/or pulmonary
interstitial diseases. However BAL is not advised for patients in respiratory distress
because it transiently exacerbates hypoxemia.
iv. Eosinophilic inflammation, suggesting a hypersensitivity response, is most
common with feline idiopathic bronchitis or feline asthma; pulmonary parasites
and heartworm disease (in endemic regions) should be ruled out. Over time a mixed
inflammatory response can develop. However some cats with idiopathic bronchitis
have a (usually non-degenerative) neutrophilic inflammatory response.
v. If BAL cultures and parasite tests are negative, a glucocorticoid and bronchodilator
(see cases 99 and 100) are usually helpful. Potential inhaled irritants or allergens
(e.g. litter smoke, carpet cleaners, household aerosols) should be avoided. For acute
respiratory distress, supplemental O, with a rapid-acting glucocortioid (e.g. pred-
nisolone sodium succinate, to 10 mg IV or IM; or dexamethasone sodium phosphate,
to 2 mg/kg IV) and terbutaline (0.01 mg/kg SC) or albuterol (via metered dose inhaler)
are recommended.
97 i. Arterial thromboembolism (ATE) at the distal aorta. Tissue ischemia causes
acute, painful hindlimb paresis with loss of palpable femoral pulses. Hypothermia,
tachypnea, and azotemia are common. Feline cardiomyopathies are associated with
increased ATE risk. Mechanisms include poor intracardiac blood flow, altered
coagulability, or local endothelial injury.
i. Initial goals include stabilizing the cat and preventing thrombus extension and
additional ATE. Supportive care is given to optimize tissue perfusion and manage
congestive heart failure (if present). An analgesic (e.g. hydromorphone or
buprenorphine) is indicated. Heparin can reduce additional clot formation.
times pretreatment level. Alternatively, a low-molecular weight heparin has less risk
for bleeding, but optimal dosage is unclear. Dalteparin sodium (100-150 U/kg SC
q8-24h) and enoxaparin (1 mg/kg SC q12-24h) have been used. Fibrinolytic
therapy is problematic and rarely used. When platelet count is adequate, low-dose
aspirin or clopidogrel helps reduce platelet aggregation. Renal function and serum 
electrolyte concentrations should be monitored.
ii. Limb function can improve within weeks and some cats are clinically normal
within a couple of months. However, recurrent ATE is common and long-term
prognosis is generally poor.
108
98: Question
98a
98b
98 A 4-year-old male Dachshund is presented with the complaint of coughing:
especially after drinking and eating. Coughing began 5 weeks ago. Five months
previously, the dog underwent spinal surgery for a ruptured intervertebral disk.
Physical examination is normal. Right lateral (98a) and DV (98b) thoracic radio-
graphs are taken.
i. What clinical differentials are suggested by the history and complaint?
i. What are the radiographic findings and your radiographic diagnosis?
ili. What will you do next to confirm your suspected diagnosis?
109
98:Answer
98c
98 i. Differentials include dysphagia with laryngotracheal aspiration, pharyngitis/
laryngitis, esophagitis, megaesophagus, and esophageal-bronchial fistula.
i. Most of the left hemithorax is occupied by uniform soft tissue/fluid opacity that
displaces the left lung from the thoracic wall and effaces the left cardiac border and
left half of the diaphragm. The heart is shifted righrward (opposite of the effect
with fat opacity between the cardiac border and sternum. The trachea parallels the
spine, the left diaphragmatic crus is poorly defined, and no air bronchograms,
pleural fissure lines, or esophageal dilation are evident. Radiographic diagnosis:
left-sided thoracic mass effect. Differentials include enlarging pulmonary mass,
pleural mass, and left-sided diaphragmatic hernia.
ii. Abdominal radiographs to assess if the solid organs are appropriately located,
thoracic ultrasound to further characterize the opacity, or CT. Enlargement of the
left cranial abdomen in the VD view (98c) shows absence of the splenic head; n0
splenic tail was visible in the lateral view. Ultrasound showed a diaphragmatic
defect with spleen adjacent to the heart. Surgical exploration confirmed splenic
herniation through a tear in the left side of the diaphragm.
110
99, 100: Questions
B66
966
?66
99 A 1.5-year-old male DSH cat had an episode of
respiratory distress 2 days ago. Intense abdominal
effort,
open-mouth breathing, and wheezing
occurred for about 10 minutes, then his breathing
slowly returned to normal. The moderately over-
weight cat is now alert and fully responsive. Physical
examination reveals mildly increased abdominal
effort during expiration. Rhonchi and wheezes are heard on thoracic auscultation.
s       d  
biochemistry test results are normal.
The cat is anesthetized for thoracic radiography (99a) followed by bronchoscopy.
The bronchial mucosa is edematous and bleeds easily at the touch of the scope
(99b, c). Plugs of tenacious mucus obstruct some bronchi. BAL samples contain a
large well-preserved mixed-cell population with many eosinophils. Occasional
neutrophils and moderate numbers of foamy, activated alveolar macrophages are
seen, along with scattered, well-differentiated ciliated columnar epithelial cells,
No infectious agents, parasite eggs, or larvae are seen. Culture yields no significant
bacterial growth.
i. What are the radiographic findings in this cat?
i. What is your diagnosis?
ili. How would you manage this case?
100 Describe options for bronchodilator therapy.
111
99, I00: Answers
99 i. A diffuse bronchial pattern and mild lung overinflation are seen. The cardiac
silhouette is normal and there is no venous congestion or interstitialalveolar pattern
to suggest heart failure.
ii. The bronchial pattern and airway mucosal inflammation with excessive mucus
and numerous eosinophils, as well as foamy activated macrophages, suggest airway
hypersensitivity (feline asthma*). Acute paroxysmal respiratory signs are typical in
this condition. The cat's auscultatory findings suggest bronchospasm as well as
accumulation of airway secretions.
iii. Reduction of airway inflammation, usually by long-term corticosteroid
administration, is crucial. Administration by inhalation (e.g. fluticasone) avoids
systemic side-effects and delivers the steroid directly to the airways. A dedicated
spacer (e.g. *Aerokat Feline Aerosol Chamber') designed for inhalation therapy is
helpful. A bronchodilator is also important to reduce bronchospasm. Oral or
albuterol, salbutamol) administered via the dedicated spacer seem more efficient
and provide more rapid response in dyspneic cats.
Environmental triggers/irritants, including cigarette smoke, dust (including litter
dust), and aerosols (e.g. deodorants, cleaning products), should be avoided when
secretions. Obese cats may benefit from a reducing diet, as excessive fat can impair
respiratory function.
100 Methyxanthine bronchodilators (theophylline and related drugs) and β2-
adrenoceptor agonists (e.g. terbutaline, albuterol) are usually used. Theophylline
inflammation. Adverse effects include cardiac arrhythmias, sinus tachycardia,
gastrointestinal upset, nervousness, and seizures. Long-acting theophylline
preparations are usually effective administered twice daily. Plasma concentration
measurement can guide dosing. Therapeutic (peak) concentrations are thought to
be 5-20 mcg/ml. Collect samples at 4-5 hours (long-acting formulations) or
1.5-2.0 hours (immediate release theophylline) post dosing. A β,-agonist can be
used instead of, or occasionally in combination with, a methylxanthine agent.
Adverse effects include arrhythmias, sinus tachycardia, nervousness, and
spacer and anesthetic mask can be effective, especially in cats. (See Drugs used for
cardiac and respiratory diseases, pp. 255-261, for doses.)
112
101, 102: Questions
101 A 7-year-old male mixed
10la
breed dog weighing 18.6 kg
(41 Ib) is presented for lethargy of
6-day duration, occasional cough-
ing, and increased respiratory
effort (especially during expira-
tion). The dog has also been
anorexic for the past 24 hours.
Because there had been possible
exposure to rat poison, the dog
had been treated by vitamin K
injection, but no improvement
occurred. The dog is not receiving
heartworm preventive. Lung sounds are decreased. Thoracocentesis indicates
chylous effusion. A right lateral thoracic radiograph is shown (101a).
i. What is the salient abnormality in the lateral radiograph?
ii. What is the imaging diagnosis?
102 A l-year-old spayed female Bichon Frise is presented for a persistent, non-
productive cough of 5-week duration and one known episode of collapse 2 days
 sg re  n r  n  e i si o  
is noted during initial examination; heart and lung sounds are normal. Mucous
membranes color and capillary refill time are normal, as are arterial pulses and
precordial palpation. The dog vomits shortly after blood samples are drawn for
routine CBC and serum chemistry analysis, and then it collapses with apparent
respiratory arrest. HR is ~12 bpm and membranes are cyanotic. An endotracheal
tube is placed and O, administered with manual ventilation. Spontaneous
respirations soon resume and HR increases. A short time later after the dog is
extubated, an arterial sample is obtained for blood gas analysis (see below).
Test
Result
Normal
Units
pH
7.25
7.31-7.42
PCO,
34.4
29-42
mmHg
PO2
65.8
85-100
mmHg
HCO,
14.6
17-24
mmol/l
Base excess
-12.7
mmol/l
Total CO,
15.7
mmol/l
% Saturation
89.9
%
i. What is your interpretation of the blood gas results?
i. What are the major causes of hypoxemia?
ili. What are your other diagnostic recommendations?
113
I0l, I02: Answers
101 i. Well-defined air bronchograms are evident
I0lb
in the mid-ventral thorax. The cranial air
bronchogram is directed ventrally towards the
sternum. The caudal bronchogram is longer and
angles towards the ventral diaphragm. A mild
air bronchogram. Neither has visible connection
with the trachea. There is also pleural effusion.
i. Left cranial lung lobe torsion. Normally in a
right lateral view, the left cranial lobe bronchus
and origin of cranial and caudal subdivision bronchi are well depicted. The cranial
segment bronchus should course cranially towards the manubrium; the caudal seg-
ment bronchus should course directly ventrally, not caudoventrally. The air broncho-
gram is well demonstrated in this dog, but visible connection with the common
bronchus is lacking (bracketed area, 101b). The common trunk bronchus tapers off
from the trachea (summated [superimposed] with 5th ribs). Lung surrounding the
peripheral portions of these air bronchograms has a mild vesicular gas pattern.
Radiographic features most suggestive of lung lobe torsion are vesicular emphy.
sema in a lobe of soft tissue opacity and narrowed, blunted, and/or abnormally
oriented lobar bronchus. Pleural effusion is a common but less specific finding. CT
imaging is useful for presurgical diagnostic confirmation of lung lobe torsion.
102 i. Arterial hypoxemia is evident. The pH indicates acidosis. With respiratory
acidosis, the PaCO, is elevated; bicarbonate increases in an attempt to compensate.
However, HCO, is decreased here, indicating metabolic acidosis; the low normal
PaCO, likely reflects partial respiratory compensation. PaO, <60 mmHg causes
dangerously low hemoglobin (Hb) saturation. Cyanosis is visible when over 50 g/l
(5 g/dl) of Hb becomes unsaturated (non-oxygenated). Cyanotic animals with normal
hematocrit likely have PaO, <50 mmHg.
i. Causes of hypoxemia usually involve either alveolar hypoventilation, pulmonary
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch with varying degrees of venous admixture
(perfusion of non-ventilated areas; shunt), anatomic right-to-left shunt, or
a
combination of factors. Hypoventilation increases PaCO2; with V/Q abnormalities,
PaCO, can be low or normal. Impaired alveolar gas diffusion or low O, content of
inspired air uncommonly causes hypoxemia. Reduced blood O-carrying capacity
(e.g. anemia, hemoglobinopathy) also causes tissue hypoxia, even with normal PaO.
i. Chest radiographs. If unremarkable, then airway fluoroscopy and/or broncho-
scopy are recommended. Although the irregular heart rhythm is probably sinus
arrhythmia, an ECG may identify AV block or other abnormality. Blood test results
should help indicate if hypoxemia is chronic (erythrocytosis) or another cause for
metabolic acidosis besides the arrest.
114
103: Question
103a
103b
103c
103 Chest radiographs of the dog in case 102 show normal cardiac size (VHS
10.0 v), pulmonary vessels, lung fields, and major airways. A thin pleural fissure line
is noted near the right middle lobe. Pronounced sinus arrhythmia is seen on ECG,
but HR exceeds 100 bpm during the recording; electrical axis and complex
measurements are normal. Echocardiographic examination and routine serum
chemistry and hemogram test results are unremarkable. The next day,
bronchoscopy is done; images from the carina (103a), left main bronchus (103b),
and region of the right middle lobar bronchus (103c) are shown.
i. What is your assessment of the bronchoscopic images?
ii. Could this explain the dog's hypoxemia, bradycardia, and collapse, as well as
cough?
ii. How would you follow-up this patient?
11.5
103:Answer
103d
103 i. Mild mucosal edema and erythema is seen at the carina and within the right
bronchus (103a, c). A whitish circular foreign body (FB} is in the right middle lobar
bronchus (103c). This plastic, cone-shaped FB (the tip from a caulk tube, 103d)
was freely moveable, slipping in and out of the bronchial orifice during attempts at
removal with forceps. The airways to the left lung lobes appeared normal and there
was no sign of tracheal collapse.
i. Yes. Besides the physical presence of the FB being a cough stimulus, it was
thought that the FB probably moved into the right main bronchus or trachea during
coughing and/or vomiting, creating greater airway obstruction and causing
hypoxemia and collapse. Severe bradycardia can result from marked increases in
vagal tone related to underlying pulmonary or airway disease; the vomiting likely
exacerbated this.
ii. Culture of airway washings obtained at the time of bronchoscopy is indicated.
Appropriate antibiotic therapy is warranted, especially if coughing or other signs
    e     s
recommended because residual infection or inflammation is possible. No further
coughing or episodic bradycardia occurred in this case after the foreign body was
removed.
116
104, 105: Questions
104A 10-year-old male indoor-outdoor
104
DSH cat is presented as an emergency
after 2 days of lethargy and inappetence.
There was no known trauma, but the
cat does hunt mice and birds. The cat is
tachypneic, with open-mouth breathing.
Mucous membranes are extremely pale.
There are multiple areas of subcuta-
neous hemorrhage on both thorax and
abdomen. Increased breath sounds are
heard on auscultation, but no cardiac
murmur. His hematocrit is 0.1 /l (10%) and total protein is 50 g/l (5 g/dl).
Supplemental O, is provided (104).
i. When presented with a cat in respiratory distress from unknown cause, what are
your initial considerations?
11.
 Based on the physical findings and hematocrit, what are your differential
diagnoses?
ili. What additional tests or therapy do you recommend at this time?
105a
105b
105
An 11-year-old male Maltese was
treated for an episode of pancreatitis during
the holiday season. Recovery was rapid and
uneventful. Two days after discharge from the hospital, the dog is presented for
acute respiratory distress. Thoracic radiographs are obtained (105a, b).
i. What radiographic abnormalities are seen?
i. What are the likely causes of the acute respiratory signs?
ili. How should this case be managed?
117
I04, 105: Answers
104 i. Severe respiratory distress (orthopnea) is evident; the cat crouches in a sternal
position with elbows abducted, neck extended, and mouth open (drooling) gasping
for air. Considerations include airway obstruction (e.g. acute asthma), severe
intrapulmonary disease (e.g. edema, pneumonia, hemorhage, neoplasia), or pleural
space disease (pleural fluid, pneumothorax, intrathoracic mass lesion, diaphrag-
matic hernia). Respiratory pattern and auscultatory findings help point to the
underlying mechanism. (See also case 1 and Further reading.)
i. Subcutaneous hemorrhage with severe anemia suggests trauma or coagulopathy,
with time for fluid translocaton into the vasculature. Pulmonary hemorrhage and
hemothorax along with anemia intensify respiratory distress. Rodenticide toxicity
is a strong possibility (and was verified here). Cats can be poisoned secondarily by
eating rodents that have ingested anticoagulant rodenticides. Other causes of
coagulopathy include disseminated intravascular coagulation, severe thrombo-
cytopenia, and hepatic failure.
i. PT and aPTT should be measured. Prolongation of PT greater than that of aPTT
strongly suggests anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity; vitamin K, therapy should be
started (e.g. 5 mg/kg SC initially). Transfusion with fresh whole blood is also
 indicated here. Chest radiographs are useful; pleural fluid/blood may need to be
105 i. A moderate diffuse interstitial to alveolar lung pattern is seen, predominantly
in the caudoperipheral regions (especially the right). A focal area of increased
opacity is in the caudal portion of the left cranial lobe. The left heart appears mildly
enlarged. The heavy interstitial pattern partially obscures pulmonary vessels, but no
obvious pulmonary venous congestion is seen. The gas-distended stomach suggests
dyspnea with aerophagia.
(ARDS) is likely. Although acute heart failure (e.g. from ruptured mitral chordae
tendineae) is possible and can produce atypical edema distribution, more evidence
of LA enlargement and pulmonary venous congestion is expected with chronic
mitral valve disease. ARDS is a syndrome of acute capillary permeability disruption.
It is associated with numerous illnesses including sepsis, aspiration of acidic gastric
secretions, inhalation injury, multiple ransfusions, shock, pancreatitis, microbial
pneumonia, drug reaction or overdose, and major trauma or surgery.
iii. Supplemental Oz, other supportive measures, and treatment for underlying
the later phases of ARDS. Overzealous fluid therapy can worsen pulmonary edema
and hypoxemia, so only the smallest volume needed to maintain cardiac output
and arterial BP is given. Corticosteroids are of unconfirmed benefit.
118
106, 107: Questions
106 Brief physical examination of the
106
dog in case 105 presented for acute
respiratory distress reveals good body
condition,
severe
tachypnea
and
dyspnea, a soft systolic murmur at the
left cardiac apex and harsh lung sounds
on inspiration and expiration.
Supplemental O, via an
oxygen
chamber and a 4 mg/kg IM furosemide
injection are initially administered.
Chest radiographs show interstitial and alveolar lung infiltrates, especially in the
caudal and peripheral regions, and mild left heart enlargement. Pulmonary vessels
are not clearly delineated because of the heavy interstitial pattern, but there is no
obvious pulmonary venous congestion (see 105a, b). There is no improvement after
initial therapy; respiratory arrest occurs shortly thereafter. An endotracheal tube is
placed and fluid (shown) is aspirated from the airway.
i. What is your working diagnosis/es in this case?
ii. What would you do next?
ili. How can the fluid help identify the underlying pathology?
107a
107b
107 A 10-year-old neutered male DSH cat developed hindlimb paresis while at a
boarding facility. The cat ambulates abnormally and has no pain response in either
hindlimb. Femoral pulses are not palpable, but his extremities are warm and dorsal
pedal pulses are identified. A gallop sound and grade 2/6 systolic murmur are heard
on auscultation. Chest radiographs show marked cardiomegaly without pulmonary
edema. Right parasternal short axis (107a) and long axis (107b) echocardiographic
images are shown.
i. What abnormalities are seen on the echo images?
ii. What does this indicate?
ii. How would you manage this case?
119
I06, 107: Answers
106 i. Pulmonary edema is likely, but is it non-cardiogenic or cardiogenic in origin?
The lack of obvious venous congestion, caudalperipheral distribution of pulmonary
infiltrates, and minimal cardiomegaly on radiographs speak against acute
cardiogenic edema (although still possible). Non-cardiogenic edema can develop
with ARDS, electric shock, or seizure activity. Diffuse pulmonary neoplasia or other
infiltrative disease is also possible. Pancreatitis has been associated with ARDS.
Given the otherwise unremarkable historical, ARDS was the working diagnosis.
i. Emergency therapy was initiated with a positive-pressure ventilator using 100%
O,. Another 4 mg/kg bolus of furosemide was administered IV. A bronchodilator
was also used. At this time, no specific treatment is available for ARDS other than
assisted ventilation and other supportive care. In this case there was no response to
emergency therapy.
from cardiogenic edema. The ratio of edema fluid (E) protein content to plasma
(P) protein content is 79-90% for ARDS; for cardiogenic pulmonary edema it is
typically <50%. This dog's edema fluid E:P ratio was 86%. ARDS patients often
deteriorate rapidly. This dog died from respiratory failure.
107 i. The LA is severely dilated (~2.6 cm). Spontaneous echo contrast (swirling
smoke'} is visible within the LA and LV. Pericardial effusion and mild LV
hypertrophy are also present (LV wall ~ 0.6 cm, diastole).
   al  s a  s is t  '
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), although mitral insufficiency, if present, could
contribute to LA enlargement. Spontaneous contrast is thought to result from blood
stasis with cellular aggregates and be a harbinger of thromboembolism (TE).
Pericardial effusion can occur from advanced cardiomyopathy in cats.
ii. This cat has clear lungs and some hindlimb collateral circulation. Treatment is
aimed at preventing further TE, optimizing cardiovascular function, and supportive
care as needed. Low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) was used in this cat
(enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg SC q12h). LMWH only minimally affects coagulation times;
its effect can be monitored indirectly by anti-Xa activity. When platelet numbers are
adequate, concurrent low-dose aspirin (e.g. 5 mg/cat q72h) or clopidogrel
(18.75 mg/cat PO q24h) can be added. An angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
and diltiazem are also recommended. This cat was managed medically for another
1.5 years, then died after his 4th arterial TE event.
120
108: Question
108a
108b
108 A 1-year-old neutered male Alaskan Malamute is presented with a 3-month
history of coughing with intermittent hemoptysis. The dog has been living in the
Mississippi river valley region of the USA. He has an inducible cough with mid-
tracheal palpation, and coughs up bloody mucus during the examination. CBC and
          
radiographs are shown.
i. How would you characterize the radiographic lesions?
ii. What are the etiologic differentials for these lesions?
ili. What diagnostic procedure(s) would you do next?
121
108:Answer
108c
108d
108i. Multiple cavitary nodules are
present. Their walls vary in thickness
from uniformly thin, with smooth inner and outer borders, to non-uniform,
moderately thick, with mildly irregular inner borders (108c, arrows). In some, more
i   s   a i s    
appearance of a multiloculated cavity. A CT scan done on this patient (108d) shows
[wo cavitary lesions, one circled in the dorsal left lung and one in the right ventral
lung. PAs adjacent to lobar bronchi are also evident.
ii. Cavitary pulmonary lesions can arise from trauma (bulla, bleb), pneumonia
(pneumatocele), bacterial abscess, granuloma, parasitic cysts (Paragonimus
kelicotti), or neoplasia. The young age of this dog makes neoplasia unlikely. There
was no history of trauma and with a normal hemogram and no fever, bacterial
 infection is unlikely. Paragonimiasis is a strong consideration in endemic regions
when access to the crayfish intermediate host is possible. Congenital cavitary lung
lesions are also a possibility.
i. Identification of fluke eggs, which can be recovered from feces, sputum cytology,
or tracheal washings, confirms a diagnosis of paragonimiasis.
122
109, 110: Questions
109 A 7-year-old male Boxer has been
109a
losing weight for the past couple of
months, but more recently his head and
forelimbs have started getting bigger
(109a). He does not seem painful, but
his appetite is poor. Body temperature is
normal. The forelimbs, cranial chest,
ventral neck, and lips are swollen, cool
to the touch, non-painful, and indent
with digital pressure. Heart and lung
sounds are normal over the mid to
caudal thorax, but are muffled over the
 cranial thorax. The caudal body is quite
thin.
i. Can the location of this dog's disease
be identified based on his appearance
and physical findings?
ii. What etiologies can cause this condition?
i. What tests would you recommend next, and why?
110 One week ago a 6-year-
110
old male mainly outdoor
DSH cat developed labored
breathing and poor appetite.
Lung sounds were somewhat
increased, but reportedly
other physical findings were
unrermarkable. Radiographs
suggested cardiomegaly with
possible pulmonary infiltrates.
A trial of furosemide (12.5 mg
q12h) was prescribed. The
owner thinks the cat's signs
are improved. Cardiac disease of some kind is suspected, but echocardiography is
not available. A non-selective angiocardiogram is done (110).
i. Does this study suggest a diagnosis of heartworm disease?
ii. Describe the angiographic findings.
ili. What are your recommendations to the owner?
123
I09, Il0: Answers
109 i. The swelling is subcutaneous
109b
edema. The distribution is typical for the
so-called ‘cranial caval syndrome'
where obstruction of cranial vena caval
flow raises venous and capillary hydro-
static pressure in regions that drain into
this vessel. Muffled heart and lung
sounds over the cranial, but not caudal,
thorax suggest a mass lesion pushing the
heart and lungs caudally.
i. Cranial vena caval compression (usually by an expanding cranial mediastinal
lymphoma, thymoma, or other mass) or complete thrombosis leads to this syndrome.
Besides bilaterally symmetric cranial edema, as seen here, pleural effusion is common.
Caval thrombosis can occur with diseases causing a hypercoagulable state (e.g.
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anermia, sepsis, nephrotic syndrome,
and some neoplasia), usually in conjunction with central venous catheter use.
11i.
1. Thoracic radiographs indicated a cranial mediastinal mass (109b).
Ultrasonography also can identify masses or caval thrombosis, if present. Needle
aspirate or biopsy of the mass (lymphoma in this dog), and routine bloodwork and
urinalysis, are indicated to guide therapy. Underlying disease process(es) must be
sought for caval thrombosis.
110 i. The image was taken after dye passed through the lungs to the left heart,
although some residual dye is seen in the cranial vena cava. Dilated and slightly
tortuous caudal vessels are seen, but these are pulmonary veins, not arteries. There
is no specific indication for heartworm disease here.
i. There is massive LA enlargement, with dilated pulmonary veins entering caudally.
elevated carina and proximal caudal vena cava) and there appears to be some filling
defects within the lumen; possible causes include hypertrophied papillary muscles,
iregular mural hypertrophy, and endocardial scarring. Severe hypertrophic or
restrictive cardiomyopathy is likely.
i. Although echocardiography may provide additional information, this study indi-
cates chronic diastolic dysfunction. An increased risk for decompensated heart failure,
arterial thromboembolism, and arrhythmias is expected. Furosemide should be
continued at the lowest level needed to control pulmonary edema. The owner should
enzyme inhibitor and therapy to reduce risk of thromboembolism (e.g. aspirin, clopi-
dogrel are also recommended. Other agents may be helpful for refractory heart failure
(e.g pimobendan, spironolactone) or tachyarrhythmias (e.g. atenolol, diltiazem).
124
IlI, Il2: Questions
Ilb
111 A 13-year-old male-neutered Irish
Setter is presented  for abdominal
distension. A palpable fluid wave indi-
cates ascites. No murmur is auscultated, but jugular pulsation and distension are
noted. Femoral pulses are normal. Echocardiography shows a serious lesion. The
owners elected euthanasia. Postmortem images are shown (111a, opened RV with
freewall to the right and pulmonary valve at top of image; 111b, opened RA).
i. Describe the lesion and its location.
i. Can the dog's clinical signs be attributed to this lesion? Why, or why not?
112 An 18-year-old female spayed DSH
cat is presented for episodes of collapse
that are becoming more frequent and
severe. Over the past few weeks the
owner has also noted the cat sometimes
has trouble jumping up on the bed. The
cat is alert and in good condition.
Physical examination is unremarkable.
Chest radiographs and BP are normal.
You hospitalize the cat for observation. Later the cat vocalizes briefly, collapses
 into lateral recumbency, and stiffens her limbs. Several similar episodes occur over
i. What are common characteristics of cardiovascular syncope that may help
differentiate it from seizure activity?
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered in this case?
ili. What would you do next in this case?
12.5
Ill, Il2: Answers
111 i. In 111a (viewed from the RV cavity) there is a glistening yellowish mass of
enveloping the mass (on the left). The mass appears multilobular and gelatinous. In
111b (from inside the RA looking toward the tricuspid orifice) the mass appears to
completely occlude the RV inflow region. This intracardiac tumor was histologically
identified as a myxoma. Cardiac myxoma is a benign neoplasm resulting from
multipotent mesenchymal cells. It usually arises from the interatrial septum near
the fossa ovalis, most commonly in the LA but occasionally from the RA. This
tumor type is very rare in dogs.
i. Jugular pulsation related to atrial contraction can occur with any cause of
increased right heart filling pressures. In this case the mass partially obstructed
tricuspid inflow and increased resistance to RV filling. Jugular vein distension
develops when RA pressure is high. As obstruction to ventricular filling worsens,
pulsation of the jugular veins diminishes and may disappear, although venous
distension persists. Ascites develops because systemic venous and capillary
hydrostatic pressure elevation increases fluid transudation from the capillaries. This
mimics right-sided congestive heart failure.
112 i. Syncope is sudden, transient unconsciousness, usually caused by abruptly
reduced cerebral perfusion. Collapse into lateral recumbency, limb stiffening,
opisthotonic posture, micturition, and vocalization are common. Syncope is often
associated with excitement or exertion. Atypical for syncope are facial fits,
persistent tonic/clonic motion, defecation, a prodromal aura, (postictal) dementia,
and neurologic deficits. Profound hypotension can cause hypoxic seizure-like
activity ('convulsive syncope'), but loss of muscle tone usually precedes this.
Neurologic seizure activity is usually preceded by atypical limb or facial movement
or staring spells before collapse.
i. Either syncope or seizure activity could be occurring here, although the apparent
absence of pre- or postictal mentation change makes cardiovascular syncope more
likely. Syncope has many causes, but given this cat's age, absence of cardiac murmur
and normal thoracic radiographs, an intermittent tachy- or bradyarrhythmia would
be most likely in this case. Myocardial disease may also be present. Likely
differentials for seizure activity include brain tumor, transient cerebrovascular
events, and cerebral inflammatory lesion.
ii. An ECG, echocardiogram, neurologic examination, and laboratory database
(e.g. CBC, biochemical profile, Ta, urinalysis, heartworm test) are advised.
Ambulatory ECG monitoring can help identify or exclude cardiac arrhythmias if
resting ECG is normal.
126
113, 114: Questions
113 The cat in case 112 is
113
being monitored because of
frequent collapse events. She
collapses during in-hospital
ECG monitoring. The heart
rhythm just prior to and
during the event is shown
(113, lead I1, 25 mm/s, 1 cm =
1 mV; the top two strips are
continuous).
i. What is your ECG interpre-
tation?
ii. Is the underlying problem likely to be within the AV node?
ili. What treatment options are available?
4a
4b
114A 7-year-old female English Springer
Spaniel  in  good
1 body condition 
1has
progressive lethargy and exercise intolerance
of several months' duration. Over the past
 2 weeks she has developed an occasional soft cough and seems reluctant to go on
walks. Examination reveals pink mucous membranes, jugular pulses extending to the
laryngeal region, and strong synchronous femoral pulses. Pulse rate is regular at
40 bpm. Holosystolic plateau murmurs are heard over the left and right apex on
auscultation. An ejection murmur is also suspected, over the left base region. Lung
sounds are normal. Right lateral (114a) and DV (114b) thoracic radiographs are taken.
i. What abnormalities are seen on these chest radiographs?
ii. Identify differential diagnoses for this case based on the information available.
ii. Should a diuretic be administered for congestive heart failure at this time?
iv. What other clinical test(s) are indicated?
127
Il3, I14: Answers
113 i. The ECG begins with sinus rhythm at 200 bpm; the QRS complexes have
deep and wide S waves typical for right bundle branch block (RBBB). Midway
12 seconds elapse (and syncope occurred) before a ventricular escape rhythm
appears (middle strip, right side). Complete AV block with ventricular escape
rhythm continues into the bottom strip; after the Sth QRS complex, three sinus
P waves are conducted with RBBB, followed by brief alternating periods of AV
block with escape rhythm and conduction.
i. The RBBB apparent during sinus rhythm indicates an intraventricular conduction
system abnormality. More widespread intraventricular disease is likely, with
intermittent left bundle branch block producing complete heart block. Nevertheless,
AV nodal disease may also exist. Most advanced AV block is associated with
underlying structural disease (e.g. endocarditis/myocarditis, cardiomyopathy,
endocardiosis, fibrosis, trauma).
i. The intermittent nature of the AV block is problematic. Most cats with persistent
third degree AV block are asymptomatic, with ventricular escape rates of
90-120 bpm. The efficacy of medical management is unclear. Artificial pacing can
alleviate the syncope. An epicardial approach is now thought to be better in cats as
chylothorax commonly develops after transvenous pacing (as in this cat).
114 i. Generalized cardiomegaly is present, with LV and especially LA enlargement
being predominant. This is evidenced by the extremely tall (lateral) and elongated
(DV) cardiac silhouette. The caudal edge of the enlarged LA overlaps the LV apical
region on DV view; the left auricular bulge is seen at the 2 o'clock position. The
caudal vena cava is prominent. Pulmonary vessel size and pulmonary parenchyma
appear normal.
i. Differential diagnoses for this case include chronic volume overload dilation
secondary to chronic bradycardia, or dilated cardiomyopathy, or chronic AV valve
disease with concurrent conduction disturbance. The most likely underlying causes
for the regular bradyarrhythmia in this case is complete AV block or, considering
the signalment, atrial standstill. Other bradyarrhythmias such as intermittent sinus
arrest, sick sinus syndrome, or second degree AV block are classically associated
with an irregular heart rhythm.
ii. There is no evidence of pulmonary edema (left-sided heart failure); pulmonary
vessels appear normal in size and pulmonary parenchyma appears clear. Diuretics
are not needed at this time.
iv. An ECG is indicated for cardiac rhythm diagnosis. An echocardiogram is
warranted to evaluate chamber sizes and ventricular systolic function. (See also case
115.)
128
115, 116: Questions
115 This ECG (115a, leads
15a
I, II, and III at 50 mm/s,
1 cm = 1 mV) is taken from
the dog in case 114. An
echocardiogram
shows
 severe dilation of the LA and
moderate to severe dilation
of the LV. LV systolic
function is characterized as
normal, with a FS of 55%.
Serum biochemical tests are normal.
i. What is the ECG rhythm diagnosis?
ii. What treatment, if any, would you advise?
ili. What is the long-term prognosis for this patient?
116 An 18-year-old cat is presented for difficulty
16a
breathing and weight loss, which began a couple
weeks ago.S
She nows
shows
sopen-mouth
breathing and increased abdominal effort. The
cat has long tested positive for feline leukemia
and immunodeficiency viruses. On physical
examination she appears depressed, thin, and
somewhat dehydrated. F
Respiratory rate is
24 breaths/min and labored; HR is 160 bpm and
regular. Wheezes are heard on auscultation.
Thoracic radiographs reveal a soft tissue opacity
within the distal trachea. Laboratory tests show
mild azotemia. Supplemental O, and intravenous
fluid therapy are instituted prior to anesthesia for
116b
bronchoscopy. Images from within the mid
(116a) and distal (116b) trachea are shown.
i. What are the bronchoscopic findings?
i. What would you do now?
ii. What are the most common causes of large
airway obstruction in cats?
iv. How would you manage this case after
bronchoscopy?
129
I15, Il6: Answers
115
5i. Atrial standstill with a
15b
ventricular escape rhythm and fre-
quent ven tricular premature contrac-
tions
(VPCs). Persistent
atrial
standstill is characterized by a junc-
tional or i
idioventricular escape
rhythm without detectable P waves.
In this ECG a VPC follows every
escape complex in a repeatable
pattern (ventricular bigeminy), which
 may represent a re-entry path within an area of diseased myocardium. The VPCs occur
early enough that an arterial pulse may not be generated. In this dog, serum electrolytes
were normal and clinical and radiographic findings indicated severe heart disease.
i. Medical therapy is usually inadequate for atrial standstill. An atropine challenge
test may indicate whether the bradyarrhythmia is responsive to changes in vagal tone.
Permanent transvenous pacemaker implantation is the treatment of choice (115b).
i. Persistent atrial standstill, also called AV muscular dystrophy, has been recognized
mainly in Springer Spaniels and Old English Sheepdogs. It has been compared to a
type of human muscular dystrophy and involves progressive atrial and ventricular
muscle degeneration. Congestive heart failure often results. Even with pacemaker
placement, the disorder is usually fatal within 12-18 months of diagnosis.
116 i. An irregular fleshy mass is attached to the lateral trachea wall near the carina.
i. Debulk the mass as much as possible with endoscopic biopsy forceps and submit
the tissue for histologic
C examination. A wire snare passed through the
bronchoscope's biopsy channel can also be used to remove intratracheal masses in
the cat. Incomplete removal may result in regrowth of the mass. However given the
deep intrathoracic location of this mass and the cat's advanced age, surgical
resection was deemed too risky.
ii. A neoplastic mass (e.g. lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma)
is most likely, although lymphoplasmocytic inflammatory polyps and lymphoid
hyperplasia are also reported. Lymphoid hyperplasia may presage later discovery of
neoplasia. Laryngeal
I masses are more common than tracheal mass lesions.
Laryngeal paralysis is another consideration for upper airway obstruction. This
mass appeared to be an adenoma or a very well-differentiated carcinoma.
iv. Supplemental O, should be continued during anesthetic recovery. Prednisolone
(e.g. 1 mg/kg initially then tapering over several days and discontinuing) helps
reduce airway inflammation and edema. A broad-spectrum antibiotic may also be
Lsed. Long-term prognosis is usually poor because of mass recurrence.
130
I17, 1l8: Questions
117b
117 A 2-year-old female DLH cat is presented
for signs of respiratory distress. She appears
anxious and tachypneic. Body temperature,
 mucous membrane color, pulses, jugular veins,
and precordial palpation are normal. HR is
240 bpm. A grade 2/6 systolic murmur and
S4 gallop sound are heard at the left apex. Breath
sounds are harsh. Lateral (117a) and DV (117b)
chest radiographs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. What would you do next?
118
118 A 12-week-old male Bengal kitten is presented for breathing difficulty. The cat
is otherwise healthy except for the physical abnormality illustrated (118, cat
positioned in dorsal recumbency with its head to the left).
i. What is the physical abnormality illustrated?
i. What is the cause of this condition?
ili. What diagnostic tests are indicated, and why?
iv. What concurrent abnormalities may be found with this condition?
131
Il7, Il8: Answers
117 i. The cardiac silhouette is enlarged (VHS ~8.8 v), with moderate tracheal
elevation. Diffuse patchy interstitial to alveolar infiltrates are especially prominent
in the dorsocaudal lung fields. Pulmonary vessels to the right caudal lobe are seen
best and are enlarged (wider than the 10th rib where they cross; 117b). Aerophagia
is consistent with respiratory distress.
i. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema. This condition in cats usually involves an uneven
and patchy distribution of opacities, either extending throughout the lung fields or
commonly causes an S4 gallop and congestive heart failure (CHF) in cats, but other
cardiomyopathies are other potential causes. Congenital cardiac shunts or mitral
dysplasia often cause left-sided CHF. Although enlargement of both veins and
arteries often accompanies pulmonary overcirculation, this vascular pattern also
occurs with CHF (pulmonary venous congestion and secondary increase in PA
pressure). Other differentials for interstitial pulmonary infiltrates include infection,
hemorrhage, and neoplasia.
ii. Administer supplemental O, and parenteral furosemide. Minimize patient stress
and manipulation. When respiration improves, obtain an echocardiogram, along
with BP measurement and a complete laboratory database, to guide further therapy.
Severe HCM was identified in this cat.
118 i. Pectus excavatum. This concave sternal deformity is caused by dorsal
deviation of the mid or caudal sternum and associated costal arches.
ii. Pectus excavatum is a congenital deformity of the sternum and costal cartilages
that results in dorsoventral narrowing of the thorax. The exact developmental
mechanism of this abnormality is not known.
li. Thoracic radiographs should be obtained to assess the degree of dorsoventral
radiographs also provide a baseline for evaluating the effectiveness of treatment.
Echocardiography can also be helpful, especially if a heart murmur is heard.
iv. Concurrent abnormalities can include tracheal hypoplasia and congenital heart
defects; animals with pectus excavatum are also more susceptible to lower airway
infection and pneumonia. However, a cardiac murmur heard in an animal with
pectus excavatum may not necessarily indicate a congenital heart defect. Murmurs
in affected animals without structural heart disease often disappear after surgical
correction of pectus excavatum. Such murmurs are thought to be related to cardiac
malpositioning rather than a cardiac defect per se.
132
119, 120: Questions
119 Physical examination of
R
119
the kitten in case 118 reveals a
palpable sternal abnormality.
Thoracic radiographs
are
taken (right
lateralview
shown [119]].
i.
What  ist
the
physical
abnormality illustrated in the
radiograph?
i. What is the recommended
treatment for this condition?
ii. How soon should defini-
tive  treatment
forthis
condition be performed?
iv. What are the potential consequences of not treating this condition?
120a
120b
120 A 5-month-old male Pit Bull Terrier
is presented for abdominal distension
that has developed over the past
2 months (120a). He is acting and eating normally, but recently his large abdomen
has been slowing him down. The dog is alert and active, with normal mucous
membrane color and capillary refill time. Femoral pulses are normal. The jugular
veins are not distended or pulsating. HR and rhythm and heart and lung sounds are
 normal. There is large-volume ascites, which is a modified transudate. Thoracic
radiographs show normal heart size and shape, with normal lungs and pulmonary
vasculature (DV, 120b).
i. What are the causes of large-volume modified transudate in the abdomen?
i. Does this dog have right-sided congestive heart failure (CHF}?
ii. How would you proceed with this puppy?
133
I19, 120: Answers
119 i. The dorsal sternal deviation of pectus excavatum is evident.
i. Treatment involves fashioning an external frame of lighrweight thermoplastic
material that is secured with sutures placed around the sternum and through holes
in the frame. Sutures are preplaced around the sternum and threaded through holes
 n ar s a   a n s s  s
sternum is pulled toward the frame, reversing the pectus excavatum. The frame is
maintained for 3 weeks.
ii. The procedure is ideally performed when the animal is still growing, so that
thoracic remodeling will occur quickly and before the animal outgrows the frame.
iv. Respiratory compromise is the most common manifestation of pectus
excavatum. The severity of clinical signs relates to the severity of the deformity,
thoracic volume reduction, and lung collapse. Secondary pneumonia or cardiac
compromise can be complications. Signs can range from mild exercise intolerance
to marked respiratory distress and death. Some cases exhibit persistent coughing.
Others are asymptomatic except for the physical presence of the defect; however,
waiting for clinical signs to develop may not be prudent, because the condition is
treated more readily in an actively growing animal than in an adult with a less
pliable thorax.
120 i. Ascites usually results from abnormal Starling's forces, often high systermic
venous
6 or portal pressure. Increased
 capillary  permeability
(e.g.from
inflammation), low capillary colloid oncotic pressure (from hypoalbuminemia), and
lymphatic obstruction are other mechanisms. Ascites from high venous hydrostatic
ascites occurs from restricted blood flow between the hepatic vein and RV. Excessive
fluid formation in hepatic sinusoids then diffuses across the liver capsule to the
peritoneal space. Posthepatic ascites is usually secondary to right-sided CHF or
cardiac tamponade. Uncommonly, caudal vena caval or RA inflow obstruction or
compression are causes. “Hepatic' ascites, from primary liver disease, usually
involves portal hypertension, although other mechanisms are possible. Prehepatic'
ascites develops from portal vein obstruction; excess fluid transudation from
intestinal serosa produces increased lymph formation. Prehepatic ascites is
uncommon because collateral portosystemic shunting reduces portal hypertension.
i. Right-sided CHF should also cause jugular vein distension, as well as other
evidence for cardiac enlargement or dysfunction. However, the caudal vena cava
appears large on the radiograph.
ii. Recommend echocardiography to examine the proximal caudal vena cava and
RA inflow region for obstructive lesions, and possibly abdominal ultrasonography
or vena caval angiography.
134
121, 122: Questions
12la
121b
121 An echocardiogram is done on the
Pit Bull Terrier puppy described in case
120. A diastolic frame from the right
parasternal short axis view with color flow Doppler sector over the RA (121a) and
pulsed wave (PW) Doppler with sample volume in the RA above the tricuspid valve
(121b) are shown. 1 - RA, 2 - Ao, 3 - RV.
i. Describe the findings in 121a.
ii. What is shown in 121b?
ili. What is your diagnosis?
iv. How can this condition be treated?
22a
122b
R
122
A 3-year-old,spayed female DLH cat is
presented after 1 week of increased respiratory effort.
The physical examination findings are tachypnea,
dull thoracic auscultation particularly ventrally, and
decreased thoracic
 compliance on palpation.
Thoracic radiographs (122a, b) are made.
i. What are the radiographic abnormalities?
ii. What is the radiographic diagnosis?
i. What are the etiologic differentials?
iv. Of what value would a CT study be in this patient?
13.5
121, I22: Answers
121 i. A perforated membrane bisects the
121c
RA. Low velocity flow (coded red) moves
through the large caudal RA chamber,
accelerating across the membrane's narrow
opening into the cranial RA chamber.
Tricuspid valve, RV, Ao, and main PA are
normal.
ii. The sample volume is in the cranial RA
chamber. Flow velocity is increased (peak
>2 m/s) across the intra-atrial membrane,
with pressure gradient ~10-20 mmHg
throughout the cardiac cycle.
ii. Cor triatriatum dexter. This uncommon malformation occurs when the
embryonic right sinus venosus valve fails to regress, creating an abnormal
membrane that divides the right (dexter) atrium in two. Caudal vena caval and
coronary sinus flows enter the caudal RA chamber. Obstructed flow through the
abnormal membrane raises hydrostatic pressure in the caudal vena cava and veins
caudal cava and flow restriction at the RA membrane (arrows, 121c).
iv. The abnormal membrane can be surgically excised or the orifice enlarged using
balloon dilation catheters.
122 i. Nearly the entire thorax is of soft tissue/fluid opacity. Only the caudal right
r   si      si 
right and demonstrate air bronchogram formation. The cardiac shadow is effaced
with the exception of a small portion of the apex evident in the DV view that is
shifted to the right. The left half of the diaphragm is effaced and the impression is
i. Large left-sided thoracic mass, more likely of mediastinal origin than pulmonary
or pleural.
i. Thymic origin neoplasia (lymphoma or thymoma), cranial mediastinal
lymphadenomegaly (lymphoma), thymic cyst, and branchial cyst. The diagnosis in
this patient was malignant thymoma.
iv. Based on the limited studies in dogs and cats, CT imaging is not likely to provide
an etiologic diagnosis for a cranial mediastinal mass. However, it has been found
to be useful in the local staging of these masses and thus in the surgical
management.
136
123, 124: Questions
123a
123b
123 A 13-year-old neutered female Beagle presents with a 1-week history of
lethargy, followed by cough and respiratory distress that developed 2 days prior to
Physical examination reveals normal body temperature (38.9°C [102*F]), good
fermoral pulse quality, and no jugular pulsation or distension. The hepatojugular
reflux is negative. Chest percussion indicates a bilateral horizontal line of dullness.
Other parameters are unremarkable. Thoracic radiographs show increased opacity
throughout the ventral aspect of the chest, with retraction and scalloping of lung
lobes, consistent with a mild pleural effusion. Echocardiography and abdominal
ultrasonography
are
unremarkable.
. Thoracocentesis
yields
150mlof
serosanguineous fluid: total protein, 50.5 g/l (5.05 g/dl); albumin, 34.1 g/l
(3.41 g/dl); globulin, 20.4 g/l (2.04 g/dl); alb/glob ratio, 1.49; pH, 7.4; SG, 1.035;
appearance, red turbid fluid; cell preservation, good; cytology, individual small
clusters and large rafts of cells with foamy cytoplasm, variable round to oval nuclei
and occasional mitoses, cells have a variable nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, high number
of neutrophils in the background; microbiology, negative aerobic and anaerobic
cultures.
Thoracoscopy is performed under general anesthesia and an image is obtained
(123a, 1 - pericardium, 2 - right middle lung lobe). No parenchymal lesions or
isolated masses are identified. A pleural biopsy is obtained (123b, 25x; H&E).
i. What are the differential diagnoses for this case?
i. How would you describe the thoracoscopic findings?
ili. What does the biopsy show?
124 What are the effects of, and indications for, pimobendan?
137
123, I24: Answers
123 i. The effusion is consistent with a pleural exudate. This can occur from
inflammation (pleuritis), with increased permeability of the pleural surface to
proteinaceous fluid. Causes of pleuritis include bacterial infection, neoplasia
(pulmonary, mediastinal, or pleural), thoracic trauma, or even chronic effusion of
different causes.
i. The thoracoscopic image shows several white-gray plaques, a few millimeters in
diameter, on the visceral pleural surface. Similar lesions were observed on the
pericardium and parietal pleura.
ili. Biopsy and histopathology of the pleural lesions are necessary for definitive
diagnosis. In this case, cords of cells, acini, and papillary projections are seen on
histologic examination. Some of the larger, bizarre cells observed at the surface in
some areas resemble the cells observed in the pleural fluid. In the absence of an
obvious primary mass elsewhere, and from the cytologic appearance, these changes
are consistent with pleural mesothelioma.
Life expectancy with mesothelioma is often less than a 1 year, although survival
time may increase with chemotherapy (and pericardectomy if concurrent pericardial
effusion). Intracavitary administration of cisplatin or carboplatin, possibly with
piroxicam, may produce clinical remission for several months. The intracavitary
oftoxicity.
124 Pimobendan increases cardiac contractility and promotes systemic and
pulmonary vasodilation, thereby improving cardiac pump function. It increases
contractility by phosphodiesterase-3 (PDE-3) inhibition (enhances adrenergic effects
on Ca++ fluxes) and by a calcium-sensitizing effect on cardiac contractile proteins.
The latter increases contractility without additional myocardial O, requirement.
PDE-3 inhibition underlies the drug's vasodilating effect. Pimobendan also can
modulate neurohormonal and proinflammatory cytokine activation. Pimobendan
Pa   ( e n   s   
disease or dilated cardiomyopathy; it has improved clinical signs and survival when
added to conventional CHF therapy. Dogs with other causes of myocardial
dysfunction and cats with refractory CHF may also benefit.
138
125: Question
125a
125b
125c
125 A 5-year-old 3 kg (6.5 Ib) spayed female cat has episodes of cyanosis and
increased respiratory rate and effort, mostly after playing. The referring veterinarian
has prescribed enalapril and furosemide, with little improvement. The cat is alert.
Respiratory rate is 72 breaths/min, HR is 240 bpm, and temperature is 38.8°C
(101.9*F). No cardiac murmur is heard on auscultation, but increased breath sounds
slight cyanosis of the oral mucous membranes and increased respiratory effort are
evident. An echocardiogram is done; images shown are from the right parasternal
long axis position (125a-c). 1 - RV, 2 - RA, 3 - LV, 4 - LA, 5 - Ao.
i. Assess the echo findings.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ii. Why is no murmur evident?
iv. How should this be managed?
139
I25:Answers
125 i. Moderate RV hypertrophy and RA enlargement are evident (125a). 125b
shows a large ventricular septal defect (VsD) with overriding aortic root; flow
from both RV (blue) and LV (red) enters into the aorta (125c). The slightly
elevated pulmonary outflow velocity is consistent with mild pulmonic stenosis
(PS).
i. Tetralogy of Fallot; component anomalies are VsD, PS, a dextropositioned
aorta, and RV hypertrophy. PS can vary from mild (as in this case) to complete
PA atresia. The rightward shift of the aortic root facilitates RV-to-aorta shunting.
 RV hypertrophy develops secondary to systolic pressure overload.
li. The relatively equilibrated ventricular pressures, along with the mild PS here,
explain the lack of murmur. In other cases, hyperviscosity from hypoxia-induced
erythrocytosis also reduces turbulence and murmur intensity.
iv. The degree of RV-to-aorta shunting depends on the balance between PS severity
(fixed RV outflow resistance) and systemic arterial resistance (variable). Shunting
increases with exercise because systemic resistance declines, so exercise restriction
is prudent. Hematocrit is periodically monitored. Phlebotomy helps control severe
erythrocytosis and hyperviscosity signs. Hydroxyurea and palliative surgery have
also been used in dogs. Furosemide and enalapril were discontinued in this case.
140
126, 127: Questions
126a
126b
126 An 11-year-old Yorkshire Terrier was
recently
diagnosed with  hyperadreno-
corticism (Cushing's disease). At a recheck
examination the owner complains that the dog has developed *breathing problems'
and a cough. You hear no cardiac murmur, but there is an occasional soft crackle
n (q7) Aa p (e7) prae ‘uds dap jo pa Aa a 1e
radiographs are taken.
i. What radiographic abnormalities are seen?
ii. What is the likely cause?
273
27b
127 A 6-year-old neutered male Pomeranian develops episodic trembling asso-
ciated with stiffening of the limbs as well as weakness, vomiting, and panting. An
echocardiogram is done (127a, M-mode image at mitral valve level; 127b, color
M-mode in same position).
i. What is shown in the figures?
ii. Why does this occur?
ili. What etiologies can cause this?
iv. Are particular physical examination findings likely to result?
141
126, I27: Answers
126 i. A severe diffuse miliary to nodular coalescing interstitial pattern lung pattern
is seen. The pattern is intensely opaque, suggesting pulmonary mineralization/
ossification. Moderate RV enlargement and severe RA and main PA enlargement are
seen on the DV view, consistent with the ‘reverse D' pattern of RV pressure
overload. These cardiac changes suggest pulmonary hypertension, likely secondary
to the severe interstitial lung condition. Moderate to severe hepatomegaly is also
noted.
ii. Cutaneous dystrophic mineralization of the truncal region (calcinosis cutis) is
occur elsewhere in the body such as the bronchial or lung tissue. It was suspected
that this dog's pulmonary mineralization was related to the endocrinopathy
Mineralization  associated  with hyperadrenocorticism  may be difficult  to
differentiate from idiopathic pulmonary ossification. Most animals with the latter
With hyperadrenocorticism-associated cutaneous mineralization, resolution can
Occur after weeks to months of endocrine therapy.
127 i. Diastolic flutter of the anterior mitral leaflet is seen (127a; arrow, 127c).
Color flow Doppler reveals marked diastolic turbulence within the LV outflow
[ract, between the septum and the anterior mitral leaflet (127b). The mitral
E point-septal separation is increased.
i. A regurgitant jet from aortic valve insufficiency creates diastolic LV outflow
turbulence and strikes the mitral leaflet, causing it to vibrate and pushing it away
from its fully open position (see case 128).
ii. Infective aortic valve endocarditis is the most likely acquired cause. Congenital
ventricular septal defect with loss of aortic root support, aortic valve malformation,
Or aortic regurgitation (AR) with subaortic stenosis are other causes.
iv. A diastolic decrescendo murmur is often audible at the left base with moderate
to severe AR. A systolic murmur of relative aortic stenosis is also possible because
AR imposes a volume overload on the LV, increasing stroke volume. AR causes
stronger arterial pulses because diastolic pressure falls more quickly and lower than
normal, widening the pulse pressure (difference between systolic and diastolic
arterial pressure).  Progressive  LV dilation,
secondary mitral insufficiency, and left-sided
127c
heart failure can result from AR
142
128: Question
128a
128b
128c
128 A 6-year-old Pomeranian has a history of episodic trembling, stiffening of the
 9t)   r    d pe  sm s
[10.2 Ib]). Body temperature is 40°C (104*F). A grade 4/6 systolic murmur and
2/6 diastolic murmur are heard at the left base. Left femoral pulses are very strong, but
no right femoral pulse is palpable. Chest radiographs indicate mild generalized
cardiomegaly. Neutrophilia (>25,400/μl) with left shift, mild anemia (PCV 30%), and
thrombocytopenia (99,500/μl) are seen on CBC. Echocardiography shows LV volume
 overload and moderate systolic dysfunction. These images are from the left cranial
long axis view (128a, systole; 128b, diastole; 128c, diastole). 1 - LV, 2 - A0.
i. Describe the echo findings.
ii. What is your assessment of this case?
ili. What is your management plan?
143
128:Answer
128 i. A large, elongated vegetative lesion, attached to the aortic valve, extends
into the ascending aorta during systole, then moves back into the LV during
diastole. Color flow Doppler (128c) reveals marked aortic regurgitation, with
turbulent flow surrounding the vegetation.
ii. Infective aortic valve endocarditis is most likely here, based on the large
vegetative lesion along with fever, CBC abnormalities, evidence for arterial
thromboembolism (absent right femoral pulse), and other findings. In general,
presumptive diagnosis of endocarditis is based on positive blood cultures with
either echocardiographic evidence of vegetations or valve destruction (e.g.
ruptured chordae, flail leaflet tip) or documented recent onset of a regurgitant
murmur.
ii. Goals include identifying the organism and source of infection, choosing
appropriate bactericidal antibiotic therapy, and managing complications (e.g.
cardiac, thromboembolic). Enterococcus faecalis was cultured here; however,
negative blood and urine cultures do not rule out infective endocarditis.
Aggressive antibiotic therapy is begun immediately after obtaining culture
samples, modified if necessary based on results, and continued for at least
6-8 weeks. A combination of cephalosporin, penicillin, or synthetic penicillin
derivative with an aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone is commonly used.
Clindamycin or metronidazole adds anaerobic efficacy.
144
129, 130: Questions
129a
129b
129 A 10-year-old spayed female English
Setter is presented for progressive exercise
intolerance, excessive panting, and, recently,
collapse with minimal exertion. The dog is in
poor body condition. Cardiovascular examin-
 ation indicates pale pink mucous membranes, jugular pulsations, and weak femoral
pulses that are correlated with the cardiac apex beat. Thoracic auscultation reveals
a holosystolic murmur heard best over the right apex and a ‘snappy’ second heart
sound, but no other auscultatory abnormalities. Right lateral (129a) and DV (129b)
thoracic radiographs are obtained.
i. What abnormalities are seen on the thoracic radiographs?
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ili. What additional clinical tests would be indicated?
130 A4-month-old male DSH
130a
kitten is presented for cardiac
evaluation because of occa-
sional
collapse
episodes.
Physical examination is unre-
markable. An ECG is recorded
(130a, leads as marked,
25 mm/s except lower right
segment of lead II at 50 mm/s,
1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What do the arrows point to?
ii. What is your ECG interpretation?
ii. Describe the conduction abnormality present.
iv. Could this be associated with the collapse episodes? If so, how?
14.5
I29, I30: Answers
129 i. The main PA and major branches
129c
{especially the right) are severely enlarged, but
become markedly truncated peripherally. The
mildly rounded right heart (129b) and main
PA bulge (1-2 o'clock position) create a
'reverse D' cardiac appearance. The rounded
RV also lifts the LV apex dorsally off the
sternum (129a).
i. The ‘reverse D' appearance suggests RV
pressure overload. Common causes are con-
genital pulmonic stenosis (PS) and PA hyper-
tension (PAH). PS is unlikely as the murmur in this older dog is not characteristic of
PS. However, the tricuspid regurgitation (TR) murmur and loud second heart sound
are typical for severe PAH, although not always heard. PAH can develop with chronic
airway disease, infiltrative lung disease, and pulmonary vascular disease, including
heartworm disease and pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE), as well as chronic left-
sided heart failure.
iii. Echocardiography can confirm PAH and suggest severity. Classic findings
include RV hypertrophy, right heart and PA dilation, and TR. Peak TR jet velocity
is used to estimate RV and (when PS is absent) PA systolic pressures. Vascular
abnormalities are sometimes identified, including the chronic in-situ PTE seen here
(129c); two hyperechoic thrombi (arrows) are within the dilated right PA.
130 i. Calibration marks (with QRS complex superimposed in lead I).
i. HR 220-240 bpm, with sinus rhythm. Mean electrical axis (0°) is normal. PR
interval is short (~0.03 second), QRS duration is increased (~0.06 second), and in lead
I, R wave amplitude (maximum QRS excursion) is greater than normal at 1.3 mV.
iii. Ventricular pre-excitation. PR intervals are shortened because an accessory
a widened and slurred QRS upstroke or *delta’ wave (arrows, 130b). This is typical
for Wolff-Parkinson-White type pre-excitation. The increased QRS amplitude here
is probably secondary to abnormal ventricular activation.
Usually, a ventricular impulse is conducted backwards through the accessory pathway
to the atrium, then down the AV node in the normal ('antegrade' or 'orthodromic')
direction to re-enter the ventricles. Rapid AV reciprocating tachycardia can cause
weakness, syncope, congestive heart failure, and death. Atenolol therapy controlled
this cat's collapse episodes.
130b
146
131, 132: Questions
131 A young female Cocker Spaniel has
131
poor exercise ability (131). The owners
have become quite concerned over the
past 5 months because she has had
increasingly
frequent
episodes
weakness or paralysis in her hindlimbs
when outside playing. At other times she
 seems normal. Oral mucous membranes
are pink; femoral pulses are normal. The
precordial impulse is strong, especially on the right. HR and rhythm are normal. No
cardiac murmur is heard, but the second heart sound is quite prominent.
Respirations are normal. You take the dog outside and walk her; after a short time,
she becomes weak in the rear and resists walking further. The dog remains alert
with a normally pink tongue and oral membranes.
i. What are your initial differential diagnoses?
ii. Is the absence of a murmur surprising in this dog?
ili. Is evaluation of tongue/oral membrane color adequate to detect cyanosis with
exercise in this dog?
132a
132b
132
 A 16-year-old  spayed female cat  was
previously diagnosed with hyperthyroidism and is
receiving methimazole. HR is 200 bpm. Respir-
132c
ations are normal. An S4 gallop sound, but no
murmur is heard. BP is 220 mmHg, systolic. A
lateral thoracic radiograph is obtained (132a) and
echocardiography is undertaken (132b, c). 1 - RV,
2 -LV, 3 -Ao.
i. What are the radiographic abnormalities?
ii. Describe the echocardiographic findings.
ii. How would you manage this cat's hyper-
tension?
147
I3l, I32: Answers
131 i. Most likely a right-to-left shunting (reversed) patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
The observed hindlimb weakness and ‘apparent paralysis' with exercise are typical
with reversed PDA because the caudal body receives relatively unoxygenated blood
through the shunt. The strong right precordial impulse suggests RV hypertrophy
(secondary to severe pulmonary hypertension). A loud, snapping (and sometimes
split) S, sound on auscultation suggests pulmonary hypertension. Other
considerations could be arterial thromboembolic or other vascular disease affecting
the hindlimbs (although the normal femoral pulses contradict this) or a neuro-
muscular disorder. The abnormal precordial and auscultatory findings would not
be expected with these conditions.
i. There is often no murmur or only a soft systolic murmur with reversed PDA; a
continuous murmur is not heard. Factors contributing to this include the reduced
pressure gradient between PA and aorta and an increase in blood viscosity as
secondary polycythemia develops.
ili. No. Reversed PDA causes cyanosis of the caudal mucous membranes alone
(differential cyanosis). The cranial body receives normally oxygenated blood via
the brachycephalic trunk and left subclavian artery, which arise from the aortic
arch upstream from the ductus. Intracardiac shunts cause equally intense cyanosis
throughout the body.
132 i. The horizontal cardiac orientation is common in geriatric cats. Mild
cardiomegaly (VHS ~8.5 v) is consistent with chronic hypertension. The thoracic
aorta are reported in hypertensive cats.
i. Mild interventricular septal (7 mm, 132b) and LV free wall (6 mm) hypertrophy
are seen. Chronic systemic hypertension can stimulate mild to moderate LV
hypertrophy. This cat's gallop sound likely reflects increased ventricular stiffness
despite minimal hypertrophy. The ascending aorta is dilated (132c). Correlation
between ascending aortic diameter and systolic BP (SBP) has been shown in cats,
although aortic valve annulus diameter typically is normal. A proximal ascending
aortic diameter:aortic annulus diameter ratio ≥1.25 is reported in hypertensive cats.
ii. Hemogram, serum biochemistries (including T4), urinalysis, and ocular
examination are indicated. Underlying or concurrent disease is treated if possible.
>200/110 mmHg); SBP below (160-}170 mmHg is the usual therapeutic goal.
Amlodipine is the first-line therapy for most hypertensive cats. However, a beta
blocker is advocated for hyperthyroid-induced hypertension, so T measurement is
particularly important in this cat. Combination of benazepril with amlodipine may
be advantageous if there is underlying renal disease.
148
133, I34: Questions
133A 16-year-old male Miniature
33
Poodle is presented for respiratory
distress (133). He has a history of
coughing for the past month, with
lethargy and poor appetite developing
recently. Although the dog has coughed
when excited or nervous for a “long
time', this seems different. One week
ago, another veterinarian prescribed
furosemide and torbutrol, believing the
YH aul pue paisaauoo Aiaa, aq o1 sgun]
irregular and slow'. The clinical signs
may have improved initially, but then worsened. Amoxicillin was also prescribed for
dental disease. The dog is orthopneic with marked inspiratory effort. Mucous
membranes are slightly cyanotic. Vital signs are temperature 38.9°C (102*F),
respirations 24 breaths/min, HR 130 bpm. A grade 2-3/6 systolic murmur over the
mitral area and increased breath sounds during inspiration are heard.
i. Is cardiogenic pulmonary edema likely in this dog? Why, or why not?
i. What does this respiratory pattern usually signify?
ili. Besides providing supplemental O, what would you do next?
134 A 3.5-year-old intact male Pomeranian
134a
is   presented 
1 for respiratory
distress
associated with recurrent pneumothorax.
Thoracic radiographs reveal the lesion seen
in these two intraoperative photographs
(134a, b, the animal's head is to the left).
The surgical approach is via median
sternotomy.
What lesion has caused
recurrent
pneumothorax in this dog?
i. Why is median sternotomy a better
surgical approach than lateral thoracotomy
134b
for this condition?
ii. What intraoperative disadvantage is
encountered with
median
sternotomy
versus lateral thoractomy for treatment of
this condition?
iv. What is the reported advantage of
surgical  treatment  versus conservative
management for this condition?
149
I33, I34: Answers
133 i. No. Although the murmur is consistent with chronic mitral regurgitation,
which would be the most common cause of cardiogenic pulmonary edema in this
case, the relatively slow respiratory rate with labored inspiration is atypical,
    as   as
ii. Slow and labored inspiration is most often associated with upper airway
obstruction. Causes include laryngeal paralysis, severe cervical tracheal collapse,
laryngeal or tracheal foreign body, granuloma, tumor, or other mass lesion.
stability allows, radiographs of the laryngeal, cervical, and thoracic regions may
help localize the obstructive lesion. However, immediate sedation for laryngeal
examination and tracheal intubation (or, if necessary, tracheostomy under general
anesthesia) may be required. In this dog, one lateral radiograph permitted
localization of the obstructive lesion (see case 9), which was then surgically
removed.
134 i. A large pulmonary bulla encompasses nearly the entire right cranial lung
lobe. A pulmonary bulla is an air-filled space in the lung parenchyma formed when
adjacent alveoli become confluent. The cause of this confluence in most cases is
idiopathic. Spontaneous rupture of a bulla results in pneumothorax.
i. Median sternotomy is performed when pulmonary bullae are diagnosed or
suspected, because multiple bullae and blebs may be present, and because lateral
thoracotomy does not allow exploration of all lung lobes.
li. The disadvantage of median sternotomy is that lung lobectomy is technically
   d si  p    r
bronchus, PA, and pulmonary vein are located deep in the dorsal aspect of the
pleural cavity.
iv. Surgical treatment is preferred instead of conservative management because
recurrence rates are lower with surgical intervention. Often, the bulla that has
ruptured has already sealed at the time of surgery, but the remaining lesion and
additional bullae can be excised, usually via partial lung lobectomy, to prevent
future episodes of spontaneous pneumothorax. Also, small blebs can be ruptured
intraoperatively and allowed to seal in a controlled, monitored situation to prevent
them from causing recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax.
1.50
135, 136: Questions
135
A15-year-old
 female
135a
Schipperke has sinus node dys-
function with prolonged periods of
sinus
arrestand
1  syncope.
A
 transvenous pacemaker system is
implanted via the right jugular vein
using a pulse generator in VVIR
mode. The following day this ECG
is recorded (135a, leads as marked,
25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What does VVIR mean?
i. Does the ECG show a normal paced rhythm?
ii. What is your ECG interpretation?
iv. How can this happen?
136a
136b
136 A 7-year-old spayed female mixed breed
dog is presented for reduced exercise tolerance,
a mild cough, and weight loss over the past
several weeks. Her vaccination status is
uncertain. She is on no medications. Another
dog in the household was recently diagnosed
with heartworm disease. The dog is thin, with a dull haircoat. There is mild jugular
distension and pulsation, a loud S, sound heard best at the left base, and a grade 3/6
systolic murmur at the right apex. Lung sounds are harsh, but no crackles or wheezes
are heard. You obtain lateral (136a) and DV (136b) chest radiographs.
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
i. Do the dog's physical findings suggest heartworm (HW) disease?
ili. What test(s) would confirm a diagnosis of HW disease?
151
135, I36: Answers
135 i. This pacemaker nomenclature
135b
code indicates: chamber paced,
Ventricle; chamber where spontaneous
electrical activity is sensed, Ventricle;
pacemaker response to sensed event,
Inhibited (i.e. pacemaker does not
discharge when spontaneous cardiac
activation is detected within preset
timing cycle); and, pacemaker is Rate
responsive (i.e. rate of pacing changes with activity).
ii. No.
ii. HR is 80 bpm. Only occasional QRS complexes are pacemaker stimulated (P',
135b); the others are junctional escape complexes. Six pacing artifacts that fail to
stimulate a QRS are seen (arrows denote some), indicating pacemaker *exit block'
Also, occasional failure to sense spontaneous cardiac activity ('entrance block') is
evident (3rd arrow from left). Spontaneous (non-paced) cardiac activation should
be sensed and pacemaker output inhibited for a preset interval to avoid triggering
tachyarrhythmias. Sinus node activity is not evident, but occasional abnormal
negative P' waves appear.
iv. Pacing and sensing failure can result from electrode dislodgement, cardiac
perforation, lead fracture or insulation break, loose connector pin, and increased
pacing threshold from tissue inflammation or fibrosis. Reprogramming of pulse
generator output and sensing parameters may restore normal function in the latter
case. Chest radiographs may depict lead dislodgement or fracture.
136 i. The overall heart size is normal (VHS ~10.5 v), but there is right heart
prominence especially on the DV view. The main PA segment is enlarged and caudal
PAs are slightly larger than the 9th ribs, where they cross (136b); the cranial PA
(136a) is larger than the accompanying vein. Pulmonary hypertension is likely. The
lung fields are normal.
i. The jugular distension and pulsation indicate high right heart filling pressure and,
in view of the right apical murmur, tricuspid insufficiency. The loud S, sound is
consistent with an underlying cause of pulmonary hypertension, which often causes
a loud and 'snapping' or split S,. Given the history, HW disease is the likely etiology.
i. An adult HW antigen test. Circulating microfilariae are naturally absent in some
(occult') HW infections and monthly HW preventive drugs also eventually eliminate
microfilariae by impairing worm reproduction. Because this dog is not on monthly
HW preventive, a test for circulating microfilariae may yield the diagnosis (as it did
in this dog). Microfilaria concentrations tests (e.g. millipore filter or modified Knott
technique) are more accurate than fresh wet blood smear examination.
152
137, 138: Questions
137a
137b
137 A 13-year-old spayed female DSH cat
from the USA midwest has been coughing
intermittently for 2 years. She appears in good
physical condition, but is slightly tachypneic.
Physical findings include moderate dental
disease and mild lenticular sclerosis. Auscul-
tation indicates normal HR and rhythm, with
no obvious cardiac murmur; however, soft
pulmonary crackles are heard over the ventral lung fields. Lateral (137a) and DV
(137b) radiographs are taken.
i. Is heart failure likely in this cat?
ii. What are the main causes of coughing in cats?
ii. Describe the radiographic findings.
iv. What additional testing is recommended?
138 A Maine Coon cat is presented for
138
acute onset of tachypnea and respiratory
distress. The cat is open-mouthed
breathing and the oral mucous mem-
branes appear dark red. The owners
mention that the cat tends to be very
curious and raided one of the kitchen
cabinets yesterday, spilling its contents
onto the floor. Thoracic radiographs are
interpreted as normal. Blood is sub-
mitted
for routine CBC and bio-
chemistry tests. This blood smear (138) is stained with new methylene blue (100x,
oil immersion}.
i. Is an abnormality seen on this blood smear?
i. How is this related to the cat's clinical signs?
ili. How would you manage this case?
1.53
I37, 138: Answers
137 i. No. Although some cats with cardiomyopathy have no murmur, cats with
congestive heart failure rarely cough.
i. Reactive airway disease (asthma), heartworm disease, and lungworm infection
are the most common diseases causing coughing in cats within this geographical
region. Lack of cough receptors in the pulmonary alveolar regions of cats may
explain an absence of coughing with lung parenchymal disease. Pharyngeal
irritation, nasopharyngeal polyp, drainage of nasal/pharyngeal secretions, and
hairballs also cause coughing/gagging sounds in cats.
ii. The heart size is normal. The PAs, especially those to the caudal lobes, are
markedly enlarged, but not tortuous. Bronchointerstitial lung infiltrates are present,
especially in the caudal lobes. There is a small amount of air in the cranial thoracic
esophagus; other findings include spondylosis, mild sternal deformity, healed rib
fractures (right caudal two ribs), and mild hepatomegaly
iv. Heartworm serologic tests are indicated, as the pulmonary infiltrates and arterial
enlargement are typical of this disease. Echocardiography can identify heartworm
disease when an adult worm is visualized in the PA or right heart. Airway washings
 and fecal examination can be used to screen for lungworms. Serologic heartworm
tests were negative in this cat, but one adult worm was found at necropsy.
138 i. Heinz bodies are seen as pale blue bodies protruding from the surface of red
cells. Heinz bodies represent aggregates of precipitated, oxidized hemoglobin.
Oxidative damage to the red cell can occur as a result of ingestion of aceta-
minophen, onions, zinc, methylene blue, phenazopyridine, benzocaine, vitamin K,
DL-methionine, propylene glycol, and phenolic compounds.
i. Oxidation of heme iron results in methemoglobin formation, which cannot bind
O,. Clinical hypoxia and cyanosis result.
ii. The only known compound to which the cat could have been exposed was
removal of the oxidative substance if possible, and administering N-acetylcysteine
(140 mg/kg PO or IV loading dose, followed by 70 mg/kg q6h for 7 treatments) to
provide an alternate substrate for conjugation with the reactive acetaminophen
metabolites. The prognosis in acetaminophen toxicity is variable and depends on
the dose ingested, identification (or suspicion) of the toxin, and treatment
promptness. This cat responded well to therapy and was discharged from the
hospital 4 days later.
1.54
139: Question
139a
139b
139 A 7-week-old female Chow Chow cross is presented for her first examination
and vaccinations. The owners note that she regurgitates her food frequently. The
puppy is thin, but otherwise appears healthy. Auscultation reveals a continuous
murmur heard high at the left base and a systolic murmur that is loudest at the
right sternal border. Lateral (139a) and DV (139b) chest radiographs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. Is the cause for the dog's regurgitation evident?
ii. What additional radiographic test is commonly done to verify this?
iv. Are the auscultatory findings typical for this problem?
1.5.5
139:Answer
139c
139 i. The cranial thoracic esophagus is dilated and air filled. The cardiac silhouette
is enlarged. An interstitial infiltrate is in the caudal lung fields. Dilated pulmonary
vessels are seen on the DV view.
i. Esophageal distension at the cranial heart base is characteristic for vascular ring
anomaly. Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA) is most common, but other embryonic
aortic arch malformations can entrap the esophagus within a vascular ring. PRAA
encircles the esophagus with the aortic arch (right and dorsal), ligamentum
arteriosum (left), and heart base (ventral). Because solid food cannot pass normally,
regurgitation and stunted growth commonly develop within 6 months of weaning.
pneumonia is a common complication. Other radiographic signs of PRAA can
include leftward tracheal deviation near the cranial heart border (not seen well
here), focal tracheal narrowing and ventral displacement cranial to the heart, and
cranial mediastinal widening.
ii. A barium esophagram depicts the esophageal stricture and cranial dilation
(139c).
iv. Vascular ring anomalies do not cause murmurs. Concurrent patent ductus
arteriosus and ventricular septal defect caused the murmurs, cardiomegaly,
pulmonary overcirculation, and early pulmonary edema in this dog.
156
140, 14l: Questions
140a
140b
140 A 3-year-old female spayed DSH cat is
presented for lethargy and vomiting over the
past 2 days. The abdomen is non-painful and
thin. Heart sounds are normal on the left, but
hard to hear on the right. The physical
examination is otherwise unremarkable. Exten-
ded thoracic radiographs (140a, b) are taken.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. How does this occur?
iv. What other tests can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
141 A 7-year-old castrated male DSH
4
cat is presented for lethargy of 3-week
duration and intermittent respiratory
difficulty over the past week. The cat
appears depressed. Heart sounds are
muffled, although a grade 2-3/6 systolic
murmur is heard at the left sternal
border. Pleural effusion is identified on
thoracic1
radiographs;t
the
cardiac
silhouette is enlarged and globoid in
appearance. Echocardiography reveals
the presence of pericardial effusion.
 Samples of pericardial fluid are prepared for cytologic examination. A cytospin
preparation is shown (141, Wright's stain, 50x oil).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What additional tests would be useful?
1.57
140, I4I: Answers
140 i. The cardiac silhouette is extremely
140c
enlarged and not clearly separated from the
diaphragmatic border. The trachea is displaced
dorsally. Fat and soft tissue opacities are seen
within the silhouette. A pleural fold (140c,
arrow) is evident between the silhouette and
diaphragm.
i. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
(PPDH).
ii. Abnormal embryonic development, probably
of the septum transversum, allows persistent
communication between the pericardial and
peritoneal cavities at the ventral midline. The
pleural space is not involved. Although the
peritoneal-pericardial communication is not trauma induced, trauma can facilitate
movement of abdominal contents through a pre-existing defect. PPDH is the most
common pericardial malformation in dogs and cats.
iv. Plain radiography is often diagnostic or highly suggestive of PPDH. Other
findings can include gas-filled bowel loops within the pericardial sac, a small liver,
few organs in the abdominal cavity, and sternal or other thoracic deformity.
          
gastrointestinal barium series is diagnostic if stomach or intestines are in the
herniated), positive contrast peritoneography, or CT are also useful.
141 i. Lymphoblasts are the predominant cell type in this sample, therefore a
cytologic diagnosis of lymphoma was made. This diagnosis was confirmed at
necropsy. Multiple thoracic organs were involved (heart, mediastinal lymph node,
parathyroid). Neoplastic pericardial effusion is much less common in cats compared
with dogs. In cats, congestive heart failure and feline infectious peritonitis are more
common causes of pericardial effusion.
i. A CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis, and FeLV testing would be useful to help
determine other organ involvement and prognosis. Abdominal imaging and bone
marrow sampling could also be performed for lymphoma staging. Additionally,
although a diagnosis of lymphoma can be confirmed with cytology alone,
at1
this time. In 1
this case, B cell lymphoma was confirmed with immuno-
histochemistry from histopathology samples taken at necropsy.
158
142, I43: Questions
142
A
3-year-old
142a
142b
spayed female German
Shorthair
Pointer
is
presented for lethargy,
fever, stiff gait, and
swollen limbs. Radio-
graphs of the distal
forelimb
(142a)and
pelvis (142b) are shown.
i. What are the radio-
graphic findings?
ii. Why would thoracic
radiographs
be indi-
cated for this patient?
143
A12-year-old English
143a
Cocker Spaniel was diagnosed
with a heart condition 2 weeks
ago at another clinic. At that
time, digoxin, furosemide, and
aspirin were prescribed. For the
past week the dog has been
lethargic and sleeps excessively.
His appetite is now poor. The
143b
dog is quiet, but alert. Vital
signs are normal. There is a
grade 5/6 systolic murmur at
the left apex; lung sounds are
normal. CBC is normal; mildly
elevated alkaline phosphatase
 and cholesterol are the only biochemical
abnormalities. Radiographs show marked cardiomegaly with LA enlargement;
pulmonary vessels and lungs are normal. An ECG is recorded at admission (143a,
leads as marked, 25 mm/s, 0.5 cm = 1 mV) and 6 hours later in hospital (143b,
non-continuous lead II, 25 mm's, 0.5 cm = 1 mV).
i. Describe the ECG findings.
i. Are other tests indicated at this time?
i. What are your recommendations for this case?
1.59
142, I43: Answers
142 i. Each femur shows smooth solid
142c
periosteal new bone along the medial and
lateral length of the diaphysis. The meta-
carpals, radius, and ulna show a palisade
pattern of diaphyseal periosteal new bone.
Similar but more faintly evident, periosteal
new bone is visible on the diaphyses of the
first phalanges. No cortical lysis is evident.
i. The character and distribution (particu-
larly on metacarpals 2 and 5) of the perio-
steal new bone is classic for hypertrophic
osteopathy (HO). HO is a systemic condition most commonly precipitated by
concurrent thoracic cavity disease. A wide variety of thoracic diseases, including
pulmonary, cardiac, and esophageal abnormalities, have been associated with HO.
Many dogs are presented for lameness caused by the HO rather than the underlying
thoracic disease. Thus, recognition of the lesions of HO should prompt radiographic
investigation for thoracic disease. The lateral thoracic radiograph (142c) of this dog
showed a large cranial thoracic mass determined to be a malignant sarcoma.
143 i. HR is 50 bpm (143a). The rhythm is sinus bradyarrhythmia with periods of
sinus arrest. One junctional escape complex is seen (1st QRS from left). Increased
R wave voltage (3.8 mV) suggests LV dilation. Intermittent first degree AV block occurs
(3rd complex from the left). Baseline artifact is present. Later, sinus bradyarrhythmia
with variable PR intervals continues (143b) and multiform ventricular premature
(og to unid erg n pe don to xado isi rdde sx
i. The ECG abnormalities and clinical signs suggest digoxin toxicity. Serum digoxin
concentration should be measured and the digoxin dose closely evaluated. This 15 kg
(33 Ib) older dog was receiving 0.25 mg digoxin PO q12h (2-3 times the recommended
dose). Serum digoxin concentration was 6.5 ng/ml in this dog (therapeutic range
0.5-2.0 ng/ml). Echocardiography and BP measurement are also indicated. Besides
the arrhythmias here, digoxin toxicity can also cause more serious ventricular as well
as supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, junctional rhythms, and second degree AV
block.
ii. Discontinue digoxin immediately; monitor cardiac rhythm, serum electrolytes,
and pulmonary status. Cautious fluid administration with supplemental potassium
will promote digoxin excretion and reduce myocardial binding. If necessary, use
atropine or glycopyrrolate for excessive bradycardia. For severe digoxin-induced
yentricular tachyarrhythmia, use lidocaine first (or if ineffective, diphenyl-
hydantoin). For critical digoxin overdose cases, digoxin-specific antigen-binding
fragment (digoxin-immune Fab) therapy is available.
160
144, 145: Questions
144a
144b
144 A 10-year-old neutered male Golden Retriever has developed signs of weakness
and abdominal fluid accumulation. On physical examination, his mucous
membranes are pale pink, femoral pulses are slightly weak, and jugular veins are
prominent. The precordial impulse is difficult to palpate. Heart sounds are very
soft, but lung sounds are normal. Chest radiographs show generalized cardiomegaly
with a large caudal vena cava. An echocardiogram is done: 2-D images from right
parasternal (144a) and left cranial (144b) long axis views are shown. 1 - RV,
2 -LV, 3 -LA, 4 -RA.
i. Describe the echocardiographic findings.
ii. What is cardiac tamponade?
ili. What echo views are of particular importance in a case such as this?
145 A 9-year-old female German Shepherd
145
Dog is presented for lethargy, abdominal
distension, and a gagging-type cough. Her HR
is rapid. Breath sounds are prominent and
occasional pulmonary crackles are heard. An
ECG is recorded (145, leads as marked,
50 mm/s, with a segment of lead aVF at
25 mm/s (bottom); 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG diagnosis?
ii. Is IV lidocaine therapy indicated?
ili. How would you manage this case?
UAAAAAAIAAAAAAIAAAAA
161
I44, I45: Answers
144 i. The echo-free space between the
144c
bright parietal pericardium and epicardium
is pericardial effusion (144c, 5). Collapse of
the right atrial wall in diastole and early
systole
 (144c, arrows) indicates cardiac
tamponade. LA size appears compromised.
No mass lesion is evident in these images.
ii. Cardiac tamponade occurs when peri-
cardial effusion increases intrapericardial
pressure above normal cardiac diastolic
pressure. This external cardiac compression
progressively limits RV then LV filling;
systemic venous pressure increases and cardiac output falls. Weakness, exercise
intolerance, collapse, jugular vein distension, ascites, pleural effusion, and weak
femoral pulses are common sequelae.
i. Pericardial effusion in older dogs is usually of neoplastic origin. Most cardiac
tumors involve the right heart, especially the right atrial appendage (hemangio-
sarcoma), or the aortic root region (chemodectoma and others). Mesothelioma is
another consideration and may have no discrete mass lesion. Although a complete
echo examination is important to visualize all possible structures, the best view of
the right auricle (144b) is obtained from the left cranial long axis position.
145 i. HR is 240 bpm. The rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AF); there are no
identifiable P waves and the rhythm is irregular as well as rapid. QRS complexes
are wide (~0.10 second) and abnormal; the mean electrical axis is shifted right and
cranial (between -150 and -90°). Right bundle branch block is likely, as the latter
part of the QRS is especially wide. Causes of right ventricular enlargement should
be considered.
i. IV lidocaine is only occasionally effective against AF, although a standard initial
bolus is unlikely to be harmful.
ii. IV diltiazem can rapidly reduce heart (ventricular response) rate in AF.
Auscultation after the HR is slowed may reveal abnormal heart sounds. Chest
status. This dog had dilated cardiomyopathy with congestive heart failure.
Conversion to sinus rhythm is unlikely with severe cardiac disease. The usual
p  se m s (o A os Aq)  o on si po
disease and signs of heart failure (see als0 cases 38, 95, 124, 157, 187, 189, 190,
216). In-hospital HRs <150 bpm are desirable. Long-term AF therapy in dogs with
heart failure usually includes digoxin combined with PO diltiazem or a beta blocker.
162
146: Question
146a
=146b
146 A 1-year-old female Newfoundland
146c
developed progressive exercise  intol-
erance and episodic collapse over the
past 2 weeks. Her body condition,
mentation, respirations, membrane color
CW:1.75MHz
and jugular veins are normal. Femoral
pulses are hypokinetic. A grade 4/6
5.0
systolic heart murmur is heard over the
low left base, with radiation to the right
base. Lung sounds are normal. CBC and
serum chemistries are unremarkable. The
cardiac silhouette
appearsmildly
enlarged (VHS 10.6 v), with left heart
10.
prominence. Pulmonary vessels and
parenchyma are normal. Systolic BP is 110 mmHg. Echocardiography is done; images
are from right parasternal long axis view in systole (146a, 2-D; 146b, color flow
 Doppler) and subcostal view, LV outflow (146c, continuous wave Doppler).
i. Describe the echocardiographic findings.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ili. Does this explain the dog's clinical signs?
iv. How would you manage this case?
163
146:Answer
146d
146 i. An area of increased echogenicity protrudes from the interventricular septum
(146a, d, arrow), narrowing the LV outflow region. Marked systolic turbulence
occurs here (146b). Peak LV outflow velocity is greatly increased at 8.4 m/s
(284 mmHg estimated pressure gradient, 146c). LV free wall and papillary muscle
hypertrophy is seen (146a). (146d, 1 - LV, 2 - Ao, 3 - LA.)
ii. Severe congenital subaortic stenosis (SAS).
ii. Yes. Severe SAS may prevent sufficient increase in cardiac output to sustain
normal exercise. Paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias or reflex bradycardia also can cause
syncope. Severe SAS causes hypokinetic pulses because of slower rise to systolic
arterial pressure. The systolic ejection murmur of SAS is heard best at the low left
aortic arch).
iv. Exercise restriction and beta blocker therapy may reduce ischemia-induced
arrhythmia. The dog should not be bred; SAS is known to be inherited in
Newfoundlands. Risk for aortic valve endocarditis is increased with SAS, so
prophylactic antibiotic therapy is used for dental and other *dirty’ procedures.
Sudden death and congestive heart failure are common with severe SAS. Surgical
procedures have not convincingly improved prognosis.
164
147, I48: Questions
147a
147b
147 An 11-month-old male mixed breed dog
weighing 31.8 kg (70 Ib) was hit by a grain
truck 2 days ago. He was treated for shock
and then referred for evaluation of pelvic
injuries. On physical examination, the lung
and heart sounds are muffled and the heart
rhythm is irregular. Thoracic radiographs are made (147a, b).
i. What potential thoracic abnormalities should be suspected based on the physical
examination?
i. What radiographic abnormalities are present?
148
148 An 8-year-old male Dobermann has become progressively less active over the
Apoq saop au isnul paseainu Aipu inq aadde rood e pue qanos iuisisiad
condition is good. Temperature is 37.8°C (100°F), pulse 170 bpm, and respiratory
rate 75 breaths/min with labored effort. Membranes are pale with 2.5 seconds
capillary refill time. The heart rhythm is occasionally irregular. A grade 1/6 systolic
murmur and a low-pitched soft diastolic sound are heard over the left apex.
Inspiratory pulmonary crackles and some wheezes are heard over all lung fields. An
ECG is recorded (148, lead II, 25 mm/s, 0.5 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
i. What is your assessment of this dog?
ii. What is the most likely cause for the diastolic sound heard on auscultation?
iv. How would you proceed with this case?
16.5
I47, I48: Answers
147 i. Pneumothorax, pleural effusion (hemorr-
147c
hage), rib fracture, pulmonary hemorrhage
(contusion), traumatic bullae, and diaphragmatic
rupture should all be considered as possible
thoracic sequelae of vehicular trauma. The
physical examination findings can vary widely
with these lesions. Although less common,
trauma to cardiac structures could cause peri-
cardial bleeding/effusion.
ii. Single fractures in the proximal region of right
ribs 7 and 8 are present (147c, arrows). The distal
segment of each rib is moderately displaced
cranioproximally. Rib fractures, particularly in
the proximal third, are difficult to detect radio-
graphically. Careful tracing of the borders of each
rib and comparing intercostal space width can improve detection of these fractures.
The lung in the region of the fractures has a moderate interstitial pattern consistent
with pulmonary hemorrhage. Within this region of soft tissue opacity is a thin-
walled circular lucency (asterisk in the center) consistent with a traumatic bulla
The dog was successfully anesthetized the following day for replacement of a
right coxofemoral luxation and stabilization of a right femoral fracture.
148 i. Normal sinus rhythm is seen at the beginning of the strip (some baseline
artifact is present), but a rapid paroxysm of ventricular tachycardia (VT; at
390 bpm) develops soon after. Sinus complex measurements are normal.
i. Signalment, history, and clinical findings are consistent with dilated cardio-
  px    s e () o
common in Dobermanns with DCM and often leads to syncope or even sudden
death.
ii. The timing, location, and low-pitch indicate a gallop sound, most likely the S,
(ventricular) gallop. This is associated with ventricular dilation and failure, typically
from DCM.
iv. Most urgent initially is to improve oxygenation (resolve pulmonary edema) and
suppress rapid VT. Supplemental Oz, furosemide, and lidocaine should be used to
effect (or maximum recommended dose). Chest radiographs, echocardiogram, and
laboratory database are obtained as soon as patient stability allows. In addition,
pimobendan and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy is started.
Monitoring of heart rhythm, respirations, BP (IV inotropic support may be needed),
metabolic status, and general supportive care are important. If lidocaine does not
control the VT, other antiarrhythmic therapy (e.g. amiodarone or sotolol) should be
tried and continued PO if effective. Spironolactone can be added for long-term therapy.
166
149, 150: Questions
149a
149b
149
A 9-month-old female black
Labrador Retriever is presented for
evaluation of exercise intolerance and
increased
 panting.
The
referring
49c
veterinarian has prescribed furosemide
and amoxicillin; the owner reports this
has helped her breathing. The dog is
alert and excited. She is small in stature.
Respirations are 48 breaths/min with
slightly increased effort. HR is >180
bpm. Mucous membranes are pink,
femoral pulses are of variable intensity
and irregular, and jugular veins are
normal. There is a grade 5/6 systolic
murmur loudest at the left apex, but
heard all over the precordium. Blood
pressure is 120 mmHg, systolic. Chest
radiographs show marked cardiomegaly (VHS 12.5 v) with LA and LV prominence.
Mild pulmonary interstitial infiltrates are seen in the dorsal/hilar region. An
echocardiogram is done (149a, 2-D right parasternal long axis in diastole; 149b, left
apical color flow in diastole; 149c, left apical color flow in systole)
i. Describe the echocardiographic findings shown.
ii. What is your assessment of this dog's problem(s)?
ii. How would you manage this case?
150 What general guidelines are important when treating bacterial pneumonia?
167
149, I50: Answers
149 i. Findings include markedly dilated LA and LV, atrial fibrillation, and
thickened and deformed mitral leaflets with restricted opening (149a). Diastolic
flow acceleration (with aliasing) near the mitral valve orifice indicates mitral
stenosis (149b). Mitral regurgitation occurs in systole (149c).
i. Mitral valve dysplasia, with regurgitation and stenosis, is the underlying problem.
Atrial fibrillation with uncontrolled ventricular rate contributes to early congestive
heart failure. Mitral dysplasia occurs mostly in large-breed dogs. Malformations
include shortened or overly elongated chordae, direct valve-papillary attachments,
thickened or cleft leaflets, and malformed papillary muscles. Valve regurgitation
ranges from mild to severe. Mitral stenosis is relatively uncommon, but further
raises LA pressure. Medical management for congestive failure is used as needed;
surgical valve reconstruction or replacement could be an option. Prognosis is poor
with severe malformations.
ii. The HR must be controlled (conversion to sinus rhythm is unlikely here);
diltiazem (with or without digoxin) is recommended. Furosemide is prescribed for
pulmonary edema, along with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and
pimobendan for initial chronic heart failure management.
150 Antibiotic therapy and supportive care are fundamental. Airway secretion
culture and sensitivity testing should guide antibiotic selection whenever possible.
Amoxicillin-clavulanate (20-25 mg/kg PO q8h) or cephalexin (20-40 mg/kg PO q8h)
is often used while awaiting culture results. More aggressive or intravenous
antibiotic therapy is warranted if clinical signs are severe. Appropriate antibiotic
therapy is continued for a week or longer after signs disappear. Supportive care
includes supplemental O, if needed, and good airway hydration to facilitate
secretion clearance. Fluid therapy and sterile saline nebulization (several times daily)
are helpful. Physiotherapy, by inducing deeper breaths and coughing, promotes
airway secretion/exudate mobilization. Chest coupage and/or mild exercise can be
used, and ideally follows nebulization. A bronchodilator may help some animals,
but can also promote ventilation/perfusion mismatching. Individual patient
monitoring is important. In general, cough suppressants, glucocorticoids, and
diuretics are avoided with bacterial pneumonia.
168
151, 152: Questions
151  A 13-year-old female Cocker Spaniel is
15la
presented for a 4-month history of coughing.
which has worsened over the past month.
She now often produces mucus at the end of
a coughing fit. Therapy with amoxicillin-
clavulanate, butorphanol, and prednisone
has been tried, but the cough persists.
Physical examination reveals harsh lung
 sounds, but no cardiac murmur. Radiographs
show a moderate bronchial pattern. CBC
shows mild thrombocytosis, mild lympho-
penia, and mild eosinophilia. Serum chemistry
tests are normal. Heartworm antigen test is
negative. Bronchoscopy (151a, b) with BAL
151b
is performed. BAL cytology reveals low to
moderate cellularity, consisting of 31%
neutrophils, 6% macrophages, and 63%
eosinophils, with mucus and cellular debris.
No obvious etiologic agents or neoplastic
cells are observed.
i. What is your assessment of the broncho-
scopic findings?
ii. What etiologies should be considered?
ii. How would you manage this case?
152 A 14-year-old DSH cat
152
is euthyroid and clinically
well. A grade 2/6 systolic
murmur is heard at the left
sternal border. Echocardio-
graphy shows mild septal
hypertrophy and mild mitral
systolic anterior motion. An
ECG is recorded (leads I and
II, 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV)
(152).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
ii. How does this abnormality occur?
ili. What could happen if it worsens?
iv. Is cardiac drug therapy indicated at this time?
169
151, 152: Answers
151 i. The airway mucosa is diffusely thickened and irregular. BAL cytology shows
marked eosinophilic and moderate neutrophilic inflammation, suggesting
hypersensitivity response.
i. Allergic bronchitis, lungworm or heartworm infection, and eosinophilic lung
disease should be strongly considered. Bacterial bronchitis is less likely, but routine
microbiologic culture of BAL samples is recommended. The negative heartworm
antigen test and radiographic pattern make this disease unlikely. Fecal tests for
lungworms are indicated in endemic areas even though BAL samples were negative
for parasites; fecal tests were negative in this dog.
i. Allergic bronchitis can result from hypersensitivity to inhaled or, possibly,
ingested allergens. Definitive identification of specific allergens is rare. Management
involves eliminating potential allergens and palliative gluocorticoid (e.g. 1-2 mg/kg
q12h initially) and bronchodilator therapy. Environmental allergens can include
smoke, dust, and mold/mildew. Food allergy may affect some cases; dietary trials
using novel protein and carbohydrate sources may help. Hypersensitivity to insects
aq un n Aan e haisso si is ap po ap a ie
tried. Allergic bronchitis in dogs typically causes coughing without respiratory
distress, unless there is more widespread eosinophilic lung disease (pulmonary
infiltrates with eosinophils or eosinophilic granulomatosis). Peripheral eosinophilia
occurs inconsistently. Long-standing allergic bronchitis can cause airway pathology
similar to chronic bronchitis.
152 i. HR is 240 bpm, with regular sinus rhythm. Intermittent right bundle branch
block (RBBB) is seen, sometimes alternating with normal QRS conduction and
sometimes affecting multiple complexes in succession. Other measurements and
intervals are normal.
i. Slowed or blocked conduction within any of the major branches of the
intraventricular conduction system (aberrant conduction) causes the region of
ventricular muscle served by the affected bundle branch to be activated late and
slowly. This widens the QRS complex and shifts orientation of the terminal QRS
forces toward the area of delayed activation, in this case the right ventricle. RBBB
can result from right ventricular disease or distension, but sometimes it occurs in
otherwise normal cats and dogs. In contrast, left bundle branch block is usually
related to clinically relevant LV disease. The left anterior fascicular block pattern is
common in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
li. The major intraventricular conduction pathways (the right bundle branch and
the left anterior or posterior fascicles of the left bundle branch) can be affected
singly or in combination. If conduction were to fail in all three major branches,
third degree (complete) heart block would result.
iv. No, RBBB alone does not cause hemodynamic impairment.
170
153, 154: Questions
153A 7-year-old female Miniature Pinscher is
153a
presented for coughing of 2-week duration. The
cough has worsened; it occurs during both day
and night, but is more intense with excitement.
Exercise tolerance and appetite are now poor.
The dog appears slightly depressed. HR and
rhythm are normal.
Respiratory rate is
 moderately increased. Lung sounds are harsh,
with increased effort and occasional expiratory
wheezes. A dry cough is easily elicited by
tracheal palpation. Other physical findings are
unremarkable. Thoracic radiographs show a
3 cm mass in the right caudal or middle lung
lobe region. A hemogram reveals marked
153b
eosinophilia (>7 x 103/μl), with a mild increase
in band neutrophils. Bronchoscopy and a fine
needle aspiration (FNA) of the lung mass are
performed.1
FNA
cytology
shows
many
eosinophils with both non-degenerate and
 degenerate neutrophils, macrophages, cellular
debris, and occasional ciliated epithelial cells.
Some macrophages contain phagocytized red
blood cells and eosinophil granules. Broncho-
scopic images of the distal trachea (153a) and
proximal right bronchus (153b) are shown.
i. What do the bronchoscopic images show?
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ili. How would you manage this case?
 n sis    s  t
171
153, 154: Answers
153 i. A thick, mucopurulent exudate. The mucosa appears inflamed and
edematous.
i. Eosinophilic inflammation indicates a hypersensitivity response. Common causes
Occasionally, fungal or neoplastic disease can induce an eosinophilic response;
absence of such causes, this dog's pulmonary mass, FNA findings, and peripheral
eosinophilia are consistent with eosinophilic pulmonary granulomatosis. Pulmonary
Hilar lymphadenopathy, eosinophilic bronchitis, and peripheral eosinophilia also
variably occur. An underlying etiology is often not found. Bronchoscopic samples
in this dog showed a purulent eosinophilic exudate, with no bacterial growth on
cultures. Tests for pulmonary parasites and hearrworms were negative.
li. If definitive diagnosis is still unclear after searching for identifiable causes of
eosinophilic pulmonary disease, lung mass biopsy can be helpful. Cure is more likely
if the triggering antigen can be identified and eliminated. Anti-inflammatory
glucocorticoid therapy (e.g. prednisone, 1-2 mg/kg PO q12h initially) is indicated,
especially if an inciting cause is not found. Addition of more aggressive
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. cyclophosphamide, 50 mg/m2 PO q48h) is usually
necessary for dogs with large pulmonary nodules
154
 Drugs used to kill Angiostrongylus vasorum include: fenbendazole
(20-50 mg/kg for [5-]21 days); the combination of imidacloprid with moxidectin
(10[-25] mg/kg imidacloprid plus 2.5[-6.25] mg/kg moxidectin as a single dose
topical [0.1 ml/kg]); or milbemycin oxime (0.5 mg/kg PO once weekly for 4 weeks).
Supportive therapy should be given according to individual case need. This can
include supplemental O, blood transfusion, antibiotics, and possibly a
corticosteroid. An angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and diuretic are used for
congestive heart failure signs. Baermann fecal testing for 3 consecutive days at
3-6 weeks after anthelmintic treatment is advocated to assess treatment efficacy.
172
155: Questions
155a
155b
155 A 7-year-old male Boxer is presented for anorexia, weight loss, and more recently,
increased panting. On physical examination, the dog is tachycardic (180 bpm) and
has labored respirations. An ECG reveals sinus tachycardia; other parameters are
normal. VD (155a) and DV (155b) thoracic radiographs are available.
i. What radiographic findings are useful in assessing the cause of pleural effusion?
i. What radiographic features in this case are suggestive of a thoracic mass versus
pleural effusion?
173
155: Answers
ER A24
i.Although radiography cannot
155c
differentiate between pleural effusion types,
thoracic structural changes can provide clues to
the cause. For example, cardiomegaly with
concurrent abdominal enlargement and effusion
in dogs suggests a transudate from right-sided
congestive heart failure. Rib fracture(s) strongly
suggests hemorrhage. Aggressive bone lesions
may indicate neoplastic transudate, hemorr-
hage, or exudate. Nevertheless, a fluid sample
should be obtained for analysis.
This patient has active periosteal new bone
formation on the caudal borders of left ribs
9 and 10 at the curvature of the chest wall
(155c).
ii. Pleural fluid redistribution depends on fluid
type; transudates redistribute more evenly
within the thorax than exudates. A mass tends
not to move with positional changes. A fluid
opacity that cannot be moved from a thoracic
region by positional change indicates either
trapped or loculated fluid or a mass.
Another finding that suggests a mass is altered
shape or position of adjacent organ(s). This is
easier to evaluate when the adjacent organ
provides contrast with the mass, as in this dog's
DV view. A concave shape change in the left
caudal lung lobe's lateral border from the 9th to
11th ribs, along with adjacent rib changes, strongly suggests a mass near or involving
the thoracic wall. Biopsy indicated a fibrosarcoma.
174
156, 157: Questions
156a
156b
156 A 4-month-old male Sheltie puppy
156c
is presented for cardiac examination
because of a heart murmur and
declining exercise tolerance. The puppy
is alert but quiet. Mucous membranes
 are pink. Heart sounds are clearly heard,
as well as a grade 2/6, ill-defined systolic
murmur at the left base. Lung sounds
are normal. A prominent right apical
impulse is noticed, but other examin-
ation parameters are unremarkable.
Hematocrit is 0.47 /l (47%). An echo-
cardiogram, among other tests, is done
(right parasternal short axis views; 156a, ventricular level, diastole; 156b,
heartbase; 156c, color flow Doppler, systole). 1 - RV, 2 - LV, 3 - Ao.
i. What is the significance of a prominent right apical impulse on chest palpation?
ii. Describe the findings shown in the figures.
ii. What recommendations would you give this owner?
157 List important general guidelines for re-evaluating patients with chronic heart
failure.
175
156, 157: Answers
156 i. The precordial impulse is normally strongest over the left cardiac apex. A
           
displacement to the right, as from a mass lesion, lung atelectasis, or chest deformity.
i. There is RV hypertrophy and dilation (156a) consistent with systolic pressure
overload. The mildly dilated main PA appears to divide into three branches (156b),
rather than only right and left PAs; the third vessel, oriented downward, is a large
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Flow within this vessel moves away from the
transducer (coded blue, 156c), from PA towards aorta. This dog has severe
i. Pulmonary hypertension associated with congenital shunts is usually irreversible.
Reversed shunts cause hypoxemia and exercise intolerance. Reversed PDA causes
greater hindlimb weakness and differential (caudal but not cranial) cyanosis because
unoxygenated blood enters into the descending aorta (see case 131). Exercise
exacerbates right-to-left shunting by reducing peripheral vascular resistance;
exercise restriction is advised. Secondary erythrocytosis can compromise tissue
perfusion; hematocrit should be periodically monitored.
Sildenafil citrate may reduce pulmonary resistance and right-to-left shunting,
157 Periodic re-evaluation is important because heart disease is progressive and
complications often occur:
 Review medications and dosage schedules with the owner at each visit.
● Ask about any problems with drug administration (and compliance) and
possible adverse effects.
●Ask about the pet's diet, appetite, resting breathing rate (which the owner
should be routinely monitoring at home), activity level, and any other
concerns.
● Do a thorough physical examination.
· Check BP.
Husr e apniou nau sisai anedoidde rao 'snis sued uo suadaa *
ECG or ambulatory monitoring, thoracic radiographs, hemogram, serum
biochemical tests (especially renal function and electrolytes), echocardiogram,
or serum digoxin concentration.
● For patients with early and stable heart failure, recheck examinations every
 4-6 months may suffice. More frequent visits are needed for advanced disease.
176
158: Question
158a
158b
158 A 7-year-old spayed female Boxer is presented for cardiac screening prior to
anesthesia for removal of a skin mass. She has normal exercise tolerance and
cardiovascular examination findings. Echocardiography reveals an occasional
ventricular premature complex, but normal cardiac chamber size and function; right
parasternal short axis (158a) and long axis outflow (158b) images are shown.
i. What abnormality is seen on these images?
i. What dogs are more likely to be affected by this?
ii. What is the usual natural history?
iv. Is treatment usually effective?
177
158:Answer
158c
158 i. Note the (~3 cm) mass (arrows, 158c, 1 - RV, 2 - Ao, 3 - PA, 4 - LA) at the
aortic root between LA and PA. An aortic body tumor (ABT) is most likely,
base.
ii. The majority of canine ABTs are reported in brachycephalic breeds, particularly
Boxers, Boston Terriers, and Bulldogs, but other breeds can be affected.
ii. ABT (chemodectoma) is the second-most common cardiac tumor. ABTs arise
from clusters of chemoreceptor cells near the aortic root (aortic bodies) that sense
blood O, and CO, tension. About half of affected dogs are between 10 and 15 years
and about a third are 7-10 years old when diagnosed. ABTs are usually slow
growing and locally invasive, but sometimes metastasize. They can be an incidental
finding, as in this dog, unless or until they cause pericardial effusion and cardiac
tamponade or dysfunction of surrounding structures.
cardiotomy may prolong survival for months to years, depending on tumor growth
rate. Surgical resection is rarely possible because of local invasion. ABTs are fairly
unresponsive to chemotherapy.
178
159, 160: Questions
159
159 An 8-year-old neutered DLH cat with sneezing and serous nasal discharge is
referred for cardiopulmonary examination. Physical examination is unremarkable.
Although cardiac disease is not expected in this case, the owner requests additional
assurance regarding cardiac status. Thoracic radiographs and an ECG are done
(159; simultaneous leads I, II, and IHI at 50 mm/s; 1 cm = 1 mV). Radiographs are
normal.
i. What is the ECG interpretation?
ii. Is there an abnormal heart rhythm? If so, what is it?
160a
160 A 9-year-old dog develops abdominal distension, weakness, and increased
panting. Poor pulses, jugular distension, ascites, and muffled heart sounds are found
on examination. Chest radiographs enhance your suspicion of pericardial effusion
with tamponade. You perform pericardiocentesis (160a).
i. What equipment is used for pericardiocentesis?
ii. How is the patient positioned and prepared?
ili. Describe how to perform pericardiocentesis
179
159, I60: Answers
159 i. The HR is 200 bpm. The rhythm is normal sinus rhythm. The mean electrical
axis is thought to be normal. Complex measurements are also normal.
i. No. The saw tooth appearance seen in the baseline at the beginning and near
the end of the strip is an artifact, created by purring. With close evaluation, one can
identify underlying sinus complexes that occur at the same intervals as the sinus
complexes seen clearly in the middle of the strip. The underlying sinus complexes
are seen best in leads I and II.
160 i. An over-the-needle catheter system, with gauge and length determined by
patient size (some small side holes can be cut near the tip of large [12-16 g]
catheters for faster fluid removal); sterile extension tubing attached to a three-way
stopcock and a collection syringe; a collection bowl; sterile clot and EDTA tubes for
fluid samples; an ECG monitor.
i. Manually restrain the patient in left lateral or sternal recumbency. Alternatively,
use an elevated echocardiography table with a large cut-out, restrain the patient in
right lateral recumbency, and tap from underneath (160b). Echo guidance is not
usually necessary. Prepare the skin surgically from right 3rd-7th intercostal spaces
and sternum to costochondral junction. Using sterile gloves and aseptic technique,
palpate for the cardiac impulse at the puncture site (usually between 4th and 6th
rib), then infiltrate 2% lidocaine into the skin, underlying intercostal muscle, and
pleura.
ii. Attach the prepared extension tube assembly to the needle stylet within the
catheter. Advance the needle/catheter through a small stab incision, avoiding
intercostal vessels caudal to the rib. An assistant applies gentle suction to the
collection syringe as you slowly advance the needle towards the heart; aim the
needle towards the patient's opposite shoulder. Pleural fluid may be aspirated first.
Pericardial contact causes increased resistance to needle advancement and a subtle
scratching sensation. Gently press through the pericardium; you may feel a loss of
resistance as pericardial fluid, usually dark red, appears in the tubing. Advance the
stylet/catheter unit slightly into the pericardial space before removing the stylet.
Attach the extension tubing to the catheter itself. Save samples for analysis then
drain as much fluid as possible.
160b
180
161, 162: Questions
161  You are performing pericardiocentesis on
16la
the dog from case 160
and obtain this
hemorrhagic fluid (161a).
500ml
i. How do you know that you are withdrawing
pericardial fluid and not intracardiac blood?
ii.What complications can occur
：from
pericardiocentesis?
62a
162b
162 A 6-year-old female Labrador Retriever from southern England is presented
for coughing and respiratory difficulty, which began 3 weeks ago and has worsened
helpful. The owner notes frequent coughing and labored breathing now, and
 mentions that recently a small wound on the dog's tongue bled for a long time.
Hemoptysis has not been observed. The dog is bright and alert, but quickly becomes
tachypneic  when  walking
around the room."
Thoracic auscultation reveals
pulmonary crackles over all lung fields and a grade 3/6 holosystolic heart murmur,
loudest over the right parasternal region. Other physical findings are unremarkable.
Thoracic radiographs (162a) and an echocardiogram are obtained. Echo-
cardiography shows RV enlargement, diastolic interventricular septal flattening,
moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR), with peak systolic velocity of 4.8 m/s, and
an abnormal PA flow profile (162b).
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
i. How would you interpret the echocardiographic findings?
il. What additional tests might be helpful?
181
161, I62: Answers
161 i. Pericardial fluid in dogs is usually dark red like venous
161b
blood. To differentiate, drop a small amount onto the table or
into a serum tube. Pericardial fluid does not clot unless there is
very recent hemorrhage. Also, spin some in a hematocrit tube;
o     s  d p  a
peripheral blood, with yellow-tinged (xanthochromic) super-
natant (161b, left). As pericardial fluid is removed, the patient's
ECG
complex
amplitude
usually
increases,
tachycardia
diminishes, and the animal often appears more comfortable.
i. Pericardiocentesis is a relatively safe procedure when carefully
done and extraneous needle movement within the chest avoided.
If the needle/catheter contacts the heart, a scratching or tapping
sensation is felt or the device moves with the heart beat; retract
slightly to avoid cardiac trauma. Direct myocardial injury or
puncture commonly causes ventricular premature beats, which
usually cease when the needle is withdrawn. Lung laceration is a
potential complication; pneumothorax and/or hemorrhage can result. Spread of
infection or neoplastic cells into the pleural space occurs in some cases. Coronary
artery laceration can occur and cause myocardial infarction or further intrapericardial
bleeding, but this is rare, especially with a right-sided approach to pericardiocentesis.
162 i. Overall cardiac size is normal (VHS 10.5 v), although there is mild RV
prominence. Bronchointerstitial pulmonary infiltrates, with areas of alveolar
pattern, are seen ventrally and cranially.
ii. Whenever septal flattening occurs, RV
 pressure exceeds LV pressure, during
on the RV. Estimated RV systolic pressure is ~95-100 mmHg (Bernoulli pressure
gradient = 4 x peak velocity2 plus assumed RA pressure of 3-8 mmHg). The normal
PA peak systolic velocity indicates pulmonary hypertension (PH) as the cause of
the RV pressure overload. The late systolic notching of the pulmonary flow signal
is abnormal and consistent with severe PH. RV enlargement and TR are common
sequelae. PH can result from severe lung or pulmonary vascular disease.
ii. Routine laboratory and coagulation tests help screen for systemic disease and
possible  bleeding
disorder.
.Persistent
cough
indicates airwayinvolvement.
Bronchoscopy and airway lavage for cytology and culture are indicated. Thoracic
CT could
lfurther characterize t
the
pulmonary
infiltrates or reveal other
abnormalities. Angiostrongylus vasorum can sometimes cause PH and is of growing
concern in the UK and northern Europe. Baermann fecal tests may detect its larvae.
Heartworm disease (Dirofilaria immitis) is generally not expected in this geographic
region, although its worldwide occurrence is spreading.
182
163, 164: Questions
163a
163b
163 Routine physical examination of a 10-month-old Collie reveals a loud murmur
at the high left heart base. Additional diagnostic tests are done and cardiac
catheterization procedures are pursued (163a, initial aortic angiogram; 163b.
postprocedure aortic angiogram).
i. What is shown on the initial angiogram, and what is your clinical diagnosis?
ii. Has the procedure been successful?
164a
164b
164 An 11-year-old spayed female
164c
Chihuahua-mix weighing 6.4 kg (14 Ibs)
is presented for an intermittent dry and
occasionally ‘honking’ cough. She was
diagnosed previously with degenerative
mitral valve disease and pulmonary
hypertension, and has moderate mitral
and
tricuspid
valve
regurgitation.
Besides the murmur the physical examination findings are unremarkable. The dog's
trachea is evaluated fluoroscopically during resting respiration and an induced
cough (164a is at peak inspiration; 164b at end expiration; 164c during the cough).
i. What is your diagnosis based on these images?
i. What other conditions are commonly associated with this radiographic
diagnosis?
183
I63, I64: Answers
163c
163d
163 i. A bolus of radiopaque contrast has been delivered to the aortic root via a
catheter ascending from the femoral artery. Contrast material is also present in the
ssoaire snp naid s i-oi-ll e jo asq sq s pe vd u
(PDA) (see 163c: 1 - PA, 2 - ductus, 3 - Ao).
i. Yes. A self-expanding device (Amplatz? Canine Duct Occluder) has been
successfully deployed. The narrow waist of the device straddles the junction
between PA and ductal ostium; the larger (top) portion is inside the ductal ampulla.
The dense nitinol mesh of the device occludes ductal flow. Contrast (appears dark
in 163b) delivered to the aortic root no longer passes through the ductus into the
PA. 163d shows the appropriately positioned duct occluder.
164 i. 164b and 164c show complete collapse of the mainstem bronchi. 164c shows
partial collapse of the intrathoracic trachea during the cough. This image also shows
extrathoracic movement and a striking curvature of the rachea during the cough.
However, there is no collapse of the portion showing pronounced ventral curvature.
Mild to moderate LA enlargement associated with mitral valve disease is also seen
(164a). Although marked LA enlargement can compress the main bronchi and
LA enlargerment was only mild.
This dog's signalment is typical for dogs with collapsing trachea. Standard
radiography may be successful at demonstrating either extra- or intrathoracic
tracheal collapse particularly if comparative lateral images are acquired; one at the
peak of the inspiratory breath and one at end expiration. Some dogs only
demonstrate collapse during coughing. In such patients, dynamic evaluation by
fluoroscopy is needed. Fluoroscopic assessment usually shows a greater degree of
collapse than plain radiographs.
i. These patients are often obese, but may be thin. They may have concurrent
acquired valve disease and chronic bronchitis.
184
165: Question
165a
165b
165c
165 An 11-year-old male neutered cat is presented after 2 weeks of respiratory
difficulty. The cat is in good body condition, alert, and responsive, but appears
slightly uncomfortable. Respirations are rapid and shallow, with increased
abdominal effort. Femoral pulses are weak but regular. Thoracic auscultation
reveals sinus tachycardia (250 bpm), with an intermittent gallop rhythm.
Pulmonary crackles are heard over the caudal lung fields. Systolic BP is slightly low
(100 mmHg). Hematology, serum biochemistry, and thyroid test results are normal.
Thoracic radiographs show cardiomegaly, pulmonary venous engorgement, patchy
alveolar infiltrates, and mild pleural effusion. An echocardiogram is done; images
from the right parasternal position are shown (165a, 2-D long axis LV inflow; 165b,
M-mode at ventricular level; 165c, 2-D short axis at heart base). 1 - LV, 2 - LA,
3 -Ao
i. What is the clinical significance of an audible gallop rhythm?
i. What is your diagnosis based on the clinical and echocardiographic findings?
ii. What therapeutic strategy would you advise for this patient?
18.5
165:Answer
165d
165 i. *Gallop rhythm' refers to audible S, and/or S, sounds. These diastolic sounds
are not heard in normal cats and dogs. They can become audible when myocardial
compliance is reduced (e.g. by myocardial hypertrophy or fibrosis) and ventricular
filling pressure is increased. The S4 gallop is most common in cats.
i. Findings indicate congestive heart failure (CHF). Echo images show LA and LV
enlargement with mild pericardial effusion, ascribed to CHF (165a, c). LV free wall
motion is markedly hypokinetic (165b, bottom). A thrombus (arrow, 165d) is
evident within the left auricular appendage. Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
was diagnosed. RCM is characterized by a restrictive filling pattern, minimal or no
LV hypertrophy, and severe LA enlargement. Myocardial fibrosis is common.
ii. Furosemide is indicated for congestive signs. Pimobendan may improve systolic
function. Efficacy of other agents (e.g. angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or
beta blocker) is unclear; some cats with RCM may benefit. However, with marked
systolic dysfunction (as in this cat), beta blockers are generally avoided or used only
increased risk for arterial thromboembolism; low-dose aspirin, clopidogrel, or
possibly both, is advised, although prophylactic efficacy remains unclear. The
prognosis is guarded.
186
166, 167: Questions
166a
166b
166
A 2-month-old male Bichon Frise
developed  a paroxysmal,  nonproductive
(honking") cough 1 week ago. Two days ago,
respiratory distress also developed. The puppy
appears lethargic, with increased respiratory
effort. Mucous membranes are slightly dry and capillary refill time is prolonged.
Rectal temperature is 39.8°C (103.6°F). CBC shows moderate leukocytosis
(19.7 × 10*/l, normal 6.0-15.0) with neutrophilia (15.7 x 10*/l; normal 3.0-11.5).
Serum biochemistry tests are normal. Thoracic radiographs are shown (166a, b).
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
i. What additional tests may be useful for this case?
ili. What empirical treatment would be indicated pending these test results?
167 A 4-year-old spayed female
167
mixed breed dog is presented for
acute onset of respiratory distress
after eating a rawhide chew. A lateral
radiograph of the neck is taken (167).
i. Is the rawhide chew evident in this
image?
i. If not, what views will you add to
the evaluation?
187
I66, 167: Answers
166 i. There are diffuse interstitial and alveolar pulmonary infiltrates, most severe
throughout the right lung. Several air bronchograms are visible. Infiltrates are less
severe in the left lung. Cardiac size is normal. Considering this dog's age and history,
canine infectious tracheobronchitis ("kennel cough') complicated by secondary
pneumonia is most likely. Canine influenza is another differential for the initial
cough and lung injury.
i. BAL or tracheal wash is indicated to obtain samples for bacterial culture and
cytologic evaluation. Tests to rule out canine influenza can include PCR for viral
RNA, antigen detection, virus isolation, and serologic testing.
li. A wide-spectrum antibiotic is recommended while awaiting bacterial culture
results or if additional testing is not allowed. Bordetella spp. infection is often
susceptible to potentiated amoxicillin (e.g. amoxicillin-clavulanate 20-25 mg/kg
q8h), fluoroquinolones (e.g. enrofloxacin 10-20 mg/kg q24h), and tetracyclines
(e.g. doxycycline 5-10 mg/kg q12h). Patient hydration should be optimized.
can help reduce anxiety in particularly distressed patients. Nebulization and
coupage can help loosen and mobilize secretions. Gentamicin nebulization has been
helpful against Bordetella spp. in some cases. Some animals may need parenteral
nutritional support.
167 i. An irregular, gas and soft tissue-mixed opacity is evident in the pharyngeal
region, overlapping with the larynx. Although this odd appearance could raise
suspicion of a foreign body, there are two findings that suggest this is unlikely. Note
the oblique positioning of the head and neck. This is evident by the excellent
definition of the dens of C2 and separation of the tympanic bullae. The ability
radiographically to evaluate the pharyngeal and laryngeal regions is markedly
compromised when positioning is oblique because of the summation of soft tissue,
bone, and gas-filled structures. The complex opacity in this case is the summation
of the ear pinna with the oropharynx. When producing radiographic images, it is
important to think about the placement of body parts, such as the pinna and skin
folds, as well as other objects external to the animal, such as collars, leashes, and
fluid administration tubing. At the caudal end of this image, the trachea deviates
more ventrally than normal at the thoracic inlet. This suggests an abnormal thoracic
esophagus.
ii. Lateral and DV or VD views of the thorax are indicated.
188
168, 169: Questions
168 A 13-year-old female Labrador Retriever is
168a
presented for coughing of 1-month duration. Chest
radiographs reveal a diffuse interstitial lung pattern
 and a mass-like opacity in the right caudal thorax.
Bronchoscopy (168a, b, right lobar bronchi), with
BAL and biopsy, is done to further evaluate the
lungs before surgical removal of the pulmonary
mass is attempted. BAL fluid is only moderately
cellular; cytospin preparation shows basophilic cell
clumps scattered among numerous foamy macro-
phages, with occasional neutrophils and eosinophils.
Clumped cells have basophilic cytoplasm, one or
 more prominent nucleoli, and marked anisocytosis
168b
and anisokaryosis; some are multinucleated. Biopsy
specimens show neoplastic cuboidal epithelial cells
aligned in tubular or papillary formations separated
by dense fibrous connective tissue.
i. What is seen in the bronchoscopic images?
ii. What is your assessment of this case?
ii. What are the most common tumor types in the
lung?
169 An 11-year-old spayed female Shih
169
Tzu is presented for chronic cough,
weight loss, and a mass on the right
forelimb 4th digit. The dog has always
lived in the midwest region of the USA.
In addition to the mass, hyperemia of the
associated foot pad, tachypnea, and an
enlarged right prescapular lymph node
are noted on physical examination. A
stress leukogram and mild hypoalbumi-
 nemia are the only abnormal findings on
CBC and chemistry panel. Thoracic radiographs show a difuse alveolar pattern. BAL
is performed and samples submitted for cytologic evaluation and microbiological
culture. Shown is a direct preparation from the endotracheal tube following BAL
procedure (169, Wright's stain, 50x oil).
i. Identify the etiologic agent present in the figure.
i. What is the preferred treatment?
ili. What is the prognosis?
189
I68, I69: Answers
168 i. Iregular soft tissue masses protrude into the bronchial lumen in each figure.
i. The biopsy findings are consistent with pulmonary adenoma or well-
differentiated pulmonary adenocarcinoma (bronchioloalveolar carcinoma).
Although malignancy is not clear based only on the biopsy specimens, the presence
of more than one bronchial nodule, along with the radiographically evident
pulmonary mass and the atypical, neoplastic cells found on BAL cytology, indicate
this dog has metastatic bronchioloalveolar carcinoma.
iii. Lung tumors can be primary, multicentric, or metastatic. Primary lung tumors
are usually malignant. Carcinomas are most common, especially adenocarcinoma,
bronchoalveolar carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma. Multicentric tumors
involving the lung include lymphoma, malignant histiocytosis, and mastocytoma
Ko d    p o  s 
tumors as well as distant neoplasms. Pulmonary neoplasia causes variable clinical
signs depending on the structures involved and the extent of respiratory
compromise. In this case the cough presumably was triggered by metastases in the
airways. Prognosis for patients with pulmonary neoplasia not only relates to the
tumor's histology, but also to whether metastasis has occurred. Surgical resection
can be effective for solitary pulmonary masses. Metastatic disease is often minimally
responsive to chemotherapy, with relentless progression and death from hypoxemia.
169 i. In the middle of the figure is a macrophage containing oval bodies that have
a thin clear halo surrounding a purple
e center. These are intracellular yeast,
morphologically consistent with Histoplasma capsulatum. There are also increased
numbers of neutrophils in the sample.
i. Itraconazole is the preferred treatment for histoplasmosis in small animals.
Fluconazole may also be used and may be a better choice than itraconazole if the
central nervous system (CNS) and/or eyes are involved. Ketoconazole is less
efficacious against Histoplasma spp. infection, and therefore is generally not
recommended. Some cases of pulmonary histoplasmosis may be self-limiting:
however, antifungal therapy is still recommended to prevent dissemination of the
organism.
i. The prognosis for appropriately reated disseminated histoplasmosis ranges from
fair to good, depending on which organ systems are involved. Infections involving
the eye, CNS, epididymis, and bone are more difficult to treat and therefore carry
a poorer prognosis.
190
170, 17l: Questions
170a
170b
170 A 7-year-old male American Cocker
Spaniel is presented for presurgical evaluation.
Lateral (170a) and DV (170b) chest radio-
graphs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
ii. What are your likely differential diagnoses?
ili. What do you recommend?
17la
171b
171 The dog in case 170 returns 2 weeks later.
He has been breathing harder and coughing
recently. No medications have been given.
Lateral (171a) and DV (171b) radiographs are
shown. Echocardiography shows dilation of all cardiac chambers, poor ventricular
wall motion, and moderate AV valve regurgitation.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
ii. What is the underlying disease process?
ili. How would you manage this case?
191
I70, I7l: Answers
170 i. There is generalized cardiomegaly (VHS ~12.7 v).
170c
The heart shadow is rounded, yet the contours of the
enlarged LA (170a) and LV apex (170b) are seen.
A cranial lobar pulmonary vein (large arrow, 170c) is dis-
tended compared with the accompanying artery (small
arrow). Pulmonary parenchyma is normal.
i. Dilated cardiomyopathy or chronic mitral and
tricuspid regurgitation are most likely. Pericardial effusion
is also possible, but the cardiac silhouette is not truly glo-
boid and pulmonary venous distension would be unexpected. Tricuspid regurgitation
alone (either congenital or acquired) would not cause this pulmonary vascular pattern.
i. Careful physical examination and auscultation may provide additional clues
about the underlying cardiac disease. Echocardiography will depict abnormal
cardiac structure and function. Dilated pulmonary veins imply high pulmonary
venous pressure and incipient left-sided congestive heart failure. Resting respiratory
rate and activity level should be closely monitored and a reduced salt diet instituted.
Initiating angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (or pimobendan) therapy now is
reasonable. Low-dose furosemide can also be considered. Follow-up examination
within 1-2 weeks is advised.
171 i. In addition to the cardiomegaly and pulmonary venous congestion seen in
previous radiographs (see 170a, b), pulmonary interstitial and alveolar infiltrates in
the hilar and caudal regions indicate cardiac decompensation with fulminant
pulmonary edema.
i. Echocardiographic findings are consistent with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).
Although DCM is most common in large dog breeds, Cocker Spaniels are also
known to develop DCM. Low plasma taurine, and sometimes carnitine,
Concurrent degenerative AV valve disease is common in Cocker Spaniels and likely
contributes to valve regurgitation in this case.
li. Therapy for congestive heart failure includes furosemide, pimodendan, an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, supplemental O, and other supportive care
as needed. Plasma or whole blood taurine concentration measurement is
recommended; plasma concentrations <25(-40) nmol/ml and blood concentrations
<200 (or 150) nmol/ml are considered deficient. Plasma carnitine concentration is
not a sensitive indicator of myocardial carnitine deficiency. Oral taurine and L-
carnitine supplementation (see Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases, pp.
255-261) can improve LV function and reduce heart failure medication requirement
 m so  o q   a    s  
Three to 4 months is allowed to determine if echocardiographic improvement will
occur.
192
172: Question
172a
172b
172 A 17-year-old spayed female Keeshond is presented late at night after two
episodes of collapse that day. She is otherwise well and has no previous history of
collapse. She is alert, with slight tachypnea and tachycardia. No cardiac murmur is
heard and lung sounds are normal. An ECG shows sustained ventricular
tachycardia, which converts to normal sinus rhythm after a lidocaine bolus.
Constant rate lidocaine infusion is given through the night. Chest radiographs the
following morning are unremarkable. An echocardiogram is done; right parasternal
views are shown (172a, short axis at ventricular level; 172b, long axis 4-chamber).
1 - RV, 2 - RA, 3 - LV, 4 - LA.
i. Describe the echo findings.
ii. What are your differential diagnoses?
ili. Are other tests or therapy indicated?
193
I72:Answers
172c
172 i. The anteromedial papillary muscle and LV apical area are thickened and
slightly hypoechoic compared with the surrounding myocardium (172a).
ii. The asymmetric thickening and altered echogenicity suggest infilrative disease.
Myocardial lymphoma or other neoplasm, including hemangiosarcoma (HSA) or
metastatic tumor should be considered. Other unusual differentials include
granulomatous inflammatory lesions or asymmetrical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
ii. Careful peripheral lymph node and abdominal palpation, thoracic and
abdominal radiographs, routine laboratory database, and abdominal ultrasono-
graphy to look for evidence of neoplastic or inflammatory disease elsewhere.
Cardiac troponin assay may indicate ongoing myocardial damage (suggested by
ventricular tachyarrhythmia). Ventricular antiarrhythmic therapy is indicated.
Several splenic masses were identified ultrasonographically.  Postmortem
examination confirmed HSA in the LV (172c), spleen, and other organs. The LV
location is unusual; most cases of cardiac HSA involve right heart structures,
especially the right auricle. Also unusual is the dog's advanced age. Although cardiac
194
173, 174: Questions
173A 9-year-old female
173
mixed breed dog is referred
for repair of a fractured femur.
The dog has been healthy and
active until she was hit by a
car 2 days ago. Her heart
rhythm is irregular. Pulses are
strong;
；mucousmembrane
color, capillary refill time, and
hydration are normal. BP is normal. Chest radiographs are normal. She is on no
medication. An ECG is recorded (173, lead II, 25 mm/s, 0.5 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is the ECG rhythm diagnosis?
i. Should lidocaine or another antiarrhythmic drug be given?
ii. How would you manage this case?
174a
174b
174 A 4-year-old female Labrador Retriever is
referred for evaluation of an arrhythmia. Two
months ago she began coughing. One week ago
she had an episode of respiratory distress that
improved after furosemide administration. She is alert but quiet, with increased
respiratory rate and effort. Mucous membranes are pale pink, with a 2-3 seconds
capillary refill time. HR is ~220 bpm and irregular. Harsh lung sounds and soft
 crackles are ausculted; a murmur is suspected, but tachycardia and increased lung
sounds make it difficult to characterize. The ECG rhythm is atrial fibrillation.
Lateral (174a) and DV (174b) chest radiographs are shown (ECG electrodes are
visible).
i. What are the radiographic findings?
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
i. What would you do next?
19.5
I73, I74:Answers
173 i. Sinus arrhythmia with an intermittent accelerated idioventricular rhythm at
approximately the same HR as the sinus rhythm (90-100 bpm). The ventricular
rhythm appears as the sinus rate slows. First degree AV block with variable PR
intervals is also present and may reflect high vagal tone or AV nodal injury/disease.
PR prolongation is greatest as the increasing sinus rate interrupts the idioventricular
rhythm, suggesting partial retrograde AV conduction.
i. No. The dog's physical condition and normal chest radiographs indicate good
hemodynamic status.
ii. Continued monitoring of HR, rhythm, AV conduction, and hemodynamic status
is important. If the idioventricular rate increases markedly (e.g. >140-150/min), or
multiform or irregular ventricular tachycardia develops, antiarhythmic therapy
may become necessary. Fracture repair and continued supportive care are indicated.
Post-traumatic cardiac arrhythmias usually appear within 1-2 days after trauma.
Possible causes of myocardial injury and arrhythmias could include
acceleration-deceleration forces, autonomic imbalance, ischemia, or electrolyte and
acid-base disturbance. Ventricular premature complexes, ventricular tachycardia,
and accelerated idioventricular rhythm
1 {usually 60-100 bpm} are common.
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm is usually benign, often evident only when the
sinus rate slows, and generally disappears within 1-2 weeks in animals without
underlying heart disease.
174 i. Cardiomegaly (VHS >15 v) with marked LV and LA enlargement (174a) is
edema. A left auricular bulge is evident (2-3 o'clock position) on DV view. Caudal
pulmonary vessels and aorta are not well visualized, but cranial lobar pulmonary
vessels look slightly dilated. In dogs, the width of the cranial lobar vessels, where
they cross the 4th rib, is normally 0.5-1.0 times the width of the proximal 1/3 of
that rib. Caudal lobar vessels are normally 0.5-1.0 times the width of the 9th rib
where they cross.
i. Causes of marked left heart enlargement include dilated cardiomyopathy, chronic
severe mitral valve insufficiency (either acquired or congenital), and certain
congenital left-to-right cardiac shunts; all of these can cause pulmonary edema.
Enlarged lobar pulmonary vessels can occur from pulmonary overcirculation or
yenous congestion with pulmonary hypertension secondary to left-sided heart
failure.
i. Additional furosemide (for pulmonary edema) and diltiazem (to reduce HR from
becomes more controlled, auscultatory findings should be reassessed. Echo-
cardiography is warranted to evaluate cardiac structure and function, and further
direct therapy.
196
175: Question
175a
175b
75d
175 An echocardiogram is done in the
MMM
dog in case 174. Images shown are from
the right parasternal position (175a,
long axis in diastole; 175b, long axis in systole; 175c, M-mode at mitral valve level;
175d, short axis color flow in diastole). 1 - LV, 2 - LA, 3 - RA, 4 - RV, 5 - Ao,
6 -PA
i. Describe the echo abnormalities seen.
i. Does this dog have idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy?
ii. How would you manage this case?
197
I75:Answer
175e
175 i. There is severe LA and LV dilation, with little change from diastolic to
systolic chamber size, and wide mitral E-point-septal separation (>10 mm, 175c)
consistent with marked LV dysfunction. Restricted mitral motion from congenital
s- i o  r    r is 
separation, but were not found here. Atrial fibrillation caused irregular mitral
opening with “A' point loss (175c). 175d shows diastolic flow disturbance into the
dilated left PA from a left-to-right shunting patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), which
led to severe LV and LA volume overload, myocardial dysfunction, atrial
fibrillation, and congestive heart failure. A left cranial long-axis image (175e,
6 - PA, 7 - RV outflow tract, 8 - descending Ao) shows the PDA jet (arrow) from
the descending aorta into the PA
i. No. Cardiac failure is secondary to chronic PDA.
ii. First, treat the congestive signs and uncontrolled heart rate using standard
therapies (pimobendan, furosemide, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor,
diltiazem +/- digoxin, and dietary salt and exercise restriction). After the patient is
stable, PDA closure is recommended to reduce hemodynamic load. Medical
management for heart failure and heart rate control is continued as needed.
198
176, 177: Questions
176a
176b
176
A6-year-old femaleLabrador
Retriever
r ispresented
for chronic
coughing. She appears to be doing well
otherwise. Thoracic radiographs (176a, b)
are obtained.
i. What is the abnormal radiographic pattern present?
ii. What is the significance of this pattern?
177
The 2-month-old Bichon
177
 Frise puppy in 166 is evaluated.
Chest radiographs reveal diffuse
pulmonary
interstitial
and
alveolar infiltrates, especially
throughout the right lung. Bron-
choscopy shows edema and
inflammation of the bronchial
mucosa, with fluid and mucus
partially obstructing the bronchial
lumen. A cytologic specimen from
BAL fluid is shown (177).
i.
What is the predominant
feature of the BAL cytology?
ii. What other assessment should be done?
ii. Based on the information available, how would you manage this case?
199
I76, I77: Answers
176 i. The ventral lung regions show dilated
176c
bronchi extending to the lung periphery (176c).
Some of these bronchi have a beaded contour
and some show saccular terminal dilations. This
is a bronchial pattern with bronchiectasis. An
add an u nsd oe si d ro
of the middle lung region.
i. This bronchial pattern generally indicates
chronic airway disease, involving either the
bronchial wall or supporting connective tissue
surrounding it. Bronchiectasis is an irreversible dilation of the bronchial lumen; it
usually is associated with chronic bronchial inflammation/infection, with consequent
mural weakening and accumulation of secretions.
Several types of bronchiectasis are described: (1) cylindrical, characterized by
dogs); (2) varicose, where the wall assumes a beaded appearance; (3) saccular, with
single or multifocal bulbous (saccular) dilations at the distal bronchus; and
(4) cystic, where strings or clusters of rounded cavities occur along the dilated
bronchus (*balloons on a stick'). The usual presenting complaint with bronchiectasis
is coughing. Dogs older than 10 years, as well as American Cocker Spaniels, West
Highland White Terriers, Miniature Poodles, Siberian Huskies, and English Springer
Spaniels, may be at increased risk.
177 i. The BAL fluid cytology indicates septic neutrophilic inflammation. There is
a mild amount of mucus and some extracellular material resembling bacterial rods.
These findings are consistent with infectious bronchopneumonia.
i. Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is indicated to identify the etiologic agent
and the most appropriate antibiotic treatment. In this case, Bordetella bronchiseptica,
whichwassensitive to
 amoxicillin-clavulanate, enrofloxacin, gentamicin,
streptomycin, and tetracycline, was isolated from the BAL culture. B. bronchiseptica
 n        
tracheobronchitis (kennel cough). Other infectious agents that can be involved include
canine adenovirus-2, parainfluenza virus, and canine respiratory coronavirus. The
disease is usually self-limiting unless complicated by bronchopneumonia, which may
develop in unvaccinated puppies or immunocompromised adults.
i. Antibiotic therapy should be provided based on the culture results. Supportive
care is also important. Depending on patient status, this can include hospitalization,
supplemental O, and parenteral antibiotic and fluid administration (to maintain
good hydration). Physiotherapy (coupage) and airway nebulization can help mobilize
airway secretions. Cough suppressants are avoided with bacterial pneumonia.
200
178: Question
178a
178b
178 A 5-year-old spayed female DSH cat is presented for suspected trauma after
being found in the neighbor's yard breathing with difficulty. The cat is laterally
recumbent, with open-mouth breathing and in apparent shock. After initial stabili-
zation, physical examination reveals a chin abrasion and small holes with bruising
on the ventral thorax. Thoracic auscultation is normal. Palpation of the limbs and
 abdomen is normal. Despite a return to closed-mouth breathing, the respiratory
rate remains elevated. Thoracic radiographs (178a, b) are taken.
i. Are thoracic wall abnormalities present?
ii. Are intrathoracic abnormalities present?
201
178:Answer
178c
178 i. Three electrocardiographic electrodes have been applied to the skin of the
thoracic wall. There are small subcutaneous gas shadows present along the sternum,
particularly between sternebrae 3 and 6. Similar gas shadows are present in the
right thoracic wall from the axilla to the 5th rib. There is increased bone opacity
at the caudal half of the 6th sternebra due to cranial luxation (overlapping) of the
6th intersternal joint (178c, arrow). There is also detachment of the sternocostal
joint as noted by the ventral positioning of the distal ends of the 7th costal
cartilages. The small holes in the skin are likely due to bite wounds.
ii. There is no radiographic evidence of pleural space, lung, or cardiac
abnormalities. The absence of radiographic pneumothorax does not exclude the
 potential for a bite wound to enter the thoracic cavity. Careful evaluation of the bite
wounds, including probing, is needed. Respiratory rate can increase as a response
to pain, no doubt associated with the sternal luxation.
202
179, 180: Questions
261
179b
179 The dog in 177 is further evaluated with
lateral (179a) and DV (179b) thoracic
radiographs.
i. What is the location of the rawhide chew?
ii. What is the explanation for the gastric shadow size?
180a
180b
180 A 10-year-old neutered male Sheltie
is alert, but unable to support weight with his hindlimbs (180a), which are slightly
cool to the touch and show abnormal conscious proprioception (180b). Femoral
pulses are non-palpable. Body temperature is 37.7°C (99.9°F), HR is 132 bpm;
respirations are labored at 76“breaths/min. Other physical findings are
 unremarkable. Chest and abdominal radiographs show no abnormalities.
i. What is the most likely cause of this dog's hindlimb weakness?
i. What tests would be useful to confirm this?
ii. What underlying conditions can predispose to this?
iv. What are the general management goals in cases such as this?
203
I79, I80: Answers
179i. The thoracic images show
179c
moderate ventral and sharp rightward
deviation of the trachea at the level of
the 3rd rib. In the DV view (enlarge-
ment, 179c), a circular radiolucency
with a soft tissue border summated
(superimposed) with T3 is seen on the
left side of the tracheal deviation. This
feature has about the same diameter as
the width of T3. Thin, parallel soft
tissue opacity lines course through the
mid and caudal thorax at the expected
location of a thoracic esophagus that
appears
moderately
dilated.
The
stomach is in a normal position, but markedly distended with gas. The combination
of findings indicates that the foreign material is in the cranial thoracic esophagus
at approximately the level of the 3rd rib.
of all parts of the alimentary tract with air.
180 i. Caudal aortic thromboembolism (TE). Dogs with arterial TE usually show
Signs include pain, hindlimb paresis, lameness or weakness (often progressive or
 intermittent), and chewing or hypersensitivity of affected areas. Physical findings are
similar to those in cats with aortic TE: absent or weak femoral pulses, cool
extremities, hindlimb pain, loss of sensation in affected digits, hyperesthesia,
cyanotic nailbeds, and neuromuscular dysfunction.
i. Aortic TE usually can be visualized with abdominal ultrasonography or other
imaging modalities. TE elevates circulating D-dimer concentration, although a
modest increase can accompany neoplasia, liver disease, immune-mediated and
other diseases. Skeletal muscle ischemia and necrosis from arterial TE also elevates
muscle enzyme concentrations.
i. Diseases causing vascular endothelial damage, blood stasis, or hypercoagulability
neoplasia, hyperadrenocorticism, chronic interstitial nephritis, gastric dilatation-
volvulus, pancreatitis, sepsis, endocarditis, vasculitis, and other conditions.
iv. Management goals are to stabilize the patient (fluids and other supportive care
as needed), prevent additional TE (antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy), and
identify underlying disease(s) and treat as possible. Thrombolytic therapy is
sometimes given, but there are dosage uncertainties, intensive monitoring
requirements, and potentially serious or fatal complications.
204
181, 182: Questions
181 A 14-year-old female Schnauzer/
813
Poodle-cross develops coughing and
recent exercise intolerance. She was
previously diagnosed with chronic mitral
and tricuspid regurgitation and mild
pulmonary edema, for which furosemide,
aminophylline,
and
digoxin were
aV
prescribed. Chest radiographs today
indicate cardiomegaly but no pulmonary
edema. You hear an arrhythmia and
record this ECG (181a, b, leads as
marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG interpretation?
181b
ii. What does the arrow in181b
indicate?
ii. How would you adjust this dog's
medication?
182a
182b
182 A 14-month-old spayed female mixed breed cat (182a) is presented for
emergency treatment of acute-onset respiratory distress and whole body *bloating'
Ten days prior to this an ovariohysterectomy was performed; incisional dehiscence
occurred but was subsequently repaired. The cat's respiratory distress resolves with
supplemental O, and she remains stable overnight. Nevertheless, the owners request
 euthanasia. A lesion is discovered at postmortem examination (182b).
i. What is the medical term for the whole body *bloating' in this cat?
i. What is the cause of this cat's respiratory distress and *bloating'?
ili. Does the cat's previous surgery relate to this condition? If so, how?
iv. What other procedure is commonly associated with this condition in cats, and why?
v. Does surgical or non-surgical management yield better results in this condition?
vi. What can be done to prevent this condition from occurring?
20.5
I81, 182: Answers
181 i. HR is 180 bpm. The rhythm is
181c
sinus tachycardia with frequent atrial
premature complexes (singles and pairs;
asterisks, 181c). The mean electrical axis
is shifted rightward (to -150"). The
widened terminal portion of the QRS
suggests right bundle branch block, although marked right ventricular enlargement
is possible. The P waves, seen more easily as HR slows (181b), are widened at
0.06 second, consistent with LA enlargement. PR intervals are upper normal to
slightly prolonged (0.13-0.16 second), which could be a digoxin-induced effect or
indicate more widespread conduction system disease.
i. Calibration signal superimposed on a sinus QRS complex.
ii. More frequent atrial tachyarrhythmias could underlie these clinical signs.
Aminophylline's sympathomimetic effects can exacerbate arrhythmias; reducing the
dose or discontinuing aminophylline may help. Ambulatory ECG monitoring can
detect intermittently worse arrhythmias. Alternatively, diltiazem or atenolol can be
added as a clinical trial. Digoxin suppresses some atrial tachyarrhythmias, but its
serum concentration should be verified. Serum chemistries should also be measured.
Pimobendan and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor are recommended for
chronic heart failure management.
182 i. Subcutaneous emphysema is the accumulation of air in the subcutaneous
tissues.
 ii. The cause of subcutaneous emphysema and respiratory distress in this cat was a
tracheal tear.
ii. The tracheal tear probably occurred during either the ovariohysterectomy or
hernia repair as a result of endotracheal tube trauma.
iv. Dentistry procedures are frequently implicated in tracheal tears. The repeated
repositioning of the animal during such procedures causes rotation of the
endotracheal tube, which can strain and tear tracheal tissue.
v. Surgical treatment involves tracheal suturing or resection of the damaged trachea
and anatomosis. However, conservative management of a simple tracheal tear, like
the one shown in 182b, is often as effective as surgical repair.
vi. Careful endotracheal tube selection and insertion can prevent tracheal tearing.
Endotracheal tubes with high-volume, low-pressure cuffs are preferred over those
with low-volume, high-pressure cuffs because they minimize tracheal injury.
However, the main preventive measure during anesthesia is to disconnect the
endotracheal tube from the anesthetic tubing whenever the animal must be
repositioned. The torque on the trachea at the inflated cuff as the tube is twisted is
the most likely cause of the tear.
206
183, 184: Questions
183  A 14-year-old spayed female
183a
German Shepherd Dog is presented for
evaluation of a large abdominal mass.
The owners mention that over the last
6 months she has seemed slower and
pants more, but otherwise has no
clinical signs. The dog is alert and pants
constantly. Body temperature is 39.2°C
(102.6°F), mucous membranes are pink,
and capillary refill time is <2 seconds.
The heart is difficult to hear on auscultation, but the rate seems slow; a systolic
-pu u 'arel v jeuou are spunos uni 'el an uo pansadsns si rnu
abdominal mass is palpated. Mild cardiomegaly is seen on radiographs. An ECG is
recorded (183a, leads as marked, 25 mm/s, 1 cm = 1 mV).
i. What is your ECG diagnosis?
i. What additional tests do you recommend at this time?
ii. The owner wishes to pursue abdominal exploratory surgery and mass removal.
What do you advise?
184a
184b
184 These radiographs (184a,b) are from a
9-year-old male  West Highland  White
Terrier that is presented for exercise intolerance of several month's duration.
 Recently, an occasional cough has been noted. The dog has had no other past
medical problems and is current on routine vaccinations and heartworm preventive.
i. What is the likely disease process(es)?
i. What other diagnostic tests are indicated?
ili. How would you manage this case?
207
I83, I84: Answers
183 i. Heart rate is 40 bpm. P waves are
183b
evident, but none appear to be conducted
(complete AV block). A regular ventricular
escape rhythm is present. The upright
configuration of these ventricular complexes
is less common than the wide, negative QRS
of many idioventricular rhythms. P waves are
wide (0.06 second), suggesting LA enlargement or intra-atrial conduction delay.
i. An atropine challenge (see case 37) will test for vagal influence on AV conduction;
  e       s s
indicated to evaluate cardiac structure and function. Other tests include BP
measurement, routine laboratory database, and abdominal imaging to identify the
source and extent of the mass.
iii. Considering this dog's age, large abdominal mass, and complete AV block,
prospects for a positive outcome seem slim. Nevertheless, if a fully-informed owner
wants to pursue abdominal exploratory, pacemaker implantation is recommended
first. A transvenous pacemaker was implanted; postoperative ECG shows pacing
artifacts (arrows, 183b) at the QRS onset. Two weeks later a 20 cm mass (necrotic
omental lipoma) was surgically removed. The dog thrived for another 1.5 years.
184 i. These radiographs would support the diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis, sometimes called “Westie lung disease'. This condition was first described
in West Highland White Terriers, but recent reports suggest that other breeds of
dogs may be affected, particularly Staffordshire Bull Terriers. Note the right heart
enlargement, main PA and right PA enlargement, and the diffuse bronchointerstitial
lung pattern creating a coarse honeycomb-like appearance. A very small amount of
pleural fluid is also seen
i. A lung aspirate and/or BAL may be helpful to identify pathologic organisms and
rule out other causes of parenchymal infiltration. In many cases these tests reveal
only mild to moderate inflammation. A lung biopsy is often needed to obtain a
A  s  r    s 
be used to monitor pulmonary pressures during therapy.
ii. The principal therapy for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a corticosteroid (e.g.
low-dose prednisone). Bronchodilators and azathioprine may benefit some cases.
Sildenafil may decrease pulmonary hypertension, which can improve symptoms;
pulmonary fibrosis is often poor because the disease is progressive and tends to be
advanced at the time of diagnosis.
208
185: Question
185a
185b
185 A 6-year-old neutered male DSH
185c
cat is presented for vomiting a reddish
brown
material
last
night.
He
frequently goes outdoors during the
day and lives in the American midwest.
In the past he has ingested various
foreign objects such as rubber bands
and flower stems. The cat is tachypneic
(60 breaths/min) and slightly hypo-
thermic (36.9°C [98.5*F]). Lung sounds
are increased; no heart murmur is heard.
BP and abdominal radiographs are
normal.(
Chest
radiographs
show
increased right lung opacities and
enlarged caudal lobar arteries. Right
parasternal short axis echocardio-
graphic images of the Ao/LA (185a) and
main PA (185b) and a left cranial short
axis view of the Ao and PA (185c, enlarged, 1 - PA) are shown.
i. What are the echo findings?
ii. Are the clinical findings consistent with this diagnosis?
ii. How would you manage this case?
209
I85:Answer
851
185 i. LA, Ao, and PA sizes are normal. Characteristic parallel echos of an adult
heartworm are inside the PA (185c, d, arrows).
ii. Yes. Feline heartworm disease has variable signs. Tachypnea, dyspnea, or
 paroxysmal cough can mimic feline asthma. Vomiting is common. Lethargy,
anorexia, syncope, neurologic signs (especially with aberrant larval migration), and
sudden death can also occur.
li. An adulticide is not recommended for cats; acute worm death can cause severe
complications. Respiratory signs usually respond to prednisone (e.g. 2 mg/kg q24h,
reduced gradually over 2 weeks to 0.5 mg/kg q48h, then discontinued after 2 more
weeks). This is repeated if necessary. Monthly heartworm prophylaxis and restricted
activity are also recommended. Severe respiratory distress and death can occur any
time, especially after worm death. Signs of pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE)
include fever, cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, pallor, pulmonary crackles, tachycardia,
and hypotension. Supportive care includes an IV glucocorticoid (e.g. 100-250 mg
prednisone sodium succinate), fluid therapy, a bronchodilator and supplemental O,
Diuretics are not indicated for PTE. Pleural effusion from right-sided heart failure is
managed with thoracocentesis, furosemide, and an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor.
210
186, 187: Questions
186a
186b
186 An 8-month-old mixed breed dog is
186c
presented for vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and
weight loss (body condition score 2/5). A
grade 6/6 systolic heart murmur loudest at
the right sternal border, is discovered on
physical examination. A grade 1/6 diastolic
murmur is also heard at the left heart base.
Mucous membranes are pink, but capillary
refill time is prolonged. Body temperature is
normal. Ventricular premature complexes
are seen on ECG. Blood work indicates
marked neutropenia, mild hypoalbumine-
mia, and a positive parvovirus test. Supportive fluid and antibiotic therapy is begun
and an echocardiogram is obtained. M-mode at ventricular level (186a) and right
parasternal long axis (186b, in diastole; 186c, color flow in systole) images are shown.
1 - RV, 2 - LV, 3 - A0, 4 - LA.
i. What abnormalities are seen on the echo images?
ii. Are the auscultatory findings consistent with this?
ii. Do these findings influence your therapy?
187 What strategies can be helpful for managing chronic refractory (stage D)
congestive heart failure?
211
I86, 187: Answers
186 i. Marked LV dilation is evident. There is a 6-7 mm ventricular septal defect
(VSD) just below the aortic valve (186b), with left-to-right systolic flow (186c).
VSDs volume overload the lungs, left heart, and RV outflow ract. However, the
degree of LV dilation here seems disproportionate and probably reflects additional
LV volume loading from concurrent aortic valve insufficiency, as well as mild LV
dysfunction. Although LV FS is within normal range (~35%), more vigorous LV
 motion is expected with the reduced LV afterload afforded by shunt flow into the
relatively low-pressure RV. Occasional ventricular premature beats are also present.
i. A holosystolic murmur heard best at the right sternal border is typical for VSD.
The soft, left basilar diastolic murmur is consistent with aortic valve regurgitation
This sometimes occurs with VSD, presumably because the deformed septum
provides inadequate support for the aortic root.
li. Moderate and large left-to-right shunting VSDs can lead to left-sided congestive
failure. This is of great concern in this dog because aggressive fluid therapy may be
needed to manage parvovirus infection. Careful monitoring of respiratory rate and
effort (and, ideally, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) is recommended.
187 First, verify dosage and frequency of all drugs and supplements being
administered. The following strategies can be used sequentially or in combinations,
depending on individual needs:
· Increase dose and/or frequency of furosemide.
Add pimobendan, if not being used (INBU).
+
 Add an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), INBU.
Add spironolactone, INBU.
●
 Increase ACEI to q12h and maximal recommended dose.
●Identify and manage arrhythmias, if present.
● Add arteriolar vasodilator to further reduce afterload (e.g. amlodipine or
hydralazine). (Note: Not recommended for patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy or fixed ventricular outflow obstruction [e.g. subaortic
stenosis]).
● Add sildenafil, if moderate/severe pulmonary hypertension.
+Add digoxin, INBU.
·Add thiazide diuretic (closely monitor renal function!}
●Further restrict dietary salt intake and exercise.
212
188: Question
188a
188b
188c
188 A 7-year-old male Brittany is presented for recent lethargy, vomiting, and
inappetence. A couple days ago he ingested a mouse toy. One week ago he had
successful surgical repair of a ruptured anterior cruciate ligament. On examination
the dog is alert but quiet. Body temperature is normal, HR is 140 bpm and irregular
respiratory rate is increased, pulse deficits are noted, and heart sounds are muffled.
 Systolic BP is 130 mmHg. Recent chest radiographs forwarded by the referring
veterinarian show a large, globoid cardiac silhouette (VHS 15 v) that almost fills the
thoracic cavity and abuts the diaphragm; visible lung fields are normal.
An echocardiogram is done; images are from right parasternal short axis (188a)
and long axis (188b) and left apical (188c) positions.
i. What abnormalities are seen in the figures?
ii. What is your assessment of this case?
ii. What are your recommendations?
213
I88:Answer
188 i. Marked LA and mild LV dilation are seen. Mitral valve thickening (188b)
and insufficiency (188b) are evident. The pericardial space is greatly distended
with soft-tissue opacities (pericardial echos near ECG trace in 188a, b). The ECG
rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AF).
i. Differentials for soft tissue within the pericardial space include abdominal
organs displaced through a congenital peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
(PPDH) or neoplastic mass lesion(s). The mitral valve thickening suggests
degenerative valve disease. Based on LA size, significant mitral regurgitation has
existed for quite some time. AF is common with chronic atrial enlargement.
li. Further imaging is warranted to search for diaphragmatic discontinuity and
abdominal organ displacement (from PPDH) or for other causes of the
intrapericardial soft tissue and clinical signs. Also recommended are diltiazem
(possibly with digoxin) to control HR, echocardiographic evaluation of LV systolic
function, and close monitoring for early signs of cardiac decompensation. In this
case, PPDH was confirmed with abdominal ultrasonography and surgically
repaired; displaced tissues included gallbladder and portions of atrophied liver,
spleen, small intestine, and pancreas. An immature pyloric-to-diaphragm adhesion
was also found; this was thought to have precipitated the recent vomiting and
inappetence.
214
189, 190: Questions
189a
189b
189 An 18.6 kg (41 Ib) 9-year-old female
0681
English Pointer has a history of chronic
mitral valve disease (endocardiosis) with
congestive heart failure (CHF) and,
possibly, small airway disease. Current
medications are: furosemide, 12.5 mg
q12h; enalapril, 10 mg q24h; digoxin, 1 a
0.125 mg tab q24h; theophylline, 100 mg
q12h; and a hearrworm preventive. Some
coughing
and
increase
in
resting
respiratory rate have recently developed.
The dog is alert and active during
examination.HR is 140
bpm and
somewhat irregular. A grade 5/6 mitral
regurgitation (MR) murmur and soft pulmonary crackles are heard. Chest
radiographs show cardiomegaly with dorsohilar pulmonary infiltrates. An ECG
reveals sinus rhythm with frequent supraventricular premature complexes. Renal
function and serum electrolytes are normal; heartworm test is negative.
An echocardiogram is done. Right parasternal M-mode at ventricular level (189a),
and systolic long axis 4-chamber (189b, c) images are shown.
i. What are the echo findings?
i. What do you recommend at this time?
ii. What complications might be anticipated in cases like this?
o i a i a n r said i ai r i m
21.5
189, I90: Answers
189 i. Marked LV and LA dilation, mitral valve thickening, and severe MR (189c)
are evident. LV FS is 32%. FS provides an afterload-dependent estimate of
contractility. Consequently, with well preserved contractility but severe MR, an
suggests some myocardial dysfunction.
ii. For decompensated CHF add pimobendan, increase furosemide dose, and
increase enalapril to q12h. Try reducing the dose of or discontinuing theophylline,
as it may be exacerbating the tachyarrhythmia. Measure trough serum digoxin
concentration; if low, consider increasing to q12h dosing as an antiarrhythmic
measure. Verify reduced dietary salt intake and restrict exercise. Closely monitor
renal function, serum electrolytes, BP, heart rhythm, resting respiratory rate,
appetite and activity. Low-dose carvedilol therapy and an omega-3 fatty acid (fish
oil) supplement may be helpful.
li. Complications could include: more severe arrhythmias, including atrial
tachycardia or fibrillation and ventricular tachyarrhythmias; recurrent, refractory
pulmonary edema; persistent dry cough from bronchial compression; pulmonary
hypertension; and biventricular failure with body cavity effusions. Intensified CHF
therapy can promote azotemia, electrolyte disturbances including hypo- or hyper-
kalemia, hypotension, inappetence, and other adverse drug effects or toxicity.
190
+
important to minimize patient stress. Cart (or carry) if patient needs to be
moved. No exercise should be allowed.
● Provide supplemental O, but avoid increasing the patient's anxiety level.
● Induce diuresis with parenteral furosemide - dose aggressively as needed (can
give IM initially until IV catheter can be safely placed).
● Monitor respiratory rate (RR) and effort frequently; adjust diuretic dosing
accordingly.
● Promote vasodilation (hydralazine or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
with or wthout nitroglycerine, or alternatively, nitroprusside if fulminant
pulmonary edema).
Support myocardial function (pimobendan).
 Minimize anxiety (butorphanol or morphine).
 For hypotension or myocardial failure, add dobutamine or other positive
inotrope as needed to support BP.
●
Monitor BP, HR and rhythm, as well as RR; treat arrhythmias as indicated.
● Evaluate serum chemistries and perform other tests to clarify underlying
cardiac and other abnormalities as soon as patient stability allows.
216
191: Question
191a
191b
191 A 9-year-old neutered male Labrador Retriever is presented for 2 days of
vomiting after being given a linear dental chew. He appears weak and lethargic.
Physical examination findings include a body temperature of 39.8°C (103.7*F), HR
of 152 bpm, respiratory rate of 36 breaths/min, and normal mucous membrane
 color and capillary refill time. Heart sounds are normal, but pulmonary crackles are
heard over the right mid-lung field. Right lateral (191a) and DV (191b) thoracic
radiographs are made.
i. What is your radiographic assessment?
i. What etiologic differentials should be considered in this patient?
217
19l:Answer
191c
191 i. There is diffuse caudal cervical and thoracic megaesophagus with right
cranial and right middle lung lobe consolidation most consistent with aspiration
pneumonia.
impaired swallowing reflexes. The right middle lobe is the most commonly affected
single lobe, followed by the right cranial lobe. Variable infiltrate distribution occurs
when multiple lobes are affected. Using both lateral radiographic projections better
reveals the extent of lung involvement. In this dog, the left lateral view (191c) shows
air bronchograms in the right cranial and middle lobes (arrows). Although right
cranial lobe changes are evident on the DV view, right middle lobe abnormalities
are only clear on the left lateral view (arrows), summated (superimposed) with the
cardiac apex.
i. Megaesophagus is described radiographically as focal or segmental versus diffuse.
General causes of megaesophagus include neuromuscular diseases, mechanical
causes, and idiopathic. Diffuse esophageal dilation is more likely with neuro-
corticism, hypothyroidism), immune-mediated disease, and toxins. Mechanical
causes include intraluminal foreign objects, mural masses, and strictures (as from
esophagitis or vascular ring anomalies). Focal megaesophagus is more likely with
mechanical causes, although diffuse dilation can accompany obstructions near the
lower esophageal sphincter. Aerophagia associated with excitement, respiratory
distress, and anesthesia should be differentiated.
218
192, 193: Questions
192a
192b
192 A 6-year-old female Basset Hound has a
3-week history of coughing
andrapid
respiration. Enlarged peripheral lymph nodes
are found on physical examination; other
parameters are unremarkable. On auscultation, lung sounds are found to be harsh.
Right lateral (192a) and DV (192b) thoracic radiographs are shown.
i. What radiographic changes are present?
i. Does this patient have concurrent pneumothorax?
ili. What will be your next diagnostic procedures?
193a
193b
193 An 11-year-old male Scottish Terrier is
presented with a history of two episodes of spontaneous pneumothorax. The dog
has a chronic cough not associated with any particular activity or event.
On presentation his breathing is labored and harsh lung sounds are heard. A right
lateral thoracic radiograph (193a) and a CT scan image (193b) are shown.
i. What is evident radiographically?
i. Is a cause for the pneumothorax evident in the CT image and if so, what and
where is it?
ili. What are the causes of and diagnostic options for spontaneous pneumothorax?
219
192, 193: Answers
192 i. A diffuse pulmonary unstructured to small nodular interstitial pattern is
evident. There is incidental T4/5 spondylosis deformans.
i. No. In the DV view there is a distinct lucent-soft tissue interface positioned in the
lateral portion of each hemithorax extending from ribs 4-10. Note that cranially
the interface is at the thoracic wall and at the caudal level the interface curves
medially. Pulmonary shadows are evident in the left 8th intercostal space between
the interface and the thoracic wall border. The lucent-soft tissue interface is the
effect of skin folds and/or the conformation of the thoracic cavity. The influence of
the latter is particularly prominent in some chondrodystrophic breeds. Both of these
effects can simulate pneumothorax. However, there is no evidence of pneumothorax
seen in the lateral view of this dog.
i. Fine needle aspiration of the enlarged lymph nodes and cytologic examination
should be done. In this dog, lymphoma was diagnosed
There is a broad list of etiologic differential diagnoses consistent with the
interstitial pattern. Besides lymphoma, these include mycotic pneumonia, diffuse
pulmonary metastasis, eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy, and hemorrhage.
Pulmonary histopathology from necropsy in this patient showed neoplastic
lymphocytes in cuffs around blood vessels and airways, as well as in lymphatic
vessels.
193 i. The heart is markedly displaced from the sternum. There is a large
radiolucent space with no pulmonary vascular shadows in the dorsocaudal thorax.
The caudal lung lobes are markedly collapsed.
  an  s  an rg qn s n s rd a 's '
immediately cranial to the tracheal bifurcation. A segment of chest tube is seen
dorsally, adjacent to the right side of the mediastinum. A large-volume
pneumothorax is present in the right hemithorax causing right lung collapse and
shifting of the heart to the left. There is minimal pleural air between the left cranial
and caudal lobes dorsally. An air attenuating cavity (arrow), of diameter equal to
the trachea, is seen ventral to a left lobar bronchus and adjacent to the left border
of the pulmonary trunk. This is consistent with a large superficial bulla.
ii. Spontaneous pneumothorax is a closed pneumothorax that occurs without
traumatic or  iatrogenic cause.  Pneumonia,
,abscesses, neoplasia, bullous
emphysema, heartworm disease, and pulmonary bullae and blebs are the reported
causes. Although radiography clearly indicates the pneumothorax, it has poor
sensitivity for blebs and bullae when pneumothorax is present. CT is more sensitive
for detecting blebs and bullae, and assessing their extent prior to surgical treatment.
220
194: Question
194a
194b
194c
194  A 6-year-old male Labrador Retriever is brought to the Emergency Service
with a several hour history of lethargy, inappropriate defecation, and weakness.
The dog runs outside, but there was no known trauma or toxin exposure. On
presentation, he is lethargic and weak. Mucous membranes appear 'muddy’ and
his tongue is bluish. He is panting, HR is 140 bpm, and temperature is 37.8°C
(100*F). A small wound is seen on the left thorax. Systolic BP is 75 mmHg. IV fluid
and O, are administered. An ECG shows paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia.
Subsequent bloodwork shows a PCV of 0.23 /1 (23%), thrombocytopenia,
hypokalemia, and increased creatinine. Pleural effusion consistent with hemorrhage
is detected. An echocardiogram is done; right parasternal short axis (194a) and
long axis (194b) and left apical (194c) views are shown. 1 - LV, 2 - LA.
i. Describe the echo findings.
ii. What is the likely etiology?
ili. How would you manage this case?
221
194: Answer
194d
194e
194 i. Pleural (arrowhead) and small pericardial (arrow) effusions are seen (194d);
atrial size is normal. There is a focal, markedly hyperechoic area near the LV apex
(arrow, 194e) that appears to protrude into the lumen and casts an acoustic shadow
deep to this area. 1 - LV, 2 - LA, 3 - Ao, 4 - RV. The monitor ECG shows
ventricular tachycardia.
i. A bullet or other metallic projectile is the likely cause (documented radio-
graphically). The difference in acoustic impedance between tissue and metal (also
air) is so great that most of the ultrasound energy is reflected and deeper structures
cannot be seen. Antemortem identification of penetrating cardiac wounds is rare
because most rapidly cause death from uncontrolled bleeding, cardiac dysfunction,
and arrhythmias. This dog recovered without residual cardiovascular signs.
  r n  s   so  
oxygenation (including blood transfusion and thoracocentesis, if needed), correct
metabolic abnormalities, and control infection.
222
195, I96: Questions
195a
195b
195 A 12-year-old spayed female Miniature Pinscher is presented with a 9-month
history of coughing and wheezing that worsens with excitement and exercise.
Currently she is on no medications. A moist, hacking cough is noted during the
examination. Thoracic radiographs show normal lung fields, slightly thickened
bronchial walls, and mild cardiomegaly. CBC, serum chemistry, and urinalysis tests
are unremarkable. Tracheobronchoscopy is done; images from the thoracic inlet
region (195a) and just cranial to the carina (195b) are shown.
i. What abnormalities are seen on the images?
i. What other tests should be done?
ili. What is your assessment?
iv. What are the management principles for this condition?
196a
196b
196 A 7-year-old neutered male mixed breed dog weighing 43.6 kg (96 Ib) is referred
for possible surgical treatment of spontaneous pneumothorax. Thoracic drainage
tubes had been used to remove free air from the pleural space. Thoracic radiographs
at presentation show no pneumothorax and no abnormalities other than the subtle
lesion shown in the left lateral view (196a). A CT study is done to further define this
region (transverse post-contrast CT image shown in 196b, 1 - aorta).
i. What is the subtle lesion (circled) shown in 196a?
ii. What additional information is provided by the CT study?
223
195, I96: Answers
195 i. Small mucosal nodules are present and especially numerous near the carina,
along with mucosal edema and inflammation (195b). The sagging dorsal tracheal
membrane indicates tracheal collapse.
ii. Besides visual airway inspection, tracheobronchial muscosal brushings and BAL
fluid should be collected for cytologic examination and bacterial culture/sensitivity
testing
ii. Chronic bronchitis (CB) is likely. CB is defined as coughing occurring on most
days for 2 or more consecutive months, in the absence of other causative disease.
Airway inflammation with excessive mucus production, epithelial hyperplasia,
fibrosis, and sometimes polypoid mucosal proliferation (as here) occurs, along with
Complications can include bacterial bronchitis and pneumonia, airway collapse,
pulmonary hypertension, and bronchiectasis. In this dog, cytology showed intense
inflammation (neutrophils and eosinophils), but no organisms. However, cultures
reactive nodules within the carina and main bronchi is Oslerus osleri parasitic
infection.
iv. Avoid potential inhaled irritants and other cough triggers; be alert for
complications. Bronchodilators, glucocorticoids, and cough suppressants can help
culture/sensitivity results. Saline nebulization and coupage help mobilize secretions.
196 i. There is a focal circular lucency, ventral to T4, which partially overlaps the
trachea just proximal to the carina.
i. The CT scan confirms a cavitary lesion in the left dorsal medial edge of the left
cranial lung (arrow, 196b). The ovoid shape of the gas in the cavity suggests the
presence of fluid in the ventral portion, although the average Hounsfield unit (HU)
of 40 is more typical of tissue or blood. However, higher HU numbers are associated
with fluid of high protein content. The CT scan also shows the proximity of the
lesion to the aorta. The advantage of CT in this patient is that it provides improved
 a m pre sm ns a d s r is n go 
aspect of the aorta; however, successful surgical dissection and removal was
accomplished. Microbial culture of the lesion was negative and histopathology
showed it was an inflammatory lesion.
224
197, 198: Questions
197a
197b
197 A 4-year-old castrated male Saint Bernard from the American midwest is
presented for a cough and purulent nasal discharge. Two week earlier he was
was identified. Vitreal fluid cytology revealed prior hemorrhage; a presumptive
diagnosis of rickettsial disease was made. Thoracic radiographs were normal. The
dog was sent home on doxycycline and prednisone while awaiting definitive test
results.
Physical examination reveals panophthalmitis, purulent nasal discharge, and
tachypnea with increased respiratory effort. The patient also has a harsh, productive
with an additional ventrally-distributed alveolar component. Cardiovascular
structures are normal. A sputum sample is submitted for cytologic examination
(197a, Wright's stain, 100x oil). Despite aggressive therapy, severe acute respiratory
distress develops and the dog dies. A photomicrograph of a lung section taken at
necropsy is shown (197b, H&E stain, 20x).
i. What is seen in 197a?
i. What was the likely cause for the patient's rapid deterioration and death?
ili. Are the histologic findings in 197b consistent with the patient's clinical course?
198 Normal breath sounds, caused by turbulent air flow in larger airways, are
similar to the sound of wind gently blowing through trees. Describe the different
types of abnormal lung sounds and their general associations.
22.5
I97, I98: Answers
197
i. The basophilic round, thick-walled
197c
structures (197c, arrow) are yeast organisms,
morphologically consistent with
1Blastomyces
dermatitidis. Yeast are approximately 7-15 microns
 in diameter and exhibit broad-based budding.
ii. The dog's progressive respiratory signs, diffuse
interstitial pulmonary infiltrates, and sudden onset
of severe respiratory distress are consistent with
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), in this
case secondary to pulmonary blastomycosis.ARDS
is a clinicopathologic condition in which diffuse
lung injury, often triggered by a systemic inflammatory response, leads to sudden and
severe respiratory distress. ARDS has been associated with a variety of conditions,
including bacterial pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, and sepsis. In people, ARDS is
a common complication in critical care patients and generally carries a poor prognosis;
the prognosis for ARDS associated with pulmonary blastomycosis is grave.
ii. The lung section shows lesions characteristic of the exudative phase of ARDS.
Note the diffuse alveolar damage, characterized by loss of type I pneumocytes and
hyaline membrane formation. Alveolar lumens contain cellular debris, erythrocytes,
and fibrin. These histopathologic lesions represent a severe, acute process that
would markedly impair respiration if widespread, as they were in this case. The
rapid clinical deterioration of this patient is consistent with these changes.
198 Although some disagreement about the classification of respiratory sounds
exists, the terms crackles, rhonchi, and wheezes are recognized in the international
classification system as abnormal respiratory sounds.
Crackles (previously known as rales) are fine, popping, crackling, discontinuous,
non-musical sounds. They are usually heard during inspiration, resulting from
explosive opening of small, previously-collapsed airways. Fine crackles are more
common over ventral lung fields, but may be heard elsewhere over peripheral lung
fields. Causes include small airway disease and pulmonary edema.
Rhonchi (or coarse crackles) sound similar to crackles, but tend to be associated
sound than crackles and usually involve secretions moving in large bronchioles and
bronchi (e.g. with chronic bronchitis).
Wheezes are high-pitched, squeaking or musical, continuous sounds that are
heard mainly during expiration, although they can occur throughout the respiratory
cycle. Wheezes stem from airway wall vibrations caused by lower airway
narrowing, constriction, or spasm. Causes include asthma, congestive heart failure,
fibrosis, and pneumonia.
226
199: Question
661
966 1
199c
199 A 9-year-old spayed female DSH
cat is presented for coughing, which has
occurred since the cat was found as a
stray 8 years ago when the owner was
living in the mid-west USA. The cat has
been housed indoors only
since
adoption. Recently, she has inter-
mittently shown respiratory distress.
 The owner has given prednisone off and
on over the years, but it does not seem
 to be helping lately. Chest radiographs
(lateral, 199a,
b}, tracheal
wash,
heartworm test, and a fecal examination (199c) are done.
i. What radiographic abnormalities are seen?
i. What does the fecal test show?
ii. What is your diagnosis?
iv. How would you treat this case?
227
199: Answer
P661
199 i. Multiple soft tissue opacities in the dorsal and caudal lung fields, with several
smaller areas of randomly distributed calcification. Some of the opacities contain
cystic areas (199d, arrow) suggestive of parasitic lung disease, abcesses, or
granulomas.
ii. A Paragonimus kellicotti egg (note single operculum at top). Multiple eggs were
found in the feces and tracheal wash cytology.
ii. Chronic paragonimiasis. P. kellicotti is a parasitic lung fluke found in North
America usually, although sometimes elsewhere. It requires two intermediate hosts
(snail, then crayfish or crab). After the host ingests an infected intermediate, larvae
migrate to the lungs. Eggs produced by adult flukes are coughed up, swallowed, and
passed in the feces. Diagnosis is by identification of eggs on fecal examination
(sedimentation technique is best) or airway washings. Adult flukes can live for many
years. Host pulmonary changes include granulomatous reaction around adults or
generalized inflammatory reaction to fluke eggs. Signs often mimic those of allergic
bronchitis. Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs when cystic lesions rupture. Some
animals are asymptomatic. P. kelicotti infection is more common in cats, but dogs
and other species can be affected.
iv. Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q4h for 14 days) or praziquantel (23 mg/kg PO
q8h for 3 days).
228
200, 201: Questions
200a
200b
200 A 9.5-year-old neutered female Staffordshire Bull Terrier is referred because
of a chronic cough that has worsened over the previous 2 months. The cough is
described as productive and is accompanied by a 'gurgling noise'. Retching and
spasmodic abdominal contractions also occur during coughing. The dog has been
treated with a variety of medications, including wide-spectrum antibiotics, without
notable improvement. Yesterday she coughed up a frothy white fluid tinged with
fresh blood.
The dog is alert, responsive and in excellent body condition. Physical
examination is unremarkable. A cough can be elicited by moderately strong tracheal
palpation, but sounds different from the dog's chronic cough. Hematology and
serum biochemistry test results are unremarkable. Thoracic radiographs show a
mild bronchial pattern, thought to be age related. Abdominal sonography is
unremarkable. Laryngeal anatomy and function appear normal during anesthesia
induction for bronchoscopic examination, which reveals only a small amount of
            
numbers, with no cytologic abnormalities or bacterial growth.
 Because of the retching and gagging history, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is
also performed. An image of the distal esophagus is shown (200b). Several wood
fragments are found in the stomach; most are removed with endoscopic forceps.
Multiple duodenal and gastric biopsies indicate histopathologically normal
gastrointestinal mucosa.
i. What abnormalities are observed in the endoscopic images?
i. What is the most likely cause of coughing and retching in this dog?
ii. How would you manage this case?
201 What is amlodipine, and when is it indicated?
229
200, 201: Answers
200 i. The images show moderate inflammation of the distal esophageal lining,
characterized by mucosal hyperemia and ulcerations.
i. Esophageal reflux is the likely cause of coughing and retching in this dog, thought
to be similar to gastroesophageal reflux disease in people. Coughing can occur when
gastric contents reflux up to the hypopharynx and are aspirated, stimulating the
laryngeal cough receptors. An esophageal-bronchial reflex may also be stimulated
when gastric acid refluxes onto the distal esophageal mucosa. Although definitive
diagnosis would require invasive long-term pH monitoring, the history and clinical
signs accompanied by esophageal erosions strongly suggest gastroesophageal reflux
disease.
ii. A change in diet or feeding frequency and antacid therapy may help minimize
esophageal reflux and control the related cough. This dog was successfully treated
with sucralfate, ranitidine, and frequent small meals (4-5 small meals per day
instead of larger meals given twice daily).
201 Amlodipine besylate is a dihydropyridine L-type Ca++ channel blocker. It causes
vasodilation without appreciable cardiac effects. Amlodipine is the initial drug of
choice for hypertensive cats, including those with chronic renal failure. It can be
Lseful for hypertensive dogs that respond inadequately to an angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor. Amlodipine is also used for additional afterload reduction in dogs
with refractory congestive heart failure. Amlodipine is usually administered q24h,
but it can be dosed q12h if needed. Several days are required to achieve maximal
effect, so low initial doses and weekly BP monitoring during slow up-titration are
recommended.
230
202: Question
202a
R
202 A 1-year-old female Chesapeake
202b
 Bay Retriever is presented after being
in an accident with a farm machine.
The dog is reluctant to stand or walk,
is non-weight bearing on the left
hindlimb, has puncture wounds on
the left side of the chest and lumbar
area, and has a mild increase in
respiratory effort.
Right lateral
{202a} and VD (202b} thoracic radio-
graphs are taken to assess thoracic
trauma.
i.
What
findings
indicate
that
substantial
thoracic
trauma
has
occurred?
ii. Based
on
the findings
in the
thoracic radiographs, what other
body  system  needs
to be more
thoroughly assessed?
231
202: Answer
202c
202d
202 i. There is partial to complete effacement of the
ventral cardiac border, caudal vena cava, and ventral
and right half of the diaphragm. Several thin pleural
fissure lines are visible (both views). There is a well
defined gas-soft tissue border in the caudodorsal
thorax, with a decrease in lung vascular markings
between this border, the spine, and the left crus of the
diaphragm. A mild interstitial to alveolar soft tissue
opacity is seen in the dorsal mid-right lung field. The
gastric axis is normal. No rib fractures are evident. The
3rd thoracic vertebra is labeled (1) in 202c and 202d.
There is misalignment of the ventral border of the spine
at the T4/5 disk space, with T5 approximately 3 mm ventral to T4. The ventral
cranial border of T5 overlaps with the T4/5 intervertebral disk space. Summary:
mild/moderate pleural effusion (probably hemorrhage), mild pneumothorax, mild
right-sided pulmonary opacity (likely contusions), and probable T5 compression
fracture (202c, d).
i. Because of the suspected T5 compression fracture, a more thorough neurologic
evaluation is warranted. Although reluctance to stand or walk may relate to
 u  d s r a  a  d 
is indicated. Based on the results of neurologic examination, additional imaging,
such as myelography, CT, or MRI, may be needed to assess further the vertebra
and spinal cord.
232
203, 204: Questions
203a
203b
203 A 5-year-old spayed DSH cat becomes
tired easily. She breathes heavily and her gums
look slightly blue with moderate activity.
Another veterinarian prescribed furosemide,
suspecting  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy
(HCM), then referred the cat. She is alert but
quiet. HR is 200 bpm; the rhythm is
occasionally irregular. Respiratory rate is 30 breaths/min, with slightly increased
effort. A soft systolic murmur is heard at the sternal border; lung sounds are
 normal. Mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, and femoral pulses appear
normal. Lateral (203a) and DV (203b) thoracic radiographs are taken.
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
i. Do the radiographic findings support the presumptive diagnosis of HCM?
ili. What is your assessment of this case?
iv. Should furosemide be continued?
204 A 13-year-old male Miniature
204
Schnauzer has episodic collapse with
exercise and exciterment. The dog will
stagger and lie down abruptly or fall
onto his side, then return to normal
within 1-2 minutes. He appears alert
and in good body condition. An
irregular heart rhythm, but normal HR
is heard. This ECG is recorded (204;
leads I, II, and III at 25 mm/s, 1 cm =
1 mVy.
i. Describe the ECG abnormalities.
i. What is the name of the syndrome associated with such abnormalities?
ili. How would you manage this case?
233
203, 204: Answers
203 i. Generalized cardiomegaly (VHS of 9.4 v) and massive caudal vena cava
(CaVC) enlargement are the most prominent findings. Normally the CaVC diameter
is approximately that of the descending thoracic aorta. Persistent CaVC widening
suggests increased systemic venous pressure, as with right ventricular failure,
cardiac tamponade, pericardial constriction, or other obstruction to right heart
inflow. Pulmonary parenchyma and vessels are unremarkable.
i. Although there is generalized cardiomegaly, the marked CaVC enlargement
without signs of congestive failure (usually pulmonary venous congestion with
edema, or pleural effusion), is atypical for HCM.
ii. The history of cyanosis with activity suggests marked hypoxemia; polycythemia
cardiovascular findings is consistent with a previously undiagnosed congenital
cardiac malformation causing right-to-left shunting of blood. The murmur location
suggests either a ventricular septal defect with pulmonary hypertension or a tetralogy
of Fallot. An echocardiogram, ECG, and hematocrit measurement are recommended
next. A large ventricular septal defect, marked pulmonary hypertension, and
occasional ventricular premature beats were identified in this cat.
iv. No. Without evidence for pulmonary edema or pleural effusion, furosemide is
unlikely to be helpful and can cause dehydration. This could further compromise
tissue perfusion if the cat is polycythermic.
204 i. Two sinus complexes are followed by a long sinus pause or sinus arrest that
is interrupted by a ventricular escape complex. A sinus complex then occurs,
seen, but could be buried in the preceding T waves) and finally another sinus
complex. Sinus arrest reoccurs, again interrupted by a ventricular escape complex.
i. Periods of sinus arrest, often with intermittent tachycardia, are typical for sick
sinus syndrome (sometimes called bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome). The diseased
sinus node exhibits inappropriate periods of arrest. As sympathetic tone rises in
response to the arrest, a burst of tachycardia can be stimulated. The tachycardia may
cause overdrive suppression of the sick sinus node and additional sinus arrest.
ii. Some cases can be managed with oral anticholinergic, β-2 adrenergic, and/or
methylxanthine bronchodilator drugs to minimize collapse episodes caused by the
   os p  o s a sd 
exacerbate tachycardias. Positive response to medical therapy, if it occurs, is often
short-lived. Permanent pacemaker implantation is usually needed for advanced
symptomatic sick sinus syndrome. Occasionally, paroxysmal tachycardia also
warranted only after bradycardia is controlled by pacing.
234
205, 206: Questions
205 A 5-year-old male English Bulldog
205a
ECG
developed progressive abdominal distension.
weakness, and exercise intolerance. Physical
findings include ascites, jugular venous
distension with pulsation, and a loud left
basilar systolic murmur. After other testing
is done, the dog is anesthetized for cardiac
Simultaneous
RAP
catheterization.
ECG and
intracardiac pressures are recorded from the
RA (205a) and a pullback from PA to RV
(205b). Pressure reference range at left.
i. What information is evident from
205a?
mH
205b
ii. What is shown in 205b?
ili. What is the diagnosis?
iv. Is there any additional
lconcern
regarding the diagnosis given the breed of
this dog?
206a
206b
eue jo asnesaq pauasaid s Addnd raain rperqet pio-yram-g u 907
distension (ascites), poor appetite, and stunted growth. Euthanasia and necropsy are
requested by the breeder. The open RV, with pulmonary valve at top (206a), and the
open RA, looking onto the tricuspid valve with RV below (206b), are shown.
i. Describe the abnormal findings
i. What is the diagnosis?
ili. Does this explain the clinical findings?
23.5
205, 206: Answers
205 i. RA pressure is elevated (estimated mean pressure
205c
ECG
~12 mmHg) consistent with right-sided heart failure. The
‘a' wave (from atrial contraction, 205c) is especially
prominent, suggesting RV hypertrophy and increased
stiffness.
i. PA pressures are normal (left side, 205b). As the
catheter tip moves into the RV, a systolic pressure gradient
becomes evident and premature ventricular contractions
RAP
(VPCs) occur.  Note the poor RV systolic pressure
generated by the VPCs. After three VPCs, a sinus beat
causes markedly increased RV systolic pressure ('post-
extrasystolic potentiation'); this recurs after the following
0
single VPC. RV systolic pressure then stabilizes, indicating
a systolic PA to RV pressure gradient of about 60 mmHg. Doppler-estimated
systolic pressure gradients in unanesthetized animals are usually 40-50% higher
than those recorded during cardiac catheterization.
li. Severe valvular pulmonic stenosis with congestive heart failure.
iv. Some English Bulldogs (and Boxers) have a single anomalous right coronary artery,
from which a major left coronary branch courses around the PA and contributes to
contraindicated because of the mortality risk from rupture of this vessel.
206 i. A malformed tricuspid valve apparatus is seen. The lateral leaflet inserts
directly into a wide, abnormally-formed papillary muscle (206a). A large
perforation of the leaflet, as well as abnormal chordal and papillary muscle
formations of both leaflets, are also present (206b). Both RA and RV are dilated.
i. Congenital tricuspid dysplasia. Malformations of the tricuspid valve and its
dysplasia is diagnosed most frequently in large-breed dogs; heritability has been
shown in Labrador Retrievers. Valve insufficiency most commonly results, but
stenosis can also occur as can abnormal ventral displacement of the valve (Ebstein-
like anomaly). Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias are common. Tricuspid
regurgitation leads to progressive RA and RV dilation.
li. Yes. Severe tricuspid dysplasia leads to right-sided congestive heart failure.
Initially, the animal may be asymptomatic; but fatigue, ascites, pleural effusion,
anorexia, and cardiac cachexia often develop. Physical features include a tricuspid
regurgitation murmur (not always audible) and jugular vein pulsation. Jugular
distension, muffled heart and lung sounds, and ballotable abdominal fluid develop
with congestive failure.
236
207: Question
207b
207c
207 An 8-year-old 29 kg (64 Ib) female Doberman Pinscher is presented for cardiac
screening. The dog is in good condition. Other than two subcutaneous lipomatous
masses on the thorax, physical examination is unremarkable. An echocardiogram
is done; M-mode images at the ventricular (207a) and mitral valve (207b) levels
and a right parasternal long axis systolic (207c) image are shown.
i. What are the echocardiographic findings?
i. What is your diagnosis?
ili. How would you manage this case?
237
207:Answer
207 i. M-mode measurements are:
Diastole (cm)
Systole(cm)
RV wall
0.4
0.9
RV chamber
0.2
0.2
IVS
0.9
1.2
LV chamber
5.7
4.5
LV wall
0.9
1.1
LV FS is 21%. Mitral E-point-septal separation (EPSS) is 1.2 cm (207b). Activation
of LV wall and IVS is dyssynchronous. LV and LA dilation and mild mitral
regurgitation (207c) are evident.
i. Occult (preclinical) dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), based on: diastolic LV
dimension >4.6 cm (in Doberman Pinschers s42 kg), systolic LV dimension
>3.8 cm, FS <25%, and EPSS >8 mm. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias also are
common during occult DCM in Doberman Pinschers. Arrhythmia frequency
increases as LV function deteriorates. A 24-hour ambulatory ECG recording is
  )  o o po s o
Doberman Pinschers with >50 ventricular premature complexes (VPCs)/24 hours
or any couplets or triplets are likely to develop DCM. Variability in VPC number
between repeated Holter recordings in individual dogs can be extensive.
ii. Therapy with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and sometimes
pimobendan is initiated as LV function deteriorates during the occult phase.
Chronic low-dose beta blocker therapy (e.g. carvedilol, metoprolol) is probably
beneficial, if tolerated. Oral L-carnitine supplementation (e.g. 3-6 month trial) may
help a few Doberman Pinschers.
238
208: Question
208a
208 A 5-year-old spayed female DSH cat
208b
is brought in for re-evaluation because of
increasing respiratory effort over the past
few weeks. Two years ago you diagnosed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
with congestive heart failure (pulmonary
edema). The cat responded well to
therapy with furosemide, benazepril, and
low-dose aspirin. However the cat was
 not returned for follow-up over the past
year. The cat is alert and has a respiratory
rate of 40 breaths/min, with increased
effort in both inspiration and expiration.
Mucous membranes are pink, pulses are
normal bilaterally, HR is 200 bpm and
regular. There is mild jugular distension.
A soft systolic murmur is heard at the left
sternal border; lung sounds are not
heard. Lateral (208a) and DV (208b)
radiographs are obtained.
i. Describe the radiographic findings.
i. What would you do next?
ii. How would you change this cat's
therapy?
239
208:Answer
208 i. Large-volume pleural effusion is present, with rounded lung lobe borders
suggesting chronicity. The cardiac borders are effaced, but tracheal elevation
suggests cardiomegaly. Pulmonary vessels are not clear. A microchip is in the dorsal
subcutis. Progressive cardiac disease with biventricular failure is likely in this cat.
With lung lobes extending well into the cranial thorax, a mediastinal mass is
unlikely.
fluid analysis. A modified transudate is expected with congestive heart failure, but
chylous effusion is common in cats with advanced failure. Echocardiography can
further characterize cardiac disease. A restrictive form of cardiomyopathy (RCM),
can (and did here) develop as the end stage of myocardial failure and infarction
from HCM. RCM is characterized by increasingly abnormal ventricular stiffness,
restricted filling, and marked LA enlargement; right heart dilation and failure,
arrhythmias, intracardiac thrombus, and reduced contractility often develop as well.
CBC, serum biochemistries, BP measurement, and ECG would complete the initial
database.
ii. Recommendations for intensified therapy in feline advanced biventricular heart
failure include increasing furosemide dose and frequency, adding pimobendan and
spironolactone, increasing to q12h benazepril, continuing aspirin or clopidogrel,
and repeating thoracocentesis as needed. Carefully monitor renal function and
electrolytes.
240
209: Question
209a
209b
tamponade. Signs initially occurred 6 months ago (see case 144). No evidence of
neoplasia could be detected at that time or 2 months later when tamponade
recurred. At the latter visit, balloon pericardiotomy was performed, allowing
complete drainage of the pericardial effusion. The dog had been asymptomatic until
recently. Chest radiographs now show pleural effusion. CBC and serum chemistries
are unremarkable, except for mildly increased liver enzyme activities, attributed to
hepatic congestion. Another echocardiogram is done; right parasternal short axis
(209a) and long axis (209b) views are shown. 1 - LV, 2 - LA.
i. What is your echocardiographic interpretation?
ii. How could this happen?
ili. How would you proceed with this case?
241
209:Answer
209c
collapse (209b). The RV wall is adhered to the pericardium, deforming the RV
chamber (209a). A discrete mass lesion could not be identified.
ii. Malignant mesothelioma with pericardial inflammation and scarring is the most
abrasion during pericardiotomy, with pericardial adherence, might be another
possibility.
li. Pericardiocentesis may relieve tamponade, but recurrence is likely. Surgical or
continued pleural effusion is expected with mesothelioma. This dog developed acute
respiratory distress and died before surgery could be pursued. Postmortem
examination revealed mesothelioma (with local scar tissue reaction) involving the
pericardium (209c) and pleura and a large pulmonary thromboembolus.
Mesothelioma can be difficult to diagnose. Tumor cells often grow diffusely
along membrane surfaces, without a discrete mass. Reactive mesothelial cells appear
cytologically similar to tumor cells. Even with biopsy, immunohistochemical stains
intracavitary cisplatin may prolong survival.
242
210, 21 I: Questions
210  An adult male dog living in the central
210
USA has recent onset of weakness, abdominal
distension, rapid breathing, and inappetence.
His mucous membranes are pale; femoral
pulses are weak. Jugular distension with
pulsation is evident. A regular HR at 180 bpm
and a systolic murmur loudest at the right
 apex are heard. Respirations are rapid, with
prominent breath sounds. An echocardiogram
is done. A 2-D, right parasternal short axis
view at the ventricular level in diastole is
shown (210). 1 - RV, 2 - LV
i. Describe the echo findings.
i. What treatment do you recommend?
ii. What are your follow up recommendations?
.7.7.1.9
211a
21E
211 An 8-year-old male Cavalier King Charles Spaniel is receiving furosemide,
benazepril, pimobendan, and spironolactone for congestive heart failure, initially
diagnosed a year ago. Clinical signs of congestion are controlled and no coughing
has been noticed. Recently, several collapse episodes have occurred with exertion
or excitement.
The dog is alert and responsive. Respiratory rate (25 breaths/min) and pattern
are normal. A grade 3/6 systolic heart murmur is loudest over the left apex region,
but also heard at the right apex. Systolic BP is 130 mmHg. Echocardiographic
images (from right parasternal position) are shown: M-mode at the ventricular level
(211a) and 2-D color flow systolic frame from a long axis view (211b). Spectral
Doppler interrogation of tricuspid valve regurgitation (TR) yields a peak velocity
of 4.6 m/s. 1 - LV, 2 - LA.
i. What are the major echocardiographic abnormalities shown?
i. How would you interpret the findings on the spectral Doppler study?
ii. What are some likely causes of episodic collapse in this dog?
243
2l0, 2lI: Answers
210 i. Interventricular septal flattening indicates higher diastolic pressure in the
RV compared to the LV. The RV wall is almost as thick as the left, consistent with
chronic RV systolic pressure overload. Multiple, bright parallel echoes are seen
This dog has caval syndrome, which develops when a mass of heartworms obstructs
venous inflow to the heart.
ii. Heartworms must be removed from the heart quickly. Alligator forceps, an
endoscopic basket retrieval instrument, or other device can be used to grasp and
withdraw the worms via a right jugular venotomy, using local anesthesia and light
sedation. The instrument is gently passed down the vein into the RA with
fluoroscopic guidance, if available, to retrieve as many worms as possible. Unless
reated, most dogs die within 1-3 days from cardiogenic shock complicated by
metabolic acidosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, anemia, and multi-
to hupuadap suunn rao pue pi Ai sapnou aieo aaioddng 'anej uen
individual patient needs.
ii. Survivors of acute caval syndrome are given monthly heartworm preventive after
being stabilized; adulticide treatment to eliminate the remaining worms can proceed
a few weeks later.
211 i. LV motion appears hyperdynamic (FS = 46%; 211a), as is typical with
advanced mitral regurgitation (MR) and well preserved systolic function (increased
LV preload with reduced afterload). Marked MR (211b) is present; the LA and LV
are dilated consistent with chronic MR. Mitral thickening typical for degenerative
(myxomatous) mitral valve disease was seen on 2-D views.
i. The peak TR velocity (4.6 m/s) indicates a systolic pressure gradient of
84.6 mmHg across the tripcuspid valve, according to the Bernoulli relationship
(P = 4 x v2). This suggests a RV systolic pressure of 89.6 mmHg, if RA pressure is
normal (~5 mmHg). Because this also represents the estimated PA systolic pressure
(if there is no RV outflow obstruction), this indicates concurrent severe pulmonary
hypertension (normal PA systolic pressure <25 mmHg). Chronic MR and
pulmonary venous hypertension often promote secondary PA hypertension,
although usually to a lesser degree than seen here.
ii. Pulmonary hypertension can cause exercise intolerance and collapse by
impairing pulmonary blood flow. Collapse could also stem from paroxysmal
-o  r o ro (e a) s
cardiogenic reflexes (e.g. vasovagal syncope).
244
212, 213: Questions
212a
212b
212 A 6-year-old spayed female Lhasa
Apso is presented for coughing, which is
worse at night. On physical examination
there is mild respiratory distress, an
occasional cough, and normal thoracic
auscultatory findings. Right lateral (212a)
and DV (212b) thoracic radiographs are
taken.
i. What is the specific location of the major abnormality?
ii. What are the differentials for the lesion?
213 An 8-year-old spayed female DSH cat is
213
presented for anorexia of 1-week duration.
Thoracic radiographs reveal a mediastinal
mass. After CT-guided
biopsy yields
a
diagnosis of thymoma, a median sternotomy is
performed for surgical excision. An intra-
operative photograph is shown (213); the
cranial aspect of the thorax is to the lower left.
i. What would be the primary differential
diagnosis for this mass (prior to confirmation of the diagnosis of thymoma)?
i. What are the common presenting clinical signs for thymoma in cats?
ii. What paraneoplastic syndromes are possible with thymoma?
dogs that have surgical excision of thymoma?
v. What treatment modality can be used for non-resectable thymomas in cats and
dogs and provide a reasonable chance of achieving 1-2-year survival?
24.5
212, 213: Answers
212 i. There is uniform soft tissue opacity between the heart and the diaphragm.
The border effaces the caudal vena cava, the mid-caudal border of the heart, and
the central portion of the diaphragm. This suggests a lesion in the accessory lung
lobe, a lesion arising from the diaphragm, or plica vena cava of the caudal
mediastinum. There is also moderate widening of the mainstem bronchi, best seen
in the DV view.
i. The radiographic findings are non-specific. The general differentials of infection
(bacterial or mycotic) and neoplasia are equally likely, both of which could also
cause secondary tracheobronchial lymph node enlargement. Because of the normal
location of the liver and gastric shadows, diaphragmatic hernia is considered
unlikely. Further assessment by ultrasound and CT imaging may aid in defining the
origin of the lesion and possibly identify a route for non-surgical biopsy. Surgical
biopsy in this patient provided a diagnosis of undifferentiated sarcoma.
213 i. The primary differential diagnosis for mediastinal thymoma in cats is
lymphosarcoma. Differentiating between these two tumors by minimally invasive
means is important because of the divergent treatment recommendations;
chemotherapy for lymphosarcoma versus surgical excision for thymoma.
ii. The most common clinical sign in cats with thymoma is dyspnea. Coughing.
anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, and regurgitation are other reported signs.
and people, include myasthenia gravis, megaesophagus, hypercalcemia, polymyositis,
exfoliative dermatitis, cranial vena cava (cranial caval) syndrome, non-thymic
neoplasia, cytopenias, glomerulonephritis, systemic lupus erythematosis, rheumatoid
arthritis, thryoiditis, and cardiac arrhythmias.
iv. The percentage lymphocyte composition of the mass is the most consistent
prognostic indicator in these cases. Cats and dogs with lymphocyte-rich thymomas
live longer than animals with thymomas containing a low lymphocyte percentage.
Tumor invasiveness is another factor related to prognosis. Cats and dogs with
invasive thymomas have a high rate of immediately postoperative mortality.
However, if the animal survives surgery, the chance for 1-2-year survival is good.
v. When a thymoma is determined to be non-resectable, external beam radiation
therapy may be employed. While complete responses are rare with radiation therapy
of feline and canine thymomas, long-term survival can be achieved.
246
214, 215: Questions
214a
214b
 214 An older spayed female Terrier mix is
presented for recurrence of a cough. Several
 sd s  s
coughing and was diagnosed with chronic mitral valve disease and mild pulmonary
edema. Furosemide, enalapril, and pimobendan were prescribed and her cough
radiographs are obtained.
i. What additional historical or physical examination information would be helpful
in this case?
i. What is your radiographic interpretation?
ili. How would you manage this case?
215 A 6-year-old spayed female DSH cat is
215
evaluated for a pharyngeal mass, weight loss,
and suspected tongue paresis. Temporary
tube tracheostomy is performed when the cat
is anesthetized for complete oral examination
and biopsy of the mass (later identified as
squamous cell carcinoma). The owners
declined surgical excision with radiation and
chemotherapy, and opted to maintain the
tube at home for a time prior to euthanasia.
i.
What is the principal indication for
tracheostomy tube placement?
i List some situations where temporary tube
tracheostomy is indicated.
ii. What are the key steps for tracheostomy
tube placement?
iv. What two concerns are most important when a tracheostomy tube is in place?
247
214, 215: Answers
214 i. Is the cough from recurrent pulmonary edema or another cause (e.g. airway
collapse or compression, inflammatory small airway disease, parenchymal disease)?
Findings more likely associated with decompensating heart failure include reduced
exercise tolerance, increased resting respiratory rate, increased HR with minimal to
no sinus arrhythmia, soft productive (rather than dry, honking) cough, and reduced
appetite. In this case, no change in resting respiratory rate, exercise tolerance, or
appetite was observed and a dry cough was described.
i. There is generalized cardiomegaly (VHS ~12 v) with marked LA enlargement
(LAE; note double ^apex' shadow, 214b) causing left main bronchus compression.
No pulmonary edema is evident.
i. No increase in diuretic dosage is presently indicated. The dog should be screened
for hypertension, which can exacerbate mitral regurgitant flow and LAE. Manage-
ment strategies include enalapril dosing (q12h), if tolerated, and/or cautiously adding
amlodipine or hydralazine to further increase forward cardiac output. Monitor BP to
 iss r  rs    r
important. If concurrent small airway disease is suspected, confirmation by airway
washing cytology and culture is preferred; if declined, trials of antibiotic,
bronchodilator, and anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid therapy can be tried.
relieve life-threatening upper airway obstruction.
i. Temporary tracheostomy may be necessary for oropharyngeal/laryngeal trauma,
foreign body or tumor, and for laryngeal paralysis. Tube tracheostomy can also be
used to facilitate removal of lower airway secretions when the cough reflex is
compromised, to allow manual or mechanical ventilation when orotracheal
intubation is not practical, to reduce airway resistance in patients with increased
intracranial pressure, and to permit inhalant anesthesia during certain intraoral
surgical procedures.
ii. After general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation, key surgical steps are to
make a short ventral mid-line cervical incision, separate the sternohyoideus muscles,
make an interannular tracheal incision less than 50% of the racheal circumference,
place long knotted stay sutures around the tracheal rings cranial and caudal to the
incision, remove the endotracheal tube as the tracheostomy tube is inserted, and
secure the tube with umbilical tape tied at the back of the neck.
iv. The two major concerns are to avoid obstruction of the tube and infection.
Constant monitoring, frequent suctioning, and periodic hydration of the tracheal
lumen via saline instillation help to prevent obstruction. Sterile or sanitized supplies
contamination.
248
216, 217: Questions
216a
216b
216c
216d
216 A 15-year-old spayed female Miniature Schnauzer has increased respiratory rate
and effort, first noticed when sleeping. She also has a mild cough in the morning and
is reluctant to go on walks. The dog's HR is 150 bpm; respirations are 50 breaths/min.
A grade 4/6 systolic murmur is heard at the left apex. Increased breath sounds, but no
crackles, are heard. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. Chest radiographs
indicate moderate cardiomegaly with LA prominence and mild perihilar interstitial
( s is s n   s   '
and long axis (216b) and systolic left apical (216c, d) frames are shown.
i. Describe the echo findings.
ii. What is your diagnosis?
ili. How would you manage this case?
217 What is amiodarone, and when is it indicated?
249
216, 217: Answers
216 i. The images show LV and LA enlargement with knobby mitral valve
thickening. Color flow Doppler shows marked mitral regurgitation (MR, 216d).
Right heart size appears normal, but the tricuspid valve is also thick.
i. Advanced degenerative mitral valve disease, with left-sided congestive heart
failure (CHF; stage C disease).
ili. Furosemide is used at doses necessary to control the CHF signs (e.g. 1-2 mg/kg
q12h initially here). Pimobendan is also indicated now; its positive inotropic and
vasodilatory effects should improve cardiac pump function. An angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEl) is also recommended; although conferring
only modest diuretic and vasodilatory effects, ACEIs moderate excess
ACEIs; benazepril's lesser dependence on renal elimination is advantageous with
concurrent kidney disease. Exercise is not advised in decompensated CHF. A
moderately reduced salt diet is recommended. After CHF signs resolve,
furosemide is gradually titrated downward to the lowest effective dosage (and
 respiratory rate monitoring helps guide this process. Pimobendan and ACEI
therapy are continued. Regular mild to moderate exercise can improve quality of
life in chronic heart failure. Low-dose beta blocker therapy may be helpful long
term.
217
Amiodarone HCl is a “broad-spectrum’ antiarrhythmic drug used for
refractory tachyarrhythmias (both atrial and ventricular origin) in dogs. It is an
iodinated compound that affects K+ (and also Na+ and Ca++) channels and has non-
competitive alpha,- and beta-blocking properties. Classified as a class II
antiarrhythmic drug, amiodarone prolongs action potential duration and
refractoriness in both atrial and ventricular tissues. It may reduce risk of sudden
death. Amiodarone's complex pharmacokinetics are characterized by delayed onset
of action, prolonged time to steady state, and tissue accumulation of an active
metabolite. Potential side-effects with long-term use are many and include depressed
appetite, gastrointestinal upset, pneumonitis leading to pulmonary fibrosis,
hepatopathy, thyroid dysfunction, and thrombocytopenia, among others.
Occasional hypersensitivity reactions (with acute angioedema) or tremors occur,
especially with IV use (which also can cause hypotension).
2.50
218: Question
218a
218b
218c
218 Additional testing is done on the dog described in 162. A hemogram indicates
mild anemia, mild neutrophilia, and monocytosis. Serum biochemistry tests are
normal, but a coagulation profile shows moderately increased prothrombin and
activated partial thromboplastin times. Thoracic CT imaging (218a, representative
slice from caudal thorax, dog's back is at the bottom) and bronchoscopy are
performed. Visual airway inspection reveals small areas of focal hemorrhage in larger
airways and some mucus accumulation within the bronchi. BAL fluid cytology
shows numerous inflammatory cells, especially macrophages containing hemosiderin
pigment and neutrophils; there are also small numbers of eosinophils and parasitic
larvae (218b, c).
i. What abnormalities can be observed on the CT image?
ii. What is your diagnosis?
ili. What are the available treatment options for this condition?
251
218:Answer
218 i. Areas of alveolar infiltrate peripherally and around dependant bronchi.
This suggests a diffuse pneumonia, although the possible causes are numerous.
i. The small larvae support a diagnosis of infection with Angiostrongylus
vasorum, a nematode parasite that infects the PAs and RV of wild and domestic
canids. Angiostrongylosis is common in western and northern Europe, but is also
reported in several other regions worldwide. Verminous pneumonia and
pulmonary vascular lesions are often observed, with thromboarteritis, intimal
proliferation, and, in some cases, development of pulmonary hypertension,
although this is less common than with heartworm disease (Dicrofilaria immitis).
Coagulopathies and anemia are often present, as observed in this case.
 p e Aq piai p   os are ('r)  os 
(218b) and dorsal spine (seen better in 218c). Larvae may also be found on fecal
examination (Baermann technique), as L, larvae migrate into small airways to be
coughed up and swallowed. Multiple fecal samples may be needed for diagnosis
because of intermittent shedding.
i. Several anthelmintics can kill adult A. vasorum worms. Fenbendazole,
imidacloprid/moxidectin, or milbemycin are commonly used (see case 154 for
doses). Supportive care is provided as needed; post-treatment parasitic embolism,
similar to heartworm disease, is possible.
2.52
219: Question
219 A 9-year-old 40 kg (88 Ib) male
219a
Laborador Retriever is referred for a
2-week history of exercise intolerance,
non-productive cough, and 
ascites
(modified
[ransudate).
Furosemide
(40 mg q12h) and spironolactone
(50 mg q12h) have been prescribed by
another veterinarian. The dog is alert,
wellhydrated, overweight, and panting.
Body temperature is 38.9°C (102°F);
HR is 72 bpm. Mucous membranes and
femoral pulses are normal. Jugular veins
are mildly distended. No heart murmur
is heard and lung sounds are normal.
The abdomen is severely distended with
ascites. Systolic BP is normal. Chest
radiographs show minimal cardiac
enlargment (VHS 11.6 v) with
1a
219b
moderate volume of pleural fluid.
Laboratory tests reveal a stress leuko-
gram, mild hyperglycemia, and mild
hypoalbuminemia. Central venous pres-
sure (CVP) is 16 mmHg (normal
0-5 mmHg). Echocardiography shows
trivial AV valve insufficiency; right
parasternal short axis (219a) and left
apical 4-chamber (219b) images are
shown.
i. Describe the echo findings.
ii. What is your assessment of this case?
i. What are your recommendations?
2.53
219:Answer
219 i. There is a tiny amount of pericardial effusion. Cardiac chamber proportions
are unremarkable. A mass lesion is not evident. Some pleural effusion is seen near
the cardiac apex (219b).
ii. Elevated CVP with bicavitary effusion occurs from diseases causing right-sided
congestive heart failure, cardiac tamponade, restrictive pericardial disease, and
other inflow obstruction. Evidence for primary right-sided heart disease, cardiac
tamponade, or intracardiac obstruction is lacking here. Constrictive pericardial
disease was diagnosed. This can develop subsequent to bouts of idiopathic
pericardial effusion, but this dog has no history of this. Other causes include
pericardial infection (e.g. actinomycosis, coccidioidomycosis), foreign body, and
neoplasia (including mesothelioma), but the etiology often is unknown.
ii. Medical therapy (e.g. diuretic, vasodilator) is ineffective and further reduces cardiac
output. Constrictive pericarditis requires surgical pericardiectomy to improve
ventricular filling; pericardial window and balloon pericardiotomy procedures are
generally inadequate. Pericardiectomy is more likely to succeed if parietal pericardium
only is affected. Visceral pericardial involvement and adhesions require epicardial
stripping to relieve restriction. This increases surgical difficulty and associated
complications. Excised tissue should be biopsied (mesothelioma was diagnosed in this
case). Complications can include myocardial bleeding, cardiac perforation, pulmonary
thrombosis, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, arrhythmias, and cardiac arrest.
2.54
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Acepromazine
0.02-0.1 mg/kg (up to 3 mg total)
Same
IV, IM, SC
Albuterol
0.02-0.05 mg/kg PO q6-8h
Same
Amikacin
5-10 mg/kg IV, SC q8h
Same
Aminophylline
11 mg/kg PO, IM, IV q8h
5 mg/kg PO, IM, IV q12h
Amiodarone
10 mg/kg PO q12h for 7 days, then
8 mg/kg PO q24h (lower as well as
higher doses have been used);
3(-5) mg/kg slowly (over
10-20 minutes)
IV (can repeat, but do not exceed
10 mg/kg in 1 hour)
Amlodi pine
0.05-0.3(-0.5) mg/kg PO q12-24h
0.625 (-1.25) mg/cat
{or 0.1-0.5 mg/kg)
PO q24(-12)h
Amoxicillin
22 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Same
Amoxicillin-
20-25 mg/kg PO q8h
Same
 cla vulanate
Ampicillin
22 mg/kg PO, IV, SC q8h
Same
Azithromycin
 5-10 mg/kg PO q24h for 3 days,
5-10 mg/kg PO q24h for
then q48-72h
3 days, then q72h
Aspirin
0.5 mg/kg PO q12h
Low-dose, 5 mg/cat q72h (or
20-40 mg/cat [44-12 baby
aspirin] PO 2-3 times a
week)
Atenolol
0.2-1.0 mg/kg PO q12-24h
6.25-12.5 mg/cat
PO q(12-}24h
Atropine
0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, SC;
Same
0.04 mg/kg PO q6-8h.
Atropine response test: 0.04 mg/kg
IV; record ECG 5-10 minutes after
injection. If HR not increased by
≥150%, repeat ECG 15 (to 20)
minutes after injection.
Benazepril
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO qf12-)24h
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
PO q(12-}24h
2.5.5
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q6-8h 0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM, IV,
SC q6-8h
Butorpha nol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q2-4h;
0.2-0.8 mg/kg IV, SC q2-6h;
antitussive: 0.05-0.06 mg/kg SC
1.5 mg/kg PO q4-8h
q6-12h or 0.5 mg/kg PO
Captopril
0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q8-12h
0.5-1.25 mg/kg PO q12-24h
Carvedilol
0.05 mg/kg q24h (initial dose, if
cardiac disease), gradually titrate up
to 0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO q12h as 
tolerated; possibly up to 1.5 mg/kg
PO q12h PO if needed
Cefazolin
20-35 mg/kg IM, IV q8h
Same
Cephalexin
20-40 mg/kg q8h
Same
Chlorothiazide
10-40 mg/kg PO q12-48h
10-40 mg/kg PO q12-48h
(start low)
(start low)
Clindamycin
5.5-11(-20) mg/kg PO, SC, IM,
5.5-11(-25) mg/kg PO, SC,
IV q12(-24)h
IM, q12-24h
Clopidogrel
 2-4 mg/kg PO q24h; oral loading
14 {-12?) of 75 mg tab/cat
dose, 10 mg/kg
PO q24h
Codeine
0.1-0.3 mg/kg PO q4-6h
(antitussive)
 Dalteparin
100-150 U/kg SC q12(-24)h
100 U/kg SC q12(-24)h
sodium
Dexamethasone
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV, IM, PO q12-24h
Same
Dextro-
1-2 mg/kg q6-8h
 methorphan
Digoxin
PO: dogs <22 kg,
0.007 mg/kg (or 14 of
0.005-0.008 mg/kg
0.125 mgtab) PO q48h
q12h; dogs >22 kg, 0.22 mg/m2 or
0.003-0.005 mg/kg q12h.
Decrease by 10% for elixir.
Maximum: 0.5 mg/day or
0.375 mg/day for Doberman Pinschers
256
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Diltiazem
 Oral maintenance: initial dose
Same?
0.5 mg/kg (up to 2+ mg/kg) PO q8h; 
For HCM: 1.5-2.S mg/kg
acute IV for supraventricular
(or7.5-10 mg/cat) PO q8h;
tachycardia: 0.15-0.25 mg/kg over
sustained-release
2-3 minutes IV, can repeat every 15
preparations: Diltiazem
minutes until conversion or
(Dilacor) XR, 30 mg/cat/day
maximum 0.75 mg/kg; CRI:
(12 of a 60 mg controlled-
5-15 mg/kg/hour; PO loading
release tablet within the
dose: 0.5 mg/kg PO followed by
240 mg gelatin capsule), can
0.25 mg/kg PO q1h to a total of
increase to 60 mg/day in
1.5(-2.0) mg/kg or conversion.
some cats if necessary;
Diltiazem (Dilacor) XR, 1.5-4
(45 mg/cat ~105 mg of
(-6) mg/kg PO q 12-24h
Cardizem-CD, 10 mg/kg/day
Cardizem-CD, or amount
that fits into small end of a
No. 4 gelatin capsule)
Diphenhydra-
1 mg/kg IM; 2-4 mg/kg PO q8h
1 mg/kg IM, IV q6-8h;
mine
(or 25-50 mg/dog IV, IM, PO)
2-4 mg/kg PO q6-8h
Dobutamine
1-20 mcg/kg/minute CRI; start low
1-5 mcg/kg/minute CRI;
start low
Dopamine
1-10 mcg/kg/minute CRI; start low
 1-5 mcg/kg/minute CRI;
start low
Doxycycline
5-10 mg/kg PO, IV q12h
Same
Enalapril
0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
PO q(12-)24h
Enalaprilat
0.2 mg/kg IV, repeated q1-2h as
needed
Enoxaparin
0.8 mg/kg SC q6h
1-1.25 mg/kg SC q6-12h
Enrofloxacin
5-20 mg/kg PO, IM q24h
5 mg/kg PO q24h
Esmolol
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV over 1 minute
Same
{loa ding dose), followed by infusion
of 0.025-0.2 mg/kg/minute
Fenbendazole
25-50 mg/kg PO q12h for 14 days
Same (lungworms)
(lungworms); 20-50 mg/kg for [5-]
21 days {A.vasorum)
Flecainide
(?) 1-5 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Fosinopril
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q24h
2.57
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Dog doses
Cat doses
Furosemide
Acute: 2-5[-8] mg/kg IV or IM,
Acute: 1-2[4] mg/kg IV or
q1-4h until respiratory rate
IM, q1-4h until respiratory
decreases, then 1-4 mg/kg q6-12h,
rate decreases, then q6-12h.
or 0.6-1 mg/kg/hour CRI
Long term: 1-2 mg/kg PO
Long term: 1-3(or more) mg/kg PO
q8-12h; use smallest
q8-24h; use smallest effective dose
effective dose
Gentamicin
9-14 mg/kg IV. IM, SC q24h
5-8 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q24h
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV or IM; 0.01-
Same
0.02 mg/kg SC as needed
Heparin sodium
200-250 IU/kg IV, followed by
Same
200-300 IU/kg SC q6-8h for 2-4
days or as needed
Hydralazine
0.5-2 mg/kg PO q12h (to 1 mg/kg
2.5 (up to 10) mg/cat
initial); for hypertensive crisis:
PO q12h
 0.2 mg/kg IV or IM, repeated q2h
as needed
Hydro-
0.5-4 mg/kg PO q12-48h (start low)(
0.5-2 mg/kg PO q12-48h
chlorothiazide
(start low)
Hydrocodone
0.25 mg/kg PO q4-12h
Not recommended
bitartrate
Hydrocortisone
Shock: 50-150 mg/kg IV;
 sodium
anti-inflammatory: 5 mg/kg IV q12h Same
succinate
Hyoscyamine
0.003-0.006 mg/kg PO q8h
Imidacloprid/
0.1 ml/kg {10[-25] mg/kg plus
moxidectin
2.5 [-6.25] mg/kg) topical, single
dose (A.vasorum)
Imidapril
0.25 mg/kg PO q24h
Isoproterenol
0.045-0.09 mcg/kg/minute CRI
Same
Isosorbide
0.5-2 mg/kg PO q(8-)12h
dinitrate
Isosorbide
0.25-2 mg/kg PO q12h
mononitrate
Ivermectin
Heartworm prevention: 6 mcg/kg
Heartworm prevention:
PO q30days; endoparasites: 200-
24 mcg/kg PO q30days;
400 mcg/kg SC, PO weekly
endoparasites: same
l-Carnitine
1 g (for dogs <25 kg) to 2 g (for
dogs 25-40 kg) q8h; mix with food
258
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Labetolol
0.25 mg/kg IV over 2 minutes,
repeated up to a total dose of
3.75 mg/kg; follow with
25 mcg/kg/minute CRI
Lidocaine
Initial boluses of 2 mg/kg slowly IV,
Initial bolus of 0.25-0.5 (or
up to 8 mg/kg; or rapid IV infusion
1.0) mg/kg slowly IV; can
at 0.8 mg/kg/minute; if effective,
repeat boluses of 0.15-
then 25-80 mcg/kg/minute CRI;
0.25 mg/kg, up to total of
can also be used intratracheally
4 mg/kg; if effective,
for CPR
10-40 mcg/kg/minute CRI
Lisinopril
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q(12-)24h
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q24h
Marbofloxacin
3-5.5 mg/kg PO q24h
Same
Melarsomine
2.5 mg/kg IM (see case 27 for
Not recommended
instructions)
Metoprolol
Initial dose, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO
q24{-12)h, up to 1 mg/kg q8(-12)h
Metronidazole
10 mg/kg PO q8h
10 mg/kg PO q12h
Mexiletine
4-10 mg/kg PO q8h
Milbemycin
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q30days
2 mg/kg PO q30days
oxime
( hea rtworm prevention); 0.5 mg/kg
(heartworm prevention)
 PO once weekly for 4 weeks
(A.vasorum)
Moxidectin
3 mcg/kg PO q30days
(heartworm prevention)
Nitroglycerin
12-112 inch percutaneously q4-6h
14-12 inch percutaneously
2% ointment
q4-6h
Nitroprusside
0.5-1 mcg/kg/minute CRI (initial) to
Same
5-15 mcg/kg/minute CRI
Oxtriphylline
14 mg/kg PO q8h
Phenoxy-
0.2-0.5 mg/kg PO q(8-)12h
0.2-0.5 mg/kg or 2.5 mg/cat
benzamine
PO q12h
Phentolamine
0.02-0.1 mg/kg IV bolus, followed
Same
by CRI to effect
Phenytoin
10 mg/kg slowly IV;
Do not use
30-50 mg/kg PO q8h
Pimobendan
0.2-0.3 mg/kg PO q12h
As for dog, or 1.25 mg/cat
PO q12h
2.59
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Praziquantel
23 mg/kg PO q8h for 3 days
Same
(for Paragonimus)
Prazosin
0.05-0.2 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Prednisone
0.25-2 mg/kg PO q12h
Same
Prednisolone
Up to 10 mg/kg IV
Same
sodium succinate
Procainamide
6 -10 (up to 20) mg/kg IV over 5-
1.0-2.0 mg/kg slowly IV;
10 minutes; 10-50 mcg/kg/minute
10-20 mcg/kg/minute CRI;
CRI; 6-20 (up to 30) mg/kg IM
7.5-20 mg/kg IM or
q4-6h; 10-25 mg/kg PO q6h
PO q(6-)8h
(sustained release: q6-8h)
Propafenone
2-4 (up to 6) mg/kg PO q8h
(start low)
Propantheline
3.73-7.5 mg/dog PO q8-12h
bromide
Propranolol
0.02 mg/kg initial bolus slowly IV
Same IV instructions; 2.5 up
{up to maximum of 0.1 mg/kg);
to 10 mg/cat PO q8-12h
initial dose, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q8h,
up to 1 mg/kg q8h
Quinidine
6-20 mg/kg IM q6h (loading dose,
6-16 mg/kg IM or PO q8h
14-20 mg/kg); 6-16 mg/kg PO q6h;
sustained action preparations,
8-20 mg/kg PO q8h
Ramipril
0.125-0.25 mg/kg PO q24h
Selamectin
6-12 mg/kg, topical q30days
Same
(heartworm prevention)
Sildenafil
0.5-2 (-3) mg/kg PO q8-12h
Sotalol
1-3.5 (-5) mg/kg PO q12h
10-20 mg/cat PO q12h (or
2-4 mg/kg PO q12h)
Spironolactone
0.5-2 mg/kg PO qf12-)24h
0.5-1 mg/kg PO q(12-)24h
Taurine
0.5-1 g (for dogs <25 kg) to 1-2 g
0.25 (-0.5) g PO q12(-24)h
(for dogs 25 - 40 kg) PO qf8-)12h
(myocardial failure)
Terbutaline
1.25-5 mg/dog PO q8-12h
1/g-1/4 of 2.5 mg tablet/cat
q12h PO initially, up to 12
tablet q12h; 0.01 mg/kg SC,
can repeat once in
S-10 minutes if needed
Tetracycline
22 mg/kg PO q8h
Same
260
Drugs used for cardiac and respiratory diseases
Drug
Dog doses
Cat doses
Theophylline
9 mg/kg PO q8h
4 mg/kg PO q12h
base
(immediate
release)
Theophylline
10 mg/kg PO q12h
15 mg/kg PO q24h (in
(long acting)
evening)
Trimethoprim-
15-30 mg/kg PO q12h
Same
sulfadiazine
Vitamin K,
2-5 mg/kg PO, SC q24h
Same
Verapamil
Initial dose, 0.02-0.05 mg/kg slowly
Initial dose, 0.025 mg/kg
IV, can repeat q5minutes to total of
slowly IV, can repeat
0.15(-0.2) mg/kg; 0.5-2 mg/kg
q5minutes to total of 0.15
PO q8h
(-0.2) mg/kg; 0.5-1 mg/kg
(Note: diltiazem preferred)
 PO q8h. (Note: diltiazem
preferred)
Warfa rin
0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q24h
0.5 mg/cat PO q24h
HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; CRI, constant rate infusion; CPR,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally;
SC, subcutaneously; —, effective dosage not known.
261
Further reading
CARDIOPULMONARY SIGNS
 Respiratory distress and hypoxemia
Arterial pulses
Hackett TB (2009) Tachypnea and
Tidholm A (2010) Pulse alterations. In
hypoxemia. In Small Animal Critical Care
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
Medicine. (eds DC Silverstein, K Hopper)
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 37-40.
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 264-265.
Haskins SC (2004) Interpretation of blood
Ware WA (2011) The cardiovascular
gas measurements. In Textbook of
examination.In Cardiovascular Disease in
Respiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats. (ed
Small Animal Medicine.(ed WA Ware)
LG King) Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis, pp.
Manson Publishing, London, pp. 26-33.
181-193.
Hawkins EC (2009) Diagnostic tests for the
Cardiac auscultation abnormalities
lower respiratory tract. In Small Animal
Prosek R (2010) Abnormal heart sounds and
Internal Medicine,4th edn.{eds RW
heart murmurs. In Textbook of Veterinary
Nelson, CG Couto) Mosby, St. Louis, pp.
Internal Medicine,7hedn. (eds SJ Ettinger,
252-284.
EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis,
Koch DA, Arnold S, Hubler M et al. (2003)
pp.259-263.
Brachycephalic syndrome in dogs.
Ware WA (2011) The normal cardiovascular
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 25:48-54.
system; The cardiovascular examination;
Lee JA, Drobatz KJ (2004) Respiratory
and Murmurs and abnormal heart sounds.
distress and cyanosis in dogs. In Textbook
In CardiovascularDisease in Small Animat
of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats.
Medicine.(ed WA Ware) Manson
(ed LG King) Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis,
Publishing, London, pp. 10-25, 26-33,
pp.1-12.
and 92-97.
Miller CJ (2007) Approach to the respiratory
patient.Vet ClinSmallAnim37:861-878
Cyanosis
Allen J (2010) Cyanosis. In Textbook of
Syncope
Veterinary InternalMedicine,7hedn.(eds
Ware WA (2011) Symcope or intermittent
SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
collapse.In Cardiovascutar Disease in
St. Louis, pp. 283-286.
Small Animat Medicine.(ed WA Ware)
Forrester SD, Moon ML, Jacobson JD (2001)
Manson Publishing, London, pp, 139-144.
 Diagnostic evaluation of dogs and cats
Yee K (2010) Syncope. In Textbook of
with respiratory distress. Compend Contin
Veterinary Internal Medicine,7th edn. {eds
EducPract Vet23:56-68.
SJ Etinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
Lee JA, Drobatz KJ (2004) Respiratory.
St. Louis, pp. 275-277.
distress and cyanosis in dogs. In Textbook
ofRespiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats.
CARDIOPULMONARY TESTS
(ed LG King) Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis,
Biomarkers
pp.1-12.
Boswood A (2009) Biomarkers in
cardiovascular disease: beyond natriuretic
Jugular vein distension or pulsation
peptides. J Vet Cardiol 11:S23-S32.
Riel DL (2010) Jugular catheterization and
Connolly DJ, Soares Magalhaes RJ, Syme
central venous pressure. In Textbook of
HMet al. (2008) Circulating natriuretic
Veterinary Internat Medicine, 7th edn. (eds
peptides in cats with heart disease. J Vet
SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
Intern Med 22:96-105.
St. Louis, pp. 317-318.
Herndon WE, Rishniw M, Schrope D et al.
Ware WA (2011) Jugular vein distension or
(2008) Assessment of plasma cardiac
pulsations.In Cardiovascular Disease in
toponin I concentration as a means to
Small Animat Medicine.(ed WA Ware)
differentiate cardiac and noncardiac causes
Manson Publishing, London, pp. 117-120.
of dyspnea in cats. J Am Med Assoc
232:1261-1264.
Ljungvall I, Hoglund K, Tidholm A et al.
262
Further reading
(2010) Cardiac troponin I is associated
Doppler echocardiography I. Pulsed-wave
with severity of myxomatous mitral valve
and continuous wave examinations. Vet
disease, age, and C-reactive protein in
Clin North AmSmalt Anim Pract
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 24:153-159.
28:1325-1359.
MacDonald KA, Kittleson MD, Munro C et
Campbell FE, Kittleson MD (2007) The effect
al. (2003) Brain natriuretic peptide
of hydration status on the echocardio-
concentration in dogs with heart disease
graphic measurements of normal cats / Vet
and congestive heart failure. J Vet Intern
InternMed21:1008-1015.
Med 17:172-177.
Cornell CC, Kittleson MD, Torre PD et af.
Oyama MA, Sisson DD (2004) Cardiac
(2004) Allometric scaling of M-Mode
troponin-I concentration in dogs with
cardiac measurements in normal adult
cardiac disease.J Vet Intern Med 18:831
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 18:311.
839.
Koffas H, Dukes-McEwan J, Corcoran BM et
Oyama MA, Rush JE, Rozanski EA et al.
al. (2006) Pulsed tissue Doppler imaging in
(2009) Assessment of serum N-terminal
normal cats and cats with hypertrophic
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 20:65-
concentration for differentiation of
77.
congestive heart failure from primary
Schober KE, Hart TM, Stern JA et al. (2010)
respiratory tract disease as the cause of
 Detection of congestive heart failure in
respiratory signs in dogs. J Am Med Assoc
dogs by Doppler echocardiography. J Vet
235:1319-1325.
Intern Med20:1358-1368.
Prosek R, Ettinger SJ. (2010) Biomarkers of
Ware WA (2011) Overview of
cardiovascular disease. In Textbook of
echocardiography. In Cardiovascuiar
Veterinary Internat Medicine, 7th edn. (eds
Disease in Small Animal Medicine.(ed WA
SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
Ware) Manson Publishing, London, pp.
68-90.
Serres F, Pouchelon JL, Poujol L et al. (2009)
Plasma N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
Electrocardiographic interpretation and
peptide concentration helps to predict
abnormalities (see Cardiac arrhythmias for
survival in dogs with symptomatic
rhythm disturbances)
degenerative mitral valve disease regardless
Bonagura JD (1981) Electrical alternans
of and in combination with the initial
associated with pericardial effusion in the
clinical status at admission.  Vet Cardiof
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:574-579.
11:103-121.
MacKie BA, Stepien RL, Kellihan HB (2010)
Spratt DP, Mellanby RJ, Drury N et al.
Retrospective analysis of an implantable
(2005) Cardiac troponin I: evaluation of a
loop recorder for evaluation of syncope,
biomarker for the diagnosis of heart
collapse, or intermittent weakness in 23
disease in the dog. J Small Anim Pract
dogs (2004-2008). J Vet Cardiol 12:25-33.
46:139-145.
Miller M, Tilley LP, Smith FWK et al. (1999)
Wess G, Simak J, Mahling M et at. (2010)
Electrocardiography. In Textbook of
Cardiac troponin I in Doberman Pinschers
Canine and Feline Cardiology, 2nd edn. (eds
with cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
PR Fox, D Sisson, NS Moise) WB
24:843-849.
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 67-105.
Zimmering TM, Meneses F, Nolte IJ et al.
Rishniw M, Bruskiewicz K (1996) ECG of
(2009) Measurement of N-terminal
the month. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia
proatrial natriuretic peptide in plasma of
and wandering pacemaker in a cat. J Am
cats with and without cardiomyopathy Am
Vet Med Assoc 208:1811-1812.
JVetRes 70:216-222.
Stafford Johnson M, Martin M, Binns S et al.
(2004) A retrospective study of clinical
Echocardiography
findings, treatment and outcome in 143
Belanger MC (2010) Echocardiography. In
dogs with pericardial effusion. J Small
Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine,
Anim Pract 45:546-552.
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
Tag TL, Day TK (2008) Electrocardiographic
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.415-431.
assessment of hyperkalemia in dogs and
Bonagura JD, Miller MW, Darke PG (1998)
cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18:61-67.
263
Further reading
Tilley LP (1985) Artifacts. In Essentials of
correlation. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 7:5-11.
Canine and Feline Electrocardiogpraby,2nd
Sleeper MM, Buchanan JW (2001) Vertebral
edn. (ed LP Tilley) Lea & Febiger,
scale system to measure heart size in
Philadelphia, pp. 240-246.
growing puppies. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Ware WA (2011) Overview of
219:57-59.
electrocardiography. In Cardiovascular
Suter PF (1984) (ed) Thoracic Radiograpby:
Disease in Smalf Animal Medicine.{ed WA
A Text Atlas of Thoracic Diseases ofthe
Ware) Manson Publishing, London, pp.
Dog and Cat. Wettswil, Switzerland, p.
47-67.
533-537.
Ware WA, Christensen WF (1999) Twenty-
Ware WA (2011) Overview of cardiac
four-hour ambulatory electrocardiography
radiography In Cardiovascular Disease in
in normal cats. J Vet Interm Med 13:175-
Small Animal Medicine.(ed WA Ware)
180.
Manson Publishing, London, pp. 3446.
Radiography
CARDAC THERAPY: ARRHYTHMLA
Berry CR, Graham JP, Thrall DE (2007)
MANAGEMENT
Interpretation paradigms for the small
Bradyarrhythmias
animal thorax. In Textbook of Veterinary
Bulmer BJ, Sisson DD, Oyama MA et af.
Diagnostic Radiology, 5th edn. (ed DE
(2006) Physiologic VDD versus
Thrall) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.
nonphysiologic VVI pacing in canine 3d
462485.
degree atrioventricular block. J Vet Intern
Buchanan JW, Bicheler J(1995) Vertebral
Med20:257-271.
scale system to measure canine heart size in
DeFrancesco TC, Hansen BD, Atkins CE et
radiographs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
al. (2003) Noninvasive transthoracic
206:194.
temporary cardiac pacing in dogs. J Vet
Buecker A, Wein BB, Neuerburg JM et al.
Intern Med 17:663-667.
(1997) Esophageal perforation:
Estrada AH, Maisenbacher III HW, Prosek R
comparison of use of aqueous and barium-
et al. (2009) Evaluation of pacing site in
containing contrast media. Radiology
dogs with naturally occurring complete
202:683-686.
heart block. J Vet Cardiol 11:79-88.
Coulson A, Lewis ND (2002) An Atlas of
Ferasin L, van de Stad M, Rudorf H et af.
Interpretive Radiographic Anatomy of the
Dog and Cat. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
paroxysmal atrioventricular block and
Litster AL, Buchanan JW (2000) Vertebral
atrial standstill in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
scale system to measure heart size in
43:124-128.
radiographs of cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Fine DM, Tobias AH (2007) Cardiovascular
216:210-214.
device infections in dogs: report of 8 cases
McAlister WH, Askin FB (1983) The effect of
and review of the literature. J Vet Intern
some contrast agents in the lung: an
Med 21:1265-1271.
experimental study in the rat and dog. Am
Forterre S, Nirnberg J-H, Skrodzki M et at.
Roentgeno!140:245-251.
(2001) Transvenous demand pacemaker
Moon ML, Keene BW, Lessard P et al. (1993)
treatment for intermittent complete heart
Age-related changes in the feline cardiac
block in a cat. J Vet Cardiol 3:21-26.
silhouette.Vet RadiolUftrasound 34:315-
Fox PR, Moise NS, Woodfield JA et al.
320.
(1991) Techniques and complications of
Nawrocki MA, Mackin AJ, McLaughlin R et
pacemaker implantation in four cats. J Am
al. (2003) Fluoroscopic and endoscopic
Vet Med Assoc 199:1742-1753.
localization of an esophagobronchial
Francois L, Chetboul V, Nicolle A et af.
fistula in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
(2004) Pacemaker implantation in dogs:
39:257-261.
results of the last 30 years. Schweiz Arch
O'Brien RT (2001) Thoracic Radiograpby for
Tierheilkd146:335-344.
the Small Animal Practitioner.Teton
Hildebrandt N, Stertmann WA, Wehner M et
NewMedia, Jackson.
al.(2009) Dual chamber pacemaker
Reif JS, Rhodes WH (1966) The lungs of
implantation in dogs with atrioventricular
shooudiou-otydeitoipei e rshop pate
block.JVetInterrn Med23:31-38.
264
Further reading
Johnson MS, Martin MWS, Henley W
Tachyarrhythmias
(2007) Results of pacemaker implantation
Bright JM, Martin JM, Mama K (2005) A
in 104 dogs.J Small Anim Pract 48:411.
retrospective evaluation of transthoracic
Kaneshige T, Machida N, Itoh H et al. (2006)
biphasic electrical cardioversion for atrial
The anatomical basis of complete
fibrillation in dogs. J Vet Cardiol 7:85-96.
atrioventricular block in cats with
Calvert CA, Browm J (2004) Influence of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Comp
antiarrhythmia therapy on survival times
Path135:25-31.
of 19 clinically healthy Doberman
Kellum HB, Stepien RL (2006) Third-degree
Pinschers with dilated cardiomyopathy that
atrioventricular block in 21 cats (1997-
experienced syncope, ventricular
2004).J Vet Intern Med 20:97-103.
tachycardia, and sudden death (1985-
MacAulay K (2002) Permanent transvenous
1998). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:24-28.
pacemaker implantation in an Ibizan
Calvert CA, Meurs KM {2009)
hound cross with persistent atrial standstill.
Cardiomyopathy in Doberman Pinschers
Can Vet J 43:789-91.
In Kirk's'Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Maisenbacher III HW, Estrada AH, Prosek R
(eds JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders 
et al. (2009) Evaluation of the effects of
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 800-803.
transvenous pacing site on left ventricular
Cober RE, Schober KE, Hildebrandt N et al.
function and synchrony in healthy
(2009) Adverse effects of intravenous
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 70:455-
amiodarone in 5 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
463.
23:657-661.
Oyama MA, Sisson DD (2009) Permanent
Cote E, Harpster NK, Laste NJ et at. (2004)
cardiac pacing in dogs. In Kirk's Current
Atrial fibrillation in cats: 50 cases (1979-
Veterinary Therapy XIV. (eds JD
2002). Am Vet Med Assoc 225:256-260.
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
Gelzer ARM, Kraus MS (2004) Management
St. Louis, pp. 717-721.
of atrial fibrillation. Vet Clin North Am
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Lehmkuhl LB
Small AnimPract34:1127-1144.
(2001) Practices and outcome of artificial
Gelzer ARM, Kraus MS, Rishniw M et af.
cardiac pacing in 154 dogs. J Vet Intern
(2009) Combination therapy with digoxin
Med15:229-239.
and diltiazem controls ventricular rate in
Penning VA, Connolly DJ, Gajanayake I et al.
chronic atrial fibrillation in dogs better
(2009) Seizure-like episodes in 3 cats with
than digoxin or diltiazem monotherapy: a
intermittent high-grade atrioventricular
randomized crossover study in 18 dogs. J
dysfunction.JVetIntern Med23:200-205.
Vet Intern Med23:499-508.
Saunders A (2005) ECG of the month.Sick
Glaus TM, Hassig M, Keene BW (2003)
sinus syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Accuracy of heart rate obtained by
227:51-52.
auscultation in atrial fibrillation. J Am
Van De Wiele CM, Hogan DF, Green III HW
Anim Hosp Assoc 39:237-239.
et al. (2008) Cranial vena caval symdrome
Kraus MS, Thomason JD, Fallaw TL et af.
secondary to transvenus pacemaker
(2009) Toxicity in Doberman Pinschers
implantation in two dogs. J Vet Cardio!
with ventricular arrhythmias treated with
10:155-161.
amiodarone {1996-2005). Vet Intern Med
Ware WA (2011) Managment of arrhythmias.
23:1-6.
In CardiovascularDisease in Small Animat
Menaut P, Belanger MC, Beauchamp G et al.
Medicine.{ed WA Ware) Manson
(2005) Atrial fibrillation in dogs with and
Publishing, London, pp. 194226.
without structural or functional cardiac
Wess G, Thomas WP, Berger DM et al.
disease: a retrospecive study of 109 cases.
(2006) Applications, complications, and
Vet Cardiot 7:75-83.
outcomes of transvenous pacemaker
Meurs KM, Spier AW (2009)
implantation in 105 dogs (1997-2002). J
Cardiomyopathy in Boxer Dogs. In Kirk's
VetIrternMed20:877-884.
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.(eds JD
Zimmerman SA, Bright JM (2004) Secure
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
pacemaker fixation critical for prevention
St. Louis, pp. 797-799.
of Twiddler's syndrome. J Vet Cardio!
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA et al.
6:4044.
(2002) Comparison of the effects of four
26.5
Further reading
antiarrhythmic treatments for familial
CARDLAC THERAPY:HEART FAILURE
ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. J Am
MANAGEMENT
Vet Med Assoc 221:522-527.
Abbott JA, Broadstone RV, Ward DL et at.
Miyamoto M, Nishijima Y, Nakayama T et
(2005) Hemodynamic effects of orally
al. {2001) Acute cardiovascular effects of
administered carvedilol in healthy
diltiazem in anesthetized dogs with induced
conscious dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:637-641.
atrial fibrillation.J Vet Intern Med 15:559-
Adin DB, Hill RC, Scott KC (2003) Short-
563.
 term compatibility of furosemide with
Moise NS, Gelzer ARM, Kraus MS.
Crystalloid solutions. J Vet Intern Med
Ventricular arrhythmias in dogs. (2009) In
17:724-726.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Adin DB, Taylor AW, Hill RC et al. (2003)
(eds JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders
Intermittent bolus injection versus
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 727-731.
continuous infusion of furosemide in
Moise NS, Pariaut R, Gelzer ARM et al.
normal adult greyhound dogs. J Vet Intern
(2005) Cardioversion with lidocaine of
Med17:632-636.
vagally associated atrial fibrillation in two
Amberger C, Chetboul V, Bomassi E et al.
dogs. J Vet Cardiol 7:143-148.
(2004) Comparison of the effects of
Oyama MA, Prosek R (2006) Acute
imidapril and enalapril in a prospective,
conversion of atrial fibrillation in two dogs
multicentric randomized trial in dogs with
by intravenous amiodarone administration.
naturally acquired heart failure. J Vet
J Vet Intern Med 20:1224-1227.
Cardiol 6:9-16.
Santilli RA, Spadacini G, Moretti P et al.
Arsenault WG, Boothe DM, Gordon SG et al.
(2006) Radiofrequency catheter ablation of
(2005) Pharmacokinetics of carvedilol after
concealed accessory pathways in two dogs
intravenous and oral administration in
with symptomatic atrioventricular
conscious healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res
reciprocating tachycardia. J Vet Cardio!
66:2172-2176.
8:157-165.
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Etinger S et al. (2009)
Saunders AB, Miller MW, Gordon SG et at.
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
(2006) Oral amiodarone therapy in dogs
of canine chronic valvular heart disease.
with atrial fibrillation. J Vet Intern Med
ACVIM Consensus Statement. J Vet Intern
20:921-926.
Med23:1142-1150.
Smith CE, Freeman LM, Rush JE, et af.
Atkins CE, Keene BW, Brown WA et al.
(2007) Omega-3 fatty acids in boxer dogs
(2007) Results of the veterinary enalapril
with arrhythmogenic right ventricular
tial to prove reduction in onset of heart
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
failure in dogs chronically treated with
21:265-273.
emalapril alone for compensated, naturally
Stafford Johnson M, Martin M,Smith P
occurring mitral valve insufficiency. J Am
(2006) Cardioversion of supraventricular
Vet Med Assoc 231:1061-1069.
tachycardia using lidocaine in five dogs. J
BENCH study group (1999) The effect of
Vet Intern Med20:272-276.
benazepril on survival times and clinical
Ware WA (2011) Managment of
signs of dogs with congestive heart failure:
arrhythmias.In Cardiovascular Disease in
results of a multicenter prospective,
Small Animal Medicine.(edWAWare)
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-
Manson Publishing, London, pp.
controlled, long-term clinical trial. J Vet
194-226.
Cardiol 1:7-18.
Wright KN (2009) Assessment and
Bernay F, Bland JM, Haggstrom J et al.
treatment of supraventricular
(2010) Eficacy of spironolactone on
tachyarrhythmias. In Kirk's Current
survival in dogs with naturally occurring
Veterinary Therapy XIV.(eds JD
mitral regurgitation caused by
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
myxomatous mitral valve disease. J Vet
St. Louis, pp. 731-739.
Intern Med24:331-341.
Wright KN, Knilans TK, Irvin HM (2006)
Bonagura JB, Lehmkuhl LB, de Morais HA
When, why, and how to perform cardiac
(2006) Fluid and diuretic therapy in heart
radiofrequency catheter ablation. J Vet
failure.In Fluid,Electrolyte, and Acid-Base
Cardiol &:95-107.
Disorders in Smalt Animat Practice,3rd
266
Further reading
edn. (ed SP DiBartola) Elsevier Saunders,
Med 16:255-261.
St. Louis, pp. 490-518.
Marcondes Santos M, Tarasoutchi F, Mansur
Gordon SG, Arsenault WG, Longnecker M et
AP et al. (2007) Effects of carvediiol
al. (2006) Pharmacodymamics of carvedilol
treatment in dogs with chronic mitral
in conscious, healthy dogs. J Vet Intern
valvular disease. J Vet Intern Med 21:996-
Med20:297-304.
1001.
Haggstrom J, Boswood A, O'Grady M et al.
O'Grady MR, Minors SL, O'Sullivan ML et
(2008) Effect of pimobendan or benazepril
al. (2008) Efficacy of pimobendan on case
HCl on survival times in dogs with
fatality rate in Doberman Pinschers with
congestive heart failure caused by naturally
congestive heart failure caused by dilated
occurring myxomatous mitral valve
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Interr Med
disease: the QUEST study. J Vet Intern
22:897-904.
Med22:11241135.
O'Grady MR, O'Sullivan ML, Minors SL et
Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Karlberg BE et al.
al. (2009) Efficacy of benazepril hydro-
(1996) Efects of long-term treatment with
chloride to delay the progression of occult
enalapril or hydralazine on the renin-
dilated cardiomyopathy in Doberman
angiotensin-aldosterone system and fluid
Pinschers.J Vet Intern Med 23:977-983.
balance in dogs with naturally acquired
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Prosek R et al.
mitral valve regurgitation. Am J Vet Res
(2007) Carvedilol in dogs with dilated
57:1645-1652.
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
Hood WB, Dans AL, Guyatt GH et al. {2004)
21:1272-1279.
Digitalis for treatment of congestive heart
Pouchelon JL, King J, Martignoni L et at.
failure in patients in sinus rhythm: a
(2004) Long-term tolerability of benazepril
systematic review and meta-analysis.}
in dogs with congesive heart failure. J Vet
Card Fail 10:155-164.
Cardiol 6:7-13.
Kvart C, Haggsrom J, Pedersen HD et al.
Rush JE, Freeman LM, Brown DJ et al.
(2002) Efficacy of enalapril for prevention
(2000) Clinical, echocardiographic, and
of congestive heart failure in dogs with
neurohormonal effects of a sodium-
myxomatous valve disease and
restricted diet in dogs with heart failure. J
asymptomatic mitral regurgitation. J Vet
Vet Intern Med 14:512-520.
Intern Med16:80-88.
Rush JE, Freeman LM, Hiler C et al. (2002)
Lefebvre HB, Brown SA, Chetbouls V et af.
Use of metoprolol in dogs with acquired
(2007) Angiotensin-convering enzyme
cardiac disease.J Vet Cardiol 4:23-28.
inhibitors in veterinary medicine. Curr
Sisson DD (2010) Pathophysiology of heart
Pharmaceut Design 13:1347-1361.
failure. In Textbook of Veterinary Interna!
Lefebvre HP, Jeunesse E, Laroute V et at.
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC
(2006) Pharmacokinetic and
Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.
pharmacodynamic parameters of ramipril
1143-1158
and ramiprilat in healthy dogs with
Smith PJ, French AT, Van Israel N et af.
reduced glomerular filtration rate. J Vet
(2005) Efficacy and safety of pimobendan
Intern Med20:499-507.
in canine heart failure caused by
Lombarde CW, Jons O, Bussadori CM
myxomatous mitral valve disease. J Small
(2006) Clinical efficacy of pimobendan
Anim Pract 46:121-130.
versus benazepril for the treatment of
Uechi M, Sasaki T, Ueno K et af. (2002)
acquired atrioventricular valvular disease
Cardiovascular and renal effects of
in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42:249-
carvedilol in dogs with heart failure. J Vet
261.
Med Sci 64:469475.
Luis Fuentes V (2004) Use of pimobendan in
Ware WA. (2011) Management of heart
the management of heart failure. Vet Clin
failure.In Cardiovascular Disease in Small
North AmSmall Anim Pract 34:1145-
Animal Medicine.(ed WA Ware) Manson
1155.
Publishing, London, pp. 164193.
Luis Fuentes V, Corcoran B, French A et af.
(2002) A double-blind,randomized,
HEART DISEASES: CONGENITAL
placebo-controlled study of pimobendan in
Abdulla R, Blew GA, Holterman MJ (2004)
dogs with cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern
Cardiovascular embryology. Pediatr
267
Further reading
Cardio/25:191-200.
via the carotid artery in seven dogs. J Vet
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Thomas WP et al.
Cardiol 11:129-136.
(2010) Congenital heart disease. In
Moore KW, Stepien RL (2001) Hydroxyurea
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
for treatment of polycythemia secondary to
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
right-to-left shunting patent ductus
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1250-
arteriosus in 4 dogs. j Vet Intern Med
1298.
15:418-421.
Ware WA (2011) Congenital cardiovascular
Nguyenba TP, Tobias AH (2008) Minimally
diseases.In Cardiovascular Disease in
invasive per-catheter patent ductus
Smalt Animat Medicine.(ed WA Ware)
arteriosus occlusion in dogs using
Manson Publishing, London, pp. 228-262.
prototype duct occluder. jVet Intern Med
22:129-134.
Shunts
Oswald GP, Orton CE (1993) Patent ductus
Blossom JE, Bright JM, Griffiths LG (2010)
arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension in
Transvenous occlusion of patent ductus
related Pembroke Welsh Corgis. J Arm Vet
arteriosus in 56 consecutive dogs. J Vet
Med Assoc 202:761-764.
Cardio! 12:75-84.
Saunders AB, Miller MW, Gordon SG et af.
Brockman DJ, Holt DE, Gaynor JW et al.
(2007) Echocardiographic and
(2007) Long-term palliation of tetralogy of
angiocardiographic comparison of ductal
Fallot in dogs by use of a modified
dimensions in dogs with patent ductus
Blalock-Taussig shunt. J Am Vet Med
arteriosus. J Vet Intern Med 21:68-75.
Assoc 231:721-726.
Schneider M, Hildebrandt N, Schweigl T et
Chetboul V, Charles V, Nicolle A et al. (2006)
al. (2007) Transthoracic echocardiographic
Retrospective study of 156 atrial septal
measurement of patent ductus arteriosus in
defects in dogs and cats (2001-2005). J Vet
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 21:251-257.
Med 53:179-184.
Shimizu M,Tanaka R,Hirao H etal. (2005)
Cote E, Ettinger SJ (2001) Long-term clinical
Percutaneous transcatheter coil
management of right-to-]eft (*reversed”)
embolization of a ventricular septal defect
patent ductus arteriosus in 3 dogs. J Vet
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:69-72.
Intern Med 15:39-42.
Fujii Y, Fukuda T, Machida N et at. (2004)
Valve malformations
Transcatheter closure of congenital
Buchanan JW (2001) Pathogenesis of single
ventricular septal defects in 3 dogs with a
night coronary artery and pulmonic
detachable coil. J Vet Intern Med 18:911-
stenosis in English Bulldogs. J Vet Intern
914.
Med 15:101-104.
Gordon SG, Miller MW, Roland RM et al.
Bussadori C, DeMadron E, Santilli RA et at.
(2009) Transcatheter atrial septal defect
(2001) Balloon valvuloplasty in 30 dogs
closure with the Amplatzer atrial septal
with pulmonic stenosis: effect of valve
occlude in 13 dogs: short- and mid-term
morphology and annular size on initial and
outcome. J Vet Intern Med 23:995-1002.
1-year outcome. J Vet Intern Med 15:553-
Gordon SG,Saunders AB, Achen SE et al.
558.
(2010) Transarterial ductal occlusion using
Estrada A (2009) Pulmonic stenosis. In Kirk's
the Amplatz Canine Duct Occluder in 40
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. (eds JD
dogs. J Vet Cardiol 12:85-92.
 Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
Miller MW, Gordan SG (2009) Patent ductus
St. Louis, pp. 752-756.
arteriosus. In Kirk's Current Veterinary
Estrada A, Moise NS, Erb HN et al. (2006)
Therapy XIV. {eds JD Bonagura, DC
 Prospective evaluation of the balloon-to-
Twedt) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.
annulus ratio for valvuloplasty in the
744-747.
teatment of pulmonic stenosis in the dog- J
Miller MW, Gordon SG, Saunders AB et af.
Vet Intern Med 20:862-872.
(2006) Angiographic classification of
Estrada A, Moise NS, Renaud-Farrell S
patent ductus arteriosus morphology in the
(2005) when, how and why to perform a
dog. J Vet Cardiol 8:109-114.
 double ballooning technique for dogs with
Miller SJ, Thomas WP (2009) Coil
valvular pulmonic stenosis. J Vet Cardiol
embolization of patent ductus arteriosus
7:41-51.
268
Further reading
Falk T, Jonsson L, Pedersen HD (2004)
retrospective study of 24 cases seen
Intramyocardial arterial narrowing in dogs
between 1990-1999.J Vet Cardiol3:13-
with subaortic stenosis. J Small Anim Pract
19.
45:448-453.
Stafford Johnson M, Martin M, Edwards D
Famula TR, Siemens LM, Davidson AP et af.
et al. (2004) Pulmonic stenosis in dogs:
(2002) Evaluation of the genetic basis of
balloon dilation improves clinical outcome.
tricuspid valve dysplasia in Labrador
VetInternMed18:656-662.
Retrievers.Am  Vet Res 63:816-820.
Stamoulis ME, Fox PR (1993) Mitral valve
French A, Luis Fuentes V, Dukes-McEwan J
stenosis in three cats.J Small Arim Pract
et al. (2000) Progression of aortic stenosis
34:452-456.
in the Boxer. J Smalf Anim Pract 41:451-
Stepien RL, Bonagura JD (1991) Aortic
456.
stenosis: clinical findings in six cats. J Small
Fonfara S, Martinez Pereira Y, Swift S et al.
AnimPract32:341-350.
(2010) Balloon valvuloplasty for treatment
of pulmonic stenosis in English bulldogs
Vascular and other malformations
with an aberrant coronary artery. J Vet
Buchanan JW (2004) Tracheal signs and
Intern Med24:354-359.
associated vascular anomalies in dogs with
Hoffman G, Amberger CN, Seiler G et al.
persistent right aortic arch. J Vet Intern
(2000) Tricuspid valve dysplasia in fifteen
Med18:510-514.
dogs. SchweizArch Tierbeitkd 142:268-
delPalacio MJF, Bayon A, Agut A (1997)
277.
 Dilated coronary sinus in a dog with
Jenni S, Gardelle O, Zini E et al. (2009) Use
persistent left cranial vena cava. Vet Radiof
of auscultation and Doppler
Ultrasound38:376-379.
echocardiography in Boxer puppies to
Fossum TW, Miller MW (1994) Cor
predict development of subaortic or
triatriatum and caval anomalies. Semin Vet
pulmonary stenosis. J Vet Intern Med
Med Surg 9:177-184.
23:81-86.
Muldoon MM, Birchard SJ, Ellison GW
Johnson MS, Martin M, Edwards D et af.
(1997) Long-term results of surgical
(2004) Pulmonic stenosis in dogs: balloon
correction of persistent right aortic arch in
dilation improves clinical outcome. J Vet
dogs: 25 cases (1980-1995). J Am Vet Med
Intern Med 18:656-662.
Assoc 210:1761-1763.
Kienle RD, Thomas WP, Pion PD (1994) The
Stafford Johnson M, Martin M, DeGiovanni
natural history of canine congenital
JV et al. (2004) Management of cor
subaortic stenosis.J Vet Intern Med 8:423-
triatriatum dexter by balloon dilatation in
431.
three dogs. J Small Anim Pract 45:16-20.
Kunze CP, Abbott JA, Hamilton SM et al.
VanGundy T (1989) Vascular ring anomalies.
{2002) Balloon valvuloplasty for palliative
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 11:36-
treatment of tricuspid stenosis with right-
48.
to-left atrial-level shunting in a dog- J Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:491-496.
HEART DISEASES: MYOCARDLAL,
Lehmkuhl LB, Ware WA, Bonagura JD
CANINE
(1994) Mitral stenosis in 15 dogs. J Vet
Boxer arrhythmogenic right ventricular
Intern Med 8:2-17.
cardiomyopathy
Linde A, Koch J (2006) Screening for aortic
(also see Cardiac therapy: arrhythmia
stenosis in the Boxer: auscultatory, ECG,
management)
blood pressure and Doppler
Baumwart RD, Meurs KM, Atkins CE et a.
echocardiographic findings. J Vet Cardiot
(2005) Clinical, echocardiographic, and
8:79-86.
electrocardiographic abnormalities in
Meurs KM, Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD
Boxers with cardiomyopathy and left
(2005) Survival times in dogs with severe
ventricular systolic dysfunction: 48 cases
subvalvular aortic stenosis treated with
(1985-2003j. J Am Vet Med Assoc
balloon valvuloplasty or atenolol. J Am Vet
226:1102-1104.
Med Assoc 227:420-424.
Kraus MS, Moise NS, Rishniw M et af.
Ristic JM, Marin C, Baines EA, Herrtage ME
(2002) Morphology of ventricular
(2001) Congenital pulmonic stenosis. A
 arrhythmias in the Boxer as measured by
269
Further reading
12-lead electrocardiography with pace-
Calvert CA, Jacobs GJ, Smith DD (2000)
mapping comparison. J Vet Intern Med
Association between results of ambulatory
16:153-158.
electrocardiography and development of
Meurs KM, Ederer MM, Stern JA (2007)
ardiomyopathy during long-term follow-
Desmosomal gene evaluation in Boxers
up of Doberman Pinschers. J Am Vet Med
with arrhythmogenic right ventricular
Assoc 216:34-39.
cardiomyopathy. Am J Vet Res 68:1338-
Calvert CA, Meurs KM (2009)
1341.
 Cardiomyopathy in Doberman Pinschers.
Meurs KM, Spier AW (2009)
In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Cardiomyopathy in Boxer Dogs. In Kirk's
(eds JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders
CurrentVeterinary Therapy XiV.(eds JD
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 800-803.
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
Carroll MC, Cote E (2001) Carnitine: a
St. Louis, p. 797-799.
review. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA et al.
23:45-52.
(2001) Comparison of in-hospital versus
Dukes-McEwan J, Borgarelli M, Tidholm A
24-hour ambulatory electrocardiography
et al. (2003) Proposed guidelines for the
for detection of ventricular premature
diagnosis of canine idiopathic dilated
complexes in mature Boxers. J Am Vet
ardiomyopathy.J Vet Cardiol 5:7-19.
Med Assoc218:222-224.
Everett RM, McGann J, Wimberly HC et af.
Oyama MA, Reiken S, Lehnart SE et af.
(1999) Dilated cardiomyopathy of
(2008) Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
Doberman Pinschers: retrospective
cardiomyopathy in Boxer dogs is
histomorphologic evaluation on hearts
associated with calstabin2 deficiency. J Vet
from 32cases.VetPathol36:221-227.
Cardiol 10:1-10.
Fascetti AJ, Reed JR, Rogers QR et al. (2003)
Smith CE, Freeman LM, Meurs KM et at.
Taurine deficiency in dogs with dilated
(2008) Plasma fatty acid concentrations in
cardiomyopathy:12 cases (1997-2001). §
Boxers and Doberman Pinschers. Am J Vet
Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1137-1141.
Res 69:195-198.
Freeman LM, Rush JE, Browm DJ et af.
Spier AW, Meurs KM (2004) Evaluation of
(2001) Relationship between circulating
spontaneous variability in the frequency of
and dietary taurine concentration in dogs
ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers with
with dilated cardiomyopathy. Vet Ther
arrhythmiogenic right ventricular
2:370-378.
cardiomyopathy J Am Vet Med Assoc
Kittleson MD, Keene B, Pion PD et al. (1997)
24:538-541.
Results of the multicenter spaniel trial
Stern JA, Meurs KM, Spier AW et at. (2010)
(MUST): taurine- and carnitine-responsive
Ambulatory electrocardiographic
dilated cardiomyopathy in American
evaluation of clinically normal adult
Cocker Spaniels with decreased plasma
Boxers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:430-433.
aurine concentration. J Vet Intern Med
Thomason JD, Kraus MS, Surdyk KK et af.
11:204-211.
 ui adoous paeosse-ipepeig (goo)
Luis Fuentes, Corcoran B, French A et al.
Boxers with ventricular tachycardia (2002-
(2002) A double-blind,randomized,
2005).J VetIntern Med22:931-936.
placebo-controlled study of pimobendan in
dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy. J Vet
Dilated cardiomyopathy
InternMed16:255-261.
(also see Cardiac therapy: heart failure
Moneva-Jordan A, Lius Fuentes V, Corcoran
management)
B et al. (2002) Pulsus alternans in English
Backus RC, Cohen G, Pion PD et at. (2003)
Cocker Spaniels with dilated
Taurine deficiency in Newfoundlands fed
cardiomyopathy.J Small AnimPract
commercially available complete and
43:410.
balanced diets. ↓ Am Vet Med Assoc
Meurs KM, Fox PR, Norgard MM (2007) A
223:1130-1136.
prospective genetic evaluation of familial
Borgarelli M, Sanilli RA, Chiavegato D et al.
dilated cardiomyopathy in the Doberman
(2006) Prognostic indicators for dogs with
Pinscher. J Vet Intern Med 21:1016-1020.
dilated cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
Meurs KM, Hendrix KP, Norgard MM
20:104-110.
(2008) Molecular evaluation of five cardiac
270
Further reading
genes in Doberman Pinschers with dilated
Doberman Pinschers with cardiomyopathy
cardiomyopathy. Am J Vet Res 69:1050-
in comparison with a 24-hour ambulatory
1053.
ECG.J Vet Intern Med 24:367-371.
O'Grady MR, O'Sullivan ML, Minors SL et
al. (2009) Efficacy of benazepril
Other myocardial disease/injury
hydrochloride to delay the progression of
Actis Dato GM, Arslanian A, DiMarzio P et
occult dilated cardiomyopathy in
af. {2003) Post-traumatic and iatrogenic
Doberman Pinschers. J Vet Interr Med
foreign bodies in the heart: report of
23:977-983.
fourteen cases and review of the literature.
O'Grady MR, O'Sullivan ML (2004) Dilated
J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 126:408-414.
cardiomyopathy: an update. Vet Clin
Breitschwerdt EB, Atkins CE, Brown TT et
NorthAmSmall AnimPract34:1187-
al.(1999) Bartonella vinsonii subsp.
1207.
berkboffii and related members of the
O'Sullivan ML, O'Grady MR, Minors SL
alpha subdivision of the Proteobacteria in
(2007) Plasma big endothelin-1, atrial
dogs with cardiac arrhythmias,
natriuretic peptide, aldosterone, and
endocarditis, or myocarditis. J Clin
norepinephrine concentrations in normal
Microbiol37:3618-3626.
Doberman Pinschers and Doberman
Falk I, Jonsson L (2000) Ischaemic heart 
Pinschers with dilated cardiomyopathy. J
disease in the dog: a review of 65 cases. J
Vet Intern Med21:92-99.
Small Anim Pract 41:97-103.
Oyama MA, Chittur SV, Reymolds CA (2009)
Fritz CL, Kjemtrup AM (2003) Lyme
Decreased triadin and increased calstabin2
borreliosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
expression in Great Danes with dilated
223:1261-1270.
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
Hess RS, Kass PH, Van Winkle TJ (2003)
23:10141019.
Association between diabetes mellitus,
Oyama MA, Fox PR, Rush JE et al. (2008)
hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism
Clinical utility of serum N-terminal pro-B-
and atherosclerosis in dogs. J Vet Intern
type natriuretic peptide concentration for
Med 17:489494.
identifying cardiac disease in dogs and
Kidd L, Stepien RL, Amrheiw DP (2000)
assessing disease severity.JAm Vet Med
Clinical findings and coronary artery
Assoc 232:1496-1503.
disease in dogs and cats with acute and
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Solter PF (2007)
subacute myocardial necrosis: 28 cases. J
Prospective screening for occult
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:199-208.
juaansea Aq shop u Auedoaoipie
Schmiedt C, Kellum H, Legendre AM et al.
of plasma atrial natriuretic peptide, B-type
{2006] Cardiovascular involvement in 8
natriuretic peptide, and cardiac troponin-I
dogs with Blastorryces dermatiditis
concentrations.Am Vet Res 68:42-47.
infection. J Vet Intern Med 20:1351-1354.
Pion PD, Sanderson SL, Kittleson MD (1998)
Snyder PS, Cooke KL, Murphy ST et al.
The effectiveness of taurine and
(2001) Electrocardiographic findings in
levocarnitine in dogs with heart disease.
dogs with motor vehicle-related trauma. J
Vet Clin North AmSmalt Anim Pract
Am Arim Hosp Assoc37:55-63.
28:1495-1514.
Ware WA (2011) Myocardial diseases of the
Sanderson SL, Gross KL, Ogburn PH et af.
dog. In Cardiovascuiar Disease in Smalt
(2001) Effects of dietary fat and L-carnitine
Animal Medicine.{ed WA Ware) Manson
on plasma and whole blood taurine
Publishing, London, pp. 280-299.
concentrations and cardiac function in
healthy dogs fed protein-restricted diets.
Heart diseases: myocardial, feline
Am} Vet Res 62:1616-1623.
Connolly DJ, Soares Magalhaes RJ, Syme
Vollmar AC, Fox PR, Meurs KM et af.
HM et al. (2008) Circulating natriuretic
(2003) Dilated cardiomyopathy in juvenile
peptides in cats with heart disease. J Vet
Doberman Pinscher dogs. J Vet Cardiol
Intern Med 22:96-105.
5:23-27.
Ferasin L (2009) Feline myocardial disease:
Wess G, Schulze A, Geraghty N et at. (2010)
classification, pathophysiology and clinical
Ability of a 5-minute electrocardiography
presentation. J Feline Med Surg 11:3-13.
(ECG) for predicting arrhythmias in
 Ferasin L (2009) Feline myocardial disease:
271
Further reading
diagnosis, prognosis, and clinical
Meurs KM, Sanchez X, David RM et al.
management. J Feline Med Surg 11:183-
(2005) A cardiac myosin-binding protein C
194.
mutation in the Maine Coon cat with
Ferasin L, Sturgess CP, Cannon MJ et al.
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
(2003) Feline idiopathic cardiomyopathy: a
HumMolGenet14:3587-3593.
retrospective study of 106 cats (1994-
Paige CF, Abbott JA, Elvinger F et al. (2009)
2001j.J Feline MedSurg5:151-159.
Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in
Fox PR (2003) Hypertrophic cardiopathy.
apparently healthy cats.J AmVet Med
Clinical and pathologic correlates. J Vet
Assoc 234:1398-1403.
Cardiol 5:39-45.
Rush JE, Freeman LM, Fenollosa NK et al.
Fox PR, Maron BJ, Basso C et af. (2000)
(2002) Population and survival
Spontaneously occurring arrhythmogenic
characteristics of cats with hypertrophic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy in the
cardiomyopathy: 260 cases (1990-1999). §
domestic cat: a new animal model similar
Am Vet Med Assoc 220:202-207.
to the human disease.Circulation
Sampedrano CC, Chetboul V, Gouni V et al.
102:1863-1870.
(2006) Systolic and diastolic myocardial
Fries R, HeaneyAM, Meurs KM (2008)
dysfunction in cats with hypertrophic
 Prevalence of the myosin-binding protein C
cardiomyopathy or systemic
mutation in Maine coon cats. J Vet Intern
hypertension. JVet 1ntern Med 20:1106-
Med 22:893-896.
1115.
Harvey AM, Battersby IA, Faena M et al.
Sampedrano CC, Chetboul V, Mary J et al.
(2005) Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
(2009) Prospective echocardiographic and
cardiomyopathy in two cats. J Small Anim
tssue Doppler imaging screening of a
Pract 46:151-156.
population of Maine coon cats tested for
Koffas H, Dukes-McEwan J, Corcoran BM et
he A31P mutation in the myosin-binding
al. (2006) Pulsed tissue Doppler imaging in
protein C gene: a specific analysis of the
normal cats and cats with hypertrophic
heterozygous status. J Vet Intern Med
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 20:65-
23:91-99
77.
Schober KE, Maerz I (2006) Assessment of
MacDonald KA, Kittleson MD, Kass PH et
left atrial appendage flow velocity and its
al. (2007) Tissue Doppler imaging in
Maine Coon cats with a mutation of
contrast in 89 cats with myocardial disease.
myosin binding protein C with or without
VetInternMed20:120-130.
hypertrophy. J Vet Intern Med 21:232-
Taillefer M, Di Fruscia R (2006) Benazepril
237.
 and subclinical feline hypertrophic
MacDonald KA, Kittleson MD, Kass PH
cardiomyopathy: a prospective, blinded,
(2008) Effect of spironolactone on diastolic
controlled study. Can Vet J 47:437.
function and left ventricular mass in Maine
Ware WA. (2011) Myocardial diseases of the
Coon cats with familial hypertrophic
at.In Cardiovascutar Disease in Small
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 22:335-
Animal Medicine.(ed WA Ware) Manson
341.
Publishing, London, p. 300-319.
MacDonald KA, Kittleson MD, Larson RF et
Wess G, Schinner C, Weber K et al. (2010)
al. (2006) The effect of ramipril on left
Association of A31P and A74T
ventricular mass, myocardial fibrosis,
polymorphisms in the myosin binding
diastolic function, and plasma
protein C3 gene and hypertrophic
neurohormones in Maine Coon cats with
cardiomyopathy in Maine coon and other
breed cats. J Vet Intern Med 20:527-532.
withoutheart failure.JVetIntern Med
Yang VK Freeman LM, Rush JE (2008)
20:1093.
Comparisons of morphometric
Meurs KM, Norgard MM, Kuan M et al.
measurements and serum insulin-like
(2009) Analysis of 8 sarcomeric candidate
growth factor concentration in healthy cats
genes for feline hypertrophic
and cats with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy mutations in cats with
cardiomyopathy. Am J Vet Res 69:1061-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern
1066.
Med 23:840-843.
272
Further reading
HEARTDISEASES:NEOPLASTIC
229:435-440.
(also see Acquired pericardial diseases and
Jackson J, Richter KP, Launer DP (1999)
neoplasia)
Thoracoscopic partial pericardiectomy in
Akkoc A, Ozyigit MO, Cangul IT (2007)
13 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13:529-533.
Valvular cardiac myxoma in a dog. J Vet
MacDonald KA, Cagney O, Magne ML
Med A Pbysiol Patbol Clin Med 54:356-
(2009) Echocardiographic and
358.
clinicopathologic characterization of
Aronsohn M (1985) Cardiac
pericardial effusion in dogs: 107 cases
hemangiosarcoma in the dog: a review of
(1985-2006). JAm Vet Med Assoc
38 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:922-
235:1456-1461.
926.
Machida N, Tanaka R, Takemura N et al.
Vicari ED, Brown DC, Holt DE et al. (2001)
(2004) Development of pericardial
Survival times of and prognostic indicators
mesothelioma in golden retrievers with a
for dogs with heart base masses: 25 cases
long-term history of idiopathic
(1986-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
haemorrhagic pericardial effusion. J Comp
219:485-487.
Patb 131:166-175.
Ware WA, Hopper DL (1999) Cardiac
McDonough SP, MacLachlan NJ, Tobias AH
mors in dogs: 1982-1995.J Vet Intern
(1992) Canine pericardial mesothelioma.
Med 13:95-103.
VetPatb29:256-260.
Warman SM, McGregor R, Fews D et al.
Rush JE, Keene BW, Fox PR (1990)
(2006) Congestive heart failure caused by
Pericardial disease in the cat: a
intracardiac tumours in two dogs. J Small
retrospective evaluation of 66 cases.J Am
Anim Pract 47:480-483.
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:39-46.
Stafford Johnson M, Martin M, Binns S et al.
HEART DISEASES:PERICARDIAL
(2004) A retrospective study of clinical
Acquired pericardial disease and neoplasia
findings, treatment and outcome in 143
Brisson BA, Reggeti F, Bienzle D (2006)
dogs with pericardial effusion. J Small
Portal site metastasis of invasive
AnimPract45:546-552.
mesothelioma after diagnostic
Stepien RL, Whitley NT, Dubielzig RR
thoracoscopy in a dog-J Am Vet Med
(200o) Idiopathic or mesothelioma-related
Assoc 229:980-983.
pericardial effusion: clinical findings and
Closa JM, Font A, Mascort J (1999)
survival in 17 dogs studied retrospectively.
Pericardial mesothelioma in a dog: long-
Small AnimPract 41:342-347.
term survival after pericardiectomy in
Thomas WP, Reed JR, Bauer TG et al. (1984)
combination with chemotherapy./ Small
Constrictive pericardial disease in the dog.
AnimPract40:383-386.
Am VetMed Assoc184:546-553.
Davidson BJ, Paling AC, Lahmers SL et al.
Tobias AH {2010) Pericardial diseases. In
(2008) Disease association and clinica]
Textbook ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine,
assessment of feline pericardial effusion. J
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 44:5-9.
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1342-
Dunning D, Monnet E, Orton EC et at.
1352.
(1998) Analysis of prognostic indicators
Ware WA (2011) Pericardial diseases and
for dogs with pericardial effusion: 46 cases
cardiac tumors. In Cardiovascular Disease
(1985-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc
inSmall AnimatMedicine.{ed WA Ware)
212:1276-1280.
Manson Publishing, London, pp. 320-339.
Hall DJ, Shofer F, Meier CK et at. (2007)
Pericardial effuision in cats: a retrospective
Congenital pericardial disease
study of clinical findings and outcome in
Miller MW, Sisson D {2000) Pericardial
146 cats. J Vet Intern Med 21:1002-1007.
disorders. In Textbook of Veterinary
Heinritz CK, Gilson SD, Soderstrom MJ et at.
Internal Medicine, 5th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger,
(2006) Subtotal pericardectomy and
EC Feldman) WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
epicardial excision for treatment of
pp.923-936.
coccidioidomycosis-induced effusive-
Reimer SB, Kyles AE, Filipowicz DE et af.
constrictive pericarditis in dogs: 17 cases
(2004) Long-term outcome of cats treated
(1999-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc
conservatively or surgically for
273
Further reading
 peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia:
Haggstrom J, Kvart C, Hansson K (1995)
66 cases (1987-2002). ↓ Am Vet Med
Heart sounds and murmurs: changes
Assoc 224:728-732.
related to severity of chronic valvular
Evans SM, Biery DO (1980) Congenital
disease in the Cavalier King Charles
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
Spaniel. J Vet Intern Med 9:75-85.
in the dog and cat: a literature review and
Kvart C, Haggstrom J, Pederson HD et al.
17 additional case histories. Vet Radio!
(2002) Efficacy of enalapril for prevention
21:108-116.
of congestive heart failure in dogs with
 Neiger R (1996) Peritoneopericardial
myxomatous valve disease and
diaphragmatic hernia in cats. Compend
asymptomatic mitral regurgitation. J Vet
Contin EducPract Vet 18:461-479.
Intern Med16:80-88.
Wallace J, Mullen HS, Lesser MB (1992) A
Orton EC, Hackett TB, Mama K et at. (2005)
technique for surgical correction of
Technique and outcome of mitral valve
peritoneal pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
replacement in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
226:1508-1511.
28:503-510.
Reineke EL, Burkett DE, Drobatz KJ {2008)
Left atrial rupture in dogs: 14 cases (1990-
HEART DISEASES: VALVULAR
2005) J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18:158-164.
Chronic degenerative AV valve disease
Ware WA (2011) Acquired valve diseases. In
(also see Cardiac therapy: heart failure
Cardiovascutar Disease in Small Animat
management)
Medicine. (ed WA Ware) Manson
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Einger S et al. (2009)
Publishing, London, pp. 263-279.
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of canine chronic valvular heart disease.
Endocarditis
ACVIM Consensus Statement. J Vet Intern
Breitschwerdt EB (2003) Bartonella species as
Med 23:1142-1150.
emerging vector-transmitted pathogens.
Atkins CE, Keene BW, Brown WA et al.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
(2007) Results of the veterinary enalapril
25(Suppl):12-15.
trial to prove reduction in onset of heart
Dunn ME, Blond L, Letard D et al. (2007)
failure in dogs chronically treated with
Hypertrophic osteopathy associated with
enalapril alone for compensated, naturally
infective endocarditis in an adult boxer
occurring mitral valve insufficiency J Am
dog. J Small Anim Pract 48:99-103.
Vet Med Assoc 231:1061-1069.
MacDonald KA, Chomel BB, Kittleson MD
Beardow AW, Buchanan JW (1993) Chronic
et al.(2004) A prospective study of canine
mitral valve disease in Cavalier King
infective endocarditis in Northern
Charles Spaniels: 95 cases (1987-1991). J
California (1999-2001): emergence of
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1023-1029.
Bartonella as a prevalent etiologic agent. J
Borgarelli M, Tarducci A, Zanatta R et af.
Vet Intern Med 18:56-64.
(2007) Decreased systolic function and
Miller MW, Fox PR, Saunders AB (2004)
inadequate hypertrophy in large and small
 Pathologic and clinical features of
breed dogs with chronic mitral valve
infectious endocarditis. J Vet Cardiol 6:35-
insufficiency. J Vet Intern Med 21:61-67.
43.
Corcoran BM, Black A, Anderson H et af.
Peddle G, Sleeper MM (2007) Canine
(2004) Identification of surface
bacterial endocarditis: a review. J Am Anim
morphologic changes in the mitral valve
Hosp Assoc 43:258-263.
leaflets and chordae tendineae of dogs with
Smith BE, Tompkins MB, Breitschwerdt EB
myxomatous degeneration. Am J Vet Res
(2004) Antinuclear antibodies can be
65:198-206.
detected in dog sera reactive to Bartonella
Haggstrom J, Boswood A, O'Grady M et al.
insonii subsp.berkhoffii,Ehrlichia canis
(2008) Effect of pimobendan or benazepril
or Leishmania infantum antigens. J Vet
hydrochloride on survival times in dogs
InternMed18:47-51.
with congestive heart failure caused by
Sykes JE, Kittleson MD, Chomel BB et at.
naturally occurring myxomatous mitral
(2006) Clinicopathologic findings and
valve disease: the QUEST study. J Vet
outcome in dogs with infective
Intern Med 22:1124-1135.
endocarditis: 71 cases (1992-2005). § Am
274
Further reading
Vet Med Assoc 228:1735-1747.
Atkins CE, Miller MW (2003) Is there a
Tou SP, Adin DB, Castleman WL (2005)
better way to administer heartworm
Mitral valve endocarditis after dental
adulticidal therapy? Vet Med 98:310-317.
prophylaxis in a dog. J Vet Intern Med
Bazzocchi C, Genchi C, Paltrinieri S et af.
19:268-270.
(2003) Immunological role of the
Wall M, Calvert CA, Greene CE (2002)
endosymbionts of Dirofilaria immitis: the
Infective endocarditis in dogs. Compend
Wotbachia surface protein activates canine
Contin EducPract Vet24:614625.
 neutrophils with production of IL-8. Vet
Parasito!117:73-83.
HEARTWORM DISEASE AND
Bove CM, Gordon SG, Saunders AB et al.
ANGIOSTRONGYLOSIS
(2010) Outcome of minimally invasive
Canine angiostrongylosis (Angiostrongyius
surgical treatment of heartworm caval
vasorum
syndrome in dogs: 42 cases (1999-2007) }
Boag AK, Lamb CR, Chapman PS et al.
AmVet MedAssoc236:187-192.
(2004) Radiographic findings in 16 dogs
Hettlich BF, Ryan K, Bergman RL et al.
infected with Angiostrongyius vasorum.
(2003) Neurologic complications after
Vet Rec 154:426-430.
melarsomine dihydrochloride treatment for
Chapman PS, Boag AK, Guitian J et al.
Dirofilaria immitis in three dogs. J Am Vet
(2004) Angiostrongyius vasorum infection
Med Assoc 223:1456-1461.
in 23 dogs (1999-2002). J Small Anim
Litster A,Atkins C,Atwell R et at.(2005)
Pract 45:435-440.
Radiographic cardiac size in cats and dogs
Helm JR, Morgan ER, Jackson MW et al.
with heartworm disease compared with
(20i0) Canine angiostrongylosis: an
reference values using the vertebral heart
scale method: 53 cases.J Vet Cardiol7:33-
Crit Care 20:98-109.
40.
Humm K, Adamantos S (2010) Is evaluation
McCall JW (2005) The safety-net story about
of a faecal smear a useful technique in the
macrocyclic lactone heartworm preven-
diagnosis of canine pulmonary
tives: a review, an update, and recom
angiostrongylosis? j Smalt Anim Pract
mendations. Vet Parasitol 133:197-206.
51:200-203
Rawlings CA, Calvert CA, Glaus TM et af.
Kranjc A, Schnyder M, Dennler M et al.
(1994) Surgical removal of heartworms.
(2010) Pulmonary artery thrombosis in
SeminVetMedSurg9:200-205.
experimental Angiostrongylus vasorum
infection does not result in pulmonary
Feline heartworm disease (Dirofilaria
hypertension and echocardiographic right
mmitis)
ventricular changes. J Vet Intern Med
Atkins C, DeFrancesco TC, Coats JR et al.
24:855-862.
(200o) Heartworm infection in cats: 50
Morgan ER, Shaw SE, Brennan SF et af.
cases {1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
(2005) Angiostrongyfus vasorum:a rea]
217:355-358.
heartbreaker. Trends Parasitol 21:49-51.
 Brawner WR, Dillon AR, Robertson-Plouch
CK et al. (2000) Radiographic diagnosis of
Canine heartworm disease ( Dirofilaria
feline heartworm disease and correlation to
immitis)
other clinical criteria: results of a
American Heartworm Society (2010) Canine
multicenter clinical case study. Vet
guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention,
Therapeutics 1:81-87.
and management of heartworm
Browne LE, Carter TD, Levy JK et al. (2005)
(Dirofilaria immitis) infection in dogs.
Pulmonary arterial disease in cats
American Heartworm Society Website
seropositive for Dirofilaria immitis but
http://www.heartwormsociety.org/veterinar
Jacking adult heartworms in the heart and
y-resources/canine-guidelines.html
lungs.Am Vet Res 66:15441549.
Atkins C (2010) Heartworm disease. In
DeFrancesco'TC, Atkins CE, Miller MW et
Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine,
al. (2001) Use of echocardiography for the
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
diagnosis of heartworm disease in cats: 43
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1353-
cases (1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
1380.
218:66-69.
275
Further reading
Dillon AR, Brawmer WR, Robertson-Plouch
Ware WA (2011) Pulmonary hypertension. In
CK et al (2000) Feline heartworm disease:
Cardiovascular Disease in Small Animat
correlations of clinical signs, serology, and
Medicine. (ed WA Ware) Manson
other diagnostics: results of a multi-center
Publishing, London, pp. 340-350.
study. Vet Tber 1:176-182.
Executive Board, American Heartworm
Hypertension: systemic
Society (2007) 2007 guidelines for the
Brown S,Atkins C,Bagley R et al.{2007)
diagnosis, prevention, and management of
Guidelines for the identification,
heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) infection
evaluation, and management of systemic
in cats.American Heartworm Society
hypertension in dogs and cats. ACVIM
www.heartwormsociety.org
Consensus Statement. J Vet Intern Med
Kramer L, Genchi C (2002) Feline
21:542-558.
heartworm infection: serological survey of
Chetboul V, Lefebvre HP, Pinhas C et af.
asymptomatic cats living in northern Italy.
(2003) Spontaneous feline hypertension:
Vet Parasitol 104:43-50.
cinical and echocardiographic
abnormalities, and survival rate. J Vet
Hypertension: pulmonary
Intern Med 17:89-95.
Atkinson KJ, Fine DM, Thombs LA et al.
Egner B (2003) Blood pressure measurement
(2009) Evaluation of pimobendan and N-
- basic principles and practical applica-
terminal probrain natriuretic peptide in the
tons.In Essential Facts of Blood Pressure
treatment of pulmonary hypertension
n Dogs and Cats. {eds B Egner, A Carr, S
secondary to degenerative mitral valve
Brownj BE Vet Verlag, Germany, pp. 1-14.
disease. j Vet Intern Med 23:1190-1196.
Elliot J, Barber PJ, Syme HM et al. (2001)
Bach JF, Rozanski EA, MacGregor J et al.
 Feline hypertension: clinical findings and
(2006) Retrospective evaluation of
response to antihypertensive treatment in
sildenafil citrate as a therapy for
30 cases./Small Anim Pract 42:122-129.
pulmonary hypertension in dogs. J Vet
Jepson RE, Elliot J, Brodbelt D et al. (2007)
Intern Med20:1132-1135.
Effect of control of systolic blood pressure
Brown AJ, Davison E, Sleeper MM (2010)
On survival in cats with systemic
Clinical efficacy of sildenafil in treatment
hypertension.J Vet Intern Med 21:402-
of pulmonary arterial hypertension in dogs.
409.
VetInternMed24:850-854.
Kraft W, Egner B (2003) Causes and effects
Henik RA. (2009) Pulmonary hypertension.
of hypertension. In Essential Facts of Blood
In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Pressure in Dogs and Cats. (eds B Egner, A
(eds JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders
Carr, S Brown) BE Vet Verlag, Germany,
Elsevier, Philadelphia, pp. 697-702.
pp.61-86.
Kellum HB, Stepien RL (2007) Sildenafil
Nelson OL, Riedesel E, Ware WA et at.
citrate therapy in 22 dogs with pulmonary
(2002) Echocardiographic and
hypertension.JVetInternMed21:1258-
radiographic changes associated with
1264.
systemic hypertension in cats. J Vet Intern
Schober KE, Baade H (2006) Doppler
Med 16:418-425.
echocardiographic prediction of pulmonary
Sansom J, Rogers K, Wood JLN (2004)
hypertension in West Highland White
Blood pressure assessment in healthy cats
Terriers with chronic pulmonary disease. J
and cats with hypertensive retinopathy. Am
VetInternMed20:912-920.
VetRes 65:245-252.
Serres F, Chetboul V, Tissier R et al. (2006)
Stepien RL (2003) The heart as a target
Doppler echocardiography-derived
organ.In Essential Facts of Blood Pressure
evidence of pulmonary arterial
n Dogs and Cats. (eds B Egner, A Carr, S
hypertension in dogs with degenerative
Brown) BE Vet Verlag, Germany, pp. 103-
mitral valve disease: 86 cases (2001-2005).
111.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:1772-1778.
Syme HM, Barber PJ, Markwell PJ et al.
Toyoshima Y, Kanemoto I, Arai S et af.
(2002) Prevalence of systolic hypertension
(2007) Case of long-term sildenafil therapy
in cats with chronic renal failure at initial
in a young dog with pulmonary
evaluation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
hypertension. J Vet Med Sci 69:1073-1075.
220:1799-1804.
276
Further reading
Tissier R, Perrot S, Enriquez B (2005)
Care Emerg Crit Care Med 10:1-6.
Amlodipine: one of the main anti-
Coyme BE and Fingland RB (1992)
hypertensive drugs in veterinary
Hypoplasia of the trachea in dogs: 103
therapeutics. J Vet Cardiol 7:53-58.
cases (1974-1990) J Am Vet Med Assoc
201:768-772.
RESPIRATORY DISEASES:AIRWAY
Hardie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD et al.
Laryngeal and upper airway disease
(1999) Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases
Flanders MM, Adams B (1999) Managing
(1983-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc
patients with a temporary tracheostomy
214:508-512.
tube.Vet Technician 20:605-613.
Harvey CE and Fink EA (1982) Tracheal
Guenther-Yenke C, Rozanski EA (2007)
diameter: analysis of radiographic
Tracheostomy in cats: 23 cases (1998-
measurements in brachycephalic and
2006).J Feline Med Surg 9:451-457.
nonbrachycephalic dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Hendricks JC, Kline LR, Kovalski RJ et af.
Assoc 18:570-576.
(1987) The English bulldog: a natural
Hawkins EC, Clay LD, Bradley JM et af.
model of sleep-disordered breathing- J
(2010) Demographic and historical
ApplPbysiol63:1344-1350.
findings, including exposure to
Jakubiak MJ, Siedlecki CT, Zenger E et al.
environmental tobacco smoke, in dogs
(2005) Laryngeal, larymgotracheal, and
with chronic cough. J Vet Intern Med
tracheal masses in cats: 27 cases (1998-
24:825-831.
2003). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:310-
Johnson L (2000) Tracheal collapse:
316.
diagnosis and medical and surgical
Koch DA, Arnold S, Hubler M et al. (2003)
treatment.Vet Clin North AmSmall Anim
Brachycephalic syndrome in dogs.
Pract30:1253-1266.
Compend Contin Educ Vet Pract 25:48-
Johnson LR, Drazenovich TL (2007) Flexible
55.
bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage
MacPhail CM, Monet E (2009) Laryngeal
in 68 cats (2001-2006). J Vet Intern Med
diseases. In Kirk's Veterinary Tberapy XIV.
21:219-225.
(eds JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders
Johnson LR, Pollard RE (2010) Tracheal
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 627-629.
collapse and bronchomalacia in dogs: 58
Schachter S, Norris, CR (2000) Larymgeal
cases (7/2001-1/2008). J Vet Intern Med
paralysis in cats: 16 cases (1990-1999). J
24:298-305.
Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1100-1103.
Kaki A, Crosby ET, Lui AC (1997) Airway
Ticehurst K, Zaki S, Hunt GB et al. {2008)
and respiratory management following.
Use of continuous positive airway pressure
non-lethal hanging. Can J Anaesth 44:445-
in the acute management of larymgeal
450.
paralysis in a cat.Aust Vet J 86:395-397.
Lekeux P, Desmecht D (1993) Ventilatory
Torrez CV, Hunt GB (2006) Results of
failure and respiratory muscle fatigue. In
surgical correction of abnormalities
Putmonary Functionin Heathy Exercising
associated with brachycephalic airway
and Diseased Animais.Flemish Vet Journal
obstruction syndrome in dogs in Australia.
Special Issue, pp. 331-350.
Small AnimPract 47:150-154.
Macready DM, Johnson LR, Pollard RE
(2007) Fluoroscopic and radiographic
Iracheal/large airway disease
evaluation of tracheal collapse in dogs: 62
Ayres SA, Holmberg DL (1999) Surgical
cases (2001-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 treatment of tracheal collapse using pliable
230:1870-1876.
total ring prostheses: results in one
Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E et af.
experimental and 4 clinical cases. Can Vet J
(2000) Tracheal rupture associated with
40:787-791.
inmubation in cats 20 cases (1996-1998). }
Buback JL, Boothe HW, Hobson HP (1996)
Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1592-1595.
Surgical treatment of tracheal collapse in
Queen EV, Vaughan MA, Johnson LR (2010)
dogs: 90 cases (1983-1993). J Am Vet Med
 Bronchoscopic debulking of tracheal
Assoc 208:380-384.
carcinoma in 3 cats using a wire snare. J
Clarke DL, Holt DE, Macintire DK (2008)
Vet Intern Med 24:990-993.
Tracheal collapse in dogs. Standards of
Roach W, Krahwinkel DJ (2009) Obstructive
277
Further reading
lesions and traumatic injuries of the canine
RESPIRATORY DISEASES:LUNG
and feline tracheas. Compend Contin Ed
Cohn LA (2010) Pulmonary parenchymal
Pract Vet31:86-93.
diseases.In Textbook of Veterinary
Robinson NE (2007) Overview of respiratory
Internal Medicine,7thedn.{eds SJ Ettinger,
function: ventilation of the lung. In
EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis,
Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 4th
pp. 1096-1118.
edn. (eds JG Cunningham, BG KIein)
McNiel EA, Ogilvie GK, Powers BE et al.
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 566-578.
(1997) Evaluation of prognostic factors for
Sura PA, Krahwinkel DJ (2008) Self-
dogs with primary lung tumors: 67 cases
expanding nitinol stents for the treatment
{1985-1992).J Am Vet Med Assoc
of tracheal collapse in dogs: 12 cases
211:1422-1427.
(2001-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Nemanic S, London CA, Wisner ER (2006)
232:228-236.
Comparison of thoracic radiographs and
Suter PF (1984){ed) Tboracic Radiograpby:
single breath-hold helical CT for detection
A Text Atlas of ThoracicDiseases ofthe
of pulmonary nodules in dogs with
Dog and Cat. Wettswil, Switzerland, pp.
metastatic neoplasia.J Vet Intern Med
533-537.
20:508-515.
Tenwolde AC, Johnson LR, Hunt GB et al.
Paoloni MC, Adams WM, Dubielzig RR et al.
(2010) The role of bronchoscopy in foreign
(2006) Comparison of results of computed
body removal in dogs and cats: 37 cases
tomography and radiography with
(2000-2008).JVetIntern Med 24:1063-
histopathologic findings in tracheobron-
1068.
chial lymph nodes in dogs with primary
Weisse CWC (2009) Intraluminal stenting for
lung tumors: 14 cases (1999-2002). J Am
tracheal collapse. In Kirk's Current
Vet Med Assoc 228:1718-1722.
Veterinary Therapy XIV. (eds JD
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier, St
Acute respiratory distress syndrome and
Louis, pp. 635-641.
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
DeClue AE, Cohn LA (2007) Acute
Bronchitis/small airway disease
respiratory distress syndrome in dogs and
Gadbois J, d'Anjou MA, Dunn M et af.
cats: a review of clinical findings and
(2009) Radiographic abnormalities in cats
pathophysiology. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
with feline bronchial disease and intra- and
17:340-347.
interobserver variability in radiographic
Dobratz KJ, Saunders HM et al. (1995)
interpretation: 40 cases (1999-2006). J Am
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in dogs
Vet Med Assoc 234:367-375.
and cats: 26 cases (1987-1993). J Am Vet
Hawkins EC (2009) Disorders of the trachea
Med Assoc206:1732-1736.
and bronchi. In Small Animal Internat
Hsu YH, Cho LC, Wang LS et al. (2006)
Medicine, 4th edn. (eds RW Nelson, CG
Acute respiratory distress symdrome
Couto) Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, pp.
associated with rabies: a case report.
285-301.
Kaohsiung J Med Sei 22:94-98.
Hawkins EC (2009) Diagnostic tests for the
Lemos LB, Baliga M, Guo M {2001) Acute
lower respiratory tract. In Small Anima!
respiratory distress syndrome and blasto-
Internal Medicine, 4th edn. (eds RW
mycosis: presentation of nine cases and
Nelson, CG Couto) Lea & Febiger,
review of the literature. Ann Diag Path
Philadelphia, pp. 252-284.
5:1-9.
Johnson LR (2005) Diseases of the small
Meyer KC, McManus EJ, Maki DG (1993)
airways. In Textbook of Veterinary
Overwhelming pulmonary blastomycosis
Interrnat Medicine. 6rh edn. (eds SJEttinger,
associated with the adult respiratory
EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis,
distress syndrome. New Engl J Med
pp.1233-1238.
329:1231-1236.
Suter PF (1984) (ed) Thoracic Radiograpby:
Parent C, King LG, Walker LM et al. (1996)
A Text Atlas of Thoracic Diseases ofthe
Clinical and clinicopathologic findings in 
Dog and Cat. Wettswil, Switzerland, pp.
dogs with acute respiratory distress
533-537.
syndrome: 19 cases (1985-1993). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 208:1419-1427.
278
Further reading
Walker T, Tidwell AS, Rozanski EA et al.
(1986-1997) Am Vet Med Assoc
(2005) Imaging diagnosis: acute lung injury
215:1306-1311.
following massive bee envenomation in a
Drobatz DJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:300-303.
(1999) Smoke exposure in cats: 22 cases
Pneumonias
(1986-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Forrester SD, Moon ML, Jacobson JD (2001)
215:1312-1316.
Diagnostic evaluation of dogs and cats
Fitzgerald KT, Flood AA (2006) Smoke
with respiratory distress. Compend Contin
inhalation. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
EducPract Vet23:56-69.
21:205-214.
Greene CE (2006) {ed) Infectious Diseases of
Goldkamp CE, Schaer M (2008) Canine
the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. Elsevier
drowning. Compend Contin Educ Pract
Saunders, St. Louis.
Vet 30:340-352.
Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Jandrey KE et at.
Heffner GG, Rozanski EA, Beal MW et at.
(2008) Clinical, clinicopathologic, and
(2008) Evaluation of freshwater
radiographic findings in dogs with aspira-
submersion in small animals: 28 cases
tion pneumonia: 88 cases (2004-2006). j
(1996-2006). JAm Vet Med Assoc
Am Vet Med Assoc 233:1742-1747.
232:244-248.
Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Sturges BK et al.
Johnson VS, Corcoran BM, Wotton PR et al.
(2008) Etology and clinical outcome in
(2005) Thoracic high-resolution computed
dogs with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases
tomographic findings in dogs with canine
(2004-2006j. J Am Vet Med Assoc
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J Small
233:1748-1755.
AnimPract46:381-388.
Rochat MC, Cowell RL, Tyler RD et al.
Norris AJ, Naydan DK, Wilson DW (2005)
(1990) Paragonimiasis in dogs and cats.
Interstitial lung disease in West Highland
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:1093-
White Terriers. Vet Patho! 42:35-41.
1100.
Polton GA, Brearley MJ, Powell SM et at.
Wray JD, Sparkes AH (2006) Use of
(2008) Impact of primary tumour stage on
radiographic measurements in
survival in dogs with solitary lung tumours.
distinguishing myasthenia gravis from
J Small Anim Pract 49:66-71.
other causes of canine megaesophagus. J
Rissetto KC, Lucas PW, Fan TM (2008) An
Small AnimPract47:256-263.
update on diagnosing and treating primary
lung tumors. Vet Med 103:154-169.
Other pulmonary parenchymal disease
Berry CR, Graham JP, Thrall DE (2007)
Ventilator therapy
Interpretation paradigms for the small
Ethier MR, Mathews KA, Valverde A et al.
animal thorax. In Textbook of Veterinary
(2008) Evaluation of the efficacy and safety
Diagnostic Radiology, 5th edn. (ed DE
for use of two sedation and analgesia
Thrall) Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, pp.
protocols to facilitate assisted ventilation of
462485.
healthy dogs. Arm J Vet Res 69:1351-1359.
Brown AJ, Waddell LS (2009) Rodenticides.
Hopper K, Haskins SC, Kass PH et al. (2007)
In Small Animat Criticat Care Medicine.
Indications, management, and outcome of
(eds DC Silverstein, K Hopper) Elsevier, St.
long-term positive-pressure ventilation in
Louis, Elsevier. pp. 346-350.
dogs and cats: 148 cases (1990-2001). J
Clercx C, Peeters D (2007) Canine eosino-
Am Vet Med Assoc 230:6475.
philic bronchopneumopathy. Vet Clin
Sereno RL (2006) Use of controlled
NorthAmSmall AnimPract37:917-935.
ventilation in a clinical setting. J Am Anim
Clercx C, Peeters D, German AJ et al. (2002)
Hosp Assoc 42:477-480.
An immunologic investigation of canine
eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy. J Vet
RESPIRATORY DISEASES: PLEURAL
Intern Med 16:229-237.
SPACE
Clercx C, Peeters D, Snaps F et al. (2000)
Heural effusion
Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy in
D'Anjou MA, Tidwell AS, Hecht S (2005)
dogs.J Vet Intern Med 14:282-291.
Radiographic diagnosis of lung lobe
Drobatz DJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC
torsion.VetRadiolUltrasound 46:478-
(1999) Smoke exposure in dogs: 27 cases
484.
279
Further reading
Boothe HW, Howe LM, Boothe DM et al.
Ludwig LL, Simpson AM, Han E (2010)
(2010) Evaluation of outcomes in dogs
Pleural and extrapleural diseases. In
treated for pyothorax: 46 cases (1983
Textbook ofVeterinary Internat Medicine,
2001).J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:657-663.
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
Fossum TW, Forrester SD, Swenson CL et al.
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1125-
(1991) Chylothorax in cats: 37 cases
1137.
(1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Maritato KC, Cokon KA, Kergosien DH
198:672-678.
(2009) Pneumothorax. Compend Contin
La Fond E, Weirich WE, Salisbury SK (2002)
EducPract Vet31:232-242.
Omentalization of the thorax for treatment
Puerto DA, Brockman DJ, Lindquist C et af.
of idiopathic chylothorax with constrictive
(2002) Surgical and nonsurgical
pleuritis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
management of and selected risk factors
38:7478.
for spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs: 64
Ludwig LL, Simpson AM, Han E (2010)
cases (1986-1999).J Am Vet Med Assoc
Pleural and exrapleural diseases. In
220:1670-1674.
TextbookofVeterinaryIntemat Medicine,
7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
THORACIC DISEASE AND OTHER
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1125-
ABNORMALITIES
1137.
Diaphragmatic disease
McGavin MD, Zachary JF (2007) (eds)
Bellenger CR, Milstein M, McDonell W
PathotogicBasis ofVeterinary Disease,4th
(1975) Herniation of gravid uterus into the
edn. Elsevier, St. Louis.
thorax of a dog. Mod Vet Pract 56:553-
Moore AS, Kirk C, Cardona A (1991)
555.
Intracavitary cisplatin chemotherapy
Lin JL, Lee CS, Chen PW et al. (2007)
experience with six dogs. J Vet Intern Med
Complications during labour in a
5:227-231.
Chihuahua due to diaphragmatic hernia.
Murphy KA, Brisson BA (2006) Evaluation
VetRec161:103-104.
of lung lobe torsion in Pugs: 7 cases {1991-
Tadmor A, Zuckerman E, Birnbaum SC
2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:86-90.
(1978) Diaphragmatic hernia in a pregnant
Neath PJ, Brockman DJ, King LG (2000)
bitch.JAm VetMedAssoc172:585-586.
Lung lobe torsion in dogs: 22 cases (1981-
1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1041-
Heinz body anemia
1044.
Court MH. Greenblatt DJ (2000) Molecular
Seiler G, Schwarz T, Rodriguez D (2008)
genetic basis for deficient acetaminophen
Computed tomographic features of lung
gucuronidation by cats: UGT1A6 is a
lobe torsion. Vet Radiol Utrasound
pseudogene, and evidence for reduced
49:504-508.
diversity of expressed hepatic UGT1A
Spugnini EP, Crispi S, Scarabello A et al.
isoforms. Pharmacogenetics 10:355-369.
(2008) Piroxicam and intracavitary
Hil AS, O'Neill S, Rogers QR et at. (2001)
platinum-based chemotherapy for the.
Antioxidant prevention of Heinz body
treatment of advanced mesothelioma in
formation and oxidative injury in cats. Am
pets: preliminary observations. J Exp Clin
VetRes 62:370-374.
Cancer Res 27:6-10.
Robertson JE, Christopher MM, Rogers QR
(1998) Heinz body formation in cats fed
Pheumotorax
baby food containing onion powder. J Am
Au JJ, Weisman DL, Stefanacci JD et af.
Vet Med Assoc 212:1260-1266.
(2006) Use of computed tomography for
Villar D, Buck WB, Gonzales JM (1998)
evaluation of lung lesions associated with
Ibuprofen, aspirin and acetaminophen
spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs: 12
toxicosis and treatment in dogs and cats.
cases (1999-2002). ↓ Am Vet Med Assoc
Vet Hum Toxicol 40:156-162.
228:733-737.
Lipscomb VJ, Hardie RJ, Dubielzig RR
Mediastinal disease
(2003) Spontaneous pneumothorax caused
Biller DS, Larson MM (2010) Mediastinal
by pulmonary blebs and bullae in 12 dogs.
disease. In Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Am Anim Hosp Assoc39:435445.
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC
280
Further reading
Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.
Toxicity: coagulopathy
1119-1124.
Brown AJ, Waddell LS (2009) Rodenticides.
Fidel JL, Pargass IS, Dark MJ et al. (2008)
In Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
Granulocytopenia associated with
(eds DC Silverstein, K Hopper) Elsevier, St.
thymoma in a domestic shorthaired cat. J
Louis, pp. 346-350.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 44:210-217.
Dunn ME (2010) Acquired coagulopathies.
Palmer KG, King LG, Van Winkle TJ (1998)
In Textbookof Veterinary Internat
Clinical manifestations and associated
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds SJ Ettinger, EC
disease symdromes in dogs with cranial
Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp.
vena cava thrombosis: 17 cases (1989-
797-800.
1996).J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:220-224.
Rottenberg S, von Tscharner C, Roosje PJ
VASCULAR DISEASE
(2004) Thymoma-associated exfoliative
Pulmonary thromboembolism
dermatitis in cats. Vet Patbol 41:429-433.
Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L (2002) Prog-
Smith AN, Wright, JC, Brawner WR et al.
nostic factors for mortality and thrombo-
(2001) Radiation therapy in the treatment
embolism in canine immune-mediated
of canine and feline thymomas: a
hemolytic anemia: a retrospective study of
retrospective study (1985-1999). J Am
72 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 16:504-509.
Anim Hosp Assoc37:489-496.
Hackner SG (2009) Pulmonary
Stephens JA, Parnell NK, Clarke K et af.
thromboembolism. In Kirk's Current
(2002)Subcutaneous emphysema,
Veterinary Therapy XIV. (eds JD
pneumomediastinum, and pulmonary
Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier, St
emphysema in a young schipperke. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 38:121-124.
Yoon J, Feeney DA, Cronk KL (2004)
Systemic arterial thromboembolism
Computed tomographic evaluation of
Alwood AJ, Downend AB, Brooks MB et al.
canine and feline mediastinal masses in 14
(2007) Anticoagulant effects of low-
patients.VetRadiolUltrasound 45:542-
molecular-weight heparins in healthy cats. j
546.
Vet Intern Med 21:378-387.
Zitz JC, Birchard SJ, Couto GC et al. (2008)
Boswood A, Lamb CR, White RN (2000)
Results of excision of thymoma in cats and
Aortic and iliac thrombosis in six dogs. J
dogs: 20 cases (1984-2005) J Am Vet Med
Small Anim Pract 41:109-114.
Assoc 232:1186-1192.
Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L (2002) Prog-
nostic factors for mortality and thrombo-
Pectus excavatum
embolism in canine immune-mediated
Boudrieau R, Fossum T, Hartsfield S et al.
hemolytic anemia: a retrospective study of
(1990) Pectus excavatum in dogs and cats.
72 dogs.J Vet Intern Med 16:504509.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:341-
Good LI, Manning AM (2003)
355.
Thromboembolic disease: physiology of
Fossum TW (2007) Pectus excavatum. In
hemostasis and pathophysiology of
Small Animat Surgery, 3rd edn. (ed TW
thrombosis. Compend Contin Educ Pract
Fossum) Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 889-894.
Vet 25:650-658.
 Fossum TW, Boudrieau RJ, Hobson HP
Good LI, Manning AM (2003)
(1989) Pectus excavatum in eight dogs and
Thromboembolic disease: predispositions
six cats.Am Anim Hosp Assoc25:595-
and clinical management. Compend
605.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 25:660-674.
Yoon H, Mann FA, Jeong S (2008) Surgical
Hogan DF, Andrews DA, Green HW et al.
correction of pectus excavatum in two cats.
(2004) Antiplatelet effects and
JVetSci9:335-337.
pharmacodynamics of clopidogrel in cats. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1406-1411.
Thoracic trauma
Laste NJ, Harpster NK {1995) A
Holt DE, Griffin G {2000) Bite wounds in
retrospective study of 100 cases of feline
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
distal aortic thromboembolism: 1977-
Anim Pract 30:669-679.
1993. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:492-
500.
281
Further reading
Moore KE, Morris N, Dhupa N et al. (2000)
Stokol T, Brooks M, Rush JE, et af. (2008)
Retrospective study of streptokinase
Hypercoagulability in cats with
administration in 46 cats with arterial
cardiomyopathy./Vet Intern Med22:546-
thromboembolism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
552.
10:245-257.
Thompson MF, Scot-Moncrieff JC, Hogan
Nelson OL, Andreasen C (2003) The utility
DF (2001) Thrombolyic therapy in dogs
of plasma D-dimer to identify
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 11:111
thromboembolic disease in dogs. J Vet
121.
Intern Med 17:830-834.
Van De Wiele CM, Hogan DF, Green III HW
Rossmeisl JH (2003) Current principles
et al. (2010) Antithrombotic effect of
and applications of D-dimer analysis in
enoxaparin in clinically healthy cats: a
small animal practice. Vet Med 98:224-
venous stasis model. § Vet Intern Med
234.
24:185-191.
Smith CE, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM et af.
Van Winkle TJ, Hackner SG, Liu SM (1993)
(2004) Use of low molecular weight
Clinical and pathological features of aortic
heparin in cats: 57 cases (1999-2003). J
thromboembolism in 36 dogs. J Vet Emerg
Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1237-1241.
Crit Care 3:13-21.
Smith SA, Tobias AH {2004) Feline arterial
Ware WA. (2011) Thromboembolic disease.
thromboembolism: an update. Vet Clin
In Cardiovascular Disease inSmall Animal
North AmSmall Anim Pract 34:1245-
Medicine. (ed WA Ware) Manson
1271.
Publishing, London, pp. 145-163.
Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA et al. (2003)
Welch KM, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM et al.
Arterial thromboembolism in cats: acute
(2010) Prospective evaluation of tissue
crisis in 127 cases (1992-2001) and long-
plasminogen activator in 11 cats with
term management with low-dose aspirin in
arterial thromboembolism. / Feline Med
24 cases.JVet Intern Med 17:73-83.
Surg 12:122-128.
282
lndex
Note: References are to case
aortic body tumor 158
atrial standstill 53, 115
numbers
aortic stenosis, see subaortic
persistent 115
stenosis
atrial tachyarrhythmias 38,
abdominal distension 43,
aortic valve
80, 87,181, 189,217
111,120,121,205,206
endocarditis 128
atrioventricular block 23,
abdominal mass 183
insufficiency/regurgitation
37,113,114
acetaminophen toxicity 138
85,86,88,127,171,
complete 183
acidosis 102
186
intermittent 23,143
activated partial
apical impulse, right 156
symptomatic 77
thromboplastin time 97,
arrhythmias
atropine 143
104
accelerated idioventricular
 atropine response test 37,
acute respiratory distress
rhythm 173
115
syndrome 105,106,197
atrial fibrillation 18, 67,
auscultation (cardiac)
Addison's disease 54
145, 149,175,188
féline 41
aerophagia 56,105,179,191
atrial standstill 53, 115
see aiso murmur
air bronchogram 62, 65, 66,
atrial tachyarrhythmias
89,101,166
38,80,87,181,189,
β2-adrenoreceptor agonists
airway collapse 15, 57, 58,
217
9%6,100
164,195
atrioventricular block 23,
bacterial pneumonia 78,
airway obstruction 1
37,77,113,114,143,
150, 177
bronchial foreign body
183
Balfour retractor 84
102,103
bradyarrthythmias 23, 37,
balloon valvuloplasty 45, 63
upper airway 9, 50, 57,
102,103,114,143
barium swallow 40
58,116,133
re-entrant
benazepril 35,208,216
albuterol 96, 100
supraventricular
beta blockers 32,47,49,80,
allergens 96,99,151
tachycardia130
132,165,207
alveolar-arterial gradient 68
sinus 21,54,102,103,
sotalol91
aminophylline 181
173
biomarkers, cardiac 75, 95
amiodarone 49, 87, 217
sinus arrest 135,143, 204
bite wounds 178
amlodipine 132, 201
supraventricular
blastomycosis 197
amoxicillin-clavanulate 150,
tachycardia 49, 87
bloating, *whole body' 182
166
ventricular tachycardia 4,
blood gas analyses 68,102
anemia82
36,148,172
blood smears 138
angiography 45,88,110,
arterial pulses (abnormal)
bone, periosteal formation
121,163
127,146,180, 188
142, 155
angiostrongylosis 64, 154,
arterial thromboembolism
Bordetella spp. 166, 177
162, 218
97,107,180
Boxer cardiomyopathy 36
angiotensin-converting
diagnosis 180
brachycephalic breeds 158
enzyme inhibitors 95.
diseases causing 180
bradyarrhythmias 23,37,
107,110,181,187,207,
feline 34
114, 143
216
management 180
bradycardia, episodic 102,
anthelmintics 154, 199, 218
ascites 43,111,120,121,
103
antiarrhythmic drugs 49, 91,
205,206,219
bradycardia-tachycardia
148, 217
categories 120
(sick sinus) syndrome 204
antibiotic therapy
aspirin 35,97,107,165,208
breathing, open mouth 21
bronchopneumonia 150,
asthma, feline 89, 99
breathing pattern 1, 133
177
atenolol35
bronchial collapse 15
endocarditis 128
atrial fibrillation 18, 145,
bronchial pattern 16, 28, 72,
infectious tracheo-
149,175,188
99,176
bronchitis 166
feline 67
bronchiectasis 72, 176
antihypertensive therapy 132
treatment 145
bronchitis
aorta, dilation of ascending
atrial premature complexes
allergic 96, 100, 151
132
38,80,181
chronic 10, 72, 195
283
Index
bronchoalveolar carcinoma
cardiomyopathy
congesive heart failure
17,70,168
arrhythmogenic RV
(ontinued)
bronchoalveolar lavage
(Boxer’)26,36
chronic patent ductus
airway inflammation 96,
dilated 4,32,95,148.
arteriosus 174,175
99
170,171,207
concurrent pulmonary
angiostrongylosis 218
hypertrophic (HCM) 28,
hypertension 211
bronchopneumonia 177
35,67,90,117
decompensated 189, 216
chronic bronchitis 10, 72
hypertrophic obstructive
feline 26,110,208
histoplasmosis 169
47
management 110, 171,
tracheal thickening 82
restrictive 110,165,208
189,214,216
bronchodilators 15, 96, 99,
thromboembolism 107
re-evaluation 157
100,150,204
carnitine, plasma 171
stage D management 187
bronchopneumonia 62, 150,
carotid sinus massage 87
staging 73
166,177
carvedilol 189
cor triatriatum dexter 120,
bronchoscopy
caval syndrome 55, 210
121
bronchial foreign body 103
caval thrombosis 109
coronaviruses 61
chronic bronchitis 195
cavitary pulmonary lesions
corticosteroids 96, 99,153,
eosinophilic lung disease
108,134,153,196
184
153
central venous pressure 29,
cough
feline asthma 99
219
causes in cats 137, 199
pulmonary tumor 168
measurement 29
chronic 1,10,176, 195,
bronchus
cephalexin 150
199,200
compression 214
chemodectoma 158
with eating/drinking 40,98
foreign body 103
chemotherapy 123
with gagging 39, 40, 93,
bulla, pulmonary 134
chylothorax 25, 59,60,
, 101
200
Bulldogs 62
clopidogrel 35,97,107,
“honking' 164, 166
bullet wound 194
165
intermittent/episodic 8, 9,
coagulopathies 65, 104
82,164
calcinosis cutis 126
Cocker Spaniels 171
non-cardiac causes 39, 40,
calcium-channel blockers
collapse 77, 102, 103, 112
102,103
201
episodic 53,130,146,172,
persistent 38,151, 162
cannon^a’waves 23
204, 211
productive 151, 200
cardiac catheterization 88,
see also syncope
recent onset 2, 8
163,205
computed tomography 17,
recurrent 2,214
cardiac shift 98,156,193
108,193,196,218
crackles, pulmonary 56, 66,
crdiac silhouette
congenital disorders
82, 90,126, 162, 165,
horizontal orientation
cor triatriatum dexter
191, 198
132
120,121
cranial caval syndrome 51,
valentine' shape 35
laryngeal paralysis 5
52, 109
vertical orientation 32
pectus excavatum 118,119
Curschmann's spiral 10
see aiso cardiomegaly
persistent left cranial vena
Cushing's disease 126
cardiac size, assessment 20,
cava 31
cyanosis 12,50,92,102,
39
persistent right aortic arch
133, 194
ardiac tamponade 43, 46,
139
with activity 125, 203
69, 144
pulmonic valve stenosis 63
causes 12
recurrent 209
subaortic stenosis 85, 86,
differential 131
ardiac troponin 175, 95
146
cyclophosphamide 153
cardiomegaly 18,32,35,46,
tetralogy of Fallot 92, 125
cyst, tracheal 9,133
79,107,110,114,117,
tacheal hypoplasia 62
cytology 218
132,140,149,175,189,
ticuspid dysplasia 87,
203
206
dalteparin sodium 97
assessment 20
congestive heart failure 18,
dental procedures, history of
generalized 28, 46, 170,
32,110,117,165,170,
78
171,203,214
205
dexamethasone sodium
left heart 174, 175
biventricular 90, 208
phosphate 96
284
Index
diaphragmatic hernia
electrocardiogram (ECG)
foreign body (continued)
left-sided 98
(continued)
esophagus 179
peritoneopericardial 140,
atrial tachyarrhythmias
fractures
188
80, 181
ribs 147
right-sided 3,74
atrioventricular block 183
spinal compression 202
traumatic 74,84
cardiac tumor 75
furosemide 38,95,110,149,
digoxin 80, 181, 189
digoxin toxicity 143
165,170,174,189,208,
digoxin toxicity 143
electrical alternans 43
216
diltiazem 49,80,87, 107,
Holter/ambulatory 36, 77,
furosemide therapy 32
145, 149
207
diphenylhydantoin 143
hyperkalemia 33
gagging 39,40,93
dobutamine 95
mean electrical axis 24
gallop sounds 32, 41, 117,
drowning 66
mitral valve dysplasia 13
132,148,165
dyspnea, see respiratory
right bundle branch block
gastroesophageal reflux 200
distress
113, 152
gentamicin 166
sick sinus symdrome 204
glycopyrrolate 143
echocardiogram 26
sinus arrhythmias 54, 155
cardiac tumor 76,158
ST segment elevation 75
heart failure
cardiomyopathy 47, 90,
ventricular pre-excitation
acute 190
165
49, 130
chronic 174,175,181
heartworm disease 185.
ventricular tachycardia 4,
right-sided 69
210
36, 148
staging 73
M-mode 47,48,90,127,
emphysema, subcutaneous
See also congestive heart
207
182
failure
mitral valve disease 149,
enalapril 38,189,214,216
heartworm disease 136, 137,
188
endocardiosis 48
210
patent ductus arteriosus
endocarditis 85,86,127,128
diagnosis 136
175
endotracheal tbe trauma
echocardiogram 185, 210
penetrating cardiac wound
182
feline 185
194
enoxaparin 97
severity grading 55
pericardial effusion 144
enrofoxacin 166
teatment 27,210
peritoneopericardial
eosinophilia 16,96,151,153
Heinz bodies 138
diaphragmatic hernia
erythrocytosis, primary 12,
hemangiosarcoma 6, 75, 76
188
92
hematocrit 82,92
pulmonary hypertension
esmolol87
hematoidin 6
129,162
esophageal reflux 200
hemoptysis 65, 108
pulmonic stenosis 63
esophagobronchial fistula
hemorrhage 6, 65, 104, 147,
recurrent cardiac
39,40
162
tamponade 209
esophagram 39,40, 139
hemosiderin 6
spontaneous contrast 107
esophagus
heparins 97, 107
subaortic stenosis 146
abnormal thoracic 167
hindlimb weakness 107,
tetralogy of Fallot 125
distension/dilation 93,
180
ventricular septal defect
139, 191
histoplasmosis 22, 169
186
foreign body 179
Horner's syndrome 93
edema
hydroxyurea 92
cranial subcutaneous 109
feline infectious peritonitis 61
hyperadrenocorticism
pulmonary 81,84,105,
femoralpulses 23
{Cushing's disease) 126
106,117,170,171
fenbendazole 154, 199
hyperkalemia 33, 53, 54
electrical alternans 43
fbrosarcoma 155
hypersensitivity response 16,
electrocardiogram
fre damage 56
96,99,151, 153
accelerated idioventricular
fsh oil 32
hypertension
rhythm 173
fuconazole 169
systemic 132
artifacts 159, 183
fuoroquinolones 166
see also pulmonary
atrial fibrillation 67, 145,
foreign body.
hypertension
188
bronchus 102,103
hyperthyroidism 132
28.5
Index
hypoadrenocorticism
mechanical ventilation 42
neoplasia (ontinued)
(Addison's disease) 54
mediastinal mass 51, 52, 93,
pericardial effusion 6,
hypotension 194
94,109,122,213
141,144,209
hypoventilation 42
megaesophagus 139, 191
pulmonary 2,17,70, 82,
hypoxemia 12,42,66,68,
causes 191
168
102, 103, 203
melarsomine
thoracic/mediastinal 51,
causes 102
dihydrochloride 26
52,93,94,109,122,
mesothelioma 71,123,209,
142,155,212,213
imidacloprid 154
219
tracheal 116
inflammation, airway 2, 82,
 metallic projective injury 194
 nephropathy, protein-losing
96,99,177
metastases, pulmonary 11,
19
inhalation therapy 99, 100
168
nodules
insulin therapy 33
metered dose inhaler 100
airway2,8,11,108,153
itraconazole 169
milbemycin oxime 154
differentiation of benign
mineralization, cutaneous 126
and malignant 11
jugular veins,
mitral regurgitation 7, 14,
NI-pro-BNP 95
pulsation/distension 23,
48,95,164, 188,189,
26,51,71,111,136,
211,214,216
octreotide 60
210
mitral valve
Ocular pressure, bilateral 87
jugular venotomy210
chronic degenerative
orthopnea 1, 104
disease 38
Osterus osteri 2
kennel cough {infectious
dysplasia 13,80,149
osteoma, pulmonary 11
tracheobronchitis) 166
moxidectin 154
osteopathy, hypertrophic 142
ketoconazole 169
murmur
oxidative damage 138
aortic 127,186
L-carnitine 32, 207
apical 20, 26,38,48
pacemaker, artificial 113,
larynx
continuous (machinery)
115,135,183
paralysis 5,58
79,85,139
pancreatitis 105,106
radiography 167
diastolic 127,128,186
paragonimiasis 108,199
left atrial enlargement 4, 14,
holosystolic 13, 14, 15,
paraneoplastic syndromes
15,38,81,107,110,114,
114,162,186
213
115,164,165,214,216
important characteristics 7
parasympathetic tone 21
left ventricle
mitral 7,39,47,133, 149,
patent ductus arteriosus
enlargement 13, 86,90,
189
79,80,139,163,174,
95,165,186
pectus excavatum 118
175
fractional shortening
physiologic 7
diagnostic tests 163
189, 207
pulmonic 45
right-to-left shunting
hypertrophy 86, 90
systolic 4,7,12,18,24,
(reversed) 131, 156
wall motion95
28,29,32,35,67,141,
pectus excavatum 9,118,
left ventricular outflow
152,186,203
119
obstruction 35,47
to-and-fro' 85
pericardial effusion 6, 43,
lidocaine 49, 87, 143, 145
muscular dystrophy, AV 115
69, 144, 194
limb swelling 142
myocardial disease, atrial 53
cardiac tamponade 46, 144
lipoma, abdominal 183
myocardial injury 173
neoplastic 6, 141, 144,
Jung consolidation 191
myocardial tumor 172
209, 219
Jung lobe torsion 101
myxoma, cardiac 111
pericardial fluid samples 6,
lung re-expansion edema
71,141,161
84
N-acetylcysteine 138
 pericardial space, soft tissue
lung sounds (abnormal) 56,
 nasal discharge 197
188
66,90,116,126,153,
neoplasia
pericardiectomy 69, 219
162,165,191,198
abdominal 183
pericardiocentesis 6, 46,
classification 198
ardiac 6,69,75,76,111,
160, 161
ymphadenopathy 22, 192
158,172
complications 161
ymphoma 52,94,141,192
mesothelioma 71, 123,
equipment and technique
diagnostic tests 141
209
159
286
Index
pericarditis, constrictive 219
propranolol87
radiography (continued)
periosteal new bone
protein/creatinine ratio,
aspiration pneumonia
formation 142,155
urine 19
191
peritoneopericardial
prothrombin time 104
bronchiectasis 72, 176
diaphragmatic hernia 140,
pulmonary arteries,
bronchitis 72
188
enlargement 137
cardiomegaly 20, 28, 32,
pulmonary carcinoma
35,46,170,203
cava 31
bronchoalveolar 17, 168
avitary pulmonary
persistent right aortic arch
bronchogenic 70
lesions 108, 196
139
pulmonary edema
diaphragmatic hernia 3
pharynx 167,215
cardiogenic 117, 170,
dilated cardiomyopathy
phlebotomy 92
171, 214
170, 171
phosphodiesterase-5
fluid analysis 106
esophagobronchial fistula
inhibitors 83
non-cardiogenic 81, 105,
39,40
physical deformities 9, 118,
106
feline asthma 89
119
re-expansion 84
fre damage 56
pimobendan 38,95,124,
pulmonary fibrosis,
hypertrophic osteopathy
165,181,207,216
idiopathic 184
142
effects and indications 124
 pulmonary granulomatosis,
laryngeal/pharyngeal
pleural effusion 29, 75,101,
eosinophilic 153
regions 167
208,219
pulmonary hypertension
lymphadenopathy 22
chylous 25,59,60,101
12,129,156,162,164,
near drowning 66
differentiation from
211
paragonimiasis 199
thoracic mass 155
echocardiography 129,
patent ductus arteriosus
exudate 61
162
79
modified transudate 26
management 83
pleural effusion 60,155,
pseudochylous 25
pulmonary infiltrates 162
208
transudates 19, 155
pulmonary pattern
pneumothorax 30,193
traumatic 194
alveolar 2, 56,62,66, 81,
pulmonary edema 117,
pleural fuid samples 25, 59,
89,101,162,191,218
170
61, 78
alveolar-interstitial 65,105
pulmonary fibrosis 184
pleuritis 123
bronchial 16,28,72,99,
pulmonary mass 17, 212
pneumomediastinum 30
176
pulmonary nodules 11
pneumonia
interstitial 2, 10, 22,96,
strangulation 81
aspiration 191
126,137,149,162,
horacic mass 52, 93,98,
bacterial 150,177
168,192,197,218
142,155,192
embolic 78
nodular 11
horacic trauma 74, 178,
fungal 22, 169
vascular 79, 117, 170,
179,202
parasitic 108,162,199,
174, 185
tacheal cyst 9
218
pulmonary
 tacheal hypoplasia 62
pyogranulomatous 89
thromboembolism 27,
racheobronchitis 166
pneumothorax 30
185
upper airway 50
recurrent 134
pulmonary vessel dilation
regurgitation (food) 139
spontaneous 193,196
170,174
renal disease 19
polycythemia rubra vera 12,
pulmonic stenosis 45, 63,
respiratory alkalosis 68
92
125,205
respiratory distress
positive end-expiratory
purring
acetaminophen toxicity
pressure 42
discouraging during
138
praziquante] 199
auscultation 41
acute respiratory distress
precordial impulse 131, 156
ECG artifact 159
syndrome 105,106,197
prednisolone 96, 116
pyothorax 78
airway obstruction 1, 5,
prednisone 153
9, 57,58, 133
pregnancy, diaphragmatic
radiography
asthma99
hernia3
air bronchogram 62, 65,
mrdiac disease 28, 95,
procainamide 49
66,89,101,166
117,149,174
287
Index
respiratory distress
systemic inflammatory
trauma(continued)
(continued)
response 82
post-traumatic arrhythmia
pulmonary bulla 134
173
severe (orthopnea) 1, 104
tachycardia
thoracic 74, 147, 178,
signs of in dog 1
AV reciprocating 49
202
thoracic trauma 178
paroxysmal ventricular 4,
tricuspid dysplasia 26, 87,
tracheal tear 182
148
206
respiratory pattern 1, 133
re-entrant
tricuspid regurgitation 162
retractor, Balfour 84
supraventricular 130
rhonchi 198
sinus 155,181
ultrasonography 34, 94
ribs
ventricular 36,172
survey 94
fractures 147
tachypnea 90, 138
upper airway obstruction 1,
periosteal new bone
taurine 171
9,50,57,58,116,133
formation 155
terbutaline 96, 100
urethral obstruction 33
right atrial pressure 205
tetralogy of Fallot 92,125
uterus, diaphragmatic
right bundle branch block
theophylline 38, 100
herniation 3
113,152
third eyelid, protrusion 93
right ventricular enlargement
thoracocentesis 25,59, 60,
vagal maneuvers 87
162,205
61,78,123,208
vascular ring anomaly 139
right ventricular pressure
thoracoscopy 69, 123
vehicle trauma 74, 84, 147,
162
thoracotomy 69
173
rodenticide toxicity 65, 104
thromboembolism
vena cava
rutin60
pulmonary 27,185
caudal enlargement 203
see also arteria]
cranial compression 52
saddle thrombus 34
thromboembolism
persistent left cranial 31
sarcoma 142,212
thymoma 122, 213
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q)
seizure activity 112
toxicities 104,138,143
mismatch 68,102
sick sinus syndrome 204
trachea
 ventricular escape rhythm
sildenafil 83,184
displacement 93,122,
115
sinus arrest 135, 143
140,167,179
ventricular pre-excitation 49,
soft palate, entrapment 50
elevation 46,117
130
sotalol 87, 91
hypoplasia 62
ventricular premature
spinal fracture 202
mass 9,116,133
complexes 4, 115, 143,
spironolactone 32,38,187
tear182
205,207
spleen, herniation 98
thickening 82
ventricular septal defect 13,
sputum histology.
tracheal collapse 57, 58,
88,125,186,203
blastomycosis 197
164, 195
ventricular tachycardia 4,
sternotomy, median 134,
tracheal collapse complex
36,148,172
213
15
ventricular trigeminy 36
sternum,luxation 178
tracheal diameter:thoracic
verapamil 49
strangulation 81
inlet ratio 62
 vertebral heart score 20
stridor 5,50
tracheal ring, prosthetic 58
vomiting 75,140,185,188
subaortic stenosis 85, 86,
tracheobronchitis, infectious
146
166
water submersion 66
subcutaneous emp
tracheoscopy 58
weight loss 109, 116
182
tracheostomy tube
"Westie lung disease' 184
subcutaneous hemorrhage
placement 215
wheezes 66,90,116,198
104
trauma
Wolff-Parkinson-White
synchronized intermittent
bite wounds 178
pre-excitation130
mandatory ventilation 42
diaphragmatic hernia 74,
Wright's stain 10
syncope 23,36,77,112,
84
113, 135,204
endotracheal tube
differentiation from
placement 182
seizure activity 112
penetrating cardiac
see also collapse
wound194
288