SECOND EDITION
R. Michael Akers & D. Michael Denbow
ANAIOMY
&
PHYSIOLOGY
of Domestic Animals
ebsir
WILEYBlackwel
Anatomy and Physiology
of Domestic Animals
Second Edition
Anatomy and Physiology
of Domestic Animals
Second Edition
R. Michael Akers
D. Michael Denbow
WILEY Blackwell
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
First edition 2008 @ Blackwell Publishing
Editorial offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the
copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell
Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For
those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes
for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-1-1183-5638-8/2013.
pasn saeu npord pue saeu puera lv sreapen se pae uato ae snpord nau ysinusip oi saueduoo Aq pasn suoeuisa
in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and
should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by health science practitioners for any
particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular
Jo mo suisuo au pue suoenau euauuaog un saueuo suoegou suadinba yreasa uouo go maa un 'asodand
information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided
in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or
e seu ioey au 'aeidoidde araum iseads e um hnsuoo pinous siapea suonesad pue shuuem pappe sg pue aesn jo uoeu
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the
author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further,
readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written
and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the 
author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Akers, R. Michael, author.
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals / R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow. - Second edition.
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
- ISBN 978-1-118-68862-5 - ISBN 978-1-118-68866-3 (ePdf)
1. Denbow, D. Michael, author. I1. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Anatomy, Veterinary. 2. Animals, Domestic-physiology. 3. Physiology. SF 761]
SF761
636.089'2-dc23
201301 7935
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic
books.
  smo aso  sU a  ste m  s a a
Cover design by Nicole Teut
Set in 10/12 pt Palatino by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
12013
Contents
Preface
vii
Chapter 9.
 Central Nervous System
241
Preface to the First Edition
ix
Chapter 10. Peripheral and Autonomic
About the Companion Website
xi
Nervous System
265
Chapter 11. Special Senses 
297
Chapter 1.
Introduction to Anatomy
Chapter 12. Endocrine System
323
and Physiology
3
Chapter 13. Cardiovascular System
375
Chapter 2.
The Cell: The Common
 Chapter 14. Respiratory System
417
 Physiological Denominator
11
Chapter 15. Immunity
441
Chapter 3.
 Fundamental Biochemical
Chapter 16. Urinary System
459
 Pathways and Processes in
Chapter 17. Digestive System
483
Cellular Physiology
57
Chapter 18. Lactation
529
Chapter 4.
Tissue Structure and Organization
85
Chapter 19. Reproduction
557
Chapter 5.
Integumentary System
121
Chapter 6.
Bones and Skeletal System
139
Clossary
591
Chapter 7.
Muscular Tissue
179
Index
633
Chapter 8.
Introduction to the Nervous System
215
Preface
As we originally concluded, the study of physiology
agricultural and biological sciences to be successful in
 goes hand-in-hand with consideration of anatomy at
upper-level specialty courses such as nutrition, repro-
multiple levels. While the fundamental focus of this
duction, lactation, growth biology, biotechnology, and
text is physiology, we have strived to include suffi-
the like. We also anticipate that this text will provide
cient system, organ, tissue, and cellular anatomy for
new graduate students with a readily understandable
students to better appreciate the integration of both
source for review of basic principles.
topics. In short, structure and function are inti-
We would like to thank our wives (Cathy Akers, 43
mately interconnected. Our book is rich with illustra-
years and counting: Dr. Cindy Denbow) for their love,
tions that we believe add interest and enhance
 support, and understanding through these long hours
understanding.
of figure making, writing, and editing. We would also
Moreover, we have made all of these illustrations
like to thank our graduate students, colleagues, and
 available to instructors who adopt the book for use in
students in our classes for the inspiration, a helping
their classes. We have also increased the use of textbox
hand, and lots of questions. We would like to espe-
highlights to provide examples to compel student
cially thank Ms. Sara Robinson for preparing several
interest and inquiry. Chapter summaries and sample
drawings and Drs. Anthony Capuco, Steve Ellis, Frank
 questions for both the student and instructor, as well
Gwazdauskas, Ray Nebel, and Frank Robinson, and
as specific websites for each, will increase the utility
 Mrs. Cathy Parsons for photographs used in the text.
of the text as well.
As before, our overriding goal with this edition is 
R. Michael Akers
to provide foundations for undergraduate students in
D. Michael Denbow
vii
Preface to the First Edition
In our view, it is virtually impossible to adequately
We would like to thank our wives (Cathy Akers, 37
understand or study physiology without consider-
years and counting; Dr. Cindy Denbow) for their love,
 ation of anatomy. While the fundamental focus of this
support, and understanding through these long hours
text is physiology, we have strived to include suffi-
of figure making, writing, and editing. We would also
cient system, organ, tissue, and cellular anatomy for
like to thank our graduate students, colleagues, and
students to better appreciate the integration of both
students in our classes for the inspiration, a helping
topics. In short, to appreciate that structure and func-
 hand, and lots of questions. We would like to espe-
tion are intimately interconnected.
cially thank Ms. Sara Robinson for preparing several
The goal of this book is to provide foundations
drawings and Drs. Ray Nebel, Frank Robinson, and
for undergraduate students in agricultural and bio-
Frank Gwazdauskas for photographs used in the
logical sciences to be successful in upper-level spe-
reproduction chapter.
cialty courses such as nutrition, reproduction, lactation,
growth biology, biotechnology, and the like. We also
R. Michael Akers
anticipate that this text will provide new graduate
D. Michael Denbow
students with a readily understandable source for
review of basic principles.
About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/akers /anatomy
The website includes:
·Review questions
· Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
● Powerpoints of all tables from the book for downloading
Anatomy and Physiology of
Domestic Animals
Second Edition
Introduction to anatomy and physiology
Contents
Anatomy and Physiology
Anatomical Nomenclature
8
Levels of Organization
Directional and Positional Terms
8
Homeostasis
Body Planes
 Homeostatic Regulatory Mechanisms
Body Cavities and Membranes
S
Feedback Systems
 Negative Feedback System
7
Positive Feedback System
Although there are many good anatomy and physiol-
 ture, of organisms. Thus, strictly speaking, anatomy
ogy texts that focus on humans, there is a paucity of
deals with form rather than function. It can be divided
such options for animals. Since animals have distinct
into macroscopic (gross) or microscopic anatomy.
physiological and anatomical differences relative to
Macroscopic anatomy deals with structure that can be
humans, a human-focused text does not do the study
 seen with the naked eye, whereas microscopic anatomy
 of animals justice. Animals walk on four legs, whereas 
deals with structure that can only be seen with the aid
humans walk on two. Ruminant animals have adapta-
of a microscope. It is also important to appreciate that
tions to their digestive system that make them unique
it is also much more than simply looking at smears of
from humans. The respiratory system of birds differs
cells or stained tissue sections. Use of immunocyto-
from that of humans, thus making birds able to fly at
chemistry, fluorescence-labeled markers, multispec-
high altitudes. The focus of this text will be to empha-
tral cameras and sophisticated imaging software, and
-adde on sere o aonisqd pe Ae an ai
so on is revolutionizing our understanding of cell and
ciate their unique physiological systems.
tissue biology. Figure l.1 provides an example of the
 ability to localize specific proteins within various cells
of the mammary gland.
Anatomy and physiology
Macroscopic anatomy can be approached in differ-
ent ways. Regional anatomy, as the name implies,
Anatomy (derived from the Greek words meaning "to
deals with all the structures, such as nerves, bones,
cut open") is the study of the morphology, or struc-
 muscles, and blood vessels, in a defined region such
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Physiology is the study of the function of living
systems. While various systems will be presented
separately throughout this book, it must be recog-
nized that all systems work together to maintain the
 normal functioning of an animal. Therefore, the car-
diovascular system does not work in isolation from
the respiratory or nervous system, but instead they
work in urison to coordinate the distribution of
 oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide throughout the
body. As in anatomy, there are levels of complexity.
Cellular physiology is the study of how cells work.
This includes the study of events at the chemical, mo-
lecular, and genetic levels. Organ physiology includes
 the study of specific organs, that is, cardiac or ovarian.
Systems physiology includes the study of the func-
Fig. 1.1. Photomicrograph of a developing mammary duct. Taken
tions of specific systems such as the cardiovascular,
from a Holstein calf, this tissue section was stained with specific
respiratory, or reproductive systems.
antibodies and fluorescent tags to detect cell nuclei (blue),
As you study anatomy and physiology, it will
cytokeratin 18 (red, a marker specific for epithelial cells), CD10
 become apparent that structure and function have
(green, a marker of myoepithelial cells), and Ki67 (yellow, a protein
evolved to complement each other. The complemen-
produced in nuclei of cells that are about to divide). The tissue
tarity of structure and function is an essential concept.
section is from a study to evaluate the effects of the ovary on
ontogeny of myoepithelial cells in the bovine mammary gland.
At multiple levels, a return to this fundamental idea
Image is courtesy of Dr. Steve Ellis, Clemson University.
will hasten your grasp of what sometimes seems to be
 an overwhelming amount of information and detail.
But ultimately, the point is for you to understand how
as the head or hip. Systemic anatomy entails the study
an animal works and to understand limitations. This
 of a given organ system such as the muscular or skel-
relationship between form and function is evident
etal system. It also involves the study of organ systems
beginning at the cellular level. For example, the epi-
that are groups of organs that work together for a
thelial cells that line the internal surface of the small
specific function, such as the digestive or urinary
intestine have so-called tight junctions that act to
system. Surface anatomy considers markings that are
 restrict the movement of materials into the body from
visible from the outside. These may include knowl-
 the gastrointestinal tract, whereas the epithelial linings
edge of the muscles, such as sternocleidomastoid
(endothelial cells) of capillaries have modified junc-
muscle, as a landmark to find another structure, such
tions. The linings of capillaries must be sufficiently
as the carotid artery.
 porous to allow solutes to move readily in either direc-
Microscopic anatomy includes cytology and histol-
tion across the capillary wall to nourish the tissue and
ogy. Cytology is the study of the structure of indi-
 remove waste products.
vidual cells that constitute the smallest units of life, at
As another example, there are structural differences
least in the sense of animal physiology Histology is
between birds and mammals that allow flight. Birds
the study of tissues. Tissues are a collection of special-
contain pneumatic bones, that is, bones that are hollow,
ized cells and their products that perform a specific
which are connected to the respiratory system. These
function. Tissues combine to form organs such as the
bones include the skull, humerus, (
clavicle, keel,
 heart, liver, and brain, and willbe explained in greater
sacrum, and lumbar vertebrae. In addition, the lumbar
detail in Chapter 4.
and sacral vertebrae are fused as an adaptation for
Developmental anatomy is the study of the changes
fight. This provides yet another example of comple-
 in structure that occur throughout life. Embryology is
mentary structure and function.
a subdivision of developmental anatomy that traces
the developmental changes prior to birth. Many sys-
tems of the body are not completely developed at
birth, hence the need to continue to follow their devel-
Levels of organization
 opment after parturition. Specific to farm mammals,
 understanding and management of the postnatal devel-
The animal body has a complex organization ex-
opment of the mammary gland and reproductive
tending from the most microscopic levels up to the
system are essential for the success of dairies, cow/
macroscopic (Fig. 1.2). Beginning with the smallest
calf operations, flocks of sheep and goats, piggeries,
microscopic units of stability, the levels of organiza-
and so on.
tion are as follows:
Introduction to anatomy and physiology
pancreas to form part of the digestive system. The
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2
 pancreas also functions as part of the endocrine
hydroxyapatite
system because of the pancreatic islets that
. Chemical level
produce insulin and glucagon. The organ systems
include the integumentary, skeletal, muscular,
Osteoclast
6. Org anismal leve
nervous, endocrine, respiratory, digestive, lym-
2. Cellular level
phatic, urinary, and reproductive systems (Fig. 1.3).
 Organismal level. The organismal level, or the
whole animal, includes all of the organ systems
that work together to maintain homeostasis.
Homeostasis
3.Tissueleve
 The 19th-century French physiologist Claude Bernard
4. Organ level
(1965) coined the term milieu interieur, which referred
Fig. 1.2. Levels of organization. (1) Atoms interact to form
to the relatively constant internal environment, that is,
molecules, which combine to form complex chemicals. (2)
extracellular fluid, in which cells live. Walter Cannon
Chemicals combine to form cells that can display specific
(1932), a 20th-century American physiologist, later
functions depending on the proteins expressed. (3) Cells having a
coined the term homeostasis, meaning "unchanging"
common function combine to form tissue. (4) Tissues combine to
internal envirorment. While the concept of homeo-
perform a common function. (5) Organs can work together for a
common function. (6) All the organ systems combine to produce 
stasis is fundamental to understanding physiology.
 a living animal.
the term is better understood as a relatively steady
state that is maintained within an animal despite a
wide range of environmental conditions. In this way.
Chemical level. Atoms are the smallest units of
various internal conditions, such as plasma glucose,
matter that have properties of an element. They
electrolyte concentrations, or body temperature, are
combine with covalent bonds to form molecules
maintained within narrow limits through homeostatic
such as molecular oxygen (O2) glucose (CgH2O),
mecharisms
or methane (CH4). The properties of various
Homeostasis is maintained at all levels of life. Indi-
chemicals have a major influence on physiology.
vidual cells, for example, control their internal envi-
For example, at a low pH, a chemical may not be
ronment via selectively permeable membranes. These
ionized and can thus cross a cellular membrane
 membranes will allow selective movement across the
whereas above a certain pH, the same molecule
 membrane based on such factors as pH, size, or
may become ionized and thus unable to cross a
whether there is a specific transport system for that
lipid bilayer.
compound. Whole animals maintain their internal
Cellular level. As the smallest unit of life, cells
environment by a host of behavioral and physiological
have various sizes, shapes, and properties that
mechanisms. A behavioral method of regulation may
allow them to carry out specialized functions.
include moving from a sunny area to a shady area to
 Some cells have cilium that allow them to move
decrease body temperature, whereas a physiological
materials across their surfaces (i.e., the epithelial
method may involve an increase in sweating or
lining the bronchioles or cells lining the oviduct),
panting to accomplish the same goal.
whereas other cells are adapted to store lipids,
produce collagen, or contract when stimulated.
Tissue level. A tissue is a group of cells having a
Homeostatic regulatory mechanisms
common structure and function. The four types of
tissue include muscle, epithelia, nervous, and
Elaborate regulatory mechanisms exist to maintain
connective tissue.
homeostasis. Homeostasis is maintained by the actions
Organ level. Two or more tissues working for a
of the nervous and endocrine systems that communi-
given function form an organ. All four tissue
cate changes in the internal and external environment.
types combine to form skin, the largest organ
The two systems work in conjunction to make rela-
of the body, or the cochlea in the ear, the smallest
 tively rapid or slow changes, respectively The nervous
 organ of the body.
 system responds to immediate, short-term needs, as
Organ system level. Organs can work together
seen in a reflex arc in which an animal withdraws its
for a common function. For example, the alimen-
foot after stepping on a sharp object. In contrast, the
tary canal works with the liver, gallbladder, and
endocrine system generally elicits responses that last
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter ?
a. Integumentary system: Foms
b. Skeletal system: Functions in
C. Muscular system: Functions in
d. Nervous system: Through its
the extemal covering of the body
support, protection, and movement.
 movement, maintains posture, and 
functions of sensory input,
providing protection, preventing
A lso important in blood cell formation
 generates heat.
integration, and motor output, it
desiccation,supplying sensory
and mineral storage.
quickly helps the animal interact
 information about the environment
with the intemal and external
and synthesizing vitarm in D.
environment.
e. Endocrine system: Collectively,
f. Cardiovascular system: Includes
g. Lymphatic system: Retums
h. Respiratory system: Provides
all the endocrine-secreting cells;
 blood vessels and the heart, which
excess interstitial fluid to the
blood and contains phagocytic
 oxygen and eliminates COz-
these produce hormones that 
function to caty nutrients and
help maintain the intemal
waste throughout the body.
 cells involved in immunity.
environment.
i. Digestive system: Assimilation,
j. Urinary system: Eliminates
k. Reproductive system: Functions
 breakdown, and absorption of
nitrogenous wastes, maintains
to produce offspring.
nutrients. Provides inportant
fluid and electrolyte balance,
 immunological bartier against
 and has an endocrine function.
extemal environment.
Fig. 1.3. Organ systems. The body consists of 11 major organ systems that are shown above along with examples of their components.
hours or days such as the release of insulin in response
hand, involves the coordinated action of both the ner-
to a rise in blood glucose levels.
vous and endocrine systems. Such regulation occurs,
When regulation occurs at either the cellular, tissue,
for example, during prolonged stress where there is
organ, or organ system level, it is termed autoreg-
 release of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and cortico-
ulation. For example, the presence of tryptophan in
 steroids from the paired adrenal glands. This results 
the small intestine will cause the local release of cho-
in an increase in blood pressure and a change in blood
lecystokinin (CCK) that will cause the pancreas to
flow such that there is an increase to the skeletal
secrete enzymes. Extrinsic regulation, on the other
muscle and a decrease to the digestive tract.
Introduction to anatomy and physiology
Effector
responds to
3. Body temperature
(3) Output signal is
correct the change
returns to normal
 sent to the effector.
range.
1. Exposure to
sun causes
an increase
Control center 
(4) The response caus
in body
processes stim ulus
temperature.
 infor mation.
variable.
(2) Receptor
(1) Stimulus produce
an increase or
ca rries stimulus
 clecrease in 
 inform ation to 
variable.
control center.
2. Activation of heat
Variable
loss mechanisms by
the control center.
Fg. 1.5. Negative feedback systems. (1) A stimulus causes a
change in a variable, in this example, an increase in body
Fig. 1.4. Feedback systems. (1) A stimulus causes a change in a
temperature. (2) Information regarding the increase in body
variable (i.e., plasma glucose, blood pressure, and heart rate).
 temperature is caried to the control center, which activates
(2) A receptor senses the change in the variable and sends that
 appropriate heat loss mechanisms to decrease body temperature
information to the control center. (3) The control center compares
toward the set point. (3) As a result of the heat loss mechanisms,
the level of the variable to a set point and then initiates appropriate
body temperature is returned to the set-point value, and
responses to change the variable. (4) The actions of the effectors
homeostasis is maintained.
bring about a change in the variable.
The factor being regulated is the variable. The regu-
as an example, every animal has a set point for body
latory mechanisms involve a receptor, a control center,
temperature, with the control center residing in the
and an effector. The receptor is a neuron that senses
hypothalamus, a region of the brain. When the body
a change in the environment, called a stimulus. In
temperature of an animal rises, possibly due to expo-
response to the stimulus, the receptor carries an affer-
sure to the sun, the warmth receptors located in the
ent (away) signal to the control center. The control
 skin and hypothalamus sense a rise in temperature
center has a set point around which the variable is
-oy a ody an on is e pus pe
maintained. When the input signal is outside of the
thalamus compares these signals to the set point and
-a st asuodsan aiedodde ue 'uod ias aul jo a
then activates heat loss mechanisms (effector) such as
ited to correct the variable. An efferent (toward) signal
 sweating and vasodilation. Sweating results in evapo-
is then sent to the effector. The effector induces a
 rative cooling, while vasodilation increases the blood
change in the controlled variable to bring it back to the
flow to the skin where heat is lost to the environment
set point (Fig. 1.4).
through radiation, conduction, and convection. The
effector response results in a decrease in temperature
back toward the set point.
Feedback systems
While the negative feedback system acts to correct
changes from the set point, it is also common for the
Homeostatic regulatory mechanisms consist of either
cally throughout the day. When an animal gets a fever,
negative or positive feedback systems. Negative feed-
 back systems are far more common than positive feed-
the set point for body temperature increases. This
results in the activation of heat production pathways,
back systems.
including shivering and vasoconstriction (Fig. 1.6).
When the set point returns to normal, the animal acti-
vates heat loss mechanisms.
Negative feedback system
In negative feedback systems, the control system initi-
Positive feedback system
ates changes that counteract the stimulus (Fig. 1.5).
This either reduces or eliminates the stimulus, thereby
In response to a stimulus, the animal elicits regulatory
 reestablishing the variable near its set point to main-
mechanisms that augment or exaggerate the effect.
tain homeostasis. Using body temperature regulation
This creates a regulatory cycle in which the response
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
the femur, simply saying that it is "in the back leg
4. Body temperature
1. Body temperature
and located before the tibia and fibula" will not
returns to
rises in response to
suffice.
normal
an increase in the
range.
set point.
Directional and positional terms
onge
Anatomical terms are used to describe an animal that
is in its normal anatomical position. In the case of
humans, who are biped (i.e., walk on two legs), this
means standing with the arms hanging by the side and
 3. Set point
2. Elevated
decreases s0
the palms rotated forward. For animals that are quad-
heat loss
 set point 
ruped (i.e., walk on four legs), anatomical position
maintains new
mechanisms are
body temperature
entails standing on all four limbs.
activated.
at fever levels.
Positional and directional terms are presented in
Fig. 1.6.
 Alterations in the homeostatic set points. The set
Table 1.1. The use of such terms allows for more preci-
point for a variable can change. For example, the development
sion while using fewer words to describe body struc-
of a fever involves a change in the body temperature set point.
tures. For example, one might say, "The knee is located
(1) The control center responds to an increase in the set point for
body temperature caused by a pyrogen (i.e., something that causes
       
a fever) and activates heat production pathways. (2) After being
 trunk and the hoof." With directional and positional
raised to the elevated set point, body temperature is maintained at 
terms, one can say, "The knee is located distal to the
this new level. (3) The set point decreases either because the
humerus and proximal to the radius and ulna, in the
animal fights off the cause of the fever or has been given an
middle of the front leg."
antipyretic, so the set point decreases to the original value. The
These terms can have different meanings when
it activates heat loss mechanisms. (4) Body temperature is returned
referring to humans as opposed to animals. While
to normal.
dorsal and posterior mean toward the back or spinal
column in humans, dorsal means toward the spinal
cord in a quadruped, while posterior means toward
the tail.
causes an augmentation of the stimulus, which fur-
ther increases the response. While positive feedback
Body planes
 systems are rare, there are situations where they prove
beneficial. In the case of blood clotting. an injured
When talking about anatomical locations, it is neces-
blood vessel secretes factors that attract platelets to
 sary to take into account the three-dimensional nature
that site. These platelets secrete factors that attract
of an animal. The body can be sectioned, or cut, in all
 more platelets, and thus a positive cascade begins to
 three planes. Knowing which plane one is observing
occur. While this is beneficial in preventing the loss of
blood, if left unchecked, the clotting process would
when looking at a cross section gives knowledge of
the location of various structures. Looking at anatomi-
continue until all the blood in the body was clotted,
cal planes has become common in the many television
resulting in death.
crime and medical mystery shows that show images
 Childbirth is another classic example of a positive
feedback system. Near the time of parturition, oxyto-
from various magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
cin is produced by the fetus, which, along with pros-
scans. Using the horse as an example, the terms are
further depicted in Figure 1.7.
taglandins, initiates uterine contractions. The uterine
A sagittal plane divides the body into right and left
contractions cause the hypothalamus of the mother to
parts along the longitudinal axis (Table 1.2; Fig. 1.7).
release more oxytocin, causing greater uterine contrac-
If the plane is exactly along the midline of the longi-
tions. Thus, a positive feedback loop is initiated.
tudinal axis, it is said to be a median, or midsagittal,
plane. Any sagittal plane other than the midsagittal is
'ard (reau = mnd) rebeseied e aq oi pres
Anatomical nomenclature
A frontal (dorsal) plane runs longitudinally and
passes through the body parallel to its dorsal surface
As with any field of science, anatomy has its own
 and at a right angle to the median plane. In other
language. It is necessary to know this language to
words, it divides an animal into a dorsal and ventral
 describe strucfures and events in a precise and accu-
portion and runs parallel to the ground. In humans,
rate manner. When trying to describe the location of
such a plane runs perpendicular to the ground.
Introduction to anatomy and physiology
Table 1.1. [
 Directional and positional terms.
Term
Meaning
Exampfe
Dorsal
Toward the back; also, below the proximal ends of the carpus and
The vertebral column is dorsal to the sternum.
tarsus, dorsal means toward the head (i.e., dorsal replaces cranial)
Ventral
Toward the belly
The udder is ventral to the tail.
 Cranial
Toward the head
The neck is cranial to the tail.
Caudal
Toward the tail
The tail is caudal to the head.
Rostral
Part of the head closer to the nose
The beak is rostral to the ear.
 Proximal
Near the trunk or origin of the limb
The elbow is proximal to the ankle.
Distal
 Farther from the trunk
The ankle is distal to the elbow.
 Palmar
Below the proximal ends of the carpus, palmar replaces caudal
The dewclaws are on the palmar surface of the
forelimb.
 Plantar
 Below the proximal ends of the tarsus, planar replaces caudal
The dewclaws of the hind limb are on the plantar
surface of the foot.
 Medial
Toward the longitudinal axis (midline)
The sternum is medial to the limbs.
Lateral
Away from the longitudinal axis 
The scapula lies lateral to the spine.
Superficial
 Nearer the body surface
The skin is superficial to the ribs.
Deep
Farther from the body surface
The heart is deep to the ribs.
 Axial and 
 Restricted to the digits, these terms indicate position relative to the
The lateral edge of the hoof is abaxial to the
abaxial
longitudinal axis of the limb; axial and abaxial are closer and 
 phalanges.
further to the longitudinal axis, respectively
Table 1.2. Body planes.
brain and spinal cord and contains the cranial cavity
within the skull, and the vertebral, or spinal, cavity
Orientation
Pfane
 Description
of Pfane
that is found within the vertebral column. The brain
and the spinal cord are continuous; therefore, the
Perpendicular
Transverse
 Divides the body into
crarial and vertebral cavities are also continuous.
to long axis
 cranial and caudal parts;
 When looking down the longitudinal axis, the trunk
 also crosses an organ or
of the animal can be divided into three cavities. The
limb at a right angle to its
long axis
thoracic cavity is surrounded by the ribs and muscles
 of the chest. It can be further subdivided into the pleu-
Parallel to
 Median
 Divides body into equal
ral cavities, each of which houses a lung, and the medi-
long axis
(midsagittal)
right and left halves
astinum, which is located medially between the lungs
Sagittal
 Divides body into unequal
and contains the pericardial cavity. The mediastinum
right and left halves
also houses the esophagus and trachea.
Frontal
 Longitudinal plane passing
The abdominopelvic cavity is separated from the
(dorsal)
through the body parallel to
thoracic cavity by the diaphragm. The abdominopel-
 dorsal surface and at right 
 angles to the median plane
vic cavity has two components: the abdominal cavity
that contains, among others, the stomach, intestines,
spleen, and liver, as well as the more caudal pelvic
cavity. The pelvic cavity is surrounded by the bones
A transverse plane runs perpendicular to the long
of the pelvis, and contains the bladder, part of the
axis of the structure. A transverse plane can divide an
 reproductive organs, and rectum.
animal into a cranial and caudal half, or it can divide
The walls of the ventral body cavities, as well as the
 a limb into a proximal and distal section.
surface of the visceral organs, are covered by a thin,
double-layer membrane called the serosa, or serous
membrane. The portion of the serosa lining the body
Body cavities and membranes
cavity is called the parietal (parie = wall) serosa, while
the portion lining the organ is the visceral serosa.
A median view of an animal will reveal two cavities,
The best way to visualize the relationship between
the dorsal and ventral. The dorsal cavity protects the
the two layers of the serosa is to imagine pushing your
 1 0  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Medianplane
fist into an inflated balloon. The layer of the balloon
(midsagittal)
closest to your fist would be equivalent to the visceral
Chapter
serosa, while that part of the balloon on the outside
 would represent the parietal serosa. The two serosal
 membranes each secrete serosal fluid into the space
between the two layers. This fluid acts as a lubricant
 to reduce the friction between the parietal and visceral
 serosa as they slide across one another. This is impor-
tant when one considers how often the heart beats or
the lungs inflate, during which time the visceral and
parietal serosa slide across one another.
 The serosa membranes have specific names depend-
Frontalplane
ing on their locations. When found surrounding the
heart, itis called the pericardium (peri = around + kardia,
Sagittalplane
heart). Therefore, the parietal pericardium lines the
pericardial cavity,  while  the  visceral  pericardium
 adheres to the heart. The pleura adheres to the lungs
and lines the thoracic cavity, whereas the peritoneum
 lines the abdominopelvic cavity and adheres to the
visceral organs.
Review questions and answers are available
online.
References
Bernard, C. 1965. An Introduction to the Study of Experi-
 mental Medicine. Great Books Foundation, INC., Chicago,
Transverse
 Illinois.
planes
Cannon, W.B. 1932. The Wisdom of the Body. Norton,
New York.
Fig. 1.7. Planes of the body. The three major planes (frontal,
transverse, and sagittal) are shown.
2
The cell: The common physiological
denominator
Contents
Cells: a Common Denominator
11
Lipids
39
Water: the Universal Solvent
12
Nucleic Acids
40
Cellular Organelles
14
Cellular Biochemistry
41
 Fluid Mosaic Model
15
Chemical Bonds
43
Microscopy Techniques
16
Chemical Reactions
45
Organelles of the Cytoplasm
19
Significance of Enzymes
45
Nuclear Structure
25
Extracellular Environment and Cell Function
47
Cell Growth and Differentiation
27
Osmosis
48
 Stages of the Cell Cycle
30
Transport Mechanisms
50
Stages of Mitosis
31
Chapter Summary
55
 Regulators of Cell Division
33
 Macromolecules and Cellular Physiology
34
 Proteins
34
Carbohydrates
37
Cells: A common denominator
stomach, small intestine and large intestine, and related
accessory organs (liver, pancreas, gall bladder). This
All of the physiological systems, for example, diges-
 tube-within-a-tube organization allows for acquisition
tive, respiratory, or cardiovascular, depend on the
of food, physical mastication, chemical digestion, and
actions and activities of cells. Groups of cells and their 
ultimately, absorption of nutrients across the lining of
products coalesce to create the four basic tissue types
the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract into the bloodstream.
(epithelial, neural, muscular, and connective tissues).
The mature Gl tract has elements of each of the four
Attributes of these tissues will be discussed in detail
major tissue types.
in Chapter 4. Combinations of these tissues produce
 The internal lining, the mucosa (an example of epi-
 organs. Functionally related organs are arranged into
thelial tissue), is composed of a layer of specialized
physiological systems. To illustrate, the digestive sys-
 epithelial cells called enterocytes. The enterocytes rest
tem includes the mouth and oral cavity, esophagus,
 upon a thin layer of extracellular proteins, the basement 
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 12   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 membrane. The mucosal layer also includes other spe-
B0x 2.1
 Practical anatomy and physiology
cialized connective tissue elements, including the
structurally important proteins collagen and elastin,
There is a lot in the news lately about stem cells.
as  well as protein-carbohydrate hybrid molecules
 Much of this involves efforts to produce replace-
called proteoglycans. The mucosa also has a popula-
ment tissues or organs or combat ravages of cancer
气
tion of scattered smooth muscle cells, the muscularis
and other diseases. What about general physiol-
mucosa, and a distinctive connective tissue called the
ogy? Are there examples? The answer is yes. One
lamina propria. The submucosa appears between the
of the most elegant demonstrations for the exis-
enterocytes and the next major tissue layer, the mus-
tence of stem cells is for the mammary gland. Using
cularis. This region provides a passageway for capil-
genetically similar mice, researchers first prepared
laries and lymphatic vessels. Exocrine glands, which
recipient mice which had their rudimentary
 produce secretions destined for the lumen of the Gl tract,
 mammary epithelium surgically removed before
also reside in this location. Closer to the outer circum-
puberty. This resulted in animals with an intact
ference of the tract, there are two closely aligned, dense
mammary fat pad (so-called cleared mammary
layers of smooth muscle cells called the muscularis
gland), that is, no remaining mammary parenchy-
externa. The innermost layer of smooth muscle cells
mal tissue. Using cell separation and isolation tech-
are arranged around the circumference of the Gl tract,
niques, scientists recreated the entire epithelial
while the outer layer is oriented along the longitudinal
(parenchymal) portion of the mammary gland and
axis of the Gl tract. The coordinated contraction and
induced milk synthesis following the injection of a
 relaxation of these two smooth muscle cell layers provide
single stem cell into a cleared mammary fat pad
for mixing and movement of gut contents. A thin layer
(Kordon and Smith, 1998; Bussard and Smith, 2011)
of epithelial cells called the serosa covers the outside
Other animal scientists are working to identify
of the Gl tract that is adjacent to the internal body cavity.
and manipulate stem cells in domestic animals to
The serosa is continuous with the mesentery, which
improve meat and milk production.
provides a means for entrance of veins, arteries, and
nerve fibers into the muscularis externa and submucosa
and for general support via attachment to ligaments.
and thereby create new lineages of cells that can
Despite the complexity of tissue and cell types in
repopulate those tissues. Box 2.1 provides some exam-
the Gi tract, and requirement of multiple cell and
ples of mammary stem cells.
tissue types for maximum efficiency, the essential
These examples serve to emphasize an unexpected
function of the Gl tract depends on the actions of the
plasticity of tissues and cells. It may be possible in the 
enterocytes. Consequently, understanding physiologi-
future to bioengineer replacements for damaged or
   d  s 
diseased organs or tissues as more is learned about the
 pe aid e po ue re 
 rules governing cell growth and differentiation.
tion. A common theme that we will emphasize
repeatedly is that structure and function go together.
Water: The universal solvent
organization—molecular, cellular, organ, and system.
Our story begins with a discussion of the cell.
Because mammals are composed largely of water
Once past the primordial stem cell stage of the
(-70%), cellular biochemistry is governed by interac-
embryo, cells acquire varying degrees of structural
tions of physiologically important molecules and
and functional differentiation. Differentiation of cells
water of the cell cytoplasm, the water surrounding the
equips them for their particular function. For many
cells (interstitial fluid), or the aqueous environment of
years, the dogma was that once cells became differen-
various cellular organelles. We all appreciate, at least
tiated, it was impossible to reprogram them cell so that
in a general sense, that water is essential to our sur-
these cells or their daughters could be induced to
vival. But remembering some of the physicochemical
follow a different path. Under usual circumstances,
attributes of water emphasizes its physiological rele
this likely is true; however, it is also evident that
vance. Water is an excellent solvent for many but not
advances in cell and molecular biology have called
all physiologically important molecules. Blood plasma,
this dogma into question. For example, development
which is about 90% water, transports a myriad of dis-
 of the cloned sheep Dolly in 1996 was achieved using
solved nutrients (e.g., glucose, amino acids), minerals
cultured fibroblasts. Other examples of animals cloned
(e.g., Na, Cl, and K), and gases (e.g., O2, CO2). Intra-
from fully differentiated cells have been recently
and intercellular water is similarly filled with solutes.
reported. It is now known that virtually all tissues
The urinary system maintains body water reserves to
harbor populations of undifferentiated cells that serve
 ensure that blood pressure and volume are adequate
as stem cells capable of being induced to proliferate
and that proper osmolality is maintained.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
13
from water while at the same time allowing hydro-
philic amino acids' hydrogen bonding interactions
with water. This fundamental property of water means
that it can form highly oriented layers or shells around
charged areas of large macromolecules, for example,
nucleic acids, proteins, or proteoglycans, and thereby
impact structure, organization, and function. Biochem-
Oxygen (negative charge)
ists can take advantage of these properties to isolated
macromolecules from homogenates of tissues or cells.
Hydrogen (positive charge)
For example, if the shielding of protein or nucleic acid
charges by water is reduced by adding a water-miscible
Attractionforces
solvent that reduces hydrogen bonding, protein-
Fig. 2.1. Hydrogen bonds and water.
 protein or nucleic acid interactions are enhanced, and
 precipitation of the macromolecules occurs. This is
 often achieved by the addition of ethanol or acetone.
Water is touted as the biological universal solvent-
but why? The answer lies in its abundance and struc-
include specific heat, thermal conductance, and sur-
tural properties of the water molecule. The chemical
face properties. Briefly, water can absorb substantial
formula for water (HzO) is well known, but Figure 2.1
amounts of heat energy without a drastic change in
illustrates that water has a distinct dipole moment.
temperature. Alternatively, a significant amount of
This means that there is unequal sharing of electrons
heat energy can be lost without a dramatic effect on
between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms of the mol-
temperature. This temperature buffering is impor-
ecule so that the molecule is polarized. The oxygen
tant since most biochemical processes are tempera-
atom, because of its greater capacity to attract elec-
ture sensitive. Evolutionarily, the greater success of
 trons, has a slight negative charge. The hydrogen atoms
warm-blooded mammals compared with cold-blooded
therefore have a slight positive charge. This polarity
 animals reflects the appearance of physiological mech-
causes the water molecules to arrange themselves so
anisms to maintain body temperature, and therefore
that they form hydrogen bonds (opposite charges
 water temperature. Since the water content of animal
attract). Hydrogen bonds, while weak compared with
tissues is so high, the total capacity to store heat energy
covalent chemical bonds, are very important physio-
is correspondingly high. Energy needed to vaporize
logically because of their abundance. They also are
water is also relatively high. Think of how quickly you
important in attractions between many macromole-
feel the cool effect of an alcohol swab on your skin
cules. For example, the two strands of intact DNA are
compared with a simple water-moistened swab. This
held together by hydrogen bonds between base pairs.
property can be viewed as both an advantage and a
 Because of its dipole moment, there is a net negative
disadvantage, depending on the physiological circum-
charge associated with the oxygen atoms of the water
stances. In hot environments or with excessive work,
molecule. This charge separation allows water mole-
 thermoregulation depends on sweating or panting in
cules to organize to form attractant bonds with other
many animals to reduce the thermal load. Too much
water molecules. This property explains many of the
loss and there is dehydration. New visitors to hot, dry
attributes of water as the so-called universal solvent
desert environments must be admonished to drink
and the ability of other polar molecules to readily dis-
 often to make up for unrecognized insensible water
solve in water.
 losses. Many animals have adapted specialized physi-
 This attribute explains the commonsense example of
 ological mechanisms and behaviors to minimize
oils not dissolving in water. Most common oils or lipids
insensible water loss and to maximize efficient use of
are composed of hydrocarbon chains that exhibit equal
water. As another example, seal pups reared in polar
sharing of electrons between atoms and therefore are
seas (in many respects a "desert" environment with
of little or no polarity. Such nonpolar molecules cannot
 regard to water availability) depend on water derived
associate with water and are described as hydrophobic
 from the metabolism of high-fat milk to supply much
(water-fearing molecules). Polar molecules, in con-
 of their water requirement. Consider the impact of
trast, readily associate with water and are described as
water on accumulation of milk in the mammary gland,
a hydrophilic (water-loving molecules). Interestingly.
blood in the cardiovascular system, or perhaps urine
 many cellular and tissue macromolecules have both
production. There are also numerous moist surfaces
hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions. For example,
on many organs. The surface properties of water also
the three-dimensional shape of a protein in the cell is
affect fluid movement and the capacity of tissue sur-
determined by physicochemical forces that act to
faces to interact. This phenomenon is evident in the
meriscus characteristic of a test tube filled with water.
 1 4  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Another commonsense example is the appearance of
H
beads of rainwater on the surface of a waxed car; the
Ho -C-CH-- CH,- CH... CHg
3 Fatty
H-C -OH
wax is very hydrophobic so the molecules of water in
acid chains
H-C-OH
the droplet are much more attracted to one another
than the nonpolar wax. The spherical shape is a reflec-
H-C-OH
Ho -C - CH,- CH- CH..
CH
tion of the physics of attractions between the mole-
cules and the fact that the sphere is the optimal shape
-CH-CH-CH-
Glycerol
to minimize forces. Surface tension describes these
forces and is expressed in force per length or newtons
(N) per meter. Pure water has a surface tension of
7N/m, but dilute detergent reduces this to about
-CH- CH,
. CH
4N/m. Surface properties of water play a critical
-CH, --CH-CH, .... CH
role in many physiological processes. Surface-acting
3H,O
amphipathic molecules reduce surface tension. These
Triglyceride
C -O -C - cH -CH- CH .... CH
molecules have distinct polar and nonpolar domains.
When placed onto a moist surface environment, the
molecules disrupt association between water mole-
Fg. 2.2. Triglyceride synthesis and structure.
cules and at liquid-vapor interfaces limit water-to-
water connections and thus the strength of the surface
tension. For example, the capacity of the lung alveoli
Table 2.1.
 Common saturated fatty acids.
 to expand in the newborn requires that the surfaces of
Fatty Acid
Formufa
Arttributes
the epithelial cells lining the internal surface of the
alveolar air sacs be coated with a surfactant. This mini-
Acetic
CH,COOH
 Major end product of rumen
mizes the attraction of the surfaces and therefore
fermentation, energy source
allows expansion. In fact, the surface tension of lung
for ATP production
extracts can be as low as 0.5N/m. Specialized alveolar
Propionic
C,M,COOH
End product of rumen
cells (Type Il cells) scattered among the normal epithe-
fermentation, major precursor 
for gluconeogenesis
lial cells secrete surfactant. Production is stimulated
by the secretion of glucocorticoids (steroid hormones
Butyric
C,H,COOH
Major end product rumen
 produced in the adrenal gland), near the time of par-
fermentation
turition. Animals that are born prematurely often have
Caproic
C,HCOOH
 Minor end product rumen
 respiratory problems because of failed surfactant
fermentation
 production.
Caprylic
C,M,sCOOM
 Small amounts in many fats
Palmitic
C1sM3iCOOM
Common in all animal and 
plant fats
Cellular organelles
Stearic
C1>MsCOOM
 Common in all animal and 
plant fats
Structures found inside cells are called organelles.
Examples include the nucleus, mitochondria, and
ribosomes. Most organelles are membrane covered.
Other organelles, secretory vesicles and lysosomes, for
often derived from the catabolism of the common
example, are urique because of their membrane-
 hexose sugar glucose. Fatty acid molecules are linear
bound contents. Thus, understanding membranes is
hydrocarbon chains with a carboxylic acid moiety at
important to understanding physiology. We begin
one end. This residue or group is the most reactive or
with lipids and especially phospholipids. Lipids are a
functional part of the molecule. Fatty acids vary in
very heterogeneous group of molecules, but common
length, but the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride is
 atributes include (1) being practically nonsoluble in
constant. Fatty acids also vary with respect to the
 -os  rou 1i ios a () 1nq r
number of double bonds between carbon atoms. Those
vents such as ether, ethanol, or chloroform. Lipids
with no double bonds are called saturated fatty acids,
include fats, oils, waxes, and related compounds.
those with a single double bond are monosaturated,
Figure 2.2 shows the general structure of molecules
and those with more than one are polysaturated fatty
necessary to produce common fats called triacylglyc-
acids. The degree of saturation and length of the fatty
erols or triglycerides.
 acids affect their properties. For example, the shorter
 Neutral fats are esters composed of two building
chain members <6 carbons are water soluble and vola-
blocks—glycerol and one of any number of different
tile, but longer fatty acids are neither soluble nor vola-
fatty acids. Glycerol is a 3-carbon alcohol that is most
tile. Table 2.1 gives a listing of some of the common
The cell: The common physiological denominator
15
saturated fatty acids, structural formulae, and common
Glycerol
features. Common names of many of the fatty acids
backbone
are widely used, but systemic names make deduction
-O-C-CH-CH-CH..CHg
of structure easier. To illustrate, palmitic acid is the
common name for the 16-carbon fatty acid hexadeca-
noic acid. This indicates the carboxylic acid of hexa-
!
-CH-CH-CH..CH
decane (hexa meaning 6 and deca meaning 10, and ane
CHg
indicating an alkane). This fatty acid is also written as
CH-N-CH-CH-O-
-O-CH2
Ci6:o, which means there are 16 carbons and 0 double
CHg
bonds. Formally, triglycerides are called tri-acyl
esters and are created from the alcohol glycerol and
Two fatty acid chains
(nonpolar end)
any of a number of particular fatty acids. The reac-
tion involves a dehydration synthesis reaction (water
groLp
is liberated, e.g., remember the earlier comment
Shorthanc
version
o ie   am s sdnd es inoe
lism) between a carbon of the glycerol and the carbox-
ylic acid residue of each of the fatty acid chains to
create the ester linkage illustrated generally by this
equation:
0
0
R-C-
OH + HO－R
+R
-C-O-R
Carboxylic Acid Alcohol
Ester
Fluid mosaic model
 Model of cell membrane
 Glycerol linked with three fatty acids creates a triglyc-
Fg. 2.3. Panel A illustrates the structure of a typical phospholipid.
 eride, two fatty acids a diglyceride, and a single fatty
Similarity to triglyceride structure is apparent. Panel B gives a
 acid a monoglyceride. Only a few naturally occurring
common shorthand version of the phospholipid structure that is
 triglycerides have the same fatty acid in all three ester
often used to demonstrate the arrangement of phospholipids to
 positions. Most are mixed acylglycerols. Phospholip-
create the bilayer organization of cellular membranes. Panel C
shows the organization of both phospholipids and proteins within a
ids demonstrated by the general formula shown in
typical membrane. The polar phospholipid heads are oriented
Figure 2.3 also contain a phosphoric acid residue. The
toward aqueous environments and the hydrophobic, hydrocarbon
alcohol moiety in many of the phospholipids is also
tails with each other in the center of the bilayer. Various
glycerol, but for others, for example, the sphingophos-
membrane-associated proteins (indicated by the dark blue
pholipids, the alcohol is sphingosine. Phospholipids
sructures) orient either with the hydrophobic center of the bilayer
or with the more hydrophilic outer region of the membrane,
are often drawn in the form of a ball to represent the
depending on the nature of the protein.
polar head of the molecule and two trailing tails to
represent the nonpolar hydrocarbon chains of the fatty
acids. Along with associated proteins and some other
lipids, the capacity of the phospholipids to sponta-
plastic resins thinly sectioned (-900nm) and prepared
neously form bilayers is essential to understanding
for examination in an electron microscope. This is
the formation of all of the cellular membranes. The
sometimes likened to a peanut butter sandwich, with
now-classic organization of the plasma membrane is
the peanut butter as the tails and the two slices of
described as a fluid mosaic model. This consists of a
bread as the phospholipid heads. This fundamental
mosaic of globular proteins suspended in a sea of
 structure is true for all cellular membranes, but there
phospholipids. Membranes are organized with the
are differences in the specific composition, for example,
polar heads of two layers of phospholipids oriented
the Golgi membranes versus the plasma membrane.
either toward the aqueous envirorment of the inter-
Proteins associated with the membranes are oriented
stitial fluid or toward the aqueous environment of the
within either the outer or inner membrane leaflets.
cytoplasm. The hydrophilic hydrocarbon chains of the
 Other proteins completely span the membrane. What-
fatty acids interact so that the membrane has a trilami-
ever their specific arrangement, these proteins are
 nar appearance—phospholipid heads on either side
called integral membrane proteins. Those that span
with fatty acid tails in the center. This organization
the membrane are positioned so that fewer polar
is apparent in well-preserved tissues, embedded in
amino acids occur within the central hydrocarbon tails
16  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of the fatty acid chains, with polar amino acids located
with the polar heads or aqueous surfaces of the mem-
L
brane. Examples of complex plasma membrane pro-
 teins include receptors for hormones or growth factors
(GFs) and those required for transport of metabolites
and nutrients.
Cellular membranes are fluid, dynamic, and active
structures. Membrane components are also inter-
changeable between many cellular components. For
example, in the mammary gland of a lactating
mammal, milk components are packaged into secre-
tory vesicles within the Golgi apparatus. These
product-containing vesicles progressively make their
GA
way to the apical surface of the cell where their con-
tents are released into the storage spaces of the
RE:
mammary gland by the process of exocytosis. The
membrane surrounding the vesicles becomes part of
the plasma membrane. Furthermore, lipid droplets
BL
synthesized in the cells progressively enlarge and also
migrate to the apical surface of the cells for secretion.
However, in this case, the droplets literally begin to
 protrude from the cells and become surrounded by the
Fg. 2.4. Diagram to illustrate major pathways for cellular
plasma membrane. This continues until droplets pinch
synthesis and secretion. Milk precursors in capillaries (Cap) are
off with the former plasma membrane now encapsu-
transported across the endothelial cells and basal lamina (BL) to the
interalveolar connective tissue. Nutrients pass across the alveolar
lating the droplet. The membrane is now referred to
BL and/or myoepithelium (My), the basal plasma membrane (PM),
as the milk fat globule membrane, but its origin was
and into the cytoplasm. Milk proteins are synthesized in the rough
the plasma membrane of the cell. Figure 2.4 illus-
endoplasmic reticulum (RER), enter the RER lumena, and are
trates the organelles and secretion activity of such a
transported to the Golgi (GA) for processing and packaging. In
 mammary epithelial cell. Similar events occur in many
typical exocytosis, the secretory vesicles (Sv) with casein micelles
(CM) and lactose leave the Golgi, translocate to the apical PM, and
other secretory cells, for example, pancreas, liver, sali-
release contents of the vesicle (SVl). Alternatively, vesicles can fuse
vary gland, and pituitary gland.
to form chains for secretion (SV2) or fuse with release of double
membrane-bound micelles (SV3). Milk lipid is synthesized in the 
region of the RER and as droplets grow, they also translocate to the
apical PM. These droplets are enveloped by PM and protrude from
Microscopy techniques
the cell (LD1), and are pinched off from the cell into the lumen 
(LD2) and into the lumen (LD3). It is also possible that SV can fuse
Beginning with invention of the light microscope in
around lipid droplets, with other droplets, and with the apical PM
d n  sad aisd pe sot 
in groups (LD4). Lipid droplets might also be released via coalesced
ervation, techniques to embed tissue in materials for
secretion vacuoles (Vac). Other features include mitochondria (M),
sectioning, and staining to identify specific cellular
nucleus (N), nucleolus (Nu), microtubules (Mt), microfilaments (Mf),
coated vesicles (C), and tight junctions (J). Diagram modified from
components, much has been learned regarding cell
Nickerson and Akers (1984).
structure and function. However, even simple smears
of dislodged isolated cells can be very useful in physi-
ological or clinical situations. The Pap smear is rou-
tinely used in women's health to monitor the cells of
sample. For example, the horse averages about 55%
the cervix. The morphology of the cells is classified to
neutrophils, 35% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, 3%
determine if any of the cells appear to have precancer-
eosinophils, and 1% or fewer basophils. Changes in
 ous attributes, for example, altered nuclear morphol-
these proportions can reflect various diseases. What
 ogy or staining characteristics. Another example is the
would be your prediction about a classmate with
blood smear, that is, a small sample of blood is spread
mononucleosis or a cat with leukemia?
and dried on a microscope slide and then stained.
In dairy animals, mastitis (inflammation of the
Such smears are cover-slipped, and a differential count
 mammary gland) status is routinely evaluated by
is performed. In this procedure, the slide is scanned in
the presence and number of leukocytes in the milk.
a standard pattern and the first 100 white blood cells
The technology used is based on a well-characterized
encountered are identified (lymphocyte, neutrophils,
relationship between cell number and the amount of
etc.) and tabulated. This informationis used to produce
 a specific dye that binds to DNA. As the cell number
a distribution profile of the types of leucocytes in the
 increases in the milk sample, the amount of dye binding
The cell: The common physiological denominator
17
Table 2.2.
 Relationship between MSCC, DHI cell counts score,
 merged in additional paraffin in a mold and allowed
and milk production in dairy cows.
to harden. This can be imagined by thinking of the
string in the center of a candle as being the processed
MSCC
DHI Score
Mifk Yiefd
Mifk Yiefd
(kg/d)
305d (kg)
tissue. If the candle is carefully sliced in cross section,
 a piece of string would be in the center of each slice,
12,500
0
29.2
8906
representing the fixed embedded tissue. The slicing of
25,000
1
28.6
8723
 the tissue blocks needs to be relatively precise and
50,000
2
28.0
8540
uniform. Embedded blocks of tissue are sliced in a
100,000
E
27.4
8357
200,000
4
26.9
8205
machine called a microtome. The machine uses a thin
400,000
5
26.2
166
steel blade, much like a razor blade, and the sections,
800,000
6
25.4
7747
which are cut one at a time, usually come off in a
1,600,000
7
24.6
7503
ribbon. The sections are floated on a water bath and
3,200,000
8
23.6
7198
22.5
then transferred to a microscope slide. Once the sec-
6,400,000
6
6863
tions are dried, the slides are generally dipped in
Adapted from Jones et al. (1984).
xylene and processed back to aqueous environment to
allow the sections to be stained. The staining allows
structures to be seen in a standard bright field micro-
scope. H&E, or hematoxylin and eosin, are very
increases proportionally. Although these assays are
common stains. This technique makes the cell nuclei
now automated, a milk smear is used to calibrate these
dark blue, the cytoplasm various shades of blue to
machines. Table 2.2illustrates the relationship between
pink, and extracellular components pink to red. Most
milk somatic cell count and milk production.
histological slides used in physiological classes are
In some experimental situations, it is useful to know
H&E stained. Many other stains have been developed
the stage of the estrus cycle. For many laboratory
for specific uses, and examples are given in various
animals, it is problematic to collect a sufficient number
sections of the text. One especially exciting recent
of repetitive blood samples to measure reproductive
innovation in tissue staining is the use of specific anti-
hormones (estrogen, progesterone, follicle-stimulating
bodies to localize proteins within particular cells or
hormone, luteinizing hormone) for this purpose.
even within particular cellular organelles. Figure 2.5
However, daily vaginal smears can be used to evalu-
shows tissue blocks, molds, and processed sections for 
ate the stage of the estrus cycle. The number of corni-
tissue embedded in paraffin.
fied epithelial cells and leukocytes varies according to
 Despite the widespread use of paraffin-embedded
the stage of the estrus cycle so that changes in these
 fissue sections and the rich experimental and patho-
cellular profiles can be used to determine the stage of
logical history of this technique, there are serious
the estrus cycle.
limitations. One of these is that tissue sections thinner
 Although information obtained from smears of
than about 5μ cannot be easily prepared. A reason-
various cells is useful, the technique is limited since
able approximation of an epithelial cell is about
most cells are part of tissues. More importantly, the
10 × 10 x 10μm. This means that for the study of intra-
 organization and differentiation of the various cell
cellular organelles, the sections are thick so that it
types and their products is fundamental to under-
becomes difficult to distinguish these structures. These
standing the physiology of a tissue or organ. For this
limitations lead to the development of plastic resins
evaluation, it is necessary to infiltrate the tissue and
that could be used for embedding cells and tissues.
cells with a medium that is sufficiently solid to allow
With subsequent development of specialized micro-
sections thin enough for light to penetrate to be pre-
tones designed to use pieces of fractured glass or even
pared. The most common embedding medium is par-
diamond knives, it became possible to section fixed
affin wax. Since tissues and cells are largely water
fissues embedded in plastic very thin indeed. In fact,
based, fresh tissues are first preserved or fixed in an
for light microscopic study, sections of 0.5-1 μ in thick-
 aqueous solution containing chemicals that cross-link
ness can be easily prepared. To distinguish sections
major cell structures and macromolecules. These
from the paraffin blocks from those in plastic, they are
include formalin, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, and
often called semithin sections.
others. After a period of fixation, the tissues are dehy-
Perhaps, more importantly, these breakthroughs
drated by transferring the tissue through a series of
 allowed even thinner sections to be examined using
increasing concentration of ethanol, then into xylene,
the electron microscope. While a detailed consider-
a mixture of xylene and paraffin, and finally, pure
 ation of the electron microscope is beyond the scope
paraffin. This gradual process allows the water to first
of our text, some analogy with the readily understood
be replaced by ethanol, then the ethanol by xylene,
light microscope is useful. The standard compound
and the xylene by paraffin. The tissue blocks are sub-
1 8  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter 2
C
D
Fig. 2.5. Preparation of tissues for microscopic examination. Panel A shows tissues that have been embedded in paraffin (upper) or in plastic
(lower) for preparation of sections for light microscopy. The tissue in the paraffin block is visible as a faint yellow mass (arrow) in the center.
The width of the block is about the size of a U.S. quarter. The tissue in the lower plastic block is not visible but occupies a position near the
center of the block. Panel B shows a view of a typical microtome for preparation of paraffin-embedded tissues. Panel C shows a paraffin
embedded tissue block mounted in the microtome. With each up and down motion of the microtome, the block of tissue moves past a
stationary knife so that a ribbon of serial sections (typically ~5μm thick) is cut. The ribbon of sections is transferred to a water bath (panel D)
and ultimately floated onto a microscope slide. The sections are allowed to dry, then the paraffin is removed, the sections hydrated, stained,
and subsequently cover-slipped for examination. Processing of tissue embedded in plastic resins follows a similar procedure, but thinner
prepared.
in which the specimen is first magnified by the lens in
the objective lens and are focused for view through
the objective barrel and secondly by the lens of the
the eyepieces. This is accomplished mechanically by
eyepiece or ocular. The total magnification is the
 raising or lowering the posifion of the objective lens
 product of the magnification of the objective lens used
relative to the specimen. Resolution is the degree of
and that of the eyepiece. For example, using a 20x
 separation that can be seen between adjacent points in
objective lens with a typical 10x eyepiece produces an
a specimen—in other words, the degree of detail. The
image that is 200-fold greater than the original. The
smaller the distance that can be distinguished between
specimen is placed on a stage below the objective lens.
 two points, the greater the detail in the image. With
Light is then directed from a light source, through an
the unaided eye, points appear as independent struc-
aperture, then a substage condenser, and through the
tures only if a distance of 0.2mm or 200 μm separates
them, but with a good microscope, points as close as
The cell: The common physiological denominator
19
0.25 μm can be distinguished. Ultimately, resolution of
the bright field microscope is limited by the wave-
length of light and sample preparation. The maximum
useful magnification of the light microscope is about
1,400-fold. Images can be reproduced to larger sizes in
the printing process, but this does not increase true
resolution.
In the electron microscope, a beam of electrons
replaces the beam of light. The sample (now only
about 900nm in thickness) is positioned on a copper
grid, and the grid is inserted into a sealed chamber
and placed under vacuum. A beam of electrons passes
through the sample. To increase the electron density
of the sample, the tissue is treated with heavy metals
(usually lead citrate or uranyl acetate) that bind with
macromolecules in the sample and improve sample
resolution. The electron beam penetrates the tissue
located in the open spaces of the grid, and the image
Fig. 2.6.  Comparisons between tissue preparation for light
microscopy and transmisson electron microscopy.The upper row
aa  e aq son  nn si pad
shows samples prepared for paraffin, plastic, and electron
 applied to a series of electromagnets located on either
microscopy. The holder in the center of the upper row is designed
side of the column which houses the electron beam.
to hold a series of small copper grids (just below the coin to the
The image is viewed first on a phosphorescent screen,
right) that have very small ribbons of plastic embedded tissue. The
 Busodxa pue Sunuonisod Aq paaes si aheu aul pue
tissue fragment is first embedded in a bullet-shaped mold that is
filled with plastic resin. Once the plastic is polymerized, the mold
film. The film is developed, and images of the speci-
is removed, and the hardened plastic with the tissue, now located 
sud sdensoud sueu Aq paredand are uau
at the end of the bullet, is sectioned. The ribbon of sections is then
from the film. The process as described is called trans-
floated onto the copper grid. As can be appreciated from the scale
mission electron microscopy. A similar process called
offered by the coin, these ribbons must be maneuvered via a
dissecting microscope attached to the microtome. The middle row
scanning electron microscopy relies on images pro-
 shows a slide with a ribbon of unstained tissue compared with
duced by coating surfaces often with a thin layer of
deparaffinized, stained tissue. The plate to the right of the middle
 gold. Detailed images of intracellular structure became 
row is an exposed, developed film plate (negative) from the
possible only with electron microscopy; several exam-
electron microscope. The lower portion of the figure shows a part
ples are included along with descriptions of cell
of a glossy print made from this negative (the tissue is from the
organelles. Figure 2.6 shows a block of tissue prepared
pituitary gland).
for study in an electron microscope, one of the small
copper grids, and an example of an exposed, devel-
oped photographic plate.
Certainly, biochemical differentiation of the secre-
tory cells is required for onset of milk secretion.
However, the cells must also acquire the structural
Organelles of the cytoplasm
 machinery needed to synthesize, package, and secrete
 milk constituents. When alveolar cells first appear
While many complete texts are devoted to aspects of
during mid-gestation, they exhibit few of the organ-
cell and molecular biology, a basic appreciation of cell
elles needed for copious milk biosynthesis or secre-
structure is important in understanding cellular phys-
tion. The cells are characterized by a sparse cytoplasm
iology and ultimately tissue, organ, and systems-level
with few polyribosomes, some clusters of free ribo-
physiology It is imperative to appreciate that essen-
 somes, limited rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
tially all organelles are found in all cells. However, the
total number and arrangement of these organelles
 nucleus, some isolated mitochondria, and widely dis-
vary markedly from cell type to cell type. Numbers
persed vesicles. Individual cells often contain large
 can also change dramatically within a given cell type
lipid droplets (especially during later stages of gesta-
depending on the activity of the cell. This is often
tion) that along with irregularly shaped nuclei account
described as the degree of differentiation of the cell.
for much of the cellular area. Electron microscopic
For example, mammary alveolar epithelial cells taken
studies solidified the dramatic structural changes in
 from a nonlactating pregnant animal have a very dif-
the alveolar secretory cells at the onset of lactation.
ferent complement of cellular organelles than cells col-
These differences are illustrated in Figure 2.7 and
lected during lactation. This is a reflection of differences
in activity between these stages of development
similar changes in cell differentiation occur in many
20
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
B
Fig. 2.7. Cellular differentiation examples. Shown are companion
light (upper) and transmission electron microscopic (lower) images
Fg. 2.8.  Examples of light and transmission electron microscopic
of bovine mammary tissue of a nonlactating cow in late gestation.
images of lactating bovine mammary tissue. The cells typically have
rounded, basally displaced nuclei, scattered fat droplets, and 
Note the relatively large proportion of cell area occupied by the 
evidence of secretions (panel A). Note the lacy appearance of the
nuclei of the cells, relative lack of cellular organelles, absence of
apical ends of these well-differentiated, polarized cells.
cellular polarity, and minimal evidence of secretion. These cells are
Conformation that the lacy appearance indicates the presence of
minimally active, so there is a correspondingly minimal
abundant secretory vesicles is evident in the EM view of portions of
complement of cellular organelles.
two secretory cells in panel B. Panel A is unpublished, and panel B
is adapted from Nickerson and Akers (1 984).
 epithelial cels, that is, various glands, intestines, and
metabolized, intermediate products from the diges-
pancreas; the mammary gland makes a converient
tive process, for example, glucose, amino acids, fatty
and dramatic example.
acids, are converted into compounds that enter the
mitochondria. These compounds are catabolized to
carbon dioxide and water by the action of the mito-
chondrial enzymes, and a portion of the bond energy
Mitochondria
oy sdnor aqdsoqd yoee oi pasn pue parnides st
Called the powerhouses of the cell, mitochondria
ADP to generate ATP. This is called aerobic respiration
provide most of the ATP necessary for energy-
because it requires oxygen. Essentially, the need for
requiring reactions. Two membranes enclose the gen-
 Oxygen is explained by the fact that it is required for
erally elongated, thin, hot dog-shaped mitochondria.
 production of adequate amounts of ATP.
The outer membrane smoothly  encapsulates 
the
Mitochondria are very complex organelles. They
organelle, but the inner membrane is thrown into mul-
have their own DNA (derived incidentally from the
tiple folds that form partitions called cristae. Surfaces
mother) and RNA. As energy demand increases, mito-
 of the cristae are studded with embedded enzymes
chondria increase the density of cristae or undergo
that interact with the internal gel-like matrix of the
fission to create new mitochondria. Active cells such
mitochondria. Although details are discussed in sub-
as those in muscle, pancreas, or the lactating mammary
sequent chapters, as energy-yielding nutrients are
gland may have hundreds of mitochondria, but inac
The cell: The common physiological denominator
21
B
C
Fig. 2.9. Panel A shows a diagrammatic representation of prototypical mitochondria. The structure is clearly bounded by a double
membrane with the inner membrane thrown into distinct folds or cristae. Panel B shows a group of mitochondria (arrows) in the basal region
of a bovine kidney cell, and panel C illustrates a high-resolution image of mitochondria from the bovine ovary.
tive cells (nonlactating mammary gland) or quiescent 
sequently discussed, the ribosomes are the sites of
lymphocytes, for example, have only a few. In living
protein synthesis. Because of the relationship between
cells, the mitochondria can also change shape. Regard-
 ER and the Golgi apparatus (Fig. 2.10), ribosomes of
less of its particular morphology, the emergence of
the RER allow for newly manufactured proteins to be
 mitochondria was a major evolutionary event. Figure 2.9
packaged in secretory vesicles for secretion from the
illustrates typical mitochondria. It is widely believed
cell. Free ribosomes in the cytoplasm function to syn-
that mitochondria arose from bacteria that invaded
thesize proteins destined to act within the cell.
the ancestors of plant and animal cells.
Endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus
Ribosomes
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an interconnected
These small, dark-staining organelles are composed of
 network within the cytoplasm of the cell It is a system
proteins and a class of RNA called ribosomal RNA.
of interconnecting membrane tubes or sheets that
Each of the ribosomes has two subunits identified
enclose fluid-filled spaces that appear in two varia-
based on size as 18 and 28s RNA. Ribosomes can
tions: smooth or rough ER. It is also continuous with
appear singly as free structures in the cytoplasm or
the nuclear membrane. Protein synthesis depends on
sometimes arranged along coiled loops of mRNA
three forms of RNA. These are (l) transfer RNA
called polyribosomes. Alternatively, especially in cells
(tRNA), (2) ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and (3) messen-
that are synthesizing abundant amounts of protein for
ger RNA (mRNA). When the mature mRNA reaches
secretion, ribosomes are often attached to membranes
 the cytoplasm, it binds to a small ribosomal subunit
to create rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). As sub-
 by base pairing to rRNA. The tRNA transfers amino
22
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Golgi
RER
Secretory
vesicles
Fig. 2.10. Relationships between RER, Golgi. and secretory vesicles. Panel A shows the arrangement between ribosomes (red dots) on RER
and movement of newly manufactured proteins into the cisternal space of the RER and then to the Colgi for packaging and appearance of
secretory vesicles. Panel B shows a transmission electron microscopic view of RER, and panel C shows an array of Golgi membranes. Panel D
shows secretory vesicles from epithelial cells in a mammary gland of a lactating animal. The dark, black granules are the casein micelles.
Sis  edde sais  sud  as  e s  ed pe  uu pnd oeae a
because lactose cannot pass across the vesicle membrane so water is drawn osmotically into the vesicle. For other protein-synthesizing and 
secreting cells, the secretory vesicles more often appear densely compacted, with the vesicle membrane directly adjacent to the product.
the secretory granules.
 acids to the ribosome. There are approximately 20 dif-
acid is bound to one end of the tRNA (the tail), but the
ferent types of tRNA, each capable of binding a spe-
other end of the molecule (the head) has a three-
cific amino acid. The linkage process is controlled by
nucleotide base sequence (anticodon), which is com-
a synthetase enzyme whose action depends on the
plementary to the codon of the mRNA. For a given
cleavage of ATP to form the peptide bonds between
strand of mRNA, multiple ribosomes can become
amino acids of the growing peptide chain. Once its
 attached, and as the ribosomes move along the mol-
amino acid is loaded, the tRNA migrates to the ribo-
 ecule, many chains of new protein can be made simul-
some, where it moves the amino acid into position,
taneously In fact, it is not uncommon to find
based on the codons of the mRNA strand. The amino
polyribosomes in the cytoplasm. These are repre-
The cell: The common physiological denominator
23
sented in transmission electron microscopic views of
the cell or for excretion. This digestion process is espe-
active cells by chains or coils of ribosomes seemingly
cially important in macrophages and neu trophils since
 organized in the cytoplasm.
these cells actively engulf potentially harmful bacteria
However, proteins destined for secretion from the
and other toxins. Destruction of these agents by the
cell are synthesized by ribosomes attached to the
lysosomes is protective, and in the case of processed
endoplasmic reticulum. The mRNA for these proteins
foreign proteins, fragments of the digested proteins
codes an initial short peptide sequence (signal peptide),
 are presented to other cells of the immune system to
which directs the growing peptide chains into the cis-
allow development of specific immunity. Lysosomes
ternal space of the endoplasmic reticulum. Because
are also critical in the recycling of worn-out or non-
 this space is continuous with the Golgi apparatus, pro-
functional organelles as well as a variety of metabolic
teins destined for secretion are vectored into Golgi for
actions, for example, release of thyroid hormones from
storage.
the cell by exocytosis. After synthesis in the RER, mod-
ifications to secretory proteins may also occur in the
Golgi apparatus. These posttranslational modifica-
Microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate
filaments
tions can markedly affect the structure of the protein.
 Common modifications include the addition of sugar
It was originally assumed that the cytoplasm of the
or phosphate groups. Other components can also be
cell was essentially a water-filled space with multiple
added to developing secretory vesicles in the Golgi.
dissolved substances. However, appropriate fixation
For example, in the mammary gland, the milk sugar
and embedment techniques for electron microscopes
lactose is synthesized within the Golgi apparatus by
led to the realization that the cytoplasm contains an
the action of galactosyl-transferase and c-lactalbumin.
elaborate array of structures that make up the cyto-
skeleton of the cell. This does not mean that cells are
rigid, but microtubules, microfilaments, and interme
Lysosomes and peroxisomes
 diate filaments of the cytoskeleton provide an unex-
 Peroxisomes are intracellular vesicles containing a
pected structure and organization to the cell cytoplasm.
mixture of enzymes, namely, oxidases and catalases.
Some of these organelles are for communication
Oxidases depend on the presence of oxygen to detox-
between the cell surface and interior, for transport of
ify various noxious substances, for example, alcohols
vesicles to be secreted, for cell division, or for cell
and aldehydes. They also convert toxic-free radicals
adhesion.
into hydrogen peroxide for neutralization by catalase.
 Microtubules are the largest of these organelles and
Free radicals are very reactive substances known to
 as the name suggests are hollow tubes composed of c.
alter the structure and function of a variety of regu-
and β subunits of the globular protein tubulin. They
latory molecules. Thus, the peroxisomes are essential
are slender with an outside diameter of 25nm. When
to limit the free radical accumulation. Peroxisomes
   e r   s  
are abundant in liver and kidney cells, two organs
13 subunits of tubulin around the circumference. Its
      
cylindrical  structure develops as  heterodimers of
substances.
tubulin pack around a central core, which appears as
Lysosomes also contain hydrolytic enzymes that are
 a space in electron micrographs. At 37C, purified
capable of digesting many cellular proteins. Known as
tubulin polymerizes into microtubules in zitro in the
suicide bags or sacs, inappropriate release of the con-
 presence of Mg and GTP. Several antimitotic cancer
tents of these organelles could destroy the cell. In fact,
drugs (colchicine and it relatives) act by interfering
rupture of activated lysosomes is believed to be
with tubulin polymerization.  Another antimitotic
involved in some aspects of programmed cell death or
drug, taxol, stabilizes microtubules and arrests cells
 apoptosis. Lysosomes are present in all cell types, but
in mitosis. These effects demonstrate the critical role
they are especially plentiful in neutrophils, macro-
of microtubules in cell division. Polymerization of
phages, and other leucocytes. The acid hydrolases
tubulin to form microtubules occurs initially in a
within the lysosomes function best in an acidic envi-
region near the nucleus called the centrosome. This
ronment. Consequently, the lysosomal membrane con-
has been demonstrated most clearly in cultured cells
    r 
first treated with colchicine to disrupt the microtu-
hydrogen ions from the cytoplasm to maintain a low
bules. After various periods of time, groups of cells
pH. Many cells are capable of capturing materials
were fixed, and the microtubules were stained by
from near the cell surface by endocytosis. Vesicles pro-
duced in this manner can then fuse with lysosomes.
When the drug is removed, new microtubules can be
Captured molecules can be digested by the acid
 seen growing out from the centrosome to create a star-
hydrolyses and released into the cytoplasm for use by
like structure called an aster. The microtubules then
24
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
elongate toward the outer regions of the cell to rees-
 of changes in microtubule number and orientation
tablish the microtubule network.
related to cell function, and Figure 2.1l shows the
It is also known that disruption of microtubules
 appearance of microtubules in the mammary cells of 
dramatically impairs cellular secretion. For example,
a lactating cow.
 intramammary infusion of colchicine into the lactating
mammary gland virtually stops milk secretion, but
 once the treatment is ended, milk secretion rapidly
Table 2.3. Microtubules in mammary cells.
returns to normal. This demonstrates the requirement
Nonfactating
Lactating
for microtubules for trafficking and exocytosis of
secretory vesicles. An increase in the relative abun-
Location 
 dance of microtubules in mammary epithelial cells
Apical
4.6 ± 0.9
17.4 ± 2.1
corresponds with increased milk secretion following
Basal
0.9 ± 0.2
3.7 ± 0.8
 Orientation
thelial cells. Two families of microtubule-dependent
Apical-basal
4.2 ± 0.8 (50.3%)
18.9 ± 2.1 (65.6%)
motor proteins, kinesins and dyneins, are involved in
Lateral-lateral
4.1 ± 0.6 (49.7%)
9.9 ± 1.5 (34.4%)
organelle transport in the cytoplasm, in mitosis, and
Average number of microtubules in the apical or basal cytoplasm
in movement of vesicles of neurotransmitter from sites
observed in an apical to basal or lateral to lateral orientation with
of synthesis in the cell body to sites of release at the
respect to the plasma membrane in mammary epithelial cells of non-
ends of axon terminals. Table 2.3 provides an example
lactating and lactating cows. Adapted from Nickerson et al. (1982).
 Growing point
Actin subunits
Tubulin
dimer
ungni-o
β-Tubulin 
7 nm
Microtubule (side view)
Microtubule (top view)
D
Fig. 2.11. Microtubules and microfilaments. Panel A illustrates the organization of a microtubule and its development from dimers of α- and 
e po puel Ae aui wo lan lauda ue jo uoisai ieide aui jo ma aidonso uonala uoisssuen e smos g lauen ungnig
lactating cow. The arrows indicate microtubules that have been cut longitudinally. Panel C shows the helical organization of monomers of
actin arranged to create microfilaments. Panel D shows bundles (arrows) of microfilaments in secretory epithelial cells.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
25
Microfilaments are the smaller, thin components of
near the center of the centrosome. The centrosome acts
the cytoskeleton composed of the protein actin. In
 as an organizing center for building microtubules and
many cells, actin accounts for 5% or more of the total
 serves as the spindle pole during mitosis. The two
protein in the cell. Actin can exist as a monomer or,
centrioles are oriented at right angles to each other in
similar to the tubulin of microtubules, can polymerize
an L-shaped pattern. The centrosome duplicates and
to form thin thread-like structures (-7rm in thickness)
divides into two equal parts during the interphase
called filamentous actin. In most cells, about half of
period of cell division so that each half contains a
the actin is present in the monomeric conformation
 duplicated centriole pair. The daughter centrosomes 
because it is bound to the regulatory protein thymo-
migrate to either side of the nucleus at the start of
sin. Rapid changes in rates of polymerization-
 mitosis to form the two poles of the mitotic spindle.
depolymerization produce changes in the cell surface
The granular appearance of the cytoplasm in the
that produce lamellipodia (essentially cell projections)
 region surrounding the centrioles is believed to result
and ultimately cell movement and migration. Specific
from a complex of proteins and fibers involved in the
arrangements of microfilaments within the cytoplasm
movement and duplication of the centrioles. Each cen-
can be induced by the activation of cell surface recep-
 triole resembles a pinwheel made of each of nine trip-
tors. This is important for the action of highly mobile
lets of microtubules arranged to form a hollow tube.
phagocytic cells of the immune system. Bundles of
 They also form the basal structures of cilia and flagella
microfilaments are also found near cell surfaces and
and are usually called basal bodies based on the
are highly ordered within the microvilli of absorptive
original interpretation that they were different from
epithelial cell layers. In this way bundles of actin fila-
centrioles. It is now known that the structures are
ments provide structural integrity for the microvilli.
related. However, whereas the centriole has the pattern
This is functionally significant because the adaptation
of nine microtubule triplets, the basal bodies have an
of having the microvilli on the surface of an intestinal
arrangement of nine pairs of microtubules oriented
epithelial cell, for example, markedly increases the
around a single pair of microtubules in the center.
surface area available for absorption. A single intesti-
Although each of the central microtubules is complete,
nal enterocytes has several thousand microvilli. Actin
the outer doublets are fused so that the pair shares a
filaments do not act independently, rather a variety of
 common layer. This 9 + 2 organization is characteristic
actin-binding proteins control rates of filament forma-
 of most if not all types of cilia and flagella. The bending
tion and creation of the specific types of filament
of the central core of the structure, which is called
 groupings. For example, cross-linked microfilaments
the axoneme, produces the movement of the cilia or
can form loose gels or rigid bundles to anchor plasma
flagella.
membranes.
Figure 2.12illustrates a cross section through the tail
Intermediate filaments are less labile than micro
 of a bovine sperm cell. The arrangement of doublets
filaments or microtubules and are more elemental
of microtubules around a central pair of microtubules
members of the cytoskeleton. The protein structure of
is apparent. The diagram shows that the microtubules
these filaments can vary between cell types, but the
 are linked with molecules of the protein nexin to form
 proteins are bound together something like a braided,
the circular array. The doublets are decorated with
woven rope. These filaments are called neurofilaments
inner and outer arms composed of the protein dynein
in nerve cells and keratin filaments in many epithelial
 and anchorage proteins that position the outer dou-
cells. Regardless, they provide additional support for
blets around the central core. In sperm cells, the asym-
the cell. They are especially important in the creation
 metric arrangement of filaments around the outside of
of desmosomes. Desmosomes are a type of anchoring
the axoneme allows the movement of the tail to follow
junction that serves to hold adjacent epithelial cells
a figure-eight pattern of motion characteristic of
together. In these regions, the plasma membranes of
bovine sperm cell motility.
the neighboring cells do not touch, but linker proteins
(cadherins) extend outward from the desmosomal
plaque of each cell. On the cytoplasmic side of the
Nuclear structure
 plaque in each cell, intermediate fibers extend into the
cytoplasm of the cell to provide interactions with other
With the exception of mitochondrial DNA, the major-
cytoskeletal elements and additional support. Types
ity of the DNA in eukaryotic cells is confined to the
of cell junctions will be considered in other chapters.
nucleus. Comparable to the double membrane of the
mitochondria, the nucleus is delimited by a double
membrane called the nuclear envelope. Unlike mito-
Centrioles
chondria, these membranes are interspersed with
These structures are composed of a short cylindrical
nuclear pores. A complex of proteins populates these
arrangement of microtubules. They occur as a pair
areas and acts to control passage of molecules into and
26 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
naptel
NP
NC
Tubule A
Fg. 2.13. The nucleus of epithelial cell is shown. Regions of
TubuleB
condensed chromatin (CC) and extended chromatin (EC) are
indicated along with nuclear pores (NP) and the nucleolus (NC).
Inner
dynein
Outer
fraction of the total DNA is being actively utilized at
dynein
any given moment. For example, although all cells
Radial
would contain the gene's copies for making the milk
spoke
proteins or for synthesizing lactose, these genes would
Nexin
 only be activated in the epithelial cells of the lactating
mammary gland. Many other genes are activated only
 at a particular developmental period or in response to
B
very specific stimuli. Consequently, much of the DNA
Fig. 2.12.
Centrioles and cellular movement. Panel A shows a
is tightly compacted in the nucleus.
sani8 g laued llan wjads auiog e jo lel ayl yanonyi uooas ssoin
Most cells have a single nucleus, but there are excep-
a diagrammatic representation of the molecular and associated
proteins.
tions. Skeletal muscle cells, bone osteoclasts, cardiac
cells, and some liver cells are multinucleated. This is
usually associated with cells that have a larger-than-
out of the nucleus. This is important since the DNA or
normal cytoplasmic volume. With the exception of
genes must be transcribed to generate molecules of
mature red blood cells of mammals, all cells are nucle-
messenger RNA. Newly synthesized mRNA mole-
ated, and even these cells have the nucleus until late
cules are processed and transferred to the cytoplasm
in their developmental sequence. Of course, without
for translation by the ribosomes to create the myriad
the nucleus and the genes necessary for protein syn-
of proteins needed by the cell. The presence of the
 thesis, these cells cannot replace proteins that are pro-
nucleus in eukaryotic cells allows processing related
 gressively degraded by normal functioning. Although
 to DNA synthesis and gene activation to be localized
it is expected that the appearance of the nucleus would
away from other activities in the cytoplasm. This
change dramatically during cell division, even in non-
 likely serves to minimize possible disruption of these
dividing cells (so-called interphase or Go phase of the
critical gene-related activities. In short, the eukaryotic
cell cycle), there are distinct differences between cell
cells have evolved with the creation of numerous
types. These differences can be useful to identify some
membrane-bound organelles that allow for segrega-
cell types. For example, plasma cells have a distinct
tion of many specific, divergent, biochemical reac-
 pattern of condensed chromatin around the periphery
tions. This is believed to increase metabolic 
and
of the nucleus resembling a clock face. Neutrophils
biochemical efficiency of eukaryotic compared with
have elongated, lobed nuclei that make the appear-
prokaryotic cells.
ance of these cells unique.
The nucleus houses all of the chromosomes and
Figure 2.13 shows an electron microscopy section
therefore the genes. Fortunately for most cells, only a
through the nucleus of an epithelial cell. During most
The cell: The common physiological denominator
27
of the life of the cells, the DNA is in a complex with
into the smaller (40S) ribosomal subunit. Two addi-
strongly basic proteins called histones, some nonhis-
tional smaller rRNA molecules are also synthesized
tone proteins, and a small amount of RNA. This com-
 and incorporated in the larger ribosomal subunit in its
bination of proteins and DNA is called chromatin.
final mafure state. The four primary rRNA molecules
While the double helix structure of DNA is widely
 needed to manufacture the complete ribosome are all
familiar, the degree of order or compaction of the
formed from the same primary transcript. This ensures
 DNA within the chromatin matrix varies. Compaction
    s   e 
is extreme in cells that are preparing for the final
will be available when the process is initiated.
stages of mitosis as the chromatin appears as distinct
pairs of chromosomes. However, even in cells in Go.
Chromatin structure
degrees of chromatic condensation can be seen. Dark-
staining areas indicate regions containing condensed,
DNA and its associated proteins, the chromatin, are
n e   a 
organized into a complex structure with varying
more active, extended chromatin. Clumps of con-
degrees of condensation. In its most available, open
 densed chromatin often appear around the periphery
state, the DNA strands are unwound as transcription
of the nucleus (peripheral chromatin) along with scat-
occurs. At other times, the fundamental basic struc-
 tered islands of condensed chromatin throughout the
tural units of chromatin are the nucleosomes. These
nuclear space. The interphase nucleus also has a
highly repetitive units are made of clusters or cores of
protein network called the nuclear matrix. Much of
eight histone proteins oriented in repeating fashion
this material appears as a thin, interwoven layer (the
 along the DNA strand. If the DNA strand is envi-
nuclear lamina) that adheres to the internal surface of
 sioned as a ribbon, the histone clusters can be imag-
the nuclear envelope. This provides support and
ined as large Velcro-covered beads attached to the
anchorage for the nuclear pores. An extension of the
ribbon. Now imagine the ribbon with attached beads
nuclear lamina radiates into the interior of the nucleus.
 being wound into a repeating coil. This highly ordered
This layer also interacts with a similar lamina that
structure allows a physical mechanism for the very
surrounds the nucleolus. Together they regulate
long linear arrays of DNA to be compacted inside the
nuclear shape, reinforce the inner membrane of the
nucleus but at the same time maintain critical orderli-
nuclear envelope, secure the location of nuclear pores,
ness. In addition to the physical aspects, the histones
and anchor condensed chromatin to the nuclear enve-
are also important regulators of gene expression. For
lope. This organization is maintained except during
 example, changes in the methylation or phosphoryla-
mitosis. It is accepted that maintenance of the nuclear
tion of the histones bound to the DNA modify their
matrix is essential for routine gene transcription.
capacity to sequester or bind the DNA. If the histones
in a particular nucleosome become dissociated with
the DNA, this would increase the opporfunity for the
Nucleoli
DNA in that region to be available for transcription.
The nucleoli (little nucleus) are dark-staining, gener-
 Responses of some target cells to hormone stimulation
ally oval bodies located within the nucleus (see Fig.
are known to cause the synthesis of new proteins. Cor-
2.13). They are not membrane-bound and are sites for
responding with this, many of these hormones also
ribosome synthesis and assembly. The size and number
alter rates of methylation of nuclear proteins. This
of nucleoli vary between cells. Cells that are very
 Suggests that gene activation must ultimately depend
actively synthesizing and secreting large amounts of
 on regulatory molecules that modify interactions
 protein are more likely to have a large nucleolus and /
between the histones and other nuclear proteins that
or multiple structures. The nucleoli are closely linked
function to control chromatin structure. The organiza-
 to segments of chromatin (nucleolar organizer regions)
tion is illustrated in Figure 2.14.
that contain the genes that code for synthesis of rRNA.
As the rRNA is synthesized, proteins previously made
in the cytoplasm are combined in the nucleus to create
Cell growth and differentiation
 one of the two subunits of the ribosomes. These sub-
units are transported out of the nucleus into the cyto-
While a definition of growth might seem to have a
plasm where they are combined to make mature
ribosomes. The primary rRNA transcript has a sedi-
simple. The question is what do we mean when we
 mentation coefficient of 45S (Svedberg units) that cor-
       s
responds to 13,000 nucleic acid base pairs. From this
bigger. However, it is important to understand that
precursor molecule, a 28S (5,000 base pair) rRNA
changes in mass can occur for a variety of reasons. For
molecule is created and combined into the larger
example, under some circumstances, it is possible to
(60S) ribosomal subunit. A smaller 18S (2,000 base
accumulate fluids in the interstitial spaces between
 pair) rRNA moiety is also generated. It is incorporated
cells so that edema occurs. This can occur in female
28
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
humans as the stages of the menstrual cycle wax and
Nucleosome
Double-
wane. Another example is the mammary edema that
subunits
stranded DNA
frequently occurs as cows or goats approach parturi-
tion or the facial edema that can occur as a side effect
ptet
of steroid treatments. But these increases in size would
not be considered growth. In most instances, growth
depends on an increase in cell number This is called
hyperplasia. It is also possible for cells to increase in
size; this is called hypertrophy. Both of these processes
are involved in growth. It is also possible to increase
the noncellular constituents between cells (extracel-
lular proteins and complex carbohydrates) and affect
an increase in tissue mass. This can be considered
 growth as well. This suggests that really understand-
ing growth requires an understanding of the specific
types of cells that might be dividing to affect an
Beads on a string form
increase in tissue or organ mass as well as products
that these various cells might be synthesizing.
of chromatin
 In many cases, it is possible to obtain a more detailed
view of growth by measuring specific tissue compo-
nents. For example, at any given moment, only a small
fraction of the total cells in a tissue or organ are actively
synthesizing DNA in preparation for cell division. For
a brief period just before the cell divides, it will have
duplicated its chromosomes so that it will have twice
(2n) the normal complement of DNA. However, since
this typically is occurring in only a small fraction of
cells, measuring the total tissue content of DNA is an
Higher-order packing
effective, quantitative way to determine changes in
and condensation
 growth. After all, an increase in the DNA content of a
tissue or organ can usually only be explained by an
Fig. 2.14. DNA and histone relationships. DNA-binding proteins
increase in cell number. Realization in the early 1960s
as well as the histones and nonhistones form complexes
that the DNA content of cells is essentially constant
(nucleosome subunits) that allow the coiling of DNA into compact
(with the exception of the generally small proportion
particles that make up chromatin. This can be envisioned first by
 of cells that are undergoing DNA synthesis in prepara-
the formation of subunits to create the core particle followed by the
coiling of DNA around the structure. This produces a structure 
tion for cell division at a given moment) ushered in a
described as beads on a string. Further packing and condensation
host of studies to estimate number based on total DNA
leads to a higher order of structure and remarkably organized
 a p  n s 
packaging of DNA.
DNA have evolved so that assay of DNA is now a
primary means used to determine if growth is due to
an increase in hyperplasia. Data in Table 2.4 illustrate
 the dramatic changes in mammary growth from birth
Table 2.4.
 Mammary parenchymal growth in heifers and ewes.
Measure
Stage of Devefopment
Prepuberty
Postpuberty
Mid Gest
Late Gest
Lactation
Heifers
DNA (g)
1.1
2.6
16.3
E'65
38.8
Wt. (g)
495
957
5110
8560
16,350
Ewes
DNA(g)
0.02
0.09
1.3
E'6
2.6
Wt (g)
15
78
557
1057
1340
Data adapted from Sejrsen et al. (1982, 1986), Keys et al. (1989), Smith et al. (1989), and McFadden et al. (1990).
The cell: The common physiological denominator
29
to lactation in Holstein heifers and crossbred ewes.
6
Measured as trimmed udder weight or parenchymal
 DNA, mammary growth is greatest during gestation.
However, relative lack of change in DNA from late
 gestation into lactation compared with trimmed udder
weight suggests that DNA is a better measure of cell
 growth, since increased weight may be accumulated
secretions. This method is especially valuable when
combined with careful dissection of the mammary
2
as the functional tissue of an organ) from the stromal
tissue of the mammary gland. Even with careful dis-
section of the mammary gland to remove apparent
Before
After
connective tissue, there are clearly nonglandular cel-
A
lular elements, thatis, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels,
nerves, fibroblasts, adipocytes, and white blood cells,
which contribute to the DNA content of the paren-
chymal tissue compartment. This illustrates the diffi-
culty of accurately and precisely estimating growth at
the tissue level. Regardless, classic studies in a vari-
ety of lactating species give direct evidence that the
number of mammary epithelial cells is proportional to
milk production. Indeed, the correlation between total
parenchymal DNA and milk production averages
about 0.85.
A more acute, dynamic means to evaluate cell pro-
 liferation utilizes either radioactively tagged thymidine
(a nucleotide base that is unique to DNA) or the analog
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), which incorporates into
 growing DNA strands like thymidine does. In these
cases, animals to be tested are injected with the test
substances, or in zitro experiments with cells or tissue
incubated in culture are exposed to radiolabeled thy-
Fg. 2.15. Proliferation and cell growth. Panel A shows
proliferation of bovine mammary epithelial cells indicated by the 
midine or BrdU. After an appropriate period of time,
percentage of epithelial cell nuclei incorporating tritiated thymidine
tissues are removed and the quantity of material incor-
in prepubertal heifers before or after a 1l -week treatment with bovine
porated is measured. The greater the rate of incorpora-
growth hormone. Panel B shows a histological section of mammary
tion (or the proportion of cell nuclei that are labeled),
tissue from a heifer that was injected with BrdU 2 hours prior to
the greater the growth rate, since only cells in the S
tissue collection. Cells that have incorporated BrdU (indicating
these cells were in the S phase of the cell cycle) have been detected 
phase (period of DNA synthesis prior to cell division)
by immunocytochemistry using a specific antibody. Several cells 
of the cell cycle accumulate these compounds. Figure
that were synthesizing DNA are indicated by the presence of dark
2.15 provides an example of changes in mammary
ganules over the cell nucleus. Panel A is adapted from Berry et al.
tissue cell growth induced by the treatment of heifers
(2003). Panel B is courtesy of Dr. Steve Ellis, Clemson University.
with bovine growth hormone (bST) and shows that
the effect is primarily in the epithelial cells of the
mammary gland. However, other components may
cheaply as possible. However, at a whole-body level,
also be excellent measures of growth. For example, an
the integration of multiple organ systems ultimately
increase in muscle tissue would be an evidently desir-
explains the rate of growth and tissue composition of
able attribute for a lamb producer. Quantification of
 Jo ym je suaedde oste st i 'se penpa
such an effect might be better confirmed by measuring
all but the simplest life forms is irregular. All tissues
 total muscle protein rather than DNA.
do not grow the same rate or at the same times for
Clearly, the question of growth is complex, but
that matter. Commonly observed changes in stature,
understanding and regulating rates and types of tissue
degrees of fatness, or morphology (secondary sex
growth are key elements of many aspects of animal
characteristics, for example) are familiar when we con-
agriculture. For example, lamb or beef producers are
sider aging. The evident differences in rates and pat-
 concerned with getting their animals to market weight
terns of growth among different tissues or organs are
at an appropriate body composition as rapidly
Iand
the essence of development.
 30   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 2.5. Effect of colchicine on structural differentiation of mammary alveolar cells.
Mifk Yield (kg)
Light Microscopy
Electron Microscopy?
%Undiff
% Inter
11nd %
% RER
18100 %
ptet
Control
60
7
12
81
18
25
Cha
T'reated
17
49
46
6
7
6
'Milk yield is given as kilogram produced per udder half during week three postpartum.
2Light microscopy data are the percentage of epithelial cells classified as undifferentiated, intermedi-
ately differentiated, or fully differentiated.
Electron microscopy data is the percent of cellular area occupied by rough endoplasmic reticulum or
Golgi membranes and vacuoles.
Data adapted from Nickerson and Akers (1983) and Akers and Nickerson (1983)
 For many tissues, not only must new cells be created,
 system are activated, clones of lymphocyte cells can
but these cells must acquire the capacity to carry out
be generated in a matter of days. Other cells—for
specific functions. The changing growth and develop-
 example, neurons—are believed to almost never divide.
ment of the mammary gland or uterus during the
Although early cytologists thought that cells that were
reproductive cycle provides excellent examples of cel-
not in the mitotic phase of development were inactive
lular differentiation. Analysis of mammary tissue at
because of the absence of marked visual changes, this
the light microscopy level, especially if the tissue is
is not true. Cells without apparent mitotic figures or
 embedded in a plastic resin (compared with more tra-
 morphological changes were said to be in a resting or
 ditional paraffin), allows an estimation of the propor-
tion of alveolar epithelial cells, which fall into various
interphase cells carry out the normal functioning of
classes of structural differentiation. Table 2.5 gives
tissues, for example, secretion of pancreatic enzymes
data to illustrate how evaluation of cell differentiation
 ,    e    
can be physiologically relevant. In this experiment the
this time is from activities directly leading to cell
effect of arresting cell growth and cell differentiation
division. As a general rule, once cells acquire their
was studied. Two diagonal mammary glands of each
terminal functional activity, for example, many glan-
 of two pregnant Holstein heifers were infused with
dular epithelial cells, they effectively cease dividing
 colchicine every second day from 1 week prior to par-
and are referred to Go cells. These cells are progres-
turition until calving. Twice-daily milking began at
sively degraded and lost but are replaced by the
calving, and the drug treatment was discontinued.
daughters of undifferentiated cells within the tissue.
Data for mammary biopsies obtained on day 21 of
 Dogma suggests that Go represents a terminal state so
lactation are given. Clearly, measures of mammary
these cells cannot be induced to return to a path
epithelial cell structural differentiation correlate well
leading to cell division; however, control of cell growth
with function. In this experiment, treatment with col-
is an active area of research.
chicine during the period just before calving prevented
For cells that are not terminally differentiated, the
the normal structural differentiation of the epithelial
interphase period encompasses three subperiods.
 cells. This in turn markedly impaired the functioning
After the initial division to create the cell, it enters G.
of the mammary gland despite the fact that drug treat-
During this time, the cells are metabolically active,
ment was discontinued immediately after calving. The
rapidly synthesizing necessary proteins and creating
point of this is to illustrate how changes in cell dif-
new cellular organelles. However, the time that the
ferentiation are closely related to cell function.
 cell spends in G, can vary from a few hours in rapidly
growing tissues to periods of weeks or even years.
Once signals are produced to continue toward cell
Stages of the cell cycle
division, the cell enters the S or DNA synthesis phase.
As G, ends the centrioles begin to replicate. During
The cell cycle is a description of the events the cell
the S phase, the cell DNA is replicated so that the cell
undergoes from the time of its initial creation until it
produces new histones and chromatin so that it has
divides. However, there is a great deal of variation
two complete copies of each of the chromosomes. As
between cell types as to how quickly they progress
indicated in our discussion of growth, incubating cells
through the cell cycle. Some cells divide very rapidly
with radioactivity tagged thymidine and measuring
indeed. For example, once stem cells of the immune
the rate or degree of incorporation provides a valuable
The cell: The common physiological denominator
31
tool to study cell growth. This is because appreciable
Stages of mitosis
 amounts of thymidine are only incorporated into cells
that have entered the S phase of the cell cycle. Once
 The pattern of cell division is virtually identical among
duplication is completed, the cell enters G. This is
all cell types. The process begins at the end of G, as
generally the shortest of the interphase periods, lasting
only a matter of minutes. During this time the cells
with cytokinesis, the physical separation of daughter
complete synthesis of enzymes and other proteins
cells into two independent cells. Simply stated, mitosis
 required for chromosomal migration, and the active
is a coordinated series of events that allows the dupli-
process of mitosis is the last stage of the cell cycle.
cated DNA produced during the S phase of the cell
Figure 2.16 illustrates the sequence of stages in the cell
cycle to be divided between two identical daughter
cycle as well as changes in cellular DNA content
cells. Once begun, mitosis typically lasts less than 1
during the cell cycle.
hour. For this reason, in histological sections of most
fissues, it is relatively rare to observe mitotic figures.
 Exceptions are in samples of very rapidly growing
tissues, for example, tumors or perhaps the crypts
 of the small intestine. On the other hand, if rapidly
 growing tissues are treated with colchicine or some
other microtubule-disrupting agent, the number of
dividing cells will become more apparent since the
cells become arrested in various stages of the mitosis.
This has been especially useful for the study of cells
grown in culture.
It is reasonable to ask how cells in different phases
24 Hours
of the cell cycle can be identified and if the durations
of phases are different for different cell types. Because
cells require a period of time for growth, even the cells
 in rapidly developing tissues require several hours to
complete the cell cycle. For many mature tissues, a
cycle time of 16-24 hours is typical. An extreme
example of short duration occurs in early embryonic
cell growth. Because the cells spend little time in G; or
G2, cell hypertrophy does not occur, and the time
 spent in a combination of S and then M phase may be
only a matter of 60 minutes or less. The rate of prolif-
eration in these cells can approach rates usually only
observed for bacterial cells. This process serves to
of cells
essentially subdivide the fertilized oocyte into many
smaller cells. As for tracking cells in phases of the
 cycle, those in S phase can be identified by supplying
Number
S phase
them with labeled molecules of thymidine (some DNA
G, and M
phase
repair occurs even in nondividing cells). The label is
 often radioactive, in the form of *H-thymidine, or
chemical, in the form of BrdU, a synthetic analog of
0
2
thymidine (see Fig. 2.15). Figure 2.17 outlines the
 Helative amount of DNA per cell
events and stages associated with mitosis.
From microscopic study, the passage from the last
B
period of interphase (G2) into prophase is gradual.
Fig. 2.16. Cell cycle analysis. A typical cell cycle is divided into
Chromatin, which is relatively diffuse, begins to con-
four phases. Following division, the cell enters a phase called G,
 dense into recognizable chromosomes. In the prior S
(G = gap). In most cases, the cell undergoes hyperplasia at this 
loj aseyd s ou! sassed l! pajeusis Ajanedoidde uaum pue aw
 phase, the chromosomes were duplicated. In this new
replication of the DNA. Notice the cellillustrated increases in size
configuration, each chromosome is made up of two
as it progressed through the cell cycle. Once synthesis is
identical arms or threads called chromatids. Each
completed, the cell enters Gz, which allows for completion of the
chromatid pair is held together by a small, dense
final steps before the cell begins mitosis (M) and the creation of two
daughter cells. Many cells can also enter a somewhat quiescent
structure called a centromere. Newly duplicated cen-
phase (Go) during which time the cell carries out usual functions
trioles separate in the cell to become polarized at
but remains in a nondividing state.
opposite ends of the cell to create the spindle poles.
 Prophase
 Metaphase
Centrosomes
 Key events
Key events 
· Centromeres align midway 
+ Chromosomes 
between poles.
Chapter 2
condense, with two sister
chromatids.
+ Kinetochore microtu bules
+ Nuclear envelope
attached to daughter 
chromatids.
begins to degrade.
+ Centrosomes migrate to
 create the spindle poles.
Nuclear envelope
B
Anaphase
Telophase
Key events
· Paired kinetochores of each
chromosome separate and
Key events
move toward poles.
+ Dau ghter chromosomes 
· Cell elongates, as poles get
arrive at poles, and kinetochore
further apart.
microtubules disappear.
· Condensed chromatin begins
to expand.
·Nucleoli and nuclearenvelope
begin to reappear.
C
Cytokinesis
Key events
+ Cytoplasm divides by
Cleavage as the mid dle of the
membrane is drawn inward.
+Nuclear envelope is now
completed, and the 
chromosomes expand so that
normal chromatin structures
reappear.
Fig. 2.17. Stages of mitosis. Mitosis is typically divided into five phases: (A) prophase, (B) metaphase, (C) anaphase, (D) telophase, and 
(E) cytokinesis. These involve first the condensation of chromatin into chromosomes, formation of spindle pole, division and migration of
daughter chromatids, and finally, cleavage to create daughter cells. Panel F in this figure shows a dividing mammary cell caught in anaphase.
32
The cell: The common physiological denominator
33
This occurs as the nucleolus disappears and the
arrested in Go. It is now known that serum supplies
nuclear matrix and envelope disassemble. As the
critical GFs, and even now, for routine growth of cells,
chromosomes condense and become visually appar-
fetal bovine serum is often added to cell cultures.
ent, each of the polarized centrioles becomes a focal
 Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) was one of
point for the creation of a new assembly of micro-
the first GFs discovered. Like many GFs, its existence
tubules. This growth of microtubules mimics a star-
was hypothesized from effects observed with cells
burst pattern and is aptly called aster formation. These
in culture. Specifically, it was found that fibroblasts
 events occur during early prophase. Late in prophase,
would proliferate in culture if serum were added but
elongating microtubules attach to protein-DNA com-
not with addition of plasma. Since serum is the liquid
plexes (kinetochores) in the region of the centromere
that remains after the blood clots, this suggested that
of each chromatid pair. The kinetochore microtubules
the clotting process liberates a soluble agent from the
 are critical for the role they play in subsequent separa-
blood cells or platelets that are contained within the
tion and migration of chromosome pairs. Other micro-
clot. Subsequent experiments showed that extracts
tubules create the mitotic spindle to maintain the polar
prepared from isolated platelets were also able to
orientation of the centrioles. Metaphase is the next
 stimulate growth of fibroblasts. These observations
well-defined event in mitosis. It is characterized by the
eventually lead to the isolation, purification, and iden-
appearance of the chromosomes aligned along the
tification of PDGF. In a physiological sense, it is easy
center or equator of the spindle. The organization of
to visualize a role for PDGF in wound healing. With
chromosomes in a plane between the poles is called
clot formation following an injury, liberation of PDGF
the metaphase plate creation and is one of the more
at the site acts to stimulate the proliferation of fibro-
distinct, readily recognizable phases of mitosis.
blasts in and around vessel walls. Since fibroblasts
Sudden separation of the sister kinetochores identi-
 synthesize and secrete collagens, their role in healing
fies the start of anaphase. Within minutes, each of one
and scar tissue formation is obvious. More than 50
chromatid pair (now called a chromosome) is pulled
proteins are now known to function as GFs. However,
to one of the spindle poles. The arrival of all of the
it is important to appreciate that not all cells respond
daughter chromosomes at each pole and dissolution
to this entire myriad of possible stimulators. Only
 of the kinetochore microtubules marks the beginning
 those cells that express receptor proteins for a given
of telophase. Remaining polar microtubules elongate,
GF are capable of responding. However, it is also pos-
a new nuclear envelope coalesces around each polar-
sible to crudely divide GFs into those that affect a
ized cluster of chromosomes, and the compacted,
broad spectrum of cells, for example, insulin-like
dense chromatin expands and nucleoli reappear. The
 growth factor one (IGF-I), from those that impact only
final stage of mitosis, cytokinesis, is characterized by
 a specific population of cells, for example, erythropoi-
 the appearance of a cleavage furrow between the cells.
etin, which causes proliferation of red blood cell pro-
This narrows, and finally, the remaining elements of
genitor cells. We will discuss some of these specific
the mitotic spindle are broken, and two independent
GFs in subsequent chapters.
cells are created.
Regardless of external agents that act to initiate cell
division, this must involve the activation of specific
 genes that control DNA synthesis. Cell-cycle control
Regulators of cell division
relies on two classes of proteins. The first, cyclin-
dependent protein kinases (Cdk), cause phosphoryla-
It is difficult to study the details of cell division and
tion of selected enzymes. As we will see in our study
especially regulation in intact tissues or whole an-
 of cell metabolism, a general feature of many regula-
imals. Thus, much of the detailed understanding has 
tory proteins is that either adding or deleting phos-
come from cell culture experiments. When normal
phate groups dramatically alters function. The second
mammalian cells are maintained in culture, they
class of proteins, the cyclins, bind to the Cdk proteins
-aip Tao os inoqe roy pajegedoud aq Auo ueo Aensn
and thereby regulate their enzymatic activity. Cyclins
sions. After this, the cells enter a senescence period
 get their name from the fact that they undergo a cycle
and eventually die. Despite the obvious limitations,
 of synthesis and degradation with each cell division.
the study of culture cells has been scientifically in-
This means that the periodic assembly, activation, and
valuable.
 disassembly of cyclin-Cdk complexes are critical ele-
Mammalian cells were first cultured in clotted blood,
ments in cell proliferation. As with most cellular activ-
and for many years, efforts to routinely grow cells in
ifies, understanding the details of gene expression is
culture failed, despite efforts to supply well-recognized
 central to understanding cellular function; for cyclins,
nutrients. Cells could be maintained only if serum
 it is easy to visualize the significance of synthesizing
was included with the nutrients. In the absence 
of
these proteins at just the ideal moment during the cell
serum, cells would typically stop growing and become
 cycle. Conversely, inappropriate synthesis or failure of
 34  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
disassembly is likely important when cell growth
trations. There is much interest in regulation of amino
becomes uncontrolled, that is, in tumor formation.
 acid uptake to better understand factors limiting milk
tion viewpoint, much of the value of animal products
 Macromolecules and cellular physiology
 resides in their protein content, for example, meat,
milk, and eggs.
Although we have considered some aspects of lipid
While the significance of proteins as important
structure, especially related to membrane structure,
 building blocks in anabolism is easily appreciated,
it is apparent that normal cellular function depends
 the enzymes that are vital for cell function are also
on a myriad of biochemical reactions and macro-
proteins. Like most biologically critical macromole-
molecules. At first glance, the number of biologically
cules, linking together subunit monomers—the amino
acids—in this case allows a large variety of proteins
However, some relatively simple combinations of
to be generated. Individual amino acids share the
atoms—methyl (-CHs), hydroxyl (-OH), carboxyl
common structure illustrated in Figure 2.18. The R
(-COOH), and amino (-NHs) groups—appear repeat-
(or residual group) is attached to the c-carbon and is
edly in biologically important molecules. Second,
unique for each amino acid. For the simplest, the
repeating combinations of relatively simple com-
 amino acid glycine, the R is a hydrogen atom. Indi-
 pounds create most of the large complex macromole-
vidual amino acids are bound together by a dehydra-
cules. Most of the organic molecules in cells are derived
tion synthesis reaction (so named because water is
from four major groupings of molecules. These are
simple sugars or carbohydrates, amino acids, fatty
acids, and nucleotides.
Major phases of metabolism can be subdivided in a
Residual (R)
variety of ways, but a simplistic view would consider
side group.
activities that build new cellular components (anabo-
lism) compared with those that break down various
cellular elements (catabolism). Interestingly, both pro-
H
cesses are occurring simultaneously. For example,
α-Carbm
catabolism of various nutrient compounds by diges-
tive tract tissues provides the structural building
blocks for other tissues to grow or synthesize and
HN
COOH
secrete products (anabolism). Other nutrients are
catabolized to provide elements needed for energy
o go Aps ao uaq am ( Aensn) uoopod
 lular physiology by first considering major classes of
Amino
H
macromolecules. However, our discussion is no sub-
group
stitute for related classes in chemistry and biochemis-
A
try. Our goal is to provide an overview to aid your
understanding of physiological processes.
HRO
N-
N-
Proteins
H
凸
T
H
OH
 Peptide bond 
In the absence of disease or trauma, most cellular
H
R O
proteins are synthesized from free amino acids or
C
peptides absorbed from the bloodstream. The cell
日
H
OHB
Dipeptide
membrane (and associated carrier proteins) regulates
Dehydration 
formation 
the uptake of these molecules from the interstitial
synthesis
fluids. Understanding of amino acid transporters is an
area of active research, but many features are common
B
between tissues. Some of these transporters show an
Fg. 2.18. Structure of amino acids. Panel A shows the general
ion dependence (e.g., Nat, Cl , and K") or use an H+-
tructure of an amino acid. Formation of a dipeptide is illustrated in
 gradient to drive transport. The Na*-dependent system
panel B. Two amino acids (A and B) are linked by the formation of
 A transporters for neutral amino acids are believed
a peptide bond between the carboxylic acid moiety of one amino
acid and the amine group of the other amino acid. In this process a
to regulate the accumulation of neutral amino acids
molecule of water is produced. The reverse reaction, hydrolysis,
within the cells when compared with plasma concen-
requires the addition of water to cleave the peptide bond.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
35
liberated in the process). Newly created covalent
between some of the amino acids, as well as between
bonds between amino acids are called peptide bonds
amino acids and intermediates of carbohydrate metab-
(Fig. 2.18).
olism associated with Krebs cycle reactions also occur
There are 20 common amino acids. Some are con-
as part of normal cellular activity. Transamination
sidered essential amino acids because they must be
reactions allow the conversion of selected amino acids
supplied in the diet. Others can be created by interme-
into their corresponding keto acid and the simultane-
diary metabolism. However, specific amino acids con-
ous conversion of another keto acid into an amino
sidered essential vary between species, especially in
acid. Oxidative deamination of amino acids occurs
 ruminants compared with nonruminant species. This
primarily in the liver. This initially leads to the genera-
is because the bacteria and protozoa of the ruminant
tion of ammonia, which is highly toxic to cells. Fortu-
 can generate amino acids not initially available in the
nately, most ammonia is rapidly converted into urea,
diet fed to the animals. As illustrated in Figure 2.18,
which can then be excreted. Some of the properties of
all amino acids have two functional (or reactive)
the amino acids are given in Table 2.6. These proper-
 groups: an amine (-NH,) and a carboxylic acid residue
ties explain much of the physicochemical properties
(-CHOOH). Differences in the number and arrange-
of proteins.
 ment of atoms in the R group give each of the amino 
Proteins are long chains of amino acids linked by
acids its unique chemical attributes. For example, if
 peptide bonds. Two amino acids create a dipeptide,
the side group is a simple string of hydrocarbons
three a tripeptide, and so forth. By definition, 10 or
(leucine, for example), this region of the amino acid
 more linked amino acids are called polypeptides, and
will be very hydrophobic, much like fatty acid tails of
those with greater than about 50 amino acids are
a phospholipid. Other side groups, for example, the
simply called proteins. Since each of the amino acids
inclusion of an additional amine group (lysine, for
 have unique properties because of variation in the R
example), would make the amino acid very hydro-
groups, the sequence of amino acids produces poly-
philic and more basic. The various amino acids can be
 peptide and protein chains with correspondingly varied
categorized based on the properties that the R groups
and complex properties. With the availability of 20
 give to the molecule. These are acidic, basic, uncharged
different amino acids, the variation of possible struc-
polar, or nonpolar attributes. In addition to the
 tures and therefore functional properties is very large.
common names, the amino acids are also denoted by
This is analogous to the huge number of words that
simple abbreviations or a single letter code. Other
can be created with the 26 letters of the alphabet.
important amino acids or their derivatives, for
 Structurally, proteins are described at four levels of
example, ornithine, 5-hydroxytrytophan, L-dopa, and
organization. The linear sequence of amino acids in a
thyroxine, are found in the body, but these molecules
protein is called the primary structure of the protein.
do not typically occur in proteins. Interconversions
This can be thought of like beads on a string. However,
Table 2.6.
 Characteristics of common amino acids.
Name
Abbreviation
Singfe Letter
R Group Class
Alanine
Ala
A
Nonpolar side chains
Arginine
Arg
R
Basic side chains
Asparagine
Asn
N
Uncharged polar side chains
Aspartic
Asp
D
Acidic side chains
Cysteine
Cys
C
Nonpolar side chains
Glycine 
D
Nonpolar side chains
Glutamic acid
nID
E
Acidic side chains
Glutamine
Gln
Q
Uncharged polar
Histidine 
His
H
Basic side chains
lsoleucine
lleu
Nonpolar side chains
Leucine
Leu
L
Nonpolar side chains
Lysine
Lys
K
Basic side chains
Methionine
Met
M
Nonpolar side chains
Phenylalanine
Phe
F
Nonpolar side chains
Proline
Pro
P
Nonpolar side chains
Serine
Ser
S
Uncharged polar side chains 
Theronine
Thr
T
 Uncharged polar sicde chains
Tryptophan
Trp
W
Nonpolar side chains
Tyrosine
J人1
Y
 Uncharged polar side chains
Valine
Val
V
Nonpolar side chains
36 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
proteins in solution do not simply exist as a long
and are relatively insoluble. Examples include struc-
strand. Instead, variations in the properties of the R
tural proteins found in the connective tissues of blood
 groups allow interactions between the protein and
vessels, in subcutaneous regions, surrounding muscles
other molecules in the local environment as well as
or other glandular structures, and in tendons and liga-
interactions between other amino acids of the same
ments. The most abundant of these is collagen, which
气
 protein chain. This twisting and bending produces a
is made by fibroblasts located throughout the body.
more complex secondary structure. One of the more
Collagen begins with the synthesis of a monomeric
common results is the formation of coils that can be
form, helical tropocollagen. These precursor mole-
imagined like a coiled telephone cord. Portions of a
cules are modified and packaged side by side to yield
 protein organized in this way are called α helix seg-
 strong, rope-like structures. Other types of collagen
ments or regions. The c helix configuration is stabi-
occur in the basement membrane just underneath epi-
lized by hydrogen bonds that occur between NH and
thelial cells. In fact, collagens are the most abundant
CO groups of amino acids of the primary chain that
proteins in the body. Other examples of fibrous pro-
ss ae      i ps a
teins include other connective tissue proteins, elastic,
To reinforce the significance of the primary sequence,
keratin, and the contractile proteins of muscle cells,
this interaction can only occur if the particular side
actin and myosin.
groups of the amino acids allow hydrogen bonds
Globular proteins, by contrast, are generally very
to form. The α helix formation only occurs within
soluble, compact, and spherical. These proteins are
a single protein chain. In contrast, the formation of
reactive and are therefore more fragile than the fibrous
β-pleated secondary structure can occur via interac-
proteins. Since their functionality depends on their
tions with amino acids within the same protein or by
three-dimensional shapes and high degree of struc-
interactions between independent proteins. In this
tural organization, disruption or denaturation effec-
 secondary structure arrangement, the amino acids are
tively destroys function. Enzymes, antibodies, and
oriented side by side to produce a layer somewhat like
 protein hormones are examples of globular proteins.
a pleated ribbon. A given protein can exhibit both c.
Adequate functioning of globular proteins depends
helix and β-pleated sheet structure in different regions
on the maintenance of active site(s) of the protein. The
of the protein. A further or tertiary structure occurs
consequence of denaturation of such a globular protein
when c-helical or β-pleated regions of a protein twist
is illustrated in Figure 2.19.
or fold upon one another to create globular-like struc-
Classic autoradiographic studies, which traced the
ture. To maintain this complex array, both hydrogen
movement of radiolabeled amino acids through the
bonds and covalent bonds are required. When two or
secretory cells, established that the site of protein syn-
thesis was the RER. For example, after rats were
 larger aggregates, the proteins are said to have quater-
injected with ['H]-leucine or tissue explants were incu-
nary structure. Examples include the four chains that
bated with radiolabeled leucine, the percentage of
create functional hemoglobin or the 12 proteins that
 label in the RER subsequently fell with a following
create the enzyme fatty acid synthetase.
peak in labeling of the Golgi region of the secretory
As the discussion suggests, the three-dimensional
cells. Within 30 minutes of exposure, label began to
structure of a protein is critically important in allow-
decrease in the Golgi but increase in the alveolar
 ing the protein to carry out its function. Since much of
lumen. These simple but convincing studies demon-
the secondary, tertiary, or quaternary structure depends
 strated that after synthesis in the RER, proteins are
on interactions between amino acids and the creation
rapidly transported to the Golgi for packaging into
of hydrogen and /or ionic bonds, it is easy to see that
secretory vesicles and subsequent exocytosis.
changes in the local environment of the protein can
 Steps for protein synthesis are essentially the same
markedly impact function. For example, changes in
for all cells, although final packaging and fate of new
pH or aqueous conditions can markedly alter interac-
synthesized proteins varies between cells and tissue
tions that depend on ionic or hydrogen bonds. These
types. Aside from directing its own replication, DNA
changes in protein structure are called denaturation.
 also directs protein synthesis by its capacity to gener-
 Depending on the degree of insult and the particular
ate mRNA. Each gene is composed of a segment of
 protein involved, when conditions return to normal,
DNA, which carries the chemical instructions for syn-
the protein can return to its appropriate, functional
 thesis of one polypeptide chain in its arrangement of
state. As an example of irreversible denaturation, con-
nucleotide bases (adenine, thymine, cytosine, and
 sider what happens to the jelly-like albumin of the egg
guanine). Each sequence of three bases—the triplet
 when it is heated or it mixed with a bit of vinegar to
code—directs the joining of a specific amino acid in
make a sauce.
the mature mRNA molecule. Although one-half of the
 Proteins can also be divided into fibrous or globular
double-stranded DNA serves as template for synthesis
classifications. Fibrous proteins are usually elongated
of the mRNA (transcription), not all of the nucleotides
The cell: The common physiological denominator
37
Only one strand of the DNA, the sense strand, serves
 as the template for the creation of a complementary
Receptor
mRNA. However, before the mRNA can direct protein
synthesis, the noncoding introns are enzymatically
protein
removed before the newly made mRNA exits the
nucleus for translation. Single-stranded RNA also
differs from double-stranded DNA in having the sugar
ribose instead of deoxyribose and the base uracil
instead of thymine. This feature provides a ready
means to access the ability of cells for proliferation or
synthesizing of proteins by measuring the incorpora-
tion of radiolabeled thymidine or uracil, respectively.
While it is beyond the scope of this book, elegant
 molecular studies have confirmed that the specific
Receptor
 proteins for secretion are synthesized by membrane-
ligand
associated ribosomes and that the newly made pro-
teins have short sequences of amino acids that serve
as signals to allow binding and vectoring of the na-
scent protein into the cisternal spaces of the RER. The
signal peptide is ultimately cleaved as the protein pro-
gresses to the Golgi apparatus for possible posttrans-
lational modification, that is, enzymatic addition of
Denatured ligand protein
sugar residues or phosphate groups. The proteins are
ultimately released from the Golgi as secretory vesi-
Loss of usual three-
cles. From here they migrate to the apical membrane
dimensional structure destroys
the arrangement of amino
of the cell where they are released by exocytosis (see
acids needed to create a
Fig. 2.4). Thus, mechanisms of protein synthesis are
 match with the binding site of
essentially the same in all cell types. However, total
the receptor.
 protein synthesis and the degree to which proteins are
manufactured for secretion vary markedly from cell
B
type to cell type.
Fig. 2.19. Protein structure and function. Protein interactions and
significance of secondary and tertiary structure is illustrated.
Functional binding between a hormone receptor and the binding 
Carbohydrates
hormone or ligand requires that the ligand achieve the correct
shape and orientation so that the amino acids that make the
As with proteins, carbohydrates are utilized as both
binding site match the active site of the receptor. This is illustrated
structural components in cells and as precursor mol-
by the correspondence between the two proteins (panel A). When
the ligand protein becomes denatured, these critical amino acids
ecules for energy production. The primary dietary
lose their alignment so that the hormone can no longer bind to the
carbohydrates are polysaccharides, disaccharides,
suoeaui uaoid sewis (a jaued) isol si uoung pue rodaai
and monosaccharides. Carbohydrates are classified
are required in biochemical reactions, for example, substrates
according to size and relative solubility. For example,
binding to active sites of enzymes, neurotransmitters binding to
 monosaccharides are more soluble than the larger
their receptors, antibodies binding to antigens, or molecules binding
to protein transporters in the cell membrane.
polysaccharides. In both plants and animals, poly-
meric forms of carbohydrates are stored as relatively
insoluble granules, that is, starch in plants and glyco-
 in the gene appear in the final mRNA blueprint. The
 gen in animal cells. Common monosaccharides include
 genes of higher organisms contain exons, the amino-
those with 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 carbons; these are trioses,
 acid specifying sequences, separated by introns. These
tetroses, pentoses, hexoses, and heptoses, respectively.
noncoding introns range from 60,000 to 100,000 nucle-
Derivatives of trioses are generated when the enzymes
 otides in length. Transcription of a particular gene
of the glycolysis biochemical pathway break down the
depends on the binding of a transcription factor to a
common hexose sugar glucose. These molecules are
site on the DNA adjacent to the start sequence for the
used by the cells for various catabolic and anabolic
gene. This region is the promoter. The transcription
activities. For example, trioses are used to produce
factor mediates the binding of the enzyme RNA poly-
glycerol needed to create the backbone for the attach-
merase. This enzyme acts to open the DNA helix, and
ment of fatty acids in triglycerides (see Fig. 2.2).
the DNA segment coding for the protein is uncoiled.
Understanding this biochemical pathway is critical to
38 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Pentose sugars (ribose and deoxyribose) are key com-
 ponents of nucleotides, nucleic acids, and several
HO:
C-H
coenzymes. The hexose monosaccharide, glucose,
OH
H-C-OH
 plays an especially critical role in intermediary metab-
 olism, particularly as an energy source. For the hexose
H
HO-D
CH,OH
CHOH
sugars, glucose, galactose, and fructose are especially
9
CHOH
 important. These monosaccharides serve as the mono-
L-Glucose
D-Glucose
 mers of building blocks for generation of more complex
carbohydrates needed by the cells. Many glycopro-
teins (proteins with attached sugar residues) appear
on cell surfaces. Other complex polysaccharides are
OH
secreted into the connective tissues, for example, the
glycosaminoglycans, where they serve important roles
D-Glucose
2
in maintenance of tissue structure and hydration.
ring structure
OH
B
Carbohydrates contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxy-
 e u uno uaxo pe uy a ym 
ratio as in water. This explains the word carbohydrate,
that is, hydrated carbon. Structurally, these simple
sugars can be represented as chains, but more often, a
cyclic ring structure is preferred. Figure 2.20 illustrates 
General numbering and
the formulae and structures of some of these common
arrangementofcarbonsina
pentose sugar
simple sugars. Compounds that have the same struc-
C
tural formulae but have different spatial arrangement
 of their atoms are called stereoisomers. The presence
Deoxyribose
Ribose
 of carbon atoms attached to four different atoms or
groups, known as an asymmetric carbon, allows for
HOH,C
HOH,C
the formation of isomers. The number of possibilities
depends on the total number of asymmetric carbons
in the molecule (n) and is determined by the expres-
Specific examples
sion 2". Glucose with its 4 asymmetric carbons has 16
 possible spatial isomers. Furthermore, the orientation
D
of the H and OH groups around the carbon adjacent
Fg. 2.20. Structure of sugars. Panel A provides line structures for
 to the terminal primary alcohol residue (OH group)
two structural isomers of the common hexose monosaccharide,
determines whether the sugar is a D- or L-isomer.
glucose (arrows). Panel B gives the cyclic structure for α-D-glucose
jesns asojuad e u! suoqies jo Sujjaqwunu pue juawauene aul
 Nearly all monosaccharides in mammals are D-isomers.
 appears in panel C. Panel D shows the difference between ribose
Whether they are created via dehydration synthesis
and deoxyribose, the sugar residues present in RNA and DNA,
or as a consequence of digestion from larger polysac-
respectively.
tant. One of the most common is lactose or milk sugar.
 ao pe aso  Aq pnd st 
ruminants, fed starches are fermented by rumen
most mammals, lactose supplies much of the energy
 microorganisms so that little, if any, glucose is avail-
needed by the suckling neonate as well as the mono-
 able for absorption across the smallintestine. For these
meric building blocks needed for rapid tissue devel-
animals, the primary fermentation products—acetate,
opment. Maltose, which derives from two glucose
butyrate, and propionate—supply the precursors for
molecules, is a common cleavage product generated
fatty acid synthesis and energy production. In particu-
 by the hydrolysis of starch. Table sugar, sucrose, is a
lar, portal blood supplied to the liver from the small
combination of glucose and fructose. As the name
intestine allows for the conversion of most of the
suggests, 6-carbon fructose is a common fruit sugar. It
absorbed propionate to glucose for use by the cells.
also is a component in reproductive tract secretions.
This is called gluconeogenesis. It is important in all
 Figure 2.21 illustrates the structures of some of these
animals at times but is especially critical in ruminants
common disaccharides.
since glucose from the diet for absorption across the
Whether a plant starch or glycogen, both are poly-
small intestine is nearly nonexistent.
mers of glucose and are the essential sources of the
Dietary starches are first attacked for hydrolysis by
 glucose that is used throughout the body in monogas-
 C-amylase in the saliva. This initial breakdown is sup-
tric species. Although glucose is also essential for
pressed by the reduced pH of the stomach; that is,
The cell: The common physiological denominator
39
HOHS
HOHO
HO
OH
H
H
OH
OH
OH
1:4 α Linkage
HHO
H
HO
Galactose
Glucose
1:6 c Linkage
HOH
CH,OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
Fg. 2.22. Structure of glycogen. A simple example of the structure
of a portion of glycogen is illustrated. Repeating glucose monomers
OHH
H
HO
are linked together to form large branched chain polymers. These 
relatively insoluble molecules serve as ideal storage products and 
appear in liver and muscle cells as dense granules. Cleavage of the
Lactose
1:4α linkages that produce the linear chains and the 1:6α linkages
that make branches depend on two different enzymes when
glycogen is hydrolyzed for use by the cell.
HOHO
C-amylase pH optima is near neutrality. However,
hydrolysis of starches increases again as starch reaches
HO
OHOH
HOHO
the small intestine and additional amylases from the
OH
 pancreas and small intestine appear. Glucose is stored
OH
 primarily in liver and muscle cells in the form of gly-
OH
H
 cogen. This reserve of glycogen can then be mobilized.
Glucose
Fructose
 to supply glucose when needed. When ATP is plenti-
ful and stocks of glycogen are suficient, additional
 energy reserves produced by the conversion of glu-
HOHO
cose to acetate and ultimately fatty acids are stored
HOCH2
 as triglycerides in adipocytes. Figure 2.22 illustrates
the structure of glycogen. Subsequent chapters will
describe the biochemical reactions and pathways
HOHO
involved in catabolism of glycogen and other carbohy-
drates to supply the energy needs and building blocks
OH
OH
H
for synthesis of important macromolecules.
B
Lipids
Fig. 2.21. Structure of disaccharides. Panel A shows the
combining of galactose and glucose to produce the disaccharide
Although we have discussed triglycerides and phos-
lactose or milk sugar. Panel B depicts the creation of the 
pholipids related to membrane formation, other lipids
disaccharide sucrose from the combination of glucose and fructose.
 are also important. Some are messenger molecules.
Maltose, a disaccharide composed of two molecules of glucose,
 Details of the endocrine system and other aspects of
follows a similar pattern.
cell signaling will be considered in subsequent chap-
ters, but some appreciation of these special lipids is
warranted. Steroids are structurally very different
from triglycerides. They are derived from the parent
 terol is nonetheless essenfial. In addition to serving as
40 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
the parent molecule for steroid hormone production,
Most of the cholesterol, triglycerides, and phospholip-
it is also a vital element in membranes, where it acts to
ids appear in a complex with lipoproteins for trans-
increase membrane fluidity. It is also essential for the
port. There are five families of lipoproteins that vary
production of vitamin D and production of bile salts.
with respect to the ratio of protein to lipid in the
Unlike the hydrocarbon chain of the fatty acids, cho-
complex. They can be distinguished based on the posi-
 lesterol is composed of a series of interlocking rings
tion they migrate to following high-speed centrifuga-
with a side chain. Specifically, the four interlocking A,
tion. Those with greater lipid contents (less density)
B, C, and D rings of the cholesterol core contain the
orient closer to the top of the centrifuge tube, and
cyclopentanohydrophenanthrene nucleus that occurs
those with less lipid orient further toward the bottom
 repeatedly in all of the steroid hormones. For example,
 of the tube. This is somewhat like the cream rising to
two structural types of steroid hormones are made in
the top of a container of nonhomogenized milk. This
the cortex of the adrenal gland: those that have a
explains the description of the lipoproteins as very
2-carbon side chain attached at position 17 of the D
low- (VLDL), intermediate- (IDL), low- (LDL), or
ring for a total of 21 carbons, the C2; steroids, and those
high- (HDL) density lipoproteins. The other class
that have a keto or hydroxyl group at position 17 for
includes the chylomicra that are produced in the intes-
a total of 19 carbons, the C19 steroids. Most Ci9 steroids
tinal villi and are critical in initial packaging and
have a keto group at position 17 and are often simply
transport of digested triglycerides. Lipoproteins are
called 17-ketosteroids. The Ci9 steroid hormones have
topics in the popular press because of their involve-
androgenic or testosterone-like effects or actions. The
ment with lipid and cholesterol transport in the blood
C2i steroids of the adrenal gland are either mineralo-
and relationships with health. For this purpose,
corticoids or glucocorticoids. The mineralocorticoids
usually only the major classes, HDLs and LDLs, are
have primary effects on sodium and potassium excre-
distinguished. The amounts and ratios of these in the
tion. The major hormone in this class is aldosterone.
blood are important diagnostic tools related to cardio-
The glucocorticoids, as you might guess from the
 vascular health in humans and animals. Cells can take
name, have primary effects related to glucose and car-
 up cholesterol and other lipids from the blood. Most
bohydrate metabolism. Examples of specific steroids
of the cholesterol is associated with LDLs. When cells
in this class are cortisol and corticosterone. Other sex
need cholesterol to make new membranes or other
steroids, for example, estrogen and progesterone, will
purposes, they synthesize transmembrane receptors
be discussed in subsequent chapters. A major point of
for the LDL proteins. These receptor proteins migrate
our discussion at this point is to appreciate the fact
within the membrane until they become localized in
that despite the seemingly small differences in struc-
clathrin-coated pits. These are areas of the cell mem-
 ture between, for example, estrogen and testosterone,
brane that are destined for endocytosis. LDLs that
these two steroid hormones have markedly different
bind to the receptors are subsequently taken into the
effects. This is directly related to the specificity
of
cells as part of an internalized vesicle. These coated
 hormone receptors that are expressed in various target
vesicles are processed by interactions with lysosomes
cells. That is, estrogen molecules bind very poorly
to release the cholesterol for use by the cell. Interest-
to androgen receptors, and, conversely, testosterone
 ingly, more than 25 different receptors are processed
binds very poorly to the estrogen receptor.
via this clathrin-coated pit pathway. In the case of
 The eicosanoids are a diverse family of lipids gener-
cholesterol, if the LDL receptor-mediated uptake of
ated from a 20-carbon fatty acid called arachidonic
cholesterol is blocked, this leads to excess accumula-
acid. Arachidonic acid is plentiful in the plasma mem-
tion of cholesterol-laden LDL in the blood, and this
brane of the cell. The four major groups of eicosanoids
excess cholesterol is believed to contribute to produc-
include prostaglandins, prostacyclins, thromboxanes,
tion of atherosclerotic plaques and consequently car-
 and leukotrienes. A commercial preparation of prosta-
 diovascular disease. The study of families with strong
glandin Fzo, lutalyse (dinoprost tromethamine),
is
 genetic links to cardiovascular disease initially led to
familiar to many dairy and beef producers because it
discovery of this relationship. One of the mecharisms
is used in a management scheme to synchronize estrus
 responsible for increased disease was a mutation that
in cattle. The product acts to cause early dissolution
prevented normal expression of the LDL receptor.
of the corpus luteum on the ovary. Various eicosanoids
 Structures of some of selected lipids are illustrated in
are important in the control of blood pressure, Gl tract
Figure 2.23.
motility, vasoconstriction, and blood flow.
Since the major lipids in plasma do not circulate
Nucleic acids
acids and other important lipids are transported
bound to carrier molecules. Free fatty acids are bound
 Understanding DNA or RNA requires an appreciation
( an q panpd uond noe e) unare o
of the molecules that compose these macromolecules.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
41
Position 17
with the hydroxyl group located on the C, carbon of
the pentose sugar of another nucleotide. Thus, the
H
nucleic acid chain grows in a 3' to 5' direction. This
means that along the course of a growing nucleotide
Cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene
chain, the nitrogenous bases are not directly linked
Cholesterol 
with other bases in the same chain. For DNA, this
    s 
occurring between adjacent chains. This is the essence
of creation of double-stranded DNA. The DNA mol-
 ecule is most easily imagined like a ladder. The outside
 supports of the ladder are represented by the cova-
3.5[10}-triene-3.17
(estradiol-17-β)
testosterone,
the nucleotides. Complementary bonding between
bases creates the rungs of the ladder. Now if the ladder
is imagined as being twisted like a spiral staircase, this
rachidonic
gives a reasonable approximation of the DNA.
 n n n   n s
Fig. 2.23. Structure of specialized lipids. Structures of some of the
linkages between sugars within a chain are main-
specialized lipid molecules are illustrated. Cholesterol and the 
steroid hormones and their relatives have the 
tained by strong covalent bonds, the interactions
 Cyclopentanohydrophenanthrene nucleus with four hydrocarbon
between nitrogenous bases between two DNA chains
rings in common (upper panel). Additions of side chains to the 17
depends on simple hydrogen bonding, similar to the
carbon, methyl, or hydroxyl groups, or addition of double bonds in
interactions between adjacent water molecules (see
the A ring lead to production of cholesterol, estradiol, testosterone,
and other steroids. The relatively linear hydrocarbon chain of the 
Fig. 2.1). These hydrogen bonds, while not strong indi-
20-carbon arachidonic acid becomes folded and modified to yield
vidually, are critical because of their abundance; this
various prostaglandins, thromboxanes, or leukotrienes.
 also allows the double-stranded DNA to readily unzip
as required for gene transcription. Once this is accom-
plished, the strands can then readily rejoin. Interac-
tions between bases allows for bonding between
These nucleic acids are produced from combinations
adenine and thymine, cytosine and guanine. These
of nucleotides, but nucleotides are in turn a combina-
linkages, A + T and C + G, are called complementary
tion of three elements: (l) a phosphate group, (2) a
 bonds or complementary bases. However, the stands
 pentose sugar (either ribose or deoxyribose), and (3) a
 are oriented so that one is oriented in a 5' to 3' direc-
nitrogen-containing base (either a purine or a pyrimi-
tion and the other 3' to 5' (the numbering is based on
dine). There are three types of pyrimidines: cytosine
the orientation of phosphate groups linking the 3 or 5
(C), thymine (T), and uracil (U). The two types of
carbons of the pentose sugar). In single-stranded RNA
purine are adenine (A) and guanine (G). Thymine is
molecules, the bases are A, G, C, and U (replaces the
unique to DNA, and uracil is unique to RNA.
T found in DNA). The pentose sugar is ribose instead
Variation between DNA strands, or in other words
of deoxyribose. Examples of nucleic acid structures
between different genes, depends on the particular
and components are illustrated in Figure 2.24 and
sequence of ritrogenous bases that occur. A combina-
Figure 2.25.
tion of either deoxyribose or ribose and one of the
bases is called a nucleoside. Include the phosphate
 a no pe (asd + aq + ns) don
Cellular biochemistry
nucleotide. The phosphate groups are joined to the
hydroxyl group on the Cs carbon of the sugar residue.
The cell theory, namely the idea that cells only arise
Moreover, as you will see related to ATP production,
from other cells, was first proposed in the late 1800s.
it is not uncommon to find mono-, di- or triphosphates
This now seems elementary, but in the 1600s, Robert
attached to many nucleotides. To illustrate, a combina-
Hooke based it on initial observations of plant samples,
tion of the purine adenine + deoxyribose + one phos-
which showed that tissues were composed of cells.
 phate makes adenosine monophosphate or AMP. The
This was followed by studies by the German scientists
same base and sugar with two phosphates makes ADP
Schleiden and Schwann, who insisted that all living
or adenosine diphosphate. If a third phosphate is
things were composed of cells. This idea flew in the
added, adenosine triphosphate or ATP is generated.
face of the notion of spontaneous generation, which
 Single strands of DNA or strands of RNA are pro-
suggested that organisms arose from debris or other
duced when a phosphate group from one nucleotide
inert nonliving materials. Four ideas inherent in cell
(attached to the Cs carbon of the pentose sugar) links
theory are as follows:
42
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
NH
 Phosphate bonds.
 for example, with the C5
 carbon of ribose or 
 deoxyribose.
ptel
O-P
-0
CH2
Adenine
Purine
Diphosphate
NH2
Triphosphate
Guanine
Nucleotide
Phosphate
"Deoxyribose
·Thymine
H,C
HC
Pyrimidine
0
-0
P-
CH2
Thymine
H
OH
H
Adenine
Cytosinc
Uracil
Thymine
Fig. 2.24. Structures of nitrogenous bases found in DNA and RNA.
 Structures of the parent nitrogenous bases, purine (A) and 
pyrimidine (B), and specific bases occurring in DNA and RNA are
illustrated.
The cell is the fundamental structural and func-
tional unit of living organisms.
 Phosphate 
 The function of organisms depends on activities
groups 3', 5′
2.
linkages
of cells both individually and collectively.
3.
 The biochemistry of cells is dictated by the subcel-
lular organelles present in the cell.
4，
 Propagation of life is based on cellular activity.
oxyribo
Despite the relevance of the cell in physiology.
B
chemistry, physics, and biochemistry are at the center 
Fg. 2.25. Structure of a single strand of DNA. Bases shown are
of all catabolism and anabolism. In other words, it is
 adenine, thymine, and guanine (A). The repeating pattern with the
 reasonable to think of the cell as the core-organizing
 backbone of deoxyribose and phosphate groups is apparent with a
variable sequence of nitrogenous bases (B).
element that allows for control and coordination of the
myriad of chemical and physical reactions that consti-
The cell: The common physiological denominator
43
tute life and living. Understanding physiology requires
donor, now called a cation, has a net positive charge.
 an appreciation of these other scientific disciplines. Be
Atoms with opposite charges attract. This is the basis
advised that our discussions of specific chemical reac-
of the ionic bond. A commonly used example of ionic
tions, biochemical events, or physical properties are
bonds is table salt or sodium chloride. As you may
 no substitute for specific classes in physics, chemistry.
e r s s s   
 or biochemistry. However, we do believe that a sincere,
number of 1l and therefore has only one electron in
 thoughtful study of physiology provides an opportu-
its third or outer valence shell. To achieve stability, the
nity to integrate the fundamentals gained from the
 atom would have to acquire an additional seven elec-
study of these disciplines. What could be more inter-
trons (the third orbit around the nucleus can accept
esting than learning how our bodies and those of our
eight electrons). Stabilizing this outer orbit is more
animals function?
 likely to happen by shedding the single electron so
that the second orbit (filled) becomes the valance shell
around the nucleus of the atom. Chlorine has an
Chemical bonds
atomic number of 17. The outer valance shell needs
only one electron to fill its valance orbit. When it
Cellular activity is tied to the creation of complex mac-
accepts an electron, stability is increased, but the atom
romolecules, which requires combining other simpler
 acquires a net negative charge and becomes an anion.
molecules and creation of new bonds, and catabolic
As you would suspect, ionic bonds are common
activity to break the bonds in nutrient molecules to
between atoms with one or two valance electrons
 supply the building blocks for these new creations.
(metallic elements, sodium, calcium, and potassium,
Some of the energy derived from breaking chemical
for example) and elements with seven valance elec-
bonds is also captured for future use by the cells.
trons (chlorine, fluorine, and iodine). The majority of
Enzymes catalyze nearly all cellular chemistry. As you
ionic compounds exist as salts. When dry, they form
learned in general chemistry, attractive forces main-
highly organized crystals as a consequence of their
tain orientations between atoms in molecules
to
ionic bonds. In aqueous environments, salts dissociate
produce chemical bonds. Three major types of bonds
 to produce ions. Many more common ions (Ca+2, Na*,
are (1) hydrogen bonds, (2) ionic bonds, and (3) cova-
K+,
 Cl) are critical to normal cellular physiology
lent bonds. In addition, Van der Waals forces, similar
 because of their roles in regulation of activity of many
to hydrogen bonds, are important in maintenance of
o a  ais pe (e) sz
the structure of complex biological molecules where
 polarity across cell membranes. Calcium, which is the
charge differentials aid maintenance of structural rela-
 most abundant essential mineral in the body, is espe-
tionships. We have already discussed hydrogen bonds
cially important. It not only is critical for the activation
in our description of how water behaves (see Fig. 2.1).
of various cytoplasmic kinases, it is essential for
Hydrogen bonds are produced when a hydrogen atom
muscle function, and in a more stable form
is covalently bound to an electronegative atom. The
(hydroxyapatite—Ca1o(PO4)(OH2)), it is a fundamen-
most common examples are oxygen and nitrogen.
tal part of the inorganic, extracellular structure of
When these groups are positioned close to other
bone. This likely is the reason why shed antlers or
strongly electronegative atoms, this produces a kind
skeletal remains of animals are not found in rural
 of tug of war as the two electronegative atoms "fight"
areas. Other animals, especially rodents, use these
for dominion of the hydrogen atom. These reactions
materials to supply their mineral needs.
create attraction forces that link or bridge the mole-
About one-third of basal energy (ATP hydrolysis) is
cules. Hydrogen bonds are particularly important as
used to maintain an ionic gradient across the plasma
intramolecular forces that act to mold the three-
 membranes through the activity of Na-K ATPase
dimensional shape of many macromolecules. Much of
 protein transporters in the plasma membrane. Specifi-
the folding of proteins that defines their tertiary struc-
cally, these proteins move Nat and K+ against their
 ture depends on hydrogen bonds. Another example is
concentration gradients (energy requiring) so that
the interaction between complementary strands of the
concentrations of intracellular Na are about 10-fold
DNA molecule. Despite the relative weakness of indi-
lower inside than outside the cell (-15 vs. 150mEq/L)
vidual hydrogen bonds, they are collectively critical
with the opposite for K+ ions (-14 vs. 140mEq/L).
for normal cellular functioning.
 Since these ions passively move down their concentra-
Ionic bonds are produced when the transfer of elec-
tion gradients, the ATPase pumps must be constantly
trons from one atom to another generates attractive
 active, somewhat like the bilge pumps of a boat that
forces between atoms. This happens because the usual
act to constantly remove water that leaks or splashes
balance between + and - charges is lost and ions are
into the boat. The transporter couples sodium and
formed. The atom that accepts electrons acquires a net
negative charge and is called an anion. The electron
ejects 3Nat out of the cell and carries 2K+ ions into the
 44  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
cell. Coupled with the fact that the membrane is
Helium
Neon
slightly more permeable to K+ than Na+ under basal
(2p*, 2n°, 2e-)
(10p*, 10n°, 10e-)
 conditions, the action of the ATPase protein maintains
the ionic and electrical gradient across the cell mem-
brane. These actions combined with the accumulation
 of cellular proteins cause the production of an electri-
cal gradient across most cells of about -40mV (inside
relative to outside). Many cells, especially nerve cells,
take advantage of changes in ion concentrations or
polarity for cell signaling. The activities of chemical
and voltage-regulated gates for sodium and potas-
sium (transporter proteins) are altered to explain the
abrupt changes in membrane potential that occurs
during nerve transmissions.
Aside from transferring electrons, atoms can also be
stabilized by the sharing of electrons between nuclei.
In these cases, the valence orbits of the sharing atoms
are also shared so that stability of both atoms is
achieved. This is the essence of covalent bonds. If a
Oxygen
single pair of electrons is shared, this creates a single
Carbon
(8pt, 8n°, 8e-)
(6p*, 6n°, 6e-)
covalent bond. For illustrative purposes, this is usually
shown as a single line connecting two atoms. In other
Hydrogen
cases, atoms can share two or three electron pairs; this
(1p+, 0n°, 8e-)
produces double or triple covalent bonds that are
Fg. 2.26. Examples of chemically reactive and inert atoms. The
illustrated by double or triple lines between atoms, as
red balls depict electrons in orbit around the nucleus of each atom.
(O=O) in O2 gas or (N=N) in N2 gas (see Fig. 2.18).
Helium and neon with completely filled valence orbits have little
incentive to interact with neighboring molecules. In contrast,
Some atoms are considered relatively reactive and
oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen need a change in the number of
others relatively inert. As Figure 2.26 shows, a look at
valence electrons to complete their outer shell of electrons and 
the atomic structure of some example atoms explains
maximize stability.
the reason for these differences.
 Carbon is an especially abundant cellular atom. It
has four electrons in its outer or valence orbit, but
 s (  )  g s 
stability is achieved when the orbit is filled to capacity
example of a polar covalent bond. In these instances,
(eight electrons). This means that there are numerous
like spoiled children, one or more atoms of the bond
 possibilities of sharing electrons to achieve stability.
unit have a greater capacity to attract the shared elec-
One possibility is to create sharing of four electrons
 trons. Since the electrons spend more of their time in
from four distinct neighbors. This would be the case
orbit near the stronger partner, these covalent bonds
 in the creation of methane gas (CH). Since hydrogen
produce a separation of charge. In other words, on
needs either to lose an electron or gain another to
 average, there is a separation of charge: one area of the
complete its outer valence orbital, sharing between the
new molecule has a net negative charge (shared
single carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms satisfies
 electron(s) more often in this region) and a net positive
 both atoms. Numerous examples of covalent bonds
charge (shared electrons more often "playing next
involving carbon atoms are shown in the structures of
door"). As a general rule, small atoms with six or
neutral lipids (essentially hydrocarbon chains), carbo-
seven valence electrons (oxygen, nitrogen, chlorine)
hydrates, and proteins (see Fig. 2.2, Fig. 2.18, and Fig.
are better able to attract electrons so are they are
2.20). By convention in drawings, carbon atoms are
described as being strongly electronegative. These
not explicitly shown but are understood to be posi-
atoms favor "hogging" shared electrons to complete
tioned at line intersections. A simple example of
their valence orbital shells. Atoms with only one or
double bonds is the sharing of electrons between a
two valence electrons are more likely to relinquish
carbon atom and two oxygen atoms. In carbon dioxide
 control of shared electrons and are called electroposi-
(CO, or O=C=O), sharing of electrons is equal between
tive atoms. Examples of these include hydrogen,
the atoms. Because of this, there is no separation of
 potassium, and sodium. If you ponder the difference
charge, so this covalent bond is also called a nonpolar
between polar and nonpolar covalent bonds, it should
covalent bond. Nonpolar covalent bonds are common.
be easy to imagine why molecules with an abundance
For example, consider the fatty acid tails of the phos-
of polar covalent bonds easily dissolve in (associate
pholipids in cellular membranes (see Fig. 2.3). Our
with) water. Conversely, molecules with few or any
The cell: The common physiological denominator 
45
polar covalent bonds—lipids, for example—have little
tions are common. For example, the nucleotides ATP
capacity to interact with the abundant polar water
 or GTP are frequent donors of a phosphate group to
molecules in our cells and bodies.
another molecule. A very large family of enzymes
called kinases catalyzes these phosphorylation reac-
tions. As we will see in our discussion of cell signaling.
Chemical reactions
many important regulatory enzymes are themselves
controlled by their phosphorylation state. Some of
 uo puadan sassand lan rr suardde si 1
almost bewildering array of chemical reactions. Mol-
is added and others are inhibited. Other examples
ecules in our food or in the rations of our animals are
also abound. For example, the first step in the catab-
destroyed (chemical bondls are broken) to supply inter-
 olism of glucose in the biochemical pathway, gly-
 mediate molecules for building blocks, for example,
colysis, involves the introduction of phosphate to
 consider hydrolysis of plant starches to supply glucose
 produce glucose-6-phosphate catalyzed by the enzyme
for production of glycogen in liver cells. Some of the
hexose kinase. Other exchange reactions transfer amino
 glucose is oxidized to produce ATP needed to supply
groups to allow generation of nonessential amino acids.
cellular energy. DNA and RNA are synthesized as our
 For example, the enzyme alanine-pyruvate transami-
cells flourish and grow. How do we organize and
 nase functions to promote the transfer of amino groups
make sense of all of these reactions? Fortunately,
 from most amino acids to generate alanine by adding
despite the number of individual molecules involved,
 the amino group to pyruvate.
patterns begin to evolve. For example, the breaking
A final class of reactions to consider is the oxidation-
down of bonds between the glucose and fructose in
reduction reactions. These reactions are central to
the disaccharide sucrose or of the peptide bonds
catabolism of nutrients to manufacture ATP. Failure of
between alanine and lysine in a protein molecule are
these reactions, as occurs in the absence of oxygen,
both hydrolysis reactions. Chemical reactions occur
results in death. The essence of the reactions is the
when chemical bonds are created between atoms,
 exchange of electrons between reactants. The molecule
when chemical bonds between atoms are broken, or
or atom that loses the electron (electron donor) is char-
when chemical bonds are rearranged. A common illus-
acterized as having become oxidized. The reactant
tration is to denote the reactions in simple symbolic
that accepts the electron is said to become reduced.
expressions as chemical equations. For example, the
Many of these reactions involve the transfer of hydro-
combination of a carbon and oxygen to create carbon
gen (which of course includes the electron). These
dioxide could be written in the following manner:
reactions will be considered in greater detail in our
20+C→CO2.
discussion of aerobic respiration.
(reactants)(product)
This is an example of a synthesis reaction that re-
Significance of enzymes
quires the formation of new chemical bonds. This
could be generally indicated by the following expres-
It is difficult to overstate the importance of enzymes
sion: A + B →→ AB. Simplistically, such reactions explain
 in celular metabolism. Without the presence of
the anabolic side of metabolism. Figure 2.18 shows an
enzymes to catalyze the myriad of biochemical reac-
example of a synthesis reaction between two amino
tions required for anabolic and catabolic activities, life
acids to create a dipeptide. The opposite of this is a
would cease. All enzymes are globular proteins that
decomposition reaction. These are often hydrolysis
act as promoters of various but specific chemical reac
reactions because of the addition of water to complete
tions. Reactants must be present in the cell, but rates
the reaction. The expression AB → A + B gives a
 of reaction for virtually all biologically relevant pro-
 generic example of such a reaction. Specific examples
cesses are nonexistent if the required enzymes are
would include the cleavage of glucose monomers
absent or defective. As catalysts, enzymes accelerate
from glycogen, the cleavage of peptides from a dietary
reaction rates but do not become altered in the process.
protein by enzymes in the intestinal lumen, or the
The enzyme can be thought of as a kind of biochemical
initial reactions of beta-oxidation—the process that
matchmaker. Binding sites for substrates allow for
acts to catabolize two carbons at a time from fatty acid
close association of the substrates, a lowering of acti-
chains. These are all examples of catabolic reactions.
vation energy, and an enhanced opportunity that the
Another type of reaction is the exchange reaction.
reaction will take place. Because of the critical nature
As the name suggests, in this situation, a functional
of the substrate-binding sites on the enzyme, even
 group is moved from a donating molecule to a receiv-
 small changes in conditions can perturb the arrange-
ing molecule. This is indicated by these expressions
ment of amino acids around the binding site, render-
AB + C → AC + B or AB + CD → AD + CB. Such reac-
ing the enzyme ineffective (see Fig. 2.19). Because of
 46  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
the unique nature of the binding site, enzymes are
Table 2.7. Enzyme classifications.
highly specific. For example, the enzyme hexose
 kinase, which adds a phosphate group to glucose, has
Enzyme Class
Action
Exampfe
' on  rsd e pe o A o
Oxidoreductases
Oxidation-
Lactate
despite the fact that both molecules are similar hexose
reduction
dehycrogenase
sugars.
reactions
 Some enzymes are functional just as they are syn-
(electron-
hydrogen transfer)
thesized, that is, the protein alone. Other enzymes
require the presence of a particular ion (often a trace
Transferases
Transfer of groups
Mexose-6-
mineral, e.g., Mg, Co, Cu, Mn) in their environment.
(other than
phosphotransferase
hydrogen between 
(hexose kinase)
 These ions are thought to maintain the active-binding
substrates)
 site of the enzyme in the appropriate conformation for
Hydrolyases
Cleaves ester,
reactants to be able to bind. These aids to enzyme
Amylase
 peptide, and other
function are called cofactors. Still other enzymes
types of bonds
operate in combination with organic molecules called
Lyases
Removes groups
Aldolase
coenzymes that are essential for the enzyme to carry
leaving behind
out its function. Coenzymes assist some groups of
double bonds
enzymes by acting as carriers of various specific func-
Isomerases
Interconversions
Phosphohexose
tional groups or of electrons (hydrogen atoms). Many
 of optical or
isomerase
coenzymes are derived from vitamins, which explains
 geometric isomers
the need for these substances to be present in the diet.
Ligases
New bonds to link
Glutamine
For example, the B vitamins riboflavin (B2) and niacin
together two
synthase
give rise to flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and
substrates
ricotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), respec-
tively. These cofactors become reduced as a conse-
quence of carbohydrate catabolism. When membrane
 further a serine proteinase because this defines the
bond enzymes in the mitochondria subsequently
catalytic mechanism by which the enzyme cleaves
oxidize them, a portion of the energy associated with
 proteins. The International Union of Biochemistry
these electron transfers is utilized to drive the synthe-
promotes a very systematic nomenclature for the
sis of ATP. Finally, some enzymes are composed of
naming of enzymes. However, in much of the physi-
more than one protein. Some enzymes are first synthe-
ological literature, common and general names for
a   s d  -  
enzymes abound. Table 2.7 provides a six-level clas-
active when they reach the area where they are to be
sification of enzymes along with examples.
used. For example, digestive enzymes synthesized by
Three steps occur in enzyme action. Step one is
pancreatic cells are secreted into ducts where the
binding of substrates to the active site of the enzyme
enzymes are mixed with alkaline secretions
and
(formation of the enzyme-substrate complex). This
dumped into the lumen of the small intestine. The
binding induces a conformation change in the protein
enzymes only become functional when they enter the
that allows rearrangement of the substrates and for-
lumen of the intestine. This is an important safety
mation of the product (step two). The third step is
mechanism. Since these enzymes are capable of hydro-
release of the products from the enzyme. This happens
lyzing a wide array of cellular proteins, inappropriate
because the newly created product no longer has a
activation of the enzymes at the time of synthesis and
shape that is compatible with the active site of the
secretion could cause degradation of your own pan-
enzyme. Enzymes function by reducing activation
creatic tissue. This is clearly undesirable.
 energy. Some chemical reactions can be promoted in
Most enzymes are named based on the reactions
the test tube by heating the reactants. This increases
 n   s a r  
kinetic and thermal energy and makes collisions
 For example, enzymes that cleave starch molecules are
 between substrates more frequent, thereby reducing
called amylases, those that cleave proteins are called
the required activation energy. Lower activation
proteases, and lipases break down lipids. Others are
 energy in this manner in cells is not feasible. For
designated as dehydrogenases because they
act to
example, one of the consequences of a high fever is
remove hydrogen atoms or decarboxylases for removal
 the degradation of some proteins. By specific mecha-
of carboxyl groups. Unfortunately, there are often
nisms that are poorly understood, binding of a
multiple names applied to the same enzymes, and
 substrate(s) to its specific enzyme lowers activation
traditional names remain in usage. For example, the
 energy. The significance is profound. Compared with
small intestine enzyme chymotrypsin is described as
noncatalyzed conditions, rates of reaction are increased
       r 
a million- or more fold. Just as remarkable, once the
The cell: The common physiological denominator
47
No enzyme
Activation
Activation
A一
energy less with
ezyme
Reactants
A+B
With
enzyme
Products
C
Reaction direction
A
Enzyme (E)
Substrates
Enzyme
binding sites
New product
Free enzyme
B
Fig. 2.27. Significance of activation energy. Panel A demonstrates the effect of lowering activation energy on the chemical reactions.
 Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are markedly enhanced. In panel B, the mechanism of enzyme action is depicted. Each enzyme is highly specific;
ui ' das ul pai si xad aensnsaazua ae 't das ul paae ag m sas ae an on suuig jo agee sansgns 
rearrangements occur, and substrates are covalently linked. In step 3, the new product is released, and the enzyme is free for another round
of activity.
product is released, the enzyme is free to repeat the
leucocytes are sometimes present), and blood clotting
process thousands of times. Indeed, some cellular
factors are absent. Other electrolytes, nutrients, and
enzymes remain in the cell for extended periods before
water are abundant. The movement of these com-
they must be replaced. Figure 2.27 illustrates the idea
 pounds into and out of cells is controlled by both
of lowered activation energy and mechanisms of 
passive and active mechanisms. Health of the cells
enzyme action.
depends on the fact that the plasma membrane is
semipermeable and selective. This means that some
substances are allowed to pass across the membrane
Extracellular environment and cell function
but others are not. As you might guess, nutrients are
readily captured, waste products are secreted, and
Animal cells are continually bathed in extracellular
 many potentially harmful substances are excluded.
liquid called interstitial fluid that is mostly derived
The purpose of this section is to characterize some
from blood. In many ways, it is similar to blood plasma
fundamental properties related to cellular transport
 but contains few, if any, blood cells (some wandering
and maintenance of the cellular environment within
48 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
appropriate boundaries. As noted previously, mainte-
Simple diffusion
nance of normal concentrations of nutrients and ions
in body fluids is an important part of homeostasis.
Osmosis
 The diffusion of solvent—-water, for example—through
a selective or semipermeable membrane is called
osmosis. Water transport occurs when there is a dif-
Time
ference in the relative concentration of water mole-
cules across the membrane. If both sides of a
water-permeable membrane are exposed to distilled
water, there is no net move of water molecules. Just as
Osmosis
many molecules would randomly move in either
direction across the barrier. On the other hand, if a
substance (solute) were dissolved in the water on one
side of the membrane but not the other, the relative
number of water molecules per unit volume would be
decreased on the side of the membrane with the
solute. If the membrane were impermeable to the dis-
solved substance, but permeable to the water, then
water molecules would begin to leave the area with
the higher concentration of water molecules and pass
Time
across to the opposite side. Movement of solvent in
Fg. 2.28. Diffusion and osmosis. The upper panels illustrate the
this manner is called osmosis. Figure 2.28 illustrates
 the effects of membrane permeability on diffusion and
process of simple diffusion. At the beginning (A), two sides of a
u-tube are separated by a membrane that is permeable to the solute
osmosis. In the open system illustrated in the figure,
(red particles) in the left arm of the tube. Over time (B), the solute
 differences in osmolality drive the movement of water
molecules diffuse down their concentration gradient to areas of
molecules until hydrostatic pressure becomes suffi-
lower concentration. With sufficient time, the solute molecules
become equally dispersed throughout the entire solution. The lower
cienly high to resist the further movement. Move-
panels demonstrate osmosis. Two sides of the u-tube are separated
ment of water molecules to a region of greater solute
by a semipermeable membrane that is permeable to the solvent
 concentration can be prevented by applying pressure.
(indicated by the green coloring) but not the solute (red) molecules
The pressure required to prevent migration of sol-
(C). Since the right side of the tube has a greater concentration of
vent molecules is the effective osmotic pressure of the
solvent molecules, they move from the right side through the
solution.
membrane. Migration continues until the hydrostatic presure
equals the osmotic pressure (D). Note the difference in the
If we consider the cytoplasm of the cell (or the
levels of liquid (arrows) after the experiment has continued for a
aqueous environments of many cellular organelles),
period of time.
there are multiple opportunities for varying concen-
trations of solutes and corresponding differences in
osmolarity across these membranes as well as between
the cytoplasm and the outside interstitial fluid. Since
these membrane-bound compartments are permeable
5% glucose solution. These solutions are routinely
to water, osmosis has dramatic effects. For these
used for preparation of intravenous treatments
reasons, it is important that the osmolarity of intersti-
because the solutions have no impact on normal cell
tial fluids and, consequently, blood, be maintained
volume. Solutions with a greater effective osmotic
within relatively narrow boundaries. Changes in the
pressure than blood are hypertonic and those with
 osmolarity of the solutions bathing cells can cause
lesser effective osmotic pressures are hypotonic. Cells
cells to either shrink or swell. The capacity of a solu-
that are placed in a hypertoric solution lose water and
tion to affect the tone or shape of ceils by modifying
 shrink or crenate. Cells that are placed in dilute (hypo-
the internal water volume of the cell is called tonicity.
toric) solutions swell. As an extreme example, if cells
 A typical value for blood plasma or interstitial fluid is
 are placed in distilled water, there are no dissolved
about 300mOsm/L. Cells exposed to solutions with
substances, so water molecules enter the cells until the
the same osmolarity or toricity as blood plasma will
cells rupture. Figure 2.29 illustrates the responses of
retain their normal shape. Such solutions are described
red blood cells incubated in isotonic, hypertonic, or
as isotonic. Examples include 0.9% saline (NaCl) or a
hypotonic solutions.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
49
Isotonic
HO
OH
HO
Hypotonic
HO
0°H oH
H,O
H,O
H,O
OH
Hypertonic
OH O²H
H,O
H,O
C
Fig. 2.29. Significance of tonicity. The consequence of placing red blood cells in solutions with difering tonicity values is illustrated. In
panel A, cells are in an isotonic solution. Since the relative number of water molecules is the same inside and outside the cell, there is no net
molecules outside is much greater than on the inside, so water enters and rapidly swells the cells. In fact, if the solution is sufficiently
hypotonic, the cells will rupture. This is shown on the left. These are remnants of red blood cell membranes. Panel C shows the effect of
shrink. This is called crenation and is characterized by the spikes of cell membrane shown on the left.
Osmotic pressure (P) is related to temperature and
be easily predicted. For example, if the solute under
volume, similar to the pressure of a gas as described
consideration ionizes completely, each molecule or
in the following equation:
particle is osmotically active. For example, 1mol of
NaCl per liter of water (58g) would yield a 2Osm or
nRT
P=
2000mOsm solution. This is because NaCl dissociates
V
completely so that each Na and Cl ion exerts an
In this expression, n is the number of particles, R is the
 osmotic effect. By contrast, 1mol of glucose (180g) per
 gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and V is
liter would produce a solution with an osmotic pres-
the volume. In usual physiological circumstances, R,
sure of only 1Osm or 1000mOsm. For solutes that do
T, and V are essentially constants. This means that
not ionize, the molarity and osmolarity of the solution
the primary factor affecting osmotic pressure is the
are the same. However, it is important to consider if
number of particles or solute molecules per unit of
 the solute under consideration is penetrating or non-
solvent. With ideal solutions, the osmotic pressure can
 penetrating relative to the cell membrane. If cells are
50  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 exposed to a 300mOsm solution of a penetrating
lipid soluble readily pass across cell membranes.
 solute, the solute will enter the cells, the relative water
Examples are oxygen and carbon dlioxide. Since
 concentration outside the cellincreases proportionally.
      
and water then enters the cells. The solution effec-
the blood and interstitial fluid than in the cytoplasm,
tively becomes more hypotonic over time. In addition,
 Oxygen continually diffuses into cells. Similarly, carbon
biological fluids are not ideal solutions. Interactions
dioxide is nearly always higher inside the cells, as a
between molecules or partial dissolution of ionizing
consequence of metabolic activity, so carbon dioxide
substances means that simply knowing the concentra-
is continually diffusing out of the cells. Most water-
tions of various substances in blood, lymph, or urine,
 soluble molecules cannot simply diffuse through the
for example, cannot be used to accurately calculate
cell membrane. This is because these polar molecules
osmolarity. Fortunately, it is possible to measure
cannot "dissolve" in the fatty acid tails of the phos-
osmolarity by indirect means. The temperature at
pholipids of the lipid bilayer. However, if the sub-
which a fluid freezes is directly related to the osmolar-
stance is small enough, it can pass through the plasma
ity of the solution. Thus, the effective osmotic pressure
membrane
 by passing through water-filled pores.
of even complex solutions can be determined by mea-
Integral membrane proteins that span the entire width.
suring freezing point depression.
 of the cell membrane create these pores. This means
 that substances sufficiently small and polar can essen-
 tially diffuse across the membrane by interacting with.
 the water associated with these membrane-sparning
Transport mechanisms
proteins. Some of the pores are always available but
 others can be regulated. For example, in the cells of
Passage of molecules into and out of cells and across
the kidney tubules, specifically the collecting ducts,
 organelle membranes occurs by either active or passive
 permeability of the cells to water uptake by osmosis
 transport. For passive mechanisms, there is no direct
is variable. This reflects changes in the conformation
of these
 pore-forming proteins. When antidiuretic
contrast, require metabolic energy Table 2.8 provides
hormone (ADH) concentrations are elevated, the pores 
 a listing of the membrane transport processes.
are widely available so that much of the water in
As illustrated in Figure 2.28, simple diffusion is the
kidney filtrate is recovered. When secretion of ADH is
tendency for molecules to disperse evenly throughout
inhibited, more of the pore-forming proteins acquire a
a solution. Substances that are small, nonpolar, and
conformation that impairs water movement so urine
Table 2.8. Summary of transport processes used by cells.
Transport Type
Energy Source
Description
Exampfe
Passive
 Simple diffusion
Kinetic energy
 Movement of molecules down a concentration gradient 
Transfer of oxygen, some ions
Facilitated diffusion
Kinetic energy
Like simple but molecule bound to a carrier
T'ransfer of glucose into cells
Osmosis
Kinetic energy
Basically simple diffusion of water via semipermeable
Water transport
 membrane
Filtration
Hydrostatic
 Movement of water and solutes through a
T'ransfer of water and solutes 
pressure
semipermeable membrane by a pressure gradient
from capillaries
Active
Active Transport
ATP
Move a solute against a concentration gradient
Exocytosis
ATP
Secretion of cellular products via fusion of membrane-
Secretion of milk proteins and 
bound secretory vesicles
lactose
Phagocytosis
ATP
So-called cell eating ameboidl-like engulfing of
Removal of foreign clebris or
extracellular materials by pseudopodia
dead cells by macrophages
 Bulk-phase endocytosis
ATP
So-called cell drinking, involves the appearance of
Occurs essentially in all cells
depression of the plasma membrane and progressive
incorporation of fluid-filled vesicles
Receptor-mediated
ATP
Ligand binding to surface receptors causes clustering of
 Uptake of cholesterol and
endocytosis
 bound receptors in clathrin-coated pits which are then
iron; downregulation of
taken into cells for processing by lysosomes
protein hormone receptors
The cell: The common physiological denominator 
51
combination of facilitated diffusion and active trans-
B0x 2.21
 Practical anatomy and physiology
port is capable of removing and recovering all of the
The plasma membrane is a barrier to the extracel-
glucose molecules that appear in the kidney filtrate.
lular space. It was long believed that water simply
However, concentrations of glucose in the blood and
passed across cell membranes by diffusion. However,
consequently the urinary filtrate of an animal with
realization that water transport varied dramatically
diabetes can be many times higher than normal. Since
in different membranes, for example, proximal
the number of transport proteins in the membrane of
tubular cells versus cells of the ascending loop of
the kidney tubule cells is limited and the rate of trans-
Henle in the kidney, lead to the discovery of pro-
port is finite, not all of the glucose can be removed
 teins called aquaporins (AQPs). These membrane-
before the fluid passes out of the nephron and into the
spanning proteins are especially abundant in cells
renal pelvis. This is an example of saturation. Simply
 such as those in the kidney nephron and are believed
stated, when all of the binding sites are occupied, the
sd o so ram, re-uns sui aq oi
rate of transport is maximized. This rate of transfer,
hypothesized in the past.
called the Vmax, is unique for each class or type of
 The first of these proteins was identified in 1992
carrier protein. The capacity of the carrier to function
(Benga, 2012). There are now 13 different members
is also affected by the relative ability of the binding
of this family of proteins in humans, as well as
 site on the carrier protein to attract and hold the mol-
many analogous proteins in plants, yeast, bacteria,
ecule for transport. This attraction is described as
and amphibians. Skowronski (2010) reported the
affinity. Carrier proteins with high affinity for their
expression of AQPs 1, 5, and 9 in the pig uterus
transport partner are able to sequester, bind, and
during the estrous cycle and early pregnancy, thus
 transport their partner molecules even when concen-
suggesting that changes in AQPs are involved in
 trations are very low. Estimating the Km or binding
changing the uterine envirorment to support
 constant for this interaction provides a quantitative
reproduction.
measure of affinity. The Kv is the molar concentration
at which half of the carrier proteins are occupied. The
 lower this value, the greater the affinity. Interestingly.
similar aspects apply related to the binding of hor-
production increases, and the urine that is produced
mones to their specific receptors.
is more dilute (Box 2.2).
 Carrier proteins may also be affected somewhat like
Many important nutrient molecules, glucose, and
enzymes. Competitive inhibitors are able to block
certain amino acids are too polar to dissolve in the
binding of the ligand (molecule to be transported).
These inhibitor molecules essentially compete for the
the cells by passage through the plasma membrane
same binding site. In some cases the competing mol-
pores or channels. These substances nonetheless pass
 ecule is transported, but in other cases it is not. Some
into the cell by diffusion because they can interact
inhibitors can bind to regions other than the ligand-
with carrier proteins located in the plasma membrane.
 binding site of the carrier protein and induce a change
Precise mechanisms for this transport process are not
in conformation that then makes the usual binding site
well understood. But it is generally believed that
incapable of interacting with the transport molecule.
binding of the substance to be transported causes a
These effects are similar to the actions that serve to
conformational change in the protein carrier that acts
 modulate enzyme activity. Carrier proteins that facili-
(1) to shield the molecule from interactions with the
 tate the transport of a single molecule or class (single
lipid bilayer and (2) to simultaneously move the mol-
binding reaction) across the membrane are called uni-
ecule across the membrane. With the change in con-
formation, the carrier protein no longer can bind the
Km values determine the rate of reaction for these car-
molecule so it is released to the inside of the cell. This
 riers. Other transporters are more complicated because
type of transport is called facilitated diffusion because
the transfer of one solute depends on the simultane-
substances transported still must pass down their con-
ous binding and transport of another molecule. If the
centration gradients but presence of the carrier pro-
molecules to be transported both move in the same
teins is required to mediate the transport. Unlike with
 direction, the carrier is called a symport (something
simple diffusion, there are limitations. First, the carrier
like a symbiotic relationship), but if the molecules
proteins themselves are typically highly specific. For
move in opposite directions, the carrier is called an
example, carrier proteins that facilitate the diffusion
 antiport. Clearly, the kinetics that affect the actions of
of glucose would not be expected to also transport
 symport and antiport carriers are more complex than
ribose. Secondly, the process can be saturated. This
for simple uniport carriers. As an example, consider
is essentially the reason why diabetic animals have
the uptake of glucose. Most animal cells have uniport
glucose in their urine. Under normal conditions, a
carriers that take up glucose from the extracellular
52  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
fluids where its concentrations are usually higher than
filtrate or movement of fluids across capillary beds
 in the cytoplasm. This is passive transfer that depends
throughout the body demonstrates physiological fil-
 on facilitated diffusion. However, intestinal and kid-
tration. Filtration is considered a passive process, but
ney cells continue to take up glucose even when con-
it is obvious that pressure in the cardiovascular system
centrations are low. These cells actively
ysequester
depends on continued cardiac activity and muscle
 glucose across their membranes via a symport carrier
tone of arteries.
linked with the diffusion of Na into the cell. In other
Hydrolysis of ATP and release of chemical bond
words, the movement of Na down its concentration
 energy that fuels transport of substances across mem-
 gradient allows for the coupled transport of glucose
branes is active transport. Mechanisms are variable
into the cell. While cellular energy is not directly
but fall into two broad groups. The first, like facilitated
needed, maintenance of an effective concentration
diffusion, depends on specific membrane carrier pro-
gradient for Na does require energy. Figure 2.30
teins. The second is the formation and uptake of ves-
illustrates differences between simple diffusion and
icles. Carrier-mediated transport is specific but, unlike
carrier-mediated diffusion as well as theoretical mod-
diffusion processes, moves molecules against their
 els of three types of carrier proteins.
concentration gradients. In primary active transport,
Filtration is the physical process whereby water and
ATP is used to phosphorylate the carrier protein.
solutes are forced through a membrane or a capillary
 Binding of the phosphate group to the protein alters
wall by simple hydrostatic pressure. Despite the non-
its conformation. This causes the transport molecule
selective nature of this type of transport, it is critical
to be shuttled across the cell membrane and released.
for many physiological functions. Creation of urinary
One of the best studied of these carriers is the sodium-
Carrier-mediated
Uniport carrier protein
Lipid
bilayer
 Rate of transport
%2V
Simple diffusion
Symport carrier protein
KM
Concentration of
transported molecule
Antiport carrier protein
2
3
3
C
Fig. 2.30. Carrier protein-mediated transport properties. In panel A, the kinetics of simple diffusion compared with carrier-mediated transport
are shown. For simple diffusion, the rate is directly proportional to the concentration of the transported molecule. Carrier-mediated transport 
Ae uug aui jo aesa ue si sa il e uoeuuo aul uoeuauon ui aseaui laung jo ssaian (a) aee eix e sous
(Km). Panel B illustrates the action of a uniport carrier protein. Step 1 shows binding of the transport molecule to the protein, followed by a
change in carier conformation (2), and then release (3) of the molecule to the inside of the cell. Symport carriers follow a similar pattern
except that solute molecules (red and green symbols) bind and are transferred simultaneously in the same direction. In antiport carriers,
transport of one molecule depends on the simultaneous binding and transfer of another molecule in the opposite direction.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
53
Glucose
Na
Sodium-
Na+-glucose
Na
potassium
symport
punp
Iransporler
Na
K
Fg. 2.32. The sodium-potassium ATPase pump and sodium-
glucose symport. As detailed in Figure 2.31, the Na-K pump
K
maintains a gradient so that concentrations of Na are higher outside
Fig. 2.31. Action of ATPase pumps. In step 1, Na ions from the
the cell. As Na ions diffuse down their electrochemical gradient,
Cytoplasm bind to three sites on the protein. In step 2, complete 
the inside of the cell also has a net negative charge, and movement
loading stimulates the hydrolysis of ATP and phosphorylation of the
of Na is linked with the simultaneous transfer of glucose into the
protein. Phosphorylation causes a conformation shift and unloading
cell (transporter on the right). With respect to glucose uptake, this is
of Na ions to the outside of the cell (step 3). Unloading of Na exposes
two K binding sites available to K ions from the extracellular space
required for action of the glucose-Nat symport, but it is needed to
(step 4). Complete loading of K ions (step 5) triggers release of the
Create and maintain the Nat gradient across the cell membrane.
phosphate group and release of K ions to the inside of the cell step
6). Once K ions are released, the protein returns to the conformation 
 as in step 1 and is ready for loading of Na ions once again.
glucose and some amino acids against their concentra-
tion gradients can be achieved in this manner. This is
potassium ATPase pump. The carrier in this instance
 illustrated in Figure 2.32. Ion gradients are critical for
is a membrane-bound enzyme that cleaves ATP and
the actions of many different membrane transport
functions to maintain steep gradients for Na (-10-fold
systems. Some of these are similar to the symport for
higher outside) and K (-10-fold higher inside) relative
glucose. For example, other specific symport carriers
to the plasma membrane. These ion gradients are
also linked with the electrochemical gradient for Na+
 essentially for normal signaling in nerve cells and ini-
   o s  n d
tiation of muscle contractions. Another example of
sugars. lon gradients are also important in the opera-
active transport is closely linked with muscle activity.
tion of the antiport carrier that operates in the mem-
When muscle contraction occurs, the cytoplasm of the
brane of cells in the gastric pits in the stomach to
cell is flooded with calcium. To regulate contraction
regulate the pH of gastric juices by secretion of HCl.
events, calcium ions are pumped uphill back into 
 In addition to the transport involving specific mem-
storage inside the sarcoplasmic reticulum or back out
brane carrier proteins, substantial numbers of mole-
of the cell in some situations. The working of the
cules associated with the cell surface or molecules
 sodium-potassium ATPase pump is illustrated in
simply positioned near the surface can be moved into
Figure 2.31.
the cells by either pinocytosis (engulfment of fluids) or
 In addition to its relevance maintaining Na and K
endocytosis (engulfment of particles). Both of these
 gradients and osmotic balance, the sodium-potassium
processes require energy. Control of endocytosis is
ATPase pump is also responsible for transport of a
complex and poorly understood. In some cases, the
number of important molecules. This is called second-
 process is receptor mediated. That is, the binding of a
ary active transport. With greater concentrations
 specific ligand to proteins on the cell surface initiates
outside the cell and the fact that the inside of the cell
 a cascade that leads to endocytosis of the receptor and
has a net negative charge, there is a continuous elec-
associated ligand. This process often begins in areas of
trochemical gradient that promotes the diffusion of
the membrane containing called clathrin-coated pits.
Na ions back into the cell. This is a bit like filling a
 These endocytosed receptor proteins can be processed
pond behind a dam. Open a sluice and water pours
in at least three different ways, depending on the par-
out. The energy of the water flow can be used to spin
ticular receptor-ligand combination and cellular con-
a turbine to produce electricity or, as in the 1800s,
, to
ditions. Multiple vesicles are believed to fuse to create
turn grinding wheels to produce corn meal or flour.
a larger membrane structure called an endosome, from
 The cell can take advantage of energy from this down-
which smaller vesicles bleb or bud. A common fate is
hill diffusion of Na by linking it with the uptake
of
for receptors to be either recycled to the same region
other important molecules. For example, recovery
7of
 of membrane (recycling), moved to another area of
54  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
membrane (transcytosis), or shuttled to lysosomes for
called a phagosome. Most often, this is followed by
 cdestruction. As for pinocytosis, it is generally believed
fusion with lysosomes to degrade the material. Inter-
that essentially all cells continually ingest bits of their
estingly, in some cases, protein fragments from the
plasma membrane along with fluids via the continu-
 degraded material, especially in the case of foreign
 ous generation of these very small vesicles.
substances, are returned to the cell surface so that
Specialized blood-related cells, especially neutro-
other leucocytes can detect it. Macrophages that carry
 out this activity are called antigen-presenting cells.
 sis. This process is familiar from our images of ameba
surrounding food particles. In similar fashion, these
memory cells and initiate the production of antibodies 
leukocytic cells send pseudopods around cell debris
 against the foreign invader. Figure 2.33 illustrates
 or bacterial cells and engulf the material. The ingested
types of endocytosis and the trafficking associated
material is captured in a membrane-bound body
with endocytosis.
Apical surface
Phagocytosis
Recycling
 Cell surface
Endosome
Phagosome
Transcytosis
Degradation
Ingested
Nucleus
Nucleus
 foreign debris
are destroyed by
hydrolytic
enzymes from
the lysosome
Lysosome
Basal surface
A
Bulk-phase
endocytosis
C
· Molecules in the
fluid phase and 
randomly captured
into vesickes.
D
Receptor-mediated
endocytosis
• Molecules specifically bound
to surface receptors are
clustered, entrained by coated
pits, and captured into
endocytotic vesicles.
Fig. 2.33. Processing of vesicles derived from receptor-mediated endocytosis. Processing of vesicles derived from receptor-mediated endocytosis is
 illustrated in panel A. Once vesicles enter the cell they fuse to produce the endosome. Vesicles that bleb from the endosome are subjected to 
 one of three fates. Many of the receptor proteins are returned to the plasma membrane to be reused at the original site (recycling) or in a
different location of the plasma membrane (transcytosis). Other vesicles along their proteins (receptors and/or ligands) are degraded by lysosomal
enzymes following fusion. Panel B illustrates a specialized type of endocytosis (phagocytosis) that is employed by certain white blood cells.
Macrophages, for example, identify cellular debris or perhaps bacterial cells for engulfment. Cytoplasmic extensions called pseudopods extend
 and surround the targeted particle (1). The material is engulfed and captured in a vesicle called a phagosome (2). Fusion between the phagosome and 
lysosomes (3) lead to destruction of the captured material (4). The next two panels (C and D) illustrate differences between pinocytosis and
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Pinocytosis is more random since the cell has no control over specific molecules that can be secured.
The cell: The common physiological denominator
55
Chapter summary
synthesize ATP or to synthesize cellular organelles.
Most cellular proteins are created from the uptake of
While the definition of "living" has been stretched to
amino acids or peptides absorbed from the blood-
include viruses and perhaps prions, for animal phys-
stream. Basic amino acid structure is centered on the
iology, the cell is the fundamental unit of life. Com-
C-carbon, an amino group, and a carboxy group. The
binations of cel create tissues, groups of fisues lead
remaining side group attached to the carbon varies
to organs, and groups of organs lead to physiological
to create the individual amino acids. For example, if
systems. Four principles are derived from cell theory:
this residual or R group is a hydrogen atom, this
yields the simple amino acid glycine. There are 20
The cell is the primary structural and functional
common amino acids.
unit of living organisms.
Simple monomeric sugars include the 6-carbon
 Function of organisms depends on activities of
hexoses such as glucose, galactose, or the 5-carbon
cells.
 ribose. Disaccharides are familiar as lactose or sucrose.
Cell biochemistry is dictated by cellular or-
In polymeric forms, glucose creates glycogen, which
ganelles.
is important as a storage molecule to supply glucose
 Propagation of life depends on cellular activity.
to maintain blood glucose concentrations between
meals.
Cells and organelles
 In addition to the phospholipids critical for mem-
branes, other lipids, for example, cholesterol, provide
the backbone for synthesis of a myriad of steroid
The combinations of structures within cells allow for
specific functions linked to particular cell types, but
hormones. Lipid stored to generate ATP comes from
common features of nearly all cells include the cell
triglycerides, which are composed of a 3-carbon
membrane, mitochondria, nucleus, nucleolus, Golgi.
glycerol molecule with three attached fatty acids.
 Nucleic acids are necessary in synthesized DNA
ribosomes, rough endoplasmic reticulum, microtu-
bules, microfilaments, and inclusions (lysosomes,
and RNA as well as a number of coenzymes neces-
peroxisomes, secretory vesicles). The plasma mem-
sary for ATP production. The two-ringed base purine
 gives rise to adenine and guanine, while single-ring
brane as well as membranes surrounding many
pyrimidine is utilized to produce thymine, cytosine,
internal organelles are highly structured, with an
inner and outer leaflet of highly polar "heads" (
and uracil.
of
phospholipids and internal leaflet consisting on the
Making and breaking of molecular bonds is at the
nonpolar tails of the phospholipids. In addition, inte-
center of cellular biochemistry. Covalent bonds are
critically important, but the presence of hydrogen
gral membrane proteins are incorporated in either
the inner or outer phospholipid leaflets or are
bonding is extremely important in maintenance of
the structural integrity of DNA and higher-level
arranged so they span the entire membrane. Many
of these proteins function as receptors for hormones
structures of proteins. Chemical reactions in cells are
and GFs or are involved in signaling related to
dependent on the actions of enzymes, which allow
 reactions that would rarely, if ever, happen spontane-
immune function. This membrane structure is fre-
quently described as a fluid mosaic model. Centri-
ously. All enzymes are cellular proteins, and the
oles are a specialized arrangement of cellular proteins
actions of many require the presence of cofactors or
 pe e  e rn sa p
coenzymes.
They are also critical in cell division as they organize
Movement of critical nutrients across cell mem-
and direct movement and separation of the chromo-
branes often depends on the presence of specific
 transport proteins located within the membrane.
somes when the cell divides during mitosis.
Carriers that move materials against their concentra-
tion gradients require energy expenditure usually
Macromolecules and cell function
either directly or indirectly in the form of ATP
hydrolysis. Three broad classes of transporters are
It should be no surprise that cell and physiological
recognized: uniport, symport, and antiport. Materi-
function depends on multiple interactions to catabo-
als can also enter cells via bulk phase endocytosis,
lize various nutrient macromolecules (lipids, pro-
receptor-mediated endocytosis, or, in special cases,
teins, and carbohydrates) to supply the materials to
phagocytosis.
56
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Review questions and answers are available
Kordon, E.C. and G.H. Smith. 1998. An entire functional
online.
s e u od a asd A pu r
cell. Development 125: 1921-1930.
McFadden, T.B., T.E. Daniel, and R.M. Akers. 1990. Effects
 of plane of nutrition, growth hormone, and unsafurated
"uv 1 squen eaqndaid u mora Areuueu uo je
5
References
Sci. 68: 3171-3179.
 Nickerson, S.C. and R.M. Akers. 1983. Effect of preparfum
Akers, RM. and S.C. Nickerson. 1983. Effect of preparfum
blockade of microfubule formation on ultrastrucfural dif-
blockade of microfubule formation on milk production
ferentiation of the mammary epithelium in Holstein
and biochemical differenfiation of the mammary epifthe-
heifers. Int. J. Biochem. 15: 777-788.
lium in Holstein heifers. Int. J. Biochem. 15: 771-775.
Nickerson, S.C. and RM. Akers. 1984. Biochemical and
Benga, G. 2012. On the definifion, nomenclafure and classi-
ultrastructural aspects of milk synthesis and secretion. Int.
fication of water charnel proteins (aquaporins and rela-
J. Biochem. 16: 855-865.
fives). Mol. Aspects Med. 33: 514-517.
Sejrsen, K., J.T. Huber, H.A. Tucker, and R.M. Akers. 1982.
Berry, S.D.K., PM. Jobst, S.E. Ellis, R.D. Howard, A.V.
 Influence of plane of nutrifion on mammary develop-
Capuco, and R.M. Akers. 2003. Mammary epithelial pro-
ment in pre- and post-pubertal heifers. J. Dairy Sci. 65:
iqndard u ussadxa a ridaar uaosa pue uera
793-800.
tal heifers: effects of ovariectomy and growth hormone. J.
Sejrsen, K., J. Foldager, M.T. Sorensen, RM. Akers, and D.E.
Dairy Sai. 86: 2098-2105.
 Bauman. 1986. Effect of exogenous bovine somatotropin
Bussard, K.M. and G.H. Smith. 2011. The mammary gland
on pubertal mammary development in heifers. J. Dairy
 microenvironment directs progenitor cell fate in vivo. Int.
Soi. 69: 1528-1535.
J. Cell Biol. doi: 10.1155/2011/451676
Skowronski, M.T.
2010. Distributfion and quantitative
Jones, G.M., R.E. Pearson, G.A. Clabaugh, and C.W. Heald.
 changes in amounts of aquaporin 1, 5 and 9 in the pig
1984. Relaftionships befween somafic cell counts and milk
uterus during the estrous cycle and early pregnancy.
production. J. Dairy Sci. 67: 1823-1831.
Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 8: 109.
Keys, J.E., A.V. Capuco, RM. Akers, and J. Djiane. 1989.
Smifh, J.J., A.V. Capuco, W.E. Beal, and R.M. Akers. 1989.
 Comparative study of mammary gland development and
 Association of prolactin and insulin receptors with mam-
differenfiation between beef and dairy heifers. Domest.
mogenesis and lobulo-alveolar formation in pregnant
Anim. Endocrinol. 6: 311-319.
ewes. Int. J. Biochem. 21: 73-81.
3
Fundamental biochemical pathways
and processes in cellular physiology
Contents
 Metabolism and Energetic Definitions
57
Clycogenesis, Gluconeogenesis, and
Production of ATP
60
Clycolysis
67
Glycolysis
61
Lipogenesis and Lipolysis
70
The Cori Cycle
64
Interconversions and Catabolism of Proteins
78
The Krebs Cycle
64
Structure and Function of DNA and RNA
79
Intermediary Metabolism: Processing and
 Protein Synthesis
80
Pathways
67
Chapter Summary
82
While our focus is physiology, as we have already seen,
 truth. For example, acquiring the energy to maintain
the ioric gradients we discussed in Chapter 2 depends
appreciation of various aspects of chemistry, biochem-
 on the hydrolysis of one of the phosphate bonds of
istry, physics, and other disciplines. The purpose of this
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The question becomes,
chapter is to introduce you to some of the basics of how
"where did the energy needed to produce the ATP in
cells carry out essenfial steps to obtain the energy
the first place come from?" This is the crux of the
needed for various activities and to generate the build-
 problem; some molecules are catabolized so that oth-
ing blocks required for growth and development.
 ers can be created. Simply put, living systems are in a
Please appreciate that in many respects our discussions
constant thermodynamic battle. As the second law of
are rudimentary. However, this foundation will give
thermodynamics indicates, the natural tendency is
you the tools and concepts to understand the roles and
toward equilibrium with dispersion of energy and
actions of each physiological system, and to excel in
increasing disorder, or in thermodynamic terms, in-
advanced courses in nutrition, reproduction, lactation,
 Creased entropy Living systems, cells, tissues, organs,
 or other biological and animal-oriented courses.
n sn aq p e sso pe ssss
opposite. The degree of complexity and organization
in living systems is antithetical to this law. Unlike most
Metabolism and energetic definitions
of the nonliving universe, open biological systems are
   r e  ax  
We have all heard the expressions, "there are no free
roundings. This allows living systems, while they are
rides" or "no free lunches." This is certainly true when
 alive, to move away from the dispersion and energy
it comes to living our lives but is also a physiological
 equilibrium that the second law of thermodynamics
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
58  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
dictates. The first law of thermodynamics is familiar
Given the importance of energy in fueling the bio-
as the maxim that energy can neither be created nor
 chemical reactions in cells, it is fitting that we consider
 destroyed. More formally, it is expressed in this way:
 some definitions. What do we mean by energy? Are
the total energy of a system plus its surroundings re-
-oisd e u aqnea Aena Aaa jo sg e
mains constant. Thus, the exquisite organization and
 ical viewpoint? We often say that the diets we supply
complexity that characterize living systems are at the
to our animals give them the energy they need for
expense of free energy from the environment; that is,
productive functions—for example, to allow draft
 energy that can be harnessed to do work. Thus, living
horses to pull wagons, thoroughbreds to race, or cows
systems are analogous to an oasis in the desert. The
 to produce milk. Our animals do not consume energy
 oasis, often short-lived in a geological sense, provides
directly, but rather it is the digestion of foodstuffs that
a place for relief for the weary traveler. Living sys-
liberates the nutrient molecules that can then be oxi-
tems represent transient conditions during which time
 dized in a controlled, deliberate fashion to provide
nonequilibrium conditions related to energy-matter
energy needs. In physics, energy is described as the
circumstances exist.
capacity to do work. In biological systems, energy is
 A fundamental postulate of theoretical biology is that
 sometimes expressed as heat units or calories. A calorie
life processes can be explained in terms of chemistry
(cal) is the amount of energy needed to increase the
and physics—in other words, in terms of matter and
temperature of 1g of water 1 degree at a pressure of
energy Building on this idea, it can be reasoned that life
latm. Other related terms are the kilocalorie (1000
processes are represented by the myriad of chemical
calories) or the megacalorie (Mcal = 1,0o0,000 cal) often
  (  )
used in descriptions of the energy content of animals
that occur within cells and tissuesin other words, me-
feeds. Other measures of energy are also frequently
tabolism. The yin and yang of metabolism are anabolism
used. For example, lJ is the work done by a force of
and catabolism. Our discussion begins with catabolism.
1 N working over a distance of 1m (m? x kg × sec).
 n  , d 
Other measures of energy can be derived as well
used in nutrition and biochemistry texts. This refers to
(1 cal = 4.187J or 0.004 British thermal units [BTU]).
the many steps of reaction between the initiation of a
It is also clear that not all of the bond or chemical
biochemical process and its completion. For example,
energy that is available in food molecules can be cap-
the complete oxidation of the critical nutrient glucose
 tured for use by tissues or cells. If a known quantity
begins with uptake of the glucose into the cell and
of a food material or nutrient is completely combusted
entry of the molecule into a sequence of reactions
or oxidized in the presence of oxygen and the heat
called glycolysis. This is an example of a biochemical
 generated measured, this provides an estimate of the
 pathway. The steps in the pathway detail the reactions
 gross or potential energy of the substance. This process
that are required to convert this 6-carbon hexose sugar
is
called calorimetry. This technique is valuable
into two 3-carbon molecules of pyruvate. This process
 because it provides a measure of the potential energy
is also called anaerobic respiration. The various mol-
available in a particular nutrient or other substance.
ecules that are temporarily produced in the 10 steps
 However, as another old expression says, "it takes
of glycolysis are called intermediates. Other biochemi-
money to make money"; there are biochemical costs
cal pathways would generate their own specific family
involved in acquiring the energy that is potentially
of intermediate molecules. Consequently, intermedi-
 available in various nutrients. Just as there are over-
ary metabolism refers to the creation and existence of
head costs in running a business or a university for
the hundreds of molecules that are fabricated as
that matter, there are physiological costs that must be
various molecules progress toward their final bio-
paid to capture the energy available in nutrients. For
chemical destination. Finally, although we typically
example, consider feeding your horse a carrot and the
describe important biochemical pathways singly, it
steps needed to capture the energy in the starch. For
needs to be emphasized that a host of biochemical
 processing there is mastication and swallowing, trans-
reactions or pathways are occurring simultaneously.
port to the small intestine, secretion of gastric and
 Intermediates from one pathway often also supply
intestinal enzymes, and transport of digested glucose
 materials that can be used in other pathways. For
molecules across the epithelial cells. All of these
example, one of the intermediate steps in glycolysis
events can be thought of as overhead or maintenance
produces triose phosphate. This molecule can supply
 costs associated with the physiological processing of
the carbon atoms to make pyruvate or alternatively be
the carrot.
shuttled out of the glycolysis pathway to produce
 Thus, the amount of energy present in the diet does
glycerol that is needed in the anabolic pathway to
not equal energy that is ultimately available to the
make triglycerides. A key idea is that regulation and
animal. Animal science nutritionists often conduct
control of the rates of activity of these various, often
feeding trials to evaluate the practical value of differ-
competing biochemical pathways is critical. Resources
ent feedstuffs. These feedstuffs are often complex mix-
 must be used effectively and efficiently.
tures. Consider total mixed rations that are often fed
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
59
to dairy cows with various combinations of forages
 portion of fecal energy comes from sloughed intestinal
and concentrates. In such studies, great care must be
 epithelial cells, bacteria cells, and substances that have
taken to account for measurement errors, for example,
been excreted by way of the feces.
spilled feed and variation in the efficiency of digestion
For nutrients that are ultimately 2
absorbed, the
and ingestion. Particularly for complex rations, the
energy content still does not match energy that ulti-
gross energy content of the diet gives only a broad
mately becomes available to the animal. However, the
indication of how valuable the diet is to the animal.
fraction that is represented by digested and absorbed
What happens if one of the components in the diet
 nutrients is called metabolizable energy. This is the
cannot be digested? What if there are interactions so
fraction of total or gross energy fed that is directly
that the breakdown of one dietary component affects
available to the tissues and cells to be processed. This
the microorganism population of the Gl tract so that
 energy can be used for maintenance, for heat genera-
normally effective nutrients are lost? Even under the
tion (sometimes considered a waste product), or for
best conditions, especially for animals fed fibrous
more recognizable practical productive functions, that
 feeds, a part of the feed is not digested and contributes
is, muscle growth, egg production, or milk produc-
to the energy content of the feces. The difference
tion. Metabolizable energy is less than digestible
between the gross energy content of the diet and the
 energy, typically about 80%, because of other losses in
 portion of the energy that is available to the animal is
addition to the fecal losses. This fraction would be
called digestible energy. Various rations can then be
lower still if the heat that is generated is considered a
compared based on their digestibility energy, often
waste product. The additional losses include materials
expressed as a fraction or percentage of the gross
that are lost in urine as well as gaseous product from
energy. From measurements made over the course of
 gut fermentation that are expelled. These products are
several days and sometimes weeks, average daily
energy consumption minus the energy content of the
ruminants. The fraction of energy that is ultimately
feces and urine is called the apparent digestible energy.
 used for physiological activities is called net energy.
It is called apparent because some generally small
a Ar g ssnd a s i an
Ingested
 Ingested energy
feeds
Fecal
energy
Endogenous
additions, i.e.,
sloughed cells,
Apparent digested
secretions
energy
Urine
Methane
Sweat
Metabolizable
energy
Lactation
Growth
 Egg production
Maintenance
Wool growth
Net
Work
energy
Fig- 3.1.F
aa jo sunowe aun 'spaay pansuo ui rsaua ssoe jo aea leoi aui ym paneduo haua ynsaan jo suissaoid
ultimately available to cells and tissues is substantially reduced.
60 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 It is common to characterize energy that is needed
Table 3.1. Effect of bovine somatotropin (bST) in lactating dairy
for basal or resting life activities in animals as the
 cows on milk production and energy metabolism parameters.
energy of maintenance. These energy costs do not
Variabie
Treatment
reflect energy that is needed for productive work in a
production agriculture sense—for example, work
Controt
bsT
done by a draft horse or racehorse or energy recovered
from products such as meat, milk, or eggs. These are
Milk yield (kg/day)
26.0 ± 0.5
31.8 ± 0.5!
O consumption (L/day)
5345 ± 58
8723 ± 58
critical physiological functions, action of the Na-K
CO2 production (L/day)
5391 ± 58
5454 ± 58
ATPase pump, cardiac function, and so forth. As
 Figure 3.1 illustrates, there are additional energy costs 
% Intake
associated with acquiring feed and assimilating nutri-
ents themselves. Ideally, maintenance activities are
Fecal energy
33.9 ± 0.5
35.2 ± 0.5
stated as the energy costs of preserving an adult
Digestible energy
66.0 ± 0.5
64.8 ± 0.5
Gaseous energy
animal under resting or sedentary circumstances, in
5.3 ± 0.1
5.8 ± 0.5
Urinary energy
3.2 ± 0.05
3.3 ± 0.05
the absence of weight gain or loss, in thermoneutral
Heat energy
34.6 ± 0.7
37.6 ± 0.7
conditions. In practical terms, this ideal status is rarely
Retained energy
22.9 ± 0.9
18.1 ± 0.9!
 obtained, but it does give a framework to understand
Milk energy
24.2 ± 0.9
31.7 ± 0.9'
the meaning of maintenance energy costs. In humans,
Tissue energy
-1.6 ± 1.6
-13.7 ± 1.6'
the term basal metabolic rate may be more familiar
suawean uaamieg auaep ueguals Aesies e saeipul
 and is determined for subjects in a quiet, thermoneu-
P≤ 0.5.
tral environment, about 12 hours after a meal.
Data are adapted from Tyrrell et al. (1 988).
Basal energy needs are determined indirectly by
measuring oxygen consumption under these condi-
tions. This is effective because the amounts of oxygen
tion in dairy cows is related to increased use of tissue
needed to completely oxidize fats, proteins, or carbo-
reserves and altered partitioning of nutrients rather
hydrates are known. If CO2 production is simultane-
than dramatic effects on digestibility of nutrients or
ously measured, the respiratory quotient can 
be
 apparent changes in maintenance requirements of the
calculated (moles of CO, exhaled divided by the moles
animals. Simply, the increases observed would have
of O2 consumed). These data can then be used to esti-
been expected with the degree of increased milk pro
mate the nature of the nutrients (protein, carbohy-
duction, regardless of the specific reason for increased
drate, or fat) being oxidized for energy production.
 production.
The alternative to indirect calorimetry is to measure
heat production along with completed collection of
 gases and other wastes. This is clearly a difficult and
Production of ATP
 expensive undertaking with large domestic animals.
However, Table 3.1 shows an example of calorimetry
For essentially all physiological activities, the most
data from a study by Tyrrell et al. (1988) designed to
useful and available form of energy comes from ATP.
determine in part if the metabolic rate of dairy cows
When the terminal phosphate group is cleaved to
treated with bovine somatotropin (bST) was increased
 produce adenosine diphosphate (ADP), each mole of
compared with controls. Briefly, nine cows received
ATP yields 7400cal. There are other similar high-
bST (51.5IU/day) or a daily control injection in a
energy-yielding molecules but most are similar to
single reversal experimental design, which utilized
 ATP, for example, GTP or creatine phosphate. Indeed,
14-day treatment periods. With increased milk pro-
the formation of creatine phosphate (which acts as a
duction after bST (22% increase), cows already in a
 storage form of energy in muscle cells because of its
negative tissue nitrogen balance (-2l g/day) tended to
capacity to regenerate ATP from ADP) gains this
become more negative during the bST treatment
capacity only when ATP is produced in excess of
immediate demand as in the following reaction:
were measured in open-circuit respiration chambers.
ATP+ Creatine <> ADP + Creatine phosphate.
As predicted from increased milk production, there
was a corresponding greater heat energy loss and
This means that production of ATP is vital. The struc-
increased milk energy secretion after bST treatment.
ture of ATP is shown in Figure 3.2. Mitochondria are
Tissue energy balance was -1.1Mcal/day during the
critical because the final stages of oxidation of several
 control treatment period. Increased use of energy
coenzymes occur within these organelles. When the
 reserves with bST treatment decreased tissue energy
reduced coenzymes are oxidized, a portion of the
balance to -9.8 Mcal/day. These researchers concluded
 energy produced is utilized to drive the synthesis of
that much of the effect of bST to increase milk produc-
ATP from ADP as shown below:
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
61
ADP + Phosphate + Energy →ATP
Table 3.2. Common terms associated with the metabolism of
carbohydrates.
NH,
Term
Definition
Glycolysis
Anaerobic oxidation of a molecule of
CH,
glucose via 10 enzymatic reactions to
produce two molecules of pyruvate.
The reactions occur in the cytoplasm.
Glycogenolysis
The breakdown of glycogen to
produce glucose for utilization in the
Structure of ATP
呈
glycolysis catabolic pathway.
HO
Glycogenesis
Synthesis of glycogen from glucose.
Fig. 3.2. Structure of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is presented. It
Gluconeogenesis
The formation of glucose from
is the most important labile energy carrier in the body. Hydrolysis
of the terminal phosphate bond yields an exceptionally high level 
noncarbohydrate substrates. Important 
of free or (available) energy. The nitrogenous group should be
in times of stress, makes glucose
familiar as adenine, linkage with the ribose produces adenosine,
available from nonessential amino
and addition of a single phosphate moiety gives adenosine
acids. Critical in ruminants due to
monophosphate or AMP and two adenosine diphosphate or ADP.
fermentation of dietary carbohydrates.
   +  + 
sible for this conversion are collectively called glycoly-
As you might guess, since many different feedstuffs
sis, the Embden-Meyerhof pathway, or anaerobic
can be used to produce energy, a host of nutrient mol-
respiration. It is typical to describe carbohydrate
ecules under the appropriate circumstances can be
catabolism beginning with glucose, but you should
modified to enter the biochemical pathway for ATP
remember that polymers of glucose (glycogen in
production. Although some ATP can be generated in
animal cells) can be cleaved to provide the glucose
the absence of oxygen through substrate-level phos-
 monomers to enter the glycolysis pathway. Thus, the
phorylation (essentially the regeneration of ATP from
cell may well contain stores of glycogen that can be
ADP as with creatine phosphate), production rates are
cleaved to supply glucose aside from the uptake of
minor compared with oxidative phosphorylation. In a
glucose across the plasma membrane. Table 3.2 pro-
nutshell, this explains the critical need for oxygen.
vides a list of some often confusing, similar-sounding
Within the mitochondria, where reduced coenzymes
terms that have to do with carbohydrate metabolism.
are oxidized, oxygen serves as the final acceptor of
It may be useful for you to periodically refer to this
 electrons in this cascade of reactions. Without oxygen
table as you study this important topic. Figure 3.3
available, the electron transport chain fails, and the
provides an outline of each of the steps in glycolysis.
energy normally available to drive phosphorylation of
We have purposefully not given all of the chemical
ADP to regeneration ATP also fails. Needs for continu-
 structural detail showing changes in carbons and
ous supplies of ATP are so acute that unless oxygen is
functional groups as glucose is modified through gly-
quickly returned, death occurs in a matter of minutes.
colysis. If this is needed, it is available in any introduc-
To understand the pathways for ATP generation, we
tory biochemistry book. Our goal is for you to
will focus first on the catabolism of carbohydrates and
 appreciate the highlights, the overall chemical events,
specifically on the catabolism of glucose. Once we
and most importantly, the physiological relevance.
have this core of information, we will then discuss
Although each of the reactions of glycolysis is enzyme-
how other nutrients can be diverted for use as fuels to
mediated, we have focused on two glycolysis reac-
drive ATP generation.
tions and their associated enzymes along with one
other reaction that is not strictly part of glycolysis.
These are (1) the conversion of glucose to glucose-6-
Glycolysis
phosphate (step 1 of glycolysis, catalyzed by hexoki-
nase), (2) the conversion of fructose-6-phosphate into
We begin our quest to understand energy production
fructose 1,6-diphosphate (step 3, catalyzed by phos-
with glucose because it is typically the most common
phofructokinase [PFK]), and (3) the conversion of
 nutrient used for acute energy production. The initial
 pyruvate into lactate (catalyzed by lactate dehydroge-
processing of glucose molecules begins in the cyto-
nase). Some specific reactions and molecules associ-
plasm of the cell. Once inside the cell, 6-carbon glucose
ated with glycolysis are provided in Figure 3.4. At this
is converted in a series of reactions into two 3-carbon
point, it is worth remembering the significance of gly-
 molecules of pyruvate. The 10 linked reactions respon-
colysis. This pathway allows the conversion of the
62
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Glucose
Glucose-6-P
Fructose 6-P
hapter
Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphate
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Dihydroxyacetone P and
2x
Glyceraldehyde 3-P
2-Phosphoglycerate
 3-Phosphoglycerate
2X
2x
2x
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
2x
Lactate
Fig. 3.3. Chemical steps and intermediates in glycolysis are illustrated.
nutrient glucose into molecules that can then be
from ATP as illustrated in Figure 3.4. In step 2, glucose-
shuttled into the mitochondria for use in the process
 6-phosphate is converted into another hexose sugar by
 of oxidative phosphorylation. However, as we indi-
the action of the enzyme phosphohexose isomerase,
cated earlier, oxidative phosphorylation (simply the
that is, fructose-6-phosphate. Step 3 again utilizes
production of ATP linked to a series of oxidation-
another molecule of ATP as the enzyme PFK catalyzes
 reduction reactions) requires oxygen. In addition to
 the addition of another phosphate group to produce
 preparing molecules for entrance into the mitochon-
fructose 1,6-diphosphate. Step 4 is a cleavage reaction
dria, a small amount of ATP is produced during the
catalyzed by the enzyme aldolase, which produces
glycolysis reactions. In contrast with mitochondrial
 two 3-carbon molecules. These are dihydroxyacetone
activity, this occurs via substrate-level phosphoryla-
phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. In step 5,
tion. As you will see, the amount of ATP made in this
the enzyme phosphotriose isomerase converts dihy-
manner is very small compared with that which occurs
droxyacetone into a second molecule of glyceralde-
with the complete catabolism of the glucose (glycoly-
hyde 3-phospate. There are now two identical
sis reactions + mitochondrial activity), but it is none-
molecules to continue through glycolysis so that prod-
theless essential. This is because production of ATP via
ucts made from this point are doubled. Step 6 depends
glycolysis alone can occur in the absence of oxygen.
on the enzyme glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydro-
 For this reason, it is called anaerobic respiration.
 genase. As we will discuss in more detail relative to
Let us outline the steps of glycolysis. Typically,
mitochondrial activity, this enzyme depends on the
glucose is captured by the action of membrane trans-
oxidized form of the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine
 sn r s  o pssd p s
dinucleotide or NAD*. During this reaction the NAD+
ture, a phosphate group is added to the sixth carbon
becomes reduced (NADH), and inorganic phosphate
of the glucose. This then produces glucose-6-phos-
is added to the substrate to produce 1,3-bisphosphate
 phate. Somewhat ironically, even though the glycoly-
glycerate. The first direct production of ATP occurs in
sis ultimately leads to energy production, in the first
step 7 as a phosphate group is cleaved, and the energy
 step of glycolysis, ATP is actually used. This is because
 is utilized to simultaneously add a phosphate group
the phosphate group added to the glucose is donated
to ADP. This is an example of substrate phosphorylation
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
63
Action of hexokinase
Fructose 6-
phosphate
CH,OH
CHOH
Phosphofructokinase
(regulatory enzyme)
HO
HO
HO
lapt
OH
H
HO
Mg2+
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-
diphosphate
ATP
ADP
A
Action of phosphoglycerate
kinase
R
B
Mg2+
广
H-C-OH
H-C-OH
ADP
ATP
CH,- 0
0 -"H3
1,3-Bisphospho-
 3-Phosphoglycerate
 glycerate
Action of pyruvate kinase
Mg2+
c-o
C-
C
C-OH
ADP
ATP
...
H3
'H3
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
(enol form)
C
Fig. 3.4. Selected reactions of glycolysis. Panel A shows the action of the hexokinase. This enzyme adds a phosphate group (red circle) to
carbon 6 of glucose. This effectively traps the glucose inside the cell since it can no longer bind to membrane transporters. Panel B shows
phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate by the enzyme phosphofructokinase (PFK). PFK is a critical regulatory enzyme of glycolysis because
its activity is modulated by the ATP/ADP ratio in the cytoplasm. A high ratio inhibits and a low ratio stimulates the enzyme. These first two
reactions can be thought of as energy requiring activation phases of glycolysis. Panels C and D illustrate two reactions that produce ATP by
 substrate phosphorylation. Remember, two molecules of each substrate are produced when fructose 1,6-diphosphate is cleaved (steps 4 and 5
of glycolysis) so a total of four molecules of ATP are produced. When the ATP debt is paid for use of ATP in the first two reactions, the net
gain is +2 ATP under anaerobic conditions.If the reduced NADH (two molecules) produced in step 6 of glycolysis can be oxidized in the 
mitochondria (aerobic conditions), an additional six ATP are generated as a consequence of glycolysis.
to produce a molecule of ATP, and the reaction is cata-
 as the enzyme pyruvate kinase acts to transfer a phos-
lyzed by phosphoglycerate kinase. Step & depends on
 phate from phosphoenolpyruvate to ADP as pyruvate
 is also created. At this point, the pyruvate is at a cross-
 of the 3-phosphoglycerate made previously to yield
roads. The redox state of the tissue determines which
2-phosphoglycerate. Step 9 is the conversion of the
of two alternative paths will be followed. If oxygen is
2-phosphoglycerate into phosphoenolpyruvate cata-
 available, the pyruvate is shuttled into the mitochon-
lyzed by enolase.Step 10is another ATP-making event
dria as subsequently described. If, however, oxygen is
64  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
limited, that is, there are anaerobic conditions, pyru-
 These molecules are absorbed into the portal vein that
vate is reduced by the action of lactate dehydrogenase,
drains the intestinal tract for use by the liver and other
and the coenzyme NADH becomes oxidized again.
tissues. There are various other compounds that are
This is a critical process under these conditions. You
considered glucogenic. These are molecules that can
may recall that step 6 of glycolysis requires the oxi-
 ssd q o a o a  
dized form of this coenzyme (NADt). Although only
glycolysis for subsequent ATP production or for use
 a small amount of ATP is derived directly from gly-
in other biochemical pathways. For example, propio-
colysis, even this would be lost were it not for the
 nate that is derived from fermentation of dietary
action of lactate dehydrogenase. As an aside, there are
carbohydrates in ruminant animals is an essential
also several isozymes of lactate dehydrogenase that
substrate to allow ruminants to synthesize the glu-
are important clinically. For example, the unique
cose they need. These glucogenic compounds can be
structure of the LDH from heart muscle can be detected
Aussa are jeqi aoue (h) sdnona omi ou papia
in blood serum in animals (or people) that have suf-
direct conversions into glucose without a significant
fered cardiac injury (Fig. 3.5). Table 3.3 summarizes
amount of recycling, for example, propionate and
ATP production that is associated with glycolysis.
certain amino acids, and (2) products of partial metab-
olism of glucose in particular tissues that are then
transported to the liver or kidney for generation of
The Cori cycle
glucose, for example, lactate. In all animals, there are
times when oxygen is locally limited so that anaerobic
Most carbohydrates in the diet can be readily con-
 respiration is favored and lactic acid accumulates. For
verted into glucose, galactose, or fructose when digested.
example, the accumulation of lactic acid occurs in
active muscle tissue and produces the sensation of
muscle fatigue. In addition, since erythrocytes lack
Action of lactate
mitochondria, they rely on glycolysis for all of their
dehydrogenase
ATP needs and consequently continually produce
lactic acid regardless of oxygen availability Most of
the lactic acid from muscle or erythrocytes diffuses
into the bloodstream. Fortunately, it is transported to
the liver and, to a lesser extent, the kidney where it
c-α
c-o
can be converted into glucose. At this point, it can be
C=α
HO -C -H
stored as hepatic or renal cell glycogen or released back
NADH
NAD
into the bloodstream for use by muscle or other tissues
CH3
CH3
(see Fig. 3.10). Cycling of lactic acid from muscle (or
other tissues) to liver and the return of glucose is called
the Cori cycle and is outlined in Figure 3.6.
Pyruvate
Lactate
(keto form)
Fig. 3.5. The action of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is illustrated.
The Krebs cycle
After an initial spontaneous rearrangement of pyruvate from the
enol form to the keto isomer, LDH catalyzes the conversion of
 Let us now trace the fate of pyruvate that is produced
pyruvate to lactate. Most important in anaerobic conditions, this is
at the end of glycolysis under aerobic conditions.
linked with the simultaneous oxidation of reduced NADH. This
 Remember our goal here is to understand how the
newly produced NAD is essential for glycolysis to continue under
these conditions. This is because NADt is required for step 6 of
catabolism of glucose and other carbohydrates is used
glycolysis.
to generate the ATP that is essential to cells and tissues.
Table 3.3.S
 Summary of ATP production in glycolysis.
Reaction
ATP Production Type
Number per Mofe of Gfucose
Glyceraldehyde 3-P dehydrogenase
Creation of reduced NADH (2)
6
Phosphoglycerate kinase
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
Pyruvate kinase
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
Subtract ATP used by hexokinase and phosphofructokinase
-2
Summary
Net gain & (aerobic)
Net gain 2 (anaerobic)
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
65
Active muscle
convention is to abbreviate the structure of the reduced
tissue
Liver
form of the molecule as CoA·SH, which designates the
reactive SH group of the molecule. The acetyl group
Glycogen
Glycogen
that is now part of acetyl-CoA is derived from the
 catabolism of pyruvate (two carbons remaining after
Glucose-6-P
decarboxylation of pyruvate). As we will see, acetyl-
Glucose
CoA is at the confluence of a variety of major meta-
Blood
bolic pathways. Almost all of the many specific
Glucose-6-P
 carbohydrates and fats that are catabolized for energy
glucose
Pyruvate
production are utilized to generate acetyl-CoA. In
Pyruvate
addition, a number of the nonessential amino acids
from degraded proteins also are cannibalized to gen-
Lactate
erate acetyl-CoA. As a special case in ruminants, one
 of the major products from fermentation of dietary
TCA cycle
Lactate
carbohydrates is acetate, which is readily converted to
Blood lactate
acetyl-CoA for subsequent processing through the
Fig. 3.6. The Cori cycle. In active muscle (e.g., with anaerobic
mitochondria.
conditions) the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA and
Back to our story: at this point, the two carbons of
processing via the TCA cycle is blocked (red X). This leads to
the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA and the 4-carbon mol-
lactate or lactic acid production. The lactate diffuses out of the 
ecule oxaloacetate condense to create the 6-carbon
muscle tissue into blood where the liver and kidney can convert
compound citrate. This is the first step of the Krebs
lactate into glucose-6-phosphate for storage as glycogen or
cycle as outlined in Figure 3.7. There are two critical
conversion to glucose-1-phosphate then glucose. Muscle or other
tissues in the body can then use this regenerated glucose.
physiological points to the Krebs cycle reactions. The
first is that some ATP is produced directly via
substrate-level phosphorylation of ADP similar to that
Once this foundation is established, we will then be
which occurs in glycolysis. The second and most
able to understand how other nutrients can also be
important is that with each turn of the cycle, reduced
used for energy production. The next major biochemi-
forms of the coenzymes NAD and flavin adenine
 cal pathway for this processing is called the citric acid
dinucleotide (FAD) are produced. When enzymes of
or Krebs cycle. These reactions occur inside the mito-
the electron transport chain, also located in the mito-
chondria, so before pyruvate can be modified, it has
chondria, subsequently oxidize these molecules, this
 to pass across the mitochondrial membrane.
yields the energy for synthesis of the vast majority of
This occurs via the action of a specific membrane
ATP that can be created from overall catabolism of
 transporter. The pyruvate is then quickly oxidatively
glucose. We have provided only a skeleton outline
decarboxylated (removal of CO2) to produce acetyl-
showing the names of the intermediates of the Krebs
coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). This reaction is catalyzed
cycle reactions and locations of specific events.
by the action of the multienzyme complex pyruvate
Remember that each molecule of glucose generates
dehydrogenase. The product, acetyl-CoA plays an
two molecules of pyruvate so there are two turns of
especially central role in energy metabolism. This
the cycle for each glucose molecule.
overall reaction involves two coenzymes:
As was the case with glycolysis, the coupled
Pyruvate + NAD+ + CoA
oxidation-reduction reactions are a critical part of the
processing. The combination NADt and NADH ap-
→ Acetyl-CoA+ NADH+ CO2.
 pears again along with FAD and FADH. The enzymes
The oxidized-reduced NAD* and NADH are familiar
that catalyze these oxidation reactions by removal of
from the action of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehy-
hydrogen atoms are dehydrogenases, for example,
drogenase or lactate dehydrogenase and reactions of
lactate dehydrogenase whose action is illustrated in
 glycolysis. Now a description of CoA is in order. CoA
Figure 3.9. For these reactions to take place, the enzymes
is a complex molecule derived from pantothenic acid
 require the assistance of coenzymes that act to hold
(common in meats and grains), thioethanolamine, and
or carry these hydrogen atoms. It can be a source of
ATP. The essential feature is that CoA acts as a carrier
confusion, but transfer of the hydrogen atom, with
of acyl groups. Specifically, the thiol group of the thio-
its lack of a neutron but paired electron and proton,
ethanolamine residue of the molecule functions in this
is effectively viewed as an electron transfer. Thus,
manner in a variety of reactions involved in fatty acid
oxidation-reduction reactions defined by either elec-
oxidation and fatty acid synthesis and acetylation
tron acceptance or electron donation are often linked
reactions. The molecule is also important in oxidative
with movement of the hydrogen atom. This explains
decarboxylation reactions as with pyruvate. Acommon
the abbreviations related to FAD versus FADH2 or
66
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Pyruvate
COOH
Oxidation [-2H]
COOH
CO2
NAD+
C-H
NADH + Ht
FAD
FADH2
H-C-H
(oxidized)
(reduced)
C-H
CoA
Acetyl CoA
COOH
COOH
1
2
 Succinic
Fumaric acid
apt
NADH + H
Oxaloacetic
Citric
acid
acid
acid
1
CoA
NAD+
Fg. 3.8. Reduction of FAD. Coupled reduction of FAD in
Malic acid
Isocitri
NAD+
conjunction with the conversion of succinic acid to fumaric acid as
acid
CO2k
occurs in the Krebs cycle is shown. Arrows indicate the fate of
Krebs
hydrogen atoms (electrons).
Cycle
NADH + H
 Fumaric
Ct-Ketoglutaric
CoA
200
CO2k.
NAD+
passed along until they are combined with oxygen.
NADH+H+
Oxygen is the final electron acceptor in the chain so
FAD
2010
that water is formed. The reduced forms of both
CoA
NADH and FADH, that were generated in the Krebs
cycle become oxidized again as their hydrogen is
donated to the electron chain enzymes. Energy that is
produced as electrons passes ultimately to oxygen and
is indirectly used to power the attachment of inorganic
phosphate groups to ADP to create ATP The enzyme
Fig. 3.7. Outline of the Krebs cycle reactions. Since each glucose
responsible for this final step is ATP synthase, whose
molecule yields two pyruvate molecules (in the presence of 
activity is linked to the movement of hydrogen atoms
 oxygen), this allows two turns of the cycle. With each turn, two
 down a concentration gradient across the membrane
carbons are removed from the citric acid (six carbons) by
decarboxylation reactions; this leads to the production of the
of the mitochondria. Some of the energy from the
4-carbon intermediate oxaloacetic acid. Oxaloacetic acid initiates
action of the electron transport chain acts to transport
the cycle as it condenses with acetyl-CoA (two carbons) to produce
hydrogen ions out of the mitochondrial matrix space.
citric acid. Although the pyruvate that entered the mitochondria
 The resulting electrochemical gradient drives hydro-
had three carbons, remember that two carbons were lost as CO to
gen ions back across the membrane in conjunction
generate acetyl-CoA. Although not "officially" part of the Krebs
Cycle, at the time of decarboxylation of the pyruvate, NAD+ is
with ATP synthase leading to ATP generation. Because
simultaneously reduced. Four additional oxidations by the removal 
 of the need for oxygen as the final electron acceptor in
of hydrogen atoms occur during the cycle. This yields four
the electron transport chain, the production of ATP in
molecules of reduced coenzymes (three NADH + Ht and one
 this manner is called oxidative phosphorylation.
FADHz). One ATP molecule is made with each turn of the cycle
Interestingly, the position along the electron trans-
due to the initial creation of GTP, which then provides the
phosphate group to make ATP from ADP. As in glycolysis, this is
port chain at which FADH or NADH + H+ donate
 another example of substrate-level phosphorylation.
their electrons differs. Because of this, the amount of
energy that is produced is greater for NADH com-
NAD+ versus NADH + H+ in the Krebs cycle reactions
atoms from NADH + Ht supplies energy for the cre-
 outlined in Figure 3.7. Figure 3.8 gives an example of
ation of three ATP, but the two hydrogen atoms from
this type of reaction.
FADH2 yield only two ATP. Most of the proteins of the
At this point you are probably wondering
just
electron transport chain are closely linked clusters
how much ATP is generated from glucose catabolism
within the inner mitochondrial membrane along with
and when this actually occurs. As we have seen, each
more mobile proteins (coenzyme Q and cytochrome
 turn of the Krebs cycle only generates two molecules 
C) that act as carriers between complexes. Figure 3.9
of ATP via substrate-level phosphorylation. The key
 illustrates the release of energy associated with oxida-
 depends on a cluster of interrelated membrane-bound
tion of NADH or FADH in the electron transport
enzymes that make up the electron transport chain.
chain, and Table 3.4 summarizes ATP production from
The activity of these enzymes also accounts for essen-
completed catabolism of glucose.
tially all of our need for oxygen. As the electron chain.
Under ideal conditions, the complete oxidation of
enzymes function, the hydrogen atoms (electrons) that
one glucose molecule to CO2 and water yields 36-38
are removed as various intermediates of glycolysis
ATP. Alternative figures come from uncertainty about
and Krebs cycle are oxidized and are progressively
the energy yield of reduced NADt that is produced
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
67
from glycolysis. For these molecules to be utilized,
they must be passed across the mitochondrial mem-
NADH + H+
FADH2
brane by active transport. An estimate of this "expense"
50
is that the net ATP gain from reduced NAD+ derived
 (kcal/mol)
from the cytoplasm is only two ATP per molecule
instead of the usual three ATP for those created inside
the organelle. Since two of these molecules are pro-
40
duced in the cytoplasm during glycolysis, the total
yield is reduced to 36 ATP per molecule of glucose.
8
Cyt b
Regardless, when oxygen is available, energy capture
relative
30
Fes
from the biological oxidation of glucose is highly effi-
yt C
cient. If a mole of glucose is completely combusted, as
Cytc
in a calorimeter, it yields 686 kcal. Energy obtained in
energy
20
 Cyt as
the creation of high-energy ATP bonds equals 262 kcal
for an efficiency of 38% [262/686 × 100]. This is mark-
 edly more efficient than most machines. Energy not
Free
captured in the formation of ATP is liberated as heat.
Intermediary metabolism: processing
and pathways
Fig. 3.9. Electron transport chain and reduced coenzymes. Each
Now that we have an appreciation for the processing
linked protein oscillates between reduced and oxidized states. As
an upper protein is reduced, its capacity to hold the electron is
of glucose to make ATP, we will explore some of the
lowered, and the next protein in the cascade captures the electron.
 alternatives for storing glucose for situations when it
This continues until the oxygen atom at the end of the cascade
is not immediately required for ATP generation, as
captures the electron. The overall reduction in energy for electrons
well as pathways involved in mobilizing carbohy-
passed from NADH to oxygen is 53 kcal/mol, but the energy is
drate reserves. Similarly, we will also consider path-
captured stepwise. Since electrons from FADH, enter the chain further
down, less energy is available so fewer ATP molecules are created.
ways that allow other important nutrients, that is,
proteins and lipids, to be processed for ATP produc-
tion. As we shall see, the glycolysis, Krebs cycle, and
Table 3.4.S
 Summary of ATP production from the Krebs cycle and
electron transport chain are central to the capacity to
electron transport chain reactions.
catabolize many different nutrients.
Reaction
ATP Production
Number
Type
per Mofe
of Gfucose
and glycolysis
 Pyruvate to acetyl-CoA
Creation of 
6
reduced NADH (2)
 While much of the available glucose is used to produce
Isocitrate to
Creation of
6
ATP, when energy demands are reduced, ATP produc-
α-ketoglutaric acid
reduced NADH (2)
tion also declines. Cells have little capacity to "store"
α-Ketoglutaric acid to
Creation of 
6
ATP; in fact, as ATP concentrations in cytoplasm rise,
succinyl CoA
reduced NADH (2)
this produces allosteric inhibition of the regulatory
Succinic acid to
Creation of
4
enzyme PFK. So what happens to excess glucose?
fumaric acid
reduced FADH (2)
Fortunately, this rise in ATP stimulates reaction path-
Malic acid to
Creation of
6
ways that act to convert excess glucose molecules into
oxaloacetic acid
reduced NADH (2)
glycogen and into fat. Animals have much more
Substrate
-0 1q 'o as ot  i as 0n ede
Succinyl CoA to
succinic acid
phosphorylation
 gen stores are nonetheless critical, especially for acute
GTP and then ADP
 energy demands. We will consider fafty acid synthesis
to ATP
(lipogenesis) and catabolism (lipolysis) in a subse-
Total from Krebs and
OE
quent section.
electron transport chain
 When glycolysis is inhibited but glucose is avail-
Total from glycolysis
8
able, this initiates glycogenesis (glyco = sugar + genesis
Grand total
= origin). Like the case with glycolysis, the first step
86
depends on the uptake of glucose and conversion to
68   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
glucose 6-phosphate by the ubiquitous enzyme hexo-
Blood glucose
kinase. However, instead of progressing through the
Outside
glycolysis pathway, the glucose 6-phosphate is con-
     e n  
Glucose-6-
of glucose 6-phosphomutase. Interestingly, the ability
phosphatase
ATP
 of this enzyme to bind glucose to its active site is sub-
ADP
stantially less than for hexokinase. In other words, its
Glucose-6-phosphate
binding site has much less affinity for glucose. This
Mutase
means that when concentrations of glucose are low
(likely also associated with a need for energy), then
Gluc
1-ph osphate
 the hexokinase reaction pathway is favored because of
Pyrophosphorylase
the higher-affinity binding site. Of course, high con-
centrations of ATP also allosterically inhibit PFK. As
Uridine diphosphate
glucose concentration increases, the law of mass action
 Glycogen
glucose
phosphorylas
promotes the activity of the mutase enzyme, thus
favoring the path toward glycogen synthesis.
，The
 enzyme glycogen synthase catalyzes the attachment of
Glycogen
 glucose-i-phosphate molecules to growing glycogen
Inside
synthase
chains (see Figure 2.22).
 As energy demands increase, stored glycogen mol-
Glycogen
ecules can be hydrolyzed to provide glucose for use
storage
by the cells. This process is called glycogenolysis
Fig. 3.10. Glycogenolysis and glycogenesis. Biochemical pathways
lase. This regenerates glucose-l-phosphate, which can
for glycogenesis (red arrows) and glycogenolysis (black arrows) are
then be converted to glucose-6-phosphate and pro-
illustrated. When glucose is abundant, some of the excess is
cessed for glycolysis. In most tissues (muscle cells,
converted into glycogen. When demand for ATP subsequently
for example), the glucose-6-phosphate is effectively
increases, glycogen is cleaved to provide glucose-6-phosphate for
 trapped in the cells since it cannot interact with mem-
ATP generation. The conversion of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose
that can then leave the cell occurs only in some cell types but is
 brane carrier proteins. This means that for most cells,
especially important in liver cells. Because of the mass of the liver
 glycogenolysis can supply energy for specific cells
and capacity to store glycogen, hepatocytes can be called upon to
with stored glycogen only. However, liver cells along
maintain blood glucose concentrations.
with some intestinal and kidney cells express the
enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase, which catalyzes the
removal of the phosphate group. In these cells, when
into glucose. This conversion is acutely driven by
intracellular concentrations of glucose are increased,
increases in stress-related hormones (epinephrine and
some of the glucose can pass back out of cells and into
 glucocorticoids) and over longer periods by increased
the bloodstream. The capacity of the liver to utilize
 secretion of growth hormone and triodothyronine.
some of its glycogen stores to replenish blood glucose
These topics will be covered in greater detail when we
is critical for homeostasis. Pathways associated with
consider endocrinology (Box 3.1).
glycogenesis and glycogenolysis are illustrated in
Before we leave carbohydrate metabolism, it is
Figure 3.10.
worth considering one of the major pathways that is
 Describing gluconeogenesis completes our discus-
 an offshoot of glycolysis. It is called the hexose mono-
sion of glucose metabolism. As we have seen, glucose
 phosphate shunt or pentose phosphate pathway. Its
and its intermediates from glycolysis and Krebs cycle
major functions are to provide NADPH (similar to
are essential. Maintenance of blood glucose concentra-
 NADH), which is needed for many reactions, particu-
tions within relatively narrow boundaries is vital to
larly fatty acid synthesis, and to supply ribose, which
the homeostasis and health of our livestock and pets.
 is essential for DNA and RNA synthesis. This sequence
However, in some situations (especially acute for
of reactions begins with glucose-6-phosphate, which
is converted by the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate
bohydrate or situations of high demand or depleted
glucose reserves occur. Fortunately, there is a kind of
simultaneous conversion of NADPt (oxidized) into
metabolic backup system. Gluconeogenesis effectively
 NADPH (reduced). The next step catalyzed by the
protects the body, and especially the nervous system,
 enzyme 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase pro-
which has an absolute requirement for glucose, from
duces another molecule of NADPH, frees CO2, and
hypoglycemia. Fortunately, many nonessential amino
yields a molecule of the pentose sugar ribulose
acids and some other intermediates can be converted
5-phosphate. This provides a direct precursor for
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
69
Table 3.5. Activities of several enzymes involved in NADPH 
Box 3.11
Biochemical pathways and "real life'
 production and fatty acid synthesis in mammary tissue of cows 2
weeks before and 2 weeks after calving.
 Are you thinking. "Is the study of all this biochem-
istry and all of these pathways really relevant to the
Enzyme
 Prepartum
feeding and care of my animals? Do producers or
 industry professionals use this information?"
Glucose-6-phosphate
7.8 ± 2.8
12.1 ± 3.1
In the dairy industry, concern with the transition
dehydrogenase
period in cows is a topic of intense interest to pro-
6-Phosphogluconate
16.0 ± 5.3
39.5 ± 5.3
lapt
ducers, veterinarians, dairy scientists, and others.
dlehydrogenase
The transition period refers to the time from late
NADP-isocitrate
98 ± 24
338 ± 100
pregnancy into calving and early lactation. For
dehydrogenase
mature animals, this period is when the majority of
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
0.1 ± 0.07
7.3 ± 0.9
 mastitis, reproduction issues, and metabolic dis-
 Fatty acid synthase
0.7 ± 0.1
10.5 ± 1.8
eases occur The same is true for beef, sheep, and
pig farmers. The physiological changes and adjust-
The first two enzymes are part of the pentose phosphate shunt
ments required for successful birth and lactation
pathway and are involved in generation of the NADPH required for
put tremendous pressure and stress on new mothers.
fatty acid synthesis. Isocitrate dehydrogenase, one of the Krebs cycle
Chronic metabolic diseases linked to transition
enzymes, is also involved in NADPH production in ruminants. Acetyl-
CoA carboxylase catalyzes reactions between acetyl-CoA and CO to
animals directly impact energy production, lipid
form malonyl-CoA, also required for fatty acid synthesis. As the name
mobilization, absorption of nutrients, neural regu-
 suggests, fatty acid synthase is directly involved in condensation of
lation of feeding behavior, and intake. Mulligan
malonyl-CoA with acetyl-CoA for addition of two carbons at a time
and Doherty (2008) review the various production
to growing fatty acid chains. Data are adapted from Akers et al. (1981).
diseases of the transition cow, and Contreras and
 Sordillo (201l) discuss the negative impacts of lipid
mobilization on inflammatory responses and func-
Table 3.6. Data for rates of acetate and glucose use for energy
production (CO2) and for fatty acid synthesis by bovine mammary
tions of leukocytes in transition cows.
tissue slices before and ate calving.
 Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)
and pyruvate carboxylase (PC) are rate-limiting
Activity
Prepartum
enzymes that are necessary for hepatic gluconeo-
 genesis and of course de novo synthesis of glucose
Acetate incorporation into
358 ± 137
2428 ± 265
essential in ruminants. White et al. (2012) reported
fatty acids
that selection of cows for increased production
CO production from acetate
168 ±113
455 ± 127
alters the expression of these important liver enzymes.
CO2 production from glucose
22 ± 14
92 ± 18 
Bionaz and Loor (2012) have described a systems
Rates of fatty acid synthesis or CO2 production were calculated from
rates of incorporated measures for radiolabeled [2-4Cl-acetate or
sion changes are coordinated between the liver,
radiolabeled [U-'4Cl-glucose and are expressed as nanomoles of sub-
adipose tissue, and the mammary gland during
strate converted into product per hour per 100mg of tissue. Data are
 transition as well as in response to various feeding
adapted from Akers et al. (1 981).
levels. It is evident that entire classes of related
genes (pathways) differentially change in these
three tissues to support predominant physiological
before and after parturition. Remember, this is a time
functions.
 of dramatic changes in the synthetic activity of the
 Interest in biochemical pathways and ultimately
 mammary gland as lactation is initiated. The corre-
the genes that code for the synthesis of the enzymes
sponding needs for energy and precursors for milk
that drive the pathways, the role of microRNAs,
component biosynthesis are also elevated. Similarly.
 and the transcription factors that regulate gene
Table 3.6 shows metabolic flux data for bovine
expression has never been greater.
mammary tissue slices during the same period. Spe-
cifically, rates of oxidation of acetate and glucose as
well as use of these substrates for milk component
biosynthesis are shown. Do the changes in enzyme
activities and metabolism reflect your reasoning of
ate the significance of these reactions is to consider
what the physiological status of the mammary tissue
how dramatically the activities of selected enzymes
would be at these times? Remember this is just one
change with physiological conditions. For example,
selected example; during periods of rapid growth,
Table 3.5 shows the activity of several metabolically
work, and so on, many tissues exhibit dramatic
important enzymes in mammary tissue from cows just
changes in tissue and cell activity.
 70  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Lipogenesis and lipolysis
acid chain is oxidized with each cleavage step. This
reaction sequence is illustrated in Figure 3.11. Table 3.7
Although storage of glucose in the form of glycogen
summarizes the total ATP produced from the oxida-
is critical, for longer-term energy needs, lipids seques-
tion of a common fatty acid, 18-carbon oleic acid.
tered in the adipocytes of adipose tissue supply the
Although the most common fatty acids from stored
 bulk of the fuel necessary for ATP synthesis. Depend-
triglycerides are typically longer than six carbons,
ing on immediate needs, a variable amount of the
even the oxidation of the 6-carbon fatty acid caproic
carbohydrate of the diet is also converted into triglyc-
acid is more efficient(44 vs. 38 ATP) than the oxidation
erides before ultimately being catabolized. For many
of glucose (also six carbons). Fatty acids are activated
 tissues, presentation of the fatty acids removed from
via hydrolysis of ATP coupled with CoA. If first acti-
storage provides the major carbon source for energy
vated in the cytoplasm, the fatty acid is passed into
the mitochondria by carnitine for further processing.
the body, triglycerides have distinct advantages over
With each cleavage cycle, this generates one molecule
both proteins and carbohydrates. The first is that the
caloric value -38.9k]/g of a triglyceride is more than
twice that of either glucose or protein. Second, storage
in adipocytes is dense, compact, and occurs with
much less water. Third, the catabolism of fatty acids
Fatty acid
 provides metabolic water when oxidized, a distinct
R - CH,- CH - C- OH
advantage to animals living in dry environments. The
Cytoplasm
CoA-SH-
ATP
formation of triglycerides is called lipogenesis, and
ADP
the breakdown of triglycerides is called lipolysis. Let
Acyl-CoA
 us consider how fatty acids are catabolized for energy
[Activated fatty acid]
R-CH- CH,-C -S- CoA
production.
Whether they are derived from the diet or from
CAR
storage, fatty acids are broken down into acetyl-CoA
Translocated
Mitochondri
which, as we saw with glucose oxidation, enters the
fatty acid
R- CH-CH- C- S- CoA
Krebs cycle for subsequent processing. Fatty acid oxi-
NAD+
dation first requires activation of the fatty acid. This
reaction occurs both inside the mitochondria and in
Nadh + H +
the cytoplasm. If it occurs in the cytoplasm, activated
FAD
fatty acids cross the membrane in a process that
FADH,
requires carnitine. Carnitine is a lysine derivative that
markedly stimulates the oxidation of fats. The subse-
quent cleavage of the fatty acids takes place inside the
Acetyl-CoA
mitochondria as two carbon units (essentially acetic
acid or acetate molecules) are produced and fused
Fg. 3.11. Overview of β-oxidation. Fatty acids are activated via 
with CoA to produce acetyl-CoA molecules. These
hydrolysis of ATP coupled with coenzyme A. If first activated in the
acetyl-CoA molecules transit the Krebs cycle
to
cytoplasm, the fatty acid is passed into the mitochondria by
produce a small amount of ATP by substrate-level
carnitine (CAR) for further processing. With each cleavage cycle,
oxidation but, more importantly, reduced coenzymes
this generates one molecule of reduced NAD, one of reduced FAD,
(NADH + H and FADH2) as illustrated in Figure 3.7.
and finally, cleavage of the 2-carbon end group to produce
acetyl-CoA. This process repeats until the final four carbons of the
This process is called beta-oxidation because the
fatty acid chain are cleaved to make two additional molecules of
carbon atom in the third or beta position of the fatty
acetyl-CoA.
Table 3.7.S
 Summary of ATP production from β-oxidation of the 16-carbon oleic acid.
Reaction
ATP Production Type
Number ATP Created
One cleavage cycle to produce acetyl-CoA
Creation of reduced NADH (1) and reduced FADH
5
Each acetyl-CoA through the Krebs cycle
Creation of reduced NADH (3), reduced FADH2 (1), and ATP (1)
12
Total from cleavage reactions (8)
40
Total from processing acetyl-CoA (8)
96
Minus ATP for activation
-1
Grand total
135
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
71
of reduced NAD, one of reduced FAD, and, finally,
calving. The normal feeding behavior is also markedly
cleavage of the 2-carbon end group to produce acetyl-
impacted by both clirical and subclinical infections, so
CoA. This process repeats until the final four carbons
 that appetite and performance is reduced in sick
of the fatty acid chain are cleaved to make two addi-
animals.
tional molecules of acetyl-CoA. In this manner, long-
As championed in a review by Bauman and Currie
chain fatty acids are degraded completely into these
(1980) and emphasized by Ingvartsen and Andersen
 2-carbon acetyl-CoA units. The β-oxidation pathway
(2000), the onset of lactation in high-producing dairy
oxidizes fatty acids with an odd number of carbon
cows requires a coordinated physiologically mediated
atoms until 3-carbon (propionyl CoA) residue remains.
reallocation ofbiochemicalresources—homeorrhesis—
This compound is converted into succinyl-CoA, a
allow high milk production while maintaining
to2
constituent of the Krebs cycle. Of course the capacity
homeostasis. Because of the premium placed
on
for storing fat as an energy substrate is very large,
 glucose to supply precursors for lactose synthesis and
 given the capacity of animals to deplete and replenish
the general energy requirements of the udder, changes
adipocytes.
 in circulating nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and
As a dramatic example of utilization of body fat
reserves, consider the capacity of high-producing
tions of NEFA immediately at postpartum are dra-
dairy cows to mobilize fatty acids to supply the energy
 matically increased while glucose in the blood is
needed for milk production. Paradoxically, just at the
reduced (Figure 3.12). This reflects the mammary
time when the cow needs the most nutrients, there is
 demand for glucose and the corresponding stimula-
routinely a decline in voluntary dry matter intake
 tion of lipolysis and the use of lipids as an energy
(VDMI) in the periparturient period. This decline
source.
begins in late lactation and continues into early lacta-
Table 3.8 provides a partial listing of metabolic
tion. For modern dairy operations, management of
adjustments that accompany the onset of lactation. It
these transition cows is critically important. Most
is important to appreciate that similar changes occur
health problems of both a metabolic and infectious
in all lactating mammals. We have used the dairy
nature occur in early lactation. The typical decline in
cow as an example because the effects are especially
VDMI coincides with marked changes in reproductive
status, body fat status, and the dramatic metabolic
adjustments necessary to support energy, protein, and
mineral demands of milk secretion. Just on the basis
4.5
of energy needs the changes are staggering. It is esti-
M
mated that fetal development demands on day 250 of
3.5
day. The requirement for the lactating cow producing
30kg of milk per day is estimated at 26Mcal/day.
3
 Eating behavior and intake result from multiple inter-
actions between neural inputs associated with the
2.5+
feed, feed presentation, management, metabolic con-
-24
-6
-1
2
8
24
ditions, and endocrine signals are poorly understood
Weeks relative to calving
but especially so in ruminants. Dramatic changes in
VDMl occur both within and between lactations in
dairy cows. Pregnant dairy heifers, for example, begin
to progressively reduce their VDMI beginning several
1200
until 3 weeks before calving. For primiparous and
(ueq/
800
multiparous cows given diets of constant composi-
tion, milk yield typically peaks at about 6 weeks post-
NEFA
400
partum, but maximum intake is not achieved until
 8-22 weeks postpartum. Indeed, the demands of lacta-
+0
tion require that the high-producing cow mobilizes
-24
-6
-1
2
8
24
body tissues through much of the first one-third to
Weeks relative to calving
one-half of lactation so that the animals are in a pro-
longed period of negative energy balance. Difference
Fg. 3.12. Plasma glucose and nonesterified fatty acids. Changes
in the rate of intake recovery postpartum depends on
in plasma glucose and nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) in heifers in
the diet fed in early lactation as well as the degree of
the period before and after calving are shown. Data are adapted
fatness or body condition score (BCS) at the time of
from Ingvartsen and Andersen (2000)
72
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 3.8.
-Summary of major metabolic adjustments associated
Table 3.9. Changes in volume of adipocytes from ewes between
with the onset of lactation in high-producing dairy cow.
late pregnancy and mid-lactation.
Physiofogicat
Biochemical
Tissue Affected
Average Adipocyte Vofume (pt)
Process
Adjustment
Offspring
Late
Peak
Mid
 Milk synthesis
↑ Synthesis
Mammary gland
Pregnancy
Lactation
Lactation
↑Blood flow
2
↑ Nutrient uptake
1 Lamb
423
476
apt
2 Lambs
↑ Lipolysis
478 ± 31
293 ± 33
215 ±28
Lipid 
Adipose tissue
↓ Lipogenesis
3 Lambs
286 ± 63
1
199 ± 53
metabolism
Glucose
↑ Gluconeogenesis
Other body tissues
Data adapted from Vernon and Flint (1984).
metabolism
↓ Glucose utilization
Protein
↑ Proteolysis
Muscle and other
metabolism
tissues
supply the demands of lactation in a high-yielding
 Mineral
↑ Absorption
Gl tract and bone
dairy cow. Similar responses occur in other lactating
metabolism
↑ Mobilization
 mammals. For example, Table 3.9 shows changes in
↑ Food consumption
 mean adipocyte volume in sheep between late preg-
Intake
Nervous system
nancy and mid-lactation related to the number of
Digestion
↑ Food consumption
Gl tract and liver
 suckling lambs. Clearly, increased demand has a dra-
↑ Blood flow
matic impact on adipose tissue metabolism.
 Data are adapted from Bauman and Currie (1980) and Ingvartsen and 
Let us now consider how fats are liberated from
Andersen (2000)
storage and the processing required for making fatty
acids from the triglycerides available. Signals are
required to stimulate the breakdown of triglycerides
1.5
from storage in the adipocytes. Both the nervous and
endocrine systems are involved. As a reminder, bio-
logically important lipids fall into two broad classes:
(1) structural lipids, for example, phospholipids, and
/day
(2) neutral fat, for example, triglycerides stored as an
energy reserve. Blood plasma averages about 300mg
of lipid per 100mL of blood. About 50% is typically
0.5
phospholipid, 30% triglycerides, and 20% cholesterol,
and there is a variety of other lipids. Included in this
fraction are the nonesterified or free fatty acids (FFAs).
0
These molecules have a rapid turnover and are the
main form in which fatty acids are transferred from
3
5
9
11
storage in adipocytes for oxidation in other cells. Inter-
Week of lactation
estingly, oxidation of fatty acids in the adipocytes of
white adipose tissue is very limited. If you consider
Fig. 3.13. Fat mobilization in lactating cows. The estimation of the
the structure of these cells, this is easy to explain. The
amount of fat mobilized per day to meet the demands of lactation
cytoplasmic compartment of the cells is limited to a
in a high-producing dairy cow is illustrated. The cows in this study
small crescent containing the nucleus, a bit of rough
averaged 9534 kg of milk over a 305-day lactation. Adapted from
endoplasmic reticulum (RER), and a few mitochon-
Bauman and Currie (1980).
dria. The bulk of the cell area is the stored lipid droplet.
With a minimal number of mitochondria, β-oxidation
dramatic because of the selection for increased milk
of fatty acids is limited. In contrast, a specialized type
production. The increase in milk yield during early
of adipose tissue, brown adipose tissue, has an abun-
lactation precedes increases in appetite, so that the
dant blood supply and numerous mitochondria. This
animals are in a negative energy balance and thus
type of adipose tissue contains adipocytes with many
there is dramatic lipid mobilization over the first 12-16
 small lipid droplets. This tissue is vital for thermogen-
weeks of lactation. It is estimated that the body fat
esis in many newborn animals as these cells oxidize
 needed to meet the demand is equivalent to more than
large amounts of lipid and generate heat that is essen-
50% of the milk fat yield during this period. These
tial to the neonatal homeostasis. However, the white
animals typically mobilize 50-60kg of fat, -10% of
adipose tissue reserves are critical for maintenance of
body weight and likely 50% of body fat reserves.
homeostasis or to meet energy demands in particular
Figure 3.13 illustrates the mobilization of lipids 
to
physiological circumstances. Figure 3.14 provides an
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
73
Adipocyte
Lipolysis
0.8
Trlglycerlde
1.
12
(ng/ml)
(ng/ml)
Glycerol-P
Glycerol
0.6
11
H5
Fatty acetyl CoA
Fatty aclds
0.5
+ Insulin
10
H+
0.4
Glucose
Acetate
 Fatty aclds
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275
Day of Lactation
Fg. 3.15.
 Changes in GH and insulin in lactating cows (Herbein 
Glucose
Acetate
 Fatty aclds 
et al. (1988); Koprowski and Tucker (1973).
Abumln
Glycerol
 glycerol
FFA
Llpoproteln 
of lactation with a greater-than-average capacity to
Trlglycerldes
mobilize nutrients from body stores. It is hypothesized
Fig. 3.14. Overview of lipogenesis and lipolysis. Overall aspects
that this is in part due to enhanced secretion of growth
of lipogenesis and lipolysis in a ruminant adipocyte are illustrated.
hormone (GH) in these animals. Logically, changes in
Included are (1) de novo fatty acid synthesis, (2) uptake of
average circulating concentrations of GH and insulin
preformed fatty acids from blood, (3) fatty acid esterification, and 
(which promotes lipogenesis) are reversed during the
(4) lipolysis. For nonruminant species, uptake of acetate (red arrow)
course of lactation in dairy cows. During early lacta-
would be of minor importance. In these animals, glucose would act
 tion, when the animals are in a net negative energy
to supply the carbon skeleton for both glycerol and growing fatty
acid chains. Adapted from Bauman and Davis (1974).
balance, concentrations of insulin are suppressed and
those of GH are enhanced. As the animals begin to
consume more feed and milk production declines,
after the peak of lactation, the situation is reversed.
ically oriented to ruminant adipose tissue and the
GH concentrations decline (less need for nutrient
significance of acetate availability. For monogastric
mobilization from storage), but insulin concentrations
species, little acetate appears in the blood so glucose
increase (to store excess nutrients). This is illustrated
is the predominant substrate for lipid synthesis.
in Figure 3.15.
Given the need to carefully control the release of
Not only are there adjustments in the secretion of
fatty acids to supply critical energy needs, especially
hormones that affect lipid tissue metabolism, there are
at times when the diet may be limited or demands are
also modifications in the activity of the tissue itself.
For example, sensitivity of the tissue to the effects of
 are involved. The neurotransmitter norepinephrine,
epinephrine or norepinephrine also changes as cows
 locally released by nerves supplying adipose tissue, in
enter lactation. Adipose tissue becomes more sen-
conjunction with glucagon and epinephrine released
sitive to these catecholamines, and rates of fatty acid
into the circulation, are major stimulators of lipolysis.
re-esterification (related to storage) drop precip-
As we will see in our discussion of the fight or flight
 sarr aa pasnd are sasudsr asau isno
reactions that occur with stimulation of the sympa-
 the number of hormone receptors expressed by the
thetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
 target adipocytes as well as alterations in the signaling
 making energy available in emergency or stress situa-
pathways within the cells. As illustrated in Chapter
 tions is critical. This means that the very rapid response
12 (Endocrine System), there are very complex, yet
that occurs with nervous system stimulation is rein-
elegant interactions between the nervous system,
forced by more prolonged secretion of the hormones
 endocrine system, and cellular biochemistry to main-
epinephrine and glucagon. An excellent example of an
tain homeostasis and to prepare for specific physiolog-
even more prolonged adjustment to promote lipid
ical events. The data illustrated in Figure 3.16 show
mobilization occurs at the onset of lactation in many
very clearly some of the adjustments in adipose tissue
mammals (see Fig. 3.13). It is now known that geneti-
physiology that enable pregnant animals to prepare
cally superior dairy cows, for example, have
an
for the metabolic demands of lactation. In this experi-
 enhanced capacity to respond to the energy demands
 ment, adipose tissue was collected by biopsy at varying
74
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
NE
60-
--Fatty acids
60
Cell surface
Glycerol control
Glycerol stimulated
B-Recepton
se(nmol/min）
45
rifie
-ester
ATP
Cyclic AMP
Adenylate cyclase
30
30
sp!
tapt
aci
15
Fatty
Active lipase
Inactive lipase
yce
15
Pratein kinase
FFA + glycero!
10
16
-10
-4
D
10
16
24
Daysrelative to calving
Fg. 3.17. Adipose tissue signaling. The association between
binding of norepinephrine to the β1-adrenergic receptor on the
Fig. 3.16. Adipose tissue metabolism. Rate of glycerol release
surface of an adipocyte and activation of an intracellular lipase is 
from adipose tissue explants incubated with or without
illustrated. The binding reaction promotes the activation of the
norepinephrine and the proportion of fatty acids re-esterified (a
enzyme adenylate cyclase, which converts ATP to cyclic AMP
 measure of synthesis) in the absence of norepinephrine is
(cAMP). Increased concentrations of cAMP activate a protein kinase
illustrated. Notice that there is an increasing rate of stimulated
by adding a phosphate group to the inactive lipase enzyme,
changing its conformation, thereby allowing the lipase to actively
lipolysis that begins before the actual onset of milking. Data are
adapted from Metz and Van Den Burgh (1977).
catalyze the cleavage of triglycerides into free fatty acids (FFAs) and
glycerol. This internal lipase is called hormone sensitive because of
the ability of catecholamines and other hormones to induce the
appearance of intracellular cAMP and therefore increase the rate of
lipolysis.
times before and after calving. The tissues were minced
and incubated in the absence (control) or the presence
of norepinephrine. The rate of release of glycerol (a
Before we leave the topic of lipolysis, we should
measure of the rate of lipolysis) was determined.
mention one of the more common disorders related to
Addition of  norepinephrine  markedly stimulated
lipid metabolism, namely, ketosis. It is likely the most
lipolysis, but tissues collected immediately after
common metabolic disorder of lactating cows but can
calving were more responsive. Furthermore, the rate
be a problem in many animals. Ketosis can be simply
of fatty acid synthesis (re-esterification) began to
defined as the accumulation of excess concentrations
 decrease before calving and was marked inhibited
of acetoacetic acid (AAA), β-hydroxybutyric acid
after the onset of milk secretion. These metabolic
(BHBA), and decarboxylation products acetone and
adjustments in adipose tissue begin to occur before the
isopropanol in various body fluids. In many tissues,
actual onset of milk secretion after calving and the first
 acetyl-CoAmolecules cancondense toform acetoacetyl-
milking. This suggests that changes in neural and
CoA. The liver (unlike most tissues) expresses a deac-
endocrine signaling pathways act to anticipate subse-
ylase enzyme that cleaves this to form AAA. This
quent needs. As an example, the supply of fatty acids
material is converted to BHBA and acetone that dif-
to various tissues is regulated by two lipases: (l) lipo-
fuses into the bloodstream. These compounds are
 protein lipase that resides on the surface of the endo-
called ketone bodies. Since these compounds are
thelial cells to cleave triglycerides from circulating
catabolized slowly, continuing production can eventu-
chylomicra and (2) hormone-sensitive lipase that
ally lead to metabolic acidosis, a condition that can be
exists inside the adipocytes. Hormones that increase
severe and even fatal. The fundamental problem is an
intracellular concentrations of the cyclic AMP (cAMP),
impairment of the entrance of acetyl-CoA into the
a second messenger molecule, in adipocytes increase
citric acid cycle because of the relative lack of oxalo-
lipolysis. This is because high concentrations of cAMP
acetic acid. This leads to increased concentrations of
activate an intracellular kinase that converts the
acetyl-CoA and ketone formation or ketogenesis.
hormone-sensitive lipase from an inactive to an active
Three conditions that lead to low intracellular glucose
conformation. Since this reaction is initiated by the
 supplies are starvation, diabetes melitus, and feeding
binding of norepinephrine or epinephrine to β-
 of a high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet (in monogastric
adrenergic receptors on the surface of adipocytes,
species). In the case of diabetes, uptake of glucose by
changes in receptor number or the concentration of
 the cells is impaired so signals are generated to supply
their ligands in the fluid surrounding the cells impacts
energy demands by oxidizing fatty acids. This only
the rate of lipolysis. The relationship between receptor
exacerbates the problem and leads to even more accu-
binding and lipolysis is illustrated in Figure 3.17.
mulation of ketone bodies. When most of the energy
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
75
is supplied by fat (high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet),
So what are some of the conditions that promote
there is a carbohydrate deficiency because there is no
this chain of events? It is most likely to occur in dairy
major route for converting fats to carbohydrates. Liver
cows in early lactation (between 2 and 6 weeks post-
cells are also to likely become engorged with fat (fatty
partum). Symptoms can include decreased appetite,
 liver syndrome), which impairs cellular functioning.
lethargy, decreased milk production, reduced body
(Box3.2)
weight, and an acetone-like odor of milk or exhaled
air. However, the disorder can be either subclinical or
clinical. With clinical ketosis, the need for treatment
Box 3.2 The fat debate
 and losses in milk production become readily appar-
1
ent, but subclinical ketosis is much more problematic.
Does understanding fat synthesis, lipid accretion,
In the absence of overt testing, these cows are often
or capacity for lipid mobilization have relevance in
described as "not doing as well as expected." Kronfeld.
animal agriculture or the pet industry?
(1982) distinguished four classifications of ketosis:
The popular press has repeatedly reported on the
scourge of childhood obesity.
 Primary underfeeding ketosis. This is essentially
Ironic isn't it, the desire for an appropriately
a result of poor management, that is, failure to
 marbled steak versus the desire for lean chicken or
offer enough acceptable feed to the cow.
 pork or altered lipid content of eggs.
 Secondary underfeeding ketosis. The cow's VDMI
As you have learned, unneeded deposition of
is reduced by disease.
lipid in adipocytes is energetically wasteful and is
Ketogenic ketosis. The cow is consuming a diet
practically an economic loss unless producers are
with elements that promote production of ketones.
 paid on the basis of fat content of animals or animal
 Spontaneous ketosis. The cow is consuming an
products.
adequately balanced diet, but ketosis occurs none-
 Metabolic impairments that are influenced by
theless.
feeding management can lead to fatty liver syn-
Whatever the cause, lactation ketosis is a worldwide
drome in dairy cows and associated increased risk
problem and is seemingly most prominent in high-
of disease and poor milk production.
producing herds. However, incidence, especially of
Dodson et al. (2010) discussed issues related to
 subclinical ketosis, can vary substantially between
adipocyte physiology, animal production concerns,
herds irrespective of average milk production. This
and how meat animals can serve as experimental
suggests that its etiology is complex. Some common
models to solve human-specific problems. Zhao
features are that ketotic cows are usually in a negative
et al. (2010) describe differences in the proteins ex-
energy balance and that frequency of clinical ketosis
pressed (proteomic analysis) in adipose tissue of
beef cattle crosses in the hope of discovering
is often greatest at about the time of peak milk produc-
tion postpartum. Two reliable biochemical changes are
markers to identify animals with genetic differ-
ences in fat deposition. Annexin 1, a protein that
a reduction in blood glucose and increased concentra-
tions of ketones in blood, urine, and milk. This has led
binds to cell membranes in a calcium-dependent
to renewed interest in development of reliable screen-
manner, was significantly lower in animals with
reduced fat deposition irrespective of the breed
ing methods to detect subclinical ketosis via monitor-
ing of ketones, especially in milk samples. Animals
combination. This is likely to lead to studies to
 determine how annexin 1 is involved in adipogen-
destined to develop ketosis seemingly fail to main-
tain blood glucose concentrations so that the energy
esis by using adipocytes in cell culture. In addition,
 they found that glycerol-3-phosphate cehydroge-
demands begin to be met by inappropriate overmobi-
lization of adipose stores. Increased catabolism of the
nase, malic enzyme 1, and isocitrate dehydroge-
fat leads to elevations in blood lipids and transport of
nase were more abundant in samples from cattle
fatty acids into the liver in greater quantities than the
with great fat deposition. Glycerol-3-phosphate de-
liver can metabolize. Acute treatments typically involve
hydrogenase is involved in triglyceride synthesis
glucose infusions or injections to provide alternative
while the other two enzymes regulate glycerol deg-
 energy substrates and/or treatment with glucocorti-
radation and oxidative decarboxylation of malate to
 create pyruvate, respectively.
coids to stimulate the cow's own capacity for gluco-
The bottom line is that understanding biochem-
neogenesis. The reasons why some animals seemingly
istry, metabolic pathways, and the related phys-
readily adapt to make the metabolic adjustments
required for onset of lactation and high milk produc-
iology is key to the development of tools to
 tion are unknown. It is interesting, however, that geneti-
improve animal efficiency, increase yield of desir-
cally superior animals (with respect to milk production)
able animal products, and maintain animal health
 and well-being.
 often secrete more GH and that one of the salient prop-
erties of GH is to promote mobilization of nutrients.
76  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Paradoxically, excessively overfeeding cows during
by the cells and re-esterified to form much of the
 the dry period, which would logically allow the accu-
neutral fat stored in the cells.
mulation of adipose tissue stores for use in lactation,
The direct synthesis of fatty acids is called de novo
actually impairs the capacity of the cow to mobilize
 synthesis. Since nutrients other than fats can be con-
tissue nutrients in early lactation. Most nutritionists
sumed or fed in excess, there are alternative methods
recommend that cows be moderately fed during late
of fat synthesis, which allow storage of carbohydrates
lactation and that concentrated feeding be increased
and proteins as energy sources in the form of neutral
c  o n p a  i 
fat. One of the more common fatty acids is palmitate
 Prevention of ketosis is focused on management of
(Ci6o). The overall reaction to produce palmitate is
 feeding practices in the dry period and in early lacta-
illustrated in the following equation:
 tion. Since overfeeding and excessive weight gain in
the dry period adversely affect the capacity of the cow
Acetyl-CoA + 7 malonyl-CoA + 14 NADPH+ H+)
 to mobilize nutrients, attention to dry cow manage-
→ Palmitate + 7 CO2 + 14 NADHP+
ment is essential. Because of the economic problems
associated with ketosis and the subtle nature of sub-
+ 8 CoA-SH+ 6 H2O.
clinical cases, there has been increased attention
directed toward development of easy-to-use cow-side
Let us consider the source for these ingredients. First,
tests. Blood concentrations of BHBA greater than
 Our discussion of carbohydrate metabolism provides
1200 μmol/L can be used to classify normal from sub-
a ready explanation for the source of the acetate to
clinically ketotic cows.
 make acetyl-CoA, that is, the oxidation of glucose or
Let us now consider some of the events associated
other sugars. The malonyl-CoA can be produced from
with conditions when energy supplies are plentiful
acetate or butyrate. The coenzyme NADPH is gener-
and excess nutrient resources are being used to
ated from the pentose phosphate shunt or in rumi-
"restock" adipose tissue. The fatty acids in the triglyc-
 nants by isocitrate dehydrogenase in the cytoplasm. A
erides of the adipocytes can be derived by de novo
 number of amino acids can be catabolized to produce
synthesis (within in the tissue) or can be "deposited"
intermediates of glycolysis or Krebs cycle that can be
following digestion and absorption of dietary lipids.
used to make acetate. Ruminants exhibit extensive fer-
For the preformed dietary fats, this requires first the
 mentation of dietary carbohydrates and produce large
action of lipases in the Gl tract and absorption of liber-
amounts of the volatile fatty acids: BHBA, acetate, and
ated fatty acids into the intestinal cells. As these
propionate. Some of this acetate is directly used for
dietary fats are hydrolyzed and emulsified by the
ATP production or shunted to fatty acid synthesis.
actions of bile salts and phospholipids, particles called
Similarly, butyrate is readily used in fatty acid synthe-
micelles are formed. These aggregates have the polar
sis. Thus, availability of acetate is a key to fatty acid
portion of the bile salts to the outside and the nonpolar
synthesis. Because ruminants depend on gluconeo-
cholesterol-like portion interacting with the fatty
 genesis to maintain blood glucose concentrations,
acids, monoglycerides, and cholesterol oriented to the
they have evolved mecharisms to minimize the use of
center of the sphere. The cells absorb the micelles and
glucose for direct synthesis of fatty acids, a glucose-
 process their contents. Fatty acids of 12 carbons or less
 sparing effect. In fact, in the case of lactating cows, the
can pass into the bloodstream to be transported as free
demand for glucose is even greater with the need for
(nonesterified) fatty acids. The larger fatty acids are
lactose synthesis by the mammary gland. Whereas in
nonruminants glucose oxidation leading to pyruvate
terol become coated with a layer of lipoprotein and
oxidation in the mitochondria produces citrate that
phospholipids to generate chylomicra, which leave
can pass into the cytoplasm to be used to make acetyl-
the intestinal cells and enter the lymphatic drainage.
CoA for fatty acid synthesis, this is minimal in rumi-
Once they appear in blood circulation, the chylomicra
nants. There are many details concerning fatty acid
can be utilized to supply the fatty acids for regenerat-
synthesis, that is, control over the degree of desatura-
ing adipose tissue fat. In monogastric species, after a
tion and chain length, that are beyond the scope of our
fat-rich meal, so many of these particles can appear in
text, but a rudimentary description of the process is in
the blood that the plasma can have a milky appear-
order. Figure 3.18 and Figure 3.19 illustrate differences
ance (lipemia). The chylomicra are removed by the
in fatty acid synthesis pathways in ruminant and
action of the enzyme lipoprotein lipase, which is
nonruminants.
sequestered on the surface of the endothelial cells
 In cows and other ruminants, the precursors for de
of capillaries. When activated, the enzyme catalyzes
novo fatty acid synthesis are acetate and BHBA. BHBA
the hydrolysis of triglycerides, making fatty acids
 appears in the first four carbons of the majority of fatty
and glycerol available to the surrounding tissues. In
acids made in the cells or the molecule is cleaved into
adipose tissue, the fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed
2-carbon units to be used as acetyl-CoA. Acetate yields
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
77
Gluc
6-P
-NADP+-
Pentose
Fatty acids
Cycle
NADPH-.
FrLGt
-6-P
α-Glycerol-P
- NADP+
NADH NAD+
-NAD+.
- NADPH -
NADH.
Malonyl CoA
BHBA
cetate
Tricarboxylic
Isocit
acid
NAD
cycle
 NADH
-Ket
-Ketoglutarate
Mitochondria
2
Cytosol
Fig. 3.18. Fatty acid synthesis in ruminant tissue. Biochemical pathways related to fatty acid synthesis in the ruminant mammary gland are
depicted. Adapted from Bauman and Davis (1974).
the carbon for the shorter fatty acids (C4-C14) and
marily concern the sources of the acetyl-CoA needed
some C16 fatty acids. The NADPH comes from the
 in the initial step and the generation of the necessary
 catabolism of glucose via the pentose phosphate shunt
NADPH.
or the oxidation of isocitrate to c-ketoglutaric acid in
 In nonruminants, the acetyl-CoA for fatty acid syn-
the Krebs cycle. The malonyl-CoA pathway, which
 thesis comes from the decarboxylation of pyruvate in
sequentially adds two carbon units to the growing
the mitochondria but not directly. Since acetyl-CoA
 fatty acid chain, is the major synthesis pathway in the
does not easily pass across the mitochondrial mem-
ruminant mammary gland and occurs in the cyto-
brane, citrate derived from the combination of acetyl-
plasm. The first step depends on the regulatory
CoA and oxaloacetate diffuses from the mitochondria
enzyme acetyl-CoA carboxylase and involves the
and enters the cytoplasm. The citrate is broken down
addition of carbon from CO, to acetyl-CoA and hydro-
by ATP-citrate lyase to give acetyl-CoA and oxaloac-
lysis of ATP to form malonyl-CoA. The second step is
etate. The acetyl-CoA provides the carbon skeleton for
catalyzed by the enzyme fatty acid synthase. This
fatty acid synthesis, and the oxaloacetate enters the
complex enzyme controls growth of the growing fatty
 malate transhydrogenation cycle, which yields pyru-
acid chain two carbons at a time.
In most fat-
 vate and NADPH. The pyruvate subsequently enters
synthesizing tissues, fatty acid synthase produces
the mitochondria.
mostly palmitic acid. However, the presence of the
 In ruminants, acetate and BHBA from the blood
enzyme thioesterase Il in mammary tissue induces the
 provide most of the carbon needed for fatty acid syn-
synthesis of more medium-chain fatty acids and fewer
thesis. In mammary cells, for example, glucose is
long-chain fatty acids. Thus, differences between fatty
largely spared from being used as a carbon source for
acid synthesis in ruminants and nonruminants pri-
fatty acid synthesis because of the near absence of the
78
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Glucose
G
6-P
NADP+
Pentose
 phosphate
Fatty acids
Cycle
NADPH.
4
d-g-as0
Chapter
Triose
α-Glycerol-P
NADP
NADF
NAD
NAD+
NADP+
NADPH
NADH
NADPH
Malate
Pyrnivate
Lvate
NAD+
Malate
Malonyl CoA
branshycrogenation
cycle
(Primer)
NADH
PyrLv
Acetyl CoA
Acetyl CoA
Citre
Citrate
Tricarboxylic
acid
cycle
Mitochondria
Cytosol
 Fig. 3.19. Fatty acid synthesis in nonruminant tissue. Biochemical pathways for fatty acid synthesis in a nonruminant mammary gland are
depicted. Adapted from Bauman and Davis (1 974).
citrate lyase enzyme in the cytoplasm of the cell. The
ALA
citrate that does leave the mitochondria is either con-
verted to isocitrate and then to c-ketoglutarate gener-
ating NADPH in the process, or it passes into the
LEU
TRP
ILE
LYS
Golgi and is secreted into milk. Cow's milk is higher
LEU
PHE
in citrate than nonruminants and concentrations of
TRP
TRP
TYR
citrate increase with the final stages of lactogenesis.
This abrupt increase in citrate concentrations of
Acetyl CoA
Acetoacetyl CoA
mammary secretions can be used as a marker for lac-
togenesis and parturition.
ASN
[aspartate)
Oxaloacetic
ARG
acid
HIS
Interconversions and catabolism of proteins
soci
GLN
PRO
Just as there are multiple paths by which substrates
Krebs
Cycle
can be supplied for fatty acid synthesis, there are also
C-Ketoglutaric
interconversions that are possible to allow nonessen-
TYR
acid
acid
PHE
tial amino acids to be used for ATP production.
However, before amino acids can be used, they must
be deaminated; that is, the NH, has to be removed.
acid
This remaining carbon skeleton can then be converted
Fig. 3.20. Amino acids and the Krebs cycle. Interconversions of
 into pyruvate or one of the other intermediates of the
carbon skeletons of common amino acids to intermediates
Krebs cycle as shown in Figure 3.20. A key to these
associated with the Krebs cycle are illustrated.
 Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
79
reactions is glutamic acid, a common nonessential
α-Amino acid
0-Keto acid
amino acid. Many amino acids are modified when
pe rao on passd s do a 
(one of the Krebs cycle intermediates). This produces
glutamic acid from the former c-ketoglutaric acid,
and the remaining carbon skeleton from the amino
(-Ketoglutarate
L-Glutamate
acid is converted into a keto acid (there is now an
oxygen atom in place of the original amine group).
This is a transamination reaction, literally the transfer
Oxidative
of an amine group of an amino acid. The liver absorbs
deamination
the glutamic acid, and the amine group is removed as
ammonia (NHs). This is called oxidative deamination.
This reproduces the c-ketoglutaric acid, freeing it to
NH
CO,
Ammonia
be recycled in another round of transamination reac-
tions. Because ammonia is toxic in mammals, it is
usually quickly carboxylated to produce urea and
water. The urea diffuses into the bloodstream, and
Urea
after filtering in the kidney, large quantities of urea
Fig. 3.21. Amino acid nitrogen metabolism. A general overview of
are excreted in urine. Thus, urea is derived from the
nitrogen flow in amino acid metabolism is shown. Transamination
catabolism of amino acids. The capacity of liver glu-
reactions provide a mechanism to catabolize a variety of amino
tamic acid to shuttle amine groups from various
 acids by transfer of the amine group to pyruvate (alanine.
amino acids for excretion as urea (urea cycle) is criti-
transaminase, i.e., alanine is produced from pyruvate in the transfer)
cal to animal well-being. Some organisms (fishes)
or transfer of the amino acid amine group to α-ketoglutarate
catalyzed by the enzyme glutamate transferase; that is, glutamate is
actually excrete free ammonia. These species are
produced by the transfer. The ability to generate glutamate is
called ammonotelic. Other animals (birds and amphib-
especially important because it is the only amino acid in most
ians) excrete uric acid and are referred to as uricotelic
mammals that readily undergoes oxidative deamination. This
species, and those that excrete urea are referred to as
provides a mechanism to excrete the amine group in the form of
ureotelic species. Thus, ammoria is typically removed
ammonia, which is typically converted to the less toxic urea.
from the body after being converted into less toxic
urea, often in the liver. Blood urea is cleared by urinary
excretion. However, in ruminants, substantial urea
also is excreted into saliva. Once the urea reaches
Glycogen
the rumen, microorganisms can hydrolyze it and use
soonb pue
the free NHs for protein synthesis. Much of this micro-
 bial protein ultimately passes to the small intestine
where it is absorbed. Thus, some of the absorbed
Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
proteins contain amine groups that were originally
cetyl-CoA
waste products. Figure 3.21 illustrates reactions asso-
Acetate
ciated with the catabolism of amine groups from
(ruminants)
Some
Krebs
amino acids.
Lactate 
amino
cycle
Ketone bodies
As we have seen, glycolysis and Krebs cycle reac-
acids
 Some
tions explain not only how glucose and other carbo-
amino
hydrates are oxidized to supply ATP, but also how
acids
both proteins and fats must be catabolized to enter this
Fig. 3.22. Overview of acetyl-CoA metabolism.
pathway for ATP production. Figure 3.22 provides an
overview to emphasize the critical role that produc-
tion of acetyl-CoA has in schemes to produce the
energy and provide the building blocks that are
components depend on enzymes. Other proteins are
needed to meet physiological demands.
critical components of various cellular organelles. This
means it is nearly impossible to overestimate the
importance of proteins. It follows then that the cre-
ation and activation of proteins must be carefully
Structure and function of DNA and RNA
orchestrated so that the suitable enzymes are available
when required and the proteins for organelle genera-
As we have now learned, essentially all of the bio-
tion are present. In many respects, cellular functioning
chemical reactions to produce energy or build cellular
follows the now-popular business concept of on-time
 80  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
delivery. This ultimately goes back to regulation of
Intron
Exon
 gene expression and controls that affect transcription
DNA
and translation (Chapter 2). Although we have consid-
ered some of the basics of RNA and DNA structure,
we will now review protein synthesis in a bit more
Transcription
RNA
detail. It is reasonable to think of cells as miniature
protein factories and that the particular combination
 and number of proteins fashioned determine the func-
tional attributes of the cell. For example, although all
Deleted
 cells have common components, it is logical to predict
that the complement of proteins needed for adequate
functioning of a fibroblast would be very different
Mature
from the complement of proteins made by a secretory
mRNA
epithelial cell from the pancreas.
Translation
Protein
Fg.3.23.
.Overview of transcription and translation and protein
Protein synthesis
synthesis.
 DNA not only provides the template to direct its own
replication, it also provides the blueprint for the syn-
thesis of proteins by its ability to direct the formation
 of mRNA. As you should recall, this process is called
 transcription. Figure 3.23 gives an overview of infor-
of amino acids for a particular protein. These triplet
mation transfer from DNA to RNA to proteins for a
 sequences are the genetic code.
eukaryotic cell. An important aspect for eukaryotic
 So what are the mechanics of protein synthesis? This
cells compared with prokaryotic cells is the fact that
 requires the combined activities of three types of RNA
the genes of higher organisms are interrupted by DNA
molecules: mRNA, rRNA (ribosomal), and tRNA
sequences that do not code for the ultimate protein
(transfer RNA). The ribosomes are the cellular organ-
 product. DNA sequences that do correspond with the
elles that are the focus of actual protein synthesis.
 protein are called exons and those that make the inter-
These organelles are composed of subunits derived
vening sequences are called introns. A single gene
from RNA and protein molecules and are fabricated
may contain 50 or more introns. Moreover, these
by the nucleolus inside the nucleus of the cell. To use
introns range from as few as 60 to more than 100,000
 an automobile analogy, rRNA can be thought of as the
nucleotides. This means that the initial RNA strand
factory that houses and organizes the needed compo-
must be processed to remove the introns before it can
 nents. Processed mRNA provides the blueprint for
be used to accurately direct protein synthesis. One of
protein assembly. It could be thought of as the assem-
the great puzzles of cell biology is to understand
bly line that is organized along the factory floor. The
the physiological significance of the introns. On the
tRNA can be thought of as the forklifts and cranes that
surface it seems wasteful for the cell to spend the bio-
bring the components (in our case amino acids) needed
chemical resources to synthesize introns initially and
to make the car (protein in our case). Of course with
then to recreate segments of the mRNA molecule that
cars, the components are welded or bolted together by
must be removed and discarded.
workers or workers driving machinery. In our analogy.
Proteins are chains of amino acids. Genes can be
as we have seen with other biochemical processes, the
viewed as the segment of DNA that provides the
bolting or welding of the amino acids (peptide bond
directions for construction. There are also a few genes
s d A pndns aaa saan ro
that direct the creation of specialized variants of RNA.
and is accomplished by enzyme activity. To summa-
but certainly, most genes direct protein synthesis. The
rize, polypeptide synthesis requires two fundamental
nucleotide bases A, T, C, and G make up the founda-
 steps: (1) transcription, during which time the DNA
tion of the code for these assembly instructions. A
"information" is encoded into mRNA, and (2) transla-
sequence of three bases or triplet specifies a particular
tion, the process by which the "information" in mRNA
amino acid. For example, the sequence AAA indicates
is decoded and is used to manufacture the proteins.
the amino acid lysine. This means that the sequence
This process is outlined in Figure 3.24.
of triplets in the mature processed mRNA that leaves
Let us begin with detailing transcription. The first
the nucleus (see Fig. 3.23) spells out the exact sequence
step involves the unwinding or unraveling of a segment
 Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
81
Triplet
DNA
tRNA
TACGGTAGCGATTTCAAAACT
Large
Codon
ribosomal
mRNA
subunit
Augccaucg
Cua aaguuuuga
UAC
CCA
UAC
Small
Y
mRNA
ribosomal
Codon
A
subunit
Met
Lys
Fg. 3.25. Transfer RNA. Transfer RNA transports amino acids
(alanine and glutamic acid) in this example, to the ribosome for
interaction with the mRNA. The triplet codon of the mRNA stand
corresponds with complementary binding of the anticodon of the 
tRNA. Following binding of adjacent amino acids, the enzyme
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase catalyzes the formation of peptide
Fig. 3.24. Information transfer from DNA to RNA. Processed
bonds. As the mRNA passes through the ribosome complex, the 
mRNA is utilized to direct the fabrication of the growing protein
protein chain continues to elongate until a stop codon is reached
chain via transfer RNA and their attached amino acids which
 and the nascent protein chain is released.
have complementary binding (anticodon) to the codons of the
mRNA.
of DNA thatis destined for use. The cytoplasm contains
triplet of the DNA corresponds with a three-base
 specialized molecules (some of which are mediators of
 sequence of the mRNA called a codon. Since there are
hormone action, by the way) called transcription
four different nucleotides in RNA or DNA, there are
factors. These molecules have the capacity to bind to
4 or 64 possible codons. Three of these (UAA, UAG,
regions near the beginning or "start" sequence of a
and UGA) serve as stop signals and AUG, which
 gene. This region, which is not part of the final mRNA
codes for the amino acid methionine, serves as a start
product, is called the gene promoter. In simplistic
signal. Since there are only 20 common amino acids,
terms, activation of this region sets in motion or pro-
some amino acids are coded by more than one triplet
motes the subsequent transcription of a particular
sequence.
 gene. A great deal of cellular activity is determined by
Once the mature or processed mRNA (introns
the complex of particular transcription factors that are
removed) reaches the cytoplasm, it joins the smaller of
unleashed in a cell at a given moment and which pro-
 the ribosomal subunits. At this point the tRNA comes
moter regions are available to be acted upon.
 into action. The tRNA binds its amino acid and trans-
The transcription factor acts to mediate the binding
e ae      s
and initiation of the enzyme RNA polymerase. RNA
different tRNA variants, which correspond with each
polymerase allows opening of the double-stranded
of the different amino acids. Not only must the tRNA
DNA. One strand then serves as the template to
recognize its particular amino acid (by possessing a
produce the complementary mRNA molecule (sense
unique binding site), it must also recognize the triplet
strand). For example, if the triplet sequence were
codon of the mRNA molecule. These tRNA molecules
AGC, the corresponding mRNA would be UCG. You
have a complex wire hanger-like conformation that
might recall that RNA differs from DNA in that it is
allows simultaneous recognition of the mRNA codon
single-stranded, contains ribose instead of deoxyri-
by complementary base pairing (anticodon) along
bose, and the base uracil (U) substitutes for thymine
with orientation of the attached amino acid into posi-
(T). This explains the U instead of T in the newly
tion to allow the enzyme aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
created RNA triplet. The strand of DNA that is not
to catalyze formation of peptide bonds between adja-
used as a template is called the antisense strand. Each
cent amino acids attached to the mRNA (see Fig. 3.25).
 82  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
This is accomplished because of the elegant structure
Ribosome
that is produced by the combination of the large and
mRNA
small ribosomal subunits attached to the mRNA mol-
ecule. There is a binding site for the mRNA and three
Growing peptide chain
sites for binding of the tRNA molecules. The charged
tRNA (one that has its amino acid attached) binds to
the A (attachment) site. As the peptide bonds are
formed, there is a shift to the P site, which holds the
 growing peptide chain. As newly charged tRNA mol-
ecules arrive at the ribosome, the old empty tRNA
shifts to the E (exit) site and is released to capture
 another amino acid. As the mRNA codons are progres-
sively read, the mRNA passes through the ribosome as
 the elongating amino acid chain appears. As the mRNA
emerges, other ribosomes can attach and begin the
Ribosomal subunits
process of translation. This means that many protein
Fg. 3.26. Development of polyribosomes. Each polyribosome
molecules can be fabricated simultaneously. These
consists of a strand of mRNA that is being transcribed by multiple
complexes are called polyribosomes. This is illustrated
ribosomes. As the mRNA moves through the ribosome, each codon
in Figure 3.26. The mRNA strand continues to be read,
is sequentially read, and peptide bonds are formed between
and the protein chain grows until its stop codon is
adjacent amino acids. Ribosomes that have been attached longer
have the correspondingly longer peptide chains. This progression
reached. At this point, the elongating protein chain and
(left to right) continues until the stop codon is reached when the 
the ribosomal subunits is freed from the ribosome.
nascent peptide is released along with the ribosomal subunits.
Chapter summary
take place in the cytoplasm of the cell because the
necessary enzymes are produced by the cell and are
Just as we have all heard the expression, "it is all
maintained within the cytoplasm. Movement of
about the money," physiologically speaking, it is all
glucose into the cells requires a transporter or carrier.
 about thermodynamics and managing to convert 
Importantly, once in the cytoplasm, glucose is phos-
substrates into macromolecules and macromolecules 
phorylated, that is, converted into glucose-6-phosphate
into cell structures. Cellular biochemistry concerns
 by the enzyme hexose kinase. This step is important
the myriad of conversions and interactions necessary
 because the addition of the phosphate group pre-
 to acquire building blocks and the energy to perform
vents the glucose from interacting with the mem-
 critical anabolic and catabolic reactions. Only a
brane carrier Thus, the facilitated ciffusion of additional
portion of the energy available from the breaking of
glucose into the cell is not impaired. A series of
the chemical bonds in molecules from ingested feed
enzyme-mediated reactions ultimately leads to the
materials can be captured. Moreover, the balance of
generation of two molecules of the 3-carbon interme-
energy captured, lost, and needed for maintenance
 diate pyruvate for each glucose molecule that enters
ultimately determines the net energy remaining to
the cycle. In the absence of oxygen, pyruvate is 
provide for lactation, growth, work, egg production,
converted to lactate. This is important because the
or hair growth in our animal systems.
conversion to lactate via the enzyme lactate dehydro-
Cellular energy revolves around ATP and the
 genase is coupled with the conversion of NADH to
ability of cells to utilize energy that becomes avail-
NAD. NAD is necessary for continued operation of
able with the breaking of the bonds that attach the
glycolysis. There is a net gain of two ATP under
third phosphate group in the molecule. ATP is com-
anaerobic conditions.
posed of adlenosine + ribose + three phosphate groups
With the availability of oxygen, pyruvate from gly-
coupled in sequence to carbon 5 of the ribose back-
colysis enters the mitochondria to participate in the
bone. Removal of phosphate groups in succession
Krebs cycle as it is decarboxylated to create acetyl-
would lead from ATP to ADP to adenosine mono-
CoA. With each turn of the Krebs cycle, multiple
phosphate (AMP). Most cells utilize the catabolism
molecules of reduced NAD and FAD are produced.
of the hexose sugar glucose to generate needed ATP.
These coenzymes enter the electron chain in the
The initial processing of glucose by the cell is
mitochondria where a series of coupled electron
called glycolysis (translated as the breaking or lysis
 transfers provide the power to generate ATP. The
of glucose). The steps in this biochemical pathway
final acceptor of electrons is oxygen. This ultimately
Fundamental biochemical pathways and processes in cellular physiology
83
explains why oxygen is essential. In the absence of
source (ATP generation) after it is converted into
oxygen, the electron chain transfers grind to a halt.
acetyl-CoA in the mitochondria.
In total, for each molecule of glucose through both
Glucose and carbohydrate metabolism is essen-
glycolysis and Krebs cycle, 38 ATP are generated.
tial, but there are limited stores of glycogen. Instead,
The importance of these two pathways cannot be
long-term energy storage relies on sequestration
 overstated. Consequently, it is critical that the supply
of triglycerides in adipocytes. Lipogenesis is the
of glucose (or molecules that can participate in the
making, packaging, and storage of these triglycer-
Krebs cycle) is maintained. Glycogenesis refers to the
ides. When there is a call for release of FFAs into the
conversion of excess glucose into glycogen (animal
blood, this is called lipolysis. FFAs are oxidized via
starch). Muscle and liver cells are primary sites for
a biochemical pathway called β-oxidation. This
storage of glycogen. Gluconeogenesis refers to the
process efficiently produces multiple molecules of
conversion of other nutrients into glucose. These
 acetyl-CoA for use in the Krebs cycle. For example,
processes are particularly critical in ruminants
a molecule of the 16-carbon fatty acid oleic produces
because nearly all available dietary glucose is fer-
a net of 135 molecules of ATP.
mented into volatile fatty acids (acetate, butyrate,
Several different amino acids can also be deami-
and propionate) by rumen bacteria. Fortunately, the
nated to produce intermediates of the Krebs cycle
liver of ruminants is able to convert propionate into
and thus also be used for ATP production. The sub-
glucose to supply tissues and functions (brain and
 sequent combination of amine group from the catab-
lactose production) that have absolute requirements
olized amino acid with CO2 produces urea which is
for glucose. For cows and other ruminants, acetate
much less toxic than ammonia.
 from rumen fermentation can be utilized as an energy
Review questions and answers are available
Herbein, J.H., R. J. Aiello, L.I. Eckler, R.E. Pearson, and R.M.
Akers. 1985. Glucagon, insulin, growth hormone and
online.
Ap e yo eusend po u sueua ass
cows. J. Dairy Sci. 68: 320-325.
Ingvartsen, K.L. and J.B. Andersen. 2000. Integration of
References
metabolism and intake regulation: a review focusing on
 periparturient animals. J. Dairy Sci. 83: 1573-1597.
Akers, R.M., D.E. Bauman, A.V. Capuco, G.T. Goodman,
Koprowski, J.A. and H.A. Tucker. 1973. Bovine serum
and H.A. Tucker. 1981. Prolactin regulation of milk secre-
growth hormone, corficoids and insulin during lactation.
tion and biochemical differenfiation of mammary epithe-
Endocrinology 93: 645-651.
lial cells in periparfurient cows. Endocrinology 109:
Kronfeld, D.S. 1982. Major metabolic determinants of milk
23-30.
volume, mammary efficiency, and spontaneous ketosis in
Bauman, D.E. and W.B. Currie. 1980. Partitioning of nutri-
dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 65: 2204-2212.
 ents during pregnancy and lactation: A review of mecha-
Metz, S.H. and S.G. Van Den Burgh. 1977. Regulation of fat
nisms involving homeostasis and homeorrhesis. J. Dairy
mobilization in adipose fissue of dairy cows in the period
Soi. 63: 1514-1529.
around parturition Neth. J. Agric. Sci. 25: 198-211.
Bauman, D.E. and C.L. Davis. 1974. Biosynthesis of milk fat.
Mulligan, FJ. and M.L. Doherty. 2008. Production diseases
 In Lactation: A Comprehensive Treatise, Vol. 2. Edited by
of the transifion cow. Vet. J. 176: 3-9.
B.L. Larson and V.R. Smith. Academic Press, New York.
Tyrrell, H.F., A.C. Brown, PJ. Reynolds, G.L. Haaland, D.E.
 Bionaz, M. and J.J. Loor. 2012. Ruminant metabolic systems
Bauman, C.J. Peel, and W.D. Steinhour. 1988. Effect of
 biology: reconstruction and integration of transcriptome
 bovine somatotropin on metabolism of lactating dairy
dynamics underlying functional responses of tissues to
Aq pauuaap se uezn uaonnu pue Aiaua ismo
nutrifion and physiological state. Gene Regul. Syst. Biol.
respiration calorimefry. J. Nutr. 118: 1024-1030.
6: 109-125.
Vernon, R.G. and D.J. Flint. 1984. Adipose tissue: metabolic
Confreras, G.A. and L.M. Sordillo. 2011. Lipid mobilization
adaptation during lactation. Symp. Zoolog. Soc. Lond 51:
and inflammatory responses during the transiftion period
119-145.
of dairy cows. Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 34:
White, H.M., S.S. Donkin, M.C. Lucy, T.M. Grala, and J.R.
281-289.
 Roche. 2012. Short communication: genetic differences
Dodson, M.V., G.J. Hausman, L. Guan, M. Du, T.P. Rasmus-
between New Zealand and North American dairy cows
sen, S.P. Poulos, P. Mir, W.G. Bergen, M.E. Ferryhough,
 alter milk production and gluconeogenic enzyme expres-
D.C. McFarland, RP. Rhoads, B. Soret, JM. Reecy, S.G.
sion. J. Dairy Sci. 95: 455-459.
Velleman, and Z. Jiang. 2010. Lipid metabolism, adipocyte
Zhao, YM., U. Basu, M.V. Dodson, J.A. Basarb, and L.L.
depot physiology and utilization of meat animals as
Guan. 2010. Proteome differences associated with fat
experimental models for metabolic research. Int. J. Biol.
accumulation in bovine subcutaneous adipose tissues.
Sci. 6: 691-699.
Proteome Sci. 8: 14.
Tissue structure and organization
Contents
Introduction
85
Connective Tissue
102
 Microscope General Points
86
Classification of Connective Tissue
103
Terminology and Definitions
86
Specialized Connective Tissues
106
Epithelial Tissue
88
 Muscle Tissue
111
Epithelial Tissue Characteristics
89
Skeletal Muscle
112
Simple Epithelium
91
Cardiac Muscle
114
Stratified Epithelium
95
Smooth Muscle
115
Epithelial Cell Junctions
99
Nervous Tissue
115
Clandular Epithelial Types
101
Chapter Summary
118
Introduction
 mammary, pituitary, pancreas, and so forth. Muscle
fissue is readily recognizable because of its capacity to
While the cellis considered a basic unit of life, complex
generate motion and distinct appearance. It is worth
functions in multicellular animals require interaction
remembering, however, that there are three classes
and cooperation between cells. With increased devel-
of muscle tissue: skeletal or voluntary, cardiac, and
dodans u eade sun pazeads 'o
smooth muscle. The final tissue type, connective
tions of cells. Many of these activities are attributed to
fissue, is also very widely distributed and is usually
types of tissues. For example, nervous or neural tissue
found as a component of the other tissue types. This
composed of neurons and supporting neuroglial cells
means that when you study preparations of various
allows generation, transmission, and interpretation of
tissues, although there will be emphasis on particular
electrical signals. This is the hallmark of the nervous 
cells (epithelial, muscle, or neural), various connec-
system. Another tissue type, epithelium, is widely dis-
five tissue elements are also present. Lastly, there are
persed in animals and generally is involved in cover-
also subclasses of connective tissues, that is, bone,
ing surfaces, that is, skin or peritoneum, in the
cartilage, and blood. Our purpose in this chapter is to
development and function of various glands, that is,
aid your activities in the laboratory, especially time
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
85
 86  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
spent looking at samples in the microscope, to rein-
spend in laboratories at the microscope. Keys to good
force your other reading and attendance of lectures,
 microscope use are listed as follows.
 and to give you some rudimentary understanding of
histology.
Examining Prepared Slides
 Ensure the stage is lowered.
 Place a low-power objective (4 or 10x) in position
Microscope general points
for initial examination.
 Ensure the slide is clean and the cover-slipped
Remember that your text cannot substitute for self-
 side is face up.
study. It will also become apparent that you simply
5
cannot randomly view a microscope slide labeled, for
Bring the specimen into proper focus and orient
 example, simple epithelium, and immediate see an
yourself to the entire sample.
 Close the field diaphragm to ensure proper align-
 e 5e as pm n em o nea 
example. Samples are chosen because there is a pre-
ment (see Fig. 4.2).
dominate tissue or cell type, but this does not exclude
 Switch to the magnification of choice; if the objec-
tives are parfocal on the revolving nosepiece, only
others. Second, we have searched slides to find excel-
 small adjustments should be necessary when
 lent examples of the features we wish to illustrate.
changed.
Some areas of even professionally prepared slides
 Be careful not to smash the slide when focusing.
have artifacts,that is, wrinkles, folds, and areas of poor 
 staining. Consider yourself warned!
 Always lower the slide stage and place a low-power
 a   p  n  n 
objective lens in position when you are finished.
 Turn off the power to the light source.
the microscope, the image you see is no better than
your ability to handle the microscope and appropri-
ately adjust the light source and various condensers
and lenses to get the best, brightest image with ade-
quate resolution.Figure 4.1 (microscope parts and use)
Terminology and definitions
 and Figure 4.2 (microscope alignment) describe some
of the attributes of the typical brightfield microscope
 In any field of study, there are terms and expressions
and how you can get the most out of the time you
that are common and allow easy communication. You
Alignment steps
1 Carefully place a slide on the stage (A).
2 Swing the 10x objective (B) in to position and
turn on the light source (C).
3 Open the substage condenser diaphragm
about 1 fourth (D).
 4 Focus on the specimen (E).
5 Close the field diaphragm (F) to a small
aperture (panel B)
6 Move the substage condenser (G) up and
down until the edge of aperture is in sharp
focus.
7 Center the image ofthe field diaphragm with
centering screws (H).
8 Expand the image ofthe field diaphragm
aperture until the lighted area just fills the field
of view.
9 Adjust the substage condenser (D)
diaphragm for maximum resolution but do not
C-
open and close to regulate brightness (use the
light source intensityy.
4
B
Fig. 4.1. Microscope parts and use.The first step in getting the most out of your efforts is to make sure your microscope has the proper
osod ou! (a) sual aoalgo xot aui aneoi Alnjaen pue (v) aeis adossoii aui uo aps panedaid e ald o s! das is auluoeuni!
and then turn on the light source (C). You should then adjust the focus knob (E) to view the image.Further steps are outlined in the box
highlighted in panel B. The get the best image, illumination should be centered on the specimen and the beam of light should completely fill
the aperture of the objective lens. Examples of needed adjustment are detailed in Figure 4.2.
Tissue structure and organization 
87
A
B
C
Unfocused
 Sharp edge,
Open to fill
'abpe
image
image area
image not
centered
centered
Fig. 4.2. Microscope alignment. In panel A, the field diaphragm (F) has been closed to create a small aperture; however, the image is not
centered in the field of view andl the edge is not in focus. In panel B, the edge has been focused by carefully raising or lowering the substage
condenser lens (G) until the image of the field of light is at its sharpest. The image has been centered by adjusting the two centering screws
(H). In panel C, the field diaphragm has been opened further to expose more of the image. Letters in parenthesis refer to the microscope parts
in Figure 4.1.
have already been introduced to some basic physiol-
tant nutrients filtered  into  the lumen  of  the
ogy language in Chapter 1. As we begin to explore the
nephron. Thus, these epithelial cells make up the
 structure of tissues, it is important to appreciate some
critical functional structure of the kidney.
of the specific language and terms that apply:
 Stroma. Refers to the support cells, that is, connec-
tive tissue, blood vessels, and nerves, that are
 Histology. Subspecialty of anatomy that deals
needed for the parenchymal tissue to carry out its
with the microscopic structure of tissues.
functions.
Tissue. A group of similar cells and intercellular
materials specialized to carry out a specific activ-
Although the task of learning the rudimentary histol-
ity. The four primary tissues are epithelial, muscle,
ogy of various tissues and organs may seem daunting
nervous, and connective tissue.
at first, the job becomes easier when the information
Organ. A discrete portion of the body composed
is organized into more manageable blocks. For example,
of two or more tissue types dedicated to a particu-
 any cell or cellular product can be classified into one
lar function. For example, the heart is an organ of 
 of four basic tissue types. Names and primary func-
the circulatory system.
tions are outlined as follows:
Cytology. Subspecialty of anatomy that deals with
Epithelium. Covering for protection, glandular
the structure and functional differentiation of 
 individual cells either as isolated cells or as part
activity.
Muscle. Movement, cardiovascular function, heat
of a tissue.
 production.
 Pathology. Subspecialty of anatomy and physiol-
 Nervous. Signaling, control, integration of physi-
ogy that deals with changes in gross anatomy.
histology, or cytology associated with disease or
ological systems.
 Connective. Support, mineral storage, protection.
injury.
 Necropsy Refers to the gross and /or microscopic
We will cover the basics of each of these tissues in this
examination of organs, tissues, and cells after
 chapter, but as we consider more of the physiology of
death;most often associated with determinations
various organ systems in subsequent chapters, we will
of the cause of death.
often return to discuss structural attributes of cells or
 Parenchyma. Refers to the functional portion of a
tissues. This is because to a very large degree, struc-
tissue or organ. For example, in the kidney, the
ture and function go hand in hand. In other words,
epithelial cells of the nephron are responsible for
the capacity of a tissue or organ to complete a specific
the formation of urine and the recovery of impor-
function is directly dependent on the arrangement
88   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Box 4.1
1 Tissue structure and histology: Is it
Squamous
ancient history?
As you have been reading the descriptions of
tissues and cells and realized that many of the basic
techniques have been around since the 1900s, you
Cuboidal
might be thinking. what is new in the study of
tissues and cells?
First, producers and animal scientists are very
 interested in tools that might increase or improve
efficiency of production—meat, milk, eggs, and so
on. This often requires evaluations of tissues related
 to cell growth and development. Often histology
Columnar
and, increasingly, detection and quantitation of cel-
lular proteins (receptors, signaling molecules, and
 cell products) are needed to evaluate the impacts
 of treatments and animal management to under-
Fg. 4.3. Epithelial cell shape classifications. These stylized
stand mecharisms. This detailed study often uses
illustrations show three-dimensional as well as surface views for
specific antibodies linked with "secondary" anti-
three common shapes of epithelial cells. The cell nucleus is
bodies that contain molecules that can be induced
indicated by the black oval. Relatively flattened, thin cells are
squamous. The one cell thick row of cells that line the internal
to fluoresce or enzymatically react so that the cel-
surface of capillaries or the lung alveoli are examples of squamous
 lular and tissue location of the protein that the spe-
cells. Cuboidal cells, as the name suggests, are similar to a child's 
cific (first antibody) recognizes can be detected and
set of ABC toy blocks. The cells approximate cubes. Such cells
the amount of the protein quantified. Similar tech-
appear as part of the lining of many ducts in glandular tissues.
riques can be used to detect and measure mRNA.
Columnar cells, by contrast, are more elongated and can be likened
to tiny skyscrapers. These cells appear on the surface of the lining
Second, domestic animals are being used as
 of the intestinal tract, among other places.
models to evaluate methods and treatments to better
understand disease or injury mechanisms related
to human health needs. This often requires evalua-
tion of detailed responses of animal tissues and
 cells to various treatments including changes in
tissue development, cell proliferation, and func-
tion. A recent review by Bartol et al. (2013) ele-
whereby bioactive factors in mother's milk act to
Simple
modify tissue development in the neonate, in this
case, development of the female reproductive tract
and associated expression of multiple signaling
 and regulator proteins.
 Stratified
and organization of the cells within the tissue or organ
(Bacha and Bacha, 2012) (Box 4.1).
Epithelial tissue
Fig. 4.4. Epithelial cells classified by number of strata. This
Classification is sraightforward; a single layer of cells constitutes a
As illustrated in Figure 4.3, epithelial cells are classi-
simple layer, but when there are multiple layers of cells, this is
fied based on the shape of the cells. In addition, the
called a stratified epithelium. The black lines represent various 
 number of epithelial cells in the layer adds an addi-
tional element of classification (Fig. 4.4). A single layer
the layer of epithelial cells.
of squamous, cuboidal, or columnar cells is called
a simple epithelium. An alternative structure with
 several layers of cells is called stratified.These stylized
images are oversimplified, but you should get the idea
Tissue structure and organization
89
of how these cells are classified. One of the things that
will take some practice is to distinguish epithelial cells
from other cells present in tissues, for example, con-
nective tissue cells (fibroblasts, adipocytes). One key
 is that the epithelial cells are often on a surface (even
if the surface is internal, the lining of a duct for secre-
tion onto the internal surfaces of body cavities). When
the stratified type occurs, the shape classification is
only considered for the single layer of cells on the
outer surface. For example, in the stylized example
 given in Figure 4.4, the epithelium would be classified
Fg. 4.5. Drawing of glandular duct. You can easily imagine that 
as stratified cuboidal epithelium.
the structure illustrated in this drawing is essentially a large tube to
Notice that the outer layers of epithelial cells in
transport secretions that empty from several other small tubes. As
both examples in Figure 4.4are classified as cuboidal.
e Ag pau s! aqnt jaiel ayi 'sisagans ly8! ayi oi eaie Aemeins au
Second, the dark lines underneath the cells represent
double layer of cells; the small cross section of one of the smaller
tubes (lower let) suggests it is lined by a simple layer of epithelial
the basement membrane that the epithelial cell layer
cells. How would the image of the larger sructure appear if it were
rests upon. This is an unfortunate term, in that the
sectioned longitudinally? what if the structure was sectioned in a
basement membrane is not a true membrane in the
perfect cross section compared with an oblique angle? what would
usual sense, but is a complex of extracellular proteins
it look like? These are some of your concerns as you examine tissue
(collagen, elastin, etc.), proteoglycans, and so forth,
sections. You need to strive to imagine the tissue in three
 a a  p  in as r
dimensions.
is   s   nd s
preparations but not in others. This is depends on the
fixation process used to preserve the tissue and the
particular staining process (see Fig. 2.5). Since most
routine processing focuses on the cellular structure, do
Longitudinal
not be alarmed if the basement membrane is not also
section
Cross section
apparent.
Tissue sections prepared for the light microscope
are usually made from tissues that have been pre-
served in formalin, dehydrated in ethanol, and ulti-
Fg. 4.6. Diagram of tubular structure. These simple drawings are
mately infiltrated with paraffin wax, as discussed
an attempt to illustrate the appearance of an epithelial duct cut in
briefly in Chapter 2. These tissue blocks are then
either longitudinal or cross section. The cross-section profile is
easier to imagine, but the longitudinal profile can easily seem like a
 placed in a machine called a microtome that is used to
simple mass of cells.
cut thin slices or sections that are then mounted on a
 microscope slide and stained. This is how the majority
of tissues have been prepared since the late 1800s.
Although this is a routine process, the sections pre-
 When you are interpreting what is seen in a single
pared can be relatively thick, sometimes more than
plane of section, it is important that you think about
 one cell in thickness, so that you are sometimes looking
what might have been present either above or below
 at parts of multiple cells. Just like problems with other
a particular structure.
artifacts, wrinkles, tears, and so forth, thickness has to
Can you now reexamine the tissue in Figure 4.7 and
be considered as you use the microscope or consider
 imagine the organization and three-dimensional struc-
illustrations. A further problem concerns learning to
ture of the tissue from the microscopic image?
recreate three dimensions from the flat images you
will be studying. Take a moment to consider the exam-
ples of what the cutting angle does to the image you
Epithelial tissue characteristics
see in the microscope. Imagine a real organ with twist-
ing and turning epithelial ducts or blood vessels and
Epithelial tissue or epithelium (the plural form is epi-
the possible variations. How would this equate to the
thelia)occurs as a sheet of cells to cover an organ
two-dimensional image of tissue on the microscope
surface or to line a body cavity. In other cases, epithe-
slide? For many structures, you will need to consider,
lial tissue makes up the bulk of the cells in glandular
has the specimen been cut longitudinally, in cross
tissues. The covering type of epithelium is abundant
section, or perhaps at some odd tangent? All of these
and widespread. These are the cells that make up the
things impact the image that you see in the micro-
 skin, the internal surfaces of the cardiovascular system,
scope. Consider the illustrations in Figure 4.5 and
digestive tract, reproductive tract, and respiratory tract
Figure 4.6.
Epithelial tissue also covers internal body cavities. The
90  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter
H
C
D
Fig. 4.7. Examples of epithelial structures. The four images shown are actual mammary ducts. Panel A is a picture of a whole mammary
gland taken from a prepubertal mouse after the gland was defatted and stained. The picture was taken with a dissecting microscope, so the
ducts are intact and whole. Notice the elongated ducts with the bulbous endings (terminal end buds). Panel B is a section of mammary tissue
from the mammary gland of a prepubertal Holstein heifer. Panel C is an image of mammary tissue from a pregnant heifer, and panel D is of
mammary tissue taken from a lactating cow. Late in pregnancy, the mammary ducts begin to develop alveoli. The alveoli are spherical,
hollow structures lined by the epithelial cells that are responsible for the synthesis and secretion of milk (this is more evident from the drawing
in Fig. 4.8). The epithelial cells that line the internal surface of the alveoli are simple cuboidal. Around the outside of the alveoli, specialized
myoepithelial cells form a network around the circumference of the alveolus. These cells contract in response to oxytocin released from the
posterior pituitary at the time of milking. This reduces the volume of the alveolus to force accumulated milk into larger ducts and then the 
nipple or teat. This is called milk ejection or milk letdown. Somewhat similar structures are found in lungs. pancreas, and thyroid gland.
functional cells of the accessory organs of the digestive
is composed of cells that are very tightly packed
system, that is, the liver, pancreas, and gall bladder,
d n   sn a a p os r
are mostly epithelial cells. Other glandular organs,
between the cells. In fact, for the epithelial cells to suc-
that is, pituitary, adrenal, thyroids, salivary, and so
cessfully complete their roles as protective barriers,
forth, are also composed of epithelial cells. Epithelial
adjacent cells form specialized contacts. Epithelial
cells form boundaries between different regions of the
 cells acting to absorb or secrete products are described
body. For example, the epidermis of the skin creates a
as being polarized. This is most easily visualized for
protective barrier between the inside and outside of
glandular secretory cells. The basal region of the cell
the body. The same is true for the epithelial cells that
(closest to the basement membrane and capillaries)
line the internal surface of the respiratory or digestive
can be thought of as the manufacturing site for the cell.
tract. Other specialized epithelial cells include repro-
Products to be secreted are packaged and processed
ductive cells (ova and spermatozoa), rods and cones
 in the Golgi apparatus for subsequent secretion from
of the retina, and the taste buds. This explains the
the cells in the apical region of the cell (see Fig. 4.8).
myriad of functions attributed to epithelial fissues: (1)
In other cases, the apical end of the cell (near the free
protection, (2) absorption, (3) secretion, (4) excretion,
 surface) is acting to absorb nutrients or to move surface
(5) filtration, and (6) sensory reception.
secretions. For example, the cells of the intestinal tract
Distinctive features also contrast epithelial tissues
and kidney tubules have extensive microvilli. This
from the other three tissue types. One of these is the
markedly increasesthe surface area to improve func-
degree of cellularity of the epithelial tissues compared
tion. Other epithelial cells are even more specialized
with that of other fissues. Specifically, epithelial tissue
with cilia—for example, cells lining the ova duct or
Tissue structure and organization
91
Myoepithelialcell
Fg. 4.9. Cultured epithelial cells. These mammary cells have
formed a monolayer that is one cell thick. This is similar to the
sheet of simple squamous epithelial cells that would line the
surfaces of organs or surfaces of internal body cavities.
Fig. 4.8. Alveolar drawing.The figure provides a representation of
tightly packed epithelial cells and the capillaries
the structure of mammary alveoli. As you can see, it takes
underneath. This likely explains why it is rare to find
experience and practice to discern the three-dimensional structure
epithelial tissue that contains more than a few strata
of tissues. One of the tissues for which this is very important is the
of living cells. A final property is the capacity of epi-
kidney. Once you develop an appreciation of the structure of the
kidney nephron, it will be much easier for you to understand and
thelial cells for rapid growth and regeneration. For
appreciate the filtering, reabsorption, and excretion that occurs in
example, notice how quickly skin abrasions heal. But
the urinary system. We will now consider the features of some of
this may have a downside when you consider that
the more common epithelial types.
most cancers are carcinomas, that is, derived from
epithelial cells.
 the respiratory tract that function to propel substances
along their surfaces.
Simple epithelium
The epithelial cells, however, are not alone in carry-
ing out their activities. The cells are attached to a thin
As you will likely experience in a laboratory setting
 supporting sheet or layer of nonliving material called
with a microscope and a set of slides or in multimedia
the basal lamina.This layer is composed of proteins
presentations, fissue samples contain multiple cell
 and glycoproteins that are produced by the epithelial
types and, in the case of epithelial tissues, often more
cells. In some regions, for example, Bowman's capsule
than one type of epithelial cell. This means that while
of the kidney tubules, the basal lamina is particularly
the focus of a particular specimen maybe on a specific
thick so that it acts as a filtration barrier to prevent the
cell or tissue, it does not mean this cell or tissue type
movement of plasma proteins in the urinary filtrate.
is exclusive. Our first example (Fig. 4.9) shows epithe-
Underneath the basal lamina, the reticular lamina
lial cells growing on the surface of a cell culture dish.
 appears. This is an additional layer of more fibrous 
These cells have proliferated and arranged themselves
proteins, for example, collagens and elastic that link
into a pavement of cells one cell layer thick. If you
the epithelial cells with the connective tissue under-
 imagined these cells growing on a flexible sheet that
neath. These two layers or lamina (basal + reticular)
could be rolled into a tube, you would have a simple
are collectively called the basement membrane. It
recreation of a capillary. Regardless, in this view, you
defines the boundary between the epithelium and the
are looking directly down onto the surface of the cells.
connective tissue or stromal. Interestingly, although
 Each cell looks something like a fried egg, with the
there are nerve fibers, that is, sensory nerves that pen-
rucleus the yolk of the egg. The cells are flattened and
etrate the epithelium of the skin or intestinal tract, the
closely packed together. They would be classified as
epithelium is avascular. It does not contain blood
 simple squamous. As another way to visualize simple
vessels. These appear in the loose, more open spaces 
squamous cells, imagine the flattened floor tiles in a
of the connective tissue. Thismeans that both the
kitchen as single squamous epithelial cells all linked
nutrients that supply the epithelial cells and waste
together to make the floor. The grout between the tiles
products depend on diffusion to pass between the
would represent the membrane junction complexes
 92   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
that anchor epithelial cells together and create func-
mally be located. There can also be additional magni-
tional barriers between tissue compartments, that is,
fication associated with printing or viewing, but this
the surface and the subflooring underneath. It is
 does not really increase true resolution. At this mag-
typical to find simple squamous epithelium in areas
nification, the difference in the cellular appearance of
where absorption and filtration occur and a thin
squamous and cuboidal epithelial cells should be
barrier are desirable, for example, capillaries or lining
apparent in the lower portion of the image. Many of
 of alveoli of the lungs. Can you rationalize why simple
squamous cells would be a poor choice for the surface
of the body?
1210
The image shown in Figure 4.10 is from the kidney
and is mostly parenchymal tissue. It shows a series of
cross-sectioned tubules from several nephrons. You
should remember that epithelial cells are often found
on free surfaces, even though some of the surfaces
may be very minute internal surfaces, that is, the
inside of small vessels or tubules. Some of these
tubules are lined by a single layer (simple) of squa-
mous epithelial cells, but others are lined by a single
layer of cuboidal epithelial cells. Can you find exam-
ples of each? Perhaps a hint is in order. For many of
the squamous epithelial cells, the cytoplasm is very
thin so that the most prominent feature of the cells is
the nucleus, which often seems to protrude into the
lumenal space of the tubule. Can you pick some of
these out of the image?
Fg- 4.11.
High-power image of kidney tissue. Figure 4.12 is taken
Figure 4.1l shows a portion of this tissue taken at a
with a 20x objective and is an image of a tangential section
higher magnification, 1,0oox. This is accomplished by
through a blood vessel, specifically a vein. You can see clusters of
the use of the 100x objective lens of the microscope
red blood cells in the lumenal space of the vessel and you can also
and the 10x eyepiece. This means that the magnifica-
distinguish a layer of simple squamous epithelial cells that line the
internal surface of the vessel. The center of this section shows the
tion reaching your eye is 1,0oo-fold. The camera used
lumen of a vein that has been cut at a tangent. Several red blood
to take the photographs also utilizes a 10x lens
cells are clustered near the upper center of the vessel lumen. The
mounted in position where the eyepieces would nor-
cells that line the side of the lumen are endothelial cells.
A
B
Fig. 4.10. Kidney tissue. Multiple kidney tubules are cut in cross section. Some are thin-walled regions of the loop of Henle, lined by simple
"(shan ielayopua palle) sllas leaulida snowenbs alduis Ag paul osle <(smonel saiielldes jo suoas ane sieuo sllas ielauida snowenbs
There are also a smaller number of cross sections through a portion of the nephron called the collecting duct. These are lined by simple
cuboidal epithelial cells (circle).
Tissue structure and organization   93
the cuboidal cells have distinct pink staining around
cells (also called endothelial cells) and the layer just
their borders, and the nucleus when present is gener-
under these cells, the tunica media, which has smooth
ally oval-shaped and positioned in the center of the
muscle cells in arteries. The yellow arrow points to the
cells. Three of these cells are present near the center of
nucleus of an endothelial cell and the red arrow to
the image. For the low squamous cells surrounding
another endothelial cell's nucleus, which was synthe-
the lumen of a smaller duct (lower portion of the
sizing DNA at the time the sample was taken. The
slide), the cells have only a thin rim of cytoplasm, but
 brown stain is due to the attachment of an antibody
the nuclei are prominent and seem to protrude into
that is specific for presence of bromodeoxyuridine
the lumen of the duct.
(BrdU) an analog of thymidine that is used to measure
Figure 4.12 is taken with a 20x objective and is an
DNA synthesis. You should recall the relevance of
image of a tangential section of a blood vessel, spe-
these analogs in the study of cell proliferation from
cifically a vein. You can see clusters of red blood cells
 your earlier reading.
(RBCs) in the lumenal space of the vessel. The cells
Before we leave our discussion of simple epithe-
that line the side of the lumen are endothelial cells.
lium, as you have likely gathered from the figure
Notice the difference in the staining compared with
descriptions, some simple squamous epithelia have
Figure 4.10. This means you need to learn structures
specialized names. The term endothelium (meaning
not based on color but on morphological charac-
inner covering) is used to describe the lubricating cell
teristics.
covering for all vessels of the cardiovascular system
 Figure 4.13 shows a similar section through an artery
including the lymphatic vessels and the internal sur-
at higher magnification. The box (yellow) in the figure
faces of the chambers of the heart. Capillaries specifi-
indicates a portion of the tunica intima or interna,
 cally are made of endothelium. This structure promotes
which is composed of simple squamous epithelial
rapid, easy movement of nutrients to the surrounding
cells as the corresponding uptake of waste products.
Similar simple squamous cells also make up the meso-
thelium (middle covering), the epithelium that makes
the serous membranes of the body. These are the
coverings of the internal organs and body cavities that
are well lubricated to allow organs toslide past one
another.
Figure 4.14 is an image from a tissue sample taken
from a section of the small intestine. A portion of
a villus is shown with a layer of simple columnar
epithelial cells covering the outer portion. The nuclei
Fig. 4.12. Section through blood vessel.
Artery
(40x)
Fg. 4.14. Simple columnar epithelial cells from the intestine. This
tissue section is longitudinally cut through a villus in the intestine.
The epithelial cells appear as a uniform row of cells that cover the
surface. Notice the dark blue-purple nuclei, most of which appear
Fig. 4.13. Section of artery wall.
lined up in the basal region of individual epithelial cells.
 94   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
appear mostly in a row in the lower third of the cell.
bit out of focus, and second, it is a bit too thick. This
Notice the cells are tall and narrow.
makes it difficult to distinguish individual cells. The
Although not apparent at lower magnification, the
villi have become pushed into one another during
apical ends of the cells have many microvilli, which
processing, so it takes some effort to distinguish indi-
add capacity for absorption. This is also called the
vidual structures. Finally, to the upper right and far
brush border. If you look closely, you should notice
right of the section, there are some tears that have
that the outer rim of the cells looks as if the cells have
altered the orientation of the tissue.
been slightly colored. This is because the microvilli
Many other artifacts also can occur. The point is that
clump slightly and trap proteins when the tissue is
section preparation is sometimes as much an art as a
preserved. These associated proteins and carbohy-
science, so patience is needed as you study even pro-
5
drates are called the glycocalyx. The accumulated
fessionally prepared slides. Regardless, several villi
 material and closely aligned microvilli allow staining
have been sectioned roughly along their longitudinal
and explain the darker rim.
axis. This simply illustrates what you can and will see
Can you distinguish individual epithelial cells?
when you examine actual slides. Since you know what
Columnar cells are usually associated with absorption
 you are looking for in columnar epithelial cells from
and secretion and are found lining the intestinal tract
Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15, you should still be able to
from the stomach to the rectum. This epithelium has
- po r e  pa a pas y
two modifications that greatly aid its functioning. The
nar epithelial cells.
first is the presence of the microvilli that markedly
Figure 4.17 illustrates a similar section of the duo
increase absorptive surface, and the second is the pres-
denum, but the sample is from a calf and the animal
ence of goblet cells. These unicellular glands produce
was injected with BrdU2 hours before the tissue was
mucus that is secreted on the epithelial surface. This
collected. Remember, this is the analog of DNA that
increases lubrication and provides protection. These
 gets incorporated into cells that are in the S-phase of
specialized secretory cells also appear in the respira-
the cell cycle. In this section, many of the villi are cut
tory and reproductive tracts. Although the images
 at a tangent to the longitudinal axis, but you can see
shown in Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15 are excellent,
 that there are many brown-stained nuclei (indicating
representative examples of the features of intestinal
the cells were synthesizing DNA, i.e., presence of
 BrdU) in the lower regions of the villi. It is well known 
all histological sections are of such quality. Also, as
that the cells that populate the villus proliferate in
indicated previously, the plane of section can make it
lower crypts and are lost from the upper region of the
difficult to interpret a given tissue section.
villi as they age. To maximize the opporfunity to
The image in Figure 4.16 is also a section through
detect labeled cell nuclei but to also be able to distin-
intestine. It is still possible to distinguish the presence
guish basic tissue structure, the sample was only
of villi and the appearance of the epithelium, but can
briefly counterstained in hematotoxylin but without
you detect some of the problems? First, the image is a
 eosin. This gives the pale blue staining to the cells, but
Fig. 4.15. High-power view of the intestinal epithelium. In this
image, the outer layer of epithelial cells isclearly tall and slender
with the round nuclei oriented toward the basal ends of the cells.
There is a very evident brush border (outer thin layer of the cells)
Fg. 4.16. Small intestine tissue artifacts. This image of a section of
that results from staining of the abundant microvilli and associated
the intestine illustrates some of the problems that can be
proteins.
encountered in the study of typical histological sections.
Tissue structure and organization
95
Fg. 4.18. Tissue from the anterior bovine vagina. This section
illustrates the general structure of the internal lining of a region of
the bovine reproductive tract. The surface is thrown into folds and
is covered by simple columnar epithelial cells. Notice the red-
stained, dense connective tissue surrounding the epithelium.
Fig. 4.17. Section of duodenum from BrdU-injected calf. This
section of intestinal tissue is processed to show the presence of
 BrdU-labeled cell nuclei. Several villi are closely aligned and some
are cut at a tangent, but it is apparent that the number of BrdU-
labeled cells (brown-stained nuclei and arrows) is markedly higher
in the crypts of the villi. The pale globules indicate the presence of
goblet cells. Image is courtesy of Dr. Anthony Capuco, USDA,
Beltsville, MD.
it is less distinct than in the H&E-stained sections of
intestinal tissue (Fig. 4.14 and Fig. 4.15)
Subsequent figures,Figure 4.18and Figure 4.19, give
examples of simple columnar epithelial cells from the
reproductive tract. The complex folding of the internal
 surface is evident (Fig. 4.18), as is the regular arrange-
Fg. 4.19. Simple columnar epithelial cells. This section is a 
higher-power (40x objective) image of the epithelium shown in
ment of epithelial and goblet cells (Fig. 4.19).
Figure 4.18. Note the layer of closely aligned epithelial cell nuclei
Figure 4.18 shows a tissue section from the anterior
in Figure 4.20, which shows a low-power image of sectioned
(fornix) vagina of a cow taken during the follicular
cornea.
phase of the estrus cycle. Notice the epithelium is on
the internal surface, and as the higher magnification
(40x objective) image (Fig. 4.19) shows, the epithelium
simple epithelial types but are much less efficient at
is also a simple columnar epithelium.
absorption. This means these cells are also poorly
adapted for secretion. When secretions are needed
along a stratified epithelial surface, this is usually
Stratified epithelium
accomplished by the presence of exocrine glands that
are located inferior to the epithelial surface. Ducts that
To this point, we have considered examples of simple
radiate from the glandular cells to the surfaces provide
epitheliawith squamous, cuboidal, or columnar cells.
most needed secretions. However, most of the lubrica-
Now let us consider stratified epithelium types. As
 tion for these internal epithelial surfaces is provided
you should surmise, the stratified types are better able
by goblet cells. As mucus accumulates in the cells,
to withstand physical trauma and wear and tear than
they eventually rupture to release their contents.
 96  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Remember that with stratified epithelia, the classi-
cells appear as cubes or polyhedrons, but the cells are
fication depends on the shape of the epithelial cells on
progressively flattened as they migrate to the surface.
the outer surface, adjacent to the lumen or free surface.
Since the outermost cell layer is flatted, the classifica-
The first image in this series (Fig. 4.20) is a section
tion is stratified squamous. Can you detect any of the
through the cornea taken at very low magnification
fibroblast nuclei in the underlying substantia propria
(4x) objective. The outside of the cornea is covered by
(the name given to the bulk of the corneal tissue)?
 a stratified squamous epithelium and the inside by a
Figure 4.22 shows the epithelial layer on the inner
simple squamous epithelium. The bulk of the corneal
 surface also at higher magnification. The cells are in a
 structure (arrow) consists of collagen fibers arranged
single layer and they are highly flattened, so it is an
in lamella that are parallel to each other as well as
example of simple squamous epithelium. Other areas
5
scattered fibroblasts.
 where this epithelial type would appear ison the inter-
The outer stratified squamous epithelium of the
nal surface of the lung alveoli. What better way to
cornea is about five cells thick (Fig. 4.21). The basal
promote rapid diffusion of gases than with a single
layer of thin epithelial cells?
   e sd t a
of stratified squamous epithelium. The section is from
an internal body opening that is moist but requires
 protection. Examples for this type of epithelium would
include the lip, mouth, posterior vagina, and anus.
The bracketed area indicates the epithelial portion of
Cornea
the tissue; the lower portion of the slide is the cornec-
tive tissue or stroma. Notice the multiple layers of cells
(4x obj)
but the fact that the outermost layer of cells are flat-
tened (arrows), therefore the stratified squamous clas-
sification. In contrast to areas that are moist, the skin
also needs the protection provided by multiple layers
of cells, but excess loss of moisture can be a problem
for many animals. Figure 4.24 shows the beginnings
of the keratinization process. The number of cell layers
and classification is similar except that there is now a
layer of keratin (a cellular protein) and a layer of pro-
gressively dying cells. This keratin layer provides
Fig. 4.20. Low-power image of sectioned cornea. At this 
magnification, no cellular detail is visible, but it is apparent the
protection. As a specific example, the keratin that is
outer cell layer is thicker than on the inside (stratified vs. simple
produced in the teat opening of lactating cows is a
epithelial layers).
very important protection against mastitis. In exper-
iments in which the keratin has been artificially
Cornea
(40x inner)
Cornea
(40x obj)
Fig. 4.21. Stratified squamous epithelium cornea. This higher-
Fg. 4.22. Simple squamous epithelium cornea. At higher
magnification view of the outside of the cornea shows several
magnification, only a single layer of highly flattened epithelial cells 
layers of epithelial cells. The outermost layers are higher flatted.
is apparent on the internal corneal surface. As in the previous
Within the body of the cornea there is the faintly stained nucleus of
figure, there is also a faintly stained fibroblast nucleus within the
a fibroblast (right).
lamellae of the cornea.
Tissue structure and organization
97
Fg. 4.25. Low-power section of skin. This low-power image
shows a section of skin from a region with high fiction and
pressure. The outermost layer called the stratum corneum (brackets)
can account for 75% of the total epithelial thickness. It is composed
 of keratin and thickened plasma membranes from multiple layers of
dead cells.
Fig. 4.23. Nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium. This
tissue sample from just inside the bovine oral cavity shows the
hallmarks of tratification, that is, multiple layers of epithelial cells
(bracket area). The outermost layers of visible cells are highly
flattened (arrows), thus the squamous classification. The lower area
 of tissue is connective tissue.
Fg. 4.26. High-power section of skin.ln this higher magnification,
you can see some of the morphological characteristics that
distinguish other strata in the epithelium.For example, the dark-
stained boundary (upper arrow) at the lower edge of the stratum
Fig. 4.24. Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. This tissue
corneum is called the stratum granulosum because of the presence
sample from just inside the bovine reproductive tract shows the
of the keratohyaline granules. The bulk of the cells are in the
 beginnings of keratinization. The outer visible layer of cells is
sratum spinosum (brackets) and are bounded by the stratum basale
highly flattened and more darkly stained. There are also trands of
(lower arrows), which appear as lighter, staining cells occurring just
keratin fibers near the surface of the tissue.
before the connective tissue in the dermis.
removed, incidence of mastitis is markedly increased.
ing and morphological characteristics that allow the
The next image Figure 4.25 shows a more extreme
epithelial cells in varying strata within the epithelium
example of the protection that is provided by kerati-
to be distinguished. These will be described in more
nization in the skin. Here, dead and dying cells form
detail in our discussion of the integumentary system.
a very distinct outer layer that markedly increases
Other types of stratified epithelium occur on the
protection against abrasion. The layer is especially
internal surfaces of some of the larger tubular struc-
increased in skin areas subjected to pressure. Figure
tures in the body, that is, trachea, reproductive tract, and
4.26 shows some of the cellular features of skin at
bladder. These will be considered in subsequent slides.
higher magnification. Here you can begin to see stain-
Stratified cuboidal epithelium is usually associated
 98  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
with various exocrine glands in which secretions
shownin Figure 4.30. This sample is a cross section
made by the secretory cells of the gland must be trans-
through the epidymis of a bull. In this tissue, there is
ported through ducts to be emptied. The cells, which
a more complex surface specialization, called stereo-
compose the walls of the ducts, generally do not
cilia. These structures, similar to but more elaborate
produce secretions themselves but provide a passage-
than simple cilia, are evident as the elongated spikes
way for products to the site of secretion. Exceptions
that protrude into the lumenal space of the tubule. The
include the ductal cells of the salivary gland and pan-
center of the lumen is also filled with stored sperma-
creas, which can act to modify secretions produced by
 tozoa, a highly specialized epithelial cell.
 the acinar cells. Figure 4.27 illustrates a cross section
A final epithelia type (Fig. 4.31) we will consider is
through a duct leading from a sweat gland. Note the
transitional. This type appears in the lining of the
1210
roughly double layer of epithelial cells. The tissue sur-
bladder and is unique because its appearance changes
rounding the duct is mostly collagen fibrils and other
 extracellular matrix materials, a few fibroblasts, and
blood vessel cells.
The cells in Figure 4.28 illustrate a type of epithe-
lium found in the trachea and areas of the reproduc-
tive tract. These are pseudostratified because although
the cells appear to be residing in multiple layers, in
reality, each of the epithelial cells is anchored to the
 basement membrane. This may only be by a thin
projection of cytoplasm, but since all the cells are
attached,the layer only appears to be stratified. The
sample is from the oviduct of a cow. Clusters of cilia
are evident as tufts protruding from the apical ends of
the cells.
The drawing provided in Figure 4.29 illustrates the
arrangement of pseudostratified epithelial cells. Again,
the nuclei appear at various layers, but all are attached
to the basement membrane. It is also usual for this
epithelial type to have goblet cells and cilia. Another
example of pseudostratified columnar epithelium is
Fg. 4.28.
 Pseudostratified columnar epithelium. This image is
from a section of the oviduct of a cow. Only one side of the 
oviduct is shown with the surface epithelial projecting into the
lumen. The nuclei stained in dark blue-purple appear to be
aligned in multiple layers. However, all of the individual cells are
actually anchored in the region of the basement membrane.For
this reason, the cells are clasified as pseudostratified (false
tratification). The shape of the cells is columnar.ln addition, these
cells exhibit a surface specialization, the presence of cilia. Here 
they were clumped into tufts when the tissue sample was
processed.
Fig. 4.27. Duct cross section. A portion of tissue from a sebaceous
Basement
gland is shown. The cross-sectioned duct shows an example of
membrane
stratified cuboidal epithelium. It is typical of the structure of various
ducts of exocrine glands.
Fg. 4.29. Drawing of a pseudostratified epithelium
Tissue structure and organization
66
Epithelial cell junctions
Along the adjoining borders of epithelial cells there
 are specialized cell junctions. These are regions or sites 
where some special contact between cells can be rec-
ognized. Three functional classes of junctional com-
plexes include (l) occluding junctions, (2) anchoring
junctions, and (3) communicating junctions. Some of
the communicating junctions, for example, the gap
because of the importance of epithelial tissue to create
fissue compartments or barriers, it is important to
understand the role of cell junctions in this process. To
illustrate the idea of barriers, consider the differences
between milk and blood. It is clear that blood circu-
lates throughout the mammary gland within the capil-
Fig. 4.30. Pseudostratified epithelium bovine epidymis. These
laries just underneath the secretory epithelial cells of
epithelia have stereocilia that protrude from the apical cell surfaces
into the lumenal space. The movement of these stereocilia
the mammary alveolus (see Fig. 4.8). However, the
maintains the flow of maturing sperm cells in the reproductive tract.
composition of blood or interstitial fluids and milk is
Compacted sperm cells appear as the dark cluster in the center of 
very different. The same can be said for the environ-
the lumenal space.
ment of the gut lumen versus the interstitial fluid of
the lacteals of the villi of the intestinal tract. How are
these differences developed and maintained? This is
where junctional complexes come into play.
In circumstances where it is necessary to maintain
a seal between epithelial cells, the lateral margins of
the cells become fused together along a system of
membrane ridges between adjacent cells. These ridges
extend completely around the perimeter of the cells to
create a sort of belt located near the apical ends of the
cells. These junctional complexes are called zonaoc-
cludens or tight junctions toindicate that they produce
an effective barrier. For example, during the latter
stages of mammary development in the pregnant
heifer, the approach of parturition signals both the
structural differentiation of the alveolar cells and mat-
uration of tight junctions between the cells. Increases
 in circulating glucocorticoids along with declining
progesterone seem to be especially important. Once
this occurs, paracellulartransport (transport of compo-
Fig. 4.31. Transitional epithelium bladder. The appearance of this
nents between the cells) is dramatically reduced. This
epithelial layer changes related to the degree of stretch. As the
 creates an effective blood-milk barrier so that transfer
bladder or other areas of the urinary tract expand, the apparent
number of epithelial cell layers decreases until the pressure is
of serum components into milk or milk constituents
relieved.
into blood is minimized. This does not mean that
transport cannot occur but that wholesale leakage is
prevented. The effectiveness of this barrier function is
as the bladder expands and contracts. When relatively
readily apparent from study of secretions obtained
 empty, the epithelium is similar in appearance to non-
from animals with acute mastitis or experimental
keratinized stratified squamous. As the bladder fills,
treatments known to disrupt the tight junctions. One
the expansion reduces the number of apparent cell
of the effects of this disruption is the appearance of
layers. In the nondistended state, the rounded sur-
serum proteins in milk, for example, albumin. Con-
faces of the epithelial cells seem to protrude into the
versely, these situations also allow abrupt increases in
lumenal space.Notice the cross section of the vein and
the appearance of lactose and c-lactalbumin (and
artery just below the epithelium. The nuclei of the
likely other milk components) into serum.
larger circumference of the vein (upper) also provide
Adhering junctions are a second class of mem-
an excellent example of simple squamous epithelium.
brane specializations that act to anchor epithelial cells
1 00 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
together. These complexes also appear as bands or
This can be imagined as small pipes passing between
belts that circumnavigate the perimeter of the cells
two adjacent apartments. Gap junctions appear not
below the level of the tight junctions. In intestinal
 just in epithelial tissue but are prominent in cardiac
 epithelial cells, for example, these complexes are called
 muscle, some types of smooth muscle cells, and between
 zona adherens. As you traverse along the lateral mem-
cells of the nervous system. Gap junctions allow for
brane toward the basal end of the cell, a second type
the direct passage of small molecules (typically less
of adhering junction, the desmosome or macula adhe-
than 300MW) between cells. This is important for cell-
-  ae sn r e s
 to-cell communication and rapid responses necessary
 uted and allow the epithelium to maintain structural
for nerve function and muscle contraction. We will
 integrity by linking cells together and by linking cells
discuss the specific physiological events related to cell
5
to the underlying extracellular matrix. These com-
junctions in subsequent chapters. A stylized view of
plexes are plentiful in tissues that are subjected to
cellular junctions is provided in Figure 4.32. Figure
mechanical stress, for example, skin. The adherens
4.33 illustrates the structure of the gap junction.
junctions are focal points where actin filaments attach
 Gap junctions are composed of transmembrane pro-
to the junctional proteins. In general terms, there are
 teins called connexins.When arranged to create acom-
two basic parts of these complexes. The intracellular
 attachment proteins create a plaque or thickening on
the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane and provide
Aplcal surface
sites for attachment of cytoskeleton proteins and for
 transmembrane linker proteins. The transmembrane
linker proteins have cytoplasmic tails that attach to the
plaque structure, but the extracellular domains of the
proteins interact with the extracellular domains of
adjacent junction proteins or with other extracellular
 matrix proteins,that is,hemidesmosomes. In the case
of the adhesion belts in epithelial sheets, the com-
 plexes in companion cell are directly apposed. The 
transmembrane linker protein is a member of a family
of Ca?+-dependent proteins called cadherins. The
plaque or adhesion belt through the actions of several
 Basal surfac
linker proteins (catenin, vinculin, and others) binds
bundles of actin fibers that radiate into the cytoplasm
Fg. 4.32. Celular junctions. Tight junctions (1) serve to effectively
seal the apical from the basal surfaces of the epithelium. Notice
interacting with the cytoskeleton. It is thought that
that apical or basal molecules penetrate between the cells only to
changes in the orientation and contraction of these
the region of the junction. Desmosomes (2) act to link cells together
bundles explain the folding of epithelial sheets to
something like spot welds, while hemidesmosomes anchor the cells
create tubular structures during tissue development.
to extracellular matrix molecules. Adhesion belts are not illustrated
Desmosomes, unlike the bands of the zona adher-
but would typically occur in the region just below the tight junctions.
ens, are limited to spots or patches of the membrane
between adjacent cells. They could be envisioned as
spot welds or small dollops of glue to help bind adja-
cent epithelial cells together. To carry this analogy a
bit further, the zona adherens could be thought of as
miniature packing straps that bind the epithelial cells.
Membranecell1
Both the zona adherens and desmosomes are closely
Gapbelweencells
associated with microfilaments within the cytoskele-
ton of two cells that are linked. A variant of the desmo-
Membrane cell2
some, the hemidesmosome, has the structure of only
half a desmosome. This complex serves to anchor the
epithelial cells to the underlying basement membrane.
 For desmosomes, the transmembrane linker proteins
also belong to the cadherins family of proteins, but the
specific intracellular protein associated with the plaque
varies. In most cells, these are keratin filaments, but des-
Gapjunction
min filaments fulfill the same function in cardiac cells.
(connexon)
instance, proteins aligned in neighboring cells essen-
Closed
Open
tially create pores that pass from one cell to the other.
Fg. 4.33. Gap junction structure.
Tissue structure and organization 
101
plex, six connexin proteins align to form a pore or
release their contents via exocytosis. Since only the
channel called a cornexon. As ilustrated in the upper
secretory vesicle contents are lost from the cell, this
panel, when connexons of two adjacent cells become
mode of secretion is meocrine. In reality, the details for
aligned, they create an aqueous pore that connects the
secretion patterns of mammary cells were not settled
two cells. However, unlike tight junctions, the outer
until mammary tissue from lactating mammals was
leaflets of the adjacent cells are not fused. Gap junc-
studied with transmission electron microscopy in the
tions can also alternate between open and closed
early 1960s. Thus, attempts to determine the phylog-
states. For example, a decrease in pH or an increase in
eny of the mammary glands solely on the basis of
Ca²+ concentrations promotes closure. Thus, the func-
secretion pattern were futile. It seems likely that the
tion of gap junctions can be regulated.
- pq e u asre pr Ar aad
bination of both types of glandular cells. Diagrams
showing holocrine, meocrine, and apocrine modes of
Glandular epithelial types
secretion are shown in Figure 4.34.
 Epithelial glands follow several distinct patterns of
Numerous glands serve multiple physiological func-
development based on the arrangement of cells within.
tions. The simplest classification of glands is based on
the secreting unit of the gland. Simple glands have a
the number of cells. The single or unicellular gland
duct that opens onto a surface. Usually, cells that
represented by mucus-secreting goblet cells is the
create the duct opening or neck are nonsecretory and
 most rudimentary. Multicellular glands include two
serve as a passageway for products made deeper
subtypes: (1) exocrine and (2) endocrine glands. Exo-
within the gland. The shape of the gland mimics the
 crine glands are familiar examples,that is, salivary or
shape of tubes or rounded flasks called alveoli or acini.
mammary glands, in which products or secretions
Presence of a single glandular unit denotes a simple
made by the epithelial cells are transported via a duct
gland. Depending on the shape of the secretory struc-
to be emptied.Endocrine glands in contrast are duct-
 ture, the gland is classified as simple tubular or simple
less. Hormones produced from these secretory cells
alveolar. By contrast, compound glands are branched
are captured by capillaries surrounding the tissue and
with multiple secretory units opening into a duct.
 transported to target tissues throughout the body. We
will consider the structure and function of endocrine
glands in subsequent chapters.
Holocrine
 In addition to the structural organization of multi-
secretion
cellular exocrine glands, there are also differences in
the how secretions are released from the cells. For
example, early anatomists tried to define the origin of
the mammary gland by classifying the secretion mech-
®
anism for the secretory cells. To illustrate, sebaceous
 glands exhibit a holocrine mode of secretion in which
cells are ruptured and sloughed to become a part of
the secretion. Sweat glands follow an apocrine mode
of secretion in which only portions of the cells are lost
so that individual cells are capable of periodic secre-
Meocrine
 Apocrine
tion. Other glands follow a meocrine mode of secre-
secretion
secretion
tion in which products are secreted but the secretory
cells remain intact. Mammary cells follow both apo-
crine and meocrine modes of secretion. Specifically, as
lipid droplets form in the cytoplasm of the cells,these
droplets progressively enlarge, migrate to the apical
end of the cell, and protrude into the alveolar lumen
until the membrane-bound droplets pinch off to
become the butterfat of milk. Since the membrane sur-
Fg. 4.34. Mechanisms of cellular secretion. In holocrine
rounding the lipid droplet is derived from the plasma
secretion, secretory products accumulate until the cell ruptures and 
membrane of the cell, it is clear that a portion of the
secretions are released. In the meocrine mode, membrane-bound 
cell is lost to become a part of the cellular secretion.
secretory vesicles move the cell margin, fuse with the plasma
This is an example of an apocrine mode of secretion.
membrane, and release the contents by exocytosis so that only the
 contents of the vesicles are lost. In apocrine secretion,
For secretion of specific milk proteins and lactose,
accumulating droplets of product protrude from the plasma
membrane and are progressively lost as membrane-bound vesicles.
the Golgi apparatus. These vesicles both singly andin
 Since the membrane is directly derived from the plasma membrane,
chains fuse with the apical plasma membrane and
a portion of the cell is lost in the secretion.
1 02  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Depending of the specifics of the secretory units,
The type of products they secrete also distinguishes
glands are classified as compound tubular, alveolar,
subclasses of exocrine glands. Mucous glands produce
 or tubuloalveolar. Mammary glands, for example, are
a viscous glycoprotein mixture called mucus. Serous
compound alveolar glands. Various arrangements of
glands produce a more watery or wheylike secretion
the cells within glands are illustrated in Figure 4.35.
that contains enzymes. The exocrine portion of the
pancreas is an example. Some glands (parotid salivary
gland, for example) produce both types of secretions
because they contain a mixture of mucus and serous
Nonsecretory
cells. In typical H&E-stained sections, mucous secre-
cells
Chapter
tory units are very pale-staining compared with the
Secretory
serous secretory units. The serous cells usually have
cells
an intense basophilic staining of the basal areas of
the cells. This is because of the abundant amounts of
Tubular (simple)
Alveolar or acinar (simple)
endoplasmic reticulum, as the cells are actively
producing proteins for secretion. The pale-staining
mucus-secreting cells typically have a flattened nucleus
with most of the area of the cells packed with vacu-
oles containing mucus. Examples are illustrated in
Figure 4.36.
Connective tissue
Compound tubular
 Compound alveolar 
Fig. 4.35. Glandular structures. Simple tubular or simple alveolar
The term connective tissue is used in several contexts.
glands (upper left and right) are essentially cellular pipes lined by
 First, it is a general name for a diverse collection of
epithelial cells (illustrated by the darker green). Cells near the
tissues with varying functions. This includes the con-
opening that form the neck of the bottle-like structure are usually
nective tissues proper, which will be outlined further,
nonsecreting cells. They create the passageway for products to be
as well several specialized tissues. Although connec-
secreted. Epithelial cells located deeper within the sructure
produce and secrete the glandular secretions (illustrated by the dark
five tissue histology is extremely varied, there are
spots). Secretions are released in the lumen spaces of the glands
nonetheless generalities that can be made to compare
(lighter green) to make their way out of the gland. Differences in
these tissues with others, for example, epithelial
aeipui spuel jeloale snsan jengni jo (oloydio aui
tissues. One of the most apparent is that the relative
differences in the shape (tubelike vs. flask-like) for the portion of
density of cells is much less than in epithelial tissue.
the gland thatcontains secretory cells. Compound glands simply
have multiple secreting units thatempty into common ducts. Can
As the name implies, connective tissues serve to
you visualize the appearance of a compound tubuloalveolar gland?
support, unify, and "connect" other tissues to allow
B
Fig. 4.36. Serous and mucous glands.Panel Ashows an area of pancreatic tissue. These serous-type cells exhibit abundant red-staining
secretory granules in the apical regions of the cells (arrows) as well as densely basal cytoplasm (brackets). Panel Bshows a portion of salivary
gland; the pale cells are mucus-secreting cells and the surrounding darker-stained cells serous secretory units.
Tissue structure and organization
103
the creation of more complex tissues and organs. The
Box 4.2
 Tissues, cells, and technology
"cornecting" properties of connective tissues depend
 on products (largely proteins and complex carbohy-
Just as microchips and computer technology have
drates) synthesized and secreted by connective tissue
revolutiorized communications, advances in digital
cells. Connective tissue cells (derived from the meso-
 imaging, microscopy, and software for analysis of
derm germinal layer) become surrounded by their
images is also dramatically changing information
al yo eas e ut ,papuadsns, ae aa jeu os sinpod
that can be obtained from the study of tissues and
own making. So in summary, connective tissue con-
cells. Many of you are likely aware of Western
sists of cells and extracellular fibers (protein polymers)
blotting techniques that allow the detection and
embedded in a matrix consisting of ground substance
quantitation of proteins that are first separated by
and fluid. These fibers are divided into three types:
electrophoresis then transferred to membranes.
collagen, reticular, or elastic. If you imagine a gelatin
Proteins are then identified based on their molec-
 dessert with bits of string, scattered hair, and perhaps
 ular weights as well as visual detection of enzyme-
some fine paper fibers, youwill have a reasonable
linked or fluorescence-tagged antibodies. Not only
mental image of the extracellular matrix of many con-
is it possible to identify the protein, but the amount 
nective tissues. Now in your imaginary connective
of the protein present in the sample is proportional
tissue, add a random suspension of small raisins to
to the signal produced.
represent connective tissue cells (primarily fibroblasts)
In a recent review, Ellis et al. (2012) describe such
and you have an idea of the composition.
techniques to evaluate changes in mammary de-
 One final idea related to the cells that are present is
velopment (specifically ontogeny of myoepithelial
that some are considered fixed; they are always con-
cells) and, perhaps more importantly, indicate the
stituents of the connective tissue in question, that is,
growing importance of imaging in the animal and
fibroblasts or osteoblasts in bone, for example. Other
biological sciences and the need for training of
cells called wandering cells, various blood-derived
new scientists to take advantage of these emerging
cells, macrophages, neutrophils, plasma cells, and so
technologies.
forth, may be present as well.
When tissues are fixed, embedded, and prepared for
histological examination, the material between cells
can sometimes appear as empty space, but this is far
the other cell types in loose connective tissue are the
from the truth. When more specialized stains are used,
"wandering" immune-related cells that migrate from
many of these specialized products can be readily
local capillaries.
visualized. Our purpose is to simply introduce you to
Dense connective tissue has more abundant, thicker
the idea of connective tissues and to provide some
fibers but not as many cells. The most abundant cell
examples of the many varieties of connective tissues
type is usually the fibroblast, the cell responsible for
(Box 4.2).
the synthesis and secretion of the proteins of the fibers.
Dense irregular connective tissue is found in the
protective capsules around organs and surrounding
Classification of connective tissue
developing glands. Dense regular connective tissue is
more specialized, in that the regular arrangement of
It is not easy to formulate a classification of connec-
fibers is important in providing strength as in tendons
tive fissue that is completely adequate for all situa-
and ligaments. Other specialized connective tissues
tions. However, some organization helps the learning
   a  a a 
 process by producing at least a general frame of ref-
cartilage, bone, adipose, and blood.
erence. General connective tissues, called proper con-
The first illustration in this section (Fig. 4.37) shows
nective tissues, are divided into loose, dense regular,
a simple mesenteric spread. This image of fixed stained
and dense irregular types. The primary distinction here
tissue that anchors and protects the intestines demon-
is with the arrangement and relative number of fibers
strates many of the general feafures of connective
between the connective tissue cells. The loose con-
tissues, namely, the presence of extracellular fibers,
nective tissue contains aggregates of loosely arranged
space between cells, and varying types of cells.
fibers and a relatively large number of cells. Loose
As might be expected, there is some gray area in
connective tissues have many fibroblasts but many
deciding the difference between loose and dense con-
other cells as well. A major site of loose connective
nective tissues. How compacted must the material be
tissue is just below the various epithelial layers that
to be considered dense? The tissue just underneath
cover internal and external body surfaces. These are
 many epithelial surfaces, for example, the skin or
sites where antigens and other foreign materials can
areas of the reproductive tract, is loose connective
be present; it should not be surprising that many of
fissue, but there is certainly variation. The immature
1 04 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Adipose
Chapter
Fig. 4.37. Mesentery spread. The mesentery, which serves to
anchor and support the loops of the digestive tract, is very thin.
Many of the very thin fibers (E) are elastin fibers, while the thicker
pink fibers are collagen (C). Some of the dark specks are nuclei of
Fg. 4.39. Loose connective tissue bovine mammary. This image
fibroblasts (arrows).
illustrates an area of loose connective tissue from the bovine
mammary gland. Notice the similarity with the tissue from the
pancreas. However, this section also shows an area with a cluster
 of adipocytes or adipose tissue, a specialized type of connective
tissue, in addition to the band of pinkish connective tissue in the
center of the image.
 or apparent cells are apparent in this region. Collagen
fibrils and other extracellular matrix proteins and
ground substance occupy most of the space. The scat-
tered fibroblasts and other cells only become apparent
 at higher magnification. Figure 4.39 illustrates an area
of similar loose connective tissue from the bovine
mammary gland.
At a higher magnification (Fig. 4.40), some of the
fibroblast nuclei become apparent and the swirls of
light pink-stained collagen fibrils and other more
amorphous proteins can be seen. Many of the fibro-
 blasts are so closely aligned with the collage fibrils that
Fig. 4.38. Loose connective tissue (CT). This image from the
it is difficult to distinguish between cell cytoplasm
pancreas illustrates the general features of the loose CT present
 and the extracellular matrix. This is especially true
under the epithelial regions of many tissues. At the low
for paraffin-embedded tissues. However, the darkly
magnification of this image of H&E-stained tissue shows only the 
 stained nuclei of various cells stand out in the prepara-
amorphous pink of faintly stained collagen fibrils and scattered 
tion. The next example (Fig. 4.4l) shows a sample of
fibroblast nuclei in the region adjacent to the glandular tissue.
 dense and loose connective tissue in the same speci-
men. Another difference is the staining of the speci-
men. It has been stained with a dye called Sirius Red
 mammary gland provides good examples of this vari-
and counterstained with another dye called Fast
ation. The connective tissue immediately adjacent to
Green. In this preparation, the collagen appears 
as
the ducts (intralobular) is less dense than the connec-
bright red, wavy fibers and the epithelium is stained
tive tissue some distance away from the developing
a faint bluish-green, but there is little detail for the
ducts (interlobular). Other organs also have abundant
epithelium because there is no specific nuclear stain.
areas of connective tissue. Figure 4.38 shows a section
The higher-magnification image shown in Figure
from the pancreas. The epithelial tissue to the upper
 4.42 also illustrates the difference between dense irreg-
left is part of the exocrine glandular tissue of the
ular and loose connective tissue. It is easy to see that
organ. The pale pink tissue to the right is a region of
it is largely a matter of degree. The red collagen fibers
loose cornective tissue that supports and anchors the
appear in both regions, but just underneath the epi-
glandular structure. Notice that relatively little detail
 thelial surface of a large epithelial duct (to the upper
Tissue structure and organization
105
Fg. 4.42. Dense irregular connective tissue. Dense irregular
versus loose connective tissue is contrasted with loose connective
tissue in this image from the developing mammary gland of a heifer.
Fig. 4.40. Loose connective tissue detail. An example of loose
 connective tissue for the mammary gland of a cow is shown at 
higher magnification. Most of the darkly stained nuclei are from
fibroblasts. The pink, somewhat wavy pattern is largely from
Collagen fibrils.
CAP
Fig. 4.43. Histology of a tendon. This section through a portion of
a tendon demonstrates the largely directional, parallel orientation of
the fibers from top to bottom. This corresponds with the direction
of greatest strength. Fibroblast nuclei (F) are very difficult to detect,
and their pale blue-stained nuclei seem to blend with the general
structure of the fibers. An approximate longitudinal cut through a
 Capillary (CAP) is also indicated.
Fig. 4.41. Sirius Red-stained connective tissue. Examples of loose
(LC),compared with dense (DC), irregular are indicated. Cross 
nective tissue, is found in tendons and ligaments. This
sections of epithelial ducts appear a faint pale bluish-green color.
 tissue gets its name because of collagen and other fibers
that are uniformly arranged. This is easy to imagine
 in a tendon or ligament where there is a need for great
left), the fibers are much more apparent. The very
tensile strength, usually along a particular axis. In fact,
 pale blue structures embedded in this dense collagen
 injuries and tears to ligaments are especially common
matrix are mostly the nuclei of fibroblasts.
 when forces are applied perpendicular to the direction
As you might suspect, dense connective tissue is
in which the fibers are oriented. Figure 4.43 illustrates
especially strong because of the abundant fibers. A
a histological section through a portion of a tendon. The
subclass of dense connective tissue, dense regular con-
staining is not specialized for detection of collagen or
1 06  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
other fibers (H&E staining), so it is difficult to distin-
bated with the tissue section, then the location of the
guish individual fibers or fibroblasts, but the general
bound antibody detected by the use of a secondary
regular orientation of the fibers is evident from top to
antibody linked with an enzyme. When the enzyme is
bottom in this image (Fig. 4.44).
activated in the presence of an appropriate substrate,
The image in Figure 4.45 shows the result of immu-
a reaction product is deposited at the site(s) where the
nostaining for the presence of one of the subclasses of
antibody is bound. In this specimen, you can see that
collagen in the developing tissue. In this procedure,
type IV collagen is almost exclusively located around
an antibody specific for type IV collagen was incu-
the endothelial cells of blood vessels. The use of
    s 
1210
study details of tissue development. If you compare
the very evident red stain for "total" collagen fibers in
Figure 4.41 and Figure 4.42 with the restricted expres-
sion of collagen type IV in Figure 4.46, you can see that
the distribution of type IV collagen is very concen-
trated or localized. In fact, type IV collagen is most
often expressed in the basal lamina. This explains its
 abundance around the endothelial cells of the capillar-
ies, but its apparent absence around the developing
epithelial ducts in the tissue is surprising. It may be
that basal lamina associated with epithelium does not
fully mature until later in development. This is further
suggested by the image shown in Figure 4.46, which
shows staining for expression of type IV collagen in
the mammary tissue of a lactating cow. In this case,
the expression occurs around the blood vessels as well
 as the secretory alveoli. This supports the idea that the
basal lamina is not fully developed until major ducts
Fig. 4.44. Elastin fibers. This is a section through the wall of a
large artery. In this specimen, the sample has been stained with a
and /or the alveoli are fully formed. Again, the point
special dye to emphasize elastic fibers. They appear as black wavy
here is showing how these histology techniques can
lines (E) oriented around the circumference of the artery. Given the
provide information about tissue growth, develop-
need for many arteries to expand and recoil in response to changes
ment, and ultimately physiological function. Other
 in blood pressure, it is easy to rationalize the function of these fibers.
collagens include types I, Il, and Ill. Type I is associ-
ated with connective tissues of skin, bone, tendon,
and ligaments. Type Il is predominantin cartilage and
type Il infetal tissues and connective tissue capsules
 around various organs.
Specialized connective tissues
Adipose tissue is a specialized connective tissue con-
sisting of fat-storing cells called adipocytes. There are
two types of adipose tissue, white (or unilocular) and
brown (or multilocular). In well-nourished animals
(or people), adipose tissue forms a nearly continuous
layer within the connective tissue underneath the
skin. It is called panniculus adiposus and is part of the
hypodermis. It is generally believed that adipocytes
 are derived from the mesenchymal cells of the meso-
derm germinal layer. Unilocular adipocytes are often
Fig. 4.45. Collagen immunocytochemistry. This specimen is an
large cells 100μm or more in diameter. The size is a
immunocytochemical preparation showing the expression of type
reflection of the accumulation of a large lipid droplet
IV collagen in the developing mammary gland. The brown staining
 that occupies most of the cell area. This causes the
(where antibodies against collagen type IV are located) indicates
the location of this protein. Notice that it is almost exclusively
nucleus and most of the cytoplasm to be pushed to
located around blood vessel endothelial cells as part of the basal
one side of the cell, so that the cells are often described
lamina of these vessels.
as having a signet ring appearance when sectioned.
Tissue structure and organization
107
ME
BV
A
B
au oi juanepe Alaneipaww! (a) eumel leseg au jo eane aui ui uaellon Al adk jo uoissaidxa payiew s! aaui 'anssj ainew Alleuawdoaap
epithelial cells of the alveoli as well as blood vessels (A). The figure insert (B) at higher magnification (oil immersion) makes the expression
around both regions evident. In the center of the figure, there is a cross section through a capillary with each three nuclei of endothelial cells
evident (BV and arrows). Other arrows (ME and arrows) indicate staining associated with the basal lamina of the mammary epithelial cells.
In most histological preparations, the lipid is lost
because of the lipid solvents (ethanol and xylene)
 used to prepare the tissue for embedding in paraffin
Or plastic. White adipose tissue is most abundant.
Brown or multilocular adipose tissue is less common
CT
'see hueaql u shunoe aaret un jasard st ing
In other animals, it is relatively more common in
newborn and young animals. Unlike much of the lipid
white adipose tissue, brown adipose tissue adipocytes
have mitochondria that have evolved to use most of
the mobilized lipid to produce heat energy rather than
ATPThis probably explains the importance of these
specialized cells in hibernating animals and in new-
borns where maintenance of body heat is so critical.
The following series of slides shows examples of
white adipose tissue. Figure 4.47 and Figure 4.48 illus-
Fg. 4.47. Low-power adipose. This is a low-magnification view
 trate the general structure adipose tissue at a relatively
(1 0x objective with 10x eyepiece, i.e., 100-fold) of white adipose
low magnification. Both of these images are from
tissue. The essential feature is the appearance of lots of seemingly
samples embedded in paraffin. As indicated in an
closely packed, circular sructures, which are the profiles of
earlier section, samples prepared in this manner are
sectioned adipocytes. Remember, in the living tissue the spaces
usually relatively thick (4-7μm), so some details of
would have been occupied by lipid droplets. The other prominent
features are several bands of connective tissue, which appear here
cellular structure are difficult to see. Figure 4.49 and
as pink bands (CT). At higher magnification (Fig. 4.48), the cellular
Figure 4.50 illustrate sections of white adipose from
organization becomes more apparent.
samples embedded in plastic. The stains used are dif-
ferent (H&E vs.Azure Il), but more importantly, plastic
embedded sections can routinely be cut at l μm or less.
Figure 4.51 shows the structure of small parts of the
 The difference in cellular detail between paraffin and
four different adipocytes. This image also provides
plastic embedding is striking but especially so with
some perspective on the size of these cells. The con-
actively secreting epithelial cells, that is, pancreas,
nective tissue between the cells has cross sections of
liver, mammary gland, and so forth.
two vessels with several RBCs. A reasonable estimate
108
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
121011
RBCs
Fig. 4.48. Adipose tissue, paraffin, high magnification. Here,
Fg. 4.50. Adipose tissue. Adipose tissue from a region of the
llews e Ajuo s! aiul luanedde aiow sawosag uojezjuesio jeinia
mammary gland is shown. The tissue was embedded in plastic,
rim of cytoplasm and nuclei positioned at the periphery of the cells.
 sectioned at about 2 μm in thickness, and stained with Azure Il.
Cell profiles are distinct, but there is little cytoplasm.
Fig. 4.49. Adipose tissue, low-power, osmium-stained. In this
case, some of thelipid was retained in the cells during processing
Fg. 4.51. Adipose tissue high magnification. In this section,
portions of four adipocytes (A) are visible. The large open spaces
and the tissue was subsequently stained with osmium tetroxide.
This chemical has a very high affinity for lipid and causes the 
contained stored lipid. The nucleus of one adipocyte (arrow)
appearance of a dense black product. Notice the darkly stained
appears at the rim of the cell. The upper left has cross-sectioned
adipocytes in the lower left of this tissue section.
profiles of a small artery and companion venule. A number of red 
 blood cells appear in the lumen of the artery.
for an RBC is 7μm across its widest dimension, so the
animal develops, the cartilage is progressively replaced
adipocytes (A) in comparison are clearly many times
by bone in a process called endochondral ossification.
larger. The nucleus of one of the adipocytes is also
Three cartilage types can be distinguished. These are,
apparent compressed to one edge of the cell. Nuclei
in order of abundance, hyaline, fibrocartilage, and
for the other adipocytes do not appear in this image.
 elastic cartilage. Hyaline cartilage is grossly character-
Although the structure of other specialized connec-
ized by the presence of a shiny, milky, glass-like
five tissues will be discussed as we consider specific
homogenous matrix. It should be familiar to you as
systems, it is worth introducing bone and cartilage.
 the cartilage that appears at the end of a chicken leg
In the case of the long bones of the limbs, for example,
or the gristle you sometimes bite into at the edge of a
tibia andhumerus, they begin as cartilage models
chicken breast. Cartilage very clearly illustrates the
(essentially miniature versions) in the fetus. As the
idea that connective tissues have relatively few cells
Tissue structure and organization 
109
but lots of extracellular matrix components. However,
The insert in Figure 4.52 shows a higher-power
unlike many other connective tissues, which usually
image of hyaline cartilage; it appears as a largely avas-
have a ground substance with an abundance of col-
cular field of matrix with scattered chondrocytes. The
lagen fibrils, cartilage is also rich in three types of pro-
chondrocytes produce this matrix so that in its fully
teoglycans. These complex polymeric molecules are
 mature state, the cells are literally trapped. The spaces
composed of a core protein with various attached gly-
immediately surrounding the cells are called lacunae.
cosaminoglycan (GAG) chains. The three-dimensional
This terminology also applies to bone, but the cells
shape of the molecule resembles a miniature bottle-
within the spaces are called osteocytes. The outer cov-
brush with the stem being the core protein and the
ering of the cartilage is called the perichondrium and
bristles the GAG chains. The GAGS include hyaluronic
can be divided into an outer, more protective, capsule-
acid, chondroitin sulfate, and keratin sulfate. These
 like protective layer, and an inner region with more
-n pen os (eod) pirr Aa ae s reans
cells that are chondrogenic; that is, these cells can
lage is very highly hydrated. This aids the cushioning
be induced to produce more active chondrocytes.
associated with cartilage, but the sparseness of cells in
 Although the matrix surrounding the cells appears
the mature tissue and relative lack of blood supply
rather homogenous in typical H&E-stained sections,
also explains the difficulty of repair to injured carti-
the matrix contains collagenous fibrils, which add
lage. Figure 4.52 is an example of hyaline cartilage
 strength. Often the chondrocytes appear very close
from the trachea. In this instance, these C-shaped
together; these are called isogenous cell clusters
rings of cartilage (with the opening of the C facing a
because they arise from division from a single prede-
dorsal direction) provide the rigid support to hold the
cessor cell. Growth in this manner, with subsequent
entrance to the respiratory tract open. You may recog-
addition of more matrix material around the cells,
nize the upper right edge of the tissue as an epithelial
 allows for interstitial growth of the cartilage or growth
layer. Although you could not identify its characteris-
within the substance of the cartilage. In contrast,
tics at this level of magnification, you might recall that
development of additional cartilage in the outer peri-
pseudostratified columnar epithelial cells cover the
 chondrium leads to growth at the surface called appo-
respiratory tract above the level of the bronchioles.
sitional growth. This later style of development
The cartilage appears as two "islands" within the con-
explains the continued lengthening of the long bones
nective tissue. As cartilage is created by chondroblasts,
prior to the time of epiphyseal plate closure at puberty.
the cells progressively mature into chondrocytes as
At this time, there is cessation of the generation of
their own products trap the cells. These mature chon-
drocytes come to reside in spaces called lacunae.
provide the ground substance and matrix necessary
Cartilage
A
B
Fig. 4.52. Section of cartilage from the trachea. This low-power image shows the general features of the trachea. (A) The internal surface of
the trachea (upper right) is covered by epithelial cells (pseudostratified columnar epithelial cells), and just underneath, there are several
mucus-producing glands. Further into the tissue, portions of sectioned hyaline cartilage appear (arrows). The inset (B) shows a grouping of 
chondrocytes in greater detail. The cell structure is barely visible, but the nuclei appear as distinct dots.
1 10 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
for osteogenesis. Sections of the fetal mouse foot
contain the osteocytes. Other apparent structures
provide an excellent tissue sample to study the struc-
are the canaliculi. Bone located between the circular
ture of cartilage and developing bone.
 osteons is called interstitial bone.
 In mature bone, for example, the humerus, two
Figure 4.55 shows an area of ossification in a devel-
types of osseous tissue can be distinguished. The outer
oping bone that is destined to be spongy bone. The
portion of the bone is called compact or dense bone,
irregular shape of the ossifying tissue and lack of orga-
and it has a very distinctive structure. At the micro-
nization with respect to the lamella is evident. The
scopic level, it is often viewed by preparing what are
area of ossification is stained pale blue; areas with
called ground bone samples. Essentially preserved,
lacunae containing trapped osteocytes are scattered in
fixed samples are cut into very thin wafers and
the matrix. Areas to the outside (stained red) are areas
mounted on slides. This allows an examination, pri-
of bone marrow.
marily of the matrix structure. The center or medul-
lary cavity, in addition to marrow components, is
composed of an interlacing, spiderweb-like compo-
nent of bone called spongy or cancellous bone. Both
types of bone have osteocytes and various other bone
cells (osteoblasts, osteoclasts), but the organization of
the matrix is much less regular. Figure 4.53 shows a
relatively low-power image of a sample of ground
bone to illustrate major features, while Figure 4.54
gives a higher magnification to show some of the
details of osteocytes and lacunae.
At higher magnification (Fig. 4.54), structures of an
individual Haversian system become apparent. The
dark areas are the spaces that in living bone would
Can
Fg. 4.54. Haversian canal. This high-power image of compact
bone shows the ringlike lamellar structure surrounding the
HC
Haversiancanal (HC). Each ring is a lamella. The dark areas are the
lacunae. These spaces contain the osteocytes. Radiating away from
the lacunae are small fissures called canaliculi (Can). These spaces
allow for diffusion of nutrients and waste products.
Ossification area
Fig. 4.53. Compact bone low power. The structure of compact
bone can be imagined as a series of miniature trees where in the
 center of the trunk is a canal called the Haversian canal (HC), and
the rings or lamellae (Lam) represent the concentric growth rings.
These Haversian systems, or osteons (circled area), generally align
Marrow
themselves along the longitudinal axis of the long bones. Other
channels called Volkmann canals (Volk) pass perpendicular to
intersect the central Haversiancanal and link the central
passageways to provicde for entrance of blood vessels and nerves. In
compact bone, the spaces between lamellae areoccupied by the 
osteocytes, which come to be surrounded by the matrix they have 
Fg. 4.55. Ossification. This image illustrates the process of
produced and secreted, much like chrondrocytes in cartilage. Small
 ossification in a region of spongy bone. The center (blue-stained)
fissures, called canaliculi, also radiate out from the lacunar spaces
area contains cartilage cells undergoing ossification to become
that hold the mature osteocytes.
osteocytes. The surrounding area will contain red bone marrow.
Tissue structure and organization   111
A final type of cornective tissue to consider is blood.
ration of at least some connective tissue. For muscle
At first glance, it seems odd to think of blood as con-
fissue in particular, the connective tissue elements are
nective tissue, but once you consider that it consists of
essential for functioning of the tissue. First, because of
 a matrix (plasma) with suspended cells, it matches our
the metabolic demands of the muscle tissue, availabil-
prior definition of connective tissue. Of course, the
ity of nutrients and capacity to get rid of wastes is
majority of cells are erythrocytes or RBCs, typically
critical. The connective tissue sheaths that surround
4-5million/mm?. The white blood cells (WBCs) or
skeletal muscles and the connective tissue layers that
leukocytes average 6,000-9,000/mm and are divided
 penetrate around even individual muscle cells (fibers)
into two subclasses based on the presence or absence
provide passageways for capillaries. Second, the
of cellular granules,that is,granulocytes versusagran-
various connective tissue sheaths from around the
ulocytes. Agranulocytes include large and small lym-
phocytes (30-35% of the total white cells) and
monocytes (3-7%). Granulocytes include neutrophils
(55-60%), eosinophils (2-5%), and basophils (0-1%).
Platelets, also called thrombocytes, are small struc-
tures that average 200,000-400,000/mm?). Figure 4.56
shows a relatively low-power image of a blood smear
to provide some perspective. There are two neutro-
phils and one lymphocyte in the field. It is clear that
RBCs greatly outmumber WBCs. Figure 4.57, Figure
4.58, Figure 4.59, and Figure 4.60 show some of the
features of various leukocytes. Specifically, Figure 4.57
shows a lymphocyte; Figure 4.58 shows a monocyte
(these are the agranulocytes); Figure 4.59 has a neutro-
phil on the right and an eosinophil on the left; and
Figure 4.60 shows a basophil.
Muscle tissue
Epithelial, muscle, and nervous tissues are sometimes
Fig. 4.57. Lymphocyte. Lymphocytes have a large nuclear to
called composite tissues. This simply means that
cytoplasmic ratio; that is, typically only a thin rim of cytoplasm
although the tissue primarily is composed of the cells
may be evident.The nucleus is uniformly stained roughly ovoid in
that give the tissue its name, there is also the incorpo-
 shape, and cells are common in the circulation, ~25% of the total.
Leukocytes
Fig. 4.58. Monocyte. Monocytes are characterized by the
Fig. 4.56. Blood smear. This low-power image shows a field of
presence of a kidney bean-shaped nucleus and under normal
pale-staining erythrocytes and several leukocytes (three neutrophils).
conditions are relatively rare, -2-8% of the total.
112
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Epimysium
 Perimysium
Endomysium
Chapter4
Fg. 4.61. Cross section, skeletal muscle. A thin layer of
connective tissue, the endomysium, wraps each skeletal muscle 
fiber or cell. Bundles of muscle fibers called fascicles (outlined in 
yellow) are wrapped by the perimysium and the entire muscle by
the epimysium that is continuous with the tendon that attaches
skeletal muscles to bone.
Fig. 4.59. Basophil. Basophils have abundant darkly stained blue
or purple granules (with standard basic dyes), and the cells are
 smaller than neutrophils or eosinophils. The nucleus is typically
lobed and numbers are usually very low, -1-2% of the total.
have elegantly constructed myofilaments, primarily
 combinations of actin and myosin protein filaments
that allow for contract and tissue movement. Details of
muscle cell structure and the sliding filament model
for contraction will be described in a subsequent
 chapter. Our purpose in this section is to introduce the
basics of muscle tissue histology.
Skeletal muscle
Fig. 4.60. Eosinophil and neutrophil. The eosinophils that appear
to the left of the image gets its name from the dark staining of its
At a gross level, each skeletal muscle is a distinct unit
composed of several tissues. Of course the muscle
granules with the red acidic dye eosin. The nucleus is lobed but
relative rare, ~1-2% in the circulation. The neutrophil on the right
cells or fibers predominate, but adequate functioning
is commonly ~50% of the total and, unlike other granulocytes, the
 requires connective tissue sheaths, blood vessels, and
granules stain poorly with either basic or acidic dyes, for example,
nerve fibers. One of the most unusual features of skel-
the neutral of the name. The nucleus has two to five lobes, a bit
 etal muscle cells is that they are multinucleated, large
like beads on a tring. Neutrophils are also called
elongated cells. Furthermore, the internal volume of
polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) because of this
the cell is chiefly dedicated to the packaging of a
characteristic.
complex array of myofibrils. These individual myofi-
brils are composed of overlapping thin filaments,
outside of a muscle to bundles of muscle fibers to
primarily made of the protein actin, and the thick fila-
individual muscle fibers (epimysium, perimysium,
ments made of the protein myosin. These myofibrils,
 and endomysium, respectively) means contractile ele-
like tightly packed wires in a telephone cable, are
ments are anchored together. This allows for unified,
arranged along the longitudinal axis of the individual
smooth functioring of the muscle.
 muscle cells. Let us consider organization of a common
There are three types of muscle cells. First, the famil-
 muscle (the biceps) cut in cross section across the belly
iar skeletal or voluntary muscle is named because its
 or gaster of the muscle. Our examination would allow
contraction is linked with movement of the skeletal
us to distinguish the three connective tissue sheaths
system. A second, cardiac muscle, shares many fea-
as diagramed in Figure 4.6l. In this diagram, the
tures with skeletal muscle including the presence of
smallest circular units (dark pink) within the yellow
striations. The third type, smooth muscle, is very
background represent the individual muscle cells that
widely distributed and gets it is name because it does
have been cut in cross section. The endomysium that
not exhibit striations present in the other types. Like
surrounds individual cells is indicated by the black
epithelial tissue, muscle tissues are highly cellular but
outline of each cell. The cells are grouped together in
in contrast are also highly vascularized. Muscle cells
fascicles, outlined in yellow, and the perimysium that
Tissue structure and organization   113
anchors these muscle bundles by the black outline
At higher magnification,with cells cut in cross
around each. Groups of fascicles come together to
section, you can distinguish profiles of individual cells
create the muscle, which is surrounded by the epi-
(Fig. 4.63) and in some preparations individual myo-
mysium. When skeletal muscle cells are sectioned
fibrils within the cells. It also becomes apparent that
along their longitudinal axis, the highly organized
there are multiple nuclei per cell and that they are
arrangement of the myofilaments is evident by dis-
located at the peripheral edges of the cell. It is only
tinct banding or striations. These alternating dark and
when cells are sectioned longitudinally that striations
lightly stained regions reflect areas in which only thin
        
filaments, thick filaments, or both overlap. This explains
nification is it possible to decipher the detail of the
why skeletal and cardiac muscle is also referred to as
filaments responsible for the banding pattern of the
striated muscle. Some of the microscopic features of
muscle sarcomere (Fig. 4.65). A diagrammatic repre-
skeletal muscle are outlined in subsequent figures as
sentation of the sarcomere is provided in Figure 4.66.
well as the molecular organization of the contractile
Mechanics of muscle contraction will be discussed in
filaments (Fig. 4.62).
a subsequent chapter.
Mus
Fascicle
Fig. 4.62. Cross section, skeletal muscle. The image at very low
 magnification shows portions of several muscle bundles or fascicles;
Fg. 4.64. Skeletal muscle, longitudinal. This section from the
 profiles of individual muscle cells or fibers appear as the irregular
bovine tongue illustrates the peripheral location of nuclei (arrows)
shapes within the muscle bundles.
and the pattern of triations characteristic of skeletal muscle.
A
B
Fig. 4.63. Skeletal muscle, cross section, high. At progressively higher magnification, it is possible to see profiles of individual muscle cells
(a) algiuiaos ag osie Aew slgow au 'uoneiedaid ayi uo suipuadaa y 'smoe) paeanunu ane sllan ayn jo Auew jeui pey au pue
1 14  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Sarcomere
[relaxed)
Z-line
Band
ABand
Fig. 4.65. Transmission electron microscope (EM) image, skeletal
A band
I band
muscle. This image shows portions of several sarcomeres. A single
Z-line
sarcomere is bounded on either side by the Z-line, the site where
the thin filaments are anchored. The region bounded by the pale
band is called the I band of the sarcomere. Notice that the I band 
at each end of the sarcomere also contains the I band for the
Sarcomere
adjacent sarcomere. The darker band is the A band. Depending on
(contracted)
the degree of contraction, a lighter band (the H band) can be seen
in the center of the A band. In this particular sample, because the 
muscle was contracted at the time it was prepared, the H band is
>》>
barely visible as the thin pale stripe in the center of the A band.
The darker sripe (M-line) is the location where the thick myosin
filaments are anchored.
At first glance, the striations of the muscle cellfibrils
Fg. 4.66. Structure of sarcomere. A schematic view of sarcomere
seem to be repeating disks stacked along the length of
shortening is shown to illustrate changing relationships between I, 
the cell. However, when examined in the electron
A, and H bands as contraction occurs. The thick filaments are
microscope (Fig. 4.65), the striations clearly appear
outlined as green bundles with protruding myosin heads and the
only in the myofibrils andnot within the cytoplasm of
thin filaments as simple black lines. Note that the A band stays 
the cell. The alternating dark and light bands are due
constant but that the H and I bands get smaller as the Z-lines and
to the relative density in regions where there are only
ends of the thin filaments approach.
thin or thick filaments. Furthermore, the pattern is
very highly ordered. This is because the fibers are
linked together into an organizing unit called a sarco-
 mere. The sarcomeres are linked together, something
like train cars along the entire length of the myofila-
Cardiac muscle
 ments. The myofilaments are essentially repeating
 groups of linked sarcomeres. The contraction process
Skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle are very similar.
is explained by the ability of the sarcomere to shorten
Both have striations and essentially identical sarco-
and then relax. Regulatory details will be discussed in
mere structures. However, individual muscle cells
a subsequent chapter, but the fundamental process
(fibers) are typically shorter and contain fewer nuclei
involved is the movement of the thinner actin fila-
per cell, that is, they are often binucleated. There are
 ments moving along the thicker myosin filaments. As
also some differences in the mechanics of contraction
indicated by the diagram in Figure 4.66, as pairs of
regulation. In skeletal muscle, the calcium needed for
thin filaments (attached at the Z-line) on either end of
interaction between the actin and myosin comes from
the sarcomere move toward one another, the sarco-
storage within the muscle cells, the sarcoplasmic retic-
 mere shortens. Since the sarcomeres are linked and the
ulum. For cardiac cells, extracellular calcium plays a
myofibrils are anchored and cells are bound to other
more important role than in skeletal muscle. Also,
cells by the endomysium, this results in shortening of
although it is possible to learn to change one'sheart
entire bundles of muscle cells and, if stimulated suf-
rate under special circumstances, cardiac contraction
ficiently, the entire muscle.
is usually considered involuntary. Control of cardiac
Tissue structure and organization 
115
intercalated disks as fibers in a commonsense view.
Smooth muscle cells by comparison are small, spindle-
shaped cells that taper on either end. Like the cardiac
cells, smooth muscle cells have a single, centrally
located nucleus. Despite their small size, groups of
smooth muscle cells are physiologically vital. These
cells are found in the walls of hollow viscera and in
the walls of all but the smallest blood vessels. In the
walls of many tubular visceral structures, the smooth
muscle cells appear in two distinct layers. For example,
in the muscularisexterna of the Gl tract, there is an
 pe so p At ro rae rino
inner layer that goes around the circumference of the
 tract.Smooth muscle cells that are arranged in these
coordinating layers of cells are called single unit
smooth muscle and are the most common type. In
contrast, about 1% of the cells in smooth muscle act
rather independently and are called multiunit cells.
Both classes are involuntary. However, the single unit
 smooth muscle is more likely to be impacted by the
secretion of various hormones than the multiurit cells
that depend primarily on neural input for contraction
to occur.
For example, within the muscularisexterna of the GI
tract, groups of smooth muscle cells act as pacemaker
cells for the tissue. When these cells spontaneously
Fig. 4.67. Cardiac muscle. The upper panel (A) shows a group of
depolarize, this induces rhythmic contractions that
cardiac muscle cells cut in cross section. In profiles where the 
pass through the tissue. The level of autonomic
nucleus is present, it is located toward the center of the cell, in 
nervous system activity or secretion of some hor-
contrast to skeletal muscle. The lower panel (B) shows a
mones (i.e., estrogen or progesterone influence on
longitudinal section of cardiac muscle. Note the striations and, at
uterine smooth muscle) can also alter the normal
the arrows, branching of a cell. The dark bars (brackets) are
 pattern of spontaneous contractions that occur or the
intercalated disks that join cells in series.
strength of contractions.
As the name suggests, there are no apparent stri-
rate and force of contraction is clearly important to
ations in smooth muscle cells. There are, however,
 supply the oxygen and nutrients necessary for varying
thin and thick myofilaments anchored to the cyto-
levels of activity. It should be no surprise that regula-
skeleton that allow shortening of the cells. Since the
tion involves close coordination between the nervous
cells are linked together (single unit cells), this allows
and endocrine systems as discussed in our review of
 the coordinated contraction of the tissue layer. Multi-
cardiovascular physiology.
unit cells are typically anchored to extracellular pro-
At a histological level, cardiac cells have striations 
teins. Extracellular calcium concentrations also have
 a r  a  oe i
a greater impact on contraction of smooth muscle
centrally within fibers; and groups of cells are linked
cells than skeletal muscle cells because of the lack
longitudinally by complexes of gap junctions within.
 of sarcoplasmic reticulum for intracellular storage
regions called intercalated disks. These features allow
 of calcium. Differences in the appearance of cross-
skeletal muscle fibers to be distinguished from cardiac
sectioned  versus  longitfudinally  sectioned  smooth
muscle fibers in histological sections as illustrated in
muscle cells are illustrated in the diagrams shown in
Figure 4.67.
Figure 4.68 and examples of smooth muscle tissue
from the small intestine shown in Figure 4.69 and
Figure 4.70.
Smooth muscle
Nervous tissue
Although it is common to describe all muscle cells as
fibers, it is easier to think of the large multinucleated
Clearly, the functional cell in the sense of impulse
skeletal muscle cells or the cardiac cells linked by
transmission is the neuron. Diagrammatic examples of
1 16  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Longitudinal
smooth muscle
Chapter 4
Cross-sectioned
 smooth muscle
Fig. 4.68. Diagram of smooth muscle. The upper panel illustrates
Fg. 4.70. Several motor endplates appear in this image. These
the arrangement of smooth muscle cells in a longitudinal view. The
motor neuron endings release acetylcholine to initiate
spindle-shaped cells with a single central nucleus make a tightly
depolarization and ultimately muscle contraction.
compacted layer of closely adhering cells. The lower panel
illustrates the appearance of cellular profiles cut in cross section
(see dashed line). Since some of the cells would be cut near the
center, these profiles would be relatively large ovals with the nucleus
in the center. Other profiles would be smaller oval shapes because
 of sections through the more narrowed tapered ends of the cells.
A
B
Fig. 4.69. Smooth muscle cells, small intestine. Panel A shows inner and outer layers of smooth muscle tissue in the muscularisexterna of the 
an inner circular smooth muscle layer that has been sectioned longitudinally and an outer layer of cells that are oriented lengthwise along the
intestinal tract. This cell layer has been cut in cross section. Panel B illustrates some of the cellular detail. Notice how the cells cut
longitudinally seem to "flow" together. It is difficult to distinguish individual cells.
various types of neurons are illustrated in Chapter 8.
that have been teased apart. The periodic pale areas
However, it is important to appreciate that neural tissue
that transverse individual nerve fibers are areas
is more than simply collections of neurons. Figure 4.70
between Schwann cells  (which create the myelin
 illustrates the interaction between the nervous system
sheaths) called the nodes of Ranvier. These are regions
and the skeletal muscle. This image shows several
where ion flow allows for rapid transmission (saluta-
motor nerve connections to skeletal muscle fibers.
 tory) impulse transmission in myelinated compared
Figure 4.71 shows a cluster of myelinated nerve fibers
with nonmyelinated nerve fibers (see Chapter 8).
Tissue structure and organization
117
Fig. 4.71. These teased myelinated nerve fibers demonstrate the
appearance of nodes of Ranvier (the pale areas that transverse
Fg. 4.73. Section of the spinal cord. A portion of the cell bodies
individual fibers). These spaces between regions where Schwann
of several motor neuron neurons appears to the left of the section.
cell growths to wrap the axons allow for saltatory nerve
The dark spots are nuclei of smaller supporting cells.
conduction, which is more rapid in myelinated compared with
nonmyelinated nerve fibers.
astrocytes, microglia, ependymal cells, and oligoden-
drocytes. Astrocytes are important in anchoring
neurons, and two of these cell types, Schwann cells in
the peripheral nervous and oligodendrocytes in the
central nervous system, produce the myelin sheath
that wraps many axons (see Fig. 4.7l). The structure
of neurons related to the physics of conduction in
nerves will be discussed in subsequent chapters.
Figure 4.73 shows a spinal cord section to illustrate the
nerve bodies of several large motor neurons. Because
the axons do not necessarily appear on the same plane
as the body of the nerve cell, it is rare to see a relatively
thin two-dimensional tissue section that contains more
a part of the cell body and perhaps a bit of the begin-
ning (axon hillock)of the axon as it exits the cell body.
It is important to realize that this brief chapter is
Fig. 4.72. This image illustrates portions of three nerve bundles (upper
left,lower leftandlower centercut incross sectionhe analog
meant to simply give you some of the basic histology
nerve fibers like bundles of telephone cables passing through a
for each of the fundamental tissue types. We focused
conduit is apparent. Cross-sectioned blood vessels, adipocytes,
a great deal of effort on epithelial tissue because epi-
'eane supunons au u! jeadde siseigoigy pue 'siagy uasellon
thelial cells (of one organ or another) are responsible
for the synthesis and secretion of nutrients, signaling
molecules, enzymes, and so on; in other words, the
Figure 4.72 shows a cross section through a nerve
functional attributes of many vital organs. However,
bundle. The analogy of nerves being like multiple phone
it should be clear at this point that each of the basic
lines bundled in a surrounding cable is apparent.
tissues must interact for physiological function and
The health and functioning of neurons depends on
 homeostasis to be maintained. You should appreciate
many supportive cells called neuroglia or sometimes
that the microscopic study of tissues and cells pro-
simply glia. Four types of neuroglia appear in the
vides an important adjunct to better understand phys-
central nervous system and two in the peripheral
iology. In short, as we indicated at the beginning.
nervous system. Some of these cells produce growth
structure and function are ultimately intertwined at
factors and other agents that promote health
1and
multiple levels. As you learn the attributes of various
tissue development, and others are responsible for-
organs and organ systems, consider the organization,
manufacturing the myelin sheath that acts to insulate
development, and differentiation of the cells within
many axons. The supporting cells of the CNS include
the organ that make the physiology possible.
1 18  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter summary
erides. Bone and cartilage is unique. In these tissues,
the principal cells, osteocytes and chondrocytes,
Understanding tissue structure and organization
respectively, have become essentially trapped in the
requires the ability to study a two-dimensional view
extracellular materials they have secreted. Cartilage
in a microscope or a photomicrograph, but imagine
 occurs in three variations: hyaline, fibrocartilage, and
how multicellular structures (ducts, tubes, layers,
elastic cartilage. Their properties are determined by
etc.) are organized. Securing a quality image also
variations in proteoglycans and fibers (collagen vs.
depends on preparation and staining of the tissues
elastin). Familiar as the white glistening cover at the
 or cells to be studied and appropriate alignment
ends of long bones, hyaline cartilage is the most
1210
and use of the microscope. Four basic tissue types
 abundant of the three types. Bone is particularly well 
combine to produce organs: epithelium, muscle,
 organized. In a long bone, the outer compact bone is
neural, and connective tissues.
composed of circular layers of bone matrix arranged
Epithelial cells are classified based on the number
in concentric circles that become evident if the tissue
cells in the layer. A layer one cell thick is called
is cut in cross section. Each of these structures is
simple. If there are multiple layers of cells, it is called
called a Haversian system or osteon. In the center,
stratified. Cells are also classified based on shape:
there is a canal thatprovides for passage of blood
squamous, cuboidal, or columnar When the tissue is
vessels and nerves. The appearance is much like the
stratified, the outer layer of cells is used to determine
rings of a tree with the osteocytes residing in small
shape characteristics. Other specializations are also
 spaces at the boundaries between lamellae or layers.
used to distinguish types of epithelium,that is,the
 In the center of the long bone, there are areas of ossi-
presence of keratin or cilia, for example. Epithelial
fication by also spaces filled by bone marrow. Lastly.
cells are often the "functional" cells within an organ
blood is also classified as connective tissue, that is,
or tissue and, in those cases, are referred to as the
cells surrounded by a matrix (the blood plasma).
tissue parenchyma. Epithelial tissues typically have
Muscle tissue appears in three versions: skeletal,
many cells that are very closely packed. Examples
cardiac, and smooth. All muscle cells are character-
include the islet cells of the pancreas that produce
ized by their ability to contract and thereby to elicit
insulin and glucagon, or the glandular and ductular
movement and do work.However, the contractile ele-
cells that synthesize and secrete digestive enzymes.
ments are most evident in cross sections of skeletal or
Epithelial cells also often create effective barriers
cardiac muscle. In these views, alternating bands of 
between regions or compartments, for example, the
light and dark occur along the entire length of the
 barrier between the gut lumen and internal organs,
muscle cell. Groups of cells create bundles called
or the lung surface and the internal body Specialized
fascicles and groups of fascicles to create muscles.
structures between the cells (tight junctions, desmo-
The structure responsible for contraction, the sarco-
somes, and gap junctions) act to control anchoring of
mere, becomes clearly evident in transmission elec-
the epithelial cells, movement of molecules between
 tron microscope images. Individual sarcomeres are
cells, and communication between cells. Epithelial
 bounded on either end at Z-lines where proteins that 
cells that are part of glands are arranged in several
make up the thin filaments (primarily filamentous
different structures including simple tubular, simple
 actin) are anchored. The center region of the sarco-
alveolar, compound tubular, or compound tubule-
mere has the thick filaments (primarily myosin). Con-
alveolar. Products made in secretory cells are released
traction involves the sliding of the thin filaments
by meocrine, apocrine, or holocrine mechanisms.
over the thin filaments. Since all the sarcomeres are
Cornective tissues have many fewer cells than
arranged in sequence, as the individual sarcomeres
equivalent areas of epithelial tissues. A common cell
shorten, the entire muscle shortens. Cardiac muscle
type is the fibroblast, but other cells (wandering
cells also have sarcomeres, but muscle cells tend to be
WBCs, macrophages, adipocytes, etc.) are frequent.
branched and muscle fibers are much shorter than in
In the regions between cells, there are a variety of
skeletal muscle. There are also specialized "connec-
extracellular elements that are produced primarily
tors" between ends of cells called intercalated disks.
by the fibroblasts. These include collagen, elastin,
 In these areas, gap junctions are abundant. This 
reticular fibers, and proteoglycans. The density of
 allows for much greater coordination between groups
fibers and extracellular materials allows for classifi-
of cardiac muscle cells. Finally, although calcium is
cation of connective tissues as loose or dense. In
central to the initiation of contraction in both skeletal
more compact tissues (tendons or ligaments), fibers
and cardiac muscles, skeletal muscle depends on
are very densely arranged but are described
1as
release of calcium for storage within the sarcoplasmic
regular or irregular. Adipose tissue is a specialized
reticulum, whereas cardiac muscle contraction is
 connective tissue dedicated to the storage of triglyc-
 more greatly impacted by extracellular calcium con-
Tissue structure and organization 
119
centrations. Skeletal muscle is voluntary; that is,
individual cells can be induced to contract. Move-
it requires neural input to initiate contractions.
ment depends on the anchoring of the cells to
Cardiac muscle also depends on neural activity, but
various extracellular proteins. Control is typically
there is an increased degree of inherent control, that 
much more nuanced, as, for example, in muscles
is, the pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial node.
that control pupil dilation. The contractile process
Smooth muscle cells do not exhibit striations or
depends on calmodulin, which serves a role similar
sarcomeres. The most abundant smooth muscle, so-
to troponin in skeletal muscle with respect to bind-
called single unit smooth muscle, occurs in areas
 ing calcium. Once activated, calmodulin activates a
where there is a need of contraction of tubular vis-
myosin light chain kinase that utilizes ATP to phos-
ceral organs, that is, gut motility and uterine contrac-
phorylate the myosin head, which allows attachment
tions. Histologically, the cells are closely aligned in
to actin. The absence of T-tubules or sarcoplasmic
layers.In the muscularis of the intestine, there is an
reticulum means that smooth muscle cells are very
inner layer of muscle cells that are oriented around
dependent on extracellular calcium. Detailed com-
 the circumference and an outer layer oriented along
parisons of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscles are
the longitudinal axis of the Gl tract. Certain cells
available in Chapter 7.
within these layers (pacemaker cells) are inherently
Neural or nervous tissue is composed of neurons,
more sensitive to signals and/or simply spontane-
but the majority of the cells are actually supporting
ously begin to contract. This response solicits neigh-
cells called neuroglial cells. The supporting cells
boring cells so that waves of contraction 
and
 of the central nervous system include astrocytes,
relaxation occur Rates of the occurrence of these
 microglia, ependymal cells, and oligodendrocytes. In
waves of contraction can be modified by changes in
 the peripheral nervous system, Schwann cells func-
neural and hormonal stimulations. About 1% of
 tion much like oligodendrocytes where they produce
smooth muscle cells are classified as multiurit. Here
the myelin wrap around most axons.
Review questions and answers are available
Bartol, FF., A.A. Wiley, D.J. Miller, A.J. Silva, K.E. Roberts,
M.L.P. Davolt, J.C. Chen, A. Frankshun, M.E. Camp, K.M.
online.
Rahman, J.L. Vallet, and C.A. Bagnell. 2013. Lactocrine
signaling and developmental programming. J. Animal Sci.
91: 696-705.
References
Ellis, S., R.M. Akers, A.V. Capuco, and S. Safayi. 2012. Bovine
 mammary epithelial cells lineages and parenchymal
Bacha, W.J., Jr. and L.M. Bacha. 2012. Color Aflas of Veteri-
development. J. Animal Sci. 90: 1666-1673.
nary Histology, 3rd edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester,
West Sussex, UK.
Integumentary system
Contents
Overview of Skin Structure
121
Nails, Claws, Hoofs, and Feathers
132
 Epidermis
122
Horns
135
Dermis
124
Feathers
135
Specialized Structures
125
Leather
136
 Biochemical Properties of Skin
130
Chapter Summary
136
Skin and Coat Color
130
Vitamin D Metabolism
132
Although we sometimes consider some of the agricul-
body temperature regulation
tural products derived from skin, for example, leather
sensory information via cutaneous receptors
and wool, we often fail to appreciate the physiological
 metabolic actions
1
relevance of skin. The skin and its derivates (sweat
excretion of wastes.
and oil glands), hair (wool, fur), and nails (claws,
The skin covers the entire exposed surface of the
hoofs) constitute a complex mix of tissues that together
body and is continuous with the mucous membranes
create the integumentary system. This organ system is
lining openings onto the body surface, for example,
critical to the health and well-being of our animals and
the digestive, respiratory, and urogenital systems. We
in many cases provides important economic assets. It
is easy to appreciate that its primary function is pro-
will begin by considering the structure of the skin.
tection. But it is more than a simple physical protective
covering. Without their skin, our animals would
Overview of skin structure
quickly fall prey to environmental pathogens and
rapidly die from dehydration and heat loss. Our major
As you can appreciate, the thickness of the skin varies
goal is to outline some of the physiological attributes
from region to region of the body. Consider our own
of the integumentary system that are essential for
bodies and the toughness of the skin on the plantar
homeostasis. The following list ilustrates criftical func-
(sole) surface of our feet compared with the skin of our
tions of the integumentary system:
faces. Now imagine how tough the skin of a horse or
 physical protection: barrier against the outside
 cow must be to withstand the environmental and phys-
prevention of dehydration
ical demands. This probably explains the durability of
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
121
122
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
leather-covered furniture. However, no matter the
These cells contain thick bundles of intermediate fila-
location or thickness, skin is composed of two distinct
ments (tonofilaments). In histological preparations,
tissue regions—epidermis and dermis. The epidermis
these cells often shrink. This causes the cells to have a
is the outer layer and is composed of multiple layers
prickly or spiked appearance. This explains the name
of epithelial cells along with other specialized cells.
of this layer, that is, the spinosum (little spine). Because
The underlying dermis is largely composed of cornec-
the stratum germinativum and stratum spinosum are
tive tissue and provides for the passage of blood
immediately adjacent to the dermis, these are the only
vessels and nerves. The epidermis is also avascular.
epidermal cells that receive adequate sustenance from
This means that nutrients must diffuse from capillar-
diffusion of nutrients from the capillaries of the under-
ies located within the dermis to supply the epidermal
 lying dermis. With further degeneration and increased
cells. The tissue that lies just under the dermis is the
keratin accumulation, the cells appear in the stratum
hypodermis, often just called subcutaneous tissue.
 granulosum. In this layer the keratinization process
This subcutaneous tissue is not strictly part of the skin,
begins in earnest, and the cells begin to die. This layer
but because the region primarily contains areolar con-
is called granulosum because the accumulation of
nective tissue and adipose tissue, it serves to cushion
keratin granules becomes more evident in dead cells.
and protect both the skin and underlying muscle and
In areas of thick skin, a layer called the stratum
 organs. A needle and syringe is often generically called
lucidum can be distinguished. Here a thin layer of
a hypo or hypodermic syringe. Penetrating the skin
cells (typically 2-3 cells in thickness) becomes translu-
and releasing the material into the space just below
cent. With time, the dead cells, accumulated keratin,
the dermis constitutes a hypodermic injection, hence
and lipids combine to create the outermost layer of
the name.
skin, the stratum corneum. The relative thickness of
these layers varies from region to region. Figure 5.1
provides a diagrammatic illustration of these tissue
Epidermis
layers and Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3 provide histologi-
cal examples.
The epithelium of the epidermis is a keratinized strat-
There is much interest in the antimicrobial proper-
ified squamous epithelium that consists of four cell
ties of molecules that accumulate in or are produced
types and four to five distinct layers (depending on
by the epidermis. For example, Schroder and Harder
location). The most common epidermal cell is the kera-
(1999) described an inducible, transcriptionally regu-
tinocyte. As their name suggests, a major function of
lated antibiotic peptide produced by human skin. The
these cells is to produce keratin, a fibrous protective
peptide named human beta defensin-2 (hBD-2) was
 protein. Keratin acts to waterproof the skin and, along
 shown to be effective in killing gram-negative bacte-
with secretions produced by accessory glands, pro-
ria. Such findings might well find application in the
tects the underlying tissues from heat, microbes,
dairy industry For example, the opening of the teat
abrasion, and chemicals. Keratinocytes are closely con-
end of cows and other ruminants is lined by stratified
 nected by desmosomes, which serve to anchor the cells
squamous epithelium, which continues into the teat
together to physically create a more protective barrier.
meatus as the streak canal. It is well known that the
The keratinocytes are first produced in the cell layer
closest to the underlying dermis, called the stratum
basale. As the cells age, they are progressively pushed
 Stratum
into layers closer to the surface of the body. By the time
corneum
the cells reach the outermost layers, they have accu-
 Stratum
mulated large amounts of keratin. The turnover of
 granulosum
 epidermal cells is rapid. The entire epidermis can be
replaced every 25-50 days. In areas subjected to abra-
Langerhans'
cell
Stratum
sion cell proliferation and replacement, this is even faster.
spinosum
Essentially, new cells are formed in the stratum
basale (or stratum germinativum). This is the deepest
of the epidermal layers. It is composed of one row of
cuboidal to columnar-shaped epithelial cells that
 Stratum
divide rapidly to produce new keratinocytes that are
basale
subsequently pushed toward the surface to become
Melanocyte
 part of the more superficial layers. In addition, approx-
imately 20% of the cells are melanocytes. As new cells
Merkle cell and 
 push older cells outward, these older cells become the
 nerve ending 
stratum spinosum, which typically is 8-10 cells thick.
Fg. 5.1. Diagram of skin cell types and layers.
Integumentary system
123
Stratum comeum
Stratum lucidum
Stratum granulosum
 Stratum comeum
 Stratum spinosum
Stratum lucidum 
(brackets)
Stratum spinosum
(brackets)
 Stratum basale
(double arrows
A
B
Fig. 5.2. Low-power view (A) of thick skin and cell detail (B).
be derived from mammary secretions that become
Epidermis -
trapped within the epithelium of the streak canal.
Effects might involve the direct killing of microorgan-
isms or perhaps the prevention of colony formation.
During machine milking, there are dramatic physi-
cal effects on the teat, the teat end, and the streak
ee nerve
ending.
canal. Given that the rate of milk flow in cows is
Merkle
7-8m/s, it is reasonable to expect that resulting shear
nxak
Meissner's
forces might remove some of the protective keratin.
corpuscle
It is also probable that some milk constituents are
 absorbed into the keratin during the time of milking
Pacinian
corpuscle
 or from milk droplets remaining after milking. If
milking removes substantial amounts of the keratin
Hair follicle
and if renewal is delayed or changes in composition
Adipose
tissue
favor the formation of bacterial colonies or bacterial
adherence, this could decrease the effectiveness of the
Fig. 5.3. Diagram illustrating some major features of the dermis.
 streak canal as the primary defense against mastitis.
In fact, experimental removal of streak canal keratin
markedly increases the rate of intramammary infec-
keratin and other molecules serve as a barricade to seal
tions. In Holsteins, keratin weight before milking was
the streak canal of the teat and protect the mammary
1.6 times greater than after milking (3.1 vs. 1.9mg
gland from mastitis. Much of the protection involves
per teat). Jerseys, by contrast, showed little effect of
the physical closure of the teat opening between
milking (3.5 vs. 3.1mg per teat). There is a negative
 milking episodes, but there is substantial evidence that 
correlation between keratin loss at milking (r = 0.53,
specific components within the keratin layer can
wet weight basis, 0r r = 0.65, dry weight basis) and
directly act as antimicrobial agents. Some of these sub-
milk production. Total lipid in the keratin is similar
124  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
before and after milking. In addition, although the
Melanocytes are the final cell type of the epider-
major aspects of the fatty acid profiles are also similar
mis. They are located in the lowest layer, the stratum
before and after milking, keratin after milking has
basale, where they function to produce the pigment
more short-chain fatty acids. This is consistent with
melanin. As melanin is synthesized, it accumulates
addition of milk-derived lipids to the keratin by con-
in secretory vesicles—melanosomes—that are seques-
tamination of milk droplets remaining in the streak
tered in elongated processes that extend from the
 canal. In the case of the Holsteins, a greater proportion
cells. The presence of these peripheral vesicles causes
 of the keratin is made up of these lipids after milking
the cells to have a spider-like appearance. Over time,
(Bitman et al., 199l). Although it was once thought
melanin is released and taken up by surrounding kera-
that the keratin regenerated rather slowly, that is, 2-4
tinocytes. With increased concentrations, the melanin
weeks, detailed quantitative studies show that follow-
 granules become oriented in the region of the cell that
ing an initial collection, the keratin regenerates at a
orients to the outside of the body. This pigment shields
rate of 1.5mg (wet weight) or 0.6mg (dry weight) per
and protects the nucleus of cell from ultraviolet
day per teat. This suggests complete restoration of
radiation.
the keratin occurs within 1-2.5 days (Capuco et al.,
1990). Just as in human medicine, there is considerable
research interest in the identification of epidermal-
keratin components that might act to protect the udder
Dermis
from infection. Clearly, techniques to enhance the pro-
tective function of the integumentary system would
The dermis, the second major subdivision of the skin,
find many animal agricultural applications.
accounts for about 80% of the total mass. It is typical
In a recent paper, Fukui et al. (2012) have deter-
 of many connective tissues. There are a variety of cell
mined the distribution of a variety of antimicrobial
types present but as you might expect, fibroblasts are
products within the eccrine glands of porcine snout
common along with their products, that is, the colla
skin, including β-defensin 2, lysozyme, and lactofer-
 gen, elastin, and reticular fibers that provide essential
rin. Given the propensity of pigs to root and explore,
strength and flexibility. Unlike most other connective
it is not hard to imagine the significance of these pro-
tissues, there is also seemingly a dizzying array of
tective agents in secretions and surfaces of the snout.
 specialized structures. Most of these are related to the
While the keratinocytes are most plentiful, other
sensory side of the nervous system. Since the integu-
cells also play important roles. For example, Merkel
mentary is intimately associated with the external
cells function as sensory receptors (touch). They orient
environment, various receptors provide the central
with elements from the nervous system to create a
nervous system with information necessary to main-
disc-shaped sensory nerve ending called a Merkel
 tain homeostasis: external temperafure, pressure and
disc. Other nerve endings and specialized receptor
 touch, and presence of noxious or damaging agents.
cells also occur in the skin, but these are located within
 There are also other specialized epithelial structures
the dermis.
that assist maintenance of homeostasis: sweat and
A very specialized immune system cell type, Lang-
 sebaceous glands and hair.
erhans cells, develops in the bone marrow, but they
 The dermis consists of two layers: the papillary
migrate to the epidermis where they take up resi-
  r  a  r a pe 
dence. They are also called epidermal dendritic cells
outer region closest to the epidermis. In this area, there
and are essentially modified macrophages. Their name
are fingerlike projections called dermal papillae (these
is derived from their morphology. Usually located
 also give the layer its name) that penetrate into the
within the stratum spinosum, they nestle between
epidermis. In some areas, for example, the palms of
keratinocytes and send multiple projections between
the hands or fingertips in humans and apes or the
the cells to create an extensive network. In this way.
pads of a cat's foot, the papillae are arranged on the
the cells act as monitors to detect the presence of
top of larger structures called dermal ridges. This acts
foreign debris, microorganisms, and other materials.
to increase friction and allows for an easier grip. The
When they are simulated, they actively process these
particular pattern of ridges is unique to each indi-
materials and function as antigen-presenting cells
to
vidual and is the basis for fingerprints in humans or
induce activity of T- and B-lymphocytes. We have all
other primates. These projections contain capillaries,
experienced the results of immunological response in
and a variety of nerve endings and receptors. Three
the skin after being exposed to irritants, the itch and
broad groupings of receptors include (1) exterocep-
rash. In fact, the skin is continually exposed to an
tors, (2) interoceptors (sometimes called visceroceptors),
incredible variety of antigenic stimuli. Consequently.
and (3) proprioceptors. Exteroceptors are concerned
a wide array of immune responses occurs in part
with stimuli that arise from the outside. Most extero-
because of mediators secreted by keratinocytes, den-
ceptors are located on or near the body surface. These
dritic cells, and mast cells in the skin.
 are the focus of our study of the integumentary system.
Integumentary system
125
Interoceptors react to stimuli from within the body, for
Specialized structures
example, chemical signals, temperature, or gut motil-
ity. Proprioceptors also reflect internal responses but
Sweat glands
are specifically involved in the relay of information
The dermis contains a variety of glandular structures.
concerned with muscle, tendon, or ligament move-
Sweat glands in primates are plentiful and widely
ment or stretch. In other words, they monitor the mus-
distributed. The most common type is the eccrine
culoskeletal organs. The latter two classes of receptors
will be discussed in subsequent sections. Our focus
now is on exteroceptors of the skin.
These receptors can also be classified based on their
structural complexity. Free nerve endings, for example,
are structurally simple, especially when compared
with receptors associated with the special senses
(vision, hearing, olfaction, or taste). Even the relatively
simple receptors of the integumentary can be divided
into unencapsulated (free nerve endings) and encap-
sulated groupings. Specialized Meissner's or Pacinian
corpuscles are examples of encapsulated receptors.
Papillary
Pacinian corpuscles have a structure similar to the
layers of an onion; pressure induces ion changes that
layer
are translated into graded potentials in the associated
nerve fibers (Fig. 5.5). These impulses are interpreted
as touch or pressure by neurons in the cerebral cortex.
Table 5.1 summarizes the types and classes of sensory
receptors within the skin.
 The reticular layer is the thicker and deeper layer of
the dermis. It is composed of dense irregular cornec-
tive tissue and contains thick bundles of interlacing
collagen fibers and some coarse elastic fibers. However,
Reticular
elastin fibers are typically only visible after special
layer
staining. These fibers run in several directions, which
increases strength, but most are oriented parallel to
the skin exterior. The fibers provide much of the
strength and resistance to stretch in skin and the long-
wearing attributes of leather. The reticular layer is also
abundantly supplied with blood vessels and nerves.
These elements of the dermis are illustrated in Figure
5.3. Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5 show histological exam-
Fg. 5.4. Example of thick skin. In this preparation the dermis is
ples of some of the other structures that occur within
stained a pale turquoise and stands in sharp contrast to the
the dermis.
epidermis. Arrows indicate dermal papillae.
Table 5.1.I
ung pue ainnns Ag passe sindaai osuas Aeuasnaui 
 Structuraf Cfass
Functionaf Activities
Location
Unencapsulated
 Nociceptors (pain); thermoreceptors; mechanoreceptors
 Most tissues
Free nerve endings
(pressure)
Modified nerve
Mechanoreceptors (light pressure)
Stratum basale
endings (Merkel discs)
Root hair plexuses
Mechanoreceptors (hair movement)
In and around hair follicles
Encapsulated
Mechanoreceptors (light pressure, discriminative touch,
Dermal papillae, esp. face, fingertips
Meissner's corpuscles
vibration)
Kraus's end bulbs
Mechanoreceptors (modified from Meissner's corpuscles)
Connective tissue of mucosae
 Pacinian corpuscles
Mechanoreceptors (deep pressure, stretch, rapid adaptation)
Widespread in skin 
Ruffini's corpuscles
Mechanoreceptors (deep pressure, stretch, slow adaptation)
Deep dermis, joint capsules
126  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapf
A
B
Fig. 5.5. Structure of Meissner's corpuscle (A) and Pacinian corpuscle (B). Both of these sensory receptors are located in the dermis and are
responsive to pressure and touch. Arrows indicate multiple layers of a Pacinian corpuscle.
gland. These simple coiled glands open onto the
moves greater amounts of air over moist surfaces. This
surface in pores. They produce a hypotonic watery
 extra water-saturated air is exhaled, and in the process,
secretion that derives from interstitial fluids. It is
body temperature decreases.
mostly water with some dissolved salts, lactic acid,
Although eccrine sweat glands are lacking, horses,
and traces of other waste products. The rate of secre-
cattle, sheep, swine, dogs, and cats have numerous
tion is controlled by the activity of the sympathetic
apocrine glands. In the dog, for example, the protein-
nervous system. In humans, a typical response occurs
aceous, whitish secretions from the apocrine glands
with overheating. Sweating induced in this way begins
mix with the oily secretions of the sebaceous glands
on the forehead and progresses downward. Emotion-
to form an emulsion-like coating on the skin. The char-
 ally induced sweating—due to fright, embarrass-
acteristic dog, horse, or cow odor is primarily a result
ment, or nervousness—begins on the palms, soles,
of bacterial action on these accumulated secretions.
and armpits, and spreads to other areas. Of course, the
These secretions also impact heat loss, but this is likely
primary function of sweat is to cool the body as a
most effective in horses, followed by cattle, sheep,
result of evaporation. A second type of sweat gland,
dogs, cats, and swine. Regardless of the evaporative
apocrine glands, makes up a small proportion of the
effect of heat lost from sweat, the skin of these animals
total. These glands are larger than eccrine glands, and
is nonetheless important in temperature regulation.
d      o s 
This is because simply changing the rate of blood flow
confined to the axillary and anogenital areas of the
through capillaries in the skin alters the volume of
primate body. The secretions in addition to watery
warm blood near the surface of the body, thereby
sweat also contain fatty acids and some proteins.
affecting thermoregulation.
These glands are affected by sex steroids; that is, activ-
ity begins with the onset of puberty. For this reason,
Sebaceous glands
apocrine glands are believed to be analogous to the
scent glands of other animals. Eccrine sweat glands
Sebaceous or oil glands also occur in mammals. These
are sparse among domestic animals. For example, in
are simple branched areolar glands that release their
dogs and cats they are located only on the footpad.
products (holocrine mechanism) onto the hair folli-
This limited distribution means that these glands have
cles. The secretion is called sebum, which is a mixture
virtually no effect on heat loss, but they do act to
of cellular lipids and other cell components. Sebum is
 moisten the surface and improve traction. We have all
a natural skin cream and hair protector. It helps keep
noticed the panting dog on a hot day or after exercise.
hair from becoming brittle, prevents excessive evapo-
Panting is an effective cooling mechanism because it
ration of water from the skin, keeps the skin soft, and
Integumentary system
127
contains a bactericidal agent that inhibits the growth
Box 5.1:
 Skin derivatives
of certain bacteria. This is closely related to lanolin
that secretes onto wool fibers in sheep.
 Every biology student quickly learns that the pres-
ence of functioning mammary glands is a hallmark
Other skin glands
of mammals. As outlined in his recent review,
Oftedal (2012) provides support for the idea that
Many animals have glands associated with the anal
primitive lactation began as a reproductive advan-
region. These glands are usually divided into three
tage in synapsids (the direct ancestors of mammals)
classes depending on specific location and orientation:
 likely during the Pennsylvania period. The capac-
(1) anal glands, (2) glands of the anal sac, and (3) peri-
-aoas apraoid oi spuelg Areurureu ,uapou, jo A1!
anal glands. Anal glands are found in dogs, cats, and
tions with both vital nutrients (proteins, fats, and
pigs. They are modified tubuloalveolar sweat glands
carbohydrates) and health benefits (immunoglobu-
located in the submucosa of the anal canal and the
lins, lysozyme, etc.) likely evolved from apocrine-
 like glands that were associated with hair follicles.
 opening of the anus. Carnivores secrete a lipid-like
material, but pigs secrete a more mucus-like material
 It is believed that secretions from these glands pro-
from these glands. Clusters of lymphatic tissue, similar
vided moisture and antimicrobial agents for the
to the Peyer's patches in the intestine, often accom-
parchment-like shelled eggs laid by these ances-
 pany the glands.
tors. Fossil evidence suggests that some therapsids
Anal sac glands, sometimes called perianal sinuses,
and mammaliaformes present during the Triassic
occur in pairs and are essentially invaginations or
period produced milk-like secretions. Evolutionary
diverticula of the analsurface. They are located between
pressure likely promoted the incorporation of mol-
the outer and inner anal sphincters. Within each pocket
ecules such as lysozyme or iron-binding lactoferrin
 or sac, glands embedded in the wallhave openings that
into these secretions. Certainly, the capacity to
release the contents into the space of the sac. The anal
prevent desiccation of the eggs and protection from
sac is present in carnivores and rodents. In dogs, the
microbial attack would have been highly beneficial.
glands are arranged as compound tubular structures
Thus, the significance of the skin and skin-derived
and exhibit an apocrine mode of secretion. In cats, the
molecules and skin-derived glands remain physi-
glands are similar, but apocrine and holocrine secre-
ologically critical in humans and animals.
tion occurs. Products from the glands open into secre-
tory ducts in the neck of the anal sac. The excretory
secretions of the anal sac glands, sloughed cells, and
of the horns. Rubbing this area leaves sebaceous secre-
fecal material can block the openings of these anal sacs.
tions that are apparent because they contain caproic
When the sacs become blocked, they may have to be
acid. This is the short-chain volatile fatty acid that is
manually expressed—not a pleasant experience.
responsible for the distinct odor of male goats. The
 Circumanal or perianal glands are anomalies in the
uropygial gland of birds, also called the oil or preen
 sense that they often appear as masses of epithelial
gland, is the only skin gland of birds. It is composed
cells within the submucosa that appear not to have
of a series of closely aligned sebaceous adenomeres
functional ducts that lead to the surface. They are
       ( )
sometimes oriented adjacent to sebaceous glands,
which suggests they may be related, but this is far
The papilla has associated smooth muscle fibers that
from certain. These nondescript masses of cells are
surround the duct opening. The opening is located
 frequently described as nonsecretory glands. Unfortu-
above the last sacral vertebra (Box 5.1).
nately, the solid masses of cells are believed to be
especially prone to neoplasia.
Hair
The mammary glands are also skin glands but will
be considered in greater detail in a subsequent chapter.
 Functions associated with hair include insulation, pro-
Some other specialized glands include the infraorbital
tection, and sensory reception. Hair or fiber produc-
glands of sheep, the submental organ of the cat, and
tion in domestic animals is directly related to the
the scent or horn glands of goats. For example, the
 number and size of the follicles in the skin. As you
submental glands of the cat are located within the
 might guess, various aspects of hair growth and devel-
 , r a ar  ds 
essentially a cluster of sebaceous glands. It is not
 goats. Regardless of whether the animal in question is
uncommon to note domestic cats marking their terri-
used for fiber production or not, unlike that of humans,
tory by rubbing their chins. In goats, this activity is a
the hair of animals is especially important physiologi-
bit more apparent. The scent glands in the goat are
cally. We will begin by first considering some of the
located along the caudal to medial aspect of the base
basics of hair structure and properties. Hairs or pili are
128  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
ter
Chapf
Hair
bulb
Papilla
A
B
Fig. 5.6.Histology of hair follicles. Histological section of several hair follicles at low magnification (A) and of a single follicle at higher
magnification (B) is shown. At lower power it is evident that the hair bulbs penetrate deep into the dermis and hypodermis.
 generated by hair follicles and are flexible strands that
of the epidermis generally. Cells from lower depths
mostly consist of layers of dead keratinized cells.
 progressively displace those above. See Figure 5.6 for
However, the keratin in hair is harder and more
examples of hair and hair follicle structure.
 durable than the softer keratin of the epidermal cells.
In many situations there is a sheath of smooth muscle,
The parts are simple: (l) the shaft projects from the
the arrector pili, that attaches to the connective tissue
skin; (2) the root is embedded in the skin. In humans,
that surrounds the hair follicle and a portion of the
if the cross section of the shaft is ribbonlike, the hair
hair shaft that is underneath the surface of the skin.
is kinky. If the shaft cross section is oval, the hair is
The contraction of this smooth muscle causes the hair
wavy. if the shaft cross section is round, the hair is
to stand on end and is likely associated with increased
straight and relatively coarse. These basic relation-
secretion of surrounding sebaceous glands. This is the
ships also apply to animal hair.
basis of a hair-raising experience or the familiar Hal-
At a more detailed level, the hair shaft can be
 loween cat with its arched back and raised hair
divided into three regions: (1) outer cuticle, (2) inner
In horses and cattle, the hairs are evenly distributed
cortex, and (3) a central medulla. The outer cuticle is
across the body, but in other species (dog, cat, pig), the
a layer of cornified epithelial cell "husks" that closely
 hairs are oriented into groups called hair beds. In the
interlink with the cuticle cells of the root of the hair.
 dog, each hair bed has a group of follicles that consist
The cortex makes up the majority of the hair shaft and
 of one larger major hair (guard or principle hair) typi-
is composed of several layers of flattened cornified
cells that have accumulated "hard" keratin. Pigments
sz inoqe Auo pue raous Aeida are jen sie
may also appear in these cells along with air spaces.
in diameter surrounds the guard hairs. These hairs
The medulla contains cells that are more cuboidal.
often exit the skin in the same opening as the guard
These layers are especially clear in cross-sectioned
hairs. In addition, the auxiliary hairs do not have a
hair shafts. The hair terminates in the root or hair bulb.
 medulla. Clustering of hairs in this manner can be
Essentially, the hair resides in an invagination of the
 extreme. For example, the chinchilla, noted for its soft,
surface of the epithelium that extends to the dermis.
dense pelt, can have clusters that have 50-75 auxiliary
This is important because it allows ready transfer of
hairs each. In this case, the guard hair is also very fine
nutrients and waste products from the hair bulb to the
 and only slightly larger than the auxiliary hairs, that
interstitial fluid of the dermis. Growth occurs when
is, 15 versus 1l μm in diameter.
cells in the apex of the root bulb give rise to new med-
Other specialized hairs include tactile or sinus hairs.
ullary cells. Laterally positioned cells give rise to the
These are familiar as cat's whiskers, for example.
cells of the inner cortex and outer cuticle, respectively.
ou ueq raret pue rlut Aensn are siey asa
The growth of the hair then is analogous to the growth
but share similar structures to normal guard hairs. The
Integumentary system
129
roots of these hairs are highly innervated by free nerve
into a solid, keratinized mass, and the more distal
 endings and Merkel's discs.
region of the follicle thins. The bulb is forced toward
The hair growth cycle is divided into three phases:
 the surface and the papilla is lost. In this condition, the 
(1) anagen, (2) catagen, and (3) telogen. Hairs are gen-
hair is referred to as a club hair. After a time, a second-
erated by the proliferation of cells within the hair bulb
ary germ structure develops deep under the club hair.
during anagen. The continuous addition of new cells
The formation of the new germinal center marks the
 to the shaft or the hair produces elongation. Termina-
 beginning of telogen, which can last for weeks or even
tion of growth occurs when mitotic activity of the basal
 months. During early anagen, the new hair bulb pro-
of germinal cells of the bulb decreases. Catagen is a
gressively elongates and the shaft of the new hair
 transition phase. It is characterized by gradual tran-
displaces the older club hair. Figure 5.7 provides a
sition of the bulb cells. The cells progressively convert
 diagrammatic illustration of the cycle of hair growth.
Hair shaft
Sebaceous
glands
Constriction
Hair bulb
papilla ~
Late anagen
Early catagen
Cornifi-
cation
2° germ
center
New hair
and papilla
2° hair bulb
Late catagen
Early anagen
B
 catagen, the hair is increasingly cornified, producing a club hair that is progressively extruded. A 2° germ center and papilla appear some time after.
 By early anagen, a new hair bulb and growing hair shaft begin to develop. The new hair often follows the same path as the old hair follicle.
130  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
The follicle population determines the quantity and
of a quick flush of oxygenated blood through the
quality of wool production. As a general rule, a high
capillaries of the dermis of the cheek. Clinically, the
number of hair follicles leads to production of fibers
 appearance of a bluish cast to the skin or nail beds is
with a lower diameter but the opposite with low fol-
an indication of inadequate oxygenation of blood,
licle density, that is, fibers that are thicker and more
perhaps as a consequence of anemia or some other
coarse Hocking Edwards et al., (1996). It is also appar-
problem, such as a respiratory or cardiac problem.
 ent that hair growth is cyclic but that this basic rhyth-
Other items related to skin color include (l) jaundice,
 mic pattern can be modified by external cues. This is
caused by deposition of bile pigments in certain liver
evident in the seasonal pelage cycles noted in many
diseases, (2) hematoma, the blue-black color produced
mammals. Recent studies have focused on the role of
by bruising when blood vessels in the skin rupture,
 the pituitary hormone prolactin in wool growth, for
and (3) erythema, the term for the reddish cast pro-
example. The secretion of prolactin is well known to
 duced by blushing, fever, or strenuous exercise.
be altered by changes in photoperiod, specifically
What about skin or hair color in animals? In reality,
decreased secretion during short days, and typically
there are two subtypes of melanin: eumelanin (brown-
 in cooler temperatures in regions well above or below
black) and pheomelanin (yellow-red). The making and
the equator, with increased secretion during long days
processing of melanin, melanogenesis, is complex
and warmer temperatures. Reduced photoperiod and
because of interactions of multiple cell types in the
correspondingly reduced prolactin concentrations in
skin. In mice, for example, nearly 100 genes are known
the blood are associated with the stimulation of hair
to affect coat color. However, these genes are classified
 growth and generation of the winter pelage. Nixon et
into two primary groups: (1) those that act on the
al. (2002) reported changes in expression of prolactin
melanocyte and (2) those that directly impact the bio-
receptor within the dermal papilla and the outer root
 chemistry of pigmentation. The melanocytes residing
sheath of wool follicles of sheep. Moreover, changes
in the stratum basale and within hair bulbs synthesize
in receptor expression were altered in sheep subjected
and package melanin into secretory vesicles called
 to photoperiod-induced changes in circulating prolac-
melanosomes. The melanosomes are then distributed
tin. This suggests that changes in expression of prolac-
to surrounding cells. It is easy to imagine sources of
tin receptor within specific regions of the follicle are
variation in these steps and how this might affect skin
involved in seasonal changes in hair growth.
or hair color. For example, which type of melanin is
made, how much is made, where it is distributed,
how quickly it is degraded, and so forth. Tyrosinase is
Biochemical properties of skin
 the essential regulatory enzyme in melanin synthesis.
With high rates of enzyme activity, the formation of
In this section we will consider physiological attributes
eumelanin is enhanced; lower rates favor formation
 of the integumentary system. Included here are aspects
of pheomelanin. In addition to synthesis variation,
related to vitamin D synthesis and homeostasis. We
melanocortin receptors are crifical in initiation of
also discuss factors that control coat and skin color.
 melanin synthesis. Hormone control of pigmentation
 is evident in many situations, for example, changes in
fur color in Arctic mammals and increased skin pig-
Skin and coat color
mentation, which is a symptom of primary adrenal
gland dysfunction. Melanocortin refers to a large
In humans, three primary pigments give color to the
family of structurally related hormones derived from
 skin. Melanin is especially important and can produce
the precursor protein pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC).
various shades of yellow, brown, or black. The rate of
This protein is abundant in the intermediate lobe of the
melanin synthesis is largely genetically determined.
pituitary gland. Depending on processing, at least four
For example, if you have very fair skin, melanin pro-
melanocortin peptides can be generated. These are
duction is low, and it is a very light shade. If you have
proteins that can interact with the melanocortin 1
very dark skin, on the other hand, melanin production
receptor (MC1R). These include adrenocorticotrophic
is higher, and the pigment is inherently darker. It is
hormone (ACTH), as well as c-, β-, and y-melanocyte-
believed that the average density of melanocytes is
stimulating hormone (MSH). Excess production of
ACTH explains the excess skin pigmentation that
lular activity vary. The yellow-orange pigment caro-
occurs with adrenal insufficiency disease, since ACTH
tene also impacts skin color. It tends to collect in the
readily binds to the MCi-R receptor on the melano-
stratum corneum and in the adipose tissue of the
cytes. MC1-R is a G-protein-linkedl receptor (see endo-
hypodermis. Hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein
crine chapter) with seven transmembrane spanning
of red blood cells, also impacts skin color. To illustrate,
domains. However, variants of the receptor (MC 2-, 3-,
a blush, especially in a fair-skinned person, is a result
or 4-R) are expressed in other tissues. This suggests that
Integumentary system
131
Mutation
Gene Product
Phenotype
 Albino
Tyrosinase required for melanin synthesis
 Absence of pigmentation
Agouti
Secreted ASP, agonist of MC1-R
Loss of function = black hair 
Gain of function = yellow hair
Brown
Tyrosinase-related protein 1
Loss of function = brown instead of black hair
Lethal spotting
Endothelin 3 (peptide related to angiogenesis)
Piebald spotting, deafness, death 
Piebald spotting
Endothelin receptor type β
 Same as for lethal spotting
 Pink-eyed dilution
Integral membrane protein in the melanosomes
Loss of function = pink eyes, yellow-gray hair
Recessive yellow
Melanocortinreceptor
Loss of function = yellow hair
Gain of function = black hair
Slaty
Tyrosinase-related protein 2
Partial loss of function = dilution of black hair
Steel
Mast cell growth factor
White hair, black eyes, sterility
White spotting
Receptor tyrosine kinase (encoded by the proto-oncogene kit)
 Partial loss of function = piebald spotting 
the melanocortin ligands have a variety of physiologi-
 In mice, the switch between production of eumela-
cal effects in addition to pigmentation of skin or hair.
nin and pheomelanin production is tied not only to
Mouse coat color genes were some of the first muta-
 the binding of the melanocortin ligands to MCi-R, but
tions discovered that have been related to regulation
also to signaling from the agouti signaling protein
of coat color. Resource animals for many of the classic
(ASP). ASP is a soluble paracrine protein made by
mammalian genetic studies have their foundations in
dermal papila cells within the hair follicles. Binding
the very large numbers of coat color variations (brown,
of ASP to MC1-R prevents normal binding of c-MSH
silver, and yellow) that were described by fanciers of
and thereby promotes production of pheomelanin
unusual mice in Europe and Asia in the 18th and 19th
 rather than eumelanin. In mice with the agouti phe-
centuries. During this time, animals with unusual or
 notype, the promoter of the ASP gene is transiently
striking variation in their pelage were prized and con-
 activated during the mid-phase of the hair growth
sequently saved as breeding stock. These fancy mice
cycle. This causes a band of yellow pigment (accu-
provided many of the initial resources to generate
mulation of pheomelanin) in hair that is otherwise
strains of mice that are used extensively in research
black (eumelanin accumulation). Strains of mice with
today. Of course, understanding of molecular basis for
entirely yellow hair coats have mutations that involve
variations in these traits has mushroomed in recent
this ASP gene. For example, in one case, a prevailing
years. Table 5.2 summarizes some selected mutations
mutation in the agouti locus (Ay /A) results in exces-
and corresponding phenotypes related to pigmenta-
 sive production of ASP throughout the body. This
tion in mice.
causes the complete yellow hair coat as well as obesity.
 It is now recognized that most of these mouse genes
The obesity results from ASP antagonism of the MC4-R
have counterparts in other animals. For example,
receptor in the hypothalamus. In another strain, the
black horses are homozygous for a deletion in the
complete yellow coat is produced in a recessive allele
agouti locus. The mutation producing the chestnut
(e/e), in the gene for MCi-R. In these animals the
 allele is a single base substitution on the MCi-R gene
receptor protein is synthesized with extra amino acids
(Rieder et al., 2001). In domestic pigs, the predominant
(extension locus), which causes a failure of signaling.
white phenotype is linked with two mutations in the
 This leads to the exclusive production of pheomelanin
KIT proto-oncogene, which encodes for mast (stem)
and the total yellow hair color. Interestingly, yellow
cell growth factor receptor. The many millions of
mouse hair is thought to be the murine equivalent of
white pigs around the world are assumed to be het-
( ' pe ss) s u  pa
erozygous or homozygous for these two mutations
As emphasized in recent reviews (Schneider et al.,
(Marklund et al., 1999). In the bovine, three alleles
of
2009; Lee and Tumbar, 2012), molecular understand-
the MSH receptor gene (localized to chromosome 18)
 ing of hair follicle physiology has depended on study
have been reported. A point mutation in the dominant
 of various mouse mutants (either naturally occurring
allele ED results in black coat color. However, a frame-
or genetically engineered) that express various abnor-
shift mutation, which causes a synthesis of a short-
malities in hair structure, growth patterns, and/or
ened receptor protein in homozygous e/e animals,
color. Moreover, a detailed study has also provided
leads to a red coat color. The wild-type allele E+ allows
general insights related to topics such as organogenesis,
production of a variety of colors. This likely reflects
regeneration, morphogenesis, stem cell biology, cell
the great variety in regulation of the normal receptor
proliferation, and cell migration, as well as apoptosis. As
(Klungland et al., 1995).
outlined by Lee and Tumbar (2012), key cell-signaling
132
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
B0x 5.21
 Hair follicles to the rescue
Sun
While we have indicated the significance of the skin.
 in protection against disease, as described by Heath
and Mueller (2012), it may be that hair follicles are
 7-Dehydrocholesterol
Vitamin D3
also important players in the recruitment of anti-
 gen-sensing dendritic (Langerhans) cells to the epi-
dermis of the skin. Nagao et al. (2012) have shown
that recruitment of bone marrow monocytes to
Kidney
 25-Hydroxy
become dendritic cells depends on hair follicles. In
vitamin D3
Liver
their study, they we able to induce specific deple-
25-Hydroxyla5
tion of Langerhans cells from the skin and then
moritor reestablishment. To their surprise, in addi-
1,25-Dihydroxy
tion to blood-derived monocytes, precursor cells
vitamin D3
appeared to reside in the hair follicle. Regardless of
the source (blood or follicles), cells that become the
Fig. 5.8. Metabolism of vitamin D.
newly derived dendritic cells gained access to the
epidermis via the interfollicular epidermis of the
 hair follicles. They used histology and multiphoton
homeostasis require this vitamin. This story begins in
 microscopy to identify the cells and track their mi-
 the skin. Vitamin D, is a plant product generated by
gration. In support of the role of the hair follicles,
ultraviolet irradiation of ergosterol. This precursor can
the skin of mutant mice that do not produce hair
appear in the diet. However, vitamin D; or cholecal-
follicles has little capacity to repopulate the skin
ciferol is also synthesized in the skin. This is induced
with dendritic cells when they are depleted. Repop-
by the UV irradiation of7-dehydrocholesterol. However,
ulation of areas without hair follicles, that is, the
before the vitamin D; is fully active, it must be modi-
foot pad, depends on adjacent regions with hairy
fied. The first step occurs in the liver with the conver-
skin. Finally, gentle abrasion of the skin (removal of
sion of vitamin D; into 25-hydroxycholecalciferol by
adhesive tape) induces a rapid accumulation of neu-
the addition of a hydroxyl group by the action of the
 trophils and dendritic cells around the follicles. These
enzyme 25-hydroxylase. This material again enters the
results suggest important roles for hair follicles in
bloodstream and is taken up by the kidney cells. A
regulation of migration between the dermis and epi-
second hydroxyl group is added to create the most
dermis and the role of chemokines produced in the
potent from of vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol.
follicles as regulators of trafficking of cells and of
This requires the actions of the lo-hydroxylase. This
 the immune responses of the integumentary system.
form of the molecule acts on the intestinal epithelial
cells to stimulate the synthesis of calcium transporter
 molecules that increase the absorption of calcium.
Deficiencies of vitamin D can lead to malfunctions
families involved in hair follicle development and
in calcium homeostasis so that bone growth and
development is impaired in growing animals. This
physiology include Wnt-related, BMP/TGFβ-related,
produces rickets, a syndrome characterized by bowlegs
Shh-related, and EGF/FGF-related, as well as multiple
 or knock-knees. In human medicine, as the importance
transcription factors. Also, many questions remain.
of vitamin D was realized, this resulted in the practice
How are signals from the dermis, adipocytes, or blood
of fortifying milk with vitamin D to help ensure that
vessels controlled? How can these networks of signal-
children received adequate amounts of the vitamin to
ing pathways be regulated to treat diseases or perhaps
minimize the appearance of rickets. Interconversions
alter wool and hair production commercially? (See
of vitamin D are illustrated in Figure 5.8 (Box 5.3).
Box 5.2).
Vitamin D metabolism
Nails, claws, hoofs, and feathers
Vitamin D has three major effects: (1) promote absorp-
Let us begin by first considering the nails of humans
tion of calcium from the intestine, (2) activate resorp-
 and other primates. Nails are hard plates of tightly
tion of calcium from bones, and (3) increase excretion
packed keratinized cells. They are clear and cover the
of phosphate via the kidneys. In conjunction with in-
dorsal surface of the last phalanges of fingers and toes.
creased concentrations of parathyroid hormone, there
Each nail is made up of three regions: (l) the nail body.
are increased amounts of biologically active vitamin
(2) free edge, and (3) the nail root. The body of the nail
D to increase blood calcium. Thus, overall health and
is the visible portion. It rests on the nail bed, essentially
Integumentary system
133
B0x 5.3
Rickets, anyone?
Ligaments
Rickets, considered a classic metabolic disease of
bone, was first described in both humans and
Second
animals more than 2000 years ago. The discovery
phalanx
that vitamin D could prevent the disease led to a
dramatic decrease in developed countries, but
Digital
 cases still occur. In humans, reduced sun exposure
Third
cushion
 and increased use of sunscreen are believed to play
phalanx
a role. Dittmer and Thompson (2011) describe animal
 models that have been developed to study vitamin
Navicular
D physiology and related bone disease as well as
bone (N)
etiology of rickets in domestic animals. This is most
often associated with phosphorous deficiency or
other genetic disturbances.
A
 Skin, of course, is a primary physical barrier to
 protect the body from a variety of envirormental
pathogens, but specific secretions are also important.
 Fukui et al. (2012) report on the expression of a variety
of naturally occurring antimicrobials, including
 lysozyme, defensin-2, lactoferrin, and others within
the cells, and secretions of eccrine glands of the skin
of the porcine snout. It is not hard, given the pro-
-a  aa e n i sd  Ad
ment, to imagine the importance of these products.
Second
phalanx
Navicular
bone
a combination of the stratum basale and the stratum
Digital
spinosum. The free edge is that part that extends past
cushion
the end of the digit. The nail root is hidden from view
and is embedded in a fold of skin (or nail fold). The
Third phalanx
Sole co
cuticle is the stratum corneum of the nail fold that
(coffin bone)
(yellow
 gets pushed outward over the surface of the nail body.
Nail growth depends on the nail matrix located
Frog
under the nail root. As you might guess from your
review of the epidermis, the nail matrix consists of the
two deepest layers of the epidermis (stratum basale
and stratum spinosum). The keratinization of the
cells of the nail matrix develops directly from the spi-
nosum so that the stratum granulosum and lucidum
are absent. The result is the creation of a hard, durable
plate. As the nail matrix proliferates and the cells are
keratinized, this hard plate gets pushed forward onto
B
the nail bed and the nail lengthens. If you consider
your own nails, you can see a small white crescent.
Fg. 5.9. Equine foot and hoof. Diagram (A) and corresponding
This is called the lunula, and it corresponds with the
photograph of cross section (B) of the equine foot.
 presence of the thick matrix underneath. So how does
this differ from claws and hoofs?
ligaments, and nerves. Some of these major features
We will use the horse as an example of the remark-
are illustrated in Figure 5.9.
able development of hooves. Let us begin with the
The hoof is largely an insensitive cornified layer
lower leg and foot. The foot includes the hoof (epider-
derived from the epidermis. Strictly speaking. the
mis) and the underlying dermis and associated struc-
an a are ,sp, pe ,srda, s
tures. Specifically, these include the corium or dermis,
digital cushion, terminal phalanx or coffin bone, the
respectively. The structure of the hoof is produced in
 distal end of the second phalanx (short pastern bone),
two fashions. In some regions, the dermis is very
navicular bone, and a variety of muscles, tendons,
highly papillated; this mirrors the general appearance
1 34  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of dermal papillae in other regions of the body, but
torium, stratum medium, and stratum internum. The
they are more abundant and highly interlinked with
stratum tectorium extends from the periople layer of
corresponding epidermal pegs. This organization
the skin epidermis in the area of the coronet. Most of
increases strength and assists interchange between the
the wall is made up of the stratum medium and is
dermal blood vessels and the avascular epidermis. In
organized in a tubular arrangement of cells. This is
other areas, the papillae and epidermal pegs are so
similar in appearance to compact bone if cut in cross
confluent that the adjacent epidermal and dermal
section. These tubular structures are sometimes notice-
tissues create distinct layers or lamina.
able as lines oriented from the coronet toward the
The hoof is essentially an extension of the skin of
ground in the wall of the hoof. The boundary between
the lower limbs. This boundary area that circles the
 leg just above the hoof is called the coronet. In this
dermis occurs in the stratum internum. Here there is
 region, the dermis of the skin is continuous with the
a complex interaction between the outer epidermis
dermis or corium of the hoof. The subdivisions of the
and underlying laminar corium. Specifically, papillae
corium correspond with the adjacent epidermal
 from the dermis extend into the epidermis in a regular
regions of the hoof. As you move from the anterior
repeating array. Beyond the dermis (depending on the
surface of the hoof in a caudal direction, you pass
angle) you would penetrate the bone of the distal
through the following epidermal layers: stratum tec-
 phalanx. This is illustrated in Figure 5.10. If you pen-
Toe
Epidermal
Stratum.
laminae
medium
(hoof wall)
Apex of
Frog
Body of sole
Frog
Fig. 5.10. View of the plantar (bottom) of the equine hoof.
 Integumentary system
135
etrated from the bottom of the hoof near the center,
 ing. Even a small amount of corium can produce a
you would pass through similar (but thinner) layers
crooked, stubbed horn.
of epidermis and the tubular and intertubular horn of
the sole, the solar corium (dermis), the periosteum,
 and compact bone of the distal phalanx.
Feathers
In addition to these complex histological structures,
there are also a number of well-defined structures
Feathers are likely the most complex structure that is
associated with the hoof. These include the frog (so
 derived from the integument among vertebrates. It is
named because of its shape), bulbs, and the sole. The
also clear that there are dramatic differences between
anterior edge is the toe and the caudal margin the heel.
avian species as well as marked differences depending
The white line, most apparent when the hoof is
on location and purpose. To illustrate, the tail feathers 
 trimmed, is created by the epidermal laminae and rep-
of a rooster are more than 10o0 times larger than the
resents the boundary between the dermis and epi-
smallest feathers on his body. First let us consider
dermis. The frog is a wedge-shaped mass of mostly
what feathers actually do. Protection from the ele-
keratinized tissue that is softer than in other areas
 ments and maintenance of body temperature are
because of higher water content. The tubules of the
clearly critical in all birds, but in addition, they allow
sole are arranged vertically in correspondence with
 the bird to fly. Other aspects include protection from
the papillae of the dermis or corium of the sole. The
 predators and the ability to attract the members of the
corium itself has a good supply of nerve and blood
opposite sex. Feathers are also plentiful. A mature
vessels. Figure 5.10 illustrates the gross anatomy of
chicken has about 5000 feathers.
an equine hoof. The photograph is of the bottom or 
Feathers come in several forms, but they are all
ventral surface of a freeze-dried hoof. It is easy to
imagine the structure like a shoe that surrounds
may be absent or rearranged from type to type. The
the dermis bones, blood vessels, and nerves of the
 predominant feather type on a bird's body is called
lower foot.
the pennae or contour feather. Other feathers vary
from this common type to large stiff feathers of the
wings, small fluffy down feathers, hairlike filoplumes,
Horns
and small, bristle-like structures. Major features of a
contour feather include the shaft, the vanes on either
The horns of cattle, goats, and sheep are generated in
side, and, often, an after feather underneath. The shaft,
the region over the horn process, a germinal center
familiar as the writing end of a quill pen, is the longi-
that projects from the surface of the frontal bone of the
tudinal axis of the feather. It has two parts: the calamus
skull. The dermis or corium envelops the horn core so
and the rachis. The calamus is the portion that pene-
that it is fused with the outer covering of the bone
trates into the skin and the feather follicle. The distal
tissue or periosteum. As the horn develops, the corium
 end tapers and has an opening called the inferior
at its base is especially thick where it links to the
umbilicus. This entrance allows the development of
skin via abundant long slender papillae. The papillae
the pulp of the shaft as the feather develops. The nib
become shorter and less abundant toward the apex of
of the quill pin is anchored in this opening. The rachis
the horn. The bulk of the horn tissue consists of tubules
is the long, slender portion of the center of the feather
that extend from the base of the horn toward the apex.
that protrudes above the skin. On either side of the
Softer tissue covers the surface of the horn near the
rachis there are fine branches. Each branch is called a
base and extends a variable distance toward the apex.
barb, but each branch also has smaller branches called
This is similar to the outer covering of the hoof, the
barbicels. The barbicels are typically hooked so that
periople. Growth of the horn varies with nutrition.
the structure of the feather is maintained. You can
This can be especially evident in wild animals with
distinguish this yourself by stroking a feather in the
seasonal variation in available nutrients. This varia-
   e    , ,
tion is reflected in the appearance of rings in the horn
particular direction that the branches prefer. These
 that can be used to estimate age.
parts are collectively called the vane and are respon-
In many commercial situations, especially dairy, polled
sible for the distinctive shape of the feather.
cattle are often dehorned. This is usually accom-
In fact, the barbicels can hold the feather vane
plished by destroying the corium when only the horn
together so closely that water is excluded. Have you
buttons are present. This is typically accomplished
heard the expression, "like water off a duck's back"?
by either surgical removal or destruction with a hot
This elegant structural arrangement is responsible for
iron or application of caustic paste. Once the horn has
this effect. It is also true that birds use secretions from
begun to develop, both the corium and entire horn
their oil or uropygial glands to keep their feathers
 must be removed to prevent the horn from redevelop-
 clean and in good condition, but contrary to popular
136
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
belief, the secretions do not provide a waterproof
quent removal easier. Bits of hair and fat that are
coating.
missed by machinery are removed by scraping the
skins by hand with a plastic scraper or dull knife. This
is called scudding. Once the skins are cleaned, they
Leather
 pass to a vat containing acid. This acts to remove
excess lime. The hides are then typically treated with
Leather is made from animal skins or hides that are
 enzymes to smoothen the grain of the leather and to
chemically treated. This is called tanning. When prop-
make the skin softer and more flexible. The tanning
erly done, the resulting product is strong, flexible
process follows.
leather that is able to resist decay and spoilage. Most
Hides can be subjected to a variety of steps at this
 leather made is produced from tanned cattle hides,
point, depending on the desired product. For example,
but a variety of skins can be used, including those
vegetable tanning produces leathers that are flexible
from sheep, goats, calves, horses, pigs, ostriches, seals,
 but stiff. This material would be used in belts, luggage,
 and various reptiles.
or furriture. In these cases, the hides are often stretched
 The skins are typically cured, a process that involves
 onto frames and suspended in vats containing various
either salting or drying the hide as soon as it is
tannins. These are agents found in bark, wood, and
removed. In the so-called wet salting process, the
leaves. Tannins from oak, chestnut, or hemlock trees
skins are rubbed with salt, stacked, and bundled
are frequently used. The hides are often transferred to
together. After about a month, most of the salt is
multiple vats containing progressively stronger con-
absorbed into the skin. An alternative is to pack the
 centrations of tannins. Mineral or chrome tanning is
skins in vats with a mixture of salt and disinfectants.
an alternative process used to produce leathers for use
This process can be completed in less than 24 hours
in shoes, gloves, and clothing. After curing, scudding.
and is called brine curing. After curing, the hides are
and lime removal, the hides are soaked in a chro-
allowed to soak in water to remove excess salt and
mium-sulfate solution. Depending on the desired
debris. In the next step the preserved flesh is usually
 product, the hides can then be dyed. This not only
stripped away mechanically.
adds color as desired, it also adds moisture to increase
Skins are usually then moved to large vats and
softness and flexibility. Vegetable-tanned hides are
 again soaked up to 2 weeks in a mixture of lime and
usually bleached and then soaked with oils and soaps
water. This process loosens the hair and makes subse-
to increase flexibility.
 Chapter summary
 The epidermis and dermis are the two primary
layers of the skin, but the relative size (thickness)
 It is easy to overlook the significance of the integu-
varies based on location and species. In areas where
mentary system and forget that it is the largest organ
friction and wear are prominent, the outer layers of
system. However, its physiological significance is
the epidermis are expanded to provide additional
profound and can be summarized in the attributes
protection. The discrete layers of epithelial cells
listed here:
listed as follows (outside to inside) are present:
physical protection: barrier against the outside
stratum corneum
 prevention from dehydration
stratum granulosum
body temperature regulation
stratum spinosum
 sensory information via cutaneous receptors
stratum basale.
metabolic actions
Other cells suspended with in the epidermis include
excretion of wastes.
 melanocytes, which are important in protection from
It is also increasingly clear that the skin and espe-
UV radiation as well as development of skin color,
cially specialized dendritic cells are important to the
as well as Langerhans or dendritic cells.
 The deeper epidermis has scattered fibroblasts
the environment so that when necessary, immune cells
and adipocytes, extracellular fibers (collagen, elas-
can be stimulated to respond and fight or prevent
tin), and proteoglycans, as well as capillaries and
infections.
blood vessels. There are also nerve endings and spe-
Integumentary system
137
cialized receptor cells that occur as either encapsu-
when a new hair bulb is created and the older hair
lated (Krause's, Meissner's, Pacinian, or Ruffin's
moves toward being shed. Control of hair growth is
corpuscles) or unencapsulated (free nerve endings,
typically closely tied to season and the secretion of
 modified nerve endings)—-Merkel discs, or root hair 
 prolactin and epidermal growth factor. The distribu-
plexuses that appear around hair follicles. Two re-
tion and density of hair also varies between species.
gions of the dermis include the papillary and reticu-
Consider the dense, luxurious fur of the chinchilla
lar layers.
and its value as a fashion item.
There are two types of sweat glands. Eccrine glands
Control of hair color is biochemically complex but
are the most common. They have a simple coiled
in humans, for example, melanin and carotene are
structure and open via pores on the skin surface.
 especially important. The rate and degree of pigment
They produce a hypotonic watery secretion that aids
 synthesis and accumulation in hair cells and skin
in control of body temperature. Control of secretion
cells determine both skin and hair color. In more
depends on the sympathetic nervous system. In hu-
detail, amounts of eumelanin (brown-black) versus
mans, sweating can also be emotionally induced
pheomelanin (yellow-red) interact to determine sub-
(fright, embarrassment, or nervousness). In these cases,
tleties in hair and skin color. The genetics of color in
sweating begins on the palms, soles, and armpits.
mice is well-studied, in part based on husbandry of
Apocrine sweat glands make up a smaller propor-
genetic mutations of mice that were raised and
 tion of the total sweat glands. These glands are larger
studied by European fanciers in the late 1800s. More
 and open up onto hair follicles. The secretion is also
than 100 genes are known to be involved. Some of
watery and also contains fatty acids and proteins. In
these act on the melanocytes, and others directly
primates, these glands are affected by sex steroids
impact the biochemistry of pigmentation. Hormonal
 and become prominent with the onset of puberty.
 control is also apparent. Consider the dramatic sea-
Sebaceous or oil glands release their contents (holo-
 go ad r ad a  sa 
crine mechanism) on the hair follicles. The secretions
animals. Melanocortin and its related family members
provide some protection to the hair and are familiar
 are produced from POMC, which is abundant in
in animal agriculture by the lanolin in sheep wool.
 the pars intermedia of the pituitary gland. Some of
Other skin glands include anal glands, often fa-
 these mutations and associated phenotypes are listed
miliar to dog or cat owners, as well as the infraorbital
here:
glands (sheep), scent or horn glands (goats), sub-
 mental glands of cats, and the uropygial gland of
Albino, lack of tyrosinase needed for melanin
birds, familiar through observation of birds preen-
synthesis, absence of color.
ing and grooming their feathers. The mammary
 Agouti, altered signaling protein, increase
二
gland (covered in detail in Chapter 18) is also a skin-
 yellow; decrease = black.
derived gland essential in many aspects of animal
Brown, altered tyrosinase related protein 1, loss
agriculture.
of function = brown instead of black hair.
 Hair is probably the most apparent skin adapta-
 Piebald spotting, altered endothelin receptor,
tion. Functions include insulation, physical protec-
patches without color, deafness.
tion, and sensory reception (the root plexuses around
 Slaty, altered tyrosinase-related protein 2, dilu-
the follicles or the specialized whiskers of cats), as
tion of black color.
well as secondary sex characteristics and behavioral
responses. The hair shaft has three regions: outer
 Vitamin metabolism is also an important skin prop-
cuticle, inner cortex, and central medulla. The outer
erty in many animals. Specifically, vitamin D, can be
cuticle is essentially a layer of cornified squamous
 produced by the effect of UV irradiation to convert 
epithelial cells, the bulk of the hair shaft is the cortex
 7-dehydrocholesterol into Ds. Subsequent steps in-
composed of epithelial cells that have accumulated
volving the liver and kidneys are needed to produce
a specialized "hard" keratin as well as pigments, and
the biologically potent 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3.
medullary cells are more cuboidal. The hair termi-
 Finally, products from the integumentary system
nates in the root or hair bulb.
( wool and hair, leather, feathers, and horns) pro-
The hair growth cycle has two primary phases:
vide economic incenfive to producers and goods for
anagen and catagen. Late anagen represents the point
consumers.
138
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Review questions and answers are available
Lee, J. and T. Tumbar. 2012. Hairy tale of signaling in hair
online.
follicle development and cycling. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.
23: 906-916.
Marklund, S., J. Kijas, H. Rodriguez-Martinez, L. Ronnstand,
K. Funa, M. Moller, D. Lange, I. Edfors-Lilja, and
References
L. Andersson. 1999. Molecular basis for the dominant white
phenotype in the domestic pig. Genome Res. 8: 826-833.
Bitman, J., D.L. Wood, S.A. Bright, R.H. Miller, A.V. Capuco,
Nagao, K., T. Kobayashi, K. Moro, M. Ohyama, T. Adachi,
 A. Roche, and J.W. Pankey. 1991. Lipid composiftion of teat
D.Y. Kitashima, S. Ueha, K. Horiuchi, H. Tanizaki,
canal kerafin collected before and after milking from Hol-
K. Kabashima, A. Kubo, Y. Cho, B.E. Clausen, K. Matsu-
stein and Jersey cows. J. Dairy Sci. 74: 414 420.
shima, M. Seumatsu, G.C. Furtado, S.A. Lira, J.M. Farber,
Capuco, A.V, D.L. Wood, S.A. Bright, RH. Miller, and
M.C. Udey, and M. Amagai. 2012. Stress-induced produc-
 J. Bitman. 1990. Regenerafion of teat canal keratin in lac-
tion of chemokines by hair follicles regulates the traffick-
6
tating dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 73: 1745-1750.
ing of dendritic cells in skin. Nat. Immunol. 13: 744-754.
Diftmer, K.E. and K.G. Thompson. 2011. Vitamin D metabo
Nixon, A.J., C.A. Ford, J.E. Wildermoth, A.J. Craven, M.G. Ash-
 lism and rickets in domestic animals: a review. Veterinary
 by, and A.J. Pearson. 2002. Regulation of prolactin recep-
Pathology 48: 389-407.
tor expression in ovine skin in relation to circulating
Fukui, K., T. Yasui, H. Gomi, H. Sugiya, O. Fujimori,
 prolactin and wool follicle growth status. J. Endocrinoi.
W. Meyer, and A. Tsukise. 2012. Histochemical localiza-
172: 605-614.
tion of sialic acids and antimicrobial substances in eccrine
Oftedal, O.T. 2012. The evolution of milk secretion and its
glands of porcine snout skin. Eur. J. Histochem. 56: e6,
ancient origins. Animal 6: 355-368.
28-34.
Rieder, S., S. Taourit, D. Mariat, B. Langlois, and G. Guerin.
Heath, W.R. and S.N. Mueller. 2012. Hair follicles: gatekeep-
2001. Mutations in the agouti (ASIP), the extension (MC1R),
ers to the epidermis, new and views. Nat. Immunol. 13:
and the brown (TYRP!) loci and their association to coat
715-717.
color phenotypes in horses (Equus caballus). Mamm.
Hocking Edwards, JE., M.J. Birtles, G.A.
Wickham,
Genome 12: 450-455.
PM. Harris, and S.N. MeCutcheon. 1996. Pre- and post-
Schaffer, J.V. and J.L. Bolognia. 2001. The melanocortin-1
natal wool follicle development and density in sheep of
receptor. Arch. Dermatol. 137: 1477-1485.
five genotypes. J. Agric. Sci. 126: 363-370.
Schneider, M.R, R. Schmidt-Ullrich, and R. Paus. 2009.
 Klungland, H., D.1. Vage, L. Gomez-Raya, S. Adalsteinsson,
The hair follicle as a dynamic miniorgan. Curr. Biol. 19:
and S. Lein. 1995. The role of melanocyte-stimulating
R132-R142.
hormone (MSH) receptor in bovine coat color determina-
Schroder, J.M. and J. Harder. 1999. Human beta-defensin-2.
tion. Mamm. Genome 6: 636-639.
Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 31: 645-651.
Bones and skeletal system
Contents
Bones
139
Skeleton
149
Introduction
139
 Skeletal Cartilage
151
Classification of Bones
139
Skeleton Classification
151
 Bone Structure
140
Axial Skeleton
152
Cross Anatomy
140
The Skull
152
Microscopic Anatomy of Bone
141
The Vertebral Column
154
Chemical Composition of Bone
143
Appendicular Skeleton 
156
Hematopoietic Tissue in Bones
143
Thoracic Limbs
156
Bone Development
144
 Pelvic Limbs
163
 Intramembranous Ossification
144
Avian Skeleton
166
Endochondral Ossification
144
Joints
167
Bone Growth, Remodeling, and Repair
145
Types of Joints 
167
 Bone Growth
145
Synovial Joints
168
 Bone Remodeling and Repair
146
Specific Joints
171
Repair of Fractures
147
Intervertebral Articulations
171
Homeostatic Imbalances of Bone
148
Thoracic Limb
171
Osteomalacia and Rickets
148
Pelvis
172
Parturient Paresis (Milk Fever)
148
Pelvic Limb
173
Egg-Laying Fatigue in Birds
148
Chapter Summary
174
 Bones and Skeleton
148
 Markings on Bones
148
Bones
Classification of bones
Introduction
 The human skeleton contains 206 major bones whereas
the number of bones in different animals varies. The
Osteology is the study of bones. The skeleton provides
bones can be classified into five categories, including
the basic scaffolding for the body. The skeletal system
 long bones, short bones, flat bones, irregular bones,
includes the bones, cartilage, ligaments, and connec-
and sesamoid bones (Fig. 6.1), named due to the
tive tissues that hold everything together.
resemblance to sesame seeds.
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
139
140  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
outer coating; cancellous bone is found on the
interior.
 Cancellous bone, also called spongy bone, consists 
Irregular bone
of a network of pieces of bone called trabeculae
(vertebrae)
Long bone
 or spicules, interspersed with spaces filled with red
(femur)
 or yellow bone marrow. Spongy bone predominates
in short, flat, and irregular bones, as well as in the
epiphyses of long bones. It is also found as a narrow
lining of the medullary cavity of the diaphysis of long
bones.
Sesamoid bone
Long bones
(patella)
In developing long bones, the shaft is called the diaph-
Short bone
Flat bone
ysis, and each extremity is called an epiphysis
(carpal)
(rib)
(plural = epiphyses) (Fig. 6.2). The epiphysis consists
Fig. 6.1. Types of bones. Examples of the various types of bones
of mostly cancellous bone with a thin outer coat of
 as found in the pig skeleton.
 compact bone. It is generally enlarged relative to the
diaphysis. The metaphysis is the joining region of the
 diaphysis and epiphysis. Between the diaphysis and
epiphysis of growing bones is a flat plate of hyaline
cartilage called the epiphyseal plate. After growth is
 Long bones. These are bones that are longer than
complete, this cartilage is replaced by the epiphyseal
they are wide. Some of the bones of the limbs are
 line. The medullary cavity (from medulla, "innermost
long bones. Long bones are characterized by an
part") is the space within the diaphysis that contains
elongated shaft and somewhat enlarged extremi-
bone marrow. The joint surface of the bone is covered
ties that bear articular surfaces. Examples of long
with a smooth layer of hyaline cartilage where one
bones include the humerus, radius, femur, tibia,
bone forms a joint with another bone.
metacarpal bones, and metatarsal bones.
 The fibrous sheath surrounding that part of the
  a  s s 
bone not covered with articular cartilage is called the
what like a cube; examples include the carpal
 periosteum. It consists of dense irregular cornective
bones of the wrist and tarsal bones of the ankle.
fissue. The innermost periosteal layer consists of an
Flat bones. As the name implies, these are thin
osteogenic layer containing osteoblasts (bone germi-
and flattened bones. They include two plates of
nators) that make new bone and osteoclasts that break
compact bone separated by cancellous or spongy
down bone. The periosteum contains nerve fibers,
bone. Examples include the sternum (breastbone),
lymphatic vessels, and blood vessels that supply the
ribs, scapula (shoulder blade), and certain skull
 bone. The periosteum is attached to the underlying
bones.
 bone by Sharpey's fibers extending from the fibrous
 Irregular bones. These are complex and irregu-
layer of the periosteum into the bone matrix. Sharp-
 larly shaped bones. Examples include the verte-
ey's fibers are particularly dense where tendons and
brae and certain facial bones.
 ligaments attach to the periosteum.
 Sesamoid bones. These are small bones embedded
The internal surfaces of the bone are covered with
in a tendon and resemble the shape of a sesame
 the endosteum. The endosteum lines the medullary
seed. The most prominent example is the patella
cavity in long bones and covers the trabeculae of
(kneecap).
spongy bone.
Short, irregular, and flat bones
Bone structure
Short, irregular, and flat bones vary in the pro-
Gross anatomy
portion of compact and cancellous bone (Fig. 6.3).
Furthermore, these bones do not have a shaft or
Each bone consists of compact bone and cancellous
epiphyses. They contain bone marrow between their
bone. Compact bone, also called dense or cortical bone,
trabeculae, but no bone marrow cavity is present.
is a term describing solid-looking bone. Compact bone
The internal spongy layer in flat bones is called the
 is found on the surface of bones forming a protective
diploe (folded).
Bones and skeletal system 
141
Articular
Spongy bone 
cartilage
Red marrow
Epiphysis
Metaphysis
Diaphysis
Medullary cavity
Compact bone
Yellow marrow
Metaphysis
Periosteum
Epiphysis
Articular
Cartilage
Metaphysis
Metaphysis
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Epiphysis
Spongy bone
Spongy bone
Compact bone
Medullary cavity
B
Fig. 6.2. Anatomy of long bones. (A) Using the femur as an example of a long bone, the epiphysis is the enlarged area at either end of the
pue sishydida aui uaamag huiod suuio! aui s! sishydea aul auog aui jo uood aippi aui u! yeus huol aui s! sissyde aui alum auog
diaphysis. The periosteum is the fibrous covering of the area of the bone not covered with articular cartilage. The endosteum is the fibrous
and cellular tissue lining the medullary cavity of the bone. (B) Cross section of an equine humerus showing exterior and interior anatomy.
Microscopic anatomy of bone
produce osteoblasts and  are therefore important in
 fracture repair. Osteoprogenitor cells are located in the
Four major cell types are found in bone (Fig. 6.4).
 inner, cellular layer of the periosteum, the endosteum
Osteocytes are the mature cells within bone that
that lines the marrow cavity, and the lining of vascular
account for most of the population of bone cells. Each
passageways in the matrix.
osteocyte lies  within a lacuna  (see next section,
"Compact Bone"). Osteoblasts are cells that secrete the
Compact bone
extracellular matrix of bone. They secrete collagen and
 ground substance that makes up unmineralized bone,
called osteoid. Eventually, osteoblasts become sur-
eye, microscopically, it contains considerable detail.
rounded by the matrix they secrete, at which point
The structural unit of compact bone is the osteon or
they mature and become osteocytes. Osteoclasts are
 Haversian system (Fig. 6.5). Each osteon appears as a
cells involved in resorption of bone, and are therefore
cylindrical unit consisting of 3-20 concentric lamellae
 present in areas where bone is being removed. Osteo-
 of bone matrix surrounding the central osteonal canal
clasts are giant multinucleated cells. Bone also con-
(Haversian canal or central canal) that runs parallel to
tains a small number of mesenchymal cells known as
the long axis of the bone. The lamellae are like paper
osteoprogenitor cells. These are stem cells that can
towels wrapped around a cardboard roll (i.e., the
142 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
osteonal canal). The osteonal canal contains the vascu-
in the osteonal canal. These canals are lined with
 lar and nerve supply of the osteon. The osteonal canals
endosteum.
carry small arteries and veins.
During bone formation, osteoblasts secrete the bone
A second group of canals, called perforating, Volk-
matrix. Osteoblasts maintain contact with one another
mann's, or lateral canals, run at right angles to the
via connections containing gap junctions. As the
long axis of the bone. These canals connect the blood
matrix hardens, the osteoblasts become trapped within
vessel and nerve supply of the periosteum with that
it, thus forming the lacunae and canaliculi. The osteo-
blasts become osteocytes or mature bone cells.
Osteocytes, the spider-shaped mature bone cells, are
found in lacunae, the small cavities at the junctions of
the lamellae. Orly one osteocyte is found per lacuna,
and these cells cannot divide. Numerous processes
extend from each osteocyte into little tunnels running
through the mineralized matrix called canaliculi,
which connect adjacent lacunae. Therefore, a continu-
210
ous network of canaliculi and lacunae contains osteo-
cytes and their processes running throughout the
mineralized bone. Canaliculi are important because
they provide a route by which processes from one
Compact bone
osteocyte can contact those of adjacent osteocytes.
Therefore, via the canalicular system, all osteocytes
are potentially in communication with one another.
Spongy bone
They pass information, nutrients, and /or wastes from
(diploe)
one place to another.
Compact bone
Osteocytes can synthesize or absorb bone matrix. If
the osteocyte dies, bone matrix resorption occurs due
 or remodeling by osteoblast activity.
Fig. 6.3. Internal anatomy of flat bone. Flat bones consist of an
 While mature compact bone has a lamellar structure
outer layer of compact bone that sandwiches an inner layer of 
spongy, or trabecular, bone (diploe).
in which the fibers run parallel, immature bone, also
Osteocyte: Mature bone cell
found in a lacuna; derived 
from osteoblasts
Osteoblast: Secretes collagen
eoblast
and ground substance that
makes up unmineralized bone
called osteoid; derived from
osteoprogenitor cells
 Osteoclast: Large multinucleated 
 bone resorbing cells derived 
from monocytes
 Osteoprogenitor cell:
Precursors to the
osteoblasts
Fig. 6.4. Bone cells. The four types of bone cells and their locations are shown.
Bones and skeletal system
143
Articular
cartilage
Spongy
Haversian
canal
bone
Red
marrow
Endosteum
Medullary cavity
Osteonal
Compact bone
canals
Yellow marrou
Blooc
Periosteum
Canaliculi
between
Spongy
Lateral
osteocytes
bone
canal
Y
Articular
Compact
cartilage
bone
oensule suiseaus ui umous auog ayt jo suoas euipnluol suasaidai sainsy asaul auog pedwon jo annnns pidossoi 's'g i
from left to right. The osteon, or Haversian system, consists of a central osteonal canal surrounded by concentric lamellae of bone matrix.
These canals are all interconnected by lateral canals that run horizontal, or at right angles, to the osteonal canals. Osteocytes, or mature bone
cells, are found in cavities called lacunae that lie between the lamellar layers. The osteocytes have processes that project into canaliculi,
which are narrow canals interconnecting the lacunae. The osteocytes pick up nutrients and oxygen from the blood and pass it via the
 canalicular system. (Figure modified from Marieb, 2003.)
called woven bone, has a nonlamellar structure.
The remaining organic portion of the bone is made
Woven bone is put down rapidly during growth or
up of cells (osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts)
repair, and its fibers are aligned at random, resulting
and osteoid, which includes collagen fibers and
 in reduced strength. Woven bone is generally replaced
 ground substance (proteoglycans and glycoproteins).
by lamellar bone as growth continues.
Osteoid is secreted by osteoblasts.
Cancellous or spongy bone
Hematopoietic tissue in bones
 Unlike compact bone, spongy bone does not contain
Red bone marrow, which is hematopoietic (i.e., blood
osteons but instead consists of an irregular lattice
forming), is found in the spongy bone of long bones
network of bone spicules called trabeculae. In specific
and the diploe of flat bones. Red bone marrow consists
regions of certain bones, red bone marrow can be
of mature and immature red blood cells, white blood
found in the space between the trabeculae. Osteocytes
cells, and the stem cells that produce them. In newborn
are found in lacunae within the trabeculae, and cana-
individuals, the medullary cavities of spongy bones
liculi radiate from the lacunae.
contain red bone marrow. In adult long bones, the
medullary cavities of spongy bone become large
hollow cavities extending into the epiphysis and con-
Chemical composition of bone
taining yellow bone marrow. Yellow marrow func-
tions in fat storage and contains mostly fat cells.
Bone consists of both organic and inorganic compo-
Therefore, blood cell production in adult long bones
nents. The major inorganic component is calcium
is restricted to the head of the femur and humerus.
 phosphate, Ca(PO4)2, which accounts for two-thirds
However, if an animal becomes anemic (has too few
of the weight of bone. Calcium phosphate interacts
red blood cells), the yellow marrow can revert to red
with calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, to form hydroxy-
 marrow to supplement red blood cell production. In
apatite, Caio(PO4)(OH). As crystals of hydroxyapatite
contrast, the spongy bone found in flat bones, such as
form, they also incorporate other inorganic materials,
those in the hips, remains hematopoietic throughout
including calcium carbonate, sodium, magnesium,
life and is therefore the best source when needing to
and fluoride
sample bone marrow.
144 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
The osteonal and lateral canals are also the path-
which all connective tissue develops. As these cells
ways by which blood cells formed in the marrow enter
condense, they form the membrane from which the
circulation. Since bone marrow sinuses connect with
bone will develop (Fig. 6.6). This presumptive bone
the venous vessels running through these channels,
site becomes more vascularized with time, and the
newly formed blood cells that are released into osteo-
mesenchymal cells enlarge and become rounder. As
 nal and lateral canals have a path to enter the general
the mesenchymal cells change from eosinophilic (i.e.)
circulation.
stained shades of red with eosin dyes) to basophilic
(affinity for basic or blue dyes), they differentiate into
osteoblasts. These cells secrete the collagen and pro-
Bone development
 teoglycans (osteoid) of the bone matrix. As the osteoid
 is deposited, the osteoblasts become increasingly sep-
Osteogenesis, or ossification, is the process of bone
arated from one another, although they remain con-
formation. Calcification, the process of calcium salt
nected by thin cytoplasmic processes.
deposition, occurs during ossification. While calcifica-
The site where the matrix first begins calcification is
tion is associated with bone formation, it can occur in
called the ossification center. Eventually, as the matrix
other tissues.
becomes calcified, the osteoblasts become osteocytes.
 There are two general classes of bone formation.
 The osteocytes are contained in canaliculi. Some of the
Intramembranous ossification occurs when bone
surrounding primitive cells in the membrane prolifer-
develops from a fibrous membrane. The flat bones of
ate and give rise to osteoprogenitor cells. These cells
the skull and face, the mandible, and the clavicle if
come to lie in opposition to the spicules and become
 present, are formed by this method. Intramembranous
osteoblasts, thus adding more matrix. This results in
ossification can also result in the formation of bones
appositional growth in which the spicules (areas of
in abnormal locations such as testes or whites of
calcification extending from the ossification center)
the eyes. Such bones are called heterotopic bones
enlarge and become joined into a trabecular network
   (d =   = 
having the shape of bone.
model serves as a precursor for the bone, formation is
called endochondral ossification. Because of remodel-
ing that occurs later, the initial bone laid down by
Endochondral ossification
either method is eventually replaced.
 Endochondral ossification begins similarly to intra-
 membranous ossification, with migration and aggre-
Intramembranous ossification
gation of mesenchymal cells (Fig. 6.7). However,
these cells now become chondroblasts, instead of
 Early in embryonic development, elongate mesenchy-
 Osteoblasts, and begin making a cartilage matrix. Once
 mal cells migrate and aggregate in specific regions of
 made, the cartilage matrix grows by both interstitial
the body. Remember, mesenchyme is tissue from
 and appositional growth. Interstitial growth is respon-
Osteoblas
Ossificatior
center 
mesenchyn
Osteocyte
Marrow
Fig. 6.6. Intramembranous ossification. (A) Mesenchymal cells within the mesenchyme migrate and condense in specific areas, forming a
membrane that will become ossified. This condensed mesenchyme becomes progressively more vascularized, and the cells become larger
and calcified, the osteoblasts become osteocytes contained within canaliculi. Some of the surrounding cells become osteoprogenitor cells.
As osteoprogenitor cells come into apposition with the initial bone spicules, they become osteoblasts and continue appositional growth.
(B) Ossification begins in a relatively confined region called the ossification center.
 Bones and skeletal system
145
blood vessels begin to enter this diaphyseal area, vas-
cularizing the developing cavity.
Cells from the periosteum migrate inward with the
blood vessels and become osteoprogenitor cells. Other
cartlage
cells also enter to give rise to the marrow. The break-
down of the matrix leaves spicules that become lined
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
with osteoprogenitor cells that then differentiate into
A hyaline
The connective
Chondrocytes in
 Chondrocytes die,
 osteoblasts. Osteoblasts then begin to produce the
cartilage model is
tissue around the
midregion
matrix begins
breaking down.
osteoid on the spicule framework. Bone formed in this
produced by
middle of the
forming
hypertrophy
chondrocytes. It
carilage
Blood yesselsgrow
manner is called endochondral bone, and this region
increases in
changes to
irregular
into this region.
cartilage plates;
Fibroblasts migrate
becomes the primary ossification center. As the carti-
length by.
periosteum,
interstitial
which is
cells synthesize
with blood vessels,
lage is resorbed (i.e., broken down), the bone depos-
growth, but also
osteogenic and
alkaline
differentiate into
ited on the calcified spicules becomes spongy bone.
grows by
contains
phosphatase;
osteoblasts; they
appositional
os teoblasts.
surrounding
lay down osteoid
Eventually, a secondary ossification center develops
growth.
matrix calcifies.
on remaining
in each epiphysis. Bone develops in these regions
spicules.
similarly to how it develops in the primary ossifica-
tion center. As the secondary ossification develops, the
only cartilage remaining is that at the ends of the
 bones, and a transverse region known as the epiphy-
 seal plate separating the diaphyseal and epiphyseal
cavities.
As the cavity in the diaphyseal marrow enlarges, a
distinct zonation develops in the cartilage at either
Step S:
end of the diaphysis (Fig. 6.8). The following five
Chondrocytes die;
calcified matrix
regions develop beginning most distal from the
begins breaking
Step 6:
diaphysis:
down. Cther
A secondary
primitive cells enter
ossification center
 Zone of reserve cartilage. This region contains no
via new vasculature
is established in the
and give rise to
cellular proliferation or matrix production. Small,
upper epiphysis.
marrow.
scattered chondrocytes are present.
Endochondral bone
2.
 Zone of proliferation. Cartilage cells are dividing
forms on
remaining spicules.
and organized in distinct columns in this area. The
cells are larger than in the reserve zone and
Fig. 6.7. Endochondral ossification.
 produce matrix.
3.
 Zone of hypertrophy. Cartilage cells in this region
 are large with a clear cytoplasm containing glyco-
sible for most of the increase in length of the bone,
 gen. Matrix is found in columns between the cells.
whereas the increase in width is produced by new
 Zone of calcified cartilage. Enlarged degenerating
 chondrocytes that differentiate from the chondrogenic
cells form this region. The matrix is calcified.
layer of the perichondrium surrounding the cartilage
Zone of resorption. Nearest the diaphysis, the car-
mass.
tilage in this region is in direct contact with con-
Formation of true bony tissue begins when peri-
 nective tissue in the marrow cavity.
chondrial cells in the midregion of the model give rise
to osteoblasts rather than chondrocytes. At this point,
the connective tissue surrounding the middle of the
cartilage changes from perichondrium to periosteum.
Bone growth, remodeling, and repair
 A thin layer of bone begins forming around the carti-
lage model. This bone can be called either periosteal
Bone growth
bone because of its location, or endochondral bone
because of its method of development. This periosteal
As bone grows, there is constant internal and external
 bone is sometimes termed the bony collar.
remodeling that takes place in the epiphyseal plate.
As the chondrocytes in the midregion become
The epiphyseal plate remains constant in size since
hypertrophic, the matrix is compressed. These cells
 new cartilage is produced in the zone of proliferation,
begin to synthesize alkaline phosphatase, and the sur-
while a similar amount of cartilage is removed in
rounding matrix begins to calcify. As the chondrocytes
the zone of resorption due to the action of osteocytes.
die, the matrix breaks down and the neighboring
The resorbed cartilage is replaced by spongy bone
lacunae become interconnected. At the same time,
produced by osteoblasts found between the zone of
1 46  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Zone of reserve
cartilage
Zone of
proliferation
Zone of 
hypertrophy
Zone of calcified
cartilage
pter
T
Zone of resorption
of bone
uoeuz pous Ag paziaeeun s! l! pue 'd) aeld yon aui s! sishydida pue sisyde aui uamag eane aul aneid jeasydida a'g i
as shown in this longitudinal section.
resorption and the diaphysis. As the cells in the pro-
(resorbed) and replaced in response to various physi-
 liferative region divide, an increase in length of the
cal or hormonal changes. This constant breakdown by
bone occurs as the epiphysis is moved away from the
osteoclasts and formation by osteoblasts is termed
diaphysis.
remodeling and occurs at both the periosteal and end-
The width of bone is increased by appositional
 osteal surfaces.
 growth of bone that occurs between the cortical lamel-
The breakdown of bone by osteoclasts is called bone
lae and the periosteum as bone resorption occurs on
 resorption. In this proces, osteoclasts first bind tightly
the endosteal surface of the outermost region of the
to the surface of the bone (either the endosteum or
bone. As bones elongate, they are constantly remodel-
periosteum), forming a leakproof seal. The osteoclasts
ing, which involves resorption of bone in some areas
release lysosomal enzymes and acids into this sealed
concomitant with deposition in other areas.
region, which then digest the collagen fibers and
Eventually, new cartilage production ceases. The
 organic matrix while the acid digests the minerals. The
cartilage that is present in the epiphyseal plate is con-
tight seal of the osteoclast to the bone surface prevents
verted to bone until no more cartilage exists. This is
leakage of the enzymes and acids to undesired areas.
termed epiphyseal closure, and growth of the bone is
The digested components are engulfed by the osteo-
complete. The only remaining cartilage is at the articu-
clasts via endocytosis, packaged into vesicles, translo-
lar (i.e., regions where bones form joints) surfaces on
cated across the osteoclastby the process of transcytosis,
the bone. The epiphyseal plate now becomes the
and released by exocytosis into the interstitial space
 epiphyseal line.
whence the material is absorbed into the capillaries.
The major hormone controlling bone growth in
The canal that is formed establishes the future Haver-
young animals is growth hormone that is released
sian system. Eventually, the osteoclasts are replaced
from the anterior pituitary gland. Excessive secretion
by osteoblasts that rebuild the bone.
of growth hormone can cause gigantism, whereas
hyposecretion can cause dwarfism. Thyroid hormones
Hormonal control
also play an important role in bone development. The
action of these hormones is discussed in Chapter 12.
The control of bone homeostasis is poorly understood.
Since bones are a major calcium storage site, calcium
homeostasis plays an important role in bone miner-
Bone remodeling and repair
alization (Fig. 6.9). The two hormones involved in
calcium homeostasis are parathyroid hormone (PTH),
se re  q  redde A auq 
produced by the parathyroid glands, and calcitonin,
reach adulthood, this is not true. In fact, bone remains
from the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid
very active and is constantly being broken down
gland. PTH is released in response to low-plasma ionic
 Bones and skeletal system
147
Calcitonin
release
Thyroid
Calcium
pueib
deposition in bone
Plasma ionized
calcium
1. Hematoma
2. Fibrocartilaginous 3. Bony callus
4.Bone
formation
callus formation
formation
remodeling
Fig. 6.10. Steps in fracture repair.
Osteoclasts
Tesorbbone
Parathyroid gland
 The repair process for a fractured bone involves
↑ PTH
four steps (Fig. 6.10):
Fig. 6.9. Hormonal control of plasma ionic calcium concentration.
 Hematoma formation. As a result of a fracture, the 
An increase in plasma ionic calcium concentration results in the
blood vessels tear, causing the formation of a
release of calcitonin from the thyroid gland. Calcitonin stimulates
hematoma, a mass of clotted blood, at the fracture
i seld ui aseaap e 'seuon ul uog ui uonsodap unie
site. Bone cells begin to die and the site shows the
calcium concentration stimulates the release of parathyroid
classic signs of inflammation, that is, pain, swell-
hormone (PTH) from the parathyroid glands, which promotes
ing, redness, and loss of function.
osteoclast activity resulting in an increase in plasma ionic calcium
levels.
2.
Fibrocartilaginous callus  formation. Capillaries
 grow into the hematoma from which phagocytic
cells invade and remove the debris. Fibroblasts
and osteoblasts migrate into the fractured area
calcium levels, while calcitonin is released when
from the periosteum and endosteum. The fibro
plasma ionic calcium levels rise.
blasts form collagen fibers, which serve to span
 If resorption is excessive, bones become weak, such
the space in the break, thus connecting the two
as in osteoporosis. Abnormally predominant deposi-
ends. As the fibroblasts differentiate into chon-
tion can produce anomalies such as bone spurs. Estro-
droblasts, they secrete cartilage matrix. Finally.
gens are known to reduce bone resorption whereas
 osteoblasts close to the capillaries begin forming
PTH promotes bone resorption. The decrease in estro
 spongy bone; those found further away secrete a
 gen level associated with menopause is linked with a
bulging cartilaginous matrix. This entire mass,
weakening of the bones.
called a fibrocartilaginous callus, spans the frac-
tured area.
Repair of fractures
3.
Bony callus formation. Bone trabeculae begin to
appear as a result of the actions of the osteoblasts
Fractures can be classified in several ways:
converting the fibrocartilaginous callus into a
bony callus made of spongy (or woven) bone.
Bone end alignment. If the bone ends remained
Bony callus formation continues until the two
aligned following a fracture, it is called a nondis-
ends of the bone are firmly attached.
placed fracture. Displaced fractures occur when
+
Bone remodeling. Remodeling begins during bony
the bone ends are out of alignment.
callus formation and continues until the bony
 Degree of break. If the break is all the way through
callus is complete. Excess material is removed
the bone, it is termed a complete fracture; if not
from both the periosteal and endosteal area, and
all the way through, it is an incomplete break.
compact bone is formed along the shaft. Normally,
 Orientation of the break. If the break is parallel
 the final product has the same shape as the origi-
to the long axis, it is a linear fracture; if it is
nal bone.
perpendicular to the long axis, it is a transverse
fracture.
Response to mechanical stress
 Skin penetration. If bone protrudes through the
skin, it is an open, or compound, fracture. A non-
 Bone deposition can occur not only in response to a
protruding break is called a closed, or simple,
bone injury, but also when additional strength is
fracture.
needed. This can occur in response to new physical
148 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Load
same condition when it is present in prepubertal
animals. Though osteoid is produced, calcium salts
are not deposited and the bones remain soft. Inade-
quate calcium or vitamin D in the diet is a common
cause of osteomalacia. Vitamin D is necessary for
intestinal absorption of Ca²+. When blood calcium
levels decrease due to inadequate intestinal absorp-
tion, parathyroid hormone maintains plasma Ca2+ by
stimulating the release of Ca²+ from the bone.
Tension
Compression
Parturient paresis (milk fever)
As dairy cattle begin milk production, the first milk
pte
produced (called colostrum) contains high concentra-
tions of Ca?t. Colostrum requires approximately 3g
of calcium per hour to produce. When a cow cannot
mobilize this amount of calcium, she can develop
milk fever within 72 hours following parturition.
Symptoms include loss of appetite, followed by muscle
weakness, decreased body temperature, labored breath-
ing, and paralysis of hind legs. If left untreated, the
Fig. 6.11. Mechanical stress on bone. Using the femur as an
cow can collapse into a coma and die.
example, the bone is acted upon by the load of the body weight.
 To prevent milk fever, cows should be given suffi-
This load is transmitted through the bone as indicated by the
cient vitamin D in the diet prior to parturition. If milk
dashed arc. This causes compression on one side of the bone while
fever develops, cows are given oral or intravenous
stretching the other side. These two forces sum to zero in the
middle of the bone, creating the point of zero stress.
calcium, according to individual severity
pressures placed on the bone as would take place if
Egg-laying fatigue in birds
the bone is bearing weight at a different angle. Wolff's
law states that a bone grows or remodels in response
Similar to milk fever in cows, high-producing egg-
to forces placed on the bone. Such forces include
weight bearing on the bone or muscles pulling on the
laying hens can develop weak and brittle bones. A hen
bone. Since such forces are generally off-center, they
must deposit as much as 8-10% of her total calcium
into the eggshell each day. Since the eggshellis depos-
tend to bend the bone. In response, the compact bone
thickens on one side while thinning on the other side
ited during the night, the hen must draw upon the
through the remodeling process. Spongy bone forms
calcium reserves located in a specialized type of bone
in the middle since mechanical forces acting on the
called medullary bone. Under the influence of estro-
gens and androgens secreted from the ceveloping
bone sum to zero in this region (Fig. 6.11).
ovarian follicles, medullary bone is produced in hens
2 weeks prior to commencement of egg laying. As
Nutrients necessary for bone deposition 
blood calcium levels decrease during eggshell forma-
 Bone deposition requires vitamin C for collagen syn-
tion, the hen releases PTH, which mobilizes bone
thesis, vitamin D for calcium absorption in the gut,
calcium. If insufficient stores of calcium are present in
and vitamin A for bone deposition and removal, in
the bones, the bones become weaker as they become
addition to calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and
demineralized.
manganese.
Bones and skeleton
Homeostatic imbalances of bone
Markings on bones
Osteomalacia and rickets
The surface of bone is seldom smooth. Instead, various
Osteomalacia is a condition in which the bones are
depressions, bumps, and ridges serve as sites where
insufficiently mineralized. Rickets is a name for the
muscles and tendons originate or attach and blood
Bones and skeletal system 
149
vessels and nerves travel. These various markings
are shown in Table 6.1 and Figure 6.12. Learning the
Trochantel
Trochlea
terms is helpful when studying the origins and inser-
Head 
tions of muscles.
Fovea 
Tuberosity
B
Groove
Skeleton
Condyle
Tubercle 
The skeleton includes all the bones of the body. These
Epicondyle
bones and their articulations have been altered during
+
D
evolution to accommodate various functions. There-
Fossa
fore, the skeleton is an excellent example of the com-
plementary nature of form and function. The skeletons
Notch
of various species are shown in Figure 6.13. Most
of the remainder of the chapter is concerned with
Spine
mammals; however, a brief discussion of features
Fig. 6.12. Marking on bones. Various bovine bones are shown,
 unique to avian species will be included at the end of 
including the femur (A), humerus (B), radius-ulna (C), and scapula 
the section on the skeleton.
(D), which are labeled to illustrate bone markings.
Table 6.1.E
Bone markings.
Term
Description
Example
 Projections, Depressions and Openings Where Muscles and Ligaments Attach
Crest
Narrow ridge of bone; usually prominent 
Illiac crest
Epicondyle
Raised area on or above a condyle
Lateral epicondyle of the humerus
Fossa
Shallow depression, often serving as an articular surface
Olecranon and radial fossae of the humerus 
Line
Narrow ridge of bone; less prominent than a crest
Gluteal line on wing of ilium
Process
Generally any bony prominence; sometimes used to name specific
Crest, spine, trochanter, tubercle, tuberosity,
prominences
etc.; olecranon process
Ramus
Armlike bar of bone
Ramus of the mandible 
Spine
Sharp, slender, often pointed projection
Spine of the scapula
Tuberosity
Large rounded projection
 Deltoid tuberosity of the humerus
Trochanter
Very large, blunt, irregular-shaped process; found only on the femur
Trochanter of the femur
Tubercle
Small rounded projection or process
Greater tubercle of the humerus
 Projections That Help Form Joints
Condyle
Rounded articular projection
Occipital condyle of the skull 
 A deep articular depression
 Acetabulum of the hip joint
Facet
 Smooth, nearly flat articular surface
Superior costal facet of the vertebrae
Head 
Bony expansion carried on a narrow neck
Head of the femur
Trochlea
 A pulley shaped, articular structure
Trochlea of the femur
 Depressons and Openings Allowing Blood Vessels and Nerves to Pass
Fissure
Narrow, slit-like opening
Palatine fissure
Foramen
Round or oval opening through a bone
Foramen magnum
Fovea
A shallow, nonarticular depression
Fovea capitis on the head of the femur
Incisure
A notch-shaped depression at the edge of a bone
Semilunar notch of the ulna 
Meatus
Canal-like passageway
 External auditory meatus
Sinus
Cavity within a bone, filled with air and lined with mucous membrane
 Nasal sinuses
Sulcus
Furrow-like groove
Brachial groove of the humerus
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
人
Caudal
vertebrae
Maxilla
Scapula
Mandible
Humerus
Femur
Tibia-fibula
Radius
Ulna
-Tarsal bones
Carpal bones
Metatarsal
Metacarpal bones
bones
 Sesamoid bones
 Phalanges
Sesamoid
bones 
210
Phalanges
Cervical
vertebrae
Thoracic
Lumbar
 Sacral
vertebrae
vertebrae vertebrae
人
Maxilla
Mandible
Caudal
vertebrae
Scapula
Humerus 
Femur
False
Sternum
Tibia-fibula
Radius
ribs
UIna
Tarsal bones
Carpal bones
Metacarpal bones
Metatarsal
bones
Sesamoid
Sesamoid bones
bones
Phalanges
Phalanges
of digit
of digit
Cervical 
Thoracic
Lumbar 
 Sacral
vertebrae
vertebrae  vertebrae
vertebrae
Os coxae
Maxilla
Femur
Mandible
Fibula
UIna
Radius-
False Floating
Tibula
sau
ribs
Tarsal bones
Carpal bones
Metacarpal bones 
 Metatarsal bones 
Phalanges -
"Dewclaw"
Phalanges
C
Fig. 6.13. Skeletons. (A) Cow. (B) Horse. (C) Pig. (D) Dog.
150
Bones and skeletal system
151
Thoracic
Lumbar
 Sacral
Cervical
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
人
Oscoxae
Maxilla 
Mandible
Scapula
Femur
Humerus
UIna
Fibula
Radius
Tibula
Carpal bones
Phalan
nge
 Metacarpal bones
Tarsal bones
Phalanges
 Metatarsal bone
D
Fig. 6.13. Continued
Functions of the skeletal system
costal cartilage connecting the ribs to the sternum, (3)
in the respiratory cartilages forming the skeleton of
 The skeleton has five primary functions:
 the larynx and reinforcing passageways of the respira-
 Support. The skeletal system provides the struc-
tory system, and (4) in nasal cartilages supporting the
ture to which the bones attach, as well as the struc-
external nose.
 tural support for the entire body.
 Elastic cartilage contains more elastic fibers than
2.
 Storage of minerals and lipids. The bones provide
hyaline cartilage. It is therefore better able to with-
 major storage for various minerals, parficularly
stand bending. It is found in only two places in the
calcium. In addition, the bones contain a substan-
skeleton: (l) the external ear and (2) the epiglottis,
tial amount of lipid.
which is the flap of tissue that covers the opening of
3
 Blood cell production. The bone marrow is a site
 the larynx during swallowing.
of formation for all types of blood cells.
Fibrocartilage is highly compressible, possessing
4.
Protection. The vital organs of the body are pro-
great tensile strength. It contains approximately paral-
 tected by the skeletal system. The ribs surround
lel rows of chondrocytes with intervening thick col-
the visceral organs, whereas the central nervous
lagen fibers. It is found in the menisci within the knee
system is encased within the skull and spinal cord.
and intervertebral discs.
5.
Leverage. Many of the joints of the body act as
 levers, therefore assisting with movemenf.
Growth of cartilage
Cartilage can continue to grow by two processes.
Skeletal cartilage
Appositional growth occurs when new cartilage forms
on the surface of preexisting cartilage. Interstitial
Types of cartilage
growth occurs from inside of the cartilage mass in
The skeleton begins as cartilage and fibrous mem-
which lacunae-bound chondrocytes inside the carti-
branes, but then is replaced with ossified tissue as the
lage divide and secrete new matrix, thereby expand-
animal develops through gestation. Cartilage contains
ing the cartilage from within.
no nerves or blood vessels and is surrounded by a
layer of dense irregular connective tissue called the
perichondrium. Blood vessels found within the peri-
Skeleton classification
chondrium provide nutrients for the chondrocytes
within the cartilage.
The skeleton is divided into the appendicular skeleton
There are three types of cartilage found in the skel-
and the axial skeleton (Fig. 6.14). The axial skeleton
eton. Hyaline cartilage is the most abundant and
 includes the skull, hyoid apparatus, vertebral column,
provides support and flexibility for the skeleton. The
ribs, and sternum. The appendicular skeleton includes
matrix contains only fine collagen fibers. Hyaline
the bones of the limbs and limb girdles. The thoracic
cartilage is found (1) on articular surfaces, (2) within
limb or pectoral limb includes the scapula, humerus,
1 52 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
radius, ulna, carpal bones, metacarpal bones, phalan-
Axial skeleton
 ges, and their sesamoid bones. The thoracic girdle or
shoulder girdle includes the two scapulae and the
The skull
clavicle in man, which holds the shoulder laterally, but
which is only vestigial in domestic animals.
The skull is a very complex structure made mostly of
flat bones. Except for the mandible that is attached via
a movable joint, the bones of the skull are connected
Axialskeleton
by interlocking joints called sutures. The suture joints
 are characterized by a saw-toothed or serrated appear-
Appendicularskeleton
ance that keeps the bones attached, but allows the
cranium to expand and contract while remaining
intact.
Suture lines are visible between the bones of the
skull (Fig. 6.15). The internasal suture is between the
 two nasal bones while the frontonasal sufure separates
210
the frontal bones from the nasal bones. The frontopa-
rietal suture separates the frontal bones from the pari-
etal bones. The nasomaxillary suture separates the
nasal bones from the maxillary bones.
The skull contains both cranial and facial bones
(Table 6.2). The cranium includes those bones that sur-
round the brain. The cranium consists of the cranial
vault, also called the calvaria, forming the superior,
Fig. 6.14. Axial and appendicular skeleton. As shown with this
lateral, and posterior aspects of the skull, and the
dog skeleton, the axial skeleton includes the bones and cartilage
cranial base or floor that forms the inferior aspect of
 protecting the soft structures in the head, neck, and trunk, and
 the cranium. The cranial base is divided by bony
consists of the skull, hyoid apparatus, vertebral column, and thorax.
The appendicular skeleton includes the limbs and bones connecting
ridges into three distinct fossae: the anterior, middle,
 the limbs to the axial skeleton.
and posterior cranial fossa. The cranial bones form the
Interfrontal suture
Interparietal suture
 Nasomaxillary suture 
Parieto-occipital
suture
Internasal suture
 Frontonasal suture
 Frontoparietal suture
Zygomaticotemporal suture 
Parieto-occipital
suture
Fig. 6.15. Suture lines of the skull. These lines are shown on top and side view of skull of a pig
Bones and skeletal system
153
Table 6.2. Bones of the skull.
Term
Description
Cranial Bones (Number)
Frontal (2)
The rostral portion of the roof of the cranial cavity in most domestic species; in the ox, it forms
entire roof of cranial cavity
 Parietal (2)
Along with frontal, forms the roof of the cranial cavity in most domestic animals except ox.
Occipital (1)
Forms caudal aspect of the cranial cavity, as well as the skull
Temporal (2)
Forms caudolateral wall of the cranial cavity
Sphenoid (1)
Unpaired bone forming floor of cranial cavity; it has several parts, including the body, greater wings,
lesser wings, and pterygoid processes
Ethmoid (1)
Unpaired bone forming rostral wall of cranial cavity; forms part of the nasal septum, caudal wall of
nasal cavity, and part of medial wall of the orbit
Facial Bones (Number)
Mandible (1)
The lower jaw
Maxilla (2)
Form the upper jaw, and parts of the hard palate, orbits, and nasal cavity
Zygomatic (2)
Cranial portion of zygomatic arch; forms part of cheek and orbit
Nasal (2)
Along with cranial portion of frontal bone, forms osseous roof of nasal cavity
Lacrimal (2)
Forms medial surface of orbit
Palatine (2)
Forms part of hard palate along with maxillary and incisive bones
Vomer (1)
Unpaired bone forming part of osseous nasal septum
Ventral nasal concha (2)
A fragile scroll of bone that increases nasal surface area
Pterygoid (2)
Small bones in caudal part of nasopharynx
Incisive or premaxillary (1)
Holds upper incisors
cranial cavity that houses the brain and also provide
surrounding the oral cavity. The nasal region is formed
the site for attachment of head and neck muscles.
by portions of the nasal, maxillary, palatine, and inci-
-do pu io xe s s 
sive bones that surround the nasal cavity. The orbital
ings, including foramina, canals, fissures, and orbits.
region consists of the bony socket holding the eye and
These provide passageways for the spinal cord, blood
is formed by portions of the frontal, lacrimal, palatine,
vessels, and the 12 cranial nerves to enter and leave
sphenoid, and zygomatic bones. The zygomatic arch,
the brain.
which forms the ventral wall of the orbit, consists of
the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic process of the
temporal bones. An exploded view of the equine skull
Cranium
is shown in Figure 6.17.
The roof of the cranium is formed by the paired frontal
and parietal bones (Fig. 6.16). The caudal aspect of the
skull is formed by the unpaired occipital bone. The
Species differences
floor of the cranium is formed by the unpaired sphe-
Unique to the horse and cat, the interparietal bone is
noid bone. Finally, the rostral wall of the cranium is
found between the two parietal bones. In other species,
formed by the ethmoid bone.
this bone is present in the fetus, but fuses with sur-
The facial bones include those bones enclosing the
rounding bones during gestation. In the ox, the frontal
nasal and oral cavities. These bones form the structure
bone forms the entire roof of the cranium, whereas the
of the face; contain cavities for special senses, includ-
parietal bones help form the roof in other species.
ing sight, taste, and smell; provide openings for air
In the dog, three types of skulls are described based
and food; secure teeth; and provide attachment sites
 on the proportions of the facial bones and cranial
for facial muscles. The facial region is divided into the
cavity (Fig. 6.18):
 oral, nasal, and orbital regions.
The oral region is formed by parts of the incisive,
 Mesaticephalic. Average conformation (e.g., Sibe-
maxillary, and palatine bones, as well as the mandible
rian husky).
 1 54 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Bovine
Equine
Porcine
Front view
Front view
Front view
Frontview
Back view
Back view
Back view
Back view
Frontal
Palatine
 Parietal
Temporal:
1310
Interparietal
Squamous
■ Nasal
Petrous
Incisive
Tympanic
T
Maxilla
■Occipital
Lacrimal
 Sphenoid
Zygomatic
Pterygoid 
Vomer
Fig. 6.16. Skulls of various species. The skulls of different species showing main bones.
Temporal
Parietal
Frontal-
Lacrimal ~
Occipital
Nasal 
Collie
Maxillary-
Occipital
Incisive
condyle
Zygomatic
Mandible
Siberian
B
Maxillary
Frontal
husky
Nasal
Temporal
Incisive
Parietal
Occipital
bopling
Fig. 6.17. Exploded equine skull. The various bones of the equine
skull have been separated, showing side (A) and top (B) view.
Fg. 6.18. Examples of dog skulls. The three general types of dog
 skulls are represented. The collie, Siberian husky, and bulldog
 Dolichephalic. Has an elongated facial component
represent the dolichephalic, mesaticephalic, and brachiocephalic
2
types of skulls, respectively. Note the relatively long facial
(e.g, collie).
 component on the collie and the short facial component on the
3.
Brachiocephalic. Has a shorter facial component
Bopling
(e.g., bulldog).
site for muscles affecting body movements. The bony
The vertebral column
column consists of irregular bones connected by joints
 that are characterized by different degrees of mobility
The vertebral or spinal column, also colloquially
in different regions of the column.
(though incorrectly) called the spine (a spine is a
 The vertebrae (singular = vertebra) are the irregu-
pointed projection from any bone), protects the spinal
larly shaped bones making up the vertebral column.
cord, supports the head, and serves as an attachment
Five general regions are described: cervical (neck),
Bones and skeletal system 
155
thoracic (back), lumbar (loin), sacral, and caudal
midline to complete the lamina, form the roof of the
(tail) vertebrae. Each is named by the first letter of the
vertebral foramen. In the articulated vertebral column,
group followed by the number within the group, for
consecutive vertebral foramen communicate to form
example, C1, T3, L5, S3, and Ca20. The number of
the vertebral canal. In the intact state, the spinal cord
vertebrae typically present in various species is shown
 passes through the vertebral canal.
in Table 6.3.
Within each region, the common vertebral features
Typical vertebrae are shown in Figure 6.19. Features
are modified to optimize the ability of each vertebral
common to all vertebrae include the body, vertebral
 region to accomplish its function. Regional vertebrae
arch, vertebral foramen, and processes. The body is
are characterized by feafures that are more similar to
the thick, spool-shaped ventral portion of the vertebra.
those of others in that same region than to those of the
The vertebral body is convex at the cranial end and
 following region. However, the transition from one
concave at the caudal end, allowing articulation with
region to the next is fairly gradual, with the last ver-
the adjacent vertebrae. The vertebral arch is the dorsal
tebra of a given region bearing strong resemblance to
 portion of the vertebra consisting of two upright ped-
 the first vertebra of the following region.
icles that form the wall of the vertebral foramen.
 Potentially, seven processes arise from each verte-
 Paired (right and left) half- (or hemi-) laminae project
 bra. The dorsal spinous process projects vertically
from the pedicles toward the back and, meeting in the
toward the back, and the paired transverse processes
Table 6.3. Number of vertebrae.
Species
Cervica!
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacra!
Cauda!
Carnivore
T13
L7
ES
Ca20-24
Pig
C7
T11-15
L6-7
S4
Ca20-23
Horse
C7
T18
L6
S5
Ca15-21
Ox
C7
T13
L6 
S5
Ca18-20
Sheep
C7
T13
L6-7
S4
Ca16-18
Chicken
C7
T7
L14 (lumbar sacral)
Spinous process
-LaminaVertebral
-Pedicle∫ arch
Vertebral foramen-
Cranial articular
process
Facet for
Transverse
tubercle of
process
the rib
Facet for 
Body
rib head 
Ventral tubercle
Cervical vertebra
Thoracic vertebra
 Cranial articular
Spinous process
process
Wing
Vertebralforamen
Transverse
Body
process
Lumbar vertebra
Sacral vertebra
Fig. 6.19. Examples of various vertebrae. Examples of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral vertebrae are shown. Note that in cervical
vertebrae, the spinous process is greatly reduced. Thoracic vertebrae have an exaggerated spinous process, and lumbar vertebrae have an
exaggerated transverse process. Sacral vertebrae are generally fused into a single unit, with the processes also tending to fuse into continuous
lines rather than individual elevations.
156  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
extend laterally from each side of the vertebral body.
the floor of the thorax. Species-specific numbers of
Two pairs (right and left) of cranial and caudal articu-
sternebrae are as follows: six in pigs, horses, and
  ee ds-r e  nad sssd 
humans; seven in ruminants, and eight in carnivores.
lamina to allow adjacent vertebrae to articulate with
The manubrium is the enlarged first sternebra, while
each other at a second site (the first is at the cranial
the xiphoid process is the last sternebra capped by
and caudal articular surfaces of each vertebral body).
the xiphoid cartilage. The thoracic inlet is the entrance
into the bony thoracic cavity as delineated by the
stability than could otherwise be achieved.
 last cervical vertebra, the first pair of ribs, and the
The first and second cervical vertebrae are very
sternum.
a   u ann are pre pzads 
The ribs consist of long, curved bones that form the
other and from any other vertebra. Only these two
 lateral wall of the thorax. The ribs can be grouped as
vertebrae are given specific individual names (Fig.
follows:
6.20). The atlas (Cl) supports the head, hence its name
1.
 Sternal (sometimes called "true") ribs. Articulate
(similar to the mythological Atlas, who carried the
directly to the sternum via their costal cartilage.
Earth upon his shoulders). Cranially, the atlas articu-
Costal cartilage consists of hyaline cartilage.
 lates with the occipital condyles of the skull (see Fig
2
Asternal (sometimes called "false") ribs. Costal
6.17), forming the atlanto-occipital joint. Motion at this
 joint is a back-and-forth rocking motion, which allows
cartilages merge to form the costal arch, which
indirectly joins them to the sternum in all domes-
the neck to flex and extend as in nodding "yes." The
tic species.
atlas is unique in that its spinous process is reduced
3.
 Floating ribs. End in short costal cartilages that
to a bump (the dorsal tubercle), and the body is modi-
join neither the sternum nor the costal arch, but
fied into the ventral arch. The axis (C2) possesses
d a as s n u ,aa, p
large ridge-like spinous process. The dens is a heavy,
of floating ribs is present in dogs and cats, two
peg-like, cranially directed process that forms a pivot-
pairs in humans and cattle, but none are present
ing articulation with the atlas, and allows a twisting
in horses.
motion of the head on the neck, as when shaking the
  aa i s  ,, pi
As shown in Figure 6.22, the proximal part of each
a part of the atlas.
rib consists of a head and a tubercle. The head articu-
Thoracic vertebrae are generally characterized by
lates with the caudal and cranial costal fovea of adja-
robust spinous proceses. The anticlinal vertebra is the
cent thoracic vertebrae and the intervertebral disc
one with the most vertically oriented dorsal process.
found in between. The tubercle of the rib articulates
Cranial to this vertebra, the dorsal processes are
with the transverse process of the same numbered
inclined cranially while those caudal to this vertebra
vertebra. Between each rib is the intercostal space.
are inclined caudally. The anticlinal vertebra is an
important landmark when reading radiographs. The
bodies of these vertebrae possess an articular facet at
Appendicular skeleton
the cranial and caudal end for articulation with the
ribs.
Thoracic limbs
 Lumbar vertebrae are characterized by their massive
bodies, shorter spinous processes, and long, flat trans-
In humans the clavicle braces the shoulder against the
verse processes. These vertebrae also lack costal facets
 sternum, which facilitates climbing and other similar
since ribs do not articulate with them.
 behaviors. In domestic mammals the thoracic limb
The sacral vertebrae fuse in adult individuals to
bears weight and has a much more restricted range of
form the sacrum. Each sacral vertebra has dorsal and
motion, and the clavicle is vestigial. The proximal end
ventral foramina allowing the passage of spinal nerves.
of the thoracic limb begins at the scapula. This "shoul-
The wings of the sacrum (Fig. 6.19) articulate with the
der blade" is a flat, triangular bone in the shoulder
ilium of the pelvis, forming the sacroiliac joint. This is
region (Fig. 6.23). Together the two scapulae constitute
the single site of connection between the axial skeleton
the thoracic girdle.
and pelvic limb.
The lateral surface of the scapula presents the spine
of the scapula that ends in the acromion, the expanded
distal end of the spine of the scapula. The acromion is
Thorax
 absent in the horse. The area cranial to the spine is the
The thorax is the bony cavity formed by the sternum,
 supraspinous fossa; the area caudal to it is the infra-
ribs, costal cartilages, and bodies of the thoracic ver-
spinous fossa. Most of the medial surface of the
tebrae (Fig. 6.21). The sternum, or breastbone, is the
 scapula is called the subscapular fossa. On the dorsal
composite of the unpaired bones (sternebrae) forming
border of the scapula is the scapular cartilage. On the
Bones and skeletal system
157
Atlas
Axis
Wing
 Spinous
process
(dorsal
Spinous
tubercle)
process
Dorsal
arch
Cranial articular
Vertebral foramen
process
Dens
Dorsal view
Dorsal view
Cranial articular
Dens
process
Caudal articular
Ventral tubercle
process
Ventral view
Ventral view
Vertebral
foramen
Cranialview
Cranial view
Atlas
Axis
Dorsal view
Fig. 6.20. Atlas and axis. The atlas and axis are the first and second cervical vertebrae, respectively. (A) The dorsal, ventral, and cranial
views of the atlas and axis of a horse. (B) The articulation between the atlas and axis.
opposite end of the bone, the cavity in which the
 ssd  e S (a , re r) ssd
humerus articulates, is the glenoid cavity The supra-
the medial side of the supraglenoid tubercle where the
glenoid tubercle, located near the cranial aspect of the
coracobrachialis muscle arises. Found only in cats,
glenoid cavity,  is  the site  of  proximal  attachment 
the suprahamate process is a caudal projection from
(origin) of the biceps brachii muscle. The coracoid
the acromion.
158  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae
Intercostal space
Scapula
Asternal ribs
Manubrium sterni
Costal cartilage
Xiphoid cartilage
Humerus
12101
Sternal ribs
Thoracic vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbarvertebrae
Spinal process
Anticlinical
vertebrae
Scapula
Floating rib
 Manubrium sterni
Asternal rib
Costal cartilage
Humerus
B
Sternum
Sternal ribs
permission from the publisher.)
The humerus, sometimes called the brachial bone,
tioned deltoid tuberosity, to which the deltoid muscles
is the largest bone in the thoracic limb (Fig. 6.24).
attach, is the largest tuberosity on the bone. The distal
 Proximately, the humerus articulates with the scap-
end of the bone is called the humeral condyle and
ula at the glenoid cavity, thereby forming the shoul-
includes the humeral capitulum and humeral trochlea
der joint. Distally, the humerus articulates with the
that are the two articulating surfaces, two fossae, and
both the radius and ulna contibuting to the elbow
the medial and lateral epicondyles. The olecranon
joint.
fossa is a groove on the caudal surface of the distal
The head of the humerus is a rounded process artic-
 end of the humerus in which the olecranon process of
ulating with the glenoid cavity. The greater (lateral,
 the ulna rests. The radial fossa, opposite the olecranon
major tubercle is the large process craniolateral to the
fossa, receives the proximal end of the radius while
head, and can be palpated as the point of the shoulder.
the elbow is flexed. In the dog, and sometimes the pig.
The lesser (medial, minor) tubercle is located on the
the supratrochlear foramen is a hole that connects the
medial side of the head. The bicipital, or intertubercu-
 olecranon and radial fossa. Nothing passes through
lar, groove is a sulcus between the greater and lesser
 the supratrochlear foramen. In cats only, the supracon-
tubercles through which the tendon of the biceps
dylar foramen lies on the lateral surface just proximal
brachi muscle passes. The body of the humerus con-
to the condyle; the median nerve and the brachial
nects the two epiphyses of the bone. The laterally posi-
vessels pass through this hole.
Neck
Tubercle
Head (capitulum)
Shaft
Neck
Tubercle
Head
Articular surface
Articularsurfaceoftubercle
Neck
Head
Fig. 6.22. T'ypical rib. T'ypical rib from the mid-thoracic region. (The inserted rib drawing is from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004.)
 Porcine 
Bovine
Cranial border
Supraspinous fossa
Cranial border,
Acromion
 Supraglenoid tubercle
Glenoid cavity
Spina
Infraspinous fossa
Caudal border
Dorsal border
Subscapular fossa
Glenoid cavity
Supraglenoidtubercle
Supraspinous fossa
Supraglenoidtubercle
Coracoid process 
Glenoid cavity
Right
Left
Fig. 6.23. Scapula of porcine and bovine. The lateral (A), medial (B), and caudal (C) views of the porcine and bovine scapula.
159
 1 60 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Equine
Bovine
Lesser tubercle
Intertubercular groove
Lesser tubercle
Greater
/tubercle
Greater
tubercle
Head
Head
Intermediate
tubercle
Intertubercular
Deltoid
groove
tuberosity
Deltoid
tuberosity
Body
Olecranon
fossa
12101
Lateral
Capitulum,
epicondyle
Lateral
Trochlea
epicondyle
Humeral condyle
Medial
Olecranon
Humeral 
epicondyle
fossa
condyle
Caudal view
Cranial view
Caudal view
Cranial view
Right
Right
Porcine
Canine
Greater tubercle,
 Intertubercular groove
Lesser tubercle
Head
Greater
tubercle
Head
Deltoid
tuberosity
Deltoid
tuberosity
Shaft
Lateralepichondyle
Olecranon fossa
 Medial
Condyle
epichondyle
Lateral epichon dyle
Medial epichondyle
Humeral condyle
Caudal view
Cranial view
Caudal view
 Cranial view
Left
Right
Fig. 6.24. Humerus of various species. The parts of the equine, bovine, porcine, and canine humerus.
The radius is the weight-bearing bone of the forearm
The ulna functions mainly as a site for muscle
(Fig. 6.25). Proximately, the radius articulates with the
 attachments and formation of the elbow. Proximately,
humerus and ulna at the elbow (the cubital joint);
it articulates with the humerus and radius, and dis-
distally, the radial articulation is with the carpal bones
tally with the radius and carpal bones. The proximal
and ulna forming the antebrachiocarpal joint. The
 end of the ulna is called the olecranon process, the
head of the radius articulates with the capitulum of
 point of the elbow where the extensor muscles of
the humerus, as well as the ulna. The (medial) styloid
the elbow attach. The trochlear notch is the crescent-
 process lies on the distal end of the radius.
shaped articulation site with the humerus. The distal
Bones and skeletal system
161
Equine
Bovine
Olecranon
Olecranon
Anconeal
Anconeal
process
process
Trochlear
Trochlear
UIna
notch
notch
UIna
、Radial
Radial
Interosseous
tuberosity
tuberosity
space
UIna
Uina
 Shaft of
Radius
radius
Styloid process
Styloid process
Styloid process
 of radius
of ulna
of ulna
Styloid process
 of radius
Lateral view
Caudal view
 Medial view
Caudal view
Right
Right
Porcine
Canine
Olecranon
Anconeal
process
Olecranon
UIna
Trochlear
Anconeal
notch
process
Radial
Head of
UIna
tuberosity
radius
Interosseous
space
Head of radius
Shaftof 
ulna
Shaft of
radius
Shaft of
radius
Medial view
Caudal view
Medial view
Caudal view
Left
Right
Fig. 6.25. Radius and ulna. The radius and ulna of various species.
end of the ulna also ends in the styloid process,
tion (palm-down position). In contrast, these bones are
referred to as the lateral styloid process to distinguish
not fused in carrivores; therefore, these animals can at
 it from the radial styloid process.
 least partially supinate (turn upward) their paws.
The radius and ulna fuse in the horse and rumi-
 Premature closing of the growth plates in the radius
 nants. Because they are fused, these animals cannot 
 or ulna can cause deviations in these bones resulting
supinate or pronate (rotate the wrist), and the mannus
in valgus or vargus deviations. Valgus is a lateral devi-
(hand of humans) is committed to permanent prona-
ation distal to a joint; vargus is a medial deviation
1 62  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Accessory carpal bone
bones
Metacarpal Il
 Metacarpal IV
Metacarpal bone
1310
Proximal sesamoid bones
 Proximal phalanx
(long pastern bone)
Middle phalanx
(short pastern bone)
Navicular bone
Distal phalanx
(distal sesamoid bone)
(coffin bone).
Lateral view
Caudal view
Fig. 6.26. Lower leg, including the mannus, of the horse.
 distal to a joint. For example, carpus valgus or carpus
paired proximal sesamoid bones are present on the
vargus are lateral and medial deviations distal to the
palmar (ground-facing) surface at the metacarpopha-
 carpus. Carpal valgus, a lateral deviation of the joints
langeal joint (junction of metacarpal bone and its asso-
distal to the carpus, is also called "knock-kneed";
ciated digit). In dogs, only a single sesamoid bone is
carpal vargus, a medial deviation of the bones distal
 present for the dewclaw.
to the carpus, is called "bowlegged."
Carnivores have five metacarpal bones because all
The distal portion of the thoracic limb is technically
five toes are present. The first metacarpal bone is
the manus (hand), commonly called the forepaw in
much shorter than the others because digit I (the
carnivores (Fig. 6.26). The manus consists of the car-
"dewclaw") is not weight bearing.
pus, metacarpus, and digits. Each digit is a complete
The pig has four metacarpal bones since MC I is
toe, including two or three separate bones called sesa-
 absent. The third and fourth metacarpal bones are
moid bones, which are associated with the joints
weight bearing and therefore the longest, while the
between each metacarpal bones and digit, as well as
second and fifth are somewhat shorter and non-
 some of the joints between phalanges (interphalangeal
 weight-bearing on solid ground.
joints).
 The horse has three metacarpal bones, with MC 1
The carpus, the wrist of humans, consists of two
 and V absent. The second and fourth metacarpal bones
 transverse rows of carpal. The number of carpal bones
are commonly called splint bones because they are
varies among species. The pig and horse have eight
 greatly reduced in size and end proximal to the digit.
carpal bones, although the first carpal bone in the
 The rounded distal ends of each splint bone are called
distal row is often absent in the horse. Dogs and cats
the buttons of the splints. The large, heavy third meta-
have seven carpal bones due to the fusion of two of
carpal is called the cannon bone.
the carpal bones in the proximal row. Ruminants have
The digits of the forelimb correspond with the
six carpal bones since the first carpal bone is absent
fingers of humans. Like the metacarpal bones (which
and the second and third are fused.
support the digits), potentially five digits are present
The metacarpal (MC) bones are located between the
 and again are numbered from medial to lateral. Their
carpus and digits (toes). Potentially five are present,
and they are numbered I-V from medial to lateral.
 bones. However, the number of digits present varies
Species differ in the number and relative size of meta-
by species.
carpal bones due to absence or fusion of these bones
Each digit contains multiple bones called phalan
as related to which are weight-bearing. Generally.
 ges. The first digit (when present) possesses two pha-
Bones and skeletal system
163
langes, while the remaining digits possess three.
Pelvic limbs
The phalanges are named proximal phalanx, middle
phalanx, and distal phalanx.
The pelvic girdle, or bony pelvis, consists of the two
 Carnivores possess weight-bearing digits. As with
hip bones (ossa coxarum), the sacrum, and the first
MC I, the first (non-weight-bearing) digit is reduced
few caudal vertebrae (Fig. 6.27). The pelvic cavity is
in size. Pigs possess digits II-V but bear weight only
 the internal space defined by the bony pelvis. Each hip
on Ill and IV. Superficially, ruminants seem to have
bone (os coxae) consists of the fused ilium, ischium,
four digits since they have four hooves, but actually
pubic, and acetabular bones. The acetabulum is the
only have two digits (ll and IV) since no bony ele-
site where the head of the femur articulates. It is
ments are associated with the lateral- and medial-most
 formed by the fusion of the ilium, ischium, pubic, and
hooves (which are referred to as "claws"). Horses
acetabular bones. The small acetabular bone lies in the
possess only digit Ill corresponding with the MC Ill.
center of the acetabulum, and in the adult is fused
 Craniodorsal iliac spine
Equivalent region of tuber
Sacrum
sacrale of large animals 
lliac crest
 Caudodorsal iliac spine
Wing of ilium
Caudal vertebrae
Tuber coxae
Cranioventral-
Greater
iliac spine
ischiatic
notch
Acuate line
Ischiatic spine
Lesser ischiatic notch
Acetabular fossa
Articular surface
lliopubic eminence
Ischiatic tuberosity
Acetabular fossa
|schiatic arch
Ventral pubic tubercle
Obturator foramen
A
Spinous processes
lliac crest
Sacrum
Craniodorsal
iliac spine
 Equivalent region of tuber
Caudodorsal /
 sacrale of large animals 
 iliac spine
Articular surface
Body of ilium
for the sacrum
lliopubic eminence
Spinous process
Pubis
Ischiatic spine
Obturatorforamen
Body of ischium
Ischium
Transverse process
Ischiatic tuberosity
lschiatic
Caudal
arch
vertebrae
B
Fig. 6.27.
Canine pelvic girdle. (A) Lateral view. (B) Dorsal view. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. With permission from the
publisher.)
1 64  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Bovine
Equine
Greater trochanter
Foveaoffemoral
head
Head
Greater
Neck
trochanter
Trochanteric foss
Lesser trochanter-
Head-
Lessertrochanter
Thirdtrochanter
 Shaft
Lateral epicondyle
1310
Lateral condyle
Medial condyle
Medial condyle
FLateralcondyle
Trochlea (for patella)
Intercondyloid 
Intercondyloid
fossa
fossa
Cranial view
Caudal view
Cranial view
Caudal view
Right
Right
Fig. 6.28. Femur of bovine and equine.
with the other bones. The two hip bones are fused on
The femur, or thigh bone, articulates proximally
the ventral midline at the pelvic symphysis. This
with the os coxae at the acetabulum, forming the hip
fusion includes the two pubic and two ischial bones.
joint, distally with the tibia forming the stifle (true
The ilium is the largest and most cranial of the os
knee) joint (Fig. 6.28). A small depression on the medial 
coxae, consisting of a wing and body. The ilium forms
 surface of the head of the femur, the fovea capitis,
the cranial part of the acetabulum and articulates with
provides attachment for the round ligament of the
the sacrum at the sacroiliac joint. In carnivores, the
femur. This ligament inserts in the acetabular fossa,
wing of the ilium is relatively unspecialized and its
anchoring the head of the femur into the acetabulum.
broad plane is oriented parallel with the longitudinal
The head of the femur continues with the body of the
 axis of the body. In large animals, the iliac wing is 
femor. The greater trochanter is the large prominence
 expanded and twisted so that the broad plane is ori-
found lateral to the head of the femur; the lesser tro-
ented almost transverse to the longitudinal axis of the
chanter is the smaller prominence found distal to the
body. The modifications relate to increasing surface
head on the medial side. In horses, a prominent third
area for attachment of the powerful muscles of the
trochanter also lies on the lateral side, distal to the
   p    q p
greater trochanter. Note that trochanters are unique to
The tuber coxae are the more lateral prominences of
the femur. The medial and lateral condyles are the two
the ileac wings. Because the tuber coxae are particu-
large rounded prominences at the distal end of the
larly prominent in cattle, it is commonly referred to as
femur, and articulate with the tibia. Also on the distal
the "hook." The tuber sacrale is the medial process of
end of the femur is the patellar surface, a groove bor-
the wing that articulates with the sacrum. The ischium
dered by two ridges that articulates with the patella.
is the caudalmost portion of the os coxae and forms
The patella, or kneecap, is the largest sesamoid bone
the lateral portions of the obturator foramen, the large
of the body.
opening in the floor of each ox coxa. The ischiatic
The tibia and fibula, or bones of the "lower leg"
tuberosity is the caudalmost part of the ischium and
(crus), are located between the femur and metatarsal
is quite prominent. The ischiatic tuber is referred to as
bones (Fig. 6.29). The tibia, or shin bone, is located
d, a s pre 'sas pe   ,sq ns, a!
medially, and is the weight-bearing bone of the crus.
 bone" in cattle. The pubis forms the cranioventral part 
 Located at the proximal end of the tibia are the medial
of the os coxae. The pubis consists of a central body
and lateral condyles, separated by the intercondylar
and two branches. The more medial branch contrib-
eminence. The tibia condyles articulate with the cor-
utes to the obturator for humans, while the more
responding condyles of the femur. The fibula is located
lateral branch contributes to the acetabulum.
more laterally and is not weight bearing. Distally, the
Bones and skeletal system
165
Bovine
Equine
Lateral condyle
Intercondylar eminence 
Intercondylar
 Medial condyle
eminence
Fibula head
(fused to tibia)
Tibial
tuberosity
Body of
the tibia
Fibulashaft
Lateral malleolus
Malleolus bone
 Medial malleolus
Medial malleolus
Cranial view
 Caudomedial view
Cranial view
Caudal view
Fig. 6.29. Tibia and fibula of various species. The fibula for the equine was drawn to show where these bones would be if they were present
on these specimens.
fibula articulates with the tibia and the fibular tarsal
Femur
 bone. The distal fibula in cattle is represented by the
Sesamoids
separate malleolar bone.
Patella-
Trochlea
Lateral condyle
The tarsus, or "hock," consists of the three rows of
Lateral condyle
 bones between the crus and metatarsal region (Fig.
Lateral meniscus
Head of fibula
6.30). Similar to the carpus, this region is characterized
Tibial tuberosity
by multiple bones arranged in multiple rows. However,
Cranial border
Inter osseousspace
the hock has a more complex arrangement than the
carpus, with a proximal row, a sort of intermediate
Body of fibula
bone, and then a distal row. Again, marked species
 variation is present in the number of individual bones 
Body of tibia
 present. In all species, the proximal row consists of
two bones. Beyond that, generally, marked variations
 occur among species in fusions among different bones
Lateral malleolus
and the resulting number of separate bones. To sim-
 Calcanean tuber
plify, carnivores and pigs have seven tarsal bones,
horses have six, and ruminants have five separate
Trochlea of talus 
Calcaneus
tarsal bones.
In all species, one of the two largest bones of the
tarsus is the talus or tibial tarsal bone. The talus is
Dorsal sesamoidbones
Metatarsal bones
located dorsomedially and articulates with the tibia
and fibula or its equivalent via its trochlea. The calca-
neus or fibular tarsal bone is the other bone in the
Proximal sesamoid bones
 proximal row, just lateral to the talus. The calcanean
tuberosity is a large process of the calcaneus acting as
Fg. 6.30. Distal pelvic limb of the dog. The lateral aspect of the
a lever for the common calcanean (Achilles) tendon,
pelvic limb of the dog from the stifle to the toes. (Reprinted from 
 Constantinescu, 2002. With permission from the publisher.)
and is commonly called the point of the hock.
1 66   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Metatarsal bones and digits are located distal to the
ferences compared to mammals. The neck consists of
tarsus. In the horse and pig, they follow the same
a large number (12-17) of cervical vertebrae, with
pattern as the thoracic limb. In carnivores, the first
 the joint between the vertebrae being synovial. The
metatarsal bone is greatly reduced, and the digit is
increased length of the neck also allows it to absorb
usually absent. Exceptions exist among certain breeds
shock that can be associated with landing and thus
of dog, in which the dewclaw may be present or even
protect the brain.The atlas articulates with a single
 doubled. Certain breed standards require the pres-
occipital condyle, thus allowing great mobility. The
ence of hind dewclaws. Usually, these rear dewclaws
extensive mobility in the atlanto-occipital joint and
are similar to the dewclaws of cattle, in that they
the neck allows the beak to be used in many motions.
contain only cutaneous (skin-related) and no bony
All but the atlas bear ribs.
elements. In ruminants, the first and fifth metatarsal
In some species adapted to sudden short burst of
bones are absent, and the second is reduced to a tiny
flight (Galliforms, chicken-like birds such as chickens,
element.
turkeys, pheasants, and quail), the last cervical verte-
 The digits of the pelvic limb follow the same pattern
bra and first several thoracic vertebrae fuse to form
as in the thoracic limb: each weight-bearing digit is
 the notarium. This structure, along with the synsa-
composed of three phalanges, with paired sesamoid
 o r  a al n  s 
bones on the plantar aspect of the metacarpophalan-
 geal joint and a single distal sesamoid on the plantar
reducing body weight. Caudad to the notarium, a
 aspect of the distal interphalangeal joint.
 species-specific number of free thoracic vertebrae are
 present. The synsacrum is formed from the fusion of
the last few thoracic, all of the lumbar, all of the sacral,
Avian skeleton
and the first few caudal vertebrae. The synsacrum is
also fused to the ilium. The chicken has six free caudal
 The skeleton of birds has been especially adapted for
vertebrae, allowing flexibility of the tail. The caudal
flight (Fig. 6.3l), resulting in many significant dif-
end of the tail, called the pygostyle, consists of four to
Mandible
Free caudal vertebrae
-Pygostyle
Coracoid bone
Humerus
Clavicle
Pelvis
Caudolateral
Keel
process
Tibia/Fibula
Tarsometatarsus
Spur
Ulna
Notarium
Radius
 Synsacrum
Humerus
Free caudal
Scapula
vertebrae
Publis
Ischium
llium
Fig. 6.31. Chicken skeleton.
 Bones and skeletal system
167
six fused caudal vertebrae and provides the site of
femur and tibia, with a smaller amount present in the
attachment of the flight feathers of the tail.
skull and cervical vertebrae. The humerus, metatar-
The pectoral girdle consists of the scapula, coracoid
sus, and toes lack medullary bone.
bone, and clavicle. Fusion of the right and left clavicles
Eggshell formation occurs largely at night, a time
forms the furcula (wishbone). The latter two bones are
when laying hens are not eating and therefore are not
either missing or rudimentary in most mammals. The
 absorbing dietary calcium. During the time of eggshell
 coracoid braces the shoulder joint against the sternum
deposition, osteoclasts surround the trabeculae of
to prevent collapse of the thoracic cavity (and hence
medullary bone and actively reabsorb this bone in
lungs) during the powerful downstroke of the wing
 order to deliver calcium to the blood necessary for
during flight. The sternum has ligamentous attach-
eggshell formation. Approximately 20 hours are
ments directly to the ribs to further brace the shoulder
 required to form one eggshell. During the last 15 hours
from the sternum. Thus, the shoulder is not pulled
of eggshell formation, the shell gland of the hen
toward the sternum as the pectoralis muscles pull the
secretes calcium at the rate of 100-150mg/h, a rate
wings downward during flight.
that would deplete blood calcium in 8-18 minutes.
The ribs have been modified with the inclusion of
Thus, medullary bone provides an essential source of
the uncinate processes, meaning hooked or barbed.
blood calcium necessary for shell deposition without
Q
These processes extend from the vertical portion of
causing the death of the hen.
od s  p q a  d p q ra
viding more strength. This morphology assists with
both respiration and maintaining rib cage strength
Joints
during flight.
The ulna is larger than the radius and the two are
Types of joints
 r r r  e a p
form a unit with a slight mediolateral convex configu-
Arthrology is the study of joints. Joints are necessary
ration. The increased distance between these two
to allow for the movement of the skeleton. By their
bones adds strength that resists bending of these two
bones during flight. The distal row of carpal bones
structure, joints can be classified several ways accord-
ing to (l) the number of articulating bones, (2) struc-
fuses with the metacarpus, forming the carpometacar-
tural classification, and (3) functional classification:
 pus. The carpometacarpus articulates with the radial
and ulnar carpal bones at the wrist. Finally, there are
1.
 Number of articulating bones. A simple joint has
three digits, including the alular digit with two pha-
only two articulating bones forming the joint,
langes, the major digit with two phalanges, and a
whereas a compound joint has three or more artic-
minor digit with one phalanx.
ulating bones.
The avian pelvic girdle consists of a partly fused
2.
Structural classification. Joints can be classified by
ilium, ischium, and pubis. The ilium is joined to the
the medium holding the joint together (Table 6.4):
synsacral portion of the vertebral column. The pelvic
a.
 Fibrous joints. Fibrous tissue between bones
 girdle has no pubis symphysis (in birds other than the
holds the bones together but allows little or no
ostrich), which is presumably an adaptation for
movement; thus, no joint capsule is present
 passing large, fragile eggs.
(Fig. 6.32). These joints usually ossify later.
Two sites articulate the femur and the pelvis. Similar
According to details of formation, fibrous
to mammals, the head of the femur articulates with
joints are classified as sutures, syndesmoses,
the acetabulum. The tarsal bones are fused with other
or gomphoses.
bones, giving the tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus.
b.
Cartilaginous joints. Fibrocartilage, hyaline
Four digits are present in most species, and an
cartilage, or both hold the joint together
accessory structure, the metatarsal spur, develops
(Fig. 6.33). These joints only allow slight move-
in males.
ment, so like fibrous joints, they lack a joint
Laying hens of all species possess a special type of
capsule. Two types of cartilaginous joints are
bone, called medullary bone. This bone serves as a
synchondroses and symphyses. The best
reservoir to store calcium necessary for eggshell pro-
examples of synchondroses are the epiphyseal
duction. Produced only when the birds are producing
plates in long bones, which eventually close,
eggs, medullary bone grows from the inner endosteal
and the joint between the first rib and the
surface of the shaft of certain bones, forming interlac-
 manubrium. An example of a symphysis is the
ing spicules that fill the marrow space. Medullary
pubic symphysis.
bone is found in bones possessing a good blood
Synovial joints. The articular surfaces of
supply, and is formed under the influence of estrogen.
two hyaline cartilage-covered bones are joined
Large amounts of medullary bone are found in the
by a synovial joint capsule, and are freely
1 68 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 6.4. Classification of joints.
Structuraf Cfass
Characteristics
Type
Mobility
Exampte
 End of bones united
1. Sutures
Immobile (synarthrosis)
Bones of the cranium
by fibrous tissue
2. Syndesmosis
 Slightly mobile
Distal tibiofibular joint
(amphiarthrosis) and
immobile
3. Gomphosis
Immobile
Articulation of a tooth with
its socket 
Cartilaginous
End of bones united
1. Synchondrosis (hyaline 
Immobile
Epiphyseal plates
by cartilage
cartilage)
2. Symphysis (fibrocartilage)
Slightly movable
Pubic symphysis
Synovial
Ends of bones covered
1. Ball-and-socket
 Freely movable
Coxofemoral (hip) joint and
with articular
glenohumeral (shoulder)
1310
cartilage, and a joint 
joint
cavity enclosed with a
2. Pivot
Rounded end of one bone
Between atlas and dens of
joint capsule
projected into sleeve or ring 
axis; proximal radioulnar
on another bone; freely
joint in animals where 
movable but allows only
pronation and supination
uniaxial rotation
possible
3. Ellipsoidal
Both articulating suraces
Radiocarpal joints
are oval; freely movable
allowing flexion, extension,
abduction, adduction, and 
circumduction
4. Saddle
Each articulating surface has
Caprometacarpal joint of
both concave and convex
thumb in man
areas, resembling a saddle;
freely movable
5. Plane (or gliding)
Articulating surfaces ~flat; 
Intercarpal and intertarsal
freely movable, but only
joints; vertebral processes
slipping or gliding motions
6. Hinge
Cylindrical projection of
Knee, elbow, and
 one bone into trough-like
interphalangeal joints
depression of another
movable. The structure and types of synovial
contain bursae sacs. Examples include shoul-
joints are discussed later.
der, knee, wrist, and elbow.
3.
 The functional classification of joints indicates the
degree of mobility in the joint:
Synarthrotic. Movements in these joints are
Synovial joints
absent or extremely limited. Examples of these
joints include the sutures in the cranium.
Anatomy of synovial joints
 Amphiarthrotic. There is slight movement in
these joints. Examples include the interverte-
     r  m
bral joints of sternoclavicular joints.
 many parts. It is movable, and consists of a joint cavity.
C.
 Diarthrotic. Also called synovial joints, these
articular cartilage, joint capsule with an inner synovial
joints have considerable
movement.
.They
 membrane, and an outer fibrous layer (Fig. 6.34). The
allow for one-, two-, or three-dimensional
fibrous layer attaches to the periosteum on or near the
movement, and contain articular cartilage and
articular cartilage. The synovial membrane is highly
synovial membranes. Many such joints also
vascular, well innervated, and produces synovial
Bones and skeletal system
169
fluid. Synovial fluid is viscous and acts to lubricate the
joints. The ligaments consist of bands of white fibrous
joint, provide nutrients, and remove waste from the
 connective tissue holding the joints together.
hyaline articular cartilage.
 The meniscus or articular menisci is fibrocartilage
 The articular cartilage is a translucent, bluish-tinged
   s  o  
cartilage, usually hyaline, that covers the articulating
 Menisci are found only in the stifle and temporo-
surfaces of the bone. The joint cavity is unique to
mandibular joints. They serve to make the joint more
synovial joints and contains a trace amount of syno-
 stable by improving the fit between two articulating
vial fluid. Outside the fibrous layer of the joint capsule
bones.
may be ligaments that hold together the bones of the
A bursa is a saclike structure between different
 tissues that acts as a ball bearing, reducing the friction
between the bones. The bursa is a flattened sac lined
with a synovial membrane and contains a small
 amount of synovial fluid. While technically not part
of the synovial joint, bursae are associated with such
￥
Medial
Collateral
Lateral
ligament
collateral
ligament
A
B
A. Sutures
Epiphyseal
First rib
plate
B. Syndesmosis
C. Gomphosis
Joint between
Sternum
Fig. 6.32. Fibrous joints. Examples of fibrous joints include the
first rib and
sternum
following: (A) Sutures as found between the bones in the skull.
(B) Syndesmosis joints in which ligaments connect the bones.
Fig. 6.33. Cartilaginous joints. (A) The epiphyseal plate located in
(C) Gomphosis joints exemplified by the teeth located in alveolar
a growing long bone. (B) The sternocostal joint located between the
sockets. Used with permission from Constantinescu, G.M., 2002.
first rib and sternum. Used with permission from Constantinescu,
 Clinical Anatomy for Small Animal Practitioners. lowa State Press,
G.M., 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small Animal Practitioners. lowa 
Ames, lowa.
State Press, Ames, lowa.
Tendon
Joint capsule
Bone
Synovial membrane
Articulating
Synovial fluid
cartilage
Bursa
Muscle
Fig. 6.34. General structure of a synovial joint. Modified from http://www.studyblue.com/notes/note/n/ibhs-3-lecture-3/deck/4036345
1 70 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
joints where ligaments, muscles, skin, tendons, or
Saddle. Also known as sellar or biaxial, allows all
bones rub together. A burion is an enlarged bursa at
movements except rotation. An example includes
the base of the big toe in humans.
the carpometacarpal joint of thumb.
 A tendon synovial sheath wraps completely around
 Plane. Also called an arthrodia, gliding, or biaxial
力
a tendon. It acts similar to a bursa, reducing friction
joint, allows gliding in flexion, extension, abduc-
between the tendons and bones.
tion, and adduction. Such joints are present in
intercarpal and intertarsal joints.
Classification of synovial joints
The types of synovial joints can be classified as follows:
Movements of synovial joints
 Ball-and-socket. Also called a spheroid or triaxial,
Synovial joints can make various types of movements
this joint allows all movements, thus allowing the
and display different ranges of motion. The range
greatest range of motion. Examples include the
of motion of synovial joints varies from nonaxial
iliofemoral (hip) joint and glenohumeral (shoul-
 movement, which includes slipping motions only; to
210
der) joint.
uniaxial movement, involving motion in one plane;
2
Hinge. Also called a ginglymus or monaxial joint,
to biaxial movement (movement in two planes); and
movement is limited to flexion and extension.
 to multiaxial movement, involving movement in three
Examples include the knee, elbow, and interpha-
planes.
langeal joints.
 There are three general types of movements possi-
3
Pivot. Also called a trochoid or monaxial joint, it
ble in synovial joints: rotation, gliding, and angular.
allows movement limited to rotation. Examples
These are listed in Table 6.5.
 include the atlantoaxial or proximal radioulnar
 In addition, there are special movements unique to
joint.
 synovial joints. The manus (hand) can undergo supi-
4.
Ellipsoidal or condyloid. Also called a condyloid
nation, palm-up position, and pronation, palm-down
or biaxial joint, it is essentially a reduced ball-and-
or back position. Supination involves the lateral rota-
socket joint. Ellipsoidal joints allow all angular
tion of the radius; pronation involves the medial rota-
motions, including flexion, extension, abduction,
tion of the radius relative to the ulna. During pronation,
and adduction, but not rotation. Examples include
the distal end of the radius crosses over the ulna so
the radiocarpal joints.
that the bones form an "X."
Table 6.5. Movements within synovial joints.
Movement
Description
Exampfe
Rotation
Rotation
Turning a bone around its own long axis
Femur can rotate away from median plane (lateral
rotation) or toward median plane (medial rotation)
NonAngular Movements
Gliding
One flat or nearly flat bone surface slips over
Intercarpal and intertarsal joint movements
another similar surface
Angular Movements
Flexion
Decreasing the angle of the joint
The elbow joint (humerus-radius/ulna)
Extension
Increasing the angle of the joint 
The elbow joint (humerus-radius/ulna)
Dorsal and ventral flexion
Bending the spinal column dorsally or ventrally
The spine
Abduction
Moving a part away from the median plane
The shoulder joint (humerus-glenoid fossa)
Adduction
Moving a part toward the median plane
The shoulder joint (humerus-glenoid fossa)
Circumduction
Movement that traces a cone shape, thus combining
Movement of a limb in a circular motion with the
flexion, abduction, extension and adduction
shoulder or hip remaining essentially stationary
Rotation
Movement around the long axis of a part
Radio-ulnar joint
 Universal
All of the above movement
The shoulder joint
Bones and skeletal system
171
Inversion and eversion are terms describing the
Box 6.1
 Rupture of an intervertebral disc
movement of the foot. During inversion, the sole of
the foot turns medially; during eversion, the sole faces
The rupture or degeneration of a disc between the
laterally.
vertebrae allows the pulpy nucleus to bulge or leak
 Protraction and retraction involve nonangular ante-
out of the disc. This usually occurs dorsally or dor-
rior or posterior movement along a transverse plane.
solaterally. This can result in pressure being placed
 When the mandible is pushed outward from the jaw,
on the spinal cord or spinal nerves. It most com-
this is protraction; pulling the mandible back is called
monly occurs at the thoracolumbar junction or neck
retraction.
region.
 Elevation and depression are terms used to describe
shoulders or jaw movement. When the shoulders are
moved dorsally, it is called elevation; lowering the
shoulders is called depression. The mandible is ele-
vated or depressed during chewing.
Thoracic limb
Shoulder joint
Specific joints
Also called the glenohumeral or scapulohumeral
Intervertebral articulations
 joint, the shoulder joint is a ball-and-socket type of
synovial joint. The head of the humerus articulates
The intervertebral articulations consist of cartilagi-
with the glenoid cavity of the scapula. It contains a
nous and synovial joints. The cartilaginous joints are
loose joint capsule with no true collateral ligaments.
formed by the intervertebral discs joining the bodies
Instead, the muscles crossing the joint provide the
of the vertebrae. The synovial joints are formed by
support to minimize shoulder luxation (i.e., separa-
caudal and cranial articular processes of the adjacent
tion). Functionally, this is a freely movable joint
vertebrae.
(Fig. 6.35).
The first two joints within the vertebral column are
 The intertubercular, or bicipital, sulcus is a groove
atypical. The first, the atlanto-occipital joint, is a modi-
between the greater and lesser tubercles. This site
fied hinge type of the synovialjoint between the occip-
holds the biceps brachii tendon. There is a synovial
ital condyles and the cranial articular surfaces of the
sheath around this tendon as it passes through the
atlas (i.e., first vertebral vertebra). This joint has a spa-
intertubercular groove in carnivores, pigs, and sheep.
,sa, e moe oi pazieioads st pure arnsdes juo sno
In horses, oxen, and goats, there is an intertubercular
 motion. The atlanto-axial joint is a pivot type of syno-
bursa found between the intertubercular groove and
vial joint. It is between the dens of the axis and the
the bicipital tendon. The transverse humeral ligament
cranial articulation surfaces on the atlas.
attaches between the greater and lesser tubercles
holding the biceps tendon in the intertubercular
groove.
Costovertebral joints
There are two types of articulations between the ribs
Ebow joint
and the vertebral column. The head of each rib forms
a ball-and-socket type of synovial joint, with the causal
The humeroradioulnar articulation is a hinged type of
and ostal facets of adjacent vertebrae. The tubercle of
synovial joint allowing flexion and extension. It is a
       s  
compound joint since it consists of three bones. There
transverse process of the corresponding rib (Box 6.1).
is a joint capsule encasing all three bones.
The humeral condyle consisting of the capitulum
and trochlea articulates with the head of the radius,
Sternocostal joints
and the anconeal process of the ulna fits into the olec-
There is a pivot type of synovial joint between the first
ranon fossa of the humerus. The medial and lateral
eight costal cartilages and the sternum. Each joint has
collateral ligaments located on the sides of the joint
a joint capsule and ligaments.
 restrict the movement to flexion and extension.
 In horses and ruminants the proximal and distal
joint between the radius and ulna is fused. In carni-
Costochondral joints
vores, these joints are not fused. This allows some
There is a fibrous joint between the ribs and costal
rotation of the radius and hence, some degree of
cartilage. These have no synovial cavities or joint
supination of the forepaw, as well as return to
capsule.
pronation.
1 72   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Elbow joint
Joint capsule
Lateral glenohumeral lig.
Annular lig.
Lateral
Joint capsule
 collateral lig.
Antebrachial
Interosseous lig.
Antebrachial
Interosseous
membrane
 Dorsal radiocarpal lig.
 Radioulnar lig.
Shoulder joint 
Lateral collateral lig.
1310
 Carpal joint
Accessoriocarpoulnar lig.
Accessoriometacarpal lig.
Metacarpophalangeal joint
Lateral collaterallig.
Interphalangeal joints 
Dorsallig.
Collateral sesamoidean ligg.
Lateral collateral lig.
Fig. 6.35. Joints of the Thoracic Limb. The lateral aspect of the thoracic limb of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by
permission of the publisher.)
Carpal joint
combination of a cartilaginous and synovial joint.
 Fibrocartilage unites the ilium with the wing of the
The carpal joint consists of three main joints including
the antebrachiocarpal, middle carpal, and carpometa-
sacrum.
 The sacrotuberous ligament connects the sacrum
 carpal joint. The carpal joint is a hinged type of syno-
vial joint. The antebrachiocarpal joint consists of an
and first caudal vertebrae with the ischiatic tuberosity.
This ligament stabilizes the caudal end of the sacrum
articulation between the distal radius and ulna and
between the os coxae. It is absent in cats.
the proximal row of carpal bones. The distal row of
carpal bones articulates with the metacarpal bones,
 constituting the carpometacarpal joint. The middle
Hip joint
carpal joint is between the two rows of carpal bones.
 There are plane joints between individual carpal
Also called the coxal or coxofemoral articulation, this
bones.
is a ball-and-socket synovial joint between the head
of the femur and the acetabulum of the hip bone. It
is a freely movable (diarthrodial) joint allowing uni-
Pelvis
versal movement (i.e., flexion, extension, abduction,
adduction, lateral rotation, and circumduction). It has
 no collateral ligaments; instead, its stability depends
Pelvic symphysis
on the ligament of the head of the femur, a strong
This is a slightly movable fibrocartilaginous joint
joint capsule, and a large muscle mass surrounding
between the hip bones (os coxae). The front portion of
it. The ligament of the head of the femur connects
this joint is formed by the pubic symphysis between
 from the acetabular cavity to the notch on the fovea
the two pubic bones; the caudal portion is formed
capitis, on the head of the femur. Found only in
by the ischial symphysis between the two ischial
horses, the accessory ligament of the head of the
bones.
femur extends from the prepubic tendon through the
acetabular notch under the transverse acetabular liga-
ment to the fovea capitis of the head of the femur.
Sacroiliac joint
 This ligament makes it harder for the horse to kick to
The sacroiliac joint is a relatively immobile joint
the side, that is, cow kick, although it doesn't totally
between the wings of the sacrum and the ilium. It is a
prevent it (Box 6.2).
Bones and skeletal system 
173
 Carnivores, pigs, and small ruminants have one patel-
B0x 6.21
 Hip dysplasia
 lar ligament; horses and oxen have three, including
Hip dysplasia involves a malformed hip joint
the lateral, middle, and medial.
resulting in a progressive degenerative disease.
 The femorotibial joint is the articulation between the
This disease has a high incidence in some breeds of
femur condyles and the tibia, and has interposed
dogs. Diagnosed radiographically, the condition
menisci. These menisci include the medial and lateral
causes pain. Treatments include cutting the pectine-
menisci that sit between the tibial and femoral
ous muscle, removing the neck and head of the
condyles.
femur (head and neck osteotomy), or remodeling
The medial collateral ligament fuses with the joint
 the acetabulum by cutting the hip bones and repo-
 capsule and medial meniscus and stabilizes the medial
sitioning them.
side of the stifle. The lateral collateral ligaments con-
nect the lateral epicondyle and head of the fibula. It is
separated from the lateral meniscus by the tendon of
the popliteus muscle.
Pelvic limb
The cranial cruciate ligament originates on the cau-
Knee (stifle joint)
dolateral femur and inserts cranially on the tibia. It
 prevents cranial movement of the tibia relative to the
The knee, also known as the stifle joint, is a compound
femur The caudal cruciate ligament arises from the
joint involving the femur, patella, and tibia. It is a
craniomedial distal femur and inserts on the tibia. It
hinge type of synovial joint  allowing  flexion and
 prevents caudal movement of the tibia relative to the
extension with little rotation (Fig. 6.36).
femur.
The joint between the patella and femur is called the
femoropatellar joint and contains a large joint capsule.
Tarsus
The patellar ligament runs between the patella and the
tibial tuberosity. Remember that the patella is a sesa-
 The tarsus, or hock, is a compound hinge type of syno-
moid bone, meaning that it is found within a tendon.
vial joint. It allows only flexion and extension. The
Hip joint
Stifle joint
Illiofemoral lig.
Hip joint capsule
Parapatellar
 Lateral femoropatellar
fibrocartilages
ligament
 Anticularis coxae M.
 Caudal cruciate ligament 
patellar ligament
Lateral collateral lig. of stifle
Cranial cruciate
 Cranial lig. of fibular head 
ligament
Tarsal joint
Long plantar lig.
Lateral collateral lig.
Metatarsophalangeal joint
 Interphalangeal
joint
Dorsal lig.
 Collateral sesamoidean lig.
 Lateral collateral lig.
Fig. 6.36. Joints of the pelvic limb. The lateral aspect of the pelvic limb of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. With permission
from the publisher.)
1 74  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
tibiotarsal portion of the tarsus is the most movable
tarsal joint is the articulation between the proximal
joint, and is an articulation between the proximal row
row of tarsal bones and the central and fourth tarsal
of tarsal bones (i.e., the talus and calcaneus) and the
bones. The distal intertarsal joint includes the articula-
fibula and tibia. The cochlea of the tibia receives
tion between the central tarsal and tarsal bones I, Il,
the trochlear ridges of the talus. The proximal inter-
and Ill.
Chapter summary
bone matrix. Osteocytes, embedded in lacunae,
are cornected to each other by sending processes
Classification of bones
that project into canaliculi, which are narrow
canals connecting the lacunae.
Osteology is the study of bones.
Bones are classified as long, short, flat, or irregu-
 lar or sesamoid on the basis of their shape and
Chemical composition of bone
T
 their proportion of compact or spongy bone.
Bone is composed of organic and inorganic compo-
nents. The matrix includes osteoid, organic sub-
stances that are secreted by osteoblasts and give the
Bone structure
bone tensile strength. The major inorganic compo-
nent is calcium phosphate, which, when combined
Gross anatomy
with calcium hydroxide, forms hydroxyapatite to
Bones consist of compact (dense) and cancellous
make the bone hard.
(spongy) bone.
2.
Spongy bone consists of a network of bone called
trabeculae or spicules interspersed with spaces
Bone development
filled with red or yellow marrow. Compact bone
Osteogenesis, or bone formation, occurs in two
is found on the surface while spongy bone is
manners. The flat bones of the skull, face, man-
found on the interior.
dible, and clavicle form through intramembra-
3.
 A long bone consists of a diaphysis (shaft) and
nous ossification in which the bones develop
epiphyses (ends), with a metaphysis joining the
from a fibrous membrane. The cells of the con-
two. The medullary cavity of the diaphysis
nective tissue differentiate into osteoblasts.
contains yellow marrow; the epiphyses contain
2
Other bones develop via endochondral ossifica-
spongy bone. The bone elongates in the region
 of the epiphyseal plate, which, after growth
tion in which cells first become chondroblasts
ceases, is replaced by the epiphyseal line.
and make a hyaline cartilage matrix. Eventually.
 near the center of the bone, a primary ossification
The fibrous covering surrounding the bone is the
center forms in which cells from the periosteum
periosteum while the internal cavity is lined with
migrate inward and become osteoprogenitor
the endosteum. Hyaline cartilage covers joint
cells, which then become osteoblasts. Secondary
surfaces.
ossification centers develop in each epiphysis.
5.
Flat bones consist of two thin plates of com-
 During endochondral ossification, the cartilage
pact bone enclosing a diploe, or spongy layer.
at each end of the diaphysis forms five regions:
Short and irregular bones resemble flat bones
(a) zone of reserve cartilage (most distal from the
structurally
diaphysis), (b) zone of proliferation, (c) zone of
In adults, hematopoietic tissue is found within
hypertrophy, (d) zone of calcified cartilage, and
the diploe of flat bones and occasionally within
 the epiphyses of long bones. In young animals,
(e) zone of resorption.
 red marrow is also found in the medullary cavity.
4.
Cartilages grow from within (interstitial growth)
and by addition of new cartilage tissue at the
periphery (appositional growth).
Microscopic anatomy of bone
1，
 The structural unit of compact bone is the osteon,
 Bone growth, remodeling, and repair
or Haversian system. Each osteon consists of a
central canal running parallel to the long axis,
Long bones increase in length by interstitial
which is surrounded by concentric lamellae of
 growth of the epiphyseal plate carilage and its
 Bones and skeletal system
175
replacement by bone. Eventually, the epiphyseal
bones to become weak and porous. Postmeno-
cartilage is replaced by bone and epiphyseal
pausal women are particularly susceptible.
closure occurs, which marks the end of long bone
5.
Paget's disease is characterized by excessive and
lengthening.
abnormal bone remodeling.
2.
Appositional growth increases bone diameter/
thickness.
 New bone is continually deposited and resorbed
Bones and skeleton
3.
in response to hormonal and mechanical stimuli,
a process called bone remodeling.
Markings on bones
+
Osteoclasts release lysosomal enzymes and acids
 Bones contain various depressions, bumps, and
on bone surfaces that digest and resorb bone.
ridges that serve as sites where muscles and tendons
The dissolved products are transcytosed to the
 originate or attach and blood vessels and nerves
 opposite side of the osteoclast and released into
travel.
the interstitial space.
 Eventually, osteoclasts are replaced by osteo-
0.
blasts, which rebuild the bone.
Skeleton
6.
When blood calcium levels decline, PTH is
1.
The skeleton includes all of the bones of the
released from the parathyroid glands and stimu-
body.
 lates osteoclasts to digest bone matrix, releasing
2.
 Functions of the skeleton include (1) support, (2)
ionic calcium. When blood calcium levels rise,
 storage of minerals and lipids, (3) protection, (4)
calcitonin is released from the thyroid glands,
 blood cell production, and (5) leverage.
stimulating deposition of calcium into the bone.
3
 There are three types of cartilage found in the
skeleton. Hyaline cartilage is the most abundant,
Bone repair
and provides support and flexibility for the skel-
 eton. Elastic cartilage contains more elastic fibers
 Fractures can be classified as a displaced or non-
than hyaline cartilage. It is, therefore, better able
displaced fracture, complete or incomplete frac-
to withstand bending. It is found in only two
ture, linear or transverse fracture, or an open or
places: the external ear and the epiglottis. Fibro-
closed fracture.
cartilage is highly compressible, possessing great
 The bone repair process involves four steps:
tensile strength. It is found in the menisci within
(a) hematoma formation, (b) fibrocartilaginous
the knee and intervertebral discs.
callus formation, (c) bony callus formation, and
 Cartilage can continue to grow by two processes.
(d) bone remodeling.
 Appositional growth occurs when new cartilage
forms on the surface of preexisting cartilage.
Homeostatic imbalances of bone
Interstitial growth occurs from inside of the car-
tilage mass.
Osteomalacia is a condition in which the bones
are insufficiently mineralized. Rickets is a name
 for the same condition when it is present in pre-
 Skeleton classification
pubertal animals.
The skeleton is divided into the appendicular skel-
 Parturient paresis (milk fever) occurs at the
eton, which includes the bones of the limbs and limb
beginning of lactation when the cow cannot
girdles, and the axial skeleton, which includes the
mobilize enough calcium to meet the needs
 skull, hyoid apparatus, vertebral column, ribs, and
for milk production. Symptoms include loss
sternum.
of appetite, followed by muscle weakness,
 decreased body temperature, labored breathing.
Axial skeleton
and paralysis of hind legs.
 Egg laying fatigue in birds is similar to milk fever
The skull is a very complex structure made
in cows. High-producing egg-laying hens can
mostly of flat bones. Except for the mandible that
develop weak and brittle bones. A hen must
is attached via a moveable joint, the bones of the
deposit as much as 8-10% of her total calcium
 skull are connected by interlocking joints called
into the eggshell each day.
sutures.
 Osteoporosis is any condition in which bone
2.
 The cranium includes those bones that surround
+
breakdown outpaces bone formation, causing
the brain.
(Continued)
1 76  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
3.
 The facial bones include those bones enclosing
Floating ribs. These include the last false
the nasal and oral cavities. These bones form the
ribs in the dog and man. There is one pair in
structure of the face.
dogs and two pairs in man.
The vertebral column
Appendicular skeleton
 The vertebral column, also called the spine, pro-
tects the spinal cord, supports the head, and
Thoracic limb
serves as an attachment site for muscles affecting
While humans have the clavicle to keep the
body movements.
shoulder in a lateral position, domestic animals
The vertebrae are the irregularly shaped bones
lack this bone since their thoracic limb is main-
making up the spinal column. They are grouped
tained under their body. The top of the thoracic
into the cervical (neck), thoracic (back), lumbar
limb begins at the scapula.
(loin), sacral, and caudal (tail) vertebrae. The
2
The humerus, sometimes called the brachial
210
number of different groups of vertebrae differs
bone, is the largest bone in the thoracic limb. It
by species.
articulates proximally with the scapula in the
3.
 The common features of a vertebra include the
 glenoid cavity forming the shoulder joint, and
body, vertebral arch, vertebral foramen, and
distally with the radius and ulna forming the
processes. The processes include a midsaggital
 elbow joint.
 dorsal projection called the spinous process, two
 lateral extensions called the transverse processes,
3.
The radius and ulna fuse in the horse and
ruminants.
 and four articular processes.
4.
The distal portion of the thoracic limb is techni-
T
 The first and second cervical vertebrae are called
cally the manus, commonly called the forepaw
the atlas and axis, respectively.
in carnivores. It consists of the carpus, meta-
5.
The vertebral foramen of each vertebra connects
carpus, and digits, the latter with their individ-
to form the vertebral canal.
ual phalanges and their associated sesamoid
bones.
Thoracic
The thorax is the bony cavity formed by the
The pelvic (hip) girdle
sternum, ribs, costal cartilages, and bodies of the
 The pelvic girdle, or bony pelvis, consists of the
thoracic vertebrae. The sternum, or breastbone,
two hip bones (ossa coxarum), sacrum, and the
are the unpaired bones (sternebrae) forming the
first few caudal vertebrae. It encases the pelvic
floor of the thorax. The thoracic cage protects the
cavity.
organs of the thoracic cavity.
2.
The hip bone (os coxae) consists of the fused
2.
The manubrium is the enlarged first sternebra
ilium, ischium, pubic, and acetabular bones.
while the xiphoid process is the last sternebra
The two hip bones are fused at the pelvic sym-
capped by the xiphoid cartilage.
physis. The femur, or thigh bone, articulates
3.
The ribs consist of long, curved bones that form
proximately with the hipbone, forming the hip
the lateral wall of the thorax. The ribs can be
joint, and distally with the tibia, forming the
grouped as follows:
stifle joint.
 True ribs. These articulate directly to the
3.
The tibia and fibula are located between the
sternum via their costal cartilage.
femur and metatarsal bones.
b.
False ribs. These include all ribs that are not
The tarsus, or "hock," consists of the three rows
true ribs. Their costal cartilages merge to
of bones between the tibia/fibula and metatarsal
form the costal arch, which indirectly joins
region.
 them to the sternum in all domestic species
5.
 Metatarsal bones and digits are located distal of
 except the dog.
the tarsus.
 Bones and skeletal system
177
Review questions and answers are available
Constantinescu, G.M. and I.A. Constanfinescu. 2004. Clini-
online.
cal Dissection Guide for Large Animals. Iowa State Press,
Ames, Iowa.
Marieb, E.N. 2003. Human Anatomy & Physiology. Pearson
References
 Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco, California.
Constanfinescu, G.M. 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small
Animal Practitioners. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Muscular tissue
Contents
Muscle Tissue Overview
180
Creatine Phosphate
193
Introduction
180
 Anaerobic Mechanism
193
 Properties of Muscles
180
Muscle Fatigue and Oxygen Consumption
194
 Functions of Muscles
180
Heat Production
194
Skeletal Muscle
180
Types of Muscle Fibers
194
Connective Tissues
180
Effects of Exercise on Muscles
194
 Blood Vessels and Nerves
181
Cardiac Muscle
195
 Skeletal Muscle Fibers
181
Cardiac versus Skeletal Muscle Cells
196
Myofibrils
182
Functional Characteristics
196
Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
182
Smooth Muscle
196
Sarcomeres
183
Structure
196
Contraction of Skeletal Muscle
185
 Types of Smooth Muscle
196
Neuromuscular Junction
185
Neural Innervation of Smooth Muscle
197
 Pharmacology of the Neuromuscular Junction 
186
Contraction of Smooth Muscle
197
 Excitation-Contraction Coupling
186
Muscle System
198
Sliding Filament Theory
188
Naming Muscles 
198
 Rigor Mortis
189
Arrangements of Fascicles
199
Summary of Skeletal Muscle Contraction
189
Muscles as Levers
199
Length-Tension Relationships
189
Muscle Terminology
200
A Muscle Twitch
190
Major Skeletal Muscles
201
Treppe
190
Muscles of the Head and Neck
202
Summation
190
Muscles of the Pectoral Limb and Lateral
Muscle Tone
Thorax
191
204
Isometric versus Isotonic Contraction
191
Muscles of the Pelvic Limb and Body Wall
207
Stay Apparatus of a Horse
Muscle Relaxation or Return to Resting Length
210
192
Metabolism of Skeletal Muscle
192
Chapter Summary
211
Aerobic Mechanism
193
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
179
1 80  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Muscle tissue overview
 Production of movement. One feature unique to
animals compared with plants is their ability to
Introduction
 move. The action of skeletal muscle is responsible
for moving joints and thus allowing locomotion.
Muscle tissue is specialized for contraction and is
However, movement can be viewed more broadly
responsible for body movements and changes in size
than locomotion. An animal can change its posture
and shape of internal organs. Muscle cells are usually
or facial features as a result of muscle contraction.
elongated and arranged in parallel arrays.
In addition, generally as a result of smooth or
 Muscle is classified based on the appearance of its
cardiac muscle contraction, materials can be relo-
cells. The two principal types of muscle include stri-
cated within the body. For example, contraction of
ated and smooth muscle. Striated muscle appears to
the heart helps propel blood through the vessels;
have cross striations when viewed under the light
contraction of the bladder or gastrointestinal tract
microscope, whereas smooth muscle lacks such stria-
can also move materials.
tions. Striated muscle can be further subdivided into
 Maintaining posture. Maintaining a position is
 two types: skeletal muscle that is attached to bone and
 generally an active, rather than a passive, process.
responsible for the movements of the axial and appen-
Through the actions of signals generated from
 dicular skeleton, and cardiac muscle that makes up
sensors located in joints, tendons, and muscles,
the majority of the heart. Skeletal muscle and cardiac
minute adjustments are automatically made to
muscle are sometimes referred to as voluntary striated
maintain the position of joints.
 and involuntary striated muscles, respectively.
Stabilizing joints. In addition to moving joints,
The prefixes myo and sarco refer to muscle. There
 muscles also stabilize the joints, thus minimizing
fore, terms such as myofibril or myofilament reference
dislocations
structures within a muscle. For example, the plasma
Generating heat. Endotherms maintain a rela-
membrane of a muscle cell is called the sarcolemma,
tively constant body temperature over a range of
the cytoplasm the sarcoplasm, and the endoplasmic
environmental temperafure. Skeletal muscles are
reticulum the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). In addition,
an important organ in heat production, such as
a single skeletal muscle cell is also called a muscle fiber.
through the process of shivering.
Properties of muscles
Skeletal muscle
Four properties of muscles enable them to perform
Skeletal muscle accounts for approximately 40% of
their functions. These properties include
body weight. Each skeletal muscle is considered an
Excitability. Sometimes called irritability. Muscle
 organ and is made up of muscle fibers as well as con-
cells maintain a membrane potential and are able
nective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve fibers.
to respond to a stimulus such as a neurotransmit-
ter by developing an electrical impulse. The stim-
ulus is usually neurochemical, but can also be
Connective tissues
mechanical or chemical. The electrical impulse
can migrate across the sarcolemma.
As with neurons, each muscle has three connective
Contractility. When stimulated, the electrical impulse
tissue layers (Fig. 7.1).
spreading across a muscle cell can cause the cell to
 Epimysium. The entire muscle is surrounded by a
contract.
 Extensibility. In addition to contraction, muscle cells
dense, irregular connective tissue layer called the
can lengthen in response to stretch. This is more
epimysium containing a dense concentration of
evident in smooth muscle compared to skeletal
collagen fibers. This layer separates the muscle
muscle.
from surrounding tissue.
Elasticity. Once stretched, muscle fibers can recoil
2.
Perimysium. In cross section, a muscle consists of
to their original resting length due to the elastic
multiple groupings of muscle fibers called fasci-
elements within the muscle.
cles (bundles). Each fascicle is surrounded by the
perimysium (peri = around) containing collagen
and elastic fibers. This layer contains blood vessels
Functions of muscles
 and nerves supplying the fascicles.
3.
 Endomysium. Within each fascicle are individual
 Muscles serve four major functions, including produc-
skeletal muscle cells, called muscle fibers, each
tion of movement, maintenance of posture, stabiliza
surrounded by the endomysium (endo = within)
tion of joints, and generation of heat:
Within this connective tissue layer are capillaries
Muscular tissue
181
Epimysium
Perimysium
Skeletal muscle fiber
Muscle fascicle
Skeletal muscle fiber
Blood vessels
Capillary
Sarcoplas
En domysium
Myofibril
Perimysiur
Satellite cell
Nucleus
Epimysium
Nerve
Mitochondria
Fig. 7.1. Connective tissue sheaths in skeletal muscle. Each skeletal muscle represents skeletal muscle fibers grouped into a muscle
surrounded by a thin connective tissue sheath called the epimysium. Within the muscle are groupings of muscle fibers called fascicles, which 
'unisaopua aut Ag papunons siagy asnm lenpiaipui ae aiosey ypea uyim wnishwad aui Ag papunons ane
supplying each muscle fiber, nerve fibers control-
ling the muscle, and satellite cells. These latter
Myoblast:
cells serve as stem cells that can help repair
damaged muscle.
Near the ends of the muscle, the epimysium, peri-
mysium, and endomysium blend together forming
either a bundle called a tendon or a broad sheet called
an aponeurosis. Tendons and aponeuroses attach
 muscle to bones, blending with the periosteum of the
bone. These attachments allow contraction of the
muscles to move the bones.
Muscle
fiber
Blood vessels and nerves
Satellite cell
Fg. 7.2. Formation of skeletal muscle cell. During embryonic
The two innermost layers of connective tissue within
development, myoblasts begin to fuse forming a large.
the muscle each contain blood vessels and nerves.
multinucleated skeletal muscle cell called a muscle fiber. Nonfused
 Skeletal muscle is generally under voluntary nervous
myoblasts remain as satellite cells that function as muscle stem cells.
control, and therefore requires stimulation for nerve
fibers to initiate contraction. Therefore, individual
nerve fibers must innervate each muscle fiber to
 Muscle fibers can be 100 μm in diameter and run the
control contraction. While the diaphragm consists of
skeletal muscle, it usually is under involuntary control
entire length of a muscle, and can contain hundreds
but can be under voluntary control as well.
of nuclei. These cells form from the fusion of small,
 individual muscle cells called myoblasts during devel-
 opment. Instead, some remain unfused and become
Skeletal muscle fibers
satellite cells. While skeletal muscle fibers are inca-
pable of dividing, new muscle fibers are produced
Skeletal muscle tissue consists of large, multinucleated
from satellite cells located in the adult muscle. Not all
cells commonly referred to as muscle fibers (Fig. 7.2).
myoblasts fuse to form muscle fibers. The satellite cells
1 82  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
can later enlarge, divide, and then fuse with damaged
filaments. The myofibrils are packed tightly into the
 muscle cells, thus regenerating the muscle.
muscle fiber, forcing the mitochondria, nuclei, and
The nuclei are located immediately
yunderthe
plasma membrane, which in skeletal muscle is called
of the cell.
the sarcolemma. There is a resting membrane poten-
 The myofibrils contain three types of proteins that
tial present due to the unequal distribution of ions
will be discussed in more detail when describing the
across the sarcolemma similar to that found in neurons.
structure of thin and thick filaments below:
 The cytoplasm of skeletal muscle is called sarcoplasm.
1.
 Contractile proteins. Contractile proteins generate
Within the sarcoplasm are glycosomes, storage gran-
the force during contraction. These proteins include
ules of glycogen, and myoglobin, a red pigmented
myosin and actin.
protein that stores oxygen.
2.
 Regulatory protein. Regulatory proteins help initi-
Although skeletal muscle fibers are large, an electri-
ate and terminate the contraction process and
cal signal must be able to propagate throughout the
include tropomyosin and troponin found on the
cell quickly to cause contraction.
Transverse, or T,
thin filaments.
 tubules are small-diameter tubes running perpendicu-
3.
Structural proteins. Structural proteins help main-
lar to the sarcolemma and traveling into the sarco-
tain the alignment of the thin and thick filaments,
plasm. These tubes are continuous with the extracellular
provide elasticity and extensibility, and attach
space, and thus they contain extracellular fluid. They
the myofibrils to the sarcolemma. These proteins
can be thought of as extensions of the sarcolemma. As
 we will see later, the action potential can travel along
include titin, myomesin, and dystrophin.
the sarcolemma and down the T tubules.
The myofibrils are attached to the inner surface of
the sarcolemma. The outer surface of the muscle fibers
is attached to collagen fibers that help connect the cells
Myofibrils
to the tendon or aponeuroses. Therefore, as the muscle
fibers contract, they exert force on the bones causing
Muscle fibers are composed of functional subunits
them to move.
called myofibrils. Each muscle fiber contains hun-
dreds to thousands of myofibrils that run longitudi-
nally the length of the fiber. The myofibrils consist of
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
bundles of myofilaments that are protein filaments
composed primarily of actin and myosin, the two con-
Similar to the endoplasmic reticulum in nonmuscle
tractile proteins in muscle. Actin forms the bulk of the
cells, the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) forms a tubular
thin filaments, and myosin forms the bulk of the thick
network surrounding each myofibril (Fig. 7.3). The
T tubule
Triad
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleus
 Myofibril
Sarcolemma
M-
line
Terminal cisterna of 
H
sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Zone
1,,
A Band 
1,,
I Band
Band
Fig. 7.3. T tubule and sarcoplasmic reticulum. The transverse, or T' tubules are inwardly directed invaginations of the sarcolemma found near
aasi leuwal aey yiym pue lan aui apisu! punoy saingn jo yiomau e si wninai sseldonies aul 'spueg I pue y au jo uoung au
near the T tubules. Two terminal cisterna and the intervening T tubule make a triad.
 Muscular tissue
183
terminal cisternae (end sacs) of the SR are always
Sarcomeres
found in pairs, with an intervening T tubule. The com-
bination of a terminal cisterna, a T tubule, and the
The functional unit of skeletal muscle is the sarcomere.
adjacent terminal cisterna form a triad. Note that the
A myofibril consists of thousands of sarcomeres (Fig.
T tubule communicates with the extracellular space
7.4). In stained cross sections of skeletal muscle, alter-
while the SR is intracellular.
nating light and dark bands are evident, which are
 The terminal cisternae have an active calcium pump
called the I band and A band, respectively. These
that pumps calcium from the sarcoplasm into the SR.
bands give skeletal muscle its striated appearance.
This maintains a low concentration of free calcium
The dark bands alter the plane of the polarized light
within the sarcoplasm, whereas the free calcium con-
and are therefore anisotropic (i.e., not having the same
centration inside the SR may be 1000 times greater.
properties in all directions), whereas the light bands
Also found within the terminal cisternae is the protein
do not alter the plane of polarized light and are there-
calsequestrin that reversibly binds Ca2t. The free and
fore isotropic (ie., appear the same in all directons),
calsequestrin-bound calcium concentrations can be
 thus the names A band and I band, respectively.
40,000 times that in the sarcoplasm. As we will discuss
The sarcomere is composed of thick and thin fila-
later, the terminal cisternae of the SR are the source of
ments, proteins that stabilize those filaments, and pro-
calcium for skeletal muscle contraction.
teins that regulate the interactions between thick and
Sarcomere
Zone of
Thick
Thin
overlap
M-line
filaments filaments
Titin
（
000
Q00
000
Z-line
H Zone
I Band
A Band
I Band
Sarcomere
line
and
Fig. 7.4. Sarcomere. A sarcomere, the functional unit of skeletal muscle, runs from Z-line to Z-line. The various segments of the sarcomere
are identified in the top portion of the figure, and a photomicrograph of a sarcomere is shown in the bottom portion of the figure.
184  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
thin filaments. As shown in Figure 7.4, a sarcomere is
C
the region between two adjacent Z discs (or Z-lines).
It consists of one-half an I band, an A band, and one-
G actin
Troponin
Tropomyosin
Myosin-binding
half an I band. The A band is the length of the thick
site
filament, and can contain both thick and thin fila-
ments. In a muscle at rest, a lighter region can be
found in the center of the A band called the H zone
(from helle, meaning bright), which contains only
myosin. This region disappears as skeletal muscle con-
 tracts and the actin filaments overlap, thus entering
F actin-
this area. The M-line, named for being in the middle
of the sarcomere, transects the H zone and is com-
posed of proteins that stabilize the position of the
Thin filament
thick filaments. Near the ends of the A band are zones
Fig. 7.5. Thin filament. The thin filaments in skeletal muscle
of overlap where thin and thick filaments are found
consist of G actin, troponin, and tropomyosin. G-actin polymerizes
side by side.
into F actin, or filamentous actin. Troponin is made of three
The I band, located between each intervening A
globular proteins binding G actin, tropomyosin, and calcium ions,
respectively. Two strands of tropomyosin, a rod-shaped protein,
band, contains thin filaments. The I band is bisected
intertwine around the F actin covering the myosin-binding sites
by the Z-line that consists of proteins called actinins,
while the muscle is at rest.
which interconnect adjacent thin filaments.
There are several structural proteins associated with
the myofibrils making the sarcomere. Titin (from titan,
of F actin is composed of polymers of G actin, or
meaning gigantic) is a large protein, and the third
 globular actin. Therefore, the F actin appears as
most abundant protein in the sarcomere behind
two twisted strands of pearls, with each pearl
myosin and actin. Each titin molecule extends from
being analogous to a molecule of G actin.
the Z-line to the M-line and helps anchor a thick fila-
2
Tropomyosin. Strands of tropomyosin (trope =
ment to both the Z-line and M-line. This provides
turning) wrap around the length of the F actin.
stabilization for the position of the thick filaments. As
Each tropomyosin molecule is a double-stranded
shown in Figure 7.4, the portion of the titin molecule
protein that, at rest, covers seven myosin-binding
located between the Z-line and the end of the thick
 filament is very elastic and can stretch up to four times
 sites on the actin filament.
Troponin. A globular protein, troponin consists of
its resting length. Therefore, titin probably assists in
three subunits. One binds to tropomyosin (TnT),
returning the muscle to its resting length following
stretching.
one to G actin (Tnl), and the other to calcium ions
(TnC). Therefore, troponin controls the structural
 The Z-line is composed of the protein nebulin.
relationship between tropomyosin and F actin. At
 Nebulin anchors thin filaments and connects myofi-
rest, troponin allows tropomyosin to be positioned
brils to each other throughout the muscle cell. The
 such that it covers the myosin-binding sites. When
M-line is composed of the protein myomesin. The
a muscle is stimulated and intracellular calcium
M-line binds to titin, thus helping to connect adjacent
levels increase, calcium binds to troponin, causing
thick filaments. Dystophin is another structural protein
a conformational change that allows the tropo-
that links thin filaments to integral membrane pro-
 myosin to slide into the grooves of the double helix
teins in the sarcolemma. Other proteins in the sarco-
 of actin and thus uncover the myosin-binding sites.
lemma then attach to the cornective tissue sheath
surrounding the muscle. Thus, the contractive forces
 generated in the sarcomere are transferred throughout
Thick filaments
the muscle.
Thick filaments are 10-12nm in diameter and 1.6μm
 in length (Fig. 7.6). Thick filaments consist of approxi-
Thin filaments
mately 500 myosin molecules, each composed of two
myosin subunits wrapped around each other The
Thin filaments are 5-6nm in diameter and 1μm in
long tails of the myosin molecules line up forming the
length (Fig. 7.5). Each thin filament is composed of
thick filament, and the heads of the myosin molecules
four proteins:
 project off the filament toward the adjacent thin fila-
1. F actin. Thin filaments are composed of two
ments. The head of the myosin molecule consists of
strands of F actin, also called filamentous actin,
two globular proteins, has ATPase activity, and is able
arranged in a double-stranded helix. Each strand
to bind to the actin filament. A cross bridge is formed
Muscular tissue
185
Myosinhead
 Ne urom uscular control
Myosin tail
Hinge
Excitation-contraction-coupling
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Calcium
release
Thick filament
Calcium binds to
troponin
Fig. 7.6. Thick filament. A single myosin molecule is shown at the
top. It contains a pair of intertwined subunits each consisting of a
丰
tail, a hinge region, and a globular head. The thick filaments
ae sn au yry ui sanalo uisoiw oos Aiaeixoidde uiuo
lined up so that the heads project away from the M-line.
Muscle
when the head of the myosin binds to the actin fila-
contaction
 ment. There is a hinge between the head and the tail
of the myosin molecule that allows the head to pivot
Fg. 7.7. Summary of skeletal muscle contraction. Stimulation of 
toward or away from the M-line.
α-motor neurons going to skeletal muscle causes the release of
The myosin molecules are arranged so that their
 acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. This causes the
production of an action potential in the muscle fiber that spreads 
tails point toward the M-line. In the H zone, there are
along the sarcolemma and down the T tubules where it causes the
no myosin heads, only tails. Also within each thick
release of calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Calcium
filament is a molecule of titin extending from the
then diffuses to the thin filaments where it binds to troponin to
M-line to the Z-line.
 initiate contraction.
Contraction of skeletal muscle
Synaptic vesicl
As summarized in Figure 7.7, control of skeletal
Subneural
muscle contraction involves the voluntary stimulation
of motor neurons innervating the muscle. The release
Acetylcholi
of the neurotransmitter from these motor neurons ini-
tiates excitation-coupling-contraction in which an action
potential is generated within the skeletal muscle fiber.
Nicotinic
The action potential causes the release of calcium from
receptor
the SR, which then causes muscle contraction
Muscle cell
Neuromuscular junction
Fg. 7.8. Neuromuscular junction. The neuromuscular junction is
 a specialized synapse between an α-motor neuron and skeletal
Skeletal muscle is controlled by the somatic nervous
muscle fibers. The synaptic bouton is imbedded in the sarcolemma.
At this site are subneural clefts that increase the surface area
system. The cell bodies of the c-motor neurons, that
surrounding the synapse. Synaptic vesicles containing acetylcholine 
is, somatic motor neurons, that innervate skeletal
(ACh) are located in the nerve ending. Upon stimulation, the
muscle reside in the central nervous system (CNS).
α-motor neuron releases ACh that can diffuse across the synaptic
The axons of these neurons leave the CNS and inner-
cleft and bind to nicotinic receptors on the skeletal muscle fiber.
Upon binding to the receptor, ACh causes Nat ions to enter the 
vate skeletal muscle fibers at a specialized junction
 skeletal muscle fiber, causing a postsynaptic potential. The 
called the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) or myoneu-
uone ue anpui oi ynoua aiel shemle s! leuaod sdeuisisod
ral junction (Fig. 7.8).
potential in the skeletal muscle fiber.
1 86  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
blepharospasm (uncontrolled blinking), or cervical
Each muscle fiber is innervated by a neuron,
dystonia (also known as spasmodic torticollis), which
although a single neuron may innervate multiple
is characterized by involuntary tonic contractions or
muscle fibers. The neuron branches as it enters the
perimysium, and each branch ends in a synaptic ter-
 intermittent spasms of the neck muscles.
ACh is normally inactivated by the enzyme acetyl-
minal, sometimes called a synaptic bouton. The synapse
is the region of contact between a neuron and its target
cholinesterase (AChE). Agents known as AChE inhibi-
tors can be used to strengthen weak skeletal muscle
cell, which in this case is a skeletal muscle fiber. The
contractions. An autoimmune disease called myasthe-
space between the neuron and the muscle fiber is
nia gravis, in which there is reduced ricotinic receptor
the synaptic cleft. The sarcolemma in the region of the
function, is treated with the AchE inhibitor neostig-
 NMJ is called the motor end plate.
 Since an electrical signal cannot traverse the synap-
mine. This drug can also be used to reverse the effects
of curare.
tic cleft, the signal from the motor neuron is commu-
nicated via the release of a neurotransmitter. The
neurotransmitter released from c-motor neurons is
Excitation-contraction coupling
acetylcholine (ACh). ACh is contained in synaptic
vesicles located in the synaptic bouton. When the
The process by which an action potential in skeletal
 action potential arrives at the synaptic bouton, it causes
 the release of ACh that then diffuses across the synapse
muscle fibers induces contraction is called excitation-
5
contraction coupling (Fig. 7.9). The action potential
and binds to a specialized cholinergic receptor located
migrates along the sarcolemma and down the T
on the muscle fiber. This receptor is called a nicotinic
tubules. At the triad, the action potential triggers the
receptor. This is a transmembrane protein that binds
ACh, and can also be stimulated by the agonist
release of Ca't from the terminal cisterns of the SR.
The release of Ca²+ from the terminal cisterns
nicotine.
When ACh binds to the nicotinic receptor, it causes
involves the direct mechanical connection between the
the opening of a ligand-gated ion channel that allows
T tubules and the terminal cisterns (also called lateral
sacs) of the SR. Located on the T-tubule membrane is
sodium ions to enter the muscle fiber. This causes the
production of a postsynaptic potential that results in
a T-tubule voltage sensor, which senses a change in
 membrane potential associated with the action poten-
the production of an action potential in the muscle
fiber. The amount of neurotransmitter released
tial. A change in voltage causes a conformational
per
change in the T-tubule voltage sensor that is transmit-
nerve impulse is greater than the amount needed to 
ted to the Ca?+ channels on the terminal cisterns of the
induce a postsynaptic action potential, and the number
SR, causing them to open and release Ca?+ into the
of receptors activated by ACh is more than required
cytosol. This direct mechanical connection is unique
to reach threshold, thus leading to a "safety factor"
to skeletal muscle, whereas smooth muscle has a dif-
assuring that stimulation of a motor neuron results in
ferent mechanism and different source of calcium for
contraction of skeletal muscle.
excitation-contraction coupling.
Cytosolic calcium levels increase at least 10-fold. As
Pharmacology of the neuromuscular junction
cytosolic calcium levels increase, Ca’+ binds to tropo-
nin, causing a conformational change in the shape of
Since the NMJ is a chemical synapse, it is prone to
this globular protein. This change in shape allows
pharmacological manipulation. Curare, produced by
tropomyosin to slide into the grooves of the double
certain frogs, is a compound used by South American
helix formed by F-actin (Fig. 7.10). As tropomyosin
Indians to make poisonous arrows and darts. Curare
slides into the groove, it uncovers the myosin-binding
blocks nicotinic receptors and thereby prevents ACh
sites on G actin. Once uncovered, the heads of the
from inducing skeletal muscle contraction. Deriva-
myosin filament binds to the myosin-binding sites,
 tives of curare are sometimes given prior to surgery in
and contraction begins.
order to relax the skeletal muscles.
 When stimulation from the motor neurons ends, the
Clostridium botulinum is a bacteria often found in
action potential is no longer propagated down the T
contaminated canned foods. The toxin from this
 tubules. At this point, a calcium-active transport pump
organism prevents the release of ACh from somatic
called calsequestrin actively pumps Ca?t back into the
motor neurons. Botulinum toxin prevents skeletal
terminal cisterns of the SR. This process requires ATP,
muscle contraction. A very tiny amount of this toxin
and allows for the concentration of Ca?t in the SR
can cause death by paralyzing the diaphragm and
to be 10,0o0 times higher than in the sarcoplasm. As
other respiratory muscles. Recently, this toxin has
 the Ca?+ levels in the sarcoplasm decrease, troponin
been increasingly used in human medicine (Botox) to
returns to its resting configuration, and tropomyosin
reduce wrinkles, control strabismus (crossed eyes),
again covers the myosin-binding sites on the G actin.
AP travels along
T
sa rcole mma.
tubule
5.
AP travels
Sarcolemma
down T tubule.
Na+ enters cell.
Action potential is
1,3-bis-inosital
produced.
phosphate
3.
ACh binds to
nicotinicreceptors.
Phospholipase
C
SR
IP2
6.
Ca2+ binds to
Fig. 7.9. Increasing sarcoplasmic calcium concentration. The action potential (AP) migrates along the sarcolemma and down the T tubule.
When reaching thetriad, the AP activates the enzyme phospholipase C, resulting in the production of 2-diacylglycerol (2-DAG) and inosital
triphosphate (IPs). The 2-DAG remains membrane bound while IPs diffuses through the sarcoplasm to the terminal cistern of the SR. This
 opens Ca2+ release channels, causing the release of Ca?+ from the SR into the sarcoplasm. Ca?+ then binds to troponin, which initiates
 contraction.
A
Myosin
Calcium
B
P
DP
Ca2+ release
Tnl
from SR
Troponin
SR
SR
Tropomyo sin
G actin
Myo sin-binding site
Sequester Ca2
Ca2t binds to
in SR
troponin 
D
C
R
SR
SR
Myosin head
binds to thin 
fila ment 
Power stroke
Fig. 7.10. Excitation-contraction coupling. (A) At rest, calcium is sequestered in the SR, and the myosin head sits perpendicular to the thin 
filament. The myosin head is a charged intermediate with ADP and inorganic phosphate (P) attached. (B) Calcium released from the SR binds 
to the T'nC component of troponin. (C) The conformational change in troponin results in the tropomyosin filament sliding into the groove of 
the double helix formed by F actin, thus uncovering the myosin-binding site located on the actin filament. The myosin head binds to actin,
releasing ADP and Pi. (D) The power stroke occurs when the myosin head tilts toward the M-line.
187
1 88  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Sliding filament theory
 Detachment of the myosin head. At the end of the
power stroke, the myosin head remains attached
During skeletal muscle contraction, the length of the
to actin until a molecule of ATP attaches to the
thin and thick filaments does not change. Instead, the
myosin head, thus breaking the bond between
thin filaments slide between the thick filaments as
 myosin and actin. The myosin head returns to its
nd pe sa uoe a ,qea, speaq usoa a
 perpendicular position as it hydrolyzes ATP, thus
them toward the M-line (Fig. 7.11). Hence, as the thin
returning to step 1.
filaments move toward the M-line, the Z-lines get
 This cycle then repeats itself as long as the myosin-
closer, thus decreasing the length of the sarcomere and
binding sites on the actin remain uncovered and suf-
the myofibril. As the sarcomere width decreases, the
ficient ATP is present. Each thick filament possesses
muscle shortens.
about 6o0 myosin heads. As contraction occurs, these
Contraction of skeletal muscle involves four steps:
heads are attaching and detaching throughout the
1.
 Hydrolysis of ATP. In the resting position, the
cycle such that at any given time, there are many
myosin head is perpendicular to the thin filament,
myosin heads attached. Therefore, contraction force is
and ATP has been hydrolyzed to ADP and inor-
always being generated during this time. The myosin
ganic phosphate (Pi), creating a charged interme-
heads are sequentially "walking" the thin filament
Chapter
diate. The myosin head is "waiting" for a binding 
toward the M-line throughout the contraction cycle,
site to become available on the thin filament.
 and therefore pulling the Z-lines closer together.
2
 Formation of cross bridges. When tropomyosin
The elastic components in muscle include titin,
uncovers the myosin-binding sites on the thin fila-
tendons, and the connective tissue sheaths (endomy-
ment, the myosin head binds to one of these sites
sium, perimysium, and epimysium). As the muscle
liberating ADP and P.
fibers contract, the elastic components are stretched.
3.
Power stroke. Release of P; initiates the power
This stretch is relayed out to the tendons, which then
stroke in which the myosin head tilts toward the
pull on the bones causing them to move.
M-line, and ADP is released. The myosin head
As calcium is sequestered in the SR, tropomyosin
thus pulls the thin filament toward the M-line so
again covers the myosin-binding sites. Hence, the
that there is greater overlap between the thick and
myosin head, with its hydrolyzed molecule of ATP
thin filaments. Hence the name, the sliding fila-
attached, assumes its resting position poised to attach
ment theory.
to actin when a binding site becomes available. As
Sarcomere
OOp
20Q
20Q
HZone.
IBand
A Band
I Band
Z-lines
QQQ
000
QOQ
QOQ
600
HZone
I Band
A Band
I Band
Fig. 7.11. Sliding filaments. The top sarcomere is at rest while the bottom sarcomere is in a contracted state. Note that in the contracted 
state, the Z-lines move closer together and the I bands and H zone shorten while the A band remains the same width.
 Muscular tissue
189
contraction ceases, the elastic components of the
6
Sequester calcium. At the conclusion of motor
muscle help return the muscle to its resting position.
neuron stimulation, calcium is actively seques-
tered back into the terminal cisterns of the SR by
the protein calsequestrin.
10. Myosin head refurns to resting position. After
Rigor mortis
 detaching from the thin filament, the myosin head
After death, the supply of energy within the cells
hydrolyzes ATP and returns to a posiftion perpen-
diminishes as metabolism ceases. As such, the cells
dicular to the thin filament. ADP and P; remain
bound to the myosin head until it attaches to
can no longer synthesize ATP. ATPis needed to actively
 remove sequestered Ca?t into the terminal cisterns of
another myosin-binding site on a thin filament.
the SR. In addition, since the cross bridges can be
broken only in the presence of ATP, myosin and actin
Length-tension relationships
remain attached following death. This occurs in all the
skeletal muscles, creating a state called rigor mortis
The tension developed by a muscle fiber during con-
(rigidity of death) in which the animal appears rigid.
Rigor mortis ceases only as proteolytic lysosomal
traction is dependent on the length of the sarcomere
 enzymes released by autolysis digest the cross bridges.
prior to contraction. At a sarcomere length of approxi-
 mately 2.0-2.4 μm, or 90-110% of the resting sarcomere
length, the overlap between the actin and myosin fila-
 ments is optimal, and the muscle can generate the
Summary of skeletal muscle contraction
maximum tension (Fig. 7.12). At these lengths, the
The following steps summarize the contraction of
maximum number of cross bridges can be formed
between the myosin head and thin filament. As the
skeletal muscles:
muscle is either contracted or stretched, the number
1.
 Release of ACh. Stimulation of the c-motor neuron
of cross bridges that can form decreases, and less
to skeletal muscle causes release of ACh at the
tension is generated during contraction.
NMJ.
 As the muscle fiber is stretched to approximately
2.
 Activation of nicotinic receptors. ACh binds to
 170% of its resting length, the thick and thin filaments 
 nicotinic receptors causing an influx of Nat into
 no longer overlap, and therefore, no tension can be
the muscle fiber resulting in the generation of an
 generated. Conversely, as the length of the sarcomere
 end-plate potential.
 becomes too short, the thick filaments are compressed
3.
 Generation of an action potential. Generation of
against the Z-line, decreasing the number of cross
an end-plate potential results in an AP developing
bridges that can be produced.
in the muscle fiber.
4.
 Release of Ca²+ from the SR. The AP is propagated
along the sarcolemma and down the T tubules
where it causes the production of IPs at the triad.
IP then diffuses to the SR where it causes the
 release of Ca’t into the sarcoplasm.
120-
 Uncovering myosin-binding sites. Ca2+ binds to
maximum)
5.
 troponin causing a conformational change result-
100
ing in the movement of tropomyosin into the
80
grooves of the thin filament, thus uncovering the
Optimal length
myosin-binding sites on the thin filament.
%
60
6.
 Power stroke. Once uncovered, the heads of the
uo!
40
myosin filaments bind to their binding sites on the
Tensi
actin filament. Once bound, the myosin head tilts
20
toward the M-line, dragging the thin filaments in
the same direction.
10
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
7.
 Breaking the myosin-thin filament bond. If
Resting sarcomere length (% of optimal)
present, ATP binds to the myosin head, which
breaks the bond between myosin and the thin
Fig. 7.12. Length-tension relationship. At the optimal resting.
filament.
sarcomere length, the maximum number of cross bridges can be
formed between myosin and the thin filament resulting in the
8.
 Termination of ACh activity. At the conclusion of
maximum tension. As the length of the sarcomere is stretched or
motor neuron stimulation, ACh is broken down in
compressed, the number of cross bridges is reduced, resulting in
the synaptic cleft by the enzyme AChE.
less tension.
1 90 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
A muscle twitch
Treppe
A single stimulation of a motor neuron results in a
 If skeletal muscle is stimulated a second time, shortly
single contraction or twitch (Fig. 7.13). Although
after the relaxation phase of the first twitch, the second
twitches can produce heat during shivering, they are
twitch will generate greater tension (Fig. 7.14). This
not generally observed during normal muscle contrac-
increase in tension is known as treppe, German for
tion. Instead, prolonged stimulation results in more
 tension being produced than caused by a single twitch.
stimulations results from the gradual increase in sar-
A recording of a single muscle twitch is called a
coplasmic calcium since the calcium pumps located in
 myogram. A single twitch can last from 20 to 200ms,
 the SR are unable to sequester all the calcium between
depending on the type of muscle, temperature, stretch
twitches.
of the muscle, and so on. A muscle twitch consists of
three phases:
1.
 Latent phase. Following stimulation by the motor
Summation
neuron, the action potential moves along the sar-
colemma and down the T tubules to the triad
While a muscle twitch is an all-or-none response,
where it induces the release of Ca?+ from the ter-
muscle contraction is graded, meaning that it displays
5
minal cisterns of the SR. The calcium then diffuses
varying length and strength of contraction. There are
to troponin where it binds. This process generally
two mechanisms leading to graded responses: (1)
lasts about 2ms.
changing the frequency of stimulation and (2) chang-
2
 Contraction phase. After a conformational change
ing the strength of the stimulus.
in troponin allows tropomyosin to move, thus
uncovering the myosin-binding sites on the actin
filament, the myosin head binds to the actin fila-
Wave summation
ment, and the power stroke pulls the thin filament 
While muscle twitches can be observed in the labora-
toward the M-line, which produces tension. This
tory, muscle contraction generally involves smooth
lasts about 10-100ms.
sustained contraction resulting from frequent stimula-
3.
 Relaxation phase. Calcium is sequestered into the
tion. If a second stimulation occurs before the muscle
SR, the tropomyosin covers the myosin-binding
completes its relaxation phase, the second twitch will
sites on the actin filament, and ATP causes the
create greater tension than the original twitch. This
myosin head to detach from the actin filament,
process is called wave summation (Fig. 7.15). This
decreasing the number of cross bridges 
and
generally occurs at stimulation rates of about 50 per
tension. This phase can also last 10-100ms.
second. Stimulation occurs rapidly enough that the SR
 contraction
 of contraction
Treppe
Stimulus
of
Force
Force 
phase
Latent
Stlmulus
Stlmulus
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Fig. 7.13. Muscle twitch. A myogram showing the three stages of
Fg. 7.14. Treppe. If the muscle is stimulated shortly after the
an isometric muscle twitch. The stimulus is followed by a latent period
relaxation phase, the subsequent muscle twitches generate greater
during which calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum
tension, producing a steplike increase in magnitude called treppe.
(SR) and then binds to troponin. The contraction period is when the
The increase in tension in subsequent twitches results from the 
myosin head actively binds and pulls on the thin filaments, and the
increase in sarcoplasmic calcium due to the inability of the SR to
relaxation period occurs when calcium is sequestered in the SR.
recapture all the calcium between twitches.
Muscular tissue
191
4O
Motor unit #1
++++++++
0-
.Twtich
2Wave
3. Unfused (incomplete) 4. Fused (complete)
etanus
Time (ms)
Fig. 7.15. Wave summation and tetanus. (1) A single twitch.
Motor unit #2
(2) The muscle is stimulated (T) before the relaxation phase is
complete, causing wave summation and increased contraction
force. (3) Frequency of stimulation is more rapid, resulting in
Neuromuscular
junction
unfused tetanus in which the individual twitches can still be 
discerned. (4) Frequency of stimulation is so rapid that individual
Fg. 7.16. Motor units. All of the muscle fibers innervated by a
twitches cannot be distinguished, resulting in fused tetanus.
single motor neuron constitute a motor unit. Motor unit #1 is larger
than motor unit #2 because it innervates more muscle fibers. Motor
unit #2 would be involved in more precise motor movement than 
motor unit #1.
is no longer able to sequester Ca2t between twitches.
As an animal begins a task, it generally stimulates
 In addition to prolonging contraction, the second con-
the smallest motor urits. However, if more force is
traction causes greater shortening than the first con-
required, more and larger motor units are recruited in
traction because it is superimposed on an already
order to increase the tension produced by the muscle.
 contracted muscle, thus increasing tension.
As the frequency of stimulation increases, the tension
developed also increases. Incomplete tetanus (tetan =
Muscle tone
rigid or tense) occurs when the individual twitches are
still distinguishable. When the frequency of stimula-
Skeletal muscle is seldom flaccid, but instead main-
tion is rapid enough to eliminate the relaxation phase,
tains a degree of tension called muscle tone. Since
and the individual twitches are no longer distinguish-
skeletal muscle contraction is controlled by motor
able, the contraction is termed complete tetanus. Com-
neurons releasing ACh, muscle tone is established by
plete tetanus is the normal state observed during
the central nervous system. If these motor neurons are
muscle contraction. Wave summation results in smooth,
cut, skeletal muscle becomes flaccid. Muscle tone is
continuous muscle contraction. Note that the fre-
 due to the alternating stimulation of motor units by
 quency of nerve stimulation cannot be faster than the
the central nervous system. Such tone helps keep an
absolute refractory period of the neurons.
animal upright, keep the head held up, stabilize joints,
 and maintain posture.
 Muscle tone is not unique to skeletal muscle, but it
Multiple motor unit summation
is also found in smooth muscle. For example, blood
A second type of summation that increases the force
vessels generally maintain a vascular tone as does the
of muscle contraction is called multiple motor unit
 gastrointestinal tract.
summation or recruitment. Skeletal muscles have
thousands of muscle fibers. All of the muscle fibers
innervated by a single motor neuron constitute a
Isometric versus isotonic contraction
motor unit (Fig. 7.16). The size of a motor unit can vary
with a single motor neuron innervating as few as four
There are two major categories of muscle contraction:
to six muscle fibers, or as many as several thousand.
isotonic and isometric (Fig. 7.17). During isotonic
Where fine, delicate movements are necessary, such as
(iso = same; tonos = tension), the length of the muscle
in the lips, motor units are small, whereas in areas
changes as force is generated, resulting in movement.
where precise movements are not necessary, such as
There are two types of isotonic contractions, concen-
in the hindquarter of a beef cow, the motor units are
tric and eccentric. In a concentric contraction, the
much larger. Motor units are intermingled within a
muscle gets shorter as it works. In other words, the
muscle so that they always deliver force on the tendon
muscle forms cross bridges and the thin filaments
attaching to a bone.
interdigitate within the thick filaments, overcoming
192  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
A
lsotonic
contraction:
Resting length
kg
Time
B
lsometric
contraction
Resting length
21
5
Resting length
Time
Fig. 7.17. Isotonic versus isometric contractions. (A) During isotonic contraction, force is generated as the muscle shortens. (B) In isometric
 Contraction, force is generated, but there is minimal shortening of the muscle.
the resistance of the load on the muscle. During eccen-
Contraction of the opposing muscle will also help
tric contraction, the tension developed by the muscle
return a muscle to its resting length. For example, as
is less than the load on the muscle. As a result, the
the triceps brachi muscle in the back of the front leg
muscle lengthens. As an animal walks down a steep
contracts, it causes the biceps brachii on the anterior
 incline, the animal controls the rate of elongation of
 portion of the leg to extend.
muscles as the legs stretch to the next location.
 Similarly, gravity can cause muscles to extend. The
During isometric (metric = measure) contraction, the
neck of a horse is extended in order to look upward,
length of the muscle does not change because the
and then when the muscles are relaxed, the head will
 tension produced does not exceed the resistance. Iso-
move toward the ground, thus stretching the neck
metric contraction is commonly observed in postural
 muscles that originally were involved in extension.
muscles that maintain a constant body position while
opposing gravity.
 When performing various movements, animals use
Metabolism of skeletal muscle
all these types of contractions. Consider the motions 
as a dog sits and then stands back up. The quadriceps
The major energy source for muscle metabolism is
 are involved in controlling this motion. As a dog
ATP. It is used for cross bridge formation, to actively
begins to sit, the knees begin to bend or flex (eccen-
pump calcium into the SR, and to pump Na out of
 tric). As the dog holds a position partway through the
and K+ into the muscle fiber. The endogenous stores
sitting motion, an isometric condition exists. As the
of ATP are able to last only about 4-6 seconds. There-
dog stands, thus extending the knee, isometric and
fore, there must be mechanisms to replenish this
concentric contractions occur.
limited store.
While at rest, skeletal muscle makes sufficient ATP
to meet its metabolic needs, and to store surplus
Muscle relaxation or return to resting length
 energy in the form of creatine phosphate and glyco-
 gen. Resting muscle can use fatty acids that are broken
While muscle contraction is an active process requir-
down in the mitochondria and the ATP used to make
ing energy, the relaxation of muscle is a passive
creatine phosphate. The glucose that is delivered
process. Elastic forces, opposing muscles, and gravity
 through the bloodstream can be converted to glyco-
act to return the muscle to its resting length. Such
gen. When the demands for ATP become greater, there
elastic fibers include connective tissue and many of
are three pathways for generating ATP: (l) aerobic
the muscle proteins, such as titin.
respiration, (2) ADP interacting with creatine phos-
 Muscular tissue
193
A
B
Muscle
C
glycogen
2 Pyruvic acid
ATP
Creatine
Fatty acids
Blood 
Creatine
Aerobic respiration
kinase
glucose
 in mitochondria
Creatine
2 ATP?
phosphate
 2 Pyruvic acid
36 ATP
NADH + H
CO, +H,0
NAD+
 2 Lactic acid
Direct phosphorylation
 Anaerobic metabolism 
Aerobic metabolism
 of creatine phosphate
Energy substrate is
Energy substrate is glucose
Energy substrates are
creatine phosphate
glucose, pyruvate, and amino
acids
 Uses no O2: produces 1
Uses no O2; produces 2
Uses Oz; produces 36
ATP
ATP/glucose and 2 lactic acids
ATP/glucose, COz, and H,0
Fig. 7.18. ATP production in muscle. There are three mechanisms for generating ATP in muscle fibers. (A) During the direct phosphorylation 
'assnu ui woy aseois Alaua ue 'audsoud auean sunpoid auseann oi dly wo paow s! dnoie aeudsoud e aeydsoud auean po
When ADP is plentiful, this reaction is reversed to produce ATP. (B) During glycolysis, glucose is anerobically broken down to two molecules
of pyruvate, which are then converted to lactic acid in order to regenerate NAD*. (C) In the presence of Oz, pyruvate is further metabolized to
COz and HzO, plus ATP.
phate, and (3) from stored glycogen through the
group from ATP to creatine. When ADP is present in
anaerobic process of glycolysis (Fig. 7.18).
the muscle, creatine kinase catalyzes the transfer of
 a high-energy phosphate group from creatine phos-
phate to ADP forming ATP. Creatine phosphate is
Aerobic mechanism
three to six times more plentiful in muscle than ATP
These two compounds together can provide enough
 When O2 is present, pyruvate enters the mitochondria
 e    s  r
where aerobic respiration occurs. This process pro-
 duces 36 moles of ATP for every 1 mol of glucose. During
is replenished.
aerobic respiration, the following reaction occurs:
Glucose + O, → CO, + water + ATP.
Anaerobic mechanism
Since muscle is able to store glycogen, the breakdown
 of glycogen can yield glucose for aerobic metabolism.
Although ATP and creatine phosphate can provide
In addition, muscle can get energy from blood-borne
energy for short periods of time, other mechanisms
glucose, pyruvic acid, free fatty acids, and some amino
 are needed to produce ATP Glucose can be metabo-
acids. During moderate exercise, aerobic metabolism
lized through glycolysis, the initial phase of glucose
is able to meet the energy demands of the muscle.
respiration. Glycolysis does not require oxygen, and
therefore is termed an anerobic (without oxygen)
 process, anaerobic glycolyis. Therefore, this process is
Creatine phosphate
utilized when there is insufficient O2 available for
aerobic metabolism to sustain the energy needs of the
While at rest, muscles are able to produce more ATP
muscle.
than is utilized. This surplus energy is used to synthe-
 During glycolysis, one molecule of glucose is metab-
size creatine phosphate, an energy storage form found
olized to 2 molecules of pyruvic acid. During this
exclusively in muscle. The enzyme creatine kinase
 process, 2 ATPs are produced per molecule of glucose.
catalyzes the transfer of a high-energy phosphate
Therefore, anaerobic glycolysis can produce only 5%
194  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of the amount of ATP from glucose as aerobic respiration
Types of muscle fibers
whereas aerobic respiration produces 95% of the ATP.
In the process of breaking down glucose, NAD+ is
There are three functional ways to classify skeletal
reduced to NADH + H+. In order to continue glycoly-
muscle fibers: (1) speed of contraction, (2) metabolic
sis, the cell must be able to oxidize NADH back to
pathways forming ATP, and (3) myoglobin content:
NAD'. When oxygen is not present, the cell can do this
 Speed of contraction. Based on rate of contraction,
only by converting pyruvate to lactic acid, during
which NAD+ is regenerated. Lactic acid then diffuses
fibers can be classified as fast or slow. Speed is
based on the rate at which the myosin ATPase
out of the cells and goes to the liver, heart, or kidney.
 In the liver, it can be converted back to glycogen.
splits ATP.
2.
 Metabolic pathways forming ATP. Fibers that rely
 on oxygen-requiring pathways for generating ATP
are called oxidative, whereas those that rely on
Muscle fatigue and oxygen consumption
anaerobic glycolysis are called glycolytic.
3.
 Myoglobin content. Some muscle fibers have a
Muscle fatigue is the inability of muscle to contract
large amount of myoglobin, the red-colored
 n      d 
 protein that binds oxygen in muscle fibers. These
tions within the muscle fiber, since it occurs even in
fibers are termed red muscle fibers. In contrast,
5
 the presence of sustained neural input. Muscle fatigue
 some fibers have low myoglobin content and are
differs from central fatigue, in which the muscle is still
called white muscle fibers.
 able to function but the mind is unwilling.
Based on these criteria, there are now three major
While the exact mechanism of muscle fatigue is
categories of muscle fibers, including slow oxidative
unknown, several factors probably play a role. These
fibers, fast oxidative-glycolytic fibers, and fast glyco-
include inadequate release of Ca?+ from the SR, deple-
lytic fibers—sometimes called slow, intermediate, and
tion of creatine phosphate, insufficient O2, depletion
fast fibers, respectively. To further complicate matters,
of glycogen, buildup of lactic acid (decrease in pH)
 these fibers are also called Type I, Type I-A, or Type
and ADP, or depletion of ACh from motor neurons.
 II-B fibers, respectively While there are many more
 Furthermore, the lack of ATP in fatigued muscle may
types of fibers, these are three such classifications that
compromise the action of the Na*-K+ pump on the
sarcolemma, causing a loss of intracellular Kt.
allow for the discussion of general characteristics
(Table 7.1). For example, slow fibers allow for pro-
During prolonged exercise, muscles accumulate
lactic acid. This lactic acid must be reconverted to
longed, sustained activities that are powered by
 pyruvic acid. In addition, the animal must replenish
aerobic metabolism and that fatigue slowly. Such
fibers have a good blood supply, a high myoglobin
 rsrd  r p sis o
ATP, and the liver must convert blood lactic acid to
content and many mitochondria. Conversely, fast gly-
colytic fibers are better suited for quick, powerful
glycogen. These processes all require O2, leading to
what was termed the "oxygen debt," or the amount of 
movements that occur over a short period of time and
that fatigue quickly. Since these latter fibers contract
extra O, that an animal must inspire to restore homeo-
quickly, they rely on endogenous glycogen stores
stasis. Since body temperature and enzymatic reaction
rates are elevated for a period of time after exercise, a
rather than glucose delivered via the bloodstream, and
better term for the increased oxygen needed following
they have fewer mitochondria and little myoglobin.
exercise is recovery oxygen uptake. During the recovery
 period, the muscle fibers return to their pre-exertion
Effects of exercise on muscles
conditions.
 Exercise results in changes in the muscle. With endur-
ance exercise, there is a prolongation of the time to
Heat production
fatigue. This resistance to fatigue appears associated
with increases in aerobic power and anaerobic capac-
Since metabolism is not 100% efficient, the by-product
ity. Such changes include increases in muscle buffer
of metabolism is heat. While a resting muscle fiber is
 ing capacity and citrate synthase activity and reduced
approximately 42% efficient, an active fiber is only
glycogen utilization. There is also an increase in the
about 30% efficient. The remainder of the energy
capillary-to-muscle fiber ratio, the number of mito-
appears as heat that is used to warm the tissues and
chondria, and the amount of myoglobin.
fluids and help maintain normal body temperature.
With sustained but relatively weak muscle activity,
The excess heat produced when muscles are active is
the muscle does not display significant hypertrophy.
the reason body temperature climbs during exercise.
However, high-intensity anaerobic activity is associ-
 Muscular tissue
195
Table 7.1.(
 Characteristics of skeletal muscle fibers.
Functionaf Characteristics
Sfow Oxidative
Fast Oxidative-Gfycofytic
Fast Gfycofytic
Fibers (Type I fibers)
Fibers (Type II-A)
Fibers (Type II-B)
 Structural Characteristics
Fiber diameter
Smallest
Intermediate
Largest
Myoglobin content 
Large
Large
 Small 
Capillaries
Many
Many
Few
Mitochondria
Many
Many
Few
Color
Red
Red-pink
White
 Functional Characteristics
 Capacity to generate ATP
High 
Intermediate
Low
Method to generate ATP
 Aerobic respiration 
 Both aerobic respiration and
Glycolysis
glycolysis
Rate of ATP hydrolysis
Slow
Fast
Fast
 Contraction velocity
Slow
Fast
Fast
Fatigue resistance
High
Intermediate
Low
Creatine kinase content 
Low
Intermediate
High
Glycogen stores
Low
Intermediate
High
 Order of recruitment
First
Second
Third
 Primary function of fibers
 Postural; endurance-type
 Sprinting; walking 
 Short-term activities
activities
Presence of Gap Junctions
No
Yes; located at intercalated
 Present in single-unit, but not 
discs
multiunit smooth muscle
 Fibers Contain lndividual
Yes
No
 Present in multiunit, but not 
 Neuromuscular Junctions
single-unit, smooth muscle 
Source of Calcium for Contraction
 Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Sarcoplasmic reticulum and 
Mostly extracellular fluid, but
 extracellular fluid
also sarcoplasmic reticulum
Site of Calcium Binding and
Troponin located on thin
Troponin located on thin
Calmodulin located in
Regulation
filaments
filaments
sarcoplasm
Contraction
Rapid onset, can tetanize.
Develops slowly; cannot 
 Slow onset; may tetanize,
 Depending on fiber type, can
tetanize
but generally fatigues slowly
fatigue rapidly
 Effect of Nervous System lnput
 Excitation at nicotinic receptors
Cause contraction
Cause contraction
Respiration
Aerobic and anaerobic
Aerobic
Primarily aerobic
ated with muscle hypertrophy. This is because this
Box 7.1
Carnitine and exercise
type of exercise is associated with strength more than
Carnitine is needed for optimal mitochondrial oxi-
with endurance. Such hypertrophy is due to increased
dation. An animalgets carritine from dietary sources
 muscle fiber size rather than hyperplasia (i.e., increase
such as meat or dairy products, endogenous biosyn-
in cell number) (Box 7.1).
 thesis, or from dietary supplements. While supple-
 mental carnitine does not appear to enhance exercise
 performance in untrained humans,there is evidence
that it may be beneficial in trained individuals. In
Cardiac muscle
 recent studies conducted with Standardbreds, long-
 term (5 weeks) dietary supplementation with carni-
Cardiac muscle, composed of cardiac muscle cells
tine given in conjunction with exercise increased the
 percentage of type Il-Afibers, increased the capillary-
called cardiocytes or cardiac myocytes, is found exclu-
 sively in the heart. It is considered as involuntary,
o asr areds on paeade pue 'on -o
striated muscle.
196  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cardiac versus skeletal muscle cells
Structure
Cardiac muscle has several structural differences from
Smooth muscle cells are long and slender, varying
skeletal muscle fibers:
from 5 to 10 μm in diameter and 30-200 μm in length,
with a single, centrally located nucleus. There are no
Cardiocytes are smaller in diameter and length
T tubules, and the sarcoplasmic reticulum is not as
than skeletal muscle fibers.
well organized as in skeletal and cardiac muscle. As
2.
 Cardiocytes generally have a single, centrally
discussed in the following, the source of Ca²t for
located nucleus, although occasionally a cell may
smooth muscle contraction is mostly the extracellular
have two or more nuclei. In comparison, skeletal
space. To facilitate the entry of Ca2t, the sarcolemma
muscle fibers are multinucleated.
of smooth muscle has in-foldings called caveoli that
3.
T tubules are shorter and broader, and they lack a
increase the surface area.
triad. The T tubules encircle the sarcomere at the
 Smooth muscle also lacks the well-organized con-
Z-line rather than at the overlap between thin and
nective tissue sheaths found in skeletal muscle. There
thick filaments.
is an endomysium found between smooth muscle
4.
 The SR lacks terminal cisternae.
cells that is secreted by the smooth muscle cells and
5.
The sarcoplasm of cardiocytes contains a large num-
that contains blood vessels and nerves.
ber of mitochondria since cardiac muscle is almost
While smooth muscle contains actin and myosin, it
exclusively dependent on aerobic metabolism.
lacks myofibrils and sarcomeres that cardiac and skel-
6.
Cardiocytes connect with each other at specialized
junctions called intercalated (intercal = to insert
etal muscles possess. As a result, smooth muscle lacks
striations, hence the name smooth or nonstriated muscle.
between) discs.
Thick filaments are found throughout the smooth
At the intercalated discs, the sarcolemma of the
muscle cell. Cross bridges are more numerous in
adjacent cardiocytes have irregular thickenings that
smooth muscle since they are found along the entire
connect the cells to one another. Within these regions
length of the myosin filament, which is also longer
are desmosomes that hold the cells together, as well
than in skeletal muscle. In addition, scattered through-
as gap junctions. The gap junctions allow ions, small
out the sarcoplasm is a network of intermediate fila-
molecules, and an action potential to move between
ments composed of the protein desmin (Fig. 7.19).
adjacent cells. Since the cardiocytes are mechanically
Attached to the intermediate fibers are structures called
and functionally connected, they are said to act as a
dense bodies. Some dense bodies attach directly to the
functional syncytium, meaning that they act as a fused
sarcolemma, and the thin filaments are attached to
mass of cells.
dense bodies. Therefore, dense bodies act similarly to
the Z discs in striated muscle. The ratio of thin to thick
Functional characteristics
filaments is much lower in smooth muscle (1:13) than
in skeletal muscle (1:2). However, the thick and thin
filaments do interdigitate.
Unlike skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle can contract
Due to the network of attachments between the thin
without neural stimulation. Therefore, cardiac muscle
filaments and the sarcolemma, when the thick fila-
is said to be autorhythmic. Such contraction is gener-
ally controlled by a specialized group of cardiac cells
ments pull on the thin filaments, this causes the cell
that act as the pacemaker cells.
to shorten, with the areas between the dense bodies
bulging outward, creating an irregular cell surface
As will be discussed in Chapter 13, contraction of
cardiac muscle cells lasts approximately 10 times
(Fig. 7.19). Since the network of intermediate fibers
longer than that of skeletal muscle. This is due to the
crosses throughout the cell, during contraction the cell
 differing mechanism of the action potential. In addi-
does not simply shorten in one plane, but rather short-
tion, cardiac muscle cells cannot display wave sum-
ens in multiple directions.
mation, nor can they produce titanic contractions.
These features are important for the pumping function
Types of smooth muscle
 of the heart.
There are two types of smooth muscle: single-unit
smooth muscle and muliunit smooth muscle (Fig. 7.20).
Smooth muscle
1.
 Single-unit smooth muscle. Single-unit smooth
 Smooth muscle, also called nonstriated or involuntary
muscle, also called visceral smooth muscle, is
muscle, can be found surrounding the blood vessels,
widely distributed throughout the body. The cells
digestive tract, urinary system, reproductive system,
 are electrically coupled by gap junctions, allowing
and respiratory system. It can be found in the form of
an electrical impulse to move between cells. Since
bundles or sheets around other tissues.
the cells are electrically connected, they function
 Muscular tissue
197
Intermediate
as a unit in which an entire sheet of cells are inter-
fibers
Nucle us
Dense
connected. Such muscle is found along the wall of
bodie s
the digestive tract, the gall bladder, the urinary
bladder, and most other internal organs.
This type of muscle is often found as two layers:
 a longifudinal layer running parallel to the long-
 axis of the organ and a circular layer in which the
Relaxed smooth muscle cell
fibers encircle the organ. When the longitudinal
 layer contracts, this dilates and shortens the organ,
whereas contraction of the circular layer constricts
the lumen of the organ. Such muscle generally
displays rhythmic contractions that are controlled
 by pacesetter cells that can spontaneously depo-
larize and trigger contraction of the remainder of
the muscle.
2.
 Multiunit smooth muscle. In contrast to single-
unit smooth muscle, individual cells are separated
from one another in multiunit smooth muscle.
 Such cells generally lack gap junctions. This neces-
Contracted smooth muscle cell
 sitates that each cell must be innervated by a nerve
Fig. 7.19. Smooth muscle cell. A smooth muscle cellis long and 
ending. Therefore, such muscle has a richer nerve
slender, with a single nucleus. Unlike the skeletal muscle fibers, the
supply than single-unit smooth muscle. There is
seldom synchronous contraction of the entire
fibers have intermediate fibers attached to dense bodies. Many of
 muscle. This type of muscle is found in the iris of
the dense bodies are attached directly to the sarcolemma. Since the
the eye, along portions of the male reproductive
intermediate fibers crisscross the cell, when stimulated, a smooth
tract, surrounding the walls of large arteries, and
muscle fiber contracts in multiple directions.
in the arrector pili muscle of the skin.
Neural innervation of smooth muscle
A
Single-unit (visceral)
Smooth muscle is innervated by the autonomic
smooth muscle
nervous system, whereas skeletal muscle is innervated
Autonomic
Varicpsities
by the somatic nervous system. Unlike skeletal muscle
neurons
that has a well-defined NMJ, autonomic fibers run
over the surface of smooth muscle cells and have
Multiunit
 many bulbous swellings called varicosities. The neu-
smooth
muscle
rotransmitter is released from these varicosities and
diffuses into a wide synaptic cleft, forming a diffuse
C
junction.
Enlargement
showing
varicosity
Contraction of smooth muscle
Synaptic
vesicles
 Contraction of smooth muscle takes longer to develop,
Fig. 7.20. Types of smooth muscle, and their innervations. (A) In 
single-unit, or visceral, smoothmuscle there aregap junctions
 but lasts longer, than skeletal muscle. Smooth muscle
between the individual muscle cells. Therefore, when one cell is
can also shorten and stretch further than skeletal
stimulated by an autonomic neuron, the action potential can spread 
muscle. This is due to the differences in the structure
among cells so that single-unit smooth muscle can contract as a
 between the two muscle types. While tropomyosin is
unit. (B) In multiunit smooth muscle, individual muscle cells are
 separated from one another; therefore, each fiber needs its own
found in smooth muscle associated with the thin fila-
innervation. (C) The autonomic fibers that innervate smooth muscle
ments, troponin is lacking. There is less SR in smooth
have varicosities along their length that make diffuse synaptic
muscle, and smooth muscle lacks T tubules. As a
connections with muscle cells releasing neurotransmitters at these
 result, the action potential must spread only along the
locations.
surface of the cell, and the greatest source of calcium
for muscle contraction is the interstitial space. The
sequence of events for smooth muscle contraction is
as follows:
198
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 7.2. Comparison of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle.
 Properties
Skefetaf Muscte
Cardiac Muscte
Smooth Muscle
Location 
Attached to bones; or occasionally
Wall of the heart
Single-unit found in walls of
to skin in the case of some facial 
hollow organs; multi-unit found
muscle
 in intrinsic ocular muscles
Size
Single, long, cylindrical; Striated;
Branching: Striated;
 Fusiform; non-striated;
100μm-30cm
10-20μm × 50-100 μm
5-10 μm × 30-200μm
Number of nuclei
Multinucleated
Uni- or binucleated 
 Uninucleated 
Connective tissue
Epimysium, perimysium, and
 Endomysium attached 
Endomysium
components
endomysium
to fibrous skeleton
 Presence of sarcomere
Yes
Yes
 No; actin and myosin scattered
throughout sarcoplasm; actin
 attached to dense bodies
Presence and location
Yes; located at junction of A and I
Yes; located at Z disc
No; caveoli (infolding of cell
of T' tubules
bands
membrane)
 Presence gap junctions
No
Yes at intercalated discs
No; caveoli instead
5
Individual
Yes
No
 Present in multiunit but not
 neuromuscular junctions
single-unit muscle
Source of calcium
 Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Mostly extracellular
and extracelluar
 Site of calcium binding
Troponin on thin filaments 
 Troponin on thin
 Calmodulin in sarcoplasm
 and regulation
filaments
Contraction
Rapid onset, can tetanize depending
 Develops slowly cannot 
Slow onset, may tetanize but
 on fiber type can fatigue rapidly
tetanize
 generally fatigues slowly
 Effect of nervous system 
Yes; located at junction of A and 1
Yes; located at Z disc 
 No; caveoli instead 
bands
Respiration
Aerobic and anaerobic
Aerobic
 Primarily aerobic
The muscle is stimulated by autonomic fibers
 In addition to responding to the autonomic nervous
releasing either norepinephrine or ACh.
 system, smooth muscle can contract and relax in re-
2.
 An action potential spreads along the sarcolemma.
sponse to stretching; hormones; or changes in local
3.
 Cytosolic Ca?+ levels increase, with calcium coming
factors, including pH, O2, CO2, temperature, and ion
mostly from the interstitial space, but some from
concentrations. For example, stretching of the blad-
the SR.
der can cause contractions. Hence, the bladder can
4.
 Ca2+ binds to the calmodulin, a second messenger,
continue to function in an animal with a spinal cord
causing its activation.
injury. Epinephrine, released from the adrenal me-
5.
The activated calmodulin then activates myosin
dulla during a stress response, can cause the bron-
light-chain kinase.
chioles to dilate. For a comparison of skeletal, smooth,
6.
The activated protein kinase phosphorylates the
and cardiac muscle (discussed in Chapter 13), see
myosin head.
Table 7.2.
7.
 Phosphorylation allows cross bridges to form
between myosin and actin.
8.
The muscle contracts as Ca²+ is pumped out of
Muscle system
the cell.
 Note that in smooth muscle, calmodulin is serving
Naming muscles
a role similar to that of troponin in skeletal muscle in
that it binds calcium. Once activated, calmodulin acti-
The muscle system includes all the skeletal muscle
vates a myosin light-chain kinase that uses ATP to
 and is therefore responsible for voluntary movement.
phosphorylate the myosin head, thus allowing the
It is not the intent of this book to cover all the muscles,
myosin head to attach to actin. The pumping of
but rather to give an overview of many of the major
calcium out of the cell is a slow process partially
muscles involved in movement. The muscles will be
explaining the delay in smooth muscle relaxation.
covered by functional area.
 Muscular tissue
199
Generally, the name of the muscle gives consider-
 able information about its location or role. Muscles are
named by several criteria:
 Location. Sometimes, a bone or body region is
included in the name, giving an indication of its
location (e.g., temporalis is located over the tem-
poral bone and the intercostal muscles are found
 Parallel
Unipennate
Bipennate
between the ribs). The word deep (e.g., deep digital
flexor) indicates that the muscle is not found at a
superficial level.
2.
 Action. The action performed by the muscle may
be included in the name. For example, the exten-
sor digitorum extends a digit while the pronator
teres pronates a limb.
 Size. Whether the muscle is large or small may
be indicated in the name (e.g., pectoralis major,
adductor longus). The name may include such
terms as longus (long), brevis (short), maximus
Multipennate
Circular
Convergent
(largest), minimus (smallest).
Fg. 7.21. Fascicle arrangement. Muscle fascicles can have varying
4.
 Shape. Sometimes muscles are named according
arrangements allowing for different functions.
to their shape (e.g., deltoid or trapezius muscles).
6.
 Direction of the fibers. Terms, such as rectus, indi-
cate that the muscle fibers run parallel or straight
found around an orifice such as the orbicularis oris
relative to the body axis, whereas transverse muscles
muscle that surrounds the mouth. In a convergent
run at right angles to the same axis. Oblique fibers
muscle, the fascicles converge to the tendon for inser-
run at some other angle relative to that axis
tion. Therefore, the muscle begins wide, similar to the
6.
 Number of origins/bellies. The name may include
shape of a fan, and then narrows, as is seen in the
the number of heads (e.g., biceps brachii) or bellies
 pectoralis major muscle. In the pennate muscle, such
(digastricus).
as the gastrocnemius muscle, the fascicles are short
7.
 Attachment. Many times, the origin or attachment
and attach obliquely (penna = feather) to the tendon.
site is included in the name of the muscle (e.g,
In a unipennate muscle, the tendon runs along one
cleidomastoid is attached to the clavical, or its
side of the tendon, whereas in multipennate, the
remnant, and mastoid process).
tendon branches within the muscle and looks like
 many feathers laying side by side.
Muscles can have several types of attachments.
They may attach to a bone via either (l) a tendon,
which is a dense cord of regular connective tissue, (2)
Muscles as levers
an aponeurosis, which is a tendinous sheet, or (3)
fascia, which is common for superficial muscles, or (4)
The muscular and skeletal systems work together to
they may attach directly to the periosteum of the bone.
function as a lever system. A lever consists of a rigid
Examples of each include the biceps brachii, which
structure (i.e., bone) that moves around a fixed point
attaches via a tendon; the latissimus dorsi, which
called the fulcrum. Muscle contraction acts as the force
attaches via the thoracolumbar aponeurosis; the pla-
to move a load, or bone. Levers provide a mechanical
tysma, which attaches via the fascia; and the masseter.
advantage, allowing a force to move a heavier load
which attaches to the mandible.
either further or faster (Fig. 7.22).
Three different classes of levers exist, depending on
the relationship of the force, fulcrum, and load (Fig.
Arrangements of fascicles
7.23). In a first-class lever, the fulcrum is between the
force and load, which are at either end of the lever.
 As stated previously, skeletal muscles are arranged in
This is similar to a playground seesaw, and it provides
fascicles (Fig. 7.l). The fascicle arrangement can vary
 a mechanical advantage. The act of an animal lifting
(Fig. 7.21). Fascicles are sometimes found to be
its head functions as a first-class lever.
 -eed se o paa ae pue au yes e u pauree
 A second-class lever exists when the force is applied
 lel muscles (an example is the abductor digiti minimi).
 at one end and the fulcrum is found at the other end,
 If the arrangement is circular, the fascicles appear
while the load is placed in between. Such levers create
as concentric rings. Such an arrangement is typically
a mechanical disadvantage, and are thus rarely found
200
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Force x Distance = Resistance x Distance
skeletal muscles. When the biceps brachi flexes the
A
elbow, the insertion is located on the radius-ulna while
20 kg
the origin is located in the shoulder region. Contrac-
.25
tion of the muscle causes the leg to flex at the knee. In
a third-class lever, the speed and distance traveled by
the load are increased at the expense of effective force.
5 m
1000 kg
Muscle terminology
20 × 5 = 1000 × .25
B
Origins and insertions
?kg
Muscles are always attached to other structures at
either end. Generally, one end is in a fixed position
-2.5m
while the other end moves toward it when the muscle
is contracted. The fixed attachment site is called the
5 m
origin, and the movable end is called the insertion
1000 kg
(Fig. 7.24). While the origin is normally proximal or
?x2.5=1000 × 5
 Superior to the insertion, this is not always the case.
5
？=2000 kg
The sternocleidomastoid muscle originates at the
Fig. 7.22. Mechanical advantage versus disadvantage. A lever
sternum, and inserts at the mastoid process of the
 system can provide a mechanical advantage or a mechanical
temporal bone.
disadvantage. The equation shown at the top explains the
relationship between force and distance. (A) With this lever system,
Actions
a mechanical advantage is provided because of the position of the
fulcrum relative to the force and load. Twenty kilograms of force is
The movements of the skeleton caused by muscle
able to lift 1000kg of load. (B) With the fulcrum and load placed at
contraction involve flexion or extension, adduction
opposite ends of the lever, and a force provided in the middle, it 
requires 100 times the amount of force needed in the example shown 
or abduction, protraction or retraction, elevation or
 in A to move the same load. This is a mechanical disadvantage.
depression, rotation, circumduction, pronation or
supination, inversion or eversion. These actions are
defined in Table 7.3.
A First-class lever
C Third-class lever
 Muscles typically work in groups rather than indi-
vidually. For example, the biceps branchii and bra-
chialis cause flexion of the elbow, and the triceps
brachii, tensor fasciae anterbrachi, and anconeus
cause extension of the elbow. The agonist is the muscle
primarily responsible for producing a certain move-
ment, and the antagonist is the muscle whose action
 Opposes that movement. In the case of the elbow, the
Synergist
(stabilizes shoulder)
Antagonist
Fig. 7.23. Anatomical examples of lever systems. (A) In a first-class
(opposes flexion of elbow)
lever, the force and load are on opposite sides of the fulcrum. (B) In 
Origin -
 a second-class lever, the load is between the force and the fulcrum. (C)
 In a third-class lever, the force is between the load and the fulcrum.
Agonist-
(causes flexion
in the body. A wheelbarrow acts as such a lever. The
of elbow)
Insertion
calf muscles act as a second-class lever when causing
plantar flexion.
Fg. 7.24. Muscle functions and attachments. Using the thoracic
In a third-class lever, the fulcrum and load are at
limb of the horse, this figure demonstrates the origin and insertion
either end of the lever, and the force is applied between
of muscles, as well as the agonist and antagonist functions with 
the two. Tweezers work in this manner, as do most
regards to the elbow. (Figure modified from Getty, 1964.)
Muscular tissue
201
Table 7.3. Muscle terminology.
Term
Description
Abduction
Jo saoi aui supeaids d'a) Apog aui jo aueld ueipaw aui wony Aeme jo gu!l jo ainpnns e jo juaaao
moving a limb away from the center of the body)
Adduction
Movement of a structure or limb toward the median plane of the body (e.g., bringing the toes together or
moving a limb toward the center of the body)
Antagonist
Opposes the movement of the prime mover (e.g., the triceps brachi, which extends the elbow joint, is the
antagonist of the biceps brachi, which flexes the elbow joint)
Circumduction
Circular movement of an extremity describing the surface of a cone; involves successive flexion, abduction,
extension, and adduction (e.g., moving a limb in a circular motion)
Depression
Moving a structure in a ventral direction (e.g., dropping the shoulders)
Elevation
Moving a structure in a dorsal direction (e.g., shrugging the shoulders upward)
 Eversion
Twisting the foot to face the sole outward
Extension
as aun luuaiens ro 'uosod pann e wo sauy supuxa xg sauog uamag alsue aun luiseau
(knee)
Flexion
Decreasing the angle between bones. Ex: Bending the elbow toward a 90° angle.
Trunk lateral flexion
 Bending to the side
Trunk flexion
Bending forward
Shoulder flexion
Swinging the limb backward (in humans, it is swinging the limb forward)
 Plantar flexion
Movement of the ankle joint to push the sole of the foot downward
Dorsiflexion
Flexion of the ankle joint in order to raise the top of the foot upward
Insertion
The more movable of the two attachments. In the limbs, this is usually the more distal attachment
Inversion
Twisting motion of the foot to face the sole inward
Origin
The less movable of the two attachments. In the limbs, it is usually the more proximal attachment
 Pronation 
Movement of the palmar side of the paw downward
 Protraction
Moving a part of the body cranially in the horizontal plane. Ex: Pushing the shoulders forward
Retraction
Moving a part of the body caudally. Ex: Pulling the shoulders back
Rotation
Movement around the long axis
Lateral rotation
The cranial surface of a limb turns away from the long axis of the trunk (e.g., Gemelli)
Medial rotation
The cranial surface of a limb turns toward the long axis of the trunk
Supination
Movement of the forearm (radius and ulna) so the palmar side is rotated upward or forward as when a cat
laps milk off its paw.
Synergist
A muscle that indirectly aids the action of the prime mover. Ex. Teres major muscle is a synergist to the
latissimus dorsi muscle
biceps brachi is the agonist for flexion of the elbow
tendinous attachment, the muscle is attached to the
and the triceps branchii is the antagonist. A synergist
bone via dense connective tissue. In an aponeurotic
is a muscle that helps the agonist work more effi-
attachment, there is a flat, tendinous sheet attaching
ciently. Synergists may provide additional force to
the muscle, as is seen in the abdominal wall.
move the joint, or they may help stabilize the joint.
Major skeletal muscles
Muscle attachments
Muscles can make three types of attachments. In a
There are over 600 skeletal muscles in the body. We
fleshy attachment, there is an apparent direct attach-
will only cover the principal muscles, presenting
ment of the muscle to the bone, as in the case of muscle
them as groups controlling various parts of the body
attachments to the scapula. In actuality, the muscles
(see Table 7.4, Table 7.5, and Table 7.6 and Fig. 7.25,
are attached to the bones by very short tendons. In a
Fig. 7.26, Fig. 7.27, Fig. 7.28, and Fig. 7.29).
202
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Muscles of the head and neck
Table 7.4.
 Muscles of the head and neck.
Muscle
Description
Origin (O)/nsertion (1)
Action
 Muscles of Facial Expression and Mastication
Buccinator
Muscle contained within the wall of 
O—Fascia of cheek wall
Holds the cheeks toward the
the cheek
I—Fascia of cheek wall
mouth when chewing
Masseter
 Most powerful muscle for closing jaw
O—Zygomatic arch
 Elevates mandible (closes
I—Masseteric fossa of mandible
mouth)
 Mentalis
 Major muscle making bulk of muscle
O—Rostral end of mandible
 Elevates and protrudes lower lip
mass of chin
I—Skin of chin
Orbicularis oris
 Multilayered muscle of the lips
O—Lips
 Purses lips 
I—Lips 
 Pterygoid
 Medial
Two-headed muscle running along
O—Sphenoid and pterygoid bones
5
 Acts with temporalis and
Cha
internal surface of mandible 
I—Medial surface of mandible
masseter muscle to elevate
mandible (close mouth)
Lateral 
Two-headed muscle lying superior to
O—Sphenoid bone
 Protrudes mandible; in
medial pterygoid muscle
I—Neck of condyle of mandible
herbivores, cross jaw-action
 Platysma
"Grimace" and "neck-cording" muscle
O—Skin of neck
Retract lips
I——Angle of lips 
Temporalis
Fan-shaped muscle covering part of
O—Temporal fossa
 Closes mouth; elevates and 
temporal, frontal and parietal bones
I—Coronoid processs of mandible
 retracts mandible
O—Zygomatic bone near
Zygomaticus
Muscle running diagonally from cheek
 Retracts and elevates corners of
Zygomaticomaxillary suture
bones to corner of mouth
mouth
I—Angle of the mouth
Muscles of the Neck
 Brachiocephalicus
Cleidobrachialis
Complex muscle acting on head and/
O—Clavicle or its remnant
Depending on which end is
or limb
I—Cranial humerus
fixed (not moved), and whether
Cleidomastoideus
O—Clavicle or its remnant 
one or both sides (right and left)
I—Mastoid process of skull 
contract: Advances forelimb,
O—Clavicle or its remnant
turns head to the side, or flexes
 Cleidocephalicus
I—Dorsal midline of neck 
neck ventrally
 Sternocephalicus
In carnivores, consists of
OCranial part of the sternum
Flexes the head and neck and 
sternomastoid and sternoocipitalis. In 
(wn!qgnuew)
inclines them to one side.
 ox and goats, the sternoocipitalis is
Sternomandibularis may also
replaced by the sternomandibularis.
help open the mouth.
The horse has only
sternomandibularis.
I—Mastoid process of skull
Sternomastoid
O—Sternum (manubrium)
I—Mastoid process of skull
 Sternooccipitalis (dog
O—Sternum (manubrium)
and cat)
|—Occipital region of skull 
O—Sternum (manubrium)
 Sternomandibularis
I—Angle of the mandible
 Zygomaticoauricularis M.
Masseter M.
 Retractor anguli oculi lateralis M.
Transverse facial V.
Parotidoauricularis M.
Zygomatic M.
 Malaris M.
Angularis oculi v.
ParotidIn.
Buccal br. of facial N.and transverse facial A.
Levator nasolabialis M.
Auriculotemporal N.
Superior labial V.
Facial N.
Lateral nasal V.
Dorsal nasal V.
Transverse facial A.
Levator labi superioris M.
Parotid gland
Caninus M.
Communicating
Depressor labi
br. between
superioris M.
buccal br. and
mandibular marginal
br. of facial N.
MaxillaryV.
Linguofacial V.
Sternozygomaticus M.
Inferior labial V.
Parotid duct
(sternocephalicus M.)
Orbicularis oris M
Cutaneous faciei
Mylohyoideus M.
Mandibular marginal
M.(cut)
br. of facial N.
Buccinator M.
Depressor labi inferioris M.
Fig. 7.25. Superficial muscles of the neck of the goat. A, artery; br, branch; V, vein; In, lymph node; M, muscle; N, nerve. (With permission 
from Constantinescu, 2001.)
203
2 04 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Rhomboideus cervicis M.
Trapezius M. pars thoracica
 Trapezius M. pars cervicalis
 Splenius cervicis M.-
C4
Axillary fascia,
Serratus ventralis cervicis M.-
superficial sheet
Chapter
Axillary fascia,
deep sheet
Omotransversarius M.
 Supraspinatus M.
Cleidooccipitalis M.
C
Fig. 7.26. Deeper muscles of the neck of the goat. A, arterty; V, vein; In, lymph node; M, muscle; N, nerve. (With permission from
Constantinescu, 2001.)
Muscles of the pectoral limb and lateral thorax
Table 7.5.
 Muscles of the pectoral limb.
Muscte
Description
Origin (O)/Insertion (1)
Action
Extrinsic Muscles of Thoracic Limb'
 Brachiocephalicus
This is a wide muscle running from the head
Draws the lifted forelimb
and neck to the front limb. The clavicular
forward or draws the
intersection divides the muscle into the 
head to the side
 Cleidocephalicus and cleidobrachialis
Cleidocephalicus
O—Occipital and dorsal midline
 Pulls humerus forward 
of neck
I—Clavicle
Clavodeltoid
O—Clavicle
 Pulls humerus forward 
I—Cranial border of humerus
 Pectoralis
A broad flat muscle extending from the
sternum to the humerus
Pectoralis
O—Sternum
Adducts and retracts
superficialis
I—-Humerus (greater and lesser
limb (flex shoulder)
tubercles)
 Pectoralis
O—Sternum
Flexes shoulder and 
profundus
I-Cranial surface of the humerus
draws humerus caudally
Table 7.5.
Continued
Muscle
Description
Origin (O)/Insertion (1)
Action
Rhomboideus
Extrinsic muscle lying deep to the trapezius
O—Dorsal neck and thorax;
 Rotates (capitis and 
Cervicis
extends between dorsal medial scapula and
nuchal crest of skull
cervicis) or adducts the
Thoracis
midline from head or neck to cranial thorax
—Dorsal border of scapula and 
scapula (thoracis)
scapular cartilage
Trapezius
Triangular-shaped muscle extendling from
O—Cervicis: Median fibrous
 Both concurrently:
Cervicis
the dorsal midline of neck and thorax to the
raphe of neck
Elevate shoulder
Thoracis
spine of the scapula
Thoracis: Spines of T's-Tg or T4
Cervicis only: rotate
—(both parts)—Spine of scapula
scapula cranially
Thoracis only: rotate
scapula caudally
Latissimus dorsi
Broad, flat, fan-shaped muscle extending
O—Thoracolumbar fascia of 
Pulls humerus caudally;
 from dorsal thoracolumbar region to medial
thorax and lumbar region; and 
medially rotates and 
side of humerus
some caudal ribs
adducts the shoulder
ITeres tuberosity of humerus
 Instrinsic Muscles of Shoulder?
 Biceps brachii
One headed (Two-headed in humans)
O—Supraglenoid tubercle of
Extension of the
fusiform muscle
scapula
shoulder
I—Radial tuberosity; also ulnar
tuberosity in some species
Coracobrachialis
Small muscle crossing medial side of
O—Coracoid process of scapula
 Stabilizes and potentially
shoulder joint
IProximal shaft of humerus
flexes shoulder joint
Deltoideus
 Extends from scapular spine over shoulder
O—Spine of scapula; acromion
Flexes shoulder joint;
joint to the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus 
process of scapula
 slightly abducts humerus 
—Deltoid tuberosity of humerus 
Supraspinatus
 Fills the supraspinous fossa of the scapula
 O—Supraspinous fossa of scapula 
 Extends shoulder joint 
—Greater and lesser tubercule of 
humerus
Infraspinatus
Fills the infraspinous fossa of the scapula
 O—Infraspinous fossa of scapula
Abducts and rotates
—Infraspinous tubercle of
humerus, may flex 
humerus
humerus depending on
position
Teres major
 Extends from caudal border of scapula and 
O—Proximal 2/3 of caudal
Flexes shoulder joint
inserts on latissimus dorsi muscle on medial
border of scapula
side of humerus
I-Teres tuberosity of humerus 
Teres minor
 Small muscle ventral to the tendon of the 
O—Distal third of caudal border
Flexes/stabilizes
 infraspinatus muscle 
of scapula
shoulder
I—-Teres minor tuberosity of 
humerus
Subscapularis
Large muscle filling most of the space on the
O—Subscapular fossa of scapula
Adducts shoulder joint
 medial scapular surface and inserting on
ILesser tubercle of humerus 
humerus
Intrinsic Flexor Muscles of Leg?
Biceps brachii
Spans cranial surface of humerus
O—Supraglenoid tubercle of
Action distal to shoulder
scapula
is to flex shoulder; also
I—-Radial tuberosity; also ulnar 
 supinates paw in
tuberosity in carnivores
carnivores
Brachialis
Extends from caudal part of humerus to the
O—Proximal lateral humerus
Flexes elbow
radius
I—-Radial tuberosity
Intrinsic Extensor Muscles of Leg?
Triceps brachii
Multi-headed muscle crossing shoulder and
caudal leg
Long Head 
O—Caudal border of scapula 
 Extends elbow joint
I—Olecranon process of ulna 
Lateral Head
O—Lateral surface of humerus
Extends elbow joint
—Olecranon process of ulna 
(Continued)
205
Table 7.5.
Continued
Muscle
Description
Origin (O)/Insertion (1)
Action
Medial Head 
O—Medial surface of humerus
Extends elbow joint
—Olecranon process of ulna 
Accessory Head
O—Proximal caudal humerus
Extends elbow joint
(carnivores only)
—Olecranon process of ulna 
O——Latissimus dorsi
Tensor faciae
Thin, insignificant muscle arising from the
Extends elbow joint 
latissimus muscle
—Olecranon process of ulna 
 antebrachii
and antebrachial fascia
Anconeus
Small muscle filling olecranon fossa
O—Epicondyles of humerus 
Lifts joint capsule out of
I—Olecranon process of ulna 
joint space on full elbow
extension
I'Muscles that attach to the thoracic limb and some other part of the body.
2Muscles having both attachments on the thoracic limb bones.
Chapter
Latissimus dorsi M.
Trapezius M.
Tensor fasciae
antebrachii M.
 Serratus ventralis
thoracis M.
C4
Triceps brachii M.
C5
- Lateral thoracic N.
Omotransversarius M
 Ascending pectoral M.
C6
Descending pectoral M.
 Lateral cutaneous antebrachial N.
Cleidobrachialis M.
Deltoideus M.
BSrotantns
 Cranial cutaneous
antebrachial N.
Fig. 7.27. Superficial muscles of lateral thorax of the goat. C, cervical spinal nerves; M, muscle; N, nerve. (With permission from
Constantinescu, 2001.)
206
Muscular tissue
207
Muscles of the pelvic limb and body wall
Table 7.6.
 Muscles of the pelvic limb and body wall.
Muscte
Description
Origin (O)/Insertion (1)
Action
Sublumbar Muscles'
Psoas minor
A long, thin muscle extending from
O—Vertebrae T13-L5
 Stabilize back; flex vertebral
lumbar vertebral bodies to ilium
I—lliopubic tubercle
column
lliopsoas (psoas
Fused psoas major and iliacus 
 O—Lumbar vertebrae
 Flexes hip when leg is free;
major and iliacus)
muscle; chief flexor of hip 
I—Lesser trochanter of femur
flexes vertebral column when
leg is fixed 
Quadratus
Lies along underside of transverse
 O—Transverse processes of
 Stabilizes lumbar vertebrae
lumborum
 processes of lumbar vertebrae
lumbar vertebrae
IWing of sacrum and ilium
Rump Muscles2
 Gluteal muscle
Superficial
 Smallest, thinnest gluteal muscle
O—Sacral vertebrae
 Abducts limb of femur
|—Third trochanter
 Medial
Largest gluteal muscle
OWing of ilium
Extends hip, abducts limb
I—-Greater trochanter of femur
Deep
Moderately sized, fan shaped
O—Body of ilium
Extends hip, abducts limb
I—On or near greater trochanter
Tensor fasciae latae
Triangular-shaped
O—Tuber coxae
Tense lateral femoral fascia and
|Lateral femoral fascia, patella
thus flex hop joint and extend 
stifle
Pelvic-Associated Muscles?
Obturators
External
Fan-shaped muscle covering
 O—Ventral surface of pubis and 
Adducts thigh
obturator foramen externally
ischium surrounding obturator
foramen
I——Trochanteric fossa of femur
Internal
Fan-shaped muscle covering
O—Interior (floor) of pelvis
Rotates femur laterally
covering obturator foramen inside
surrounding obturator foramen
pelvic cavity
IT'rochanteric fossa of femur
Gemelli
Fairly insignificant hip rotator
O—lschium
 Rotates femur laterally
I——Trochanteric fossa of femur
Quadratus femoris
Small rectangular muscle that
 O—Ventral surface of the caudal
Outward rotation of the hip:
extends from ileum to femur
ischial tuberocity
minor action in extending hip
I—-Intertrochanteric crest, just 
 distal to intertrochanteric fossa
Body Wall
 Abdominal obliques
Four muscles forming ventrolateral
abdominal wall
External
 Sheet-like muscle extending
 O—Last several ribs and 
 Support the abdominal wall; 
cranially and ventrally from ribs
thoracolumbar fascia
assist forced expiration/
and thoracolumbar facia
|—Midventral
urination/defecation; twist trunk
Internal
 Sheet-like muscle deep to the
O—Tuber coxae and
Support the abdominal wall;:
external abdominal oblique 
thoracolumbar fascia
 assist forced expiration/
I— Ventral midline at the linea
urination/defecation; twist trunk
alba
Gracilis
Broad, superficial muscle extending
O—Symphyseal tendon (ventral
Adducts thigh
from pelvic symphysis to medial
pelvic symphysis)
thigh and inserting on the tibia 
IMedial surface of knee/leg
(Continued)
Table 7.6.
Continued
Muscle
 Description 
Origin (O)/nsertion (1)
Action
Rectus abdominis 
Tow long, straight muscles running 
O—Sternum
 Support/balance
 fom sternum to prepubic tendon
—Prepubic tendon
Thigh Musclesd
Mamstrings
Biceps femoris
Largest and most lateral of caudal
O—lschial tuberocity
Extends thigh, flexes leg
thigh muscles
I—Lateral surface of knee/leg
Semimembranosus
 Arises with semitendinosis muscle
O—lschial tuberocity
 Extends hip, flex or extend
form ischiatic tuberosity. Splits into
I—Posterior surface of femur and
knee (stifle)
two bellies.
tibia
Semitendinosus
 The longest hamstring: forms
-lschial tuberocity
 Extends hip and tarsus, flexes
caudal border of thigh.
I—-Tibia and calcanean tuberosity
knee (stifle)
Pectinius
Long, spindle-shaped muscle on
O—Pubic tendon
 Adducts limb and flexes hip
medial thigh
|—Femoral shaft
Quadriceps femoris
 Large muscle covering lateral,
Main stifle (knee) joint extensor
 medial and cranial surfaces of
femur
5
Vastus lateralis
 O—Cranial and inferior to greater
Extends knee (stifle)
trochanter of femur and along
linea aspera
I—-Tibial tuberosity via patellar
ligament
Vastus intermedius
O—Craniolateral surface of
 Extends knee (stifle)
femur and linea aspera of femur
|—-Tibial tuberosity via patellar 
ligament
Vastus medialis
O—Entire length of linea aspera
 Extends knee (stifle)
of femur
ITibial tuberosity via patellar
ligament
Rectus femoris
O——Rectus femoris area of ilium
Extends knee (stifle); flexes hip
I—Tibial tuberosity via patellar
ligament
Sartorius
A strap-like muscle on medial thigh
OIlium
 Flexes hip joint and extends
|—Knee
knee
'Originates from ventral surface of caudal thoracic and lumbar vertebrae and inserts on the os coxae and femur
2Originates from the ilium and inserts on the femur.
Originiates caudomedial to the hip joint and inserts in or near trochanteric fossa.
4Includes extensors of the stifle that are innervated by the femoral nerve, adductors and hamstring musles.
208
Sciatic N.
Gluteobiceps M. (cut)
Pudendal N.
Deep gluteal M.
Cranial gluteal A.N.
Pelvic Nn.
Internal iliac A.
Middle gluteal M. (cut)
Accessory gluteal M.
Caudal rectal N.
Caudal gluteal N.
Rectum
Anus
Vulva
Lateral part
of iliacus M.
-Deep perineal N.
from
Labial N.
 pudendal N.
Mammary br.
Lateral cutaneous
femoral N.
Caudal cutaneous
femoral N.
Semimembranosus M.
 Internal pudendal A.
TensorfasciaelataeM.
Gemelli Mm.
Quadratus femoris M.
 Gluteobiceps M. (cut)
Rectus femoris M.
Vastus lateralis M..
Adductor M.
Deep sheet
 of fascia lata
Superficial sheet
Gluteobiceps M.
SemitendinosusM.
Superficial sheet 
of fascia lata
Fig. 7.28. Deeper muscles of left pelvis and thigh of goat, lateral aspect. A, artery; M, muscle; N, nerve; br., branch. (With permission from
Constantinescu, 2001.)
209
210 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Iliacus M.
External iliac V.A.
SciaticN
lidle gluteal M.
Femoral V.A.N.
Gemelli Mm
Psoas minor M.
Biceps femoris M. (cut) 
Tensor fasciae
Gracilis M.
latae M.
(cut and
Psoas major M.
reflected)
Quadratus femoris M.
Vastus
lateralis M.
Fascia iliaca
Semimembranosus
Adductor M.
Adductor M.
Pectineus M.
Tensor fasciae
Medial circumflex
(cut and reflected)
latae M.
femoral V.A.
V.
Semitendinosus M.
(reflected)
Commonfibular N.
Rectus femoris M.
Semitendinosus M.
- Tibial N.
-Popliteal In.
Vastus medialis M.
> Gracilis M. (cut and
reflected)
Medial head of
Caudal cutaneous
gastrocnemius M.
 sural N.
Supeficial digitl flexor M-
Lateral saphenous
5
Lateral head of
V. (reflected)
gastrocnemius M.
of semitendinosus M
of biceps femoris M.
) uia 'A au 'n aosnw ' adse ieip (a) adse leaen () reo jo ytyn u ui salsnw dap pue leidns et'2 
permission from Constantinescu, 2001.)
Stay apparatus of a horse
placement of collateral ligaments behind the axis
of the joint.
The stay apparatus allows a horse to rest while stand-
 Carpus flexion. The carpus would tend to flex, but
ing, using little muscular activity or fatigue. The stay
this is prevented by the tendon of the biceps
apparatus uses a system of tendons and ligaments to
brachii, the lacertus fibrosus, and the tendon of
"lock" the lower portion of the leg, thus requiring
the extensor carpi radialis acting cranially, and
minimal muscular effort to stand (Fig. 7.30). The stay
 the flexor tendons and accessory ligaments acting
apparatus of the thoracic limb consists of the tendi-
caudally.
nous tissue of the serratus ventralis muscles, biceps
a.
The lacertus fibrosus is a tendinous band
brachi, lacertus fibrosus, radial carpal extensor,
that connects the tendon of the biceps bra-
common digital extensor, long head of the triceps, sus-
chii muscle to the tendon of the extensor
pensory ligament and its branches, collateral liga-
carpi radialis muscle, thus forming an unbro-
ments, superficial and deep digital flexor tendons, and
ken line of force from the shoulder to the
their accessory ligaments. The stay apparatus works
metacarpus.
as follows:
b
Tendon of the extensor carpi radialis. Tension
is transmitted through the tendon of the biceps
Shoulder flexion. Prevented by the tendon of the
brachi and pulls the lacertus fibrosus, which
biceps brachi.
directs tension down to the tendon of the
a.
Serratus ventralis. When the horse is at rest,
extensor carpi radialis and then down to the
the body is suspended from the scapulae by
metacarpus.
fibrous tissue in the serratus ventralis that
 Carpus hyperextension. This is prevented by the
causes the shoulder to flex.
cube shape of the carpal bones and the palmar
b.
 Biceps brachii. The tendon of the biceps brachii
carpal ligament.
runs the length of the muscle. Stretching this
  d s s x 
5.
tendon prevents flexion of the shoulder.
 suspensory apparatus, the extensor branches of 
 Elbow flexion. The elbow tends to flex because of
the suspensory ligament, and the flexor tendons
the weight of the animal. This is prevented by
and their accessory ligaments.
 Muscular tissue
211
 Serratus vertralis
 Triceps muscle, long head
Long tendon of
biceps brachii muscle 
Lacertus fibrosos 
 Extensor carpi radialis muscle 
 Collateral ligament
Accessory ligament of the superficial digital flexor
Tendon of extensor carpi radialis
 Superficial digital flexor
 Deep digital flexor tendon
Accessory ligament of the deep digital flexor
Tendon of common digital extensor :
 Suspensory ligament
Extensor branch of interosseous
Fig. 7.30. Stay apparatus of the thoracic limb of the horse. (Modified from Pasquini et al., 1995.)
Chapter summary
3.
Smooth muscle, located chiefly in the walls of
 hollow organs, is nonstriated, and is involun-
Overview of muscle tissues
tarily controlled.
Properties and functions of muscle
Skeletal muscle
The properties of all muscle include excitability.
contractility, extensibility, and elasticity.
Gross anatomy of a skeletal muscle
2.
 The functions of muscle include production of
movement of both internal and external body
 Skeletal muscle, constituting approximately 40%
parts, maintaining posture, stabilizing joints, and
 of body weight, is made up of muscle cells called
generating heat.
fibers.
2.
 Skeletal muscle is protected and strengthened by
Types of muscle tissue
connective tissue coverings. From superficial to
deep, these coverings are called the epimysium,
Skeletal muscle attaches to bones, is striated, and
 perimysium, and endomysium.
is voluntarily controlled.
3.
 Skeletal muscle attachments (origins/inser-
2.
Cardiac muscle is found in the heart, is striated,
tions) may be direct or indirect via tendons or
and is involuntarily controlled.
aponeuroses.
(Continued)
212   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Microscopic anatomy of a skeletal muscle fiber
2.
When stimulated, a motor unit responds with a
single brief twitch. A twitch has three phases
1.
Skeletal muscle fibers are long, striated, and
including the latent period (release of calcium
multinucleated.
from SR), the period of contraction (the muscle
2.
Most of their cell body is occupied by myofibrils,
tenses and may shorten), and the period of relax
which are composed of thick and thin myofila-
ation (calcium is resequestered and the muscle
ments consisting primarily of myosin or actin,
resumes its resting length).
respectively Their striated appearance results
3.
When stimulated rapidly, wave summation of
from alternating dark (A) and light (l) bands.
twitches occurs giving a graded response re-
3.
The functional urit of skeletal muscle is the sar-
sulting in unfused or fused tetanus. With
comere, which consists of alternating A- and
strong stimulation, many motor units can be re-
I-bands. Myofibrils consist of chains of sarcomeres.
 cruited in a process called multiple motor unit
 The heads of myosin molecules form cross bridges
summation.
that interact with the actin (thin) filaments.
4.
 Isotonic contractions occur when a muscle short-
+
The SR, comparable to the endoplasmic reticu-
ens (concentric contraction) or lengthens (eccen-
lum in other cells, is a system of membranous
tric contraction), thus moving a load. Isometric
tubules surrounding each myofibril. It functions
contractions occur when tension occurs with no
5
to release and actively sequester calcium ions.
change in the length of the muscle.
5.
 T tubules are invaginations of the sarcolemma
that run between the terminal cisternae of the SR.
 These tubules allow the action potential to go
Muscle metabolism
deep into the muscle fiber and interact with the SR.
 The energy source for muscle contraction is ATP,
which can be produced through either aerobic
Excitation-coupling and sliding filament theory
 and anaerobic metabolism of glucose, or from a
 coupled reaction transferring a phosphate group
 A motor end-plate potential develops when ACh
from creatine phosphate ADP to form ATP.
released by a nerve ending binds to ACh recep-
2
When ATP is produced by nonaerobic metabo-
tors (i.e., a ricotinic receptor) on the sarcolemma,
lism, lactic acid accumulates and an oxygen debt
causing depolarization of the muscle fiber. This
occurs. Following such activity, ATP must be
results in the production of an action potential
produced aerobically and used to regenerate cre-
that is self-propagating and unstoppable.
atine phosphate, and accumulated lactic acid
2.
 In excitation-contraction coupling, the action
 must be oxidized and NAD+ regenerated from
potential is propagated down the T tubules and
NADH.
causes the release of calcium from the SR into the
 Muscle contraction is only about 42% efficient,
sarcoplasm.
 with the remainder of the energy being liberated
3.
Calcium then binds to troponin, causing a con-
as heat.
formational change in its shape, allowing tropo-
 myosin to move and uncover myosin-binding
sites. This allows cross-bridges to form between
Smooth muscle
the myosin head and thin filament. Myosin
ATPase splits ATP, which energizes the power
Structure of smooth muscle fibers
strokes.
4.
The binding of a new molecule of ATP to the
 Smooth muscle fibers are spindle-shaped, have a
myosin head is necessary for cross-bridge detach-
single centrally located nucleus, and have no
ment. If ATP is not present, a rigor complex
striations. They also have no T tubules, and the
forms in which the myosin head remains bound
SR is not well organized.
to the thin filament.
2.
Generally arranged in sheets, smooth muscle
5.
Cross bridge activity ends when calcium is
fibers lack well-organized connective tissue
 pumped back into the SR.
coverings.
Actin and myosin filaments are present, but they
Contraction of a skeletal muscle
lack myofibrils and sarcomere.
+
Thick filaments are found throughout, as well as
A motor unit consists of one motor neuron and
a network of intermediate filaments which are
all the muscle cells it innervates.
attached to the sarcolemma via dense bodies.
 Muscular tissue
213
When the thick filaments pull on the intermedi-
whereas in multipennate, the tendon branches within
ate filaments, this causes the cell to shorten.
the muscle.
5.
There are two types of smooth muscle: visceral
and multiunit. Visceral smooth muscle cells are
coupled by gap junctions (electrical synapses)
Muscles as levers
and can contract as a functional syncytium. Mul-
tiunit smooth muscle cells lack gap junctions and
A lever consists of a rigid structure (i.e., bone)
 therefore can only contract when stimulated by
that moves around a fixed point called the
a neural signal.
fulcrum. Levers provide a mecharical advan-
tage, allowing a force to move a heavier load
either further or faster.
Contraction of smooth muscle
2
 In a first-class lever, the fulcrum is between the
force and load as in an animal lifting its head
Smooth muscle contraction depends on ATP and
(effort-fulcrum-load). This type of lever may
is initiated by calcium, mostly entering from the
operate at a mechanical advantage or disadvan-
extracellular space. Calcium binds to calmodulin
tage. In a second class lever, the force is applied
rather than to troponin (which is not present
at one end and the fulcrum is found at the other
in smooth muscle fibers), which then causes
end, as in how the calf muscles work. In a third-
phosphorylation of the myosin head to initiate
class lever, the fulcrum and load are at either end
contraction.
of the lever. This is the most common lever found
2.
 Smooth muscle can contract for longer periods
in skeletal muscle.
of time than skeletal muscle. It uses low amounts
 of ATP and does not fatigue.
Muscle terminology
3.
Neurotransmitters from the autonomic nervous
system (i.e., norepinephrine and ACh) can inhibit
or stimulate smooth muscle contraction. Smooth
The origin of a muscle is its fixed attachment
muscle contractions may also be initiated by
whereas its insertion is in the movable end.
pacemaker cells, hormones, local chemical factors,
2.
The movements of the skeleton caused by muscle
or mechanical stretch.
contraction involve flexion or extension, adduc-
tion or abduction, protraction or retraction, ele-
vation or depression, rotation, circumduction,
pronation or supination, inversion or eversion.
Muscle systems
3
 An agonist muscle produces a movement, while
its antagonist opposes that action.
Naming muscles
 Muscles can make three types of attachments. In
Generally, naming muscles takes into account a mus-
a fleshy attachment, there is an apparent direct
cle's location, action, size, shape, direction of fibers,
attachment of the muscle to the bone, although
number of origins/bellies, and attachment site.
in actuality, the muscles are attached to the bones
by very short tendons. In a tendinous attach-
ment, the muscle is attached to the bone via
Arrangement of fascicles
dense connective tissue. In an aponeurotic attach-
Skeletal muscles are arranged in fascicles. Fascicles
ment, there is a flat, tendinous sheet attaching
are sometimes found to be arranged in a straight line
the muscle as is seen in the abdominal wall.
and are referred to as parallel muscles. If the arrange-
 ment is circular, the fascicles appear as concentric
Stay apparatus of the horse
rings. In a convergent muscle, the fascicles converge
to the tendon for insertion. Therefore, the muscle
The stay apparatus allows a horse to rest while
begins wide similar to the shape of a fan and then
standing. using little muscular activity or fatigue.
narrows. In pennate muscle the fascicles are short
pue suopuai jo uaisas e sasn snenedde Aens au
and attach obliquely to the tendon. In a unipennate
ligaments to "lock" the lower portion of the leg, thus
muscle, the tendon runs along one side of the muscle
requiring minimal muscular effort to stand.
214
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Review questions and answers are available
Getty, R. 1964. Aflas for Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Iowa
online.
State Press, Ames, IA.
Pasquini, C., T. Spurgeon, and S. Pasquini. 1995. Anatomy
 of Domestic Animals, 8th ediftion. SUDZ Publishing, Pilot 
Point, TX.
References
Constantinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
Press, Ames, IA.
Chapter
Introduction to the nervous system
Contents
Organization of the Nervous System
216
Neurophysiology
222
The Neuron
217
The Resting Membrane Potential
222
Cell Body
217
 Membrane Channels
224
 Dendrites
217
 Postsynaptic Potentials
225
Axon
218
Generation of an Action Potential
226
 Synapse
218
 Propagation of the Action Potential
227
Classification of Neurons
220
Coding of Stimulus Intensity
229
 Supportive Cells
221
 Synaptic Transmission
229
 Ependymal Cells
221
Electrical Transmission
229
Astrocytes
221
Chemical Transmission 
229
 Oligodend rocytes
221
 Modulation of the Synaptic Signal
230
 Microglia
222
Neurotransmitters
231
Satellite Cells and Schwann Cells
222
Chapter Summary
237
The body must be in constant communication with
 in a highly coordinated and specific manner much like
both the internal and external environment. To main-
our older phone system in which signals were carried
tain homeostasis, the body must receive information
 to and from various locations via wire that had to pass
about the environment and then must be able to
 through a central switching station.
 respond to that information. These responses must be
 The nervous system can be viewed as having three
rapid and coordinated. The nervous system carries
components: sensory input, integration, and motor
out these functions.
output (Fig. 8.1):
information about what is happening inside (internal
Sensory
7information about both the internal
environment), as well as outside (external environ-
 and external environment must be gathered. Any
ment), the body. It communicates with all parts of the
change in the environment can act as stimuli.
body via electrical signals. This communication occurs
 Such sensory or afferent information is collected
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
215
216
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Sensory input
Central nervous systen (CNS)
Peripheral nervous system (CNS)
· Brain
· Cranial nerves
· Spinal cord
· Spinal nerves
Sens
sory (afferent) division)
Motor (efferent) division)
+ Somatic and viscera
 Motor nenve fbers
Integration
sensory fbers
· Spinal cord
Autonomic nervous system
 Somatic nervous system
· Involuntary nerve fibers
Voluntary (somatic) nerve
fibers
 Motor output
Sympathetic dlivision
Anabolic
· Fight or flight 
Fig. 8.1. Components of the nervous system. The nervous system
has a sensory component responsible for detecting stimuli and 
Fg. 8.2. Organization of the nervous system. The two main
 transmitting that information to the integration center. There, the
divisions of the nervous system include the central and peripheral
 information is processed and the appropriate response is conveyed
nervous system. The peripheral nervous system has a sensory
to an effector organ via the motor output.
division that carries signals toward, and a motor division that
carries signals away from, the central nervous system, respectively.
The motor division is further divided into the autonomic component 
10l
by specialized neurons called sensory neurons
that controls involuntary functions, such as gastrointestinal tract
and is transmitted as sensory input.
motility and heart rate, and a somatic component that controls
skeletal muscle. The autonomic nervous system is made of the
2
 The processing and interpreting of sensory input
 parasympathetic and sympathetic divisions.
is called integration.
 Once the information has been processed, the
appropriate response is elicited by sending a
motor, or efferent, signal to an effector organ. As
an example of this process, when an animal sees
The PNS is further divided into the sensory, or affer-
feed being placed in a feeder, the visual informa-
ent (ad = to + ferre = to carry), and motor, or efferent
tion is gathered by the eyes, which sends that
(ex = from), division. The sensory division consists of
 information to the brain (sensory input). The brain
sensory neurons located throughout the body that
 pe ) n nn s
project to the brain and spinal cord. This sensory input
sends a signal to the legs to enable the animal to
 is carried in the sensory division of the PNS. Sensory
walk to the feeder (motor output).
input originates from receptors, which are specialized
structures that detect changes in either the internal or
external environment. These receptors can be as simple
Organization of the nervous system
as the dendrite of a neuron, or they can consist of an
 organ adapted to detect a specialized type of informa-
For the purpose of presentation, the nervous system
tion such as the Golgi tendon organ, which detects the
is generally divided into two major divisions: the
stretch of the tendons. The motor response generated
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral
via the integrative function of the CNS is carried to
nervous system (PNS) (Fig. 8.2). The CNS includes the
either a muscle or endocrine gland by the motor divi-
brain and spinal cord. These are located in the dorsal
sion of the PNS.
body cavity and are encased in the skull and verte-
The motor division of the PNS is further divided
brae. The CNS includes not only neurons but also
into two parts: somatic nervous system and autonomic
blood vessels, connective tissue, and supportive cells.
nervous system. The somatic nervous system controls
The CNS is responsible for the integrative function
skeletal muscle contractions and is under voluntary
in which sensory information from both inside and
control. Therefore, an animal can consciously control
 outside the body is processed and the appropriate
 the somatic nervous system.
response is generated.
 The autonomic nervous system, also called the vis-
The PNS includes all the neurons outside the CNS.
ceral motor system, controls smooth muscle, cardiac
These include the spinal nerves that carry impulses to
muscle, and glandular secretions. In contrast to the
and from the spinal cord and the cranial nerves that
somatic nervous system, the autonomic nervous
carry impulses to and from the brain. Peripheralnerves
system is under involuntary control, meaning that its
consist of the neurons and associated blood vessels
regulation generally occurs at the subconscious level.
and connective tissue that lie outside of the CNS.
An animal does not have to consciously control the
Introduction to the nervous system
217
dilation or constriction of a blood vessel in the skin in
the hippocampus, has been shown to increase under
response to heat. Instead, this happens automatically
 certain conditions. It is assumed this happens in other
hence the name autonomic nervous system. The auto-
species.
nomic nervous system includes the sympathetic and
 parasympathetic divisions. These two divisions gen-
erally have an antagonistic effect on various functions.
Cell body
 For example, stimulation of the sympathetic nervous
 system will increase heart rate, whereas stimulation
The cell body, or soma, consists of a large, round
 of the parasympathetic nervous system will decrease
nucleus 5-10μm in diameter surrounded by cyto-
heart rate.
plasm, also called perikaryon (karyon = nucleus).
Within the cytoplasm are the normal cell organelles
except for the lack of centrioles that are responsible for
The neuron
formation of the mitotic spindle associated with cell
division.
The nervous system consists of neurons and support-
 The cytoplasm contains free ribosomes, smooth
ive cells. Neurons are excitable cells that are able to
and rough endoplasmic reticula (ERs), mitochondria,
 transmit an electrical impulse along their length. Sup-
 and Golgi apparatus. The rough ER is also known as
portive cells are responsible for making the myelin
Nissl substance that stains darkly in the presence of
sheath surrounding many neurons, providing nutri-
basic dyes called Nissl stains. The rough ER is the
ents, as well as performing a phagocytic role.
 major site of protein synthesis destined for insertion
Neurons are highly specialized cells that
can
into the membrane of the cell or an organelle. Free
1
respond to stimuli, and produce an impulse, and
 ribosomes are responsible for the synthesis of proteins
transmit that information to a distant site (Fig. 8.3).
destined for the cytosol. Smooth ER can be continuous
Neurons come in many sizes and shapes. They have
with rough ER and acts as a site where newly synthe-
a long life span and are generally considered amitotic,
 sized proteins are folded into their three-dimensional
meaning that they no longer divide. However, recent
structure. Smooth ER can also regulate cytosolic con-
evidence has revealed that within certain sites in the
centrations of ions such as calcium.
brain, neurons do reproduce. It has been demonstrated
 Also within the cytosol is an internal scaffolding
in songbirds that the number of neurons in regions of
called the cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton consists of
the brain associated with the production of songs
several components. The largest are the microtubules
 increases in the spring as the birds increase their rep-
 measuring about 20nm in diameter and running lon-
 ertoire in preparation for mating. Similarly, the number
gitudinally down the neurites (axons and dendrites).
of neurons in sites within the human brain, such as
 They are formed through polymerization of molecules
 of the protein tubulin. Associated with the microtu-
bules is another class of proteins called microtubule-
  s  d 
Dendrites
anchor microtubles to other parts of the neuron and
to each other. The second component of the cytoskel-
Mitochondria
eton is neurofilaments, which are called intermediate
 Golgi apparatus
Telodendria
fibers in other cell types, measuring 10nm in diameter.
Nucleus-
Node of
They consist of multiple subunits connected end to
Schwann Ranvier
end. Each subunit consists of three proteins interwo-
cell
 ven together. A third component is the microfilaments
measuring 5nm in diameter. They consist of two
Axon hillox
braided strands, each of which is made of polymers of
 the protein actin. Microfilaments not only run longi-
Axon
tudinally down the neurites but are also anchored to
Terminal bouton
(synaptic terminal)
the inside of the cell membrane.
Fig. 8.3. A typical neuron. A typical neuron has a cell body
(soma) that contains various organelles. The dendrites act as afferent
fibers carrying signals to the soma. A neuron typically has a single
Dendrites
axon that is the efferent fiber carrying signals away from the cell
body. Many times, the axon is surrounded by a myelin sheath that
The term dendrite is derived from the Greek word for
acts to insulate the process. In the periphery, Schwann cells make
"tree,” and as such, they look like the branches of a
the myelin, whereas in the central nervous system, it is made by
oligodendrocytes. The space between adjacent Schwann cells is
tree originating from the cell body. All of the dendrites
Called the node of Ranvier.
collectively make up the dendritic tree. The dendrites
218  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 on some neurons also have on their surface dendritic
cell does not spiral around the axon, but instead
spines. Dendrites act as the receptive region of the
encloses many axons at one time in what look like
neuron. The combination of the dendritic tree and
indentations on its surface. Such axons are said to be
dendritic spines makes for a large surface area that
unmyelinated. Adjacent Schwann cells do not touch
facilitates this function. The cytoplasm of the den-
one another, but instead form a space called the node
drites resembles that of the soma. As discussed further,
of Ranvier, or neurofibral nodes, in which the axonal
neurons can be classified based on dendrites.
 membrane is exposed.
 In the CNS, myelin is produced by another type
 of cell called an oligodendrocyte. Oligodendrocytes
Axon
are a type of glial, or supportive, cell in the CNS.
Instead of spiraling around the axon, the oligoden-
While the structures discussed earlier are common to
drocytes form end feet that surround the axon and
most cells, the axon is urique to neurons. The axon is
form the myelin sheath. One oligodendrocyte can
specialized to allow an impulse to be transmitted
thereby myelinate many axons, whereas a Schwann
along its length and thus carried from one location to
cell myelinates only a single axon. In the CNS, areas
another. A long axon is sometimes called a nerve fiber.
 containing myelinated fibers are referred to as white
A bundle of axons within the CNS is called a tract; it
 matter and generally consist of fiber tracts. Areas
is called a nerve in the periphery.
containing cell bodies are referred to as gray matter;
A neuron has a single axon that originates from the
collections of cell bodies are called nuclei.
 soma in a region called the axon hillox. This is where
The collaterals of the main axon trunk end in a
the nerve impulse originates and, therefore, is some-
series of fine extensions called telodendria. A collec-
 times called the trigger zone. The axon is unique in
tion of telodendria is called a terminal arbor. The
that it contains no rough ER; it contains few, if any.
telodendria end in a knoblike structure called the
free ribosomes; and its membrane has a different
axon terminal, terminal bouton, or synaptic knob.
 protein composition from that of the soma.
Microtubules do not extend into the terminal, but the
While the axoplasm (cytoplasm inside the axon)
terminal will typically contain synaptic vesicles. Syn-
contains neurofibrils, neurotubules, lysosomes, mito-
aptic vesicles are small membrane-bound spheres
chondria, and small vesicles, it lacks rough ER and
 measuring 50nm in diameter and containing quanta
ribosomes. Therefore, protein synthesis does not occur
of neurotransmitters. The axon terminal will end at
in the axon. Instead, proteins must be synthesized in
another neuron or cell such as an endocrine gland or
the soma and transported along the axon.
muscle cell.
Axons may extend less than a millimeter or over a
meter in length. Axons typically branch, forming col-
laterals that enable one neuron to communicate with
Synapse
several other sites. Occasionally, an axon collateral
may communicate with the same neuron from which
Where the axon terminal meets another cell is called
it originated, thus forming a recurrent collateral. The
the synapse. It consists of a presynaptic membrane,
 diameter of an axon can range from less than 1 μm to
 a synaptic cleft, and a postsynaptic membrane. The
as large as lmm. The thicker the axon, the faster the
 axon terminal will typically contain synaptic vesicles.
 speed of conduction of the nerve impulse down its
-ds oor eudde s uou araae 
length.
tic junctions.
 The nerve fibers of many nerves are covered with a
The synaptic terminal of one neuron can synapse on
whitish, fatty sheath called myelin. Myelin acts to
any part of an adjacent neuron. Therefore, this can
 protect and insulate the axon and increases the speed
create synapses such as axoaxonic, axodendritic, and
of conduction of the impulse. Whereas the speed of
axosomatic. When a neuron synapses on a skeletal
conduction may be 1m/s in unmyelinated fibers, it
muscle cell, it creates a specialized junction called a
can be 150m/s in myelinated fibers. The dendrites are
neuromuscular junction. If the neuron synapses with
always unmyelinated.
a gland, it creates a neuroglandular synapse.
In the PNS, the myelin is produced by the Schwann
There are two types of synapses, electrical and
cells. The Schwann cell spirals around the axon, pro-
 chemical, which have different functional properties
ducing many concentric circles enclosing the axon and
(Table 8.l). While chemical synapses are much more
forming the myelin sheath. During the spiraling
common between neurons in the mammalian and
process, the nucleus and cytoplasm of the Schwann
avian brain, electrical synapses are common between
cell gets squeezed to the outer layer of the cell and
nonneural cells such as glial cells, epithelial cells,
appears as a bulge on the outer surface. The outer
smooth and cardiac muscle cells, liver cells, and some
layer is the neurilemma. Occasionally, the Schwann
glandular cells.
Introduction to the nervous system
219
Table 8.1.
 Electrical versus chemical synapses
Type of Synapse
Distance within
Components of Synapse
Agent of
Synaptic Defay
Direction of
Synaptic Cleft
Transmission
Transmission
Chemical
20-40nm
 Synaptic vesicles, active
Chemical
15 ms 
Unidirectional
zone, postsynaptic
receptors
 Electrical
3.5 nm
Gap-junction channels
Electrical
Virtually absent
Bidirectional
 Pre synaptic membrane
Synaptic cleft
Postsynaptic membrane
Synaptic vesicles 
Snare proteins
Intramembranous
Synaptic
 proteins
Cleft
Presynaptic membrane
Hemichanne
(active zone)_
(connexon)
Postsynaptic
Closed
Open
membrane
Neurotransmitter
Receptor
Fig. 8.4. An electrical synapse. An electrical synapse consists of a
presynaptic and postsynaptic cells contains channels called
Fg. 8.5. A chemical synapse. A chemical synapse consists of
connexons, each composed of six protein subunits called 
 synaptic membrane, synaptic cleft, and a postsynaptic membrane.
 connexins. The connexon forms a cytoplasmic connection between
Since the nerve impulse cannot jump across the synaptic cleft, a
adjacent cells allowing ions and small molecules to pass between 
neurotransmitter is released, which carries the signal to the
both cells. The connexins can tilt toward each other, closing the
postsynaptic cell. The active zone of the presynaptic cell contains
 channel.
intramembranous proteins, thought to be calcium channels. When
the neuron is depolarized, calcium enters through the calcium
channels and causes the synaptic vesicles to bind to the presynaptic
membrane and release their contents through a process of
In electrical synapses, the pre- and postsynaptic
exocytosis. SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive proteins)
cells communicate through special channels called
 attaches synaptic vesicles to the presynaptic membrane.
gap junctions (Fig. 8.4). These junctions provide a
channel between the cytoplasm of the adjacent cells.
Gap junctions consist of a pair of hemichannels, with
 The chemical synapse is characterized by a synaptic
 one associated with the presynaptic membrane and
cleft 20-50nm wide (Fig. 8.5). Within the synaptic cleft
the other with the postsynaptic membrane. Each
is a fibrous protein matrix to help the two cells adhere
hemichannel consists of specialized proteins called
 to one another. An electrical signal cannot cross the
connexins. Six connexins combine to form a channel
synaptic cleft, so a chemical substance called a neu-
called a connexon through which ions can pass from
rotransmitter carries the signal to the postsynaptic
the cytoplasm of one cell to the cytoplasm of another
 cell. The neurotransmitter is stored in the synaptic
cell. The pore formed within the connexon is about
vesicles. The concentration of neurotransmitter can be
2nm in diameter, making it one of the largest known,
10,00o times higher than in the cytosol. This is accom-
and is of sufficient size to allow small organic mole-
plished by a countertransport system in which a mol-
cules to pass. It appears that the connexins can tilt 
 ecule of transmitter enters the vesicle in exchange for
toward one another to close the channel.
a H+ ion (Fig. 8.6).
 The electrical synapse allows an action potential to 
 Also found on the presynaptic membrane are
pass from one cell to another with virtually no delay.
pyramid-shaped proteins projecting into the cyto-
This is beneficial when it is necessary for a signal to
plasm. These proteins, and the associated cell mem-
 pass rapidly to another cell, and for that signal to not
brane, make the active zone. The active zone is the
be modified.
site of neurotransmitter release. The pyramid-shaped
220 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Bipolar
Unipolar
Pseudounipolar
Multipolar
neuron
neuron
Presynaptic
Choline
cholinergic
neuron 
Dendrites
2 Na+
Dendrite
Axon
endrites
ACh
AxOr
ACh
Axon
Axon
Synaptic
Synaptic
terminals
terminals
 Synaptic
terminals
Fg. 8.7.
 Classification of neurons. Anaxonic neurons lack an
axon. Bipolar neurons have one dendrite and one axon originating
Fig. 8.6. Pumping neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are actively
from the cell body. In unipolar neurons, the dendrite and axon
concentrated into the synaptic vesicles, using a countertransport
merge into a single process having a dendritic and axonic
system. The vesicle membrane has an H+-ATP pump that loads the
component. Pseudounipolar neurons have a small process coming
vesicle with H+. The neurotransmitter then enters the vesicle in
off at the cell body and leading to the axon. In multipolar neurons,
exchange for a molecule of H*. In addition, there is a transport
there are many dendrites but a single axon originating from the
 system on the presynaptic neuron membrane that transports either
cell body.
the neurotransmitter, or its precursor, into the cell. In this example,
 choline, the precursor of acetylcholine (ACh), is actively
 Cotransported into the cell with Nat.
dominate type of neuron is the multipolar neuron,
1
which has a single axon and generally has many
dendrites.
proteins associated with the active zone are believed
Classification based on axon length
to be calcium channels.
 Classifications based on axon length include Golgi
type I and Golgi type Il neurons. Golgi type I neurons 
Classification of neurons
have long axons and are considered projection neurons
 since they carry signals to other sites. An example
Neurons can be classified based on several character-
would be pyramidal cells with the cell bodies located
istics. These include the structural classifications based
in the cerebral cortex and whose axons extend to the
on the number of neurites that extend from the soma
spinal cord. Golgi type Il neurons have short axons
or the length of the axon, the function, or the neu-
and are involved in local circuits. Examples include
rotransmitter they contain.
 stellate or basket neurons in the cerebellum.
Classification based on neurite number
Classification based on function
Based on neurite number, neurons can be classified as
Based on function, neurons are classified the following
unipolar, bipolar, pseudouripolar, or multipolar (Fig.
ways: (1) sensory or afferent neurons, (2) motor or
8.7). Unipolar neurons are the simplest nerve cells,
 efferent neurons, and (3) interneurons or association
 and they have a single process. They are found in the
neurons. Sensory neurons respond to sensory stimuli
autonomic nervous system. Bipolar neurons have an
and transmit that information to the nervous system,
 with most information being carried to the CNS. Most
the dendrite and the axon. Many sensory neurons
sensory neurons are pseudounipolar, and their cell
are bipolar, such as those in the retina of the eye
 bodies are located in the dorsal root ganglion of the
 and olfactory epithelium of the nose. Pseudounipolar
 spinal nerves. Motor neurons transmit signals from
cells serve as mechanoreceptors that sense touch, pres-
the brain or spinal cord to the muscles or glands. Their
sure, and pain. The pseudounipolar neuron develops
cell bodies are located in the CNS. Interneurons are
d on      
the largest class of neurons—constituting 99% of all
cesses, but eventually, these two processes fuse into a
neurons, including all those neurons that are not
single axon that emerges from the soma. The axon
sensory or motor—and are generally multipolar. This
then divides into two segments, with one going to the
class can be divided into two groups. Relay or pro-
periphery and one going to the spinal cord. The pre-
jection interneurons have long axons and transmit
Introduction to the nervous system
221
signal, they make up only 10% of nervous tissue. The
remaining 90% is made of several cell types collec-
fively called neuroglia, or glia, that support, protect,
and nourish neighboring neurons both in the CNS
and PNS. The neuroglia of the CNS include (1) epen-
dymal cells, (2) astrocytes, (3) oligodendrocytes, and
(4) microglia. The neuroglia of the PNS include (1)
satellite cells and (2) Schwann cells.
B
Ependymal cells
The brain has four fluid-filled cavities within its
borders called cerebroventricles; the spinal cord has a
central canal. These cavities are lined with ependymal
Fig. 8.8. Diverging and converging neuronal pools. Interneurons
cells that range in shape from squamous to columnar
are involved in making neuronal pools. (A) Convergence occurs
d e   n   a  
when several interneurons synapse on a single neuron.
meable barrier between the cerebrospinal fluid and
(B) Divergence occurs when a single interneuron synapses on
fissue. The exception is ependymal cells covering the
 more than one interneuron.
choroid plexus (capillary tuft in each cerebroventricle
responsible for forming cerebrospinal fluid). These
signals over considerable distances, such as the dorsal
 ependymal cells form tight junctions creating a barrier
columns located in the spinal cord. Local interneurons
between the blood and brain. The cilia located on
have short axons and are involved in processing infor-
mation in localized circuits, such as the horizontal
 spinal fluid within the ventricular system.
 cells in the retina or stellate cells that inhibit Purkinje
cells in the cerebellum.
Interneurons, sometimes called association neurons,
Astrocytes
 are the most numerous of all neuronal types. Mostly
located in the brain and spinal cord, some are found
Astrocytes are star-shaped and are the most abundant
in autonomic ganglia. They function to distribute
 glial cells. They have radiating processes that expand
sensory information and coordinate motor activity.
at the end and form end feet that wrap around capil-
Interneurons produce patterns of cornections such as
laries. The astrocytes secrete some chemical that causes
divergence and convergence (Fig. 8.8). Information
the endothelial cells lining the brain capillaries to form
coming from a single source and spreading to multiple
tight junctions. These tight junctions form the blood-
neurons is known as divergence, whereas input from
brain barrier that greatly restricts the movement of
 multiple neurons synapsing on a single interneuron is
compounds into the brain. Astrocytes also help guide
called convergence.
the migration and connections of new neurons, control
the chemical environment around neurons, and help
Classification based on neurotransmitter
inactivate neurotransmitters that are released into the
 synapse. Since astrocytes are also connected via gap
Finally, neurons can be classified according to the neu-
junctions, they also signal one another, although the
rotransmitter they release. In the case of motor
function is unclear.
neurons, which innervate skeletal muscle, they all
release acetylcholine (ACh) and are called cholinergic
neurons. Neurons that release serotonin, such as
Oligodendrocytes
 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), are called serotonergic
neurons. An example would be those neurons in the
Oligodendrocytes have fewer processes than astro-
raphe nucleus of the brain stem.
cytes and smaller cell bodies. As already discussed,
these cells are responsible for producing the myelin
sheath found around axons in the CNS. This sheath is
Supportive cells
formed by the process of the oligodendrocyte that
       
Although neurons are the fundamental cell of the
 circles, much like wrapping layers of gauze around a
 nervous system and are responsible for transmitting a
cut finger.
222   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Microglia
These are small ovoid cells that have narrow cytoplas-
mic processes with many branches. These cells origi-
nate from mesodermal stem cells related to those
that produce monocytes and macrophages. They can
migrate within the CNS where they phagocytize
microorganisms and dead neurons. Although cells in
the peripheral immune system cannot enter the CNS,
the microglia seem to partially fill this role.
Satellite cells and Schwann cells
 Also called amphicytes, satellite cells surround neuro-
+
+
nal cell bodies in peripheral ganglia. Their function
is unknown. As previously discussed, Schwann cells
form the myelin sheath around peripheral axons.
Therefore, they are analogous to oligodendrocytes.
Neurophysiology
The neuron is a highly excitable cell that is able to
 respond to and transduce a stimulus into an electrical
-70 mV
potential. Like an electrical wire, an axon carries a
signal along its length. Whereas in an electrical wire
the signal involves the flow of electrons along the
length of the wire, nerve cells are poor conductors of
electricity over a long length. Instead of the movement
of electrons, neurons rely on the flow of charged ions
Voltmeter
to propagate the signal. The nerve impulse, or action
potential, can travel over long distances without
Fig. 8.9. Resting membrane potential. When a voltmeter is used to
diminishing.
compare the voltage difference between the inside and outside of a
neuron membrane, a membrane potential of approximately -70 mV
is typically measured.
The resting membrane potential
Nerve cells and muscle cells have an excitable mem-
most important ions with regard to membrane poten-
brane. When such a cell is not generating an impulse,
tial, the concentration of Na and Cl is higher outside
it is said to be at rest. When at rest, the cytosol has
the cell, whereas the concentration of K+ and organic
a negative electrical charge relative to the outside
anions is higher inside the cell. The organic anions
of the cell (Fig. 8.9). The potential energy generated
consist mostly of proteins and amino acids. These
by the separation of charge across the membrane is
differences in ion concentrations establish chemical
called voltage and is measured in volts or millivolts
gradients.
(1 V = 1000mV). By placing an electrode both inside
The lipid bilayer of the cell membrane acts as an
and outside the cell, a voltage can be measured
 insulator between the interior and exterior of the cell.
between these two sites. That voltage is called the
Ions cannot cross the membrane except by way of
potential difference, or potential. The difference in 
ion channels. Within the membrane there are passive
electrical charge across the membrane of a cell at rest
ion channels, sometimes called leak channels, which
is called the resting membrane potential, and it is typi-
remain open. These passive charnels are most perme-
cally about -60 to -70mV.
 able to K* and chloride ions, relatively less permeable
The inside and outside of the cell is separated by a
to Na*, and impermeable to proteins. Since K+ is
membrane that acts as a semipermeable membrane.
in higher concentrations inside the cell, it tends to
The membrane potential is caused by the unequal dis-
 diffuse outwardly, down its concentration gradient.
tribution of ions across the membrane. For the four
The movement of ions to eliminate the potential dif-
 Introduction to the nervous system
223
ference is called a current. How much the membrane
RT
 Pk[K+ ]ouside
Vm=
restricts the movement of ions is a measure of its
-In
Ps[K+ Jinside
resistance. As K+ moves outward, an excess of nega-
Pna [Na Jouside  Pea[Cl- Jouside
tively charged anions remain inside the cell, thus
PNa [Na* Jinside
Pa [Cl- linside
establishing an electrochemical gradient. Eventually,
the movement of K+ outward reaches equilibrium
where Vm is the membrane potential and P is the
because the outwardly directed chemical gradient is
permeability of the respective ion. The relative perme-
opposed by the inwardly directed electrical gradient.
ability of the ions is P:Pna :Pci = 1.0:0.04:0.45. Note
This point is called the ionic equilibrium potential,
that in the Goldman equation, the concentrations of
or equilibrium potential, and is represented by the
Cl inside and outside the membrane are reversed
symbol Ejon
compared to Na+ and K+ since Cl is an anion.
The equilibrium potential of an ion can be calcu-
At rest, the flow of ions is not static but is in equi-
lated using the Nernst equation:
 librium such that Na is moving into the cell while K+
[ion]outside
is moving out (Fig. 8.10). This movement is countered
RT,
Eton = 2.303
log
by an active Na*-K+ ATPase. This active transport
zF
[ionjinside
system pumps three molecules of Na+ out of the cell
for every two molecules of K+ pumped back in. This
where Eion equals ionic equilibrium potential, R equals
 helps maintain the unequal distribution of ions across
the gas constant, T equals absolute temperature, z
equals charge on the ion, F equals Faraday's constant,
the cell membrane (Box 8.1).
and [ion] is the concentration of the ion either inside
Y
or outside the cell. At body temperature, the Nernst
equation for the monovalent ions K+, Na*, and Cl can
be simplified to
[ionJoutside
Eton = 61.54 mV log
 Extracellular space 
[ionjinside
C-
Na+
CL-
whereas for Ca", a divalent cation, the equation
K*channel
Passive
would be
Na* channel
3 Na +
[Ca++Jouside
Nerve
Na
Eca = 30.77 mV log
membrane
ATPase
[Ca++ linside
Protein
2K
Eion is very important for understanding the effect
Na+
ATP
ADP
 an ion has on the membrane potential (Table 8.2).
d+
If the membrane were permeable only to K+, the
Protein
Protein
Qytosol
At this point, the chemical gradient for K+ would equal
Fg. 8.10. The basis of the resting membrane potential. In a nerve
the electrochemical gradient. However, the membrane
at rest, there is an unequal distribution of ions across the cell
is permeable to ions other than K+. The Nernst equa-
 membrane. The concentration of Nat and Cl- is higher outside the
tion does not take into consideration the permeability
cell, while that of K+ and anions is higher inside the cell. Moving
of multiple ions, or that the relative permeability of
down their concentration gradient, Nat passively moves into the 
the various ions is different. If the permeabilities of the
cell while Kt moves out of the cell. A Na*-K+ ATPase then actively
pumps three molecules of Nat out of the cell for every two
ions are known, the membrane potential can be calcu-
molecules of K+ pumped in while cleaving ATP to ADP plus
lated using the Goldman equation:
inorganic phosphate (P).
Table 8.2.
Ion concentrations and equilibrium potentials in neurons.
fon
Concentration outside (mM)
Concentration inside (mM)
Ratio outside inside
Eion (mV)
K+
5
100
1:20
-80
Nat
150
15
10:1
62
Ca
2
0.0002
10,000:1
123
CF
150
13
11.5:1
-65
224 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
1. Directly gated (ionotropic)
Box 8.1
 Lethal injection
 Neurotran smitter
Recalling that K+ concentrations are higher inside
Extracellular
the cell than outside the cell, imagine what will
happen if the extracellular concentration of K+ is
Gate
 suddenly increased by an injection of K+. Using the
Intracellular
Nernst equation, it can be shown that an increase
Closed
Opened
in [K+Jouside depolarizes the cell, thus eliminating
 2. Indirectly gated (metabotropic)
the resting membrane potential. Therefore, an
G protein
Neurotransmitter
intravenous injection of K+ will cause the heart to
stop beating, thus causing death. This, in fact, is
β*α
how Dr. Jack Kevorkian has helped patients commit
suicide by allowing them to switch their intrave-
nous infusion to an anesthetic and potassium
Receptor
G protein-g ated
 solution.
ion channel 
Opened
GDPP
GTP
Fg. 8.11. Indirectly and directly gated channel. Neurotransmitters
can activate either directly or indirectly gated channels. (1) In
directly gated, or ionotropic, channels, the neurotransmitter
 Membrane channels
receptor and ion channel are the same protein. When the
neurotransmitter binds to the receptor, it causes a conformation 
The neuron is excitable and thus is able to generate
change that results in either an opening or closing of the ion
 and transmit an impulse. A nerve impulse is a change
channel. (2) In indirectly gated, or metabotropic, channels, the
in the resting membrane potential. It is generated in a
channel. Binding of the neurotransmitter to the receptor activates a
 rather complex process. We have already discussed
G protein. The G protein can either act directly on a G protein-
 passive membrane channels that allow ions to move
gated ion channel or affect the action of an enzyme that makes a
through the membrane of a resting neuron. In addi-
second messenger. GTP, guanosine-5'-triphosphate; GDP,
tion, there are also active channels, sometimes called
guanosine diphosphate.
 gated channels, in the cell membrane. The gated chan-
 nels open or close in response to stimuli. There are
three classes of gated channels: (l) chemically gated,
cell membrane. Binding of a neurotransmitter to
(2) voltage-gated, (3) mechanically gated.
such a receptor causes a conformational change that
opens the channel permitting ions to flow down their
 electrochemical gradients. Ionotropic receptors act in
Chemically gated channels
submilliseconds.
Chemically
gated
channels,
sometimes
called
 Indirectly gated channels, often called metabotropic
 neurotransmitter-gated channels, are located on the
receptors, consist of macromolecules that are distinct
postsynaptic membrane. These channels are found
from the ion channels they affect. Binding of the neu-
most abundantly on the dendrites and cell body, and
rotransmitter to these channels stimulates or inhibits
they respond to a neurotransmitter binding to its
the production of second messengers such as cAMP,
receptor. The binding of a neurotransmitter will gener-
inositol triphosphate, or diacylglycerol. The second
ally cause these channels to either open or close.
messengers then activate protein kinases that are
However, a high concentration of neurotransmitter
enzymes that phosphorylate other proteins such as
can cause these channels to become inactivated.
ion channels. This can result in opening or closing of
Chemically gated channels can be either directly
ion channels, thus altering the membrane potential.
gated or indirectly gated (Fig. 8.1l). Directly gated
Metabotropic receptors are composed of a single
channels consist of a single macromolecule in which
polypeptide. In contrast to ionotropic receptors,
 part of the molecule serves as an extracellular domain
instead of opening an ion channel in response 
to
forming a receptor for a neurotransmitter, while the
binding of a neurotransmitter, metabotropic receptors
second part of the molecule consists of a membrane-
 instead normally activate GTP-binding proteins (G
spanning domain, which forms an ion channel. Such
proteins). Such receptors generally display slower
receptors are sometimes called ionotropic receptors.
onset and longer duration than ionotropic receptors.
 Binding of the neurotransmitter to the receptor portion
of the molecule causes a conformational change that
Voltage-gated channels
results in opening the channel.
Ionotropic receptors are relatively large and contain
Voltage-gated channels are found on those membranes
multisubunits that form an ion channel through the
that generate an action potential, including axons and
Introduction to the nervous system
225
Box 8.2  Voltage-gated channels: neurotoxins and
anesthetics
Cell
membrane
The puffer fish is considered a delicacy in Japan.
When prepared properly, its consumption results in.
numbness around the mouth. It is prepared by
aration of this fish. Yet each year, dozens of people
die from eating this fish. The ovaries of the puffer
fish contain a tetrodotoxin, a compound that spe-
ansmembrane alpha helix
cifically  blocks voltage-gated sodium  channels.
Blockage of these channels results in the inability
Polypeptide chain
of neurons to generate an action potential.
Fig. 8.12. Voltage-gated sodium channel. The voltage-gated
Dinoflagellates of the genus Gonyaulax produce
sodium channel consists of four groups of homologous domains of
a neurotoxin called saxitoxin that similarly blocks
similar sequences of amino acids, with each domain being
voltage-gated sodium channels. Dinoflagellates can
composed of six transmembrane segments. Each transmembrane
contaminate shellfish such as clams and mussels.
segment consists of nonpolar amino acids coiled into an alpha
helix. The peptide chains connecting the transmembrane domains
Occasionally, there is a sudden increase in the level
 consist of polar amino acids.
of dinoflagellates resulting in a "red tide" that
causes contamination resulting in occasional human
deaths from consumption of these seafoods.
Local anesthetics such as lidocaine also work by
blocking voltage-gated sodium channels. Lidocaine
binds to the S6 alpha helix of domain IV of the
the sarcolemma of skeletal and cardiac muscle. These
channel, thus blocking the flow of Nat into the
channels open or close in response to changes in mem-
neuron. These anesthetics affect smaller axons
brane potential. More precisely, when the membrane
 before affecting larger axons. Fortunately, it is the
potential reaches a critical level called the threshold,
 smaller axons that carry pain signals.
voltage-gated channels open. The threshold is nor
mally between -55 and -50mV.
 For our discussion, the most important such chan-
nels are those for sodium, potassium, and calcium.
 Mechanically gated channels
The voltage-gated sodium channel is created by a
long polypeptide having four distinct domains, each
These channels open and close in response to physical
consisting of six transmembrane segments (Fig. 8.12).
distortion of the cell membrane. They are found in
As the membrane potential becomes more positive
sensory neurons such as those that respond to touch,
due to stimulation, positively charged amino acids
pressure, or vibration.
lining the pore formed by the channel move away
from the center, thus opening the channel. The
voltage-gated sodium channel is unique in that it
Postsynaptic potentials
operates in three stages. When stimulated by depo-
larization, the channel opens rapidly. It remains open
At rest, only the passive channels are open, while the
for about lms and then becomes inactivated.
It
neurotransmitter-gated channels are closed. When
cannot be opened again until the membrane poten-
 a neurotransmitter binds to a postsynaptic receptor,
tial returns to a negative value below or near the
it activates a neurotransmitter-gated, or chemically
value that originally caused the channel to open.
gated, channel that causes a change in the membrane
These channels can be blocked by the neurotoxin
potential. This change in potential is called a postsyn-
tetrodotoxin, which is found in the ovaries of the
aptic potential since it occurs in the postsynaptic cell.
puffer fish (see Box 8.2).
 Postsynaptic potentials are also graded because their
Voltage-gated potassium channels do not open
magnitude depends on both the amount and the dura-
immediately upon stimulation. In addition to having
tion of action of the neurotransmitter.
a delayed opening, they also do not become inacti-
 If the neurotransmitter is excitatory, it generates an
vated after stimulation. The voltage-gated calcium
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). During an
channels are similar to the other voltage-gated chan-
EPSP, the membrane potential moves toward OmV, or
 nels, and will be discussed further with regard to neu-
becomes depolarized. If the neurotransmitter is inhibi-
rotransmitter release.
226 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
(IPSP). An IPSP results in the membrane potential
becoming more negative, or hyperpolarized. The acti-
vation of mechanically gated channels can also cause
the generation of an EPSP or IPSP.
(Aw)
potential
EPSP
+20
Action
potential
The binding of an excitatory neurotransmitter to a
postsynaptic receptor causes channels to open, which
allow both sodium and potassium to simultaneously
lembrane
Threshold
move down their concentration gradient. However,
sodium moves inward more rapidly than potassium
,+E,+E
+E,+E
moves outward due to the electrochemical gradient
08-
EPSP IPSP
Temporal
 Spatial
that exists. Remember that the inside of the cell
M
summation
summation
is negatively charged and thus attracts positively
charged molecules. The net result of this ion move-
Time
 ment is an increase in intracellular sodium, resulting
in depolarization.
Fg. 8.13. Summation. In response to activation of a chemically or
The EPSPs are generated in the dendrites and cell
mechanically gated channel, neurons can develop postsynaptic
potentials, which can be either excitatory (EPSP) or inhibitory
bodies. Dendrites and cell bodies do not have voltage-
(IPSP). These postsynaptic potentials summate algebraically. EPSPs
 gated charnels, which are necessary for the generation
result in depolarization, whereas IPSPs cause hyperpolarization. If a
of an action potential. An EPSP is not the same as an
neuron receives stimuli from a single neuron in rapid succession,
 action potenfial but instead is graded.
the postsynaptic potentials can cause temporal summation, whereas
if a neuron receives input from multiple locations at the same time,
it causes spatial summation.
IPSP
The binding of an inhibitory neurotransmitter to
its receptor causes the cell membrane to become
channels respond. This results in the production
ally cause the opening of transmitter-gated potassium
of postsynaptic potentials. These are graded
channels, chloride channels, or both. Opening potas-
 potentials, and they can summate (Fig. 8.13). For 
example, if a neuron generates a volley of EPSPs
sium channels allows potassium to move out of the
 cell, thus making the interior of the cell more negative.
in rapid succession, they will summate, or add up
 algebraically, over time, which is called temporal
Conversely, opening chloride channels allows chlo-
ride to move into the cell that also makes the cell more
summation. If a neuron receives many stimuli
simultaneously from various neurons synapsing
negative.
onits surface, the postsynaptic potentials summate
via spatial summation, meaning that it is occur-
ring across space rather than time. A neuron typi-
Generation of an action potential
 cally receives both inhibitory and excitatory input
that is summated. The postsynaptic potentials are
 Neurons are able to generate and propagate an electri-
 generated in the dendrites and cell's body, and
cal impulse, called an action potential, along their
they travel to the axon hillox.
length. The action potential is a stereotypic depolar-
Step 3—Generation of the action potential. If summa-
ization and repolarization of the membrane. It is an
 tion brings the membrane to threshold, the voltage-
all-or-none response which means that within a given
gated channels are activated (Fig. 8.14). Upon
cell, the response always looks identical both in ampli-
reaching threshold, the voltage-gated Nat chan-
tude and duration, independent of the stimulus. The
nels open, increasing the permeability to Na+ a
 action potential is generated at one site in the neuron,
the axon hillox, and is then propagated down the
thousandfold and allowing Na+ to rapidly move
inward. This causes the membrane potential to
length of the axon:
move toward the equilibrium potential for Na+
Step 1—-Resting state. At rest, the voltage-gated chan-
(ENa = +62mV). This results in the upstroke, or
nels are closed, and there is only passive move-
 rising phase, of the action potential. At the peak
ment of ions across the cell membrane.
of the action potential, the voltage-gated Na+
Step 2—Depolarization. When a neuron receives
channels become inactivated. Therefore, Na+ can
stimuli, the chemically or mechanically gated
no longer move inward. However, at this time, the
Introduction to the nervous system
227
Extracellular
Na'
Extracellular
Na*
oltage-gate
K
2. After reaching threshold, voltage-
gated Na* channels open.
although theiractivationgateisopen.
40
0
-40
-80
-120
5
9131721
Time (ms)
Na
Na
3.Voltage-gated Natchannels
K+
4.Voltage-gated Nat channels closed;
inactivated; Voltage-gated K+ channels
Voltage-gated K+ channels open.
open.
Fig. 8.14. Generation of an action potential. (1) At rest, the voltage-gated Nat and K+ channels are closed. (2) when the neuron is
depolarized to threshold by the summation of postsynaptic potentials, the voltage-gated Nat channels open. The movement of Na+ into the
cell results in the upstroke of the action potential as the membrane potential moves toward the equilibrium potential for Na*. (3) At the peak
the downstroke of the action potential as the membrane potential moves toward the equilibrium potential for K+. (4) If the voltage-gated K+
channels remain open for an extended period of time, a hyperpolarizing afterpotential can develop. Finally, the voltage-gated K+ channels
 close, and the membrane potential returns to rest.
voltage-gated potassium channels are opening.
Propagation of the action potential
thus allowing K+ to move outward. The outward
movement of K+ causes the repolarization phase,
Once the action potential is generated, it must be
also called the downstroke or falling phase, of
carried along the length of the axon. During the gen-
the action potential in which the membrane
 eration of the action potential, there is a reversal in
potential moves back toward its resting membrane
membrane potential induced by the movement of Na+
potential.
inward, causing the interior of the membrane to tem-
porarily become positive while the outside becomes
At the end of the repolarization phase, if the voltage-
negative. After this happens, the positively charged
gated potassium channels are slow to close, K+ contin-
ions now inside the membrane move laterally since
ues to move outward. This results in a hyperpolarizing
they are attracted by the negatively charged ions
afterpotential, or undershoot, in which the membrane
lining the inside of the membrane. Conversely, the
potential becomes hyperpolarized relative to the origi-
positively charged ions found on the outside of the
nal resting membrane potential before returning to
membrane migrate toward the new sink of negatively
normal.
charged ions created by the reversal in membrane
At the peak of the action potential, the voltage-
potential, thus completing the circuit.
 gated sodium channels become inactivated. This 
 The local flow of current caused by the opening of
creates a brief time period called the absolute refrac-
the voltage-gated Nat channels results in a series of
tory period during which no stimuli, no matter how
electrotonic changes (Fig. 8.16). As the positive ions on
large, can generate an action potential. This is fol-
the inside of the membrane flow to an area of negative
lowed by another brief period of time, called the rela-
ions, this depolarizes that area and thus causes the
tive refractory period, during which only a greater
voltage-gated Na+ channels in that area to open. A
than normal stimuli can initiate an action potential. A
positive feedback system is initiated that allows the
summary of the generation of the action potential is
action potential to be propagated down the length
shown in Figure 8.15.
of the axon without diminishing in amplitude. The
228 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
40
Step 1 : Depolarization to threshold-
Postsynaptic potentials summate temporaly or 
20
spatially to reach threshold.
Step 2: Opening voltage-gated Na*
-20
channels—Voltage-gated sodium channels
 open, allowing Na+ to rush inward and
40
membrane potential to move toward ENat.
60
5
Step 3: Inactivation of voltage-gated Na+
channels, activation of voltage-gated K+
channels—At the peak of the action potential,
-100
 the voltage-gated sodium channels become
 inactivated. This results in the absolute
Time (ms)
refractory period during which time another 
action potential cannot be generated. This is
immediately followed by the relative refractory period when a greater than normal stimuli can again
open the voltage-gated Na+ channels. At the peak of the action potential, the voltage-gated K+
 channels are opening, allowing K+ to flow outward and the membrane potential to move toward
EK·
Step 4: After potential—lf the voltage-gated K+ channels are sluggish in closing, then the
membrane potential will move closer to the Ek+ and will drop below the original resting membrane
potential.
10l
Step 5: Resting membrane potential—-The cell returns to the original resting membrane
potential.
1
Fig. 8.15. Summary of an action potential.
 Nat channels carnot open. Since the action potential
originates in the axon hillox in zivo, the action poten-
tial moves only from the axon hillox toward the nerve
bouton. If the nerve is removed and placed in vitro,
and the axon is stimulated in the middle, the action
Extracellular
potential can travel in either direction.
+++++++
Cell membrane
Intracellular
Conduction velocity
 Conduction velocity refers to the speed with which an
 action potential is propagated down the length of the
axon. Two factors control the conduction velocity:
axon diameter and myelin sheath:
Extracellular
Axon diameter. The larger the axon diameter, the
faster the conduction velocity During an action
+++++++
Cell membrane
 potential, the cations that enter the cell can move
intracellular
either through the cytoplasm or back through the
cell membrane. Both the membrane and the cyto-
Fig. 8.16. Propagation of an action potential. Local current flows
plasm offer resistance. While the cytoplasm offers
between the site of the action potential and the adjacent inactive
areas. This flow of current triggers an action potential in the
resistance, the larger the diameter of the axon, the
adjacent area while returning the original site to its resting 
resistance in the cytoplasm becomes less, relative
membrane potential. In this manner, the action potential is able to
to that of the axon membrane. The farther the
propagate down the axon.
current can flow down the axon due to less resis-
tance in the larger diameter axons, the farther the
wave of depolarization moves, and thus the faster
process is self-propagating. As the action potential
the speed of conduction.
 migrates down the axon, the voltage-gated Na+ chan-
Myelin and saltatory conduction. While increas-
nels in the area it just moved from are absolutely
ing the diameter of an axon is one strategy to
refractory. Therefore, the action potential cannot go
backward through that area since the voltage-gated
found in nature is to myelinate the axon. The
 Introduction to the nervous system
229
Coding of stimulus intensity
If the action potential is an all-or-none response, how
does the CNS determine the intensity of a stimulus?
How does the brain know whether the animal just
touched something warm versus something very hot?
 The answer lies in the frequency of the action poten-
Schwann
tials. As a stimulus increases in intensity, a neuron will
cell
Nodeof
produce more frequent action potentials. For example,
Ranvier
as an area of the skin gets warmer, the frequency of
the firing rate of warm receptors will increase. Con-
versely, as the site gets cooler, the frequency of the
firing rate of the warm receptors will decrease, while
Intracellular
space
those of cold receptors will increase.
Extracellular
space
Synaptic transmission
Fig. 8.17. Saltatory conduction. On myelinated axons, the
Electrical transmission
voltage-gated channels are clustered at the node of Ranvier. An
action potential propagates along the axon by "jumping" from node
to node. Since there are no voltage-gated channels in the internode
As discussed earlier, electrical synapses are relatively
area, there is no movement of ions nor reversal of membrane
rare. They allow the electrical signal to be propagated
potential in these regions.
from one cell to another with virtually no delay. Cells
are connected via a connexon, and ions can flow from
 one cell to the other. The electrical signal can be propa-
myelin acts as an insulative sheath enwrapping
 gated bidirectionally, without modification, across the
an axon. There are 0.2- to 2.0-mm breaks in the
electrical synapse.
myelin sheath called nodes of Ranvier. Voltage-
 gated channels are concentrated in the nodes. An
action potential is propagated down a myelinated
Chemical transmission
axon by a process called saltatory conduction
(from Latin, "to leap"). In essence, the action
 Far more numerous, chemical synapses are responsi-
potential skips along the axon from node to node
ble for most communication between neurons and
(Fig. 8.17).
adjacent cells. As shown in Figure 8.5, a chemical
 Myelinating a neuron also decreases the amount of
synapse is much more complicated. An action poten-
 energy needed for neural transmission. This is because
 tial arriving at the synaptic bouton initiates a series of 
Na+ and K+ move across the axon membrane only at
events:
the nodes; therefore, less energy is expended via the
Step 1—Depolarization of the synaptic bouton. The
Na+-K+ ATPase to restore the Nat and K+ concentra-
arrival of the action potential at the nerve ending
tion gradients (Box 8.3).
causes depolarization of this region.
 Step_ 2—Opening voltage-gated calcium channels.
 Depolarization of the nerve ending allows the
Box 8.31
 Demyelinating diseases
voltage-gated calcium channels to open. This
allows the influx of calcium from the extracellular
Problems with myelin can result in several disease
space into the synaptic bouton. Calcium causes the
 states. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disease involving
synaptic vesicles to bind to the presynaptic mem-
the myelin sheath of axons in the brain, spinal cord,
brane. Calcium is then sequestered by the mito-
 and optic nerve. Sclerosis is derived from the Greek
chondria or ER, or is acfively pumped out of
word for "hardening." In this disease, the myelin
the cell.
sheath in many areas (i.e., multiple) becomes hard-
Step 3—Exocytosis. Once bound to the presynaptic
ened, resulting in a multitude of symptoms such
 membrane, the synaptic vesicles release their
as weakness, lack of coordination, and impaired
contents into the synaptic cleft through a process
vision and speech. In Guillain-Barre syndrome, the
of exocytosis. The vesicles contain quanta, or
myelin of peripheral nerves innervating muscle
 packages, of neurotransmitter molecules. The neu-
 and skin is affected.
rotransmitter diffuses throughout the synaptic
230  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
cleft. The amount of neurotransmitter released is
gated calcium channels, (2) entry of calcium, (3)
dependent on the frequency of impulses reaching
binding of synaptic vesicles to the presynaptic mem-
the synaptic bouton. The higher the frequency
7of
brane, (4) exocytosis, (5) diffusion of the neurotrans-
impulses, the more synaptic vesicles that bind to
 mitter to postsynaptic membrane, and (6) activation
the presynaptic membrane, and the more neu-
 of transmitter-gated channels.
rotransmitter released.
Step 4—Binding of neurotransmitter to postsynaptic
 membrane. If the neurotransmitter binds to a post-
 Modulation of the synaptic signal
synaptic receptor, it activates the transmitter-gated
channels. This will result in either an IPSP or EPSP
The transmission of a signal across the chemical
in the postsynaptic cell, depending on whether the
synapse can be modified both over the short or long
neurotransmitter is inhibitory or excitatory.
term. This is known as synaptic plasticity. It can be
Step 5—-Inactivation of the neurotransmitter. The neu-
controlled by either internal processes within a neuron
rotransmitter can continue to cause an effect on
or by extrinsic processes.
the postsynaptic cell until it is inactivated. The
For short-term regulation, the amount of transmit-
action of neurotransmitters is short-lived due to
ter released at the synapse is dependent on the con-
rapid methods of inactivation. The methods of
centration of presynaptic calcium. Calcium enters the
inactivation include (1) enzymatic breakdown, (2)
reuptake into the neurons that released the neu-
hapter
 rotransmitter, (3) uptake by glial cells, or (4) diffu-
resting membrane potential can decrease or increase
sion from the site.
the entry of Cat through these channels, thus affect-
ing neurotransmitter release. In addition, another
During chemical transmission, there is a synaptic
 neuron can synapse on the axon terminal of the neuron
delay of 0.2-0.5ms between the time an impulse
and also control  the amount of neurotransmitter
reaches the nerve bouton and the initiation of a post-
 released by that cell. This can cause either presynaptic
synaptic potential in an adjacent cell. This delay is due
inhibition or facilitation depending on whether the
to the time it takes for all the events associated with
amount of neurotransmitter released is decreased or
chemical transmission, including (l) opening voltage-
increased, respectively (Fig. 8.18).
A
Inhibited
postsynaptic potential
 Postsynaptic potential
Presynaptic action
potential
Ca*+ current in
 presynaptic terminal
Inhibited
B
Cat current
Facilitated
postsynaptic potential 
Postsynaptic potential
 Presynaptic action
potential
Ca++ current in
Facilitated
 presynaptic terminal
Ca current
Fig. 8.18. Presynaptic inhibition (A) and presynaptic facilitation (B). (A) An inhibitory neuron (C,) can synapse on the axon terminal of a
and thereby decreasing the amount of neurotransmitter released from Al, which acts on neuron B,. (B) An excitatory neuron (C) can synapse
on a presynaptic neuron (Az). Release of the excitatory neurotransmitter can enhance the entry of Cat+ into neuron Az and thereby increase the
release of a neurotransmitter from Az, which acts on neuron B
Introduction to the nervous system
231
AMPA receptors then open and allow Na+ to enter,
resulting in enhanced formation of EPSPs. Because of
the increased number of AMPA receptors, the cell now
Glutamate
Glutamate
displays an enhanced sensitivity to glutamate result-
Long-term
ing in long-term potentiation.
 potentiation
ca
Ca+
Ca*
Neurotransmitters
 Neurotransmitters are the means by which signals are
carried across the chemical synapse. To be considered
ependent
dent kln
 a neurotransmitter, a compound must satisfy the fol-
system
lowing four criteria:
Postsynaptic
=NMDAreceptor
=AMPA receptor
1.
 It must be synthesized in the neuron.
2.
 It must be present in the presynaptic terminal and
Fig. 8.19. Long-term potentiation. Stimulation of presynaptic
released in amounts sufficient to exert a defined
glutaminergic neurons causes the release of glutamate. Glutamate
binds to postsynaptic glutamate NMDA receptors leading to the
 action on the postsynaptic cell
entry of Cat into the postsynaptic cell. Cat stimulates a Ca++-
When administered exogenously, it must exactly
dependent second messenger system, resulting in the formation of
mimic the action of the endogenously released
new AMPA glutamate receptors. Thereafter, stimulation of NMDA
neurotransmitter.
receptors allows the entry of Catt, which stimulates Cat+-
1
4.
There
must be
aspecific
mechanism
calmodulin dependent kinase Il to phosphorylate AMPA receptors.
of
The AMPA receptors then allow the entry of Na*, which results in
inactivation.
enhanced depolarization of the postsynaptic cell, and thus 
It was originally believed that neurons released a
Iong-term potentiation.
single neurotransmitter. This is known as Dale's prin-
ciple. Although some neurons make and release a
single neurotransmitter, it is now known that some
neurons release more than one neurotransmitter. It is
The neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric  acid
 not uncommon for a peptide-containing neuron to
(GABA) has been shown to cause presynaptic inhibi-
 also release an amino acid or amine-type neurotrans-
tion by increasing the presynaptic influx of Cl through
mitter. If a cell releases more than one neurotransmit-
GABA-gated Cl channels. This causes hyperpolariza-
 ter, it can either be coreleased or released separately
tion of the presynaptic neuron that results in less
 in response to various stimulation frequencies.
influx of Ca into the presynaptic terminal in response
Neurotransmitters are generally grouped into four
to an action potential in that cell. In contrast, serotonin
chemical categories: (1) amino acids, (2) amines, (3)
has been shown to activate a cAMP-dependent protein
peptides, or (4) dissolved gases (Table 8.3). The term
kinase causing phosphorylation and closure of K+
biogenic amines has classically been used to include the
channels. This results in depolarizing the presynaptic
catecholamines and serotonin. Occasionally, histamine
terminal, allowing the entry of Catt to persist longer,
 is also considered a biogenic amine. The term classical
and thus enhancing the release of the neurotransmit-
neurotransmitters refer to ACh, biogenic amines, and
 ter from the presynaptic neuron.
 the amino acid neurotransmitters.
 Calcium also appears involved in another type of
synaptic plasticity that lasts for a longer period of time
called long-term potentiation (Fig. 8.19). Stimulation
Amines
of the glutamate NMDA receptor, named after the
ACh
chemical N-methyl D-aspartate, results in an influx of
Caft into the postsynaptic nerve terminal. Although
ACh was the first neurotransmitter discovered. It is
this does not cause an EPSP, it does cause activation
 the transmitter at the neuromuscular junction. It is
of a Ca-dependent second messenger pathway,
 therefore synthesized in all motor neurons whose cell
which results in an increase in the number of another
bodies are in the spinal cord and brain stem. It is also
type of glutamate receptors called α-amino-3-hydroxy
used in other cholinergic neurons both in the CNS and
 5-methylisoaxzole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors
PNS (Box 8.4).
at the same site. Now, when glutamate stimulates
Synthesized in a one-step enzymatic process within
NMDA receptors, thus allowing Ca” to enter, Ca
the nerve ending, choline acetyltransferase transfers
stimulates
 calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein
an acetyl group from acetyl CoA to choline to form
kinase Il, which phosphorylates AMPA receptors. The
ACh (Fig. 8.20). Once synthesized in the cytosol of the
232
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 8.3. Major neurotransmitters.
Amines
Amino Acids
Peptides
Dissofved Gases
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Aspartic acid
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Nitric oxide (NO)
Dopamine (DA)
Gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA)
Dynorphin
Carbon monoxide (CO)
Epinephrine (E)
Glutamic acid
Enkephalins
Histamine
Glycine
Neuropeptide Y
Norepinephrine
Somatostatin
Serotonin (5-HT)
Substance P
ATP
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Adenosine
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Box 8.4
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
Presynaptic
neuron
Many pharmacological agents have been devel-
oped in order to manipulate the synaptic levels of
Chollne
acetylcholine (ACh). AChE inhibitors increase the
transporter
ACh
Choline
transporter
synaptic levels of ACh. Examples of such inhibitors
HOCH,CH,N(CH)
ChAT
ACh
include various nerve gases, such as sarin, that
+
ACh
were developed for chemical warfare and organo-
Na+
Acetyl CoA
CH,C-COA
phosphates, such as parathion, which are used as
insecticides. Succinylcholine, which is a competi-
ACh
tive neuromuscular blocking agent, is used as an
Choline
+
Choline
adjunct with anesthetics to increase muscle relax-
 ation during surgery.
acetyltransferase
Aceticacid
Postsynaptic
cell
Fg. 8.20. Cholinergic neuron. Choline plus acetyl CoA, acted
cell, ACh is concentrated into the synaptic vesicles by
upon by choline acetyltransferase, combine to form acetylcholine
an ACh transporter. Upon stimulation of the cell, ACh
(ACh). ACh is actively pumped into the synaptic vesicles by an ACh
is released into the synaptic cleft where it can bind to
transporter. When released from the presynaptic cell, ACh can
 a cholinergic receptor or be enzymatically degraded
either bind to a presynaptic receptor or be broken down by choline
 acetyltransferase into choline and acetic acid. Choline is then
by AChE. AChE is secreted into the synaptic clet, and
actively pumped back into the presynaptic cell by a choline
its action represents the major route of inactivation for
transporter where it can be used to make more ACh.
ACh. The action of AChE yields choline and acetic
acid. Choline is taken back into the cholinergic axon
terminals by a specific choline transporter. Since the
availability of choline limits how much ACh can be
synthesized, the transport of choline into the presyn-
nephrine and epinephrine, respectively. Catechol-
aptic terminal is the rate-limiting step.
aminergic neurons are found throughout the peripheral
and CNS. The role of epinephrine within the CNS is
Catechofamines
limited since it is found in only two medullary sites,
The amino acid tyrosine is the precursor to a group
known as the Cl and C2 cell groups.
of neurotransmitters that all contain the chemical
The first step in the synthesis of catecholamines is
structure called a catechol. Collectively, this group of
      
neurotransmitters
called
catecholamines
 and
 sine to L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-dopa). This step
is
include dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.
is under end-product inhibition so that if the levels of
Catecholamines are compounds that contain both a
catecholamines in the synapse rise, they can inhibit the
 -idanou as (ig ) dnon ae ue pre poqoai
activity of this enzyme. Furthermore, when catechol-
nephrine (NE) and epinephrine (E) are found in the
aminergic neurons are stimulated, enzymatic activity
adrenal medulla, they are sometimes called norepi-
 of this enzyme increases in response to depletion of
Introduction to the nervous system
233
Catechol
Tryptophan
HO
HO
COOH
CH,CHNH,
L-Dopa
COOH
HO
HOO3
仁
CH,CHNH2
Tyrosine
OH
hydro xylase
HO
CH,CHNH,
Dupa
Tryptophan
End-product
ecarboxylase
hydroxylase
inhibition
Epinephrine
Dopamine
HO
HO
 5-Hydroxtryptophan
CH,CHNH,CH,
10
HO
(5-HTP)
HO
HO
COOH
Norepinephrine
OH
CH,CHNH2
HO
CHCHNH,
Dopamine
Phenylethanolamine
β-hydroxylase
N-methyltransferase
HO
Fig. 8.21. Catecholamine synthesis. Catecholamines are a group
of compounds that contain both a catechol and an amine group.
5-HTP
 Synthesized from tyrosine, the catecholamines include dopamine,
decarboxylase
norepinephrine, and epinephrine. The rate-limiting enzyme,
tyrosine hydroxylase, is under end-product inhibition. If a neuron
 5-H ydroxtryptamine
releases only dopamine, it will lack those enzymes and compounds
found further along in the biosynthetic pathway.
(serotoinin, 5-HT)
HO
 CH,CHNH2
the catecholamines. The remainder of the biosynthetic
Fg. 8.22.
Serotonin synthesis. The indoleamine serotonin, also
 pathway is shown in Figure 8.21.
called 5-hydroxytryptamine, is synthesized from the amino acid
tryptophan. The synthesis of serotonin is not under end-product 
Catecholamines are inactivated at the synapse
inhibition.
by selective reuptake into the presynaptic terminal.
This reuptake system involves Nat-dependent active
transporters. These transporters are subject to phar-
macological manipulation. For example, amphet-
amine and cocaine can block these transporters, thus
 prolonging the action of the neurotransmitter in the
pharmacological manipulation. One very successful
synapse. After reuptake, the neurotransmitters can
class of antidepressants is known as specific serotoner-
be enzymatically degraded by monoamine oxidase
 gic reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which include Prozac?.
(MAO), or they can be reloaded into the synaptic ves-
Once inside the cell, 5-HT is degraded by MAO.
icles. Another enzyme, catechol-O-methyltransferase,
is also found in the synapse and can break down
catecholamines.
Adenosine
There is growing evidence that ATP, and its deriva-
tives such as adenine, can act as neurotransmitters.
Indofeamine
Adenine and guanine, and their derivatives, are called
 purines. These compounds act as purinergic receptors.
The neurotransmitter serotonin, also called 5-HT, is an
Adenosine acts to dampen sympathetic function fol-
indoleamine. It is synthesized from the amino acid
 lowing intense sympathetic activity, thus reducing
 tryptophan (Fig. 8.22). While in relatively low concen-
further release of norepinephrine and ATP, which are
trations in the CNS, 5-HT is involved in mood, emo-
coreleased from sympathetic fibers.
tional behavior, and sleep. Because the synthesis of
 5-HT is not under end-product inhibition, the endog-
 enous levels of 5-HT can be increased by dietary sup-
Amino acids
plementation with tryptophan.
 Once in the synapse, 5-HT is inactivated by a spe-
Amino acids are ubiquitous within the body, and
cific serotonergic reuptake transporter. Like the trans-
 some appear to act as neurotransmitters. The amino
 porter for catecholamines, this transporter is subject to
acids glutamate and aspartate act as excitatory
234 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Glial cell
Presynaptic neuron
Glutamine
Glutamine
Glutamin
Glutamlne synthase
HN
NH2
COOCCH,CH,CH
COOCCH,CH,CH
COOCCH,CH,CH
COOCCH.CH
HOOO
COOH
α-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
COOH
COOH
GAD
GAD
GABA-T
GABA-T
HOOCCH,CH,CHO
HOOCCHCH,CHNH
OOCCH,CH,CHNH,
HOOCCH,CH,CHO
Succinic semialdehyde
GABA
 Postsynaptic neuron
Fig. 8.23. Gamma amino butyric acid synthesis (GABA). GABA is ultimately synthesized from glucose metabolism in which α-ketoglutarate
pie oue aul (l-vgv) aseuesuen anenen-oxo-a aazua aun ag pazaieen aewnl oi paeuiesuenn s! alh sgany aui u! paoy
glutamate is decarboxylated by the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD). Upon release, GABA is taken back into the presynaptic
glutamine synthetase in order to be transported back to the presynaptic neuron where it is deaminated by glutaminase.
neurotransmitters, whereas glycine acts as an inhibi-
COOH
tory neurotransmitter in the interneurons of the spinal
CH2CHNH2
CHCHNH2
cord. Although these amino acids are found in all cells,
the concentrations are about two to three times higher
Histidine
(-20mM) in those cells in which they are neurotrans-
decarboxylase
mitters. Furthermore, there are transporters within
Histidine
Histamine
those cells that load the amino acids into vesicles, thus
Fg. 8.24. Histamine synthesis. Histamine is synthesized from
further increasing their concentrations (50mM). These
histidine by the action of histamine decarboxylase.
 transporters are found only in neurons in which the
amino acid is a neurotransmitter.
(GABA) is synthesized from the amino acid glutamate
Peptides
(Fig. 8.23). However, unlike other amino acids that
are found ubiquitously throughout the body, GABA is
Peptides consist of strings of amino acids connected
found only in neurons that use it as a neurotransmit-
 in amide linkages. Unlike the classical neurotransmit-
ter. GABA serves as the neurotransmitter at most CNS
ters discussed earlier, which are synthesized in the
 synapses where it acts as an inhibitory neurotransmit-
nerve ending, peptides are synthesized in the cell
ter. It is also found in other tissues, including the islet
body and transported to the nerve ending (Fig. 8.25).
cells of the pancreas and adrenal gland. GABA is inac-
 Peptides are generally synthesized as a prohormone
tivated by uptake into the presynaptic terminals and
in the rough ER. This prohormone is packaged in
 glia by Na*-dependent transporters.
 secretory vesicles that bud off from the Golgi appara-
Histamine, in addition to serving a role in the
 tus. Peptidases then act on the prohormone to produce
immune system where it is found in mast cells, also
 the active transmitter In addition to being synthesized
 acts as a neurotransmitter. It is localized in the hypo-
dlifferently from classical neurotransmifters, peptides
thalamus. It is synthesized from the amino acid histi-
 are inactivated by enzymes rather than by reuptake
dine by decarboxylation (Fig. 8.24).
processes.
Introduction to the nervous system
235
Presynaptic
glutaminergic
Postsynaptic
neuron
neuron
NMDA
receptor
1
Transcriptior
3
Glutamate
→Ca++
CGMP
sensitive
Splicing
L-Arginine
targets
5）
NT/NMNmRNA
NOS
Citrulline+NO
Fg. 8.26. Nitric oxide (NO) containing neuron. Nitric oxide is
Fig. 8.25. Peptide neurotransmitter synthesis. Peptide
synthesized from arginine by the action of nitric oxide synthase
 neurotransmitters are generally synthesized by transcription in a
(NOS) that forms citrulline and NO. Glutamate, acting on NMDA
prohormone form. (1) For example, the 170 amino acid
receptors, causes an influx of Ca into the postsynaptic cell.
prohormone precursor of neurotensin (NT) is encoded by a single
Calcium then induces NOs. Nitric oxide, which is small and 
gene. (2) The mRNA is translated by the rough endoplasmic
membrane-permeable, acts as a retrograde messenger causing the
reticulum (ER). The prohormone that is made also contains one
synthesis of cGMP in the presynaptic cell.
 Copy each of neurotensin and neuromedin N (NMN). (3) The
prohormone is targeted to the Golgi apparatus where it is packaged
into secretory vesicles. (4) The secretory vesicles are transported
anterogradely toward the nerve bouton. (5) The peptide transmitter
 macrophage-inducible NOS present in microglia,
is ready for release by the process of exocytosis.
 endothelial NOS found in endothelial cells lining 
1
blood vessels, and neuronal NOS.
NO can act as a retrograde messenger, meaning that
Whereas the amounts of classical neurotransmitters
it is produced in a postsynaptic cell and acts on the
can be enhanced through increased local synthesis,
presynaptic cell where it activates guanylyl cyclase,
peptide transmitters require activation of gene expres-
resulting in the production of cGMP, which then
sion that takes hours or days. The classical neurotrans-
enhances the release of the neurotransmitter from the
mitters are generally stored in relatively small vesicles
presynaptic cell. As such, NO is believed to facilitate
 are u ps ae spdd s ()
long-term potentiation in which the release of a neu-
cles 100nm in diameter. In addition, peptide neu-
 rotransmitter from a presynaptic cell is increased upon
rotransmitters are typically released at higher neuronal
increased firing rate at the synapse.
firing rates than are necessary to release the classical
neurotransmitters.
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a gas that forms in the body
Unconventional neurotransmitters
by the enzyme heme oxygenase-2, the same enzyme
responsible for degrading heme in aging red blood
Nitric oxide
cells. This enzyme is localized in discrete neuronal
Although its mechanism was unknown, for decades,
 populations suggesting that CO, like NO, may act as
nitroglycerine was used to treat cardiovascular disor-
a neurotransmitter. In fact, from using knockout mice
der. In the 1980s, it was known that a factor called
(i.e., mice that have a gene removed or inactivated), it
 endothelial-derived relaxation factor was produced
 appears that CO and NO both function in the relax-
by the cells lining blood vessels and caused vasodila-
ation of smooth muscle associated with peristalsis in
tion. This factor was shown to be nitric oxide (NO).
the gastrointestinal tract. Like NO, CO activates gua-
Nitric oxide is an unconventional neurotransmitter for
nylyl cyclase.
several reasons: (1) It is a gas; (2) it is not stored; (3) it
is not released in an exocytotic manner; and (4) there
Neurotransmitter receptors
is no active process that terminates the action of NO.
Instead, since NO is small and uncharged, it readily
The action of neurotransmitters is dependent on the
crosses membranes, and due to its short half-life of
receptor to which they bind. Neurotransmitters can
less than 30 seconds, it decays spontaneously to nitrite.
generally act at multiple receptors, resulting in dif-
The synthesis of NO is very simple, involving one
ferential responses. Each of the receptors to which a
enzymatic step in which L-arginine is converted to
neurotransmitter binds is called a receptor subtype.
citrulline and NO (Fig. 8.26). The enzyme that cata-
For example, ACh can bind to both ricotinic and
lyzes this reaction is nitric oxide synthase (NOS).
muscarinic receptors.A
Although ACh can bind
There are three known isoforms of NOS, including
 to both receptor subtypes, the subtypes mediate
236
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 8.4. Neurotransmitters and their receptors.
Neurotransmitter
Receptors
Mechanism of Signaf Transduction
Functions
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Nicotinic
↑gCa²+, gK, and gNat
Contract skeletal muscle and excite
postganglionic neurons
 Muscarinic
M,M, Ms
↑IP and DAG
Ms: contract smooth muscle
M. Ma
↓CAMP; TgK+
M: ↓ heart rate
Ma: modulate neurotransmission
Dopamine (DA)
D, Ds
↑cAMP
Inhibitory
D, D, D4
↓CAMP
Inhibitory
Epinephrine (E) and
α
↑IP: and DAG
Excitatory
 norepinephrine (NE)
↓CAMP
Inhibitory
↑cAMP
Excitatory
↑cAMP
Inhibitory
Histamine
Hi
↑IP and DAG
Excitatory
M2
↑cAMP
Excitatory
H
Unknown
？
Serotonin (5-HT)
5-MT
↓CAMP;↑gK+
Inhibitory
 5-MT2
 ↑IP: and DAG
Inhibitory
5-MT3
↑ gK*, and gNat
Excitatory
5-MT4
↑cAMP
Excitatory
 5-MT's
↓cAMP
Inhibitory
 5-MT6
↑cAMP
Excitatory
 5-MTz
↑cAMP
Excitatory
Opioid peptides
8, k, and μ
JcAMP and gCat; TgK+
Inhibitory
ATP
Pi purinoceptors
 Adenosine
P2 purinoceptors
↓cAMP
Inhibitory
↑cAMP
Excitatory
DAG, diacyl glycerol; g, conductance; ↑, increased; ↓, decreased.
 different responses. Nicotinic receptors are found in
receptor is called an agonist; a drug that blocks the
skeletal muscle where their stimulation results in con-
neurotransmitter is called an antagonist (Table 8.5).
traction of skeletal muscle. In contrast, muscarinic
Agonists and antagonists are routinely used in
receptors are found on postsynaptic cells of the para-
animal and human medicine. They have been devel-
sympathetic nervous system, and their stimulation
oped because they generally have fewer side effects
can cause contraction of smooth muscle or decreased
because of their specificity and have longer half-lives
heart rate.
 than neurotransmitters. Treatments typically involve
The same neurotransmitter can cause opposite
either stimulating or inhibiting the action of a neu-
effects depending on which receptors it stimulates.
rotransmitter. Since atropine can block the action of
 When norepinephrine binds to β2-adrenergic recep-
the parasympathetic nervous system, it is commonly
tors, it causes vasodilation, whereas binding
to
given prior to surgery in order to reduce the produc-
 C-adrenergic receptors causes vasoconstriction. Exam-
tion of saliva and thereby reduce the chances of suf-
ples of receptors and their effects are shown in
focation during surgery. In glaucoma, it is necessary
Table 8.4.
to increase smooth muscle tone in order to increase
 Neuropharmacology deals with the action of various
outflow of aqueous humor. The administration of ACh
neurotransmitters and explores drugs that either
would be ineffective because of its rapid hydrolysis by
 mimic or block the action of neurotransmitters. A drug
 AChEs. Instead, a muscarinic agonist, such as pilocar-
that mimics the action of a neurotransmitter at its
pine, is given.
Introduction to the nervous system
237
Table 8.5. Neurotransmitters: agonists and antagonists.
Neurotransmitter
Receptors
Agonists
Antagonists
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Nicotinic
 Nicotine
Curare
Muscarinic
Muscarine
 Atropine
Dopamine (DA)
Dopaminergic
Apomorphine
Haloperidol
Epinephrine (E) and norepinephrine (NE)
Phenylephrine
Phenoxybenzamine
β
Isoproterenol 
Propranolol
GABA
GABAA
Muscimol
Bicuculline
GABAg
Baclofen
Phaclofen
Serotonin (5-HT)
Serotonergic
Quipazine
Methysergide
Chapter summary
5.
 A synapse is where the axon terminal meets
 another cell. It consists of a presynaptic mem-
asisd e pe  sdeus e 'aa
1.
 The nervous system plays a major responsibility
membrane.
 for maintaining body homeostasis by collecting
There are two types of synapses, electrical and
and integrating information regarding the inter-
chemical. Electrical synapses are quick, bidirec-
nal and external environments.
tional, and do not use neurotransmission. In con-
The nervous system has three components:
trast, chemical synapses have a gap located
sensory input (afferent), integration, and motor 
between the pre- and postsynaptic cells, and
output (efferent).
 require a neurotransmitter to carry the message
between the two cells. While chemical synapses
Organization of the nervous system
are much more common between neurons in
the mammalian and avian brain, electrical syn-
The nervous system is divided into the CNS and
apses are common between non-neural cells
PNS. The CNS includes the brain and spinal cord.
such as glial cells, epithelial cells, smooth and
cardiac muscle cells, liver cells, and some glan-
The PNS includes all the neurons outside the CNS.
dular cells.
7.
 Functionally, neurons can be classified based on
The neuron
the number of neurites, length of the axon, the
function, or the neurotransmitter they contain.
Neurons have a cell body, or soma, and processes
Based on neurite number, neurons can be classi-
called axons and dendrites.
fied as unipolar, bipolar, pseudo-unipolar, 
.or
Dendrites, which collectively make up the den-
multipolar. Classifications based on axon length
dritic tree, are the receptive region of the neuron.
 include Golgi type I and Golgi type Il neurons.
3.
A neuron has a single axon that originates from
Based on function, neurons are classified the fol-
the soma at the axon hillox. This is where the
lowing ways: (1) sensory, or afferent, neurons;
nerve impulse originates, and is sometimes
(2) motor, or efferent, neurons; and (3) interneu-
called the trigger zone. The axon is unique in that
rons, or association, neurons. Based on the neu-
it contains no rough ER; has few, if any, free
 rotransmitter released, if a neuron releases ACh,
ribosomes; and its membrane has a different
it is called cholinergic neuron. If it releases sero-
 protein composition from that of the soma. A
 tonin, also called 5-HT, it is called a serotonergic
bundle of axons in the CNS is called a tract while
neuron.
in the periphery is called a nerve.
8.
 Interneurons, sometimes called association neu-
+
 Large nerve fibers (axons) are often myelinated.
rons, are the most numerous of all neuronal
The myelin sheath is formed in the PNS by
types. They function to distribute sensory infor-
Schwann cells and in the CNS by oligodendro-
mation and coordinate motor activity. Interneu-
cytes. The myelin sheath has gaps called nodes
rons produce patterns of connections such as
of Ranvier.
divergence and convergence.
(Continued)
238  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Supportive cells
2. 
Chemically gated channels, sometimes called
neurotransmitter-gated channels, are located on
Neurons make up only 10% of nervous tissue, while
the postsynaptic membrane. The binding of a
the remaining 90% is made of several cell types col-
neurotransmitter  will generally cause  these
lectively called neuroglia, or glia, that support,
channels to either open or close. Chemically
protect and nourish neighboring neurons. The neu-
 gated channels can be either direcly gated (iono-
roglia of the CNS include (l) ependymal cells, (2)
tropic) or indirectly gated (metabotropic).
astrocytes, (3) oligodendrocytes, and (4) microglia.
3.
 Voltage-gated channels are found on those mem-
The neuroglia of the PNS include (l) satellite cells
branes that generate an action potential includ-
and Schwann cells.
ing axons and the sarcolemma of skeletal and
cardiac muscle. These channels open or close in
response to changes in membrane potential.
The resting membrane potential
Postsynaptic potentials
1.
 The difference in electrical charge across the
At rest, only the passive channels are open while
 membrane of a cell at rest is called the resting
the neurotransmitter-gated channels are closed.
membrane potential, and is typically about -60
 When a neurotransmifter binds to a postsynaptic
to -70mV. It is due to differences in sodium and
10wl
receptor, it activates a neurotransmitter-gated, or
potassium ion concentrations inside and outside
chemically gated, channel that causes a change
1
the cell and differences in permeability of the
in the membrane potential. This change in poten-
membrane to these ions.
tial is called a postsynaptic potential since it
2.
 With regard to membrane potential, the concen-
occurs in the postsynaptic cell.
tration of Nat and Cl is higher outside the cell,
1
 Postsynaptic  potentials
are
 also   graded
whereas the concentration of Kt and organic
because their magnitude depends on both
anions is higher inside the cell.
the amount and the duration of action of the
3.
Ions cannot cross the membrane except by way
neurotransmitter.
of ion channels. Within the membrane, there are
A neurotransmitter that causes depolarization
passive ion channels, sometimes called leak
 generates an EPSP, while a neurotransmitter that
channels, which remain open. Sodium ions are
hyperpolarizes the cell generates an IPSP.
always leaking inward, while potassium ions are
always leading outward. These ionic movements
are opposed by the sodium-potassium pump,
which ejects 3Nat from the cell for each 2K+
Generation of an action potential
 transported in.
The equilibrium potential of an ion can be calcu-
Neurons are able to generate and propagate an elec-
lated using the Nernst equation.
trical impulse, called an action potential, along their
length. The action potential is a stereotypic depolar-
At body temperature, the Nernst equation for
ization and repolarization of the membrane.
the monovalent ions K', Na', and Cl can be simpli-
 There are three steps to an action potential:
fied to
(1)]
 Resting state. At rest, the voltage-gated chan-
[ion Joutside
 nels are closed, and there is only passive move-
Eion = 61.54 mv log 
[ionjinside
ment of ions across the cell membrane.
(2)
 Depolarization. When a neuron receives a stim-
ulus, the chemically or mechanically gated
Membrane channels
channels respond, resulting in the production
of postsynaptic potentials. These are graded
In addition to leakage channels, there are also
potentials, and they can summate either spa-
active channels, sometimes called gated chan-
tially or temporally.
 nels, in the cell membrane. The gated channels
(3)
Generation of the action potential. If summa-
open or close in response to a stimuli. There are
tion brings the membrane to threshold, then the
three classes of gated channels: (1) chemically
voltage-gated channels are activated. Upon
gated, (2) voltage-gated, and (3) mechanically
reaching threshold, the voltage-gated Nat chan-
gated.
nels open increasing the permeability to Na*.
 Introduction to the nervous system
239
This causes the membrane potential to move
Chemical synapses are responsible for most com-
toward the equilibrium potential for Nat result-
munication between neurons and adjacent cells. A
ing in the upstroke, or rising phase, of the action
chemical synapse is much more complicated. An
potential. At the peak of the action potential, the
 action potential arriving at the synaptic bouton initi-
 voltage-gated Na+ channels become inactivated.
ates a series of events:
Therefore, Na+ can no longer move inward. At
(1)
Depolarization of the synaptic bouton. The
this time, the voltage-gated potassium channels
arrival of the action potential at the nerve ending
are opening, thus allowing K+ to move outward.
The outward movement of K+ causes the repo-
causes depolarization of this region.
(2)
 Opening voltage-gated calcium channels. Depo-
 larization phase, also called the downstroke or
larization of the nerve ending allows the volt-
falling phase, of the action potential in which
age-gated calcium channels to open. Calcium
the membrane potential moves back toward its
causes the synaptic vesicles to bind to the pre-
 resting membrane potential.
synaptic membrane. Calcium is then seques-
Action potentials are independent of stimulus
tered by the mitochondria or ER, or actively
strength. Strong stimuli cause action potentials to be
pumped out of the cell.
generated more frequently but not with greater
(3)
Exocytosis. Once bound to the presynaptic
amplitude.
membrane, the synaptic vesicles release their
contents into the synaptic cleft through a process
of exocytosis.
Propagation of the action potential
(4)
 Binding of neurotransmitter to postsynaptic
membrane. If the neurotransmitter binds to a
During the generation of the action potential,
postsynaptic receptor, it activates the transmit-
there is a reversal in membrane potential induced
ter-gated channels. This will result in either an
by the movement of Na+ inward. After this
 IPSP or EPSP in the postsynaptic cell.
happens, the positively charged ions now inside
(5)
Inactivation of the neurotransmitter. The neu-
the membrane move laterally since they are
rotransmitter can continue to cause an effect on
 attracted by the negatively charged ions lining
the postsynaptic cell until it is inactivated.
the inside of the membrane. Conversely, the pos-
itively charged ions found on the outside of
the membrane migrate toward the new sink
of negatively charged ions created by the rever-
Neurotransmitters and their receptors
sal in membrane potential, thus completing the
circuit.
The major classes of neurotransmitters based on
The process is self-propagating. As the action
chemical structure are ACh, biogenic amines,
2.
potential migrates down the axon, the voltage-
 amino acids, peptides, purines, and dissolved
gated Na+ channels in the area it just moved from
gases.
 are absolutely refractory.
2
Functionally, neurotransmitters are classified as
3.
 In unmyelinated fibers, action potentials are pro-
(1) inhibitory or excitatory (or both) and (2) direct
duced in a wave all along the axon. In myelin-
 or indirect. Direct-acting neurotransmitters bind
ated fibers, action potentials are generated only
to and open ion channels. Indirect-acting neu-
-npes Aq pajesedod are pue iaauey jo sapou je
 rotransmitters act through second messengers.
tatory conduction.
 Neuromodulators also act indirectly presynapti-
strength.
Synaptic transmission
3.
 Neurotransmitter receptors are either channel-
linked receptors that open ion channels, leading
Electrical synapses are relatively rare. They allow the
to fast changes in membrane potential, or G
electrical signal to be propagated from one cell to
protein-linked receptors that oversee slow syn-
another, with virtually no delay. Cells are connected
aptic responses mediated by G proteins and
via a connexon, and ions can flow from one cell to
intracellular second messengers. Second mes-
the other. The electrical signal can be propagated
 sengers most often activate kinases, which, in
 bidirectionally, without modification, across the elec-
turn, act on ion channels or activate other
trical synapse.
proteins.
(Continued)
240  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Modulation of the synaptic signal
(2) be present in the presynaptic terminal and
released in amounts sufficient to exert a defined
 The transmission of a signal across the chemical
action on the postsynaptic cell, (3) exactly mimic
synapse can be modified. This is known as syn-
the action of the endogenously released neu-
aptic plasticity.
rotransmitter when administered exogenously.
2.
 Another neuron can synapse on the axon termi-
and (4) be a specific mechanism of inactivation.
nal of the neuron, and also control the amount of
2.
The term biogeric amines has classically been
neurotransmitter released by that cell. This can
used to include the catecholamines and sero-
 cause either presynaptic inhibition or facilitation
tonin. Occasionally, histamine is also considered
depending on whether the amount of neu-
a biogenic amine. The term classical neurotrans-
rotransmitter released is decreased or increased,
mitter refers to ACh, biogenic amines, and the
respectively.
 amino acid neurotransmitters.
3.
 Calcium appears involved in another type of
3.
 Unconventional neurotransmitters refer to nitric
d a e r sis r Ad ss
oxide and carbon monoxide.
of time called long-term potentiation.
Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitter receptors
hapter
Neurotransmitters are the means by which
 The action of neurotransmitters is dependent on the
 signals are carried across the chemical synapse.
receptor to which they bind. Neurotransmitters can
1
To be considered a neurotransmitter, a com-
 generally act at multiple receptors, resulting in dif-
pound must (l) be synthesized in the neuron,
ferential responses.
Review questions and answers are available
online.
Central nervous system
Contents
 Embryonic Development 
241
Mesencephalon
251
Three Brain Vesicles
243
Metencephalon
252
Organization of the Brain
243
Medulla Oblongata
253
 The Cerebral Hemispheres
243
Functional Systems
254
Ventricles of the Brain
245
Cranial Nerves
257
Cerebral Cortex
246
 Organization of the Spinal Cord
258
 Motor Areas
247
Protection of the Central Nervous System
260
Sensory Areas
247
Meninges
260
Cerebral White Matter
247
Cerebrospinal Fluid
260
 Diencephalon
249
Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB)
261
Thalamus
249
 Blood-Cerebrospinal Fluid Barrier
261
 Hypothalamus
249
Chapter Summary
261
 Epithalamus 
251
The central nervous system (CNS) includes the
chord develops from the chordamesodermal tissue.
brain and spinal cord. One of the major factors dis-
The notochord, in a process called primary induction,
tinguishing animals into different classes is the de-
sends a signal to the overlying ectoderm to begin to
gree of development of the brain that has occurred
thicken, thus forming the neural plate (Fig. 9.1). The
during evolution. This process, called cephalization,
 inducing signal is a protein called noggin.
has resulted in an increase in size and complexity of
Shortly after formation of the neural plate, its lateral
the rostral, or front, portion of the brain.
edges become elevated forming the neural folds,
which flank the neural groove. As the neural plate
begins to invaginate, the neural folds surround it. The
Embryonic development
lateral edges of the neural folds eventually migrate
toward the longitudinal midline of the embryo, thus
The CNS is derived from the ectoderm, the outermost
forming the neural tube. The neural tube then sepa-
layer of the embryo. During gastrulation, the noto-
rates from the overlying cutaneous ectoderm. The
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
241
242
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Ectoderm
Neural plate
Notochord
Spinal coro
Neural groove
Neural fold
Normal spine
Meningocele
Ectodem
Myelocele
 Neural crest cells 
Fg. 9.2. Spina bifida. Spina bifida aperta produces a noticeable
sac in the back. A meningocele, in which a portion of the meninges
protrudes, produces little or no muscle paralysis or incontinence
 Somite
once it is repaired. However, in 90% of all spina bifida cases, a
 portion of the undeveloped spinal cord itself protrudes through the
spine and forms a sac called a myelocele. Any portion of the spinal
 Cord outside the vertebrae is undeveloped or damaged, causing
Neural crest cells
paralysis and incontinence.
Ectoderm
Neural tube
Box 9.1
 Folic acid and birth defects in humans
napter
 Neural tube defects (NTDs) are among the most
C
 common birth defects in humans. Folic acid appears
Fig. 9.1. Neurulation. (A) During early development, shortly after
 very important in neural tube development. In
formation of the primitive streak, the notochord sends a signal to
1992, it was recommended by the Public Health
the overlying ectoderm to begin to flatten and the cells elongate,
Service, and endorsed by the American Academy
thus forming the neural plate. (B) After induction from the
 of Pediatrics, that women who might become preg-
notochord, the overlying ectoderm begins to involute, and a neural
nant should take 400μg of folic acid daily. For
groove is formed in the midline while the sides of the area involuting 
form the neural folds. (C) Later in embryonic development, the 
women at higher risk for giving birth to a child
 neural tube forms and is covered by the overlying ectoderm.
with spinal bifida, it is recommended that they take
4000 μg of folic acid/day by prescription. Studies
have shown that 50% or more of NTD can be
cavity inside the neural tube is called the neurocoele.
prevented if women consume adequate folic acid
before and during the early weeks of pregnancy.
Closure of the tube first occurs in the upper spinal
 Folic acid is a synthetic compound used in forti-
cord and progresses both cephalad (toward the head)
fied foods and dietary supplements. Folate is a
and caudad (toward the tail).
term describing all compounds having the same
In the chick, neurulation occurs in the cephalic
 region while gastrulation is still occurring in the caudal
vitamin activity.
region. The opened ends of the tube are called the
anterior and posterior neuropore, respectively.
In mammals, neural tube closure is initiated at
several sites along the tube. Failure of the tube to close
myelocele). The sac is filled with cerebrospinal fluid
at different sites results in various birth defects. Spina
(CSF), but there is generally no nerve damage. In a
bifida occurs if the posterior neural tube does not
myelomeningocele, the meninges and spinal nerves
close, whereas anencephaly is a lethal condition that
push through an opening in the vertebrae (Box 9.1).
results when the anterior neural tube fails to close.
 As the neural tube is closing, a group of ectodermal
Craniorachischisis is a failure of the entire tube to
cells separates from the neural tube and locates on the
close. There are different forms of spina bifida. In
dorsal lateral edge of the tube. These cells become the
spina bifida occulta, often called hidden spina bifida,
neural crest cells, which eventually migrate through-
the spinal cord and the nerves are usually normal and
 aar e sn e nd Aoq a ano
there is no visible opening on the back (Fig 9.2).
bodies in the peripheral nervous system, including (1)
 Usually harmless, there is a small defect or gap in a
neurons and glial cells of the sensory, sympathetic,
few of the vertebrae. When the meninges protrude
 and parasympathetic nervous system; (2) norepineph-
from the spine, it is called a myelocele (or meningo-
rine and epinephrine producing cells of the adrenal
Central nervous system
243
gland; (3) pigment-containing cells of the epidermis;
The metencephalon includes the pons (pons = bridge)
and (4) skeletal and connective tissues of the head.
and cerebellum, and the myelencephalon includes the
The neural crest cells develop in conjunction with
 medulla oblongata. Collectively, the midbrain, pons,
the underlying mesoderm. The mesoderm on either
and medulla oblongata constitute the brain stem.
side of the neural tube forms the somites. The somites
produce the  vertebrae and  the  associated skeletal
muscle. The nerves that innervate the skeletal muscle
Organization of the brain
are called somatic motor neurons since they are
derived from somites.
The cerebral hemispheres
The telencephalic vesicles form the telencephalon,
Three brain vesicles
which consists of two cerebral hemispheres. As the
brain develops, the telencephalic vesicles grow poste-
As the brain develops from the neural tube, three
riorly and laterally until they encase the diencephalon.
swellings form at its rostral end. These three vesicles
There is a proliferation of neurons resulting in the
include the prosencephalon; the mesencephalon, or
formation of three major white matter systems, includ-
midbrain; and the rhombencephalon, or hindbrain.
ing the cortical white matter, the corpus callosum, and
The rhombencephalon connects the brain with the
the internal capsule. The cortical white matter includes
spinal cord (Fig. 9.3).
neurons that run to and from the cerebral cortex. The
 During the next stage of development, two second-
corpus callosum includes neurons that connect the
ary vesicles called the optic vesicles and telencephalic
two cerebral hemispheres, and the internal capsule
vesicles form from the prosencephalon. The remaining
cornects the cortex with the brain stem.
unpaired vesicle in the middle is called the diencepha-
The surface of the brain is marked by many convo-
lon, or "between brain." The telencephalon vesicles
 lutions. The grooves are called sulci (singular: sulcus);
grow to become the two cerebral hemispheres, col-
 the ridges are called gyri (singular: gyrus). The outer six
lectively called the cerebrum. Finally, another pair of
layers of neurons constitute the cerebral cortex. The
vesicles forms on the ventral surface of the telence-
convolutions greatly increase the surface area, thus
phalic vesicles and eventually become the olfactory
increasing the amount of cortex. Whereas the brain of
bulbs. The olfactory bulbs participate in the sense of
a chicken has a relatively flat surface, the brain of most
smell. The mesencephalon does not divide, but instead
domestic animals is considerably convoluted (Fig. 9.4).
remains the midbrain while the rhombencephalon
   ds e s  
divides into the metencephalon and myelencephalon.
called fissures. The longitudinal fissure separates the two
3 Primary vesicles
5 Secondary vesicles
Neural canals
Olfactory bulbs
Telencephalon
 Basal ganglion
vesicles
Limbic system
Hypothalamus
Lateral ventricle
Diencephalon
Epithalamus
Thalamus
Prosencephalon
(forebrain)
Optic vesicles
Eyes
Mesencephalon
Mesencephalon
Midbrain
Cerebral aquaduct
(midbrain)
Cerebellum
Fourth ventricle
Rhombencephalon
Metencephalon
LPons
Rhombencephalon
(hindbrain)
Fourth ventricle
Myencephalon
Medulla
Spinal cord
Spinal cornd
which gives rise to the telencephalon and diencephalon vesicles. The most caudal, the rhombencephalon, gives rise to the metencephalon
and myelencephalon.
244 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Sylvian
Longitudinal
fissure
fissure
Sulci
Sulci
Sylvian
Gyri
fissure
Olfactory
bulb
Gyri
Transverse
fissure
Cerebellar
hemispheres
Cerebellar
vermis
Hypophysis
Chapter
Pons
Crus cerebri
GiFbtaeFusu
Fig. 9.4. Cytoarchitecture of the goat brain surface. (A) Lateral view; (B) dorsal view. Cephalization has resulted in the formation of ridges,
called gyri, and valleys, called sulci. Fissures are larger grooves separating major brain areas, such as the longitudinal fissure that separates the
cerebral hemispheres, whereas the cerebral hemispheres
Parietal lobe
are separated from the cerebellum by the transverse
Parieto-occipitalsulcus
Central sulcus
fissure, which runs perpendicular to the longitudinal
fissure.
Occipitallobe
 When viewing an intact brain, four lobes—frontal,
Frontal
parietal, temporal, and occipital—are visible in the
lobe
cerebral hemispheres. In most animals, the lobes are
not delineated by sulci but are named for the cranial
bones under which they lie (Fig. 9.5). In the human
brain, various sulci separate the lobes, as will be
Temporal lobe
Lateral fissure
described further. The frontal lobe lies just under the
frontal bone making up the most rostral lobe of
the cerebral hemispheres. Immediately caudal to the
Fig. 9.5. Lobes of the brain. Four lobes are visible on the surface
frontal lobe is the parietal lobe, which is separated
of the brain. The frontal lobe is most rostral. Caudad to the frontal
lobe is the parietal lobe. Below the lateral fissure is the temporal
from the frontal lobe by the central sulcus.
lobe. The most caudal lobe is the occipital lobe. (Modified from
 Two important gyri are also bordered by the central
Constantinescu, 2001.)
sulcus: the precentral gyrus anterior and the postcen-
tral gyrus posterior to the central sulcus.
Below the parietal lobe is the temporal lobe, which
 is found under the temporal bone. The temporal lobe
 occipital lobe, which is separated from the parietal
is separated from the frontal and parietal lobes by the
 lobe by the parieto-occipital sulcus.
lateral sulcus (lateral fissure, Sylvian fissure). Finally,
Although not visible on the surface, there is a fifth
at the back surface of the cerebral hemispheres is the
 lobe called the insula, which is found by spreading the
Central nervous system
245
brain apart at the lateral fissure. It is covered by parts
the ventricles causing hydrocephalus, or swelling of
 of the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes.
 the ventricles. Since the skull cannot expand, increased
pressure in the ventricles causes the soft tissue of the
brain to be compressed, which leads to impaired brain
Ventricles of the brain
function and death if untreated.
The adult human contains about 150mL of CSF, and
As development progresses, the neurocoel expands
it is estimated that 430-450mL are produced daily.
to produce four chambers, called cerebroventricles.
Therefore, CSF is turned over every 6-7 hours. After
 Ependymal cells line the cerebroventricles. Each cere-
entering the subarachnoid space, CSF moves through
bral hemisphere contains a lateral ventricle, also called
one-way valves called arachnoid villi that project into
the first and second ventricle. A thin layer of tissue
the superior sagittal sinus formed by the dura mater
called the septum pellucidum separates the two lateral
 located in the longifudinal fissure. The superior sagit-
ventricles from each other. The third ventricle is found
tal sinus is filled with venous blood. Therefore, once
in the diencephalon, and the fourth ventricle extends
 the CSF enters the superior sagiftal sinus, it returns to
from the posterior surface of the pons and the anterior
the circulatory system.
surface of the cerebellum to the superior portion of the
medulla oblongata (Fig. 9.6). The fourth ventricle is
Lateral
continuous with the central canal of the spinal cord.
ventricle
The lateral ventricles are connected to the third ven-
 tricle via the interventricular foramen of Monroe (Fig.
Interventricular
foramen
9.7). The third ventricle connects to the fourth ventri-
dle via the mesencephalic aqueduct, also called the
aqueduct of Sylvius or cerebral aqueduct. CSF flows
by bulk flow from the lateral ventricles to the third
ventricle to the fourth ventricle.
CSF can leave the fourth ventricle through the
medial aperture called the foramen of Magendie and
the two lateral apertures called the foramina of
Fourth
 Luschka and enter the subarachnoid space (Fig. 9.8).
ventricle
ventricle
Cerebral
This space is found between the arachnoid and pia
aqueduct
 mater, which, along with the dura mater, form the
three meningeal layers covering the brain. The fluid
Fig. 9.7. Cerebroventricles of the sheep. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
is formed in the choroid plexus located in each lateral ventricle.
in the subarachnoid space bathes the surface of the
Via bulk flow, the CsF flows from the lateral ventricles through the
brain and spinal cord. Should the CSF not be able to
interventricular foramen of Monroe to the third ventricle. It then
flow through the ventricular system, it will back up in
flows through the cerebral aqueduct to the fourth ventricle.
Subarachnoid
Cerebral
Lateral
ventricle
Cerebroventricles
space
hemisphere
Thalamus
Cerebellum
Foramenof
Foramenof
Luschka
Luschka
olfactory
Diencephalonventricle
3rd
4th
bulb
Brain
ventricle
stem
Foramenof
Fig. 9.6. Cerebroventricles. The neurocoele, or central cavity, in
Magendie
the neural tube eventually enlarges into four cerebroventricles filled
with cerebrospinal fluid. Two lateral ventricles, one in each
Fg. 9.8.  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) movement out of ventricles.
 cerebral hemisphere, empty into the medially located third ventricle
CSF travels from the fourth ventricle to the subarachnoid space via
located in the diencephalon. This empties into the fourth ventricle
the medially located foramen of Magendie and the two lateral
located between the cerebellum and the brain stem.
foramina of Luschka.
246 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cerebral cortex
to be subdivided into three components including the
projection areas, rhinencephalon (olfactory and limbic)
areas, and association areas. The projection and
The cerebral cortex is arranged as layers of cells that
association areas comprise the neocortex. Association
lie parallel to the surface of the brain. The layer closest
areas receive sensory information, process that infor-
to the surface of the brain is separated from the pia
mation, develop a response, and predict its conse-
mater by a zone called the molecular layer or layer I
quences. As animals became more evolutionarily
that lacks neurons. Furthermore, at least one layer
advanced, the association areas became more devel-
contains pyramidal cells that project large dendrites,
oped (Fig. 9.10).
called apical dendrites, that project to layer I where
The white matter, or fibers, in the cerebral cortex
they form multiple synapses.
form three types of fibers:
The neocortex, which is found only in mammals
and is associated with higher brain functions such as
Association fibers. Association areas allow complex
conscious behavior, is found over most of the surface
problem solving and creative thinking. There are
of the cerebral hemisphere and consists of six layers
association areas found in the frontal, temporal,
of cells (Fig. 9.9). Medial to the lateral ventricles is an
parietal, and occipital lobes. These fibers course
area of cortex named for its unique shape called the
within a cerebrai hemisphere, thus connecting
various areas of the cortex. The parietal and occip-
 cell layer. Ventral and lateral to the hippocampus is
ital lobe association areas are involved with cogni-
the third area of cortex called the olfactory cortex (piri-
tive functions, whereas the frontal association areas
form, or pyriform cortex) that consists of two cell
are involved with general alertness, intelligence,
 layers. The olfactory cortex cornects with the olfactory
and temperament. The temporal association area
 bulbs. The olfactory cortex is separated from the neo-
is involved with learning and memory. Although
cortex by the rhinal fissure.
these areas are not well developed in cats and
 In humans, the neocortex was extensively mapped
dogs, lesions to the frontal association area result
by Korbinian Brodmann in 1906 in which he num-
 in changes in behavior and personality.
 bered 52 different cortical areas each having a common
2
Projection fibers. Neurons that leave the cerebrum
cytoarchitecture. Such an extensive mapping has not
 and enter the brain stem via the internal capsule
been done in other animals. The cortex can be desig-
are called projection fibers. They therefore connect
nated into three areas: (1) motor areas responsible for
the cortex with subcortical structures, as well as
the control of voluntary motor functions, (2) sensory
the remainder of the nervous system.
areas responsible for perception of various sensations,
3.
Commissural fibers. Each cerebral hemisphere
and (3) association areas that integrate the motor and
 generally controls the contralateral side of the body;
sensory signals.
therefore, fibers need to cross between hemispheres.
 The motor and sensory areas can be grouped
When crossing from one side of the cerebral cortex
together into projection areas, thus allowing the cortex
to the other, they do so as commissural fibers.
Rabbit  Cat and
and rat
bop
Humans
Neocortex
Hippocampus
Rhinencephalon
Olfactory
Limbic 
Lateral
ventricle
Projection areas
100 %
% 08
15 %
Primary motor area
 Primary somatic
sensory area
Auditory area
Visual area
 Rhinal fissure
 Olfactory cortex
Fig. 9.9. Three types of mammalian cortex. The neocortex is
Association Areas
% 0
20 %
85 %
found on the outer surface of the cerebral hemispheres. Medial to 
the lateral ventricles is a second type of cortex called the
Fg. 9.10. Evolutionary changes in the cerebrocortex. Through
hippocampus, part of the limbic system. The third type of cortical
evolutionary development, the ability to display higher-order
tissue is the olfactory cortex, located ventrally and laterally to the
thinking is associated with enhanced development of the
hippocampus.
association areas. (Modified from King, 1987.)
Central nervous system 
247
Motor areas
tion from sensory receptors located in the skin and
 proprioceptors in skeletal muscles.
These are cortical areas responsible for motor func-
tions. The primary motor cortex is the final site for
Cerebral white matter
cortical processing of motor commands before mes-
sages are then sent to the somatic muscles. While in
humans the primary motor area lies in the posterior
Basal ganglion
part of the frontal lobes just anterior to the central
In addition to the cerebral cortex discussed earlier, and
sulcus, in mammals, this area lays in the rostral region
its commissures, and association and projection fibers,
of the frontal lobes (Fig. 9.1l). Unlike birds, reptiles,
there are some deep subcortical nuclei called the basal
amphibians, and fish, mammals possess a pyramidal
 ganglia or nuclei (Fig. 9.13). Although the definition
system. The pyramidal system consists of corticospi-
 of the structures included in the basal ganglion varies,
nal fibers that travel from the primary motor area
it generally includes the caudate nucleus, putamen,
through the medullary pyramids located at the base
globus pallidus, substantia nigra (consisting of the
of the medulla oblongata, to the somatic motor neurons
 pars reticulata and pars compacts), and subthalamic
found in the spinal cord. It also includes the cortico-
nucleus. The putamen and globus pallidus (or palli-
nuclear fibers that project to the nuclei of those cranial
dum) together form the lentiform nucleus that later-
nerves that innervate striated muscles in the head. The
ally borders the internal capsule. The lentiform nucleus
pyramidal fibers decussate, or cross over, in the pyra-
 and caudate are collectively called the corpus striatum
mids of the medulla.
because the fibers of the internal capsule, a collection
 The extrapyramidal system includes all the descend-
of fibers that runs between the neocortex and thalamus,
 ing somatic motor pathways excluding those described
 pass through them, giving them a striated appearance.
earlier that constitute the pyramidal system.
The
 The corpus striatum receives most of the inputs to
extrapyramidal system is phylogenetically old and
the basal ganglion from the cerebral cortex, thalamus,
found in all but the lowest vertebrates. It consists of
and brain stem. The corpus striatum sends projec-
nine main motor areas located in the forebrain, mid-
tions to the globus pallidus and substantia nigra that
brain, and hindbrain (Fig. 9.12). These will be dis-
provide the major output projections from the basal
cussed in depth later in the chapter.
ganglion. These projection fibers travel through the
thalamus to the premotor and prefrontal cortex, and
therefore affect motor movement.
Sensory areas
Limbic system
Unlike the motor areas that are located in the frontal
lobe, sensory areas are located throughout the cortex.
The limbic system consists of a group of structures
The primary somatosensory cortex receives informa-
located in the medial region of each cerebral hemisphere
Forebrain
Primary somatic sensory area
Cerebral cortex
Basal ganglion
Primary motor
Visual area
area
Midbrain
Descending
 reticular 
Red
Tectum
 nucleus
formation
Hindbrain
Pontine motor
reticular center
 Lateral medullary
 motor reticular
 Medial medullary
Vestibular
 center
 motor reticular
 nuclei
 center
Auditoryarea
Fig. 9.11. Primary projection areas of the cat. The primary motor
Fg. 9.12. Extrapyramidal system. The extrapyramidal system is a
and somatic sensory areas spread over the medial surface of the
multisynaptic motor pathway that includes all those motor neurons
frontal lobes. The visual area is located in the occipital lobe; the
not part of the pyramidal system. It consists of nine motor centers
auditory area is located in the temporal lobe.
 scattered throughout the brain.
248 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Thalamus
Amygdala
Caudate,head
Corpus
striatum
Lentiform
Putamen
Subthalamicnucleus
nucleus
Globus pallidus:
Substantia nigra
internal segment
external segment
Fig. 9.13. Basal ganglion. The basal ganglion, or nucleus, is a collection of brain nuclei that function in motor movement as part of the
extrapyramidal system. The basal ganglion includes the globus pallidus and putamen, which together constitute the lentiform nucleus. Also 
included is the caudate, which, combined with the lentiform nucleus, forms the corpus striatum. Finally, also included in the basal ganglion
 are the amygdala, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra.
Chapter
Mammillothalamic
 rior portions of the limbic lobe. These later two gyri
Cingulate gyrus
conceal the hippocampus, which is a nucleus lying
tract
inferior to the lateral ventricle. The fornix is a fiber
Hippocampus
→Mammillary bodies
Fornix
tract running inferior to the corpus callosum and
 of the hypothalamus
 connecting the hippocampus with the hypothalamus
 Column of the fornix
Body of the fornix
where it ends in the mammillary bodies. Also included
Thalamus
in the limbic system is the anterior nucleus of the
Cingulate
thalamus, which relays information from the mammil-
gyrus
 lary bodies to the cingulate gyrus. The amygdaloid
Corpus
callosum
body (nucleus) serves as the interface between the
 limbic system, cerebrum, and various sensory systems.
The limbic system is involved in emotional and
 behavioral patterns. The functions of the limbic sys-
tem include (l) establishment of emotional states; (2)
Pituitary
Parahippocampal
Mammillary
linking of conscious functions with unconscious, auto-
Amygdala
body
gyrus
nomic functions; and (3) long-term memory storage
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
 and retrieval. The rabies virus generally attacks the
Fig. 9.14. Limbic system. The limbic lobe includes the cingulate
hippocampus and results in emotional changes includ-
gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus, and the hippocampal formation that
 ing bouts of terror and rage. The amygdala is believed
lies deep in the parahippocampal gyrus. The hippocampal
to be the major component of the limbic system
formation includes the hippocampus, dentate gyrus (deep to the
involved in emotion since electrical stimulation of
parahippocampus gyrus), and subiculum. The limbic system
this region produces feelings of fear and apprehen-
additionally includes parts of the rhinencephalon, amygdala,
hypothalamus, and anterior nucleus of the thalamus. The fornix 
sion, whereas damage to this region causes tameness.
helps connect parts of the limbic system.
Removal of the amygdala will allow a cat to wander
through a colony of monkeys ignoring the monkey's
hoots and threats.
 It is believed that the hippocampal formation pro-
(Fig. 9.14). These structures encircle (limbus = ring or
cesses information from the cingulated gyrus. This
border) the brain stem. The limbic lobe of the cerebral
information is sent to the mammillary bodies of the
hemisphere includes gyri surrounding the diencepha-
hypothalamus via the fornix (Fig. 9.14). The hypo-
 lon, as well as other underlying structures. Specifi-
 thalamus gives feedback to the cingulate gyrus by a
cally, it consists of three gyri. The cingulate gyrus is
pathway from the mammillary bodies to the anterior
thalamus via the mammillothalamic tract, and then to
parahippocampal gyrus form the inferior and poste-
the cingulate gyrus.
Central nervous system
249
Diencephalon
that runs the rostrocaudal length of the thalamus. The
 medial group of nuclei is located medial to the medul-
The telencephalon and diencephalon make up the
lary lamina. The medullary lamina splits at the rostral
forebrain and are derived from the rostral-most vesicle
 end of the thalamus and encases the anterior group.
called the prosencephalon. Surrounded by the cere-
 The posterior nuclear group consists of the pulvinar
bral hemispheres, the diencephalons consist of three
and medial and lateral geniculate bodies, whereas the
 paired structures—the thalamus, hypothalamus, and
anterior group consists only of the anterior nucleus.
epithalamus.
 The anterior nucleus receives input from the mammil-
lary nuclei of the hypothalamus and is thought to
 participate in memory and emotion. It is also intercon-
Thalamus
nected with the cingulated and frontal cortices and is
therefore part of the limbic system.
The thalamus lies dorsal to the hypothalamus and is
The medial group, consisting mostly of the medial
bordered by the caudate nucleus dorsally and the
 nuclei, receives inputs from the basal ganglia, amyg-
 internal capsule laterally. Its two halves are separated
dala, and midbrain. It projects to the frontal cortex
by the third ventricle. There is a collection of nuclei
and has been implicated in memory. The ventrolateral
found in each half of the thalamus (Fig. 9.15). The
 group consists of the remaining nuclei shown in Figure
intermediate mass of the thalamus extends through
9.15. The ventral anterior and ventral lateral nuclei
the third ventricle connecting the two halves.
carry information from the basal ganglia and cerebel-
The thalamus is the major relay station for sensory
 lum to the motor cortex. The ventral posterior lateral
information generated in the periphery and trans-
nucleus carries somatosensory  information to  the
ferred for processing to the cerebral hemispheres. It
neocortex.
also integrates motor information from the cerebellum
and basal ganglion and transfers such information to
the motor regions of the cortex.
Hypothalamus
 The nuclei of the thalamus are generally classified
into four groups—anterior, ventrolateral, medial, and
The hypothalamus (hypo = below) is found ventral to
posterior. The ventrolateral and posterior groups are
the thalamus and forms the inferolateral walls of the
located lateral to the medullary lamina, a fiber tract
third ventricle (Fig. 9.16). It extends from the optic
Lateral posterior
Dorsal nuclei 
Lateral dorsal
group
(Medial
Pulnivar
 Medial
Anterior nuclear group
geniculate
 Posterior
body
 nuclear
Ventral anterior
 group
Lateral 
Ventral lateral
Ventral lateral
geniculate 
nuclei group
body
 Ventral posterior lateral 
Fig. 9.15. The thalamus. The thalamus consists of four groups of nuclei. The anterior nucleus and pulvinar constitute the anterior and
posterior groups, respectively. The medial group consists mainly of the mediodorsal nuclei (not shown).
250 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
chiasm, the site where the optic nerves cross to the
system, and that many of the early effects attributed
contralateral sides, to the posterior border of the mam-
to the hypothalamus were a result of stimulation of
millary bodies. The infundibulum, which connects the
fiber pathways that course through the area.
hypothalamus to the pituitary, lies between the optic
While relatively small, the hypothalamus is a complex
chiasm and mammillary bodies. It arises from the
structure containing many nuclei (Fig. 9.17). It can be
tuber cinereum, which is an oval protuberance located
divided into three general areas: anterior, middle, and
 on the floor of the third ventricle.
posterior. The anterior region lies dorsal to the optic
 The hypothalamus serves an essential role in the
chiasm and is called the preoptic region. It contains 
control of homeostasis and reproduction. Once termed
the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is involved in cir-
the "head ganglion" of the autonomic nervous system,
cadian rhythms, the anterior hypothalamic nucleus,
the hypothalamus was thought to control the auto-
 and the lateral and medial preoptic nuclei. This area
nomic nervous system. This was due to the observa-
also controls blood pressure, body temperature, and
tions that electrical stimulation of the hypothalamus
reproductive activity.
altered autonomic functions. However, it is now
 The middle region lies dorsal to the pituitary and
believed that the hypothalamus plays more of an
contains various nuclei including the dorsomedial,
integrative role in regulating the autonomic nervous
ventromedial, paraventricular, supraoptic, and arcuate
nuclei. The paraventricular nucleus contains magno-
cellular and parvocellular neuroendocrine regions.
The arcuate nucleus and parvocellular region of the
paraventricular nucleus produce hormones that control
the anterior pituitary. The magnocellular area of the
paraventricular nucleus, consisting of large neurons,
Chapter
produces oxytocin that is secreted in the neurohy-
pophysis. The paraventricular nucleus also has con-
nternal capsule
nections to both parasympathetic and sympathetic
Mammillotha
alamictract
preganglionic neurons in the medulla and spinal cord,
and can thus control the autonomic nervous system.
The supraoptic nucleus produces antidiuretic hormone,
which is also secreted from the neurohypophysis.
The posterior region of the hypothalamus contains
Amygdala
the mammillary bodies, tuberomammillary nucleus,
 Periventricular nucleus
(Ventromedial nucleus
Optictract
and the overlying posterior hypothalamic region. This
Arcuatenucleus
Cerebral peduncle
latter nucleus contains histamine and appears involved
Infundibulum
in wakefulness and arousal.
Hypothalamic
Third Ventricle
 The hypothalamus can also be divided longitudi-
nuclei
 nally into the periventricular, medial, and lateral zones
Fig. 9.16. Diencephalon. A coronal section through the sheep
that each run the rostral-caudal length of the hypo-
 brain at the level of the diencephalon is shown. The hypothalamus
 is that region surrounding the third ventricle.
 thalamus. The periventricular zone lies immediately
 Column of the 
fornix
 Dorsomedial
 Anterior commissure
hypothalamic nucleus 
 Paraventricular nucleus 
Medial preoptic nucleus 
 Posterior hypothalamic
area
Anterior hypothalamic 
 Mammillary bodies 
nucleus
Lateral preoptic nucleus
Ventromedial
hypothalamic nucleus 
Suprachiasmatic nucleus 
 Supraoptic nucleus
Arcuate nucleus
Optic chiasma
Infundibulum 
Pituitary
Fig. 9.17. Hypothalamus. Saggital view of the hypothalamus showing the various hypothalamic nuclei.
Central nervous system
251
adjacent to the third ventricle. There are two major
from the retina to the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
fiber systems running through the hypothalamus.
Lesioning the suprachiasmatic nucleus attenuates
 The medial forebrain bundle runs through the lateral
 sleep and other circadian rhythms. These rhythms
hypothalamus connecting the hypothalamus with the
-rdns peiag e uends Aq paonsau aq re
brain stem, basal forebrain, amygdala, and cerebral
asmatic nucleus. Furthermore, stimulation of the
cortex. The second fiber system is located medial to
posterior hypothalamus produces arousal that
the major hypothalamic nuclei along the wall of the
is mediated by histaminergic neurons, whereas
 third ventricle, and it links the periaqueductal gray
destruction of this area decreases histaminergic
matter in the midbrain with the hypothalamus. This
output, which causes sleep, much like that caused
latter fiber system is involved in stereotyped behavioral
by antihistamines. In contrast, stimulation of the
patterns such as posturing during sexual behavior.
 anterior hypothalamus induces sleep. This appears
The hypothalamus integrates the regulation of the
tobe mediated by GABAnergic inhibitory neurons.
autonomic nervous system and thereby controls growth,
feeding, drinking, circadian rhythms, and maternal
behavior. Specifically, the hypothalamus plays a key
Epithalamus
role in six physiological areas:
The epithalamus lies superiorly, caudally, and medi-
1.
 It controls blood pressure and electrolyte compo-
ally relative to the other parts of the diencephalon and
-adde ses pue uogdunsuos raem lunage Aq uois
 thus represents a cephalad extension of the pretectum
tite as well as controlling blood osmolarity and
(just rostral of where the midbrain fuses with the
vasomotor tone. When the blood becomes hyper-
thalamus) of the mesencephalon. The epithalamus
osmotic, osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus are
includes the pineal body (epiphysis), the habenula, the
stimulated and result in the release of antidiuretic
habenular commissure, and the striae medullares.
tet
hormone (vasopressin) from the posterior pitu-
The pineal body serves a role in sensing light and
itary that causes the collecting tubules in the kidneys
thereby controlling the sleep-wake cycle via the pro-
to reabsorb water. This results in a decrease in
duction of melatonin. It also has an important role in
blood osmolarity.
seasonal breeding animals such as sheep in which a
2.
 It regulates body temperature by controlling met-
decrease in day length, and therefore a decrease in
abolic rate, vasomotor tone, and thermoregulatory
melatonin levels, results in estrus.
behavior.
3.
 It regulates food and water intake. For example
 an increase in white adipose levels in the body
Mesencephalon
causes increased plasma leptin levels. Leptin cir-
culates to the hypothalamus where it decreases
The mesencephalon lies between the diencephalon
the production and release of neuropeptide Y by
and pons (Fig. 9.18). The tectum (Latin for "roof")
neurons in the arcuate nucleus, thus resulting in
forms the roof of the mesencephalon and contains two
decreased food intake.
 pairs of prominent bulges known as the corpora quad-
4.
 It regulates reproduction through the hormonal
rigemina. Consisting of the superior and inferior col-
control of estrus, pregnancy, and lactation. Releas-
liculi, these nuclei process visual and auditory stimuli,
ing factors produced in the hypothalamus and
respectively. The tegmentum forms the floor of the
released into the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal
midbrain.
system control the release of hormones from the
The superior colliculus receives visual input from
anterior pituitary. Conversely, the hormones released
 the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus from the
from the posterior pituitary (i.e., oxytocin and
ipsilateral side. The inferior colliculus receives audi-
antidiuretic hormone) are produced in supraoptic
tory information from the medulla oblongata and
and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus
 pons, and relays that information to the medial genic-
and then travel down the axons and are released
ulate on the same side. The inferior colliculi control
 from the posterior pituitary.
 the orientation of movements in response to auditory
5.
 It controls the stress response. This includes the
stimuli. The superior colliculi control the orientation
physiological and immunological responses such
 of movements of the eyes, head, and neck in response
as increased blood pressure and decreased humor-
to visual stimulation such as bright light.
al immunity.
 The cerebral aqueduct cornecting the third ventricle
6.
 It controls circadian rhythms and sleep-wake cycles.
 with the fourth ventricle runs through the mesenceph-
The suprachiasmatic nucleus acts as a major inter-
alon. The tegmentum forms the part of the midbrain
nal clock in mammals. This nucleus is entrained
lying ventral to the cerebral aqueduct. On the walls
by light via the retinohypothalamic tract that runs
and floor of the mesencephalon are found the red
252   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Epiphysis
,Superior colliculus
Corpora
Inferior colliculus_
quadrigemina
Cerebellar
vermis
Fourth
ventricle
Medulla
Pons
Tegmentum
Crus cerebri
Cerebral aqueduct
Fig. 9.18. Mesencephalon. Saggital view of goat brain showing the mesencephalon. (Modified from Constantinescu, 2001.)
 nuclei, substantia nigra, reticular formation, and nuclei
Fiber tracts and nuclei connecting the cerebellum
for the third (occulomotor) and fourth (trochlear)
to the brain stem, forebrain, and spinal cord.
cranial nerves. The red nucleus is named for its red
4
Transverse tracts. Found on the anterior surface of
 color caused by the extensive blood supply it receives
the pons are fiber tracts that link nuclei found in
and the iron pigment found in the cell bodies. It is the
the pons with the contralateral (opposite) cerebral
largest nucleus of the reticular formation discussed
hemisphere.
further. It receives information from the cerebrum and
The cerebellum (Latin for "little brain") is the second
cerebellum, and is involved in subconscious motor
largest region of the brain, accounting for 10% of its
control of the forelimb positions and background muscle
 total mass, but containing half of all neurons in the
tone. The substantia nigra (nigra = black), named for
brain. It is located dorsal to the pons and medulla
its black pigment, lies lateral of the red nucleus.
 oblongata, with the fourth ventricle in between, and
Visible on the sides of the mesencephalon are the
is separated from the cerebral hemispheres by the
cerebral peduncles (little feet). They contain descend-
ing fibers connecting to the cerebellum via the pons,
transverse fissure.
The cerebellum is important in coordinating muscle
 and descending fibers carrying voluntary motor signals
movement and maintaining balance. For example,
from the cerebral hemispheres. The large ventral bundle
when a horse jumps over an obstacle, it requires the
of efferent fibers in the cerebral peduncles are referred
coordinated movement of all the limbs, as well as a
to as the crus cerebri.
good sense of where the horse is in space. The cerebel-
lum compares what movement was intended to what
movement happened. The cerebellum can then insti-
Metencephalon
tute adjustments to the intended movement while
they are in progress, or during repetitions.
The metencephalon consists of the pons and cerebel-
Resembling a piece of cauliflower, the cerebellum is
lum. The pons links the spinal cord with the forebrain,
 as well as the cerebellum with the forebrain and spinal
connected to the brain stem by the inferior, middle,
and superior cerebellar peduncles, also called the res-
cord. It forms part of the anterior surface of the fourth
tiform body, brachium pontis, and brachium conjucti-
ventricle.
vum, respectively (Fig. 9.19). The surface of the
The pons has four major components:
cerebellum consists of small convolutions similar to
 Cranial nerves. Cranial nerves V (trigeminal), VI
small gyri, called folia (leaves), running side to side.
(abducens), Vll (facial), and Vlll (vestibuloco-
The anterior and posterior lobes of the cerebellum are
chlear) are found in the pons.
separated by the primary fissure. The anterior and
2.
 Nuclei controlling respiration. Located bilaterally
posterior lobes are further subdivided into two and
are two respiratory centers called the apneustic
five lobules, respectively. The two lateral cerebellar
center and the pneumotaxic center.
hemispheres are separated by a narrow ridge of cortex
Central nervous system 
253
Stria terminalis
Thalamus
Epiphysis
Corpora
 Superior colliculus
Superior cerebeller peduncle
quadrigemina
Inferior colliculus
 Middle cerebeller peduncle
 Inferior cerebeller peduncle
Medulla oblongata
 Dorsal medial sulcus
Fasciculus cuneatus
 Fasciculus gracilis
Fissure of Sylvius
Vermis
Cerebellar
hemisphere
Cranial nerve|
Olfactory bulb 
Cranial nerve II
Pons
Crus
Medullar
Periformis
Hypohysis
cerebri
 oblongata
B
lobe
Fig. 9.19. Brain of the horse. (A) Dorsal view of brain stem. (B) Lateral view of brain. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu,
2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
called the vermis (Latin for "worm"). When viewing
Information leaves the pons via the cerebellar pedun-
 a saggital cut of the cerebellum, the flocculonodular
 cles. The superior cerebellar peduncle carries signals
lobe is seen between the cerebellar hemispheres,
to the midbrain, diencephalons, and cerebrum while
vermis, and the roof of the fourth ventricle. This lobe
 the middle cerebellar peduncle transmits signals to the
is separated from the body of the cerebellum by the
sensory and motor nuclei in the pons. The inferior
posterolateral fissure (Fig. 9.19).
cerebellar peduncle relays information between the
The surface of the cerebellum is covered with a
cerebellum and nuclei in the medulla oblongata and
cortex containing large, highly branched neurons
 cerebellar tracts from the spinal cord.
called Purkinje cells. These cells contain an extensive
Signals generated in the sensorimotor areas of the
dendritic tree and receive input from up to 200,000
cortex project to nuclei in the pons, and then to the
synapses. The importance of this input is evidenced
 cerebellum. This is a large pathway containing approx-
by the fact that 40 times as many axons project to the
imately two times the axons found in the pyramidal
cerebellum as leave it. Inside the cerebellum, forming
 tract. The lateral cerebellum then sends signals back
the shape of a tree, is white matter called the arbor
to the motor cortex via the ventral lateral nucleus of
vitae, or "tree of life." In addition, there are three pairs 
the thalamus.
of deep cerebellar nuclei.
 The cerebellum monitors all proprioceptive, visual,
tactile, balance, and auditory sensory information.
Medulla oblongata
Most of this information is carried to the Purkinje
cells, thus bypassing deep cerebellar nuclei. The motor 
Originating from the myelencephalon, the medulla
 information traveling to the cerebellum from the pyra-
oblongata is continuous with the spinal cord. The
midal and extrapyramidal system is relayed from
rostral portion of the medulla contains part of the
nuclei in the pons or cerebellar nuclei found in the
fourth ventricle; the caudad portion contains a central
arbor vitae.
canal.
254  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
The medulla contains three major groups of nuclei.
gastrointestinal responses such as swallowing and
The first is part of the reticular formation, which
vomiting: respiratory activities such as initiation of
extends from the medulla to the mesencephalon, and
 respiratory rhythm, coughing. hiccupping, and sneez-
was described earlier. The portion of the reticular for-
 ing; and cardiovascular functions including the baro-
mation in the medulla is responsible for regulating
receptor reflexes. The main descending lateral pathway
autonomic functions. The two major reflex centers are
is the rubrospinal tract originating in the magnocel-
the cardiovascular centers and the respiratory rhyth-
lular portion of the red nucleus and traveling to the
micity center. The cardiovascular centers regulate
lateral column of the spinal cord. The lateral reticulo-
heart rate, the strength of cardiac contractions, and the
 spinal pathway inhibits antigravitational muscles and
flow of blood through peripheral tissues. The cardio-
can lead to atonia.
vascular centers include the cardiac center and vaso-
Neurons in the medial region are larger (magno
motor center. The respiratory rhythms center regulates
cellular) and have long ascending and descending
the pace of respiratory movements. These are con-
 axons (e.g, pontine reticulospinal tract) that modulate
trolled by inputs from the apneustic and pneumotaxic
neurons involved in movement and posture, pain,
centers in the pons.
autonomic functions, and arousal. In particular, this
The second group of nuclei is for the cranial nerves
pathway enhances antigravitational reflexes by facili-
(see Fig. 9.22, later in the chapter). Five cranial nerves
 tating extensors and helping standing posture.
 originate in the medulla including the Vll (vestibulo-
Within the reticular formation, certain neurons send
[eds) Ix '(sngea) x (teaguA1eydossolo) xI '(reayoos
continuous impulses via the thalamus to the cerebral
accessory), and Xll (hypoglossal) nerves. Note that
cortex. These impulses cause excitation, thus causing
cranial nerve Vlll carries sensory information from the
arousal. This system is called the ascending RAS. This
inner ear to both the vestibular and cochlear nuclei
system receives input from ascending sensory tracts.
aidul
that extend from the pons into the medulla.
 It is responsible for filtering out selected sensory
The third group of nuclei acts as relay stations from
signals after they become familiar and weak.
 sensory and motor pathways. They include the nucleus
The RAS is inhibited during sleep and is thus
gracilis and nucleus cuneatus that carry somatic
involved in the sleep-wake cycle. Studies in the 1940s
sensory information to the thalamus. The solitary
and 1950s revealed that electrical stimulation of the
nucleus, located bilaterally, receives visceral sensory
 midbrain reticular formation (i.e., midline tegmental
information coming from the spinal cord and cranial
area) promoted wakefulness, whereas damage to this
nerves. This information is relayed to the autonomic
region caused a state similar to that in non-REM sleep.
centers in the medulla and elsewhere. The olivary
 This area was found to be inhibited by a system in the
nuclei, which form olive-shaped bulges along the
medulla. Making a cut just caudad to the midbrain
ventrolateral surface of the medulla, transmit somatic
(i.e., midpontine-pretrigeminal transection) prevented
motor commands from higher brain centers to the cer-
 an animal from sleeping.
ebellar cortex.
Stimulating the RAS increases the firing rate of
various neurons including the locus coeruleus in the
 pons, which contains norepinephrine, the raphe nuclei,
which produces serotonin, acetylchonine-containing
Functional systems
neurons in the brain stem and forebrain, as well as
The reticular activating system (RAS)
histamine-containing neurons in the midbrain. These
neurons synapse in the thalamus, cerebral cortex, and
The reticular formation forms the core of the brain
 other brain regions.
stem tegmentum extending from the medulla oblon-
gata through the pons and midbrain. It consists of
Sleep
loosely clustered neurons and is homologous to the
central gray area of the spinal cord that contains inter-
Sleep can be defined as a readily reversible state of
neurons. It is termed an area since it lacks cell cluster-
reduced responsiveness to and interaction with the
forming nuclei, and is spanned by long bundles of 
environment. Therefore, behaviorally, sleep has four
ascending and descending fibers, giving it a reticu-
characteristics: (1)reduced motor activity, (2) decreased
lated appearance.
The area can be divided into lateral and medial
reversibility. Coma and anesthesia do not qualify as
regions. The lateral region generally consists of parvo-
sleep since they are not readily reversible.
cellular interneurons found close to motor nuclei of
Sleep is categorized into two categories. Rapid eye
the cranial nerves, and is involved in coordinated
movement (REM) sleep, is noted for the movement of
reflexes and simple stereotyped behaviors. These are
the eyes under the eyelids, and the almost complete
generally related to the vagus nerve and include
inhibition of skeletal muscle tone. This stage of sleep
Central nervous system 
255
Non-REM sleep
Waking
REM (paradoxical) sleep
Beta rhythm
Fig. 9.20. EEG. Various EEG wave patterns seen during wakefulness and various stages of sleep. (A) Beta rhythm (alert and awake). (B) Alpha
rhythm (relaxed, eyes closed).
is when most dreaming occurs. Non-REM sleep is
is an example of an ultradian rhythm that is shorter
characterized by a change  in the electroencephalo-
than circadian rhythm.
gram (EEG). Non-REM sleep is sometimes called
Non-REM sleep is divided into four stages. The
slow-wave sleep because of the large, slow EEG
lightest stage of sleep, stage 1, is the transition period
rhythms (Fig. 9.20). All mammals sleep, although the
from wakefulness to onset of sleep and may last 5-10
length of sleep varies. Birds also show both REM and
minutes. While awake, people show low-voltage EEG
activity of 10-30μV and 16-25Hz (Fig. 9.20). As they
short, with REM sleep lasting maybe only a few
relax, they show alpha activity of 20-40 μV and 10Hz.
seconds. In addition, muscle atonia during REM sleep
During stage 1, the EEG shows a low-voltage mixed
is rare in birds.
frequency pattern known as theta waves. Stage 2 con-
Non-REM sleep appears designed for rest. Neu-
tains theta waves plus K complexes and sleep spin-
ronal activity is low, muscle tension is reduced, and
dles. Sleep spindles are sudden bursts of electrical
movement is minimal, although movement is possi-
activity, 12-14Hz, lasting 1-2 seconds, whereas K
ble. Body temperature and metabolic rate are at their
complexes are sudden and sharp waves of electrical
lowest. Sympathetic outflow decreases while the ac-
 activity of longer frequency, often triggered by noise.
tivity of the parasympathetic nervous system increases.
Eye movements almost cease. During stage 3, the
Therefore, heart rate, blood pressure, respiration rate,
EEG contains large-amplitude, slow delta rhythms
and kidney function decrease, and digestive function
(0.5-2Hz), and eye and body movements are absent.
increases. The slow, large-amplitude EEG rhythms in-
 Delta waves are the slowest and strongest waves pro-
dicate that the cortex is oscillating in high synchrony
duced. Stage 4, the deepest stage of sleep, is character-
while receiving little, if any, sensory input.
ized by large EEG rhythms of 2Hz or less (slow wave
In contrast, the EEG during REM sleep is nearly
sleep). Growth hormone, prolactin, and gonadotro-
indistinguishable from that of the awake brain. It dis-
phins are released during these last two stages, leading
plays fast, low-voltage fluctuations and is therefore
some to speculate that these stages of sleep are restor-
sometimes called paradoxical sleep. Oxygen con-
ative. If awakened during stages 3 and 4, an animal
sumption of the brain is higher during REM sleep than
will appear confused.
when an animal is awake and concentrating. While
Throughout the night, there is a reduction in the
most of the muscles of the body are in atonia, the
duration of non-REM sleep, particularly stages 3 and
muscles controlling eye movement and those in the
4, while there is an increase in the duration of REM
inner ear are active.
 sleep. During REM sleep, brain temperafure and met-
Roughly 75% of the sleep cycle is spent in non-REM
 abolic rate rise, although almost all skeletal muscle
sleep and 25% in REM sleep. An animal cycles between
activity is lost.
these two stages of sleep going from non-REM to REM
During non-REM sleep, gamma-aminobutyric
sleep, and back approximately every 90 minutes. This
acid (GABA)-containing neurons in the ventrolateral
256 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
preoptic (anterior) area of the hypothalamus send a
polarized, and spindling becomes reduced, cortical
signal to the posterior hypothalamus, particularly the
neurons spontaneously develop delta waves.
tuberomammillary nucleus, which contains histamin-
Using brain transection and stimulation experi-
ergic neurons. These latter neurons normally project
ments, Francois Michel and Michel Jouvet showed
to the thalamus and cortex causing activation. The
 that the pons is the source of EEG activation and rapid
reticularis nucleus of the thalamus and thalamocorti-
eye movement during REM sleep. The pons is also the
cal neurons are reciprocally interconnected, and they
site of inhibitory signals that lead to atonia. Signals
shift into a non-REM sleep spindle wave when deac-
 called pontine-geniculate-occipital (PGO) waves are
tivated by the hypothalamus and brain stem. These
sent from the pons, specifically from the reticularis
cells have a unique property; when they are hyper-
pontis oralis/caudalis region, to both the forebrain
 polarized, voltage-sensitive calcium channels open,
and the spinal cord (Fig. 9.2l). These signals cause
causing a burst of action potentials. Following the
bursts of firing in cortical neurons while sensory input
calcium spike, the membrane potential returns to
is suppressed via presynaptic inhibition. The cholin-
the hyperpolarized state. The action potential in the
 ergic PGO-on cells fire in bursts, and this leads to the
reticularis nucleus leads to the release of gamma ami-
PGO spikes observed in the thalamus during REM
nobutyric acid (GABA) that hyperpolarizes thalamic
 sleep. Thus, the brain is blocked from external stimuli.
cells projecting to the cortex (thalamocortical neurons),
 During waking periods, serotonergic neurons from
and such hyperpolarization causes a rebound low-
the raphe nucleus called REM-off cells hyperpolarize
threshold calcium spike in these thalamocortical
 and biock the burst firing of PGO-on cells. Noradren-
 neurons. The firing of the thalamocortical neurons
ergic neurons in the locus ceruleus, as well as hista-
causes synchronized postsynaptic potentials in cor-
minergic neurons in the posterior hypothalamus, also
 tical neurons that cause spindle waves. When the
 are involved in inhibition of the PGO cells during
 thalamocortical neurons become progressively hyper-
waking periods.
Thalamus
Cerebellum
Cortex
GABA
GABA
NE
5-H
glutamate
RPO/RPCregion
ACh
Spinal cord
with stage 4 of non-REM sleep is replaced by a low-voltage EEG. In addition, skeletal muscle tone is reduced. During this transition, GABA
containing neurons in the pons become activated. They cause an inhibition of NE- and 5-HT-containing neurons found in the locus ceruleus
of the pons. The ascending pontine neurons cause the reduction in EEG voltage associated with REM sleep by blocking the burst firing mode
of the GABAergic neurons in the thalamus. The cholinergic neurons in the pons also stimulate descending glutamatergic neurons that project
to the medulla, synapsing on glycine-containing neurons. These latter neurons project to the central gray area of the spinal cord and synapse
on α-motor neurons causing inhibition. GABA, gamma aminobutyric acid; NE, norepinephrine; 5-HT, 5-hydroytryptamine.
Central nervous system 
257
Another class of neurons in the nucleus reticularis
 of the CNS. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, and
pontis oralis, the REM-on cells, shows little firing
 they arise from the ventrolateral surface of the brain.
during waking and non-REM sleep, but has high
These nerves mostly innervate the head.
activity during REM sleep.
The cranial nerves attach to the brain near their
associated sensory and /or motor nuclei. As shown in
Table 9.1, the cranial nerves can be classified as sensory.
Cranial nerves
special sensory, motor, or mixed. Sensory nerves carry
 somatic sensory information such as touch, pressure,
Cranial nerves connect directly to the brain rather
vibration, temperature, and pain input to the brain.
than the spinal cord (Fig. 9.22). Most are part of the
Special sensory nerves carry signals associated with
peripheral nervous system, although the first two
special senses including smell, sight, hearing, taste, or
(olfactory nerve and optic nerve) are considered part
balance. Motor nerves carry somatic motor input to
 Olfactory nerve (l)
Accessory
nerve (Xl)
Trochlear
Olfactory nerve (l)
[nerve (IX)
Optic nerve (ll)
Pituitary
Hypoglossal
nerve (Xll)
Pons
Mammary body
Facial nerve (Vll)
Oculomotor nerve (ll)
Vagus nerve (X)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Vesatibulocochlear nerve (Villl)
 Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
Fig. 9.22. Cranial nerves. Cranial nerves shown exiting the goat brain. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Table 9.1. Cranial nerves.
Number
Name
Types of Axons
Function
Olfactory
Special sensory
Smell
Optic
Special sensory
Vision
Oculomotor
Somatic motor
Movements of eye and eyelid
Visceral motor
Parasympathetic control of pupil size
IV
Trochear
Somatic motor
Movement of the eye
V
 Trigenimal
Somatic sensory
Sensation of touch to the face
Somatic motor
Motor control of mastication 
VI
 Abducens
 Somatic motor
Movement of the eye
VIl
Facial
Somatic motor
Facial expressions
Special sensory
Taste in anterior two-thirds of the tongue
VII
Vestibulocochlear
Special sensory
Hearing and balance
IX
 Glossopharyngeal
Somatic motor
Movements in the throat 
Special sensory
Taste in posterior two-thirds of the tongue
Visceral sensory
Detection of blood pressure (BP) changes in aorta
Visceral motor
Parasympathetic control of salivary glands 
X
Vagus
Visceral sensory
Sense of pain in viscera
Visceral motor
 Movement in the throat
Somatic motor
Parasympathetic control of heart, lungs and abdominal organs
XI
Spinal accessory
 Somatic motor
 Movement in throat and neck
XIl
Hypoglossal
Somatic motor
 Movement of the tongue
258  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
their respective muscles, while mixed nerves are
of the cranial nerves. Examples of these reflexes are
 both afferent and efferent, carrying sensory and motor
shown in Table 9.2.
information.
Cranial nerves Il, Vll, IX, and X are associated with
 the parasympathetic nervous system. They carry auto-
Organization of the spinal cord
nomic signals to preganglionic fibers located in the
 periphery.
The spinal cord is housed in the vertebral column (Fig.
Cranial nerves are involved in cranial reflexes.
9.23). It extends from the foramen magnum at the base
 These are reflexes involving sensory and motor fibers 
of the skull, to approximately the level of the first or
Table 9.2. Cranial reflexes.
Reftex
Stimufus
Afferent Craniaf Nerve
Centrat Synapse
 Efferent Craniaf Nerves
Response
Somatic
Corneal reflex
Touching corneal
V
Motor nucleus
VlI
 Blinking eyelids 
surface
for facial nerve
Tympanic reflex
Loud noise
VIII
Inferior
VII
Reduced movement
 colliculus
of auditory ossicles
Auditory reflex
Loud noise
VIII
Motor nuclei of
Ill, IV, VI, VII, X, and
Eye and/or head
brain stem and
cervical nerves
 movements triggered
spinal cord
by sudden sounds 
hapter
Vestibulo-ocular
Rotation of head
VIII
Motor nuclei
III, IV, VI
Opposite movement
reflex
controlling eye
of eyes to stabilize
muscles
field of vision
Visceral
Direct light reflex
Light stimulating
Superior
川I
Constriction of
photoreceptors
colliculus
 ipsilateral pupil
Consensual light
Light stimulating
Superior
Constriction of
reflex
photoreceptors
colliculus
 contralateral pupil
Epidural spac
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater.
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
Gray matter
Termination of
Nerve exiting last 
Conus
 Spinal
filum terminale
 intervertebral foramen 
medullaris
cord
B
Fig. 9.23. Spinal cord. (A) The spinal cord with its various meningial layers is shown. (B) The spinal cord extends only to the level of the first
or second lumbar vertebrae in adult animals where it ends in a tapered structure called the conus medullaris. A fibrous extension called the 
filum terminale anchors the spinal cord to the sacrum. (Modified from Getty, 1 964.)
Central nervous system
259
second lumbar vertebra in an adult animal. The spinal
cord, the central gray area also has lateral horns on
cord terminates as a tapered structure called the conus
  s       
 medullaris. It contains ascending and descending
commissure that connects both sides of the central
pathways to and from the brain, as well as nerve cell
 gray area. The posterior horns contain interneurons;
bodies that function in motor activity and reflexes.
the anterior horns contain both interneurons and
 Continuing as an extension of the medulla oblon-
cell bodies of somatic motor neurons. The lateral
 gata, like the brain, the spinal cord is surrounded by
 horns contain motor neurons of the sympathetic ner-
bone, meninges, and CSF. The dura mater over the
vous system.
spinal cord is a single layer that is not attached to
 The white matter of the spinal cord is grouped into
the vertebral column. Instead, between the walls of the
three white columns, also called funiculi (long ropes).
vertebral canal and the spinal cord is the epidural
Named according to their location, they include the
space containing loose connective tissue, blood vessels,
 posterior, lateral, and anterior columns (Fig. 9.25). The
and a layer of fat. The arachnoid mater and pia mater
extend further down the spinal canal than does the
spinal cord. This fibrous extension is called the filum
terminale, which extends to the second sacral verte-
 brae and anchors the spinal cord.
 In cross section, the spinal cord has a central core of
 gray matter consisting mostly of cell bodies and an
 outer region of white matter containing myelinated
and unmyelinated nerve fibers (Fig. 9.24). The anterior
Posterior white column
Posterior median sulcus
and posterior surfaces of the spinal cord each contains
Posterior gray commissure
 a groove called the anterior median fissure and the
posterior median sulcus, respectively.
Posterior
 The central gray area approximates the shape of a
Lateral
gray horn
Somatic sensory
butterfly. The relative amounts of gray and white
white
column
Lateral
gray horn
Visceral sensory
 matter change at successive levels of the spinal cord.
Anterior
Visceral motor
 Moving from the inferior end toward the medulla oblon-
gray horn?
Somatic motor
gata, the relative amounts of gray matter decrease as
Anterior gray commissure
white matter increases. Therefore, there are increasing
B
Anterior white column
Anterior median fissure
numbers of fibers carrying information to the brain.
Fig. 9.25. Organization of the spinal cord. (A) A photomicrograph
The central gray area has two posterior (dorsal) horns
 of a cross section of the thoracic spinal cord. (B) A drawing
and two anterior (ventral) horns. In addition, in the
showing the important landmarks of the same cross section. Note
thoracic and superior lumbar regions of the spinal
that structures are bilateral.
 Posterior median sulcus 
Gray commissure
Posterior funiculus
 Posterior (dorsal) horn
Gray
 Anterior funiculus
 Anterior (ventral) horn
matter
 Lateral funiculus
 Lateral horn
Dorsal root
 Dorsal root ganglia
Dorsal ramus
Spinal nerve
Ventral root
 Central canal
Ventral ramus
Anterior median fissure
Suunons e pue saipog lan aiau jo lso susisuo eaie Aen jeuan e sey pios ieuids aul pios ieuids aui jo uonas ssoi 'th'e i
region of white matter consisting of fiber tracts made largely of myelinated fibers. The spinal nerves are shown on either side of the spinal
cord. (Modified from Getty, 1964.)
260
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Descending motor
Skull
 Ascending sens0
pathways
PeriostealDura
pathways
Meningeaimater
Fasciculus grailis
Arachnoid mater
Dorsal
columns 
Corticospinal tract
ateral
Pia mater
Rubrospinal trac
Artery
Brain
Anteriorcerebell
vestibulospinaltra
Medial reticulospinal tra
Lateral spinothalamic tract 
Tectospinal tract
 Anterior spinothalamic tract '
Anteriorcorticospinal tract
Fg. 9.27. The meninges. There are three connective tissue layers,
Fig. 9.26. The major ascending (sensory) and descending (motor)
collectively called the meninges, which cover the brain. The
pathways of the spinal cord. The left side shows ascending pathways;
outermost layer, the dura mater, is a tough, fibrous connective
the right side shows descending pathways within the spinal cord.
tissue consisting of two layers: a periosteal layer attached to the
inner surface of the skull and a meningeal layer. The arachnoid 
mater lies inside the dura mater and is a loosely knit layer. The
deepest layer is the pia mater, which also courses into the brain
fiber tracts within these columns are named according
closely adhering to capillaries as they move into the brain tissue.
Between the arachnoid and pia mater is the subarachnoid space,
to their origin and destination (Fig. 9.26).
which is filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
lapter
Protection of the central nervous system
Tentorium cerebelli. This separates the cerebellum
from the cerebral hemispheres.
Meninges
Falx cerebelli. This divides the two cerebellar
hemispheres running along the vermis of the
The meninges (Greek for "covering") consist of three
cerebellum.
connective tissue membranes that overlay the CNS.
These membranes act to cover and protect the CNS,
The arachnoid mater (Greek for "spider") resembles
a spider web and lies between the dura mater and pia
as well as encase blood vessels and help divide gross
mater. It forms a loose covering of the brain and never
areas of the CNS.
The three layers, named from the outermost, include
dips into the sulci or fissures. Between the arachnoid
 mater and pia mater is the subarachnoid space. This
the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater (Fig.
 9.27). The dura mater is a tough, fibrous connective
 space is filled with large blood vessels, as well as CSF
coming from the fourth ventricle. Arachnoid granula-
tissue layer. Surrounding the brain, it consists of two
tions, or villi, project from the arachnoid, through the
layers, with the outermost layer attached to the peri-
 dura, and into the superior sagittal sinus. CSF moves
osteum of the cranium. The inner layer serves as a
by bulk flow through these granulations and into the
covering over the brain and extends over the spinal
 general circulation.
cord where there is only one dural layer. Although the
 Finally, the pia mater closely adheres to the surface
two dural layers over the brain are generally fused,
 of the CiNs. It contains many small blood vessels, and
there are several locations where the two layers sepa-
the pia mater adheres to these vessels for a short dis-
rate and form dural sinuses. The dural sinuses are
tance as they move into the brain.
blood filled structures that somewhat resemble blood
vessels, and which collect venous blood and return it
to the internal jugular veins.
Cerebrospinal fluid
There are also areas where the dura mater extends
inward from the surface of the brain forming dural
A clear and colorless fluid, CSF has many functions:
folds that help stabilize gross brain structures. The
(1) It maintains a constant external environment for
largest of these folds are the following:
cells in the brain, (2) provides a route for removing
 Falx cerebri. This is a sickle-shaped fold of dura
harmful metabolites from the brain, (3) provides a
that extends down into the longitudinal fissure
cushion to protect the brain from trauma, (4) acts as
helping to separate the two cerebral hemispheres.
the lymphatic system for the brain, and (5) provides a
Both the superior sagittal sinus and the inferior
route for peptides that are released at one site and act
sagittal sinus are found within this fold.
at a distant site in the brain.
Central nervous system
261
Table 9.3. Comparison of the composition of cerebrospinal fluid
which prevents the movement of many molecules into
(CSF) and blood.
the CNS. The BBB is formed by the endothelial cells
Blood
lining the blood capillaries. In the periphery, these
Chemica!
CSF
cells are fenestrated; in the CNS, these cells form tight
Na
145 mmol/L
13 5-1 50mEq/L
junctions. The tight junctions are induced by factors
K
3 mmol/L
3.9-5.3 mEq/L
produced by astrocytes whose end feet surround the
CI
125mmol/L
97-116mEq/L
endothelial cells of brain capillaries.
HCO:
22 mmol/L
To cross the BBB, a molecule either must be lipid
P
 500μmol/L
5.5-6.5mEq/L
Ca
1.2 mmol/L
10.3-11.4 mg/1 00ml
soluble or must cross via a carrier-mediated transport
Mg
1.0 mmol/L
2.0-3.0mg/100 mL
system. Lipid-soluble compounds readily cross cell
Glucose
2.5-4.2 mmol/L
40-120mg/100 mL
membranes and are thereby readily able to enter
 Protein
12-60mg/dL
7.0-8. 3 gm/1 00 mL
the CNS. Such compounds include carbon dioxide,
Osmolarity
 295mOsmol/L
 oxygen, steroids, prostaglandins, and alcohol. In con-
pH 
7.31-7.35
7.30-7.54
trast, non-lipid-soluble compounds, such as peptides
and various antibiotics, do not readily cross the BBB.
However, since many essential nutrients for the brain
CSF is produced mostly from the choroid plexus, a
are not lipid soluble, the BBB also possesses many
tuft of capillaries found at the top of the third and
fourth ventricles, as well as the floor of the lateral
compounds to enter the brain at a rate far greater than
ventricles. The remaining CSF is formed from the
that explained by their lipid solubility
ependymal cells. Although CSF originates as an ultra-
filtrate of blood, its composition differs from that of
Blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier
plasma in several important ways. It contains less
protein, calcium, and potassium, and more sodium,
Although the choroid plexus is located within the ven-
chloride, and hydrogen ions than plasma (Table 9.3).
tricles, embryologically, it is derived from mesodermal
tissue that is outside of the CNS. Therefore, unlike the
Blood-brain barrier (BBB)
endothelial cells in most brain capillaries, those in the
choroid plexus do not have tight junctions. Instead,
Neurons of the brain and spinal cord are very sensitive
the ependymal cells lining the cerebroventricles over-
to alterations in their environment. As such, they are
lying the choroid plexus have tight junctions, thus
isolated from the systemic circulation by the BBB,
forming a barrier between the blood and CSF.
Chapter summary
anencephaly is a lethal condition that results when
the anterior neural tube fails to close. Craniora-
Embryonic development
chischisis is a failure of the entire tube to close.
 The CNS is derived from the ectoderm. During
gastrulation, the notochord develops from the
Organization of the brain
chordamesodermal tissue. The notochord, in a
process called primary induction, sends a signal
Cerebral hemispheres
 to the overlying ectoderm to thicken, thus forming
 the neural plate. The inducing signal is a protein
The telencephalic vesicles form the telencepha-
 called noggin.
lon, which consists of two cerebral hemispheres.
After formation of the neural plate, its lateral
As the brain develops, the telencephalic vesicles
edges become elevated forming the neural folds
 A  n p d m
which flank the neural groove. As the neural
the diencephalon.
plate begins to invaginate, the neural folds sur-
2
The surface of the brain is marked by many con-
round it. The lateral edges of the neural folds even-
volutions. The grooves are called sulci (singular:
tually migrate toward the longitudinal midline
 sulcus), while the ridges are called gyri (singular:
of the embryo, thus forming the neural tube.
gyrus).
 Failure of the tube to close at different sites results
3
 The larger grooves that separate brain regions
in various birth defects. Spina bifida occurs if the
 are called fissures. The longitudinal fissure sepa-
posterior neural tube does not close, whereas
rates the two cerebral hemispheres, whereas the
(Continued)
262
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
cerebral hemispheres are separated from the cer-
Cerebral white matter
ebellum by the transverse fissure, which runs
There are deep subcortical nuclei called the basal
perpendicular to the longitudinal fissure.
 ganglia or nuclei. While the definition of the
When viewing the cerebral hemisphere, four
 structures included in the basal ganglion varies,
lobes—frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipi-
it generally includes the caudate nucleus, putamen,
tal—are visible.
globus pallidus, substantia nigra (consisting of the
pars reticulata and pars compacts), and subtha-
Ventricles of the brain
lamic nucleus.
 The limbic system consists of a group of struc-
The brain contains four fluid-filled chambers
tures located in the medial region of each cere-
called cerebroventricles. Ependymal cells line
bral hemisphere. These structures encircle
the cerebroventricles. Each cerebral hemisphere
(limbus = ring or border) the brain stem. The
contains a lateral ventricle, also called the first
limbic lobe of the cerebral hemisphere includes
and second ventricles. A thin layer of tissue called
 gyri surrounding the diencephalon, as well as
the septum pellucidum separates the two lateral
 other underlying structures. Specifically, it con-
ventricles from each other. The third ventricle is
sists of three gyri. The cingulate gyrus is dorsal
found in the diencephalon and the fourth ven-
to the corpus callosum. The dentate gyrus and
tricle extends from the posterior surface of the
 parahippocampal gyrus form the inferior and
pons and the anterior surface of the cerebellum.
posterior portions of the limbic lobe. The limbic
1
The lateral ventricles are connected to the third
system is involved in emotional and behavioral
ventricle via the interventricular foramen of Mon-
patterns.
roe. The third ventricle connects to the fourth ven-
tricle via the mesencephalic aqueduct, also called
the aqueduct of Sylvius or cerebral aqueduct.
Diencephalon
3.
CSF, formed largely in the choroid plexus located
The diencephalon consists of three paired
at the top of each ventricle, flows by bulk flow
structures—the thalamus, hypothalamus, and
from the lateral ventricles to the third ventricle.
epithalamus.
to the fourth ventricle.
2.
 The hypothalamus is found ventral to the thala-
mus and forms the inferolateral walls of the third
Cerebral cortex
ventricle. It extends from the optic chiasm to the
posterior border of the mammillary bodies. The
The cerebral cortex is arranged as layers of cells
infundibulum, which connects the hypothala-
that lie parallel to the surface of the brain.
 mus to the pituitary, lies between the optic chiasm
The neocortex, which is found only in mammals
and mammillary bodies.
and is associated with higher brain functions
The hypothalamus controls the autonomic ner-
such as conscious behavior, is found over most
vous system, and thereby controls growth, feding.
of the surface of the cerebral hemisphere and
drinking, circadian rhythms, and maternal behav-
 consists of six layers of cells.
ior. Specifically, the hypothalamus plays a key
3.
 Medial to the lateral ventricles is an area of cortex
role in six physiological areas.
named for its unique shape called the hippo-
s e Ao si iI (,asoqeas , og yaa) sndes
cell layer.
Epithalamus
4
Ventral and lateral to the hippocampus is the
The epithalamus lies superiorly, caudally, and medi-
third area of cortex called the olfactory cortex
ally relative to the other parts of the diencephalons,
(piriform, or pyriform cortex) that consists of
and thus represents a cephalad extension of the pre-
two cell layers.
tectum of the mesencephalon.
5.
 The primary motor cortex is the final site for
cortical processing of motor commands before
Thalamus
 messages are then sent to the somatic muscles.
 In mammals, this area lays in the rostral region
The thalamus lies dorsal to the hypothalamus
of the frontal lobes.
and is bordered by the caudate nucleus dorsally
6.
 The extrapyramidal system includes all the de-
and the internal capsule laterally. Its two halves
scending somatic motor pathways excluding those
are separated by the third ventricle.
 described previously that constitute the pyrami-
2
The thalamus is the major relay station for
dal system.
sensory information generated in the periphery
Central nervous system
263
and transferred for processing to the cerebral
Cranial nerves
hemispheres.
Cranial nerves connect directly to the brain rather
than the spinal cord. Most are part of the periph-
Mesencephalon
eral nervous system, although the first two (olfac-
 The mesencephalon lies between the diencephalons
tory nerve and optic nerve) are considered part of
and pons. The tectum forms the roof of the mesen-
the CNS.
cephalon and contains two pairs of prominent bulges
 known as the corpora quadrigemina. Consisting of
Organization of the spinal cord
the superior and inferior colliculi, these nuclei
 The spinal cord is housed in the vertebral column.
process visual and auditory stimuli, respectively. The
2.
The spinal cord terminates as a tapered structure
tegmentum forms the floor of the midbrain.
called the conus medullaris.
 In cross section, the spinal cord has a central core
Metencephalon
of gray matter consisting mostly of cell bodies
 and an outer region of white matter containing
1.
 The metencephalon consists of the pons and cer-
myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers.
ebellum. The pons links the spinal cord with the
 The central gray area has two posterior horns
forebrain, as well as the cerebellum with the fore-
and two anterior horns. In addition, in the tho-
brain and spinal cord. It forms part of the ante-
racic and superior lumbar regions of the spinal
rior surface of the fourth ventricle.
cord, the central gray area also has lateral horns
 The cerebellum is the second largest region of the
brain accounting for 10% of its total mass, but
on either side. The central gray area also has a
 gray commissure that connects both sides of the
containing half of all neurons in the brain.
 The cerebellum is important in coordinating mus-
central gray area.
5.
 The white matter of the spinal cord is grouped
cle movement and maintaining balance. The cer-
into three white columns, also called furiculi.
ebellum monitors all proprioceptive, visual, tactile,
 balance, and auditory sensory information.
Protection of the central nervous system
 Medulla oblongata
Meninges
Originating from the myelencephalon, the medulla
 The meninges consist of three connective tissue
oblongata is continuous with the spinal cord. The
rostral portion of the medulla contains part of the
membranes that overlay the CNS. These mem-
branes act to cover and protect the CNS, as well
fourth ventricle, while the caudad portion contains a
 as encase blood vessels and help divide gross
central canal.
areas of the CNS.
2.
The three layers, named from the outermost,
Functional systems
include the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia
mater.
 Reticular activating system
1，
The reticular formation forms the core of the
Cerebrospinal fluid
brain stem tegmentum extending from the
medulla oblongata through the pons and mid-
A clear and colorless fluid, CSF has many func-
brain. It consists of loosely clustered neurons and
tions: (l) It maintains a constant external envi-
is homologous to the central gray area of the
ronment for cells in the brain; (2) provides a
spinal cord that contains interneurons.
route for removing harmful metabolites from the
The RAS is inhibited during sleep and is thus
brain; (3) provides a cushion to protect the brain
involved in the sleep-wake cycle.
from trauma; (4) acts as the lymphatic system for
3.
Sleep is categorized into two categories. REM
the brain; and (5) provides a route for peptides
sleep is noted for the movement of the eyes
that are released at one site and act at a distant
under the eyelids, and the almost complete inhi-
site in the brain.
bition of skeletal muscle tone. This stage of sleep
CSF is produced mostly from the choroid plexus.
is when most dreaming occurs. Non-REM sleep
The remaining CSF is formed from the ependy-
is characterized by a change in the EEG
mal cells.
(Continued)
 264 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Blood-brain barrier
2.
the blood capillaries. While in the periphery,
Neurons of the brain and spinal cord are isolated
these cells are fenestrated; in the CNS, these cells
 from the systemic circulation by the BBB, which
form tight junctions.
 prevents the movement of many molecules into
the CNS.
 Review questions and answers are available
Constantinescu, G.M. and I.A. Constantinescu. 2004. Clini-
cal Dissection Guide for Large Animals, Horse and Large
online.
Ruminants, 2nd edifion. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Getty, R. 1964. Aflas for Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Iowa
State Press, Ames, Iowa.
King, A.S. 1987. Physiological and Clinical Anatomy of
References
 Domestic Mammals, Vol. 1, Central Nervous System.
Oxford Uriversity Press, Walton Street, Oxford.
Constantinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
 Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
Press, Ames, Iowa.
Chapter
10
Peripheral and autonomic
nervous system
Contents
Nerves and Ganglia
265
Spinal Reflexes
277
Nerves
265
Use of Reflexes in Diagnosis
281
Classification of Nerves
266
Autonomic Nervous System
281
Spinal Nerves 
266
Overview
281
 Degeneration and Regeneration of Nerves
267
Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
283
Ganglia
267
Anatomy of the Autonomic Nervous System
284
Sensory Receptors
268
Physiology of the Autonomic Nervous System
286
 Classes of Sensory Receptors
268
Central Nervous System Control of the
Ceneral Senses
268
Autonomic Nervous System
288
Reflexes
274
Chapter Summary
291
 Classification of Reflexes
276
The peripheral nervous system includes that part of the
neurons and is found in the peripheral nervous
nervous system outside the brain and spinal cord. It is
system. Nerves vary in size and are surrounded by a
responsibie for collecting most of the sensory infor-
series of connective tissue layers (Fig. 10.1). The epi-
mation that is relayed to the central nervous system
neurium is the outermost layer, consisting of a dense
(CNS). It is also responsible for carrying motor signals
 network of collagen fibers. The perineurium is the
to the skeletal and smooth muscles. As discussed in
next innermost layer, and it partitions the nerve into
Chapter 8, the peripheral nervous system includes a
a series of fascicles each containing a bundle of axons.
sensory and motor component (Fig. 8.2). The autonomic
The innermost layer is the endoneurium that sur-
nervous system is a branch of this motor component
rounds each individual axon.
Arteries and veins enter through the epineurium
 and branch within the perineurium. Capilaries can
Nerves and ganglia
penetrate into the endoneurium where they nourish
axons and Schwann cells of the nerves as well as the
Nerves
fibroblasts of the cornective tissue. Therefore, a nerve
consists not only of axons, but its bulk is composed of
Components of a neuron were described in Chapter 8.
 other tissues, including blood vessels, glial cells, and
 A nerve, however, is a collection of axons from many
connective tissue.
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
265
266
6 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Classification of nerves
the CNS are called sensory or afferent nerves, whereas
 those carrying impulses away from the CNS are motor
Since the peripheral nervous system has both sensory
or efferent nerves. Remember that efferent nerves
 and motor components, nerves are classified accord-
 carry impulses toward an effector. A nerve that carries
 ing to their function. Nerves carrying impulses toward
 impulses in both directions is called a mixed nerve.
Peripheral nerves can function within the auto-
 nomic (visceral) nervous system or somatic nervous
Blood vessels
Epineurium
system. Therefore, they can be further classified as
visceral afferent, visceral efferent, somatic afferent, or
Perineurium
 somatic efferent.
Endoneurium
Spinal nerves
Schwann
cell
Nerves leaving t
the CNS are called either spinal
Fascicle
nerves or cranial nerves. Cranial nerves were dis-
 cussed in Chapter 8. There is a pair of spinal nerves
Axon
 exiting at each spinal segment. Each spinal nerve has
Fig. 10.1. Peripheral nerve. A peripheral nerve consists of many
a dorsal and ventral root that enters and exits the
bundles of axons, each called a fascicle. There are three connective
 spinal cord, respectively (Fig. 10.2). Thus, the dorsal
tissue layers surrounding various parts of the nerve. The epineurium
roots contain afferent fibers, and the ventral roots
 is the outermost layer, wrapping around the entire nerve. The
perineurium surrounds each fascicle, while the endoneurium
contain efferent fibers consisting of motor neurons
surrounds each axon.
 of both the somatic and autonomic nervous system.
apter 10
A. Sensory fibers
Somatic sensory
Dorsal root Dorsal root 
, Visceral sensory
 ganglion
Sympathetic
chain
Sensory fibers
 from proprioceptors
 in body wall and limbs 
Gray
White
ramus
ramus
Sympathetic
Ventral root
 ganglion
Sensory fibers
 from proprioceptors 
in body wall and limbs
B. Motor fibers
Visceral motor
Dorsal root
Somatic motor
Fg. 10.2. Spinal nerves. (A) The
sensory neurons from the periphery
enter the spinal cord through the
dorsal root, and their cell bodies are
Somatic motor neurons
located in the dorsal root ganglion.
to skeletal muscle
These fibers synapse in the dorsal
gray horn of the central gray area of
the spinal cord. The sensory visceral
Postganglionic fibers to
(autonomic) fibers may or may not 
smooth muscles and glands
 pass through the sympathetic chain.
(B) The motor fibers exit the spinal
Ventral root
 cord via the ventral root. The
visceral motor fibers may enter the
 sympathetic chain via the white
Sympathetic fibers
ramus.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
267
 Near the spinal cord, the two roots merge, forming a
Without NGF
With NGF
spinal nerve, which is a mixed nerve containing both
afferent and efferent fibers. Each dorsal root has a
swelling, called the dorsal root ganglion, situated
near the spinal cord, which contains the cell bodies
Reactive O
of the neurons running through the dorsal root. The
Apaf-1 Bcl-2
dorsal and ventral roots pass through the interver-
Apaf-1Bcl-2
Apaf-1
Bcl-2
tebral foramen located between adjacent vertebrae;
the dorsal root ganglion lies between the pedicles of
adjacent vertebrae.
Cytochrome C
Spinal nerves exit at every vertebra. The first spinal
nerve exits superior to the first cervical vertebra while
an additional spinal nerve exits inferior to each ver-
Caspasena
Caspaseaclivg
Caspasenacliva
tebra. Therefore, cervical spinal nerves are named for
Cell
the vertebrae immediately following where they exit.
death
Since there are seven cervical vertebrae, there are
Fg. 10.3. Apoptosis. In a healthy cell, Bcl-2 is found on the outer
eight cervical cranial nerves (C1-C8). All other cranial
mitochondria membrane and is bound to Apaf-1. Internal damage
 nerves are named for the vertebra immediately pre-
to the cell, such as the presence of reactive oxygen species, or lack
ceding where they exit (i.e., T1, T2). After leaving
of neurotrophic factors, such as nerve growth factor (NGF), causes
the spinal cord, both the dorsal and ventral roots
merge, forming a spinal nerve. Shortly thereafter, the
the mitochondral membranes, causing the leakage of cytochrome C
into the cytoplasm. Released Apaf-1 and cytochrome C bind to
spinal nerve branches into the dorsal and ventral
inactive caspase. The resulting complex containing cytochrome C,
ramus. The ventral ramus carries fibers to the skeletal
Apaf-1, caspase 9, and ATP is called the apoptosome. Once
 muscles of the body wall and limbs, as well as post-
activated, caspase 9 activates other caspases leading to digestion of
structural proteins in the cytoplasm and degradation of
ganglionic fibers to smooth muscles, glands, body
walls, and limbs. The dorsal ramus carries similar
chromosomal DNA and phagocytosis of the cell.
fibers to the back.
Degeneration and regeneration of nerves
ases). Caspases are a family of over a dozen proteins
 that cleave cellular proteins at aspartate residues.
Like other cells, neurons die. It is believed that neuro-
Cells can also die from trauma or necrotic cell death,
trophic factors are responsible for keeping neurons
a process called necrosis, which is distinguishable
 alive. The presence of these factors suppresses a latent
from apoptosis. Traumatic death is characterized by
biochemical pathway present in all cells that causes
an initial swelling of the cell with only modest con-
the cells to commit suicide. Cells can die by a process
densation of the chromatin, and then rapid lysis
called apoptosis, or programmed cell death, which
 of cellular membranes without endogenous pro-
involves four steps. The cell shrinks, the chromatin
 grammed cell death. Necrotic cells elicit an inflamma-
condenses, the cell fragments into apoptotic bodies,
tory response that recruits macrophages that eliminate
and the cellular remnants are phagocytized by macro-
 the cellular debris. In contrast, during apoptosis, indi-
phages or other such cells.
 vidual cells are generally phagocytized prior to releas-
 Using sympathetic neurons as a model, a proposed
ing their contents.
mechanism for apoptosis is as follows (Fig. 10.3). The
loss of neurotrophic factors, such as nerve growth
factor, decreases activity of the MAP kinase and phos-
Ganglia
phatidylinositol 3-kindase pathways, resulting in an
e oi speat s sads uax a  as
Ganglia are collections of neuron cell bodies located
increase in c-jun N-terminal kinases and phosphoryla-
in the peripheral nervous system. Recall that within
tion of c-jun protein. Then there is an increased expres-
the CNS, a collection of cell bodies is called a nucleus.
sion of genes, including cjun, cyclin Dl, and c-fos,
The ganglia for afferent (sensory) neurons are located.
and a decrease in RNA and protein synthesis. There is
in the dorsal root ganglia, discussed earlier. Somatic
a decrease in Bcl-2 family proteins. Bcl-2 family pro-
motor neurons do not have ganglia since these motor
teins are expressed on the outer surface of mitochon-
 neuron cell bodies are located in the dorsal horn of the
dria, and are bound to a molecule of Apaf-1. When
spinal cord. However, autonomic motor neurons are
damaged, Bcl-2 family proteins release Apaf-1, which
associated with ganglia since there are two consecu-
activates caspases (cysteine aspartate specific prote-
five nerve fibers associated with each autonomic
268  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
motor pathway. These autonomic ganglia will be dis-
tion), joint position, hearing, and sense of balance.
cussed in the section "Autonomic Nervous System."
Chemoreceptors function in the sensing of itches,
taste, and smell. Nociceptors detect pain. Thermore
ceptors can sense either hot or cold; photoreceptors
Sensory receptors
sense electromagnetic energy.
These receptors can be further classified by location
Sensations are the awareness of a stimulus, whereas
as exteroceptors, interoceptors, or proprioceptors
perception involves the interpretation of the sensation
(from the Latin word proprius, meaning "belong to
and occurs in the CNS. All senses involve three steps:
 one's own self"):
(1) a physical stimulus, (2) transformation of the stim-
Exteroceptors. These are sensitive to stimuli
ulus into a nerve impulse, and (3) a response to the
sensation in the form of a perception or conscious
outside
：(external) the body. Located near the
surface of the body, they can detect touch, pres-
experience of sensation. Furthermore, all sensory
sure, pain, and temperature, as well as special
systems give four types of information about the
 senses such as smell, taste, vision, and auditory.
stimuli, including modality, location, intensity, and
2
Interoceptors. These receptors monitor the vis-
timing, which collectively yield sensation (Table 10.1).
ceral organs and their function. They monitor
The various modalities of sense include vision,
chemical and temperature changes, as well as
hearing, touch, taste, smell, the vestibular sense of
stretching within the viscera. Although an animal
balance, and the somatic senses, including nociception
(pain), temperature, itch, and proprioception (posture
they may produce pain signals, alerting the animal
and movement of body parts). General senses include
to a problem.
temperature, pain, touch, pressure, vibration, and pro
3.
Proprioceptors. Although these receptors also
prioception; special senses include olfaction (smell),
respond to internal signals, they are restricted to
vision (sight), gustation (taste), equilibrium (balance),
those receptors in muscles and joints that provide
and audition (hearing). General sensory receptors are
121
information concerning the position of the bones
located throughout the body; receptors for special
and muscles.
senses are located in specialized structures or organs.
General senses are discussed later; special senses are
covered in Chapter 11.
General senses
Mechanoreceptors
Classes of sensory receptors
Mechanoreceptors detect distortions in their cell mem-
branes, such as bending and stretching. There are
There are five classes of sensory receptors: mechanical,
three classes of mechanoreceptors:
chemical, nociceptors (nocere = to injure), thermal, and
electromagnetic. Mechanoreceptors can detect touch,
Tactile receptors. These are responsible for the
proprioceptive sensation (muscle stretch or contrac-
sensations of touch, pressure, and vibration.
Table 10.1.
 Sensory receptors and modalities.
Sensory System
Modafity
Stimufes
Receptor Cfass
 Receptor Cell Type
Auditory
Hearing
Sound
Mechanoreceptors
Hair cells (cochlea)
Visual
Vision
Light
Photoreceptors
Rods and cones
Vestibular
Balance
Gravity
Mechanoreceptors
Hair cells (vestibular labyrinth)
Somatosensory
Somatic Senses:
Touch
Pressure
Mechanoceptors
IlI, IV, Vl, Vll, X and cervical nerves
 Proprioception
 Displacement
Mechanoceptors
Temperature
Thermal
 Thermoreceptors
Pain
Chemical, thermal,
 Chemoreceptors, thermoreceptors,
o mechanical
or mechanoreceptors
Gustatory
Taste
 Chemical
Chemoreceptors
Taste buds
Olfactory
Smell
 Chemical
Chemoreceptors
 Olfactory sensory neurons
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
269
tion occurring several centimeters away These recep-
 tors are activated by touching a tuning fork (200-300 Hz)
Meissner's
to the skin or bony structure.
corpuscle
Ruffini endings, slightly smaller than Pacinian cor-
puscles, are slow-adapting. They consist of a capsule
surrounding a core of collagen fibers that are continu-
 Ous with fibers in the surrounding dermis. Dendrites
from the sensory neuron are intertwined with the col-
Pacinian
lagen fibers in the capsule. They link the subcutaneous
corpuscle
fissue with folds in the skin at the joints and nails.
Thus, they sense stretch of the skin bending in these
regions.
Vibration is the detection of sinusoidal oscillations
of objects in contact with the skin. The various tactile
receptors differ in their sensitivity to vibration.
Merkel's discs are most responsive to low-frequency
oscillations (5-15Hz). Meissner's corpuscles are sensi-
Fig. 10.4. Receptive field. Meissner's corpuscles have a smaller
tive to midrange oscillations (20-50 Hz), and Pacinian
receptive field compared with the more deeply located Pacinian
corpuscles to high frequencies (60-400 Hz). The lowest
corpuscles.
 sd r e    
action potential is the receptor's turing threshold. The
intensity of the vibration is coded by the number of
sensory nerve fibers that are firing rather than the
 frequency of action potentials within a fiber.
2.
 Baroreceptors (baro = pressure). These detect
The size of the receptive fields for the various
changes in pressure in the walls of blood vessels,
touch receptors differs. Meissner's corpuscles and
as well as the digestive, reproductive, and urinary
 Merkel's discs, located in the superficial skin layers,
tracts.
have small receptive fields. A single dorsal root gan-
3.
 Proprioceptors. These detect changes in the posi-
 glion cell innervates 10-25 of each of these receptors
tion of joints and muscles.
and produces a receptive field of 2-10mm in diam-
 eter. Therefore, these receptors are responsible for a
Tactile receptors
fine discriminating touch that detects small spatial
Named after the German and Italian histologists who
differences. These receptors are important in a two-
discovered them, the two principal mechanoreceptors
point discrimination test. When performed on people,
located in the superficial skin layers are Merkel's discs
the skin is simultaneously touched by two pointed
and Meissner's corpuscles. The Merkel disc receptor
objects, and the person is asked whether they can
is a slowly adapting receptor consisting of a small
detect two objects or a single object. As the two
epithelial cell surrounding a nerve terminal. They are
points are moved closer together, the person will
involved in the sense of touch and pressure. Meiss-
eventually be unable to discriminate between the
ner's corpuscles are rapidly adapting and consist of a
two objects.
globular, fluid-filled structure enclosing a stack of flat-
 In contrast, each Pacinian corpuscle and Ruffini
tened epithelial cells around which the sensory nerve
ending, located in deeper skin layers, is innervated by
is entwined.
a single nerve fiber, but its receptive field is large since
The two mechanoreceptors found in the deep sub-
these receptors can detect changes from mechanical
cutaneous layers are the Pacinian corpuscle (Fig. 10.4)
displacement over a large distance. Because of their
and the Ruffini ending. Although larger than the
large receptive fields, these receptors are involved in
receptors found in the superficial layers, these recep-
coarse resolution of touch. The combination of the
tors are less numerous. The Pacinian corpuscle, physi-
adaptation rate and size of the receptive field leads to
ologically similar to the Meissner's corpuscle, is a
variations in how the tactile receptors respond to
large receptor measuring as long as 2mm and nearly
stimuli (Fig. 10.5).
1 mm in diameter.
In addition to differences in receptive fields of the
The Pacinian corpuscle, also called a large lamel-
various tactile receptors, there are also differences in
lated corpuscle, is fast-adapting and responds to rapid
the number of these receptors located throughout the
indentation of the skin but not steady pressure. Since
body. The smallest receptive fields, that is, those with
the capsule surrounding this receptor is attached to
the most receptors, are located in the tips of the paws
the skin, this receptor can sense low-frequency vibra-
and whiskers.
270
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Primary
 Size of receptive fields
Adaptation
somatosensory
rate
 Small 
Large
cortex
 Meissner's corpuscle
 Pacinian corpuscle
Fast
Ventral posterior
3
3
Firing
Firing
nucleus
rate
rate
Dorsal column
nuclei
Merkel's disc
 Ruffini's ending 
-Medulla
Aβ axon
Slow
Firing
Firing
rate
LLILL
rate
Spinal
cord
Fig. 10.5. Response of tactile receptors to stretch. The various
Fig. 10.6. Dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway.
tactile receptors change their firing rate qualitatively and
quantitatively in response to stretch. whereas Meissner's and 
Mechanoreceptor signals enter the spinal cord through the dorsal
Pacinian corpuscles respond quickly but also adapt quickly.
root where they either synapse on secondary fibers in the gray area
or ascend in the dorsal column. Fibers ascending in the dorsal
Merkel's discs and Ruffini's endings adapt more slowly.
column synapse in the dorsal column nuclei (nucleus gracilus and
cuneatus). Fibers from these nuclei immediately decussate and
 ascend to the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus via the
 medial lemniscus. From there, fibers ascend to the primary
Baroreceptors
somatosensory cortex.
 Consisting of free nerve endings, baroreceptors sense
change in the walls of distensible organs, including
 blood vessels, and a portion of the respiratory, diges-
 Golgi tendon organs. Located at the junction
tive, and urinary tracts. When the pressure in the walls
between skeletal muscle and its tendon, the Golgi
of these organs increases, the walls are stretched,
tendon organs detect stretch of the tendons. The
causing a deformation in the sensory nerves. As the
dendrites of the receptor neurons branch exten-
 pressure in these organs decreases, the elastic fibers
 sively, wrapping around the collagen fibers of the
cause the walls to return to their original structure.
Baroreceptors monitor blood pressure in the major
tendon.
3.
 Receptors in joint capsules. In order to monitor
vessels, particularly in the carotid artery at the carotid
the position of the body, joint capsules are inner-
sinus, and the aorta at the aortic arch. Increases in
 blood pressure at these sites initiate the baroreceptor
vated with free nerve endings that detect pressure,
 reflex, in which increased firing rates from these baro-
tension, and movement of the joint.
receptors is relayed to the CNS and appropriate
Dorsal cofumn-medial femniscal pathway
adjustments in heart rate and blood pressure are initi-
(mechanoreceptor pathway)
ated. Baroreceptors in the lungs send information
 regarding lung inflation to the respiratory rhythmicity
Axons of skin sensory receptors are designated, in
 centers in the brain stem to regulate breathing. Simi-
order of decreasing size, as Ao, Aβ, A8, and C, which
larly, baroreceptors in the colon and urinary bladder
function in defecation and micturition, respectively.
called groups I, II, ll, and IV, respectively. Ao, Aβ, and
 There are also baroreceptors along the gastrointestinal
 A8 are myelinated; C fibers are unmyelinated. Sensory
tract (Gl tract) that are involved in peristalsis.
nerves from the skin do not have Ac fibers. Mechano-
receptors send their messages via Aβ. These fibers
Proprioceptors
 enter the dorsal horn of the central gray area of the
 spinal cord and branch. One branch synapses on
Proprioceptors monitor the position of joints, and the
second-order sensory neurons deep in the dorsal horn
tension in tendons, ligaments, and muscle. These
receptors do not adapt, and they continuously send
and are involved in reflexes. The other branch ascends
information to the CNS. There are three groups of
to the brain in the dorsal column-medial lemniscal
 pathway (Fig. 10.6). This branch enters the ipsilateral
proprioceptors:
dorsal column of the spinal cord. Composed of primary
 Muscle spindles. Discussed in Chapter 8, these
sensory axons, as well as second-order axons from
receptors detect the length of skeletal muscles.
neurons in the central gray area of the spinal cord,
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system
271
these fibers ascend to the dorsal column nuclei at the
junction of the spinal cord and medulla where they
synapse. The fibers leaving the dorsal column nuclei
decussate (cross to the other side) and ascend in the
medial lemniscus that courses through the medulla.
pons, and midbrain, and synapses in the ventral pos-
Bradykinin
terior nucleus of the thalamus.
ATP
Substantia
gelatinosa
 Spinothalamic
Nociceptor
tract
Nociceptors
Dorsal root
Pain is mediated by nociceptors. These receptors
ganglion
respond to stimuli that can damage tissue. Some noci-
ceptors respond directly to stimuli, and others respond
indirectly since they respond to chemicals released by
damaged tissue. The list of chemical intermediates
Ventral root
includes histamine, K', and proteases released from
Fg. 10.7. Nociception. Damage to the skin can cause release of
injured cells, bradykinin, substance P, acidity, adenos-
certain substances, including ATP, prostaglandins, and bradykinin.
ine triphosphate (ATP), prostaglandins, serotonin, and
These substances can stimulate the nociceptors. Collaterals of the
acetylcholine (ACh).
receptors can release substance P and calcitonin gene-related
Chemical mediators are released in response to
 peptide (CGRP) that can stimulate mast cells to release histamine.
Histamine can stimulate nociceptors as well as cause vasodilation.
various stimuli. Bradykinin is produced when pepti-
 Hence, the redness associated with inflammation. The pain signals
 dases released from injured cells cleave the extracel-
 are carried by A8 and C fibers through the dorsal root to the
lular protein kininogen. Bradykinin acts directly on
substantia gelatinosa of the central gray area of the spinal cord.
Here the fibers release glutamate and/or substance P, which signals
nociceptors, and it also increases the synthesis and
secondary fibers. The secondary fibers cross to the contralateral
release of prostaglandins from nearby tissue. Tissue
side and synapse on neurons that carry the impulse to the brain via
acidity can increase when, for example, a galloping
the spinothalamic tract.
8
 horse begins anaerobic metabolism producing lactic
acid that leads to an increase in extracellular Ht ions.
Histamine is released when mast cells found in the
connective tissue are stimulated, such as during a bee
produce two different kinds of pain perceptions (Fig.
sting. Prostaglandin E, is a metabolite of arachidonic
10.7). The first pain is a fast, sharp pain mediated by
acid and is generated by the enzyme cyclooxygenase
A8fibers; it is followed by secondary pain that is
released from dlamaged cells. Aspirin and other non-
duller, but longer lasting and mediated by C fibers.
steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics work by block-
 Once stimulated, branches of the nociceptor neurons
 ing cyclooxygenase and inhibiting the synthesis of
can secrete substance P and calcitonin gene-related
prostaglandins.
 peptide, peptide neurotransmitters, from peripheral
There are three classes of nociceptor. Mechanical
terminals of collaterals of the primary nociceptive
and thermal nociceptors are sensitive to mechanical
neurons. These two peptides can cause vasodilation as
and thermal stimuli, respectively, whereas polymodal
well as release of histamine from mast cells.
nociceptors respond to traumatized tissue rather than
Heat, redness, swelling, and pain are the cardinal
physical properties. Mechanical nociceptors respond
signs of inflammation. Substance P can cause all of 
to a strong tactile or sharp penetrating stimulus that
these symptoms. The heat and redness are caused by
results in pain. Their firing rate increases with the
the vasodilation, swelling is caused by the leakage
destructiveness of the mecharical stimuli. Thermal
of proteins and cells from these blood vessels into
   s   s
 the interstitial space, and the pain can result from
group responds to noxious heat above 45°C; the
the induced release of histamine that stimulates
second group responds to noxious cold below 5°℃.
nociceptors.
The polymodal nociceptors respond not only 
to
painful mechanical stimuli such as a strong pinch or
Pain pathway
 puncture, but also to noxious heat and cold and irri-
tant chemicals. Stimulation of these receptors evokes
The A& and C fibers enter the spinal cord through
slow, burning pain. These are the primary receptors in
 the dorsal root and synapse in the substantia gelati-
tooth pulp.
nosa of the central greay area. The neurotransmitters
 Pain signals are carried by lightly myelinated A8
released at this site are thought to be glutamate
and unmyelinated C fibers. These fibers have different
and substance P. The glutamate, released from A8
conduction velocifties; therefore, pain information can
and C fibers, acts at AMPA-type glutamate receptors
272
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Primary
somatosensory
cortex
3
 Intralaminar and ventral
 posterior nucleus 
Medulla
Spinal
cord
Fig. 10.8. The spinothalamic pathway. Pain and temperature
Fg. 10.9. Referred pain. Referred pain occurs when visceral
information is carried to the brain via the spinothalamic pathway.
nociception is perceived as a cutaneous sensation. The classic
Sensory fibers enter the spinal cord by way of the dorsal root and
example of this is angina, in which the heart receives insufficient
synapse in the central gray area of the spinal cord. They synapse on 
oxygen resulting in pain from this region.However, the body
fibers that decussate and then ascend through the spinothalamic
perceives the pain as coming from the upper chest or left arm since
tract to the intralaminar and ventral posterior nuclei of the
cutaneous sensations from this region synapse in the spinal cord 
thalamus, where they synapse on fibers that then course to the
near the same region, and the brain is unable to distinguish
primary somatosensory cortex.
between the two.
apter 10
Thermoreceptors
and evokes fast synaptic potentials in dorsal horn
neurons. Substance P is released from C fibers
Thermoreceptors alter their firing rate as a result of
and evokes slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials
changes in temperature. Unlike mechanoreceptors
that are silent in the absence of stimuli, thermorecep-
transmit pain signals and, with substance P, enhance
tors maintain a low, tonic firing rate (2-5 spikes/s) at
and prolong the actions of glutamate. The impulse is
 normal body temperature. There are separate cold and
then carried by secondary fibers that immediately
warm receptors, which can be shown by differential
decussate and then ascend to the brain via the spi-
mapping on the skin. These free nerve endings are
nothalamic tract (Fig. 10.8).
located in the dermis of the skin, skeletal muscles,
Many times, shortly after an injury, the site becomes
 liver, and hypothalamus.
Warm receptors begin firing around 30*C, increas-
This is called hyperalgesia and is the body's way of
 ing their firing rate up to 45°C, after which their firing
protecting this site from further injury. Primary
rate decreases (Fig. i0.10). Above 50°C, warm recep-
hyperalgesia is associated with the damaged tissue;
tors stop firing. Instead, the animal senses heat pain
however, the surrounding area can also become super-
rather than warmth due to the firing of thermal noci-
sensitive, a process called secondary hyperalgesia.
ceptors. Cold receptors actively fire at temperafures
Hyperalgesia is due to the action of various com-
ranging from 35°C down to 10°C. Below this tempera-
pounds released during injury that make the nocicep-
ture, cold becomes an anesthetic. For unknown
tors more sensitive.
reasons, some cold receptors increase their firing rate
Nociceptors from the viscera also enter the spinal
above 45°℃.
cord by the same route as those from cutaneous noci-
 Thermoreceptors are very sensitive to differences in
ceptors. These signals can get mixed within the spinal
 temperature between an object being touched and
cord since the afferent fibers from the viscera and
 skin temperature. They respond vigorously to these
somatic area converge on the same projection neurons
 abrupt changes in temperafure and then adapt their
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Fig. 10.9). This
firing rate. This can be demonstrated by placing your
leads to the phenomenon of referred pain in which
hand in a beaker of cold water. Notice that with time,
visceral pain is perceived as a cutaneous sensation.
the sensations of cold decrease. Then, take your hand
Such is the case with angina, in which ischemia in the
and plunge it into a beaker of warm water. Notice that 
heart leads to pain in the upper chest and down the
the water will actually feel hot due to the sudden
left arm.
change in temperature.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
273
Dorsal column medial
lemniscal pathway
Spinothalamic pathway
 rate (spikes/s
Warrm receptors
Cerebral cortex
Cerebral cortex
Thalamus
Medulla
Firing
Cold receptors
Spinal cord
10
35
45
50
Ao and.
Aα, Aβ, and
A8fibers
Cfibers
Skin temperature (°C)
Touch, vibration,
Pain, temperature,
proprioception
and some touch
Fig. 10.10. Thermoreceptors. Thermoreceptors change their firing 
rate in response to changes in skin or organ temperature. At normal
Fig. 10.12. Pain and temperature pathways. The two major
body temperatures (36-38°C), both cold and warm receptors are
ascending pathways that carry pain and temperature information 
discharging. As skin temperature decreases below 30°C, warm
include the dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway and the
receptors discontinue firing, whereas cold receptors increase their
spinothalamic pathway. Note that the dorsal column medial 
firing rate, which is maximal at 25°C. Warm receptors fire
lemniscal pathway enters the spinal cord through the dorsal root 
maximally at 45°℃.
and ascends to the medulla where it synapses on second-order
neurons that cross over to the contralateral side and then ascend to
the cerebral cortex. In the spinothalamic tract, fibers enter the
spinal cord via the dorsal root and synapse on second-order fibers
Primary
in the central gray area. These second-order neurons cross over to
somatosensory
the contralateral side before ascending to the thalamus where they
 synapse on neurons that then project to the cerebral cortex.
 second-order neurons in the spinal trigeminal nucleus
Thalamus
in the brain stem. These fibers decussate and ascend
to the thalamus in the trigeminal lemniscus. T
The
 pzns are smd adn pe d
Trigeminal
Figure 10.12.
 nucleus 
Chemoreceptors
Trigeminal
nerve
 Chemoreceptors are responsible for detecting changes 
 in concentrations of specific chemicals or compounds.
Fig. 10.11. Trigeminal pathway. Pain and temperature information
from the face send information via the trigeminal nerve (cranial
 These receptors are also responsible for the special
 nerve V). This information is carried to the trigeminal nucleus and
senses of taste (gustation) and smell (olfaction). Taste
synapses on second-order neurons that decussate and ascend to the
 and olfaction, which are considered special senses
thalamus where they synapse on neurons and then ascend to the
whose signals are relayed to the primary sensory
 primary somatosensory cortex.
cortex, will be discussed in a separate chapter. The
chemoreceptors whose signals do not travel to the
primary sensory cortex will be discussed here. They
Thermoreceptor pathway
are responsible for sensing irritating substances on the
Cold receptors connect to A8 and C fibers, whereas
skin, or nutrients within the Gl tract or brain, and
warm receptors connect only with C fibers. These
carbon dioxide or oxygen levels in our blood.
fibers synapse in the substantia gelatinosa of the dorsal
 There are chemoreceptors in the respiratory centers
horn in the spinal cord. The secondary fibers then
of the brain that sense changes in Ht and CO, concen-
decussate and ascend in the contralateral spinotha-
trations. There are also chemoreceptors in the carotid
lamic tract along with the pain signals.
bodies located near the origin of the internal carotid
 Pain and temperature information from the face and
arteries and in the aortic bodies found between the
head reaches the thalamus via the trigeminal pathway
 major branches of the aortic arch. These receptors
(Fig. 10.11). Fibers in the trigeminal nerve synapse on
respond to changes in blood pH, CO2, and oxygen
274  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
concentrations. Signals for the carotid and aortic
the production of an EPSP. The amplitude of the recep-
bodies travel to the respiratory centers through the
tor potential is proportional to the intensity of the
 glossopharyngeal (cranial nerve IX) and vagus (cranial
stimulus. Greater conformational change in the tissue
nerve X).
will result in a greater number of channel openings on
the mechanoreceptor. When the stimulus is removed,
the ion channels close.
 Detection of sensory signals
 Receptors involved in general senses are either free
Sensory receptors are morphologically specialized
 dendritic endings or encapsulated dendritic endings.
structures that respond to specific stimuli. When stim-
Free nerve endings are located throughout the body,
ulated, these receptors transform the stimulus into an
but are especially abundant in epithelia and connec-
electrical signal called a receptor potential, which is a
tive tissue. They are nonmyelinated and end in a
graded potential causing either depolarization or
knob-like swelling, sensitive to touch and pressure.
 hyperpolarization of the cell. The amplitude and dura-
There appears to be no structural differences between
tion of the receptor potential are related to the magni-
those that detect touch and pressure and those that
tude and length of time of the stimulus. If the receptor
detect temperature and pain. While these are the only
 potential is large enough to reach threshold, it is called
sensory receptors on the surface of the eye, there are
 specialized tactile receptors located throughout the
to form in the sensory neuron. The process of convert-
body surface that are probably more important. A
ing the stimulus into a receptor potential is called
summary of the various sensory receptors is shown in
stimulus transduction.
Table 10.2.
The various types of sensory receptors have differ-
Surrounding all hairs is a root hair plexus that moni-
ent mechanisms for transducing the stimulus into a
tors distortions and movements. Movement of the hair
receptor potential. In mechanoreceptors, when there
causes a distortion in the sensory dendrites, resulting
is a conformational change in the tissue in which the
 in the production of a receptor potential. These are
receptor resides, it causes a change in the plasma
rapidly adapting receptors. Therefore, they are most
121
 membrane of the mechanoreceptor, thus causing a
 important for detecting initial movements or changes.
 physical change in the cation channels located in the
For example, when a saddle is first placed on a horse,
 sensory neuron membrane (Fig. 10.13). This physical
 these receptors send signals to the brain notifying the
change results in the opening of stretch-sensitive
 presence of the saddle, but rather quickly these recep-
channels that increase ion conductance. This leads to
tors adapt and stop sending signals.
depolarization of the neuron and generation of a
receptor potential. This mechanism is very similar to
Reflexes
Reflexes are automatic, neural responses to specific
lon channels
stimuli. Reflexes work to preserve homeostasis by
Na
making rapid adjustments that do not require con-
Na
scious activity. Therefore, all reflexes involve a sensory
receptor and a motor response.
 The neural path controlling a reflex is called a reflex
Stretched
Meissner's
Cell.
Cytoskeleton
arch (Fig. 10.14). The reflex arch begins with a sensory
corpuscle
membrane
receptor and ends with the effector. There are four
steps to a reflex arch:
1.
 Stimulus activates receptor. Sensory receptors,
2.1.
such as those described earlier, receive a stimulus
that generates a receptor potential, resulting in the
 If the sensory cell and sensory neuron are sepa-
 rate, the action potential is produced in the sensory
Fig. 10.13. Mechanoreceptor depolarization. Mechanoreceptors
neuron.
respond to physical ceformation of the plasma membrane. In this
2.
 Information processing. The sensory information
example, a Meissner's corpuscle, located in the skin, is deformed
is transmitted to the CNS where it is processed.
when the skin is pressed. This produces a physical change in the
corpuscle membrane, which causes an opening of an ion channel
In a monosynaptic reflex, the sensory neuron
on the plasma membrane. As cations move inward, a receptor
synapses directly on a motor neuron, releasing
potential is generated in the corpuscle.
an excitatory neurotransmitter and causing the
Table 10.2.
 Sensory receptors: structure and function.
Type
ffustration
Function
Adapting
Location
Unencapsulated
Free dendritic
Nociceptors,
Slowly adapting
Most body tissues; dense
nerve endings
thermoreceptors,
 concentration in connective
 mechanoreceptors
tissues, including ligaments,
tendons, dermis, joint
Capsules, periostea; epithlia
(epidermis, cornea, mucosa,
glands)
Merkel discs:
Mechanoreceptors
Slowly adapting
 Basal layer of epidermis of 
modified free
(fine touch)
skin
dendritic endings
Merkel
Tactile
cell
disc
Root hair plexuses
Mechanoreceptors
Rapid
 In and around hair follicles
10
 Encapsulated 
Meissner's
Mechanoreceptors
Rapidly adapting
 Dermal papillae of hairless
corpuscles
(light pressure,
skin, especially nipples,
discriminative
external genitalia, fingertips.
touch, low-
soles of feet, eyelids
 frequency vibration)
(Continued)
275
276
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 10.2. Continued
Type
ffustration
Function
Adapting
Location
Krause's end bulbs
Mechanoreceptors
Rapidly adapting
 Deep in the dermis and
 Pacinian corpuscles
(deep pressure and
subcutaneous tissue; joint
(laminated
vibration when first
capsules, tendons,
corpuscles)
(pa!ldde
ligaments
Ruffini's corpuscles
 Mechanoreceptors
Slowly adapting
Deep in dermis,
(respond to deep
hypodermis, and joint 
continuous pressure)
capsule
Muscle spindles
Proprioreceptors
Nonadapting
Skeletal muscle
Golgi tendon
Proprioreceptors
Nonadapting
 T'endons close to skeletal
organs
 muscle insertion
 Sensory neuron
 Central nervous system
tiple sites (Fig. 10.15). These reflexes generally
involve both excitatory and inhibitory neurotrans-
mitters being released from various interneu-
 Sensory apparatus
rons (i.e., excitatory interneurons and inhibitory
interneurons).
3.
Activation of the motor neuron. As a result of the
stimulus, a motor neuron is activated to cause con-
Effector
traction in order to establish homeostasis. In the
case of polysynaptic reflexes, there are other syn-
ergistic muscles that may be stimulated and
 antagonistic muscles that are inhibited.
4.
 Response of the peripheral effector. Stimulation
of the motor neurons results in release of a neu-
Fig. 10.14. Reflex arch. A reflex arch includes a sensory
rotransmitter at the synapse between the motor
apparatus, a sensory neuron, a site of information processing or
aueuo e spaap snenedde Aiosuas aul 'lopae ue pue 'uoeibanu!
neuron and its effector. This results in contraction
that is transmitted via the sensory neuron to the central nervous
of a single muscle in the case of a monosynaptic
 system. There, the information is processed and a motor response is
reflex, or multiple muscles in the case of a poly-
sent via a motor neuron to the periphery in order to maintain
 synaptic synapse.
homeostasis.
production of an EPSP in the motor neuron.
Classification of reflexes
Under normal conditions, EPSPs in motor neurons
always result in an action potential in the motor
Reflexes can be classified based on their develop-
neuron. In a polysynaptic reflex, there are pools 
ment, site of information processing, or resulting
of interneurons generally carrying signals to mul-
motor response.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
277
1. Monosynaptic
1. Somatic reflex
Sensoryneuron
Pacinian
corpuscle
timul
Motor neuron
2. Visceral reflex
2. Polysynaptic
Sensory neuron
Postganglionic
sympatheticfiber
Visceral
Preganglionic
effector
sympathetic fiber
 Sympathetic ganglia
Fig. 10.16. Somatic and visceral reflexes. 1. Somatic reflexes
Fig. 10.15. Monosynaptic and polysynaptic reflexes. 1. In
involve a somatic sensory signal that is carried to the central
monosynaptic reflexes, the sensory neuron is activated and carries a
nervous system where it stimulates a somatic motor neuron whose
signal to the central nervous system where it synapses on an
fiber travels to a skeletal muscle and causes contraction. 2. A
effector neuron. The effector neuron is activated causing an effect
visceral reflex is polysynaptic. There is either a somatic sensory
to occur in the periphery. 2. In a polysynaptic reflex, the sensory
signal or a visceral sensory signal that is relayed to the central
signal synapses on an interneuron in the central nervous system.
nervous system where it stimulates a presynaptic autonomic fiber,
The interneurons process the information and then synapse on an
which then exits the central nervous system and synapses on a
effector neuron. The interneurons can either be excitatory, causing
 postsynaptic fiber that then stimulates a visceral effector (i.e.,
activation of the effector neuron, or they can be inhibitory, thus 
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or gland).
decreasing the firing rate in the effector neuron.
muscle, cardiac muscle, or glands are called visceral
Development of reflex
 reflexes (Fig. 10.16). Although the contraction of skel-
Animals are born with some reflexes called innate
etal muscle is generally under conscious, voluntary
reflexes. Such reflexes involve the development of a
 control, somatic reflexes involve the involuntary con-
traction or relaxation of skeletal muscle.
Such reflexes generally entail some process vital for
Visceral reflexes are essential for maintaining
life. Examples of such reflexes include suckling.
homeostasis. Some input to the autonomic nervous
chewing. a withdrawal reflex from painful stimuli,
 system is somatosensory. For example, if an animal
and tracking objects with the eyes. A newborn calf will
suddenly cuts itself, this noxious stimulus can activate
 generally begin suckling almost immediately after
the sympathetic nervous system, causing local vaso-
birth.
constriction as well as increased blood pressure and
Other reflexes may develop later in life as a result
heart rate. Visceral sensory information can also stim-
of experience, and are called acquired reflexes. An
ulate such reflexes. Sensory information from the tho
example of an acquired reflex might be salivation in
racic and abdominal region is carried to the brain via
response to the sound of a bell. Like innate reflexes,
the vagus nerve, information from the head and neck
these responses are quick, automatic, and stereotypic,
via the glossopharyngeal nerves, and visceral chemo-
but they must be learned.
sensory information (i.e., taste) by the facial nerves.
This sensory information is all carried to the nucleus
Site of information processing
of the solitary tract.
If the sensory information is processed in the spinal
cord, the reflex is called a spinal reflex (e.g., with-
Spinal reflexes
drawal reflex). Such reflexes do not require input or
processing from the brain; therefore, they are func-
 Monosynaptic reflexes
tional in decerebrate animals. The processing of infor-
mation in the brain results in cranial reflexes.
Skeletal muscle is essential for the control of posture
and voluntary movement. The brain sends messages
to the muscles in order to initiate movement. For
Resulting motor response
example, assume the brain sends a message to the leg
Reflexes that involve the contraction of skeletal muscle
of a horse in order to raise the leg and hold it above
are termed somatic reflexes; those that involve smooth
the ground. After the leg is raised, proprioceptive
2 78 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 messages are constantly sent back to the brain from
neurons. There are two types of sensory fibers. The
the leg in order to inform the brain as to the location
primary sensory endings are large type Ia fibers that
of the leg.
sense both rate and amount of stretch of the muscle
spindle. The secondary sensory endings are small type
Stretch reflex
 Ii fibers that surround the endings of the intrafusal
fibers and sense only stretch of the muscle spindle.
The stretch reflex, also called the myotatic reflex from
 There are gamma motor neurons that innervate each
its Greek roots (myo = muscle + tatic = stretch), is the
intrafusal fiber, whereas c-motor neurons innervate
simplest reflex in the body, and it is an example of a
the extrafusal fibers.
proprioceptive message  involved  in  maintaining
When a muscle is stretched, the intrafusal fibers in
 posture and muscle tone. It is a monosynaptic reflex
the muscle spindle are also stretched. This causes
providing autonomic control of skeletal muscle. The
increased activity in the sensory endings. When the
sensory mechanism involves the muscle spindles,
muscle shortens, the activity in the sensory endings
which are small, encapsulated sensory receptors
decreases. Therefore, the components of the stretch
located within skeletal muscle that provide informa-
reflex include (1) stretch of the muscle spindle, (2)
tion about the changes in length of the muscle.
activation of the sensory neurons in the muscle spindle,
(3) transmission of the sensory signal to the c-motor
Anatomy of the muscfe spindfe
neurons located in the dorsal horn in the spinal cord,
There are two types of muscle fibers within the skel-
and (4) stimulation of muscle contraction induced by
etal muscle: extrafusal and intrafusal. Extrafusal
the c-motor neurons (Fig. 10.18).
muscle fibers are those fibers found outside of the
Stimulation of the gamma motor neuron causes the
muscle spindle making up the bulk of skeletal muscle,
 intrafusal fibers to contract, while having no effect on
and which are responsible for muscle contraction. In
the extrafusal fibers. Contraction of the intrafusal
 contrast, intrafusal (intra = within; fusal = spindle)
fibers does not contribute to the force of muscle con-
muscle fibers are about one-quarter the size of the
 traction; instead, that is generated by the extrafusal
extrafusal fibers, are located within the connective
fibers. Stimulation of the gamma motor neurons
tissue capsule that surrounds the muscle spindle, and
causes the intrafusal fibers to contract at either end.
run parallel to the extrafusal fibers (Fig. 10.17). The
 Since they are attached to the ends of the capsule, this
middle third of the capsule is swollen, giving it a
causes the sensory endings to increase their firing rate
spindle shape. The central region of each intrafusal
because they sense stretch.
fiber lacks myofilaments and is thus noncontractile.
 There are two types of intrafusal fibers: nuclear
bag fibers and nuclear chain fibers. A typical muscle
spindle has two to three nuclear bag fibers and a
varying number of nuclear chain fibers. Each intra-
1. Muscle spindle
2. Increased firing
fusal fiber is innervated by both motor and sensory
 senses stretch
rate in sensory
 neuron 
la sensory fiber
 Gamma motor neuron
Il sensory fiber
Nuclear chain fibers
Nuclear bag fibers
4. α-Motor neuron
Capsule
causes skeletal
3. Sensory signal 
 muscle contraction
causes increased
 firing rate in
α-motor neuron
Fg. 10.18. Components of stretch reflex. 1. A muscle spindle
senses stretch in the skeletal muscle caused either by contraction
of the muscle or tension on the muscle. 2. The sensory endings in
Fig. 10.17. Muscle spindle. A muscle spindle consists of three
the muscle spindle are activated, resulting in an increased firing 
components: intrafusal fibers, sensory endings, and a motor neuron.
rate in the sensory fibers from the muscle spindle. 3. The sensory
There are two types of intrafusal fibers: nuclear chain and nuclear
fibers synapse within the spinal cord on the α-motor neurons going
bag fibers. There are two types of sensory endings: primary endings
to the same muscle. 4. The α-motor neuron is activated and causes
and secondary endings. The intrafusal fibers are innervated by a
the same muscle to contract. (Leg was adapted from Riegel and 
gamma motor neuron.
Hakola, 1996.)
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
279
Muscfe spindfe and muscfe contraction
Stimulus
Since contraction of intrafusal fibers does not contrib-
ute to the force of muscle contraction, what is the
Primary (la)
function of the muscle spindle? When a muscle con-
Secondary () ++HHHHHII
tracts, there are two phases to contraction. The
dynamic phase is the period during which the muscle
length is changing; the static phase is when the muscle
 has stabilized its length. The two sensory endings
 Stimulus
provide information regarding these phases (Fig.
10.19). When the muscle is first stretched, both the
Primary (la)
primary and secondary endings increase their firing
Secondary ( ++H+++H++
rate. Since the primary endings are also sensitive to
 the velocity of stretch, their firing rate also provides 
 information regarding the rate of stretch (or contrac-
Fig. 10.19. Response of muscle spindles to stretch. (A) During
stretch of the muscle, both primary and secondary endings in the
tion) of the muscle.
Ad aul aen uj jiau saui pue puodsai aipuids aosn
endings give additional information regarding the velocity of stretch
Function of the gamma motor neurons
as seen here as an increase in firing rate associated with the
 initiation of stretch. (B) Since stretch occurred more rapidly, the
When the c-motor neurons are stimulated, they cause
aui ne sujy jo Auanbany paseaou! pamous suipua Anewid
contraction of extrafusal fibers within skeletal muscle.
beginning of the muscle stretch compared to that seen in panel A.
Since the muscle spindle capsule is anchored within
the extrafusal fibers, the muscle spindle becomes
flaccid as the two ends of the spindle move closer
together (Fig. 10.20). As a result, the muscle spindle
10
la firing
rate
Stretch
Tension
B
α-Motor
la firing ↓1
neuron
rate
 Stimuiate
α-motor
Tension
neuron
c
c-Motor
la firing L
neuron
rate
-Motor
Stimulate
neuron
α-motor
Tension-
neuron
Fig. 10.20. Role of gamma motor neuron in muscle spindle. Although the muscle spindle is actually found deep in the muscle, for clarity,
Suy ui aseaui ue si anaun 'pauas s! alosnw aun uaum (y) 'ansy sun ui Alanenedas paneldsi uaag aey sigy iesnjeu! pue jesnjexa aui
rate in the sensory neurons. Only the primary endings are displayed in this figure. (B) when the α-motor neuron is stimulated, it causes
contraction of the extrafusal fibers. Since the muscle spindle is anchored within these fibers, the muscle spindle become flaccid as the 
extrafusal fibers shorten. (C) If the gamma motor neuron is stimulated simultaneously with the α-motor neuron, the intrafusal fibers contract
along with the extrafusal fibers, thus preventing the muscle spindle from becoming unloaded. Therefore, the muscle spindle is able to
maintain its ability to sense stretch within the muscle. (Figure modified from Kandel et al., 2000.)
280
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
1. Gamma motor
 2. Intrafusal fibers
3. Sensory neuron
 increases firing rate.
neuron fires.
contract.
5. α-Motor neuron
4. Sensory signal
causes skeletal
causes increased
muscle contraction.
firing rate in 
o-motor neuron.
Golgi tendon organ sensory neuror
Sensory neuron from muscle spindle
α-Motor neuron to agonist muscle
Gamma motor neuron
α-Motor neuron to antagonist muscle
c-Motor neuron
Fig. 10.21. Gamma motor neuron loop. Stimulation of the gamma
Fg. 10.22. The tendon reflex (inverse myotatic reflex). When the
motor neuron causes shortening of the intrafusal fibers within the
Golgi tendon apparatus within the tendon is stretched, a sensory
muscle spindle. This causes an increased frequency of firing in the 
signal is carried in afferent fibers to the spinal cord where they
sensory neuron that synapses on the α-motor neuron. Stimulation of 
synapse on interneurons. Inhibitory interneurons synapsing on
the α-motor neuron results in contraction of the skeletal muscle.
α-motor neurons going to the muscle where the sensory signal was
(Leg was adapted from Riegel and Hakola, 1996.)
generated cause relaxation of that muscle. Excitatory interneurons
also synapse on α-motor neurons going to antagonist muscles,
causing them to contract in order to relieve the stretch on the
tendons in the agonist muscle. (Leg was adapted from Riegel and
Hakola, 1996.)
becomes insensitive to stretch. To correct this situa-
tion, the intrafusal fibers in the muscle spindle are
innervated with motor neurons. Stimulation of 
motor neurons results in contraction of intrafusal
fibers, thus causing the muscle spindle to shorten so
10.22). Golgi tendon receptors located within the
that it remains responsive to changes in the length of
tendons of the muscle increase their firing rate in
the extrafusal fibers.
response to increased tension in the tendon. When
 stimulated, afferent signals from the Golgi tendon
Gamma motor neuron loop
receptors are transmitted to the spinal cord where
Although conscious motor movement is usually initi-
 is      
ated by signals carried by the c-motor neuron, there
causes inhibition of contraction of the muscle from
is a second method to initiate the contraction of skel-
which the signal initiated, while causing reciprocal
 etal muscle called the gamma motor neuron loop (Fig.
activation of antagonist muscles. The result is relax-
10.21). Stimulation of a gamma motor neuron causes
ation of muscle attached to the overstretched tendon,
contraction of intrafusal fibers, which causes 
the
 and contraction of antagonist muscles, an effect oppo-
 muscle spindle to detect stretch. The sensory endings
site that of the stretch reflex.
 in the muscle spindle detect the stretch, resulting in
 The Golgi tendon reflex is particularly important 
an increased firing rate in the sensory neuron. This
during quick activities involving rapid changes
information is transmitted back to the CNS where the
between flexion and extension. This reflex is designed
sensory neurons synapse directly on the c-motor
to prevent the overstretching of the collagen fibers in
neurons going to the same muscle. Increased firing
tendons.
rate in the c-motor neuron results in contraction of the
muscle in order to reduce the stretch in the muscle
Withdrawaf reflex
 spindle.
The withdrawal reflex, also called the flexor reflex,
allows for the immediate withdrawal of a body part
Polysynaptic reflexes
in response to painful stimuli (Fig. 10.23). A painful
stimulus causes a sensory signal to be transmitted to
Tendon reflex
the spinal cord where it causes excitation of c-motor
Although the stretch reflex is designed to prevent
 neurons going to flexors in that region while simul-
tearing of skeletal muscle, the tendon reflex, also
taneously inhibiting the extensors in the same region.
called the inverse myotatic reflex or reverse myotatic
This allows for the quick withdrawal of the body
reflex, functions to prevent tearing of tendons (Fig.
part.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
281
These neurons either facilitate or inhibit lower motor
neurons, which innervate a single motor unit. When
an upper motor neuron is diseased, this results in
facilitation (i.e., lowering the threshold for propaga-
tion of the action potential) of the lower motor neurons,
causing hypertonia.
Table 10.3 gives examples of reflexes used in diag-
 nostics. These reflexes are important in determining
the site of injury in an animal.
Autonomic nervous system
Overview
Fig. 10.23. The withdrawal and crossed-extensor reflexes. The
Many activities of an animal are under conscious
withdrawal reflex is initiated as a response to painful stimuli.
control. Such activities include voluntary motor
Stepping on a nail would cause a noxious signal to be transmitted
 movement and generally are not immediately neces-
to the central nervous system where it would initiate contraction (+)
sary to sustain life. These activities are controlled by
of the flexor muscles and relaxation (-) of the extensor muscles so
 the somatic nervous system. In contrast, most physi-
that the limb is withdrawn from the painful stimuli. Simultaneously.
 ological and endocrine activities of the body require
the crossed-extensor reflex is also initiated, in which the extensors
and flexors on the contralateral side are stimulated and relaxed,
no conscious activity but are instead controlled auto-
respectively.
matically. These activities are generally essential to
 sustain life and include such activities as blood pres-
sure, heart rate maintenance, and control of blood
chemistry. These life-sustaining activities are con-
Crossed-extensor reflex
1
trolled by the autonomic nervous system, which coor-
 The crossed-extensor reflex is a polysynaptic reflex in
 dinates and integrates the visceral functions of the
which a signal is sent to the contralateral side of the
body. As originally proposed by Claude Bernard and
spinal cord to initiate an extensor reflex at the same
further developed by Walter Cannon, the concept of
time the withdrawal, or flexor, reflex is occurring on
homeostasis is largely controlled by the autonomic
the ipsilateral side (Fig. 10.23). As an animal with-
nervous system.
draws a limb in response to a noxious stimuli, it would
The somatic nervous system, or somatic motor
fall if it did not simultaneously support itself on the
 system, is under voluntary control and regulates the
 opposite leg. The crossed-extensor reflex immediately
contraction of skeletal muscle. In contrast, the auto-
allows the animal to support its weight on the contra-
nomic nervous system, or visceral motor system, is
lateral side as it shifts its weight off the ipsilateral side.
 generally not under voluntary control and controls
visceral effectors, including smooth muscle, cardiac
muscle, glandular tissue, and visceral reflexes.
Use of reflexes in diagnosis
There are some fundamental differences in the
arrangement of these two branches of the nervous
 Reflexes are routinely examined when assessing the
 system (Fig. 10.24). Efferent fibers in the somatic
nervous system. They provide a diagnostic tool at the
nervous system begin in the primary motor cortex and
site of a spinal cord, brain, spinal nerve, or cranial
travel either to cranial nerve nuclei located in the brain
nerve injury Muscle tone is tested by passively manip-
or to c-motor neuron cell bodies in the anterior horn
ulating a limb. This can provide an indication
of
of the spinal cord. From there, motor neurons exit the
whether the animal has hypotonia (less than normal
CNS and travel to skeletal muscles. Therefore, in the
muscle tone) or hypertonia (excessive muscle tone).
somatic nervous system, the cell bodies of the motor
Disease of the lower motor neurons, those motor
neurons are located within the CNS.
neurons with cell bodies in the brain stem or spinal
 Efferent fibers of the autonomic nervous system
cord, usually causes hypotonia, whereas hypertonia
generally originate in the hypothalamus and travel to
and spasticity are observed with diseases of the upper
either autonomic nerve nuclei in the brain or pregan-
motor neurons. Upper motor neurons are those
glionic neurons located in the anterior horn of the
 neurons with cell bodies in the CNS processing center.
spinal cord. The preganglionic neurons then leave the
When muscles are no longer innervated by the lower
spinal cord and synapse on postganglionic neurons
motor neurons, they begin to atrophy and lose tone.
located in autonomic ganglia located in the periphery.
282
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 10.3. Reflexes used in diagnostics.
Reffex
Stimuftus
 Afferent Nerves
 Spinat Segment
Efferent Nerves
Normaf Response
 Patellar
Lightly tap patellar 
 Femoral nerve
L3, La, Ls 
 Femoral
 Extension of knee
tendon
Tricep
Tap tricep tendon 
Radial nerve
CsC>,T, T2
Radial nerve
Extension of elbow
proximal to
 olecranon process
Bicep
 Place finger on distal
Musculocutaneous
Cs, Cs, Cz
Musculo-cutaneous
Flexion of elbow
ends of biceps and 
nerve
nerve
 brachialis muscles at
level of elbow; tap
finger with hammer
Flexor-pelvic limb
Painful stimuli (i.e..
Tibial, saphenous,
L4, Ls, S1
Tibial, saphenous,
Flex hip
 pinch base of toenail
femoral nerves
femoral nerves 
with hemostats)
Crossed-extensor
 Initiating flexer reflex
Regional spinal
Regional spinal
Regional spinal
If animal has upper
nerves
area
nerves
motor neuron disease,
extension of opposite
limb
Perineal
Noxious stimuli to
Sacral nerves
Sacrum
Sacral nerves
 Contraction of 
anus
 sphincter and flexion 
 of tail
Panniculus
Mild stimulation of 
 Regional spinal
 Regional spinal
Regional spinal
 Contraction of
hapter 10
 skin of trunk
 nerves
area
nerves
cutaneous trunci
 A. Somatic nervous system
B. Autonomic nervous system
These neurons are called pre- and postganglionic
neurons because they synapse on one another within
Spinal
 a ganglion located in the peripheral nervous system.
cord
 In contrast to the somatic nervous system, the cell
bodies of motor neurons of the autonomic nervous
Primarymotor
Hypothalamus
system are located outside of the CNS within auto-
cortex
nomic ganglia.
Innervation of target tissue by the autonomic
nervous system differs from that of the somatic
Autonomic
 ganglia
nervous system. Whereas somatic neurons innervat-
Skeletal muscle
Visceral effectors
structures such as an active zone, nerve endings of
autonomic neurons have only swellings called vari-
Fig. 10.24. Organization of the somatic and autonomic nervous
cosities and
  vesicles containing neurotransmitters
systems. (A) Motor commands for the somatic nervous system
(Fig. 10.25). Autonomic neurons can be highly
originate in the primary motor cortex. These efferent fibers then
branched with synaptic transmission occurring 
at
synapse either within the brain on nuclei for cranial nerves, or on
multiple sites along an axon terminal.
α-motor neurons within the spinal cord. The α-motor neurons,
whose cell bodies are within the central nervous system, exit and
travel to the skeletal muscle. (B) Motor commands for the
Overlap of somatic and autonomic functions
autonomic nervous system originate in the hypothalamus. These
efferent signals then travel to autonomic nuclei either in the brain
Both somatic and visceral sensory information can ini-
 or spinal cord where they synapse on preganglionic fibers. These
tiate a visceral reflex (Fig. 10.26). In other words, the
two systems work together to maintain homeostasis.
 autonomic ganglia located in the periphery where they synapse on 
 postganglionic fibers. The postganglionic fibers travel to the visceral
For example, if an animal suddenly feels cold, it may
effectors such as smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands.
activate the somatic nervous system to move to a
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system
283
subdivisions have opposing effects on most functions.
The sympathetic division, sometimes called the "flight-
or-fight"(
division, generally causes excitation and
 results in catabolism. This division is activated during
 periods of stress and exertion. The parasympathetic
division is responsible for rest, digestion, and anabo-
Vario
sities
lism (i.e., building phase of metabolism). Walter
 Cannon originally suggested that these two divisions
Sympathetic
Vesicles
ganglia
work in opposition and function at opposite times; in
fact, they are generally both active and work in con-
Postganglionic
junction to control motor systems.
sympatheticfiber
Included under the autonomic nervous system is
the enteric nervous system, sometimes called the
"little brain." Located within the walls of the digestive
Smooth muscle cells
tract, this extensive network of neurons is a largely
self-contained system consisting of the myenteric (or
Fig. 10.25. Sympathetic varicosities. Rather than embedding
within the smooth muscle cells, postganglionic sympathetic fibers
 Auerbach's) plexus and the submucosal (or Meiss-
running over smooth muscle cells have swellings along their length
ner's) plexus that controls digestive functions. While
called varicosities. Within the varicosities are vesicles containing
under normal circumstances the other branches of
norepinephrine.
 the autonomic nervous system influence the enteric
nervous system, if the digestive tract is deinnervated,
such as occurs during severe spinal injuries, the enteric
Higher Brain Functions
nervous system is able to maintain digestive func-
(Memory, learning, integrating sensory infomation)
tions. The enteric nervous system is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 17.
Sensory
Brain Motor Center
 processing in the
(Conscious and 
brain
subconscious)
Sympathetic division
The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
system allows that body to respond to emergency situ-
Somatic nervous
Autonomic nervous
 ations resulting from sudden changes in the internal
system
system
or external environment. It mediates an increase in
alertness, heart rate, blood pressure, metabolism, res-
 piration rate, sweating, piloerection, and mobilization
Somatic sensory
Visceral Effectors
 of energy within the body Simultaneously,it decreases
receptors
Skeletal muscle
(Smooth muscle,
cardiac muscle, glands)
activity of the digestive, urinary, and immune systems.
It causes an increase in blood flow to the skeletal
Fig. 10.26. Neural integration of the somatic and autonomic
muscles while decreasing blood flow to the visceral
nervous systems. The somatic and autonomic nervous systems can
organs.
simultaneously elicit various responses as a result of sensory
information.
In other words, the sympathetic nervous system
activates those systems an animal needs in order to
fight while inhibiting those systems not needed for
warmer location but may also activate a visceral reflex
fighting. If an animal is engaged in a fight, it needs
that causes vasoconstriction in the skin and piloerec-
increased blood flow to the skeletal muscles for
 tion in order to reduce heat loss. If an animal is running
increased muscular activity. Such blood flow comes at
hard, not only are neural inputs necessary to tell the
the expense of blood flow to the viscera. If an animal
skeletal muscles to contract, but visceral reflexes are
is shunting resources to fight, it does not need to be
necessary in order to increase blood flow to the skel-
 simultaneously digesting a meal; therefore, blood flow
etal muscles.
is shifted from the digestive tract to the skeletal muscle.
Divisions of the autonomic nervous system
Parasympathetic division
The  parasympathetic 
nervous system stimulates
The autonomic nervous system is subdivided into the
restful activities while inhibiting stress responses.
sympathetic and parasympathetic subdivisions. These
Therefore, it is active during nonstressful conditions.
 284 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
The parasympathetic nervous system promotes activi-
level, or they can travel rostrally or caudally before
ties such as digestion while simultaneously conserv-
synapsing. The unmyelinated postganglioric fibers
ing energy and decreasing blood pressure, heart rate,
 exit the sympathetic chain via the gray rami.
and respiration rate. Metabolic rate is decreased by the
The sympathetic preganglionic fibers innervating
parasympathetic nervous system, and the pupils are
the head exit the spinal cord from the first four tho-
constricted while the lens is allowed to become more
convex in order to accommodate for close vision.
Dorsal root
Dorsal root ganglia
Dorsal ramus
Anatomy of the autonomic nervous system
Sympathetic division
 The sympathetic division, also called the thoracolum-
Ventrali
bar division, exits the CNS from the thoracic and
ramus
 lumbar vertebrae. The preganglionic fibers have cell
Spinal nervef
bodies in the intermediolateral horn, sometimes called
Ventral root
Whiteramus
the lateral horns or visceral motor zones, of the spinal
Gray ramus
cord (Fig. 10.27). After leaving the spinal cord through
the ventral root, the preganglioric sympathetic fibers 
Fg. 10.27. Sympathetic chain and pathways. Preganglionic
enter the spinal nerve along with somatic motor
sympathetic fibers originate in the intermediolateral horn of the
fibers. Shortly thereafter, the sympathetic pregangli-
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. These fibers can follow three paths:
1. As shown in green, the fiber can enter the sympathetic chain via
onic fibers separate from the spinal nerve and pass
the white ramus and continue to a different level within the chain
through the white rami to enter the sympathetic chains
where it then synapses on a postganglionic fiber that leaves the
(paravertebral chain) lying on either side of the spinal
chain via the gray ramus. 2. As shown in blue, the preganglionic
cord. Therefore, the preganglionic fibers are short, and
fiber can enter the spinal nerve and synapse on a postganglionic
fiber in an outlying ganglion (prevertebral ganglion). 3. As shown in
 the postganglionic fibers are long.
red, the preganglionic fiber can enter the sympathetic chain and 
Upon entering the sympathetic chain, the myelin-
 synapse on a postganglionic fiber at the same level. (Figure
ated preganglionic fibers can either synapse at that
modified from Getty, 1964.)
Hair follicle
Sympathetic chain
Sweat gland
(paravertebral ganglia)
Peripheral
S
!Cy
blood vessel
Superior cervical
ganglia
 Celiac ganglia
Prevertebral
 Superior mesenteric ganglia 
ganglia
Inferior mesenteric ganglia
 Preganglionic fibers
 Postganglionic fibers
Fig. 10.28. Sympathetic (thoracolumbar) division of the autonomic nervous system. The preganglionic fibers of the sympathetic nervous
system originate in the lateral horns of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. The fibers exit and travel as shown in Figure 10.2 to outlying
sg suasaidai iA pue is in'i ' suesio jaiel ayi o aen pue elues SuAno ayi ui aeusuo siegy sjuouesisod ay1 elues
cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal vertebrae, respectively. (Figure modified from Getty, 1 964.)
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
285
racic segments (T1-T4), enter the sympathetic chain,
the adrenal medula is unique in that it consists
and ascend to the superior cervical ganglion, the most
of postganglionic cells of the sympathetic nervous
rostral extension of the sympathetic chain (Fig. 10.28).
 system. The preganglionic fibers are found in the tho-
These fibers stimulate the dilator muscles for the irises
racic splanchnic nerves that pass through the celiac
of the eye, inhibit nasal and salivary glands, and
ganglion without synapsing before reaching the
innervate the muscle that lifts the eyelids. These
 adrenal medulla. The postganglionic cells making up
responses are all typical of those observed during
 the adrenal medulla secrete norepinephrine and epi-
stress. Other fibers from the superior cervical ganglia
nephrine when stimulated.
innervate skin and blood vessels in the head, as well
as sending branches to the heart.
Prevertebraf gangfia
Parasympathetic division
The preganglionic fibers from T caudally pass through
The parasympathetic division, or craniosacral divi-
the sympathetic chain before synapsing in preverte-
sion, originates from brain stem nuclei and S-S4 of the
bral ganglia. Prior to reaching the prevertebral ganglia,
 sacrum (Fig. 10.29). The preganglionic fibers synapse
these fibers form nerves called splanchnic nerves
 on postganglionic fibers either on or near the target
(splanchnic = viscera) that include such nerves as the
organ (intramural ganglia). Therefore, the pregangli-
thoracic greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves;
 lumbar splanchnics; and sacral splanchnics. The pre-
ae siaa eisod an pe t are siaa o
short.
vertebral ganglia include the celiac ganglion and the
 The cranial outflow of the parasympathetic nervous
superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia. These ganglia
differ from the paravertebral chain in that they lie
system comes from four cranial nerves. These fibers
originate in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus, the oculo-
anterior to the vertebral column, are unpaired, and
occur only in the abdomen and pelvis. The postgan-
motor nerve (lll), the superior salivary nuclei associ-
 ated with the facial nerve (Vll), the inferior salivary
 glionic fibers from the prevertebral ganglia innervate
the Gl tract and its accessory organs, including the
nuclei associated with the glossopharyngeal nerve
(IX), and the dorsal vagal nucleus and nucleus ambig-
pancreas and liver. These fibers also innervate the
uous, both associated with the vagus nerve (X). The
kidneys, bladder, and genitalia.
oculomotor nerves are responsible for pupil constric-
tion and bulging of the lens as occurs during accom-
Pathways to the adrenaf medulffa
 modation when objects are moved closer in the field
Embryologically, the adrenal medulla and sympa-
of vision. The facial nerves stimulate secretory activity
thetic ganglia arise from the same tissue. Therefore,
from glands in the head such as the lacrimal and nasal
CY
Preganglionic fibers
Postganglionic fibers
Fig. 10.29. Parasympathetic (craniosacral) division of the autonomic nervous system. The preganglionic fibers of the parasympathetic
nervous system originate in the brain stem and sacral vertebrae. The fibers exit either as cranial nerves from the brain stem or spinal nerves
from the sacrum and project to outlying ganglia located on or near the target organ. The postganglionic fibers originate in the outlying
(intramural) ganglia and innervate the target organs. (Figure modified from Getty, 1964.)
286  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
glands  and mandibular and  sublingual  salivary
systems. Therefore, somatic neurons and all pregan-
glands. The glossopharyngeal nerves activate the
glionic neurons release ACh that acts at nicotinic
parotid salivary glands.
receptors. The binding of ACh to nicotinic receptors
The vagus nerves account for 90% of all pregangli-
always causes excitation of the effector cell. In auto-
onic parasympathetic fibers. They provide input to the
nomic ganglion, stimulation of the nicotinic receptors
neck and all viscera in the thoracic and abdominal
cavities. The vagus nerve mostly arises from the dorsal
tial in the postsynaptic neuron.
 motor nuclei in the medulla, with its fibers synapsing
 All cholinergic postganglionic fibers act at musca-
 on ganglia located on the target organ walls. These
rinic receptors. These include all parasympathetic
ganglia are not named, but instead collectively are
fibers as well as those sympathetic fibers innervating
called intramural ganglia, that is, "ganglia within the
sweat glands.
walls." After passing into the thorax, the vagus sends
branches to various nerve plexuses, including the
cardiac plexuses, the pulmonary plexuses, and the
Adrenergic fibers
esophageal plexuses supplying the heart, lungs, and
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers, except those
bronchi, and esophagus, respectively Upon reaching
innervating sweat glands, release norepinephrine.
the esophagus, fibers from the two vagus nerves inter-
 mingle and form the anterior and posterior vagal
The sympathetic postganglioric fibers in the adrenal
 medulla release both norepinephrine and epineph-
trunks.
 rine. There are two major classes of adrenergic recep-
 The prevertebral fibers from the sacral spinal cord
tors: alpha (o) and beta (β). Norepinephrine and
leave via the ventral roots and travel in the pelvic
epinephrine act at both types of receptors. Target
nerve to the pelvic ganglion plexus. These fibers inner-
organs can have one or both types of receptors. While,
vate the descending colon, bladder, and external
in general, activating c-adrenergic receptors causes
genitalia.
excitation and activating β-adrenergic receptors causes
hapter
inhibition, there are notable exceptions to these rules
because there are various subclasses of these classes
 Physiology of the autonomic nervous system
 of receptors. A summary of the actions of these recep-
tors is shown in Table 10.4.
Neurotransmitters and receptors
 Note that norepinephrine can have opposite effects
The major neurotransmitters in the autonomic nervous
on vasomotor tone, depending on the dose of neu-
system are ACh and norepinephrine. Postganglionic
rotransmitter (Fig. 10.30). When the dose of norepi-
neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system
nephrine or epinephrine is relatively low, it causes
release ACh and are thus called cholinergic neurons;
vasodilation in skeletal muscle. Such a response is
those of the sympathetic nervous system generally
 seen when an animal is alarmed or is experiencing a
release norepinephrine and are called adrenergic
flight-or-fight response in which there needs to be
fibers. The exception is sympathetic fibers innervating
 increased blood flow to skeletal muscle to support its
sweat glands, which release ACh.
increased metabolic activity. This effect is mediated by
 Both sympathetic and parasympathetic pregangli-
the neurotransmitters acting at β2-adrenergic recep-
 onic fibers generally release ACh that acts at nicotinic
tors. In contrast, the same neurotransmitters can cause
receptors to induce fast excitatory postsynaptic poten-
vasoconstriction when these neurotransmitters are
tials in postsynaptic cells.
administered at high doses, and the effect is mediated
by C-adrenergic receptors. This latter response is
observed only at dloses of neurotransmitters above
Cholinergic fibers
those present in vivo.
Acetylcholine can bind to two types of receptors called
nicotinic and muscarinic. These receptors were named
Other neurotransmitters
for pharmacological compounds that activate these
receptors and are thus called agonists. Nicotine, the
Acetylcholine can also evoke slow EPSPs and inhibi-
active ingredient in cigarettes, is the agonist for
-isod  (s) s odisod 
the nicotinic receptor; muscarine, which is found in
glionic neurons. These effects are mediated by
poisonous mushrooms, is the agonist at muscarinic
muscarinic receptors. The slow EPSPs occur when
receptors.
ACh causes the opening of Nat and Catt channels
 Nicotinic receptors are found at skeletal muscle
and the closure of M-type K+ channels. Since these
end plates, and in autonomic ganglionic neurons in
K+ channels are normally open at resting membrane
both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous
potentials, their closure results in depolarization.
 Neurotransmitter
Receptor Types
 Major Locations
Effect
Drugs Acting at
Medicaf Use
Receptor
Acetylcholine
Nicotinic
Neuromuscular
Skeletal muscle
Tubocurarine
Neuromuscular
(ACh)
(ganglion)
junction; all
contraction; excitation
(antagonist)
blocking agent
 ganglionic neurons,
of postganglionic cells
adrenal medullary
cells
Mucscarinic
M
 Autonomic nerve
Inhibit ACh and NE
Pirenzepine
Anti-ulcerogenic
terminals
release
(antagonist)
M2
Parasympathetic
Inhibits heart rate;
Atropine
Dilation of pupils
 input to heart and
excitation of smooth
(antagonist)
smooth muscle
muscle
M3
Glandular tissue
 Secretion from glands
Atropine
Reduce drooling
(antagonist)
during surgery
and Parkinson's
disease
Norepinephrine
Alpha
(NE): epinephrine 
C
 Most all
Vasoconstriction;
 Prazosin (antagonist)
(E)
Hypertension
 sympathetic target
constriction of organ
cells except heart
sphincters; dilation of
pupils
 Presynaptic nerve 
Inhibits norepinephrine 
Yohimbine
Delay ejaculation
as
release from nerve
(antagonist)
(autoreceptors);
terminal; promotes
blood platelets;
blood clotting;
 postsynaptic in CNS
 relaxation of digestive
tract smooth muscle
Beta
β
Heart and coronary
Increases heart rate
Isoproterenol
 Bronchiole
blood vessels;
and strength of 
(agonist)
dilator
kidney: liver;:
contraction; stimulates
adipose tissue
 renin release from
kidney
β2
 Most sympathetic
 Dilation of blood
Propranolol
Decrease blood
target cells
vessels and
(antagonist)
pressure
 bronchioles; stimulates
insulin secretion;
relaxes smooth muscle
of digestive and 
urinary tracts; relaxes
uterus when pregnant;
glycogenolysis
β
Adipose tissue
Stimulates lipolysis in
Clenbuturol
 Decrease lipid 
fat cells 
deposition 
Adensosine and
 Purinergic P,
 Autonomic effectors
Reduce autonomic
Theophylline
 Bronchodilator
ATP
response
(antagonist)
Purinergic P2
Smooth muscle
Fast and slow
 Pyridoxalphosphate-
responses to ATP
6-azophenyl-2',4"-
disulfonic acid
tetrasodium salt 
(antagonist)
Nitric oxide 
NO receptor
Smooth muscle,
Relax smooth muscle
 Glyceryl trinitriate
Induce coronary
(NO)
especially blood
and nitroprusside
vasodilation for
vessels
(generate NO)
eujgue
287
288  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
where the nerve ending is within 20nm of the target,
neuropeptide Y acts presynaptically to inhibit ATP
B2
and norepinephrine release. Sympathetic neurons can
Norepinephrine
odilation
also contain galanin and dynorphin along with neu-
ropeptide Y.
Receptors
Interactions of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
divisions
Both divisions of the autonomic nervous system inner-
vate most organs, with the two divisions having
 opposing effects. While both divisions are normally
α
Vasoconstriction
active, the effect on the organ is dependent on the rela-
tive activity of each division (Table 10.5).
Fig. 10.30. Adrenergic effect on blood vessels. Blood vessels have
both α, and β, receptors on their surface. Epinephrine and
norepinephrine have differential effect on blood vessel tone
depending on the concentration of the neurotransmitter. When the
concentration of these neurotransmitters is low, they stimulate the
Central nervous system control of the
β2-adrenergic receptors on the blood vessel walls, causing
autonomic nervous system
vasodilation. When the concentration is high, the primary effect is
due to stimulation of the α-adrenergic receptors, which causes
The two divisions of the autonomic nervous system
vasoconstriction.
         
nucleus of the solitary tract serves an important role
hapter 1
1
in this regard. It receives visceral input from cranial
 nerves Vil, IX, and X, and can then modulate auto-
 nomic functions in two ways. First, this nucleus proj-
ects to neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord,
The slow IPSPs result from opening K+ channels
forming circuits to control autonomic function. For
resulting in hyperpolarization.
example, visceral sensory information transmitted
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is frequently core-
 through this nucleus is used to regulate vagal motor
leased with norepinephrine at many postganglioric
control to the stomach and heart. Second, this nucleus
sympathetic neurons. ATP can act at ATP-gated ion
integrates autonomic functions with endocrine and
channels (P2 purinergic receptors) causing excitation.
behavioral responses largely through its interaction
In addition, adenosine, which is produced by the
with the hypothalamus.
hydrolysis of ATP, can act both pre- and postsynapti-
- p, a pn a sim sodq a
cally at P2 receptors. Adenosine reduces the release of
glion" of the autonomic nervous system. Early studies
norepinephrine and ATP from nerve terminals, par-
 on brain function found that stimulating or lesion-
ticularly after intense sympathetic activity.
ing the hypothalamus altered hypothalamic func-
Many neuropeptides are also coreleased with
tion. Recent studies have revealed that these effects
norepinephrine and ACh from autonomic neurons.
were due to interruption of ascending and descend-
Cholinergic preganglionic fibers may contain en-
  r  p s 
kephalins, neurotensin, somatostatin, or substance P.
 amus traveling between the cerebral cortex and basal
Cholinergic postganglionic fibers can also contain
forebrain.
calcitonin gene-related peptide and vasoactive intes-
The hypothalamus serves a role in regulating five
tinal peptide (VIP). Corelease of VIP may enhance
autonomic functions:
the effect of ACh since VIP causes vasodilation. For
example, when ACh causes salivary gland secretion,
 It regulates blood pressure and electrolyte compo-
VIP enhances blood flow to support the secretory
sition by controlling fluid and salt intake, thus
response.
maintaining blood osmolality and volume.
Noradrenergic postganglionic fibers may also
2
 It regulates body temperature by controlling the
release neuropeptide Y. At synapses where the nerve
ae p a oq rg rd ps
ending is more than 60nm from the target tissue, neu-
 either heat loss or heat production pathways.
ropeptide Y enhances both the purinergic and adren-
3.
It regulates energy metabolism by controlling
ergic component of the tissue response. At synapses
food intake, digestion, and metabolic rate.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
289
Table 10.5. Parasympathetic and sympathetic effects.
Target Organ
 Sympathetic Effects
 Eye (lris)
Constricts eye pupils
 Dilates eye pupils(αi)
Eye (ciliary muscle)
 Makes lens more convex for accommodation
No effect
Glands (nasal, lacrimal, salivary,
 Stimulates secretion
Inhibits secretion; causes vasoconstriction 
gastric, pancreas)
of blood vessels to glands
Sweat glands
No effect
Stimulates secretion via cholinergic fibers
Adrenal medulla
No effect
Stimulates NE and E secretion
 Arrector pili muscles
No effect
Contraction causing erection of hairs and 
goosebumps
Meart muscle
Decreases heat rate and strength of
Increases heart rate and strength of
contraction
contractions
Coronary blood vessel
Vasoconstriction
Vasodilation
Bladder/urethra
Contraction of bladder wall; relaxation of
Relaxation of bladder wall; constriction of
urethra sphincter; void urine
urethra sphincter; inhibits urine release
Lungs
Constricts bronchioles
Dilates bronchioles
 Digestive tract
Increases peristalsis and secretion of
Decreases digestive motility and secretion
digestive juices; relaxes sphincters
Liver
No effect
Epinephrine stimulates glycogenolysis
 Gallbladder
 Stimulates contraction
Inhibits contraction
Kidney
No effect
Vasoconstriction; decreased urine output;
increases renin formation
 Penis
Erection via vasodilation
Ejaculation
Vagina/clitoris
Erection via vasodilation of clitoris
Reverse peristalsis or contraction of vagina
Blood vessels
Vasodilation via production of nitric oxide
Constricts most vessels increasing blood 
pressure; dilates vessels in skeletal muscle,
heart, and bronchioles
 Blood coagulation
No effect
Increases coagulation
Cellular metabolism
No effect
Increases metabolic rate
 Mental activity
No effect
Increases alertness 
Adipose tissue
No effect
Stimulates lypolysis
4.
 It controls an animal's response to stress by regu-
from the visceral sensory system, the olfactory system,
lating adrenal function, blood flow to muscles,
and the retina. Information from the retina is used by
and immunological responses.
the suprachiasmatic nucleus to synchronize the inter-
5.
 I regulates reproductive functions, including
nal clock and control circadian rhythms. Pain informa-
 mating, pregnancy, and lactation.
tion is carried to the hypothalamus from the spinal
and trigeminal dorsal horns. In addition, the hypo-
The hypothalamus is well positioned to coordinate
thalamus contains sensory neurons that monitor tem-
 these functions since it receives sensory information
perature, osmolality, glucose, and sodium levels.
from most of the body, it is able to compare that infor-
Signals from the periphery, such as blood leptin or
mation with endogenous set points, and it can then
angiotensin II levels, are also able to reach the hypo-
 make appropriate adjustments via negative feedback
thalamus because of specialized structures called cir-
loops to maintain homeostasis. Regarding sensory
cumventricular organs, which allow peptides to cross
information, the hypothalamus receives direct input
the blood-brain barrier at these sites.
290  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Visceral reflexes
for firing the pacemaker cells in the SA node. The
Although the definition of visceral reflexes was
strength of contraction of cardiac muscle is also
decreased by ACh by decreasing the intracellular
discussed earlier, here we describe specific visceral
cAMP, thus reducing the L-type Ca+ current.
reflexes. Visceral reflexes control an array of auto-
nomic responses. Some responses are very rapid, such
as change in pupil size; others are relatively slow, such
Glandufar reffexes
as gastric secretions.
The parasympathetic nervous system stimulates gas-
trointestinal glands such as the nasal, lacrimal, and
gastric glands. Glands located in the upper Gl tract,
Ocular reflexes
particularly in the mouth and stomach, are more
The diameter of the pupil and the shape of the lens
strongly stimulated than those in the lower Gl tract.
 are controlled by the autonomic nervous system. Sym-
Glands in the lower part of the Gl tract are mostly
pathetic fibers originating from the superior cervical
under the control of the enteric nervous system. Sali-
 ganglia innervate the muscles controlling dilation of
vary glands are under both sympathetic and parasym-
the pupil; parasympathetic fibers innervate circular
pathetic control. Sympathetic input causes a viscous
muscles constricting the pupil. When excited, the
secretion high in amylase; parasympathetic input
 autonomic nervous system inhibits pupillary constric-
causes a watery secretion of higher volume.
tion while it stimulates pupillodilator muscles.
In general,  the sympathetic 
nervous system
decreases glandular secretions, while the parasym-
pathetic nervous system increases glandular secre-
tions. This is because the sympathetic nervous
Cardiovascufar reffexes
system generally decreases blood flow to glands. The
Arterial blood pressure is controlled by both cardiac
exception is sweat glands, in which the sympathetic
 output and resistance to blood flow. The sympathetic
nervous system increases sweating. Sympathetic
nervous system can increase heart rate, strength of
fibers to the sweat glands are cholinergic rather than
cardiac contraction, and peripheral resistance while
adrenergic.
 the parasympathetic nervous system can decrease
heart rate and peripheral resistance, although its effect
Gastrointestinaf reflexes
on peripheral resistance is less than that of the sym-
 pathetic nervous system.
The parasympathetic nervous system stimulates
Sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone is controlled by
gastric acid secretion, whereas the sympathetic
adrenergic neurons originating in the ventrolateral
nervous system inhibits such function. The enteric
medulla that innervate sympathetic vasoconstrictor
nervous system controls peristalsis. The presence of a
 preganglionic neurons. Stimulation of baroreceptors
bolus of food in the GI tract causes stretch in the gut
sends signals to the nucleus of the solitary tract, which
walls, generating sensory signals that synapse on
excites interneurons in  the caudal ventrolateral
interneurons within the gut wall. These interneurons
medulla leading to inhibition of vasomotor neurons
initiate a stimulatory motor signal to the circular
and excitation of vagal cardiomotor neurons. This
muscle layer rostral of the bolus while simultaneously
results in a decrease in blood pressure and heart rate.
causing inhibition of motor neurons of the circular
Norepinephrine is released from sympathetic fibers
muscle layer caudad of the bolus. In addition, the
innervating the heart and acts on the β-adrenergic
interneurons send signals resulting in stimulation of
receptors in the heart to increase heart rate and force
the longitudinal muscle layer caudad of the bolus
of contraction. It acts by increasing the production of
while inhibiting the longitudinal muscle layer rostral
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) that in turn
of the bolus.
opens long-lasting (L-type) Ca+ channels. Norepi-
nephrine also decreases the threshold for firing of
Urogenital reflexes
cardiac pacemaker cells (located in the sinoatrial [SA]
node), leading to increased heart rate.
Bladder emptying is generally under autonomic
Acetylcholine is released from parasympathetic
 control, although there can be some voluntary control.
fibers innervating the heart and acts on muscarinic
When the bladder is extended, there is a visceral
receptors in the SA and atrioventricular (AV) nodes of
sensory reflex in which parasympathetic postgangli-
cardiac muscle. This causes an increase in K+ conduc-
 onic neurons in the pelvic ganglion plexus promote
tance in these cells, which causes hyperpolarization of
contraction of the bladder. The sympathetic nervous
the SA and AV nodes, thus slowing transmission
system promotes the bladder's smooth muscle
through these sites. ACh also increases the threshold
relaxation.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
291
Chapter summary
biochemical pathway present in all cells that 
causes the cells to commit suicide.
The peripheral nervous system consists of sensory
2.
Cells can die by a process called apoptosis, or
receptors, nerves conducting impulses to and from
programmed cell death, which involves four
 the CNS, their associated ganglia, and motor endings.
 steps. The cell shrinks, the chromatin condenses,
the cell fragments into apoptotic bodies, and the
cellular remnants are phagocytized by macro-
Nerves and ganglia
phages or other such cells.
 In apoptosis, the loss of neurotrophic factors such
Nerves
as nerve growth factor decreases activity of the
MAP kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
A nerve is a collection of axons from many
pathways, resulting in an increase in reactive
neurons and is found in the peripheral nervous
 oxygen species. This leads to an increase in
system.
c-jun N-terminal kinases and phosphorylation of
Nerves are surrounded by a series of connective
c-jun protein. Then, there is an increased expres-
tissue layers. The epineurium is the outermost
sion of genes, including c-jun, cyclin Dl, and
layer, consisting of a dense network of collagen
c-fos, and a decrease in RNA and protein synthe-
fibers. The perineurium is the next innermost
 sis. There is a decrease in Bcl-2 family proteins.
layer, and it partifions the nerve into a series of
When damaged, Bcl-2 family proteins release
fascicles, each containing a bundle of axons. The
Apaf-1, which activates caspases (cysteine aspar-
innermost layer is the endoneurium that sur-
tate specific proteases). Caspases are a family of
rounds each individual axon.
over a dozen proteins that cleave cellular pro-
teins at aspartate residues.
Classification of nerves
Ganglia
Nerves carrying impulses toward the CNS are
Ganglia are collections of neuron cell bodies located
called sensory or afferent nerves, whereas those
 in the peripheral nervous system.
carrying impulses away from the CNS are motor
or efferent nerves.
Peripheral nerves can function within the auto-
Sensory receptors
2.
nomic (visceral) nervous system or somatic
nervous system.
Sensations are the awareness of a stimulus,
whereas perception involves the interpretation
of the sensation, and occurs in the CNS.
Spinal nerves
2.
All senses involve three steps: (l) a physical stim-
Nerves leaving the CNS are called either spinal
ulus, (2) transformation of the stimulus into a
nerves or cranial nerves. There is a pair of spinal
nerve impulse, and (3) a response to the sensa-
tion in the form of a perception or conscious
nerves exiting at each spinal segment.
Each spinal nerve has a dorsal and ventral root
experience of sensation.
2.
3.
 All sensory systems give four types of informa-
that enters and exits the spinal cord, respectively.
Near the spinal cord, the two roots merge.
tion about the stimulus, including modality.
forming a spinal nerve, which is a mixed nerve
location, intensity, and timing, which collectively
containing both afferent and efferent fibers.
yield sensation.
3.
 Each dorsal root has a swelling called the dorsal
Classes of sensory receptors
root ganglion, situated near the spinal cord,
which contains the cell bodies of the neurons
1.
There are five classes of sensory receptors:
running through the dorsal root.
mechanical, chemical, nociceptors (nocere = to
injure), thermal, and electromagnetic.
2
 Mechanoreceptors can detect touch, propriocep-
Degeneration and regeneration of nerves
tive sensation (muscle stretch or contraction), joint
1.
Neurons do die. It is believed that neurotrophic
position, hearing, and sense of balance. Chemo-
factors are responsible for keeping neurons alive.
receptors function in the sense of itches, taste, and
The presence of these factors suppresses a latent
smell. Nociceptors detect pain. Thermoreceptors
(Continued)
292
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
can sense either hot or cold while photoreceptors
Thermoreceptors
sense electromagnetic energy.
A：
 Thermoreceptors alter their firing rate as a result 
3.
These receptors can be further classified by
 Of changes in temperature.
location as exteroceptors, interoceptors, or
2.
 Thermoreceptors maintain a low, tonic firing rate
proprioceptors.
(2-5 spikes/s) at normal body temperature.
+
Exteroceptors are sensitive to stimuli outside the
3
There are separate cold and warm receptors
body. Located near the surface of the body, they
located in the dermis of the skin, skeletal muscles,
can detect touch, pressure, pain, and tempera-
liver, and hypothalamus.
ture, as well as special senses such as smell, taste,
vision, and auditory.
5.
 Interoceptors monitor the visceral organs and
Chemoreceptors
 their function. They monitor chemical and tem-
 Chemoreceptors are responsible for detecting
perature changes, as well as stretching within the
changes in concentrations of specific chemicals
viscera.
or compounds.
 Proprioceptors are restricted to those receptors
2
These receptors are also responsible for the
in muscles and joints that provide information
special senses of taste, smell, or olfaction. They
concerning the position of the bones and muscles.
are responsible for sensing irritating substances
on the skin, nutrients within the Gl tract or brain,
 or carbon dioxide or oxygen levels in our blood.
General senses
Detection of sensory stimuli
Mechanoreceptors
 When sensory receptors are stimulated, they
 Mechanoreceptors detect distortions in their cell
transform the stimulus into an electrical signal
hapter 1
membranes such as bending and stretching.
called a receptor potential. The amplitude and
2.
There are three classes of mechanoreceptors: (1)
duration of the receptor potential are related to
tactile receptors are responsible for the sensa-
the magnitude and length of time of the stimu-
tions of touch, pressure, and vibration; (2) baro-
lus. If the receptor potential is large enough to
receptors detect changes in pressure in the walls
 reach threshold, it is termed a generator poten-
of blood vessels, as well as the digestive, repro-
 tial, and causes an action potential to form in the
 ductive, and urinary tracts; and (3) propriocep-
 sensory neuron.
tors detect changes in the position of joints and
2
The process of converting the stimulus into
muscles.
a receptor potential is called stimulus trans-
3.
 The two principal tactile receptors located in the
 superficial skin layers are Merkel's discs and
duction.
Meissner's corpuscles. The two tactile receptors
found in the deep subcutaneous layers are the
Reflexes
 Pacinian corpuscle and the Ruffini ending.
 There are three groups of proprioceptors: (1)
 Reflexes are automatic, neural responses to spe-
muscle spindles detect the length of skeletal
cific stimuli. Reflexes work to preserve homeo-
muscles; (2) Golgi tendon organs, located at the
 stasis by making rapid adjustments that do not
junction between skeletal muscle and its tendon,
detect stretch of the tendons; and (3) receptors in
require conscious activity.
2
The neural path controlling a reflex is called a
joint capsules monitor the position of the body.
 reflex arch. The reflex arch begins with a sensory
and joint capsules are innervated with free nerve
receptor and ends with the effector.
endings that detect pressure, tension, and move-
3.
 There are four steps to a reflex arch: (a) stimulus
ment of the joint.
 activates receptor, (b) information processing. (c)
 activation of the motor neuron, and (d) response
of the peripheral effector.
Nociceptors
 Pain is mediated by nociceptors. These receptors
Classification of reflexes
respond to stimuli that can damage tissue.
Some nociceptors respond directly to stimuli,
 Reflexes can be classified based on their develop-
while others respond indirectly since they respond
 ment, site of information processing, or resulting
to chemicals released by damaged tissue.
motor response.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system
293
Development of reflex. Animals are born with
cord, and (d) stimulation of muscle contraction
some reflexes, termed innate reflexes, such
induced by the c-motor neurons.
as suckling. chewing. a withdraw reflex from
8.
Stimulation of the gamma motor neurons causes
painful stimuli, and tracking objects with the
the intrafusal fibers to contract at either end.
eyes. Other reflexes are called acquired reflexes
Since they are attached to the ends of the capsule,
such as salivation in response to the sound of
this causes the sensory endings to increase their
a bell.
firing rate because they sense stretch.
 Site of information processing. If the sensory
6
Gamma motor neuron loop. Stimulation of a
information is processed in the spinal cord, the
gamma motor neuron causes contraction of
reflex is called a spinal reflex (e.g., withdrawal
intrafusal fibers, which causes the muscle spindle
reflex). The processing of information in the
to detect stretch. The sensory endings in the
brain results in cranial reflexes.
muscle spindle detect the stretch, resulting in an
4.
 Resulting motor response. Reflexes that involve
 increased firing rate in the sensory neuron. This
the contraction of skeletal muscle are termed
information is transmitted back to the CNS
somatic reflexes, while those that involve smooth
where the sensory neurons synapse directly on
muscle, cardiac muscle, or glands are called vis-
the c-motor neurons going to the same muscle.
ceral reflexes.
Increased firing rate in the c-motor neuron
results in contraction of the muscle in order to
reduce the stretch in the muscle spindle.
Spinal reflexes
Monosynaptic reflex
Pofysynaptic refflexes
The stretch reflex, also called the myotatic reflex,
Tendon reflex. The tendon reflex, also called the
is the simplest reflex in the body, and it is an
inverse myotatic reflex or reverse myotatic reflex,
 example of a proprioceptive message involved in
functions to prevent tearing of tendons. Golgi
maintaining posture and muscle tone.
tendon receptors located within the tendons of
2.
 The stretch reflex is a monosynaptic reflex pro-
the muscle increase their firing rate in response
viding autonomic control of skeletal muscle.
to increased tension in the tendon. This signal
 The sensory mechanism involves the muscle
then causes inhibition of contraction of the
spindles, which are small, encapsulated sensory
muscle from which the signal initiated while
receptors located within skeletal muscle that
causing reciprocal activation of antagonist
provide information about the changes in length
muscles.
of the muscle.
Withdrawal reflex. The withdrawal reflex, also
3.
Anatomy of the muscle spindle. There are two
called the flexor reflex, allows for the immediate
types of muscle fibers within skeletal muscle:
withdrawal of a body part in response to painful
extrafusal muscle fibers that are found outside of
stimuli. A painful stimuli causes a sensory signal
the muscle spindle, making up the bulk of skel-
to be transmitted to the spinal cord where it
etal muscle, and intrafusal muscle fibersthat are
causes excitation of c-motor neurons going to
located within the connective tissue capsule that
flexors in that region while simultaneously inhib-
surrounds the muscle spindle and run parallel to
iting the extensors in the same region.
the extrafusal fibers.
3.
Crossed-extensor reflex. The crossed-extensor
4.
There are two types of sensory fibers: primary
reflex is a polysynaptic reflex in which a signal
is sent to the contralateral side of the spinal cord
5.
Gamma motor neurons innervate each intrafusal
to initiate an extensor reflex at the same time the
fiber, whereas c-motor neurons innervate the
withdrawal, or flexor, reflex is occurring on the
extrafusal fibers.
ipsilateral side. The crossed-extensor reflex
6.
 When a muscle is stretched, the intrafusal fibers
immediately allows the animal to support its
are also stretched, thus increasing activity in the
weight on the contralateral side as it shifts its
sensory endings.
weight off the ipsilateral side.
7.
The components of the stretch reflex include (a)
stretch of the muscle spindle, (b) activation of the
Use of reflexes in diagnostics
sensory neurons in the muscle spindle, (c) trans-
mission of the sensory signal to the c-motor
 Reflexes are routinely examined when assessing
neurons located in the dorsal horn in the spinal
the nervous system. They provide a diagnostic
(Continued)
294  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
tool at the site of a spinal cord, brain, spinal
cles while decreasing blood flow to the visceral
 nerve, or cranial nerve injury.
organs.
2.
 Table 10.3 gives examples of reflexes used in
diagnostics.
Role of the parasympathetic division
The parasympathetic nervous system stimu-
lates restful activities while inhibiting stress
Autonomic nervous system
responses. Therefore, it is active during non-
stressful conditions.
Overview
2.
 The parasympathetic nervous system promotes
 In contrast to conscious activities controlled by
activities such as digestion while simultaneously
the somatic nervous system, most physiological
conserving energy, and decreasing blood pres-
 and endocrine activities of the body require no
 sure, heart rate, and respiration rate. Metabolic
 conscious activity, but are instead controlled
rate is decreased by the parasympathetic nervous
automatically These life-sustaining activities are
system.
controlled by the autonomic nervous system that
coordinates and integrates the visceral functions
Anatomy of the autonomic nervous system
of the body.
2.
 The autonomic nervous system controls visceral
Sympathetic division
 effectors, including smooth muscle, cardiac
The sympathetic division, also called the thoraco-
muscle, glandular tissue, and visceral reflexes.
lumbar division, exits the CNS from the thoracic
Efferent fibers of the autonomic nervous system
and lumbar vertebrae.
generally originate in the hypothalamus and
travel to either autonomic nerve nuclei in the
2.
After leaving the spinal cord through the ventral
brain or preganglionic neurons located in the
root, the preganglionic sympathetic fibers enter
the spinal nerve along with somatic motor fibers.
anterior horn of the spinal cord. The pregangli-
 Shortly thereafter, the sympathetic preganglionic
 onic neurons then leave the spinal cord and
synapse on postganglionic neurons located in
through the white rami to enter the sympathetic
autonomic ganglia located in the periphery.
chains (paravertebral chain) lying on either side
 of the spinal cord. Therefore, the preganglionic
Divisions of the autonomic nervous system
fibers are short and the postganglionic fibers are
long.
 The autonomic nervous system is subdivided
3.
 The unmyelinated postganglioric fibers exit the
into the sympathetic and
parasympathetic
sympathetic chain via the gray rami.
subdivision.
2
The sympathetic division, sometimes called the
flight-or-fight division, generally causes excita-
Parasympathetic division
tion and results in catabolism. This division is
The parasympathetic division, or craniosacral divi-
 activated during periods of stress and exertion.
sion, originates from brain stem nuclei and S2-S4 of
 The parasympathetic division is responsible for
the sacrum. The preganglionic fibers synapse on
rest, digestion, and anabolism (i.e., building
 postganglionic fibers either on or near the target
phase of metabolism).
organ. Therefore, the preganglionic fibers are long.
and the postganglioric fibers short.
Rofe of the sympathetic division
The sympathetic division allows the body to
Physiology of the autonomic nervous system
respond to emergency situations resulting from
Neurotransmitters and receptors
sudden changes in the internal or external envi-
ronment. It mediates an increase in alertness,
The major neurotransmitters in the autonomic
heart rate, blood pressure, metabolism, respira-
nervous system are ACh and norepinephrine.
tion rate, sweating, piloerection, and mobiliza-
Postganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic
tion of energy within the body.
nervous system release ACh and are thus called
2.
Simultaneously, it decreases activity of the diges-
 cholinergic neurons while those of the sympa-
five, urinary, and immune systems. It causes
thetic nervous system generally release norepi-
an increase in blood flow to the skeletal mus-
nephrine and are called adrenergic fibers.
Peripheral and autonomic nervous system 
295
 Both sympathetic and parasympathetic pregan-
neurons. Cholinergic preganglioric fibers may
glionic fibers generally release ACh that acts at
contain enkephalins, neurotensin, somatostatin,
nicotinic receptors to induce fast EPSPs in post-
 or substance P. Cholinergic postganglionic fibers
synaptic cells.
can also contain calcitonin gene-related peptide
and VIP. Corelease of VIP may enhance the effect
Chofinergic fibers
of ACh since VIP causes vasodilation. For
example, when ACh causes salivary gland secre-
 Acetylcholine can bind to two types of receptors
tion, VIP enhances blood flow to support the
called nicotinic and muscarinic.
secretory response.
2.
Nicotinic receptors are found at skeletal muscle
end plates and in autonomic ganglionic neurons
Interactions of the sympathetic and
in both the parasympathetic and sympathetic
paraysmpathetic divisions
nervous systems. Therefore, somatic neurons
and all preganglionic neurons release ACh that
Both divisions of the autonomic nervous system
acts at nicotinic receptors.
 innervate most organs, with the two divisions having
3.
 All cholinergic postganglionic fibers act at mus-
 opposite effects. The effect on the organ is dependent 
carinic receptors. These include all parasympa-
on the relative activity of each division.
thetic fibers as well as those sympathetic fibers
innervating sweat glands.
Central nervous system control of the autonomic
Adrenergic fibers
nervous system
Postganglioric sympathetic fibers, except those
The two divisions of the autonomic nervous
 innervating sweat glands, release norepineph-
system are highly coordinated at the level of the
 rine. The sympathetic postganglionic fibers in
CNS.
 the adrenal medulla release both norepinephrine
 The hypothalamus serves a role in regulating
and epinephrine.
five autonomic functions:
2.
There are two major classes of adrenergic recep-
a.
It regulates blood pressure and electrolyte
tors: alpha (c) and beta (β). Norepinephrine and
composition by controlling fluid and salt
epinephrine act at both types of receptors.
intake, thus maintaining blood osmolality
3.
When the dose of norepinephrine or epineph-
and volume.
rine is relatively low, they cause vasodilation
b
 It regulates body temperature by controlling
 in skeletal muscle. Such a response is seen when
the set point for body temperature and acti-
an animal is alarmed or experiencing a flight-
vating either heat loss or heat production
 or-fight response in which there needs to be
pathways.
increased blood flow to skeletal muscle to sup-
 It regulates energy metabolism by control-
ling food intake, digestion, and metabolic
port its increased metabolic activity. This effect
is mediated by the neurotransmitters acting at
rate.
β2-adrenergic receptors. When these neurotrans-
d.
 In controls an animal's response to stress by
mitters are administered at high doses, they
regulating adrenal function, blood flow to
cause vasoconstriction mediated by C-adrenergic
muscles, and immunological responses.
receptors.
 It regulates reproductive functions including
mating, pregnancy, and lactation.
Other neurotransmitters
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is frequently
Visceraf reflexes
Visceral reflexes control an array of autonomic
ganglioric sympathetic neurons. Adenosine,
responses.
which is produced by the hydrolysis of ATP, can
act both pre- and postsynaptically at purine (P2)
Ocufar reflexes
 receptors. Adenosine reduces the release of nor-
epinephrine and ATP from nerve terminals, par-
The diameter of the pupil and the shape of the lens
ticularly after intense sympathetic activity.
are controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
 Sympathetic fibers originating from the superior
norepinephrine  and  ACh from  autonomic
cervical ganglia innervate the muscles controlling
(Continued)
296  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
dilation of the pupil, while parasympathetic fibers
2.
 In general, the sympathetic nervous system
innervate circular muscles constricting the pupil.
decreases glandular secretions, while the para-
 When excited, the autonomic nervous system inhib-
sympathetic nervous system increases glandular
its pupillary constriction, while it simulates pupil-
secretions.
lodilator muscles.
Gastrointestinaf reflexes
Cardiovascular reflexes
The parasympathetic nervous system stimulates
The sympathetic nervous system can increase heart
gastric acid secretion, whereas the sympathetic
rate, strength of cardiac contraction, and periph-
 eral resistance, while the parasympathetic nervous
nervous system inhibits such function. The enteric
nervous system controls peristalsis.
system can decrease heart rate and peripheral resis-
tance, although its effect on peripheral resistance is
less than that of the sympathetic nervous system.
Urogenitaf reffexes
Glandufar reflexes
control, although there can be some voluntary
 The parasympathetic nervous system stimu-
control. When the bladder is extended, there is a
lates gastrointestinal glands such as the nasal,
 visceral sensory reflex in which parasympathetic
lacrimal, and gastric glands. Sympathetic input
 postganglionic neurons in the pelvic ganglion plexus
 causes a viscous secretion high in amylase, while
promote contraction of the bladder. The sympathetic
parasympathetic input causes a watery secretion
 nervous system promotes bladder smooth muscle
of higher volume.
relaxation.
hapter 10
Kandel, E.R., J.H. Schwartz, and T.M. Jessell. 2000. Princi-
 Review questions and answers are available
 ples of Neural Science, 4th edition. McGraw-Hill, New
online.
York.
Riegel, R.J. and S.E. Hakola. 1996. Illustrated Atlas of
Clinical Equine Anatomy and Common Disorders of
References
the Horse, Vol. 1, Musculoskeletal System & Lameness
Disorders. Equistar Publication, Limited, Marysville,
Getty, R. 1964. Aflas for Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Iowa
Ohio.
State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Special senses
Contents
Olfaction: The Sense of Smell
297
Anatomy of the Eyeball
303
 Anatomy of Olfactory Receptors
297
 Physiology of Vision
306
 Physiology of Olfaction
298
Hearing and Balance
311
Olfactory Pathway
298
Anatomy of the Ear
311
Gustation: The Sense of Taste
298
Sound
313
Tongue
298
Physiology of Hearing
314
1
Taste
299
 Physiology of Equilibrium
314
Vision
301
Chapter Summary
316
Accessory Structures of the Eye
301
The special senses include smell, taste, vision, hearing.
plate of the ethmoid bone and extending along the
and equilibrium. Unlike the sense of touch that gener-
superior nasal concha and upper part of the middle
ally involves free nerve endings, special senses are
nasal concha. It consists of olfactory receptors, sup-
dependent on specific receptor cells localized in the
 porting cells, and basal stem cells.
head region of the animal.
Olfactory receptors are bipolar neurons (Fig. 11.1).
At their apical end, the dendrite forms a knob from
Olfaction: The sense of smell
which several long cilia project. These cilia lie flat on
the nasal epithelium and are covered with a thin
Both smell and taste are chemical senses involving
mucus layer produced by the supporting cells and
olfactory glands. Unlike other cilia, these remain sta-
chemoreceptors. Olfaction involves the detection of
tionary. At their basal end, the axon from the olfactory
volatile chemicals in solution.
receptors projects through the cribriform plate and
into the olfactory bulb.
Anatomy of olfactory receptors
 The supporting cells are columnar epithelial cells
surrounding the olfactory receptors. They provide
The olfactory epithelium is located in the roof of the
physical support and cushioning, nourishment, and
nasal cavity along the inferior surface of the cribriform
electrical insulation for the olfactory receptor cells.
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
298  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Olfactory pathway
To olfactory bulb
Olfactory foramina
The unmyelinated axons of the olfactory receptors
 constitute the first-order neurons, which pass through
Ethmoid bone
the numerous olfactory foramina in the cribriform
plate of the ethmoid bone. These axons collectively
form the right and left olfactory nerves (cranial nerve
Receptor cells<
I). They terminate on secondary neurons located within
the olfactory bulbs located just below the frontal lobes
of the cerebrum. Neurons from the olfactory bulb
Supporting cells 
extend posteriorly in the olfactory tract, projecting to
the lateral olfactory area in the temporal lobe. The
Mucous layer-
olfactory area is part of the limbic system. The olfac
tory neurons also project to the hypothalamus and
Ofactory cilia
other limbic areas, thus explaining how smell can
Fig. 11.1. Olfactory receptors. Olfactory receptor cells are
 evoke various memories and emotions.
interspersed among supporting cells. The olfactory cilia, embedded
in the mucous layer of the olfactory epithelia, detect odorants
causing the development of a receptor potential in the olfactory
Gustation: The sense of taste
cells. Axons project from the olfactory receptors forming the
olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I).
Tongue
The tongue is the muscular organ filling most of the
They also contain a yellow-brown pigment that gives
oral cavity. It is composed of interlacing bundles of
the olfactory epithelium a yellow tint.
 skeletal muscle fibers, and it is involved in gripping.
 Basal stem cells are found between the supporting
repositioning food, mixing food with saliva, and
 cells. They continually undergo cell division produc-
forming the compact mass of food called a bolus.
ing new olfactory receptors. The olfactory receptors
 The tongue has intrinsic and extrinsic muscles. The
live for approximately 1 month before dying and
intrinsic muscles confined to the tongue, and not
being replaced. This makes these neurons unusual,
attached to bone, run in several directions, allowing
since most neurons are long-lived and are not replaced.
the tongue to change shape as necessary for prehen-
Olfactory (Bowman's) glands are found in the con-
sion, moving food, and making sounds. The extrinsic
nective tissue that supports the olfactory epithelium.
muscles attach the tongue to bones of the skull and
These glands produce mucus that is carried to the
the soft palate. They allow the tongue to protrude,
surface of the olfactory epithelium and that dissolves
retract, and move side to side. The lingual frenulum
odorants, that is, chemicals that stimulate the olfac-
 attaches the tongue to the floor of the mouth.
tory hairs.
 The surface of the tongue is covered with small
 The facial nerve (cranial nerve Vll) innervates sup-
bumps called papillae (Latin for "bumps"; singu-
porting cells and olfactory glands. When these struc-
lar = papilla). Papillae are named for their shape. Fili-
tures are stimulated by certain chemicals, nerve
form papillae are thorn-shaped, giving the tongue
impulses in the facial nerve can result in stimulation
roughness and thus aiding in licking and manipulat-
 of the lacrimal glands in the eyes and nasal mucous
 ing food. They have a mechanical function. In the ox
glands. This can cause tearing and a runny nose.
and cat, they are heavily cornified. Fungiform papillae
are mushroom-shaped, scattered among the more
numerous filiform papillae, have taste buds, and
Physiology of olfaction
are thus mechanical and gustatory (Fig. 1l.2). Foliate
 papillae have a series of leaf-shaped ridges, are located
Odorants dissolve in the mucus membrane of the
on the lateral borders of the tongue, and have a gusta-
olfactory epithelium. They bind to protein receptors
tory function. They are absent in the ox. Vallate, or
 on the olfactory cilium membrane, stimulating G pro-
circumvallate, papillae are the largest and least numer-
teins and resulting in the activation of adenylate
ous. They are located in a V-shaped row near the back
cyclase. Adenylate cyclase then catalyzes the produc-
of the tongue. They resemble the fungiform papillae,
tion of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
but are circled by a cleft containing taste buds. Mar-
which causes Nat channels to open. The influx of Na+
ginal taste buds are found along the edge of the rostral
results in depolarization of the olfactory receptor and
portion of the tongue of newborn dogs, but they dis-
the production of a receptor potential.
appear when puppies switch to solid food.
Special senses
299
C
D
Fig. 11.2. Shape of papillae. (A) Filiform papillae, which are thorn-shaped. (B) Fungiform papillae, which are mushroom-shaped. (C) Filiate
papillae, which are leaf-shaped. (D) Vallate, or circumvallae papillae, which are similarly shaped to fungiform, but have clefts along the side
that contain taste buds.
Taste
Taste pore
Taste is an important sense in animals because it helps
differentiate nutritious feedstuffs from toxic materials.
Animals have innate preferences for certain flavors,
such as those that are sweet, while tending to reject
 Synaptic
vesicles
those that are unpleasant, such as bitter flavors. Each
 papilla has one to hundreds of taste buds. Taste buds
Dark taste cell
are also located in the palate, pharynx, epiglottis, and
upper third of the esophagus.
Each taste bud is gourd-shaped and consists of three
Intermediate taste cell
types of taste cells, called light, intermediate, and dark
Basal cell
Light taste cell
cells, as well as basal cells (Fig. ll.3). The different
/Gustatory afferent nerves
taste cells are believed to be either cells at different
 to sensory ganglion
stages of differentiation, with the lightest being the
Fg. 11.3. Taste bud. Each taste bud consists of three types of taste
most mature, or cells of different cell lineages. The
cells called dark, intermediate, and light cells. In addition, there are 
basal cells are thought to be stem cells for the taste
small, round basal cells located at the base of the taste bud. The
cells, which are short-lived. There is a small opening
basal cells are thought to be stem cells that produce taste cells.
at the surface of the epithelium called the taste pore.
Each taste cell has microvilli extending into the taste
pore. The microvilli are the only part of the cellexposed
 Until recently, it was generally believed that animals
to the oral cavity. Each taste cell is innervated by
had four primary tastes, including salty, sour, sweet,
sensory gustatory neurons. The space between the
and bitter. Recently, a fifth category was added, called
taste cells and sensory neurons appears to act as a
-ns sh hI 'ssudef u ,snoap, ure 'ruren
synapse. Taste cells are electrically excitable and
lated by monosodium glutamate. Foods can provide
have voltage-gated Na*, K', and Ca channels on
 a different taste by stimulating a varying combination
their surface.
 of these five tastes. In addition, volatile components
 300 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of feedstuffs stimulate the sense of smell that influ-
to activation of phospholipase C, an enzyme that cata-
ences the sense of taste.
 lyzes the synthesis of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3).
The binding of taste stimuli, called tastants, to extra-
 IP; causes the release of Ca from intracellular stores.
cellular receptors located on taste cells leads to depo-
Calcium then causes the release of the neurotrans-
larization of the taste cell either directly or indirectly
 mitter, which then stimulates the gustatory sensory
through the activation of second messengers. The
neurons.
receptor potential induced by depolarization allows
the influx of Cat+ through voltage-gated Cat+ channels.
Bitter taste
This leads to the release of a neurotransmitter, whose
identity is unknown, at the synapse with the sensory
Bitter taste, often associated with toxic compounds, is
 gustatory neuron. This neurotransmitter causes exci-
elicited by divalent cations, some amino acids, and
tation in the sensory neuron.
alkaloids. Some bitter-tasting compounds (such as
quinine) are membrane permeable, while others (such
as denatorium) are not, suggesting multiple mecha-
Sweet taste
nisms for transduction. The mechanisms for bitter
Sweet taste is initiated by the binding of sweet tastants
taste appear similar to those for sweet tastes (Fig.
 to receptors. There are two mechanisms for transduc-
11.5). Denatorium causes the increase in intracellular
ing sweet taste stimuli (Fig. 11.4). In the first, the
calcium through an IPs-dependent mechanism. Other
binding of sweet tastants to specific receptors activates
 bitter compounds activate gustducin that stimulates
a G protein, called gustducin, which activates adeny-
taste cell phosphodiesterase reducing intracellular
lyl cyclase, causing the formation of cAMP in the cyto-
cAMP and cGMP levels. Knockout mice, in which the
plasm. The cAMP then activates protein kinase A,
gustducin gene has been deleted, are insensitive to
which phosphorylates K+-selective ion channels located
selected bitter tastes. Some bitter compounds are also
 on the basolateral membrane of the taste cells, causing
thought to bind directly to K'-selective ion channels
them to close. The cAMP-dependent closure of K+
blocking them. This prevents the movement of K+ out
channels results in depolarization of the taste cells,
of the cell, thus causing depolarization and release of
leading to the release of the neurotransmitter that
the neurotransmitter.
excites the sensory neuron. In the second mechanism,
sweet tastants cause production of G proteins, leading
1. Salty
2. Sour
Na+
OH+
1.
Sweet
K
G-proteir
 Neurotransmitter
3. Bitter
ME
release
Inactivated
Activated
K+
PKA
PKA
2.
G-proteir
PDE
G- protein
PLC
CAMP
AMP
IP2
PLC
GMP
G-protein
CGMP
Neurotransmitter 
IP3
→Ca
Fg. 11.5. Salty, sour, and bitter taste. (1) Salty taste is elicited by
release
cations, primarily Na*, which enter through a Na*-selective ion
Fig. 11.4. Sweet taste. There are two mechanisms for sweet taste.
channel that can be blocked by amiloride. The entry of Nat causes
(1) A sweet tastant binds to a specific receptor inducing the
depolarization of the taste cell and release of the neurotransmitter,
formation of a G protein that activates adenylyl cyclase (AC), thus
which causes excitation in the gustatory neurons. (2) Sour taste is
causing the formation of cAMP. The cAMP activates protein kinase
caused by the entry of H+ ions that permeate amiloride-sensitive 
A (PKA) which then closes membrane-bound K+-channels, thus
Nat channels; this leads to depolarization of the cell because the
causing depolarization of the taste cell. This allows voltage-gated 
cell cannot distinguish between Nat and H+. Sour taste can also be
Ca# channels to open, and Cat+ enters the cell, causing the release
elicited by H+ binding to and blocking Kt-selective channels,
of the neurotransmitter that excites the gustatory sensory neurons.
preventing the movement of K+ out of the cell. (3) Bitter taste is
(2) G proteins activate phospholipase C (PLC), which catalyzes the 
caused by either increasing intracellular calcium through an
formation of 1,4,5-triphosphate (IPs). IP3 causes the release of
IP3-dependent mechanism, or by activating the G-protein gustducin
 calcium from endogenous stores in the endoplasmic reticulum. Ca##
that stimulates taste cell phosphodiesterase (PDE), thus reducing
then causes the release of the neurotransmitter.
intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels.
Special senses
301
Salty taste
voltage-gated Catt channels to open, causing depolar-
 ization that triggers neurotransmitter release. The
Salty taste is mostly caused by the cation Na*. Taste
 second mechanism entails glutamate binding to a G
cells sensitive to salt have a Nat-selective ion chan-
protein-coupled receptor,  probably resulting  in a
nel that can be blocked with amiloride (Fig. 1l.5).
decrease in intracellular cAMP levels.
This amiloride-sensitive channel is different from the
voltage-gated sodium channels responsible for the
upstroke of the action potential. Instead, this channel
Taste pathway
is not voltage sensitive, and remains open all the time.
When an animal consumes feedstuffs high in sodium,
Information from taste buds in the anterior two-thirds
this increases the Nat concentration outside the salt-
of the tongue and on the palate travel in the chorda
sensitive taste cell, and Na+ then moves down its con-
tympani, a branch of the facial nerve (cranial nerve
centration gradientinto the cell,causing depolarization.
Vll). Signals from the taste buds in the posterior third
of the tongue are carried via the glossopharyngeal
Sour taste
 nerve (IX). Taste buds on the epiglottis and esophagus
are innervated by the vagus (cranial nerve X). Fibers
The sour taste is caused by the acidity of the feedstuff.
carrying this information enter the solitary tract in the
The higher the H ion concentration, the more sour the
medulla and enter the gustatory area of the nucleus
 flavor. The H+ ions can affect the sour taste receptors
of the solitary tract. Second-order fibers then ascend
in two ways. First, H+ can permeate amiloride-sensitive
to the thalamus, synapsing in the parvocellular region
 Na+ channels, which leads to depolarization of the cell
of the ventral posterior medial nucleus. This area then
since the cell cannot distinguish between Nat and Ht.
 projects to the area along the border between the ante-
Second, H+ can bind to and block K+-selective channels,
rior insula and frontal operculum in the ipsilateral
 preventing the movement of K+ out of the cell(Fig 11.5).
cerebral cortex. Note that this pathway does not cross
 to the contralateral side.
Umami
Since amino acids are a major part of dietary intake, it
should come as no surprise that animals have a taste
Vision
for amino acids. Studies with glutamate and aspartate
show at least two pathways for this taste. Glutamate
Vision is a major sensation in many animals. This is
can activate an ion channel, allowing Na+ and Cat to
reflected in the large number of receptors within the
enter the cell (Fig. ll.6). This inward current causes
eye and the large percentage of the cortex that is
devoted to vision. Vision is particularly important in
birds. Although the eyes make up only about 1% of
1. Metabotropic glutamate receptor
the weight of the head in humans, they make up
approximately 15% in a starling.
-0101
Accessory structures of the eye
PKA
The accessory structures of the eye include the eyelids,
eyelashes, eyebrows, lacrimal (tearing) apparatus (Fig.
2. lonotropic glutamate receptor
11.7), and extrinsic muscles of the eye.
Cat+/Na+
Eyelids, eyelashes, and eyebrows
The upper and lower eyelids, or palpebrae, cover the
Neurotransmitter
release
 eye during sleep, protect the eye from excessive light
 and foreign objects, and assist with lubricating the eye
Fig. 11.6. Umami taste. There are two proposed umami pathways:
(1) The first involves a glutamate binding to a receptor which
(Fig. 11.8). The layers of the eyelid consist of the super-
activates a G protein (i.e., a metabotropic receptor). The activated
ficial epidermis, dermis, subcutaneous tissue, fibers of
G protein causes a decrease in cAMP levels, resulting in a decrease
the orbicularis oculi muscle, a tarsal plate, tarsal
 in the activation of phosphokinase A (PKA), and thus a decrease in
glands, and conjunctiva. The tarsal plate is a fold of
the metabolic pathway downstream. (2) The second pathway involves
connective tissue giving support to the eyelid. Embed-
an ionotropic receptor in which glutamate interacts with a receptor
 on the taste bud surface causing the influx of Nat and Catt. The
ded in the tarsal plate is a row of sebaceous glands
resulting depolarization results in neurotransmitter release.
called the tarsal, or Meibomian, glands. They secrete
302
2 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Palpebral
A
B
commissures
Superior
lacrimal
Lacrimal 
Medial
Lateral
punctum
lake
Cilia
 Superior
eyelid
Pupil
Lacrimal
caruncle
Iris
Inferior
eyelid
Cornea
Inner 
Third
lacrimal 
eyelid
punctum
 aul jo aa pue spias (g) snenedde ieel pue aa aui jo adse jeiuoiy () re aui ui ala aul jo sannns ieunaxi -z'tl 
(Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Chapter
Medial
Lateral
Lens Iris commissure carunde
 Superior eyelid
Inner eyelid
Lateral palpebral
commissure
Lateral puncta
Fig. 11.8. Front view of the eye of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
fluid that helps prevent the eyelids from adhering
The gap between the two eyelids is the palpebral
from one another. The conjunctiva is a thin, protective
fissure. At either corner of the eyelid is the lateral and
mucous membrane consisting of stratified columnar
 medial commissure, respectively. A small, reddish
epithelium with goblet cells and areolar connective
elevated area found in the medial commissure is the
tissue. It lines the inside of the palpebrae and the
lacrimal caruncle. It contains both sebaceous (oil) and
anterior surface of the eyeball, excluding the cornea.
sudoriferous (sweat) glands.
Special senses
303
Lacrimal gland
Superficial gland
 of the third eyelid
Lateral palpebral commissure
Cartilage of
third eyelid 
 Superior lacrimal puncta 
Lacrimal gland
Lacrimal caruncle
Lateral palpebral lig./canthral tendon -
Medial palpebral lig/canthal tendon
Lateral angle of the ey
Inferior lacrimial puncta
Pupil
Third eyelid
 Superficial gland
of the third eyelid
Fig. 11.9. Eye and accessory structures of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Domestic species have a nictitating membrane or
fhuid contains water, salts, mucus, antibodies, and
third eyelid (Fig. 11.9). This fold of mucous membrane
lysozyme. This fluid protects, lubricates, and moistens
 arises from the ventromedial border of the eye. At its
the eyeball. The moisture seen on the nose of domestic
base is a serous gland called the gland of the third
animals is largely lacrimal fluid.
eyelid.
Located at the margin of the eyelids are the cilia
(eyelashes). Located above each eyelid are the eye-
Extrinsic eye muscles
brows. Both structures help keep foreign objects, per-
Movement of the eyeball is controlled by six striated
spiration, and direct sunlight out of the eye. Located
muscles called extraocular muscles, in contrast to
at the base of the hair follicles of the eyelashes are
 intraocular muscles located within the eyeball (Fig.
sebaceous ciliary glands that release a lubricating
11.10). The lateral and medial rectus muscles move the
fluid. Infection of these glands is a sty.
 eye laterally and medially, respectively. The superior
rectus and inferior rectus muscles elevate and depress
Lacrimal apparatus
the eye, respectively. The inferior oblique muscle ele-
vates and furns the eye laterally, while the superior
 The lacrimal apparatus (Fig. 11.9) consists of a group
 oblique depresses and turns the eye laterally.
of structures that produce and drain tears (lacrimal
fluid). Lacrimal glands, located in the dorsolateral
portion of the orbit, secrete lacrimal fluid through
Anatomy of the eyeball
excretory lacrimal ducts that empty onto the surface
of the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid. The fluid moves
The receptors for vision reside within the eyeball. The
over the anterior surface of the eye and enters two
eyeball consists of three layers: (1) fibrous tunic, (2)
d ramn p rn a  sdo s
vascular tunic, and (3) retina (Fig. 11.11).
near the medial corner called the lacrimal puncta.
From there, the fluid enters the lacrimal canals, two
Fibrous tunic
 ducts leading into the lacrimal sac. The nasolacrimal
duct carries fluid from the lacrimal sac into the nasal
The fibrous tunic, or external coat of the eyeball, is avas-
cavity just below the inferior nasal concha. Lacrimal
cular and consists of the anterior cornea and posterior
304  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
LevatorpalpebraesuperiorisM
Dorsal rectus M.
Trochlea
Trochlea
 Superior
Dorsal oblique M
eyelid
Retractor bulbi M.
Lateral rectus M
Lateral
Scleral groove
Medial
rectus M.
rectus M.
Cornea
Optic
Sclera
nerve
Ventral
cblique M
Ventral rectus M.
Retractor
bulbi M.
Ventral oblique M
Fig. 11.10. Muscles of the eye of the dog. The left drawing shows the lateral aspect of the eye while the right drawing shows the posterior
aspect of the eye. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Levator palpebrae
Lacrimal gland   superioris M.
Upper fornix
Upper tarsus
Ciliary body
Bulbar conjunctiva
 Ora serrata
Corneal limbus
Retina
 Choroid
Upper (superior)
Sclera
eyelid
Tarsal glands.
Ciliary zonule
Sebaceous
T
glands (Zeis)
tapter
Cilia
senstautu
_ens
Palpebral
Disc of the
conjunctiva
optic N.
Optic N.
Lower (inferior)
eyelid
Third eyelid
(plica semilunaris)
Cribriform area
Cartilage of the ^
of the sclera
 third eyelid 
Vitreous chamber 
of the eyeballfilled
 Superficial gland
Conjunctivalwith vitreous body
of the third eyelid 
lymphonodules
Fig. 11.11. Median section of the eye of a dog. M, muscle; N, nerve. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the
publisher.)
opaque sclera. The cornea is a transparent layer cover
is located at the junction of the sclera and cornea.
ing the iris, the colored portion of the front of the eye.
Aqueous humor drains into this sinus.
The cornea is curved and therefore helps bend light
toward the retina. The cornea consists of three layers.
Its outer layer consists of nonkeratinized stratified
Vascular tunic
squamous epithelium, the middle layer consists of col-
The vascular tunic, or uvea, is the middle layer of the
lagen fibers and fibroblasts, and the inner layer is
eyeball. It consists of three parts: choroid, ciliary body.
 simple squamous epithelium. The sclera covers the
and iris. The choroid is the highly vascularized, dark
entire outside surface of the eye with the exception of
 brown, posterior portion of the vascular tunic, lining
the cornea. It consists of dense connective tissue and
the majority of the inside of the sclera. Its brown
provides rigidity, helping to maintain the shape of the
 pigment is produced by melanocytes, and helps absorb
eyeball. The scleral venous sinus (canal of Schlemm)
light so that it is not scattered throughout the inside
Special senses  305
 of the eye. The choroid is incomplete where the optic
stimulates the photoreceptors found close to the
nerve exits the posterior of the eyeball.
pigmented layer. This generates signals that travel
 Many species of domestic animals, including cats,
dogs, horses, and ruminants, have an additional layer
 a o a s r  y p
in the choroids called the tapetum lucidum. This
cells. Interspersed among these cells are two other
causes the animal's eyes to appear to glow when
types of neurons: horizontal cells and amacrine cells.
shined with a light. The tapetum lucidum reflects light
These latter neurons form lateral connections that
back toward the retina so that the animal can see in
 modify signals along the photoreceptive pathway.
low light.
Axons from the ganglion cells collectively form the
In the anterior, the choroid becomes the ciliary body
 optic nerve, which exits the eye at the optic disc. Since
that extends from the ora serrata, the serrated front
the optic disc lacks photoreceptors, it is also called the
margin of the retina, to just posterior of the junction
blind spot. The blind spot normally is not apparent
 of the sclera and cornea. It consists of the ciliary pro-
since the brain "fills in" information from this area.
However, you can demonstrate its presence to your-
folds of tissue containing capillaries that secrete
self by covering your right eye and gazing at the plus
aqueous humor. Extending from the ciliary processes
sign below. As you move the position of the book
to the lens are zonular fibers (suspensory ligaments).
closer or farther from your eye, you will see the large
The ciliary muscles are a bundle of smooth muscles
dot disappear:
that alter the shape of the lens in order to allow for
near or far vision.
+
The iris is the colored portion at the front of the
eyeball that is shaped like a disc with a hole, the pupil,
There are two types of photoreceptors: rods and
in the center. The color of the iris is controlled by its
cones. Rods outnumber cones 20:1—except in birds,
number of pigmented cells. A large number of pig-
which have more cones than rods. Rods have a low
mented cells results in a brown color; a low number
light threshold, and therefore are effective in dim light,
results in a blue color. The shape of the pupil can vary.
allowing for the perception of only shades of gray.
It can be round, elliptical, or slitlike. Cats have an
Cones have a higher threshold for light and provide
1
elliptical pupil that opens and closes faster than round
for color and high acuity vision.
pupils.
 The macula lutea is an oval region found in the
The iris lies between the cornea in front and the lens
exact center of the posterior of the retina. It contains
in back, and is attached to the ciliary processes. Con-
mostly cones. At its center is a small pit, the central
 sisting of circular and radial smooth muscle fibers, the 
fovea, which contains only cones and where the
ciliary process regulates the amount of light entering
bipolar and ganglion cells are displaced to the sides.
the eye. Parasympathetic signals stimulate the circular
Therefore, light passes unimpeded to the cones. The
muscles to contract during bright light and close
density of cones in the retina decreases moving from
vision, causing the pupil to constrict. During dim light
the macula toward the periphery. Since the central
or distant vision, sympathetic signals stimulate the
fovea has a high concentration of cones, this is the
radial muscles to contract, causing the pupil to dilate.
region of the eye with the greatest visual acuity (sharp-
o pqo  so   1 o  g 55
the fovea to generate greater detail.
Retina (the sensory tunic)
 The avian retina is avascular, and contains a unique
The innermost layer of the eye is the retina, which
 structure called the pecten. This is a black pigmented
lines the posterior portion of the eyeball. The retina
structure extending from the ventral retina up to just
pe rt paid rano te sia oml jo sisis
above the area where the optic nerve exits. It is made
an inner neural layer The pigmented layer is a one-
of blood vessels and pigmented stromal cells, and is
cell-thick layer of melanin-containing epithelial cells,
thought to serve a nutritive function.
similar to the choroid. These cells also act as phago-
cytes and store vitamin A.
Lens
The neural layer of the retina is multilayered, and
grows direcly out of the brain during embryonic
The lens is a biconvex, transparent, avascular struc-
development. It has three major layers: the photore-
ture that can change its shape in order to focus light
ceptor layer, the bipolar cell layer, and the ganglion
on the retina. Located behind the iris, the lens is held
cell layer (Fig. l1.12). The outer and inner synaptic
 in place by the suspensory ligament attaching it to the
layers separate these layers from each other. Before
choroid process.
reaching the photoreceptor layer, light must first pass
The lens, enclosed in a thin, elastic capsule, consists
 san  roda pre u a yn
of two regions: lens epithelium and lens fibers. The
 306 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Choroid
Nuclei of
Pigmented 
rods and 
layer of retina
cones
Pigmented 
Outer segments 
layer of retina
of rods and cones
Horizontal
cell
Axons of
Rod-
 ganglion cells
Cone
Nuclei of
Nuclei
 ganglion
 of bipolar
cells
cells
Bipolar cells
Amacrine cells
Ganglion cells-
Pathway
of light 
Fig. 11.12. Microscopic anatomy of the retina. Copyright @ 2004 Pearson Education. Inc. publishing as Benjamin Cummings.
lens epithelium consists of cuboidal cells located on
like substance. The vitreous humor pushes the retina
the anterior surface of the lens. These cells differenti-
 against the pigmented layer of the choroid, allowing
ate into the lens fibers that form the bulk of the lens.
the retina to receive a clear image. Unlike aqueous
Arranged like layers of an onion, lens fibers are anu-
humor, the vitreous humor forms during embryonic
clear and contain few organelles. Lens fibers are made
development and lasts a lifetime. Running through
of folded proteins called crystallins.
the center of the vitreous humor from the lens to the
 optic disc is the hyaloid canal, a narrow charnel that
Chambers of the eye
is occupied by the hyaloid artery during fetal develop-
ment. Occasionally, debris called vitreous floaters are
The lens divides the eye into the anterior and posterior
visible within the vitreous humor. Such debris may
segments. The iris subdivides the anterior segment
cast a shadow on the retina.
into the anterior chamber, located between the cornea
 and iris, and the posterior chamber, located between
the iris and lens. The anterior segment is filled with
Physiology of vision
aqueous humor. It is a clear, watery fluid similar in
composition to plasma, which nourishes the lens and
The eye can be likened to a camera. The image of an
cornea. Aqueous humor is continually derived as a
object is focused on the retina by the lens, and the
filtrate from the capillaries of the ciliary processes
amount of light entering the eye is controlled by
entering the posterior chamber. It flows forward
the pupil. The retina, lens, and pupil are analogous
through the pupil of the iris into the anterior chamber.
 to the film, lens, and aperture of the camera, respec-
From there, it drains into the venous blood via the
tively. Three processes are important in the formation
schleral venous sinus (canal of Schlemm).
of a clear image: refraction, accommodation, and pupil
Normally produced and removed at the same rate,
diameter.
aqueous humor, along with the vitreous humor dis-
cussed below, maintains the intraocular 
r pressure.
Refraction
However, if the drainage of aqueous humor is blocked,
 intraocular pressure increases, causing compression of
      sd s  
the retina and optic nerve. This can lead to glaucoma
a different density, the speed of light changes. As a
 and blindness.
result, the light rays are bent, or refracted (Fig. 1l.13).
The posterior segment of the eye is the larger of the
For example, when light rays move from air into
two segments. It contains vitreous humor, a clear gel-
water, light rays are bent at the interface of the two
Special senses
307
 is, more rounded, which increases its focusing power,
Air
 causing greater bending of the light rays.
 In addition to the accommodating mechanisms
Light rays
described above, some species of birds possess a static
Watel
bending at
mechanism allowing them to keep objects in focus
 air-water
regardless of their distance. This is accomplished from
 interface
asymmetries in the eye, allowing it to be emmetropic
(i.e., light rays focus directly on the retina) in its upper
 A. Refraction of light rays
portions, while becoming increasingly myopic (i.e.,
Nearly parallel light rays
nearsighted) toward its lower portions. This allows a
bird to keep objects in the horizon in focus in the
upper portion of the eye while simultaneously keeping
Lens
nearer objects in focus in the lower portion of the eye.
 Horses appear to have a limited accommodating
B. Accommodation of far object
ability due to weak ciliary muscles. To compensate,
horses have a ramp retina in which the distance
 Divergent light rays
between the lens and the retina varies from dorsal to
ventral positions. This allows horses to use a form of
static accommodation in which they move their head
Cornea
to focus an object at different locations on the retina,
C. Accommodation of close object
depending on the distance of the object from the eye.
Fig. 11.13. Refraction of light rays. (A) Refraction of light rays at
 The far point of vision is that distance beyond which
the interphase between air and water. (B) The refraction of light in
no accommodation (no change in lens shape) is neces-
order to focus a far object on the retina. (C) Note the more spherical
sary for focusing. The near point of vision is the closest
shape of the lens necessary to focus a near object on the retina.
point at which the animal can focus clearly. It is the
point of maximum accommodation of the lens. This
s   s am  s  
1
mediums. With respect to the eye, light rays are
 refracted, or bent, at the anterior and posterior sur-
Refraction probfems
faces of both the cornea and lens. Approximately 75%
of the refraction occurs at the interphase with the
A normal eye is said to be emmetropic. As animals
cornea. Note that images are inverted, both upside
 age, the lens loses its elasticity, and therefore its ability
down and backward, as they are focused on the retina.
to accommodate, a condition called presbyopia. When
an animal can see close objects but distant objects are
 blurred, it is called myopia or nearsightedness. It
 perceived as inverted.
 occurs because the eyeball is too long relative to its
focusing power, and therefore distant objects are
Accommodation
focused in front of the retina (Fig. 11.14). In hypermy-
In the eye, the angle at which the light rays are bent
opia, also called hyperopia or farsightedness, the
depends on the shape of the lens. The more convex
animal can see distant objects but is unable to focus
the lens, the greater the degree to which light rays are
near objects because the eyeball is too short. Therefore,
bent. As an object is moved closer to the lens, the light
there is not enough accommodating power to focus
rays must be bent at a greater angle in order to focus
the light rays of a near object, and the animal instead
the image on the retina. The process of increasing the
focuses at a point behind the retina. An irregular
refractive power of the lens is called accommodation.
curvature in either the lens or cornea results in
Therefore, as an object moves closer to the eye, the
astigmatism.
lens must become more rounded, that is, made more
convex, in order to focus the image on the retina.
Pupil diameter
Accommodation is accomplished by the actions of
the ciliary muscle. When the ciliary muscle is relaxed,
The amount of light that can enter the eye is controlled
the zonular fibers surrounding the lens pull on the
by the diameter of the pupil. Circular muscle fibers
lens, thus making it fatter or less convex. When the
control the pupil diameter. During the accommoda-
ciliary muscle contracts, it pulls the ciliary body and
tion papillary reflex, parasympathetic signals from
choroid forward, thus decreasing the tension of the
 the oculomotor nerves cause the pupil to constrict,
zonular fibers on the lens. As a result, because of
thus preventing the most divergent light rays from
elastic fibers in the lens, it becomes more convex, that
entering the eye. These light rays would fall on the
308
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Blind area
Nearly parallel light rays
_ens
A.Normal(emmetropic)eye
Cornea
Binocular
B. Nearsighted (myopic) eye
C. Farsighted (hypemytropic) eye
Fig. 11.14. Refraction problems. (A) A normal (emmotropic) eye
that can focus light rays on the retina. (B) A nearsighted (myopic)
 eye is too long; thus, the light rays from distant objects are focused 
 in front of the retina. (C) In a farsighted (hypermyopic) eye, the
B
Blind area
 eyeball is too short so that near objects are focused behind the
retina, and the lens does not have enough accommodating power
Fg. 11.15. Field of vision. (A) There is a blind area immediately
to focus the light rays on the retina.
between the eyes of a horse and behind the horse's body. (B) The
cat has a larger binocular area than the horse, but also has a greater
blind area behind its body.
periphery of the retina where they would not be
focused properly.
toreceptors consist of rods and cones, named for the
shape of the outer segment (Fig. ll.16). The outer
Field of vision
segment of rods is cylindrical whereas that of the
The field of vision is the spatial area that can be seen
cones is tapered or cone-shaped. The tips of the rods
by a single eye, providing monocular vision. The loca-
and cones lie next to the pigmented layer. In birds, oil
tion of the eyes within the head has an impact on the
droplets are also found in cones, which may help filter
field of vision. The field of vision of the two eyes gen-
out UV radiation.
 erally overlaps, providing an area of binocular vision.
 Rods and cones consist of an outer segment involved
The eye location varies between species and within
 in photoreception and an inner segment containing
breeds of species. The wider set the eyes, the greater
the cell nucleus, Golgi complex, and mitochondria.
the panoramic field of vision. Herbivores tend to have
 The proximal end of each photoreceptor consists of
their eyes set wide, thus providing them with a pan-
 bulb-shaped synaptic endings containing synaptic
oramic field of vision (Fig. ll.15), although they
vesicles.
cannot see directly in front of the nose or behind their
 Within the outer segments are stacks of membra-
hindquarters.
 nous discs in which the visual pigments, or phot-
opigments, are embedded. In rods, the discs are
discontinuous and stacked like pancakes, one on top
 Photoreception
of the other. In cones, the disc membranes are continu-
Photoreception involves the light energy focused
ous with the plasma membrane, and the interior of the
on the retina being converted to an electrical signal
discs is continuous with the extracellular space. In
carried by the optic nerve. As mentioned earlier, pho-
rods, one to three new discs are added to the base of
Special senses
309
Bipolarcell endings
可
Discs of
outer
segment
Cone
Rod
Pigmented
cell
Opsin
Retinal
Pigmented
Melanin
cell nucleus
granules
 direction of light and that the tips of the photoreceptors lie near the pigmented layer.
the outer segment every hour, thus pushing old discs
toward the distal end where they are sloughed off and
11-cis-retinal
 phagocytized by the pigmented epithelial cells. Cones
also renew their discs, but it appears to occur in a
CH
circadian rhythm and is not as well understood.
CH
H.C
There is one type of rod and three (four in birds)
Light
types of cones, distinguished by different visual pig-
ments. Although rods are more sensitive to light and
Retinal
 are stimulated by all visible wavelengths, they per-
isomerase
ceive only gray tones, whereas cones allow for dif-
ferentiation of color.
All-trans-retinal
Chemistry of visuaf pigments
F
The light-absorbing photopigment in rods is rhodop-
sin. It consists of a glycoprotein called opsin and a
Fig. 11.17. Retinal isomers involved in photoreception. In the
dark, 11-cis-retinal remains bound to opsin to form rhodopsin. When
vitamin A derivative called retinal. Vitamin A is found
light strikes the retina, 11-cis-retinal is converted to all-trans-retinal
 in carotenoid-rich vegetables, including carrots, spin-
in a process called bleaching. All-trans-retinal dissociates from 
ach, broccoli, and yellow squash, as well as vitamin
opsin and can be isomerized back to 11-cis-retinal in the pigmented
A-containing tissues such as liver. Although retinal is
epithelium by the enzyme retinal isomerase, which requires ATP.
the light-absorbing part of all photopigments, the
opsins found in each of the three types of cones differ,
 In the dark, retinalis found in a bent configuration
permitting them to absorb primarily either blue, green,
     
 or yellow-orange wavelengths of light.
opsin. In rods, this forms rhodopsin.
The photopigments respond to light in the follow-
When exposed to light, cis-retinal is isomerized to
ing sequence (Fig. 11.17):
all trans-retinal, which is no longer able to bind to
3 10 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
retinal. Therefore, trans-retinal and opsin dissoci-
potassium leakage from the cell continues, the cell
ate, thereby forming a colorless photopigment.
hyperpolarizes as the membrane potential approaches
This process is called bleaching.
-70 mV, thus decreasing the release of the neurotrans-
3.
 The enzyme retinal isomerase converts trans-
mitter. Since the photoreceptors release an inhibitory
retinal back to cis-retinal.
neurotransmitter, a decreased release of glutamate
results in stimulation of bipolar cells. Bipolar cells
then stimulate ganglion cells whose axons make up
Light transduction by photoreceptors
the optic nerve.
In the dark, cyclic GMP (cGMP) binds to sodium
channels located on the plasma membrane of the
Retinaf processing of visuaf information
 outer segment of the photoreceptor and keeps them
Orly ganglion cells produce action potentials while
open (Fig. 11.18). The influx of sodium, called the
"dark current," into the photoreceptors depolarizes
the amacrine, horizontal, and bipolar cells produce
graded potentials. Ganglion cells have circular recep-
the membrane. This keeps the Ca channels on the
five fields consisting of a circle within a circle (Fig.
synaptic endings open, thus allowing the continuous
11.19). The circular zone at the center is called the
release of the neurotransmitter, thought to be gluta-
on-center area; that on the periphery is called the off-
mate, which then interacts with the bipolar cells.
Glutamate induces the production of inhibitozry
center, or surround, area. The on-center ganglion cells
are excited when light illuminates rods or cones in the
postsynaptic potentials in bipolar cells, thus inhib-
central area while the off-center area is inhibited. Con-
iting them.
versely, light illuminating the off-center area will
On the disc membrane, the presence of light con-
inhibit the on-center ganglion cells while exciting the
verts ll-cis-retinal to all-trans-retinal, causing opsin to
 off-center ganglion cells.
dissociate from the photopigment. Opsin then inter-
Each rod or cone in the on-center area synapses in
acts with a G-protein subunit called transducin. Trans-
an on-center and off-center bipolar cell (Fig. 1l.20). In
ducin activates phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that
 the dark, rods and cones are depolarized, and gluta-
breaks down cGMP to GMP. The breakdown of cGMP
mate is released. In light, the rods and cones are
 causes the sodium channels on the plasma membrane
 to close. Since sodium entry into the cell decreases while
charnels and reduces the release of glutamate. Gluta-
mate affects the on-center and off-center bipolar cells
differently. The decreased release of glutamate disin-
Dark
Light
hibits the on-center bipolar cells, allowing them to
 Outer segment
become depolarized. Conversely, decreased glutamate
Disc membrane
membrane
release causes the off-center bipolar cells to become
Response of on-Response of off.
Light
G protein
Area stimulated
Ganglion cell
 center ganglion 
 center ganglion
CGMP 5 GMF
with light
cells
cells
of-cer
Cytoplasm
No illumination
On-
cente
 Central area
illumination
Fig. 11.18. Chemical transduction of light signal. In the dark,
cGMP migrates to the plasma membrane and keeps cGMP-gated
Surrounded area
sodium channels open. When light interacts with rhodopsin found 
illumination
on the disc membrane, it causes 11 -cis-retinal to be isomerized to
all-trans-retinal. Opsin then dissociates from rhodopsin and
 activates a G protein. The transducin subunit of the G protein
activates phosphodiesterate, which breaks down cGMP to GMP. In
Fg. 11.19. Receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells. Ganglion
the light, since cGMP levels are reduced, the sodium channels
cells have circular receptive fields with the central area being the
close, and the cell becomes hyperpolarized, causing a decrease in
on-center area and the surrounding area being the off-center area.
release of the neurotransmitter glutamate. Since glutamate inhibits
On-center ganglion cells increase their firing rate when illuminated;:
bipolar cells, decreased release of glutamate disinhibits the bipolar
 off-center cells have an opposite response, and vice versa when the
cells, so they develop action potential.
off-center cells are illuminated.
Special senses
311
sity that can be detected by the cell increases with
prolonged exposure to light.
Dark adaptation is essentially the reverse of light
adaptation. When an animal moves to a relatively
dark area, photosensitivity is slowly restored as the
 rod photopigments regenerate. Cones essentially stop
érelease
functioning in low-intensity light, so animals can per-
Off-center bipolar cells
 On-center bipolar cells 
ceive only black, white, and shades of gray. Cats have
 more rods than cones, making their night vision and
motion detection superior to that of humans.
Off-center ganglion cells
Visual pathway
There are many more rods and cones than bipolar
cells, so these photoreceptors converge on bipolar
Optic nerve
cells, which send signals to the ganglion cells. The
Fig. 11.20. Off-center bipolar cells. The on-center and off-center
axons of the ganglion cells project to the back of the
bipolar cells are differentially affected by glutamate. Glutamate
eyeball converging to form the optic nerve. At the optic
opens Nat-channels on off-center bipolar cells allowing the inward
chiasma, fibers from the medial portion of the eye
movement of Na*, and thus causing depolarization. Acting on
on-center cells, glutamate either opens K+-channels or closes
cross to the opposite side and continue via the optic
cGMP-gated Nat-channels, resulting in hyperpolarization. (Modified
tracts (Fig. 11.21). Therefore, each optic tract contains
from Kandel et al., 2000.)
fibers from the temporal (lateral) aspect of the eye on
the ipsilateral side and fibers from the nasal (medial)
aspect of the contralateral eye. Each eye is carrying
hyperpolarized. The differential effects of glutamate
information from the same half of the visual field from
on bipolar cells are due to its effects on different cation
each eye. Since the lens reverses all images, the medial
channels. On off-center bipolar cells, glutamate opens
half of each retina receives light rays from the lateral
1
a Na*-channel allowing Na* to enter the cell; in
 portion of the visual field, while the lateral half of each
 on-center bipolar cells, glutamate either opens a K+.
retina receives light rays from the medial portion of
channel or closes a cGMP-gated Nat-channel.
 the visual field. Therefore, the right optic tract carries 
 Amacrine and horizontal cells function as interneu-
 signals representing the left half of the visual field,
rons providing lateral inputs within the retina. Hori-
and the left optic tract carries signals from the right
zontal cells receive input from the photoreceptors and
visual field.
project to surrounding bipolar cells and photorecep-
The axons of ganglion cells make up the optic
tors, whereas amacrine cells receive input from bipolar
nerve, which crosses at the optic chiasma. Most of
cells and project laterally to surrounding ganglion
 these axons then travel to the lateral geniculate body
cells, bipolar cells, and other amacrine cells. When the
 of the thalamus, where they synapse on second-order
 off-center area is illuminated, horizontal cells hyper-
neurons that travel through the internal capsule,
 polarize the on-center bipolar cells. Similarly, informa-
forming the optic radiation. These fibers project to the
tion from surrounding bipolar cells is conveyed to
primary visual cortex in the occipital lobes.
 on-center ganglion cells by amacrine cells.
 Some fibers in the optic tract project to the superior
colliculi, which is involved in visual reflexes control-
ling the extrinsic muscle of the eye. Other fibers project
Light or dark adaptation
 to the pretectal nucleus, which is involved in pupil
The eye adapts to a sudden increase in light intensity
light reflexes, and to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
by decreasing its sensitivity, a process called light
of the hypothalamus, which is involved in circadian
adaptation. While light adaptation involves contrac-
rhythms.
tion of the pupil to restrict the amount of light reach-
ing the retina and bleaching of photopigments the two
most important changes ocur in the cone photorecep-
Hearing and balance
tors. Bright light causes the cGMP-gated channels to
close, thus hyperpolarizing the cells to approximately
Anatomy of the ear
70 mV. If bright light continues, the cells slowly depo-
  os -    
I are
The ear consists of three regions: the outer, middle,
again responsive to light. In addition, cones become
and inner ear. The outer ear, also called the external
desensitized so that the smallest change in light inten
ear, collects sound waves and directs them to the
312 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Optic nerve
Pretectal
Optic
nucleus
chiasm
Lateral
geniculate body
of thalamus
Superior
colliculus
Occipital lobe
Fig. 11.21. Visual fields of the eyes. The visual fields of the two eyes overlap in the middle, indicated in green. The pathway of signals
generated in the retina of the right and left eye are indicated by red and blue lines, respectively.
middle ear. The middle ear carries these sound waves
These bones are connected by synovial joints. The
to the inner ear, and the inner ear contains receptors
handle of the malleus is attached to the inner surface
2.
for hearing and equilibrium.
of the tympanic membrane, and its head is attached
to the body of the incus. The incus articulates with the
head of the stapes, whose footplate then fits into the
Outer (external) ear
oval windows.
Two small muscles also attach to the auditory ossi-
The outer ear consists of the pinna, or auricle, and the
cles. The tensor tympani muscle restricts the move-
external acoustic meatus (Fig. 1l.22). The pinna is a
fleshy appendage attached to the lateral surfaces of
ment and increases tension on the tympanic membrane
the skull by muscles and ligaments. It is mobile and
to minimize damage to the inner ear from loud noises.
The stapedius muscle, the smallest skeletal muscle,
funnels sound waves toward the external auditory
attenuates large vibrations of the stapes in response to
meatus. Hairs and specialized sebaceous (oil) glands
loud noises.
called ceruminous glands that secrete earwax are
found near the entrance of the external auditory
meatus. The hair and earwax function to restrict the
Inner ear
entrance of foreign materials such as dust.
The inner ear is sometimes called the labyrinth because
of its extensive series of canals (Fig. 1l.23). It consists
 Middle ear
of two main sections, an outer bony labyrinth enclos-
ing an inner membranous labyrinth. The bony laby-
Separated from the outer ear by the tympanic mem-
rinth lies in the temporal bone and consists of three
 brane, a thin, semitransparent membrane, the middle
areas: (1) the semicircular canals, (2) the vestibule, and
ear is an air-filled cavity within the temporal bone
(3) the cochlea. The first two contain receptors for
(Fig. 11.23). It is separated from the inner ear by two
equilibrium, and the cochlea contains receptors for
openings, the superiorly located oval window and the
hearing. The bony labyrinth is lined with periosteum
round window. Extending from the tympanic mem-
 and is filled with perilymph. Perilymph is similar to
brane to the oval window are three auditory ossicles
cerebrospinal fluid. The membranous labyrinth is
called the malleus, incus, and stapes, or commonly
lined with epithelium and contains endolymph, which
called the hammer, anvil, and stirrup, respectively.
contains a relatively high level of K+ ions.
Special senses 
313
 Marginal
cutaneous
Helix
pouch
Auricularapex
Scapha
Tragic border
Spine of helix
Antihelix
Lateral crus
 of helix
Medial crus
Tail of helix
of helix
Tragus
External
Auricular
acoustic
meatus
apex
Lateral view
Medial view
Fig. 11.22. Outer ear of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
The vestibule is the central region of the bony laby-
The spiral organ, or organ of Corti, sits on the basilar
rinth. The parts of the membranous labyrinth within
 membrane. It consists of epithelial cells, supporting
the vestibule are the utricle (little bag) and saccule
cells, and hair cells, the receptors for hearing (Fig.
(little sac), which are connected by a short duct. Pro-
jecting from the vestibule are three semicircular canals,
single row of inner hair cells and three rows of outer
called the anterior, posterior, and lateral semicircular
 hair cells. On the apical (top) surface of each hair cell
canals. They lie at a right angle to each other. There is
 is a hair bundle consisting of many stereocilia and one
a swollen enlargement at one end of each semicircular
long kinocilium, which are in contact with a flexible,
canal called the ampulla (saclike duct). The membra-
 gelatinous membrane called the tectorial membrane.
nous labyrinth within each semicircular canal is called
    a   e 
the semicircular ducts, and is continuous with the
with first-order sensory neurons and with motor
utricle and saccule.
neurons from the cochlear branch of the vestibuloco-
The cochlea (snail-shaped), a bony spiral canal
chlear nerve (cranial nerve Vlll). The cell bodies of
 resembling a snail shell, lies anterior to the vestibule.
these sensory neurons reside in the spiral ganglion.
The cochlea makes nearly three spirals around a bony
The inner hair cells synapse with approximately 90%
core called the modiolus. If uncoiled and cut in cross
of the first-order sensory neurons; 90% of the motor
section, the cochlea consists of three channels. Begin-
 neurons synapse with outer hair cells.
 ning at the oval window, the upper channel is the scala
vestibuli. The lower channel is the scala tympani,
Sound
which ends at the round window. These two channels
contain perilymph and are continuous with
1one
Sound waves appear as sine waves traveling through
another, connecting at the apex of the cochlea, the
a medium such as air or water. Originating from a
helicotrema. The third channel, lying between the
vibrating object, the pitch is related to the frequency
other two, is the cochlear duct, or scala media. The
of the sound wave, while the intensity is related to the
cochlear duct is separated from the scala vestibuli by
amplitude of the sound wave. The higher the fre-
the vestibular membrane and from the scala tympani
quency, the higher the pitch. Similarly, the higher the
by the basilar membrane.
amplitude, the louder the sound.
3 14 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Auditory
ossicles
 Bony labyrinth 
Auditorynerve
Tympanic
membrane
ear
tube
Tympanic bulla
Left ear
Dorsal
semicircular
Lateral
canal
semicircular
Utricle
ncus
canal
Cochlea
Stapes
Ventral
semicircular
Tympanic membrane
canal
Auditory Ossicles
Bony Labyrinth
Fig. 11.23. Anatomy of the left ear. (Reprinted from Getty, 1964. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Physiology of hearing
as the basilar membrane oscillates, it causes the
cilia and kinocilia on the hair cells to shear.
The act of hearing can be described as follows:
7.
 If the hair cells shear toward the kinocilia, the hair
cell is depolarized, whereas shearing away from
The auricle collects the sound waves into the
the kinocilia causes hyperpolarization.
external meatus.
2
These sound waves strike the tympanic mem-
Depending on the frequency, or pitch, of the sound
 brane, causing it to vibrate.
wave, it causes different regions of the basilar mem-
 The central region of the tympanic membrane
brane to oscillate. Higher-frequency sounds cause the
3.
makes contact with the malleus, causing it to
basilar membrane closest to the round window to
vibrate. This causes the incus and stapes to vibrate
vibrate; lower-frequency waves cause the region near
in succession.
the helicotrema to oscillate. The stimulation of hair
4.
 The stapes makes contact with the oval window,
cells near the round window is associated with high-
causing it to vibrate. The sound wave is thus
pitch sounds; those near the helicotrema are associ-
 transferred to the perilymph in the scala vestibuli
ated with low-pitch sounds.
located in the cochlea.
5.
 This sound wave moves through the scala ves-
tibuli, around the helicotrema, and into the scala
Physiology of equilibrium
tympani, which finally causes the round window
to vibrate. This sound wave causes the basilar
 In addition to hearing, the ear is involved in the sense
membrane to move up and down.
of balance. Receptors in the semicircular canals and
Since the cilia and kinocilia of the hair cells are
vestibule collectively make up the vestibular appara-
embedded in the stationary tectorial membrane,
tus, the part of the ear associated with equilibrium.
Special senses
315
Helicotrema
Scala vestibule
Cochlear duct
Tectorial
 Organ of
membrane
Corti
Inner hair
Basilar
 Outer hair
cell
membrane
cells
Scala tympani
Fig. 11.24. Section through the cochlea. A transverse section through the cochlea reveals its three channels, including the scala vestibule,
which is continuous with the scala tympani, and the cochlear duct, which lies in between. The spiral organ (organ of Corti) rests on the
basilar membrane. It consists of a single row of inner hair cells and three rows of outer hair cells, which project into the tectorial membrane.
Q
There are two types of equilibrium: static and dynamic.
Otoliths
Static equilibrium refers to the maintenance of the
position of the body while not moving, whereas
Otolithic
dynamic equilibrium is the maintenance of body posi-
membrane
tion in response to sudden movements such as accel-
Macula
Kinocilia
eration, deceleration, and rotation.
Sensory
neurons
Otolithic organs within the utricle and saccule
On the walls of both the utricle and saccule is a thick-
ened area called the macula. These are perpendicular
Fg. 11.25. The macula. The macula is a sensory apparatus found
to one another and are mostly involved in static equi-
in the utricle and saccule. The sensory neurons have hair cells
 librium, but they also have a role in dynamic equilib-
called stereocilia that project into the gelatinous otolithic
rium since they respond to linear acceleration, but not 
membrane. The longest stereocilia is called the kinocilium.
to rotation. They provide sensory information about
 Embedded in the otolithic membrane are grains of calcium
 carbonate called otoliths.
the position of the head in space and thereby function
in posture and equilibrium.
Each macula consists of a bed of supporting cells
 shear in the opposite direction, much like the head
surrounding scattered hair cells. The hair cells have
falls backward when one suddenly accelerates for-
 many stereocilia and a single kinocilium projecting
ward in a car. This shearing of the otolithic mem-
from their apex. The hair cells are embedded in an
brane causes the hair cells projecting into the
overlying otolithic membrane (Fig. 1l.25). The oto-
membrane to bend in the opposite direction of move-
lithic membrane is a jellylike mass on which crystals
ment. When the hair cells bend toward the single
 of calcium carbonate called otoliths (ear stones) are
kinocilium, they depolarize; bending in the opposite
present. The otoliths provide inertia to the otolithic
direction causes hyperpolarization. While the hair
membrane, which resists any change in motion.
cells continuously release neurotransmitters, a change
As the head starts or stops moving in a linear direc-
in membrane potential alters the release of the neu-
tion, the otoliths cause the otolithic membrane to
 rotransmitter released by these receptors. This changes
3 16  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
the rate of impulse in the vestibular nerve, a subdivi-
 The crista ampularis responds to changes in velocity
sion of cranial nerve VIll
of rotation of the head. The inertia exerted by the
Remember, the macula responds only to changes in
endolymph in the semicircular canals causes the hair
linear acceleration of the head. The hair cells adapt
cells to bend in the opposite direction of movement.
quickly, so they do not respond while the head is
As in the macula, this causes either depolarization or
stationary.
hyperpolarization of the hair cells, thus changing the
release of the neurotransmitter.
Signals from the semicircular canals are important
The crista ampularis and dynamic equilibrium
in vestibular nystagmus, a reflex movement of the
The crista ampularis, located in the ampulla of each
eyes. As the head rotates, the eyes drift in the opposite
semicircular canal, is the receptor for dynamic equi-
direction as if fixed on an object. After a time,
librium. Like the macula, the crista ampularis consists
the eyes rapidly jump toward the direction of rota-
 of supporting cells and hair cells. The hair cells have
  s d   n y e 
stereocilia and one kinocilium that project into a gelat-
eye movement continues until the endolymph comes
inous mass called the capula.
to rest.
Chapter summary
Physiology of olfaction
Odorants dissolve in the mucus membrane stimulat-
The special senses include smell, taste, vision, hearing.
ing G proteins, thus activating adenylate cyclase and
and equilibrium.
producing cAMP, which causes Na-channels to
open. The influx of Na+ results in depolarization of
the olfactory receptor.
Olfaction: The sense of smel
 Both smell and taste are chemical senses involving
Olfactory pathway
chemoreceptors. Olfaction involves the detection of
The axons of the olfactory receptors form the olfac-
volatile chemicals in solution.
tory nerve (cranial nerve I), which terminates on
neurons in the olfactory bulbs. Neurons from the
 olfactory bulb project to the lateral olfactory area in
 Anatomy of olfactory receptors
the temporal lobe. The olfactory neurons also project
to the hypothalamus and other limbic areas, thus
The olfactory epithelium is located in the roof of
explaining how smell can evoke various memories
 the nasal cavity along the inferior surface of the
and emotions.
cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone and extend-
 ing along the superior nasal concha and upper
part of the middle nasal concha.
Gustation: The sense of taste
 Olfactory receptors are bipolar neurons. At their
apical end, the dendrite forms a knob from which
Tongue
several long cilia project. Axons from the olfac-
 tory receptors project into the olfactory bulb.
The tongue is involved in gripping, reposition-
3.
 The supporting cells are columnar epithelial cells
 ing food, mixing food with saliva, and forming
surrounding the olfactory receptors.
the compact mass of food called a bolus.
 Basal stem cells are found between the support-
2.
 The surface of the tongue is covered with small
ing cells. They continually undergo cell division,
bumps called papillae. Filiform papillae are
producing new olfactory receptors.
thorn-shaped, giving the tongue roughness, thus
 Olfactory (Bowman's) glands found in the con-
aiding in licking and manipulating food. Fungi-
nective tissue that supports the olfactory epi-
form papillae are mushroom-shaped, have taste
thelium produce mucus that is carried to the
buds, and are thus mechanical and gustatory.
surface of the olfactory epithelium and dissolves
 Foliate papillae have leaf-shaped ridges, are
odorants.
located on the lateral borders of the tongue, and
6.
The facial nerve (cranial nerve Vll) innervates
have a gustatory function. Vallate, or circumval-
supporting cells and olfactory glands.
late, papillae are the largest and least numerous,
Special senses
317
and resemble the fungiform papillae but are
Lacrimaf apparatus
circled by a cleft containing taste buds.
The lacrimal apparatus consists of structures that
produce and drain tears (lacrimal fluid). Lacrimal
glands secrete lacrimal fluid through excretory lacri-
Taste
mal ducts. The fluid moves over the eye and enters
1.
 Arimals have innate preferences for flavors such
 two small openings called the lacrimal puncta. From
as those that are sweet, while tending to reject
there, the fluid enters the lacrimal canals, two ducts
unpleasant flavors such as bitter flavors. Each
leading into the lacrimal sac. The nasolacrimal duct
 papilla has one to hundreds of taste buds.
carries fluid from the lacrimal sac into the nasal
2.
Taste cells are electrically excitable and have
cavity.
 voltage-gated Na*, K+, and Ca channels on their
surface.
Extrinsic eye muscfes
3.
 While it was formerly generally believed that
animals had four primary tastes, including salty.
Movement of the eyeball is controlled by extraoc-
sour, sweet, and bitter, recently, a fifth category
ular muscles. The lateral and medial rectus muscles
was added, called umami, meaning "delicious"
move the eye laterally and medially, respectively.
The superior rectus and inferior rectus muscles
in Japanese. It is stimulated by monosodium
glutamate.
elevate and depress the eye, respectively. The inferior
 The binding of taste stimuli, called tastants, to
oblique muscle elevates and turns the eye laterally
extracellular receptors located on taste cells leads
while the superior oblique depresses and turns the
to depolarization of the taste cell, leading to the
eye laterally.
release of an unknown neurotransmitter, causing
excitation in the sensory neuron.
Anatomy of the eyeball
The eyeball consists of three layers: (l) fibrous tunic,
(2) vascular tunic, and (3) retina.
Vision
Fbrous tunic
 Accessory structures of the eye
The fibrous tunic, or external coat of the eyeball, is
The accessory structures of the eye include the eyelids,
avascular and consists of the anterior cornea and
eyelashes, eyebrows, lacrimal (tearing) apparatus,
posterior opaque sclera. The cornea is a transparent
 and extrinsic muscles of the eye.
layer covering the iris, the colored portion at the
front of the eye.
Eyefids, eyefashes, and eyebrow
Vascufar tunic
The upper and lower eyelids, or palpebrae, cover
the eye during sleep, protect the eye from exces-
The vascular tunic, or uvea, is the middle layer
sive light and foreign objects, and assist with
 Of the eyeball. It consists of three parts: choroid,
lubricating the eye.
ciliary body, and iris. The choroid is the highly
2.
 The gap between the two eyelids is the palpebral
vascularized, dark brown, posterior portion of
fissure. At either corner of the eyelid is the lateral
the vascular tunic, lining the majority of the
and medial commissure, respectively. A small,
inside of the sclera.
reddish elevated area found in the medial com-
2
 Many species of domestic animals, including
missure is the lacrimal caruncle. It contains both
cats, dogs, horses, and ruminants, have an addi-
sebaceous (oil) and sudoriferous (sweat) glands.
tional layer in the choroid called the tapetum
3.
Domestic species have a rictitating membrane or
lucidum. The tapetum lucidum reflects light back
third eyelid.
toward the retina so that the animal can see in
 Located at the margin of the eyelids are the cilia
+
low light.
(eyelashes). Located above each eyelid are the
 In the anterior, the choroid becomes the ciliary
eyebrows. Located at the base of the hair follicles
body. It consists of the ciliary processes and ciliary
of the eyelashes are sebaceous ciliary glands
muscles. The ciliary muscles are a bundle of
that release a lubricating fluid. Infection of these
 smooth muscles that alter the shape of the lens
glands is a sty.
in order to allow for near or far vision.
(Continued)
318 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
4.
The iris is the colored portion at the front of the
blocked, intraocular pressure increases, causing
eyeball that is shaped like a disk with a hole, the
compression of the retina and optic nerve,
 pupil, in the center.
leading to glaucoma and blindness.
3
 The posterior segment of the eye contains vitre-
Retina (the sensory tunic)
ous humor, a clear gel-like substance that pushes
the retina against the pigmented layer of the
The innermost layer of the eye is the retina,
choroid.
which lines the posterior portion of the eyeball.
The retina consists of two layers: an outer pig-
mented layer and an inner neural layer.
Physiology of vision
2.
The neural layer of the retina has three major
layers—the photoreceptor layer, the bipolar cell
The eye can be likened to a camera. An image is
 layer, and the ganglion cell layer. The outer and
focused on the retina by the lens, and the amount of
inner synaptic layers separate these layers from
light entering the eye is controlled by the pupil. The
each other. Before reaching the photoreceptor
retina, lens, and pupil are analogous to the film, lens,
layer, light must first pass through the ganglion
 and aperture of the camera, respectively.
and bipolar cell layers. Interspersed among these
cells are two other types of neurons—-horizontal
Refraction
cells and amacrine cells.
3.
Axons from the ganglion cells collectively form
When light rays pass from one medium to another
the optic nerve, which exits the eye at the optic
of a different density, the speed of light changes. As
disc. Since the optic disc lacks photoreceptors, it
 a result, the light rays are bent or refracted. Images
is also called the blind spot.
are inverted, both upside down and backward, as
 There are two types of photoreceptors, rods and
they are focused on the retina. The brain reinter-
cones. Rods outnumber cones 20:1, except in
prets this image so that objects are not perceived as
birds, which have more cones than rods. Rods
inverted.
are effective in dim light. Cones provide for color
and high acuity vision.
The macula lutea is found in the exact center of
Accommodation
the posterior of the retina. It contains mostly
Increasing the refractive power of the lens is
cones. At its center is a small pit, the central
 called accommodation. Therefore, as an object
fovea, which contains only cones and where
moves closer to the eye, the lens must become
the bipolar and ganglion cells are displaced to
 more convex, in order to focus the image on the
the sides.
retina.
6y
The avian retina is avascular, and contains a
2.
 Accommodation is accomplished by the actions
unique structure called the pecten. This is a black
of the ciliary muscle. When the ciliary muscle is
pigmented structure extending from the ventral
relaxed, the fibers surrounding the lens pull on
retina up to just above the area where the optic
the lens, thus making it fatter or less convex.
nerve exits.
When the ciliary muscle contracts, it pulls the
ciliary body and choroid forward, thus decreas-
Lens
ing the tension of the zonular fibers on the lens.
 The lens is a biconvex, transparent, avascular struc-
3.
 Some species of birds possess a static mecharism
ture that can change its shape to focus light on the
 allowing them to keep objects in focus regardless
 retina. The lens is held in place by the suspensory
of their distance. This is accomplished from
ligament attaching it to the choroid process.
asymmetries in the eye allowing it to be emme-
tropic (i.e., light rays focus directly on the retina)
 in its upper portions while becoming increas-
Chambers of the eye
 ingly myopic (i.e., nearsighted) toward its lower
The lens divides the eye into the anterior and
portions.
 posterior segments. The iris subdivides the ante-
Horses have a limited accommodating ability
rior segment into the anterior chamber located
due to weak ciliary muscles. To compensate,
between the cornea and iris, and the posterior
horses have a ramp retina that allows them to
chamber between the iris and lens.
use a form of static accommodation in which
The anterior segment is filled with aqueous
they move their heads to focus an object at dif-
humor If the drainage of aqueous humor is
ferent locations on the retina.
Special senses
319
The far point of vision is that distance beyond
Chemistry of visual pigments
which no accommodation (no change in lens
The light-absorbing photopigment in rods is rho-
shape) is necessary for focusing. The near point
dopsin. It consists of opsin and a vitamin A
of vision is the closest point at which the animal
derivative called retinal. The opsins found in the
can focus clearly.
each of the three types of cones permit them to
absorb primarily either blue, green, or yellow-
Refraction probfems
 orange wavelengths of light.
 A normal eye is said to be emmetropic. As animals
2
In the dark, retinal is found as ll-cis-retinal,
which binds strongly with opsin. In rods, this
age, the lens loses its elasticity and its ability to
accommodate, a condition called presbyopia.
forms rhodopsin. When exposed to light, cis-
retinal is isomerized to all-trans-retinal, which no
2.
Myopia, or nearsightedness, is when an animal
can see close objects, but distant objects are
longer binds to retinal. Therefore, trans-retinal
 blurred. In hypermyopia, also called hyperopia
and opsin dissociate, thereby forming a colorless
 photopigment.
or farsightedness, the animal can see distant
objects but is unable to focus near objects because
 the eyeball is too short. An irregular curvature in
Light transduction by photoreceptor
either the lens or cornea results in astigmatism.
 In the dark, cyclic GMP (cGMP) binds to sodium
channels located on the plasma membrane and
Pupil diameter
keeps them open. The influx of sodium depo-
The amount of light that can enter the eye is con-
larizes the membrane, allowing continuous
 trolled by the diameter of the pupil. Circular muscle
release of the neurotransmitter glutamate, which
fibers control the pupil diameter.
bipolar cells.
Feld of vision
The presence of light converts 1l-cis-retinal to
all-trans-retinal, causing opsin to dissociate from
The field of vision is the spatial area that can be
the photopigment. Opsin then interacts with a
seen by a single eye. The location of the eyes
G-protein subunit called transducin an enzyme
within the head has an impact on the field of
that breaks down cGMP to GMP. The break-
vision. The field of vision of the two eyes gen-
down of cGMP causes the sodium channels on
erally overlaps, providing an area of binocular
the plasma membrane to close, thus hyperpolar-
vision.
izing the membrane potential. This decreases the
2.
 The eye location varies between species and
release of glutamate.
within breeds of species. The wider the set of the
eyes, the greater the panoramic field of vision.
 Herbivores tend to have their eyes set wide, thus
Retinal processing of visual information
providing them with a panoramic field of vision.
Ganglion cells produce action potentials while the
amacrine, horizontal, and bipolar cells produce
Photoreception
graded potentials. Ganglion cells have circular recep-
Photoreception  involves conversion  of light
five fields consisting of a circle within a circle. The
energy to an electrical signal carried by the optic
circular zone at the centeris called the on-center area,
while that on the periphery is called the off-center,
nerve.
Rods and cones consist of an outer segment
 Or surround, area. The on-center ganglion cells are
involved in photoreception and an inner segment
excited when light illuminates rods or cones in the
containing the cell nucleus, Golgi complex, and
 central area, while the off-center area is inhibited.
mitochondria.
3.
 Within the outer segments are stacks of membra-
Light or dark adaptation
nous discs in which the visual pigments, or phot-
opigments, are embedded.
 The eye adapts to a sudden increase in light
 There is one type of rod and three (four in birds)
+
intensity by decreasing its sensitivity, a process
types of cones, distinguished by different visual
called light adaptation. Light adaptation in-
pigments.
volves contraction of the pupil and bleaching of
(Continued)
320  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
photopigments. In addition, bright light causes
2.
The vestibule is the central region of the bony
the cGMP-gated channels to close.
labyrinth. Within the vestibule are the utricle and
2.
 Dark adaptation is essentially the reverse of light
saccule. Projecting from the vestibule are three
adaptation.
semicircular canals called the anterior, posterior,
and lateral semicircular canals.
Visuaf pathway
3.
 The cochlea, a bony spiral canal resembling a snail
shell, lies anterior to the vestibule. The cochlea
 The axons of the ganglion cells converge to form
consists of three channels. The upper channel is
the optic nerve. At the optic chiasma, fibers from
the scala vestibule, the lower channel is the scala
the medial portion of the eye cross to the oppo-
tympani. The third channel, lying between the
 site side and continue via the optic tracts. Each
other two, is the cochlear duct or scala media.
optic tract contains fibers from the temporal
The cochlear duct is separated from the scala
(lateral) aspect of the eye on the ipsilateral side
vestibuli by the vestibular membrane and from
and fibers from the nasal (medial) aspect of the
the scala tympani by the basilar membrane.
contralateral eye.
+
The spiral organ, or organ of Corti, sits on the
2. 
Most of these axons then travel to the lateral
basilar membrane. It consists of epithelial cells,
geniculate body of the thalamus, where they
 supporting cells, and hair cells, the receptors for
hearing. On the apical (top) surface of each hair
nal capsule forming the optic radiation. These
 cell is a hair bundle consisting of many stereo-
fibers project to the primary visual cortex in the
cilia and one long kinocilium, which are imbed-
occipital lobes.
ded in the tectorial membrane.
Hearing and balance
Sound
The pitch is related to the frequency of the sound
Anatomy of the ear
wave while the intensity is related to the amplitude of
The ear consists of three regions: the outer, middle,
the sound wave.
 and inner ear.
Outer (externaf) ear
Physiology of hearing
The outer ear consists of the pinna, or auricle, and
The stapes make contact with the oval window
the external acoustic meatus.
so that the sound wave is thus transferred to
the perilymph in the scala vestibuli. This sound
Middle ear
wave moves through the scala vestibuli, and into
the scala tympani, which finally causes the round
1.
Separated from the outer ear by the tympanic
window to vibrate. This sound wave causes the
membrane, the middle ear is an air-filled cavity
basilar membrane to move up and down.
within the temporal bone. It is separated from
2.
As the basilar membrane oscillates, it causes the
Adns a sado omn Aq r a 
cilia and kinocilia on the hair cells to shear.
located oval window and the round window.
If the hair cells shear toward the kinocilia, then
 Extending from the tympanic membrane to the
the hair cell is depolarized.
 oval window are three auditory ossicles called
the malleus, incus, and stapes, commonly called
the hammer, anvil, and stirrup, respectively.
Physiology of equilibrium
The ear is involved in the sense of balance. Receptors
Inner ear
in the semicircular canals and vestibule collectively
 The inner ear consists of two main sections: an
 make up the vestibular apparatus, the part of the ear
outer bony labyrinth enclosing an inner mem-
 associated with equilibrium.
branous labyrinth. The bony labyrinth lies in the
temporal bone and consists of (1) the semicircu-
lar canals, (2) the vestibule, and (3) the cochlea.
Otofithic organs within the utricle and saccufe
The first two contain receptors for equilibrium
On the walls of both the utricle and saccule is the
 and the cochlea contains receptors for hearing.
macula. They are perpendicular to one another,
Special senses
321
and are mostly involved in static equilibrium,
The crista ampufaris and dynamic equiibrium
but also have a role in dynamic equilibrium.
2.
Each macula consists of hair cells embedded in
The crista ampularis, located in the ampulla of each
an otolithic membrane. The otolithic membrane
semicircular canal, is the receptor for dynamic
is a jellylike mass on which sit crystals of calcium
equilibrium. It consists of supporting cells and
carbonate called otoliths.
hair cells. The hair cells have sterocilia and one
3.
As the head moves in a linear direction, the oto-
kinocilium that project into a gelatinous mass
 liths cause the otolithic membrane to shear in the
called the capula.
opposite direction. When the hair cells bend
2
The crista ampularis responds to changes in
toward the single kinocilium, they depolarize,
velocity of rotation of the head. The inertia
while bending in the opposite direction causes
exerted by the endolymph in the semicircular
hyperpolarization. This causes a change in the
 canals causes the hair cells to bend in the oppo-
 impulse rate in the vestibular nerve.
site direction of movement, causing depolariza-
 tion or hyperpolarization of the hair cells.
Review questions and answers are available
Constantinescu, G.M. 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small
online.
Animal Practitioners. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Gefty, R. 1964. Atlas for Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Iowa
State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Kandel, E.R, J.H. Schwartz, and T.M. Jessel. 2000. Principles
References
Of Neural Science. MeGraw Hill, New York.
Constanfinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
Press, Ames, Iowa.
12
Endocrine system
Contents
Introduction and Overview
323
 Follicle-Stimulating Hormone and
Cell Signaling
324
 Luteinizing Hormone
349
Mechanisms of Cell Surface Hormone
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
350
Signaling
325
 Adrenocortropic Hormone
351
 Mechanisms of Internal Hormone Cell
Thyroid Gland
352
 Signaling
329
 Biosynthesis of Triodothyronine and
 Receptors and Regulation
331
Thyroxine
352
Measuring Circulating Hormone
Biological Effects of Thyroid Hormones
352
2
Concentrations
333
Calcitonin
355
 Endocrine and Growth Factor Signaling
336
 Parathyroid Hormone
355
The Hypophyseal-Pituitary Axis
337
Adrenal Gland
357
Pituitary Overview
337
 Endocrine Pancreas
360
Negative Feedback Loops
340
Other Hormones and Growth Factors
362
 Hormones and Cells of the Posterior Pituitary
341
IGF Family
363
Hormones of the Anterior Pituitary
343
EGF Family
365
Somatotropin (GH)
344
 FCF Family
367
The Somatomedin Hypothesis
345
TGF-β Family
368
CH Secretion
346
Leptin
369
Prolactin
347
 Chapter Summary
370
 Prolactin Secretion
348
Introduction and overview
 effects are often slow to develop but frequently gener-
ate responses that continue for hours or even weeks.
As we consider regulation of homeostasis, two closely
 Some simple examples illustrate these points. Con-
 linked interacting physiological systems, the nervous
 sider what happens with overheating. As the core
and endocrine system, are critical. As a general rule,
 body temperature rises, warmer blood flowing to the
actions mediated by the nervous system are typically
hypothalamus and other brain areas initiates nerve
acute and relatively short-lived, whereas endocrine
impulses relayed by efferent spinal nerve tracts to the
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
323
324  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 smooth muscle sphincters of the arterioles controlling
this endocrine-mediated effect is very rapid. The
 blood flow to the dermis. This produces relaxation
moral is simple: homeostasis is possible only because
and thereby increased blood flow so that heat can be
of the functional coordination between the nervous
lost. Nerve fibers also stimulate the secretion of dermal
and endocrine systems.
sweat glands. These events increase the flow of warm
blood near the body surface, and the release and evap-
oration of sweat serve to lower temperature and
Cell signaling
thereby return body temperature to its usual limits.
These reactions occur very quickly.
The complex interface between the nervous and en-
Let's now consider how changes in the two hor-
docrine systems continues at the cellular level. You
mones calcitonin (CT) and parathyroid hormone
have already learned that many neurotransmitters
(PTH) act to regulate circulating concentrations of
act by binding to receptors on the surface of postsyn-
calcium. Decreases in calcium stimulate the release of
 aptic cells. These binding reactions ultimately induce
PTH. PTH, in turn, directly impacts bone and kidney
a biochemical process in the target cells that, if suffi-
and indirectly impacts the Gl tract. In the bone, PTH
 cient, causes the generation of an action potential in
stimulates the secretion of calcium into extracellular
that cell.
fluids and ultimately blood by promoting the resorp-
A substance that binds to a receptor is called a
tion of inorganic bone matrix by activated osteocytes
ligand, for example, when insulin binds to its specific
and osteoblasts. In the kidney, PTH acts on the cells
receptor on the surface of liver cell. However, this can
of the distal convoluted tubules of the nephrons to
become complicated. If we stick with the insulin
increase the recovery of calcium from the filtrate at the
family, there are other hormones called insulin-like
expense of phosphate secretion. PTH also promotes
 growth factors, that is, insulin-like growth factor one
the absorption of calcium from the lumen of the gut
(IGF-I) and insulin-like growth factor two (IGF-Il).
because it promotes activation of vitamin D, which is
Based on the names you would likely suspect that
 needed for maximal activity of calcium transport pro-
these growth factors must have some attributes that
teins by gut enterocytes. CT is secreted in situations
are similar to insulin. You would be correct. These
when circulating calcium concentrations are too high.
molecules have similar but not identical structures.
 Cellular targets of CT are primarily in osseous tissue
This means that insulin can also bind to specific IGF-1
where the stimulated cells promote the deposition of
receptors on target cells. However, this is usually not
calcium. However, it seems clear that the capacity to
 physiologically important because the affinity (a mea-
+
maintain calcium concentrations within a relatively
sure of how easily the binding occurs) of the binding
narrow range is increased by having regulators that
is much less than for IGF-1. You can envision the rel-
 act specifically when concentrations are either too low
        
 or too high. As you might predict, responses that
for a receptor occupies a greater proportion of the
require synthesis of enzymes, that is, bone resorption
receptors at a much lower concentration than if the
or stimulation of transporter proteins (Gl tract), are
-r i  e i e s rar a r 
 likely to occur over more prolonged periods compared
tor. Does this have practical significance? The answer
with neural effects.
is absolutely yes.
However, it is not accurate to carry this general-
For example, at normal circulating concentrations,
ization too far. For example, when dairy animals are
insulin molecules would rarely interact with an IGF-I
prepared for milking, auditory cues (clanging of
receptor. However, with diabetes or other situations
the milking equipment) and /or tactile stimulation to
when insulin concentrations are chronically increased,
clean the udder and teats for attachment of the milking
the greater abundance of insulin molecules can "over-
machine stimulate the secretion of oxytocin from the
come" the fact that insulin has low affinity for the
 posterior pituitary. In the mammary tissue, oxytocin
IGF-I receptor. As another example, many synthetic
binds to receptors on the myoepithelial cells that sur-
 steroids have been engineered so that they have great-
round the mammary alveoli. This induces the contrac-
er affinity for receptors than the native molecule, that
tion of the myoepithelial cells. Since they are arranged
is, testosterone versus synthetic anabolic steroids.
in a network around the alveoli, this reduces volume,
The classic definition of a hormone is as follows. A
increases internal pressure, and forces milk into larger
hormone is a signaling molecule that is secreted by a
ducts and to the teat or nipple end for harvesting. In
ductless (endocrine) gland into the bloodstream where
reality this is a neuroendocrine reflex; that is, neural
it travels to a site some distance away and acts on
input to the hypothalamus stimulates secretion of oxy-
a target cell. Except for the transport period in the
tocin that promotes milk ejection. Thus, a close rela-
bloodstream, this pattern is not different from that of
tionship between the nervous system and endocrine
regulators that are secreted into the extracellular fluid
system is necessary for this event to occur. Moreover,
to act on target cells only a few millimeters or microm-
Endocrine system
325
eters away from the site of production. At the mecha-
Table 12.1. Major structural classes of surface-acting receptors.
nistic level, there are many parallels between the effects
Seven-transmenbrane domain receptors
of neurotransmitters, classic hormones, and growth
Adrenocortotropic hormone (ACTH)
factors. Indeed, as understanding has evolved, it is
β adrenergic
now recognized that many growth factor-, hormone-,
Glucagon 
 or neurotransmitter-like molecules can impact target
Growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH)
cells at multiple levels.
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
 For example, a paracrine action refers to a molecule
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
released from a signaling cell that acts to impact neigh-
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
boring cells. An example of this is the production of
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
IGF-1 by stromal cells of the mammary gland. This
 Single-transmembrane receptors
growth factor subsequently stimulates the epithelial
Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
cells of the adjacent mammary ducts or alveoli. Auto-
Insulin
crine stimulation indicates that the signaling molecule
Insulin-like growth factor one (IGF-l)
impacts the same cells that produced the molecule.
 Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
Juxtacrine refers to the stimulation of immediately
Cytokine receptor superfamily
adjacent cells.
Erythropoietin
Growth hormone (GH)
 Both neurotransmitter and peptide hormones inter-
Interleukins
act primarily with receptors located in the plasma
Leptin
 membrane of the target cells. For these regulators, this 
Prolactin (Prl)
means that this binding event triggers biochemical
Guanyl cyclase-linked receptors
changes inside the target cells that are responsible
Natriuretic peptides
for the hormone effects that are observed. Since the
hormone or ligand does not enter the target cell, this
pattern of action is known as a second messenger
mechanism. In other words, the hormone binding to
 includes insulin, IGF-l, epidermal growth factor (EGF),
the receptor is the "first" messenger and the biochemi-
and others.
cal mediator released inside the target cell is the
 A third group is structurally similar to the second
"second" messenger. Our goal is not to overwhelm
but the receptors have no intrinsic tyrosine kinase
you with details, but we think it is important to have
activity. Instead, functional activity depends on ligand
2
some appreciation of the various biochemical path-
binding, causing the activation of soluble transducer
5
ways that are involved in explaining how surface-
molecules located in the cytoplasm. In this case, ligand
acting hormones function. We begin by illustrating
binding causes molecules in the cytoplasm to interact
some of the types of surface receptors.
 with the receptor, which then produces a cascade of
As shown in Table 12.1, based primarily on structure,
reactions. Receptors for prolactin (Prl) and growth
  d     s 
hormone (GH) are examples of this type of receptor.
 grouped into the four classes. Seven-transmembrane-
A fourth group acts via guanylyl cyclase or adenylyl
domain receptors are one of the largest groups. These
cyclase and synthesis of cGMP or cAMP, respectively.
receptors all contain an amino terminal piece or domain
Epinephrine, for example, binds to its surface receptor
followed by seven hydrophobic segments that form
and in conjunction with a stimulatory G protein acti-
loops that span the plasma membrane. The last of the
vates adenylyl cyclase, which causes the conversion of
od pen  oq e un s so 
ATP to cAMP. This pathway was the first example
trudes into the cytoplasmic portion of the cell. So you
demonstrating the second messenger mechanism of
can imagine a bit of the receptor protein at the outer
hormone action. Figure 12.1 provides a schematic
surface of the cells and a bit protruding into the cyto-
view of the structural variations between these types
plasm of the cell. Most of these receptors rely on the
of surface receptors.
activation of G proteins to elicit their effects. Examples
 of these receptors include those for PTH, luteinizing 
hormone (LH), and melanocyte-stimulating hormone
Mechanisms of cell surface hormone
(MSH).
signaling
A second class of receptors is single-transmembrane
domain receptors. These receptors span the plasma
In addition to classification based on structure, receptor
 membrane and have intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity;
proteins for hormones, growth factors, and neurotrans-
in other words, the binding of the ligand to receptor
mitters are also classified by the signal transduction
activates enzyme action. Do you recall that kinases are
 method that is employed. lon-channel-linked receptors
involved in phosphorylation reactions? This group
are common in the nervous system and are involved
326
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Binding
Hormone
Extracellular
domain
NH2
(1st Messenger)
space
Seven-
transmembrane
domain 
receptor
Plasma
membrane
COOH
 Enzyme or ion 
Receptor
G protein
channel protein
Growth factor
Cytoplasm 
receptor fi.e.,
EGF)
Hormone bound to
receptor
Tyrosine
kinase
B
Cytokine
receptor
(i.e., Prl)
Enzyme or ion
Receptor
 channel protein
Activated
 Accessory protein
G protein
with tyrosine
kinase activity
！
Guanylyl
cyclase
2
Chapter 
receptor
 Kinase-like
Activated enzyme,i.e..
domain
cAMP, cGMP, or other
Guanylyl
second messenger
cyclase
Cellular
response
Fig. 12.1. A schematic view of the structural variations between 
types of cell surface receptors. From the top to bottom are
illustrations of (A) a seven-transmembrane domain receptor, (B) a
Fig. 12.2. Example of a G-protein linked hormone mechanism of
 single-transmembrane domain receptor with kinase activity typical
action. Activation of the receptor is induced by the binding of 
 of many growth factors, (C) receptors with no intrinsic tyrosine
hormone (first messenger) (panel A). This leads to a conformational
change in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor to allow binding of a
aa ae ro ase (uen uo aadap sidanai (a)
and synthesis of cGMP or cAMP.
complex links to a second membrane-bound protein (enzyme or 
ion channel) to increase the intracellular concentration of an
 intracellular mediator (second messenger), which is responsible for 
the effect associated with hormone action (panel C).
in rapid signaling, usually between electrically excit-
able cells. G-protein-linked receptors function by
 modifying the activity of a separate plasma membrane-
anchored protein, which may be an enzyme or may
diacylglycerol, or inositol triphosphate). It should be
act as an ion channel. Briefly, interaction between the
understood that G protein hormone-mediated effects
 receptor and the anchored membrane protein is medi-
can be inhibitory or stimulatory. The illustration in
ated by the action of a third protein, a trimeric GTP-
Figure 12.2 depicts a response if a stimulatory G
binding protein (G protein). If this target protein is the
protein variant (G,) is activated in response to hormone
 enzyme type, activation alters the concentration of an
binding. The result is an increase in the intracellular
 intracellular mediator (e.g., cyclic GMP, cyclic AMP,
concentration of a second messenger molecule.
Endocrine system
327
Let's suppose, however, that the illustrated target
Extracellular
 1. External signal
cell also has receptors for another hormone whose
effect is mediated by an inhibitory G protein variant
(G) and that the second messenger molecule is the
same. In this case, hormone binding to the receptor
RS
2. Receptor
would activate G; with the effect of inhibiting the pro-
duction of the second messenger. This suggests that
Plasma
3. Transducer
membrane
the overall response of the cell to these two hormones
would depend on the relative concentration of the two
Adenylate
cyclase
receptors on the cell surface and ratio of circulating
concentrations of the two hormones in the blood
available to interact. This possibility is illustrated in
Figure 12.3.
CAMP
CAMP
As Figure
e 12.3 suggests, complex interactions
Intracellular
control the concentrations of even a single second
A
 messenger molecule in target cells. Just imagine the
possible control points. Using this illustration as an
Regulatory
Catalytic
example, what regulates the rate of synthesis of G
unit
unit
CAMF
proteins or the rate at which cAMP molecules are
degraded? What about the rate of synthesis of the
 adenylyl cyclase enzyme or expression of the receptor
CAMP
subtypes? On the other side of the coin, how many
molecules of the hormones are available in the blood
to bind to the receptors on the cell surface? Overlap in
 signaling pathways, changes in secretion of hormones,
and alterations in expression of cell receptors provide
Inactive
Active
 many opportunities for regulation of cell response to
 kinase
kinase
hormones or growth factors.
B
Common membrane enzymes regulated by G pro-
teins include adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C.
Regulatory
Catalytic
Changes in activity state of adenylyl cyclase depend
unit
unit
CAMF
 on G, or G, proteins to influence capacity of the enzyme
to convert ATP to cyclic AMP (cAMP). Cyclic AMP
binds to a cytosolic protein, cyclic AMP dependent
protein kinase (A-kinase). This allows regulatory pro-
CAMP
tein (subunits) to detach from inactive A-kinase. These
active enzymes cause phosphorylation of proteins
unique to particular target cells. These phosphor-
ylated proteins have potent biochemical effects, includ-
Inactive
Active
ing activation of other enzymes or gene activation.
kinase
kinase
 n  aq g sd  
C
ing) the inositol phospholipid-signaling pathway. Efects
Fig. 12.3. Stimulatory versus inhibitory G proteins. In this example
are initiated by hormone receptor binding, which
the target cell expresses receptors for two hormones, both of which
allows binding to an inactive G protein. Binding of
impact the synthesis of the second messenger cyclic AMP.
GTP displaces GDP and the G protein is activated. Acti-
However, one induces the activation of a stimulatory G protein (G,)
vated G protein translocates within the plasma mem-
and the other an inhibitory G protein (G). This suggests that the
brane and activates phospholipase C (PLC). PLC cleaves
balance between the actions of these two antagonistic pathways
controls pathways affected by cAMP abundance. What would you
the phospholipid phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
predict if the expression of receptors for one of the hormones
(PIP2) to yield diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5
suddenly tripled? The lower portion of the figure illustrates a
triphosphate (IP3). DAG activates specific protein
possible model for activation of a kinase enzyme with increased
kinases and IP3 triggers the release of Ca2t ions. In-
free cAMP concentrations. The cAMP binds to a regulatory subunit
creased Ca2+ stimulates activity of specific enzymes,
allowing the catalytic subunit to phosphorylate its substrate protein.
Changes in phosphorylation state can either stimulate or inhibit the
thus acting as a second messenger, or it binds the regu-
actions of the target protein (depending on the particular protein).
latory protein calmodulin.
 Other binding reactions lead to the activation of gua-
nylate cyclase. This enzyme catalyzes the conversion
828
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of apoptosis. Research with IGF-1 and IGF-Il was ini-
tially centered on the somatomedin hypothesis, which
proposed that these two growth factors mediated
 somatotropin (GH) effects on postnatal growth. Since
those early experiments, the view has evolved that the
GTP
Guanylate
Phospholipase C
IGFs are also important local actors. These peptides
cyclase
 can interact with several related cell surface receptors.
Phosphyaticylinositol (PIP)
 The primary signaling receptor for IGF-1 (IGF-IR) is a
tyrosine kinase receptor structurally similar to the
Inositol triphosphate (IPs)
GTP
 insulin receptor. Members of this family of proteins
CGMP
Diacylglycerol
share a heterotetrameric structure. IGF-IR binds with
[DAG)
IGF-I with high affinity (Kd - 1nM), but affinity for
insulin binding is about 500 times lower.
Gkinase(s)
 IGF-ll binds with high affinity to a receptor that
Kinase C
is identical to a receptor for mannose-6-phosphate,
Ca kinase(s)
but the receptor has no known intracellular signaling
function. The affinity of this receptor for IGF-I is about
Fig. 12.4. Phospholipase C signaling pathways. A variety of
100-fold lower than for IGF-ll and it does not recog-
second messengers DAG, IP3, and Ca can be produced by factors
that stimulate phospholipase C in the plasma membrane.
nize insulin.
For IGF-I binding to its receptor to be effective,
two cellular processes must come together. First, the
of GTP into cyclic GMP (cGMP), which can act as a
 binding reaction must transmit a signal through the
second messenger like cAMP. Some of these other
plasma membrane to regulatory molecules located on
second messengers are illustrated in Figure 12.4. To
the cytoplasmic face of the membrane. Second, a signal
finish our discussion of G proteins, if the target protein
is needed to cause localization and interaction of the
acts as an ion channel, activation acts to change per-
internal receptor domain with downstream effector
meability of the membrane for that ion. The G protein-
molecules of the signal transduction cascade. Activa-
linked receptors make a very large family of surface
tion of IGF-IR produces intracellular molecules that
receptors, including the oxytocin receptor we dis-
mediate at least four distinct, but overlapping, signal-
 cussed earlier related to the milk ejection reflex.
ing pathways. This likely explains multiple effects
A third class of surface-acting signaling molecules
linked to IGF-I activation reported in various cells
 is the enzyme-linked receptors. Essentially, the binding
types or in the same cell type under differing physi-
of the hormone to the receptor activates the receptor
ological conditions.
(or directly linked protein) so that it capable of phos-
 In addition to receptors and the intracellular signal-
phorylating cellular proteins. Phosphorylation alters
ing cascade, there are also six IGF-1 binding proteins
activity of the affected protein. Some agriculturally
(IGFBPs) and nine related proteins (IGFBP-rP) that
relevant signaling molecules include the mammary
affect the actions of IGF-1 (Clemmons, 1998).
active regulators IGF-I, insulin, EGF, and vascular
 Mechanisms of action for prolactin (Prl) and growth
endothelial growth factor (VEGF); these are all exam-
hormone (GH), two protein hormones with long-
ples of tyrosine-specific protein kinases (Butler et al.,
recognized importance in growth and development
1998; Adams et al., 2000).
and mammary function, have only recently been elu-
To illustrate some of the cellular and molecular
cidated. Prolactin receptor (PrlR) and growth hormone
detail of these receptor types we focus on the interac-
receptor (GHR) are simple proteins with a single
tion of IGF-I and its receptor. This is because IGF-I is
transmembrane domain. The hormone has two sites
an excellent example of a receptor kinases. Secondly.
capable of binding to its receptor protein. Initially the
IGF-I is important in animal agriculture and medicine.
hormone binds (site l) to create an inactive complex.
IGFs are intimately tied to normal development
This hormone-receptor complex then diffuses within
(muscle growth, mammary growth, and reproduc-
the membrane to bind with a second receptor (site 2).
tion), diabetes, and some cancers. In animal agricul-
 This causes receptor homodimerization and formation
ture, growth is critical, and use of GH as a tool to
of an active complex (Fig. 12.6). Although it had been
increase milk production and development is also
known that stimulation with Prl or GH caused tyro-
linked to IGFs (Akers, 2006). Figure 12.5 illustrates an
sine phosphorylation of a number of cellular proteins,
example of one of these receptor types, specifically the
the cytoplasmic domains of the receptors have no
insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors.
inherent enzymatic activity. This means that hormone
IGF-I and IGF-ll regulate cell growth, cell differen-
binding and dimer formation must activate other
tiation, maintenance of cell function, and prevention
kinases. A breakthrough came with the discovery of
Endocrine system
329
IGF-1
Fg. 12.5. Diagram of components of the insulin and IGF family of
proteins and receptors. The upper portion illustrates binding of
IGF-l, IGF-ll, and insulin to related receptors. The thickness of the 
arrows varies with affinity of binding. The center of the figure
indicates phosphorylation signaling cascades linked to binding of
IGF-IIR
IR-A
IR-B
Hybrid 
IGF-IR
ligands to different receptors. The bottom panel shows cellular 
events most closely related to receptor binding, but the overlap in
binding, signaling, and response is also apparent. The example is
 on activities in mammary tissue, but similar responses also occur in
IRS
14-3-3
Methenyltetrahydrofolate
 cther tissues. Panel B illustrates some of the details of the signal
Grb10
RasirafMAPK
 PI3IAKT
Synthase
transduction pathways for IGF-l. Of course the process is initiated 
by binding of IGF-I to its receptor (1); this leads to
autophosphorylation of the tyrosine residues of the β subunits of the
Cellcycle
Dsetranspor
receptor (blacked circles). This phosphorylation cascade allows for
Dcasein geon
progression
Glucose metabolism
 binding of IRS proteins (3) and their phosphorylation. This change
Protein synthesis
Cell survival
makes available binding sites for recruitment of other intracellular
 Lipid synthesis 
Gene transcri ption
 signaling molecules (i.e., the p85 and p110 subunits of P13 kinase),
resulting in enzymatic activity that converts membrane-bound lipids 
like 3,4 inositol phosphate into active second messenger molecules
(inositol triphosphate). These molecules combine with
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 to activate AKT. AKT
signaling is linked with IGF-l stimulation of protein synthesis.
 PI3K-linked signaling is associated with inhibition of apoptosis (as
 described in the text) as well as IGF-l stimulation of glucose
transport. In addition to this pathway, IRS-1 with SHC bind to the
receptor and are phosphorylated as well (4). Activation of MAPK 
RAS
onoire spaaoid sueuais (aseusy uiaoid paeae-uao)
SOS
recruitment of a complex composed of Grb2 and son of sevenless
p110
(SOS), which is recruited from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane.
Grb2
SHC
This allows SOS to come in close position to RAS (a GTP-binding
p85
3
 Map kinase kinase
protein named for the RAS gene first identified in viruses that cause
P13 kinase
[MEK]
 aueuxa dadl sa e sazaiees sul (sei ui eoies
then activates RAF kinase, which in turn activates MAPK or MEK1.
Targets of this cascade include members of the Ets and forkhead 
Map kinase (ERKs)
transcription factor families. Regulation ultimately of these
2
[Bad FKHRL)
transcription factors explains how IGF-l binding to its receptor can
 Cell 
produce alterations in gene expression that modify proliferation,
survival
(Cyelin D1) Cell
paidepe aie sainslg sllan alien ui sisoidode pue 'uoeuana
proliferation
from Hadsell and Bonnette (2000), Hadsell et al. (2002), Clemmons
B
and Maile (2003), and LeRoith and Roberts (2003).
dasn re de (i z as a se
goal is not to overwhelm you with details of cell sig-
tor dimerization. This kinase belongs to a family with
 naling, but to give you an appreciation of the intricate,
four members, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and Tyk2, each of
 even elegant myriad of controls that are possible in
which act in signaling of various cytokine receptors.
regulation of hormone and growth factor action after
For PrlR and GHR, JAK2 is especially important. With
 they bind to their respective receptors.
 PrlR, JAK2 is constitutively associated with the recep-
tor but with GHR the enzyme associates with the
receptor only after hormone binding and dimer for-
Mechanisms of internal hormone cell signaling
mation (Goffin and Kelly, 1997; Hynes et al., 1997).
The signaling pathway depends on JAK2-induced
Hormone receptors (steroid hormones, thyroid hor-
phosphorylation of a transcription factor called signal
mones, retinoic, and vitamin D), adapted orphan recep-
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs).
 tors (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptors PPAR
One of these, STAT5, is specifically for Prl stimulation
[α, β/8, and y], Liver X receptors [α and β] and reti-
 of the casein gene expression in mammary tissue.
noid X receptors [α, β, and yl), orphan receptors, and
It is sometimes easy to dismiss these detailed bio-
other nuclear receptors serve to activate functions
chemical studies as esoteric. However, basic informa-
linked to a plethora of structurally diverse, small,
 tion derived from studies of our domestic species will
hydrophobic molecules that pass across the plasma
yield techniques to improve the control of growth and
membrane of target cells to act internally. Activated
performance of our animals in unexpected ways. This
 receptors for these agents, that is, those bound by
is a very complex and important area of research. Our
ligand, act essentially as transcription factors.
330
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Hormone
Nucleus
 Cell surface
Steroid
 Cytoplasm
 Cell membrane
Free
chaperones
A
DNA
receptor
Receptor
complex
blnding
slte
New
proteln
DNA
Transcrlptlon
Translatlor
B
Inactive
Rough
mRNA
endoplasmlc
retlculum
Fg. 12.7. Steroid hormone mechanism of action. The hormone
Active
diffuses into the nucleus and binds to a receptor-chaperonin 
complex. Binding allows the chaperone proteins to dissociate and 
the activated hormone receptor combination binds to specific sites
 on the DNA. This triggers the transcription of certain genes and
production of new mRNA. The new mRNA is translated and new
proteins are made. These new proteins are responsible for the
biological effects of the hormone.
JAK2 kinase is
+
activated -
phosphorylation of
complex can attach to a specific region of the DNA.
STAT proteins
 This association allows transcription of the gene(s)
adjacent to this binding site. Thereafter, transcription
Activated Stat5a and
Stat5b cause gene
 of the specific gene(s) occurs and the new mRNA is
tran scripti on
processed and transported to the ribosome for transla-
tion. These newly minted proteins are responsible for
Fig. 12.6. Ligand-induced receptor homodimerization. The
the hormone effects observed (Fig. 12.7). A reasonable
hormone first binds with the receptor to create an inactive complex
view is that steroid hormone family receptors are
(A). Binding with a second receptor produces a dimer (B). This
produces an activated complex (C). The active complex stimulates
essentially ligand-activated transcription factors. A
JAK2 kinase, which phosphorylates Stat proteins. As a dairy
 general rule is that responses to these hormones are
example, Stat5a and Stat5b are closely involved in Prl stimulation
 slower than for the surface-acting peptides.
of milk protein gene transcription. Receptor activation can also 
However, evidence for extracellular or surface
stimulate other signaling pathways, including mitogen-activated 
actions for steroid hormones includes reports of spe-
protein (MAP) kinase and protein C kinase (PKC).
cific binding of radiolabeled steroid hormones to cell
membranes and very rapid response that can occur
following addition of steroid hormones to target cells.
These receptors constitute a complex of at least 48
For example, testosterone rapidly stimulates transport
members that are involved in a myriad of functions,
 of glucose, calcium, and amino acids into kidney cells.
including hormone signaling, cell differentiation, and
There is also evidence for binding of steroid hormones
cell metabolism (Kurakula et al., 2013). The receptor
 to gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) receptors in
 proteins for these hormones and agents have a hydro-
nerve cells and associated rapid changes in ion flow
phobic region near the C-terminal end of the protein
into the cells. At least one G protein-linked receptor
that binds directly to the hormone. A more hydro-
(GPR30) that is activated by estrogen has been iden-
philic domain of the receptor binds to DNA when
tfified. Indeed, it appears to explain a part of the re-
the hormone-receptor complexes translocate to the
sistance to the anfiestrogen tamoxifen that occurs in
nucleus. These segments of the receptor proteins are
some breast cancer patients (lgnatov et al., 2012).
Thus, some effects linked with steroid hormone action
there are nine highly conserved Cys residues that occur
may well depend on surface actions (Levin, 201l). The
in Cys-X-X-Cys sequences, the so-called zinc-finger
point here is to remind you that endocrine research is
 arrangement. Binding releases associated proteins called
rapidly expanding, so it is foolish to make dogmatic
chaperones so the newly formed hormone-receptor
conclusions about hormone mechanisms of action.
Endocrine system
331
 New findings and discoveries are continually being
were critical. Soon after techniques were developed
incorporated into our understanding.
for the radiolabeling of hormones, it became clear to
Estrogen, progesterone, cortisol, triodothyronine
a number of researchers that measuring the amount of
(Ts), retinoids, and others are potent stimulators of
isotope bound to a target tissue, cells, or cell fractions
 target cells in domestic animals. Effects of a variety of
could be used to estimate the number of receptors.
steroid family hormones will be discussed in subse-
Radiolabeling refers to the incorporation of a radioac-
quent sections as well as in other chapters. The essen-
tive isotope into the structure of the hormone. For
 tial feature of this section is to emphasize the primary
proteins, iodine is the most common isotope used for
differences in the mechanism of action for surface-
this purpose. Analogous to thyroid hormones that
 acting versus other hormones.
have dietary iodine incorporated into the ring struc-
ture of their tyrosine amino acids, test tube reactions
are used to chemically incorporate radiolabeled iodine.
Receptors and regulation
If this is done using either I12 or 131 isotopes of iodine,
the protein is effectively labeled or tagged. Assuming
As you have surmised from your reading to this point,
the protein is still biologically active, that is, that the
controlling the actions of hormones and growth factors
site where the iodine molecule incorporated does not
is critical in homeostasis. Alterations in internal cell
impair the binding reaction, the newly labeled protein
signaling are important but it is also important to
can be used to measure the quantity of receptor in a
 appreciate general factors that affect the ability of hor-
tissue or cell preparation. This is typically done by
mones to function. Hormones elicit their biological
 allowing the iodinated hormone (called hot or tracer)
effects by binding with high-affinity receptors. Ligand
to bind and then in parallel tubes adding an excess of
binding to its receptor is governed by the law of mass
nonradiolabeled (cold) hormone. The difference in
action (illustrated in the following).
binding of isotope between samples with and without
k+1
the competing cold hormone is a relative indicator of
[HR]
receptor number. Figure 12.8 is an example illustrating
In this expression, [H] is the hormone concentra-
prolactin receptor binding in the membranes from the
tion, [R] is the receptor concentration, and [HR] is the
ovine mammary gland.
concentration of the hormone-receptor complex; k + 1
 In this example, a series of tubes all containing
and k - l are rate constants for creation and dissolu-
equal amounts of cell membrane suspended in buffer
tion of the [HR] complex, respectively. At equilibrium
were incubated with the same quantity of radiola-
2
conditions, these terms can be written as shown here:
beled hormone (64,500cpm [counts per minute] per
tube equal to lng). Notice in the absence of competi-
[H][R] _k-1
=KD
tion that the membranes bound about half of the total
[HR]
k+1
KD is the equilibrium dissociation constant that
 describes the affinity of the ligand-receptor interac-
40
tion; that is, the lower the value of the KD, the higher
 s e  sn d   
low concentrations on the ligand (hormone or growth
factor are sufficient tobind to the receptor. On average.
30
ctiv
when the concentration of the hormone is equal to the
3
ound radioac
value for the affinity of the receptor, 50% of the recep-
tor will be bound. Typical affinity estimates for
×
20
M
common receptors are in the range of 10-9 to 10-10 M/L.
(CP
For example, the affinity of prolactin receptor for
membranes of mammary cells is about 2 x 10-*M/L.
10
A concentration of 50ng/mL is approximately equal
B
to the affinity value. This is relevant because normal
blood (basal) concentrations range from 5ng/mL to
75ng/mL. So the affinity of the receptor ensures that
200
400
600
800
1000
normal circulating concentrations prolactin can effec-
tively impact target cells.
Competing hormone (ng)
You might ask how it is possible to measure the
Fg. 12.8. Receptor assay. In this example, increasing
affinity of various receptors for their hormone ligands
concentration of nonradiolabeled prolactin (competing hormone)
 or to measure very low-circulating concentrations of
displaces binding of radiolabeled prolactin to receptors on cel
hormones. As is often the case, technology advances
332 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
added, -38,000cpm. Sets of tubes then received
2000 
increasing quantities of cold hormone (noniodinated)
ranging from 0 (total binding tubes) to 512ng per tube.
The data presented are the average of three samples
[HR]
at each concentration. After a period of time to reach,
pL
1000-
the tubes were centrifuged. The membrane formed a
pellet in the bottom of the tube and the liquid was
removed. The amount of radioactivity remaining in
the pellets was then measured by placing the samples
in a gamma counter. This machine measures the
0
amount of radioactivity in cpm. As you can see, addi-
100
200
300
tion of increasing amounts of cold hormone dis-
placed about 90% of the bound radioactivity once
Radiolabeled hormone [H]
the hormone concentration reached about a 10o-fold
凸
excess (-100ng) compared with the quantity of radio-
actively labeled material added. Notice that adding
Ro
greater quantities of cold hormone has very little
KD
further effect. The radioactivity that cannot be com-
peted away even in the presence of excess cold is
called nonspecific binding. The radioactivity that is
Slope =
displaced (specific binding) reflects the number of
receptor molecules in the sample. In addition, if dis-
placement is studied using either a graded concen-
[HR]
 tration of cold displacement or a safuration of binding
using known graded increasing concentrations of
[H]
tracer, it is possible to calculate the affinity of the
binding reaction as well as estimate the number of
receptors.
Specifically, if it is assumed that total receptor con-
centration Ro = [HR] + [R], the equation given earlier
can rearranged to give the following expression:
[HR]
[HR]
[HR][RO]
[H]
KD /KD
B
This is the Scatchard equation, which provides that
Fig. 12.9. Saturation binding and Scatchard plot. A hypothetical
when the ratio of bound over free ligand ([HR]/[H])
ligand saturation curve (upper) and Scatchard analysis of receptor
binding (lower) is shown. The K。 represents the dissociation
is plotted against bound ligand concentration ([HR]),
constant, RO the total receptor concentration and [HR| and [H|
the slope of the line is defined by -1/KD, the y-intercept
concentrations of the bound and free ligand, respectively.
by R0/KD and the x-intercept by R0. These computa-
tional methods, based on knowledge of bound and
free concentrations of hormone determined experi-
receptor complexes that can be formed is corre-
mentally, give information about the apparent affinity
spondingly reduced. This also suggests that changes
of the receptor and the total concentration of receptors
in the other element of the equation, hormone concen-
in the preparation. Examples of a saturation curve and
tration or [H], are also important in determining
Scatchard plot are illustrated in Figure 12.9.
responsiveness. Indeed, circulating concentrations of
 In practice, the affinity of a given receptor for its
many hormones are dramatically altered with time or
ligand is generally stable; however, the number of
 in response to physiological stimuli. For example, in
 receptors can vary dramatically in response to treat-
 monogastric species, consumption of a meal high in
ments or physiological status. Thus, a major mecha-
carbohydrates stimulates the secretion of the hormone
nism for regulating the effects of a hormone or growth
insulin. This means that the capacity of insulin to
factor is to alter the number of target cell receptors that
drive glucose into storage is improved because of the
 are synthesized. This is really fundamental when you.
increased blood concentration. Even if the concentra-
consider the initial equation describing the law of
tion of insulin receptors is not changed, the effect of
mass action given earlier in the chapter. If the number
insulin is enhanced; this is the essence of the law of
of available receptors is reduced, and the hormone
 mass action. With more insulin, the odds of generating
concentration stays the same, the number of hormone
the [HR] complexes are improved. As time passes, the
Endocrine system
333
peak in insulin concentrations decreases, so its effect
 occupy the receptor, normal agonists are prevented
is diminished because of reduced receptor binding.
from action so hormone response declines.
 To summarize, not only are there complex changes
In a few cases, receptors are available in several fold
surplus relative to those required for a maximum
responses, but changes in hormone receptor number
 physiological response. Having these spare receptors
or hormone concentration also modify effectiveness.
seems a waste but it is suggested that this allows a
A change in the number of receptors can result from
seeming mismatch between low-circulating concen-
the synthesis of more hormone receptors, that is, more
 trations of the hormone and relatively low-affinity
mRNA, transcription, and translation, or in some
receptors to still be effective. Going back to the law of
cases by simply making available receptors that were
mass action, by increasing the number of available
previously unavailable. Such receptors might be bound
receptors, this guarantees that an adequate number of
to other proteins that mask the hormone-binding site.
receptors will be bound for appropriate action despite
If this inhibitor is removed, the number of available
the presence of less-than-saturating concentrations of
hormone receptors is increased and, everything else
hormone in circulation.
being equal, response to the hormone is enhanced. As
we discuss specific endocrine organs we will provide
some examples of changes in receptor number that
Measuring circulating hormone
 correspond with alterations in function.
concentrations
 One common response to prolonged increases in
circulating concentrations of a particular hormone is
The development of radioimmunoassay (RlA) tech-
receptor downregulation. This is essentially a homeo-
riques in the late 1960s and early 1970s ushered in a
 static response to prevent overstimulation. These mech-
golden age for the study of endocrine regulation of lac-
anisms are vital but not foolproof. For example,
tation, reproduction, and growth in domestic animals.
Although bioassays had served to establish general
can lead to gigantism but after puberty, acromegaly
themes (changes in pituitary Prl, GH, FSH or LH in.
can occur. In some breeds of beef cattle, large size and
correspondence with major reproductive events, e.g.
muscle development are at least partially attributed to
puberty, pregnancy, lactation), widespread availabil-
alteration in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth.
ity of RIA methods for Prl, GH, oxytocin, progester-
factor axis. This suggests there has essentially been
one, estrogen, and other hormones allowed study of
 genetic selection for what was initially a mutation in
hormone secretion on a scale previously unimagined.
growth control.
These techniques replaced the bioassays and allowed
5
 In other cases, increased secretion of a hormone
the accurate measurement of circulating blood or
stimulates the synthesis of other hormone receptors.
tissue concentrations of many hormones. Hormones
 For example, late in gestation, as parturition approaches,
 and growth factors are typically present in only pico-
circulating concentrations of estrogen increase. This
 gram (pg) or nanogram (ng) quantities per milliter of
produces increased synthesis of oxytocin receptors in
plasma. For the first time it became possible to deter-
the uterus. This adjustment promotes the birth process
mine correspondence between the secretion rate and
at the appropriate time; increased uterine oxytocin
 pattern of secretion. As an offshoot of methods for
receptors early in gestation would not be desirable.
radiolabeling purified hormones for use in biochem-
Molecules that bind to receptors with high affinity
istry and receptor-binding studies, RIA methods were
are classified as either agonists or antagonists. Ago-
subsequently developed.
nists are ligands that trigger the usual response associ-
A brief history explains the idea behind the RlA. Dr.
ated with hormone action. However, if you use the
Rosalyn Yalow, who was working at the Veterans
pharmaceutical industry as an example, many drugs
Administration Hospital, Bronx, NY, was considering
act to either mimic or block naturally occurring ligand-
the possibility that some of her diabetic patients were
binding reactions. The same general idea applies to
producing antibodies against insulin. To test this idea
hormone receptor interactions. Some synthetic
ver
she reasoned that if this were true it could be tested
 sions of steroid hormones are much more potent than
by incubating blood serum from suspect patients with
the corresponding naturally occurring versions. This
radioactively tagged or labeled insulin. This was about
may reflect an increased affinity of the receptor for the
the time when techniques for radiolabeling proteins
analog compound so that more [HR] complexes are
for receptor studies were also developed. The idea
maintained, therefore enhancing response. Other pos-
was that if antibodies against insulin were present that
sibilities are that the analog is longer lived, that is, not
 they would bind to the insulin and thereby prevent
subject to normal degradation pathways or some
insulin from having its normal physiological effects.
 other mechanism. Antagonists bind to the receptor but
After an incubation period with added radiolabeled
fail to activate usual effector mechanisms. Since they
insulin the samples were passed over a gel filtration
334  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
column. The key point is that antibodies are very large
proteins compared to insulin. Radiolabeled insulin
the animals would have antibodies that recognize or
that is not bound to an antibody would pass through
bind bovine insulin in their bloodstream. Blood or
the column more slowly than insulin in the bound
serum samples from these animals could be used to
state. Specifically, small molecules are retarded in the
 provide the first antibody source needed in an RIA. As
column (they can migrate into all small spaces that
part of the procedure, there is also a need for more
make up the gel matrix) but large complexes of anti-
body plus insulin would quickly be eluted from the
body; in other words, anti-guinea pig gamma globulin
column. Second, she could estimate rates of passage
antiserum (gamma globulin is the class of proteins to
by measuring the amount of radioactivity in fractions
which antibodies belong). Most often a large animal
that eluted from the column. If the sample contained
(sheep or goat) is used for this purpose. Briefly, the
antibodies, the rate of passage would be much faster
 sheep or goat is immunized with a mixture of purified.
with a control sample. She did find that some diabetic
 guinea pig gamma globulins. It is important to realize
patients made antibodies against insulin.
that these antibodies recognize antibodies from the
 However, our focus is on what happened later. She
guinea pig. They do not recognize the hormone (bovine
 and her collaborators, started to work on the question
insulin in our example). The purpose of these second
of whether antibodies might not be used to somehow
antibodies is to create a complex that can be precipi-
measure hormone concentrations. This is similar to
tated by simple centrifugation. They are added in
the example shown in Figure 12.8 that illustrates the
excess so that all of the available primary antibody
competition of radiolabeled Prl on receptor protein-
 molecules are captured. Since the tracer is competed
sites by adding increasing amounts of nonradiola-
from binding sites on the first antibody, much of the
beled Prl. Essentially, could antibodies be used to first
tracer can be lost when the tubes are decanted fol-
bind radiolabeled hormone and the rate of competi-
lowing centrifugation. Table 12.2 summarizes these
tion be used to estimate the amount of hormone in an
required reagents. Let's now consider the procedure
unknown sample? The answer turned out to be yes.
 of how the double antibody RIA assay is performed.
This was a major accomplishment. In fact, Dr. Yalow
A normal procedure requires the creation of stan-
shared the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1977 for her
dard curve and dilution of unknown samples followed
pioneering efforts to develop RIA for protein hormones.
by addition of the reagents in a prescribed sequence.
The other winners that year were Drs. Andrew Schally
A typical pattern is illustrated in the following:
and Roger Guillemin for their competing efforts to
 discover hypothalamic hormones that control secre-
Day l—label tubes and add dilutions of standards
tion of anterior pituitary hormones.
tubes (usually 500μL total volume).
Several things are required to develop an RIA for
Day 2—add tracer (a dilution of radiolabeled
measuring hormone concentration. First, a source of
hormone -30,000 cpm per tube; usually 100 μL)
purified hormone is needed. This was fortuitous in Dr.
 Day 2—add diluted first antibody to all tubes except
Yalow's research since insulin has been purified from
total count and background tubes (usually 100 μL).
porcine or bovine pancreatic tissue since the 1930s for
use in diabetic patients. Because of recombinant DNA
technology much of the insulin currently in clinical
use utilizes the human insulin gene spliced into Esch-
Table 12.2. Materials needed for RlA procedure.
erichia coli. By the way, this biotechnology revolution
has altered much more than possibly esoteric study of
Reagent
Purpose
endocrinology; an increasing number of agricultural
products that are produced in this manner—bovine
 Purified 
Preparation of a standard curve
hormone
 Making of radiolabeled hormone (tracer)
GH or bST to increase milk production or the rennet
 Use in immunization procedure
used in cheese making—readily come to mind.
Tracer
This is the radiolabeled hormone
The purified hormone is needed to make the radio-
 labeled tracer and is used to generate a standard curve
First or primary
 This is often diluted blood serum from
in the assay procedure. A source of purified hormone
antibody
 an immunized animal; rabbits or guinea
 pigs are frequently used
is also necessary to produce antibodies that recognize
the hormone under study. The antibody (often simply
Second 
This is usually diluted blood serum from
a dilution of serum from an immunized host animal)
antibody
 an immunized sheep or goat (e.g.
sheep anti-rabbit gamma globulin)
that specifically binds to the hormone is called the
Assay buffer
primary or first antibody. A common RIA technique is
Usually a phosphate buffer solution to
 called the double antibody RIA. This procedure requires
maintain pH and conditions appropriate
for the binding reactions to take place
the use of another antibody solution. For example, if
Endocrine system
335
Day 3—add diluted second antibody to all tubes
-33,0o0 counts per minute (cpm) each in this example.
Radioactivity is more accurately described in terms of
except the total count tubes (usually 100μL).
Day 3-6—incubate the assay tubes at 4C.
disintegrations per minute (dpm) because this takes
into account the efficiency of the counting device.
Day 7—add cold assay buffer (usually 1mL) and
immediate centrifuge all tubes except the total
However, use of cpm is acceptable to describe relative
count tubes. Decant the liquid and measure the
differences in radioactivity, especially if there are no
radioactivity remaining in each tube.
issues with variation in counting between samples.
This is not typically an issue with higher energy iso-
There are now variations on this basic procedure.
 topes such as I12s. Tubes 3-4 received all of the same
for example, many commercial RlA kits use tubes that
solutions as the other assay tubes, except buffer instead
have the first antibody bound to the surface of the
of 100μL of first antibody solution. Because the tracer
 tube. This eliminates the need for the second antibody
is an iodinated protein it can stick nonspecifically to
and centrifugation but basic principles remain the
surfaces. The radioactivity or cpm remaining in these
same. The fundamental idea is that competition for
tubes provides a measurement of background or non-
tracer bound to the primary antibody by hormone in
 specific binding. The values for percent binding have
unknowns to be evaluated is compared with the com-
the background cpm subtracted prior to calculation.
 petition that occurs when known amounts of purified,
Tubes 6-9 are called total binding tubes because they
nonradiolabeled hormone are added to assay tubes. In
contain tracer and all the necessary antibodies but no
 other words, the amount of radioactivity remaining
competing hormone, that is, neither added standard
in tubes containing unknown samples is compared
nor unknown. Notice that in the absence of any
against a standard curve. While most procedures now
competition about 39% of the total tracer added is
rely on computer programs to crunch the numbers
bound to the antibody TB/TC x 100 [12,950/32,650 x
and calculate concentrations rather than interpolation
100 = 39.7%]. For the purpose of creating the standard
of results from a graphical plot of the standard curve,
curve, this total binding or zero competing value pro-
the ideas can be readily illustrated this way. Let's con-
vides a reference point for comparison to create the
sider a set of results (Table 12.3) from a RIA standard
standard curve and is called the 100% binding value.
curve for bovine insulin and some radioactivity values
 Now consider the radioactivity values for tubes
for some unknown samples.
10-12 and 31-33. For those that had 0.1ng of nonra-
 The values listed are averages for replicates of 3-4
diolabeled insulin added, the radioactivity is slightly
tubes or duplicates for the total count tubes. Total
less than for the total binding tubes (12,950 vs. 11,551);:
2
count tubes are simply the average of two tubes that
expressed as a percent of the total binding sample, this
contain 1ooμL of the tracer solution but nothing else.
 is 88.7%. As you scan down the listing with increasing
These tubes are set aside and counted along with the
 amounts of nonradiolabeled (cold) insulin added, the
other assay tubes to provide a measure of how much
of the tracer was added to each of the assay tubes.
 and smaller. For example, with the addition of 6.4ng
Remember that all the tubes had 1ooμL of the same
of cold insulin, bound radioactivity equals 2507 cpm
diluted solution of tracer at the start of the assay or
 or 15.7% of total binding. Clearly, there is a negative
relationship between the concentration of competing
cold insulin and the amount of tracer bound to the
Table 12.3.
Example bovine insulin RlA data.
antibody. Data for tubes 34-36 are the average for
replicated samples (100uL of serum) taken from a cow
Tube
Description
Radioactivity
% Bound
 prior to the infusion of glucose. Bound radioactivity
No.
Remaining (cpmj
 averages 10,639 cpm or 79.2% of total binding. Data for
Total count
32,650
tubes 37-39 is the average for replicate samples (100 μL
1,2
3-5
Background 
555
of serum) from the same cow 10 minutes following an
6-9
Total binding
12,950
100
 IV infusion of glucose. Bound radioactivity averages
10-12
Std 0.1 ng/tube
11,551
88.7
7256cpm or 54.1% of total binding. Could you now
13-15
 Std 0.2 ng/tube
9981
76.0
 extrapolate from the standlard curve to estimate the ng
16-18
Std 0.4 ng/tube
8800
66.5
19-21
agn/su g'0 prs 
54.5
of insulin in each of these samples?
7311
22-24
Std 1.6 ng/tube
5564
40.4
Figure 12.10 shows a plot (insert) of percentage of
25-27
agn/su z'e pis
4026
28.0
radioactivity bound versus nanogram of cold insulin
28-30
aqn/su t9 prs
2507
15.7
added. While this simple plot clearly shows this nega-
Std 12.8ng/tube
1856
10.5
tive relationship, it is mathematically more complex
34-36
Unknown 1
10,369
79.2
54.1
to extrapolate from this curve. However, a simple
Unknown 2
7256
 transformation serves to linearize the shape of the
'Data given as average counts per minute (cpm).
curve so that extrapolation is simpler. Specifically,
336 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
concentrations of cold hormone are expressed on a
and molecules. For isotope labeling, some steroids are
log scale (x-axis) and the percent binding (y-axis) as a
 labeled with tritium (*H) or carbon 14C. In addition, to
 logit transformation. In practice, these calculations are
produce antiserum to detect steroids and other small
usually done via computer program but comparing
poor antigens, the molecules are often linked with
the two plots (Fig. 10.i0) illustrates the utility of the
larger proteins or peptides. Although traditionally
transformation. For example, consider the data for
hormones were tagged with radioactivity, a number
unknown 1 (tubes 34-36; 10,669 cpm; 79.2% binding)
 other immunoassay techniques have evolved to avoid
and the corresponding dashed line (Sl) in Figure
the use of isotopes and costs associated with possible
10.10. The intersection with the x-axis suggests this
safety issues or waste disposal. In these assays the
corresponds to -0.22ng of insulin in 100 μL of serum
antigen is linked to an enzyme, fluorescent tag. or
or 2.2ng/mL, thatis, each mL (0.22ng × 10 = 2.2ng/mL).
chemiluminescent label to produce the tracer solution.
The second unknown (S2) suggests an interaction at
For example, many enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent
about 0.85ng, so this corresponds with 0.85ng/100μL
assays (ELISAs)
)that depend on antibody-coated
 or 8.5ng/mL. This indicates a nearly fourfold increase
microtiter plates and enzyme-labeled reporter antibod-
in serum insulin within 10 minutes after administra-
ies can be as sensitive as traditional RlA procedures.
tion of glucose.
Despite the advancements allowed by use of the
The RIA methodology has been a powerful technol-
RIA, it is nonetheless important to remember that the
 ogy to measure not only hormones but other proteins
 method depends on antibody-antigen binding so that
it is possible with highly specific antibodies (e.g-,
monoclonal antibodies) that fragments of hormones
might be detected in addition to intact molecules.
95
Since the method does not distinguish biologically
active hormones, some caution in interpretation of
90
8
results is also warranted.
25
Percent
80
binding
0 0.250.5 12481632
160)!
70
Insulin (ng)
Endocrine and growth factor signaling
scale)
60
50
40
2
30
build a framework to add some sense to this seem-
Chapter
20
ingly bewildering array of first and second messen-
S 1
S 2
 gers, receptor types, and signaling cascades to really
10
understand relationships with physiology? Tradi-
tionally, hormones were classified based on their effects.
0.20.3 0.4
1.0
2.0 3.0
10
20
Insulin (ng) (log scale)
One such classification scheme is illustrated in Table
12.4. For example, glucocorticoids (cortisol and rela-
Fig. 12.10. RlA standard curve standard plot. The insert shows the
tives) were named for their capacity to affect carbohy-
relationship between percent binding and amount of added insulin 
drate metabolism, hence the metabolic classification.
on a simple arithmetic plot. Conversion to Logit-Log transformation
of the same data produces a straight-line relationship that simplifies
The pituitary hormones were named because of their
extrapolation for calculating unknown values (S 1 and S 2).
trophic effects, that is, their capacity to induce secre-
Table 12.4. Functional classification of hormones.
Cfass
Exampfes
Actions
Kinetic
Oxytocin, epinephrine
Uterine contractions, milk ejection
 Pigment secretion
Metabolic
Cortisol
Carbohydrate mobilization
Insulin 
Glucose uptake
Triiodothyronine
Metabolicrate
Morphogenic
Estrogen
Gamete production, tissue development, sex characteristics
HD
General body growth
Testosterone
Gamete production, secondary sex characteristics
Behavior
Estrogen
Estrus
Testosterone
Aggression
Prl
 Nest building and other maternal actions
Endocrine system
337
tions of hormones in other endocrine glands. However,
 Secretion of the hormones of the anterior pituitary
GH, for example, has impacts on metabolism, growth,
is tightly linked to secretion of other hormones that
cardiac function, and secretion of IGF-I from the liver.
 are produced by cells located in nuclei of the hypo-
Prl is associated with more than 100 specific physio-
 thalamus. Although these releasing hormones (or releas-
logical activities. Other hormones were named based
 ing inhibiting hormones, in some cases) are produced
on their gland of origin, that is, thyroid hormones.
only in very small amounts, they are able to impact
While such classifications have logic, there can be con-
the activity of cells of the pars distalis because of a
fusion and problems. For example, the actions of the
 unique arrangement of blood vessels between the
glucocorticoids can be much more diverse than just
hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary. This is called
those that impact carbohydrate metabolism. These
the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal blood system.
effects are only a subset. Second, it is possible that
Simply stated, venous blood that drains from the hypo
structurally similar hormones can signal target cells
thalamus mixes with arterial blood and passes to the
by a common receptor. For example, as illustrated
anterior pituitary before it goes into the general venous
in Figure 10.5, insulin and IGF-1 have distinct recep-
circulation. The importance of this special anatomical
tors. The affinity of insulin for the IGF-I receptor is
relationship was confirmed by elegant experiments in
lower than the affinity of IGF-1, but, for example, what
the 1960s and 1970s that showed that placing a foil
would happen in a diabetic state with elevated con-
barrier between the hypothalamus and pituitary
centrations circulating insulin? Despite the lower
markedly inhibited the secretion of all of the anterior
affinity, it is likely that under these conditions insulin
pituitary hormones except Prl. Although the secretion
could more likely signal via its native receptor as well
of the hypothalamic releasing hormones was not pre-
as IGF-1.
vented by this procedure, diversion of these secretions
 These complications and the burgeoning data coming
into the general circulation, diluted the concentrations
from molecular biology and cell biology studies sug-
so much that the capacity of regulated secretion of
 gest that hormones and growth factors would be more
anterior pituitary hormones was lost. Of course, the
logically classified based on the receptor through which
these molecules signal target cells. This has certainly
 blood. Arterial branches of the circle of Willis supply
revolutionized our understanding of cell signaling in
most of this blood.
that we now understand that there are broad families
of hormones and growth factors that share similar
2
mechanisms of action. For example, until the struc-
tural details of the receptors became available, who
Pituitary overview
would have combined leptin, Prl, and erythropoietin
Chap
into the same class of molecules? This does not mean
The pituitary gland or hypophysis is located at the
that we plan to abandon a traditional discussion of the
very base of the brain in a depression of the sphenoid
major endocrine glands and their products. It is,
bone of the lower skull called the sella turcia. This
however, important to appreciate that understanding
obviously provides a great deal of protection for this
e re st aisd si pe ss aa al jo
important endocrine gland. It is divided into three
of rapidly evolving research and study.
divisions or lobes. The largest is the adenohypophysis
 Or anterior pituitary. Much of the anterior lobe con-
tains cords of closely compacted epithelial cells, which
The hypophyseal-pituitary axis
 secrete many of the more familiar pituitary hormones,
that is, GH, Prl, FSH, and so on. This hormone-
For many years the pituitary gland was called the
synthesizing region, called the pars distalis, accounts
 master endocrine gland. This was because of the large
for most of the tissue mass. However, a smaller tongue
number of hormones that it produces and their wide-
of tissue extends up and around the pituitary stalk to
spread physiological effects throughout the body.
form a part of the anterior lobe called the pars tubera-
However, since negative feedback loops and secretion
lis. A smaller region of tissue, the pars intermedia or
of hypothalamic hormones ultimately regulate secre-
intermediate lobe, is sandwiched between the anterior
tion of the pituitary hormones, the question of master
pituitary and the second largest division called the
and servant is a real one. Regardless, the pituitary
 posterior pifuitary or pars nervosa. As you might have
hormones are essential and crifically important in
 guessed from its name, this region of the pituitary
control of animal functions directly related to animal
 gland has a very different cellular structure than the
agriculture productivity, that is, rate of growth, muscle
 anterior lobe. The cells of the region are in fact neuro-
development, reproduction, and lactation. This is
 secretory cell nerve endings and associated supporting
where we will begin our survey of major endocrine
cells. The hormones of the posterior pituitary are actu-
glands, their products, and their actions
ally synthesized by cell bodies of the hypothalamus
338 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
but released from the neural cells that populate the
pituitary hormones directly; that is, continued secre-
posterior pituitary Figure 12.1l illustrates the basics
tion of high amounts of the hormone negatively
 of the pituitary gland.
impacts the pituitary to reduce further synthesis and/
Many of the pituitary hormones are called trophic
 or secretion of the hormone. In other cases the nega-
hormones. This refers to the fact that these hormones
tive feedback involves the target stimulated by the
 generally stimulate the secretion of hormones by other
particular trophic hormone. Negative feedback can
endocrine glands in addition to other biological effects.
also occur by altering the rate of secretion of the hypo-
For example, consider follicle-stimulating hormone
thalamic hormones that stimulate the secretion of the
(FSH). In females, FSH stimulates the ovarian follicles,
anterior pituitary hormones. We will provide exam-
which synthesize and secrete estrogen and /or proges-
ples of these feedback loops as we discuss individual
terone (following ovulation). In males, FSH and LH
hormones.
 are involved in spermatogenesis, but they alsopromote
The epithelial cells of the anterior pituitary, specifi-
testosterone production. There are often many over-
cally the pars distalis, were first described based on
lapping biological actions between hormones. The
 their morphology and staining characteristics. For
secretion of one hormone can enhance the action of
 example, some populations of the cells stained with
another. This is called a synergistic effect. In other situ-
basic dyes and were identified as basophils. Other
ations, secretion of one hormone is necessary for
 populations stained with acidic dyes and were dubbed
 another to be effective; this can be described as a per-
acidophils. Cells that stained poorly with either class
missive effect. In fewer situations, two hormones can
of dyes were identified as chromophobes. Various
have opposing or antagonistic effects. It is important
that the secretion of the anterior pituitary hormones
tracked changes in reproduction, growth, or other
be adequately controlled. We will discuss the impor-
factors slowly lead an appreciation of cell types that
tance of the hypothalamus shortly, but secretion of
were connected with the secretion of specific hor-
these hormones is controlled by negative feedback
mones. For example, lactating animals were shown to
loops. This type of regulation can involve the anterior
have pituitaries with an increased number of acido-
phils. This was coupled with increased Prl secretion,
thus linking Prl secretion with acidophils. Generally,
 Pituitary stalk
acidophils include both somatotrophs that secrete GH
(infindibulum)
Pars
 or somatotropin and lactotrophs that secrete Prl.
2
tuberalis
Under usual circumstances the acidophils account for
50-70% of the cells. The basophils include the FSH and
 LH secreting gonadotrophs, cortiotrophs that secrete
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and thyrotrophs
that secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). More
recent studies have utilized specific immunocyto-
Pars distalis
 Posterior lobe
chemical techniques to localize specific hormones to
(pars nervosa)
particular pituitary cells. Results of these studies
 suggest that some cells may secrete more than one
hormone. For example, Prl and GH staining has been
Anterior
noted in the same cells. Such cells are called mammo-
lobe
somatotrophs. In humans they are most frequently
Sphenoid
 noted within pituitary fumors. Regardless, this sug-
 Intermediate lobe
bone
 gests that the cells of the pars distalis may display
(pars intermedia)
much more plasticity with respect to secretion of
Fig. 12.11. Pituitary gland anatomy.
hormones that was once thought. Table 12.5 provides
Table 12.5.
 Hormones of the anterior pituitary gland.
Hormone
Abbreviation
Tropic Target
Growth hormone
GH or STH
Liver
Prolactin
Prl
None
Adrenocorticotropin
ACT H
Adrenal cortex
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
TSH
Thyroid
Follicle-stimulating hormone
FSH
Ovary-testes
Luteinizing hormone
LM
Ovary-testes
 Endocrine system 
339
a listing of the anterior pituitary hormones and their
 mones. For example, ghrelin is a potent secretagogue
major trophic targets.
for GH that is found in both the Gl tract and central
Secretion of these pituitary hormones is closely
nervous system, with the highest concentrations in the
coupled with the hypothalamus. Figure 12.12 illus-
 stomach. On a weight basis it is even more potent than
trates relationships between the hypothalamus and
GHRH in stimulating secretion of GH. It also stimu-
the pituitary gland. The key idea is that particular
lates hunger and in many respects may act as a counter
groups of nerve cells (nuclei) in the hypothalamus
to leptin, which induces satiety (Kirsz and Zieba, 2011).
secrete hormones that act on the adjacent anterior
Kisspeptins are a group of related peptides that are
pituitary. For example, growth hormone releasing
produced from a 145-amino acid precursor that leads
hormone (GHRH) is 44-amino acid peptide produced
toc
cleavage products 10-14 amino acids in length.
in the arcuate nucleus from a larger precursor mole-
Kisspeptin-secreting neurons are present in the hypo-
cule of 107 or 108 amino acids. Most of the activity of
 thalamus, including the periventricular nucleus, pre-
the GHRH resides in the first 29 amino acids of the
optic nucleus, and arcuate nucleus. The neurons send
molecule, since experiments have shown that infu-
 projections to the medial preoptic nucleus, which is rich
sions of the truncated version are as effective as the
in cells producing gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
full-length version of the molecule. Many of the hypo-
Thus, kisspeptin is believed to act on GnRH neurons
 thalamic peptides appear in other places in the body.
 to stimulate GnRH secretion. Kisspeptin neurons also
For example, D cells of the pancreatic islet cells also
are apparently sensitive to changes steroid hormones
secrete the tetradecapeptide somatostatin (GHIH).
which are involved in control of GnRH and thereby
These hormones and their corresponding pituitary
 secretion of FSH and LH. Kisspeptins appear to be
target hormones are listed in Table 12.6.
especially important in regulation of the onset of
It seems that other agents are frequently being iden-
puberty (Amstalden et al., 201l; Pinilla et al., 2012).
tified that have impacts on secretion of pituitary hor-
 The hypothalamic hormones were first described
 because of their effects on the anterior pifuitary hor-
mones. It is now known that many of these substances
Hypothalamus
also function as neurotransmitters. The reverse is also
true. A number of molecules first described as neu-
Neurosecretory
rotransmitters also function as classic hormones; that
cells
is, the same substance might act as neurotransmitter,
Optic chiasma
neural hormone, or classic hormone. For a student,
2
this adds confusion, but also indicates how difficult it
Hypothalamo-
is to make hard and fast rules to categorize whether a
hypophyseal portal
blood supply
 messenger is a hormone or a neurotransmitter.
Table 12.7 provides some further detail about the
structure of hypothalamic hormones and posterior
pituitary hormones. Many of these peptides are very
small molecules compared with many other protein
 hormones. A comparison of the nonapeptides oxyto-
Capillary
network
cin and vasopressin shows the similarity of structure
Tropic
of these molecules, that is, only two amino acids differ
hormones into
and they have essentially identical cyclic structures,
circulation
yet their biological responses are distinct. GHRH and
Fig. 12.12. Relationship between the hypothalamus and the
CRH are larger but relatively simple peptide chains.
 anterior pituitary.
PIH is now known to be dopamine, which is similar
Table 12.6. Hormones of the hypothalamus.
Hormone
Abbreviation
Pituitary Target
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TRH
TSH-secreting cells (Prl—lactotrophs?)
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
GnRH
Gonadotrophs (FSH-LH)
GH-inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)
HIHD
Somatotrophs (GH)
GH-releasing hormone
GHRH
Somatotrophs (GH)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
CRH
Corticotrophs (ACTH)
Prolactin-inhibiting hormone (dopamine)
PIH
Lactotrophs (Prl)
Prolactin-releasing hormone
PIH
? (TRH)
340 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 12.7. Hypothalamic and neurohypophysis hormone structures.
Hormone
Structure
TRH (tripeptide)
(pyro)Glu-His-Pro-NM
GNRH (decapeptide)
(pyro)Glu-Mis-Trp-Ser-T'ry-Gly-Leu-Arg-Pro-Gyl-NM2
S
S
GHIH (tetradecapeptide)
Ala-Gyl-Cys-Lys-Asn-Phe-Phe-Trp-Lys-Thr-Phe-Thr-Ser-Cys
GHRH
 44 amino acids—derived from 107 AA precursor
CRH
41 amino acids—derived from 196 AA precursor
PIH
HO
HO
CH2CH2NH2
(dopamine)
Oxytocin (nonapeptide)
Cys-Try-lle-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Leu-Gly-NH2
S
S-
Vasopressin (nonapeptide)
Cys-T'ry-Phe-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Arg-Gly-NM2
Table 12.8.
- Neuroendocrine messengers as hormones and neurotransmitters.
Hormone Secreted by
Hormone Secreted by
Neurotransmitter
Endocrine Gfand
Neurons
Dopamine
Yes
Yes
Yes
Norepinephrine
Yes
Yes
Yes
Epinephrine
Yes
Yes
Somatostatin
Yes
Yes
GNRH
Yes
Yes
Yes
TRH
Yes
Yes
Oxytocin
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vasopressin
Yes
Yes
Yes
2
Glucagon
Yes
Yes
ter
Cholecystokinin
Yes
Yes
5
in structure to epinephrine and norepinephrine. Soma-
control begins in the hypothalamus with the synthesis
tostatin, like several of the hypothalamic hormones
and secretion of the hypothalamic hormones into the
 and neurotransmitters, is found in not only in the
hypophyseal portal blood supply Because these
hypothalamus but also in the D cells of pancreatic
agents reach their target cells in the pars distalis with
 islets, enterocytes of the Gl tract, and C cells (parafol-
minimal dilution, they are very effective. One means
licular cells) of the thyroid gland. There are also several
of regulation is to alter the rate at which these hypo-
structural variants of somatostatin. Somatostatin 14 is
thalamic hormones are made. Changes in higher brain
 predominant in the hypothalamus but somatostatin 28
function that impact the hypothalamus also alter pro-
is found in the cells of the intestinal tract. In addition
duction of many of these agents and thereby activity
to its role in regulating GH secretion, somatostatin
of the pituitary.
inhibits the secretion of insulin, glucagon, gastrin, and
An interesting example of this is the Bruce Effect.
secretin. Somatostatin also regulates the secretion of
 As first described in rodents, this is an example of a
TSH because of its capacity to enhance the negative
pheromone (a hormone like agent that acts between
feedback of thyroid hormone on the thyrotrophs of
individuals) that blocks implantation of a newly fertil-
the anterior pituitary. Similarly, TRH acts to increase
ized ovum in the uterus. If a new mature male is
secretion of Prl. Table 12.8 provides a listing of neuro-
 introduced into a rodent population soon after mating
 endocrine messengers with overlapping and diverse
by the previous dominant male, newly fertilized
activities.
females fail to maintain their pregnancies. How does
this occur? First, a little background is needed to
understand how failure occurs. Development of fol-
Negative feedback loops
licles, then a dominant follicle, and finally ovulation
depends on secretion of pituitary FSH and LH. Estro-
Secretion of most of the anterior pituitary hormones
 gen and then progesterone from the ovary are essen-
is controlled at multiple levels. As Table 12.6 shows,
tial to prepare the uterus to accept the newly fertilized
Endocrine system
341
ovum for implantation. Secretion of FSH and LH are
Higher CNS
 Negative feed back
controlled by GHRH from the hypothalamus. When
input
loops
the new male is introduced to the newly mated female,
1 = Short loop
 she responds to a pheromone secreted in his urine.
This agent acts on her brain to block production of
Hypothalamus
2 = Long loop
hypothalamic GHRH. This lowers FSH and LH secre-
tion, which minimizes steroid hormone production
3 =Long,long loop
and thereby prevents implantation. It is known that
Releasing hormones
the agent acts through the olfactory system because
females that have their olfactory nerves blocked do
not display this response. Second, the new male does
Pituitary
not have to be physically present. Simply exposing the
animals to urine from the male can elicit the effect.
Let's now consider some less exotic examples of
Trophic hormone
regulation anterior pituitary hormones. Since there are
multiple interacting steps for these trophic anterior
pituitary hormones, that is, hypothalamus → pituitary
Target
> endocrine organ target —> target hormone secretion,
endocrine
there are many opportunities for negative feedback. In.
gland
the simplest case, the secretion of a hormone by an
endocrine gland builds up in the bloodstream. As the
concentration increases the hormone affects the secret-
Hormone
ing cells to reduce the amount that is being made
 and /or secreted. This can be called simple or primary
level negative feedback. Since the effects of hormones 
Target
are generally proportional to their concentrations in
blood, it follows that physiological systems would
 have evolved to ensure normal functioning could be
Fig. 12.13. Negative feedback loops and pituitary hormones
maintained by carefully monitoring and regulating
circulating concentrations of hormones. Since the
2
primary factor that affects the circulating concentra-
 One of the first experiments to indicate the impor-
tion is the rate of secretion, negative feedback loops
tance of these hormones was work from the late 1800s
have evolved to monitor concentrations of hormones
that showed that the injection of an extract from the
at their point of origin. This is complicated by these
pituitary gland increased blood pressure. This effect
interactions between the hypothalamus, pituitary, and
was traced to the posterior lobe of the gland and is
target endocrine gland. Figure 12.13 illustrates feed-
one of the primary effects of the hormone now known
back loops that act to regulate the secretion of pitu-
as vasopressin. Evidence for the presence of a second
itary hormones.
hormone of the posterior lobe, oxytocin, was deduced
from experiments by Gaines, described in 1915. He
showed that injection of posterior pituitary extracts
Hormones and cells of the posterior pituitary
caused milk ejection in lactating animals. Structures of
 s      
 The neurohypophysis or posterior pituitary is chiefly
du Vigneaud's Nobel Prize-winning work elucidated
composed of neurosecretory cells and supporting
the amino acid sequences of these peptides. In fact,
cells. The axons have their origins primarily with the
 this was the first example of research providing the
amino acid sequence and structure of any peptide
thalamus. Fundamentally, the posterior pituitary is an
(Fig. 12.14).
extension of the hypothalamus with the nerve endings
In cows and other mammals, sensory receptors are
within the posterior lobe. However, these neurons
abundant in the skin of the mammary gland and espe-
differ from others neurons in several ways. Like other
 cially in the teat or nipple. In response to preparation
neurons, they are innervated by other nerve cells
 of the udder for milking or nuzzling of the offspring.
located in higher brain regions. Unlike other neurons,
nerve impulses travel via afferent nerves (branches of
these cells release their neurotransmitter-like mole-
 the inguinal nerve) to the dorsal root ganglia of the
cules into the bloodstream. This means that the targets
spinal cord and ultimately ascend the spinal cord
for these agents can literally be positioned anywhere
along the dorsal funiculus to the midbrain. Branches
in the body. In this way secretions from these cells are
project to the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of
acting as classic hormones.
the hypothalamus. Ultimately, associated nerve cells,
342
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Hypothalamus
800
PVN
600
SON
w/6d)
Oxytocin
400
200
0
5
1030
Secretion
Time (minutes)
Oxytocin
Fg. 12.15.S
 Serum oxytocin at milking. Serum oxytocin measured 
Vasopressin
in two cows in the period just before and after milking. For one
cow (o), there is no measurable change in oxytocin concentration,
Fig. 12.14. Posterior pituitary pathways. Neurosecretory cells from
but for the other cow (A), oxytocin is increased fourfold within 4
the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and supraoptic nucleus (SON) of
minutes. Milk yields were normal for each animal. Adapted from
the hypothalamus send axons to the neurohypophysis for secretion
Lefcourt and Akers (1983).
of vasopressin and oxytocin, respectively.
which synapse with the neurosecretory cells of the
40
Control
 paraventricular or supraoptic nuclei, act to either
35
inhibit or facilitate this pathway. A predominance of
- Oxytocin
（kg)
 cholinergic activity excites or facilitates but stimula-
30
tion of local adrenergic neurons impairs oxytocin
 secretion. It has long been recognized that stress at the
25
time of milking interferes with the milk ejection reflex.
20
Failure of oxytocin to be secreted as an explanation for
M
impaired milk let down is called central inhibition.
15
Since it is likely that stress causes stimulation of the
10
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
10
20
30
40
50
it is also possible that increased sympathetic nervous
system-mediated vasoconstriction (via β adrenergic
Week of lactation
receptors) on the sphincters of the metarterioles in the
Fig. 12.16. Lactation curves of cows treated with oxytocin.
mammary capillary beds acts to shunt oxytocin-laden
Placebo or oxytocin was administered at the time of milking. Data
blood away from the alveoli. Since the oxytocin acutely
adapted from Nostrand et al. (1 991).
secreted at milking has a short half-life of -5 minutes,
failure of delivery to the myoepithelial cells (so called
peripheral inhibition) may also explain failures of
large gland cisterns relative to mammary size, milk
milk ejection. The often-repeated advice for careful,
ejection is not essential for adequate milk removal. On
 gentle handling of animals at milking or suckling is
the other hand, it is very clear that adequate oxytocin
based on sound physiological principles.
release is critical to obtain milk from rodents and pigs.
 Regardless, measurement of oxytocin with RIA con-
for example. Figure 12.15 illustrates changes in blood
firms bioassay data showing large variations in oxy-
oxytocin in response to 4 minutes of milking in two
tocin response to milking or suckling in dairy animals.
cows. One animal shows an abrupt increase in blood
In goats and cows as many as 40% of the animals show
oxytocin and the other cow essentially no response at
 no change in oxytocin with milking stimulation. More-
all, yet milk yields were normal. Regardless, oxytocin
over, milk yields of the mammary glands of goats
is widely used in veterinary medicine as an aid to
transplanted under the neck were normal despite the
induced uterine contractions or milk ejection. There is
also evidence (Fig. 12.16) that oxytocin treatments can
Perhaps for animals such as sheep and goats with
increase long-term milk production in dairy cows.
Endocrine system
343
Although vasopressin was named based on observed
hormones. Given the importance of these hormones in
impacts on blood pressure, its major physiological
regulation of growth, development, lactation, and
effect is as an antidiuretic agent. It acts on the kidney
to enhance water retention. When concentrations are
cal to understanding and improving animal agricul-
elevated, more concentrated urine is produced and
 ture. To illustrate this idea, consider the importance of
more water is retained. This increases interstitial fluid,
these hormones in mammary development and func-
and blood volume and consequently blood pressure
 tion and therefore the dairy industry specifically and
rises. Thus, vasopressin is frequently called antidi-
 management of mammals more generally.
uretic hormone or ADH. This more accurately reflects
The endocrine system, perhaps more than any other
its major physiological action. However, vasopressin
physiological system, is central in all aspects of mamma-
 Or ADH also has some direct pressor effects due to its
ry development (mammogenesis), onset of lactation
capacity to stimulate contraction of vascular smooth
(lactogenesis), and maintenance of milk secretion (galac-
 muscle cells. Most species express arginine vasopres-
topoiesis). Experiments beginning in the 1920s (Stricker
sin but closely related arginine vasotocin is synthe-
and Grueter, 1928) showed that milk secretion could
sized in many birds.
 be induced in virgin rabbits by injecting an anterior
Secretion of ADH is controlled by osmoreceptors
pituitary extract. In 1933, Riddle et al. purified the
located primarily in the hypothalamus, but receptors
protein responsible for the milk secretion response
are present in the stomach and esophagus. If the
 observed by Stricker and Grueter, naming it prolactin
osmolarity of blood or interstitial fluids is increased
(Prl). Even now, the widely touted and utilized galac-
this promotes impulses by hypothalamic neurons to
topoietic effect of somatotropin or GH to increase milk
increase ADH secretion. The end result is retention of
 production in lactating dairy cows had its foundation
water and, consequently, reduced osmolarity. A drop
in studies by Asimov and Krouze in the 1930s. They
in blood volume also activates volume receptors
showed that injections of pituitary extracts consis-
within the atria or the carotid sinus. This reduces
tently increased milk production in lactating cows.
activities of neurons that normally send inhibitory
 Scientists describing and quantifying the potent effects
signals to the hypothalamus. Problems with ADH are
 of pregnancy on mammary growth and changes in the
most often the result of hyposecretion. When this
becomes chronic, large quantities of very dilute urine
 and identify the steroid hormones estrogen and pro-
are produced. This is called diabetes insipidus. In dia-
gesterone. Advances in purification techniques and
betes mellitus, urine production is also elevated but
understanding of steroid hormone chemistry allowed
2
8
this is because of excess glucose that acts to draw
further studies, leading to the production of these ste-
water into urine. Frequent drinking is a symptom
of both diseases. Diabetes insipidus can be caused by
Although the existence of mammogenic and lacto-
a failure to secrete ADH (hypothalamic problem) or
genic substances from the pituitary had long been
by failure of the kidney to response to ADH (nephro-
known, the efforts of C.H. Li and colleagues in the
genic defect).
1940s to purify larger quantities of Prl and GH were
 Both oxytocin and ADH are synthesized from pre-
essential. Soon thereafter, specific roles for these hor-
cursor molecules called preprohormones—prepro-
mones in the regulation of mammogenesis in rodents
were delineated in classic ablation replacement ex-
for oxytocin in large cell bodies (magnocellular nuclei)
periments (Lyons et al., 1958; Nandi, 1958). In an
in the hypothalamus. As the molecules are transported
extensive series of studies, triply operated (adrenalec-
down the axons to the posterior pituitary, cleavage
tomized, ovariectomized, and hypophysectomized)
takes place to yield oxytocin or ADH. The proteins
rats and mice were treated with various combinations
neurophysin I or neurophysin ll are also secreted,
 of purified hormones see if normal mammary devel-
along with oxytocin or ADH. The neurophysins were
opment could be restored. Injections of estrogen and
initially thought to act as carrier proteins for the pep-
GH together caused proliferation of mammary ducts.
tides but there are currently no known specific func-
However, treatment with estrogen, progesterone, Prl,
 tions attributed to these proteins.
and GH were needed for lobulo-alveolar develop-
ment. The maximum ductular and lobulo-alveolar
development, although still less that in pregnancy.
Hormones of the anterior pituitary
was obtained in animals also given glucocorticoids.
For some strains of mice, GH and Prl were both
Our earlier discussion briefly outlined the names and
capable of stimulating lobulo-alveolar development.
hypothalamic partners for the anterior pituitary hor-
Interestingly, it was not until the 1960s that it was
mones. We'll now consider major physiological actions
conclusively shown that human Prl and human GH
and some of the structural details of each of these
were distinct proteins.
344  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
British researchers, focused on efforts to improve
bovine GH is 192 amino acids (23,000MW) but bio-
and maintain milk supplies during World War Il, initi-
logical activity within species is characteristically
 ated many endocrine studies on mammary develop-
distinct. As the name suggests, GH is closely associ-
ment and function in dairy animals (Cowie, 1980). For
ated with body growth. For example, soon after its
example, the effects of estrogen and progesterone on
characterization, it was hoped that bovine GH (bGH)
mammogenesis were extensively evaluated in attempts
 might supply material to treat humans with impaired
to induce lactation in nonpregnant animals. Although
 growth caused by hyposecretion of human GH (hGH).
 difficulties with needed surgeries and expense contin-
However, it was soon discovered that bGH had no
ues to limit use of ablation replacement experiments
effect in primates. Some human patients were ulti-
to study mammary development and function
lin
mately treated with hGH derived from cadavers but
cattle, Cowie et al. (1966) studied hypophysectomized-
 supplies were limited and unfortunately some samples
ovariectomized goats and showed that mammary
contained agents (viruses and possibly prions) that
development comparable to that at mid-gestation
made then harmful. More widescale therapeutic use
could be obtained in animals treated with a combina-
of GH in humans had to wait until recombinant hGH
tion of estrogen, progesterone, Prl, GH, and ACTHs.
became available.
 Such experiments served to confirm that at least general
Somatotropin or GH, depending on the tissue, can
effects attributed to these hormones on mammary
act directly or indirectly to coordinate biochemical
development in rodents also applied to mammary
adaptations that chronically alter the metabolism of
development in dairy animals.
carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Although gener-
alizations can be misleading, under most circum-
stances elevations in GH act to increase available
Somatotropin (GH)
nutrients by promoting mobilization of tissue stores.
For example, GH tends to increase protein synthesis
By the 1920s it was discovered that crude extracts
by promoting the uptake of amino acids while at the
 prepared from homogenates of bovine pituitary glands
 same time decreasing protein catabolism and promot-
could stimulate the growth of rats. The active agent
ing lipid mobilization. This acts to make fatty acids
was dubbed somatotropin after the Greek word for
preferential fuel sources. Somatotropin directly or
 growth. Soon thereafter, the ability of such extracts to
indirectly  coordinates metabolic  adaptations  that
 promote milk secretion in pseudopregnant rabbits and
promote increased milk production in the lactating
milk production in lactating goats were reported.
dairy cow. These adaptations involve chronic altera-
 Some of the more extensive early experiments with
tions in carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism
cows by the Russians Asimov and Krouze in the 1930s
in a number of tissues and serve to preferentially
involved the treatment of more than 2oo0 cows with
direct nutrients toward the mammary gland. This
crude anterior pituitary extracts. Soon after, as part of
coordinated regulation to support the priorities of a
efforts to increase food production during World War
physiological state is called homeorhetic regulation.
 Il, the British scientists Folley and Young and col-
 In farm animals, this has been studied rather exten-
leagues also studied effects of GH on milk production
sively in dairy cows because of the capacity of GH
 in cows and goats. They identified GH as the primary
treatments to enhance milk production. In some of the
active galactopoietic component in bovine pituitary
early short-term studies, GH markedly increased
extracts. Other studies established dose response
 serum triglycerides. A common belief related to nutri-
curves and confirmed that relative responses were
ent regulation at the time of these studies was that
 greater in declining lactation, that gross milk composi-
nutrient use largely involved a competition between
tion was unaffected, and the generally potent effect of
 organs for needed substrates. This means that an
GH on milk yield in dairy ruminants. They concluded
 increase in milk production in response to, for example,
that use of pituitary GH would be highly profitable to
treatment with GH would require either an increase
individual farmers but that an inadequate supply
in the metabolism of the mammary gland to better
limited the impact that GH could have in stimulating
"fight" for nutrients or reduction in nutrient use by
the national milk supply. For example, approximately
 other tissues to support increased nutrient demands
25 pituitaries are needed to produce enough GH for a
of the mammary cells for milk synthesis and secretion.
typical daily treatment. These studies were the prelude
 Mechanisms for GH's actions were generally thought
to subsequent studies and ultimately large-scale use
 to depend on acute effects to "push" metabolism of
of recombinant bovine GH (bGH) in dairy cows
 peripheral tissue to reduce competition and thus favor
(Etherton and Bauman, 1998; Bauman, 1999).
 the lactating mammary gland. On the surface many
GH, like Prl, is a single-chain protein and the pro-
acute effects of GH seem to support this model. These
teins share about 50% structural homology. GH is
GH-stimulated responses include glycotropic (reduced
also structurally similar between species, for example,
response to insulin in glucose tolerance testing), dia-
Endocrine system
345
betogenic (hyperglycemia and glycouremia), and lipo-
lytic (increases in blood nonesterified fatty acids)
B0x 12.1
Hormones in my milk—-Yes please!
activity. Given these effects, a number of researchers
As a lactation biologist (RMA) I am intrigued by
were concerned that GH induction of these responses
the popular press and general discussion about
would promote metabolic problems in lactating cows.
hormones and milk. As physiology students you
There was concern that acute mobilization of adipose
must be coming to realization that milk (like other
tissue, particularly in postpartum animals already in
secretions) is a biological fluid. So there should be
a negative energy balance, might suffer increased met-
no surprise that milk like other secretions and
 abolic disordersketosis, fatty livers. However, these
fluids is likely to contain a variety of hormones,
"extra" nutrients were preferentially directed toward
growth factors and other potentially biologically
the mammary gland for use in increased milk
active agents. As described in the lactation chapter,
production.
the relative amount of these materials is much
About this time, the concept of homeorhesis came
nq  ,a, n  an  r
to be applied to the high milk production of geneti-
nonetheless small amounts of a variety of hor-
cally superior dairy cows. The overriding idea was
 mones and growth factors are present in milk. It is
that homeorhesis does not act to defeat homeostasis
also relevant that there is no difference in the nutri-
but rather that chroric changes in physiological con-
tional value or presence of these agents in milk
 trols allow coordination of physiological processes to
from organic versus conventional dairies.
support major physiological events (the definition of
 It is likely that some of these agents have impacts
 homeorhesis). Examples include physiological support
on the neonate but gut closure and activation of
for fetal development and reproductive performance,
digestive function is also likely to limit effects in
or in this case a sustained high level of milk produc-
older offspring or adults. However, it is also true
tion while at the same time preserving homeostasis.
that a number of peptides which are biologically
The preponderance of evidence suggests that GH
activity can be produced by the digestion of a
enhances milk production largely by partitioning
number of milk proteins, especially the caseins. A
nutrients to support milk production by both direct
key question is whether or not these substances
and indirect actions, but GH does not alter digestibil-
actually have effects within the gut or induce sig-
ity of nutrients. In dairy cows given exogenous GH,
naling or other responses that impact the body of
metabolism is altered in an organ-specific fashion to
the suckling young or consumer. Just because pep-
establish nutrient flux toward the mammary gland.
tides with biological activity are generated does not
2
 Increased appetite and dietary intake interact to mod-
mean they elicit responses normally (after con-
erate some of the demand for nutrients some days
sumption of milk). Nagpal et al. (20ll) review
after the start of treatments (Box 12.1).
aspects of this topic from the point of view of func-
tional foods.
The somatomedin hypothesis
The primary function of GH is promotion of linear
block or knock out normal liver IGF-I synthesis.
 growth, but many of its growth-promoting effects are
Despite this, these animals exhibited essentially
indirect because of its ability to stimulate the liver to
normal growth and development. This suggests that
 produce IGF-1. This is called the somatomedin hypoth-
for many situations, local production of IGF-I can
esis. Initially, IGF-I and IGF-Il were called somatome-
replace and /or supplement circulating IGF-I supplied
dins, to account for their relationship with GH action.
by the liver. Other complications include the discov-
However, once structures of the molecules were delin-
ery of a family of IGF-1 binding proteins (IGFBPs).
eated it became clear that the molecules were similar
These molecules also appear in circulation and are
to insulin, hence the new names. Regardless, it is now
 produced locally in many tissues. Depending on con-
certain that many actions originally attributed to GH
ditions, these proteins can either inhibit or enhance
are mediated by IGF-1. But, it should not be forgotten
biological effects associated with IGF-1. Some of these
that many tissues also express GH receptors. The liver
relationships are illustrated in Figure 12.17. The black
is the primary source for IGF-I in circulation but IGF-1
arrows illustrate the pathways associated with the
is also produced locally in many tissues. It may be that
"classic" somatomedin hypothesis and the red dashed
locally produced IGF-1 is as important as circulating
arrows, more recent findings related to local produc-
IGF-1. The importance of nonliver sources became
tion of IGF-I and IGFBPs.
clear from knockout mouse studies. In these experi-
Figure 12.18 demonstrates synthesis of IGF-1 by
ments, genetic engineering techniques were used to
stroma cells in the bovine mammary gland. In this
346
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
instance, stromal tissue and isolated mammary epi-
Pituitary
thelial cells were tested for the presence of mRNA for
gland
IGF-1. These results suggest that IGF-I mRNA detected 
in samples of mammary parenchymal tissue is actu-
ally synthesized by stromal tissue cells that sur-
GH
round the developing mammary ducts (Akers et al.,
2000, 2005).
 The physiological relevance of GH becomes appar-
Liver
 ent in situations with either hyper- or hyposecretion.
Direct GH
IGFBPS
Hypersecretion of GH prior to puberty produces
effects
 gigantism because of rapid, prolonged proliferation of
Local tissue
ated after closure of the epiphyseal plates of the long
IGF-I
 synthesis IGF-I
bones, the result is acromegaly. This is characterized
by enlargement of extremities and facial bones. Failure
to produce sufficient GH in young animals leads to
production of stunted development and a type of
dwarfism. Given its importance to growth, it should
Growth
Metabolism
 be no surprise that there is a great deal of interest in
 Proliferation
Survival
understanding effects of GH related to growth and
development in farm animals. For example, do strains 
Fig. 12.17. The somatomedin hypothesis. Relationships between
or lines of naturally rapidly growing animals produce
secretion of pituitary GH and liver IGF-l are illustrated by the solid 
more GH? Could administration of exogenous GH or
black arrows. Dashed red arrows indicate direct effects of GH,
perhaps immunization against somatostatin be used
significance of local tissue production of IGF-l, and the role of
to promote GH secretion and more rapid growth?
IGF-l-binding proteins control of biological actions of IGF-l.
Aside from indirect effects of GH on chondrocytes and
protein accretion, changes in GH secretion are cer-
tainly important in both short-term and more chronic
changes in metabolism.
Chapter
GH secretion
Figure 12.19 illustrates average concentrations of GH
 and insulin in the blood of cows dluring the lactation
IGF-I
cycle. In early lactation, the rapid increase in milk
production causes the animals to exhibit a negative
 energy balance. In other words, feed intake does not
keep up with dlemands. After about 90 days of lacta-
tion, peak milk yields are past, feed intake continues
to rise, and the animals begin to go into a positive
energy balance. In the later stages of lactation, body
condition increases and the animals begin to deposit
excess energy in the form of subcutaneous fat.
 Changes in average concentrations of blood insulin
 and GH mirror these physiological changes. Insulin is
typically elevated to drive glucose into storage but
GH is elevated to mobilize nutrients. In early lacta-
tion, insulin concentrations are suppressed while GH
Fig. 12.18. Expression of IGF-1. Shown is a northern analysis of
is elevated. Toward the end of lactation this situation
IGF-l mRNA expression of mammary epithelial cells or stromal
is reversed.
tissue prepared from heifer mammary. 1, 4: Epithelial cell; 2. 3:
Secretion of GH is not constant. Instead it is secreted
stroma; 5: liver control. Notice there is a signal for IGF-l in samples
in bursts or pulses so that with frequent blood sam-
cell RNA. Data adapted from Berry et al. (2003).
pling blood concentrations periodically spike. In
Endocrine system
347
0.8
13
mammary growth. However, it is very clear that Prl
exhibits a very wide variety of physiological actions.
For example, increased secretion of Prl is associated
(ng/ml)
0.7
12
with onset of nest building and brooding in birds. Prl
-juny uaisas aumunn pue Aaupi u jeodu ose s
0.6
11
nsulin
tion. In the past 20 years, it has been established that
native Prl is really part of a family of structurally
related protein isoforms or variants. The Prl gene is
0.5
Insulin
10
H+
transcribed not only in the lactotrophs of the anterior
pituitary gland but also by cells in the placenta, hypo-
9
thalamus, mammary gland, and in lymphocytes.
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275
Moreover, either as it is secreted or after interaction
Day of Lactation
with target cells, some Prl is enzymatically modified
to become cleaved, phosphorylated, or glycosylated.
Fig. 12.19. Insulin and GH during lactation. Basal insulin and GH
Thus, the pleiotropic actions of Prl may ultimately be
 in serum of cows during lactation. Adapted from Herbein, J. H.,
R. J. Aiello, L. I. Eckler, R. E. Pearson and R. M. Akers. 1985.
attributed to the presence of these different isoforms
 of the hormone. As has been suggested (Das and Von-
Glucagon, insulin, growth hormone, and glucose concentrations in
blood plasma of lactating dairy cows. JDS 68: 320-325.
derhaar, 1997), the signaling pathway for Prl stimula-
tion of cell differentiation compared with that for Prl
signaling of cell proliferation needs to be deciphered
to truly appreciate the role of Prl in one of its specific
target tissues, the mammary gland.
At least three distinct forms of the Prl receptor are
also known to exist. The three forms of the receptor
exhibit differences in their cytoplasmic domains. The
u
long form is 90kDa and differs from the short form
(40kDa) because of differential splicing of mRNA
 transcribed from the Prl receptor gene. An intermedi-
ate version of the receptor is a deletion mutant of the
long form that lacks 198 amino acids in the cytoplas-
2
1011
mic domain. The intermediate form of the receptor is
Time (hours)
more sensitive to Prl and a major form of the receptor
found in the liver also belongs to a superfamily of
Fig. 12.20. Pattern of GH secretion. In this Holstein heifer
 calf, note there are several apparent secretory episodes
structurally related proteins that include GH and pla-
during this 12-hour period of time. Samples were collected at
cental lactogen. This realization has facilitated the
15-minute intervals for assay. Average GH concentration was
 study of intracellular signaling pathways since the
9.4 ng/mL.
structural similarities suggest parallel similarities in
mechanisms of action.
As a specific example, expression of the Prl receptor
younger animals and in males, these events are more
 in the bovine or ovine mammary gland increases dra-
frequent and the amplitude of these secretory spikes
matically near the time of parturition in concert with
 greater. This results in higher average or basal GH
 lactogenesis and this level of expression is generally
concentrations as well. As with many hormones,
maintained during lactation. But there is no evidence
there are also intrinsic overall patterns of secretion that
for expression of different forms of the receptor to
follow circadian and ultradian rhythms (Lefcourt et al.,
suggest that possible mammogenic versus lactogenic
1995). Figure 12.18 illustrates changes in serum GH
effects on mammary growth or function in ruminants
 over the course of 12 hours in a Holstein heifer calf
is associated with a particular Prl receptor subclass
(Fig. 12.20).
(Smith et al., 1993).
 Some of the best evidence for the importance of
increased periparturient secretion of Prl in stage II
lactogenesis in cows has come from experiments in
Prolactin
which the administration of a dopamine agonist has
 been used to inhibit Prl secretion and correspondingly
As its name suggests, Prl has undoubtedly been the
 impair lactation. In ruminants where postpartum
most widely studied hormone related to lactation and
 milking continues, administration of dopamine agonist
348 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
c-bromoergocryptine (CB154) reduced basal prolactin
Prolactin secretion
concentration about 80% and prevented the usual peri-
parturient rise as well as milking-induced Prl rise
Prl secretion, like that of GH, is not only episodic, but
during the first week postpartum. Differences in Prl
it is also is acutely increased by a variety of stimuli.
secretion in control and CB154-treated cows are shown
Average concentrations are higher with warm tem-
in Figure 12.21. Milk production was reduced 45%
peratures and longer photoperiods. Manipulation of
during the first 10 days postpartum. Lost milk pro-
photoperiod has been used to increase livestock pro-
duction was associated with reduced synthesis
of
ductivity for many years. Examples include manipula-
c-lactalbumin, lactose, and fatty acids, as well as
tion of photoperiod to increase egg production in
impaired structural differentiation of the mammary
chickens or to manipulate breeding activity in sea-
secretory cells. Selected effects are summarized in
sonal breeders such as horses and sheep. Early studies
Table 12.9. Cows treated with exogenous Prl in addi-
noting the positive effect of photoperiod on Prl secre-
tion to the agonist (to replace the periparturient surge
tion prompted a landmark investigation by Peters
in prolactin) showed no loss of milk production or
et al. (1978) on the effects of increased photoperiod on
effects on milk component biosynthesis or alveolar
milk production in cows. They showed that exposure
cell differentiation. An effect of Prl suppression and
of lactating cows to a long day photoperiod between
 replacement during the periparturient period on milk
September
 and  April  in  Michigan significantly
production in multiparous cows is shown in Figure
increased milk yields (2.0kg/day) compared with
12.21. Clearly, Prl is important in mammary cell
cows exposed to the ambient photoperiod. This effect
differentiation and lactogenesis (Akers et al., 1981)
has been confirmed by numerous other research
(Fig. 12.22).
groups in North America and Europe, in latitudes
pter
Cha
Image not available in this digital edition
Imagc not available in this digital cdition
Fig. 12.21. Serum Prl in cows at calving. Changes in serum Prl in
Fg. 12.22. Milk production after suppression of Prl. Milk
cows given ergrocryptine (CB-154) around the time of calving are 
shown. Note the usual surge in Prl secretion at calving is blocked
treated cows is shown. Note the marked decrease in milk yield of
and that average Prl concentrations before and after calving are
padepy pangu Aaaldos lou s! ld po uaias ng panpai
cows given CB154 and that that milk yield is restored to normal for
cows also given Prl. Data adapted from Akers et al. (1981).
from Akers et al. (198 1).
Table 12.9. Mammary biochemistry after prolactin suppression.
Treatment
Prepartum
CB154
CB154 + Prf
Lactose synthesis (μg/h/100mg)
39 ± 63
552 ± 70
327 ± 63
628 ± 81
α-Lactalbumin (μg/mg/protein)
1.7 ± 0.04
5.4 ± 0.4
2.8 ± 0.4
6.8 ± 0.5
RNA (g)
23.6 ± 2.1
87.2 ± 16.8
56.0 ± 8
91.5 ± 12.8
DNA (g)
27.9 ± 2.9
46.0 ± 3.8
40.1 ± 4
42.2 ± 3.8
Endocrine system
349
ranging from 39 to 62°N. In cattle, increasing the dura-
tion of daily photoperiod from 8 hours light:16 dark
to 16 hours light:8 dark increases Prl concentrations in
the blood several fold. It is, however, important that
animals experience at least a minimal dark cycle, since
animals on a continuous lighting regimen appear to
revert to a short-day photoperiodic response pattern.
However, recent work suggests that increases in milk
production are likely mediated by changes in the IGF-1
axis rather than Prl (Dahl et al., 2000).
In various species (cows, goats, sheep, human, rat),
stimuli associated with milking or sucking promote
the secretion of Prl. However, the secretion of Prl or
other hormones in response to milking or suckling
does not directly depend on the removal of secretions,
since teat stimulation alone can also induces Prl secre-
Imagc not availablc in this digital cdition
tion in nonlactating animals. Little is known about the
development of this neuroendocrine reflex, but it is
affected by stage of development. For example, in an
 experiment with 3-, 6-, and 10-month old heifers, three
 of six 3-month-old heifers showed a moderate increase
in blood Prl with mimic hand milking but only two of
six for the 6-month-old heifers and none of six for the
heifers at 10 months of age. In contrast, for heifers
tested during gestation, all of the heifers responded
 and Prl secretion increased monotonically as gestation
advanced (Fig. 12.23). The response continues into lac-
tation with Prl routinely secreted with each milking.
but in cows, the magnitude of the response declines
with advancing lactation (Akers and Lefcourt, 1982).
2
 Folicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing
Hormone
Fg. 12.23. Prl secretion after teat stimulation. Panel A shows
changes in serum Prl concentrations before, during, and after teat
stimulation of pregnant Holstein heifers sampled at 100, 150, 200,
It is fiting that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
or 250 days of gestation. Note the monotonic increase in response
and luteinizing hormone (LH) be discussed together.
with advancing gestation. Panel B shows Prl secretion in heifers in
 In both males and females, together these gonadotro-
response to machine milking 30 days postpartum. Data adapted
pins regulate reproductive physiology But first, some
from Akers and Lefcourt (1982).
of the basics: both hormones are have an c and β
chain. In fact, TSH shares this structural similarity. For
each of these hormones, the biological action of the
egg, but it also promotes remaining follicular cells
hormones depends on the β chain. FSH has a major
to differentiate into luteal cells and create a corpus
 effect on the growth and development of ovarian fol-
luteum (yellow body). This luteinization process
licles. This reflects the capacity of the hormone
to
explains how the hormone gets its name. More impor
induce estrogen secretion by the theca cells surround-
tantly, as these cells are luteinized they begin to secrete
ing developing oocytes. As the waves of follicles
 progesterone, which prepares the uterus to accept a
develop during the estrus cycle of the cow, for example,
fertilized oocyte. In the absence of fertilization, the
only one of a cohort of follicles becomes dominant.
corpus luteum of CL degenerates. Figure 12.24 illus-
This follicle proceeds to enlarge and develop so that it
 trates relative changes in secretion of estrogen and
becomes the follicle destined for ovulation. Closely
progesterone during the estrus cycle and relationship
 tied with FSH control of estrogen secretion and chang-
to changing secretion of LH.
ing sensitivity of the hypothalamus, there is an acute
 inoge slaq HT  u ans Arod 
increase in secretion of LH, which promotes ovulation
hours prior to ovulation in most domestic species
 of the dominant follicle. This is the ovulatory surge in
(cow, goat, sheep, and pig); this triggers critical
LH. This not only causes rupture and release of the
changes in the follicle to impact its endocrine activity
350  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
LH pulse frequency
increase in estrogen creates a positive feedback loop
at the level of the hypothalamus. Increased estrogen
from the rapidly developing follicle increases GnRH
pulses. This produces more FSH secretion, thus more
estrogen, and further GnRH secretion. This cycle is
broken by the maturation of the follicle and the LH
surge. As estrogen concentrations decline, the positive
Estrogen-Follicle
feedback is lost, and inhibitory progesterone concen-
trations increase. This likely explains the rapid rise
and equally rapid decline in LH. However, since
Progesterone-CL
GnRH generally stimulates the secretion of both LH
and FSH, what explains the abrupt LH surge without
a corresponding peak in FSH secretion?
 This is explained by the presence of a second cluster
0246810121416182002
of hypothalamic nuclei (preoptic nucleus, anterior hypo-
thalamic area, and suprachiasmatic nucleus) called the
Day of the estrous cycle
 surge or preovulatory center. The cells in this area to
Fig. 12.24. Hormones during estrus cycle. Relative changes in
respond to a threshold level of estrogen. As the estro-
concentrations of estrogen, progesterone, FSH, LH, and LH pulse
 gen concentration increases rapidly just before estrus,
 frequency during the estrus cycle in the cow are illustrated.
this induces a flood of GnRH secretion (like turning
on a facet compared with the drip of the tonic center)
and a corresponding marked increase in LH called the
and culminate in ovulation. Poorly characterized
ovulatory peak. Although GnRH usually stimulates
factors in the granulosa cells prevent the premature
secretion of both FSH and LH, it is thought that secre-
conversion of the cells into luteal tissue until after
tion of inhibin by the follicle at this time suppresses
ovulation. Increased LH allows for the resumption of
FSH secretion.
meiosis by the oocyte and removes the block on lutein-
In males LH, plays a major role in regulation of
ization of the granulosa cells. This effectively converts
testosterone secretion by the Leydig cells located in
the cells from predominately estrogen production to
the interstitial tissue surrounding the seminiferous
 progesterone secretion as illustrated in Figure 12.24.
tubules of the testes. Within the tubules, FSH stimu-
The process actually begins in the period before ovula-
lates development and function of the Sertoli cells
tion but the LH surge hastens the decline in estrogen
that nourish and regulate developing spermatozoa
 secretion and concomitant rise in progesterone secre-
(Box 12.2).
tion. Indeed, the progressive increase in secretion of
estrogen by the rapidly developing follicles just before
ovulation acts to signal the hypothalamus and ulti-
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
mately the anterior pituitary that conditions are appro-
priate for ovulation.
TSH is a glycoprotein that shares a similar structure
Secretion of FSH and LH is controlled by release of
to FSH and LH, having an c and a β chain. The c
GnRH from the hypothalamus. Secretion of GnRH
 subunits are identical and the β chains confer biologi-
 occurs in bursts or spikes so that the corresponding
cal specificity. During synthesis the chains are pro-
secretion of FSH and LH also occurs episodically.
 duced separately then joined as glycosylation occurs
However, at least two clusters of nerve cells or nuclei
 in the Golgi. Mature TSH ultimately binds to receptors
in the hypothalamus (ventromedial and arcuate nucleus)
in the thyroid to promote thyroid uptake of iodine.
produce GnRH in a toric release center. This secretion
iodination to produce T and thyroxine (T4) by the fol-
pattern produces short-lived pulses of GnRH some-
licular cells of the thyroid gland. These events are
times compared with the drip, drip of a leaking
-us puanasqns pue aseioo iuape Aq par
faucet and corresponding brief bursts of FSH and LH
thesis of cyclic AMP. With more prolonged stimulation
secretion.
the thyroid gland is enlarged and follicular spaces
As illustrated by the pulse frequency for LH illus-
are filled with stored thyroglobulin. Further details
trated at the top of Figure 12.24, gonadotropin secre-
will be described in our discussion of the thyroid
tion is increased during the follicular phase of the
hormones.
estrus cycle but decreased during the luteal phase.
Secretion of TSH is regulated by both stimulatory
Acute control to allow for increased pulse frequency
and inhibitory influences. The most direct control is
but decreased pulse amplitude allows for final growth
     n
and development of the dominant follicle. The rapid
However, somatostatin also acts as a potent inhibitor
 Endocrine system 
351
Box 12.2 Practical endocrinology
Pro-opiomelanocortin
-131 to 134
 Is endocrinology directly important to animal pro-
ducers? The short answer is yes very much so. One
easy example is the use of oxytocin with animals
that have issues with milk letdown (cows, sheep.
NTerminal fragment
ACTH
β-Lipotropin
and goats). Another is the very wide-spread use of
[1-131}
[1-39}
[1-91}
lutalyse? (dinoprost tromethamine) which is an
analog of the prostaglandin F2c that is used to
cause regression the corpus luteum. The product is
CMSH
CLIP
YLPH
β-Endorphin
used extensively in estrus synchronization proto-
[1-13)
[18-39]
[1-50}
(61-91)
cols to allow for timed breeding of beef and dairy
cows as well as treatment for endometritis. Other
products used in a variety of reproduction issues
β-MSH
Met-Enk
include: (Cystorelin@, Factrel?, or Fertagyl?) which
Adrenal growth factor ?
[41-58}
[61-65)
are preparations of GnRH. The history and current
[1-76}
 protocols for estrus control and synchronization are
Fg. 12.25. Processing of pro-opiomelanocortin. Abbreviations 
outlined in recent reviews (Wiltbank et al., 201l;
include corticotropin-like intermediate lobe peptide (CLIP),
Lamb et al., 2010). Pregnant mare serum gonado-
melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), lipotropin (LPH), and
tropin (PMSG) or human chorionic gonadotropin
meth ynine enkaplin (Met-Enk).
(hCG) have FSH and /or LH activity and are used
in superovulation protocols that are used in the
production and harvest of embryos from geneti-
cally superior cows.
Adrenocortropic hormone
Finally there are a variety of anabolic steroids
 that are widely used as growth stimulants primarily
Adrenocortropic hormone (ACTH) is a 39-amino-acid
in beef cattle (Capper and Hayes, 2012). Depending
 peptide processed from a larger precursor molecule
on the product these agents have estrogen, testos-
called pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) as illustrated in
 terone, progesterone, zeranol, or tenbolone activity
Figure 12.25. In the corticotrophs of the anterior pitu-
2
(Stephany, 2010). The products are designed for
itary, the mRNA from the POMC gene directs the syn-
specific animals and /or physiological states. Others 
 thesis and processing of the transcript to yield at least
have described use of β-Adrenergic agonists to
eight biologically active fragments. ACTH primarily
modify tissue composition in meat animals (Smith,
stimulates the secretion of glucocorticoids from the
1998; Bohrer et al., 2013).
 cortex of the adrenal gland. Two of the fragments are
derived from ACTH. The first 13 amino acids of ACTH
are β-MSH and the ACTH 18-39 corticotrophin-like
intermediate lobe peptide (CLIP). The larger precur-
of secretion. Under usual circumstances, negative
sor POMC appears in the intermediate lobe of the
feedback from T4 at the level of the pituitary and T at
pifuitary in many species and is associated with secre-
the level of the hypothalamus provides acute control.
tion of MSH. Biological effects of adrenal steroids will
However, since TSH and the thyroid hormones are so
 be considered in a subsequent section.
critical in metabolism it should not be surprising that
While ACTH is the focus, a family of diverse pep-
other metabolically active hormones have an impact.
tides is derived from POMC. Secretion of ACTH is
For example, estrogen enhances the effect of TRH on
 greatly impacted by neural factors and hormones.
secretion of TSH but GH and glucocorticoids dampen
 These agents modify the secretion of CRH, which, like
the effectiveness of TRH. At higher areas in the brain
GnRH, is secreted in an episodic pattern. In many
the activities of bioaminergic and peptidergic neurons
 species there is also a diurnal rhythm in the ACTH
also impact secretion of TRH and therefore TSH.
secretion pattern and therefore a diurnal secretion of
For example, dopaminergic agonists (bromocriptine)
 adrenal steroids. Negative feedback loops involving
inhibit TSH secretion but antagonists increase TSH
cortisol are important in control of ACTH. One mech-
release. Well-known effects of cold and stress to increase
anism is sensitive to the rate of change in circulating
 metabolic rate begin with alterations in neural activity
glucocorticoids (fast feedback) and another responds
that ultimately impact hypothalamic secretion of TRH.
to the absolute concentration of cortisol in a threshold-
This cascade of events leads to secretion of TSH and
like response (slow feedback). These effects are mediated
then Ts, which is ultimately responsiblefor increased
at both the pituitary and hypothalamus. Furthermore,
metabolism.
a host of stresses (pain, hypoxia, cold exposure, etc.)
352  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
can override the usual rhythmic secretion of ACTH.
duces monoiodotyrosine. The subsequent coupling of
This is classically thought of as the part of the fight-
two diodotyrosines produces T4. The coupling of one
or-flight reactions and the need for nutrient mobiliza-
diodotyrosine and one monoiodotyrosine yields T3-
tion and is associated with more prolonged secretion
When the intestinal cells absorb iodine it is converted
of glucocorticoids.
to iodide for use in the thyroid. Thyroglobulin is a
very large glycoprotein (5496 amino acids) that has
about 40 tyrosine residues. The follicular cells have an
Thyroid gland
active transport system that efficiently sequesters
iodide so that intracellular concentrations can be 200-
Located just below the larynx, the thyroid has left and
fold greater that in circulation. Structures of thyroid
right lobes medial to the midline of the ventral surface
 hormones are shown in Figure 12.27.
of the trachea. A sliver of tissue called the isthmus
Pathways for the synthesis, storage, and release of
connects the lobes. The thyroid gland is composed of
thyroid hormone are illustrated in Figure 12.28. The
clusters of follicles whose internal surfaces are lined
process can be divided into six steps: (1) uptake of 1,
by a layer of simple cuboidal epithelial cells. T, and T4
(2) oxidation of iodide and iodination of tyrosine resi-
are synthesized by the follicular cells and stored as
dues in the thyroglobulin, (3) linking of the DIT and
part of a larger protein (thyroglobulin) within the
MIT to create T and T4, (4) proteolysis of thyroglobu-
lumenal spaces of the follicles. This stored material is
lin to produce free T and T4, (5) deiodination of iodo-
called colloid. Figure 12.23 shows the histological
tyrosines in the follicular cells for reuse, and (6)
structure of a bovine thyroid gland. The follicular cells
 5'-deoiodination of T4 to generate T3.
predominate but in the spaces between follicles para-
follicular or C cells occur. The C cells synthesize CT,
which is involved in calcium metabolism (Fig. 12.26).
Biological effects of thyroid hormones
Thyroid hormones are the major regulators of basal
Biosynthesis of triiodothyronine
 metabolism. They increase oxygen consumption and
and thyroxine
therefore heat production because they stimulate oxi-
 dative phosphorylation. This is called a calorigenic
The critical elements required for thyroid hormone
 effect, a response especially useful when animals are
synthesis are the amino acid tyrosine and iodine. As
 exposed to cold stressful situations. Of course increas-
 iodine is absorbed into the follicular cells, it becomes
ing energy demands require nutrient fuel. Small
attached to the ring structure of tyrosine amino acids
amounts of thyroid hormones promote glycogen
that are part of the thyroglobulin sequence of amino
storage but glycogenolysis is stimulated as concentra-
acids. Each tyrosine is capable of becoming iodinated
tions rise. Other effects include increased absorption
with two iodide atoms. When this occurs, the result is
 of glucose and promotion of glucose uptake by cells.
diodotyrosine, but attachment of a single atom pro-
 Thyroid hormones also impact lipid metabolism, espe
A
B
Fig. 12.26. Thyroid histology. The left panel is a low-power (20x) view of a sheep thyroid. The follicles are filled with colloid and the
sgei iae ane pe eo ao ae sla ai aah e e s pii esi ) ai al ui ss ae si ela
colloid to make Ts and T4 available.
Endocrine system
353
cially lipolysis. Fitting their ability to increase metabo-
lism, the thyroid hormones also enhance the effects
HO
CH,CH- COOH
3-Monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
 of sympathetic nervous system stimulation. This is
linked to thyroid hormone stimulation of synthesis
"HN
   ss    
for epinephrine and norepinephrine. This mechanism
also likely explains the enhanced force of cardiac con-
tractions when thyroid hormones are elevated.
HO
CH,CH- COOH
3,5-Diiodothyrosine (DIT)
Other effects of thyroid hormones are evident
during growth and development. For example, classic
"HN
 experiments showed that T4 causes differentiation of
A
 tadpoles into frogs. Thyroidectomy or treatment with
antithyroid drugs caused the animals to grow into
very big tadpoles but metamorphosis was blocked.
HO
CH,CH-COOH
The situation is less drastic in mammals but thyroid
hormones are nonetheless essential for normal devel-
HN
opment of the nervous system.
Given the myriad of effects attributed to thyroid
3,5,3'-Triodothyronine (Tg)
 hormones, it should not be a surprise that deviations
 from a normal or euthyroid state impact physiology
generally and homeostasis in particular. Hypothyroid-
ism, or a deficiency, slows metabolic proceses. In
young animals development and growth is impaired
HO
CH,CH-COOH
and in primates serious permanent failure of neural
development produces mental retardation, leading to
NH2
cretinism. Hypothyroidism in mature animals pro-
 duces lethargy For example in humans, deposition of
3,5,3',5'-Tetraiodothyronine (T4)
glycosaminoglycans in the skin causes puffiness and
B
clinical symptoms called myxedema. Causes of hypo-
thyroidism vary but can be classified as (l) primary
2
Fig. 12.27. Structures of thyroid hormones.
"(aqaid Hs Aremd) Arepuosas (7) (amey pry)
(3) tertiary (hypothalamic defect), or (4) quaternary
(peripheral resistance to action of the hormones). This
last case is frequently related to autoimmune disease
 in which generation of antibodies against thyroid
Colloid
cells, thyroid hormone receptors, or thyroglobulin
impairs function. Among domestic species, lactating
Thyroglobulin
Thyroglobulin
 dairy cows are typically hypothyroid so that periph-
iodination
reabsorption
 eral deiodination of T4 to produce the more potent T3
target tissues. Hypothyroidism is also common in
Galactose
dogs. The cause is not well understood but detection
mannose
 of antibodies against thyroglobulin in many of these
animals suggests autoimmune disease plays a role.
Hyperthyroidism is relatively common in older cats
Lysosomes
 and is usually associated with appearance of benign
Amino/
lodide
acids
T, and T4
thyroid tumors.
Fig. 12.28.
lodination of thyroid hormone. A cluster of follicles is
Fortunately, because of the common structure of
shown on the left and on the right an enlargement of two cells. In 
thyroid hormones across species, RIA procedures
the cell on the left, amino acids allow synthesis of the thyroglobulin
 originally developed for human testing are appropri-
followed by posttranslational modification and packaging in the
ate for animal testing. A common functional test is to
Golgi. Once thyroglobulin is secreted, iodination is completed.
Secretion of TSH promotes the resorption of the iodinated
 measure concentrations of plasma T, for T4 in response
thyroglobulin, fusion with lysosomes, and ultimately releases of T3
to injections of TSH or TRH. In correspondence with
and T4.
variations in metabolic rate with season, the data in
 Figure 12.29 illustrate secretion of Ts and T4 following
TRH injections in cows during winter compared with
354 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
1.8
CH,CH - COOH
NH2
5Deiodina
1.4
Thyroxine
othyronine
 5 Deiodinase
1
CH,CH- COOH
/
NH2
0.6
→Summer
3,5,3 Triodothyronine
(Ta
→Winter
HO
CH,CH - COOH
0.2
NH2
3, 3, 5 Triodothyronine
-0.5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5 6.5
Reverse T, (rT3)
Time (hours)
A
Fig. 12.30. Structure and nomenclature for conversion of thyroxine.
75
mation occurs outside of the thyroid gland by the
65
deiodination of T4. Tissues with high levels of deiodin-
ation enzymes include the liver and kidneys. The
mammary gland also expresses a deiodinase that
/bu)
55
 increases with the onset of lactation and in response
to other hormones known to stimulate milk produc-
45
 tion. This provides an enhanced local tissue concentra-
tion of mammary T available to stimulate metabolic
Summer
activity to support high levels of milk production
35
Chapter
+Winter
hypothyroid state.
25
Thyroid hormones do not circulate freely in the
-0.5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5 6.5
serum but are bound to plasma proteins. The most
predominant is T4-binding globulin, but its concen-
B
Time (hours)
tration is relatively low so that despite its high-
Fig. 12.29. Thyroid hormone responses to TRH. Lactating cows were
binding affinity, substantial amounts of T; and T4 also
injected with TRH (25μg/100kg body wt.; arrow) and blood was
circulate bound to albumin. A third protein, T-binding
collected to monitor changes in Ts and T4. Secretion of both hormones
pre-albumin, is especially good at sequestering T4.
was reduced in winter. Data adapted from Perera et al. (1985).
Although only free thyroid hormones are able to pass
into target cells to bind with nuclear T; receptors, the
hormones have the potential for long lasting effects,
summer. After a delay, TRH produced modest increases
in part because of their very long half-life. Whereas
in circulating T and T4 in lactating cows. This reflects
most hormones are rapidly degraded or taken from
the time delay required for TRH to first stimulate the
circulation (half-lives of minutes), T and T4 have long
 secretion of TSH by the anterior pituitary gland and
half-lives of about 1 and 7 days, respectively. Since T3
for TSH to induce the process of colloid reabsorption
is the essential biologically active thyroid hormone,
by the thyroid follicular cells. There is also an evident
 deiodinase reactions to convert T4 are physiologically
seasonal variation in the response to TRH in these
 important. It is reasonable to view the relatively larger
cows. Mean concentrations of T; and T4 before admin-
quantities of circulating T4 as a local tissue source for
 istration of TRH were lower in cows sampled during
Ts in target cells. Two primary deiodination pathways
winter and response to TRH was reduced. These
act to convert T4 to either biologically potent T (5'deio-
 reductions likely reflect greater utilization of thyroid
dinase enzyme) or toreverse Ts(5-deiodinase enzyme),
hormones  to enhance
e thermogenesis during
the
which is biologically inert. Thus, the increased 
5-
winter. Concentrations of T4 were about 50-fold greater
 deiodinase can be viewed as a degradation pathway
than concentrations of T,. This is similar to other
 or increased 5'deiodinase as an activation pathway.
domestic animals and suggests that substantial T, for-
These conversions are illustrated in Figure 12.30.
Endocrine system
355
 Given the importance of thyroid hormones in regu-
that the body is hypothyroid as a whole. The transfer
lation of metabolism, it was only natural for animal
of iodine, iodinated nonhormonal compounds, and
scientists to consider if administration of thyroid
thyroid hormones through the mammary gland into
hormones might be used to improve metabolic rate
the milk further exacerbates a systemic hypothyroid
to support enhanced growth or development. For
condition. Maintenance of a euthyroid state in the lac-
example, involvement of the thyroid gland in mainte-
tating mammary gland in the midst of a functional
nance of lactation has been known since reports in the
hypothyroid condition is consistent with increasing
early 1900s showed that milk yield was reduced in
the metabolic priority of the mammary gland and
thyroidectomized goats. By the 1930s, it was shown
providing T, to heighten the effect of other galactopoi-
that thyroidectomy of dairy cows reduced milk yield
etic hormones. For example, this occurs in response
and, conversely, that treatment with T4 increased milk
to treatment of cows with exogenous bST (Capuco
a oe si    e  p
et al., 1989).
cious when fed, these reports stimulated much inter-
 The relationship between GH and thyroid hormones
est in the practical utilization of the hormone to
 is not limited to GH-induced alterations in 5'D during
increase milk production in cattle. This was made eco-
lactation and galactopoiesis. There is a close relation-
nomically feasible by the relatively low cost of manu-
ship between thyroid hormones, thyroid hormone
facture of T4 and other thyroactive iodinated proteins.
 metabolism, and GH and IGF-I synthesis. Mechanisti-
However, results of multiple studies showed that
cally, Ts can alter hepatic GH receptor binding and
while feeding T4 (or iodinated proteins) increased milk
thus enhance GH stimulation of IGF-I synthesis. Alter-
 production by 10-40%, the galactopoietic effect was of 
natively, Ts can also increase IGF-I synthesis in the
variable duration and milk production returned to
absence of GH. It is worth noting that in those situa-
normal or below normal levels despite continued
tions when GH does not stimulate IGF synthesis (e.g-.
treatment.
during food restriction, fetal development, sex-linked
 The galactopoietic effect of T4 supplementation
dwarfism, and hypothyroidism) there is evidence for
 depends on a general increase in body metabolism.
T deficiency. In addition, T serves as a regulator of
Thus, it is not effective when cows are in early lacta-
GH synthesis by the pituitary. Conversely, GH can
 Ae  q   p) 
lizing body reserves to meet the energy demands of
tion of T (Capuco et al., 1989).
lactation. A general increase in body metabolism at
this time would be counterproductive to meeting the
nutrient demands of lactation. It was concluded that
Calcitonin
T4 treatment should not be initiated before mid-
lactation and that the energy density of the diet should
It would be difficult to overstate the physiological rel-
be increased during treatment because feed intake
evance of the thyroid hormones, but before we leave
the thyroid gland behind, two other hormones are also
utilization. Furthermore, upon withdrawal of treat-
synthesized in the thyroid or the parathyroid glands.
ment, a hypothyroid condition ensues that exacerbates
CT is a 32-amino acid peptide whose major function
the usual decline in milk yield in late lactation. Despite
is to inhibit the enzymatic action of osteoclasts in
the initial interest in thyroid hormone supplementa-
compact bone to reduce resorption of the inorganic
tion to increase milk yield, the temporary nature of the
matrix surrounding the cells. Parafollicular or C cells
milk yield response and frequent undershoot below
 of the thyroid synthesize and secrete CT in response
normal production afterward led to the conclusion
to changes in serum Ca concentration. As concentra-
that its adaptation would be of minimal value.
tions rise—hypercalcemia—the cells increase  CT
Although T4 is the predominant thyroid hormone
secretion, but with hypocalcemia, hormone secretion
in circulation, it essentially serves as a prohormone
is inhibited so that degradation of bone matrix is
because it has little if any biological activity. The most
enhanced and Ca concentrations can return to normal.
metabolically active thyroid hormone, Ts, is produced
Although therapeutic use of CT is limited in animals,
by enzymatic 5'deiodination of T4 within the thyroid
 in humans it is used in patients with Paget's disease
and peripheral tissues. Changes in the extrathyroidal
(associated with abnormal bone resorption) and in
activity of T4-5'-deiodinase (5'D) alter localized T3
some cases of osteoporosis.
availability. Activity of the enzyme also varies with
physiological state. For example, with onset of lacta-
tion in rodents and ruminants, there is an increase in
Parathyroid hormone
5'D in the mammary gland and a decrease in the liver.
 These changes are believed to maintain a euthyroid
Parathyroid hormone or PTH works with CT to
state in the lactating mammary gland despite the fact
provide even greater control over calcium metabolism
356 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
and ultimately improved homeostasis. The parathy-
like a hormone to stimulate the synthesis of calcium
roid glands usually occur in four pairs located near
the poles of the two lobes of the thyroid gland. They
cells. Over the course of several hours or days this
are typically small clusters of tissue, -50mg each.
increases absorption of calcium from the gut and
Cells that are actively synthesizing and secreting PTH
therefore serum calcium. Given its myriad of actions,
are called chief cells. PTH is initially produced as a
it is reasonable to assume that PTH plays a more
 precursor (preproPTH) of 115 amino acids that has 25
 prominent role in calcium homeostasis than CT.
amino acids cleaved in transit from the RER to the
In domestic animals the most common disturbance
Golgi. Once in the Golgi, removal of 6 additional
in calcium metabolism typically occurs at the time of
amino acids yields biologically active PTH that is
parturition and is most frequent in dairy cows (milk
secreted in secretory vesicles by exocytosis.
 fever) and dogs. Affected animals exhibit severe hypo-
The primary effect of PTH is to increase calcium and
calcemia and often severe neuromuscular dysfunc-
decrease phosphate concentrations in extracellular
tion. The animals frequently become recumbent
fluids. These effects are mediated by actions in mul-
ae araq shop u pue (pazqou are aenidi smo)
tiple tissues. Since compact bone is the most abundant
often involuntary muscle spasms referred to as tetany
 mineral reserve in the body, it is a major target tissue.
or eclampsia. The problem arises from the sudden
 An early effect of PTH is stimulating the passage of
 demand for calcium needed for milk production so
calcium out of osteocytes and osteoblasts. Soon after,
that serum concentrations are no longer maintained
PTH activates osteoclast activity, to increase enzy-
within usual limits. Treatment typically involves infu-
 matic resorption of hydroxyapatite. Since the hydroxy-
sion of glucose and calcium. After treatment animals
apatite is essentially calcium, phosphate, and water,
 generally recover mechanisms to maintain calcium
this action increases serum calcium and phosphate.
concentrations.
Secondarily, PTH targets cells of distal convoluted
The etiology of milk fever is complex but it does not
tubules of kidney nephrons to increase calcium absorp-
seem to involve a failure of PTH secretion. However,
 tion from the filtrate and simultaneously targets cells
it may be that responsiveness of PTH target tissues
of the proximal convoluted tubules to decrease phos-
(receptor expression) or  vitamin  D activation is
phate reabsorption. These actions improve calcium
impaired. In dairy cows, a common management rec-
status without a corresponding increase in serum
 ommendation is to feed diets that are low in calcium
phosphate. In addition, PTH enhances the kidney
 in the period before calving. The idea is to induce
tissue production of αl-hydroxylase, an enzyme that
mobilization mechanisms prior to the dramatic
increase that occurs with the onset of lactation so that
 into its more biologically active 1,25 dihydroxy analog.
the increased demand can be met. Figure 12.31 illus-
This is important because 1,25-(OH)-vitamin D acts
trates changes in serum calcium around the time of
10
-Fever
13
Con
12.5
8
9
12
w
11.5
lciu
6
11
Cal
5
10.5
4
10
-10
-4
-1
2
5
-7-4 -2
2
4
Time(days)
Time (days)
A
B
Yw pagya jeu siewuy uen jo aw ayi punie smo Aasiaf u wunien wnas u sauys smous  jaued wnien wns e'zt 
fever (diamonds) showed lower minimum values compared with herd mates (con) that did not exhibit milk fever. Data adapted from Goff 
et al. (1 995). Panel B illustrates periparturient serum calcium for mares. The decrease in calcium of small magnitude and minimum values
occur 2 days after foaling. Data adapted from Martin et al. (1996).
Endocrine system
357
 parturition in horses and cows. Both exhibit a decrease
but it is relatively more dramatic in the cow and espe-
cially those that exhibited milk fever symptoms. Also,
the lowest serum calcium level in the mares does not
occur until 2 days postpartum.
Adrenal gland
Despite their small size, the adrenal glands, located at
the superior pole of each kidney, are critical regulators
of metabolism. The outer portion of each gland, the
cortex, is responsible for the production of two broad
classes of steroid hormones: the mineralocorticoids, of
which aldosterone is a prime example, and glucocor-
ticoids, represented by cortisol. The center of the
 gland, the medulla, is derived from neural tissue. It is 
Fg. 12.32. Adrenal gland. Note the central area (medulla,
essentially postganglionic tissue that is part of the
brackets) and the outer cortex; H&E staining, 2X magnification.
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system.
 When stimulated it secretes epinephrine, a structural
cousin of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine. Both
of these regions are important in adaptations neces-
cells are organized into more or less spherical clusters,
sary to respond to stress and to maintain homeostasis.
hence the name glomerulus, Latin for "little ball." The
When animals are under prolonged stress it is not
zona fasciculata is the largest region and the cells are
uncommon that the adrenal glands become enlarged.
typically arranged into columns. Between the columns
However, under extreme situations the capacity to
there are long fenestrated capillaries. The innermost
respond can be lost, resulting in exhaustion. In the
region of the cortex, the zona reticularis, is about the
1930s the work of Sir Hans Selye was among the first
size of the zone glomerulosa and the cells are arranged
to focus on the role of the adrenal to combat stress. He
 in an irregular network (Fig. 12.32 and Fig. 12.33).
studied the response of adrenalectomized animals to
The major hormones made in the adrenal cortex
 injury or stress and pioneered what came to be called
are cortisol or corticosterone (typical glucocorticoids),
the general adaptation syndrome. His hypothesis con-
androgens (testosterone or testosterone-like), and
sisted of three phases: (1) alarm reaction, (2) stage of
aldosterone (mineralocorticoids). The zone glomeru-
resistance, and (3) stage of exhaustion. This can be
losa is primarily responsible for the synthesis of aldo-
envisioned by considering the pathways responsible
sterone. Although we discussed some of the basics of
for glucocorticoid secretion and biological responses
steroid hormone structure earlier, some review is in
to glucocorticoid release. First, stress induces neural
order. Steroid synthesis begins with cholesterol. Much
stimulation, leading to hypothalamic secretion of CRH.
of the needed cholesterol comes from uptake from
This results in secretion of ACTH, which produces
plasma lipoproteins but synthesis directly from acetate
glucocorticoid secretion. An early effect of glucocorti-
also occurs. A critical, rate-limiting step involves the
coid release is mobilization of glycogen reserves to
conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone. In the two
increase circulating glucose. Other tissues are progres-
inner zones of the cortex, this is stimulated by ACTH.
sively catabolized to provide fatty acids or amino
This conversion occurs within the mitochondria and
acids for energy production. If these actions provide
involves two hydroxylation steps along with cleavage
the necessary nutrients to respond to the stress alarm,
 of the side chain of the cholesterol. The pregnenolone
repairs are made and conditions return to normal.
passes out of the mitochondria for further processing.
When stress continues but is manageable, a new "set
Differences in steroid synthesis between zones
of
point" or stage of resistance is achieved. However,
the adrenal cortex reflect differences in the enzymes
with more extreme or prolonged stress, a new balance
present. The greatest differences are between the
cannot be achieved so that signals for more glucocor-
zona glomerulosa and the inner zones. This explains
ticoid release cannot be answered by the adrenal
why aldosterone is the predominant product of
cortex. This is the stage of exhaustion.
the glomerulosa. Specifically, the zona glomerulosa
The adrenal cortex is organized into three zones.
lacks 17o-hydroxylase activity so cannot produce
Just below the protective capsule that surrounds
the gland, is the zone glomerulosa, which typically
 gesterone. This is relevant because these molecules are
accounts for about 20% of the cortical cells. Here the
the immediate precursors for cortisol and adrenal
358 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
C
Fig. 12.33. Areas of the adrenal cortex. A = glomerulosa; B = fasciculata; C = reticularis.
androgens. Furthermore, only the zona glomerulosa
the first place. Thus, secretions and regulation of the
can convert corticosterone to 18-hydroxycortisosterone
zona glomerulosa and two inner zones of the adrenal
 and aldosterone. Synthesis of aldosterone is largely
cortex are quite distinct. Some of the pathways for
controlled by the renin-angiotensin system of the
synthesis of various steroids in the adrenal gland are
kidney. This will be discussed in greater detail in our
illustrated in Figure 12.34.
study of the urinary system. However, the essential
ACTH rapidly stimulates secretion of glucocorti-
 point is that decreases in renal blood pressure lead to
 coids from the inner zones of the adrenal cortex, along
the production of angiotensin Il, which, among other
with increases in DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
actions, stimulates the secretion of aldosterone. Aldo-
With chronic stimulation there is hyperplasia and
sterone then acts to increase resorption of sodium by
hypertrophy of the cortical cells. Binding of ACTH to
the distal convoluted epithelial cells of the kidney
cortical cell receptors activates adenylyl cyclase,
nephrons. Increased recovery of sodium from the
leading to increased concentrations of cAMP. This
urinary filtrate allows the companion recovery
1of
activates intracellular phosphoprotein kinases. This
 more water (via osmosis) so that interstitial fluid
ultimately stimulates the rate-limiting conversion of 
volume and subsequently blood volume is increased.
cholesterol to pregnenolone to allow for steroidogen-
This returns blood pressure to normal, thus shutting
esis. ACTH secretion is controlled by secretion of CRH
off the trigger for increased aldosterone secretion in
from the hypothalamus so that changes in ACTH are
Endocrine system
359
Cholesterol
matrix protein synthesis required for deposition of in
inorganic components of bone. This can clearly impact
mineral metabolism as well as growth and develop-
DHEA*
ment. One of the effects of glucocorticoids, inhibition
Pregnenolone
of neutrophils, is used therapeutically to lessen inflam-
mation. These potent effects demonstrate the dramatic
Progesterone
17-0. OH
Androstenedione
problems that accompany situations where there is
Progesterone
 either too much or two little of the adrenal steroids are
produced.
 Routine control over glucocorticoid secretion depends
Estrogen
 on negative feedback at multiple levels (see Fig. 10.13)
Testosterone
In particular, increased concentrations of glucocorti-
Adosterone
coids inhibit secretion of CRH from the hypothalamus
as well as ACTH from the pituitary. In fact, two distinct
 Cortisol
 regative feedback responses have been described. A fast
feedback, glucocorticoid-induced inhibition of ACTH
Fig. 12.34. Adrenal steroid biosynthesis. Cholesterol is essential
but conversion to pregnenolone allows subsequent production of
secretion, is directly related to the rate of increase in
sex steroids (yellow), glucocorticoids (tan), and mineraldocorticoids
glucocorticoid secretion. This phase occurs within
(pink). *DHEA is dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate.
minutes and acts to reduce both basal and ACTH-
stimulated increases in adrenal glucocorticoids. A
 delayed feedback inhibition subsequently suppresses
closely paralleled by changes in cortisol or corticoste-
both CRH and ACTH secretion. At the extreme, pro-
rone secretion (depending on the species). However,
longed administration of glucocorticoids suppresses
neuroendocrine control of adrenal cortical activity is
CRH and ACTH secretion and the adrenal cortex at-
complex. Three levels of regulation include: (1) circa-
 rophies. Addison's disease or adrenocortical insuffi-
dian rhythm, (2) stress response, and (3) feedback
ciency occurs when there is a failure of the adrenal
inhibition. A circadian rhythm is superimposed on the
 cortex to produce sufficient amounts of mineralocor-
typical episodic secretion of glucocorticoids that
ticoids or glucocorticoids. The consequences of this
occurs throughout the day. This reflects CNS activity
 are clearly dramatic. Symptoms can include muscle
weakness,fatigue, anorexia, hypotension,hyponatremia,
2
that controls both the number and magnitude of CRH
and ACTH secretory episodes during the day. In pri-
and hypoglycemia. With companion failure of aldoste-
mates, glucocorticoid secretion is usually low in the
rone production, additional symptoms include dehy-
dration hyperkalemia and acidosis. Causes include
late evening and with the onset of sleep, but as dawn
or wakefulness begins, CNS activity and correspond-
destruction or dysfunction of the adrenal cortex. For
ing CRH and ACTH secretory events increase in
example, tuberculosis can destroy the adrenal cortex,
number and magnitude so that glucocorticoid concen-
as can autoimmune disorders. Secondary causes
 trations increase. This pattern of low activity during
reflect failures at the level of the hypothalamus (im-
sleep and increased activity during early day is rela-
paired secretion of CRH) or pituitary (impaired secre-
fively fixed, but substantial relative variability occurs.
tion of ACTH). Before adrenal steroids became
This inherent rhythm is impacted by physical and
 available for therapy, primary adrenocortical insuffi-
mental stresses and various disease conditions. Stress
ciency was fatal.
 responses are usually tied to corresponding increases
The opposite problem, chronic secretion of excess
in release of epinephrine and thyroid hormones. This
glucocorticoids, leads to an array of problems called
family of reactions allows for metabolic effects to
Cushing's syndrome in humans. The most common
 maintain homeostasis. For example, increased glyco-
 cause is excessive glucocorticoid therapy This again
 genolysis and gluconeogenesis provide fuel to synthe-
emphasizes the importance of careful use of these
size ATP in stressful fight-or-flight situations.
.In
 potent steroids. Classic Cushing's syndrome is often
conjunction with secretion of epinephrine from the
caused by pituitary or adrenal abnormalities that
adrenal medulla, a major effect in adipose tissue is
lead to excess concentrations of ACTH, that is, tumor
increased lipolysis and release of glycerol and fatty
products. Cushing's disease has multiple effects on
acids for energy production.
tissue metabolism and organ function. This is expected
Glucocorticoids impact multiple tissues. In excess
 given the widespread distribution of glucocorticoid
they inhibit collagen synthesis by fibroblasts. This can
receptors. Obesity can occur with alterations in distri-
produce thinning of the skin, easy bruising, and slow
 bution of adipose tissue; that is, moon face and appear-
healing of wounds. Impaired bone formation 
 ance of a "buffalo-hump" is a symptom that can
can
occur from reduced cell proliferation and extracellular
develop over time. Hypertension, glucose intolerance,
360  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
and gonad dysfunction are also manifestations of the
the islets. Glucagon-producing α cells are about 20%
disease.
of the total. Insulin-secreting β cells are the most abun-
As concerns with animal health and welfare and
dant, constituting 60% to 80% of the total. Somatostatin-
perceived problems attributed to stress have emerged
 producing & cells are infrequently observed, 3-10% of
in recent years, tools to quantitatively measure stress
the total, but pancreatic polypeptide secreting PP- or
have been sought. Certainly there are behavior attri-
 F-cells are rare with -1% abundance.
butes and production-related measures (absence of
Insulin is a small protein, with a molecular weight
chronic disease, rate of gain, milk production, etc.) that
of about 60o0 daltons. It is composed of two chains
can be linked with disruption of homeostasis tied to
held together by disulfide bonds but it is synthesized
stress, but many of these are poorly defined. It is also
 as a precursor molecule in which a fragment called the
true that some level of stress is necessary, even desir-
C peptide is removed to produce the biologically
able, for normal physiological responses and health.
active molecule. The amino acid sequence of insulin is
As indicated earlier, during short-term stress, secretion
highly conserved. For example, it is still common for
of glucocorticoids and epinephrine allow mobilization
diabetic patients to be treated with porcine insulin. In.
of nutrients necessary for homeostasis. The problems
fact, the first case of treatment of a human diabetic
arise with severe chronic stress and consequences of
with insulin was in 1922.
prolonged secretion of glucocorticoids, that is, immu-
Insulin synthesis begins with translation of its
nosuppression and atrophy of tissues. Regardless,
 mRNA as a single chain precursor called preproinsu-
measuring changes in circulating concentrations of
lin. As it passes into the cisternal space of the RER
glucocorticoids, responses to an ACTH challenge,
removal of its signal peptide produces proinsulin. Pro-
and /or secretion of epinephrine provide a generally
insulin has three domains: an amino-terminal B chain,
accepted quantifiable stress index for animals. Para-
 the A chain carboxy-terminal region, and a connecting
doxically, it is possible that the process (handling.
peptide in the middle called the C peptide. Once it
needle sticks, and restraint) of taking frequent blood
 passes into the cisternal space of the RER, endopepti-
samples (often necessary because of the episodic
 dases excise the C peptide to produce mature insulin.
nature of glucocorticoid secretion) can be stressful in
Insulin and free C peptide are packaged in the Golgi
itself. This has led to development of remote blood
 into secretory granules, which accumulate in the cyto-
sampling devices or sampling of other body fluids
plasm. When the β cell is stimulated, insulin and C
(saliva or urine), but these samples may also require
peptide are secreted from the cell by exocytosis.
confinement or handling that can confound results.
However, C peptide has no known biological activity.
 Mostl and Palme (2002) described the assay of metabo-
 Secretion of both insulin and glucagon is closely
lites of cortisol in feces as a tool to noninvasively
tied to circulating concentrations of glucose. For
monitor secretion of glucocorticoids as a possible stress
optimal health and maintenance of homeostasis, blood
index. The concentrations of these cortisol metabolites
glucose concentrations must be maintained within
 in feces reflect a kind of "average" glucocorticoid pro-
fairly narrow boundaries. In the case of the β cells,
as  si en s r p e r 
extracellular glucose is transported into the cells by
specific. For example, in sheep and cattle changes in
facilitated diffusion involving specific glucose trans-
fecal concentrations of 11,17-dioxoandrostane are
 porter proteins. Since its uptake depends on diffusion,
correlated with changes in blood levels of cortisol fol-
the greater the extracellular glucose concentration, the
lowing treatment with a bolus challenge of ACTH but
greater the corresponding intracellular concentration.
with a 10- to 12-hour delay (Palme et al., 1999).
As concentrations reach a threshold value, this pro-
duces a change in membrane depolarization and
 subsequently an influx of extracellular calcium. The
Endocrine pancreas
precise mechanism(s) responsible for depolarization
are not well defined but may depend on metabolism
The two primary endocrine products of the pancreas
of glucose that is taken up into the cell and alterations
are insulin and glucagon. Both hormones are simple
in the ATP:ADP ratio within the cytoplasm. Regard-
proteins that synthesized in small clusters or islands
less, the increase in free calcium is believed to be a
of cells nested within the exocrine tissue of the pan-
primary stimulator of exocytosis of insulin-containing
creas. The German pathologist Paul Langerhans dis-
vesicles.
covered these clusters of cells, now called the islets of
It is clear that increased glucose concentrations
 Langerhans, in 1869. They represent only a small frac-
markedly increase secretion of insulin in normal
tion of the mass of the pancreas (1-2%). Each indi-
 animals. This is particularly evident in monogastric
vidual islet (-0.4mm in diameter) contains only a few
animals after feeding of a high-carbohydrate meal.
thousand cells but they are nonetheless critical for
Figure 12.35 illustrates the increase in insulin in cows
homeostasis. Four cell types can be distinguished within
that were given a bolus injection of glucose into the
Endocrine system
361
3.5
Elevated blood
Increases
glucose
poolq 
 Stimulates
glucose
insulin release
tStimulates glycogen
2.5
breakdown
Glucagon
Pancreas
/b
一
Glycogen
Glucose
1.5
Insulin
Livei
Stimulates glycogen
Stimulates
creation and glucose
glucagon release
uptake
0.5
Decreases
Low blood
blood
glucose
glucose
-20 -10 0
5
1020304060
Fg. 12.36. Regulation of blood glucose. When glucose is
elevated, the pancreas releases insulin. This promotes the uptake
Time (min)
of glucose and glycogen formation in the liver, thus reducing blood
glucose-promoting hypoglycemia. Glucagon is released when 
Fig. 12.35. Insulin after glucose. Cows were infused with glucose
blood glucose is low. This stimulates glycogen breakdown, thereby
(0.1 g/kg body wt.) at time zero. Data adapted from Denbow et al.
returning glucose concentration to normal, a hyperglycemic
(1986).
response.
jugular vein. This experiment was done to compare
tion in healthy animals. Typical symptoms include
pancreatic responsiveness among cows in various
p ssam s m se 'nsdaod pre o
seasons. There is, plainly, an abrupt increase i
fatigue and often polyphagia with weight loss. The
serum insulin following a glucose challenge even in
increased urination is a consequence of osmotic diure-
ruminants.
sis related to hyperglycemia. Thirst and polydipsia
 Although secretion of insulin acts to lower blood
occur as a consequence of hyperosmotic state of body
glucose by promoting the uptake of glucose into most
fhuids. Since glucose is poorly utilized in the absence
2
cells and particularly increased glycogenesis in liver
of insulin, ketosis and subsequently ketoacidosis occur
tissue, control of blood glucose concentration does not
Aiaua Aiddns oi pazoqeies are pue spioe Aey se
 demands. Wasting of muscle mass can also happen as
simply depend on changing secretion of insulin. When
blood glucose concentration drops, the islets secrete
muscle proteins are degraded to supply amino acids
 glucagon. Glucagon stimulates the breakdown of gly-
 for glucose and ketone bodies. Ironically, it is as if the
cogen and promotes gluconeogenesis. As a generaliza-
 body is starving, despite the presence of large quanti-
tion, increases in blood insulin concentrations act to
ties of blood glucose. Without insulin, the capacity of
 drive energy substrates into storage in tissues by
 cells to capture blood glucose is impaired, yet energy
increasing accumulation of glycogen, which can be
 demands remain. To add insult to injury, so to speak,
mobilized when needed. This association is illustrated
the β cells of the islets also require insulin to sense that
in Figure 12.36.
glucose concentrations are adequate. This means that
 Problems with regulation of blood glucose con-
C cells are stimulated to secrete glucagon; this only
centrations are relatively common in humans and
animals. Naturally occurring diabetes is probably the
 and gluconeogenesis. With acute insulin deficiency.
most common endocrine disorder diagnosed in dogs.
 the increased energy demands, and failure to utilize
with estimates for the frequency of diabetes ranging
glucose, ketones (acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate, and
from a high of 1 in 100 to 1 in 500. Diabetes mellitus 
acetone) rapidly increase. Along with reduced renal
is a complex disease that is manifested by inappropri-
blood flow (reduced extracellular fluid volume), reduced
ate hyperglycemia. Symptoms and problems result
renal excretion of hydrogen ions also can occur. This
from of a failure of insulin secretion, failure of biolog-
 can lead to dramatic ketoacidosis. Continuing increases
ical action of insulin, or both. It is useful but some-
in blood osmolarity (>330mOsm/L) and progressive
what arbitrary to classify diabetes as either insulin
acidosis produce coma and ultimately cardiovascular
-dependent (type I) or noninsulin dependent (type II).
collapse and death.
In type I diabetes, insulin is very low or absent, plasma
Clearly, the primary treatment option is to monitor
glucagon typically elevated, and the β cells fail to
blood glucose to minimize drastic swings with
 respond to stimuli known to stimulate insulin secre-
careful attention to diet and replacement of missing
362  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
insulin with exogenous treatments. Fortunately, recent
This test utilizes an instrument that has 6.0 cm length
 advancements in molecular biology and biotechnol-
of monofilament nylon that is pushed against the
ogy have made multiple options available. Many
cornea until the there is a slight deflection. Reducing
 patients still are treated with porcine or bovine insulin
the length of the filament in 0.5 cm segments until a
but recombinant human insulin is also available. There
blink reflex is recorded continues the process. This
 are also multiple forms of insulin available for therapy.
length is recorded and converted to a force value (g/
that is, short acting (so called regular insulin), as well
 mm²), in other words, the force required to elicit the
as intermediate and long-acting formulations. This
blink response (from 0.4 to 15.9g/mm²) depending on
has increased the opportunity to better control blood
the length from 6.0 to 0.5cm. Testing was done to
 glucose, particularly with respect to meals.
compare various regions of the cornea, that is, central
With fewer acute episodes but chronic hyperglyce-
(C), nasal (N), Dorsal (D), Temporal (T), and Ventral
mia, diabetes can lead to a variety of pathological
(V), and averaged for both eyes. These data show a
changes. Vascular diseases include both microvas-
consistent pattern of reduced sensitivity (i.e., greater
cular and macrovascular problems. In capillaries and
force required to elicit the blink response) in diabetic
smaller precapillary arterioles there is frequently a
compared with clinically normal dogs.
thickening of the basement membrane. These can be
 In type Il diabetes, the problem is failure of insulin
especially problematic in the retina, leading to reti-
 to be biologically active. However, this is typically a
 nopathy and progressively failed vision, and in the
 milder form of the disease in that it is heterogeneous
 kidney, progressive disease produces pathological
with respect to symptoms and the degree of biological
failure. This also influences treatment options. Sim-
 ing the nephrons. In larger vessels, diabetes is believed
plistically, type I diabetes treatment requires replace-
to accelerate atherosclerosis and all of the associated
ment of missing insulin. The sifuation is more complex
problems, that is, it increases incidence of myocardial
with type Il because treatment options depend on the
infarction, stroke, and peripheral gangrene, which
relative contribution of still-functional β cells and the
seems to be largely unique to diabetic patients.
degree of insulin insensitivity For example, type II is
Diabetes is also associated with increased incidence
more common in obese animals. This in part reflects
of cataracts. Increased blood glucose is believed to
-dar s ue s nss asde i ir a
contribute to formation of cataracts by promoting gly-
tors and is a key tissue in control of energy balance
cosylation of lens proteins and by increasing concen-
and homeostatic alterations in carbohydrate metabo-
trations of sorbitol within the lens tissue. Sorbitol is a
lism. Therefore, a common treatment scheme is to
by-product of glucose metabolism. As it accumulates
promote weight loss and to control episodes of hypo-
 this promotes osmotic changes that ultimately promote
 or hyperglycemia with diet.
 swelling and fibrosis. Changes in the cornea and lens
are frequently rapid and are a consistent ocular man-
ifestation of diabetes. A decrease in corneal sensitivity
Other hormones and growth factors
is often observed as the disease progresses. Corneal
nerves are important in producing protective re-
As you have concluded by now, a host of hormones
sponses (tear production, eyelid closure) so that
and growth factors are involved in physiological pro-
diabetic-related impairment of these responses can
cesses. In this chapter we have chosen to focus on
have important consequences. Table 12.10 shows the
some of the major endocrine organs and selected
results of Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometer measurement
growth factors. Indeed, entire courses of study are
to compare the sensitivity of the corneal touch thresh-
devoted to endocrinology or even narrow families of
old (CTT) in diabetic compared with normal dogs.
related messengers. As we discuss specific systems we
will briefly describe the properties and actions of some
of other hormones and growth factors. Some example
include: (1) leptin, a hormone produced by adipose
Table 12.10.  Corneal touch threshold in diabetic
tissue that affects appetite; (2) erythropoietin, a kidney
and normal dogs.
derived hormone that responds to a reduction in blood
Diabetic
oxygen and stimulates synthesis of red blood cells;
Region of Cornea
Norma!
and (3) atrial naturetic peptide, a hormone from the
Central
2.9
1.8
 heart that impacts blood pressure by affecting sodium
Nasal
4.0
2.2
resorption. Table 12.1l gives a listing of some of these
Dorsal
5.1
2.8
other hormones and growth factors and some relevant
Temporal
5.1
2.8
Ventral
6.5
5.1
physiological features.
Some of the growth factors that have particular sig-
Data adapted from Good et al. (2003).
nificance in animal research are briefly discussed in
Endocrine system
363
Table 12.11.  Selected growth factors.
Growth Factor
Abbreviation
Properties
 Epidermal growth factor
EGF
 Proliferation of epithelium derived from epidermis, mammary development, cancer,
and development. At least 10 family members (EGF, TGFo, heregulins) bind to type
I receptor kinases (ErbB-1,2)
Transforming growth factor
TGF-β
Family of at least five proteins, that is, TGF-β1,2,3, and so on, involved in
modification of the extracellular matrix (ECM) to influence tissue development; 
secreted bound to glycoproteins that are cleaved for activation
Fibroblast growth factor
FGF
Related family of 20 peptides, strong affinity for heparin-like glycosaminoglycans of
the ECM. Many members are likely stromal tissue-derived mitogens.
Leptin 
 Produced primarily in adipocytes, involved in control of feed intake as well as other
developmental processes
Transforming growth factor
HD.1
Member of superfamily of proteins that typically inhibit epithelial cellgrowth,
important expression of ECM proteins, and glandular morphogenesis
 Atrial natriuretic factor
ANP
Produced by heart atrium, secreted in response to stretch along with a related factor
brain natriuretic factor (BNP); responses include vasodilation, inhibition of
aldosterone secretion, and diuresis to normalize blood pressure
the following sections. To serve as examples we have
IGF family
focused on several that are known to be important in
mammary development or function. This is because
While we previously discussed the somatomedin
lactation and mammary development are important
hypothesis and the role of IGF-I as it relates to the
in all mammals and are especially relevant with
actions of GH, it has become increasingly clear that the
respect to the dairy industry. Second, some of the
IGF family of growth factors, receptors, and binding
factors we have selected for discussion have been in
proteins are critical players in many specific physio-
the news in recent years because of relationships with
logical processes including mammary and ovarian
s r i  p  r
2
development. IGF-I and IGF-ll are widely expressed
This does not mean that these agents do not have
endocrine-, autocrine-, or paracrine-acting peptides
 more general roles in most animals; rather, our focus
that regulate cell growth, cell differentiation, mainte-
 nance of cell function, and prevention of apoptosis in
on the mammary gland gives us a common theme for
this discussion and makes for relevant examples to
multiple cell types. Research with IGF-1 and IGF-II
 illustrate some of the biological properties of these
was initially centered on the somatomedin hypothesis
agents.
(Hadsell and Bonnette, 2000; Hadsell et al., 2002).
Last, it is difficult to overstate the significance of
 Since these early experiments, with the somatomedins 
 technical advancements in cell and molecular biology
now called the IGFs, the view has evolved that the
that have allowed a major expansion in our under-
 IGFs are also important locally acting autocrine or
standing of structural relationships between various
paracrine stimulators of cell function. The primary
 messengers. Based on detailed structural analysis at
signaling receptor for the IGF-I peptide is a tyrosine
the DNA, RNA, and protein levels, messengers not
 kinase receptor (IGF-IR) structurally similar to the
 previously identified as being related have come to be
insulin receptor (see Fig. 12.5). The receptor is widely
 grouped into families of molecules. In some cases,
distributed and is now known to have important roles
messengers are grouped based on structure of the
in normal cell growth and development. Moreover,
-s uo paseq padnoa are spuea rano inq 'uaioid
abnormal stimulation of IGF-IR is implicated in
larity of the receptors to which they bind. For research-
 appearance and continuing development of a variety
 ers this is a time of astonishingly rapid advancements 
of different types of tumors. In particular, the strongly
and accumulation of enormously detailed informa-
antiapoptotic activity of the receptor is recognized
tion. Unfortunately, for students and others it can also
 as being relevant in tumorgenesis. However, other
be confusing as more details emerge to allow reclas-
related effects, including effects on cell-cell and cell-
sification or new understanding. Again, our goal in
extracellular matrix interactions, are also likely impor-
this section is not to provide a comprehensive review
tant in both normal and abnormal tissue development.
of the myriad of growth factors but to illustrate the
Our focus is on normal development, but much of the
recent basic work to understand functions of IGFs and
animal agriculture or are a part of recent medical news.
IGF-IR is derived from cancer-oriented studies.
3 64 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
In the cow, normal circulating concentrations of
In addition to IGF-I and IGF-Il, there are six IGF-
insulin 1-5ng/mL would have little ability to signal
 binding proteins (IGFBPs) and nine related proteins
via IGF-IR. IGF-I can also bind to the insulin receptor
(IGFBP-rP) that affect the actions of IGF-I and II.
but with much less affinity, -1ooo-fold. The situation
The IGFBPs are well characterized and bind IGF-I
is further confounded by the existence of hybrid recep-
with -10-fold higher affinity than the IGFBP-rPs. The
tors between IGF-IR and the native insulin receptor
 IGFBPs have several functions, including prolonging
(IR) that have higher affinity for IGFs than for insulin.
the half-life of IGF-1, transporting IGF-I from the cir-
IGF-ll binds with high affinity to a receptor that is
culation, and localizing IGF-I to potential target cells
identical with a receptor for mannose-6-phosphate,
(Clemmons, 1998; Duan, 2002). Locally produced
but the receptor has no known intracellular signaling
IGFBPs provide a mechanism to target or localize IGFs
function. The affinity of this receptor for IGF-lis about
within particular tissues or cells and thereby alter bio-
100-fold lower than for IGF-I and it does not recog-
logical responses to IGFs.
nize insulin. There are as many as five distinct types
It is worth taking a moment to discuss this idea of
of insulin/IGF-1 hybrid receptors. The IR isoforms
binding proteins and how they can be studied. A
IR-A and IR-B, as well as IGF-IR, have the ability to
typical procedure is to separate solutions of proteins
form both homo- and heterotetramers. This clearly can
pns Aq snod a u on padsn
 change the diversity of signaling induced by binding
 SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. These proteins that are
of insulin or IGFs. Signaling pathways and biological
then separated in columns or lanes based on molecu-
effects are best characterized for IGF-IR and IR-B, but
lar weight and /or charge and are then transferred to
experiments in cell culture model systems support the
a membrane (essentially like a sheet of paper). This
idea that combinations of native and hybrid receptors
 membrane is subsequently washed in an appropriate
allow both overlapping and unique physiological
effects. In general, stimulation of either IGF-IR or IR-A
radiolabeled IGF-1 or IGF-Il. The iodinated protein is
is associated with cell cycle progression but stimula-
allowed to bind, then the membrane is washed and
tion of IR-B is more closely related with metabolic
exposed to X-ray film. The position of proteins that
events. These major properties were illustrated in
bind to the IGF then appears as black, dense bands on
elegant molecular studies in which the cytoplasmic
the developed film. These bands can then be photo-
 domains for IR-B and IGF-IR receptors were swapped.
 graphed and/or scanned and evaluated for the level
 In the normal situation, there are overlapping as well
of density. When specific antibodies to the binding
 as specific signaling events associated with activation
 proteins for a particular species are available, these
of IR-B or IGF-IR (Hadsell and Bonnette, 2000).
ligand blots can be supplemented using western
Studies with rodents in which various elements of
blotting. Figure 12.37 gives an example of an IGF-1
the IGF-I axis were deleted have confirmed that IGF-1
 ligand blot-binding protein prepared from condi-
and/or IGFl-R are essential for normal mammary
 tioned medium collected from bovine mammary
development (Kleinberg et al., 200o). Since animals
epithelial cells. In this example, there is abundant
homozygous for absence of the IGF-IR do not survive
expression of IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 (as confirmed by
after parturition, these experiments required the
western
blotting) and a lower molecular weight
transplantation of the fetal mammary analogue from
binding protein that is probably IGFBP-4 based on
 approximately day-18 fetuses into the cleared mamma-
molecular weight (Romagnolo et al., 1994). The secre-
ry fat pads of syngeneic hosts. Growth of rudimentary
tion of these binding proteins is increased when the
mammary structures from IGF-IR null mice, com-
cells are incubated with native IGF-I or two analogs
pared with tissue from wild-type, was minimal. In
of IGF-I that exhibit reduced capacity to interact with
mice without expression of IGF-1, the development of
binding proteins.
terminal end buds required replacement with IGF-1.
Along with locally produced IGF-I made by epithe-
 Neither estradiol or GH alone (classic mammary acting
lial cells (see Fig. 12.18), as illustrated by experiments
 hormones) nor the combination had any effect on pre-
with bovine mammary tissue (Weber et al., 2000),
pubertal mammary development in these knockout
mammary cells also synthesize several IGFBPs, includ-
mice. These and related rodent experiments show that
 ing IGFBP-1, 2, 3, and 5. IGFBP-3 is usually touted
in normal peripubertal mammary development, GH
as an inhibitor of responses to IGF-1. For example,
acts to bind to GH receptors in the stromal tissue. This
Figure 12.38 shows increased proliferation of mamma-
is associated with local production of IGF-1, which in
ry tissue following treatment with estrogen, GH, or a
turn promotes the development of the mammary
combination of the two, and the associated mirror
ducts. Certainly, overexpression of recombinant IGF-1
 image a decrease in tissue concentrations of IGFBP-3.
in the mammary glands of transgenic mice promotes
This suggests that at least some of the proliferation
premature development of alveolar buds in prepuber-
induced with these classic mammogenic hormones
tal animals (Weber et al., 1998).
is mediated by a local reduction in mammary tissue
Endocrine system
365
800
e
600
3
R
/mg
g
400
(cpr
G
200
55 -
43 -
BP-
Con
E
GH
E+GH
A
36
BP-2
29
E+GH
GH
E
18
Con
0
500
1000
1500
Fig. 12.37. IGF-l-binding proteins. Effects of incubation of bovine 
IGFBP-3 Abundance (density)
mammary cells with IGF-I or selected IGF-l analogs are shown.
B
Adapted from Romagnolo et al. (1 994).
Fg. 12.38. Thymidine incorporation in mammary tissue and 
IGFBP-3. Panel A shows increased DNA synthesis in mammary
2
tissue of heifers treated with placebo (Con), estradiol (E), growth
hormone (GH), or both (E + GH). Panel B illustrates the relative
IGFBP-3. There is also increased tissue IGF-l, again
abundance of IGFBP-3 in mammary tissue from these same
suggesting the importance of IGF-I axis molecules
 in regulation of mammary development (Berry et al.,
correlated with decreased tissue IGFBP-3. Adapted from Berry
2001).
et al. (2001).
 In addition to their effects related to mammary
 development and function in farm animals, the IGFs
 and binding proteins are also critical in ovarian devel-
two areas of tissue and cell development that are
opment. In fact, in all mammalian species studied,
' y yo y p s A p
IGF-I stimulates the granulosa cell growth and ste-
roidogenesis. However, changes in local concentra-
tions of IGFs are not as critical as marked alterations
EGF family
 in the tissue concentrations of IGFBPs. These changes
are responsible for enhanced availability of free IGF-I
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) was discovered by
 during terminal follicular growth, then increased syn-
accident in the 1960s when unexpected biological
thesis of IGFBP-2, 4, and 5 to promote atresia. Specifi-
activity (not attributed to nerve growth factor)
cally, as reviewed by Monget et al. (2002), in the ewe,
occurred following injections of extracts of murine
sow, cow, and mare, intrafollicular concentrations of
salivary glands into test animals. These effects were
IGFBP-2, -4, are markedly decreased from the 1- to
associated with precocious eyelid opening and tooth
2-mm follicles to the larger preovulatory follicles. By
eruption in neonates. Subsequent studies showed that
contrast, intrafollicular concentrations of these same
preparations of EGF stimulated the proliferation of
IGFBPs as well as IGFBP-5 in the ruminants greatly
isolated epidermal cells and epidermal tissue explants,
increase in atretic follicles. This pattern of change is
hence the name EGF. Study of a human epidermal
 due to two events: variation in mRNA expression and
cancer cell line (A-431) was fundamental in subse-
selected degradation caused by expression of intra-
quent studies because these mutated cells greatly
follicular proteases. These examples simply illustrate
overexpressed receptors for EGF (-3 × 10° receptors
366 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
per cell). This property allowed for the isolation and
cancer patients with tumors that overexpress ErbB-2
structural characterization of the receptor. The avail-
(Harris et al., 2003; Stern, 2003).
ability of relatively large quantities of the receptor
EGF is important in normal mammary gland devel-
also led to the discovery that the addition of EGF to
 e s s o   a  
isolated membranes stimulated the phosphorylation
particular, there is compelling evidence to suggest that
of both endogenous membrane proteins as well as
estrogen (a potent mammogenic hormone from the
many exogenously added proteins. It was subse-
 ovary) likely induces local production of EGF agonists 
quently shown that the receptor protein was a 170kDa
(EGF itself, TGFo, or amphiregulin) and that these
transmembrane glycoprotein whose external domain
 agents are important in alveolar development. Recep-
formed the binding site for EGF and whose cytoplas-
 tors for EGF are present in regions of rapidly growing
mic domain possessed tyrosine kinase activity. EGF
mammary ducts, including the surrounding stromal
bound to the external portion of the receptor activates
 cells. The importance of these proteins in mammogen-
the cytoplasmic or catalytic domain of the receptor
esis in farm animals is less well established but spe-
to produce autophosphorylation and subsequently
cific EGF receptors are found in mammary tissue from
phosphorylation of cytoplasmic substrates essential
sheep and cows (Plaut, 1993) and expression of EGF
for EGF action. These observations were important
mRNA has been shown for bovine mammary tissue
because they were among the first to directly link
(Koff and Plaut, 1995). Ligand-binding assays using
ligand binding, receptor activation, and phosphor-
either radiolabeled EGF or TGFc show a single class
ylation as general mechanisms of action for many
of high-affinity-binding sites in mammary tissue of
growth factors.
 sheep and cows during gestation and into lactation.
This family of proteins contains at least ten members
 However, the number of receptors is greater during
including: EGF, heparin-binding EGF, transforming
mid than late pregnancy or during lactation. Expres-
 growth factor α (TGF-α), amphiregulin, neuroregulins
sion of TGF-α occurs in the bovine and amphiregulin
(four subtypes), and several heregulins. Each of these
occurs in ovine mammary tissue. Addition of either
structurally similar proteins acts by binding to one of
TGF-c or EGF stimulates DNA synthesis in explants
several related membrane receptors called type I
from midpregnant heifers, in epithelial cells from
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) or the ErbB family of
heifers or pregnant cows and sheep. Sheffield et al.
receptors. The usual EGF receptor is called ErbB-1, but
(1998) studied the effect of EGF on DNA synthesis in
at least four variants are known. Certain receptors in
mammary explants prepared from tissue taken from
the family, ErbB-2 (also called HER2 or Neu), contrib-
midpregnant heifers, either before or after xenotrans-
ute to the aggressive phenotype of some human breast
plantation into nude mice. For freshly prepared
carcinomas and related poor prognosis. A homolog of 
explants, concentrations of EGF of less than i0nM
EGF, TGFo, was first isolated from the medium of
only stimulated DNA synthesis after 2 days in culture.
oncogene-transformed cells and a transforming avian
For xenotransplanted tissues, priming of mice with
retrovirus subsequently was shown to code for syn-
estrogen and progesterone for 10 days increased the
thesis of an abbreviated form of the EGF receptor. EGF
sensitivity of the tissue to EGF when explants were
and TGFα are highly expressed in early embryonic
removed and tested in culture. Failure of EGF to
 development. Amphiregulin and HB-EGF are secreted
stimulate DNA synthesis in mice given hydrocorti-
heparin-binding growth factors. The ErbB family of
sone and Prl suggests that differentiation of the alveo-
receptor kinases is essential for development of the
lar cells is incompatible with EGF-induced growth.
nervous, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and other
 Indeed, we have noted that EGF can also mimic lacto
systems.
 genic effects of Prl or hGH on secretion of caseins by
 Dysfunction of these receptors is common in many
mammary explants taken from mid-gestation heifers
forms of carcinogenesis, which explains much of the
but not secretion of the milk protein c-lactalbumin.
emphasis for work in this area. A direct connection
This indicates that the role of EGF in cell proliferation
between the ErbB family and cancer was established
and differentiation in the ruminant mammary gland
with the breakthrough that the retroviral oncogene
is complex. EGF may stimulate cell proliferation in
v-ErbB, which is transduced by the avian erythroblas-
some situations but impact cell differentiation (milk
tosis virus, is a form of an avian EGF receptor. This
 component synthesis/secretion in this case) in others.
then led to subsequent discoveries showing that over-
 Interrelated actions with other mammary active hor-
      
mones and growth factors is likely. Some of the effects
of EGF on bovine mammary tissue are illustrated in
were important in a variety of human cancers. In fact,
Figure 12.39.
a humanized monoclonal antibody against ErbB-2
 For tissues that synthesize EGF or its related ligands,
 called Herceptin was the first such product approved
-a asn se a are sn  as
for human use. It was designed specifically for breast
coproteins. The EGF-like sequences are external to the
 Endocrine system
367
10
necessarily reflect the response of tissue in the complex
environment of the intact animal. Presence of EGF
-EGF
receptors and ligands and demonstrated response of
8
ruminant mammary cells to EGF support a role for
S
Cell
I-TGF
these growth factors in mammogenesis, but much
6
more information is needed to determine exact roles.
beled
 In short, it is not known if the EGF family of proteins
and receptors is largely permissive or if they have
4
 an essential direct impact in ruminant mammary
%
development.
The EGF family is also important in the growth and
2
development of hair, so there is much interest in
impacts of these growth factors on wool and other
0
 animal hair products. Specifically, the hair follicle has
0
0.01
0.1
10
two closely aligned epithelial cell layers. The inner
Concentration (nM)
root sheath cells produce TGF-α but do not express
A
 EGF receptor (ErbB-1), but the opposite is true for the
outer root sheath (receptors but no TGF-c). For normal
7
growth it is essential that newly formed TGF-α be
Aq pnoq Airder u pue an rg passad
6r
1.5
receptors in the outer sheath of cells. In the case of
EGFR- or TGF-α-null mice, which are engineered
le
without the receptor and /or ligand, hair follicle for-
Case
mation is disturbed. When this local TGF-α escapes
capture, it acts an attractor of other cells into the region
S
0.5
of the hair follicle so that the hair coat is abnormal and
whiskers are wavy (Mann et al., 1993).
B
CON
Prl
hGH
EGF
FGF family
2
Fig. 12.39.F
Panel A illustrates a concentration depending increase
in mammary cell proliferation (% epithelial cell nuclei labeled with 
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) constitute a family of
tritiated thymidine). Panel B illustrates that addition of EGF can
20 small peptide growth factors that share a highly
have lactogenic effects on bovine mammary tissue as evidenced by
an increase the secretion of the milk protein (α-S; casein) by
homologous core of 140 amino acids and strong affin-
mammary explants from mid-gestation heifer culture. This
ity for heparin and heparin-like glycosaminoglycans
lactogenic response is similar to responses following addition of
(HLGAGs) of the extracellular matrix (ECM). FGF sig-
bovine prolactin or human growth hormone. Interestingly, addition
naling and interactions with the ECM has attracted the
of EGF did not increase secretion of the milk protein α-lactalbumin
attention of numerous cancer researchers because of
as did addition of both bPrl and hGH.
the potential role of the FGFs in promoting the pro-
gression of some tumors from a hormone-dependent
to a hormone-independent pattern of growth. Others
are attracted to FGF studies from observations that
development of many cancers positively correlate
with local tissue secretion of proteases and changes in
pH, which might act to change concentrations of bio-
plasma membrane. Requirements for secretion are not
logically available FGFs in the local tissue environ-
completely understood but involve the action of a pro-
 ment. Both FGF-1 (also known as acidic FGF or aFGF)
tease that cleaves the membrane-bound protein for
and FGF-2 (also known as basic FGF or bFGF) were
release of the EGF (or relative) into the interstitial
first identified from extracts of bovine pituitary glands
fluid. Induced overexpression of TGF-α under control
based on the capacity of the proteins to stimulate DNA
of mammary promoters in rodents leads to the appear-
synthesis in cultured fibroblasts. Members of this
ance of mammary tumors. This fits with measure-
family of growth factors are linked by structural simi-
ments showing that some spontaneous human
 larities and capacity to bind heparin or HLGAGs, and
mammary tumors also express large amounts
of
not specifically by their growth-stimulating activity.
TGF-α or EGF receptor. It is also important to remem-
By convention they continued to be designated as
ber that responses of cells or tissues in culture may not
FGFs, despite the fact that not all of the proteins
368 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
actually stimulate proliferation of fibroblasts. Conse-
further supporting its proposed role as a paracrine/
quently, several members of the FGF family have
 autocrine mitogen for myoepithelial cells. Synthesis of
emerged as stroma-derived mitogens, which may act
FGF-2 in the mouse mammary fat pad is hormonally
in a paracrine manner, for example in the mammary
regulated, based on observations that expression is
gland, to locally influence epithelial cell proliferation
greatest during late pregnancy in correspondence
and glandular morphogenesis (Hovey et al., 1999;
Powers et al., 2000).
 the protein at this time. Expression is also increased in
Although the FGFs function after they appear in the
 the bovine mammary gland in late gestation. Interac-
extracellular environment via binding to high-affinity
tion between epithelium and the surrounding stroma
cell surface receptors, neither FGF-1 nor FGF-2 are
 likely influence paracrine FGF-2 expression; in rodents
synthesized with a leader peptide sequence. You may
and ruminants, expression is greater in the stroma
recall from our discussion of cell physiology that the
adjacent to the developing parenchymal tissue.
leader sequence is a strand of hydrophobic amino
acids at the amino terminal of the newly synthesized
 peptides that serve to control the secretion destination
TGF-β family
of the protein; that is, whether the protein will be
retained within the cell or secreted. The leader peptide
The transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) group of
 is recognized by a signal recognition particle (SRP),
proteins is made up of at least five multifunctional
which temporarily halts translation and serves to
proteins that have functions ranging from modifica-
transport the translation complex to the endoplasmic
tion of the ECM, to induction of differentiation of
reticulum (ER). At this point, protein synthesis resumes
 target cells, to stimulation of proliferation in multiple
and the nascent peptide chain is vectored into the
 cell types and tissues. Based on continuing genetic and
cisternal space of the ER where it subsequently passes
molecular studies, it is now known that TGF-βs are
to the Golgi for packaging into secretory vesicles for
only part of a superfamily of at least 40 members
secretion from the cell. This feature has attracted cell
structurally related proteins that include the TGF-βs,
biologists to the study of these FGF variants to deci-
 activins/inhibins (important in gamete production,
pher this secretion mechanism. Because FGFs are also
ie., first identified based on their activity in regulation
involved in wound healing, it has been suggested that
 of FSH secretion), and bone morphogenetic proteins
mechanical damage provides a mechanism for release
(BMPs). At least 28 genes encode for various elements
 of FGF from endothelial cells, but such a mechanism
of this family of proteins and companion receptors.
would seemingly lack the regulation necessary for
Three of the variants, TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β-3,
 secretion of FGFs in many other situations, for example,
stimulate connective tissue formation and are chemo-
if they play a role in normal glandular development.
 tactic for fibroblasts. They can indirectly promote pro-
FGF-1 likely functions as a paracrine mitogen for
liferation of mesenchymal cells but can inhibit growth
epithelial cells. For example, transgenic mouse experi-
of epithelial cells in vivo and in vitro. These varied
 ments that targeted overexpression of a defective FGF
receptor to the mammary gland showed that lobulo-
tant in tissue development and function. TGF-βl is the
alveolar development was distinctly impaired. Of the
 best described of these proteins related to mammary
various rat mammary cell types, fibroblasts express
function. Blood platelets provide the most concen-
the greatest level of FGF-1 mRNA in zitro. Appearance
trated source of TGF-β1, but it is believed to be pro-
of mRNA and protein within both the intact mouse
duced by nearly every cell type in the body. Biologically
mammary gland and epithelial cleared mammary fat
 active TGF-β1 is a 25-kDa disulfide-linked homodi-
pad strongly supports the idea that FGF is stromal in
 mer. When secreted, it is bound to a large 75-kDa
origin. At least three of the known FGF variants
glycoprotein called the latency-associated peptide
(FGF-1, FGF-2, and FGF-7, also known as keratinocyte
(LAP). Activation of the latent form by proteases, alka-
 growth factor KGF), are proposed to be involved in
linization, or chaotropic agents is necessary for TGF-
ruminant mammary development. These FGFs
and
β1 to bind to its receptor, so that control of this reaction
their receptors are expressed during mammogenesis,
is an important regulator of TGF-βl action. Unregu-
lactation, and mammary involution. The highest levels
lated epithelial cell proliferation is obviously an unde-
  sr  r s  e sa 
sirable trait of tumor formation, so it should not be
 primiparous heifers during involution.
surprising that activity-growing cells must be con-
 Although FGF-2 mRNA expression is greatest in the
trolled to prevent hyperplasia. For example, most of
stromal tissue, immunocytochemical studies show
the mammary-associated effects of TGF-βs are inhibi-
that the FGF-2 protein associates with myoepithelial
tory (Plaut et al., 2003).
cells. This distribution may simply reflect the high
Effects of TGF-β are mediated by binding to specific
affinity of FGF-2 for specific components of the ECM
cell surface receptors (designated type 1, Il, or IllI
Endocrine system
369
receptors) present on most cell types. The type I and
ysis through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In
type Il receptors are directly involved in signal trans-
summary, Smads can be thought of as transcriptional
duction, while the type Ill receptor is thought to
co-modulators whose activity is controlled by various
enhance binding of TGF-β to one of the other receptor
 receptors of the TGF-β superfamily of receptors via
 subtypes. In heifers, for example, the ductal epithelial
induction of nuclear accumulation of Smads (Mousta-
cells of the mammary gland show extensive presence
kas et al., 2003).
of type I and type Il receptors by immunocytochemi-
cal localization of antibody to the receptors.
The specific role of TGF-βl in ruminant mammary
Leptin
development is unknown but concentrations of TGF-
β1 in serum ranged from 7 to 30ng/mL and receptors
 Evidence for an adipose tissue-derived homeostatic
for TGF-βl are increased during the peripubertal
regulator of feed intake has accumulated for a number
period corresponding with rapid mammary develop-
of years (Ahima and Flier, 2000; Ingvartsen and Ander-
ment. Related studies show that TGF-β1 inhibits the
sen, 20o0). These studies are built on the proposals by
proliferation due to addition of IGF-1, IGF-Ⅱl, des
Kennedy (1953) stating that the amount of energy
(1-3)-IGF-1, EGF, or amphiregulin. TGF-β1 also affects
 stored in adipose tissue mass represents a steady state
the morphology of bovine mammary organoids 
between energy needs and energy derived from feed
culture (Ellis et al., 2000). The possibility that IGFBP-3
intake. Since adipose tissue tends to be relatively stable
(or fragments) might have IGF-I receptor-independent
for long periods in many mammals, he suggested that
actions in mammary cells, via binding to the type V
there must be a regulatory mechanism that effectively
TGF-β receptor, coupled with TGF-β induction of
monitors changes in energy stores to elicit the needed
IGFBP-3, makes for an intriguing overlap between the
growth-stimulating actions of the IGF-l axis and the
when demand is higher but to conversely reduce
inhibitory effects of the TGF-β family of molecules.
"deliveries" during periods of lower energy demand.
TGF-β members are important in early embryonic
This concept of a circulating fat-derived regulator of
development and maintenance of homeostasis in
feeding behavior was bolstered by the discovery of
adult tissue by affecting cell growth, differentiation of
genetic mutations in mice, obese (ob) and diabetes
epithelial cells, and apoptosis.
(db) phenotypes. Both of these recessive mutations
The signaling cascade for TGF-β, like that of the
lead to hyperphagia, decreased activity, and early
other growth factors, involves binding of the ligand to
onset of obesity. Parabiosis of wild type mice with ob /
2
cell surface receptors. These receptors are transmem-
 ob mice suppressed the weight gain in the defective
brane serine/threonine kinases. A current model is
a  a a m n s iq a
that binding induces the creation of a receptor complex
mice caused marked hyperphagia and weight gain in
composed of the type I and type Il receptor. Receptor
 the normal mice. This led to the idea that the ob gene
II then acts to phosphorylate receptor I. The phos-
 locus was essential for the production of a circulating
 phorylated form of receptor I is activated to generate
satiety factor and that the db locus encoded for a mol-
the intracellular signal responsible for the effect of the
 ecule capable of responding to this circulating agent.
 growth factor Specifically, cytoplasmic Smad proteins
The product of the ob gene was subsequently named
in target cells are substrates for the activated receptor
leptin (from the Greek word leptos, for "thin"),because
and these serve as signaling modulators. Interestingly.
of effects of the protein to reduce feed intake and body
Smad proteins were named based on work that arose
weight when injected into leptin-deprived or normal
from comparative molecular studies. Specifically, Dro-
animals. Leptin satisfied many of the requirements of
sophila geneticists isolated a gene called Mad while
the adipose tissue regulator envisioned by Kennedy
others working on Caenorhabditis elagans identified a
 gene they called Sma. It was soon realized that these
 prevent obesity by reducing feed intake and increas-
were the same gene products so that a combined
 ing thermogenesis by affecting the hypothalamus.
naming convention was evolved—Smad. Smads are
These initial reports stimulated tremendous interest in
very widely expressed throughout development and
leptin as an obesity preventive or weight-control agent
in virtually all tissues.
in humans. However, like many aspects of homeo-
Regulation of specific genes can be either positive
static or homeorhetic regulation, simple answers are
or negative, depending on the conditions specific to a
not often sufficient. Although leptin can provide a
particular target cell. In TGF-β signaling, I-Smads
signaling pathway between adipose tissue and the
 -iqn js pes-os uau Aq sueuis y
central nervous system for monitoring of adipose
 tin ligases to capture various Smad proteins and target
tissue stores, the wide distribution of leptin receptors
then for degradation. Generally, the activity of many
indicated that leptin affects many tissues and physi-
cellular proteins is controlled by selective proteol-
ological systems.
3 70 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Interestingly, leptin is also increased in the serum of
adipose cells, and in nonruminants circulates both in
 animals fed high-energy diets, which may be related
 a free form and bound to other proteins in circulation.
to decreased mammary development that can occur in
Energy stores influence expression of the leptin gene
these animals. Moreover, leptin appears in milk and is
as shown by increased adipose tissue leptin mRNA
 present in cultured bovine mammary epithelial cells.
and serum concentrations in obese mammals. There is
The cells also express mRNA for leptin and were
also a positive correlation between body fat stores and
impacted by additions of insulin and IGF-1, both of
leptin concentrations in blood, and secretion occurs
which are known mediators of mammary function.
with a circadian rhythm and may show episodic secre-
This suggests that leptin may be an autocrine or
tion. Although adipose tissue is the major source of
paracrine-signaling molecule in the mammary gland
leptin, relatively lower levels of expression are found
(Smith and Sheffield, 2002).
in many other fissues. It may be that local tissue pro-
Leptin may also be involved in regulation of onset
duction of leptin is also important in addition to effects
of puberty in heifers and ewes. It is well know that
mediated by changes in circulating concentrations.
age of puberty, within limits, is affected by dietary
Cloning studies of the leptin receptor (Ob-R) indi-
energy intake, rate of growth, and accumulation of
cate there are least six leptin receptor isoforms derived
adipose tissue in the body. Given the role of leptin in
by alternative splice variants of the mRNA coding for
adipose tissue metabolism, it is attractive to suggest
the receptor. The receptor belongs to the family
of
that leptin is also important in this process. Short-term
 cytokine receptors, which includes receptors for inter-
fasting of peripubertal heifers decreases leptin gene
leukins and Prl. Each of the leptin isoforms has iden-
expression, circulating leptin, and LH (Williams et al.,
tical extracellular ligand-binding domains, but they
2002). Leptin can modify activity of the hypothalamic-
differ at the carboxy terminal end of the molecule or
pituitary axis as well as the endocrine pancreas, de-
the cytoplasmic portion. Differences among the iso-
pending on nutritional conditions, in cattle and sheep.
forms mean that there can be a great deal of variation
 In conclusion, we have tried to provide an overview
in the signaling cascade stimulated by the binding of
 of major hormones and their sources, properties, and
leptin to a particular receptor. Since expression of re-
actions. We have also provided some examples of the
ceptor isoforms is not uniform among target tissues, this
details related to how target cells respond to hor-
adds an additional layer of complexity to under-
mones, growth factors, and similar regulators. These
standing the physiological effects of leptin stimulation.
are clearly complex and difficult topics but it is impor-
Unfortunately, studies in domestic animals and
tant to slowly develop some appreciation of intricate
especially dairy animals are limited (Houseknecht
interrelationships between these messengers and
+
 et al., 1998). However, fasting increases the expression
fissues. It is difficult overstate the relevance of the
of the Ob-RL receptor in the sheep hypothalamus.
endocrine system in physiological regulation.
Chapter summary
hormone) can be divided into those that initially act
at the surface of the target cells versus those that act
It is impossible to overstate the importance of the
internally Surface-acting hormones are typically
endocrine system in regulation of homeostasis, tissue
 peptides that are too large to pass across the plasma
and organ development, and physiological processes
membrane of the target cell. These hormones are
 in general. The nervous system and endocrine system
often described as having a second messenger mech-
regulate virtually all physiological functions. The
anism of action. This simply means that the hormone
overlap continues at the mechanism of action for
first binds to a membrane receptor, which induces a
neurotransmitters and hormones. As you have seen,
biochemical change inside the cell that is responsible
there is a distinct blurring between the actions of a
for the actions attributed to the hormone. Dr. Earl
classic hormone traveling in the blood to a target cell
Sutherland (1971 Nobel Prize) was the first to describe
compared with growth factors that may act a few
the second messenger pathway. He found that for
microns away from the site of synthesis and secretion
epinephrine to induce liver cells to convert glycogen
on a neighboring cell.
to glucose, the cells had to trigger an increase in
intracellular cyclic AMP. Drs. Martin Rodbell and
Alfred Gilman worked out the biochemical steps in
Cell signaling
detail and were awarded the 1994 Nobel Prize.
 Surface receptors can be grouped in four classes:
Broadly speaking, hormones influence target cells
seven-transmembrane domain, single-transmem-
(those that express receptors capable of binding the
 brane, cytokine superfamily, and guanyl cyclase
Endocrine system
371
receptors. In some cases, the receptors when acti-
top of this list. The pituitary gland is composed of
vated (bound by the hormone) become directly enzy-
three primary parts: pars distalis (anterior pituitary).
matically active (often acting as kinases in which
pars nervosa (posterior pituitary), and pars interme-
phosphorylation of a cellular protein initiates a
dia (intermediate lobo of the pituitary). The posterior
cascade of reactions), which is responsible for the
 lobe is fundamentally an extension of hypothalamus
hormone effect. In other cases, hormone binding
with neurosecretory cells that secrete oxytocin and
acts to inhibit or activate enzymes that regulate ion
vasopressin. Classically, the anterior lobe contains
channels or control concentrations of other internal
 three classes of epithelial cells: acidophils, basophils,
second messenger molecules.
 and chromophobes, defined based on their staining
For hormones that can enter cells, receptors are
characteristics. Use of more sophisticated immu-
typically located in the cell nucleus. In essence many
nostaining techniques has illustrated that there are
of these hormones, when bound to their receptors,
classes of cells that secrete growth hormone (GH)
are acting as transcription factors that increase gene
 and /or Prolactin (Prl), others that secrete gonadotro-
activation and subsequently production of mRNA
pins (LH and /or FSH) and others that secrete ACTH
and production of proteins responsible for the
or TSH. Most of these hormones have some direct
observed hormone effects. Generally speaking, such
 effects but also induce the secretion of other impor-
hormones are usually associated with longer or
tant hormones. For example, consider these linkages:
more slowly initiated hormone effects, but there are
GH and IGF-1; FSH and estrogen/testosterone; LH
exceptions.
and progesterone/testosterone; TSH and thyroid
How effective a given hormone can be is also
hormones (Ts and T4). The anterior pituitary hor-
directly related to the number of receptors available
mones are in turn regulated by hypothalamic hor-
and the concentration of the hormone in the blood
 mones that are effective because they are secreted
or interstitial fluids. Intuitively, all things being equal
directly into the hypophyseal-portal blood that drains
 an increase in the concentration of the hormone cor-
directly to the pituitary rather than being diluted in
 respondingly increases the likelihood that more of
general circulation. Hypothalamic hormones and their
the available receptors will be bound and thus it is
corresponding pituitary hormone include thyrotro-
more likely that a hormone-induced response will
pin-releasing hormone (TRH) and TSH; gonadotro-
occur. This relationship is known as the law of mass
pin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and FSH/LH; GH-
action. It is well recognized that there can be dra-
releasing hormone (GHRH) and GH; GH-inhibiting 
2
matic and rapid changes in the concentration of hor-
hormone (GHIH) and GH; corticotropin-releasing hor-
 mones in the blood. For example, after a carbohydrate
mone (CRH) and ACTC; and prolactin-inhibiting
meal or a glucose challenge, insulin rapidly increases.
hormone (PIH) and Prl. In addition, secretions of
Other hormones (growth hormone, prolactin, corti-
the anterior pituitary hormones are controlled by
sol, etc.) are secreted in acute episodes and/or
short, long and long, long loop negative feedback in-
daily and seasonal rhythms. One of the great break
volving hormones produced by the target organs, for
advances in endocrinology occurred in the 1970s
 example, GNRH—LH/FSH—estrogen /testosterone.
when RIAs were developed that were capable of
The somatomedin hypothesis arose from observa-
accurately measuring concentrations of many hor-
tions that many of the effects associated with GH
mones in the blood, milk, saliva and other biological
seem to be indirect. It was subsequently learned that
fhuids. Prior to this time endocrinologists often relied
many such responses to GH were dependent on
on cumbersome, much less sensitive bioassays. The
IGF-I that is secreted by the liver. IGF-lis structurally
RIA depends on the binding of the hormone in ques-
very similar to insulin.
tion to specific antibodies and the capacity of stan-
 The fundamental nature of the endocrine pancreas
dards or hormones in unknown samples to compete
seems to be driven home daily in face of the obesity
for these binding sites.
epidemic in the developed world and increasing
prevalence of type Il (adult onset diabetes). The pan-
creatic islets with alpha, beta, and delta cells synthe-
Major hormones
size and secrete glucagon, insulin, and somatomedin,
respectively. Simplistically, diabetes is essentially
With the advent of molecular and cellular tools, the
elevated circulating concentrations of blood glu-
list of hormones and growth factors seems to expand
cose that results from either a failure of insulin to
daily. However, fundamental physiological func-
be secreted (as normal) in response to increased
tions are linked with a number of well-characterized
blood glucose or a failure of insulin to induce the
hormones. The hypophyseal-pituitary axis is at the
 appropriate response (insulin receptor signaling issue,
(Continued)
372
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
autoantibodies against insulin, its receptor or beta
general health. T is much more biologically potent 
cells). The classic tests for diabetes include measure-
than T4, and it is now known that several tissues
ment of glucose in urine (usually there should none)
(mammary gland, liver, kidney) have the capacity to
and /or the glucose challenge. In this test subjects are
deiodinate T4 to produce Ts locally in the tissue.
either infused (1.V.) with glucose or given an oral
 n n    n
bolus of glucose. In normal subjects the peak in blood 
can have dramatic metabolic effects in mature animals,
glucose is blunted and relatively short-lived. With
and in young animals hyposecretion can markedly
diabetes, the peak concentration is usually higher
 retard neural development. The thyroid hormones
and the period of elevation longer. The physiological
are secreted by the follicular cells of the thyroid in
consequences of prolonged elevations in blood
the lumenal spaces similar to the mammary alveoli
glucose can be devastating: vision, circulatory, and
 as a part of a larger protein thyroglobulin. When
metabolic problems (Ingvartsen and Andersen,
signaled to secrete, the colloid is reabsorbed, the
2000).
protein is cleaved, and the thyroid hormones are
Like the pancreas, the adrenal gland and its hor-
released into circulation. The hormone CT is pro-
 s re   a e s
duced by parafollicular or C cells located in the inter-
 primary regions: cortex and medulla. The medulla
stitial regions between the thyroid follicles. It acts in
essentially functions like postganglioric tissue of the
calcium homeostasis by inhibiting bone reabsorption
autonomic nervous system, except it secretes epi-
and thus blunts increase in calcium.
 nephrine into the bloodsteam rather than the closely
 The parathyroid glands occur in pairs in each half
related neurotransmitter norepinephrine. Both the
of the thyroid gland. They are responsible for the
cortex and medulla are key players in the fight-or-
secretion of PTH. The primary effect of PTH is to
flight responses associated with high-stress situa-
increase blood calcium (bone reabsorption, increase
tions. The adrenal cortex has three distinct zones:
gut uptake).
 glomerulosa, fasciculata, and reticularis. It produced
 The list of important and potent growth factors is
 multiple steroid hormones but the two primary ones
 staggering and growing, but some of the better rec-
are aldosterone and corticosteroids (cortisol, corti-
 ognized include atrial natriuretic peptide, EGF, fibro-
costerone, etc., depending on the species). Aldoste-
blast growth factor, ghrelin, interleukins, leptin, and
rone is one of several mineraldocorticoids named for
transforming growth factors. Moreover, many of the
their role in sodium homeostasis. The corticosteroids
growth factors have many individual members
are also known as glucocorticoids because of the role
within each class. For example, more than 30 inter-
they play in regulation of glycolysis and gluconeo-
leukins are now recognized.
ss  as p g a p si
The interface between the nervous system and
 ful situations. In animals, monitoring of corticosteroid
endocrine system to regulate homeostasis and physi-
concentrations in blood, feces, or saliva can be used
ological development (reproduction, lactation, growth)
to evaluate animal wellbeing and particularly stress.
becomes ever more intertwined and convoluted with
The thyroid and its hormones Tg and T4 are closely
 each passing year.
tied to metabolic rate, tissue development, and
Review questions and answers are available
Akers, RM., D.E. Bauman, A.V. Capuco, G.T. Goodman, and
online.
H.A. Tucker. 1981. Prolactin regulation of milk secretion
and biochemical differenfiation of mammary epithelial
cells in periparfurient cows. Endocrinology 109: 23-30.
Akers, RM, T.B. McFadden, S. Purup, M. Vestergaard,
References
K. Sejrsen, and A.V. Capuco. 2000. LocalIGF-I axis in peri-
pubertal ruminant mammary development. J. Mammary
Adams, T.E., VC. Epa, T.PJ. Garreft, and C.W. Ward. 2000.
Gland Biol. Neoplasia 5: 43-51.
 Structure and function of the type 1 insulin-like growth
Akers, R.M., S.E. Ellis, and S.D. Berrya. 2005. Ovarian and
factor receptor. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 57: 1050-1093.
Ahima, R.S. and J.S. Flier. 2000. Leptin. Annu. Rev. Physiol.
heifers. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 29: 259-267.
62: 413437.
Amstalden, M., B.R.C. Alves, S. Liu, R.C. Cardoso, and
Akers, R.M. 2006. Major advances associated with hormones
G.L. Williams. 2011. Neuroendocrine pathways mediating
and growth factor regulation of mammary growth and
nutrifional acceleration of puberty: insight from ruminant
lactation in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 89: 1222-1234.
models. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausarne) 2: 1-7.
Akers, R.M. and A.M. Lefcourt. 1982. Teat stimulation-
Bauman, D.E. 1999. Bovine somatofropin and lactation: from
 basic science to commercial application. Domest. Anim.
Holstein heifers. J. Endocrinol. 96: 433-442.
Endocrinol. 17: 101-116.
Endocrine system
373
Berry, S.D., T.B. McFadden, R.E. Pearson, and R.M. Akers.
Goffin, V. and P. Kelly. 1997. The prolactin/growth hor
2001. A local increase in the mammary IGF-I:IGFBP-3
 mone receptor family: strucfure/function relationships.
ratio mediates the mammogenic effects of estrogen and
J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 2: 7-18.
growth hormone. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 21: 39-53.
Good, K.L., D.J. Maggs, S.R. Hollingsworth, R.H. Scagliotfi,
Berry, S.D., R.D. Howard, PM. Jobst, and RM. Akers. 2003.
and R.W. Nelson. 2003. Corneal sensitivity in dogs with
 Interactions between the ovary and the local IGF-I axis
diabetes mellifus. Am. J. Vet. Res. 64: 7-11.
Hadsell, D.L. and S.G. Bonnefte. 2000. IGF and insulin
J. Endocrinol. 177: 295-304.
action in the mammary gland: lessons from transgenic
Bohrer, B.M., J.M. Kyle, D.D. Boler, PJ. Ricker, M.J. Ritter,
and knockout models. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia
and S.N. Carr. 2013. Review: meta-analysis of the effects
5: 19-30.
of ractopamine hydrochloride on carcass cutability and
Hadsell, D.L., S.G. Bonnefte, and A.V. Lee. 2002. Genetic
primal cuts of finishing pigs. J. Anim. Sci. 91: 1015-1023.
maripulation of the IGF-I axis to regulate mammary gland
Butler, A.A., S. Yakar, I.H. Gewolb, M. Karas, Y. Okubo, and
development and function J. Dairy Sci. 85: 365-377.
 D. LeRoith. 1998. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
Harris, R.C., E. Chung, and R.J. Coffey. 2003. EGF receptor
signal transduction: at the interface between physiology
ligands. Exp. Cell Res. 284: 2-13.
and cell biology. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B, Biochem.
Houseknecht, K.L., C.A. Baile, RL. Mafteri, and M.E. Spurlock.
Mol. Biol. 121: 19-26.
1998. The biology of leptin: a review. J. Anim. Sci. 76:
Capper, J.L. and D.J. Hayes. 2012. The envirormental and eco-
1405-1420.
 nomic impact of removing growth-enhancing technolo
Hovey, R.C., T.B. McFadden, and R.M. Akers. 1999. Regula
tion of mammary gland growth and morphogenesis by
Capuco, A.V., J.E. Keys, and J.J. Smith. 1989. Somatotropin
the mammary fat pad: a species comparison J. Mammary
increases thryroxine-5'-monodeidonase activify in lactat-
Gland Biol. Neoplasia 4: 53-68.
ing mammary tissue of the cow. J. Endocrinology 121:
Hynes, N.E., N. Cella, and M. Wartmann. 1997. Prolactin
205-211.
mediated intracellular signaling in mammary epifhelial
Clemmons, D.R 1998. Role of insulin-like growth factor
cells. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 2: 19-27.
binding proteins in controlling IGF actions. Mol. Cell.
Ignatov, T., H. Eggemarn, A. Semczuk, B. Smith, J. Bischoff,
Endocrinol. 140: 19-24.
A. Roessner, S.D. Costa, T. Kalinski, and A. Ignatov.
Clemmons, D.R. and L.A. Maile. 2003. Minireview: inte-
 2012. Role of GRP30 in endometrial pathology affer tamox-
   n   
ifen for breast cancer. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 203(595):
insulin-like growth factor I receptor to regulate intracel-
e9-e16.
lular signaling. Endocrinology 144: 1664-1670.
Ingvartsen, K.L. and J.B. Andersen. 2000. Integration of
Cowie, A.T. 1980. Hormonal Control of Lactation. Springer-
 metabolism and intake regulation: a review focusing on
Verlag, Heidleberg, Berlin.
 periparfurient animals. J. Dairy Sci. 83: 1573-1597.
Cowie, A.T., J.S. Tindal, and A. Yokoyama. 1966. The induc-
 Koprowski, J.A. and H.A. Tucker. 1973. Bovine serum growth
5
tion of mammary growth in the hypophysectomized goat.
hormone, corticoids and insulin during lactation. Endo-
J Endocrinology 34: 185-195.
crinology 93: 645-651.
Dahl, G.E., B.A. Buchanan, and H.A. Tucker. 2000. Photope-
Kennedy, G.C. 1953. The role of depot fat in the hypotha-
riodic effects on dairy caffle: a review. J. Dairy Sci. 83:
lamic control of feed intake in the rat. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.,
885-893.
B, Biol. Soi. 139: 578-592.
 Das, R. and B.K. Vonderhaar. 1997. Prolactin as a mitogen in
Kirsz, K. and D.A. Zieba. 2011. Ghrelin-mediated appetite
mammary cells. J. Mammary Gland Biology and Neopla-
regulation in the central nervous system. Peptides 32:
sia 1: 331-341.
2256-2264.
Denbow, C.J., K.S. Perera, F.C. Gwazdauskas, RM. Akers,
Kleinberg, D.L., M. Feldman, and W. Ruan. 2000. IGF-I is an 
RE. Pearson, and M.L. MeGilliard. 1986. Effect of season
 essential factor in terminal end bud formafion and ductal
and stage of lactation on plasma insulin and glucose fol-
 morphogenesis. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 5:
lowing glucose injection in Holstein cattle. JI. Dairy Sci. 69:
7-19.
211-216.
Koff, M.D. and K. Plaut. 1995. Detection of transforming
Duan, C. 2002. Beyond carrier proteins—specifying the cel-
growth factor-alpha like messenger RNA in the bovine
lular responses to IGF-I signals: roles of IGF-binding pro-
mammary gland. J. Dairy Sci. 78: 1903-1908.
teins. J. Endocrinol. 175: 41-54.
Kurakula, K., A.A.J. Hamers, V. deWaard, and C.J.M. de Vries.
Ellis, S.E.,S. Purup, K. Sejrsen, and R.M. Akers. 2000. Growth
2013. Nuclear receptors in atherosclerosis: a superfamily
 and morphogenesis of epithelial organoids from periph-
with many "Goodfellas". Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 368: 71-84.
 [eaqndand jo euouared Areuuu epau pue lena
Lamb, G.C., C.R. Dahlen, J.E. Larson, G. Marquezini, and
heifers. J. Dairy Sci. 83: 952-961.
JS. Stevenson. 2010. Confrol of the estrus cycle to improve
Etherton, TD. and D.E. Bauman. 1998. The biology of
fertility for fixed-time artificial insemination in beef catfle:
somatotropin in growth and lactation of domestic animals.
A review. J. Anim. Sci. 88(E. Suppl.): E181-E192.
Physiol. Rev. 78: 745-761.
Lefcourt, A.M. and RM. Akers. 1983. Is oxytocin really nec-
Goff, J.P, T.A. Reinhardt, and R.L. Horst. 1995. Milk fever
essary for efficient milk removal in dairy cows? J. Dairy
and dietary cation-anion balance effects on concenfrations
Sci. 66: 2251-2259.
of vifamin D receptor in fissues of periparfurient dairy
Lefcourt, A.M., J. Bitman, D.L. Wood, and RM. Akers. 1995.
cows. J. Dairy Sci. 78: 2388-2394.
Circadian and ultradian rhythms of peripheral growth
3 74 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Plaut, K. 1993. The role of epidermal growth factor and trans-
hormone concenfrations in lactating dairy cows. Domest.
forming growth factors in mammary development and
Anim. Endocrinol. 12: 247-256.
lactafion. J. Dairy Sci. 76: 1526-1538.
LeRoith, D. and C.T. Roberts Jr. 2003. The insulin-like growth
Plaut, K., A.J. Dean, T.A. Patnode, and T.M. Casey. 2003.
factor system in cancer. Cancer Lett. 195: 127-137.
Levin, E.R. 2011. Minireview: extranuclear steroid receptors:
mammary development. J. Dairy Sci. 86(E. Suppl):
roles in modulation of cell functions. Mol. Endocrinol. 25:
E16-E27.
377-384.
Powers, C.J., S.W. McLeskey, and A. Wellstein. 2000. Fibro-
Lyons, W.R, C.H. Li, and R.E. Johnson. 1958. The hormonal
 blast growth factors, their receptors and signaling. Endocr.
control of mammary growth. Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 14:
Relat. Cancer 7: 165-197.
219-254.
Romagnolo, D., R.M. Akers, J.C. Byaft, E.A. Wong, and
Mann, G.B., K.J. Fowler, A. Gabriel, E.C. Nice, R.L. Williams,
J.D. Turner. 1994. IGF-I-induced IGFBP-3 potenfiates
and A.R Durn. 1993. Mice wifh a null mutafion of the
the miftogenic actions of IGF-I in mammary epifhelial
TGF alpha gene have abnormal skin architecture, wavy
MD-IGF-I cells. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 102: 131-139.
hair, and curly whiskers and often develop corneal inflam-
Sheffield, L.G. 1998. Hormonal regulation of epidermal
mafion. Cell 73: 249-261.
 growth factor receptor content and signaling in bovine
Martin, K.L., R.M. Hoffman, D.S. Kronfeld, W.B. Ley, and
mammary tissue. Endocrinology 139: 4568 4575.
LD. Warnick. 1996. Calcuim decreases and parathyroid
Smith, D.J. 1998. The pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and
hormone increases in serum of periparfurient mares.
tissue residues of β-adrenergic agorists in livestock.
J. Anim. Sci. 74: 834-839.
J. Anim. Sci. 76: 173-194.
Monget, P., S. Fabre, P. Mulsant, F. Lecerf, J. Elsen, S. Mazer-
Smifth, J.L. and L.G. Sheffield. 2002. Production and regula-
bourg, C. Pisselet, and D. Monniaux. 2002. Regulation of
tion of leptin in bovine mammary epifhelial cells. Domest.
Ovarian folliculogenesis by IGF and BMP system in domestic
Anim. Endocrinol. 22: 145-154.
animals. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 23: 139-154.
Smith, J.J., A.V. Capuco, I.H. Mather, and B.K. Vonderhaar.
Moustakas, A., S. Souchelnytksyi, and C. Heldin. 2003.
()  ro n d e ssda s 
Smad regulation in TGF-β signal transduction. J. Cell Sci.
33,000-36,000 in the mammary gland throughout preg-
114: 4359-4369.
nancy and lactation. J. Endocrinology 139: 37-49.
Mosl, E. and R. Palme. 2002. Hormones as indicators of
 Stephany, R W. 2010. Hormonal growth promoting agents
stress. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 23: 67-74.
in food producing animals. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 195:
Nagpal, R., P. Behare, R Rana, A. Kumar, M. Kumar,
355-367.
S. Arora, F. Morofta, S. Jain, and H. Yadav. 2011. Bioactive
 Stern, D.F 2003. ErbBs in mammary development. Exp. Cell
peptides derived from milk proteins and their health ben-
Res. 284: 89-98.
eficial potenfials: an update. Food Function 2: 18-27.
Stricker, P. and R. Grueter. 1928. Acfion du lobe anterieur de
 Nandi, S. 1958. Endocrine control of mammary develop-
lhypophyse sur la montée laiteuse. CR Soc. Biol. (Paris)
ment and function in the C3H/He Crgl mouse. J. Natl.
99: 1978-1980.
1
Cancer Inst. 21: 1039-1360.
Weber, M.S., PL. Boyle, B.A. Corl, E.A. Wong, F.C. Gwaz-
Nostrand, S.D., D.M. Galton, H.N. Erb, and D.E. Bauman.
dauskas, and RM. Akers. 1998. Expression of ovine
 1991. Effects of daily exogenous oxytocin on lactation milk
 ss  r a 
yield and composition J. Dairy Sci. 74: 2119-2127.
tal development of alveolar buds in mammary glands of
Palme, R., C. Robia, C.S. MeBmann, S.J. Hofer, and E. Mostle.
transgenic mice. Endocrine 8: 251-259.
1999. Measurement of faecal cortisol metabolites in rumi-
Weber, M.S., S. Purup, M. Vestergaard, R.M. Akers, and
nants: a non-invasive parameter of adrenocortical func
 K. Sejrsen. 2000. Regulation of local synthesis of insulin-
tion. Wien. Tierarztl. Monatsschr. 86: 237-241.
 like growth factor-I and binding proteins in mammary
Perera, K.S., FC. Gwazdauskas, R.M. Akers, and RE. Pearson.
tissue. J. Dairy Sci. 83: 30-37.
1985. Season and lactational effects on response to thyro-
Williams, G.L., M. Amstalden, M.R. Garcia, R.L. Stanko,
tropin releasing hormone injecting in Holstein cows.
S.E. Nizelski, C.D. Morrison, and D.H. Keisler. 2002.
Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 2: 43-52.
Leptin and its role in the central regulation of reproduc-
Peters, RR, L.T. Chapin, K.B. Leining, and H.A. Tucker.
tion in caffle. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 23: 339-249.
1978. Supplemental lighting stimulates growth and lacta-
Wiltbank, M.C., R. Sartori, M.M. Herlihy, J.L.M. Vasconcelos,
tion in caffle. Science 199: 911-912.
A.B. Nascimento, A.H. Souza, H. Ayres, A.P. Cunha,
Pinilla, L., E. Aguilar, C. Dieguez, RP. Millar, and M. Tena-
 A. Keskin, J.N. Guenther, and A. Gumen. 2011. Managing
 Sempere. 2012. Kisspeptins and reproduction: physiologi-
the dominant follicle in lactating dairy cows. Theriogenol-
cal roles and regulatory mecharisms. Physiol. Rev. 92:
ogy 76: 1568-1582.
1235-1316.
13
Cardiovascular system
Contents
Functions and Composition of Blood
375
Cardiac Muscle and the Cardiac Conduction
 Functions of Blood
375
System
390
Physical Characteristics of Blood
376
Mechanisms of Heart Contraction
392
 Types of Blood Cells in Mammals
377
The Cardiac Cycle
394
Formation of Blood Cells
381
Cardiac Output
395
Formed Elements and Blood Cells in Birds
Regulation of Heart Rate
396
383
Hemostasis
383
Blood Vessels and Hemodynamics
397
Vascular Spasm
383
Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
397
 Platelet Plug Formation
383
 Portal Systems
399
 Blood Clotting
384
Capillary Exchange
399
 Blood Groups and Crossmatching
385
Factors Affecting Blood Flow
400
 Blood Groups
385
Flow, Pressure, and Resistance
400
Crossmatching
385
Maintaining Blood Pressure
401
The Heart
386
Shock and Homeostasis
404
Anatomy of the Heart
386
Circulatory Routes
404
Chapter Summary
 Pulmonary, Systemic, and Coronary
407
Circulation
389
The cardiovascular system (cardio = heart; vascular
Functions and composition of blood
= blood vessels) consists of three components: blood,
 heart, and blood vessels. Blood is essential for trans-
Functions of blood
 porting nutrients and wastes, thermoregulation, im-
munity, and acid-base balance. The heart and
The study of blood, blood-forming tissues, and blood
blood vessels help deliver the blood throughout the
 disorders is called hematology Since animals consist
body.
of multiple layers of cells, they cannot rely on simple
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
375
3 76 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
diffusion to deliver nutrients and remove wastes.
teins such as complement and interferons are impor-
Instead, the blood is necessary for these functions.
tant in immunity. In addition, blood helps maintain
Blood is a connective tissue consisting of materials
homeostasis by clotting to prevent blood loss.
suspended in a nonliving liquid matrix called plasma.
 Blood has three main functions: transportation, regu-
lation, and protection.
Physical characteristics of blood
Blood is denser and thicker than water. It contains
Transportation
both cellular and liquid components. The cells (formed
Blood transports O, and CO, between the lungs and
elements) and cell fragments are suspended in plasma.
the tissues. In addition, blood transports absorbed
 Although fibers typically seen in connective tissue are
nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract to the liver
 not present, during the clotting process, dissolved pro-
and other cells; hormones from endocrine glands to
teins combine to form fibrous strands.
target cells; waste products from cells to excretory
When centrifuged, the components of the blood will 
sites including the liver, kidneys, and skin; and heat
separate into three distinct compartments (Fig. 13.1).
throughout the body.
The formed elements move toward the bottom of the
tube; the plasma appears near the top. Packed at the
bottom of a centrifuged tube will be the erythrocytes,
Regulation
 or red blood cells (RBCs). Sitting on top of this layer
Blood serves a major role in maintaining homeostasis.
will be a thin, whitish layer called the buffy coat. This
Blood helps regulate pH via buffers, body tempera-
layer contains leukocytes, or white blood cells (WBCs),
ture by either carrying excess heat to the skin for dis-
and platelets, which are cell fragments. The top layer
sipation or by vasoconstricting to conserve heat, and
is the plasma.
osmotic pressure by maintaining blood protein and
 The percentage of a blood sample that is erythro-
electrolyte levels.
cytes is called the hematocrit. An abnormally high
hematocrit is called polycythemia, which is an indica-
tion that there are too many erythrocytes per milliliter
Protection
of blood. Such blood can carry elevated amounts of
 Blood plays many roles in immunity. Some blood cells
oxygen, but it has a greater viscosity, making it harder
 are phagocytic; others produce antibodies. Blood pro-
for the heart to pump such blood. Polycythemia can
2
hapter 1
Centrifuge
Plasma
Whole
blood
Buffy coat
 Albumins 54%
Red blood
Globulins 38%
cells
 Fibrinogen 7%
Proteins
Others 1%
[7%)
Electrolytes
Water
Blood
 Nutrients
(91.5%)
plasma
Gases
(55%)
Waste Products
Other 
Hormones 
(1.5%]
Whole
blood
Platelets
 Neutrophils 60-70% 
Formed
Lymphocytes 20-25%
White blood
elements
Monocytes 3-8%
cells
[45%]
 Eosinophils 2-4%
Basophils 0.5-1.0%
Red blood
cells
Fig. 13.1. Blood components. Centrifugation of whole blood containing an anticoagulant results in the separation of red blood cells, a buffy
coat containing white blood cells and platelets, and plasma.
Cardiovascular system
377
Formed elements in mammals
Box 13.1
Blood doping
 Formed elements of blood include erythrocytes (RBCs),
 In sports, the term doping was first used to describe
leukocytes (WBCs), and platelets. RBCs and WBCs are
the illegal drugging of racehorses at the beginning
 of the 2oth century. Today, the term blood doping
whole cells, whereas platelets are cell fragments. There
is only one type of RBC, but there are five types of
includes the transfer of autologous or homolo-
WBC, including neutrophils, lymphocytes, mono-
 gous erythrocytes and the use of synthetic EPO to
cytes, eosinophils, and basophils (Table 13.1). WBCs
increase the number of RBCs. Synthetic EPO was
are grouped into either granulocytes or agranulo-
developed as a treatment for anemia resulting from
cytes, depending on whether they contain obvious
cancer therapy. Injecting EPO under the skin can
membrane-bound cytoplasmic granules. Granulocytes
increase the hematocrit, thus increasing the oxy-
include neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Agran-
 gen-carrying capacity of the blood. Recently, it was
ulocytes include lymphocytes and monocytes. The
discovered that horses have been doped using
number of various blood cells within the blood for
drugs designed for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
several domestic species is shown in Table 13.2.
disease, which increase blood flow to the brain,
thus restoring function.
Types of blood cells in mammals
practice for enhancing performance. The practice is
thought to have begun in Australia in Standard-
breds. A milkshake consisted of several ounces of
Erythrocytes
sodium bicarbonate dissolved in a gallon of water.
Erythrocytes, or RBCs, are approximately 7-8 μm in
Sometimes confectionery sugar, electrolytes, or nutri-
diameter. They are shaped like biconcave discs, thus
tional substances including creatine were added.
increasing their surface area-to-volume ratio. They are
The thought was that giving a milkshake 4-8 hours
flexible, and able to deform in order to move through
prior to a race would enhance performance.
capillaries. Erythrocytes in mammalian species lack a
nucleus and organelles. Avian RBCs, however, are
nucleated. Certain glycolipids found on the plasma
membrane of RBCs account for the various blood
also be an indication of dehydration since decreased
groups. Since RBCs lack organelles, they are unable
fluid volume will also result in an increased number
to reproduce. They must produce ATP anaerobically
of erythrocytes per milliliter of blood. Conversely, a
because they lack mitochondria.
low hematocrit reading indicates anemia, meaning
Erythrocytes are filled with hemoglobin (Fig. 13.2).
1
that there are not enough erythrocytes, and thus a low
Hemoglobin is a specialized protein that functions in
level of hemoglobin in the blood. This can result in an
 Oxygen transport. Each hemoglobin molecule consists
increased cardiac output (CO) as the animal attempts
of four polypeptide chains (two alpha and two beta),
 to deliver adequate oxygen to the tissues.
 each of which contains a nonprotein heme portion. An
In dogs and horses, the spleen stores erythrocytes.
iron ion (Fe²+) is bound in the center of each heme
In fact, horses can store up to 50% of the erythrocytes
molecule and can reversibly bind with one oxygen
in the spleen. Therefore, when the animals exercise,
molecule.
the spleen can inject erythrocytes into the circulation,
 Although most carbon dioxide is transported in
increasing the hematocrit by nearly 25% (Box 13.1).
the plasma as bicarbonate, about 13% is transported
bound to hemoglobin as carbaminohemoglobin. In
addition, hemoglobin binds nitric oxide (NO), a gas
Plasma
formed by endothelial cells, which functions as a neu-
Consisting of over 90% water, plasma also contains
 rotransmitter that causes vasodilation. As hemoglobin
nutrients, gases, hormones, waste products, electro-
 delivers oxygen, it can simultaneously release NO,
lytes, and proteins. The nutrients include various com-
which dilates the capillaries, allowing more blood,
ponents absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract or
and therefore more oxygen, to be delivered.
produced in the liver, including glucose, amino acids,
and lipids. Oxygen and CO2 are transported in the
blood, as are hormones produced in endocrine glands.
Erythrocyte fife cycfe
 Plasma proteins are the most abundant plasma solute.
Erythrocytes live about 120 days (Fig. 13.3). They get
They can function as carriers for other nutrients such
damaged as they squeeze through capillaries, and
as transferrin that carries iron, act in immunity (immu-
since they lack a nucleus and other organelles, they
noglobulins), and help in blood clotting (fibrinogen).
are unable to replace damaged structures. Damaged
The liver synthesizes most plasma proteins.
erythrocytes are removed from circulation by fixed
Table 13.1. Summary of formed elements in blood.
Cell Type
Picture
Description
Cells/mm?
Life Span
Function
Erythrocytes
Biconcave,
 4-6 million 
100-120 days
Transport oxygen and
anucleated discs;
carbon dioxide
3-7 μm in diameter,
 depending on 
species
Leukocytes (Granulocytes)
Neutrophils
Multilobed nucleus;
3,000-7,000
6 hours to
 Phagocytize bacteria and 
small granules;
a few days
some fungi
10-12 μm in 
diameter
Eosinophils
Bilobed nucleus; red
100-400
8-12 days
Kill parasitic worms;
granules; 10-14μm
destroy IgE-antigen 
in diameter
complexes, inactivate
 histamine from allergic
reactions
Basophils
U- or S-shaped
20-50
Few hours to
Release histamine and 
nucleus 8-10 μm
a few days
 other inflammatory
mediators
Leukocytes (Agranulocytes)
hapter 1
Lymphocytes
Rounded nucleus
1500-3000
Hours to years
Involved in cell- and 
 5-17μm in diameter
humoral-mediated 
immunity
Monocytes
5-17 μm in diameter
100-700
Months
Phagocytosis; develop
into macrophages
 Platelets
Granule-containing
150,000-400,000
 5-10 days
Blood clotting, seal torn
cytoplasmic
vessels
fragments 24 μm
378
Cardiovascular system
379
Table 13.2.
Blood cell numbers (cells/μL))
Species
Erythrocytes
Totaf WBC
Neutrophifs
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Dog
6-8 million 
6000-17,000
3000-11,5000
1000-5000
0-1200
100-1200
0-100
Cat
6-8 million
5500-19,500
2500-12,500
2700-6700
0-800
0-1500
0-100
Morse
7-12 million
5500-12,500
2700-6700
1500-5500
0-800
00610
0-200
Cow
6-8 million
4000-12,000
600-4000
2500-7000
0-800
0-2400
0-200
Sheep
10-13 million 
4000-12,000
700-6000
2000-9000
0-800
0-1000
0-300
Pig
 6-8 million 
11,000-22,000
3200-10,000
4500-13,000
200-2000
100-2000
0-400
Chicken
2.5-3.5 million
12,000-30,000
Rare
7000-17,500
150-2000
0-1000
Rare
'From Swenson and Reece (1993) and Thrall et al. (2004).
Hemoglobin
Alpha-chain
Beta-chain
8 um
Contains
Beta-chain
Alpha-chain
Erythrocytes
CH2
HC
CH
CH
CH
 Iron-containing
heme
H
OOC
CH2
H0
CH
CH2
00C/
polypeptide chains, 2 alpha and 2 beta, each having an iron-containing heme molecule attached.
 phagocytic macrophages in the spleen, bone marrow,
 precursor cells internalize it via receptor-mediated
and liver. Once destroyed, the following steps occur:
endocytosis and use it to synthesize hemoglobin.
Vitamin Bi2 is needed for hemoglobin synthesis.
1.
The globin and heme portions are separated.
5.
 The noniron portion of heme is converted to bili-
2.
 Globin is hydrolyzed into its component amino
verdin, a green pigment, and then to bilirubin, a
 acids, which are then used for synthesis of other
yellow-orange pigment.
proteins.
6.
Bilirubin is transported to the liver, where it is
The iron (Fe?t) removed from the heme binds to
secreted by liver cells into the bile.
the plasma protein transferrin and is transported
 Bile is released into the smallintestine. In the large
7
through the bloodstream to muscle fibers, liver
intestine, bilirubin is converted by bacteria into
cells, and macrophages in the spleen where it is
urobilinogen, which is converted to stercobilin,
stored attached to ferritin. Since Fe2+ and Fe?t can
a brown pigment giving feces their character-
damage molecules in the body, they are transported 
istic color.
and stored bound to transferrin and ferritin.
 A small fraction of the urobilinogen is reabsorbed
4.
When mobilized, the Fe?+-transferrin complex
 in the large intestine and converted to urobilin, a
transports iron to bone marrow where erythrocyte
yellow pigment, which is excreted in the urine.
3 80 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Circulate for 120 days
Macrophage
Fe²+
+
transferrin
RBC
Amino
Globin
←
acids
Fe3+
Liver
Fe3
Fe3+
transferrin
Heme
femitin
Glo
Bilirubin
 Bilirubin
Vit.
Bilinubin 
Erythrc
etin
Urine
Bilinubin
Urobilinogen
Small
intestine
Y
Feces
Sterocobilin
Large
intestine
Fig. 13.3. Erythrocyte life cycle. Erythropoietin stimulates the production of new erythrocytes in red bone marrow. The erythrocytes circulate
auog pal io 'jas!l 'uaalds aui u! saseydoipew Ag paziooeud ane Aaui ino unom uaum shep ozl inoge jo ueds ajll e aney pue poolg aul u!
marrow. The iron in the heme molecule is recycled, while the remainder of the heme molecule is metabolized and excreted.
Leukocytes
Granulocytes
Leukocytes, also called WBCs, are the orly blood cells
Neutrophils
that are truly complete cells containing nuclei and
Neutrophils account for 50-70% of WBCs. Twice as
 organelles. They do not contain hemoglobin. They
large as erythrocytes, their cytoplasm stains a pale
 generally account for only 1% of the blood volume,
lilac with very small granules. The granules stain with
but they are an important component of the immune
+
both basic and acid dyes. Some granules are consid-
system.
ered lysosomes containing hydrolytic enzymes, and
 They possess properties that allow them to carry out
others contain antibiotic-like proteins called defensins.
 immune functions. WBCs leave the circulatory system
Since the nucleus consists of three to six lobes, these
by a process called emigration. Emigration involves
 cells are often called polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
 several steps:
Attracted to sites of inflammation via chemotaxis,
 Near the site of inflammation, the endothelial cells
neutrophils are the first cells to be attracted by chemo-
lining the capillaries display cell adhesion mole-
taxis and to leave the bloodstream. After leaving the
cules called selectins on their surface. Neutrophils 
capillaries, they are attracted to bacteria and some
 have other cell adhesion molecules called integ-
fungi. Neutrophils phagocytize these foreign cells and
rins on their surface that recognize selectins. This
q osan e pas ssd e oranun 
causes the WBCs to line up along the inner surface
 Oxygen is converted to free radicals such as bleach
of the capillaries near the inflamed site, a process 
(hypochlorite, OCl), superoxide anion (O ), or hydro-
 called margination.
gen peroxide. The defensin-containing granules merge
2.
WBCs can move out of the capillaries through a
with the phagosomes, and the defensins act like
 process called diapedesis.
peptide "spears" producing holes in the walls of the
3.
After leaving the bloodstream, they migrate via
 phagocytized cells. The neutrophils then die.
ameboid action following a chemical signal pro-
duced by damaged tissue, a process called posi-
Fosinophils
tive chemotaxis.
4.
 Neutrophils and macrophages become phagocy-
Eosinophils account for 2-4% of all leukocytes. They
tized and then ingest bacteria and dispose of dead
contain large, uniformly sized granules that stain red-
matter.
orange with acidic dyes. The granules do not obscure
Cardiovascular system
381
the nucleus, which often appears to have two or three
lobes cornected by strands. The granules contain
Box 13.2
Complete blood count (CBC)
digestive enzymes, but they lack enzymes that specifi-
 If an animal is ill, often times, a blood sample will
cally digest bacteria.
be taken in order to conduct a CBC or hemogram.
Eosinophils function against parasitic worms that
A CBC includes a hematocrit, descriptions of any
are too large to phagocytize. Such worms are often
abnormalities in blood cell shapes, size, color, or
ingested or invade through the skin and move to
appearance, an assessment of blood hemoglobin,
the intestinal or respiratory mucosa. Eosinophils sur-
and a count of WBCs. An increase in WBC count
round such worms and release digestive enzymes
indicates an infection, whereas a decreased count
 onto the parasitic surface.
may indicate weakness from a long illness. A
decrease in lymphocyte numbers is observed at the
Basophils
beginning of an infection or following the use of
steroid medications. An increase in the number of
Accounting for only 0.5-1.0% of leukocytes, these are
lymphocytes can indicate prolonged illness or
the rarest WBCs. Slightly smaller than neutrophils,
leukemia. When total neutrophil numbers are
they contain histamine-filled granules that stain
increased, it is usually a sign of a bacterial infection
 purplish-black in the presence of basic dyes. The
or some form of extreme stress. Their quantities
nucleus stains dark purple, and is U- or S-shaped.
increase in the blood when the animal is suffering
 When bound to immunoglobulin E, these cells release
from an infection with parasites, or has allergies.
histamine. Histamine is an anti-inflammatory chemi-
 If there is extreme or prolonged stress to the
cal that causes vasodilation and attracts other WBCs
animal, eosinophil numbers decrease. If the platelet
to the site.
numbers are decreased, it may indicate that the
animal has either used up a large quantity of the
available cells in clot formation or if the low number
Agranulocytes
of platelets is not the consequence of injury and is
Lymphocytes
thus occurring naturally, the animal is at great risk
if bleeding.
Accounting for 25% of the WBCs, these cells contain
a large, dark-purple-staining nucleus. The nucleus
 is typically spherical, slightly indented, and is sur-
rounded by pale blue cytoplasm. Lymphocytes are
classified as either large (10-14μm) or small (6-9μm).
Formation of blood cells
The functional significance of the difference in size is
unclear.
The formation of new blood cells is called hemopoie-
sis, or hematopoiesis. Prior to birth, hemopoiesis
Monocytes
begins in the yolk sac and later occurs in the liver,
spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes of the fetus. After
Monocytes are 12-20μm in diameter and account
birth, it occurs in red bone marrow, which is found
for 3-8% of leukocytes. They contain a kidney- or
between the trabeculae of spongy bone. This is found
horseshoe-shaped nucleus. They contain very small
predominately in the axial skeleton, pectoral and
blue-gray-staining granules that are lysosomes.
pelvic girdles, and proximal epiphyses of the humerus
After leaving the bloodstream, monocytes become
and femur.
macrophages. Some become fixed macrophages, such
 Within the red bone marrow are pluripotent stem
 as alveolar macrophages located in the lungs
and
cells. These can proliferate, or differentiate, into differ-
Kupffer cells located in the liver. Others become wan-
 dering macrophages that move throughout the body
ent blood cells, macrophages, reticular cells, mast
cells, and adipoctyes. Macrophages are part of the
and collect at sites of infection and inflammation.
innate immune system. Reticular cells form reticular
fibers that serve as part of the matrix supporting red
bone marrow cells (Fig. 13.4).
Platelets
 Pluripotent stem cells produce two other stem cells:
Platelets, which are fragments of cells, consist of
myeloid stem cells and lymphoid stem cells. Myeloid
plasma membranes containing numerous vesicles but
stem cells differentiate within the red bone marrow to
not a nucleus. When there is a tear in a blood vessel,
produce erythrocytes, platelets, monocytes, neutrophils,
platelets coalesce at the site and form a platelet plug.
eosinophils, and basophils. In contrast, lymphoid stem
Chemicals released from their granules aid in blood
cells begin in the red bone marrow but finish differen-
clotting (Box 13.2).
tiating in lymphatic tissue, forming lymphocytes. In
382
2Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Pluripotent hematopoietic
Lymphoid stem cell
stem cell
Colony-forming
Myeloid stem cell
Colony-forming
unit: erythrocyte
unit: granulocyte
macrophage
Colony-forming
unit: megakaryocyte
Basophilic
myeloblast
Proerythroblast
Eosinophilic
Myeloblast Monoblast
myeloblast
 Erythroblast Megakaryoblast
Normoblast
Megakaryocyte
Reticulocyte
lymphoblastlymphoblast
Platelets
Eosinophil
Basophil
Neutrophil
Monocyte
(thrombocytes)
Erythrocyte
Granulocytes
Agranulocytes
Fig. 13.4. Formation of blood-formed elements. Blood cells are produced from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells. (Modified from Tortora
and Grabowski, 2003.)
 addition, lymphocytes produce numerous cytokines,
duce EPO. Hypoxia can be caused by a reduced
small glycoproteins that act as signals to modify
 number of erythrocytes, reduced availability of oxygen
other cells.
such as might occur at increased altitudes, or increased
 Myeloid cells produce progenitor cells. These cells
tissue demand for oxygen. In contrast, excess erythro-
1
are restricted, meaning that they are committed to
cytes or oxygen in the bloodstream reduces EPO
becoming selected blood cells and cannot reverse to
synthesis.
become stem cells. As shown in Figure 13.4, some of
these progenitor cells become colony-forming units.
Colony-forming units give rise to precursor cells, indi-
Leukocyte formation
cated by names ending in -blast.
Hematopoietic stem cells produce lymphoid stem
cells, which produce T and B lymphocytes. Leukopoi-
Erythrocyte formation
esis is the production of WBCs. It is stimulated by
Erythropoiesis is the production of erythrocytes in the
 and T lymphocytes. Cytokines are glycoproteins, and
red bone marrow. Hematopoietic stem cells divide to
they include interleukins and colony-stimulating factors.
produce myeloid stem cells, which transform into pro-
 An abnormally low level of WBCs is termed leukope-
erythroblasts (Fig. 13.4). Proerythroblasts give rise to
nia, which can be caused by radiation, shock, or che-
erythroblasts, which synthesize hemoglobin, and then
motherapeutic agents.
are transformed to normoblasts. When the normoblast
contains about 34% hemoglobin, it ejects most of its
organelles, becoming a reticulocyte, the precursor of
Platelet formation
an erythrocyte. The process of hematopoietic stem cell
to reticulocyte takes about 3-5 days. Reticulocytes are
Platelet formation is stimulated by the hormone
released into the bloodstream where, within 2 days,
thrombopoietin (TPO). TPO causes myeloid stem cells
they release their ribosomes and become erythrocytes.
to develop into megakaryocyte colony-forming cells,
Erythropoietin (EPO), a glycoprotein produced mostly
which then become megakaryoblasts. Megakaryo-
in the kidney, stimulates erythropoiesis. Although
 blasts are large cells that later splinter into 2000-3000
there is generally a small amount of EPO circulating
fragments. Each fragment has a cell membrane and is
in the bloodstream, hypoxia causes the kidney to pro-
called a platelet or thrombocyte.
Cardiovascular system
383
Formed elements and blood cells in birds
B0x 13.31
Heterophil/lymphocyte ratio in birds
Although most of the formed elements in birds are
While in many animals increased plasma cortico
similar to those in mammals, there are some notable
steroids are used as an indication of stress, in birds,
differences. Formed elements of blood in birds include
 the blood ratio of heterophils (H) to lymphocytes
erythrocytes, leukocytes, and thrombocytes, the avian
(L) is also a good measure of stress. Corticosterone
 equivalent of platelets. Like mammals, the avian leu-
is added to the feed of chickens, and the number of
kocytes are divided into granulocytes and agran-
blood lymphocytes increases while the number of
ulocytes. Avian granulocytes include eosinophils,
heterophils decreases. The ratio of H/L is now
basophils, and heterophils (equivalent to mammalian
 commonly used as an indicator of prolonged stress
neutrophils). Avian agranulocytes include lympho-
in birds. Increased plasma corticosterone levels are
cytes and monocytes. The number of various blood
an indication of acute short-term stress in birds,
cells within the blood is shown in Table 13.2.
whereas H/L ratios are a better indicator of long-
term stress. One will not observe a change in H/L
Thrombocytes
to stress.
Thrombocytes are found in birds, reptiles, amphibi-
ans, and fish. Unlike platelets, they are nucleated.
Thrombocytes are smaller than erythrocytes, and in
Box 13.4 Aspirin and gastric bleeding
 good preparations, a small eosinophilic vacuole appears 
as an orange dot located at one end of the nucleus.
In some conditions, such as arthritis, aspirin may
 Whereas mammalian platelets are derived from mega-
be prescribed to treat dogs and cats. Aspirin belongs
 karyocytes, such precursors are lacking in birds. There
to a class of drugs called nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
remains some debate as to whether avian thrombo-
-uas Aprelnoured are ssoI (sIIySN) sn1p Aroieu
cytes arise from antecedent mononucleated cells or
sitive to the gastrointestinal effects of NSAIDs,
multinucleated cells. Avian thrombocytes have a similar
which include pain, bleeding (i.e., gastric hemor-
function to mammalian platelets.
 rhaging), and ulceration. Coated aspirin may help
with the gastrointestinal effects. Aspirin can be
given with food, 1-2 times a day.
Heterophils
Since cats cannot break down this drug as quickly
as dogs, they are more sensitive to aspirin than dogs.
Heterophils function similarly to mammalian neutro-
Thus, time between doses is generally increased
phils. In some avian species they are the most common
 with cats. Cats are typically dosed at intervals of
     ro 
48-72 hours.
colorless cytoplasm and many eosinophilic, rod-
 Acetaminophen and ibuprofen are generally not
-d A sn a sn pends on pars
recommended for dogs. These drugs can be fatal
tially obscure the nucleus, which usually has two or
to cats.
three lobes and coarsely aggregated, purple chroma-
tin. In blood smears the heterophil sometimes has a
distinct ruby-colored central granule since the rod-
Vascular spasm
shaped granules are dissolved, leaving the central one
only (Box 13.3).
When blood vessels become injured, the vessels con-
strict. This vascular spasm is triggered by injury to the
vascular smooth muscle, chemicals released from
Hemostasis
endothelial cells and platelets, and reflexes involving
 local pain receptors.
 Hemostasis is a series of responses that stop bleeding.
As blood vessels are damaged or torn, hemostasis
quickly controls the bleeding. The hemostasis response
Platelet plug formation
is rapid, localized, and well controlled so as not to
spread throughout the body. Hemostasis entails three
 Platelets contain a large number of chemicals, includ-
mechanisms: (1) vascular spasms, (2) platelet plug for-
ing clotting factors, ADP, ATP, Ca?+, serotonin, enzymes
mation, and (3) blood clotting (coagulation). If bleed-
that produce thromboxane A2, fibrin-stabilizing factor,
ing is not stopped for any reason, an animal will
and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). They also
hemorrhage and lose blood (Box 13.4).
containlysosomes and mitochondria. Fibrin-stabilizing
384  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
factor helps strengthen blood clots. PDGF is involved
Extrinsic Pathway
Intrinsic Pathway
 in proliferation of vascular endothelial cells, vascular
Damaged tissue
smooth muscle fibers, and fibroblasts, all of which
plat
Tissu
help repair damaged vessels.
XII
Activated
XIL
A platelet plug forms as follows:
 platelets
XL
xI
IXL
Platelets
1，
 Platelet adhesion. Platelets adhere to the collagen
IX
phospholipids
fibers of the connective tissue exposed in a damaged
Ca?+
PFa
vessel wall.
 Common pathway
IX,/VIlI,
2.
Platelet release reaction. Adhesion to the vessel
wall causes the platelets to become activated.
They extend processes that allow them to contact
Prothrombinase
and interact with adjacent platelets. They also lib-
Prothrombin
erate their vesicular contents in a process called
the platelet release reaction. ADP and thrombox-
Fibrinoge
engthened
fibrin
ane A help activate neighboring platelets. Sero-
tonin and thromboxane A cause vasoconstriction
Fg. 13.5. Blood-clotting cascade. Both the extrinsic and intrinsic
by causing the vascular smooth muscle to con-
pathways result in formation of Activated Factor X that then
tract, thus decreasing blood flow.
combines with Factor V to form the active enzyme prothrombinase.
3.
 Platelet aggregation. Released ADP makes adja-
cent platelets sticky, causing more and more plate-
tissue protein called tissue factor (TF), or thrombo-
lets to adhere at the injured site.
 Platelet plug. As more platelets adhere, a platelet
plastin, that initiates the formation of prothrombinase.
4.
Since TF comes from outside the blood, this pathway
plug forms.
is called the extrinsic pathway In the presence of Ca2,
TF initiates a series of reactions resulting in the forma-
Blood clotting
tion of factor X. Factor X then combines with factor V
to form the active enzyme prothrombinase.
When blood clots, it forms a straw-colored liquid
called serum and a gel-like mass called a clot. The clot
Intrinsic pathway
consists of insoluble protein fibers called fibrin that
 In the intrinsic pathway, all the factors necessary for
 trap other formed elements of the blood.
 Clotting, or coagulation, involves a series of chemi-
blood clotting are present in (i.e., an intrinsic part of)
cal reactions resulting in fibrin thread formation. Clot-
the blood. The intrinsic pathway relies on the produc-
5
ting factors include calcium ions, inactive enzymes
tion of PFs, a phospholipid associated with the exter-
 produced in the liver and released into the circulatory
nal surface of aggregated platelets. Like the extrinsic
system, and chemicals released from platelets and
pathway, the intrinsic pathway results in the produc-
 damaged tissue. Clotting factors are generally named
tion of factor X.
by Roman numerals indicating the order of their dis-
covery, not their order in the clotting process.
 Common pathway
The formation of a clot in an unbroken blood vessel
is called a thrombosis, with the clot being called a
Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways use a common
thrombus. The movement through the blood of a clot,
pathway after the activation of factor X. Prothrombin
 air bubble, fat from a broken bone, or debris is called
is converted to thrombin by prothrombinase. Thrombin
 an embolus. These often lodge in the lungs, producing
then catalyzes the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin.
a pulmonary embolism.
Activated factor Xlll catalyzes the polymerization of
Clotting consists of three stages (Fig. 13.5): (1) two
cross-linked fibrin.
pathways, called the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways,
leading to the production of prothrombinase; (2) con-
Role of vitamin K
version of prothrombin to thrombin, catalyzed by
 prothrombinase; and (3) thrombin catalyzing the con-
Although vitamin K is not directly involved in clot
version of fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin.
formation, it is needed for the synthesis of four clot-
ting factors by hepatocytes. These include factors II
Extrinsic pathway
(prothrombin), Vll, IX, and X. Vitamin K is normally
synthesized by bacteria found in the large intestine
The extrinsic pathway is quicker and has fewer steps
 and is absorbed through the intestinal wall along with
than the intrinsic pathway. Damaged tissue releases a
other lipids.
Cardiovascular system
385
Clot retraction and repair
Aspirin can inhibit vasoconstriction and platelet
aggregation. It does so by blocking the synthesis of
Beginning about 30-60 minutes after clot formation,
thromboxane A2.
the clot becomes more stable through a process called
clot retraction. Platelets contain actin and myosin, and
these contractile proteins begin to contract, similar to
Blood groups and crossmatching
muscle contraction. This platelet contraction pulls on
surrounding fibrin strands, thus squeezing serum
Blood groups
from the clot and pulling the ruptured edges of the
vessel closer together. The platelets release factor XIll
On the surface of erythrocytes are various glycopro-
that helps strengthen the fibrin clot. Simultaneously
teins and glycolipids that act as antigens. Because of
PDGF released by degranulating platelets stimulates
these isoantigens or agglutinogens, blood is catego-
 smooth muscle and fibroblasts to divide and repair the
rized into various blood groups, each of which can
damaged site. The fibroblasts form a cornective tissue
have various blood types. In humans, the most
sheath over the injured area. Vascular endothelial
common blood groups are the ABO blood group and
 growth factor then causes the endothelial cells to mul-
the Rh blood groups, whereas animals have a variety
tiply and restore the blood vessel lining.
of different blood groups.
 Cattle have 1l major blood group systems, includ-
Fibrinolysis
ing A, B, C, F, J, L, M, R, S, T, and Z. The B group has
over 60 different antigens. The J antigen is not a true
A clot is not permanent. Following healing, the clot is
antigen, but instead is a lipid found in body fluids that
removed by a process of fibrinolysis. The major clot-
adheres to erythrocytes.
busting enzyme is plasmin, which is produced when
The antigen groups or blood types in dogs are
the blood protein plasminogen is activated by tissue
known as the DEA system. They include DEAs 1.1, 1.2,
plasminogen activator secreted by endothelial cells.
and 3-8. DEAs 1.1 and 1.2 account for 60% of the
 Plasminogen can also be activated by activated factor
canine population. Dogs having DEA 1.1 or 1.2 are
Xll and thrombin released during the clotting process.
considered A-positive; other dogs are considered
Plasmin digests the fibrin threads and inactivates
A-negative. A-negative dogs do not have antibodies
fibrinogen, prothrombin, and factors V, Vll, and Xll.
 against A-positive blood.
 Cats have three AB blood groups. Type A is most
Factors limiting clot growth and formation
common, accounting for 95% of short- and long-haired
 domestic cats. Type B is less frequent, and Type AB is
Since blood clotting involves a positive feedback
rare. Cats with type A blood have antibodies against
system, there must be systems in place to localize clot
A isoantigens whereas type B cats have alloanti-
formation. Clots are prevented from spreading by (1)
bodies (i.e., antibodies found against antigens in some
rapid removal of clotting factors and (2) inhibition of
members of the same species) against B isoantigens.
activated clotting factors. Fibrin absorbs thrombin into
There are seven blood groups in sheep, including A.
the clot, thus limiting its site of action. Thrombin that
B, C, D, M, R, and X. The B group is highly polymor-
 escapes into circulation is inactivated by antithrombin
phic, and the R system is similar to the J system in
Ill, an anticoagulant produced in the liver. Endothelial
cattle.
cells and WBCs produce prostacyclin, a prostaglandin
Five blood groups have been identified in goats: A,
that opposes the action of thromboxane A2. Prostacy-
B, C, M, and J, with J being similar to that of cattle.
clin inhibits platelet adhesion.
 Heparin, produced by mast cells and basophils, is
an anticoagulant that combines with antithrombin,
Crossmatching
increasing its effectiveness. Protein C, also produced
in the liver, inactivates factors V and Vll and enhances
Crossmatching is a procedure to determine whether
the activity of plasminogen activators.
donor blood is compatible with the recipient's blood.
There are two types of crossmatches. In major cross-
Thrombolytic agents
recipient serum to determine whether either acquired
Thrombolytic agents are chemicals injected to dissolve
or naturally occurring antibodies are present in the
blood clots. Streptokinase, produced by streptococcal
 recipient serum against the donor erythrocytes. Minor
bacteria, was one of the first commercial thrombolytic
crossmatching compares donor serum to recipient
agents. More recently, a genetically engineered version
erythrocytes, checking for preformed antibodies in
of tissue plasminogen activator has been used.
donor serum that could hemolyze recipient red cells.
3 86 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Minor crossmatching is less important since the donor
with the pulmonary trunk located between the two
 serum is markedly diluted after transfusion, decreas-
 auricles. The aortic arch projects caudally.
ing the risk of a significant reaction.
The coronary groove partially encircles the heart
except at the conus and indicates the separation of the
atria and ventricles. The conus is the pyramidal struc-
The heart
ture that is the right ventricular outflow tract into the
 pulmonary trunk. The interventricular grooves indi-
 Anatomy of the heart
 cate the divisions between the two ventricles. The two
auricles are visible on the left side of the heart, with
the pulmonary trunk between them.
Location and exterior landmarks
The heart is an inverted cone-shaped structure located
Pericardium
in the mediastinum, a mass of tissue occupying the
medial region of the thoracic cavity extending from
 The membrane surrounding the heart is the pericar-
the sternum to the vertebral column, and between the
dium. It consists of the fibrous pericardium and serous
lungs. The apex, or "pointed" end of the heart, is
pericardium. The fibrous pericardium is a tough,
directed caudoventrally; the base, or top of the heart,
inelastic, dense, irregular connective tissue sac with
is directed dorsocranially (Fig. 13.6).
 one end attaching to the diaphragm and the other
The cranial and caudal sides of the heart can be
open end fusing with the connective tissue surround-
located by other structures. The auricles point left,
ing the blood vessels entering and leaving the heart.
Left pulmonary A.
Aorta
 Right pulmonary A.
Right azygous V.
 Pulmonary Vv.
Left subclavian A.
Coronary sinus
 Branchio cephalic trunk
Cranial vena cava
Caudal vena cava -
Right atrium
hapter 1
Left ventricle
Apex
Aorta
Pulmonary trunk
Left subdavian A.
Cranial vena cava
Pu lmonary Vv.
Caudal vena cava
Branchiocephalic trunk -
 Right auricula 
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Conus arteriosus
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Apex
Apical cardiac notch
B
Fig. 13.6. External structure of the heart. (A) Atrial side of the cat heart. (B) Auricular side of the cat heart. A, artery; v, vein. (Reprinted from
Constantinescu, 2002. With permission from the publisher.)
Cardiovascular system
387
The fibrous pericardium anchors the heart within the
Box 13.5 Dilated cardiomyopathy
mediastinum and prevents overfilling of the heart.
 Inside the fibrous pericardium is the serous pericar-
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a disease char-
dium, consisting of a parietal and visceral layer. The
acterized by dilation or enlargement of the heart
 parietal layer lines the internal surface of the fibrous
chambers resulting in an abnormally large heart.
pericardium; the visceral layer, also called the epicar-
This disease eventually results in heart failure,
dium, is an integral part of the heart wall.
since the damaged heart muscle is too weak to
 Inflammation of the pericardium is called pericardi-
efficiently pump blood to the rest of the body. DCM
tis. This results in decreased production of serous
is very common in dogs, representing the most
fluid, and a roughened serous membrane. As a result,
 common reason for congestive heart failure (CHF).
the beating heart can be heard with a stethoscope
The left ventricle is most always involved. Since
rubbing against the serous layer (pericardial friction
the myocardium cannot work effectively to pump
rubs). In severe cases, inflammation leads to excess
blood out of the heart, subsequent backup of blood
fluid production, which compresses the heart and
 into the left atrium and ultimately into the lungs
 decreases its pumping ability.
occurs commonly. This backup of blood into the
lungs results in pulmonary edema and is a sign of
 congestive heart failure.
The treatment of dogs with dilated cardiomy-
Layers of the heart
opathy varies with the severity of heart failure
The heart wall consists of three layers: epicardium,
and specific organ damage. Treatment may include
myocardium, and endocardium. The epicardium is
 oxygen administration, fluid therapy, and adminis-
the outermost layer, and it is the visceral layer of the
tration of drugs that improve breathing (broncho
 pericardium. It consists of a thin, transparent layer of
dilators) and drugs that modify heart function,
 mesothelium and connective tissue. The middle layer,
such as control of the arrhythmias. If low doses of
or myocardium, is cardiac muscle and makes up the
anti-arrhythmic drugs are effective, the heart can
bulk of the heart. The innermost endocardium is a thin
often be stabilized. Serious ventricular arrhythmias
layer of connective tissue providing a smooth lining
that can only be controlled by high doses of antiar-
for the chambers of the heart and valves. The endo-
rhythmic drugs have a poorer prognosis.
cardium is continuous with the endothelial lining of
the large blood vessels attached to the heart.
Cardiac muscle is also called involuntary, striated
Atria
muscle. Like skeletal muscle, it contains actin and
The atria are the receiving chambers of the heart. Pro-
myosin that is organized into sarcomeres.
truding from the atria are the auricles, which increase
the atrial volume. The auricles are lined with pectinate
muscles, making them appear as if they were raked
Fibrous skeleton of the heart
with a comb. The atria are relatively small and thin-
walled, since they need to pump blood only to the
The heart also contains dense connective tissue sur-
rounding the valves, forming a fibrous skeleton. In
ventricles
Blood enters the right atrium from three veins: (1)
addition to forming a point of attachment for the
the superior vena cava returns blood from the body
valves, the fibrous skeleton serves to eclectically insu-
regions in front of the diaphragm, (2) the inferior vena
late the atria from the ventricles (Box 13.5).
cava returns blood from areas posterior of the dia-
phragm, and (3) the coronary sinus collects blood
draining the myocardium (Fig. 13.6). Blood passes
Heart chambers and vessels
 from the right atrium into the right ventricle through
the tricuspid valve, so named because it consists of
The heart has four chambers. Two atria located supe-
three leaflets or cusps.
riorly receive blood and pump it to the ventricles. Two
ventricles located posteriorly pump the blood away
Blood enters the left atrium via four pulmonary
veins. Blood passes from the left atrium to the left
from the heart (Fig. 13.6). The atria are separated by
ventricle via the bicuspid, or mitral, valve, named
the interatrial septum; the ventricles are separated by
because it has two cusps.
the interventricular septum. There is an oval depres-
sion on the interatrial septum called the fossa ovalis
Ventricfes
(Fig. 13.7), a remnant of the foramen ovale, which is
an opening between the atria in the fetus that closes
The ventricles form the bulk of the heart. The right
shortly before birth.
ventricle wall is thinner than the left since it has to
388 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Right 
atrium
Cranial
vena cava
Fossa ovalis
Pectiniate Mm.
Left atrium
Cusps of
Caudal vena cava
atria valve
Valvule of
caudal vena cava
Papilary Mm.
Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. With permission from the publisher.)
 Box 13.6 Feline dilated cardiomyopathy
ing it from filling efficiently; (3) There may be an
increase in ventricular pressure during relaxation
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heart
(diastole), causing blood to back up into the vessels
(cardio) muscle disease (myopathy) in which the
of the lungs and subsequent congestive heart failure,
muscular walls of the left ventricle thickens (hyper-
which includes pulmonary edema and/or pleural
 trophy). The left ventricular walls may hypertrophy
5
 secondarily to other diseases such as systemic hyper-
effusion (see vascular fluid into the lungs and/or
l
pleural spaces).
tension, or the hypertrophy can be a primary disease
Because the left ventricle is unable to fill ade-
in itself.
quately, less blood is pumped out to the body with
HCM is diagnosed when thickening of the left
each heartbeat. If the blood supply to other vital
ventricular walls is not caused by another disease.
As HCM progresses, it can alter the heart structure
organs is inadequate, heart rate (HR) may increase
 and impair its functioning in several ways, including
 as the body attempts to compensate. A decrease in
the following: (1) Ventricular chamber size may be
blood flow to the kidneys can result in an increased
release of renin, which increases blood volume,
reduced, thus limiting its ability to fill with blood;
increasing the pressures on the left side of the heart,
(2) Ventricular wall stiffness usually increases, which
and contributing to congestive heart failure.
impairs the ability of the ventricle to relax, prevent-
pump blood only through the lungs via the pulmo-
pulmonary trunk into the aorta. This vessel closes
nary trunk. The left ventricle pumps blood to the body
shortly after birth, leaving a remnant called the liga-
via the aorta, the largest artery in the body.
mentum arteriosum.
Blood leaves the right ventricle via the pulmonary
Inside the ventricles are muscle bundles called
valve. The left ventricle forms the apex of the heart.
the papillary muscles, which serve as attachments
Blood leaves the left ventricle via the aortic valve.
 for the chordae tendineae, tendinous cords attaching
During fetal development when there is no pulmo-
to the atrioventricular (AV) valves. The papillary
nary respiration, there is a temporary blood vessel
muscles and chordae tendineae assist in valve func-
called the ductus arteriosus that shunts blood from the
tion (Box 13.6).
Cardiovascular system
389
valves push into the ventricles, allowing blood to flow
 Pulmonary circulation
from the atrium to the ventricles. While the AV valves
Lung
 are open, the papillary muscles and chordae tendineae
are relaxed. When the ventricles contract, pressure in
capillaries
the ventricles increases and pushes blood back toward
the atria. This blood pushes the cusps of the valves
Right 
Left
back toward the atria, closing the valves. Simultane-
ventricle
atrium
ously, the papillary muscles contract, pulling on the
chordae tendineae. The chordae tendineae prevent the
Right
Left
Systemic circulation
cusps of the AV valves from everting into the atria.
 atrium
entricle
Damage to the AV valves or chordae tendineae allows
 Digestive
regurgitation of blood through the AV valves.
tract
Semifunar vafves
Muscles
The semilunar valves include the aortic and pulmo-
nary valves, which allow blood to pass from the ven-
Kidneys
tricles into the aorta and pulmonary vein, respectively.
These valves are made of three crescent-shaped cusps.
Brain
As the pressure in the ventricles exceeds that in the
arteries, blood passes from the heart into the arteries.
Liver
As the ventricles relax, the backflow of blood catches the
Other 
 cusps and causes these valves to close, thus preventing
sytemic
the movement of blood back into the ventricles.
 organs 
There are no valves located at the entrance of the venae
cavae into the right atrium or pulmonary veins into the
Fig. 13.8. Systemic and pulmonary circulation. The right side of the
left atrium. So as the atria contract, a small amount of
heart pumps deoxygenated blood to the pulmonary circuit, while the
blood can backflow into these veins. However, con-
left side of the heart pumps oxygenated blood throughout the body.
traction of the atria compresses the area where the
veins attach, thus minimizing the backflow of blood.
Pathways of blood through the heart
The heart acts as two pumps, side by side. The pul-
Pulmonary, systemic, and coronary circulation
Y
monary circuit carries blood to and from the lungs,
and the systemic circuit transports blood throughout
Pulmonary circulation
the remainder of the body (Fig. 13.8).
 The pulmonary circulation transports deoxygenated
The right side of the heart receives deoxygenated
 blood from the right ventricle to the lungs where it
blood from the body. This blood passes into the right
picks up O2 while delivering CO2. The right side of the
atrium, through the tricuspid valve, and into the right
ventricle. It is then pumped to the lungs via the pul-
heart is responsible for the pulmonary circuit. Deoxy-
genated blood returning from the body enters the
monary trunk. In contrast to other major arteries and
right atrium and passes into the right ventricle. The
veins in the body, the pulmonary artery carries oxygen-
right ventricle pumps the blood into the pulmonary
poor blood, while the pulmonary vein carries oxygen-
artery and into the pulmonary capillaries. Oxygenated.
rich blood.
blood is returned to the left atrium via the pulmo-
 The left side of the heart receives freshly oxygenated
 blood arriving from the lungs via the pulmonary vein.
nary vein.
The blood passes from the left atrium to the left ven-
tricle via the bicuspid valve. Blood is then pumped
Systemic circulation
from the left ventricle into the aorta, passing through
The systemic circulation distributes oxygenated blood
the aortic valve.
throughout the body. Blood is pumped from the left
ventricle into the aorta, and then into smaller systemic
Heart valve operation
 arteries. These arteries give rise to arterioles that lead
 to systemic capillaries. Exchange of nutrients occurs
Atrioventricufar vafves
across the capillary walls. Blood enters the systemic
The atrioventricular (AV) valves lie between the
venules and then into the systemic veins that return
atrium and ventricles. When open, the cusps of the
the blood to the right atrium.
390 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Ligamentum arteriosum
Thoracic aorta
 Left azygous V.
Thoracic aorta
Pulmonary trunk A.
Great cardiac vein
Brachiocephalic
Pulmonary Vv.
Cornary sinus
trunk A.
Cranial vena cava
Caudal vena
Right auricle
 Right auricle 
cava
Subsinuosal
Corus arteriosus
interventricular
Circumflex br.
br. of the
of leftcoronary
circumflex
Paracoral interventricul ar.
A.
br.ofleff
br. of left coronary A and
coronary A.
and middle
cardiac V.
Right ventricle
Leftventricle
 Fight ventricle
Fig. 13.9. Coronary circulation of goat heart. A., artery; V., vein; br. branch. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. With permission from
the publisher.)
Coronary circulation
The myocardium, or heart muscle, receives nutrients
via the coronary circulation (Fig. 13.9). Blood leaves
the aorta and passes into the left and right coronary
arteries arising at the base of the aorta and encircling
the heart in the AV groove. The left coronary artery
has two branches. The anterior interventricular artery
 travels in the anterior interventricular sulcus and sup-
plies the interventricular septum and ventral walls of
both ventricles. The circumflex artery supplies the left 
atrium and dorsal walls of the left ventricle.
The right coronary artery also divides into two
branches.  The marginal artery  supplies  the  lateral
 right side of the heart, and the posterior interventricu-
B
lar artery travels to the heart apex and supplies the
 posterior ventricular walls.
After passing through the capillaries, venous blood
in the heart collects in the cardiac veins. These veins
Intercalated discs
carry blood to the coronary sinus, which empties into
C
the right atrium.
Cardiac muscle and the cardiac conduction
system
Desmosome
Cardiac muscle
Cardiac muscle is also called involuntary, striated
muscle. Cardiac muscle fibers are shorter and less
D
circular than skeletal muscle fibers. They generally
contain a single nucleus, although occasionally two
Fig. 13.10. Cardiac muscle (A) Histological section of cardiac
muscle. (B) Drawing of a longitudinal section of cardiac muscle
are present. Cardiac muscle fibers connect with neigh-
showing the branched cardiac muscle fibers. (C) A close-up of the
boring fibers via thickening of the sarcolemma called
intersection of adjacent cardiac muscle fibers and their intervening
intercalated discs (Fig. 13.10). These discs contain des-
intercalated discs. (D) A close-up of the intercalated disc showing a
 mosomes that hold the fibers together and gap junc-
desmosome.
tions that allow action potentials to move among
cardiac muscle fibers. The gap junctions allow the
cardiac muscle fibers to act as a functional syncytium,
so that the atria and ventricles can contract as a unit.
Cardiovascular system
391
Cardiac muscle fibers contain larger, more numer-
heart pump in a coordinated manner so that blood can
ous mitochondria than skeletal muscle. The mitochon-
be pumped throughout the body.
dria account for 25% of the cell volume in cardiac
Cardiac electrical activity is propagated through the
muscle while only occupying 2% in skeletal muscle.
heart conduction system in the following manner:
Like skeletal muscle fibers, cardiac muscle contains
sarcomeres. However, the T tubules in cardiac muscle
Located in the wall of the right atria near the
fibers are wider and less abundant than in skeletal
entrance of the inferior vena cava is the sinoatrial
muscle. In addition, there is only one T tubule per
(SA) node. The cells in the SA node do not main-
sarcomere in cardiac fibers, entering at the Z disc,
tain a stable resting membrane potential, but
whereas there are two per sarcomere in skeletal muscle
instead spontaneously depolarize 75 times/min.
fibers entering at the junction of the A and I bands.
Since this is faster than in other areas of the heart,
The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is also less extensive
the SA node becomes the pacemaker, establishing
in cardiac muscle fibers.
the sinus rhythm.
 Depolarization of the SA node results in an action
 potential that is propagated throughout the atria
The conduction system
via the gap junctions between neighboring cardiac
The heart contains specialized cardiac muscle fibers
muscle fibers.
that can self-generate an action potential, and are
3.
 The action potential reaches the AV node, located
therefore called autorhythmic fibers. These cells do
in the inferior portion of the interatrial septum,
not require extrinsic neural input, and they can con-
 above the tricuspid valve. The AV node delays the
tinue to generate an action potential even when the
 action potential about 0.1 second before it travels
heart is removed from the body. These autorhythmic
to the ventricles. The delay occurs because the AV
cells act as a pacemaker, establishing the basic electri-
fibers are smaller and have fewer gap junctions.
cal activity in the heart.
This delay allows the atria time to complete their
 In addition, there are specialized cardiac muscle
contraction before the ventricles contract.
fibers that form a conduction system that provides a
From the AV node, the action potential moves to
path for electrical excitation to travel throughout the
the AV bundle, also called the bundle of His, located
heart (Fig. 13.ll). This conduction system helps the
in the superior portion of the interventricular
Sinoatrial (SA) node
Left AV fibers
James internodal tract 
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular (AV) node
Left crus
Right crus
Purkinje fibers
Renleto.
Fig. 13.11. Excitation and conducting system of the dog heart. The pacemaker of the heart is the sinoatrial (SA) node. A wave of
depolarization spreads from the SA node throughout the atria. This wave of depolarization then passes through the atrioventricular (AV) node
where it is delayed from proceeding to the ventricles. From the AV node, the wave of depolarization travels down the bundle of His located
in the intraventricular septum, and then into the Purkinje fibers. (Modified from Constantinescu, 2002.)
3 92  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
septum. There are no gap junctions between the
Mechanisms of heart contraction
atria and the ventricles, which are instead insu-
lated from each other by the fibrous skeleton of
Action potentials generated in the heart by the SA
the heart. This necessitates that the action poten-
 node travel throughout the heart via the conduction
tial travel through the AV node to reach the
system as described above. The mechanism of contrac-
ventricles.
tion of cardiac muscle fibers is described as follows
5.
 The action potential continues in the right and left
(Fig. 13.12):
branches. These continue through the inferior
 Depolarization. As a cardiac muscle fiber is stimu-
portion of the interventricular sepfum toward the
 lated by a neighboring action potential, voltage-
apex of the heart.
 gated fast Nat channels open. This allows a rapid
力
The right and left branches carry the action poten-
influx of Na+ from the extracellular fluid, which
tial to the Purkinje fibers, which complete the
results in depolarization of the cardiac muscle
pathway to the heart apex and then turn superi-
fiber from -90mV to +30mV. These channels
 orly, running up the outer walls of the ventricles
quickly become inactivated and close.
 toward the atria. Purkinje fibers supply the papil-
2.
 Plateau. As the voltage-gated fast Nat channels
lary muscles as well as the ventricular muscles.
 close, voltage-gated slow Ca2t channels open in
the sarcolemma and SR. The influx of Ca?+ from
The rate at which the SA node depolarizes can be
the extracellular space (20%) causes a large release
influenced by hormones and the autonomic nervous
(80%) of Ca2+ from the SR. Simultaneously, the
 system. If acetylcholine is released by the parasympa-
membrane permeability to K+ decreases. As a
thetic nervous system, the SA node slows, while
result, the membrane remains depolarized at
 release of epinephrine by the sympathetic nervous
around 0mV for about 0.25 second, compared to
system accelerates the SA node.
about 0.0ol second in skeletal muscle.
2. Plateau phase
 3. Repolarization
hapter 1
phase
品
-60
 1. Rapid depolarization
06
 Depolarization
 Repolarization
 Refractory period 
Contraction
Na+permeability
Ca2+ permeability
K+ permeability
B
(w) 
Fig. 13.12. Action potential in cardiac muscle fibers. (A) The action potential in cardiac muscle fibers has a plateau phase not seen in
skeletal muscle fibers. (B) The influx of Nat causes the rapid depolarization phase while increased Ca?t permeability leads to the plateau
phase. Efflux of K+ results in repolarization.
Cardiovascular system
393
3，
 Repolarization. After the relatively long plateau
phase, voltage-gated K+ channels open, allowing 
potassium ions to flow out of the cell and the
membrane to repolarize. The cell returns to its
 resting membrane potential of about -90m V.
Rwave
4.
 Refractory period. The refractory period, or time
during which the next contraction cannot be trig-
 gered, is relatively long in cardiac muscle com-
pared to skeletal muscle. The refractory period
Twave
prevents cardiac muscle from developing tetanus,
Qwave
and thereby it allows the heart to act as an effec-
tive pump rather than developing a sustained
contraction.
P wave QRS complex
The mechanism of contraction of cardiac muscle
A
fibers is similar to that in skeletal muscle fibers. As
intracellular Ca+ concentrations increase, Ca?+binds to
troponin, causing the tropomyosin to move and thus
uncovering the myosin-binding sites on the actin fila-
ments. Myosin then binds to actin, and the actin is
pulled across the myosin filament. Drugs that alter the
Rwave
movement of calcium into the cardiac muscle fibers
can affect the strength of heart contraction.
ATP production
Cardiac muscle has little capacity for anaerobic cel-
 lular respiration; thus, cardiac muscle relies almost
entirely on aerobic respiration. Therefore, cardiac
P wave P wave
T wave QRS complex
muscle needs a continuous supply of O2, which arrives
B
via the coronary circulation or is released from myo-
Fg. 13.13. Normal electrocardiogram. (A) Dog. (B) Cat. (Reprinted 
globin inside the cardiac muscle fibers. Cardiac muscle
from Constantinescu, 2002. With permission from the publisher.)
can produce ATP from the oxidation of fatty acids,
 glucose, lactic acid, amino acids, and ketone bodies.
Cardiac muscle also contains creatine phosphate,
there are abnormalities in the conduction system or
which can be used to produce ATP. The enzyme cre-
whether the heart is damaged.
atine kinase can catalyze the transfer of a phosphate
Each segment of the ECG is generated from a spe-
group from creatine phosphate to ADP to produce a
cific area of the heart in sequential manner (Fig. 13.14).
new molecule of ATP. If the heart is damaged, it
A typical ECG has three characteristic waves with
releases creatine kinase into the bloodstream, which is
each heart beat. The first, or P wave, is a small upward.
 often measured as an indicator of heart damage.
deflection reflecting atrial depolarization (Fig. 13.13).
 It is generated as the SA node depolarizes, and the
Electrocardiogram
action potential spreads throughout the atria. The
second wave, or QRS complex, begins with a down-
The propagation of the action potentials through the
ward deflection, and then rises sharply and ends
heart produces electrical currents that can be detected
with a downward deflection. The QRS complex repre-
on the surface of the body. A recording of these elec-
sents ventricular depolarization. Its shape is complex
trical activities is called an electrocardiogram (ECG
because the movement of the wave of depolarization
or EKG). An ECG represents all of the electrical activ-
through the ventricle changes direction throughout
ity in the heart rather than a single action potential
the wave. The third wave is the T wave, and it repre-
(Fig. 13.13).
sents ventricular repolarization. Since repolarization
 Two electrodes are generally placed on each fore-
is slower than depolarization, the T wave is longer
limb and one on the left hind limb. The potential
than the QRS complex.
difference between electrodes is measured using dif-
Within the ECG, it is also possible to examine
ferent combinations of electrodes. By comparing these
various intervals or segments. The P-Q interval is the
various recordings, it is possible to determine whether
time between the beginning of atrial excitation and the
3 94 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
SA node
AV node
Fig. 13.14. Heart excitation and the ECG tracing. The green shading indicates the relationship between the area of the heart depolarizing
coincident with the portion of the ECG produced by that depolarization. (Figure modified from Constantinescu, 2002.)
beginning of ventricular excitation. Therefore, it rep-
the semilunar valves closing at the beginning of ven-
1
resents the time for the action potential to travel
tricular diastole. The two other sounds, which are less
through the atria, the AV node, and the remainder of
audible, are due to the blood turbulence during ven-
5
the conduction system. This interval can lengthen if
 tricular filling and atrial systole.
there is coronary heart disease or scar tissue in the
Heart murmurs include clicking, rushing. or gur-
 heart. The S-T segment begins with the S wave and
gling sounds. Although not always due to a problem,
ends with the beginning of the T wave. It represents
heart murmurs generally indicate a valve disorder. If
the time when the ventricle is depolarized during the
the valve is stenotic, meaning it has a narrowed
plateau phase. The T wave can be elevated in acute
 opening, a click may be audible when the valve should
 myocardial infarction. The Q-T interval is the period
be fully opened. In contrast, if a swishing sound is
from  the beginning of ventricular depolarization
 heard when the valve should be closed, it may indi-
through ventricular repolarization. It can be length-
cate that blood is able to backflow through the valve.
ened by myocardial damage or myocardial ischemia.
The cardiac cycle
Heart sounds
The total of events associated with the movement of
Auscultation involves listening to body sounds,
blood during one heartbeat is called the cardiac cycle
usually with a stethoscope. Four sounds are created
(Fig. 13.15). The contraction and relaxation periods are
during each heart beat, and two of these sounds are
called systole and diastole, respectively. The following
clearly audible. These sounds are typically described
steps describe the cardiac cycle:
as "lub-dup." The first sound, lub, is the AV valves
 closing. This occurs at the beginning of systole as the
1.
 Mid-to-late diastole. While the heart is relaxed.
ventricular pressure increases above the atria pres-
blood passively returns to the atria and into the
sure, causing the AV valves to close as blood begins
ventricles through the opened AV valves. Approx-
returning to the atria. This sound is louder and longer
imately 70% of ventricular filling occurs during
than the second sound. The dup sound is caused by
this time.
 Cardiovascular system
395
2.
 Atrial systole. During atrial systole, the atria con-
4
Early diastole. Immediately following the T wave
tract while the ventricles remain relaxed. Atrial
(i.e., ventricle repolarization), the ventricles relax,
systole begins with depolarization of the SA node,
and the amount of blood remaining in the ven-
causing an action potential to spread throughout
tricles is referred to as the end systolic volume
 the atria, appearing as the P wave on an ECG. As
(ESV). As the pressure in the ventricles decreases,
the atria contract, the remaining 30% of blood is
 blood in the aorta and pulmonary arteries begins
forced through the opened AV valves and into the
to return to the heart, causing closure of the semi-
ventricles. The volume of blood in the ventricles
lunar valves. As these valves close, it causes a
is referred to as the end diastolic volume (EDV).
transient increase in aortic blood pressure (BP)
3.
Ventricular systole. While the atria are relaxed
called the dicrotic notch.
(atrial diastole), the ventricles contract, appearing
If the HR is 75beats/min, the cardiac cycle is about
as the QRS complex on an ECG. As the volume
0.8 second. Atrial systole lasts about 0.1 second, ven-
in the ventricles decreases, ventricular pressure
tricular systole lasts about O.3 second, and the remain-
increases, causing the AV valves to close. For a
der of the cycle is the quiescent period.
fraction of a second, all the heart valves are closed,
 resulting in the isovolumetric contraction phase.
 When ventricular pressure exceeds the pressure in
Cardiac output
the large arteries, the semilunar valves are forced
 open, leading to the ventricular ejection phase.
The amount of blood pumped by the heart can be
 such factors as exercise, environmental temperafure
changes, or blood loss. The amount of blood pumped
by either the right or left ventricle per minute is called
the cardiac output (CO). CO is equal to stroke volume
(SV), the amount of blood pumped by the ventricle
140
 per heartbeat multiplied by the HR:
120-
Dicrotic notch
CO
SV
×
HR
Aortic
Aortic
(mL/min)
(mL/beat)
(beats/min)
100
valve
 opens
pressure
 SV is equal to end diastolic volume (EDV) minus end
80
systolic volume (ESV). The heart pumps approximately
 Left ventricular
60% of the blood in its chambers with each beat.
Pres
60-
Bicuspid
pressure
Factors that can alter SV will alter CO. Cardiac
valve
Left atrial
reserve is the difference between an animal's maximum
40 +
closes
CO and its resting CO (Box 13.7).
 pressure
20-
Regulation of stroke volume
+
The heart will pump all the blood returning during
140
systole. Three factors regulate SV: preload, contractil-
ity, and afterload.
(7w)
120
100
Prefoad
End diastolic
ventri
volume
Stroke volume
 Preload is the amount of stretch on the heart prior to
80
 contraction. Within limits, greater stretch of the heart 
Volume
60
results in more forceful contraction. This is known as
the Frank-Starling law of the heart. Cardiac muscle
40
 fibers are normally shorter than their optimal length
End systolic 
for generating force. As a result, stretch of these fibers
20
volume
results in increased contractile force.
 The preload is directly proportional to the volume
 of blood in the ventricles, or EDV. Two factors affect
Fig. 13.15. Cardiac cycle. The top of the figure shows a typical
EDV: (1) duration of ventricular diastole and (2) venous
ECG. The middle graph displays simultaneous changes in left atrial
and ventricle pressure, and aortic pressure. The bottom graph
return, the amount of blood returning to the heart. As
shows changes in ventricular volume during the cardiac cycle.
HR increases, duration of diastole shortens, resulting
896
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Box 13.7 Canine heartworms
Extracellular
NE
Ca2+
Canine heartworms, Diroflaria immitus, are common
in the hearts and major heart blood vesicles of dogs
throughout the world. The male worms are a few
inches in length; the female worms are about
Intracellular
double the size and cause most of the damage. The
Ca2+
worms are transferred from dog to dog through the
ecepto
 bite of an infected mosquito. Mosquitoes transfer
microscopic larva that migrate through the body
Protein kin
and arrive at the heart several months later where
Sarcoplasmic
they mature into adult worms. Damage to the dog's
reticulum
↑ Cardiac
Enhanced
heart is due to adult worms.
contractility
actin-myosin
个
Troponin
The first sign of heartworm disease is often pre-
interaction
mature aging in which dogs gray prematurely
Fg. 13.16. Mechanism of norepinephrine (NE)-induced increase
around the muzzle and forelegs. Then their activity
in heart contractility. NE, or epinephrine, binds to β1-
level decreases and their coats lack luster. Further
adrenoreceptor on the cardiac muscle fibers. This activates a G
progression results in a chroric dry cough most
protein, which activates adenylate cyclase, thus producing cAMP.
 noticeable at night when the dog is resting or in a
CAMP then activates protein kinase, which causes increased
 Cytosolic Cat, coming both from the extracellular space and the
sitting position. At the same time, the dog's heart
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca?+ increases contractility.
and pulmonary arteries enlarge due to mecharical
obstruction of the worms, inflammation, and val-
vular damage to the heart.
Afterfoad
Until recently, the only medicine available to cure
infected dogs of heartworms contained arsenic.
 The pressure that must be exceeded by the ventricles
More recent medications have an added ingredient,
before blood can be ejected through the semilunar
pyrantel pamoate, which prevents infestation with
valves is called afterload. Any factor that increases
hookworms and roundworms as well.
afterload will increase ESV and decrease SV. Such
factors include hypertension or narrowing of the arter-
ies, as in arteriosclerosis.
1
Regulation of heart rate
in a smaller EDV and a smaller SV. Although the
decreased SV can be offset by the increased HR, if HR
Cardiac output depends on heart rate (HR) and SV.
becomes too rapid, there is insufficient preload and CO
Changes in HR are important in short-term regulation
 declines. In contrast, during exercise, venous return
of CO. Factors that increase HR are positive chrono-
increases because of increased squeezing of skeletal
tropic factors; those that decrease HR are negative
muscle on the veins. Consequently, SV increases.
chronotropic factors. The most important factor con-
trolling HR is the autonomic nervous system.
Contractifity
Autonomic nervous system regulation
Contractility is the strength of contraction at a given
 preload, and it is independent of muscle stretch and
The cardiovascular center in the medulla oblongata
EDV. Although preload is the major intrinsic factor
 influences HR. This center receives input from sensory
regulating SV, contractility is influenced by extrinsic
receptors, the limbic system, and the cerebral cortex. It
factors. Substances that increase contractility are called
directs the output from both the parasympathetic and
positive inotropic agents while those that decrease
 sympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system.
contractility are called negative inotropic agents.
The cardiovascular center receives sensory input
from several areas. Proprioceptors monitor the posi-
influx into the cytosol of cardiac muscle fibers,
tions of the limbs and joints. Increased movement of
strengthening the force of contraction. Such agents
joints, such as during exercise, sends signals resulting
include digitalis, glucagon, thyroxine, norepinephrine
in a rapid rise in HR. Chemoreceptors monitor blood
(NE), and epinephrine (Fig. 13.16). Negative inotropic
chemical changes that can lead to changes in HR.
agents, which impair Ca²+ inflow, include anoxia, aci-
Baroreceptors are located in the aortic arch and carotid
dosis, increased extracellular K+ levels, and calcium
arteries. Sudden changes in pressure in these regions
channel blockers.
cause changes in HR.
Cardiovascular system
397
Activation of the sympathetic nervous system by
blood away from the heart as they branch or diverge
either emotional or physical factors causes increased
 into smaller arterioles that then carry blood to the
HR. This activation occurs via the cardiovascular
capillaries. Blood leaving the capillaries enters venules,
center, which can stimulate HR via fibers from the
which merge into the larger veins that ultimately enter
spinal cord that stimulate the cardiac accelerator
the heart.
nerves extending from the spinal cord to the SA node,
 to the AV node, and throughout the myocardium. The
Blood vessel walls
sympathetic nerve fibers release NE, which binds to
β, adrenergic receptors in the heart. NE accelerates the
 Except in the smallest vessels, there are three layers,
rate of depolarization of the SA node and increases
or tunics, surrounding the blood vessel lumen (Fig.
Ca2+ influx into cardiac myofibers, increasing contrac-
13.17). The tunica interna, or tunica intima, is the
tility. Both of these effects result in enhanced pumping
innermost layer. In intimate contact with the blood,
of blood during systole.
this layer contains the endothelium consisting of
 Although large increases in HR decrease EDV and
simple squamous epithelium lining the lumen. These
SV, moderate increases in HR are associated with
epithelial cells sit on a loose connective tissue base-
increased contractility, which maintains SV, and there-
ment membrane called the subendothelial layer. The
fore CO increases.
endothelium is continuous with the endocardium
Activation of the parasympathetic nervous system
lining the inside of the heart.
 sends signals to the heart via the vagus nerve (cranial
 The middle layer, or tunica media, consists of a cir-
nerve X). The vagus nerve terminates in the SA node,
cular layer of smooth muscle and elastin. Stimulation
AV node, and atrial myocardium. Parasympathetic
of the vasomotor nerve fibers by the sympathetic
fibers release acetylcholine, which decreases the spon-
nervous system causes vasoconstriction in which the
taneous rate of depolarization of the SA node. Para-
lumen diameter decreases. Relaxation of the smooth
sympathetic input has little effect on contractility.
muscle results in vasodilation or an increase in lumen
diameter.
Chemical regulafion of heart rate
 The outer layer, the tunica externa, or tunica adven-
Chemicals can have a profound effect on the heart.
titia, is composed of loosely woven collagen fibers.
 The major chemicals affecting the heart are hormones
This layer reinforces and protects the vessels, and it is
and cations.
the site where nerve fibers and lymphatic vessels enter
to provide nourishment.
Hormones
Epinephrine and NE are both released from the adrenal
medulla, and, acting as neurohormones, increase HR
and contractility. Thyroid hormones also increase HR
and contractility.
Tunica externa
 External elastic lamina
Cations
Artery
Tunica media
Extracellular and intracellular cation concentrations
Internal elastic lamina
Tunica interna
• Endothelium
tials. Therefore, it should come as no surprise that
·Subendothelium
alterations in cation concentrations will affect heart
function. Elevated blood Nat concentrations decrease
HR and contractility by interfering with Ca2+ influx
into the cardiac muscle fiber. Increased blood K+ also
decreases HR and contractility, butit does so by inhib-
iting the formation of the action potential. Increasing
Capillary bed
blood Ca?+ levels increases HR and contractility by
leading to increased intracellular Ca2t.
Valve
Blood vessels and hemodynamics
Tunica interna
· Endothelium
Structure and function of blood vessels
Vein
• Subendothelium
Tunica media
Tunica externa
There are five main types of blood vessels: arteries,
arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins. Arteries carry
Fg. 13.17. Blood vessel walls.
398  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Arteries
The arteries near the heart are called elastic arteries
because they contain a large proportion of elastic
fibers in the tunica media. They are large in diameter,
therefore providing little resistance to blood flow.
 They expand to accommodate blood ejected from the
ventricles. As the blood pressure (BP) decreases, these
vessels recoil, thus helping to maintain pressure. They
are sometimes called conducting arteries because they
carry blood to more muscular, medium-sized vessels.
Vasoconstriction
Elastic arteries include the aorta, and the brachioce-
phalic, common carotid, subclavian, vertebral, pulmo-
nary, and common iliac arteries.
The medium-sized arteries are called muscular
arteries because they contain more muscle and less
 elastic fibers in the funica media. Being more muscu-
lar, they have greater capacity to vasoconstrict. They
are sometimes called distributing arteries because
they deliver blood to various parts of the body.
Arterioles
Fg. 13.18. Precapillary sphincters. Constriction of precapillary
The smallest of the arteries, arterioles deliver blood to
 sphincters restricts the blood flow within a capillary bed.
the capillaries. Large arterioles contain all three turics,
with the tunica media having considerable smooth
Pericyte
muscle and few elastic fibers. The smallest arterioles
 Intercellular cleft (tight junction)
consist of simply a layer of endothelial cells
sur-
Endothelial cell
rounded by scattered smooth muscle cells. A metarte-
 Basement membrane
riole connects an arteriole with 10-100 capillaries
making a capillary bed.
121
Capillaries
 Fenestrations (pores)
5
Endothelial cell
Capillaries, also called exchange vessels, are the small-
Basement membrane
est vessels. Their walls consist of only a tunica interna.
Pericyte
Although capillaries are found in most places in the
body, they are lacking in epithelium, the cornea and
lens of the eye, and cartilage.
True capillaries originate from arterioles or metarte-
rioles. At their origin is a ring of smooth muscle called
Incomplete basement membrane
the precapillary sphincter (Fig. 13.18). When con-
Pericyte
tracted, the sphincter restricts the flow of blood into
Endothelial cell
the capillary bed. Normally, blood flow within a capil-
Large intercellular cleft
lary bed is intermittent due to changing vasomotor
Fg. 13.19. Types of capillaries. (A) Continuous, (B) fenestrated,
tone in the precapillary sphincter.
and (C) sinusoidal.
There are three types of capillaries: continuous,
fenestrated, and sinusoidal (Fig. 13.19). Found in skin
 and muscles, the most common type is continuous, in
in the endothelial cells that allow substances to move
which the endothelial cells form an uninterrupted
out of the vessels. Such capillaries are found in the
layer with tight junctions between cells. However,
kidneys, villi of the small intestine, choroids plexus,
there are intercellular clefts, or gaps, between neigh-
ciliary processes of the eyes, and endocrine glands.
boring cells allowing for exchange of nutrients. Within
 Sinusoidal capillaries have large, irregularly shaped
the brain, continuous capillaries lack intercellular
 lumens, and their endothelial cells have large fenestra-
clefts, and therefore form a structural barrier between
tions. They also lack a complete basement membrane,
the blood and brain, called the blood-brain barrier.
and thus they are very leaky. Such capillaries are
Fenestrated capillaries are similar to continuous
found in the liver, bone marrow, lymphoid tissue, such
capillaries, but they also have pores, or fenestrations,
as the spleen, anterior pituitary, and parathyroid glands.
Cardiovascular system
399
Venules
vessel, blood still goes to the tissue through an anas-
tomosis, thus providing collateral circulation.
The smallest venules found close to capillaries consist
of a tunica interna and a tunica media with a few
smooth muscle cells. As the venules enlarge, they may
Portal systems
contain a tunica externa.
In several places throughout the body, there are also
Veins
vessels that link one capillary bed to another. These
Veins have the same three layers as arteries, but their
are known as portal vessels. Such vessels have the
thicknesses vary. The tunica interna and tunica media
histological structure of veins. The complex of two
are thinner The tunica externa is the thickest layer,
capilary beds and the intervening porfal vessel is
containing collagen and elastic fibers. In the largest
known as a portal system.
veins, the tunica externa also contains a longitudinal
One such portal system, called the hypophyseal
smooth muscle layer.
 portal system, consists of a capillary network in the
Unlike other vessels, veins also contain venous
valves (Fig. 13.20). Formed from the tunica interna,
 seal artery. This capillary network unites to form a
these one-way valves point toward the heart. The con-
 series of vessels that spiral around the infundibulum
traction of skeletal muscle during movement and
and carry blood to a second capillary network located
increased thoracic pressure associated with respira-
 in the anterior pituitary.
tion squeezes the veins, forcing blood toward the
 A second example of a portal system is the hepatic
heart. As the skeletal muscle relaxes, the backflow of
portal system. The capillaries along the digestive
 blood is prevented by the venous valves.
system deliver blood into the inferior mesenteric vein,
Because veins have a large lumen and thin walls,
the splenic vein, and the superior mesenteric vein. These
they can contain a large blood volume. Because veins
all deliver blood to the hepatic portal vein, which
can contain up to 65% of blood volume, they are called
forms from a fusion of the superior mesenteric and
capacitance vessels.
splenic veins. The hepatic portal vein then carries
blood to a capillary bed located in the liver. While car-
rying blood to the liver, the hepatic portal vein receives
Anastomoses
more blood from the gastric veins draining the stomach
 Most tissues receive blood from multiple arteries. The
and the cystic vein coming from the gallbladder.
merging of these multiple sources results in an anas-
tomosis. Such mergers provide alternate routes by
which tissue can receive blood. If blood flow through
Capillary exchange
one artery is prevented by an occlusion or loss of a
The purpose of the circulatory system is to deliver
nutrients and remove wastes from tissues. This occurs
Muscles relaxed
Muscles contracted
between the blood and interstitial fluid.
Diffusion
Capillary exchange generally occurs by simple diffu-
 sion, where chemicals move along their concentration
gradient moving from an area of higher concentration
to an area of lower concentration. O, and nutrients are
Venous
generally in higher concentrations within the blood
valve
and therefore pass into the tissue; waste products are
closed
in higher concentration in the interstitial space and
pass into the blood.
 In all capillaries except sinusoids, the space between.
endothelial cells prevents the movement of plasma
proteins from leaving the capillaries. In contrast,
Vein
water-soluble chemicals, including glucose and amino
Fig. 13.20. Venous blood flow. Contraction of skeletal muscle and
acids, pass out of the capillaries through fenestrations
increased thoracic pressure due to respiration squeezes the veins,
which causes the blood to move toward the heart. The blood is
of intercellular clefts. Lipid-soluble materials such as
prevented from flowing backward, away from the heart, by
O2, CO2, and steroid hormones pass directly through
one-way venous valves located in the veins.
the endothelial cell wall. In liver sinusoids, the gaps
400  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
between the endothelial cells are large enough to allow
proteins synthesized in the liver to enter the blood.
Interstitial space
Bulk flow
 The passive movement of large numbers of materials
across a membrane is called bulk flow. Bulk flow
NetH
Net OF
moves from an area of higher pressure to an area of
(40-0)
 lower pressure. Diffusion accounts for most nutrient
exchange across the capillary wall; bulk flow controls
Net FP
4mm
blood and interstitial fluid volume. The movement of
Net FP
fluid and solutes from capillaries into the interstitial
Arteria
venule
end 
 space is called filtration, and the movement from inter-
end
stitial fluid into the capillaries is called reabsorption.
Capillary hydrostatic pressure (HPc) is the force
exerted by blood against the capillary wall. This pres-
sure tends to force fluid out of the capillary at the
Fg. 13.21. Fluid flow across the capillary wall. At the arteriole
end of a capillary, the hydrostatic pressure inside the capillary
arteriole end of a capillary bed. HPe is opposed by the
exceeds the oncotic pressure inside the capillary, which results in a
  sd s  
net outward filtration pressure. In contrast, at the venule end of the
pushes inward against the capillary. Therefore, the net
capillary, the oncotic pressure inside the capillary exceeds the
hydrostatic pressure (Net HP) acting on a capillary is
 outwardly directed hydrostatic pressure, causing a net inwardly
HPc minus HPp. However, HPip is generally zero, so
directed filtration pressure. The interstitial fluid that does not return
to the capillary enters the lymphatic system.
the effective hydrostatic pressure acting on a capillary
is equal to HPc. HPc is larger at the arterial end of a
capillary than at the venule end of the capillary.
Lack of reabsorption or an increase in filtration
HPe is also opposed by the colloid osmotic pressure
leads to edema, an abnormal increase in interstifial
(OPc), or oncotic pressure. This is the osmotic pressure
fluid volume. Lack of reabsorption can be caused
inside the capillary caused by the presence of large
by a decreased concentration of plasma proteins as
plasma proteins that cannot leave the capillaries. The
is seen during liver disease, burns, malnutrition, or
 main protein responsible for OPc is albumin. OPe does
kidney disease. An increase in filtration can result
not vary between the arterial and venule end of the
from increased capillary pressure or damage to the
 capillary. Since the interstitial fluid has a few proteins,
endothelial wall caused by chemical, mechanical, or
1
there is also an interstitial fluid osmotic pressure (OPp)
bacterial agents.
5
 opposing OPc. OPi is generally only around 1 mm Hg.
Net filtration pressure (NFP), which is an interac-
Factors affecting blood flow
tion of hydrostatic and osmotic pressures, determines
the direction of movement of fluids across the capil-
Flow, pressure, and resistance
lary wall (Fig. 13.21). NFP is calculated as follows:
NFP=(HPc -HPr)-(OPc -OP).
 Blood flow (F) refers to the volume of blood flowing
through a tissue during a given period of time. Total
If we assume that at the arterial end of a capillary
 blood flow is equal to CO. Blood flow is directly pro-
HPc is 40mmHg, OPc is 25mmHg, and OPr is
portional to the difference in BP between two points,
1 mm Hg, then:
and is inversely proportional to the resistance (R) to
NFP = (40-0)-(25 -1)=16 mm Hg.
blood flow in the vessels:
If, at the venule end of the capillary, HPe is 20 mm Hg.
ABP
F=
OPc is 25mm Hg, and OPp is 1mm Hg, then:
R
NFP =(20-0)-(25-1)=-4 mm Hg.
 Since blood vessels have a great capacity to vaso-
constrict and vasodilate, R has a greater affect on F
Since HPc varies along the capillary, there is a net
than does BP. Since total blood flow is equal to CO,
movement of materials out of the capillary at the arte-
CO equals △BP /R.
rial end of the capillary and a net movement inward
at the venule end. About 85% of the fluid filtered at
Blood pressure
the capillary is reabsorbed. The remaining fluid enters
the lymphatic capillaries and eventually returns to the
Blood flow occurs because of the pumping action of
circulation at the subclavian vein.
the heart. BP is the hydrostatic pressure exerted by the
Cardiovascular system
401
Blood vessef fumen
As lumen size decreases, resistance to blood flow
increases. Resistance is inversely proportional to the
fourth power of the lumen diameter. Therefore,
R=-
1
d4
where d = lumen diameter. A small change in blood
vessel diameter results in a large change in resistance.
Blood
Decreasing the diameter of a vessel by one-half will
increase resistance by 24, or 16-fold. Therefore, vasodi-
lation and vasoconstriction have a large affect on vas-
cular resistance.
Blood viscosity
Blood viscosity is affected by the concentration of
Fig. 13.22. Blood pressure throughout the circulatory system. The
erythrocytes. Increasing the erythrocyte concentra-
pulse pressure in the large arteries is substantial. As the blood moves
tion, that is, increasing the hematocrit, increases blood
through the circulatory system, pulse pressure declines. Although
viscosity. This can be a result of dehydration or poly-
capillaries have a small cross-sectional area, blood pressure drops
cythemia. In contrast, decreased viscosity can result
in the capillary bed due to the large numbers of capillaries. Blood
from hemorrhage or anemia.
pressure within the veins is low. (Modified from Marieb, 2004.)
Totaf blood vessef fength
blood against the blood vessel wall. BP occurs because
there is resistance to blood flow. BP is highest in the
 Resistance to blood flow is proportional to the blood
arteries and decreases as blood moves through the
vessel length. The longer the blood vessel, the greater
circulatory system (Fig. 13.22).
the resistance. Hence, obesity in animals can result in
BP is highest at the end of ventricular contraction,
hypertension due to increased length of blood vessels
which is called systolic blood pressure. During dias-
associated with adipose tissue.
tole, the semilunar valves close, preventing blood
 from returning to the heart, and the elastic recoil in the
Venous blood return
large arteries maintains pressure that keeps blood
flowing. At the end of diastole, the BP is at its lowest
 Blood pressure within the veins is relatively low due
point, which is called diastolic blood pressure.
to the cumulative effects of peripheral resistance
Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic and
throughout the vascular system (Fig. 13.21). Therefore,
 diastolic blood pressure. Mean arterial pressure (MAP)
there are other factors besides the heart that are impor-
is the pressure that propels blood. Since the heart
 tant in venous circulation. First, the respiratory pump
 spends more time in diastole than systole, MAP is not
involves increases in abdominal pressure associated
simply the mean of diastolic and systolic blood pres-
with inhalation. This increase in pressure squeezes
sure. Instead, MAP is equal to diastolic blood pressure
venous blood toward the heart. As abdominal pres-
plus one-third of pulse pressure:
sure is increasing, thoracic pressure is decreasing
during inhalation, further allowing blood to enter the
 Diastolic blood pressure + Pulse pressure
MAP=
right atrium.
3
Second, there is a muscular pump that aids in ven-
Resistance
ous return. As an animal moves, the skeletal muscle
squeezes the veins, thus moving the blood toward the
Vascular resistance opposes blood flow, and is due to
heart. As the muscles relax, the one-way valves in the
the friction between blood and the vessel walls. As
veins prevent the backflow of blood.
shown in Figure 13.22, MAP and pulse pressure
decline with increasing distance from the heart. This
is due to the increased friction between the blood and
Maintaining blood pressure
vessel walls, and the decreasing elasticity of the vessel
walls farther from the heart.
There are both short- and long-term mechanisms con-
Vascular resistance is dependent on the size of the
trolling BP and blood flow. These mechanisms are
blood vessel lumen, blood viscosity, and total blood
responsible for controlling HR, SV, systemic vascular
vessel length.
resistance, and blood volume.
402
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Neural regulation
Blood Vessel
The cardiovascular center is located in the medulla
oblongata and is responsible for controlling HR and
Liver
Angiotensinogen
SV. As discussed above, the cardiovascular center
sends sympathetic signals via the cardiac accelerator
Kidney
Renin
nerve that increases HR and contractility. Conversely.
parasympathetic  signals from  the cardiovascular
T
↓Plasma
Angiotensin I
center are carried via the vagus nerve and decrease
wn!pos
HR and contractility. The cardiovascular center also
Low BP
erting
sends signals to blood vessels via the vasomotor
hzyme
lung
Kidney
nerves, resulting in vasomotor tone, or a moderate
Angiotensin Il
tH20
amount of constriction within the vessels. The vaso-
Adrenal
and NaCI
motor tone can be altered by either vasoconstriction
cortex
absorption
or vasodilation.
Aldosterone
The cardiovascular centeris involved in two reflexes
Fg. 13.23.F
 Production and action of renin. Renin is produced by
controlling BP: the baroreceptor reflex and chemore-
the juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney in response to low blood 
ceptor reflex.
Ag (1  ll uise oi paa  s! u  uisue
Baroreceptor reffex
a converting enzyme located in the lungs. ANG Il acts on the
adrenal cortex to cause the release of aldosterone, causing the
There are pressure-sensitive mechanoreceptors located
kidneys to reabsorb Nat, thus raising blood volume and blood
in swellings within the internal carotid arteries, known
 pressure. ANG Il also acts directly on blood vessels causing
as the carotid sinuses, the aortic arch, and the walls of
vasoconstriction.
most large arteries in the neck and thorax. In response
to stretch, these receptors send signals resulting in
inhibition of the cardiovascular center. This results
renin. Renin acts on angiotensinogen produced in the
in vasodilation and a decrease in BP. Conversely, a
liver to produce angiotensin I (ANG I). As ANG 1
sudden decrease in BP results in stimulation of the
travels through the lungs, it is converted to angioten-
cardiovascular center, a resulting vasoconstriction,
sin II (ANG Il), which raises BP two ways (Fig. 13.23).
and an increase in BP.
First, it causes vasoconstriction, which increases vas-
This reflex is important in making rapid adjust-
cular resistance, thereby increasing BP. Second, it
1
ments in BP in response to acute changes. For example,
as an animal stands, the pressure in the neck may
causes the release of aldosterone from the adrenal
cortex. Aldosterone increases sodium and water reab-
 decrease. The baroreceptor reflex quickly increases BP
 sorption by the kidneys. This results in an increase in
to maintain adequate flow to the brain.
 blood volume and thereby raises BP.
Chemoreceptor reflex
Fpinephrine and norepinephrine
Chemoreceptors located in the carotid bodies and
Sympathetic stimulation causes the adrenal medulla
aortic bodies monitor blood O2, CO2, and H+ con-
centrations. Hypoxia, acidosis, or hypercapnia (i.e.,
to secrete both NE and epinephrine. These neurohor-
increased blood CO2) stimulate the chemoreceptors.
mones increase the rate and force of heart contrac-
tions, thereby increasing CO. They also have a
The resulting signals stimulate sympathetic output
 differential effect on various vascular beds, causing
from the cardiovascular center, causing vasoconstric-
vasoconstriction in the skin and visceral organs, while
tion and increased BP.
causing vasodilation in skeletal muscle.
Chemical regulation of blood pressure:
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Short-term control 
ADH is secreted from the posterior pituitary. It acts in
There are several hormones and neurotransmitters
the kidneys to increase water reabsorption, and it also
that have significant affects on BP. Some act directly
acts directly on blood vessels to cause vasoconstric-
on blood vessels, and others have differential affects
tion. Both these effects cause an increase in BP.
on organs.
Atrial naturiuretic peptide (ANP)
Renin-angiotensin-afdosterone (RAA) system
ANP is released from the atria of the heart in response
A decrease in BP or blood flow to the kidneys causes
to high BP, that is, stretching of the atria. This hormone
the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys to secrete
decreases sodium reabsorption from the kidneys,
Cardiovascular system
403
control alters blood volume (Fig. 13.25). Blood volume
Ang Il
Vasopressin
Nitric oxide
has a direct effect on CO, and therefore affects BP. An
Prostacylcin
Cytokines
increase in EDV increases CO, thus increasing BP
Thrombin
Atrial natriuretic
Oxygen-free radicals
peptide
Direct renaf mechanism
 Endothelial cell
ECE
An increase in BP or blood volume causes an increased
Pro-ET1 
filtration rate in the kidney. As the filtration rate
→ET-1
exceeds the kidney tubules reabsorption rate, more
urine is produced, resulting in increased fluid loss and
decreased blood volume.
G-protein
PLC
ETA
Indirect renaf mechanism
P
 If arterial BP declines, the kidneys release the enzyme
Contraction
renin into the bloodstream. As shown in Figure
Ca2+
H
13.23, renin induces angiotensin ⅡI (ANG I) pro-
duction. ANG Il has three effects that increase BP.
Fig. 13.24. Endothelin production and action. Endothelin is
First, it causes vasoconstriction. Second, it stimulates
produced by endothelial cells lining the blood vessels. Various 
stimuli activate endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE), which 
the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, a hormone
that stimulates sodium reabsorption from the kidney
diffuses to vascular smooth muscle cells and binds to the ETA
tubules. Third, ANG l stimulates ADH release from
receptors. These receptors are coupled to a G protein that activates
 the posterior pituitary. ADH increases water reabsorp-
phospholipase C (PLC), which results in the production of inositol
tion from the kidney tubules. Increased sodium and
triphosphate (IPs) IPs causes the release of ETA Ca?+ from the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which leads to smooth muscle
water reabsorption from the kidneys leads to increased
 contraction
blood volume and BP.
thereby decreasing water reabsorption from the kidneys.
This results in decreased blood volume and BP.
Autoregulation of blood pressure
 Local oxygen needs change throughout the body. In
Endothefiaf-derived factors
order to accommodate these local needs, capillary
Several chemicals affecting vasomotor tone are pro-
 beds can alter their vasomotor tone in response to
duced from the endothelial lining of blood vessels.
local physical and chemical factors.
Endothelin release is stimulated by angiotensin Il,
ADH, thrombin, cytokines, reactive oxygen species,
Physicaf factors
and shearing forces acting on the vascular endothe-
Increased local temperature, such as occurs during
lium. Its release is inhibited by NO, prostacyclin, and
inflammation or exercise, causes vasodilation. Decreased
ANP. Endothelin causes vasoconstriction (Fig. 13.24).
 local temperature causes vasoconstriction. In addifion,
Endothelial cells also release a potent vasodilator
the smooth muscles in arteriole walls display myo-
called NO. Originally called endothelial-derived relax-
genic responses, in which increased stretch causes
ation factor, NO is a gas produced in response to high
enhanced contraction while decreased stretch caused
BP, acetylcholine, and bradykinin. It diffuses to the
relaxation. Such responses help regulate local blood
neighboring smooth muscle cells where it causes
the production of cGMP resulting in relaxation and
flow as follows: If blood flow through an arteriole
decreases, the arteriole wall is stretched less, result-
vasodilation.
 ing in smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilation.
Inflammatory chemicals
The vasodilation increases blood flow through the
arteriole.
Erythemia, or vasodilation, is associated with inflam-
mation. A number of chemicals are involved in this
Chemical factors
response, including histamine, prostacyclin, and kinins.
This response allows monocytes and neutrophils to
Cells such as platelets, blood cells, smooth muscle,
leave the bloodstream and move toward the site of
macrophages, and endothelial cells release a variety of
inflammation.
chemicals that modify blood vessel diameter. Metaboli-
cally derived vasodilators include K+, H', lactic acid,
and ATP Other tissue-synthesized vasodilators include
 Renal regulation of blood pressure: long-term control
NO produced by endothelial cells, histamine from
Although most short-term BP control mecharisms work
mast cells, and monocytes and kinins produced during
by altering peripheral resistance, long-term renal
inflammation. Vasoconstrictors include thromboxane
 404Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Blood pressure
Baroreceptors
 Sympathetic
Kidney
NS activity
Filtrate formed
Renin release
Angiotensin II
t
 Sodium
reabsorption from
Aldosterone release
kidneys
 from adrenal cortex
Water
ADH release from
 posterior pituitary
reabsorption from
kidneys
Vasoconstriction
Blood volume
Blood pressure
Fig. 13.25. Renal control of blood pressure.
A2 and serotonin from platelets, superoxide radicals,
Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart fails to
and endothelins from endothelial cells.
adequately pump. This can be caused by a myocardial
 Note that the systemic and pulmonary circulatory
 infarction, ischemia of the heart, heart valve problems,
systems respond differently to changes in O, levels.
impaired contractility of the heart, or arrhythmias.
Systemic blood vessels dilate in response to low O2,
Vascular shock is a result of abnormal expansion of
1
whereas pulmonary blood vessels constrict. Therefore,
the vascular bed. Although there is no change in blood
5
systemic vessels dilate in order to deliver more O, to
volume, there is a drastic drop in peripheral resistance
needed areas while pulmonary vessels constrict so
leading to a drop in BP. Causes can include anaphy-
that blood is diverted from poorly ventilated alveoli.
lactic shock from an allergic reaction or neurogenic
shock resulting from head trauma damaging the car-
diovascular center. Another cause can be septic shock
Shock and homeostasis
resulting from bacterial toxins.
Circulatory shock includes any condition in which
 blood vessels are unable to deliver adequate O and
Circulatory routes
 nutrients to meet cellular needs. This results in hypoxia
in the affected tissue, leading to a switch to anaerobic
Pulmonary circulation
metabolism, lactic acid accumulation, and possibly
tissue death.
The pulmonary circulation functions to carry deoxy-
genated blood to the alveoli (air sacs) in the lungs
where gas exchange occurs (Fig. 13.26). The blood
Types of shock
picks up oxygen in exchange for carbon dioxide. The
The most common type of shock is hypovolemic shock
blood is pumped from the right ventricle into the pul-
resulting from massive blood loss. Blood loss can
 monary trunk, which then divides into the right and
occur internally from the rupture of an artery, or exter-
 left pulmonary arteries. The pulmonary arteries divide
nally from trauma. Excessive loss of body fluids such
 into lobar arteries following the bronchi into the lungs.
as occurs in profuse sweating, diarrhea, or vomiting
 They then branch, eventually forming pulmonary cap-
can also cause hypovolemic shock. Treatment involves
illaries in the air sacs. These capillary beds drain into
the restoration of fluids.
the pulmonary veins. The pulmonary veins return to
Cardiovascular system
405
 Left pu lmonary artery
 Right pulmonary artery
ateries
arteries
 Pulmonary trunk
Right
Left 
atria
atria.
Rig ht
Left
ventricle
ventricle
Fig. 13.26. Schematic diagram of pulmonary circulation. The pulmonary circulation carries deoxygenated blood to the lungs where the
 blood picks up oxygen in exchange for carbon dioxide. The blood returns to the left side of the heart where it enters the systemic circulation.
Head and
upper limbs
Aortic arch
Right
Left
atria.
atria.
 Right
Left 
ventricle
ventricle
Mediastinal structures:
thoracic walls
Diaphragm
Digestive tract, spleen
 pancreas, kidneys 
Gonads, pelvis,
lower limbs
Fig. 13.27. Schematic diagram of systemic circulation. Blood delivered to the left side of the heart from the pulmonary circulation
aui ynoiyi suissed iay Apog aui inoynoui paneinii ag oi eoe ayt ei saeal (any syi woy pao uaag sey uoeinono Aieuouind)
 capillary beds, the blood returns to the right side of the heart via the superior or inferior vena cava.
the left atria from which the blood enters the left ven-
the body, and returns deoxygenated blood to the right
tricle and is then delivered to the body.
atrium (Fig. 13.27). The systemic circulatory system
includes vessels supplying the tissue needs of the
lungs, as well as all the remaining tissues in the body.
Systemic circulation
So, while the pulmonary circulatory system supplies
The systemic circulation includes vessels that deliver
blood only to the gas exchange portion of the lungs.
 oxygenated blood from the left ventricle, throughout
the systemic circulation must supply blood to every
406
6 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
tissue of the body. This is why the left ventricle has a
 thicker muscular wall than the right ventricle.
 Systemic circulation begins with blood traveling
 through the aorta, and ends with the blood returning
via the superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, or coro-
nary sinus.
The aorta has four major divisions: the ascending
aorta, arch of the aorta, thoracic aorta, and abdominal
aorta. The ascending aorta emerges from the left ven-
tricle and runs posterior to the pulmonary trunk. It
gives rise to two coronary arteries that supply the
 myocardium (Fig. 13.28). It then curves left, giving rise
 to the aortic arch. It then continues caudally running
itria.
close to the vertebral bodies. As it courses caudally, it 
Left
is called the thoracic aorta until it passes through the
 diaphragm, becoming the abdominal aorta.
Fg. 13.28. Ascending aorta. The ascending aorta begins at the
 The aortic arch is a continuation of the ascending
 aortic valve and ascends dorsal to the aortic arch. It gives rise to
vessels supplying the heart.
 aorta. It gives rise to three major arteries: the brachio-
 cephalic trunk, the left common carotid, and the left
subclavian (Fig. 13.29). The brachiocephalic trunk
gives rise to the right subclavian artery and right
 common carotid artery. These vessels provide the arte-
rial supply to the head, neck, front limbs, and a portion
of the thoracic spine (Fig. 13.30).
Right
Right
Right
Left
hapter 1
common
proper
posterior
posterior
palmar
palmar
arch
cerebal
cerebal
Right
Right
superficial
deep
palmar
palmar
palmar
metacarpal
arch
arch
Right
Right
Left anterior 
Left middle
ulnar
cerebral
cerebral
Right
Left internal
Left external
Right
brachial
external
Right internal
carotid
carotid
Left
Left
vertebral
axillary
Right
Right
axillary
vertebral
Right common
Left common
arotid
carotid
Left subclavian
Right
subclavian
Brachiocephalic
Arch of aorta
trunk
Fig. 13.29. Aortic arch. The aortic arch is a continuation of the ascending aorta.
Cardiovascular system
407
aor
Mediastinal
Bronchial
Posterior
Superior
Thoracic
intercostals
intercostals
Esophageal
Bronchial
Diaphragm
aor
Gonadal
Suprarenal
 Inferior 
Lumbars
Median
 Superior and
Celiac
 phremics
sacral
infeior
trunk
mesenteries
Left lower
Right common
Left common
Left lower
limb arterioles
iliac
iliac
Imb arterioles
 Fig. 13.30. Thoracic and abdominal aorta. The thoracic aorta gives rise to visceral and parietal branches supplying the thorax wall and
viscera. The abdominal aorta supplies the abdominal walls and viscera. It ends in the right and left common iliac arteries supplying the pelvis
and hind limbs.
Chapter summary
Regulation
 Blood helps regulate pH, body temperature and
The cardiovascular system (cardio- = heart; vascu-
osmotic pressure by maintaining blood protein and
lar = blood vessels) consists of three components:
electrolyte levels.
blood, heart, and blood vessels.
1
Protection
1
 Some blood cells are phagocytic while others
Functions and composition of blood
produce antibodies. Blood proteins such as
complement and interferons are important in
Functions of blood
immunity.
2.
 Blood helps maintain homeostasis by clotting to
 The study of blood, blood-forming tissues, and
prevent blood loss.
blood disorders is called hematology.
2.
 Blood is a connective tissue consisting of materi-
als suspended in a matrix called plasma.
Physical characteristics of blood
3.
Blood has three main functions: transportation,
Blood
contains  both 
cellular and
liquid
 regulation, and protection.
components.
2.
Blood can be separated into three distinct com-
partments. When centrifuged, the formed ele-
Transportation
 ments move toward the bottom of the tube while
Blood transports O, and CO, between the lungs and
 plasma appears on top. At the bottom will be the
tissues. Blood transports absorbed nutrients from the
erythrocytes over which will be a buffy coat. This
gastrointestinal tract to the liver and other cells, hor-
layer contains leukocytes, or WBCs, and plate-
mones, and waste products from cells to excretory
lets, which are cell fragments.
sites including the liver, kidneys and skin, and heat
3.
 The percentage of erythrocytes in blood is called
throughout the body.
the hematocrit. An abnormally high hematocrit
(Continued)
408
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
is called polycythemia. Conversely, a low hema-
2.
 Eosinophils account of 2-4% of all leukocytes
tocrit indicates anemia.
and function against parasitic worms that are too
4.
In dogs and horses, the spleen stores erthryo-
large to phagocytize.
cytes. Horses can store up to 50% of the erthryo-
Basophils account for only 0.5-1.0% of leuko-
cytes in the spleen.
cytes, and when bound to immunoglobulin E,
these cells release histamine. Histamine is an
Plasma
anti-inflammatory chemical that causes vasodi-
lation and attracts other WBCs to the site.
 Consisting of over 90% water, plasma also con-
tains nutrients, gases, hormones, waste products,
electrolytes, and proteins.
Agranufocytes
2.
 Plasma proteins are the most abundant plasma
 Lymphocytes account for 25% of the WBCs.
solute. They can function as carriers for other
2
Monocytes account for 3-8% of leukocytes. After
nutrients such as transferrin that carries iron, act
leaving the bloodstream, monocytes become
in immunity (immunoglobulins), and help in
macrophages.
blood clotting (fibrinogen).
 The liver synthesizes most plasma proteins.
Platefets
 Platelets, which are fragments of cells, coalesce at the
Type of blood cells
site of injury and form a platelet plug. Chemicals
Formed elements of blood include erythrocytes
 released from their granules aid in blood clotting.
(RBCs), leukocytes (WBCs), and platelets.
Erythrocytes
Formation of blood cells
1、
 Erythrocytes, approximately 7-8 μm in diameter,
The formation of new blood cells is called hemo-
are shaped like biconcave discs, thus increasing
poiesis or hematopoiesis. Prior to birth, hemo-
their surface area to volume ratio. Erythrocytes
poiesis begins in the yolk sac and later occurs in
 in mammalian species lack a nucleus and organ-
the liver, spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes of the
elles while avian RBCs are nucleated.
fetus. After birth, it occurs in red bone marrow.
2.
Erythrocytes are filled with hemoglobin that
2.
Within the red bone marrow are pluripotent
functions in oxygen transport.
stem cells which differentiate into different blood
3.
Most carbon dioxide is transported in the plasma
cells, macrophages, reticular cells, mast cells, and
as bicarbonate.
adipoctyes.
5
l
Erythrocytes live about 120 days. Damaged
3.
 Erythrocyte formation: Erythropoiesis is the pro-
erythrocytes are removed from circulation by
duction of erythrocytes.  Hematopoietic  stem
fixed phagocytic macrophages in the spleen,
cells divide to produce myeloid stem cells which
bone marrow, and liver.
transform into proerythroblasts. Proerythoblasts
give rise to erythroblasts, which synthesize hemo
Leukocytes
globin, and then are transformed to normoblasts.
When the normoblast contains about 34% hemo-
Leukocytes, also called WBCs, generally account
 globin, it ejects most of its organelles, becoming
for only 1% of the blood volume, but are an
a reticuloctye, the precursor of an erythrocyte.
important component of the immune system.
t
 Erythropoietin (EPO), produced mostly in the
WBCs are grouped into either granulocytes
 kidney, stimulates erythropoiesis.
 or agranulocytes. Granulocytes include neutro-
5
 Leukocyte formation: Hematopoietic stem cells
phils, eosinophils, and basophils. Agranulocytes
produce lymphoid stem cells which produce T
include lymphoctyes and monocytes.
and B lymphocytes. Leukopoiesis is the produc-
tion of white blood cells.
Granufocytes
Platelet formation: Platelet formation is stimu-
Neutrophils account for 50-70% of WBCs, and
lated by the hormone TPO. TPO causes myeloid
are the first cells to be attracted by chemotaxis
stem cells to develop into megakaryoctye col-
and to leave the blood stream. Neutrophils
ony-forming cells which then become mega-
phagocytize these foreign cells, and then undergo
karyoblasts. Megakaryoblasts are large cells that
a proces called a respiratory burst, and then die.
later splinter into 2000-3000 fragments.
Cardiovascular system
409
Formed elements and blood cells in birds
3.
The formation of a clot in an unbroken blood
vessel is called a thrombosis. These often lodge
Formed elements of blood in birds include eryth-
in the lungs producing a pulmonary embolism.
rocytes, leukocytes, and thrombocytes, the avian
 Clotting consists of three stages: (a) two path-
equivalent of platelets.
ways, called the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways,
Avian granulocytes include eosinophils, baso-
phils, and heterophils (equivalent to mammalian
that lead to the production of prothrombinase.
Prothrombin is converted to thrombin by pro-
neutrophils). Avian agranulocytes include lym-
thrombinase. Thrombin then catalyzes the con-
phoctyes and monocytes.
version of fibrinogen to fibrin. (b) conversion
3
Thrombocytes. Thrombocytes are found in birds.
 of prothrombin to thrombin, catalyzed by pro-
reptiles, amphibians, and fish. Unlike platelets,
thrombinase, and (e) thrombin catalyzes the con-
they are nucleated. There remains debate whether
version of fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin.
avian thrombocytes arise from antecedent mono-
5.
 Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways use a
nucleated cells or multinucleated cells. Avian
common pathway after the activation of factor X.
thrombocytes have a similar function to mam-
malian platelets.
Heterophils. Heterophils function similarly to
Clot retraction and repair
mammalian neu trophils.
The clot becomes more stable through a process
called clot retraction. Platelets contain actin and
myosin, which begin to contract, similar to muscle con-
Hemostasis
 traction. This platelet contraction pulls on surrounding
fibrin strands, squeezing serum from the clot and
Hemostasis is a series of responses that stop bleed-
 pulling the rupfured edges of the vessel closer
ing. Hemostasis entails three mechanisms: (l) vascu-
together.
lar spasms, (2) platelet plug formation, and (3) blood
clotting (coagulation).
Fibrinofysis
A clot is not permanent. Following healing, the clot
Vascular spasm
is removed by a process of fibrinolysis. The major
 When blood vessels become injured, the vessels con-
clot-busting enzyme is plasmin, which is produced
when the blood protein plasminogen is activated
0 An Aq pana si seds renosa s is
the vascular smooth muscle, chemicals released from
by tissue plasminogen activator secreted by endothe
 endothelial cells and platelets, and reflexes involving
lial cells.
local pain receptors.
Blood groups and crossmatching
 Platelet plug formation
 On the surface of erythrocytes are various glyco-
 Platelets contain a large number of chemicals,
proteins and glycolipids that act as antigens. In
 including clotting factors, ADP, ATP, Ca²t, sero-
humans, the most common blood groups are the
tonin, enzymes that produce thromboxane A2,
ABO blood group and the Rh blood groups,
fibrin-stabilizing factor, and PDGF.
whereas animals have a variety of different blood
2.
Platelet plug formation involves: (a) platelet
 groups.
adhesion, (b) platelet release reaction, (c) platelet
2
Cattle have 11 major blood groups systems
aggregation, and (d) platelet plug.
including A, B, C, F, J, L, M, R, S, T, and Z. The 
B group has over 60 different antigens. The J
Blood clotting
antigen is not a true antigen, but instead is a lipid
found in body fluids and which adheres to
When blood clots, it forms a straw-colored liquid
erythrocytes.
called serum, and a gel-like mass called a clot.
In dogs, the antigen groups or blood types are
Clotting. or coagulation, involves a series of
known as the DEA system. They include DEAs
 chemical reactions resulting in fibrin thread
1.1, 1.2, and 3-8. DEAs 1.1 and 1.2 account for
formation.
60% of the canine population.
(Continued)
410  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cats have three AB blood groups. Type A is most
3.
Blood enters the left atrium via four pulmonary
common, accounting for 95% of short- and long-
veins. Blood passes from the left atrium to the
hair domestic cats. Type B is less frequent, and
left ventricle via the bicuspid, or mitral, valve.
Type AB is rare.
+
The right ventricle wall is thinner than the left
In sheep there are seven blood groups in sheep
since it only has to pump blood through the
including A, B, C, D, M, R, and X. The B group
lungs whereas the left ventricle pumps blood to
is highly polymorphic, and the R system is
the body via the aorta, the largest artery in the
similar to the J system in cattle.
body.
 Five blood groups have been identified in goats:
5.
 Blood leaves the right ventricle via the pulmo-
A, B, C, M, and J, with J being similar to that of
nary valve, and the left ventricle via the aortic
cattle.
valve.
 Inside the ventricles are the papillary muscles
which serve as attachments for the chordae ten-
The heart
 dineae attaching to the AV valves. The papillary
muscles and chordae tendineae assist in valve
The heart is an inverted cone-shaped structure
function.
located in the mediastinum.
Pathway of blood through the heart
Coverings of the heart
 The pulmonary circuit carries blood to and from
the lungs while the systemic circuit transports
1，
The heart is enclosed within a double-layered sac
 blood throughout the remainder of the body.
made up of the outer fibrous pericardium (pari-
2
The AV valves lie between the atrium and ven-
etal layer) and the inner serous pericardium (vis-
tricles. When the ventricles contract, pressure in
ceral layers). The pericardial cavity between the
the ventricles increases pushing blood back
serous layers contains lubricating serous fluid.
toward the atria, thus closing the valves.
2
 Inflammation of  the pericardium is called
3.
The semilunar valves include the aortic and pul-
pericarditis. This results in decreased produc-
monary valves, which allow blood to pass from
tion of serous fluid and a roughened serous
the ventricles into the aorta and pulmonary vein,
membrane.
respectively. These valves are made of three cres-
cent moon-shaped cusps.
1
Layers of the heart waff
4.
There are no valves located at the entrance of the
 venae cavae into the right atrium or pulmonary
The heart wall consists of three layers: the epicar-
dium, myocardium, and endocardium. The epicar-
veins into the left atrium.
dium is the outermost layer, and is the visceral layer
of the pericardium. The middle layer, or myocar-
Systemic, pulmonary, and coronary circulation
dium, is cardiac muscle and makes up the bulk of the
heart. The innermost endocardium is a thin layer of
Pulmonary circufation
connective tissue providing a smooth lining for the
Pulmonary  circulation  transports  deoxygenated
chambers of the heart and valves.
blood from the right ventricle to the lungs where it
picks up O2 while delivering CO2. The right side of
Heart chambers and vessels
the heart is responsible for the pulmonary circuit.
The heart has four chambers. Two atria located
superiorly receive blood and pump it to the ven-
Systemic circufation
tricles. The two ventricles located posteriorly
Systemic  circulation  (
 distributes oxygenated blood
 pump the blood away from the heart.
throughout the body. Blood is pumped from the left
2.
Blood enters the right atrium from three veins:
ventricle into the aorta.
(1) the superior vena cava returns blood from the
body regions in front of the diaphragm, (2) the
 inferior vena cava returns blood from areas pos-
Coronary circufation
terior of the diaphragm, and (3) the coronary
Blood leaves the aorta and passes into the left
sinus which collects blood draining the myocar-
and right coronary arteries arising at the base of
dium. Blood passes from the right atrium into
the aorta and encircling the heart in the atrioven-
the right ventricle through the tricuspid valve.
triclar groove.
Cardiovascular system
411
 The left coronary artery has two branches. The
of the ventricles toward the atria. Purkinje fibers
anterior interventricular artery supplies the
 supply the papillary muscles as well as the ven-
interventricular septum and ventral walls of
tricular muscles.
both ventricles. The circumflex artery supplies 
the left atrium and dorsal walls of the leff
ventricle.
Mechanisms of heart contraction
3.
The right coronary artery also divides into two
Action potentials generated in the heart by the
branches. The marginal artery supplies the lateral
 right side of the heart, while the posterior inter-
SA node travel throughout the heart via the con-
duction system.
ventricular artery travels to the heart apex and
2
As a cardiac muscle fiber is stimulated by an
supplies the posterior ventricular walls.
action potential, voltage-gated fast Nat channels
open. This allows a rapid influx of Na+ from the
Cardiac muscle and the cardiac conduction system
extracellular fluid that results in depolarization.
3.
Plateau stage: As the voltage-gated fast Na+
Cardiac muscfe
charnels close, voltage-gated slow Ca2+ channels
Cardiac muscle is also called involuntary, stri-
open in the sarcolemma and SR. The influx of 
Ca²+ from the extracellular space (20%) causes a
ated muscle. Cardiac muscle fibers are shorter
and less circular than skeletal muscle fibers and
 large release (80%) of Ca²t from the SR. Simulta-
generally contain a single nucleus.
 neously the membrane permeability to K+
Cardiac muscle fibers connect with neighboring
decreases. As a result, the membrane remains
2.
fibers via thickening of the sarcolemma called
depolarized at around 0mV for about 0.25
intercalated discs. These discs contain desmo-
second, compared to about 0.o0l second in skel-
somes and gap junctions. The gap junctions
etal muscle
allow the cardiac muscle fibers to act as a func-
A
After the relatively long plateau phase, voltage-
tional syncytium, so that the atria and ventricles
 gated K+ charnels open, allowing potassium ions
can contract as a unit.
to flow out of the cell and the membrane to
3.
Cardiac muscle fibers contain larger, more
repolarize.
5.
 The refractory period, or time during which the
numerous mitochondria than skeletal muscle.
The T tubules in cardiac muscle fibers are wider
next contraction cannot be triggered, is relatively
and less abundant than in skeletal muscle. The
long in cardiac muscle compared to skeletal
SR is also less extensive in cardiac muscle fibers.
muscle. The refractory period prevents cardiac
muscle from developing tetanus.
The mechanism of contraction of cardiac muscle
The conduction system
fibers is similar to that in skeletal muscle fibers.
 The heart contains specialized cardiac muscle
fibers called autorhythmic fibers that can self-
ATP Production
 generate an action potential.
2.
There are specialized cardiac muscle fibers that
Cardiac muscle relies almost entirely on aerobic
form a conduction system that provides a path
respiration. Therefore, cardiac muscle needs a
for electrical excitation to travel throughout the
 continuous supply of O2 which arrives via the
heart.
coronary circulation or is released from myoglo-
3.
The SA node is located in the wall of the right
bin inside the cardiac muscle fibers.
atria and is the pacemaker. Depolarization of the
Cardiac muscle also contains creatine phosphate,
SA node results in an action potential that is
which can be used to produce ATP.
 propagated throughout the atria. The action
 potential reaches the AV node, which delays the
Electrocardiogram
 action potential about 0.1 second before traveling
to the ventricles. From the AV node, the action
A recording of these electrical activities in the
 potential moves to the AV bundle, also called the
heart is called an electrocardiogram (ECG or
bundle of His. The right and left branches carry
EKG).
the action potential to the Purkinje fibers which
2
A typical ECG has three characteristic waves
complete the pathway to the heart apex, and
with each heart beat. The first, or P wave, reflects
sm nno a dn uu aans  u
atrial depolarization.
(Continued)
412
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
3，
The second wave, or QRS complex, represents
Regufation of stroke vofume
ventricular depolarization. Its shape is complex
The heart will pump all the blood returning from
because of the movement of the wave of
 the body during systole. Three factors regulate
depolarization.
SV: preload, contractility, and afterload.
The third wave is the T wave and represents
2
Preload is the amount of stretch on the heart
ventricular repolarization.
prior to contraction. Within limits, greater stretch
of the heart results in more forceful contraction
Heart sounds
(Frank-Starling law of the heart).
Contractility is the strength of contraction at a
 While four sounds are created during each heart
 given preload, and is independent of muscle
beat, two of these sounds are clearly audible.
stretch and EDV. Substances that increase con-
 These sounds are typically described as lub-dup.
tractility are called positive inotropic agents,
 The first sound, lub, is the AV valves closing.
while those that decrease contractility are called
The dup sound is caused by the semilunar
negative inotropic agents.
valves closing at the beginning of ventricular
4.
The pressure that must be exceeded by the ven-
diastole.
tricles before blood can be ejected through the
3.
 Heart murmurs include clicking, rushing, or gur-
semilunar valves is called afterload. Factors
gling sounds. Heart murmurs generally indicate
that increase afterload will increase ESV and
a valve disorder.
decrease SV.
The cardiac cycle
Regulation of heart rate
The events associated with the movement of
 Factors that increase HR are positive chronotropic
blood during one heartbeat is called the cardiac
factors, while those that decrease HR are negative
cycle. The contraction and relaxation periods are
chronotropic factors. The most important factor con-
called systole and diastole, respectively.
trolling HR is the autonomic nervous system.
 While the heart is relaxed, blood passively
returns to the atria and into the ventricles through
the opened AV valves. Approximately 70% of
Autonomic nervous system regufation
ventricular filling occurs during this time.
11
3.
 During atrial systole, the atria contract while the
The cardiovascular center in the medulla oblon-
5
ventricles remain relaxed. The volume of blood
 gata influences HR. This center receives input
l
in the ventricles is referred to as the EDV.
from sensory receptors, the limbic system, and
4
 The ventricles contract, appearing as the QRS
the cerebral cortex.
complex on an ECG. Ventricular pressure increases
2
 Proprioceptors moritor the positions of the limbs
causing the AV valves to close. When ventricular
 and joints. Chemoreceptors monitor blood chem-
pressure exceeds the pressure in the large arter-
ical changes that can lead to changes in HR.
ies, the semilunar valves are forced open, leading
Baroreceptors located in the aortic arch and
to the ventricular ejection phase.
carotid arteries monitor sudden changes in pres-
5.
The ventricles relax, and the amount of blood
sure in these regions.
 remaining in the ventricles is referred to as the
3.
Activation of the sympathetic nervous system
ESV. As the pressure in the ventricles decreases,
increases HR. The sympathetic nerve fibers
 blood in the aorta and pulmonary arteries begins
 release NE which binds to β, adrenergic recep-
to return to the heart, causing closure of the
tors in the heart.
semilunar valves.
 Activation of the parasympathetic nervous system
releases acetylcholine, which decreases the spon-
taneous rate of depolarization of the SA node.
Cardiac output
1.
The amount of blood pumped by either the right
Chemicaf regufation of heart rate
or left ventricle per minute is called the CO. CO
is equal to SV, the amount of blood pumped by
Epinephrine and NE increase HR and contractility.
the ventricle per heart beat, muliplied by the HR.
2
Thyroid hormones also increase HR and
2.
SV is equal to EDV minus ESV.
contractility.
Cardiovascular system
413
3
 Elevated blood Nat or K+ concentrations decrease
4
 Sinusoidal capillaries have large, irregularly-
 HR and contractility. Increasing blood Ca?+ levels
shaped lumens, and their endothelial cells have
increases HR and contractility.
large fenestrations.
Veins
Blood vessels and hemodynamics
Veins have the same three layers as arteries, but
the tunicas interna and media are thinner.
Structure and function of blood Vessels
2
Veins also contain venous valves. The backflow
Except in the smallest vessels, there are three
of blood is prevented by venous valves.
3.
 Since veins can contain up to 65% of blood
layers or tunics. The tunica interna, or tunica
intima, is the inner most layer. The middle layer,
volume, they are called capacitance vessels.
or tunica media, consists of a circular layer of
smooth muscle and elastin. The outer layer is the
Portal systems
tunica externa, or tunica adventitia, which rein-
forces and protects the vessels.
 When one capillary bed is linked to another, it is
2.
There are five main types of blood vessels: arter-
called a portal system.
ies, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins.
2
 The hypophyseal portal system consists of a cap-
illary network in the median eminence supplied
Arteries
 by the superior hypophyseal artery. This network
carries blood from the infundibulum to the ante-
The arteries near the heart are called elastic arter-
rior pituitary.
ies since they contain a large proportion of elastic
3.
 The hepatic portal system carries blood from the
fibers in the tunica media. They are sometimes
digestive system to the liver.
called conducting arteries since they carry blood
to more muscular, medium-sized vessels.
2.
The medium-sized arteries are called muscular
Capillary exchange
arteries since they contain more muscle and less
elastic fibers in the tunica media. They are some-
Diffusion
times called distributing arteries.
Capillary exchange generally occurs by simple diffu-
sion. Water-soluble chemicals, including glucose and
Arteriofes
amino acids, pass out of the capillaries through fen-
estrations of intercellular clefts. Lipid-soluble materi-
The smallest of the arteries, arterioles deliver blood
als such as O2, CO2, and steroid hormones pass directly
to the capillaries.
through the endothelial cell wall.
Capillaries
Bufk flow
Capillaries, also called exchange vessels, consist
The passive movement of large numbers of
of only a tunica interna. At their origin is a
materials across a membrane is called bulk flow.
ring of smooth muscle called the precapillary
 Diffusion accounts for most nutrient exchange
sphincter.
across the capillary wall, while bulk flow is what
2.
 There are three types of capillaries: continuous,
 controls blood and interstitial fluid volume.
fenestrated, and sinusoidal capillaries. In con-
2
The movement of fluid and solutes from capil-
tinuous capillaries, the endothelial cells form an
 laries into the interstitial space is called filtration,
uninterrupted layer with tight junctions between
while the movement from interstitial fluid into
cells. Within the brain, continuous capillaries
the capillaries is called reabsorption.
lack intercellular clefts and therefore form a
3.
Capillary hydrostatic pressure (HPc) tends to
structural barrier between the blood and brain,
force fluid out of the capillary at the arteriole end
called the blood-brain barrier.
 of a capillary bed. HPc is opposed by the inter-
3.
 Fenestrated capillaries are similar to continuous
stitial fluid hydrostatic pressure (HPr) which
capillaries, but also have pores, or fenestrations,
pushes inward against the capillary. Therefore,
in the endothelial cells that allow substances to
the net hydrostatic pressure (Net HP) is HPc
move out of the vessels.
minus HPp.
(Continued)
414  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
4.
HPc is also opposed by the colloid osmotic pres-
2.
The respiratory pump involves increases in
sure (OPe) or oncotic pressure. Since the intersti-
abdominal pressure associated with inhalation.
tial fluid has a few proteins, there is also an
This increase in pressure squeezes venous blood
interstitial fluid osmotic pressure (OPr) oppos-
toward the heart.
ing OPc.
As an animal moves, the skeletal muscle (mus-
5.1
 NFP is calculated as follows:
cular pump) squeezes the veins, thus moving the
blood toward the heart.
NFP=(HPc -HPr)-(OPc -OPr).
Maintaining blood pressure
Factors affecting blood flow
There are both short- and long-term mechanisms
controlling BP and blood flow.
Blood flow (F) refers to the volume of blood flowing
through a tissue during a given period of time. Blood
Neuraf regufation
flow is directly proportional to the difference in BP
between two points, and is inversely proportional to
The cardiovascular center sends sympathetic
the resistance (R) to blood flow.
and parasympathetic signals via the cardiac
 accelerator nerve and vagus nerve, respectively.
which affect HR and contractility.
R
2.
The cardiovascular center also sends signals to
 blood vessels via the vasomotor nerves, resulting
Blood pressure
in vasomotor tone.
BP is highest at the end of ventricular contrac-
3.
The cardiovascular center is involved in two
tion, called systolic blood pressure. At the end of
reflexes controlling BP: the baroreceptor reflex
diastole, BP is at its lowest point, called diastolic
 and chemoreceptor reflex.
blood pressure.
 Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic
located in dilations within the internal carotid
and diastolic blood pressure. MAP is equal to
arteries, known as the carotid sinuses, the aortic
diastolic blood pressure plus one-third of pulse
arch, and the walls of most large arteries in the
pressure.
neck and thorax. Stretch of these receptors send
 signals resulting in inhibition of the cardiovascu-
11
lar center (baroreceptor reflex).
5
Resistance
5.
Chemoreceptors located in the carotid bodies
Vascular resistance is dependent on the size of
and aortic bodies moritor blood O, CO2, and H+
the blood vessel lumen, blood viscosity, and total
concentrations. Hypoxia, acidosis, or hypercap-
blood vessel length.
nia (i.e., increased blood CO) stimulate the che-
 As lumen size decreases, resistance to blood flow
moreceptors (chemoreceptor reflex).
2.
increases.
3.
Increasing the erythrocyte concentration increases
Chemicaf regufation of bfood pressure:
blood viscosity. In contrast, decreased viscosity
Short-term controf
can result from hemorrhage or anemia.
1
Rerin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) system. A
+
Resistance to blood flow is proportional to the
decrease in BP or blood flow to the kidneys
blood vessel length. Hence, obesity in animals
causes the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys to
can result in hypertension due to increased
 secrete renin, which causes production of angio-
 length of blood vessels associated with adipose
tensin II (ANG II). ANG II causes vasoconstric-
tissue.
tion and the release of aldosterone from the
adrenal cortex. Aldosterone increases sodium
and water reabsorption by the kidneys.
Venous blood return
2.
Sympathetic stimulation causes the adrenal
Blood pressure within the veins is relatively low
medulla to secrete both NE and epinephrine,
due to the cumulative effects of peripheral resis-
which increase the rate and force of heart con-
tance throughout the vascular system. Therefore,
tractions, thereby increasing CO.
other factors besides the heart are important in
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH is secreted
venous circulation.
from the posterior pituitary, which increases
Cardiovascular system
415
water reabsorption from the kidneys, and
during inflammation. Vasoconstrictors include
also acts directly on blood vessels to cause
thromboxane A2 and serotonin from platelets,
vasoconstriction.
 superoxide radicals, and endothelins from endo-
Atrial naturiuretic peptide (ANP). ANP is
thelial cells.
 released from the atria of the heart in response
to high BP and causes decreased sodium reab-
sorption from the kidneys.
Shock and homeostasis
5.
Endothelial-derived factors. Endothelin release
Circulatory shock includes any condition in which
is stimulated by angiotensin Il, ADH, thrombin,
 blood vessels are unable to deliver adequate O2 and
cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and shearing
nutrients to meet cellular needs.
forces acting on the vascular endothelium. Its
release is inhibited by NO, prostacyclin, and
ANP. Endothelin causes vasoconstriction. Endo-
Types of shock
thelial cells also release a potent vasodilator
1-
 The most common type of shock is hypovolemic
called NO.
shock resulting from massive blood loss.
 Inflammatory chemicals. Erythemia, or vasodila-
2
 Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart fails to
tion, is caused by histamine, prostacyclin, and
 adequately pump.
kinins.
3.
Vascular shock is a result of abnormal expansion
of the vascular bed.
Renaf regufation of blood pressure: Long-term
contro!
Circulatory routes
Direct renal mecharism. An increase in BP or
blood volume causes an increased filtration rate
Pulmonary circulation
in the kidney. This causes more urine production
The pulmonary circulation functions to carry deoxy-
resulting in increased fluid loss and decreased
 genated blood to the alveoli (air sacs) in the lungs
blood volume.
where gas exchange occurs. The blood is pumped
2.
 Indirect renal mechanism. If arterial BP declines,
the kidneys release the enzyme renin into the
from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk,
which then divides into the right and left pulmonary
bloodstream.  Rennin induces angiotensin II
arteries. Respiratory capillary beds drain into the
which increases BP.
pulmonary veins, which return to the left atria.
Autoregulation of blood pressure
Systemic circufation
Physical factors. Increased and decreased local
temperature, such as occurs in changes in envi-
The systemic circulation includes vessels that
ronmental temperature, causes vasodilation or
deliver oxygenated blood from the left ventricle,
vasoconstriction, respectively.
throughout the body, and returns deoxygenated
2
Increased stretch causes enhanced contraction
blood to the right atrium.
while decreased stretch causes relaxation of
2.
Systemic circulation begins with blood traveling
 blood vessel walls (myogenic response).
through the aorta, and ends with the blood
3.
Chemical factors. Metabolically derived vasodi-
returning via the superior vena cava, inferior
lators include K+, H+, lactic acid, and ATP. Other
vena cava, or coronary sinus.
 tissue-synthesized vasodilators include NO, pro-
3
 The aorta has four major divisions: the ascending
duced by endothelial cells, histamine from mast
aorta, arch of the aorta, thoracic aorta, and
cells, and monocytes, and kinins produced
abdominal aorta.
416
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Review questions and answers are available
Large Ruminants, 2nd ediftion. Iowa State Press, Ames,
Iowa.
online.
Marieb, E.N. 2004. Human Anatomy & Physiology, 6th
edition. Pearson Educafion, Inc., San Francisco.
Swenson, J.J. and W.O. Reece. 1993. Duke's Physiology of
References
 Domestic Animals, 11th edition. Cornell University Press,
Cornell University, Ifhaca, New York.
Constantinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
Thrall, M.A., D.C. Baker, T.W. Campbell, D. DeNicola, M.J.
Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
Fettman, E.D. Lassen, A. Rebar, and G. Weiser. 2004. Vet-
Press, Ames, Iowa.
erinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Lippincoft
Constantinescu, G.M. 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small
Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland.
Arimal Practitioners. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Tortora, G.J. and S.R. Grabowski. 2003. Principles of Anatomy
Constantinescu, G.M. and IA. Constantinescu. 2004.
and Physiology, 10th edifion. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Clirical Dissecfion Guide for Large Arimals, Horse and
Hoboken, New Jersey.
hapter 1
14
Respiratory system
Contents
Introduction
417
Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide
427
Functional Anatomy: Nose and Paranasal Sinuses 418
Hemoglobin and Oxygen Transport
427
Conducting Pathway Anatomy
419
Other Factors Affecting the
 Pharynx and Nasopharynx
419
 Oxygen-Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve
427
Oropharynx and Laryngopharynx
420
Hemoglobin-Nitric Oxide
428
Larynx
420
Carbon Dioxide Transport
428
Trachea and Bronchi
420
Control of Respiration: Neural Mechanisms
428
Respiratory Anatomy of the Lungs and Pleural
Pneumotaxic and Apneustic Areas
429
Membrane
421
Chemoreceptors
429
Alveoli
422
 Pulmonary and Airway Receptors
430
 Blood Supply to the Lungs
422
Avian Respiration
430
Pulmonary Ventilation
423
 Anatomy of the Avian Respiratory System
430
 Pressure Changes during Respiration
423
Air Sacs
431
Other Factors Involved in Pulmonary
Avian Ventilation and Gas Exchange
431
Ventilation
424
 Prehatching Respiration in Birds
433
 Lung Volumes and Capacities
425
 Defense Mechanisms of the Respiratory System
433
Exchange of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide
426
 Nonspecific Defense Mechanisms
433
Dalton's Law and Henry's Law
426
Specific Defense Mechanisms
434
External and Internal Respiration
426
Chapter Summary
435
Introduction
delivered to each cell and wastes are removed. The
functions of the respiratory system include gas
As animals evolved from single-celled organisms to
 exchange, regulation of blood pH, olfaction, filtration 
multilayered organisms, it became impossible for
of inspired air, production of sounds, and elimination
 Oxygen to diffuse effectively to every cell of the body.
 of some water and heat via expired air.
Therefore, animals evolved systems to deliver nutri-
The primary function of the respiratory system is
ents to every cell. The respiratory and circulatory
the intake of oxygen and the elimination of carbon
system became the means by which nutrients are
 dioxide from the body. The respiratory system consists
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
417
418Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of the nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, and
 or absent in the pig, ox, and horse. The pig possesses
lungs. Structurally, the respiratory system can be
a rostral bone in the tip of its flattened, cylindrical-
divided into the upper respiratory system, including
shaped nose, apparently to assist in rooting. The
the nose, pharynx, and associated structures, and
 lateral portion of the nose has sebaceous and sweat
the lower respiratory system, including the larynx,
glands. The most rostral portion of the nose lacks
trachea, bronchi, and lungs. Functionally, it can also
sebaceous glands, except in the horse.
be divided into two sections: (l) The conducting
The nasal cavity extends from the external nares to
 portion consists of a series of connected tubes, both
 the caudal nares, and it is separated from the mouth
outside and within the lungs, that filters, warms,
by the hard and soft palates (Fig. 14.2). The hard palate
moistens, and conducts air to and from the lungs. This
 consists of the horizontal portions of the incisive, pala-
portion includes the nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea,
tine, and maxillary bones; the soft palate is a muscu-
bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal bronchioles; and
lomucosal extension of the hard palate dividing the
(2) the respiratory portion is the site of gas exchange
rostral part of the pharynx into the oropharynx and
between the air and blood and consists of the respira-
nasopharynx.
tory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and
 The space inside the internal nose is the nasal cavity.
alveoli.
which is divided into two halves by the median nasal
septum. This septum is composed of the vomer, nasal,
and ethmoid bones, and cartilage. The nasal cavity is
Functional anatomy: nose and
divided into three sections. The vestibule is the most
paranasal sinuses
rostral portion located just inside the nostrils. The
middle section is filled with the nasal conchae, which
The nose is the externally visible portion of the respi-
are scrolls of bone arising from the lateral wall, and
ratory system. It can be divided into an external and
covered with a mucous membrane (Fig. 14.2). Named
internal portion. The external nose consists of the
 superior to inferior, the three conchae are dorsal, eth-
bone, hyaline cartilage, muscle, skin, and mucous
moidal (middle), and ventral nasal concha. The areas
membrane protruding from the face. The immovable
 between the conchae are called meatuses, and include
portion of the external nose consists of the rostral ends
the dorsal, middle, and ventral nasal meatus. The
of the nasal bones and the incisive bones. The nasal
common nasal meatus is located between the median
cartilage extends rostrally from these bones.
nasal septum and conchae, and it is continuous with
The external nares (nostrils) are the external open-
the other nasal meatuses.
ings to the respiratory tract (Fig. 14.1). The philtrum
The caudal section of the nasal cavity contains many
is the area between the lips and nose. It is relatively
ethmoturbinates (chonchae of the ethmoid bone). The
 deep in carnivores and small ruminants, but shallow
nasal cavity commuricates with the paranasal sinuses,
lapter
Lacrimal caruncle
Third
Planum nasale
Planum nasale
eyelid
Nostrils
Nostrils
 Philtrum
Philtrum
Animal Practitioners. lowa State Press, Ames, lowa.
Respiratory system
419
Frontal sinus
Nasopharynx
Soft palate
Choana
Nasal septum
Middle nasal concha
Dorsal nasal concha
Ventral nasal concha
Laryngopharynx
Palatine ridges 
Oropharynx
Fig. 14.2. Median aspect of the head of a large ruminant. The dorsal, ventral, and middle nasal concha are visible in the nasal cavity. They
are located dorsal to the hard palate and are separated by dorsal, middle, and ventral nasal meatuses. Also shown are the oropharynx,
nasopharynx, and laryngopharynx. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Maxillary
Dorsal
Lacrimal
Frontal
conchal
canal
sinus
sinus
sinus
sinus
Maxillary sinus
Rostral
Caudal
maxillary
 maxillary
Caudal
sinus
sinus
Nuchal
frontal
Cornual
D
diverticulum:
sinus
diverticulum
Conchofrontal
Oblique septum
sinus
Postorbital diverticulum
Caudal sinus
Middle rostral frontal sinus
-Maxillary septum
Medial rostral frontal sinus
Rostral maxillary
Lateral rostral frontal sinus
septum
Dorsal conchal sinus
Fig. 14.3. Paranasal sinuses. (A) Lateral aspect of a horse. (B) Frontal aspect of a horse. (C) Lateral aspect of a large ruminant. (D) Frontal
 aspect of a large ruminant. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
and posteriorly with the nasopharynx through two
Conducting pathway anatomy
openings called the internal nares, or choanae (Fig.
14.3). The paranasal sinuses are air-filled cavities
 Pharynx and nasopharynx
within some bones of the skull. The major ones are the
frontal and maxillary sinuses, but others may
be
The pharynx connects the nasal cavity and mouth to
present depending on the species. In horned cattle, the
the larynx and esophagus, respectively. Commonly
frontal sinus can extend into the horn as the cornual
called the throat, it directs food and air into the diges-
diverticulum.
tive and respiratory systems, respectively. The soft
420  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 palate divides the rostral portion of the pharynx into
 primary bronchi above the base of the heart. The cervi-
the oropharynx and nasopharynx (Fig. 14.2), and the
cal portion runs from the larynx to the thoracic inlet,
 common caudal portion is the laryngopharynx.
while the thoracic portion continues to the bifurcation
The nasopharynx is located dorsal to the soft palate
of the primary bronchi. The thoracic inlet is formed by
extending from the internal nares to the laryngophar-
the first pair of ribs, the first thoracic vertebra, and the
ynx. The palatopharyngeal arches are found at the
cranial parts of the sternum. The trachea consists of
border of the nasopharynx and laryngopharynx. Since
four layers: (1) mucosa, which is the deepest layer; (2)
it is located above the mouth, it serves as a passage-
submucosa; (3) hyaline cartilage; and (4) adventitia,
way only for air. When the animal swallows, the soft
the most superficial layer composed of areolar connec-
palate and uvula move superiorly, closing off the
tive tissue. The mucosa consists of pseudostratified
nasopharynx and preventing food and water from
ciliated columnar epithelium resting on the lamina
entering the nasal cavity.
 propria containing elastic and reticular fibers.
 The pharyngotympanic, or auditory, tubes drain
The trachea contains a series of dorsally incomplete,
from the middle ear to the nasopharynx. It helps
 C-shaped hyaline cartilage rings. These rings keep the
equalize the pressure within the middle ear with
trachea open. The trachea cartilages are united by the
 atmospheric pressure.
annular cartilage, thus making the trachea flexible
(Fig. 14.4). The trachealis muscle is smooth muscle
cornecting the open, dorsal portion of the cartilagi-
Oropharynx and laryngopharynx
nous rings.
 The trachea divides into the right and left primary.
The oropharynx lies ventral to the soft palate extend-
 or principal, bronchi. Like the trachea, the primary
ing from the oral cavity to the base of the epiglottis.
 bronchi contain incomplete cartilaginous rings and
The palatoglossal arches lie at the border between the
are lined  with  pseudostratified ciliated columnar
oral cavity and oropharynx. This is a common pathway
o  e pae pue poo pms o 
epithelium.
pharynx also serves as a common pathway for food
and air. It extends from the epiglottis to the larynx,
the diverging point for the respiratory and digestive
Box 14.1  Purring in cats
systems.
It is well known that cats purr while content, but
they can also purr when injured and in pain. The
Larynx
mechanism of purring is not well understood. It
was once thought that the pur was produced from
The larynx connects the laryngopharynx with the
blood surging through the inferior vena cava, but
trachea, and it contains the vocal cords. The two func-
it is more widely believed that the intrinsic (inter-
tions of the larynx are (1) to provide a routing mecha-
nal) laryngeal muscles are the likely source for the
nism for air and food, and (2) to make sounds.
purr. The laryngeal muscles are responsible for the
Superiorly, the larynx attaches to the hyoid bone. The
opening and closing of the glottis (space between
larynx is formed by five mucus-covered cartilages
the vocal chords), which results in a separation of
including single epiglotic, thyroid, and cricoid carti-
the vocal chords and thus the purr sound. There is
lages, and paired arytenoid cartilages (Box 14.1).
an absence of purring in a cat with laryngeal paral-
The epiglottic cartilage provides structure to the
ysis. Studies have shown that the movement of the
epiglottis, which closes the opening to the larynx
a, annn e  pais si ss au
during swallowing, thus preventing ingested materi-
oscillator" in the cat's brain.
als from entering the lungs. The thyroid cartilage is
 ,adde s,uepv, an sg pue aeres isaet an
humans. The cricoid cartilage connects the thyroid
cartilage and trachea. The arytenoid cartilages are
A
Trachealls musck
B
paired and irregularly shaped. They have a ventral
Tracheal cartllages
vocal process to which the vocal ligament (vocal cord)
is attached. The glottis consists of the vocal ligaments
and the slit-like gap between them, the glottic cleff.
Tracheal,
cartllage
Trachea and bronchi
Annular
Ilgaments
Fg. 14.4. Trachea of a goat. (A) Cross section of trachea. (B)
The trachea, or windpipe, is a cylindrical tube extend-
Annular ligaments. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by
ing from the larynx to the bifurcating right and left
permission of the publisher.)
Respiratory system .
421
Accessory
obe
Right
Caudal
Left
Lobe
Caudal
Lobe
Right
Middle
Primary
Lobe
bronchi
Tertiary
bronchi
Secondary
Left
bronchi
Cranial
Right
Lobe
Cranial
Lobe
Trachea
Fig. 14.5. The canine bronchial tree. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Upon entering the lungs at the lung's hilus, the
 The lungs are surrounded by a serous membrane
primary bronchi divide into the smaller secondary, or
called the pleural membrane. The superficial layer
lobar, bronchi. These keep dividing into the following
lining the thoracic cavity is the parietal pleura and the
sequence of channels: tertiary, or segmental, bronchi
layer closely adhering to the lungs is the visceral
      
pleura. The narrow parietal space between these two
ducts →> alveolar sac → alveoli (see Fig. 14.5; see also
layers contains a small amount of pleural fluid that
 Fig. 14.7). This extensive branching of the respiratory
 allows the two layers to slide over one another during
channels is called the bronchial tree. The alveoli are
breathing. Inflammation of the pleural membrane is
thin-walled sacs where gas exchange occurs. Below
called pleurisy. The mediastinum is the midline site
the tertiary bronchi, the mucous membrane changes
formed where the two pleural membranes meet. It
from ciliated cuboidal epithelium with no goblet cells
contains the heart, large vessels, esophagus, and
to nonciliated simple cuboidal epithelium in the respi-
 other structures, and separates the two lungs from one
ratory bronchioles.
another.
After the first breath, the lungs become less dense.
This fact allows one to determine whether a newborn
animal is stillborn. A sample of lung tissue can be
Respiratory anatomy of the lungs and
 placed in water to see whether it floats. If it floats, it
pleural membrane
indicates that the animal took at least one breath and,
therefore, was born alive.
The lungs are paired organs located within the thorax.
 The pressure inside the intrapleural space is nega-
In general, the left and right lungs have two and four
 tive. This negative pressure is vital for the expansion
lobes, respectively. The horse has three right lobes
of the lungs. If an injury to the chest wall punctures
(Fig. 14.6). The cranial portion, or apex, of each lung
the pleural membrane, it can allow air to enter the
is located in the thoracic inlet; the base is the caudal
 intrapleural space, resulting in a pneumothorax. Such
end of the lung resting on the diaphragm. The hilus
 an injury can be caused by a sharp object penetrating
of the lung is the medial area where the bronchi, blood
 the chest cavity, or a traumatic blow such as being
vessels, and nerves enter the lungs. The cardiac notch
struck by a car. Because this allows the intrapleural
is the indentation between the lobes where the heart
 pressure to equilibrate with atmospheric pressure, the
makes contact with the lung.
lung on that side will collapse.
422
2 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Azygous V. impression
Aortic impression
Esophageal impression
 Cranial 
lobe
Impression of
caudal
vena cava
 Cardiac impression
Caudal lobe
Accessory lobe
Esophageal impression 
Aortic impression
Vascular impression
Base
Hilus
Cranial
lobe
Cardiac impre ssion
Caudal lobe
(cardiac notch)
Fig. 14.6. Lungs of a horse. (A) Medial aspect of the left lung. (B) Medial aspect of the right lung. (Reprinted from Constantinescu anc
Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Alveoli
2.
 the epithelial basement membrane
the capillary basement membrane
Surrounding the alveolar ducts are many alveoli and
4.
the endothelial cells lining the capillary.
alveolar sacs. Within the alveolar sac are two or more
alveoli, saclike outpouchings lined with simple squa-
Blood supply to the lungs
 mous epithelium on a thin elastic basement membrane
(Fig. 14.7). Alveoli walls contain predominantly type
 The pulmonary and bronchial arteries supply blood to
I alveolar cells, which are simple squamous epithe-
the lungs. The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated
lium and are the main site of gas exchange. They also
blood through the pulmonary trunk and into the right
contain type Il alveolar (or septal) cells, alveolar mac-
and left pulmonary arteries. Oxygenated blood returns
rophages, and fibroblasts that produce reticular and
to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins. In most
 elastic fibers. Type II alveolar cells are cuboidal epithe-
vessels, hypoxia causes dilation of blood vessels in
lial cells containing microvilli that secrete alveolar
order to increase O delivery. However, in the pulmo-
fluid containing surfactant. The alveolar macrophages
nary blood vessels, hypoxia causes vasoconstriction.
are wandering phagocytes that remove debris from
This is called ventilation-perfusion coupling, which
the lungs.
 allows pulmonary blood to be diverted to well-
 The respiratory membrane is where O2 and CO2
ventilated areas.
diffuse across the alveolar and capillary walls. It is a
Bronchial arteries arise from the aorta and deliver
very thin membrane about 0.5μm thick and consists
 Oxygen to the lungs. They mostly perfuse the bronchi
of four layers:
and bronchioles. Their blood returns mainly via the
1.
 a layer of type I and type II alveolar cells, and
pulmonary veins, but some returns via the superior
alveolar macrophages
vena cava.
Respiratory system  423
Terminal bronchi
Aveolar duct
Alveolar sac
Smooth
muscle
cells
Surfactant
Respiratory
Type I cells
bronchiole
Alveolar sac
Alveolar
Macrophage
Type Il cells
Fig. 14.7. Alveolar sacs and respiratory membrane. Within the alveolar sac are several alveoli. The alveoli contain type I alveolar cells that
are the site of gas exchange. T'ype Il alveolar cells produce surfactant. (Adapted from http://php.med.unsw.edu.au/embryology/images/d/d4/
Alveolar-sac-01.jpg.)
 During exercise, cardiac output can increase by as
Pressure changes during respiration
much as eightfold. During this time, blood flow to
the lungs must increase in order to collect oxygen.
Inspiration
 Pulmonary blood vessels dilate. In the horse, pulmo-
Boyle's law states that at constant temperature and
nary arterial pressure can be so high as to cause
erythrocytes to leak from pulmonary capillaries, a
 pressure, there is an inverse relationship between the
volume and pressure of a gas:
 condition called exercise-induced pulmonary hemor-
rhage. This is a significant problem in athletic
horses.
PV=BV,
where Pis the pressure of the gas (mL of Hg), and V
is the volume (cm?). Therefore, the pressure inside a
Pulmonary ventilation
closed container will decrease as the volume of the
container increases, and vice versa. When this law is
Respiration, the process of gas exchange, occurs in
 applied to the lungs, we find that the pressure inside
three steps:
the lungs decreases as the volume of the lungs
1.
 Pulmonary
ventilation, or breathing, is 
the
increases. Air moves into the lungs as a result of a
mechanical movement of air into (inspiration) and
 decrease in air pressure within the lungs.
 out (expiration) of the lungs.
In most animals, inspiration is an active process.
External  respiration  is the 
 exchange of gases
The main muscles responsible for quiet inhalation are
between the lungs and the pulmonary capillaries,
the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles.
which occurs across the respiratory membrane.
The diaphragm is a dome-shaped muscle innervated
 The blood gains O, and loses CO2.
by the phrenic nerves. As the diaphragm contracts, it
3.
 Internal respiration is the exchange of gases
increases the horizontal dimensions of the thoracic
between systemic capillaries and tissue. The blood
cavity, thus increasing the volume of the thorax. This
gains CO2 and loses O2.
causes the volume of the lungs to expand and thereby
424  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
decreases the pressure inside the lungs. This results in
Box 14.2 Surfactant production in
inspiration.
premature infants
Contraction of the external intercostal muscles
causes the ribs to move cranially and ventrally, thus
Premature infants are at risk for respiratory distress
increasing the diameter of the thorax. This accounts
syndrome. This is due to the lack of surfactant pro
for about 25% of the entry of air into the lungs.
duction, which does not line the alveolar walls until
 In a horse at rest, the intrapleural pressure is nega-
near parturition. The National Institutes of Health
tive, about 754mmHg. As inspiration begins, this
recommends broad use of maternal glucocorticoid
pressure drops to approximately 744mmHg. Atmo-
therapy to stimulate surfactant production in the
spheric pressure is 760mmHg at sea level. As the
 fetus. In addition, surfactant replacement therapy
volume of the thoracic cavity increases during inspira-
is recommended in low birth weight immature
tion, the parietal pleura is pulled outward, and the
 infants. The preterm lamb is often used as a model
visceral pleura is pulled with it. As a result, the pres
for investigating the effects of glucocorticoids on
sure inside the lungs, the alveolar pressure, decreases.
surfactant production and its effects on postnatal
Air then flows from an area of high pressure (the
development (see Ikegami et al., 1997).
atmosphere) to an area of lower pressure (the alveoli).
As an animal increases the force of inspiration, addi-
tional muscles are engaged. These include the sterno-
tension. In a sphere such as that found in the alveoli,
cleidomastoid muscles that move the sternum rostrally,
this surface tension produces an inwardly directed
the scalene muscles that pull the first two ribs forward,
force causing the alveoli to assume the smallest pos-
and the pectoralis minor muscles that pull several
sible diameter. In order to expand the lungs, this
other ribs forward.
surface tension must be exceeded. This surface tension
accounts for approximately two-thirds of the lung's
Expiration
elastic recoil
Surfactant, produced by type ll alveolar cells, is a
 Normal expiration is a passive process involving no
complex of lipids and proteins that reduces the surface
active muscle contraction. Like inspiration, it is due
tension in much the same way the soap allows lipids
to pressure gradients, but in an opposite direction.
to dissolve in aqueous solutions. Since surfactant is
Because of the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall,
 one of the last compounds produced during embry-
there are two inwardly directed forces resulting in this
onic development, premature animals often have
recoil: (1) the elastic fibers that were stretched during
respiratory distress as a result of the underdeveloped
inhalation and (2) the inwardly directed force due to
respiratory system. In the case of sheep, surfactant is
the surface tension arising from the alveolar fluid.
released into the alveolar spaces near the beginning of
As the neural signals to the diaphragm cease, it
the fourth month of gestation. Its release correlates
relaxes and this dome-shaped muscle moves rostrally.
with a rise in plasma cortisol levels (Box 14.2).
 thus decreasing the volume of the thoracic cavity. The
 external intercostals also relax and allow the ribs to
Compliance of the lungs
move dorsally and caudally, thus further decreasing
 the volume of the thoracic cavity. This decreases lung
The distensibility of the lungs is referred to as lung
volume and causes alveolar pressure to increase
compliance. High lung compliance means that the
 approximately 2mmHg above atmospheric pressure.
lungs will expand easily. Lung compliance is related
As a result, air flows out of the lungs to an area of
 to (1) the distensibility of lung tissue and the thoracic
lower pressure.
 cage, and (2) alveolar surface tension. Lung compli-
During forceful exhalation, the abdominal 
and
ance is normally high due to the elasticity of the lung's
internal intercostal muscles contract. This causes the
tfissue and decreased alveolar surface tension from
ribs to move caudally and dorsally compressing the
surfactant.
 abdominal viscera and decreasing the thoracic volume.
Compliance can be decreased by several factors: (1)
This increases pressure inside the thoracic cavity and
scar tissue formed in the lungs as a result of certain
forces air outward.
diseases, (2) pulmonary edema resulting from accu-
mulation of fluid in the lungs, (3) insufficiency of sur-
Other factors involved in pulmonary
factant, and (4) decrease in the ability of the thoracic
cage to expand.
ventilation
Surface tension of alveolar fluid
Airway resistance
Alveolar fluid coats the inside surface of the alveoli.
The flow of air into the lungs is inversely related to
Because of hydrogen bonding, this fluid has a surface
airway resistance:
Respiratory system-
425
△
eases or injuries to the airways can increase airway
F
R
resistance.
 During exercise, animals decrease the airway resis-
where F is gas flow, Pis pressure, and R is resistance.
tance by dilating the external nares and vasoconstric-
The walls of the airways into the alveoli, particu-
tion of the vascular tissue in the nose. As exercise rate
larly the bronchioles, create resistance to airflow. The
increases, cows and dogs breathe through their mouth
larger the diameter of the airway, the less the resis-
 in order to bypass the greater airway resistance associ-
tance to airflow. The diameter of the airways can be
ated with the nose. However, horses are considered
altered by the degree of contraction of the smooth
 obligate nose breathers and must rely on their ability
muscle in these airways. Stimulation of the sympa-
to decrease airway resistance in order to increase
thetic nervous system causes relaxation of these walls,
airflow. One can watch the nostrils of a horse flare
which allows air to more readily enter the lungs. Dis-
during exercise (Box 14.3).
Lung volumes and capacities
Box 14.3  Airway obstruction in
The respiratory capacity, or the amount of air that
short-nosed dogs
moves in and out of the lungs, depends on the strength
The term brachycephalic, or brachiocephalic, means
of inspirations and expirations. During normal, quiet
short-nosed and refers to dogs with short muzzles,
 breathing, the volume of air moving in and out of
noses, and mouths. Brachycephalic airway obstruc-
the lungs is called the tidal volume (TV). Only about
tion syndrome (BAOS), also called brachycephalic
 70% of tidal volume reaches the lungs. The remaining
airway disease (BAD) and brachycephalic airway
portion of the air is found in the airways including the
syndrome (BAS), is an inherited condition in the
 nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles,
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, English bulldog.
and terminal bronchioles. These airways are collec-
pug. Boston terrier, and Pekingese, in particular.
tively called the anatomical dead space.
The throat and breathing passages in brachyce-
The minute volume (MV) is the volume of air
phalic dogs often are undersized or flattened.
inhaled and exhaled each minute, and is calculated as
The symptoms of this disorder typically include
labored and constant open-mouthed breathing.
MV = TV xrespiration rate.
noisy breathing, snuffling. snorting, excessive
 snoring, gagging, retching, exercise and/or heat
The respiration rate varies by species (Table 14.1).
intolerance, general lack of energy, and pale or
 Because of the anatomical dead space, not all of the
 bluish tongue and gums due to a lack of oxygen.
 minute volume is available for gas exchange. The
 Precautions should be taken to avoid overheating.
alveolar ventilation rate (AVR) is that portion of the
excessive excitement, and excessive exercise, which
tidal volume that actually reaches the site of gas
may cause increased panting. Excessive barking or
exchange:
panting may cause the throat to swell, which could
AVR
=respiration rate x(TV-dead space).
result in a totally blocked airway. Most importantly,
the owner should not let the dog get too hot, par-
(mL/min) (breaths/min)
(mL /breath)
ticularly in the summer months, and should not
allow the dog to become overweight because
If an animal inhales more forcefully, it can increase
 the volume of air entering the lungs above normal
obesity will exacerbate the respiratory difficulties.
tidal volume (Fig. 14.8). The additional inhaled air is
If severe, this disorder can result in death from such
called the inspiratory reserve volume. Similarly, an
related causes as heatstroke.
animal can force more air out of its lungs than occurs
Table 14.1. Tidal volume and respiration rate.
Species
Body Weight (kg)
Condition
Respiration Rate (Breaths/min)
Tidaf Vofume (mL/kg Body Weight)
Cat
3.7
Anesthetized
30
9.2
Holstein cow
516
Suipues
26
8.2
Jersey cow
450
Standing
27
8.4
Dog
19
Anesthetized
13.6
10.7
12.6
 Anesthetized 
21.0
11.4
Horse
486
Resting
10
15.4
'Data from Swenson and Reece (1993).
426  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
6000+
Pn, = 760 ×0.786 mmHg = 597.4 mmHg
Po = 760 × 0.209 mmHg = 158.8 mmHg
Inspiratory
5000
reserve
PHzo = 760 × 0.004 mmHg = 3.0 mmHg
volume
(7w)
Pco, = 760 ×0.0004 mmHg = 0.3 mmHg
4000
0.5 mmHg
Tidal volume
Pother gases = 760 x0.0006 mmHg =
760 mmHg
3000
Expiratory
reserve
20004
volume
Henry's law
Henry's law says that the quantity of a gas that will
1000+
Residual
 dissolve in a liquid is proportional to its partial pres-
volume
 sure and its solubility coefficient. Therefore, gases
will dissolve in body fluids more readily if they have
Fig. 14.8. Respiratory volumes and capacities. During quiet
a greater partial pressure and solubility coefficient.
respiration, the volume of air inspired and expired is called the
The solubility coefficient of CO2 is 24 times higher
tidal volume. The additional air brought into the lungs during a
forced inspiration is called the inspiratory reserve volume, and the
than that of O2. Therefore, CO2 dissolves in blood
additional air that can be expired during a forced expiration is
more readily than O2. In contrast, the solubility of
called the expiratory reserve volume. The air remaining in the lungs
nitrogen is very low, so even though atmospheric
after a forced expiration is called the residual volume.
air has 79% N, it has very little effect on body
functions.
during quiet respiration. This additional volume
exhaled is called the expiratory reserve volume. Fol-
External and internal respiration
lowing a forced expiration, the air remaining in the
lungs is the residual volume.
External respiration, also called pulmonary gas
exchange, is the diffusion of O2 and CO, from the
alveoli to pulmonary blood. Pulmonary blood is deox-
Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
 ygenated blood arriving from the right ventricle.
Blood circulating through the body picks up CO, and
Dalton's law and Henry's law
delivers O2. As this blood travels through the pulmo-
nary capillaries, CO, diffuses into the alveoli while O2
The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
diffuses from the alveoli to pulmonary blood. The
'ssd aaissed e st pooq Areuournd pure e reoae
5
exchange of these gases occurs independently and
which is explained by two gas laws. Dalton's law
passively.
explains how gases move by diffusion based on pres-
 Pulmonary gas exchange is facilitated by a very thin
sure differences; Henry's law describes the diffusion
respiratory membrane. In addition, there is a close
 of gas based on its solubility.
association between the amount of gas reaching the
alveoli, that is, ventilation, and the blood flow through
 the pulmonary capillaries, that is, perfusion. When 
Dalton's law
ventilation becomes inadequate within the alveoli,
Dalton's law states that each gas within a mixture
the Po, will decrease. This causes an autoregulatory
exerts its own pressure independent of the other gases
response in which pulmonary arterioles constrict.
present. The pressure of an individual gas is called its
Conversely, if Po, increases, the pulmonary arterioles
partial pressure, designated Px. The total pressure of a
dilate, allowing more blood to flow to those areas that
gas mixture is calculated by summing all its partial
 can maximize gas exchange. Note that this is the oppo-
 pressures. Atmospheric air is a combination of nitro-
site of what happens in systemic circulation, where a
gen (N2), oxygen (O2), carbon dioxide (CO2), and water
decrease in Po, results in vasodilation.
vapor.
 Internal respiration, or systemic gas exchange,
At sea level, atmospheric pressure is 760mmHg.
 Occurs at the tissue level, where there is an exchange
Atmospheric air is 78.6% nitrogen, 20.9% oxygen,
of O2 and CO, between systemic capillaries and
0.04% carbon dioxide, 0.06% other gases, and varying
tissue. O diffuses from the capillaries into the
water vapor, depending on the humidity. Therefore,
cells; CO2 diffuses from the cells into the systemic
atmospheric air can be computed as follows:
capillaries.
Respiratory system
427
Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide
Lungs
100 
Hemoglobin and oxygen transport
Tissues
90
Oxygen has a low solubility coefficient, so it does not
80
readily dissolve in blood. Instead, over 98% of O2 is
of hem
70
bound to hemoglobin. The heme portion of hemoglo-
60
bin contains four atoms of iron, each able to bind to
50
 one molecule of O2.
saturati
40
Adult hemoglobin consists of two alpha and two
30
beta chains. Fetal hemoglobin contains two alpha and
rcent
two gamma chains. More than 400 different types of
20
abnormal hemoglobin have been identified, but the
10
most common associated with diseases in humans are
the following:
20
40
60
80
100
 Hemoglobin S. This type of hemoglobin is present 
Po2 (mmHg)
1
in sickle cell anemia.
Fg. 14.9. Oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve. The saturation
Hemoglobin C. This is another type of hemoglo-
of hemoglobin is affected by changes in Po. At the lungs.
bin found in sickle cell anemia.
hemoglobin is 100% saturated. As the blood passes through tissue
 Hemoglobin E. This type of hemoglobin is found
in which the Po, is lower, hemoglobin is able to rapidly unload O
 in people of Southeast Asian descent.
Hemoglobin D. This type of hemoglobin may be
 present with sickle cell anemia or thalassemia.
Po, is the most important factor controlling how
Hemoglobin H (heavy hemoglobin). This type of
much O is bound to hemoglobin. When reduced
hemoglobin may be present in certain types of
hemoglobin is converted to oxyhemoglobin, it is fully
thalassemia (Box 14.4).
saturated. When only a portion of hemoglobin exists
as oxyhemoglobin, it is partially saturated. This can be
 Oxygen bound to hemoglobin forms oxyhemoglo-
graphically represented as an oxygen-hemoglobin
bin. Hemoglobin that has released O2 is called reduced
dissociation curve (Fig. 14.9). At the level of the lungs,
hemoglobin, or deoxyhemoglobin. Because it picks
hemoglobin becomes fully saturated. As blood passes
up a H+ ion after releasing O2, reduced hemoglobin is
through tissue where the Po, drops to 40mmHg.
abbreviated as HHb:
hemoglobin unloads its oxygen and is only 75%
saturated.
Hb
+○2
 The oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve has a
Reduced
oxygen
steep slope between 10 and 50mmHg Po,. When an
hemoglobin
animal is at rest, hemoglobin releases approximately
Hb-O2
only 25% of its oxygen. It maintains a reserve that is
1
H+
available when needed. If the animal begins vigorous
oxyhemoglobin hemoglobin.
 exercise, hemoglobin is able to respond by releasing a
 greater amount of O2.
Box 14.4
 Onion toxicity in cats and dogs
Other factors affecting the oxygen-
Allium species (meadow garlic, nodding onion,
hemoglobin dissociation curve
 Pacific onion, and wild garlic) contain organosulfur
compounds that can be very toxic when consumed
Although the Po, is the most important factor affecting
by cats or dogs. These compounds can cause
hemoglobin's affinity for oxygen, other factors can
oxidative hemolysis, which results in cell lysis of
also influence this association. These factors can shift
erythrocytes. Consuming as little as 5g/kg or
the oxygen-hemoglobin curve to either side of normal
15-30g/kg of onions in cats and dogs, respectively,
(Fig. 14.10):
 can cause this problem. Treatment includes induc-
L.
pH of the blood. Increasing the acidity of blood,
ing emesis in asymptomatic dogs and cats known
 to have ingested these products. If severely affected,
that is, lowering the pH, lowers the affinity of
a blood transfusion and supplemental oxygen may
hemoglobin for O2. Therefore, as the metabolism
of tissue increases, resulting in increased lactic and
be necessary.
carbonic acid at the same Po, hemoglobin releases
428 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
100-
-Higher bood pH
 a change in the conformation of hemoglobin allowing
 of hemoglobin
90-
Lower temperature
NO to bind to the cysteine of hemoglobin. This
Lower blood Po02
80
protects NO from being broken down by the Fe in
70
hemoglobin. As oxyhemoglobin releases its O2, it
simultaneously releases NO. NO dilates local blood
60
-Lower bood pH
ion
-Higher temperature
vessels, thus further aiding in supplying O, to areas
saturati
50
-Higher blood Pooz
in need.
40
Percent
30
Carbon dioxide transport
20
10
Carbon dioxide is a waste product of metabolism. It is
0
20
40
60
80
transported in the blood to the lungs in three forms:
100
Po2 (mmHg)
Dissolved CO2. Accounting for the smallest
 amount of transported CO2, 7-10% is carried dis-
Fig. 14.10. Bohr effect. Increases in temperature, decreases in pH,
 solved in the plasma.
or increases in blood Pco shift the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation
curve to the right.
Carbamino compounds. Approximately 20% of
 CO, is transported in the red blood cells attached
to the amino acids of globin forming carbamino-
more O2 at that site. Mechanistically, this occurs
hemoglobin. Since CO, is bound to globin, and not
 because the binding of H+ to hemoglobin causes a
the heme molecule, the CO2 does not compete
conformational change decreasing hemoglobin's
O-carrying capacity This shift of the curve to the
with O2 or NO transport:
right is termed the Bohr effect. The reverse reac-
Hb
+
CO2
tion can also occur in which binding of O2 to
Hemoglobin
carbon dioxide
hemoglobin causes the liberation of H*. Decreas-
→
Hb-CO2
 ing the acidity shifts the oxygen-hemoglobin dis-
sociation curve to the left.
carbaminohemoglobin.
2.
Temperature. An increase in temperature also
shifts the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve
The formation of carbaminohemoglobin is influ-
to the right. Like increased acidity, increased
enced by Pco, and the degree of oxygenation of
temperature is a by-product of increased metab-
hemoglobin. In the lungs, where Pco, in alveolar
olism. Increased metabolism requires additional
air is low, carbon dioxide dissociates from hemo-
O2, so shifting this curve to the right provides
globin and is exhaled. At the tissue level, where
necessary O2-
Pco, is high, the formation of carbaminohemoglo-
3.
 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate (BPG). An increase in the
bin is favored since deoxygenated hemoglobin
10l
production of BPG, formerly called diphospho-
readily combines with CO2.
glycerate, also shifts the curve to the right, thus
Bicarbonate ions. Most carbon dioxide, about 70%.
liberating more O. Increased production of BPG
is transported in the blood as bicarbonate ions
is also associated with increased metabolism.
(HCO;) (Fig. 14.1l). As tissues produce CO2, it
Pco,. A decrease in pH acts similarly to an increase
diffuses into the systemic capillaries where most
4.
in Pco. As shown next, CO, can react with water
of it enters the red blood cells and, in the presence
to form carbonic acid, which then dissociates to
of carbonic anhydrase, it combines with water to
form bicarbonate and H+. Thus, increased Pco, is 
produce carbonic acid. Carbonic acid dissociates
associated with decreased pH.
to bicarbonate and hydrogen ions. The hydrogen
ions bind to hemoglobin, causing the Bohr effect
CO2
+HO
H,CO;
and enhancing the release of O2. HCO; diffuses
Carbon dioxide
water
carbonic acid
from the red blood cells into the plasma and is
transported to the lungs. As HCO,- leaves the red
1
HCO;
十
H+
blood cells, chloride ions (Cl) enter, a process
bicarbonate
hydrogen.
called the chloride shift.
Hemoglobin-nitric oxide
Control of respiration: neural mechanisms
Nitric oxide (NO), a gas, plays an important role in
vasomotor tone. It is a potent vasodilator. Produced
The medullary rhythmicity area is located in the
in lung and endothelial cells, NO can be carried by
medullar oblongata, and it controls the basic respira-
hemoglobin. The binding of O2 to hemoglobin causes
tion rhythm. It consists of two areas, the inspiratory
Respiratory system
429
Interstitial space
CO, (dissolved in plasma)
CO2 + HO→HCO→HCO + H+
Chloride Cl-
Tissue cell
shitt
HCO
CO2
Red blood cell
Cl
CO2
COg + H0
 H,CO3
+HCO3
Carbonic
anhydrase
CQ2 + Hb -HbCO2
HHO
carbaminohemoglobin
O2
Hb-O2
+ Og + Hb
Plasma
CO, (dissolved in plasma)
CO + HO+ HCO+ HCO + H+
4veol
HCO,
CO,
CI
CO2-
1 CO2+HO4
HCO3+
H++HCO3
+0o
CO2 + Hb 
Hb-CO2
carbaminohemoglobin 
O2 + Hb-H =
→Hb-O2+H+
Plasma
 O2 (dissolved in plasma)
Fig. 14.11. Transport of O, and CO, in the blood. The top portion of the figure shows gas exchange at the tissue level, and the bottom
portion is at the level of the lungs. As COz is produced in the tissues, it diffuses into the red blood cells (RBCs) where it combines with water
to form carbonic acid. As carbonic acid dissociates, the HCOs that was formed diffuses out of the RBC and into the plasma in exchange for
Cl, which moves into the RBC, a process called the chloride shift. Most COz (70%) is transported as HCOs; the remainder is transported as
either dissolved CO, (7%) or carbaminohemoglobin (22%). The bottom portion of the figure shows how the gases move when the blood
arrives in the lungs. Hb, hemoglobin.
and expiratory areas, also called the dorsal respiratory
Conversely, the apneustic area, located in the lower
 group and the ventral respiratory group, respectively.
pons, sends stimulatory signals to the inspiratory area
The inspiratory area sends signals to the diaphragm
that prolongs inspiration. The pneumotaxic area can
via the phrenic nerves and to the external intercostal
 override the apneustic area.
muscles via the intercostal nerves. These signals cause
 muscle contraction resulting in inspirations. When
these signals cease, inspiration is concluded, which
Chemoreceptors
 allows the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles
to passively relax, during which time the elastic
 The respiratory system functions to bring in O2 and
recoil of the lungs and thoracic walls causes the
eliminate CO, from the body. This function is assisted
volume of the thoracic cavity to decrease. Transection
by specialized receptors called chemoreceptors that
 between the spinal cord and medulla oblongata stops 
monitor the levels of CO2, O2, and H+, and then send
breathing.
 such information to the respiratory center.
 Although not active during quiet breathing, forceful
These chemoreceptors are located in several loca-
expiration requires signals from the expiratory area
 tions. There are central chemoreceptors found in the
that cause contraction of the internal intercostals and
medulla oblongata that respond to changes in cerebro
abdominal muscles. Contraction of these muscles
spinal fluid Hf and Pco,. Peripheral chemoreceptors
further decreases the volume of the thoracic cavity,
include the aortic bodies and carotid bodies whose
thus increasing exhalation.
removal eliminates a respiratory response to hypoxia.
The aortic bodies are a cluster of chemoreceptors in
the aortic arch; the carotid bodies are oval nodules in
Pneumotaxic and apneustic areas
the wall of the left and right common carotid arteries,
where they bifurcate into the internal and external
Located in the upper pons, the pneumotaxic area,
carotid arteries. Axons from the chemoreceptors in the
also called the pontine respiratory group, sends inhib-
 aortic bodies are part of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve
itory signals to the inspiratory area. These signals pri-
X), whereas those of the carotid bodies project in the
marily function to prevent overfilling of the lungs.
 glossopharyngeal nerves (cranial nerve IX).
430 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
The levels of CO, and H+ are highly correlated.
bird lungs are inelastic and therefore do not change
Throughout the body, CO is quickly converted to car-
volume during respiration. In birds, the relative
bonic acid catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhy-
volume of the trachea is much larger, and therefore the
drase. Carbonic acid dissociates into HCO; and Ht.
 bird must compensate for this large dead space. Rather
(See formula from #4 under the section "Other Fac-
 than having alveoli, gas exchange in birds occurs in
tors Affecting the Oxygen-Hemoglobin Dissociation
air capillaries. Furthermore, since birds lack a dia-
Curve" previously in this chapter.) Therefore, increases
phragm, the movement of the ribs and the sternum
in CO, lead to increases in Ht, while decreases in CO2
 are important in changing the abdominal pressure in
lead to decreases in H'. As a result, Pco, has a large
order to move air in and out of the air sacs, another
affect on respiration, whereas Po affects respiration
structure unique to birds.
only if its levels change substantially.
 Increases in arterial blood CO2, called hypercapnia,
  e s s      
Anatomy of the avian respiratory system
 effect on central chemoreceptors since there is litfle
 protein within the cerebrospinal fluid to buffer the
The avian respiratory system has a unique structure
H'. Activation of the central chemoreceptors causes
   ) a  n 
increased respiration rate, possibly causing hyperven-
 do not expand; instead, air sacs act as bellows to move
tilation. Conversely, low arterial blood CO2, called
air in and out of the lungs. Gas exchange occurs in the
hypocapnia, inhibits respiration. Large drops 
in
 lungs, but not the air sacs. Also, birds have no dia-
 arterial Po increase ventilation by stimulating periph-
phragm, and the thoracic cavity is at atmospheric
eral chemoreceptors. An increase in plasma H+
is
pressure instead of negative pressure as in mammals.
also detected by the aortic and carotid bodies, which
Although birds have a larynx, sound is instead gener
are highly responsive to changes in arterial H+
ated in the syrinx, which is composed of cartilage and
concentra tion.
vibrating soft tissue.
The avian lung is a rigid structure located in the
thoracoabdominal cavity. The trachea extends from
Pulmonary and airway receptors
the larynx to the syrinx, and it is composed of com-
plete tracheal cartilages. Tracheal volume in birds is
Three types of sensory receptors have been identified
about 4.5 times larger than in mammals since avian
in the lungs, including slowly adapting stretch recep-
 tors, irritant receptors, and unmyelinated C fibers. The
 space. Birds compensate by having a larger tidal
stretch receptors increase their firing rate as the lungs
volume and lower respiratory frequency.
and larger airways inflate.
 Short primary bronchi extend from the syrinx to the
lungs. The intrapulmonary primary bronchus travels
through the lungs to the abdominal air sac at the
Avian resp
iration
caudal border of the lungs. Two groups of secondary
5
bronchi exist. The cranial group includes 4-5 medio-
There are several differences between the avian and
ventral secondary bronchi originating from medio-
mammalian respiratory systems. Unlike mammals,
ventral intrapulmonary bronchi; the caudal group
The Respiratory System
Pneumatic
Trachea
humerus air sacs
Cervical air sacs
 Intercl avicular air sac
Pneumatic
humerus air sacs
Primary bronchi
Anterior
thoracic
alrsacs
Lungs
Cervical
Posterior
air sacs
Thoracic air sacs
Abdominal air sacs
Interclavicular air sac
 Anterior thoracic air sacs
Abdominal air sacs
Posterior thoracic air sacs
Fig. 14.12. Respiratory system in birds. (Reprinted from http://www.paulnoll.com/Oregon/Birds/Avian-Respiratory.html.)
Respiratory system
431
includes 6-10 mediodorsal secondary bronchi. There
 includes the paired caudal thoracic and paired abdom-
is also a third group, which varies among species,
inal air sacs.
consisting of lateroventral secondary bronchi. The
 aeded jou op q ruonas pue Ard
 gas exchange.
Avian ventilation and gas exchange
The parabronchi, also called tertiary bronchi, origi-
nate from the secondary bronchi and are the site of
Since birds do not have a diaphragm, they have a
 gas exchange. There are two types of parabronchi. The
single thoracoabdominal cavity, which functionally
medioventral and mediodorsal secondary bronchi,
 behaves as a single compartment. During inspiration,
also called paleopulmonic parabronchi, appear as par-
the sternum moves both cranially and ventrally as
allel tubes extending from the secondary bronchi. Gas
the coracoids and furcula (wishbone) simultaneously
flow through the paleopulmonic parabronchi is unidi-
rotate forward at the shoulders (Fig. 14.13). The sternal
    o s a 
ribs also move cranially, thus laterally expanding the
of neopulmonic parabronchi through which gas flow
 sternal ribs and thoracoabdominal cavity. Both inspi-
is bidirectional. The lumen of the parabronchi is lined
ration and expiration are active processes involving
with smooth muscle surrounding the entrances to the
various muscles (Table 14.2). Therefore, in birds, the
atria that branch off and lead to infundibula, which
volume of the respiratory system is half of end-
 give rise to air capillaries. The air capillaries intermesh
inspiratory and end-expiratory volumes when relaxed.
with pulmonary blood capillaries, the site of gas
This is in contrast to mammals, where during relax-
exchange.
ation only the residual volume remains.
 During inspiration, approximately half the tidal
volume first enters the caudal air sacs and half enters
Air sacs
the cranial air sacs. As the thoracic cavity expands
during inspiration, the volume, and therefore pres-
Air sacs are poorly vascularized, thin membranous
sure, inside the air sacs decreases. This causes air to
structures connected to either the primary or second-
move caudally through the intrapulmonary bronchus.
 ary bronchi via ostia. Comprising most of the volume
About half of this air goes through the neopulmonic
of the respiratory system, they do not participate in
lung continuing directly to the caudal thoracic and
gas exchange, but function to move air through the
 abdominal air sacs. The other half goes into the medio-
lungs so that gas exchange can occur in the parabron-
dorsal secondary bronchi and into the paleopulmonic
chi. Air sacs can also extend into selected bones.
parabronchi, and then into the cranial group of air sacs
Birds possess nine air sacs; four are paired and one
(Fig. 14.14). During expiration, contraction of the expi-
is unpaired (Fig. 14.12). The cranial group of air sacs
ratory muscles decreases the volume of the thoracoab-
 consists of paired cervical and cranial thoracic air sacs
dominal cavity causing air to flow out of the caudal
and the unpaired clavicular air sac. The caudal group
thoracic and abdominal air sacs (Fig. 14.14). This gas
Vertebral ribs
(unicate
processes
Vertebral
removed)
column
Bach
Coracoid
UrCua
Vertebral ribs
Sternum
(unicate
ribs
processes
Sternum
Sternum
removed)
Sternum
ribs
Fig. 14.13. Changes in the thoracic skeleton during respiration in birds. Solid lines show thoracic position at the end of expiration; dashed 
lines show position at the end of inspiration (Reprinted from Whittow, 2000. Used by permission of the publisher.)
432
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 14.2. Muscles involved in respiration in birds.
passes through the neopulmonic lungs to the paleo-
pulmonic lungs. Simultaneously, air leaves the cranial
Inspiration
Expiration
air sacs through the medioventral secondary bronchi
 flowing into the primary bronchus and the trachea to
M. scalenus 
Mm intercostals externi of
fifth and sixth spaces
 exit the body. Therefore, during quiet breathing, all air
 Mm intercostals externi
Mm intercostals interni of
moves through the paleopulmonic parabronchi, and
(except in fifth and sixth
third to sixth spaces
air passes through the paleopulmonic parabronchi in
spaces)
 a caudal-to-cranial direction while traveling through
 M. intercostalis interni in
M. costasernalis pars minor 
 the neopulmonary parabronchi bidirectionally.
second space
Gas exchange occurs between the air capillaries and
 blood capillaries. As shown in Figure 14.15, the flow
M. costostrernalis pars major
M.obliquus externus
abdominis
of gas within the air capillaries is in the opposite direc-
tion as the flow of blood in the blood capillaries. Thus,
Mm. levatores costarum
M. obliquus internus
 this is a countercurrent system. As air moves through
abdominis
the parabronchus, CO, is added to the blood while O2
M. serratus profundus
 M. transversus abdominis
is removed from the blood. The interaction between
M. rectus abdominis
 the respiratory system and the cardiovascular system
M. serratus superficialis,
is shown in Figure 14.16.
 pars cranialis and caudalis
M. costoseptalis
凸
ntraclavicular
air sac
Abdominal
air sac
Trachea
Cranial thoracic
hapter 1
Primary
air sac
 Syrinx
Caudal thoracic
oronchuss
air sac
Segmentum accelerans
Laterobronchus
：
Intraclaviculal
air sac
Abdominal
air sac
Trachea
Cranial thoracic
air sac
Caudal thoracic
Syrinx
air sac
Fig. 14.14. Pathway of gas flow through the avian pulmonary system during inspiration and expiration. (A) Inspiration through the right 
paleopulmonic parabronchi; the neopulmonic parabronchi have been omitted for clarity. (B) Expiration. (Used with permission from John W.
Ludders and Michael Simmons, Cornell University, http://people.eku.edu/ritchisong/birdrespiration.html).
Respiratory system-
433
loss, which would result in dehydration, or too little
Parabronchus
carbon dioxide loss, thus disrupting acid-base
balance.
During the first 18 days of incubation, the prenatal
bronchu
 period, the capillaries located in the chorioallantoic
membrane, analogous to the mammalian placenta,
function in gas exchange across the shell and its asso-
idary
AE
ciated shell membranes. Such gas exchange is ample
to meet the embryonic needs through 18 days of incu-
Blood
bation. After this time, the embryo prepares for hatch-
apiliary
ing. Simple diffusion across the shell is insufficient to
 meet the oxygen needs of the embryo.
 Intrapulmonary primary bronchus
 On day 19 of incubation, the chick's beak penetrates
 the internal shell membrane, thus poking into the air
Fig. 14.15. Cross-current gas exchange in the avian lung. The
cell located at the blunt end of the egg. This process,
parabronchi lie parallel to the intrapulmonary primary bronchus.
 called internal pipping, allows the chick to begin pul-
Air capillaries branch perpendicular from the parabronchi. Gas
monary respiration using air located in the air cell.
exchange occurs between the air capillaries and blood capillaries,
each of which flows in an opposite direction. (Modified from
This time during which the embryo is breathing from
Sturkie, 1986.)
the air cell is called the paranatal period. About 6
hours after internal pipping, the chick's beak pene-
trates the eggshell, which is called external pipping.
The chick is now able to receive sufficient oxygen to
 complete the hatching process.
Pulmonary
 system
Defense mechanisms of the
 Pulmonary capillaries 
 respiratory system
 Pulmonary
Pulmonary veins
arteries
Cardiovascular
 Red blood cells (oxygenated)
While animals are grazing or playing outside, there is
System
Right side
 generally little particulate matter in the air. However,
 Left side of heart
of heart
when animals are housed in confined areas or are
Veins
Arteries
being transported, exposure to particulate matter can
Tissue capillaries
increase dramatically. Such particulate matter can
contain many harmful materials such as bacteria,
viruses, and allergens. The respiratory system con-
Blood Cells
Mitochondria
tains defense mechanisms to minimize the harmful
effects from these materials.
ADF
Fig. 14.16. Cooperation between respiratory and circulatory
systems. Oxygen diffuses from the air capillaries to the pulmonary
capillaries. It is then carried through the cardiovascular system and
Nonspecific defense mechanisms
delivered to the tissues. (Reprinted from Sturkie, 1986. Used by
permission of the publisher.)
Inhaled air can contain aerosols, airborne particles
small enough to float in the air, and unwanted gases.
 When airborne particles come in contact with the wall
of the conducting airway or a respiratory unit, they
Prehatching respiration in birds
undergo a process of deposition, which prevents them
n  e rn s e oqe q 
Bird eggs contain all the nutrients necessary for
of four ways:
 embryonic development except oxygen. Oxygen pas-
sively diffuses into the egg through the pores found
Sedimentation, which is settlement by gravity.
in the eggshell while carbon dioxide diffuses out
 tends to occur in larger airways.
 Inertial impaction occurs when
anä
 airstream
approximately 10,0o0 pores. The number of these
changes direction, especially in the nose but also
 pores is important because the shell must allow ade-
in other large airways. This happens in places
quate entry of oxygen to meet the embryo's needs
 s ar   sa a  a
while simultaneously preventing too much moisture
airborne particles fail to make the turns.
434  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Box 14.5  Chronic obstructive pulmonary
such as asbestos or fibrous dust, which, because
disease (COPD)
of their shape, avoid sedimentation and inertial
impaction. However, they are intercepted by col-
COPD is the fourth leading cause of death in
lision with walls of bronchioles, especially at
humans and also occurs in animals. It is a lung
bifurcations or if the fibers are curved.
disease that resembles human asthma. The condi-
 Diffusion is when very small aerosol particles
tion is also known as heaves, recurrent airway
reach peripheral airways and alveoli and contact
obstruction, broken wind, emphysema, chronic
the epithelial surface and then move inward in the
bronchitis, or small airway disease.
mucous membrane.
Horses are more at risk for COPD if they spend
their winters stabled and fed on hay. Small dust and
Most particles larger than 20 microns in diameter
fungal spores, particularly Micropolyspora faeni and
are filtered within the nose during breathing at rest.
 However, conditions that increase respiration rate or
Aspergillus fumigatus, enter the airways when the
horse eats, causing irritation to the lungs and
favor mouth breathing, (e.g., high ventilation rates 
and obstructive disease of the nasal airways) cause
inflammation and narrowing of the airways.
Treatment first involves lifestyle changes in order
large particles to bypass this filter. Slow deep breath-
to decrease the animal's exposure to allergens. If
ing favors the movement of particles deep into the
this proves ineffective, the animals may need to be
lung; rapid shallow breathing favors deposition in the
given corticosteroids (prednisone, dexamethasone,
larger airways.
triamcinolone) to suppress inflammation. Long-
Particles trapped in the mucous lining of the respi-
term use of corticosteroids can cause problems, par-
ratory tract are transported back toward the pharynx
ticularly heart problems, immune suppression, and
by the mucociliary escalator. The movement of the
decreased ability to heal. The animals can also be
cilia pushes the mucus back toward the mouth, thus
 given bronchodilators (clenbuterol, pirbuterol, alb-
carrying unwanted particles out of the respiratory
uterol) to help decrease smooth muscle contraction
system. Allowing a horse to lower its head facilitates
and reduce mucus production. Although oral
such movement and decreases the incidence of pneu-
administration is the easiest, the most effective
 monia by preventing the accumulation of bacteria in
the lungs.
treatment is to administer these drugs directly into
the airways. This results in minimal systemic side
effects, but it requires a special mask.
Specific defense mechanisms
 The alveolar lining contains many macrophages. Alve-
 olar macrophages are the cells within the lungs, such
to the larynx, or they can pass through the alveolar
 as phagocytose microbes and particulate matter, for
wall and pass into alveolar lymphatics.
example, inhaled dust. Alveolar macrophages begin
Alveolar macrophages may phagocytize erythro-
 as monocytes produced in the bone marrow, and then
cytes that have left the pulmonary capillaries as a
they differentiate while in transit through the blood-
result of pulmonary congestion. Such macrophages
stream where they leave the capillaries and enter the
stain posifively for iron in the altered pigment hemo-
lungs.
 siderin. These "heart failure" cells may be coughed up
Alveolar macrophages can function in two ways.
by the animal in its sputum (Box 14.5).
They can eitherbe fixed, in which case they are trapped
If the lung is injured by infectious agents, it can
within the connective tissue of the alveolar walls, or
produce cytokines and chemokines, which come from
they can be free, in which they are mobile and can
monocytes, injured epithelial or endothelial cells, or
scavenge for particles that are trapped within the sur-
other cells involved in the inflammatory response.
factant layer. These cells can leave the lungs by ascend-
These compounds are involved in the inflammatory
ing in the layer of mucus on the mucociliary escalator
response.
Respiratory system
435
Chapter summary
functions of the larynx are (1) to provide a routing
mechanism for air and food, and (2) to make
Respiratory system
sounds.
 The larynx is formed by five cartilages including
 The respiratory and circulatory systems are the
single epiglottic, thyroid, and cricoid cartilages,
 means by which nutrients are delivered to each
and paired arytenoid cartilages. The epiglottic
cell and wastes are removed.
cartilage closes the opening to the larynx during
The functions of the respiratory system include
 swallowing.
 gas exchange, regulation of blood pH, olfaction,
filtration of inspired air, production of sounds,
Trachea
and elimination of some water and heat via
expired air.
The trachea extends from the larynx to the right
3.
 Functionally, it can also be divided into two sec-
and left primary bronchi above the base of the
tions: (l) The conducting portion consists of a
heart. It consists of four layers: (1) mucosa, which
series of connected tubes that filters, warms,
is the deepest layer; (2) submucosa; (3) hyaline
 moistens, and conducts air to and from the lungs;
cartilage; and (4) the adventitia, the most super-
(2) the respiratory portion is the site of gas
ficial layer composed of areolar connective tissue.
 exchange between the air and blood, and con-
2.
The trachea contains a series of dorsally incom-
sists of the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar
 plete, "C"-shaped hyaline cartilage rings.
ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli.
Bronchi
Functional anatomy
1.
The trachea divides into the right and left primary
bronchi.
Nose
 The primary bronchi contain incomplete carti-
laginous rings and divide into the smaller sec-
The nose is the externally visible portion of the
ondary bronchi. These keep dividing into the
 respiratory system. The external nares (nostrils)
following sequence of channels: tertiary, or seg-
are the external openings to the respiratory
mental, bronchi →> bronchioles → respiratory
tract. The philtrum is the area between the lips
bronchioles → alveolar ducts → alveolar sac →
and nose.
alveoli.
2.
The nasal cavity extends from the external nares
to the caudal nares, and is separated from the
mouth by the hard and soft palates.
Lungs
3.
The nasal cavity commuricates with the parana-
7
 In general, the left and right lungs have two and
sal sinuses, and posteriorly with nasopharynx
four lobes, respectively. The horse has three right
through two openings called the internal nares
lobes.
or choanae.
2.
The cranial portion, or apex, of each lung is
4
The paranasal sinuses are air-filled cavities
located in the thoracic inlet, while the base is
within some bones of the skull. The major ones
the caudal end of the lung resting on the
are the frontal and maxillary sinuses.
diaphragm.
3
 The cardiac notch is the indentation between the
The pharynx
lobes where the heart makes contact with the
lung.
The pharynx connects the nasal cavity and mouth to
the larynx and esophagus, respectively. It directs
food and air into the digestive and respiratory
Pleural membrane
systems. The pharynx is divided into the oropharynx
The lungs are surrounded by a serous membrane
and nasopharynx, and the common caudal portion
 is the laryngopharynx.
called the pleural membrane. The narrow pari-
etal space between these two layers contains
a small amount of pleural fluid that allows the
Larynx
two layers to slide over one another during
1.
 The larynx connects the laryngopharynx with
breathing. Inflammation of the pleural mem-
the trachea and contains the vocal cords. The two
brane is called pleurisy.
(Continued)
436
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
2.
 The pressure in the intrapleural space is nega-
The pressure inside the lungs decreases as the
tive. This negative pressure inside the intrapleu-
volume of the lungs increases. Air moves into the
ral space is vital for the expansion of the lungs.
lungs as a result of a decrease in air pressure
 If an injury to the chest wall punctures the pleural
within the lungs. In most animals, inspiration is
membrane, it can result in a pneumothorax. The
an active process.
lung on that side can collapse.
2
The main muscles responsible for quiet inhala-
tion are the diaphragm and external intercostal
Alveoli
muscles. As an animal increases the force of
inspiration, additional muscles including the
 Surrounding the alveolar ducts are many alveoli
sternocleidomastoid muscles, scalene muscles,
and alveolar sacs. Alveoli walls contain predomi-
and pectoralis minor muscles are involved.
nantly type I alveolar cells, which are the main
 site of gas exchange.
Expiration
2.
Alveolar walls also contain type ll alveolar
 cells, alveolar macrophages, and fibroblasts that
 Normal expiration is a passive process involving no
produce reticular and elastic fibers. Type Il alve-
active muscle contraction.
olar cells secrete surfactant.
3.
The respiratory membrane is where O2 and CO2
Other factors involved in pulmonary ventilation
diffuse across the alveolar and capillary walls. It
 Surface tension of alveolar fluid. Alveolar fluid
is a very thin membrane about 0.5μm thick and
 consists of four layers.
coats the inside surface of the alveoli. In order to
expand the lungs, the surface tension of the alve-
olar fluid must be exceeded. This surface tension
Blood supply to the lungs
accounts for approximately two-thirds of the
elastic recoil of the lungs.
 The pulmonary and bronchial arteries supply
 Compliance of the lungs. The distensibility of the
lungs is referred to as lung compliance. High
blood to the lungs. The pulmonary artery carries
deoxygenated blood through the pulmonary
lung compliance means that the lungs will
trunk and into the right and left pulmonary
expand easily. Lung compliance is related to (1)
 arteries. Oxygenated blood returns to the left
the distensibility of lung tissue and the thoracic
atrium via the pulmonary veins.
cage and (2) alveolar surface tension. Compli-
 Bronchial arteries arise from the aorta and deliver
ance can be decreased by several factors: (1) scar
2.
oxygen to the lungs. They mostly perfuse the
tissue formed in the lungs as a result of certain
bronchi and bronchioles.
diseases, (2) pulmonary edema resulting from
the accumulation of fluid in the lungs, (3) insuf-
ficiency of surfactant, and (4) a decrease in the
Pulmonary ventilation
ability of the thoracic cage to expand.
 Airway resistance. The flow of air into the lungs
 Respiration occurs in three steps:
is inversely related to airway resistance:
Pulmonary ventilation, or breathing, is the
AP
F=
mechanical movement of air into (inspiration)
 and out (expiration) of the lungs.
where F is gas flow, Pis pressure, and R is resis-
2.
 External respiration is the exchange of gases
tance. The larger the diameter of the airway, the
between the lungs and the pulmonary capillaries.
less the resistance. Stimulation of the sympa-
3.
Internal respiration is the exchange of gases
thetic nervous system causes relaxation of these
between systemic capillaries and tissue.
walls, which allows air to more readily enter the
lungs. Diseases or injuries to the airways can
Pressure changes during respiration
increase airway resistance.
Inspiration
Lung volumes and capacities
1.
Boyle's law states that there is an inverse
Respiratory volumes
relationship between the volume and pressure of
a gas:
The respiratory capacity, or the amount of air
PV=BV2
that moves in and out of the lungs, depends on
Respiratory system
437
the strength of inspirations and expirations.
 Henry's law says that the quantity of a gas that
During normal, quiet breathing, the volume of
will dissolve in a liquid is proportional to its
air moving in and out of the lungs is called the
partial pressure and its solubility coefficient.
tidal volume (TV). Only about 70% of the tidal
Therefore, gases will dissolve in body fluids
volume reaches the lungs.
more readily if they have a greater partial pres-
2.
 The remaining portion of the air is found in the
sure and solubility coefficient. The solubility
airways including the nose, pharynx, larynx,
coefficient of CO2 is 24 times higher than that
trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal bron-
of O. Therefore, CO, dissolves in blood more
chioles. These airways are collectively called the
readily than O2. In contrast, the solubility of
anatomical dead space.
ritrogen is very low, so even though atmospheric
The minute volume (MV) is the volume of air
air has 79% N2, it has very little effect on body
inhaled and exhaled each minute, and is calcu-
functions.
lated as
External and internal respiration
MV = TV xrespiration rate.
 External respiration, also called pulmonary gas
 The respiration rate varies by species. Because of
 exchange, is the diffusion of O2 and CO, from the
the anatomical dead space, not all of the minute
alveoli to pulmonary blood. Pulmonary blood
volume is available for gas exchange.
is deoxygenated blood arriving from the right
5.
 The alveolar ventilation rate (AVR) is that portion
ventricle. Blood circulating through the body
of the tidal volume that actually reaches the site
picks up CO2 and delivers O2. As this blood
 of gas exchange:
travels through the pulmonary capillaries, CO2
diffuses into the alveoli while O2 diffuses from
AVR
=respiration rate x(TV-dead space).
the alveoli to pulmonary blood. The exchange of
(mL /min) (breaths /min)
(mL /breath)
these gases occurs independently, and passively.
2.
Araa e Aq paeiey si alreoxa sel Areud
6-
If an animal more forcefully inhales, it can
increase the volume of air entering the lungs
 thin respiratory membrane.
3.
In addition, there is a close association between
above normal tidal volume. The additional
inhaled air is called the inspiratory reserve
the amount of gas reaching the alveoli, that is,
ventilation, and the blood flow through the pul-
volume. Similarly, an animal can force more air
monary capillaries, that is, perfusion. When ven-
out of its lungs than occurs during quiet respira-
tilation becomes inadequate within alveoli, the
tion. This additional volume exhaled is called the
 Po, will decrease. This causes an autoregulatory
expiratory reserve volume. Following a forced
 expiration, the air remaining in the lungs is the
response in which pulmonary arterioles con-
strict. Conversely, if Po, increases, then the pul-
residual volume.
monary arterioles dilate allowing more blood to
flow to those areas that can maximize gas
Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
exchange. Note that this is the opposite of what
 happens in systemic circulation where a decrease
Dalton's law and Henry's law
in Po, results in vasodilation.
 Internal respiration, or systemic gas exchange,
The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
occurs at the tissue level where there is an
between alveolar air and pulmonary blood is a
exchange of O2 and CO2 between systemic
passive proces, which is explained by two gas
capillaries and tissue. O, diffuses from the capil-
laws. Dalton's law explains how gases move by
laries into the cells while CO2 diffuses from the
diffusion based on pressure differences, while
cells into the systemic capillaries.
Henry's law describes the diffusion of gas based
on its solubility.
2.
 Dalton's law states that each gas within a mixture
Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide
exerts its own pressure independent of the other
gases present. The pressure of an individual gas
Oxygen transport
is called its partial pressure, designated Px. The
total pressure of a gas mixture is calculated by
Oxygen has a low solubility coeficient, so it
summing all its partial pressures.
does not readily dissolve in blood. Instead, over
(Continued)
438  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
98% of O2 is bound to hemoglobin. The heme
CO2
+HO 
H,CO;
 portion of hemoglobin contains four atoms of
Carbon dioxide
 water
carbonic acid
iron, each able to bind to one molecule of O2.
HCO,
H+
Oxygen bound to hemoglobin forms oxyhe-
 moglobin. Hemoglobin that has released O2 is
bicarbonate
hydrogen.
called reduced hemoglobin, or deoxyhemoglo-
bin. Because it picks up a H+ ion after releasing
Hemoglobin-nitric oxide
O2, reduced hemoglobin is abbreviated as HHb:
Nitric oxide (NO), a gas, plays an important role
HHb
O2
 in vasomotor tone. It is a potent vasodilator. Pro-
duced in lung and endothelial cells, NO can be
Reduced
oxygen
carried by hemoglobin.
hemoglobin
The binding of O, to hemoglobin causes a change
1
Hb-O2
+
H+
 in the conformation of hemoglobin allowing NO
 to bind to the cysteine of hemoglobin. This pro-
oxyhemoglobin hemoglobin.
tects NO from being broken down by the Fe in
 Po, is the most important factor controlling
hemoglobin. As oxyhemoglobin releases its O2, it
how much O2 is bound to hemoglobin. When
simultaneously releases NO. NO dilates local
reduced hemoglobin is all converted to oxyhe-
blood vessels, thus further aiding in supplying
moglobin, it is fully saturated.
O, to areas in need.
3.
 When an animal is at rest, hemoglobin only
releases approximately 25% of its oxygen. It
Carbon dioxide transport
maintains a reserve that is available when
 needed. If the animal begins vigorous exercise,
 Carbon dioxide is a waste product of metabolism. It
hemoglobin is able to respond by releasing a
is transported in the blood to the lungs in three
greater amount of O2.
forms:
1.
Dissolved CO2. Accounting for the smallest
Other factors affecting the oxygen-hemoglobin
amount of transported CO2, 7-10% is carried dis-
dissociation curve
solved in the plasma.
Carbamino compounds. A
 Approximately  20%
Other  factors
 influence  oxygen-hemoglobin
of CO2 is transported in the red blood cells
dissociation.
 attached to the amino acids of globin forming
a.
 pH of the Blood. Increasing the acidity of
carbaminohemoglobin:
blood, that is, lowering the pH, lowers the
affinity of hemoglobin for O2. Therefore, as
Hb
+
CO2
 the metabolism of tissue increases, resulting
Hemoglobin  carbon dioxide
in increased lactic and carbonic acid at the
→
Hb-CO2
same Po, hemoglobin releases more O2 at
that site. This is termed the Bohr effect.
carbaminohemoglobin.
0.
 Temperature. An increase in temperature,
3.
Bicarbonate ions. Most carbon dioxide, about
 like increased acidity, is a by-product of
70%, is transported in the blood as bicarbonate
increased metabolism. Increased metabo-
ions (HCO,).
lism requires additional O2, so shifting the
dissociation curve to the right provides nec-
essary O2.
Control of respiration: neural mechanisms
BPG. An increase in the production of
BPG, formerly called diphosphoglycerate,
The medullary rhythmicity area is located in
liberates more O. Increased production
the medulla oblongata, and it controls the basic
of BPG is also associated with increased
respiration rhythm. It consists of two areas, the
metabolism.
inspiratory and expiratory areas, also called the
d.
 Pco,. A decrease in pH acts similarly to an
 dorsal respiratory group and ventral respiratory
increase in Pcoz- As shown next, CO, can
group, respectively.
react with water to form carbonic acid, which
2.
The inspiratory area sends signals to the dia-
then dissociates to form bicarbonate and
phragm via the phrenic nerves and to the
H. Thus, increased Pco, is associated with
external intercostal muscles via the intercostal
decreased pH:
nerves. These signals cause muscle contraction
Respiratory system
439
resulting in inspirations. Transection between
arterial Po increase ventilation by stimulating
 the spinal cord and the medulla oblongata stops
 peripheral chemoreceptors.
breathing.
3.
 While not active during quiet breathing. forceful
expiration requires signals from the expiratory
 Pulmonary and airway receptors
area that cause contraction of the internal inter-
Three types of sensory receptors have been identified
costals and abdominal muscles. Contraction of
 these muscles further decreases the volume of
 the thoracic cavity, thus increasing exhalation.
tors, irritant receptors, and unmyelinated C fibers.
The stretch receptors increase their firing rate as the
lungs and larger airways inflate.
Pneumotaxic and apneustic areas
 Located in the upper pons, the pneumotaxic
area, also called the pontine respiratory group,
Avian respiration
sends inhibitory signals to the inspiratory area.
 These signals primarily function to prevent over-
Anatomy of the avian respiratory system
filling of the lungs.
 The lungs do not expand, but instead, air sacs act
2.
Conversely, the apneustic area located
in
 as bellows to move air in and out of the lungs.
the lower pons sends stimulatory signals to the
2.
 Gas exchange occurs in the lungs, but not in the
inspiratory area that prolongs inspiration. The
air sacs.
pneumotaxic area can override the apneustic
3.
 Birds have no diaphragm, and the thoracic cavity
area.
is at atmospheric pressure.
4.
 Sound is generated in the syrinx, which is com-
Chemoreceptors
posed of cartilage and vibrating soft tissue.
5.
The avian lung is a rigid structure located in the
The respiratory system functions to bring in O2
thoracoabdominal cavity.
and eliminate CO, from the body. This function
6.
Tracheal volume in birds is about 4.5 times larger
 is assisted by specialized receptors called chemo-
than in mammals, creating a larger dead space.
receptors that monitor the levels of CO2, O2, and
Birds compensate by having a larger tidal volume
H, and then send such information to the respi-
 and lower respiratory frequency.
7.
The primary and secondary bronchi do not par-
ratory center.
ticipate in gas exchange. The parabronchi, also
2.
Respiratory   chemoreceptors  are  located
in
several locations. Central chemoreceptors found
called tertiary bronchi, originate from the sec-
xa s p as  ae pue 'q e
in the medulla oblongata respond to changes in
 cerebrospinal fluid Ht and Pco,. Peripheral che-
8.
There are two types of parabronchi. The paleo-
moreceptors include the aortic bodies and carotid
bodies whose removal eliminates a respiratory
extending from the secondary bronchi, and gas
 response to hypoxia.
flow is unidirectional.
 The levels of CO2 and Ht are highly correlated.
9.
There is also an irregular branching system of
Throughout the body, CO, is quickly converted
neopulmonic parabronchi through which gas
to carbonic acid catalyzed by the enzyme car-
flow is bidirectional.
bonic anhydrase. Carbonic acid dissociates into
HCO; and H*. Therefore, increases in CO, lead
Air sacs
to increases in H', while decreases in CO, lead to
decreases in H'. As a result, Pco, has a large effect
Air sacs are poorly vascularized, thin membra
on respiration, whereas Po, only affects respira-
nous structures connected to either the primary
tion if its levels change substantially.
 or secondary bronchi. They do not participate in
 Increases in arterial blood CO2, called hypercap-
 gas exchange, but function to move air through
4
nia, cause an increase in Ht. This has a large
the lungs so that gas exchange can occur in the
effect on central chemoreceptors which causes
parabronchi.
increased respiration rate, possibly causing
2.
Air sacs can also extend into selected bones.
hyperventilation. Low arterial blood CO2, called
3.
 Birds possess nine air sacs; four are paired and
hypocapnia, inhibits respiration. Large drops in
 one is unpaired.
(Continued)
440 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Avian ventilation and gas exchange
racic and abdominal air sacs. This gas passes
 through the neopulmonic lungs to the paleopul-
1.
During inspiration, approximately half of the
monic lungs. Simultaneously, air leaves the
tidal volume first enters the caudal air sacs and
cranial air sacs through the medioventral sec-
half enters the cranial air sacs. About half of this
ondary bronchi flowing into the primary bron-
air goes through the neopulmonic lung continu-
chus and the trachea to exit the body. Therefore,
 ing directly to the caudal thoracic and abdominal
all  air moves through the paleopulmonic
air sacs. The other half goes into the mediodorsal
parabronchi, and air passes through the paleo-
secondary bronchi and into the paleopulmonic
pulmonic parabronchi  in  a caudal-to-cranial
 parabronchi, and then into the cranial group of
direction while traveling through the neopulmo-
air sacs.
 nary parabronchi bidirectionally.
2.
 During expiration, contraction of the expiratory
3.
Gas exchange occurs between the air capillaries
 muscles causes air to flow out of the caudal tho-
 and blood capillaries.
Review questions and answers are available
Large Ruminants, 2nd edifion. Iowa State Press, Ames,
online.
Iowa.
IKegami, M., A.H. Jobe, J. Newnham, D.H. Polk, K.E.
Willet, and P. Sly. 1997. Repetifive prenatal glucocor-
ticoids improve lung function and decrease growth in
References
preterm lambs. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 156: 178-
184.
Constantinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
Sturkie, P.D. 1986. Avian Physiology, 4th ediftion. Springer-
Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
Verlag, New York.
Press, Ames, Iowa.
Swenson, J.J. and W.O. Reece. 1993. Duke's Physiology of
Constantinescu, G.M.
. 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small
 Domestic Animals, 1lth ediftion. Cornell University Press,
Animal Practifioners. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Cornell Uriversity, Ifhaca, New York.
Constantinescu,
G.M.
and IA. Constanfinescu.
2004.
Whittow, G.C. 2000. Sturkie's Avian Physiology, 5th edition.
Clinical Dissection Guide for Large Animals, Horse and
Academic Press, San Diego, California.
hapter 1
15
Immul
Contents
Introduction
441
Cell-Mediated Immunity
451
Innate or Nonspecific Defenses
442
Avian versus Mammalian Systems
453
Specific Immunity
449
Lymphatic System
454
Antibody Structure and Function
450
Chapter Summary
455
B Cell Selection and Antibody Secretion
451
Introduction
chasing your brother. He manages to soak the cut with
dirty bacterial-filled water. However, fortunately for
 The capacity of animals to run from or disable poten-
him, he has received a good supply of antibodies from
tial predators is the essence of survival. Perhaps less
his mother's colostrum. This means that he likely has
 apparent is the need to protect cells and tissues from
specific antibodies in his bloodstream from his mother.
attack by harmful agents—parasites, bacterial patho-
 This allows his fledgling immune system to recognize
gens, toxins, or cells that have become cancerous.
and ultimately kill bacteria present in the dirty water.
15
Some everyday examples help us understand phys-
This would be an example of specific but passive immu-
 nity. As the puppy grows and is exposed to various
iological processes involved in protection of animals
from these various agents. Let's suppose that your
 materials in his environment he will develop his own
puppy is playing in the yard, and he is splashed by
complement of specific antibodies and the cells neces-
your little brother as your brother rides his bicycle
 sary to regenerate additional supplies of specific anti-
through a puddle of debris from the gutter. Secretions
bodies. Thus, defense mechanisms are divided into
from the puppy's eyes and mucus membranes of his
nonspecific and specific divisions. The immune system
nostrils act to flush material away to prevent the
primarily concerns specific protection.
 chance of infection. Similarly, his hair covering, eye-
The basis for specific immunity arose from observa-
lashes, and thick skin prevent bacteria and debris from
tions in the late 1800s, when scientists discovered that
the dirty water from gaining entrance. Even sebaceous
animals that had survived a bacterial infection had
secretions of his skin or ear canals can produce condi-
protective agents in their blood (now known to be
tions that limit the potential growth of harmful bacte-
immunoglobulins or antibodies) that defended the
ria. These are all examples of nonspecific defenses.
 animal. It was also shown that if antibody-containing
Let's suppose that your puppy simultaneously steps
serum from the surviving animals was given to
on a broken bottle as he runs through the puddle
 animals that had not been exposed to the pathogen,
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
441
442
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
these animals were also protected against attack. It
was initially believed that production of antibodies
was the only critical requirement for protection. How-
Innate
Humoral Immunity
Protection
Cell-Mediated Immunity
 ever, in cases where transfer of antibody-containing
Bcell selection
serum failed to provide protection, transfer of the
Skin
T cell selection
Differentiation
Secretions
Differentiation
donor's white blood cells often did provide protec-
Memory cells
Saliva
T cell activation
 Antibody production
tion. As experiments became more elaborate, it became
Acids
Specific types of T cells
 clear that immunity involved both circulating agents
Phagocytes
as well as populations of white blood cells or leuko-
cytes. Thus, the two overlapping arms of specific
defense are humoral immunity (meaning blood derived)
Fg. 15.1. Overview of defense mechanisms. Nonspecific or innate
and cell-mediated immunity (Rodriguez et al., 2012).
protection provides a first line of defense. The barrier derived from
One of the major types of white blood cells includes
the epidermis of the skin or the stratified squamous epithelium of
 body openings and their secretions are a first line of protection.
the lymphocytes. Furthermore, there are two broad
General effects of phagocytes, natural killer T cells, and 
classes of lymphocytes. When they are activated, B
antimicrobial proteins are also important. Humoral immunity
lymphocytes, usually simply called B cells, are induced
involves activation of clones of B lymphocytes to produce memory
to divide to generate clones of cells. You may have
B cells and daughter B cells that differentiate into plasma cells that
read or heard of polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies
synthesize and secrete large amounts of antibodies. Cell-mediated 
immunity depends on selection of clones of T lymphocytes by the
being used in scientific experiments or more recently
action of antigen-presenting cells which stimulate proliferation of 
in some cancer treatments (Herceptin). Regardless,
the T' cells. Subtypes of T' cells (helper, cytoxic, and suppressor T
some of these clonal cells are retained in the body as
cells) fine-tune cell-mediated immunity.
 memory B cells. Other B cells differentiate into plasma
cells that synthesize and secrete large quantities of anti-
bodies. The presence of the memory B cells explains
Practically speaking, the actions of the two divi-
the marked increase in antibody concentration (titer)
sions of the immune system are closely interwoven.
in the blood when animals are exposed to the same
 pathogen or antigen a second time. Essentially, the
But generally, humoral immunity is most effective
pieces required for more antibody production are
against bacteria and their toxins or free viruses because
antibody binding can directly inactivate these attack-
already in place. Cell-mediated immunity depends on
ers for example, causing precipitation or agglutina-
T lymphocytes, which include several subclasses of
cells (helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells, and suppressor
tion, or masking surfaces, to make them susceptible to
destruction by phagocytic cells or complement acti-
T cells). Other cells critical to functioning of both
vation. Cell-mediated immunity is a better weapon
branches of the immune system include the antigen-
against cellular targets; examples include cells that
presenting cells (fixed and wandering macrophages),
have been infected by viruses or parasites, or perhaps
neutrophils, and dendritic cells. For the most part,
these various classes of cells have been identified
cancer cells.
 In subsequent sections we will consider some of
CT
based on their actions and on the fact that the cells
these elements of the immune system in more detail.
express various classes of antigens or markers on their
But let's begin by considering defense attributes of the
cell surfaces. When specific antibodies against these
 antigens are available, it allows researchers and clini-
cians to quantify and classify the various groups of
Defense of the internal environment centers on three
main functions:
white blood cells. Because these cells often circulate in
the bloodstream or appear in secretions, it has been
destruction or neutralization of bacterial, viral, or
possible to use these markers and flow cytometry
parasitic pathogens
methods to identify and isolate populations of cells
destruction of aged or damaged ; that is, consider
with specific marker characteristics. These techniques,
the finite life of red blood cells
along with cell culture and utilization of transgenic
surveillance to detect and eliminate abnormal,
mouse models, have led to an explosion in detailed
 cancerous, or virally infected cells (Fig. 15.1).
information about immune responsiveness in general
and functional attributes of the classes of leukocytes
in particular. The point is that understanding of immu-
Innate or nonspecific defenses
 nity, disease interactions, and physiology is growing
 exponentially. Our purpose is to provide an overview
As the name suggests, nonspecific defenses do not
and basic ideas, but, as with other topics covered in
distinguish one threat from another. The protection
this text, please be aware of the rate at which current
that is afforded is the same no matter what the circum-
research is expanding all aspects of immunology.
stances. These measures include physical barriers,
Immunity  443
phagocytic cells, complement, general inflammatory
lium in the bladder. Regardless, this periodic stretch
response, and fever The first line of defense against
allows the keratin to spread over the surface to form
 pathogens at first blush seems minor, but in reality, the
 a bactericidal barrier. With milking, some of the keratin.
protective properties of the skin and the mucous
is flushed away during the periodic opening and
membranes are substantial. Consider the physical
closing of the teat canal, but fortunately it is constantly
barrier that intact skin provides and the problems that
being renewed by the epithelium (Capuco et al., 1990).
rapidly occur if there are cuts or open wounds. The
 The keratin itself has antibacterial agents that inhibit
stratified nature of the skin epithelium, presence of
the growth of pathogens. Some researchers also
desmosomes to link the cells together, keratinized
 SUuggest that the minute areas of secretory tissue in the
 surface, and secretions of sebaceous and sweat glands
area of Furstenberg's rosette (near the opening of the
are highly protective. The importance of lanolin on the
teat cistern) secrete protein(s) with bactericidal effects,
wool of sheep to provide protection from the elements
but others suggest the material is lipid-like and made
is another example. Extend this to many animals, and
by the epithelial cells secreting the keratin. Certainly.
the added physical protection provided by fur, hair, or
 the epithelial cells of the streak canal are constantly
wool becomes apparent. The acidity of skin secretions
being renewed based on the appearance of mitotic
(pH 3 to 5) also inhibits bacterial growth. Move to the
cells in the basal layers of the epithelium (stratum
internal passageways of the respiratory, digestive, and
 germinativum). Passage of cannula through the teat
urinary tracts. As you should recall, the more exterior
 canal or use of teat dilators scrapes away the keratin
portions of these tracts (oral cavity, esophagus, rectum,
and can traumatize the epithelium. Experimentally,
etc.) are also covered by stratified squamous epithelial
 resistance to mastitis is markedly reduced if the keratin
 cells. In more internal regions, the epithelium is typi-
layer is removed. Studies in which pathogens were
cally thinner and simple, but the cells are linked by
inoculated 3mm into the streak canal caused infec-
tight junctions that increase the barrier function of the
tions in about one-third of treated glands. Inoculations
epithelium. In addition, specialized glands (globlet
4mm into the streak canal increased infection rates
 cells and various multicellular glands) provide mucus
further, and inoculations 5mm into the streak canal
and specific proteins that act to coat and protect the
nearly always caused infection. This confirms the
internal surface. Saliva and lacrimal fluids of the eye
significance of this barrier function (Nickerson and
contain the protein lysozyme and enzymes that can
 Pankey, 1983). Since pathogens, which cause mastitis,
attack bacteria. In mammary secretions produced
are not motile, to gain entrance into the parenchymal
during the nonlactating or dry period, accumulation
tissue they must be moved by physical forces from the
of the protein lactoferrin binds iron, which acts to
Outside of the teat, through the streak canal, teat and
impair growth of bacterial cells. The stomach mucosa,
gland cistern, and larger ducts, and to the alveoli.
with secretion of HCL and peptidases, also kills many
Other than the period around milking, the keratin of
ingested microorganisms.
the streak canal makes an effective barrier. However,
As a specific agricultural example, consider the
animals with inherently thin keratin or animals with
importance of the epithelial layer of the teat end of the
damaged teat areas are susceptible to local coloniza-
dairy cow in protection of the internal mammary
 tion with microbes and are therefore at greater risk to
15
gland from mastitis (inflammation of the mammary
infection. During milking itself, retrograde movement
gland caused by invading microorganisms). The teat
 of milk due to vacuum fluctuations or vacuum slips
of the ruminant has a single opening called the streak
with leakage of air around the teat cups can allow
canal that leads directly into a space within the teat
bacteria-laden droplets to pass the streak canal.
called the teat cistern (see Chapter 18). This means that
During machine milking, there are certainly dra-
the structure of the streak canal is critical as the
matic effects on the teat and teat end. Given the rate
primary defensive barrier against mastitis. The lowest
of milk flow, 7-8m/s, it is reasonable to expect that
2 cm of the streak canal is especially important because
resulting shear forces might remove some of the pro
of the capacity of tissues in this region to act as a
tective keratin. It is also probable that some milk con-
barrier to minimize milk leakage or entrance of envi-
stituents are absorbed into the keratin during the time
 ronmental agents. Intuitively, the diameter of the
of milking or from milk droplets remaining after
streak canal is positively related to the rate of milk
milking. If milking removes substantial amounts of
flow, but cows with the best balance of acceptable
the keratin and if renewal is delayed or changes in
rates of milk flow and protection from bacterial inva-
composition favor the formation of bacterial colonies
sion have the greatest longevity in the herd. Because
 or adherence, this could have marked effects on the
the teat canal is lined with longitudinal folds, dilation
 streak canal as the primary defense against mastitis.
of the streak canal during milking causes the epithelial
Phagocytes are cells that engulf pathogens and cell
lining to become flattened and thin during milking.
debris. These include neutrophils and eosinophils that
This is analogous to the changes in transitional epithe-
normally circulate in the blood and macrophages that
 444Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
typically reside within tissues. Some of these macro-
Bacterial
phages are considered fixed because they are perma-
hflammation
cells
nent residents of a tissue. Examples include the
overview
Epithelial
barrier
Kupffer cells of the liver or the star-shaped dendritic
cells of the skin. Other "free" macrophages are more
mobile and can respond to problems throughout the
7
Bacterial invasion or
body or act to patrol local tissue areas. An example of
tissue damage
the latter is the alveolar macrophages of the lung.
+
which patrol the internal surface of the alveoli. Mono-
2
Mast cell
cytes in the bloodstream are converted into macro-
release of histamine
phages when they exit the circulation.
 Macrophages (monocytes) and microphages (neu-
 Increased endothelia
trophils, eosinophils) share the ability to migrate and
Local vasodilation
permeability
squeeze between the endothelial cells of capillaries by
a process called diapedesis. This process is typically
More blood flow at site
initiated by injury to the endothelial cells and/or
Increased fluid
of injury
accumulation
appearance of factors that act as attractants for the
cells. This is called chemotaxis. The process begins
with adhesion followed by the leukocytes forming a
 sort of pavement of cells lined up along the periphery
of the  capillary  With  increased permeability
or
 damage, there is then an often rapid diapedesis of the
Swelling and redness
Heat and pain
cells between the endothelial cells to the region where
the bacterial cells or there toxins are located. Figure
15.2 illustrates general events that occur with
an
Appearance of plasma
 Recruitment of phagocytic
inflammatory response. Many of these effects are
proteins in tissue
cells
(neutrophils, macrophages)
mediated by the release of chemical compounds pro-
duced by injured cells, proteins that appear in exu-
Cellular
secretions
dates from the circulation, as well as molecules
released by stimulated platelets and phagocytes. The
 local response to infection is called inflammation but
 depending on the particular circumstances, the physi-
Defense response,
ological response can become more widespread. Fever,
tissue repair
systemic response (e.g, fever)
a higher-than-normal body temperature, occurs in
response to some microorganisms and their toxins.
Fg. 15.2. Bacterial attack and inflammation response. Following 
For example, in dairy cattle, mastitis caused by Staphy-
penetration of the epithelial barrier by bacteria damage to tissues or
release of bacterial products, the liberation of histamine, complement,
CT
titis caused by Escherichia coli is characteristically
and other molecules initiates a cascade of responses. Increased 
vasodilation, capillary permeability, and appearance of substances
associated with marked systemic effects well beyond
chemotactic to phagocytes produce rapid migration of these cells to
 appearance of abnormal milk and heat and redness of
the region. The four primary signs of acute inflammation are heat,
the udder. Fever, lethargy, absence of appetite, and
redness, pain, and swelling.
markedly reduced milk production  are common.
Neither is it uncommon for systemic problems to
become so severe that physiological systems can fail
When infection is severe, responses can be dramatic.
and death occurs. With marked activation of leuko-
 The creamy or yellowish pus that fills infected tissue
areas is a mixture of dead cells, tissue debris, as well
 gens secreted by the leukocytes and toxins from the
 as dead or dying microorganisms. If repair mecha-
microorganisms act to reset the hypothalamic neurons
nisms do not clear the area of debris, these materials
responsible for homeostatic control of body tempera-
can become walled off by layers of collagen fibers and
ture. Prolonged high fevers are dangerous because
other extracellular matrix proteins, essentially scar
excess heat denatures enzymes. However, milder
tissue. This is a protective mechanism (e.g., isolation
fever is beneficial because metabolic rates of tissues
of the affected area), but this can also lead to creation
are increased, allowing for more rapid repair and
of an abscess. In these cases, it is often necessary to
healing. Interestingly, while fever is known to occur in
surgically drain the material before healing can take
virtually all mammals, responses in birds are poorly
 place. In some particularly difficult infections, bacte-
understood (Gray et al., 2012)
rial cells can be engulfed by macrophages but not
Immunity
445
destroyed. The macrophages with their now protected
B0x 15.1
 Protective secretions
residents become encased in clusters or granulomas.
Since the bacteria are not actually destroyed, if the
As mentioned in an earlier chapter, it is believed
 granulomas are disrupted, an activated infection can
that secretions from skin glands evolved to provide
resurface. This explains why the tuberculosis bacilli
moisture and protection (antimicrobial agents) for
which are resistant to digestion by macrophages and
the parchment-like shelled eggs laid by mammalian
therefore protected from antibiotic treatment, can be
ancestors. Evolutionary pressure likely promoted
so difficult to treat. It is believed that some mastitis-
the incorporation of molecules such as lysozyme or
causing organisms behave in an analogous manner.
iron-binding lactoferrin into these secretions. Cer-
 tainly, the capacity to prevent desiccation of the eggs
 areas (likely walled off by connective tissue elements)
and protection from microbial attack would have
so that they are safe from destruction. This could
been highly beneficial. The importance of lactoferrin
explain why some cases of clinical mastitis are repeat-
in particular has come full circle with the production
 edly caused by the same organism as well as reoccur-
of human-specific lactoferrin in milk of transgenic
ring cases of subclinical mastitis.
animals as well as the appearance of milk-extracted
Some of the important substances involved in
lactoferrin in products such as infant formula, human
inflammation and their effects are summarized in
and pet foods, skin care products, toothpaste, and
Table 15.1. Before we move to specific immunity, let's
mouthwash (Stelwagen et al., 2008; Brock, 2012).
consider some of the effects of these molecules and
related molecules involved  in inflammation  and
chemical defenses. Some tissue proteins can inhibit or
slow bacterial cell growth. For example, lactoferrin is
a protein that is produced in secretions of the nonlac-
Releas
tating mammary gland, where it accumulates to a
high concentration. This is important because is acts
Kallikrein
to bind iron that is needed for bacterial cell growth
(Brock, 2012). Histamine, released by local mast cells
at the site of an attack, increases capillary permeability
as well as vasodilation so that blood flow is increased.
Kininogens
Kinins
Neutrophils
Mast cells also produce molecules that induce chemo-
taxis, which act as signals to induce the migration of
 phagocytic cells. Moreover, the binding of these agents 
to receptors on the cell surface of macrophages
 increases Caf+ flow into the cells. The increase in Ca+
Promotes
 Simulates
Activation of
Acts as
vasodilation
complement
pain 
activates contractile elements in the cells that allow
chemotaxins
permeability
receptors
 ameba-like movement of the cells along the gradient
of chemotactic signals (Box 15.1).
Fg. 15.3. Role of kallikrein in inflammation. Activated neutrophils
15
As illustrated in Figure 15.3, kallikrein secreted
release kallikrein which acts enzymatically on kininogens to produce
from phagocytes cleaves inactive kininogens produced
kinins. These kinins promote multiple reactions that ultimately aid 
Q
by the liver. These molecules appear in circulation and
the body to fight inflammation.
Table 15.1.
Agents involved in inflammation.
Agent
Source
Reaction
Histamine
Basophils and mast cells; released after injury, response
Vasodilation of arterioles increased permeability
to microorganisms or secretions from neutrophils
 Prostaglandins
 From arachidonic acid present in cell membranes of 
Stimulation of endothelial cells and leukocytes to
neutrophils, platelets, and so on
secrete inflammatory modulators
Kinins
Kininogens into interstitial fluid cleaved by kallikrein to
 Effects similar to histamine but also chemotaxis
produce active peptide
Complement
System of ~20 plasma proteins
When activated mechanism to inactivate bacteria
and target foreign debris for removal
Cyokines
Circulation, lymphocytes, macrophages, and other
Examples include interferons, interleukins, and 
immune cells
 others all act to regulate immune function
446  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
diffuse into inflamed areas because of increased vaso-
The activation of cytokine-producing cells triggers
dilation, where they are converted into active kinins.
them to synthesize and secrete their particular class of
 Kinins subsequently stimulate several steps in com-
cytokines. The cytokines then bind to specific cytokine
plement activation, reinforce vascular bed changes
receptors on other cells of the immune system and
initiated by histamine release, activate pain receptors,
influence their activity in some manner. Actions of
and serve as chemotactic agents to produce even more
cytokines are described as multifaceted, redundant,
leukocyte migration and more kinin production in
and pleiotropic. The idea is that a specific cytokine is
a posifive-feedback pattern of action. This enhances
likely to impact multiple target cells, not just one type
the opportunity to defeat the offending agent. These
of cell. In addition, some cytokines are antagonistic so
inflammatory reactions can be likened to an alarm
response as a large mixture of chemicals is released
another cytokine inhibits the same function. In other
into the extracellular fluids.
cases, cytokines act synergistically to produce a greater
Macrophages are especially important because these
effect than either would have alone. These features
cells (along with certain epithelial cells in mucosal
 mean that there are enormous opporfunities for control
membranes) express proteins on their surface called
 and regulation of immune responses. Most of the
Toll-like receptors (TLR). The receptors were named
cytokines act on leukocytes or the endothelial cells
because they have a similar structure to a protein tran-
to affect inflammatory responses. But there is also
scribed by the Toll gene in drosophila. They are also
overlap between classic hormones and cytokine sig-
characterized as pattern recognition receptors and are
naling pathways. For example, leukocytes and macro-
appreciated for their capacity to recognize or bind
phages express prolactin receptors. It seems likely
molecules that are present on many pathogens but
that, in addition to its well-characterized actions in
distinct from host surface molecules. These groupings
 mammary development and reproduction, prolactin
of molecules are called pathogen-associated molec-
also acts as a cytokine in the immune system. Leptin,
ular patterns or PAMPs. The TLRs combined with
the hormone produced by adipocytes, is also now
  r r d a  r
recognized for its impacts on the immune system
receptors with similar attributes based on the fact that
(Procaccini et al., 2012). Some features of a few selected
 all of its members share the Toll-ll-receptor structural
 cytokines are described below.
domain.
Tumor necrosis factor c (TNFc) is the major cyto-
Cytokine is a general term given to the chemical
kine involved in acute inflammation. It is primarily
 messengers that regulate cells involved in immune
 synthesized by monocytes, macrophages, and helper
responses. However, based on genetic linkages and
T cells. When produced in very large amounts, it is
structural similarities, many hormones and growth
believed to be the cause of systemic shock in severe
factors can be classified as cytokines. Interleukins
reactions. It acts on the endothelial cells to stimulate
are a subclass of cytokines that were first identified
 inflammation and blood clotting. It also promotes
because they are secreted by leukocytes. At least 36
endothelial cells to secrete selectins (adhesion mole-
 distinct interleukins are known. Most are produced by
cules) that are important for diapedesis of leukocytes.
CT.
helper T lymphocytes, which are identified from their
 Furthermore, it triggers macrophages and endothelial
121
 actions and expression of specific cell surface markers,
cells to secrete chemokines. Chemokines also impact
+
 in particular CD4. The interleukins are especially sig-
 diapedesis and chemotaxis, and additionally promote
 nificant in the induction and differentiation of T cells,
macrophages to secrete interleukins (see later discus-
B cells, and other hematopoietic cells. It is telling that
sion). Finally, TNFc is directly cytotoxic for some
interleukins are also detected in other nonimmune
 tumor cells, thus explaining its name.
tissues, and receptors for these proteins are widely
 The interleukins include a very large family of struc-
 distributed. Thus, roles for these powerful signaling
turally similar cytokines. Interleukin 1 (IL-i) is espe-
molecules will certainly expand in the future.
cially significant. It has actions functionally similar to
At the present time, 13 distinct TLRs have been
those of TNFo (an example of some of the redundan-
identified. Each of the receptors recognizes a particu-
cies among cytokines). Common effects include induc-
lar class of microbes based on the components of the
tion of fever and sleep and stimulation of collagen
bacterial cell wall. Activation of the TLR in turn trig-
 synthesis as well as collagenase needed for tissue
 gers the release of cytokines. Most cytokines are low
repair and remodeling. It also stimulates T and B lym-
 molecular weight, soluble proteins produced following
phocytes to proliferate. IL-1 is also produced by mono
activation of a "sensing" cell (e.g., the macrophages
cytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and a variety of
with activated TLR as described earlier) (Rawlings
other cells in the body.
et al., 2012).
Other interleukins include IL-2 that is secreted pri-
Cytokines are produced by nearly all cells involved
marily by helper T cells to stimulate the proliferation
in immunity, but the T cells are especially important.
of helper T cells and activate the natural killer T cells.
Immunity 447
It is also called T cell growth factor. IL-3 promotes
A final group of cytokines to introduce are the inter-
hemopoiesis to generate precursors of lymphocytes
ferons. As the name suggests, these molecules are
and mast cells. IL-4, also produced by the helper T
       p
cells, stimulates B cells and enhances antibody secre-
something. In this case, it is the replication of viruses.
tion by active plasma cells, especially secretion of IgE.
 Like other cytokines, there are multiple types of inter-
IL-5 behaves in a similar fashion but is more likely to
ferons (α, β, and y). In short, as illustrated in Figure
promote plasma cells to secrete IgA-type antibodies.
15.4, interferons provide some resistance to viral infec-
It also acts as a chemoattractant for eosinophils. IL-6
tions by interfering with the replication of the virus in
has wide-ranging effects, including promotion of dif-
 neighboring potential host cells. In addition, interfer-
ferentiation of B cells into plasma cells and stimulation
ons enhance the phagocytic activity of macrophages
of the liver to secrete a mannose-binding protein that
 and stimulate the secretion of antibodies by plasma
 triggers complement protein binding to the surface of
 cells. Furthermore, these molecules markedly improve
microorganisms that have mannose-containing poly-
the function of natural killer and cytotoxic T cells,
saccharides in their cell walls. IL-8 promotes angio-
which are important in the destruction of virus-
 genesis, an action that is clearly important in repair of 
infected and cancerous cells.
tissue damage. IL-10 acts to dlampen or turn down
Figure 15.5 provides an overview of an essential
immune responses, so it is important in overall regula-
 aspect of inflammation, the migration of phagocytes
tion of immune function.
 to the affected area. In this example, the rapid response
Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) is also a
of polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytes into the
suppressor of immune responses by its capacity to
mammary gland following an experimental insult
inhibit the proliferation and function of T cells and
(i.e., intramammary infusion of endotoxin) is shown.
proliferation of B cells. Along with the other cytokines
Since the site of the inflammation is deep within
released, TGF-β is an important participant because
the areas of the mammary gland that store milk, the
of its role in several stages of wound healing. Vas-
phagocytes must move out of the capillaries (between
cular endothelial cells are early responders. There is
the endothelial cells) but additionally pass the base-
enhanced secretion of adhesion molecules (VCAM-1,
ment membrane and between the epithelial cells that
ELAM-1, ICAM-l) in the area of the endothelial
 compose the outer structure of the mammary alveoli.
cells that gives a foundation for the anchoring of
 In these cases, the phagocytes have responded to che-
circulating leukocytes that express receptors (integ-
moattractant agents in milk that have diffused into
rins, selectins, etc.) to recognize these adhesion factors
surrounding interstitial fluids and local capillary beds.
and allow accumulation of the leukocytes, chemo-
As an example, the somatic cell count of raw milk
tactic attraction, and diapedesis. Indeed, TGF-β is a
 is the most common dairy producer-related method to
 potent chemoattractant in its own right. Because of its
effects on secretion of extracellular matrix proteins
by stromal cells (fibroblasts), it also promotes tissue
repair. TGF-β is produced by T lymphocytes, macro-
Cell
Virus enters cell
 invaded by
phages, and other stromal tissue cells and appears in
①
virus
15
circulation in a latent form that is activated by tissue
Cell releases interferon
proteases.
 Interferon bind s
The colony-stimulating factors (CSF) are an addi-
tional group of proteins that impact immune function
rece ptors on
More cells 
Uninfe cte d cells.
 invaded by
by their ability to induce production of colonies of the
virus
different leukocyte types in the bone marrow. Some
②
BUT
 These cells have 
specific CSF members include granulocyte macro-
Uninfected cells
been acted upon 
phage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granulocyte
 by interferon.
produce ina ctive
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and macrophage
enzymes capable
of breaking down
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Aside from effects
viral mRNA.
 On proliferation, the CSFs also influence leukocyte
 Virus-blocking enzymes
function. For example, when GM-CSF binds to recep-
 are activated and
virus is unable to replicate.
tors on neutrophils, eosinophils, or monocytes, it acti-
vates the cells and also enhances survival of the cells.
Fg. 15.4. Action of interferon. In step 1, a cell is invaded by a
 GM-CSF increases the capacity of these phagocytes to
virus. In response the infected cell produces and secretes interferon.
form pavements involved in diapedesis between
The interferon binds to receptors on neighboring cells and induces 
the cells to produce inactive enzymes capable of breaking down
endothelial cells and improves the ability of the cells
viral mRNA. In step 2, a cell previously impacted by interferon is
to destroy engulfed bacterial cells. CSFs are produced
subsequently invaded by the virus. The virus blocking enzymes are
mostly by T cells and macrophages.
activated, and viral replication in this cell is prevented.
448
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
30
1S
20
10
S
(PMN)
11
122
24
36
48
60
72
¥84
96
Capillary
A
Hours posttreatment
12
yield
Fig. 15.5. Leukocyte (PMN) response in the mammary gland.
Chemotaxis causes PMNs to migrate from the capillaries and form a
pavement along the basement membrane of the infected alveoli (A).
Some groups of epithelial cells become damaged by the toxins or
PMN activity and are sloughed into the alveolar spaces (damaged
0
12
24
364860728496
cells indicated by the broken cell membranes). Neutrophils and 
macrophages accumulate (B) where they engulf bacterial cells (C)
B
Hours posttreatment
and destroy them along with cell debris (Nickerson and Heald,
1981; Capuco et al., 1986).
Fig. 15.6. Cell and milk production responses in cows. Changes in 
so u! (laued ramo) uonpoid yu pue (aued jaddn) 
given an intramammary infusion of bacterial endotoxin are shown.
 evaluate milk quality and udder health status of indi-
Note the marked increased and corresponding decrease in
vidual lactating cows. Leukocytes and a small percent-
mammary function. Adapted from McFadden et al. (1988).
age of epithelial cells normally occur in milk. This
combination of cells is referred to the milk somatic cell 
collected milk samples by approved bacteriological
count (MSCC). The term somatic, which means body,
methods. Figure 15.6 shows the marked ability of
alludes to the fact that these are normal body-derived
PMN to respond to an intramammary signal. In this
cells. Most (-98%) of the cells are leukocytes, and most
case, the mammary gland of the cow was infused
of these are neutrophils, sometimes called PMN leu-
with purified endotoxin diluted in sterile physiologi-
 kocytes. This descriptive term is a reference to the
cal saline. By the time of the next milking, the MSCC
lobed nucleus of these cells. Milk from uninfected
 had increased -30-fold, and there was a correspond-
CT
cows typically contains fewer than 200,000 cells per
ing sharp decrease in milk production. However, after
mL, and it is not uncommon to find uninfected cows
several days, the cell response and milk production
with MSCC of 50,000 cells or fewer. Milk samples with
 returned to normal. This is an experimental situation,
values more than 400,000 cells per mL are very likely
 but it certainly demonstrates the dramatic response that
from cows with inflammation most likely caused by
 phagocytic cells can make in response to stimulation.
mastitis-producing organisms. These leukocytes enter
 Fortunately, most tissue regions have macrophages
the milk as a consequence of homing to the mammary
that are residents. For example, with a skin break,
gland from the bloodstream in response to chemicals
 these resident macrophages can begin phagocytizing
released directly by bacterial cells or materials released
microorganisms (assuming they are recognized as
 by injured mammary cells. These chemicals induce
invaders) almost immediately. However, the number
chemotaxis that initially recruits neutrophils and
 of cells is limited so that a full-blown response depends
thereafter macrophages (monocytes) into the udder.
on chemotaxis to recruit additional phagocytes (more
Since an increase in MSCC is closely correlated with
 macrophages and neutrophils). It is important, of
intramammary infection, the MSCC is measured for
course, that these cells express the ability to recognize
 milk samples collected as a part of routine monitoring
foreign material so that normal cells are not harmed.
 of milk composition in many dairy herds. However, it
 The tagging of materials to be engulfed is complex,
is important to remember that, strictly speaking.
but when it comes to bacterial cells, the complement
bacteria-induced mastitis can only be confirmed by
system is especially important. This is because the
the isolation of pathogeric organisms in aseptically
effects of activated complement can be very potent,
Immunity
449
but secondly, the presence of specific antibodies on the
Specific immunity
surface of the bacterial cells (or other materials) acts
to mark these invaders for destruction by phagocytes
 Despite the impressive benefits of nonspecific defenses,
as well as attack by complement proteins.
this alone is not sufficient. Hallmarks of both cellular
The complement system, usually simply called
and humoral immunity include (1) specificity, (2)
complement, is a complex of at least 20 proteins
systemic rather than local responses, and (3) evidence
present in the circulation (originally produced by the
of memory. Specificity indicates that the immune
liver). These proteins provide an important mecha-
response is directed at a unique antigen. Systemic
nism for the destruction of foreign substances because,
responsiveness refers to the notion that a response to
when activated, they greatly enhance the inflamma-
an attack can be mounted regardless of the point of
tory response, but, even more impressively, they can
entry. Memory indicates that the immune system is
stimulate the direct destruction of bacteria and some
 better prepared with a faster response when exposure
other cells by causing the cells to rupture. Aside from
to an antigen occurs a second time. This is the idea
direct effects on bacterial cells, activated complement
behind vaccinations. A vaccination is essentially the
 also enhances inflammation in several ways:
induction of a specific immune response and creation
stimulates release of histamine from mast cells
 of immunological memory as a result of a planned
 promotes vasodilation and thereby increased vas-
exposure to the antigen in a manner that does not
cular permeability
cause illness. For example, immunizafion with cell
activates kinins
wall components or killed bacterial cells (incapable of
coats the surface of microorganisms and act as
causing disease) can nonetheless induce an immune
opsonizing agents.
 response because of the foreign proteins or polysac-
 Thus, while complement is really nonspecific, it clearly
charides present in these preparations. If the animal is
 then exposed to live microorganisms, the animal can
enhances or "complements" the immune response,
respond more quickly so that the chance of exhibiting
hence the name. The effects of complement on bacte-
 the disease is reduced or symptoms are milder and
rial cells are illustrated in Figure 15.7.
less severe compared with nonimmunized animals.
 Let's first consider humoral or antibody-mediated
Usual Pathway
Altemate Pathway
immunity. However, it is worth remembering that
Bacterial surface sugars
 the two divisions of the immune system (humoral
Antigen-antibody
combined with
and cell-mediated) do not function independently
ompement c1, c2, and c4
factors B, D, and P
but rather function together to enhance protection. As
Figure 15.8 shows, it is also important to realize that
immunity can be either passive or active. Clearly, the
Opsonization
 protection provided to the newborn calf (or puppy in
Inflammation
Bacterial cell coated get
our earlier example) by suckling colostrum from its
Histamine relkase, chemotactic
attraction of eukocytes
enhanced phagocytosis
MAC Attack
Acquired
2
Holk into
immunity
bacterial cell
walland cell
upture
Naturally
Artificially
 acquired
acquired
Fig. 15.7. Complement activation. In the classic activation 
pathway the binding of antibody to bacterial antigens induces
complex formation with complement proteins C1, C2, and C4.
Alternatively, plasma proteins (factors B, D, and P) can bind with
Active
Passive
Active
Passive
surface polysaccharides in the cell wall of some bacteria and fungi.
 Regardless of the pathway, both converge with the activation of
Contact
Antibodies
Vaccination
Injection 
complement protein C3. This activation produces a cleavage
with
with dead or
with
reaction to yield C3a and C3b. When C3b binds to the bacterial
 pathogen
mother
 attenuated
Immune
cell surface, it initiates the recruitment of complement proteins 
 microorganism
 serum 
C5b, C6, C7, C8, and C9 to poduce the membrane attack complex
(MAC). This complex penetrates the cell wall to create a hole or
Fg. 15.8. Types of acquired immunity. Both naturally and
pore that leads to cell lysis. In addition, binding of C3b induces
Auo ing 'ueodui Aian ag uen Aunmu! painbe Alleiye
opsonization or coating of the bacterial cell which enhances
 active immunity can establish immunological memory. Once
targeting by phagocytes for engulfment. Finally, the presence of free
antibodies from the mother or via injection are degraded, they
C3a and C5a in the area promotes inflammation.
cannot be replaced by the animal.
450  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Antigen-binding
Box 15.2 Natural killers
sites
 Just the idea of some of our animals' lymphocytes
"running around" with the capacity of kill other
cells seems somehow unnerving. The notion that
selected T cells can be induced to target virus-
infected cells or tumor cells is more comforting. As
reviewed by Boysen and Storset (2009), s0-called
natural killer (NK) cells were first discovered in the
Light chain
1970s as cells that could spontaneously lyse and kill
tumor cells without prior immunization. It was
Stem region
subsequently recognized that the cells that attack
cells cannot be "identified" as self (i.e., the absence
Heavy chain
of surface markers common to somatic cells of an
individual). Essentially, if the NK cells do not rec-
ogrize a self-MHC class I molecule on a target cell,
Macroph age-binding site
 no inhibitory signal is delivered, and the target cell
is doomed.
omplement-binding site
Fg. 15.9. Basic antibody structure. An antibody molecule
consists of four protein chains: two heavy and two light chains.
 mother is critical, but it is limited. The antibodies pro-
The portion of the heavy chain resembling the stem of the letter
vided in the colostrum are only a stop gap measure
Y provides sites of activation of complement and interactions with
until the calf or puppy is able to begin mounting its
macrophages. The combination of light and heavy chains at the
ends of the arms of the Y creates two identical antigen-binding
own immune responses with related immunological
sites. Disulfide bonds are prominent in linking heavy and light 
memory (Box 15.2).
chains together as well as at locations within the chains.
Antibody structure and function
to antigen, the stem region of the molecule reacts with
mast cells and basophiles, causing them to release his-
There are five major classes of immunoglobulins: IgA
 tamine and other chemicals. Unfortunately, hyper or
IgG, IgM, IgD, and IgE. IgG is the most abundant and
inappropriate IgE-induced activation of these cells is
diverse antibody in circulation. It accounts for -80%
involved in many allergic reactions. This explains the
 of the total. It is primarily responsible for both primary
 significance of antihistamine treatments to treat aller-
and secondary antibody responses (increased blood
gic reactions.
titers) following immunization or other exposure to
Whatever its specific class, each antibody molecule
9
antigens. IgG also circulates as a monomer. IgA also
has a basic structure consisting of four protein chains
 appears as a monomer but is limited in the circulation.
 linked together by disulfide bonds. Two identical
It occurs more frequently in secretions (saliva, sweat,
heavy chains of about 400 amino acids each make
intestine, etc.) associated with mucous membranes
up the bulk of a structure that resembles the shape of
and epithelial surfaces. It also is most frequently
the letter Y. Two additional identical protein chains
secreted as a dimer with the two antibody molecules
(the light chains) essentially overlap the portions of
 joined by a third element called the secretory piece.
the heavy chains in the arms of the Y and are joined
IgM appears as a monomer and in groupings of five
by sulfide bonds. The heavy chains have a hinge-like
antibodies (pentamer) linked together. In the mono-
region near the top of the stem of the Y. The two ends
meric form, the antibody is usually attached to the
at the top of the Y of the antibody molecule create the
 surface of B cell. During primary antibody responses,
sites for binding of the antibody to its antigen. This
the pentamer form of IgM is the first class of antibody
means that the antibody is divalent; that is, one anti-
released by the plasma cells. Since there is usually
 body molecule is capable of binding two antigen mol-
only a small amount of IgM free in the circulation,
 ecules. The stem region of the molecule is significant
detection of an increase in the blood is diagnostically
because it contains sites for complement binding and
useful as an indicator of a current infection in an
for macrophage activation. These sites are important
animal. IgD is nearly always attached to the surface of
because the binding or fixing of the antibody allows
 B cells where it functions as a receptor for the activa-
the development of a cascade of reactions important
tion of the cells. IgE is secreted by plasma cells in the
in the immune attack. The structure of an antibody
skin and mucosal membranes. When the IgE is bound
molecule is illustrated in Figure 15.9.
Immunity
451
Although antibodies do not directly destroy patho-
 Primary B cell
 gens, their binding to antigens on the surface of bacte-
 stimulation
Bcells
Antigen
rial cells, for example, marks the cells for destruction.
Antibody binding to toxins or foreign debris can also
inactivate these agents by neutralization, precipitation,
Plasma cells
or, in the case of cell-associated antigens, agglutina-
Memory B cells
tion. These reactions greatly enhance inflammation, and
along with inflammation, induced chemotaxis recruits
Antibody
ondary B ce
leukocytes that destroy bacterial cells by phagocyto-
stimmulation
sis. Antibody binding also triggers complement fixa-
tion and exposes the macrophage-binding sites on the
antibody molecule. The coating of foreign substances
with antibodies is called opsonization.
More memory
Antigens are substances that can activate the immune
 More antibody-secreting
B cells
system, thereby provoking an immune response. Most
plasma cells
often these are large, complex molecules (typically
Fg. 15.10. Antigen stimulation of B cells. In the primary 
 Apoq an u radde Au jou op e (suaoid
timulation, antigen (green spheres) binds to receptors on the
other words, the immune system does not recognize
surface of selected B cells. This induces cell proliferation and
production of clones of identical cells. Some of the cells enlarge
them as self. In the case of completely reactive or
into B lymphoblasts and then plasma cells that secrete antibodies
 immunogenic antigens, these molecules induce prolif-
specific to the antigen. Other clonal B cells remain as memory B
eration of specific lymphocytes and the synthesis and
cells. With a subsequent exposure to the antigen (weeks, months,
secretion of specific antibodies. In other cases, many
or even years later), a second, more rapid induction and secretion
small peptides, nucleotides, are not immunogeric in
 of antibody and generation of additional memory B cells occurs.
themselves, but when linked with other self-proteins,
the new combinations can produce a dramatic, even
harmful, response. This is the basis of some allergenic
of the same antigen, these antibodies are referred to as
responses. Researchers were able to take advantage of
 polyclonal antibodies.
Most of the stimulated B cells are induced to become
nonresponsive molecules, that is, steroid hormones
plasma cells. This is fortuitous because plasma cells
to create many immunological-based assays, for exam-
have an extensive array of rough endoplasmic reticu-
ple, radioimmunoassay, enzyme-linked immunoas-
lum (RER). Thus, the capacity of these plasma cells to
says (ELISA), and western blotting.
synthesize and secrete antibody molecules (proteins)
is very high. This is illustrated in Figure 15.10.
It is estimated that each plasma cells can secrete
more than 2oo0 antibody molecules per second. These
B cell selection and antibody secretion
antibodies have the same antigen-binding capacity as
the receptor proteins on the surface of the B cells that
15
When B cells are stimulated by antigens, a cascade is
first bound the antigen. Clonal B cells that are not
2
initiated so that antigen binding to surface receptors
activated to become plasma cells become long-lived
 on a particularly naive or previously inactivated B cell
memory cells. It is the presence of the memory B cells
becomes activated to complete its differentiation cycle.
that explains the very rapid and sustained secretion of
This activation process, usually in combination with T
antibody that occurs when an animal is exposed to an
cells, triggers clonal selection and expansion. The
antigen for a second time. This pattern of response is
initial step induces B cell growth followed by rapid
illustrated in Figure 15.11.
proliferation of an army or clone of identical daughter
cells, all of which express receptors specific for the
antigen that initiated the process. Since all of the cells
Cell-mediated immunity
 are identical, they form a group called a clone. In cases
where a particular antigen leads to the production of
Antibodies are extremely important, but it is also clear
a single clone of cells, this would be called a monoclo-
that effectiveness depends on the capacity of the anti-
nal response. This situation is taken advantage of
bodies to recognize specific pathogens. How are our
animals protected against viruses or infections from
antibodies. More often in physiological situations,
microorganisms that can "hide" from detection by
several different families or clones of stimulated B
antibodies? The T cells provide this added, more
cells are generated. Since each of the antibodies that
complex layer of protection. Two primary groups of T
 are produced is likely to recognize different epitopes
cells have been recognized based on the complexes of
452
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Second
Macrophages secrete
Bacteria
aunsodxa
IL-1 to enhance B cell
Macropl
Apoqae
104
action
Macrophages process and
response
antigen (X)
present bacterial antigens tc
B and T lymphocytes.
103
ansodxa
IL-1 
antibody
 Helper T cell
response
ansodxa
102
antigen (X)
phagocytosis by
Antibodies enhanc
response (Y)
opsonization.
Activated
B cell
101
Plasm
Bcell GF
Cell
(cytokine)
100
14
21
28
35
Helper T cells secrete
Cytokines that enhance B
Antibodies
cell proliferation and antibody
Time (days)
production by plasma cells.
Fig. 15.11. Primary and secondary antibody responses. The blue 
Fg. 15.12. Antigen process in macrophages. Bacterial cells are
line illustrates the relative antibody secretion response to
engulfed by macrophages, and antigens are processed and 
immunization with antigen X. The initial response begins after 
expressed on the surface of the macrophage. Helper T cells
several days, peaks at a relatively low level, and declines markedly
associate with the macrophage and bind fragments of bacterial cell
by 4 weeks. A second exposure to antigen X at this time elicits a
1 diay aui saeae sul aleudones au Ag apaasaid, suiaod
rapid and relatively much greater response. Exposure to a second
cell so that it is stimulated to secrete cytokines which stimulate
antigen, Y, at the same time has no effect on the response to
proliferation of B cells and conversion into plasma cells that secrete
antigen X, and the relative response to antigen Y is similar to the
 antibodies specific to the bacterial antigen.
 initial reaction noted to immunization with antigen X.
recognized as foreign by the particular animal but are
glycoproteins that are expressed on their cell surfaces.
 strongly antigenic to other animals. This is the essence
These are CD4 cells, also known as helper T cells (TH)
 of blood transfusion or graft rejection between unre-
 and a larger population the CD8 cells that are mostly
lated animals. Some of the major surface proteins are
cytotoxic T cells (Tc). Some of the CD8 expresing T
part of a group of glycoproteins called major histo-
cells are also suppressor (Ts) cells that act as modula-
compatibility complex or MCH proteins that are coded
tors of cell-mediated immunity.
by MHC genes. Because there are virtually millions of
While B cells and antibodies bind to and respond
possible combinations for the complex of genes that
directly to antigens, T cells do not have this ability.
code for these proteins, except for identical twins, it is
Instead, the T cells can recognize and respond to
 very unlikely that two animals would have expression
pieces or fragments of protein antigens that have been
 patterns that would be the same between individual
processed by other cells of the immune system, the
animals. It is even more complex in that there are two
antigen-presenting cells (macrophages, neutrophils,
CT
major clusters of MCH proteins and genes. Class 1
 dendritic cells of the skin, etc.). This process is illus-
 MHC proteins are expressed on surfaces of essentially
 trated in Figure 15.12.
 all celis but class II MHC proteins appear only on
Cytotoxic T cells (Tc), also called killer T cells, have
certain cells of the immune system. Each MHC protein
the ability to directly attack and kill other cells. When
has a cleft or groove that displays a peptide. In normal
activated, these cells migrate through the circulation
cells, the peptides that are displayed in this cleft are
and the lymphoid tissues seeking cells that express
peptides that are derived from normal recycling of
 antigens for which the Te cells have been sensifized.
cellular proteins. When some cells become infected or
The primary targets of the cells are other cells that
are altered by cancer, the MHC proteins can bind and
have been infected by viruses, but under some circum-
display peptides derived from bacterial cells, viruses,
stances they can attack cells that are infected by bac-
or cancer-mediated processes. This then acts to mark
teria or parasites. They can also act on cancer cells and
the infected or cancerous cells as nonself, thereby tar-
are the primary cells involved in transplant rejection
 geting them for close surveillance and possible attack
reactions.
by the Tc cells.
Before the cells can respond, the Tc cells have to link
Essentially, the CD8 class of lymphocytes or Tc cells
 or dock with potential targets by binding to the self/
is activated when they dock with other cells that have
non-self-complex on the cell surface. Briefly, 
the
processed antigens in combination with the class 1
surface of all cells expresses a myriad of proteins.
MHC
C proteins that are not recognized as self. The
example shown in Figure 15.13 illustrates the activa-
ately programmed, all of these self-antigens are not
tion of Tc cells that have encountered a virus-infected
Immunity
453
ssI MHCreceptor
Virus
Cytotoxic T cell
vral antigen
3
= T cell receptor
Inactive
Lymphotoxin
Tccell
secretion
Perforin release 
Infected
Impaired 
Cytokin
Destruction of
Proliferation
metabolism
 target cell membrane 
activeTc
target cell
cells
Infected cell
Activated
Tc cells
Target cell
de struction!
5
Fig. 15.13. Cytotoxic and helper T cells activation. Both Te and TH
Fg. 15.14. Cytotoxic T cell attack. Once the Te cell has
cells are simulated to proliferate and produce clones when they
encountered and responded to an infected cell, several different
 saxados ui ane peun (l) suasue usianoi y paneiosse
mechanisms can be induced to produce destruction of the target
MHC proteins on cell surfaces. In this example, a competent Te cell
cell. Release of lymphotoxin can essentially poison the cell by
docks with a cell expressing a foreign viral antigen in combination 
disrupting its metabolism. Release of perforin can act to perforate
with the cells MHC proteins (2). Activation (3) induces proliferation
and disrupt the plasma membrane of the cells. Granzymes released
leading formation of more Tc cells (memory) as well as currently
 by T cell vesicles (granules) can degrade target cell proteins.
activated cells. When the activated Te cells complexes with an
Finally, some cytokines released act to promote apoptosis
infected cell (4), the infected cell is ultimately (5) destroyed.
(programmed cell death in the target cell).
Activation of T cells would occur in a similar fashion except the
complex would involve class Il MHC proteins rather than class I
MHC proteins.
that the death of the targeted cells is indirect. This is
 analogous to hiring a hit man to do the deed. Details
 cell and, as a consequence, a clone of activated Te cells
of Tc attack are illustrated in Figure 15.14.
is produced. These cells can then detect and bind to
 A final type of T cell to consider is the suppressor
 other infected cells. The fundamental result is that this
(Ts) cell. As the name suggests, these cells act to
encounter induces the Tc cell to divide and produce
dampen the aggressive action of the Te cells once the
clones of identical cells. Some of these new cytotoxic
inflammation has subsided. In addition, it is believed
T cells become memory T cells, while others are acti-
that the Ts cells are important in minimizing autoim-
vated to seek out cells that exhibit the antigen/MHC
mune reactions, thatis, in situations where the immune
on the cell surface that initiated the process in the
 system can attack normal healthy cells. However, sup-
beginning.
pression does not occur immediately. In part this is
15
The actual mechanism for the Te destruction of the
because most of the activation that initiates the T cells
"foreign" cell is complex and poorly understood, but
2
 to respond in the beginning increases the number of 
several events occur at least in some cases. When
Tc and T cells to a much greater extent than it does
binding between the cells occurs, the Tc cell releases
for Ts cells. Table 15.2 summarizes the immune cells
granules that contain a protein called perforin that
that participate in defense of tissues and cells.
inserts itself into the plasma membrane of the cell
targeted for destruction. Especially in the presence of
Caf, the perforin molecules combine to create pores
Avian versus mammalian systems
through the plasma membrane. This allows entrance
of inactivated enzymes called granzymes, also con-
 At a global level, many aspects of immunology are
tained in the vesicles released from the T cell, to enter
 similar between species, for example, the presence of 
the cytoplasm of the targeted cell. Once inside the
 humoral versus cellular immunity, significance of cir-
target cell, like a miniature Trojan horse, the proteases
culating antibodies, impact of inflammation, and the
are activated, and the cellular machinery begins to
role of cell signaling in maturation of various classes
degrade. In other cases, the Tc cells can produce the
of leucocytes. However, understanding of immune
death of targeted cells by secretion of lymphotoxin, a
responses in avian species, especially chickens, is
protein that causes the fragmentation of the target
 especially significant scientifically. In 1956, Glick et al.
cell's DNA. Other Tc cells release  interferon which
 reported that the chicken bursa of Fabricius (BF) was
activates macrophages in the area to killer status so
essential for development of humoral immunity.
454  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 15.2. Immune cells involved in defense of tissue and cells.
Ceff Type
Actions
Mast cells and basophils
Stimulate and coordinate inflammation by release of histamine, prostaglandins, and other agents
Neutrophils (PMN)
Aside from resident macrophages, these are the first of the phagocytes to arrive at a site of infection
Eosinophils
Important in phagocytosis of antigen-antibody complexes and in allergic reactions
Macrophages
 Both fixed and wandering essential phagocytes and antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
B cells
Class of lymphocytes in response to stimulation divided to produce memory cells and plasma cells
which synthesize and secrete antibodies
 Plasma cells 
Derived from B cells
Helper T cells (TH)
Regulator T cells that interact with antigens presented by APCs stimulate other immune cells
Cytotoxic T' cells (Te)
and cancer cells
Suppressor Ts cells 
Inhibit the activity of B and T cells, especially in later stages of infection
Memory cells
pidel joj Aliedes jay o siaja Aowaw 'sllan 1 jo g paienus Asnoaid woy slan aysnea
response when exposed to an antigen for a second time
APCs
these antigens or parts on their cell surfaces in combination with MCH proteins; allows recognition by
T cells and continued activation
Bursectomized chickens had no antibody production
lin that can be made by each individual B cell. Similar
responses when challenged.
rearrangements occur for L chain locus, but there are
The BF is an invagination of a portion of the cloaca.
just two regions [V and J]. The outline given below
It contains 10-15 folds surrounding a lumen with
briefly describes events during sequential develop-
tissue containing approximately 10,oo0 follicular
mental stages of B cell maturation:
structures. These folicles develop in part from stem
 Progenitor B cells have starting germ cell H and
cells that migrate from the yolk sac and embryonic
 liver to the BF. As development progresses, BF struc-
L genes.
Early Pro-B cells get beginning of D and J rear-
tures change from small buds to colonies of clonal B
rangement on the H chains.
cells that proliferate and move to the outer regions of
 Late Pro-B cells have beginning of V-DJ rearrange-
the BF. Complex gene rearrangements and gene con-
ment of V, D, J on the H chains.
version events ultimately create populations of poten-
 Large Pre-B cells occur as the H chain is VDJ rear-
tial B cells. Complicated signals associated with
ranged, germ line L genes.
9
cytokines specific to the bursa and cell interactions
 Small Pre-B cells undergo V-J rearrangement on
121
leave only about 5% of these cells to become fully
the L chains.
functional B cells that are active in humoral immunity
Immature B cells have the VJ rearranged on L
(Scott, 2004). Thus, the identification of these cells as
chains, VDJ rearranged on H chains, and expres-
 B lymphocytes reflects the fact that in birds, these cells
sion of IgM receptors occurs.
develop in the BF. It also distinguishes these lympho
 Mature B cells begin expression of IgD.
 cytes from T cells which are thymus derived. Mammals
do not have a structure equivalent to the BF. Conse-
 If the B cellfails in any step of the maturation process,
quently, the bone marrow serves as a site for B cell
apoptosis leads to the death of the cell. Moreover, if
maturation
the cell recognizes a self-antigen during the matura-
As you might guess, B cell development occurs in
tion process, the cell either becomes arrested or under-
progressive steps, but based primarily on mouse
goes apoptosis. This probably explains why only a
models, each stage depends on dramatic gene altera-
small percentage of precursor B cells survive to become
tions. As discussed earlier, the antibody molecule is
 part of the peripheral B cell pool.
composed of two light (L) and two heavy (H) chains.
Moreover, the genes directing the synthesis of these
proteins are found in corresponding L and H chain
Lymphatic system
loci. An H chain locus has three regions, V, D and J,
which recombine randomly as the cells mature. This
It would be reasonable to discuss the lymphatic system
creates unique variable domains in the immunoglobu
with either the circulatory system or the immune
Immunity 455
system, because in many ways, it is a link between the
fluid flow through the lymphatic vessels is one-way
two. The fundamental parts include the lymph nodes
because of the presence of valves. Moreover, because
and nodules, the spleen, the thin vessels that link them
it is not pressurized (as in the sense of the circulatory
together, and, of course, the fluid (tissue fluid or inter-
system), the lymph is dependent on passive move-
stitial fluid) or lymph that flows in the vessels. In
 ment and some impact of changes in the diaphragm
addition to circulation in blood, lymph provides routes
to aid emptying of lymph into the thoracic duct.
for passage of lymphocytes and ready links between
The microscopic structure of lymphoid tissue is
clusters for lymphoid tissues. Because of the manner
 somewhat variable, but common features are clusters 
in which interstitial fluid drains from many organs,
or clumps of lymphocytes essentially trapped within
localized lymph nodes are often one of the first sites
strands of connective tissue, especially reticular fibers.
that are impacted by localized tissue infections.
A
 In some regions (the submucosa of the Gl tract), the
prime example are the paired supernumery lymph
tissues also appear in diffuse scattered clumps or more
nodes that are located on the dorsal aspect of the two
organized nodules (Peyer's patches). Other lymphoid
rear mammary glands between the upper portion of
fissues (spleen, tonsils, thymus, and nodes) are much
the udder and the body wall of the cow. In older
more highly structured and encapsulated.
animals, it is common to see these two lymph nodes
A typical node has an outside capsule with multiple
 greatly enlarged, as a consequence of the proliferation
 entering or afferent lymphatic vessels that provide
and activation that occurred as a consequence of mas-
fluid that essentially percolates through the organ as
titis and the drainage of lymph-containing antigens.
well as efferent vessels that typically exit from an
The consequences of poor drainage and osmotic
 indentation called the medullary sinus. Bands of con-
changes induced by the presence of leaking milk pro-
nective tissue called trabeculae pass from the outer
teins in lymph is frequently a cause for the udder
capsule in the internal structure of the nodes to help
edema that is relatively common in first-calf heifers.
 organize the clusters of lymphocytes and to provide
The lymph vessels are part of a one-way pathway
some structural integrity. The internal structure con-
for fluids that roughly parallels the venous circulation.
tains many clusters of lymphocytes as well as sinuses
These vessels with branches coming from throughout
and vessels that converge in the medulary sinus
the body progressively coalesce and empty into the
where the efferent vessels exit the node. The gross
 general circulation in the cranial vena cava. The begin-
structure is somewhat reminiscent of kidney or adrenal
nings of this circulatory pathway are essentially thin,
gland. There is an outer cortex, paracortex, and
blind-ended pouches that collect interstitial fluid that
medulla. The afferent vessels provide fluid to a sub-
 drains to localized tissue lymph nodes and the regional
capsular space of sinus that connects with smaller
nodes and the large lymph vessels that parallel the
internal sinuses and progressively slows drainage to
trunk of the body. Lymph drainage from the forelimbs,
the medulla and the hilus of the node where the effer-
neck, and head also empties at the thoracic duct. The
ent lymphatic vessels and blood vessels exit the node.
Chapter summary
ficular bacterium or agent and (2) that responses
15
have an aspect of memory. While it is converient to
Introduction
 discuss cellular immunity, that is, the actions of lym-
Q
phocytes (T cells, B cells), macrophages, neutro-
Q
The immune system, through both nonspecific (innate)
phils, and dendritic cells as independent of humoral
and specific (humoral and cellular) pathways, acts to
immunity (production and circulation of antibodies),
prevent infections and fight infections when they do
it is important to appreciate that functions occur in
occur. Examples of nonspecific protection include the
 concert. In other words, the effectiveness of either
skin and its modifications, that is, hair and sebaceous
depends on the other.
secretions. Proteins such as lactoferrin and other
antibacterial lipids appear in the milk and in other 
Antibodies
body fluids. The mucus that coats internal surfaces
is also protective.
There are multiple classes of antibodies (lgA, IgG,
 etc.), but these immunoglobulins are produced and
Specific immunity
secreted by B cells that have been stimulated by anti-
gens in cornection with other lymphocytes (T cells
Two key features of specific immunity are (l) that
 or macrophages) to first divide and produce daugh-
-red e ronsap pue yee ot ,paraauua, st asuanan
ter cells. Some of these daughter cells azre further
(Continued)
456  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
stimulated to differentiate into plasma cells. The plasma
excessive immunity responses. B lymphocytes (B
cells are essentially miniature antibody-making fac-
cells) originally got their name because they were
tories. This explains the increase in antibodies in cir-
identified in lymphoid tissue called the bursa of
culation in the days and weeks following exposure
Fabricius, which is located near the cloaca of chick-
to a foreign antigen. An antigen, by the way, is a
ens. These are the cells that give rise to other B cells
 protein, polysaccharide, or other molecule that is
-s pe sn esd an  m se ,, y
thesize and secrete immunoglobulins.
cytes and the differentiation to create plasma cells.
Some of the B cells that were initially stimulated
(the population of daughter cells) can subsequently
Cytokines
divide and produce clones of cells, but these clones
retain the capacity to very rapidly respond if they are
Control and regulation of most immune responses
exposed to the same antigen a second time. These
depends on the secretion of powerful hormone-like
are the memory cells of the immune system. This
molecules or messengers collectively called cyto-
explains why the vaccination is effective. Further-
kines or immunokines. These proteins are typically
more, because most antigens have multiple regions
secreted by the various leukocytes. Their targets are
or structures that can elicit activation of B cells, anti-
typically other lymphocytes and related cells (macro-
bodies in circulation most often are directed against
 phages, dendritic cells, neutrophils). Examples include
different parts of the same antigen. This population
an entire suite of 36 different interleukins, interfer-
of antibodies is called polyclonal. It is also possible
ons, TNF-o, and many others.
experimentally  to utilize tumor-derived immune
cells to generate monoclonal antibodies. This can be
very useful when there is a need for antibodies
Passive immunity
 directed against a very specific region of a molecule,
 that is, analytical tools, and therapy.
This refers to the protection that is provided by the
administration of antibodies to a patient or more
often the passage of antibodies from mother to off-
Leukocytes, lymphocytes, and others
spring in utero (depending on the type of placenta-
tion). For example, in ruminants there is no in utero
The distinction between all of the various white
transfer of immunoglobulins so antibodies received
blood cells can be confusing, but to understand the
from the sucking or feeding of colostrum is essential
basics of immunity, it is important to have some
 to provide some immunity until the calf, kid, or lamb
appreciation of these various cells. Lymphocytes are
 can begin to generate its own specific immunity.
divided into two broad classes: T cells and B cells. In
 mammals, the T cells get their name because during
development, the initial population of T cells is pro-
Lymphatic system
9
duced in the thymus. Because of subsequent stimula-
1210
tion and migration, these cells further differentiate to
This is a system of thin vessels and interconnected
become helper T cells (Th), killer or cytotoxic T cells
series of lymph nodes and related organs, such as
(Tc), or suppressor T cells (Ts). Each of these classes
spleen, tonsils, thymus, lacteals, and nodules, which
of T cells is identified based on the array of surface
provide a pass for interstitial fluid to return to the
markers that they express. As the names suggest, Tc
 general circulation in the form of lymph that empties
cells with proper stimulation are capable of destroy-
at the thoracic duct. The lymph nodes and related
ing other cells, that is, cells infected by a virus. The
 organs provide sites for the proliferation and con-
Th cells act by assisting or helping the actions of B
centration of lymphocytes that can ultimately be
cells to differentiate or other T cells to become acti-
recruited to enter the circulation or tissue regions in
vated. The Ts cells function as regulators to prevent
response to inflammation.
Immunity 457
Review questions and answers are available
McFadden, T.B., R.M. Akers, and A.V. Capuco. 1988. Rela-
online.
tionships of milk proteins in blood with somatic cell
counts in milk of dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 71: 826-834.
Nickerson, S.C. and C.W. Heald. 1981. Histopathologic
 response of the bovine mammary gland to experimen-
References
tally induced Staphylococcus anreus infection. Am. J. Vet.
Res. 42: 1351-1555.
Boysen, P. and A.K. Storset. 2009. Bovine nafural killer cells.
Nickerson, S.C. and J.W. Pankey. 1983. Cytological obser-
Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 130: 163-177.
vaftions of the bovine teat end. Am. J. Vet. Res. 44:
Brock, J.H. 2012. Lactoferrin 50 years on. Biochem. Cell Biol.
1433-1441.
90: 245-251
Procaccini, C., E. Jirillo, and G. Matarese. 2012. Leptin and
Capuco, A., M.J. Paape, and S.C. Nickerson. 1986. In
an immunomodulator. Mol. Aspects Med. 33: 35-45.
vitro study of polymorphonuclear leukocyte damage to
Rawlings, D.J., M.A. Schwartz, S.W. Jackson, and A. Meyer-
mammary tissue of lactating cows. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47:
 n      
663-668.
like receptors and anfigen receptors. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
Capuco, A.V, D.L. Wood, S.A. Bright, RH. Miller, and
12: 282-294.
J. Bitman. 1990. Regeneration of teat canal keratin in lac-
Rodriguez, RM., A. Lopez-Vazquez, and C. Lopez-Larrea.
tating dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 73: 1745-1750.
 2012. Immune systems evolution. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.
Glick, B., TS. Chang, and R.G. Japp. 1956. The bursa of
739:237-251.
Fabricius and antibody production in the domestic fowl.
Scoft, T.R. 2004. Our current understanding of humoral
Poult. Sci. 35: 224-225.
immunity of poultry. Poult. Sci. 83: 574-579.
Gray, D.A., M. Marais, and S.K. Maloney. 2012. A review of
Stelwagen, K., E. Carpenter, B. Haigh, A. Hodgkinson, and
the physiology of fever in birds. J. Comp. Physiol. [B.] 183:
TT. Wheeler. 2008. Immune components of bovine colos-
297-312.
trum and milk. J. Anim. Sci. 87(Suppl. 1): 3-9.
15
det
16
Urinary system
Contents
Anatomy of the Urinary System
459
Renal Clearance
472
Nephron Structure
462
Kidney Excretion of Wastes and Control of pH
473
Mechanisms of Urine Formation
464
Excretion of Nitrogenous Wastes
477
Factors Affecting Filtration
464
Comparative Urinary Physiology and Function
478
Proximal Convoluted Tubule
465
Avian Nitrogen Excretion
479
Countercurrent Mechanisms and Medullary
Avian Salt Glands
479
Osmotic Gradient
468
Chapter Summary
480
Anatomy of the urinary system
some additional materials are added (secretion), but
others are recovered (reabsorption). The liquid that
The urinary system is critical for homeostasis and per-
makes it through the microscopic tubular nephrons of
forms many essential functions. These include
the pelvis of the kidney and ultimately the urinary
bladder exits the body as urine. Urine is typically
 regulation of blood volume and blood pressure
slightly acidic (-pH6.0), but its volume and composi-
control of blood concentrations of several ions
tion varies depending on metabolism, diet, and the
(e.g., Na, K, Ca)
need to produce either dilute or concentrated urine to
 maintenance of blood pH via control of H+ and
 maintain extracellular fluid volume and osmolarity.
 HCO; ion secretion
Let's now consider some of the detailed anatomy
elimination of waste products and recovery of fil-
of this system, beginning with the kidneys. We'll use
tered nutrients.
 the ovine kidney to characterize some of the major
The urinary system is composed of the paired
features. In their normal retroperitoneal position, the
kidneys and ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra.
Essentially, dissolved materials in the liquid fraction
third lumbar vertebra. They are held in place by
of blood (plasma) are formed into a filtrate by the
 the peritoneum and are in contact with adjacent vis-
action of the kidneys. Once this filtrate is created,
ceral and surrounded by a layer of adipose tissue.
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
459
460  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Consequently, the kidneys are generally well pro-
tion and reabsorption is done by complex multicellu-
tected. The outermost renal fascia anchors the kidney
lar tubules called nephrons that are only evident at a
to the peritoneum, while the center layer of adipose
microscopic level. These functional units of the kidney
tissue provides additional support and cushioning. The
 are located in lobules within distinct zones or regions 
innermost connective tissue layer is the renal capsule.
 of the kidney that can be grossly distinguished.
It is directly adjacent to the outer surface of the kidney
The outer region or zone, the cortex, lies over the
parenchymal tissue. The photograph provided in
inner region called the medulla and a central area
Figure 16.1 shows a bisected preserved sheep kidney.
called the renal pelvis or hilus. This central area is the
 A portion of the thin but tough renal capsule is indi-
location for the entrance and exit of the renal vein
cated. This specimen and companion drawing illus-
and artery as well as the origin of the ureter, which
trate major macroscopic feafures of the kidney.
conducts urine to the bladder. The model illustrated
However, as we'll soon see, the ultimate work of filtra-
in Figure 16.2 provides a three-dimensional represen-
Medulla
Capsule
Chapter
Cortex
Fig. 16.1. Bisected preserved sheep kidney. Red latex fills much of the renal pelvis or hilus. The cortex is the outer rim of parenchymal
tissue (brackets) and the medulla occurs in the region between the renal pelvis and cortex. A portion of the protective renal capsule is evident
as a thin, membrane-like material. The dotted line outlines the region of a renal pyramid.
Urinary system
461
Cortex
B
[euai aul aupiy aui jo Awoieue ssois eap jaieil ui saensuoap ydeionoud siyi u! panesni lapow aul aup po japon z'yt -i
vein and artery (arrows) are evident in the region of the renal pelvis, as is the ureter (3). The funnel-like structures that feed the exiting ureter
are the major (4)(closest to the ureter4)and minor calyces (5).These structures capture filtrate from the tips of the renal pyramids as shown in
'7'gl ainslg pue I'gl ains!g u! saull panop aui Ag pajensnll s! pwenid jeuai e jo aldwexa uy uoisai Aemeno au!
tation of these structures. Figure 16.3 gives a "flow"
Near the boundary between the cortex and medulla
diagram to link blood flow and corresponding urine
the interlobar arteries branch into the arcuate arteries
production in the kidney. Briefly, the renal artery and
that arch (hence the name) over the bases of the med-
vein branch at nearly right angles to supply each of
ullary pyramids. Small interlobular arteries radiate
the kidneys. As each of these vessels approaches the
outward to supply the tissue of the cortex. Most of the
hilus, they branch into smaller segmental arteries,
 blood (-90%) that enters the kidney supplies the corti-
named because they supply blood to sectors or seg-
cal tissue. Not surprisingly, this is the region where
ments of the mass of the kidney tissue. Each of the
the bulk of the nephrons are located. The veins trace
segmental arteries divides to create lobar arteries
 essentially the same pathway in reverse (Fig. 16.4).
that divide to yield interlobar arteries that pass
Among the domestic species, swine and large rumi-
between the pyramids of the medulla toward the
nants have kidneys that are described as multipyrami-
kidney cortex.
dal or multilobar. In these cases, a papilla (essentially
462
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Segmental
Lobar
Interlobar
Arcuate
Interlobar
blood eventually passes into the tufts of capillaries
artery
artery
artery
artery
artery
that constitute the renal corpuscle (a surrounding
structure called Bowman's capsule + the tuft of capil-
 laries) that is connected with the first segment of the
Afferent
Glomerulus
Efferent
 Peritubular
 nephron (proximal convoluted tubule).
arteriole
arteriole
capillaries
Interlobular
Arcuate
Interlobar
Renal
Nephron structure
vein
vein
vein
Fg. 16.3. Kidney blood flow. The group of progressive vessels
The function of the kidney is tied to the nephrons.
(left to right) is the arterial branches (tan boxes) that ultimately
Each nephron consists of the glomerulus (the tuft of
supply the capillaries of the glomerulus where filtration takes place
blood vessels) and glomerular capsule (often called
to supply fluid that enters the lumen of the nephron. Elements of 
Bowman's capsule). This tuft or knot of capillaries has
the blood that are not filtered (cells and large proteins) and blood
that is not subjected to filtration leaves the capillaries of the
an afferent (toward) and efferent (away) arteriole.
glomerulus and enters the venous circuit to exit the kidney via the
Blood that enters is subjected to filtration and osmotic
renal vein (green boxes).
pressures that act to force some of the liquid of the
blood between the endothelial cells into the space sur-
rounded by Bowman's capsule. Blood cells, larger
molecules, and the remaining liquid exit the tuft of
capillaries via the efferent arteriole. Liquid that passes
INA
out of the capillaries into the space of Bowman's
capsule enters into the first segment of the tubular
Cortex
portion of the nephron called the proximal convoluted
tubule (PCT). This segment of the nephron gets its
name because the tube is very highly coiled (convo-
AR
luted), and it is the closest to the site of filtrate forma-
Medulla
tion (proximal).
In sequence, the remaining parts of the nephron are
品
the portion of the PCT leading to the thin or descend-
ing limb of the loop of Henle, ascending loop of
Henle, distal convoluted tubule (DCT), and collecting
duct (CD). The ends of the collecting ducts are located
at the tips of the renal pyramids. This means that
liquid that exits the nephrons at this point enters the
ureter, passes to the bladder, and is lost as urine.
Fig. 16.4. Kidney blood supply. This stylized drawing illustrates
Nephrons occur in two classes. The majority class
some of the blood supply to kidney parenchymal tissue. SA,
(cortical) is located primarily within the kidney cortex.
segmental artery; IA, interlobar arteries; AR, arcuate arteries; and
However, so-called juxtamedullary nephrons are
 INA, interlobular arteries.
arranged near the boundary between the cortex and
9
medulla so that the loop of Henle for these nephrons
lapter
passes deep into the medullary region. As we'll soon
see, these nephrons play an especially important role
the tip of the pyramid) projects into the space of a
in regulation of blood osmolarity. Figure 16.5 illus-
minor calyx, and this is continuous with the ureters.
 trates the orientation of nephrons within the kidney
 Unipyramidal or unilobar kidneys occur in most car-
tissue.
nivores, small ruminants, and horses. The kidney (of
 In particular, notice that the branches from the
the cat, for example) consists of one lobe that results
arcuate arteries (paired artery and vein that arch over
from the fusion of several lobes during development.
 the boundary between the cortex and medulla) supply
A single broad ridge or crest created by the fusion of
the interlobular arteries that ultimately supply the
the papillae is intimately associated with an expanded
efferent arterioles of the glomerulus. These appear as
internal portion of the ureters, which spreads over the
circular white balls in the photograph. The two classes
internal surface of the renal pelvis (Banks, 1983)
 of nephrons (cortical) and the longer juxtamedullary
Under usual circumstances, blood flow to the kidney
 nephrons are also illustrated in this photograph. The
is impressive, typically averaging 25% of cardiac
large branched structure in the center illustrates a CD,
 output. As blood enters the renal artery, it progresses
which, as the name suggests, collects effluent from the
as outlined in Figure 16.3. The essential feature is that
DCT of numerous nephrons as it traverses along the
Urinary system
463
CD
Fig. 16.5. Organization of nephrons. This photograph of a kidney model illustrates the orientation of microscopic structure within the tissue
 of a kidney pyramid. Numerous renal glomeruli (white globular structures) populate the renal cortex. Cross-sectioned glomeruli (arrows) show
the funnel-like arrangement of the Bowman's capsule surrounding the tuft of capillaries and the afferent and efferent arterioles. The coiled 
tubule immediately exiting the glomerulus is the proximal convoluted tubule. Its path can be traced, as it becomes the descending then 
ascending loop of Henle. Once back in the region of the glomerulus, the tubular nephron becomes the distal convoluted tubule before it joins
the collecting duct (CD)
length of the renal pyramid. Further detail of the
reptiles and birds. This perhaps explains the serious
structure of the glomerulus and initial segment of the
nature of kidney disease or defects in our animals. In
nephron is shown in Figure 16.6.
short, there is no substitute for a healthy, well-
Figure 16.7 provides a drawing to illustrate the com-
functioning urinary system. As we have indicated in
ponents of a nephron and associated blood supply to
prior sections, structure and function are closely allied.
the glomerulus. The mammalian kidney is the best-
The kidney and especially the elegant arrangement of
understood osmoregulatory  organ  in  the animal
the sections of the nephron, associated blood supply.
kingdom, thanks to extensive research over the past
and, finally, creation of a continuously maintained
40 years. Activities linked with the mammalian kidney
 osmotic gradient within the tissue of the renal medulla
include a number of functions that are tied with other
are critical to kidney function. The nephron is a highly
organs in lower vertebrates, for example, the skin,
convoluted but nonetheless simple tube composed of
bladder, and gills of fishes or the salt glands of many
a single layer of epithelial cells. The tube is essentially
464  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Fig. 16.6. Structure of the glomerulus. This photograph illustrates cellular structure associated with the glomerulus. The larger vessel on the
upper right illustrates the afferent arteriole; the pale yellow covering on the surface of the vessel once it enters Bowman's capsule illustrates a
layer of cells called podocytes that support the endothelial cells of the afferent capillary bed. These cells aid in regulation of the filtration 
processas ciscussed inthe following.Theother half of the tuft of vessels demonstratesthe efferent vesselslading to the efferent arteriole.The
pale blue layer of cells inside the Bowman's capsule represents the simple squamous epithelial cells that line its internal surface. To the left,
these cells give rise to simple cuboidal epithelial cells that constitute the internal lining of the proximal convoluted tubule (CT). The structure
on the extreme right illustrates a cross section of the distal CT. The boxed area represents cells of the wall of the afferent arteriole and
adjoining distal CT that comprise a structure called the juxtaglomerular apparatus or JGA. As discussed in the text, the JGA is important in
'eou oi ainssaid arnsai ii suaa ieisoy i peal peun ainssaid pooig ui saseaap luisuas
closed because of the tuft of capillaries and filtered
tubular reabsorption of water and most of the salts
fluid as it leaves the Bowman's capsule, but it is open
of the ultrafiltrate, and (3) tubular secretion, much of
at its distal end as it joins the collecting ducts that
which occurs via active transport. Let's begin by con-
ultimately empty into the renal pelvis. We will explore
sidering factors that control the creation of filtrate.
these relationships by discussing in some detail the
As you might guess, one of the factors that directly
cellular structure of different epithelial cells located
impacts the rate of filtration is the blood pressure sup-
along the course of the nephron. To understand the
plying the glomerulus, just as the rate of water flow
role of the kidney in long-term control of blood
through a sprinkler increases as the water faucet is
pressure, blood flow, and stimulation of erythrocyte
opened. Indeed, one of the symptoms of high blood
 production, we will describe the importance of a spe-
pressure is more frequent urination. The data plotted
cialized cluster of modified distal convoluted cells
in Figure 16.8 demonstrate the dramatic nature of this
called the macula densa and the juxtaglomerular cells
response.
 of the wall of the afferent arteriole, which together
 make up the juxtaglomerular apparatus. In addition,
we'll consider the significance of the network of peri-
Factors affecting filtration
tubular capillaries that intertwine around the loop
of Henle and the curved course of blood flow that
Other forces within Bowman's capsule also influence
mirrors the hairpin bend in the loop of Henle called
the rate of filtrate formation. Once filtration has started
the vasa recta.
and fluid begins to collect, the fluid-filled space pro-
duces hydrostatic pressure against the endothelial cell
from outside the capillaries. You can imagine this as
Mechanisms of urine formation
the difference between filling an empty water bucket
with a hose compared with pushing the hose to the
Remember, there are three critical processes that con-
 bottom of a barrel that is already filled. The water
tribute to control the volume and composition of
coming from the hose is counteracted by the force of
urine: (1) filtration of the blood plasma to create ultra-
the water already in the container. In addition, the
filtrate within the lumen of Bowman's capsule, (2)
 osmotic properties of the blood and newly created
Urinary system
465
tial, because of the very large number of glomeruli in
each kidney, that is, typically 2-4 million (depending
on the species), this produces an enormous degree of
filtration. For a 70-kg primate, the average glomerular
CD
filtration rate (GFR) is 125mL per minute. As a crude
Cortex
estimate, let's assume that blood volume equals 10%
of body weight and that the blood is 50% plasma. This
results in a blood volume of 7kg. Let's further esti-
Medulla
mate that 1kg = 1L. This then would yield a blood
volume of 7L or 3.5L of blood plasma. Since the
plasma is mostly water, at a normal rate of GFR, it
would only take 28 minutes for the entire plasma
Vasa
volume to be filtered. In other words, without mecha-
nisms to minimize urine production, the entire plasma
recta
LH
volume would be lost in about 30 minutes. This stag-
gering calculation highlights not only the degree of
Fig. 16.7. Nephron diagram. This simplified diagram illustrates
filtration but also the significance of the actions of the
key aspects of a juxtaglomerular nephron. while in reality the
kidney to recovering the majority of filtered water and
convoluted tubules are more extensive, relative orientation is
important nu trients.
maintained. Notice that the branches of the efferent arteriole that
In addition to the hydrostatic pressure within the
supplies the region surrounding the convoluted tubules give rise to
the network vessels surrounding the loop of Henle (LH) and the
glomerulus, these capillaries are also are structurally
vasa recta, which allows blood from the region of the convoluted
designed to maximize bulk fluid flow. Specifically.
tubules to flow around the loop of Henle but in the opposite
they are fenestrated. Compared with capillaries in
direction of fluid flow within the tubule. This is important because
other regions of the body, the endothelial cells contain
the countercurrent flow allows a steep osmotic gradient that is
numerous large pores so that permeability is about
created by the action of cells of the loop of Henle to be maintained
within the surrounding interstitial space. In practical terms, this
 100 times greater than for other capillary beds. Despite
means that fluid that then passes up the ascending loop of Henle
the benefit of enhanced fluid filtration, is it also impor-
into the distal convoluted tubule and into the collecting duct
 tant that large macromolecules within the blood are
transits down the collecting duct (CD) and through this surrounding
not filtered. Thus, the basement membrane surround-
 osmotic gradient. By controlling the degree of permeability of the
collecting duct to water, this allows either dilute (water is not 
ing the endothelial cells contains collagen and numer-
recovered from the fluid entering the collecting duct) or
ous negatively charged glycoproteins. This acts to
concentrated (water follows osmotic forces and leaves the
repel albumin and other serum proteins. There are
collecting duct lumen) urine to be produced.
also specialized cells called podocytes that cover the
 outer surface of the endothelial cells. The podocytes
6
send out numerous pseudopodia that create processes
called pedicels that interdigitate to create filtration
slits. Filtrate driven by hydrostatic pressure passes
4
through the pores of the endothelial cells, through the
3
basement membrane, and then through these filtra-
rine
tion slits. These three layers effectively act as a kind of
2
molecular sieve, so that small molecules and water
readily pass into the lumen of Bowman's capsule but
essentially all proteins are excluded from filtrate based
。
on charge and/or molecular size. There is bulk flow
25
75
125
175
225
- s  o s n  m 
Renal blood pressure (mm Hg)
solved ions, sugars, amino acids, urea, and most other
 small molecules enter the filtrate. Table 16.1 illustrates
Fig. 16.8. Urine formation and blood pressure. The relationship
 the relationship between molecular weight and trans-
between renal blood pressure and rate of urine formation is evident.
 fer of several common blood components into kidney
filtrate.
filtrate impact the rate of water movement across the
capillary cells. This means that despite a typical hydro-
static pressure of about 55mm Hg at the level of the
Proximal convoluted tubule
 afferent arteriole, the combination of competing forces
 produces a net filtration force of about +10mm Hg.
The composition of the filtrate is similar to that of
Regardless of this seemingly small pressure differen-
blood plasma with the exception of the protein content,
466
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
but the composition of urine is very different; thus, it
mitochondria. The proton V-ATPase pump utilizes the
is apparent that both the volume and composition of
hydrolysis of ATP to transport protons out of the cell
the filtrate are markedly altered as it passes through
 or across membranes to generate an electrochemical
the segments of the nephron. Essentially, the kidneys
 gradient. These gradients then can serve many func-
filter blood plasma then reabsorb needed materials
tions, for example, by acting via cotransport to direct
from the ultrafiltrate. In fact, nearly all of the water
movement of ions through specific channels, via
and the majority of critical nutrients are recovered
 symporters, or via antiporters as described in earlier
before the fluid reaches the end of the proximal con-
voluted tubules. The activity of the cells of the proxi-
intermediate form of the transport protein. This feature
mal convoluted tubule is reflected by the structure of
is important because it adds an element of control to
the cells. Specifically, these cuboidal epithelial cells
the activity of the pump. In other words, changes
 have plentiful mitochondria and rough endoplasmic
in molecules (hormone receptors for example) that
reticulum (RER) as well as numerous apical microvilli.
impact the degree of phosphorylation of this interme-
These attributes provide for synthesis of abundant
diate protein have a direct impact on the functionality
amounts of ATP, much of which is needed to power
of the transporter. Three subclasses of this type of
active transport mechanisms to recover important
ATPase pump include the Na*/K+ P-ATPase pump
nutrients that should not appear in urine. In short,
discussed in relation to nerve function, the Ca2+
ATP is expended either directly or indirectly in trans-
P-ATPase pump that is involved in muscle contrac-
ferring ions (and other molecules) across the epithe-
tion, and H /K+ pump that is involved in acidification
lium against a concentration gradient. lonic gradients
of gastric juices as well as kidney cell activity. Table
that are developed depend on the activity of three
16.2 provides a summary of some of the features of
classes of ATPases or protein pumps. ATPases were
these pumps.
discussed generally in Chapter 3. In reality, these are
 pa Aads snd asn are mor o
quite complex components of cell membranes in many
kidney function? The Nat /K+P-ATPase pumps located
 organisms. They are composed of membrane domains
on the basolateral membranes of the tubular epithelial
as well as catalytic and regulatory subunits located on
cells regulate intracellular sodium levels and thereby
the cytoplasmic face of the membrane. For example,
cell volume by moving sodium out of the cell into
 protons (Ht) from electron transport in the mitochon-
extracellular fluid. If the cell also has K+ channels in
dria pass through the F-ATPase system that powers
 the apical membrane, then K+ ions will be excreted
ATP synthesis within the internal membranes of the
 into the extracellular fluid as long as the electrochemi-
cal gradient is maintained in the appropriate direction
Table 16.1. Relationship between molecular weight and properties
(Fig. 16.9). If there are K+ channels in the basolateral
 of selected substances and urinary filtration.
membrane, then there will be K+ movement between
intra- and extracellular compartments that is driven
Substance
Mofecufar
Radius
Bfood/fiftrate
by the Nat /K+ ATPase pump. These mecharisms are
Weight
(nm)
Ratio
involved in the overall secretion of K+ and recovery of
Water
18
0.11
1.0
Nat by the cells of the nephron.
0.36
 While it is critical that appropriate quantities of
Glucose
180
1.0
Sucrose
342
0.44
1.0
 sodium and potassium be recovered from kidney fil-
Insulin
5500
1.48
0.98
trate to maintain the osmolarity of body fluids, the
Ova albumin
43,500
2.85
0.22
 Nat/K+ ATPase pumps either directly or indirectly
Hemoglobin 
68,000
3.25
0.03
Serum albumin
69,000
3.55
support the movement of many substances. For
<0.01
 example, if the apical membrane of the tubular cells
Adapted from Eckert Animal Physiology, Edition 5.
contains Na*/glucose or Na+/2Cl/K+ symporters,
sdund ased.i yo sasselo rotew aanui jo saniead '7'yt ajgel
Property
H F-ATP Synthase
H V-ATPase
NatAc P-ATPase
Location
 Mitochondria
 Plasma membranes (apical)
 Plasma membranes (basolateral)
Function
 ATP synthesis
 Acidification, gradient energy formation
Gradient energy formation
Action
 Uses H+ gradient to power
Uses ATP to create H+ gradient
Uses ATP to create gradients for H+, Na*, Kt,
ATP synthase
and Ca²+
Inhibitors
Azide
Bafilomycin
Ouabain
Urinary system
467
Lumen of
Blood
tubule
Na
Nat
K+
K+
ATPase
Fig. 16.9. Distal tubule ion transport. In the distal convoluted 
tubule and collecting duct of the nephron, the cells secrete K+ into 
the filtrate. Nat/K+ AT Pase pumps in the basolateral membrane
actively transport K+ into the cell where it then passes down its
 concentration gradient and exits from the apical end of the cell into
the lumen. This allows the recovery of Nat essentially in exchange
for elimination of K+.
 then the activity of these pumps can control the uptake
of glucose, K+, or Cl. This is just what selectively
happens within specific sections of the nephron. If the
 Nat/2Cl /K+ pump is located in the basolateral mem-
brane of the cell, its activity can drive the uptake of
B
Cl from the extracellular fluid (to be secreted into the
filtrate). Specifically, the presence of chloride channels 
Fg. 16.10. Nephron histology. Panel A gives a low-power survey
image of the tissue from the cortex of the kidney. The larger
or pores in the apical membrane of the cell allows the
rounded structures (arrows) are the renal corpuscles. The other
 passage of higher concentrations of chloride out of the
abundant circular profiles are cross-sectioned areas of various
cell and into the filtrate.
segments of nephrons. Most of the profiles would be either
 Figure 16.10 illustrates the histological appearance
proximal or distal convoluted tubules. Panel B shows some of the
of renal corpuscle as well as several cross-sectioned
detail of a renal corpuscle (outlined by the brackets). Ultrafiltrate
flows from this structure into the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT).
profiles of parts of a nephron. At first it may seem
In this case, by chance, a portion of the tubule that drains this renal
confusing. The larger rounded structures are the renal
corpuscle has been sectioned. The large arrow indicates the
 corpuscles, and the various tubules are sections through
direction of flow.
proximal or distal convoluted tubules, perhaps an
ascending or descending loop of Henle or collecting
ducts. Other tubelike structures include the network
 appearance of long parallel arrays of simple tubes is a
 of peritubular capillaries. Remember the name of the
major indication that the tissue section was prepared
beginning and ending section of the nephron: convo-
from a sample collected deeper into the renal medulla,
luted tubule. Because of its highly coiled, curving
perhaps near the apex of a renal pyramid. These
structure, a given histological section from the kidney
tubules likely represent the walls of the ascending or
 might well exhibit many profiles of the same tubular
descending loops of Henle of the juxtamedullary
structure as it is cut at various places. However, there
nephrons, peritubular capillaries, or numerous collect-
are distinct structural features that allow the identifi-
ing ducts.
cation of proximal versus convoluted tubules, or dif-
As filtrate enters the PCT, forces begin the recovery
ferences between loops of Henle and collecting ducts,
of important nutrients, ions, and water. Because of
for that matter. One simple feature that allows a quick
these activities, the structure of the cells of PCT and
orientation is the presence of renal corpuscles. If these
distal convoluted tubule (DCT) are distinct. As shown
structures are present, then the tissue section was taken
in Figure 16.1l, epithelial cells of both PCT and DCT
from either within the cortex or the fissue included
are cuboidal, but the cells of the PCT typically have
the boundary between the cortex and medulla. The
abundant microvilli and mitochondria. In paraffin
468
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Table 16.3. Summary of functions of nephron regions.
Region
Function
DCT
Glomerulus
Creation of filtrate from blood
Proximal convoluted
Major area for reabsorption of
tubule
filtrated water and solutes,
PCT
 obligatory water reabsorption
PCT
Thin descending limbs
 Maintenance of hypertonicity of
of loops of Henle
medullary tissue via
countercurrent system
Thick ascending limbs
Na*, K*, Cl reabsorption,
of loops of Henle
creation of osmotic gradient in
medullary tissue
Distal convoluted tubule
NaCI reabsorption, facilitative
Fig. 16.11. Proximal and distal tubules. This image is taken from
water resorption
the renal cortex and shows profiles of proximal (PCT) and distal
Collecting ducts
Final control of excretion of
convoluted tubules (DCT). In both cases the cells are cuboidal, but
electrolytes and water,
cells of the PCT are larger and have evidence of stained material
regulation of acid-base balance 
along the apical cell surface, evidence of abundant microvilli (arrows).
100
Table 16.4.  Rate of fluid flow in regions of the nephron.
Region
Rate of Ffow (mL/min)
Percent
Glucose
50
n
Glomerulus
124
100
8
Loop of Henle
50
40
20
Distal CT
25
20
Hippuric acid
Collecting duct
12
9
Amino
Renal pelvis 
1
0.8
acids
Under normal circumstances, nearly all of the glucose
Proximal
Loop of
Distal
 Collecting
and amino acids are recovered from the filtrate before
CT
Henle
 CT 
duct
it reaches the loop of Henle. The significance of mea-
 suring of inulin and hippuric acid to understanding
 Nephron region
kidney function is also indicated. Table 16.3 summa-
Fig. 16.12. Flow of selected materials. This diagram illustrates the
 rizes major functions associated with each of the seg-
dramatic rate of removal of amino acids and glucose from the
ments of the nephron.
ultrafiltrate formed in the glomerulus. By the time fluid enters the
 In addition to the recovery of dissolved substances,
loop of Henle, essentially all of the amino acids and glucose have
the rate of fluid flow also is dramatically reduced as
 been recovered in normal circumstances. When animals are given
 inulin or hippuric acid, the rate of appearance of these substances
each of the progressive segments of the nephron is
 can be used to monitor kidney health. For example, for inulin that 
 traversed. As indicated earlier, the capacity to regulate
 enters the filtrate remains, it is neither reabsorbed nor is any
the volume of urine produced is critical. As shown in 
transported from the peritubular blood (no secretion). This gives a
 Table 16.4, despite an average rate of filtrate formation
measure of the glomerular filtration rate or GFR. Hippuric acid, on
d a 'd -o e u uti- go
the other hand, is not recovered, but in addition, all of it in the
blood that enters the glomerulus is transported into the filtrate
is typically only about 1 mL per minute. Just how this
(100% secretion). Thus, evaluation of hippuric acid concentrations
 regulation takes place will be discussed in subsequent
provides a measure of plasma flow rate to the kidney.
sections.
sections of fixed kidney tissue the lumenal spaces of
Countercurrent mechanisms and medullary
the PCT sometimes appear as if the apical ends of the 
osmotic gradient
 cells are painted. This color and thickness is an indica-
 tion of stain accumulation on the proteins that coat the
The mammalian kidney has a remarkable ability to
microvilli.
regulate the concentration of urine to maintain the
The remarkable capacity of the nephron to recover
water content of the body so that the osmolarity of
important nutrients is illustrated in Figure 16.12.
body fluids remains within very narrow boundaries.
Urinary system
469
Box 16.1
 Alcohol and urination
While not an issue for our animals, it is often
 observed that drinking beverages containing alcohol
mOsm/L
seems to induce more frequent urination. Certainly.
Cortex
consumption of additional liquids has an impact on
300
kidney function, but it also turns out that ethanol
inhibits the secretion of antidiuretic hormone or
400
ADH. Can you use this knowledge to figure a mech-
anism to explain why this might occur?
Medulla
600
008
For most animals there is a very real danger of desic-
cation so the kidney is designed to reabsorb nearly all
1200
of the water that is filtered. However, if necessary, the
kidney is also capable of responding to produce very
hypotoric urine to eliminate water. For example, con-
Fg. 16.13. Kidney osmotic gradient. The difference between the
sider that a 10-kg dog likely produces more than 50L
osmolarity of interstitial fluid in the cortex compared with the
of glomerular filtrate per day but only 0.2-0.25L of
medulla is dramatic. The development and maintenance of this
urine. If the dog is water deprived it can produce a
gadient is important as it allows the production of either dilute or
very low volume of urine whose osmolarity is 10 times
concentrated urine.
 as great as blood plasma or, with water loading. urine
with an osmolarity of only 100mOsm/L. How does
water recovery does not occur unless ADH is secreted
the kidney manage these remarkable shifts (Box 16.1)?
 to facilitate this process. This is contrasted with reab-
The answer to this question is reflected in the
sorption of water that happens within the PCT. In
complex but elegant structure of the nephron, variable
these areas of the nephron the cells are always perme-
function of cells within different nephron segments,
able to water. This means, for example, that when
 and a urnique arrangement of blood vessels within the
sodium is reabsorbed from the tubular fluid the
tissue surrounding the nephrons. Three key elements
osmotic difference that is created allows water to
are involved in determining if concentrated or dilute
follow. Thus, water reabsorption in these regions is
urine will be produced. First, there is the presence of
referred to as obligatory transport. Since the tubule
 an osmotic gradient that is generated and maintained
is permeable to water the removal of sodium or other
in the tissue surrounding the juxtaglomerular neph-
solutes create an osmotic drive that water is "obligated"
rons whose loops of Henle dip from the cortex of the
to follow. Figure 16.14 illustrates factors that create
kidney, deep into the medulla. Second, the fluid of the
and help maintain the interstitial osmotic gradient.
tubule becomes progressively dilute as it passes
The vasa recta, the network of capillaries that follow
through the loop of Henle into the distal convoluted
the course of the loop of Henle, are also essential in
tubule. Third, the permeability of the collecting duct
maintenance of the osmotic gradient. This is because
cells to water can be directly regulated by the action
 this arrangement acts as a countercurrent exchange
of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). As the dilute filtrate
mechanism to minimize alterations in the concentra-
fluid passes from the distal convoluted into the col-
tions of solutes within the interstitial fluid. Essentially,
lecting ducts, it again traverses from the region of the
this allows the recycling of salt. Without this arrange-
cortex down through the renal medullary tissue to the
ment, if ordinary vessels paralleled the loop of Herle
apex of the renal pyramids for release. As illustrated
the medullary gradient would quickly be dissipated.
in Figure 16.13, the osmolarity of the tissue fluid
Specifically, as large amounts of Nat were absorbed,
becomes progressively greater, -1200mOsm/L, near
water would follow and the gradient would essen-
the lower regions of the medulla, so that given the
 tially be flushed away. In contrast, the vasa recta func-
 opportunity to respond to the osmotic pressure, water
 tion to minimize disruption. First, these capillaries get
will pass across the cells of the collecting ducts into
only about 10% of the blood flow. This acts to make
the interstitial fluid and be recovered in surrounding
blood flow relatively slow in comparison with other
capillaries. However, this does not occur automati-
capillaries. In addition, throughout the course of the
cally. In the absence of sufficient secretion of ADH, the
vessels, the cells are freely permeable to both water
water is retained within the tubular fluid and a more
 and sodium. Consequently, the blood makes passive
copious and dilute urine is produced. Water recovery
exchanges with the tubular fluid to maintain equilib-
or excretion within this region of the nephron is some-
rium with the surrounding interstitial fluid. For
times referred to as facultative reabsorption. That is,
example, as the blood flows toward the apex of the
470
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Interstitial
Na
fluid
300
osmolarity
(mOsm/L)
100-
300
300
300
Na
H,0
200
600
H20
H,0
 NaCI
 NaCI
NaCl
600
300
600
H,0
NaCl
700
800
900
500
H20
800
 NaCI
H2O
900
1200
 NaCl
1100
1200
Fig. 16.15. Countercurrent exchange in the vasa recta. The vessels
Fig. 16.14. Role of loop of Henle. The thin limbs of the loops of 
of the vasa recta follow the curved course of the loop of Henle.
Henle and the DCT' generate and maintain the osmotic gradient 
Since the cells are freely permeable to both sodium and water,
between the cortex and medulla. The osmolarity of the tubule fluid 
osmolarity of the blood (values within the vessel) can reach
leaving the PCT is about 300 mOsm/L. It becomes progressively
equilibrium with the surrounding interstitial fluid during transit.
more concentrated so that osmolarity increases as water leaves in
However, the blood has essentially the same osmolarity when it 
response the tonicity of the surrounding fluids. This is because the
enters and leaves the system. These transient shits allow the osmotic
 descending limb is permeable to water but not sodium. After the 
gradient in the surrounding interstitial fluid to be maintained.
hairpin turn, the fluid becomes progressively more dilute because
the cells are impermeable to water but not sodium. The differences
in permeability of the descending and ascending limbs and the
countercurrent flow act to create and maintain the interstitial tissue
Box 16.2Kangaroo rats
osmotic gradient. In the upper regions of the ascending loop (indicated 
by the thick lines) the cells are impermeable to water, but active
What are some adaptations that animals in very.
transport of sodium (chlorine follows via electrochemical attraction)
very harsh climates have completed to avoid dehy.
indicated by the black circles and arrows occurs. This creates dilute
dration or other osmotic disasters? Desert-dwelling
tubular fluid (~1 00mOsm/L) as the fluid enters the collecting ducts.
kangaroo rats rarely drink. They get about 90% of
As indicated, the permeability of the collecting ducts to water is
 daily water needs from tissue metabolism and
controlled by secretion of ADH. Control of permeability allows 
either diluted (low ADH secretion) or concentrated (high ADH
10% from food (seeds and vegetation). There are
secretion) urine to be created as needed to maintain homeostasis.
both behavioral and physiological adaptations.
They stay in cool burrows in the day. They have no
sweat glands, but most importantly, they have very
 renal pyramid, it loses water and gains salt because of
long loops of Henle. So they are able to concentrate
the increasing osmolarity. In other words, the blood
urine to an extreme degree. For example, they can
becomes hypertonic. However, after the vessels bend
concentrate urea to 3500mmol/L, compared with
in the region of the hairpin loop, the process is reversed.
400mmol/L in humans. Overall urine produced is
As the blood leaves the medulla and enters the cortex
20 times more concentrated than body fluids. Feces
the osmolarity is essentially the same as when it entered
 are also extremely dry.
the descending side of the system. These countercur-
rent exchanges protect the osmotic gradient that is
created by the selective actions of the descending and
urine, what are the factors that determine which type
ascending limbs of the loop of Henle. Figure 16.15
of urine should be produced? To understand this regu-
illustrates the idea of a countercurrent system gener-
lation we need to appreciate the fact that the kidney.
 ally and of the vasa recta specifically (Box 16.2).
specifically specialized cells within the glomerulus,
While the structure-function relationships among
afferent arteriole, and distal convoluted tubule, are
parts of the nephron explain much of the action of the
important in the long-term chronic control of blood
kidney with respect to the capacity of the kidney to
 pressure. A second key element is the fact that main-
control production of either dilute or concentrated
tenance of blood and interstitial fluid osmolarity,
Urinary system
471
while sensed by cells of the hypothalamus, requires
the cells of the wall of the afferent arteriole and a
changes in kidney function to effect homeostatic
segment of the distal convoluted tubule. Secretory
control of body fluid osmolarity.
cells within the JGA respond to decreases in blood
We begin by considering the role of sodium chlo-
pressure and /or very low concentrations of Na within
ride. More than 90% of the osmotic activity of extracel-
the fluid of the distal CT by secreting the enzyme
lular fluid is directly related to concentrations of NaCl,
renin. Renin acts to restore blood pressure in two
especially Na. In most sifuations, reabsorption or
ways. Mostrapicly, as outlined in Figure 16.16, increased
movement of salt across an epithelial or cell mem-
 blood renin causes an increase in the blood concentra-
brane also results in the movement of water because
tion of angiotensin ll. This agent has two actions to
of osmosis. Thus, the amount of salt in the body is a
help restore blood pressure. First, it causes a general-
very important determinant of extracellular fluid
ized vasoconstriction of capillary sphincters through-
volume and consequently blood volume and blood
 out the body. This acts to reduce blood flow through
 pressure. In short, all things being equal, reabsorption 
many capillary beds, increases vessel resistance, and
of more sodium from the glomerular filtrate of the
thereby increases venous return to the heart. The
kidney leads to greater reabsorption of water. Thus,
increased volume produces increased cardiac output
there is a direct relationship between kidney function
and therefore an increase in blood pressure. In addi-
and control of blood pressure via control of extracel-
tion, angiotensin ll also promotes the secretion of the
 lular fluid volume. Certainly, something as important
steroid hormone aldosterone from the adrenal cortex.
as control of blood pressure (volume) and osmolarity
Aldosterone acts to promote increased reabsorption of
cannot be left to chance. The first component involved.
Na from t
the distal CT. As indicated previously,
is the renin-angiotensin system.
enhanced recovery of Na within this region of the
Figure 16.6 shows cells that make up the juxtaglo-
nephron leads to simultaneous reabsorption of water.
 merular apparatus (JGA). The JGA is a combination of
The reabsorbed water enters the capillaries and con-
sequently the vascular system, which also increases
blood pressure. Furthermore, the angiotensin Il also
Hypothalamus
promotes the secretion of ADH. This is called the
ADH
renin-angiotensin system.
Aldosterone
The mecharism aldosterone uses to increase sodium
Increased H,0
reabsorption in the distal CT is not fully understood.
Increased Nat
recovery
reabsorption
Like other steroid hormones, aldosterone diffuses
Adrenal
cortex
across the cells of its target cells and binds to receptors
in the cytoplasm. These activated receptor-hormone
complexes migrate to the nucleus to ultimately pro-
Angiotensin Il
General
duce transcription of specific genes. These newly
vasoconstrictior
minted proteins are responsible for the effects of
aldosterone.
However, three detailed mechanisms
AngiotensinI
have been proposed to explain the increased sodium
 Renin
reabsorption.
First, the sodium pump hypothesis suggests that
Angiotensinogen
the activity of the Na*/K+ pumps in the basolateral
Fig. 16.16. Renin-angiotensin system. The secretory cells of the
 membrane is simply stimulated. A second, metabolic
juxtaglomerular apparatus JGA) indicated in the boxed area release
 hypothesis suggests that aldosterone increases pro-
renin in response to low blood pressure in the afferent arteriole
duction of ATP, perhaps due to enhanced fatty acid
and/or low sodium in distal CT. In a cascade of reactions, renin first
 promotes the cleavage of the serum protein angiotensinogen
oxidation, and that making more ATP available simply
(synthesized in the liver). This action produces angiotensin I, which
tively. A third hypothesis is that aldosterone increases
removal of two additional amino acids to form the eight amino acid 
the synthesis of sodium channel proteins that are
peptide, angiotensin ll, as the blood passes through the lungs.
deposited in the apical membranes of the cells. Fur-
Angiotensin Il has two major actions. First, it stimulates a general
vasoconstriction, which increases blood pressure rather quickly,
thermore, animals are stimulated by thirst to increase
and second, it promotes secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal 
water intake as illustrated by Figure 16.17.
cortex. As described previously, aldosterone promotes increased
There are also elements to "adjust" the activity of
reabsorption of sodium, which leads to increased water recovery,
the renin-angiotensin system to prevent extremes. For
increased extracellular fluid volume, and, ultimately, increased 
example, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is released
blood volume and therefore increased blood pressure. Finally
increased angiotensin Il also increases synthesis of antidiuretic
by cells in the atrium of the heart in response to
hormone in the hypothalamus. ADH increases water permeability
increased venous blood pressure. ANP acts to increase
of the collecting ducts to also increase blood volume and pressure.
urine production and sodium excretion by inhibiting
472
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Increased
the lumen of the nephrons, and the remainder exits
 Decreased blood
blood  
volume
via the efferent arteriole.
osmolarity
 Inulin, a sugar that is isolated from the tubers of
dahlias, is filtered from the blood, but it is neither
Reduced blood P
reabsorbed from the filtrate nor is any additional
Reduced
Stimulate
salivation
inulin secreted into the lumen of the nephrons. For
hypothalamic
Stimulate
osmoreceptors
 this reason, measuring the concentrations of inulin in
JGA kidney
 samples from the renal vein and artery following
Dry mouth
injection into systemic circulation gives a measure of
 Activate renin-
the volume of blood plasma that is filtered by the
angiotensin system
kidney. This is called the GFR. This determination of
Stimulate
hypothalamic thirst
the GFR is based on the idea of clearance, which is the
center
Increased
rate at which the plasma is cleared or cleaned of a
angiotensin Il
given substance. The clearance rate (RC) is determined
by the rate of elimination divided by the plasma con-
*Mucus membranes moistened
centration of the substance in question, as follows:
*Water absorbed
*Plasma osmolarity goes down 
UxV
RCx=
Px
Homeostasis
where RCx is the volume of plasma cleared of sub-
restored
stance × per unit time, Ux is the urine concentration of
 substance X, V is the volume of urine collected divided
Fig. 16.17. Thirst reactions. In addition to the kidney control of
by the time period of the collection, and Pis the
urine production, drinking must also be regulated. Multiple
plasma concentration of X. GFR is considered the best
elements (dry mouth, reduced blood osmolarity, and increased
single parameter for assessing overall renal function
blood angiotensin Il) act via osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus to
because its value is directly related to the functional
elicit the sensation of thirst that leads to drinking. Ingestion of water
moistens mucus membranes and absorption increases osmolarity of
mass of kidney tissue. In veterinary practice, measure-
fluid bathing osmolarity-sensitive cells in the hypothalamus,
ment of blood levels of urea nitrogen (BUN) and cre-
reducing the sensation of thirst and along with kidney action
atine concentration are often used as screening tools
restoring homeostasis.
 to detect renal dysfunction. Unforfunately, values typ-
ically rise markedly only when 75% or more of the
 nephrons no longer function.
 The total clearance of a particular substance is the
sum of the rates of filtration and secretion with the
the release of ADH and renin and thus secretion of
rates of reabsorption subtracted. To determine the fil-
aldosterone by the adrenal gland.
tration rate accurately, the effects of secretion and
reabsorption have to be taken into account. In the case
of inulin, since it is freely filtered but is neither secreted
Renal clearance
nor reabsorbed and is not produced in animals, it is 
ideal for calculating GFR. Indeed, the equation for
Data illustrated in Figure 16.12 show absorption and
 calculation of inulin clearance is in effect an equation
secretion patterns for some selected substances as
 for calculation of GFR as shown in the following equa-
these materials pass through regions of the nephrons.
tion, where GFR is in milliliters per minute, Cinulin is
Measuring changes in the concentrations of two of
the rate of clearance of inulin from the plasma in mil-
these substances, inulin and hippuric acid (specifi-
liters per minute, Unulin is the inulin concentration in
cally aminohippuric acid or para-aminohippuric acid
a urine sample collected over a period of time T in
[PAH]), are very valuable tools to evaluate kidney
 minutes; V is the volume of urine collected over time
function. To determine effectively if plasma is cleared
 T; and Pinulin is the average plasma inulin concentration
 or "cleaned" of unwanted waste products, two vari-
during time T.
ables related to kidney action must be measured. First,
we need a measure of the rate of blood or plasma flow
GFR =
Pinulin
to the kidneys, and second, we need to determine how
much of the blood plasma is filtered. You might recall
Again, since infused inulin (typically a standard
from our description of blood flow to the renal glom-
dose to achieve an initial concentration of -1mg/mL
erulus that as blood enters via the afferent arteriole,
of plasma or 3000mg/m? body surface area) is elimi-
some fluid is lost to create the ultrafiltrate that enters
nated only in the urine, its clearance rate value is equal
Urinary system
473
350 
over 24 hours (either catheterization or collection in a
metabolic cage). The volume produced is recorded,
300
and the creatine concentration is measured. The con-
250
centration of creatine in blood collected at the start
 and end of the collection period is typically measured
150
and averaged to provide a measure of plasma concen-
100
tration. These values are used in the clearance equa-
50-
tion to give an estimate of GFR. When many different
 animals are evaluated, it is better to express the GFR
 on a body weight or body surface basis (milliliters per
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
s rad a ad su   d a
GFR (mL/min/m)
meter) to account for the large variation between
species. Note the example given in Figure 16.18.
Fig. 16.18. Relationship between GRF and serum creatine. The
 Para-aminohippuric acid is useful because it is fil-
vertical line indicates the lower value for GFR that is still
 considered normal. The horizontal line indicates a normal upper
tered as it passes into the glomerulus. Moreover, the
limit for serum creatine. Animals in the upper left quadrant of the
remaining portion that passes out of the efferent arte-
 graph have higher than normal serum creatine concentrations and
 riole is secreted into the tubular fluid. Thus, all of the
correspondingly reduced kidney function as evidenced from the 
material that is in the blood plasma that enters the
reduced GFR (adapted from Haller et al., 2003).
 kidney appears in the filtrate and ends up in urine.
This property allows a calculation of plasma flow to
the kidney. This can be very useful to evaluate kidney
as well as cardiovascular health.
to the GFR. Measured values for inulin in humans are
 If less of a substance appears in the urine than was
U = 125mg/mL, V = 1mL/min, and P = 1mg/mL.
initially produced at the time of filtration, then some
Thus, the calculated value for RC for inulin = (125 x 1)/
reabsorption of the substance must have occurred in
1 = 125mL/min. This means that in 1 minute, the
the tubule. In a human, the GFR averages 125mL per
kidneys have removed or cleared the amount of inulin
min (mostly water), but urine production is only about
that would have been in 125mL of blood plasma.
1 mL per min. Clearly, most of the water is recovered.
Typical values for healthy cats, for example, average
For important nutrients (Fig. 16.12), reabsorption is
about 2.7mL/min/kg or -12mL/min for a typical
essentially complete in most circumstances. For example,
adult cat. Figure 16.18 illustrates the relationship
consider glucose; unless blood concentrations
are
between BUN and GFR in a population of cats. In this
abnormally elevated, all of the filtered glucose is
case, GFR was estimated from the clearance of injected
recovered so that the clearance is zero. There is,
inulin. It was also found that the serum inulin value
however, a maximum rate at which glucose can be
 after a single time period (180 minutes) corresponded
recovered from the filtrate. In humans, for example,
well with more extensive blood sampling. In practical
the transport maximum (Tmax) is about 320mg/min.
terms this would minimize stress associated with mul-
As long as plasma glucose remains below about
tiple sampling. Since some of the animals in this trial
 1.8mg/mL (180mg/dL), all of the glucose appearing
were suspected of being in early stages of renal disease,
in the filtrate is recovered. At about 300mg/dL of
it is also apparent that several of the cats with elevated
plasma, the transport mechanism becomes completely
serum creatine levels have correspondingly reduced
saturated so that glucose is lost in the urine. Exact
GRF values. This supports the predictions of impaired
 transport values likely differ between species, but the
kidney function.
idea remains the same. Specifically, elevated blood
Although the standard method to calculate GFR
glucose occurs with diabetes so that appearance of
is by measuring the clearance rate of inulin from
 glucose in the urine is an initial indication of diabetes
the blood, GFR can be estimated by measuring other
in both humans and other animals.
endogenous substances. In clinical veterinary situa-
tions, this can be done by measuring the clearance of
creatine. Creatine is a by-product of muscle metabo-
Kidney excretion of wastes and control of pH
lism that is handled by the kidney (at least in dogs)
much like inulin; that is, it is freely filtered, not reab-
As we learned in earlier sections, maintenance of 
sorbed, and not secreted into the tubular lumen. This,
blood and extracellular fluid pH within relatively
however, may not be true in all species. For example,
narrow boundaries is critical for homeostasis. Move-
in some animals, about 10% of the creatine in urine
ment of carbon dioxide from tissues and the bicarbon-
occurs because of secretion. In practical terms, the
ate buffering system of blood is a critical component
usual procedure is to collect the urine that is produced
in maintenance of pH. Clearly, the ratio of ventilation
474  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
rate to the rate of CO2 production determines the body
Carbonic
concentration of CO,. Changes in ventilation rate there-
anhycrase
COz + H0
HCO;
H+ +
HCO;
fore have an important role in modulation of pH,
 especially in the short term. However, the capacity to
Carbonic
Bicarbonate ion
2id
regulate excretion of CO, via the lungs and excretion
of acid via the kidneys combine to provide long-term
control of blood and extracellular fluid pH. In particu-
In reality, most of the CO, that enters blood through
lar, the excretion of acid or H+ ions in the urine is an
the capillary beds in transit for exhalation in the lungs
important aspect of maintaining the plasma bicarbon-
also passes through the red blood cells. Much of the
ate (HCO;) concentration in mammals. It is worth
H+ that is liberated from carbonic acid in the creation
remembering that normal digestive and metabolic
of bicarbonate ion is captured by oxygen-depleted
processes produce large quantities of acids that must
hemoglobin (Hb). CO, is also carried by depleted
be buffered and/or excreted.
hemoglobin (carbaminohemoglobin). Bicarbonate ions
At this point, a brief reminder of some pH and buff-
 diffuse out of the red blood cells in exchange for chlo-
ering fundamentals is in order. Since all functional
ride ions from the plasma. The situation is essentially
 proteins (enzymes, receptors, etc.) are influenced by
reversed as the blood gets to the lungs. Oxygen enter-
pH, it follows that acid-base balance is critical for
ing the red cells displaces the protons from the Hb,
homeostasis. When the pH rises above the optimal
and CO, enters the plasma. Carbonic anhydrase in the
value (-7.4 for most animals), the situation is referred
membrane of the endothelial cells also converts some
to as alkalosis; if pH drops below pH7.35, this is
 of the bicarbonate into CO2
described as acidosis. Because in a chemical sense a
The various chemical acid-base buffer systems in
pH of 7.0 is neutral, a pH of 7.35 is not, chemically
the body are essentially pairs of molecules that act to
speaking acidic, but the hydrogen ion concentration
 resist changes in H+ concentration when a strong acid
is higher than optimal for the animal. So for most
or base is added to the system. The three systems
animals, any arterial pH between pH7.35 and 7.0 is
are the bicarbonate, phosphate, and protein buffer
deemed physiological acidosis.
systems. The idea of protein buffering was illustrated
While all animals ingest small amounts of acidic
by the capacity of Hb to capture protons coming from
substances, most Ht are derived as by-products of
carbonic acid production. The bicarbonate
buffer
metabolism. Consider the breakdown of amino acids
system is especially important in the extracellular
from proteins or fatty acids from triglycerides or the
 fluid compartments and is a mixture of carbonic acid
buildup of lactic acid. Concentrations of H+ in blood
(HCOs) and its sodium salt (NaHCOs). In this combi-
 and consequently extracellular fluids are controlled by
nation, if a strong acid (HCl) is added, bicarbonate
(1) buffer systems, (2) respiratory centers in the brain
ions of the salt act as a weak base to capture much of
stem, and (3) the kidneys. The chemical buffers act
the Ht produced from the dissociation of HCl. This
produces more of the weaker carbonic acid. Again,
in pH. Changes in respiration rate and depth of respi-
since it is a weak acid, it dissociates only modestly so
ration begin to compensate for either acidosis or alka-
the pH of the solution is lowered much less than
losis within a matter of minutes. The kidneys have
would have been expected. In a similar way, if a strong
 very potent effects, but these changes require hours or
base (NaOH) were added, more of the carbonic acid
perhaps days before they are fully effective.
reacts with the NaOH to produce more of the weak
 The chemical buffers act by converting strong
+
base (sodium bicarbonate) and water. The net result is
acids or bases into weaker acids or bases. The point
that the pH of the solution rises only modestly. These
to remember is that strong acids or bases dissociate
reactions are illustrated as follows:
rapidly and completely so that the change in free
H ion concentration can be dramatic. Weaker acids
HCL
NaHCO:
HzCO3
NaCI
 or bases dissociate less effectively so changes in H+ ion
Strong
or OH concentration are reduced. Important buffer
Sodium
PIOR
bicarbonate
(weak acid)
systems in the body include the bicarbonate buffer
(weak base)
system, phosphate buffer system, and the protein
buffer system.
NaOH
HzCO,
NaHCO;
H2O
The respiratory system regulation of H+ ion concen-
Strong
Carbonic acid
Sodium
Water
tration revolves around the elimination of carbon
(weak acid)
bicarbonate
dioxide generated by cellular respiration. Briefly, CO2
[weak base)
that enters the circulation combines with water to
The phosphate buffer system operates in a similar
create carbonic acid. It then dissociates to produce H+
fashion. Its components are the sodium salts of dihy-
and bicarbonate ion as illustrated in the following:
drogen phosphate (H,PO4 ) and monohydrogen phos-
Urinary system
475
phate (HPO2-). NaH,PO4 acts as a weak acid, while
The kidneys, then, are critical for long-term reg-
Na,HPO4, acts as a weak base. The phosphate buffer
- o e  y aia d Apo yo u
system is only in low concentrations in the extracel-
pensate for acid-base imbalances caused by changes
lular fluids, but it is an important buffer in urine and
in diet or disease. One of the most important aspects
within intracellular compartments where phosphate
is the capacity of the kidney to either conserve (reab-
 concentrations are typically higher. As illustrated in
sorb) or produce new bicarbonate ions as well as
the following, hydrogen ions from strong acids are
 the ability to excrete bicarbonate ions if required. The
captured by converting a weak base to a weak acid
concentration of HCO’ in the plasma of most mam-
and strong bases countered by conversion of a weak
 mals is about 25 × 10-M/L and H+ ion concentration
acid to a weak base.
about 40 x 10-M/L. Since the composition of the fil-
trate that enters the nephrons is about the same; there
HCL
Na2HPO4
NaHPO4
NaCl
are relatively large amounts of bicarbonate but very
Bus
Monohydrogen
Dihydrogen
much less hydrogen ion. However, urine has a pH of
Salt
acid
about 6.0 with a minimal amount of bicarbonate ions.
{weak base)
As we discussed, metabolic processes demand that
 NaOH
 NaH,PO4
NaHPO4
+
HO
excess acid produced from catabolic events must be
excreted. So how is this accomplished? The goal is to
Strong
Dihydrogen
base
Water
add excess H+ to the filtrate to be lost in urine with
[weak base)
 little bicarbonate. If you consider the operation of the
Proteins located in the blood plasma and intracellular
 bicarbonate-carbonic acid buffer system dlescribed
proteins are also critically important buffering ele-
earlier, losing a HCO, from the system pushes the
ments (protein buffering system). Because of their
equation to the right and effectively increases Hf ion
abundance, proteins account for most of the buffering
concentration. In the opposite manner, the creation
capacity of the body. As we discussed in earlier chap-
 or reabsorption of HCO; from the kidney filtrate is
ters, proteins are chains of amino acids. Some of the
the same as losing H+ as the equation is pushed to the
amino acids have reactive or free carboxyl residues
left. To summarize, to reabsorb bicarbonate, Ht ions
-sp ym ([HOO-] sdna poe ono pn-os)
are secreted, but whenn excess HCO, is excreted, H+
sociate to release Ht ions when the pH begins to rise.
is retained.
 Other amino acids have reactive groups that can act
Let's first consider the events that allow for excre-
as bases to accept protons. For example, an exposed
tion of H+ into the filtrate (remember, this is in addi-
 NH2 group can bind a hydrogen ion to become NHs*.
tion to H+ that was initially filtered; you might also
This action effectively removes free hydrogen ions,
recall that urine is typically slightly acidic, -6 com-
which prevents the solution surrounding the protein
pared with blood plasma). Hydrogen ion excretion
from becoming too acidic. The same proteins can func-
 occurs primarily within the PCT as well as so-called
tion in a reversible manner either as acids or bases
type A cells of the collecting ducts. The hydrogen ions
 depending on the pH of their environment. Molecules
to be secreted arise from the dissociation of carbonic
with this capacity are called amphoteric molecules.
acid. However, as in the red blood cells, the carbonic
These buffer systems can effectively capture excess
acid is produced within the tubular epithelial cells
hydroxyl or hydrogen ions in the short term, but they
from the diffusion of CO, from the peritubular capil-
cannot eliminate excess acids or bases from the body.
laries and the action of carbonic anhydrase, which
The lungs can dispose of carbonic acid by exhalation
combines water and CO, to produce carbonic acid. As
 of CO2, but the kidneys are critical in eliminating most
each H+ ion is excreted, a Na+ ion is reabsorbed. This
of the other acids produced by metabolic activity.
maintains the electrochemical balance across the
 These include phosphoric, uric, and lactic acid. Calling
tubular cells. In general, the rate of H+ excretion varies
these metabolic or fixed acids is sometimes used to
with changes in the CO2 content of the peritubular
make a distinction between carbonic acid derived
blood. Since blood CO2 is directly related to blood pH,
from CO, and these other metabolic acids. For example,
these systems can respond to adjust to either rising or
acidosis that is caused by the accumulation of these
falling pH. High CO2 (corresponding with low pH)
"metabolic" acids is sometimes called metabolic aci-
would lead to a larger diffusion gradient for move-
dosis to distinguish it from acidosis that can be caused
ment of CO2 from the peritubular blood into the
by a failure of the lungs to eliminate sufficient CO2.
tubular cells. This would be followed by increased
 This failure can produce an accumulation of carbonic
production of carbonic acid, its dissociation, and
acid; thus, acidosis is referred to as respiratory acido-
therefore excretion of more H*. Some of this excreted
sis. Clearly, both types of acidosis depend on altera-
H+ can combine with urinary bicarbonate ions (HCO;)
tions in metabolism, but sources of the problem can
 to produce CO, and water. Some of this urinary filtrate
be distinguished.
CO2 can also enter the tubular cells and promote
476  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
further excretion of H*. A reduction in blood CO2
increases in blood bicarbonate would serve to counter
would produce the opposite effect.
the acidosis. For example, aldosterone is known to
The A cells are located primarily in the DCT and CD
stimulate the activity of the proton ATPases.
and serve as acid-secreting cells. These cells have a
As H+ secretion by the tubular cells continues, the
 proton pump in the apical membrane and a chloride-
pH of the filtrate drops, and consequently, continued
bicarbonate exchange system in the basolateral mem-
secretion is against an increasing concentration gradi-
brane. The cells also have high concentrations of
ent. The ability to secrete more protons decreases with
carbonic anhydrase, which serves to combine CO2 and
decreasing pH (higher H+ concentration) until, at a
HO making protons and bicarbonate ions available.
pH of about 4.5, acid secretion stops. However, more
The H+ ions are moved across the apical membrane
 protons can be secreted if needed if the acidic filtrate
(facing the filtrate) and the bicarbonate ions trans-
can be buffered. Depending on conditions, bicarbon-
ported across the basolateral membrane into the sur-
ates, phosphates, and ammonia can accomplish this
rounding interstitial fluid. The H+ions that are secreted
mission. Hydrogen ions can react with bicarbonate
can react with bicarbonate ions in the filtrate to create
to form carbon dioxide and water, with HPO²- to
carbon dioxide and water, which can diffuse back into
 produce H,PO4, or with NH, (ammonia) to produce
the cell. The net result of this process is that activated
ammonium ions (NH4). Thus, the kidney has three
type A cells can produce a positive uptake of bicarbon-
systems (bicarbonate, phosphate, and ammoria) to act
ate into the blood through the recycling of CO, while
 as buffering agents. The cells of the nephron are nearly
adding protons the filtrate. Thus, the A cells are acid-
impermeable to both ammonium ions and phosphates
secreting cells (Figure 16.19).
 so that these agents effectively capture excess hydro-
The activity of the A type cells and therefore the
 gen ions for excretion from the body. The phosphates
degree of acid secretion can be regulated. For example,
that appear in the filtrate are derived when filtration
in periods of acidosis, the activity of the cells is stimu-
of the blood takes place in the glomerulus; ammoria,
lated. This is believed to involve direct changes in
 on the other hand, diffuses from the blood into the
the proton ATPase activity (increases synthesis
of
tubular cells where it gets converted into the less toxic
transporter proteins and /or activity) as well as increased
 ammonium ion. The availability of phosphate for buff-
activity or synthesis of the basolateral membrane
ering is dependent on the diet.
 bicarbonate-chloride exchange proteins. In this way.
 Under acidosis conditions, plasma bicarbonate con-
centrations can fall so that the buffering capacity of
the renal filtrate is also reduced. When this occurs,
ammonia can become a major pathway for elimination
of excess acid. Ammonia is synthesized in the tubular
cells by the enzymatic deamination of amino acids.
Lumen of
Blood
 The amino acid glutamine is especially important in
tubule
this process. Ammonia is formed routinely in hepatic
cells, but it is rapidly converted to less toxic urea
Nat
and glutamine. Effectively, ammonia is carried to the
Nat
kidney cells in the form of glutamine, where its deami-
Nat/K+
nation produces ammonia. In its nonpolar, unionized
ATPase
K+
form (NHs), it readily diffuses across the cells into the
ipter
filtrate to combine with H+ to yield the highly polar
 ammonium ion (NH). Because of its polarity, it is
 essentially trapped in the filtrate so that it is excreted
CO2
co, t
in the urine. This pathway therefore allows for the
H,O
Carbonic
 s s e s e s r 
anhydrase
 gen ions.
H+
Bicarbonate ions are also clearly critical in the bicar-
Proton
HCO
bonate buffer system. If this reserve of base is to be
ATPase
C-
maintained, then the kidneys must not only act to
counter rising H+ concentrations by excreting more H*,
they must also either recover HCO; ions that have
been filtered or secreted or create additional bicarbon-
Fig. 16.19. Acid-secreting type A cells. A-type cells pump protons
ate ions. This involves a convoluted process because
into the filtrate of the nephron by action of an apical Ht AT Pase.
 This acidifies the filtrate so that the potential favors reabsorption of
the tubule cells are nearly impermeable to HCO, ions
Nat ions. The intracellular Nat concentration is reduced by the
present in the filtrate. A second type of cells, the B type
activity a basolateral Na /K+ ATPase pump.
cells, function as base-secreting cells. These cells are
Urinary system
477
Lumen of
Blood
 Proteins
tubule
Amino acids
Glutamine
cO2
Ammonia
CO2
H,O
Urea
Carbonic
Excretion
anhydrase
H+
Urea
NHg
NH4
+H + HN
HCO,
Proton
ATPase
Volatilization
Diffusion
Diffusion
CI
Jo/p Le
tapping
Fg. 16.21. Nitrogen excretion. Ammonia accumulates in tissue
fom the catabolism of proteins. It is either directly excreted, or, as
in most mammals, it is converted into less toxic urea or uric acid 
for elimination from the body.
Fig. 16.20. Base-secreting type B cells. B-type cells use the proton
ATPase proteins in the basolateral membrane to pump protons into
the blood in concert with recovery of chloride ions.
 ammonia is freely diffusible, keeping concentrations
 low (to allow movements down a concentration gra-
dient) requires large amounts of water. It is estimated
that 0.5L of water is necessary to excrete 1g of nitro-
    sx    
gen waste in the form of ammonia. Nonetheless,
porter in the basolateral membrane and a chloride-
 some animals do excrete their ritrogenous waste pri-
bicarbonate exchange protein in the apical membrane.
 These cells also express carbonic anhydrase. The result
marily as ammonia. These animals are called ammo-
notelic. Many fishes and aquatic invertebrates are
is that bicarbonate is secreted into the filtrate while
ammonotelic. There are also some animals (snails
protons are recovered (Fig. 16.20).
and crabs) that excrete ammonia into the air as a vola-
tile gas.
Urea is much less toxic than ammonia and in addi-
Excretion of nitrogenous wastes
tion only about 10% as much water is required to
    s   
Although we have touched on the relationship between
 with ammonia. On the other hand, there is an energy
 cost, since ATPis required for urea synthesis. Ureotelic
worth considering this important topic in a broader
 animals excrete most of their nitrogenous waste as
context. When amino acids are catabolized to be used
urea. Two primary pathways are used for urea for-
 as energy sources or for use as carbon skeletons to
mation. Most animals generate urea largely in the
synthesis other building blocks, the amino groups (-
liver via the ornithine-urea cycle as illustrated in
NH2) are removed (deamination reaction). In other
Figure 16.22.
cases, the amino group is salvaged for rebuilding non-
Uricotelic animals, which include birds and reptiles,
essential amino acids. However, if the amino group is
excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid or the closely
not transferred in this fashion, it must be eliminated
related compound guanine. Both of these molecules
from the body to prevent the buildup of toxic waste.
have the advantage of carrying away four ritrogen
Excessive ammonia can cause convulsions, coma, and
 atoms in each molecule. The nitrogen groups in uric
subsequently death. This also explains the importance
acid are derived from the breakdown of glycine,
 in removalof wastes from animalbedding and housing
 aspartate, or glutamine. These animals lack the enzyme
facilities. Animals excrete most of the excess nitrogen
uricase and so cannot breakdown uric acid. This
in the form of ammonia, urea, or uric acid. These
means that the poorly soluble uric acid precipitates
associations with protein catabolism are outlined in
and is excreted as a semisolid material. For example,
Figure 16.21.
the whitish-colored material in chicken manure is
Ammonia is much more toxic than either urea or
largely uric acid. An advantage is that relatively little
uric acid, so concentrations must be kept low. Since
water is required for excretion.
478 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 mately involves interactions between multiple organs
"HN --
ATP ADP
+
 and organ systems (Hildebrandt, 2001; Hughes, 2003).
HN
—0- po,
This includes the kidneys, intestinal tract, skin, respi-
CO2/
Carbamoyl
ratory system, and salt glands (for birds that possess
phosphate
synthetase
Carbamoyl phosphate
these structures). For our discussion, we will focus on
kidneys and the cloaca.
NH2
HN
 Avian urinary organs consist of the paired kidneys
CH2
C=O
and ureters, which carry urine to the urodeum of the
一
Ornithine
cloaca. As a reminder, the major segments of the avian
CH2
carbamoyl transferase
HN
digestive tract include esophagus, proventriculus and
"H
CH2
gizzard, small intestine, cecum, and rectum. The rec-
HC-NH2
CH2
tum (also referred to as the colon in birds) is relatively
COOH
CH2
short and serves to link the ileum of the small intestine
with the coprodeal compartment of the cloaca. The
L-Citrulline
HC-NH2
L-Ornithine
cloaca acts as a common pathway for digestive wastes,
COOH
.
excretory material, and reproductive activity. It has
three chambers: coprodeum, urodeum, and procto-
L-Citr uline
deum. The cranial coprodeum empties into the rectum.
L-Ornithine
HOOC-CH
COOH
The middle urodeum is separated from the other two
L-Aspartic
compartments by folds that serve to isolate this cham-
acid
ber. The urinary and reproduction tracts empty into the
urodeum. Birds do not have urinary bladders.
Cy
The avian kidney is typically elongated and divided
Arginas
Argininosuccinate
H
CH
into anterior, middle, and posterior regions. Within
CH
Lyas
CH2
COOH
each region there are cone-shaped subunits with a
CH
L-Argining
cortex and medulla called medullary cones. The med-
H
ullary cone and region of associated cortex that is
drained create a kidney lobule. Compared with a
-Arginine
      
Urea
heterogeneous. Smaller nephrons, usually positioned
near the surface of lobules, have simple (modestly
coiled) glomeruli and they lack loops of Henle (LLN,
Fig. 16.22. The ornithine-urea cycle.
loopless nephrons). These were traditionally called
 reptilian-type (RT) nephrons because they resemble
Comparative urinary physiology and function
nephrons found in reptiles. Deeper in the lobules
the nephrons do exhibit the loop of Henle (LN, looped.
While we have focused on the mammalian system to
describe and illustrate the anatomy and physiology of
thus the older terminology of mammalian-like (MT)
the urinary system, some appreciation of the diversity
nephrons. There are also variations in structure
in other animals is important. For this we will describe
 between the LN and LLN nephrons that are called
Aue pue onoisard Areun reae po sioadse as
transitional nephrons (TN). On average, about 20% of
(Goldstein and Braun, 1989). This is because of the
nephrons are classified as LN or MT. Regardless, both
importance of various domestic species—chickens,
 classes of nephrons empty in a regular pattern into
turkeys, ducks, geese, and so on—in production agri-
common collecting ducts. The collecting ducts combine
culture and many other birds utilized as pets. If is
 and descend to the end of the medullary cone where
evident that birds, like all animals, must regulate
a single large collecting duct empties into the ureter.
water and electrolyte balance to maintain osmoregula-
Since the tissue of the cloaca, like the large intestine,
tion for homeostasis. Some reflection illustrates
has substantial resorption capacity, much of the water
marked variation not just between mammals 
and
can ultimately be recovered.
birds but also between various bird species that occupy
Like the mammalian system, the avian kidney has
an enormous range of environmental riches. To illus-
a countercurrent multiplier arrangement where the
trate, consider marine birds that depend on seawater
 loops of Henle parallel the collecting ducts (LN neph-
 to provide their needs. Some wild birds can routinely
 rons). This means that birds are capable of producing
obtain the water they need through their food or pro-
urine that is hyperosmotic to blood plasma. For
duction of metabolic water. The majority, however,
 example, water-deprived birds can produce urine that
depend on drinking to supply requirements. Conse-
is approximately two times more concentrated than
quently, just as in mammals, osmoregulation ulti-
plasma. However, some mammals can produce urine
Urinary system  479
that is 20-25 times more concentrated. This likely
plants are low in sodium. This explains why herbi-
 reflects differences in nephron morphology described.
vores such as sheep, cows, and deer use natural salt
earlier (Randall et al., 2002; Whittow, 2000).
licks or mineral-rich soil. Most of these animals also
have high blood levels of aldosterone, the steroid
hormone important to enhance renal reabsorption
Avian nitrogen excretion
of sodium to minimize losses. For marine animals,
excessive sodium intake is a serious issue. Yet many
Urates, ammonia, urea, and creatinine all contribute
 species of marine and shore birds can drink sea water
to nitrogen excretion in urine of birds. However, based
as their only source of water for indefinite periods of
on experiments with domestic chicken, whether fed or
time. Given the relative inability of birds to concen-
fasted or provided low or high protein diets, urates
constitute 55-84% of total nitrogen excretion. Indeed,
trate their urine compared with most mammals, how
is this possible? The answer is that there is a nonrenal
urates are the major waste product of nitrogen-
pathway.
containing metabolites excreted by the urinary system
 Suborbital or salt glands exist evidently in nearly all
of birds and most reptiles and amphibians. Secretion
birds but are fully functional primarily in marine birds
of urates or uricotelism is an important adaptation to
 and in species that depend on hypersaline food and
allow animals with no ability to concentrate (i.e., greater
 water. These glands are best described in the domestic
osmolarity than blood plasma) urine (reptiles and am-
duck. In fact, when ducklings never before exposed
phibians) or limited capacity (birds) to survive and
to excessive salt become osmotically stressed, the salt
 prosper in arid habitats. Alterations in ammonia excre-
glands quickly begin to secrete a hypertonic sodium
tion are also closely related to acid-base homeostasis.
chloride solution and within 48 hours cells per gland
Urate circulating in avian blood is believed to be
increase two- to threefold, and the secretory cells
mostly unbound and therefore available to be filtered
become fully differentiated and active.
by the glomeruli. However, given the plasma concen-
The glands are paired and located in depressions
tration and rate of filtration, clearance of urate exceeds
either in or above the orbit of the eye. The glands are
that of inulin. It is clear that 90% or more of urinary
also distinct from lacrimal glands. Structurally, they
urate comes from tubular excretion. Most urate
is
are composed of lobes that exhibit closed secretory
derived from liver metabolism of purine. Uric acid is
units (tubuloacinar gland structure) that drain into
relatively inert and markedly less toxic than ammonia
central canals. Blood flow runs countercurrent to the
or urea. After secretion or filtration, the fate of uric
direction of flow of the secretions and the central
acid varies. In an acidic environment, uric acid is
poorly soluble, but with a typical urinary pH of 6-7,
canals coalesce into common ducts that drain into
the nasal cavity. Each gland has a medial and
most of the uric acid exists as monobasic urate. Urate
 lateral duct that receives branches from groupings of
also forms salts with sodium or potassium. This is
 lobes or lobules. Salt gland secretions either drip or
important because of the abundance of these ions in
urine. Sodium and potassium urate are also much
are shaken from the beak. Stimulation of secretion
 depends on nervous input via the Vll cranial nerve
 more soluble (6.8 and 12.1 mmol/L, respectively) than
(glossopharyngeal) and postganglionic fibers, which
uric acid (0.38mmol/L). However, this still does not
 release acetylcholine and vasoactive intestinal pep-
account for the high concentrations of urate typical in
tide (VIP). Both central and peripheral receptors
avian urine. Urates can exist in supersaturated solu-
are thought to be involved in initial stimulation of 
tions because of their ability to form colloidal sus-
nerve impulses. Osmoreceptors in the area of the third
pensions and to combine with mucopolysaccharides
ventricle appear especially sensitive to increases in
and glyoproteins, especially in the distal convoluted
 Nat concentration. Other receptors located around
tubules. This is believed to minimize formation of uric
 the heart and larger arteries respond by initiating
acid crystals, thereby promoting the passage of urates
impulses to the central nervous system via the vagus
through the nephrons and into urine. In addition, pre-
(X cranial nerve).
pue eN den aein jo saayds papuadsns inq panend
Salt gland secretions, as you would guess from
K so that these ions are not free in solution, thus these
the name, are nearly all NaCl with small amounts of
K', Cat, HCOs, and Mg. It is important to remem-
likely is a mechanism to enhance secretion of these
ber that, just as in mammals, interactions and integra-
ions despite the relatively small proportion of LN
nephrons in the avian kidney.
tion between multiple systems is required for osmotic
regulation. Nonetheless, the salt glands represent a
crifical adaptation in these animals. For example,
Avian salt glands
when the salt glands are stimulated by salt feeding or
dehydration, 75% or more of Na+ excretion occurs via
For many terrestrial animals, sodium is not easy to
salt gland secretion, as does more than 30% of K+
obtain. Most fresh water is low in minerals and most
elimination.
480  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter summary
Kidney blood flow
Introduction
 In usual circumstances, the kidneys receive about
 25% of cardiac output. The renal arteries enter the
It is difficult to overestimate the significance of the
kidney in the hilus, then divide into interlobular
urinary system. Certainly in human medicine, the
arteries, which pass between the pyramids and close
numbers of patients on dialysis who are awaiting
to the cortex where arched branches become the
possible kidney transplants are stark reminders. The
arcuate arteries. Each of these feeds interlobular
kidney is a key to metabolic health, maintenance of
arteries that supply blood to the afferent arterioles,
electrolyte balance, control of blood and tissue fluid
which provide blood to the glomerulus. The glom-
osmolarity, and elimination of multiple waste prod-
erulus is housed within the renal corpuscle, the inter-
ucts. The capacity of the kidney to produce copious
nal surface of which is Bowman's capsule and the
amounts of dilute urine or scant amounts of highly
entrance into the proximal convoluted tubule. Capil-
concentrated urine is a physiological marvel.
laries from the glomerulus combine to become the
efferent arterioles that give rise to veins correspond-
 ing to the arteries described earlier.
Urinary system
The urinary system consists of the paired kidneys,
Blood pressure, hormones, and regulation
two ureters, the urinary bladder (except in birds),
and the urethra. When sufficiently distended, the
It is easy to recognize the significance of the heart
urinary bladder discharges the stored urine to the
and blood vessels in control of blood pressure, but
 outside of the body.
the kidneys are especially important in long-term
 control of blood pressure. Fundamentally, the degree
to which urinary filtrate volume is recovered is
directly correlated with blood volume and therefore
Anatomy and function
blood pressure. Determining how much (or how
little) urine is produced depends on multiple struc-
There is probably no better example of the concept
tures and actions. For example, recovery of filtrate
of structure and function going hand in hand than
depends on the maintenance of an osmotic gradient
the kidney The primary functional component of the
in the tissue surrounding the loops of Henle and the
kidney is the nephron. This simple but elegantly
collecting ducts of the nephrons that are located in
organized tube and associated structures allow for
the border region between the cortex and medulla.
(1) filtering and creation of fluid derived from the
Near the beginning of the collecting ducts, inter
 blood plasma, (2) addition (secretion) of waste prod-
stitial fluid osmolarity is similar to blood plasma
ucts or recovery (absorption) of important nutrients,
~400mOsm/L, but closer to the distal end of the col-
(3) adjustments in volume of urine produced, and (4)
lecting ducts (deeper in the medulla), and near the
 control of blood and tissue acid/base balance, pH,
boundary between the descending and ascending
tet
 and osmolarity.
loop of Henle, interstitial fluid osmolarity can reach
1200mOsm/L or more (depending on the species).
The creation and maintenance of this osmotic gradi-
ent depends on the unique structure of the loops of
The nephron
Henle and the capillaries that are a part of the
descending and ascending vasa recta. The blood flow
The nephron begins in the area of Bowman's cap-
through the vasa recta is the opposite of the flow of
sule as filtrate is formed. Sequential segments of
fluid in the loops of Henle. This is called a counter-
the nephron include proximal convoluted tubule,
current flow. This arrangement, along with changes
descending loop of Henle, ascending loop of Henle,
in the permeability of the loops of Henle (descending
distal convoluted tubule, and collecting duct. The
different from ascending), allows the osmotic gradi-
location of nephrons (cortical or medullary) varies
ent in the surrounding interstitial fluid to be main-
as well as the relative length of the loop of Henle.
tained. The control of urine production depends on
These variations help determine the relative impor-
(1) the relative degree to which sodium and other
tance of individual nephrons in regulation of blood
ions and osmotically active agents are removed from
osmolarity.
the filtrate flowing in the collecting ducts and (2) the
Urinary system
481
degree to which the collecting ducts are permeable
between afferent and efferent arterioles near the
to water.
renal capsule. In these regions, cells in the space be-
The secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) has
tween these structures are differentiated for special
 a major impact on the permeability of the cells of the
functions. Populations of cells in the wall of the af-
collecting ducts to water. If ADH is not secreted or is
ferent arteriole called juxtaglomerular or granular
low in concentration, the collecting duct permeabil-
cells synthesize the enzyme renin. Modified cells
ity to water is poor, so there is minimal response to
of the adjacent nephron (the macula densa) along
passage of filtrate through the region of high inter-
with the juxtaglomerular cells create a grouping
stitial fluid osmolarity. In other words, the normal
called the juxtaglomerular apparatus. The release of 
osmotic forces that you would expect would cause
renin is controlled by sympathetic nerve impulses
water to leave the collecting duct do not occur. This
and /or reductions in blood pressure at the level of
means a larger amount of dilute hypotonic urine is
the arterioles. Renin acts on plasma precursors to
produced. On the other hand, when ADH is present,
 produce angiotensin I, which in turn is cleaved to
the cells of the collecting duct are highly permeable
produce angiotensin Il, which constricts other non-
so the osmotic forces allow water to be recovered so
kidney arterioles and increases blood flow and pres-
that a smaller volume of concentrated hypertonic
sure to the kidney. It also promotes the secretion of
urine is produced. Secretion of ADH is regulated by
aldosterone.
osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus.
Produced by the adrenal gland, aldosterone acts
Another blood pressure control depends on the
 on principal cells in the collecting ducts to promote
juxtaglomerular cells. Some nephrons have loops 
sodium reabsorption from the filtrate. This promotes
of Henle and corresponding distal convoluted tu-
additional recovery of water and therefore enhances
bules that pass in close apposition to the boundary
blood volume and pressure.
Review questions and answers are available
clearance for roufine measurement of glomerular filtra-
online.
tion rate in cats. J. Feline Med. Surg. 5: 175-181.
Hildebrandt, J. 2001. Coping with excess salt: adaptive func-
tions of exfrarenal osmoregulatory organs in vertebrates.
References
Zoology (Jena) 104: 209-220.
Hughes, M.R. 2003. Regulation of salt gland, gut and kidney
Banks, W.J. 1983. Applied Veterinary Histology Williams
interactions. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A. Mol Integr.
and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland and London.
Physiol. 136: 507-524.
Goldstein, D.L. and E.J. Braun. 1989. Structure and concen-
Randall, D., W. Burggen, and K. French. 2002. Eckert 
trating ability in the avian kidney. Am. J. Physiol. 256:
Animal  Physiology. 
W.H. Freeman and Company,
501-509.
New York.
Haller, M., K. Rohner, W. Muller, F. Reufter, H. Binder,
Whiftow, G.C., ed. 2000. Sturkie's Avian Physiology, 5th
W. Estelberger, and P. Arnold. 2003. Single-injection inulin
ediftion. Academic Press, San Diego, California.
17
Digestive system
Contents
Digestive System Overview
483
Functional Anatomy of the Digestive System
488
 Functions of the Digestive Tract
483
Mouth
488
 Peritoneal Cavity
485
Pharynx
494
Mesenteries
485
Esophagus
496
Blood Supply of the Digestive Organs
486
Stomach
496
Histology of the Digestive Tract
486
 Small Intestine
507
Mucosa
487
Accessory Organs
515
Submucosa
487
Large Intestine
519
Muscularis Externa
487
Gut Microflora
520
Serosa
487
Chapter Summary
522
 Enteric Nervous System
487
Digestive system overview
Functions of the digestive tract
 All animals need a supply of nutrients and oxygen
The digestive tract has eight functions:
that are obtained via the digestive system and respi-
ratory system, respectively. The digestive system
 Ingestion. This is the active process of bringing
 consists of the digestive tract, also called the gastroin-
material into the oral cavity.
testinal or alimentary tract, and its accessory organs.
2
 Propulsion. Ingested materials are moved through
The accessory organs include the teeth, tongue, sali-
the digestive tract by swallowing and peristalsis
vary glands, liver, pancreas, and gallbladder.
(peri = around + stalsis = constriction), which
The digestive tract is a muscular tube running
involves alternating waves of contraction and
through the body extending from the mouth to the
relaxation of muscles along the digestive tract wall
anus. Contents within the digestive tract are con-
(Fig. 17.1), and is the major propulsive mechanism
sidered outside the body, so in addition to digesting
moving food through the tract.
and absorbing nutrients, the digestive tract must
3.
Mechanical  processing.  Material  entering 
the
act as a barrier blocking the entry of pathogenic
digestive tract is physically reduced in size. This
organisms.
begins in the oral cavity where food is crushed
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
483
484  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Circular smooth muscle
behind contracts
Longitudinal smooth
muscle contracts in front 
of bolus
B
Fig. 17.1. Peristalsis and segmentation. (A) During peristalsis, the 
uscle layer behind the bolus contracts while that in front
of the bolus relaxes. Conversely, the longitudinal smooth muscle
behind the bolus relaxes while that in front of the bolus contracts. This
increases the diameter of the lumen in front of the bolus while constricting the diameter of the lumen behind the bolus. This results in 
propulsion of the bolus down the digestive tract. (B) During segm
sections of the digestive tract contract and relax,
resulting in mixing of the contents.
and sheared before being propelled along the
Secretion. Water, mucus, acids, enzymes, buffers,
digestive tract. The reduction in size of ingested
and salts are released into the lumen of the diges-
material increases its surface area, thereby facili-
tive tract along its length. Secretions come from
tating enzymatic digestion. In the case of rumi-
epithelial cells and glandular organs.
nant animals, food materials are also moved
6
Absorption. Along the length of the digestive
from the stomach back to the mouth for further
tract, nutrients including organic substrates,
hapter 1
reduction in particle size. Food is also churned
electrolytes, vitamins, and water pass from the
along the digestive tract by segmental contrac-
lumen into the body. In addition to absorbing
fions (Fig. 17.1), which further mix the contents
ingested nutrients, the digestive tract must
with digestive juices, but do not advance their
absorb secreted water, salts, and other secreted
movement.
material. Failure of such absorption will result in
4.
 Digestion. Following reduction in size, ingested
dehydration.
nutrients are chemically broken down into parti-
7.
 Excretion. The digestive tract is a site of elimina-
cles small enough for absorption. Although simple
tion of waste products. Such waste products can
molecules such as monosaccharides and amino
 be eliminated via either defecation or egestion.
acids can be absorbed without further reduction
8.
 Immunity. The digestive tract must provide a sub-
 in size, macromolecules such as protein, DNA,
 stantial barrier to prevent the entry of pathogens
 polysaccharides, and triglycerides must first be
into the body. The digestive tract acts not only as
reduced into smaller molecules. Specific enzymes
a physical barrier but also has an innate immune
complete such reduction
 system.
Digestive system
485
Vertebra
Pancreas
(retroperitoneal)
Dorsal mesentery
Digestive tract
Ventral mesentery
Liver
Peritoneal cavity
 Parietal peritoneum
Visceral peritoneum
(serosa)
Fig. 17.2. Peritoneum and peritoneal cavity. The cross section through the abdominal cavity of the horse shows the visceral and parietal
peritoneum, and the dorsal and ventral mesentery. Although not shown, the peritoneal cavity is filled with organs. Note that some organs,
such as the pancreas, are located in a retroperitoneal position, or outside the peritoneal cavity.
Peritoneal cavity
During embryonic development, the digestive
 organs are suspended from the body wall by the
The peritoneal cavity is formed from a serous mem-
 dorsal and ventral mesentery. The ventral mesentery
brane, called the peritoneum, which lines the abdomi-
 largely disappears except on the ventral surface of the
nopelvic cavity, forming the largest serous membrane
stomach, between the stomach and liver and between
in the body (Fig. 17.2). It consists of a layer of simple
the liver and the ventral abdominal wall. The mesen-
squamous epifhelium, the mesothelium, with
an
teries are named for the organs they supply (e.g.,
underlying connective tissue layer. The peritoneal
mesoduodenum, mesoileum, mesocolon).
membrane has a serosa, or visceral layer, that covers
The omentum refers to those portions of the mesen-
the organs in the peritoneal cavity, and a parietal peri-
 tery connecting the stomach to the abdominal organs
toneum that lines the inner surface of the body wall.
or abdominal wall. In animals with simple stomachs,
 The peritoneal membrane produces peritoneal fluid
such as carnivores, pigs, and horses, the greater
 providing lubrication between the serosa and parietal
omentum connects the greater curvature of the
layers, called the peritoneal cavity, thus reducing fric-
stomach to the dorsal abdominal wall (Fig. 17.3). It
tion and irritation. Diseases of the liver, kidney, and
folds over itself forming deep and superficial layers
heart can cause increases in this fluid production pro-
(i.e., four layers). It normally contains considerable
 ducing an abdominal swelling called ascites. Accumu-
 adipose tissue. The lesser omenfum connects the lesser
lation of this fluid can distort the internal organs,
curvature of the stomach and initial segment of the
 causing pain and discomfort.
duodenum with the liver. The falciform ligament
 attaches the liver to the ventral midline while the hep-
 atoduodenal ligament connects the liver to the proxi-
Mesenteries
mal duodenum.
 In ruminants, the superficial and deep portions of
The mesentery consists of two layers of serous mem-
the greater omentum attach to the left side of the
branes fused back to back, and suspends portions of
rumen and the right side of the rumen, respectively.
the digestive tract from the body wall. The mesenter-
They tract toward the right side of the animal, attach-
ies have three functions: (l) to provide a route for
 ing to the intestine and then to the right abdominal
blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves to travel
wall. Although most abdominal organs are located
to the digestive system; (2) to hold organs in place; and
within the peritoneum, some are located between
(3) to store lipid.
the posterior parietal peritoneum and the posterior
486
6 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Dmental foramen
Peritoneal cavity
Pancreas
Ascending duodenum
Abdominal aorta
Caudodorsal
Distal loop of
Caudal vena cava
Dorsal:
blind sac
Left kidney
ascending colon
Caudoventral
Descending
Descending colon
 blind sac
duodenum
Ruminal
(covered by
Dorsal sac
 Rt. longitudinal
antrum
greater omentum)
 of rumen
Lt. longitudinal 
groove
groove
Proximal loop of
Peritoneal cavity
ascending colon
 Superficial wall
ofgreater
Ventral sac
Reticull
omentum
of rumen 
of greater omentum
Superficial wall of
Deep wallof
greater omentum
greateromentum
Parietal peritoneum
Cranial part of
Abomasum
Ventral sac
Omental bursa
duodenum
 Ruminal
(covered by
Abomasum
recess
Rumen
(covered by
greater omentum)
Jejunum
greater omentum)
Supraomental recess
A
B
Fig. 17.3.
 Arrangement of mesenteries in ruminants. (A) In this view of the left side of a large ruminant, the greater omentum is visible.
(B) A cross section of the flank of a large ruminant showing greater omentum and peritoneum. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and
Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Mucosa:
·Epithelia
+ Lamina propria
● Muscularis mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis externa:
● Longitudinal muscle 
+ Circular muscle
Serosa
Fig. 17.4. Basic structure of the digestive tract. The four basic layers of the digestive tract, from the lumen outward, are the mucosa,
 submucosa, muscularis externa, and serosa.
abdominal wall, and are thus outside this cavity and
stomach, respectively, and the mesenteric arteries
are said to be retroperitoneal (retro = behind). These
 serving the small and large intestines. At rest, the
organs include the kidneys, adrenal glands, ureters,
duodenum, ascending colon, descending colon, and
the cardiac output.
pancreas. Those organs whose mesenteries remain
inside the peritoneal cavity are called intraperitoneal
 or peritoneal organs.
Histology of the digestive tract
Blood supply of the digestive organs
The digestive tract includes four major layers (Fig.
17.4). Listed from the lumen outward, they are (1) the
The splanchnic circulation serves the digestive organs
mucosa, (2) the submucosa, (3) the muscularis externa,
and hepatic portal system. The arteries of this system
and (4) the serosa. These layers vary somewhat accord-
include the hepatic, splenic, and left gastric branches
ing to region of the digestive tract, so the following
of the celiac trunk serving the spleen, liver, and
description applies to the small intestine.
Digestive system   487
Mucosa
external anal sphincter also generally contains skeletal
muscle permitting voluntary control of defecation.
The mucosa layer is a mucous membrane lining the
Along the remainder of the digestive tract, the mus-
inside of the digestive tract. It consists of three sublay-
cularis externa generally consists of two layers of
ers including a layer of epithelial tissue in direct
smooth muscle: an inner layer of circular smooth
contact with the contents of the digestive tract, the
muscle fibers and an outer layer of longifudinal
lamina propria, and the muscularis mucosae.
smooth muscle fibers. These layers control peristalsis
Within the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, and
and segmental contractions.
anal canal, the epithelial tissue is stratified squamous
epithelium that performs a protective function. The
remainder of the tract is mostly simple columnar epi-
Serosa
thelium and mucus-producing goblet cells. Shortly
after birth, the simple columnar epithelial cells develop
Most portions of the digestive tract lie within the peri-
tight junctions, thus forming a barrier between the
toneal cavity. The outermost portions, or superficial
lumen contents and the body. Prior to the formation
layer, of the digestive tract is lined with the adventitia.
of these tight junctions, an animal is able to absorb
As the digestive tract passes through the diaphragm
antibodies found in the colostrum until the epithelial
 and enters the peritoneal cavity, this layer is composed
cells undergo closure, or until the development of
of the visceral portion of the peritoneum, also called
tight junctions. Closure generally occurs within a
the serosa. There is no serosa around the oral cavity,
couple days after birth. Also found scattered among
pharynx, esophagus, or rectum. Instead, there is a
the epithelial cells are endocrine cells, collectively
layer of collagen fibers attaching the digestive tract to
called enterendocrine cells, which secrete hormones
surrounding structures.
coordinating digestive functions.
The epithelial cells have a life span of approximately
 2-3 days in the esophagus and up to 6 days in the large
intestine. These cells are always being sloughed off,
Enteric nervous system
and they are continually replaced.
The lamina propria, consisting of areolar cornective
The digestive tract has its own nervous system, called
tissue, binds the epithelial cells to the muscularis
the enteric (enteric = gut) nervous system, sometimes
mucosae. This layer also contains blood vessels,
Jo so pasod st i ,in a yo uea, au pae
sensory neurons, lymphatic vessels, smooth muscle
two large plexuses: the submucosal plexus and myen-
cells, and lymphatic nodules that are part of the
teric plexus. If the digestive tract is deinnervated, it
mucosa-associated lymphatic system (MALT). The
will begin to function near normally due to the sensory
MALT is present along the digestive tract and contains
and motor neurons in the enteric nervous system.
n pe xde a ss an an g s
The submucosal plexus, or Meissner's plexus, is
are part of the MALT.
located within the submucosal layer. If includes
The muscularis mucosa is a thin layer of smooth
 sensory and motor neurons, and postganglionic fibers
muscle fibers. This layer helps create folds in the
of both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
stomach and small intestine, thus increasing their
system. It regulates the activity of glands and smooth
 surface area.
muscle in the mucosa.
 The myenteric plexus, or plexus of Auerbach, is
 located between the two layers of smooth muscle
Submucosa
fibers in the muscularis externa. These neurons coor-
dinate the frequency and strength of digestive tract
 The submucosa consists of dense irregular connective
motility. Therefore, this plexus controls patterns of
tissue and contains large blood vessels, lymphatic
 peristalsis and segmentation through automatic local
vessels, and—in some regions—exocrine glands
reflex arcs.
secreting buffers and enzymes into the lumen.
The enteric nervous system also communicates with
the central nervous system via afferent visceral fibers
 of the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches
Muscularis externa
of the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic
nervous system also exerts extrinsic control over the
Within the oral cavity, pharynx, and parts of the
 functions of the digestive tract. Parasympathetic input
esophagus, depending on the species, this layer con-
 generally enhances digestive functions, whereas sym-
tains skeletal muscle that controls swallowing. The
 pathetic input inhibits these functions.
488
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Functional anatomy of the digestive system
have a ruminant stomach in which they can ferment
 nondigestible carbohydrates. The third group consists
The digestive system shows great variation among
of hindgut fermenters such as horses, rabbits, and
species (Table 17.1). These variations in structure
 guinea pigs. These animals rely on fermentation that
are necessary depending on whether the animal is a
 occurs in the cecum. The final group consists of birds
carnivore (meat-eating), herbivore (plant-eating), or
in which various adaptations have occurred to both
 omnivore (meat- and plant-eating). Arabbit is a typical
store and grind various foodstuffs.
 nonruminant example; its stomach and small intestine
are relatively small, whereas the cecum is well devel-
 oped in order to allow for microbial digestion. Non-
Mouth
 ruminant herbivores typically have a well-developed
The mouth is the space extending from the lips or beak
tion. Ruminants have a complex stomach that accom-
to the pharynx, and it is bounded laterally by the
 modates microbial digestion, a proportionately long
cheeks. It is also called the oral cavity, or buccal cavity,
small intestine, and a large colon. Carnivores, such as
and is where food first enters the digestive tract. The
dogs and cats, have a short small intestine, poorly
 mouth is lined with stratified squamous epithelium,
developed cecum, and average colon. The pig, which
which protects against friction. For further protection,
is an omnivore, has an intermediate size colon since
 the epithelium of the gums, hard palate, and dorsum
this is a major site of microbial digestion.
of the tongue are slightly keratinized.
Further evolutionary adaptations have occurred in
the stomach and gastrointestinal tract of animals to
Lips, cheeks, and gums
accommodate differing methods of digesting carbohy-
drates. As a result, animals can be classified into four
The lips and cheeks contain skeletal muscle covered
groups as follows. The first group includes animals
by skin. The orbicularis oris muscle forms the lips. The
with a simple stomach, such as humans, pigs, dogs,
 lips possess long, tactile hair, and regular hair. The
and cats. The second group is foregut fermenters,
s pue sans  d rdn al jo  n
which includes cattle, sheep, and goats. These animals
ruminants is called the philtrum.
Table 17.1. Length and capacity of selected parts of the digestive tract.
Species
Part of Digestive Tract
Refative Length of
Average
Refative
Absofute
Intestines (%)
Length (m)
Capacity (%)
Capacity (L)
Horse
Stomach
8.5
17.96
Small intestine 
75
22.44
30.2
63.82
Cecum
4
1.00
15.9
33.54
Large intestine
21
6.47
38.4
81.25
Pig
Stomach
29.2
8.00
Small intestine
78
18.29
33.5
9.20
Cecum
1
0.23
5.6
1.55
Large intestine
21
4.99
31.7
8.70
Sheep and goats
Rumen
52.9
23.40
Reticulum
4.5
2.00
Omasum
2.0
0.90
Abomasum
7.5
3.30
l
Small intestine
80
26.2
20.4
00'6
Cecum
1
0.36
2.3
1.0
Large intestine
19
6.17
10.4
4.6
Cat
Stomach
69.5
0.34
Small intestine
8
1.72
14.6
0.11
Cecum
Large intestine
17
0.35
15.9
0.12
Chicken
Small intestine
6
1.08
Cecum
6
0.13
Large intestine
5
.068
Dog
Stomach
62.3
4.33
Small intestine
85
4.14
23.3
1.62
Cecum
2
0.08
1.3
0.09
Large intestine
13
0.60
13.1
0.91
Digestive system 
489
Fornix of pharynx
Oral cavity
Nasopharynx
Hard palate
 Soft palate
Nasal cavity 
Tongue
Laryngopharynx
 Pharyngoesophageal
lumen
~Esophagus
Arytenoid cartilage
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartila GE
woy pauday) sop e jo peay ayn yanoyi uoas uepaw aui ui algisia s! ynow aul jo aneied yos pue piey ayl Aaen leio 's'zl s
Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
The cheeks form the caudolateral wall of the oral
sion, moving food, and making sounds. The extrinsic
cavity The gums, or gingivae, enclose the necks of the
muscles attach the tongue to bones of the skull and
teeth. The oral cavity is divided into the vestibule and
the soft palate. They allow the tongue to protrude,
oral cavity proper. The vestibule (porch) is the recess
retract, and move side to side. The lingual frenulum
xa pue qaan pue suna a Aq Aeua papunog
attaches the tongue to the floor of the mouth.
nally by the lips and cheeks. The oral cavity proper
 The superior surface of the tongue has many papil-
lies within the teeth and gums.
lae that are named for their shape. Filiform papillae
The palate is the roof of the oral cavity and orophar-
 are thorn-shaped, giving the tongue roughness and
ynx, and it separates the respiratory and digestive
thus aiding in licking and manipulating food. They
passages within the head (Fig. 17.5). It consists of a
have a mechanical function. In the ox and cat, they are
rostral bony part called the hard palate and a caudal
heavily cornified. Fungiform papillae are mushroom-
musculomembranous portion called the soft palate.
shaped, scattered among the more numerous filiform
The horse is unable to voluntarily raise its soft palate,
 papillae, have taste buds, and are thus mechanical and
and therefore breathes through its nose. The hard
gustatory (Fig. 17.6). Foliate papillae have a series of
palate is formed by the palatine, maxillary, and inci-
leaf-shaped ridges, are located on the lateral borders
sive bones. It forms a hard surface against which the
of the tongue, and have a gustatory function. They are
tongue can press food.
 absent in the ox. Vallate, or circumvallate, papillae are
The soft palate divides the rostral region of the
the largest and least numerous. They are located in a
pharynx into the oral and nasal portions. Projecting
V-shaped row near the back of the tongue. They
downward from the soft palate is the fingerlike uvula.
resemble the fungiform papillae, but are circled by a
The soft palate closes the nasopharynx as the animal
cleft containing taste buds. Marginal taste buds are
swallows. Birds, unlike mammals, lack a soft palate.
found along the edge of the rostral portion of the
The oral and pharyngeal cavities are combined and
tongue of newborn dogs, but they disappear when
referred to as the oropharynx.
puppies switch to solid food.
Tongue
Salivary glands and saliva
The tongue is the muscular organ filling most of the
 Salivary glands are extramural glands (glands outside
oral cavity. It is composed of interlacing bundles of
the wall of the digestive system) that are associated
 skeletal muscle fibers, and it is involved in gripping.
with the oral cavity. The secretions of the salivary
repositioning food, mixing food with saliva,
and
glands can be serous, mucous, or mixed. Serous cells
forming the compact mass of food called a bolus.
produce a watery secretion containing enzymes, ions,
The tongue has intrinsic and extrinsic muscles. The
and a small amount of mucin, whereas mucous cells
intrinsic muscles, confined to the tongue and not
produce a viscous, stringy secretion called mucus.
attached to bone, run in several directions allowing
Minor salivary glands are located within the wall of
the tongue to change shape as necessary for prehen-
the oral cavity and oral pharynx, and have short ducts.
490  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Philtrum
Superior lip
Canine tooth
Premolars
 Rugae palatinae
Soft palate
Molars
Vocal folds (chords)
Epiglottis
Root of the tongue
hferior lip
Foliate papillae
Dorsal aspect
of tongue
Vallate papillae
Median groove
anbuol
Fungiform papillae
Fig. 17.6. Tongue of the dog. The vallate and fungiform papillae are shown on the tongue of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002.
Used by permission of the publisher.)
They are named for their location (labial, buccal,
2.
Provides alkaline buffering and fluid. Bicarbonate
palatal). They are mixed glands, meaning they have
and phosphate in the saliva can neutralize acidic
mucous and serous secretions.
feedstuffs. As discussed further, the addition of
The major salivary glands are located some distance
alkaline fluid via the saliva is particularly impor-
from the oral cavity, and require ducts to carry their
tant in ruminants.
secretions. The parotid salivary gland is located below
3.
 Removes wastes. Metabolic waste products such
the ear (auricular) cartilage, between the masseter
as urea and uric acid are excreted in the saliva.
 muscle and skin (Fig. 17.7). The parotid duct parallels
Lubricates and binds. The mucus in the saliva
the zygomatic arch and opens into the buccal vesti-
helps bind masticated food so that it can be formed
bule. It produces a predominantly serous secretion.
into a bolus. In addition, saliva coats the oral
 The mandibular (submandibular, submaxillary) sali-
cavity and esophagus, thus protecting the mucosa
vary gland is located caudal to the angle of the jaw,
 of the oral cavity and esophagus.
and is a mixed gland. The mandibular duct runs ros-
5.
Initiates starch digestion. Salivary amylase begins
trally along with the sublingual duct, medial to the
starch digestion.
mandible, and opens near the sublingual caruncle.
 Assists oral hygiene. Lysozyme,found in saliva, is
6.
The sublingual salivary gland is under the tongue and
a bacteriostatic enzyme that lyses bacteria, thus
secretes mostly mucus.
protecting the mouth. IgA attaches to microbes,
Saliva consists of water (97-99.5%), and is therefore
thus decreasing their ability to penetrate the epi-
 hypoosmotic. Electrolytes in the saliva include sodium,
thelium. Cyanide, found in saliva, acts as a bacte-
potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, and phosphate. It
riocide, while defensins act as cytokines to attract
tends to be slightly acidic (pH 6.75-7.00). Saliva has
 lymphoctyes and neutrophils that protect against
several functions:
microbes.
7.
 Enables evaporative cooling. This is particularly
1、
Solubilizes food. Dissolves foods so they can be
important in dogs, which have very poorly devel-
tasted and digestive reactions can occur.
oped sweat glands. However, it is also used by
Digestive system
491
Parotid duct
Parotid gland
Sublingual gland
Mandibular gland
Zygomatic gland
apntt..
Major
 sublingual
 Mandibular
 Facial
 Lingual
 External
duct
duct
vein
vein
jugular
vein
Fig. 17.7. Salivary glands. The major salivary glands are shown in the dog. (Drawings reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002, and
Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004.)
cats that preen themselves and avian species that
 during fermentation in the rumen. An adult cow can
display gular flutter (very rapid, but shallow,
produce as much as 100-200L of saliva daily.
respiration).
In nonruminants, as the secretion of saliva increases,
Teeth
the concentration of Na',bicarbonate, and Cl increases,
while K+ decreases. In ruminants, as saliva production
The teeth, or dentes, are accessory digestive organs.
increases, the levels of Nat and PO4 in the saliva
They are located in the sockets of the alveolar pro-
decrease, while those of bicarbonate, Cl, and K+
cesses of the mandible and maxillae. Domestic animals
increase.
have two types of teeth: low-crowned (brachydont)
 Salivary glands continuously secrete saliva, thus
 and high-crowned (hypsodont). All domestic species
keeping the oral cavity moist. However, presence of 
have two sets of teeth, deciduous and permanent.
food increases salivation due to parasympathetic
Deciduous teeth are smaller and fewer in number.
nervous system stimulation. Chemoreceptors and
 Low-crowned teeth are simple teeth, as found in
mechanoreceptors send signals to the superior and
man, carnivores, pigs, ruminant incisors, and horse
 inferior salivatory nuclei in the brain stem. Parasym-
deciduous incisors. They consist of a crown, neck, and
 pathetic impulses travel via the facial nerve (cranial
root. The crown is the part projecting above the gum
 nerve Vll) and glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve
line and is covered with enamel. The neck is the con-
IX) to stimulate salivation.
striction between the crown and root, and it is located
The sight, smell, sound, or thought of food can also
 at the gum line. The root is the part below the gum
stimulate saliva production. This was evidenced when
line. High-crowned teeth, which have no distinct neck,
 Pavlov trained dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell.
are found in all permanent horse teeth, ruminant
Such salivation helps initiate digestion as soon as food
 cheek teeth (i.e., premolars and molars), and the tusks
 enters the oral cavity.
of pigs.
The saliva in ruminants is isotonic, containing high
Teeth
are
 composed of three layers: cementum,
concentrations of bicarbonate and phosphate, and a
enamel, and dentin (Fig. 17.8). Cementum, a thin,
high pH. This saliva acts to buffer the acids produced
bonelike covering. is found on the entire tooth of
492
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
C
Infundibulum
Vestibular
Lingual
Clinical
surface
surface
crown
Central canal
Neck
-Peripheral enamel
Clinical
Clinical
root
crown
-- Cementum
Attachment
Occlusal
 of gingiva
G
surface
Dentin
Lingual
Vestibular
surface
Body
surface
Cementum
Pulp
cavity
Clinical
Root
root
H
Occlusal 
surface
Clinical
crown
Vestibular
surface
Clinical
root
Fig. 17.8. Teeth of the horse. Vertical section of a permanent incisor (A). Vestibular surface (B), left side (C), and lingual surface (D) of the
first right-lower deciduous incisor. Vestibular surface (E), left side (F), and lingual surface (G) of first right-lower permanent incisor. Third
right-lower permanent premolar (H) and second left-lower permanent molar (I). (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004.
 Used by permission of the publisher.)
high-crowned teeth, but only on the root of low-
in the incisive part of the mandible. The canine is the
crowned teeth. It attaches the root to the periodontal
large tooth between the incisors and cheek teeth.
ligament. Enamel, the hardest substance in the body
Cheek teeth are those teeth caudal to the canine and
(consisting of 95% calcium salts by dry weight), covers
incisors in the maxillary. They include the premolars
the crown of low-crowned teeth and the body (portion
located in the rostral cheek area and molars located
of tooth below crown in high-crowned teeth) and
caudal to the premolars.
crown of high-crowned teeth. The enamel protects the
 Cheek teeth function in grinding, while incisors are 
 dentin from acids. Dentin, which makes up the bulk
 merely for shearing and biting.
of the tooth, is similar to bone only harder because it
Pigs have 44 teeth; other domestic species have
has a higher content of calcium salts.
fewer due to a decreased number of cheek teeth (Table
The dentin surrounds a cavity. Within the crown,
17.2). Ruminants lack upper incisors and canines,
this cavity is the pulp cavity, and it is filled with pulp.
which are replaced by a dental pad. They also lack the
a connective tissue containing blood vessels, nerves,
first upper and lower premolar, giving them 32 per-
 and lymphatic vessels. Narrow extensions of the pulp
 manent teeth. Dogs are missing the upper third molars
cavity project into the roots and are called the root
and therefore have 42 teeth. Brachiocephalic breeds
canals.
(those dogs that have shortened noses and very prom-
 Teeth are divided into groups according to their
 inent eyes due to shallow orbit) may be missing addi-
location and func tion. Incisors are located in the rostral
 tional teeth. Horses are usually missing the first upper
 s  a (   a g 
premolar and are always missing the lower first pre-
embedded in the incisive bone and the lower incisors
molar. Mares often have smaller canines that may not
Digestive system
493
Molars
Premolars
Incisive teeth
Canine teeth
Carnassial teeth
Fig. 17.9. Teeth of the dog. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2002. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Table 17.2. Number of teeth in various species.
Species
Deciduous
Permanent
Cat
2 (I 3/3 C 1/1 P 3/2) = 26
2 (I 3/3 C 1/1 P 3/2 M 1/1) = 30
Dog
2(1 3/3 C 1/1 P 3/3) = 28
2 (I 3/3 C 1/1 P 4/4 M 2/3) = 42
Horse
2(1 3/3 C 0/0 P 3/3) = 24
9E={/E W E/()  (0)/(0) E/E 1)
Pig
2(1 3/3 C 1/1 P 3/3) = 28
2 (I 3/3 C 1/1 P 4/4 M 3/3) = 44
Ruminant
2(I 0/4 P 3/3) = 20
2(1 0/4 P 3/3 M 3/3) = 32
I, incisor; C, canine; P, premolar; M, molar.
Table 17.3. Nomenclature for teeth.
Term
Meaning
Floating
The filing off of sharp edges (points) of the horse's cheek teth
Needle teeth
The pig's deciduous third incisors and canines. They are often nipped off in
newborn pigs to benefit the sow suckling.
Parrot mouth
Seen in a horse when the mandible is shorted
Scissor mouth
 Seen in a horse when an oblique angle to the incisors forms on the occlusal
surface due to uneven wear
Shear mouth
Seen in a horse in which there is a narrow lower dental arch requiring frequent
floating
Sow mouth
Seen in a horse when the mandible is elongated
Tusks
The canine teeth of the pig. The lower tusks are larger than the upper.
Wolf teeth
 The horse's rudimentary upper fist premolars. They are usually absent.
erupt. As a result, horses may possess 36-42 perma-
manent incisors are present, the horse is probably
 nent teeth. Various terms used when discussing teeth
under 2-1/2 years old. Deciduous teeth are character-
are shown in Table 17.3.
ized by a distinct neck and are smaller and usually
The eruption and wear of the lower incisors can be
lack longitudinal ridges seen in permanent teeth. The
used to estimate a horse's age (Fig. 17.10). If no per-
incisors erupt at the following times: Il, 2-1/2 years;
494 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
B
C
G
H
Fig. 17.10. Aging horses using the lower incis
SO[S.{A}
weeks old. (C) 7 months old. (D) 3 years old. (E) 4 years old.
(F) 5 years old. (G) 10 years old. (H) 15 years old. (l) 20 ye
s old. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. Used by
permission of the publisher.>
12, 3-1/2 years; and 13, 4-1/2 years. If all incisors have
pharynx. It extends from the internal nares to the
erupted, and 13 is worn such that a little dentin is
esophagus. It connects the nasal and oral cavities with
 seen, the horse is approximately 5 years old. Disap-
the trachea and esophagus, respectively. The soff
pearance of the cup from the respective lower
palate divides the rostral portion of the pharynx into
incisors can indicate age as follows: li, 6 years old;
the oropharynx and nasopharynx, and the caudal-
12, 7 years old; and 13, 8 years old. Disappearance
 most portion of the pharynx is called the laryngophar-
 of the cup from the upper incisors can indicate age
ynx (Fig. 17.1l). The nasopharynx is located dorsal to
as follows: 11, 9 years old; 12, 10 years old; and 13, 11
the soff palate extending from the caudal nares to the
years old.
laryngopharynx with the caudal edge of the soft palate
a u i eds sae peedoeed pu
laryngopharynx. The oropharynx lies ventral to the
Pharynx
 soft palate. The laryngopharynx is where air crosses 
 to the larynx and food and water crosses to the esoph-
 The pharynx is the common passageway for food and
agus. It is located between the base of the epiglottis
air. As food first passes from the mouth, it enters the
 and esophageal entrance.
Digestive system
495
Nasopharynx
Laryngopharynx
Oropharynx
 Pharyngeal opening of auditory tube
Soft palate
Nasopharynx
Arytenoid cartilage
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Lamina of the
cricoid cartilage
Basihyoid bone
Arch of the .
cnicoid cartilage
Tracheal rings
 Epiglotis
Thyroid cartilage
Vocal cord
B
Fig. 17.11. Upper digestive tract of horse. (A) A median section of the head of the horse showing the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and 
laryngopharynx. (B) An expanded drawing of the pharynx and larynx. (Reprinted from Constantinescu et al., 2004. Used by permission of the
publisher.)
The tonsils are an aggregation of lymphatic tissue
Swallowing
in the mucosa of the pharynx. They are named for
their location (i.e., palatine, pharyngeal, or tubal,
The act of swallowing, or deglutition, moves food
which are found around the auditory tube). They help
from the mouth, through the pharynx to the esopha-
 gus, so that it can be transported to the stomach. Saliva
isms and toxic substances. In birds, there is no sharp
and mucus facilitatethis movement.  Swallowing
distinction between the pharynx and mouth.
involves three stages:
496  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Soft and hard
palate
Nasopharyn>
Food bolus
Oropharynx
Epiglottis
Region of glottis
Breathing
Swallowing
Fig. 17.12. Swallowing. During swallowing, the tongue forces the bolus into the oropharynx, thus raising the soft palate and closing of the
Aa sh suaid alym sneydosa aui oi sniog aui suai 'sno aui jaon oi snaida ayn suimole sas xuiel aue 'uaul xuieudosu
into the larynx. Once in the esophagus, the bolus is moved to the stomach by peristaltic waves. (Figure modified from Pasquini et al., 1995.)
Voluntary stage. Bolus moved into the orophar-
Histology of the esophagus
ynx.
The esophagus has four layers, as described previ-
2.
Pharyngeal stage. Bolus moves involuntarily
through the pharynx to the esophagus.
ously in this chapter. The outermost layer is the adven-
titia rather than the serosa since the areolar connective
3.
Esophageal stage. Bolus moves involuntarily
tissue is not covered by mesothelium, and the connec-
through the esophagus to the stomach.
 five tissue merges with structures in the mediastinum,
 The tongue, after forming a bolus, propels it from
thus attaching the esophagus to surrounding struc-
the oral cavity to the oropharynx (Fig. 17.12). This is
 tures. The muscularis externa layer varies in the pro-
carried out by skeletal muscle fibers, and is thus the
 portion of skeletal and smooth muscle, depending on
voluntary stage. The presence of a bolus in the oro-
the species. The esophagus of birds consists entirely
pharynx initiates the pharyngeal stage in which
of smooth muscle; that of cats, dogs, pigs, and rumi-
impulses are carried to the deglutition center in the
nants consists mostly of smooth muscle, with a small
medullar oblongata and lower pons of the brain stem.
portion of skeletal muscle just as the esophagus nears
Motor signals from these centers close off the naso-
the stomach.
pharynx, and cause the larynx to move forward and
upward, allowing the epiglottis to move backward
and downward sealing off the rima glottide, the
Stomach
opening in the larynx. After the bolus travels from the
laryngopharynx to the esophagus, the respiratory pas-
The stomach is located at the inferior end of the esoph-
sageways reopen.
agus and cranial portion of the abdominal cavity. It is
found left of the median plane. It has four functions:
(1) storage of ingested food, (2) mechanical break-
121
Esophagus
down of ingested food, (3) disruption of chemical
bonds of food through the action of acids and enzymes,
l
The esophagus is a collapsible muscular tube lying
and (4) production of the intrinsic factor required for
 behind the trachea. It extends from the laryngophar
vitamin B2 absorption from the small intestine. Mono-
ynx, passes through the mediastinum, pierces the dia-
gastric animals have a single, simple stomach, and
phragm at the esophageal hiatus, and ends at the
ruminants have a complex stomach consisting of four
superior portion of the stomach. A hiatal herria occurs
chambers. The true stomach is the area that produces
when a part of the stomach protrudes through the
hydrochloric acid.
diaphragm at the esophageal hiatus.
 In many species of birds, the upper portion of the 
Anatomy of the monogastric stomach 
esophagus is expanded to form the crop. The crop
stores food and, in some species (ie., pigeons), pro-
In monogastric animals, the stomach appears as a
duces a secretion called crop milk that is used to feed
J-shaped structure. Its concave lateral surface is the
the young.
greater curvature, and the smaller concave medial
Digestive system-
497
Cardia
body. The pyloric antrum narrows to the pyloric
canal, which cornects to the pylorus. The pylorus
Fundus
Esophagus
is separated from the duodenum by the pyloric
sphincter. The pyloric sphincter consists of modi-
fied smooth muscle that acts as a valve controlling
the flow of chyme exiting the stomach.
Pyloric sphincter
The stomach is innervated by fibers from the auto-
nomic nervous system. Sympathetic fibers originate
from the thoracic splanchnic nerves and carry signals
Lesser curvature
to the celiac plexus. Parasympathetic fibers are sup-
 plied by the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X). The arterial
Body
Pyloric antrum
 supply comes from branches of the gastric and splenic
arteries; the veins are part of the hepatic portal system.
Greater curvature
Histology of the monogastric stomach
Fig. 17.13. Stomach of the horse. (Adapted from Constantinescu,
The stomach is lined with simple columnar epithe-
G.M. and I.A. Constantinescu, 2004. Clinical Dissection Guide for
lium with goblet cells. The many goblet cells produce
Large Animals. lowa State Press, Ames, lowa.)
a layer of mucus protecting the mucosal surface of the
 stomach. Gastric pits, or shallow depressions, are
visible on the mucosal surface. The walls of the gastric
surface is the lesser curvature. The greater and lesser
pits are formed mainly from goblet cells. Gastric pits
omenta attach to the greater and lesser curvature,
open into gastric glands (Fig. 17.14). The gastric glands
respectively.
are composed of different cells cepending on the
 In addition to the circular and longitudinal smooth
stomach region. The cardia and pyloric regions contain
 muscle layers found along the remainder of the diges-
 primarily mucus-secreting cells, and the glands in the
tive tract, the muscularis externa of the stomach has
 pyloric antrum produce mucus and hormones includ-
an additional inner oblique or transverse layer. This
ing gastrin. In the fundus, the glands produce the
extra layer of muscle helps strengthen the stomach
majority of the stomach secretions, including acid.
wall and assist with mixing the chyme, the partially
There are four cell types in gastric glands.
digested food, with enzymes and acid. As food
lis
Mucous neck cells. Found in the upper, or neck,
ingested, the muscles of the stomach relax to accom-
L.
region of a gastric gland, they produce a more
modate the increased volume of food. While relaxed,
acidic mucus than goblet cells.
prominent folds called rugae are visible on the stomach
2.
 Parietal cells. Found in the middle region, they
 mucosa. As the stomach expands, the rugae spread or
secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl) and intrinsic
flatten out.
factor. Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein necessary
The stomach is typically divided into four regions
for absorption of vitamin Bi2 in the small intestine.
(Fig. 17.13):
These cells are shaped like pitchforks with three
 Cardia. The cardia is the smallest region, and is
prongs, each covered extensively with microvilli,
found at the junction between the stomach and
thus increasing their surface area for secretion.
esophagus. It is located near the heart, and thus is
The HCl decreases the pH of the stomach to 1.5-
 the "cardia" region. This region contains numer-
3.5. This low pH has several functions: (1) It is
ous mucous glands that help protect the esopha-
necessary for the function of pepsin; (2) it provides
gus from the acids and enzymes of the stomach.
a harsh environment for bacteria ingested with
 Fundus. The fundus lies superior to the junction
food; (3) it denatures proteins and inactivates
between the cardia region, acting as a blind-ended
enzymes in food; and (4) it breaks down cell
sac.
walls of plant material and connective tissue in
3.
Body. The body, the largest region, is located
meat.
between the fundus and the pylorus. The body
3.
 Chief cells. These cells produce pepsinogen, the
functions as a mixing tank for the stomach, and it
inactive form of pepsin, and an enzyme that
is the site where most acid and enzyme secretion
digests proteins. When pepsinogen is first released,
occurs.
it interacts with HCl and converts it to its active
4.
 Pyloric region. The pyloric region is the caudal-
form, pepsin. Once activated, pepsin can convert
most portion of the stomach. It consists of the
other molecules of pepsinogen to pepsin. Chief
pyloric antrum (antrum = cave) connected to the
cells also secrete minor amounts of lipases.
498 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Pit
Pepsin
HCI
Pepsinogen
Mucous neck
cell
Parietal cell
Chief cell
 Enteroendocrine
cell
Fig. 17.14. Gastric glands. The histological section of a gastric gland shows the gastric pit, the entrance to the gastric gland. within the
gland are neck cells that secrete mucus, parietal cells that secrete HCl, chief cells that secrete pepsinogen, and enteroendocrine cells that
secrete hormones. G cells, which secrete gastrin, are an example of enteroendocrine cells. Once released into the stomach lumen, pepsinogen
is converted to pepsin by the action of HCl and pepsin.
4.
Enteroendocrine cells. These cells produce a
 of adult animals. Dietary proteins are denafured by
variety of hormones or hormonelike products that
 HCl secreted by the parietal cells. However, HCl is not
are released into the lamina propria. Products
 produced within the parietal cells because it would
include gastrin, histamine, endorphins, serotonin,
destroy the cell. Both H+ and Cl are independently
cholecystokinin (CCK), and somatostatin.
 transported from the parietal cells into the stomach
 p ae sn uaspa (rt ) 
 The mucosa of the stomach must provide a substan-
 the dissociation of carbonic acid that is produced by
tial barrier against the harsh environment found in the
 the enzyme carbonic anhydrase acting upon CO, and
stomach. The concentration of H+ is 10,0o0 times that
HO. Hydrogen ions are then transported into the
found in blood. Pepsin, if not contained, can digest the
stomach lumen in exchange for K+. Chloride ions enter
lining of the stomach. The mucosal barrier of the
the parietal cell in exchange for bicarbonate ions. The
stomach contains a thick, bicarbonate-rich mucus
chloride ions then travel down their concentration
lining. In addition, the epithelial cells are connected
gradient and enter the stomach lumen. Once in the
by tight junctions to prevent the leakage of luminal
lumen, hydrogen and chloride ions combine, produc-
 contents to deeper gastric layers. Finally, the epithelial
 cells are replaced every 3-6 days by division of undif-
ing HCl. Since the pH of the lumen can be as low as
1.5-2.0, this can represent nearly a millionfold (6log
 ferentiated stem cells found in the gastric pits.
units) increase in hydrogen ion concentration. When
parietal cells are producing considerable HCl, a sig-
Gastric secretions
nificant amount of bicarbonate enters the blood, thus
Pepsin is not produced within the chief cells because
increasing the pH in what is called the alkaline tide.
this would cause the self-digestion of the cells. Instead,
 Parietal cells respond to many signals. Located on
chief cells produce the zymogen (i.e., the precursor
their surface are receptors for histamine, acetylcholine
form of an enzyme) pepsinogen, which is activated
(ACh), and gastrin (Fig. 17.16). Histamine comes from
when it enters the stomach lumen and comes in contact
 mast cells located in the lamina propria, ACh from
with HCl (Fig. 17.14). Once activated, pepsin can acti-
postganglionic parasympathetic fibers, and gastrin
vate other pepsinogen molecules.
from G cells. Histamine acts at H, receptors, whereas
Protein digestion is initiated in the stomach via the
ACh acts at muscarinic receptors. Stimulation of these
action of pepsin, the only enzyme found in the stomach
 receptors results in stimulation of protein kinase,
Digestive system
66t
 Interstitial fluid
 Stomach lumen
other neural and hormonal stimuli such as ACh and
 Parietal cell
histamine.
Gastric motility
With the arrival of food, the stomach can stretch to
CO, + H20
anhyenis
accommodate this increased volume without an
To bloodstream
H,CO3
increase in luminal pressure. This reflexive relaxation
K+
is mediated by the vagus nerve. In addition, the
HCO3 t
HCO" + H+
+H
 stomach can actively dilate in a process called adap-
HCI
 tive relaxation, which appears mediated by the release
CI-
Cl-
+ CI-
 of nitric oxide freed by local neurons. In addition to
Key:
 the propulsion of food into the duodenum, the stomach
Active transport
Diffusion
churns and mixes food within its lumen.
HCO:-/CI antiporter
Carrier-mediated transport
Peristalsis in the stomach begins near the cardiac
sphincter with gentle ripple-like movements toward
Fig. 17.15. Secretion of HCI by the stomach. Carbonic acid is
 produced within the parietal cells by the action of carbonic
the pyloric sphincter. The peristaltic waves strengthen
anhydrase. After dissociation, the bicarbonate ions are transported
as they move toward the pylorus. The pyloric sphinc-
into the intestinal fluid, whereas the hydrogen ion is actively
ter, acting sort of like a dam, allows only liquids and
transported into the stomach. Chloride ions enter the cell in
 small particles to pass over its opening. Heavier par-
exchange for HCOs, and then move down their concentration
ticles settle below the level of the sphincter and thus
gradient and into the stomach lumen where they combine with
hydrogen ions forming HCl.
do not pass through. As the peristaltic wave nears the
 pyloric sphincter, a small amount of chyme is squirted
through the sphincter before the peristaltic wave
Interstitil fluid 
Parietal cell
Stomach Iumen
closes the sphincter, causing the remainder of the
material to be propelled backward into the pylorus
Gastrin
and further churned. Such an action further breaks
ACh
Protein kinase
down the particle size of the ingesta.
Histamine
CAMP
The peristaltic rhythm is controlled by the sponta-
H + 205
neous activity of pacemaker cells located in the longi-
To bloodstream
Garbapls 
tudinal smooth muscle layer. These noncontractile
EOSH
cells, called interstitial cells of Cajal, are located
R+
H+K+
near the cardiac sphincter depolarize and repolarize
HCOg
Alkalinp tide
+H +_E0SH
 approximately three times per minute producing slow
HCI
C.
waves, or the basic electrical rhythm. These slow
waves migrate throughout the stomach via the gap
Key:
junctions that electrically couple smooth muscle cells.
Active transpor
"Diffusion
Slow waves establish the maximum rate of smooth
HCOg_ ICl-antiporter
Carrier -med iated transport
muscle contraction by producing subthreshold depo-
Fig. 17.16. Regulation of HCl secretion from parietal cells. Parietal
larizations on which depolarizations resulting in con-
cells have receptor sites for histamine, gastrin, and acetylcholine
tractions are superimposed (Fig. 17.17).
(ACh). Histamine binds to Hz receptors, while ACh acts at
muscarinic receptors. Stimulation of these receptors by the 
appropriate ligand initiates a second-messenger system that results
Vomiting and egestion
 in increased HCl secretion into the stomach lumen.
Presence of irritants or toxins in the stomach can stim-
ulate vomiting, or emesis. Sensory impulses sent to
which then stimulates the Ht /K+ ATPase, thus increas-
the emetic center in the medulla oblongata initiate a
 ing HCl secretion by parietal cells.
motor response that causes the diaphragm and
 Endocrine cells located in pyloric glands produce at
 abdominal wall muscle to contract, increasing intra-
least seven hormones. The major hormone, gastrin, is
abdominal pressure. As the pressure increases, the
secreted by G cells found most abundantly in the
cardiac sphincter relaxes; the soft palate rises to close
gastric pits of the pyloric antrum. Gastrin stimulates
off the nasopharynx; and the stomach contents are
secretion of both parietal and chief cells, and causes
forced upward through the esophagus, pharynx, and
contractions of the gastric wall, thus mixing luminal
 mouth. Excessive vomiting can cause metabolic alka-
contents. Pyloric glands also contain D cells that
losis, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalances.
secrete somatostatin. Somatostatin, which is released
 Egestion is a proces unique to birds. During eges-
into the interstitial fluid bathing the G cells, inhibits
tion,1
nondigestible materials such as bone, fur, or
 gastrin release. This inhibition can be overridden by
feathers are orally eliminated from the digestive tract.
500  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
onic parasympathetic fibers innervating mucous cells,
Spikes
Spikes
chief cells, parietal cells, and G cells in the stomach,
(AW)
+20
thus increasing gastric secretions. This phase is short,
potential
lasting minutes. Emotional responses associated with
activation of the fight-or-flight response decrease
gastric secretions and gastric motility.
Threshold
Gastric phase
Beginning with the arrival of food in the stomach, this
二
-80
phase further stimulates gastric secretion and motility.
Slow waves
This phase accounts for about two-thirds of gastric
secretions. Stimuli for the gastric phase include disten-
Time
tion of the stomach, an increase in gastric pH, and the
Fig. 17.17. Slow waves. Slow, rhythmic depolarizations and
presence of undigested food, especially proteins and
repolarizations, called slow waves or basic electrical rhythm, are
peptides. The arrival of protein in the stomach
initiated by the interstitial cells of Cajal. They establish the 
increases the pH since proteins act as buffers. Activa-
background rhythm for peristalsis, which involves spikes
tion of stretch receptors sends signals to the myenteric
superimposed on the slow waves resulting in depolarizations above
plexus (short loop reflex) and the medulla via the
threshold that cause smooth muscle contractions.
vagus (long loop reflex). These reflexes result in the
 release of ACh, which stimulates gastric secretions.
 Chemical stimuli, such as partially digested proteins
Approximately 12 minutes prior to egestion, gizzard
and increasing pH, also directly activate G cells to
contractions increase, resulting in the compaction of
secrete gastrin, which strongly stimulates HClbut also
this undigestible material into a pellet. The pellet can
 has a weaker effect of increasing pepsinogen secretion.
contain exoskeletons of insects and indigestible plant
 A decrease in the luminal pH below 2 inhibits gastrin
 material. Seconds before egestion, the pellet is moved
secretion. Finally, local release of histamine in the
orad by esophageal antiperistalis. This process does
lamina propria, presumably from mast cells, also stim-
not use abdominal or duodenal muscles.
ulates parietal cells to secrete HCl. Therefore, there are
three chemicals that can stimulate parietal cells to
release HCl.
Regulation of gastric secretions and emptying
Gastric secretions are controlled by neural and hor-
Intestinaf phase
monal mechanisms. The nervous control includes
Involving neural and hormonal signals, the intestinal
both long and short nerve reflexes involving the vagus
phase functions to decrease gastric motility Stimula-
nerve. Stimulation of the vagus nerve (i.e., parasym-
tion of chemoreceptors and stretch receptors triggers
pathetic nervous system) increases secretory activity
 the enterogastric reflex. This reflex inhibits gastrin
of the stomach. In contrast, sympathetic stimulation
production and gastric motility, and stimulates con-
inhibits stomach secretion.
traction of the pyloric sphincter, thus slowing gastric
Gastric secretions are controlled at three levels,
emptying into the duodenum. The enterogastric reflex
including the central nervous system, stomach, and
has three components: (l) inhibition of vagal nuclei in
small intestine. Controls from these three sites are the
the medulla, (2) inhibition of local reflexes, and (3)
cephalic phase, gastric phase, and intestinal phase
sympathetic stimulation of the pyloric sphincter
 of gastric secretion, respectively (Fig. 17.18). These
causing it to tighten. The enterogastrone reflex is a
control mechanisms can either increase or decrease
hormonal reflex. The arrival of lipids (especially
gastric secretions.
medium- and long-chain fatty acids) and amino acids
(especially tryptophan) cause the release of CCK and
Cephafic phase
gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). CCK inhibits gastric
 The cephalic phase causes an increase in gastric secre-
secretion of acid and enzymes, while GIP inhibits
tions prior to the arrival of food. This stage is con-
gastric secretions as well as gastric motility. These
trolled by the central nervous system, and it prepares
reflexes act to prevent the excessive decrease in pH of
the stomach for the arrival of food. The sight, smell,
the small intestine, as well as slow up gut motility in
and taste of food stimulate the parasympathetic
order to facilitate digestion and absorption from the
nervous system to send signals via the vagus nerve
small intestine, particularly in response to lipids. A
that synapse on the submucosal plexus located in the
decrease in duodenal pH below 4.5 also stimulates
wall of the stomach. This stimulates the postgangli-
secretin release by enteroendocrine cells in the duode-
Digestive system
501
Vagal stimulation 
Function:
Prepare for anival of food
 Duration:
 Short (minutes)
Mucous cells
Mechanism: Preganglionic vagal fibers
Chief cells
Pepsinog
Actions:
Stimulate mucus, enzyme, gastrin, and acid 
Parietal cell
HCI
secretion
 Submucosal and 
myenteric plexus
 Enhance gastric secretions
Stretch
 Function:
Distensic
receptors.
 Duration:
Long (hours)
pH 
Mucous cells
Chemoreceptors
Mechanism:
 Short reflexes involving stretch
 and chemoreceptors, stimulation
Chief cells
MUCOUS
by gastrin released as a result of
Pepsinogen
 peptides and amino acids
Parietal cells
 HCI
Actions:
 Increased acid and pepsinogen
 production, increased motility to
Gastrir
G cells
Peptides and
 mix lumenal contents 
 amino acids
C
Myenteric
Function:
plexus
Control gastric emptying rate
 Chief cells
Pepsinoger
Duration:
Long (hours)
Parietal cells
HCL
Mechanism:  Enterogastric (neural) and
 enterogastrone (homonal reflexes
CCK
Actions:
 Reduce gastric acid and pepsinogen
GIP
 Lipids and carbohydrates
production, reduce gastic motility
in chyme
Secretin
 Decreased pH
 Duodenal stretch and 
chemoreceptors
Key:
Inhibitory signals
 Stimulatory signals
Shading within stomach represents presence of chyme
Fig. 17.18. Phases of gastric secretion. (A) Cephalic phase. (B) Gastric phase. (C) Intestinal phase. (Figure modified from Martini, 2004.)
 num. Secretin further inhibits gastric HCl and pep-
 short because it is overridden by the inhibitory intes-
sinogen release in the stomach. A summary of these
 tinal phase mechanisms described in the preceding
intestinal inhibitory effects on motility is shown in
paragraph.
Figure 17.19.
 In addiftion to these inhibitory effects occurring
Anatomy of the stomach of ruminants
during the intestinal phase, there is an excitatory com-
 ponent. The presence of partially digested proteins in
Ruminants are those animals that ruminate (i.e., chew
the duodenum stimulates G cells in the duodenal wall
their cud). They have a specially modified stomach
to release gastrin that circulates to the stomach to
that consists of three nonsecretory forestomachs and a
facilitate enzyme secretion. This gastrin is referred to
secretory "true" stomach. The forestomachs include
as intestinal (enteric) gastrin. The excitatory phase is
the reticulum, rumen, and omasum; the true stomach
502
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
cranial and caudal pillars as well as by the right and
left longitudinal pillars (Fig. 17.23). The dorsal sac is
further divided into the cranial sac found between the
ruminoreticular fold and cranial pillar, the dorsal sac,
and a caudodorsal blind sac. The luminal surface of
CNS:
↑ Sympathetic activit
the rumen is lined with papillae to increase its surface
Secretin, CK, GIP
Parasympathetic
activity
area.
Entericne
The omasum is kidney-shaped, and lies to the right
Secrete
Long
reflex
of the ruminoreticulum and is located between the
reflex
Enteroendocrine cells
rumen-reticulum and abomasum. Its lining consists of
In duodenal wall
Chemoreceptors and
 stretch receptors
 many leaflike folds, or plies, attached to the greater
curvature with their free edges extending into the
Presence of medium and long-chain fatty
omasal canal. It is therefore sometimes called the
"book stomach" since its interior looks like pages of a
book. The leaves have small papillae, thus further
Key:
Stimulate
.......+ Inhibit
increasing the surface area. Food enters the omasum
Fg. 17.19. Neural and hormonal inhibition of gastric emptying.
via the reticuloomasal orifice and exits to the aboma-
 Inhibitory signals originating in the duodenum slow gastric
sum via the omasoabomasal orifice.
emptying allowing the duodlenum time to buffer the acid and to
 The abomasum consists of two glandular regions
absorb nutrients.
equivalent to the fundus and pyloric region of the
 monogastric stomach. The cardiac region is confined
is the abomasum (Fig. 17.20). The forestomachs serve
to the area adjacent to the omasoabomasal orifice. The
as a large fermentation chamber where microbial
interior of the abomasum has about 12 rugae (folds)
digestion occurs, allowing the ruminant to digest
that spiral over the fundus and body, but are absent
feedstuffs not available to nonruminants. The fermen-
from the pylorus. A constriction in the pylorus sepa-
tation end products, such as volatile fatty acids (VFAs),
rates this region from the duodenum.
are absorbed and used as metabolic substrates.
The ruminant stomach provides several advantages
The esophagus cornects with the reticulum at the
compared to the monogastric stomach: (l) It allows
cardiac opening (Fig. 17.20). The reticulum is sepa-
 animals to use feedstuffs too fibrous for monogastrics;
rated from the heart by only the diaphragm. As a
(2) cellulose can be broken down and used by rumi-
result, any hardware such as nails or wire entering the
nants; (3) it allows the use of nonprotein nitrogen
reticulum can puncture the pleural and pericardial
sources (urea and uric acid), which are converted by
spaces, or the liver (hardware disease). Often a magnet
the rumenal microbes to high-value organic nitrogen
is placed in the reticulum to attract hardware and to
compounds; and (4) it provides B complex vitamins
 prevent its migration to the remainder of the stomach.
due to the action of microbes as long as cobalt is
The lining of the reticulum has a honeycomb
 present in the diet. However, there are also disadvan-
arrangement of ridges (Fig. 17.21). The reticulum is
tages associated with ruminant digest: (l) Animals
 separated from the rumen by the ruminoreticular fold,
must spend a considerable part of each day ruminat-
or groove. While this separates the two chambers,
 ing (chewing); (2) a large amount of alkaline saliva is
there remains an opening connecting the two. There-
necessary; and (3) considerable amounts of volatile
fore, the rumen and reticulum act as a functional unit,
 acids are released into the environment.
the reticulorumen, which is lined with keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium.
Motifity of the ruminant stomach
 In young animals, the reticuloomasal fold (Fig.
 17.22), sometimes called the reticular groove, prevents
The mixing, or A, sequence spreads across the reticu-
 food from entering the rumen and instead directs it to
lorumen in a "Z" pattern. It begins with a double
the omasum. Since the milk ingested during suckling
contraction in the reticulum that proceeds across the
does not require fermentation, it is shunted directly to
dorsal rumen to the caudodorsal area. The contraction
the abomasum through the omasal canal. This groove
then propagates through the ventral region of the
closes as a result of a reflex initiated by stimulation
rumen. This sequence provides extensive mixing of
of receptors in the mouth and pharynx. This reflex
 the rumen contents, which disrupts the layering of
diminishes with age, thus attenuating the reticular
 luminal contents that would allow gas to collect at the
groove.
 top, with coarse solids floating on the surface and finer
The rumen, sometimes called the "pouch," occupies
particles suspended below. Soil and sand gathers in
almost the entire left side of the abdominal cavity. The
the ventral region. See Figure 17.24 for further expla-
rumen is divided into a ventral and dorsal sac by the
nation of this mixing sequence.
Digestive system
503
 Right accessory groove
Dorsal sac rumen 
Insula
 Right longitudinal groove
Blind
Caudodorsal
sacs
 Caudoventral
Esophagus
Omasum
Duodenum
Pylorus
Ventral sac rumen
Abomasum
Reticulum
Dorsal sac
 Left longitudinal groove 
 Rumenal antrium
Caudodorsal
Blind
Esophagus
Caudoventral sacs
Rumenoireticular
groove
Ventral coronary groove
Abomasum
Reticulum
Rumenal recess
Ventral sac
B
Fig. 17.20. Ruminant stomach. The right (A) and left (B) aspect of the stomach of the goat. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by
permission of the publisher.)
With fermentation comes the production of gas,
 While grazing, ruminant animals quickly move
which must be removed from the animal. The B, or
feed into the rumen before it is completely masti-
eructation, sequence moves gas from the rumen
cated. This feed is then returned to the oral cavity
toward the oral cavity (Fig.
. 17.24). This sequence
 through a process called rumination. Rumination is a
allows the formation of a gas bubble, which is eventu-
 series of coordinated events involving the respiratory
ally forcibly ejected into the esophagus by contraction
muscles, larynx, pharynx, esophagus, oral cavity,
of the ventral rumen. Excess accumulation of gas in
and reticulum. At the height of a single contraction
the reticulum and rumen leads to bloat.
of the reticulum, the animal inhales while the glottis
 504 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Fig. 17.21. Inside of ruminant stomach. (A) The inside of the reticulum (honeycomb) and rumen. Note the hardware found in the rumen that
was ingested as the animal grazed. (B) The reticuloomasal fold (reticular groove). Continued on next page.
Chapter 17
is closed so that air cannot flow into the lungs. This
Rumenaf microbiaf fermentation
generates great negative pressure in the thorax. The
transfer of this negative pressure to the esophagus
Fermentation involves the anaerobic action of bacteria
allows a bolus of reticular contents to move through
and protozoa with bacteria accounting for about 80%
the cardia and, by a process of reverse peristalsis, to
of rumen metabolism. Primary bacteria are those that
move into the oral cavity. Immediately, there is a
break down the dietary constituents; secondary bacte-
swallowing event that carries the liquid portion of
ria further break down the end products of the primary
the bolus back to the rumen. The remaining residue
bacteria. Secondary bacteria include those that produce
is chewed, saliva is added, and it is again swallowed.
propionate from lactate, and methane-producing bac-
Time spent ruminating varies with the diet. A cow
teria. The protozoa consume rumenal bacteria, plant
-dde puds m i y asroo e n
starch granules, and perhaps linoleic and linolenic
mately 8h/day.
acids.
C
Fig. 17.21. Continued. (C) The many plies shown in the omasum.
Rumenoreticular fold
Cranial rumenal sac
Cardia
/ (rumenal atrium)
 Dorsal rumenal
Reticulum
sac
- Cranial pillar
Reticular.
Ventral
sulcus
rumenal
recess
二
Ventral
rumenal
sac
Reticulo-omasal
orifice
Fig. 17.22. Internal configuration of the reticulum and rumenal atrium of the goat. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by
permission of the publisher.)
505
Right
accessory Right
Cardia
pillar
pillar
Insula
Right dorsal coronary pillar
Reticular sulcus
Rightventral coronary pillar
Caudoventral
blind sac
Caudal pillar
Reticulum
Caudodorsal
 blind sac
Rumenoreticular
fold
Ventral rumenal
sac
 Left dorsal coronary
Rumenal atrium
 pillar
Left ventral coronary
 Cranial pillar
Left pillar
pillar
Fig. 17.23. Internal configuration of the rumen of the goat. (Reprinted from Constantinescu, 2001. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Dorsal sac
Esophagus
 Caudodorsal blind sac
 Caudoventral blind sac
Reticulum
1.1
Ventral sac
tapter:
B
Fig. 17.24. Mixing and eructation sequence of rumen motility. (A) The mixing, or A, sequence, begins in the reticulum in a biphasic, or
double, contraction (1,1'). The contraction is next seen in the rumen in the foliowing sequence: anterior dorsal sac (2), caudal region (3),
ventral rumen (4), and finally, in the caudoventral sac (5). (B) The eructation sequence allows elimination of gas produced by fermentation.
The sequence begins in the caudodorsal blind sac (1) and proceeds to the craniodorsal blind sac (2) and dorsal sac area (3), the cardia (4),
506
Digestive system
507
Complex carbohydrates in feedstuffs
Cranial
Starch
Cellulose
Fructans
Hemicellubose
Pectin
From crop and
Maltose
Cellobiose
Fructose
Xylose
snfeudose
Glucose
Caudal
septum
 Cranial thin muscle
Caudal thin
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Lateral thick muscle
muscle
Formate
Pyruvate
八
Gizzard
 Proventriculus
Y
Acetyl CoA
Lactate
Oxabacetate
CO2
Acrylate
Methane
CO2
Acetate
Butyrate
Propionate
Fig. 17.25. Rumenal carbohydrate fermentation. Complex
 Carbohydrates are fermented by microorganisms within the rumen.
Those compounds displayed in blue do not accumulate; those
 shown in green are the end products.
Rumenaf carbohydrate digestion
Products of the bacteria and protozoa carbohydrate
digestion include short-chain VFAs, carbon dioxide,
and methane (Fig. 17.25). The major VFAs are acetic,
B
propionic, and butyric acids, which are produced in
the following proportions: 60-70% acetic acid, 15-20%
Fg. 17.26. Avian stomach. (A) The avian stomach has two
chambers. The gizzard is the most orad and is the muscular,
 propionic acid, and 10-15% butyric acid. The percent-
nonglandular portion. The proventriculus is the glandular portion.
 age of propionic acid increases when the animal is fed
(B) The inside aspect of the gizzard and proventriculus.
concentrates with soluble sugars or starch. The rumen
 epithelium can absorb glucose and VFAs.
 The interior of the gizzard is lined with a cuticle,
Rumenaf protein digestion
occasionally called koilin, produced by the mucosal
glands. The cuticle protects the gizzard from acid and
Rumen microorganisms hydrolyze dietary proteins to
 proteolytic enzymes secreted from the proventriculus,
 peptides and amino acids. In addition, these microor-
as well as abrasion from grinding of hard feedstuffs.
 ganisms can make amino acids from nonprotein nitro-
 The gizzard consists of two pairs of opposing circular
 gen sources such as uric acid, urea, and ammonia. As
 muscles called thick and thin pairs. Alternating con-
a result, as much as 50% of the diet of ruminant
traction of these muscles results in a grinding motion
animals can include poultry waste since the rumenal
 much like placing a large nut in one's palm and trying
bacteria will convert the uric acid into amino acids.
to crack it open while squeezing and twisting the
These amino acids are then absorbed and used by the
hands.
animal.
Rumenaf fipid digestion
Small intestine
Triglycerides are hydrolyzed by rumenal bacteria
yielding glycerol and fatty acids. The glycerol is gener-
The small intestine is the area where most digestion
ally metabolized to propionic acid while the fatty
and 90% of absorption occur. Digestion occurs with
acids pass to the duodenum where they are absorbed.
the aid of accessory organs that produce necessary
enzymes, buffers, and other secretions.
Anatomy of the stomach of birds
Anatomy of the small intestine
In mammals, the stomach is a single chamber. Birds
 have a two-chambered stomach, including the pro-
The small intestine extends from the pylorus to the
ventriculus (pars glandularis) and gizzard (pars mus-
large intestine and is divided into three sections: (1)
cularis) (Fig. 17.26). The proventriculus is the glandular
duodenum, (2) jejunum, and (3) ileum. The duode-
or true stomach and is located orad to the gizzard.
num is the first section past the stomach, and is largely
508   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
a retroperitoneal organ. It is the area where the chyme
combine at a point in the wall of the duodenum called
from the stomach is mixed with the secretions from
the hepatopancreatic ampulla, which opens into the
the pancreas and liver. The duodenum has a descend-
duodenum via the duodenal papilla. The entry of
ing and ascending segment separated by the caudal
fluid into the duodenum is controlled by the hepato-
flexure (Fig. 17.27 and Fig. 17.28).
 pancreatic sphincter, or sphincter of Oddi (Fig. 17.29).
The pancreatic and bile ducts empty into the
The longest part of the small intestine, the jejunum
descending duodenum. The bile and pancreatic ducts
runs  ventrally  and  caudally  within  the  abdomen,
Ascending
Pelvic
mesocolon
Descending
Jejunum
of cecum
flexure
Transverse
colon
Base
of cecum
 Left ventral colon
 Diaphragmatic flexure
Body of cecum
 Ascending mesocolon
Cecocolic fold
Right
Right
Ileum
Apex
ventral
dorsal
of
colon
colon
cecum
Fig. 17.27. Horse intestinal tract. The small intestine, beginning with the jejunum, and large intestine of the horse. (Reprinted from
Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004.)
 Distal loop of ascending colon
Descending colon
Duodenum
Rectum
Transverse colon
Proximal loop of
Last centrifugal coil
ascending colon
of the spiral loop
Hapter :
Cecum
lleum
First centrifugal coil
of the spiral loop
Last centrifugal coil
of the spiral loop
Jejunum
Spiral loop
Fig. 17.28. Goat intestinal tract. The large and small intestine of the goat, left aspect. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu,
2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Digestive system
509
Left lobe
Right lobe
of pancreas
of pancreas
Body of pancreas
Common
Accessory pancreatic duct
 hepatic duct
 Duodenal ampulla 
Pancreatic duct
Minor duodenal
 Major duodenal papillae
papillae
enclosing the
hepatopancreatic ampulla
Fig. 17.29. Bile and pancreatic ducts of the horse. The hepatopancreatic sphincter, or sphincter of Oddi, is found surrounding the
hepatopancreatic ampulla. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
forming many loops and coils. This is the site of the
further, enzymes are embedded in the walls of the
 bulk of chemical digestion and absorption.
plasma membranes of the microvilli. These enzymes
The ileum is the short, terminal segment of the small
 are involved in mucosal digestion of carbohydrates
intestine. On gross examination, it is indistinguishable
and proteins. The combination of plicae, villi, and
from the jejunum. In birds, the ileum is generally sepa-
brush border increases the surface area of the small
rated from the jejunum at the yolk stalk (diverticulum
 intestine approximately 600-fold.
vitellinum), formally called Meckel's diverticulum.
The lamina propria within each villi has an exten-
The ilium ends at the ileocecal valve, a sphincter con-
sive network of capillaries originating in the submu-
trolling the movement of digesta from the ileum into
cosa. These capillaries carry absorbed nutrients to the
the cecum.
 liver. In addition, there is a lymphatic capillary called
An extensive mesentery attaches the jejunum and
a lacteal, or central lacteal, which transports materials
ileum to the dorsal abdominal wall. Blood vessels,
not entering the blood capillaries. The lacteals carry
lymphatics, and nerves reach the small intestine
lipid-protein mixtures called chylomicrons to the tho-
through the mesentery. The blood supply is from the
 racic ducts where they enter the venous blood supply
cranial and caudal mesenteric artery (Fig. 17.30). The
at the left subclavian vein.
venous blood from the small intestine drains into
Contraction of smooth muscle located in the mus-
the hepatic portal vein that runs to the liver.
cularis mucosa allows the intestinal villi to move back
 and forth. Such movement assists in moving the lique-
fied intestinal contents into contact with the mucosa
Histology of the small intestine
aiding in digestion and absorption. Such movement
The interior of the small intestine contains transverse
 also assists with squeezing the lymph along the lacteal
folds called plicae, or plicae circulares (Fig. 17.31).
and out the villi.
Although the rugae of the stomach are transient
 Goblet cells are located between the columnar epi-
depending on the stretch in the lumen, the plicae are
thelial cells lining the villi. These cells secrete mucus
permanent. They increase the surface area.
into the lumen. At the base of each villi are entrances
The mucosa has fingerlike projections called intes-
to intestinal glands, or crypts of Lieberkihn. These
tinal villi. The villi are covered with simple columnar
glands secrete a watery mucus-containing intestinal
epitheliums that have microvilli on their surface. The
juice that assists with absorption of nutrients. The
microvilli make up the brush border. As discussed
stimulus for secretion is distension or irritation of the
510  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cranialme
sentericartery
Middle colic artery
Ileocolic artery
Colic branch
sentericartery
Right colic artery
Ventral colon
Descending colon
Left colic artery
Caudal pancreaticoduodenal artery
Cranial pancreaticoduodenal artery
Duodenum
Fig. 17.30.
 Blood supply to the intestines of the horse. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the
publisher.)
Microvilli
Absorptiveepithelial cell
Chapter 1
Central lacteal
Arteriole
Fig. 17.31. Intestinal wall. Histological section of the wall of the small intestine showing a villi, and then expanded to show microvilli found
 on the columnar epithelia cells lining the villi.
intestinal mucosa. Located at the base of each gland
Paneth cells, which secrete lysozyme and are part of
are stem cells that produce new epithelial cells that
the immune system.
 migrate up the villi. These cells replace cells sloughed
The submucosa consists of areolar connective tissue.
off near the villi tips and constantly replace brush-
It contains aggregates of lymphatic tissue called
border enzymes. Also located within the crypts are
Peyer's patches that become more numerous toward
Digestive system   511
the end of the small intestine. These function to prevent
potential of this basic electrical rhythm, moving it
bacteria from entering the bloodstream. Also in the
either closer or farther away from the threshold. Para-
submucosa are duodenal glands, sometimes called
sympathetic stimulation enhances, and sympathetic
submucosal glands or Brunner's glands. These glands
 stimulation reduces, segmental contractions. The pres-
produce large amounts of alkaline mucus to protect
ence of ingesta in the dluodenum moves the resting
the epithelium from the acidic chyme arriving from
potential toward threshold, thus allowing segmental
the stomach.
contractions to increase. Segmental contractions are
The duodenum has a bilayered muscularis externa
simultaneously increased in the ileum, even though
containing circular and longitudinal smooth muscle.
ingesta is not present. This latter effect is caused by
Since the bulk of the duodenum is retroperitoneal, it
 gastrin produced in response to food in the stomach
is lined with an adventitia. When located within the
(gastroileal reflex).
 peritoneal cavity, the external surface is covered with
 Late in the intestinal phase, when most nutrients
the peritoneum. The serosal layer of the peritoneum
have  been  absorbed,
l, segmental contractions are
lines the intestinal surface, and the visceral portion
replaced by peristaltic contractions. Peristaltic con-
lines the peritoneal cavity.
 tractions propel chyme along the length of the diges-
tive tract. Peristalsis in the small intestine is controlled
Intestinal juices and brush-border enzymes
by the migrating myoelectric complex (MMC), which
 is a type of slow wave characterized by three phases.
Intestinal juices are secreted from the mucosal
 Phase 1 involves quiescence; Phase 2 has irregularly
 lining of the small intestine. They contain water and
spaced spike activity superimposed on slow waves;
mucus, and are slightly alkaline (pH 7.6). This liquid
and Phase 3 is characterized by high-amplitude,
aids in absorption of substances from the digestive
regular spike activity superimposed on slow waves.
tract lumen. Also embedded in the microvilli of the
The MMC begins near the caudal end of the stomach
absorptive epithelial cells lining the small intestine
and pushes contents along a short segment of the
are enzymes called brush-border enzymes. These
small intestine before decaying.  MMCs slowly
 enzymes include the carbohydrate-digesting enzymes
migrate down the small intestine. These complexes
C-dextrinase, maltase, sucrase and lactase, the protein-
strengthen as nutrients and water are absorbed,
digesting enzymes aminopeptidase and dipeptidase,
thereby decreasing the distension of the wall of the
and nucleotide-digesting enzymes nucleosidases and
small intestine.
phosphatases, as well as enterokinase, the enzyme
The MMC is thought to serve a "housekeeping" role
that activates trypsinogen.
by sweeping residual undigested material through the
digestive tract. In dogs and man, the cycle recurs
every 1.5-2 hours. The MMC is thought to be con-
Mechanical digestion and motility in the
 trolled from the central nervous system and may be
small intestine
initiated in part by motilin. The growling sound that
Small intestine motility is regulated mainly by the
is occasionally heard from the gastrointestinal tract is
enteric reflex responding to the presence of materials
caused by the MMC. Ingesting food will switch this
in the intestinal lumen. There are two types of move-
pattern to the quieter segmental contractions.
ments within the small intestine: segmentation and
Birds display a unique type of intestinal motility
 peristalsis. Segmental contractions are a nonpropagat-
involving intestinal refluxes. This motility involves
ing type of movement that results in churning and
the reflux of intestinal contents into the proven-
mixing of the luminal contents with digestive juices
triculus.
(Fig. 17.1). Segmental contractions, the prominent
motility pattern in the small intestine, consist of oscil-
Chemical digestion in the small intestine
lating ringlike contractions separated by relaxed areas
containing a bolus of chyme. The constant formation
Some starch digestion occurs in the mouth by the
and then relaxation of these contractual rings along
action of salivary amylase. In the stomach, some
the length of the small intestine result in a mixing
chemical protein digestion occurs as pepsin converts
action, as if kneading dough, thus forcing the chyme
proteins to peptides. However, most chemical diges-
d e o re paxea isnd e  aao o
tion occurs within the small intestine.
ously contracted area.
The segmental contractions are initiated by intrinsic
Carbohydrate digestion
pacemaker cells located in the longitudinal smooth
muscle layer. The pacemaker cells produce a basic
Since food remains in the mouth only a short time.
electrical rhythm similar to the slow waves discussed
little starch is totally digested. Instead, pancreatic
 in the stomach. Various factors can change the resting
 amylase completes this process. Starch and glycogen
512
2 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Starch and gycogen
are acted upon by salivary and pancreatic amylase to
Amylose
-0-0-0
form maltose, maltotriose, and α-dextrins (Fig. 17.32
D-Amylase
and Table 17.4). This is the lumenal phase of carbohy-
Amylopectin
0-0-0-0
(salivary and
 drate digestion since it occurs within the lumen. The
pancreatic)
oooo
smaller di- and trisaccharides then move into contact
Maltose
Maltotriose
cLimit dextrins
with the brush border where mucosal digestion
●
●-0-0
by brush-border enzymes digests these sugars to
Glucoamylase
monosaccharides.
Maltase
Limit dextrinase
Fructose
Gluco
Galactose
actase
Protein digestion
Sucrose
Lactose
 Chemical digestion of protein begins in the stomach
Key:
O =Carbon in sugar
Enzymes in blue are bcated on brush border
by the action of pepsin. Pepsin, which works opti-
 =Terminal carbon
 mally at a pH of 1.5-2.5, cleaves bonds involving tyro-
 sine and phenylalanine. Pepsin digests approximately
Fig. 17.32. Carbohydrate digestion in the small intestine. Lumenal 
10-15% of dietary protein before being inactivated in
digestion of carbohydrates results in the production of maltose,
 the lumen of the small intestine.
maltotriose, and α-dextrins. Mucosal digestion is then completed by
the brush-border enzymes. The shaded circles represent the
Once in the small intestine, trypsin and chymo-
 monosaccharides found in the polysaccharides.
trypsin secreted by the pancreas break down proteins
Table 17.4. Digestive enzymes.
Enzyme
Source
Substrate
 Products
Saliva
Salivary amylase
Salivary glands
Starch and glycogen
Maltose (disaccharide), maltotriose
(trisaccharide), and α-dextrins
Lingual lipase
Gland in the tongue
Triglycerides and other lipids
Fatty acids and diglycerides
Gastric Secretions
 Pepsin
Chief cells
Proteins
 Peptides 
Gastric lipase
Chief cells
 Short-chain triglycerides
Fatty acids and monoglycerides, α-dextrins
 Pancreatic Secretions
Trypsin
Pancreatic acinar cells
Proteins, chymotrypsinogen,
 Peptides
 procarbox ypeptidase
 Chymotrypsin
 Pancreatic acinar cells
Proteins
Peptides
Elastase
 Pancreatic acinar cells
 Proteins
Peptides
Carboxypeptidase
 Pancreatic acinar cells
 Terminal amino acid at carboxyl
 Peptides and amino acids
end of peptides
Pancreatic lipase
 Pancreatic acinar cells
Triglycerides
Fatty acids and monoglycerides
Ribonuclease
 Pancreatic acinar cells
Ribonucleic acid
Nucleotides
 Deoxyribonuclease
 Pancreatic acinar cells
Deoxyribonucleic acid
Nucleotides
l
Brush-Border Enzymes
α-Dextrinase
 Membrane microvilli
α-Dextrins
Glucose
Maltase
 Membrane microvilli
Maltose
Glucose
Sucrase
 Membrane microvilli
Sucrose
Glucose and fructose
Lactase
 Membrane microvilli
Lactose
Glucose and galactose
Enterokinase
 Membrane microvilli
 Trypsinogen
Trypsin
Aminopeptidase
Membrane microvilli
 Terminal amino acid
 Peptides and amino acids
Dipeptidase
Membrane microvilli
 Dipeptides
Amino acids
 Nucleosidases 
 Membrane microvilli
Nucleotides
Nitrogenous bases, pentoses, and phosphates
 Phosphatases
Membrane microvilli
Phosphorylated nutrient molecules
Digestive system
513
into peptides. Carboxypeptidase, another pancreatic
Absorption in the small intestine
enzyme, cleaves one amino acid at a time from the
Having decreased the size of the particles through
carboxyl and amino end of a polypeptide, respectively.
mechanical and chemical digestion, nutrients are now
while the brush-border enzymes aminopeptidase and
in a form suitable for absorption. Absorption is the
dipeptidase further cleave the proteins.
process whereby compounds and ions move through
the epithelial cells lining the mucosa and pass into the
Lipid digestion
 bloodstream or lymphatic system.
About 90% of absorption occurs within the small
Triglycerides are the most abundant lipid in the diet.
intestine, with the rest occurring in the stomach
Triglycerides and phospholipids are digested by
 and large intestine. Absorption occurs via diffusion,
lipases. Although most lipid digestion occurs in the
facilitated diffusion, osmosis, and active transport
small intestine, lingual and gastric lipases begin the
(Fig. 17.34).
 process. Bile salts assist in emulsifying dietary lipids
within the aqueous environment found in the small
Absorption of monosaccharides
intestine lumen. During this emulsification process,
large lipid masses are dispersed into small droplets in
 The result of lumenal and mucosal digestion of carbo-
which the polar (ionized) portion of the lipids face the
hydrates is the production of monosaccharides, the
outside of the droplet, while the nonpolar (hydropho-
only form of carbohydrates absorbed. Fructose, a
bic) portions face the inside of the droplet. This
monosaccharide found in fruits, is absorbed by facili-
increase in surface area produced by reducing the
tated diffusion, and therefore can only move down its
droplet size allows the water-soluble pancreatic lipase
concentration gradient.
to act more efficiently. Pancreatic lipase cleaves off two
Glucose and galactose are absorbed via secondary
fatty acids from triglycerides producing two free fatty
active transport. These latter two sugars are cotrans-
acids and monoglyceride (Fig. 17.33).
ported across the apical epithelial membrane along
with two molecules of Na*. Since Nat and the sugars
are moving in the same direction, this is a symporter.
Nucleic acid digestion
All three binding sites must be occupied for transport
 DNA and RNA are part of ingested foods. Pancreatic
nucleases digest these molecules to their nucleotide
monomers. The nucleotides are then acted upon by
brush-border nucleosidases and phosphatases that
 release free bases, pentose sugars, and phosphate
Small intestine lumen
ions.
Na*
(Symporter)
Fructose
N. Faslitated diff!
Large triglyceride droplet
Na
(Symporter)
Amino acidls
Bile salts
+H
Symporte
Di- and tripeptidles
Lipid emulsion
Diffusion 
wnpew pue -uoys
Pancreatic lipase
chain fatty acidls
in5
Free fatty acids
Long-chain
Monogycerides
fattyacids
Difft
o Triglycerice
Bile salts
 Monoglycericdes
DiffLIsi
Centra
Chylomicron
Micelles
Fig. 17.34.  Absorption of nutrients in the small intestine.
Carbohydrates, amino acids, and peptides are absorbed by
 secondary active transport systems. As Nat is actively pumped out
of the epithelial cells and into the interstitial space, this creates a
Nat concentration gradient in which there is a higher concentration
Endothelial cell
in the small intestine lumen than within the epithelial cell. As Nat
enters the epithelial cells moving down its concentration gradient, it
Fig. 17.33. Lipid digestion in the small intestine. Lumenal
carries glucose, galactose, or amino acids with it. Peptides enter
digestion of lipids results in the production of monoglycerides and
epithelial cells via a H+ symporter. Long-chain fatty acids and 
free fatty acids. With the help of bile salts, these then form
monoglycerides enter epithelial cells and are re-esterified into
water-soluble micelles that can move toward the microvilli located
 on the epithelial cells lining the villi of the small intestine.
into the central lacteals, and eventually into the subclavian vein.
5 14  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
to occur. While transport across the apical membrane
Gut lumen
is passive, the driving force for this movement is
Micelles
derived from the Na+-K+-ATPase that actively trans-
 ports Na* out of the cell at the basolateral membrane
and into the interstitial space. The active transport of
Monoglycerides
Fatty acids
Na+ out of the cell produces a lower concentration of
Reesterify
Na+ inside the cell than that found in the small intes-
+Triglycerides 
Epithelial cells
!A u!
tine lumen. Glucose, galactose, and Nat can therefore
Form droplets
move down their concentration gradient from the
coatedwith
lipoproteins 
intestinal lumen into the epithelial cells. Once inside
Chylomicrons
the cell, the sugars move out of the cell at the basolat-
Exocytos
eral membrane by facilitated diffusion, and into the
 hepatic portal vein.
Interstitial
Absorption of amino acids, dipeptides, and
space
Central lacteal
tripeptides
Fig. 17.35. Transport of lipids through the enterocytes. As the
Although it was once believed that only amino acids
micelles produced in the lumen of the small intestine come in 
are absorbed, it is now well established that di- and
 Contact with the microvilli on the enterocytes lining the villi, the 
monoglycerides and fatty acids passively pass into the enterocytes.
tripeptides are also actively absorbed in the small
Inside the enterocytes, they re-esterify forming triglycerides. These
intestine. Some amino acids enter the epithelial cells
form droplets that are then coated with lipoproteins, thus forming
by a secondary active transport system similar to
chylomicrons. The chylomicrons pass through the basal surface of
that described for glucose and galactose. There are
the enterocytes into the interstitial space and then enter the central
some amino acids that utilize a sodium-independent
lacteal found in each villi.
 cotransporter in which the amino acids enter along
with H+ instead of Na*. In this case, H+ is pumped into
the intestinal lumen in exchange for Na*. The Na+is
then pumped out of the cell by the Na*-K+-ATPase on
Once inside the epithelial cells lining the gut, the
the basolateral membrane. This creates a concentra-
short-chain fatty acids, those having fewer than 12
tion gradient for H', which is now in high concentra-
carbons, pass into the hepatic portal system similarly
tions within the lumen. As H+ enters the epithelial
to amino acids and monosaccharides. The remaining
cells, selected amino acids are cotransported. Peptides
triglycerides and monoglycerides are resynthesized
are absorbed via this sodium-independent cotrans-
into triglycerides (Fig. 17.35). These triglycerides
 porter. Once inside the epithelial cell, the peptides are
combine with cholesterol and proteins formed in the
hydrolyzed to single amino acids, which then move
rough endoplasmic reticulum to form droplets called
by diffusion into the hepatic portal vein.
chylomicrons. The phospholipids and cholesterol are
oriented in the chylomicrons so that their hydropho-
Absorption of fipids
bic ends face the interior of the droplet and their
Since lipids are not water soluble, lipid absorption and
hydrophilic ends face the surface, thus making these
transport within the body pose unique challenges
droplets water soluble. The proteins found on the
compared to carbohydrate and protein absorption.
chylomicron surface stabilize the structure.
Within the small intestine lumen, triglycerides 
are
The chylomicrons are secreted by a process of exo-
 broken down into fatty acids and monoglycerides.
cytosis into the interstitial fluid of the villus. In
The bile salts within the gut lumen help emulsify the
mammals, these chylomicrons then enter the central
 lipids by forming water-soluble particles, which helps
lacteal, which is part of the lympathic system, and are
the lipids migrate within the aqueous chyme found in
carried to thoracic ducts where they merge with the
the gut. Since lipids are fat soluble; once the micelles
venous blood supply at the left subclavian vein. In
come in contact with the lumen wall, the monoglycer-
ides and free fatty acids can cross the epithelial mem-
crons. After leaving the enterocytes, portomicrons
brane by simple diffusion. The bile salts that helped
 ans o d oeda i o a s
form the micelles continue to form new micelles down
are carried directly to the liver.
the length of the small intestine. Upon reaching the
Although fat absorption into the epithelial cells is a
ileum, the bile salts are reabsorbed via active transport
passive proces, it still requires energy Bile salts are
and are recycled. This allows a small amount of bile
actively secreted by the liver, and the re-esterification
salts to assist with the absorption of large amounts of
 of monoglycerides and fatty acids into triglycerides
lipids.
requires energy.
Digestive system
515
Accessoryorgans
True stomach
Pancreas
imulatesecretionot
 Chyme passes from the stomach to the small intestine.
bicarbonate ions
The chemical digestive processes that occur within the
Stimulate secretion of
 pancreatic enzymes
small intestine depend upon accessory organs, includ-
CCK
Secretin
ing the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder.
Lipids
Low pH
The pancreas is a V-shaped retroperitoneal organ
Procarboxypeptidase
 Carboxypeptidase
lying posterior to the greater curvature of the stomach.
 Chymotypsinogen
Chymotrypsin
It is composed of two lobes joined by a body. The body
Trypsinogen
Trypsin
is the middle portion of the pancreas and is in contact
Enterokinase
with the pyloric part of the stomach. The right lobe is
in the mesoduodenum next to the descending duode-
(bound to brush border)
num, and the left lobe lies in the greater omentum.
The pancreatic duct (Wirsung's duct) opens with the
Fig. 17.36. Activation of protein-digesting enzymes. Trypsinogen
is secreted into the small intestine lumen where it is converted to
common bile duct on the major duodenal papilla.
trypsin by the enzyme enterokinase found on the brush border.
There are also accessory pancreatic ducts opening on
Trypsin then activates the other pancreatic zymogens including
the minor duodenal papilla. Pigs have only accessory
chymotrypsinogen and procarboxypeptidase.
ducts, whereas small ruminants have only pancreatic
ducts.
The pancreas has both endocrine and exocrine func-
tions. Its endocrine function includes the synthesis
and release of insulin and glucagons, which is dis-
the nucleic acid-digesting enzymes ribonuclease and
cussed in Chapter 12. Its exocrine function is to release
deoxyribonuclease.
enzymes involved in the digestion of all nutrients,
 These protein-digesting enzymes are produced
including carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic
within the pancreas in an inactive form so that they
acids.
do not digest the pancreas. Pancreatic acinar cells
secrete a protein called trypsin inhibitor that prevents
the activation of trypsinogen (Fig. 17.36). Upon enter-
Histology of the pancreas
ing the duodenal lumen, trypsinogen is acted upon by
The pancreas is composed of small clusters of glandu-
the brush-border enzyme enterokinase, which splits
lar epithelium. Approximately 99% of these cells are
off a small part of the trypsinogen molecule, thus
arranged in clusters called acini composed of secre-
 activating it. Trypsin then activates the remaining
tory cells surrounding ducts, and are involved in the
exocrine portion. These cells have an extensive endo-
and proelastase producing the respective active
 plasmic reticulum and dark-staining zymogen gran-
enzymes.
ules. The remaining 1% of the cells are scattered among
the acini and are called pancreatic islets (islets of Lang-
Regufation of pancreatic secretions
erhans) involved in the endocrine function. They
Similar to gastric secretions, pancreatic secretions
secrete glucagons, insulin, somatostatin, and pancre-
are controlled by both neural and
hormonal
ateic polypeptide.
mechanisms:
1、
During the cephalic and gastric phases of gastric
Composition and function of pancreatic juice
 secretion, parasympathetic signals carried via the
Pancreatic juice is a clear, colorless liquid. Contain-
vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) increase secretion of
ing mostly water, it also has salts, sodium bicarbon-
pancreatic enzymes.
ate, and enzymes. Sodium bicarbonate serves as a
2
Partially digested lipids and proteins within
buffer to neutralize stomach acid within the small
the duodenal lumen stimulate the secretion of
intestine, thus stopping the action of gastric pepsin.
CCK from enteroendocrine cells in the duodenal
wall. CCK stimulates the secretion of pancreatic
enzymes to function. Pancreatic enzymes include the
enzymes.
carbohydrate-digesting enzyme pancreatic amylase;
3.
 Decreased pH in the duodenal lumen stimulates
several protein-digesting enzymes, including trypsin,
the release of secretin from enteroendocrine cells
 chymotrypsin, carboxypeptidase, and elastase;
the
in the duonenal wall. Secretin stimulates release
triglyceride-digesting enzyme pancreatic lipase; and
of bicarbonate ions from the pancreas.
 516 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Liver and gallbladder
ligament located on the free border of the falciform
ligament is a vestige of the umbilical vein. The right
The liver and gallbladder are accessory organs of the
and left triangular ligaments attach the liver to the
digestive system. The liver is the largest gland of the
right and left crus of the diaphragm, respectively. In
body It resides just under the diaphragm mostly in
the right hypochondriac and epigastric region,
addition, the lesser omentum extends from the liver
porta to the lesser curvature of the stomach. The
although it can extend to the left hypochondriac and
hepatic artery, hepatic portal vein, and other struc-
umbilical regions (Fig. 17.37). The liver receives blood
tures enter the liver at the porta, having traveled
from the intestines and the general circulation. The
through the lesser omentum.
gallbladder, which stores bile, is a thin-walled muscu-
lar green sac found on the ventral surface of the liver.
Histology of the fiver
Water is absorbed, thus concentrating the bile as much
 as 10-fold. Bile formed in the bile canaliculi moves into
Each lobe of the liver has approximately 100,00o liver
 the bile ducts, which fuse to form the common hepatic
 lobules, the functional unit of the liver (Fig. 17.38).
duct.
are pue adeus u euosexay aiaexodde are sanqo 
 Deep fissures divide the liver into four lobes. The
 separated from each other by an interlobular septum.
right lobe is the largest, and is separated from the left
The cells of the liver, hepatocytes, are arranged in
lobe by a deep fissure. The quadrate lobe is located
plates that radiate longitudinally outward from the
between the right and left lobes and ventral to the liver
 central vein like the spokes of a wheel.
porta, or hilus, the area where blood vessels and
At each corner of the hexagonal lobule is a portal
nerves enter the organ on the visceral surface. The
 triad consisting of a branch of the hepatic artery, a
caudate lobe is located dorsal to the porta.
branch of the hepatic vein, and a bile duct. Instead of
The liver is covered with visceral peritoneum that
capillaries, between the hepatic plates are cavities
closely adheres to its surface. There are also several
 called sinusoids. They resemble fenestrated capillaries
attachments holding the liver in place. The falciform
except that they have spaces between adjacent endo-
ligament connects the ventral liver to the sternal part
 thelial cells and the basal lamina is thinner or absent.
of the diaphragm and ventral abdomen. The round
The sinusoids allow even large plasma proteins to
Dorsal
Spleen
Caudodorsal blind sac
sac
Caudoventral blind sac
Heart with pericardium
Reticulum abomasum
Ventral rumenal sac
Descending duodenum
 Cranial flexure of duodenum 
Ascending duodenum
ter
Transverse duodenum
Proximal loop of ascending colon
Descending duodenum
Cranial duodenum
Caudal flexure
Pylorus
of duodenum
Cecum
Liver
Jejunt
Right
Abomasum
 Spiral colon
kidney
Pancreas
Fig. 17.37. Abdomen of a goat. (A) Right view of the abdominal cavity. (B) Right view of the abdominal visceral. (Reprinted from
Constantinescu, 2001. Used by permission of the publisher.)
Digestive system
517
Central vein
Kupffer cells
Hepatic artery
Hepatic vein
Portal Triad
Bile duct
Bile
canaluculi
Sinusoids
Interlobular
septum
Liverlobules
Fig. 17.38. Liver lobules. The functional unit of the liver is the lobule. Lobules are hexagonal in shape and are separated by the interlobular
septum as shown in the lower left-hand corner. The portal triad consists of the portal arteriole and venule that bring blood to the liver
sinusoids, and the bile duct that collects bile from the bile canaliculi. Liver macrophages, called Kupffer cells, are also found in the sinusoids.
Blood from the portal artery and portal vein flow into the sinusoids and toward the central vein. Material filters through the hepatic plates into
the bile canaliculi and then flows into the bile ducts. (Adapted from http://curesure.com/lmage_3.jpg.)
pass out of the bloodstream and into the spaces sur-
sinusoids where the hepatocytes remove some nutri-
rounding the hepatocytes. In addition to the endothe-
ents and toxins. As the blood passes through the sinu-
lial cells lining the sinusoids, there are also star-shaped
soids, metabolites from the hepatocytes are secreted
fixed macrophages called Kupffer cells that are con-
into the blood. This blood then passes to the central
fined to the liver. They phagocytize pathogens, cell
vein and then into the hepatic vein (Fig. 17.39).
 debris, and damage red and white blood cells.
 Bile is secreted by hepatocytes and enters the bile
Histofogy of the gaffbfadder
canaliculi, which are narrow intercellular canals
The mucosa of the gallbladder is lined with simple
between the hepatocytes. The bile empties into the bile
columnar epithelium. The surface has rugae similar to
ducts located at the periphery of the lobules. Bile ducts 
those found in the stomach. The middle layer of the
 merge to form the right and left hepatic duct, which
 gallbladder consists of smooth muscle that allows for
then unite to form the common hepatic duct that
 expulsion of the bile into the small intestine. The outer
travels toward the duodenum. Before entering the
layer of the gallbladder is the visceral peritoneum.
duodenum, the cystic duct from the gallbladder fuses
with the common hepatic duct to form the common
Bife composition and function
bile duct. Note that the horse does not have a
gallbladder.
Bile consists of water, bile salts, bile acids, cholesterol,
 the phospholipid lecithin, bile pigments, and ions. The
bile salts include sodium and potassium salts of bile
Blood supply of the fiver
acids, mostly cholic acids and chenodeoxycholic acid.
As stated earlier, the liver receives oxygenated blood
These salts assist in emulsification of lipids within the
from the hepatic artery and also receives deoxygen-
 small intestine lumen. This decreases the surface area
ated blood from the hepatic portal vein that contains
 to volume ratio of the lipids, thus increasing the effi-
nutrients, drugs, and toxins from the digestive tract.
ciency of pancreatic lipase as it digests triglycerides.
Branches from both of these arteries enter the liver
Bile salts, free fatty acids, and lecithin combine to form
 518 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
micelles within the small intestine lumen. The polar
the duodenum. There are neural and hormonal stimuli
ends of the molecules are arranged to the outside of
that can stimulate bile secretion:
the micelle, and the nonpolar portions face the inside
Parasympathetic signals traveling along the vagus
 of the micelle. Cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins are
nerve can stimulate bile production by the liver.
 packaged inside the micelle.
As aged red blood cells are phagocytized, iron,
Fatty acids, particularly medium- and long-chain,
and amino acids in the chyme cause duodenal
globin, and bilirubin are liberated. Bilirubin is the
enteroendocrine cells to secrete CCK. CCK causes
 main waste product of heme breakdown. The globin
the smooth muscle cells of the gallbladder to con-
and iron are recycled, but bilirubin is absorbed from
 tract, and bile is squeezed into the cystic duct and
the blood by the hepatocytes and excreted into the bile
through the common bile duct. CCK also relaxes
conjugated to glucuronic acid. When in the small
the sphincter of the hepatopancreatic ampulla.
intestine, it is metabolized by bacteria. Stercobilin, one
 The action of hormones controlling digestion is
of its breakdown products, gives feces their dark
summarized in Table 17.5.
brown color. Most bile salts are reabsorbed via active
transport in the ileum whereupon they enter the
Functions of the fiver
hepatic portal blood and return to the liver.
The liver is a vital organ. It performs many
Regufation of bife secretion
functions:
In those animals that have a gallbladder, bile is stored
Carbohydrate metabolism. The liver plays a vital
between meals. The sphincter of the hepatopancreatic
role in maintaining blood glucose levels. When
ampulla (sphincter of Oddi) restricts the entrance to
blood glucose levels are high, the liver converts
glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) and triglycer-
ides so that energy can be stored until needed.
When blood glucose levels drop, the liver can
break down glycogen to glucose (glycogenolysis)
andtoxi
and release the glucose into the bloodstream. In
absorbed in dige stiv
addition, the liver can convert certain amino acids
to glucose (gluconeogenesis), as well as lactic acid
Hepatocytes
to glucose
Liver sinusoids
Absorbs nutrents,
2.
 Lipid metabolism. Hepatocytes can store triglyc-
detoxifies some drugs,
erides as well as use fatty acids to synthesize ATP.
produces bile
 In addition, hepatocytes synthesize lipoproteins
Central vein
that carry fatty acids, triglycerides, and cholesterol
throughout the body. Cholesterol can be synthe-
sized in the liver, and cholesterol is used to make
 Hepatic vein 
bile salts.
3.
 Protein metabolism. Hepatocytes remove the
amino group (deamination) of amino acids so they
Inferior vena cava
can be used for ATP synthesis. Hepatocytes also
Fig. 17.39. Blood flow through the liver lobule.
synthesize carbohydrates and fats from certain
Table 17.5.
Hormones controlling digestion.
l
Hormone
Site of Secretion
Stimufus for Secretion
Actions
Gastrin
 Enteroendocrine G cells in the
 Stomach distention, partially 
Increases secretion of gastric juice, increases
pyloric antrum mucosa, also
digested protein, high pH in the 
 gastric motility, stimulates growth of gastric
secreted from duodenal mucosa 
stomach
mucosa, constricts lower esophageal
sphincter while relaxing ileocecal sphincter
Secretin
 Enteroendocrine S cells in
Acidic pH in duodenal lumen
 Stimulates pancreatic secretion rich in
duodenal mucosa
bicarbonate ions
 Cholecystokinin 
 Enteroendocrine CCK cells in
 Partially digested proteins,
 Stimulates pancreatic secretion rich in
(CCK)
duodenal mucosa
 medium and long-chain fatty
enzymes, gall bladder bile ejection, opens 
acids
hepatopancreatic ampulla, inhibits food
intake peripherally and in the central 
nervous system
Digestive system  519
amino acids. Hepatocytes can synthesize various
colic (hepatic) flexure, continuing as the transverse
plasma proteins such as albumin, prothrombin,
colon. Upon reaching the left side of the abdomen near
fibrinogen, and alpha and beta globulins (needed
the spleen, it again abruptly bends at the left colic
for hemoglobin synthesis).
(spleric) flexure and passes inferiorly as the descend-
 Removal of waste products. The liver detoxifies
 ing colon to the level of the iliac crest. From this point,
substances such as alcohol and antibiotics, and
the sigmoid colon projects medially to the midline,
can alter and excrete steroid hormones. The liver
terminating as the rectum. The rectum extends from
is an important site of detoxification of ammonia,
the large intestine to the anal canal. The digestive tract
which is converted to the less toxic urea, which is
terminates at the anal canal, which has an exterior
excreted in the urine. The waste product of red
opening called the anus.
blood cell destruction, bilirubin is eliminated via
the bile.
Histology of the large intestine
5.
 Synthesis of bile salts. The bile salts necessary for
Unlike the small intestine, the mucosal lining of the
lipid emulsification within the small intestine are
large intestine lacks villi and plicae (circular folds).
synthesized in the liver.
 Since almost no chemical digestion occurs in the large
6.
 Storage. The liver is the primary storage site of
intestine, the lining also lacks cells that secrete diges-
fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K), as well as
vitamin Bi. Glycogen and certain minerals (Fe
tive enzymes. The colon is lined with simple columnar
and Cu) are also stored in the liver.
epithelium and mucus-secreting goblet cells. The anal
 Phagocytosis. Kupffer cells destroy aged blood
7.
cells and microbes that may have entered via the
merges with the skin surrounding the anus.
 Unique to the large intestine, portions of the lon-
 hepatic portal blood.
gitudinal smooth muscle found in the muscularis
8.
Activation of vitamin D. The liver combines with
 the skin and kidneys to synthesize the active form
externa layer are thicker, forming three visible longi-
tudinal bands called the teniae coli. The areas
of vitamin D.
between the teniae coli are thinner or lack longitu-
dinal muscle. Tonic contractions of the teniae coli
Large intestine
result in a series of pouch-like expansions along the
length of the colon called haustra (sing. = haustrum).
The terminal portion of the digestive tract is the large
The outermost layer of the large intestine is the vis-
ceral peritoneum. Small fat-filled pouches of visceral
intestine. It extends from the end of the ilium to the
anus. The primary functions of the large intestine are
peritoneum called epiploic appendages are attached
electrolyte and water absorption, microbial digestion
to the teniae coli.
and vitamin production, formation of feces, and expul-
sion of feces. These functions require considerable
Mechanical digestion in the large intestine
time, so transit time through the large intestine is slow.
The ileocecal valve controls the movement of chyme
into the large intestine. Normally closed, the gas-
 troileal reflex initiated immediately after a meal opens
Anatomy of the large intestine
this valve so that peristalsis allows chyme to move
The large intestine is divided into the cecum, colon,
from the ileum into the large intestine. Gastrin also
rectum, and anal canal. The ileum attaches to the large
relaxes this valve.
intestine at the ileocecal valve (sphincter), which con-
Haustra churning is characterized by the slow filling
 trols the movement of chyme into the large intestine.
of a haustrum until it is distended, at which time its
The cecum is a blind diverticulum that extends off
walls contract, squeezing the contents into the next
of the colon at the ileocecal valve (Fig. 17.40). It is
haustrum. Peristalsis also occurs along the large intes-
located on the right side of the abdomen, except in the
tine, although at a slower rate than in the small intes-
pig, where it is located on the left. In those animals
tine. Finally, mass peristalis occurs when a strong
that are hindgut fermenters (e.g., the horse), the cecum
peristaltic wave begins near the middle of the trans-
is a major site of digestion. Extending from the cecum
verse colon and quickly forces the contents to the
is another twisted, coiled blind pouch called the
rectum. Such movement normally occurs near the
appendix, or vermiform appendix.
beginning or end of a meal.
The colon consists of three segments called the
ascending, transverse, and descending colon. The
Chemical digestion in the large intestine
ascending colon ascends on the right side
of
the abdomen until it reaches the inferior surface
of
Although no chemical digestion occurs in  the
the liver. It then turns sharply to the left at the right
large intestine, considerable fermentation takes place.
520  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
C
lleocecal ostium and papilla
Cecocolic ostium
Base of cecum
A
Base of cecum
B
Base of cecum
Cecocolic valve
Right ventral colon
Neck of
the colon
Dorsal tenia
lleum
Rightventral colon
Ventral tenia
lleum
Body of cecum
Lateral tenia
Ileocecal fold
Haustra
(sacculation)
Medial tenia
Apex of cecum
Fg. 17.40. Cecum of the horse. (A) Right aspect. (B) Left aspect. (C) Communications of the cecum. (Reprinted from Constantinescu and
Constantinescu, 2004. Used by permission of the publisher.)
 especially in those animals that are hindgut fermen-
nella), other microflora are necessary. It has been
ters. Microbes ferment any remaining carbohydrates
known since the 1980s that the enzymes that make
releasing hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and methane.
vitamin Bi2 are produced by bacteria. Bacteroides the-
These gases lead to flatulence in the large intestine.
taiotaomicron can break down complex carbohydrates
Amino acids are converted to indole, skatole, hydro-
found in plants. Studies show that mice raised in a
 gen sulfide, and fatty acids. Indoles and skatole are
 sterile environment and fed a complex polysaccharide
 eliminated in the feces, contributing to its odor, while
diet, those colonized with B. thetaiotaomicron, can
 some of the remaining products are absorbed and
 derive more energy from their diet than those devoid
transported to the liver. The microbes synthesize B
of bacteria.
vitamins and vitamin K, which are also absorbed by
 Recent evidence suggests that other microorgan-
 the large intestine.
isms, in fact, regulate an animal's genes and immune
system (Lee and Mazmanian, 2010). It is now believed
Jo sads ,rd,  eonqo pes se
T-cell differentiation, thereby influencing the host
Gut microflora
genome and the function of the adaptive immune
system. Again, using mice raised in a sterile environ-
Gut microflora is more complex than that of its host,
ment, the lack of intestinal microbiota results in defec-
and it is now known that there are about 150 times
tive MALT, fewer Peyer patches, less lamina propria
 more microbial genes (3.3 million vs. 20,000-25,000) in 
in the small intestine, and less mesenteric lymph
the human gut than in the human genome. While it is
 nodes There are also extraintestinal changes including
well documented that some gut microflora can cause
reduced numbers of CD4+ T cells in the spleen, and
disease (i.e., Escherichia coli, clostridium, and salmo-
fewer and smaller germinal centers within the spleen.
Digestive system
521
In addition, there are decreased systemic antibody
cells produce proteins that restrain proinflammatory
levels. All these changes suggest that the microbiota
T cells, thus restricting inflammation and preventing
is capable of shaping systemic immunity.
 aq a d p ss a a
While Helicobacter pylori has been shown to cause
 attacking itself. B. fragilis have sugar molecules called
peptic ulcers, it has also been shown to regulate
polysaccharide A (PSA) that protrude from their
stomach acid levels. If the stomach secretes too much
 surface. PSA induces the immune system to produce
acid, strain of H. pylori containing the gene cagA
more regulatory T cells, which reduces proinflamma-
 produce proteins that reduce acid secretion. H. pylori
tory T cells, and this allows B. fragilis to reside in the
 might also affect food intake. When present, these bac-
 mucosal lining of the gut. In an experimental mouse
teria cause a postprandial reduction in ghrelin, a
model for colitis, oral PSA has also been shown to
hormone secreted from the stomach, and induce
      
increased food intake in mammals.
matory cytokine production in the gut. PSA is also
Another example of how the microbiota may inter-
able to protect animals for illness in an animal model
act with an animal's genome is revealed by recent
for autoimmune encephalomyelitis and an animal
studies on Bacteroides fragilis. Normally, regulatory T
model for multiple sclerosis (Fig. 17.41).
DNA
B. fragilis .
SFB 
A. Healthy
microbiota
B. Increased pro.
inflammatory
bacteria
B. Decreased anti-
inflammatory
bacteria
. cell
T,17 cell
Fig. 17.41.
molecules produced by a given microbiome network work with the molecules produced by the human genome to determine this equilibrium.
paawas Ag aay pauasaidan) ssiueio Aoeweuiue pue -oid yog jo uoodoid ledo ue si aaun aoigooi Ayiieay e ul ()
filamentous bacteria SFBs and B. fragiis), which provide signals to the developing immune system (controlled by the host genome), leading to
 ag pauasaidan suoene ads-aunine, uuo uen aoua isoy aue 'oeuans sn ul 'saae lian /thl pue sail jo aueleg e
stars), but disease does not develop. (B, C) The genomes of patients with multiple sclerosis, type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and Crohn's 
disease contain a spectrum of variants that are linked to disease by genome-wide association studies. Environmental influences, however, are
risk factors in all of these diseases. Altered community composition of the microbiome due to lifestyle, known as dysbiosis, may represent this
disease-modifying component. An increase in proinflammatory microbes (e.g., SFBs in animal models) may promote Tμ17 cell activity to
increase and thus predispose genetically susceptible people to Tu17-mediated autoimmunity (B). Alternatively, a decrease or absence in
anti-inflammatory microbes—for example, B. fragilis in animal models—may lead to an underdevelopment of Treg cell subsets (C). The
imbalance between T17 cells and Tregs ultimately leads to autoimmunity. (Modified from Lee and Mazmanian, 2010. Used by permission of 
the publisher.)
522   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chapter summary
the lamina propria, and the muscularis mucosae.
It consists mostly of simple columnar epithelium
Introduction
 and mucus-producing goblet cells. The lamina
 propria consists of areolar cornective tissue. The
The digestive system consists of the digestive tract,
muscularis mucosa is a thin layer of smooth
also called the gastrointestinal or alimentary tract,
muscle fibers.
and its accessory organs. The accessory organs
3.
The submucosa consists of dense irregular con-
include the teeth, tongue, salivary glands, liver, pan-
nective tissue, and contains large blood vessels,
creas, and gall bladder.
lymphatic vessels, and in some regions, exocrine
glands secreting buffers and enzymes into the
Iumen.
Functions of the digestive tract
4.
The muscularis externa generally consists of two
 Functions of the digestive system include ingestion,
layers of smooth muscle: an inner layer of circu-
propulsion, mechanical processing, digestion, secre-
lar smooth muscle fibers and an outer layer of
tion, absorption, excretion, and immunity.
longitudinal smooth muscle fibers. These layers
control peristalsis and segmental contractions.
5.
The serosa. Most portions of the digestive tract
Peritoneal cavity
lie within the peritoneal cavity. The outermost
 portions or superficial layer of the digestive tract
1.
 The peritoneal cavity is formed from a serous
is lined with the adventitia. There is no serosa
membrane, called the peritoneum. The perito-
 around the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, or
neal membrane has a serosa, or visceral layer, that
rectum.
covers the organs in the peritoneal cavity, and a
 parietal peritoneum that lines the inner surface
of the body wall.
Enteric nervous system
2.
 The mesentery consists of two layers of serous
membranes fused back to back, and suspends
The digestive tract has its own nervous system
 portions of the digestive tract from the body
called the enteric nervous system. It is composed
wall. The mesenteries (l) provide a route for
mostly of two large plexuses: the submucosal
blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves to
plexus and myenteric plexus.
travel to the digestive system; (2) hold organs in
2
The submucosal plexus, or Meissner's plexus, is
place; and (3) store lipid.
located within the submucosal layer.
3.
Some organs are located between the posterior
The myenteric plexus, or plexus of Auerbach, is
located between the two layers of smooth muscle
nal wall, and are thus outside this cavity and
fibers in the muscularis externa.
are said to be retroperitoneal. These organs
include the kidneys, adrenal glands, ureters,
duodenum, ascending colon, descending colon,
Functional anatomy of the digestive system
and pancreas.
The digestive system shows great variation among
Blood supply of the digestive organs
 species depending on whether the animal is a carni-
vore (meat-eating), herbivore (plant-eating),
121
or
The splanchnic circulation  serves t
the digestive
omnivore (meat- and plant-eating). In nonruminants,
l
 organs and hepatic portal system.
the stomach and small intestine are relatively small,
whereas the cecum is well developed. Ruminants
have a complex stomach that accommodates micro-
Histology of the digestive tract
bial digestion. Carnivores have a short small intes-
tine, a poorly developed cecum, and an average
The digestive tract includes four major layers
colon. Omnivores have an intermediate size colon
Listed from the lumen outward, they include (1)
since this is a major site of microbial digestion.
the mucosa, (2) the submucosa, (3) the muscula-
ris externa, and (4) the serosa.
The mouth
2
The mucosa layer consists of three sublayers
  ss  n  e 
 It is also called the oral cavity, or buccal cavity.
contact with the contents of the digestive tract,
and is where food first enters the digestive tract.
Digestive system.
523
The mouth is lined with stratified squamous epi-
premolars located in the rostral cheek area and
thelium, which protects against friction. For
molars located caudal to the premolars.
further protection, the epithelium of the gums,
hard palate, and dorsum of the tongue are
slightly keratinized.
Pharynx
2.
The palate is the roof of the oral cavity and it
The pharynx is the common passageway for
consists of a rostral bony part called the hard
food and air. It includes the oropharynx, naso-
palate and  a caudal   musculomembranous
pharynx, and laryngopharynx.
 portion called the soft palate.
In birds, there is no sharp distinction between the
pharynx and mouth.
Tongue
Swallowing
The tongue is composed of interlacing bundles
of skeletal muscle fibers and is involved in grip-
1.
 Swallowing, or deglutition, involves three stages:
ping. repositioning food, mixing food with
(1) voluntary stage—bolus moved into the oro-
saliva, and forming the compact mass of food
pharynx, (2) pharyngeal stage—bolus moves
called a bolus.
involuntarily through the pharynx to the esopha-
The superior surface of the tongue has many
gus, and (3) esophageal stage—bolus moves
 papillae that are named for their shape.
involuntarily through the esophagus to the
stomach.
Safivary glands and safiva
2.
 In many species of birds, the upper portion of the
esophagus is expanded to form the crop.
 Salivary glands are extramural glands associated
with the oral cavity. The secretions of the salivary
glands can be serous, mucous, or mixed.
Stomach
2.
The major salivary glands include the parotid
 salivary gland, the mandibular (submandibular.
The stomach has four functions: (
(1) storage
submaxillary) salivary gland and the sublingual
of ingested food, (2) mechanical breakdown
salivary gland.
of ingested food, (3) disruption of chemical
Saliva solubilizes food; provides alkaline buffer-
bonds of food through the action of acids and
ing and fluid; removes wastes, lubrication, and
enzymes, and (4) production of intrinsic factor
binding; initiates starch digestion; provides oral
required for vitamin B12 absorption from the
hygiene; and helps with evaporative cooling.
small intestine.
2.
 While monogastric animals have a single, simple
stomach, ruminants have a complex stomach
Teeth
consisting of four chambers.
Domestic animals have two types of teeth-
3.
The true stomach is that area which produces
low-crowned (brachydont) and high-crowned
hydrochloric acid. In ruminants, this is the
(hypsodont).
abomasums,
whilein
birds, 
itis
the
2.
 All domestic species have two sets of teeth,
proventriculus.
deciduous and permanent. Deciduous teeth are
4.
In addition to the circular and longitudinal
smaller and fewer in number.
smooth muscle layers, the stomach has an addi-
3.
 Low-crowned teeth are simple teeth as found in
 tional inner oblique or transverse layer.
man, carnivores, pigs, ruminant incisors, and
5.
The stomach is typically divided into four
horse deciduous incisors. They consist of a
regions: the cardia, fundus, body, and pyloric
crown, neck, and root.
region.
4.
 Teeth are composed of three layers: cementum,
6.
 The stomach contains gastric glands, which
enamel, and dentin.
contain mucous neck cells; parietal cells that
5.
Teeth are divided into groups according to their
secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl) and intrinsic
location and function. Incisors are located in the
factor; chief cells, which secrete pepsinogen; 
rostral portion of the mouth. The canine is the
and  enteroendocrine  cells  that  produce  a
large tooth between the incisors and cheek teeth.
variety of hormones including gastrin, hista-
Cheek teeth are those teeth caudal to the canine
mine, endorphins, serotonin, cholecsytokinin,
and incisors in the maxillary. They include the
and somatostatin.
(Continued)
 524 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Protein digestion is initiated in the stomach via
achs include the reticulum, rumen, and omasum,
the action of pepsin.
while the true stomach is the abomasum.
 Parietal cells increase secretion in response to
 The lining of the reticulum has a "honeycomb"
ACh and gastrin.
arrangement of ridges. The rumen and reticulum
act as a functional unit, the reticulorumen.
Gastric motifity
3.
The rumen, sometimes called the "pouch," occu-
pies almost the entire left side of the abdominal
With the arrival of food, the stomach can stretch
cavity.
to accommodate this increased volume (reflexive
4.
 The omasum is kidney-shaped and is sometimes
relaxation.)
called the "book stomach" since its interior looks
2.
 Peristalsis in the stomach begins near the cardiac
 like pages of a book.
sphincter with gentle ripple-like movements
5.
The abomasum consists of two glandular regions
toward the pyloric sphincter. This peristaltic
equivalent to the fundus and pyloric region of
 rhythm is controlled by the spontaneous activity
the monogastric stomach.
of pacemaker cells located in the longitudinal
B
The ruminant stomach (l) allows animals to
 smooth muscle layer called interstitial cells of
use feedstuffs too fibrous for monogastrics, (2)
Cajal.
breaks down cellulose, (3) allows the use of
nonprotein nitrogen sources (urea, uric acid)
Vomiting and egestion
which are converted by the rumenal microbes
 to high-value organic nitrogen compounds, and
The presence of irritants or toxins in the stomach
(4) provides B complex vitamins due to the
can stimulate vomiting, or emesis.
action of microbes as long as cobalt is present in
Egestion is a process unique to birds in which
the diet.
nondigestible materials such as bone, fur, or
 feathers are orally eliminated from the digestive
tract.
Motility of the ruminant stomach
The mixing, or A, sequence spreads across the
Regulation of gastric secretions and emptying
reticulorumen in a "Z" pattern and provides
Gastric secretions are controlled by neural and
extensive mixing of the rumen contents. The B,
hormonal mechanisms. Stimulation of the vagus
or eructation, sequence moves gas from the
nerve (i.e., parasympathetic nervous system)
rumen toward the oral cavity, thus allowing the
 increases secretory acfivity of the stomach, while
formation of a gas bubble which is eventually
sympathetic
 stimulation  inhibits  stomach
forcibly ejected into the esophagus by contrac-
secretion.
tion of the ventral rumen.
2.
Gastric secretions are controlled at three
2
 Feed is then returned to the oral cavity through
levels including the central nervous system,
 a process called rumination.
stomach, and small intestine, termed the cephalic
phase, gastric phase, and intestinal phase,
respectively.
Rumenal microbial fermentation
3.
 During the intestinal phase, stimulation of che-
 Fermentation involves the anaerobic action of
bacteria and protozoa. Products of the bacteria
121
enterogastric reflex, which inhibits gastrin pro-
and protozoa carbohydrate digestion include
duction and gastric motility, and stimulates
short-chain VFAs, carbon dioxide, and methane.
 The major VFAs are acetic, propionic, and butyric
contraction of the pyloric sphincter, thus slow-
ing gastric emptying into the duodenum. In
acids.
2.
 Rumen microorganisms hydrolyze dietary pro-
addition, the enterogastrone reflex, a hormonal
reflex, causes the release of CCK and GIP,
 teins to peptides and amino acids. In addifion,
 which inhibit gastric secretions as well as gastric
these microorganisms can make amino acids
motility.
from nonprotein nitrogen sources such as uric
acid, urea, and ammonia.
3.
Triglycerides are hydrolyzed by rumenal bacte-
Anatomy of the stomach of ruminants
ria to glycerol and fatty acids, and glycerol is
 Ruminants have a specially modified stomach
 generally metabolized to propionic acid while
that consists of three, nonsecretory forestomachs
the fatty acids pass to the duodenum where they
and a secretory "true" stomach. The forestom-
are absorbed.
Digestive system.
525
Anatomy of the stomach of birds
Segmental contractions are a nonpropagating
type of movement resulting in churning and
Birds have a two chambered stomach including the
mixing of the luminal contents.
proventriculus (pars glandularis) and gizzard. The
2
 Peristaltic contractions propel chyme aborad
 proventriculus is the glandular or true stomach.
along the length of the digestive tract. Peristalsis
in the small intestine is controlled by the MMC.
Small intestine
The small intestine is the area where most digestion
Chemicaf digestion in the smaff intestine
and 9o% of absorption occur.
 Carbohydrate digestion. Starch and glycogen
are acted upon by salivary and pancreatic
Anatomy of the smaff intestine
amylases to form maltose, maltotriose, and
 The small intestine is divided into three sections:
C-dextrins. Brush-border enzymes involved in
(1) duodenum, (2) jejunum, and (3) ileum.
carbohydrate digestion include dextrinase and
The pancreatic and bile ducts empty into the
glucoamylase, maltase, sucrose, and lactase to
2.
descending duodenum at the hepatopancreatic
produce glucoses, fructose, and galactose.
ampulla.
2.
Protein digestion. Chemical digestion of protein
3.
The longest part of the small intestine, the
begins in the stomach by the action of pepsin.
jejunum, is the site of the bulk of chemical diges-
 Once in the small intestine, trypsin, carboxypep-
tion and absorption.
tidase, and chymotrypsin secreted by the pan-
While in mammals the ileum is distinguishable
 creas break down proteins into peptides. The
from the jejunum, in birds, it is generally sepa-
Brush-border  enzymes  aminopeptidase 
and
rated from the jejunum at the yolk stalk (diver-
dipeptidase further cleave the proteins.
ticulum vitellinum), formally called Meckel's
Lipid digestion. Triglycerides and phospholipids
diverticulum.
are digested by lipases. Bile salts assist in emul-
sifying dietary lipids in the smallintestine lumen.
Histofogy of the smaff intestine
Pancreatic lipase cleaves off two fatty acids from
triglycerides producing two free fatty acids and
The interior of the small intestine contains trans-
monoglyceride.
verse folds called plicae, or plicae circulares.
4
Nucleic acid digestion. Pancreatic nucleases
2.
 The mucosa has fingerlike projections called
digest these molecules to their nucleotide mono-
intestinal villi. The villi are covered with simple
mers, which are then acted upon by brush-
columnar epitheliums that have microvilli that
 border nucleosidases and phosphatases that
make up the brush border.
 release free bases, pentose sugars, and phosphate
3.
 In the center of each villi is a lymphatic capillary
ions.
called a lacteal, or central lacteal.
At the base of each villi are entrances to intestinal
Absorption in the smaff intestine
glands, or crypts of Lieberkihn. Located at the
base of each gland are stem cells that produce
 About 90% of absorption occurs within the small
new epithelial cells. Also located within the
intestine with the rest occurring in the stomach
crypts are Paneth cells, which secrete lysozyme
and large intestine. Absorption occurs via diffu-
and are part of the immune system.
sion, facilitated diffusion, osmosis, and active
transport.
Intestinaf juices and brush-border enzymes
2.
Absorption of monosaccharides. Fructose is
 Intestinal juices are secreted from the mucosal lining
absorbed by facilitated diffusion, and therefore
 can only move down its concentration gradient.
of the small intestine. Also embedded in the micro-
Glucose and galactose are absorbed via second-
villi of the absorptive epithelial cells lining the small
 intestine are enzymes called brush-border enzymes.
ary active transport.
3
Absorption of amino acids, dipeptides and tri-
Mechanical digestion and motility in the
 peptides. Amino acids, di- and tripeptides, are
actively absorbed in the small intestine. Some
smalf intestine
amino acids enter the epithelial cells by a second-
1.
 Small intestine motility consists of two types
 on rs ss ds a 
of movements: segmentation and peristalsis.
described for glucose, while some amino acids
(Continued)
 526 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
utilize a sodium-independent cotransporter in
plates are cavities called sinusoids. The sinusoids
which the amino acids enter along with H+
allow even large plasma proteins to pass out of
instead of Na+.
the bloodstream and into the spaces surrounding
Absorption of lipids. Since lipids are fat soluble,
the hepatocytes.
monoglycerides and free fatty acids can cross
Bile is secreted by hepatocytes and enters the bile
the epithelial membrane by simple diffusion.
canaliculi, which are narrow intercellular canals
Short-chain fatty acids, those having fewer
between the hepatocytes.
than 12 carbons, pass into the hepatic portal
5.
 Bile composition and function. Bile consists of
system similarly to amino acids and mono-
water, bile salts, bile acids, cholesterol, the phos-
 saccharides. The remaining triglycerides and
pholipid lecithin, bile pigments, and ions. The
monoglycerides are resynthesized into triglycer-
bile salts include sodium and potassium salts of
ides. These triglycerides are then coated with
bile acids, mostly cholic acids and chenodeoxy-
 lipoproteins into droplets called chylomicrons.
cholic acid.
In mammals, these chylomicrons then enter the
6.
 Functions of the liver. When blood glucose levels
central lacteal.
 are high, the liver converts glucose to glycogen
(glycogenesis), and when blood glucose levels
drop, the liver can breakdown glycogen to
Accessory organs
glucose (glycogenolysis). Hepatocytes can store
Pancreas
triglycerides as well as use fatty acids to synthe-
size ATP, and synthesize lipoproteins. Choles-
The pancreas has both endocrine and exocrine
terol can be synthesized in the liver. Hepatocytes
functions. Its exocrine function is to release
remove deamination amino acids so they can be
enzymes involved in the digestion of all nutri-
used for ATP synthesis. Hepatocytes also synthe-
ents including carbohydrates, lipids, proteins,
 size carbohydrates and fats from certain amino
and nucleic acids.
acids. Hepatocytes can synthesize  various
2.
 Pancreatic juice contains mostly water, but it also
plasma proteins. The liver is an important site of
contains salts, sodium bicarbonate, and enzymes.
detoxification. The liver detoxifies and can alter
Pancreatic enzymes include pancreatic amylase,
and excrete steroid hormones. The liver is the
several protein-digesting  enzymes  including
 primary storage site of fat-soluble vitamins, as
trypsin, chymotrypsin, carboxypeptidase, and
elastase, pancreatic lipase, ribonuclease, and
well as vitamin Bi2. Glycogen and certain miner-
als are also stored in the liver. Kupffer cells
deoxyribonuclease.
destroy aged blood cells and microbes that may
Regulation of pancreatic secretions. During the
have entered via the hepatic portal blood. The
cephalic and gastric phases of gastric secretion,
liver combines with the skin and kidneys to syn-
parasympathetic signals carried via the vagus
thesize the active form of vitamin D.
nerve increase secretion of pancreatic enzymes.
Partially digested lipids and proteins within the
duodenal lumen stimulate the secretion of CCK,
Lar ge intestine
which stimulates the secretion of pancreatic
 The primary functions of the large intestine are elec-
enzymes. Decreased pH in the duodenal lumen
stimulates the release of secretin that stimulates
trolyte and water absorption, microbial digestion
 and vitamin production, formation of feces, and
release of bicarbonate ions from the pancreas.
121
 expulsion of feces.
Liver and gaff bfadder
l
Anatomy of large intestine
 Bile formed in the bile canaliculi moves into the
bile ducts that fuse to form the common hepatic
The large intestine is divided into the cecum,
duct.
colon, rectum, and anal canal.
2.
Each lobe of the liver has liver lobules, the func-
2
The cecum is a blind diverticulum that extends
tional urit of the liver. The cells of the liver, hepa-
off of the colon at the ileocecal valve. In those
tocytes, are arranged in plates that radiate
animals that are hindgut fermenters (i.e., horse),
longitudinally outward from the central vein.
the cecum is a major site of digestion.
3.
At each corner of the hexagonal lobule is a portal
The colon consists of three segments called the
triad. Instead of capillaries, between the hepatic
ascending, transverse, and descending colon.
Digestive system
527
Mechanicaf digestion in the farge intestine
place, especially in those animals that are hindgut
fermenters.
The ileocecal valve controls the movement of
chyme into the large intestine.
2.
Haustra churning is characterized by the slow
filling of a haustrum until it is distended, at
which time its walls contract, squeezing the con-
Gut microflora
tents into the next haustrum.
Gut microflora is more complex than that of its
3.
Peristalsis also occurs along the large intestine.
host, and it is now known that there are about
Finally, mass peristalis occurs when a strong
150 times more microbial genes than human
 peristaltic wave begins near the middle of the
genes in the human body.
transverse colon and quickly forces the contents
2
The gut microflora may regulate an animal's
to the rectum.
 genes and immune system. It is now believed
that commensal microbiota may "program"
Chemical digestion in the farge intestine
 aspects of T-cell differentiation, thereby influenc-
While no chemical digestion occurs in the
ing the host genome and the function of the
large intestine, considerable fermentation takes
adaptive immune system.
Review questions and answers are available
Constantinescu, G.M. and I.A. Constanfinescu. 2004. Clini-
online.
cal Dissection Guide for Large Animals. Iowa State Press,
Ames, Iowa.
Gheorghe, M., G.M. Constantinescu, and I.A. Constanti-
nescu. 2004. Clirical Dissection Guide for Large Animals:
Horse and Large Ruminants, 2nd edition. Iowa State
References
Press, Ames, Iowa.
Lee, YK. and S.K. Mazmarian. 2010. Has fhe microbiota
Budras, K.-D., W.O. Sack, and S. Rock. 2003. Anafomy of the
played a critical role in the evolution of the adaptive
Horse: An Illustrated Text. Schlitersche GmbH & Co.,
immune system? Science 330: 1768-1773.
Hannover, Germany.
Martini, FH. 2004. Fundamentals of Anatomy and Physiol-
Constantinescu, G.M. 2001. Guide to Regional Ruminant
 Ogy, 6th edition. Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco,
Anatomy Based on the Dissection of the Goat. Iowa State
California.
Press, Ames, Iowa.
Pasquini, C., T. Spurgeon, and S. Pasquini. 1995. Anatomy
Constantinescu, G.M.
. 2002. Clinical Anatomy for Small
 Of Domestic Animals, 8th edifion. SUDZ Publishing,
 Animal Practitioners. Iowa State Press, Ames, Iowa.
Pilot Point, Texas.
18
Lactation
Contents
Introduction
529
Hormonal Control of Lactogenesis and
Overview of Mammary Development
531
Lactation
540
 Prepubertal and Postpubertal Mammary
Milk Synthesis and Secretion
544
Development
531
Lactation Curves
546
 Mammary Development during Pregnancy
534
Galactopoiesis and bST
550
Alveolar Cell Differentiation and
 Mammary Involution
551
Lactogenesis
538
Chapter Summary
553
Introduction
quently, understanding lactation requires multiple
disciplines: histology and cytology, biochemistry,
 As biology students learn early in their schooling, the
endocrinology, cardiovascular physiology, and metab-
presence of mammary glands distinguishes mam-
 olism to name a few. In addition, the fully functioning
mals from other animals. With a few exceptions, for
mammary gland places striking demands on the phys-
example, bottle-fed human infants or early-weaned
iology of the lactating mother (Tucker, 1994, 2000).
dairy calves, lactation is critical for survival of the
 Development of the mammary gland during gesta-
 tion and subsequent differentiation of alveolar cells to
less of the specific arrangement or number of mammary
allow onset of milk synthesis and secretion in corre-
 glands, milk synthesis and secretion requires develop-
spondence with parturition is a biological marvel.
ment of a functionally mature mammary gland. In
reproductively competent mammals,
the mature
subsequently as mature milk and provide the neonate
mammary gland consists of a teat or nipple, associated
with a spectrum of all the nutrients necessary for good
ducts which provide for passage of milk to the outside,
health and early development. Milk of all mammals
 and alveoli composed of secretory epithelial cells and
contains variable amounts of proteins, carbohydrates,
 supporting tissues. The epithelial cells are arranged to
ynoura ipau snoanbe ue u papuadsns sieg pu
form the internal lining of the spherical alveoli, and
there are
 species differences in milk
< composition,
these epithelial cells synthesize and secrete milk.
having the birth of the neonate and functionality of
Secretions are stored within the internal space of the
 the mammary gland coincide is critical. Among scien-
 hollow alveoli and larger ducts between suckling epi-
tists, the study of lactation and mammary develop-
sodes (see Fig. 18.6). Milk is a complex fluid. Conse-
ment provides a rich resource for cell biologists,
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
529
 530 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
endocrinologists, nutritionists, cancer researchers, dairy
variation in number of mammary glands, location,
specialists, and others (Akers, 2002; Rowson et al., 2012).
and composition of secretions. Unlike common dairy
The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of
species (cows, goats, or sheep), aquatic mammals,
mammary development and function (Box 18.1).
 especially those in cold environments, produce milk
Given the variety of mammals and the environmen-
very high in lipid content with little or no lactose. Milk
tal riches occupied, it is no surprise that there is much
fat provides the suckling young the opportunity to
rapidly produce a layer of insulating fat for protection
from the cold and to provide a source of metabolically
Box 18.1  Lactation in males?
derived water. This illustrates the relevance of lacta-
tion to provide a strategy for survival of offspring and
There are scattered reports in the scientific litera-
reproductive succes
 for mammals in multiple riches.
ture of mammary development and appearance of
 For the placentalmammals, the number of mammary
mammary secretions in males. In most instances, it
glands varies markedly between classes and species.
is likely most appropriate to characterize this devel-
However, among those studied (only about 10% of all
 opment and appearance of secretion as gynecomas-
 mammals), each mammary gland has a teat or nipple.
tia and galactorrhoea, respectively. In most reported
For example, lactation is not common in males, but
cases, causes have been linked to hormonal imbal-
 development of small amounts of mammary tissue
ances (humans) or animals feeding on plants with
and limited secretion can occur. Lactation in males has
estrogenic compounds. However, there are at least
been reported in humans most likely associated with
two reports from field observations of wild male
pituitary dysfunction. However, anecdotal tales of
fruit bats exhibiting overt signs of mammary devel-
"witch's milk" in male and female infants are not rare.
opment and expression of mammary secretions
Apparently, normal lactation has been reported in
(Francis et al., 1994). However, it is unclear if there
male wild fruit bats. Likely, the first reported lactation
is actually suckling and physiological investment
in a male ruminant was when Aristotle noted in his
by the male in care of the young. Indeed, the entire
idea is debated among biologists (Peaker, 1994;
dugs (teats) to such effect that cheese was made of
Kunz and Hosken, 2009; Racey et al., 2009).
the product." These examples illustrate how litle is
On the other hand, we (Filep and Akers, 2000)
showed that mammary tissue taken from Holstein
known about mammary development and lactation in
 bulls treated with estrogen and progesterone could
many mammals (Table 18.1).
be induced to differentiate and that the capacity
Herds of Holstein cows routinely average 305-
day yields of 13,000 kg of milk, and individual cows
of the tissues to synthesize and secrete casein
produce much more milk. Such prodigious produc-
 depended on addition of prolactin. We also showed
fion of milk requires massive mammary glands and
that tissues from bulls from a genetic line selected
 careful attention to the feeding and management of
for higher milk production were more responsive
these impressive animals. Regardless of the rate of
than tissues from a control line of animals.
 milk production, all milk is produced by the epithelial
Table 18.1. Variation in location, number, and nipple openings of mammary glands of selected species.
Order
Common Name
Position of Giands
Totaf Gfands
 Openings per Teat
Thoracic
Abdomina!
Inguina!
Marsupialia
Red kangaroo
4
4
15
Marsupialia
Opossum
13
13
8
Carnivora
House Cat
6
8
3-7
2
Carnivora
Domestic Dog
6
10
8-14
Rodentia
House Mouse
4
2
4
10
1
Rodentia
Norway Rat
4
4
4
12
1
Lagomorpha
Rabbit 
4
4
2
10
8-10
Cetacea
Whale
2
2
Proboscidea
Elephant 
2
10-11
Perissodactyla
Horse
2
Artiodactyla
Cattle
4
4
1
Artiodactyla
Sheep
2
2
Artiodactyla
Goat
2
2
Artiodactyla
Pig
f
2
12
 Primate
 Man
1 5-25
Lactation 531
cells of the mammary alveolus. Consequently, to
course do not have a teat or gland cistern, but the
 appreciate milk secretion, it is essential to understand
structure of the ripple and branches from a number of
the structure and function of the mammary gland.
 secondary sprouts are evident. For mammals without
We'll begin by describing the ontogeny of mammary
the mammary glands arranged into an udder, a teat
development followed by a description of physiologi-
or gland cistern is absent, but there is a nipple and a
cal processes that allow final structural development
cluster of primary and secondary sprouts for each gland.
of the mammary alveoli and onset of functional dif-
The mammary gland is one of only a few tissues in
ferentiation of the secretory epithelial cells.
mammals that repeatedly undergo growth, functional
differentiation, and regression. This is one of the
reasons forvery great interest in study of the mammary
Overview of mammary development
gland. The term mammogenesis refers to the develop-
 ment of mammary gland parenchymal structures. In
Although the evolutionary origins are unclear, the
usual circumstances, studies of mammogenesis are
mammary epithelium arises from the germinal ecto-
focused on the very large changes in the mammary
derm and the primitive mammary buds. The first indi-
gland, which begin around the time of puberty or
cation is a slight thickening of the ventrolateral
more likely during pregnancy. However, the founda-
ectoderm in the embryo at about the time that limb
tion for the dramatic mammogenesis during these
buds begin to lengthen. This thickened tissue is vari-
stages begins when the animal is an early fetus.
ously referred to as the mammary band, streak, or line.
The cells within the mammary line condense or
Fundamentally, mammary development can be devel-
opmentally considered a joining of the epithelial
coalesce to form mammary buds. Each mammary bud
ectoderm and the underlying mesoderm.
gives rise to each of the individual mammary glands.
 In ruminates, the mammary buds are closely grouped
Across species, there are dramatic differences in milk
composition. Milk from Holstein cows (the source of the
so that the developing mammary glands are oriented
majority of milk for human consumption in Western
in an udder, for example, two glands in goats and
societies) has about 3.2% protein, 3.4% fat, and 4.6%
sheep but four in cattle. In the bovine, the mammary
lactose. In contrast, hooded seals produce milk with
buds appear at about day 40 of gestation. By day 80,
nds Ared au uo inods Areud pue jen a
about 6.0% protein, 50% fat, and virtually no carbo-
hydrate. Much of this variation reflects evolution-
gives rise to the teat cistern. Secondary sprouts occur
induced responses, which provide the best stratagem
Arepuooas pue Ared ai oo1 Aep Aq pue '06 Aep Aq
for offspring survival. Because the seal pups are born
spouts are canalized. At birth, the teat, teat cistern, and
 on potentially unstable pack ice, they must rapidly
gland cistern are formed. In most species, mammary
 gain sufficient strength and insulation to survive. In
structure at birth is similarly rudimentary.
fact, mothers suckle their pups for only 4 days during
Figure 18.1 illustrates the epithelial portion of the
this period, but pups can double their 20-kg birth
 mammary gland of a mouse at 1 week of age. Mice of
weight. While the hooded seal has the shortest lacta-
tion of any known mammal, the high-fat milk provides
the pup with the energy and metabolic water necessary
for an abrupt introduction into a polar environment.
 Prepubertal and postpubertal mammary
development
Generally, there is litle or no true lobuloalveolar devel-
opment before conception. This period is associated
with creation of a framework to allow proliferation of
the secretory alveolar cells needed for lactation. The
period is generally considered a time during which
the duct system is extended and growth of the adipose
and connective tissue increases. Ductular growth is
limited for dogs, cats, and rabbits but is more exten-
 sive for rats, mice, the rhesus monkey, catfle, and sheep.
Since it is expected that most organs in growing
Fig. 18.1. Rudimentary mammary gland of the 1-week-old mouse.
animals would also grow in concert with rate of overall
The nipple and primary mammary sprout are oriented at the lower
portion of the figure. Other secondary sprouts radiate as if they
body growth, the regulated, cyclic development of the
were bare tree branches into the surrounding fat pad.
 mammary gland can be difficult to study under these
 532 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
conditions. One approach is to evaluate mammary
gland grows somewhat faster than the body during
 development in terms of relative growth and to ask if
the early postpartum period but dramatically faster
growth of the mammary gland fits the law of simple
between 3 and 9 months of age.
allometry, y = bx. A usual approach is to log trans-
Although the absolute amount of mammary growth
form variables associated with body and tissue growth
during the period prior to conception is only a fraction
and use linear regression analysis to calculate the
of the mature mammary gland late in gestation, there
equilibrium constant (α), which relates the difference
 is compelling evidence that alterations in mammary
in growth rate of the organ under study to the growth.
growth during the peripubertal period can affect sub-
of the body as a whole. Simple body weight or body
sequent mammary function. For example, rapid pre-
pasn aensn st (ere aens aeuxdde o e/liam
pubertal weight gain inhibits subsequent mammary
as the independent variable in these analyses. The
parenchyma tissue growth and can reduce subsequent
 dependent variable (mammary gland area, mammary
milk production (Sejrsen and Purup, 1997; Sejrsen
gland weight, DNA content, weight of parenchymal
et al., 2000). Not surprisingly, very few cattle studies
mass) serves as an index of the growth of the mammary
have considered changes in mammary development
gland. When c = 1, the growth is said to be isometric.
 in the period shortly after parturition. While minor in
If α > 1, the growth rate is positively allometric (simple
 terms of absolute mass, our observations of mammary
allometry), but an α < 1 indicates growth rate of the
 glands of Holstein calves between 1 and 3 months of
 organ is negatively allometric (enantiometry).
age (Capuco and Akers, 2010) suggest that parenchy-
 Data for rodents, cattle, and sheep demonstrate that
p-g arde ss prea rd anss r
from birth until before puberty, the mammary gland
in only a few weeks. It is intriguing to consider that
 grows only somewhat faster than the rest of the body.
growth during even this very early postnatal period
Thereafter, the rate of mammary gland growth
may also be critical to the success of lactation. Indeed,
becomes markedly allometric usually through the first
it may be that induction and/or regulation of the
few estrus cycles. Growth then reverts to a period of
 appearance of mammary stem cells will be important
isometric growth that also waxes and wanes during
 in new tools and techniques to regulate and control
the course of the estrus cycle. As demonstrated for
mammary development and function in the future
heifers, the classic study by Sinha and Tucker (1969)
(Capuco et al., 2012; Ellis et al., 2012).
shows that positive allometric begins at about 3
 Figure 18.3 illustrates various stages of mammary
months of age and continues until about 9 months of
 development using the mouse mammary gland as an
age. Specifically, when mammary development was
example. Small rodents are especially useful for this
expressed as log of mammary DNA and body growth
purpose because an entire mammary gland can be
as log of body weight, the equilibrium constant (c)
removed, spread onto a microscope slide, fixed, defat-
averaged 1.6 in the period from birth to 2 months, 3.5
 ted, and stained. Observing structural differences in
from 3 to 9 months, and 1.5 between 10 and 12 months
 mammary glands from various physiological stages
of age (Fig. 18.2). These data indicate that the mammary
quickly illustrates the dramatic changes in the devel-
opment of the mammary epithelium as the gland pre-
pares for the onset of lactation. However, a word of
10,000
caution is advised. Although the fundamental devel-
opmental processes are similar in rodents and other
0=1.5
DNA(mg)
 species, there are clearly substantial differences in the
1000
tissue composition of the mammary gland in rodents
=3.5
compared with other species as well as differences in
100
the pattern of ductular development.
Compared with the rodent pattern of development
where the end buds allow for filling of the entire
ter]
10
mammary fat pad during the prepubertal period (Fig.
18.3), the developmental pattern in the ruminants is
 more compact. Specifically in rodents, as the epithelial
 ducts develop, they are surrounded by stromal cells,
 and the stromal tissue contains a sea of adipocytes. A
higher power view (Fig. 18.4B) of a similar area from
50
100
200
400
s       
Body weight (kg) log scale
several epithelial structures, which radiate from a
mammary duct. Pre- and postpuberty cross-sectioned
Fig. 18.2. Relative mammary growth in heifers. The data illustrate
 ducts often demonstrate a scalloped appearance, sug-
the relationship between mammary DNA and body weight in Holstein
heifers. Segments illustrate periods from birth to 2, 3, to 9, and 10
gesting a complex tubular structure. Indeed, three-
to 12 months of age. Reproduced from Sinha and Tucker, 1969.
dimensional, computer animations prepared from
Lactation
533
B
D
[euinsui ue woy panedaid sunow aloym jo sajas e anensn! sasewi asaul uawdojaaap Aiewwew pue saseis lesisojoissyd 'e'at s
mammary gland of mice at various stages of development from the prepubertl period into lactation. Panel A shows the gland of a 4-week-old
mouse. Ducts have elongated from the region of the primary sprout and nipple (let) to just beyond the lymph node. This progressive growth
depends on the highly mitogenic end buds, which appear as enlargements at the ends of the ducts. Panel B shows enlarged end buds. C
shows a gland from a mouse at about 40 days of age. The mammary fat pad is largely filled with mammary ducts but notice the end buds
pue paseaui sey sauoueng po jagwnu aul 'saa snnsa jo jasuo au jae asno e jo puel aeme aui smous a passaiai mou aey
alveolar buds have begun to appear. E shows enlarged alveolar buds. F provides an image of just a portion of the mammary gland on day 12
of gestation. Alveoli are now beginning to develop and the gland becomes thickened so that images of tissue structure are only possible at the
thinner margins of the gland. G provides an enlargement of an area of developing alveoli. H shows the margin of the mammary gland on day
4 of lactation. Because of the marked increase in alveolar growth and accumulation of secretions, the rounded structure of clusters of lobules
and alveoli is evident at the thinner margins of the whole mount.
Chapte
serial sections of prepubertal bovine mammary paren-
pubertal ruminant, closely packed ducts radiate from
chymal tissue elegantly confirm this tissue architec-
the gland cistern in broccoli-like fashion, but the ducts
ture (Capuco et al., 2002). This suggests that in the
generally fill only a fraction of the mammary fat pad.
ruminant, in contrast with rodents, the gland is not
As the gland continues to develop, the relative tissue
filled with elongated ducts during the prepubertal
area occupied by the epithelium increases at the expense
period waiting for subsequent development of side
of the surrounding stromal tissue. This is especially
branches. To use a plant analogy, in the peripubertal
   e eo    
rodent, widely spaced mammary ducts fill the mamma-
is also evident that much of the tissue area in histologi-
ry fat pad like the bare branches of a tree. In the peri-
cal sections of mammary tissue taken from cows in
534  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Fig. 18.3.Continued
late gestation and lactation is also occupied by lumenal
mates for other species range from 78% for the mouse
space. This does not mean that there is necessarily a
and sheep to 66% in rabbits and 60% for rats. By far
loss of stroma cells as the gland develops but rather
the greatest promoter of natural mammary growth or
that there is a dramatic rearrangement of cells and
 mammogenesis is pregnancy and associated hormonal
tissue elements so that that the stromal cells are less
 and physiological changes. With influence of preg-
evident. As gestation advances, clusters of alveolar
 nancy, mammary growth is reinitiated after reversion
structures appear as scattered, round islands, until late
to isometric growth following puberty. This growth.
in gestation when histological fields are filed with
can be described by an exponential equation with the
closely packed alveoli. Under normal circumstances,
following form: Y = a" where Y = mammary size,
true alveoli are not formed until conception. Variation
t = day of gestation, and the terms a and b are con-
among species reflects the number of estrus cycles
stants. Such equations have been developed to model
that occur prior to conception. Using cattle as an
mammary growth in cows, goats, and guinea pigs.
1.0
example, in the early stages of pregnancy the duct
The term a is mammary gland mass or size at the
system continues to develop with appearance of a
beginning of gestation, and the term bis the first-order
rudimentary lobuloalveolar system by about 5 months
rate constant. The time necessary for the mammary
of gestation.
gland to double is equal to ln2/b (Sheffield, 1988).
Measurement of mammary DNA or weight of dis-
 sected parenchymal tissue is useful to quantify rates
Mammary development during pregnancy
of mammary growth, but these techniques do not dis-
tinguish differences among cells types. Problems of
It is estimated that 94% of mammary development for
trying to distinguish between stromal and paren-
the hamster takes place as pregnancy advances. Esti-
chymal tissue are especially difficult in rodents. For
Lactation
535
B
Fig. 18.4. Ruminant mammary development. Panel A illustrates a mid-saggital section through the udder of a prepubertal ewe lamb and 
 panel B a histological section of mammary parenchymal taken from a region similar to that outlined by the dashed box and indicated by the
double arrow.
Table 18.2. Effect of gestation on mammary growth, histology. and epithelial cell labeling index in ewes.
Day of Gestation
 Mea surement
Day 50
Day 80
Day 115
Day 140
Trimmed udder weight (g)
304 ± 43
253 ± 30
557 ± 29
1050 ± 188
Total DNA (mg)
94± 4
57 ±14
1304 + 152
2324 ± 321
% Epithelium
14.2 ± 0.3 
19.2 ± 2.1
41.2 ± 2.3
40.3 ± 1.8
ewoS %
85.8 ± 0.3
77.8 ± 3.2
35.7 ± 6.5
20.7 ± 3.0
% Lumen
NP
1.0 ± 0.2
23.1 ± 4.3
67068
Alveolar cell No.
NP
NP
36.4 ± 3.8
36.6 ± 1.4
Labeling index
0.16 ± 0.03
1.0 ± 0.2
3.6 ± 1.7
1.0 ± 0.4
 Data adapted from Smith et al. (1987). NP indicates not present: specifically alveoli appeared between day 80 and 115 of gestation. Labeling
index indicates the percentage of epithelial cell nuclei that incorporated tritiated thymidine following a one-hour incubation of tissue explants.
example, both wet weight and defatted dry weight of
of epithelium show a marked increase in parenchy-
the inguinal mammary glands of rats are reported to
mal tissue between day 80 and 115 of gestation.
vary from 50% to 120% during pregnancy but total
However, between day 115 and 140, quantitative his-
mammary DNA changes 200-300%. Since total DNA
tology (percent of epithelial area) alone suggests there
is a reflection of cell number, changes in weight alone
is no continued parenchymal development. This is
underestimate cellular development. Table 18.2 illus-
clearly not the case, since both tissue weight and total
 trates changes in mammary development of ewes during
 DNA double. Lack of change in epithelial area between
gestation. Changes in weight, total DNA, or percent
day 115 and 140 is a reflection that alveoli are present
 536 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
at these stages of gestation, but an increase in lumen
 not determine if the growth occurs before or after par-
and decrease in stromal tissue area reflect accumula-
turition. Rates of thymidine incorporation are very
tion of some secretions and compression of stromal
low for mammary tissue taken from lactating rumi-
tissue between alveoli. In addition to the appearance of
nants, but mitotic cells are sometimes observed
alveoli during gestation, the cell undergo a progres-
(Capuco and Akers, 1999).
sive structural and biochemical maturation as parfuri-
In lactating goats, unilateral inhibition of secretion
tion approaches. The increase in DNA labeling index
in one gland of goats results in a compensatory
 on day 115 reflects the rapid growth during this period.
increase in milk production of the other gland. There
 Mammary growth as measured by total DNA con-
are also reports of increased milk production in cows
tinues during the early days of lactation in rats, rabbits,
by uninfected quarters among cows with mastitis. The
 guinea pigs, and mice. In the rat, for example, as much
relative contributions of hypertrophy and hyperplasia
as 26% of the total mammary growth occurs during
for this effect are unknown. However, in lactating beef 
lactation. In the mouse there is a transient surge in
cows, covering one-half of the udder to prevent
mammary cell proliferation 2-3 days postpartum. In
sucking increased thymidine incorporation in lactat-
fact, it is reported that the cell population doubles
 ing mammary glands compared with control glands
between the last day of gestation and day five of lacta-
of cows that continued suckling in all glands. Morpho-
tion. The guinea pig is especially interesting in that
logically, lactating tissue from control and compensa-
there is litfle change in total mammary DNA during
tory treatment cows was indistinguishable and the
 gestation but a dramatic increase within 2 days of the
tissue did not appear consistently different between
birth of the pups. However, if suckling is not per-
 Zones within lactating quarters. About 40% of the
mitted in these species, the increased growth just
parenchymal tissue consisted of closely packed alveoli.
In some areas, the secretory cells appeared highly dif-
nals associated with suckling or milking are impor-
ferentiated similar to cells from dairy cows. Remain-
tant for growth especially in early lactation. Regardless,
ing parenchymal tissue contained alveoli more widely
it seems clear that once lactation is established, the
scattered in the stromal matrix, and the cells were less
rate of mammary cell proliferation is markedly lower
well differentiated. Labeled cells were observed in
   s   
both regions but appeared more frequently in the less
However, recent reports show that several weeks of
well-differentiated tissue (Akers et al., 1990).
"extra" milking stimulation within the first 2 months
Figure 18.5 shows changes in the growth of mamma-
of lactation in dairy cows increase subsequent milk
 ry parenchymal of beef and dairy heifers during preg-
production when milking frequency is returned to
nancy and into lactation. Comparisons between panels
normal. Mechanisms for the effect are unknown, but
 A and B illustrate those measures of udder parenchy-
the fact that it continues after treatment supports the
mal mass alone but can be misleading. Specifically,
idea that it may involve recruitment of additional
based on udder parenchymal mass, there is marked
well-differentiated cells. This might reflect overt pro-
 growth of parenchymal tissue between day 260 and
liferation of additional secretory cells or perhaps
day 49 of lactation in both Holsteins and Herefords
 enhanced functional differentiation in a population of 
(Fig. 18.5A). In contrast, when udder growth is evalu-
preexisting nonsecretory cells (Bar-Peled et al., 1995).
 ated based on parenchymal DNA (Fig. 18.5B), the
This effect contrasts with the galactopoietic treatment
marked differences between breeds remain, but little
of cows with bovine somatotropin (bST) in that milk
change occurs between day 260 of gestation and day
 production is dramatically increased during the period
49 of lactation in Holsteins. This is likely explained by
of treatment but returns to control levels when treat-
the increased accumulation of secretions in the Hol-
ment is discontinued. This pattern of response has
 stein heifers compared with the Hereford heifers.
been interpreted to indicate that bST alters metabo-
When lactation performance is considered, it is clear
lism rather than cell proliferation. This is clearly an
that differences in milk production (3.5 vs. 20.3kg/
 area of continuing research interest.
uouard iappn u sasueuo Aq pauredxa are (ep
1.0u1
In dairy species, it is usually concluded that there
tissue mass and function. For example, total RNA as
is normally little mammary growth during estab-
 well as RNA/DNA ratio is greater in Holstein than
lished lactation. However, comprehensive data for
Hereford heifers. Interestingly, ability of mammary
early lactation is lacking. The concentration of DNA
 explants from lactating animals tosecrete c-lactalbumin
 in mammary parenchyma is relatively unchanged in
(a specific milk protein) closely mirrored (57 vs. 289ng
early lactation in sheep, goats, or cows, but it is risky
per mg of tissue per 24 hours) the corresponding 5.8-
n as ym Ae jo yt e se sn arda o
fold difference in daily milk production. The relative
does not evaluate the entire mammary gland. Total
failure of cytological differentiation (Akers et al., 2006)
parenchymal DNA doubles between 2 weeks before
in mammary tissue of beef compared with dairy heifers
and after parturition (27.9 vs. 46.0 g), but these data do
is puzzling since milking stimulation and manage-
Lactation
537
ment was identical between breeds in this study. Is it
the generally small proportion of cells that are under-
 possible that selection for increased milk production
going DNA synthesis in preparation for cell division
(in dairy cattle) has allowed for the maximization of
 at a given moment) ushered in a host of studies to
differentiation signals during the critical periparfuri-
estimate mammary cell number based on total DNA
ent period?
content. This method is especially valuable when com-
Realization in the early 1960s that the DNA content
 bined with careful dissection of the mammary gland
of cells is essentially constant (with the exception of
to distinguish the parenchymal portion from the
 stromal tissue of the mammary gland. Even with
careful dissection of the mammary gland to remove
20
apparent connective tissue, there are clearly nonglan-
■Beef
dular cellular elements, that is, blood vessels, lym-
(6y)
15
phatic vessels, nerves, fibroblasts, adipocytes, and
Dairy
white blood cells which contribute to the DNA content
10
 of the parenchymal tissue compartment. Regardless,
classic studies in a variety of lactating species give
direct evidence that the number of mammary epithe-
5
 lial cells is proportional to milk production. The cor-
relation between total parenchymal DNA and milk
production averages about 0.85. Consequently, any
150G
180G
260G
49L
activity that reduces the number or function of the
A
 Day of gestation or lactation
mammary alveoli, will also reduce milk production
(Tucker, 1981, 1987).
50
 In addition to the nonsecreting epithelial cells and
40
■Beef
various stromal cells, extracellular secretions, that is,
Dairy
 proteins and proteoglycans that surround the mamma-
30
ry ducts and alveoli, are also critical for development.
DNA
20
 Collagen is the major extracellular protein component
of the mammary stromal tissue. Moreover, the amino
10
acid hydroxyproline is a specific and major component
of collagen. Thus, assay of tissue content of hydroxy-
150G
180G
260G
49L
proline provides a quantitative measure of stromal
Day of gestation or lactation
tissue. When coupled with measurement of fat, the
B
relative amounts of cornective tissue associated with
Fig. 18.5. Mammary growth during gestation in cattle. Chart A
 the parenchymal tissue can be estimated.
illustrates the growth of the mammary tissue of beef and dairy heifers
during pregnancy and lactation based on weights of parenchymal
Data in Table 18.1 and Table 18.3 illustrate the dra-
tissue dissected from udder slices obtained at slaughter. Chart B
matic changes in mammary growth from birth to
 ui sauuo Ag paaai s yo idaxa 'eep els sapaid
lactation in Holstein heifers and crossbred ewes.
parenchymal tissue DNA. Both measures demonstrate a consistent
 Measured as trimmed udder weight or parenchymal
advantage for the Holstein compared with Hereford heifers.
DNA, mammary growth is greatest during gestation.
However, the increased weight of parenchymal mass between day
However, relative lack of change in DNA from late
260 prepartum and day 49 of lactation for Holsteins is not reflected
in DNA. This suggests that much of the increase in Holsteins
gestation into lactation compared with trimmed udder
(ah l ie la siay woy padepe analy uoaas yw yo lasuo soaai
Table 18.3. Mammary parenchymal growth in heifers and ewes.
Stage of Devefopment
Mea sure
Prepuberty
Postpuberty
Mid Gest
Late Gest
Lactation
Heifers
DNA (g)
1.1
2.6
16.3
6'65
38.8
Wt.(g)
495
957
5110
8560
16,350
Ewes
DNA (g)
0.02
0.09
1.3
2.3
2.6
Wt. (g)
15
78
557
1057
1340
Data adapted from Sejrsen et al. (1982, 1986), Smith et al. (1989), Keys et al. (1989), and McFadden et al. (1990)
 538 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
growth, since increased weight may be accumulated
secretions obtained prior to calving are generally
secretions.
high in protein and low in lactose compared with
Measurement of parenchymal tissue RNA and/or
normal milk but with relatively small concentrations
protein indicates synthetic capacity and is useful to
 of specific milk proteins. Because extensive removal of 
evaluate the fully developed mammary gland. The
mammary
 secretions prior to calving can alter the
reason for this is simple. As the secretory cells differ-
course of mammary development, that is, premature
entiate in concert with parturition, there is a marked
mammary cell differentiation, it is recommended that
increase in the presence of rough endoplasmic reticu-
prepartum milking once initiated should continue
lum and corresponding production of mRNA for
until onset of normal milking at calving.
specific milk proteins. Consequently, onset of milk
High concentrations of protein in secretions obtained
synthesis and secretion corresponds with a marked
 prepartum in cows reflect the accumulation of immu-
increase in the mammary tissue RNA. On a per-cell
noglobulins transferred into secretions from the blood-
basis, increased synthetic capacity can be evaluated
stream. As the alveolar cells differentiate, accumulation
by comparing the ratio of RNA/DNA in mammary
of immunoglobulins is reduced. However, the accu-
parenchymal tissue. Late in gestation, after alveoli
mulated immunoglobulins in the secretions obtained
have formed but before the onset of copious milk syn-
with the first milking or suckling postpartum, that is,
thesis and secretion, this ratio is generally about one.
 colostrum, provide passive immunity to the offspring.
During established lactation, the RNA content of the
This is critical for those species that lack immuno-
secretory cells increases dramatically so that this ratio
globulin transfer to the fetus in utero. With the onset
more than doubles. Changes in parenchymal tissue
 of regular milking or suckling, the composition of
protein follow a similar pattern; however, care must
be taken to account for the milk protein, which may
normal milk composition.
be trapped in the tissue. Finally, any of these measures
Figure 18.6 illustrates the major structure of a
are more useful if they can be applied on a whole
mammary alveolus, while Figure 18.7 and Figure 18.8
 mammary gland basis. For rodents or other animals,
tissue) can be isolated and sampled, these measures
can be related to milk production.
Myoepithelial cell
Alveolar cell differentiation and lactogenesis
Capillary
A common biological theme is that structure follows
Lumen
function. The structural differentiation of the alveo-
lar cells around the time of parturition illustrates this
 principle. As parturition approaches, these cells become
polarized, with appearance of abundant arrays of
RER, numerous mitochondria, and competent tight
junctions just as full-scale milk synthesis and secretion
is initiated. This process is called lactogenesis. Two
events are critical. The structural differentiation of the
alveolar epithelial cells allows for packaging of milk
components for secretion while biochemical differen-
tiation allows for synthesis of milk constituents. We
4
will begin by reviewing some of the structural changes.
The mammary gland begins to reach its mature
structural state late in gestation; that is, alveoli and
mammary ducts are in place. Indeed, soon after the
alveoli are formed, some accumulation of secretions
Fg. 18.6. Mammary alveolus. This diagram illustrates the three
dimensional structure of the mammary alveolus. The hollow center
begins. For example, in cows during first gestation,
of the alveolus provicdes a space for the accumulation of milk 
small but variable volumes of secretions can be ex-
components that have been synthesized and secreted by the secretory
pressed from the mammary gland several months
cells that compose the internal wall of the structure. The outside of
prior to parturition. Prepartum milking of dairy heifers
the alveolus has a network of myoepithelial cells that contract in
response to release of oxytocin at the time of milking. This forces
is sometimes initiated during the month before partu-
stored milk into the terminal duct, which exits the lumen of the 
rition as a management technique to relieve intrama-
alveolus. The milk progresses through larger ducts to be emptied at
mmary pressure. Irrespective of prepartum milking.
the nipple or teat end. This figure was reprinted from Larson (1985))
Lactation
539
凸
B
Fig. 18.7. Prepartum alveolar structure. Panel A illustrates a portion of three different alveoli from the mammary gland of a cow about 2
weeks prior to calving. This light microscope image cemonstrates the relative lack of differentiation of the epithelial cells. However, the luminal
spaces are darkly stained because of accumulation pr imarily of colostrum. Panel B illustrates the ultrastructure of cells similar to those outlined the
dashed box in panel A. Notice that most of the cell area is occupied by the cell nucleus. Structurally these cells are poorly differentiated.
Fig. 18.8. Postpartum Alveolar Structures. Panel A illustrates a portion of two different alveoli from the mammary gland of a cow about two
basally displaced in the cell. There is also abundant RER indicated by the staining of the basolateral area near the nucleus. The apical ends of
the cells have a lacy appearance because of the abundance of Golgi, secretory vesicles, and lipid droplets. Panel B illustrates the ultrastructure
o pue sia jo shene snoaunu 'laionu papunoi aui aion  laued ui xog pausep aui pauno asou oi jelwis sllin jo
illustrate the dramatic change in alveolar cell structure
Table 18.4. Ultrastructural analysis of cytoplasmic organelles
that accompanies lactogenesis. Much of this change is
in well-differentiated mammary epithelia from lactating rats and
dairy cows.
coordinated by  alterations in circulating  hormones
and changes in hormone signaling on mammary
Cytofogica!
Rats
Cows
target cells.
Parameter
 Ultrastructure of the mammary epithelium during
lactation has now been documented in many species.
RER'
14.7
16.1
 The percentages of various cellular organelles within
Golgi
20.9
18.8
pid!7
1.4
4.7
the cytoplasm of alveolar secretory cells from lactating
Mitochondria
7.1
6.3
rats and cows are illustrated in Table 18.4. This gener-
Nucleus
21.7
22.0
ally uniform structure includes basal and paranuclear
Other
34.2
31.1
cytoplasm occupied by parallel arrays of rough endo-
plasmic reticulum (RER). The supranuclear Golgi
'Rough endoplasmic reticulum.
yoea Ag paidnsso useldoo aeuanied ueaw se passaidxa ane eea
 apparatus typically consists of stacks of smooth mem-
Cytoplasmic component. Data are adapted from Nickerson and Akers
branes whose terminal cisternae release casein- and
(1984).
540 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
lactose-containing secretory vesicles. Lipid droplets
 of pituitary extracts consistently increased milk pro-
and secretory vesicles seemingly fill the apical ends
duction in lactating cows. Scientists describing and
of the cells, and microtubules are most frequently
quantifying the potent effects of the pregnancy on
 observed oriented perpendicularly with respect to the
mammary growth and changes in the mammary
 apical plasma membrane. Mitochondria and free ribo-
 gland at puberty spurred others to isolate and iden-
somes are abundant throughout the basal-lateral cyto-
tify the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone.
plasm. The basal plasma membrane is often thrown
 Advances in purification techniques and understand-
into complex folds, believed to indicate active pinocy-
 ing of steroid hormone chemistry allowed further
tosis. Myoepithelial cells frequently occur interspersed
studies leading to the production of these steroids for
between the basal plasma membrane and the basal
widespread animal testing.
lamina that forms a loose barrier between the simple
 Although the existence of mammogenic and lacto-
cuboidal epithelial cells and the underlying stromal
genic substances from the pituitary had long been
tissues. It is now apparent that parenchymal tissue
known, the efforts of C.H. Li and colleagues in the
from glands of high-yielding animals have an abun-
1940s to purify larger quantities of Prl and growth
dance of structurally highly differentiated polarized
hormone (GH) were essential (Riddle et al., 1933).
alveolar cells.
Soon thereafter, specific roles for these hormones in
the regulation of mammogenesis in rodents were
 delineated in classic ablation replacement experiments
Hormonal control of lactogenesis
(Lyons et al., 1958; Nandi, 1958). In an extensive series
and lactation
of studies, triply operated (adrenalectomized, ovariec-
tomized, and hypophysectomized) rats and mice were
The endocrine system perhaps more than any other
treated with various combinations of purified hor-
physiological system plays a central role in all aspects
mones see if normal mammary development could
of mammary development (mammogenesis), onset
 be restored. Injections of estrogen and GH together
of lactation (lactogenesis), and maintenance of milk
caused proliferation of mammary ducts. However,
secretion (galactopoiesis). Lactogenesis is frequently
treatment with estrogen, progesterone, Prl, and GH
described as a two-stage process. Stage I consists of
were needed for lobuloalveolar development. The
limited structural and functional differentiation of the
maximum ductular and lobuloalveolar development,
secretory epithelium during the last third of preg-
although still less that in pregnancy, was obtained in
nancy. Stage Il involves completion of cellular differ-
animals also given glucocorticoids. For some strains
entiation during the immediate periparfurient period
 of mice, GH and Prl were both capable of stimulating
coinciding with onset of copious milk synthesis and
lobuloalveolar development.
secretion. During lactation, the secretory cells synthe-
British researchers, focused on efforts to improve
size and secrete copious amounts of carbohydrate,
 and maintain milk supplies during World War II, initi-
protein, and lipid. Production of this complex mixture
ated many endocrine studies on mammary develop-
of nutrients depends on coordination between bio-
ment and function in dairy animals (Cowie et al.,
chemical pathways to supply metabolic intermediates
 1980). For example, the effects of estrogen and proges-
and secretory pathways for secretion. For example, the
terone on mammogenesis were extensively evaluated
disaccharide iactose is the predominant milk sugar.
 in attempts toinduce lactation in nonpregnant animals.
The enzyme complex necessary for lactose synthesis,
Although difficulties with needed surgeries and expense
membrane-bound galactosyltransferase and the whey
 continue to limit use of ablation replacement experi-
protein c-lactalbumin, combines in the Golgi appara-
ments to study mammary development and function
tus to form lactose synthetase, which links glucose
 in catfle, Cowie etal. (1966) studied hypophysectomized-
 and galactose-producing lactose. Activation of the
ovariectomized goats and showed that mammary devel-
4
c-lactalbumin gene and synthesis of c-lactalbumin is
opment comparable to mid-gestation could be obtained
 most closely associated with stage Il of lactogenesis.
in animals treated with a combination of estrogen,
Experiments beginning in the 1920s (Stricker and
 progesterone, Prl, GH, and ACTH. Such experiments
Grueter, 1928) showed that milk secretion could be
 served to confirm that at least general effects attrib-
 induced in virgin rabbits by injecting a pituitary extract.
uted to these hormones on mammary development in
In 1933, Riddle et al. purified the protein responsible
A      s
for the milk secretion response observed by Stricker
 animals (Asimov and Krouze, 1937; Purup et al., 1993)
and Grueter; they named it prolactin (Prl). Even now,
Although it should be clear that mammogenesis
the widely touted and utilized galactopoietic effect of
 involves more than increased secretion of estrogen
 somatotropin to increase milk production in lactating
and progesterone, which occurs during pregnancy,
dairy cows has its foundation in studies by Asimov
this is nonetheless critical. During the estrus cycle,
and Krouze in the 1930s. They showed that injections
estrogen concentrations increase as a consequence of
Lactation  541
follicle growth, but with the appearance of the domi-
initial colostrum-like secretions rapidly gave way to
nant follicle and ovulation, concentrations of estrogen
secretion of milk. As reviewed (Akers, 1985), subse-
decline and progesterone concentrations increase.
 quent studies showed that lactation could be induced
Since estrogen and progesterone are both important
 in about 70% of these nonpregnant cows and that milk
for final duct growth and lobuloalveolar develop-
yields for the successful animals averaged 70% of
 ment, the lack of a sustained simultaneous increase of
normal. Others found positive correlations between
both steroids during the estrus cycle likely explains
the success of induced lactations and concentrations
the lack of marked parenchymal tissue development
of Prl and well as improved yields when cows were
at this time. Furthermore, few of the studied species
also given drugs to induce Prl secretion. Also, greater
show evidence of lobuloalveolar development prior to
milk yields measured for cows induced into lactation
conception. With conception, the corpus luteum is
during the spring and summer was attributed to higher
Aq uonpod urseaun ym huoe pure paureure
concentrations of Prl in serum compared with cows
the placenta in many species, blood concentrations of
treated during winter months.
 progesterone are elevated throughout gestation. Con-
Although changes in blood concentrations of mam-
centrations of estradiol are higher (relative to the
 mogenic hormones are important in explaining changes
 estrus cycle) with a gradual increase during gestation
pe iss anss n sr 'a r 
until a more dramatic increase during the final few
availability of biologically active hormones are also
weeks before birth. Consequently, concentrations of
 important (Purup et al., 1993, 1995). In circulation, the
 estrogen and progesterone are both simultaneously
steroid hormones are bound to transport proteins.
elevated during much of gestation, especially
SO
Even in tissues, the steroids can become sequestered
during the later portion of gestation. This is believed
with cellular lipids and therefore effectively unavail-
 to be responsible for much of the mammary growth
able (Capuco et al., 1982). This effect, coupled with a
during gestation. Prl and possible prolactin-like activ-
decrease in progesterone receptor concentration and a
ity associated with secretion of placental lactogen is
change in isoforms of the receptor, explains the disap-
 also important in mammogenesis in some ruminants 
pearance of the negative effect of progesterone on lac-
(sheep and goats). In cattle, Prl is most likely a permis-
togenesis at the time of parturition in cattle. This
 sive agent for the mammogenic effects of the steroids
illustrates the concept that the biological effectiveness
and other growth factors. There are no specific changes
of circulating hormones may change independently of
 in secretion of Prl in cattle associated with mammogen-
the total blood concentration of the hormone. In addi-
 esis and lobuloalveolar formation during pregnancy.
tion, changes in expression, synthesis, or availability
An interesting accidental discovery reported
by
of hormone receptors in target cells also clearly impact
Smith and Schanbacher (1973) created a flurry of activ-
biological response. While there is little data for
ity on hormonal induction of lactation in cattle. These
expression of estrogen or progesterone receptors in
researchers were studying the effects of steroids on
bovine mammary tissue during mammogenesis, data
secretion of immunoglobulins into mammary secre-
from assay of ovine mammary tissue shows that
tions of nonlactating cows, that is, animals that had
expression of the progesterone receptor occurs in close
failed to conceive. They observed that injections of
correspondence with appearance of lobuloalveolar
estradiol-17-β and progesterone for only 7 days, at
development (Table 18.2). Serum concentrations of
doses that mimicked blood concentrations in animals
 progesterone are consistently elevated during gesta-
near calving, caused the udders of some of the animals
tion with higher concentrations in later stages of gesta-
to "bag up." When these animals were milked, the
tion and in ewes with more than one fetus. Table 18.5
Table 18.5.
Effect of stage of gestation on serum concentrations of mammogenic hormones mammary
tissue receptor concentration.
Day of Gestation
Measurement
50
80
115
140
Hormone binding
(E = u)
(n = 4)
(E = u)
(n = 4)
 Progesterone (fmol/mg cytosolic protein)
125 ± 53
149 ± 26 
656 ± 216
57 ± 22
 Prolactin (fmol/mg microsomal protein)
7.2 ± 2.1
5.2 ± 1.9
32 ± 3.6
22.2 ± 2.9
Hormone concentration
Progesterone (ng/mL)
3.6 ± 1.3
5.6 ± 1.0
29.9 ± 8.6
14.8 ± 0.7
Prolactin (ng/mL)
58 ± 10 
24 ± 4
31±8 
1 34 ± 26
Growth Hormone (ng/mL)
2.4 ± 0.4
4.4 ± 1.4
8.1 ± 1.3
15 ± 6.0
Data adapted from Smith et al. (1987, 1989).
542
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
illustrates changes in serum concentrations of some
continues, administration of the dopamine agonist
important mammogenic hormones during gestation
c-bromoergocryptine (CB154) reduced basal prolactin
as well as mammary tissue receptor concentration.
concentration about 80% and prevented the usual
As its name might suggests, Prl has undoubtedly
 periparturient rise as well as the milking-induced Prl
been the most intensely studied hormone related to
rise during the first week postpartum. Milk produc-
lactation and mammary growth. Despite understand-
tion was reduced 45% during the first 10 days post-
ing that the presence of the pituitary is essential for
partum. Lost milk production was associated with
normal mammary development, whether Prl or GH
reduced synthesis of c-lactalbumin, lactose, and fatty
is predominant in mammogenesis is not clear. The
acids, as well as impaired structural differentiation of
 answer to this question is likely species dependent.
the mammary secretory cells. Selected effects are sum-
In addition to the ovary and corpus luteum, the
 marized in Table 18.6. Cows treated with exogenous
placenta produces estrogen, progesterone, and
la
 Prl in addition to the agonist (to replace the peripar-
prolactin-like hormone called placental lactogen (PL).
 jo sso ou pamos (uoeond u sns jua
PL was first recognized by its Prl-like biological effects.
production or negative effects on milk component bio-
However, the PLs of many species have both GH and
 synthesis or alveolar cell differentiation. The effect of
Prl-like activities. For example, Prl and nonprimate
 Prl suppression and replacement during the peripar-
GH molecules interact only with their specific recep-
turient period on milk production in multiparous
tors, called lactogenic and somatogenic, respectively.
 cows is shown in Figure 18.9. Clearly, Prl is important
Human GH, in contrast, recognizes both receptor
in mammary cell differentiation and lactogenesis
classes. This coincidently probably explains the inap-
(Akers et al., 1981a).
 propriate breast development sometimes observed in
human males with pituitary tumors that over produce
180
GH. Both ovine and bovine PL behave like human
←Control
GH; they compete for both somatogenic and lacto-
150
CB154
 genic receptors. This explains some of the names asso-
(7w
ciated with these proteins isolated from the placenta,
120
that is, chorionic somatomammotropin or chorionic
6u)
 mammotropin. Although PL is implicated in prepara-
lactin
90
tion for the mammary gland for lactation, stimulation
of steroidogenesis, fetal growth, and alteration of
60
maternal metabolism, direct evidence for effects in
cattle are lacking. The best evidence for a role Pl in
30
' pe das u pe s un si sisau
 In contrast with a role for Prl in mammogenesis,
there is no doubt about the importance of Prl in lacto-
-6-5-4-3-2-1012
3
4
 genesis. Some of the best evidence for the importance
Day relative to calving
of increased periparturient secretion of Prl in stage II
lactogenesis has come from experiments in which
Fg. 18.9. Serum Prl in cows given CB154. Cows were
the administration of a dopamine agonist was used
administered daily injections of ergrocryptine (CB154) during the
periparturient period. Both basal concentrations and the surge in
to inhibit Prl secretion and correspondingly impair
Prl, which accompanies parturition, were blocked. Data adapted
lactation. In ruminants where postpartum milking
from Akers et al. (1 981a).
o po pue A ui na pue na ungieel-a 'sisauss asol ui sauu g'at ajs
uanas id ssaiddns oi ts ia um juawean y pue uoned iaje pue anoeg
lapter
Treatment
Prepartum
 Postpartum
CB154
CB154 + Prf
Lactose synthesis (μg/h/100 mg)
E9干6E
552 ± 70 
327 ± 63
628 ± 81
α-Lactalbumin (μg/mg/cytosol protein)
1.7 ± .04
5.4 ± 0.4
2.8 ± 0.4
6.8 ± 0.5
RNA (g)
23.6 ± 2.1
87.2 ± 16.8
56.0 ± 7.9
91.5 ± 12.8
DNA (g)
27.9 ± 2.9
46.0 ± 3.8
40.1 ± 3.8
42.2 ± 3.8
Adapted from Akers et al. (1981b). Control animals were euthanized 10 days before or after parturition.
aam ld uas su uned yny uned paaxa oid sep zl i paasue sem si
infused continuously for 6 days immediately before parturition.
Lactation543
Aside from circumstantial evidence related  to
secretion of α-lactalbumin (a specific milk protein)
changes in circulating hormone concentrations, there
 by mammary explants taken from pregnant cows.
is a marked increase in numbers of mammary cell
 Mammary explants from estrogen-primed or pregnant
receptors for Prl, IGF-1, and cortisol during late gesta-
 mice also require insulin, cortisol, and Prl for the accu-
tion. Progesterone receptor concentration is also cor-
mulation of casein and c-lactalbumin. However, some
respondingly reduced with the onset of lactation.
caution is advised with wholesale extrapolation of
 Thus, simultaneous, coordinated changes in circulat-
results from culture experiments to the intact animal
ing hormones and receptors serve to regulate the
 as well as uncritical extrapolation between species. For
timing of lactogenesis. It is believed that high concen-
 example, induction of the various milk proteins in
tration of progesterone during most of gestation acts
culture does not necessarily reflect the timing of events
to inhibit the onset of lactation. Near the time of par-
in vivo. Neither do existing culture methods allow con-
turition, progesterone concentrations begin to wane
sistent synthesis and secretion of milk lipids. Finally.
and estrogen concentrations increase. Removal of the
 hormone concentrations employed may not accurately
negative effects of progesterone along with positive
reflect the situation at the level of the mammary cell in
effects of Prl and glucocorticoids sets the stage for
the animal. Culture systems by their very nature rep-
the onset of copious milk production (stage l of
resent relatively uncomplicated regulation compared
lactogenesis).
with the intact animal. Nonetheless, results shown
 Data from culture experiments also support a role of
in Figure 18.10 illustrate the positive effects of Prl,
these hormones in lactogenesis. For example, additions
cortisol, and estradiol on synthesis and secretion of
of estradiol or cortisol markedly enhance Prl-induced
 c-lactalbumin by explants of bovine mammary tissue.
2.5
16
(ng)
1.5
P1000+Pr
el
0.5
P100+Prl
P10+Prl
0
25
50
75
100
Prl (ng/mL)
P1000
C+Prl
P100
Prl
P10
C
Prl
Basal
Control
0.5
1
1.5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
B
α-Lactalbumin (ng/mg)
C
α-Lactalbumin(ng/mg)
Fig. 18.10. Effect of lactogenic hormones on secretion of α-lactalbumin. Explants of bovine mammary tissue from multiparous, nonlactating.
pregnant cows were incubated with various combinations of hormones. Panel A demonstrates a concentration-dependent increase in
α-lactalbumin in response to addition of bovine Prl. Panel B shoes the additive effect of cortisol on Prl-induced α-lactalbumin secretion. Panel
 C demonstrates a concentration-dependent inhibitory effect of progesterone (P) on Prl timulation of α-lactalbumin secretion. Data adapted
from Goodman et al. (1 983).
 544 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Application of molecular techniques to mammary
that Prl, GH, glucocorticoids, and thyroid hormones
gland biology has solidified knowledge that Prl
are typically required for the full maintenance of lacta-
and glucocorticoids are the primary stimulators of
tion (Topper and Freeman, 198o). This does not mean
mammary cell differentiation. Both Prl and glucocor-
 that additional hormones and growth factors (humoral
ticoid response elements are found within the pro-
and local, identified and unidentified) might not also
moterregions of the genes forseveralmammary-specific
be important or mediate effects of these hormones.
milk proteins. Induction of both mRNA and specific
Secretion of oxytocin at milking or suckling is nec-
milk proteins in the presence of Prl or glucocorticoids
essary in most species for efficient removal of accumu-
in isolated mammary epithelial cells confirms the
lated milk and in some species is essential to obtain
importance of these hormones in lactogenesis and
any milk at all. The importance of regular milk removal
provides details for mechanisms of action of these
 to prevent mammary involution has been known for
hormones in control of milk protein gene expression
 many years but it has also long been hypothesized
(Rosen et al., 1999; Akers, 2006).
that the secretion of galactopoietic hormones with
The term galactopoiesis was originally coined to
milking or sucking was also important. Secretion of
describe the enhancement of an established lactation.
Prl and oxytocin, as well as related secretions of nor-
With this strict definition, only exogenous GH (bST)
epinephrine or epinephrine, which can impact the
and thyroid hormone are undisputed galactopoietic
secretion (or action) of oxytocin, are most often associ-
hormones in dairy animals. Responses also suggest
ated with hormone secretion at milking and effects
that these hormones are endogenously rate limiting.
on milk synthesis. However, glucocorticoids are also
However, more generally, galactopoiesis can also be
secreted in response to milking or suckling, as is GH
described as the maintenance of lactation. In this
 in some species.
sense, a larger number of hormones and growth factors
are candidates as galactopoietic agents. Continued
secretion of galactopoietic hormones, growth factors,
Milk synthesis and secretion
and regular milk removal are essential for regulation
and maintenance of lactation following lactogenesis.
The mammary gland is an unusual exocrine gland
The pituitary gland and its hormones are essential
in several respects. The product is a very complex
integrators of the endocrine regulation of milk secre-
mixture that depends on apocrine and meocrine
tion. This is dramatically shown by the loss of milk
 modes of secretion. Other components are derived
production in hypophysectomized lactating goats.
by passage of soluble molecules across (transcellu-
However, milk yield can be fully restored to prehy-
lar) and sometimes between (paracellular) the cells.
 pophysectomy levels by the combined administration
Physically, milk is a complex solution of salts, carbo-
of Prl, GH, glucocorticoids, and triodothyronine (T3)
hydrates, miscellaneous compounds with dispersed
see Figure 18.1l. Although species differences exist,
 proteins and protein aggregates, casein micelles, and
endocrine organ ablation/replacement studies show
fat globules. Milk osmolarity generally equals blood
(-300 mOsm) and has a pH between 6.2 and 7.0. Bovine
'0' pue g9 jo Hd anaae ue aay u ueny pue
Dex
respectively.
Prl
Once initiated, milk secretion continues more or less
GH
continuously throughout  lactation. This secretion
A
T3
mixture includes membrane-bound lipid droplets;
3.5
(Aep)
casein micelles; and an aqueous phase usually con-
taining lactose, minerals, other proteins, and a variety
6x)
2.5
of other soluble components. Milk is stored within the
2
yield 
lumen of the alveoli and ductular system until it is
1.5
removed by the milking machine or the suckling
offspring. Suckling intervals vary widely between
0.5
 mammals, ranging from minutes to hours in cattle, to
once daily in rabbits, to once every 2 days in tree
Intact
25
44
60
80
130
shrews, or to only once a week in some seals. More-
Day of treatment
over, although there are species-specific changes in
Fig. 18.11. Milk yield after hypophysectomy. A lactating goat was
milk composition with stage of lactation, milk compo-
hypophysectomized and administered hormone replacement. Milk
 sition for most of lactation is generally only moder-
production averaged 3.7kg per day prior to surgery (intact). Afer
 ately affected by environmental or nutritional changes,
treatment for 2 months with dexamethasone (Dex; synthetic
despite the often-dramatic changes in milk volume.
glucocorticoid) yields were as indicated at time zero. Milk
production is depicted with addition or removal of hormone
Function of the mammary gland during established
treatment as indicated. Adapted from Cowie (1969).
lactation is closely linked with a number of hormones,
Lactation
545
Table 18.7. Gross milk composition of various species.
Percentage by Weight
Species
Water
Fat
Casein
Whey
Lactose
Ash
Human (Homo sapiens)
87.1
4.5
0.4
0.5
7.1
0.2
Cow (Bos taurus)
87.3
66
2.6
0.6
4.6
0.7
Sheep (Ovis aries)
82.0
7.2
3.9
0.7
4.8
0.9
Goat (Capra hircus)
86.7
4.5
2.6
0.6
4.3
0.8
Morse (Equus cabaffus)
88.8
1.9
1.3
1.2
6.2
0.5
Pig (Sus scrofa)
81.2
6.8
2.8
2.0
5.5
1.0
Dog (Canis familiaris)
76.4
10.7
5.1
2.3
E'6
1.2
Cat (Felis catus)
4.8
3.7
E'6
4.8
1.0
Rat (Rattus norvegicus)
79.0
10.3
6.4
2.0
2.6
1.3
Mouse (Mus muscufus)
73.6
13.1
7.0
2.0
3.0
1.3
Blue Whale (Batenopteridae musculus)
45.5
39.4
7.2
3.7
0.4
1.4
Adapted from Jenness (1974) and Oftendal (1984, 1997).
growth factors, and local tissue regulators, but it is
centration of Cl is higher inside the cells than the
difficult to ascribe a specific transport activity to a
 equilibrium distribution would suggest, so membrane
 particular molecule or to determine if effects are direct
 pumps in the basolateral and apical membranes act to
or indirect.
sequester Cl. It is easy to imagine that this balance of
Across species, there are dramatic differences in
 ions between milk and blood is readily compromised
milk composition. Milk from Holstein cows (the source
if the leakiness of the tight junctions is altered (Stel-
of the majority of milk for human consumption in
wagen, 2001).
Western societies) has about 3.2% protein, 3.4% fat,
 As dietitians and nutritionists frequently note, milk
and 4.6% lactose. In contrast, hooded seals produce
is a rich source of calcium, with total concentrations
milk with about 6.0% protein, 50% fat, and virtually
 equaling 100mM or more. With the onset of lactation
 no carbohydrate. Table 18.7 provides milk composi-
the mammary gland extracts large quantities of
tion data for some selected species.
calcium to supply the developing neonate. For high-
Along with mammary cell-specific constituents,
 producing dairy cows, this demand can lead to met-
milk contains a myriad of minor components. Many
abolic periparturient paresis unless animals are
of these molecules are important nutrients or regula-
carefully managed. The calcium in the milk exists
tors of the neonate (growth factors, water, and ions),
as free calcium, casein-bound calcium, or calcium as-
but other components may include drugs or other
sociated with various inorganic anions, for example,
xenobiotic substances transported from the circula-
citrate and phosphate. There is little movement of
tion. Molecules are transported into the milk by several
calcium from milk to blood, which suggests that
 possible routes. Mammary epithelial cells are able to
calcium cannot pass across the apical plasma mem-
maintain substantial gradients for Na', K', and Cl
brane. Given that most of the calcium is associated
ions across the cell membrane. During established lac-
with the casein micelles, the Golgi vesicle route of
tation there are also gradients between milk and
secretion is the predominating pathway. However,
plasma. These ions are important to maintain normal
since all of the milk calcium is derived from the circu-
 electrical gradients across the alveolar cell membranes,
 lation, there must be differences in transport between
but they also are critical in regulation of milk osmolar-
basolateral and apical membranes. Mammary cells
ity, especially for those species with low lactose pro-
maintain a low intracellular free calcium concentra-
duction. Concentrations of Nat inside (-43mM) the
tion in spite of the marked accumulation of calcium in
cells are typically lower than outside (150mM), but the
 milk. This is important because changes in free calcium
gradient for K+ is the opposite (143mM inside com-
concentration are closely linked with several hormone
pared with 4.5mM outside). These differentials are
and growth factor-signaling pathways. One idea is
maintained by action of Na+ K+ ATPase pumps in the
that the rate of calcium influx into the cell is matched
basolateral membranes. The apical plasma membrane
by a corresponding uptake of calcium by cellular or-
is permeable to both ions so that the distribution of
ganelles. The presence of an ATP-dependent calcium
these ions into milk is controlled by the electrical
 pump on Golgi membranes has been demonstrated.
potential across the apical plasma membrane. Milk is
Calcium uptake by mammary cells is also likely hor-
electrically positive with respect to the cell, so that the
concentrations of Nat and K+ are lower in milk than
protein and 1,25-(OH) vitamin D stimulates the
in the cells, but the K+/Nat ratio (-3:1) is similar. Con-
uptake of calcium in cultured mammary tissue.
546   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Lactation curves
 Since the mammary glands and teats are close together,
the portion of the milking machine attached to the
Once initiated, lactation depends on regular suckling
animal (teat cups and teat cluster) can be relatively
or milking of the mammary gland to maintain the
compact. For those not familiar with milking and
lactation. Although the time required for regression
management of modern dairy cows, the udder of a
varies markedly between species, that is, days for
lactating Holstein cow can be massive. Itis not unusual
rodents versus weeks for ruminants, without milk
for a single cow to yield 30kg or more of milk at a
 removal the alveolar structure is eventually degraded,
single milking. Combined with the mass of the udder
 alveolar cells de-differentiate and many cells undergo
tissues this means that the connective tissues of the
 apoptosis. Without the stimulus of another gestation,
mammary glands have to support as much as 70kg of
the gland progressively reverts to a structure similar
 tissue and stored milk just before milking. Given the
to that of the mature virgin. However, in dairy cows,
dorsal inguinal orientation of the udder, this is no
milk production increases with each successive lacta-
trivial matter. Support is provided by strong flat sus-
tion milk. This suggests accumulative mammary
pensory ligaments, which are attached to the pelvic
 growth with each lactation cycle. Normal husbandry
bone and to the strong tendons of the abdominal
dictates that dairy cows are rebred soon after the onset
muscles in the pelvic area.
 The udder is divided into two distinct halves, sepa-
of lactation and milked for much of the concurrent
 pregnancy. Consequently, during the later part of lac-
rated by the medial or median suspensory ligament,
tation, the cow has dual functions of growth of the
which provides most of the strength to hold the udder
developing calf and continued lactation. Compared
attached to the dorsal body wall. Fibers of the lateral
with wild ruminants or beef cows, the period between
ligaments are continuous with the medial ligament
consecutive lactations is relatively short. Conse-
but spread over either side of the udder so that it
quently, there is less opportunity for mammary regres-
 appears to be held in a sling of connective tissue. The
sion or involution. Second, hormonal and metabolic
medial ligament is somewhat elastic but the lateral
changes associated with late gestation and prepara-
ligaments are not. As the milk accumulates in the
 tion for parturition are conducive for mammary devel-
udder, the normally vertical orientation of the teats
 opment. This means that the time course of mammary
involution is impacted by concurrent gestation.
 animals age, excessive degradation of the fibers of the
Although early sections provide an overview of
 medial suspensory ligament can reduce its support
mammary development, the somewhat urique anat-
capacity so that the udder becomes pendulous irre-
omy of the udder deserves special attention. In the
spective of time relative to milking. This can lead to
cow and other ruminants the mammary glands are
difficulties with milking, that is, problems maintain-
ing attachment of teat cups as well as problems with
or four (cattle) mammary glands to create the udder.
teat injury and increased mastifis risk. Figure 18.12
a rd e sd  s
illustrates the appearance and strength of the medial
C
Chapter 1
A
B
Fig. 18.12. Medial and lateral suspensory ligaments. Panel A shows the dissected udder of a cow supported by only the medial suspensory
ligament (A). Panel B shows a portion of the lateral suspensory ligament dissected as a flap of tissue (arrows). The letters a and b indicate the
cut edge and boundaries of a flap of the lateral suspensory ligament. Adapted from Swett et al. (1942)
Lactation 547
and lateral ligaments. The mammary glands of the
streak canal. However, relative lack of insulation
udder are directly connected to the abdominal cavity
seems to make the teats susceptible to cold weather
only via passage through the inguinal canals. These
 problems. The washing of udders and teats in prepa-
are paired narrow oblique passages through the
ration for milking and movement of cows into freez-
abdominal wall on either side of the midline, just
 r aq sm p sn 
above the udder. These canals allow passage of blood
amplify teat injury problems. Between the outside
and lymph vessels and nerves to the udder.
skin of the teat and internal surface of the streak canal
Compared with most other mammary glands, those
or teat cistern, the stromal tissue contains a network
of animals with udders also have relatively large
 of blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, smooth muscle
ripples or teats. Specifically, the teat of the ruminant
cells, and nerves. This extensive blood supply is
has a single opening called the streak canal that leads
 important in maintenance of normal tissue tempera-
directly into a space within the teat called the teat
ture and especially so during severely cold tempera-
cistern. The structure of the streak canal is considered
tures. Because mechanical milking can retard blood
further with respect to its role as the primary defen-
 flow in the teat and produce vascular congestion or
sive barrier against mastitis. The space of the teat
swelling of the stromal tissue, this likely exacerbates
cistern would typically hold only a few milliliters of
problems with teat skin injury in cold weather.
milk. Near the base of the teat there is an annular fold
The streak canal ranges from 7 to 16mm in length
of tissue, which separates the teat cistern from the
with a mean diameter of 0.82mm (Fig. 18.13). The
gland cistern. The gland cistern is roughly the size
lowest 2cm of the streak canal is especially important
of an orange and holds -200mL of milk. The gland
 because of capacity of these tissues to act as a barrier
cistern has many irregularly shaped cavities, which
to minimize milk leakage or entrance of environmen-
accommodate the endings of large intra-lobular ducts,
tal agents. Intuitively, the diameter of the streak canal
which drain milk from the secretory tissue. Except for
is positively related to the rate of milk flow, but cows
the terminal ducts that are directly adjacent to the
with the best balance of acceptable rates of milk flow
alveoli, ducts are lined with at least two layers of
 and protection from bacterial invasion can expect
nonsecretory
 epithelial cells. It is estimated that
greatest longevity in the herd. Teats vary in shape and
40-60% of the milk is stored in the lumenal spaces of
size, from cylindrical to funnel shaped. Teat ends also
the ducts or cisterns. Above the gland cistern, the
vary, with some that are flat, but others round or
tissue is progressively more dense and compact
 pointed. Pointed teats are less common and are associ-
because of the relative lack of very large ducts and the
ated with slow milking times but resistance to masti-
closely arranged lobules.
tis. Round teats are common and occur on cows with
 It has long been assumed that milk is prevented
faster milking times, but these cows exhibit some
from escaping from the teat by the action of bands of
resistance to mastitis. Flat teat ends are less common,
sphincter-like smooth muscle cells in the teat meatus
but these cows also tend to have faster milking with
surrounding the streak canal. However, recent studies
suggest that most of these smooth muscle cell ele-
ments are located some distance from the streak canal
and that they are more likely involved in rhythmic
contractions of the teat. Thus, closure of the teat canal
depends on passive elastic elements in the region sur-
rounding the streak canal. A more recent suggestion
is for a multi-spiraled, net-like combination of elastic
fibers and associated smooth muscle cells that produce
a spiraling of the internal epithelial folds of the streak
canal to affect closure. Regardless of the exact mecha-
nism, the internal structure of the streak canal and its
surface secretions prevent milk leakage and act as a
barrier. Although milking ease and milk speed are
important factors in the economics of a dairy opera-
tion, selection of cows with wide, short teat canals
 may well speed the milking process at the expense of
SC
increased risk of mastitis.
The skin of the teat is hairless but tough and resis-
tant to tears or punctures. Histologically, it is a strati-
Fg. 18.13. Internal structure of the cow's teat. Areas illustrated
fied squamous epithelium that extends over the teat
include the streak canal (SC), Furstenberg's rosette (Fr), and the teat
end and into the teat opening for the length of the
cistern (Tc). Adapted from Nickerson and Pankey (1983).
 548 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
less resistance to mastitis. Certainly, the uniformity of
Garst et al. (1999a, b) reported results for animals that
milking machine teat cups means that cows with teats
were milked four times per day as well as effects on
of large diameter or length are more likely to suffer
litter weight gains. Milk yields peaked at about 19
 milking machine-related trauma.
 days postparfum and declined to 45 days postpar-
A lactation curve for typical Holstein cow is illus-
tum. As might be expected, sows that were milked
trated in Figure 18.14A. However, it is important to
four times per day had litters with substantially lower
realize that estimates of milk yield need to be evalu-
weights at the time of weaning. Average daily milk
ated in relationship to milk composition, state of
yield per sow was 1.1L per day or 43.1 ± 8.6L for
maturity of the offspring, suckling patterns, diet, and
the entire lactation period. There were also substan-
behavior of the species. Practically, production curves
tial differences in milk yields between individual
 are most reliable for dairy animals (cows, goats, sheep)
 mammary glands. For example, anterior glands pro
because these animals have been selected for ease of
 duced more than posterior glands (-40 vs. 15mL per
milking and handling, high yields of milk, and for
 milking). Examples of pig milk yields are illustrated
 their capacity to response to machine or hand milking.
in Figure 18.14.
Because of their usefulness as bioreactors to produce
 For other species, direct measurement of milk yield
pharmaceutical proteins in their milk, renewed inter-
requires that the animals be sedated and/or injected
est in milking of pigs has emerged in recent years.
with exogenous oxytocin. Under these circumstances,
30
60
50
AE
20
(kg/da
40
30
10
pla
一
20
100
200
000
10
Days postpartum
1500
10
20
30
40
50
C
Days postpartum
1200
Daily milk yield (mL)
900
600
300
12
22
32
42
B
Days in milk
Fig. 18.14. Lactation curves in cows and sows. Panel A shows the lactation curve for a typical Holstein cow. Milk production typically peaks 
at about 60 days postpartum and declines gradually. Panel B illustrates milk prodluction in sows that were machine milked 4 times per day.
 Panel C shows the yield per milking in anterior (diamonds) compared with posterior (circles) mammary glands in sows.
Lactation  549
the relevance of the data (other than comparison
bination of increased feed intake and mobilization of
between treatments) can be questioned. Certainly, it is
 body reserves. The typical dairy cow is in a negative
unknown if yields reflect "natural" levels of produc-
 energy balance for much of early lactation. However,
tion or if measures of composition are accurate. An
when compared with smaller mammals, f
these
alternate for estimating yields is the response to timed
demands seem relatively less severe. This is a reflec-
suckling episodes. This typically involves removal of 
tion of not only demands of the suckling young but
the suckling young for a period of time, then weighing
also the fact that smaller mammals typically secrete a
the litter or offspring immediately before and after a
much more energy-dense milk than cows. As an
set period when returned to the mother (Beal et al.,
extreme case, it is estimated that the pygmy shrew
1990). For species in which the offspring are solely
(Sorex minutus), which weighs only 5g. must more
dependent on milk for nourishment, measurement of
than double its food consumption during lactation
offspring weight gain is used as an indirect measure
 and eat more than four times its body weight per day
of milk production of the mother.
to meet the additional demands of lactation. Lactation
 While there is likely some question of the accuracy
in small animals generally involves a relatively short
of yield estimates for nondairy mammals, compari-
period of intense metabolic demand, but in larger
sons of peak milk yields between species give valuable
 animals there is a longer period of lesser demand.
insight toward physiological demands of lactation. In
The relationship between milk yield and body
particular, scaling milk production relative to body
weight is illustrated in Figure 18.15. The regression
weight or mammary gland weight suggests common
line for several species not selected for milk produc-
relationships and illustrates the effect of genetic selec-
tion is shown. Because certain species have been
tion for milk production. Although only a small
selected for high yields (dairy cows, dairy goats),
number of the known mammals have been evaluated,
values for some of these highly selected animals are
when data for 19 species including the mouse, hamster,
 also plotted as individual data points. Data points for
rabbit, pig, human, goat, sheep, cow, and camel are
these animals are above the calculated regression line
for the nonselected species, that is, well above 95%
relationships between milk yield and body weight,
confidence intervals, reflecting greater than expected
Aree pue 'iam Apoq pue u u ndno aaa
milk production. The success of genetic selection for
weight versus body weight. Equations for these rela-
milk yield in dairy cows, a trait with a heritability of
tionships include the following examples (Hanwell
 only 0.2-0.3, is such that a typical Holstein cow has
and Peaker, 1977):
been converted to the metabolic size of a dog and
 Milk yield (kg/ day) = 0.084 body weight (kg)0.77
exceptional cows to the metabolic size of rodents.
Concern for good husbandry practices and health of
Energy output in milk (kcal/day)
= 127.2 body weight0.69
Mammary weight (kg) = 0.045 body weight (kg).&2
102
11
 Per unit of body weight, smaller animals have higher
010
milk yields, greater outputs of energy in their milk,
and relatively larger mammary glands than other
(day)
101
mammals. If data are averaged, the relationship
between mammary gland weight and milk yield can
 be expressed by the following equation: milk yield
yield
(kg/day) = 1.67 × gland weight (kg).%. Because the
 exponent does not differ significantly from unity, on
Milk
average, lg of mammary tissue from a lactating
10-1
animal produces 1.67mL of milk per day. There must
certainly be some variation in this ratio, that is, varia-
10-2
tion in the degree of differentiation of the alveolar
cells, contribution of accumulated secretions to weight
10-2
10-1
101
102
103
measurements, stage of lactation, and milking or suck-
Body weight (kg)
 ling patterns, but this value provides a reasonable rule
of thumb for comparative purposes. It comes as no
Fg. 18.15. Relationship between bodyweight and milk yield.
 surprise to good dairy cattle managers that energy
Comparisons between dairy (open circles) and nondairy animals is
illustrated. 1 = mouse, 2 = hamster, 3 = rat, 4 = fox, 5 = human,
and metabolic demands on the high-producing dairy
6 = goat, 7 = dairy goat, & = sheep, 9 = beef cow, 10 = Holstein
 are very great. The energy and substrate demands to
cow, 11 = Jersey cow. Adapted and redrawn from Hanwell and 
support increased milk production are met by a com-
Peaker (1977).
 550 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
dairy animals particularly in face of recent techniques
 conservative estimate of the effect of bST treatment on
(e.g., use of bovine somatotropin) to increase produc-
milk production (Bauman, 1999).
tion and continuing genetic progress is justified, but it
Given the voluminous literature and now very wide
is equally important view these physiological demands
spread commercial use of bST in dairy cows in the
 on the dairy cow within an appropriate frame of refer-
 United States and other countries, testing and evalua-
ence (Mepham, 1983).
tion of this technology has likely been the most
Any discussion of milk synthesis has to consider
not only the nutrients necessary for milk synthesis
history. Public debate about bST use was also exten-
but also the physiological adjustments necessary to
sive. Special interest groups and very public individu-
supply these nutrients to the mammary gland. Require-
als predicted dire consequences from adoption of bST
 ments for high levels of milk production are stag-
for use in dairy cows. Among concerns that had little
 gering at first glance. For example, in the dairy cow
if any scientific basis, bST approval would cause a
the energy requirements for milk production can
massive reduction in milk consumption, milk price
 easily approach 80% of net energy of intake. Demands
would decline, and farmers would go bankrupt.
for lactose production can require 85% of available
Others predicted dire animal consequences. Media
glucose. It has been calculated that high-producing
 coverage was extensive near the time of approval by
cows must mobilize adipose tissue and body nutrient
the Center of Veterinary Medicine of the Food and
reserves equal to approximately one-third of the
Drug Administration in 1994, with more than 800
milk produced during the first month or more of lacta-
reports in the first quarter of the year. At the current
tion. Clearly, finely tuned coordinated interactions
time, the regulatory agencies of more than 50 coun-
between all the major physiological systems are neces-
tries have reviewed safety concerns and approved bST
sary for success.
for use. It estimated that more than 3 million cows
currently receive bST supplementation. In the United
States, this includes animals in herds of all sizes,
Galactopoiesis and bsT
located in every region of the country. Scientific and
anecdotal information support the view that bST is a
Administration ofbST to lactating dairy cows increases
safe, effective, and profitable management tool for the
the yield and efficiency of milk production. In response
dairy farmer. Although U.S. food laws do not mandate
to injection of bST, milk secretion increases within a
labeling of milk from bST-treated cows because the
day and is maximized within a week. The increased
composition of the milk from the bST cows is equiva-
milk yield is maintained as long as treatment is con-
lent to that of controls, a relatively small riche market
tinued but quickly returns to control levels when
has developed for milk obtained from herds not using
bST is discontinued. The milk yield response is dose
bST. However, since there is no chemical test to distin-
dependent and the response curve hyperbolic. At
guish the milk from bST- and non-bST-treated cows,
approximately 40mg of bST/day, nearly maximal
validation of milk from non-bST treated cows simply
 response is obtained. Milk yield achieved with near
depends on the fact that these producers sign a certi-
maximal doses of bST is impressive, with increases
fication declaring that bST is not used on their farms.
reported as high as 30-40%. Typically bST increases
This is analogous to niche markets for other organi-
7a
cally farmed products. A recent estimate is that milk
10-15% increase in yield. The magnitude of response
from these farms constitutes less that 1% of fluid milk
to a particular dose of bST depends upon biological
sales in the United States. This suggests that the vast
variation, stage of lactation, and management param-
majority of consumers are interested in wholesome
eters. The bST formulation currently approved for use
food products obtained at competitive prices. In fact
in the Urited Statesis aprolonged-release N-methionyl-
during the first year after approval, milk fluid con-
bST (Posilac, Monsanto Co.) that was approved by
 sumption in the United States increased about 1%.
the United States Food and Drug Administration in
Reasons for some of the rancorous debate on the
5
 November 1993. It is administered at a dose of 500mg
 approval of bST for use in dairy cows were varied but
per cow every 2 weeks. Package instructions are that
   na s i s
treatment should be initiated after peak lactation at
was the first proposition for widespread treatment of
 >60 days postcalving, when cows are at or near posi-
animals with a recombinant DNA-derived product
tive energy balance.
that impacted not animal health but animal produc-
 The first year after approval average milk yield
tion. Second, the wholesomeness of milk and milk
increased 3kg, and this level of increase for bST-
products seem to occupy a special position when com-
adopting herds has been maintained. Since not all
pared with many other food materials. Third, the now
cows in the bST herds are treated, that is, some cows
roundly refuted dire predictions of consequences on
are not eligible < the 60 days postpartum, this is a
animal health (Collier et al., 2001) coincided with a
Lactation  551
-e jo ,suuaars, paienosse pue aruane sumoa
underway. Given the rapidity and magnitude of these
tudes among many segments of the population. Finally.
tissue changes, it is not surprising that involution in
popular concerns that the adoption of the technology
the mouse is only partially reversible if suckling young
might hasten the disappearance of family farms and
are returned within 48 hours. Although much of the
change the sociology of rural farm areas were seem-
involution process is initiated by milk stasis, the con-
ingly carried along on a wave of nostalgia at the time.
tinued secretion of lactogenic hormones associated
Certainly it was an interesting process to observe.
with milking or suckling can delay the process. This
Regardless, responses of milk cooperatives, grocery
is shown by experiments in which suckling is allowed
chains, and other marketing concerns make it clear
 in only selected glands. For example, in lactating
that decisions related to use of technologies such as
sheep, when both glands were nonsuckled for the first
bST do not necessarily follow the scientific evidence.
 15 days postpartum, mammary prolactin receptor was
reduced 84%, but in the nonsuckled gland of ewes
with the opposite gland having continuing suck-
Mammary involution
ling, stimulation the prolactin receptor was reduced
only 36%. Parenchymal DNA concentration was not
 Mammary involution can be stimulated at any stage
affected by suckling treatments; however, RNA con-
 of lactation by removal of suckling young or in dairy
centration followed a pattern similar to prolactin
animals by suspending milking. Most of the detailed
 receptor, lowest when neither gland was suckled
 cellular and molecular research on mammary involu-
(2.1 mg/g), highest in suckled glands (7.4mg/g), and
tion has focused on effects of acute induction of invo-
intermediate in nonsuckled glands companion to a
lution. However, after the peak of lactation, a gradual
suckled gland (3.8mg/g). Alveolar structure was
involution occurs, as the young are progressively
maintained in all treatments but the cytological
weaned. In dairy cows, there is also a gradual decline
appearance of the epithelial cells reflected changes in
in milk production with time even with regular
RNA concentration. Epithelial cells from ewes with
milking. This decline is greater for cows that become
neither gland suckled were poorly maintained, with.
 pregnant soon after calving.
 many cells engorged with secretory vesicles and lipid
Cellular details of mammary involution have been
droplets (Box 18.2).
most studied in rodents. Regardless of the differences
Involution in the ruminant mammary gland is
in timing of events between species, that is, days to
 decidedly slower with less loss of alveolar structure.
hours in rodents versus days to weeks in ruminants,
After 3 days of nonmilking casein and c-lactalbumin
 paurrd  sidode sanoa uon
 mRNA was reduced but β-lactoglobulin mRNA was
death) of the alveolar epithelial cells and tissue remod-
unchanged. After a week, mRNA for the two milk
eling. Apoptosis of mammary epithelial cells occurs
proteins C-sicasein and c-lactalbumin was dramati-
in several phases of mammary development, not just
cally lower (85 and 99%, respectively). After 4 days of 
mammary involution. These include canalization of
nonsuckling, alveolar structure is degenerated in the
major mammary ducts in fetal development, rapid
rodent and apoptosis, based on the degree of DNA
elongation of mammary ducts via the terminal end
laddering, is near maximal. However, even in non-
bud, and the waxing and waning of ductular growth
pregnant, lactating beef cows, alveolar structure was
during estrus or menstrual cycles. Apoptotic destruc-
largely intact in the absence of suckling. with only
tion of abnormal cells at early phases of carcinogen-
isolated areas of tissue degeneration evident even
 esis is also a likely mechanism for protection against
 after several weeks. Nonetheless, based on quantita-
breast cancer.
tive histology, well-differentiated cells, common in
In rodents, removal of the suckling young and accu-
suckled glands, were rare in nonsuckled glands. Inter-
mulation of milk at midlactation rapidly initiates invo-
estingly, regression of the gland in the absence of 
lution of the mammary gland. Marked changes 
in
sucking was not uniform. Structure of parenchymal
a pe s  u jpia are ussxa aa
fissue distant from the teat was better maintained.
dence of widespread apoptosis observed by 48 hours.
 Even 42 days after cessation of suckling, areas of alve-
For example, in rats, expression of mRNA for the
olar structure were present. Overall, alveoli from lac-
caseins is reduced 95% and that of acetyl-CoA carbox-
tating glands had more cells per cross section
ylase, a key lipogenic enzyme, 98% within 24 hours.
(30.4 ± 0.9) compared with 21.4 ± 0.8 in glands not
Translational activity is also reduced. A second stage
suckled for 42 days. In total, these data illustrate that
of involution is initiated between 72 and 96 hours with
even a prolonged period of nonsuckling (42 days)
the activation of a series of tissue proteinases, includ-
does not result in complete destruction of the
ing stromelysin 1 and 2, gelatinase A, and plasmino-
mammary alveoli. However, since total gland DNA
was reduced (50-64% after 21 and 42 days of non-
gland to prepare for a new reproductive cycle is well
suckling, respectively), cells are lost with prolonged
552
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
to about 50% of control. After 1 week of renewed
B0x 18.2
 Milk composition and milk removal
suckling, milk yield had increased 1l-fold (2.2kg/
 Does the composition of milk influence milking
day), and composition was near normal except for
or suckling capacity? As illustrated in an earlier
reduced lactose (3.7 vs. 4.7%). These data do not mean
chapter (Fig. 2.10), secretory processes in epithelial
 that mammary involution does not occur in cattle;
cells can be influenced by specific products made
however, the extent and timing of events are more
by the cells.
prolonged than for rodents (Akers et al., 1990; Lamb
 The disaccharide lactose appears in all milks,
et al., 1999).
with the exception of those of some marine mam-
When extrapolated to the dairy cow with a dry
mals. Its synthesis depends on the enzyme lactose
period between lactations occurring 40-60 days prior
synthetase, which is active as a complex of β1-4-
to the birth of the calf, it is reasonable to suggest that
galactosyl transferase and the hormonally regu-
fissue degeneration is certainly less than in rodents
lated milk protein c-lactalbumin. It is known that
and likely less than in nonpregnant cows. Just as suck-
c-lactalbumin evolved from lysozyme prior to the
ling or milking of contralateral glands acts to slow
evolution of sauropsids (leading to birds and rep-
involution in companion nonmilked or nonsuckled
files). Thus, the ability to produce lactose appeared
glands, the involution process is also likely minimized
before it was utilized as a milk component. It is
during the typical dry period of dairy cows. During
likely then that many of these early milk-like secre-
the later stages of the dry period, the mammary gland
tions contained antimicrobial oligosaccharides but
is growing and alveolar cells are preparing for lacto-
 no lactose. Interestingly, the cellular biosynthesis of
genesis. This overlap of lactation and pregnancy when
lactose in the modern mammary gland also acts to
su san rg uednd u o pap, are smon
promote hydration of suckling young because of
those stimuli associated with mammary involution
the capacity of lactose contained within secretory
and milk stasis conflict with mammogenic and lacto-
vesicles to attract water via osmosis, thus effec-
 genic stimuli of pregnancy. Cows are usually well into
tively diluting mammary secretions. It is also likely
the last trimester of pregnancy; that is, 40-60 days
that the presence of lactose improves milk let-
before calving at drying off, goats may be in early
down and the supply of milk to the suckling young
stages to second trimester of pregnancy, and ewes are
because of the production of less viscous secretions.
typically nonpregnant at the end of lactation. Differ-
Indeed, experiments in transgenic mice have dem-
ences in the management of the reproductive /lactation
onstrated that when the c-lactalbumin gene is
of these dairy animals are due to the seasonal nature
silenced, the pups fail to thrive because of a failure
of reproduction in goats and sheep, gestational length,
to productively nurse (Stinnakre et al., 1994).
and usual lactation periods. Among dairy animals, the
This sugests that there must be differences
dairy cow is urique in this abrupt interface between
in oxytocin release, response times, or mammary
successive lactations.
architecture that allow for sufficient and efficient
Dairy managers have developed methods to maxi-
 milk removal in mammals with milk containing as
mize profitability and milk production. Empirical evi-
much very high fat (as much as 50%) but no lactose
dence shows that the inclusion of a nonlactating or dry
(fur seals and sea lions) or very low (<l%) carbo-
period between lactations is needed to maximize milk
p are arn a (sieas Ar) ae
production in the dairy cow. Without a dry period,
differences among species with respect of lactation
milk production in the subsequent lactation is reduced
(Brennan et al., 2007).
about 20%. Thus, the dry period is not essential but is
beneficial. In fact, a dry period of 40-60 days seems
 optimal, since a dry period that is too short (less than
40 days) also impairs subsequent milk production.
The dry period seems to be important because of
 milk stasis in the beef cow. Regardless, survival of
effects on the mammary gland rather than for effects
de-differentiated alveolar cells should allow milk
on the nutritional status of the dam as was once com-
secretion to be reinitiated if milking is resumed. In
monly believed. However, this is an area of intensive
dairy cows, resumption of milking after 12 days of
research activity, given the fact that better manage-
normilking in selected glands caused a rapid recovery
ment, use of bST, and genetic improvement means
in milk production to near pretreatment values for
those glands. When none of the glands were milked,
amounts of milk at the time when dry off would nor-
recovery was impaired; that is, only 28% of pretreat-
mally occur (Box 18.3).
ment yields were obtained. In contrast, return of suck-
Because of the typical breeding pattern, little atten-
ling calves to their dams after a 28-day hiatus in beef
tion has been given to determining an optimal dry
cows was recently shown to restore milk production
period for goats or sheep. However, when lactating
Lactation
553
Box 18.3  Lactation strategies
 The Phocids or true seals have adopted a fasting
strategy regarding lactation. Especially for the larger
Fur seals and sea lion (Otaridaes) have developed a
 animals, mothers give birth and use mobilization of
novel approach to lactation and optimizing offspring
body reserves to supply milk for all of the lactation
survival. Mothers typically forage at sea then return
period. In these animals, lactation lasts for little as 4
with others to isolated areas to give birth and stay
days (4-42 days), then pups are weaned. During this
with their pups for a relatively short initial suckling
time the pups grow rapidly because of the high
period (-1 week); thereafter, the mothers regularly
levels of fat.
return to the sea to forage often for several days or
The Odobenids, the walrus, for example, use an
weeks at a time. They then return to periodically
 aquatic nursing strategy. Mothers build up blubber
suckle their pups (usually 1-3 days). In contrast with
stores, then, during a short fasting period, they give
other mammals they have evolved an ability to mini-
birth (typically on an ice flow), the pup suckles and
 s n s a  ss  
 bonds, and soon after it accompanies the mother into
that mammary regression and involution does not
the sea to forage. Lactation can continue for 2-3
occur. The milk for pups is every high in fat, -35%.
years, but by about 5 months, pups are foraging and
The transfer of this energy allows the pups to rapidly
nursing. Walrus milk is lower in fat compared with
 gain weight and lay subcutaneous fat, which insu-
 pue ramois Aiaaelau moa sdnd os sdnona rao
lates the pups and provides nutrition for periods
physiological investment in lactation is extended.
when mothers are foraging. These repeated cycles of
 These examples give a taste of some of the variety
suckling and foraging continue throughout lactation
in lactation strategies that have evolved in various
(4-12 months) depending on the subspecies.
 groups of mammals (Sharp et al., 2006).
goats were hormonally induced to ovulate and mated
the udder on cell turnover and lactogenesis have not
during the usual seasonal anestrus period, they
entered the next lactation without a dry period and
lactogenesis and milk production, milking one gland
produced 12% less milk than controls. However, the
may conceivably advance lactogenesis and milk pro-
data were confounded with possible effects of season.
 duction in other glands. In nonpregnant ruminants,
Consequently, in a second study, these researchers
milking delays mammary involution in other non-
used a within-animal experimental design to deter-
suckled glands. Thus, it is possible that milking one
mine the effect of drying off on lactation in goats. One
gland during the prepartum period inhibits the ability
gland was milked continuously, and the other dried
of the opposite gland to produce maximally during
off 24 weeks before parturition. There was no differ-
the subsequent lactation, or that milk production was
ence in subsequent milk production between udder
increased in glands milked continuously when the
halves. In contrast with the first study, this suggests a
 opposite gland was dried off. The importance of a dry
dry period is of no benefit. However, the dry period
period to maximize milk production in dairy goats
was relatively very long (i.e., three times the optimal
and sheep is unsettled. Studies to determine the effects
length for the cow). Finally, udder-half experimental
of pregnancy status, length of the dry period, and
design may be less than ideal for this evaluation. Inter-
other implications of the udder-half experimental
actions of glands of differing lactational state within
design are warranted (Wilde et al., 1999).
Chapter summary
sis and storage of milk between milking or suckling
episodes. Composed of an inner spherical layer of
Introduction
cuboidal epithelial cells with an internal lumen, it is
surrounded by myoepithelial cells that contract and
Lactation is critical in multiple aspects of animal pro-
reduce the volume and elicit removal of milk from
duction involving mammals. This is most apparent 
storage. The space that surrounds alveoli is filled with
qan oi Sunon jo Suean inq uogonpond Aep u
blood vessels, connective tissue proteins and cells (fibro-
market weight or to produce new breeding stock also
blasts, adipocytes, white blood cells), and interstitial
depends on successful lactations and mothering.
fluid. Study of the mammary gland and lactation in-
Within the mammary gland the multicellular alveo-
volves scientists with multiple discipline interests,
lus is the key structure that is responsible for synthe-
including molecular biologists, cancer biologists, dairy
(Continued)
554   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
specialists, endocrinologists, and others. Milk pro-
mammary secretory cells so that synthesis and secre-
duction and milk composition (other than genetic
tion of specific milk components (lactogenesis) can
selection in dairy breeds) have evolved as part of
begin. Once lactation is established, it is essential that
reproductive strategies to ensure successful rearing
milk removal continues and that secretion of sup-
of offspring.
portive hormones continues (growth hormone, gluco-
corticoids, thyroid hormones, etc.) so that milk
secretion is maintained (galactopoiesis).
 Mammogenesis, lactogenesis, and
galactopoiesis
Milk composition
Changes in the growth (mammogenesis) and devel-
opment of the mammary gland are most apparent
When compared across species, milk composition is
when considered in the context of physiological
highly variable. But the composition has been tai-
stages. The mammary gland is also urique compared
 lored through evolutionary pressures to supply milk
with most organs because there is relatively little
that is best suited for the survival of offspring. For
development until the postpartum period. Develop-
example, milk of artic mammals or sea mammals is
ment during the early neonatal period has also tra-
typically very high in fat (50% or more) but very low
ditionally been viewed as relafively unimportant.
in lactose and water. The high fat supplies the energy
However, it is becoming increasingly clear that physi-
      ss
 ological, nutritional, and management conditions can
 animals (seals for example) that are born on floating
have both positive and negative impacts on future
 sea ice. For most mammals, the first secretions pro-
development and function. Regardless, expressed on
 duced are usually high in protein due to the presence
a mass or DNA basis, growth of the mammary paren-
of immunoglobulins that accumulate in the alveo-
chymal begins in earnest with the onset of puberty.
lar spaces during late gestation. For mammals in
 But by far the largest proportion of mammary growth
which there is minimal or no transfer of antibodies
to the fetus in utero, passive immunity supplied via
of gestation, growth consists of expansion of the
 the consumption of colostrum and gut transfer is
mammary ductular tree. Estrogen, progesterone, and
vitally important. Drivers for accumulation of anti-
 growth hormone (likely in the guise of IGF-l) are the
-f nn ,ei, ro srd ae ap so
primary drivers of mammary ductular growth
 tions between alveolar cells prior to parturition as
(Purup et al., 20oo). But a variety of growth factors
well as expression of IgG receptors on the undiffer-
are likely involved in multiple aspects of ductal cell
entiated the alveolar cells. As parturition approaches,
proliferation and morphogenesis of the developing
increased  prolactin  and glucocorticoid  secretion
 mammary gland. In the last third of gestation the
induces alveolar cell differentiation and inhibition of
mammary alveoli appear, but the alveolar epithe-
IgG receptors. With the induction of lactose synthe-
lial cells are poorly differentiated. As parturition
tase and induction of specific milk proteins (caseins,
approaches, decreases in progesterone along with
c-lactalbumin, β-lactoglobulin), the composition of
increasing serum estradiol, glucocorticoids, and pro-
mammary secretions becomes progressively similar
lactin induce the progressive differentiation of the
to the mature milk for the particular mammal.
Review questions and answers are available
Akers, RM., D.E. Bauman, A.V. Capuco, G.T. Goodman, and
online.
H.A. Tucker. 1981a. Prolactin regulation of milk secretion
2
and biochemical differenfiation of mammary epifhelial
lapt
cells in periparfurient cows. Endocrinology 109: 23-30.
References
Akers, RM., D.E. Bauman, G.T. Goodman, A.V. Capuco, and
H.A. Tucker. 1981b. Prolactin regulation of cytological dif-
Akers, R.M. 1985. Lactogenic hormones: binding sites,
ferentiation of mammary epithelial cells in periparturient
cows. Endocrinology 109: 31-40.
biosynthesis in ruminants. J. Dairy Sci. 68: 501-519.
Akers, R.M., W.E. Beal, T.B. McFadden, and A.V. Capuco.
Akers, R.M. 2002. Lactaftion and the Mammary Gland. Iowa
  n s  0
State Press, Ames, Iowa, 278 pages.
 mammary tissue after 21 or 42 days of non-suckling.
Akers, R.M. 2006. Major advances associated with hormone
J. Anim. Sci. 68: 3604-3613.
Akers, R.M., A.V. Capuco, and J.E. Keys. 2006. Mammary
lactation in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 89: 1222-1234.
 histology and alveolar cell differentiation during late ges-
Lactation 
555
tation and early lactation in mammary tissue of beef and
Ellis, S., R.M. Akers, A.V. Capuco, and S. Safayi. 2012. Bovine
dairy heifers. Livest. Sci. 105: 44 49.
 mammary epithelial cell lineages and parenchymal devel-
Asimov, G.J. and N.K. Krouze. 1937. The lactogeric prepara-
opment. J. Anim. Sci. 90: 1666-1673.
tions from the anterior pituitary and the increase of milk
Filep, R. and RM. Akers. 2000. Casein secretion and cyto-
yield in cows. J. Dairy Sci. 20: 289-306.
logical differenfiation in mammary tissue from bulls of
Bar-Peled, U., E. Maltz, I. Bruckental, Y. Folman, Y. Kali,
9-97   A 1  a8 m 1 1
H. Gacifua, A.R. Lehrer, C.H. Kright, B. Robinzon, H.
Francis, C.M., E.L.P. Anthony, J.A. Brunton, and T.H. Kunz.
Voet, and H. Tagari. 1995. Relationship between frequent
1994. Lactafion in male fruit bats. Nafure 367: 691-692.
milking or sucking in early lactafion and milk production
Garst, A.S., S.F. Ball, B.L. Williams, C.M. Wood, J.W. Kright,
of high producing dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 78: 2726-2736.
H.D. Moll, C.H. Aardema, and FC. Gwazdauskas. 1999a.
 Bauman, D.E. 1999. Bovine somatotropin and lactation: from
Techrical note: machine milking of sows—-lactational milk
basic science to commercial applicafion. Domest. Anim.
yield and lifter weights. J. Animal Sci. 77: 1620-1623.
Endocrinol. 17: 101-116.
Garst, A.S., S.F. Ball, B.L. Williams, C.M. Wood, J.W. Kright,
Bauman, D.E, R.W. Evereft, W.L. Weiland, and R.J. Collier.
H.D. Moll, C.H. Aardema, and F.C. Gwazdauskas. 1999b.
1999. Production responses to bovine somatotropin in
Influence of pig substifution on milk yield, lifter weights,
northeast dairy herds. J. Dairy Sci. 82: 2564-2573.
and milk composition of machine milked sows. J. Anim.
Beal, W.E., D.R. Nofter, and RM. Akers. 1990. Techriques
Sai. 77: 1624-1630.
for estimation of milk yield in beef cows and relationships
Goodman, G.T., R.M. Akers, K.H. Friderici, and H.A. Tucker.
 to calf weight gain and postparfum reproduction. J. Anim.
1983. Hormonal regulation of c-lactalbumin secretion
Sci. 68: 937-943.
from bovine mammary fissue culfured in vitro. Endocri-
Brennan, A.J., J.A. Sharp, C. Lefevre, D. Topcic, A. Auguste,
nology 112: 1324-1330.
 M. Digby, and K. Nicholas. 2007. The tammar wallaby and
Hanwell, A. and M. Peaker. 1977. Physiological effects of lac-
fur seal: models to examine local control of lactation.
tation on the mother. Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. 41: 297-312.
J. Dairy Sci. 90: (E. Suppl.): E66-E75.
Jenness, R. 1974. The composifion of milk. In Lactation: A
Capuco, A.V. and R.M. Akers. 1999. Mammary involution
       
in dairy animals. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 4:
B.L. Larson and VR. Smifh. Academic Press, New York
137-144.
and London.
Capuco, A.V. and RM. Akers. 2010. Management and envi-
Keys, J.E., A.V. Capuco, R.M. Akers, and J. Djiane. 1989.
ronmental influences on mammary gland development
Comparative study of mammary gland development and
and milk production. In Managing Prenatal Development
differentiation between beef and dairy heifers. Domest.
to Enhance Livestock Productivity, pp. 259-292. Edited by
Anim. Endocrinol. 6: 311-319.
PL. Greenwood, A.W. Bell, PE. Vercoe, and G.J. Viljoen.
Kunz, T.H. and D.J.s Hosken. 2009. Male lactation: why, why
Springer, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, IAEA.
not and is it care? Trends Ecol. Evol. 24: 80-85.
Capuco, A.V, P.A. Feldhoff, R.M. Akers, J.L. Wiftliff, and
Lamb, G.C., B.L. Miller, J.M. Lynch, D.M. Grieger, JIS. Ste-
H.A. Tucker. 1982. Progestin binding in mammary tissue
venson, and M.C. Lucy. 1999. Suckling reinitiated milk
Of preparfum, nonlactating and postparfum, lactating cows.
secretion in beef cows affer an early postparfum hiafus of
Steroids 40: 503-517.
 milking or suckling. J. Dairy Sci. 82: 1489-1496.
Capuco, A.V.,S. Ellis, D.L. Wood, R.M. Akers, and W. Garreft.
Larson, B.L. 1985. Biosynthesis and cellular secretion of
2002. Postnatal mammary ductal growth: three-dimensional
 milk. In Lactation. Edited by B.L. Larson. Iowa State Uni-
imaging of cell proliferafion, effects of estrogen treaftment
versify Press, Ames, Iowa.
and expression of steroid receptors in prepubertal calves.
Lyons, W.R., C.H. Li, and R.E. Johnson. 1958. The hormonal
Tissue Cell 34: 143-154.
 control of mammary growth. Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 14:
Capuco, A.V., R.K. Choudhary, K.M. Daniels, R.W. Li, and
219-254.
C.M. Evock-Clover. 2012. Bovine mammary stem cells:
McFadden, T.B., T.E. Dariel, and R.M. Akers. 1990. Effects
cell biology meets production agriculture. Amimal 6:
 of plane of nutrition, growth hormone, and unsafurated
382-393.
"uuv '1 'squren renraqndaid u vmoro Areuueu uo jey
Collier, R.J., J.C. Byaft, S.C. Denham, PJ. Eppard, A.C. Fabel-
Soi. 68: 3171-3179.
lar, R.L. Hintz, M.F.
MeGrath, C.L. 1
McLaughlin,
Mepham, T.B., 1983. Physiological aspects of lactation. In
J.K. Shearer, J.J. Veenhuizen, and J.L. Vicini. 2001. Effects
 Biochemistry of Lactatior, pp. 4-28. Edited by T.B. Mepham.
 of sustained release bovine somatotropin (Sometribove)
 Elsevier Science Publishers, B.V. Amsterdam.
Nandi, S. 1958. Endocrine control of mammary gland devel-
84: 10981108.
opment and function in the C3H/He Crgl mouse. J. Nafl.
Cowie, A.T. 1969. Lactogenesis. In The Initiation of Milk
Cancer Inst. 21: 1039-1360.
Secretion at Parfuriftion, pp. 157-169. Edited by M. Reyn-
Nickerson, S.C. and RM. Akers. 1984. Biochemical and
olds and S.J. Folley. University of Pennsylvania Press,
ultrastructural aspects of milk synthesis and secretion. Int.
Philadelphia.
J. Biochem. 16: 855-865.
Cowie, A.T., IA. Forsyth, and IC. Hart. 1980. Hormonal
Nickerson, S.C. and J.W. Pankey. 1983. Cytological observa-
Control of Lactation. Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg.
tions of the bovine teat end. Am. J. Vet. Res. 44: 1433-1441.
Cowie, A.T., J.S. Tindal, and A. Yokoyama. 1966. The induc-
Offtendal, O.T. 1984. Milk composifion, milk yield and
J Endocrinology 34: 185-195.
Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. 51: 33-85.
 556 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Oftendal, O.T. 1997. Lactafion in whales and dolphins: evi-
Sheffield, L.G. 1988. Organization and growth of mammary
dence of divergence befween baleen- and toothed-species.
epifhelia in the mammary fat pad. J. Dairy Sci. 71:
J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 2: 205-230.
2855-2874.
Peaker, M. 1994 Male suckling. Nafure 371: 292.
Sinha, YN. and H.A. Tucker. 1969. Mammary development
Purup, S., K. Sejrsen, J. Foldager, and RM. Akers. 1993.
 and pituitary prolactin level of heifers from birth through
 Effect of exogenous bovine growth hormone and ovariec-
 puberty and during estrus cycle. J. Dairy Sci. 52: 507-512.
tomy on prepubertal mammary growth, serum hormones
Smifth, JJ., A.V. Capuco, and RM. Akers. 1987. Quantifica-
and acute in-vitro proliferative response of mammary
tion of progesterone binding in mammary tissue of preg-
explants from Holstein heifers. J. Endocrinol. 139: 19-26.
nant ewes. J. Dairy Sci. 70: 1178-1185.
Purup, S., K. Sejrsen, and R.M. Akers. 1995. Effect of bovine
Smifh, J.J., A.V. Capuco, W.E. Beal, and R.M. Akers. 1989.
GH and ovariectomy on mammary sensitivify to IGF-I in
Associafion of prolactin and insulin receptors with mam-
prepubertal heifers. J. Endocrinol. 144: 153-158.
mogenesis and lobulo-alveolar formation in pregnanf
Purup, S., M. Vestergaard, M.S. Weber, K. Plaut, RM. Akers,
ewes. Int. J. Biochem. 21: 73-81.
 and K. Sejrsen. 2000. Local regulation of pubertal mamma-
Smith, K.L. and F.L. Schanbacher. 1973. Hormone induced
ry growth in heifers. J. Anim. Sci. 78(Suppl. 3): 36-47.
lactation in the bovine. I. Lactational performance follow-
Racey, D.N., M. Peaker, and P.A. Racey. 2009. Galactorrhoea
 ing injections of 17β-estradiol and progesterone. J. Dairy
is not lactafion. Trends Ecol. Evol. 24: 354.
Soi. 56: 738-745.
 Riddle, O., R.W. Bates, and S.W. Dykshorn. 1933. The prepa-
 Stelwagen, K. 2001. Effect of milking frequency on mammary
ration, identification and assay of prolactin- a hormone of
functioning and shape of the lactaftion curve. J. Dairy Sci.
the anterior pifuitary. Am. J. Physiol. 105: 191-216.
84:(E. Suppl.):E204-E211.
Rosen, J.M., S.L. Wyszomierski, and D. Hadsell. 1999. Regu-
Stinnakre, M.G., J.L. Vilofte, S. Soulier, and J.C. Mercier.
lation of milk protein gene expression. Annu. Rev. Nutr.
1994. Creation and phenotypic analysis of c-lactalbumin-
19: 407-436.
deficient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sai. U.S.A. 91: 6544-6548.
Rowson, A.R., K.M. Daniels, S.E. Ellis, and R.C. Hovey. 2012.
Stricker, P. and R. Grueter. 1928. Acfion du lobe anterieur de
 Growth and development of the mammary glands of live-
1'hypophyse sur la montée laiteuse. C.R. Soc. Biol. (Paris)
stock: a veritable barnyard of opporfunities. Semin. Cell
99: 1978-1980.
Dev. Biol. 23: 557-566.
Sweft, W.W., PC. Underwood, C.A. Matthews, and
Sejrsen, K. and S. Purup. 1997. Influence of prepubertal
 RR. Graves. 1942. Arrangement of the tissues by which
feeding level on milk yield potenfial of dairy heifers: a
the cow's udder is suspended. J. Agric. Res. 65: 19-42.
review. J. Anim. Sci. 75: 828-835.
Topper, Y.J. and C.S. Freeman. 1980. Multiple hormone inter-
Sejrsen, K., J.T. Huber, H.A. Tucker, and RM. Akers. 1982.
actions in the developmental biology of the mammary
Influence of plane of nutrition on mammary develop-
gland. Physiological Rev. 60: 1049-1106.
ment in per-and post-pubertal heifers. J. Dairy Sci. 65:
Tucker, H.A. 1981. Physiological confrol of mammary growth,
793-800.
lactogenesis, and lactation. J. Dairy Sci. 64: 1403-1421.
Sejrsen, K., J. Foldager, M.T. Sorensen, R.M. Akers, and
Tucker, H.A. 1987. Quantitative estimates of mammary
D.E. Bauman. 1986. Effect of exogenous bovine somato-
 growth during various physiological states: a review.
J. Dairy Sai. 70: 1958-1966.
Dairy Sai. 69: 1528-1535.
Tucker, H.A. 1994. Lactation and its hormonal control. In
Sejrsen, K., S. Purup, M. Vestergard, and J. Foldager. 2000.
 dd    g  a
High body weight gain and reduced bovine mammary
1098. Edited by E. Knobil and J.D. Neill. Raven Press, New
York.
yield potential. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 19: 93-104.
 Tucker, H.A. 2000. Hormones, mammary growth, and lacta-
Sharp, JA., K.N. Cane, C. Lefevre, J.PY. Arnould, and
tion: a 41-year perspective. J. Dairy Sci. 83: 874-884.
K.R. Nicholas. 2006. Fur seal adaptafions to lactation:
Wilde, C.J., C.H. Kright, and D.J. Flint. 1999. Control of milk 
insights into mammary gland function. Curr Top. Dev.
Biol. 72: 275-308.
J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 4: 129-136.
lapter
19
Reproduction
Contents
Introduction
557
Reproduction in Birds
578
Overview of the Female Reproductive Tract
558
 Avian Female Reproductive System
579
Puberty in Females
563
Avian Male Reproductive System
580
 Endocrinology of Female Puberty
563
Reprod uctive Technologies
581
Estrous Cycles, Estrus, and Ovulation
564
Artificial Insemination
581
 Fertilization and Pregnancy
568
In Vitro Fertilization (IVF)
582
Implantation and Placentation
569
Embryo Transfer (ET)
582
Parturition
573
Sexed Semen
582
Overview of Male Reproductive Tract
574
Cloning
583
Spermatogenesis
575
Transgenic Animals
584
Sperm Storage, Maturation, and Delivery
577
Chapter Summary
586
Introduction
For r-selection animals, the investment in each indi-
vidual is small both in a physical and energetic sense.
What could be more fundamental to success of a
Examples of this pattern of reproduction include
 species than reproduction? Understanding homeosta-
fishes or amphibians that can produce extremely large
sis and physiological controls are of limited use unless
numbers of eggs. The trade-off in producing so many
we can maintain our animals. Natural selection has
small offspring is that there is little if any care of the
produced an astounding variety of successful repro-
offspring. They are produced and released into the
ductive strategies. From an evolutionary viewpoint,
environment to fend for themselves. It is estimated
the most favored pattern is one that results in the
that only six out of a million mackerel fry survive to
largest number of offspring reaching sexual maturity.
also reproduce. On the other hand, K-selection species
Most population biologists have recognized
produce fewer but larger offspring. Because these off-
two
general patterns, namely, r-selection or K-selection.
 spring are cared for—at least to some degree—during
2
These terms were coined from logistic equations that
development, the chance that they will successfully
 were used to model growth of populations of animals
reach reproductive age is far greater. Compared with
in the wild.
the mackerel, individual K-selection animals may have
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
557
558 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
a 50% chance of success. Clearly, for most agricultural
manipulation per rectum. Thus, there is a practical
 operations the K-selection pattern predominates.
means to determine the functional status of the ovary,
Energetic costs of parental care occur in two catego-
determine pregnancy status, or manipulate the tract
ries. First, there is the cost that relates to transfer of
for artificial insemination (Al). The female tract is
nutrients to the developing neonate. For mammals,
essentially a series of interconnected tubes with dis-
the demands of lactation can be very large. The lactat-
tinct layers of varying thickness. The outer serosa is a
 ing mother can expend 40% of her energy producing
thin layer of simple squamous epithelial cells. The
milk. This can be even greater in high-producing
next layer, the muscularis, is composed of an outer
 dairy cows that have been selected for copious milk
layer of smooth muscle cells arranged longitudinally
production. Other animals' milk, for example, crop
and an inner circular layer of smooth muscle cells.
 milk produced by pigeons and doves, also represents
This arrangement allows for the generation of muscle
a direct energetic expenditure cost. In addition, there
contractions to aid transport of fluids and secretions,
are costs of behavioral responses to protect and nurture
movement of ova and spermatozoa, passage of the
neonates.
 early embryo, and expulsion of the fetus and fetal
As with most of the other chapters, entire courses
membranes at the time of parturition. Just under the
are devoted to these physiological specialties. Many
muscularis, the submucosa provides connective tissue
animal science majors will take courses devoted to
 space for blood and lymphatic vessels, nerves, and
nutrition, lactation, and reproduction. Our goal for
glands to support and nourish the mucosa. The lumen
this chapter is not to substitute for a specialized course
 of all of the regions of the mucosa is lined by epithelial
in reproduction but rather to provide some basics and
cells, but the structural and functional attributes of
stimulate your interest in more detailed study (Randall
these cells vary from region to region to reflect differ-
et al., 2002)
ent activities and variation in the reproductive cycle.
To illustrate, a simple layer of columnar epithelial cells
lines the oviduct, but some of the cells are also ciliated.
Overview of the female reproductive tract
 Fluids that coat the surface allow for the beating of the
cilia to propel ovulated eggs from the ovary into the
The structures of the female reproductive tract include
oviducts and into the uterus for implantation if fertil-
the ovaries, oviducts, uterus, cervix, vagina, and exter-
ization occurs. In contrast, a layer of stratified squa-
nal genitalia. In farm animal species, the reproductive
mous epithelial cells provides for increased protection
tract is positioned below the rectum. For cows and
and lines the lumen of the reproductive tract in the
mares, this is helpful because it allows the producer
 posterior region of the vagina. Figure 19.1 illustrates
 or veterinarian to evaluate the reproductive tract by
the general histology of a cross section through the
ongitudina
muscle
Circular
smooth
Chapter
A
region outlined with the dashed line contains the mucosa and submucosa. Most evident in this view is the highly folded mucosal surface
surrounding the opening of lumen of space in the center of the oviduct. The surrounding muscularis occurs as circular and longitudinal layers
s! esoonw ayl 'lauios juajl jaddn awanxa ayi u! sheadde esoias ayi jo aspa lews y 'esoonw aul spunojns jeyi pueg e se juapia aie
enlarged (40x) in panel B. Here the epithelial cells appear as columnar epithelial cells with evident cilia.
Reproduction559
oviduct of a cow as well as specialization of the epi-
associated with stage of the estrus cycle. Unlike the
thelial cells, that is, presence of cilia.
 oviduct, here the epithelial lining is composed of strat-
As you might suspect, there is substantial deviation
ified squamous epithelial cells. During the follicular
in the surface epithelium at different locations of the
phase of the estrus cycle, the layer of cells is thicker
reproductive tract. There are also marked variations
compared with the luteal phase.
associated with stage of the estrous cycle. For example,
For primates that express menses, variation in the
Figure 19.2 illustrates the vaginal epithelium along the
uterine epithelium and in uterine glands is pro-
surface of the posterior vagina as well as differences
 nounced. Figure 19.3 shows the histological appear-
ance of the uterus. Compared with other regions of the
reproductive tract, the muscularis is extensive, and the
submucosa area has abundant glands that supply secre-
tions that are especially important during pregnancy.
The reproductive tract develops in a retroperitoneal
neum. With continued growth, the tract becomes com-
pletely surrounded. This new cornective tissue sheath
forms a continuous drape around the reproductive
tract. This functions to suspend and maintain the posi-
tion of the ovaries, oviduct, uterus, and the anterior
 vagina. In this mature state this supporting tissue is
called the broad ligament.
The ovaries, analogous to the testes in the male, are
the primary reproductive organs since they produce
the female gametes (ovum, singular, or ova, plural).
 However, the ovaries produce not only gametes; they
are also critical endocrine organs. Release of mature
B
Fg. 19.3. Section of bovine uterus from a cow during the
Fig. 19.2. Posterior vaginal epithelium of bovine. During the luteal
follicular phase of the estrus cycle (4x). A section through a uterine
phase (A), the epithelial cell layer is thinner than during the
gland is evident (brackets) as well as older glands deeper within the
follicular phase (B) of the estrous cycle.
muscularis (arrows).
 560 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
ing name, these epithelial cells do not produce the
Uterine
gametes. Instead, beneath the tunica albuginea, within
horns
the ovarian cortex, there are populations of oocytes,
which are recruited to develop into the mature folli-
cles. The ovarian cortex also houses the corpus luteum
Ovary
as well as older degenerated corpora lutea called
corpora albicantia. The center of the ovary is called the
ovarian medulla and contains the blood, nerves, and
lymphatic vessels that supply the ovary. The structure
of the bovine ovary is illustrated in Figure 19.6.
In domestic species, the uterus consists of a body, a
cervix (or neck), and two uterine horns. However,
there are substantial variations in the shape and
Bladder
arrangement of the horns. For example, the body of
 the bovine uterus appears larger because the intercor-
nual ligament, which acts to obscure the individual
nature of the two uterine horns, covers the caudal
region of the uterus. Among mammals there are three
adina
distinct types of uteri. The duplex uterus has two cer-
vical canals, which act to separate each uterine horn
into distinct compartments. However, there are two
types of duplex uteri. In one there is a single vaginal
canal opening to the outside. On the interior it divides
to produce two vaginas and two cervices. This occurs
 in marsupials. In the North American opossum, for
Fig. 19.4. Gross anatomy of the female bovine reproductive tract.
example, the male accommodates this circumstance
by having a forked penis. The rabbit has a less complex
 arrangement; there are two uterine horns and two
ova occurs with the rupture of follicles on the surface
 cervical canals but a single vaginal canal. The bicornu-
 of the ovary. The ovum or ova enter the funnel-like
ate uterus is characterized by the presence of two
 open end of the oviducts (infundibulum) to be directed
uterine horns and a small uterine body. In all of these
to the uterus. Fertilization usually occurs within the
cases, the uterus opens into the vagina via a single
oviduct during transit to the uterus. Figure 19.4 illus
cervical opening. Cows, mares, and pigs all have this
trates the gross anatomy of the primary structures of
type of uterine structure. Primates, on the other hand,
the reproductive tract of a cow and Figure 19.5 a dis-
have a simplex uterus. There is a large uterine body
sected view of the vagina and cervix.
but essentially no uterine horns.
The paired ovaries are located in the lumbar region
 The appearance of the internal lining of the uterus,
in close proximity to the kidneys. In sexually mature
the endometrium, varies during the estrous or men-
animals, the ovary undergoes dramatic but predict-
strual cycles and during pregnancy The tissue is also
able cyclic development. For example, within a
highly glandular with a rich blood supply The epithe-
window of about 3 weeks in cows, pigs, or horses,
lial surface is a simple columnar epithelium in the
ovulation occurs, and the selected ovarian follicles are
 mare but stratified columnar epithelial cells in rumi-
transformed into corpus luteum (singular) or corpora
 nants. In addition, simple branched tubular glands
 lutea (plural) that produce large quantities of proges-
terone. If fertilization does not occur, the corpus
 oueusand pue snnsa sunp pueodu Aeadsa
luteum regresses, and a new crop of follicles matures.
many animals the uterine glands are scattered through-
 These follicles produce estrogen, and selected follicle(s)
out the endometrium. But in ruminants, the internal
T
 proceed to undergo ovulation. This pattern constitutes
 uterine surface is punctuated by caruncles that are not
121
an estrus cycle. The ovary is oval to round in shape
glandular. These mushroom-like caruncles provide
with distinct regional differences and blister-like
sites for attachment of fetal membranes in these
structures—the follicles—near the outer surface. A
 animals. The smooth muscle of the uterus (the muscu-
connective tissue layer called the tunica albuginea
laris) is frequently called the myometrium.
covers and protects the ovary. This cornective tissue
The most caudal region of the uterus leads to the
band supports the surface layer of epithelial cell,
cervix. The cervix is a tough, connective tissue and
which is unfortunately called the germinal epithe-
    e   
lium. This is unfortunate because despite the promis-
during estrus and parfurition. During estrus, the slight
External
cervical os
 Fornix
 vagina
Anterior 
 vagina 
Urethral
opening
B
(indicated by the dashed box, the external cervical os). The pocket on either side of the cervix (panel B) (fornix vagina) can be a nemesis for
those learning the "art" of artificial insemination. Toward the rear or posterior end of the vagina (panel C), the opening to the urethra (panel
 D) is recessed in the suburethral diverticulum, an area that has to be successfully navigated for placement of urine cannulas used for
experiments requiring collection and monitoring of urine production in cows.
561
Annular
fods
Oviduct
Uterine horn.
Ovary
External
cervical
Os
Corpus lutea
Follicles
C
Fig. 19.6. Reproductive tract anatomy continued. Panel A shows a bisected view of the cervix. The circular pattern of the annular folds is
evident. Panel B shows the relationship between the uterine horns, oviduct, and ovary. Panel C illustrates variation in follicles and corpus 
lutea. The follicle to the left is nearing ovulation, as indicated by the red points in the surface. The third follicle is relatively mature (evidenced 
Chapter
by the fluid-filled cavity [center reddish brown areal). The left corpus luteum is older than the more yellow body to the right of the panel.
562
Reproduction.
563
Table 19.1. Comparative anatomy of female reproductive tracts.
Anima!
Organ
Mare
Sow
Cow
Ewe
Oviduct
20-30cm
15-30cm
25 cm
15-19cm
Uterus
Type
Bipartite
Bicornuate
 Bipartite
Bipartite
Horn
15-25cm
40-65cm
35-40 cm
10-12cm
Body
15-20cm
5 cm
2-4cm
1 -2 cm
 Endometrium
 Prominent longitudinal folds
Slight longitudlinal folds
40-120 caruncles
 88-96 caruncles
Cervix
Lumen
Conspicuous folds
Corkscrew-like
2-5 annular rings
Annular rings
 Opening to uterus
Clearly defined 
IlI-defined
Small and protruding
 Small and protruding
Vagina
20-35 cm
10-1 5 cm
25-30 cm
10-14cm
Vestibule
10-12 cm
6-8cm
10-12cm
2.5-3 cm
Modified from Frandson et al. (2003).
loosening of the cervix allows spermatozoa to enter
 support pregnancy without harm to herself is proba-
the uterus. In ruminants, the inner surface of the
bly an excellent definition, while the physiological
uterus is oriented in a series of circular folds or ridges
demands to complete follicular development, ovula-
called annular folds. Learning to traverse these folds
tion, and transport of the fertilized ova to the uterus
can be a challenge to beginning artificial breeding
for implantation are relatively minor. The metabolic
technicians.
requirements to maintain the pregnancy and initiate
The vagina is the region of the reproductive tract
lactation to support a rapidly growing neonate can be
within the pelvis positioned between the cervix on the
daunting. Thus, from a husbandry standpoint, it is
cranial end and the vulva on the caudal end. The
vulva or external genitalia is composed of the right
 at the earliest possible time.
and left labia, which join at the midline to produce a
commissure or urion. The ventral commissure of the
vestibule (the posterior vagina) houses the clitoris, the
Endocrinology of female puberty
female homolog of the glans penis in males. It contains
 erectile tissue and is covered by stratified squamous
In females the neurons of the hypothalamus that
epithelium. It is well supplied with sensory nerve
secrete GnRH must acquire the ability to secrete
endings. The functional significance is not well estab-
enough GnRH in response to feedback from ovarian
lished in domestic animals but clitoral stimulation at
 estrogen to stimulate ovulation. This process is influ-
the time of insemination has been shown to increase
enced by body mass, management, social cues, and
conception rates in beef cows. Some comparative fea-
genetics. For example, the range in months for the
tures of the female reproductive tract of various non-
onset of puberty in cattle can be marked, that is, as
 pregnant farm animals are given in Table 19.1.
low as 8.5 months in Holsteins to 19.0 months in
Brahman cattle. We begin by recalling the relation-
ship between the hypothalamic hormones, anterior
Puberty in females
pituitary hormones, and specifically the impact of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone or GnRH on secre-
On the surface, the definition of puberty seems simple
tion of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and lutein-
enough: the age at which reproductive competence is
izing hormone (LH). It is known even in prepubertal
achieved. However, in farm animals, several criteria
animals that exogenous GnRH is capable of stimulat-
have been used to define puberty in females. For
ing secretion of FSH and LH from the anterior pitu-
 example, age at first estrus or heat can be a defining 
itary and that FSH and LH can stimulate follicular
moment in cattle. However, this may or may not be
development in the ovary. However, sustained follicu-
associated with ovulation. Thus, this may not neces-
lar development and maturation of selected follicles
sarily reflect reproductive competence. Ovulation can
 to undergo ovulation requires sustained secretion of
be evaluated by palpation of the ovary or ultrasound
 these gonadotropic hormones. This suggests that the
imaging in larger animals. However, in practical
primary delay is a failure of the hypothalamus to
terms, the age at which a female can conceive and
produce enough GnRH in prepubertal animals.
 564 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Senger (2003) has likened this gradual process to a
Estrous is an adjective. (The average length of an
rheostat in control of a light. As the rheostat is gradu-
estrous cycle in the Holstein dairy cow is 21 days). A
ally turned higher, the light in the room becomes more
review of British and European scientific literature
and more intense until maximal brightness is reached.
shows that oestrus and oestrous are the equivalent
 You may recall that the hypothalamus has a number
terms for estrus and estrous.
of specific nuclei. The secretion of GnRH is controlled
Arimals that exhibit only one estrous cycle per year
 by a tonically acting center located in the area of the
are monoestrous and estrus lasts for several days
dorsomedial nucleus. Before puberty, secretion of 
(dogs, wolves, foxes, and bears). As a reproductive
GnRH occurs infrequently, and the amplitude of the
strategy, having the extended period of estrus increases
each of the secretory events is also low. This means
the chance of a successful mating. In contrast, polyes-
that corresponding effects on secretion of FSH and LH
trous species exhibit multiple cycles each year.
from the anterior pituitary are also reduced. However,
However, these cycles are not necessarily uniformly
as ovarian development progresses, secretion of estra-
distributed throughout the year. There are windows
diol from waves of growing follicles increases. Over
of inactivity when the animals are anestrous. These
time, the estradiol (along with effects of environment,
 animals are seasonal polyestrous. Even among animals
nutrients, and social interactions) escalates so the fre-
 that are not seasonal breeders, there can be interrup-
quency and amplitude of bursts of GnRH secretion
tions in the usual regular pattern. For example,
from this tonic center in the hypothalamus are
cattle that breed year round, there is typically an anes-
increased. This produces more FSH and LH and, in a
trous period for several weeks or months after calv-
 posiftive cascade, more follicular activity.
ing. This can be especially pronounced in beef cows
However, ovulation requires not just low-level
that are suckling their calves. Table 19.2 provides a
 secretion of LH but rather a marked surge in the con-
summary of selected reproductive measures in some
centration. This is called the preovulatory LH surge.
common farm animals.
This requires activation of a second population of
 It is important to appreciate that there can be sub-
hypothalamic nuclei called the surge center. These
 stantial differences between breeds. For example,
nuclei are located more anterior in the hypothalamus
onset of puberty in cattle can vary from a low of about
(preoptic and anterior) nuclei. Essentially, the prepu-
9 months in Holsteins to 19 months in Brahman cows.
bertal female is characterized by having insufficient
Similarly, Meishan pigs can show estrus as early as 3
ovarian-derived estradiol to stimulate the surge center.
months but Yorkshire gilts average about 7 months. In
As she matures, her hypothalamus becomes progres-
the case of onset of puberty, several external factors
sively more sensitive to estradiol.
are also important. In sheep and goats, season of birth
or photoperiod can act to hasten or delay onset of
puberty. Presence or absence of the opposite sex
Estrous cycles, estrus, and ovulation
during the peripubertal period impacts cattle and
swine, as does the density of housing in swine. In a
 The ovaries are the source of the female gametes (ova)
large grouping of gilts, normal puberty is 28 weeks,
and estrous cycles in postpubertal animals. These
but in a smaller group (-3), puberty is often delayed
cycles delineate periodic development or maturing of
until 32 weeks. Age at onset of puberty is also greatly
follicles, which results in release of eggs or ova that
influenced by body size and condition. Onset of
have the possibility of being fertilized. The cellular
       
events required to create eggs are called oogenesis.
animal management. In dairy cattle it is an advantage
The period when the female is receptive to sexual
 tobreed females as soon as practical so that the animals
activity is called estrus or more commonly heat. An
 enter the milking herd earlier. This has to be coupled
estrous cycle is simply the time from the beginning of
with the animals also having the necessary body size
one estrus period to another. It is worth taking
a
and condition to avoid calving difficulties and suc-
 moment to clarify some of this confusing terminology.
cessfully compete with older stronger cows at the feed
Estrus is a noun. (A cow displays estrus or heat).
bunk. From a genetic view point, minimizing the age
19
oter
dul
Table 19.2.
 Average age or time for selected reproductive attributes.
Anima!
Onset of Puberty
Age of First Breeding
Estrous Cycfe
Estrus
Gestation
Bovine
9-24 months
21-25 months
 21 days
18 hours
282 days
Ovine
4-14 months
12-18 months
17 days
1-2 days
150 days
Porcine
5-7 months
 8-10 months
21 days
2 days
114 days
Equine
12-19
24-36 months
 21 days
6 days
336 days
Reproduction  565
at puberty in males likely has the greatest benefit. In
surrounded by a single layer of follicular cells. As the
other words, like many aspects of animal production-
ovary mafures, it is usual to find clusters or nests of
growth, lactation—reproduction is also markedly
these germ cells in the cortex of ovary (Fig. 19.9A). It
impacted by management of the animals.
is worth remembering that these cells undergo meiosis
We will use the dairy cow as our model species to
describe the estrous cycle and process of ovulation.
sion. In most animals, the first of the two meiotic divi-
The general development of follicles is similar in most
sions is completed, producing the first polar body, at
mammals. The ovary contains thousands of primary
about the time of ovulation. The essential point is that
 or dormant follicles. Essentially these are the ova, each
 unlike spermatogenesis, where each primary germ
of which is surrounded by a thin layer of cuboidal
cell produces four spermatozoa, the maturation of the
follicular or granulosa cells. In response to tonic secre-
 oocyte creates only one mature ovum and three polar
tion of FSH and LH, some of these primary follicles
bodies. Thereafter some of these primary or primor-
enlarge to become small antral follicles. Antral follicles
 dial follicles are stimulated to growth progressing first
exhibit the appearance of a fluid-filled space between
to a secondary follicle stage. This is characterized by
the oocyte in the center and the surrounding granu-
an increase in the number of granulosa cells surround-
losa cells. These follicles provide the source of follicles
 ing the oocyte (Fig. 19.7B). A tertiary follicle or antral
that are eligible for activation during the next estrous
follicle is characterized by the coalescence of fluid that
cycles.
appears between the granulosa cells so that a promi-
Based on convention, the estrous cycle is divided
nent space is evident (Fig. 19.7C). With progressive
into two phases, named after the dominant structures
development the stroma cells surrounding the follicle
that are present on the ovary The follicular phase is
segregate into two distinct layers—the theca interna
relatively short, -20% of the estrous period, and the
(closest to the layer of granulosa cells) and an outer
preovulatory follicles that produce estradiol are in
theca externa. These layers give additional structural
control. The follicular phase encompasses the time
substance to the rapidly developing follicle. Moreover,
from the regression of the corpora lutea to the time of
the theca interna, if the follicle is a dominating ovula-
ovulation. This is not to say that there is no follicular
tory follicle, is destined to be a major source of steroid
activity at other stages of the estrous cycle. Indeed,
 hormones. The granulosa cells are separated from the
there are populations of follicles that sequentially
theca cells by the basement membrane. At this time
develop throughout the estrous cycle. However, as in
the oocyte is typically displaced to one side of the fol-
many things, timing is everything. As described in the
licle and antrum where it is surrounded by a cluster
following, it is only the dominant follicles that are part
or cloud of granulosa cells called the cumulus oopho-
of a wave of development occurring near the time
rus (Fig. 19.8). Other granulosa cells remain in layers
when the regression of the corpus luteum that has the
surrounding the oocyte adjacent to the theca interna.
opportunity to be qualified for ovulation.
 These cells are referred to as the membrana granulosa.
 It is now known that several waves (typically three)
The granulosa cells adjacent to the ovum secrete gly-
of follicular development occur during the estrous
coproteins that create or form a protective layer called
cycle in cattle. Beginning after ovulation, groups or
the zona pellucida. Figure 19.9 shows examples of
clusters of small or medium antral follicles become
developing follicles.
 sensitive to gonadotropins. These follicles are described
While we have used the cow as our primary model,
as recruited follicles. Among this group of recruited
there are dramatic differences between species. The
follicles, several are selected and begin to mature.
LH surge and ovulation in most farm animals (cow,
However, typically only one of these selected follicles
sow, ewe, and mare) take place regularly, independent
will win the maturity race so that it becomes the domi-
of copulation (Fig. 19.10). These animals are spontane-
nant follicle. Other selected follicles in this class begin
ous ovulators. In contrast, in rabbits, mink, camels,
to undergo regression or atresia. Even the dominant
llamas, and alpacas, ovulation requires copulation.
follicle is destined to undergo atresia if it is so unlucky
Such animals are induced ovulators. In these arimals,
to have been recruited in the first or second wave
of
 appearance of the preovulatory LH surge depends on
follicular development during the estrous cycle. This
 neural reflexes produced by vaginal simulation. These
developmental process is illustrated in Figure 19.1l.
animals (often depending on season) have typical
2
Figure 19.12 illustrates changes in major reproductive
 estrous cycles and associated follicular development,
hormones during a bovine estrous cycle.
but the mature follicles undergo atresia if copulation
 For a moment let's consider development of the
does not occur.
 ovary and specifically the relationship between the
Once ovulation occurs, the granulosa cells lining the
follicle and the oocytes. In the fetus, primordial germ
 now empty follicular cavity begin to divide, fill the
cells migrate from the yolk sac to the immature ovary.
 space, and begin a process called luteinization in
These germ cells (now called an oogonium) become
response to high levels of LH. The result is a structure
566  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cortex
Oocyte
 Oocyte nucleus
Granulosal layer
B
Follocular layers
boplasm
Basement membrane
+
Fig. 19.7. Examples of follicular development in the bovine. Panel A shows a low-power view of the ovary. In the outer cortex, larger
ejo aueieadde aui saensnil g laued enpu au pallee s! jauan aul saooo lepiowd aie (smoe ym isau sa) sllan jo sasni
secondary follicle. The oocyte with its evident nucleus and large area of cytoplasm is surrounded by multiple layers of granulosa cells (layer).
Panel C illustrates a tertiary follicle. The antral space or antrum and surrounding layers of follicular cells are evident. In this particular case,
the nucleus of the oocyte is not apparent, but the ooplasm can be seen. The basement membrane demarcates the boundary between the
follicular and theca cells.
called the corpus luteum (yellow body or CL). The CL
If pregnancy is not established, the CL must regress 
is a powerful endocrine tissue that produces large
for the animal to continue estrous cycles. In most
amounts of progesterone. Secretion of progesterone
domestic species, the signal to induce CL regression is
prepares the uterus to receive the ovulated ovum or
prostaglandin F2α (PGF2α). Secretion of PGF2α begins
ova. If fertilization and implantation of the ova is suc-
to increase after ovulation with timing that corre-
cessful, this produces maternal recognition of preg-
sponds with estrous cycle length in the species.
T
nancy, and the usual regression of the CL does not take
When PGF2α secretion is sufficient, this stimulates
121
place. Progesterone concentrations in the blood are
a series of biochemical and cellular changes in the CL
 maintained throughout pregnancy. Some species are
so that it regresses or undergoes luteolysis. This then
dependent on the CL for all of the progesterone needs,
 allows for another estrous cycle to begin.
but in others the CL can actually be removed and
 Certainly successful breeding depends on the ability
pregnancy maintained because of progesterone pro-
to detect candidate animals in estrus. In situations
duced by the placenta. Progesterone, especially in the
where cattle are bred naturally, herd bulls handle
later stages of pregnancy, is critical for mammary
these demands very well. However, in dairy opera-
development needed to support lactation after the
tions, it is not usual to maintain bulls for breeding.
birth of the young.
saaurep pue aaissae Aeondaxa are stq Ae
 Theca interna
Membrana granulosa
Membrana
 granulosa
Hillock
Corona radiata
Cumulus
 Theca interna
oophorus
Theca extema
Antrum
B
 Zona pellucida
Nucleolus
Perivitelline 
membrane/
space
Ooplasm
Corona radiata
Cumulus oophorus
C
Fig. 19.8. Details of tertiary follicle development. In panel A, the antrum occupies most of the area. The ovum (without evident nucleus)
appears to the upper left.The granulosa membrana (the edge of the layer of follicular cells) borders the antrum. To the outside, theca interna
and theca externa are evident as distinct layers. In panel B, regions of the cumulus oophorus and corona radiata (layer of granulosa cells that
immediately surround the ovum) and hillock (group of granulosa that anchor the oocyte within the antral space) are illustrated. In panel C,
 some of the detail of the ooplasm can be seen as well as the oocyte nucleus and the zona pellucida and perivitelline space.
18 -
16
Luteolysis
Progesterone
Estrogen-follicle
Ovulation
14 -
D
12
1 5
Wave
S
2nd Wave
Progesterone-CL
S-A
S-A
R
A
FSH
Metestrus
Diestrus
Proestrus
Estrus
Q
246810121416182002
5
10
15
20
 Day of the estrous cycle
Days of the estrous cycle
Fig. 19.10. Relative changes in secretion of major reproductive
Fig. 19.9. Several follicular waves occur during the estrous cycle.
hormones during a bovine estrous cycle. During the follicular phase 
The smallfilled circles represent gonadotropin-sensitive follicles.
(proestrus+estrus) from about day 17 to 1, progesterone declines
 During each wave, some follicles are recruited (R), some of these 
rapidly due to luteolysis, and there is a correspondingly rapid
 are selected (S), and some become dominant (D). Most eventually
 increase in estrogen coming from recruited and selected follicles.
regress or become atretic (A). Only follicles recruited during the 
This promotes increases in FSH with further stimulation
third wave or after luteolysis of the corpus luteum produced in the
of estrogen secretion and finally the dramatic LH surge that leads
 previous cycle will become eligible for ovulation.
to ovulation.
567
568 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Thus, the physical needs for adequate handling and
1.38 g of progesterone and a l-mg injection of estradiol
housing facilities can be substantial. Perhaps more
cypionate (ECP). After 7 days, the CIDR was removed,
and the heifers were given a 25-mg injection of PGF,o.
-ads Aa o sos Ae paaq on qe au u
On day 9, the heifers were given an injection contain-
rior bulls. This is only possible by use of Al. Without
ing 100-μg GNRH. The heifers were bred 48, 56, or 72
bulls to detect females in heat, this means that produc-
hours after the CIDR was removed. The first service
ers had to learn other methods of heat detection. For-
 pregnancy rates averaged 57.6%. There was no estrus
tunately, behavioral cues in cattle are dramatic and
detection in the study but more importantly the success
animals are housed so that interactions between
rate was similar to that that obtained with laborious
females are possible, that is, appropriate pastures or
heat detection systems. Some of the advances in re-
lots with good footing and sufficient time for observa-
productive technologies have recently been reviewed
tion. Specifically, as the cow enters estrus she gradu-
(Sakaguchi, 2011; Wiltbank et al., 2011; Perry, 2012).
ally begins to display activity that signals approaching
sexual receptivity. These include increased physical
activity (locomotion), bellowing, nervousness, and
Fertilization and pregnancy
attempts to mount other females. As the period pro-
gresses, the female's willingness to accept the male
Assuming a successful ovulation and insemination
increases. During this time the cow will display mating
has occurred, the reproductive story is just beginning.
posture called lordosis. Such animals stand still so that
As spermatozoa ascend through the cervix, uterine
that herd mates will periodically engage in mounting
body, and the oviduct, many are lost. However, those
behavior. The animal ready for breeding is said to be
-d pneo sd e orp is uen i
in standing heat. Observation of standing heat is the
tion. These are biochemical changes to the sperm cells
 major cue for managers to breed these animals. To be
induced by secretions of the female reproductive tract.
most efficient—-after breeding, spermatozoa deposited
It is generally accepted that exposure of spermatozoa
in the body of the uterus after Al have a limited viabil-
to seminal fluid during maturation in the testes or at
ity period—it is important to have the inseminate
the time of ejaculation leads to the coating of the cell
deposited very near the time of ovulation. This means
surface with a complex layer of proteins and carbohy-
that most operations would need to observe candidate
drates. Removal of these materials via the capacitation
animals at least twice daily, likely 30-45 minutes per
process in the female tract is essential for the sperma-
session. Since labor is an important part of farm costs,
tozoa to bind the oocyte. Fertilization typically occurs
it is not surprising that multiple techniques to better
when the oocyte and spermatozoa meet in the ampulla
automate heat detection have been devised. As exam-
region of the oviduct.
ples, patches placed on the rump of candidate animals
Interestingly, when the spermatozoa reach this area,
that contain packets of dye that rupture when the
animal is mounted, mounted pressure sensors that
movements to more a more erratic or frenzied motion.
send radio signals to a base station on the farm, or
This change is induced by molecules secreted in this
monitoring of activity via daily reading of pedometers
region of the oviduct and is thought to increase the
are all methods used to decrease the costs and increase
 opportunity of contact between sperm and oocyte.
the efficiency of heat detection. One of the more inter-
 Fertilization depends on a complex series of steps,
which are outlined in Figure 19.11.
identify cows in heat.
Sperm cells have very specific proteins associated
In recent years, control of estrous cycles to more
with the acrosome portion of the head of the sperma-
efficiently manage the breeding of cattle has become
tozoa, which have an affinity for the zona pellucida of
a reality through the use of estrus synchronization
the oocyte. This outer layer of the oocyte is composed
schemes. This has become possible because of the
of three glycoproteins called zona protein 1, 2, and 3
availability of commercial formulations of PGF2o,
-d a z pue iaZ oqs i a pue 'z 'iZ 1o
GNRH, and progesterone. Indeed there are now effec-
marily structural proteins that maintain the space and
T
 tive schemes to allow the timed breeding of cows and
 organization of the zona pellucida. ZP3, in contrast,
121
heifers without the need for heat detection. As an
acts an anchor or receptor for proteins found in the
example, Peeler et al., 2004 reported results from a trial
membrane of the sperm cell. Two binding sites are
 in which heifers were synchronized using intravaginal
 present. The primary zona binding region allows for
progesterone inserts also called controlled internal
the close adherence of the oocyte and sperm cell. A
drug release devices (CIRD), coupled with GNRH
second site induces the acrosome reaction when ZP3
treatment and timed Al. Briefly, heifers were assigned
from the zona pellucida binds.
to the protocol irrespective of stage of the estrous
The acrosome is a lysosome-like, membrane-bound
cycle. At this time they received a CIDR containing
structure oriented around the outer portion of the
Reproduction
569
Hyperactive
Binding to
zona
Perivitelline
motility
Acrosome
pellucida
Acrosome
space
reaction
Cytoplasm
Oocyte
Nucleus
Nuckeus
 Penetration
Before
During
of zona 
pellucida
Zona
Sperm-oocyte
pellucida
membrane
 Sperm
fusion
engulfed
After
Fg. 19.12. The oocyte and fertilization. The upper panel
Decondensation
illustrates the structures of the oocyte. Before fertilization can take
 of sperm nucleus
place, the spermatozoon must penetrate the zona pellucida, enter
the perivitelline space, and ultimately fuse with the oocyte plasma
membrane and be engulfed. The lower panel illustrates events of 
the acrosomal reaction. During the reaction, the outer plasma
Formation of male
membrane surrounding the sperm head fuses with the other
pronucleus
membrane of the acrosome. This leads to release of the acrosomal
Fig. 19.11.  Events following capacitation and fertilization.
contents. The end result is that the inner membrane of the 
acrosome encompasses the nucleus and continues in a continuous
fashion with the remaining plasma membrane of the spermatozoon.
spermatozoa where it partially encapsulates the con-
densed nucleus of the spermatozoa. It contains
surface and release their contents by exocytosis. The
 enzymes that are important for events associated with
 proteases, mucopolysaccharides, plasminogen activa-
fertilization. The acrosome reaction is essential because
tor, acid phosphatases, and peroxidases contained in
it allows the spermatozoa to penetrate the zona pel-
the granules alter the biochemical properties of the
 lucida, and it exposes the nucleus of the sperm cell
 Zona pellucida so that additional sperm cannot enter.
that is now surrounded by the former inner mem-
This is called zona block. In some species these sub-
 brane of the acrosome. After binding, the acrosomal
reaction begins as the plasma membrane surrounding
stances also reduce the capacity of the oocyte plasma
membrane to fuse with additional spermatozoa, the
the sperm head forms fusion points with the acroso-
mal membrane. As small vesicles appear, this pro-
vitelline block. This provides a second mechanism to
 prevent polyspermy (fertilization by more than one
duces a morphological cellular landmark called
spermatozoon), which results in embryonic death.
vesiculation that is used to identify cells that have
After the sperm nucleus is freed into the cytoplasm of
undergone the acrosome reaction. Among the enzymes
the oocyte, it becomes the male pronucleus. However,
released, proacrosin has a very high affinity for the
this requires a major decondensation of the sperm
zona pellucida. This supports the close adherence of
ucleus. During the maturation of the spermatozoa in
the oocyte and spermatozoa undergoing the acro-
the testis the nucleus becomes very highly compacted
some reaction. When activated to acrosin, its hydro-
and ordered due to the creation of many disulfide
lytic action degrades the zona pellucida in the very
crosslinks. In this state the chromosomes are essen-
local region where the sperm cell is attached. This is
 tially inert. Fortunately, the oocyte cytoplasm is rich
important because the continued presence of the zona
in glutathione, which allows for the loosening of the
pellucida is necessary for subsequent development.
chromosomes so that interaction can take place. The last
The continued beating of the tail of the spermatozoa
 step in fertilization is the fusion of male and female
 supplies the mechanical force needed for the activated
 pronuclei. This is called syngamy. After this point the
spermatozoa to penetrate through the zona pellucida
Zygote enters the first stages of embryo genesis. Struc-
 to the perivitelline space, which surrounds the plasma
tures of the oocyte and spermatozoa are illustrated
membrane of the oocyte. When the spermatozoon
 in Figure 19.12 (see also follicular development).
 gets to the perivitelline space it binds to microvilli on
the surface of the oocyte. The plasma membrane of the
oocyte then fuses with the membrane surrounding
Implantation and placentation
the spermatozoon and engulfment occurs. After this
event, dense vesicles—the cortical granules, previ-
After a successful fertilization, the embryo then develops
ously produced inside the oocyte—migrate to the cell
into a blastocyst and hatches from the surrounding
570 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
 Zona pellucida. It then develops a functional tropho-
to secrete enzymes and an area of the zona pellucida
blast and secretes signaling proteins that allow main-
degrades and ruptures. The blastocyst escapes or
 tenance of the corpus luteum. After fusion of the male
hatches and becomes a free-floating embryo within
and female pronuclei, the single-celled egg is called a
the lumen of the uterus. This development cycle is
 zygote. It can also be referred to as an embryo (defined
illustrated in Figure 19.14.
as an organism in the early stages of development).
After hatching of the blastocyst, cell division occurs 
Embryos typically have not acquired features that
very rapidly. For example, in the cow on day 13 the
allow for recognition of a particular species. By con-
blastocyst is about 3mm in diameter. Over the next
trast a fetus—a potential offspring still within the
few days the blastocyst increases in length to 250mm
uterus—can generally be recognized as a member of
and appears as a string or thread. By day 18 of gesta-
the species. A conceptus, defined as the product of
tion, the blastocyst occupies areas of both uterine
conception, is a commonly used term but is poorly
horns. Much of this growth involves appearance of
descriptive. It is really a catch-all term since it includes
extraembryonic membranes essential for the embryo
early and late embryos, the embryo + extraembyronic
to attach to the uterus of the dam for subsequent
 membranes during preimplantation, as well as the
development. The outer trophoblast combined with
fetus and placenta.
the newly developed endoderm gives rise to the
 Soon after syngamy, the zygote initiates as series of
chorion and amnion. The yolk sac develops from the
 mitotic divisions or cleavages. The first cleavage pro-
endoderm (see Fig. 19.15).
duces a two-celled embryo. Each of the cells at this
 Implantation is the attachment of the free-floating
time is called a blastomere. Subsequent divisions
 blastocyst to the uterine epithelium and correspond-
produce 4, 8, and 16 identical daughter cells. At these
 ing growth or penetration of the epithelium by embry-
early stages the blastomeres are totipotent. In other
onic tissues. Just how dramatic and extensive this
words, each of the individual cells is capable of giving
 interaction is varies among species. In most farm
rise to a fully formed offspring. For example, identical
animals, the degree of penetration is much less than
twins can be produced in experimental situations by
in rodents and humans, for example. Implantation in
separating individual blastomeres, placing then into
most farm animals is considered noninvasive and pri-
surrogate zona pellucida, and allowing development
marily associated with cell to cell junctions between
in the uterus of a recipient female. It was long thought
embryonic and uterine tissues. After fertilization,
that adult or differentiated cells were not capable
attachment occurs in the cow at about 35 days, the sow
of this process. However, the production of Dolly the
about 11 days, and the mare about 55 days.
sheep from adult mammary gland fibroblast cells
Placentation refers to the development of the extra-
showed that it is possible with just the correct condi-
 embryonic membranes or the placenta. The placenta
tions to dedifferentiate cells so that they can become
and its layers allow for exchanges between the mater-
totipotent once again. Once beyond the 16-cell stage it
 nal and fetal circulations so that nutrients can be sup-
becomes impossible to accurately count the growing
plied and wastes removed. The chorion is the outer
ball of cells so the structure is called a morula. With
most membrane and therefore is in contact with the
further divisions a blastocyst develops. It is character-
maternal uterine wall. The next layer toward the fetus
ized by the presence of inner cell mass (ICM), a fluid-
is the allantois, which forms a continuous layer that
filled cavity called a blastocoele, and a layer of cells
creates a fluid-filled sac—the allantoic cavity—around
around the periphery called the trophoblast. Figure 19.13
the fetus. The amnion is the closest membrane to the
illustrates some of these stages of development.
fetus. It also forms a fluid-filled cavity in direct contact
 During the morula stage the cells begin to segregate
with the fetus. The amnion is fused to the inner layer
into two distinct populations, inner and outer cells.
of the allantois. When parturition occurs, the allantoic
Cells in the ICM develop gap junctions which allows
sac is expelled, followed by the amniotic sac. Branches
for coordinated communication between the cells. The
 outer cells, by contrast, become linked by tight junc-
connective tissue between the allantois and chorion.
 tions. This allows for the creafion of a unique environ-
The physical attachment of the conceptus to the uterus
 ment with respect to ions inside the developing.
 offers major reproductive advantages. Modification of
121
blastocoele. Specifically, increasing concentrations of
the intrauterine environment as the fetus develops
 Nat produce osmotic drive for water to enter the struc-
ensures that the developing fetus will be provided
ture and expand the volume of the blastocoele. The
with nutrients and physiological support to maximize
ICM develops into the embryo while the trophoblast
the chance for a successful birth. This was a major
gives rise to the chorion, which eventually becomes
evolutionary step for eutherian mammals compared
the fetal component of the placenta. With continuing
with lower animals that laid their eggs.
 expansion of the blastocyst via fluid and cell prolifera-
Cornections between the chorion and the uterus are
tion and pressure increases, the trophoblast cells begin
varied between species. By convention, the histological
Chapter
Fig. 19.13. Stages of bovine oocyte development. The upper panels (left to right) are 2 and 4 cells, the middle panels are & cells and morula,
and the lower panels are expanded blastocyst and hatched blastocyst, respectively.
571
572  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
ZP
ICM
Blastocoele
A
B
Fig. 19.14. Photograph and representation of a preimplantation embryo just before hatching. The inner cell mass (ICM) develops into the
embryo (panel A), and the trophoblast cells (lower arrows) that surround the expanding space or blastocoele give rise to the chorion (panel B).
outer surface of chorionic capillaries. The number of
Cotyledons
Amnion
layers separating fetal and maternal circulations is
important in part because this affects transfer of
immunoglobulins in utero. Since most farm animals
have epitheliochorial connection, calves, for example,
are born without protective antibodies from the dam.
Consequently, absorption of antibodies from the colos-
Chorior
Fetus
 trum is very important. Primates, rabbits, rodents, and
other species with the hemochorial or hemoendothe-
lial arrangements are born with some antibodies that
transfer in utero from the mother.
llantois
 Placentation patterns also vary grossly In the horse
 and pig. extensions from the chorion (chorionic villi)
project into crypts scattered over the entire surface of
the endometrium. This is called a diffuse placenta.
 Ruminants have scattered attachments, which depend
Fig. 19.15. Developing bovine fetus and associated membranes.
on a cotyledonary type of connection. In this situation,
exchange takes place at distinct structures called plac
entomes. The placentomes are formed by the com-
relationship between the fetal membranes and uterine
bined invagination of specific regions of the chorionic
epithelium is named beginning with the maternal
 membrane, the cotyledons, into the button-like projec-
T
side. For example, placenta of most farm animals is
tions from the surface of the endometrium, the carun-
121
classified as epitheliochorial. This means that the
cles. Caruncles project from the surface of the uterus
chorion of the fetus is in direct contact with the uterine
about 2cm and vary from 1 to 10cm in diameter. The
surface. This is the least intimate arrangement of the
caruncles also increase in size as pregnancy advances
types of placentas. In hemochorial placentation, fetal
and are larger in the gravid horn than in the nongravid
vessels and chorion are invaginated so that there is
horn of the uterus. Zonary placentas, found in dogs
 direct contact between a single layer of chorion epi-
and cats, for example, are characterized by a major
thelial cells and maternal blood. In hemoendothelial
region of exchange that forms an area near the center
placentation, maternal blood can directly bathe the
of the developing conceptus essentially in a band. In
Reproduction  573
primates and rodents, the discoid placenta type occurs.
expulsion of the fetal membranes. However, events
It is characterized by the presence of one of two
leading to birth result from a cascade of actions. During
distinct discs on a region of the chorion. The discs
most of gestation, maintenance of high progester-
house the chorionic villi, which interconnect with the
 one concentrations maintain a "quiet" uterus; as birth
endometrium.
 approaches, luteolysis of the dominant CL and /or de-
Exchanges that occur across the placenta involve
 creasing placental production of progesterone couples
typical mechanisms, that is, diffusion, facilitated
diffusion, and active transport. Glucose is the major
parturition. Increasing estrogen also stimulates ex-
energy source for the fetus. Since lipids do not cross
pression of oxytocin receptors in the myometrium.
readily cross the placenta, triglycerides are hydrolyzed
Activation of the fetal pituitary-adrenal axis is essen-
and the fatty acids reesterified. With the exception
tial for the initiation of parturition. It is generally ac-
of antibodies—depending on the placentation type
cepted that the fetus essentially becomes "stressed" so
large proteins do not pass the placenta. Unfortunately.
that it begins to secrete ACTH and therefore glucocor-
many toxic substances are readily absorbed. Appear-
ticoids. High concentrations act to remove the proges-
ance of fetal alcohol syndrome in humans is evidence
terone block by stimulation of three enzymes in the
of the ability of ethanol to pass the placenta and adversely
 placenta that increase the conversion of progesterone
affect fetal development. Substances that cause abnor-
to estradiol. These enzymes are 17α hydrolyase (con-
 mal fetal development or birth defects are teratogenic.
version of progesterone to 17α hydroxyprogesterone),
The placenta is also a major endocrine organ
17, 20 lyase (conversion of 17α hydroxyprogesterone
during pregnancy. For example, mares produce a
to androstenedione), and aromatase (conversion of
 gonadotropin—equine chorionic gonadotropins (ECG),
androstenedione to estradiol). Fetal corticoids also
sometimes called pregnant mare serum gonadotropin
 promote synthesis of PGF2o, which also acts to remove
(PMSG). The hormone acts like LH and serves to stim-
the progesterone block. Increasing estradiol and PGF2c
ulate the maintenance of the primary CL on the ovary.
 synergize to make the uterus more sensitive to actions
Concentrations are especially high during the period
that promote contractions. In some species (mares,
between 40 and 100 days of gestation. In fact, this
human, rabbits, pigs) the hormone relaxin, which is
"extra" stimulus can promote adlditional luteinization
 produced by the ovary and /or placenta, acts to soften
of ovarian follicles to ensure that an adequate level of
cervical tissues and allow pelvic ligament stretch to
 progesterone is maintained. When used in other species,
aid parturition. Interestingly, there is also growing evi-
PMSG has a very strong FSH-like action, so that it is
dence that relaxin and perhaps other milk-born factors
useful to induce follicular development, that is, in
-onpordar ,dumnrroud, Aenuassa u paaoau are
 superovulation and embryo transfer (ET) schemes.
 tive tract development in the neonate, that is, the lac-
 In addition to the ovaries, in many species the pla-
tocrine hypothesis (see Chapter 18).
centa is a major source of estrogen and progesterone.
As estradiol and glucocorticoids increase, the con-
For example, in the sow or rabbit, lutectomy (surgical
 tracting uterus pushes the fetus toward the cervix.
removal of the CL) terminates the pregnancy at any
Neural signals from the cervix promote oxytocin release,
time during gestation. But in other species, the pla-
 more contractions, more pressure on the cervix, and
centa can take over the production of progesterone.
more oxytocin in a positive cascade. As the fetus enters
The time when the placenta can take over and main-
 the cervical canal, the first stage of parturition is com-
tain the pregnancy in the cow, ewe, mare, and human
plete. Although estradiol and other hormones increase
is 7 months, 50 days, 70 days, and 50 days, respectively.
 mucus secretion and general lubrication of the cervical
The placenta also produces a polypeptide in many
canal and vagina, progressively stronger contractions
 species that has properties similar to Prl and GH; it is
are critical. With the fetus properly positioned, the feet
now most commonly referred to as placental lactogen.
- in a uo anssd snn mnd peu p
Whether the GH- or Prl-like activity predominates
branes so that the membranes rupture, releasing amni-
varies markedly, as does the amount of placental lac-
otic fluid. This also acts as lubrication. As the fetus
 togen that appears in the material circulation. In sheep
passes the birth canal it becomes hypoxic. This pro-
and goats, concentrations of several hundred nano-
motes fetal movement, which stimulates more uterine
 grams per milliters are common near the time of partu-
contraction. Along with active abdominal contractions
2
1
rition but concentrations are only 1-2ng/mL in cattle.
of the dam, expulsion of the fetus is accomplished.
In most cases, the fetal membranes are expelled just
after the fetus. The degree of disruption varies depend-
Parturition
ing on the type of placentation but requires that the
chorionic villi are removed from the crypts on the
Parturition occurs in three phases: (l) initiation
of
maternal side of the placenta. This believed to be
uterine contractions, (2) expulsion of the fetus, and (3)
caused by active vasoconstriction of the arteries of the
 574 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
villi. This is important to minimize hemorrhage. Clearly.
through the enlarged foramen of the genitofemoral
this is also much more likely in animals with hemo-
nerve (Lumbar; L3 and L4). This process requires the
chorial or hemoendothelial types of placentation.
formation of a peritoneal sac that extends through the
 The duration of parturition varies between species.
abdominal wall so that the testis is enclosed by an
For example, in cows, initial stages of parturition (start 
inguinal ligament of the testis called the gubernacu-
of contractions and cervical dilation) typically last 2-6
lum testis. The migration is complete once the testes
 hours, fetal expulsion 30-60 minutes, and expulsion
are in the scrotum. If this process fails, the condition
 of fetal membranes 6-12 hours. If the duration of par-
is called crytorchidism. If both testes fail to descend,
turition extends beyond the normal range for the
the male is sterile. This is because the lower tempera-
animal this is called dystocia. One cause of problems
ture of the testes within the scrotum is required for
is excessive size of the fetus. Consequently, care must
 spermatogenesis. As diagrammed in Figure 19.16, the
be taken in breeding programs. Another problem
various parts of the male reproductive system have
occurs when there is a failure of the fetus to become
 been likened to a manufacturing operation. If success-
 properly positioned for birth. For example, in catfle,
 ful, the end products are fully functional spermatozoa.
the calf is normally positioned as if it is diving head
This requires hormones (testosterone, FSH, and LH)
first with the front legs extended underneath the lower
and secretory products (fluids of the epididymis and
jaw. In about 5% of births, the calf is abnormally posi-
seminal plasma) to allow for appropriate movement,
tioned. In some cases, normal birth becomes impos-
transport, and maturation of the spermatozoa.
sible so that a Cesarean section is required. A third
The testes are responsible for the creation of the
issue arises in normally monotocous species when
spermatozoa and they are very efficient. Depending
there are multiple births. This can be the result of
twins presenting simultaneously, one abnormally
 per day Once the cells are produced over a period of
positioned fetus blocking birth of another, or uterine
several days, they pass thorough the rete tubules and
fatigue from prolonged parturition.
enter the head (caput) and body (corpus) of the epi-
didymis. In these locations the cells are modified so
that they become fertile. Cells that enter the tail (cauda)
Overview of male reproductive tract
of the epididymis are capable of fertilization if
removed and incubated in an appropriate buffer solu-
 The reproductive tract of the male is made up of testis,
tion. This region of the epididymis serves as a reser-
epididymis, spermatic cord, accessory sex glands, and
voir for spermatozoa prior to ejaculation. With sexual
the penis. The testis is critical for production of sper-
arousal, the spermatozoa in the tail of the epididymis
matozoa and testosterone. The epididymis provides
are transported via contractions of the smooth muscle
the environment needed for the spermatozoa
to
mature and storage. The accessory sex glands produce
 seminal plasma and fluids and the penis the structure
needed for copulation.
The testes lie outside the abdominal cavity within
the scrotum, essentially a purse-like structure that is
derived from the skin and connective tissue of the
abdominal wall. The testes develop in the abdomen,
 in a position medial to the embryoric kidney. A group-
 ing of ducts within the testis develops so that they
connect to the mesonephric tubules to eventually give
Marehouse
shipping
Tail[T}ofepididyn
rise to the epididymis, ductus deferens, and the vesic-
ular gland. The prostate and bulbourethral glands
hatozoa production
1-25 billi
develop from the embryonic sinus and the penis forms
Lower temperature
Finishing room
 by tabulation and elongation of a tubercle that appears
Head (H), Body (B)
T
Epididymis
at the orifice of the urogenital sinus. This pattern of
121
development depends on secretions from the fetal
testis. Specifically, androgen production stimulates
Fg. 19.16. Male reproductive function viewed as a manufacturing
 secretion of a glycoprotein called Mullerian-inhibiting
substance, which prevents the female developmental
tubules of the testes; (2) spermatozoa are transported to the body
 pattern from proceeding. In other words, in the absence
and head of epididymis; (3) in the tail of the epididymis.
spermatozoa become functionally fertile; (4) addition of secretions
of blockage, the female development pattern is normal.
from the accessory sex gland (seminal vesicles, prostate, etc.)
The testes normally migrate in a caudal direct within
provides seminal plasma; (5) sexual arousal and intromission
the abdominal cavity to the inguinal ring. They pass
povide the delivery system to the female reproductive tract.
Reproduction 575
of the epididymal duct and the ductus deferens to the
Suggest, they are very highly convoluted structures
pelvic urethra. The final packaging involves the addi-
with a complex array of developing cells (germinal
tion of fluids produced by the accessory sex glands
epithelium) that make up the wall of the tubule. The
(ampulla of the ductus deferens, seminal vesicles,
end of each seminiferous tubule joins with the rete
prostate gland, and bulbourethral glands). The non-
tubules that are continuous with the epididymis. The
cellular component of the semen is called seminal
tubule is surrounded by peritubular cells, connective
plasma. Some of these basic structural elements are
tissue elements, capillaries, and the Leydig cells.
illustrated in Figure 19.17.
Within the basement membrane the basal compart-
 ment contains the Sertoli cells and the developing
population of germ cells the spermatogonia. The cycle
Spermatogenesis
of differentiation involves sequential development of
the germ cells until the mature spermatozoa are
The functional tissue of an organ is called the paren-
released into the luminal space of the seminiferous
chyma of the organ. Testicular parenchyma is com-
tubule. The Sertoli cells are the only somatic cells that
prised of the seminiferous tubules and the interstitial
are part of the internal structure (inside the basement
cells of Leydig. The testis is surrounded by a tough
capsule composed of two elements. The tunica vagi-
nalis (visceral tunic) is closest to the testicular paren-
chyma and the tunica albuginea, a tougher outer
connective tissue layer to the outside. Tissue projec-
Parenchyma
 Tunica
 vaginalis
tions from the capsule penetrate into the testicular
tissue to create supporting septa for the seminiferous
tubules where they join a central connective tissue
band called the mediastinum. When the testis is cut
longitudinally it appears that there are elongated
islands of parenchymal tissue separated by faint bands
Tunica
albuginea 
of connective tissue. Examples of the gross and micro-
scopic anatomy of the testis are shown in Figure 19.18.
The seminiferous tubules are the key to spermato-
 genesis. As the images in Figure 19.17 and Figure 19.18
lcM
1UM-
RPM
Epididymis
Testis
Scrotum
B
Fig. 19.17. Gross anatomy of the dissected reproductive tract of a
Fig. 19.18. Gross anatomy of the bull testis and corresponding
bull. A=ampulla of ductus deferens, GP=glans penis, DD=ductus 
histological appearance of the testicular parenchymal tissue. The
deferens, IcM=ischiocabernosus muscle, RPM=retractor penis
 capsule surrounding the testis (tunica vaginalis and tunica
muscle, PG=prostate gland, PF=preputial fold, SF = sigmoid 
albuginea) supports the parenchymal tissue (panel A). The sriking
flexure, SP = shaft of penis, SV = seminal vesicles, UB = urinary
feature of the testis is the abundance of seminiferous tubules (ST),
bladder, UM = urethralis muscle.
responsible for the production of the spermatozoa (panel B).
576   Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
membrane) of the seminiferous tubules. As the sper-
is a well-characterized histological-cellular profile of
matogonia develop, their destiny is largely controlled
the epithelium that defines a particular period of
by the Sertoli cells. Each of the Sertoli cells tends or
spermatogenesis. A wave of development defines the
anchors a maximum number of germ cells. This means
sequential order of the stages of spermatogenesis that
that the absolute number of spermatozoa produced
occur along the length of the tubule. As an example,
per day is directly linked with the density of Sertoli
-s u y ,do, e m  a  aq no 
cells within the seminiferous tubules. In many ways
matozoa have been released into the lumen of the
 the Sertoli cells are analogous to the granulosa cells of
tubule, this region of the germinal epithelium is
the ovarian follicles. The layer of Sertoli cells near the
basement membrane are linked to one another by
tight junctions. This produces a barrier that allows
different local environments within the basal region
 compared with the area near the lumen of the tubule
(the adluminal compartment). The basal region houses
the spermatogonia and the early spermatocytes. The
adluminal region has all the other germ cells, that is,
primary and secondary spermatocytes, spermatids,
elongated spermatids, and mature spermatozoa. Cells
of the seminiferous tubules are illustrated in more
detail in Figure 19.19. Because not all the cells in
 regions of the tubules mature simultaneously, a survey
of sections shows varying stages of maturity. Figure
19.20 shows a section of seminiferous tubule with fully
formed spermatozoa nearing the point of being
released into the lumen; this would be Stage Vlll of
the development.
This developmental process can be characterized in
several ways. Acycle is described as a series of changes
Fg. 19.20.  Stage Vlll development of bull spermatogenesis.
in a given region of the tubular epithelium between
Several clusters of mature spermatozoa (arrows) are nearing release
 appearances of the same developmental stage. A stage
 into the lumen of the seminiferous tubule.
Basement
membrane
Spermatogonia
Elongated
spermatids
Sertoli
cell
Leydig
cells
basement membranes (bracket indicates a portion of a single tubule). In the regions between the tubule islands of cells, Leydig cells (lower left 
corner) are responsive to gonadotropin (FSH and LH) secretion and in turn produce locally high concentrations of testosterone. Testosterone,
in addition to its effect on secondary sex characteristics, is also important in differential of the germ cells. Panel B provides higher
 magnification to illustrate the presence of Sertoli cells and spermatogonia of the basal compartment as well as presence of spermatids and
elongated spermatids in the adluminal compartment. The thin dashed line shows the approximate boundary between the basal and adluminal
compartments.
Reproduction 577
described as being in Stage I of spermatogenesis. The
Given the continuous production of several billion
 appearance is characterized by the complete absence
spermatozoa daily there is also a continuous loss of
     
 spermatozoa irrespective of sexual activity. Since there
and Sertoli cells (near the basement membrane) and
is no reabsorption of spermatozoa, periodic contrac-
some round spermatids in the adluminal area, but
tion of the epididymis and ductus deferens pro-
little else. By Stage Il, some elongation of some of the
duces a flow of cells into the pelvic urethra where they
spermatids begins. In Stage Ill, the elongating sperma-
are flushed with urination. Figure 19.2l and Figure
tids begin to clump or bunch in close association with
19.22 illustrate histological features of the epididymis.
the apical regions of the Sertoli cells. In Stage IV, sec-
 Notice the accumulation of spermatozoa in the lumen
 are A saeis readde sards Ar
of the caudal regions, presence of a distinct muscu-
acterized by continued expansion of the epithelium
laris (contrast with the seminiferous tubules), and the
until the new crop of mature spermatozoa "back out"
of their docking stations with the Sertoli cells and are
released so the cycle in that region of the tubule can
begin once more.
The peritubular cells, basement membrane, and the
 Outer - tubular
junctional complexes of the Sertoli cells combine to
create a so-called blood-testis barrier that prevents
large molecular weight materials and immune cells
from entering the adluminal area of the seminiferous
tubules. This is important because it prevents autoim-
 mune reactions from impacting the developing sper-
matozoa as they undergo meiosis.
Sperm storage, maturation, and delivery
Once spermatozoa are shed from into the luminal
space of the seminiferous tubules, the efferent ducts
converge into the rete tubules and then a single epi-
Fg. 19.21. Image of the body region of the bovine epididymis.
didymal duct. Here the cells and fluids (rete fluid)
Part of the thick muscular tunic (outer tubular muscularis) that
combine. The head of the epididymis is the initial
surrounds the entire tructure as well as smooth muscle (M)
 segment. The head and body of the epididymis
surrounding the highly convoluted epididymal tubular elements
provide an environment, governed at least in part by
are shown.
the effects of testosterone, for maturation of the sper-
 matozoa. Like the seminiferous fubules, the epididy-
mis is also highly convoluted. In many species if
extended it would reach 60 meters. It is surrounded
Muscularis
by smooth muscle so that rhythmic contractions pro-
didymis. Transit times vary but in bulls, for example,
it takes 9-14 days for the trip from head through the
tail. Once in the tail, smooth muscle activity is reduced
unless there is sexual stimulation. Sexual stimulation
induces smooth muscle contractions in the tail so that
spermatozoa are propelled into the ductus deferens.
However, transit through the body and head of the
epididymis are not affected. This means that the tail
region of the epididymis, especially the distal region,
 serves as a reservoir Thus, sperm number per ejacu-
late is dramatically impacted by ejaculation frequency.
 In a practical sense this explains the need for not over-
stocking breeding males so that maximum fertility is
Fig. 19.22. Histological appearance of tail region of the
epididymis. Note the distinct layer of smooth muscle (muscularis)
maintained. In short, the breeding capacity depends
surrounding the tubule, the cluster of spermatozoa in the luminal
 primarily on the epididymal tail reserves rather than
area, and the pseudostratified epithelial cells with cilia that line the
the rate of sperm production.
internal surface.
578  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
distinct presence of the stratified, ciliated epithelium
five response to ensure that newly hatched chicks can
 lining the internal surface of the epididymis.
 be cared for under conditions most suitable for sur-
vival. A common mechanism for ending the breeding
season of wild birds in northern latitudes depends on
Reproduction in birds
hypothalamic signaling and subsequent hormonal
response of the birds to increasing photoperiod. In
It is apparent even to the casual observer that there are
 other words, the birds become refractory to normally
dramatic reproductive differences between mammals
stimulating long days. This results in regression of
and birds. Chickens (gallus domesticus) are familiar
the gonads. Recovery or the ability to respond posi-
as domesticated birds in the poultry industry. These
tively to long day photoperiods is only reestablished
birds are believed to be descended from Red Jungle
after birds are exposed to short photoperiods for
fowl found in southeastern Asia. We take advantage
40-60 days.
of the prodigious egg production of these animals to
Avian reproduction is best understood in domestic
provide a breakfast staple around the world and meat
chicken and turkeys. In fact, the modern poultry
for our tables. Indeed, the world population of chick-
 industry depends on a well-developed understanding
ens is approximately 24 billion (Whittow, 2000).
of the reproductive cycle and how best to manipulate
Before World War Il, most egg production came
 and control it for maximum egg production. Birds lay
from farm flocks of only a few hundred hens. Begin-
 eggs in groups or clutches of one or more eggs. This
ning in the 1950s and 1960s, changing technology and
is then followed by a rest period, then another cycle.
creation of specialized equipment shifted production
Clutch size, as well as the numbers of clutches laid in
from these small farm flocks to larger, vertically inte-
a breeding season, varies with species, but the prin-
ciple is the same. Domestic hens usually lay five or
ducers and egg or meat wholesalers) large enterprises.
more eggs in a clutch, with a day break between
In the major egg-producing states, flocks of 100,000
clutches.
laying hens are not unusual and some flocks number
 Hens ovulate in the morning, and almost never after
 more than 1 million. Each of the 235 million laying
3:00 pm under normal photoperiod. The final stages
birds in the United States produces between 250 and
to prepare the terminal egg for laying takes between
-q auos apraord oi si asodind 1no reaa e sasa 0og
xde sp pd s or g pe 5
lights and comparative aspects with a focus on the
 3.5 hours to add the layers of albumen (egg white)
domestic chicken.
around the yolk, 1.5 hours for shell membranes, and
Mature male chickens are called roosters and cocks
 20 hours for shell formation. Ovulation of the next egg
or cockerels if immature. Castrated roosters are called
 in sequence (part of the clutch) begins within an hour
capons. Young females are called pullets and mature
of laying the previous egg. What this means is that the
females called hens. Roosters are usually differenti-
hen starts to slowly get behind as each day passes.
ated from hens by their striking plumage and often
After several days she gets so far behind that she
bright feathers on their necks.
would have to ovulate after 3:00 PM. Since this does
Given the opportunity, flocks of chickens are gre-
not happen, the next ovulation is delayed and the
,ad, ro os prs e rn pu snos
clutch cycle is broken. After a couple of days the
order. A mature rooster that finds food may call the
sequence begins again with a new clutch of eggs.
other chickens by making a clucking sound and by
 Sometimes a hen will stop laying additional eggs
picking up and dropping the food. This behavior also
and begin to focus on the incubation of eggs. This is
occurs in hens calling their chicks. As a part of a
 called broodiness or going broody. A broody chicken
courting ritual the rooster may drag the wing opposite
 ad 1o isaod pue isau ry uo is Aipasop m
the hen and turn in a circle around her. When she
disturbed. While brooding, the hen maintains con-
becomes acclimated to responding to his vocalization
stant temperature and humidity, and also turns the
the rooster may mount the hen and proceed with
eggs regularly. At the end of the 21-day incubation
the fertilization. Similar behaviors can be observed
period, if the eggs are fertilized, they will hatch and
61
 during the spring-summer mating season with various
the broody hen will take care of her chicks. Since indi-
121
song birds.
vidual eggs do not all hatch at the same time (the hen
 Most wild birds usually lay one of more eggs in a
 only lays one egg approximately every 25 hours), the
 group called a clutch, then stop laying additional eggs 
 hen will usually stay on the nest for about 2 days after
to incubate eggs in the nest. These birds display yearly
 the first egg hatches. During this time, the newly
breeding cycles. On the other hand, domestic chickens
 hatched chicks live off the egg yolk they absorb just
are continuous breeders and under the best conditions
 before hatching. The hen can sense the chicks peeping
are reproductively active throughout the year. Sea-
inside the eggs, and will gently cluck to stimulate
sonal disruption of reproduction in birds is an adap
them to break out of their shells. If the eggs are not
Reproduction579
fertilized and do not hatch, the hen will eventually
lose interest and leave the nest.
During phase 3 in the chicken, the folicle adds 2g of
 g    sas pe ap rd ud
 37 mm. Yolk proteins are made in the liver. The ovary
Avian female reproductive system
enlarges greatly during the breeding season. The chicken
 ovary is divided into two lobes, each with follicles.
The right ovary and oviduct are present during early
The ovary in a hen exhibits a clear hierarchy of pro-
embryonic development in birds, but asymmetrical
a s e ) s  
migration of precursor germ cells to the left ovary
the cycle of egg laying to create the clutch of eggs.
ultimately results in regression of the right ovary in
The follicles in birds bear little resemblance to those
most species. Thus, the mature reproductive system
in mammals. There is no antrum or follicular fluid but
consists of a single left ovary and its oviduct. The
the follicle is filled with yolk. The mass of yolk grows
ovary of a chick embryo contains -500,000 oocytes at
very rapidly, which is important because it provides
time of hatching when oogenesis ends. The ovary in
all of the nourishment for the developing embryo.
immature birds exhibits a mass of small ova, many of
This mass progressively decreases as the embryo
which are visible to the unaided eye. It is typical that
grows. In chickens, posthatching nutrition is also
250-500 ova are ovulated during the life of most
mostly from the yolk for a short time since it is not
domesticated birds. Figure 19.23 gives the parts of an
completely absorbed when the chick hatches.
avian reproductive tract.
 Ovulation causes release of a mature egg. The egg.
Follicle growth is characterized into three phases:
with its extensive nutrient reserves, is picked up by
(1) slowly growing small (60 to 100 μm) follicles that
the infundibulum and carried into the magnum, which
occur over periods of months or years; (2) growth over
is the largest segment of the oviduct. Over about 3
a period of months with rapid deposition of yolk
hours, the egg receives a coating of albumen. The egg
protein; and (3) very rapid growth during the typical
then passes into the isthmus, where the shell mem-
6-11 days prior to ovulation, when the majority of
branes are deposited. This takes about 1 hour. The egg
Softegg
Isthmus
Ovary
Infundibulum
Fig. 19.23. Structures of female chicken reproductive tract. The ovary with multiple oocytes in various stages of development is apparent.
After ovulation, the egg progresses through segments of the oviduct, infundibulum, magnum, and isthmus. In this ilustration, a mature egg
after albumin deposition (soft egg) but before shell formation is shown. The mature egg is subsequently laid after passage into the cloaca.
Original photograph provided courtesy of Dr. Frank Robinson, University of Alberta.
 580 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Germinal disc
Viteline
membrane
E6
53
Yolk
Chalaza
Albumen
Air cell
F5
Outer
SWF
membrane
Inner
Shell
membrane
Fg. 19.25. Parts of a chicken egg.
Fig. 19.24. Progressively developing follicles of a laying hen
ovary. F1-F6 illustrate sequential development of follicles and thus
eggs destined for ovulation. Small yellow follicles (SYF) are those
Avian male reproductive system
that are beginning to sequester yolk proteins. Small white follicles
(SWF), some of which appear in the area bounded by the dashed
box, are follicles in still earlier stages of development. Original
Fundamentals are similar to male mammals in that
photograph provided courtesy of Dr. Frank Robinson, University
male birds have two testes that produce sperm. A
of Alberta.
bird's testes (or ovaries for that matter) greatly increase
in size during the breeding season. Their small size
during the rest of the year lightens the load for flight.
then moves to the uterus, or shell gland, where the
The cloaca is the outlet for eggs and sperm.
 shellis added, and in some birds, pigment is added in
 Male birds have paired abdominal testes located
characteristic patterns. The egg then passes into the
anterior to the cranial lobe of each kidney. The vas
vagina and cloaca for laying.
deferens emerges medially and passes caudally along-
The shells of newly deposited eggs are completely
side the ureters to the cloaca where it has a common
filled. The air cell forms by contraction of the contents
opening with the ureter in the urodeum. The distal
during cooling and by the loss of moisture. A high-
portion of the vas deferens becomes straightened, then
quality egg has only a small air cell. The yolk is posi-
abruptly widens at the point where it joins the cloaca.
tioned in the center of the albumen and is surrounded
 This enlarged structure has a bean-shaped appearance
by the colorless vitelline membrane. The germinal disc
when it is filled with stored semen during the breed-
is the site of fertilization and is attached to the yolk.
ing season.
On either side of the yolk there are two twisted,
Sperm production occurs in the seminiferous
whitish cord-like structures called chalazae. These
tubules of the testes. As in mammals, sperm formation
structures support the yolk in the center of the
is temperafure sensitive. Thus, maturation is improved
 albumen. Most of the albumen is thick. Surrounding
with reduced temperatures typical of evening and
the albumen there are two shell membranes and the
right hours and in some cases by the development of
shell itself. The shell contains several thousand pores
scrotal-like external thermoregulatory swellings that
that permit gas exchange.
house the seminal glomera. Accessory organs include
The yellow of your breakfast egg is the true oocyte.
the paracloacal vascular bodies, dorsal proctodeal
61
The yellow of the egg is a single cell and the yolk
gland, and lymphatic folds. These structures are either
121
represents a massive lipid inclusion in its cytoplasm.
directly adjacent to the cloaca or a part of its structure.
The largest single cell in existence is the yolk of an
Few male birds have a penis-like structure. Thus, most
 ostrich egg, which can have a diameter of 6 inches.
achieve fertilization via a cloacal kiss. This involves
 An average hen egg weighs about 60g. Of this
 positioning the male on the back of the female with a
weight, the shell constitutes 11%; the white, 58%; and
twisting of his tail under hers and the touching of the
the yolk, 31%. These proportions are generally consis-
cloaca of each. During copulation or in response to
tent for small or large eggs. Figure 19.25 illustrates the
massage, a phallic-like swelling occurs in the acces-
structures of a chicken egg.
sory lymphatic folds of the cloaca. The paracloacal
Reproduction  581
bodies are essential to this event because they act to
For example, in 1677, Leuwenhoek was the first to
store lymph fluid, which promotes swelling.
see spermatozoa with his newly created microscope.
In chickens after copulation or turkeys after insemi-
The Italian scientist Spallanzani discovered in 1780
nation , spermatozoa are stored in specialized storage
that a dog could be impregnated with the cellular
tubules located in the uterovaginal region of the female.
 portion of semen and that semen could be cooled and
These cells remain viable for up to two weeks in chickens
used at a later time. The Russian professor Ivanov
and three weeks or more in turkeys. Most evidence
developed techniques for collection of semen and
suggests that spermatozoa fill these glands sequen-
 insemination of cattle, horses, sheep, and pigs by the
tially and that there is no mixing between successive
early 1930s. A Danish scientist, Sorenson, who had
copulations or inseminations. However, sperm cells
 connections with Ivanov, established the first Al coop-
from the most recent copulation are most likely 
to
erative for dairy producers in 1933.
fertilize an ovum. After each egg is laid, spermatozoa are
The extension dairy specialist E.J. Perry from
released from these glands where they migrate to the
 Rutgers University was visiting Denmark at this time
infundibulum of the oviduct, where fertilization occurs.
and returned to establish the first Al cooperative in the
United States in 1937. This exploded, with the creation
of seven Al cooperatives by 1939. This pace of devel-
Reproductive technologies
opment continued as more Al organizations appeared
and the number of cows inseminated increased dra-
A variety of techniques often called assisted reproduc-
matically. To control costs, many small cooperatives
tive technologies (ART), for example, in vitro fertiliza-
ultimately consolidated.
tion (IVF), superovulation, ET, and freezing, are
It is estimated that 60% of U.S. dairy cows are arti-
popularized because they are used to assist couples
ficially inseminated. In contrast, more than 90% of
incapable of conceiving naturally. However, these
dairy cows in Europe are bred using Al. The two
 tools have their origins in reproductive physiology of
 largest Al organizations are privately owned compa-
laboratory and farm animals. For example, scientists 
nies with national and worldwide semen distribution
worked for many years to perfect IVF before it was
efforts. The largest of these, American Breeders Service
recognized that sperm cells have to undergo capacita-
Global, sells approximately 3.5 million breeding ser-
tion in the female reproductive tract before fertiliza-
 vices per year. The second largest is Select Sires.
tion. This ultimately led to methods to induce
Although methods for collecting semen and insemi-
capacitation, and therefore routinely successful IVF.
nation have been available for many years, it is likely
Advances in one aspect of reproduction thus allow
that the commercial industry would not have devel-
 oped as rapidly without several critical research dis-
practical without endocrine tools to induce superovu-
coveries: (1) the development of semen extenders that
lation and methods to routinely collect, fertilize, and
would protect sperm cells against temperature shock
freeze eggs. Cloning and development of transgenic
and thereby allow cold storage, (2) the realization that
animals depended on development of techniques to
bull semen could be extended (diluted) to breed large
visualize, micro-manipulate, and culture eggs 
and
numbers of cows from each ejaculate, and (3) the dis-
embryos. Several of these key techniques are outlined
covery of methods for frozen storage of bull sperma-
in subsequent sections (Bearden et al. 2004)
tozoa. In 1939, Drs. Phillips and Lardy at the Uriversity
of Wisconsin discovered that egg yolk would protect
Artificial insemination
 protection was due to phospholipids and lipoproteins
 in the egg yolk. Extenders combining egg yolk with
The artificial insemination (Al) industry is an excellent
phosphate, citrate, and bicarbonate buffers were soon
example of a practical link between scientific under-
developed and they form the basis for extenders in use
standing, rapid adoption of practical procedures, and
today. Heated milk was also found to be a satisfactory
creation of an entirely new agricultural industry. The
 semen extender and to provide temperature shock
foundations to understanding semen preservation
protection.
and storage did not occur overrnight. However, it was 
Spermatozoa were some of the first cells frozen by
clear, especially to dairy producers, that techniques to
English scientists in 1949. Dr. Polge and coworkers
   s ad pe 
discovered that glycerol in the extender media would
bulls would rapidly increase genetic progress. Specifi-
protect fowl and bull spermatozoa from damage
cally, a highly selected sire could potentially be mated
 s p a g  
with thousands of females. The first commercial AI
accomplished with dry ice and alcohol at a tempera-
using fresh semen dates back to 1937, but this was
ture of -79C. Afterward, liquid ritrogen became the
built on a long history of discoveries.
coolant of choice because its -196°C temperature
582  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
provided longer and safer storage conditions. The first
be expected to produce three to five embryos suitable
U.S. calf (named Frosty) from frozen semen was born
for implantation.
in 1953.
The advantage of this system is the ability to collect
 Dairy producers use Al in their herds because of the
oocytes from cows of known genetic merit, at least
following advantages: (1) ready access to genetically
twice weekly for extended periods of time, as source
superior sires, (2) ability to maintain a herd closed to
material for IVF and microinjection of DNA (see below).
new animals for added disease protection, (3) a dan-
This procedure has been shown to yield about 10%
gerous bull need not be kept on the farm, and (4)
greater development of microinjected zygotes to the
 organized breeding management and record services
 are provided. In swine operations, Al is often used to 
blastocysts developing to term compared with use of
decrease the cost of maintaining males at the produc
slaughterhouse-derived oocytes (Krisher et al., 1995).
tion unit. In turkeys, Al is used because mating cannot
 Occur naturally because of development of very large-
Embryo transfer (ET)
breasted birds.
The techniques are generally available for use of AI
Although embryo transfer (ET) has been in the pop-
in other species, but use is limited for economic
reasons or in horses because the registry of offspring
ular press recently because of implications to human
is restricted. Changes in industry structure, however,
reproduction, the basic techniques have been known
for many years. The first recorded successful case in
often drive changes in the use of Al. For example, in
   d r sd an  
the swine industry, the growth of large farm units in
the 1990s led to the adaptation of Al toreduce expenses
rabbits. By the 1930s, transfers with sheep and goats
were reported and in the 1950s, the first successful ETs
 of maintaining males. In the horse industry, a change
in cattle occurred in Cambridge, England. The first
in the Quarter Horse Association regulations to allow
 Successful ET in cattle in the United States was in 1951.
the registration of foals from Al with cooled and
In the United States, commercial ET work began in
shipped semen has increased the use of Al.
 the 1970s. The first Holstein ET calf was registered in
1974. The popularity of ET in the dairy industry
increased dramatically with development of nonsur-
In vitro fertilization (IVF)
gical methods for recovery of embryos and subse-
quent implantation of either freshly collected or frozen
The relevance of in vitro fertilization (IVF) as a research
embryos. The first successful nonsurgical embryo col-
tool has been recognized for many years. The first
 lection was reported in 1964 and the first North Amer-
report of offspring (rabbits) produced this way was in.
ican calf from a frozen embryo was in 1977. Further
1959. The first "test-tube" human infant was born in
development of the ultrasound transvaginal collection
1978. In cattle, successful fertilization occurs more
method combined with improvements in IVM will
readily with oocytes that are ovulated compared with
 likely further increase use of ET to expand populations
those collected from ovarian follicles. Regardless, this
 in part explains the importance of collecting eggs from
of genetically superior cattle or to allow for cloning of
transgenic animals. At the current time, approximately
animals that are superovulated (hormonally treated so
-xoidde :iH Aq pasnpoid are sans Iy SunoA jo %08
 that a greater than normal number of eggs are pro-
 mately 12,000 ET heifers are registered each year.
duced and ovulated) for both ETs and cloning (i.e.,
 genetically superior donors), as well as donors of eggs
Finally, it is also possible using PCR techniques
designed to amplify male-specific sequences on the Y
to be used in transgenic trials.
chromosome to determine the sex of embryos. Briefly.
Methods to improve techniques for oocyte collec
d r e ad i s ao pe 
only a small sampling of cells from the blastocyst
(perhaps only one cell) can be utilized. The detection
centage of successful oocytes collected from ovaries
of these sequences in the amplified DNA from these
are under active development. These in zitro matura-
cells would indicate a male and the absence a female.
tion (IVM) schemes are efforts closely tied with
T
Biopsied cells are quickly reproduced. In France,
121
ultrasound-guided follicular aspiration, also called
where this technology has been rapidly adopted,
many dairy producers will no longer transfer embryos
ration needle inserted through a guide within a trans-
without having them sexed.
vaginal ultrasound probe is passed through the
vaginal wall and into each follicle while applying a
 vacuum. Typically, six to eight oocytes can be collected
Sexed semen
less of superovulation, it is possible to recover 10-20
Since the initiation of Al, countless numbers of tech-
 0ocytes every 10-14 days. Current IVM and IVF would
riques have been investigated with the goal of sepa-
Reproduction583
rating spermatozoa into X- and Y-bearing cells as a
numbers per dose and compromised sperm viability.
means to control sex of offspring. Most of these
sex-sorted semen is only recommended for use in
methods were only marginally better than chance and
well-managed, highly fertile virgin heifers. Data sum-
suffered from poor repeatability.
marized to this time indicate that herds that typically
However, in the 1980s, a breakthrough in semen
achieve a 60-65% conception rate in virgin heifers
sexing technology was made by USDA researchers.
with normal semen can expect a 45-55% conception
The patents for this technology were subsequently
rate with sexed semen. Sex-sorted semen is not cur
licensed to a company named XY Inc. of Fort Collins,
 rently recommended for use in lactating cows (because
Colorado. Commercialization of sexed semen in the
of inherently reduced conception rates, compared
 United States was initiated with a 2003 license granted
with heifers).
to Sexing Technologies (STs) in Navasota, Texas. Sexed
bovine semen is now commercially available.
Briefly, the method utilizes a flow-cytometer and
Cloning
associated nontoxic DNA dyes to sort sperm
1and
simultaneously detect the 3-4% difference in DNA
Cloning is the creation of a new individual that is
 content between male and female sperm. The first step
 genetically identical to the source individual. Identical
in this procedure is to dilute sperm to a very low con-
(monozygotic) twins come from an embryo that spon-
centration and stain them with a fluorescent dye. The
taneously splits, resulting in natural cloning. Cloning
sample is passed under pressure through the flow
animals is a technique that may well assist animal
cytometer. As single sperm cells pass through an inter-
industries in maintaining high quality livestock to
nal laser beam, the fluorescent dye is excited. Because
supply future food and fiber needs. Identifying and
of the larger X chromosome, female sperm emit less
reproducing superior livestock genetics ensures that
fluorescence than the Y chromosome bearing male
herds are maintained at the highest quality possible.
spermatozoa. Detectors measure the amount of fluo-
Animal cloning offers potential benefits to consum-
rescence and assign positive or negative charges to
ers, farmers, and endangered species. For example, it
each droplet containing a single sperm. Charged
 allows farmers and ranchers to accelerate the repro
deflector plates then split the single stream into three
 duction of their most productive and healthiest live-
streams: positively charged particles containing one
 stock. Cloning can be used to protect endangered
- sdo  A  m a o x
species. For example, in China, panda cells are being
taining the other sex are deflected in the opposite
kept on reserve should this species' numbers be threat-
 direction, while uncharged droplets containing mul-
ened by extinction.
tiple sperm or unidentified sperm pass through the
 In 1997, cloning was revolutionized when Dr. lan
machine without being deflected. Based on multiple
Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute in
research trials, the procedure separates sperm of the
Edinburgh, Scotland, successfully cloned a sheep
two sexes with approximately 90% accuracy.
named Dolly. Dolly was the first mammal cloned
There are, however, limitations that have ham-
using nonembryonic cells. Wilmut and his colleagues
pered widespread implementation of Al using sex-
transplanted a nucleus from a mammary gland fibro-
sorted semen. Reduced conception rate is an issue.
 blast of a Finn Dorsett sheep into the enucleated egg
 Given the necesary manipulation, the sorting pro-
 of a Scottish blackface ewe. The nucleus-egg combina-
A e a ds si  si
tion was stimulated with electricity to fuse the two
compared with normally cryopreserved semen (Wei-
and to stimulate cell division. The new cell divided
gel, 2004).
and was placed in the uterus of a blackface ewe to
 In addition, the procedure is extremely slow and
develop. Dolly was subsequently born. Dolly was
relatively inefficient. To properly sort, sperm must be
shown to be genetically identical to the Finn Dorsett
precisely oriented as they pass through the laser and
mammary cells and not to the blackface ewe. This
fluorescence detectors in the flow cytometer. Due to
clearly demonstrated that she was a successful clone
the flat shape of bovine sperm heads, only about 30%
 s       
are correctly oriented and half of these are female. This
cessful). Dolly has since grown and reproduced several
21
means only 15% of the sperm entering the procedure
offspring of her own through normal sexual means.
are recovered as a marketable product. A
Although
Therefore, Dolly is a viable, healthy clone.
3000-5000 sperm of each sex can be sorted per second,
Nuclear transfer in livestock using cells of the inter-
it still takes approximately 1.3 hours of sorting
to
stitial cell mass (ICM) of a donor blastocyst is rela-
produce enough semen for a standard 20 million
tively routine. Nuclear transfer is accomplished by the
sperm/straw dosage. This resulted in commercializa-
fusion of a donor cell to the unfertilized ova, which
tion of a product with about 10-fold fewer spermato-
has been enucleated. Before the success of somatic cell
zoa per insemination. Because of the low sperm
nuclear transfer, it was possible to obtain cells from
 584 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
transgenic early bovine embryos as a source of nuclear
of this genetic gain arose from the selection of indi-
 material for donation to an enucleated oocyte.
viduals considered superior to be retained as breeding
,      i a
stock. Production of transgenic animals is in many
ways an extension of this effort. This became possible
fer," requires two kinds of cells. One is a somatic cell,
as a consequence of the ability of scientists to develop
which is collected from the animal scheduled to be
recombinant DNA and thereby isolate individual
cloned (known as the "genetic donor"). A somatic cell
genes for the transfer of copies into the genome of
is any cell other than a sperm cell or egg cell. The other
   s  ,   
 kind of cell required for cloning is an egg cell, which is
grates recombinant DNA into its own genetic material.
collected from a female of the same species. In the lab,
 The primary method for the production of trans-
the nucleus of the egg cellis removed. The nucleus from
genic animals is through the introduction of foreign
the donor somatic is then inserted into the enucleated
d a o  n   s
egg. A charge is applied resulting in the fused egg.
of fertilized ova. This procedure was described in 1980
The activated egg is then placed in a culture medium.
for mice and has been used mostly for the production
Over the course of several days, a blastocyst forms.
 of transgenic animals. Fertilized ova can be collected
The blastocyst is subsequently implanted in the uterus
 prior to the time of cell division after superovulation
of a recipient female (sometimes referred to as "sur-
or following IVF of oocytes collected from slaughter-
 rogate mother") where it continues to develop. After
house ovaries. The apparent potential viability of in
 a full-term pregnancy, the recipient gives birth to an
viv0 collected zygotes is higher than for the superovu-
animal that is essentially the identical twin of the
lated zygotes, but the number of potential cells available
 genetic donor. Since Dolly, several university labora-
for gene insertion makes the slaughterhouse-provided
tories and companies have used various modifications
 oocytes more practical for transgenic work in cattle.
of the nuclear transfer technique to produce cloned
Review summaries indicate that for DNA microin-
mammals, including cows, pigs, monkeys, and mice.
jected into over 11,500 IVF slaughterhouse-derived
This technique is outlined in Figure 19.26.
ova, only 9% developed to the morula/blastocyst
stage. Of 478 embryos transferred to recipients, 90
(19%) produced calves. Ten percent of the calves were
Transgenic animals
 transgenic and a heifer from the study was induced to
lactate and shown to secrete human c-lactalbumin in
Farmers began manipulating genome of animals soon
her milk. The rate of transgenesis, based on microin-
after domestication of livestock began. Certainly most
jected zygotes, was .08% (Ayares, 2000). This tech-
nique is illustrated in Figure 19.27.
Qocyte enucleation
Enucleation pipette
Indeed, a variety of proteins used in human medi-
apply vacuum pressure to
remove nuclearmaterial]
cine (human growth hormone, insulin, erythropoietin,
etc.) are recombinant proteins derived from the trans-
Electroporation to
fuse cells and activate
d s r d    s  
theoocyte
Reconstru cted
clone
2
Pronucleus
Nuclear donor cells 
 Zona pellucida
(ICM cells)
(Swollen after Injectlon
of solutlon contalnlng
DNA construct)
Holding
Injection pipette
3
pipette
[donor cellinto
9oo
the enucleated cocyte)
Fig. 19.26. Overview of micromanipulation and cloning. Step 1
L
DNA
indicates the removal or enucleation of the existing nucleus of a
1
injection
fertilized oocyte. This is accomplished by micromanipulating the
pipette
egg under differential contrast or phase contrast microscope. The
Pronucleus
egg is held with slight vacuum with a microscopic blunted
(nonlnjected;
Nucleus
"holding” pipette (not shown) while a fine dissection pipette is used
not swollen)
(red-shaded area)
to aspirate the nucleus of the egg. Step 2 indicates the collection of
Fg. 19.27. Microinjection and transgenic animals. Step 1
the nucleus of a donor cell, in this case cells from the interstitial
indicates the normal appearance of the pronucleus of a fertilized
cell mass (ICM) from the embryo of an animal scheduled for
egg. For insertion of the gene constructs, the egg is positioned with
cloning. In step 3, the donor cell nucleus is injected, and a slight
 a holding pipette and the injection pipette containing a solution
electrical charge is used to induce fusion of the donor nucleus and
with multiple copies of the DNA construct (step 2) is used to inject
lo uazo uaui 'doaaap oi pamolle si la paeiaua Almau aui 8a
a small volume (-1 pl) into the pronucleus. In response, the
implanted in a surrogate dam.
organelle swells
Reproduction 
585
into bacterial cells. Bacterial cells containing these
goats and possibly cows and pigs as bioreactors
choice proteins are subsequently grown in large incu-
for the production of human recombinant proteins.
bators and the proteins harvested and purified. The
Despite the potential benefits, there are limitations
recombinant bovine somatotropin used to enhance
 in technology because of availability of appropriate
lactation performance in dairy cows, the rennet used
genes for DNA insertion and the inefficiencies of pro-
in cheese making, and much of the insulin used to
duction of transgeric livestock. More genes are likely
 treat human diabetics is derived in a similar process.
to become available as more basic genome projects
In recent years, scientists have utilized these tech-
 identify candidates. But low efficiencies for transgene
nologies to link genes of interest with gene promoters
integration and low embryonic survival rates because
that would drive the production of specific proteins
of embryo manipulation are large impediments. Inte-
in selected tissues and especially the mammary gland.
 gration efficiencies are less than 30% in laboratory
 It has been possible to utilize promoter regions of
mice, and lower in livestock species. While the low
specific milk protein genes (caseins, c-lactalbumin,
integration and reproductive efficiencies are accept-
β-lactoglobulin) to direct secretion of a variety of pro-
able for laboratory species, these costs become less
teins into milk. These transgenic animals are then
 acceptable for use in livestock species.
bred, and the lactating animals are used as living bio-
Choice of gene construct is probably the most
reactors, for example, the milk used to purify
1 and
 important decision for attempting to design livestock
isolate the desired protein products (Table 19.3).
to have a significant impact on the agricultural and
The production of pharmaceutical proteins (assum-
consuming community. The construct usually con-
ing investment and support continues) likely holds a
tains a regulatory element (promoter, enhancer) from
more immediate application than transgenic tools to
 one gene ligated to a strucfural gene sequence. This
improve livestock performance. Safe and effective pro-
combination allows for theoretical direction of the
teins produced from transgenic animals can be pro-
 expression of the structural gene to specific areas of
duced with current technologies and products could
 production, at specific times, and allows for regulation
be available in unlimited quantities and at reasonable
of the amount of product produced.
costs to consumers. Many of these products may
be
Transgenic technology for the improvement of
the result of using the mammary glands of sheep and
animal production or performance has been touted
Table 19.3. Selected listing of milk protein gene promoters and expression of recombinant proteins in milk.
 Promoter and Expressed Protein
Anima!
Concentration per Milfifiter
 Bovine α-lactalbumin
Rat
2.4mg
Bovine α-lactalbumin
Mouse
1.5mg
 Human α-lactalbumin
Cow
2.4mg
Bovine QsI-casein
hE PO!
Mouse
0.2mg
hIGF-1?
Rabbit
1 mg
hLactoferrin
Cow
Not reported
Goat β-casein
Mouse
22 mg
hLAtPA3
Goat
hAnti-thrombin Il1
Goat
Ovine β-lactoglobulin
hAAT4
Mouse
5μg to 21 mg
hAAT
Sheep
5μg to 35mg
hFactor IX
Sheep
25 ng
hlnterferon Y
Mouse
20ng
hFibrinogen
Sheep
5mg
 Mouse whey acidic protein
hGH5
Mouse
3.5mg
 Protein C
Mouse
8n E
Protein C
Pig
1 mg
hFactor VIlI
Pig
2.7mg
'hEPO-recombinant human erythropoeitin.
2hIGF-l-recombinant human insulin-like growth factor-1.
3hLAtPA-recombinant human long-acting tissue plasminogen activator.
4hAAT-recombinant human α-1-antitrypsin.
ShGH-recombinant human growth hormone.
Adapted from Gwazdauskas (2002).
 586 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
for nearly two decades since the first publication of
quent physiological conditions similar to excessive
the "super" mouse with an added growth hormone
 GH production in acromegaly. Additionally, the high
(GH) construct. The prospect for improvement of
cost of animals and their care, the lack of inbred lines,
dairy, beef, swine, and sheep production and health
long generation intervals, and production of small
through transgenesis is still rudimentary. Part of the
d  s  sd   
 and cattle have lowered the chances for meaningful
duction has been the fact that DNA injected into the
progress in livestock species with this approach.
 egg (with current techniques for livestock species) is
However, as indicated previously, utilization of the
incorporated at random sites in the genome. This
mammary gland as a bioreactor offers interesting
can produce negative effects. For example, addition
 possibilities for large scale production of recombinant
 of a GH gene in swine lead to overproduction of GH
proteins that cannot be done with bacterial cell
and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-l) and subse-
cultures.
Chapter summary
of epithelial cells lining the mucosal surface vary by
location along the tract. For example, the vaginal
n animal agriculture, reproductive success is re-
epithelium is stratified squamous but the relative
quired at some point along the production chain. Popu-
thickness of this layer varies during the estrus cycle
lation biologists describe two general reproductive
(thicker during the follicular phase and thinner
 patterns: r-selection and K-selection. The r-selection
during the luteal phase). The uterus is lined by
depends on production of many offspring but minimal
simple cuboidal epithelial cells but there are also
or no parental care once the animals are hatched or
 many uterine glands that extend into the underlying
born. Examples include amphibians or in aquacul-
 submucosa. Also, compared with other regions, the
 ture among agricultural industries. The K-selection 
muscularis is markedly more extensive. Like the
is more typical, where parental investment is sub-
vaginal lining, the activity of the uterine glands and
stantial because the number of ofspring is low, with
the surface cells varies during the estrus cycle and
1-2 offspring or small litters or clutches. Expendi-
 particularly during pregnancy The epithelial cells of
tures can be dramatic in terms of time (behavioral,
the oviduct are highly specialized columnar epithe-
lial cells with cilia. Secretions and movement of the
(lactation and nursing, gathering/hunting). Animal
cilia aid the movement of spermatozoa such that
husbandry and domestication of animals evolved to
fertilization of the egg transiting from the ovary
improve the odds of reproductive success as well as
usually occurs in the ampulla region of the oviduct.
improve efficiency of growth and development of
When conditions are suitable, the fertilized ovum
offspring.
passes into the uterus where implantation occurs.
The ovaries, analogous to the testes in the male, are
the primary reproductive organs since they produce
Female reproductive system
 the female gametes (singular = ovum; plural = ova).
The ovaries are paired structures located at the
The structures of the female reproductive tract in-
ends of the uterine horns. In postpubertal animals
dude the ovaries, oviducts, uterus, cervix, vagina,
the ovary undergoes dramatic cyclic development.
and external genitalia. In most farm animals the re-
 Ovulation is the rupture of the mature follicle and
productive tract is positioned below the rectum. For
the release of the ovum. It is picked up by the infun-
cows and mares, this allows the producer to manu-
dibular (furnel-like) end of the oviduct. The remain-
ally evaluate the reproductive tract by manipulation
ing ruptured folicle(s) are transformed into corpus
per rectum. This allows determining functional
luteum (singular) or corpora lutea (plural) that
T
 status of the ovary, diagnosis of pregnancy, or ma-
produce large quantities of progesterone. If fertiliza-
121
nipulation of the tract for Al.
tion does not occur, the corpus luteum regresses and
 The histology of the reproductive tract reflects
a new crop of follicles mature.
function of the various segments. Similar to the GI
Newly recruited follicles produce estrogen and
tract, the outside is covered by serosa of simple squa-
selected follicle(s) proceed to undergo ovulation. The
 mous epithelial cells, followed by the muscularis with
ovary is oval to round in shape with distinct regional
layers of longitudinal and circular smooth muscle,
differences and blister-like structures—the follicles-
the submucosa with associated blood and lymph
near the outer surface. Instead, beneath the outer pro-
 vessels and nerves, and finally the mucosa. The types
tective tunica albuginea, within the ovarian cortex,
Reproduction.
587
there are populations of oocytes, which are recruited
cal state, for example, early postpartum anestrous in
to develop into the mature follicles. The ovarian
suckling beef cows.
cortex also houses the corpus luteum as well as older
With the dairy cow as a model, tonic secretion of
degenerated corpora lutea called corpora albicantia.
 FSH and LH cause a cohort of primary follicles to
The very center of the ovary is called the ovarian
enlarge and become small antral (fluid filled) folli-
medulla and it contains the blood, nerves, and lym-
cles. These follicles provide those that are eligible
phatic vessels that supply the ovary.
for activation during sequential estrous cycles. The
Grossly, the uterus consists of a body, a cervix (or
estrous cycle is divided into two phases, named after
neck), and two uterine horns. However, there are
 the dominant structures that are present on the ovary.
variations in the shape of the uterine body and
The follicular phase is relatively short, -20% of the
arrangement of the horns. Three distinct types of
estrous period, and the preovulatory follicles that
uteri are common: simplex, bipartite, and bicornuate.
 produce estradiol are in control. The follicular phase
 Primates have a simplex uterus. There is a large
encompasses the time from the regression of the
uterine body but essentially no uterine horns. The
corpora lutea to the time of ovulation. Several waves
bicornuate uterus is characterized by the presence of
of follicular development occur during the estrous
two very distinct uterine horns and a relatively small
cycle in cattle. Beginning after ovulation, groups or
heart-shaped uterine body. Examples include the sow,
clusters of small or medium antral follicles become
 rats, and mice. In the bipartite, the uterus appears
especially sensitive to gonadotropins and are recruited.
nearly divided into two parts nearly to the base with
Among these follicles, several are selected and begin
distinct uterine horns (mare, cow, and ewe).
to mature. However, typically only one of the selected
The internal lining (endometrium) of the uterus
follicles will win the maturity race to become the
varies markedly during the estrous or menstrual
dominant follicle. Other follicles in the class undergo
cycles and during pregnancy The tissue is highly
atresia (regression). Even the dominant follicle is
glandular with an epithelial surface of simple colum-
destined to undergo atresia if it is so unlucky to have
nar epithelium in the mare but stratified columnar
been recruited in the first or second wave of follicular
epithelial cells in ruminants. Simple branched tubular
development during the estrous cycle.
glands provide secretions—called uterine milk—that
 The LH surge and ovulation in most farm animals
are especially important during estrus and preg-
(cow, sow, ewe, and mare) take place regularly, inde-
nancy. In many animals these uterine glands are scat-
pendent of copulation. These animals are spontane-
tered throughout the endometrium. Butin ruminants,
ous ovulators. In other animals, such as rabbits,
the internal uterine surface is punctuated by carun-
mink, camels, llamas, and alpacas, ovulation requires
cles that are not glandular. These mushroom-like
copulation (induced ovulators). After ovulation, gran-
caruncles provide sites for attachment of fetal mem-
ulosa cells lining the now-empty follicular cavity
branes in these animals. The smooth muscle of the
divide and undergo luteinization in response to high
uterus (the muscularis) is frequently called the
levels of LH. This results in the appearance of the
myometrium.
corpus luteum. The CL is a powerful endocrine tissue
 that produces large amounts of progesterone, which
prepares the uterus to receive the ovulated ovum or
ova. If fertilization and implantation of the ova is
Estrous cycles and ovulation
successful, this produces maternal recognition of
 pregnancy and the usual regression of the CL does
The period when the female is receptive to sexual
not take place. If pregnancy is not established, the CL
activity is called estrus or, more commonly, heat. An
regresses and the cycle repeats.
estrous cycle is simply the time from the beginning
In females, the neurons of the hypothalamus that
of one estrus period to another. Estrus is a noun. (A
secrete GnRH must acquire the ability to secrete
cow displays estrus or heat). The average length of
 enough GnRH in response to feedback from ovarian
an estrous cycle in the Holstein dairy cow is 21 days.
estrogen to stimulate ovulation. This depends on
Arimals that exhibit only one estrous cycle per year
interactions between hypothalamic hormones, ante-
are monoestrous. The estrous period lasts for several
rior pituitary hormones, and especially the impact of
days. Examples are dogs, wolves, foxes, and bears.
gonadotropin-releasing hormone or GnRH on secre-
In contrast, polyestrous species exhibit multiple
tion of FSH and LH.
cycles each year. During periods of inactivity the
Secretion of GnRH is controlled by a tonically
animals are as described anestrous. These periods
 acting center located in the area of the dorsomedial
may be seasonally induced or related to physiologi-
nucleus of the hypothalamus. Before puberty, secretion
(Continued)
 588 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
of GnRH occurs at a relatively slow frequency and
16-cell stage it becomes impossible to accurately
the amplitude of the each of the secretory events is
count the growing ball of cells, so the structure is
also rather low. As ovarian development progresses,
called a morula. The blastocyst develops and is char-
the secretion of estradiol from waves of growing fol-
acterized by the presence of inner cell mass (ICM), a
licles alsoincreases. Over time, as puberty approaches,
fluid-filled cavity called a blastocoele, and a layer of
the estradiol (along with effects of environment,
cells around the periphery called the trophoblast.
 nutrients, and social interactions) has an escalating
The ICM develops into the embryo while the tropho-
impact to increase the frequency and amplitude of
blast gives rise to the fetal component of the
bursts of GnRH secretion from the tonic control
placenta.
center. This produces more FSH and LH and, in a
 Implantation is the attachment of the free-floating
 positive cascade, more follicular activity.
blastocyst to the uterine epithelium and growth or
However, ovulation requires not just low-level
penetration of the epithelium by embryoric tissues.
 secretion of LH but rather a marked surge in the
Just how dramatic and extensive this interaction is
concentration. This is called the preovulatory LH
varies between species. Placentation is development
surge. This depends on the activation of a second
of the extraembyronic membranes or the placenta.
population of hypothalamic nuclei called the surge
The placenta allows for exchanges between the
center. These nuclei are located more anteriorly in the
maternal and fetal circulations so that nutrients can
preoptic and anterior hypothalamic nuclei. The pre-
be supplied and wastes removed. The chorion is the
outer membrane and therefore is in contact with
cient ovarian-derived estradiol to stimulate the surge
the maternal uterine wall. The next layer toward the
center and reduced sensitivity to estradiol. As she
fetus is the allantois. The amrion is the closest mem-
matures, her hypothalamus becomes progressively
brane to the fetus. It also forms a fluid-filled cavity
more sensitive to estradiol, so that cycles of ovulation
 in direct contact with the fetus. When parturition
then begin to occur.
occurs, the allantoic sac is expelled, followed by the
amniotic fluid.
The placentation of most farm animals is classified
Fertilization and pregnancy
as epitheliochorial. This means that the chorion of
the fetus is in direct contact with the uterine surface.
After a successful ovulation and insemination, sper-
 This is the least intimate arrangement of the types of
matozoa ascend through the cervix, uterine body.
placentas. In hemochorial placentation, fetal vessels
and the oviduct. But for fertilization to succeed, the
and chorion are invaginated so that there is direct
spermatozoa must undergo a process called capaci-
contact between a single layer of chorion epithelial
tation. These are biochemical changes induced by
cells and maternal blood. In hemoendothelial placen-
secretions of the female reproductive tract. Fertiliza-
tation, maternal blood can directly bathe the outer
tion typically occurs when the oocyte and spermato-
surface of chorioric capillaries. The number of layers
 Zoa meet in the ampulla region of the oviduct.
separating fetal and maternal circulations is impor-
The embryo develops into a blastocyst, hatches
tant in part because this markedly affects transfer of
from the surrounding zona pellucida, develops a
immunoglobulins in utero. Since most farm animals
functional trophoblast, and secretes signals that
have epitheliochorial connection, calves, for example,
allow maintenance of the corpus luteum. After fusion
 are born without protective antibodies from the dam.
 of the male and female pronuclei, the fertilized egg
 Placentation patterns also vary at a gross anatomy
is called a zygote. By contrast, a fetus-a potential
 level based on the location or distribution of sites for
offspring still within the uterus—can generally be
 exchange between the placental and the uterus. In
recognized as a member of the species. Soon after
 the horse and pig, extensions from the chorion (cho-
syngamy the zygote initiates a series of mitotic divi-
rionic villi) project into crypts scattered over the
sions. Each of the cells at this time is called a blasto-
entire surface of the endometrium. This is called a
T
mere. Subsequent divisions produce 4, 8, and 16
diffuse type of placenta. Ruminants have scattered
121
identical daughter cells. At these early stages the
 attachments, which depend on a cotyledonary type
blastomeres are totipotent. In other words, each of the
of connection. Exchange takes place at distinct struc-
individual cells is capable of giving rise to a fully
tures called placentomes. The placentomes are
formed offspring. For example, identical twins can
formed by the combined invagination of specific
das Aq suns paadxa u pinpond a
regions of the chorionic membrane, the cotyledons,
 ing individual blastomeres, placing then into surro-
into the button-like projections from the surface of
gate zona pellucida, and allowing development in
the endometrium, the caruncles. Caruncles project
the uterus of a recipient female. Once beyond the
from the surface of the uterus. Zonary placentas
Reproduction
589
(dogs and cats) are characterized by a major region
a common opening with the ureter in the urodeum.
of exchange that forms in an area near the center of
Few male birds have a penis-like structure. Fertiliza-
the developing conceptus essentially in a band.
tion is achieved by pressing the cloaca of the male
Parturition occurs in three phases: (l) initiation of
 and female together. This involves positiorning the
uterine contractions, (2) expulsion of the fetus, and
 male on the back of the female with a twisting of his
(3) expulsion of the fetal membranes. During gesta-
tail under hers and the touching of the cloaca.
tion high progesterone concentrations maintain a
Testicular parenchyma includes the seminiferous
 si 'sde   irn i,,
 tubules and the interstitial cells of Leydig. The semi-
the dominant CL and/or decreasing placental pro-
niferous tubules are the key to spermatogenesis. The
duction of progesterone couples with increasing
end of each seminiferous tubule joins with the rete
estrogen concentrations to prepare for parturition.
tubules that are continuous with the epididymis.
Increasing estrogen stimulates expression of oxyto-
Sertoli cells are the only somatic cells that are part of
cin receptors in the myometrium. Activation of the
the internal structure (inside the basement mem-
fetal pituitary-adrenal axis is essential for the initia-
brane) of the seminiferous tubules. Each of the Sertoli
tion of parturition. The fetus becomes "stressed" and
cells tends or anchors a maximum number of germ
secretes ACTH and then glucocorticoids. High con-
cells. Sertoli cells are analogous to the granulosa cells
centrations act to remove the progesterone block by
 of the ovarian follicles. The basal region houses the
stimulation of placenta enzymes that increase the
spermatogonia and the early spermatocytes. The
conversion of progesterone to estradiol. Fetal corti-
adluminal region has all the other germ cells, that is,
coids promote synthesis of PGF2α, which also acts to
primary and secondary spermatocytes, spermatids,
 remove the progesterone block.
 elongated spermatids, and mature spermatozoa.
Neural signals from the cervix induce oxytocin
and release more contractions, more pressure, and
more oxytocin in a positive cascade. As the fetus
Reproductive technologies
enters the cervical canal, the first stage of parturition
is complete. With the fetus positioned, the feet and
A variety of techniques, often called ART, for
head increase pressure on the fetal membranes,
example, IVF, superovulation, ET, and freezing, are
which rupture, releasing amniotic fluid. As the fetus
 popularized because they are used to assist couples
passes the birth canal it becomes hypoxic. This pro-
incapable of conceiving naturally. However, these
motes fetal movement and more uterine contraction.
tools have their origins in reproductive physiology
of laboratory and farm animals. For example, scien-
Male reproductive system
tists worked for many years to perfect IVF before it
was recognized that sperm cells have to undergo
capacitation in the female reproductive tract before
The male reproductive tract consists of the testis,
fertilization. This ultimately led to methods to induce
epididymis, spermatic cord, accessory sex glands,
and the penis. The testes produce spermatozoa and
capacitation, and, therefore, routinely successful IVF.
Advances in one aspect of reproduction thus allow
testosterone. The epididymis provides the environ-
ment for spermatozoa to mature and be stored. The
 progress in other areas. For example, ET would not
be practical without endocrine tools to induce super-
accessory sex glands produce seminal plasma and
fluids and the penis is the structure needed for copu-
ovulation and methods to routinely collect, fertilize,
lation. Male birds have paired abdominal testes
and freeze eggs. Cloning and development of trans-
located anterior to the cranial lobe of each kidney.
 genic animals depended on development of tech-
The vas deferens emerges medially and passes cau-
 niques to visualize, micromanipulate, and culture
eggs and embryos.
dally alongside the ureters to the cloaca, where it has
Bearden, H.J., J.W. Fuquay, and S.T. Willard. 2004. Applied
Review questions and answers are available
Animal Reproduction. Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper
online.
Saddle River, New Jersey.
Frandson, R.D., W.L. Wilke, and A.D. Fails. 2003. Anatomy
and Physiology of Farm Animals, 6th Edifion. Lippincoft
References
Williams and Wilkins, Ambler, Pennsylvania.
Gwazdauskas, F.C. 2002. Gamete and embryo technology-
Ayares, D.L. 2000. Transgenic protein production: achieve-
transgeric animals. In Encyclopedia of Dairy Science.
ments using microinjection technology and the promise of
Edited by H. Roginski, J.W. Fuquay, and PF. Fox. Aca-
nuclear transfer. J. Anim. Sci. 78(Suppl. 3): 8-18.
demic Press, London.
590  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Krisher, R.L., J.R. Gibbons, and FC. Gwazdauskas. 1995.
Sakaguchi, M. 2011. Pracfical aspects of the fertility of dairy
 Nuclear transfer in the bovine using microinjected donor
cafle. J. Reprod. Dev. 57: 17-33.
embryos: assessment of development and deoxyribonu-
       
cleic acid detection frequency. J. Dairy Sci. 78: 1282-1288.
Current Concepts, Inc., Pullman, Washington.
Peeler, I.D., R.L. Nebel, R.E. Pearson, W.S. Swecker, and
Weigel, K.A. 2004. Exploring the role of sexed semen in dairy
A. Garcia. 2004. Pregnancy rates after timed AI of heifers 
 production systems. J. Dairy Sci. 87: E120-E130.
following removal of intravaginal progesterone inserts.
Whiftow, G.C., ed. 2000. Sturkie's Avian Physiology, 5th
J. Dairy Sci. 87: 2868-2873.
ediftion. Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Perry, G.A. 2012. Harnessing basic knowledge of factors con-
Wiltbank, M.C., R. Sartori, M.M. Herlihy, J.L.M. Vasconcelos,
trolling puberty to improve synchronization of estrus and
A.B. Nascimento, A.H. Souza, A.P. Cunha, A. Keskin,
fertility in heifers. J. Anim. Sci. 90: 1172-1182.
 JN. Guenther, and A. Gumen. 2011. Managing the domi-
Randall, D., W. Burggen, and K. French. 2002. Eckert Animal
nant follicle in lactating dairy cows. Theriogenology 76:
 Physiology. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
1568-1582.
Chapter
lossary
11-cis-retinal: A carotenoid constifuent of visual pig-
marily in the acid hydrolysis of microbial and
ments. It is the oxidized form of retinol, which func-
dietary protein, preparing these protein sources
tions as the active component of the visual cycle. It
for further digestion and absorption in the small
is bound to the protein opsin, forming the complex
intestine.
rhodopsin. When stimulated by visible light, the
Absolute refractory period: The period following
retinal component of the rhodopsin complex under-
stimulation during which no additional action
 goes isomerization at the ll-position of the double
 potential can be evoked.
bond to the cis form; this is reversed in "dark" reac-
Absorption: The active or passive uptake of gases,
tions to return to the native trans configuration.
fluids, or solutes.
2,3-bis-phosphoglycerate (BPG): Athree-carbon isomer
Accessory organs: Organs that assist with the func-
of the metabolic intermediate 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.
tioning of other organs within a system.
 It is notable because it binds to deoxygenated hemo-
Accessory pancreatic duct: An additional duct called
globin in the red blood cell. In so doing, it indirectly
the duct of Santorini, which connects directly to the
regulates the ability of red blood cells to release
duodenum.
 oxygen near tissues that need it most.
Accommodation reflex: A reflex action of the eye, in
5-hydroxytryptamine: A monoamine neurotransmit-
response to focusing on a near object, and then
ter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central
looking at a distant object (and vice versa), compris-
nervous system (CNS) and enterochromaffin cells in
ing coordinated changes in convergence, lens shape,
the gastrointestinal tract.
and pupil size. It is dependent on cranial nerve II
(afferent limb of reflex), higher centers, and cranial
nerve Il.
Abdominal cavity: The space bounded by the abdom-
Acetylcholine:  A  white crystalline  derivative of
 inal walls, diaphragm, and pelvis, it contains most
choline that is released at the ends of nerve fibers in
of the organs of digestion, the spleen, the kidneys,
 the somatic and parasympathetic nervous systems
and the adrenal glands.
and is involved in the transmission of nerve
Abdominopelvic cavity: The portion of the ventral
impulses in the body.
body cavity that contains abdominal and pelvic sub-
Acetylcholinesterase: Any of various enzymes in the
 divisions. It also contains the peritoneal cavity.
blood and in certain tissues that catalyze the hydro-
Abduction: To move away from the midline of the
lysis of acetylcholine.
 body or from an adjacent part or limb.
Acetyl CoA: A small molecule that carries acetyl
Abomasum: The fourth and final stomach compart-
 groups in cells. It is a critical part of energy produc-
 ment of the stomach in ruminants. It serves pri-
tion by cells.
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
591
592
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Acquired reflex: An acquired response that is under
itary It controls secretion of glucocorticoids (cortisol,
the control of (conditional on the occurrence of) a
corticosterone, etc.) from the adrenal cortex.
stimulus.
Adventitia: The superficial layer of connective tissue
Acromion: Bone comprising the tip of the shoulder.
surrounding an internal organ; fibers are continu-
 Acrosome: A saclike organelle positioned on the ante-
ous with those of surrounding tissues, providing
rior end of the sperm head. It contains enzymes that
support and stabilization.
are necessary for sperm penetration of the egg at
Aerobic respiration: Respiration in which molecular
fertilization.
 oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide and water
Actin: A protein found in muscle that, together with
 are produced.
myosin, functions in muscle contraction.
Afferent: Carrying to or toward a center.
Active transport: The mediated transport of biochem-
Afferent nerve: Anerve conveying impulses from the
icals and other atomic/molecular substances across
 periphery to the central nervous system; also called
 membranes.
the centripetal nerves.
Active zone: The region on the surface of functional
Afferent neuron: A nerve cell that carries impulses
(globular) proteins that fit and interact chemically
toward the central nervous system. These neurons ini-
with other molecules of complementary shape and
tiate nerve impulses following receptor stimulation.
charge.
Afterload: The arrangement of a muscle so that it
Adduction: To move inward toward the median axis
 lifts a weight from an adjustable support or works
 of the body or toward an adjacent part or limb
against a constant opposing force to which it is not
Adlenine: A purine, that is, one of the types of nitrog-
exposed when at rest.
enous bases found in nucleic acids such as DNA
Agonist: A substance that can combine with a cell
and RNA.
receptor to produce a reaction typical for that
Adenohypophysis: The anterior lobe of the pituitary
substance.
gland.
Agranulocytes: Nongranular leukocytes (monocytes
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP): Amolecule of adenine
or lymphocytes).
with two phosphate groups attached. It is an impor-
Air sacs: One of many spherical outcroppings of the
tant precursor for generation of adenosine triphos-
respiratory bronchioles in the mammalian lung, the
phate (ATP).
 primary sites of gas exchange with the blood.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP): A critical cellular
Albumin: A common liver-produced protein found
molecule composed of adenine with three phos-
in many tissues, including plasma. It is soluble in
phate groups attached. The third phosphate depends
 on a high energy bond, which, when broken, can be
Alimentary tract: The tubular portion of the digestive
used by the cell to produce energy.
tract. See also gastrointestinal tract (Gl tract).
Adenylate cyclase: An essential cellular enzyme
Alkaline tide: A period of urinary neutrality or alka-
localized in the cytoplasmic side of the plasma
linity after meals.
membrane. When activated it converts ATP to cyclic
All trans-retinal: Retinol and derivatives of retinol
 AMP (cAMP). cAMP serves as an intracellular regu-
 that play an essential role in metabolic functioning
lator for hormone action.
of the retina, the growth of and differentiation of
Adrenal gland: Paired endocrine glands located at
epithelial tissue, the growth of bone, reproduction,
the superior pole of each kidney. The adrenal has a
 and the immune response. Dietary vitamin A is
cortex and medulla. The cortex is responsible for
derived from a variety of carotenoids found in
production of two major classes of steroid hor-
plants. It is enriched in the liver, egg yolks, and the
mones: glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. The
fat component of dairy products.
adrenal medulla produces the catecholamines epi-
Allantois: A sac connected to the embryo that makes
nephrine and norepinephrine.
respiration by the embryo possible. It also stores
Adrenaline: See epinephrine.
excretions.
Adrenergic fibers: Nerve fibers that release norepi-
Allometric growfh: A growth rate of an organ or
nephrine.
tissue that is faster than the rate of general body
Adrenergic receptors: Cellular proteins that bind
growth.
 norepinephrine and epinephrine and similar mole-
Allosteric protein: A protein (most often in reference
cules. They mediate neural signaling in the CNS
to an enzyme) that changes conformation (and
and hormonal signaling via epinephrine in some
thereby functional capacity) when it binds to
 peripheral tissues. The name was derived because
another molecule or when covalent changes alter its
epinephrine and norepinephrine were originally
shape.
called adrenalin and noradrenalin.
Alveolar ducts: Part of the respiratory passages beyond
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): A glycopro-
a respiratory bronchiole; from them arise alveolar
tein hormone made in the anterior lobe of the pitu-
sacs and alveoli.
Glossary
593
Alveolar macrophages: The cells within the lungs
directly produce energy in cells; it merely allows
that phagocytose microbes and particulate matter,
glycolysis (a process that yields two ATP per
for example, inhaled dust. They are mainly sited
glucose) to continue.
within the alveoli where they arrive via the capillar-
Anal canal: The distal
1portionof
the rectum
ies after production within bone marrow from
that contains the anal columns and ends at the
monocytes.
anus.
Alveolar sac: An air-filled chamber that supplies air
Anaphase: A stage of mitosis during which the
 to several alveoli; also, terminology used to describe
chromosomes separate and move away from each
the glandular structures in the mature mammary
other.
gland.
Anastomosis: The joining of two tubes, usually refer-
Alveolar ventilation rate: An index of respiratory
 ring to a connection between two peripheral vessels
efficiency; it measures volume of air wasted and
without an intervening capillary bed.
flow of fresh gases in and out of alveoli.
Anatomical dead space: The volume of the conduct-
Alveoli: Blind pockets at the end of the respiratory
ing airways from the external environment down to
tree, lined by a simple squamous epithelium and
the terminal bronchioles.
surrounded by a capillary network; sites of gas
Anatomical position: An anatomical reference posi-
exchange with the blood; a bony socket that holds
tion; the body viewed from the anterior surface with
the root of a tooth.
 the palms facing forward. For domestic species, this
Alveoli
(mammary): Multicellular,
spherical,
would be four legs on the ground and head facing
hollow units of the mammary gland that are
forward.
responsible for synthesis and secretion of milk.
Anatomy: The study of the structure of the body.
Milk is secreted into and stored in the internal
Anencephaly: Congenital absence of most of the
lumenal space of the alveoli between milking or
brain and spinal cord.
suckling episodes.
Anestrus: Term that can refer to the absence of estrus
 Amacrine cells: Interneurons in the retina that operate
without ovulation, the period of sexual quiescence
at the inner plexiform layer, the second synaptic
between two estrous cycles, or prolonged failure of
retinal layer where bipolar cells and ganglion cells
estrus in mature animals.
 Anisotropic: Having physical properties that differ
synapse.
Aminopeptidase: An enzyme that is used as a bio-
according to the direction of measurement.
 marker to detect damage to the kidneys, and that
Annular cartilage: The lowermost of the laryngeal
A  aso di on pasn aq a
 a isn d aa   's
disorders.
thyroid prominence adjacent the cricoid cartilage
Amnion: The innermost of the fetal membranes, it
and the first tracheal ring is the cricothyroid mem-
forms the fluid-filled sac that surrounds and pro-
brane, a site used for rapid emergency airway access 
tects the developing fetus. The amnion and amni-
(cricothyroidotomy).
otic fluid protect the developing embryo from shock
Antagonist: Something, such as a muscle, disease, or
and permit movement.
physiological process that neutralizes or impedes
Amoeboid action: The flowing movement of the
the action or effect of another.
 cytoplasm of a phagocyte.
Anterior: On or near the front, or ventral surface, of
AMPA
(α-amino-3-hydroxy
 5-methylisoaxzole-4-
the body.
 propionic acid) receptor(AMPARs): Anon-NMDA-
Anterior chamber: The fluid-filled space inside the
type ionotropic transmembrane receptor for glutamate
eye between the iris and the cornea's innermost
that mediates fast synaptic transmission in the
surface, the endothelium.
central nervous system (CNS). Its name is derived
Anterior horn: The front section of the lateral ven-
from its ability to be activated by the artificial glu-
tricle of the brain, extending forward from Monro's
tamate analog, AMPA. AMPARs are found in many
foramen; also called the ventral horn.
parts of the brain and are the most commonly found
Anterior median fissure: The longitudinal groove in
receptor in the nervous system.
the midline of the anterior aspect of the medulla
Amygdaloid
body: Almond-shaped
 groups
of
oblongata, continuous with the anterior median
neurons located deep in the medial temporal lobes
fissure of the spinal cord and ending at the foramen
of the brain in complex vertebrates. Shown in
cecum medullae oblongatae.
research to perform a primary role in the processing
Anterior neuropore: The anterior opening leading
and memory of emotional reactions, the amygdalae
from the central canal of the embryonic neural tube
are considered part of the limbic system.
to the exterior.
Anaerobic glycolyis: The anaerobic metabolic break-
Anterior segment: The front third of the eye that
down of a nutrient molecule, such as glucose,
includes the structures in front of the vitreous
without net oxidation. Fermentation does not
humor: the cornea, iris, ciliary body, and lens.
594  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Anterior vagal trunks: A nerve trunk (or trunks)
Apoptosis: One of the main types of programmed cell
formed by fibers from both left and right vagus
death (PCD). As such, it is a process of deliberate
nerves.
life relinquishment by a cell in a multicellular
Antibody: Proteins produced by B lymphocytes
organism.
(plasma cells) that are produced in response to
Apositional growth: The enlargement of a bone
exposure to a specific antigen. Antibodies are mem-
by the addition of cartilage or bony matrix at its
bers of the immunoglobulin family of proteins.
surface.
Anticodon: The sequence of three nucleotides in the
Appendicular: Pertaining to the upper or lower limbs.
transfer RNA that is complementary to the three
Aqueous humor: The clear, watery fluid in the eye
nucleotide sequence of the messenger RNA. The
that fills the space between the back surface of the
anticodon corresponds to a specific amino acid
cornea and the front surface of the vitreous humor.
also attached to the tRNA during active protein
Arachnoid granulations: Any of numerous villuslike
synthesis.
projections of the cranial arachnoid through the
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH): A hormone produced 
dura into the superior sagittal sinus or into its lateral
 in the hypothalamus but stored and released from
venous lacunae; also called the arachnoid villus or
the posterior lobe of the pituitary. Its secretion pro-
 pacchionian body.
motes reabsorption of water by the distal convo-
Arachnoid mater: One of the three meninges, the
luted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidney
membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord. It
nephrons.
is interposed between the two other meninges, the
Antigen: Usually a foreign substance that, when it
more superficial dura mater and the deeper pia
enters the body, elicits an immune response (anti-
a aq  eid a  as st pre a
body production or cell-mediated response).
subarachnoid space.
Antiport: A form of membrane carrier protein that
Arbor vitae: White matter of the cerebellum.
transports two different ions or molecules across a
Arytenoid cartilages: A pair of small cartilages in the
 membrane in opposite directions. The transfer can
larynx.
occur with both ions simultaneously or sequentially.
Ascending aorta: Part of the aorta from which the
Antithrombin: Any substance that inhibits or pre-
coronary arteries arise.
vents the effects of thrombin so that blood does not
Ascending segment: A part of the large intestine.
coagulate.
Ascites: The overproduction and accumulation of
Anus: The external opening of the anal canal.
peritoneal fluid.
Aorta: The large, elastic artery that carries blood away
Aspartate: A salt or ester of aspartic acid.
from the left ventricle and into the systemic circuit.
Association area: An area of the cerebral cortex where
Aortic arch: The curve between the ascending and
motor and sensory functions are integrated.
descending portions of the aorta.
Astigmatism: A refractive error of the eye in which
Aortic body: A receptor in the aortic arch sensitive to
there is a difference in degree of refraction in differ-
changing oxygen, carbon dioxide, and pH levels of
 q pa ai si i  
the blood.
aspherical, nonfigure of revolution cornea in which
Aortic valve: A one-way valve that permits the flow
the corneal profile slope and refractive power in
 of blood from the left ventricle into the aorta during
one meridian are greater than that of the perpen-
ventricular emptying but prevents the backflow of
dicular axis.
blood from the aorta into the left ventricle during
ATP: See adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
ventricular relaxation.
ATP synthase: Enzyme complex located in the inner
Apex: Extremity of a conical or pyramidal structure.
membrane of the mitochondria that catalyzes the
The apex of the heart is the rounded tip directed
formation of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate
 anteriorly and slightly inferiorly
as a consequence of oxidative phosphorylation.
Apical: The tip of a cell or a structure. For example,
ATPase: General name for a large class of enzymes
in activity secreting epithelial cells, products are
that catalyze reactions that hydrolyze ATP, thereby
packaged and ultimately released from the cell at
liberating energy for biochemical processes.
the apical end of the cell.
Atria: Thin walled chambers of the heart that receive
Apneustic area: A respiratory center whose chronic
venous blood from the pulmonary or systemic
activation would lead to apnea at full inhalation.
circuit atrial natriuretic peptide.
Aponeurosis: A sheetlike fibrous membrane resem-
Atrioventricular (AV) node: Specialized cardiocytes
bling a flattened tendon that serves as a fascia to
that relay the contractile stimulus to the bundle of
 bind muscles together or to connect muscle to bone.
His, the bundle branches, the Purkinje fibers, and
Aponeurotic aftachments: Fibrous or membranous
the ventricular myocardium; located at the bound-
sheets connecting a muscle and the part it moves.
ary between the atria and ventricles.
Glossary
595
Auditory ossicles: The three smallest bones in the
 forrm the prickle cells in the above layer (the stratum
body. They are positioned within the middle ear
spinosum).
space and serve to transmit sounds from the air to
Basal lamina: The thin layer of extracellular matrix
the fluid-filled labyrinth (cochlea). The absence of
 that creates a boundary between the epithelial cells
the auditory ossicles would cause a moderate to
and the surrounding stromal tissue and between
severe hearing loss.
other cell types; also called the basement membrane.
Auditory tube: A passageway that connects the naso-
Basophils: Circulating granulocytes (white blood cells)
pharynx with the middle ear cavity; also called the
similar in size and function to tissue mast cells.
eustachian tube or pharyngotympanic tube.
Bicarbonate ions: HCO;; anion components of the
Auricle: Abroad, flattened process that resembles the
carboric acid-bicarbonate buffer system.
external ear; in the ear, the expanded, projecting
Bicuspid valve: The left atrioventricular (AV) valve;
portion that surrounds the external auditory canal;
also called the mitral valve.
also called the pinna. In the heart it is the externally
Bile duct: Any of a number of long tubelike structures
visible flap formed by the collapse of the outer wall
that carry bile.
of a relaxed atrium.
Bilirubin: A pigment that is the by-product of hemo-
Auscultation: The technical term for listening to
globin catabolism.
the internal sounds of the body, usually using a
Biliverdin: Green bile pigment formed from the oxi-
stethoscope.
dation of bilirubin.
Autocrine: Mechanism whereby ligands (growth
Biogenic amines: Class of neurotransmitters, includ-
factors, hormones) produced by a particular cell act
ing catecholamines and indolamines.
to modify the action of that cell.
Biopsy: To remove a small piece of tissue or cells
Autonomic nervous system: Efferent division of the
(biopsy of embryo) from a living animal for analysis
 peripheral nervous system that innervates cardiac
or study.
and smooth muscles and glands; also called the
Bipolar cell: As a part of the retina, the bipolar cell
involuntary or visceral motor system.
exists between photoreceptors (rod cells and cone
Autoregulation: Changes in activity that maintain
cells) and ganglion cells.
homeostasis in direct response to changes in the
Bipolar neuron: Neuron with an axon and a dendrite
local environment; does not require neural or endo
extending from opposite sides of the cell body.
crine control.
Blastocoele: The cavity in the center of the blastocyst.
Autorhythmic: Spontaneous and periodic; for example,
Blastocyst: An early embryo composed of an inner
in smooth muscle it implies spontaneous (without
cell mass, the blastocoele, and trophoblast.
nervous or hormonal stimulation) and periodic
 Blastomere: A cell created by the cleavage divisions
contractions.
of the early embryo.
Autorhythmic fibers: Self-excitable and repeatedly
Blind spot: The specific region of the retina where
 generated action potentials that trigger heart con-
the optic nerve and blood vessels pass through to
 tractions. They continue to stimulate a heart to beat
connect to the back of the eye.
even after it is removed from the body.
Blood-brain barrier: The isolation of the central
Axial skeleton: The bones constituting the head and
nervous system from the general circulation; pri-
trunk of a vertebrate body.
marily the result of astrocyte regulation of capillary
Axon: The elongate extension of a neuron that con-
permeability.
ducts an action potential.
Blood pressure: A force exerted against vessel walls
 Axon hillock: In a multipolar neuron, the portion of
by the blood in the vessels, due to the push exerted
the cell body adjacent to the initial segment.
by cardiac contraction and the elasticity of the vessel
Axon terminals: The branched endings of a neuronal
walls; usually measured along one of the muscular
axon, which release a neurotransmitter that influ-
arteries, with systolic pressure measured during
ences target cells in close association with the axon
ventricular systole and diastolic pressure during
terminals.
ventricular diastole.
Bohr effect: The increased oxygen release by hemo-
globin in the presence of elevated carbon dioxide
Baroreceptor reflex: A reflexive change in cardiac
levels.
activity in response to changes in blood pressure.
Bolus: Any kind of ball-shaped organic structure of
Baroreceptors: The
receptors
responsible
for
an organism or of its discharged substances.
baroreception.
Bone remodeling: The continuous turnover of bone
Basal cells: The innermost layer of the epidermis;
matrix and mineral that involves first, an increase
also called the stratum germinativum or stratum
in resorption (osteoclastic activity), and later, reac-
basale. Cells produced here in the germinal layer
tive bone formation (osteoblastic activity).
596
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Bony collar: A bone collar that forms concurrently
Cancellous bone: Structure composed of a network
with the primary ossification center. Cells of the
 of bony struts or spikes; also called spongy bone.
 perichondrium begin to form bone. The bone collar
Canine: Referring to the cuspid tooth.
holds together the shaft, which has been weakened
Capacitance of vessels: The capacitance of a vessel is
by the disintegration of the cartilage. The connective
a measure of how easily it stretches.
tissue about the bone collar, previously a perichon-
Capacitation: Activation of spermatozoa that occurs
drium, is now called periosteum.
after deposition into the female reproductive
Boyle's law: The principle that, in a gas, pressure and
tract. It involves release of enzymes from the
 volume are inversely related.
acrosome of the sperm cells and is necessary for
Brachiocephalic: Relating to the arm and the head.
fertilization.
Brachiocephalic trunk: An artery that arises from the
Capillary: A small blood vessel, located between an
arch of the aorta and divides into the right subcla-
arteriole and a venule, whose thin wall permits the
vian and right carotid arteries.
diffusion of gases, nutrients, and wastes between
Brain stem: The portion of the brain—consisting of
plasma and interstitial fluids.
the medulla oblongata, pons Varoli, and midbrain-
Capillary bed: The network of capillaries supplying
that connects the spinal cord to the forebrain and
an organ.
cerebrum.
Capillary exchange: A dynamic process that has the
Bronchi: A branch of the bronchial tree between the
 role of supplying extravascular cells with the sub-
 trachea and bronchioles.
stances essential for survival.
Bronchial tree: The trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles.
Capillary hydrostatic pressure (HP): In capillaries,
Bronchioles: The branching air passageways inside
hydrostatic pressure is exerted by blood. Thus, cap-
the lungs.
illary hydrostatic pressure (HP.)is equivalent to the
Brush-border: The epithelial surface consisting of
blood pressure in the capillaries.
microvilli.
Carbamino compounds: The combination of CO2
bST or bovine somatotropin: A protein hormone,
also called the growth hormone (GH), that is pro-
the most important is the globin of hemoglobin.
duced in the anterior pituitary gland. A common
Carbaminohemoglobin: Hemoglobin bound to carbon
terminology is to use a lowercase letter to indicate
dioxide molecules.
the species of origin (e.g., pST for porcine somato-
Carbohydrate: Organic compound composed of carbon,
tropin) and a lowercase "r" to indicate that the
hydrogen, and oxygen in a l:2:1 ration. Examples
protein is derived by recombinant DNA technology.
include glucose, lactose, starch, and cellulose. Many
For example, rbST stands for recombinant bovine
are critical for ATP production in cells.
somatotropin or growth hormone.
Carboxyl group: A carbon atom linked to an oxygen
Buccal: Pertaining to the cheeks.
 atom by a double bond and to a hydroxyl group.
Bulk flow: The movement of large particles and mac-
This combination is common in fatty acids and
romolecules across a plasma membrane.
amino acids.
Carboxyl terminal (C terminal): The end of a protein
 chain that has a free carbonyl group.
Caleification: Impregnation with calcium or calcium
Carcinoma: Refers to a cancer of the epithelial cells
salts; also called calcareous infiltration.
or the epithelium. It is the most common type of
Calcitonin: A 32-amino acid polypeptide hormone
cancer.
that is produced primarily by the C cells of the
Cardia: The area of the stomach surrounding its con-
thyroid and, in many animals, in the ultimobran-
 nection with the esophagus.
chial body.
Cardiac accelerator nerves: Sympathetic nerves respon-
Calmodulin: Aubiquitous, eukaryotic, calcium-binding
sible for increasing cardiac rate.
protein that regulates cellular processes by modify-
Cardiac center: Part of the medulla oblongata respon-
ing the activity of specific calcium-sensitive enzymes.
sible for controlling the heart rate.
Calsequestrin: The principal calcium-binding protein
Cardiac cycle: One complete heartbeat, including
 present in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of cardiac and
atrial and ventricular systole and diastole.
skeletal muscle.
Cardiac muscle: The muscle of the heart, consisting
Calvaria: The skullcap, consisting of the superior
of anastomosing transversely striated muscle fibers
portions of the frontal, parietal, and occipital bones.
formed of cells united at intercalated discs; also
Canaliculi: Microscopic passageways between cells;
called the myocardium or, simply, heart muscle.
bile canaliculi carry bile to bile ducts in the liver; in
Cardiac notch: The lateral deflection of the anterior
bone, canaliculi permit the diffusion of nutrients
border of the left lung. It is produced to accommo-
and wastes to and from osteocytes.
date the space taken up by the heart.
Glossary
597
Cardiac output: The amount of blood ejected by the
ciated with activation of a class of lymphocytes, the
 left ventricle each minute; normally about 51 mL.
T cells.
Cardiac reserve: The potential percentage increase in
Cellular physiology: The study of how cells work.
 cardiac output above resting levels.
Cementum: Bony material that covers the root of a
Cardiocytes or cardiac myocytes: A type of involun-
tooth and is not shielded by a layer of enamel.
tary mononucleated striated muscle found exclu-
Central chemoreceptors: Receptors  located in the
sively within the heart. Its function is to "pump"
medulla near the respiratory center that respond
 blood through the circulatory system by contracting.
to changes in extracellular fluid Ht concentration
Cardiogenic shock: Essentially the failure to pump, a
resulting from changes in arterial PCO, and adjust
condition wherein the heart is so inefficient that it
respiration accordingly.
cannot sustain adequate circulation.
Central nervous system: Brain and spinal cord.
Cardiovascular center: Poorly localized centers in the
Centriole: A small organelle located near the nucleus
reticular formation of the medulla oblongata of the
of the cell. It is involved in synthesis of microtubules
brain. It includes cardioacceleratory, cardioinhibi-
and in cell division.
tory, and vasomotor centers.
Cephalic: Pertaining to the head.
Carotid bodies: A small cluster of chemoreceptors
Cephalization: An evolutionary trend in the animal
and supporting cells located near the bifurcation of
kingdom toward centralization of neural and sen-
the carotid artery. It measures changes in blood
sory organs in the head or anterior region of the
pressure and the composition of arterial blood
body.
flowing past it, including the partial pressures of
Cerebral aquaduct: The slender cavity of the mid-
 Oxygen and carbon dioxide, and is also sensitive to
brain that connects the third and fourth ventricles;
changes in pH and temperature.
also called the aqueduct of Sylvius.
Carotid sinus: A dilated segment at the base of the
Cerebral peduncles: The massive bundle of corticof-
internal carotid artery whose walls contain barore-
ugal nerve fibers passing longitudinally over the
ceptors sensitive to changes in blood pressure.
ventral surface of the midbrain on each side of the
Caruncle: In ungulates, this is the buttonlike area of
midline.
the uterine endometrium that creates the maternal
Cerebroventricles: Fluid-filled spaces in the brain.
side of the cotyledonary placenta.
Cerebrum: The largest portion of the brain, including
Caseins: Proteins that constitute the largest group
practically all the parts within the skull except the
of specific proteins found in milk. They are empiri-
medulla, pons, and cerebellum, and now usually
cally defined by their precipitation from milk at pH
referring only to the parts derived from the telen-
4.6 and their capacity to produce micelles contain-
cephalon and including mainly the cerebral hemi-
ing calcium. Major subtypes include α, β, and 
spheres that are joined at the bottom by the corpus
caseins.
 callosum. It confrols and integrates motor, sensory,
Catecholamines: Epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopa-
and higher mental functions, such as thought,
mine, and related compounds.
reason, emotion, and memory.
Caudate nucleus: An elongated, curved mass of gray
Cervical thoracic air sacs: A pair of air sacs located
matter consisting of three portions: an anterior,
on each side in the neck region of birds; one sac
thick portion that projects into the anterior horn of
usually extends from each lung, but sometimes a
the lateral ventricle; a portion extending along the
series of cervical sacs are located along the neck, as
floor of the body of the lateral ventricle; and an
in geese.
elongated, thin portion that curves downward and
Cervix: The proximal portion of the uterus, it forms
backward in the temporal lobes to the wall of the
 the boundary between the vagina and uterus.
lateral ventricle; also called the caudatum.
Chaperone: An intracellular protein that allows other
Caudodorsal blind sac: A region of the rumen.
proteins to avoid alterations in folding or conforma-
Caveoli: A small vesicle or recess, especially one com-
tion so that the supported protein maintains its
municating with the outside of a cell and extending
function.
inward, indenting the cytoplasm and the cell
Chemical synapses: 
 Specialized junctions  through
membrane.
which cells of the nervous system signal to one
Cecum: An expanded pouch at the start of the large
another and to nonneuronal cells such as muscles
intestine.
or glands.
Cell body: The body of a neuron; also called the
Chemically gated channels: Channels in the plasma
soma.
membrane that open or close in response to the
 Cellular immunity: That part of the immune system
binding of a specific chemical messenger with a
that depends on the actions of specialized cells to
membrane receptor site that is in close association
provide protection. Protection is most closely asso-
with the channel.
598  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Chemoreceptor: A cell or group of cells that trans-
Cilia: Extensions of the plasma membrane containing
duce a chemical signal into an action potential.
doublets of parallel microtubules. They are approxi-
Chemoreceptor reflex: Chemoreceptors that detect
mately 5 to 10 micrometers in length. There are two
decrease in blood oxygen, increase in carbon
types of cilia: (l) motile cilium, which constantly
dioxide, or decrease inpH, and produce an increased
beats in one direction, and (2) nonmotile cilium,
rate and depth of respiration, and, by means of the
which cannot beat and usually serves as a sensor.
vasomotor center, vasoconstriction.
Ciliary body: The part of the eye containing the
Chemotaxis: The attraction of phagocytic cells to the
ciliary muscle and ciliary processes.
 source of abnormal chemicals in tissue fluids.
Ciliary muscles: A smooth muscle that affects zonules
Chloride shift: The movement of plasma chloride
in the eye (fibers that suspend the lens in position
ions into red blood cells in exchange for bicarbonate
 during accommodation), enabling changes in lens
ions generated by the intracellular dissociation of
shape for light focusing.
carbonic acid.
Ciliary processes: Processes formed by the inward
Choanae: Openings from the nasal cavity into the
folding of the various layers of the choroid, that is,
nasopharynx. They are also known as internal nares.
the choroid proper and the lamina basalis, and are
Cholecystokinin (CCK): A duodenal hormone that
received between corresponding folds of the sus-
 stimulates the contraction of the gallbladder and the
 pensory ligament of the lens.
secretion of enzymes by the exocrine pancreas; also
Cingulate: A gyrus in the medial part of the brain. It
called pancreozymin.
partially wraps around the corpus callosum and is
Cholesterol: A common lipid with a characteristic
limited above by the cingulate sulcus.
four-ring structure; it is important for membrane
Circulatory shock: When mean arterial blood pres-
fluidity and as the precursor for a myriad of
sure falls so low that adequate blood flow to the
steroids.
tissues can no longer be maintained.
 Cholinergic neurons: Nerve endings that, upon stim-
Circumduction: The circular movement of a limb
ulation, release acetylcholine.
such that the distal end of the limb delineates an arc.
Chondroblasts: Cells of growing cartilage tissue
Circumvallate papilla: one of the large, dome-shaped
responsible for increasing tissue mass.
 papillae on the superior surface of the tongue that
Chondrocyte: The primary cell type found in devel-
form a V, separating the body of the tongue from
oped cartilage.
the root.
Chondroitin sulfate: A major proteoglycan found in
Circumventricular organs: Sites in the neuroendo-
cartilage.
Chordae tendineae: Fibrous cords that stabilize the
 brain-blood barrier. These organs secrete or are sites
position of the AV valves in the heart, preventing
of action of different hormones, neurotransmitters,
backflow during ventricular systole.
and cytokines.
Chordamesoderm: The middle germ layer that devel-
Citric acid cycle: This fundamental biochemical
ops into muscle, bone, cartilage, blood, and connec-
pathway (also called the TCA, tricarboxylic acid
tive tissue.
cycle, or Krebs cycle) is central to aerobic respira-
Chorion: The outer extraembyronic membrane that is
tion. Acetyl groups derived from nutrient sources
 derived from the trophoblastic ectoderm. It develops
are area oxidized to CO, and HzO. In the process,
villi that make the fetal sites of placental attachment.
the coenzymes NAD and FAD become oxidized and
Choroid plexus: A vascular proliferation of the cere-
are ultimately utilized in the electron transport
bral ventricles that serves to regulate intraven-
chain of the mitochondria to produce ATP.
tricular pressure by secretion or absorption of
Clavicular air sac: A single, median air sac between
cerebrospinal fluid.
the clavicles and surrounding the bifurcation of the
Choroids: The vascular layer of the eye lying between
trachea of birds.
the retina and the sclera. The choroid provides
Cloaca: The common opening in birds through which
 oxygen and nourishment to the outer layers of the
the intestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts
retina.
empty.
 Chylomicrons: Relatively large droplets that may
Clostridium botulinum: A bacterium that occurs
contain triglycerides, phospholipids, and choles-
widely in nature and is a cause of botulism; its six
terol in association with proteins. They are synthe-
main types, A through F, are characterized by dis-
sized and released by intestinal cells and transported
tinct but pharmacologically similar, very potent
to the venous blood by the lymphatic system.
neurotoxins.
Chyme: A semifluid, acidic mixture of ingested food
Clot: A network of fibrin fibers and trapped blood
and digestive secretions that forms in the stomach
cells; also called a thrombus if it occurs within the
during the early phases of digestion.
circulatory system.
Glossary
599
Clot retraction: Condensation of the clot into a denser,
Concentration gradient: The difference in concentra-
compact structure; caused by the elastic nature of
tion of a material between tissue regions or loca-
fibrin.
tions within cells. For example, the concentration of
Cochlea: A coiled, tapered tube containing the audi-
sodium is typically higher in the extracellular fluid
tory branch of the mammalian inner ear. Its core
than the cytoplasm. Movement of molecules down
component is the organ of Corti, the sensory organ
their concentration gradients is often utilized to
of hearing.
" drive" various transport functions.
Cochlear duct: An endolymph-filled cavity inside the
Concentric: Having a common center or center point,
cochlea, located between the scala tympani and the
as of circles.
scala vestibuli, separated by the basilar membrane
Concentric lamellae: One of the tubular layers of
and Reissner's membrane (the vestibular mem-
bone surrounding the central canal in an osteon;
brane), respectively.
also called Haversian lamellae.
Codon: Sequence of three bases in DNA or a strand
Conchae: Three pairs of thin, scroll-like bones that
 of mRNA that corresponds with the instructions for
project into the nasal cavities; the superior and
incorporating a specific amino acid into a growing
medial conchae are part of the ethmoid, and the
protein chain.
inferior conchae are separate bones.
Coenzymes: Organic molecules that serve as cofac-
Cones: Cells in the retina of the eye that function only
tors required for the action of certain enzymes. Most
in relatively bright light. They gradually become less
coenzymes are derived from vitamins.
concentrated toward the periphery of the retina.
Cofactor: A companion molecule necessary for func-
Conjunctiva: A membrane that covers the sclera
tion of many enzymes. Most often this is either a
(white part of the eye) and lines the inside of the
 metal ion or organic molecule.
eyelids. It helps lubricate the eye by producing
Collagen: The most abundant class of proteins in
mucus and tears, although a smaller volume of tears
the body, collagens are predominant in the extracel-
than the lacrimal gland.
lular matrix surrounding cells and in connective
Connexon: Hollow cylinders made of transmem-
tissues.
brane proteins that connect adjacent cells at gap
Collaterals: Abranch of a nerve axon or blood vessel.
junctions, allowing chemical substances to pass
Colloid osmotic pressure (OP): Pressure created in
through.
a fluid.
Continuous capillary: A capillary in which pores are
Colon: The large intestine.
absent; it is less permeable to large molecules than
Colostrum: Mammary gland secretion that accumu-
other types of capillaries.
lates prior to the onset of normal milk production.
Contractility: The ability to contract; possessed by
It is rich in antibodies.
skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle cells.
Common hepatic duct: The duct formed by the junc-
Control center: One of three interdependent compo-
tion of the right hepatic duct (which drains bile from
nents of homeostatic control mecharnisms; it deter-
the right functional lobe of the liver) and the left
mines the set point.
hepatic duct (which drains bile from the left func-
Conus medullaris: The terminal end of the spinal
tional lobe of the liver).
cord. It occurs near lumbar nerves 1 (Ll) and 2 (L2).
Compact bone: Dense bone that contains parallel
After the spinal cord terminates, the spinal nerves
osteons.
continue as dangling nerves called the cauda equina.
Complementarity of structure and function: An
Convergence: The converging of many presynaptic
essential concept to understanding of how an animal
terminals from thousands of other neurons on a
works and its limitations. In short, the principle that
 single neuronal cell body and its dendrites so that
function and structure are interdependent.
activity in the single neuron is influenced by the
Complete fracture: Break involving the entire width
activity in many other neurons.
of the bone.
Convergent: The coordinated turning of the eyes
Complete tetanus: An acute, often fatal disease that
inward to focus on an object at close range.
 is characterized by spasmodic contraction of volun-
Coracoid process: A long curved projection from the
tary muscles, especially one occurring in the neck
neck of the scapula, overhanging the glenoid cavity
and jaw, and that is caused by the bacterium Clos-
and giving attachment to the short head of the
tridium tetani, which usually enters the body through
biceps, the coracobrachial muscle, the smaller pec-
 an infected wound and produces a neurotoxin; also
toral muscle, and the coracoacromial ligament.
called lockjaw.
Cori cycle: A metabolic pathway that allows lactic
Compound fracture: Afracture in which broken bone
acid produced by muscle action to be to be con-
fragments lacerate soft tissue and protrude through
verted to glucose by the liver. This action typically
an open wound in the skin.
occurs during muscle rest.
600  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Cornea: The transparent front part of the eye that
limb contract and the extensors relax, while in the
covers the iris, pupil, and anterior chamber, provid-
other limb the opposite occurs.
ing most of an eye's optical power.
Crossmatching: Matching blood types.
Corpora quadrigemina: The four colliculi--two infe-
Cryptorchidism: Failure of the testicles to descend
rior, two superior—located on the posterior aspect
into the scrotum during fetal development. The
of the midbrain.
undescended testis remains in the abdominal
Corpus callosum: The commissural plate of nerve
cavity.
fibers connecting the two cerebral hemispheres
 Crystallins: A water-soluble structural protein found
 except for most of the temporal lobes; also called the
in the lens of the eye accounting for the transpar-
commissure of cerebral hemispheres.
ency of the structure. Crystallins from a vertebrate
Corpus luteum (CL): Yellow to orange structures
eye lens are classified into three types: alpha, beta,
formed on the surface of the ovary after ovulation
and gamma.
 from granulosal and thecal cells from the ruptured
Curare: A purified preparation or alkaloid obtained
follicle. The CL produces progesterone and oxytocin.
from the Chondrodendron tomentosum, it is used to
Corpus striatum: Either of two gray and white, stri-
relax skeletal muscles.
ated bodies of nerve fibers located in the lower
Cyclic AMP: An important intracellular signaling
 lateral wall of each cerebral hemisphere.
molecule, it is formed by the action of the enzyme
Corticoids: General name for the class of steroid hor-
mones secreted by the adrenal gland.
induced by binding of a particular hormone to its
Costal cartilages: The cartilage forming the anterior
surface receptor.
continuation of a rib.
Cyclicity: The condition during which the female dis-
Cotransport: A membrane carrier system in which
 plays estrus cycles with predictable duration.
the transfer of one molecule depends on the simul-
Cystic duct: A duct that carries bile between the gall-
taneous transfer of another molecule.
bladder and the common bile duct.
Cotyledons: In ruminants, the points of attachment
Cytokines: Small growth factor-like proteins that
between the fetal and maternal placenta. It is com-
serve to regulate the activity of the various immune
posed of the maternal cotyledon (the caruncle of the
system cells.
uterus) + the fetal cotyledon (from the chorion of the
Cytokinesis: The dividing of cytoplasm between two
conceptus).
cells at the time of mitosis.
Covalent bond: A common chemical bond in which
Cytology: The study of the structure, organelles, and
electrons are shared between atoms.
function of cells.
Cranial: Pertaining to the head.
Cytoplasm: The portion of the cell interior not occu-
Cranial base: The structure that forms the inferior
pied by the nucleus.
aspect of the cranium and is divided by bony ridges
Cytosine: A pyrimidine that is one of the two classes
into three distinct fossae.
 of nitrogenous bases found in nucleic acids such as
Cranial nerves: Nerves that emerge from the brain
DNA and RNA.
stem instead of the spinal cord.
Cytoskeleton: The network of microtubules and
Cranial vault: Eight skull bones that surround and
 microfilaments found in the cytoplasm of the
 protect the brain; braincase.
cell.
Cranium: The braincase; the skull bones that sur-
Cytosol: The fluid portion of a cytoplasm, it is effec-
round and protect the brain.
Creatine kinase: The enzyme that catalyzes the trans
saving the supernatant from a 100,0o0 × g centrifu-
fer of phosphate from phosphocreatine to ADP,
gation minus any lipid.
forming creatine and ATP; important in muscle
Cytoxic T cell: An activated lymphocyte, part of cel-
contraction
lular immunity, also called a killer T cell; it acts to
Creatine phosphate: An organic compound found
destroy cells that have been infected by viruses by
 in muscle tissue and capable of storing and pro-
releasing enzymes.
viding energy for muscular contraction; also called
phosphocreatine.
Cricoid cartilage: A ring-shaped cartilage that forms
Dale's Principle: A principle
 postulated by the
the inferior margin of the larynx.
English neuroscientist Herry Hallett Dale, which
Crop: A thin-walled, expanded portion of the alimen-
states that, although different neurotransmitters can
tary tract that is found in many animals and is used
be produced at different synapses within the brain,
for the storage of food prior to digestion.
individual neurons are capable of releasing only one
Crossed-extensor reflex: A withdrawal reflex. When
neurotransmitter from its axonal terminal. Dale's
the reflex occurs, the flexors in the withdrawing
Principle has been shown to be false because many
Glossary 601
nerve terminals release neuropeptides as well as
Dermis: A deep layer of the skin, it is primarily com-
amino acids or amines.
posed of dense irregular cornective tissue. A hypo-
Dalton's Law: Named for the English chemist John
dermic injection, for example, would be placement
 Dalton. In a mixture of gases, the portion of the total
of the material just under the skin into the adjacent
pressure resulting from each type of gas is deter-
tissue.
mined by the percentage of the total volume repre-
Descending segment: The portion of the large intes-
sented by each gas type.
tine that leads to the rectum.
Dark adaptation: The ability of the eye to adjust to
Desmin: Acomponentof the cytoskeleton—important
various levels of darkness and light.
structural components of living cells. Their size is
 Dark cells: Cells that line the endolymphatic space of
intermediate between that of microfilaments and
the ear.
microtubules.
De novo: Refers to a synthesis process occurring
Desmosomes: A structure that forms the site of adhe-
within a tissue or cell.
sion between two cells, consisting of a dense plate
Deamination: The removal of an amine group from a
in each adjacent cell separated by a thin layer of extra-
molecule often in relation to the metabolism of the
cellular material; also called the macula adherens.
amino acids from proteins.
Diabetes insipidus: A disease characterized by the
Deciduous: An adjective meaning "temporary"
Or
production of large amounts of dilute urine and
"tending to fall off" (derived from the Latin word
intense thirst. Itis named because the symptoms are
decidere, to fall off).
similar to those common in diabetes mellitus, but
Decomposition reaction: Description of a chemical
 the cause is insufficient production of antidiuretic
reaction that results in the breaking down of a
hormone (ADH) rather than insulin insufficiency or
larger molecule into its component parts, that is, a
failure of insulin action.
protein into amino acids or starch into glucose
Diabetes mellitus: A disease caused by either failure
monomers.
 of the endocrine pancreas to produce sufficient
 Defensins: Locally produced tissue proteins that can
amounts of insulin or failure of insulin function.
protect cells from infection by bacteria.
Diacylglycerol: Alipid produced in the plasma mem-
 Deglutition: Swallowing.
brane after the cleavage of inositol phospholipids.
 Dehydration synthesis: A chemical reaction wherein
This usually occurs following hormone signaling. It
a larger molecule is created by covalently bonding
is two fatty acid chains linked to glycerol.
smaller molecules together. In the process, water is
Diapedesis: The movement of white blood cells
often produced.
through the walls of blood vessels by migration
Deltoid tuberosity: A bump or raised area on the
between adjacent endothelial cells.
outside of the humerus where the deltoid muscle
Diaphysis: The shaft of a long bone.
attaches.
Diastole: Period of the cardiac cycle when either the
Denaturation: Dramatic change in the tertiary struc-
ventricles or the atria are relaxing.
ture of a protein or other macromolecule that leaves
Diastolic blood pressure: Pressure measured in the
it nonfunctional. This can be caused by heating (egg
walls of a muscular artery when the left ventricle is
albumin after frying or poaching) or exposure to
in diastole.
chemicals.
Dendrite: A branching process of a neuron that
alon, composed of the epithalamus, the dorsal thala-
receives stimuli and conducts potentials toward the
mus, the subthalamus, and the hypothalamus.
nerve cell body.
Diestrus: The stage of the estrus cycle characterized
 Dentate gyrus: One of the two interlocking gyri com-
by major secretion of progesterone from the corpus
posing the hippocampus.
luteum and periods of minimal or no reproductive
Dentin: The bonelike material that forms the body of
behavior.
a tooth; it differs from bone in that it lacks osteo-
 Differential blood count: A common laboratory pro-
cytes and osteons.
cedure often using a stained blood smear to tabulate
Deoxygenated blood: Blood whose red blood cells
the relative proportions of classes of white blood
carry very little oxygen, as found in all veins except
cells in a sample. Variations from normal propor-
 the pulmonary vein; also called oxygen-poor blood.
S sdoap Jo ais ro sads uai e r s
Deoxyhemoglobin: Hemoglobin  without  oxygen
used diagnostically.
bound to it.
Diffuse placenta: The placental type characterized by
 Depolarization: A reduction in membrane potential
the distribution of chorionic villi across the surface
from resting potential; movement of the potential
of the chorion (e.g. pigs, mares).
from resting toward 0m V.
Diffusion: Passive molecular movement from an area of
 Depression: An inward displacement of a body part.
higher concentration to an area of lower concentration.
602
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Digestion: The chemical breakdown of ingested
ron cell bodies of the nerve fibers conveyed by
 materials into simple molecules that can be absorbed
the root.
by the cells of the digestive tract.
 Dorsal root ganglion: A nodule on a dorsal root that 
 Digestive tract: An internal passageway that begins
contains cell bodies of neurons in afferent spinal
at the mouth, ends at the anus, and is lined by a
 nerves. All of the axons in the dorsal root convey
mucous membrane; also called the gastrointes-
somatosensory information, bringing sensory infor-
tinal tract.
 mation into the brain and spinal cord.
 Dipeptidase: An enzyme that catalyzes the hydroly-
Dorsal sac: Toward the back; posterior.
sis of dipeptides into their constituent amino acids.
Downregulation: A term frequently used to describe
Diploe: The diploic veins are found in the skull and
a reduced response to hormone stimulation over
drain the diploic space. This is found in the bones
time. It often reflects a decrease in the number of
of the vault of the skull, and is the marrow-
available hormone receptors.
containing area of cancellous bone between the
Downstroke or falling phase: The repolarization phase
inner and outer layers of compact bone. The diploic
of an action potential in which the cell or neuron
veins drain this area to the outside of the skull and
membrane potential moves toward a more neg-
 are usually four in number: one frontal, two pari-
ative value.
etal, and one occipital.
Duct: A tubular
 canal or passageway most often
Directly gated: Also called a transmitter or ligand-
 associated with secretion of products from a glan-
gated channel, in which the ligand receptor and ion
dular organ.
channel are one and the same.
 Ductus arteriosus: A vascular connection between
Disaccharide: A sugar molecule composed of two
the pulmonary trunk and the aorta that functions
simple sugars, for example, glucose + galactose, to
throughout fetal life; it normally closes at birth or
yield milk sugar or lactose.
shortly thereafter and persists as the ligamenfum
 Displaced fractures: Abreak or fracture in which the
arteriosum.
 two ends of the broken bone are separated from one
Duodenal gland: Small gland that opens into the base
another.
of intestinal glands. It secretes a mucuslike alkaline
Distal: Away from the origin. For example, the wrist
substance.
is distal from the elbow, or the distal convoluted
Duodenal papilla: A conical projection from the inner
 tubules of the kidney nephrons are distant from the
 surface of the duodenum that contains the opening
proximal (near the site of filtration) convoluted
of the duodenal ampulla.
tubules.
Duodenum: The proximal region of the small in-
Distributing arteries: Medium-sized artery with a
testine that contains short villi and submucosal
tunica media composed principally of smooth
glands.
 muscle; regulates blood flow to different regions of
Dura mater: The tough fibrous membrane covering the
the body.
 brain and the spinal cord and lining the inner surface
 Divergence: The diverging, or branching, of a neu-
 of the skull; also called the dura pachymeninx.
ron's axon terminals so that activity in this single
Dural sinuses: Venous channels found between
neuron influences the many other cells with which
layers of dura mater in the brain. They receive blood
 its terminals synapse.
from internal and external veins of the brain and
Diverticulum: A sac or pouch in the wall of the colon
ultimately empty into the internal jugular vein.
 or other organ.
 Damage to the walls of the dural sinuses may result
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid): The critical polynucle-
in dural sinus thrombosis.
otide created by covalent bonding of nucleotides,
Dystocia: Difficult birth, a term often used in animal
phosphate groups, and deoxyribose in repeating
 management-recording schemes to indicate that an
chains. It is the basis for transference of genetic
animal required assistance with giving birth.
information.
Dystophin: A structural
 protein found in small
Dolichephalic: Having a disproportionately long head.
amounts in normal muscle but absent or present in
Dominant follicle: The final maturation stage of fol-
abnormal amounts in individuals with muscular
licle development in cattle, that is, the follicle likely
dystrophy.
destined to ovulate.
Dopamine: An important 
neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system.
Eccentric: Departing from a recognized, conventional,
 Dorsal: Toward the back, posterior.
 or established norm or pattern.
Dorsal root: The afferenf sensory root of a spinal
Eccrine glands: A common type of sweat gland that
nerve. At the distal end of the dorsal root is
produces primarily a watery secretion containing
the dorsal root ganglion, which contains the neu-
dissolved salts.
Glossary
603
Ectoderm: One of three germinal cell layers (ecto-
End buds: The swollen terminal ends of mammary
 derm, mesoderm, and endoderm) in the developing
ducts in the gland of peripubertal rodents. These
 embryo. The mammary gland, for example, is derived
structures are responsible for the rapid growth and
from the ectoderm.
elongation of the ductular tree. Although alveolar
Edema: Abnormal accumulation of fluid in body
 budlike structures in the mammary glands of peri-
parts or tissues; causes swelling. It is common sur-
pubertal ruminants serve as sites of focus for rapid
rounding the udder of first-calf heifers.
growth of mammary ducts, ruminants apparently
 Effector: Aperipheral gland or muscle cell innervated
do not have morphologically similar end buds.
by a motor neuron.
End diastolic volume (EDV): The volume of blood in
Effector organ: The muscles or glands that are inner-
the ventricle at the end of diastole, when filling is
vated by the nervous system and that carry out the
complete.
nervous system's orders to bring about a desired
End systolic volume (ESV): The volume of blood in
effect, such as a particular movement or secretion.
 the ventricle at the end of systole, when emptying
Efferent: Away from.
is complete.
Efferent nerve: A nerve conveying impulses from the
Endocardium: The simple squamous epithelium that
central nervous system to the periphery; also called
lines the heart and is continuous with the endothe-
a centrifugal nerve.
 lium of the great vessels.
Elastic cartilage: A yellowish flexible cartilage in
Endochondral ossification: The conversion of a car-
which the matrix is infiltrated by a network of elastic
tilaginous model to bone; the characteristic mode of
fibers; it occurs primarily in the external ear, eusta-
formation for skeletal elements other than the bones
chian tube, and some cartilages of the larynx and
of the cranium, the clavicles, and sesamoid bones.
epiglottis; also called yellow cartilage.
Endocrine system: A control system of ductless glands
Elastin: A relatively common extracellular matrix
that secrete chemical "instant messengers" called hor-
protein, which gives strength and flexibility to tissues.
 mones, which circulate within the body via the blood-
For example, it allows the expansion and recovery
stream to affect distant cells within specific organs.
 of the aorta or the spring in the fibroelastic carilage
Endocrinology: Study of the endocrine system.
of the external ear.
Endocytosis: The uptake of material into a cell by the
Electrical synapses: A mechanical and electrically
 invagination of the plasma membrane followed by
conductive link between two abutting neurons that
internalization of membrane-surrounded vesicles.
is formed at a narrow gap between the pre- and
Endolymph: The fluid contained in the membranous
postsynaptic cells known as a gap junction.
labyrinth of the inner ear. The main cation of this
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG): A graphic record
unique extracellular fluid is potassium.
of the electrical activities of the heart, as monitored
Endoneurium: The innermost layer of connective
 at specific locations on the body surface.
 fissue in a peripheral nerve, forming an interstitial
Electrochemical gradient: The simultaneous exis-
layer around each individual fiber outside the neu-
tence of an electrical gradient and concentration
rolemma. In some circumstances, also called the
(chemical) gradient for a particular ion.
epilemma, sheath of Henle, or sheath of Key and
Electron acceptor: An atom or molecule that easily
Retzius.
takes up an electron, thereby becoming reduced in
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER): A cellular organelle
the process.
composed of a network of membranous sacs or
Electron carrier: A molecule that transfers an electron
tubules whose  intercompartment is continuous
from a donor molecule to an acceptor molecule, for
with the Golgi apparatus. The outer surface is fre-
 example, cytochrome c in the mitochondria in con-
quently studded with ribosomes. In this situation,
version of NADH to NAD.
newly made proteins are often vectored into the
Electron transport: The movement of electrons from
cisteral space of the ER to transport to the Golgi
a higher to lower energy via movement along a
Without ribosomes it is called smooth endoplasmic
series of carrier molecules—for example, the oxida-
 reticulum (SER); with ribosomes it is called rough
 tive phosphorylation process inside mitochondria.
endoplasmic reticulum or RER.
Elevation: Movement in a superior, or upward,
Endosteum: An incomplete cellular lining on the
direction.
inner (medullary) surfaces of bones.
Embryology: The study of embryonic development,
Endothelium: A single layer of simple squamous
 focusing on the first 2 months after fertilization.
cells that line the walls of the heart, blood vessels,
Emesis: Vomiting.
and lymphatic vessels.
Enamel: Crystalline material similar in mineral com-
End-product inhibition: A process whereby the accu-
 position to bone, but harder and without osteocytes,
mulation of the last product in a biochemical pathway
which covers the exposed surfaces of the teeth.
acts to inhibit further production of the product
604  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Enterendocrine  cells: Endocrine  cells
scattered
Epiphyseal plate: The plate of cartilage between the
among the epithelial cells that line the digestive
shaft and the epiphysis of a long bone during its
tract.
growth; also called the epiphyseal cartilage.
Enteric nervous system: An interdependent part of
 Epiphysis: The head of a long bone.
the autonomic nervous system. Despite its many
Epiploic appendage: One of a number of small pro-
interactions with other parts of the ANS, it can be
cesses of peritoneum projecting from the serous coat
 regarded as a nerve body of its own.
of the large intestine except the rectum; it is gener-
Enterogastric reflex: The reflexive inhibition of gastric
ally distended with fat.
secretion; it is initiated by the arrival of chyme in
Epifhelium: A tissue composed of a layer of cells. It
the small intestine.
is one of four primary body tissues. Epithelium
Enterokinase: An enzyme in the lumen of the small
lines both the outside (skin) and the inside cavities
 intestine that activates the proenzymes secreted by
and lumen of bodies. Epithelial cells are also the
the pancreas.
suo jo shrd (eud) uoun Aed
Eosinophil: A microphage (white blood cell) with a
and glands.
 lobed nucleus and red-staining granules; it partici-
Equilibrium: The sense of balance, which maintains
pates in the immune response and is especially
physical balance in animals.
important during allergic reactions.
Equilibrium potential: The potential that exists when
Ependymal cells: A type of neuroglia cell lining the
the concentration gradient and opposing electrical
central canal of the spinal cord or the brain.
 gradient for a given ion exactly counterbalance each
Epicardium: A serous 1
 membrane covering
the
other so there is no net movement of the ion.
outer surface of the heart; also called the visceral
Eructation sequence: The coordinated neural and
 pericardium.
mechanical steps that occur when a ruminate animal
Epidermal growth factor (EFG): A protein that along
regurgitates material to "chew its cud."
with its related receptors (EGFR or ERBBl), makes
Erythrocytes: A red blood cell; it has no nucleus and
up a family of related growth factors and receptors
contains large quantities of hemoglobin.
that are believed to be involved in regulation of
Erythropoiesis: The process of erythrocyte formation.
     m 
Erythropoietin (EPO): Ahormone released by tissues,
tissue development in many species. Receptors for
especially the kidneys, exposed to low oxygen con-
this family include EGRR as well as for several
 centrations; stimulates erythropoiesis (red blood
ligands such as amphriegulin, TGF-o, and ERBB2
cell formation) in bone marrow.
(called HER in humans and Neu in rodents).
Esophageal hiatus: The defect in the diaphragm
Epidermis: The outer or superficial layer of the skin.
through which the esophagus passes from the
It is composed of stratified squamous epithelial cells
thorax into the abdomen.
with selected specialized immune cells and associ-
Esophagus: Amuscular tube that cornects the pharynx
ated sensory elements.
to the stomach.
Epidural space: The space between the walls and
Estrogen: A steroid hormone produced predomi-
the dura mater of the vertebral canal.
 nately in female reproductive tissues (ovary, pla-
Epiglottic: Pertaining to, or connected
with, the
centa) associated with development of sexual
epiglottis.
receptivity and secondary sex characteristics (mam-
Epinephrine: A catecholamine hormone secreted by
mary development, characteristic female body
the adrenal medulla and a neurotransmitter, released
development).
by certain neurons and active in the central nervous
Estrous cycle: The reproductive cycle of nonprimate
system. It is stored in the chromaffin granules and
 females defined as the period from one estrus (heat)
is released in response to hypoglycemia, stress, and
to the next. Consecutive ovulations can also be used
 other stimuli. It is a potent stimulator of the adren-
to signal cycles. Each cycle consists of a follicular
ergic receptors of the sympathetic nervous system
and luteal phase.
and a powerful cardiac stimulant that accelerates
Estrus: Period during which the female is sexually
the heart rate and increases cardiac output. It also
receptive to the male.
promotes glycogenolysis and exerts other meta-
Ethmoid bone: A light spongy bone located between
bolic effects.
the eye sockets, forming part of the walls and
Epineurium: The outermost layer of connective tissue
septum of the superior nasal cavity, and containing
 of a peripheral nerve, surrounding the entire nerve
perforations for the passage of olfactory nerve fibers.
and containing its supplying blood vessels and
Ethmoidal: Of, relating to, or being a light spongy
lymphatics.
bone located between the orbits, forming part of the
 Epiphyseal line: The line of junction of the epiphysis
pe Aan eseu rans aul jo udas pue sm
and diaphysis of a long bone where growth in
containing numerous perforations for the passage
length occurs.
of the fibers of the olfactory nerves.
Glossary
605
Eutherian mammal: Those that produce a placenta.
Eyebrows: A bony ridge above the eye that protects
Eversion: A turning outward, as of the eyelid.
the eye and bears a tuft of facial hair in most
Ewe: An adult female sheep.
mammals. The main function of the eyebrows is
Excitable membrane: Membranes f
 that propagate
to prevent moisture (mostly sweat and rain) from
 action potentials, a characteristic of muscle cells and
dripping into the eye.
nerve cells.
Eyelashes: The hairs that grow at the edge of the
Excitation-contraction coupling: The process whereby
eyelid. Eyelashes protect the eye from debris and
the spreading depolarization is converted into force
perform some of the same function as whiskers
production by muscle fibers.
do on a cat or a mouse, in the sense that they
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP): A small
are sensitive to being touched, thus providing a
depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane in
warning that an object (such as an insect or dust
response to neurotransmitter binding, bringing the
mote) is near the eye (which is then closed
membrane closer to threshold.
reflexively).
Excretion: A removal from body fluids.
Eyelid: Athin fold of skin and muscle that covers and
Excretory lacrimal ducts: Tear ducts.
protects an eye.
Exocrine: Glands that secrete their products and tem-
 porarily store their secretions in a duct.
Exocytosis: Fusion of a membrane-enclosed intracel-
F actin: One of the major protein components found
lular vesicle with the plasma membrane, followed
in muscle, existing as F actin or G actin.
by the opening of the vesicle and the emptying of
 Facial: Pertaining to the face.
its contents to the outside.
Facilitated diffusion: The passive movement of a
Expiratory reserve volume: The amount of additional
substance across a cell membrane by means of a
 air that can be voluntarily moved out of the respira-
protein carrier.
tory tract after one normal exhalation.
Falciform ligament: A sheet of mesentery that con-
Extension: A pulling or dragging force exerted on a
tains the ligamentum teres, the fibrous remains of
limb in a distal direction.
 the umbilical vein of the fetus.
External nares: The entrance from the exterior to the
Far point of vision: Distance from the eye where
nasal cavity.
accommodation is not needed to have the image
 External respiration: The diffusion of gases between the
focused on the retina.
alveolar air and the alveolar capillaries and between
Fascia: A sheet or band of fibrous connective tissue
 the systemic capillaries and peripheral tissues.
enveloping, separating, or binding together muscles,
Exteroceptor: A sense organ, such as the ear, that
 organs, and other soft structures of the body.
receives and responds to stimuli originating from
Fast glycolytic fibers: Muscle fibers with low myo-
outside the body.
globin content, few mitochondria, few blood capil-
Extracellular matrix: A complex network or mesh of
laries, and a large amount of glycogen. Also called
proteins (collagen, elastin, etc.) and polysaccharides
fast twitch B or fatigable fibers, they hydrolyze ATP
(glycosaminoglycans, etc.) secreted by cells. It serves
very quickly, fatigue easily, and are needed for
as a structure scaffold for tissue and organ develop-
 sports such as sprinting.
ment and tissue function.
 Fast oxidative fibers: Muscle fibers that contain large
Extrafusal muscle fibers: A class of muscle fiber
amounts of myoglobin, many mitochondria, and
innervated by alpha motor neurons. Contraction of
many blood capillaries. Also called fast twitch A or
 these fibers allows for movement. Extrafusal muscle
fatigue-resistant fibers, they generate ATP by the
fibers and associated alpha motor neurons are called
aerobic system, split ATP at a slow rate, have slow
a motor unit. The connection between alpha motor
contraction velocity, are resistant to fatigue, are
neurons and extrafusal muscle fiber is a neuromus
found in large numbers in postural muscles, and are
cular junction.
needed for aerobic activities such as long distance
Extraocular muscles: The six muscles that control the
running.
movements of the eye. The actions of the extraocu-
Fatty acid: A common lipid composed of a carboxylic
lar muscles depend on the position of the eye at the
acid typically attached to a long hydrocarbon chain.
time of muscle contraction.
 Examples are palmitic or oleic acid.
Extrapyramidal system: A neural network located in
 Fenestrated: Pierced with one or more small openings.
the brain that is part of the motor system involved
Fenestrated capillaries: Capillaries  with openings
 in the coordination of movement. Extrapyramidal
that allow larger molecules to diffuse.
neurons, like related gamma system neurons, excite
Ferritin: A protein that stores iron in the body. The
or inhibit anterior horn cells.
serum ferritin level—the amount of ferritin in one's
Extrinsic muscles: The six skeletal muscles that attach
blood—is directly proportional to the amount of
to and move each eye.
iron stored in the body.
606
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Fibrinolysis: The breakdown of the fibrin strands of
Foramen of Magendie: An opening in the hollow
a blood clot by a proteolytic enzyme.
nerve tube connecting the fourth ventricle of the
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF): One of a number of
 brain with the subarachnoid space.
-18,0o0 dalton proteins from a family with at least
Foramen ovale: Hole or opening in a bone or between.
23 members. FGFs were first isolated from bovine
body cavities.
pituitary, but they are known to be widely distrib-
Foramina of Luschka: Along with the median aper-
uted and are involved in tissue growth and devel-
 ture, they comprise the three openings in the roof of
opment, including embryonic development.
 the fourth ventricle. They are found at the extremi-
Fibroblasts: Cornective tissue cells responsible for
ties of the lateral recesses.
the production of extracellular fibers and the secre-
Fornix: An archlike anatomical structure or fold, such
tion of the organic compounds of the extracellular
as the arched band of white matter located beneath
ma trix.
the corpus callosum of the brain.
Fibrocartilage: Cartilage containing an abundance of
Fornix vagina: The cranial region of the vagina that
collagen fibers; it is located around the edges of
creates a crypt extending to the cervix.
joints, in the intervertebral discs, the menisci of the
 Fourth ventricle: A cerebrospinal fluid-filled space
knee, and so on.
within the hindbrain bordered dorsally by the cer-
Fibrous tunic: Outer layer of the eye; composed of
ebellum and ventrally by the tegmentum.
the sclera and the cornea.
Fovea: A part of the eye, a spot located in the center
Filiform papillae: Thin, longer papillae that don't
 of the macula. The fovea is responsible for sharp
contain taste buds but that are the most numerous.
central vision.
These papillae are mechanical and not involved in
 Frank-Starling law of the heart: Intrinsic control of
 gustation.
the heart such that increasing the end diastolic
Filtration: The movement of a fluid across a mem-
volume, that is, increased venous return, results in
brane whose pores restrict the passage of solutes on
a greater stroke volume.
the basis of size.
Freemartin: A sterile heifer born twin to a bull. It has
Filum terminale: A fibrous extension of the spinal
incomplete development of the reproductive tract
cord, from the conus medullaris of the neural tube.
and malelike behavior.
First-class lever: An anatomical structure that acts as
Frontal lobe: The largest portion of each cerebral
 a hinge or point of support.
hemisphere, anterior to the central sulcus.
Fissures: A normal groove or furrow, as in the liver
Frontal plane: A sectional plane that divides the body
or brain, that divides an organ into lobes or parts.
into an anterior portion and a posterior portion; also
Fixed macrophages: Macrophages that are resident
called the coronal plane.
cells in a particular tissue or organ, as opposed to
Frontonasal suture: Separates the frontal bones from
circulating monocytes that are recruited to a tissue
the nasal bones.
because of chemotaxis.
Frontoparietal suture: A suture extending across the
 Flat bones: A bone having a thin, flattened shape, as
 skull between the parietal and frontal bones.
the scapula.
 Fulcrum: An anatomical structure that acts as a hinge
 Flexion: The act of bending a joint or limb in the body
or point of support.
by the action of flexors.
Fully saturated: Afatty acid molecule with no double
 Flexor reflex: Reflex initiated by a painful stimulus
 bonds between any of its carbon atoms.
(actual or perceived); causes automatic with-
Functional syncytium: A group of smooth or cardiac
drawal of the threatened body part from the
muscle cells that are interconnected by gap junc-
 stimulus.
tions and function electrically and mechanically as
Folia: A broad, thin, leaflike structure, as of the cere-
a single unit.
bellar cortex.
Fundus: The base of an organ.
 Foliate papillae: The leaf-shaped ridges on the lateral
Fungiform
 papillae: Mushroom-shaped papillae
borders of the tongue.
(projections) on the tongue. They are located on the
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): A glycoprotein
top surface of the tongue, toward the back. They
hormone produced in the anterior pituitary gland
have taste buds on their surface that can distinguish
in response to secretion of gonadotropic releasing
the four tastes: sweet, sour, bitter, and salty.
hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. FSH pro-
Funiculi: One of three major divisions of white matter
 motes follicular development in females and Sertoli
 in the spinal cord, consisting of fasciculi.
cell function in males.
Follicular phase: The period of the estrous cycle when
the dominant follicle produces estradiol. Females dis-
G actin: Globular protein molecules that, when bound
play behavioral estrus and ovulation during this time.
together, form fibrous actin (F actin).
Glossary
607
G protein: A generic term for a member of a large
Gastrointestinal tract: Also referred to as the Gl
family of guanine triphosphate (GTP)-binding pro-
tract, the alimentary canal, (nourishment canal) or
 teins that are important elements in cell signaling.
the gut, it is the system of organs within multicel-
The binding of a hormone or other signaling ligand
lular animals. It takes in food, digests it to extract
in this family activates these cellular proteins, many
energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining
of which act as kinases.
waste.
Galactopoiesis: This term refers to the maintenance
Generator potential: A small depolarization pro-
of continuation of an established lactation. For
duced by neurotransmitter binding or activation of
example, secretion of growth hormone and prolac-
a sensory receptor in the nervous system.
tin are believed to be essential for maintaining lacta-
Germ layers: The ectoderm, mesoderm, and endo
tion in most species, so these hormones would be
derm, which are the earliest recognizable tissues in
 classified as galactopoietic hormones.
the developing embryo.
Gamma-aminobutryic acid (GABA): A neurotrans-
Gestation: The act or faculty of tasting.
mitter of the central nervous system whose effects
Gingivae: The gums.
 are generally inhibitory.
Gizzard: An adapted stomach that is found in birds,
Gamma motor neurons: Regulates the gain of the
earthworms, and other animals. It has a thick, mus-
stretch reflex by adjusting the level of tension in the
cular wall, enabling powerful grinding action.
intrafusal muscle fibers of the muscle spindle. This
Gland of the fhird eyelid: A gland also known as a
mechanism sets the baseline level of activity in c
nictitating membrane, which can move across the
motor neurons and helps to regulate muscle length
eyeball to give the sensitive eye structures addi-
and tone.
tional protection in particular circumstances.
Ganglia: A tissue mass that contains the dendrites
Glaucoma: A group of diseases of the optic nerve
   (,  s  
involving loss of retinal ganglion cells in a charac-
most cases, ones belonging to the peripheral nervous
teristic pattern of optic neuropathy.
system. Within the central nervous system such a
Glenoid cavity: The hollow in the head of the scapula
mass is often called a nucleus. An interconnected
into which the head of the humerus sits to make the
group of ganglia is called a plexus.
shoulder joint; also called the glenoid fossa.
Ganglion cell: A type of neuron located in the retina
 Globus pallidus: The inner and lighter gray portion
of the eye that receives visual information from pho-
of the lentiform nucleus of the brain; also called the
toreceptors via various intermediate cells such as
pallidum.
bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and horizontal cells.
Glottis: The passageway from the pharynx to the larynx.
Gap junction: A gap between adjacent cell mem-
Glucose: A six-carbon (hexose) sugar that is funda-
branes containing very fine, latticelike connections
mental to the metabolism of cells. It is stored as a
that allows physiologic components to pass directly
polymer in animal cells as glycogen.
from cell to cell; also called a nexus.
Glucuronic acid: A carboxylic acid that has the struc-
Gastric glands: The tubular glands of the stomach
ture of a glucose molecule that has had its sixth
whose cells produce acid, enzymes, intrinsic factor,
carbon atom (of six total) oxidized. Its formula is
and hormones.
CH0O,.
Gastric  
inhibitory
peptide (GIP): A duodenal
Glutamate: A salt of glutamic acid.
hormone released when the arriving chyme con-
Glycerol: A simple three-carbon polyalcohol that is
tains large quantities of carbohydrates; triggers the
often derived from the catabolism of glucose.
secretion of insulin and a slowdown in gastric
 Among other functions, it serves as a precursor in
activity.
the formation of mono-, di-, or triglycerides.
Gastric pits: Small pit in the mucous membrane
Glycine: A nonessential amino acid derived from the
of the stomach at the bottom of which are the
alkaline hydrolysis of gelatin and used as a nutrient
mouths of the gastric glands that secrete mucus,
and dietary supplement; also used in biochemical
hydrochloric acid, intrinsic factor, pepsinogen, and
research and in the treatment of certain myopathies.
hormones.
-s e aso go o ais  aoa
Gastrin: A hormone produced by enteroendocrine
ride composed of repeating glucose units. Granules
cells of the stomach, after exposure to mechanical
of glycogen are found in liver and muscle cells.
stimuli or stimulation of the vagus nerve and of the
Glycolytic: The metabolic breakdown of glucose and
 duodenum, after exposure to chyme that contains
 other sugars that releases energy in the form of ATP.
undigested proteins.
Glycoprotein: A protein that has one or more cova-
Gastroileal reflex: Peristaltic movements that shift
 lently linked oligosaccharide chains. These proteins
 materials from the ileum to the colon; triggered by
are common as integral proteins of the outer surface
the arrival of food in the stomach.
of the plasma membrane of cells.
608
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Goblet cell: A goblet-shaped, mucus-producing, uni-
H zone: Area in the center of the A band in which
cellular gland in certain epithelia of the digestive
there are no actin myofilaments; contains only
 and respiratory tracts.
myosin.
Golgi or Golgi apparatus: The cellular organelle
Habenula: A circumscriptive cell mass embedded in
linked with packaging and processing (phosphory-
the posterior end of the medullary stria of the thala-
lation, glycosylation, etc.) of proteins destined to be
mus, from which it receives most of its afferent
secreted from the cell. Stacks of Golgi membranes
fibers; also called the habena, pedunculus of pineal
and associated secretory vesicles are abundant
body (or gland).
in the apical cytoplasm of fully differentiated secre-
Hard palate: The bony roof of the oral cavity, formed
tory epithelial cells, for example, mammary, pancre-
by the maxillary and palatine bones.
atic, etc.
Haustra: Saclike pouches along the length of the large
Golgi tendon receptors: Proprioceptors located in
intestine that result from tension in the tenia coli.
tendons, close to the point of skeletal muscle inser-
Haversian system: A central canal and the concentric
tion; important to smooth onset and termination of
osseous lamellae encircling it, occurring in compact
muscle contraction.
bone.
Golgi type I neurons: Anerve cell having a long axon
 Hearing: The sense by which sound is perceived.
that leaves the gray matter of the central nervous
Heat shock proteins: Also called stress-response pro-
system, of which it forms a part.
teins, these are produced by cells in response to
Golgi type II neurons: A nerve cell having a short
elevated temperatures or other stressors and are
 axon that ramifies in the gray matter of the central
believed to help the cell survive.
nervous system.
Helicotrema: The part of the cochlear labyrinth where
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH): A deca-
the scala tympani and the scala vestibuli meet. It is
 peptide hormone produced by hypothalamic
 also known as the cochlear apex.
neurons. Release into the portal blood supplying the
 Hematocrit: The percentage of the volume of whole
anterior pituitary causes secretion of gonatotropins
blood contributed by cells; also called the volume
(follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH, and luteinizing
of packed red cells (VPRC) or packed cell volume
hormone, LH).
(PCV).
 Granulocytes: White blood cells containing granules
 Hematoma: A tumor or swelling filled with blood.
that are visible with a light microscope; includes
Hematopoiesis: Blood cell formation; also called
eosinophils, basophils, and neutrophils; also called
hemopoiesis.
 granular leukocytes.
Hematopoietic
 Stem cells: Undifferentiated cells,
Gray matter: Brownish-gray nerve tissue, especially
usually located in the bone marrow, that are capable
of the brain and spinal cord, composed of nerve
of dividing and producing daughter cells, which
 cell bodies and their dendrites and some support-
 become various blood system components.
ive tissue; also called gray substance or substantia
Hemopoiesis: Blood cell formation and differentiation.
grisea.
Henry's Law: Named for the English chemist William
Gray ramus: Abundle of postganglionic sympathetic
Henry. The concentration of a gas dissolved in a
nerve fibers that are distributed to effectors in
liquid is equal to the partial pressure of the gas over
the body wall, skin, and limbs by way of a spinal
the liquid multiplied by the solubility coefficient of
nerve.
the gas.
Greater curvature: The larger, longer outside dimen-
Hepatic artery: An artery that distributes blood to the
sion of the stomach.
liver, pancreas, and gallbladder, as well as to the
Greater omentum: A large fold of the dorsal mes-
stomach and duodenal portion of the small intestine.
entery of the stomach; hangs anterior to the
Hepatic growth factor (HGF): A heparin-binding
intestines.
 protein that has also been referred to as hematopoi-
Growth factors: Small peptides that act by an auto-
etin or scatter factor. It has proliferation and differ-
crine, a paracrine, or a classic endocrine loop
to
entiation effects on multiple cell types, including
stimulate or inhibit growth and development of
liver, muscle, and mammary cells.
tissues or cells.
Hepatic portal vein: The vessel that carries blood
GTP (guanosine triphosphate): A critical nucleoside
between the intestinal capillaries and the sinusoids
involved in reactions for synthesis of RNA, protein
of the liver.
 synthesis, and cell signaling.
Hepatocyte: A liver cell.
Gyri: Any of the prominent, rounded, elevated con-
Hepatoduodenal ligament: The portion of the lesser
volutions on the surfaces of the cerebral hemi-
omentum extending between the liver and
spheres (singular = gyrus).
duodenum.
Glossary
609
Hepatopancreatic ampulla: Commonly called the
cerebral ventricles causes enlargement of the skull
Ampulla of Vater, it is formed by the union of the
and compression of the brain, destroying much of
pancreatic duct and the bile duct.
the neural tissue.
Hepatopancreatic sphincter: Controls secretions from
Hydrochloric acid (HCl): The aqueous (water-based)
the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder into the duode-
solution of hydrogen chloride (HCl) gas. It is a
num of the small intestine. It is a sphincter muscle
strong acid, the major component of gastric acid,
located at the surface of the duodenum.
and of wide industrial use.
Heterotopic: Ectopic, positioned outside the normal
Hydrophilic: Refers to molecules that readily associ-
location.
ate or dissolve in water—for example, ethanol.
 Hiatal hernia: The protrusion (or hernia) of the upper
Hydrophobic: Refers to molecules that do not readily
part of the stomach into the thorax through a tear
dissolve in water—for example, oil and water.
 or weakness in the diaphragm.
Hyperalgesia: An extreme sensitivity to pain, which
Hilum/hilus: A localized region where blood vessels,
in one form is caused by damage to nociceptors in
lymphatic vessels, nerves, and /or other anatomical
the body's soft tissues.
 structures are attached to an organ.
Hypercapnia: High plasma carbon dioxide concen-
Hippocampus: The complex, internally convoluted
trations, commonly as a result of hypoventilation or
structure that forms the medial margin of the corti-
inadequate tissue perfusion.
cal mantle of the cerebral hemisphere, borders the
Hyperopia: Also known as hypermetropia or collo-
choroid fissure of the lateral ventricle, is composed
quially as farsightedness or longsightedness, it is a
of two gyri with their white matter, and forms part
defect of vision caused by an imperfection in the eye
 of the limbic system.
(often when the eyeball is too short or when the lens
Histamine: The chemical released by stimulated mast
cannot become round enough), causing inability to
cells or basophils to initiate or enhance an inflam-
focus on near objects, and in extreme cases causing
matory response.
a sufferer to be unable to focus on objects at any
Histology: The study of tissues.
distance.
Histones: A group of proteins, high in arginine and
Hyperpolarization: An increase in membrane poten-
lysine, that are closely associated with DNA in the
tial from resting potential; potential becomes even
chromosomes.
 more negative than at resting potential.
Holocrine glands: Glands that contain secretory cells
Hypertonia: Extreme tension of the muscles or arteries.
that accumulate their products; then the cells are
Hypertonic: Refers to any fluid with a high enough
sloughed and disrupted to create the secretion from
concentration of solutes to cause water to move out
the glands—for example, the crop sac glands of
of the cell (cell shrinkage) because of osmosis.
some birds.
 Hypocapnia: A low plasma PCO, concentration com-
Homeorrhresis: This indicates a state of adjusted or
monly as a result of hyperventilation.
altered physiology to support a particular activity
Hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system: A unique
or function (e.g., lactation or reproduction).
 s s   
Homeostasis: The maintenance of a relatively con-
ties of hypothalamic releasing hormones to flow
stant internal environment.
directly down the pituitary stalk to the anterior
 Horizontal cells: The laterally interconnecting neurons
pituitary without being diluted in the general circu-
in the outer plexiform layer of the retina. There are
lation, thus making these hormones much more
three basic types—Hl, Hl, and Hlll—and all three
potent.
are multipolar cells.
Hypotonic: Refers to any fluid with a low enough
 Hyaline cartilage: Semitransparent opalescent carti-
concentration of solutes to cause water to move into
lage that forms most of the fetal skeleton and that
the cell (cell swelling and possible rupture) because
consists of cells that synthesize a surrounding matrix
of osmosis.
of hyaluronic acid, collagen, and protein; in the adult,
Hypovolemic shock: The most common form of
it is found in the trachea, larynx, and joint surfaces.
shock; results from extreme blood loss.
Hyaline cartilage rings: C-shaped bands of cartilage
that provide the rigid structure apparentin the trachea.
Hyaloid canal: A branch of the ophthalmic artery,
I band: A pale band of actin on each side of the Z line
which is itself a branch of the carotid artery. It is
of a striated muscle fiber.
contained within the optic stalk of the eye and
Ileocecal valve: A fold of mucous membrane that
 extends through the vitreous humor to the lens.
 guards the connection between the ileum and the
Hydrocephalus: A usually congenital condition in
cecum.
which an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the
Ileum: The distal 2.5m of the small intestine.
610  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Immunity: Resistance to injuries and diseases caused
Inner synaptic layers: Where inner nuclear layer cells
 by foreign compounds, toxins, or pathogens.
 contact ganglion cells.
Incisive: Having the power to cut.
Insertion: The point or mode of attachment of a skel-
Incisors: The first kind of tooth in heterodont mammals.
etal muscle to the bone or other body part that it
Incomplete break: The break goes only partway
moves.
through the bone. An incomplete fracture is also
Inspiratory areas: Nuclei located in the respiratory
 known as a greenstick fracture.
center of the brain stem that are involved in control
Incomplete tetanus: Myograph recording, or siftuation
of inspiration.
 in which individual muscle twitches are apparent.
Inspiratory reserve volume: The maximum amount
Incus: The anvil-shaped small bone or ossicle in the
of air that can be drawn into the lungs over and
middle ear. It cornects the malleus to the stapes. The
above the normal tidal volume.
incus exists only in mammals, and is derived from
Insula: An oval region of the cerebral cortex, lateral
 a reptilian upper jawbone, the quadrate bone.
to the lentiform nucleus, and buried in the fissure
Inferior colliculus: The structure in the brain that lies
of Sylvius.
caudal to its counterpart, the superior colliculus,
Insulin: The protein hormone produced by the β cells
above the trochlear nerve and at the base of the
of the endocrine pancreas (Islets of Langerhans).
 projection of the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN)
When blood glucose is elevated it is secreted, which
and the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN).
(in normal circumstances) stimulates the uptake
 Inferior oblique muscle: A thin, narrow muscle, placed
of glucose to maintain normal blood glucose
 near the anterior margin of the floor of the orbit.
concentration.
Inferior rectus muscles: A muscle in the orbit that
Insulin receptor substrate (IRS): These proteins are
depresses, adducts, and rotates the eye laterally
intracellular mediators of IGF-I and insulin action.
Inferior sagittal sinus: An unpaired dural sinus in
 Binding insulin or IGF-I to their cell surface recep-
the lower margin of the falx cerebri.
tors causes autophosphorylation or the receptor and
Inferior vena cava: The vein that carries blood from
creation of docking sites for IRS family members.
the parts of the body inferior to the heart to the right
When IRS docks, this allows further interactions, a
atrium.
cascade of other signaling molecules, including the
Infraspinous fossa: The hollow on the dorsal aspect
p85 substrate of P13K.
of the scapula inferior to the spine, giving attach-
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I): A small growth
ment chiefly to the infraspinatus muscle.
factor (-7.4kD) that appears in circulation largely in
Infundibulum: The funnel-shaped, unpaired promi-
response to growth hormone stimulation of the
nence of the base of the hypothalamus behind the
liver. However, it is also locally produced in the
optic chiasm, continuous below the stalk of the pitu-
stromal tissue of a number of organs. It is a potent
itary gland. The funnellike opening of the oviduct
stimulator of cell proliferation and is involved in
is also called the infundibulum.
prevention of apoptosis.
Ingestion: The introduction of materials into the
Insulin-like
growth
factor
binding
proteins
digestive tract by way of the mouth.
(IGFBPs): These proteins comprise a family of at
 Inhibin: A hormone, produced by Sertoli cells in the
least six well-characterized members and several
male and granulosa cells in the female, that acts to
relatives that can bind IGF-1. They are believed to
inhibit secretion of FSH.
modulate the biological effectiveness of IGF-1.
 Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP): Hyperpo-
IGFBP-2, 3, and 4 are evident in serum, but IGFBPs
larization in the postsynaptic membrane that causes
are also produced within various tissues.
the membrane potential to move away from the
 Integration: The process by which the nervous system
threshold.
 pr pnu Aoss sird pe sass
Innate reflexes: An automatic, instinctive, unlearned
decisions about what should be done at each moment.
 reaction to a stimulus.
Integrins: Family of transmembrane proteins that are
Inner ear: Structure comprising both the organ of
important in adhesion of cells to the extracellular
hearing (the cochlea) and the labyrinth or vestibular
 matrix and in cell signaling.
apparatus, which is the organ of balance located in
Interatrial septum: Wall between the atria of the
the inner ear consisting of three semicircular canals
heart.
and the vestibule.
Intercalated discs: Regions where adjacent cardio-
Inner hair cells: Bulbous cells that are medially
placed in one row in the organ of Corti. In contrast
 trical coupling between the cells.
to the outer hair cells, the inner hair cells are fewer
Interleukins: Group of growth factor-like proteins
in number, have fewer sensory hairs, and are less
produced primarily by immune tissues that regu-
differentiated
late growth and activation of various immune cells.
Glossary
611
Intermediate mass: A type of mesoderm that is lo-
Intramembranous ossification: The formation of bone
cated between the paraxial mesoderm and the lateral
within a connective tissue without the prior devel-
plate.
 opment of a cartilaginous model.
 Internal capsule: A layer of white matter separating
Intraocular pressure: The fluid pressure inside the eye.
the caudate nucleus and thalamus from the lenti-
It may become elevated due to anatomical prob-
form nucleus and serving as the major route by
lems, inflammation of the eye, genetic factors, or as
which the cerebral cortex is connected with the
a side effect from medication.
 brain stem and the spinal cord.
Intrapulmonary
 primary
 bronchus: The section
Internal nares: The entrance from the nasal cavity to
between the pulmonary hilus and the ostium of
the nasopharynx.
the abdominal air sac.
Internal respiration: The diffusion of gases between
Intrinsic factor: A glycoprotein, secreted by the pari-
 interstitial fluid and cytoplasm.
etal cells of the stomach, that facilitates the intes-
Internasal suture: The line of urion between the two
tinal absorption of vitamin B12-
nasal bones.
Intrinsic muscles: Muscles located within the struc-
Interneurons: Association neurons; central nervous
ture being moved.
system neurons that are between sensory and motor
Intron: The noncoding segments of DNA that are
neurons.
transcribed in the production of mRNA but then
Interoceptors: A specialized sensory nerve receptor
excised by RNA-splicing enzymes before the mature
that receives and responds to stimuli originating
mRNA exits the nucleus for protein synthesis.
from within the body.
 Inversion: A chromosomal defect in which a segment
Interphase: The usually prolonged period of a cell
of the chromosome breaks off and reattaches in the
cycle between the end of one mitosis and the next;
 reverse direction.
this includes G,, S, and G2 phases.
Involuntary striated muscle: Also called cardiac muscle.
Interstitial growth: A form of cartilage growth
Ionotropic receptors: A group of intrinsic transmem-
through the growth, mitosis, and secretion of chon-
brane ion channels that are opened in response to
drocytes in the matrix.
binding of a chemical messenger, as opposed to
Interventricular  
foramen
of  Monroe: Channels
voltage-gated ion channels or stretch-activated ion
that connect the paired lateral ventricles with the
charnels.
third ventricle at the midline of the brain. As
IPs: Inositol trisphosphate, a small molecule produced
channels, they allow cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pro-
by the breakdown of the inositol phospholipid PIP2
duced in the lateral ventricles to reach the third
following stimulation by hormone binding. IP:
ventricle and then the rest of the brain's ventricular
acts as a second messenger by releasing Cat+ from
system.
storage in RER.
Interventricular septum: The wall between the ven-
Iris: The most visible part of the eye of vertebrates.
tricles of the heart.
Irregular bones: Any of a group of bones having
Intervertebral foramen: Any of the openings into the
peculiar or complex forms, such as the vertebrae.
vertebral canal bounded by the pedicles of adjacent
Isometric: Of or involving muscular contraction
vertebrae above and below, the vertebral bodies in
against resistance in which the length of the muscle
front, and the articular processes behind.
remains the same.
Intestinal glands or crypts of Lieberkihn: Glands
Isotonic: Of or involving muscular contraction in
found in the epithelial lining of the small intestine.
which the muscle remains under relatively constant
Named for the 18th-century German anatomist
 tension while its length changes.
 Johann Nathanael Lieberkihn, the crypts secrete
Isotropic: Identical in all directions; invariant with
various enzymes, including sucrase and maltase.
 respect to direction.
Intestinal villi: Multicellular projections from the
Isovolumetric contraction phase: The period of
wall of the small intestine that protrude into the
cardiac contraction before the pressure inside the
lumen of the intestine. They are covered with
heart chamber is sufficiently elevated to open the
absorptive epithelial cells.
heart valves and induce blood flow.
Intrafusal muscle fibers: Muscle fibers that comprise
the muscle spindle. They are fibers walled off from
the rest of the muscle by a collagen sheath. This
Janus protein tyrosine kinases (JAKS): Cellular
sheath has a spindle or fusiform. Although the intra-
kinases that become activated when certain cyto-
fusal fibers are wrapped with sensor receptors, their
kine family members (e.g., prolactin and growth
counterparts, extrafusal muscle fibers, are respon-
hormone) bind to their surface receptors on target
sible for the power-generating component of muscle
cells. They are involved in signal transduction.
and are innervated by motor neurons.
Jejunum: The middle part of the small intestine.
612  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
K-complex: An EEG waveform that occurs during
ments of the eye and the only muscle innervated by
stage 2 sleep. It consists of a brief high-voltage peak,
 the abducens nerve, cranial nerve Vl.
 iahuot rog sist pue 'Anoot re ratena Aensn
Lateral sulcus (lateral fissure, Sylvian fissure): The
0.5 second. K-complexes occur randomly through-
deepest and most prominent of the cortical fissures
O asuodsn u o ose A inq 'dais z ais ino
 of the brain, extending between frontal and tempo-
auditory stimuli.
       e 
 Kinocilium: Aspecial structure connected to the hair
the lateral aspect of the cerebral hemisphere.
cells of the inner ear's cochlea of amphibia.
Leak channels: Resting channels that allow ions to
Kupffer cells: Stellate reticular cells of the liver;
cross the membrane down their electrochemical
 phagocytic cells of the liver sinusoids.
 gradient, whether or not the cell is depolarized.
Left colic flexure: A bend in the colon, known as the
"splenic flexure," that is near the spleen.
Labyrinth: Asystem of fluid passages in the inner ear.
Lens fiber: Epithelial cell that makes up the lens of
Lacrimal canals: The small channels in each eyelid
the eye.
that commence at minute orifices, puncta lacrimalia,
Lentiform nucleus: The large, cone-shaped mass of
on the summits of the papille lacrimales, seen on
 gray matter that forms the central core of the cere-
the margins of the lids at the lateral extremity of the
brai hemisphere, whose convex base is formed by
lacus lacrimalis.
the putamen and whose apical part consists of the
Lacrimal glands: Paired glands, one for each eye, that
globus pallidus; also called the lenticular nucleus.
secrete lacrimal fluid. Each gland is about the size
Lesser curvature: The inside curve of the stomach,
of an almond (2cm) and sits alongside the eyeball
found opposite the greater curve located on the
within the orbit, nestled in the lacrimal fossa of the
outer edge.
frontal bone.
Lesser omentum: A small pocket in the mesentery
Lacrimal sac: The upper dilated end of the naso-
that connects the lesser curvature of the stomach to
Aq py ao dp e u paspo inp 
the liver.
the lacrimal bone and frontal process of the maxilla.
Leukocyte: A white blood cell.
α-Lactalbumin: A specific milk protein synthesized
Leukopoiesis (or leucopoiesis): The production of
and secreted by the alveolar epithelial cells. The
white blood cells.
protein is also part of the lactose synthetase enzyme.
Leydig cells: Cells in the interstitial tissue of the testis
It appears in the whey fraction of milk.
that secrete testosterone.
Lactase: A member of the β-galactosidase family of
Ligamentum arteriosum: The fibrous strand in adults
enzymes, it is involved in the hydrolysis of the
that is the remnant of the ductus arteriosus of the
disaccharide lactose into constituent galactose and
fetal stage.
glucose monomers.
Ligand: Any molecule that binds to a specific site on
Lacteal: A terminal lymphatic vessel within an intes-
 a protein; term often used in reference to hormones
tinal villus.
or growth factors binding to their receptors.
Lactogenesis: The onset of lactation that occurs near
Ligand-gated ion channel: Also referred to as LGICs,
the time of parturition. It occurs in two phases,
or ionotropic receptors, a group of intrinsic trans-
with limited structural and functional differentia-
tion of the mammary alveolar cells after lobulo-
to binding of a chemical messenger, as opposed to
alveolar development during gestation, followed
voltage-gated ion channels or stretch-activated ion
by dramatic differentiation and copious milk secre-
channels.
tion within hours or days of parturition. Hormones
Light adaptation: Ability of the eye to adjust to
(e.g-, prolactin or glucocorticoids) that promote this
various levels of darkness and light.
 process are called lactogenic hormones.
Linear fracture: A fracture that runs parallel to the
Lacuna: A small pit or cavity.
long axis of a bone; also called a fissured fracture.
Lamina propria: The reticular tissue that underlies a
Lingual frenulum: An epithelial fold that attaches
mucous epithelium and forms part of a mucous
the inferior surface of the tongue to the floor of the
membrane.
mouth.
Laryngopharynx: The division of the pharynx that
Lobar arteries: Arteries that pass between lobes of the
is inferior to the epiglottis and superior to the
kidney.
esophagus.
 Lobar (secondary) bronchi: Branch from a primary
Lateral geniculate: The part of the brain that is the
 bronchus that conducts air to each lobe of the lungs.
 primary processor of visual information, received
There are two branches in the left lung and three
from the retina, in the central nervous system
 branches from the primary bronchus in the right lung.
Lateral rectus muscle: A muscle in the orbit. It is one
Lobulo-alveolar: A developmental term that indi-
of six extraocular muscles that control the move-
 cates a structural grouping of several alveoli, their
Glossary
613
terminal ducts and related common ducts, and
 Malleus: A hammer-shaped small bone or ossicle
 surrounding supporting connective tissue.
of the middle ear that connects with the incus
Long bone: One of the elongated bones of the ex-
and is attached to the inner surface of the
tremities, consisting of a tubular shaft, which is
eardrum.
composed of compact bone surrounding a central
Maltase: An enzyme produced by the cells lining the
marrow-filled cavity and two expanded portions
small intestine to break down disaccharides.
that usually serve as articulation points.
Mammillary bodies: A pair 
of
small,
 round
Longitudinal pillars: Supporting layers in the rumen.
bodies, resembling two breasts, located in the
 They provide some compartmentalization as well as
 brain and forming part of the limbic system. They
mixing.
are located at the ends of the anterior arches of
Long-term potentiation: The long-lasting enhance
the fornix.
ment in efficacy of the synapse between two
Mammogenic: Substances that stimulate mammary
netrons.
growth and development. For example, the ovarian
Lower respiratory system: A system composed of the
hormone estrogen is a classic example of a mam-
 larynx, trachea, and lungs.
mogenic hormone.
 Lung compliance: A static measure of lung and chest
recoil, expressed as a change in lung volume per
which the clavicle and the first two pairs of ribs
unit change in airway pressure, for example, L/cm
articulate.
H,O.
 Margination: The arrangement of neutrophils along
Luteal phase: The phase of the estrus cycle character-
an endothelial cell border prior to diapedesis into a
ized by major production of progesterone and the
tissue area.
 presence of a functional corpus luteum.
Mass peristalsis: A powerful peristaltic contraction
Luteinization: The process by which granulosal and
that moves fecal materials along the colon and into
thecal cells are transformed into luteal cells follow-
the rectum.
 ing ovulation.
 Maxillary: Of or relating to a jaw or jawbone, espe-
Luteinizing hormone (LH): A hormone produced in
 cially the upper one.
the anterior pituitary gland. It causes ovulation and
Maxillary sinus: One of the paranasal sinuses. It is an
development of the CL in females and stimulates
 Leydig cells to secrete testosterone in males.
that is located in a maxillary bone and opens into
 Lymphocyte: A cell of the lymphatic system that par-
the nasal cavity.
 ticipates in the immune response.
Mean arterial pressure (MAP): The average pressure
Lysosome: A membrane-bound organelle that con-
responsible for driving blood forward through
tains hydrolytic enzymes. These organelles 
are
the arteries into the tissues throughout the cardiac
activated to destroy damaged cells (apoptotic
cycle; it equals cardiac output times total peripheral
actions) and are important in the action
of
resistance.
neu trophils.
s       
Mechanical nociceptors: Receptors that respond to
 excess pressure or mechanical deformation.
M-line: A fine dark band in the center of the H band
 Mechanoreceptors: A specialized sensory end organ
 in the myofibrils of striated muscle fibers; also called
 that responds to mecharical stimuli such as tension
the M band.
or pressure.
M phase: Period of the cell cycle during which the
 Medial forebrain bundle: A fiber system running
 nucleus and cytoplasm of the cell divide.
longitudinally through the lateral zone of the
Macrophage: A protective cell type common in con-
hypothalamus, connecting it with the midbrain teg-
nective tissue, lymphatic tissue, and certain body
mentum and various components of the limbic
 organs that phagocytizes tissue cells, bacteria, and
system.
other foreign debris. It is important as an antigen
Medial geniculate: A nucleus of the thalamus that
presenter to T cells and B cells in the immune
acts as a relay for auditory information. It receives
response.
its input from the inferior colliculus and sends infor-
Macula lutea: An oval yellow spot near the center of
 mation out to the auditory cortex.
the retina. It has a diameter of about 1.5mm and is
Medial rectus muscle: A muscle in the orbit. As with
often histologically defined as having two or more
most of the muscles of the orbit, it is innervated by
layers of ganglion cells.
 the inferior division of the oculomotor nerve (cranial
Magnocellular: Cells in the brain concerned pri-
nerve III).
marily with visual perception. In particular, these
Median: Of, relating to, or situated in or near the
cells are responsible for resolving motion and coarse
plane that divides a bilaterally symmetrical animal
outlines.
into right and left halves; mesial.
614  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Mediastinum: The central tissue mass that divides
Mesenchyme: Refers to the tissue or cells derived
the thoracic cavity into two pleural cavities; it
from the embryonic mesoderm. In developing
includes the aorta and other great vessels, the
glands—mammary, for example—the stromal tissue
esophagus, trachea, thymus, pericardial cavity, and
that surrounds the developing epithelial ducts con-
heart, and a host of nerves, small vessels, and lym-
tains precursor cells capable of being induced to dif-
phatic vessels. In males, the area of cornective tissue
ferentiate into one of several different stromal tissue
attaching a testis to the epididymis, proximal
cell types (i.e., endothelial, fibroblast, adipocyte).
 portion of ductus deferens, and associated vessels.
Mesentery: A double layer of serous membrane that
Medullary cavity: The space within a bone that con-
 supports and stabilizes the position of an organ in
tains the marrow.
the abdominopelvic cavity and provides a route for
Medullary rhythmicity area: The center  in the
 the associated blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic
 medulla oblongata that sets the background pace of
vessels.
respiration; it includes inspiratory and expiratory
Mesothelium: A simple squamous epithelium that
centers.
lines one of the divisions of the ventral body cavity.
Meibomian glands: A special kind of sebaceous
Metabotropic receptors: Receptors indirectly linked
glands at the rim of the eyelids, responsible for the
with ion channels on the plasma membrane of the
supply of sebum, an oily substance that prevents
cell through signal transduction mechanisms.
 evaporation of the eye's tear film; also called the
Metaphysis: The zone of growth between the epiphy-
tarsal glands.
sis and diaphysis during development of a bone.
Meissner's corpuscles: A type of mechanoreceptor
 Metarteriole: A vessel that connects an arteriole to
and, more specifically, a tactile corpuscle (corpuscu-
a venule and that provides blood to a capillary
lum tactus). They are distributed throughout the
plexus.
skin, but concentrated in areas especially sensitive
 Metestrus: A stage of the estrous cycle between ovu-
to light touch, such as the fingertips, palms, soles
lation and formation of the corpus luteum.
lips, tongue, face, ripples, and the external skin of
Microtubules: Hollow tubes composed of tubulin,
the male and female genitals. They are primarily
p r u  e s
located just beneath the epidermis within the dermal
usually several micrometers long. They help provide
papillae.
support to the cytoplasm of the cell and are a com-
 Meissner's plexus (submucosa): A sensory network
 ponent of certain cell organelles, such as centrioles,
formed by nerve branches that have perforated cir-
 spindle fibers, cilia, and flagella.
cular muscular fibers of the small intestine. This
Middle ear: The portion of the ear internal to the
plexus lies in the submucosa of the intestine. It also
eardrum and external to the oval window of the
 contains ganglia from which nerve fibers pass to the
cochlea. The middle ear contains three ossicles,
muscularis mucosae and to the mucous membrane.
which amplify vibration of the eardrum into pres-
Melatonin: A hormone derived from serotonin and
 sure waves in the fluid in the inner ear.
produced by the pineal gland that stimulates color
Midsagittal plane: A plane passing through the
change in the epidermis of amphibians and reptiles
midline of the body that divides it into left and right
and that is believed to influence estrus in mammals
halves.
 Membranous labyrinth: A system of fluid passages
Minor duodenal papilla: Site of the opening of the
in the inner ear, comprising the vestibular system
accessory pancreatic duct into the duodenum.
and the auditory system, which provides the sense
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK): Aprotein
of balance.
 Meningeal layers: The layers of protective tissue sur-
 signals for the plasma membrane to the cell nucleus.
rounding the central nervous system.
It is activated by a variety of proliferation or dif-
Meninges: A membrane, especially one of the three
ferentiation signals from outside target cells.
membranes enclosing the brain and spinal cord.
Mitral valve: See bicuspid valve.
Merkel's discs: Mechanoreceptors found in the skin
Mixed nerve: A nerve that contains both sensory and
and mucosa of vertebrates that provide touch infor-
motor fibers.
mation to the brain. Each ending consists of a Merkel
Modiolus: The central bony pillar of the cochlea, but
 cell in close apposition with an enlarged nerve
also the muscle of facial expression found near the
terminal.
risorus muscle, between the lateral edge of the orbi-
Mesaticephalic: The ratio of the maximum width of
cularis oris, and the insertion of the zygomatic major
the head to its maximum length, multiplied by 100.
muscle.
Mesencephalon: The portion of the vertebrate brain
 Molars: The rearmost and most complicated kind of
that develops from the middle section of the embry-
 tooth in most mammals. In many mammals they grind
onic brain; also called the midbrain.
food, hence the name, which means "millstone.
Glossary 615
Monoamine oxidase (MAO): An enzyme in the cells
Muscarinic: A highly toxic alkaloid, C,HoNO2, related
of most tissues that catalyzes the oxidative deami-
to the cholines, derived from the red form of the
nation of monoamines such as serotonin.
 mushroom Amanita muscaria and found in decaying
Monocytes: Phagocytic agranulocytes (white blood
animal tissue.
cells) in the circulating blood.
Muscle fatigue: The decline in the ability of a muscle
Monoglyceride: A lipid molecule consisting of a
to create force; it can be caused by barriers or inter-
single fatty acid bound to a molecule of glycerol.
ferences at many of the differing stages of muscle
Monosaccharide: A simple sugar with the general
contraction, and it is primarily regulated by the
formula (CHO)x, where x = 3 to 7; examples are
reduction in the release of Ca2+ (calcium) ions
glucose and ribose.
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, along with falling
Monosynaptic reflex: A reflex that provides auto
ATP levels.
 matic regulation of skeletal muscle length.
Muscle fiber: A cylindrical multinucleate cell com-
Monotocous: Animals that typically give birth to
 posed of myofibrils that contract when stimulated.
 single offspring.
Muscle spindles: A  stretch  receptor in  vertebrate
Morula: A stage of early embryonic development
muscle.
while the egg is still within the confines of the zona
Muscle tone: The continuous and passive partial con-
 pellucida. It is characterized by the appearance of
traction of muscles. It helps maintain posture.
blastomeres from initial cleavage divisions.
Muscularis externa: Concentric layers of smooth
Motor areas: The cortical area that influences motor
muscle responsible for peristalsis.
movements.
Muscularis mucosae: The layer of smooth muscle
 Motor end plate: The flattened end of a motor neuron
beneath the lamina propria; it is responsible for
that transmits neural impulses to a muscle.
moving the mucosal surface.
Motor nerve: Anerve that passes toward or tomuscles
Myelin: An insulating sheath around an axon; it con-
or glands.
sists of multiple layers of neuroglial membrane. It
Motor neurons: Neurons that innervate skeletal,
smooth, or cardiac muscle fibers.
along the axon.
Motor umit: A single somatic motor neuron and the
Myelocele: Protrusion of the spinal cord in cases of
 group of muscle fibers innervated by it.
spina bifida.
mRNA: Messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) speci-
Myelomeningocele: Protrusion of the spinal mem-
fies the amino acid sequence of a protein. In eukary-
branes and spinal cord through a defect in the ver-
otes, it is derived from a larger precursor immature
tebral column; also called the meningomyelocele.
mRNA produced by RNA polymerase in the cell
 Myenteric (or Auerbach's) plexus: Parasympathetic
nucleus from a complementary strand of DNA. Pro
motor neurons and sympathetic postganglionic
cessing of this immature RNA stand to remove
fibers located between the circular and longitudinal
sections corresponding with the noncoding introns
layers of the muscularis externa located in the
yields the mRNA used for protein synthesis.
esophagus, stomach, and intestines.
Mucosa: A mucous membrane; the epithelium plus
Myoblasts: A primitive muscle cell having the poten-
the lamina propria.
tial to develop into a muscle fiber; also called a
Mucosa-associated lymphatic system (MALT): The
sarcoblast.
extensive collection of lymphoid tissues linked with
Myocardium: The cardiac muscle tissue of the
the digestive system.
heart.
 Multiparous: A term indicating an animal that has 
Myoepithelial cells: Specialized cells that form a
 had more than one pregnancy and birth.
 network surrounding the mammary alveoli. In
Multipennate: A muscle whose internal fibers are
response to oxytocin, these cells contract to cause
organized around several tendons.
milk ejection.
Multiple motor umit summation: Increased force of
Myofibrils: One of the threadlike longitudinal fibrils
contraction of a muscle due to recruitment of motor
 occurring in a skeletal or cardiac muscle fiber; also
units.
called a sarcostyle.
Multipolarneuron: One of three categories of neurons
Myofilaments: Any of the ultramicroscopic filaments,
consisting of a neuron cell body, an axon, and two
made up of actin and myosin, that are the structural
 or more dendrites.
units of a myofibril.
Multiunit smooth muscle: A smooth muscle mass
 Myoglobin: An oxygen-binding pigment that is espe-
that consists of multiple discrete units that func-
cially common in slow skeletal muscle fibers and
tion independently of one another and that must
cardiac muscle cells.
be separately stimulated by autonomic nerves to
 Myogram: The tracing of muscular contractions made
contract.
by a myograph.
616
6 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Myomesin: A 185-kDa protein located in the M band
Neostigmine: A drug that inhibits acetylcholinester-
of striated muscle where it interacts with myosin
ase, used in its bromide form orally and its methyl-
and titin, possibly connecting thick filaments with
 sulfate form parenterally to treat myasthenia gravis.
the third filament system.
Nerve: Any of the cordlike bundles of nervous tissue
Myoneural junction: The synaptic connection of the
made up of myelinated or unmyelinated nerve
axon of a motor neuron with a muscle fiber.
fibers and held together by a connective tissue
Myopia: Sometimes called short-sightedness or near-
sheath through which sensory stimuli and motor
sightedness, it is a refractive defect of the eye in
impulses pass between the brain or other parts of
which collimated light produces image focus in
the central nervous system and the eyes, glands,
front of the retina when accommodation is relaxed.
muscles, and other parts of the body.
Myosin: The most common protein in muscle cells, a
Nerve growth factor (NGF): First identified because
globulin responsible for the elastic and contractile
of effects on the salivary gland, there are multiple
properties of muscle and combining with actin to
members: NGF, neurotropin 1-6, etc. These peptides
form actomyosin.
are needed for development of the sympathetic
Myosin light-chain kinase (MLCK): This protein is
nervous system and play a role in follicular devel-
important in the mechanism of contraction in
opment in the ovary.
smooth muscle. Once there is an influx of calcium
Nervous system: Fast-acting control system that trig-
into the smooth muscle, either from the sarco-
gers muscle contraction or gland secretion.
plasmic reticulum or, more importantly, from the
Net filtration pressure (NFP): The net difference in
extracellular space, contraction of smooth muscle
 the hydrostatic and osmotic forces acting across the
fibers may begin. First, the calcium will bind to
glomerular membrane that favors the filtration of
calmodulin. This binding will activate the MLCK,
protein-free plasma into Bowman's capsule.
which will go on to phosphorylate the myosin light
Neural crest: A component of the ectoderm, this is
chains. This will enable the myosin light chains
one of several ridgelike clusters of cells found on
to bind to the actin filament so that contraction
either side of the neural tube in vertebrate embryos.
may start.
It has been referred to as the fourth germ layer, due
Myotatic reflex: Tonic contraction of the muscles in
 to its great importance.
 response to a stretching force, due to stimulation of
Neural tube: A dorsal tubular structure in the verte-
muscle proprioceptors; also called the stretch reflex.
 brate embryo formed by longitudinal folding of the
neural plate and differentiating into the brain and
spinal cord.
 Nasal bones: Two small oblong bones, varying in size
Neurocoel: The central canal and ventricles of the
and form in different individuals; they are placed
spinal cord and brain; the myelencephalic cavity.
side by side at the middle and upper part of the face,
Neuroglia: Cells in the nervous system other than
and they form, by their junction, the bridge of the
the neurons; it includes astrocytes, ependymal
nose. Each has two surfaces and four borders.
cells, microglia, oligodendrocytes, satellite cells, and
 Nasal cavity: A chamber in the skull that is bounded
Schwann cells.
by the internal and external nares.
Neuromuscular junction: The junction between a
Nasolacrimal duct: A duct that carries tears from the
nerve fiber and the muscle it supplies.
lacrimal sac into the nasal cavity
 Neurons: A cell in neural tissue that is specialized for
Nasomaxillary suture: The suture uniting the nasal
intercellular communication through (1) changes in
bone and the maxilla.
membrane potential and (2) synaptic connections.
Nasopharynx: A region that is posterior to the inter-
Neurotransmitter: A chemical compound released by
 nal nares and superior to the soft palate and ends at
one neuron to affect the transmembrane potential of
the oropharynx.
another.
Near point of vision: Closest point from the eye
 Neurotransmitter-gated channels: Cell  membrane
 at which an object can be held without appearing
channels of neurons that are activated by the binding
blurred.
of neurotransmitters.
 Nebulin: An actin-binding molecule, which is local-
Neurotrophic factors: Secreted by cells in a neuron's
ized to the I band in skeletal muscle.
target field, these act by prohibiting the neuron from
Necrosis: Death of cells or tissues through injury or
apoptosis.
disease, especially in a localized area of the body.
Neutrophil: Amicrophage that is very numerous and
Negative chronotropic factors: Factors that act to
normally the first of the mobile phagocytic cells to
 slow normal heart rhythm, and therefore heart rate.
arrive at an area of injury or infection.
Negative feedback: A corrective mechanism that
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD): A mol-
opposes or negates a variation from normal limits.
ecule that serves as a coenzyme for oxidative path-
Glossary
617
ways (glycolysis, Krebs cycle, electron transport
Nucleus gracilis: The medial of the three nuclei of the
chain). It serves to transfer electrons in oxidativer-
dorsal spinal column, receiving dorsal root fibers
eduction reactions and is derived from niacin.
conveying sensory innervation of the leg.
Nicotinic: Of or relating to ricotine.
Nulliparous: Afemale that has not become pregnant.
 Nicotinic receptor: Ionotropic receptors that form ion
channels in plasma membranes.
Nictitating membrane: A membrane that can move
Occipital bone: A bone at the lower and posterior
across the eyeball to give the sensitive eye struc-
part of the skull, consisting of basilar, condylar, and
tures additional protection. It is often called a third
squamous sections. It encloses the foramen magnum.
eyelid or haw and may be referred to as the plica
Occipital lobe: The posterior lobe of each cerebral
semilunaris.
hemisphere, having the shape of a three-sided pyramid
Nitric oxide (NO): A recently identified local chemi-
and containing the visual center of the brain.
cal mediator released from endothelial cells and
Oestrous: British spelling of estrous.
other tissues. It exerts multiple effects, ranging from
Oestrus: British spelling of estrus (sexual receptivity
local vasodilation to acting as a toxic agent against
or heat in the female).
foreign invaders or as a neurotransmitter.
Olfaction: The sense of smell.
NMDA receptor: A brain receptor activated by the
 Olfactory: Of, relating to, or connected with the sense
amino acid glutamate, which, when excessively
of smell.
stimulated, may cause cognitive defects in Alzheim-
 Olfactory (Bowman's) glands: Any of the tubular
 er's disease; also called the N-methyl-D-aspartate
and often branched glands occurring beneath the
receptor.
olfactory epithelium of the nose.
Nociceptor: A sensory receptor that responds
to
Olfactory
bulb: A:
 structure
of
the
vertebrate
pain.
forebrain involved in olfaction, the perception
Node of Ranvier: The area between adjacent neuroglia
of odors.
where the myelin covering of an axon is incomplete.
Olfactory
 cortex: The sensory system used for
Noggin: A slang term that means "head."
olfaction.
Nondisplaced fracture: A simple crack in the bone
Olfactory receptors: A type of G protein-coupled
that has not caused the bone to move from its
receptor in olfactory receptor neurons. In verte-
normal anatomic position; also called a hairline
brates, the olfactory receptors are located in the
fracture.
olfactory epithelium.
Nonstriated involuntary muscle: Another name for
Oligodendrocyte: Central nervous system neuroglia
smooth muscle.
cell type that maintains cellular organization within.
Noradrenaline: See norepinephrine.
the gray matter and provides a myelin sheath in
Norepinephrine: A catecholamine neurotransmitter
areas of white matter.
in the peripheral nervous system and central
Olivary nuclei: A smooth oval prominence of the
nervous system, it is released at most sympathetic
ventrolateral surface of the medulla oblongata
neuromuscular and neuroglandular junctions, and
lateral to the pyramidal tract, corresponding to the
a hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla; also
olivary nucleus; also called the oliva or olive.
called noradrenaline.
Omasoabomasal orifice: The opening between the
Nuclear bag fibers: Fibers that lie in the center of each
omasum and abomasum of the ruminant stomach
intrafusal muscle fiber of a muscle spindle. Each has
compartments.
 a large number of nuclei concentrated in bags,
Omasum: Also known as the "manyplies" because of 
which cause excitation of both the primary and sec-
its appearance like pages of a wet book, it is the
ondary nerve fibers.
third compartment of the stomach in ruminants.
Nuclear  chain  f
fibers: Fibers numbering 3-9 per
Though its functions have not been well studied, it
muscle spindle, which are half the size of the nuclear
'em go uondosqe aun ui pre Ared oi sreadde
bag fibers. Their nuclei are aligned in a chain and
magnesium, and fermentation acids.
they excite the secondary nerve. Nuclear chain
Oncotic pressure: Pressure exerted by the vitreous
 fibers are static; nuclear bag fibers are dynamic.
humor of the eye.
Nucleosidases: Hydrolytic enzymes that catalyze the
Oocyte: The developing egg.
hydrolysis of a nucleotide into a nucleoside and a
Opsin: A group of light-sensitive 35-55kDa mem-
phosphate.
brane-bound G protein-coupled receptors found in
Nucleus cuneatus: A wedge-shaped nucleus in the
photoreceptor cells of the retina. They are involved
closed part of the medulla oblongata. It contains
in vision, mediating the conversion of a photon of
cells that give rise to the cuneate tubercle, visible on
light into an electrochemical signal, the first step in
the posterior aspect of the medulla.
the visual transduction cascade.
6 18 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Optic chiasm: A flattened quadrangular body that is
Osteonal canal: Located at the center of osteons,
the point of crossing of the fibers of the optic nerves;
this canal contains blood vessels, a nerve, and bone
also called the optic decussation.
fluid.
Optic chiasma: The part of the brain where the
Osteoprogenitor cells: A mesenchymal cell that differ-
optic nerves partially cross. Specifically, the nerves
entiates into an osteoblast; also called a preosteoblast.
connected to the right eye that associate the right
Otolithic membrane: A gelatinous membrane located
visual field of the left eye and vice versa for the
 in the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear, which
left eye.
plays an essential role in the brain's interpretation
Optic disc: The point in the eye where the optic nerve
of equilibrium. Both the saccular macula and utricu-
fibers leave the retina.
lar macula are covered by an otolithic membrane.
Optic radiation: A collection of axons from relay
Outer ear: The external portion of the ear, which
neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thal-
includes the eardrum.
amus carrying visual information to the visual
Outer hair cells: Acoustical preamplifiers.
cortex (also called the striate cortex) along the cal-
Outer synaptic layers: The location within the retina
carine fissure.
where connections are made between photorecep-
Optic vesicles: An evagination on either side of the
tors and cells of the inner nuclear layer, and the
embryonic forebrain from which the optic nerve
nuclear layer cells contact ganglion cells.
 and retina develop.
Oxidative: A reaction in which the atoms in an
Ora serrata: The serrated junction between the retina
element lose electrons and the valence of the element
and the ciliary body. This junction marks the transi-
is correspondingly increased.
tion from the simple nonphotosensitive area of the
Oxidative phosphorylation: The process of ATP
retina to the complex, multilayered photosensitive
synthesis during which an inorganic phosphate
region.
group becomes attached to ADP. It occurs via the
Oral: Pertaining to the mouth.
electron transport chain in the mitochondria and to
Organ physiology: The study of specific organs, for
a lesser extent as a result of substrate-level phos-
example, cardiac or ovarian.
phorylation.
Origin: The point of attachment of a muscle that
Oxygen debt: The amount of extra oxygen required
remains relatively fixed during contraction of the
by muscle tissue to oxidize lactic acid and replerish
muscle.
depleted ATP and phosphocreatine following vigor-
Oropharynx: The middle portion of the pharynx,
ous exercise.
bounded superiorly by the nasopharynx, ante-
Oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve: A graph
riorly by the oral cavity, and inferiorly by the
describing the relationship between the percentages
laryngopharynx.
of hemoglobin saturated with oxygen and a range
Osmosis: The movement of water across a selectively
of oxygen partial pressures.
permeable membrane from one solution to another
 Oxyhemoglobin: An oxygen-bound form of hemo-
solution that contains a higher solute concentration.
globin.
Ossification: The formation of bone.
Oxytocin: A hormone produced by neurons in the
Ossification center: The site where bone begins to form
 hypothalamus and released by nerve terminals in
in a specific bone or part of bone as a result of the
the posterior pituitary gland. Primary systemic
accumulation of osteoblasts in the connective tissue.
effects are to elicit milk ejection and uterine contrac-
Osteoblast: A cell that produces the fibers and matrix
tions. However, oxytocin is also produced locally by
of bone.
the corpus luteum.
Osteocyte: A bone cell responsible for the mainte-
nance and turnover of the mineral content of the
surrounding bone.
 P wave: A deflection of the ECG corresponding to
Osteogenesis: Formation and development of bony
atrial depolarization.
tissue; also called osteogeny.
Pacemaker cells: A device by which the contractions
Osteoid: The bone matrix, especially before calcification.
of the heart are controlled by electrical impulses;
 Osteomalacia: A disease occurring primarily in adults
these impulses occur at a rate that controls the beat
that results from a deficiency in vitamin D or calcium
of the heart. The cells that create these rhythmical
and that is characterized by a softening of the bones
 impulses are called pacemaker cells.
with accompanying pain and weakness; also called
Pacinian corpuscle: An encapsulated receptor found
adult rickets or late rickets.
 in deep layers of the skin that senses vibratory pres-
Osteon: The basic histological unit of compact bone.
sure and touch.
consisting of osteocytes organized around a central
Palate: The horizontal partition separating the oral
canal and separated by concentric lamellae
cavity from the nasal cavity and nasopharynx; it is
Glossary
619
divided into an anterior bony (hard) palate and a
sulcus, and from the occipital lobe only partially by
posterior fleshy (soft) palate.
the parieto-occipital sulcus on its medial aspect.
Palatine bones: Pertaining to the palate.
Parietal serosa: The part of the double-layered mem-
Palatopharyngeal arches: Either of two ridges or
brane that lines the walls of the ventral body cavity.
folds of mucous membrane passing from the soft
 Parieto-occipital sulcus: A deep fissure on the me-
palate to the wall of the pharynx and enclosing the
dial surface of the cerebral cortex marking the bor-
palatopharyngeal muscle.
der between the parietal lobe and the cuneus of
Palpebral fissure: A fissure that separates the upper
the occipital lobe; also called the parieto-occipital
 and lower eyelids.
fissure.
 Pancreatic duct: Atubular duct that carries pancreatic
Parotid salivary gland: Large salivary glands that
juice from the pancreas to the duodenum.
secrete saliva that contain high concentrations of
Pancreatic islets: Aggregations of endocrine cells
salivary (alpha) amylase.
embedded within the exocrine tissue of the pan-
Partial pressure: The pressure exerted by a single
creas; also called the islets of Langerhans.
component of a mixture of gases.
Paneth cells: Cells that provide host defense against
Parvocellular (P cells): Slow-conducting neurons that
microbes in the small intestine. They are func-
transmit information about color vision, texture,
tionally similar to neutrophils. When exposed to
pattern, and visual acuity. The cells transmit the
bacteria or bacterial antigens, these cells secrete
information to the lateral geniculate nucleus.
 antimicrobial molecules into the lumen of the crypt,
Passive immunity: Immunity that is derived from
thereby contributing to maintenance of the gastro-
transfer rather than activation of an animal's own
intestinal barrier.
immune system. Examples include antibodies
Papillae: Any of the small projections on the top of
 passed to the fetus in utero or across the gut of the
the tongue, in particular vallate and fungiform
newborn via colostrum ingestion.
 papillae, that contain taste buds.
Pelvic cavity: The inferior subdivision of the abdomi-
Papillary muscle: A ripplelike conical projection of
 nopelvic cavity, it encloses the urinary bladder, the
myocardium within the ventricle; the chordae
sigmoid colon and rectum, and male or female
tendineae are attached to the apex of the papillary
reproductive organs.
muscle.
Pelvic symphysis: The midline cartilaginous joint
Parahippocampal gyrus: A long convolution located
uniting the superior rami of the left and right pubic
on the medial surface of the temporal lobe of the
bones.
brain and forming the lower part of the gyrus for-
Perception: Recognition and interpretation of sensory
 nicatus; also called the hippocampal gyrus.
stimuli based chiefly on memory.
Paranasal sinuses: Bony chambers, lined by respira-
Pericardial cavity: The space between the parietal
tory epithelium, that open into the nasal cavity;
pericardium and the epicardium (visceral pericar-
the frontal, ethmoidal, sphenoidal, and maxillary
dium) at the outer surface of the heart.
sinuses.
Pericardlitis: An inflammation of the pericardium.
Parasympathetic divisions: One of the two divisions
Pericardium: The fibrous sac that surrounds the heart;
 of the autonomic nervous system; also called the
its inner, serous lining is continuous with the
craniosacral division; generally responsible for
epicardium.
activities that conserve energy and lower the meta-
 Perichondrium: The dense irregular fibrous mem-
bolic rate.
brane of connective tissue covering the surface of
Parasympathetic subdivision: One of three divisions
cartilage except at the endings of joints.
of the autonomic nervous system. Sometimes called
 Perikaryon: The cytoplasm that surrounds the nucleus
the "rest and digest" system, the parasympathetic
in the cell body of a neuron.
 system conserves energy as it slows the heart rate,
 Perilymph: Extracellular fluid located within the
increases intestinal and gland activity, and relaxes
cochlea (part of the ear) in two of its three compart-
sphincter muscles in the gastrointestinal tract.
 ments; the scala tympani and scala vestibuli.
Parenchyma: The functional portion of a tissue or
Perineurium: The sheath of connective tissue enclos-
 organ. For example, in the exocrine pancreas, the
ing a bundle of nerve fibers.
acini that produce and secrete enzymes
are
 Periosteum: The thick fibrous membrane covering
 parenchyma.
the entire surface of a bone, except its articular car-
Parietal cells: Cells of the gastric gland that secrete
tilage, and serving as an attachment for muscles and
 hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor.
tendons.
Parietal lobe: The middle portion of each cerebral
 Peripheral nervous system: The portion of the nervous
hemisphere, separated from the frontal lobe by the
system consisting of nerves and ganglia that lie
central sulcus, from the temporal lobe by the lateral
outside the brain and spinal cord.
620  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Peristalsis: A wave of smooth muscle contractions
hormone melatonin; also called the conarium,
that propels materials along the axis of a tube such
epiphysis, or pineal gland.
as the digestive tract, the ureters, or the ductus
Pitch: The tone of a sound, determined by the fre-
deferens.
quency of vibrations (i.e., whether a sound is a C or
Peritoneal cavity: See abdominopelvic cavity.
G note).
Peritoneum: The serous membrane that lines the
Placenta: The reproduction structure that allows met-
peritoneal cavity.
abolic exchanges between fetus and mother. It is
Phagocytosis: The amebalike engulfment of extracel-
 composed of embryonic tissue (the chorion) and
 lular material by one of the immune cells, most
maternal tissue (endometrium). The placenta also
 often neutrophils or macrophages.
functions as an endocrine organ during gestation.
Pharyngotympanic: See auditory tube.
Plasmin: A proteolytic enzyme important in dissolu-
Pharynx: The throat; a muscular passageway shared
tion of blood clots. It converts fibrin to soluble
by the digestive and respiratory tracts.
components.
Philtrum: The midline groove in the upper lip that
Plasminogen: An inactive form of plasmin found in
runs from the top of the lip to the nose.
blood and tissue fluids.
Phosphatase: An enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric
Pleura: The serous membrane that lines the pleural
acid monoesters into a phosphate ion and a mole-
cavities.
cule with a free hydroxyl group.
 Pleural cavities: Subdivisions of the thoracic cavity
Phosphatidyinositol-3-kinase (P13K): An enzyme
that contain the lungs.
 involved in the synthesis of the phosphoinositide
 Pleural membrane: The membrane lining the lung
family of lipid second messengers. Members of
and the chest cavity.
this family of intracellular signaling molecules are
Pleurisy: An inflammation of the pleura; also called
thought to be critical to suppress signals that can
pleuritis.
cause apoptosis or programmed cell death.
 Plica: A permanent transverse fold in the wall of the
Phosphodiesterease: Enzymes that split phosphodi-
small intestine.
ester bonds—for example, in the conversion of
Pluripotent stem cells: Precursor cells—for example,
cyclic AMP to AMP.
those that reside in the bone marrow and continu-
Phospholipid: A class of essential lipids needed for
ously divide and differentiate to give rise to each of
creation of cellular membranes. They are usually
the types of blood cells.
composed of two fatty acids attached to glycerol
Pneumotaxic area: A center in the reticular forma-
 and an additional polar group, for example, choline.
tion of the pons that regulates the activities of the
 Phosphorylation: The addition of a phosphate group
apneustic and respiratory rhythmicity centers to
to a protein, most often by the action of an enzyme
adjust the pace of respiration; also called pneumo-
called a kinase.
taxic center.
Photopigments: Located  in  photoreceptor outer
Pneumothorax: The introduction of air into the
segment disc membranes, they change their con-
pleural cavity.
formation on the perception of photons. The con-
Polycythemia: An excessive or abnormal increase in
formational change allows the photopigment to
the number of erythrocytes.
interact with transducin and to start the visual
 Polyestrous: Exhibiting multiple estrous cycles dis-
cascade.
tributed throughout the year, that is, no seasonal
Photoreceptor: A specialized type of neuron found in
anestrous.
the eye's retina that is capable of phototransduction.
Polyestrus: Exhibiting multiple episodes of estrus
More specifically, the photoreceptor sends signals to
distributed throughout the year.
other neurons by a change in its membrane poten-
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes: Another name for a
tial when it absorbs photons.
neutrophil, the name describes the fact that the cell
Physiology: The study of function, which deals with
 has a lobed nucleus, which makes it appear as if it 
the ways organisms perform vital activities.
 has multiple (poly) nuclei.
Pia mater: The fine vascular membrane that closely
Polysynaptic reflex: A reflex in which interneurons
envelops the brain and spinal cord under the arach-
are interposed between the sensory fiber and the
noid and the dura mater
motor neuron(s).
Pigmented layer: The layer of the retina that consists
Polytocous: Mammals that give birth to multiple off-
of a single stratum of cells. In the eyes of albinos,
spring (litters).
the cells of this layer contain no pigment.
 Pontine reticulospinal tract: Any of several fiber
Pineal body: A small, unpaired, flattened glandular
tracts descending to the spinal cord from the reticu-
structure lying in the depression between the two
lar formation of the pons and medulla oblongata.
superior colliculi of the brain and secreting the
Some fibers conduct impulses from the neural
Glossary
621
mechanisms regulating cardiovascular and respira-
Precentral gyrus: The posterior convolution of the
tory functions to the spinal cord; others form links
frontal lobe, bounded in back by the central sulcus
in extrapyramidal motor mechanisms affecting
and in front by the precentral sulcus.
muscle tonus and somatic movement.
Preganglionic: Situated proximal to or preceding a
Portal triad: Branches of the portal vein, hepatic
ganglion, especially a ganglion of the autonomic
artery, and hepatic duct bound together in the con-
nervous system.
nective tissue that divides the liver into lobules.
Premolars: Transitional teeth located between the
Positive chronotropic factors: Agents that increase
canine and molar teeth.
heart rate.
Presbyopia: The eye's diminished power of accom-
Postcentral gyrus: The anterior convolution of the
modation, which occurs with aging.
 parietal lobe, bounded in front by the central sulcus
Presynaptic inhibition: A reduction in the release of
and in back by the interparietal sulcus.
Posterior chamber: Anarrow chink behind the periph-
nal as a result of excitation of another neuron that
eral part of the iris of the eye and in front of the
terminates on the axon terminal.
suspensory ligament of the lens and the ciliary
Presynaptic membrane: The synaptic surface where
processes.
neurotransmitter release occurs.
Posterior cranial fossa: Part of the intracranial cavity.
Pretectal nuclei: A structure located in the midbrain.
 located between the foramen magnum and tento-
It receives binocular input from the eyes and is
rium cerebelli. It contains the brain stem and
involved with the pupillary light reflex.
cerebellum.
Prevertebral ganglia: Any of the sympathetic ganglia
Posterior (dorsal) horns: The occipital division of
lying in front of the vertebral column, including the
the lateral ventricle of the brain, extending back-
celiac and the superior and inferior mesenteric
ward into the occipital lobe; also called the dorsal
ganglions.
horn.
 Primary fissure: The trilobed structure of the brain,
Posterior median sulcus: The longitudinal groove
lying posterior to the pons and medulla oblon-
marking the posterior midline of the medulla ob-
gata and inferior to the occipital lobes of the cere-
longata and continuous below with the posterior
bral hemispheres, responsible for the regulation
median sulcus of the spinal cord; also called the
 and coordination of complex voluntary muscular
posterior median fissure.
movement and the maintenance of posture and
 Posterior neuropore: The posterior opening leading
balance.
from the central canal of the embryonic neural tube
Primary hyperalgesia: Pain sensitivity that occurs
to the exterior.
directly in the damaged tissues.
Posterior segment: The back two-thirds of the eye,
 Primary motor area: A group of networked cells in
which includes the anterior hyaloid membrane and
 mammalian brains that controls movements of spe-
all structures behind it: the vitreous humor, retina,
cific body parts associated with cell groups in that
 choroid, and optic nerve.
area of the brain. The area is closely linked by neural
Postganglionic: Located posterior or distal to a
networks to corresponding areas in the primary
ganglion.
somatosensory cortex.
 Postsynaptic membrane: The portion of the cell mem-
Primary visual cortex: The part of the cerebral cortex
ds e go ped st see hn yndesisd e go a
that is responsible for processing visual stimuli. It is
Postsynaptic potential: Changes in the membrane
the simplest, earliest cortical visual area. It is highly
 potential of the neuron that receives information at
 specialized for processing information about static
a synapse.
and moving objects and is excellent in pattern
Pos ttranslational
modification: Enzyme-mediated
recognition.
changes to proteins made after initial synthesis.
Primiparous: A term indicating a mammal that is
This most often occurs in the Golgi apparatus
experiencing its first pregnancy or that is in the
and can include phosphorylation, glycosylation, or
period following the birth of its first offspring.
methylation.
Proerythroblasts: The precursor of the erythroblast,
 Potential difference: The separation of opposite charges;
which in turn produces red l
blood cells
or
 requires a barrier that prevents ion migration.
erythrocytes.
P-Q interval: Time elapsing between the beginning
Proestrus: The stage of the estrus cycle between lute-
 of the P wave and the beginning of the QRS com-
olysis and onset of estrus (heat).
plex in the electrocardiogram; also called the PR
Progenitor cells: A less mature cell in a develop-
interval.
mental pathway. For example, in the immune
 Precapillary sphincter: A smooth muscle sphincter
system, B lymphocytes are the precursors of plas-
that regulates blood flow through a capillary.
ma cells.
622
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Progesterone: A steroid hormone primarily produced
monary artery during ventricular emptying but pre-
by the ovary (corpus luteum) and placenta. It is
vents the backflow of blood from the pulmonary
necessary for maintenance of pregnancy as well as
artery into the right ventricle during ventricular
normal mammary development.
relaxation.
Prohormone: A precursor of a hormone, it usually
Pulmonary veins: Vessels that deliver freshly oxy-
refers to a larger protein structure, which is cleaved
genated blood from the respiratory zones of the
to produce the active agent.
lungs to the heart.
Prolactin (Prl): A protein produced in the anterior
Pulmonary ventilation: The movement of air into
pituitary gland, it is a critical regulator of mammary
 and out of the lungs.
gland function and other physiological processes,
Pulp cavity: The internal chamber in a tooth, contain-
including regulation of fluid balances and some
ing blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, nerves, and the
 aspects of behavior.
cells that maintain the dentin.
 Pronation: To turn or rotate (the foot) by abduction
Pulse pressure: Difference between systolic and dia-
and eversion so that the inner edge of the sole bears
stolic pressure.
the body's weight.
Pupil: The opening in the middle of the iris. It appears 
Proprioceptor: A sensory receptor, commonly found
black because most of the light entering is absorbed
in muscles, tendons, joints, and the inner ear,
by the tissues inside the eye.
that detects the motion or position of the body
Purine: One of two categories of nitrogenous ringed
 or a limb by responding to stimuli within the
compounds found in RNA and DNA (the others
organism.
are the pyrimidines); examples are adenine and
Prosencephalon: The most anterior of the three
guanine.
 primary regions of the embryonic brain, from which
Purkinje cells: Any of numerous neurons of the cere-
the telencephalon and diencephalon develop
bral cortex having large flask-shaped cell bodies
Prostacyclin: A prostaglandin produced in the walls
with massive dendrites and one slender axon; also
of blood vessels that acts as a vasodilator and inhib-
called the Purkinje corpuscles.
 its platelet aggregation.
Putamen: The outer, larger, and darker gray of the
Prostaglandin (PG): A large group of structurally
 three portions into which the lentiform nucleus of
related hormone- or growth factor-like regulators
the brain is divided.
(including PGE, PGF, PGA, and PGB) found in
Pyloric region: The region of the stomach that con-
tissues throughout the body. They are derived from
nects to the duodenum.
 arachidonic acid and exhibit multiple actions.
Pyloric sphincter: A sphincter of smooth muscle that
Proteoglycan: An example of a common extracellular
regulates the passage of chyme from the stomach to
matrix molecule, it consists of a glycoaminoglycans
the duodenum.
(GAG) chains attached to a protein core. These mol-
Pylorus: The gastric region between the body of the
ecules are important in maintenance of intercellular
 stomach and the duodenum; it includes the pyloric
spaces.
sphincter.
Protraction: The extension of teeth or other maxillary
Pyramidal system: a massive collection of axons that
or mandibular structures into a position anterior to
travel between the cerebral cortex of the brain and
the normal position.
the spinal cord.
 Proventriculus: A section of the avian digestive tract
Pyrimidine: One of two classes of ritrogenous bases
located before the gizzard.
 found in DNA and RNA examples; a sample is cyto-
Pseudo-unipolar neuron: Another term for unipolar
sine. The other class is purine.
neuron.
Pulmonary arteries: Vessels that deliver blood to the
lungs to be oxygenated.
QRS complex: The principal deflection in the elec-
Pulmonary circuit: Blood vessels between the pulmo-
trocardiogram, representing ventricular depolarization.
nary semilunar valve of the right ventricle and the
Quiescent period: The time interval of no activity
entrance to the left atrium of the heart. It describes
 Occurring between each pulse during transmission.
the blood flow to and from the lungs.
Pulmonary circulation: The closed loop of blood
vessels carrying blood between the heart and lungs.
Radioimmunoassay (RlA): A sensitive assay method
 Pulmonary trunk: The large elastic artery that carries
to measure the concentration of hormones and other
blood from the right ventricle of the heart to the
factors in biological fluids. The technique depends
right and left pulmonary arteries.
on the ability to produce antibodies against the
Pulmonary valve: A one-way valve that permits the
substance under study and to label it with a
flow of blood from the right ventricle into the pul-
radioisotope.
Glossary
623
Ramp retina: The human retina has a smooth con-
Renin: The enzyme released by cells of the juxtaglo-
cave surface, but the horse has a ramp retina,
 merular apparatus when renal blood flow declines;
which is irregular and inconsistent in its concave
 it converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin I.
appearance.
Residual volume: The amount of air remaining in the
Ras protein: An example of a large family of GTP-
 lungs after maximum forced exhalation.
 binding proteins that serve to relay signals from cell
Resistance: Hindrance of flow of blood or air through
 surface receptors to the cell nucleus. It was named
a passageway (blood vessel or respiratory airway.
for the ras gene, first identified in viruses that cause
respectively).
sarcoma in rats.
Resorption: The act or the process of resorbing.
Reabsorption: The net movement of interstitial fluid
Respiratory 1
 bronchiole: The smallest bronchiole
into the capillary.
(0.5mm in diameter) that connects the terminal
Receptive fields: A sensory neuron is a region of
bronchiole to the alveolar duct.
 space in which the presence of a stimulus will alter
Respiratory burst: The rapid release of reactive
the firing of that neuron. Receptive fields have been
 Oxygen species (superoxide radical and hydrogen
identified for neurons of the auditory system, the
 peroxide) from different types of cells.
 somatosensory system, and the visual system.
Respiratory capacities: The amount of air that can be
Receptor: A specialized cell or group of nerve endings
forcibly expelled from the lungs following breath-
that responds to sensory stimuli.
 ing in as deeply as possible.
Receptor potential: The transmembrane potential
Respiratory membrane: The membrane that consists
difference of a sensory cell.
of the epithelial cells of the alveolus, the endothelial
Rectum: The inferior 15 cm (6in) of the digestive tract.
cells of the capillary, and the two fused basement
Red bone marrow: Bone marrow characterized by
 membranes of these layers. Gas exchange occurs
meshes of the reticular network that contain the
across this respiratory membrane.
 developmental stages of red blood cells, white blood
Respiratory pump: A mechanism by which changes
 cells, and megakaryocytes.
 in the intrapleural pressures during the respiratory
Red muscle fibers: Those fibers that have a red
cycle assist the venous return to the heart; also
 appearance; they contain high levels of myoglobin
called the thoracoabdominal pump.
and oxygen-storing proteins and tend to have more
Respiratory   I
rhythmicity center: An area of the
mitochondria and blood vessels than the white ones.
brain stem that is involved in the control of
Red nucleus: A large, well-defined, somewhat elon-
respiration.
 gated cell mass of reddish-gray hue that is located
Resting membrane potential: The voltage that exists
in the mesencephalic tegmentum, receives 
across the plasma membrane during the resting
massive projection from the contralateral half of
 state of an excitable cell. Values range from -50 to
the cerebellum, receives an additional projection
-200 mv, depending on cell type.
from the ipsilateral motor cortex, and whose effer-
Reticular activating system (RAS): The name given
ent connections are with the contralateral half of the
to part of the brain (the reticular formation and
rhombencephalic reticular formation and spinal cord.
its connections) believed to be the center of
Reduced hemoglobin: Hemoglobin that is not com-
arousal and motivation in animals. It is situated
bined with O2
at the core of the brain stem between the myelen-
Referred pain: Pain that is felt in a part of the body
cephalon (medulla oblongata) and metencephalon
at a distance from its area of origin.
(midbrain).
Reflex arch: The receptor, sensory neuron, motor
Reticulocyte: An immature erythrocyte.
 neuron, and effector involved in a particular reflex;
Reticulorumen: The first chamber in the alimentary
interneurons may be present, depending on the
canal of ruminant animals, it is composed of the
reflex considered.
rumen and reticulum.
Refracted: The ability of the eye to bend light so that
Retina: A thin layer of neural cells that lines the back
an image is focused on the retina.
of the eyeball of vertebrates and some cephalopods.
Relative refractory period: The period that follows the
 Retinal: A carotenoid constituent of visual pigments.
absolute refractory period; the interval during which
 It is the oxidized form of retinol, which functions as
a threshold stimulus is unable to trigger an action
the active component of the visual cycle. It is bound
 potential unless the stimulus is particularly strong
to the protein opsin, forming the complex rhodop-
Releasing hormones: The general name given a
sin. When stimulated by visible light, the retinal
number of small peptides synthesized by hypotha-
component of the rhodopsin complex undergoes
lamic neurons whose release into the hypothalami-
isomerization at the ll-position of the double bond
chypophyseal portal blood system controls secretion
to the cis-form. This is reversed in "dark" reactions
of anterior pituitary hormones.
to return to the native trans configuration.
624  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Retinal isomerase: An enzyme that catalyzes the con-
Rumen: The larger part of the reticulorumen, which
version of the trans form of retinaldehyde to ll-cis-
is the first chamber in the alimentary canal of rumi-
retinal, a reaction needed in the regeneration of the
nant animals.
visual pigments.
Ruminant: Any hoofed animal that digests its
 Retraction: The act of pulling apart, usually as part of
food in two steps, first by eating the raw material
a surgical procedure.
and regurgitating a semidigested form known
Retroperitoneal: Located behind or outside the peri-
as cud, and then eating the cud, a process called
toneal cavity. For example, both male and female re-
ruminating.
productive tracts and the kidneys are retroperitoneal.
 Rumination: An eating disorder characterized by
Rhinencephalon areas: A part of the brain involved
 having the contents of the stomach drawn back up
with olfaction.
into the mouth, chewed for a second time, and swal-
Rhodopsin: Also known as visual purple,itis expressed
lowed again. In some animals, known as ruminants,
 in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is a pigment of
this is a natural and healthy part of digestion and is
 the retina that is responsible for both the formation
not considered an eating disorder.
of the photoreceptor cells and the first events in
the perception of light.
Rhombencephalon: The portion of the embryonic
Sacroiliac joint: The joint between the sacrum, at the
brain from which the metencephalon and myelen-
base of the spine, and the ilium of the pelvis, which
cephalon develop, including the pons, cerebellum,
are joined by ligaments. Inflammation of this joint
 and medulla oblongata; also called the hindbrain.
is known as sacroilitis, one cause of disabling low
Rib: One of a series of long, curved bones occurring
back pain.
in pairs and extending from the spine to or toward
Sagittal plane: A sectional plane that divides the
the sternum.
body into left and right portions.
Right colic (hepatic) flexure: Abend in the colon that
Saltatory conduction: Transmission of an action poten-
is adjacent to the liver, and is therefore also known
tial along a myelinated fiber in which the nerve
as the hepatic colic flexure.
impulse appears to leap from node to node.
Rigor mortis: Muscular stiffening following death;
Sarcolemma: A thin membrane enclosing a striated
also called postmortem rigidity.
muscle fiber.
Rods: Photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye that
Sarcomere: One of the segments into which a fibril of 
can function in less intense light than can the other
striated muscle is divided.
type of photoreceptor, cone cells.
Sarcoplasm: The cytoplasm of a striated muscle fiber.
Root canals: The narrow extension of the pulp cavity
Sarcoplasmic reticulum: The endoplasmic reticulum
that projects into the roots.
found in striated muscle fibers.
 Rotation: Regular and uniform variation in a sequence
Satellite cells: Any of the cells that encapsulate the
or series, as in the recurrence of symptoms of a
bodies of nerve cells in many ganglia.
disease.
 Scala media: An endolymph-filled cavity inside the
Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER): The cellular
cochlea, located between the scala tympani and the
organelle involved in translation of mRNA for syn-
scala vestibuli, separated by the basilar membrane
 thesis of proteins for secretion from cells. It appears
and Reissner's membrane (the vestibular mem-
 in transmission electron micrographs as parallel
 brane), respectively.
arrays of intracellular membranes studded with
Scala tympani: The name of one of the perilymph-
ribosomes.
filled cavities in the cochlear labyrinth. It is sepa-
Round ligament: The fibromuscular band that is
rated from the scala media by the basilar membrane,
attached to the uterus on either side in front of and
and it extends from the round window to the heli-
below the opening of the uterine tube; it passes
cotrema, where it continues as scala vestibuli.
through the inguinal canal to the labium majus.
Scala vestibuli: A perilymph-filled cavity inside the
Ruffini ending: One of the four main cutaneous
cochlea of the inner ear. It is separated from the scala
 mechanoreceptors. Named after Angelo Ruffini,
media by Reissner's membrane and extends from
they are slowly adapting receptors found in the
the oval window to the helicotrema where it joins
dermis and subcutaneous tissue of the skin. These
the scala tympani.
thin, cigar-shaped encapsulated sensory endings
Scapula: Either of two large, flat, triangular bones
 measure pressure when the skin is stretched. Their
forming the back part of the shoulder. More com-
main function is thermoreception.
monly called the shoulder blade.
Rugae: Mucosal folds in the lining of the empty
Schwann cells: Neuroglia responsible for the neuri-
stomach that disappear as gastric distension
lemma that surrounds axons in the peripheral
occurs.
nervous system.
Glossary
625
Sclera: The (usually) white outer coating of the eye
Sensations: A perception associated with stimulation
made of tough fibrin connective tissue, which gives
of a sense organ or with a specific body condition.
 the eye its shape and helps protect the delicate inner
Sensory areas: The main cerebral areas that receive
parts.
 sensory information from thalamic nerve projections.
Scleral venous sinus (canal of Schlemm): A circular
Sensory input: Input that includes somatic sensation
channel in the eye that collects aqueous humor
and special senses.
from the anterior chamber and delivers it into the
 Sensory nerve: An afferent nerve conveying impulses
bloodstream.
Seasonal anestrus: A period of anestrous produced
become part of the organism's perception of itself
by exposure of either short (mare) or long (ewe)
and of its environment.
photoperiods.
Sensory neurons: Nerve cells within the nervous
Seasonal polyestrus: The term for exhibiting multi-
system responsible for converting external stimuli
ple estrous cycles during certain times of the year.
from the orgarism's environment into internal elec-
Sebaceous ciliary gland: Holocrine glands found in
trical motor reflex loops and several forms of invol-
the skin of mammals. They secrete an oily substance
untary behavior, including pain avoidance.
called sebum (Latin, meaning "fat" or "tallow") that
Septum pellucidum: A thin membrane of nervous
is made of fat (lipids) and the debris of dead fat-
tissue that forms the medial wall of the lateral ven-
 producing cells.
tricles in the brain. Itis also called the septum lucidum.
 Second messenger: An intracellular molecule whose
Serosa: See serous membrane.
concentration changes as a consequence of a
Serosal fluid: Clear, watery fluid secreted by cells of
hormone binding to a cell surface receptor. The
a serous membrane.
released molecule serves to carry the signal of the
Serotonin: A neurotransmitter in the central nervous
hormone (first messenger) into the target cell to
system; a compound that enhances inflammation and
elicit a reaction. The first second messenger identi-
is released by activated mast cells and basophils.
fied in conjunction with the effects of glucagon was
Serous cell: A cell that produces a serous secretion.
cyclic AMP.
Serous membrane: A squamous epithelium and the
Secondary hyperalgesia: Pain sensitivity that occurs
underlying loose connective tissue; the lining of the
 in surrounding, undamaged tissues.
 pericardial, pleural, and peritoneal cavities.
Secondary ossification center: About the time of
Serous pericardium: The lining of the pericardial sac
birth, a secondary ossification center appears in
composed of a serous membrane.
each end (epiphysis) of long bones. Periosteal buds
Sertoli cells: Cells located in the seminiferous tubules
carry mesenchyme and blood vessels in and the
of the testes that are thought to control spermato-
process is similar to that occurring in a primary
genesis. They contain FSH receptors and were named
ossification center.
for the Italian reproductive physiologist Errico Sertoli.
Secretin: A hormone secreted by the duodenum that
Serum: The ground substance of blood plasma from
stimulates the production of buffers by the pancreas
which clotting agents have been removed.
and inhibits gastric activity.
Sesamoid bone: A bone that forms within a tendon.
Secretion: The process of segregating, elaborating.
Sharpey's fibers: A matrix of connective tissue con-
and releasing chemicals from a cell, or a secreted
sisting of bundles of strong collagenous fibers con-
chemical substance or amount of substance.
necting periosteum to bone. They are part of the
Segmentation: A morphogenesis process that divides
outer fibrous layer of periosteum, entering into the
a metazoan body into a series of semirepetitive
outer circumferential and interstitial lamellae of
segments.
bone tissue.
Selectins: A family of transmembrane molecules
 Short bone: A bone whose dimensions are approxi-
expressed on the surface of leukocytes and activated
mately equal, consisting of a layer of cortical sub-
endothelial cells.
stance enclosing the spongy substance and marrow.
Self-propagating: Propagating by one's self or by itself.
Short-day breeders: Sexually mature females that
Semicircular canals: A group of three half-circular,
begin to initiate estrous cycles during periods with
intercornected tubes located inside each ear that are
reduced photoperiods, that is, short days.
 the equivalent of three gyroscopes located in three
Sigmoid colon: The S-shaped portion of the colon,
planes perpendicular to one another.
18 cm long, between the descending colon and the
Semicircular ducts: Consists of three oval ducts
rectum.
 Signal peptide: A small sequence of amino acids in
arranged at right angles to one another; an integral
part of the equilibrium mechanism.
the structure of a newly synthesized protein if the
Seminiferous tubules: The highly convoluted tubules,
protein will be transported to the Golgi apparatus
located in the testes, that produce spermatozoa.
for packaging and secretion from the cell.
626
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Signal transduction: The relaying of a signal from
demonstrated to have a high concentration of
one form to another. In physiological processes, this
 mitochondrial enzymes, and thus they are fatigue
is the process whereby extracellular signals are con-
resistant.
verted into intracellular responses.
Slow-wave sleep: A term used to describe stages 3
Signaling transducers and activators of transcription
and 4 sleep.
(STATs): Regulators that make a group of transcrip-
Smell: The ability to perceive odors; also called
tion factors (seven are recognized) that are seques-
olfaction.
 tered in the cytoplasm until activated by the binding
 Smooth muscle: Spindle-shaped cells with one cen-
of a cytokine or growth factor receptor. Ligand
 trally located nucleus and no externally visible stria-
binding causes aggregation of receptor (cytokine)
tions (bands). It is found mainly in the walls of
subunits and initiation of a cascade of tyrosine
hollow organs.
phosphorylation events, during which receptor-
Soft palate: The fleshy posterior extension of the hard.
linked JAKs become activated to cause phosphory-
palate, separating the nasopharynx from the oral
lation of the receptor. This creates a docking 
or
cavity.
binding site for a STAT that is, in turn, phosphory-
Solitary
nucleus: A slender compact bundle
of
lated by the receptor. Phosphorylated STAT dissoci-
primary sensory fibers that accompany the vagus,
ates from the receptor, dimerizes, and translocates
glossopharyngeal, and facial nerves and convey
to the cell nucleus to interact with the promoters of
information from stretch receptors and chemorecep-
 specific genes. For example, STAT-5 is known to be
tors in the walls of the cardiovascular, respiratory,
essential for the hormone prolactin to induce pro-
and intestinal tracts and impulses generated by the
duction of mRNA for milk proteins.
 receptor cells of the taste buds in the tongue.
Simple fracture: A bone fracture that causes little or
Somatic afferent: Fibers that receive information
no damage to the surrounding soft tissues; also
from external sources.
called a closed fracture.
 Somatic efferent: Nerve fibers that are responsible
 Single-unit smooth muscle: The most abundant type
for muscle contraction.
of smooth muscle. It is made up of muscle fibers that
Somatic nervous system: That part of the peripheral
A r os st d aq pa a
nervous system associated with the voluntary
become excited and contract as a unit; also known
control of body movements through the action of
as visceral smooth muscle.
 skeletal muscles, and also the reception of external
Sinoatrial (SA) node: The natural pacemaker of the
stimuli.
heart. It is located in the wall of the right atrium.
Somatic reflexes: Reflexes that activate skeletal muscle.
Sinusoidal capillary: A capillary with a caliber of
Somatomedin hypofhesis: An older idea stating that
 10-20μm or more; it is lined with a fenestrated type
nearly all of the effects attributed to growth hormone
of endothelium.
were mediated by GH induction of IGF-I in the liver.
Sinusoids: An exchange vessel that is similar in
When first isolated, IGF-I and IGF-Il were known as
general structure to a fenestrated capillary. The two
somatomedin A and B, respectively.
- ar pue rare are spnosns) azis u a
Somatostatin: A 14-amino-acid peptide produced in
ular in cross section), continuity (sinusoids have
the hypothalamus and other brain areas as well as
the pancreas and gut. It is primarily known for its
soids have thin basal laminae, if they have them at all).
role in inhibiting the secretion of growth hormone,
Skeletal muscle: Muscle composed of cylindrical multi-
but it is also likely important in Gl tract-nervous
nucleate cells with obvious striations; the muscle(s)
system interactions.
attached to the body's skeleton; voluntary muscle.
Somites: A segmental mass of mesoderm in the
Sleep spindles: A burst of brain activity, visible on an
vertebrate embryo, occurring in pairs along the
EEG, that occurs during stage 2 sleep. It consists of
notochord and developing into muscles and
12-16Hz waves that occur for 0.5 to 1.5 seconds.
vertebrae.
Sliding filament theory: The concept that a sarco
Spatial summation: A summation of the local poten-
mere shortens as the thick and thin filaments slide
 tials in which two or more action potentials arrive
 past one another in the muscle cell.
 Slow oxidative fibers: Fibers that generate energy for
 nals that synapse with a single neuron.
ATP resynthesis by means of a long-term system of
Special senses: Any of the five senses related to the
aerobic energy transfer. They tend to have a low
organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch.
activity level of ATPase, a slower speed of contrac-
tion with a less-developed glycolytic capacity. They
zoa. It depends on proliferation, meiosis, and differen-
contain large and numerous mitochondria, and,
tiation of precursor cells (primary spermatocytes).
coupled with the high levels of myoglobin, that
Sphenoid bone: A compound bone with winglike
gives them a red pigmentation. They have been
 processes, situated at the base of the skull.
Glossary
627
Sphincter of the hepatopancreatic ampulla (sphinc-
Stereocilia: Mechanosensing organelles of hair cells,
ter of Oddi): Controls secretions from the liver,
which respond to fluid motion or fluid pressure
 pancreas, and gallbladder into the duodenum of the
changes in numerous types of animals for various
small intestine.
functions, primarily hearing.
Spicules: A needlelike structure or part.
 Sternebrae: One of the four segments of the primor-
Spina bifida: A congenital defect in which the spinal
dial sternum of the embryo, the fusion of which
column is imperfectly closed so that part of the
forms the body of the adult sternum.
meninges or spinal cord may protrude, often result-
Sternum: A long flat bone, articulating with the car-
ing in neurological disorders; also called hydrocele
tilages of the first seven ribs and with the clavicle,
spinalis.
forming the middle part of the anterior wall of the
Spinal nerves: Any of 31 pairs of nerves emerging
thorax, and consisting of the corpus, manubrium,
from the spinal cord, each attached to the cord by
and xiphoid process; also called the breastbone.
two roots, anterior or ventral and posterior or dorsal
Stimulus transduction: The conversion of a stimulus
(the latter provided with a spinal ganglion). The two
from one form to another.
roots unite in the intervertebral foramen but divide
 Streptokinase: An extracellular metallo-enzyme pro-
again into ventral and dorsal rami, or anterior and
duced by beta-hemolytic streptococcus and used as
posterior primary divisions (the former supplying
an effective and cheap clot-dissolving medication—
the foreparts of the body and limbs and the latter
in some cases, of myocardial infarction (heart attack)
the muscles and skin of the back).
 and pulmonary embolism.
Spinal reflex: A reflex arc involving the spinal cord.
 Stretch reflex: See myotatic reflex.
Spinothalamic tract: A large ascending bundle of
 Striated muscles: Muscles that are marked by stripes
fibers in the ventral half of the lateral furiculus of
or bands.
     n    
Stroke volume (SV): The amount of blood pumped
levels of the cord and continuing into the brain
out of a ventricle during one contraction.
stem. It is composed in the spinal cord of a lateral
 Stroma: The supporting elements in a tissue or organ.
part that conveys impulses associated with pain and
For example, in the mammary gland this would be
temperature sensation and of an anterior part that
the connective tissue elements that surround and
is involved in tactile sensation.
 support the ducts and alveoli.
Spiral ganglion: Cell bodies of sensory neurons that
Sty: An inflammation of the sebaceous glands at the
 innervate hair cells of the organ of Corti are located
base of the eyelashes.
 in the spiral ganglion.
 Subarachnoid space: The space between the arach-
Spiral organ or organ of Corti: The organ in the inner
noid membrane and pia mater that is filled with
ear of mammals that contains auditory sensory
cerebrospinal fluid and contains the large blood
cells, or "hair cells."
vessels that supply the brain and spinal cord.
Splanchnic circulation: The blood vessels serving the
Submucosa: The region between the muscularis
 digestive system.
mucosae and the muscularis externa.
Splanchnic nerves: Part of the sympathetic nervous
Submucosal glands: Glands that are situated below
system, which is part of the autonomic nervous
or underneath (sub) the mucosal tissue.
system. Most sympathetic preganglionic nerves
Submucosal (or Meissner's) plexus: A plexus of
synapse in the sympathetic trunk lying beside the
unmyelinated nerve fibers, derived chiefly from the
spinal cord, but splanchnic nerves pass through the
superior mesenteric plexus and ramifying in the
 trunk, travel near their target organ, and synapse in
intestinal submucosa.
 prevertebral ganglia.
Subscapular fossa: A depression in either of two
S-T segment: The part of an electrocardiogram imme-
 large, flat, triangular bones forming the back part of
diately following the QRS complex and merging
the shoulder or scapula.
into the T wave.
Substance P: A short-chain polypeptide that func-
Stapedius muscle: The smallest striated muscle in
tions as a neurotransmitter, especially in the trans-
 the body. At just over 1mm in length, its purpose
mission of pain impulses from peripheral receptors
is to stabilize the smallest bone in the body, the
to the central nervous system.
stapes.
Substantia gelatinosa: The apical part of the poste-
Stem cells: Primal undifferentiated cells that retain
rior horn of the gray matter of the spinal cord com-
the ability to produce an identical copy when they
posed largely of very small nerve cells and whose
divide (self-renew) and differentiate into other cell
gelatinous appearance is due to its very low content
types.
of myelinated nerve fibers. It functions in the inte-
Stercobilin: A tetrapyrrole chemical compound created
gration of sensory stimuli that gives rise to the sen-
by bacterial action on bilirubin and subsequent
sations of heat and pain; also called Rolando's
oxidation.
gelatinous substance.
628
Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Substantia nigra: A layer of large pigmented nerve
organ of Corti, olfactory epithelium, taste buds, and
cells in the mesencephalon that produce dopamine
seminiferous tubules.
and whose destruction is associated with Parkin-
Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS): Intracel-
 son's disease; also called nigra.
 lular proteins that regulate the activity of signaling
Subthalamic nucleus: A circumscript nucleus that is
 pathways, especially STAT-associated pathways.
located in the ventral part of the subthalamus,
Suprachiasmatic nucleus: Anucleus in the hypothal-
receives a massive projection from the lateral
amus, so named because it resides immediately
segment of the globus pallidus, and projects to both
above the optic chiasm (Ox). It consists of two
pallidal segments and to the mesencephalon.
nuclei, each of which lies on either side of the hemi-
Sucrase: The enzyme involved in the hydrolysis of
sphere separated by the third ventricle (3V). Its
sucrose to fructose and glucose. It is secreted by
principal function is to create the circadian rhythm,
the tips of the villi of the epithelium in the small
which regulates the body functions over the 24-hour
intestines.
period.
Sulci (singular = sulcus): Depressions or fissures
Supraglenoid tubercle: A projection of bone located
in the surface of an organ, most especially the
 superior to the glenoid cavity. It is the attachment
brain.
site for the tendon of the long head of the biceps
Summation: An accumulation of effects, especially
brachiim.
those of muscular, sensory, or mental stimuli.
Supraspinous fossa: Smaller than the infraspinatus
Superior cervical ganglion: The largest of the cervical
fossa, it is concave, smooth, and broader at its ver-
 ganglia, it is placed opposite the second and third
tebral than at its humeral end; its medial two-thirds
cervical vertebrae. It is reddish-gray, usually fusi-
gives origin to the supraspinatus.
form in shape, sometimes broad and flattened, and
Surface tension: The force at the liquid surface of an
 occasionally constricted at intervals. It is believed to
air-water interface resulting from the greater attrac-
be formed by the coalescence of four ganglia, cor-
tion of water molecules to the surrounding water
responding to the upper four cervical nerves.
molecules than to the air above the surface; it is a
Superior colliculi: The part of the brain that sits
force that tends to decrease the area of a liquid
below the thalamus and surrounds the pineal gland
surface and resists stretching of the surface.
in the mesencephalon of vertebrate brains. This
Sympathetic chains: Chains that extend from the
structure comprises the rostral aspect of the mid-
base of the skull to the coccyx.
brain, anterior to the periaqueductal gray and adja-
Sympathetic division: The division of the autonomic
cent to the inferior colliculus. The inferior and
nervous system that is responsible for "fight or
superior colliculi are known collectively as the
flight" reactions; it is primarily concerned with
corpora quadrigemina, or four twins.
the elevation of metabolic rate and increased
Superior oblique muscle: A fusiform muscle in the
alertness.
upper, medial side of the orbit whose primary action
 Sympafhetic subdivision: The subdivision that acti-
is intorsion and whose secondary actions are to
-   n,    n  
abduct (laterally rotate) and depress the eyeball (i.e.,
sponse. This response is also known as sympathetico-
make the eye move outward and downward).
adrenal response of the body; the preganglionic
Superior rectus muscle: A muscle in the orbit. It is
sympathetic fibers that end in the adrenal medulla
 one of the extraocular muscles.
(but also all other sympathetic fibers) secrete acetyl-
Superior sagittal sinus: An unpaired dural sinus in
choline, which activates the secretion of adrenaline
the sagittal groove.
(epinephrine) and to a lesser extent noradrenaline
Superior vena cava: The vein that carries blood to the
(norepinephrine) from it.
right atrium from parts of the body that are superior
Symporter: Also known as a cotransporter, it is an
to the heart.
integral membrane protein that is involved in sec-
Superovulation: The ovulation of an abnormally
 ondary active transport. It works by binding to two
large number of ova for a given species. This is
molecules at a time and using the gradient of one
usually a result of exogenous hormonal treatment.
solute's concentration to force the other molecule
It is often used to produce ova for embryo transfer,
against its gradient.
cloning, or transgenic manipulation of animals.
Synapse: The junction across which a nerve impulse
Supination: The rotation of the forearm such that the
passes from an axon terminal to a neuron, a muscle
palm faces anteriorly.
cell, or a gland cell.
Supporting cells: Cells that serve to provide support
Synaptic bouton: Axonal terminals; the bulbous
and protection for and perhaps contribute to the
distal endings of the terminal branches of an axon;
 nutrition of principal or other cells of certain organs;
also called synaptic knob.
such cells are found in the labyrinth of the inner ear,
Synaptic cleft: The fluid-filled space at a synapse.
Glossary
629
Synaptic delay: The period between the arrival of an
 Tectum: A rooflike structure of the body, especially
impulse at the presynaptic membrane and the ini-
the dorsal part of the mesencephalon.
tiation of an action potential in the postsynaptic
Tegmentum: A part of the midbrain consisting of white
membrane.
fibers running lengthwise through gray matter.
Synaptic plasticity: The ability of the connection,
Telodendria: The terminal axonal branches that end
 or synapse, between two neurons to change in
in synaptic knobs.
strength.
Temporal lobe: The lowest of the major subdivisions
 Synaptic vesicles: Small membranous sacs contain-
 of the cortical mantle of the brain, containing the
 ing a neurotransmitter.
sensory center for hearing and forming the rear
 Syndesmochorial placenta: A type of epitheliocho-
two-thirds of the ventral surface of the cerebral
rial placenta in which endothelial epithelium
hemisphere. It is separated from the frontal and
becomes eroded so that maternal capillaries are
 parietal lobes above it by the fissure of Sylvius.
 exposed to the chorionic epithelial tissue.
Temporal summation: The summation of the local
Synergist: Muscle that aids the action of a prime
potential that results when two or more action
mover by effecting the same movement or by stabi-
potentials arrive at a single synapse in rapid
lizing joints across which the prime mover acts to
succession.
 prevent undesirable movements.
Tendon: A band of tough, inelastic fibrous tissue that
Syrinx: The name for the vocal organ of birds. Located
connects a muscle with its bony attachment and
at the base of a bird's trachea, it produces sounds
consists of rows of elongated cells; minimal ground
without the vocal cords that mammals have.
substance; and densely arranged, almost parallel,
Systemic circuit: The vessels between the aortic valve
bundles of collageneous fibers.
and the entrance to the right atrium; the system
Tendon reflex: A myotatic or deep reflex in which the
other than the vessels of the pulmonary circuit.
muscle stretch receptors are stimulated by per-
Systemic circulation: The closed  loop of blood
cussing the tendon of a muscle.
vessels carrying blood between the heart and body
Tensor tympani muscle: A muscle that originates
systems.
from the cartilagenous wall of the eustachian tube
Systems physiology: The study of the function of
(also called the auditory tube) and the bony wall
 specific systems such as the cardiovascular, respira-
surrounding the tube.
tory, or reproductive systems.
 Terminal bouton: An enlarged axon terminal or pre-
Systole: A period of contraction in a chamber of the
synaptic terminal.
 heart, as part of the cardiac cycle.
 Testosterone: The major male sex steroid, it is pro-
Systolic blood pressure: The peak arterial pressure
 duced in the interstifial tissue of the testes by Leydig
measured during ventricular systole.
cells.
Tetrodotoxin: A potent neurotoxin, found in many
puffer fish and certain newts.
T tubule (transverse tubule): The extension of the
     r
muscle cell plasma membrane (sarcolemma) that
to heat and cold.
 protrudes deeply into the muscle cell.
Thick filament: A cytoskeletal filament in a skeletal
T wave: A deflection of the ECG corresponding to
or cardiac muscle cell, it is composed of myosin,
ventricular depolarization.
with a core of titin.
Tapetum lucidum: A reflecting layer immediately
Thin filament: A cytoskeletal filament in a skeletal or
behind, and sometimes within, the retina of the eye
cardiac muscle cell, consists of actin, troponin, and
of many vertebrates (though not humans); it serves
tropomyosin.
to reflect light back to the retina, increasing the
Third ventricle: A narrow, vertically oriented cavity
quantity of light caught by the retina.
in the midplane below the corpus callosum that
Tarsal plates: Two thin, elongated plates of dense
commuricates with each of the lateral ventricles
connective tissue, about 2.5cm in length; one is
 through the interventricular foramen.
placed in each eyelid, and contributes to its form
Thoracic cavity: A cavity that is surrounded by the
and support.
ribs and muscles of the chest.
Taste: One of the most common and fundamental of
Thoracic inlet: The superior thoracic aperture refers
the senses of animals. It is the direct detection of
to the superior opening of the thoracic cavity. It is
 chemical composition, usually through contact with
referred to anatomically as the thoracic inlet and
chemoreceptor cells.
clinically as the thoracic outlet.
Tectorial membrane: A gelatinous membrane, attached
Thorax: The chest.
to the bony spiral lamina, which overlies the hair
Threshold: The transmembrane potential at which an
cells within the cochlea of the inner ear.
action potential begins.
630  Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Thromboplastin: A protease that converts prothrom-
spleen). The transverse colon hangs off the stomach,
 bin to thrombin in the early stages of blood clotting;
attached to it by a wide band of tissue called the
also called thrombokinase.
mesocolon. The transverse colon is mobile (unlike
Thrombopoietin (TPO): A glycoprotein hormone,
the parts of the colon immediately before and after
 ap a pre ra a Aq A pand
it), and it is very mobile in the abdomen of some
regulates the production of platelets by the bone
individuals.
 marrow. It stimulates the production and differen-
Transverse fissure: A short but deep fissure, about
tiation of megakaryocytes, the bone marrow cells
5cm long, extending transversely across the under-
that fragment into large numbers of platelets.
surface of the left portion of the right lobe, nearer
Thyroid: An endocrine gland whose lobes are lateral
its posterior surface than its anterior border.
to the thyroid cartilage of the larynx.
Transverse fracture: A fracture in which the line of
Thyroxin: Also called T4, it is a hormone produced
 break forms a right angle with the axis of the bone.
by the thyroid gland; it is less potent than T3 trio-
Triad: The transverse tubule, and the terminal cister-
dothyronine, which is also produced in lesser
 nae on each side of it, in a skeletal muscle fiber.
amounts by the thyroid gland.
Tricuspid valve: The right atrioventricular valve,
Tidal volume (TV): The volume of air moved into
which prevents the backflow of blood into the right
and out of the lungs during a normal, quiet respira-
atrium during ventricular systole.
tory cycle.
Trigger zone: A specific area that, when stimulated by
Tissue factor (TF): A protein present in subendothe-
touch, pain, or pressure, excites an attack of neuro-
 lial tissue, platelets, and leukocytes necessary for 
logic pain.
the initiation of thrombin formation from the
Triglyceride: A lipid that is composed of a molecule
zymogen prothrombin. Thrombin formation ulti-
 of glycerol attached to three fatty acids.
mately leads to the coagulation of blood.
Trypsin inhibitor: Chemicals that reduce the bio-
Tissue plasminogen activator: A thrombolytic agent
availability of trypsin, an enzyme essential to nutri-
(clot-busting drug). It is approved for use in certain
tion of many animals.
 patients having a heart attack or stroke. This drug
 Tuber cinereum: A prominence of the base of the
can dissolve blood clots, which cause most heart
   a  's
attacks and strokes.
dibulum and pituitary stalk.
Titin: A giant 3MDa muscle protein and a major con-
Tunic: One of the enveloping layers of a part; one of
stituent of the sarcomere in vertebrate striated
the coats of a blood vessel; one of the coats of the
muscle. It is a multidomain protein that forms fila-
eye; one of the coats of the digestive tract.
 rds  un e de s
Tumica externa: The outermostlayer of connective tissue
 a sarcomere. Titin has a number of functions, includ-
fibers that stabilizes the position of a blood vessel.
ing the control of assembly of muscle thick fila-
Tunica interna: The innermost layer of connective
ments, a role in muscle elasticity, and the generation
tissue fibers in a blood vessel; it consists of the endo-
of passive tension.
 thelium plus an underlying elastic membrana.
Trabecula: A connective tissue partition that subdi-
Tunica media: The middle layer of connective tissue
vides an organ.
fibers in a blood vessel; it contains collagen, elastin,
Trachea: The windpipe, an airway extending from the
 and smooth muscle fibers in varying proportions.
larynx to the primary bronchi.
Tympanic membrane: Colloquially known as "the
Transducin: The name given to the heterotrimeric G
eardrum," it is a thin membrane that separates the
 protein that is naturally expressed in vertebrate
external ear from the middle ear. Its function is to
retina rods and cones (a different transducin gene is
transmit sound from the air to the ossicles inside the
 expressed in each cell type).
middle ear.
Transferrin: A plasma protein that transports iron
Type I alveolar cells: The single layer of flattened
through the blood to the liver, spleen, and bone
 epithelial cells that forms the wal of the alveoli
within the lungs.
marrow.
Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β): One of a
 Type II alveolar (or septal, cells): The cells within the
number of structurally related growth factors
alveolar walls that secrete pulmonary surfactant.
involved in the regulation of growth, differentia-
tion, and development of the many organ systems.
Transverse: Lying across the long axis of the body or
Ultradian rhythms: The regular recurrence in cycles
 of a part.
of less than 24 hours from one stated point to
Transverse colon: The part of the colon from the
another, as certain biologic activities which occur
hepatic flexure (the turn of the colon by the liver) to
at such intervals, regardless of conditions of
the splenic flexure (the turn of the colon by the
illumination.
Glossary
631
 Undershoot: A temporary decrease below the final
Vasodilation: An increase in the diameter of arteri-
steady-state value that may occur immediately fol-
oles due to the relaxation of smooth muscles in the
lowing the removal of an influence that had been
 tunica media, it reduces peripheral resistance and
raising that value.
 may occur in response to local factors through the
 Unipennate: Of or being a muscle whose fibers are
action of hormones, or after decreased stimulation
n    as    
of the vasomotor center.
Unipolar neuron: A neuron in which embryological
Vasomotor center: The chief dominating or general
 fusion of the two processes leaves only one process
center, which supplies all the unstriped muscles
extending from the cell body.
of the arterial system with motor nerves, situated in
Unmyelinated axon: An axon whose neurilemma
a part of the medulla oblongata; it is a center of
does not contain myelin and across which continu-
reflex action, by the working of which afferent
ous propagation occurs.
impulses are changed into efferent, vasomotor
Upper respiratory system: The nasal cavity, pharynx,
impulses leading either to dilation or constriction of
and associated structures.
the blood vessels.
Upstroke: The rising or depolarization phase of the
Vasomotor nerve fibers: Sympathetic nerve fibers
 action potential.
that cause the contraction of smooth muscle in the
Urobilin: A compound derived from urobilinogen
walls of blood vessels, thereby regulating blood
and ultimately from the bilirubin excreted in bile.
vessel diameter.
Urobilinogen: A colorless product of bilirubin reduc-
Vasomotor tone: A relatively constant frequency of
tion. It is formed in the intestines by bacterial action.
sympathetic impulses that keep blood vessels par-
Part of it is resorbed and returned to the liver, while
tially constricted in the periphery.
the rest is excreted in feces. Trace amounts can be
Venous return: The volume of blood returned to each
detected in urine.
 atrium per minute from the veins.
Uterus: A hollow, tubular organ with layers of smooth
Venous  valves: A multicuspid structure  located
 muscle and internal epithelial lining. It connects the
inside a vein. The valve cusps are attached to the
cervix and the oviducts. It is responsible for sperm
vein wall and grow in a conjoined state.
 transport to the site of fertilization in the oviducts,
Ventral: Pertaining to the anterior surface.
accepts the early embryo, and houses the fetus
Ventral respiratory group: The area that controls expi-
during gestation.
ration and acts to increase the force of inspiration.
Uvea: The middle of the three concentric layers that
Ventral root: The efferent motor root of a spinal nerve.
 make up an eye.
At its distal end, the ventral root joins with the
 dorsal root to form a mixed spinal nerve.
Ventricles: A fluid-filled chamber; in the heart, one of
Vagus nerve: Also called pneumogastric nerve or
the large chambers discharging blood into the pul-
cranial nerve X, it is the tenth of twelve paired
monary or systemic circuits; in the brain, one of four
cranial nerves, and is the only nerve that starts in
fluid-filled interior chambers.
the brain stem (within the medulla oblongata)
Vermis: The narrow middle zone occurring between
and extends, through the jugular foramen, down
the two hemispheres of the cerebellum.
below the head, to the abdomen. The vagus nerve
Vestibular apparatus: The sensory system that pro-
is arguably the single most important nerve in the
vides the dominant input about one's movement
body.
and orientation in space.
Variable: A quantity that is capable of assuming any
Vestibular membrane: A membrane inside the cochlea
of a set of values.
 of the inner ear. It separates scala media from scala
Varicosities: A varicose enlargement or swelling.
vestibuli.
Vascular endothelial growth  factor: A substance
Vestibular nystagmus: Rapid involuntary rhythmic
made by cells that stimulates new blood vessel for-
eye movement, with the eyes moving quickly in one
mation, a mitogen for vascular endothelial (vessel
direction (quick phase), and then slowly in the other
lining) cells.
(slow phase).
Vascular tunic: The middle of the three concentric
Vestibule: An enlarged area at the beginning of a
layers that make up an eye; also called the uvea.
canal, that is, inner ear, nose, larynx.
Vasoconstriction: Areduction in the diameter of arte-
Visceral afferent: A pathway coming into the central
rioles due to the contraction of smooth muscles in
nervous system that carries subconscious informa-
the turica media, it elevates peripheral resistance
tion derived from the internal viscera.
and may occur in response to local factors through
Visceral pleura: Serous membrane investing the lungs
the action of hormones, or from stimulation of the
and dipping into the fissures between the several
vasomotor center
lobes.
632
 Anatomy and physiology of domestic animals
Visceral serosa: The part of the double-layered mem-
White rami: A bundle of nerve fibers that connect a
 brane that lines the outer surfaces of organs within
sympathetic ganglion with a spinal nerve and are
the ventral body cavity.
divided into two kinds, one consisting of myelin-
Vision: Visual perception via the visual system; one
ated preganglionic fibers.
of the senses.
Withdrawal reflex: A spinal reflex intended to protect
Visual pigments: Chemicals functioning in the visual
the body from damaging stimuli. The classic
cycle in retinal rod cells. Through excitation by
example is when you touch something hot and
visible light, a series of complex molecular changes
withdraw your body part from the hot object.
occur that serve to trigger, in the optical nerve
Woven bone: Bony tissue characteristic of the embry-
 endings, an impulse transmitted to the brain, result-
onic skeleton in which the collagen fibers of the
ing in the perception of vision.
matrix are arranged irregularly in the form of inter-
Vocal ligament: The band that extends on either side
lacing networks; also called nonlamellar bone or
from the thyroid cartilage to the vocal process of the
reticulated bone.
arytenoid cartilage.
Voltage-gated channels: Channels in the plasma
membrane that open or close in response to changes
Xiphoid cartilage: The posterior and smallest of the
 in membrane potential.
three divisions of the sternum, below the gladiolus
Voluntary striated: Also called skeletal muscle.
and the manubrium; also called xiphoid or xiphoid
process.
Xiphoid process: The cartilage at the lower end of the
Wandering macrophages: The macrophages that
sternum; also called ensiform cartilage, ensiform
migrate to a wound to effect cellular defenses
 process, xiphisternum, or xiphoid cartilage.
against invading pathogens.
Wave summation: An increase in the frequency with
which a muscle is stimulated, which increases the
Yellow bone marrow: Bone marrow in which the
strength of contraction.
meshes of the reticular network are filled with fat.
White blood cells (WBCs): Leukocytes; the granulo-
 cytes and agranulocytes of blood.
White matter: Whitish nerve tissue, especially of the
Z discs (or Zlines): Delicate membranelike structures
 brain and spinal cord, chiefly composed of myelin-
found at either end of a sarcomere to which the actin
 ated nerve fibers and containing few or no neuronal
myofilaments attach.
cell bodies or dendrites; also called alba, substantia
Zonular fibers: A ring of fibrous strands connecting
alba, or white substance.
the ciliary body with the crystalline lens of the eye.
White muscle fibers: Those fibers that contain low
Zygomatic arch: The arch formed by the temporal
levels of myoglobin and oxygen-storing proteins
process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic
and have a white appearance.
process of the temporal bone; also called zygoma.
7
Note: Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations/photos; tables are noted with t.
AAA. See Acetoacetic acid
Acetylcholinesterase, 186, 232 (box)
in cardiac muscle fibers, 392
A band, sarcomeres and, 183, 184
Acetyl-CoA
generation of, 226-227, 227,
Abaxial, 9t
for fatty acid synthesis, 77
238-239
Abdominal aorta, 406, 407
metabolism, overview of, 79
propagation of, 227-229, 228,
Abdominal cavity, 9
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, 551
239
Abdominopelvic cavity, 9
Acetyl coenzyme A, 65
conduction velocity, 228-229
Abducens cranial nerve (VI), 252,
Acetyl coenzymeA carboxylase, 74
through heart, 391, 392
257t
ACh. See Acetylcholine
smooth muscle and, 197, 198
Abduction, 200, 201t
AChE. See Acetylcholinesterase
summary of, 228
ABO blood group, 385
Achilles tendon, 165
Actiors, of muscles, 200-201
Abomasum, 502
Acidic FGF, 367
Activation energy, significance of,
Abscess, 444
Acidophils, 338
47
Absorption, digestive tract and, 484
Acidosis, 402, 475, 476
Active transport, 52-53
Accessory crarial nerve (XI), 254
Acid-secreting A-type cells, 476,
secondary, 53
Accessory organs, of digestive
476
Active zone, 219-220, 282
system, 483,515519, 526
Acinar cells, pancreafic, 515
"Adam's apple," 420
Accessory sex glands, 574, 575
Acini cells, 515
Addison's disease, 359
Accommodation, in eye, 307,
Acoustic meafus, external, 313
Adduction, 200, 201t
318-319
Acquired immunity, types of, 449
Aderine, 41,42,55,233
A cells, acid-secreting, 476, 476
Acquired reflexes, 277
Adenohypophysis, 337
Acetabular bones, 163
Acromegaly, 333, 586
Adenosine, 233, 236t,288
 Acetabular fossa, 164
Acromion, 156
autonomic nervous system and,
Acetabulum,
163
Acrosome, 568, 569
287t
Acetate, 38
ACTH. See Adrenocorficotropic
Adenosine diphosphate, 20
Acetic acid, 507
hormone
Adenosine monophosphate, 41, 82
Acetic fatty acid, 14t
Actin, 25,36,100, 112, 385
Adenosine triphosphate, 20, 41, 57,
Acetoacetic acid, ketosis and, 74
in cardiac muscle, 387
82, 236t, 288, 466
Acetylcholine, 221, 231-232, 236t,
heart contraction and, 393
autonomic nervous system and,
237t, 397, 479
myofibrils and, 182
287t
 altonomic nervous system and,
in smooth muscle, 196
glycolysis and, 61-64
287t
Actinins, 184
hydrolysis of, contraction of
cardiac reflexes and, 290
Action potentials, 186, 187,
skeletal muscle and, 188
nociceptors and, 271
189
muscle metabolism and, 192, 193,
skeletal muscle confraction and,
cardiac conduction system and,
194
185, 186
391
nociceptors and, 271
t0
Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals, Second Edition. R. Michael Akers and D. Michael Denbow.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
633
634 Index
Adenosine triphosphate (continued)
Agonists, 200, 236, 286, 333
Amino acids, 34, 55, 233-234, 393,
primary active transport and, 52
Agoufi, 131t,137
475
production of, 60-61
Agouti signaling protein, 131
absorption of, in small intestine,
heart contraction and, 393
Agranulocytes, 111, 377, 378t, 408
514
in muscle, 193
avian, 383
characteristics of, common, 35t
summary, from beta-oxidation of
lymphocytes, 381
essenfial, 35
16-carbon oleic acid, 70t
monocytes, 381
Krebs cycle and, 35, 78
summary, from Krebs cycle and
AI. See Artificial insemination
structure of, 34
 electron transport chain
Air sacs, 431, 439
transporters of, 34
reactions, 67t
Airway obstruction, in short-nosed
Aminohippuric acid, 472
strucfure of, 61
dogs, 425
Aminopeptidase, 511
Adenylate cyclase, olfaction and,
Airway receptors, 430
Ammoria
298
Airway resistance, 424
nitrogen excretion and, 477, 477
Adenylyl cyclase, 325
Albino, 131t, 137
urinary excretion of, and pH
ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone
Albumin, 578, 579
control, 476
Adhering junctions, 99-100
colloid osmotic pressure and, 400
Ammonotelic species, 79, 477
Adipocytes, 89, 106
Alcohol, urination and, 469 (box)
Amnion, 570
changes in volume of, from ewes
Aldolase, 62
Amniotic fluid,573
 between late pregnancy and
Aldosterone, 40, 357, 358, 471, 481
Amniotic sac, 570
mid-lactation, 72t
 blood pressure regulation and,
AMP. See Adenosine monophosphate
Adipose fissue
402
AMPA receptors, 231
high magnification, 108
 Aldosteroneammonia, urinary
Amphiarthrotic joints, 168
leptin and, 369, 370
excretion of, and pH control,
Amphicytes, 222
low-power, 107
476
Amphiregulin, 366, 369
osmium-stained, 108
Alimentary tract, 483
Amphoteric molecules, 475
metabolism of, 74
Allantoic cavity, 570
Ampulla, 313
paraffin, high magnification, 108
Allantoic sac, 570
of ductus deferens, 575, 575
from region of mammary gland,
Allantois, 570
Amygdala, 248
108
 Alpha-adrenergic receptors, 286
Amygdaloid body (nucleus), 248
signaling. 74
Alpha-amylase, 38
Amylase, pancreatic, 515
types of, 106
Alpha-bromoergocryptine (CB154),
Anabolic steroids, 351 (box)
Adluminal compartment, 576
basal prolactin concentration
Anabolism, 58
ADP. See Adenosine diphosphate
and, 542
Anaerobic mecharism, muscle
Adrenal cortex, 357
Alpha-dextrinase, 511
metabolism and, 193-194
areas of, 358
Alpha helix formation, 36
Anaerobic respirafion, 58, 61
zones of, 357
Alpha-ketoglutarate acid, 78
Anagen, 129, 137
Adrenal corfical activity,
Alpha-ketoglutaric acid, 79
Anal canal, 519
neuroendocrine control of,
Alpha-lactalbumin, 540, 543, 551,
Anal glands, 127
359
5336
Anaphase, 32,33
Adrenal gland, 357, 357-360
 effect of lactogenic hormones on
Anastomoses, 399
Adrenal medulla, pathways to, 285
secretion of, 543
Anatomy
Adrenal steroid biosynthesis, 359
Alveolar cell differentiation,
body cavifies and membranes,
Adrenergic effects, on blood vessels,
lactogenesis and, 538-540
9-10
288
Alveolar drawing, 91
body planes, 8-9, 10
Adrenergic fibers, 286, 295
Alveolar ducts, 421
defined, 3
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, 130,
Alveolar fluid, surface tension of,
 developmental, 4
338, 351-352
424
directional and posifional terms,
adrenal cortex and, 358
Alveolar macrophages, 434, 444
8
glucocorticoids and, 359
 Alveolar (or acinar) glands, 102,
macroscopic, 3-4
parfurifion and, 573
102
microscopic, 3, 4
 Adrenocorticotropin, anterior
Alveolar sacs, 421
nomenclafure for 810
pituitary gland and, 338t
respiratory membrane and, 423
surface, 4
 Aerobic mechanism, muscle
Alveolar strucfures
systemic, 4
metabolism and, 193
postparfum, 539
Anchoring junctions, 99, 100
Aerobic respiration, 20
preparfum, 539
Anconeus muscle, of leg, 206t
 Afferent (or sensory) division, of
Alveolar ventilation rate, 425
Androgens, 357, 574
 peripheral nervous system,
Alveoli, 421, 422, 436
Anemia, 377
216, 266
Alveoli walls, 422
Angiotensin I, 402
 Afferent (or sensory) neurons, 220
Amacrine cells, 310, 311
Angiotensin II, 358, 402, 403, 471
Affinity, 51
Amiloride, 301
Angular movements, of synovial
Afterload, 396
Amino acid nitrogen metabolism, 79
joints, 170t
Index
635
Annexin 1, 75 (box)
Appendicular skeleton, 156-166, 176
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
Annular folds, bovine, 562
pelvic limbs, 163-166
ATPase pumps, 43, 44 
ANP. See Atrial natriuretic peptide
thoracic limbs, 156-158, 160-163
action of, 53
Antagonists, 200, 201t, 236, 333
Appendix, 519
feafures of three major classes of,
Antebrachiocarpal joint, 160, 172
Apposifional growth, 109
466t
Anterior median fissure, 259
 of cartilage, 151
kidney function and, 466
Anterior nucleus, of thalamus, 249
Aquaporins (AQPs), 51, 51 (box)
Atria,387
Anterior pituitary, 337
Aqueduct of Sylvius, 245
Atrial natriuretic factor, 363t
follicle-stimulating hormone,
Aqueous humor, 306
Atrial natriuretic peptide, 362, 403,
luteinizing hormone and, 563,
Arachidonic acid, 40, 41
471
564
Arachnoid granulations, 260
 blood pressure regulation and,
hormones of, 338t, 343-344
Arachnoid mater, 259, 260
402-403
hypothalamus and, 339
Arachnoid villi, 245
Atrial systole, in cardiac cycle, 395
Anterior semicircular canals, 313
Arbor vitae (tree of life), 253
Atrioventricular (AV) valves, 388
Antibodies, 455
Arcuate arteries, 461, 462
Atropine, 236
 avian vs. mammalian systems,
Aristotle, 530
Auditory ossicles, 313
453-454
Arrector pili, 128
Auditory reflex, 258t
primary and secondary responses,
 ART. See Assisted reproductive
Auditory sensory system, 268t
452
technologies
Auditory tubes, 420
specific
Arterial blood pressure, sympathetic
Auditory-vestibular cranial nerve
antibody strucfure and function,
nervous system and, 290
(VⅢI),257t
450451
Arteries, 398, 413
Auerbach's plexus, 2
283
 B cell selection and antibody
coronary, 390
Auricles
secretion, 451
pulmonary, 404
heart, 387
cell-mediated immunity,
Arterioles, 398,413
outer ear, 313
451-453
Artery wall, section of, 93
Auiscultation, 394
 strucfure and function of, 450-451
Arthrodia joint, 170
Autonomic nervous system, 216,
 Antibody secretion, B cell selection
Arthrology, 167
216, 265, 281-290
and, 451
Articular cartilage, 169
anatomy of, 284-286
Anticlinal vertebra, 156
Artificial inseminafion, 558, 568,
 parasympathetic division,
Antidiuretic hormone, 50, 469, 481
581-582
285-286, 294
 blood pressure regulation and,
Artificial insemination cooperatives,
sympathetic division, 284-285,
402
581
294
secretion of, 343
Arytenoid cartilages, 420
cenfral nervous system confrol of,
Antigen-presenting cells, 54, 442
Ascending aorta, 406
288-290, 295
 tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Ascending loop of Henle, 462
cardiovascular reflexes, 290
 Antigens, 451
Ascending reticular activating
 gastrointestinal reflexes, 290
Antigen stimulation, of B cells, 451
system, 254
glandular reflexes, 290
Antiport carriers, 51, 52
Asimov, G. J., 344, 540
Ocular reflexes, 290
Antiport transports, 55
ASP. See Agouti signaling protein
urogerital reflexes, 290
Antisense strand, 81
Aspartate, 233
visceral reflexes, 290
Antithrombin, 385
Aspergillus fumigatus, 434 (box)
digestive tract and, 487
Antral follicles, 565
Aspirin, 385
divisions of, 283-284, 294
Aorta, 398
gastric bleeding and, 383 (box)
parasympathetic division,
ascending, 406
Assisted reproductive technologies,
283-284, 294
divisions within, 406
581
sympathetic division, 283, 294
Aortic arch, 406, 406
Association fibers, 246
heart rate regulation and, 396-397
Aortic bodies, 429
Associafion neturons (or
hypothalamus and, 281, 288, 289
Aortic valves, 389
interneurons), 220, 221
neural integration of, 283
AP. See Action potential
Aster formation, 33
organization of, 282
 APCs. See Anfigen-presenting
Asternal ribs, 156
overlap of somatic and aufonomic
cells
Astrocytes, 117, 119, 221
functions, 282-283
Apneustic area, 
429
Asymmetric carbon, 38
Overview of, 281-282
Apneustic center, 252
Atherosclerosis, diabetes and, 362
parasympathetic and sympathetic
Apocrine glands, 126, 137
Aflanto-axial joint, 170, 171
effects on, 289t
Apocrine secretion, 101, 101
Aflanto-occipital joint, 156, 166,
peripheral nerves within, 266
Aponeuroses, 181
171
 pharmacology of, 287t
Apoptosis, 23, 369, 454
Aflas, 156, 157
physiology of, 286, 288-289,
 of mammary epithelial cells, 551
Atoms, 5, 5
294-295
t10
mecharism for, 267, 267
chemically reacfive and
adrenergic fibers, 286
Apparent digestible energy, 59, 59
inert,examples of, 44, 44
cholinergic fibers, 286
636 Index
Autonomic nervous system
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 520
Bicarbonate ions, carbon dioxide
(continued)
BAD. See Brachycephalic airway
transport and, 428
interactions of the sympathetic
disease
Bicep reflex, in diagnostics, 282
and parasympathetic
Balance
Biceps brachii, 157, 205t
divisions, 288
hearing and, 314-316, 320-321
Bicornuate uterus, 560
neurofransmiffers and recepfors,
physiology of, 314-316
Bicuspid valves, 387
286
Ball-and-socket joint, 170
Bile, 516
other neurotransmifters, 286, 288
 BAOS. See Brachycephalic airway
 composition and function of,
smooth muscle innervated by, 197
 obstruction syndrome
517-518
stomach and, 497
Barbicels, 135
secretion of, 517
Autoregulation of blood pressure,
Barbs, 135
Bile ducts, 517
physical and chemical factors,
Baroreceptor reflex, blood pressure
of horse, 509
403-404
maintenance and, 402
Bile salts, 40, 517, 518
Autorhythmic fibers, 391
Baroreceptors, 269, 270
absorption of, in small intestine,
 Avian immunology, mammalian
heart rate and, 396
514
systems immunology vs.,
Barriers, cell junctions and, 99
liver and synthesis of, 519
453-454
BAS. See Brachycephalic airway
Bile secretion, regulation of, 518
Avian lung, cross-current gas
syndrome
Bilirubin, 379, 518
exchange in, 433
 Basal energy needs, determining,
 Binding proteins
Avian nitrogen excretion, 479
60
 ovarian development and,
Avian pulmonary system, pathway
Basal ganglion, 247, 248
365
of gas flow through, 432
Basal lamina, 91
study of, 364
 Avian reproductive systems
 Basal metabolic rate, 60
Binocular vision, 308
female, 579-580
Basal metabolism, thyroid hormones
Bioassays, 333
male, 580-581
and, 352
Biochemical pathways
Avian respiration
Basement membrane, 11-12, 36, 89,
example of, 58
air sacs, 431, 439
86
"real life" and, 69 (box)
anatomy of avian respiratory
Basophils, 111, 112, 338, 377, 378t,
Biogenic amines, 231
system, 430-431, 439
381, 383
Biotechnology, 334
avian venfilatior and gas
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Bipeds, 8
exchange, 431-432, 440
BBB. See Blood-brain barrier
Bipennate fascicle arrangement,
 prehatching respiration in birds,
B cells, 442, 446
199
433
antigen stimulation of, 451
Bipolar cells, 310
Avians
base-secreting, 476-477, 477
Bipolar neurons, 220
feathers of, 135-136
 mafuration of, developmental
Birds
red blood cells in, 377
stages of, 454
accommodating mechanisms in,
stomach of, 507, 507
selection of, antibody secretion
307
Avian salt glands, 479
and, 451
 changes in thoracic skeleton
Avian skeleton, 166-167
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
during respiration in, 431
AVR. See Alveolar ventilation rate
BCS. See Body condition score
egestion in, 499-500
Axial, 9t
Beef caffle, anabolic steroids used in,
egg-laying fatigue in, 148
Axial skeleton, 152-156, 175
351 (box)
esophagus in, 496
cranium, 153
Bernard, Claude, 5, 281
formed elements and blood cells
skull, 152-153
Beta-adrenergic agonists, tissue
in, 383, 409
species differences, 153-154
composifion in meat animals
heterophils, 383
thorax, 156
and, 351 (box)
thrombocytes, 383
vertebral column, 154-156
 Beta-adrenergic receptors, 286
 heterophil/lymphocyte ratio in,
Axis, 157
Beta-defensin 2, 124
383 (box)
Axon collateral, 218
Beta-hydroxybutyric acid, 74, 76, 77
intestinal motility in, 511
Axoneme, 25
Beta-oxidation
 muscles involved in respiration in,
Axon hillock, 117, 217, 218
overview of, 70-71
432t
Axon length, neuron classification
 of 16-carbon oleic acid, summary
pneumatic bones in, 4
based on, 220
of ATP production from,
70t
prehatching respiration in, 433
Axons, 117, 217,218
 Beta-pleated regions, of protein, 36
reproduction in, 578-581
diameter of, conduction velocity
BF. See Bursa of Fabricius
respiratory system in, 430
and, 228
bGH. See Bovine GH
skeleton of, 166-167
Axon terminal, 218
BHBA. See Beta-hydroxybutyric acid
urinary physiology and function
Axoplasm, 218
Biaxial joint, 170
in, 478-479
 Bicarbonate buffer system
Birth defects, 573
 Bacterial attack, inflammatory
Bicarbonate buffer system of
folic acid and, 242 (box)
response and, 444
blood, pH maintenance
Bitter taste, 299, 300, 300,
Bacteroides fragilis, 521
and, 473-477
317
Index
637
Bladder, 460
Blood-milk barrier, 99
Body
transifional epithelium, 98-99,
Blood plasma, 12, 377
stomach, 497
99
Blood pressure, 398, 400-401,
vertebral, 155
 urogenital reflexes and, 290
414
Body cavities and membranes, 9-10
Blastocoele, 570
diastolic, 401
Body condition score, 71
Blastocyst, 569, 570
hypothalamus and, 288
 Body growth, somatotropin and,
Blastocyst cell division, 570
renal confrol of, 403, 404
344
Blastomere, 570
renal regulation: long-term confrol
Body planes, 8-9, 9t, 10
Bleb, 53, 54
of, 464 
 Body temperafure, hypothalamus 
 Blephorospasm, 186
renin and, 471
and, 288
Blind spot, 305
systolic, 401
Body wall, muscles of, 207t-208t
Blood, 111, 375
throughout circulatory system,
Body weight, milk yield and, 549
components of, 376
401
Bohr effect, 428, 428
formed elements in, 377
uurinary system and, 459, 480
Bolus, 298, 496
summary of, 378t
 Blood pressure maintenance,
 Bone cells, types of, 142
functions of, 375-376, 407
401-404, 414-415
 Bone deposifion, nutrients necessary
immunity and, 376, 407
autoregulation of
for, 148
pathways of, through heart, 389
chemical factors, 403-404
Bone development, 144-145, 174
physical characteristics of,
physical factors, 403
endochondral ossification, 144-145
376-377, 407-408
baroreceptor reflex, 402
inframembranous ossification,
regulation and, 376, 407
chemical regulation: short-term
144
supply of, to lungs, 389
control, 402-403
Bone markings, 148-149, 149, 149t,
transport of, 376, 407
 antidiuretic hormone, 402
175
transport of oxygen and carbon
atrial natriuretic peptide,
Bone remodeling, 146
dioxide in, 429
402-403
fracture repair, 147
Blood-brain barrier, 221, 261, 264,
endothelial-derived factors, 403
 Bone resorption, 146
398
Bone(s)
 Blood cell numbers, in various
402
cancellous or spongy 140, 143
species, 379t
inflammatory chemicals, 403
chemical composition of, 143,
Blood cells, 377-383
renin-angiostnsin-aldosterone
174
formation of, 381-383, 382,408
system, 402
classificafion of, 139-140, 174
erythrocyte formafion, 382
chemoreceptor reflex, 402
compact, 140, 141-143
leukocyte formation, 382
neural regulation, 402
compact, low power, 110
platelet formation, 382
 renal regulation: long-term confrol
growth of, 145-146, 174-175
formed elements and, in birds,
direct renal mechanism, 403
hematopoietic tissue in, 143-144
383
indirect renal mechanism, 403
heterotopic, 144
heterophils, 383
Blood smear, 16, 111
homeostatic imbalances on,
thrombocytes, 383
Blood supply
146-147, 148, 175
types of, 377, 379-381
to kidneys, 462
mechanical stress on, 147-148,
agranulocytes, 381
to liver, 517
148
erythrocytes, 377, 379
medullary, 148
granulocytes,
380-381
Blood-testis barrier, 577
microscopic anatomy of, 141-143
platelets, 381
Blood vessel lumen, 401
periosteal, 145
 Blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier,
Blood vessels, 375
pneumafic, 4
261
adrenergic effects on, 288
remodeling and repair of, 146-147
Blood clotting,
384-385, 409
anastomoses, 399
of skull, 153t
cascade, 384
arteries, 398
types of, 140
clot refraction and repair, 385
arterioles, 398
woven, 143
 common pathway, 384
capillaries, 398
Bone strucfure
extrinsic pathway, 384
capillary exchange, 399-400
gross anatomy of, 140, 174
factors limiting clot growth and
 connective tissue and, 181
microscopic anatomy of, 141-143,
formafion, 385
length of, 401
174
fibrinolysis, 385
portal systems and, 399
Bony collar, 145
intrinsic pathway, 384
section through, 93
Bony pelvis, 163
positive feedback system and, 8
structure and function of, 397-399,
"Book stomach," 502
vitamin K and, 384
413
Botox, 186
Blood doping, 377 (box)
veins, 399
Botulinum toxin, 186
Blood flow
venules, 399
Bovine epididymis, pseudostratified
factors related to, 400-401
venus blood flow, 399
epithelium, 99
through liver lobule, 518
walls of, 397, 397
Bovine estrous cycle, secretion of
Blood groups, 385, 409-410
Blood viscosity, 401
major reproductive hormones
 Blood levels of urea nitrogen, 472
B lymphocytes, 382
during, 567
638 Index
Bovine growth hormone, 29, 344
BP. See Blood pressure
Broody chickens, 578
 Bovine insulin RIA data, example,
Brachial bone, 158
Brown adipose tissue, 72, 106,
335t
Brachiocephalic skulls, 154
107
Bovine mammary tissue
Brachiocephalic trunk, 406
Brown mutation, 131t, 137
 lactating, light and transmission
Brachiocephalicus muscles
Bruce Effect, 340
electron microscopic images,
of neck, 202t
Brunner's glands, 511
20
of thoracic limb, 204t
Brush border, 94, 94, 509
 loose connective, 104
 Brachium conjunctivum,
252
Brush-border enzymes, 512t
 Bovine mammary tissue slices, data
Brachium pontis, 252
intestinal juices and, 511, 525
rates for acetate and glucose
Brachycephalic airway disease, 425
bST. See Bovine somatotropin
uise for energy production
Brachycephalic airway obstruction
BTUs. See British thermal units
and for fafty acid synthesis
syndrome, 425
Buccinator muscles, of head and
 by, before and affer calving,
 Brachycephalic airway syndrome,
neck, 202t
169
425
Buffy coat, 376
 Bovine reproductive tract, female,
Bradykinin, nociceptors and, 271
Bulbourethral glands, 574, 575
histology of, 558
Brahman cows, puberty in, 564 
Bulk flow, 413
Bovines
Brain, 241
capillary exchange and, 400
 average age or time for selected
cerebral cortex, 246
Bull, 568
reproductive aftributes in,
cerebral hemispheres, 243-245
gross anatomy of dissected
564t
cerebral white mafter, 247-248
reproductive tract of, 575
developing fetus and associated
basal ganglion, 247
gross anatomy of testis and
membranes in, 572
limbic system, 247-248
corresponding histological
epididymis in, body region of,
cranial nerves and, 257, 257-258,
appearance of testicular
577
257t
parenchymal tissue, 575
female reproductive tract, gross
cytoarchitecture of goat brain
Bulldog, skull of, 154
anatomy of, 560
surface, 244
BUN. See Blood levels of urea
femur of, 164
diencephalon, 249
nitrogen
follicular development in, 566
 epithalamus, 251
Bundle of His, 391
humerus of, 160
functional areas
Bunion, 170
 reticular activating system, 254
Bursae, 169-170
loose connective mammary tissue
sleep and, 254-257
Bursa of Fabricius, 453-454
from, 104
hypothalamus, 249-251
Butyrate, 38, 76
Oocyte development in, stages of,
lobes of, 244, 244-245
Butyric acid, 507
571
medulla oblangata, 253-254
Butyric faffy acid, 14t 
 posterior vaginal epithelium of,
mesencephalon, 251-252
559
metencephalon, 252-253
Cadherins, 100
 proliferation and cell growth,
motor areas of, 247
Caenorhabditis elegans, 369
 mammary epifhelial cells, 29
organization of, 243-245,
cagA gene, 521
radius and ulna of, 161
261-262
Calamus, 135
scapula of, 159
sensory areas of, 247
Calcanean tuberosity, 165
 secfion of uterus during follicular
thalamus, 249
Calcaneus, 165
phase of estrus cycle, 559
ventricles of, 245, 262
Calcitonin, 146, 147, 324, 355
tail of sperm cell, 26
Brain stem, 243
Calcium, 43
tibia and fibula of, 165
Brain vesicles, 243, 243
excitation-confraction coupling
tissue from anterior vagina, 95
BrdU. See Bromodeoxyuridine
and, 186
vagina and cervix in, 561
Breast carcinomas, HER2, Neu 
in milk, 545
various bones in, 149
receptors and, 366
 parathyroid hormone and
Bovine somatotropin
Breathing, 423
metabolism of, 324, 355-357
debate over commercial use of, in
 Breeding capacity, epididymal tail
synaptic plasticity and, 231
dairy cows, 550-551
reserves and, 577
Calcium homeostasis, bone
effect in lactating cows, on milk
Brine curing, 136
mineralization and, 146
 production and energy
British thermal urits, 58
Calmodulin, 119
metabolism, 60, 60t
Brodmann, Korbinian, 246
in smooth muscle, 198
galactopoiesis and, 536, 550-551
Bromodeoxyuridine, 29, 93, 94
Calories, 58
 Bovine vagina, anterior, tissue from,
Bronchi, 420-421, 435
Calorigenic effect, 352
95
in birds, 430-431
Calorimetry, 58, 60
"Bowlegged," 162
Bronchial arteries, 422
Calsequestrin, 183
Bowman's capsule, 91, 462, 464
Bronchial tree, 421
Calvaria, 152
filtrate formation and, 464
canine, 421
CAMP. See Cyclic adenosine
Bowman's glands, 298
Bronchioles, 421
monophosphate
Boyle's law, 423
Broodiness, 578
Canaliculi, 110, 142, 143
Index
639
Canal of Schlemm, 304, 306
Cardiac notch, 421
Catechols, 232
Cancellous bone, 110, 140, 143
Cardiac output, 377, 395-396, 412
Catenin, 100
Cancer, Erb family and, 366
afterload, 396
Cations, heart rate and, 397
Canine heartworms, 396 (box)
contractility, 396
Cats
Canines
exercise and, 423
AB blood groups in, 385
humerus of, 160
preload, 395-396
atrial side of heart in, 386
pelvic girdle of, 163
Cardiac veins, 390
auricular side of heart in, 386
radius and ulna of, 161
Cardiocytes, 195, 196
blood cell numbers in, 379t
Canines (teeth), 492
Cardiogenic shock, 404
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 388
Cannon, Walter, 5, 281, 283
Cardiovascular center, 254
(box)
Capacitation, 568, 581
in medulla oblongata, 402
external nose of, 418
events following, 569
Cardiovascular disease, 40
field of vision in, 308
Capillaries, 390, 398, 413
Cardiovascular reflexes, 290, 296
hypothyroidism in, 353
endothelial cells of, 4
Cardiovascular system, 6, 375-415
kidney of, 462
types of, 398
blood groups and crossmatching,
length and capacity of parts of
Capillary exchange, 399-400, 413
385
digestive tract in, 488t
bulk flow, 400
blood vessels and hemodynamics,
location, number, and ripple
diffusion, 399-400
397-399
openings of mammary glands
Capillary hydrostatic pressure, 400
components of, 375
in, 530t
Capillary-to-muscle fiber ratio, 194
factors affecting blood flow,
normal electrocardiogram in, 393
Capillary wall, fluid flow across, 400
400-401
number of teeth in, 493t
Capons, 578
function and composition of blood,
onion toxicity in, 427 (box)
Caproic fatty acid, 14t
375-376
primary projection areas of, 247
Caprylic fatty acid, 14t
heart, 386-389
purring in, 420 (box)
Carbamino compounds, 428
hemostasis, 383-384
relationship between BUN and
Carbaminohemoglobin, 377, 428,
Carnitine, 70
GFR in, 473
474
exercise and, 195 (box)
thorax in, lateral aspect of,
158
Carbohydrate fermentation, rumenal,
Carnivores, 488
thyroid histology for, 352
507
Carotid arteries, 429
tidal volume and respiration rate
Carbohydrates, 37-39
Carpal bones, 160, 162
in, 425t
lassification of, 37-38
Carpal joint, 172, 172
Cattle
 digestion of, in small intestine,
Carpormetacarpal joint, 172
behavioral cues in, 568
511-512, 512
Carpometacarpus, 167
blood groups in, 385
liver and metabolism of, 518
Carpus, 162
embryo transfer in, 582
metabolism of, common terms
 Carpus flexion, stay apparatus of
estrous cycle in, 565
associated with, 61t
horse and, 210
hormonal induction of lactation in,
rumenal digestion of, 507
 Carpus hyperextension, stay
541
Carbon, 38, 44
apparatus of horse and, 210
horned, frontal sinus in, 419
Carbon dioxide, 45, 50
Carpus valgus, 162
location, number, and nipple
 exchange of oxygen and, 426
Carrier protein-mediated transporf
openings of mammary glands 
transport in blood, 429
properfies, 52
in, 530t
transport to lungs, 428, 438
Carrier proteins, transport
mammary growth in, 532
Carboric acid, 428, 430, 475
mechanisms and, 51
during gestation, 537
Carboric anhydrase, 475
Cartilage, 118
puberty in, 563, 564
Carbon monoxide, 235
growth of, 151
Caudal, 9t
Carboxylic acid, 15, 15
larynx, 420
Caudal articular processes, 156
Carboxypeptidase, 515
nasal, 418
Caudal vertebrae, 155, 163
Cardia, stomach, 497
of third eyelid, 303
Caudate nucleus, 247
Cardiac conduction system, 391-392
types of, 108, 151
Caveoli, 196
Cardiac cycle, 395, 412
Cartilaginous joints, 167, 168t,
CBC. See Complete blood count
steps in, 394-395
169
CB154-treated cows, Prl sescretion in,
Cardiac electrical activity.
Caruncles, uterus, 560, 572
348
 propagation of, through heart 
Catabolic reactions, 45
CCK. See Cholecystokinin
conduction system, 391-392
Catabolism, 58, 283
CD. See Collecting duct
Cardiac muscle, 112, 114-115, 115,
of proteins, 78-79
CD4 cells, 452
118, 119, 195, 198t, 387, 390,
Catagen phase, in hair growth cycle,
CD8 cells, 452
390-391, 411
129, 137
Cdk. See Cyclin-dependent protein
action potential in fibers of, 392
Catalases, 23
kinases
functional characteristics of,
196
Cataracts, diabetes and, 362
Cecum, 519
11
skeletal muscle cells vs., 196
Catecholamines, 232-233
of horse, 520
Cardiac myocytes, 195
synthesis of, 233
Celiac ganglion, 285
640 Index
Cell biology, technical advancements
stages of cell cycle, 30
functions of, 260
in, 363
stages of mitosis, 31, 32,33
movement out of ventricles, 245
Cell body (or soma), 217
membrane strucfure and
Cerebroventricles, 221, 245, 245
Cell cycle, stages of, 26, 30-31, 31
fluid mosaic model, 15-16
of sheep, 245
Cell division, regulators of, 33-34
 microscopy techniques, 16
Cerebrum, 243
Cell-mediated immurity, 442, 442,
nuclear strucfure, 25-27
Cervical cranial nerves, 267
451-453
chromatin strucfure, 27
Cervical dystonia, 186
Cells,5,5,55
nucleoli, 27
Cervical os, 561, 562
bone, 142
 organelles of the cytoplasm, 19-25
Cervical vertebrae, 154, 155,155t,
columnar, 88, 88,94, 118
centrioles, 25
156
columnar epithelial, 95
endoplasmic reticulum and
Cervix, 558, 560, 563
from intestine, 93
Golgi apparafus, 21-23
bisected view of, 562
as common denominator, 11-12
 lysosomes and peroxisomes, 23
bovine, 561
cuboidal, 88, 88,89, 118
microfilaments, microtubules,
parfurition and, 573
death of, 267
and intermediate filaments,
Cesarean section, 574
degree of differentiation of, 19
23-25
Chalazae, 580
differentiation examples, 20
mitochondria, 20-21
Chaperones, 330
endothelial, 93
ribosomes, 21
Cheeks, 489
epifthelial, 118
Cellular physiology, 4
Cheek teeth, 492
goblet, 94, 101, 443
macromolecules and, 34-41
Chemical bonds, major types of,
immune, in defense of fissue and,
Cellular secrefion, mechanisms of,
43-44
454t
101
Chemical digestion, in small
multinucleated, 26
Cellular synthesis and secretion,
intestine, 511
multiunit, 115
major pathways for, 16
Chemically gated charnels, 224
nucleated, 26
Cemenfum, 491
Chemical reactions, 45, 55
osteoprogenitor, 141, 142, 145
Central fafigue, muscle fatigue vs.,
Chemicals, 5
simple squamous, 91, 92
194
Chemical synapses,
218, 219,219,
squamous, 88,88,118
Central fovea, 305
219t
taste, 299
Central medulla, 128
Chemical transmission, synaptic
tissues, technology and, 103 (box)
Central nervous system,
185,216,
transmission and, 229-230
transport processes used by, 50t 
216, 241-264, 265. See also
Chemokines, 434
types of, 11
Brain; Spinal cord
Chemoreceptor reflex, blood pressure 
wandering, 103
control of autonomic nervous
maintenance and, 402
Cell signaling, 45, 324-325, 370-371
system by, 288-289, 295
Chemoreceptors, 268, 273-274, 292,
endocrine and growth factor
embryoric development, 241-243,
297, 396
signaling, 336-337
261
 respiratory system and, 429-430
 measuring circulating hormone
enteric nervous system and, 487
Chemotaxis, 443, 444, 448
concentrafions, 333-336
protection of, 260-261
Chewing reflex, 277
 mechanisms of cell surface
blood-brain barrier, 261
CHF. See Congestive heart failure
hormone signaling, 325-329
 blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier,
Chicken egg, parts of, 580
 mecharisms of internal hormone
261
Chicken reproductive tract, female,
cell signaling, 329-331
cerebrospinal fluid, 260-261
structures of, 579
receptors and regulation, 331-333
meninges, 260
Chickens
Cell surface hormone signaling,
Centrioles, 25,33
 blood cell numbers in, 379t
cyclic AMP and, 325-329
 cellular movement and, 26
bursa of Fabricius in, 453 454
Cell surface receptors, strucfural
Centromeres, 31
 length and capacity of parts of
variations between types of,
Centrosomes, 25, 32
digestive tract in, 488t
326
 Cephalic phase, gastric secretions
mating behaviors in, 578
Cell theory, ideas inherent in, 41-42,
and emptying, 500, 501
number of vertebrae in, 155t
55
Cerebellar peduncles, 253
reproduction in, 578
Cellular biochemistry, 12, 41-47
Cerebellum, 252
skeleton of, 166
chemical bonds, 43-45
Cerebral cortex, 243, 246, 262
Chief cells, in gastric glands, 497
chemical reactions, 45
evolutionary changes in, 246
Childbirth, posifive feedback system
significance of enzymes of, 45-47
white mafter, or fibers in, 246
and,8
Cellular movement, cenfrioles and,
Cerebral hemispheres, 243-244
Chlorine, 43
26
Cerebral peduncles, 252
Cholecystokinin, 6, 500, 518
Cellular organelles, 14-20
Cerebral white mafter, 262
Cholesterol, 39-40, 55, 518
 cell growth and differenfiation,
Cerebrospinal fluid, 221, 242, 245,
liver and synthesis of, 518
tid
27-30
260-261, 263
steroid synthesis and, 357
 regulators of cell division,
 composition of blood vs.
Cholinergic fibers, 286, 295
33-34
composition of, 261t
Cholinergic neurons, 221, 232
Index 641
Chondroblasts, 109, 144
Cleidomastoideus muscles, of neck,
Complement, 376, 449
Chondrocytes, 109, 145, 145
202t
 inflammation response and, 445t 
Chondroitin sulfate, 109
CLIP. See Corticotrophin-like
Complement activafion, 449
Chordae tendineae, 388
 intermediate lobe peptide
Complementary bases (or bonds), 41
Chorion, 570, 572
Clitoris, 563
Complete blood count, 381 (box)
Chorionic mammotropin, 542
Cloaca, 454, 478, 580
Complete fracfure, 147
Chorionic somatomammotropin, 542
Cloacal kiss, 580
Composite tissues, 111
Chorionic villi, 572, 573
Cloning, 581, 583-584
Compound alveolar glands, 102, 102
Choroid, 304
from fully differentiated cells, 12
Compound fracture, 147
Choroid plexus, 261
overview of micromanipulation
Compound microscope, 17-19
Chromatids, 31
and, 584
Compound tubular glands, 102, 102
Chromatin, 26, 27
Clostridium, 520
Concentric confraction, 191
Chromophobes, 338
Clostridium botulinum, 186
Conceptus, 570
Chromosomes, mitotic stages and,
Clot, blood, 384
Conchae, 418
31, 32, 33
Club hair, 129
Conducting pathway anatomy.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
Clutches, of eggs, 578, 579
419-421
disease, 434 (box)
CNS. See Central nervous system
larynx, 420
Chylomicrons, 40, 76, 509,514
CO. See Carbon monoxide; Cardiac
oropharynx and laryngopharynx,
Chyme, 497, 499, 508, 511, 514, 515
output
420
Chymotrypsin, 46, 515
Coagulation, 384
 pharynx and nasopharynx,
Chymotrypsinogen, 515
Coat color, 130-132
419-420
Cilia,25
Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometer
trachea and bronchi, 420-421
Ciliary body, 304
measurement, corneal touch
Conduction system, cardiac, 391-392
Ciliary muscles, 305
threshold in diabetic and
Conduction velocity, 228-229
accommodation and, 307
normal dogs, 362, 362t
Condyloid joint, 170
Ciliary processes, 305
Cochlea, 5, 312,313
Cones, 305, 308, 309
Cilium, 5
Cochlear duct, 313
structure of, 309
Cingulate gyrus, 248
Cocks, 578
visual information processing and,
Circadian rhythms
Codon, 81
310
hypothalamus and, 251, 289
Coenzyme Q, 66
visual pathway and, 311
neuroendocrine control of adrenal
Coenzymes, 46t
Congestive heart failure, 387 (box)
cortical activity and, 359
Coffin bone, 133
Conjunctiva, 302
Circle of Willis, 337
Colchicine, 23, 24
Connective tissues,
5,11, 12, 87,
Circular fascicle arrangement,
199
"Cold" hormones, 331, 332, 336
102-111, 118
Circulation
Cold receptors, 272, 273
classificafion of, 103-106, 180-181
068Xreuo.10
Collagen, 12, 89, 91, 103, 124
components of, 103
systemic and pulmonary, 389, 389
in mammary stromal tissue, 536
sheaths in skeletal muscle, 181
Circulatory routes, 404 406
type IV, 107
Sirius Red-stained, 105
pulmonary circulation, 404-405
types of, 36
specialized, 106-111
systemic circulation, 405-406
Collagen immunocytochemistry, 106
Connexins, 101, 219, 219
Circulatory system
Collecting duct, 462
Connexons, 101, 219, 219
blood pressure throughout, 401
Collie, skull of, 154
Consensual light reflex, 258t
 cooperafion between respiratory
Colloid osmotic pressure, 400
Continuous capillaries, 398
system and, 433
Colon, 519
Contour feather, 135
Circumduction, 200, 201t
avian, 478
Contractile proteins, 182
Circumvallate papillae, 298
Colony-stimulating factors, 382, 447
Contractility, 396
 CIRD. See Controlled internal drug
Colostrum, 148, 441, 449, 450, 487,
muscle and, 180
release devices
572
Contraction phase, muscle twitch,
Citric acid cycle, 65
Columnar cells, 88, 88, 94, 118
190, 190
CL. See Corpus luteum
Columnar epithelial cells
Control center, 7, 7
Classical neurotransmifters, 231,
from intestine, 93
Controlled intermal drug release
235
pseudostratified, 98
devices, 568
Clathrin-coated pits, 53
simple,95
Conus medullaris, 258, 259
Clavicle, 156
Commissural fibers, 246
Convergence, of neuronal pools, 221
Clavodeltoid muscles, of thoracic
Commissure, 563
 Convergent fascicle arrangement,
limb, 204t
 Common pathway, blood clotting
199
Claws, 163
and, 384
COPD. See Chronic obstructive
Clearance rate, 472
Communicating junctions, 99
pulmonary disease
Cleidocephalicus muscles
Compact bone, 110, 140, 141-143
Coracobrachialis, 157, 205t
t10
of neck, 202t
low power, 110
Coracoid, 167, 431
of thoracic limb, 204t
microscopic structure of, 143
Coracoid process, 157
642 Index
Cori cycle, 64, 65
lactafion curves in, 548
CTT. See Corneal touch threshold
Corium, 133, 135
for those freated with oxytocin,
Cubital joint, 160
Cornea, 302
342
Cuboidal cells, 88, 88, 89, 118
layers of, 304
loose connective tissue from, 105
Cumulus oophorus, 565, 567
sectioned, low-power image of, 96
mating behaviors in, 568
Curare, 186
 simple squamous epithelium
milk production in, affer
Curing, of leather, 136
cornea, 96
suppression of Prl, 348
Cushing's syndrome, 359-360
stratified squamous epifhelium
nonlactating, mammary tissue of,
Cyanide, in saliva, 490
cornea, 96
20
Cydes, 576
Corneal nerves, diabetes and, 362
saliva production in, 491
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
Corneal reflex, 258t
 selected effects on, and treatment
74
Corneal touch threshold, in diabetic
with CB154 to suppress Prl
cell surface hormone signaling
and normal dogs, 362t 
secretion in, 542, 542t
and, 325-329
Cornual diverticulum, 419
serum Prl in, at calving, 348
Cyclic GMP, light transduction by
Corona radiata, 567
serum Prl in those given CB154,
photoreceptors and, 310,
Coronary arteries, 390
348,542
310
Coronary circulation, 390, 410-411
skeleton of, 150
Cyclin-dependent protein kinases,
of goat heart, 390
TRH injections in, 353-354
33
Coronary groove, 386
Coxal (or coxofemoral) arficulafion,
Cyclins, 33
Coronary sinus, 387, 406
172
Cyclopentanohydrophenanthrene
Coronet, 134
C peptide, 360
nucleus, 40, 41
Corpora albicanfia, 560
Cystorelin, 351 (box)
Corpora quadrigemina, 251
Crarial bones,
：152-153,153t
Cytochrome C, 66
Corpus callosum, 243
Cranial cavity,
6
Cytokine receptors, 370
Corpus luteum, 560, 562, 565, 566, 570
Cranial cruciate ligament, 171
Cytokine receptor superfamily.
Corpus striaftum, 247
Cranial division, of autonomic
325t
Cortex
nervous system, 285
Cytokines, 382, 403, 434, 446, 456
of kidney, 460, 460, 461, 461
Crarial nerves, 252, 257, 257-258,
 inflammation response and, 445t
tissue from, 467
263, 266
Cytokinesis, 31, 32
of ovary, 560, 565
Cranial processes, 156
Cytology, defined, 4, 87
Corticosterone, 357
Cranial reflexes, 258, 258t
Cytoplasm, 217
Corticotrophin-like intermediate lobe
Cranial sac, 502
organelles of, 19-25
peptide, 351
Crarial vault, 152
Cytosine, 41, 42, 55
Cortisol, 40, 331, 357
Crariorachischisis, 242
Cytoskeleton, 217
Costal arch, 156
Crariosacral division, of aufonomic
Cytotoxic cell activation, 453
Costochondral joints,
171
nervous system, 285
Cytotoxic T cells, 442, 452
Costovertebral joints,
：171
Cranium, 152, 153
attack of, 453
Cotyledons, 572
Creatine, 473
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Covalent bonds, 43, 44, 55
Creatine phosphate, 60, 393
Cows. See also Dairy cows
muscle metabolism and, 193
DAG. See Diacylglycerol
blood cell numbers in, 379t
Cricoid cartilages, 420
Dairy cows. See also Cows
 cell and milk production responses
Crista ampularis, dynamic
artificial insemination of, 581, 582
in, 448
equilibrium and, 316, 321
disturbance in calcium metabolism
duration of parfuriftion in, 574
Cristae, 20,21
in, 356
 EGF receptors in mammary tissue
Crop, 496
estrous cycle and ovulation in,
from, 366
Crop milk, 496, 558
565-566
exercise and mouth breathing in,
Cross bridge formation, sliding
high-producing, summary of major
425
filament theory and, 188
metabolic adjustments with
female reproductive tract in, 563t
Cross bridges
onset of lactafion in, 71-72,
 hormones during estrus cycle in,
 length-tension relationships and,
72t
350
189, 189
lactating
infusion of insulin affter glucose in,
in smooth muscle, 196
effect of bST in, 60t
361
Crossed-extensor reflex, 281, 281
hypothyroidism in, 353
internal strucfure of teat in, 547
in diagnostics, 282
ultrastrucfural analysis of
lactating
Crossmatching, 385-386, 409-410
cytoplasmic organelles in
GH and insulin in, 73
Crus cerebri, 252
mammary epithelia from,
mammary tissue taken from, 90
Cryptochordism, 574
539t
thyroid hormone responses to
Crypts of Lieberkin, 509
lactation curves and, 546
t10
TRH in, 354
Crystallins, 306
large-scale use of recombinant
type IV collagen in mammary
CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid
bovine GH in, 344
tissue from, 107
CT. See Calcitonin
mammary involution and, 552
xapul
643
relationship between MSCC, DHI
Diabetes, 324, 473
Diroflaria immitus, 396 (box)
cell counts score, and milk
Type I, 361, 362
Disaccharides, 37, 38, 55
production in, 17t
Type I1, 361, 362
structure of, 39
thyroidectomies in, 355
Diabetes insipidus, 343
Discoid placenta, 573
Dale's principle, 231
Diabetes mellitus, 74, 361
Disintegrations per minute, 335
Dalton's law, 426, 437
Diacylglycerol, 327
D-isomers, 38
Dark adaptation, by eye, 311,
Diagnostics, reflexes used in, 281,
Displaced fracfures, 147
319-320
282t, 293-294
16 e1s
"Dark current," photoreceptors and,
Diaphragm, 9, 421, 423
Distal convoluted tubule, 462, 467,
310
Diaphysis, 140, 146
468, 476
 DCM. See Dilated cardiomyopathy
Zonation of development most
Distal phalanx, 163
DCT. See Distal convoluted tubule
distal from, 145
Distal tubule ion fransport, 467
DEA system, in dogs, 385
Diarthrotic joints, 168
Divergence, of neuronal pools, 221
Deciduous teeth, 491, 493
 Diastolic blood pressure, 401
DNA, 363
 Deep (positional term), 9t
Dicrotic notch,
395
chromatin structure and, 27
 Defense mecharisms, overview of,
Diencephalon, 243, 243, 249, 250, 262
double-stranded, creafion of, 41
442
 Dietary energy, processing of, 58-59
histone and, 27, 28
Defensins, 380
Diffuse placenta, 572
informafion fransfer from RNA to,
Dehorning, 135
Diffusion, 413
81
 Dehydration, polycythemia and,
airborne particles and, 434
mammary, measure of, 535-536
376-377
capillary exchange and, 399-400
mitochondrial, 20, 25
Deiodination enzymes, 354, 355
osmosis and, 48
protein synthesis and,
.37.80-82
Deltoid muscles, 158
Digestible energy, 59
sexed semen and, 583
of shoulder, 205t
Digestion, 484
structure and function of, 42,
Deltoid tuberosity, 158
hormonal control of, 518t
79-80
Demyelinating diseases, 229 (box)
 Digestive enzymes, 512t 
structure of nitrogenous bases in,
Denatorium, bifter taste and, 300
 Digestive organs, blood supply of,
41, 42
Denafured ligand protein, 37
486
transgenic animals and, 584, 586
Dendrites, 217,217-218
Digestive system, 5, 6, 11, 483-527
Dogs
Dendritic cells, 442
enteric nervous system and, 487
anfigen groups or blood types in,
Dendritic spines, 218
functional anatomy of, 488-520,
385
Dendritic tree, 217, 218
522
axial and appendicular skeleton in,
de novo synthesis, 76
accessory organs, 515-519
152
Dens, 156
esophagus, 496
blood cell numbers in, 379t
Dense bodies, in smooth muscle, 196
large intestine, 519-520
bronchial tree in, 421
Dense bone, 110
mouth, 488-494
diabetic and normal, cormeal touch
Dense connective tissue, 103, 105
pharynx, 494-496
threshold in, 362t
 Dense irregular connective fissue,
small intestine, 507-514
distal pelvic limb of, 165
103, 105
stomach, 496-507
disturbance in calcium metabolism
 Dense regular connective tissue,
overview of, 483
in, 356
103
Digestive tract
excitation and conducting system
Dental pad, 492
basic structure of, 486
of heart in, 391
Dentate gyrus, 248
enteric nervous system and, 487
 exercise and mouth breathing in,
Dentes, 491
functions of, 483484, 522
425
Dentin, 491, 492
histology of, 486-487, 522
external nose of, 418
Deoxyribonuclease, 515
length and capacity of parts of,
eye and accessory structures of,
Deoxyribose, 38, 41
488t
303
 Depolarization, heart contraction
upper, of horse, 495
eye in, front view of, 302
and, 392
Digital cushion, 133
eye muscles of, 304
Depression
Digits, 162-163, 166
heartworms in, 396 (box)
muscle contraction and, 200,
 Dihydroxyacetone phosphate, 62
humerus in, 160
201t
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 387 (box)
hypothyroidism in, 353
 of shoulders or mandible, 171
 Dinoprost tromethamine, 40
intestinal motility in, 511
Dermal papillae, 124
Dipeptidase, 511
joints of pelvic limb of, 173
Dermis, 124-125
Dipeptides, absorption of, in small 
length and capacity of parts of
major features of, 123
intestine, 514
digestive tract in, 488t
Desmin, 196
Diploe, 140
location, number, and nipple
Desmosomes, 25, 100, 100
 Dipole moment, of water, 13
openings of mammary glands 
intercalated discs, 390
 Directional terms, in anatomy, 8
in, 530t
 Developmental anatomy, 4
Direct light reflex, 258t
normal electrocardiogram in, 393
Dewclaw, 162, 166
Directly gated charnels, 224
number of teeth in, 493t
644 Index
Dogs (continued)
middle ear, 312
Elephant, location, number, and
onion toxicity in, 427 (box)
outer ear, 312
ripple openings of mammary
oral cavity in, 489
of dog, 313
glands in, 530t
outer ear of, 313
Early diastole, in cardiac cycle, 395
Elevation
pelvic girdle of, lateral and dorsal
Earwax, 313
muscle contraction and, 200,
views, 163
Eccentric contraction, 191, 192
201t
radius and ulna of, 161
Eccrine glands, 125-126, 137
of shoulder or jaw, 171
salivary glands in, 491
ECG. See Equine chorionic
ELISAs. See Enzyme-linked
shorf-nosed, airway obstrucfion in,
gonadotropins
 immunoabsorbent assays
425 (box)
Edlampsia, 356
Ellipsoidal joint, 170
skeleton of, 151
ECM. See Extracellular mafrix
Embden-Meyerhof pathway, 61
skulls of, 154
Ectoderm, 241, 242
Embolus, 384
examples, 154
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, 285
Embryo genesis, 569
teeth in, 492, 493
EDV. See End diastolic volume
Embryology, 4
thoracic limb of, lateral aspect,
EEG wave pafterns, during
Embryos, 570
172
wakefulness and various sleep
 preimplantation, just before
thorax in, lateral aspect of, 158
stages, 255
hatching, 572
 tidal volume and respiration rate
Effectors, 7, 7
Embryo transfer, 573, 581, 582
in, 425t
Efferent fibers
Emesis, 499
tongue of, 490
of autonomic nervous system, 281
 Emigration, of leukocytes, 380
Dolicephalic skulls, 154
of somatic nervous system, 281
Emmetropic eye, 307
Dolly (cloned sheep), 12, 570, 583,
 Efferent (motor) nerves or neurons,
Enamel, tooth, 491, 492
584
220, 266
 Encapsulated dendritic endings,
Dopamine, 232, 236t, 237t
Efferent (or motor) division, of
274
Doping, blood, 377 (box)
 peripheral nervous system,
End diastolic volume, 395
Dorsal cavity, 9
216, 266
confractility and, 396
 Dorsal column-medial lemniscal
Efferent signal, 7
 preload and, 395
pathway, 270,270-271
Egestion, vomiting and, 499-500, 524
Endochondral bone, 145
Dorsal mesentery, 485
EGF. See Epidlermal growth factor
Endochondral ossification, 108,
 Dorsal (positional term),
16
Egg cell, cloning and, 584
144-145, 145
 Dorsal proctodeal gland,
580
Egg-laying fatigue, in birds, 148
Endocrine glands, 101
Dorsal ramus, 267
Egg production, photoperiod and, 348
Endocrine pancreas, 360-362, 370
 Dorsal respiratory group,
429
Eggs
Endocrine signaling, 336-337
Dorsal root ganglion, 267
chicken, parts of, 580
Endocrine system, 5, 6, 323-372
Dorsal sac, 502
pores in, 433
adrenal gland, 357-360
Dorsal spinous process, 155
production of, 578
cell signaling, 324-325
Dorsiflexion, 201t
release of, 580
EGF family, 365-367
Double bonds, 44
Eggshell formation, 167
endocrine and growth factor
 dpm. See Disintegrations per minute
Eicosanoids, 40
signaling, 336-337
Dry periods, milk production and,
ELAM-1, 447
endocrine pancreas, 360-362
552-553
Elastase, 515
FGF family, 367-368
Duct cross section, 98
Elastic arteries, 398
homeostasis and, 5, 323
Ducfus arferiosus, 388
Elastic cartilage, 108, 118, 151
hormones of anterior pituitary.
Ducfus deferens, 574, 575, 575
Elastic fibers, 103
343-344
Duodenum, 507, 508
Elasticity, muscle and, 180
hormones of posterior pifuitary,
section of, from BrdU-injected calf,
Elastin, 12, 89, 124
341-343
95
Elastin fibers, 106
hypophyseal-pifuitary axis, 337
Duplex uterus, 560
 Elbow flexion, stay apparatus of
IGF family, 363-365
Dural sinuses, 260
horse and, 210
 lactogenesis, lactation and,
Dura mater, 245, 259, 260, 260
Elbow joint, 171, 172
540-544
Du Vigneaud, 341
Electrical synapses, 218, 219, 219, 219t
leptin, 369-370
Dwarfism, 355
Electrical transmission, synaptic
measuring circulating hormone
Dynamic equilibrium, 315
transmission and, 229
concentrations, 333-336
crista ampularis and, 316, 321
Electrocardiogram, 393-394, 411-412
mecharisms of cell surface
Dyneins, 24
normal, 393
hormone signaling, 325-329
Dystocia, 574
Electrolyte composiftion,
 mechanisms of internal hormone
Dystophin, 182, 184
hypothalamus and, 288
cell signaling, 329-331
 Electrolytes, 47
overview of, 323-324
Ear
Electron microscope, 17, 19
receptors and regulation, 331-333
anatomy of, 311-313,320
Electrons, 44
thyroid gland, 352-355
inner ear, 312-313
Electron transport chain, reduced
transforming growth factor beta
lefft, anatomy of, 314
coenzymes and, 67
family, 368-369
Index
645
Endocrinology, practical, 351 (box)
Epididymis, 574, 575
Eructation sequence, 503
Endocytosis, 53, 54, 54,55, 146
bovine, body region of, 577
Erythemia, 130, 403
Endoderm, 570
head and body of, 577
Erythrocytes, 111, 376, 377, 378t, 381,
Endometrium, 560
tail region of, histological
408
Endomysium, 112, 180-181
appearance,577
blood viscosity and, 401
Endoneurium, 265, 266
Epiglottic cartilage, 420
characteristics of, 377
Endoplasmic reticulum, 19, 368
Epiglottis, 420, 494
formafion of, 382
Golgi apparatus and, 21-23
Epimysium, 112, 180, 181
life cycle of, 377, 379, 380
Endosome, 53
Epinephrine, 68, 74, 198, 232, 236t,
structure of, 379
Endosteum, 140
237t, 286, 325, 357, 360
Erythropoietin, 362, 382
Endothelial cells, 4, 93
blood pressure regulation and,
Escherichia coli, 334,444,520
Endothelial-derived factors, blood
402
Esophagus, 9, 11, 494
 pressure regulation and,
Epineurium, 265, 266
histology of, 496
403
Epiphyseal plate, 140,145, 146
layers of, 496
 Endothelial-derived relaxafion factor,
closure of, at puberty, 109
Estradiol, 364, 563, 564, 565
235
Epiphysis, 140, 145, 146
parturition and, 573
Endothelin, 403
Epiploic appendages, 519
Estrogen, 40, 331, 560
production and action of, 403
Epithalamus, 249, 251, 262
alveolar development and, 541
Endothelium, 93
Epithelial cells, 4, 11, 118
parfurition and, 573
End systolic volume, 395
classification of, by number of
placenta and, 573
afterload and, 396
strata, 88
Estrous cycles, 587
Energy
cultured, 91
defined, 564
descriptions of, 57-60
junctions of, 99-101
follicular waves in, 567
feedstuff, processing of, 59
nucleus of, 26
phases of, 565
 Energy metabolism, hypothalamus
Epithelial cell shapes, classificafions
Estrus control and synchronization,
and, 288
of, 88
351 (box)
 Energy of maintenance, 60
Epithelial strucfures, examples of, 90
Estrus cycle, 17, 560
Enkephalins, 288
Epithelial tissue, 5, 87, 88-102
follicular phase of, 559, 559
Enterendocrine cells, 487
characteristics of, 89-91
hormones during.
350
Enteric nervous system ("liffle
epithelial cell junctions, 99-101
Estrus (heat), 564
brain"), 487, 522
functions of, 90
Estrus synchronization schemes,
Enterocytes, 11, 12
glandular epithelial types,
：101-102
568
lipid transport through, 514
simple epithelium, 91-95
ESV. See End systolic volume
 Enteroendocrine cells, in gastric
stratified epithelium, 95-99
ET. See Embryo transfer
glands, 498
Epitheliochorial placentas, 572
Eukaryotic cells, 26
Enterogastric reflex, components of,
Epithelium, 87, 89
Eumelanin, 130, 131, 137
500
EPO. See Erythropoietin
Eversion, 171, 200, 201t
Enterokinase, 511, 515
EPSPs. See Excitatory postsynaptic
Ewes
Entropy, 57
potentials
 effect of gestafion on mammary
 Enzyme-linked immunoassays, 336,
Equations
growth, histology, and
451
Goldman, 223
epithelial cell labeling index
Enzyme-linked receptors, 328
milk yield-body weight
in, 535t
Enzymes, 55
relationship, 549
female reproductive tract in, 563t
action of, 46-47
Nernst, 223
leptin and onset of puberty in,
classification of, 46t
 palmitate production, 76
370
digestive, 512t
Equilibrium, 297
mammary development in, 535
naming, 46
physiology of, 314-316, 320-321
 mammary parenchymal growth in,
 protein-digesting, activation of,
receptors for, 312
28t,29,537t
515
Equine animals
Exchange reaction, 45
significance of, 45-47
 average age or time for selected
Exchange vessels, 398
Eosinophils, 111, 112, 377, 378t,
reproductive aftributes in, 564t
Excitability, muscle and, 180
380-381, 383, 443, 444
femur of, 164
Excitation-contraction coupling, 186,
tissue and cell defense and,
foot and hoof in, 133
187, 212
454t
humerus of, 160
Excitatory postsynaptic potentials,
Ependymal cells, 117, 119, 221
plantar view of hoof, 134
225,226, 226, 272, 276
Epicardium, 387
radius and ulna of, 161
Excretion
 Epidermal dendritic cells, 124
 skull of, exploded view,
154
digestive tract and, 484
Epidermal growth factor, 325, 328,
tibia and fibula of, 165
of rnitrogenous wastes, 477, 477
363t, 365-367
Equine chorionic gonadotropins, 573
Exercise
t10
cell growth and, 367
ER. See Endoplasmic reticulum
carnitine and, 195 (box)
Epidermis, 122-124
ErbB-1, 366
lactic acid and, 194
Epididymal duct, 575
ErbB family of receptors, 366
muscles and, 194-195
646 Index
Exhalation, 424
"False" ribs, 156
 Fetal membranes, expulsion of,
Exocrine glands, 12, 95, 98, 101
Falx cerebelli, 260
573
Exocytosis, 146, 229, 569
Falx cerebri, 260
Fetlock hyperextension, stay
Exons, 80
Faraday's constant, 223
apparafus of horse and, 210
Expiration, 436
Far point of vision, 307
Fetus, 570
 Expiration, pathway of gas flow
Farsightedness, 307
bovine, and associated membranes,
through avian pulmonary
Fascicles, 113, 113, 118, 180
572
system during, 432
arrangements of, 199, 199
Fever, 444
Expiratory reserve volume, 426
in peripheral nerves, 266
FFAs. See Free fatty acids
Extensibility, muscle and, 180
Fast glycolytic fibers, 194, 195t
FGFs. See Fibroblast growth factors
Extension, 200, 201t
Fast Green stain, 104
FGF variants, 368
External pipping, 433
Fast muscle fibers, 194
Fibrin, 384
External respiration, 423, 426, 437
Fast oxidative-glycolytic fibers, 194,
Fibrinolysis, 385
Exteroceptors, 124, 125, 268
195t
Fibroblast growth factors, 363t,
 Extracellular environment and cell
 Fat mobilization, in lactating cows, 
367-368
function, 47-48
72
Fibroblasts, 33, 89
Extracellular matrix, 367
F-ATPase system, 466
Fibrocartilage, 108, 118, 151
Extrafusal muscle fibers, 278
Fats, 14
Fibrous joints, 167, 168t
Extraocular muscles, 303
Fatty acids, 14, 37, 520
examples of 169
Extrapyramidal system, 247, 247
catabolization of, for energy
 Fibrous pericardium,
386-387
Extrinsic eye muscles, 303, 317
produuction, 70-78
Fibrous protein, 36
 Extrinsic pathway, blood clotting,
de novo synthesis and, 76
Fibrous skeleton of heart, 387
384
synthesis of, 38
Fibrous furic, of eyeball, 303-304,
Eyeball
in nonruminant tissue, 78
317
anatomy of, 303-306, 317-318
in ruminant tissue, 77
Fibula, 164-165
fibrous funic and, 303-304
Fatty liver syndrome, 75
of various species, 165
lens, 305-306
Feather follicle, 135
Field of vision, 308, 308, 319
retina (sensory tunic), 304-305
Feathers, 135-136
Fight-or-flight division (or
vascular funic and,
，304-305
Feather vane, 135
sympathetic division), 283
Eyebrows, 303, 317
Feedback systems, 7, 7-8
Fight-or-flight response, 73, 286,
Eyelashes, 303, 317
negative, 7
359
Eyelids, 285, 301-303, 317
positive, 7-8
Filiform papillae, 298, 489
layers of, 301
 Feedstuff energy, processing of, 59
Filtration, 52, 400, 413
third,303
Feline dilated cardiomyopathy, 388
factors related to, 464 465
Eyes
(box)
Filum terminale, 259
accessory structures of, 301-303,
 Female avian reproductive system,
First antibody, 334
317
579-581
First law of thermodynamics, 58
chambers of, 306, 318
Female puberty, endocrinology of,
Fissures, brain, 243
of dog
563-564
5-HT, 233, 236t, 237t
accessory structfures of, 303
Female reproductive tract, 586-587
Fixed acids, 475
front view of, 302
bovine
Fixed macrophages, 442
median section of, 304
gross anatomy of, 560
Flagella, 25
muscles of, 304
histology of, 558
Flat bones, 139, 140, 140
extrinsic muscles, 303
 comparative anatomy, domestic
internal anatomy of, 142
Of goat: external strucfures of,
farm animals, 563t
Flavin adenine dinucleotide, 46
302
overview of, 558-560,563
Krebs cycle and, 65
 likening to camera, 306
Females, puberty in, 563
reduction of, 66
tracking reflex and, 277
Femoropatellar joint, 173
Flexion, 200, 201t
visual fields of, 312
Femorotibial joint, 171
Flexor-pelvic limb reflex, in
Femur, 164
diagnostics,
282
Facial bones, 153, 153t
avian, 167
Flexor reflex, 280
Facial crarial nerve (VII),
252,257t,
bovine, 149
Flight, adaptations for, 166
285, 298, 301, 491
of bovine and equine, 164
 Floating ribs, 156
Facilitated diffusion, 51
Fenestrated capillaries, 398
Floating teeth, 493t
F actin (filamentous actin), 184
Fertagyl, 351 (box)
Flocculonodular lobe, 253
Factor X, 384
Fertilizafion, 560, 587
Fluid mosaic model, 15-16
Factrel, 351 (box)
in birds, 581
Fluorine, 43
 Facultative reabsorption, 469
events following, 569
Folia,252
 FAD. See Flavin adenine
oocyte and, 569
Foliate papillae, 298, 489
dinucleotide
pregnancy and, 568-569
Folic acid, birth defects in humans
Falciform ligament, 485, 516
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 573
and, 242 (box)
Index
647
Follicles, 560, 562
Galactose, 38
hormones and mammary growth
development of, 565, 579
Galactosyltransferase, 540
during, 541
in bovine, 566
Gallbladder, 11, 484, 516, 526
lactation curves and, 546
tertiary, 567
histology of, 517
mammary gland structural state
laying hen ovary, 580
Gametes, 559, 564
and, 534
Follicle-stimulating hormone, 338,
Gamma aminobutyric acid, 234, 237t
stage of, and serum concentrations
340, 341, 349-350, 563, 574
non-REM sleep and, 255-256
 of mammogenic hormones,
anterior pifuitary gland and, 338t
 presynaptic inhibition and, 231
541t
Follicular phase, 559, 559, 565
synthesis of, 234
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate
 Follicular waves, in estrous cycle,
Gamma motor neuron loop, 280, 280
GFs. See Growth factors
567
Gamma motor neurons
GH. See Growth hormone
Food and Drug Administration, 550
function of, 279-280
GHR. See Growth hormone receptor
Foot, movement of, 171
response of, to muscle spindles,
Ghrelin, 339, 521
 Foramen of Magendie, 245
279
GHRH. See Growth hormone
Force, 199-200
Ganglia, 267-268, 291
 releasing hormone
Forebrain, 243
Ganglion cells, 310
Gigantism, 333
Foregut fermenters, 488
Gap junctions, 99, 100, 100-101, 219
Gilman, Alfred, 370
Forepaw (manus), 162
strucfure of, 100
Ginglymus joint, 170
Forestomachs, in ruminants, 501-502
Gas exchange
GIP. See Gastric inhibitory peptide
Formaldehyde, 17
avian lung and, 433
Gizzard, 507
Formalin, 17
avian ventilation and, 431-432
Gland cistern, 547
 Formed elements, in mammals, 377
Gastric bleeding, aspirin and, 383
Gland of the third eyelid, 303
Fornix, 248
(box)
Glands
Fornix vagina, bovine, 561
Gastric emptying, neural and
classification of, 102
Fossa ovalis, 387
hormonal inhibition of, 502
exocrine, 12
Fovea capiftis, 164
Gastric glands, 498
lacrimal, 303
Fracfures
types of, 497
Glands of anal sac, 127
classification of, 147
Gastric inhibitory peptide, 500
Glandular duct, 89
repair of, 147
Gastric motility, 499, 524
 Glandular epithelial types, 101-102
steps in, 147
Gastric phase, gastric secretions and
Glandular reflexes, 290, 296
Frank-Starling law, of the heart, 395
emptying, 500, 501
Glandular structures, 102
Free dendritic nerve endings, 274,
Gastric pits, 497
Glans penis, 575
275t
Gastric secretions, 498-501, 499,
Glaucoma, 236, 306
Free edge, 132, 133
512t
Glenohumeral joint, 170
Free fatty acids, 40, 72, 517
phases of, 501
Glenoid cavity, 157
Free nerve endings, 274
regulation of, 524
Glial cells, 221
Free radicals, 23
cephalic phase, 500
Gliding joint, 170
Frog, 1335
gastric phase, 500
Globular protein, 36
Frontal (dorsal) plane, 8
intestinal phase, 500-501
Globus pallidus, 247
Frontal 1obe, brain, 244, 244
Gastrin, 518, 519
Glomerular capsule, 462
Frontal plane, 9t, 10
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 11, 483
Glomerular filtration rate, 465,
Frontonasal sufure, 152
tissue types in, 12
472
Frosty (calf), birth of, 582
Gastrointestinal reflexes, 290, 296
calculating, 473
Fructose, 38, 39,513
Gastrulation, 242
serum creafine and, 473
Fructose 1,6-diphosphate, 61, 62
G cells, 500, 501
Glomerulus, 357, 462
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating
G-CSF. See Granulocyte colony-
blood supply to, 463
hormone
 stimulating factor
structure of, 464
Fulerum, 199, 200
Gene construct, transgenic animals
Glossopharyngeal cranial nerve (IX),
Function, strucfure and, 4, 12, 538
and, 585
254, 257t, 285, 301, 429, 479,
Fundus, stomach, 497
Gene promoters, 81
491
Fungiform papillae, 298, 489
Generator potential, 274
Gluicagon, 73, 360, 361
Funiculi, in spinal cord, 259
Genetic donor, cloning and, 584
Glucocorticoids, 68, 336, 357, 360
Furcula (wishbone), 167, 431
Geritalia, female, 558, 563
ACTH and, 359
Furstenberg's rosette, 443
Genitofemoral nerve, 574
 mammary cell differenfiation and,
Germinal epifhelium, 560
544
GABA. See Gamma-aminobutyric
Gestation
parfurition and, 573
acid
 in catfle, mammary growth during,
 Glucogenic compounds, groups of,
GAGs. See Glycosaminoglycan chains
537
64
Galactopoiesis, 544, 554
effect of, on mammary growth,
Gluconeogenesis, 38, 61t, 83,
t10
bovine somatoftropin and, 550-551
histology, and epithelial cell
518
endocrine system and, 343
labeling index in ewes, 535t
Glucorficoids, 40
648 Index
Glucose, 38, 45, 55, 61, 393
   s 
in lactating cows, 73
homeostasis and concentrations of,
neck muscles of, superficial, 203
during lactation, 346-347, 347
360
right thigh of, superficial and deep
mechanisms of action for, 328
hypothalamus and levels of, 289
muscles in, 210
secretion of, 346-347
insulin infused in cows after, 361
rumen of, internal configurafion
pattern in, 347
storage of, 39
of, 506
Growth hormone receptor, 328
Glucose-1-phosphate, 68
 stomach of, right and left aspect,
Growth hormone releasing hormone,
Glucose-6-phosphate, 61, 62, 68, 82
503
339
Glutamate, 233, 310
 superficial muscles of lateral
hypothalamus and, 339t
 off-center and on-center bipolar
thorax of, 206
G2 phase, in cell cycle, 31, 31
cells and, 311
trachea of, 420
Guanine, 41, 42,55, 233
pain pathway and, 272
Goblet cells, 94, 101, 443, 497, 509
Guanylate cyclase, 327-328
Glutamic acid, 79
Goldman equation, 223
Guanyl cyclase-linked receptors,
Glutamine, 476
Golgi apparatus, 37, 217, 217
325t
Glutaraldehyde, 17
endoplasmic reticulum and, 21-23
Guanylyl cyclase, 325
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, 62
Golgi membranes, 22
Guard hairs, 128
Glycerol, 14, 15, 58
Golgi tendon organs, 270, 276t
Gubernaculum testis, 574
Glycerol-3-phosphate
Golgi type I neurons, 220
Guillain-Barre syndrome, 229 (box)
dehydrogenase, 75
Golgi type II neurons, 220
 Guinea pigs, mammary development 
Glycine, 234
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
in, 536
Glycogen, strucfure of, 39
female puberty and, 563, 564
Gustafion, 273, 298-301
Glycogenesis, 61t, 67, 68, 68
secretion of FSH, LH and, 350
taste, 299-301
Glycogenolysis, 61t, 68, 68, 518
G phase, in cell cycle, 30, 31
bifter taste, 300
Glycogen phosphorylase, 68
Gonyaulax, 225 (box)
salty taste, 301
Glycolysis, 58, 61-64, 61t, 63, 82, 193
GP. See Glans penis
sour taste, 301
ATP production in, summary of,
G-protein linked hormone
sweet taste, 300
62-64, 64t
mechanism of action, example
lumami, 301
 chemical steps and intermediaries
of, 326
taste pathway,
301
in, 62,62-64
G proteins
tongue, 298
selected reactions of, 63
membrane enzymes regulated by,
Gustatory system, 268t
Glycoproteins, 465
327
Gustducin, 300
Glycosaminoglycan chains, 109
stimulatory vs. inhibitory, 326-327,
Gut microflora,
520-521, 527
Glycosaminoglycans, 38
327
Gyri, 243, 244
Glycosomes, 182
Granulocyte colony-stimulating
Go phase, in cell cycle, 30, 31
GM-CSF. See Granulocyte
factor, 447
macrophage colony-
Granulocyte macrophage colony-
Habenula, 251
stimulating factor
stimulating factor, 447
Habenular commissure, 251
 GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing
Granulocytes, 111, 378t, 380-381, 408
Hair, 127-130, 137
hormone
basophils, 381
Hair beds, 128
Goats
eosinophils, 380-381
Hair bulb, 129
blood groups in, 385
neutrophils, 380
Hair cells
brain surface of, cytoarchitecfure
Granulomas, 445
of inner ear, 313
of, 244
Granulosa cells, 565
macula and, 315
 coronary circulation in heart of,
Granzymes, 453
Hair color, 137
390
Gravity, muscle extension and, 192
Hair follidles, 137
eye in, external strucfures of, 302
Gray area, of spinal cord, 259
histology of, 128
internal configuration of reticulum
Gray matter, 218
in protection against disease, 132
and rumenal atrium of, 505
Greater trochanter, 164
(box)
intestinal tract in, 508
Growth, cell growth and
Hair growth cycle
 lactating, milk yield after
differentiation, 27-30
events in, 129
hypophysectomy, 544
Growth and development, thyroid
phases of, 129, 137
left pelvis and thigh of, deeper
hormones and, 353, 355
Hair products, EGF family and, 367
muscles, 209
Growth factors, 16, 33, 362
Hair root, 137
length and capacity of parts of
IGF family of, 363-365
Hair shaff, regions of, 128
digestive tract in, 488t
selected, abbreviations and
Hard palate, 418, 489, 489
location, number, and nipple
properties, 363t
Hardware disease, 502
 openings of mammary glands
signaling cascade for, 369
Hatching process, 578-579
in,530t
Growth factor signaling, 336-337
Haustra, 519
p
 mesencephalon of, sagittal view,
Growth hormone, 68, 73, 75, 325, 540
Haversian canal, 110, 141
252
 anterior pituitary gland and, 338t
Haversian system, 110, 118, 146
milk production in, 536
exogenous, galactopoiesis and, 544
hBD-2. See Human beta defensin-2
Index
649
HCI
Heifers
Hepatopancreatic sphincter, 508
 regulation of secretion from
CIDR and, 568
Heptoses, 37
parietal cells, 499
 IGF-I mRNA expression of
HER2, 366
secretion of, by stomach, 498
 mammary epithelial cells or
Herbivores, 488
HCM. See Hypertrophic
stromal cells prepared from
Herceptin, 366, 442
cardiomyopathy
mammary of, 346
 Herefords, mammary parenchymal
Head
leptin and onset of puberty in, 370
growth in, 536
 of humerus, 158
loose connective tissue from
Heregulins, 366
 of large ruminant, median aspect,
 developing mammary gland
H&E stains, 17
419
of, 105
Heterophil/lymphocyte ratio, in
muscles of, 202t
 mammary parenchymal growth in,
birds, 383 (box)
of rib, 156
28t, 29, 537t
Heterophils, 383
Heap, Walter, 582
 pregnant, mammary tissue from,
Heterotopic bones, 144
Hearing, 297
90
Hexokinase, 46, 63, 82
balance and, 320-321
Prl, milking and, 349
Hexose monophosphate shunt, 68
 physiology of, 314, 320
relative mammary growth in, 532
Hexoses, 37
Heart, 375, 386-389
sexed semen and, 583
hGH. See Human GH
anatomy of, 386-387
udder edema in, 455 
Hidden spina bifida, 242
blood pathways through, 389, 410
Helical tropocollagen, 36
High-crowned teeth, 491, 492
 cardiac muscle and cardiac
Helicobacter pylori, 521
High density (HDL) lipoproteins,
conduction system, 411
Helicotrema, 314
40
 cat, atrial and auricle sides of,
Helper T cells, 442, 452
Hillock, 567
386
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Hilus, of lung, 421
coronary circulation, 390
Hematocrit, 376, 377
Hindbrain, 243
 coverings of, 410
Hematology, 375
Hindgut fermenters, 488
external structure of, 386
Hematoma, skin color and, 130
Hinge joint, 170
fibrous skeleton of, 387
Hematopoiesis,
，381
Hip bones, 163, 164
internal structure of, 388
Hematopoietic cells, 446
Hip dysplasia, 173 (box)
layers of, 387
Hemidesmosomes, 100, 100
Hip joint, 164, 172, 173
layers of wall of, 410
Hemochorial placentation, 572
Hippocampus, 246, 246
locafion of, and exterior
Hemodynamics, blood vessels and,
Hippuric acid, 472
landmarks, 386
397-399
kidney function and, 468
pericardium, 386-387
 Hemoendothelial placentation, 572
Histamine, 234, 236t, 403, 445
pulmonary circulation, 389
Hemoglobin, 377
 inflammation response and, 445t
systemic circulation, 389
diseases in humans and types of,
nociceptors and, 271
Heart chambers and vessels,
427
synthesis of, 234
387-388, 410
nitric oxide and, 428, 438
Histology, 4
atria, 387
oxygen transport and, 427
defined, 87
ventricles, 387-388
skin color and, 130
tissue strucfure and, 88 (box)
Heart contractility, mechanism of
structure of, 379
Histones, 27
 norepinephrine-induced
 Hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation
HLGAGs. See Heparin-like
increase in, 396
curve, 427-428,428
glycosaminoglycans
Heart contraction mechanisms,
Hemopoiesis, 381
Hock, 165, 171-174
392-394, 411-412
Hemostasis, 383-384, 409
Holocrine mechanism, 126
ATP production, 393
platelet plug formation, 383-384
Holocrine secretion, 101
electrocardiogram, 393-394
vascular spasm, 383
Holstein calves
heart sounds, 394
Hen eggs, weight of, 580
embryo transfer and, 582
Heart murmurs, 394
Henry's law, 426, 437
mammary duct in, 4
Heart rate
Hens, 578, 579
developing, 4
baroreceptors and, 396
Heparin, 385
 mammary glands of, 532
chemical regulation of, 397
Heparin-binding EGF, 366
Holstein cows
regulation of, 396-397, 412-413
Heparin-like glycosaminoglycans,
estrous cycle length in, 564
Heart sounds, 394, 412
367
lactation curve for, 548, 548
Heart valve operation
Hepafic artery, 516, 517
 mammary parenchymal growth in,
atrioventricular valves, 389
Hepatic duct, 517
536
semilunar valves, 389
Hepatic portal system, 399
milk composifion and, 531, 545
Heartworms, canine, 396 (box)
Hepatic vein, 517
milk yield from,
530
Heat, detection of, 568
Hepatocytes, 516, 517, 518, 519
puberty in, 564
Heat generation, muscles and,
：180
Hepatoduodenal ligament, 485
tidal volume and respiration rate
11
Heat production, muscles and, 194
Hepatopancreatic ampulla, 508,
in, 425t
Heat units, 58
518
udders in, 546
650 Index
Holstein heifers
of posterior pituitary, 341-343
Humerus, 158, 160
 prepubertal, mammary tissue
radiolabeling of, 331
bovine, 149
from, 90
trophic,338
of various species, 160
 Prl secretion after teat stimulation
Hormone-sensitive lipase, 74
Humoral immurity, 442, 442,
in, 349
Horn glands, 137
449-450, 453
Homeorhesis, 71, 345
Horns, 135
Hyaline cartilage, 108, 109, 118, 151,
Homeostasis, 215, 473
Horses
167, 418
acid-base balance and, 474
 aging, use of lower incisors by,
Hyaline cartilage rings, tracheal,
adrenal glands and, 357
494
420
autonomic nervous system and,
aflas and axis in, 157
Hyaloid canal, 306
281
bile and pancreatic ducts of, 509
Hyaluronic acid, 109
blood and, 376
blood cell numbers in, 379t
Hydrocephalus. See Cerebrospinal
circulatory shock and, 404, 415
blood supply to intestines of, 510
fluid
endocrine system and, 323
brain of, 253
Hydrogen bonds, 43
glucose concentrations and, 360
cecum of, 520
water and, 13
hypothalamus and, 289
 chronic obstructive pulmonary
Hydrogen ion excretion, 475
maintenance of, 5
disease in, 434 (box)
Hydrogen sulfide, 520
overlap of somafic and autonomic
exercise and flaring nostrils of,
Hydrolyases, 46t
functions and, 282
425
Hydrophilic molecules, 13
 regulation of hormones and
field of vision in, 308
Hydrophobic molecules, 13
growth factors and, 331
intestinal tract in, 508
Hydrostatic pressure, 400, 465
 transforming growth factor beta
intrapleural pressure in, 424
 Hydroxyprogesterone, parturition
and, 369
length and capacity of parts of
and,
573
urinary system and, 459
digestive tract in, 488t
Hydroxyproline, 536
visceral reflexes and, 277
lobes of lungs in, 421
Hyoid bone, 420
Homeostatic regulatory mechanisms,
location, number, and ripple
Hyperalgesia, 272
5-7
 openings of mammary glands
Hypercalcemia, 355
Homeostatic set points, alterations
in, 530t
Hypercapnia, 402, 430
in, 8
lower leg, including mannus of,
Hyperglycemia, 361
Hoof, 163
162
Hypermyopia, 307
equine，133
lungs of, 422
Hyperopia, 307
plantar view, 134
number of teeth in, 493t
Hyperplasia, 28
equine foot and, 133
number of vertebrae in, 155t
Hyperpolarization, kinocilia and,
structure of, 133-135
 paranasal sinuses, lateral and
315
Hook, 164
frontal aspect of, 419
Hypertonia, 281
Hooke, Robert, 41
 photoperiod and breeding activity
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 388
Horizontal cells, 310, 311
in, 348
(box)
Hormones
pulmonary arterial pressure in,
Hypertrophy, 28
 of anterior pifuitary, 343-344
423
Hypocalcemia, 355
adrenocorfropic hormone,
ramp retina in, 307
Hypocapnia, 430
351-352
skeleton of, 150
Hypoglossal cranial nerve (XI), 254,
 follicle-stimulating hormone and
 stay apparafus of thoracic limb of,
257t
luteinizing hormone, 349-350
211
Hypophyseal-pituitary axis, 337
GH secretion, 346-347
stomach of, 497
Hypophyseal portal system, 399
prolactin, 347-349
teeth of, 492-493
 Hypophysectomy, milk yield after,
somatotropin, 344-345
 tidal volume and respiration rate
544
thyroid-stimulating hormone,
in, 425t
Hyposecretion of human GH, 344
350-351
 unipyramidal kidneys in, 462
 Hypothalamic hormone structures,
 of anterior pituitary gland, 338t
upper digestive tract of, 495
340t
defined, 324
"Hot" hormones, 331
 Hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal 
during estrus cycle, 350
Human beta defensin-2, 122
blood system, 337
functional classification of,
Human genome, inflammatory
Hypothalamic-pifuitary axis, leptin 
336-337,336t
disease and, 521
and, 370
heart rate and, 397
Humans, locafion, number, and
Hypothalamus, 248, 249-251
of hypothalamus, 339t
ripple operings of mammary
ADH secretion and, 343
lactogenesis, lactation and,
glands in, 530t
anterior pifuitary and, 339
540-544
Humeral capifulum, 158
 autonomic functions regulated by,
major, 371-372
Humeral condyle, 158, 171
250, 288-289
t10
in milk, 345 (box)
Humeral trochlea, 158
circadian rhythms and,
251, 289
 neuroendocrine messengers as,
Humeroradioulnar arficulation,
hormones of, 251, 339t
340t
171
regions of, 251
Index 651
role of, in six physiological areas,
 B cell selection and antibody
infusion of in cows, affer glucose,
251
secretion, 451
361
sagiftal view of, 250
 cell-mediated immunity,
 in lactating cows, 73
secretion of pifuitary hormones
451453
lactation and, 346-347, 347
and, 339
Immunocytochemistry, 106, 106
radiolabeled, 334
zones of, 250-251
Immunoglobulins, classes of, 450
Type I diabetes and, 361, 362
Hypothyroidism, causes of,
Immunology, 442
Type ⅡI diabetes and, 361, 362
classification of, 353
Implantation, placentation and,
Insulin-like growth factor I, 33, 324,
Hypotonia, 281
569-570, 572-573
325,328, 337, 345, 363, 364,
Hypotonic solutions, 48, 49
Incisors, 492
365,586
Hypovolemic shock, 404
Incomplete break, 147
expression of, 346
Hypoxia, 382, 402, 404, 422
Incus, 313
Insulin-like growth factor I, 324,
Hyptertonic solutions, 48, 49
Indirect calorimetry, 60
328,345,363
Hyroxyapatite, 43
Indirectly gated channels, 224
 Insulin-like growth factors, 363
H zone, sarcomeres and, 183, 184,
Indoleamine, 233
 Integration, nervous system and,
185
Indoles, 520
216, 216
Inertial impaction, airborne particles
 Integumentary sensory receptors,
I band, sarcomeres and, 183, 184
and, 433
classified by structure and
ICAM-1, 447
Infections, responses to, 444-445
function, 125t
ICM. See Inner cell mass
Inferior colliculi, 251
 Integumentary system, 5, 6, 121-137
Ielum, 519
 Inferior mesenteric ganglia,
285
dermis, 124-125
IgA, 450
Inferior vena cava, 387, 406
epidermis, 122-124
IgD, 450
Inflammation, 444
hair, 127-130
IgE, 450
 agents involved in, 445t 
leather, 136
IGF-1. See Insulin-like growth factor
kallikrein's role in, 445
nails, claws, hoofs, and feathers,
one
 Inflammatory chemicals, 403
132-135
IGFBP-rP, 364
 Inflammatory disease, microbiome,
 other skin glands, 127
IGFBPs. See IGF-I binding proteins
human genome and, 521
 physiological significance of, 121,
IGF family
 Inflammatory response, bacterial
136
of growth factors, 363-365
aftack and, 444
sebaceous glands, 126-127
 of proteins and receptors, 329
 Information processing, reflexes and,
skin and coat color, 130-132
 IGF-1. See Insulin-like growth factor
276, 277
skin cell types and layers, 122
one
 Infraorbital glands, 127, 137
skin strucfure overview, 121-122
IGF-I binding proteins (IGFBPs),
Infraspinafus muscles, of shoulder,
sweat glands, 125-126
328, 345, 364, 365
205t
vitamin D metabolism and, 132
IGF-II. See Insulin-like growth factor
 Infraspinous fossa, 156
Intercalated discs, 118, 390, 390
two
Infundibulum, 431
 Interception, airborne particles and,
IGF-IR, 328, 363, 364
in chicken reproductive tract, 579
434
IgG, 450
Ingestion, digestive tract and, 483
Intercostal muscles, 423, 424
IgM, 450
 Inguinal ring, 574
Interferons, 447
Ieocecal valve, 509, 519
Inhalation, 423
action of, 447
Ieofemoral joint, 170
 Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials,
immurity and, 376
Ieum, 163, 164, 167,507,509
226, 226, 286
Interleukin 1, 446
Iiac wings, 164
Innate (nonspecific) defenses,
Interleukin 2, 446
Immune cells, involvement in
442449
Interleukin 3, 447
defense of tissues and cells,
Innate protection, 442
Interleukin 4, 447
454t
Innate reflexes, 277
Interleukin 5, 447
Immurity, 441-457
Inner cell mass, 570
Interleukin 6, 447
acquired, types of, 449
Inner cortex, 128
Interleukin 8, 447
blood and, 376
Inner ear, 312-313, 320
 Interleukin 10, 447
cell-mediated, 442, 442, 449
 Inositol phospholipid-signaling
Interleukin-1 receptors,
446
digestive tract and, 484
pathway, 327
Interleukins, 382, 446
humoral, 442, 442, 449-450,
Insertion, muscle, 200, 201t
Interlobular arteries, 461
453
Inspiration, 436
Intermediary metabolism, 58, 67-79
innate or nonspecific defenses,
pathway of gas flow through avian
glycogenesis, gluconeogenesis, and
442449
 pulmonary system during,
glycolysis, 67-69
overview of,
，422,441-442
432
 interconversions and catabolism of
passive, 441
Insula, 244
proteins, 78-79
specific, 442, 449-450
Insulin, 324, 325, 328, 337
 lipogenesis and lipolysis, 70-78
t10
antibody strucfure and function,
endocrine pancreas and synthesis
Intermediate density (IDL)
450451
of, 360-362
lipoproteins, 40
652 Index
Intermediate fibers, 194
Iodine, 43
 Keratin, of streak canal, protective
 Intermediate lobe, pituitary, 337
radiolabeled, 331
quality of, 44
Intermediate molecules, 58
thyroid hormone synfhesis and,
Keratin layer, protection afforded by.
 Internal pipping, 433
352
96-97
Internal respiration, 423, 426, 437
Ionic bonds, 43
Keratinocyte, 122
Internasal sufure, 152
Ionotropic receptors, 224
Keratinocyte growth factor, 368
 Internafional Union of Biochemistry,
 IPSPs. See Inhibitory postsynaptic
Kerafin sulfate, 109
46
potentials
Kerbs cycle, 64-67
 Interneurons (or association
Iris, 285, 302, 304, 305
Keto acid, 79
neurons), 220, 221
Irregular bones, 139, 140, 140
Ketogenesis, 74
Interoceptors, 124, 125, 268
Ischial bones, 164
 Ketogenic ketosis, 75
Interphalangeal joints, 162
Ischiatic fuberosity,
164
Ketone bodies, 74, 393
Interphase, 26
Ischium, 163, 164
Ketosis, 74
 Interphase periods, in cell cycle,
Islets of Langerhans, 360, 515
classifications of, 75
30-31, 31
Isogenous cell clusters, 109
prevention of, 76
Interstitial bone, 110
Isomerases, 46t
Kevorkian, Jack, 224 (box)
Interstifial cells of Cajal, slow waves
 Isometric versus isotonic contraction,
KGF. See Keratinocyte growth factor
and, 499, 500
191-192, 192
Kidney osmotic gradient, 469
Interstitial fluid, 47
Isotonic solutions, 48, 49
Kidneys, 459
Interstitial growth, 144, 151
 Isotonic versus isometric contraction,
anatomy of, 459-462
 Intertubercular (or bicipital) sulcus,
191-192, 192
avian, 478
171
Isthmus, 352
blood flow to, 462, 462, 480
 Interventricular foramen of Monroe,
Ivanov, 581
blood supply to, 462
245
IVF. See in vitro fertilization
excretion of wastes and control of
Intervertebral arficulations, 171
IVM, Se in vitro mafuration
pH by, 473-477
Intervertebral disc, rupfure of, 171
function of, 462
(box)
JAK2. See Janus tyrosine kinase 2
model of, 461
 Intestinal epithelium, high-power
JAK tyrosine kinases, 329
renin-angiotensin system of, 358
view of, 94
Janus tyrosine kinase 2, 329
Kidney tissue, 92
 Intestinal juices, brush-border
Jaundice, skin color and, 130
high power image of, 92
enzymes and, 511, 525
Jejunum, 507, 509
multiple kidney tubules cut in
 Intestinal phase, gastric secretions
Jersey cows
cross section, 92
and emptying, 500-501,
serum calcium changes in, around
Killer T cells, 452
501
time of calving, 356
Kilocalorie, 58
Irtestinal tracf
tidal volume and respiration rate
Kinases, 45
of goat, 508
in, 425t
Kinesins, 24
of horse, 508
JGA. See Juxtaglomerular apparatus
Kinetochores, 33
Intestinal villi, 509
Joint capsules, receptors in, 270
Kinins, 403, 446
Intestinal wall, 510
Joints, 167-171
 inflammation response and, 445t 
 Intestine, simple columnar epithelial
cartilaginous, 167
Kinocilium, 315
cells from, 93
costochondral,
171
Kisspeptins, 339
 Intrafusal muscle fibers,
278
costovertebral, 171
Knee (stifle joint), 164, 173
Intramembranous ossification, 144,
fibrous, 167, 169
"Knock-kneed," 162
144
of pelvic limb, 173
Krause's corpuscles, 137
 Intramural ganglia, 286
strucfural classification of, 168t
Krause's end bulbs, 125t, 276t
Intraocular muscles, 303
synovial, 167, 168-171
Krebs cycle, 70, 77, 82, 83
Intraperitoneal organs, 486
types of, 167-168
amino acids and, 35, 78
 Intrinsic pathway, blood clotting and,
Jouvet, Michel, 256
outline of reactions, 66
384
Juxtacrine, 325
two crifical physiological points to,
Introns, 80
Juxtaglomerular apparatus, 464,
65
Inulin, 472
471
Krouze, N. K.,
344,540
 in humans, measured values for,
Juxtaglomerular nephrons, 465
K-selection animals, 557, 558
473
Juxtamedullary nephrons, 462
Kupffer cells, 381, 444, 517
 kidney function and, 468
Inverse myotatic reflex, 280, 280
Kallikrein, 445
Labyrinth (irner ear), 312
Inversion, 171, 200, 201t
inflammaftion and role of, 445
Lacrimal apparatus, 303, 317
in vitro fertilization, 581
 Kangaroo rats, 470 (box)
Lacrimal canals, 303
in vitro mafuration, 582
Kennedy, G. C., 369
Lacrimal caruncle, 302
 Involuntary muscle, 196
Keratin, 122
Lacrimal gland, 303
Involuntary striated muscle, 180,
in hair, 128
Lacrimal glands, 285, 303
390
streak canal, removal of, 123
Lacrimal lake, 302
Index
653
Lacrimal puncta, 303
Larger lamellated corpuscle, 269
Ligands, 324
Lacrimal (tearing) apparatus, 301
Laryngopharynx, 420, 494 
Ligases, 46t
Lactase, 511
Larynx, 420, 435
Light, eye and adapting to, 311,
Lactate, conversion of pyruvate into,
Latency-associated peptide, 368
319-320
61
Latent phase, muscle twitch, 190,
 Light microscope, 16
Lactate dehydrogenase, 61
190
 Light microscopy, tissue preparation
action of, 64
Lateral, 9t
for, 19
Lactating cows
Lateral canals, 142
Light signal, chemical transduction 
bST administered to, 60, 60t
Lateral condyles, 164
of, 310
fat mobilization in, 72
Lateral horns, of spinal cord, 284
Light transduction, by
GH and insulin in, 73
 Lateral muscles, of head and neck,
photoreceptors, 310, 319
Lactafior, 529-554, 553
202t
Limbic system,
247-248, 248
energy costs of, 558
Lateral palpebral commissure, 303
functions of, 248
 in high-producing dairy cow,
Lateral puncta, 302
Linear fracture,
：147
summary of major metabolic
Lateral rotation, 201t 
Lingual frenulum, 298, 489
adjustments with onset of,
Lateral sacs, of SR, 186
Lipemia, 76
71-72, 72t
Lateral semicircular canals, 313
Lipid digestion
hormonal control of, 540-544
 Lateral styloid process, 161
rumenal, 507
insulin and GH during, 346-347,
Law of mass action, 331, 332
in small intestine, 513, 513
347
Law of simple allometry, 532
Lipid metabolism, thyroid hormones
overview of, 529-531
Laying hens, 578
and, 352
thyroid gland and maintenance of,
Leak charnels, 222
Lipids, 39-40, 45
355
Leather, tanning process for, 136
absorption of, in small intestine,
Lactation curves, 546-550
Lecithin, 517
514
in cows and sows, 548
Legs
aftributes of, 14
in cows treated with oxytocin, 342
intrinsic extensor muscles of,
digestion of, in small intestine, 507
milk yields and, 548
205t-206t, 205t-206t
liver and metabolism of, 518
Lactation ketosis, 75-76
intrinsic flexor muscles of, 205t
specialized, structure of, 41
 Lacteal (or cenfral lacteal) capillary,
lower, of horse, 162
transport of, through enterocytes,
509
 Length-tension relationships, muscle
514
Lactic acid, 393
fiber and, 189, 189
Lipogenesis, 83
Cori cydle and, 64
Lens, 305-306, 318
lipolysis and, 70-78
exercise and, 194
epithelium, 305
overview of, 73
Lactocrine hypothesis, 88, 573
of eye, in dog, 302
Lipolysis, 83
Lactoferrin, 124, 445, 445 (box)
fibers, 305, 306
lipogenesis and, 70-78
Lactogenesis, 554
Lentiform nucleus, 247
overview of, 73
alveolar cell differentiation and,
Leptin, 362, 363t, 369-370
Lipo-protein lipase, 74
538-540
immune system and role of, 446
Lipoproteins, families of, 40
cifrate concentrafions and, 78
Lesser trochanter, 164
Lips, 488
endocrine system and, 343
Lethal injection, 224 (box)
"Liffle brain," 283
hormonal control of, 540-544
Leukocytes (white blood cells), 23,
Liver, 11, 484, 526
stages in, 540
47, 111, 376, 377, 378t, 408, 442,
anatomy of, 516
Lactogenic hormones, effect of, on
446, 456
 blood supply of, 517
alpha-lactalbumin, 543
emigration of, 380
functions of, 518-519
Lactose, 38
formation of, 382
histology of, 516-517
Lactose synthesis, 540
Leukotrienes, 40
lobules of, 516, 517
Lacunae, 109, 142
Leuwenhoek, Anton von, 581
plasma protein synthesis and,
Lamellae, 141
Levers
377
Lamellipodia, 25
classes of, 199
Liver lobule, blood flow through,
Lamina propria, 12, 487, 509
muscles as,
199-200,213
518
Langerhans, Paul, 360
Lever systems
Living systems,
57-58
Langerhans cells, 124
anatomical examples of, 200
Load, 199, 200
Lanolin, 127
 mechanical advantage versus
Lobar arteries, 404
LAP. See Latency-associated peptide
disadvantage, 200
Lobes
Large intestine, 11, 519-520
Leydig cells, 350, 575
of brain, 244, 244-245
anatomy of, 519, 526
Li, C.H., 540
of liver, 516
chemical digestion in, 519-520,
Lidocaine, 225 (box)
of lung, 421
527
Ligamenfum arteriosum, 388
of pancreas, 515
functions of, 519
Ligand-induced receptor
Lobules, liver, 516, 517
11
histology of, 519
homodimerization, 330
Long bones, 139, 140, 140
mechanical digestion in, 519, 527
Ligand-receptor interaction, 331
anatomy of, 141
654 Index
Loop of Henle, 462, 464
Macroscopic anatomy, 3-4
number of, among various species,
role of, 470
Macula,315
530,530t
Loose connective tissue, 103, 104,
equilibrium and, 315
stem cells and, 12
105
Macula adherens, 100
unusualness of, 544
Lordosis, 568
Macula lutea, 305
variafion in locafion, number, and
Low-crowned teeth, 491, 492
Mad gene, 369
 ripple openings of, among 
Low density (LDL) lipoproteins, 40
Magnum, in chicken reproductive
various species, 530t
"Lub-dup" heart sound, 394
tract, 579
 Mammary growth
Lumbar splanchnic nerves, 285
Maintenance, energy of, 60
 effect of gestation on, in ewes,
Lumbar vertebrae, 155, 155, 155t, 156
Major crossmatching, 385, 386
535t
Lumen size, blood flow and, 401
Major histocompatibility complex,
in various animals, 532-533
Lungs, 435
452
Mammary involution, 551-553
alveoli, 422
Male reproductive function, 574
 Mammary parenchymal growth,
avian, 430
Male reproductive tract, 574-578,
in heifers and ewes, 28t, 29,
blood supply to, 389, 422-423, 436
589
537t
carbon dioxide transport in, 428
overview of, 574-575
 Mammary secretions, in males, 530
compliance of, 424
spermatogenesis, 575-577
(box)
of horse, 422
sperm storage, mafurafion, and
Mammogenesis, 531, 554
lobes of, 421
delivery, 577-578
endocrine system and, 343, 540
 pleural membrane
Males, lactation in, 530 (box)
pregnancy and, 534
respiratory anatomy of, 421
Malleolar bone, 165
Mammogenic hormones, effect
volumes and capacifies of,
Malleus, 313
of stage of gestation upon
425-426, 436-437
Malonyl-CoA pathway, 77
serum concentrafions of,
Lunule, 133
MALT. See Mucosa-associated
541t
Lutalyse, 351 (box)
 lymphatic system
Mammosomatotrophs, 338
Lutectomy, 573
Maltose, 38, 39,511
 Mandibular salivary glands, 286,
Luteinization, 565
Mammalian cortex, types of, 246
490
Luteinizing hormone, 325, 340, 341,
 Mammalian kidney, activities linked
Marnus, 161
349-350, 563, 574
with, 463464
of horse, 162
anterior pifuitary gland and, 338t
Mammalian systems immunology,
Manubrium, 156, 176
testosterone secretion and, 350
 avian immunology vs.,
Manus (or forepaw), 162, 170
Luteolysis, 566
453-454
MAO. See Monoamine oxidase
Lyases, 46t
Mammals
MAPs. See Microtubule-associated
Lymph, 455
cortex in, three types of, 246
proteins
Lymphatic folds, 580
erythrocytes in, 377
Mares
Lymphatic system, 5, 6, 454-455, 456
lactation strategies in various
female reproductive tract in, 563t
Lymph drainage, 455
(xoq) ess_'go sdnore
periparfurient serum calcium for,
 Lymph nodes and nodules, 455
Mammary alveolus, 538
356
Lymphocytes, 111, 111, 377, 378t, 381,
Mammary band (or streak or line),
Masseter muscles, of head and neck,
442, 455, 456
531
202t
Lymphoid stem cells, 381
 Mammary buds, 531
Mast cells, 445
Lymphoid tissue, 455
Mammary cells, microtubules in,
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Lymphotoxin, 453
24t
Mastitis, 546, 548
Lysosomes, 23, 380
Mammary development
bacteria induced, 444
Lysozyme, 124,490
IGF-I and/or IGFI-R and, 364
defense barrier against, 441
overview of, 531
 in lactating cows, keratin and,
Machine milking, 443, 546, 548
during pregnancy, 534-538
96
Macromolecules, 13, 43
 prepubertal and postpubertal,
Mastitis stafus, 16
cell function and, 55
531-534
 Mating behaviors
cellular physiology and, 34-41
progesterone and, 566
in chickens, 578
carbohydrates, 37-39
in ruminants, 535
in cows, 568
lipids, 39-40
Mammary ducts, 90
MC1R. See Melanocortin 1 receptor 
nucleic acids, 40-41
Holstein calf, 4
M-CSF. See Macrophage colony-
proteins, 34-37
Mammary epithelial cells, bovine,
stimulating factor
 Macrophage colony-stimulating
proliferation and growth of,
Meafuses, 418
factor, 447
29
 Mechanically gated channels, 225
Macrophages, 23, 54, 381, 444, 446
 Mammary gland development, EGF
Mechanical nociceptors, 271
anfigen process in, 452
and, 366
Mechanical processing, digestive
t10
fixed, 442
Mammary glands, 127 (box), 137
tract and, 483-484
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
leukocyte (PMN) response in, 447,
Mecharical stress, bone and response
wandering, 442
448
to, 147-148, 148
Index
655
Mechanoreceptors, 268-270, 274, 292
Merkel cells, 124
Microinjection, transgenic animals
baroreceptors, 269, 270
Merkel's discs, 125t, 129, 137, 269,
and, 584, 584
depolarization of, 274
275t
Microphages, 444
proprioceptors, 269, 270
Mesaficephalic skulls, 153
Micropolyspora faeni, 434 (box)
tactile receptors, 268, 269
Mesencephalon, 243, 243, 251, 252,
Microscope
Meckel's diverticulum, 509
252-253, 263
general points about, 86
Medial, 9t
Mesenchymal cells, 144
magnification, epithelial cell
Medial collateral ligament, 171
Mesenteries, 12, 485-486
viewing and, 92-95
Medial condyles, 164
 in ruminants, arrangement of, 486
parts of, use of, and alignment
Medial forebrain bundle, 251
Mesentery spread, 104
steps for, 86, 86, 87
Medial muscles, of head and neck,
Mesoderm, 243
 Microscopic anatomy, 3, 4
202t
Mesothelium, 485
of bone, 141-143
Medial nucleus, of thalamus, 249
Messenger RNA, 21, 22, 23, 26,
 Microscopy techniques, 16-19
Medial rotation, 201t 
36-37, 80
Microtome, 17
Median plane, 9t, 10
Metabolic acidosis, 74, 475
Microtubule-associated proteins, 217
Mediastinum, 9, 575
Metabolic acids, 475
Microfubules, 23, 24, 33, 217
Mediodorsal secondary bronchi, 431
Metabolism, 34
kinetochore, 33
Medioventral secondary bronchi,
of adipose fissue, 74
in mammary cells, 24t
431
adrenal glands and, 357, 357-360
Microvilli, 25, 94, 509, 510
Medulla, of kidney, 460, 460
 of carbohydrates, common terms
Mictotome, 89
Medulla oblongata, 243, 253-254,
associated with, 61t
Midbrain, 243, 243
263
 energetic definifions and, 57-60
Middle carpal joint, 172
cardiovascular center in, 396, 402
intermediary, 58
Middle ear, 312, 320
Medullary bone, 148
Of skeletal muscle,
：192-194, 212
Middle phalarx, 163
 in laying hens, 167
aerobic mechanism, 193
Midsagiftal plane, 8, 9t, 10
Medullary cavity, 140
anaerobic mechanism, 193-194
Mid-to-late diastole, in cardiac cycle,
Medullary cones, 478
creatine phosphate, 193
394
Medullary lamina, 249
heat production, 194
 Migrating myoelectric complex,
Medullary osmotic gradient,
 muscle fatigue and oxygen
 peristalsis in small intestine
countercurrent mechanisms
consumpfion, 194
and, 511
and, 468-472
thyroid hormones and, 351
Milieu interieur, 5
Medullary pyramids, 461
Metabolizable energy, 59, 59
Milk
Megacalorie, 58
Metabotropic receptors, 224
calcium in, 545
Meibomian glands, 301
Metacarpal (MC) bones, 162
complexity of, 544
Meishan pigs, puberty in, 564
Metacarpophalangeal joint, 162
composiftion of, 554
Meissner's corpuscles, 125, 125t, 137,
Metaphase, 32,33
across species, 531, 545
269, 275t
Metaphase plate creation, 33
gross composition of, for various
receptive field, 269
Metaphysis, 140
species, 545t
strucfure of, 126
Metatarsal bones, 166
hormones in, 345 (box)
Meissner's plexus, 283, 487
Metatarsal spur, 167
milk protein gene promoters and
Melanin, 124, 130, 137
Metencephalon, 252-253, 263
expression of recombinant
Melanocortin, 137
Methane gas, 44
proteins in, 585t
Melanocortin 1 receptor, 130
MHC. See Major histocompatibility
Milk ejection reflex, 328, 342
Melanocytes, 122, 124, 130, 304
complex
 Milk fever (parturient paresis), 148,
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone,
MHC proteins and genes, 452
356
325
Mice
Milking
Melanogenesis,
130
location, number, and nipple
keratin loss at, 123-124
Melanosomes, 130
 openings of mammary glands
preparfum, 538
Membrana granulosa, 565, 567
in, 530t
serum oxytoxin at, 342
Membrane channels, 238
 mutations, gene products, and
Milking machine, 443, 546, 548
 Memory cells
phenotypes related to
Milk production
B cells, 442
pigmentaftion genes in, 131t 
after suppression of prolactin, 348
T cells, 452
Micelles, 76
 lactation strategies, profitability
fissue and cell defense and, 454t
Michel, Francois,
：256
and, 532
Meninges, 260, 260, 263
Microbial fermentation, rumenal,
milk somatic cell count and, 448
Meningo-myelocele, 242
504, 524
pifuitary hormones and, 544
Meriscus, 169
Microbiome, inflammatory disease
 prolactin and, 343, 540
Mentalis muscles, of head and neck,
and, 521
rates of, 530-531
202t
Microbubules, organization of, 24
responses in cows,
：448
11
 Meocrine glands, 101
Microfilaments, 23, 24, 25, 217
somatotropin and, 344,550
Meocrine secretion, 101
Microglia, 117, 119, 222
total parenchymal DNA and, 536
656 Index
Milk secretion, colchicine and, 24
Motor oufput, nervous system and,
cardiac, 195-196, 387, 390,
Milk smear, 17
216, 216
390-391, 411
Milk somatic cell count, 448
Motor response, reflexes and, 277
Milk synthesis
Motor urits, 191, 191
deeper, of left pelvis and thigh of
secretion and, 544-545
Mouse
goat, lateral aspect, 209
galactopoiesis and bST, 544,
 mammary development during
exercise and, 194-195
550-551
pregnancy in, 534
eye, 303
lactation curves, 546-550
mammary development from
functions and aftachments of, 200
mammary involution, 551-553
 prepubertal period into
functions of, 180, 211
Milk yield-body weight equations,
lactation in, 533, 534
of head and neck, 202t
549
rudimentary mammary gland of,
as levers, 199-200, 213
Milk yield- body weight relationship,
531
 of pectoral limb and lateral thorax,
549,549
whole mammary gland from, 90
204t-206t
Milk yields
Mouth, 11,488-494,522-523
of pelvic limb and body wall,
after hypophysectomy, 544
lips, cheeks, and gums, 488-489
207t-208t
bST administration and, 550
 salivary glands and saliva,
properties of, 180, 211
lactation curves and, 548
489-491
respiration in birds and, 432t
Mineralocorticoids, 40, 357
teeth, 491-494
skeletal, 180-195
Minor crossmatching, 385, 386
tongue, 489
smooth, 180, 196-198
Minute volume, 425
Movement, muscles and, 180
striated, 180
Mitochondria, 20-21, 60, 70, 217
M phase, 31, 31
superficial, of goat's neck, 203
prototypical, 21
mRNA. See Messenger RNA
superficial, of lateral thorax of
Mitosis, 25, 570
MS. See Multiple sclerosis
goat, 206
stages of, 31, 32,33
MSCC. See Milk somatic cell count
superficial and deep, in right thigh
Mitotic spindle, 25, 33
MSH. See Melanocyte-stimulating
of goat, 210
Mitral valve, 387
hormone
tongue, 298
Mixed nerves, 258, 266
Mucin, 489
Muscle spindles, 270, 276t
M-line, sarcomeres and, 183, 184,
Mucosa, 486, 486,487
anatomy of, 278, 278
185
in digestive tract, 11
muscle contraction and, 279
MMC. See Migrating myoelectric
 Mucosa-associated lymphatic system,
response of, to stretch, 279
complex
487
role of gamma motor neurons in,
Modified junctions, 4
Mucous glands, 102, 102
279
Molars, 492
 Mucous neck cells, in gastric glands,
Muscle system, 198-201
 Molecular biology, technical
497
arrangements of fascicles, 199
advancements in, 363
Mucus, 102, 489
muscles as levers, 199-200
Molecular layer, 246
Mullerian-inhibiting substance, 574
muscle terminology, 200-201
Monaxial joint, 170
Multicellular glands, subtypes of,
naming muscles, 198-199, 213
Monoamine oxidase, 233
101
Muscle terminology, 200-201, 201t,
Monoclonal antibodies, 442
Multilocular adipose tissue, 107
213
Monocular vision, 308
Multinucleated cells, 26
actions, 200-201
Monocytes, 111, 377, 378t, 381, 444
 Multipennate fascicle arrangement,
muscle aftachments, 201
Monoestrous species, 564
199
 origins and inserfions, 200
Monoglycerides, absorption of, in
Multipernate muscles, 199
Muscle tissue, 5, 87, 111-115, 118
small intestine, 514
Multiple births, 574
cardiac, 114-115
Monoiodotyrosine, 352
Multiple motor unit summafion, 191
overview of, 111-112, 180
Monosaccharides, 37, 38
Multiple sclerosis, 229 (box)
skeletal, 112-114
Monosafurated fatfty acids, 14
Multiunit cells, 115, 119
smooth, 115
Monosodium glutamate, 299
Multiunit smooth muscle, 197, 197
types of, 211
Monosynaptic reflexes, 277, 277-278,
Muscarine, 286
Muscle tone, 191
293
Muscarinic receptors,
236,286
 reflexes and testing of, 281
Morula, 570
Muscle contraction
Muscle twitch, 190, 190
Motility
muscle spindle and, 279
Muscular arteries, 398
of ruminant stomach, 502-504
 Muscle fatigue, oxygen consumption
Muscular cells, 11
in small intestine, 511
and, 194
Muscularis, of female reproductive
Motor areas, cortex, 247, 247
Muscle fibers, 180, 181, 181-182
tract, 558, 559
 Motor cranial nerves, 257
types of, 194, 278
Muscularis externa, 12, 486, 486, 487
Motor end plates, 116, 186, 282
Muscle relaxation, or refurn to
of intestine, 116
Motor neurons, 117, 220
resting length, 192
Muscularis mucosa, 12, 487
 Motor (or efferent) division, of 
Muscles
Muscular system, 5, 6
peripheral nervous system,
actions of, 200-201
MV. See Minute volume
266
aftachment types for, 199, 201
Myastheria gravis, 186
Index
657
Myelinated nerve fibers, teased, 117
hypophyseal-pituitary axis and,
Neurofilaments, 25
Myelin sheafh, 117, 218
337
 Neuroglandular synapse, 218
conduction velocity and, 228-229
hypothalamic hormones and, 338
Neuroglia, 117
Myelocele, 242
pifuitary hormones and, 341
 Neurohypophysis hormone
Myeloid stem cells, 381, 382
Negative feedback system, 7, 7
structures, 340t
Myenteric plexus, 283, 487
Neocortex, 246, 246
Neuromuscular junction, 185,
Myoblasts, 181
Neopulmonary parabronchi, 432
185-186, 218
Myocardium, 387, 390
Nephrons, 460, 461, 480
pharmacology of, 186
Myofibrils, 182
avian, 478
Neuronal pools, diverging and
Myofilaments, 115
diagram of, 465
converging, 221
Myoglobin, 182
flow of selected materials, 468
Neurons, 217, 217-221, 237
Myogram, 190, 190
histology of, 467
axon, 218
Myomesin, 182, 184
organization of, 463
cell body, 217
Myometrium, 560
rate of fluid flow in regions of,
cholinergic, 232
Myoneural junction, 185
468t
classification of, 220-221
Myopia, 307
strucfure of, 462464
axon length and, 220
Myopic eye, 307
summary of functions of regions
function and, 220-221
Myosin, 36, 112, 385
of, 468t
neurite number and, 220
in cardiac muscle, 387
Nernst equation, 223, 224 (box)
neurotransmifters and, 221
heart confraction and, 393
Nerve bundles, porfions of, 117
dendrites, 217-218
myofibrils and, 182
Nerve fiber, 218
ion concenfrations and equilibrium
in smooth muscle, 196
Nerve in the periphery, 218
potentials in, 223t
Myotatic reflex, 278
Nerves, 291
kisspeptin-secreting, 339
classification of, 266, 291
overview of, 217
NAD. See Nicotinamide adenine
connective tissue and, 181
parts of, 217
dinudleotide
cranial, 266
pre- and postganglionic, 282
NADH, 62, 64, 82
degenerafion and regenerafion of,
synapse, 218-220
Krebs cycle and, 65, 66
267, 291
Neuropeptides, 288
NADPH, 68, 77, 78
description of, 265
 Neuropeptide Y, 288
 NADPH production, activities of
mixed, 266
Neuropharmacology, 236
enzymes involved in, 69t
spinal, 266,266-267, 291
Neurophysiology, 222-229, 238
Nail body, 132
vagus, 286
coding of stimulus intensity, 229
Nail fold, 133
Nervous system, 5, 6. See also
 generation of action potential,
Nail root, 132, 133
Autonomic nervous system;
226-227
Nails, 132-133
 Peripheral nervous system
membrane charnels, 224-225
Nanogram, 333
components of, 215-216, 216
chemically gated channels, 224
Nares, 418
homeostasis and, 5
mechanically gated channels,
Nasal cartilage, 418
organization of, 216, 216-217,
225
Nasal cavity, 418
237-238
voltage-gated channels, 224-225
Nasal conchae, 418
supportive cells, 221
postsynaptic potentials, 225-226
Nasal glands, 285-286
Nervous ftissue, 5, 87, 115-117, 119
excitatory postsynaptic
Nasal region, of skull, 153
Net energy, 59, 59
potentials, 226
Nasal sepfum, 418
Net filtration pressure, calculating,
inhibitory postsynaptic
Nasolacrimal glands, 303
400
potentials, 226
Nasomaxillary suture, 152
Net hydrostatic pressure, 400
 propagation of action potential,
Nasopharynx, 418, 419-420, 494
Neural crest cells, 11, 242, 243
227-229
Nafural killer T cells, 450 (box)
 Neural mecharisms, for respiratory
conduction velocity, 228-229
Natural selection, 557
control, 428-429, 438
resting membrane potential,
Navicular bone, 133
Neural plate, formafion of, 241, 242
222-223
Near point of vision, 307
Neural regulation, of blood pressure,
 Neuropores, anterior and posterior,
Nearsightedness, 307
402
242
Nebulin, 184
Neural tube, 241, 242
Neuroregulins, 366
Neck muscles, 202t
Neural tube defects, 242 (box)
Neurotensin, 288
Necropsy, defined, 87
Neu receptor, 366
Neurotoxins, Puffer fish and, 225
Necrosis, 267
Neurite, neuron classificafion based
(box)
Needle teeth, 493t
on, 220
Neurotransmifter receptors, 235-236,
NEFA. See Nonesterified fatty acids
Neurocoele, 242
236t, 240
Negative feedback 1oops, 340-341
 Neuroendocrine messengers, as
Neurotransmifters, 186, 219,
ACTH control and, 351-352
hormones and
231-237, 240
t10
 anterior pifuitary hormone
neurotransmifters, 340t
agonists and antagonists, 237t
secrefion and, 340-341
Neuroendocrine reflex, 324
amines, 231-233
658 Index
Neurotransmifters (confinued)
blood pressure regulation and, 402
On-center bipolar cells, 311
acetylcholine, 231-232
cardiac reflexes and, 290
Oncotic pressure, 400
adenosine, 233
heart contractility and, 396
Onion toxicity, in cats and dogs,
amino acids, 233-234
heart rate and, 397
427 (box)
catecholarmines, 232-233
Norway rat, locafion, number, and
Oocytes, 560, 565, 579
indoleamine, 233
nipple openings of mammary
bovine, development stages, 571
peptides, 234-235
glands in, 530t
fertilization and, 569
classes of, 239
Nose, 418, 435
Oogenesis, 564
classical, 231, 235
external, 418
Oogonium, 565
criteria for compounds, 231
Nostrils, 418
Ooplasm, 567
inactivation of, 230
Notarium, 166
Opioid peptides, 236t
major, 232t
Notochord, 241, 242
Opossum, location, number, and
 NTDs. See Neural tube defects
nipple openings of mammary
340t
Nuclear envelope, 27, 32, 33
glands in, 530t
neurons classified according to, 221
Nuclear lamina, 27
Opsin, 309, 310
receptors and,
286,294-295
Nuclear matrix, 33
Opsonization, 451
unconvenfional
Nuclear transfer, 584
 Optic chiasma, 311
carbon monoxide, 235
Nucleic acids, 40-41, 55
Optic cranial nerve (I), 257t
nifric oxide, 235
digestion of, in small intestine, 513
Optic disc, 305
Neurotrophic factors,
267
Nucleoli, 27
Optic nerve, 305
Neurulation, 242, 242
Nucleosidases, 511
Optic tract, 311
Neutral fats,
14
Nucleotides, 41
Optic vesicles, 243, 243
Neutrophils, 23, 26, 54, 111, 112, 377,
Nucleus, 26
Oral cavity, 11, 489
378t, 380, 442, 443, 444
of epithelial cell, 26
Oral region, of skull, 153
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Nucleus cuneafus, 254
Ora serrata, 305
NFP. See Net filtration pressure
Nucleus gracilis, 254
Orbicularis oris muscle, 202t, 488
Niacin, 46t
Nutrients, absorption of, in small
Orbital region, of skull, 153
 Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide,
intestine, 513
Organelles, 55
46, 62
Organic acid groups, 475
Nicotine, 286
Obligatory transport, 469
Orgarismal level, 5
Nicotinic receptors, 186, 189, 236, 286
Obturator foramen, 164
Organization, levels of, 4-5, 5
 Nictitating membrane (or third
Occipital condyle, 166
Organ of Corti, 313
eyelid), 303, 303
Occipital lobe, brain, 244, 244
Organ physiology, 4
Nipples, 530, 546
Oecluding junctions, 99 
Organs, 5, 5, 11
Nissl substance, 217
Ocular reflexes, 290, 295-296
defined, 87
Nitric oxide, 235, 403
Oculomotor cranial nerve (IⅢl), 257t,
Organ system level, in animal body,
autonomic nervous system and,
285
6
287t
Off-center area, 310
Origins, muscles, 200, 201t
hemoglobin and, 428, 438
Off-center bipolar cells, 311
Ornithine-urea cycle, 477, 478
Nifrogenous wastes, excretion of,
Oil gland, 127
Oropharynx, 418, 420, 489, 494
477, 477
Oils, 14
Os coxae, 163
NM. See Neuromuscular junction
Olecranonn fossa, 158
Osmatic gradient, vasa recta and
Nociceptors, 268, 271, 271, 292
Olecranon process, 160
maintenance of, 469
Node of Ranvier, 116, 217
Olfaction, 273, 316
Osmolality, hypothalamus and, 289
Noggin, 241
physiology of, 298, 316
Osmolarity, 49
Nomenclafure, for enzymes, 46
Olfactory bulb, 298
Osmosis, 48-50
 Nonangular movements, of synovial
Olfactory cortex, 246, 246
diffusion and, 48
joints, 170t
Olfactory cranial nerve (I), 257t
Osmotic pressure, 49
Nondisplaced fracfures, 147
Olfactory epithelium, 297
Ossa coxarum, 163
Nonesterified fatty acids, 71
Olfactory pathway, 298, 316
Ossification, 110, 144, 144
 plasma glucose and,
71
Olfactory receptors, 298
Ossification center, 144
Nonpolar covalent bonds, 44
anatomy of, 297-298, 316
Osteoblasts, 110, 140, 141, 142, 142,
Nonpolar molecules, 13
Olfactory system, 268t
144,145,146
Non-REM sleep, stages of,
255
hypothalamus and, 289
Osteoclasts, 110, 140, 141, 142, 146
Nonstriated muscle, 196
Oligodendrocytes, 117, 119, 218, 221
Osteocytes, 109, 110, 118, 141, 142,
 Noradrenergic postganglionic fibers,
 Olivary nuclei, in medulla oblongata,
142, 144
288
254
Osteogenesis, 144
 Norepinephrine,
73,74,232,236t,
Omasum, 501, 502, 505
Osteology, 139, 174
tid
237t, 286
Omenfum, 485, 486
Osteomalacia, 148
 alutonomic nervous system and,
Omnivores, 488
Osteon, 141
287t
On-center area, 310
Osteonal canals, 142
Index
659
Osteoprogenitor cells, 141, 142, 145
Oxytocin, 8, 250, 251, 341, 351 (box)
Parahippocampal gyrus, 248
Otolithic membrane, 315
lactation curves of cows freated
Parallel muscles, 199
Otolithic organs, within utricle and
with, 342
Paranasal sinuses, 418-419, 419
saccule, 315-316, 320-321
parfurition and, 573
Paranatal period, 433
Otoliths, 315
secretion of, 324
Paranchymal tissue, 536, 537
Outer cell mass, 570
 at milking or suckling, 544
Parasagittal plane, 8
Outer cuticle, 128
stress, cenfral inhibifion and, 342
Parasympathetic division, of
Outer (external) ear, 312, 320
Oxytocin receptors, 333
altonomic nervous system,
of dog, 313
283-284, 285, 285-286
Outer serosa, of female reproductive
 Pacemaker cells, 119
Parasympathetic nervous system
tract, 558
 peristalsis and, 499
 gastrointestinal reflexes and, 290
Ova, 565
Pacinian corpuscles, 125, 125t, 137,
glandular reflexes and, 290
Oval window, middle ear, 313
269,269, 276t
Parathion, 232 (box)
Ovarian development, IGFs, binding
strucfure of, 126
Parathyroid hormone, 324, 325,
proteins and, 365
Paget's disease, 355
355-357
Ovarian follicles, 338
PAH. See Para-aminohippuric acid
bone control and, 146, 147
Ovarian medulla, 560
Pain
Paraventricular nucleus, 250
Ovaries, 558, 559, 562,564
nociceptors and mediation of, 271
Paravetebral chain, 284
avian, 579,580
referred, 272, 272
Parenchyma
in chicken reproductive tract, 579
 Pain information, hypothalamus and,
defined, 87
developmenf of, 565
289
of organ, 575
cyclic, 560
Pain pathway, 271-272, 273
Parenchymal tissue, 92
female bovine, 560
Palate, 418, 420, 489, 489
Parental care, energetic costs of, 558
Overfeeding, ketosis and, 76
Palatoglossal arches, 420
Parietal cells
Oviduucts, 558, 559,560, 562
Palatopharyngeal arches, 420
in gastric glands, 497, 498-499
avian, 579
 Paleopulmonic parabronchi, 432
regulation of HCI secretion from,
Ovines
6 eu
499
 average age or time for selected
 Palmitate, production of, overall
Parietal lobe, brain, 244, 244
reproductive aftributes in,
reaction to, 76
Parietal peritoneum, 485
564t
Palmitic acid, 77
Parietal serosa, 10
kidney in, anatomy of, 459-462
Palmific fafty acid, 14t, 15
Parotid salivary glands, 286, 490
Ovulation, 560, 565, 587
Palpebrae (eyelids), 301
Parrot mouth, 493t
 differences between species, 565
Palpebral commissures, 302
Pars compacts, 247
egg release and, 579-580
PAMPs. See Pathogen-associated
Pars distalis, 337, 338
follicle-stimulating hormones and,
molecular pafterns
Pars intermedia, 337
349
Pancreas, 11, 484, 515
Pars nervosa, 337
in hens, 578
functions of, 515
Pars reticulata, 247
luteinizing hormone and, 349-350,
histology of, 515
Pars tuberalis, 337
564
Pancreatic duct, of horse, 509
Partial pressure, 426
Ovulatory peak, 350
Pancreatic juice, composifion and
Parfurient paresis (milk fever), 148
Ovum (ova), 559, 560
function of, 515
Parfuriftion, 570, 573-574
Ox
Pancreatic secretions, 512t
cifrate concentrafions and, 78
hook in, 164
regulation of, 515
durafion of, 574
number of vertebrae in, 155t
Paneth cells, 510
phases of, 573-574
Ox coxa, 164
Panniculus adiposus, 106
Passive immurity, 441, 456
Oxidases, 23
Panniculus reflex, in diagnostics,
Passive transport, 52
Oxidation-reduction reactions, 45
282
Pastern bone, 133
Oxidative phosphorylation, 62, 66
Panting, 126
Patella, 164
Oxidoreductases, 46t
Papillae, 461-462
Patellar ligament, 173
Oxygen, 50
shape of, 299
Patellar reflex, in diagnostics, 282
 exchange of carbon dlioxide and,
tongue surface, 298
Patellar surface, 164
426
Papillary layer, dermis, 124
 Pathogen-associated molecular
hemoglobin and transport of, 427
Papillary muscles, 388, 389
patterns, 446
Oxygen consumption, muscle fatigue
Papillary reflex, 307
Pathology, defined, 87
and, 194
Pap smear, 16
Pattern recognifion receptors, 446
Oxygen debt, 194
Para-aminohippuric acid, 472, 473
PC. See Pyruvate carboxylase
 Oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation
Parabronchi, 431
PCT. See Proximal convoluted tubule
curve, 427-428, 428, 430,
Paracloacal vascular bodies,
PDGF. See Platelet-derived growth
438
580-581
factor
t10
Oxygen transport, 437-438
Paracrine action, 325
Pecten, avian retina, 305
in blood, 429
Paraffin, 17
Pectoral girdle, 167
660 Index
Pectoralis muscles, of thoracic limb,
Perivenfricular zone, of
Picogram, 333
204t
hypothalamus, 250-251
Piebald spofting, 131t, 137
Pectoral limbs, muscles of, 204t-206t
Peroxisomes, 23
Pigmentation genes, mutations, gene
Pelage cycles, 130
Perry, E. J., 581
products, and phenotypes 
Pelvic-associated muscles, 207t
Peyer's patches, 455, 510
related to, in mice, 131t 
Pelvic cavity, 9, 163
PFK. See Phosphofructokinase
Pigs
Pelvic (hip) girdle, 163, 176
pH
blood cell numbers in, 379t
avian, 167
kidneys and control of, 473-477
length and capacity of parts of
canine,163
of milk, 544
digestive tract in, 488t
Pelvic limbs, 163-166, 173
Phagasome, 54
location, number, and nipple
distal, of dog, 165
Phagocytes, 443
 openings of mammary glands
joints of, 173
Phagocytosis, 54, 55
in, 530t
muscles of, 207t-208t
neutrophils and, 380
number of teeth in, 493t
Pelvic symphysis, 164, 172
Phalanges, 162-163, 166
number of vertebrae in, 155t
Pelvic urethra, 575
Pharmaceutical proteins, livestock
rostral bone in nose of, 418
Pelvis, 172
performance and, 585
skeleton of, 150
Penis, 574
Pharyngotympanic tubes, 420
sufure lines of skull in, 152
Pennae, 135
Pharyrx, 419-420, 435, 494 495, 523
teeth in, 492
Pennate muscles, 199
Pheomelanin, 130, 131, 137
types of bones in, 140
Pentose phosphate pathway, 68
Pheromones, 340
 Pilocarpine, 236
Pentoses, 37
Philtrum, 418, 488
"Pin bone," 164
Pentose sugars, 38
Phosphatases, 511
Pineal body, 251
PEPCK. See Phosphoenolyruvate
Phosphate buffer system, 474-475
Pinna, outer ear, 313
carboxykinase
Phosphodiesterase, 310
Pinocytosis, 53, 54, 54, 540
Pepsin, 498
 Phosphoenolyruvate carboxykinase,
PIP2, 327
Peptic ulcers, 521
69
Pitch, of sound waves, 313, 320
Peptides, 234-235
Phosphofructokinase, 61, 62, 63
 Pituitary. See also Anterior pifuitary;
nociceptors and, 271
Phosphoglycerate kinase, 63
 Posterior pifuitary
synthesis of, 235
Phosphoglycerate mutase, 63
overview of, 337
Perception, sensafions vs., 268
Phospholipase C, 327
 Pituitary-adrenal axis, fetal,
Perforating canals, 142
signaling pathways, 328
parturition and, 573
Perforin, 453
Phospholipids, 40, 55, 72
 Pituitary gland
Perfusion, 426
strucfure of, 15
anatomy of, 338
Perianal glands, 127
Phosphorylation state, 45
endocrine regulation of milk
Perianal sinuses, 127
Photoperiod, 578
production and, 540
Pericardial cavity, 9
 onset of puberty and, 564
milk secretion and, 544
Pericarditis, 387
 prolactin secretion and, 130,
Pituitary hormones, 336
Pericardium, 10, 386-387
348-349
hypothalamus and secretion of,
Perichondrium, 109, 151
 Photopigments, 308
339
Perikaryon, 217
light response, sequence of,
negative feedback loops, 340-341
Perimysium, 112, 180, 181
309-310
Pituitary fumors, 338
Perineal reflex, in diagnostics, 282
Photoreception, 
308-311,319
Pivot joint, 170
Perineurium, 265, 266
 chemistry of visual pigments,
Placenta, 570
Periosteal bone, 145 
309-310
Placental lactogen (PL), 542, 573
Periosteum, 140
light or dark adaptation, 311
Placentas
 Peripheral nerves
light transduction by
classification of, 266
photoreceptors, 310
types of, 572-573
components of, 266
retinal isomers involved in, 309
 Placentation, implantation and,
Peripheral nervous system, 216,
retinal processing of visual
569-570, 572-573
216
information, 310-311
Placentomes, 572
responsibilities of,
265
visual pathway, 311
Plane joint, 170
Peristalsis, 483, 499
Photoreceptors, 268
Plantar, 9t
enteric nervous system and, 290
light transduction by, 310, 319
 Plantar flexion, 201t
in large intestine, 519
types of, 305
Plasma, 376, 377,408
segmentation and, 484
Phrenic nerve, 423
kidney filtration of, 466
in small intestine, 511
Physiology
Plasma cells, tissue and cell defense
Peritoneal cavity, 485, 485, 522
cellular, 4
and，454t
 Peritoneal organs, 486
defined, 4
 Plasma glucose, nonesterified fatty 
Peritoneal sac, 574
organ, 4
acids and, 71
Peritoneum, 485, 485
systems, 4
Plasma ionic calcium concentration,
Perifubular cells, 577
Pia mater, 259, 260, 260
hormonal control of, 147
Index
661
Plasma membrane, 51, 51 (box)
Pons, 243
Preproinsulin, 360
Plasma proteins, 377
components of, 252
 Prepro-oxyphysin, 343
thyroid hormones bound to, 354
REM sleep and, 256
Prepropressinphysin, 343
Plasmin, 385
respiration and, 429
 Prepubertal mammary development,
Plasminogen, 385
 Pontine-geniculate-occipital (PGO)
531-534
Plateau, heart contraction and, 392
waves, sleep and, 256
 Presbyopia, 307
Platelet adhesion, 384
Pontine respiratory group, 429
Presynaptic inhibiftion and
 Platelet aggregation, 384
 Porcine animals
facilitation, 230, 230
 Platelet-derived growth factor, 33,
 average age or time for selected
Presynaptic membrane, 218
383
reproductive aftributes in,
Prevertebral ganglia, 285
Platelet plug formaftion, 383-384,
564t
Primary antibody, 334
409
humerus of, 160
Primary bacteria, fermentation and,
Platelet release reaction, 384
radius and ulna of, 161
504
Platelets, 111, 376, 377, 378t, 381,
scapula of, 159
 Primary hyperalgesia, 272
408
Portal systems, 399, 413
Primary induction, 241
formation of, 382
Portomicrons, 514
 Primary level negative feedback, 341
Platysma muscles, of head and neck,
 Positional terms, in anatomy, 8
 Primary sensory endings, 278
202t
Positive feedback system, 7-8
Primary sprout, 531
PLC. See Phospholipase C
Posterior median sulcus, 259
Primary underfeeding ketosis, 75
Pleural cavities, 9
Posterior nucleus, of thalamus, 249
 PrIR. See Prolactin receptor
Pleural membrane, 421, 435-436
Posterior piftuitary, 337
Prl. See Prolactin
 respiratory anatomy of lungs and,
hormones and cells of, 341-343
Proacrosin, 569
421
pathways, 342
 Procarboxypeptidase, 515
Pleurisy, 421
Posterior semicircular canals, 313
Processes, vertebral, 155
Plexus of Auerbach, 487
Postganglionic neurons, 282
Proelastase, 515
 Plicae (or plicae circulares), 509
 Postparfum alveolar structures, 539
Proerythroblasts, 382
Pluripotent stem cells,
，381
 Postpubertal mammary
Progesterone, 40, 331
PMN leukocytes, 448
development, 531-534
alveolar development and, 541
PMNs. See Polymorphonuclear
physiological stages and, 533
lactation and, 543
leukocytes
Postsynaptic membrane, 218, 219
mammary development and, 566
 PMSG. See Pregnant mare serum
Postsynaptic potentials, 225-226
parfurition and, 573
gonadotropin
Posture, muscles and, 180
placenta and, 573
 Pneumatic bones, 4
Potassium, 43
production of, 560
Pneumotaxic area, 429
Potential difference, 222
 Programmed cell death, 267
Pneumofaxic center, 252
Pouch, 502
Projection fibers, 246
Pneumothorax, 421
Poultry industry, reproductive cycles
Prokaryotic cells, 26
PNS. See Peripheral nervous
svstern
and, 578
Prolactin, 325, 343, 347-349, 542
Podocytes, 465
 Power stroke, sliding filament theory
anterior pifuitary gland and, 338t
Point of the hock,
165
and, 189
as cytokine in immune system,
Polar covalent bonds, 44, 45
 P-Q interval, in electrocardiogram,
446
Polar molecules, 13
393-394, 1393
mammary biochemistry affer
Polyclonal antibodies, 442, 451
Precapillary sphincters, 398, 398
suppression of, 348t, 542,
Polycythemia, 376-377
Precursor cells, 382
542t
 Polyestrous species, 564
Preen gland, 127
mammary cell differenfiation and,
Polymodal nociceptors, 271
 Preganglionic neurons,
282
544
Polymorphonuclear (PMN)
Pregnancy, 587-589
mechanisms of action for, 328
leukocytes, 447
fertilization and, 568-569
 milk production affter suppression
Polypeptides, 35
mammary development during,
of, 348
 Polypeptide synthesis, 80
534-538
milk secretion response and, 540
Polyribosomes, development of, 82
 maternal recognition of, 566
secretion of, 348-349
Polysaccharide A, 521
Pregnant mare serum gonadotropin,
affter teat stimulation, 349
Polysaccharides, 37
573
wool growth and, 130
Polyspermy, preventing, 569
Prehatching respiration in birds, 433
Prolactin receptor, 328
Polysynaptic reflexes, 277, 280-281,
Preload, 395-396
Pronafion, 161, 170, 200, 201t
293
Premafure infants, surfactant 
Pro-opiomelanocortin,
，130,137,351
crossed-extensor reflex, 281,
production in, 424 (box)
processing of, 351
281
Premolars, 492
 Proper connective tissues, 103
tendon reflex, 280
 Preovulatory center, 350
Prophase, 31, 32
withdrawal reflex, 280, 281
 Preovulatory LH surge, 564
Propionate, 38
t10
 Polyunsafurated faffy acids, 14
 Preparfum alveolar structures, 539
Propionic acid, 507
POMC. See Pro-opiomelanocortin
Preprohormones, 343
Propioric fatty acid, 14t
662 Index
Proprioceptors, 124, 125, 268, 269,
Pubic symphysis, 167
Radial fossa, 158
270, 396
Pubis, 164
Radial styloid process, 161
Propulsion, digestive tract and, 483
Puffer fish, 225 (box)
Radioactivity, disintegrafions per
Prosencephalon, 243, 243, 249
Pullets, 578
minute and, 335
Prostacyclins, 40, 385, 403
Pulmonary arteries, 404
Radioimmunoassay (RIA)
Prostaglandins, 40, 566, 573
Pulmonary artery, 422
techniques, 333-334
inflammation response and, 445t
Pulmonary circulation, 389, 389,
bovine insulin RIA data, example,
nociceptors and, 271
404-405, 405, 410, 415
335t
Prostate gland, 574, 575
Pulmonary embolism, 384
Radiolabeling, of hormones, 331
Proteases, nociceptors and, 271
Pulmonary gas exchange, 426
Radioulnar joint, 170
Protein, 34-37
 Pulmonary receptors, 430
Radius, 160, 161
binding, study of, 364
Pulmonary valves, 388, 389
of various species, 161
defined, 35
Pulmonary veins, 387, 404
Radius-ulna, bovine, 149
digestion of, in small intestine, 507
Pulmonary ventilation, 423, 436
Ramp retina, in horses, 307
fibrous, 36
airway resistance, 424-425
 Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep,
globular, 36
compliance of lungs, 424
254
interconversions and catabolism
expiration, 424
 possible neurochemical model for
inspiration, 423-424
control of, 256
levels of organization for, 36
surface tension of alveolar fluid,
 RAS. See Reticular activating system
liver and metabolism of, 518-519
424
Rats
myofibrils and, 182
Pupil, 302, 303, 305
lactating, ultrastructural analysis
plasma, 377
diameter of, 307-307, 319
 of cytoplasmic organelles in
rumenal digestion of, 507
Purine, 41, 42,55, 233
mammary epithelia from, 539t
sperm cells and, 568
Purkinje cells, 253
mammary development during
structure and function of, 35-36,
Purkinje fibers, 392
pregnancy in, 534, 536
37
Purring, in cats, 420 (box)
RBCs. See Red blood cells
synthesis of, 36-37
Pus, 444
Receptive field, 269
Protein buffer system, 474, 475
Putamen, 247
 Receptor assay, 331
Protein C, 385
 P wave, in electrocardiogram, 393,
Receptor downregulation, 333
 Protein-digesting enzymes, activation
393
Receptor ligand, 37
of, 515
 Pygostyle, 166
Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 54
Protein synthesis
Pyloric antrum, 497
Receptor potential, 274
overview of, 80
Pyloric region, 497
Receptor protein, 37
RNA, DNA and, 80-82
Pyloric sphincter, 497, 499
Receptors, 7,7
Proteoglycans, 12, 89
Pyramidal system, 247
for equilibrium, 312
cartilage rich in, 109
Pyrimidines, 41, 42, 55
neurotransmifters and, 294-295
Prothrombinase, 384
Pyruvate, conversion of, into lactate,
regulation and, 331-333
Protraction, 171, 200, 201t
61
stretch, 430
Proventriculus (pars glandularis),
Pyruvate carboxylase, 69
toll-like, 446
507
Pyruvate kinase, 63, 63
Receptor subtype, 235
Proximal, 9t
Pyruvic acid, 194
 Receptor tyrosine kinases, type 1,
Proximal convoluted tubule, 462,
366
465-468, 468, 469
QRS complex, in electrocardiogram,
 Recombinant bovine somatotropin,
Proximal phalarx, 163
393,393
585
Pseudopods, 54
Q-T interval, in electrocardiogram,
 Recombinant human proteins, 585
Pseudostratified columnar
394
Recruited follicles, 565
epithelium,
, 98, 98
Quadruped, 8
Rectum, 478, 519
 Pseudostratified epithelial cells, 98
Quarter Horse Association, 582
Recurrent collateral, 218
 Pseudostratified epifhelium, drawing
Q wave, in electrocardiogram, 393
Red blood cells, 93, 111, 376, 377,
86 '0
408
 Pseudounipolar neurons,
220
RAA system. See Renin-angiotensin-
avian, 377
Pterygoid muscles, 202t
aldosterone system
Red bone marrow, 143
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
Rabbits
Red kangaroo, locafion, number, and
Puberty
location, number, and ripple
ripple openings of mammary
 farm animal management and,
openings of mammary glands
glands in, 530t
564-565
in, 530t
Red tide, 225 (box)
in females, 563
 mammary development during
Reduced hemoglobin,
，427
endocrinology of, 563-564
pregnancy in, 534
Re-esterification, 74
t10
kisspeptins and onset of, 339
 Race horses, milkshake and, 377
Referred pain, 272, 272
leptin's role in, 370
(box)
Reflex arch, 276
Pubic bones, 163, 164
Rachis,135
steps to, 274, 276
Index
663
Reflexes, 274, 276-281, 292-294
 implantation and placentafion,
blood supply to lungs, 389
acquired, 277
569-573
chemoreceptors, 429-430
cardiovascular, 290, 296
parturition, 573-574
conducting pathway anatomy, 419
classification of, 276-277, 292-293
hypothalamus and, 289
control of respiration: neural
development of, 277
overview of female reproductive
mechanisms, 428-429
in diagnostics, 293-294
tract, 558-560, 563
 cooperation between circulatory
enterogastric, 500
overview of male reproductive
system and, 433
gastrointestinal, 290, 296
tract, 574-578
defense mechanisms of, 433434
glandular, 290, 296
spermatogenesis, 575-577
nonspecific, 433-434
innate,277
 sperm storage, mafuration, and
specific, 434
monosynaptic,
277,277-278
delivery, 577-578
 exchange of oxygen and carbon
myotatic, 278
puberty in females, 563
dioxide, 426
neuroendocrine, 324
endocrinology of, 563-564
functional anatomy of, 418-419
ocular, 290, 295-296
Reproductive attributes, selected,
lung volumes and capacifties,
papillary, 307
average age or time for, in
425-426
polysynaptic, 277
some species, 564t
overview of, 417-418
somatic, 277,277
 Reproductive functions,
primary function of, 417-418
spinal, 277-281, 293
hypothalamus and, 340, 341
pulmonary ventilation, 423-425
tendon, 280, 280
Reproductive system, 5, 6. See also
transport of oxygen and carbon
urogenital, 290, 296
 Reproduction
dioxide, 427
use of, in diagnostics,
281,282t
Reproductive technologies, 581-586,
Respiratory volumes and capacities,
visceral, 277, 277, 290
589
426
Refraction, 306-307, 318-319
artificial insemination, 581-582
Restiform body, 252
of light rays, 307
cloning, 583-584
Resting membrane potential, 222,
problems with, 307, 308, 319
embryo transfer, 582
222-223,238
Refractory period, heart confraction
overview, 581
basis of, 223
and, 393
sexed semen, 582-583
Rete fluid, 577
 Regional vertebrae, 155
transgenic animals, 584-586
Rete tubules, 574
Regulatory proteins,
182
in vitro fertilization, 582
Reticular activating system, 254, 263
Relaxation phase, muscle twitch,
Reproductive tract. See Female
Reticular cells, 381
190, 190
reproduuctive tract; Male
Reticular fibers, 103
Relaxin, parturition and, 573
reproductive tract
Reticular formafion, 254
REM-on cells, 257
Reptilian-type (RT) nephrons, 478
Reticular groove, 502
Renal capsule, 460, 460
 RER. See Rough endoplasmic
Reticular lamina, 91
Renal clearance, 472-473
reticulum
Reticular layer, 124, 125
 Renal corpuscle, histological
Resistance, vascular, 401, 414
 Reticuloomasal fold (reticular
appearance of, 467
Respiration
groove), 502, 504
Renal pelvis (or hilus), 460, 461
aerobic, 20
Reticulum, 501, 502, 504
Renal pyramids, 462, 463
expiration, 424
of goat, 505
 Renal regulation of blood pressure
external, 423, 426
Retina, 318
direct, 403
inspiration, 423-424
avian, 305
indirect, 403
internal, 423, 426
hypothalamus and information
Renal vein and artery, 460, 461
pons and, 429
from, 289
Renin, production and action of, 402
pressure changes during, 423 424
layers of, 305
 Renin-angiotensin-aldlosterone
 Respiration rate, tidal volume and,
 microscopic anatomy of, 306
 system, blood pressure
425t
visual information processed by,
regulation and, 402
 Respiratory acidosis, 475
310-311, 319
Renin-angiotensin system, 471, 471
Respiratory bronchioles, 421
Retinal, 309
 of kidney, 358
Respiratory burst, 380
 Retinal ganglion cells, receptive
 Repolarization, heart contraction 
 Respiratory control, neural
fields of, 310
and, 393
mechanisms for, 428429, 438
Retinoids, 331
Reproduction, 557-589
Respiratory distress syndrome, 424
Retinopathy, diabetes and, 362
in birds, 578-581
(box)
Retraction, 171, 200
avian female reproductive
Respiratory membrane
Rh blood groups, 385
system, 579-580
alveolar sacs and, 423
Rhodopsin, 309
 avian male reproductive system,
layers of, 422
Rhombencephalon, 243, 243
580-581
 Respiratory quotient, calculating,
60
 RIA procedures, materials needed
estrous cydles, uterus, and
Respiratory system, 5, 6, 417-440,
for, 334t
ovulation, 564-568
435
Riboflavin, 46t
11
fertilization and pregnancy,
avian respirafion, 430-433
Ribonuclease, 515
568-569
in birds, 430
Ribose, 38, 41, 68
664 Index
Ribosomal RNA, 21, 80
median aspect of head of, 419
Scapular cartilage, 156
nucleoli and, 27
motility of stomach in, 502-504
Scar tissue, 444
Ribosomes, 21
number of teeth in, 493t
 Scatchard equation, 332
Ribs, 167, 176
uiterus in, 563
Scatchard plot, safuration binding
types of, 156
Ruminant tissue, fafty acid synthesis
and, 332
typical, 159
in, 77
Scent glands, 127, 137
Rickets, 132, 133 (box), 148
Ruminafion, 503-504
Schleiden, 41
Rigor mortis, 189
Ruminoreticular fold, 502
Schwann, 41
RNA, 363
Rump muscles, 207t
Schwann cells, 116, 117, 217, 218, 222
 information transfer from DNA to,
R wave, in electrocardiogram, 393
Scissor mouth, 493t
81
Sclera, 304
 in mammary parenchymal tissue,
SA. See Segmental artery
Sdleral venous sinus, 304
538
Saccule, 313
Scrotum, 574, 575
 protein synthesis and, 80-82
 otolithic organs within, 315-316,
Seals
structure and function of, 79-80
320-321
lactation strategies in, 553 (box)
Robdell, Martin, 370
Sacral splanchnic nerves, 285
milk composiftion and, 531, 545
Rodents
Sacral vertebrae, 155, 155, 155t, 156
 Seasonal breeding, 564
 mammary gland development in,
Sacroiliac joint, 164, 172
Sebaceous glands, 101, 126-127, 137,
364,533
Sacromeres, 113, 114
303
 mammary growth in, 532
Sacrofuberous ligament, 172
Sebum, 126
mammary involution in, 551
Sacrum, 163, 164
 Secondary active transport, 53
Rods, 305,308
Saddle joint, 170
Secondary bacteria, fermentation
strucfure of, 309
Sagittal plane, 8, 9t, 10
and, 504
 visual informaftion processing and,
Saliva, 491, 512t, 523
Secondary hyperalgesia, 272
310
functions of, 490-491
 Secondary sensory endings, 278
visual pathway and, 311
Salivary glands, 285, 286, 484,
Secondary underfeeding ketosis,
75
Roosters, 578
489491, 523
Second law of thermodynamics, 57
Root hair plexus,
274,275t
in dog, 491
 Second messenger mechanism, 325
Rostral, 9t, 418
Salmonella, 520
Secretin, 500-501, 515, 518
Rotation, 170, 200, 201t
Saltatory conduction, 229, 229
Secretion, digestive tract and, 484
of synovial joints, 170t
Salt glands, avian, 479
Secretion mechanisms, glandular,
 Rough endoplasmic reticulum, 21, 
Salt licks, 479
101, 101
22,72, 217, 451, 466, 539
Salts, 43
 Secretory piece, 450
 protein synthesis and, 36
Salty taste, 299, 300, 301, 317
Secretory vesicles, 23, 24
 Round ligament, 516
 Sarcolemma, 182
Golgi membranses, rough
Round window, middle ear, 313
of smooth muscle, 196
endoplasmic reticulum and,
rRNA. See Ribosomal RNA
Sarcomeres, 118, 183, 183-185
22
r-selection animals, 557
in cardiac muscles, 391
Sedimentation, airborne particles
RTKs. See Receptor tyrosine kinases
  
and, 433
Ruffini's corpuscles, 125t, 137, 276t
thick filaments, 183, 184-185
Segmental artery, 461
Ruffini's endings, 269
thin filaments, 183, 184
 Segmentation
Rugae, 497
Sarcoplasm, 182
peristalsis and, 484
in gallbladder, 517
of cardiocytes, 195, 196
in small intestine, 511
Rumen, 501, 502,504
 Sarcoplasmic calcium concentration,
Sellar joint, 170
 of goat, internal configuration of,
increasing, 187
Sella turcia, 337
506
Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 182, 182-183
Selye, Hans, 357
Rumenal atrium, of goat, 505
in cardiac muscle fibers, 391
Semen, sex-sorted, 583
 Rumen motility, mixing and
Sarin, 232 (box)
Semen extenders, artificial
 eructation sequence of, 506
Satellite cells, 222
insemination and, 581
Ruminants
 Saturated fatty acids, 14
Semicircular canals
anatomy of stomach in, 501-502
common, 14t
crista ampularis and, 316
 arrangement of mesenteries in,
 Saturation, 51
inner ear, 312
486
Saturation binding, Scatchard plot
Semicircular ducts, 313
large, internal structure of heart in,
and, 332
Semilunar valves, 389, 394
388
Saxitoxin, 225 (box)
Seminal fluid, 568
 large, multipyramidal kidneys in, 
 Scala tympani,
313
Seminal plasma, 574, 575
461
Scala vestibuli, 313
Seminal vesicles, 575
mammary buds in, 531
Scanning electron microscopy, 19
Seminiferous tubules, 575
mammary development in, 533,
 Scapula, 156
avian, 580
535
bovine, 149,159
histology of, 576
 mammary involution in, 551
porcine, 159
Semipermeable membrane, 48
Index
665
Senger, P. L., 564
photoperiod and breeding activity
cross section, 112, 113
Sensations, perception vs., 268
in, 348
cross section, high, 113
Sensory areas, cortex, 247, 247
thyroid histology for, 352
fbers, 180, 181, 181-182
Sensory cranial nerves, 257
thyroid in, panel view of, 352
characteristics of, 195t
Sensory fibers, types of, 278
Shock, types of, 404, 415
formation of cells, 181
 Sensory information, nervous system
Short bones, 139, 140, 140
gross anatomy of, 211
and, 215, 216
Shoulder, intrinsic muscles of, 205t
longifudinal, 113
 Sensory neurons, 220
Shoulder blade, 156, 158
major, 201-210
 Sensory (or afferent) division, of
Shoulder flexion, 201t
muscles of the head and neck,
peripheral nervous system,
stay apparatus of horse and, 210
202t
266
Shoulder joint, 171, 172
muscles of the pectoral limb and
Sensory receptors, 268-274, 291
 Siberian husky, skull of, 154
lateral thorax, 204t-206t
classes of, 268, 291-292
Sickle cell anemia, 427
muscles of the pelvic limb and
general senses, 268-271
Signal recognition particle, 368
body wall, 207t-208t
modalities of, 268t
 Signal transducers and activators of
 stay apparafus of thoracic limb
structure and function of,
transcription, 329
of horse, 210, 211
275t-276t
 Simple epithelium, 91-95
metabolism of, 192-195, 212
Sensory signals, detection of, 274
Simple fracfure, 147
aerobic mechanism, 193
Sensory stimuli, detection of, 292
Simple squamous cells, 91, 92
anaerobic mechanism, 193-194
Septic shock, 404
 Simple squamous epithelium cornea,
 creatine phosphate, 193
Septum pellucidum, 245
96
effects of exercise on muscles,
Serosal fluid, 10
Single-transmembrane receptors,
194-195
 Serosa (serous membrane), in
325, 325t
 muscle fatigue and oxygen
digestive tract, 9, 12, 485, 486,
Single-unit smooth muscle, 115,
consumption, 194
486,487
196-197, 197
microscopic anatomy of, 212
Serotonergic neurons, 221
Sinoafrial (SA) node, 391, 392
 monosynaptic reflexes and,
Serotonin, 236t, 237t
Sinus hairs, 128
277-278
nociceptors and, 271
Sinusoidal capillaries, 398
myofibrils, 182
synthesis of, 233
Sinusoids, 516-517
sarcomeres, 183-185
Serous glands, 102, 102
Sirius Red stain, 104
thick filaments, 184-185
Sertoli cells, 575, 576, 577
 Sirius Red-stained connective tissue,
thin filaments, 184
 Serum calcium, in Jersey cows,
105
sarcoplasmic reticulum, 182-183
around time of calving.
356
"Sit bones," 164
transmission electron microscope
Serum creatine, GFR and, 473
Skatole, 520
image, 114
Sesamoid bones, 139, 140, 140,
Skeletal muscles, 112-114, 118-119,
Skeletal system, 5, 6, 139
162
180-195, 198t
Skeleton, 139, 149, 175
 Seven-transmembrane domain
blood vessels and nerves, 181
appendicular, 151, 152, 156-166,
receptors, 325,325t
cardiac muscle, 195
176
Sexed semen, 582-583
functional characteristics, 196
avian, 166-167
Sexing Technologies, 583
skeletal muscle cells vs., 196
axial, 151, 152, 152-156, 175
Sexual receptivify, behavioral cues in
connective tissues, 180-181
chicken, 166
caffle and, 568
connective tissue sheaths in, 181
classification of, 151-152, 175-176
Sharpey's fibers, 140
contraction of, 185-195, 212
primary functions of, 151
Shear mouth, 493t
excitation-contraction coupling,
types of cartilage in, 151
Sheep
186
Skin, 5
anatomy of kidneys in, 459-462
isometric versus isotonic
biochemical properties of, 130-132
bisected preserved kidney of, 460
contraction, 191-192
color of, 130-132
blood cell numbers in, 379t
length-tension relationships, 189
as defense mecharism, 443
blood groups in, 385
muscle relaxafion or refurn to
high-power section of, 97
cerebroventricles of, 245
resting length, 192
low-power section of, 97, 123
 EGF receptors in mammary tissue
muscle tone, 191
 protection provided by
from, 366
muscle twitch, 190
keratinization in, 122
length and capacity of parts of
neuromuscular junction,
thick, 125
digestive tract in, 488t
185-186
Skin derivatives, 127
location, number, and nipple
pharmacology of neuromuscular
Skull, 152-153
openings of mammary glands
 junction,
186
bones of, 153t
in, 530t
rigor mortis, 189
dog, examples of, 154
mammary development during
sliding flament theory, 188-189
equine, exploded view of, 154
pregnancy in, 534
summary of, 185,189
species differences in, 153-154
t10
mammary growth in, 532
summation, 190-191
sufure lines of, 152
number of vertebrae in, 155t
treppe, 190 
of various species, 154
666 Index
Slaty mutation, 131t, 137
Soff palate, 418, 489, 489
Spermatogonia, 575, 576
Sleep, 254-257
Sole, 1335
Spermatozoa, 568,569
categories of, 254-255
Solitary nucleus, in medulla
in birds, 581
characteristics of, 254
oblongata, 254
freezing of, 581-582
defined, 254
 Somatic afferent nerves, 266
production of, 574
EEG wave pafterns seen during
Somatic cell count, of raw milk,
 Sperm cells
wakefulness and various
447-448
bovine, tail of, 26
stages of, 255
Somatic cell nuclear fransfer, 584
proteins and, 568
Slides
Somatic efferent nerves, 266
S phase, in cell cycle,
,30,31,31
prepared, examining, 86
Somatic nervous system, 216, 216,
Spheroid joint, 170
section preparation, 94
281
Sphincter of Oddi, 508, 509, 518
Sliding filaments, 188
neural integration of, 283
Sphingophospholipids, 15
Sliding filament theory, 188-189, 212
organization of, 282
Spicules, 140
Slow fibers, 194
peripheral nerves within, 266
Spina bifida, 242, 242
Slow oxidative fibers,
194, 195t
skeletal muscle innervated by, 197
Spinal accessory crarial nerve (XI),
Slow waves, 499, 500
Somatic reflexes, 277, 277
257t
 Slow-wave sleep, 255
Somatomedin hypothesis, 328,
Spinal cavity, 9
Sma gene, 369
345-346, 346,371
Spinal column, 154-156
Small intestine, 11, 507-514
Somatosensory system, 268t
Spinal cord, 155, 241
absorption in, 513-514, 525
Somatostatin,
288,339
cross section of, 259
of amino acids, dipeptides, and
Somatotropin, 344-345
 major ascending and descending
tripeptides, 514
Somites, 243
pathways of, 260
of lipids, 514
Sorbitol, 362
meningeal layers of, 258
of monosaccharides, 513-514
Sorenson, 581
organization of, 258-260,259,263
of small nutrients in, 513
Sound waves, 313, 320
section of, 117
anatomy of, 507-509, 525
Sour taste, 299, 300, 301, 317
Spinal nerves, 266, 291
carbohydrate digestion in, 511-512
Sow mouth, 493t
Spinal reflexes, 277-281, 293
chemical digestion in, 511, 525
Sows
monosynaptic reflexes, 277-278
histology of, 509-511, 525
female reproductive tract in, 563t
stretch reflex, 278
intestinal juices and brush-border
lactation curves in, 548
Spindle pole, 25, 31
enzymes, 511
Spallanzari, 581
Spine, 154
lipid digestion in, 513, 513
Spasmodic torticollis, 186
Spinothalamic pathway, 272
 mechanical digestion and motility
 Specialized connective tissues,
Splanchnic circulation, 486
in, 511, 525
106-111
Splanchnic nerves, 285
 nucleic acid digestion in, 513
 Special senses,
297-321
Spleen, 455, 520
nutrient absorption in, 513
gustation: sense of taste, 298-301,
 Splint bones, 162
pancreas, 526
316-317
Spongy bone, 110, 140, 143, 145
 protein digestion in, 512-513
hearing and balance, 311-316,
ossificafion in, 110
smooth muscle, 116
320-321
Spontaneous ketosis, 75
tissue artifacts, 94
olfaction: sense of smell, 297-298,
Squamous cells, 88, 88,118
Smell, 273, 297
316
SR. See Sarcoplasmic reticulum
olfaction: sense of, 297-298
vision, 301-311, 317-320
 SRP. See Signal recognition particle
Smooth endoplasmic reticula, 217
Special sensory cranial nerves, 257
Stages, 576
Smooth muscle, 112, 115, 116, 119,
Specific immunity, 441, 449-453, 455 
Standing heat, 568
180, 196-198, 198t
antibody strucfure and function,
Stapes, 313
cell, 197
450-451
Staphylococcus aureus, 444
contraction of, 197-198, 213
 B cell selection and antibody
Starches, 38
neural innervation of, 197, 197
secretion, 451
STAT5,329
small intestine, 116
cell-mediated immunity, 451-453
Static equilibrium, 315
structure of, 196, 212-213
 Sperm
Static phase, in muscle contraction,
types of, 196-197, 197
avian, 580
279
Smurf ubiquitin ligases, 369
capacitation and, 568
STATs. See Signal transducers and
Sodium, 43
 storage, maturation, and delivery
 activators of transcription
Sodium chloride, 43
of, 577-578
Stay apparafus, of thoracic limb of
osmotic activity of extracellular
Spermatic cord, 574
horse, 210, 211,213
fluid and role of, 471
Spermatids, 576
Stearic faffy acid, 14t
 Sodium levels, hypothalamus and,
Spermatocytes, primary and
Stem cells, 12, 12 (box)
289
secondary, 576
pluripotent, 381
 Sodium-potassium ATPase pump,
Spermatogenesis, 338, 574, 575-577
Stercobilin, 379, 518
52-53, 53
bull, stage VIII development of, 
Stereocilia, 99
Sodium pump hypothesis, 471
576
Stereoisomers, 38
Index 
667
Sternal ribs, 156
Stretch
Supraspinafus muscles, of shoulder,
Sternebrae, 156
 response of muscle spindles to,
205t
 Sternoccipitalis muscles, of neck, dog
279
Supraspinous fossa, 156
and cat, 202t
 response of tactile receptors to,
Supratrochlear foramen, 158
Sternocephalicus muscles, of neck,
270
 Surface-acting receptors, major
202t
Stretch receptors, 430
structural classes of, 325t
Sternocleidomastoid muscles, 424
Stretch reflex, components of, 278,
Surface anatomy, 4
Sternocostal joints, 171
278
Surface tension, of pure water, 14
Sternomandibularis muscles, of neck,
Striae medullares, 251
 Surge (or preovulatory center), 350
202t
Striated muscle, 180
Surrogate mother, 584
Sternomastoid muscles, of neck, 202t
 Stroke volume, regulation of,
Sutures, 152
Sternum (or breastbone), 156
395-396, 412
SV. See Stroke volume
Steroid hormones, 40
Stroma, defined, 87
Swallowing, 483, 496,523
adrenal cortex and synthesis of,
 Strucfural proteins,
182
stages of, 495-496
357
Structure, function and, 4, 12, 538
Sweat, primary function of, 126
mechanism of action for, 330-331
STs. See Sexing Technologies
Sweat glands, 101, 125-126, 137
Steroids, 39
 S-T segment, in electrocardiogram,
Sweating, 7
Stifle joint, 164, 173, 173
394
Sweet taste, 299, 300, 300, 317
Stimulus, 7,7
Styloid process, 160, 161
Swine, multipyramidal kidneys in,
 Stimulus intensity, coding of, 229
 Subarachnoid space, 260
461
Stimulus transduction, 274
 Sublingual salivary glands, 286
Sylvian fissure, 244
Stomach, 11, 496-507, 523-524
Sublumbar muscles, 207t
Sympathetic chain, 285
bird, anatomy of, 507, 507, 525
Submental glands, 127, 137
and pathways, 284
four regions of, 497
Submuicosa, 12, 486, 486, 487
Sympathetic division, of autonomic
gastric motility and, 499
of female reproductive tract, 558,
nervous system, 283, 284,
gastric secretions and, 498-501
559
284-285
horse, 497
Submucosal plexus, 283, 487
Sympathetic nervous system,
monogastric, anatomy of, 496-497
Subscapular fossa, 156
arterial blood pressure
ruminant, 503
 Subscapularis muscle, of shoulder,
and, 290
anatomy of, 501-502,524
205t
Sympathetic varicosifties, 283
inside of, 504
Substance P, 288
Symport carriers, 53, 55
motility of, 502-504, 524
nociceptors and, 271
Synamic phase, in muscle
ruminant vs. monogastric, 502
pain pathway and, 272
contraction,279
secretion of HCI by, 498-499, 499,
Substantia nigra, 247, 252
Synapses, 218-220
500
 Substrate phosphorylation,
62-63, 66
types of, 218-219, 219, 219t
 Storage, liver and, 519
Succinylcholine, 
232 (box)
Synaptic bouton, 186, 230
Strabismus, Botox and, 186
Suckling, variation in intervals,
Synaptic cleft, 186, 218, 219
Stratified cuboidal epithelium, 89
among mammals, 536, 544
Synaptic knob, 218
Stratified epithelium, 95-99
Suckling reflex, 277
 Synaptic membrane, 219
Stratified squamous epithelium
Sucrose, 38,39,511
Synaptic transmission, 239
keratinized, 97
Suicide bags or sacs, 23
chemical transmission, 229-230
nonkeratinized, 97
Suli, 243, 244
electrical transmission, 229
 Stratified squamous epithelium
Summation, 190-191
long-term potentiation, 231
cornea, 96
 multiple motor unit summation,
modulation of synaptic signal,
Strafum basale, 122, 136
191
230-231
Strafum corneum, 136
wave summation, 190-191
Synarthrotic joints, 168
Strafum germinativum, 122
Superficial, 9t
Synergist, 201t
Stratum granulosum, 122, 136
Superficial gland (of third eyelid),
Synergistic effect, 338
Strafum internum, 134
303
Syngamy, 569, 570
Strafum lucidum,
122
Superior colliculi, 251, 311
Synosacrum, 166
Strafum medium, 134
Superior eyelid, 302
Synovial fluid, 169
 Stratum spinosum, 122, 136
Superior lacrimal puncta, 302, 303
Synovial joints, 167, 168t, 170-171,
Strafum tectorium, 134
 Superior mesenteric ganglia, 
：285
170t
Streak canal, 441, 546
Superior vena cava, 387, 406
anatomy of, 168-170
dimensions of, 547
Superovulation, 581
classification of, 170
Streptokinase, 385
Supination, 161, 170, 200, 201t
general structure of, 169
Stress
Suppressor T cells, 442, 452, 453
 Synovial membrane, 168
adrenal glands and, 357, 360
tissue and cell defense and, 454t
Synthase, 77
milk ejection reflex and, 342
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, 289
 Synthesis reactions, 45
 Stress response, hypothalamus and,
 Supraglenoid tubercle, 157
Syrinx, 430
289
Suprahamate process, 157
Systemic anatomy, 4
668 Index
Systemic circulation, 389, 389, 405,
Temporal bone, 312, 313
extrinsic muscles of, 204t-205t
405-406, 410, 415
Temporalis muscles, of head and
of horse, stay apparatus of, 210,
Systems physiology, 4
neck, 202t
211
Systolic blood pressure, 401
Temporal 1obe, brain, 244, 244
joints of, 172
Temporal summation, 226
shoulder joint, 171
Tactile hairs, 128
Tendon reflex, 280, 280
Thoracic vertebrae, 155, 155, 155t,
Tactile receptors, 268, 269
Tendons, 181
156
response of, to stretch, 270
histology of, 105
Thoracoabdominal cavity, 431
Talus, 165
Tendon synovial sheath, 170
Thoracolumbar division, of 
Tanning process, for leather, 136
Teriae coli, 519
 autonomic nervous system,
Tannins, 136
Tensor faciae antebrachi muscle, of
284, 284
Tapetum lucidum, 305
leg, 206t
Thorax, 156, 176
Tarsal glands, 301
 Tentorium cerebelli, 260
of different species, 158
Tarsal joint, 173
Teratogenic substances, 573
lateral, muscles of, 204t-206t
Tarsal plate, 301
Teres major muscle, of shoulder, 205t
lateral of goat, muscles of, 206
Tarsometatarsus, 167
Teres minor muscle, of shoulder,
Thrombin, 385, 403
Tarsus (hock), 165, 171-174
205t
Thrombocytes, 111, 383
Tastants, 300
Terminal arbor, 218
Thrombolytic agents, 385
Taste, 273, 297, 299-301, 316, 317
Terminal bouton (synaptic terminal),
Thromboplastin, 384
bitter, 300
218
Thrombopoietin,
382
salty, 301
Terminal cisterna, 183
Thrombosis, 384
sour, 301
Testes, 574, 575,575
Thromboxane A2, 403-403
sweet，300
avian, 580
Thromboxanes, 40
umami, 301
Testicular parenchyma, 575
Thrombus, 384
Taste buds, 299, 299, 489
Testosterone, 40, 574, 577
Thymidine, 29, 29, 31
Taste pathway, 301
production of, 338
incorporation of, in mammary
Taste pore, 299
 Testosterone secretion, luteinizing
tissue and IGFBP-3, 365
Taxol, 23
hormone and, 350
Thymine, 41, 55
T cells, 446
 Tetanus, wave summafion and, 191,
Thymus, 455
activation of, 453
191
Thyroglobulin, 350, 352
 cell-mediated immunity and,
Tetany, 356
Thyroid cartilage, 420
451-453
Tetrodotoxins, in puffer fish, 225
Thyroid gland, 352-355
Teat cistern, 443, 531, 546
Tetroses, 37
biological effects of thyroid
Teat ends, dairy cow, importance of
TF. See Tissue factor
hormones, 352-355
epithelial layer of, 443
Thalamus,
：249, 249,262-263
biosynthesis of triodothyronine
Teat injury problems, weather and,
anterior nucleus of, 248
and thyroxine, 352
547
Thalassemia, 427
calcitonin and, 355
Teats, 530, 546
Theca externa, 565, 567
histology of, 352
cows, internal structure of, 547
Theca interna, 565, 567
 parathyroid hormone and,
shapes of, 547
Theoretical biology, 58
355-357
skin of, 547
Thermal nociceptors, 271
Thyroid hormones,
337
 Teat stimulation, Prl secretion affer,
Thermoreceptor pathway, 273
biological effects of, 352-355
349
Thermoreceptors, 268, 272, 273, 292
galactopoiesis and, 544
Technology, tissues, cells, and, 103
 Thermoregulation, 13
heart rate and, 397
(box)
Thick filaments, 183,184-185, 185
iodination of, 353
Tectorial membrane, 313
in smooth muscle, 196
structures of, 353
Teeth, 484, 491-494, 523
Thigh bone, 164
Thyroid-stimulating hormone, 338,
of dog, 493
Thigh muscles, 208t
350-351
of horse, 492
Thin filaments, 183, 184
anterior pituitary gland and, 338t
 nomenclafure for, 493t
in smooth muscle, 196
Thyroxine (T4), 354
number of, in various species,
493t
Thioesterse I, 77
biosynthesis of, 352
Telencephalic vesicles, 243, 243
Third eyelid, 302, 303, 303
differentiation of tadpoles into
Telencephalon, 243, 243, 249
Thirst reactions, 472
frogs and, 353
Telodendria, 218
Thoracic aorta, 406, 407
galactopoietic effect of
Telogen phase, in hair growth cycle,
Thoracic cavity, 9
supplementation with, 355
129
Thoracic girdle, 156
structure and nomenclafure for
Telophase, 32,33
Thoracic inlet, 156, 420
conversion of, 354
 Tempanic membrane, 313
Thoracic limb, 156-158, 160-163,
Tibia, of various species, 165
 Temperature, hypothalamus and,
171-172, 176
Tibial tarsal bone, 165
289
carpal joint, 172
Tibia (shin bone), 164
 Temperafure pathway, 273
elbow joint, 171
Tibiotarsus, 167
Index
699
Tidal volume, 425, 431
Tract, 218
Trochoid joint, 170
 respiration rate and, 425t
 Transamination reactions, 35
Trophic hormones, 338
Tight junctions, 4, 99, 100, 118, 570
Transcription, overview of, 80
Trophoblast, 570
Tissue factor, 384
Transcription factors, 81
Tropomyosin, 182, 184
Tissues, 4, 5, 5
Transcytosis, 54, 146
heart contraction and, 393
cells, technology and, 103 (box)
Transducin, 310
in smooth muscle, 197
composite, 111
Transferases, 46t
Troponin, 182, 184
connective, 12, 102-111, 118
Transfer RNA, 21, 22, 80, 81
"True" ribs, 156
defined, 87
Transforming growth factor, 363t
"True" stomach, 501
epifthelial, 88-102
 Transforming growth factor alpha,
Trunk flexion, 201t 
immune cells and defense of, 454t
366, 367
Trunk lateral flexion, 201t
kidney, 92, 92
Transforming growth factor beta,
Trypsin, 515
muscle, 111-115, 118
368-369, 447
Trypsinogen, 511, 515
nervous, 115-117
Transgenic animals, 581, 583,
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating
 preparation of
584-586
hormone
for light microscopy, 19
microinjection and, 584, 584
T tubules, 182, 182, 183
for microscopic examination, 18,
 Transitional epithelium bladder,
in cardiac muscles, 391
89
98-99, 99
Tuber cinereum, 250
for transmission electron
Transitional nephrons, 478
Tubercle, of rib, 156
microscopy, 19
Transition period, 69, 71
Tuber coxae, 164
Tissue structure and organization,
Translation, overview of, 80
Tuberculosis bacilli, 445
85-119
 Transmission electron microscopy, 19
Tuberomammillary nucleus, 256
connective tissue,
102-111
tissue preparation for, 19
Tuber sacrale, 164
classification of, 103-106
 Transport mechanisms, 50-54
Tubers of dahlias, 472
specialized, 106-111
Transport processes, cells and use of,
Tubular structure, 89
epithelial tissue, 88-102
50t
Tubulin, polymerization of, 23
characteristics of, 89-91
Transvaginal ovum recovery, 582
Tumor necrosis factor alpha, 446
epithelial cell junctions, 99-101
Transverse fracture, 147
Tunica albuginea, 560, 575, 575
glandular epifhelial types,
Transverse (or T) tubules, 182, 183
Tunica externa (or tunic adventitia),
101-102
Transverse planes, 9, 9t, 10
397
simple epithelium, 91-95
Transverse tracts, 252
Tunica interna (or funica intima), 93,
stratified epithelium, 95-99
Treppe, 190, 190
397
histology and, 88 (box)
TRH, 351
Tunica media, 93, 397
introductory remarks, 85-86
thyroid hormone responses to, 354
Turica vaginalis (visceral tunic), 575,
muscle tissue, 111-115
Triacylglycerols, 14
575
cardiac muscle, 114-115
Triaxial joint, 170
Turkeys, reproduction in, 578
skeletal muscle, 112-114
Tricep reflex, in diagnostics, 282
Tusks, 493t
smooth tissue, 115
Triceps brachii, of leg.
205t-206t
TV. See Tidal volume
 nervous tissue, 115-117
Tricuspid valve, 387, 391
T wave, in electrocardiogram, 393,
terminology and definitions, 86-88
Trigeminal crarial nerve (V), 252,
393
Titin, 182, 184, 192
257t
Twins, 570
TLR. See Toll-like receptors
Trigeminal lemniscus, 273
Tympanic reflex, 258t
T lymphocytes, 382, 442
Trigeminal pathway, 273
Type I alveolar cells, 422
TN. See Transifional nephrons
Triglycerides, 14, 15, 37, 39, 40, 58,
Type I diabetes, 361, 362
Toll-II-receptor, 446
70
Type I fibers, 194
Toll-like receptors, 446
absorption of, in small intestine,
Type II-A fibers, 194
Tongue, 298, 316-317, 484, 489, 523
514
Type I alveolar cells, 422, 424
06 8op g0
availability of faffy acids from,
Type I-B fibers, 194
Tonicity, significance of, 49
72-74
Type ⅡI diabetes, 361, 362
Tonofilaments, 122
synthesis and structure, 14
Typtophan, 6
Tonsils, 455, 494
Triiodoiothyronine (Ts), 68, 331, 352,
 Tyrosinase, melanin synthesis and,
Total pressure, 426
354, 355
130
Totipotent blastomeres, 570
Triose phosphate, 58
Tyrosine, 232
Touch, 268, 297
Trioses, 37
thyroid hormone synthesis and,
TPO. See Thrombopoietin
Tripeptides, absorption of, in small 
352
Trabeculae, 140, 143, 455
intestine, 514
Tyrosine kinase, 325
"Tracer" hormones, 331, 335
Triple bonds, 44
Tyrosine-specific protein kinases,
Trachea, 9, 420-421, 435, 494
Triplet code, 36
examples of, 328
of goat, 420
tRNA. See Transfer RNA
section of cartilage from, 109
Trochlear cranial nerve (IV), 257t
UAA, 81
Trachealis muscle, 420
Trochlear notch, 160
UAG, 81
670 Index
Ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, 369
Urotelic species, 79
Ventral respiratory group, 429
Udders, 531
Uterine horns, 560, 562
Ventricles, 387-388,406
anatomy of, 546-547
female bovine, 560
of brain, 262
 medial and lateral suspensory
Uterine milk, 560
Ventricular systole, in cardiac cycle,
ligaments of, 546, 546
Uterus, 558, 559, 560, 566
395
strcture of, 546-547
bovine, section of, 559
Ventrolateral nucleus, of thalamus,
UGA, 81
chorion and, 570, 572
249
Ulna, 160, 161, 167
types of, 560
Venules, 399
of various species, 161
Utricle, 313
Vermiform appendix, 519
Umami taste, 299, 301, 301, 317
otolithic organs within, 315-316,
Vermis,253
Uncinate processes, 167
320-321
Vertebrae, 154
Uricellular glands, 101
Uvea, 304
number of, 155t
Urilobar kidneys, 462
Uvula, 420, 489
various, examples of, 155
 Unilocular adipocytes, 106
Vertebral arch, 155
 Unipernate fascicle arrangement,
Vaccinations, 449
Vertebral body, 155
199
Vagina, 558, 559, 563
Vertebral cavity, 9
Uripernate muscles, 199
bovine, 95,560,561
Vertebral column, 154-156, 176
Unipolar neurons, 220
Vaginal epithelium, posterior, of
spinal cord in, 155, 258
Uriport carriers, 51, 52
bovine, 559
Vertebral foramen, 155
Uriport transporters, 55
Vaginal smears, 17
Very low density (VLDL) density
Uripyramidal kidneys, 462
Vagus cranial nerve (X), 254, 257t
lipoproteins, 40
Uracil, 41, 42,55
Vagus nerve, 286, 301, 429, 497,
Vesicles, brain, 243, 243
Urates, birds and excretion of, 479
499
Vesicular gland, 574
Urea, 477
Vallate papillae, 298, 489
Vesiculation, 569
Urea cycle, 79
Van der Waals forces, 43
Vestibular nerve, 316
Ureters, 459, 460, 462, 478
Varicosifies, sympathetic, 283
Vestibular sensory system, 268t
Urethra, 459
Vasa recta, 464, 469
Vestibule
Urethral opening, bovine, 561
countercurrent exchange in, 470
of inner ear, 312, 313
Uric acid, 477, 479
Vascular endothelial growth factor,
of nasal cavity, 418
Uricotelic animals, 477
328
Vestibulocochlear cranial nerve
Uricotelism, 479
Vascular resistance, 401, 414
(VⅢ), 252, 254, 313
Urinary bladder, 459
Vascular shock, 404
Vestibulo-ocular reflex, 258t
 Urinary filtration, relationship
Vascular spasm, 383, 409
VFAs. See Volatile faffty acids
between molecular weight
Vascular funic (or uvea), 304-305,
Vibration detection, 269
and properfies of selected
317-318
Villi, 509, 510
substances and, 466t
Vas deferens, avian, 580
Vinculin, 100
 Urinary physiology and function,
Vasoactive intestinal peptide, 288,
VIP. See Vasoacfive intestinal
478-479
479
peptide
avian nitrogen excretion,
479
Vasoconstriction, 403
Visceral afferent nerves, 266
avian salt glands, 479
Vasoconstrictor tone, sympathetic,
Visceral efferent nerves, 266
Urinary system, 5, 6, 459-481,
control of, 290
Visceral motor zones, of spinal cord,
480
Vasodilation, 403
284
anatomy of, 459-462
Vasopressin, 341, 343
Visceral nervous system, 216
body water reserves and, 12
V-ATPase pumps, 466
Visceral pericardium, 10
 nephron structure, 462-464
VCAM-1, 447
Visceral reflexes, 277, 277, 290,
Urination, alcohol and, 469 (box)
VDMI. See Voluntary dry mafter
295-296
Urine, 459, 466
intake
Visceral sensory system,
pH of, 475
Vegetable tanning, 136
hypothalamus and, 289
Urine formation
VEGF. See Vascular endothelial
Visceral serosa, 10
mecharisms of, 464-472
growth factor
Visceral smooth muscle, 196
countercurrent mechanisms and
Veins, 387, 399, 413
Visceroreceptors, 124
medullary osmotic gradient,
cardiac, 390
Vision, 297, 306-311, 317-320
468-472
 pulmonary, 404
near and far points of, 307
factors affecting filtration,
Venous blood flow, 399
physiology of, 306-311, 318
464-465
Venous blood return, 401, 414
accommodation, 307
 proximal convoluted tubule,
Ventilation, 426
field of vision, 308
465-468
Ventilation-perfusion coupling, 422
light or dark adaptation,
311
Urobilin, 379
Ventral, 9t
photoreception, 308-311
Urobilinogen, 379
Ventral body cavities, 9
pupil dliameter, 307-308
Urogenital reflexes, 290, 296
Ventral mesentery, 485
refraction, 306-307
Uropygial glands, 127, 135, 137
Ventral ramus, 267
visual pathway, 311
Index 671
Visual fields, of eyes, 312
Warm receptors, 272, 273
Work, energy and capacity for, 58
Visual information, retinal processing
Waste products
World War II, British research on
of, 310-311, 319
kidneys and excretion of, 473-477
milk supply improvement
Visual pathway, 311, 320
liver and removal of, 519
during, 540
Visual pigments, chemistry of,
Water
Woven bone, 143
309-310, 319
hydrogen bonds and, 13
Wrinkle reduction, Botox and, 186
Visual sensory system, 268t
physiologically important
Vitamin A, 309
properties of, 13-14
XY Inc., 583
Vitamin D, 40, 324
surface properties of, 14
Xylene, 17
calcium uptake and, 545
as universal solvent, 12-14
 integumentary system and
Water-permeable membrane, 48
Yalow, Rosalyn, 333, 334
metabolism of, 132, 132
Wave of development, 576
Yellow bone marrow, 143
liver and activafion of, 519
Wave summation, 190-191
Yolk, egg, 578, 580
metabolism of, 137
tetanus and, 191, 191
Yolk proteins, 579
Vitamin K, blood clotting and, 384
Waxes, 14
Yolk sac, 570
Vitamins
WBCs. See White blood cells
Yorkshire gilts, puberty in, 564
coenzymes and, 46
Weight-bearing digits, 163
liver and storage of, 519
Western blotting, 451
Zinc-finger arrangement, 330
Vitelline block, 569
Western blotting, 103
Z-line, sarcomeres and, 183, 184,
Vitelline membrane, 580
Wet salting process, 136
185
Vitreous floaters, 306
Whale, location, number, and ripple
Zona adherens, 100
Vitreous humor, 306
 openings of mammary glands
Zona block, 569
Vocal cords, 420
in, 530t
Zona occludens (tight junction), 99
Volatile fafty acids,
，76, 502, 507
White adipose fissue, 106, 107
Zona pellucida, 565, 568, 569, 570
Volkmann's canals, 110, 142
White blood cells, 111, 376, 377, 380,
 Zona proteins, 568
Voltage-gated channels, 224-225,
408, 442
Zona reticularis, 357
225, 225 (box)
White mafter, 218
Zonary placentas, 572
Voluntary dry matter intake, 71
of spinal cord, 259
Zonation, five regions of, 145
Voluntary muscle, 112
Wilmut, Ian, 583
Zone glomerulosa, 357, 358
Voluntary striated muscle,
：180
Windpipe, 420
Zone of calcified cartilage, 145
Vomiting, 499-500, 524
Wirsung's duct, pancreas, 515
Zone of hypertrophy, 145
Vulva, 563
Wishbone, 167
Zone of proliferation, 145
Withdrawal reflex,
277,280,281
Zone of reserve cartilage, 145
Walruses, lactation strategies in, 553
Wolf teeth, 493t
 Zone of resorption, 145
(box)
Wool, prolactin and, 130
 Zygomaticus muscles, of head and
Wandering cells, 103
Wool production, hair follicles and
neck, 202t
Wandering macrophages, 442
130
Zygote, 569, 570
t10