forthe
SmallAnimal
Practitioner
RalfS.Mueller
Dr. med.vet.,
MACVSc,DipACVD,FACVS
Made Easy Series
Teton
Newmedia
Section
'HoWTo"
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
In this section, I discuss key questions important in taking a der-
matologic history and their implications, as well as specific der-
matologic lesions and what they tell us. Furthermore, I introduce
various tests important in veterinary dermatology, give their
indications, explain necessary techniques in detail, and discuss
the interpretation of the results.
Dermatologic
History
Clinical signs for various skin diseases are very similar and the
etiology of a patient's problem may not be apparent based solely
on the findings of a clinical examination.
A thoroughhistory
will typically provide clues in regard to the cause of the skin dis.
order and allow the veterinarian to prioritize time-consuming
and frequently costly laboratory tests needed to confirm the diag-
nosis. I prefer my clients to fill out a questionnaire in the waiting
room which we then review together during the consultation.
This decreases the time needed to extract a good history from
the owner, helps ensure a complete history independent of stress
levels and time constraints, and allows the client to think about
her or his pet's skin problem for a little while without unneces-
sarily delaying the appointment schedule. A sample of a derma
tology questionnaire is enclosed in the Appendix. It is important
to phrase questions appropriately, because many owners leave out
pertinent facts either because they are not aware of their rele-
vance or because they think these facts may not be well received
by the veterinarian. Sometimes, it is necessary to ask the same
question several times in different ways to obtain meaningful
answers. I cannot overemphasize the importance of taking a good
and efficient dermatologic history, which requires tremendous
knowledge, experience, practice, and effective communication
skills. To teach this is beyond the scope of this book. However, I
do discuss some crucial questions and their implications in more
detail.
Question:What is the breed of the patient?
Relevance
V Some breeds are predisposed to certain skin diseases and it
may be worthwhile to keep a list of such breed predispositions
in easy reach.
V A list of reported breed predisposition is given in the
Appendix. But beware, breed predispositions may vary with
geographiclocation!
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Question: How old was the patient when clinical signs were
first recognized?
Relevance
V Very young animals (puppies and kittens) are more commonly
presented with congenital and hereditary defects, ectopara-
sites such as Sarcoptes scabiei, Otodectes cynotis, or
Demodex canis, infections with bacteria (impetigo) or fungi
(dermatophytosis) or, in dogs, canine juvenile sterile granulo-
matous dermatitis and lymphadenitis.
V Young adult dogs are more commonly affected by demodico-
sis, atopic dermatitis, and flea-bite hypersensitivity, as well as
idiopathic seborrhea and follicular dysplasia.
V In middle age, hormonal diseases become a significant consid.
eration, although allergies still occur in a significant number
of animals, particularly in cats.
Y Neoplastic diseases are more commonly seen in older animals.
Question: How long has the disease been present and how did
it progress?
Relevance
V Acute onset of severe pruritus is frequently associated with
scabies. Food adverse reaction may also have an explosive
onset.
V If pruritus was the first initial sign and lesions occurred later,
  o   o  o 
with lesions that occur at approximately the same time may
be due to a wide variety of causes.
V Chronic nonlesional pruritus is typically due to atopic der-
matitis or food adverse reaction, possibly complicated by sec-
ondary infections. Scabies incognito may also cause nonles-
ional pruritus.
V If cutaneous signs have been present for years without the
development of concurrent systemic signs, endocrine disor-
ders are unlikely.
V Nonpruritic alopecia for years without systemic signs points
towards alopecia and follicular dysplasias or hereditary
alopecia.
V The presence of chronic wounds alone or assoc iated with
draining tracts necessitates the search for an infectious
organism.
Copyright2000TetonNewMedia888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
3
Diagnostic procedures: Scabies treatment trial, skin scrapings
elimination diet, cytology, bacterial culture, fungal culture, biopsy.
Question: Where on the body did the problem start?
Relevance Tables 1-1 and 1-2 outline typically affected sites of
Certain diseases.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Table 1-1
Location of Lesions and/or Pruritus of
Various Canine Skin Diseases
LOCATION OF LESIONS
COMMON UNDERLYING DISEASES
AND/OR PRURITUS
Otitis externa
Atopy, food adverse reaction, parasites, polyps.
Secondary infections are common
and can also occur with primary endocrine
disease!
Pinnae
Atopy, food adverse reaction, scabies,
vasculitis, pemphigus foliaceus
Head/face
Demodicosis, atopy, food adverse reaction,
dermatophytosis, insect allergies, scabies, is
coid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus
Paws
Demodicosis, atopy, food adverse reaction,
Malassezia dermatitis, pemphigus foliaceus,
metabolic epidermal necrosis.
Claws
Bacterial or fungal infection, trauma,
immune-mediated skin diseases.
Tail base
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
Table 1-2
Location of Lesions or Pruritus of
VariousFelineSkinDiseases
LOCATION OF LESIONS
COMMON UNDERLYING DISEASES
AND/OR PRURITUS
Otitis externa
Atopy, food adverse reaction, parasites, polys.
Secondary infections common?
Pinnae
Notoedres cati, vasculitis, pemphigus foliaceus
Head/face
Atopy,food adverse reaction, dermatophytosis,
insect allergies, feline scabies, pemphigus foliaceus
Paws
Atopy, food adverse reaction, pemphigus
foliaceus, trauma, plasmacytic pododermatitis
Claws
Bac terial infection, trauma, immune-mediated
skin diseases
Tail base
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
Question:  Is the animal itchy?
Relevance
Pruritus is sometimes difficult to identify. Owners often do not
consider licking, rubbing, or biting as clinical signs indicative
of pruritus (we all have heard the story of the dog who is con-
stantly licking its feet because "it is a very clean dog ..."). Several
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
routine questions may be needed to identify pruritus in some
patients: Are they licking or chewing their paws? Are they
 ia ae rae o nos ae o ia a 
they scratching their armpits?
√ The presence of pruritus with skin lesions does not help much
in discovering the etiology of the pruritus, given that many
skin diseases cause pruritus. However, pruritus without lesions
typically means either atopic dermatitis or food adverse reac-
tion (possibly with secondary infections) or in rare instances
scabies incognito.
V The perceived severity of pruritus may vary with the owner.
Some owners deny the presence of pruritus despite the
patient's frantic scratching in the consultation room. Others
insist on severe pruritus in a patient with no evidence of self
trauma on clinical examination. Good communication skills
and judgement are essential to form a realistic opinion for
evaluation. If the pet's scratching wakes the owner up at
night, the pruritus is severe irrespective of the presence of
lesions.
V If itch preceeds the occurrence of lesions, atopic dermatitis,
food adverse reaction, and scabies incognito must again be
considered.
Diagnostic procedures: Trichogram in alopecic patients that
are reportedly nonpruritic.
Question: Is the disease seasonal?
Relevance
V Insect bite hypersensitivities (caused most commonly by fleas, but
mosquitoes or other insects can also be involved) frequently cause
disease that worsens in summer. Whether clinical signs are absent
or milder in the colder season depends on specific environmental
conditions.
V Atopic dermatitis may also be seasonal in certain climates. In
       s  
mer and autumn because of weed pollens. Warmer climates such
as those found in tropical or subtropical regions usually have an
extended pollen season. Hypersensitivities to house dust mites are
often nonseasonal, but may be seasonally worse in winter in some
areas and patients.
6
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V Seasonal noninflammatory alopecia and hyperpigmentation
may be due to cyclic follicular dysplasia.
Diagnostic procedures: Insect bite trial, intradermal skin test-
ing, serum testing for allergen-specific IgE, biopsy, keeping the
animal inside to evaluate for mosquito-bite hypersensitivity.
Question: Are there other clinical signs such as sneezing, coughing,
or diarrhea?
Relevance
V Sneezing, coughing, wheezing, and conjunctivitis may be seen
concurrently with atopic dermatitis and caused by airborne
allergies.
V Diarrhea may be associated with food adverse reaction.
V Polydipsia and polyuria are common with iatrogenic and idio-
pathic hyperadrenocorticism.
xia, lethargy, and with gastrointestinal or respiratory symp-
toms.
Diagnostic procedures: Cytology of nasal exudate or conjunctiva,
elimination diet, urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, low dose dexametha-
sone suppression test, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
stimulation test.
Question:What is fed to the animal?Was a special diet used in the
past?What was it and how long was it fed exclusively?
Relevance
V Knowing the diet will allow the clinician to determine possi-
ble nutritional deficiencies.
V It will also help in formulating an elimination diet if indicated
(p. 46).
V If a diet was fed in the past and it was not a true elimination
diet (was not fed exclusively or not fed for an appropriate
length of time) it may need to be repeated.
 Contrary to the common belief, food adverse reactions typically
do not occur immediately after a change in feeding habits. Most
animals with food adverse reactions have been consuming the
offending diet for years before showing clinical signs.
 Remember to ask about treats and supplements, which are
often forgotten, when food is discussed with the client.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
f
Question: Are there other animals in the household? Do they show
cutaneous symptoms?
Relevance
V If other animals in the household are similarly affected, conta-
V Other animals may serve as a reservoir for ectoparasites
without showing clinical signs.
Diagnostic procedures: If indicated, insect control trial, fungal
cultures, or scabies treatment trials should include all animals in
the household to identify and/or treat possible carrier animals to
allow successful long-term remission for the patient.
Question: Does any person in the household have skin disease?
Relevance
V Two zoonoses of major concern in veterinary dermatology are
scabies and dermatophytosis (ringworm). However, even if
owners are not affected, these diseases cannot be ruled out.
V Canine scabies affecting humans occurs as an itchy papular
     s      
weeks after onset of pruritus in the pet.
V Dermatophytosis is often characterized by scaling and ery-
thema and may not be particularly pruritic, but occasionally
can present as severely inflammatory and pruritic skin disease.
Dermatophytosis may sometimes be misdiagnosed as eczema
in humans.
V Sporotrichosis and other mycoses have zoonotic potential and
may occasionally cause disease in humans.
V Don't forget that the skin disease of the owner may also be
completely unrelated to the animal's skin disease.
Diagnostic procedures: Wood's light, skin scrapings, fungal cul-
ture, scabies trial treatment. In severe forms of suspected der-
matophytosis, a biopsy and special fungal stains may prove useful
for obtaining a quick diagnosis.
Question: Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were
used and how successfuf was treatment?
Relevance Response to previous therapy can be of tremendous
help in establishing or ruling out underlying causes for the skin
disease.
8
Copyright2000TetonNewMedia888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
V Initial response to recent glucocorticoid administration may
not be helpful because many skin diseases improve for a short
period with this symptomatic, nonspecific treatment.
gests hypersensitivities (possibly complicated by Malassezia
dermatitis caused by Malassezia pachydermatis).
V Repeated response to antibiotics and glucocorticoids in
combination is of little help
V Repeated partial or total response to antibiotics indicates a
pyoderma usually secondary to either atopic dermatitis, food
adverse reaction, hormonal disease, or another less common
addition to antibacterial treatment, the underlying problem
needs to be identified and treated to prevent recurrences.
 Ask specifically how much the pet improved while receiving
medication because many owners tend to judge a treatment as
not helpful if it did not cure the disease.
Question: What is currently used to control fleas?
Relevance
V Flea-bite hypersensitivity is the most common hypersensi-
tivity and an extremely common skin disease in most small
animal practices. If flea-bite hypersensitivity is suspected, a
flea control trial should be commenced.
√ Details of the flea control for all animals in the household are
important because in a severely allergic animal, clinical signs
can be caused by a very small number of flea bites. Inconsi-
stent or ineffective flea control can be discovered only
through detailed questioning.
 Many owners take questions about their flea control as an
insult to their own cleanliness and hygiene. Good communica-
tion skills are a great help. I own a flea-allergic dog and rou-
tinely mention her as an example, which breaks the ice and
increases the client's willingness to listen and follow my
instructions.
Question: When was the last medication given?
Relevance
V Recent administration of medication may affect the clinical
presentation.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
6
V It may also affect various indicated diagnostic tests that may
need to be postponed.
V Long-term glucocorticoid therapy will affect the results of allergy
tests - both intradermal skin testing and serum testing for
allergen-specific IgE. It will also affect histopathologic findings
and the results of many blood tests.
V Antihistamines and short-term systemic and topical glucocor-
ticoids (i.e.,< 4 weeks) may influence intradermal skin
testing-
V Some antibiotics, such as trimethoprim-sulfonamide combina-
tions, will affect blood concentrations of thyroxin. Others
such as cephalosporins may affect the glucose readings of
some urine test strips.
V Remember to ask specific questions regarding heartworm pre-
vention, vitamin supplements, or deworming which are also
forms of pharmacotherapy.
Question: Does the animal get better with a change of enwironment
(a weekend away or a day at the in-laws for example)?
Relevance
V The animal's improvement in another environment indicates
involvement of an environmental allergen (airborne or con-
tact) or irritant.
V Lack of improvement does not rule out these allergies, in that
airborne and contact allergens may be the same in different
locations (house dust mites are found almost anywhere in the
world).
10
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Dermatologic
Examination
A good dermatologic examination requires adequate lighting, a
systematic and thorough approach, and should always include a
general physical examination. Observation from a distance should
be followed by close inspection of skin and mucous membranes. I
start at the head, look at the lips, mouth, ears, run my hands
through the coat of the trunk, lift up the tail to inspect the peri-
anal area, and then examine the legs and feet with pads and claws.
Next, the patient is rolled on his back - reluctant small pets are
made to sit up in the lap of the owner; with larger dogs the front
paws are lifted up for a short moment, which gives me the oppor
tunity to examine the animal's ventral aspects from the axillae to
the groin.
General Observation
Localized or Generalized Problem
V Localized problems may be due to infectious organisms that gained
entry at a certain site and spread only locally such as atypical
mycobacterial or fungal infections.
V Neoplastic disease is commonly localized, at least initially.
/ Generalized disorders are more commonly due to hypersensitivities
Or systemic conditions such as endocrine disorders and immune-medi-
ated or metabolic skin diseases.
Symmetry
V Bilaterally symmetric lesions are typically caused by internal
disease such as hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or pemphi-
gus foliaceus. Allergies may also present with bilaterally symmetric
symptoms.
V Asymmetric lesions more commonly have external causes such as
ectoparasites (e.g., demodicosis) or fungi (e.g., dermatophytosis).
Haircoat Quality, Color, and Shine
V Is the haircoat dull or shiny? A dull haircoat may be due to meta-
bolic or hormonal diseases, nutritional deficiencies, or chronic skin
disease.
V Are there color abnormalities or changes and if so, did they occur
Copyright  2000 TetonNewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
11
before or concurrent with the onset of skin disease or as a conse-
quence of the disease. Hair color changes may be associated with
hormonal disease or follicular dysplasia.
V Changes in the hair quality (either to a coarse coat or to a
fine puppy coat) may again point to hormonal disease or follicu-
lar dysplasia.
Close inspection of the skin and mucous membranes follows the
general observation. Pay special attention to any individual
lesions. Primary lesions are initial eruptions that are caused
directly by the underlying disease process. Secondary lesions
evolve from primary le
lesions or are caused by the patient (self.
trauma) or environment (medications). It is important that the
clinician be able both to differentiate between primary and sec.
ondary lesions and to understand the underlying pathomech-
anism because this helps in the formulation of a relevant list of
differential diagnoses. I next discuss the individual lesions and
their implications and give the most common differential diag-
noses for each lesion.
Primary Lesions
Macule
Figure 1-1A
Figure 1-1B
Macule
Macule
Definition: A focal, circumscribed,
Differential diagnoses-depigmenta-
nonpalpable change in color <1 cm
tion: Vitiligo, discoid lupus erythemato-
(when it is larger, it is termed a
sus, uveodermatologic syndrome, mucocu-
patch). Pathogenesis: Pigmentation
taneous pyoderma.
Differential diagnoses-hyperpigmen-
change due to decreased or increased
melanin production, erythema due to
tation: Lentigo, hormonal diseases or
inflammation or local hemorrhage
post-inflammatory with a multitude of
caused by trauma or vasculitis.
possible underlying causes lentigo.
Differential diagnosis-erythema:
Inflammation due to a variety of underly.
ing diseases or hemorrhage due to vascu-
lopathies or coagulopathies.
12
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Papule
Figure 1-2A
Figure 1-2B
Papule
Papule
Definition: A solid elevation of up to
Differential diagnoses: Bacterial
1 cm in diameter. Larger lesions are
folliculitis, demodicosis, fungal folli-
called plaques. Pathogenesis: Influx of
culitis, flea-bite and mosquito-bite
inflammatory cells into the dermis,
hypersensitivity, scabies, contact aller-
focal epidermal hyperplasia, early
gy, autoimmune skin disease, drug
neoplastic lesions.
eruption.
Pustule
Figure 1-3A
Figure 1-3B
Pustule
Pustule
Definition: A small circumscribed
Differential diagnoses-
area within the epidermis filled with
neutrophils: Bacterial infection, fun
pus. Pathogenesis: Most pustules are
gal infection, autoimmune skin disease.
filled with neutrophils, but eosino-
Differential diagnoses-eosinophils:
philic pustules may also be seen.
Insect or contact hypersensitivity, para-
Aspiration cytology and biopsy are
sites, immune-mediated skin disease
indicated. (Courtesy of Dr. Thierry
Olivry.)
13
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Vesicle
Figure 1-4A
Figure 1-4B
Vesicle
Vesicle
Definition: A small circumscribed
Differential diagnoses: Immune-
area within or below the epidermis
mediated and congenital skin
filled with clear fluid. Larger vesicles
diseases, viral diseases, or iritant
are called bullae. Vesicles are very
dematitis.
fragile and thus transient.
Pathogenesis: Spongiosis and extra-
cellular fluid collection due to inflam-
mation and loss of cohesion.
(Courtesy of Dr. Thierry Olivry)
Wheal
Figure 1-5A
Figure 1-5B
Wheal
Wheal
 Definition: A sharply circumscribed,
Differential diagnoses: Urticaria,
raised, edematous lesion that appears
 insect bites, other hypersensitivities,
and disappears within minutes to
drug eruption.
hours. Pathogenesis: Subcutaneous
edema.
14
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Nodule
Figure 1-6A
Figure1-6B
Nodule
Nodule
Definition: A circumscribed, solid
Differential diagnoses: Sterile gran-
elevation more than 1 cm in diame
ulomatous diseases, bacterial or fungal
ter that extends into deeper layers of
infections, neoplastic diseases, calci-
the skin. Pathogenesis: Massive infil
nosis cutis
tration of inflammatory or neoplastic
cells into the dermis and subcutis or
deposition of fibrin and crystalline
material.
Tumor
Figure 1-7A
Figure 1-7B
Tumor
Tu mor
Definition: A large mass involving
Differential diagnoses: Sterile gran-
skin or subcutaneous tissue.
ulomatous diseases, bacterial or fungal
Pathogenesis: Massive influx of
infections, neoplastic diseases.
 inflammatory or neoplastic cells.
15
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Primary or Secondary Lesions
Alopecia
Figure 1-8
Alopecia
Definition: Partial to complete loss of hair.
Pathogenesis: Self-trauma, damage to the hair
or hair follicle due to dysplasia, inflammation
and/or infection, lack of hair regrowth often
due to hormonal disease.
Differential diagnoses: Primary lesion in
follicular dysplasias, endocrine disorders, telo
gen efluvium, anagen defluxion. Secondary
lesion in pruritic skin diseases, bacterial or
fungal folliculitis, demodicosis.
Scale
Figure 1-9A
Figure 1-9B
Scale
Scale
Definition: An accumulation of loose
Differential diagnoses: Primary
fragments of the horny layer of the
lesion in follicular dysplasias, idiopathic
skin. Pathogenesis: Increased produc-
seborrheas and ichthyosis. Secondary
tion of keratinocytes (often associat-
lesion in diseases associated with chronic
ed with abnormalities of the kera-
skin inflammation.
tinization process) or increased reten
tion of corneocytes.
16
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Crust
Figure 1-10A
Figure 1-10B
Crust
Crust
Definition: Adherence of dried
Differential diagnoses: Primary
exudate, serum, pus, blood, scales,
lesion in idiopathic seborrhea, zinc-
or medications to the skin surface.
responsive dermatitis, metabolic epi-
dermal necrosis. Secondary lesion in a
variety of skin diseases.
Follicular Cast
Figure 1-11A
Figure 1-11B
Follicular cast
Follicular cast
 Definition: An accumulation of ker-
Differential diagnoses: Primary
atin and follicular material to the hair
lesion in vitamin A-responsive der
shaft.
matosis, idiopathic seborrhea, and
sebaceous adenitis. Secondary lesion
in dematophytosis and demodicosis.
17
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Pigmentary Abnormalities
Hyperpigmentation
Figure 1-12A
Figure 1-12B
Hyperpigmentation
Hyperpigmentation
Definition: Increased epidermal
Differential diagnoses: Primary
and/or dermal melanin. Pathogenesis:
lesion in endocrine dermatoses, sec-
Increased production, size, or mela
ondary postinflammatory change due
nization of melanosomes or increased
to a variety of skin diseases.
number of melanosomes due to a
variety of intrinsic or extrinsic fac
tors. Most common cause: Chronic
inflammation
Comedo
Figure 1-13A
Figure 1-13B
Comedones
Comedones
Definition: A dilated hair follicle
Differential diagnoses: Primary
filled with corneocytes and sebaceous
lesion in feline acne, some idiopathic
material. Pathogenesis: Primary kera-
seborrheas, Schnauzer comedo syn-
tinization defects or hyperkeratosis
drome, endocrine diseases. Secondary
due to hormonal abnormalities or
lesion in demodicosis, and less com-
inflammation.
monly dermatophytosis.
18
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Secondary Lesions
Epidermal Collarette
Figure 1-14A
Figure 1-14B
Epidermal collarette
Epidermal collarette 
Definition: Scale of loose keratin
Differential diagnoses: Most likely
flakes or "peeling" keratin arranged in
bacterial infection, less commonly fun.
a circle. Pathogenesis: Remnant of a
gal infection, immune-mediated skin
 pustule or vesicle after the top part
disease, insect-bite reaction, or contact
(the "roof") has been lost, or caused
hypersensitivity.
by a point source of inflammation,
such as a papule.
Erosion
Figure 1-15A
Figure 1-15B
Erosion
Erosion
Definition: A shallow epidermal defect
Differential diagnoses: Various
that does not penetrate the basal mem-
skin diseases associated with self trau-
brane. Pathogenesis: Trauma or inflam-
ma such as infections or allergies.
mation leads to rapid death and/or loss
ofkeratinocytes
19
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Ulcer
Figure 1-16A
Figure 1-16B
Ulcer
Ulcer
Definition: Focal loss of epidermis
Differential diagnoses: Various skin
with exposure of underlying dermis
diseases associated with trauma such as
 Pathogenesis: Severe trauma and/or
infections and allergies, also immune-
deep and severe inflammation
mediated diseases.
Lichenification
Figure 1-17A
Figure 1-17B
Lichenification
Lichenification
Definition: Thickening and harden-
Differential diagnoses: All chronic
ing of skin characterized by exagger-
 and pruritic skin diseases.
ated superficial skin markings.
Pathogenesis: Chronic trauma such as
friction or rubbing.
20
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Specific Tests in Small
Animal Dermatology
Cytology
Indications
Any pruritic, scaly, odoriferous, or alopecic animal should be
evaluated for evidence of bacterial or fungal infection. Thus.
cytology is indicated for almost all patients presented with skin
disease. Skin scrapings, aspirations, impressions, ear swabs and
tape preparations are different techniques to obtain cytologic
samples.
V A superficial skin scraping is used in areas such as the inter-
digital skin where impression smears may be difficult to obtain.
It is also used when the skin is normal, slightly moist, or greasy.
V An aspirated sample is useful in the evaluation of pustule
content and intracutaneous or subcutaneous nodules.
/ An impression smear is used when moist or oily skin with
oozing or discharging lesions is evaluated.
Y Ear swabs are used to evaluate ear canals.
V Dry scaly skin maybe evaluated by tape preparations. This
technique is also frequently used in the interdigital area where
impression smears may be difficult to obtain.
Technique
1. Skin scraping for cytology
V Affected skin is exposed and the surface of the skin scraped
very gently and superficially with a scalpel blade in the direction
of hair growth.
V The debris collected on the blade is applied to a slide and spread
with the blade in a “"buttering the bread" motion (Figure 1-18).
2.  Aspiration of nodules
V Aspiration from nodules or abscesses is undertaken with a
12-ml syringe and a 22-ga needle.
21
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V The nodule is firmly grasped and the needle is then inserted
(Figure 1-19), aspirated several times (up to the 10-ml mark if
possible), the pressure released, and the syringe with needle still
attached is withdrawn.
V It is important to release the pressure before withdrawal of the
needle or else the aspirate can be sucked back into the barrel of
the syringe - from which it may not be retrieved.
V The needle is detached, the plunger pulled back, and the
needle reattached.
V Cells are then blown onto a slide. The smear is air dried.
3. Impression Smears
V Cotton swabs are used to obtain samples from ear canals by
inserting them into the canal, rotating, and withdrawing them
They are then rolled gently onto a slide. I hold ear slides uni-
formly on the left side with my left hand, the cotton swab from
the left ear is rolled onto the mid-section of the slide and the cot-
ton swab from the right ear onto the right third of the same slide
V In patients with dry skin, a cotton swap may be moistened
with saline solution and rubbed on the surface of affected skin
before it is rolled onto a slide.
V In patients with moist or greasy skin, the slide can be rubbed
or impressed directly onto affected skin (Figure 1-20).
4. Tape Preparation
V A direct impression technique uses clear sticky tape to collect
debris from the surface of the skin. Although quick, this method
does take practice to establish what is "normal."
V The tape is pressed sticky side down onto the skin (Figure 1-21).
V Next, it is pressed (also sticky side down) onto a drop of meth-
ylene blue or the blue stain of DiffQuick on a slide (Figure 1-22).
/ The tape serves as a cover slip: the sample can be evaluated
even under oil immersion (with a small droplet of oil placed
directly on top of the tape).
V This technique is especially useful for Malassezia evaluation.
Other items of interest that can be identified include inflamma-
tory cells such as neutrophils (which may have passed through
the epidermis in response to a superficial infection), nucleated
epithelial cells (which are not normal and reflect a keratinization
abnormality), cocci, rods, macrophages, short-bodied demodex
mites, Cheyletiella, and occasionally Sarcoptes mites.
22
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-18
 Debris collected with a superficial skin
 scraping is spread onto a slide with a
"butter the bread" motion.
Figure 1-19
Aspiration of a small nodule.
Figure 1-20
Impression smears are obtained by gently
pressing a slide onto affected skin.
Figure 1-21
The tape is pressed sticky-side down onto
affected skin.
23
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Stain
V A modified Wright's stain (e.g., DiffQuick) can be used to stain
the air-dried slides. It is much faster and easier than Gram's stain
and sufficient to evaluate nearly all skin cytology samples. But
Gram's stain is also suitable.
Interpretation
V Yeast organisms are most often M. pachydermatis (Figure 1-23),
although Candida spp. may occasionally be involved.
V Cocci are most often Staphylococcus intermedius (Figure 1-24).
S. aureus or Streptococci may be found in some patients.
V Rod-shaped organisms are found mostly in the ear canal and are
most often Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Proteus mirabilis (Figure 1-25).
0 The number of organisms is important. Occasional cocci or
yeast are probably not relevant. On the skin, I consider one or
more yeast organisms per high-power field (HPF) relevant; cocci
should be seen in high numbers. In the infected ear, yeast and
  so  iq t   i 
abnormal. Don't mistake exogenous bacterial contaminants for
infection.
V Inflammatory cells with intracellular organisms are pathogno-
monic for a clinically relevant infection (Figure 1-26).
V Eosinophils typically indicate allergic or parasitic skin disease.
% Neoplastic cells may be difficult to recognize so that the help
of a clinical pathologist is typically needed. Even with high skill
levels, neoplastic skin disease should not be diagnosed exclusively
by cytology (with the exception of mast cell tumors); a biopsy
should always confirm any suspicions raised clinically and cyto-
logically.
V If mast cells are found cytologically (Figure 1-27), the diagnosis
of mast cell tumor is confirmed, but complete surgical excision
should still be confirmed by histopathology. In some patients with
mast cell tumors, mast cell granules do not stain with routine
DiffQuick and thus a negative cytologic result can not rule out mas-
tocytosis.
V Acantholytic cells are keratinocytes that have lost their intercellu-
lar connections (desmosomes) and present as round cells with a pur-
ple cytoplasm and a central dark purple nucleus (Figure 1-28). These
cells suggest pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus but can also be
seen on cytologic samples of severe pyodermas. A biopsy is indicated
to confirm the diagnosis.
24
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-22
Tape is then pressed sticky-side down
onto a drop of methylene blue on a slide.
Figure 1-23
Malassezia pachydermatis on a tape
preparation stained with blue stain of
DiffQuick (original magnification x400).
Figure 1-24
Cocci on an impression smear stained
with DiffQuick (original magnification
x1000).
Figure 1-25
Rods on an impression smear obtained
from otitis externa and stained with
DiffQuick (original magnification
x1000).
25
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
 Remember, that bacterial and yeast infections are usually
secondary to other diseases, which need to be identified and
treated to prevent recurrence of the infection.
@ Cytologic re-evaluation at the end of antimicrobial therapy
is crucial because organisms may change during treatment. For
instance, a dog initially presented with bacterial infection may
develop a yeast infection during successful antibacterial treat-
ment, preventing clinical improvement and vice versa.
Treatment of bacterial infections and antifungal therapy are
discussed in Section 3.
Superficial skin Scrapings
Indications
Any pruritic or scaly dog and cat may be infested with
Cheyletiella spp., Otodectes cynotis, Scabies scabiei, or Notoedres-
cati and should be scraped.
Technique
V If scabies is suspected, preferred areas for scrapings are the
elbows, hocks, and ventrum. Ear margins should be scraped
thoroughly if any pruritus or scaling is observed in this area.
Sometimes scaling is subtle and only becomes evident on close
examination.
V Sites are gently clipped with #40 clipper blades. Mites may be
difficult to find (especially canine scabies mites), so that the big-
ger the surface area scraped, the greater will be the chance of a
positive skin scraping.
 Several drops of mineral oil are applied directly to the
clipped skin and distributed evenly in the area.
V The oil is scraped off with a #11 scalpel blade (Figure 1-29)
and transferred to one or more glass slide(s). Scrape 10 to 15
times especially when canine scabies is suspected.
V A cover slip is used to allow rapid yet thorough evaluation of
collected debris (Figure 1-3O) and the slide(s) is (are) evaluated
under low power (x40 or xl00) systematically from the left upper
corner to the right lower corner.
26
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-26
Neutrophils with intracellular cocci
(arrow) pathognomonic for bacterial
infection stained with DiffQuick (origi-
nal magnification x1000).
Figure 1-27
Mast cells on an aspirate from a feline
mast cell tumor stained with
DiffQuick (original magnification
x1000).
Figure 1-28
Acantholytic cells on an aspirate of an
intact pustule from a dog with pemphigus
foliaceus stained with DiffQuick (original
magnification x1000).
Figure 1-29
A scalpel blade is used to scrape applied
 oil off the affected and clipped skin.
27
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Interpretation
A finding of one mite or egg of Sarcoptes spp., Notoedres cati,
Cheyletiella spp. or Otodectes cynotis (Figures 1-31, 1-32, and
1-33) is diagnostic for the cause of the skin disease. Negative scrap-
ings do not rule out the presence of mites and clinical disease par-
ticularly in canine scabies. Cheyletiella spp. and Otodectes cynotis may
also be missed by superficial skin scrapings. The next step would be
a therapeutic trial (p. 49), possibly in conjunction with other diag-
nostic tests such as an elimination diet (p. 46) to evaluate other
causes of pruritus.
Deep skin Scrapings
Indication
Any dog or cat with possible demodicosis must be scraped. Thus,
every alopecic patient and every patient with papules, pustules,
crusting, and particularly interdigital pododermatitis must be
scraped for the presence of demodicosis. Effective deep skin scrap-
ings of paws may require sedation or general anesthesia.
Technique
 Because Demodex canis and felis mites live deep in the hair folli-
cle, it is useful to squeeze the skin as hard as the patient can tolerate
before scraping in an attempt to push mites out from the depths of
the follicles.
? A blade covered with mineral oil should be used in the direc-
tion of hair growth until capillary bleeding is observed (Figure 1-34).
 Feet and faces are hard to scrape, so that it may be worthwhile to
scrape erythematous areas adjacent to papules and crusts interdigital-
ly to maximize the yield and to minimize bleeding associated with
scraping. Hair plucks may be useful for those areas, the plucked hair
is placed in a drop of mineral oil on a slide, with a cover slip and
evaluated microscopically for the presence of mites (p. 38).
V Negative scrapings or hair plucks of interdigital areas do not rule
out pododemodicosis; a biopsy may be needed to confirm or rule out
the diagnosis.
V Old English Sheepdogs, Scottish Terriers and especially Shar-peis
may produce negative results on scrapings and may have to be biop-
sied for diagnosis. Although not documented, it is thought that
these breeds have more tortuous and deeper hair follicles.
28
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-30
..and the oil and gathered debris are
transferred to a slide.
Figure 1-31
Sarcoptes scabiei mites and eggs
obtained with a superficial skin scrap-
ing from a dog with scabies (original
magnification x40).
Figure 1-32
Cheyletiellaparasitivorax(original
magnification x40).
Figure 1-33
 Otodectes cynotis mites and eggs (original
magnification x40).(Courtesy of Dr.
Peter Ihrke.)
29
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V The finding of more than one mite should be considered diagnostic.
Interpretation
V It is important to assess the relative numbers of adults (both
live and dead), larvae/nymphs and eggs (Figure 1-35) per low
power field (LPF) and to record the site of scraping. During sub.
sequent visits, assessment of response to therapy relies on the
comparison of such numbers, so we routinely repeat scrapes at
the same sites monthly when monitoring cases with demodicosis.
Treatment for demodicosis is outlined in Section 3.
Wood's Lamp Examination
Indication
Any dog or cat with possible Microsporum canis infection should
be examined with a Wood's lamp. Any patient with alopecia,
papules, pustules, and/or crusts may benefit from the procedure.
Technique
V The Wood's lamp should be warmed up for 5 minutes before use
because the stability of the light's wavelength and intensity
depends on temperature.
V The animal is examined under the lamp in a dark room.
 Hairs invaded by M. canis may show a yellow-green fluores-
cence. This fluorescence runs along the hair shafts (Figure 1-36)
rather than fluorescing on discrete, individual, occasional scales, as
may be seen in normal animals and humans.
V Some drugs, soaps, and bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa
may also cause fluorescence but are usually not associated with hair
shafts.
Interpretation
V In approximately 50% of all infections with M. canis, greenish
fluorescence of tryptophan metabolites is seen under ultraviolet
light at 253.7 nm.
V Positive fluorescence is diagnostic for dermatophytosis and by
far the most common fluorescing dermatophyte in veterinary medi-
cine is M. canis. Some other dermatophytes may show fluorescence,
but these are not relevant in veterinary dermatology.
30
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-34
To evaluate a patient for demodicosis,
scrapings must be deep, until capillary
bleeding is observed. The skin should be
squeezed to maximize the yield.
Figure 1-35
Demodex canis (A) mite and (B) egg
(original magnification xl00).
Figure 1-36
Green fluorescent hair shafts under
Wood's lamp examination in a cat
infected with M. canis.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
31
 A lack of fluorescence does not rule out dermatophytosis. Fungal
culture and/or biopsy are the next steps.
Treatment of dermatophytosis is outlined in Section 3.
Fungal Culture
Indication
A fungal culture may be indicated in any dog or cat with possible fun-
gal infection and thus in any patient with alopecia, papules, pustules,
and/or crusts.
Technique
V Hairs and scale from the edge of a lesion (preferably the ones fluor-
escing under the Wood's lamp) should be taken (Figure 1-37).
V If lesions are not well circumscribed or if asymptomatic carriers are
suspected, I recommend the McKenzie tooth brush method. In this
technique, the hair is brushed with a sterile toothbrush (any new
 as i s  s    
Scales and loose hairs caught in the tooth brush are gently imprinted
onto the agar (Figure 1-38).
V Sabouraud's agar is the most common medium for fungal cultures.
In practice dermatophyte test medium (DTM) is frequently used.
DTM is essentially a Sabouraud agar with a color indicator and added
ingredients to inhibit overgrowth with saprophytes and bacteria.
 After being innoculated, the culture jars should be incubated at
between 25° and 30° C at 30% humidity, or in a warm dark corner
with the lids not screwed down tightly.
V Cultures should be incubated for 2 to 3 weeks and must be evaluat-
ed daily.
Interpretation
 A pH change (and subsequent color change) that occurs as the
colony grows indicates dermatophytes (Figure 1-39). These fungi use
protein and produce alkaline metabolites which cause the pH and
color change. It is imperative that the color change is observed coinci-
dentally with the development of the colony. Color changes also occur
in association with mature (i.e., large) saprophyte colonies. Saprophytes
initially utilize carbohydrates. Once all carbohydrates have been used
and the colony is already grown (Figure 1-40), they turn to the proteins
and rapidly change the color and pH with the subsequent
32
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-37
Hairs and scales from the edge of skin
lesions are chosen for fungal culture.
Figure 1-38
Contents of a tooth brush are transferred
to a fungal culture medium after using
the McKenzie toothbrush technique.
Figure 1-39
A dermatophyte culture changes the
color of the dermatophyte test medium
in early stages of growth.
Figure 1-40
A large saprophyte colony prior to color
change.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
alkaline metabolites (Figure 1-41). It may be impossible to distinguish
on gross appearance whether a mature colony with significant red pig
mentation to the underlying and surrounding agar is a pathogenic or
saprophytic fungus.
V Always check the colony microscopically for characteristic macro-
conidia. Clear sticky tape is impressed gently onto the culture (sticky
side down), then laid onto a drop of methylene blue or the blue stain
of DiffQuick (also sticky side down) on a microscope slide and evalu-
ated under the microscope. The surface of the sticky tape acts as its
own cover slip. If required, microscope oil can be placed directly onto
the surface of the tape.
V Microsporum canis grows in a white, wooly colony with a yellowish
reverse pigment (which maybe difficult to assess if grown on DTM).
Abundant spindle-shaped macroconidia with knobs at the terminal
ends and typically more than six internal compartments are seen
microscopically (Figure 1 -42).
 M. canis is a zoophilic fungus and patients typically were
infected by another animal or human. Humans and other ani-
mals in contact with the patient are at risk to develop the infec-
tion or may be asymptomatic carriers and need to be carefully
evaluated and possibly treated as well.
V M. gypseum grows in a granular beige culture with yellowish
reverse pigment and has thin-walled echinulate macroconidia with
fewer than six internal compartments (Figure 1-43). M. gypseum is
soil and thus has a limited zoonotic potential.
V Trichophyton mentagrophytes grow in colonies of variable
texture and color that characteristically have a few cigar-shaped
macroconidia and globous microconidia (Figure 1-44). Typical
        
are usually associated with exposure to these hosts or their
immediateenvironment.
See Section 3 for treatment of dermatophytosis
34
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-41
Saprophyte colony of Figure 1-40
24 hours later.
Figure 1-42
Hyphae and macroconidia of
Microsporum canis.
Figure 1-43
Hyphae and macroconidia of
Microsporum gypseum.
Figure 1-44
Hyphae and microconidia of Trichophyton
mentagrophytes.
35
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Trichogram
Indication
Trichograms may be useful in any alopecic animal as well as in
animals with suspected dermatophytosis and associated papules,
pustules, or crusting.
Technigue
V A forceps is used to forcefully pluck hairs from affected skin
(Figure 1-45).
V The hairs are then placed onto a slide and evaluated under
low power. I generally use mineral oil and a cover slip to prevent
the hair sample from blowing all over the table rather than
remaining under the microscope (Figure 1-46).
Interpretation
A trichogram is taken for several reasons:
V To determine how many hairs are in telogen (or resting) versus
anagen (or growing) phase (in shedding or suspected endocrine
problems). This requires practice! Anagen-phase bulbs are rounded,
smooth, shiny, glistening and soft so the root may bend (Figure 1-47).
Telogen bulbs are club- or spear-shaped with a rough surface
(Figure 1-48). A sample with exclusively or mostly telogen hairs
points to an endocrine disorder or follicular arrest.
V To determine if a cat or dog creates hair loss by licking or rub.
bing, or if the hair falls out for another reason. If the animal is pru-
ritic and licks the hair off, the tips of the hairs are broken off
(Figure 1-49). Any trauma to the hair shaft, such as occurs in der-
matophytosis or anagen defluxion, may also cause hair with broken
ends. If the hair falls out for other reasons, the tips are tapered
(Figure 1-50)
V Trichograms are used routinely in human dermatology to evalu-
ate alopecias, but their usefulness in veterinary dermatology has
not been explored in any great detail and is hampered by the
marked variations in breed characteristics.
 A trichogram is most useful to determine ifbald cats that
present with a history of "nonpruritic" alopecia are really so-called
"closet lickers" or "hidden groomers" (in which case the hair-shaft
ends will be fractured) or if the hair falls out due to telogen effluvi-
um or, very rarely, for hormonal reasons.
36
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-45
A forceps is used to pull hairs from affected skin
for a trichogram.
Figure 1-46
The hairs are placed in oil onto a slide
under a cover slip.
Figure 1-47
Anagen bulbs in a trichogram of
a normal dog (original magnification
x100).
Figure 1-48
Telogen bulb in a trichogram of a dog
with hyperadrenocorticism (original
magnification x100).
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
37
0 Trichograms may also be used to diagnose canine demodicosis.
If mites are found microscopically, the diagnosis is confirmed.
However, if no mites are present, demodicosis cannot be ruled out!
: Trichograms can also help to diagnose color-diluent alopecia.
In this disease the melanin in the hair shaft is present in big
clumps rather than finely dispersed as in normal pigmented hair.
Biopsy
Indication
V Any skin that appears unusual to the clinician should be biopsied.
V A biopsy should also be considered if lesions fail to respond to
appropriate empiric therapy.
V Nodules are possibly neoplastic and should be biopsied.
V The presence of any suspected disease for which treatment is
expensive and/or life-threatening should be confirmed histopatho.
logically.
V One of the major reasons to perform a skin biopsy is to rule out
other diagnoses ("I think this is an allergy but... "). In such a situa-
 s  ,   d a 
mononuclear perivascular infiltrate" has at least ruled out common
infectious agents and unusual dermatoses. A supportive pathologic
diagnosis interpreted in conjunction with the clinical impressions
may be just as useful as a confirmatory diagnosis.
Technigue
Selection of the Site
V Selection of the site requires careful examination of the entire ani-
mal for the most representative samples, identification of the primary
and secondary lesions present, and the formation of a list of differen-
tial diagnoses before biopsy.
 With the exception of a solitary nodule, we recommend taking
multiple tissue samples. These should include primary lesions if pres-
ent, contain a representative range of lesions, and above all, should
be taken and handled carefully. A normal sample of haired skin
should also be included.
V Depigmenting lesions should be biopsied in an area of active
depigmentation (gray color) rather than the final stage (white or
pink color).
V Alopecia should be biopsied in the center of the worst area as well
as in junctional and normal areas.
38
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-49
Hair tips are broken off in an alopecic
cat with atopic dermatitis (original
magnification x100).
Figure 1-50
Tapered hair tips from an alopecic area
of a dog with hyperadrenocorticism
(original magnification x1 00).
V Ulcers and erosions should not be biopsied. Do not expect a
pathologist to be able to describe more specifically than "an ulcer"
if an ulcer is biopsied or "a crusted erosion" if an excoriated area
is selected.
Preparation of the Site
V With the exception of excision biopsies of nodules, no surgical
preparation of the site should be employed. Even topical application
of alcohol and air drying may alter the epidermis.
 If crusts are present, these should be left on the skin. If they
are accidentally dislodged they should still be placed in the for-
malin and a note "please cut in crusts" should be added to the
request form. Crusts may contain microorganisms or acantholytic
cells that will help to obtain a diagnosis. Infection as a result of
lack of surgical preparation does not seem to be a problem.
Wedge versus Punch Biopsy
V There are two commonly employed biopsy techniques in veter-
inary medicine-the punch biopsy and the wedge biopsy. The lat-
ter is commonly employed as an excisional technique when
removing solitary nodules. It is also indicated with vesicles
    s    i  
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
39
Out rupturing), suspected cases of panniculitis (in which suffi-
cient depth of biopsy may not be achieved with a punch) and
when biopsying the edge of a lesion in a spindle shape (which
allows correct orientation of the lesion in the laboratory where
spindle-shaped lesions are always cut in longitudinally).
V The punch biopsy is quick, relatively atraumatic, and usually
employed with suspected infectious, inflammatory, and endocrine der
matoses. Disposable biopsy punches are readily available in various
sizes. They can be cold-sterilized and reused.
 With the exception of face and foot biopsies, 8 mm punches
should be used! Smaller punches with a diameter of 4 or 6 mm are
employed to biopsy face and feet. Very small punches (i.e., 2 to 3 mm)
are not useful in small animal practice with the exception of eyelid
biopsies.
V The overlying hair is clipped and gently removed and the biopsy
site is marked with a water-proof marker pen (Figure 1-51). If crusts
are present, using scissors may be less traumatic.
 General anesthesia is indicated for nasal or footpad biopsies.
I use a combination of ketamine at 5 mg/kg bodyweight and diazepam
at O.25 mg/kg body weight given intravenously in one syringe. No fur-
n paad aq on si asdnq a f ssau s ad r
manual restraint or with sedation (I use xylazine at O.4 mg/kg or
medetomidine at 10 mcg/kg intravenously), then a subcutaneous
injection of 1ml xylocaine (or the less stinging prilocaine) without
adrenaline will usually provide adequate local anesthesia (Figure 1-52).
If the agent is administered subcutaneously with the needle entry
point outside the proposed biopsy area, there should be no disruption
to the biopsy.
% Don't overdose small animals with lignocaine (> 1ml / 5 kg), since
this can cause cardiac arrhythmias.
 Allow 3 to 5 minutes for the local anesthetic to have effect.
V If a punch is used, it is held at right angles to the surface of the skin
and gently placed over the selected lesion (Figure 1-53). Firm continu-
ous pressure is applied and the punch is rotated in one direction (note
carefully!) until a sufficient depth has been reached to free the dermis
from its underlying attachment. The punch is removed and any blood
should be carefully blotted.
V The section of tissue is grasped at the base-which should be the
panniculus-and subcutaneous attachments severed (Figure 1-54).
Under no circumstances should the dermis or epidermis be grasped
with forceps because this leads to a "crush artifact." Crushed tissue
may be misinterpreted as scarring at best, and at worst renders the
sample worthless. The tissue is rolled on gauze to gently blot the blood
40
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-51
The biopsy site is gently clipped and
marked with a water-proof marker pen.
Figure 1-52
Local anaesthetic is injected subcuta-
neously.
Figure1-53
The punch is placed vertically onto the surface and
rotated in only one direction.
Figure 1-54
The sample is removed by grasping its
base with a forceps and cutting it.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
41
from its surface. A thin sample should then be placed with the pan-
niculus face down-onto a rigid piece of cardboard or broken tongue
depressor (Figure 1-55). This prevents the tissue from curling when
placed in the formalin optimizing the interpretation by the patholo.
gist. Thick samples may be placed in formalin without such support.
V The unit of tissue and cardboard is placed in 10% formalin
(tissue side down) and allowed to fix for several hours before sec-
tioning. The volume of formalin required is at least 1O times the
volume of the sample. Nodules should be sectioned into 1 cm
thick pieces to allow adequate penetration of the formalin into
the center of the lesion.
Submission of Biopsy Samples
 Careful completion of the appropriate skin biopsy request
form, including history and physical examination, will greatly
improve the chances of a diagnostic report.
W A list of differential diagnoses is important with any clinical
case but is essential with dermatologic patients. Seborrhea or
draining tracts can be the result of a wide range of disease
processes. This list is important for the clinician to ensure that
he or she has considered all options and obtained as much infor
mation as possible from both pet and owner as necessary before
taking the biopsy. It is also important for the pathologist and
may aid in choosing special stains to rule out or confirm unusual
diseases.
Serum Testing for
Allergen-specific lgE
Indication
Useful if the owner of an atopic dog or cat diagnosed by history,
clinical examination, and ruling out of differential diagnoses, is
either curious about what causes the problem or is interested in
allergen-specific immunotherapy.
Interpretation
V Different serum tests are available. Laboratory techniques
have improved over the years and serum testing has become an
alternative to intradermal skin testing for many small animal
practitioners. However, tests vary in their sensitivity and speci-
ficity so that careful selection of an appropriate test is important.
42
Copyright @ 2000 TetonNewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 1-55
paoeld s! i! 'uui s uaunoads Asdoq auijl
onto a cardboard or tongue depressor
before placing it into formalin.
V Testing for individual allergens rather than allergen groups is
prudent to avoid immunotherapy with inappropriate allergens. It
is impossible to tell which of the allergens in a particular react-
ing group are involved in the disease process.
√ Results need to be interpreted in light of the clinical history of a
patient. A dog with positive reactions to grass pollens only and a clin
ical history of nonseasonal pruritus for years in a temperate environ
ment such as in England or Canada will most likely not benefit from
allergen-specific immunotherapy.
V I still consider intradermal skin testing my first choice for the
identification of offending allergens in atopic dermatitis for several
reasons: 1) more individual allergens are used in skin testing than in
serum testing; 2) the skin is the affected organ and thus it seems
logical to test the organ affected; and 3) the input of a veterinary
dermatologist in regards to the interpretation of test results and man-
agement of patients on allergen-specific immunotherapy is invalu-
able for practitioners with limited experience in this particular field.
Bacterial Culture
Bacterial cultures are used infrequently in veterinary dermatology. Most
bacterial skin infections are caused by Staphylococcus intermedius. If cocci
are identified on cytology, empiric antibiotic therapy is sufficient in
almost all patients.
Indication
V Empiric therapy at appropriate doses for an appropriate time has
failed to resolve the pyoderma (lesiors are still present and cytology
still reveals cocci).
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
43
V Numerous rod-shaped bacteria are identified on cytology samples
from ear canals. These organisms may also rarely play a role in cuta
neous infections of patients clinically not responding to empiric therapy.
Procedure
/ Swabs are taken from ear canals as described for cytology samples.
V Aspirates from intact pustules are useful in patients with
superficial pyoderma.
 Swabs from the skin surface to culture organisms from
patients with deep pyoderma are not suitable. Samples are taken
in a similar manner to that used in biopsies under aseptic condi-
tions (scrub the skin surface and use sterile instruments and
gloves). The upper half of the tissue sample with the epidermis
and hair is cut off and the lower half is submitted in a sterile
container placed on a sterile gauze pad soaked in a sterile saline
solution for maceration culture. This prevents overgrowth of the
culture by surface bacteria not relevant to the deep infection.
 Each sample for culture and sensitivity should be accompa-
nied by cytologic examination, and culture results must be inter-
preted in relationship to cytologic findings.
Patch Testing
This is the test of choice to confirm contact allergy. In classic patch
testing, the test substance is applied onto intact skin (clipping is rec-
ommended 24 hours earlier, to minimize any confusion due to clipper
rash in a sensitive individual), covered with an impermeable sub-
stance, and fixed. Human test kits are available (Figure 1-56).
Alternatively, an area may be clipped and tape applied in a checker-
board pattern to leave two, four, or six spaces of bare skin surrounded
by areas covered by tape (Figure 1-57). Then individual antigens are
placed on to the bare patches and fixed with a tape. Fresh material
may need to be cut up in small pieces and applied to the skin with
  p i  d o      d 
whole trunk bandage is applied (and fixed around the neck as well) to
avoid movement of the bandage and the allergens (Figure 1-58).
After 2 days, the patch is removed and reactions are observed. After
removing the bandage and allergens, the individual areas are marked
with a permanent marker pen (to make possible a second evaluation
24 hours later). No reaction is graded as O; erythema as 1+; erythema
and edema or induration as 2+; and erythema and vesiculation as 3+.
44
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The latter two reactions are considered significant. The bandage
should then be reapplied (without taping and allergens) to avoid self-
trauma and removed 24 hours later for a second evaluation. True con-
tact allergy is characterized by a delayed-type reaction persisting or
increasing during these 24 hours without the allergen on the skin.
Figure 1-56
Human test kit on a dog. (Courtesy of
Dr. Thierry Olivry.)
甲
Figure 1-57
Patch test using tape.
Figure 1-58
Trunkal bandage covering the patch
test site.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
45
If neither erythema nor vesiculation is present, the reaction on
the previous day was probably caused by an irritant rather than
allergic dermatitis. Topical or systemic steroids must be with-
drawn for 3 to 6 weeks before testing.
In open-patch testing, the allergen is rubbed into a marked test
site of normal skin and then examined daily over a 5-day period.
The reactions similarly consist of mild erythema and edema. The
technique is suitable only for liquid or plant allergens (in which
crushed leaves are used). An already sparsely haired clinically
unaffected area, such as the medial thigh or the inner pinna, is
commonly used.
Diagnostic
Trials
Diagnostic trials are well accepted tests in veterinary dermatology.
They are performed when a certain problem is suspected and the
trial is either the only or the best way to diagnose the possible
underlying disease. A response to the trial confirms the diagnosis
in some instances (such as the scabies treatment trial), but in
other instances a relapse after discontinuing the trial with subse-
quent resolution on restarting the trial is diagnostic (such as in
elimination diets). If there is no response to a well-conducted
diagnostic trial, the suspected disease is extremely unlikely
(which helps veterinarian, owner, and patient, and needs to be
emphasized to clients frustrated by the lack of response).
Elimination Diet
Indication
An elimination diet is used to evaluate food adverse reaction
which can occur with any food fed over a period of time. As a
general rule food adverse reactions present infrequently. Any dog
with nonseasonal pruritus (particularly if the face, feet, or ears
are affected) or recurrent pyoderma, or any cat with miliary der-
matitis, noninflammatory alopecia, eosinophilic granuloma com-
plex, or head and neck pruritus could possibly have an underly.
ing food adverse reaction.
46
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Procedure
g An elimination diet for dogs consists of one protein source
and one carbohydrate source previously not fed! This means
that the elimination diet for a particular patient is determined
by the diet fed so far to this animal. Cats are fed only one pro-
tein without the carbohydrate source to enhance compliance.
V Possible options for proteins are chicken, turkey, duck, veni-
son, mutton, beef, horse, buffalo, rabbit, hare, kangaroo, emu,
various sorts of fish, among others. Carbohydrates may consist of
rice, potatoes, sweet potatoes, beans, or others.
V The diet chosen needs to be fed exclusively! Concurrent
heart-worm prophylaxis or supplements must not contain food
flavor extracts.
V It may take 6 to 8 weeks before a response becomes evident.
 After initial improvement, a rechallenge with the normal
diet previously fed is essential because improvement may result
from other factors such as seasonal or environmental changes or
concurrent medication. If a relapse occurs within 2 weeks and
clinical signs resolve again after reinstitution of the elimination
diet, the diagnosis is confirmed.
Tips to increase compliance
V Warming the food may improve patient compliance.
V Spices such as garlic or salt (in small amounts) may also be
beneficial to improve palatibility.
 If the animal (and owner) is used to treats, the habit should be
continued in a modified fashion to prevent feeding of inappropri-
ate proteins. Little pieces of the selected meat protein can be fried
and kept in the fridge for use as treats. The selected meat can be
dried (in the oven or microwave) and given as treats. If an animal
is receiving potatoes in the diet, then fried pieces of potato may be
used (so long as they are not fried in butter, but in a plant-derived
oil). If rice is chosen, rice cakes may be an additional option.
V If bones are part of the normal diet, bones of the meat selected
for the elimination diet may be fed if available.
V Good client communication is essential. It must be made clear
that an occasional slip in feeding habits (as little as once or twice
weekly of a very small amount of a different protein) may destroy
all the effort.
V It may be worthwhile to advise neighbors about the diet as well.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
47
V If a home-cooked diet is not an option, a commercial diet
consisting exclusively of a protein source and a carbohydrate
source not previously fed may be considered. The same principles
apply to commercial as to home-cooked elimination diets.
However, some animals with food adverse reactions may be
missed when using commercial diets.
After a diagnosis of food adverse reaction is confirmed, the
client has two options: 1. To continue a commercial elimination
diet forever-the more convenient option; 2. A home-cooked
diet. It should be properly balanced (the help of a veterinary
nutritionist may be indicated).
V Identifying of the offending allergen allows a more varied diet
and is achieved through a sequential rechallenge with proteins
formerly fed. Beef, lamb, chicken, or cheese and milk products
are added to the elimination diet one at a time for 2 weeks each
If a relapse occurs within the first 2 weeks (many patients show
symptoms within the first 2 days), the protein is discontinued
until the patient's condition settles.  Ihat particular protein is
avoided in the future. After Z weeks of a given protein without
clinical symptoms, a reaction to this protein is ruled out and it
may be fed in the future. Some dogs will tolerate any home-
cooked diet, but relapse on commercial diets may be caused by a
reaction to additives or preservatives.
Insect Control Trial
Indication
An insect control trial may be used in any patient with suspect
ed insect-bite hypersensitivities. Most animals with insect-bite
hypersensitivities will be allergic to fleas. Clients generally
accept these trials more readily when they are labeled “insect
control trials" because many do not believe fleas cause the prob.
lem, whereas most will accept ants or mosquitoes as a possible
cause. Any dog with pruritus, alopecia, and/or a papular or
crusty rash in the tailbase or inguinal area, and any cat with mil-
iary dermatitis, noninflammatory alopecia, or eosinophilic granu
loma complex may benefit from an insect control trial.
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity in the cat is characterized by
papules and crusts on the nose, pinnae, and foot pads. A trial
using insect repellents may be beneficial to these animals.
48
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Procedure
V The patient should be treated regularly with an insecticide. In
a diagnostic trial, I often increase the frequency of administration
above the manufacturer's recommendations. Fipronil spray, imida-
cloprid, permethrin, and selamectin spot-ons are administered
every 2 weeks. Pyrethroid sprays are administered daily depending
on the product. Nitenpyram tablets are given either daily or every
other day. Which products to use depends on the individual cir-
cumstances. More details are provided on page 138.
V At the start of the trial, treat the animal's environment with
an insect-development inhibitor such as methoprene, fenoxycarb.
Or pyriproxifen. More details are provided on page 138.
V Contact animals (either living in the same household or those
that visit on a regular basis) must be treated as well, although
the frequency between adulticide applications may be increased
to the manufacturers' recommendations.
V At the start of the trial, I often prescribe 5 to 7 days of pred.
nisolone at 1 mg/kg bodyweight daily to hasten clinical response.
is present and insect control may be tapered to the minimum
required.
 Remember that the required minimum treatment typically
varies seasonally, as does the insect load.
Scabies Treatment Trial
Indication
Any pruritic dog or cat could possibly be infested with Sarcoptes
scabiei or Notoedres cati, respectively, particularly if the pruritus
was of sudden onset or if pinnae, ventrum, and elbows are pruri-
tic. With spot-ons used for flea control, I have seen patients with
pruritus and lesions limited to ventrum and lower legs. Negative
superficial skin scrapings do not rule out scabies (p. 26) so trial
treatment is indicated in any patient with suspected scabies irre-
spective of negative skin scraping results. In as much as
Cheyletiella spp. and Otodectes cynotis are sensitive to the same
antiparasitic agents, a scabies treatment trial will be useful for
these parasites as well.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
49
Procedure
V Several treatments for scabies are available but many of them
are not labeled for this use.
√ Topical treatments include ivermectin, lime sulfur dips, ami-
traz, and other antiparasitic rinses. They are used weekly for 4
weeks. More details are given on page 133.
V Systemic therapy may be undertaken with selamectin, iver-
mectin or milbemycin. Treatment details are outlined on page 133.
V All animals in contact with the patient need to be treated as well!
V Initial deterioration during the first days of treatment may
 1 1  t n    9o i 1 
body weight.
V Remission should be achieved within 4 weeks although some
patients may need extended treatment for up to 8 weeks.
50
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
2
Section
The Approach
to common
Dermatologic
Presentations
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
51
In this section, I offer an approach to various common presenta
tions in veterinary dermatology. I begin each topic in this sec-
tion with general comments followed by tables containing the
most common differential diagnoses, their clinical features, diag?
nostic procedures of choice, treatment, and prognosis. I have
attempted to list diseases in order of prevalence. Diseases
marked with an (*) and a colored screen are potentially difficult
to diagnose or their management often requires considerable
experience to achieve the best possible outcome. You may con-
if you do not feel comfortable diagnosing or treating this disease.
This is not a textbook of veterinary dermatology so these tables
do not contain all possible details but rather a concise overview
concentrating on the most important features. Similarly, the
flow charts at the end of each topic are concise and simplified to
maximize the benefit for the busy small animal practitioner.
They will be useful in most instances, but remember that some of
your clients may not have read the textbooks. Even though this
information is aimed at helping you as competent veterinarians
to reach a diagnosis and formulate a treatment plan, your critical
acumen, examination, and communication skills remain the
most crucial instruments for success in your daily practice.
52
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The Pruritic Dog
Key Questions
vant for a pruritic patient.
Differential Diagnoses
If lesions are present, see page 58, The Dog with Papules,
Pustules and Crusts. If no lesions are present, differential diag-
noses are listed in Table 2-1.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
53
continued, sometimes
if offending
Good for well-being
ment; guarded out-
continued manage-
(are)
PROGNOSIS
look for cure
Excellent
Excellent,
cure
6
s amitraz, lime sulfur, iver-
lucocorticoids
Antiparasitic agents such
mectin, or milbemycin
Allergen-specific
P.
antihistamines
TREATMENT
Diagnosis based on history,
skin test
Superficial skin scrapings
s
offendi ng allergens and
 DIAGNOSTIC TEsTS 
low formulation of
(17 d) 40
immunotherapy
 Elimination diet
Table
26),
COMMONLYAFFECTEDSITES
Face, feet, axillae, ears,
Face, feet, axillae, ears,
infection with Malassezia
ic, commonly a reaction
endocrine
against a protein, rarely
causedby
 pollens, house dust
1 additive, clinically
10
DISEASE
allergi
problems)
atopy)
6
54
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Golden Retriever with
Pododermatitis in a
female Akita with
Figure 2-3
Figure 2-4
scabies.
atopy.
6
alopecia in a 5-year-old
with atopic dermatitis.
Facial erythema and
,female toy
Perianal alopecia,
Figure 2-1
Figure 2-2
Z-year-old,
Poodle.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
55
Figure 2-5
Ventral erythema, alopecia, and papules
in the dog seen in Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-6
Hyperpigmentation and alopecia in a
 2-year-old, spayed German Shepherd
with Malassezia canis. (Courtesy of Dr.
Thiery Olivry.)
Figure 2-7
Malassezia-related dermatitis in a 9-year-
old, male British Bulldog (Courtesy of
Dr. Michael Shipstone.)
Figure 2-8
Pedal salivary staining in an 8-year-old,
spayed Schnauzer with food-adverse
reaction. (Courtesy of Dr. Peter Ihrke.)
56
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 2-9
The Nonlesional Pruritic Dog
Cytology
(p.21)
Scabies, Atopy, Adverse food reaction
Malassezia dermatitis
Scabies treatment trial (p. 49)
Antifungal therapy
Elimination diet (p. 46)
No response
Good response
Atopy
Food rechallenge
Relapse
No relapse
Adversefoodreaction
Scabies, Atopy out of season
Monitoring
Sequential rechallenge
Relapse
Remission
for >12 months
Avoidance
Skin test
Scabies
Atopy
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
57
The Dog with Papules,
Pustules, and Crusts
Key Questions
 What is the breed of this patient? (p. 2)
/ How old was this patient when clinical signs were first
recognized? (p. 3)
/ How long has the disease been present and how did it
progress?(p. 3)
/ On which part of the body did the problem start? (p. 4)
V Is the animal itchy? (p. 5)
/ Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there other clinical signs, such as sneezing, coughing,
or diarrhea? (p. 7)
/ What do you feed the animal? Was a special diet used in
the past? (p. 7)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
V Does anybody in the household have skin disease?
(p.8)
/ Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used
and how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
/ What is used for flea control currently? (p. 9)
/ When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Differential Diagnoses
Papules may develop into pustules and crusts, and any dog with an
acute papular rash may eventually show pustules or crusts. Some dis
eases are characterized by papules that do not typically develop fur-
ther into pustules (such as flea-bite hypersensitivity); other diseases
typically show crusting as their predominant symptom (such as zinc-
ential diagnoses for dogs with papules, pustules, and crusts. Lesions
may be follicular or nonfollicular (Figure 2-10). Follicular papules
 and pustules indicate a pathologic process concentrating on the hair
follicle, most commonly bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis, or dermato-
58
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
phytosis. Nonfollicular lesions may indicate pathologic processes
concentrating on the epidermis, dermis, or dermo-epidermal junction,
such as superficial spreading pyoderma, flea-bite, contact hypersensi-
tivity, or immune-mediated skin diseases. Be aware that some nonfol.
licular processes may occasionally involve hair follicles as well.
Nonfollicularpapule and pustule
Follicular papule and pustule
Figure2-10
59
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
depending on climate
and owner commit-
Good, if underlying
if this is not
Fair to excellent
PROGNOSIS
Recommended Diagnostic Tests,
ment
likely, i
Fair
5
Antibacterial treatment
 neglect or antimi-
ds
 Flea control (p. 136),
treatment
TREATMENT
二
fes
 delayed hypersen-
I hypersensitivity,
biopsy
 DIAGNOSTIC TesTS 
8
vide negative results 
2-2
serum tests, p. 42.)
Table 
with
01
Dest,
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Erythema, scaling, seborrhea,
2-17)
alopecia, papules, pustules,
erythe-
Dorsal lumbosacral area,.
 either focal or
s and crusts
 involved
form:
Focal
face
Differential Diagnoses.
1 the
eneralized
are
-14)
uO
crusts,
and
2-12)
2-138
2
and
ma,
Bacterial infection (typi-
Demodicosis (probably a
canine
ada pue sn
leads to a further parasite-
induced immunosuppres-
. Adult-onset demodi
to anunderly.
reaction in sensitized
cally by Staphylococcus
古
commensal mite
chemotherapy.)
ing disease)
DISEASE
secondary 1
(saop
skin,
sion.
8
60
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Excellent with identi-
cation on the tail base of
medical management
Alopecia and lichenifi-
of allergen, fair with
hypersensitivity.
Excellent
Figure 2-12
Guarded
Good
Antiparasitic agents (p. 133)
griseofulvin or ketoconazole
Avoidance, whole-body suits,
contamination of environ-
water injection, glucocorti-
decrease
shampoos may (
Py, radiation.
Sarcoptes treatment
Superficial skin scrapings
Asdeg ( 1z d) a80
(6b d) re!.n
(92.)
(86 d)
Alopecia, lichenifica-
tion, focal ulceration,
ailbase in an 11-year-
Retriever mixed breed
and crusting of the
with flea-bite hyper-
Figure 2-11
sensitivity.
Pinnae, elbows, ventrum,
interdigital sk in, ventral
and hocks
reaction to environmental
Scabies (a highly conta-
Dermatophytosis (der.
matophytes are trans-
Contact hypersensitivity
hypersensitivity
Mast cell tumor*
(delayed h
61
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Labrador Retriever with
Rottweiler withgeneral-
Severe pododermatitis
Crusted papules in a
bacterial pyoderma.
ized demodicosis.
Figure 2-14
Figure 2-16
generalized demodicosis.
Papules, plaques, and
epidermal collarettes
crusts in a 4-year-old
Border Collie with
Figure 2-13
Figure 2-15
pyoderma.
62
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
sharp demarcation between
mentagrophytes. Note the 
affected and nonaffected
skin frequently seen with
Severe crusting on the
caused by Trichophyton
Trichophyton infections.
Mast-cell tumor in a
Labrador Retriever.
Figure 2-18
Figure 2-20
in a 4-year-old, spayed
Veimaraner. (Courtesy
Dr. Sonya Bettenay.)
resulting from contact
Abdominal papules
Papules and plaques
Figure 2-17
Figure 2-19
demodicosis.
古
4
63
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Footpad hyperkeratosis
in a 13-year-old, spayed
depending on climate
ikely,
Good, if underlying
Fair to excellent.
.Relapse 1
PROGNOSIS
Figure 2-22
ment
aceus.
Fair
neglect or antimicrobial
treatment only, p. 131).
antipruritic therapy
 TREATMENT
(p.123)
(only diagnostic in presence
 delayed hypersen-
testing
 DIAGNOSTIC TEsTS 
8
vide negative results 
serum orskin
serum tests (p. 123)
2-3
Table 
old, castrated Labrador
with severe pemphigus
crusting in a 6-year-
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Figure 2-21
 domedial thighs, inguinal area,
Dorsal lumbosacral area, cau-
Erythema, scaling, seborrhea,
foliaceus.
and crusts,either focal or
Figures
erythe-
2-15)
Localized form: Focal e
commonly on the face (
and
3
bite cause an allergic reac
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
tion in sensitized dogs)
-aapun ue ci Aiepuonas
Demodex canis, a normal
mal proliferation of
ing disease)
DISEASE
64
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Fair with appropriate
cure (except drug-trig-
Foot-pad hyperkeratosis
and crusting in a 9-year-
ic epidermal necrosis
gered pemphigus)
Michael Shipstone).
(Courtesy of Dr.
Figure 2-24
ment for secondary infection
Generalized form: Amitraz,
ivermectin, milbemycin
Immunosuppression
(p. 118)
( ))
alopecia, and crusting
Periocular erythema,
a 4-year-old, female
2-year-old, castrated
Large pustules in a
Chow Chow with
pemphigus foliaceus
(Courtesy of Dr.
Figure 2-23
Figure 2-25
(Figures 2-15,2-16, and 2-17)
 Planum nasale, periocular
Bettenay).
plaques, pustules and crusts
areas, or paws are involved
6
claw folds, :
leads to a further parasite.
sion. Adult-onset demodi-
intraepidermal pustule for-
 snayduad oi anp uoieu
antibodies against antigens
plasia, steroids, or other
(immune-mediated skin
in the intercellular con-
Pemphigus foliaceus*
nections. May be idio-
pathic drug-induced or
chemotherapy.)
paraneoplastic)
65
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Fair with appropriate
and owner commit-
treatment, poor for
Fair to excellent
gered pemphigus)
PROGNOSIS
Excellent
ment
Fair
Localized form: 95% resolve
 secondary infection
spontaneously, thus benign
Generalized form: Amitraz,
Flea control (p. 136),
therapy (p. 123)
TREATMENT
Insect control trial (p. 48),
biopsy
古
Superficial skin scrapings
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
-4
2
Table 
(92)
d) [
WW
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Dorsal lumbosacral area, cau-
area, ventrum, periumbilical
  e a
Localized form: Focal erythe-
elbows, ventrum,
ites). Generalized form:
Differential Diagnoses, 
igures
7.2
nodi
Scabies (a highly conta-
(antigens in flea saliva
sion. Adult-onset demg
induced
disease characterized 
mal proliferation 
or paraneoplastic)
chemotherapy.)
DISEASE
leads to
8
66
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Good to guarded for
well-being, poor for
 after l year of age.
Good
Varies
Poor
cure.
ment, high-quality protein,
iu/day),
environ-
mg/kg
Antiseborrheic shampoos
mg/kg q
Antimicrobial treatment,
intravenous amino acids
shampoos may decrease
increase zinc absorption
8
: flares
1008-002)
contamination 
E
Vitamin
ment.
-m 
Biopsy (p. 38)
(8e d) Asdeg
Biopsy (p. 38)
Muzzle, mucocutaneous junc.
pads,
iocular, perioral, pinnae,
Otitis externa, digital hyper-
I crusting in face (paricu-
keratosis, dry flaky skin, or
hema, scaling alopecia,
-op
ventral neck, and ventral
severe cases, megasophagus
2-26)
paws
igure 2-24)
abdomen
sale,
 dermatitis
 especially in
seba-
-Oscine)
(pathogenesis unclear)
decreased
Collies
Metabolic epidermal
trans-
8
keratinization
 autosomal rece
renewal
tion, endocrine disease,
(i 
due
Idiopathic seborrhea*
 of epidermis,
matophytes are 
lar infundibulum.
Dermatomyositis
arctic breeds)
cell
time and thus
zinc,
(primary
eration
puppies)
6
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
67
Figure2-26
Crusted papules and plaques caused by
idiopathic seborrhea in an 8-year-old,
male castrated Cocker Spaniel.
Figure 2-27
The Dog with Papules, Pustules, or Crusts
Cytology (p.21)
Skin Scrapings (p.26)
Cytology
Cytology 
Cytology/
Skin scrapings 
Skin scrapings 
Skin scrapings 
Wood's lamp (p.30)
Pyoderma
Demodicosis or scabies with
Fungal culture (p.32)
or without secondary infection
Antibiotics
(p.119)
Dermatophytosis
Insufficient
Lessions resolve,
Remission
Antifungal
response
itch persists
therapy(p.130)
Searchforunderlying
causes (allergies,
endocrine diseases)
See approach to nonlesional,
pruritic dog (p.57)
Depending on clinical signs
Insect bite
Scabies trial
trial (p.48)
(p.49)
Remission
No response
No response
Remission
Insect bite hypersensitivity
Scabies
Biopsy
(p.38)
68
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The Dog with Alopecia
Many diseases are associated with alopecia in conjunction with
pruritus and other lesions. Here we discuss dogs with clinically
noninflammatory alopecias.
Key Questions
V What breed is the patient? (p. 2)
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p.3)
V How long has the disease been present and how did it progress?
(p.3)
V On which part of the body did the problem start? (p. 4)
V Is the animal itchy? (p. 5)
√ Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there other animals in the household? (p. 5)
V Does anybody in the household have skin disease? (p. 8)
V Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8).
If the alopecic dog is pruritic but lacks other lesions, the approach is
different from that used in a bald dog without pruritus. Many alope-
cias are characterized by dry skin and mild scaling, which may or may
not be pruritic. The use of moisturizers will help the dryness and may
address concurrent pruritus. If pruritus persists, then the approach is
the same as for the dog with pruritus without lesions (p. 54).
Differential diagnoses for noninflammatory and nonpruritic alopecias
are outlined later in this section.
69
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Approximately 60%
tumors were reported
nou yonoue po
complete and con-
others only days.
stant remission
despite adequate
supplementation
PROGNOSIS
with
erative
mas.
8
latrogenic form: Cautiously
dependent hyperadrenocor.
 adrenocortical neoplasia
lucocorticoid administra-
removal of affected gland
keto-
conazole for pituitary-
 Serum biochemistry (Serum
eosinopenia), urinalysis
 adrenal glands), low dose
thyroid
, ala-
neutrophilia, lymphopenia,
[adrenal
equilib.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
V
Affected
lation test
lesterol
pue
chole
tests
tal
test)
der infections, exercise intol.
atro-
alcinosis cutis
rowth, coat color change,
orrhea, neuromuscular symp-
recurrent
,hypotri-
muscle
areas, flanks, trunk, face),
itary macroadenoma)
Differential Diagnoses, 
toms, infertility
[presumably autoimmune]
Hyperadrenocorticism*
noma or macroadenoma
tion of glucocorticoids
pituitary-dependent
or idiopathic thyroid
necrosis which may b
plasms in 15%)
DISEASE
thyroiditis)
due 
的
70
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
treatment usually only
general
ir for
with treatment
hair regrowth
for
remission
poog
moistur-
acid
5
  m
cated males, estrogen in
 Retinoids, melatonin 
Melatonin (p. 144)
essential
supplementation (p.
 Retinoids, e
(p. 144)
corticism,
ed
6
Aeds
口
口
tion with ruling out other
S1
skin
biopsy
古
38), lack 
equivocal cases.
Biopsy (p. 38)
2
ichogram
Cytology
38).
changes.
P
vith initially
 postauric-
trunk
scali-
thighs, 1
and
6
 often with :
necl
blue
and
lopecia of pinnae,
ventral
 dilute
iguresZ-33
2-31)
areas,
lopecia of 
(often the :
 
and
changes, 
igure
资
neck
8
Color dilution alopecia
hair
01
the hair shaft and bulb)
sive dermatosis, estrogen-
color with pigmentary
mone imbalance, testos-
 these syndromes that
dtogether
tration-responsive der.
Follicular dysplasia
(unknown etiology)
Pattern baldness
terone-responsive 
follicular
related
Cyelic
sure)
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
71
Excellent if causative
metastases, guarded
with metastases or
aplastic anemia
PROGNOSIS
Excellent
Excellent
 Addressing the underlying
 Not needed, if stress was a
Ovariohysterectomy
one-time event
TREATMENT
Castration
cause
History, trichogram (p. 36)
(9e d) ueauu Aieis!H
ultrasonography,
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
↑, skin
testes
6
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Bilaterally symmetric alope-
1 as col
genital area, gynecomas-
estrogen-induced bone mar-
ilaterally symmetric alope-
 Focal to generalized alopecia
prostatomegaly, prostatitis,
 Alopecia of sudden onset
 of wear areas such
row suppression
of sudden onset
 abnormalities
cia
and
ear
6
 2-5continued
Anagen defluxion (severe
(severe stress [e.g, shock,
rowth and switching to
 diseases or anti.
 many follicles, which
(most common in cryp-
hair breaks off suddenly)
tional ovarian tumors)
itotic drugs interfere
fever, surgery] causes
levels of estrogen)
Telogen efluvium
Hyperestrogenism
DISEASE
Table
58
72
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Alopecia due to follicular
(Courtesy of Dr. Peter
Figure 2-29
Figure 2-31
 Excellent
Retriever
Ihrke.)
in 6-24months
ment, history, and presence
Diagnosis based on signal.
of noninflammatory alope-
cia in clipped areas only.
Papules and crusts in an
Alopecia and hyperpig.
8-year-old, male cas-
calcinosis cutis due to
pituitary-dependent
with cyclic follicular
Figure 2-28
Figure 2-30
Clipped areas
breeds fail to regrow hair
in clipped areas; cause is
 Post-clipping Alopecia
(arctic or plushcoated
unknown)
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
73
responsive demmatosis in
Growth hormone-
Figure 2-33
Keeshond.
Color dilution alopecia
Courtesy of Dr. Thierry
Castration-responsive
Courtesy of Dr. Sonya
old male Keeshond.
Figure 2-32
Figure 2-34
Bettenay.)
74
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
 Evidence of systemic signs
Urine and blood tests
Dermatophytosis
as indicated
Inconclusive
 Everything
 is possible
result
Fungal culture
(p.32)
color dilution alopecia
Fdlicular dysplasia,
Figure 2-35
Biopsy
(8E:d)
History
(p.2)
No evidence of hypothyroidism
Hormonal disease,
telogen effluvium 
(9E'd)
Talrgere enis s
Anagen defluxion
Skin scraping
(p.26)
 Demodicosis
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
75
The Dog with Nodules
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p.3）
V How long has the disease been present and how did it progress?
(p.3)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
V Does anybody in the household have skin disease? (p. 8)
V Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses are predicted primarily based on two sep-
arate features: (1) Is there only one lesion (which increases the like-
lyhood of neoplasia or a kerion) or are there multiple lesions (which
may be due to sterile inflammatory diseases, more aggressive neo-
plastic disease or severe infection); and (2) Are draining tracts
absent or present (increasing the likelihood of foreign bodies, severe
bacterial or fungal infection, or sterile inflammatory disease)?
and clinical examination are followed by microscopical evalua-
tion of impression smears (if draining tracts are present) and
aspirates in any dog with nodules (p. 21). In some patients,
cytology will reveal an infectious organism or classic neoplastic
cells and thus a diagnosis. In most patients, cytologic examina-
tion will further narrow the list of differential diagnoses, but a
biopsy (p. 38) will be necessary to reach a diagnosis. With nodu
lar lesions, complete excision of one or more nodules should be
performed. If draining tracts are present and/or cytology indi-
cates possible infection, a culture may be useful as well. Deep
tissue should be submitted rather than a culture swab (p. 28).
76
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Fair with appropriate
 Poor to excellent
 depending on the
individual tumor
 Fair to guarded
PROGNOSIS
management
management
Good
Surgical drainage, antibac-
Ars iop uisixa ieaing
systemic glucocorticoids for
 1o/pue uoisioxa jesja1ng
lesions; vitamin E or
antimicrobial therapy
systemic disease
TREATMENT
(p. 131).
(P.
Cytology (p. Z1), biopsy.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Table 2-6.
(12 d) A0
Biopsy (p. 38)
COMMONLYAFFECTEDSITES
lethargy, Pyrex-
Nonhealing ulcerated nodules
Varies with individual neo.
 Firm, painless, nonpruritic
dermal papules, plaques and
 lesions with concur.
 of head,
commonly around neck,
 lesion over chest,
shoulders and tailbase
with draining tracts.
 Diagnoses,
nodules typically 
2-38)
and 2-37)
Solitary
neck
Differential
(unknown pathogenesis)
-oed umouyun Asou)
 lupus erythematosus)
pathogenic organisms, e.g..
smegmatis
atic implantation into sub-
(caused by bite wounds
(ubiquitous, facultatively
cause lesions after traum-
Sterile granulomatous
Mycobacteria fortuitum,
or foreign bodies)
cutaneous tissue)
chelomei, M.
Abscesses
Neoplasia*
DISEASE
M.
8
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
77
Fair with complete
PROGNOSIS
Good
Fair
Fair
Complete surgical excision,
Antimycotic and concur-
rent antibacterial therapy
combination with keto.
conazole or itraconazole
TREATMENT
(p. 131)
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
serologic testing
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Upper respiratory, cutaneous,
signs. Papules, nodules, ulcers
draining tracts (Figure 2-40)
Multiple nodules or ulcerated
Firm nodules with draining
plaques on the head, pinnae,
and trunk.
affected.
Table 2-6 continued
matophytes
Bacterial pseudomycetoma
rounded by pyogranuloma-
and secondary bacterial
Cry ptococcus neoformans)
phyte Sporothrix schenkit
(nonbranching bacteria,
canine sporotrichosis is
with ubiquitous, sapro-
(caused by ubiquitous
that infects wounds)
tous inflammation)
causedbyder
during trauma,
DISEASE
infection)
78
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
depending on surgical
 poor for vision, if
Guarded to poor, if
central nervous sys.
Guarded (reported
bone involvement)
 Fair to guarded
excision.
Guarded
Guarded
Guarded
and
y antimycotic thera-
fol-
131) based on in
antibacterial therapy
Antimycotic therapy
therapy (p. 118)
(p. 118)
(p. 131)
 21), biopsy
biopsy
21),
Cytology (p.
shnen suuep yim sampon
head, mouth, and limbs that
discharge thick pus with soft,
 neous abscesses with draining
and scar tissue. Grains vary
subcutaneous
loss, coughing, dyspnea, ocu-
 nodules, abscesses,
infected bones. Concurrent
anorexia, weight loss, cough
 Papules, nodules, subcuta-
nodules on ex tremities.
 and draining tracts over
yellow sulfur granules
icts on face and feet.
granules.
disease
Papules, I
yellow
through wound contami-
Actinobacillus ligneriesii is
traumatically implanted,
(rare infection with dimor-
(traumatic implantation
 punom yono.q) sisouooz
(wound contamination
 or wound contamin-
ation with filamentous,
(amoq pue aliaes jeno
fungus
(ubiqui tous soil sapro-
fungi with pigmented
(rare infection by the
dermatitides) Possible
Actinobacillosis*
often through bite
fungus Blastomyces
contamination)
(spunom
nation)
hyphae)
古
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
79
 Fair to good for dogs
 Guarded to poor
PROGNOSIS
 ated disease
Guarded
Poor
 Combination antimicrobial
based on in vitro suscepti-
Wide surgical excision
Antimycotic agents
health concerns
(p. 131)
Cytology (p. Z1), biopsy
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 fungal culture
38
32)
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
fever, coughing, dyspnea, gas.
 trointestinal and ocular disease
Ulcerated nodules of the face
on head, neck, and limbs that 
Papules, nodules, ulcers, and
 tracts, on the limbs and feet
oncurrent
anorexia, weight loss and
 Ulcerated nodules and
 with unpleasant smell
draining tracts.
 draining tracts
Table 2-6 continued
fungi by exposure of dam-
aged skin to infected stag-
respiratory and digestive
with dimorphic, sapro.
seminated infections)
animals caused by
sis, bovis and rarely
Histoplasmosis*
Tuberculosis*
Pythiosis*
nant water)
DISEASE
lesions)
80
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
Sebaceouscysts inacas-
Sterile panniculitis with
ulcers and nodules in a
English Springer Spaniel
 9-year-old castrated
Figure 2-37
Figure 2-39
granulomatous disease.
Maltese with sterile
Histiocytoma in a
Jack Russell mixed
Figure 2-36
Figure 2-38
breed.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
81
Figure 2-40
Dermatophyte kerion.
(Courtesy of Dr. Sonya Bettenay.)
Figure 2-41
The Dog with Nodules
Cytology
(p. 21)
No microorganisms,
Diagnostic result
Neutrophils and cocci,
otherwise inconclusive
otherwwise inconclusive
Biopsy (p. 38), culture (p. 32)
Antibacterial treatment
(p.118)
No resolution
Resolution
Bacterial infection
Biopsy (p. 38), culture (p. 32)
(48 hours post antibacterial
treatment)
82
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The Dog with
Nasal Dermatitis
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p.3)
V How long has the disease been present and how did it progress?
(p.3)
V Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
V Does anybody in the household have skin disease? (p. 8)
√ Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
V When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses are listed in Table 2-7. If lesions are present on
the haired dorsal muzzle and the planum nasale, it is important to
find out whether the first changes occurred on the planum nasale
(possibly just as depigmentation) or in the haired skin. First changes
in the haired skin indicate follicular diseases such as bacterial folli-
culitis, demodicosis, and dermatophytosis are more likely. If the
planum nasale is affected first, immune-mediated skin diseases such as
discoid lupus erythematosus or pemphigus foliaceus are higher on the
list of possible conditions to be ruled out. If initial in-house tests such
as skin scrapings (p. 26) and cytology (p. 21) are negative or nondiag.
nostic, biopsy (p. 38) is the next step.
Copyright2000TetonNewMedia888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
83
Good, if underlying.
if this is not possible
PROGNOSIS
Fair
Fair
 resolve
immuno-
spontaneously, thus benign
Generalized form: Amitraz,
neglect or antimicrobial
118).
1 %6  p
treatment only (P. 
namide (p.
(p. 141)
tion (p.
Iddns
28),
Deep skin scrapings (p. 
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 Commonly Affected
Biopsy (p. 38)
Biopsy (p. 38)
46)
lanum nasale, periocular area,
(Figures
swith atopy (Figure 2-44)
 muzzle, pin-
erythema,
, most com-
Depigmentation of planum
les and crusts where large
areas, more than 5 areas, 0
Figures
(in cats)
Focal
Differential Diagnoses,.
alopecia and scaling, 
AFFECTED SITES
involved
Localizedf
alopecia,
刊
Bacterial infection (typi-
Demodicosis (probably a
defect that permits abnor-
of canine
Discoid lupus erythem.
intermedinus and typically
normal
inducedimmunosuppres
cally by Staphylococcus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Demodexcanis,
ing disease)
DISEASE
7
8
84
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Good
Fair
Fair
e yns s aa
contamination of environ-
Antimycotic therapy with
Antimycotic therapy with
shampoos may decrease
combination with keto.
 32), serologic testing
 fungal culture
spayed Australian Shepherd
and ulcers in a 3-year-old
38),
mixed breed with discoid
lupus erythematosus.
Multiple nodules or ulcerated
signs, Papules, nodules, ulcers
Figure 2-42
plaques on the head, pinnae,
Upper respiratory, cutaneous,
Face, pinnae, paws
(Figure 2-18)
and trunk.
affected.
Dermatophytosis (der-
canine sporotrichosis is
caused by ubiquitous
fungus Cryptococcus neo-
feline sporotrichosis
im munocompromized
although
Zoonosis,
(sunu.of
85
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Bull Terrier. Note that
nasal pyoderma in a
Dr. Sonya Bettenay.)
Bacterial facial and
Figure 2-44
Antifungal treatment
Fungal culture ±
(p.130)
Cytology (p. 21), skin scrapings (p. 26), fungal culture (p. 32)
Antiparasitic treatment
Skin scraping
The Dog with Nasal Dermatitis
(p.133)
Figure 2-45
Pemphigus foliaceus
with depigmentation,
erosions, and crusting
Golden Retriever.
(8e d) Asdo!g
Figure 2-43
Antimicrobial treatment
 Bacterial infection
Cytology ±
(p.118)
86
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The Cat with
Miliary Dermatitis
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p. 3)
V How long has the disease been present and how did it progress?
(p.3)
V On which part of the body did the problem start? (p. 4)
V Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there other clinical signs such as sneezing, coughing, or
diarrhea?(p. 7)
V What do you feed the animal? Was a special diet used in the past?
(p. 7)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
√ Does anybody in the household have skin disease? (p. 8)
V Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
VWhat is used for flea control now? (p. 9)
/ When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Differential Diagnoses
Classic lesions of miliary dermatitis are focal or generalized small
papules and crusts (Figures 2-46 and 2-47). Miliary dermatitis is
not a diagnosis but rather a descriptive term for a feline cutaneous
reaction pattern with many possible causes. Most cats suffer from
an underlying flea-bite hypersensitivity. The differential diagnoses
for feline miliary dermatitis are listed in Table 2-8.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
87
offending
 and avoided.
ment; guarded for cure
the patient with con-
Good for well-being
uapl rou si aseasi
patientwith
guarded for cure
[are)
Good, but relapse
fied and treated
PROGNOSIS
计
Recommended Diagnostic Tests,
Excellent,
Hentified
continued
Good f
the
ued
古
136), gluco-
129), antihista-
 essential fatty acids
）), essential fatty acids
Avoidance, antihistamines
),glucocorticoids
),glucocorticoids
Indoor confinement (at
dawn), insect repellents
least during dusk and
Antibacterial agents
 
TREATMENT
corticoids (p.
mines (p.
129).
129).
(p.119)
Flea control trial (p. 48)
physical examination and
skin test
 Elimination diet (p. 46)
 DIAGNOSTIC TesTs
o sioopui iee sudeay
c
Intradermal s
2
Table 
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Dorsal lumbosacral area, cau-
 Head and neck or generalized
Cranial half of the body or
Papules and crusts on dorsal
 of pin-
 muzzle, lateral aspects 
generalized disease
disease.
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
(may or may not be aller-
Mosquito-bite hypersensi-
 Staphylococci and second
 pollens,
Bacterial superficial folli-
ary to other diseases)
culitis (caused by
DISEASE
spores)
88
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Guarded for cure in
catteries and Persian
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Fair
Fair
Immunosuppression
Antifungal agents
(p. 141)
(p.130)
,fungal culture
Superficial skin scrapings
and microscopically evalu-
ating debris covered with
mineral oil in a Petri dish
Superficial skin scrapings
neck, thighs,tail,and tailbase
Yellowish to brownish crusts
 for the typi-
Papular form may occasional.
Otitis externa, pinnae, face,
on the dorsum, but occasion-
 Pinnae,face, neck, general.
be mistaken for miliary
sical miliary dermatitis
claw beds, nipples
 Focal or generalized
may be mistaken
dermatitis
ized disease.
mati tis
tion (may cause more than
rare to common conta-
Otodectes cynotis infesta
gious disease caused by
ease caused by Notoedres
 Pemphigus foliaceus*
just otitis externa)
Dermatophytosis
 Mast cell tumor*
Cheyletiellosis
Feline scabies
89
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Crusting on the edges of
Miliary dermatitis in a
Dr. Sonya Bettenay.)
domestic shorthair cat
the footpads due to
Figure 2-47
Figure 2-49
(DSH).
Nasal dermatitis in a
5-year-old castrated
-Onbsou yim SH
bite hypersensitivity.
Erosions and crusted
papules in a cat with
miliary dermatitis.
Figure 2-46
Figure 2-48
90
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 2-50
The Cat with Miliary Dermatitis
Cytology (p. 21), skin scrapings (p. 26)
Cytology±
Scrapings
Scrapings
Scrapings
Scrapings(）
Ectoparasite infestation with
or without infection
 Insect control trial (p. 48) with or without antimicrobial treatment (p. 118)
厂
No improvement
Complete resolution
Depending on patient, owner and finances
Insect bite hypersensitivity
Elimination diet
Fungal culture
(p.46)
(p. 32)
Response
No response
Dermatophytosis
Rechallenge
Biopsy
(p.38)
Antifungaltherapy
(p.130)
Relapse
No relapse
Chronic
Diagnostic
/
dermatitis
Monitoring
Foodadverse
reaction
Relapse
Skin testing
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
91
The Cat with
Noninflammatory
Alopecia
Key Questions:
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized? (p.3)
V How long has the disease been present and how did it progress? (p.3)
V On which part of the body did the problem start? (p. 4)
V Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there other clinical signs such as sneezing, coughing or diarrhea?
(p. 7)
√ What do you feed the animal? Was a special diet used in the past? (p. 7)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
V Does anybody in the household have skin disease? (p. 8)
V Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and how
successful was treatment? (p. 8)
V What is used for flea control now? (p. 9)
/ When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Differential Diagnoses
Noninflammatory alopecia is a feline cutaneous reaction pattern that
may have various causes. Hormonal alopecia is extremely rare in the
feline and typically affected cats show other severe signs. Psychogenic
alopecia in the cat is greatly overdiagnosed. The disease usually affects
pure-bred cats with a nervous disposition. Environmental changes such
as a new partner, baby, pet, or a move to a new house precede clinical
signs. Most cats with noninflammatory alopecia are pruritic as a result
of allergies and may be closet groomers. Many cats previously diagnosed
with hormonal alopecia and treated successfully with medroxyprogesteron
acetate or megestrol acetate have responded because the anti-inflam-
matory action of these medications have controlled their pruritus
caused by allergies, not because of a correction of their hormonal
imbalance. The differential diagnoses for feline noninflammatory
alopecia are listed in Table 2-9.
92
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Good for well-being of
offending
 and avoided.
 for catteries and
good other-
ment; guarded for
(are)
ement,if
cure.
PROGNOSIS
.9
for
Excellent,
otein(s)
Fair with 
not ident
Guarded
crsians,
cure.
Poor f
the 
wise.
Fair
128),
Antifungal agents (p. 131)
Environmental changes, glu-
136),glu-
:123),
glucocorticoids (p. 129)
125
essential fatty acids (
( d) gpnos eal 
Allergen-specific
antihistamines (p.
histamines (p.
(71 d) spie
olytic drugs.
Intradermal skin test allows
formulation of immunother-
. 36), elimina-
 Diagnosis based on history,
physical examination, tri-
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
apy
COMMONLYAFFECTEDSITES
Dorsal lumbosacral area, cau
-uaa apoq ay jo jeu ieuen
Cranial halfof the body, ven-
 abdomen, inguinal region.
Medial forelegs, caudal
Focal or generalized
 alized disease
disease
Flea-bite hypersensitivity
house dust mites, or mold
(may or may not be aller-
ic, commonly reaction to
pollens,
ing caused by psychologi-
indistin-
pically
canis)
lergens such as 
tosis
DISEASE
caused by
Atopy*
spores)
5
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
93
 Excellent if causative
factor is removed
PROGNOSIS
 Excellent
Poor
 Addressing the underlying
Not needed, if stress was a
Metyrapone, o,p'-DDD,
TREATMENT
singular event
cause
used
Ultrasonography, ACTH
stimulation test, low-dose
History, trichogram (p. 36)
dexamethasone suppres-
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
sion test
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Figure 2-51
Polydipsia, polyuria, weight
 Focal to generalized alopecia
loss, anorex ia, polyphagia,
entire trunk), fragile skin
 Alopecia of sudden onset
Table 2-9 continued
(severe diseases or antimi-
totic drugs interfere with
hair growth, resulting in
which causes hair to break
shock,fever, surgery caus
es abrupt cessation of hail
Hyperadrenocorticism*
catagen and then telogen
which are all shed simul
1 to 3 months
severe stress, such as
after the insult)
off suddenly)
DISEASE
6
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 2-52
The Cat with Noninflammatory Alopecia
Trichogram (p.36)
Broken off
Fungal
Tapered
hair shafts
spores
hair shafts
History
Fungal
culture (p.32)
Telogen
Biopsy
Blood
effluvium
tests
Dermatophytosis
Insect control
trial (p. 48)
Remission
No response
History
 Insect bite
Eliminationdiet(p.46)
hypersensitivity
No response
Remission
Rechallenge
Symptomatic
treatment (p.123)
No relapse
Relapse
Monitoring
Food adverse
Relapse lateron
reaction
Skin testing
Psychogenic
alopecia
Atopy
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
95
The Cat with Lesions
of the Eosinophilic
Granuloma Complex
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p. 3)
V Is the disease seasonal? (p. 6)
V Are there other clinical signs such as sneezing, coughing, or diar
rhea?(p. 7)
V What do you feed the animal? Was a special diet used in the past?
(p.7)
V Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
VWhat is used for flea control now? (p. 9)
√ When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Differential Diagnoses
All subsets of the eosinophilic granuloma are mucocutaneous
reaction patterns in the cat.
V Indolent (or eosinophilic or rodent) ulcer commonly affects
the upper lip unilaterally or bilaterally (Figure 2-53), but may
occur in the oral cavity or elsewhere on the body (Figure 2-54).
The well-circumscribed ulcers with raised borders are rarely
painful or pruritic; frequently the owner is more bothered by the
lesions than the cat. The differential diagnoses of the feline
eosinophilic ulcer are neoplastic diseases such as squamous cell
carcinoma and infectious ulcers (eosinophilic ulcers are often
secondarily infected as well). Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy
(p. 38). Prior antimicrobial treatment (p. 118) is recommended
if cytology (p. 21) is indicative of infection.
96
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V Eosinophilic plaques occur typically on the abdomen or medial
thighs, are well-circumscribed, and severely pruritic (Figure 2-55).
V Eosinophilic (linear) granulomas are nonpruritic, raised, firm,
yellowish, and clearly linear plaques and occur most commonly
on the caudal thighs (Figure 2-56).
Differential diagnoses of both eosinophilic plaques and granulo.
mas include neoplasias and bacterial and fungal granulomas
(Table 2-10). Diagnostic procedures of choice are cytology (p. 21)
and biopsy (p. 38). After the diagnosis has been confirmed, the
underlying cause needs to be identified, if possible, and treated.
Figure 2-53
Indolent ulcer in a 2-year-old female
DSH.
Figure 2-54
Indolent ulcer of the nipple in a 4-year
old female DSH.
Figure 2-55
Eosinophilic plaques in the inguinal
area of a DSH. (Courtesy of Dr. Sonya
Bettenay.)
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
97
Figure 2-56
Linear granuloma in a male &-year-old
DSH.
Table 2-10
Underlying Causes and Recommended Diagnostic Tests
in a Cat with Lesions of the Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
DISEASE
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
TREATMENT
Flea-bite hypersensi tivity
Flea control trial
Flea control (p. 136),
(p. 136)
glucocorticoids
(p. 129), antihistamines
(p. 125), essential fatty
acids (p. 128)
Atopy
Diagnosis based on history,
Allergen-specific
(hypersensitivity to aero-
physical examination and
immunotherapy (p. 123),
allergens such as pollens,
ruling out differential diag-
antihistamines (p. 125),
house dust mites, or mold
moses. Intradermal skin test
essential fatty acids (p.1 28),
spores)
allows formulation of
glucocorticoids (p.129)
immunotherapy.
Food adverse reaction
Elimination diet
Avoidance, antihistamines
(may or may not be aller-
(p. 46)
(p. 125), essential fatty
gic, commonly reaction to
acids (p. 128),
a protein, rarely an addi
glucocorticoids (p.129)
tive, clinically indistin-
guishable from atopy)
Idiopathic eosinophilic
Ruling out possible hypersen-
Glucocorticoids (p. 129),
granuloma (most likely
sitivities
antibiotics (p. 119)
genetic basis)
98
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 2-57
The Catwith Lesions of the Eosinophilic
Granuloma Complex
Cytology
(p.21)
Insect control (p. 48) with or without antimicrobial treatment (p.118)
Remission
Noimprovement
Insect bite
Elimination diet
hypersensitivity
(p. 46)
No change
Remission
Rechallenge
No relapse
Relapse
Skin testing
Relapse
Monitoring
later on
Adverse food
reaction
Atopic
Idiopathic
dermatitis
disease
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
99
The Cat with Nodules
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p. 3)
Y How long has the disease been present and how did it progress? (p.
3
V Are there other clinical signs such as sneezing, coughing, or diar-
rhea? (p. 7)
√ Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses depend primarily on two features: the
number of lesions and whether draining tracts are present or not.
Is there only one lesion? This increases the likelihood of neopla-
sia or a kerion. Or are there multiple lesions? These may be due
to sterile inflammatory diseases, more aggressive neoplastic dis-
ease, or severe infection. The presence of draining tracts
increases the likelihood of foreign bodies, severe bacterial or fun-
galinfection,orsterileinflammatorydisease.
In a cat with nodules, history taking and clinical examination
are followed by microscopic evaluation of impression smears (if
draining tracts are present) and aspirates (in any cat with nod-
ules) (p. 21). In some patients, cytology will reveal an infectious
organism or classic neoplastic cells and thus a diagnosis. In most
patients, cytology will aid in further limiting the list of differen-
tial diagnoses, but a biopsy (p. 38) will be necessary to reach a
diagnosis. With nodular lesions, a complete excision of one or
more nodules should be performed. If draining tracts are present
and/or cytology indicates possible infection, a tissue culture may
be useful as well (p. 43).
The differential diagnoses for feline nodules are listed in Table 2-11.
100
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Poor to excellent depending on the
Fair with complete excision; guarded,
ains aededde m e
individual tumor.
PROGNOSIS
Good
Fair
antibacterial
Complete surgical excision, post-
and/or amphotericin B
 a Cat with Nodules
specific therapy
TREATMENT
Table 2-11
draining tracts. Nose, lips, and claw
Firm nodules with draining fistulae
Varies with individual neoplastic
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
monly around neck, shoulders,
 Nonhealing ulcerated nodules
in
beds maybe affected.
and tailbase
(Figure Z-61)
diseases
L
infection* (ubiquitous, faculta-
 snosueinqns cun uoeueidi
such as Mycobacteria fortuitum,
trauma form grains of compact
(nonbranching bacteria such
granulomatous inflammation;
cause lesions after traumatic
Bacterial pseudomycetoma
colonies surrounded by pyo-
(uncommon infection of
coagulase-positive
Neoplasia*
eign bodies)
rare disease)
DISEASE
Abscesses
(anss
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
101
ns uo supuadap papien oi lie
Guarded to grave
PROGNOSIS
 cal excision.
Guarded
Guarded
Fair
Aq pamonoy uosioxa jesisins api
Antimycotic therapy with azoles,
therapy based on in vitro suscepti.
anti mycotic therapy (p. 1
amphotericin B (p. 131)
TREATMENT
(p. 118, 121)
testing.
102
 Single or multiple, nonpainful and
Papules, nodules, ulcers, and drain.
 pue sien suuep ym sanpen
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
Grains vary in size,
Thick-walled abscesses of the
uapqe ienusa pue squl
and ocular disease
scar tissue.
granules.
ing
o culture through bite wounds
very rare disease in veterinary
Table 2-11 continued 
saiaydoides (os snoinbign]
punoM
-ne si
m  u
cutaneous, or disseminated
veterinary dermatology)
Eumycotic mycetoma
Actinobacillus ligneriesii
nary dermatology)
Actinobacillosis*
Feline Leprosy*
Histoplasmosis
dermatology)
DISEASE
8.
102
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
 Fair,if recognized and treated
Guarded
promptly.
poog
Fair
Fair
 Antimycotic therapy with iodides
131
Alqudaosns ounla ul uo pas
bscesses, antibacterial therapy
or chloramphenicol (p. 118)
or azoles (p. 131)
 Surgical excision
 spontaneously
testing.
E
 Often solitary subcutaneous nod.
ules on nose, trunk, or extremities
-dh sanpou pue 'sanberd 'sa nnded
 Solitary nodules on ventral rump
High fever, depression, anorexia,
Multiple nodules or ulcerated
cally on head and pinnae
possible concurrently
also exist.
Firm,
pestis by
through wound contamination
caused by ubiquitous dimor-
u aseasip towuesun rspunom
humans through contact with
pres-
rodents, or direct infection?
oonosis: Transmission to
Sterile granulomatous and
eterinary dermatology)
(unknown pathogenesis)
mission of infected fleas,
(unknown pathogenesis)
(infection with Yersinia 
dermatology)
 Phaeohyphomycosis*
wound
 Sterile panniculitis
easily possible!
matology
veterinary
6
万
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
103
Nasal swelling caused by
cryptococcosis in a 6-year-
in a 3-year-old castrated
Draining tracts due to
atypical mycobacteria
Thierry Olivry.)
Figure 2-59
Figure 2-60
DSH.
PROGNOSIS
Combi nation anti microbial
TREATMENT
COMMONLYAFFECTEDSITES
A 5-year-old castrated
DSH with nodules and
draining tracts resulting
from atypical mycobac-
unpleasant odor.
Figure 2-58
(very rare in small animal der.
Table 2-11 continued
ratory and digestive lesions)
Tuberculosis*
DISEASE
104
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
2-year-old castrated DSH
Nasal ulceration in a
Feline leprosy in a
Dr. Peter Ihrke.)
Figure 2-62A
Figure 2-63
Pseudomycetoma in a
(Courtesy
of Dr. Peter Ihrke.)
Dr. Peter Ihrke.)
Figure 2-62B
Figure 2-61
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
105
Figure 2-64
The Cat with Nodules
Cytology
(p.21)
No microorganisms,
Diagnostic result
Neutrophils and cocci.
otherwise inconclusive
otherwise inconclusive
Biopsy (p. 38), culture (p.32)
Antibacterial treatment
(p.118)
No resolution
Resolution
Bacterial infection
Biopsy (p.38), culture (p. 32)
(48 hours post antibacterial
treatment)
106
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
The Patient with
Otitis Externa
Otitis externa may be seen with many diseases in conjunction
with other clinical signs, which are helpful in the formulation of
a list of differential diagnoses. This discussion is the approach to
the dog with otitis externa and no other symptoms.
and perpetuating factors in the pathogenesis of otitis externa.
Predisposing factors are independent from the underlying disease
and alone will not cause disease, but will facilitate the patholog
ic process. Conformation, including dense hair in the ear canal.
a long and narrow ear canal, pendulous ears, and climate-related
seasonal factors such as increased temperature and humidity are
examples of predisposing factors.
 Complicating factors occur
only after the primary pathologic process has begun, but contin-
ue to be a problem after the primary disease has been successfully
identified and treated. Examples are otitis media, bacterial or
fungal infections, and chronic proliferative changes due to
inflammation. These complicating factors need to be treated
independently. The most common primary factors are listed in
Table 2-12.
Key Questions
V How old was this patient when clinical signs were first recognized?
(p.3)
√ Is the disease seasonal? (p. 3)
/ What do you feed the animal? Was a special diet used in the past?
(p.7)
V Are there any other animals in the household? (p. 8)
√ Was the disease treated before? If so, which drugs were used and
how successful was treatment? (p. 8)
V When was the last medication given? (p. 9)
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
107
Good for well-being of
Excellent, if offending
pi (aie) si (uid
tinued management,
erwise fair with contin-
PROGNOSIS
chance of cure.
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
respond to top-
Allergen-specific immuno.
Avoidance, antihistamines
: topical glucocorti-
 topical glucocorticoids.
cally, although many
ical miticidal therapy
TREATMENT
123)
histamines (p. 1
ivermectin (p.
therapy(P.
patients will
fatty acids
Removal
coids.
Diagnosis based on history,
pended in mineral oil; miti-
 26), sarcoptes treatment
or serum test for allergen-
offending allergens and
Otoscopic examination.
 Otoscopic examination
 Elimination diet (p. 46)
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Table 2-12
immunotherapy.
49).
noses.
(p. 49)
pinnae affected as well as (or
In some patients a seasonal
Jo pue eaeun aleida
ex terna may be caused by
Unilateral otitis externa
debris in the ear canals
worse than) the canal
adverse reactions
Differential Diagnoses: !
COMMENTS
acute onset
atopy
u Ap e
(hypersensitivity to aero-
allergens such as pollens,
tion (very common cause,
(may or may not be aller-
Otodectes cynotis infesta-
 highly contagious dis
scabiei var. canis in dogs
Food adverse reaction
mals and cats)
Foreign body
DISEASE
Atopy*
108
to survive adrenalecto-
adenocarcinomas have
tumors were reported
and others only days.
Fair with appropriate
longer than 10 years
induced pemphigus)
Good, if completely
 months. Adrenal
treatment, poor for
anp idaxa) an
excised and no
adenomas.
 metastases
Iatrogenic form: discontinue
of affected gland for adreno.
 Surgical excision (vertical
glucocorticoid administra-
Immunosuppression
 cortical neoplasia
zole for PDH
(p. 141)
ear canal)
leutrophilia, lymphopenia
), radi-
ographs (hepatomegaly,
(adrenal
 adrenal glands), low-
Otoscopic examination
(specific gravity 
SAP
6
 Subtle clinical signs may be
Inner surface of pinnae typi.
 Unilateral, older animals
mation due to pemphigus
antibodies against antigens
induced or paraneoplastic)
(ceruminous gland adeno-
 glucocorticoids either
the former more common
Hyperadrenocorticism*
tical neoplasms in 15%)
(immune-mediated skin
disease characterized by
the intercellular con-
mas-both types in cats,
Pemphigus foliaceus*
Neoplasia*
(saop u!
古
.5
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
109
all patients stay in
complete and con-
stant remission
PROGNOSIS
plementation.
for cure
 corticosteroids
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Biopsy (p. 38)
ulation test)
free
COMMONLY AFFECTED SITES
therapy of secondary ear
with topical medication.
infection
Table 2-12 continued
time and thus hyperprolif.
seba-
re trait with decreased
 and follicu-
nutritional deficiencies)
Idiopathic seborrhea*
 to inflammation, 
ceous glands,,
DISEASE
ary
110
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Figure 2-66
Bettenay).
Figure 2-67
Pinnal erythema, scaling, and ero-
Dr. Sonya Bettenay).
Figure 2-65
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
111
Figure 2-68
Identification of the Primary Disease in the Patient
with Otitis Externa
Otoscopic examination
Mass or
Inflammation
foreign body
and debris
Young animal
Older animal
Surgical or
manual remova
Thyroid testing. urine
cortisol creatinine ratio
postantimicrobial
Depending on
treatment (p. 118)
patient and owner
Nondiagnostic
Diagnostic
Biopsy (p.38)
Elimination diet
(p.46)and antimicrobial
 Further testing
treatment (p. 118)
or treatment as
indicated
Remission
Rechallenge
Relapse
No change
Relapse
Intradermal skin
Adverse food
Monitoring
lateron
testing, serum IgE
reaction
testing (p. 42)
Atopy
112
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Cytology is essential in any dog or cat with otitis externa; exami-
nation must be separate in the left and right ear canals as infec-
tive microorganisms may be different from one ear to the other.
standing otitis externa and concurrent otitis media, organisms in
the middle ear may differ from the those isolated in the external
ear. Antimicrobial treatment in the ear canal is most effective
topically and determined by cytology (p. 21) and in vitro suscep-
tibility (p. 42 and 46). Repeat cytology examinations during
treatment is essential and changes in the otic flora may necessi-
tate changing medications.
Otitis media is best treated with systemic medication. Many dogs
with chronic otitis externa and otitis media may not respond to
treatment because of severe accumulation of purulent or waxy
material in the ear canals. An ear flush under anesthesia may be
needed followed by a new attempt of topical and concurrent sys-
temic therapy. The tympanum may rupture prior to flushing or
during flushing because in an inflamed ear the tympanum is
much more fragile than normal. Frequently there are few alter-
natives for antimicrobial treatment in these patients. Sometimes
they may have to receive potentially ototoxic topical medica
tion. Be sure to discuss this possibility with owners before begin-
ning therapy. Regular cytologic examinations are a precondition
for successful management of patients with otitis externa. They
are not specifically mentioned in Figure 2-68. Therapeutic trials
and tests for primary diseases may be influenced by concurrent
topical medication and thus must be planned, executed, and
interpreted with care. Chronic long-standing otitis externa is
extremely frustrating for patients, clients, and veterinarians, and
patients may benefit from referral to a veterinary dermatologist.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
113
3
Section
Treatments
114
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
In this section, I will summarize the most common treatment
modalities, their formulations (which may vary in different parts
of the world), indications, and doses. Given that detailed discus-
sion of individual drugs, their mechanisms of action, pharmaco-
kinetics, and protocols is beyond the scope of this text, further
reading may be required. See Recommended Readings.
Drugs marked with an (*) and a colored screen are potentially
dangerous and the clinician inexperienced with these medications
may consider offering referral to a veterinary specialist or seeking
further advice from a colleague with more knowledge about that
particular agent.
Shampoo Therapy
of Various Skin
Conditions
Shampoo therapy can provide effective management of dermatoses
with both medical and cosmetic presenting complaints (Table 3-1).
There are few adverse effects associated with shampoo therapy,
although they are recognized. However, shampoo therapy is sympto-
matic treatment;it rarely"
"cures"a dermatosis
Prescribing a shampoo involves selecting the proper shampoo for both
the dermatosis and the client. Shampoo manufacturers have under
taken considerable research and development in order to produce for-
mulations, which lather well, have an appealing smell, offer little irri-
tation, and serve their intended purposes.
In addition to selecting the appropriate shampoo, the veterinarian's
instructions will have a significant impact on the efficacy. The fre-
quency of bathing and duration of skin contact time will influence
the obtained result. A 1O-minute contact time is generally recom-
mended. This is a long time for the owner of a fidgety, shivering dog
to wait and it will frequently be cut short! Techniques to improve
contact time include:
V Take a clock into the bathing area and time 10 minutes accurately.
V Use the time for patting and bonding.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
115
V Massage the skin for the full 1O minutes; it will usually be enjoy-
able for the dog and occupy both pet and owner.
√ Take the dog outside to play ball or go for a walk with the
soap still on (if climate permits).
V Rinse the shampoo off thoroughly for at least 5 to 10 minutes.
The frequency of shampooing will vary with severity and type of
the disease process. In general, the more severe the disease, the
more frequently bathing is indicated.
The major reasons for failure of shampoo therapy are
1. lack of client compliance (frequency and/or duration
of application)
2. incorrect selection of shampoo for the disease process
3. shampoo irritation
116
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
 FREQUENCY OF ADMINISTRATION
q 1-14 days
q 7-14 days
q7-14 days
q 7-14 days
q 3-14 days
q3-14 days
q3-14days
q2-14 days
Selected Shampoo Types for the Treatment of Skin Disease
Bacterial infections, sebaceous adeni.
 Seborrheic dermatitis, seborrhea oleosa
 Seborrhea sicca, seborrheic dermatitis
environmental contamination in
patients with fungal infection
Pruritic skin disease, dry skin
 Superficial pyoderma
Bacterial infections.
with fungal infection
tis, demodicosis
INDICATIONS
3-1
Table
or drying, may be used in dogs and cats
    
Keratolytic, mildly anti-inflammatory,
Ap uim seop ui suiseaiap pue a
Antibacterial, antifungal, not inacti-
Degreasing (and thus drying), kera-
turizer must be used after the sham-
Antifungal, antibacterial, virucidal,
lowed with a moisturizer. Not to be
Hydrates the stratum corneum
terial and mildly antifungal.
and potentially irritating!
in different studies
COMMENTS
used in cats!
SHAMPOO TYPE
Colloidal oatmeal
 Benzoyl peroxide
Chlorhex idi ne
Ethyl lactate
Salicylic acid
lodine
Sulfur
Copyright @ 20o0 Teton NewMedia 
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
117
Treatment of Bacterial
Infection
V Antibiotics are frequently used in veterinary dermatology,
because many conditions are associated with secondary bacterial
infection. Dogs with chronic allergies, immune-mediated der
matoses, or endocrinopathies frequently develop secondary pyo.
dermas that exacerbate these conditions and necessitate antibac-
terial treatment (Table 3-2).
/ Not all available antibiotics are useful for skin infections so
that spectrum of activity as well as pharmacology of the different
antibacterial drugs has to be considered.
 The overwhelming majority of skin infections in the dog
and cat is caused by Staphylococcus intermedius. Mixed infections
can involve organisms such as Escherichia coli or Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, which usually develop concurrently with most
patients' primary agent, S. intermedius.
 Proper dosage and proper duration are important for the suc-
cess of antibacterial therapy. Antibiotics should be given for at
least 3 weeks or longer or until at least 1 week after resolution of
clinical signs. Relapses are common in patients on short courses
of pharmacotherapy or those receiving medications at low
dosages! Deep infections may take 6 to 12 weeks to resolve.
/ Pyodermas can, at least initially, be treated empirically. If appro.
priate therapy does not resolve the condition, taking a culture is
indicated(p.32).
V Each sample for culture and sensitivity should be accompanied
of the cytology, as growth of different microorganisms does not
indicate necessarily that they are present in significant numbers
in vivo.
118
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
mg/kg q 12 h
h
y gbay/u
0
100-07
rganisms of the family
Many
Infections with gram-
Bacterial superficial
 Infections with most
positive bacteria.
bacteria.
INDICATIONS
Nocardia and
aeruginosa).
Infections 
the
pyoderma
Small Animal Dermatology
positive
ram
mosa).
OS
not
polyarthritis, bone mar-
common than with
polyarthritis, bone mar-
row suppression), hepa-
toxic, gastrointestinal
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Keratoconjunctivitis
sicca, drug reactions
Keratoconjunctivitis
sicca, drug reactions
hypothyroidism with
Vomiting, diarrhea,
Vomiting, diarrhea
fever,
ex tended use
erythromycin)
symptoms,
nausea
2
3
pattern varies,
1.n
s relatively quick-
hamsters, and guinea pigs!
5
high in
esistance
Antibioticsi
Not for Doberman
 Doberman
6
Give without food.
Give without food.
tates,
nexpensive! Re
COMMENTS
ketaconazole
istance
Australia
United :
lot forl
5
.5
Selected
MO
5
以
0mg tablets,
tablets,
120
ml,
FORMULATION
mg/40
/820
syrup.
tablets,&
syrup.
and
sulfamethox azole
Erythromycin
sulfadiazine
Lincomycin
DRUG
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
119
2mg/kg q 8 h
48 b 8y/8u
q 8-12h (D, C)
 20.30 mg/kg
20
chetes and gram-posi-
tive and gram-negative
produce penicillinase.
Iand deep
pyodermas
pyodermas
Infections with 
sensitive cocci
INDICATIONS
 Superficial :
bacterial
bacterial 
cocci,
.9
with oral acdministration,
hypersensitivity reactions
Vomiting, diarrhea, aller-
Vomiting and diarrhea,
very rarely tachypnea or
diarrhea;
Gastrointestinal signs
ADVERSE EFFECTS
blood
allergic reactions
gic reactions
pue
10
Vomiting
scrasias.
 sensitivity in vitro
Used commonly in veteri-
 u! pasn Ajuouuos noN 
resistant to
Not commonly used i
vitro resistance of
results in vivo. May 
more efficacious with
h administration.
gram-positive cocci
nary dermatology
hoststrainsof
COMMENTS
amoxycillin.
penicillin
but:
strai
MO
8b
Z
tablets, 25 mg/ml and 50
 mg/ml oral suspension.
 62.5/250
751
125, 250, 500 mg
FORMULATION
50 mg/ml syrup
15257800
1000 1
Table 3-2 continued
12.5/50 1
500 mg,
syrup.
tablets,
009
1000
 Penicillin V
Amoxycillin
amox ycillin
Cloxacillin
Cephalexin
Cefadroxil
DRUG
120
Copyright @2000TetonNewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
/animal
combina-
for immune
250
mg/kg q 24 h (C)
忆
with
8b
/kgq
combined
0
8.
uy
with
ouu
hediated
0
pasn
250-50
12h (
6
nami
5
8
5
的
一
口
q
 the
iscoid
organisms,
Actinomyces
staphy-
mycobacteria,
staphy-
nematosus,
I superficial
oSus.
 gram-negative
-negative
at
Au
erythemz
with
cocci,
with
eryth
oderma,
fections
acterial:
naerobic
Nocardia,
Infections
organisms
fections
positive 
organisms
lococci, 1
5
3
6
 discol-
puppies
discol-
hepatotoxicity
pup-
 occur in
may occur in
 phototoxic
,vomiting,
could
.5
vomiting and 
animals
erosionsi
dehydrated animals
Cartilage erosions i
 of teeth 
 suois
occur.
Aeu
reactlons
kittens,
Skin rashes, 
otentially 
Crystalluria
dehydrated
otentially
Crystalluria I
古
reactions,
ausea,
diarrhea.
ausea,
artilage
toxic
and
6a
pue
6a
2
N
concurrently
sup-
f che irmrmune systern and
ainstanaero-
immature animal
istance
8
uou!
 oral
particularly
6
cytokine production
dermatology used 
losporin,i
and
“10
agents.
Corganisms.
give
Ineffective :
(1n220
abetic
8
250 mg, 500 mg capsules
mg
mg,
mg/ml, 
suspension
1
粥
5
 Clindamycin
Enrofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin
Tetracycline
Doxycyline
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
121
Apply to affected
10
1for
0
licking area 
minutes (D,(
Infections with staphy.
lococci, mycobacteria,
most gram-negative
Localized superficial
bacterial infections,
INDICATIONS
feline acne.
organisms
ADVERSE EFFECTS
potentially occur.
Not in immature animals!
obe organisms. Resistance
Effective against gram-
COMMENTS
FORMULATION
 2% ointment
Table 3-2 continued
tablets
Marbofloxacin
Mupirocin
DRUG
122
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Treatment of Pruritus
Allergen-specific
Immunotherapy
the196Os. Since then several studies have been undertaken to
evaluate the efficacy of allergy shots in dogs and cats. Despite the
use of different allergens (aqueous versus aluminum-precipitated)
and different protocols, the overall success rate was comparable
and varied from 45% to 60% in studies with a follow-up of 1 year
or longer to 70% to 100% in studies with a shorter duration.
antigens to which it has shown an allergic reaction. This exposure
starts at low concentrations that are increased gradually over time
and after reaching a maintenance dose, are either continued indef-
initely or slowly tapered.
Considerations before Beginning
Allergen-specific Immunotherapy
Clinically and relevant to daily practice, several key issues need
to be discussed with owners before they consider allergen-specific
immunotherapy or "allergy shots"
V The success rate: About 20% of the patients will do extremely
well and thrive with no additional therapy; 4o% of the patients
do well, even though occasional additional treatments such as
antihistamines, fatty acids and/or antibiotics are needed. Owners
are happy with the improvement achieved and consider the
allergy shots worthwhile, even though therapy may be lifelong.
Another 20% of patients improve, but the degree of improve-
ment is unsatisfactory. And in 20% of the patients therapy has
no influence on the disease process.
V The cost: This may vary depending on the country of practice,
the dog's allergies, the vaccines used, and the dose rates needed.
Veterinary dermatologists are a good source of information for
approximate expense.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
123
V The time to improvement: First improvement may be seen as
early as 4 weeks into therapy and as late as 12 months after start-
ing the allergy shots. On average, improvement is expected after
between 4 and 6 months.
V The duration of treatment: A minority of owners may discon-
tinue their dogs' immunotherapy after 2 years, with their pets
being permanently cured and symptom free. Other dogs, however,
will require lifelong therapy!
V The involvement: Atopic dogs are "high maintenance" and as
such need constant care, most likely at least initially regular
rechecks and concurrent medication. Allergy shots are not an
easy way out but at this point the best of many available treat-
ments, all of which involve long-term administration of medica-
tions of some sort.
Points to Remember if You
Have Patients on Immunotherapy
 Glucocorticoids may be given on an occasional basis at anti-
inflammatory dosage levels without interfering with therapy.
V Antihistamines, fatty acids, and antimicrobials do not inter-
fere with immunotherapy so that they may be, and often are,
usedconcurrently.
deteriorates, always evaluate for infection. Yeast and bacteria are
common complicating factors secondary to these allergies, which
can cause dramatic increases in pruritus. Cytology (p. 21) will
identify cocci, rods, yeasts and inflammatory cells and thereby
guide antimicrobial therapy.
V If no infection is detected, antihistamines or glucocorticoids
can be used to regulate the patient's pruritus.
V If there is a regular increase in pruritus after the injection, the
dose and frequency may need to be adjusted. Decreased doses
may be helpful.
V If there is a regular increase in pruritus before the injection
that is greatly improved by the injection of allergen extract, the
time interval between the injections is probably too long and
needs to be shortened. The dose may also be decreased in some
of these patients without decreased efficacy.
124
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V If there is no response to allergen-specific immunotherapy
after 4 to 6 months, I recommend that you contact your nearest
veterinary dermatologist for advice while there is still sufficient
vaccine left to change the dose and frequency of the injections
by adjusting them to the needs of that particular patient. Many
patients need an approach suiting their particular requirements
and the help of a veterinarian experienced in immunotherapy
may be of great benefit.
I sincerely believe that allergen-specific immunotherapy is cur-
rently the best available treatment for canine atopic dermatitis.
but it will only be successful in most atopic animals if owners
and veterinarians have realistic expectations and are prepared to
put in significant effort over the period that sometimes extends
over many months. Only then will maximal benefit be achieved!
In as much as the first months on immunotherapy may be drain-
ing for owner and veterinarian, consider offering referral to a
veterinary dermatologist, particularly if you are not experienced
in this therapy.
Antihistamines
V Antihistamines are useful adjunctive agents in the manage-
ment of pruritic patients. The classical antihistamines act by
blocking H1 -receptors. First-generation antihistamines also have
an anticholinergic, sedative, and local anaesthetic effect.
Second-generation antihistamines penetrate less through the
blood brain barrier or have a low affinity for the brain compared
with the action on peripheral Hl-receptors. Thus they are effec-
tive yet produce less sedation (Table 3-3).
adverse effects. Drowsiness is the most common finding and may
decrease after 2 to 3 days of therapy. Thus, it may be worthwhile
continuing treatment for several days before final evaluation.
Less common are gastrointestinal signs. Acute poisoning follow
to the anticholinergic properties of terfenadine and cyprohepta-
dine, these drugs should not be used in patients with severe car-
diovascular disease, since they may cause hypertension.
V The necessity of frequent administration (two to three times
daily) and the high cost of some antihistamines limit their long
term use in many patients, especially larger dogs.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
125
V A further shortcoming in dogs is the relatively low success
rate, which varies between 5% and 30%, depending on dosage
and drug used.
f Cats are much more likely to respond to antihistamines
than dogs. However, administering oral medication on a long
term basis may be challenging in this species.
/ If a patient responds to antihistamine therapy and the owner
is willing to maintain the animal on it, antihistamines represent
safe long-term treatment that is preferable to glucocorticoids!
V Antihistamines in humans are not used to treat present symp-
toms but to prevent onset of symptoms. Thus, administration
should not be intermittent assuming the same holds true in ani-
mals.
 The potential success rate can be increased by trying several
different antihistamines sequentially because patients may be
responsive to one antihistamine but not to another.
 Antihistamines have been reported to be effective in lower-
ing the corticosteroid dose, even if they did not help the animal
as a single therapeutic agent.
V Because the withdrawal time of antihistamines before an
intradermal skin test is much shorter than that of glucocorti-
coids, they can be used to relieve pruritus during the preparation
time where the latter are contraindicated.
126
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
1-2 mg/kg q 12 h (D,C)
mg/kg q 8-12 h (D, C)
5-20 mg 9.12-24h (D)
0.25 mg/kg q 24 h (D, C)
mg/kg q 12 h (D, C)
2.5-10 mg q 8-12 h (D)
30.60 mg q 12 h (D)
30-120 mg q 12 h (D)
(@) 4 zlg b au g-
-4 mg q 12 h (C)
0.5-1 mg q 12 h (D)
2
2
2
3
Do not administer concurrently with ketoconazol, itraconazol,
Do not administer concurrently with ketoconazol, itraconazol,
 Inhibits exocytosis of eosinophils in humans
 Cyclosporine, erythromycin, or terfenadine.
erythromycin, cyclosporine, or terfenadine
lnexpensive, potentially sedating
Inexpensive, potentially sedating
Inexpensive, potentially sedating
increase serum levels significantly.
Table 3-3
COMMENTS
Sedating
1 mg tablets, 0.05 mg/ml syrup
, 120 mg tablets, 6 mg/ml
-uadsns [u/su z 'saqen Su 0]
 mg tablets, 0.5 mg/5 ml syrup
10 mg coated tablets, 1 mg/ml
10 mg, 25 mg coated tablets
10 mg tablet, 1 mg/ml syrup 
 Z mg tablets, 6 mg tablets 
10 mg, 25 mg tablets 
2.5 mg, 5 mg tablets
FORMULATION
4 mg tablets
4 mg tablets
suspension
09
syrup
LOIS
Dexchlorpheniramine
Chlorpheniramine
Cyproheptadine
Promethazine
Amitryptilline
Trimeprazine
Foxofenachin
Hydroxyzine
Clemastine
Terfenadine
Loratidine
Cetirizine
Astemizol
Azatidine
DRUG
Copyright @ 2oo0 Teton NewMedia
888-770-3165
www.veterinarywire.com
127
Essential Fatty Acids
V Essential fatty acids (EFAs) are important for epidermal barrier
function, as components of cell membranes, and as the precursors
of inflammatory mediators.
V Supplementation with specific EFAs, especially linoleic acid
(in sunflower and safflower oil), gamma-linolenic acid (in
evening primrose oil) and eicosapentanoic acid (in cold water
marine fish oil), can have anti-inflammatory effects. Linoleic
acid is needed for maintenance of stratum corneum barrier func-
tion, limits transepidermal water loss and is thus better suited for
the treatment of scaling (Table 3-4).
         h   s
V It may take several weeks of supplementation until clinical
effects become evident.
V In essence, EFA supplementation decreases production of
inflammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes in favor of an
increased production of noninflammatory or antiinflammatory
prostaglandins and leukotrienes.
VAdjunctive therapy with essential fatty acids can be beneficial
in a patient with allergies.
 Fatty acids have been reported to be effective in lowering the
corticosteroid dose, even if they did not help the animal as a sin-
gle therapeutic agent.
 Start with a small dose to avoid possible diarrhea and gradu-
ally increase the dose.
V Ideal doses and w-6/w-3 ratios are a subject of continuing
active research.
Table 3-4
Essential Fatty Acids and Their Doses
ESSENTIAL FATTY ACID
DosE
Eicosapentaenoic acid
20 mg/kg q 24 h
Linoleic acid
20-50 mg/kg q 24 h
128
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
Glucocorticoids
V Glucocorticoids are very commonly used in the treatment of
skin conditions (Table 3-5).
V At anti-inflammatory dosage, they decrease inflammatory cell
activity and migration.
V Corticosteroids are effective in most patients with atopic disease
and resolve the symptoms at least initially on reasonably low
dosages. Flea-allergic animals will also often respond to these drugs,
although typically at slightly higher dosages.
V Glucocorticosteroids can be considered the treatment of choice
in animals with a mild seasonal pruritus of 1 to 2 months duration
that is controlled with anti-inflammatory dosages (<l mg/kg) of
prednisolone every other day
V Every other day therapy is definitively preferred over daily drug
administration because as it is thought to lower the chances of
iatrogenichyperadrenocorticism.
/ I use prednisolone at anti-inflammatory doses for severely affect
ed dogs after skin testing and short term to break the itch-scratch
cycle. However, the need to increase the dosage over time to con-
trol the clinical signs in most of these patients, combined with the
potentially severe long-term side effects make glucocorticoids a
poor long-term choice for atopic patients.
V Adverse effects include polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia,
increased susceptibility to infection, and other well-known symp-
toms of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. The most commonly
encountered infections affect the urinary tract, skin, and lungs.
V Drugs should always be tapered to the lowest effective dose.
 Frequently, the dose necessary to control clinical signs can be
decreased when adjunctive therapy is used. Fatty acids and antihis-
tamines have been reported to be effective in lowering the corti-
costeroid dose, even if they did not help the animal as a single
therapeutic agent. Regular topical therapy (e.g., shampoos) may be
another means of decreasing the need for systemic glucocorticoids.
 I recommend to the owners of my atopic patients treated with
glucocorticoids the lowest possible dose, on which the animal is
mildly itchy but not uncomfortable. If no pruritus is present, the
dose used is too high.
 The glucocorticoid dose needed with individual patients often
varies seasonally
Copyright2000TetonNewMedia888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
129
(  
0.4-0.8 mg/kg q 24-48 h orally
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q 48-72 h orally
(D), 0.2-0.5 mg/ intramuscularly
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q 48-72 h orally
(D); 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM or subcu-
0.5-1 mg/kg q 24-48 h (D)
1.-2 mg/kg q 24-48 h (C)
0.5-1 mg/kg q 24-48 h (D)
1-2 mg/kg q 24-48 h (C)
(D); 0.1-0.25 mg/(C),
 Selected Glucocorticoids and Their Dosage
(D), intramuscularly
taneously SC (D,C)
100 mg tablets, 20 mg/ml, 40
 3 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml, 40 mg/ml 
Table 3-5
1 mg, 5 mg, 20 mg, 25 mg,
Z mg, 4 mg, 8 mg tablets,
 mg/ml Met. acetate
0.5, 1.5, 4 mg tablets,
1 mg, 5 mg, 20 mg,
 2 mg/ml, 4 mg/ml
FORMULATION
 50 mg tablets
50 mg tablets
Methylprednisolone
 Dex amethasone
Triamcinolone
Prednisolone
resolution.
Prednisone
DRUG
130
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 8
888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
mg/kg q 12 h (D,C)
1 71 b y/01-5
for Malasseria infec-
2.5-10
for
h
Gris-PEG
I0
2
Teratogenic! Vomiting,
bone marrow suppres-
vascular failure in cats;
scaling and dry
vomiting, diarrhea,
Vomiting, diarrhea,
ocular and nasal dis-
cholangiohepati tis
Anorexia, nausea
Anorexia, nausea,
(quite common),
 SIDE EFFECTS
hepatotoxicity
depression,
sion
Malassezia-related infec-
sporotrichosis, nocardio-
Malasseria and Candida
, dermatophy.
toses, systemic mycoses
SystemicAntimycotic Agents
Dermatophytosis
INDICATIONS
 Sporotrichosis
infections,
Table 3-6
Administered with fatty
ketoconazoleserumlevels.
slow increase over several
amines, phenytoin, or oral
ifampin may decrease
Administer with food! If
decrease itraconazole
days may minimize
adverse effects.
COMMENTS
Give with food
serum levels.
meal
R
125 mg and 500 mg
FORMULATION
 200 mg tablet
100 mg capsule
tablets
 Potassium iodide
Griseofulvin
Ketoconazole
Itraconazole
DRUG
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
131
(a) syam z 1og
 dex trose every
meous administra-
 mg/kg IV in
400 ml of 0.45%
cumulative dose
f 10-25 mg/kg.
mg/kg q 12 h (
5
q
 nausea, hepatotoxicity
Nephrotoxicity, ane.
Vomiting, diarrhea,
SDE EFFECTS
hypokalemia
Vomiting
Blastomycosis, histoplas-
ketoconazole for blasto.
mycosis, histoplasmosis,
mosis, cryptococcosis,
In combination with
Dermatophytosis
oral candidiasis
 INDICATIONS
sidered. Incompatible with
limited promising infor-
(SND) 
5
 phenytoin
 ag  u p
Fairly new and costly
 be decreased
erum levels. Increases
Relatively toxic, thus 
Penetrates into
nervous system
COMMENTS
other drugs
needs to 
atients
B
FORMULATION
 substance/bottle
250 mg tablet
 50-mg dry,
Table 3-6 continued 
 Ampotericin B*
Terbinafine
Fluconazole
DRUG
132
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
at 6 μg/kg monthly. Oral
administrations l week
possibly with Cheyletiella. Contact animals must be treated for all ectoparasites except Demodex and chig-
administration (with
0 
weeks after the first
cattle administered
gers, but, if dogs are affected with scabies, cats may not have to be treated and vice versa (Table 3-7)
scabies.
dem
coma,respiratory arrest
SIDE EFFECTS
administration: Canine
 INDICATIONS
Canine scabies
Table 3-7
Idiosyncratic toxicities
on day 5 to identify
from 50 μg/kg on day
efore severe adverse
most common in
COMMENTS
effects occur.
(often given orally to
small animals),10
mg/ml equine oral
FORMULATION
solution
 Ivermectin
DRUG
133
after the first negative
parts water, apply as
1 part to 32
negative scraping.
0
10-15 mg/kg 
Dilute 1
every
7
+
4
glycemia, hypotension
hypothermia, hyper.
 SIDE EFFECTS
Very safe drug
Very safe drug
Very safe drug
Heartworm prevention,
scabies, demodicosis
cheyletiellosis,scabies
andOtodectes cynotis
Cheyletiellosis, sca-
festation.Feline
Flea infestation
INDICATIONS
demodicosis
infestation
All household animals
lufenuron for effective
cycle, no significant
Animal must not get
Animals should not
be rinsed when wet.
 Safe for even puppies
adulticidal activity.
people
COMMENTS
Fairly costly
Asthmatic 
and kittens
the rinse.
135mg,
97.8% sulfurated lime
FORMULATION
tablets (dogs), 
10.6 ml, 50 ml
2.3 mg, 5.75 1
concentrate
Table 3-7 continued
solution
tablets
(cats).
一
Milbemycin
Lufenuron
Lyme sulfur
Amitraz
DRUG
oxime
134
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
:4-6 ml/kg q 2-12
Apply once
Use q 24.72 h (D, C)
() skep OI-e b asn 
45
4
9.
1025
6-12 mg/kg 
(D)
4 ml (D) >
:U0-10d
monthly
pray:
u
8
the 1
4.
08
一
2
peraes-
ntraindicated in
Ptyalism, tremors,
ataxia, vomiting,
ataxia, vomiting,
Focal alopecia
dyspnea
Ptyalism, 1
dyspnea
rabbits
Tem
hypersensitivi-
lea-bite hypersensitiv.
heartwormprevention,
roundworm, and hook-
lea-bite hypersensi-
 Flea-bite hypersensi-
infestation,scabies,
Canine flea-bite
Flea-bite h
tivity
tivity
E
Cosmetically appealing,
 toxici-
 salivation
toxicity
but
ou sop ranem ci as
interfere with efficacy.
rat time of writing
may discolor
pray more effective
furniture.
requent shampoo
SE
before application, 
well：
well
6
的
LO
adulticide.
Ivent
lanba
tion,
ther
.5
.5
3！
Y
R
 100 and
I powders at
9.7%
ml,
tubes.
ml tubes)
ml,
6.8
一
06
4
Imidacloprid
Selamectin
Permethrin
Pyrethrin
Fipronil
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
135
Insect Control Trials and
Individual Management
of Patients with Flea-bite
Hypersensitivity
Flea control trials
V Treatment recommendations will vary significantly with indi-
vidual situations. Confirmed flea-bite hypersensitivity, suspected
    s     
but have some fleas, are treated very differently.
V Reasonably safe and effective products are available
(Table 3-7). As veterinarians, we are in the best position to
advise clients on a flea-control program tailored to their specific
needs that considers their personality and life style as well as
their pet's little peculiarities.
 A major reason for failure of flea control programs is owner
compliance. They are either unwilling, not educated properly,
too careless, or simply not physically able to do what we ask
them to do for whatever reason. Choosing the right protocol and
educating owners properly, taking the time and possibly using
nursing staff, brochures, and message boards will greatly increase
your chance of success.
W With all topical products, the first application should be
administered in the clinic by the veterinarian or the veterinary
technician/nurse to demonstrate the correct procedure to the
owner.
uct, the question is thus not if, but rather when. In essence, we
speed up evolution and create resistant fleas by putting pressure
on the population when using products for flea control.
However, there are ways to delay this development of resistance.
The first possibility is to combine different flea products, as it is
much less likely that an individual flea gets resistant to two drugs
at the same time. This approach is called integrated flea control
and is becoming more popular all over the world. The second
possibility is to switch products quickly when signs of resistance
occur and kill the resistant flea with another effective product
before it has time to multiply in big numbers.
136
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
V Suspected flea-bite hypersensitivity: Aggressive flea control is
needed for 4 to 6 weeks. If there is no improvement, we most
likely do not deal with flea-bite hypersensitivity. With signifi
cant improvement or remission, we established a diagnosis and
    i ss   
such a trial, we usually recommend the frequent use of an adulti.
cide in combination with an insect growth regulator in the envi-
ronment to quickly lower the flea pressure (Tables 3-8 and 3-9).
V Confirmed flea-bite hypersensitivity: Ideally, we recommend
an insect growth regulator/insect development inhibitor on a
permanent basis (systemically, topically or in the environment)
and an adulticide as needed (Tables 3-8 and 3-9). The second
option is an adulticide only, in which case we need to switch
products very quickly at the first sign of resistance. However, as
adulticides are tapered slowly to identify the longest possible
interval in between applications, recurrences may indicate insuf.
ficient frequency of application rather than resistance.
V No flea-bite hypersensitivity present: In these cases, we do
not recommend flea control because permanent flea exposure
may be less likely to induce flea-bite hypersensitivity than off.
and-on flea control by an owner who is not pressed into compli.
ance by an itchy pet. If the client does want to start some sort of
flea control, insect growth regulators or development inhibitors
arerecommended.
Mosquito-bite trial
The safest and most thorough mosquito-bite trial in cats with
papules and crusted papules on nose, pinnae or foot pads is to
keep the patient indoors for 2 weeks. When there is no expo-
sure to mosquitoes, the disease regresses rapidly. However, in
cats used to outdoors this option may not be viable.
Alternatively, exposure is decreased when outdoor activities are
limited and cats are trained to come in before dawn by feeding
them in the late afternoon. In addition, a mosquito repellent
q patde aq  ads ad s q si ui as r s
wetting a cloth and wiping the feet and head daily before the
cat goes out.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com 137
corners
s and furniture, but areas
most important. Indicated with frequent vis-
The insecti-
intensive, but insecticide is deposited only
intensive, but insecticide is deposited only
pet
are
pet
and
at the start of an insect-control trial.
the start of an insect control trial.
,Advantages, and Disadvantages of Selected Flea Control Products
cover more than Z rooms/can.
cover more than Z rooms/can.
de stays on shelves
COMMENTS
derneath
control.
DISADVANTAGES
Work-intensive
Table
Comparatively safe and
effective, rapid onset of 
Comparatively safe and
effective, rapid onset of
ADVANTAGES
Insect growth regulators/development inhibitors
Convenient,
action
action.
ment of allergic pet's
 dry environments.
Administration,
 ADMINISTRATION
Indoor spray q 6 m
q6 m (C).
.5
Methoprene
Lufenuron
DRUG
138
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
weather
dde mau aiaq sip z aue coduus
 effecs.
tration in animals on lufenuron directly
not recommended.
mals, viable egg produc-
. depending on prod.
No repelling action,
effec tive for less than
Not water proof, no
monthly application
bite
Vork-intensive,
possible.
1oi speau 
one day
tion
lea
ties,
Z
E
convenient, because used
Convenient, rapid onset
Water-proof (but not
only every Z-4 weeks
weeks, easy to apply
used only every 2-4
safe
action,
knock-out
古
2-8 week, spot-on
mg/kg as a spray distrib.
sq 1-2 d or as
100 mg/ml
Tablets
needed
口
Adulticides
Imidacloprid
 Nitenpyram
Pyrethrin
Fipronil
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
139
Soak animal with sprays (pressure pump
Too new to comment at time of writing.
Varying depending on individual product up to q
* In any flea control trial adulticides are combined with an insect growth regulator used in the environment at the beginning
 SUSPECTED FLEA-BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
 Not used for insect control trials 
 Not used for insect control trials 
COMMENTS
haired dogs).
q 7-14 d for 4-6 weeks*
q 7-14 d for 4-6 weeks*
q 1-2 d for 4-6 weeks*
2-3 d for 4-6 weeks*
q 14 d for 4-6 weels*
-pord uo supuadap 'sa
Too new to comment at
monthly application
DISADVANTAGES
Work-intensive,
time of writing
CONFIRMED FLEA-BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY*
Table 3-9
Varying depending on individual product up to
 0n dn ienpod penpaipu ue Supuadap suie 
 ainsodxa paieadsns aiopeq no suais 1ea
 Repelling action, quick
Easy to use, cosmetically
ADVANTAGES
knock-out.
q4-12 weeks
q4weeks
q4 weeks
744 mg in 1 ml as a spot
q7-14d
7-14 d
q4week
ADMINISTRATON
Imidacloprid spot-on 
Permethrin spot-on
Table 3-8 continued
Permethrin spray
u0-10ds
Fipronil spray
Pyrethrin spray
 Nitenpyram
Selamectin
of the trial.
DRUG
Permethrin
 Selamectin
DRUG
140
Immunosuppressive
Therapy
% Before you think about immunosuppressive therapy you must
be sure about your diagnosis. It can be very dangerous for your
patient to start immunosuppressive drugs based only on history
and clinical examination as a confirmation of the diagnosis of
immune-mediated skin disease. If the animal has an infectious
disease (fungal, bacterial, or parasitic), it can rapidly deteriorate
and even die. There is no place for trial therapy in immune
mediated disease (except in the case of a patient facing
euthanasia otherwise)
 Patients with immune-mediated skin disease commonly have
secondary infections that need to be identified and treated. In
patients with mild-to-moderate disease, I start antimicrobial
therapy 3 weeks before immunosuppressive therapy to evaluate
how many of the clinical signs are due to the infection and how
many are due to the immune-mediated disease. In cases of severe
clinical disease, however, treatment of infection and of the
immune-mediated disease should be started concurrently.
for immunosuppression. Every dog or cat reacts differently to
each of the drugs mentioned later in this section and you have
to individualize treatment for each patient. Immunosuppression
is a technique requiring instinct, sensitivity, and experience as
well as theoretic knowledge that is beyond the scope of this text.
There are, however, certain generalizations as well as certain
starting dosages and ranges.
/ Probably the best way is to start using one preferred drug,
then, if your approach fails, refer the patient and learn from the
way the specialist treats it. After you are familiar with that new
drug, you add another one to your repertoire and use both of
them and so on.
V The doses mentioned in Table 3-10 are starting doses that are
tapered as soon as possible to the smallest effective dose.
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165www.veterinarywire.com
141
V Taper the drug once the patient is in clinical remission or if
adverse effects are intolerable. In a patient with severe adverse
effects and concurrent clinical signs of active disease, new drugs
need to be added at the same time.
% Monitoring, as described in Table 3-10, is essential. I only
compromise on monitoring standards because of financial con-
siderations in patients facing euthanasia otherwise!
V Some dogs will have seasonal relapses. This mechanism is
currently not understood. If a well-controlled patient suddenly
seems to relapse, always check for demodicosis and fungal or bac-
terial infections first. Rather than a flare-up of the immune-medi-
ated disease you may be encountering a problem secondary to
your treatment. These patients are immunosuppressed and thus
easily may be affected by infectious diseases! Increasing the dose
of the immunosuppressive drug may not always be a good idea.
142
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
currently, particu-
counts and urinaly-
6 mo, possibly
stimulation tests
Complete blood
larly during the
Complete blood
,2,4,8,
Serum biochem-
tially, then every
?
MONITORING
Urinalysis and
urine cultures
3.6
first 1-2 mo.
counts at 0, 1
山
6-12 mo
 at O,
 every
3.6 mo.
L21
中
4山
82
一
1 mg/kg q 7 d IM (D,C)
18 388 588
 remission achieved
DoSE
2
infections, muscle wasting,
divided into Z daily doses),
Vomiting, diarrhea, bone
uoissaddns moeu auog
Vomiting, diarrhea (less
Bone marrow suppres-
marrow suppression.
sion, occasional cuta-
polyphagia, lethargy,
neous eruptions and
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Polyuria, polydipsia,
proteinuria
Table 3-10
weeks in dogs. Should not
 recommended
Rapid onset of action,
complete remission and
Lag period of several
high rate of adverse
recommended before
Long lag period (6.12
before using this drug.
using this drug.
COMMENTS
effects
8
 50 mg/ml suspension 
Z mg, 5 mg tablets 
FORMULATION
Aurothioglucose*
Chlorambucil*
Prednisolone
 Azathioprine*
 Prednisone/
DRUG
Copyright @ 2000 Teton NewMedia 888-770-3165 www.veterinarywire.com
143
Dysplasia (Table 3-11)
Estrus induction, bone marrow sup-
Abscess formation with injection of
Polydipsia, polyuria, nervousness,
pression, hepatotoxicity, pyometra,
 Anaphylaxis, acromegaly, diabetes
due to Hormonal
 Selected Drugs Used in the Treatment of Endocrine Disorders with Cutaneous Symptoms
with hypoadrenocorticism
ADVERSE EFFECTS
spontaneous abortion
repository capsules.
anorexia.
mellitus
1) auejequl auouoq xas jeuaipe
 is recommended prior to using
Estrogen-responsive dermatosis
ment with this drug).
this latter disease)
 Hypothyroidism
INDICATIONS
Follicular [
Alopecia 
Table 3-11
same dose q 12 h on 2 con-
secutive days of each week as main-
then l wk off,
deter-
20 μg/kg q 12 h. If patient condi-
tion is well controlled, medication
to once daily at
3-6 mg q 12-24 h for Z-3 mo (D)
TLaR
0.1 IU/kg q 56 h for 6 wk (D)
6 38 8
may be changed
Treatment of
Diseases and
DosE
o,p′-DDD* (mitotane)
Growth hormone*
Levothyroxine
Testosterone
Melatonin
Estrogen
DRUG
144