Wolaipleprmcpdaemccrells
Onmpimemoli fmiesnm coas?Why
ANIMAL
Dpent
DERMATOLOGY
SECRETS
Questions and Answers
Reveal the Secrets
to the Principles and
Practice of Small
Animal Dermatology
qammoe. to smecl
KARENL.CAMBELL,DVM,MS
neu wnor wps ol eocuns
HANLEY &BELFUS
An lmprint of Elsevier
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106-3399
SMALL ANIMAL DERMATOLOGY SECRETS
ISBN 0-56053-626-8
Copyright @ 2004, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia, PA, USA: phone: (+1) 215 238 7869, fax: (+1) 215 238 2239,
e-mail: healthpermissions @elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier
Permissions.
NOTICE
Veterinary medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety prec autions rmust be followed, but as new
provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the recormmended dose, the
method and duration of administration, and contraindications. lt is the responsibility of the licensed
prescriber, relying on experience and knowledge of the patient, to determine dosages and the best
treatment for each individual patient. Neither the publisher nor the author assumes any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising frorm this publication.
International Standard Book Number 0-56053-626-8
Pubtishing Director: Linda Duncan
Senior Editor: Liz Fathman
Developmentat Editor: Jolynn Gower
Pubtishing Services Manager: Patricia Tannian
Project Manager: John Casey
Book Design Manager: Bill Drone
Printed in Chile
Last digitis the print number987654321
CONTRIBUTORS
 John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
Visiting Clinical Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Diane E. Bevier, DVM, DACVD
Clinical Associate Professor of Dermatology
School of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Layfayette, Indi ana
Paul Bloom, DVM, DABVP, DACVD
Assistant Adjunct Professor
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Department of Dermatology
Allergy and Dermatology Clinic for Animals
Michigan State University
Livonia, Michigan
Mona Boord, DVM, DACVD
Animal Dermatology Clinic
San Diego, California
Stephanie R. Bruner, DVM, ACVD
Veterinary Dermatology Services
Cincinnati, Ohio
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
Professor and Section Head, Specialty Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Kelly M. Credille, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Comparative Dermatology Laboratory
College of Veterinary Medicine
Texas A&M University
College Station, Tex as
Dennis W. Crow, DVM, DACVD
Animal Dermatology Referral Clinic
Dallas, Texas
vi
Contributors
Gary M. Davenport, PhD
Research and Development
The Iams Company
Lewisburg, Ohio
Louis-Philippe de Lorimer, DVM, DACVM
Visiting Assistant Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Robert W. Dunstan, DVM, MS, DACVP
 Pfizer Global Research and Development
Ann Arbor Laboratories
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Timothy M. Fan, DVM, DACVIM
Visiting Assistant Professor
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Linda A. Frank, MS, DVM, DACVD
Associate Professor of Dermatology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee
Cecilia A. Friberg, DVM, DACVD
 Animal Dermatology Center of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Jan A. Hall, BVM&S, MS, MRCVS, DACVD
Assistant Professor
Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario
Canada
Ralph E. Hamor, DVM, MS, DACVO
Clinical Associate Professor
Comparative Ophthalmology Service
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Robert Kennis, DVM, DACVD
Texas Veterinary Medical Center
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
vii
Contributors
Karen A. Kuhl, DVM, DACVD
Midwest Veterinary Derrmatology Center
Veterinary Specialty Center
Buffalo Grove, Illinois
Carol A. Lichtensteiger, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Assistant Professor of Pathology
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
 Pathology Section Leader, Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
College of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
Associate Professor
Phase II, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg,Virginia
Steven L. Marks, BVSc, MS, MRCVS, DACVIM
Associate Professor and Section-Head, Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Rosanna Marsella, DVM, DACVD
Assistant Professor
Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gaines ville, Florida
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
Visiting Clinical Assistant Professor, Dermatology
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Elizabeth A. Mauldin, DVM, DACVP, DACVD
Clinical Instructor
Department of Clinical Studies
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Karen A. Moriello, DVM, DACVD
Clinical Professor of Dermatology
Department of Medical Sciences
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
vili
Contributors
Daniel O. Morris, DVM, DACVD
 Assistant Professor and Chief of Dermatology
Veterinary Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Manon Paradis, DVM, MVSc, DACVD
Universite de Montreal,
Faculte de Medecine Veterinaire,
Department of Clinical Sciences
Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec,
Canada
Adam P. Patterson, DVM
Dermatology Resident
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
Veterinary Medicine Teaching Hospital
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Pascal Prelaud, DV, DECVD
Manager
Cabinet de Dermatologie Veterinaire
Nantes, France
Christine A. Rees, DVM, DACVD
 Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
Texas A&M University
College Station, Tex as
Rod A. W. Rosychuk, DVM, DACVIM
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Rhonda L. Schulman, DVM, DACVIM
Assistant Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
Dermatology and Allergy Service
Southern Maryland Veterinary Referral Center
Waldorf, Maryland
Randall C. Thomas, DVM, DACVD
Carolina Veterinary Specialists Medical Center
Charlotte, North Carolina
ix
Contributors
 Sheila Torres, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVD
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St.Paul, Minnesota
Brett C. Wood, DVM
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
 Blacksburg, Virginia
To the many pets I have known and loved, for they have enriched my life
immeasurably.
To my students and professional peers, who have challenged and
inspired me to continue to ask questions and seek answers.
To my family, for their encouragement and enduring love.
PREFACE
The importance of dermatology in veterinary medicine is readily apparent: one out of every four
patients in a typical small animal practice is seen for a skin disorder. As the largest and most
visible organ of the body, the skin reflects the internal health of the animal in addition to
influences from the environment and genetically determined reaction patterns unique to the skin.
 An understanding of small animal dermatology is fundamental to building a successful veterinary
practice.
The unique question-and-answer format of the Secrets series of books promotes under-
standing of subject material. As veterinarians, we are constantly asking questions and applying
the answers to guide us in solving our patients' problems. As humans, we have been programmed
from infancy to learn by asking questions. The Socratic method of teaching through questioning
helps us to maintain an inquiring, probing mind and is highly effective in self-assessment and
learning. The contributors to this book share my excitement in presenting Small Animat
Dermatology Secrets to you in this Socratic format.
Dermatology is a rapidly growing specialty. The American College of Veterinary Dermatology
has increased from 24 diplomates in 1982 to more than 150in 2003 With this increase in "critical
mass" of specialists has come increased knowledge of the pathogenesis of dermatologic diseases,
as well as the recognition of many new diseases. The overriding objective of this book is to
provide practitioners and students with concise and up-to-date information regarding small
animal dermatology. The question-and-answer format will foster self-assessiment of the reader's
understanding of each topic. Additionally, the contributors have shared many "practice tips" that
Dermatology is a visual specialty, and therefore we are excited to bring this Secrets book to
you with more than 270 color illustrations. The book is divided into nine sections: general
principles of dermatology, dermatologic therapy, inherited disorders, parasitic skin diseases,
infectious skin diseases, inflammatory skin diseases, endocrine and metabolic disorders with
cutaneous manifestations, miscellaneous dermatoses, and tumors of the skin.
I am indebted to the contributing authors—professional colleagues who have taken time
from busy schedules to prepare their chapters and share excellent illustrative materials. A special
thanks also to William Lamsback, who initiated this project, and to Jolynn Gower, John Casey,
Liz Fathman and numerous others at Elsevier who brought it to completion.
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
Section I
General
1. STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE SKIN
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
Carol A. Lichtensteiger, DVM, PhD, DACVP
1. Name the three layers of the skin. List the principal components of each layer
(Figure 1-1).
·Epidermis—includes keratinocytes, melanocytes, Langerhans cells, Merkel's cells, and
intracellular lipids.
· Dermis—composed of collagen fibers, elastin fibers, ground substance; adnexal structures
including hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and apocrine sweat glands; and cutaneous blood
vessels, lymphatics, and ner ves.
· Subcutaneous layer of adipose fat tissue, blood vessels, and nerves (also known as the
subcutis or panniculus).
Epidermis
Dermis
Sebaceous gland
Apocrineglanc
Follicle
Figure 1-1
Structure of canine skin. (Courtesy DVM Pharmaceuticals,Miami.)
2
Structure and Function of the Skin
Figure 1-2 Schematic of canine epidermis. Note that the stratum spinosum is shown as being three layers
thick, the stratum basale and stratum granulosum each consist of a single cell layer, and the cells of the
stratum corneum are exfoliating from the skin surface.
2. Cells of the epidermis are divided into layers based on their degree of differentiation.
List the layers of the epidermis and the characteristics of each of these layers
(Figure 1-2).
+Stratum basale (basal cell layer): these are the germinative cells of the epidermis; they are
in direct contact with the basement membrane. Melanocytes, Merkel's cells, and Langerhans
cells are also present in the stratum basale.
+
Stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer): the high concentration of desmosomes and keratin
filaments gives this layer a "spiny" appearance when the cells are fixed in formalin. An
occasional Langerhans cell may also be found in this layer.
 Stratum granulosum (granular layer): cells in this layer have changed from cuboidal to
flattened and contain numerous keratohyalin granules in their cytoplasm.
●Stratum lucidum (clear layer): this is a fully keratinized hyaline-like layer containing
refractile droplets and a semifluid substance called eleidin rich in protein-bound lipids; in
dogs and cats this layer is only found in the footpads and nasal planum.
·
Stratum corneum (horny layer): this is the fully keratinized outer layer of the epidermis;
in normal skin, these cells are anuclear, flattened, eosinophilic cells (corneocytes) that are
constantly being shed into the environment.
3. What is the cell renewal time (CRT) for the viable epidermis (also referred to as
epidermal turnover time)? List factors influencing the CRT of the skin.
The CRT is the time it takes for a cell to move from the stratum basale to the stratum
granulosum. It is approximately 22 days for normal canine skin.
Structure and Function ofthe Skin
3
CRT is influenced by many factors including:
· epiderrmal growth factor
· epidermal chalone (inhi bitor of proliferation)
· arachidonic acid and its metabolites (leukotrienes, prostaglandins, thromboxanes,
hydrox yeicosatetraenoic acids)
· calcium ions
·cyclic nucleotides
·glucocorticoids
+ ultraviolet light
·vitamins (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3, vitamin A, retinoids)
Minor trauma such as clipping of the hair coat can shorten the CRT to 15 days.
The CRT in disorders of keratinization (e.g., primary seborrhea in Cocker Spaniels) may be
as short as 7 days.
4. List the barrier functions of the skin.
·Prevent loss of water.
·Prevent loss of electrolytes.
·Prevent loss of cells.
+ Protect from environmental insults.
· Protect from environmental toxins.
·Protect from ultraviolet light.
 5. What is transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and how does this affect the hydration of
the skin? What factors control TEWL and the barrier function of the skin?
TEWL is the amount of water vapor evaporating from the surface of the skin. In healthy
skin, TEWL is directly proportional to skin hydration. Many skin diseases have inverse ratios of
TEWL and skin hydration (i.e., increased TEWL with decreased skin hydration, as is seen in
atopic dermatitis and disorders of keratinization.) The barrier function of the skin has been
compared to a wall made up of bricks and mortar. The keratinized cells of the stratum corneum
are the "bricks" and the intracellular lipids are the "'mortar."
6. What are the principal components of epidermal lipids in dogs?
· Sphingolipids nich in linoleic acid
· Cholesterol
·Diester waxes
· Cholesterol esters
·Ceramides
·Sterol esters
·Hydroxyceramides
·Free fatty acids
7. What is the role of the skin in temperature regulation?
· Hair coat provides important insulation.
· Arrector pili muscles control piloerection; piloerection increases the insulating properties
of the hair coat.
· Cutaneous circulation is not as important in regulation of body temperature in dogs and
cats as in pigs and humans due to the absence of extensive arteriovenous shunts within the
dermis of canine and feline skin
· The epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands of dogs and cats are not directly innervated and
are not thought to be important in thermoregulation.
·Subcutaneous fat is an efficient insulator.
8. Describe the antimicrobial functions of the skin, including components protecting the
animal from cutaneous infections.
Many factors are involved in protecting animals from cutaneous infections; these include:
·Physical barrier (shedding of stratum corneum)
4
Structure and Functionof the Skin
· Dryness of the stratum corneum
+Fatty acids ("lipid seal,’' disrupt the cell wall of some microbes)
· Inorganic salts (secreted in sweat)
· Immunoglobulins and complement (secreted in sweat and in serum)
· Cutaneous pH
· Cutaneous immune system (Langerhans cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes)
· Resident microflora (compete for nutrients, secrete antimicrobial metabolites including
antibiotics, acetic acid, propionic acid, ammonia, and lipases)
9. In the past, the skin has been referred to as having “an acid mantle." Is this true for
dogs and cats? What are the factors contributing to the pH of the skin?
Human skin has an average pH of 4.8, however the reported average pH of the skin of dogs
is 7.4 and of cats is 6.4. Canine skin tends to have the highest pH of any mammalian species.
Factors contributing to the cutaneous pH include:
·Filaggrin breakdown products (urocanic acid, pyrolidine, carboxylic acid)
·Amino acids (from sweat,sebum, keratinocytes)
·Fatty acids (from sebum, keratinocytes)
●Alpha-hydroxy acids (e.g.,lactic acid, from sweat, cutaneous microbes)
· Carbon dioxide
·Bicarbonate (from sweat)
10. Differentiate between bacterial residents, nomads, transients, and pathogens of the skin.
  o id   sso se sii g 
· Bacterial nomads are organisms that can colonize and reproduce on the skin for short periods
reproduce on the skin.
· Bacterial pathogens are organisms that become established and proliferate on the skin
surface and deeper, causing cutaneous inflammation. They are deleterious to the normal
physiology of the skin.
11. What are the functions of the Langerhans cells of the skin?
· Langerhans cells are bone marrow-derived dendritic cells which function in antigen
presentation in association with MCH I and thus are of importance in immune surveillance
· Langerhans cells have Fc-IgG and C3 receptors and also high affinity receptors for IgE
12. What are the functions of Merkel's cells in the skin? Where are these cells located?
·Merkel's cells are slow-adapting mechanoreceptors.
● Merkel's cells may also have roles in controlling hair follicle activity, cutaneous blood
flow, sweat production, and keratinocyte proliferation.
· Merkel's cells are located in the stratum basale, in tylotrich pads, and in hair
follicle epithelium.
13. What is the origin of the melanocytes in the skin? What is an epidermal melanin unit?
· Epidermal melanocytes originate in the neural crest and migrate to the skin during
embry ogenesis.
· Each epidermal melanocyte transfers pigment-containing melanosomes to a finite number
melanocyte plus its associated keratinocytes.
14. What is the distribution of melanocytes in the body?
·Stratum basale of the skin
·Leptomeminges
· Retinal pigment epithelium
·Mucous membranes
Structure and Function ofthe Skin
5
· Uveal tract
·Hair matrix
· Stria vascularis of the ear
Melanocytes are found in each of the above locations; together, these are termed the melanin
pigmentary system.
15. List the different types of melanins and the hair coat color associated with each.
·Eumelanin—dark brown to black (metabolites of tyrosine)
·Pheomelanin—reddish (rich in sulfur-containing pigments)
+Oxymelanins—yellow to reddish-brown (do not contain sulfur, properties are similar to
bleached eumelanin)
·Trichromes—reddish (rich in sulfur, different synthesis pathway from that of
pheomelanin)
16.List the functions of melanins of the skin.
· Photoprotection
· Scavenging free radicals
·Coloration
17. Define constitutive pigmentation and facultative pigmentation. What hormones
affect pigmentation?
· Constitutive pigmentation is genetically determined.
+Facultative pigmentation is influenced by stimuli (ultraviolet radiation, inflammation,
cytokines,hormones,etc.).
· Hormones affecting pigmentation include C-MSH and β-lipotropin from the
pituitary gland.
18. Describe the structure of the basement membrane zone (BMZ).
The BMZ is an extremely complex structure with many components functioning to anchor
the basal cell layer to the dermis. Uppermost in the BMZ are cytoplasmic tonofilaments of the
basal cells, which attach to the basal plasma membrane of the cells at the hemidesmosome. The
hemidesmosome is attached to the lamina lucida and the lamina densa of the BMZ via anchoring
filaments. The BMZ is anchored to the dermis by anchoring filaments that intercalate between
collagen fibers of the dermis. Hemidesmosomes contain plaque proteins including BP230 and
of congenital epidermolysis bullosa). Hemidesmosomes also contain the transmembrane proteins
B P180 and cB4-integrin, which have roles in anchoring cells to extracellular matrix. Anchoring
filaments also contain BP180, 0β-integrin plus laminin-5 and laminin-6. Other important
deficiencies of any of these molecules can result in blister formation in the skin.
19. List the functions of the hair coat.
· Thermal insulation
· Sensory protection
· Barmier against chemical, microbial, and physical injury to the skin
· Coloration—camouflage, photoprotection, and sexual roles
20. What are the differences between primary hairs and secondary hairs?
Primary hairs or guard hairs are usually larger than secondary hairs and each emerges
through its own hair follicle orifice (pore)
Secondary hairs form the undercoat of dogs and cats. In cats and most breeds of dogs,
secondary hairs outnumber the primary hairs (ratios of 5:1 to 25:1 are common). The secondary
6
Structure and Function ofthe Skin
21. List the stages of the hair growth cycle and what occurs in each stage.
·Anagen—growing period, follicle is actively producing hair.
· Catagen—transitional period, constriction occurs at the hair bulb
· Telogen—resting stage, the dermal papilla separates from the old "club" hair.
22. List factors influencing the hair growth cycle. Which one is most important?
increasing photoperiod in the spring results in new hair growth, while the short days of
winter are associated with minimal hair follicle activity.
·Ambient temperature.
· Nutrition—hairs are 65% to 90% protein; with protein deficiency dull, dry, brittle hairs
and a thin hair coat will be seen.
+Hormones—anagen is initiated and hair growth rate is accelerated by thyroxine. Conversely,
excessive amounts of glucocorticoids inhibit anagen and suppress hair growth.
·Genetics.
· Other environmental factors.
· Intrinsic factors—each hair follicle has an inherent rhythm of cyclical activity; although
the length of each stage of the hair cycle can be altered by ex trinsic factors, the sequence
hair cycle and hair growth rates.
23. What are the functions of the sebaceous glands?
infundibulum of primary hair follicles.
· Sebaceous glands secrete an oily emulsion called sebum. Sebum spreads over the hair
shafts and the surface of the skin, providing a glossy sheen and helping to keep the skin
and hairs soft and pliable.
+ Sebum contributes to the permeability barrier of the skin and helps to retain moisture in
the skin.
· Sebum contributes to the chemical barrier of the skin protecting it from
potential pathogens.
·Sebum may also have pheronome properties.
their functions?
Epitrichial (also referred to as apocrine) sweat glands are located throughout the haired skin
of dogs and cats. These glands are located below the sebaceous gland and open into the
infundibulum of the pilary canals of primary hair follicles.Epitrichial sweat functions together
with secretions of the sebaceous glands to form an antimicrobial emulsion on the surface of the
skin. Epitrichial sweat contributes inorganic salts and IgA to the surface emulsion. Epitrichial
sweat also has pheronome properties.
 In dogs and cats, atrichial (also referred to as eccrine, although functionally closer to being
merocrine) glands are only found in the footpads. These glands are located in the deep dermis
and subcutis of the footpads. The ducts of atrichial glands open directly onto the surface of the
footpads. Atrichial sweat is alkaline and hypertonic. It contains inorganic salts that contribute to
a chemical barnier against microbial proliferation.
25. What is the cell type of canine circumanal (perianal) glands?
These glands are composed of cuboidal cells arranged in lobules resembling the lobules of
the liver; thus the cells are called hepatoid cells. The function of these gland is unknown. These
glands are located in the perianal region and may be found in the skin of the prepuce and on the
dorsal and ventral surfaces of the tail
Structure and Function ofthe Skin
7
26. Why are the cells of the tail glands also referred to as hepatoid cells? What are the
proposed functions of these glands?
There are actually two cell types in these glands: (1) cuboidal cells forming lobules identical
in appearance to the hepatoid cells of the circumanal glands and (2) sebaceous glands.
The sebaceous gland ducts open into hair follicles; the secretions from the tail gland may
serve pheronome functions.
27. List the functions of cutaneous nerves.
·Sensory perception (touch, heat, cold, pressure, pain, itch)
· Modulation of inflammation, proliferation, wound healing via neuropeptide activation of
target cells (keratinocytes, mast cells, endothelial cells)
·Control vasomotor tone
· Control piloerection
· Influence secretory activities of glands
28. List neuropeptides produced by cutaneous nerves.
·Substance P
· Neuropeptide Y
·Neurokinin A
· Somatostatin
· Calcitonin gene-related peptide
· Pituitary adenylate cyclase activity peptide
·Vasoactive intestinal peptide
29. List the types of mechanoreceptors found in the skin.
· Meissner's or Ruffini corpuscles—these are sensitive to the velocity of skin movement
or touch.
·Afferent units sensitive to hair movement—some are affected only by movement of guard
(G) hairs or tylotrich (T) hairs, others are affected by movement of secondary hairs (D for
"down" hairs), and others are activated by movement of vibrissae.
· Slow-adapting type I endings from Merkel cell complexes are activated by steady pressure.
· Slow-adapting type Il units are associated with Ruffian endings and are activated by
skin stretch.
● 8 High-threshold mechanoreceptor units have A & axons and respond to painful stimuli
and carry signals for spontaneous itch (well-localized, prickling); these are myelinated
and conduct rapidly (10-20 m/sec)
· Polymodal nociceptor units with C axons are involved with hyperalgesia and itch;
these are slow-conducting (2 m/sec), unmyelinated, and transmit a diffuse burning
itch sensation.
30. What are the differences between sinus hairs and tylotrich hairs? (Table l-1)
Table 1-1 Sinus Hairs vs. Tylotrich Hairs
SINUSHAIRS
CHARACTERISTIC
(VIBRISSAE, WHISKERS)
TYLOTRICH HAIRS
 Location 
Muzzle, lip, eyelid, face,
Scattered among ordinary body
throat, palmar aspect of
hairs, associated with a
carpus in cats (pili caralis)
tylotrich pad (synonyms
include: haarsheiben, touch 
corpuscle, touch dome, hair
disk, tactile hair disk, tactile
Continued
8
Structure and Function ofthe Skin
Table 1-1 Sinus Hairs vs. Tylotrich Hairs-Cont'd
SINUS HAIRS
CHARACTERISTIC
(VIBRISSAE, WHISKERS)
TYLOTRICH HAIRS
pad, heredifom ending, Pinkus
corpuscle, Iggo dome,
Iggo-Pinkus dome and Eimer's
organ)
Unique features
These hairs are thick and stiff
These hair follicles are larger than
and are characterized by an
surrounding ones and contain a
endothelium-lined blood
single stout hair. An annular
sinus located between the
complex of neurovascular
external root sheath of the
tissue surrounds the follicle at
follicle and an outer
the level of the sebaceous
connective tissue capsule.
glands. These hairs are located
 Pacinian corpuscles are
on a tylotrich pad consisting of
located close to the sinus
the hair follicle and an
hair follicle.
underlying convex area of fine
highly vascularized connective
tissue. Unmyelinated nerve
fibers ending as flat plaques 
(touch plaques) in association
with Merkel's cells are also
located on the pad.
Function
Slow-adapting
 Tylotrich hairs are rapid-adapting
mechanoreceptors
mechanoreceptors; the touch
plaques serve as slow-adapting
touch receptors
31. Give the locations of the three major vascular plexuses of the skin and the structures
supplied by each.
· The superficial plexus is located immediately below the epidermis; capillary loops from
this plexus supply the epidermis and the upper portions of the hair follicles.
The middle plexus is located at the level of the sebaceous glands; it gives off branches to
the atrector pili muscles, ascending branches that supply the superficial plexus, and
ascending and descending branches that supply the middle portion of the hair follicles and
the sebaceous glands.
● The deep plexus is found at the interface of the dermis and the subcutis. Branches from
this plexus descend into the subcutis and ascend to supply the lower portions of the hair
follicles and the epitrichial sweat glands; the ascending vessels continue upward to supply
the middle plexus.
32. List the functions of cutaneous lymph vessels.
· Return protein, fluid (H,O), and cells from interstitial spaces to the bloodstream.
● Remove material that has penetrated the epidermis and dermis (solvents, medications,
vaccines, other antigens).
· Link the skin and regional lymph nodes and thus function in immunoregulation.
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
9
 33. How is the subcutis organized?
The subcutis (subcutaneous fat, panniculus) is arranged in fat lobules divided by fibrous
septae. The fibrous bands of the septae are continuous with dermal collagen on the top and with
fascial sheets on the bottom. Thus these fibrous bands serve to anchor the skin to underlying
muscles and periosteum. Blood vessels, nerves, and lymph vessels are also found in the septae.
ue ue ( se uun e (seo e no soodie) sdil o psodu ie sng ey 
reserve, (2) in thermogenesis and insulation, (3) as protective padding, and (4) to maintain
surface contours.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennion SD: Structure and function of the skin. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology secrets in color, ed
2, Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus.
Haake AR, Holbrook K: The structure and development of skin. In Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds):
Fitzpatrick's dermatotogy in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 70-113.
Janoff M, Marinkovich MP: The demal-epidemal basement membrane. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds):
Advances in veterinary dermatology, vo1 4, Oxford, Blackwell Science, 2002, pp 3-19.
Jimbow K, Quevedo SC, Prota F, et al: Biology of melanocytes. In Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds):
Fitzpatrick's dermatology in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 192-219.
Latkowski JM, Freedbrg IM: Epidemal cell kinetics, epidermal differentiation, and keratinization. In Freedberg IM,
Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp
133-144.
Matousek JL, Campbell KL: A comparative review of cutaneous pH, Vet Dermatot 13:293-300, 2002.
Scott DW: The biology of hair growth and its disturbances. In von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Veterinary
       
Scott DW, Miller WH,Griffin CE: Mutler & Kirk's small animal dermatology ed 6,Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, p 1-70.
Yayer JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In Kennedy PC, Jubb KV, Palmer NC (eds): Pathotogy of domestic
animais, vol 1, ed 4, New York, 1993, Academic Press, pp 531-738.
2. THE VOCABULARY OF DERMATOLOGY
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
Carol A. Lichtensteiger, DVM, PhD, DACVP
1. Why do dermatologists use words that no one else understands?
Each discipline has its own unique vocabulary—whether it is a medical discipline or a
technical one. Dermatologists use many terms that are rarely used in the other medical specialties.
The use of the correct dermatologic terms is important to accurately describe skin lesions when
will enable others to picture the problem and formulate differential diagnoses. To complicate
matters, terminology is dynamic and sometimes controversial—particularly when the terms have
been "borrowed" from human medicine and human dermatopathology—there may be subtle but
significant differences between the cutaneous reaction patterns of different species. You should
consult with your veterinary dermatologist or pathologist if you are uncertain of the significance
of a term being used.
2. Why are so many terms used?
The use of detailed terminology, including the description and distribution of lesions, assists
the listener or reader in visualizing the lesions. This is important in recognizing patterns of
disease and formulating differential diagnoses.
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
9
 33. How is the subcutis organized?
The subcutis (subcutaneous fat, panniculus) is arranged in fat lobules divided by fibrous
septae. The fibrous bands of the septae are continuous with dermal collagen on the top and with
fascial sheets on the bottom. Thus these fibrous bands serve to anchor the skin to underlying
muscles and periosteum. Blood vessels, nerves, and lymph vessels are also found in the septae.
ue ue ( se uun e (seo e no soodie) sdil o psodu ie sng ey 
reserve, (2) in thermogenesis and insulation, (3) as protective padding, and (4) to maintain
surface contours.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennion SD: Structure and function of the skin. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology secrets in color, ed
2, Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus.
Haake AR, Holbrook K: The structure and development of skin. In Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds):
Fitzpatrick's dermatotogy in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 70-113.
Janoff M, Marinkovich MP: The demal-epidemal basement membrane. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds):
Advances in veterinary dermatology, vo1 4, Oxford, Blackwell Science, 2002, pp 3-19.
Jimbow K, Quevedo SC, Prota F, et al: Biology of melanocytes. In Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds):
Fitzpatrick's dermatology in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 192-219.
Latkowski JM, Freedbrg IM: Epidemal cell kinetics, epidermal differentiation, and keratinization. In Freedberg IM,
Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in generat medicine, ed 5, New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp
133-144.
Matousek JL, Campbell KL: A comparative review of cutaneous pH, Vet Dermatot 13:293-300, 2002.
Scott DW: The biology of hair growth and its disturbances. In von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Veterinary
       
Scott DW, Miller WH,Griffin CE: Mutler & Kirk's small animal dermatology ed 6,Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, p 1-70.
Yayer JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In Kennedy PC, Jubb KV, Palmer NC (eds): Pathotogy of domestic
animais, vol 1, ed 4, New York, 1993, Academic Press, pp 531-738.
2. THE VOCABULARY OF DERMATOLOGY
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
Carol A. Lichtensteiger, DVM, PhD, DACVP
1. Why do dermatologists use words that no one else understands?
Each discipline has its own unique vocabulary—whether it is a medical discipline or a
technical one. Dermatologists use many terms that are rarely used in the other medical specialties.
The use of the correct dermatologic terms is important to accurately describe skin lesions when
will enable others to picture the problem and formulate differential diagnoses. To complicate
matters, terminology is dynamic and sometimes controversial—particularly when the terms have
been "borrowed" from human medicine and human dermatopathology—there may be subtle but
significant differences between the cutaneous reaction patterns of different species. You should
consult with your veterinary dermatologist or pathologist if you are uncertain of the significance
of a term being used.
2. Why are so many terms used?
The use of detailed terminology, including the description and distribution of lesions, assists
the listener or reader in visualizing the lesions. This is important in recognizing patterns of
disease and formulating differential diagnoses.
10
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
3. How can I learn to use the language of dermatology?
First learn the basic definitions of terms used in dermatology. Then follow this simple
template when describing skin lesions to systematically describe different types of skin lesions.
·Level of the lesions (e.g., flat, elevated or depressed)
· Color or additional descriptive terms (e.g., pigmentation, shape, size)
· Type of primary, secondary, or special skin lesions present
·Arrangement of the lesions (e.g., linear, annular, serpi ginous, grouped)
·Distribution of the lesions (e.g., localized, facial, pedal, truncal, multifocal, generalized,
symmetric, or asymmetric)
· Duration of the lesions (e.g., acute or chronic)
4. Give examples of lesions that are flat, elevated, or depressed relative to the plane of the
skin (Table 2-1)
Table 2-1
Types of Lesions Relative to Plane of Skin
FLAT (IN THE PLANE
ELEVATED (ABOVE THE
DEPRESSED (BELOW THE
OFTHE SKIN)
PLANE OF THE SKIN)
PLANE OF THE SKIN)
Macule
Cyst
Atrophy
Patch
 Lichenification
Erosion
Telangiectasia
Nodule
Excoriation
Papule
Necrosis
Plaque
Scar
Pustule
Sinus
Scales and crusts
Ulcer
Vesicle and bullae
Wheal
5. What is a primary skin lesion?
A primary lesion is the initial eruption that develops as a direct result of the disease process.
It has not been altered by trauma (scratching) or natural regression over time. Examples include
bullae, cysts, macules, nodules, papules, patches, plaques, pustules, vesicles, and wheals.
6. How are each of the primary lesions defined? List examples of diseases associated with
each type of primary lesion (Table 2-2)
Table 2-2 Diseases Associated with Primary Lesions
PRIMARY
DEFINITION AND
LESION
EXAMPLES
MORPHOLOGY
Bulla
Localized collection of fluid,
>0.5 cm in diameter,
larger than vesicles.
Autoimmune diseases
Epidermolysis bullosa
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
11
Table 2-2 Diseases Associated with Primary LesionsCont'd
PRIMARY
DEFINITION AND
LESION
EXAMPLES
MORPHOLOGY
Cyst
A nodule that contains fluid
 Or semisolid material.
Epidermal inclusion cyst
Follicular cyst
Acne
Macule
Flat, circumscribed skin
discoloration, <l cm,
lacks surface elevation
or depression.
 Pigmented nevi
Lentigo
Purpura
Petechiae
Acute erythema
Vitiligo
Nodule
A circumscribed, solid
elevation.
Usually greater than l cm
and usually extends into
the dermis.
 Large nodules may be
referred to as masses.
Neoplasia
Granulomas
Deposits of collagen
Papule
Small, solid elevation of the
skin up to l cm in
diameter, feels solid, is
due to infltration of 
inflammatory cells and
edema and epidermal
hyperplasia.
Flea bites
Sarcoptes
 Superficial bacterial
Folliculitis
Continued
12
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
Table 2-2 Diseases Associated with Primary Lesions-Cont'd
PRIMARY
 DEFINITION AND
LESION
EXAMPLES
MORPHOLOGY
 Patch
 A localized flat change in
 skin pigmentation, larger
than l cm in diameter.
Ecchymoses
Leukoderma
Postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation
Plaque
A flat-topped elevation 
> 0.5 cm formed by
 coalition of papules.
Eosinophilic plaques
Pustule
 A small, circumscri bed
elevation of the epidermis
 filled with purulent
material.
Bacterial infections
Eosinophilic folliculitis
(allergic, parasitic)
 Pemphigus foliaceus 
Acne
 Impetigo
Vesicle
A sharply circumscribed
elevated lesion that
contains fluid, < 0.5 cm
in diameter.
Viral diseases
Irritants
Autoimmune diseases
Epidermolysis bullosa
Wheal
 A sharply circumscribed,
raised lesion consisting
 of edema, usually appears
 and disappears within
minutes to hours.
Urticaria
Insect bites
TheVocabulary of Dermatology
13
7. What is a secondary skin lesion?
Secondary lesions may be created by scratching, chewing or other trauma to the skin; as a
result of infections; or may evolve from regressing primary lesions. Examples include crusts,
erosions, excoriations, fissures, scales, scars, and ulcers.
8.How are the secondary skin lesions defined? (Table 2-3)
Table 2-3
Characteristics ofSecondary Skin Lesions
SECONDARY
LESION
DEFINITION
MORPHOLOGY
Crust
 A collection of cellular debris,
 dried exudates of serum,
inflammatory cells or
blood; antecedent primary
lesions include pustules,
vesicles and bullae.
Erosion
A partial focal loss of
epidermis; does not
penetrate the basement
membrane and heals
without scarring.
ExcoriationLinear erosion induced by
scratching or trauma.
Fissure
Vertical loss of epiderimis
and dermis with sharply
defined walls, crack
in skin.
Continued
14
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
Table 2-3
Characteristics of Secondary Skin Lesions-Cont'd
SECONDARY
LESION
DEFINITION
MORPHOLOGY
Scale
Thick stratum corneum that
results from
hyperproliferation or an
increased cohesion of
surface keratinocytes.
Scar
A collection of new
connective tissue
(fibrosis); may be
hypertrophic or atrophic
(contracts with maturity);
scar implies prior
 dermoepidermal damage.
Ulcer
A full-thickness, focal loss of
 epidermis and dermis;
heals with scarring.
9. You did not mention an epidermal collarette; what is this lesion?
Epidermal collarettes are circular rings of scales; these are the "footprints" of a ruptured
pustule or vesicle.
10. What is a follicular cast?
A follicular cast is an accumulation of keratin and sebaceous material adherent to a hair shaft
ex tending above the surface of the follicular ostia. It is a primary lesion associated with vitamin
A-responsive dermatoses, primary seborrhea, and sebaceous adenitis. Follicular casts are also
seen as secondary lesions in dermatophytosis and demodecosis.
11. Are comedones primary or secondary lesions?
They can be either (Figure 2-1). A comedo is a dilated hair follicle flled with cornified
cells, and sebaceous and sweat gland secretions. Comedones are primary lesions of feline acne,
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, Schnauzer comedo syndrome, and some idiopathic seborrheic
disorders. Comedones are secondary lesions when associated with hyperadrenocorticism, topical
applications of greasy medications, demodecosis, and dermatophytosis.
12. What is a maculopapular eruption?
 It is a dermatitis composed of both macules and papules. Maculopapular eruptions are
commonly seen with erythema multiforme.
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
15
Figure 2-1Schematic of comedo.
Figure 2-2Schematic of telangiectasia.
13. What are telangiectasias?
Telangiectasias are small, dilated, superficial blood vessels (capillaries, arterioles, or venules)
that blanch when pressure is applied (diascopy) (Figure 2-2). Telangiectasias occur in many
cutaneous disorders. They are most commonly associated with hyperadrenocorticism, but can
also be seen with dermatomyositis and cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
14. How can you differentiate between telangiectasia and petechiae? Purpura?
Telangiectasia blanches on pressure, while petechiae do not. Both petechiae and purpura are
reddish lesions produced by extravasation of red blood cells (hemorrhage) into the dermis;
petechiae are< 0.5 cm in diameter whereas lesions of purpura are larger.
15. What are target (iris) lesions?
Target lesions are centrally healing lesions produced when the skin heals behind an
inflammation. The surrounding zone may be pale and the outermost zone often appears as a rim
of erythema. Target lesions are seen with bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and
erythema multiforme.
16. What terms are used to refer to changes in pigmentation?
·  Leukoderma—nonpigmented skin
· Leukotrichia (achromotrichia)—nonpigmented hair
·Aurotrichia—gold-colored hair
16
TheVocabulary of Dermatology
Figure 2-3Chronic dermatitis with acanthosis. Note the rete ridge formation associated with hyperplasia
of the stratum basale and straturm spinosum.Retention of nuclei (parakeratosis) is seen in the stratum
are also features of this chronic dermatitis.
· Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis)—decreased amount of melanin, lighter than normal
skin or hair color
· Hyperpigmentation (hypermelanosis, melanoderma)—darker than normal skin color,
increased amount of melanin
● Melanotrichia—excess pigment in the hair
17. Differentiate between hyperkeratosis and lichenification.
Hyperkeratosis is an increase in the thickness of the stratum corneum. Lichenification refers
to marked thickening of all layers of the epidermis; the lichenified areas may resemble tree bark
with accentuation of skin lines. Lichenification is associated with chronic rubbing or scratching
of the skin.
18. List and define the adjectives used in describing hyperkeratosis.
·Orthokeratotic—increase in anuclear cells in the stratum corneum
· Parakeratotic—retention of nuclei within cells of the stratum corneum, associated with
zinc-responsive dermatosis, ectoparasitism, lethal acrodermatitis, some vitamin
A-responsive dermatoses, Malassezia dermatitis, and other diseases (Figure 2-3)
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
17
Figure 2-4 Normal canine epidermis showing basketweave keratin in the stratum corneum. Keratohyalin
granules are visible in the single layer of the stratum granulosum.
·Basketweave—loosely woven cells in the stratum corneum (Figure 2-4)
· Compactdensely packed keratinocytes in the stratum corneum; associated with low-
grade trauma to the skin
·Laminated—keratinocytes in the stratum corneum are layered; seen in ichthyosis
19. Differentiate between folliculitis, furunculosis, fistulas, and sinuses.
· Folliculitisinflammation involving hair follicles. Mural folliculitis denotes targeting of
the wall of the follicle. Perifolliculitis is an accumulation of inflammatory cells around
the hair follicle without invasion of the follicular epithelium.
·Furunculosis—a perforating folliculitis with rupture of the hair follicle, may result in
granulomatous inflammation.
surface; may develop from necrotizing furunculosis with a tract of purulent material
leading from a ruptured hair follicle to the skin surface, or may lead from embedded
foreign material to the surface of the skin.
· Sinus—a sinus is a tract leading from a suppurative cavity to the skin surface (a type
of fistula).
20. What do the terms calcinosis and sclerosis refer to?
· Calcinosis is the deposition of mineral salts in the dermis. It is most commonly associated
with hyperadrenocorticism (calcinosis cutis), but can also be dystrophic (dystrophic
calcification), metabolic (metastatic calcification), or idiopathic (calcinosis circumscripta)
in origin.
· Sclerosis is a general term indicating induration or hardening (fibrosis is a common cause)
21. What do the terms dyskeratosis and apoptosis refer to?
Dyskeratosis is a histopathologic term used to indicate abnormal keratinization of
to cells undergoing programmed cell1 death; this physiologic cell suicide may be triggered by the
18
TheVocabularyofDermatology
Figure 2-5Epidermis showing apoptotic keratinocytes (arrows) in a dog with erythema muliforme.
immune system, cytokines, viruses, drugs, and many other mechanisms. Apoptosis is a feature of
erythema multiforme, discoid lupus erythematosus, and many other diseases (Figure 2-5).
22. What are acantholytic keratinocytes?
Acantholytic keratinocytes are epidermal cells "floating free" within a vesicle or pustule.
These are formed when there is a loss of cohesion between viable epidermal cells and are most
often associated with the pemphigus complex of diseases but can also be seen with severe
inflammation, viral diseases, bacterial, and fungal dermatoses (Figure 2-6).
23. Are acantholytic cells a sequela to acanthosis?
No. Acanthosis is hyperplasia of the stratum spinosum (increased number of keratinocytes
in the spinous layer). Acantholytic cells are relatively intact keratinocytes loose in pustules; the
cells were released because of damage to the desmosomes (intercellular bridges). As noted
previously, the damage is usually immune mediated; however, enzymes released from neutrophils
in inflammatory skin diseases can also form acantholytic cells
24. What are Pautrier microabscesses?
Pautrier microabscesses are focal accumulations of neoplastic lymphoid cells within the
epidermis and are characteristic of epitheliotropic lymphoma
The Vocabulary of Dermatology
19
Figure 2-6 Subcorneal pustule filled with neutrophils and acantholytic keratinocytes in a dog with
25. What is an interface dermatitis?
This is a histopathologic term used to denote an inflammatory pattern targeting and
obscuring the dermoepidermal junction. There is usually hydropic degeneration of cells in the
stratum basale. The inflammation may be minimal (as in SLE) or marked (as in DLE) with a
lichenoid cellular infiltrate. Lichenoid cellular infiltrates are accumulations of inflammatory cells,
most often lymphocytes and plasma cells, that "hug" the dermoepidermal junction in the
superficial portion of the dermis and may infiltrate the stratum basale. Other common features
include apoptotic keratinocytes, satellitosis (lymphocyte adjacent to an apoptotic keratinocyte),
and pigmentary incontinence. Interface dermatitis is commonly seen in cutaneous adverse drug
reactions, dermatomyositis, erythema multiforme, lupus erythematosus, toxic epidermal necroly sis,
and may occur in other dermatoses.
26. Is it pyoderma or dermatitis?
Pyoderma is a clinical term for bacterial dermatitis. Dermatitis is a clinical and pathological
term for inflammation of the skin. The prefix pyo in pyoderma indicates neutrophils are a major
component of the inflammation; this is equivalent to suppurative dermatitis. In biopsy specimens
obtained from bacterial pyoderma, neutrophils are often a component, but may not be the major
leukocyte (Figure 2-7).
27. What is the difference between granulomatous and granulation?
Granulomatous refers to an inflammatory reaction in which macrophages are the
cells) and sometimes the reaction is organized with fibrosis into nodules (granulomas). Granulation
is the process of forming fibrous tissue to repair damaged tissue such as ulcerations, lacerations,
and surgical incisions. New capillaries (neovascularization, angiogenesis) and reactive fibroblasts
28. What is the difference between the subcutis, subcutaneous tissue, and panniculus?
The three terms are essentially synonymous terms for the fatty connective tissue layer deep
to the dermis. This layer is composed of adipocytes, vessels, and connective tissue.
20
TheVocabulary ofDermatology
predominant inflarmmatory cell in suppurative dermatitis.
29. When is it panniculitis versus steatitis? Where does cellulitis fit?
Because the panniculus is adipose tissue, a panniculitis is also a steatitis (inflammation of
fat). Internal systemic disease (pancreatitis or vitamin E and selenium deficiency) are differentials
for causes of panniculitis, especially if there is saponification or lipofuscin. Cellulitis refers to
purulent inflammation in the subcutis; the inflammation is usually extensive with copious exudate
and effacement of the tissue.
 30. What is the difference between special stains and immunohistochemistry (THC) for
biopsy tissues?
Special stains is a generic term for all stains applied to formalin fixed tissues other than the
           x  
acid fast for mycobacteria, and Perl's iron for hemosiderin. IHC is a subset of special stains used
to detect antigens of infectious agents (e.g. Toxoplasma) or of tumor markers (e.g., B versus
T lymphocytes). In IHC, antibodies (immuno) for specific antigen(s) in tissue (histo) are bound
and then detected by using a chromogenic substrate (chemistry) for an enzyme (usually
peroxidase) that was attached as a label to the primary antibody, or more commonly, to a
secondary antibody that is an antispecies antibody that detects bound primary anti body
31. Why are so many biopsy results a "nonspecific"' dermatitis?
The skin, like other tissue, has a limited repertoire of responses to injury. Although pattern
analysis of histopathologic responses is quite useful, every disease does not have a specific
pattern. Diseases causing perivascular dermatitis are especially numerous; other changes, clinical
signs, and other assays are needed to arrive at the final diagnosis.
32. When is it hyperplasia? Neoplasia? Dysplasia?
Hyperplasia is a non-neoplastic increase in numbers of cells in a tissue; the reaction stops
when the signal inducing the proliferation is removed. Neoplasia is an increase in cell numbers
(increase in proliferation or decrease in natural death) of transformed cells no longer (or at least,
incompletely) responsive to cell cycle control signals. Dysplasia, depending on the context, is
atypical hyperplasia and potentially preneoplastic (e.g., in Bowen's disease) or is an abnormal
tissue development (adnexal dysplasia) and is not preneoplastic
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
21
 33. Are hypertrophy and atrophy opposites?
Not completely. Hypertrophy is increased organ mass because of increased size of cells in
the tissue, for example, reactive apocrine gland epithelium or reactive endothelial cells. If the cell
numbers are also increased, a second process of hyperplasia is also present. In atrophy, organ
mass is decreased because the tissue has a decrease in size of cells, loss of cells, or both.
Acknowledgment
Figures 2-1 and 2-2 and those used in questions 6 and 8 (Tables 2-2 and 2-3) were modified
from Corvette DM: Morphology of primary and secondary skin lesions. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling
JL (eds): Dermatology secrets in color, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus, Pp 8-14.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Corveltte DM: Morphology of primary and secondary skin lesions. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology
secrets in cotor, ed 2. Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus, pp 8-14.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathology. St. Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Kennedy PC, Jubb KV, Palmer NC (eds): Pathotogy of domestic animats,ed 4. New York, 1993, Academic Press, pp
531-738.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Muter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, pp 1-70.
3. DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
IN DERMATOLOGY
Paul Bloom, DVM, DABVP, DACVD
1. Which diagnostic tests should a general practitioner perform when presented with a
patient with a dermatologic problem?
Fortunately for veterinarians, dermatology is a low-cost, high-yield specialty. With a scalpel
blade, mineral oil, microscope, hemostat, handheld magnifying lens, cytologic stain, biopsy kit,
fungal culture plate, acetate tape, sterile toothbrush, cotton tip applicator sticks, and a flea comb,
almost any dermatologic test may be performed. The most common tests performed include:
·Examination of the haircoat with a magnifying lens
●Flea combing
·Acetate tape prep
·Cytologies
·Trichogram
·Skin scrapings
· Wood's lamp examination
· Fungal culture for dermatophytes
· McKenzie toothbrush culture
· Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing
· Skin biopsies
2. What is a trichogram and how is it performed?
pull the hair out. To get the bulb and not fracture the hair shaft, you should grasp the hair as close
to the skin surface as possible. The hair is put on a microscope slide that has mineral oil on it and
a cover slip applied. The hair is ex amined under 40X objective.
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
21
 33. Are hypertrophy and atrophy opposites?
Not completely. Hypertrophy is increased organ mass because of increased size of cells in
the tissue, for example, reactive apocrine gland epithelium or reactive endothelial cells. If the cell
numbers are also increased, a second process of hyperplasia is also present. In atrophy, organ
mass is decreased because the tissue has a decrease in size of cells, loss of cells, or both.
Acknowledgment
Figures 2-1 and 2-2 and those used in questions 6 and 8 (Tables 2-2 and 2-3) were modified
from Corvette DM: Morphology of primary and secondary skin lesions. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling
JL (eds): Dermatology secrets in color, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus, Pp 8-14.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Corveltte DM: Morphology of primary and secondary skin lesions. In Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology
secrets in cotor, ed 2. Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus, pp 8-14.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathology. St. Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Kennedy PC, Jubb KV, Palmer NC (eds): Pathotogy of domestic animats,ed 4. New York, 1993, Academic Press, pp
531-738.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Muter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, pp 1-70.
3. DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
IN DERMATOLOGY
Paul Bloom, DVM, DABVP, DACVD
1. Which diagnostic tests should a general practitioner perform when presented with a
patient with a dermatologic problem?
Fortunately for veterinarians, dermatology is a low-cost, high-yield specialty. With a scalpel
blade, mineral oil, microscope, hemostat, handheld magnifying lens, cytologic stain, biopsy kit,
fungal culture plate, acetate tape, sterile toothbrush, cotton tip applicator sticks, and a flea comb,
almost any dermatologic test may be performed. The most common tests performed include:
·Examination of the haircoat with a magnifying lens
●Flea combing
·Acetate tape prep
·Cytologies
·Trichogram
·Skin scrapings
· Wood's lamp examination
· Fungal culture for dermatophytes
· McKenzie toothbrush culture
· Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing
· Skin biopsies
2. What is a trichogram and how is it performed?
pull the hair out. To get the bulb and not fracture the hair shaft, you should grasp the hair as close
to the skin surface as possible. The hair is put on a microscope slide that has mineral oil on it and
a cover slip applied. The hair is ex amined under 40X objective.
22
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
 3. What are you looking for in a trichogram and what diseases could it help you identify?
You want to examine the hair shaft and the hair bulb. A normal hair shaft should be uniform
in diameter and come to a tapered end. Some of the abnormalities that may be seen are listed in
Table 3-1. A trichogram is especially helpful in differentiating alopecia due to pruritus/self-
trauma vs hairs that easily epilate (endocrinopathies, telogen defluxion, follicular arrest). In the
former, the shafts are fractured, while in the later, the shafts are normal but all of the hairs
are in telogen.
Table 3-1
Characteristic Trichogram Findings in Dermatologic Diseases
DISEASE
HAIR SHAFT APPEARANCE
BULB APPEARANCE
Normal—anagen
Uniform in diameter and has a
Rounded, smooth, shiny, and the
phase (active
tapered distal end (end
matrix (bulb) cells may be
hair growth)
opposite the bulb region).
heavily pigmented. Melanin is
From outside in - the cuticle,
evenly distributed in the matrix
cortex (may be pigmented
cells.
depending on coat color) and
medulla should be visible.
 Melanin, if present, is evenly
distributed throughout the
shaft.
Normal—telogen
Uniform in diameter and has a
Club- or spear-shaped with a
phase (resting
tapered distal end (end
rough surface and is always
phase)
opposite the bulb region).
nonpigmented (pigment is only
From outside in - the cuticle,
 produced in the bulb during 
cortex (may be pi gmented
anagen).
depending on coat color) and
medulla should be visible.
Pruritic diseases/
Fractured shaft. The rest of the
Normal - can be either an anagen
self-trauma
hair shaft (proximal to
or telogen bulb.
fracture) is normal.
Dermatophytosis
Fractured shaft. The rest of the
 Normal - can be either an anagen
hair shaft (proximal to
or telogen bulb.
fracture) may be swollen,
irregular and the cuticle,
cortex and medulla are not
clearly discernible. There
may be arthroconidia
(spores) on the surface or
hyphae in the hait.
Demodex
Normal but MAY see mites
 Normal - can be either an anagen
ass ociated with the hairs.
or telogen bulb.
A lack of mites does not
rule out Demodex but this is
a great way to screen dogs
that you suspect have
Demodex. If negative, you
need to follow up with skin
scrapings (see discussion on
skin scrapings).
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
23
Table 3-1
Characteristic Trichogram Findings in Dermatologic Diseases—Cont'd
DISEASE
HAIR SHAFT APPEARANCE
BULB APPEARANCE
Color dilution
 Breakage of hair with abnormal
Melanin clumping.
alopecia (CDA)
hairshafts. The remaining
hairshafts will have irregular
shaped clumps of melanin,
distorted cuticle-cortical
anatomy. Note that a
normal-haired dog with color
dilution will have hairs look
the same as CDA except for
the presence of abnormal hair
shafts with CDA.
Endocrinopathy
Normal for telogen but
Normal for telogen but excessive
(e.g., hyper-
excessive (majority) of hairs
(majority) of hairs in telogen.
adrenocorticism,
in telogen.
hypothyroidi sm).
4. How are skin scrapings properly performed?
A scalpel blade coated with mineral oil is scraped along the skin. The exact technique
depends on whether the mite you are looking for is superficial or deep dwelling. The material that
is collected on the scalpel blade is then placed on a microscope slide and a cover slip is applied.
Depending on the mite, the sample is then examined either with 40X (Cheyletiella, Sarcoptes,
Notoedres) or 100X (Demodex) magnification.
 5. How do you take a skin scraping to demonstrate the presence of superficial dwelling
mites (e.g., Cheyletiella, Demodex cati [cats], Sarcoptes, Notoedres)?
Because these mites live on the surface or in the superficial layers of the skin, broad,
superficial scrapings that collect scale and crusts should be performed.
6. How do you take a skin scraping to demonstrate the presence of deep dwelling mites
(e.g., Demodex canis in dogs or D. cati in cats)?
Because these mites live deep in hair follicles, deep skin scrapings must be performed.
The skin is squeezed to help extrude the mites from the hair follicles and then a scraping is
performed with intermittent squeezing of the skin. The scrapings should be deep enough to create
capillary oozing.
7. Are there other helpful hints in having success when performing skin scrapings?
Yes. Knowing which mite is suspected helps determine the sites and lesions that should be
scraped (Table 3-2).
8. Are there differences in interpreting positive skin scrapings?
Yes. Because the superficial dwelling mites are not a commensal on the skin, finding even 1
egg, larva or adult Cheyletiella, Sarcoptes, or Notoedres is diagnostic of an infestation. It is
important to remember that Demodex is a normal inhabitant of canine and feline skin so the rare
adult mite may be found, especially if scraping around the animal's eyes or mouth. In cases of
demodicosis, it is important to record the location from where the skin scraping was taken, the
24
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
Table 3-2 Skin Scraping Techniques for Common Mites of Cats and Dogs
MITE
LOCATION(S) TO SCRAPE
LESION(S) TO SCRAPE
Demodex
 Face (especially periorbital and by
Papules, pustules, erythematous or
the commissures of the mouth),
hyperpigmented macules,
forelegs, trunk, feet (interdigital),
comedones or hypotrichotic to
and hind legs. Note - Demodex
alopecic lesions.
can also be in the ear canals -
so an ear swab is also useful.
Sarcoptes
Edges of pinnae, elbows, hocks, and 
 Papules, papulocrusts or alopecic
ventral chest,
areas.
Notoedres
Edges of the pinnae, face, neck
 Papules, papulocrusts or alopecic
and feet.
areas.
Cheyletiella
Dorsum (note: acetate tape
impressions are more sensitive).
Scales, papules, papulocrusts or
alopecic areas.
number of mites at each stage (egg, larva, nymph, and adult) found and the live/dead ratio. These
results will be compared to future scrapings to help evaluate response to treatment.
9. Since Cheyletiella causes its symptoms due to a host hypersensitivity reaction, there
may be very few mites on the dog or cat. This can make it difficult to find mites on skin
scrapings (like looking for a needle in a haystack). What other techniques may be used
to find the mites?
A useful technique is the acetate tape prep. Clear tape is applied and then removed from the
coat and skin of the dog/cat. The tape is placed sticky side down on a microscope slide and
examined under 40x. Flea combing large areas along the dorsum of the patient may be used to
help recover Cheyletiella. The hair and scale collected are applied to a microscope slide with
mineral oil placed on it. A cover slip is applied and the sample examined under 40X.
10. Wood's lamp examination, trichogram, and fungal cultures can all be useful in diagnosing
dermatophytosis. We have already discussed trichograms; how does the Wood's lamp
examination work?
The Wood's lamp uses ultraviolet light filtered through either nickel or cobalt. The
wavelength of the light is 253.7 nm. Because the light's wavelength is temperature-dependent,
the lamp should be turned on for 5 to 10 minutes before use.
The principle behind the Wood's lamp examination is that certain dermatophytes
(Microsporum canis, M. distortum [strain of M. canis], M. audouinni, Trichophyton schoenleinii)
may cause infected hairs (not scales, crusts) to fluoresce an apple-green color. In the case of M.
canis, this occurs approximately 50% of the time. The exact metabolite of the dermatophyte that
is responsible for the fluorescence has not been definitely identified but is suspected to be either
pteridin or a metabolite of tr yptophan.
11. What are the pros and cons of a Wood's lamp examination?
The advantage of the Wood's lamp is that it is a fast, inexpensive SCREENING tool for
dermatophytosis. If hairs are found to fluoresce, those hairs should be plucked and submitted for
a fungal culture. Remember, a negative ex amination result does not rule out dermatophytosis
A disadvantage of the Wood's lamp is its poor sensitivity. Only 50% of the most common
dermatophyte in dogs and cats, M. canis, fluoresces. In addition, depending on the operator, it can
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
25
have poor specificity. Bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Corynebacterium minutissimum),
0loo un uosia-aldde pou aie pnq sousossiong ssneo ose Ae sueuuno pue deos sisnio 'sogos
12. What about fungal cultures. How do you perform these?
The hairs selected for culture should be hairs that fluoresce with a Wood's lamp (if possible),
are broken, or are along the edge of an alopecic lesion. To decrease contaminants, the area should
be first gently wiped with 70% alcohol. Hairs and scales are collected from the patient and
inoculated into the medium. The McKenzie toothbrush collection technique is preferred in cases
where there are poorly defined lesions, or if culturing an exposed but clinically unaffected animal.
The toothbrush collection technique involves taking a sterile toothbrush and vigorously brushing
the animal's haircoat to collect hair and scale. This material can then be removed from the
toothbrush with a sterile hemostat and placed into the culture medium.
13. What are the common culture media used to diagnose dermatophytes?
contains Sabouraud's dextrose, phenol red (pH indicator), cycloheximide (inhibits growth of
other fungi), gentamicin, and chlortetracycline (inhibits bacterial growth).
 Rapid sporulation medium (RSM) has many of the same features as DTM but with different
ingredients. It contains a pH indicator, bromothymol blue, which causes the medium to change
from yellow to blue green; it contains antimicrobial agents, chloramphenicol and chlortetracycline,
and an antimycotic agent, cycloheximide.
14. What are the advantages and disadvantage of each of these fungal culture media?
DTM is a useful medium for the rapid growth of dermatophytes and inhibits saprophytic
bacteria and fungi. As the pH increases with the growth of dermatophytes, the medium will turn
intensely red. This color change, when associated with a small amount of a white or buff colored,
cottony, colony growth, is highly suggestive of dermatophytes (Table 3-3). Natural pigmentation
on the underside of the colony (reverse color) is obscured because of the intense color change of
the medium. The reverse color is a valuable diagnostic tool in identifying the various dermatophytes.
DTM does not enhance the sporulation of dermatophytes, which is needed to speciate the
dermatophyte present.
Table 3-3
Identification of Dermatophytes Based on Colony Morphology
and Fluorescence
COLONY MORPHOLOGY
UNDERSIDEVIEW
AND APPEARANCE:
OFCOLONY
WOOD'S LAMP
ORGANISM
TOPVIEW
(REVERSE COLOR)
RESULTS
M.canis
White cottony to wooly
Yellow
Positive
approximately
50% of the time
M.gypseum
Buff-colored, flat and
Pale yellow to tan
Negative
granular
Trichophyton
mentagrophytes
White- to cream-
 Brown, tan, or dark
 Negative
colored powdery
red
(zoophilic form) or
white cottony
(anthropophi lic
form)
26
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
RSM is useful for many of the same reasons that DTM is valuable: it allows rapid growth
of dermatophytes; it has a pH indicator; and it has antimicrobial and antifungal agents to inhibit
and allows visualization of the reverse colony color. These features allow proper identification of
the dermatophyte. The major disadvantage of RSM is that the pH indicator does not create as
intense a color change as DTM, thereby making one of the diagnostic clues (medium color change
associated with a small amount of colony growth) more difficult to appreciate. In addition, some
strains of dermatophytes grow better on DTM than on RSM.
The author uses a product that is the best of both worlds. Derm Duet, is a culture medium
that contains DTM on one half and RSM on the other. Derim Duet is a flat plate that has a cover
that opens like a book, allowing easy access to the colony growth. Most DTMs are small-mouthed
jars, which hampers collection of colonies off the medium.
15. Any other tips regarding culturing for dermatophytes?
Regardless of which medium is used, the culture should be placed in the dark, with
30% humidity and a temperature of 30° C. In our practice, a child's pencil box that has a wet
sponge in it is used. This is left on the counter in the laboratory as a reminder to examine the
culture daily.
16. Because more than just dermatophytes may grow on the culture, what are some of the
clues that the organism is a dermatophyte?
As the dermatophyte FIRST begins to grow, the color of the medium changes from yellow
digest protein preferentially. When the protein is metabolized, the pH of the medium changes
(increases) and causes the color change. It is important to examine the culture daily because, with
time, all the protein in the medium is used and the dermatophytes begin to use carbohydrates.
When this occurs, the medium will change back to yellow.
Saprophytes use carbohydrates first. Eventually the carbohydrate source will be exhausted
and protein will be used. When protein is used the same color change occurs as previously
described. The difference between dermatophytes and saprophytes is that with dermatophytes,
there should be a small amount of growth associated with entire medium changing color, and with
contaminants, there will be a large amount of growth and only localized (in the earlier stages)
color change.
17. Any other clues?
Dermatophyte colonies should be white or buff and cottony in appearance, whereas bacteria
look like slime and saprophytes are usually darker colored (see Table 3-3).
18. Veterinary dermatologists recommend microscopic examination of the colonies. How
is this performed and what are you looking for?
Macroconidia are collected either by applying acetate tape to the surface of the culture
medium or by using a 25-gauge needle to lift some of the growth off the medium. The collected
19. What is the benefit of this additional step?
The source of the infection may be determined by identifying the specific dermatophyte that
is involved in the infection. Each dermatophyte has its own natural habitat. These habitats are:
geophilic (soil), zoophilic (animal), or anthropophilic (human) (Table 3-4).
 It is important to identify the specific dermatophyte involved in the infection because
different dermatophytes have different reservoirs. By doing so, eliminating the source of the
infection may be possible.
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
27
Table 3-4
Identification of Dermatophytes with Lactophenol Cotton Blue
Examination Plus the Reservoir for Each Dermatophyte
ORGANISM
MACROCONIDIA
MICROCONIDIA
RESERVOIR
M.canis
Spindle shaped with
Rarely found. Are club
Zoophilic
thick walls and
shaped but are
knobs at the ends.
non diagnostic.
Contains more than
6 cells (Fig. 3-1A).
M.gypseum
 Spindle-shaped with
 Frequently found, are
Geophilic
thin walls with
club shaped but are
rounded ends.
nondiagnostic
Contains less than
(same appearance
six cells (Fig. 3-1B).
as M. canis)
Trichophyton
Only found
 Usually present either 
Zoophilic
mentagrophytes
 occasionally. Are
singly along hyphae
cigar shaped, thin
 or in grapelike
walled with narrow
clusters.
attachment to the
hyphae (Fig. 3-1C).
20.What are the indications for performing a skin biopsy?
The author will perform a skin biopsy for:
· Any skin disease that is not responding to appropriate therapy
·Any skin disease that may be potentially neoplastic
· Any skin disease that may be a cutaneous marker for a systemic disease (e.g., hyper-
keratotic footpads associated with superficial necrolytic dermatitis)
· Any skin disease that may be autoimmune or immune-mediated
·Any nodular disease
·Any skin disease that appears unusual
· Any skin disease that requires expensive or potentially toxic drugs or therapy
21. Are there different methods used in collecting a skin biopsy? If so, what are the
advantages and disadvantages of each method?
 Two methods to biopsy the skin are the punch technique and the elliptical, incisional biopsy
with a scalpel blade.
 For punch biopsies, we usually will use a 6-mm punch biopsy instrument. Occasionally, a
 4-mm punch may be used on the pinna. When using this instrument, DO NOT include normal
tissue in the sample with a lesion. Because the sample is round, if you include normal tissue with
the lesion, the sample could be sectioned in such a manner that lesions are missed (think of a
doughnut in which you can cut with a knife and miss the hole). When using a punch instrument,
press firmly and rotate the punch in one direction until the skin is completely penetrated. To avoid
creating artifactual lesions, do not rotate the punch instrument back and forth.
We use elliptical, incisional biopsy with a scalpel blade for lesions that are ulcerated,
erosive, or are suspected to involve the subcutaneous tissue (e.g., panniculitis). For subcutaneous
lesions, a punch sample typically may not get all the subcutaneous tissue and therefore may miss
important lesions. Excisional biopsy with a scalpel blade should be performed when you biopsy
a pustule, vesicle, or bullae that exceeds the size of your punch.
28
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
B
C
Figure 3-1 A, Macroconidia of Microsporum canis. B, Macroconidia of Microsporum gypseum.
C,Macroconidia of Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
22. Are there any special techniques that you should use when you perform a biopsy of an
area that is alopecic or hypotrichotic?
Yes. If a lesion is hypotrichotic or alopecic, then either a 8-mm punch is used or an elliptical
incisional biopsy is performed. Either of these techniques will increase the number of hair
follicles that can be examined (if present of course). Ideally, the sample should be trimmed so that
the entire length of the hair follicles can be assessed. If the sample is elliptical, the piece is
trimmed from tip to tip. However, with a punch (round sample) biopsy ideal orientation is
difficult. To help properly trim a round sample to allow optimal orientation, a technique has been
established using a Sharpie permanent marker. Before collection of the sample, a black line is
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
29
drawn in the direction that the hair should run with a Sharpie permanent marker. The sample is
then collected along this line.
23. Can you explain in detail how you do your sampling if you have a lesion that is
ulcerative, erosive, or alopecic? Are there tricks to getting the maximum information
from your sample?
Yes. In those cases, an elliptical-shaped biopsy is the most valuable sampling technique.
Using a scalpel blade, the incision begins in the center of the lesion and is curved into normal
skin. The procedure is repeated making a second curved incision on the opposite side of the
other in normal skin. This allows the pathologist to section the sample so that he or she can
examine the skin as a continuum going from normal to abnormal. This frequently will help
identify the pathogenesis of the disease because the sample allows the visualization of the
 24. Can you go through the step-by-step procedure of performing a skin biopsy?
Sure. Regardless of the method used to collect the biopsy, a local anesthetic containing
2% lidocaine is injected prior to collection. To prevent overdosing, don't exceed 1 cc of 2%
lidocaine/l0 pounds body weight of the animal. For small animals, or animals that will need
biopsies of multiple sites, use a 1% lidocaine solution. This is made by mixing 2% lidocaine
50/50 with sterile water. By using this mixture, more sites can be anesthetized without concern
about toxicity. Sites should NOT be clipped or scrubbed before collection because this may
remove very valuable information. The hair may be clipped to visualize the lesion better, but to
avoid traumatizing the skin, at least /z-inch length of hair should remain. Skin biopsies are clean,
not sterile, procedures except when the sample is being collected for a macerated tissue culture
(see bacterial culture discussion for more details). The biopsy site is outlined with a Sharpie
permanent marker. Most samples, except for nails, nasal planum, and pinnae, can be collected
and clinician (sedation of the patient, not the clinician!).
For biopsies of the nails, nasal planum, or pinnae, we use a combination of general and local
anesthesia.
crushing artifact secondary to grasping the tissue with forceps). These secondary lesions may be
avoided by GENTLY grasping the sample deeply along the edge using fine thumb forceps.
After the sample is collected, close the site with one to two sutures placed in a simple
period, may allow production of autolytic lesions.
If an infectious agent/cause is suspected, a sterile sample can be submitted at the same time
for a macerated tissue sample (see bacterial culture discussion for more details.)
25. Any tips in getting the most out of a skin biopsy?
other than the sample itself, the answer would be HISTORY, HISTORY, HISTORY (see
Chapter 4). This includes the duration of the disease, clinical signs (e.g., pruritus, systemic signs),
distribution of the lesions, whether owners are also affected, whether there is multiple animal
involvement, all medications that are currently (or recently) being used and the response to any
previous therapy. A list of rule-outs would also be helpful.
Other helpful tips include:
Send your sample to a veterinary dermatopathologist.
Submit multiple samples (usually three to four samples are ideal) of different lesions that
represent various stages of the disease process. Perform a biopsy of only primary lesions
30
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
Figure 3-2 Intracellular and extracellular cocci found on skin cytology.
(macule, papule, pustule, vesicle, wheal, nodule, tumor, alopecia, scale, or crust). It is
very important that samples selected represent the disease process (a variation on a
theme) rather than one unique lesion that doesn't represent the disease process. In
general, avoid old, ulcerative, or erosive lesions.
26. What is cytology?
Technically, cytology is the study of the internal structure and organization of cells. In
dermatology, the term is used to describe the microscopic examination of fluid or tissue collected
from nodules, tumors, cysts, pustules, vesicles, papules, bullae, or the surface of the skin.
27. What is the value of cytology?
Cytology can rapidly and inexpensively detect the presence of inflammation, infection
(bacteria or fungi), autoimmune disease (presence of acantholytic keratinocytes in pemphigus),
or neoplasia (Figures 3-2 through 3-4).
28. What are the different techniques used to collect samples for cytologic examination?
Fine needle aspirates, skin scrapings, impression smears, and roll smears.
29. Can you explain how each technique is performed and the indications for each?
Absolutely. When the skin is scaly, a superficial skin scraping can be useful. A very small
amount of mineral oil is placed on a no. 15 scalpel blade to help keep the scale on the blade once
it has been collected. The lesion is scraped a few times, and the material collected is placed on a
400X and 1000x.
A fine needle aspirate is performed when a solid or fluid filled mass or lesion is present. A
 22- to 25-gauge needle attached to a 12-cc syringe is placed into the lesion and suction is applied
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
31
Figure 3-3Numerous Malassezia found on skin cytology.
plunger is pulled back and released a few times if the lesion is a solid mass, while it is only pulled
back once if fluid can be removed. The sample is placed on a microscope slide, stained, and
as a "core" biopsy instrument for solid masses. The needle is inserted into the lesion and gently
Totated. The needle is then withdrawn and reinserted in a second spot. These steps are usually
repeated three or four times. To extract the sample from the needle, the needle is attached to a
syringe that already has been prefilled with air (do not draw back on the syringe plunger with the
needle attached, it will suck the material further up the needle). Then push on the plunger while
pointing the needle toward the slide; this expels the material in the needle onto the slide.
Impression (touch) simears are useful when there is an erosion, ulcer, crust, or moist or
greasy lesion. If the lesion is fluid-filled (e.g., pustule) but is too small for a fine needle aspirate,
"lance" the lesion with a 25-gauge needle and then do an impression smear. To perform an
impression smear, a slide is firmly applied to a lesion and, in most cases, is then gently moved
back and forth a few times to increase the yield. Some people will use slides that are "sticky” on
one side (Durotak). These slides are reported to increase the yield of sample collected, but we
find that a standard slide works quite well. Sticky slides will increase the number of organisms
found even on norrmal dogs, so getting a "feel" for what is found on a normal dog with respect to
32
DiagnosticTechniquesinDermatology
Figure 3-4  Acantholytic keratinocytes are suggestive of pemphigus.
number of organisms would be useful. The slide is then processed and examined as previously
described for skin scrapings.
Roll smears (s wabs) are used when it would be difficult to get a slide into the affected area.
This could be a draining tract, the interdigital spaces on cats and small dogs, and the ear canals
in all dogs and cats. A cotton-tipped applicator is gently rubbed back and forth across the lesion
and then the material from the applicator stick is rolled back and forth on the slide. If the
lesion is scaly, applying a small amount of mineral oil to the swab can help with collection. The
sample is rolled onto a microscope slide, stained, and examined as previously described for
skin scraping
30. How do you process the sample for cytologic examination?
We heat fix the sample, using a cigarette lighter, and then wait a minute or so to allow it to
cool. As a senior veterinary student learned, placing a warm slide into the fixative (containing
95% alcohol) will create quite a large flame! A modifed Wright stain (DiffQuik) is used. There
are three jars in this kit. The first jar is a fixative containing 95% alcohol, the second contains
buffered xanthene dye, which stains the cells and organisms red, and the third contains buffered
thiazine dye that stains the cells and organisms purple. The slide is placed into each jar for 3 to
5 seconds and then is placed into a bottle containing water. The slide is then dipped a number of
times until the excess stain has been rinsed off. Since the stains are used many times before
discarding (they are usually discarded monthly and the jars are thoroughly washed) there is a
potential for debris to accumulate in the bottom of the jars. To decrease the potential for
contaminating slides, allow the slides to rest in each jar for the allotted time rather than agitating 
 them. Another tip is to use clothespins to hold the slides to avoid staining your fingers! Once the
slides have been rinsed, they can either be air dried or blotted (NOT rubbed) with a paper towel.
The sample is now ready to ex amine microscopically.
 31. What specific diseases/conditions may be detected via cytology?
The presence (and/or type) of:
·Bacterial or fungal infections (Malassezia) (see Figures 3-2 and 3-3)
·Neoplasia
·Inflammation
·Autoimmune diseases (acantholytic keratinocytes associated with pemphigus) (see
Figure 3-4)
Diagnostic Techniques in Dermatology
33
32. What are acantholytic keratinocytes?
They are keratinocytes that have lost their intercellular “glue" due to an auto-immune Or
infectious (bacterial or dermatophytic) process. Once the keratinocytes have lost their anchors,
uadde snnu sidind yp e pue sdro sdind e ym sho puni se u (sno
singly or in clusters (see Figure 3-4).
 33. When do you perform a bacterial culture and susceptibility test?
Bacterial cultures are not frequently perforrmed in dogs with skin disease because
Staphyfococcus intermedius is the most common bacterial pathogen and has a predictable
susceptibility profle. It would be uncommon to obtain culture specimens from cats with skin
disease because they rarely get bacterial infections, except for cat bite abscesses. Indications for
culture and susceptibility testing in the dog or cat would include the presence of:
·Nodules
·Deep draining tracts
·A bacterial infection of the skin (confirmed by identifying intracellular bacteria and
degenerative neutrophils) that fails to respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy
· Otitis externa with chronic changes in the ear canals especially if a single population of
rods is found on cytologic studies
·Suspicion of an uncommon bacterial infection (atypical mycobacteria, Nocardia,
Actinobacillus)
·Suspicion of an anaerobic infection (gas pocket formation)
Otitis media
Because the bacteria of interest are present in the deep tissue and not the surface, a
macerated tissue culture should be performed on samples from nodules. To collect the sample for
a macerated tissue culture, the site is sterilely prepped by clipping with a no. 40 blade and
scrubbing with a chlorhexidine or tamed iodine-based shampoo. The area is then rinsed with
alcohol. An incisional biopsy specimen, using sterile technique, is then obtained as previously
described. The sample is then placed into a sterile container rather than a formalin container. At
the laboratory, the surface is then scorched or the epidermis is sterilely removed. The remaining
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Carlotti DN, Pin D: Diagnostic approach. In Guaguere E, Prelaud P (eds): A practical guide to feline dermatology,
London, 2000, Merial, pp 2.12-2.17
Larone DH: Medically important fungi: α guide to identification, ed 3. Washington DC, 1995, ASM Press.
Mueller RS: Specific tests in smallanimal dematology.In: Dermatologyfor the small animat practitioner.Jackson,
Teton, 2000, NewMedia, pp 21-45.
Nesbitt GH, Ackerman LJ: Fundamentals of dermatologic diagnosis. In: Canine and feline dermatotogy Trenton,NJ,
1998, Veterinary Leaming System, pp 38-66
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Diagnostic methods. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Muter & Kirk's
small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 94-130.
34
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies: A Pathologist's Perspective
4. A GUIDE TO TAKING SKIN BIOPSIES:
A PATHOLOGIST'S PERSPECTIVE
Robert W. Dunstan, DVM, MS, DACVP
Elizabeth A. Mauldin, DVM, DACVP, DACVD
Gary M. Davenport, PhD
Kelly M. Credille, DVM, PhD, DACVP
1.Why a chapter on how to take a skinbiopsy?
A skin biopsy is one of those procedures that appears so simple in execution that the subject
may, at first glance, not appear to be a dermatology “secret." Although not technically difficult,
ask any dermatopathologist and he or she will tell you the preference is to receive samples from
samples is so much better. Dermatologists know where to perform a biopsy. Biopsies can be
further improved if clinicians (including dermatologists) use techniques that increase the ability
of the pathologist to visualize the clinical picture through the microscope. The secrets in this
chapter are a series of hints to improve the quality of a skin biopsy submission and to optimize
the chances that a pathologist will give you a meaningful diagnosis.
2. When should I take a biopsy?
There are four occasions when a clinician will want to biopsy:
To Confirm a Diagnosis
There are many diseases in which the lesions are characteristic but the clinician will want to
submit a biopsy sample to be absolutely certain the diagnosis is correct. Diseases of this type
include superficial spreading pyoderma; forms of cutaneous neoplasia; and metabolic diseases,
such as metabolic epiderrmal necrosis (superficial necrolytic dermatitis).
To Provide Direction without Always Receiving a Definitive Diagnosis
 In many cases, therapy may not be effective or the clinician suspects more than one disease
is occurring. In these situations, biopsy may be helpful not because it will give the clinician a
definitive diagnosis but because it helps in identifying additional diagnostic tests or treatments
that can help the patient. The most common example is that of an allergic skin disease. Only
rarely will a skin biopsy define the type of allergy present but its histologic evaluation can
confirm or deny the presence of other diseases (pyoderma, endocrinopathy, demodicosis, etc.)
that may confound therapy.
Out of Curiosity
Sometimes a clinician will submit biopsies not because the lesions are debilitating Or
disfiguring to the patient but because they are unusual and he or she just wants to learn what a
lesion represents histologically.
Out of Desperation
The patient is getting worse, no therapy seems to work, and the client is calling you three
times a day. Biopsies in this situation are submitted primarily to obtain a diagnosis of therapeutic
Televance but also as a means to share frustration with the pathologist.
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies:A Pathologist's Perspective
35
Hig h
Likelihood of 
Fully
Early
padolarap
Late
histologic changes
being present
Age of lesion
Figure 4-1 Diagram of the evolution of skin lesions. As depicted, fully developed lesions are the most
diagnostic, and early lesions are more diagnostic than late lesions.
3. What should I biopsy?
Always Consider the Life of aLesion
Lesions usually follow a progression from early to fully developed to late stages. As a rule,
fully developed lesions are the most diagnostic. Early lesions usually appear as macules or
patches. Fully developed lesions can also appear as macules and patches as well as papules,
plaques, wheals, nodules, cysts, vesicles, pustules, comedones, and papillomas. Late or resolving
lesions are usually less diagnostic than early lesions. Late lesions often appear as scales, crusts,
erosions, ulcers, or fissures.
Selecting Lesions to Biopsy
Unless a lesion is extremely localized or all lesions are in the same stage of development,
multiple skin biopsy specimens should always be submitted.
The ultimate objective of obtaining a skin biopsy sample is to allow the pathologist to see
the evolution of the disease from early to fully developed to late lesions. Thus, the first biopsy
should be of the lesions that are most representative of how the animal appears. Subsequent
biopsies should be of early or fully developed lesions (Figure 4-1).
 4. How do I prepare the site for a skin biopsy?
 Note that preparation of a skin biopsy site is not a sterile procedure! You should first trim
hair with a scissors or clip with a no. 40 blade. Trim over (not through) areas where there is
abundant scaling and crusting. There is seldom an advantage and, because of the chance of losing
diagnostic lesions in the superficial epidermis, considerable disadvantages to washing the site of
a skin biopsy, especially when a punch is being used. If you believe some cleaning is necessary,
then the clipped site should be washed with plain water and patted dry. Crusts and scales should
be left intact if possibleunder the microscope, they often contain important diagnostic clues.
For denoting the areas to be sampled, a dot does not do it! Instead of denoting the area with a
circle or a dot, mark the area to be anesthetized by a line made with a fine-tipped indelible marker
(Sharpie) parallel to the direction the hair lies. This is extremely important because it heips the
pathologist orient biopsy samples correctly when they are being trimmed for histologic
examination (Figures 4-2 and 4-3).
For local anesthesia, a bleb of no more than 1 cc of 2% lidocaine/site injected into the
subcutaneous fat is standard but try to use less if multiple biopsy sites are to be obtained from a
cat or a very small dog. To avoid pain and anxiety, use a general anesthetic if you are obtaining
a biopsy specimen from sensitive tissues such as the nose leather or paw pad.
36
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies:A Pathologist's Perspective
A
Figure 4-2 A, To allow the pathologist to better orient the skin biopsy sample, draw aline parallel to the
direction the hairflows with anindelible marking pen.There are two lines onthis dog indicating two biopsy
specimens will be taken frorm this region. B, Note how the pathologist uses the black line to trim the punch
biopsy.
5.How do I take a punch biopsy sample?
General Concepts
The standard punch biopsy size for veterinary medicine should be a 6- or 8-mm punch
(Figure 4-4). Smaller diameter punches (4 or 3 mm) should only be used when a larger biopsy is
technically difficult or could result in visible scaring (ie., lesions near the mucocutaneous
junctions or on the ear). Please do not use a punch biopsy to delineate borders of lesions! Such
lines of demarcation are usually bleached with formalin fixation and are ignored because the
punch is trimmed according to hair shaft orientation. If the borders of a lesion are important, use
an excisional biopsy (see below). You should also avoid using a punch biopsy on large pustules
Or blisters (bullae) because rotation can shear the roof of these lesions. Instead, an excisional
biopsy should be used when this situation arises. Finally, a punch biopsy should not be used to
sample neoplastic or inflammatory diseases in the subcutaneous fat of dogs or cats or the deep
dermis in large animals because biopsy punches often do not penetrate to a sufficient depth to
obtain a representativesample.
Procedure
When taking the sample, position the punch over the center of a lesion or (preferably) at a
site where only abnormal tissue is present. Once oriented, rotate the punch in one direction only,
until it sinks into the subcutaneous fat (you know you are in the subcutaneous fat because the
tissue “gives"). Gently support the plug of tissue (ie., do not crush) and cut free with a small,
iris-type scissors. Blot on a gauze pad to remove excess blood. Although older texts suggest
placing the biopsy sample on a piece of tongue depressor or cardboard to minimize curling during
fixation, this is optional for punch biopsy specimens that are too thick to curl but is mandatory
for excisional biopsies (see below) that invariably twist and wrinkle during fxation. Do not
dawdle! The time from removal of the biopsy sample to formalin immersion should be as short
as possible (seconds not minutes).
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies:A Pathologist's Perspective
37
Figure 4-3 The appearance of a biopsy sample that was correctly sectioned (A) compared to a biopsy
sample that was incorrectly sectioned (B). Note that when a biopsy sarmple is correctly sectioned parallel to
the flow of the hair,the entire structure of the hair follicle can be exarmined. When sectioned perpendicular
Or considerably tangential to the flow of the hair, the follicles look like “Swiss cheese.”
Once the biopsy sample is removed, the site should be closed with 4-0 nonabsorbable
monofilament using a cruciate suture or two simple interrupted sutures. Remember that black
sutures can be lost in black-haired animals. Some clinicians will use "surgical superglue'
(cyanoacrylate) as an alternative but we have found that using this method to effectively close a
skin biopsy site takes practice and works better at sites or in breeds in which there is abundant
looseskin.
38
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies: A Pathologist's Perspective
Figure4-4
The difference in number of follicular units available for exarmination between a 6-mm (A)
and a 3-mm (B) punch biopsy sample. From the pathologist's perspective, the 6-mm punch is always
preferred.
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies:A Pathologist's Perspective
39
Incorrect
Lesion
correct
Incorrect
Flow of hair
Figure 4-5Diagram of how to orient an elliptical biopsy
6. How do I take an elliptically oriented skin biopsy?
General Concepts
This technique is always preferred (or at least not contraindicated) by the pathologist
because "more tissue often gives more information." An elliptical sample is especially helpful
when it is oriented to cross the transition zone from normal to abnormal skin. If you are sampling
such a site, the lesion should be at one point of the ellipse and normal skin at the other point. In
addition, you should try to orient the ellipse along the "lay" of the hair so the entire follicle can
be examined (the sample will be cut along its length during trimming for histologic evaluation)
(Figure 4-5).
Technique
For small elliptically oriented biopsies, the site is prepared as for the punch biopsy—less is
more. As with the punch biopsy procedure, the use of a local versus a general anesthetic will
depend on the site of the lesion as well as the depth of the tissue to be sampled. Know that an
elliptical biopsy does not have to be large, only representative. Thus a l-cim ellipse provides
plenty of tissue for the pathologist to examine. Use a no. 15 blade on the scalpel handle to incise
an ellipse of tissue. Cut the base free with an iris scissors, then blot excess blood and place the
Pssidop snsuon sun un rossidep snsuon jo aoid 1o pieogpio uo dn shuepido, Asdong
upside-down and immerse in formalin immediately. Close the site with simple interrupted sutures.
7.How do I take a wedge biopsy?
General Concepts
This is a variant of the elliptically oriented skin biopsy. Most commonly, wedge biopsies are
taken to sample raised lesions, nodules, margins of the ear pinna, and footpad lesions.
Technique
The technique is similar to the ellipse except it extends in a third dimension to the center of
a nodule or into the subcutaneous fat. For example: for footpad biopsies, cut down into fat pad,
narrowing at the base so that the sample will have a shape like a canoe. Close with a far-far-near-
near (inverted) suture pattern. (These can be slow to heall) A wedge can also be obtained after a
nodule has been excised, affording better fixation because the sample is thinner
8. What about fixation?
 Ten percent neutral buffered formalin remains the fixation of choice for histopathology.
Being the "fixative" of choice, however, does not mean that formalin is optimal. Formalin is a
40
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies: A Pathologist's Perspective
proven irritant, a proven sensitizer to delayed-type hypersensitivity responses, and a known
carcinogen. It should be handled with caution. If your container leaks in the mail, the post office
may send the sample back to you. Although alternative, formalin-free, safer fixatives are currently
on the market, they are simply not as good when evaluated with standard histologic stains and
cannot be recommended at this time.
For adequate fixation, there should be at least ten times the volume of formalin per volume
of tissue. In addition, assume formalin can only penetrate dermal tissue a maximum of 0.5 cm
from any direction. Thus, tissues larger than I cm square may not be fixed in their center. Know
adequate fixation. Once tissues are fixed, they can be placed in smaller volumes of formalin or
snssu sy os jusseid si pinbi sun yo yanous pepioid suiddus pue seiois ioy louoole %o usas
do not dry out.
For samples sent from the North and, to a lesser extent, samples sent to the North, freezing
of tissues in transit is a major problem during the winter. Frozen tissues develop such extreme
distortion of normal morphology that in most cases they cannot be interpreted histologically. If
the biopsy sample might be exposed to freezing temperatures, you can avoid this artifact by
adding one part 70% ethyl alcohol to mine parts formalin (isopropyl alcohol works just as well!)
and use this as a fixative.
Finally, Michele's media was once used as a fixative to evaluate for the deposition of
immunoglobulins in the skin. Now equivalent results can be obtained with formalin-fixed tissues
and it is seldom used. If for whatever reason, you are advised to submit a biopsy sample in
Michele's media, make certain the person who requests the samples sends you the media.
Michele's media has a notoriously short half-life and you should not use expired media.
9. What can you expect from your pathologist?
The first concern of most practitioners is turnaround time. We recommend that you avoid
services that offer results in less than 24 to 36 hours! For skin pathology, preparation of the tissue
for optimal evaluation requires at least 12 hours in a machine known as a tissue processor.
Anything less than 12 hours results in tissue sections that are inferior to those of laboratories with
longer processing times because the tissues are more difficult to section with a microtome. This
          i     s
histologic interpretations. In all fairness, a shortened processing time will not affect the outcome
in most cases, but it can occasionally obscure subtle changes that could change the diagnosis. For
most samples it will take at least 3 to 4 working days minimum to get results from an efficient
laboratory: a day for trimming and processing, a day for making the slides and initial review by
the pathologist, a day for dictating the report, and a day for sending the proofed report out. If
additional stains are needed to confirm a diagnosis, a longer time should be expected. To shorten
the delay by mail, many pathologists will send an e-mail message with a preliminary diagnosis
or final report, especially on critical cases. Do not be afraid to ask!
Another concern is to make sure your pathologist has expertise in dermatopathology. As a
of the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology and the International Society of Veterinary
10. What should your pathologist expect from you?
The pathologist wants as brief but complete a history as possible. This should include
(1) location, pigmentation of biopsy sites and type of lesion present; (2) signalment of patient;
list; and (6) what diseases would you like to exclude (i.e., are Malassezia yeasts present? etc.).
Your technical assistant can write the address and signalment on the form but the clinician
needs to take time to fill out or dictate the clinical features of the disease, biopsy sites, medication
history, differential diagnosis, etc. Do not photocopy and send the patient's medical file.
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies: A Pathologist's Perspective
41
11. How do I provide submissions for a molecular age?
Thus, knowledge of additional methods for sampling tissues is required. The following is a list
of protocols to submit samples for less routine morphologic tests and most molecular-based
assays.
12. How do I submit a sample for electron microscopy?
the characteristic lesions in some collagen fragility diseases can only be confirmed under
ex tremely high magnification. Although you should follow the advice given by the laboratory that
will receive the sample, we have found that formalin fixation is an adequate fixative for defining
most ultrastructural alterations. Other options include fixing in glutaraldehyde or a combination
of glutaraldehyde and formalin (Karnovsky's solution). The problem we have had with these
fixatives is that the sample needs to be cut extremely simall and fixed for a relatively short period
in these compounds before it is placed in a phosphate buffer. Failure to do this correctly can ruin
the sample. In short, glutaraldehyde and Karnovsky's fixation offers pristine samples for electron
microscopy but are easy to ruin; formalin fixation offers adequate samples but is impossible to
Tuin. The choice is yours.
13. How do I submit a sample to look for proteins via immunohistochemistry that cannot
be identified after formalin fixation?
Although most immunohistochemical stains have been adapted to work on formalin-fixed
samples, some do not. This includes a number of valuable markers for lymphocytes and
macrophages. For example, separating T helper (CD-4+) from cytotoxic T cells (CD-8+) and
frozen tissues. Submitting a biopsy sample for such analysis can be done in either of two ways:
Option I: Express Mailing the Sample on Ice
This is the most commonly used technique. Simply take a 6-mm biopsy sample, wrap
in a gauze 4x4 soaked in physiologic saline, place in a plastic bag, and send in a cold pack for
next-day delivery. Note that most pathology laboratories do not open the mail during the weekend
so it is best if the sample is sent early in the week and the laboratory is forewarned about its
arrival.
Option 2:Flash-Freezing a Skin Sample in OCT
This will require assistance from the laboratory doing the analysis. Briefly you will need a
specialized embedding compound (OCT by Tissue-Tex, Torrance, CA), a cryomold (made by the
(epidermis to subcutis) oriented for hair flow (see previous section). The hal ves should be laid
cut side down in a small amount of OCT placed in the bottom of the tissue mold. The mold is
then filled with OCT, covering the sample, and is placed on top of dry ice until the sample is
totally frozen. The sample should be sent by overnight delivery to the laboratory on dry ice. There
are a number of alternatives to this method (dry ice and acetone, freezing in liquid mitrogen) but
we have had best results with the above method.
14. How do I submit a sample for nucleic acid storage/analysis?
More and more breeders are interested in having deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) samples
stored from their dogs. Unlike ribonucleic acid (RNA; see below) every cell has exactly the same
DNA; thus any sample with nuclei can be used. In addition, DNA is extremely stable and
degrades very slowly (we have isolated usable DNA from the proximal ends of dog hairs stored
isolation, gloves need to be worn at all times to prevent contamination.
42
A Guide to Taking Skin Biopsies:A Pathologist'sPerspective
DNA from whole blood: Three to 5 m of whole blood in a Vacutainer tube containing
EDTA (lavender top) should be sufficient. Send the sample cooled but not frozen.
DNA from α skin biopsy: DNA can be harvested from paraffin-embedded skin biopsies, so
each skin biopsy sample that you submit can be viewed as a DNA sample.
DNA from the buccal/oral mucosa: Laboratories that have DNA-based assays already
established will often request that submissions consist of brushed oral mucosa. If this is the case,
the laboratory you are using will provide you with a brush and directions. The technique is simple
and non-traumatic consisting of brushing the area between the cheek and gum and keeping the
brush from further contamination. This method does not provide a lot of DNA but this is almost
always adequate for established tests. The sample can be sent in the envelope in which the brush
came without refrigeration.
Submitting α sample for RNA analysis: In some diseases, full molecular evaluation requires
isolating RNA rather than DNA. When RNA analysis is preferred, the laboratory should send you
a vial of a compound called RNA Later (Ambion, Austin, TX). A 6-mm skin biopsy sample can
be placed in approximately 2 to 3 mL of this compound and sent without freezing by express mail
to the laboratory. Work quickly when taking the sample and placing it in RNA Later. Unlike
DNA, RNA is extremely labile and time is truly of the essence.
REFERENCE
              i  1
dematopathologic interpretation. Vet Med April 2002, pp 286-288.
Section II
Dermatologic Therapy
5. SYMPTOMATIC MANAGEMENT
OF PRURITUS
Paul Bloom, DVM, DABVP, DACVP
1. What is pruritus?
Pruritus (itch) is the unpleasant sensation that triggers the desire to scratch, chew, rub, lick,
or bite at the skin.
 2. How is the sensation of pruritus transmitted?
No clearly defined end organ has been found at this time. There are nociceptors (nerves
involved with itch or pain) just below the dermal-epidermal junction or sometimes in the deep
layers of the epidermis that initiate the transimission of pruritus. The sensation can be generated
by chemical, electrical, mechanical, or thermal stimulation. It is then transmitted via either free
nerve endings or a specific mechanoreceptor to polymodal units that contain C unmyelinated
axons. A small amount is transmitted via A& myelinated axons. These nerves transmit the signal
to the spinal cord where it then travels up to the sensory cortex in last brain.
3. What is meant by the “threshold theory of pruritus"?
A certain pruritic threshold is tolerated by all individuals without resulting in clinical signs.
Any increase above this threshold, even a small amount, will result in clinical signs. A good way
to think of this is that each individual has a paper bag that can hold a certain weight of groceries.
Once that amount is exceeded, the entire content of the bag is lost, not just the last item.
4. What does the phrase “summation of effect" mean in regards to pruritus?
The additive effects of different pruritogenic mediators can, together, raise an animal's
"pruritus level" above its threshold, resulting in clinical signs of pruritus. Therefore, even though
 an individual stimulus may not be enough to cause clinical signs, together, multiple stimuli may
be. An example would be a dog with environmental allergen-induced atopic dermatitis (atopy)
of effect) will push this dog over its pruritic threshold. This dog will not only show clinical signs
associated with fleas (typically pruritus of the posterior one third of the body) but will also show
clinical signs of atopy, that is pruritus of the feet, face, flexors, friction areas, or fold areas of the
body. Treating only the fleas will resolve ALL clinical signs in this dog.
 5. Why are these two concepts, pruritic threshold and summation of effect, important in
the symptomatic treatment of pruritus?
These concepts reinforce the importance of treating ALL the causes of pruritus—pyoderma,
dry skin, Malassezia, fleas, and the self-perpetuating cycle of itch-scratch-itch (trauma to the skin
causes release of inflammatory mediators).
43
44
Symptomatic ManagementofPruritus
6. How do animals manifest the symptoms of pruritus?
They will scratch, chew, rub, lick, or bite at the skin, resulting in alopecia, hypotrichosis,
excoriation, lichenification, or crusts. In some cases, quite remarkably, there are no cutaneous
lesions despite moderately severe pruritus.
7. How can pruritus be treated in cats and dogs?
The FIRST step before instituting treatment is to attempt to identify the cause of the pruritus.
The next step, if possible, would be to treat it specifically. In addition, symptomatic therapy may
be necessary. Therapy can be broken down into three categories:
Topical therapy
Barrier therapy
Systemic therapy
Frequently a combination of all three categories is necessary to control pruritus.
8. What are the advantages and disadvantages of topical antipruritic therapy?
The advantages of topical therapy include direct access to diseased tissue and the ability to
reduce or eliminate the need for systemic therapy. With less systemic therapy there is a lower
likelihood of systemic adverse reactions. The disadvantages of topical therapy are the additional
time and effort involved in administering topical therapy as opposed to systemic therapy. Also,
the cost of topical therapy can be substantial. In fact, some topical therapies are so costly that they
can only be used on localized lesions. Lastly, even topical medications can be absorbed and create
systemic effects (e.g., topical steroids, especially potent ones, that are applied over large areas of
the body and/or under an occlusive bandage can cause iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism).
9. What formulations are used in topical therapy and how are they different?
For review, please see Table 5-1.
Table 5-1Formulations of Different Topical Therapies
FORMULATION
DEFINITION/PROPERTIES/INDICATIONS/CONTRAINDICATIONS
Shampoo
Shampoos may cleanse the skin of adherent scale or debris (including
allergens) and may be used to deliver medication to the skin in the
treatment of widespread dermatologic disease.
Powders
Pulverized solids that are applied in a thin flm. Powders can be
components of a rinse (added to water), a suspension (added to a
liquid), or a paste (added to an ointment)
Indications: Because they are hygroscopic (take in water) they dry the
skin. Powders are cooling, promote drying, lubricate intertriginous
areas.
Wet dressings
Wet dressings are drying, astringent (decrease exudation by
precipitation of protein), antipruritic, acidifying, and mildly
anti septic.
 Indications: For the treatment of acute inflammatory states
characterized by exudative lesions, such as lesions that occur with
 pyotraumatic dermatitis.
Solutions
Solutions are solvents in which active ingredients are dissolved to
clarity. Molecules are freely movable in this form from vehicle to
skin and are 100% available for absorption. This does not mean
there is 100% absorption since the stratum corneum is still a factor.
Symptomatic Managementof Pruritus
45
Table 5-1
Formulations of Different Topical TherapiesCont'd
FORMULATION
DEFINITION/PROPERTIES/INDICATIONS/CONTRAINDICATIONS
Rinses
Rinses are made by mixing solutions or powders with water. They may
be sponged or sprayed on to the animal. As the rinse dries, the
residual layer of active ingredients is left on the pet's skin. Rinses,
like shampoos, are ideal for treating diseases that involve large
areas of the body.
Lotions
Lotions are liquid preparations in which inert or active medications are
suspended or dissolved. As the liquid evaporates, there is drying
and cooling of the skin, which are properties desirable in the
treatment of ex udative dermatoses. Also as the base evaporates it
leaves active, freely moveable molecules that now act like a
solution. Lotions are indicated for acute exudative lesions and are
contraindicated in dry, scaly lesions.
 Suspensions
Watery lotions to which powder is added. Generally zinc oxide,
talcum, calamine, glycerol, alcohol, or water is used. Specific drugs
 and stabilizers may be added. This preparation dries and cools 
exudative skin. A drawback of this formulation is a tendency to
have sedimentation in the bottle. It is important to shake the
container before each use in order to obtain a homogeneous
suspension. In addition, when the water has evaporated from the
skin, the powder particles may clump together and become abrasive.
Gels
Gels are transparent, colloidal dispersions that liquefy on contact with
skin. They are clear, colorless, greaseless, and water miscible
When applied to the skin, gels dry as a nonocclusive flm and are
preferable to creams or ointments because they penetrate through
the haircoat without leaving residual flm. While having the
advantage of being water-washable, nongreasy, and cosmetically
elegant, gels have the disadvantage of lacking any protective or
emollient properties.
Creams
Creams are emulsions of oil in water. In a cream, the oil droplets are
dispersed in a continuous phase of water or a polar liquid. Creams
are used widely for their cooling, moisturizing and emollient
effects. They form a protective covering that reduces contact with
the environment. Certain occlusive types may reduce water loss,
thereby softening and rehydrating the skin. They are
contraindicated for ex udative lesions.
Ointments
These spread easily to form a protective film on the skin and are more
lubricating than creams. Due to their occlusive nature, ointments 
sanip peeodooul jo uogenoued peoidoi enoq apiaoid Aieruoa
than do creams or lotions. They are insoluble in water and are
difficult to wash off.
Pastes
Pastes are ointments into which 20 to 50% powder (e.g., zinc oxide,
starch) is incorporated. The powders must be insoluble in the
ointment base in order to exert an absorbent effect. Pastes are more
drying, less greasy, and may be tolerated on slightly exudative skin 
(powder takes up water), whereas creams and ointments are
contraindicated in these lesions.
46
Symptomatic Managementof Pruritus
10. What ingredients are useful for topical antipruritic therapy and what is their mechanism
of action?
For review, please see Table 5-2.
Table 5-2 Topical Antipruritic Agents
INGREDIENT
MECHANISM OF ACTION (IF KNOWN)
Sulfur
Unknown
Tars
Anesthetizes peripheral ner ves
Pramoxine hydrochloride
 A surface or local anesthetic to peripheral nerves. Its unique
chemical structure is likely to minimize the danger of cross-
sensitivity reactions in patients allergic to other local
anesthetics.
Ketoconazole
By its anti-Malassezia properties and its ability to decrease
 leukotriene C4, a potent inflammatory cytokine.
Solutions of aluminum
Unknown
 acetate, acetic acid,
 and calcium carbonate
Aloe vera extracts
Salicylic acid and magnesium lactate are the two chemical
compounds that produce the antipruritic effects. Salicylic acid
inhibits the production of prostaglandin from arachidonic acid
 by inhibiting cyclo-ox ygenase, whereas the magnesium 
lactate inhibits the conversion of histidine to histamine in
mast cells via an enzyme called histidine carbox ylase.
Menthol
Menthol activates cold-sensitive A& fibers, this substitutes a
cooling sensation for pruritus.
Dimethyl
DMSO is anti-inflammatory (via free radical scavenging;
sulfoxide (DMSO)
decreases prostaglandin synthesis; stabilizes lysosomal
membranes) and is analgesic by blocking C fibers.
Glucocorticoids (GCs)
See text for complete discussion. GCs decrease the synthesis of
proinflammatory molecules and other mediators of
inflammation. GCs also profoundly affect the replication and
 movement of cells. They induce lymphocytopenia,
    u    
 T cells than on B cells. Macrophage functions (phagocytosis,
 anti gen-processing and cell killing) are also decreased.
 Diphenhy dramine
First-generation H1 antagonist, antipruritic properties may be
derived from competitive antagonism with histamine for H1
receptor binding.
Tacrolimus
Aminophyllin binding macrolide that is related to cyclosporine.
 Tacrolimus inhibits T cell activation and cytokine production
by blocking calcineurin. Calcineurin is a calcium and
calmodulin (widespread calcium binding protein) dependent 
protein phosphatase that dephosphorylates (activates) the
transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells).
Without the action of NFAT, cell activation is blocked.
Colloidal oatmeal
May inhibit prostaglandin synthesis. Also a humectant leading
to moisturizing of the skin, thereby raising the pruritic
threshold.
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
47
11. What is meant by the term "barrier therapy"?
These are items that physically prevent the dog or cat from scratching. This could include
Elizabethan collars, T-shirts, onesies, bandages, etc.
12. How does barrier therapy help control pruritus?
When the skin is damaged from scratching, inflammatory cytokines are released from the
damaged keratinocytes. More pruritus then occurs because of the inflammation, which causes
more scratching, which causes more inflammation, leading to the vicious cycle of itch-scratch-
itch. By preventing or minimizing the damage to the skin, the itch-scratch-itch cycle is inter-
rupted. Also, one of the functions of the skin (specifically the dead stratum corneum) is to act as
a barrier, keeping substances from penetrating into the living epidermis and deeper. When the
bartrier is physically disrupted, this function is impaired, allowing substances (e.g., antigens) to
more easily penetrate the skin.
13. What are the advantages and disadvantages of barrier therapy?
The advantages of physical barriers are that they break the itch-scratch-itch cycle by
decreasing damage to the skin without systemic side effects, are inexpensive, and are less labor-
intensive than topical therapies.
The disadvantages are:
Some animals will tear the barrier off
Some animals may get clothing "paralysis" (won't walk or move around with clothing on)
The need to keep the barrier clean and dry
Clothing may need to be altered (holes for the tail and genitals)
The barrier may need to be removed before the pet is allowed to eliminate
14. Why are antibiotics sometimes effective in decreasing pruritus?
Antibiotics can have antipruritic activity by two methods. One is by eliminating bacteria that
produce pruritogenic substances (e.g., proteases, lipopolysaccharides). Second, some of the
trimethoprim, which decreases leukocyte chemotaxis; fluoroquinolones, which decrease IL1,
tumor necrosis factor-o and various leukotrienes; and macrolides, which decrease leukocyte
chemotaxis, IL1, and lymphocyte blastogenesis.
15. How do antifungal agents help decrease pruritus?
antifungal activity against Malassezia. Like bacteria, Malassezia produces substances that are
pruritogenic. These substances also may trigger type I hypersensitivity reactions. KCZ also
affects pruritus by its ability to block the enzyme 5-lipoxygenase. This enzyme is involved in the
16. People seem to have strong opinions (both pro and con) about the administration of
glucocorticoids (GCs) for the symptomatic treatment of pruritus. How do GCs work?
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are the most commonly used medications for the symptomatic
treatment of pruritus. GCs passively diffuse through the cell membrane and bind to soluble
receptor proteins in the cytoplasm. This hormone-receptor complex then moves to the nucleus
to be their inhibitory effect on the transcription factors AP-1 and NF-kB. GCs decrease the
synthesis of proinflammatory molecules, including cytokines, interleukins, and proteases, largely
through their negative effects on these transcription factors. Other mediators of inflammation
such as the inducible form of nitric oxide synthetase and cyclooxygenase-2 are also inhibited.
functions is to increase the synthesis of lipocortin 1. One of lipocortin's actions is to inhibit
48
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
phospholipase Az (PLA2) activity. PLAz is the enzyme responsible for the release of arachidonic
acid (AA) from membrane phospholipids. Because AA is the parent compound for the formation
of proinflammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting its release, there is less precursor
available to form these inflammatory mediators.
GCs profoundly affect the replication and movement of cells. They induce lymphocytopenia,
eosinopenia, and monocytopenia.
GCs can cause mast cell depletion in the skin, possibly via decrease in stem cell factor,
which is a necessary growth factor for mast cells.
17. How should GCs be used in small animal practice?
The following caveats must be followed for the safe and appropriate administration of
glucocorticoids:
GCs should not be used in lieu of identifying the animal's underlying pruritic disease. For
animals that have seasonal symptoms of environmental allergen-induced atopic dermatitis and
must stay on GCs long term (>2 months out of the year), it is strongly recommended that intra-
the symptoms are nonseasonal then it is appropriate to investigate the possibility of cutaneous
adverse food reaction causing the pruritus. The owner is instructed how to properly perform a
food trial. A homemade diet is preferred. The second choice is a commercial "hypoallergenic"
diet, which is a less sensitive test. Commercial foods for use in restrictive feeding trials are either
a hydrolyzed diet or a novel protein diet. Regardless of which food is used, the trial should last
a minimum of 60 days for dogs and 90 days for cats. If the animal fails to respond to ASIT, a
properly performed food trial and an antihistamine trial, or if the owner refuses these options,
then GCs should be administered long term rather than have the animal euthanized or left to suffer.
Only short-acting GCs (prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone) should be
long as they are used only once or twice yearly.
Use the lowest possible dose of GCs that keeps the animal "humanely" pruritic. The goal is
to balance the discomfort of the pruritus with the risk of GC administration. Owners should be
educated to keep the animal "humanely” pruritic, NOT necessarily pruritus free.
In dogs, administer GCs every other morning. It is currently unknown whether cats should
be medicated at night because they are nocturnal animals.
To minimize the amount of GCs needed long term, it is critical to break the itch-scratch-itch
cycle. This means giving GCs at a high enough dose for a long enough period of time that the
animal stops excessive scratching. It takes less medication to prevent the onset of pruritus once
pruritus is RESOLVED than it does if you start at the same dose without resolving the pruritus.
One of the most common reasons, other than unidentified Malassezia and pyoderma, that GCs
are ineffective or minimally effective for pruritus is the failure to give an appropriate starting
dose. The author uses prednisone or prednisolone at % mg twice daily for 7 days, every day for
7 days, then every other day for 7 days in dogs. Cats require double the previously described dose
for clinical effectiveness. Because of the differences in anti-inflammatory potencies, when using
methylpredmisolone, the previously described calculations should be performed and then
Because methylprednisolone is slightly more expensive but causes less polyuria or polydipsia
(pu/pd), it is used in animals that develop pu/pd from prednisolone/prednisone.
In cases when the animal is on GCs >6 months/year, a complete blood cell count and serum
e n oy sna u, uss on ns d s inus d nso
At the same time, a urinalysis is performed to identify pyuria, hematuria, and proteinuria. A urine
culture is performed to identify a "silent" urinary tract infection (asymptomatic bacteriuria without
pyuria), associated with long-term GC administration.
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
49
19. What is the difference between prednisolone, prednisone, and methylprednisolone?
How are these drugs used in the author's practice?
For prednisone to be active, it must be converted to prednisolone in the liver. In dogs,
prednisolone, prednisone, and methylprednisolone work equally well. Because some cats have a
limited amount of the enzyme system necessary to convert prednisone to prednisolone, the author
will only use prednisolone in cats. There have been cats where prednisone was ineffective but
when prednisolone was administered at the same dose, clinical response was noted. Rather than
have both prednisone and prednisolone, only prednisolone is stocked in my practice. This avoids
the possibility of inadvertently changing a cat from prednisolone to prednisone.
Prednisone and prednisolone are equally potent in their anti-inflammatory activity, while
methylprednisolone is slightly more potent on a milligram per milligram basis. Because
methylprednisolone comes in a 4 mg vs a 5 mg tablet like prednisolone and prednisone, tablets
of any of these drugs are equivalent.
As stated previously, animals receiving methylprednisolone tend to have less pu/pd than
those receiving prednisone or prednisolone.
20.  Antihistamines, specifically H1 blockers, seem to have mixed reports of effectiveness.
Why are there disparate reports?
Histamine is one of many inflammatory mediators, some that are preformed and others that
are newly generated at the time of mast cell activation (Table 5-3). It is unclear at this time which
of the mediators is most important in humans, dogs, and cats. Another unanswered question-
Are there differences between species and between individuals of the same species? So blocking
histamine in one individual or species may be effective because histamine is an important
pruritogenic factor, while in others it will be ineffective because histamine is not as important of
a mediator of pruritus.
Table 5-31
Human Mast Cell Inflammatory Mediators
PREFORMED
NEWLY GENERATED
Histamine
Leu kotrienes B4-E4
Tryptase
Prostaglandins D, and F2
Chymases
Platelet activating factor
Carboxypeptidases
Thromboxane Az
Acid hydrolases
Cytokines
Arylsulfatase
Eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis
 Neutrophil chemotactic factor
Heparin
 Chondroitin sulfate
21. How does histamine create inflammation?
Histamine causes vasodilatation and increased permeability of vessels that contributes to
local edema formation. It also stimulates nerve endings, creating the sensation of pruritus.
22. What is the mechanism of action of antihistamines?
They work either by blocking the release of histamine or more commonly by competitive
inhibition for Hl receptors on inflammatory cells. First generation antihistamines also block the
muscarinic receptors (creating atropine-like side effects), serotonin receptors, and c-adrenergic
receptors. Currently only Hl receptor blockade is considered important for the symptomatic
treatment of pruri tus.
50
SymptomaticManagementofPruritus
23. What are the dangers and side effects of antihistamines?
Antihistamines in general are very safe but, because they are metabolized by the liver,
should be used cautiously or avoided in animals with liver disease. Side effects include sedation;
paradoxical restlessness/agitation; gastrointestinal (Gl) disturbances (anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea);
dry mouth, sometimes creating polydipsia +/- polyuria; and anticholinergic effects, such as
tachycardia and urinary retention.
Because antihistamines have anticholinergic effects, they are contraindicated in patients
with narrow angle glaucoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, severe congestive heart
failure, and conditions that create urinary retention (e.g., prostatic hypertrophy, bladder neck
obstruction). Some reports have described the lowering of seizure thresholds and recommend
avoiding their use in epileptics.* I have not seen an increase in seizures when antihistamines are
used in epileptics. However, antihistamines stimulate the cytochrome P450 enzyme system in the
liver, which can facilitate metabolism of anticonvulsants,and therefore they should be used
cautiously in animals receiving anticonvulsant medication.
24. Which antihistamines do you use and at what doses?
It is better to begin with the upper dosage and frequency and lower it if the pet responds, because
it can be difficult to convince clients to try an antihistamine a second time (Tables 5-4 and 5-5).
Table 5-4Antihistamines for Dogs
ADDITIONAL
DRUG
DOSAGE
FORMULATIONS
COMMENTS
Hydroxyzine
0.5-1 mg/1b bid-tid
Liquid: 10 mg/mL
Hydrochloride form has
Initial trial: 14 days
Pilis: 10, 25, 50 mg
become very
expensive
($0.70-0.90/50 mg
pill); the pamoate
form can be used.
Chlorpheniramine
0.2-0.25 mg/1b bid
Pills: 4 mg
Bitter tasting
Initial trial: 14 days
Capsule: 8, 12 mg
DON'T exceed dosage
listed. Sudden death
has occurred with
this medication at
doses higher than 
0.5 mg/lb/day
Available as an over-
the-counter
medication.
Diphenhy dramine
0.5-1.0 mg/lb
Liquid
Seems to be the most
bid -tid
Capsule: 25, 50 mg
sedating of all the 
Initial trial: 14 days
Caplet: 25 mg
antihistamines.
Available as an over-
the-counter
medication.
Clemastine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg bid
Tablets: 1.34,
Available as an over-
Initial trial: 14 days
2.68 mg
the-counter
 medication.
‘Antihistamines in the phenothiazine class (which includes promethazine hydrochloride and trimeprazine tartrate
[Temarill) are the most likely to lower the seizure threshold and should be avoided in animals with a history of seizures.
SymptomaticManagement ofPruritus
51
Table 5-4  Antihistamines for Dogs-Cont'd
ADDITIONAL
DRUG
DOSAGE
FORMULATIONS
COMMENTS
Amitriptyline
0.5-1 mg/lb bid
Capsules: 10, 25,
Useful for obsessive-
 Because of the long
50, 100 mg
 compulsive behavior
T the initial trial
that may complicate
should be 21 days
pruritus in dogs.
Cyproheptadine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg bid-tid 
Pill: 4 mg
Because of the size of
Initial trial: 14 days
the pill and the dose
required, large dogs
will frequently need
5-8 pills tid.
May cause polyphagia
in cats.
May cause agitation
(hallucinations?) in
cats. To avoid, start
at the lower dose and
give sid for 2 days,
bid for 2 days and
then full dose tid.
Doxepin
0.5-1 mg/lb bid
Capsules: 10, 25,
Useful for obsessive/
Because of the long
50,75, 100 mg
compulsive behavior
Tiz the initial trial
that may complicate
should be 21 days
pruritus in dogs.
Table 5-5 Antihistamines for Cats
DRUG
DOSAGE
Hydroxyzine
0.5-1 mg/lb bid-tid
Initial trial: 14 days
Chlorpheniramine
0.2-0.25 mg/1b bid
Initial trial: 14 days
Clemastine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg bid
Initial trial: 14 days
Amitriptyline
5-10 mg/cat/day given either sid or divided bid.
Because of the long Tipz the initial trial should be 21 days
Cyproheptadine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg bid-tid
Initial trial: 14 days
25. All the antihistamines listed are first generation. Why not use second-generation
an tihistamines?
Second-generation antihistamines are used in humans because they are less likely to
 penetrate the blood-brain barrier. By less penetration into the brain, there are fewer CNS effects
(e.g., sedation). In contrast to first-generation antihistamines, they also lack the antimuscarinic
properties (anticholinergic). I do not use these agents because they have not been reported to be
any more effective in dogs and cats and are very costly.
52
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
26. What benefit can be expected from antihistamines?
Unfortunately there are very few published blinded, placebo-controlled studies of the
effectiveness of antihistamines in the treatment of pruritus in dogs with atopy. U sing data from open
of dogs. Antihistamines alone will adequately control pruritus in <l0% of atopic dogs. However.
this population of dogs is biased because I am in a referral practice and only see dogs and cats
that are very pruritic.
Antihistamines may, instead of adequately controlling pruritus alone, act as steroid-sparing
agents, allowing a lowering of the dosage of GCs necessary to control pruritus.
27. What are tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and how do they help pruritic dogs and cats?
These animals are not depressed! Tricyclic antidepressants have a variety of activities including
inhibiting the reuptake of monoamine neurotransmitters (biogenic amines) such as norepinephrine
(NE) and serotomin, which are in the nerve terrminals within the CNS. Another action is their ability
to block histamine (Hl) receptors. Both these activities can help the pruritic dog or cat. The theory
of obsessive-compulsive behavior is that low levels of these biogenic amines are responsible for
the behavior. The author believes that some breeds of dogs are very focused on their licking behavior,
well in excess of overall pruritus, leading to the opinion that some dogs have pruritus that is partiafly
caused by obsessive-compulsive behavior. This is especially true in the Bichon Frise and Jack
Russell Terriers. Doxepin's antihistamine activity is 779 times more potent than diphenhydramine
 It is currently unknown whether TCAs’ antihistamine properties, their reuptake inhibition of
the neurotransmitters (NE and serotonin), or some other unknown properties are responsible for
the antipruritic activity.
28. What are the dangers and side effects of tricyclic antidepressants?
The side effects are mostly related to their blocking C-adrenergic receptors and muscarimic
receptors (anticholinergic actions). These side effects include dry mouth (possibly leading to
polydipsia +/- polyuria), sedation, tachycardia, tachyarhythmias, urinary retention, and GI dis-
turbances (constipation and anorexia). They should be avoided in patients with narrow angle
glaucoma. Some authors recommend a pretreatment electrocardiogram (ECG) and serum chemistr)
profile (to evaluate the liver); however, this is not necessary unless there is something historical
about the patient that makes them at risk for cardiac or hepatic complications. In humans they
only worry if they are using high doses in patients with cardiac conduction problems. They will
perform pretreatment ECG if the patient is older than 55 years old. They will then do a follow-
up ECG in 30-60 days. It is rare to see any changes in the ECG in these patients.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOls) will increase the concentration of these monoamine
neurotransmitters by inhibiting their metabolism. It is contraindicated to use TCAs and MAOIs
in the same patient. Examples of MAOls that are used in veterinary medicine include L-deprenyl
and amitraz.
29. Because serotonin is also a monoamine neurotransmitter, what about using selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors for dogs with pruritus associated with atopic dermatitis?
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the administration of these drugs at this time.
30. What is cyclosporine (CSA)?
Cyclosporine is a very potent immunosuppressive macrolide lactone that lacks antimicrobial
activity. It is produced by the fungus Tolypocladium inflatum.
31. What is the antipruritic mechanism of action of CSA?
It blocks T cell activation and cytokine production. By inhibiting cytokine production, it
interferes with antigen presentation. It also decreases skin mast cell counts, survival, degranulation
upon stimulation, and production of cytokines
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
53
32. How does CSA interfere with T cell activation and antigen presentation?
CSA binds to calcineurin and blocks its activity. Calcineurin is a calcium and calmodulin
calcium dependent transmission of signal information from the cell membrane to the nucleus.
Calcineurin achieves this transmission by dephosphorylating NF-AT (nuclear factor of activated
T cells). NF-AT is a transcription factor that penetrates the nucleus. In the nucleus it induces cell
activation. One of the essential processes in activation is the transcription of the genes controlling
the synthesis of IL2. IL2 is a key T cell growth factor that, when inhibited, leads to impairment
of T-helper and T-cytotoxic lymphocytes.
33. What dose of CSA has been used for atopy?
The best formulation of CSA is the microemulsified form (Neoral). Absorption of this
formulation is the most consistent. The induction dose of microemulsified cyclosporine (mCSA)
is 5 mg/kg once daily given 2 hours before or after a meal. It is given on an empty stomach to
provide more consistent absorption. This was more of an issue with the older formulations of
CSA than with the mCSA formulation. If the animal responds to this dose, which typically will
occur within 4-6 weeks, the dose is decreased to 1-3 mg/kg once daily for 30 days and then every
other day. In some cases, after 2-3 months of therapy, CSA can be discontinued and pruritus is
still controlled.
34. Anything else that we should know about prescribing mCSA?
 If you initiate therapy with 5 mg/kg once daily, at least 50% of the animals will have intense
vomiting. To minimize this problem, I use the following mCSA protocol:
Give mCSA with a small amount of food
For the first 10 days of mCSA therapy, administer metoclopramide 30-60 minutes before mCSA
treatment. Give the metoclopramide as follows:
<10 1bs body weight (B W)—2.5 mg
11-40 1bs BW—5 mg
>401b—10 mg
Slowly introduce mCSA. Start with 1 mg/kg once daily for 2 days, 2 mg/kg once daily for 2 days,
3 mg/kg once daily for 2 days, 4 mg/kg once daily for 2 days, and then 5 mg/kg once daily.
35. How effective is CSA in treating atopic dermatitis-induced pruritus in the dog?
To my knowledge, there have only been two studies evaluating the effectiveness of CSA for
the treatment of pruritus in atopic dogs. The first was an open uncontrolled study in which there
was a 100% decrease in pruritus within 14 days.
 In the second study, 30 dogs were entered into a randomized controlled trial. They were
daily. At the end of the study, the percentage reduction in pruritus was not different between the
two groups.
In my experience, in an unpublished study of 20 atopic dogs, only 10% responded enough
to stop prednisolone administration and another 10% responded enough to lower the predmisolone
dose by approximately 50%.
36. What are the disadvantages and side effects of CSA administration?
There are a number of disadvantages with CSA. The number one barrier is cost. It currently
costs approximately $7.00-8.00/100 mg of mCSA. Because a 20-kg dog would require
100 mg mCSA/day, it would cost $200.00-300.00/month.
The second barrier to using this drug is the intense vomiting that occurs during the first few
days of therapy. This can be overcome as previously described.
Additional side effects that have been reported in cats and dogs include hypertrichosis,
papillomatosis, gingival hypertrophy, other GI disturbances (diarrhea, anorexia), and weight loss
54
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
Another consideration in using CSA is the effects that other drugs have on the metabolism
of CSA. CSA is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 (cP450) system in the liver. Drugs that
inhibit cP450 will increase blood levels of CSA, possibly into the toxic range. Examples of
commonly used inhibitors of cP450 in veterinary medicine include doxycycline, fluconazole,
ketoconazole, itraconazole, predmisolone, methylprednisolone, and furosemide.
Other drug interactions that need to be considered are drugs that decrease CSA
these enzymes.
At this time increases in parasitic or bacterial infections associated with CSA administration
have not been reported.
37. How can the dose of CSA be lowered to try to decrease these side effects?
Because ketoconazole (KCZ) interferes with CSA metabolism by blocking cP450 enzymes
in the liver, some authors combine mCSA with ketoconazole to try to decrease the side effects
and cost. It has been reported that 3-10 mg/kg KCZ will lower the required CSA dose by 50%
Because the absorption and metabolism of mCSA varies from animal to animal, the appropriate
dose when using KCZ with mCSA has not been established at this time. Liver enzymes should
be monitored when chronically administering KCZ because of the concern for hepatotoxicity. I
do not recommend this combination at this time because:
There is little to no cost savings over full-dose mCSA exclusively when the total cost
of both medications is calculated and added to the additional cost of monitoring
liver enzymes;
Using KCZ adds additional potential side effects including GI disturbances (vomiting,
38. What is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and what does it do?
cAMP is an intracellular "second" messenger that is synthesized from ATP. A second
messenger amplifies the signal that is generated when a cell surface receptor is activated.
CAMP stabilizes mast cells, T cells, macrophages, and eosinophils, inhibiting cell activation
and the release of inflammatory mediators.
39. What is phosphodiesterase (PDE)?
PDE is a family of enzymes that converts cAMP to 5-AMP. Because cAMP is an inhibitor
messenger, by converting cAMP to its inactive form (5-AMP), there is less inhibition of mast cell
degranulation.
 Of the various PDE isoenzymes, PDE-4 appears to be the predominant type in mast cells,
T cells, macrophages, and eosinophils.
40. What role does PDE play in the pathogenesis of pruritus associated with
atopic dermatitis?
 One of the theories of the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis is that there is a blunted cAMP
response due to an increased activity of PDE. Because of this overactivity, there is then less
cAMP. With less (inhibitory) cAMP, the inflammatory cells are more active.
41. What pharmacologic therapies are being investigated to correct this defect?
There are a number of PDE inhibitors currently available, none being specific for PDE-4.
Currently, only drugs in the methylxanthine family are used in veterinary medicine. Examples are
aminophylline, theophylline and pentoxifylline. Pentoxifylline, in contrast to theophylline and
aminophylline, does not have cardiac effects.
Pentoxifylline has been used for a variety of diseases, including atopic dermatitis in dogs
The reports of successful treatment of atopic dermatitis with pentoxifylline have been mixed
Currently, the author does a 30-day trial using 15 mg/kg thrice daily.
Symptomatic Management ofPruritus
55
42. What therapeutic role does prostaglandin E, (PGE,) play in the treatment of canine
atopic dermatitis?
PGE, elevates cAMP and, as previously described, this elevation inhibits activation of
many different inflammatory cells. Misoprostol, a PGE, analog, has been reported to be effective
in some dogs with atopic dermatitis. The author has not seen any patients respond to this
therapy.
43. There are two families of essential polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in cats and
dogsomega 6 and omega 3. What are their roles in the normal animal?
Essential PUFA are important for epidermal barrier function, formation of cell membranes,
and as precursors of inflammatory mediators
44. Which PUFAs are involved in pruritus and how?
Arachidomic acid (AA), an omega 6 PUFA, is the major PUFA involved in inflammation.
AA is bound in an inactive form to phosphatidylcholine in the cell membrane. When cell surface
receptors are activated or the cell is damaged, phospholipase A (PLAz) is activated. PLA, breaks
down phosphatidylcholine, releasing active AA. AA is then metabolized by cyclo-oxygenase
(COX) and lipoxygenase enzymes into inflammatory mediators. These inflammatory mediators
are the even-numbered series of leukotrienes (LT), thromboxanes (TXA), and prostaglandins (PG))
45. Omega 6 PUFAs have been touted as an effective therapy for pruritus. What is the
theory behind this recommendation?
y-Linolenic acid (GLA) and dihomo y-linolenic acid (DGLA) are omega 6 PUFA that when
metabolized by COX and lipoxygenase enzymes form anti-inflammatory (odd-numbered series
of LT, PG and TXA) products. In addition to these anti-inflammatory products, GLA and DGLA
are competitive inhibitors for the COX and lipoxygenase enzymes, thereby decreasing the
amount of AA that is converted to inflammatory byproducts.
46. What other mechanisms can contribute to omega 6 PUFA's effectiveness in the
treatment of pruritus?
transepidermal water loss (TEWL).
Barrier function, the ability to prevent penetration of a variety of substances through the
skin, is primarily controlled by lipids in the skin. The major lipid involved in this function is
linoleic acid, a type of omega 6 fatty acid. When there is defective barrier function, environmental
allergens can more effectively penetrate into the living epidermis, where they are able to trigger
an inflammatory response.
In addition to its role in barrier function, linoleic acid (LA) is critically important in
controlling TEWL. When there is excessive TEWL, the skin becomes excessively dry, and this
may also contribute to pruritus.
function
47. How are omega 3 fatty acids beneficial in the treatment of pruritus?
Omega 3 fatty acids (e.g., eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA]), a PUFA that, when metabolized by
COX and lipoxygenase enzymes, produce anti-inflammatory series of PGs, LTs, and TXAs. In
addition to anti-inflammatory end products, omega 3 fatty acids are competitive inhibitors of AA
(compete for the COX and lipoxygenase enzymes). So, like some omega 6 fatty acids (GLA,
DGLA), they are anti-inflammatory. But in contrast to omega 6 fatty acids, they are not converted
to AA and therefore cannot be metabolized into inflammatory mediators.
Some authors report that the combination of omega 6 and 3 fatty acids work synergistically.
56
Symptomatic Management of Pruritus
48. How do you use these PUFAs (omega 3 and 6)? How are they dosed?
Because these PUFAs may work synergistically with antihistamines, the author uses them
simultaneously with antihistamines. As in treatment trials with antihistamines, treatment trials
should be done with these PUFAs. If the combination omega 3+6 product is ineffective, then an
To be effective, PUFAs must be incorporated into the phospholipids of the cell membrane
When the cell receptors activate PLAz, the anti-inflammatory PUFAs are available to be released
   x          
porated into cell membranes, trials with PUFAs should last 60-90 days.
Combination products (containing omega 3 and 6) are administered at double the label dose.
For products with only omega 3, animals should receive approximately 18 mg EPA/lb body
weight daily. As mentioned previously, these products are used for 60-90 days before deeming
them a failure.
If the animal is seasonally pruritic, omega 3 and/or 6 PUFA should be started 60 days before
the onset of the pruritic season.
49. What are the side effects or disadvantages associated with PUFAs?
The biggest disadvantage is the limited success that the author has experienced with their
use. Another disadvantage is that these supplements are costly, especially for large dogs.
Side effects are very limited and may include GI disturbances (vomiting or diarrhea) and the
pet having a fish smell to the breath. Additionally, if the owners puncture the capsules and squirt
the contents into the food, they may also complain of the fish smell on their hands. Reports of
prolonged bleeding time due to platelet dysfunction have not been a problem clinically.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DeBoer DJ, Griffin CE: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XXI): antihistamine phamacotherapy. In
Olivry T (ed):The American College of Veterinary Dermatotogy Task Force on canine atopic dermatitis. Oxford,
2001, Elsevier Science, pp 324-327.
DeBoer DJ, Marsella R: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XIl): the relationship of cutaneous
of Veterinary Dermatotogy Task Force on canine atopic dermatitis. Oxford, 2001, Elsevier Science,
239-247.
Marsella R, Olivry T: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (VII): mediators of cutaneous inflanmation.
In Olivry T (ed):The American College ofVeterinary Dermatology Task Force on canine atopic dermaritis.Oxford
2001, Elsevier Science, pp 205-210.
Marsella R, Olivry T: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XXII): nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
phamacotherapy.In OlivryT(ed):The American Cotlege of Veterinary Dermatology Task Force on canine atopic
dermatitis. Oxford, 2001, Elsevier Science, pp 331-336.
Marsella R, Sousa CA: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dematitis (Xll): threshold phenomenon and
summation of effects. In Olivry T (ed): The American Cotlege of Veterinary Dermatology Task Force on canine
atopic dermaritis. Oxford, 2001, Elsevier Science, pp 239-247.
Olivry T, Hill PB: The ACVD task force on canine atopic demmatitis (VIll): is the epidermal lipid barrier defective?.
In Olivry T (ed): The American College of Veterinary Dermatology Task Force on canine atopic dermatitis. Oxford,
2001, Elsevier Science, pp 205-210.
Olivry T, Marsella R, Hillier A: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XXl): are essential fatly acids
effective? In Olivry T (ed): The American Cotlege of Veterinary Dermatology Task Force on canine atopic dermatitis.
Oxford, 2001, Elsevier Science, pp 347-351.
Olivry T, Sousa CA: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XX): glucocorticoid phamacotherapy. In
Olivry T (ed): The American Cotlege of Veterinary Dermatotogy Task Force on canine atopic dermatitis. Oxford,
2001, Elsevier Science, pp 317-321
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Dermatologic therapy. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Muller & Kirk's
smalt animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 217-252.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Structure and function of the skin. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds):
Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 58-63.
AntimicrobialTherapy
57
6. ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
Jan A. Hall, BVM&S, MS, MRCVS, DACVD
1. Why is knowledge about antimicrobial therapy important in dermatology?
 Skin infections are common clinical problems in veterinary medicine. Skin infections may
occur if the integrity of the skin is weakened by trauma, if there are changes in surface immunity,
or if there are changes in microclimate and resident microflora. Skin infections are classified as
primary or secondary depending on whether an underlying cause for the infection can be found
Secondary infections are by far the most common and may reflect abnormalities in the skin, immune
Bacterial infections, such as superficial staphylococcal pyoderma, are often secondary to
underlying causes, such as hypersensitivity skin disease (atopy, food allergy, flea bite hyper-
sensitivity), endocrinopathies (hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism), parasitic skin disease
(Sarcoptes, Demodex), immune-mediated disease, or keratinization disorders. The vast majority
of bacterial skin infections in dogs involve Staphyfococcus intermedius. Occasionally Proteus
spp., Pseudomonas spp., and Escherichia coli are involved as secondary invaders. In cats,
Pasteurella muftocida and β-hemolytic streptococcus are involved. Malassezia dermatitis is also
becoming a common diagnosis, most often secondary to other skin diseases, especially those
involving any degree of greasy seborrhea (seborthea oleosa).
The key to successful management of bacterial and yeast skin infections is early recognition
of therapy instituted will normally depend on the type of infection, severity of the disease
condition, and the number of body sites affected.
2. What are the first steps in deciding how to treat a skin infection?
Many veterinarians make the mistake of not assessing the patient thoroughly enough before
instituting therapy for a skin infection. This often leads to doubts about the effectiveness of the
chosen therapy. Treatment success will be significantly improved if a logical approach to diagnosis
and appropriate diagnostic testing is used. As mentioned previously, skin cytology from the
affected areas is an important step in diagnosis. Bacterial culture and sensitivity may also be
indicated although this is often not performed unless rods are noted on cytology. Elimination of
individuals. This is especially important because bacterial or yeast involvement may be contributing
significantly to the degree of pruritus noted.
 3. When would topical therapy be considered?
Topical therapy should be regarded as more than just a useful adjunctive therapy for
dermatologic disease. It may be a way to significantly decrease the need for systemic antimicrobial
therapy. The decision to use topical therapy is usually dictated by the extent of the infection and
the severity of the problem. Topical therapy may be particularly useful when focal areas of the
body are affected, such as the interdigital areas or skin folds. Antiseptic creams, gels, or lotions
in a Bulldog with chronic facial fold pyoderma. Most dermatologists tend not to use ointment
formulations, because ointments can be occlusive, slowing healing and drying of the affected
areas, risking further spread of infection
58
Antimicrobial Therapy
Infections limited to the skin surface can be effectively treated with topical therapy alone.
moist dermatitis (pyotraumatic dermatitis, hot spots) may be treated with topical antimicrobial
treatment alone. The horny layer of the skin, the stratum corneum, is relatively impermeable,
impeding topical drug penetration. Because transdermal absorption may be limited, topical therapy
may not be suitable for deeper infections except as an adjunctive therapy. Also, if the lesions are
more widespread it may be more practical to consider systemic therapy.
In the vast majority of cases, a combination of topical and systemic therapy is the preferred
and most appropriate way to resolve a skin infection. Topical therapy may reduce the need for
systemic therapy by decreasing or eliminating the bacterial population in an area of infection as
well as removing tissue debris.
4. What antibacterial agents are available for topical use?
The most commonly used antibacterial agents for topical use are mupirocin, fusidic acid,
neomycin, gentamicin, bacitracin, polymyxin B, and thiostrepton. Because of potential systemic
topical formats. Mupirocin (Bactroderm; Pfizer Animal Health) and fusidic acid (Fucidin; Leo) are
negative as well as gram-positive organisms. Neomycin has been incriminated as a potential contact
the treatment of ear disease. The surfactant TrisEDTA has been shown to potentiate the effects of the
topical antibiotics, in particular the aminoglycosides, in the treatment of Pseudomonas ear infections.
also has a flushing effect on hair follicles. Benzoyl peroxide gels are available in a 5% concentration.
Benzoyl peroxide gel has to be used with care, because it bleaches and may be irritating with
repeateduse.
 5. Is shampoo therapy a useful way to control skin infections?
Shampoo therapy is a very effective way to decrease bacterial skin colonization. Even though
topical therapy may not be appropriate for therapy by itself it can be very useful as an adjunctive
therapy in many skin infections. Although veterinarians are often discouraged from recommend-
ing shampoo therapy because of compliance issues, it can be very useful especially in ensuring
clients' involvement in the treatment process. Product selection depends on the owner's preference
and clinician's recommendations. Choosing a milder or more client-pleasing shampoo (fragrance,
consistency, lathering ability) will often increase owner compliance.
Owner compliance can be improved if clients are shown how to bathe their pet using either
handouts, videotapes, or by demonstration. Adequate contact time is crucial for success ful shampoo
therapy. It takes 5-10 minutes to rehydrate the epidermis, and 10- 15 minutes to allow penetration
and a treatment effect. Frequency of bathing depends on the severity of the problem. Clients are
a week or so formaintenance.
Heavy-coated dogs may need to be clipped to allow the product to reach the skin surface. A
shorter coat will significantly decrease the amount of shampoo used. Clipping is essential when
allows the medication to penetrate into the deeper tissues.
Although shampooing is beneficial, soaking lesions may be even more beneficial at the start
promoting epithelialization. Warm water soaks may also dilate blood vessels, increasing the
delivery of systemic antibiotics to the skin. Typically, hydrotherapy is performed for the first 3-7
days of a treatment protocol before switching over to a shampoo therapy regimen. It is important
Antimicrobial Therapy
59
 6. What shampoo ingredients have antimicrobial activity?
Many shampoo agents can be regarded as being at least mildly antimicrobial. Some agents
are directly antimicrobial with activity against bacteria, Malassezia, or both, whereas others both
kill organisms and produce an environment that is hostile to pathogens, restoring the microclimate
(particularly keratolytic agents such as sulfur, salicylic acid, or tar). Shampoo products are used
most frequently for generalized or more widespread infections, although local treatment may be
indicated for fold pyodermas or pododermatitis.
Benzoyl peroxide shampoos have been shown to be very effective antimicrobial agents by
virtue of their bactericidal activity and follicular flushing ability. Residual activity for 48 hours
after application has been noted. Superior activity has been noted for benzoyl peroxide compared
to chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, and triclosan. Concentrations greater than 5% have been shown
to be irritating. Owners should also be warned that benzoyl peroxide products may bleach fabric.
Once- or twice-weekly application is recommended. Because benzoyl peroxide is keratolytic and
degreasing, following the shampoo with a moisturizing rinse is recommended. In my practice, I
frequently combine benzoyl peroxide shampoo with a 2% chlorhexidine leave-on conditioner
(Resichlor; Virbac) to maximize the residual antimicrobial benefit.
Chlorhexidine has been shown to be an effective antimicrobial agent with broad-spectrum
activity against bacteria and yeasts, as well as dermatophytes. Chlorhexidine is available in either
solution or shampoo formulations. Solutions are normally used at 0.5% concentrations. Shampoo
and leave-on conditioning formulations are available at 2%. Residual activity has been noted with
all formulations. Moisturizing agents are included in the shampoo and the rinse formulations to
allow long-term use. Chlorhexidine may be less irritating than benzoyl peroxide in individuals
with sensitive skin.
Imidazoles, such as ketoconazole and miconazole, may be effective in therapy for Malassezia
and other fungal organisms. They act by interfering with ergosterol synthesis within the
organism, increasing cellular permeability, suppressing metabolic function, and inhibiting growth.
Ketoconazole also decreases keratinocyte growth in culture, suggesting a possible keratoplastic
effect. A once- or twice-weekly degreasing bath using a sulfur/salicylic acid or coal tar/sulfur/
salicylic acid shampoo followed by a 2% ketoconazole or miconazole shampoo is recommended
basis for focal treatment of interdigital or lip-fold Malassezia problems. Unfortunately, there is
currently no miconazole veterinary product available in Canada.
Enilconazole (Imaverol; Janssen) is an effective topical rinse for Malassezia dermatitis and
dermatophytosis. A 1:50 solution is recommended. Acetic acid also has good activity against
Malassezia. An acetic acid-boric acid shampoo product recommended as a cleansing shampoo is
available (Malacetic; Dermapet). The use of povidone iodine products has decreased in popular-
ity because of the development of more efficient products, the risk of irritation, and their tendency
to stain the hair coat. A full list of antimicrobial shampoo agents is included in Table 6- 1.
Table 6-1 Antimicrobial Agents in Shampoo Formulation
INGREDIENT
ATTRIBUTES
PRODUCTS
 Benzoyl peroxide
Antibacterial
Benzoy1 Plus (EVSCO, 2.5%)
Antifungal
Pyoben (Allerdem, Virbac, 2.5%)
Follicular flushing
SulfOxydex (DVM, 2.5% with 2%
May be drying/irritating
sulfur))
 May bleach fabric
ChlorhexiDerm (DVM, 2% or 4%)
Chlorhexidine
Antibacterial
Hexadene (Virbac, 2%)
Antifungal
Ketochlor (Virbac, 2% with 1%
ketoconazole)
Continued
60
Antimicrobial Therapy
Table 6-1 
Antimicrobial Agents in Shampoo FormulationCont'd
INGREDIENT
ATTRIBUTES
PRODUCTS
May be drying
Malaseb (DVM, 2% with 2%
Available as a rinse
miconazole)
Resichlor (Virbac, 2%)
SebaHex (EVSCO, 2% with 2%
sulfur, 2% salicylic acid)
Povidone-iodine
May be drying/itritating
2% povidone-iodine
May stain coat
Triclosan
Antibacterial
SeboRx (DVM, 0.5% with 2%
sulfur, 3% salicylic acid)
Benzalkonium chloride
Antibacterial
 Canadian Medicated Shampoo
(Vet Solutions, 0.1%)
Renew C (Bimeda-MTC, 0.1%)
Ethyl lactace
Antibacterial
Etiderm (Virbac)
Follicle flushing
Acetic acid
Antifungal
MalAcetic (DermaPet)
Enilconazole
Antifungal
Imaverol (Janssen)
Ketoconazole
Antifungal
Nizoral (Janssen, 2%)
Keratoplastic?
Ketochlor (Virbac, 1% with
May be irritating
chlorhexidine)
Miconazole
Antifungal
Dermazole (Virbac, 2% with 0.5%
chlorhexidine)
Miconazole shampoo (EVSCO, 2%)
Malaseb (DVM, 2% with 2%
chlorhexidine)
ResiZole (Virbac, 2%)
 7. How do you decide what is the most appropriate antibiotic for systemic use?
Bactericidal antibiotics are recommended for skin infections; however, bacteriostatic
drugs may be effective if the patient is not immunocompromised. Ideally the drug chosen
should have a narrow spectrum to limit the effects on the normal flora of both the skin and
gastrointestinal tract.
The most important factors in determining the choice of antibiotic are the susceptibility of
the organism and ensuring that the antibiotic builds up effective levels within the skin. Because
only 4% of cardiac output reaches the skin, this is critically importantthere may be a dramatic
difference in the epidermal levels of anti biotic compared to serum levels. For instance, cephalexin
levels in canine epidermis are only 20-40% of the peak plasma concentrations.
Most antibiotic use in dermatology is empirical, based on Staphylococcus intermedius as
the causal agent of pyoderma in dogs. The vast majority of S. intermedius isolates show > 95%
sensitivity to fluoroquinolone antibiotics, clavulanic acid-potentiated amoxicillin, ox acillin, and
cephalosporins. Although the individual fluoroquinolones and cephalosporins each have their
own unique attributes as far as S. intermedius is concerned, if one drug shows sensitivity, the
others in the class should be effective as well. The macrolides such as erythromycin, lincomycin,
when resistance should not be an issue. Potentiated sulfonamide antibiotics have been shown to
show excellent susceptibility in some studies while others showed only 50% of isolates were
sensitive. The use of potentiated sulfonamide antibiotics has decreased dramatically because of
an increased risk of significant side effects, including immune-mediated drug reactions,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and thyroid suppression if used for longer than 3-4 weeks.
Antimicrobial Therapy
61
Most dermatologists use cephalexin as their first choice drug because it has been shown to
be a very effective drug against S. intermedius with minimal change in resistance pattern over the
years. Fluoroquinolone use for pyodermas is controversial. I personally do not believe that they
perforrm as well as cephalexin, and the development of class-specific resistance by gram-negative
organisms is of major concern. Generally, fluoroquinolone use is best reserved for situations
when it is indicated based on the results of bacterial culture and susceptibility testing. A full list
of antibacterial agents and recommended doses is included in Table 6-2.
Table 6-2Antibiotic Therapy in Veterinary Dermatology
DOSE (ORAL UNLESS
DRUG
OTHERWISE NOTED)
COMMENTS
Narrow Spectrum
 Lincomycin
20-30 mg/kg q 12h
 First time empirical therapy only
Clindamycin
5-10 mg/kg q 12h 
GI upset common
Erythromycin
15 mg/kg q 8h
First time empirical therapy only
Tylosin
10-20 mg/kg q 12h
Broad Spectrum
Cephalexin/cefadroxil
20—30 mg/kg q 8-12h
Most commonly used antibiotic in
canine therapy
4-12 weeks of therapy
Clavulanic acid
12.5-25 mg/kg q 12h
Most commonly used antibiotic in
potentiated
feline therapy
amoxicillin
 Second choice for canine therapy
Cloxacillin
20-40 mg/kg q 8h
Ox acillin
22 mg/kg q 8h
Should be dosed three times daily
 Chloramphenicol
50 mg/kg q 8h (D)
Risk of human blood dyscrasias 
50 mg/kg q 12h (C)
Ciproflox acin
5-15 mg/kg q 12h
 Potential activity against
Pseudomonas
Not in immature animals
Difloxacin
5-10 mg/kg q 12h
Not in immature animals.
Enroflox acin
5-20 mg/kg q 12h
Potential activity against
Pseudomonas
Not in immature animals
Maximum dose 5 mg/kg q 24h in cats
Marbofloxacin
2.75-5.5 mg/kg q 24h
 Potential activity against
Pseudomonas
Not in immature animals
Orbifloxacin
2.5-7.5 mg/kg q 24h
Not in immature animals
Trimethoprim-sulfadi azine
15-30 mg/kg q 12h
KCS, drug reactions,
hypothyroidism (high doses)
Trimethoprim-
15-30 mg/kg q 12h
KCS, drug reactions,
sulfamethoxazole
hypothyroidism (high doses)
 Ormetoprim-sulfadiazine
55 mg/kg q 24h (day 1)
KCS, drug reactions,
then 27.5 mg/kg
hypothyroidism (high doses)
Mupirocin 2%
Topical q 12h
Localized lesions
 cream/ointment
62
AntimicrobialTherapy
8.  How long a course of systemic antibiotics is required to eliminate a pyoderma?
Because of the difficulty in achieving effective drug concentrations within the epidermis, a
minimum 3- to 4-week treatment course is recommended and at least 1-2 weeks after clinical
cure. Longer courses are recommended for deep infections. At the Ontario Veterinary College, a
4-week course may be inadequate to completely eliminate superficial pyoderma. Recurrent
pyoderma cases are routinely treated for 12 weeks while an attempt is made to look for
predisposing causes for the infection.
9. Why are bacterial culture and susceptibility testing not performed more regularly in
veterinary dermatology?
Unlike the human staphylococcal bacteria, S. aureus, the sensitivity pattern of S. intermedius
has not changed dramatically over the years. For this reason, culture and susceptibility testing
(C&S) is not normally used unless there has been a failure to respond to rational antibiotic therapy.
As always, the results of the C&S should be interpreted in the light of skin cytology results. It is
also important to note that multiple strains of S. intermedius may be found on the same dog, each
with its own virulence and resistance pattern. Susceptibility testing of individual isolates is
therefore of doubtful value.
Culture and susceptibility testing is usually reserved for cases where a less than adequate
or displayed drug intolerance. In my experience, it is much more common that a dog fails to
respond because the chosen drug was not appropriate, the dose was not high enough, or the
course not long enough. Under these circumstances, especially if a drug like cephalexin has been
used, then the question that has to be raised is, Does this dog really have a pyoderma?
10. Give four reasons why a chosen antibiotic would not be effective.
·Resistance: the organism is not sensitive to the antibiotic. Because S. intermedius orgamisms
produce β-lactamase, antibiotics that are resistant to this enzyme are usually preferred.
· Dosage: the dosage is insufficient to maintain an inhibitory concentration within the skin.
course is recommended. Four to 12 weeks may be required to resolve deep infections.
host reaction.
for superficial pyoderma?
Most antibiotic use in veterinary dermatology is empirical. Culture and susceptibility is not
normally used unless there has been a failure to respond to rational antibiotic therapy. Most
dermatologists use cephalexin as their first choice drug because it has been shown to be very
effective against S. intermedius, with minimal change in resistance pattern over the years.
12. What other treatment options are available to treat superficial pyoderma?
Topical therapy can be an important adjunctive treatment for superficial pyoderma.
Antimicrobial shampoo therapy, twice weekly for the first 2 weeks then once weekly, is often
recommended. If a benzoyl peroxide shampoo is used, a condi tioning rinse is often recommended
because benzoyl peroxide may be drying.
Corticosteroids should be avoided during antibiotic therapy because they decrease inflammation
and may suppress the host's immune response to the infection. The use of corticosteroids may
interfere with the ability to determine if the antibiotic therapy is successful.
13. How do I cope with recurrent pyodermas in dogs?
Relapse is common in dogs that are treated with short courses or sub-therapeutic doses of
AntimicrobialTherapy
63
been used, at the appropriate dose for the appropriate length of time. Once you are sure that
appropriate therapy has been used, it is then important to look for underlying conditions such as
In rare cases no underlying cause for the recurrent pyoderma will be found. Some of these
individuals may have a confirmed immunodeficiency, although it is not unusual for dogs to
appear normal because of the currently limited testing options available to diagnose immuno-
deficiencies. In these circumstances, the options available are either to try immunoadjuvant
therapy or maintain the dog on long-term antibiotics.
14. How do immunoadjuvants work?
modulatory agent is normally administered at the same time as anti biotic therapy for a period of
weeks (normally 4-6 weeks) before the antibiotic therapy is withdrawn and the dog maintained
different immunoadjuvant therapies have been recommended, although most are only supported
by anecdotal reports of their effectiveness.
The most investigated immunoadjuvants available are Staphage Lysate (SPL, Delmont
Laboratories), an immunostimulant prepared from Staphylococcus aureus bacteria using a
bacteriophage, and Immunoregulin (Immuno Vet), a Propionibacterium acnes bacterin. The ex act
mechanism of their action is unknown but is believed to be associated with enhanced cell-
mediated immunity, as well as a nonspecific effect on humoral immunity. Both have been shown
to be beneficial in placebo-controlled clinical trials.
SPL is normally administered twice weekly at 0.5 mL subcutaneously at the same time as a
6-week antibiotic course. Cases should be re-evaluated for progress at the end of the first 10 weeks
of therapy (end of the first 10 mL treatment vial). The frequency of injections is gradually reduced
to once weekly and then every other week after 20 weeks if the pyoderma remains under control.
15. Is long-term antibiotic therapy an option for recurrent pyoderma?
   o    q  d   
alternative to the use of immunoadjuvants. Two forms of therapy are generally used: low-dose
continuous therapy and pulse therapy. The use of low-dose or pulse therapy is controversial
because of an increased risk of resistance development. Cephalexin is the only antibiotic
recommended for this type of therapy because of a documented lack of resistance development
over time. In low dose continuous therapy, the dose is reduced by half once monthly until the
lowest dose that keeps pyoderma at bay is determined. In intermittent pulse dosing, a full
therapeutic dose is administered for 7-14 days once monthly. The number of days it takes for the
patient to relapse is used to determine which method of administration would be most
relapses take 2-4 weeks, pulse therapy may be successful. Because individuals on chronic therapy
may be more at risk for drug-related side effects, close monitoring and regular re-evaluations are
recommended.
16. What would be the most appropriate antimicrobial therapy for Malassezia?
Malassezia dermatitis is an increasingly common diagnosis, most often secondary to other
diseases, especially those involving any degree of greasy seborrhea (seborrhea oleosa). Diagnostic
and treatment strategies include the elimination of the Malassezia, plus evaluation for underlying
etiologies such as allergy (may form part of hypersensitivity complex) or keratinization disorders.
Malassezia dermatitis may often be successfully treated with topical antimicrobial therapy.
Mild cases may benefit from a once or twice weekly degreasing shampoo (coal tar/sulfur/salicylic
acid) followed by a 2% ketoconazole shampoo (Nizoral, Janssen),
More severe cases are best treated with systemic antifungal agents such as ketoconazole
64
Parasiticides in Dermatology
     s       s
absorption.
Adverse effects include elevated liver enzymes (dog and cat), anorexia, and gastrointestinal
upset. Itraconazole appears to be better tolerated with a decreased incidence of side effects.
Treatment should be discontinued if side effects are noted. The significance of any Malassezia
involvement is often determined by the degree of improvement with appropriate systemic therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Greene CE, Watson ADJ: Antibacterial chemotherapy. In Greene CE, Kersey R (eds): Infectious diseases ofthe dog
and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 185-205
Greene CE, Watson ADI: Antifumgal chemotherapy. In Greene CE, Kersey R (eds): Infectious diseases of the dog
and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 357-377.
Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Bacterial skin diseases. In Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 277-288.
7. PARASITICIDES IN DERMATOLOGY
Robert Kennis, DVM, DACVD
1. Briefly describe the flea life cycle.
The flea life cycle consists of the egg, larva, pupa (pre-emergent adult), and adult. Adult female
fleas are capable of laying up to 30 eggs per day. The eggs are not sticky so they fall onto the
 ground where the pet spends its time. Eggs hatch in 7-14 days into a larval form. Larvae are motile
and active feeders consuming pet dander and flea feces. They are attracted to darkness and by
ment. In 7-14 days, they spin a cocoon where they undergo metamorphosis, changing into a pre-
emergent adult. Pre-emergent adults may remain dormant for several months, and are impervious
to virtually all insecticides. Direct pressure and vibration signal the pre-emergent adult to hatch and
jump onto its host. Fleas are obligate parasites and will remain on their hosts for the remainder
of their lives. Adult fleas may survive for several months, depending on environmental conditions.
 2. What active ingredients are licensed and approved for the treatment of fleas on dogs
andcats?
Adulticidal agents include pyrethrin and permethrins, imidacloprid, fipronil, selemectin,
nitenpyram, carbamates, and organophosphates (phosmet). Ovicidal/larvacidal agents include
such as amitraz, ivermectin, and lime sulfur dip, are not effective against fleas. Pennyroyal oil,
D-limonene, and tea tree oil are considered “natural" flea treatments. However, the side effects,
toxicities, and lack of scientifically proven efficacy preclude their usage.
3. List the mechanism of action and spectrum of activity of fipronil, imidacloprid,
selemectin, and pyrethrin.
· Fipronil: The mechanism of action is inhibition of GABA-regulated chloride flux into the
nerve cell. Its spectrum of activity includes adult fleas and ticks.
acetylcholine, leading to respiratory paralysis. Its spectrum of activity is limited to adult fleas.
64
Parasiticides in Dermatology
     s       s
absorption.
Adverse effects include elevated liver enzymes (dog and cat), anorexia, and gastrointestinal
upset. Itraconazole appears to be better tolerated with a decreased incidence of side effects.
Treatment should be discontinued if side effects are noted. The significance of any Malassezia
involvement is often determined by the degree of improvement with appropriate systemic therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Greene CE, Watson ADJ: Antibacterial chemotherapy. In Greene CE, Kersey R (eds): Infectious diseases ofthe dog
and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 185-205
Greene CE, Watson ADI: Antifumgal chemotherapy. In Greene CE, Kersey R (eds): Infectious diseases of the dog
and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 357-377.
Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Bacterial skin diseases. In Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 277-288.
7. PARASITICIDES IN DERMATOLOGY
Robert Kennis, DVM, DACVD
1. Briefly describe the flea life cycle.
The flea life cycle consists of the egg, larva, pupa (pre-emergent adult), and adult. Adult female
fleas are capable of laying up to 30 eggs per day. The eggs are not sticky so they fall onto the
 ground where the pet spends its time. Eggs hatch in 7-14 days into a larval form. Larvae are motile
and active feeders consuming pet dander and flea feces. They are attracted to darkness and by
ment. In 7-14 days, they spin a cocoon where they undergo metamorphosis, changing into a pre-
emergent adult. Pre-emergent adults may remain dormant for several months, and are impervious
to virtually all insecticides. Direct pressure and vibration signal the pre-emergent adult to hatch and
jump onto its host. Fleas are obligate parasites and will remain on their hosts for the remainder
of their lives. Adult fleas may survive for several months, depending on environmental conditions.
 2. What active ingredients are licensed and approved for the treatment of fleas on dogs
andcats?
Adulticidal agents include pyrethrin and permethrins, imidacloprid, fipronil, selemectin,
nitenpyram, carbamates, and organophosphates (phosmet). Ovicidal/larvacidal agents include
such as amitraz, ivermectin, and lime sulfur dip, are not effective against fleas. Pennyroyal oil,
D-limonene, and tea tree oil are considered “natural" flea treatments. However, the side effects,
toxicities, and lack of scientifically proven efficacy preclude their usage.
3. List the mechanism of action and spectrum of activity of fipronil, imidacloprid,
selemectin, and pyrethrin.
· Fipronil: The mechanism of action is inhibition of GABA-regulated chloride flux into the
nerve cell. Its spectrum of activity includes adult fleas and ticks.
acetylcholine, leading to respiratory paralysis. Its spectrum of activity is limited to adult fleas.
Parasiticidesin Dermatology
65
· Selemectin: This drug is a semisynthetic avermectin. Its mechanism of action is not com-
pletely defined. It probably involves an increase in permeability to chloride ions through
interaction with GABA binding sites, similar to other avermectins. Its spectrum of activity
includes fleas, scabies, Dermacentor spp., heartworms, and Otodectes cynotis in the dog.
For the cat, the spectrum also includes heartworms, fleas and Otodectes cynotis, along
with hook worms and roundwoms. Recent evidence supports efficacy against Cheyfetiefla
spp. No mention on the package indicates efficacy against ticks or Notoedres spp. in cats.
· Pyrethrin: The mechanism of action involves disruption of neurologic function by
prolonging Na* conduction. Pyrethrins are among the most broad-spectrum antiparasitic
agents available. They have efficacy against fleas, ticks, lice, Cheyletiella spp., Otodectes
cynotis, and Lynxacara radovsky.
4. What are the differences between pyrethrins and permethrins?
Pyrethrins are natural chemicals derived from chrysanthemum flowers. Permethrins are
synthetic pyrethrin-like compounds sometimes referred to as pyrethroids. Pyrethrins are generally
used in concentrations of approximately 0. 1 -0.5%, are short-acting because they are broken down
can range in concentration from 0.1-65%. At concentrations above 2%, they are toxic to cats.
Permethrins are more ultraviolet stable but have a slower knock-down than pyrethrins. They also
have very good repellent effects. Both products are sometimes combined to provide a quick kill
with longer residual and increased repellent effects.
5. Pyrethrin-based products are available in a variety of formulations. Give some
examples along with the advantages and disadvantages of each.
· Powders: safe and relatively inert, but messy and must be applied frequently.
           
hypothermia due to evaporation in puppies and kittens; cats hate to be sprayed.
· Shampoos: effective as adulticides, remove flea feces; when combined with an oatmeal
product provide antiprunitic relief. Shampoos are short-lasting, as most of the active
ingredient goes down the drain; for large animals the procedure is labor-intensive; care
should be taken with young animals to prevent hypothermia.
toxicity may occur if bottle instructions are not followed correctly.
 Spot-on formulations: usually consist of permethrins to improve efficacy, many over-the-
counter products are available in concentrations that are toxic to cats if used incorrectly.
6. What is an insect growth regulator (IGR)? Give two examples of flea IGRs.
An insect growth regulator is a compound that mimics juvenile hormone. As the larva matures,
its level of juvenile hormone decreases until a critical threshold is reached, signaling it to form a
cocoon. IGRs artificially maintain high levels of juvenile hormone and prevent maturation to the
(Precor) and Pyriproxyfen (Nylar) are commercially available in a variety of products. The
overall effect of these products is environmental control of fleas. They do not kill adult fleas; they
only prevent them from reproducing by preventing metamorphosis.
7. How is lufenuron different from other IGRs?
Lufenuron is classified as an insect development inhibitor (ID1). Lufenuron's mechanisim of
action is interference with chitin synthesis, polymerization, and deposition. It is administered
orally with food or may be injected into cats. Lufenuron is taken up by the female flea as she
consumes a blood meal. The lufenuron disrupts the ability of the larva to emerge from the egg,
66
ParasiticidesinDermatology
consumes the feces with lufenuron, it prevents a normal pupa from developing. Ultimately, the
net effect is environmental control. Lufenuron must be given orally monthly or injected every
6 months in cats to be effective. Also, the flea must feed for lufenuron to work. Other IGRs can
be applied to the pet or to the environment and will work without the flea feeding first.
8. Describe how nitenpyram might be used in a clinical setting.
This oral tablet kills literally all adult fleas starting within 6 hours but is rapidly eliminated
and is not effective after about one day. Because it does not prevent newly emerged fleas from
jumping onto the pet, additional tablets must be given to kill those fleas. This product has limited
use in the hands of the client when used as the sole method of flea control. However, it can be an
to avoid clinic infestation. It can also be given to a pet before it leaves the hospital. This will avoid
humane shelters and pet shop settings to avoid sending fleas home on the pet. It might be possible
that flea eggs that are on the pet at the time of adoption may ultimately infest the new home;
however, using nitenpyram greatly diminishes this possibility.
9.Define “integrated pest management” as it pertains to fleas.
and juvenile stages of fleas. There are several products that are adulticides but adults only make
up about 5% of the flea population. Combining an adulticide with an IGR or lufenuron will soon
reduce the population of fleas within an environment to zero. This is especially important for flea-
allergic pets. Although the argument can be made that many adulticides reach 100% efficacy,
there is no doubt that over time resistance will develop if a single product is relied upon for flea
very safe. There is really no reason not to use an IGR or lufenuron in all flea households along
with an adulticide.
10.  Diatomaceous earth and sodium polyborate are sometimes used for environmental flea
control. What are the advantages and disadvantages of these products?
These products are sometimes placed into carpeted surfaces in large amounts. The larval
stages of the flea will consume these products, causing them to die. The advantages are that they
may be highly effective in providing environmental control within the household. The dis
advantages are several. First, they are very messy when first applied. Secondly, unless an adulticide
is added to the powder, additional products must be used on (in) the pets. Lastly, there have been
anecdotal reports about similarities in particle size to asbestos. Lung lesions have developed in
some borate workers similar to those who had inhaled asbestos. With the plethora of excellent
commercial products available, diatomaceous earth and sodium polyborate should be considered
to be on the bottom of the list for flea control (my opinion).
11. Which active ingredients are licensed and approved for the treatment of ticks on dogs
andfor cats?
Fipronil and pyrethrin are the only licensed products effective for ticks for both dogs and
cats. Permethrin products are available for dogs that are in concentrations that are toxic to cats
Amitraz is licensed in a collar form for dogs only. Amitraz dip is efficacious against ticks but it
is not labeled for this use. Selemectin is licensed for the treatment of one tick species on dogs
only. It may have unproved efficacy in cats. Organophosphate dips (phosmet) are licensed for
dogs but toxicities are a major concern when using these potent cholinesterase inhibitors.
12. Amitraz is available in a collar for the treatment of ticks on dogs. Define the mechanism
of action, age restriction, potential side effects, and antidote for toxicity.
Amitraz is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAO) drug. When incorporated into a collar it
Parasiticides in Dermatology
67
causes feeding ticks to drop off and quickly die. In a recent report it was shown that the quick
 kill prevented the tick from spreading Borrelia spp. to research dogs and may thus protect dogs
from getting Lyme disease. This collar is only licensed for dogs and they must be older than 16
weeks of age. The concentration of amitraz in the collar is significantly lower than the amount
applied as a dip for the treatment for Demodex. However, if the dog ingests the collar, then signs
of amitraz toxicity including bradycardia and lethargy or coma may occur. If there is historical
evidence that the collar may be responsible for the clinical symptoms, then yohimbine may be
given as an o-2 adrenergic receptor antagonist, which reverses the signs of amitraz toxicity.
Yohimbine should be given before attempting other procedures to prevent further absorption of
the amitraz from the collar. Because yohimbine is short acting, it may need to be given several
times. It is important to keep good records regarding the sale of amitraz collars. Having this
en sanp oixon uod go isl sun sneog l s op e saes  sgeae ei uoeu
may induce similar clinical symptoms is staggering.
13. What active ingredients are safe to use in treating cats with ticks?
There are few drugs that are licensed and approved for treating cats with ticks. Pyrethrin-
based products and those containing fipronil are reasonable options. Selemectin has labeled
efficacy for canine ticks but not feline, but may be helpful for some cats. Carbaryl-based products
are highly toxic to cats and should be avoided.
14. List the active ingredients in licensed and approved products for the treatment of canine
scabies.
Lime sulfur dip, organophosphate dip (phosmet), and selemectin are licensed for the
treatment of scabies. Lime sulfur dip should be used weekly for 6 weeks. This product is among
the safest products for young puppies. Selemectin is excellent and may be used on dogs as young
as 6 weeks. I prefer to use this product every 14 days for three treatments instead of the monthly
treatments as recommended on the package. Phosmet dip clinically appears to be ineffective in
many cases and is not recommended for routine treatment of canine scabies. Amitraz dip at
250 ppm is highly efficacious but not licensed for the treatment of canine scabies. The use of 1%
ivermectin at 200 μg/kg every 14 days for three treatments is also highly effective, but it is not
licensed nor approved for this purpose and is toxic in some breeds of dogs (e.g., Collies and other
herding breeds).
15. What should be considered before using off-label 1% ivermectin for the treatment of
canine scabies?
Age and breed must be considered before using ivermectin. It is generally agreed upon that
ivermectin should not be given to dogs younger than 12 weeks of age. In shelter situations and
risk of adverse reaction to ivermectin, but any dog can be affected. The "at risk" breeds include:
Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, Border Collie, Australian Shepherd, and Old English Sheepdog.
There is a little rhyme "white feet, don't treat" that many clinicians follow. In general, with highly
effective commercially available products for the treatment of scabies, there is no reason to
continue to use off-label ivermectin.
16. What treatment options are available for the treatment of Notoedres cati infestations in
cats?
The only licensed product for the treatment of feline scabies is lime sulfur dip. Off-label
ivermectin has been used with good effects. Howevet, dosing errors are sometimes encountered,
especially when treating small kittens. Also, idiosyncratic reactions may occur. The author uses
off-label selemectin every 2 weeks for three treatments if the kitten is old enough (> 6 weeks) and
greater than the 2-lb minimum body weight listed on the package.
68
Parasiticides in Dermatology
17. How are organophosphates different from carbamates?
The mechanism of action of organophosphates is to bind ireversibly to acetylcholinesterase,
leading to the accumulation of acetylcholine at the postsynaptic junction. The end result is
paralysis. Treatment for toxicity includes atropine and 2-PAM. These products are very toxic,
especially to cats, and are not recommended for routine use. In contrast, carbamates (carbaryl)
bind reversibly to acetylcholinesterase. Treatment for toxicity includes atropine but not 2-PAM.
containing products on the market approved for use on cats, but these are decreasing in
availability and much safer products are available.
18. What are the licensed and approved active ingredients available for the treatment of
Otodectes cynotis (ear mites)?
The licensed products include pyrethrin, thiabendazole, milbemycin, ivermectin otic drops,
and topically applied selemectin. With the plethora of excellent products available, there is no
reason to use oral or injectable cattle ivermectin off-label. Pyrethrin or thiabendazole drops
should be applied for three consecutive days each week for 3 weeks. All contact animals should
be treated. It is strongly recommended to use a pyrethrin spray or shampoo weekly, especially
on the head and face and rear feet, to kill all aberrantly located mites. Newly licensed otic medications
containing milbemycin or ivermectin are highly efficacious. A second treatment is recommended
14 days after the first application. Selemectin is also an excellent option. Although effective against
ear mites when used monthly, I routinely recommend a second treatment 14 days after the first.
19.Describe the possible side effects that should be discussed with an owner before
prescribing topical applica tion of amitraz for the treatment of generalized demodicosis.
The most common and expected side effect of an amitraz dip is lethargy. Additional side
effects include pruritus, bradycardia, hypothermia, and hypotension. Uncommonly, hyperexcitability
may occur. If adverse side effects are seen, yohimbine will quickly reverse the problems. Because
the side effects of amitraz may be prolonged, several treatments with yohimbine may be needed.
Yohimbine may be used before the application of amitraz for those dogs with a history of adverse
reaction. Large animal formulations of amitraz should never be used in the treatment of
demodicosis because off-label use of these products is a serious Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) violation.
20. What is Goodwinol ointment?
This is a product that is licensed for the treatment of localized demodicosis in dogs. The
active ingredient is rotenone. Side effects are uncommon. Because many cases of localized
demodicosis are self-limiting, it is difficult to determine the true efficacy of this product. None-
21. Which products may be useful for repelling biting flies and mosquitoes?
    s           y   
containing pyrethrins or permethrins are also effective. However, these products are usually
ingredients have an inadequate residual activity to be effective. Spot-on formulations containing
combination of imidacloprid and permethrin has been developed.
22. List the active ingredients that may be useful for the treatment of infestation of
Cheyletiella spp.
Pyrethrin and permethrin products are the preferred treatment for Cheyfetiella. Because
these mites are surface feeders, avermectin drugs may be inconsistently effective. Lime sulfur
Immunoadjuvant Therapy
69
dips are also safe and effective. Organophosphates are effective but not recommended.
Imidacloprid and fipronil are ineffective against Cheyfetiefla. Selemectin has been shown to be
effective against Cheyletiefla on cats. Remember that Cheyfetiefla spp. may live off of the host
longer than other ectoparasites. Therefore environmental treatment, along with the treatment of
all contact animals, is recommended.
23. What are some of the precautions and side effects associated with lime sulfur dip?
Lime sulfur dip tends to be safe and effective. Hypothermia due to evaporation, especially
owner. The offensive odor and staining make these products among the least favored of our
using lime sulfur dips on cats. It is best to apply an Elizabethan collar to prevent cats from licking
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bledsoe B, Fadok VA, Bledsoe ME: Current therapy and new developments in indoor flea control, JAm Animat Hosp
Assoc 18:415-422, 1982
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 662-664.
ChailleuxN,Paradis M:Efficacy of selamectin in the treatment of naturally acquired cheyletiellosis in cats,Can Vet
 43(10):767-770, 2002)
Dryden MW, Perez HP, Ulitchny DM: Control of fleas on pets and in homes by use of imidacloprid or lufenuron and
a pyrethrin spray, J Am Vet Med Assoc 215(1):36-39, 1999
Macdonald JM: Flea control: an overview of treatment concepts for North America,Vet Dermatot 6(3):121-130,
1995.
Medleau L, Hnilica KA, Lower K, et al: Effect of topical application of fipronil in cats with flea allergic dermatitis,
/ Am Vet Med Assoc 221(2):254-256, 2002.
Nicholson SS: Toxicity of insecticides and skin care products of botanical origin, Vet Dermatot 6(3):139-143, 1995.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Parasitic skin disease. In: Muller and Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000, pp 423-516.
Smith CA: Searching for safe methods of flea control, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206(8):1137-1143, 1995.
8.IMMUNOADIUVANT THERAPY
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What is the goal of immunoadjuvant therapy?
The goal of immunoadjuvant therapy is to strengthen the immune defense mechanisms of
an animal. It is also called nonspecific immunotherapy, immunostimulation, immunologic en-
hancement, immunomodulation, immunoaugmentation, and immunopotentiation. Agents used
for immunoadjuvant therapy are often referred to as biologic response modifiers.
2. What are the indications for using immunoadjuvant therapy?
· A need for improving the immune potential of an old or very young animal.
Immunoadjuvant Therapy
69
dips are also safe and effective. Organophosphates are effective but not recommended.
Imidacloprid and fipronil are ineffective against Cheyfetiefla. Selemectin has been shown to be
effective against Cheyletiefla on cats. Remember that Cheyfetiefla spp. may live off of the host
longer than other ectoparasites. Therefore environmental treatment, along with the treatment of
all contact animals, is recommended.
23. What are some of the precautions and side effects associated with lime sulfur dip?
Lime sulfur dip tends to be safe and effective. Hypothermia due to evaporation, especially
owner. The offensive odor and staining make these products among the least favored of our
using lime sulfur dips on cats. It is best to apply an Elizabethan collar to prevent cats from licking
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bledsoe B, Fadok VA, Bledsoe ME: Current therapy and new developments in indoor flea control, JAm Animat Hosp
Assoc 18:415-422, 1982
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 662-664.
ChailleuxN,Paradis M:Efficacy of selamectin in the treatment of naturally acquired cheyletiellosis in cats,Can Vet
 43(10):767-770, 2002)
Dryden MW, Perez HP, Ulitchny DM: Control of fleas on pets and in homes by use of imidacloprid or lufenuron and
a pyrethrin spray, J Am Vet Med Assoc 215(1):36-39, 1999
Macdonald JM: Flea control: an overview of treatment concepts for North America,Vet Dermatot 6(3):121-130,
1995.
Medleau L, Hnilica KA, Lower K, et al: Effect of topical application of fipronil in cats with flea allergic dermatitis,
/ Am Vet Med Assoc 221(2):254-256, 2002.
Nicholson SS: Toxicity of insecticides and skin care products of botanical origin, Vet Dermatot 6(3):139-143, 1995.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Parasitic skin disease. In: Muller and Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000, pp 423-516.
Smith CA: Searching for safe methods of flea control, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206(8):1137-1143, 1995.
8.IMMUNOADIUVANT THERAPY
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What is the goal of immunoadjuvant therapy?
The goal of immunoadjuvant therapy is to strengthen the immune defense mechanisms of
an animal. It is also called nonspecific immunotherapy, immunostimulation, immunologic en-
hancement, immunomodulation, immunoaugmentation, and immunopotentiation. Agents used
for immunoadjuvant therapy are often referred to as biologic response modifiers.
2. What are the indications for using immunoadjuvant therapy?
· A need for improving the immune potential of an old or very young animal.
70
ImmunoadjuvantTherapy
          
bacterial or fungal sepsis).
function
· To potentiate immune responses to eliminate a tumor.
3. What is the mechanism of action of levamisole as an immunoadjuvant?
The functions of levamisole as an immunoadjuvant are similar to those of the thymic hormone
thymopoietin. Levamisole stimulates T-cell differentiation and T-cell responses to antigens. It
also stimulates phagocytosis and intracellular killing by macrophages and neutrophils. The
effects of levamisole are greatest in animals with depressed T-cell function and it has little or no
effect on the immune system of healthy animals. Adverse side effects include gastrointestinal and
hepatic dysfunction, neurotoxicity, agranulocytosis, erythema multiforme, and toxic epidermal
necrolysis. Levamisole at a dose of 2.2 mg/kg orally every 8 hours has been reported to benefit
approximately 10% of dogs with recurrent pyoderma.
Propionibacterium acnes is available commercially as a killed suspension in 12.5% ethanol
as an adjuvant to antibiotic therapy in the treatment of chronic recurring canine pyoderma. It is
dosed based on body weight (a 45-1b dog receives 1.0 mL intravenously) and is given twice
weekly for 2 weeks, then once weekly until symptoms abate or stabilize, and then once per month
for maintenance. Anaphylactic reactions can occur, more common side effects include fever,
chills, anorexia, and depression, lasting several hours after the injections. It can cause a
necrotizing dermatitis if given subcutaneously or intramuscularly
5. What is in Staphage Lysate? How does this product work?
Staphage Lysate (SPL) contains 120-180 million colony-forming units of Staphylococcus
aureus and 1o0 million staphylococcus bacteriophage plaque-forming units in each milliliter.
SPL is indicated for the treatment of canine pyoderma. SPL has been shown to stimulate both T
and B cells in vitro and enhances the capability of macrophages to kill staphylococci. The
recommended protocol is to administer 0.5 mL subcutaneously twice weekly for 10-12 weeks
and then 0.5-1.0 mL every 1 to 2 weeks for maintenance. Concomitant antibiotics are recom
mended for the initial 4-6 weeks of treatment. Side effects can include localized reactions with
erythema, pain, and pruritus or systemic reactions with fever, malaise, and inappetence, and in
severe cases anaphylaxis. Anecdotally, SPL appears to be effective in increasing the lesion-free
6. Is it true that cimetidine works as an immunoadjuvant?
Histamine receptors are found on the cell surface of many cells including Hz-receptors on
T-suppressor cells. Through its function as an H-antagonist, cimetidine can block histamine-
induced immunosuppression. For use as an immunoadjuvant, cimetidine is given to dogs at a
dosage of 6-10 mg/kg every 8 hours. While side effects are rare, the efficacy as an immuno
adju vant in the treatment of chronic recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma is also low.
 7. What are the effects of vitamin E in immunostimulation?
Vitamin E is an antioxidant that stabilizes lysosomes, reduces prostaglandin Ez synthesis,
increases antibody production when administered with vaccines in cattle. A deficiency of vitamin
E results in T-cell dysfunction. While more research is needed to delineate the roles of vitamin E
in enhancing immunity, supplementation of diets with vitamin E may increase resistance to
disease. Dosages of 400-800 IU every 12 hours are currently recommended for dogs.
Principles of Topical Therapy
71
 8. What are the immunoadjunctive actions of interferons?
Interferons (INF) are regulatory proteins that can act on a variety of different cell types.
 Interferon-α is normally produced by monocytes and macrophages. It has nonspecific antiviral
activity affecting RNA and protein synthesis and induces ex tracellular antiviral proteins. It also
enhances natural killer cell activity and has antiproliferative effects on both normal and neoplastic
cells. Interferon-β is produced by fibroblasts and shares a similar structure and similar actions to
INF-o. Interferon-yis produced by activated T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. It serves as an
important macrophage-activating factor, upregulates type-I and type-II MHC anti gens, increases
antimicrobial activity, increases antitumor activity, increases tumor necrosis factor-o synthesis,
and inhibits macrophage migration. It also increases IL-2 synthesis, enhances cytotoxic T-cell
and NK cell activity. INF-Y also induces antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, stimulates B-cell
activity, inhibits the growth of normal and neoplastic cells, and has nonspecific antiviral activity.
High doses of INFs, especially of INF-Y, are toxic, causing severe fever, malaise, anorexia,
thrombocytopemia, granulocytopenia, and in some cases liver, kidney, or neural toxicity.
 9. What conditions have been reported to respond to interferon therapy?
Anecdotal reports have indicated INF-α2a (Roferon-A) may be of benefit in treating dogs
with multiple papillomas, epitheliotropic lymphoma, and recurrent bacterial pyoderma. Possible
indications for the use of INF-o in cats include herpesvirus, idiopathic facial dermatosis, and
indolent ulcers. The oral dosage for cats is 30-120 1U/cat/day. In dogs, we have used 1000-2000
IU orally every 12-24 hours in treating oral papillomatosis and 1000 1U orally every 24 hours in
treating recurrent bacterial pyoderrma. Much higher doses have been recommended for use in
treating epitheliotropic lymphosarcoma; i.e., 3 million IU given by subcutaneous injection every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arioja A (ed): Compendium ofveterinary products, ed 6, Port Huron, M1, 2001, North American Compendiums, pp
1600-1601, 2094-2095.
Barta O: Immunoadjuvant therapy. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's current veterinary therapy XI small
animat practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders, pp 217-223.
Kruth SA: Cytokines and biologic response modifers in small animal practice. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds):
Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xlf smatl animat practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 547-553.
Scott DW, Miller WH,Griffin CE: Mutter and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000
WB Saumders, pp 252-263, 286-288, 1117-1118.
Tizard IR: Veterinary immunotogy, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 426-433.
Tompkins W: Immunomodulation and therapeutic effects of the oral use of IFN-o: mechanism of action,
JInterferon Cytokine Res 19:817-828,1999.
9. PRINCIPLES OF TOPICAL THERAPY
Randall C. Thomas, DVM, DACVD
1. When is topical therapy indicated?
Topical therapy is an integral part of dermatologic therapy in the dog. Depending on the
active ingredient, topical therapy can be used to moisten or dry the skin; treat bacterial, fungal,
or parasitic infections; alter the maturation of the epidermis; or ease pain and pruritus. Cats are less
appreciative of bathing and dipping than their canine counterparts. However, topical treatments
are critical in some feline skin disorders, and these instances will be noted throughout the chaptet.
Principles of Topical Therapy
71
 8. What are the immunoadjunctive actions of interferons?
Interferons (INF) are regulatory proteins that can act on a variety of different cell types.
 Interferon-α is normally produced by monocytes and macrophages. It has nonspecific antiviral
activity affecting RNA and protein synthesis and induces ex tracellular antiviral proteins. It also
enhances natural killer cell activity and has antiproliferative effects on both normal and neoplastic
cells. Interferon-β is produced by fibroblasts and shares a similar structure and similar actions to
INF-o. Interferon-yis produced by activated T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. It serves as an
important macrophage-activating factor, upregulates type-I and type-II MHC anti gens, increases
antimicrobial activity, increases antitumor activity, increases tumor necrosis factor-o synthesis,
and inhibits macrophage migration. It also increases IL-2 synthesis, enhances cytotoxic T-cell
and NK cell activity. INF-Y also induces antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, stimulates B-cell
activity, inhibits the growth of normal and neoplastic cells, and has nonspecific antiviral activity.
High doses of INFs, especially of INF-Y, are toxic, causing severe fever, malaise, anorexia,
thrombocytopemia, granulocytopenia, and in some cases liver, kidney, or neural toxicity.
 9. What conditions have been reported to respond to interferon therapy?
Anecdotal reports have indicated INF-α2a (Roferon-A) may be of benefit in treating dogs
with multiple papillomas, epitheliotropic lymphoma, and recurrent bacterial pyoderma. Possible
indications for the use of INF-o in cats include herpesvirus, idiopathic facial dermatosis, and
indolent ulcers. The oral dosage for cats is 30-120 1U/cat/day. In dogs, we have used 1000-2000
IU orally every 12-24 hours in treating oral papillomatosis and 1000 1U orally every 24 hours in
treating recurrent bacterial pyoderrma. Much higher doses have been recommended for use in
treating epitheliotropic lymphosarcoma; i.e., 3 million IU given by subcutaneous injection every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arioja A (ed): Compendium ofveterinary products, ed 6, Port Huron, M1, 2001, North American Compendiums, pp
1600-1601, 2094-2095.
Barta O: Immunoadjuvant therapy. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's current veterinary therapy XI small
animat practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders, pp 217-223.
Kruth SA: Cytokines and biologic response modifers in small animal practice. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds):
Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xlf smatl animat practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 547-553.
Scott DW, Miller WH,Griffin CE: Mutter and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000
WB Saumders, pp 252-263, 286-288, 1117-1118.
Tizard IR: Veterinary immunotogy, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 426-433.
Tompkins W: Immunomodulation and therapeutic effects of the oral use of IFN-o: mechanism of action,
JInterferon Cytokine Res 19:817-828,1999.
9. PRINCIPLES OF TOPICAL THERAPY
Randall C. Thomas, DVM, DACVD
1. When is topical therapy indicated?
Topical therapy is an integral part of dermatologic therapy in the dog. Depending on the
active ingredient, topical therapy can be used to moisten or dry the skin; treat bacterial, fungal,
or parasitic infections; alter the maturation of the epidermis; or ease pain and pruritus. Cats are less
appreciative of bathing and dipping than their canine counterparts. However, topical treatments
are critical in some feline skin disorders, and these instances will be noted throughout the chaptet.
72
Principles of Topical Therapy
2. Why use topical therapy?
 y    n             
medications. With few exceptions, topical therapies are very safe for use in both the dog and cat.
Lastly, many owners want to be actively involved in the treatment of their pet.
3. What types of topical therapy are useful in the dog and cat?
Topical therapy comes in many forms, including shampoos, rinses/dips, lotions, powders,
sprays, and ointments. Shampoos and rinses are ideal for generalized use, and powders, lotions,
and ointments are more useful for local application. Because there are literally hundreds of
products available, it is beneficial to be familiar with active ingredients, as well as the manner in
which they may be delivered.
 4. What are the disadvantages of using topical therapy?
Not every topical treatment is free of potential adverse effects. Because of the grooming
habits of our veterinary patients, it should be assumed that topical agents that are not rinsed off
are subject to ingestion. Side effects can range from gastrointestinal upset to toxicosis (rare)
When using topical products that have toxic potential, application of an Elizabethan collar may
be considered to avoid ingestion. Occasional patients may have contact allergic or irritant reactions
to certain products. Topical therapy is also labor intensive and relatively expensive. Client and
Lastly, shampoos have traditionally had little residual effect once rinsed off the animal.
5. Are there shampoo products that provide residual effects?
Microvesicle technology has allowed some shampoo and conditioner products to have
residual effects. Novasomes (EVSCO) are microvesicles with five to seven lipid bilayers around
a central holding area with moisturizers. The Novasomes remain attached to the haircoat after
rinsing. Over several days, the lipid bilayers break down, releasing the inner contents. The
moisturizers in Novasomes may counteract the drying effects of some active ingredients in
medicated shampoos. Spherulites (Allerderm/Virbac) are microvesicles with 10 to 1000 layers.
Various active ingredients can be incorporated into the many layers of these microvesicles. A
positive charge allows them to bind to the skin and haircoat.As they break down, the active
ingredients are slowly released. Spherulites also incorporate chitosanide, which has moisturizing
effects.
6. What are the beneficial effects of water (hydrotherapy)?
itching. In addition, whirlpool baths are an effective way of using hydrotherapy to treat the entire
7. Educate the owner about topical therapy!
For pets to benefit from topical therapy, it must be done correctly. Figure 9-1 describes
important points that should be discussed with the owner regarding topical therapy (Box 9-1).
8. Why can't owners use human or over-the-counter (OTC) products in their pets?
The character and pH of human skin is different from that of canine and feline skin. For that
reason, products that are highly effective for human conditions may not be useful for our veterinary
patients. Some human products can be drying, exacerbating pruritus. Use of a baby shampoo or
           ds
prescription veterinary shampoo.
PrinciplesofTopicalTherapy
73
Figure 9-1Atopic dog with superficial pyoderma and seborrhea oleosa. Benzoyl peroxide may be useful
topical therapy in this case to treat pyoderma and degrease the skin and haircoat.
Box 9-1Important Points for Owners to Know About Topical Therapy
in theDog and Cat
Frequency of use: Be specific about how often the product should be used. For most skin con-
ditions, topical therapy should be done one to two times weekly. As the pet improves, less frequent
use may be possible. Give the owner guidelines on what to look for as the treatment progresses.
Application of the product: This seems obvious, but owners don't always know how to
shampoo their dog or cat. The entire animal should be wetted down with cool water. Then the
shampoo product should be applied to the entire body. Some medicated products don't lather
well, and owners should be warned of this. Using excessive quantities of the product to
generate a good lather is wasteful, and makes it hard to effectively rinse the product.
Contact time: 10-15 minutes contact time is required for the active ingredient in most
shampoos to work. Contact time starts when shampoo has been applied to the entire animal.
Owners must be educated on the proper use of conditioners, as well, to maximize their
residual effects.
Rinsing: In general, it should take about twice as long to rinse the pet as it did to apply
the product. This ensures that the product is effectively rinsed from the skin and haircoat. Unless
the product is intended to be left on the animal, it may cause irritation if not rinsed properly.
Drying: After rinsing, pets should be dried well to prevent chilling and maceration of the
skin. Thorough towel drying is often effective for larger dogs. Warm-air drying should be
done carefully in smaller dogs and cats. Only experienced personnel should use cage-dryers
due to the risk of hyperthermia and thermal burns.
74
Principles of Topical Therapy
Numerous "'medicated" shampoos are available OTC for animals. In my experience, owners
tend to believe that these shampoos are effective against all skin conditions. While these products
are less expensive than prescription items, they are often misused, making them ineffective.
Quality control and stability may also be a problem for generic or OTC products.
 9. When is topical antibacterial therapy indicated?
 Superficial bacterial pyoderma is one of the most common disorders in the dog. Deep pyoderma
is also relatively common in the dog. Treatment of pyoderma in the dog typically involves the use
of both topical and systemic antibacterial therapies. The practitioner should choose an active
ingredient with good activity against Staphyfococcus intermedius, the most common cause of canine
Pyoderma. In the cat, bacterial pyoderma is less common. Deep bacterial infections, such as bite-
wound abscesses and opportunistic (atypical) mycobacterium infections, are not responsive to topical
antibacterials, so wound management and/or systemic treatment is the mainstay for these disorders.
10. What are the common antibacterial agents available as shampoo products?
● Benzoyl peroxide
●Chlorhexidine
●Ethyl lactate
●Povidone-iodine
11. What's the difference between these active ingredients?
Figure 9-2 shows the advantages, disadvantages, and indications of the common antibacterial
agents (Table 9-1).
Table 9-1 Active Ingredients in Antibacterial Shampoos
ACTIVE
INGREDIENT
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
INDICATIONS
 Benzoyl peroxide
·Excellent activity
·Drying
· Superficial
2.5-3%
against S. intermedius
 Bleaches colored
pyoderma
Good degreaser
fabrics
 Deep pyoderma
Follicular flushing
 Doesn't lather well
Localized
 Keratoly tic properties
Occasionally
bacterial
 Some residual activity
irritating
infection
Chlorhexidine
Good activity against
Rarely causes
 Superficial
0.5-4%
S. intermedius
contact irritation
pyoderma
· Activity against
 Mixed (bacterial
Malassezia when 1%
and Malassezia)
Or greater
infections
· Less drying than
 benzoyl peroxide
· Not inactivated by
organic debris
Ethyl lactate 10%
 Good activity against
·May not be as
 Superficial
S. intermedius
 effective as benzoyl
pyoderma
· Penetrates hair follicles
peroxide
·Impetigo
 and sebaceous glands
Good for sensitive skin
· Breakdown products
may acidify skin
Povidone-iodine
Good activity against
 Stains light-colored
Superficial
S.intermedius
 pets and fabric
pyoderma
·Inactivated by
organic debris
Principles of Topical Therapy
75
12. Why would I choose benzoyl peroxide over the other antibacterial agents?
ingredient can be drying, using a product that contains a moisturizer (MicroPearls Benzoyl Plus,
EVSCO) or following the shampoo with a moisturizing rinse may be indicated. Benzoyl peroxide
is also useful when pyoderma presents as greasy seborrhea (Figure 9-1). In dogs that already have
dry skin and haircoat, use of a milder product, such as chlorhexidine or ethyl lactate, may be
indicated. Benzoyl peroxide is the topical antibacterial agent of choice in dogs with deep
pyoderma.
13. How do I decide which strength chlorhexidine product to use?
Chlorhexidine shampoos come in a variety of concentrations from 0.5 to 4%. One study
indicates that chlorhexidine is effective against S. intermedius at each of these concentrations.
The higher concentration chlorhexidine products may provide better efficacy; however, this has
not been proven. I recommend using a product that is at least 2% chlorhexidine to provide good
efficacy against both S. intermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis, the two common cutaneous
pathogens in the dog.
14. If benzoyl peroxide is a better antibacterial, why would I use chlorhexidine?
Chlorhexidine is a good antibacterial, and can be used with confidence against superficial
pyoderma in the dog. Because chlorhexidine is milder than benzoyl peroxide, it may be more
appropriate in dogs with sensitive skin, or when seborrhea sicca (dry skin) is already present.
Chlorhexidine is also indicated in dogs with mixed (bacterial and yeast) infections.
15. What about ethyl lactate and povidone-iodine?
Ethyl lactate has good to excellent activity against S. intermedius. It is hydrolyzed to lactic
acid and ethanol on the skin, so it has acidifying properties that may contribute to its antibacterial
properties. It is a milder agent than benzoyl peroxide, and adverse effects are rare. I use an ethyl
lactate shampoo (Etiderm, Allerderm/Virbac) for puppies with impetigo or dogs with sensitive skin.
peroxide, chlorhexidine, and ethyl lactate are superior products with less potential to be irritating
or sensitizing.
16. Is modulation of skin pH an effective way to treat pyoderma?
Recent studies have shown that the growth of S. intermedius is suppressed at a pH of 6.0 and
below.。 A novel product (Advanced pHormula Spray, EVSCO) is available that reduces the pH
of canine skin to below 6.0 for longer than 48 hours. No clinical trials have been published to
show that in vivo use of this product reduces the incidence of canine pyoderma. However, I have
found this product useful in reducing the relapse of infection in some dogs with recurrent
superficial pyoderma. For best results, clearance of an active infection with traditional means
(antibiotics and antibacterial topical therapy) must be accomplished before use of this product.
17. Are there products available for localized bacterial infections?
Mupirocin (Bactoderm, Pfizer) is very effective against S. intermedius, but has limited activity
against gram-negative organisms. Mupirocin penetrates the skin well, and has a low incidence of
for localized infections due to S. intermedius such as intertrigo, chin pyoderma, callous pyoderma,
or mild impetigo.
 Pyoben gel, Allerderm/Virbac) are also available. These products are well tolerated by most pets,
but are more likely to cause irritation than mupirocin. Neomycin-based products are often effective
against S. intermedius, but resistance can develop with repeated use, and neomycin is associated
with an increased number of allergic contact reactions. Combination products with both an anti
76
Principles of Topical Therapy
B
Figure 9-2 A, Matassezia dermatitis in an atopic West Highland White Terrier. B, Acetate tape preparation
cytology of Malassezia dermatitis.
biotic and a potent corticosteroid should be used with caution outside the ear canal (see
discussion of topical steroids below).
18.When is topical therapy for Malassezia dermatitis indicated?
Once Malassezia dermatitis has been diagnosed, topical therapy is almost always indicated
in the dog or cat (Figure 9-2). Initially, I prefer to treat most cases of Malassezia with topical
therapy. With severe infections, use of both systemic and topical therapy may be indicated from
Principles of Topical Therapy
77
in eliminating yeast from the clawfold region.
the start. In addition, when yeast is present within the clawfolds, or other "hard to reach" places,
topical therapy alone may not be effective (Figure 9-3).
19. What antifungal products are available to treat Malassezia?
Chlorhexidine (1-4%)
Hexadene (Virbac/Allerderm)
Miconazole
Chlorhexiderm (DV M)
MicroPearls Miconazole (EVSCO)
Chlorhexiderm Maximum (DVM)
Dermazole (Virbac/Allerderm)
Sebahex (EVSCO)
Ketoconazole (1-2%)
Miconazole/chlorhexidine
Nizoral (Janssen)
Malaseb (DVM)
Ketoconazole/chlorhexidine
Benzoyl peroxide/sulfur
KetoChlor (Virbac/Allerderm)
Sulfox ydex (DVM)
Selenium sulfide (1%)
Selsun Blue (Chattem)
Head & Shoulders Intensive Treatment (Procter & Gamble)*
This box includes common products, but is not intended to be all-inclusive.
*Head & Shoulders standard fomula contains pyrithione zinc, which is contraindicated in the dog and cat (may
cause ocular damage).
20. Are there products that provide residual activity against Malassezia?
Enilconazole rinse (0.2%) is effective against Malassezia, and may provide some residual
activity after application. This product is available in many countries outside the United States.
A leave-on, miconazole-based conditioner (ResiZOLE, Virbac/Allerderm) is available within the
United States that provides residual activity. One study indicated that use of this product two to
three times weekly resulted in a significantly decreased Malassezia population versus placebo
treatment.? There are also anecdotal reports of successful management of Malassezia dermatitis
78
Principles of Topical Therapy
using dilute (2.5%) acetic acid (white vinegar and water) rinses, but the acidifying effect of acetic
acid on the skin is short-lived.
21. Are over-the-counter antifungal creams effective against Malassezia?
OTC products containing miconazole and clotrimazole are effective against Malassezia. Use
of these products may be indicated for localized and interdigital Malassezia infections. Terbinafine
1% cream (Lamisil) is also available OTC. This product is effective against dermatophytes, but
is ineffective against Malassezia, and should not be recommended.
22. Are these products useful for treatment of skin fold infections (intertrigo)?
 Intertri go is dermatitis resulting from friction between two apposed skin surfaces (Figure 9-4).
Cutaneous cytology is critical in determining whether this infection is caused by bacteria, yeasts,
or both. I found that mupirocin (see previous section) is very useful in cases of intertrigo caused
by S. intermedius. Clotrimazole or miconazole creams are effective when Malassezia is the
predominant organism. Mixed (yeast and bacteria) infections are common in these areas, so use
of multiple products is common. Long-term management of these skin folds is usually necessary
if the owner is unwilling to have them surgically excised.
Figure 9-4 Intertrigo. Facial and nasal fold dermatitis in an English Bulldog may require long-term
managermient.
23. What kind of long-term management of intertrigo is helpful?
Skin folds, regardless of location, need to be kept as clean and dry as possible. Because
inflammation is often marked in these areas, short-term use of a corticosteroi d-containing product
(Otomax, Schering-Plough, or similar product) may be helpful. Once the inflammation is diminished
(usually 3-4 days), I change to one of the products that does not contain a steroid. Once infection
is resolved, using pledgets or swipes that contain acetic and boric acids (MalAcetic Wipes,
DerrmaPet) or miconazole/chlorhexidine (Malaseb pledgets, DVM) makes it easier for owners to
Principles ofTopical Therapy
79
regularly clean these areas (one to three times weekly). I have also used Advanced pHormula
Skin pH Modulator (EvSCO) on a cotton ball for chronic management of intertrigo.
24. Is topical therapy effective against dermatophytosis in the dog and cat?
The recommendations for topical therapy versus dermatophytosis have changed in recent
years. It has been shown that clipping hairs and bathing may cause initial worsening of symptoms
by traumatizing the skin and spreading fungal arthrospores throughout the haircoat. " In spite of
this, clipping and topical therapy are still indicated to diminish the number of infective hairs being
shed into the environment.
Use of 2% lime sulfur or 0.2% Enilconazole dips is the most effective procedure against
dermatophytes because they provide residual activity following application. Azole-containing
shampoos (ketoconazole, miconazole) may spread arthrospores throughout the haircoat, and
provide no residual activity. In a study of topical antifungal agents, chlorhexidine was determined
to have poor efficacy against dermatophytes.
 25. Is localized treatment of dermatophytes with antifungal creams useful?
Localized treatment for dermatophytosis is usually ineffective. In the cat, dermatophytosis
is often more widespread than clinically evident, so localized treatment may offer a false sense
of security to the owner. In addition, there is no evidence that these creams are able to penetrate
infected hair shafts to effectively inactivate the fungal spores.Most cases where antifungal
creams have been successfully used to treat dermatophytosis probably represent self-resolution
26. When is topical therapy indicated as the sole treatment of dermatophytosis?
In dogs and shorthaired cats with localized lesions topical therapy may be the imitial treatment
of choice. Hairs should be gently clipped from the area immediately surrounding the lesions.
Lime sulfur or Enilconazole dips can then be applied to the entire animal and allowed to dry.
 Animals (especially cats) should be prevented from ingesting the dip while it is wet by applying
an Elizabethan collar until dry. Both of these products have been shown to be efficacious against
dermatophytes and safe for use in both dogs and cats. Dips should be applied weekly until clinical
lesions are resolved and two to three weekly dermatophyte cultures are negative. For best results,
dogs and shorthaired cats with generalized lesions and aff longhaired cats with dermatophytosis
27. Should I bother with treating longhaired cats with topical therapy?
Yes! Use of systemic therapy is almost always indicated in longhaired cats with
environmental contamination with infected hairs. These cats should have their entire trunk gently
disseminated throughout the clinic or grooming facility. Dipping with lime sulfur or Enilconazole
solution once weekly is then initiated. The end-point of therapy is similar to that for cases of
localizeddermatophytosis above.
28. What if my clients complain about the smell of lime sulfur dips?
Not too many people appreciate the smell of lime sulfur. Warning owners about the foul odor
of lime sulfur before use may result in fewer complaints. Additionally, make sure that owners
understand the benefits of lime sulfur. This product is very safe, effective, and inexpensive. Once
the dip has dried on the animal, the smell of the product is markedly decreased. Owners should
be informed that lime sulfur tarnishes jewelry and stains porcelain tubs. I encourage owners to
dip their pets outdoors when weather allows. For cats and small dogs, a plastic dish tub can be
used for the process. For larger dogs, owners can buy a plastic children's pool in which to apply
the dips. In-clinic dips can also alleviate client compliance problems with this product.
80
Principles of Topical Therapy
29. What is seborrhea?
Seborrhea is a term used to describe excessive scale formation on the skin surface and within
the haircoat. Primary seborrhea is an inherited disorder of keratinization in which there is
hyperproliferation of the basal cell layers. Secondary seborrhea is a reaction pattern of the skin
to any number of conditions, and is much more common (Table 9-2). Seborrhea can present as
excessive dry scale (seborrhea sicca) or greasy scale and haircoat (seborrhea oleosa). Seborrheic
dermatitis applies to focal, pruritic areas of dermatitis, secondarily infected with Malassezia
and/or S. intermedius.
Table 9-2
Causes of Secondary Seborrhea
Allergic Diseases
Parasitic Diseases
 Flea allergy dermatitis 
Demodicosis
Atopy
Scabies
Food allergy
Cheyletiellosis
 Heavy intestinal parasitism
Infectious Diseases
Nutritional
Superficial pyoderma
Poor diet
Dermatophy tosis
Malabsorption / mal digestion
Malassezia dermatitis
Autoimmune
Systemic Disease and Neoplasia
Pemphigus foliaceus
Hepatic disease
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Environmental and Physical
Low environmental humidity
 Inappropriate use of topical therapy
30. Can seborrhea be cured?
Primary seborrhea is a congenital disorder that cannot be cured. Control of symptoms using
both systemic and topical therapy can often be accomplished, however. Secondary seborrhea can
be managed by controlling symptoms and identification and control of the inciting cause. Cases
of secondary seborrhea that result from curable or easily controllable diseases (parasitic infestation,
hypothyroidism) can be cured. Secondary seborrhea that results from chronic diseases such as
atopy may require long-term management of both the primary and secondary disease.
31. What role does topical therapy play in control of seborrhea?
There are numerous topical products that are helpful in the management of seborrhea.
The product of choice depends on the type and severity of the symptoms. Numerous moisturizer
and emollient products are available as shampoos and rinses. For mild, dry seborrhea, these
products help by increasing the moisture content within the stratum corneum. In mild cases of
seborrhea that result from low environmental humidity or excessive bathing, moisturizers are
ex tremely effective and may be all that is necessary. In moderate cases of seborrhea, sulfur and
tar-based shampoo may be indicated. Tar products can be extremely drying to the skin and
haircoat, so they should be used judiciously. The author rarely finds the use of tar-based
shampoos necessary.
Principles of Topical Therapy
81
32. What does keratolytic mean and what role does this property play in treatment
ofseborrhea?
Keratolytic products are those that decrease the cohesion between the keratinocytes of the
stratum corneum. This facilitates the desquamation of these surface cells, resulting in a decrease
in visible scale. Because seborrhea results from an excessive rate of epidermal cell proliferation,
desquamation of excess surface cells is helpful in management of the condition. Benzoyl peroxide
sulfur, selenium sulfide, and tar products all have keratolytic properties.
33. What does keratoplastic mean, and what role does this property play in treatment
of seborrhea?
seborrhea. In one study of Cocker Spaniels with primary seborrhea, the calculated epidermal cell
renewal time was approximately 8 days, versus 21 days in normal Cocker Spaniels.67 Because
the epiderrmis of these dogs proliferates at a rate almost three times faster than that in normal
of epidermal cells, possibly by acting on the DNA of basal cells. Salicylic acid, sulfur, selenium
sulfide, and tar products have keratoplastic properties.
34. Why are sulfur and salicylic acid often used in conjunction?
As mentioned previously, sulfur has both keratoplastic and keratolytic properties, while
salicylic acid has keratoplastic properties. These agents are thought to be synergistic when used
together. Sulfur and salicylic acid products are often found in combinations of about 2% each,
and are typically well tolerated in the dog and cat.
 35. Are products containing higher concentrations of salicylic acid useful in veterinary
dermatology?
To the author's knowledge, there is only one veterinary product that utilizes a 6.6% salicylic
acid concentration (Kerasolv, DVM Pharmaceuticals). Higher concentration products are available
acid product is indicated for localized areas of hyperkeratosis, such as nasal hyperkeratosis,
36. When are tar products indicated in the treatment of seborrhea?
Tar shampoos have keratolytic, keratoplastic, and degreasing properties. The tar products are
the harshest of the antiseborrheic products, and their use should be confined to the most severe
cases of seborrhea. When milder products will work, there is no need to use a tar shampoo. Tar
shampoos can be extremely drying and often have an unpleasant odor. In most cases,a
moisturizing conditioner should be used after a tar shampoo to decrease the drying effect. Tar
oleosa. The author recommends using a tar shampoo just long enough to resolve the worst
symptoms and then changing back to a milder antiseborrheic. Cats are very sensitive to the
irritating effects of tars and may be poisoned by phenolic compounds in tars, thus tar-containing
products should not be used in feline dermatology.
37. If benzoyl peroxide is considered drying, why would it be useful in cases of seborrhea?
Superficial pyoderma is one of the most common causes of seborrhea in the dog (Figure 9-5).
benzoyl peroxide will help prevent overdrying of the skin. In addition, benzoyl peroxide (alone
that are effective degreasers should be used judiciously. Once the intended effect is accomplished,
the animal should be changed to a milder product or bathed less frequently
82
Principles of Topical Therapy
Figure 9-5   Chronic pyoderma in a dog, causing secondary seborrhea.
38. What are the indications for selenium sulfide?
Selenium sulfide is keratolytic, keratoplastic, antifungal, and degreasing. I think 1% selenium
sulfide is useful in cases of seborrhea oleosa caused by Malassezia dermatitis. As stated previously,
veterinary products with selenium sulfide are no longer available. A human product (Selsun Blue)
is available over the counter. Selenium sulfide may be irritating to the cat and is contraindicated
in this species.
39. What topical antipruritic products are available for use in the dog and cat?
A wide number of steroid and nonsteroidal products are available on the veterinary market.
Numerous shampoo products are marketed as having antipruritic effects. These products have a
place in treatment of pruritic patients, but they have limited residual effects after rinsing. A
number of conditioners and rinses are also available for control of pruritus, and some of these
products have residual activity. A number of steroid-containing ointments, pastes, and sprays are
also available. Because of their nature, these products are more useful in treating localized areas
of pruri tus, rather than generalized symptoms.
40. Is colloidal oatmeal an effective antipruritic?
Colloidal oatmeal is a safe and relatively effective antipruritic. The exact mechanism of its
antipruritic effect is poorly understood. A colloidal oatmeal-based shampoo and conditioner is
available (EpiSoothe, Allerderm/Virbac). In addition, oatmeal rinses are available for use in the
dog and cat (EpiSoothe bath treatment, Allerderm/Virbac). Oatmeal-based products are extremely
safe, but tend to provide short-term relief (24-48 hours) of mild pruritus only. Oatmeal has no
utilize an antimicrobial product first. Oatmeal-based products are most useful versus pruritus that
is uncomplicated by infection. Many oatmeal-based products are available with additional
ingredients in attempts to potentiate the antipruritic effect.
41. Are topical antihistamines effective antipruritics in the dog and cat?
have combined colloidal oatmeal with diphenhydramine (HistaCalm, ResiHIST; Allerderm/
Virbac). Again, these products may provide temporary relief of mild pruritus. ResiHist is
formulated as a "leave-on" conditioner to provide residual, antipruritic effects. There are no
clinical studies to support the claim of added efficacy. It is unclear whether topical antihistamines
work directly on the skin, or via absorption into the systemic circulation.
Principles of Topical Therapy
83
42.  Are topical anesthetics an effective way to control pruritus?
Numerous topical anesthetics are available, and they do have temporary antipruritic effects.
Pramoxine has been the topical anesthetic of choice in veterinary medicine. Other products, such
as lidocaine and benzocaine, may cause cutaneous sensitivity or toxic effects (methemoglobinemia).
Pramoxine is usually combined in shampoo or rinses with colloidal oatmeal (Relief, DVM
Pharmaceuticals; Dermal Soothe, EVSCO). It is also available as a spray (Relief spray, DVM
Pharmaceuticals) and as a leave-on conditioner (ResiPROX, Allerderm/Virbac). Like colloidal
mild pruritus, uncomplicated by secondary infections.
43. Is lime sulfur a useful antipruritic?
Lime sulfur is a very effective, nonsteroidal antipruritic. Because it is applied as a rinse and
allowed to dry on the animal, it provides residual effect. Lime sulfur is safe for use in both dogs
and cats. The author commonly recommends the use of lime sulfur dips while animals are being
withdrawn from antihistamines and corticosteroids for allergy testing.
44. Are there other nonsteroidal, antipruritic products for use in dogs and cats?
A recently introduced product may be an effective antipruritic by combining novel ingredients.
Allermyl (Allerderm/Virbac) contains linoleic acid and a monosaccharide, L-rhamnose, in a
microemulsion. Topical application of linoleic acid has previously been shown to improve
cutaneous barrier function in the dog.′ Barrier function is a protective mechanism of the skin, and
may be defective in dogs with atopic dermatitis. In vitro, L-rhamnose has been shown to decrease
inflammatory mediators that may be involved in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. To the
author's knowledge, no clinical trials have been performed to critically evaluate the effectiveness
of this product in vivo.
45. Are there topical corticosteroids that are useful in management of pruritus in the dog?
Topical corticosteroids are very effective antipruritic drugs, and are commonly used in
treatment of pruritus in humans. Until recently, most veterinary topical steroid products came as
ointments, creams, or powders for localized use. Generalized use of these products in our
veterinary patients has been limited by the haircoat and concern over ingestion of the product. In
recent years, products that lend themselves to generalized use have become available. Genesis
Topical Spray (Allerderm/Virbac) contains 0.015% triamcinolone acetonide and is effective in
short-term management of pruritus. Triamcinolone is a potent corticosteroid and should not be
used long-term.
46. Are shampoos containing topical corticosteroids safe and effective?
A few corticosteroid containing shampoo products are available (Cortisoothe, Allerderm/
with a colloidal oatmeal base. Capex shampoo (formerly known as F/S Shampoo) contains 0.01%
fluocinolone acetonide, a fluorinated corticosteroid. While topical application of fluorinated
corticosteroids can be associated with systemic absorption, use of this product twice weekly did
not result in systemic evidence of absorption or adrenal suppression.° While corticosteroid-
containing shampoos appear to be safe, they do not result in significant residual activity
47.Are there corticosteroid-containing products that provide residual antipruritic effect?
A 1% hydrocortisone-containing, leave-on conditioner (ResiCort, Allerderm/Virbac) is
available. This product may be applied to the entire body and allowed to dry. The base of the
product is non-irritating, and thus does not need to be rinsed off. When this product was applied
to normal and atopic dogs twice weekly for 6 weeks, mean values for hematologic, biochemical,
and adrenal response to exogenous ACTH remained within normal limits. In one dog with
inflamed skin, a lack of response to exogenous ACTH was detected at the end of the study,
84
Principles of Topical Therapy
suggesting that absorption of the product was increased through inflamed skin. For that reason,
even 1% hydrocortisone should be used cautiously in small dogs with generalized erythema and
for short-term use in managing a pruritic crisis; it is too potent to use on a long-term basis.
48. Is it safe to apply more potent corticosteroids to the dog or cat?
Numerous corticosteroid-containing products are available as ointments, creams, and
sprays. While these products are effective antipruritics, they are intended for short-term use only.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that application of fluorinated corticosteroids to the skin,
ears, and eyes can result in systemic absorption and suppression of the adrenal axis. In addition
to systemic effects, localized effects on the skin can occur. These include cutaneous atrophy,
Figure 9-6  Cutaneous atrophy caused by overuse of a triamcinolone-containing ointment (Panolog). Note
thin skin, pustules, and comedone formation.
49. What is the safest way to utilize topical corticosteroids?
When used, fluorinated corticosteroids should initially be applied once daily to decrease
inflammation, and then rapidly tapered to the least frequent interval needed to maintain improve-
ment. A less potent corticosteroid, such as 1% hydrocortisone, should be substituted as soon as
possible to avoid possible adverse effects. A recent study indicated that use of a 0.015%
triamcinolone solution (Genesis, Allerderm/Virbac) was effective for management of pruritus in
the dog. In that study, hematological and biochemical results of treated dogs did not change
significantly over the 28 days of treatment. This product is intended for generalized use over short
 periods of time (28 days or less) as a safer alternative to oral or injectable corticosteroids. Chronic,
excessive use of this product could certainly result in cutaneous atrophy, calcinosis cutis, or other
symptoms of iatrogenic Cushing's disease.
50.  Are topical corticosteroids safe for treatment of pruritus in cats?
 Use of topical ointments and creams is limited in cats due to their propensity to overgroom
areas that have substances applied. Cats are also much more tolerant of the systemic side effects
of corticosteroids. To my knowledge, systemic effects of topical steroids have not been reported
in the cat. Localized adverse effects such as cutaneous atrophy and alopecia can be seen in cats
with overuse of potent topical corticosteroids.
Lasers in Dermatology
85
REFERENCES
1. Abbott WH, Lemons CL, Gram WD: In vitro activity of chlorhexidine gluconate against Staphylococcus
intermedius (abstract),Proceed Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 17,1998
2.
Beale KM, Kunkle GA: Safety of long-term administration of a 0.01% fluocinolone shampoo in allergic dogs,
Vet Dermatot 11:3-7, 2000
3.
Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils on transepidermal water loss in dogs with seborrhea sicca.
In Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, vo12, New York, 1993, Pergamon Press, pp 157-162.
4.
DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Inability of two topical treatments to influence the course of experimentally induced
dematophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:52-57, 1995
5. DeBoer DJ, Schafer JH, Salsbury CS, et al: Multiple-center study of reduced-concentration triamcinolone
topical solution for the treatment of dogs with known or suspected allergic pruritus. Am / Vet Res 63:408-413
2002.
6.Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of epidemis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of beagles
and cocker spaniels with healthy skin, Am / Vet Res 50:587-591, 1989.
7.
Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation kinetics of epidemmis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands
of cocker spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea. Am / Vet Res 50:1918-1921, 1989.
 8. Marsella R, Nicklin CF, Nerbonne J: Double-blind, placebo controlled study to evaluate two miconazole leave-
9. Matousek JL, Campbell KL, Schaeffer DJ: The influence of pH on in vitro growth of Staphylococcus
intermedius and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (abstract). Proceed Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot Am Coll Vet
Dermatol 47, 1999
10.
Moriello K A, DeBoer DJ: Feline dematophytosis: recent advances and recommendations for therapy. Vet Clin
NorthAmSmaAnimPract25:901-921,1995
11. Thomas RC, Logas D: Effects of a 1% hydrocortisone conditioner on haematological and biochemical
parameters, adrenal function testing and cutaneous reactivity to histamine in nomal and pruritic dogs. Vet
Dermatol 10:109-116, 1999.
10.LASERS IN DERMATOLOGY
Mona Boord, DVM, DACVD
1. What does the term laser stand for?
LASER is an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Stimulated
emission involves a photon of light entering an atom with an excited electron, the electron falls
new atoms with excited electrons, starting a chain reaction and rapid multiplication of photon
generation. The photons emit light that is reflected between two mirrors in a system that absorbs
2. What are the special features of laser light?
Laser light has three important features:
1. Coherence. The laser light waves are aligned as the light leaves the laser, i.e., the peaks
and valleys are aligned, producing a uniform wave front that can be focused to a very small
area.
2. Monochromaticity. The laser light waves all have the same wavelength.
3. Collimation. All of the light exiting the laser is parallel and will not diffuse over distances.
3. Can a laser help my practice?
The laser is a tool that will augment your diagnostic and therapeutic options. There are many
procedures that can be performed more easily, as well as procedures that cannot be done or
Lasers in Dermatology
85
REFERENCES
1. Abbott WH, Lemons CL, Gram WD: In vitro activity of chlorhexidine gluconate against Staphylococcus
intermedius (abstract),Proceed Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 17,1998
2.
Beale KM, Kunkle GA: Safety of long-term administration of a 0.01% fluocinolone shampoo in allergic dogs,
Vet Dermatot 11:3-7, 2000
3.
Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils on transepidermal water loss in dogs with seborrhea sicca.
In Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, vo12, New York, 1993, Pergamon Press, pp 157-162.
4.
DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Inability of two topical treatments to influence the course of experimentally induced
dematophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:52-57, 1995
5. DeBoer DJ, Schafer JH, Salsbury CS, et al: Multiple-center study of reduced-concentration triamcinolone
topical solution for the treatment of dogs with known or suspected allergic pruritus. Am / Vet Res 63:408-413
2002.
6.Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of epidemis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of beagles
and cocker spaniels with healthy skin, Am / Vet Res 50:587-591, 1989.
7.
Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation kinetics of epidemmis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands
of cocker spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea. Am / Vet Res 50:1918-1921, 1989.
 8. Marsella R, Nicklin CF, Nerbonne J: Double-blind, placebo controlled study to evaluate two miconazole leave-
9. Matousek JL, Campbell KL, Schaeffer DJ: The influence of pH on in vitro growth of Staphylococcus
intermedius and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (abstract). Proceed Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot Am Coll Vet
Dermatol 47, 1999
10.
Moriello K A, DeBoer DJ: Feline dematophytosis: recent advances and recommendations for therapy. Vet Clin
NorthAmSmaAnimPract25:901-921,1995
11. Thomas RC, Logas D: Effects of a 1% hydrocortisone conditioner on haematological and biochemical
parameters, adrenal function testing and cutaneous reactivity to histamine in nomal and pruritic dogs. Vet
Dermatol 10:109-116, 1999.
10.LASERS IN DERMATOLOGY
Mona Boord, DVM, DACVD
1. What does the term laser stand for?
LASER is an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Stimulated
emission involves a photon of light entering an atom with an excited electron, the electron falls
new atoms with excited electrons, starting a chain reaction and rapid multiplication of photon
generation. The photons emit light that is reflected between two mirrors in a system that absorbs
2. What are the special features of laser light?
Laser light has three important features:
1. Coherence. The laser light waves are aligned as the light leaves the laser, i.e., the peaks
and valleys are aligned, producing a uniform wave front that can be focused to a very small
area.
2. Monochromaticity. The laser light waves all have the same wavelength.
3. Collimation. All of the light exiting the laser is parallel and will not diffuse over distances.
3. Can a laser help my practice?
The laser is a tool that will augment your diagnostic and therapeutic options. There are many
procedures that can be performed more easily, as well as procedures that cannot be done or
86
Lasers inDermatology
image of the practice. The public is well educated and desires less painful alternatives to
traditional surgery. Improved healing and increased comfort are non-economic factors that may
lead to increased numbers of procedures and referrals.
4. How do lasers interact with tissue?
The energy from the laser light is transferred to tissue. Depending on the wavelength of the
laser light, the optical properties of the irradiated tissue, and the technique of the surgeon, the 
laser energy may be reflected, absorbed, scattered, or transmitted when aimed at tissue.
There are different types of lasers available, which produce different wavelengths of light. This
depends on the lasing medium. The lasing medium is usually the product the laser is named after.
For ex ample, in a CO, laser, the lasing media is COz, which produces a wavelength of 10,600 nm.
Tissues have different energy absorption coeffcients based on their water, hemoglobin,
what type of tissue is being lased.
 Photothermal, photochemical, or photodisruptive interactions occur between the laser energy
and tissue. The first two are used in dermatology. A photothermal interaction occurs when the
energy absorbed heats the tissue. The hyperthermia denatures proteins, coagulates blood and
vaporizes tissues. With proper surgical technique there is minimal peripheral tissue damage. With
improper technique, continued lasing of the tissue creates conduction of heat to surrounding
tissues, producing collateral tissue damage. A photochemical interaction occurs when the energy
from the laser breaks chemical bonds. This has been used in medicine with the development of
photosensitizers that bind to cancer tissue and are activated by laser light to damage the cancer
rapid, short, high-power pulses of energy are in contact with target tissue. This disrupts the
structure of the tissue and is important in lithotripsy.
5. Which laser is best for which type of tissue?
CO, has a very long wavelength of 10,600 nm. It is highly absorbed by water, creating a
photothermal interaction. This results in vaporization of the tissue with high water content. The
characteristics of this wavelength also result in minimal scatter, shallow penetration, and minimal
dures. The shallow penetration of tissue is due to the long wavelength of the CO laser. The long
wavelength can only be delivered by hollow waveguides and articulated arms; therefore, it cannot
 be used for endoscopic procedures. Argon and potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) lasers have short
KTP lasers are preferentially absorbed. The problem with these lasers is that their short wave-
length allows them to transmit through tissue that does not have high hemoglobin content. This
can result in peripheral thermal tissue injury. To minimize damage the amount of energy delivered
to the target tissue should be closely monitored. Between these two lasers are diode lasers and
neodymium: yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers with wavelengths of 635-740 nm, and
1064 nm, respectively. Water and hemoglobin will absorb these wavelengths but not as well as
CO, is absorbed by water and argon is absorbed by hemoglobin. Therefore the depth of thermal
injury to surrounding tissue may be greater if the amount of energy being delivered to the tissue
is not closely monitored. Dye lasers have variable wavelengths of 400-1000 nm depending on the
most daily procedures in the veterinary dermatology practice, the CO, laser is the laser of choice.
Thermal relaxation is the time it takes for tissue to cool. This knowledge has been used to
produce lasers that deliver energy pulses versus continuous waves of energy. This allows improved
surgical precision and decreases unwanted collateral tissue damage. When purchasing a laser, this
upgrade is a little more expensive but worth the investment.
Lasers in Dermatology
87
6. What are the risks or safety issues when using lasers in veterinary practice?
With proper training and conscientious adherence to safety protocols the risks are very
 manageable. Most of the lasers being used in veterinary clinics produce heat and vaporization of
viral) as well as cells and can be irritating when inhaled. There are laser-safe surgical masks
available and the plume must be removed with a smoke evacuator. The evacuator has a flter that
should be changed based on hours of use. The surgical technician is responsible for logging the
amount of time the evacuator is in use.
As mentioned previously, heat is generated by the laser; therefore, surgical preparation
should not include flammable products such as alcohol. Accidental fire can occur with use of
flammable liquids, oxygen, paper drapes, or methane gases. It is imperative to prevent endotracheal
tube fires. There are laser-safe endotracheal tubes available or the practitioner can protect standard
tubes with saline or sterile water-soaked gauze when using lasers well absorbed by water. If
burns. Remember the laser is a light energy much like a laser pointer used in lecturing. If the laser
pointer is aimed at a hole in the lecture screen the light continues to the wall behind it. When
using the laser for cutting tissue, once through the tissue the energy continues until it comes in
contact with whatever is beyond it. It is also common to cut through one area of tissue more
quickly than another. If the laser is passed over an area already incised, it continues on and burns
the tissue beyond. This may be the surgeon's finger or another tissue on the patient. Burns can be
minimized by directing the beam at the surgical site, accurately using the foot pedal to activate
 dnso e e sosp nn   p s  e q  
surgical technician should put the laser in standby mode when not in use.
 The light from the laser can also be reflected and if reflected into the eye can cause damage.
Care should be taken not to aim the light at surgical instruments. There are laser instruments
available with ebonized or burnished finishes which decrease reflected light. Personnel in the
type of laser. Regular glasses or safety lenses are sufficient for the CO, laser. The patient's eyes
are special eye-cups and masks available. The American National Standards Institute publishes a
book of safety standards and regulations called Safe Use of Lasers in Heaith Care Facilities.
7. What are the advantages of using laser over traditional surgery?
One of the big advantages with most photothermal lasers is the sealing of small blood vessels.
Using the laser provides a very dry surgical field even in highly vascular areas. A feline rhinectomy
to remove squamous cell carcinoma may have taken 30-45 minutes with traditional surgery to
control the hemorrhage, and with the CO, laser the procedure takes approximately 15 minutes.
Another very important benefit is decreased postoperative pain. The laser energy is painful
at the time of surgery and general or local anesthesia must be used. However, postoperatively,
patients seem to have less pain and return to normal behavior more quickly. This can best be seen
following a feline onychectomy or rhinectomy. Following a feline rhinectomy our patients are
grooming and eating within hours of recovery.
Another benefit is decreased swelling. If used properly, the laser energy does not crush or
tear tissue; it vaporizes it. It also seals lymphatics, thereby decreasing swelling. However, if there
is significant peripheral tissue damage due to thermal damage, additional swelling occurs.
8. How do you vary the “strength' of the laser beam?
●Varying the diameter of the laser tip
●Changing the power density (watts/cm²)
● Changing the mode of gating: continuous wave, pulsed, or superpulsed
● Varying the distance from the laser tip to the tissue.
88
Lasers inDermatology
9. For what applications is the Co, laser used most frequently in dermatology?
The COz laser has been very helpful in patients who have multiple epidermal lesions to be
removed. Depending on size, these surgical sites once removed can heal by second intention as
quickly as lesions closed with primary closure. Examples of more common lesions would include
multiple sebaceous adenomas, hemangiomas, keratoacanthomas, and feline ceruminous
cystomatosis. There are multiple breeds in which multiple sebaceous adenomas can affect the
quality of life due to pruritus and secondary infections. The removal of these lesions can
significantly decrease the requirement for medical therapy.
Highly vascular areas are more easily handled using the laser. One of the more common
procedures it has been recommended for in dermatology is feline rhinectomy and/or pinnectomy
nd sn ns si podx e go spy sn un io o snonns soi n
takes about 15 minutes, with more hemorrhage occurring from the sutures than the tissue removal
(Figure 10-1). Masses may be removed or biopsied from the oral cavity. Remember, care must be
taken when oxygen is being administered. It has also been used to remove lesions on the penile
sheath with less pain and hemorrhage, allowing this area to heal by second intention.
Figure 10-1 A, The squamous cell carcinoma involving the nose of this cat was debulked using a CO2
Jaser. B, Photograph of the nose immediately after laser surgery.
 The laser is also very helpful in removing epidermal lesions difficult to close with primary
closure, and in some cases laser is the only therapy with good success. Feline ceruminous
cystomatosis is an example. This is an entity in which multiple fluid-filled ceruminous cysts form
initially on the tragal folds of the pinna. If left untreated, the cysts extend down into the canal,
occlude the canal, and secondary otitis externa and/or media develop. The cystic tissue is very
thin and adjacent to the pinnal cartilage. This makes removal of the entire cyst difficult with
traditional surgery; without the removal of the entire cyst, recurrence is likely. Another example
is cutaneous angiomatosis. In veterinary patients, due to the progressive proliferative nature of
this condition, previous recommendations included wide surgical excision or amputation. If the
lesions occurred in a location where this was not possible (such as the face) the pets were
euthanised. Although multiple treatments may be required, laser therapy has been reported to be
a successful alternative in these cases.
Infected tissue can be vaporized or removed using the laser. Surgical technique is very
important so that the healthy tissue to remaining is not contaminated with infected cells. The
Lasers inDermatology
89
types of infection where this is important include papilloma virus, herpes dermatitis, and
sarcoids. The use of the laser with proper surgical technique has resulted in decreased recurrence
Tates after therapy.
Another type of infected tissue includes chronic proliferative infected tissue. This is
most commonly seen in cases of chronic otitis in certain breeds such as the American Cocker
Spaniel. If the proliferative tissue is identified and removed before calcifying, the duration of
medical therapy may be shortened or total ear canal ablation may be avoided. Once the deep
folded cauliflower-like tissue is removed, medical therapy is much more effective (Figures 10-2
and 10-3).
Figure 10-2 CO, laser being used to removal proliferative tissue associated with chronic otitis externa.
10. Discuss the advantages versus disadvantages of laser therapy.
The use of the laser in veterinary practice is not a panacea for every case needing surgery. It
is a wonderful new tool available to us. Some of the major advantages using photothermal energy
surgical area. It also provides less swelling and pain. There are some procedures that can be
performed with much less aggressive tissue removal compared to traditional surgery. Lasers can
be used for photodynamic therapy and better identify tumor margins. The disadvantages include
the initial cost of the equipment and maintenance contracts. A location within the clinic for laser
surgery should be provided so the beam is contained to a specified area. The staff must be trained
q uoslns sun jeun sageiedu si li quudine su ioy saot ueueu pue uoslns sun isisse on
trained in the use of the laser. Only by understanding the physics of the laser and how the energy
is interacting with tissue can its use benefit the patient.
90
Lasers in Dermatology
A
B
Figure 10-3 A, Proliferative otitis externa before rermoval with a COz laser. B, Same dog 3 weeks after
CO, laser therapy.
REFERENCES
1.American National Standards Institute: Safe use of tasers in heath care facilities {ANSIZ136.3-1996), Laser
Institute of America, 1996, Orlando, Fla.
2. Lucroy MD, Bartels KE: Using biomedical lasers in veterinary practice, Vet Med Oct. Suppl:4-9, 2001.
3. Peavy GM, Walder EJ, Nelson JS, Rosenberg M: Use of laser photocoagulation for treatment of cutaneous
angiomatosis in one dog and two cats, / Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1094-1097, 2001.
Section III
Inherited Disorders
11. DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
Karen A. Kuhl, DVM, DACVD
1. What is a keratinization disorder?
A keratinization disorder is caused by a disorganization of the normal orderly progression
of the epidermal cells maturing from the basal cell layer to the point of loss of the dead stratum
corneum cells.
2. Why are keratinization disorders important?
Keratinization disorders are quite important because they interfere with the normal function
of the skin as a barrier to water loss. Any one of the disorders described in this chapter may cause
increased water loss and/or decreased hydration of the skin.
3. Describe how a keratinization disorder might appear.
A keratinization disorder can have many appearances. One appearance might be increased
scaling. The scaling may be many loose white scales or the scales may appear to be adherent to
the skin. Keratinization disorders may also result in frond-like projections along the margins of
footpads, ear margins, or planum nasale.
4. Name some diseases classified as keratinization disorders.
●Primary seborrhea
●Familial footpad hyperkeratosis
●Ichthyosis
·Sebaceous adenitis
● Epidermal dysplasia in West Highland White Terriers
●Schnauzer comedo syndrome
● Dermatomyositis
● Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies (vesicular cutaneous
lupus erythematosus)
●Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German Shorthaired Pointer (exfoliative cutaneous lupus
ery thematosus)
5. What is primary seborrhea?
This is an inherited keratinization disorder. The term seborrhea literally means excess sebum
production, but is also associated with excessive scaling.
6. Are certain breeds more predisposed?
Primary seborrhea has been noted in several breeds. The most notorious breeds include the
American Cocker Spaniel, English Springer Spaniel, West Highland White Terrier, and Basset
Hound, although many other breeds may also be affected.
16
92
Disorders ofKeratinization
7. What are the clinical signs of primary seborrhea?
ui  suis peoo u 'aissiid aie ue se no e ne ueg siis sun 
ceruminous, hyperplastic otitis externa, a dull flaky haircoat, greasy flaky haircoat, scaly or crusty
patches on the body, hyperkeratosis of footpads, and/or brittle claws. Many of these dogs actually
present due to an offensive strong odor associated with the skin disease. The clinical signs may
be present anywhere, but are often most severe in frictional areas. Pruritus may or may not be
present. Pruritus often depends upon the severity of the disease. Many of these dogs are also
prone to secondary Malassezia or staphylococcal infections.
8.  Can seborrhea present differently in different breeds?
In a word, yes. Many Irish Setters and Doberman Pinschers will have dry flaky skin as
the only sign (Figure 11-1). Cocker Spaniels, Springer Spaniels, West Highland White Terriers,
and Basset Hounds may have very greasy accumulation of exudate and scales that may be
generalized, but is often worse on the ventral aspects of the body, especially the ventral neck,
axillary and inguinal regions. These are just generalities and the pattern seen in individual
animals may be different.
Figure 1l-1 Note small white scales on dorsal trunk of a Doberman Pinscher, which are typical of
seborrhea in this breed.
9. How is primary seborrhea diagnosed?
This is literally a diagnosis made by ruling out secondary causes of keratinization disorders.
Primary and secondary seborrhea can look very similar. You should do a good basic dermatologic
workup. Skin scrapings should be done to rule out ectoparasites (see Section IV), Tzanck prep-
arations should be done to detect any secondary infection that must be treated (see Section V).
Dermatophyte cultures may be necessary to rule out a dermatophyte infection (see Chapter 20).
Depending on the animal's age, a complete blood cell count/chemistry screen and appropriate
endocrine testing may be necessary (see Section Vll). Some allergic dogs will have signs of
seborthea, thus necessitating an appropriate workup for hypersensitivity related diseases (see
Section Vl). Finally, biopsies will sometimes help differentiate primary seborrhea from secondary
keratinization disorders.
10. What is the treatment for a dry, flaky case of seborrhea?
The key to remember in all cases of primary seborrhea and in most secondary keratinization
disorders is that the goal is management, not cure. Secondary infections must be controlled with
Disorders ofKeratinization
93
appropriate therapies. Shampoos, rinses, and oral fatty acids can be quite helpful. When
shampooing frequently, it often is beneficial to keep the haircoat clipped quite short. Often
bathing is done two to three times per week initially and then backed off to a maintenance regimen
(every 1-2 weeks). For mild cases of seborrhea sicca, bathing can be done with a moisturizing
and salicylic acid shampoo is best. Some dogs also benefit from an emollient rinse afterward
11. Then, what could I use for a greasy seborrhea?
This type of seborrhea tends to be more difficult to manage. As mentioned, shampoos are
ex tremely useful in management. Shampoos recommended for use in seborrhea oleosa include
benzoyl peroxide and tar shampoos. Tar shampoos, of course, should not be used in cats
Occasionally, these shampoos can be so drying that an after-bath rinse is recommended. This
should be done on an individual basis because rinses can leave the haircoat oily again. For more
information on advantages and disadvantages of individual shampoos, see Chapter 9.
12. Can the ceruminous otitis externa be managed?
Sometimes. These can be some of the most exasperating cases seen in small animal practice,
especially in Cocker Spaniels. Otitis externa should be treated aggressively with appropriate
medications (see Chapter 49). If the ears have frequent recurrent infections or if the canals
become calcified or stenotic, a total ear canal ablation and/or bulla osteotomy may be necessary.
13.  Are there any oral medications that can be used?
Retinoids have been used with varying results. Cost is often a deterrent. The synthetic
retinoids include isotretinoin and acitretin. Vitamin A has also been used. Side effects may
include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, altered liver metabolism, teratogenicity, and possible changes
in serum triglycerides or cholesterol levels. Corticosteroids are not generally recommended
because they may suppress the immune system in dogs or cats that are already predisposed to
secondary infections
14. What are the clinical signs of digital (footpad) hyperkeratosis?
Footpad hyperkeratosis has been reported uncommonly, but has been noted in several breeds
including Inish Terriers, Dogue de Bordeaux, Kerry Blue Terriers, Labrador Retrievers, Golden
Retrievers and mixed breeds. Affected dogs may develop a severe hyperkeratosis by 6 months of
age. The footpads have marked feathery keratin projections and can become secondarily infected.
15. How is primary digital hyperkeratosis diagnosed?
The best means of diagnosis is via biopsy and histopathology of the affected areas. The
disease is thought to be autosomal recessive in Irish Terriers. Differential diagnoses resulting in
zinc-responsive dermatosis, pemphigus foliaceus, metabolic epidermal necrosis, and contact
irritants or allergies.
16. Can primary digital hyperkeratosis be managed?
This can be difficult to treat. I have seen dogs that groom the excess keratin themselves.
Alternatively, soaking daily in a 50% propylene glycol solution may be attempted. A keratolytic
ointment such as Kerasolv (DVM Pharmaceuticals) may also be used.
17. What is ichthyosis?
This is a rare inherited primary keratinization defect that manifests as severe scaling or
tightly adherent tannish-gray scales or sometimes feathery keratin projections. Ichthyosis can
affect any portion of the body, including footpads and planum nasale. The scales may be constantly
94
Disorders ofKeratinization
shed or may be tightly adherent to the skin to the point of "piling up." This is often seen in very
young dogs.
18. Are any breeds predisposed to ichthyosis?
Ichthyosis appears to be most common in West Highland White Terriers, but has been seen
in other breeds.
19. How is ichthyosis diagnosed?
'sisosyuoi uguoo on suop sq pinous aonouedoisy pue Asdoig u
20.  Describe different ways of managing this disease.
Frequent bathing is usually recommended. The shampoos should be moisturizing hypo-
allergenic shampoos or keratolytic shampoos (sulfur/salicylic acids). Moisturizing after-bath
Tinses or 50% propylene glycol may also be helpful. Occasionally, a weekly regimen of bathing
in a sulfur/salicylic acid shampoo, followed by a 20-minute baby oil soak, followed by rinsing in
a moisturizing hypoallergenic shampoo, can be of great benefit. Cases of ichthyosis may be difficult
to manage.
21. Are there any options besides frequent bathing?
Usually, the shampoos are very helpful, but you can also try oral medications. Retinoic acids
potential side effects.
22. What are the most common presenting signs for cases of sebaceous adenitis?
The clinical signs may be different in different breeds. Differences in appearance are evident
between short- and long-hair coated breeds (see questions 23 and 24). In both coat types the
lesions are often complicated by secondary infections. The usual age of onset is young adult to
middle-aged. The clinical signs are usually symmetric and most commonly affect the face, head,
Figure 11-2Note circular areas of scaling and alopecia on the head and trunk of a Vizsla with sebaceous
adenitis.
Disorders of Keratinization
95
Figure 1 1-3 Marked circular areas of alopecia on the dorsal head of a Vizsla with sebaceous adenitis.
pinnae, and trunk. Pruritus is generally not evident unless there is a secondary infection. However,
occasional cases can be quite pruritic.
23.  What is the appearance of sebaceous adenitis in short coated breeds?
Generally, these breeds develop circular areas of scaling and alopecia. The lesions may
become large and coalesce. The scaling is usually fine and non-adherent (Figures 11-2 and 11-3).
24. How do the longer hair coated breeds present with sebaceous adenitis?
In Standard Poodles, the initial clinical sign may be a dull haircoat with tightly adherent
scales. This is usually followed by alopecia. The remaining haircoat often loses its "crimp'
(Figures 11-4 and 11-5). Akitas also start with a dull haircoat and tightly adherent scales; this
such as weight loss, lethargy, and fever. Numerous other breeds may be affected by sebaceous
adenitis; their clinical signs generally will fit into one of these two categories.
25. Describe the best method of diagnosing sebaceous adenitis.
As mentioned previously, basic diagnostics need to be done to rule out other differential
diagnoses. The final diagnosis is based on skin biopsy and histopathology. The hallmark is an
absence of sebaceous glands in multiple skin sections. There may be a great deal of variation in the
histopathology and a trained dermatopathologist should be consulted to obtain a correct diagnosis
26. What treatments work best for sebaceous adenitis?
As in other types of keratinization disorders, the best means of therapy is usually shampoo
and rinses. Mild cases may be controlled with keratolytic shampoos and emollient rinses. Fifty
percent to 70% propylene glycol in water has been used as a spray or rinse once daily, then
decreased to two to three times per week as needed for maintenance. As mentioned in question
96
Disorders ofKeratinization
Figure 1 1-4   Note tightly adherent scaling and incomplete alopecia on the head of a Standard Poodle with
sebaceous adenitis.
Figure 11-5 Tightly adherent scaling, alopecia, and loss of crimp in the trunk haircoat of a Standard
Poodle with sebaceous adenitis.
20, using shampoos followed with baby oil soaks often works well. Additionally, oral omega 3
and omega 6 fatty acids are often used as dietary supplements and in topical sprays and rinses.
27. Are there any other possible oral therapies?
Yes, oral retinoids are a possi bility. Viszlas and Poodles tended to respond best to isotretinoin.
Akitas responded best to etretinate in previous studies; however, etretinate is no longer available
Acitretin may be used as a replacement for etretinate. Cyclosporine has also been used with
variable responses in treating sebaceous adenitis
Disorders ofKeratinization
97
28. What is the long-term prognosis of sebaceous adenitis?
therapy to maintain clinical improvement. The owners must realize that this is not a curable
disease and will typically require long-term management. Sebaceous adenitis is inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait in Standard Poodles; thus, affected dogs should not be bred.
29. Describe epidermal dysplasia of West Highland White Terriers.
The primary feature of this condition is a dysplastic epidermis associated with a Malassezia
infection developing at an early age. These usually present as a greasy seborrhea that becomes
pruritic. Pruritus is present primarily on the face, ears, feet, and ventral surface of the body. This
that the epidermal changes may just be a hypersensitivity reaction to Malassezia or a result of
excessive skin trauma after pruritus.
30. How is a diagnosis of epidermal dysplasia made?
Again, a basic dermatological workup should be done. Skin biopsy specimens submited for
histopathology will demonstrate the presence of epidermal dysplasia. Histologic findings include
usually present and Malassezia may be observed in the surface keratin.
31. How is epidermal dysplasia treated?
Emphasis should be placed upon identifying any potential underlying hypersensitivity diseases
(parasitic allergies, food allergies, atopy). Additionally, shampoos with effectiveness against
Malassezia should be tried, but may not always be particularly helpful. Often systemic therapy
antifungal agents should be used at the lowest dosage possible to keep the infection under control.
Dosages and side effects of itraconazole and ketoconazole are discussed in Chapter 20. Many
dogs affected by epidermal dysplasia have ultimately been euthanized due to poor response
to therapy.
32. What is Schnauzer comedo syndrome?
This is a localized keratinization disorder that has only been recognized in Miniature
crusts located along the dorsal midline
33. How is the diagnosis of Schnauzer comedo syndrome made?
If lesions are restricted to the back in a Miniature Schnauzer, then this is the likely diagnosis.
However, you will still need to rule out other causes of folliculitis and comedo formation (e.g.,
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, staphylococcal folliculi tis, hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism,
etc.) and obtain skin biopsies for histopathology.
34. What is the most effective treatment for Schnauzer comedo syndrome?
Treatment depends on the severity of the disease process, and this varies tremendously.
Thus, treatment also varies. Some dogs do not require any treatment. Many dogs will benefit from
daily wipes with one of the "antiseptic” wipes now available in veterinary medicine (Malaseb
pledgets, DVM Pharmaceutics; Malacetic Wipes, Dermapet) or frequent antiseborrheic shampoos
35. What is the cause of the severe “greasy kitten syndrome'"' in Persian cats?
Persian cats can be affected with a primary hereditary seborrhea oleosa (PHSO). Affected
kittens may have a dirty appearance that is apparent as early as 2 to 3 days of age. Initially the
haircoat is curly and pasted together by keratoseborrheic material that adheres to the surface of the
98
Disorders ofKeratinization
skin and hairs. Eventually the whole body becomes scaly and oily with a rancid odor. Ceruminous
otitis externa is another common feature of this disease.
36.How are kittens with PHSO managed?
PHSO is an incurable disease. Many breeders euthanize affected kittens soon after birth.
Mildly affected cats can be suitable house pets if their owners are willing to invest the time in
lifelong management of the disease. Affected cats should be clipped to keep the haircoat short.
Regular bathing (frequency may vary from every day to once monthly depending on the severity
of the cat's condition) with a mild dishwashing detergent (e.g., Joy, Sunlight, Palmolive) followed
by a sulfur/salicylic acid veterinary shampoo will help to control the odor and scaling. Isotretinoin
therapy may be helpful in some cases; this synthetic retinoid is used at a dose of 2 mg/kg orally
every other day until the seborrhea is under control and then tapered to one dose weekly.
37. Is PHsO the cause of the “dirty face syndrome'’ seen in adult Persian cats?
No, PHSO is a distinct syndrome from that of idiopathic facial derrmatitis (IFD) of Persian
cats (Figure 11-6). The lesions of IFD are confined to the head and neck region and consist of a
black exudate that encrusts the hairs of the periocular, perioral, nasal fold, and chin regions. The
etiology of IFD is currently unknown; however, the later age of onset (range 4 months to 4 years,
median 12 months, for IFD versus from birth for PHSO) and distinct regional location (facial for
IFD, generalized for PHSO) plus differing clinical appearance makes it unlikely that the two
diseases are related. No satisfactory treatment regimen has been identified for IFD. Current
treatments are aimed at minimizing secondary infections and relieving pruritus. Gentle cleansing
with medicated wipes (Malaseb pledgets, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Malacetic wipes, DerimaPet)
may be helpful in some cases.
Figure 11-6  Adult Persian with idiopathic facial dermatitis. (Courtesy of Dr. Karen Campbell.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Helman RG, Raes DS, Chester DK: Ichthyosifom dematosis in a Soff-Coated Wheaten Terrier, Vet Dermatot
8:53-58,1997.
Lewis DT, Ford MJ, Kwochka KW: Characterization and management of a Jack Russell Terrier with congenital
ichthyosis, Vet Dermatot 9:111-118, 1998.
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
66
Nett CS, Reichler I, Grest P, et al: Epidermal dysplasia and Malassezia infection in two West Highland White
Terrier siblings: an inherited skin disorder or reaction to severe Malassezia infection? Vet Dermatol 12:285-290.
2001
Paradis M: Primary hereditary seborrhea oleosa. In August JR (ed): Consultations in feline internat medicine 4,
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 202-207.
Reichler IM, Hauser B, Schiller I, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in the Akita: clinical observations, histopathology and
heredity, Vet Dermatot 12:243-253, 2001
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds)
Mutter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 913-1003.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Keratinization defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Muller &
Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saumders, pp 1025-1055.
12. DISORDERS OF HAIR AND HAIR GROWTH
Daniel O. Morris, DVM, DACVD
1. Dog and cat owners are often concerned about alopecia in their pets. Other than
endocrinopathies, what disorders should I be looking for?
several important disorders that are due to hair shaft or hair follicle defects. In cats, the most
common cause of symmetric alopecia is over-grooming (or hair pulling) due to pruritus. Congenital
and acquired alopecias that result from hair shaft or follicular disorders are a heterogeneous
group with a variety of known (or unknown) etiologies. This "group” of conditions is much more
common in dogs than in cats.
 2. Which congenital conditions are possible?
Congenital alopecias appear to be quite rare, and may involve the entire body or very specific
regions. Of course, some breeds have been developed for generalized alopecia—consider the
Mexican Hairless, Chinese Crested, American Hairless Terrier, and the feline Sphinx! However,
and puppies and kittens of various breeds have been reported in the veterinary literature. Skin
biopsy specimens may reveal defects in just the hair follicles, while others have more extensive
ectodermal defects (abnormal claws, adnexal glands, etc.). If hair follicles are not present histo-
logically, or are severely reduced or defective, you may assure your client that regrowth of hair
will not occur.
3. Are color-linked alopecias due to the same type of defect?
No...which is good news for some cases. Color-linked alopecias are due to hair-shaft
breakage at or below the level of the skin. The hair follicles are still capable of producing hair
shafts in most cases (especially younger animals), so therapeutic intervention may be useful.
There are two types of color-linked alopecias described in dogs: black hair follicular dysplasia
(BHFD) and color dilution alopecia (CDA; also known as "color mutant alopecia").
4. Are BHFD and CDA similar in appearance and diagnostic features?
CDA has been reported in 11 breeds (most commonly in blue or fawn Dobermans) and
causes alopecia and follicular plugging in the blue or fawn (black or brown dilute) areas only.
Onset of hair loss is tardive (occurring after birth) and usually develops between 4 and 18 months
of age. BHFD has been reported in 14 bi- or tri-colored breeds, and results in alopecia of the
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
66
Nett CS, Reichler I, Grest P, et al: Epidermal dysplasia and Malassezia infection in two West Highland White
Terrier siblings: an inherited skin disorder or reaction to severe Malassezia infection? Vet Dermatol 12:285-290.
2001
Paradis M: Primary hereditary seborrhea oleosa. In August JR (ed): Consultations in feline internat medicine 4,
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 202-207.
Reichler IM, Hauser B, Schiller I, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in the Akita: clinical observations, histopathology and
heredity, Vet Dermatot 12:243-253, 2001
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds)
Mutter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 913-1003.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Keratinization defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Muller &
Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saumders, pp 1025-1055.
12. DISORDERS OF HAIR AND HAIR GROWTH
Daniel O. Morris, DVM, DACVD
1. Dog and cat owners are often concerned about alopecia in their pets. Other than
endocrinopathies, what disorders should I be looking for?
several important disorders that are due to hair shaft or hair follicle defects. In cats, the most
common cause of symmetric alopecia is over-grooming (or hair pulling) due to pruritus. Congenital
and acquired alopecias that result from hair shaft or follicular disorders are a heterogeneous
group with a variety of known (or unknown) etiologies. This "group” of conditions is much more
common in dogs than in cats.
 2. Which congenital conditions are possible?
Congenital alopecias appear to be quite rare, and may involve the entire body or very specific
regions. Of course, some breeds have been developed for generalized alopecia—consider the
Mexican Hairless, Chinese Crested, American Hairless Terrier, and the feline Sphinx! However,
and puppies and kittens of various breeds have been reported in the veterinary literature. Skin
biopsy specimens may reveal defects in just the hair follicles, while others have more extensive
ectodermal defects (abnormal claws, adnexal glands, etc.). If hair follicles are not present histo-
logically, or are severely reduced or defective, you may assure your client that regrowth of hair
will not occur.
3. Are color-linked alopecias due to the same type of defect?
No...which is good news for some cases. Color-linked alopecias are due to hair-shaft
breakage at or below the level of the skin. The hair follicles are still capable of producing hair
shafts in most cases (especially younger animals), so therapeutic intervention may be useful.
There are two types of color-linked alopecias described in dogs: black hair follicular dysplasia
(BHFD) and color dilution alopecia (CDA; also known as "color mutant alopecia").
4. Are BHFD and CDA similar in appearance and diagnostic features?
CDA has been reported in 11 breeds (most commonly in blue or fawn Dobermans) and
causes alopecia and follicular plugging in the blue or fawn (black or brown dilute) areas only.
Onset of hair loss is tardive (occurring after birth) and usually develops between 4 and 18 months
of age. BHFD has been reported in 14 bi- or tri-colored breeds, and results in alopecia of the
100
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
hair in the areas of pigmented spots (although the skin itself is normal), while the white hair is completely
normal in texture and density.
black-haired areas only (Figure 12-1). Abnormal haircoat is usually evident by 4 weeks of age. I
have also recognized these conditions in solid-colored breeds (Chesapeake Bay and Labrador
Retrievers, respectively).
Familial disorders of hair shaft pigmentation, where melanin clumping in the hair shaft
results in weakness and breakage, are found in both BHFD and CDA. Autosomal recessive modes
of inheritance have been suggested in several reports where pedigree anal ysis was available.
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs will reveal large clumps of melanin within the hair
cortex, which may result in fractures or distortion of the hair cuticle. Because the age of onset
and restriction of hair loss to the color dilute or black areas onty are hallmarks, biopsy is often
not necessary. However, the pathologist will typically report similar pigment clumping in hair
shafts, as well as distorted hair follicles (i.e., follicular dysplasia) in many cases.
 In CDA, the hair loss is often accompanied by dry seborrhea and bacterial folliculitis
(papules and pustules). Fibrosis of hair follicles can eventually result, which prevents regrowth
of hairs. In older animals, complete alopecia of color dilute areas is common, often with severe
secondary seborrhea. BHFD is not typically associated with problematic folliculitis, although
alopecic areas may be mildly scaly.
5. Are BHFD and CDA treatable?
For some individuals with CDA, there is no effective treatment for the alopecia. Secondary
follicular plugging, seborthea, and staphylococcal infections require lifelong management with
topical therapies (benzoyl peroxide shampoos followed by moisturizing rinses), and systermic
anti biotics as required to treat infections. Our most effective therapy, a synthetic retinoid (vitamin
A derivative) marketed under the trade name Tegison, is no longer available. Some dogs will
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
101
respond to the newer synthetic retinoid Soriatane, but this has not been as effective as the original
(1-4 mg/kg/day orally) and the drug is quite expensive. Recently, anecdotal reports of CDA and
BHFD responding to oral melatonin have surfaced. Because oral melatonin seems to have a very
low side-effect profile, its use on a trial basis may be warranted.
6. Tell me more about melatonin!
Melatonin is a hormone secreted by the pineal gland that plays a role in photoperiod-related
hair growth and coat color in many mammals (i.e., winter coat develops when melatonin increases,
and spring shedding occurs with decreasing levels of melatonin). It also has a role in reproductive
development and function, is a potent antioxidant, and has oncostatic properties. Studies performed
at the University of Tennessee have shown that melatonin decreases the circulating levels of
adrenal sex horimones. It has been used successfully in a wide variety of alopecic diseases in which
the underlying etiologies are unknown or incompletely known, some of which may be related to
sex hormone imbalances. I typically administer melatonin at a rate of 3 mg orally every 8 hours
in small breeds, 6 mg orally every 8 hours in medium-sized breeds, and 9 mg orally every 8 hours
in large breeds. Once hair regrowth has occurred, try to decrease the frequency to once-daily or
every-other-day administration. Hair loss usually recurs when treatment is halted (with the
permanent follicular disorders). This compound has also been used in the treatment of alopecia
Chapter 39).
7. What is follicular dysplasia?
a histologic term that we also use in the clinical setting to describe a group of hair growth
abnormalities. As mentioned previously, there are color-linked dysplasias (CDA and BHFD) as
well as non-color-linked dysplasias. The latter may be classified as either cyclical or structural
follicular dysplasias.
Cyclical dysplasias are thought to represent interruptions of the normal hair follicle cycle,
which may resolve spontaneously after one or more shedding cycles of the rest of the haircoat.
The most common cyclical dysplasia is often referred to as "seasonal flank alopecia" or "canine
recurrent flank alopecia" (CRFA)
CRFA typically occurs over the flanks and mid-lateral thorax ("saddle region") of dogs, and
results in marked hyperpigmentation. The alopecia may be unilateral or bilateral. It may recur
predictably each year, or may skip a yeat. It may progress to permanent alopecia, or disappear
forever after one or more seasons. Most dogs lose hair in the fall and regrow in the spring/
summer. Some do just the opposite. The disease is most common in Boxers, English Bulldogs,
and Airdale Terriers, but many breeds have been affected (Figure 12-2). The complete etiology
remains unknown. Although similar clinical lesions have been noted in isolated cases of
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and ovarian imbalances, hormonal deficits have not been
documented in this disease entity. The most plausible etiology is an abnormal response of hair
follicle receptors in the flank region to a yet unknown mediator (which may be pineal gland
dependent), aggravated by the changing photoperiod.
Diagnosis of CRFA is made when there is a history of cyclical recurrence, or when endo-
crinopathy has been ruled out (i.e., when a dog is presented during the first episode), and the skin
biopsy reveals the characteristic atrophy of hair follicles with comedo formation (resembling an
invertedfoot).
CRFA is a cosmetic problem only; however, many owners will request intervention or hope to
prevent recurrence in subsequent years. Melatonin has been used successfully for this purpose
both orally and parenterally. Because the parenteral forms are difficult to obtain, I typically use
the oral over-the-counter products that are available in the United States.
102
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
Figure 12-2 A 3-year-old English Bulldog with canine recurrent flank alopecia. Note the extensive
hyperpigmentation of the skin in the alopecic areas over the “sadle region." Complete hair regrowth was
achieved with the onset of lengthening daylight hours.
Figure 12-3 A 2-year-old Devon Rex cat with follicular dysplasia affecting the neck and ventral surface.
Structural dysplasias are a mixed bag of conditions that occur in a myriad of breeds, and
remain to be more completely classified. In at least one breed (the Irish Water Spaniel),
investigators have reported hormonal and possibly nutritional factors to be involved, so it is
becoming less clear where these alopecic diseases fall..are they true developmental defects of
the hair follicles, or multifactorial conditions that may respond to diet or hormonal therapies?
There are no uniformly successful therapies reported for non-cyclical/non-color-linked follicular
dysplasias. The heritability of these conditions is also largely unknown, although there have been
several groups of "related" breeds reported to develop them. The most common groups noted are
Siberian Huskies/Alaskan Malamutes; curly coated breeds (Irish Water Spaniels/Portuguese Water
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
103
Dogs/Curly-Coated Retrievers); and red or black bi-colored breeds (Doberman Pinschers/Miniature
Pinschers/Manchester Terriers). Many other seemingly unrelated breeds have also been reported
anecdotally or formally in the veterinary literature. Of the cat breeds, only the Cornish Rex has
been forimally reported, but I have observed several cases in the Devon Rex as well (Figure 12-3).
8. What is pattern alopecia?
dogs. Whether these forms share pathophysiologic mechanisms with each other, or with human
currently recognized in dogs.
Pinnat afopecia of Dachshunds: This occurs predominantly in males and begins between 6
and 9 months of age. Progression to complete pinnal alopecia is complete by 8 or 9 years
of age. The skin typically becomes extremely hyperpigmented and the pinnal vasculature
is prominent.
Ventral pattern alopecia: This is most common in dachshunds, but also seen in Chihuahuas
Whippets, Greyhounds, Boxers, Italian Greyhounds, Boston Terriers, Manchester
Terriers, and Miniature pinschers, among others. The age of onset is typically around 6
months, and the alopecia occurs on the postauricular areas, the entire ventrum (from neck
to tail), and the caudomedial thighs. Residual fine hairs often remain in the alopecic
areas. The condition is more common in females than males.
Pattern alopecia of curly coated breeds: This occurs in American Water Spaniels and
Portuguese Water Dogs, and affects some combination of the ventral/lateral neck,
caudomedial thighs, rump, flanks, and tail. The typical age of onset is 6 months.
The diagnosis of pattern alopecia is based upon the signalment, history, and typical clinical
signs/pattern. The primary differential diagnosis is follicular dysplasia (especially for the curly
coated breeds). The skin biopsy specimen may show miniaturization of hairs, with otherwise
normal adnexae, however, this is very difficult for the pathologist to assess, and the biopsy may
be read as "normal" in many cases. In the Irish Water Spaniels, histologic changes more typical
of CRFA and color dilution alopecia were reported. Of course, it is possible that the curly coated
breeds are expressing a different clinical problem that the smooth coated breeds; nomenclature is
not yet precise.
In smooth coated dogs, treatment of pattern alopecia is most often achieved successfully
with oral melatonin. I have treated many dogs of different breeds successfully in this manner.
Again, once hair regrowth has occurred, try to decrease the frequency to once daily or every
other-day administration. My experience has been that most individuals will require daily dosing
Hair loss recurs when treatment is halted.
9. Is pattern baldness the cause of alopecia that occurs on the caudolateral thighs of
racing Greyhounds?
"Bald thigh syndrome" of racing Greyhounds is histologically distinct from pattern
alopecia. Rather than showing miniaturization of follicles and hairs, the follicles are typically
dilated and filled with keratin and hairs. These should appear as comedomes grossly. Histo-
logically, the pathologist may report that many of the follicles are in catagen arrest or describe
prominent tricholemmal cornification. The histologic changes are suggestive of endocrinopathy.
oe u (us e se pi ea e) sus do yo s  e ingg
dogs failed to document definitive adrenal or thyroid disease. Curiously, this condition resolves
when the Greyhounds are no longer actively racing
10. What other types of acquired alopecia are common?
surgical procedures, or any other reason that necessitates shaving to the level of the skin
104
Disorders of Hair and Hair Growth
Figure 12-4A S-year-old English Springer spaniel with post-clipping alopecia that has persisted for 8
months followingasurgical shave.Notethe sharpbordersbetween thealopecic area andnormal coat,with
clipper blade marks evident. As is often the case with post-clipping alopecia, the exposed skin has developed
dry scale.
(Figure 12-4). It may also be seen on the legs where hair is shaved for catheter placement.
Affected breeds tend to have dense, heavy coats (especially "northern" breeds) and include
Siberian Huskies, Alaskan Malamutes, Samoyeds, Keeshonds, Chows, and German Shepherds,
although other breeds can be affected. Mild scaling may accompany the alopecia, but hair beyond
the alopecic areas is normal. This may persist for as long as 12 months to 2 years, depending on
the follicular cycle of the individual. It is now known that some of the "northern'" breeds have
very long telogen (resting period) cycles, and therefore may have prolonged periods of naturally
year. Therefore, if such a dog is clipped at the beginning of a cycle, the alopecic period can be
quite protracted.
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and alopecia X) if other supportive clinical signs are
present. The skin biopsy may show diffuse catagen arrest of hair follicles, however, caution is
wattranted in interpreting the presence of these “"flame follicles,” as they appear to be a normal
occurrence in some of the predisposed breeds. Localized regrowth of hair (in tufts) may occur in
areas of skin trauma (such as the biopsy sites).
While this condition is purely a cosmetic problem, it is understandably upsetting to the pet
owner. Melatonin may be useful in some cases, although I have been routinely disappointed in
treatment of my cases.
11. Clients often ask me about the sparsely haired areas in the temporal areas of cats. Is
this truly a concern?
Many short-haired cats will have a noticeably sparse hair coat in the areas between the
pinnae and eyes. While referred to as "feline preauricular alopecia" by dermatologists, this is not
truly a pathogenic condition. It is completely normal and clients should be reassured that there is
nothing that should be (or can be) done. However, this is also an area commonly affected in cases
of facial prunitus due to allergic or parasitic diseases and crusting dermatoses such as dermato
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
105
phytosis and pemphigus foliaceus. Therefore, if evidence of inflammation (excoriations, folliculitis
crusts, scale, etc.) is present, diagnostic tests such as scrapings, fungal culture, skin biopsy, and
allergy diagnostics should be considered.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ashley PF, Frank LA, Schmeitzel LP, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin, and
thyroid homone concentrations in adult dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1111-1115, 1999.
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, MeNeil PE, et al: An analysis of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish
Water Spaniels in the United Kingdom, Vet Dermatot 11:107-122, 2000.
Credille KM, Lupton CJ, Kennis RA, et al: The role of nutrition on the canine hair follicle: a preliminary report. In
Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition. Wilmington, OH, 2000, Orange Frazer
Press, pp 37-53.
Hargis AM, Brignac MM, Kareem FA, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia in black and white Saluki dogs:
differentiation from color mutant alopecia in the Dobeman Pinscher by microscopic exanination of hairs, Vet
Dermatot 2:69-83, 1991.
Miller WH, Scott DW: Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese Water Dog, Vet Dermatot 6:67-74, 1995
Paradis M: Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's current veterinary therapy XI!I,
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 546-549.
Roperto F, Cerundolo R, Restucci B, et al: Colour dilution alopecia (CDA) in ten Yorkshire Terriers, Vet Dermatot
6:171-178, 1995
Schoning PR, Cowan LA: Bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound dogs: gross and microscopic findings, Vet Dermatot
11:49-51, 2000
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Acquired alopecias and congenital and hereditary defects. In: Mutler &
Kirk's smallaniat dermatology,ed 6, Philadephia, 2001, WB Saumders, pp 887-912 and 958-973.
13. DISORDERS OF COLLAGEN AND
ELASTIN
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS)?
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes are a group of rare hereditary connective tissue disorders
characterized by decreased tensile strength of affected tissues. Molecular and biochemical advances
have led to the definition of nine types of EDS in people (Table 13-1). This classification is based
on clinical signs, modes of inheritance, and underlying biochemical defects. Most types of EDS
are characterized by defects in collagen fibrillogenesis that result from mutations in genes coding
for fibrillar collagen (types I, Ill, V) or for enzymes (e.g, type I procollagen-N-peptidase) that
catalyze the post-translational modification of collagen fibrils. These hereditary collagen disorders
cause skin fragility and hyperelasticity in small (cats, dogs, rabbits, mink) and large animals (horses,
cattle, sheep).
 2. Two forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have been described in cats. Briefly identify and
describe the cause of each form.
Dermatosparaxis is an autosomal recessive form of EDS that correlates with EDS type VIIC
Himalayan cats.
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
105
phytosis and pemphigus foliaceus. Therefore, if evidence of inflammation (excoriations, folliculitis
crusts, scale, etc.) is present, diagnostic tests such as scrapings, fungal culture, skin biopsy, and
allergy diagnostics should be considered.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ashley PF, Frank LA, Schmeitzel LP, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin, and
thyroid homone concentrations in adult dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1111-1115, 1999.
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, MeNeil PE, et al: An analysis of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish
Water Spaniels in the United Kingdom, Vet Dermatot 11:107-122, 2000.
Credille KM, Lupton CJ, Kennis RA, et al: The role of nutrition on the canine hair follicle: a preliminary report. In
Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition. Wilmington, OH, 2000, Orange Frazer
Press, pp 37-53.
Hargis AM, Brignac MM, Kareem FA, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia in black and white Saluki dogs:
differentiation from color mutant alopecia in the Dobeman Pinscher by microscopic exanination of hairs, Vet
Dermatot 2:69-83, 1991.
Miller WH, Scott DW: Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese Water Dog, Vet Dermatot 6:67-74, 1995
Paradis M: Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's current veterinary therapy XI!I,
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 546-549.
Roperto F, Cerundolo R, Restucci B, et al: Colour dilution alopecia (CDA) in ten Yorkshire Terriers, Vet Dermatot
6:171-178, 1995
Schoning PR, Cowan LA: Bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound dogs: gross and microscopic findings, Vet Dermatot
11:49-51, 2000
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Acquired alopecias and congenital and hereditary defects. In: Mutler &
Kirk's smallaniat dermatology,ed 6, Philadephia, 2001, WB Saumders, pp 887-912 and 958-973.
13. DISORDERS OF COLLAGEN AND
ELASTIN
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS)?
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes are a group of rare hereditary connective tissue disorders
characterized by decreased tensile strength of affected tissues. Molecular and biochemical advances
have led to the definition of nine types of EDS in people (Table 13-1). This classification is based
on clinical signs, modes of inheritance, and underlying biochemical defects. Most types of EDS
are characterized by defects in collagen fibrillogenesis that result from mutations in genes coding
for fibrillar collagen (types I, Ill, V) or for enzymes (e.g, type I procollagen-N-peptidase) that
catalyze the post-translational modification of collagen fibrils. These hereditary collagen disorders
cause skin fragility and hyperelasticity in small (cats, dogs, rabbits, mink) and large animals (horses,
cattle, sheep).
 2. Two forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have been described in cats. Briefly identify and
describe the cause of each form.
Dermatosparaxis is an autosomal recessive form of EDS that correlates with EDS type VIIC
Himalayan cats.
106
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
Table 13-1
Classification of Human Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
TYPE OF
EHLERS-DANLOS
INHERITANCE
BIOCHEMICAL DEFECT
I Gravis
Autosomal dominant
Type V collagen mutation
II Mitis
 III Familial
Autosomal dominant
Not known
hypermobility
IV Arterial
Autosomal dominant
 Type IlI collagen mutation
V X-linked
X-linked recessive
Not known
VI Kyphoscoliosis
Autosomal recessive
Lysyl hydroxylase deficiency
VII Arthrochalasia
multiplex
Type A, B
Autosomal dominant
Type I collagen mutation 
Type C
Autosomal recessive
Type I procollagen-N-peptidase
mutation
Dermatosparaxis
VIII Periodontal
Autosomal dominant
Not known
X Other
Autosomal recessive
Possible defect in fibronectin
There is an autosomal dominant form of EDS that correlates best with EDS type I-Il. This
may be caused by a mutation in the gene for type V collagen. The homozygous form is probably
lethal. There is no breed predisposition.
3.List breeds of dogs and cats affected by Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Canine
Beagle, Boxer, Dachshund, English Setter, English Springer Spaniel, Fila Brasiliero,
Garafiano Shepherd, German Shepherd, Greyhound, Irish Setter, Keeshond, Manchester
Terrier, mixed breeds, Red Kelpi, Saint Bernard, soft-coated Wheaton Terrier, Toy
 Poodle, Welsh Corgi
Feline
Domestic longhair, domestic shorthair, Himalayan
4. Describe the dermatologic signs associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Cutaneous fragility and hyperextensibility (Figure 13-1) are the major dermatologic features
of EDS. After minor trauma, animals can have large, gaping wounds accompanied by minimal
hemorrhage. Animals with extremely fragile skin can tear their skin during normal grooming
processes. The wounds tend to heal with wide, "cigarette paper" thin scars.
5. Are there any noncutaneous signs that can be associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome?
Periodontal disease, epicanthal folds, subcutaneous hematomas, hygromas, coincidental
hernias (inguinal hernia), and ocular changes (microcornea, sclerocornea, lens luxation, and
cataracts) have been reported in dogs.
Other than one report of a cat with a coincidental perineal hernia, noncutaneous signs of
EDS have not been reported in cats.
Disorders of Collagenand Elastin
107
Figure 13-1  Note the skin hyperextensibility in this 1l-year-old cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. This
cat's E1 was 25%.
6. List differential diagnoses for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
·Feline acquired skinfragility
●Cutis laxa
7. How do you calculate a skin extensibility index (EI)?
El = vertical height of skin fold ÷ body length (occipital crest to tail base) × 100
 8. What is the normal skin extensibility index for dogs? For cats?
Normal dogs: less than 14.5%
Normal cats: less than 19%
EI values above these levels are consistent with a diagnosis of EDS (Figure 13-1).
9. Describe histopathologic changes found on skin biopsy specimens from an animal with
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Histologic changes related to EDS tend to be subtle, so it can be helpful to compare samples
from the patient to those of a nomal animal. Some animals with EDS do not have identifable
histopathologic abnormalities. Histopathologic findings consistent with EDS include changes in
the amount of collagen present (e.g., low collagen content, large spaces between fibers), abnormal
size and shape of the collagen bundles (e.g., fragmentation of the fibers), and altered orientation
of the collagen (e.g., disorientation of the fibers, collagen fibers whorled around blood vessels).
Masson's trichrome stain can be used to further evaluate collagen for defects. Collagen
fibers normally stain uniformly blue with Masson's trichrome, whereas abnormal fibers contain
segmental red staining defects that are birefringent in polarized light
108
DisordersofCollagenandElastin
Figure 13-2 This transmission electron microscope photo (10,000x) demonstrates haphazard collagen
fibril orientation in a cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndromie.
10. What other tests can be done to confirm a diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome?
● Scanning or transmission electron microscopy findings include loosely woven collagen
fibers with a twisted appearance (Figure 13-2). The typical banding pattern of fibrillar
collagen may be diagonal instead of perpendicular to the length of the collagen fiber.
Also, on cross-section, the collagen fibers may be abnormally shaped (*"hieroglyphics")
or there may be a bimodal distribution of large and small fiber diameter sizes.
● Advanced molecular and biochemical studies that can be on tissue include electro-
phoresis, enzymatic assays, amino acid analysis, cell culture, mRNA analysis, and tensile
strengthmeasurements.
11. Are there any treatments available for animals with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome?
Unfortunately, because of its hereditary nature, there is no specific treatment available for
EDS. Anecdotally, vitamin C supplementation has been beneficial in a few dogs. Wounds should
be cleaned and sutured promptly. Because the tissue is fragile and may be friable, suggestions to
improve the success of closing cutaneous wounds in EDS veterinary patients include using a
small taper point needle with swaged suture and placing sutures 5 mm from the wound edge.
Additionally, cruciate sutures were used in one case, and were found to be superior to simple
interrupted or mattress sutures
There is an increased incidence of wound dehiscence and delayed wound healing in patients
with EDS. Delayed wound healing may be the result of infection, hematoma formation, sutures
tearing through skin, or wound dehiscence after the wound appears healed and the sutures are
12. What advice should you give to an owner regarding the care of an animal with Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome?
●Animals with EDS can have a normal lifespan, but those with excessively fragile skin may
have multiple complications that lead to euthanasia.
● It is essential to avoid handling affected dogs and cats roughly.
●Animals should not be allowed to roam freely.
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
109
· Wounds should be promptly cleaned and sutured.
● Animals with EDS should not be used for breeding purposes because of the heritable
nature of the disease. Additionally, mating and parturition could result in serious trauma
to the animal.
13. What is cutis laxa?
Cutis laxa (a.k.a. generalized elastosis, dermatochalasia) is a systemic defect in copper
metabolisim that results in low levels of ceruplasmin and serum copper. Copper is a critical
co-enzyme for lysyl oxidase, an important enzyme involved in the synthesis of collagen and
elastin. Cutis laxa was formerly classifed as EDS type IX. Although cutis laxa has not been
reported in small animals, it is an important differential diagnosis for animals with cutaneous
inheritance exist.
Clinically, the skin is loose and hangs in redundant folds, giving people the "appearance of
a Bloodhound." The skin is hyperextensible, but cutaneous fragility, bruisability, and poor wound
predisposed to hernias (inguinal, hiatal), cardiovascular disease (mitral valve prolapse, aortic
aneurysm), musculos keletal abnormalities (hooked nose with a long philtrum, joint hypermobi lity.
thoracic malformations, carpal stenoses), and gastrointestinal abnormalities (diverticula, rectal
or acid orcein and Giemsa) are sparse, fragmented, and clumped.
14. Differentiate between the terms cutaneous asthenia, dermatosparaxis, and Ehlers-
Danlos synd rome.
Cutaneous asthenia should be reserved for diseases that affect both collagen and elastin
(e.g-, cutis laxa).
I odki e Aq pesneo se pey sopiosp on peu sq pinous (.uys uo,) sxmaodsouiaa
Ehters-Danlos syndrome is a group of connective tissue disorders that are characterized by
the reduced tensile strength of affected tissues (see Question l for details)
15. Name two inherited collagen disorders that affect German Shepherd Dogs (GSD) and
their crosses.
● Hereditary disorder of footpads in GSD
· Focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD
16. What is the cause of the hereditary disorder of footpads in GSD?
Because of clinical and histopathologic similarities, it has been proposed that the hereditary
disorder of footpads in GSD is similar to familial vasculopathy in GSD. The precise etiology of
both disorders is unknown.
17. Describe the clinical signs of the hereditary disorder of footpads in GSD. How would
you diagnose this disease?
Affected puppies are usually a few weeks to a few months old, and multiple pups in a litter
can be affected. There appears to be no sex predilection.
The footpads of all feet are affected, particularly the metacarpal and metatarsal pads. The
footpads are softer than normal, and may be swollen, with depigmentation, ulceration, and crusts
The footpads are often painful, which may lead to lameness. These dogs are otherwise healthy.
of collagen degeneration
110
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
18. Is there an effective treatment for the hereditary disorder of footpads in GSD?
There is no effective treatment for the hereditary disorder of footpads in GSD. Fortunately,
although the footpads remain soft, the ulcers often heal spontaneously within a few months if the
animal receives proper wound management. Antibiotics, glucocorticoids, and topical therapies
have not been beneficial.
19. What systemic disease has been associated with the hereditary footpad disorder
ot GSD?
Renal amyloidosis has been reported in some dogs, often occurring around 2 to 3 years of age
20.  What is the cause of focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD?
The cause of focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD is unknown. Some studies have shown that
affected dogs have increased antibody levels against type I and type II collagen
21. What are the clinical signs associated with focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD?
Affected animals are usually diagnosed at 2 to 8 years of age. Focal metatarsal fistulation of
GSD appears to be more common in males than in females. Often, both rear legs are affected.
Lesions are present on the central plantar surface of the metatarsus proximal to the metatarsal
pad. Although the metatarsal area is the most commonly affected site, lesions can also occur in
the metacarpal area. The lesions may begin as smooth, cystic structures that progress to well-
asymptomatic, or the owner may notice the dog licking the affected areas. The dogs are otherwise
healthy, and do not have other cutaneous lesions.
22. List differential diagnoses for a GSD with unilateral focal metatarsal fistulation.
● Focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD
●Foreign body
● Deep bacterial pyoderma
●Fungal infection (for example, blastomycosis)
●Neoplasia
23. How is focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD diagnosed?
● Cytologic ex amination reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation, and possibly intracellular
bacteria. Before the lesions fistulate, they are sterile. After the lesions fistulate, secondary
bacterial infections(often with Staphylococcus intermedius)are common
● Biopsy specimens and histopathologic studies reveal a deep, nodular to diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermati tis to cellulitis with fibrosis and fistulous tracts.
●Antinuclear antibody test results are negative.
24. Describe a treatment plan for animals with focal metatarsal fistulation of GSD.
The lesions often resolve with medical therapy, but in many dogs they will recur. Prednisone
1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg orally every 24 hours results in resolution within 14 to 28 days in most dogs
nation of tetracycline and niacinamide has been successful in some dogs, and has the advantage
of fewer long-term side effects compared to systemic glucocorticoids. Antibiotics are useful in treating
secondary bacterial infections. Surgical debridement of the fibrous tracts and fistulae may provide
temporary resolution. Spontaneous resolution has been reported, but treatment is recommended.
25. What is nodular dermatofibrosis?
Nodular dermatofibrosis is a skin condition characterized by multiple cutaneous collagenous
nevi. In some dogs, particularly GSD, nodular dermatofibrosis is a cutaneous marker for internal
Disorders of Collagen and Elastin
111
disease. These animals have renal cystic disease, renal cystadenocarcinoma, or uterine leiomyoma.
Additionally, small intestinal polyps have been described in a few dogs. In this syndrome, the
collagenous nevi are firm, 0.5-5 cm subcutaneous nodules that are nonpruritic. The nodules are
usually located on the limbs and the head, and may be difficult to see. An autosomal dominant
mode of inheritance is suspected in GSD.
26. List the three theories proposed for the relationship between nodular dermatofibrosis
and renal cystic disease.
● The dermatofibrosis is a paraneoplastic syndrome, and arises secondary to renal neoplasia
● The animals have inherited the tendency to develop these two diseases, independent of
each other.
● The animals have inherited a disorder that leads to simultaneous fibrosis of the skin and
kidney parenchyma. The renal fibrosis causes an outflow obstruction, which progresses to
27. Has nodular dermatofibrosis been described in breeds other than GSD?
Yes, nodular dermatofibrosis has been reported in a Boxer, a Golden Retriever, and a few
mixed-breed dogs.
28. What tests would you consider using to diagnose a dog with nodular dermatofibrosis?
Skin biopsy and histopathologic studies are indicated to diagnose the skin lesions. A complete
blood cell count, biochemical profle, urinalysis, and imaging of the abdomen (radiography,
ultrasonography, computed tomography) are indicated to investigate the possibility of renal cystic
disease, renal cystadenocarcinoma, and uterine leiomyoma. If internal abnormalities are detected,
further procedures (excretory urogram, nephrectomy, ovariohysterectomy) may be indicated.
29. What is the prognosis for animals with nodular dermatofibrosis?
There is currently no treatment for nodular dermatofibrosis, and the use of medications and
ruptured cysts and subsequent peritonitis, renal tumor metastasis) are a common cause of death
or euthanasia in animals with this syndrome. In general, the lifespan does not seem to be
significantly shortened, with an average age at death of approximately 9 years.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bamelt KC, Cottrell BD: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a dog: ocular, cutaneous and articular abnomalities,
/ Small Anim Pract 28:941-946, 1987.
Collier LL, Leathers CW, Counts DF: A clinical description of dematosparaxis in a Himalayan cat, Feline Pract
10:27-36, 1980
Femandez CJ, Scott DW, Erb HN, Minor RR: Staining abnomalities of demal collagen in cats with cutaneous
asthenia or acquired skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's trichrome stain, Vet Dermatot 9:49-54, 1998
Freeman LJ, Hegreberg GA, Robinetle JD: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in dogs and cats, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small
Anim) 12:221-227,1987
Gross TL, Schick RO: Workshop Report 5: Dermmatopathology of newly described skin diseases. In Ihrke PJ, Mason
IS, White SD (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatology, Oxford, 1993, Pergamon Press, pp 417-420.
Hegreberg GA: Animal models of collagen disease, Prog Clir Biot Res 94:229-244, 1982.
Holbrook KA, Byers PH, Counts DF, Hegreberg GA: Demmatosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: II. Ultrastructural studies
of demmal collagen, / Imvest Dermatol 74:100-104, 1980.
Krone T, Medleau L, Hnilica K, Lower K: A puppy with skin lacerations and hygromas, Vet Med Smalt Anim Clin
4:358-360, 2001
shepherd dogs, / Small Anim Pract 38:498-505, 1997.
Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutter and Kirk's smatt animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 978-987.
112
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
Wenstrup RJ: Heritable disorders of connective tissue with skin changes. In Freedburg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K,
et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in general medicine,ed 5. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 1835-1847.
White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Schultheiss P, Scott KV: Nodular dermatofibrosis and cystic renal disease in three
mixed-breed dogs and a Boxer dog, Vet Dermatot 9:119-126, 1998.
14. INHERITED VESICULOBULLOUS
DISORDERS
Christine A. Rees, DVM, DACVD
1. What is a vesicle?
A vesicle is a blister less than l cim.
2. What is a bulla?
A bulla is a large blister that is usually 2 cm or more in diameter.
3. So, what is a blister?
A blister is a sharp, well-demarcated, elevation of the skin (epidermis) that is filled with a
clear liquid. These blisters can be located within the skin (intraepidermal) or just below the skin
(subepi dermal ).
4. What is an inherited vesiculobullous disorder?
An inherited vesiculobullous disorder is characterized by vesicles and bullae on the skin that
    s  s o s g   s)     d 
genetic or inherited component to its pathogenesis.
5. Name some examples of inherited vesiculobullous disorders in animals.
·Epidermolysis bullosa
· Dermatomyositis
· Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies
· Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
· Mucous membrane pemphigoid
6. What is epidermolysis bullosa?
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a condition in which there is structural irregularity of the
anchoring substances of the skin (epidermis). The inherited forms of EB can be divided up into
four categories: epidermolysis bullosa simplex, epidermolysis acquisita, junctional epidermolysis
bullosa, and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. All of these forms have been reported in animals.
 7. What are the breeds and types of EB that can occur in small animals?
See Table 14-1.
8. What is similar between the various forms of inherited epidermolysis bullosa?
The types of skin lesions and their location are similar regardless of which type of
epidermolysis bullosa you are dealing with. Rarely are actual vesicles or bullae seen, because
these lesions are so fragile. Instead the skin lesions consist of erosive to ulcerative lesions. These
112
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
Wenstrup RJ: Heritable disorders of connective tissue with skin changes. In Freedburg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K,
et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in general medicine,ed 5. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 1835-1847.
White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Schultheiss P, Scott KV: Nodular dermatofibrosis and cystic renal disease in three
mixed-breed dogs and a Boxer dog, Vet Dermatot 9:119-126, 1998.
14. INHERITED VESICULOBULLOUS
DISORDERS
Christine A. Rees, DVM, DACVD
1. What is a vesicle?
A vesicle is a blister less than l cim.
2. What is a bulla?
A bulla is a large blister that is usually 2 cm or more in diameter.
3. So, what is a blister?
A blister is a sharp, well-demarcated, elevation of the skin (epidermis) that is filled with a
clear liquid. These blisters can be located within the skin (intraepidermal) or just below the skin
(subepi dermal ).
4. What is an inherited vesiculobullous disorder?
An inherited vesiculobullous disorder is characterized by vesicles and bullae on the skin that
    s  s o s g   s)     d 
genetic or inherited component to its pathogenesis.
5. Name some examples of inherited vesiculobullous disorders in animals.
·Epidermolysis bullosa
· Dermatomyositis
· Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies
· Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
· Mucous membrane pemphigoid
6. What is epidermolysis bullosa?
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a condition in which there is structural irregularity of the
anchoring substances of the skin (epidermis). The inherited forms of EB can be divided up into
four categories: epidermolysis bullosa simplex, epidermolysis acquisita, junctional epidermolysis
bullosa, and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. All of these forms have been reported in animals.
 7. What are the breeds and types of EB that can occur in small animals?
See Table 14-1.
8. What is similar between the various forms of inherited epidermolysis bullosa?
The types of skin lesions and their location are similar regardless of which type of
epidermolysis bullosa you are dealing with. Rarely are actual vesicles or bullae seen, because
these lesions are so fragile. Instead the skin lesions consist of erosive to ulcerative lesions. These
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
113
Table 14-1Breeds Affected by Different Types of EB
TYPE OF EB
BREEDS AFFECTED
EB simplex
Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs
EB acquisita
Great Danes
Junctional EB
Mongrels, Toy Poodles (lethal form), Beaucerons, German Shorthaired
Pointers, Siamese cats
Dystrophic EB
Akitas, Beaucerons, Golden Retrievers, domestic shorthaired cats,
Persian cats
skin lesions are usually located over the bony prominences of the face, on the pinna, and pressure
points of the limbs and/or footpads. Skin lesions may also be present in the oral cavity as well as
around the claw bed. Some animals will also lose their claws (onychomadesis).
9. How do you diagnose EB?
  e  u   s s e   5  s n A  
affected, then samples of skin around the claw and the claw itself should be collected by biopsy
and submitted for histopathology.
The results of the biopsy will differ depending on which type of EB is present:
EB simplex will have separation of the skin (cleft formation) that occurs through the
basement membrane zone and includes the hair follicles. No inflammation is present
unless ulceration is present.
EB acquisita initially has subepidermal blistering with no dermal inflammation. However,
many dogs with EB acquisita have subepidermal abscessation that occurs secondary to
the intense neutrophilic inflammation that is present. The clefting that occurs in the skin
most commonly occurs below collagen IV in the lamina densa of the epidermal basement
membrane.
Junctional EB will have subepiderimal separation with little or no subjacent dermal
inflammation.
Dystrophic EB has a sub-basilar dermoepidermal separation on histopathologic studies.
Ultrastructurally, this separation occurs beneath the lamina densa with a reduction in the
numbers of anchoring fibrils.
10. How is EB treated?
No treatment to cure an animal of EB exists. Treatments involve symptomatic care (i.e.,
treating secondary bacterial and/or fungal infections). If possible, trauma should be eliminated or
minimized because skin lesions in frictional areas develop in these dogs.
11. What is dermatomyositis?
Dermatomyositis (DM) is a devastating inherited inflammatory disease of the skin and/or
muscle, which commonly afflicts Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs and their crosses. Other breeds
that have been reported to be affected include Beauceron Shepherds, Welsh Corgis, Lakeland
Terriers, Chow Chows, German Shepherd Dogs, and Kuvasz. Although this disease is not
classically considered to be a vesiculobullous disorder, cases of a vesiculobullous form of DM
have been reported. The skin lesions more classically seen with DM include: alopecia with or
without erythema; scaling; and crusting of the face, ears, legs, and tail tip (Figures 14-1 to 14-3).
One or more of these areas of the body may be affected. In addition, some dogs may have
114
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
Figure 14-1 Tail of a dog with dermatomyositis that demonstrates the typical "rat tail" appearance.
muscular involvement. Sometimes this muscle involvement is so pronounced that it results in
muscle atrophy. Other cases may suffer from megaesophagus, with the end result of aspiration
pneumonia. In milder cases, the dogs may appear to be sloppy eaters, or have a strange, high
steppinggait.
12. When do the skin lesions associated with DM occur?
Most skin lesions develop within the first few years of life, but dogs as old as 8 years of age
have been reported to have DM. Whether these adult-onset cases are a different subset of DM or
whether these dogs had a mild form of DM that was not recognized earlier in the dog's life
remains to be determined.
13. What are the genetics behind DM?
In Collies, the mode of inheritance has been determined to be an autosomal dominant with
incomplete penetrance. The incomplete penetrance means that there are triggering factors such as
stress, viruses, heat cycles, or pregnancy that trigger genetically predisposed dogs to express DM.
Another report suggests a similar mode of inheritance may occur in the Shetland Sheepdog. The
mode of inheritance for DM in other breeds of dogs has not been determined.
14. How is DM diagnosed?
DM is diagnosed with skin and muscle biopsies. If muscle involvement is present, then
electromyography (EMG) should be performed. The histologic findings of a dog with DM include:
scattered hydropic degeneration of the surface and follicular basal cells, mild perivascular to
interstitial dermatitis in which lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes predominate. Mild
pigmentary incontinence may be present in the superficial dermis. Follicular atrophy and peri
InheritedVesiculobullousDisorders
115
Figure 1 4-2  Face of dog with dermatomyositis that shows the classic facial pattern with some hair loss,
crusting, and erytherma.
Figure 14-3 Alopecia and erythema on the distal legs of a dog with dermatomyositis.
116
InheritedVesiculobullous Disorders
follicular fibrosis are common. Vasculitis may be present. Muscle biopsy shows a mixed inflam-
matory exudate accompanied by muscle fiber necrosis and atrophy. The results of EMG are
abnormal and show positive sharp waves and fibrillation potential in the muscles of the head and
distal ex tremities.
15. How is DM treated?
 Several different treatment options are available. I prefer pentoxifylline (Trental, Aventis,
Kansas City, Mo.) with or without vitamin E for a 3-month trial period as the treatment of choice.
· Steroids: Steroids were commonly used to treat DM. However, this treatment is associated
with adverse effects when used for extended periods. The complications associated with
steroids are recurrent skin and/or urinary tract infections, demodicosis, polyuria, polydipsia,
polyphagia, panting, pot-bellied appearance, and thin skin. Anecdotal reports have
suggested that thromboemboli develop in some dogs, resulting in a life-threatening
every 24 hours.
·Pentoxifylline (Trental, Aventis, Kansas City, Mo.): Pentoxifylline is a rheologic drug
with immunologic properties. This drug increases blood flow through blood vessels
and decreases inflammatory mediators, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha and
interleukin 1. Trental has also been shown to stimulate wound healing by stimulating
collagenase. It is important that the namebrand, Trental, be used. When generic forms of
pentoxifylline have been used, they have been shown to be either ineffective or associated
with side effects (profuse vomiting and diarrhea). The drug dose in the literature varies
from as little as one 400-mg pentoxifylline tablet regardless of body size every 48 hours
to as high as 25 mg/kg every 12 hours. A lower dose but more frequent administration,
10 to 15 mg/kg orally every 8 hours, has also been proposed. Based on my experience,
a dosage of 20 to 30 mg/kg orally every 12 hours is recommended for treating DM.
Trental should always be given with food. Response to therapy is usually seen within 1 to
3months.
●Azathioprine (Imuran, AAI International, Wilmington, NC) is an immunosuppressive
antimetabolite drug that has been used by some veterinary dermatologists to treat DM.
Azathioprine targets rapidly proliferating cells, with its greatest effects on cell-mediated
that used for treating other immune disorders (azathioprine 2.2 mg/kg every 24 to 48
thrombocytopenia). Other side effects reported with azathioprine use include vomiting,
diarrhea (with or without blood), liver problems, pancreatitis, dermatitis, and alopecia.
Animals need to be closely monitored with bloodwork when on azathioprine.
· The immunostimulant drug Immunoregulin (Neogen, Tampa, Fla.) consists of a killed
bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes) preparation. This is an injectable medication;
according to label directions it is injected intravenously twice weekly, then weekly, then
monthly. Side effects occasionally occur after an injection and include lethargy, Pyrexia,
chills, and inappetence. Anaphylactic shock reactions have also been reported. If the drug
is given outside of the vein, local tissue inflammation (swelling) will occur. Long-term
Immunoregulin use has been associated with hepatitis, vomiting, diarrhea, inappetance,
malaise, pyrexia, poly dipsia, and acidosis.
·Antioxidants (vitamin E) have been used topically and systemically to treat canine DM
Vitamin E stabilizes lysosomes, reduces prostaglandin Ez synthesis, and increases
interleukin 2 production, which results in both anti-inflammatory and immunostimulatory
effects. No known side effects have occurred with either topical or systemic vitamin E
when used at recommended doses. Topical vitamin E is typically applied to the affected
skin lesions once or twice daily. Systemic vitamin E is administered at a dosage of 200 to
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
117
800 IU every 24 hours. This treatment is usually used in conjunction with another therapy
for DM.
16. What is idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies?
This dermatologic disorder is an ulcerative condition of unknown etiology. The current
thought is that idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies is an auto-
immune disorder. Therefore, some authors believe that a more appropriate name for this condition
would be vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
17. What are the clinical signs for idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs
andCollies?
Skin lesions develop in middle-aged to older dogs. Although this condition has been
reported in Collies, it appears to be more prevalent in Shetland Sheepdogs. No sex predilection
occurs but skin lesions will recur or get worse when intact female dogs are in estrus. These skin
18. What types of skin lesions are associated with idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis?
The initial lesions are vesiculobullous lesions, which can coalesce and ulcerate. The lesions
tend to have distinct borders between normal and abnormal skin.
19. Where are the lesions located?
axillary regions. Other lesion locations include the eyelids, pinnae, oral cavity, external genitalia,
anus, and footpads.
20.  How do you diagnose idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis?
A biopsy of the skin is the only way to diagnose idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis. A skin
biopsy specimen shows hydropic degeneration of basal cells and extensive individual
keratinocyte apoptosis, which extends into the stratum spinosum. In severe cases, blisters will
form at the dermoepidermal junction. In the dermis, there is superficial perivascular to partially
lichenoid dermati tis. Interface folliculitis is often present with no follicular atrophy
21. How do you treat idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis?
The cyclic nature of this disease makes it difficult to manage. Sunlight and trauma can
exacerbate skin lesions. Therefore, affected dogs should be protected from these situations. If a
secondary infection occurs, these dogs need to be treated with antibiotics. Glucocorticoids with
or without azathiopnne, a combination of tetracycline and macinamide, and vitamin E and
pentoxifylline have all been reported to be effective.
 22. What is canine benign familial chronic pemphigus?
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus is a defect in the skin that causes problems with
cellular cohesion among skin cells (keratinocytes) (Figure 14-4). Because of this lack of cellular
cohesion, vesiculobullous lesions develop easily when the skin is traumatized. The exact skin
defect is not known but it is thought to involve the desmosomes.
23. Are there any breeds of dogs that are predisposed?
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus has been reported in English Setters and their
crosses and Doberman Pinschers.
24. What is the mode of inheritance for this syndrome in dogs?
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus has been found to be inherited in an autosomal
118
Inherited Vesiculobullous Disorders
keratinocytes and neutrophils.
dominant fashion in English Setters and their crosses. The exact mode of inheritance in
Doberman Pinschers is not known.
25. What types of skin lesions are seen with canine benign familial chronic pemphigus?
Early skin lesions associated with canine benign familial chronic pemphigus are alopecia,
erythema, and slight scaling. As the disease progresses, these lesions show increased scaling and
Crusting. With time these skin lesions can develop into plaques. Although vesicopustules or
yesiculobullous lesions can occur, they are rarely seenl.
26. What are the locations of the skin lesions?
'sq sun uo suiod sinssaid eao 1nooo pue se go syuou g 1noge ne saop ui 1nooo suoist
on the ventral chest, or on the pinnae.
27. What is the best way to diagnose canine benign familial chronic pemphigus?
A skin biopsy is the only way to accurately diagnose canine benign familial chronic pemphigus.
marked, diffuse, multifocal areas of acantholysis of the lower and middle portions of the
epidermis and follicular outer root sheath. The acantholysis is so marked that the appearance of
the affected epidermis appears similar to a dilapidated brick wall. Acantholytic dyskeratotic
keratinocytes may be visible.
28. How do you treat dogs with benign familial chronic pemphigus?
In humans, management consists of treating the secondary infections with or without topical
corticosteroids and avoidance of trauma. Because the lesions in dogs are asymptomatic and
localized, no treatment has been attempted.
29. What is mucous membrane pemphigoid?
This is an autoimmune vesiculobullous disorder that has been reported in a l-year-old, intact
male Australian Shepherd.
30. What are the clinical signs associated with mucous membrane pemphigoid?
The one reported case of mucous membrane pemphigoid had a history of lethargy, lymph-
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
611
adenomegaly, swollen joints, and fever, which resolved with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
treatment. Several weeks after antibiotic treatment, generalized erythroderma developed that
progressed into vesicles, erosions, and crusts in the mouth, around the eyes and nose, and on
the ears.
31. How is mucous membrane pemphigoid diagnosed?
Mucous membrane pemphigoid is diagnosed with biopsy. On histopathology, large
subepidermal vesicles and focal neutrophilic subepidermal microabscesses are seen. With
immunohistochemistry staining, circulating IgG autoantibodies targeted against a 97-kD antigen
in the lower lamina lucidia are present.
32. How do you treat mucous membrane pemphigoid?
No treatment recommendations can be found in the literature. However, it would seem
reasonable that if the owner wanted to treat his or her pet then treatments used to treat other
autoimmune conditions can be tried.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Favrot C, Dunston S, Deslandes J, et al: Effect of substrate selection on indirect immunofluorescence staining of
canine autoimmune blistering diseases, Car / Vet Res 66(1): 26-30, 2002.
Olivry T, Dunston DM, Savery KCM, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune subepidemal bullous diseases:
identification of targeted antigens defines novel clinicopathological entities, Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:80-81, 1997.
Olivry T, Petersen A, Dunston DM, et al: Novel localized variant of canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, Vet Rec
146:193-194, 2000.
Palazzi X, Marchal T, Chabanne L, et al: Inherited dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in inbred dogs: a spontaneous
animal model for somatic gene therapy, / Irves Dermatot 115: 135-137, 2000.
Rees CA: Pentoxify1line, Derm Dialog 10-11, Winter 2002.
Rees CA, Boothe DM, Wilkie S: Therapeutic response to pentoxifylline and its active metabolites in dogs with
demmatomyositis, Vet Dermatot 13:220, 2002 (abstract).
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds):
Mutter and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp. 938-948.
15. MISCELLANEOUS CONGENITAL AND
HEREDITARVDISORDERS
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What breed of dog is affected by idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis?
Shar Pei
2.  List some differential diagnoses for cutaneous mucinosis.
Shar Pei
Hypothyroidism
Acromegaly
Alopecia mucinosa
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
611
adenomegaly, swollen joints, and fever, which resolved with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
treatment. Several weeks after antibiotic treatment, generalized erythroderma developed that
progressed into vesicles, erosions, and crusts in the mouth, around the eyes and nose, and on
the ears.
31. How is mucous membrane pemphigoid diagnosed?
Mucous membrane pemphigoid is diagnosed with biopsy. On histopathology, large
subepidermal vesicles and focal neutrophilic subepidermal microabscesses are seen. With
immunohistochemistry staining, circulating IgG autoantibodies targeted against a 97-kD antigen
in the lower lamina lucidia are present.
32. How do you treat mucous membrane pemphigoid?
No treatment recommendations can be found in the literature. However, it would seem
reasonable that if the owner wanted to treat his or her pet then treatments used to treat other
autoimmune conditions can be tried.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Favrot C, Dunston S, Deslandes J, et al: Effect of substrate selection on indirect immunofluorescence staining of
canine autoimmune blistering diseases, Car / Vet Res 66(1): 26-30, 2002.
Olivry T, Dunston DM, Savery KCM, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune subepidemal bullous diseases:
identification of targeted antigens defines novel clinicopathological entities, Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:80-81, 1997.
Olivry T, Petersen A, Dunston DM, et al: Novel localized variant of canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, Vet Rec
146:193-194, 2000.
Palazzi X, Marchal T, Chabanne L, et al: Inherited dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in inbred dogs: a spontaneous
animal model for somatic gene therapy, / Irves Dermatot 115: 135-137, 2000.
Rees CA: Pentoxify1line, Derm Dialog 10-11, Winter 2002.
Rees CA, Boothe DM, Wilkie S: Therapeutic response to pentoxifylline and its active metabolites in dogs with
demmatomyositis, Vet Dermatot 13:220, 2002 (abstract).
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds):
Mutter and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp. 938-948.
15. MISCELLANEOUS CONGENITAL AND
HEREDITARVDISORDERS
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What breed of dog is affected by idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis?
Shar Pei
2.  List some differential diagnoses for cutaneous mucinosis.
Shar Pei
Hypothyroidism
Acromegaly
Alopecia mucinosa
120
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
3.  What are the clinical signs associated with idiopathic mucinosis?
Often, the animal has exaggerated skin folds, particularly on the head, ventrum, and limbs.
Additionally, vesicles composed of mucin may be seen.
4. How do you diagnose idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis?
· Rule out other causes of mucinosis (particularly hypothyroidism).
·A skin biopsy should be done to rule out other depositional diseases (i.e., collagen, etc.).
● Skin histopathology is consistent with excessive mucin in the dermis and there are no
other significant abnormali ties.
· Thick, clear, sticky material can be removed from the vesicles.
 5. How would you treat idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis?
· This is a cosmetic disorder that does not require treatment.
· Some dogs have been reported to "outgrow” the disorder, with its resolving around 2 to
5 years of age.
●Prednisone can be used to decrease mucin deposition (e.g., 2.2 mg/kg orally every 24
hours for 6 days, then taper over 1-2 months).
6. What is congenital hypotrichosis?
Congenital hypotrichosis is a disorder that occurs as a result of an ectodermal defect. In
some animals, only the hair follicles are affected, whereas others also have abnormal dentition or
tear production.
7. List dog and cat breeds that have been affected by congenital hypotrichosis.
Beagle, French Bulldog, Rottweiler, Yorkshire Terrier, Labrador Retriever, Bichon Frise,
Lhasa Apso, Basset Hound
Cats: Birman, Burmese, Siamese, Devon Rex
8. What is the age of onset of alopecia in animals with congenital hypotrichosis?
Some animals are born with a normal haircoat that is lost within a few weeks to months.
9. Is there a gender predilection for congenital hypotrichosis?
Male dogs appear predisposed, but there is no apparent gender predilection in cats.
Alopecia of the temporal region, ear pinnae, caudal dorsum, and entire ventrum (Figure 15-1).
11. How is congenital hypotrichosis diagnosed?
s o  e is  y o  s   si 
(decreased number or small hair follicles, decreased number or small sweat and sebaceous glands,
and arrector pili muscles). If the history is not known, tests to rule out endocrinopathies
are indicated.
12. What breed of dog is affected by lethal acrodermatitis?
 Lethal acrodermatitis is an autosomal recessive syndrome that affects Bull Terriers.
13. Although the cause of lethal acrodermatitis is not known, what common feature is
involved in the pathogenesis of the disease?
Bull Terriers with lethal acrodermatitis have abnormal zinc and copper metabolism, but do
not respond to high-dose zinc therapy.
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
121
caudal dorsum, and ventrur.
14. Describe the clinical symptoms of lethal acrodermatitis.
· Onset noted at an average of 7 weeks of age
● Skin pigmentation is lighter than normal (Figure 15-2)
·Weakness
·High-arched palate makes it difficult to suckle and eat ("'messy eaters")
· Retarded growth, skeletal deformities (vertebral abnormalities, abnormal skull and
carpus)
 Splayed digits with flat feet
·Paw pads are hyperkeratotic and may fissure (Figure 15-3)
· Ulcers and crusts occur primarily on the face and paws, but can occur anywhere
·Paronychia and onychodystrophy
Secondary cutaneous infections (bacterial folliculitis, Malassezia yeast dermatitis,
Candidiasis, dermatophytosis)
·Diarrhea
·Respiratory infections
·May have ocular abnormalities (cataracts, persistent pupillary membranes, corneal opacities)
15. How is lethal acrodermatitis diagnosed?
· Consistent clinical signs in a Bull Termier puppy
· Skin biopsy specimen shows diffuse and marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, crusts,
hydropic degeneration of keratinocytes in the upper epidermis, intraepidermal pustules,
superficial perivascular dermatitis
 Serum zinc or copper is low or normal
·No classic complete blood cell count, biochermistry, or urinalysis changes
122
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
growth, and splayed feet.
Figure 15-3 Hyperkeratosis of the paw pads in a Bull Terrier puppy with lethal acrodermatitis.
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
123
16. What is the average survival time for a puppy with lethal acrodermatitis?
7 months
17. List treatment recommendations for a Bull Terrier with lethal acrodermatitis.
·Treat secondary bacterial or yeast infections
·Try zinc supplementation
· Recommend against breeding the dam, sire, and littermates
18. Describe canine acral mutilation syndrome?
Canine acral mutilation syndrome is a rare sensory neuropathy, in which affected dogs mutilate
their extremities. The disorder is probably inherited in an autosomal recessive mannet.
19. What breeds of dogs are affected by canine acral mutilation syndrome? Is there a
gender or age predilection?
Breeds: German Shorthaired Pointer, English Springer Spaniel, English Pointer
Gender: no predilection
Age: 3-5 months old
20. List the clinical signs in a puppy with acral mutilation syndrome.
·Affected puppies may be smaller than littermates.
· The puppies chew and lick their paws.
· Paws may be swollen with ulceration and paronychia (Figure 15-4).
Figure 15-4Self-induced ulceration and partial amputation of the digits in a puppy with acral mutilation
syndrome.
·Autoamputation of the digits may occur
· There is a loss of temperature and pain sensation in the paws, and possibly in the proximal
legs and trunk.
· The hindlimbs are often more severely affected than the forelimbs.
124
Miscellaneous CongenitalandHereditaryDisorders
 21. How is acral mutilation syndrome diagnosed?
A presumptive diagnosis of acral mutilation syndrome can be made based on the breed
clinical signs, and history. Histopathology of the nerve tissue (typically performed at necropsy)
provides a definitive diagnosis.
22. Are there any treatments available for acral mutilation syndrome?
Attempts to prevent self-mutilation (Elizabethan collars, bandages, sedation) are often
ineffective. Most of these animals are euthanized. Be sure to inform the owners that the dam, sire,
and litterrmates should not be bred.
23. What is the cause of persistent scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels?
Cerebellar tonsil hermiation with syringomyelia (may be similar to Chiari type l malformation
in people).
24. How old are the dogs that are affected by persistent scratching in Cavalier King
Charles Spaniels?
These dogs are typically 6 months to 2 years old when the pruritus is first noticed.
25. What is the distribution of scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels with
persistent scratching?
These dogs have pruritus over the neck or shoulder area.
 26. How do you diagnose a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with persistent scratching from
cerebellar herniation?
· Rule out other causes of pruritus.
· Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain.
27. Is there a treatment available for Cavalier King Charles Spaniels with persistent
scratching?
· Surgical correction of the herniation should help.
· Some dogs have been treated with dexamethasone or acetazolamide.
·In some dogs, treatment is not necessary.
28. What is urticaria pigmentosa?
Urticaria pigmentosa is a rare cutaneous manifestation of systemic mastocytosis (mast cell
hyperplasia that can affect any organ). It has been reported in the dog and cat (Sphinx, Devon
Rex, Siamese breeds of cats).
29. What clinical signs are consistent with urticaria pigmentosa?
Multifocal macules, papules and crusts on the head, face, neck, and ventrum. Often these
lesions are asymptomatic.
30. Can you treat animals with urticaria pigmentosa?
administration. Be sure to rule out all other diseases (particularly miliary dermatitis and the
associated underlying causes)
31. Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy (CRGV) has been reported in which
dog breed?
Primarily Greyhounds, but it is uncertain as to whether there is truly a genetic predisposition
to CRGV. Recently, CRGV was reported in a Great Dane.
Miscellaneous Congenital and Hereditary Disorders
125
32. What is the nonprofessional's term for CRGV of Greyhounds?
Alabama rot.
33. What is the proposed etiologic agent of CRGV of Greyhounds?
Shiga-like toxins from Escherichia coli, possibly from eating raw meat.
34. Describe the clinical signs associated with CRGV of Greyhounds.
Systemic signs in approximately 25% of affected dogs:
·Pyrexia
●Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea
·Lethargy
+Polydipsia, polyuria
·Ascites,ventral edema
·Acute renal failure, possibly with anuria or oliguria
Cutaneous signs:
·Well-demarcated ulcers on the limbs (especially hindlimbs), and occasionally on the trunk
· Pitting edema of the limbs
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chastain CB, Swayne DE: Congenital hypotrichosis in male Basset Hound littermates, JAm Vet Med Assoc 187:845-
846, 1985.
Conroy JD, Rasmusen BA, Small E: Hypotrichosis in Miniature Poodle siblings, J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:697-699,
1975.
Cowan LA, Hertzke DM, Fenwick BW, Andreasen CB: Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in Greyhounds
with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992-1994), J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:789-793, 1997.
Ihrke PJ, Mueller RS,Stannard AA: Generalized congenital hypotrichosis in a female Rott weiler,Vet Dermatot 4:65.
69, 1993
Kunkle GA: Congenital hypotrichosis in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:84-85, 1984.
Marks A, van den Broek AHM, Else RW: Congenital hypotrichosis in a French Bulldog, J Small Anin Pracr 33:450-
452,1992.
McEwan NA: Malassezia and Candida infections in Bull Terriers with lethal acrodermatitis, / Small Anim Pract
42:291-297, 2001.
in 28 cases of lethal acrodematitis of Bull Terriers, / Small Anim Pract 41:501-507, 2000.
Rotermund A, Peters M, Hewicker-Trautwein M, Nolte I: Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy in a Great
Dane resembling "Alabama rot" of Greyhounds, Vet Rec 151:510-512, 2002.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, 2001, pp 956-959, 992-999.
Stogdale L, Botha WS, Saunders GN: Congenital hypotrichosis in a dog, JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 18:184-187, 1982.
Uchida Y, Moon-Fanelli AA, Dodman NH, Clegg MS, Keen CL: Serum concentrations of zinc and copper in Bull
Terriers with lethal acrodermatitis and tail-chasing behavior, Am / Vet Res 58:808-810, 1997.
Section IV
Parasitic Skin Diseases
16. ARTHROPOD PARASITES
Robert Kennis, DVM, DACVD
1. How are arthropods different from insects?
Insects have three pairs of legs, three segments (head, thorax, abdomen), and wings.
Arthropods have four pairs of legs, with the head and thorax, or the head, thorax, and abdomen
fused together. No wings are present on arthropods.
 2. What is the importance of Dermanyssus gallinae to small animals?
This is a bird and poultry mite that may parasitize small animals. Exposure is usually
associated with aviaries or chicken coops. Only the larval forms of the mite will feed on animals.
After consuming a blood meal, the larvae appear red. The mites may cause clinical symptoms
associated with pruritus. Diagnosis is usually easy using tape preparations. Treatment involves
avoidance of the source of the mites.
 3. Give the name, regional distribution pattern, and clinical findings associated with the
cat fur mite.
The cat fur mite is Lynxacarus radovsky (Figure 16-1). It has been reported as parasitizing
domestic cats in Hawai, Texas, and Florida. The clinical findings are usually mild and include
Figure 16-1 Lynxacarus radovsky, the cat fur mite.
126
ArthropodParasites
127
increased scale, alopecia, and pruritus. It is uncommon to find these mites on normal healthy cats.
The fur mites are host-specific and non-zoonotic.
4. Describe the life cycle of chigger mites; include clinical findings associated with
parasitism.
hatch into six -legged larvae. Larvae are red or orange and can be seen with the naked eye. After
feeding, they drop to the ground and molt to become nymphs and later adults. They can parasitize
Identification of the mites can be made using skin scrapings or tape preparations for microscopic
pets from roaming infested environments is the best preventative. Killing the larval mites is
usually easy with commonly used topical insecticides approved for dogs and cats.
 5. What is the life cycle of the common ear mite Otodectes cynotis?
deutonymph and attaches end to end. If a female mite is produced, copulation occurs and she
      e        
6. Give three reasons for the diversity of clinical symptoms associated with ear mite
infestations.
1. Ear mites are surface feeders and may be irritating. As inflammation ensues due to
localized trauma, there are increases in the amount of sebum produced along with blood
and ear mite feces, creating an occlusive otitis externa.
 2. The host may produce antibodies against mite antigens, leading to hypersensitivity reactions.
3. Ear mites are not always confined to the ear canal. On cats, ear mites may be found on
the back feet and claws due to scratching the ear canals. On dogs, the mites may be
present on the face and neck and occasionally the posterior half of the body. Ectopic
mites may or may not be associated with prunitus.
 7. List the two common species of house dust mites and give a brief description of their
clinical significance.
The two common species are Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and D. farinae. They are
hypersensitivity reactions in dogs and cats (and humans).
8. What are the common species of Cheyletiella mites?
There are three common species of Cheyfetieffa mites. Each has its own preferred host but
may parasitize other species. All Cheyletiella mites have zoonotic potential. C. yasguri is the
canine mite, C. blakei is the feline mite, and C. parasitovorax is the common rabbit mite. These
are large surface-dwelling mites that feed on surface debris and are sometimes referred to as
walking dandruff. They are obligate parasites that do not live for extended periods off the host.
Because these mites move about, they tend to be highly contagious among in-contact animals.
The clinical symptoms are variable, although pruritus is usually present. Scaling is frequently
present with a dorsal distribution pattern. With continued exposure, a hypersensitivity reaction
may occur that is associated with intense pruritus
128
Arthropod Parasites
9.Describe the different methods foridentifying Cheyletiella mites or theireggs.
Cheyfetielfa mites lay their eggs on the hair shaft. These nits resemble lice eggs and must be
differentiated from them for successful treatment. The eggs of Cheyletietla are smaller and more
loosely attached to hairs compared to the firmly cemented hairs of lice. There are several
diagnostic methods that are available to detect adult mites on animals. More than one should be
used to achieve an accurate diagnosis because any diagnostic tool may yield false-negative
results. A handheld lens may be all that is necessary to see the mites on the skin surface. Acetate
placed in mineral oil (trichogram) may lead to the demonstration of eggs. A fecal examination
can be very useful in cats as they tend to groom the eggs and mites off the body. The single most
useful diagnostic tool is the flea comb. Large amounts of scale can be collected and deposited
onto a glass slide, coated with mineral oil, for microscopic evaluation. Broad, superficial skin
scrapings may also be beneficial. Unfortunately, clipping the hair may be necessary to obtain
successful scraping samples. Because this is a contagious problem, all contact animals,
symptomatic or not, should be evaluated. I prefer to treat all contact animals.
10. List the common names sometimes used to describe demodicosis.
Demodectic mange, red mange, and follicular mange are all common names for
demodicosis.
11. What are the four life stages of Demodex canis, and why is it clinically important to be
able to differentiate these stages?
The life stages consist of egg, larva, nymph, and adult. The larval stage contains three pairs
 of legs and the nymph has four pairs of legs. The adult stage also contains four pairs of legs. It is
clinically important to identify the life stages to monitor the success of treatment. Demodicosis
can be a very difficult disease to resolve. Once treatment is instituted, skin scrapings should be
evaluated monthly. If it is becoming apparent that there is a prevalence of juvenile stages, then it
 oe o n  g ds  odi  s n   i  g 
assumed that the survivors may be developing resistance to the treatment. Modification of the
treatment may be indicated. Besides evaluating for juvenile stages, it is important to identify
whether the mites are alive or dead. Live mites may indicate the need to modify the treatment
protocol.
12. How do dogs get Demodex mites?
Dermodex mites are a part of the normal flora of the skin and ear canals. Mites are transferred
from the bitch to offspring within a few days of birth. Demodex mites are first found on the muzzle
and feet due to close contact with the dam during nursing. Lesions beginning on the muzzle and
  n       o      
littermates. Likewise, stillborn puppies do not have Demodex mites.
13. What are the common clinical findings associated with localized demodicosis in the dog?
Although there are no finite definitions for what constitutes a localized form of demodicosis,
a reasonable starting point includes lesions that can be easily treated with topical spot treatment.
mation occurs most commonly. As the hairs fall out, comedones (plugged hair follicles) may
develop. Papules, pustules, and epidermal collarettes may also be present. The lesions associated
with localized Demodex are usually not pruritic. However, if a bacterial infection is also present,
then pruritus may occur. Because the differential diagnoses for these clinical symptoms include
clinical problems to be present concurrently in a young dog
Arthropod Parasites
129
14. Generalized demodicosis usually starts at less than 2 years of age. What is the clinical
significance of adult-onset, generalized demodicosis?
Adult-onset generalized demodicosis usually has an underlying cause. Endocrine disorders
such as hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism must be ruled out. Medications that cause
immune suppression such as corticosteroids and antineoplastic drugs can also be an underlying
cause for the development of adult-onset demodicosis. It is important to remember that chronically
generalized demodicosis. Malignant neoplasia is an additional differential diagnosis. All adult
dogs that present with generalized demodicosis should have appropriate laboratory blood work
to look for an underlying cause. In many cases, an underlying cause for adult-onset demodicosis
may not be found. This should not preclude treatment.
15. Why does demodicosis develop in some dogs and not in others (even among littermates)?
A simple answer to this question does not exist. The prevalence of demodicosis in certain
breeds, and the fact that avoidance of breeding affected dogs decreases the prevalence of disease,
has led to the suggestion that this problem is an autosomal recessive disorder; however, while the
predisposition to develop demodicosis is likely hereditary, the actual development of clinical
disease may involve multiple factors (i.e., multifactorial). It has been shown that dogs with
pyoderma and Demodex produce serum factors that are immune suppressive, thereby propagating
the problem. One hypothesis is that affected dogs have a specific T-cell defect leading to an
insufficient cell-mediated delayed hypersensitivity response against Demodex mites. Ongoing
Tesearch is being performed to further clarify these questions.
16. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the various diagnostic methods used to
identify Demodex mites?
The most commonly used diagnostic procedure to look for Demodex is the deep skin
scraping. The advantage is that it is quick and easy. The disadvantages include minor discomfort
to the patient and the likelihood of a false negative scraping in chronically inflamed or lichenified
           g   s
quick and easy and not as messy as a skin scraping. The disadvantages include the fact that there
may not be any hairs to pluck in a chronic Demodex lesion and there is some discomfort to the
            
tissues. The disadvantages include the cost of the procedure, the time (shipping and handling) to
Demodex mites are suspected yet not supported by trichogram or deep skin scrapings, doing a
biopsy is an extremely useful procedure. Many of these cases are complicated by deep bacterial
infections which should be evaluated by bacterial culture and sensitivity testing. Taking an extra
skin biopsy and submitting it for macerated tissue culture is the optimum method of obtaining
samples for culture of deep infections
17. What are the two major species of feline Demodex mites? How do they differ in their
clinical presentation?
The two major species of feline Demodex mites are Demodex cati (Figure 16-2) and Demodex
gatoi (Figure 16-3). Demodex cati is a long slender mite that resembles Demodex canis. These
are follicular mites so the clinical symptoms include alopecia and occasionally comedones.
Pruritus is not a common feature of this species of Demodex. The identification of D. cati should
leukemia, feline immunodeficiency virus), hyperthyroidism, neoplasia, or other chronic wasting
diseases such as feline infectious peritonitis should be considered. These mites are usually
associated with older cats unless one of the aforementioned immunosuppressive viruses is present.
Demodex gatoi is a short "stumpy" appearing mite. These mites are surface dwelling, living in
the epidermal pits. Usually, cats infested with D. gatoi present with a chief complaint of pruritus.
130
ArthropodParasites
Figure 16-2
Demodex cati in a skin scraping from a cat with follicular mange
Figure 16-3 Demodex gatoi in a skin scraping from a cat with pruritus and symmetric alopecia.
Because cats that are pruritic tend to groom in a symmetric manner, they may present with
symmetric alopecia resembling an endocrinopathy. D. gatoi is contagious and all cats in the
household must be treated. It is possible to have asymptomatic carriers. When looking for either
species of mite, it is important to use the correct technique. Demodex cati is a follicular mite, so
deep skin scrapings are appropriate. D. gatoi is a surface mite, so broad superficial skin scrapings
may be nlecess ary.
18. Describe the clinical symptoms of dogs infested with Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis.
The chief complaint is intense pruritus. The initial distribution pattern of pruritus includes
the elbows, hocks, and ears; especially the margins of the ears. Over time, the distribution pattern
Arthropod Parasites
131
will include the entire ventrum and sometimes the face. Dogs with scabies usually are not pruritic
on the dorsum. Scabies has been described as a rash that itches. Intense erythema may be present
as a primary lesion. As the animal traumatizes the lesion, excoriations, increased scale (seborrhea),
19.  How long does it take for clinical symptoms to develop once a dog is exposed to scabies
mites?
The incubation period is unknown. Most dogs that are infected will begin itching within a
few days, but the symptoms are mild. Three to 4 weeks later, intense pruritus develops, suggesting
a delayed hypersensitivity reaction.
20. What are the diagnostic methods available to diagnose scabies mites?
The diagnostic method of choice is multiple super ficial skin scrapings. It is common to scrape
 oso si  1o  sss  s n s e ioooi nou pe suoo yo suzo
scabies. In many cases, the diagnostic method may be response to treatment using an avermectin
drug highly effective in the treatment of scabies. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
testing for antibodies in serum to scabies mites has been evaluated from a research standpoint but
commercial testing is not currently available in the United States.An argument against using
ELISA testing is that it may be cheaper to treat based upon clinical symptoms and history.
21. Feline scabies is associated with the mite Notoedres cati. What clinical features make it
different than scabies in a dog?
Feline scabies infestations are commonly associated with pruritus, scaling, and crusting of
of the prevalence of mites, it is common for all in-contact animals and humans to be infested. Dogs
tend to harbor fewer mites, making them less likely to spread the mites throughout the household.
22. What are the common ticks that affect dogs and cats?
Ticks are generally divided into soft ticks and hard ticks. Argasid (soft-bodied) ticks are
considered to be more primitive, produce fewer offspring, and inhabit the dens or kennels of the
host. Ixodid (hard-bodied) ticks are highly parasitic and infest the open habitat of the host.
Otobius megnini is the only soft-bodied tick of importance to small animals. It is commonly
known as the spinous ear tick. The clinical symptoms associated with this tick range from
asymptomatic infestations to clinical otitis ex terna with concurrent pruritus.
Rhipicephalus sanguineus is known as the brown dog tick. It can survive inside kennels and
homes, leading to potentially severe infestations. The dog is the primary host but it may parasitize
other species.
Dermacentor variabifis is known as the common dog tick. It is commonly found along the
Atlantic Coast region. Although the principal host of the adult tick is the dog, the principal host
of the juvenile tick is the mouse.
Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick), Dermacentor occidentalis (West
maculatum (Lone Star tick) are ticks that have been known to parasitize dogs and cats. They may
be locally important and may transmit a variety of bacterial, protozoal, and rickettsial diseases.
23. Describe the general life cycle of hard-bodied ticks.
s s i s i   y   yo i is  
    s  s e   si n   e  
feed for several days before dropping off to molt. Off-host time periods are variable and may last
several months. The adult can lay several thousand eggs at one time and may live for over I year.
In general, the life cycle is completed in I year.
132
Insects
24. What are the common diseases transmitted by ticks?
Ticks are responsible for transmitting several rickettsial, bacterial, and viral diseases and can
also cause tick paralysis. Ehrlichia canis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, anaplasmosis, Babesia,
tularemia, and St. Louis encephalitis may also be encountered. Species of Ixodes ticks transmit
Borrelia spp., the bacterium responsible for causing Lyme disease.
25. What are the clinical symptoms associated with venomous spider bites?
Brown recluse spider bites are frequently associated with pain and tissue necrosis. It is
difficult if not impossible to prove the true etiology of many lesions resulting from spider bites.
Risk factors for potential exposure may help to rule in spider bites as a cause of the necrosis. It
is advisable to collect a biopsy skin sample from affected tissues. Important differential diagnoses
include other venomous creatures such as snakes, scorpions, and lizards as well as caustic,
chemical, or thermal burn, vasculitis, bacterial pathogens, and adverse drug reactions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Greene CE, Breitschwerdt EB: Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever, and typhus. In Greene CE (ed): Infectious
diseases of the dog and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 155-165.
Neer TM: Ehrlichiosis. In Greene CE (el): Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998,
WB Saumders, pp 139-147.
Sloss MW, Kemp RL: Mites and ticks of the skin and intemal organs. In Veterinary clinicat parasitology, ed 5. Ames,
Ia, 1978, Iowa State University Press, pp 146-164.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Parasitic skin disease. In: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 423-516
17. INSECTS
Cecilia A. Friberg, DVM, DACVD
1. What is an insect?
more than 800,000 species. More specifically they have three body segments and three pairs of
legs, although some insects have lost one or two pairs of legs and replaced them with wings (for
example, cockroaches, ladybugs, ants, bees, wasps, moths, butterflies, fleas, flies of all kinds, and
beetles). Some of the other chapters address dermatosis related to insects such as fleas, other
and flea allergy dermatitis.
2. What types of reactions are seen with insect allergy?
Reactions can result from either direct tactile stimulation of the insect, pain or irritation from
insect bite/sting, or from an allergic reaction triggered by insect antigens (substances capable of
eliciting an allergic reaction). Behaviors triggered by insects can include pruritus, irmitation, or
restlessness. Other clinical manifestations include those resulting from allergic reactions: urticaria
(hives), angioedema (regional swelling), anaphylaxis (uncommon to rarely seen cases), and inflam-
mation (often evidenced by pruritus, erythema and warm skin). Allergic reactions may be
localized to the area where the insect exposure occurred, or may be seen as systemic reactions.
Specific diseases that may result from insect exposure include eosinophilic furunculosis of the
face and feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. More difficult to classify nonspecific clinical signs
132
Insects
24. What are the common diseases transmitted by ticks?
Ticks are responsible for transmitting several rickettsial, bacterial, and viral diseases and can
also cause tick paralysis. Ehrlichia canis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, anaplasmosis, Babesia,
tularemia, and St. Louis encephalitis may also be encountered. Species of Ixodes ticks transmit
Borrelia spp., the bacterium responsible for causing Lyme disease.
25. What are the clinical symptoms associated with venomous spider bites?
Brown recluse spider bites are frequently associated with pain and tissue necrosis. It is
difficult if not impossible to prove the true etiology of many lesions resulting from spider bites.
Risk factors for potential exposure may help to rule in spider bites as a cause of the necrosis. It
is advisable to collect a biopsy skin sample from affected tissues. Important differential diagnoses
include other venomous creatures such as snakes, scorpions, and lizards as well as caustic,
chemical, or thermal burn, vasculitis, bacterial pathogens, and adverse drug reactions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Greene CE, Breitschwerdt EB: Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever, and typhus. In Greene CE (ed): Infectious
diseases of the dog and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders, pp 155-165.
Neer TM: Ehrlichiosis. In Greene CE (el): Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1998,
WB Saumders, pp 139-147.
Sloss MW, Kemp RL: Mites and ticks of the skin and intemal organs. In Veterinary clinicat parasitology, ed 5. Ames,
Ia, 1978, Iowa State University Press, pp 146-164.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Parasitic skin disease. In: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 423-516
17. INSECTS
Cecilia A. Friberg, DVM, DACVD
1. What is an insect?
more than 800,000 species. More specifically they have three body segments and three pairs of
legs, although some insects have lost one or two pairs of legs and replaced them with wings (for
example, cockroaches, ladybugs, ants, bees, wasps, moths, butterflies, fleas, flies of all kinds, and
beetles). Some of the other chapters address dermatosis related to insects such as fleas, other
and flea allergy dermatitis.
2. What types of reactions are seen with insect allergy?
Reactions can result from either direct tactile stimulation of the insect, pain or irritation from
insect bite/sting, or from an allergic reaction triggered by insect antigens (substances capable of
eliciting an allergic reaction). Behaviors triggered by insects can include pruritus, irmitation, or
restlessness. Other clinical manifestations include those resulting from allergic reactions: urticaria
(hives), angioedema (regional swelling), anaphylaxis (uncommon to rarely seen cases), and inflam-
mation (often evidenced by pruritus, erythema and warm skin). Allergic reactions may be
localized to the area where the insect exposure occurred, or may be seen as systemic reactions.
Specific diseases that may result from insect exposure include eosinophilic furunculosis of the
face and feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. More difficult to classify nonspecific clinical signs
Insects
133
such as restlessness and itching can be confused with other types of allergic disorders such as
food allergy and atopy, or even bacterial and fungal infections.
 3. Should insects be expected to be found in conjunction with the allergic reaction?
find one. A very small number of insects or small amount of antigen may be sufficient to trigger
an allergic reaction in a sensitized animal. In these cases the insects may not be seen. Many cases
of insect allergy are only tentatively diagnosed, and further evidence for the diagnosis is based
on response to insecticidal therapy, that is, when insecticidal control measures are taken the
Teactions are minimized, and symptoms return when these measures are stopped or reduced.
4.Do the insects always have to bite to cause allergies?
Not necessarily. Non-biting insects such as cockroaches, moths, and flies may cause allergies
by other mechanisms. Body parts or shed material from the insects may serve as environmental
or direct cutaneous absorption)
Many studies of allergies in humans have shown reactions to cockroaches and caddis fly
detected in rare cases of occupational allergies. In entomologists, occupational arthropod
dermatitis may occur in as many as one third of workers.
These studies have not been replicated in dogs and cats, so the definitive cause and effect is
still speculative. However, because of their inquisitive nature in chasing "bugs,” dogs and cats
 may have higher exposure rates than humans.
5. Can insect allergies be controlled by using insecticides and insect repellents?
Insecticides and repellents may help with allergies resulting from insect bites. If allergies are
due to inhalation of insects or contact with insect parts, then repellents and insecticides may not
be as helpful. Also, treating one time is rarely enough to solve the problem. Insecticides and
repellents have a finite functional time span and need to be reapplied to the pet and environment
on a regular basis.
6. Can the topical spot-on products be used to control insects?
Several types of these products are available on the market. Some have been well tested, and
others have very limited information. Fipronyl and imidocloprid are well-tested adulticides; the
insects must come into direct contact with these ingredients before the products work to kill the
reaction). Combination products, for example imidocloprid and permethrin, are new and may be
more helpful in preventing bites because the permethrin component has a repellent activity
7. How much do we really know about insect allergies in dogs and cats?
Flea allergy has been well studied, but allergies to other insects are less well understood.
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity in cats has also been well documented, but there is less information
available about allergies associated with non-biting insects. One study from California showed
that 5% of atopic dogs had reactions only to insects, and not to pollens, fleas, or dust mites
Clinical signs in these dogs resembled those of atopic dermatitis. Many studies have been done
in allergic humans to correlate insect antigens with allergic disease; however, these types of
studies have not yet been performed in cats and dogs.
8.  Do insect growth regulators (IGRs) have any effect on insects other than fleas?
This depends on where the insects are reproducing. These products affect the life stages
before the adult form. If IGRs are used in the areas where the development is occurming, then
134
Insects
ex ample, if the IGR is being used in the home and the mosquitoes are reproducing in some area
outside. Care must also be taken so that non-pes ky insects are not harmed. Not all insects are bad,
adheredto.
 9. Which diseases are most commonly seen in conjunction with insect transmission?
 Insects can transmit diseases as well as produce allergic disease. In the United States,
heartworm disease is the most widespread insect-borne disease in dogs. More recently West Nile
virus has emerged as a new, but still rare, insect-transmitted disease in companion animals. The
virus is obtained by mosquitoes feeding on infected wild birds. The infected mosquitoes then bite
and transmit the disease to humans and animals. Immunocompromised and sick animals are
likely to be at higher risk of clinical disease, but because this is a newly described disease in
domestic animals and is still rare, it has not yet been fully described.
10. How is pediculosis diagnosed?
·Pediculosis, lice infestation, may not always be easy to diagnose. Lice are contagious
among dogs, cats, and humans. Within the species, individual response to pediculosis may
vary considerably. Some individuals may appear asymptomatic (although there are
probably lice present), and others may appear with severe dermatitis. This variation
"asymptomatic" individuals, because the lice may be more easily identifiable on them.
· Diagnosis may also be diffcult, because the biting lice move very rapidly, and may be
difficult to find and capture. However, the sucking lice are slower and are easier to "catch
and identify." Acetate tape may be the easiest method for their capture, by actually adhering
them to the sticky surface of the tape. Identification can be done by visualization under
low power on a standard microscope. Often lice infestation can be indirectly diagnosed by
noting eggs cemented onto hairs. Cheyletiella mites also cement their eggs to the hair shafts,
so these may be confused. Eggs are cemented onto the proximal region of the hair shaft and
then move distally with the hair growth. This may be helpful as an indicator of treatment
success as fewer eggs are noted on the proximal portions of the hair (Figures 17-1 and 17-2).
Figure 1 7-1  Small lice eggs cemented onto hair shafts of a dog.
Insects
135
Figure 17-2 Microscopic view (10x) of these eggs.
Figure 17-3  Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity on the sparsely haired skin.
11. How long can lice survive off the host?
There are two classes of lice: biting and sucking. The sucking lice (Anoplura) are obligate
parasites that feed on their hosts by taking regular blood meals. These lice do not survive well off
the host more than 24-36 hours. The biting lice (Mallophaga) are not blood feeders—they feed
on dead skin and fragments of hair or feather. Adult life span can vary from I to several months.
Lice can be transferred by fomites (e.g, grooming equipment); direct contact with an infected
animal may not be necessary for the spread of lice.
12. How is mosquito bite hypersensitivity in cats diagnosed?
   s s  s       ss
tentative diagnosis. An affected cat is bitten by a mosquito and lesions proceed to develop at the
bite site. Lesions progress from wheals to papules to papulocrustous lesions. These lesions are
usually located on the face and pinna (since these are sparsely haired regions), but may occur on
any site where the mosquito bites, including the footpads. The lesions are variably pruritic among
individuals. An affected cat may redevelop lesions if bitten by mosquitoes in the future. Indoor-
only cats may also be affected if mosquitoes make their way into the horme (Figures 17-3 and 17-4).
136
Insects
Figure 17-4 Normal hair regrowth after recovery of same cat as in Figure 17-3.
13. How are insecticides used to control biting insects?
This depends on the insecticide. The only insecticides that are repellent are pyrethrins,
concentration needed to be effective. Pyrethroid-type insecticides are not stable in sunlight;
therefore, they need to be applied more frequently. Pyrethroids are classified into four generations
fore, its use in domestic animals is not encouraged. Insecticides should be reapplied according to
14. If only one animal in a group is affected, can an insect problem be ruled out?
Disorders relating to insects cannot be eliminated, especially because if that one animal is
hypersensitive to the insects, very little exposure may be necessary to produce clinical signs. The
Tole of the other animals may be very important because if they are sustaining or harboring insects
(for example, the nonallergic dog may be a source of fleas, yet have few if any clinical signs
because it is not hypersensitive to flea bites). In cases where other animals harbor insects, the
clinical signs of the affected animal will not subside unless ALL the animals in the group are
treated. This scenario extends to insects other than fleas and should be kept in mind. The allergic
animal may also not have the insects easily identifiable (findable) because very small numbers
may cause the hyper-reactive skin.
15. What if the owners will not believe that insect hypersensitivity is the problem and are
unwilling to follow through with therapy?
Owners may be very difficult to convince of the importance of insecticide therapy because
they may not be willing to believe there is a problem unless they see large numbers of insects.
Some owners are also intimidated by the amount of work and cost involved in needing to treat all
animals, especially if there are several in the household, as well as the environment which may
also need to be treated. The importance of thorough treatment cannot be overemphasized. As with
all allergies, elimination of contact with the offending antigen is the ideal, yet often unattainable
goal. In the case of insect hypersensitivity, this may actually be attainable, but if therapeutic trials
are not complete and thorough, then this disease may go undiagnosed and the owners may end
Helminth Dermatoses
137
up spending large amounts of money on incorrect diagnoses. On the other hand, if insecticide
control is done properly, and response is favorable, then this may be a simple management tool
for their pet.
Some owners may understand this once it is explained to them. Another less conventional
approach may be to explain to the owner that they may be right, that insect hypersensitivity may
not be the problem, but that the only way that they can prove this is to treat the pets and the
environment thoroughly and thereby prove that insects were not the problem.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Buerger RG.: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity disorders of dogs and cats. In: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xl!
small animat practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 631-634.
Griffin CE: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity. In: Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald IM (eds): Current
veterinary dermatology, St Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 133-137.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 486-490, 635-642
Sousa CA, Halliwell REW: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XI): the relationship between
arthropod hypersensitivity and atopic dematitis in the dog, Vet Immunot Immunopathot 81:233-237, 2001.
Campbell NA, Reece JB: Essenniat biology, San Francisco, 2001, Benjamin Cummings, pp 366-369.
18. HELMINTH DERMATOSES
Randall C. Thomas, DVM, DACVD
1. What are helminth dermatoses?
Helminths are worm-like parasites that include the cestodes (flat or tapeworms) and
nematodes (roundworms). These parasites may be common parasites of the dog and cat, but they
are uncommon causes of skin disease. Most cases of helminth dermatoses in the dog and cat
as a hypersensitivity reaction to the parasite.
2. What is dracunculiasis?
 Dracunculiasis is primarily known as a disease of humans living in rural North Africa and
 India. Dracuncutus medinensis is the species that primarily affects humans, although it has also
been reported to occur in dogs, horses, cattle, and other mammals. Dracuncufus insignis is a
common parasite of raccoons and mink in North America. It has occasionally been reported to
infest domestic dogs and other mammals.
3.What are the signs of dracunculiasis in the dog?
Infected dogs may present with single or multiple nodules on the limbs, ventral thorax and
abdomen, and head. These nodules may be pruritic or painful, and usually abscess or develop a
draining fistula over time. Generalized urticaria and pruritus or pyrexia may develop before
fistula formation. Adult female worms can sometimes be seen within or protruding from the
ulcerative lesion (Figure 18-1).
4. How do dogs become infested with D. insignis?
The intermediate host of D. insignis is a small crustacean copepod of the genus Cycfops
These crustaceans have a wide distribution in fresh water. The crustacean ingests first-stage larvae
Helminth Dermatoses
137
up spending large amounts of money on incorrect diagnoses. On the other hand, if insecticide
control is done properly, and response is favorable, then this may be a simple management tool
for their pet.
Some owners may understand this once it is explained to them. Another less conventional
approach may be to explain to the owner that they may be right, that insect hypersensitivity may
not be the problem, but that the only way that they can prove this is to treat the pets and the
environment thoroughly and thereby prove that insects were not the problem.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Buerger RG.: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity disorders of dogs and cats. In: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xl!
small animat practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 631-634.
Griffin CE: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity. In: Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald IM (eds): Current
veterinary dermatology, St Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 133-137.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 486-490, 635-642
Sousa CA, Halliwell REW: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (XI): the relationship between
arthropod hypersensitivity and atopic dematitis in the dog, Vet Immunot Immunopathot 81:233-237, 2001.
Campbell NA, Reece JB: Essenniat biology, San Francisco, 2001, Benjamin Cummings, pp 366-369.
18. HELMINTH DERMATOSES
Randall C. Thomas, DVM, DACVD
1. What are helminth dermatoses?
Helminths are worm-like parasites that include the cestodes (flat or tapeworms) and
nematodes (roundworms). These parasites may be common parasites of the dog and cat, but they
are uncommon causes of skin disease. Most cases of helminth dermatoses in the dog and cat
as a hypersensitivity reaction to the parasite.
2. What is dracunculiasis?
 Dracunculiasis is primarily known as a disease of humans living in rural North Africa and
 India. Dracuncutus medinensis is the species that primarily affects humans, although it has also
been reported to occur in dogs, horses, cattle, and other mammals. Dracuncufus insignis is a
common parasite of raccoons and mink in North America. It has occasionally been reported to
infest domestic dogs and other mammals.
3.What are the signs of dracunculiasis in the dog?
Infected dogs may present with single or multiple nodules on the limbs, ventral thorax and
abdomen, and head. These nodules may be pruritic or painful, and usually abscess or develop a
draining fistula over time. Generalized urticaria and pruritus or pyrexia may develop before
fistula formation. Adult female worms can sometimes be seen within or protruding from the
ulcerative lesion (Figure 18-1).
4. How do dogs become infested with D. insignis?
The intermediate host of D. insignis is a small crustacean copepod of the genus Cycfops
These crustaceans have a wide distribution in fresh water. The crustacean ingests first-stage larvae
138
Helminth Dermatoses
Figure 18-1Adult Dracuncutus insignis being extracted from cutaneous nodule on a dog. (Courtesy
Rhonda D. Pinckney, DVM, PhD, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis.)
that have been released into the water. The larvae molt twice within the copepod to become
infective third-stage larvae. Dogs become infected by drinking water containing the Cyciops. The
infective larvae are released in the gastrointestinal tract and migrate throughout the body.
5. How long does it take for the dog to develop clinical disease?
Development of larvae into adult Dracuncuius is thought to take 8-14 months. Once
fertilized, the females migrate to the subcutaneous tissues and form nodular lesions with shallow
larvae into the water, completing the life cycle.
6.How is the diagnosis of dracunculiasis made in the dog?
Differential diagnoses for subcutaneous nodules include abscesses or other bacterial
infection, foreign body, fungal infection, immune-mediated nodular diseases, parasitic dermatoses,
and neoplasia. Visualization of the adult female within the nodule is highly suggestive. Cytology
from the nodule or draining tract reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation with first-stage larvae.
The larvae may be up to 700 μm long, have striated cuticles, and have a prominent long and
pointed tail (Figure 18-2). Visualization of an esophagus within the larvae distinguishes them
from the microflaria of Diroflaria spp. or Dipetalonema spp. Histologic examination of excised
nodules will reveal pyogranulomatous to eosinophilic, nodular dermatitis and panniculitis with
both adult and larval parasites.
7. What is the suggested treatment for dracunculiasis in the dog?
Surgical excision of individual nodules is the treatment of choice. Although numerous
medical treatments have been investigated, none has proven reliable. In one dog with marked
D. insignis infestation, treatment with ivermectin, fenbendazole, and metronidazole did not result
in resolution of the infection. A study of Dracuncufus-infected ferrets indicated that diethyl-
carbamazine, albendazole, ivermectin, and trichlorfon were all ineffective medical treatments.
8. What is Pelodera dermatitis?
Pelodera strongyfoides is a free-living nematode, found in damp soil and decaying organic
debris. The larvae of these parasites are able to invade the skin of animals by direct contact. In
general, this is a disease of poor management. Dogs infested with Pelodera are kept in unclean
environments (usually on straw) that foster development of this parasite
HelminthDermatoses
139
Figure 18-2 Larva of Dracunculus insignis. Note striated cuticle, esophagus, and prominent tail. (Courtesy
Rhonda D. Pinckney, DVM, PhD, College of Veterinary Medicine,University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis.)
unknown.
9.What are the signs of Pelodera dermatitis?
Dogs infested with Pelodera (also called rhabditic dermatitis) typically have an erythematous
dermatitis with papules and traumatic alopecia. Pruritus is variable, but can be intense. Lesions
occur in the contact areas of the body, including the ventral abdomen and thorax, feet, legs, and
inguinal region. Secondary infection is often present (Figure 18-3).
10. How is Pelodera dermatitis diagnosed in the dog?
Pelodera dermatitis may be suspected based on the presence of appropriate clinical signs in
source. Other differential diagnoses include contact allergic or irritant dermatitis, sarcoptic
140
Helminth Dermatoses
mange, or other helminth dermatoses. Larvae can be visualized on skin scrapings from clinically
affected areas. Histologic findings include eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis with the
presence of nematode larvae within hair follicles and dermal pyogranulomas (Figure 18-4).
Figure 18-4Petodera larva within hair follicle in dog from Figure 18-3.
11.What is the treatment of Pelodera dermatitis?
This disease is easily treated once diagnosis is made. The parasite is responsive to scabicidal
dips, such as phosmet (Paramite) or lime sulfur. Ivermectin may also be an effective treatment.
Treatment of secondary bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis is also necessary. Lastly, but most
importantly, contaminated bedding materials must be removed from the environment to prevent
reinfestation.
12. Is Pelodera dermatitis a zoonotic disease?
Pelodera dermatitis has been reported to be a possible zoonotic disease, although this is
extremely rare. Because this is a disease of poor sanitation, it is just as likely that humans are
infected by contact with the infested environment rather than via direct infection from a dog.
13. What is hookworm dermatitis?
Hook worm dermatitis is a cutaneous reaction to the infestation and migration of the common
hookworms of the dog, Ancylostoma braziliense, A. caninum, and/or Uncinaria stenocephala.
Because these are normal parasites of the dog and cat, visible reaction to skin penetration is
usually absent. In some cases, a clinically evident dermatitis will develop. Cutaneous lesions may
hookworm dermatitis Lesions start as a pruritic, papular dermatitis that may progress to a chronic
dermatosis if not recognized and treated.
14. How are dogs and cats exposed to hookworm larvae?
Dogs and cats may be exposed to hookworms by ingestion of or cutaneous penetration by
infective larvae. Hook worm dermatitis results from direct cutaneous contact with larvae-infested
soil. The larvae migrate through the skin via mechanical undulation. Skin lesions are thought to
result from a hypersensitivity to migrating larvae. Hookworim dermatitis is generally a disease of
poor sanitation and management. In most cases, dogs are kenneled on grass or dirt that is infested
with infective larvae. Sanitary conditions are typically poot.
Helminth Dermatoses
141
15. What are the clinical signs of hookworm dermatitis?
Hook worm dermatitis is a pruritic, papular dermatitis that is usually confined to the contact
areas of the body. These include the ventral abdomen and thorax, feet, legs, and inguinal regions.
With progression, there is generalized erythema and alopecia in clinically affected areas. The skin
over pressure points may become erythematous and lichenified. Initially, the footpads and inter-
digital spaces may have a soft, spongy appearance, but hyperkeratosis occurs with chronicity.
Paronychia and onychodystrophy, and interphalangeal arthritis may occur in chronic cases.
16. How is a diagnosis of hookworm dermatitis confirmed?
The distribution of lesions, history of poor management conditions, and presence of
hookworm eggs on fecal examination are highly suggestive of this disease. Differential diagnoses
include contact allergy or irritant dermatitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, Pelodera or other
helminth dermatoses. Migrating larvae are rarely seen on skin scrapings. Histologic lesions
Tracts left by migrating larvae may be evident, but the larvae themselves are rarely found.
17. What is the treatment of hookworm dermatitis?
As with Pelodera dermatitis, this is primarily a disease of poor management, so efforts
should be made to improve the overall hygiene of the kennel area. Routine use of anthelmintics
is helpful in decreasing the parasite burden in the environment. Secondary infections should be
treated with oral and topical antimicrobial agents. Chronic foot and claw lesions may require
long-term management. With appropriate anthelmintic therapy and removal from the infested
18. What steps can be taken to remove hookworm larvae from the grass or soil?
Ideally, dogs should be removed from areas with larvae-infested soil. If that isn't possible,
the kennel/run area should be kept clean and dry, and feces should be removed daily to prevent
reinfestation. Occasional treatment of soil or gravel with 10 pounds of borax powder per 100 ft?
may decrease the larva burden. This, however, will also kill vegetation.
19. Is hookworm dermatitis a zoonotic disease?
,  n s     s  s 
hookworm larvae. Ancyfostoma braziliense is the most common cause of CLM in humans, but
A. caninum, Uncinaria stenocephata, and many other helminth parasites can cause migratory lesions
in humans. CLM can be prevented by ensuring that pets are properly dewormed, and by avoiding
direct contact with soil contaminated with dog or cat feces.
20.  The clinical signs of Pelodera dermatitis and hookworm dermatitis seem similar. How
canI differentiate these two diseases?
First of all, both of these disorders are uncommon to rare. Other ventrally oriented, pruritic
dermatoses, such as contact allergy/irritant dermatitis, sarcoptic mange, and atopy should be
higher on your list of differential diagnoses. Both Pefodera and hookworm dermatitis are diseases
disorders. With Pelodera, a deep skin scrape should reveal the larvae. Larvae are almost never
index of suspicion for hookworm dermatitis.
21. Is it common to see skin lesions associated with heartworm disease in the dog?
Skin lesions associated with infestation by Diroflaria immitis are rare. Details of the life
cycle of this common canine parasite can be found elsewhere, but adult worms are typically
found within the heart and lungs, and larvae within the circulation. There are rare reports of adult
142
Helminth Dermatoses
D. immitis causing a nodular dermatitis in the dog. In addition, dogs with circulating microfilaria
may rarely develop cutaneous lesions, most likely due to a hypersensitivity reaction.
22. What are the signs of cutaneous dirofilariasis?
the head and limbs, although generalized lesions can develop. These lesions are generally poorly
responsive to symptomatic, antipruritic treatment.
23. How is cutaneous dirofilariasis diagnosed?
may reveal microfilaria, but may also only show a nonspecific hypersensitivity reaction.
24. What is the treatment of choice for cutaneous dirofilariasis?
Lesions generally resolve following appropriate treatment for heartworm disease. Treatment
25. Are there other filarial nematodes that may cause cutaneous lesions?
There are other filarial nematodes that may affect dogs in North America. Besides D. immitis,
canine infections due to Acanthocheilonema reconditum (Dipetalonema reconditum)and
Onchocerca spp. have been reported. A. reconditum has not been reported to cause cutaneous
lesions. Onchocerca has been rarely reported to cause lesions in the periorbital tissues of the dog.
In one recent report, ten dogs from the western United States were described with microfilaria-
associated dermatitis. Most of these dogs tested negative for D. immitis and A. reconditum. It was
concluded that a filarioid other than these organisms was the cause. In most cases, the dogs
responded to ivermectin therapy.
26. Are there other helminth organisms that may cause dermatitis in the dog or cat?
Certainly, there are many other helminths that may rarely cause skin problems in the dog or
cat. Taenia crassiceps, Habronema spp., Lagochilascaris major and many other organisms have
been reported to occur. If single or few nodular lesions occur, then surgical excision is indicated.
      a     s
therapy should be attempted.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beyer TA, Pinckney RD, Cooley AJ: Massive Dracunculus insignis infection in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:366
368,1999
Giovengo SL: Canine dracunculiasis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 15:726-729, 1993.
Hargis AM, Lewis TP, Duclos DD, et al: Demmatitis associated with microfilariae (Filarioidea) in 10 dogs, Vet
Dermatot 10:95-107, 1999.
Irizarry-Rovira AR, Bough D, Berg D, et al: Aspirate of an elbow mass in a Beagle dog, Vet Clin Pathot 29:129-131,
2000.
Lucchina LC, wilson ME: Cysticercosis and other helminthic infections. In:Fizpatrick's dermatotogy in general
medicine, ed 5. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 2624-2625.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Parasitic skin diseases. In: Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 423-516.
Sosna CB, Medleau L: Extemal parasites: life cycles, transmmission, and the pathogenesis of disease, Vet Med 87:538-
547,1992.
Section V
Infectious Skin Diseases
19. BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. How do the microbiota on normal skin contribute to the antibacterial defense
mechanisms of the skin?
The skin is normally colonized by commensal bacteria, yeast, and parasites. The bacteria are
located in the stratum corneum of the epidermis and in the infundibulum of hair follicles. The
density and composition of bacteria present depends on a variety of factors, such as the presence
of water, nutrients, lipi ds, and the skin surface pH. Resident bacteria compete with other organisms
other microorganisms.
 2. Regarding the normal bacterial inhabitants of the skin, what is the difference between
resident and transient bacteria?
Both resident and transient bacteria can be cultured from normal skin. Resident bacteria
have the ability to live and multiply on the skin, whereas transient bacteria do not multiply on the
skin. Therefore, resident bacteria tend to persist on the skin for long periods, whereas transient
bacteria are only carried on the skin for a short time.
3. List bacterial species found on normal canine and feline skin, and identify them as
residents or transients.
Please refer to Table 19-1.
Table 19-1Bacteria Found on Healthy Skin and Hair
RESIDENT BACTERIA
TRANSIENT BACTERIA
Canine
SKIN
SKIN
Micrococcus spp.
Staphylococcus intermedius
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
E.coli
S. epidermidis, S. xylosus
Proteus mirabilis
β-hemolytic streptococci
Corynebacterium spp.
Clostridium spp.
Bacillus spp.
Propionibacterium acnes
Pseudomonas spp.
Acinetobacter spp.
 Gram-negative aerobes
HAIR
Micrococcus spp.
Bacillus spp.
Continued
143
144
Bacterial Infections
Table 19-11
Bacteria Found on Healthy Skin and HairCont'd
RESIDENT BACTERIA
TRANSIENT BACTERIA
HAIR
Gram-negative aerobes (proximal)
Staphyfococcus intermedius (distal)
HAIR FOLLICLE
Micrococcus spp.
P.acnes
Streptococcus spp.
Bacillus spp.
S. intermedius
Feline
SKIN
SKIN
Micrococci spp.
β-hemolytic streptococci
 Coagulase-negative staphylococci
E.coli
S.simulans
P. mirabilis
β-hemolytic streptococci
Pseudomonas spp.
Acinetobacter spp.
Alcaligenes spp.
S.aureus
Bacillus spp.
S. intermedius
Staphylococcus spp.
4. When you find bacteria on the skin, how do you know if it is part of the normal
microbiota or if it is causing an infection?
By definition, commensal bacteria that are colonizing the skin do not induce a host reaction
Therefore, isolation of bacteria from intact lesions (e.g., pustules) and the identification of
phagocytosed bacteria are evidence of an infection.
5. Name the most common cutaneous bacterial pathogen of dogs.
Staphyfococcus intermedius—a coagulase-positive staphylococcus species is most common.
6. Compared to dogs, bacterial folliculitis is uncommon in cats. What bacterial skin
disease is most common in cats?
Subcutaneous abscesses are the most common bacterial infection in cats.
 7. Differentiate between a primary and a secondary bacterial skin infection.
A primary infection is an infection that occurs in otherwise normal skin. Primary infections
are uncommon in small animals. Secondary infections are much more common, and are the result
of cutaneous, immunologic, or metabolic abnormalities.
Secondary infections tend to recur if the underlying problem is not identified and corrected.
8.  Define and give examples of surface, superficial, and deep bacterial infections.
· In surface bacterial infections, the bacteria secondarily colonize lesions present on the
skin surface. Ex amples include moist pyotraumatic dermatitis and intertrigo.
· In superficial bacterial infections, the bacterial infection invol ves the skin and hair follicle
epithelium. Examples include impetigo, superficial bacterial folliculitis, dermatophilosis,
and mucocutaneous pyoderma.
· In deep bacterial infections, the bacterial infection involves the dermis and subcutaneous
tissue. Examples include deep folliculitis and furunculosis, cellulitis, pyotrauimatic folliculitis
and furunculosis, acral lick furunculosis, and subcutaneous abscesses.
Bacterial Infections
145
9. Describe the clinical appearance of moist pyotraumatic dermatitis lesions (a.k.a. "hot
spots').
Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis lesions are well-demarcated areas of erythema, alopecia, and
moist dermatitis with proteinaceous exudate in the center of the lesion (Figure 19-1). Hair on the
lesion margins sticks to exudative areas. These lesions tend to be painful.
Figure 19-1 This is a German Shepherd Dog with moist pyotraumatic dermatitis on the lateral thigh.
Note the well-demarc ated area of alopecia, erythema, and crust.
10. What is the cause and pathogenesis of moist pyotraumatic dermatitis?
Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis occurs when an animal traumatizes an area in an attempt to
alleviate pain or pruritus. The self-trauma can be triggered by many things, including allergic
disorders, ectoparasites, otitis externa, hair mats, and musculoskeletal disorders. The most common
cause of moist pyotraumatic dermatitis is flea allergy dermatitis. Other predisposing factors
include hot weather and a dense hair coat.
This self-induced trauma causes alopecia, inflammation, exudation, erosion, and ulceration.
Moist pyotraumatic lesions then become secondarily colonized with bacteria, most commonly S.
intermedius. Lesions of moist pyotraumatic dermatitis have an acute onset and can occur within
several hours.
11. Propose a treatment plan for lesions of moist pyotraumatic dermatitis.
·Clip andclean the area.
· Because these lesions are painful, sedation may be required.
·Clip hair away from the lesions.
·Remove exudate and debris with a mild antiseptic, such as chlorhexidine or povidone
iodine.
1% hydrocortisone)
· Stop the self-trauma. This requires identification and elimination of the underlying cause
of pruritus or pain. For example, flea control is indicated for an animal with flea allergy
dermatitis.
146
Bacterial Infections
 Prescribe a topical medication containing both an anti biotic and a mild steroid
· An Elizabethan collar may be necessary to prevent further self-trauma
12. What is the significance of “satellite’ papules at the margin of a moist pyotraumatic
dermatitis lesion?
If papules are present at the periphery of the lesion, a diagnosis of moist pyotraumatic
folliculitis is more appropriate than moist pyotraumatic dermatitis. The papules signify a deeper
bacterial infection that requires treatment with systemic antibiotics in addition to the management
steps listed previously.
13. What is intertrigo?
Intertrigo is an inflammatory dermatitis that occurs in "skin folds,” or areas where the skin
surface is in apposition. The presence of skin folds is a breed characteristic in some animals (e.g.
Chinese Shar Pei, Persian cat). Skin folds may also be the result of obesity or chronic skin
inflammation.
14. What is the pathogenesis of intertrigo?
inflammation. Additionally, skin folds trap moisture (glandular secretions, tears, saliva, urine),
leading to cutaneous maceration. The presence of inflammation and moisture allows secondary
colonization of the area with bacteria and Malassezia spp. yeast. These organisms do not invade
the viable epidermis, but produce metabolic breakdown products that are malodorous and
irritating to the skin.
15. List different types of skin folds.
·Body fold (Chinese Shar Pei, Basset Hound, achondrodysplastic dogs, obesity)
· Facial fold (brachycephalic breeds)
· Lip fold (St. Bernard, American Cocker Spaniel)
·Vulvar fold (obesity)
●Tail fold (corkscrew tails)
16. How do you diagnose intertrigo?
Owners often report that the area is malodorous. Physical examination of the skin fold reveals
fold. Exudate can be collected with a swab, acetate tape, or by making an impression smear with
a glass slide. Cytologic studies of the exudate may reveal bacteria, yeast, or inflammatory cells.
In some animals, skin folds lead to other disorders, for example, facial and nasal folds may
cause corneal ulceration. Also, vulvar folds may predispose animals to ascending urinary tract
infections.
17. What is the treatment for intertrigo?
· Surgical correction of the fold can be curative, but this is often undesirable (e.g., skin
folds that are characteristic of thebreed).
·Weight loss for obese animals
exudate and to decrease moisture.
· Topical antimicrobial agents are useful to decrease secondary colomization. Examples
include Malaseb wipes (2% chlorhexidine, 2% miconazole), benzoyl peroxide gels, and
mupirocin ointment.
· If the cause of the fold cannot be corrected, topical therapy should be used for long-term
maintenance of infections.
Bacterial Infections
147
Figure 19-2This is an English Bulldog with facial intertrigo. Note the erythema and purulent exudate on
the surface of the lesion.
18. What is impetigo?
Impetigo is a superficial bacterial infection of sparsely haired areas (e.g., inguinal, axillary)
in puppies, and of the dorsal head and neck in kittens. The lesions are nonpainful, nonpruritic,
small pustules that do not invol ve the hair follicles.
19. Describe the pathogenesis of impetigo in puppies and kittens.
Impetigo occurs in animals younger than 1 year of age. In most cases, the infection is
secondary, but an underlying cause cannot always be identified. Predisposing causes include
endoparasitism, ectoparasitism, poor nutrition, viral infections, trauma, and dirty environments.
 In cats, overzealous mouthing of the kitten by the queen causes trauma and maceration of the skin.
 20. Name the species of bacteria most often associated with impetigo in puppies and in
kittens.
Puppies: S. intermedius
Kittens:Pasteurella mutocida,β-hemolytic streptococci
21. How do you treat impetigo?
·Many cases resolve spontaneously, thus simple cleansing may be sufficient.
148
Bacterial Infections
· Identify and correct predisposing factors.
· Topical therapies:
-Astringents: 2-5% aluminum acetate
- Antimicrobial agents: mupirocin ointment, medicated shampoo (e.g-, chlorhexidine,
ethyl lactate, benzoyl peroxide)
· Systemic antibiotic therapy is not usually indicated unless the animal does not respond to
'sooey Sursodsipeid go uo gnjosi sun pue Xdeioun leoidon
22. How does bullous impetigo differ from impetigo?
The lesion of bullous impetigo is a large, flaccid pustule. Bullous impetigo is generally seen
in adult animals, and its presence suggests that the animal is immune suppressed or has a con-
current endocrinopathy (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus). Bullous impetigo is usually
associated with S. intermedius, but Escherichia cofi and Pseudomonas spp. have also been
identified. Both topical and systemic antibacterial therapies are warranted.
23. Define superficial bacterial folliculitis.
Superficial bacterial folliculitis is a bacterial infection of the superficial portion of the hair
follicle and the adjacent epi dermis.
24. What species of bacteria is most commonly associated with superficial bacterial folliculitis
in dogs? List other species of bacteria that can also be involved.
Most common bacterial species: S. intermedius
Others: E. coli, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas spp.
 25. What are the three most common causes of folliculitis in dogs?
·Staphylococci
·Dermatophytes
·Demodex mites
26. List predisposing causes of canine superficial bacterial folliculitis.
·Dermatophytosis
·Ectoparasites (Demodex, Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella,fleas)
·Endocrinopathies (hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism)
·Follicular inflammation (sebaceous adenitis)
·Hypersensitivity disorders (parasitic, environmental, dietary)
● Immunodeficiencies (hereditary, neoplasia, glucocorticoids)
·Keratinization disorders
·Trauma
· Dirty environment
·Local iritants
27. Describe the clinical signs of canine superficial bacterial folliculitis.
The primary lesions are small follicular pustules or papules. Because the pustules are fragile,
they tend to be transient and are not always seen. The secondary lesions include epidermal
collarettes, crusts, alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and excori ation (Figure 19-3). Pruritus is variable,
and the severity is often dependent on the underlying cause.
Short-haired dogs may initially present with papules and crusts, leading to raised tufts of
hair and a "bumpy” feeling. As the hair falls out of the infected areas, there are circular areas of
in long-haired dogs may be a dull hair coat and increased shedding. Some breeds, such as Collies
and Shetland Sheepdogs, present with large, coalescing epidermal collarettes that result in large
areas of alopecia.
Bacterial Infections
149
papules, epidermal collarettes, and crusts.
The distribution of superficial bacterial folliculitis lesions usually reflects the underlying cause.
For example, a truncal distribution of lesions is commonly seen in dogs with endocrinopathies.
28. What tests should be performed to diagnose canine superficial bacterial folliculitis?
· Physical examination should reveal consistent lesions (follicular pustules and papules,
epidermal collarettes, crusts, alopecia).
· Cytologic evaluation should reveal bacteria and inflammatory cells. Also look for the
concurrent presence of Malassezia spp. yeast.
· Skin scrapings to investigate the possibility of ectoparasites.
·Dermatophyte test medium culture to evaluate for dermatophytosis.
· Cutaneous bacterial culture for identification of bacterial species and antibiotic
susceptibi lity.
·Biopsies to confirm the diagnosis and to evaluate for underlying causes.
29. When is a cutaneous bacterial culture indicated?
In most cases of superficial bacterial folliculitis, bacterial cultures are not necessary. This is
because most superficial bacterial infections are caused by S. intermedius, which has a
predictable antibiotic susceptibility profle. Therefore, empirical therapy is usually successful.
Cultures are indicated when:
·There is cytologic evidence of a mixed bacterial infection.
● The dog is not improving with the administration of an appropriate antibiotic.
30. What additional tests should be considered in a dog that has been diagnosed with
superficial bacterial folliculitis?
· Deep and superficial skin scrapes to rule out ectoparasites, particularly Demodex
· Fungal culture to rule out dermatophytosis
· Complete blood cell count, biochemistry, and urinalysis to screen for metabolic disease
and endocrinopathies
·Thyroid hormone levels or pituitary-adrenal axis testing if indicated
150
Bacterial Infections
· Intradermal skin testing and/or allergen-specific serum IgE testing for environmental
allergies
 Food trials to evaluate for food hypersensitivity
 Skin biopsies with histopathology to evaluate for immune-mediated diseases (pemphigus
foliaceus), follicular dysplasias, sebaceous adenitis, etc.
31. Outline a treatment plan for a dog with superficial bacterial folliculitis.
· The dog should receive systemic antibiotics for a minimum of 21 days, and at least 7 days
after clinical resolution. An antibiotic with efficacy against S. intermedius (Box 19-1) should
be selected. Penicillins are poor empirical choices for the treatment of superficial bacterial
folliculitis in dogs because S. intermedius produces penicillinases.
Box 19-1  Empirical antibiotics for S. intermedius
Erythromycin 10-15 mg/kg orally every 8 hr
Lincomycin 20 mg/kg orally every 12 hr
Clindamycin 5 mg/kg orally every 12 hr
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 15-30 mg/kg orally every 12 hr
Oxacillin 22 mg/kg orally every 8 hr
Cephalexin 22-30 mg/kg orally every 12 hr
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 15-22 mg/kg orally every 12 hr
Enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg per day orally (every 24 hours or divided every 12 hr)
· Shampoos and conditioners can increase the patient's comfort, speed the resolution of an
peroxide, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate) and conditioners (chlorhexidine) are available.
· Avoid corticosteroids. Corticosteroids suppress the immune system, predisposing the
animal to recurrence of the infection.
·Identify and correct the predisposing causes.
Educate the owner about the potential for recurrence of the infection, particularly if the
underlying causes of the infection are not identified and controlled.
32.  What should be done for animals with recurrent cases of superficial bacterial folliculitis?
· Make sure that the patient has received appropriate antibiotic therapy, including an
antibiotic effective against S. intermedius, the correct dosage, and the proper duration of
therapy. Additionally, investi gate owner compliance.
· If the infection never completely resolved with appropriate therapy, perform skin biopsies
and a bacterial culture and susceptibility testing.
· Ensure that a thorough search for underlying causes has been performed.
● Institute routine bathing with an antimicrobial shampoo.
· Consider using immunomodulators (efficacy is not well documented).
- S. aureus phage lysate (Staphage Lysate) 0.5 mL SC twice a week for 10-12 weeks,
then once every 7-14 days for maintenance therapy
-Propionibacterium acnes (Immunoregulin) IV twice a week for 2 weeks, then weekly
until the condition resolves, then monthly for maintenance therapy
-Human interferon alfa-2a (Roferon) 1000 IU/dog PO daily
 s
Levamisole 2.2 mg/kg orally every 48 hours
- Cimetidine 6-8 mg/kg orally three times a day
BacterialInfections
151
· Consider extended antibiotic regimens for animals that have failed to respond to adjunctive
therapies and the correction of underlying disorders. These regimens may increase the
risk of developing bacterial resistance
- Pulse-dose therapy is the use of antibiotics at a full dosage every other week.
- In low-dose continuous therapy, the antibiotic is given at a suboptimal dose (e.g., once
daily instead of twice daily).
33. What is the causative agent of dermatophilosis in small animals?
actinomycete that forms filaments (parallel rows of cocci) in tissues.
Dermatophilosis is rare in small animals, and the organism is thought to come from carrier
farm animals. The infectious zoospores are highly resistant, and can persist in crusts for years.
34. Explain the pathogenesis of dermatophilosis.
Moisture is very important in the pathogenesis of dermatophilosis; thus, the disease is rare
in dry climates. Conditions that predispose animals to Dermatophifus infections include cutaneous
trauma, maceration, inflammation, and other infections.
Moisture causes the release of infectious motile zoospores that are attracted to carbon
dioxide diffusing from the skin surface. These zoospores germinate and produce filaments that
invade the epidermis.
35. Describe the clinical signs of dermatophilosis.
bleeding ulcer underneath. In chronic cases, lesions include crusts, scale, alopecia, and hyperpig-
mentation. Usually, the lesions are distributed along the dorsum, but the face, ears, and feet may
also be affected.
36. How is dermatophilosis treated?
● Eliminate any factors that predispose to moisture or trauma
(      
37. What is the pathophysiology of furunculosis?
Furunculosis occurs when an infected hair follicle (folliculitis) ruptures, releasing hair shafts
and keratin into the dermis. The result is a foreign body reaction, including tissue eosinophilia
and a pyogranulomatous to granulomatous response.
38.  List predisposing causes of deep bacterial infections (folliculitis and furunculosis).
Adverse cutaneous drug eruptions, demodicosis and other ectoparasites, dermatophytosis,
endocrinopathies (hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism), foreign bodies, immune deficiency 01
pruritus from hypersensitivity disorders (inhalant, dietary, parasitic), or secondary to neoplasia.
39.What bacteria are associated with deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis?
S. intermedius is often involved in deep pyoderma, as well as Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp.,
andE.cotr
40. Describe the clinical signs of a deep folliculitis and furunculosis.
The lesions of deep folliculitis and furunculosis begin as superficial bacterial infections
(e.g., papules, pustules). When the infection breaks through the hair follicle, the lesions progress
152
Bacterial Infections
Figure 19-4This mixed-breed dog has deep folliculitis and furunculosis on the lateral aspect of the face.
Note the alopecia, erosions, and hemorrhagic crusts.
to furunculosis, hemorrhagic bullae, fistulas, and ulcers (Figure 19-4). In severe infections, tissue
s welling and cellulitis may be present. Pruritus is variable, and often reflects the underlying cause.
Deep folliculitis and furunculosis lesions are usually located on pressure points and on the
trunk (rump, thighs, dorsum, ventral abdomen). Additionally, the lesions may be isolated only to
 one area (nasal, muzzle, pedal, interdigital). Generalized lymphadenopathy is a frequent finding.
Some animals may also have a poor appetite, weight loss, and pyrexia. Bacteremia and sepsis are
potential systemic complications of a deep pyoderma.
41. List differential diagnoses for an animal with deep folliculitis and furunculosis.
·Parasites: demodicosis, others
·Fungal diseases: dermatophytosis, Malassezia, blastomycosis, sporotrichosis, cryptococcosis
· Immune-mediated diseases: pemphigus, lupus erythematosus, etc.
· Foreign bodies: suture or plant material
·Traumatic injuries: fights, gunshot pellets, etc.
42. What types or breeds of dogs are predisposed to developing pedal folliculitis and
furunculosis?
·Working or hunting dogs
· Dogs with psychogenic dermatitis: Poodles, terriers, German Shepherds
 Short-coated breeds (sterile pyogranulomas): English bulldogs, Dachshunds, Great
Danes, Boxers
· Flat foot shape: Pekinese, some terriers
43. What types or breeds of dogs are predisposed to developing pyotraumatic folliculitis
and furunculosis?
Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis tends to occur in long-coated breeds, for ex ample
Golden Retrievers and St. Bernards.
44. What types or breeds of dogs are predisposed to developing nasal folliculitis and
furunculosis?
 Nasal folliculitis and furunculosis tends to occur in dolichocephalic breeds, such as Collies
and German Shepher ds.
Bacterial Infections
153
45.  What are the age and breed predispositions for canine muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis?
Muzzle folliculitis (chin acne) is seen most often in young dogs with short coats. Breeds of
dogs commonly affected include Boxers, Doberman Pinschers, Great Danes, Mastiffs, English
Bulldogs, and Weimaraners.
46. What two qualities of a deep pyoderma lesion help determine the severity of the
disease?
·Size—larger lesions are more severe
·Color—darker red ("violaceous") lesions are more severe
47. List tests you would perform to diagnose deep folliculitis and furunculosis in a dog, and
procedures you would consider helpful in idenfifying the underlying cause.
· Physical ex amination reveals consistent lesions.
· Cytologic evaluation of pustules or purulent exudate should reveal neutrophils and
intracellular bacteria.
·Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing is indicated, particularly if there is a mixed
bacterial infection.
·Skin cytology for Malassezia spp. yeast
· Skin scrape for ectoparasites, particularly Demodex
·Fungal culture for dermatophytosis
· Skin biopsies and histopathology to confirm the diagnosis, evaluate for underlying disease,
and rule out neoplasia
· Complete blood cell count, biochemistry profle, and urinalysis to evaluate for underlying
metabolic disease
·Endocrine testing if indicated (thyroid testing, pituitary-adrenal axis tests)
· Immune function tests if indicated
48. Outline a treatment protocol for a dog with deep folliculitis and furunculosis.
· The dog should receive systemic antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity testing for a
minimum of 4-6 weeks, and for at least 3 weeks beyond clinical resolution.
· Lesions should be clipped and cleaned
· Topical therapy and whirlpool baths aid in the removal of crusts, exudate, and bacteria
(chlorhexidine, 2-5% aluminum acetate) or antimicrobial creams and ointments (benzoyl
peroxide, mupirocin).
·Avoid corticosteroids because they are immunosuppressive.
·Identify and correct the predisposing causes.
49. Deep folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis occur as a familial dermatosis in what
breed of dog?
German Shepherds and their crosses
50. Describe a cellulitis lesion.
Cellulitis is characterized by extensive, poorly demarcated tissue edema. The overlying skin
is sometimes devitalized (discolored, friable), and may slough.
Crepitance may occur if gas-producing bacteria (Clostridium spp., Bacteroides spp.) are
fever,malaise).
51. List aerobic and anaerobic bacteria commonly isolated from cellulitis lesions.
The most common aerobic organisms isolated are staphylococci. Occasionally other bacteria
are isolated, such as Pseudomonas spp. Tissue areas with low oxygen levels are predisposed
154
Bacterial Infections
to anaerobic infections. The most common anaerobic organisms isolated from cellulitis include
species of Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium,Porphyromonas, Clostridium,and
 52. Describe the clinical appearance of an abscess.
     d        5 
painful and commonly occur on the tail base, neck, and shoulders.
53. List common causes of abscesses and list aerobic and anaerobic bacteria that are often
isolated from abscesses.
Common causes of abscesses include traumatic wounds (especially bite or scratch wounds),
foreign bodies, and the extension of deep folliculitis and furunculosis. Immune suppression may
be a predisposing factor in some cases.
Common aerobic organisms involved in abscesses include P muftocida (bite wounds),
S. intermedius, and β-hemolytic streptococci. Common anaerobic organisms isolated from abscesses
include species of Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Clostridium,
Prevotella,and Actinomyces.
54. What is the pathophysiology of cutaneous abscess formation?
Bacteria are inoculated into the skin through a traumatic penetrating wound. The surface of
the wound heals, trapping the bacteria under the skin. As the bacteria proliferate, an abscess is formed.
55.What laboratory tests are indicated for cats with recurrent subcutaneous abscesses?
Feline leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus tests.
56. Name three differential diagnoses for cellulitis.
· Sterile panniculitis
· Mycobactenial infections
· Neoplasia
57. List several differential diagnoses for an abscess.
·Miscellaneous bacterial organisms: Nocardia spp, Yersinia pestis, mycobactenial infections,
Myoplasma spp.
●Fungal infections: cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, sporotrichosis, dermatophyte kerion
· Foreign bodies
· Sterile panniculitis
· Sterile granuloma
· Neoplasia
58. Outline a treatment plan for a subcutaneous abscess.
Systemic antibiotic therapy based on culture and susceptibility testing. It is important to
Antibiotics often used for aerobic organisms:
· Clavulamic acid 15-22 mg/kg orally twice daily
· Oxacillin 22 mg/kg orally three times daily
· Cephalexin 22-30 mg/kg orally twice daily
Antibiotics often used for anaerobic organisms:
+Metronidazole 25 mg/kg orally twice daily
· Chloramphenicol 50 mg/kg orally, intravenously, or subcutaneously three times daily
(dog), twice daily (cat)
·Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 15-22 mg/kg orally twice daily
Bacterial Infections
155
It is very important to provide drainage for focal abscesses. Surgical debridement is beneficial
for removing devitalized tissues and providing drainage for the exudate
Identify and correct predisposing factors if possible (neutering may help decrease roaming
and fighting behavior in male animals).
59. What species of bacteria is acid-fast?
Mycobactena
60. What is the causative agent of feline leprosy?
Mycobacterium lepraemurium
61. Describe the clinical signs of feline leprosy.
a variety of lesions including nodules, abscesses, plaques, draining tracts, and ulcers. The lesions
of a long incubation period, many cases are diagnosed in the winter.
62. How is feline leprosy diagnosed?
· Physical ex amination reveals consistent lesions.
·Cytologic evaluation reveals numerous acid-fast rods.
· It is very difficult to culture these organisms. They require special media (Ogawa yolk
medium) and may take months to grow.
· Skin biopsies may reveal few to numerous acid-fast organisms in the tissue.
63. What is the causative organism of canine leproid granuloma syndrome and how is it
transmitted?
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome is caused by an unknown species of acid-fast bacteria
(mycobacteria). Identification has been difficult because cultures to date have been unsuccessful.
Biting flies probably serve as vectors of the disease.
64. Describe the clinical signs of canine leproid granuloma syndrome.
A majority of dogs affected with canine leprosy have short-hair coats. Lesions include
nodules, plaques, and ulcers that usually occur on the head, ear pinnae and limbs. Similar to feline
leprosy, most cases are diagnosed in the fall and winter.
65. List organisms that cause opportunistic (atypical) mycobacteriosis.
M.fortuitum,M.phlei,M.smegmatis,M.chetoni, M.xenopi,and M.thermoresistible
66. Although it is relatively rare in small animals, which small animal is more commonly
affected by opportunistic mycobacteria?
Cats are affected more often than dogs.
67. What are the clinical signs associated with opportunistic mycobacteriosis?
Opportunistic mycobacteriosis is characterized by chronic nonhealing wounds, abscesses,
ulcers, and draining tracts.
68. In cats, where are lesions of opportunistic mycobacteriosis usually located?
Ventral abdominal or inguinal fat
69. How do you diagnose opportunistic mycobacteriosis?
·Physical ex amination reveals consistent lesions.
156
Bacterial Infections
· Cytologic evaluation reveals rare acid-fast rods.
2-3 days).
· Skin biopsy specimens may reveal a few acid-fast organisms in the tissue.
70. How do you treat cutaneous mycobacterial infections (feline leprosy, canine leproid
granuloma syndrome, atypical mycobacteriosis)?
·If possible, wide surgical excision of the lesion should be performed. This may be curative
for solitary lesions.
available, consider:
·Feline leprosy: dapsone, rifampin, clofazimine
· Canine leprosy: doxycycline, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
·Atypical mycobacteriosis: tetracyclines, clarithromycin, enrofloxacin, clofazimine
71. List mycobacteria that cause disseminated infection (e.g., cutaneous, respiratory,
gastrointestinal).
M.bovis,M.tubercufosis,M.avium,M.intracelfutare
72. Name three additional bacterial infections characterized by nodules, abscesses, and
draining fistulae.
myces (A. odontolyticus, A. viscosus, A.meyeri, A.horovufneris) are gram-positive,
non-acid-fast, catalase-positive, anaerobic rods that are commensal organisms of the ora
cavity and gastrointestinal tract.
· Actinobacillosis is an infection that occurs secondary to trauma and wound contamination.
Actinobacilfus fignieresii is a gram-negative, non-acid-fast, aerobic coccobacillus that is
a commensal orgamism of the oral cavity
· Nocardiosis is an infection that causes infection through inhalation, ingestion, and wound
contamination. Nocardia spp. (N. asteroides, N. nova, N. farcinica) are gram-positive,
partially acid-fast filamentous aerobes that are common soil saprophytes.
73. Name bacterial skin diseases that are potentially zoonotic.
D.congolensis, M.bovis, M. tubercufosis
BIBLIOGRAPHY
recurrent canine pyodema, / Vet Intern Med 3:26-30, 1989.
20:1509-1524, 1990.
DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA, Thomas CB, Schultz KT: Evaluation of a commercial staphylococcal bacterin for
management of idiopathic recurrent superficial pyodema in dogs, Am / Vet Res 51:636-639, 1990.
Denerolle P, Bourdoiseau G, Magnol JP, Lupat C, Chabannes L: Geman Shepherd dog pyoderma: a prospective
study of 23 cases, Vet Dermatol 9:243-248, 1998.
Greene CE: Dermatophilosis. In Greene CE (ed): Infectious diseases of the dog and car. Philadelphia, 1998, WB
Saunders, pp 326-327.
Halliwell REw: Current therapy in recurrent pyodermas and topical treatments in dermatology, Tijdschrjt voor
Diergeneeskunde 111:73S-76S,1986.
Hill PB, Moriello KA: Canine pyodemma, / Am Vet Med Assoc 204:334-340, 1994.
canine demmatitis, Vet Res Commun 20:205-214, 1996
Lemarie SL: Mycobacterial dematitis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pracr 29:1291-1301, 1999
Superficial Mgcotic Infections
157
Malik R, Love DN, Wigney DI, Martin P: Mycobacterial nodular granulomas affecting the subcutis and skin of dogs
(canine leproid granuloma syndrome), Aust Vet J 76:403-407, 1998.
dogs, Aust Vet J 79:30-36, 2001.
Rosser EJ: Geman Shepherd pyodema: a prospective study of 12 dogs, J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 33:355-363,
1997.
Schroeder H,Swan GE,BerryWL,PearsonJ:Effcacy of a topical antimicrobial/antinflarmatory combination in
the treatment of pyotraumatic dematitis in dogs, Vet Dermatot 7:163-170, 1996.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 274-335.
20. SUPERFICIAL MYCOTIC INFECTIONS
Karen A. Moriello, DVM, DACVD
1. What are superficial mycotic infections?
Superficial mycotic infections are fungal infections of the skin, hair, and claws. These
infections are limited to the surface of the epidermis and outer layers of the hair and claws.
Fungal infections of the dermis and subcutaneous tissues are referred to as "intermediate" fungal
infections while those that involve the body organs (e.g., lungs) are called "deep” fungal infections.
2. Are there different categories of superficial mycotic infections?
Yes, there are two major categories of superficial mycotic infections. The first group is the
dermatophytes such as Microsporum and Trichophyton species, which use keratin to grow. The
second group is the yeasts or yeast-like organisms such as Candida, Malassezia, and Trichosporon.
3. Which of these is the most common?
Ten years ago the answer to this question would have been dermatophytosis, but today the
most common superficial mycotic infection in small animal dermatology is Mafassezia dermatitis.
mycotic infection is dermatophytosis. Candida is a rare infection in dogs and cats and is usually
seen in immunocompromised hosts. The most common presentation of candidiasis is a muco-
cutaneous ulcerative disorder or moist dermatitis. Trichosporon is a rare opportunistic agent that
causes disease in debilitated and immunocompromised hosts. To date, it has only been seen in
cats as a nodular disease involving the nares or at the site of wounds. This is a diagnosis that you
stumble upon—it is rare even for a dermatologist to list this in a differential diagnosis when
submitting a biopsy specimen of a lump from the nose of a cat. Most of us would be thinking of
Cryptococcosis, not Trichosporon.
4. There are hundreds of mycotic organisms; which ones infect dogs and cats?
More than 25 different species of dermatophytes and six species of Malassezia have been
isolated from dogs and cats. The most commonly isolated dermatophytes are Microsporum canis,
M.gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and T. verrucosum. The most commonly isolated
Malassezia species is M. pachydermatis; however, there are a number of other species that have
been isolated from cats or dogs including M.furfur,M.globosa (cats), M.obtusa, M.restricta,
M.stoofiae, and M. sympodialis (cats)
Superficial Mgcotic Infections
157
Malik R, Love DN, Wigney DI, Martin P: Mycobacterial nodular granulomas affecting the subcutis and skin of dogs
(canine leproid granuloma syndrome), Aust Vet J 76:403-407, 1998.
dogs, Aust Vet J 79:30-36, 2001.
Rosser EJ: Geman Shepherd pyodema: a prospective study of 12 dogs, J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 33:355-363,
1997.
Schroeder H,Swan GE,BerryWL,PearsonJ:Effcacy of a topical antimicrobial/antinflarmatory combination in
the treatment of pyotraumatic dematitis in dogs, Vet Dermatot 7:163-170, 1996.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 274-335.
20. SUPERFICIAL MYCOTIC INFECTIONS
Karen A. Moriello, DVM, DACVD
1. What are superficial mycotic infections?
Superficial mycotic infections are fungal infections of the skin, hair, and claws. These
infections are limited to the surface of the epidermis and outer layers of the hair and claws.
Fungal infections of the dermis and subcutaneous tissues are referred to as "intermediate" fungal
infections while those that involve the body organs (e.g., lungs) are called "deep” fungal infections.
2. Are there different categories of superficial mycotic infections?
Yes, there are two major categories of superficial mycotic infections. The first group is the
dermatophytes such as Microsporum and Trichophyton species, which use keratin to grow. The
second group is the yeasts or yeast-like organisms such as Candida, Malassezia, and Trichosporon.
3. Which of these is the most common?
Ten years ago the answer to this question would have been dermatophytosis, but today the
most common superficial mycotic infection in small animal dermatology is Mafassezia dermatitis.
mycotic infection is dermatophytosis. Candida is a rare infection in dogs and cats and is usually
seen in immunocompromised hosts. The most common presentation of candidiasis is a muco-
cutaneous ulcerative disorder or moist dermatitis. Trichosporon is a rare opportunistic agent that
causes disease in debilitated and immunocompromised hosts. To date, it has only been seen in
cats as a nodular disease involving the nares or at the site of wounds. This is a diagnosis that you
stumble upon—it is rare even for a dermatologist to list this in a differential diagnosis when
submitting a biopsy specimen of a lump from the nose of a cat. Most of us would be thinking of
Cryptococcosis, not Trichosporon.
4. There are hundreds of mycotic organisms; which ones infect dogs and cats?
More than 25 different species of dermatophytes and six species of Malassezia have been
isolated from dogs and cats. The most commonly isolated dermatophytes are Microsporum canis,
M.gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and T. verrucosum. The most commonly isolated
Malassezia species is M. pachydermatis; however, there are a number of other species that have
been isolated from cats or dogs including M.furfur,M.globosa (cats), M.obtusa, M.restricta,
M.stoofiae, and M. sympodialis (cats)
158
Superficial MgcoticInfections
disease in dogs and cats?
canis. It accounts for almost all of the cases of dermatophytosis in cats.
6. Are these diseases a human health concern?
Yes. Dermatophytosis is considered a zoonotic disease. Clients at particular risk for
contracting dermatophytosis from an infected pet include children, debilitated individuals, and
those with immunosuppression from viral diseases (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus),
chemotherapy, or transplant therapy. These individuals should avoid contact with the infected pet
until it is cured. In addition, there is some evidence to suggest that Malassezia spp. infections
Malassezia otitis or dermati tis.
7. So, is it true that cats are the major reservoirs of infection for M. canis? And what
about Malassezia?
Yes and no. There are two major reservoirs of infection for dermatophytes. The first is a
contaminated environment or surface. Infective material can remain viable for weeks to months
in the environment, serving as a source of contagion for susceptible hosts. M. gypseum is a soil
The second "reservoir" of infection is exposure to an infected host or a host that is mechanically
does not normally live on the hair coat of cats, or dogs. If you isolate M. canis from a cat or dog.
it indicates that the host is either infected or mechanically carrying the organism. In either case,
a treatment plan needs to be devised to limit exposure to other animals or people. Malassezia is
found on normal skin, in normal ears, and on the mucosal regions (vaginal, oral, nasal, perianal,
anal sac) areas of dogs and cats.
8. What are Trichophyton infections?
The reservoir of infection for T. verrnucosum are cattle. Unfortunately, unless your dog or cat
has T. verrucosum and has been in contact with cows, you may never find the reservoir. However,
here is some food for thought: mice and rodents are commonly infected with Trichophyton in
playing "footsie”’ with cats have been known to infect them.
9. How are dermatophyte infections transmitted?
Dermatophytosis is a highly contagious skin disease. Infection can be transmitted from direct
animal-to-animal contact, contact with a contaminated object (e.g., brush, blanket, pet carrier), or
from contact with a contaminated environment. Human-to-animal infection has been anecdotally
reported to happen. Environmental sources of contagion are of particular concern in multiple
animal households, catteries, animal shelters, breeding kennels, or veterinary clinics. As pre-
viously mentioned, infective material can remain viable for a long time and serve as a source of
exposure for animals and people.
10. What factors affect the establishment of a dermatophyte infection?
There many factors that influence the establishment of a dermatophyte infection in a cat or
dog. First, exposure must occur. The "critical mass" of infective material or "critical time” of
exposure to an infected host is unknown. Many infections may never get established because too
little material is present to establish an infection and/or too little contact occurs between an in-
fected and uninfected animal. If infective spores reach the skin surface, an infection may or may
not occur. Grooming, especially by cats, effectively removes particulate material (including fungal
spores) from the hair coat. Spores may fall off the coat or be mechanically removed via bathing
Superficial MycoticInfections
159
or other means. Assuming infective material reaches the skin, the fungal spores require a warm
humid environment for sporulation; the normally dry arid skin surface is not very hospitable. It
pre-existing inflammatory skin diseases (e.g, atopic skin disease), those exposed to chronic
moisture and skin maceration (e.g., outdoor dogs or cats wet from the rain, s wimming, or bathing),
or animals that have concurrent skin diseases that cause microtrauma (e.g., flea infestations) have
skin surfaces with environments that favor dermatophyte infections. As a matter of fact, fleas can
mechanically carry spores on their bodies and may be a source of contagion in animal shelters,
etc. The skin immune system and surface lipids are also important barriers to infection and can
be compromised in hosts with underlying medical diseases. One of the reasons that show cats
may be more prone to infection is due to all the grooming (much to the cat's disgust) done by
exhibitors before the show. The presence of concurrent medical illnesses will make a host more
more susceptible to derrmatophyte infections.
11. List the most common clinical signs of dermatophytosis in dogs and cats.
The clinical signs of a dermatophyte infection are pleomorphic and can include any combi-
nation of the following:
+Focal or diffuse alopecia: this is caused by the dermatophyte invading the hair follicle and
hair shaft
s i s n  s g ps si sn s s n u 
·Scaling and crusting: this may be caused by infection of the stratum corneum and/or a
host defense reaction to the invading organism
· Papular or pustular eruption: this is caused by fungal folliculitis
·Variable pruritus
12. Are there any clinical signs of dermatophytosis unique to cats?
YES!!! Cats can show any of the clinical signs listed above, in addition to:
· Non-inflammatory alopecia: cats have a unique relationship with M. canis and little or no
inflammatory reaction is often visible at the time of examination.
· "Eosinophilic plaque-like lesions": dermatophytosis in cats can be very pruritic and many
cats will create areas of self-trauma that mimic those seen in eosinophilic disorders.
● Unilateral lip ulcers: small areas of dermatophytosis infection are common on the muzzle
of cats and when lesions occur near the lips, lesions similar to "eosinophilic lip ulcers'
may be seen. These lesions may persist for weeks after the infection has resol ved.
· Chin acne may be seen and often presents as a "contagious chin acne”' syndrome in multiple
cat households.
· Severe interdigital or pedal crusting, especially around the claw base
dermatophyte infections.
· Diffuse hyperpigmentation: hyperpigmentation is uncommon in cats with skin disease;
however, it is often seen in cats with dermatophytosis (Figure 20-1).
· Nodular subcutaneous lesions (kerions), especially in Persian cats
·Unilateral or bilateral areas of circular inflammation on the inner pinnae
●Symmetric alopecia or over-grooming syndromes
13. What is the difference between localized and generalized dermatophytosis?
In reality, there is no difference; it's purely a clinical description issue.
"Localized" dermatophytosis describes a clinical presentation in which one or only a few
well-circumscribed lesions are visible.
"Generalized" dermatophytosis describes a clinical presentation in which lesions are present
over the entire body.
160
Superficial MgcoticInfections
Figure 20-1 Note the hyperpigmentation of the skin of this cat with dermatophytosis.
It is important to remember that these terms refer only to "lesions"; the disease is considered
a generalized infection of the skin regardless of how widespread the clinical lesions are.
14. What is an "asymptomatic carrier"?
This term describes cats or dogs that are culture positive, but appear to be free of clinical
lesions. "Asymptomatic carriers" fall into one of two groups:
· Culture-positive dogs or cats with subtle active infections
· Culture-positive dogs or cats without active infection (mechanically carriers of spores,
most likely culture positive because of exposure to a contaminated environment)
The MOST important thing to remember is that these animals must be treated because they
represent a source of infection for people and other animals.
15. What is a kerion reaction?
A kerion reaction is a well-circumscribed, exudative, swollen nodular lesion caused by a
dermatophyte infection (Figure 20-2). Kerion reactions are most commonly seen in cases of
to the organism. Definitive diagnosis is usually made via skin biopsy, as the lesion can resemble
areas of deep pyoderma, tumors, or be a suspect area of deep or intermediate fungal infections.
Because of the inflammatory nature of these reactions, they usually heal rather rapidly.
16. How is a dermatophyte infection diagnosed?
The patient's history, clinical signs, demonstration of the presence of a dermatophyte associ-
ated with the lesions, and a positive response to specific antifungal therapy are all required to
make a definitive diagnosis of a dermatophyte infection. On occasion, a physician may make the
17. What laboratory tests can be used to aid in the identification of a dermatophyte infection?
·Wood's lamp examination
· Direct examination of hair and scale for cuffs of ectothrix spores on hair shafts
+
Superficial MycoticInfections
161
18. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these diagnostic tests?
A Wood's lamp is an ultraviolet light filtered through a cobalt or nickel flter. It is used to
the light. The only pathogen of veterinary importance that fluoresces is M. canis, and not all strains
glow. In addition, topical drugs or shampoos can change or alter the color of the fluorescence.
Sebum can give a false-positive test result, as can many bacterial infections of the skin. A positive
test result is only suggestive of an infection, not diagnostic. The primary use of this tool is for the
selection of hairs for culture or microscopic ex amination.
 Direct examination of hair and scale is done to look for evidence of fungal spores growing
in cuffs on the outside of hairs or for fungal hyphae invading hair shafts. It is often positive in
human patients, but not so in veterinary patients. Because of the density of the hair coat of dogs
and cats and the difficulty associated with finding lesions, it can be difficult for the clinician to
find actively infected hairs for examination. The chances of finding infected hairs is increased if
Wood's lamp-positive hairs are examined; unless the patient has active lesions that are Wood's
lamp-positive, it is not cost effective to perform these examinations. Glowing hairs should be
placed in a clearing agent such as 1o% potassium hydroxide or chlorphenolac to enhance finding
spores and hyphae. Clearing agents cause the background debris to swell, making the spores
more refractile. Infected hairs appear swollen, flamentous, and much larger and more
disorganized than "normal hairs." A positive test result is diagnostic for a dermatophyte infection,
but hairs should still be cultured to confirm the identity of the infective agent.
A definitive diagnosis of a dermatophyte infection can be made via histological examination
of a skin biopsy specimen. This is not usually the diagnostic test of choice because less invasive
and less expensive tests are often definitive. However, in dogs and cats with unusual presentations
of a dermatophyte infection, this may be the ultimate diagnostic test of choice. Unfortunately, the
identity of the pathogen cannot be deterimined from the formalin-fixed tissue specimen.
Successful sampling is key and multiple tissue specimens should be submitted (see Chapter 3).
162
Superficial MgcoticInfections
A fungal culture is often considered to be the diagnostic test of choice. It is easy to perform,
inexpensive, and will not only diagnose the infection, but also will identify the causative agent.
19. What is the best way to perform a fungal culture?
    g  s  i s     
· Toothbrush culture: A new toothbrush is combed over the hair coat of the animal and/or
lesions. This works very well for cats.
· Hair plucking: Hairs from the margins of lesions are plucked in the direction of growth
If the patient is a dog or indoor-outdoor cat, the area should be gently swabbed with
alcohol to decrease the number of contaminants collected.
20. What fungal culture medium is best to use?
There are advantages and disadvantages to readily available commercial fungal culture
media and containers. The best one to use is cost friendly, user friendly, and readily available.
Fungal culture containers that are easy to inoculate are preferred. Glass jars are easy to store,
but are problematic to use. It is difficult to inoculate the surface, especially with a toothbrush. It
is also diffcult to obtain mycelial samples from the surface for cytological examination. If the lid
is screwed on too tightly, the moisture can condense on the inside and bacterial and yeast over-
growth can occur. Petri dishes are easy to inoculate but the plates easily dry out if not sealed with
a laboratory wax paper.
Sabouraud's dextrose agar Petri dish plates are commonly used in diagnostic laboratories,
however these plates are expensive to purchase and have a relatively short shelf life. The major
advantage to this fungal culture medium is that "classic" gross and microscopic morphology will
be observed
The most commonly used medium for in house dermatophyte cultures is Dermatophyte Test
Medium (DTM). This fungal medium contains Sabouraud's dextrose agar, antibiotics to inhibit
overgrowth of bacteria and yeast, and phenol red, a color indicator. DTM is popular because it
in the medium first, producing the color change. In general, contaminants use the carbohydrate
source first and do not produce a color change until after all of the carbohydrate source has been
used. The problem is that the color indicator (phenol red) may alter the gross and microscopic
appearance of fungal colonies and/or depress macroconidia growth. In addition, some common
contaminants will grossly mimic pathogens and turn the media red.
21. Is it practical to perform in-house fungal cultures?
Yes. In-house fungal cultures can be performed using a commercially available plate; many
dermatologists prefer Sab-Duets (Bacti-Labs, Mountain View, CA). This fungal plate is
comprised of a dual compartment plate with plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar on one side and
DTM on the other. With this plate, the clinician has the best of both worlds—an early "alert"
system via the DTM and a fungal medium that should produce characteristic colonies for ease in
      o e     o s
(Figure 20-3).
22. How do you inoculate fungal culture plates with toothbrushes?
Toothbrush cultures are only practical if a Petri dish or Sab-Duets fungal culture plate is
       s     s   
3 minutes through the pet's hair coat. The bristles are gently stabbed onto the surface of the plate
and then the toothbrush is discarded.
23. What are the rules of thumb for the interpretation of in-house fungal cultures?
· Pathogens are pale or white in color. If a color indicator is used, a color change will be
seen around the culture growth; e.g., red if DTM is used.
Superficial MycoticInfections
163
Figure 20-3 A "Sab-Duets" fungal culture plate. Note how easy it is to open and to obtain samples.
· Pathogens are never heavily pigmented; contaminants tend not to cause color changes and
many are heavily pigmented or have colored colony growth. Bacteria and yeast produce
glistening colonies on the plates.
    o os   a i s s a
media are not diagnostic of a pathogen or infection. This cannot be stressed often enough.
24. What is lactophenol cotton blue stain and what is it used for?
ex amination. The most common technique used to examine fungal colonies is as follows:
· Place a small drop or two of stain on a glass microscope slide
· Take a small piece of clear acetate tape and gently touch the edge of the fungal colony;
hyphae and spores will stick to the tape
· Place the tape (sticky side down!) onto the stain, add another drop of stain and coverslip
the slide
· Phenol will damage the microscope lens—the coverslip is very important!
25. Okay, so how do you evaluate the cytological fungal specimen?
Early colonies may only show hyphae and no macroconidia or micro conidia. If this is the
case, resample the colony in 48-72 hours.
 Pathogens are never heavily pigmented and darkly pigmented hyphae or spores are
contaminants.
 Matching colony and microscopic morphology is used to make a definitive identification
dermatology and mycology text books (see Bibliography.)
 In most cases, an in-house diagnosis of M. canis or M. gypseum can be made with ease.
Trichophyton spp. can be more difficult to culture and identify, and the use of a reference
laboratory familiar with veterinary mycology may be needed.
26. In a healthy host, dermatophytosis will self-cure. Why bother with treatment?
It is true; dermatophytosis is a self-limiting skin disease in a healthy host. However, there
are many important reasons to treat these animals:
· Treatment will hasten the resolution of the infection and limit the risk of contagion to
other animals and people.
164
SuperficialMgcoticInfections
· Treatment will aid in decreasing environmental contamination, an important source of
infection for people and other animals.
· Dermatophytosis is a zoonotic disease
· Treatment will eliminate the guess work out of trying to determine if the animal in front
of you is “otherwise healthy”
27. Dermatophytosis infects hairs. Is it always necessary to clip the entire hair coat?
 No. Clipping of the hair coat is recommended in dogs or cats with medium or long hair, dogs
and cats with generalized or multifocal lesions, and in any animal that is not responding to
ther apy as ex pected.
No! Although dermatophytosis may appear to be a "localized" infection, it is not. Spores are
present throughout the hair coat and it is common to under-recognize lesions. Topical or spot
therapy also contributes to chronic infections. Topical ointments are messy, groomed off by the
pet, put the owner at increased risk of exposure, and are ineffective.
29. What are the current treatment recommendations for a dog or cat with dermatophytosis?
Clipping
 In animals with medium or long hair OR that have generalized infections regardless of hair
length, the hair coat should be clipped.
In animals with clinically focal lesions, the infected hairs should be clipped from the
margins of the lesion.
Bathing
Jo peids sy sseaoui Aoixopeied Aeu pue jeuondo si oodueys jeaungnue ue un suuneg
the lesions by dispersing spores from hairs fractured via scrubbing.
There is no antifungal shampoo available that alone will "cure” a dermatophyte infection.
Bathing may be beneficial in animals with dirty, matted coats in that it grossly removes hair
anddebris.
Bathing puts the owners at increased risk for exposure to the dermatophyte. Owners should
wear gloves and long sleeves during the process.
Topical Therapy
Topical antifungal dips are a useful adjuvant therapy for the treatment of dermatophytosis.
idde uanon yo gedeo si uo un piid erun os se psn q ueo un ue u
the dip. Because this is RARELY the case, topical therapy is not recommended as a sole therapy.
Topical lime sulfur 4 to 8 ounces/gallon twice weekly is effective as a sole therapy; however.
few animals (or owners!) can tolerate the required 4 to 8 weeks of therapy. Animals, especially
cats, often suffer from conjunctivitis and oral mucous membrane irritation from the dip.
     i      e i  
be irritating
 If lime sulfur or enilconazole is selected as the sole therapy, the pet should be dipped at least
twice a week until there are at least three negative culture results at weekly intervals.
SystemicTherapy
Systemic therapy is the treatment of choice for dermatophytosis.
Griseofulvin microsize 25 to 50 mg/kg orally once daily in a fatty meal and itraconazole 5
to 10 mg/kg orally once daily are the most commonly used drugs.
Griseofulvin should not be used in cats unless they are negative for feline leukemia virus and
feline immunodeficiency virus because studies have shown that these viral infections may
Superficial MgcoticInfections
165
Complete blood cell counts, ideally, should be monitored before therapy and at biweekly
intervals during griseofulvin therapy; however, this is not always possible due to cost constraints
Or fractious cats.
Liver enzymes, ideally, should be monitored before itraconazole therapy and every few
weeks during treatments. This is not always possible due to cost constraints.
Terbinafine and fluconazole can also be used, but there is no evidence to suggest that they
Ketoconazole is variably effective in the treatment of dermatophytosis; it should be avoided
in cats, because they do not tolerate this drug well.
Traditional therapy is to treat daily until three negative culture results at weekly intervals are
obtained. Weekly fungal cultures should be obtained starting at week 4 of therapy.
30. Is there a practical way to combine topical and systemic therapy?
Yes. The following plan is often used by the author and is well tolerated by all parties
involved:
·Twice-weekly lime sulfur dips for 3 weeks only
·Systemic anti fungal therapy
- Griseofulvin microsize 25 to 50 mg/kg orally daily OR
- Traconazole:
+ 5 to 10 mg/kg orally once daily
+ 5 to 10 mg/kg orally daily for 28 days and then on a "week on, week off' schedule until
cure (this is especially useful in cats to minimize gastrointestinal upset from the drug).
·Weekly toothbrush fungal cultures starting at week 4 of therapy.
31. How do you treat pregnant animals or puppies and kittens younger than 12 weeks of age?
 Pregnant animals should never be given systemic antifungal drugs because these drugs are
teratogens, especially griseofulvin. These animals should be treated with topical lime sulfur; it is
important to clip the hair coat and dip the animal at least twice a week to minimize infection of
newborns. Systemic antifungal drugs should be avoided, if possible, in animals younger than
12 weeks of age; however if the infection is severe and life threatening or euthanasia is a con-
in young patients.
32. Are fungal vaccines effective in the prevention or treatment of M. canis infections?
To date, there has been no evidence to show that M. canis fungal vaccines are protective
The benefit of this “dampening”is unclear but it may be useful in limiting the spread of the
infection because fewer active lesions shedding infective material into the environment are
present.
33. How is therapy monitored?
Weekly fungal cultures, starting at week 4 of treatment, are performed until the dog or cat
has at least two to three negative fungal culture results at weekly intervals.
34. What about environmental decontamination?
Infected animals contaminate their environment as infected hairs and spores are shed
Decontamination recommendations include:
Isolation of the infected animals until the infection has been resolved; concurrent topical
166
Ss
· Elbow grease: Gross cleaning of the environment: vacuuming of debris and dust and
aggressive scrubbing of surfaces with detergents. This includes vents, ledges, etc.
· The environment should be disinfected with a 1:l0 dilution of household bleach. The
target surface needs to be wetted for at least l0 minutes and this needs to be repeated
every2 to3days.
· All bedding, rugs, toys, combs, scratching posts, and towels should be destroyed.
35. What about using enilconazole in the environment?
Enilconazole sprays and foggers are used in poultry production units to control molds and
           a   s s
United States for use on cats or in catteries.
36. What about “resistant dermatophyte infections"?
Drug resistance is always a concern; however when most of these situations are carefully
and methodically investigated one or more of the following problems is usually found. These
problems should be investigated and corrected before changing therapy or assuming there is a
"drug resistance" problem:
· Inadequate, ineffective, or inconsistent environmental decontamination
● Inappropriate dose, dosage, or length of therapy with a systemic antifungal drug
· Use of only spot therapy for lesions
+ Resistance to clipping of the hair coat in long-haired animals or animals with generalized
infections
· Owners stopping therapy too soon; clinical cure will precede mycologic cure by several
weeks
·Lack of treatment of all exposed animals; reinfection is occurring from a subclimically
infected host
37. If Malassezia spp. are part of the normal flora of the skin, how do we know that they
are a cause of skin disease?
 For years, Malassezia spp. organisms were found on skin biopsy specimens of animals with
various skin diseases, most notably from those with pruritus and seborrheic disorders. At the
time, conventional thinking was that these organisms were "normal flora," were not invol ved in
the disease process, and were to be ignored. Eventually, clinicians started to realize that over
diseases. In time, it was recognized that although Malassezia organisms are found on the skin and
in the ear canal of normal animals, they can cause skin disease.
38. How are Malassezia infections transmitted?
Malassezia organisms are found on the normal skin of dogs and cats. It is believed that the
      s n     i d  s  
Currently, Malassezia spp. is not considered to be a contagious infection between animals
39. What skin diseases predispose animals to Malassezia infections or overcolonization?
There are a number of well-recognized skin diseases that are associated with secondary
Malassezia infections (i.e., overcolonization) of the skin. These include atopic dermatitis, recurrent
bacterial infections, endocrine disorders (especially hypothyroidism), and keratinization disorders
or primary seborrhea.
40. What factors affect the establishment of a Malassezia infection?
It is important to remember that Malassezia spp. are normally found on the skin and in the
ears of dogs and cats. They are usually present in low numbers and without any evidence of
concurrent disease. Overcolonization of the skin by Malassezia can occur for any number of
Superficial Mycotic Infections
167
reasons, including, but not limited to, the presence of a concurrent bacterial infection, increased
skin humidity at the surface or as a result of oppositional skin folds, increased presence of
nutrients from the surface of the skin, changes in sebum or hormones, and defects in the skin
immune system.
41. What are the most common clinical signs of Malassezia infections in dogs?
Dogs can exhibit any combination of the following:
· Pruritus: this is one of the MOST consistent clinical signs. It is likely caused by a hyper-
sensitivity reaction to Malassezia antigens, particularly since the number of organisms
 present can often be disproportionate to the severity of the patient's pruritus.
· Odor
·Erythema
·Waxy, oily debris and scaling of the skin
● Lichenification and hyperpigmentation of the skin, especially in the axillary and inguinal
areas
· Papular and pustular eruptions
· Intense pedal and interdigital pruritus with or without waxy debris lodged beneath the
claw beds
· Seborrheic otitis externa
·Recurrent otitis externa
·Pruritus ani
42. What are the common clinical signs of Malassezia infection in cats?
Malassezia infections are less well described in cats, most likely because this disease is
under-recognized. The clinical signs can include any combination of the following:
●Pruritus with or without scaling
· Miliary dermatitis lesions that do not respond to oral antibiotics or glucocorticoids
·Black waxy debris in the ears—ears may or may not be pruritic
·Feline chin acne
· Pedal pruritus and paronychia
· Generalized erythema and scaling
·Follicular plugging in the pre-auricular area
43. How is Malassezia dermatitis diagnosed?
The diagnosis is made by a compatible history, clinical findings, and cytologic demonstration
of the organism. One of the most important things to remember about the diagnosis of Malassezia
dermatitis is that it is almost never an "only skin disease." In other words, it is almost always
present as a result of some predisposing cause, whether that is obvious or not. The second most
that is key, but whether or not Malassezia organisms are seen in conjunction with compatible
clinical signs.
44. How many organisms need to be seen on a cytologic specimen to make a definitive
diagnosis of Malassezia dermatitis?
Sometimes all it takes is ONE. The organism is found on normal skin and in normal ears and
vs. normal flora. However, here is where common sense must prevail and not a numbers game.
If there is no inflammation or pruritus present in the area sampled, it seems reasonable to con-
clude that the population of Malassezia present is living in harmony with the surrounding tissues.
However, if the skin is inflamed and Malassezia organisms are easily found, then it seems
reasonable to conclude that the population is not living in harmony and may very well be
contributing to the patient's symptoms.
168
SuperficialMgcoticInfections
45. What is the best diagnostic test for finding Malassezia organisms?
skin. Impression smears of affected skin can easily be obtained by firmly pressing a new clean
glass slide to the skin (be sure to place your thumb directly over the site and press until a "finger-
print" is seen on the slide), heat-fixing the slide (gently flaming the underside for 5 seconds) and
then staining it with DiffQuik. Slides are best ex amined under oil immersion and the organism is
often found adhered to keratinocytes. A skin-scraping spatula can be used to scrape cellular
debris from between crevices in lichenified skin, interdigital spaces, and/or under claw beds for
cytologic examination.
46. What are the pitfalls associated with cytologic testing?
the impression smears.
· If the owner has washed the dog, it can be difficult to find organisms or the number seen
may under-represent the true extent of the overcolonization.
·Forgetting to heat-fix the slides will make it more difficult to find organisms.
47. Is skin biopsy more reliable?
Not as a routine diagnostic test. It is invasive, expensive, and often Malassezia organisms
are lost during processing because they are found in the most superficial layers of the skin.
48. What is the best treatment protocol for Malassezia dermatitis?
There is no one "best" treatment protocol for Malassezia dermatitis. All treatment
plans must take into account the severity and duration of the disorder, the clinician's experiences
with various therapies, what the owner is able and willing to do, what the owner can afford, and
any other concurrent skin diseases. In general, successful therapy involves:
· The identification and treatment of any and all concurrent skin diseases or predisposing
triggers
·Improving the hair coat hygiene (grooming practices)
· Topical therapy to remove oil and sebum, which act as growth media
49. How does the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis differ from the treatment of bacterial
pyoderma?
In many respects it does not differ, except for the fact that systemic antifungal drugs are used
instead of systemic antibiotics.
· The hair coat should be clipped to remove any mats or strands of hair matted with oil and
debris, which may harbor large populations of organisms.
remove debris and dirt, followed by a medicated shampoo.
  s  os   n n o   
(ketoconazole, miconazole, ketoconazole-chlorhexidine, or selenium disulfide),
· The hair coat should be thoroughly rinsed to remove al1 shampoo residue because this can
be irritating.
· Cats often prefer not to be bathed; however, bathing is recommended if their hair coat is
severely matted and/or oily.
· Systemic antifungal drugs should be administered for at least 7 to 14 days past clinical
-Dogs: Ketoconazole or itraconazole 5 to 10 mg/kg orally once daily
- Cats:Itraconazole 5 to l0 mg/kg orally once daily
Superficial MycoticInfections
169
50. How are chronic cases of Malassezia dermatitis managed?
Recurrent cases of Malassezia dermatitis are recurrent because either the underlying disease
or trigger has not been identified and treated, or it cannot be cured but only managed (e.g,)
Malassezia secondary to primary disorders of keratinization). In these cases, chronic bathing may
be beneficial and/or once- or twice-weekly pulse doses of ketoconazole or itraconazole.
51. How are patients with concurrent bacterial and Malassezia dermatitis treated?
The presence of concurrent bacterial and yeast pyoderma is one of the most under-recognized
causes of pruritus in dogs, and even cats. Any skin disease that can predispose a dog or cat to a
secondary bacterial pyoderma can trigger an overgrowth of Malassezia spp. In fact, there is a
infections is not difficult:
·Attention to grooming and hair coat issues.
· Bathing of the pet two to three times per week. In these cases combined antibacterial and
antifungal shampoos are especially helpful
· Concurrent systemic antibiotic and antifungal therapy; both infections should be treated
at the same time.
 52. Does antibiotic therapy predispose animals to the overgrowth of yeast? This is the case
with candidiasis.
Interestingly, chronic antibiotic therapy has not been associated with an overgrowth of
Malassezia spp. on the skin.
53. What is a Trichosporon spp. dermatitis?
Trichosporon spp. are yeast-like fungi that are normally found in the soil. They can sometimes
causes infection via traumatic introduction into a host that is incapable of eliminating the organism.
To date, reports of infections in animals have been limited to cats. It has been reported to cause
single to multiple nodular lesions on the skin, nostrils, and at the site of bite wounds. Definitive
diagnosis is via skin biopsy and the key finding is a pyogranulomatous inflammatory infiltrate
with fungal elements. Isolation of the organism for culture requires a tissue sample, best obtained
mended in cats, because it seems to be better tolerated. A thorough search for an underlying cause
is warranted
54. A skin biopsy specimen is obtained from a nodule on the face of a cat. The report
reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation with pleomorphic fungal elements that ^most
likely represent yeast or yeast-like organisms." Fungal culture is recommended. What
is the best method to collect a specimen for culture and what organisms should you tell
the reference laboratory to culture for?
In pyogranulomatous skin diseases, infectious agents are often found in small numbers.
Therefore, a tissue block collected via skin biopsy should be submitted for culture. If the lesion
is superficial and small, a skin biopsy punch may collect an adequate amount of tissue for culture.
If the lesion is large, a wedge of tissue collected with a scalpel blade is recommended; the organisms
are often cultured from the subcutaneous fat or deep dermis and skin biopsy punches often collect
too superficial a sample. The laboratory should culture the tissue on Sabouraud's dextrose agar
and be alerted for opportunistic mycotic infections such as Paecilomyces, Trichosporon spp., and
Geotrichum spp.
170
Deep Mycoses
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beneke ES, Rogers AL: Dematophytosis. In: Medical mycology and human mycoses. Belmont, Calif, 1996, Star
Publishing, pp 59-98.
Colombo S,Comegliani L,Verceli A:Efficacy of itraconazole as a combined continuous/pulse therapy in feline
dermatophytosis: preliminary results in nine cases, Vet Dermatot 12:347-350, 2001.
Medleau L, Hnilica KA: Smatt animat dermatotlogy: A color atlas and therapeutic guide. Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, pp 35-60.
Moriello KA: Diagnostic techniques for demmatophytosis, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:219-224, 2001.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Fungal skin diseases. In: Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 336-375.
21. DEEP MYCOSES
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What is a “deep'’ mycosis?
Deep mycoses are infections with fungal organisims that invade deep into the skin; many
produce skin lesions secondary to systeimic infections. These are in contrast to the superficial
fungal infections, which only invade the keratinized tissues of the epidermis and hair shafts. Deep
mycoses may be acquired through direct inoculation, ingestion, and/or inhalation of spores. Deep
mycoses are often further subdivided into subcutaneous fungal infections and systemic fungal
infections.
 2. Which fungal pathogens are most commonly associated with subcutaneous infections
in cats and dogs?
·Sporothrix
· Chromomycoses
Phaeohyphomycosis (Brachycladium spiciferum, Drechslera spiciferum, Phialemo
nium obovatum,Pseudomicrodochium suttoni,Xylohypha bantiana,and others)
Chromoblastomycosis
·Mycetomas
Eumycotic(Pseudoallescheria boydii,Curvulariagenicutata,Acremonium hyalinum
Phiatemoniumcurvatum)
-Actinomycotic (Actinomyces, Nocardia)—note, these are bacteria that result in clinical
lesions similar to those produced by fungi
·Zygomycoses
Mucorales (Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, Mortierella)
-Entomophthorales(Conidiobofus,Basidiobotus)
·Rhinosporidiosis (Rhinosporidium seeber)
 3. How are subcutaneous fungal infections acquired?
These infections are acquired by traumatic implantation of spores from the environment. In
most cases, the infections remain localized, involving only the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
4. What are the clinical signs associated with subcutaneous fungal infections?
Most cases present with solitary nodules or draining tracts that are most commonly found
on the face or limbs.
170
Deep Mycoses
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beneke ES, Rogers AL: Dematophytosis. In: Medical mycology and human mycoses. Belmont, Calif, 1996, Star
Publishing, pp 59-98.
Colombo S,Comegliani L,Verceli A:Efficacy of itraconazole as a combined continuous/pulse therapy in feline
dermatophytosis: preliminary results in nine cases, Vet Dermatot 12:347-350, 2001.
Medleau L, Hnilica KA: Smatt animat dermatotlogy: A color atlas and therapeutic guide. Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, pp 35-60.
Moriello KA: Diagnostic techniques for demmatophytosis, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:219-224, 2001.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Fungal skin diseases. In: Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 336-375.
21. DEEP MYCOSES
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What is a “deep'’ mycosis?
Deep mycoses are infections with fungal organisims that invade deep into the skin; many
produce skin lesions secondary to systeimic infections. These are in contrast to the superficial
fungal infections, which only invade the keratinized tissues of the epidermis and hair shafts. Deep
mycoses may be acquired through direct inoculation, ingestion, and/or inhalation of spores. Deep
mycoses are often further subdivided into subcutaneous fungal infections and systemic fungal
infections.
 2. Which fungal pathogens are most commonly associated with subcutaneous infections
in cats and dogs?
·Sporothrix
· Chromomycoses
Phaeohyphomycosis (Brachycladium spiciferum, Drechslera spiciferum, Phialemo
nium obovatum,Pseudomicrodochium suttoni,Xylohypha bantiana,and others)
Chromoblastomycosis
·Mycetomas
Eumycotic(Pseudoallescheria boydii,Curvulariagenicutata,Acremonium hyalinum
Phiatemoniumcurvatum)
-Actinomycotic (Actinomyces, Nocardia)—note, these are bacteria that result in clinical
lesions similar to those produced by fungi
·Zygomycoses
Mucorales (Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, Mortierella)
-Entomophthorales(Conidiobofus,Basidiobotus)
·Rhinosporidiosis (Rhinosporidium seeber)
 3. How are subcutaneous fungal infections acquired?
These infections are acquired by traumatic implantation of spores from the environment. In
most cases, the infections remain localized, involving only the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
4. What are the clinical signs associated with subcutaneous fungal infections?
Most cases present with solitary nodules or draining tracts that are most commonly found
on the face or limbs.
DeepMycoses
1Z1
5. How is the diagnosis of a subcutaneous fungal infection confirmed?
Cytologic evaluation of fine needle aspirates or impression smears demonstrates pyo-
granulomatous inflammation. Depending on the species, the fungi may form tissue grains, may
appear as thick-walled yeast-like bodies (some are found intracellularly within phagocytic cells;
others are extracellular), or may form hyphae. Some fungi are pigmented while others are not.
Caution is warranted because some organisms are also pathogenic for humans.
6.  How are subcutaneous fungal infections treated?
Where feasible, wide surgical excision followed by antifungal chemotherapy is the treatment
include ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, amphotericin B, and potassium iodide.
7. What is the most common subcutaneous fungal infection in dogs and cats?
Sporotrichosis is the most common of the subcutaneous fungal infections. Sporothrix
schenckii is ubiquitous in the soil, on thorned plants (especially roses), in hay, and in sphagnum
moss, and may be carried on the paws of cats. Cats are most likely to acquire the infection from
punctures by the teeth or claws of another cat. Dogs usually acquire this infection from puncture
wounds from thorns or wood splinters.
8. What is the treatment of choice for sporotrichosis?
The traditional treatment for sporotrichosis is oral potassium iodide. Dogs are treated with
40 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours, given with food. Cats are more sensitive to iodide toxicity and are
treated with 20 mg/kg every 12 to 24 hours, given with food. Signs of iodide toxicity include
weakness, and collapse. Itraconazole is better tolerated by most animals and is given at a dose of
5 to 10 mg/kg orally every 24 hours. Treatment should be continued for 30 days after clinical
cure. Humans are at greatest risk of acquiring the disease from cats and should wear gloves at all
times when handling an infected animal
humans. How common is it in dogs and cats?
unoy st pue os su ui punoy nse pensdeou snonbign ue si suufsu snoooidaa
in large numbers in soil contaminated with pigeon droppings. It rarely causes disease in dogs but
is the most common deep mycosis in cats. Siamese cats may be at increased risk of disease. Cats
infected with feline leukemia virus and/or feline immunodeficiency virus are at increased risk and
may have more severe disease.
10. What are the clinical signs of cryptococcosis in cats?
· Cutaneous lesions are most common on the face, pinnae, and paws and consist of multiple
papules, nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts (Figure 21-1)
mass visible within the nares or a firm swelling over the bridge of the nose (Figure 21-2).
·Lymph nodes may be enlarged and in some cases will abscess.
· Blindness—chorioretinitis, granulomas that result in retinal detachment, optic neuritis
·Neurologic signs: seizures, ataxia, paresis.
11. How is a diagnosis of cryptococcosis confirmed?
· Aspirate specimens or impression smears from nodules or nasal masses contain large
numbers of yeast organisms. An India ink stain will demonstrate the thick capsule of the
yeast (Figure 21-3).
172
DeepMycoses
Figure 2 1-1  Cutaneous nodules associated with cryptococcosis in a cat.
Figure 21-2 Cat with cryptococcosis. Note the swelling over the nose and the abscessed lesion on the
ventral neck. (Courtesy Dr. Jennifer Matousek.)
· Latex agglutination or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay detects cryptococcal capsular
antigens in the serum. The magnitude of the titer may correlate with the extent of the
infection (may be useful in monitoring response to treatment).
·Biopsies and cultures can also be used to identify the organisms.
Deep Mycoses
173
Figure 21-3 lndia ink-stained impression smear from a cutaneous nodule. Note the thick capsule
characteristic of Cryptococcus reoformans.
12. What are the drugs of choice in treating cryptococcosis?
· Itraconazole: 10-15 mg/kg orally once daily or divided twice daily. Capsules should be
given with a fatty meal to maximize absorption; liquid suspensions can be given on an
empty stomach.
● Fluconazole: 50 mg/cat orally every 12 hours; this is preferred over itraconazole if there
are ocular or nervous system signs as it has better penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid.
· Flucytosine: 25-30 mg/kg orally every 6-8 hours is given in addition to itraconazole or
fluconazole if the infection is not responding well.
Monitor biochemical profiles monthly.
Monitor capsular antigen titers every 2 months. Continue treatment for 2 months after the
titer is non-detectable, and continue to monitor titers for another 6 months because relapse is
common.
13. What are the cutaneous manifestations of blastomycosis? What other clinical signs are
usually associated with this infection?
'snded ym uooun uys ied e un nnsi A usio  jo uogedu no
nodules, plaques, draining tracts, and subcutaneous abscesses (Figure 21-4).
Cutaneous lesions are most commonly associated with dissemination from a primary
respiratory infection. The cutaneous lesions may be single or multiple papules, nodules, plaques,
draining tracts, and subcutaneous abscesses. Lymphadenomegaly is common. Other clinical signs
include fever, coughing, dyspnea, ocular disease (corneal edema, uveitis, chorioretinitis, retinal
detachment, glaucoma, blindness), prostatitis, and lameness (osteomyelitis).
14. What are the risk factors predisposing to infection with Blastomyces dermatitidis?
● Soil type: sandy, acidic with moisture, the presence of wildlife and frequent soil disruption
all favor the growth of B. dermatitidis
· Geographic "hot beds" in the Umited States include the Missouri, Ilinois, Mississippi,
Tennessee, Ohio, and St. Lawrence river valleys and basins
· Young (2-4 years) male dogs of large and sporting breeds
· Fall months
174
DeepMycoses
Figure 21-4 Draining tracts associated with blastomycosis in a cat.
15. How is the diagnosis confirmed?
Cytologic examination of impression smears or fine needle aspirates are often diagnostic
due to the presence of round to oval yeasts (5-20 μum diameter) with broad-based
budding. The cell walls are double-contoured and refractile (Figure 21-5).
Organisms may also be found on tracheoalveolar lavage or in tissue biopsies.
Thoracic radiographs generally show a generalized interstitial to nodular infiltrate and
tracheobronchiallymphadenomegaly.
Do not attempt to culture (zoonotic risk with mycelial forms).
16. What are the drugs of choice for treating blastomycosis?
· Itraconazole: 5 mg/kg orally every 12 hours, given with a fatty meal. Treatment should
be continued for a minimum of 60 days and at least 1 month after resolution of all signs of
disease. Biochemical profiles should be monitored monthly for evidence of hepatotoxicity.
· Ketoconazole: 10 mg/kg orally every 12 hours, given with food. This is a cheaper alternative;
however, it is not as effective (lower response rate and higher recurrence rate).
Deep Mycoses
175
Figure 21-5 Btastomyces dermatitidis in an impresson smear. Note the refractile, double-contoured,
broad-based budding of these yeasts.
·Amphotericin B: 0.5 mg/kg intravenously every other day, monitor closely for nephro-
toxicity. Due to the expense and toxicity, this treatment is generally reserved for dogs that
do not tolerate or respond to itraconazole.
pue sydeioipei oroeioun iouou (isoseo jo Aiofeu) puesid si ssessip Areuound uenm
continue treatment for a minimum of 30 days after resolution of active disease.
17. What are the risk factors associated with histoplasmosis infections?
 Bird roosts where soil is rich in bird droppings and old chicken coops are sources of the
organism.
Ohio, Missouri, Mississippi, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence river basins are endemic areas.
Young to middle-aged dogs are at highest risk. Most affected cats are younger than I year of age.
Pointers, Weimaraners, and Brittany Spaniels may be predisposed to this disease.
18. What are the clinical manifestations of histoplasmosis infections?
·Anorexia, diarrhea, weight loss
·Depression
· Coughing, dyspnea, exercise intolerance
· Ocular discharges, chorioretinitis
· Enlarged lymph nodes
· Cutaneous lesions: papules, nodules, ulcers, draining tracts
·Anemia
·Icterus
·Lameness
19. How is a diagnosis of histoplasmosis made?
· Complete blood cell count: non-regenerate anemia, leukocytosis, occasionally find Histo-
plasma capsuiatum organisms in circulating neutrophils and monocytes (buffy coat smear
or bone marrow aspirates may increase detection rate)
·Biochemical profile: may have elevations in hepatic enzymes with liver invol vement, low
serum protein with protein-losing enteropathy
· Thoracic radiographs: diffuse to nodular interstitial pneumonia, enlarged tracheobronchial
lymph nodes, older lesions may appear as calcified nodules
176
Deep Mycoses
· Abdominal radiographs/ultrasonography: splenic, hepatic and mesenteric lymph node
enlargement
· Osteolytic bone lesions
· Cytology of skin impression smears, fine needle aspirate specimens of nodules or lymph
nodes, bronchoalveolar lavage, hepatic aspirate specimens, rectal scrapings: pyogranulo-
matous inflammation with intracellular yeasts (2-4 μm diameter found within neutrophils,
monocytes, and macrophages) (Figure 21-6).
Figure 21-6 Histoplasma capsutatum in an impression smear. These yeast organisms are found within
macrophages (intracellular).
20. What are the drugs of choice for treating histoplasmosis?
· Itraconazole: 5 mg/kg orally every 12 hours, given with a fatty meal.
· Amphotericin B: 0.5 mg/kg intravenously every other day; this may be the initial drug of
choice for dogs with severe gastrointestinal disease. Use until the dog begins gaining
weight then switch to itraconazole. Monitor renal function closely.
· Fluconazole: intravenous form is available for use in dogs with severe gastrointestinal
disease that are not good candidates for amphotericin B (e.g., renal disease), dose at 5 mg/
kg every 12 hours until intestinal absorption improves and then switch to itraconazole.
Continue treatment for at least l month after resolution of active clinical disease (monitor
thoracic radiographs if pulmonary disease is present).
21. What are the risk factors for coccidioidomycosis infections?
·Sandy, alkaline soils
· High environmental temperature, low rainfall, low elevation
· Lower Sonoran life zone: southwestern Umited States, Mexico, Central and South America
·Young male dogs (1-4 years old)
· Boxers and Doberrman Pinschers are predisposed to disseminated infections.
· Dust storms, digging in the soil, and earthquakes disseminate the spores.
DeepMgcoses
177
22. What are the clinical manifestations of coccidioidomycosis infections?
·Fever
·Seizures
·Coughing, dyspnea
·Uveitis, keratitis
· Lameness, bone swelling, joint enlargement  · Lymphadenomegaly
23. How is a diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis made?
· Complete blood cell count: non-regenerative anemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis
·Biochemical profile: hyperglobulinemia, hypoal buminemia, azotemia
·Coccidioides immitis antibody serologic testing
· Radiographs: interstitial pulmonary disease, osteolytic bone lesions
spherules characteristic of C. immitis.
· Biopsies of skin or bone lesions: granulomatous inflammation with large spherules
charactenistic of C. immitis
· Do not attempt to perform a culture of a specimen because the mycelial form is highly
contagious!
24. What are the drugs of choice for treating coccidioidomycosis?
+Amphotericin B: 0.5 mg/kg intravenously every other day; monitor renal function closely
·Fluconazole: 5 mg/kg orally every 12 hours; this is the drug of choice when neurologic
signs are present.
Continue treatment for at least l month after resolution of active clinical disease; this is
25. What cutaneous adverse drug reactions have been reported in dogs treated with
·Vasculitis followed by skin necrosis and ulceration have been associated with itraconazole
administration (7.5% in one report of dogs treated with 10 mg/kg orally every 24 hours)
·Erythema multiforme
● Other reported side effects include anorexia, nausea, and hepatotoxicity. Adverse drug
interactions may occur due to inhibition of cytochrome p450 enzymes, which are
important in the metabolism of many drugs (ketoconazole is a more potent inhibitor of
cytochrome p450).
If side effects are seen, discontinue treatment for 1 week. Most side effects are dose-related;
restart treatment at one-half the original dose once adverse signs have abated.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ali SO, Warschaw KE: Deep fungal infections. In: Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatotogy secrets in color, ed
2,Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus, pp 225-235
Greene CE: Infectious diseases ofthe dog and cat, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Med 10:365-371, 1996.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutter & Kirk's small animal dermatology, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp
336-422.
Taboada J: Systemic mycoses. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds). Textbook of veterinary internat medicine, ed 5,
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 453-477.
Tilley LP, Smith FWK (eds): The 5-minute veterinary consult canine and feline, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, Lippincotl,
Williams & Wilkins, pp 492-493, 566-567, 598-599, 802-803, 1210-1211
178
Pythiosis and Lagenidiosis
22, PYTHIOSIS AND LAGENIDIOSIS
Rosarna Marsella, DVM, DACVD
1. What is pythiosis?
 Pythiosis is an invasive, ulcerative, proliferative, pyogranulomatous disease of the skin,
subcutis, and gastrointestinal tract caused by Pythium insidiosum, a fungus-like oomycete in the
order Peronosporales of the kingdom Protista. Pythiosis is a form of phycomycosis, which is a
complex of pyogranulomatous diseases that also includes conidiobolomycosis and basidio-
bolomycosis.
2. Where can Pythium insidiosum be found?
Pythium insidiosum naturally inhabits wetlands, ponds, and swamps and is endemic in some
areas of southeastern United States, where it is referred to as "swamp cancer." Other slang names
for pythiosis are Florida leeches and canker.
3. What is lagenidiosis?
Lagenidiosis is a recently recognized canine disease that shares many similarities with
Pythiosis. Lagenidium is another oomycete and the Lagenidium species that causes disease in
dogs is closely related to Lagenidium giganteum, a facultative pathogen of mosquito larvae, currently
approved by the Environmental Protection Agency for use in the United States to control
mosquito populations. It is reasonable to believe that in the past some cases diagnosed as
Pythiosis were indeed cases of lagenidiosis.
4. How does infection occur?
For both pythiosis and lagenidiosis, dogs become infected by ingesting or by swimming in
attracted via chemotaxis to open wounds, even minor scratches. Dogs with gastrointestinal
pythiosis often have a history of retrieving objects from water and then chewing on them.
5. Is there any geographical difference in the distribution of pythiosis versus lagenidiosis?
 Pythiosis is endemic in states that border the Gulf of Mexico, but has been diagnosed in dogs
from southern Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Kentucky, and Arizona (with no history of travel
outside the state). Most cases of lagenidiosis have been reported in Florida and Louisiana, but
some cases have been diagnosed in Tex as, Tennessee, and Indiana.
6. Is there any breed, gender, or age predilection?
Young male retriever-type dogs are particularly at risk for pythiosis. Dogs with open skin
middle-aged dogs. At present, no breed predilection has been reported.
7. Is there any seasonality for these diseases?
Yes, most cases seem to occur in the summer and fall in tropical and subtropical climates.
Presumably high temperatures and high rainfall are necessary for reproduction, and flooding
likely distributes the organism over a wide region.
Pythiosis and Lagenidiosis
179
8.  Can people become infected with oomycetes such as Pythium and Lagenidium?
Pythiosis is very rare in people. So far, there have been only 28 cases of human pythiosis
published in the literature and 23 of them were from Thailand. Currently there are no reported
cases of lagenidiosis in humans.
9. How does pythiosis manifest in people?
Human pythiosis presents in one of three clinical forms: cutaneous or subcutaneous,
systemic or vascular, and ophthalmic (e.g., corneal ulcer or keratitis). A saturated solution of
potassium iodide may be effective in the treatment of the subcutaneous form. Surgical removal
of the source of infection is the method of therapy for the vascular and ophthalmic forms.
10. Can people get infected directly from dogs?
Although direct transmission from infected animals to humans or other animals has never
been reported, it is possible that exudates and contaminated bandages may be a source for
zoonotic infections.
11. Can other animals get pythiosis or lagenidiosis?
Yes, pythiosis frequently affects horses and, much more rarely, cats and cows. Currently,
lagenidiosis has only been reported in dogs.
12. What are the symptoms of pythiosis in the dog?
The cutaneous form presents with rapidly developing pruritic nodules and draining tracts
(Figure 22-1). The nodules rapidly progress into large proliferative masses. Lesions are intensely
Figure 22-1 Extensive, ulcerated, proliferative lesions due to Pythium infection of the ventral chest,
axilla, and foreleg of a German Shepherd dog. These lesions had developed over 2 months; the dog was
euthanized shortly after diagnosis
180
Pythiosis and Lagenidiosis
pruritic and, in some cases, the animal licks and chews them to the point of self-mutilation. Initial
lesions are often confused with lick granulomas.
13. What are the clinical signs of pythiosis in cats?
Twelve cats with pythiosis have been reported; they presented with subcutaneous masses in
the inguinal, tai lhead, or periorbital region.
14. What are the symptoms of lagenidiosis in the dog?
Cutaneous lesions of lagenidiosis (Figure 22-2) are similar to those of pythiosis. Regional
lymphadenopathy is usually present. In contrast with pythiosis, most dogs with lagenidiosis
develop lesions in distant sites (e.g., invasions of distant vessels, lung lesions).
15. How rapid is the development of these diseases?
Pythiosis and lagenidiosis develop very rapidly and lesions can reach considerable size
within a matter of days to weeks.
16. How is a diagnosis of pythiosis or lagenidiosis made?
Diagnosis is usually based on clinical signs, in conjunction with supportive histologic
findings (pyogranulomatous and eosinophilic inflammation with broad, irregularly branching,
infrequently septate hyphae). In contrast to P. insidiosum, hyphae of Lagenidium can usually be
seen on regular hematoxylin and eosin sections. Special staining (e.g., GMS) is necessary to
depict Pythium. Because these characteristics are not unique, isolation and identification of the
pathogen by fungal culture has been traditionally necessary to make a defimitive diagnosis
17. What is the best way to isolate Pythium from tissues?
Optimal isolation rates of P insidiosum from infected tissues are achieved by culturing fresh
techniques include storage at room temperature for up to 3 days, reffigeration for up to 5 days,
shipping on cold packs, and storage in antibiotic solution, each combined with subsequent
inoculation on selective media.
18. What criteria are used to identify oomycetes in a culture?
Size and appearance of the sexual reproductive structures are used for identification
Unfortunately, sometimes these structures are not present in cultures, thus the evaluation of other
material). The presence of zoospores does not differentiate between Pythium and Lagenidium
19. What diagnostic tests can be done when a culture is not available?
 Recently, a polymerase chain reaction technique has been developed to make a final diagnosis
of pythiosis or lagenidiosis in absence of a fungal culture in dogs. Both frozen and ethanol fixed
animal tissues can be used.
20. Is immunohistochemistry helpful in making a diagnosis?
Specifcity of immunohistochemistry is, at this point, questionable; thus, it should not be
used to make a final diagnosis.
21. Is there a blood test that can help diagnose pythiosis?
Serology can be used to detect antibodies. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) for the detection of anti-P insidiosum antibodies in canine serum has been recently
pythiosis, and may be a useful tool for monitoring response to medical or surgical therapy. More
specifically, dogs that develop recurrence after surgery maintain a high level of antibodies,
Pythiosis and Lagenidiosis
181
Figure 22-2 Multiple, ulcerated, highly pruritic lesions due to Lagenidium infection of the leg of a dog.
The lesions had developed over a l-month period.
182
Pythiosis and Lagenidiosis
whereas dogs that undergo successful resection have a marked decrease of titers 2-3 months after
surgery.
22. Is serology helpful in making a diagnosis of lagenidiosis?
Unfortunately, the ELISA currently available has questionable specificity (e.g-, normal dogs
additional research is needed before ELISA can be used to diagnose and monitor cases of
lagenidiosis.
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice for both lagenidiosis and pythiosis, but
Tecurrence is extremely common. Because Pythium and Lagenidium are not true fungi and do not
contain ergosterol in the cell wall, traditional antifungal treatments targeting the synthesis of
ergosterol (e.g, ketoconazole) are usually ineffective. Some response may be obtained by
combination therapy (e.g., itraconazole and amphotericin B) but the success rate is very low (less
than 25%).
24. Is there any other antifungal drug that could have potential application for oomycetes?
oomycete wall, and thus has the potential of being a successful treatment. Unfortunately, it is
extremely expensive.
 25. Is immunotherapy (vaccination) successful?
It is in horses but not in dogs. In horses, two vaccines have been developed for use in
treatment but neither is commercially available. In a study of 40 horses, immunotherapy was most
effective when it was preceded by surgical debridement of the lesions. By itself, the vaccine
success rate was 53% but when combined with surgery the success rate increased to 100%.
26. Is topical therapy successful in dogs?
 It is not in dogs but it is in horses. Topical amphotericin B (either topical application or local
injection) has been reported to be successful for treatiment of smaller lesions in horses.
27. What is the prognosis for pythiosis and lagenidiosis in dogs?
Prognosis is guarded to poor in dogs with extensive lesions or lesions than cannot be
resected.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chaffin MK, Schumacher J, McMulan WC: Cutaneous pythiosis in the horse, Vet Clin North Am Egquine Pract 11
(1):91-103,1995
Grooters AM: Identification of emerging oomycete pathogens based on rRNA gene sequence. Presented at the Third
Annual Meeting of the Gulf Coast Tropical Medicine A ssociation, June 2000, Baton Rouge, La.
Grooters AM, Gee MK: Development of a nested polymerase chain reaction assay for the detection and identification
of Pythium insidiosum, / Vet Intern Med 16(2):147-152, 2002.
  g   o xis   s  e       
A tlanta, March 2000.
Grooters AM, Leise BS, Lopez MK, et al: Development and evaluation of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
for the serodiagnosis of pythiosis in dogs, / Vet Intern Med 16(2):142-146, 2002.
Grooters AM, Leise BS, O'Reilly KO: Development and evaluation of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for
the serodiagnosis of pythiosis in dogs, Focus on Furgat Infectiors 10; Atlanta, March 2000.
Grooters AM, Whittington A, Lopez MK, et al: Evaluation of microbial culture techniques for the isolation of
Pythium insidiosum from equine tissues, / Vet Diagn Irvest 14(4):288-294, 2002
Miscellaneous Infections
183
Mendoza L, Hemandez F, Ajello L: Life cycle of the human and animal oomycete pathogen Pythium insidiosum, J
Clir Microbiot 31(11):2967-2973, 1993.
Sedrish SA, Moore RM, Valdes-Vasquez MA, Haynes PF, Vicek T: Adjunctive use of a neodymium:yttrium-
aluminum gamet laser for treatment of pythiosis granulomas in two horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 211(4):464-465,
1997.
Thianprasit M, Chaiprasert A, Imwidthaya P: Human pythiosis, Curr Top Med Mycot 7(1):43-54, 1996.
23. MISCELLANEOUS INFECTIONS
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is the causative agent of feline cowpox infection?
Feline cowpox is caused by an orthopox virus that is contagious to cats, dogs, and people. It
primarily affects cats in European countries, but there have been sporadic cases in the United
States and India.
2. How is feline cowpox virus transmitted?
Cats contract feline cowpox virus by inhalation and through inoculation into the skin. Small
mammals (e.g., voles) can serve as reservoirs of the virus. Most cases of feline cowpox virus are
diagnosed in the fall, when wild rodent populations tend to be high.
3.  Describe the dermatologic signs of feline cowpox virus infection.
The primary site of feline cowpox virus infection is usually an infected wound. Viral repli-
cation in the wound leads to viremia and secondary lesions within 10-14 days. During the viremic
stage, cats may be febrile and anorexic, but systemic illness (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea,
progress to crusted papules. The lesions are distributed on the face, limbs, paws, and dorsal lumbar
1 -2 months in immunocompetent animal s.
4. How is a feline cowpox virus infection diagnosed?
A diagnosis of feline cowpox can be made with histopathology, immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopy, virus isolation, and serology. Skin histopathology demonstrates eosinophilic
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
5. List skin diseases that have been associated with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and
feline immunodeficiency virus (FTV) infections.
· FeLV and FIV: recurrent abscesses, bacterial folliculitis, chronic gingivitis, increased risk
of demodicosis
· FeLV: paronychia, poor wound healing, seborrhea, generalized pruritus, cutaneous horns
lymphoma, fibrosarcoma
6. Which canine viral infection is sometimes associated with nasal and footpad hyper-
keratosis?
Canine distemper (paramyxovirus)
Miscellaneous Infections
183
Mendoza L, Hemandez F, Ajello L: Life cycle of the human and animal oomycete pathogen Pythium insidiosum, J
Clir Microbiot 31(11):2967-2973, 1993.
Sedrish SA, Moore RM, Valdes-Vasquez MA, Haynes PF, Vicek T: Adjunctive use of a neodymium:yttrium-
aluminum gamet laser for treatment of pythiosis granulomas in two horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 211(4):464-465,
1997.
Thianprasit M, Chaiprasert A, Imwidthaya P: Human pythiosis, Curr Top Med Mycot 7(1):43-54, 1996.
23. MISCELLANEOUS INFECTIONS
Jennifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is the causative agent of feline cowpox infection?
Feline cowpox is caused by an orthopox virus that is contagious to cats, dogs, and people. It
primarily affects cats in European countries, but there have been sporadic cases in the United
States and India.
2. How is feline cowpox virus transmitted?
Cats contract feline cowpox virus by inhalation and through inoculation into the skin. Small
mammals (e.g., voles) can serve as reservoirs of the virus. Most cases of feline cowpox virus are
diagnosed in the fall, when wild rodent populations tend to be high.
3.  Describe the dermatologic signs of feline cowpox virus infection.
The primary site of feline cowpox virus infection is usually an infected wound. Viral repli-
cation in the wound leads to viremia and secondary lesions within 10-14 days. During the viremic
stage, cats may be febrile and anorexic, but systemic illness (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea,
progress to crusted papules. The lesions are distributed on the face, limbs, paws, and dorsal lumbar
1 -2 months in immunocompetent animal s.
4. How is a feline cowpox virus infection diagnosed?
A diagnosis of feline cowpox can be made with histopathology, immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopy, virus isolation, and serology. Skin histopathology demonstrates eosinophilic
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
5. List skin diseases that have been associated with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and
feline immunodeficiency virus (FTV) infections.
· FeLV and FIV: recurrent abscesses, bacterial folliculitis, chronic gingivitis, increased risk
of demodicosis
· FeLV: paronychia, poor wound healing, seborrhea, generalized pruritus, cutaneous horns
lymphoma, fibrosarcoma
6. Which canine viral infection is sometimes associated with nasal and footpad hyper-
keratosis?
Canine distemper (paramyxovirus)
184
Miscellaneous Infections
 7. Name two viral diseases that cause feline upper respiratory disease and oral ulceration.
●Feline rhinotracheitis (o-herpesvirus)
·Feline calicivirus
8. How are papillomaviruses (papovavirus) transmitted?
Direct and indirect contact
9. What is the incubation period for papillomaviruses?
2-6 months
10.  List lesions that have been associated with feline papillomaviruses.
·Solitary papillomas
·Hyperkeratotic plaques
· Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ
11. List synd romes that may be associated with canine papillomavirus infections.
· Proven to be caused by papillomaviruses:
- Canine viral papillomatosis
- Cutaneous inverted papillomas
·Suspected association with papillomaviruses:
- Cutaneous papillomas of older dogs
- Multiple papillomas on the footpads of adult dogs
12. Describe the age predisposition and lesions associated with canine viral papillomatosis.
Canine viral papillomatosis tends to affect young dogs. It is characterized by multiple
often affct the oral cavity (buccal mucosa, tongue, palate), lips, and eyelids. Papillomas can also
occur on haired skin.
Figure 23-1A 6-month-old Great Dane with early papillomavirus lesions, seen as multiple white to gray
papules in the oral cavity.
Miscellaneous Infections
185
13. What is the prognosis for canine viral papillomatosis?
Good, the lesions should spontaneously regress in immunocompetent dogs. Anecdotally,
immune stimulants have been reported to speed resolution in some cases.
14. Describe the clinical appearance of cutaneous inverted papillomas.
Cutaneous inverted papillomas are raised, 1-2 cm in diameter, alopecic masses with a central
pore. These lesions are most common on the ventral abdomen.
15. Is there an age predisposition for cutaneous inverted papillomas?
Cutaneous inverted papillomas affect animals from 8 months to 3 years of age.
16. Describe the papilloma lesions that can occur on the footpads of young adult dogs
(1-2 years old).
 Papillomas on the footpads of young adult dogs are firm, horn-like areas of hyperkeratosis.
taneously regress, but usually recur.
17. Describe papillomavirus-associated lesions that have been reported in older dogs
(3-5 years old).
Cutaneous papillomas have been described in older dogs. These lesions are gray-white
pedunculated masses that are usually found on the head or feet (Figure 23-2), and are more
form of papilloma.
Multiple pigmented plaques or nodules have also been reported.
Figure 23-2 Note the raised, white mass with a cauliflower-like surface on the paw of this mixed-breed
18. How do you diagnose cutaneous papillomas?
· Physical examination reveals the presence of consistent lesions
·Biopsy with histopathology
●Basophilic viral intranuclear or intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies may be present.
· Immunohistochemistry can be used to identify papillomaviruses.
·Electron microscopy
19. What types of treatment are available for papilloma lesions?
· Monitoring without treatment: many spontaneously regress
·Removal: surgical excision, cryosurgery, laser surgery
● Immune stimulation (benefits not proven): interferon, levamisole
·Autogenous vaccination
· Retinoids (cutaneous inverted papillomas)
186
Miscellaneous Infections
20. List cutaneous lesions associated with canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia
rickettsii).
· Cutaneous erythema
·Edema
●Petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhages
· Vasculitis: cutaneous and oral ulceration and necrosis
21. List cutaneous lesions associated with canine ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canis).
·Vasculitis
·Pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis
22. What are Leishmania spp.?
Leishmania spp. are protozoal organisms.
23. How are Leishmania organisms transmitted?
se (ds snnogud dds ruon) s pues q pnsun ne dds pusiag
particularly dogs and rodents, serve as reservoir hosts. Once an animal is infected, macrophages
engulf the Leishmania amastigotes, which are capable of resisting lysosomal degradation and
multiplying within the cell.
Dogs. Cats appear to be relatively resistant to infection.
25. How long is the incubation period in animals infected with leishmaniasis?
The incubation period is long, sometimes lasting weeks to years.
26. What causes the tissue damage associated with leishmaniasis?
Tissue damage is caused by the animal's immune response to the amastigotes, and by
immune complex deposition.
27. Leishmaniasis has a worldwide distribution, but is relatively rare in the United
States. Which states have been reported to have animals with Leishmania spp.
infections?
Alabama, Michigan, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tex as
28. List systemic signs of leishmaniasis.
·Weight loss
·Pyrexia
·Lethargy
·Muscle wasting
·Generalized lymphadenopathy
·Keratoconjunctivitis
·Hepatomegaly
·Lameness
·Splenomegaly
29. What percentage of animals affected with visceral leishmaniasis have cutaneous
signs?
Greater than 80% have cutaneous signs.
30. List dermatologic lesions associated with leishmaniasis.
· Sil very white scale, particularly on head and ex tremities
·Periocular alopecia ("lunettes")
· Nodular dermatitis
·Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
·Secondary bacterial infection
· Ulcerative dermatitis
·Predisposition to demodicosis
·Paronychia
Miscellaneous Infections
187
31. List tests that are available for the diagnosis of leishmaniasis.
·Identification of the organism cytologically (aspirate of tissue)
·Identification of the organism histopathologically
·Immunohistochemistry
· Anti-Leishmania antibodies: Indirect immunofluorescent antibody (IFA), enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
·Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
32.  Does an animal with a high anti-Leis hmania antibody titer have a better prognosis than
an animal with a low titer?
No, a strong humoral immune response is not associated with the resolution of Leishmania
infection. The cell-mediated immune system is much more important in helping the animal resist
the infection, because the amastigotes are engulfed by macrophages where they are able to resist
degradation and multiply.
 33. What stain is best for identifying Leishmania spp. organisms?
Giemsa stain
34. Which tissue aspirate specimens have the greatest chance of yielding amastigotes?
Lymph node and bone marrow aspirate specimens
35. How is leishmaniasis treated?
Leishmaniasis is currently considered an incurable disease. Climical remission can be achieved,
but dogs remain carriers. The current recommendation for therapy is the use of a combination of
meglumine antimonate and allopurinol.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennet M, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RM, Baxby D, Gruffy DD, Jones TJ: Poxvirus infection in the domestic cat: some
clinical and epidemiological observations, Vet Rec 118:387-390, 1986.
Denerolle P, Bourdiseau G: Combination allopurinol and antimony treatment versus antimony alone and allopurinol
alone in the treatment of canine leishmaniasis (96 cases), / Vet Intern Med 13:413-415, 1999.
Frank LA: Cutaneous lesions associated with ehrlichiosis in a dog, Vet Allergy Clin Immunot 5:90-92, 1997.
Gross TL, Clark EG, Hragis AM, Head LL, Haines DMI: Giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats, Vet Dermatot
4:117-122, 1993
Hargis AM, Ginn PE: Feline herpesvirus 1-associated facial and nasal dematitis and stomatitis in domestic cats, Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 29:1281-1290, 1999.
Lappin MR: Protozoal and miscellaneous infections. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Texrbook of veterinary
internat medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 408-417.
LeClerc S, Clark EG, Haines DH: Papillomavirus infection in association with feline cutaneous squanous cell
carcinoma in situ. 13th Proceedings AAV D/ACV D Meeting, 1997, pp 125-126.
Marsella R, Ruiz de Gopegui R: Leishmaniasis: a re-emerging zoonosis, Int J Dermatot 37:801-814, 1998.
Piscopo SE: Feline retroviruses and the skin, Vet Forum January:32-40, 2000.
Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Mutler and Kirk's smatt animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saumders, pp 517-542.
Sundberg JP, Van Ranst M, Montali R, et al: Feline papillomas and papillomaviruses, Vet Pathot 37:1-10, 2000.
Section VI
InflammatorySkinDiseases
24.ATOPY
Pascal Prelaud, DV, DECVD
1. Who was the first dog to be diagnosed with atopy?
Atopy has been described for many centuries in human medicine. For example, one of the
most well known cases of spontaneous allergies was the Roman Prince Britannicus. Britannicus
was allergic to horse dander; this was a significant problem for him when it was his job to lead a
battle. More recently, another famous case of atopy in humans is Richard Ill, who was allergic to
strawberries. Because there are not too many famous dogs (with the exception of Argus, the
hound of Odysseus), no reports related to spontaneous allergy in the dog are found in history. The
first published clinical case of canine atopy is Lacy.l Lacy was a dog living with owners who
were allergic to ragweed. They observed symptoms in Lacy comparable to their own disease
during ragweed pollen season. They asked their allergist, Wittich, to perforim allergy tests. He
observed huge reactions to a scratch test with ragweed in this dog. He also did a passive transfer
of anaphylaxis on healthy dogs and demonstrated that this allergy was mediated by a heat-labile
substance in the serum. Therefore, Lacy's ragweed allergy became the first described case of
spontaneous allergy to an aeroallergen in a dog. In addition, Wittich's testing provided the first
evidence of the existence of anaphylactic antibodies in the dog and the first canine skin test to be
performed using pollen extracts.
 2. Is atopy a phenomenon related to societal conditions?
Progression of atopic disease in humans is highly significant in industrial countries. Numerous
factors have been implicated, including the lack of infectious stimulation of the immune system
during childhood, confined environments, and eating highly processed and hygienic foods. In the
dog, no reliable epidemiologic studies have been done to investigate the roles of environmental
and socioeconomic factors on the incidence of canine atopy. In this species, the genetic factors
seem to be very important because breed predisposition is very clear in most countries.
3.  Are atopic dogs the same all around the world?
Yes, the clinical signs of atopy in dogs present all around the world with feet licking,
recurrent otitis, and facial or generalized pruritus. In the urban areas of most countries, the main
responsive aeroallergen is the house dust mite, Dermatophagoides farinae (the role of storage
mites is stil controversial) (Figure 24-1). However, other important allergenic pollens can vary
very significantly: ragweed in northern America, grasses in most countries of the Old Continent,
or Japanese cedar in Japan.
4. How is canine atopic dermatitis (CAD) diagnosed?
Since the first cases of atopic dermatitis were described in dogs allergic to pollens and other
aeroallergens, it was considered for a long time that the diagnosis of CAD could be made based
on the observation of positive allergy test results to aeroallergens. However numerous non-atopic
dogs can have positive allergy test results and approximately 20% of atopic dogs have negative
188
Atopy
189
areas.
test results. This is why allergy testing is now considered as a tool to be used to select aeroallergens
for hyposensitization and not to definitely diagnose atopic dermatitis.'" As in human medicine,
the diagnosis of CAD can be based on the observation of clinical and historical criteria. This
concept was used by Willemse in developing criteria for the diagnosis of atopic dermatitis in dogs
(Table 24- 1). Willemse adapted the diagnostic criteria that had been proposed by Hanifin and
Rajka for human atopic dermatitis.? More recently, diagnostic criteria of human AD were reevalu-
ated’ and the methodology of this work was applied to dog.? Five discriminant criteria were
defined (Table 24-2). The observation of at least three of these criteria is highly sensitive and
specific (> 80%) for the diagnosis of CAD. However, the use of such parameters can lead to
misdiagnosis in practice, especially in parasitic diseases such as demodicosis and some cases of
sarcoptic mange, but it is more accurate than making a diagnosis of CAD based on results of
allergy testing. Requiring three of five of the discriminant criteria allows a very simple diagnostic
approach and it is highly accurate if care has been taken to rule out the differential diagnoses of
ectoparasites.
5. What is the difference between adverse food reactions and atopy in the dog?
Commonly adverse food reactions and atopic dermatitis are considered as two distinct
clinical entities. However, it is often impossible to differentiate between these two diseases based
190
Atopy
Table 24-1
Willemse's Criteria for the Diagnosis of Canine Atopic Dermatitis
MAJOR CRITERIA (THREE OR
MINOR CRITERIA (THREE OR
MORE REQUIRED)
MORE REQUIRED)
Pruritus
· Onset of symptoms before 3 years of age
 Typical morphology and distribution
Facial erythema and cheilitis
Facial and/or digital involvement or
Bilateral conjunctivitis
 Lichenification of the flexor surface of
Superficial staphylococcal pyoderma
the tarsal joint and/or the ex tensor
Sweating
surface of the carpal joint
· Immediate skin test reactivity
Chronic or chronically relapsing
Elevated allergen-specific IgG
dermatitis
· Elevated allergen-specific IgE
 An individual or family history of atopy
and/or the presence of a breed
predisposition
From: Willemse T: / Smatl Anim Pract 27:771-778, 1986
Table 24-2 Sensitivity and Specificity of Proposed Major Diagnostic Criteria
of Canine Atopic Dermatitis (Comparison With All Other Causes of Pruritus)
Rights were not granted to include this table in electronic media.
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication.
From Prelaud P, Guaguere E, Alhaidari Z, et al: Rev Med Vet 149:1057-1064, 1998.
             s
considered as a clinical entity (a clinical syndrome of immunologically mediated pruritus) and
adverse food reaction is considered as one of the causes of CAD. With such an option, it is easy
to understand that adverse food reaction can be the cause of many different pruritic dermatoses
including CAD. This concept has been largely accepted in human medicine. Further more cross
reactions between pollens and foods are frequently seen in human beings and recently a case of
cross sensitization to tomatoes and Japanese cedar pollen has been described in an allergic dog.
Therefore allergy to both aeroallergens and food antigens can be considered etiologic factors that
can be involved in different pruritic diseases including CAD. These allergies are not a disease per
se but are the underlying causes for the development of clinical lesions in allergic animals.
6. What are the main clinical signs or the chief presenting complaints observed in CAD?
The most common chief complaint is pruritus with scratching or foot chewing and licking.
However, there are other clinical signs of CAD that are often overlooked and should be recognized
as possible symptoms. One of the most common clinical signs is recurrent external bilateral otitis
externa. CAD is the most common cause of external otitis externa (Figure 24-2). Therefore it is
important to look for other diagnostic criteria of CAD when a dog is presented for otitis externa
Atopy
161
Figure 24-2  Otitis externa is an important clinical sign of CAD; it is common to overlook the diagnosis
of CAD when dogs present with a chief complaint of otitis externa.
Figure 24-3  Bilateral erythermatous pododermatitis of the front feet, even when lesions are very mild, is
a major diagnostic criterion of CAD.
(for ex amples, see Table 24-2; Figures 24-3 and 24-4). Most veterinary dermatologists agree that
in some cases otitis externa is the only clinical sign of CAD. Recurrent bacterial folliculitis,
localized deep pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis are other common chief complaints for
which the clinician must consider CAD as a possible underlying cause.
7. I am not used to interdermal testing (IDT). How can I begin?
IDT is a very simple technique. Beginners are often overwhelmed by the choice of allergenic
extracts and the price of these products. Most companies provide IDT kits adapted to each
country or state. Such regionalized IDT test kits are typically complete enough to identify more
than 95% of aeroallergen allergies.
Z61
Atopy
Figure 24-4Cheilitis is a major diagnostic criterion of CAD. Be sure to look for these lesions even if the
owner does not report facial pruritus bec ause the lesions help support the diagnosis of CAD.
There is a very simple and cheap way to prepare a personal IDT kit. Human allergists
frequently use prick test solutions that contain 50% glycerine, 0.4% phenol, and highly con-
centrated (100-fold more than for most canine IDT) allergenic extracts. These solutions can be
kept 3 years in refrigeration. Because these solutions are often provided free for allergists, it is
easy for veterinarians to ask them for free samples! These extracts can be prepared for use in dogs
by making a 1:100 dilution using 4.5-mL vials containing saline with 0.4% phenol (can be
obtained from most allergy companies). Glycerine at 0.5% is not an irritant; we have used these
modified human kit preparations for more than 15 years to test dogs in France and find them to
be as effective as classic IDT solutions.
8. What are the indications for in vitro allergy testing?
Allergen-specific IgE serology in vitro testing is very practical for practitioners.
Commercials tend to propose these tests as a tool to diagnose an allergic skin disease. This is
erroneous and can lead to misdiagnosis, since positive tests can be observed in any non-atopic
dog. In vitro testing, just like IDT, are only indicated after the diagnosis of CAD has been made
and is used primarily to choose allergens for immunotherapy. Positive in vitro test results do not
mean the dog is atopic and likewise a negative test result does not mean it is not. There are a lot
of test being used is not as important as some companies advertise. Commercials often present
the analytical specificity of the method being used as a guarantee of the diagnostic specificity
of the technique. In fact, the diagnostic specificity also depends on the controls used and the way
the threshold of positivity is determined.
9. What are the most common mistakes made in the diagnosis of CAD?
The main mistake in the diagnosis of CAD is failure to diagnose demodicosis and sarcoptic
mange because lesions can be very similar (it is especially common to overlook the diagnosis of
demodicosis in breeds predisposed to CAD—such as Bulldogs, West Highland White Terriers,
etc.). Sarcoptic mange must be ruled out by a treatment trial if there is a diagnostic doubt.
Another pitfall in the diagnosis of CAD is the failure to consider and diagnose and then treat
the very frequent complications of staphylococcal and Malassezia infections and external otitis.
This is why clinical examinations must include all the skin with a thorough examination of the
ears and the use of skin scrapings and cytology at each clinical visit.
Atopy
193
10. Is it possible to cure an atopic dog?
It is important to explain to the owner of an atopic dog that a cure is very rare. CAD has a
genetic basis that cannot be controlled. These dogs will frequently re-present with dermatitis
during their whole life, with or without important crises. This is why even if CAD is well
controlled, hygienic procedures must be scrupulously followed.
11. What is essential advice to give to an atopic dog's owner?
There is no good treatment of CAD without good understanding and compliance from the
owner. At least the two main domains the owner must learn are hygienic measures and early
detection of an impending CAD crisis. Hy gienic measures include constant flea control; premium
food (or "hypoallergenic" or hy drolyzed diets if adverse food reaction was demonstrated), ideally
shampoos in a manner that does not interact with flea control (e.g., do not bathe for 3 days
before or after applying a residual flea product). It is also important to have good and frequent
interactions between owner and dog to minimize risk of anxiety. The owner must be able to
identify the first element of an AD crisis in his dog and begin an appropriate treatment. CAD
crises may include otitis externa, bacterial folliculitis, and Malassezia pododermatitis (Table 24-3).
Table 24-3T
Therapeutic Options for Treatment of Pruritus Adapted
to Each Etiologic Factor
CAUSE
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
 Aeroallergens allergy
Hyposensitization, emollient shampoos
Adverse food reaction
Hypoallergenic diet
 Flea allergy or enhancement by flea bites
Flea control
Keratinization defect
Emollient and/or keratomodulator
shampoos, EFA, retinoids
Malassezia infection
Chlorhexidine shampoo, ketoconazole
 Staphylococcal infection
Antiseptic shampoos, anti biotics
12. Is steroid therapy necessary for all cases of CAD?
Steroid therapy is not necessary in all cases of CAD. Most dogs can be controlled with
hygienic and antimicrobial treatments. Steroid therapy can be used to treat otherwise uncon-
trollable pruritus and to prevent dogs from experiencing recurrent pruritic crises. The treatment
of an uncontrollably pruritic CAD crisis is with prednisone or prednisolone or methylprednisolone
for 3 to 10 days (at a dosage of 0.5-1 mg/kg orally every 24 hours). The treatment can then be
stopped in most cases. No weaning is necessary with such a short treatment. If relapses are
frequent and the intervals severely pruritic crisis are very short, maintenance steroid therapy can
be prescribed, using the lowest effective dosage. In such a case, cyclosporine is a safer option for
long-term treatment of the patient.
13. Is flea control inescapable?
Excepted in geographic areas where there are no fleas, one must say yes. Flea control is
(FAD) development, and preventing an AD crisis induced by flea bites (probable role of flea
saliva super-antigens). If these reasons are simply explained, owners accept such constraint even
if they never see any fleas. If this is not done, there always will be a doubt concerning the
involvement of fleas when the patient is presented for an AD crisis
194
Atopy
14. Is there any relationship between behavioral disorders and CAD?
 In human medicine, the link between AD crisis and behavioral disorders, like anxiety, is very
clear and widely recognized. Psychotherapy can be one of the tools used in the treatment of AD
in human beings. In the dog, such a link is more difficult to demonstrate. There are anecdotal
reports of high frequency of behavioral disorders or acral lick dermatitis in atopic dogs or of the
efficacy of fluoxetine in the treatment of CAD. Sometimes, owners observe a link between CAD
crisis and behavior modifications. However, it is often impossible to know if behavior alterations
crisis is induced by a behavioral alteration.
In practice, it is important in such a chronic disease to identify any behavioral disease
(anxiety, depression) in which substitutive activities can be obser ved (chewing, licking, scratching)
and treat them using behavior modification and appropriate medications.
15. What is the best way to treat atopic dogs?
There is no universal recipe for the treatment of CAD. Each treatment must be adapted to
each case and to the owner's motivation.
The first step is identification of the causes of pruritus in the atopic dog: bacterial and/or
fungal (Malassezia) infection, possible flea infestation, other ectoparasites, allergy to aeroallergens,
adverse food reactions, and keratinization defects (see Table 24-2).
Then the goal of treatment must be defined and explained to the owner. In some cases, the
aim can be a definitive control of pruritus and lesions, but in severe cases, it can be first a decrease
of lesions and pruritus severity and decrease of frequency of crises through symptomatic
treatments.
such as immunotherapy, cyclosporine and steroid prescriptions, and the need for regular hy gienic
measures.
Regular visits between the veterinarian, client, and pet must be done to adapt treatment to
the owner's compliance and motivation and the pet's clinical response.
16. Why are antibiotics so often used in the treatment of CAD?
Antibiotics are the drug of choice in the treatment of any CAD crisis. These are of course
used to treat associated skin infections (bacterial folliculitis, BOG), but also to prevent the role
 on e rooydes  pd suns no  ud on np s uo s sio s
IgE response directed against Staphylococcus intermedius in atopic dogs.
17. Is it necessary to treat very minor forms of CAD?
It depends on the owner's complaint. If mild symptoms of otitis externa or interdigital
erythema do not generate too much discomfort, treatment may not necessary. Hygienic and
preventive prescriptions may also be sufficient treatments for many cases. These treatments may
simply include the use of essential fatty acids, emollient shampoos, and flea control.
18. Is it possible to use only topical treatments?
In minor forms of atopic dermatitis, topical treatment can be used alone. These may include
emollient shampoos for cases with cutaneous xerosis, steroid shampoos to control a minor AD
chisis, or topical steroids used on limited erythematous areas such as the ear pinnae or feet
19. Is immunotherapy effective in treating CAD?
Yes, however, one must explain what effectiveness is. It is important to explain to the owner
in 10-20% of cases. For most dogs, the goals of immunotherapy are to reduce AD crisis severity
or frequency and the need for other drug administration. If a beneficial response is not observed
Atopy
195
after one year of treatment, immunotherapy can be discontinued. During the first year of
treatment, it is important to make control visits regularly so the veterinarian can alter adjunctive
treatments and monitor the severity of the disease. Monitoring may include assignment of a
each day of steroid or cyclosporine therapy, 1 point for antibiotics or antifungal treatments, /2
point for antihistamines or essential fatty acids treatments, and so on. A progressive decrease in
drug administration scores over several months indicates a beneficial response to the immunotherapy.
20. When can I use cyclosporine A (CSA) in the treatment of CAD?
Cyclosporine A is a new treatment option for CAD at an initial dosage of 5 mg/kg per day
orally. It is as effective as steroids and in most dogs has fewer side effects. However it takes
longer (7-10 days) to achieve control of pruritus than with steroids (1-3 days). CSA can be used
for long-term treatment of CAD when the use of a potent anti-inflammatory medication is
stopped after a few months of treatment. Relapses are significantly less frequent when AD crises
are treated with CSA compared to treating AD crises with steroids.
21. What are the main causes of treatment failure?
The main causes are lack of owner motivation and lack of control of one or more
contributing causes of pruritus.
During immunotherapy, owners may stop treatment after a few months because they do not
observe any improvement. The owner must understand that immunotherapy should be continued
for a full year before assessing how effective it has been. Lack of compliance with restrictive diets
is also a very frequent cause of failure, as is the lack of systematic control of secondary infections
(staphylococcal folliculitis, Malassezia dermatitis, otitis externa, etc.). This is why it is very
important to use cytology at each consultation to identify staphylococcal or Malassezia infec-
tions. Flea infestation can also provoke an AD crisis, and motivating the owner to maintain
regular flea control is necessary at each visit.
REFERENCES
1. DeBoer DJ, Hillier A: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dematitis (XV) : fundamental concepts in clinical
diagnosis, Vet /mmunot mmunopathot 81:271-276, 2001.
2.1
infections to the pathogenesis and clinical course of canine atopic demmatitis, Vet Immunot Immunopathot
81:239-249,2001.
3. Fujimura M, Ohmori K, Masuda K, Tsujimoto H, Sakaguchi M. Oral allergy syndrome induced by tomato in a
dog with Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria japonica) pollinosis, / Vet Med Sci 64(11):1069-1070, 2002.
4.Hillier A, Griffin CE: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (X): is there a relationship between
canine atopic demmatitis and cutaneous adverse food reactions? Vet Immunot Immunopathot 81:227-231, 2001
5. Kunkle GA, Bevier DE: In vitro allergy testing. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds): Advances in veterinary
dermatology, vo1 4. Oxford, 2002, Blackwell Science, pp 324-336.
6. Olivry T, Rivierre C, Jackson HA, Murphy KM, Davidson G, Sousa CA: Cyclosporine decreases skin lesions
and pruritus in dogs with atopic dermatitis: a blinded randomized prednisolone-controlled trial, Vet Dermatot
13(2):77-87, 2002.
7. Prelaud P, Guaguere E, Alhaidari Z, Heripret D, Faivre N, Gayerie A: Reevaluation des criteres de diagnostic
de la demite atopique canine, Rev Med Vet 149:1057-1064, 1998.
8.Prelaud P: Allergotogie canine. Paris: 1999, Masson.
9.
Willemmse T: Atopic dermatitis: a review and reconsideration of diagnostic criteria, / Smatl Anim Pract 27:771-778,
1986
10.
Williams HC, Bumey PGJ, Hay RI, et al: The U.K. Working Party's diagnostic criteria for atopic dematitis. I.
Derivation of minimum set of discriminators for atopic demmatitis, Br J Dermatot 131:383-396, 1994.
11.Wittich FW: Spontaneous allergy in the lower animal, J Allergy 62:236-242, 1941.
196
Dietary Hypersensitivity
25. DIETARY HYPERSENSITIVITY
Stephanie R. Bruner, DVM, DACVD
1. What is dietary hypersensitivity?
"Dietary hypersensitivity" is a phrase associated with great confusion in veterinary medicine
today. As the third most common hypersensitivity in both dogs and cats, this is a disorder
veterinarians may see with some frequency, yet have difficulty defining. Dietary hypersensitivity
and food allergy are terms often applied indiscriminately, when in fact "allergy" refers to a
physiologic response to an allergen and hypersensitivity is an abnormal immunologic reaction to
 e as, e , sn s y s d e e 
Much of what is diagnosed as dietary hypersensitivity or food allergy should probably be
more accurately referred to as "adverse reaction to food," which encompasses both immunologic
and non-immunologic responses to foods. The phrase "food intolerance" suggests a non-
immunologic response such as an idiosyncratic reaction, pharmacologic reaction, food poisoning,
or a metabolic reaction. For the purposes of this discussion, "food allergy" will be used to
describe all of the above because this is the terminology most frequently used by the veterinary
community when explaining this disorder to a client.
2. What are the causes and pathogenesis of food allergy?
Proteins are by far the most widely diagnosed causative agents, although carbohydrates, food
additives, and preservatives are anecdotally reported as allergens. Client educati on must emphasize
that food allergies involve reactions to dietary ingredients, not food brands or manufacturers.
Adult dogs may eat a specific brand of food for several months or years before developing a food
allergy. Alternatively, dogs may change food brands frequently and still develop a food allergy.
The latter circumstance is largely due to the fact that many brands contain similar ingredients,
regardless of manufacturer. While the quality of the protein varies widely in commercially
prepared diets, the sources of the proteins frequently overlap.
Various mechanisms of food allergy in the dog are proposed. While most food allergies are
thought to be type I hypersensitivity reactions, type IIl and IV hypersensitivity reactions have
well supported. Even less discussion on the topic exists for cats. An ex act immunologic mechanism
for food allergy in small animals has not been convincingly elucidated to date. Hence, it is safe
the dog or cat. Fortunately, whether food allergy, food hypersensitivity, or simply adverse
reactions to food is being investigated, the approach to the diagnosis and management is
thesame.
Nonseasonal pruritus is perhaps the most common chief complaint for dogs with food
allergies. Pruritus may be recurrent or intermittent if the dog's diet is varied by season or work
expectations, e.g., hunting dogs. Response of the pruritus to glucocorticoids is variable. The
pruritus is often perceived by the owner as generalized in distri bution but may be focused on the
ear canals/pinnae, face, feet, axillae, inguinal areas, and/or the perineum. When discussing food
allergies with owners, the author refers to these clinical signs as "The Big Five"—head shaking,
face rubbing, foot licking, belly scratching, and bottom scooting. Chronic recurrent otitis externa
DietaryHypersensitivity
197
consistency, increased frequency of defecation, lethargy, claw loss, and seizures. The incidence
of concurrent gastrointestinal signs (other than subtle changes in defecation) is a source of
controversy in the veterinary literature.
There is no known gender predilection for food allergies in dogs. The age of onset for
clinical signs is widely variable, ranging from less than 4 months to greater than 12 years of age.
An estimated one third to one half of all cases, however, are reported to begin before l year of
age. While some studies report no breed predilection, other studies report American Cocker
Spaniels, Boxers, Chinese Shar-Pei, Collies, Dachshunds, Dalmatians, Labrador Retrievers,
Lhasa Apsos, Miniature Schnauzers, Soft-Coated Wheaten Terriers, Springer Spaniels, West
Highland White Terriers, and terrier breeds in general as being associated with an increased
incidence of food allergies.
 4. What are the physical examination findings in dogs with food allergy?
Physical examination may reveal porphyrin staining of the haircoat due to excessive licking
behavior, papular eruptions, erythroderma, post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, hyperkeratosis,
lichenification, and/or self-induced alopecia. Evidence of secondary pyoderma (follicular oriented
papules, a patchy “moth-eaten” alopecia, epidermal collarettes), secondary Malassezia dermatitis,
bacterial or yeast otitis externa, pyotraumatic dermatitis ("hot spots"), secondary seborrhea, and
seborrheic dermatitis may also be present. Skin lesion severity may range from non-existent to
marked, and in my opinion relates to chronicity and the presence of secondary dermatoses as
much as to the actual severity of the food allergy itself. Less common clinical findings include
lymphadenomegaly and onychodystrophy (Figures 25-1 to 25-3).
Figure 25-1Palmar interdigital fur staining secondary to Matassezia pododermatitis in a dog with food
allergies.
198
Dietary Hypersensitivity
Figure 25-2Staining of the dorsal forefoot in a dog with food allergies
Figure 25-3Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation of the ventral abdomen in a dog with food allergies.
DietaryHgpersensitivity
661
 5. What are the differential diagnoses for food allergies in dogs?
The primary differential diagnoses for food allergies in dogs include atopy, flea allergy
dermatitis, scabies and other ectoparasites, and primary seborrhea. To further add to the con-
fusion, concurrent environmental hypersensitivity disorders are frequently diagnosed. Dietary
hypersensitivity with concurrent atopy is hypothesized to vary from 13% to as much as 80% in
various geographic regions of the United States as well as proposed "regional pockets" of food-
allergic dogs of specific breeds across the country.
6. What are the history and clinical signs of food allergy in cats?
There is no known age or gender predilection for food allergy in cats. Siamese cats are
predisposed over other breeds. Food-allergic cats demonstrate great variation in their clinical
signs. True to their nature, cat skin is unpredictable, but cats do exhibit a group of clinical signs
that should alert the veterinarian to consider a food allergy. These clinical signs typically involve
marked nonseasonal pruritus and include miliary dermatitis, face/neck pruritus, self-induced
symmetric alopecia, and eosinophilic granuloma complex. Angioedema, urticaria, lymphadeno-
neck pruritus typically focuses on the preauricular, periorbital, pinnal, and neck regions; self-
trauma is a common and potentially severe sequela.
7. What are the differential diagnoses for food allergy in cats?
The primary differential diagnoses for food allergy in the cat include flea allergy derrmatitis,
atopy, dermatophytosis, and Malassezia dermatitis. Once the veterinarian suspects food allergy
or nonseasonal atopy as the primary cause of the dermatologic disease, and eliminates other
differential diagnoses such as ectoparasitism and dermatophytosis, the testing process for food
allergy begins.
 8. What tests are commercially available for food allergy diagnosis?
In vitro serum testing (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or radioimmunoassay testing),
intradermal testing, and the basophil degranulation test (available in Europe) are not recom-
mended for food allergy evaluation at this time. Serology focuses on IgE-mediated reactions, and
thus will not detect other hypersensitivity reactions or non-immunologically mediated responses
Likewise, intradermal testing has poor positive and negative predictive values for food allergies
in dogs and cats.
9. What is the best way to diagnose food allergy in dogs and cats?
The test of choice for diagnosing food allergy in veterinary patients is an elimination diet
trial. The elimination diet involves feeding the dog or cat a home-cooked novel protein and
carbohydrate source food for a minimum of 10-12 weeks. Various periods of test duration are
recommended. The author recommends using an extended 10-12 week duration to allow for a
bnief period of transition from the current diet to the test diet, and to ensure compliance for at
least the minimum recommended duration (8-10 weeks).
10. How is an elimination test diet chosen?
The choice of dietary components is highly individualized to the patient and requires a
diet for a given patient is simply any food that the pet has never eaten previously.
Obtaining a complete dietary history can be quite challenging if the owner is not particularly
observant or if the pet eats table food. Likewise, a complete dietary history may be impossible to
outdoor predators. It is important to raise all these possibilities when interviewing the client
before test diet selection. It is also helpful to ask the client to present labels from the pet's foods,
200
Dietary Hypersensitivity
medications and treats or to maintain an inter-office binder that contains ingredient labels from
popular dog and cat food products. After a dietary history has been obtained, an appropriate trial
diet is selected.
11. What test diets are available for diagnosing food allergy?
A home-cooked diet composed of a single protein source and a single carbohydrate source
changes associated with commercial processing procedures, the use of additives, or contamination
with other proteins at the factory. Unfortunately, home cooking requires considerable effort on
the part of the owner. Not only are some novel protein sources (duck, rabbit, venison, elk, horse)
more difficult to purchase in large quantities on a reliable basis, some of these foods tend to be
expensive. Lamb is typically more accessible than other "specialty” meats, but as a rule, lamb is
avoided because it is likely to have been fed, often unwittingly, as part of a dog's (and with
increasing frequency, cat's) growth or adult maintenance diet. Concern is also often raised
regarding the feeding of an unbalanced diet for the test period. In a healthy adult animal, this is
unli kely to be a problem. In a young, growing animal, however, 10-12 weeks of dietary imbalance
may be inappropriate. Dogs and cats on an elimination diet trial, particularly with a home-cooked
diet, are weighed at regular intervals to ensure that their caloric requirements are being met.
When home cooking is impractical or inappropriate, a balanced commercial diet is selected.
Several diets are currently marketed specifically as test diets. The author prefers to use novel
whole protein and whole carbohy drate diets when possible. Several hydrolysate diets are currently
being marketed for use in the dog and cat. These diet formulations are based on data in humans
dog and cat before recommending these foods on a broad basis. Currently, dietary selection
remains a case-by-case assessment.
The premise for selecting any one of these diets is the same find a food with a few, simple
ingredients that are novel to the pet in question. Next, ensure that the pet will eat the diet. Owners
should be warned about the perils of inappetence, particularly in the cat, and instructed to notify
the veterinary office immediately if any animal will not eat the test diet.
12. What is the most difficult part of an elimination diet trial?
Clearly the most difficult aspect of conducting a diet trial is obtaining and maintaining client
compliance for the entire test duration. Clients may be reluctant to begin a diet trial because
previous changes in food brands have resulted in little or no improvement. In these cases, the
difference between changing brands and changing protein sources must be carefully explained.
Many commercial diets look, smell, and probably taste substantially different, yet on careful
inspection of the ingredient label, these diets share common protein and carbohydrate
deceived by label claims of “lamb and rice”diets with lamb as the first ingredient, but these
diets may also contain fish meal and other protein sources. These are not diets that are suitable
for foodtnals.
Excellent client compliance can usually be obtained by explaining the purpose and
importance of the restrictive food trial. Clients should be informed that their pets cannot eat any
other foods, treats, chew toys or flavored medications for the duration of the test. Unflavored,
injectable or topical heartworm prophylaxis is used. Routine contact is maintained with the
patient and client during the test period. This can be in the form of telephone follow-ups with a
veterinary technician or assistant, regular weigh-ins, and/or re-evaluations for the treatment of
any concurrent or secondary dermatoses.
13. How is food allergy definitively diagnosed?
DietaryHypersensitivity
107
 go   s   o  0 q     s
adding the original diet, and eventually any routine table foods or treats, to the test diet followed
by careful observation for up to 14 days. If the clinical signs do not recur, food allergy has not
been confimed. If the clinical signs do recur, food allergy is confirmed. Upon provocation, the
original diet is immediately removed, and the test diet alone is fed until the clinical signs resolve
(usually within a few days to weeks). Time to recurrence of clinical signs is controversial. Many
dermatologists report that a short time to recurrence (15 minutes to 4 days) is suggestive of a true
immunologically based mechanism.Later responses are more likely to reflect a non-
immunologically based reaction. Regardless, the dog's clinical response is the same.
14. What happens after a food allergy is diagnosed?
After food allergy is confirmed, the owner has three feeding options: l) continue feeding a
balanced but severely restricted diet, 2) trial and error with commercially available diets, or 3)
feeding "basic" foods individually. Trial and error involves selecting commercially available
maintenance diets that have relatively few label ingredients. Feeding basic foods involves feeding
one new protein or carbohydrate source every 2 weeks, mixed gradually into the test diet. The
basic foods selected will depend on the pet's previous diet, but common offending allergens
should be considered. Some of the most frequent allergens in the dog are beef, soy, chicken, milk/
dairy, corn, wheat, and egg. The three most commonly implicated food allergens in the cat are
cow's milk, beef, and fish. The list of provocative foods is likely to vary somewhat in the future
as some products lose and others gain popularity on the pet food market. The average number of
dietary allergens for dogs and cats remains controversial, with some sources citing only one food
while others suggest an average of two to three and in some individuals, up to five. Hence, clients
available diet and practice antigen avoidance.
15. What is the prognosis for food allergy in the dog and cat?
The prognosis is good, provided that constant vigilance is maintained and the offending food
allergens are avoided. Clients must understand that dietary avoidance is a means of control and
not cure. Re-introduction of an allergen results in recurrence of the clinical signs. The likelihood
of developing an allergy to a new food is unknown at this time, although many veterinary
 dermatologists agree that it is a possible but uncommon occurrence.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chesney CJ: Food sensitivity in the dog: a quantitative study, / Small Anin Pract 43:203-207, 2002.
Jackson HA: Food allergy: fact and fiction, Proceedings of the 16h Annual AAVD/ ACVD Meeting 2001.
Jeffers JG, Shanley KJ, Meyer EK: Diagnostic testing of dogs for food hypersensitivity, J Am Ver Med Assoc
198:245-250, 1991.
Reedy LM, Miller WH, Willemse T: Food hypersensitivity. In Reedy LM, Miller WH, Willemse T: Allergic skir
diseases of dogs and cats, ed 2. London, 1997, WB Saunders, pp 173-188.
Rosser EJ: Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:259-262, 1993.
Rosser EJ: Food allergy in dogs and cats: a review, Vet Allergy Clin Immunot 6:21-24, 1998.
Roudebush P: Hypoallergenic diets for dogs and cats. In Bonagura JD (ed): Current veterinary therapy Xll, smat
animat practice. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 530-535.
White SD: Food allergy in dogs, Compend Contin Educ 20:261-269, 1997.
Wills J, Harvey R: Diagnosis and management of food allergy and intolerance in dogs and cats, Aust Vet J 71:322
326,1994.
Contact Hypersensitivity
26.CONTACT HYPERSENSITIVITY
Rosarna Marsella, DVM, DACVD
What is a hypersensitivity?
Hypersensitivity is an altered state of immune reactivity. The normal function of the immune
system is the discrimination between self and non-self and the protection of the organism from
noxious substances. Hypersensitivity occurs when the immune system starts attacking inoffensive
materials, such as pollen or itself. There are many different types of hypersensitivities. Allergies
are one manifestation of hypersensitivity.
2.
What is a contact hypersensitivity?
Contact hypersensitivity is a type of delayed reaction, mediated by cells called T lymphocytes.
T lymphocytes are very important in the cell-mediated immune response. There are several
subpopulations of T lymphocytes. They include helper cells, suppressor cells, and memory cells.
professional antigen-presenting cells called Langerhans cells. These cells are able to capture the
offending substance that has come in contact with the skin and digest it in a way that can be
processed by T cells. The information is then processed and memorized by T cells. At this stage
of the disease, no clinical signs are evident (incubation period or sensitization phase). Repeated
exposure to the same substance is necessary for sensitization to occur. After sensitization has
been completed, the next time that the same substance is encountered, an immune reaction is
triggered and T cells release mediators called cytokines, which cause the development of an
inflammatory reaction against the offending substance.
3. What is an antigen?
An antigen is a substance capable of inducing a detectable immune response.
4. What is an allergen?
Allergens are antigens able to induce an allergic reaction.
5. What is a hapten?
A hapten is a substance that is not immunogenic by itself but needs to bind to a larger carrier
antigens due to their low molecular weight. In cases of contact hypersensitivity, most of the
molecules responsible for clinical signs are haptens.
6. How long does sensitization last?
The length of sensitization is variable and, in animals, this period can range from a couple
of months to several years.
 7. After the sensitization period is completed, how quickly do clinical signs develop upon
re-exposure to the offending substance?
Clinical signs have a delayed onset. It takes an average of 24-48 hours before the symptoms
become evident. This latent period can be as short as a few hours in highly sensitized individuals,
and as long as 5 days in very mild cases.
Contact Hgpersensitivity
203
Figure 26-1 Papular and macular lesions on the ventrum of a dog with contact hypersensitivity
8. How does contact hypersensitivity manifest in animals?
Intense pruritus and a papular eruption are the initial manifestation of the disease (Figures
26-1 to 26-3). As trauma of the skin occurs (due to scratching), secondary infections, lichenification
(increased thickness of the skin), and hyperpigmentation (increased pigmentation) develop.
9. What is a papular eruption?
 Papules are red firm lesions, resembling little insect bites. They develop into pustules when
they become filled with opaque liquid (pus).
10. What are the differences between contact allergy and atopic dermatitis?
Contact allergy is a type IV hypersensitivity (cell-mediated, delayed hypersensitivity at
24-48 hours after exposure), while atopic dermatitis is thought to be a type I hypersensitivity
(IgE-mediated, immediate reaction at 15 minutes and late phase reaction at 4-6 hours following
exposure). From the clinical standpoint, the two diseases may look very similar, manifesting with
pruritus, and erythema primarily affecting face, feet, and ears. One clinical difference is that
contact allergy manifests with a primary papular/pustular eruption, whereas in atopic dermatitis
the presence of papules usually is related to the presence of a secondary bacterial folliculitis.
11. What are the common causes of contact hypersensitivity in people?
Virtually any chemical can cause contact hypersensitivity. In humans, topical medications,
such as neomycin and benzocaine, are common sensitizers. Plants can also cause disease-
poison ivy is the most common plant responsible for contact hypersensitivity in people. Finally
metals, such as nickel and gold, are often responsible for contact hypersensitivity.
12. What are the common causes of contact hypersensitivity in dogs?
In dogs, shampoos, insecticides, topical medications, and plants have been reported to cause
Commelinaciae (Figure 26-4) and jasmine. These plants are quite common in the Southeastern
United States. Other reported contact allergens in the dog include plastic, detergents, wool,
synthetic rugs, and fertilizers.
204
Contact Hypersensitivity
Figure 26-2Papular rash in the perineal region resulting from contact hypersensitivity.
13. How common is this disease in small animals?
It is not very common. It is estimated to affect from 1% to 10% of companion animals. It
seems to be more common in humid tropical climates, possibly because of the increased exposure
to plants that have the potential of causing this disease or because of the concomitant occurrence
of other forms of allergies (e.g., flea allergy and atopic dermatitis).
14. Do animals develop reactions to poison ivy?
Animals are allergic to other plants but are rarely allergic to poison ivy, which is a common
cause of problems for humans.
15. How can I differentiate between an irritant reaction and an allergic reaction?
Irritant reactions do not require prior sensitization; therefore, symptoms rapidly develop at
the first exposure to the offending substance. Furthermore, when multiple animals are exposed to
Contact Hgpersensitivity
205
Figure 26-3 Papules, lichenification, and hyperpigmentation of the ventrum from chronic exposure to a
contact allergen.
Figure 26-4  Leaves of the Commetina plant, a common cause of contact hypersensitivity reactions in
dogs.
irritant substances, reactions develop in all individuals as opposed to allergic reactions, which
only develop in the sensitized ones.
16. How long do symptoms persist after the last contact?
Resolution, after avoidance of the offending substance, may take 7-10 days.
17. Can the reaction be transferred from one part of the body to another?
Yes. The offending material can be transferred from the area of initial exposure to other parts
by scratching, thereby triggering an inflammatory response in various body locations.
18. Is it contagious?
No. Contact hypersensitivity is an individual reaction that occurs only in previously
sensitized patients.
206
ContactHypersensitivity
19. Can contact hypersensitivity be prevented?
No. Unfortunately, there is no prevention for the development of sensitization. In humans,
believed that abrasions and repeated minor trauma may facilitate the development of contact
allergy. Development of climical signs (elicitation), however, may be prevented by pre-medication
with oral pentoxifylline 48 hours before exposure to the offending substance in individuals that
are already sensitized. The efficacy of pentoxifylline has been tested in both dogs and people and
the response was found to be satisfactory.
20. What are possible risk factors for this disease?
Very little is known about risk factors of contact hypersensitivity in companion animals. It
appears that dogs with concurrent allergies, such as atopic dermatitis, may develop contact
hypersensitivity more frequently, possibly because of the impaired barrier function of the skin.
in dogs. No breed or gender predilection has been identified in companion animals.
to extensive parts of the body, at high concentrations, when the skin is inflamed or otherwise
damaged, in a repetitive fashion, and under occlusion, facilitate the development of this
hypersensitivity.
21. Is there any blood test that can be done to identify individuals at risk?
No. This disease is limited to the skin and it is not detectable in the blood.
22. How is contact hypersensitivity diagnosed?
It is diagnosed by complete resolution of clinical signs with avoidance and recurrence of
signs with re-challenge. Once contact allergy is suspected, patch testing with individual substances
can be done to identify the offending allergen. In a patch test, a small amount of the substance is
applied directly onto the skin and contact is allowed for 24 hours. After that time, the skin is
ex amined for the presence of pruritic papules (positive reaction).
23. Does it help to take a biopsy to make a diagnosis?
by themselves.
24. Can contact hypersensitivity be “cured"?
No. There is no cure for this disease. Avoidance is the best long-term solution for contact
but do not represent a cure for the disease.
 25. Which drugs can be used to improve the symptoms of contact hypersensitivity?
 Steroids are highly effective to decrease pruritus and papules. They can be used orally and
topically. Adverse effects of systemic steroids include increased thirst (polydipsia) and increased
urination (polyuria). Chronic use of steroids will also predispose to the development of secondary
skin and urinary tract infections. Topical steroids may also induce decreased thickness of the skin
(cutaneous atrophy). Besides steroids, other drugs are useful in decreasing the signs of contact
allergy. In 2ool, a strong immunomodulator, similar to cyclosporine, was introduced in the
United States. It is called tacrolimus and is formulated as an ointment (Protopic). It has the
the signs of contact dermatitis.
26. Do antihistamines work for this type of allergy?
Unfortunately, because this disease is not histamine-mediated, antihistamines do not provide
Contact Hypersensitivity
207
Telief. Antihistamines are mainly used for allergies that have an immediate reaction (e.g., pollen
allergies).
27. Does allergy vaccine work for this type of allergy?
Individuals with atopic dermatitis (e.g., pollen allergies) often benefit from an allergy vaccine
(hyposensitization). Unfortunately, hyposensitization does not provide relief for contact
hypersensitivity (Table 26-1).
Table 26-1
Differentiation of Contact Hypersensitivity and Atopic Dermatitis
VARIABLE
CONTACTHYPERSENSITIVITY
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Route of allergen access
 Percutaneous
Percutaneous
Inhalation?
Type of hypersensitivity
Type IV (mediated by
Type I (mediated by IgE,
1ymphocytes, delayed
immediate reaction at
reaction at 24-48 hr)
 15 min, late phase reaction
at 4-6 hr)
Incidence
Uncommon
Common (up to 10% of 
 canine population)
Clinical signs
Pruritus
Pruritus
 Primary papular/pustular
 Primary erythema
eruption
Papules are secondary to
Erythema
 development of pyoderma
Distri bution of lesions
 It depends on the offending
Face, feet, ears, axillae,
substance
groin
Diagnosis
 Resolution of signs with
 Clinical signs, history,
avoidance and relapse with
exclusion of other pruritic
re-challenge
skin diseases
Patch test
Positive serology or
intradermal skin testing is
 considered a secondary
cniterion
Therapy
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids
Pentoxifylline
Pentoxifylline
Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus
 No response to antihi stamines,
Cyclosporine
essential fatty acids, and
Moderate response to
hyposensitization
 antihistamines, essential
fatty acids, 70-80%
success with
hyposensitization 
28. Does contact allergy improve with age?
No. Unfortunately, this allergy tends to get worse with age and with repetitive exposure.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Comer KM: Carpet deodorizer as a contact allergen in a dog, / Am Vet Med Assoc 193(12):1553-1554, 1988.
Funk JO, Maibach HI: Horizons in phamacologic intervention in allergic contact dematitis, J Am Acad Dermatot
31(6):999-1014, 1994.
208
FleaAllergyDermatitis
patients, Dermatology 204(4):334-337, 2002.
Kunkle GA: Contact dermatitis, Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim Pracr 18(5):1061-1068, 1988.
Lauema AI, Maibach HI, Granlund H, Erkko P, Kartamaa M, Stubb S: Inhibition of contact allergy reactions by
topical FK506, Lancet 340(8818):556, 1992
Marsella R, Kunkle GA, Lewis DT: Pentoxifylline inhibits contact hypersensitivity reactions to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs, Vet Dermatot 8(2):121-126, 1997.
Morris SD, Rycroft RJ, White IR, Wakelin SH, McFadden JP: Comparative frequency of patch test reaclions to
topical antibiotics, Br J Dermatot 146(6):1047-1051, 2002.
Reedy LM, Miller WH: Allergic skin diseases ofdogs and cats. Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Saricaoglu H, Tunali S, Bulbul E, White IR, Palali Z: Prevention of nickel-induced allergic contact reactions with
pentoxify1line, Contact Dermariris 39(5):244-247, 1998.
Thomsen MK, Thomsen HK: Histopathological changes in canine allergic contact dermatitis patch test reactions. A
study on spontaneously hypersensitive dogs, Acta Vet Scand 30(4):379-384, 1989.
27. FLEA ALLERGY DERMATITIS
Diane E. Bevier, DVM, DACVD
1. What is flea allergy dermatitis?
Flea allergy dermatitis (FAD) is the development of pruritic skin disease in the dog or cat
associated with allergic hypersensitivity to the saliva injected by the bite of the flea.
2.  Does dermatitis develop in all dogs and cats exposed to fleas?
No, but dermatitis rarely occurs in the absence of an allergic hypersensitivity reaction.
3. How important a problem is flea allergy dermatitis?
In many areas of the Umited States, fleas and flea-related diseases account for greater than
50% of dermatologic cases presented to veterinarians.
4. What is the most common flea species to parasitize dogs and cats?
Ctenocephalides felis is the most common flea species to parasitize dogs and cats.
5. What other species of fleas parasitize dogs and cats and how common are they?
·Ctenocephatides canis is rarely isolated from dogs and cats in the Umited States.
·Pulex irritans is found frequently on dogs, but seldom on cats.
· Echidnophaga galinacea parasitizes both dogs and cats.
6. Are fleas host-species specific?
No. C. felis is the least host-specific flea.
 7. What is the immunopathogenesis of flea allergy dermatitis? (ie., Why do some dogs
and cats become flea allergic?)
Numerous studies on the immunopathogenesis of FAD in guinea pigs, humans, and dogs
have been published, with lesser research available on the disease in cats. Saliva from the flea
Ctenocephafides felis contains numerous allergenic proteins. Cfell is a high-molecular-weight
protein in flea saliva and may be the major allergen in dogs. In the dog, FAD is due to an
208
FleaAllergyDermatitis
patients, Dermatology 204(4):334-337, 2002.
Kunkle GA: Contact dermatitis, Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim Pracr 18(5):1061-1068, 1988.
Lauema AI, Maibach HI, Granlund H, Erkko P, Kartamaa M, Stubb S: Inhibition of contact allergy reactions by
topical FK506, Lancet 340(8818):556, 1992
Marsella R, Kunkle GA, Lewis DT: Pentoxifylline inhibits contact hypersensitivity reactions to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs, Vet Dermatot 8(2):121-126, 1997.
Morris SD, Rycroft RJ, White IR, Wakelin SH, McFadden JP: Comparative frequency of patch test reaclions to
topical antibiotics, Br J Dermatot 146(6):1047-1051, 2002.
Reedy LM, Miller WH: Allergic skin diseases ofdogs and cats. Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Saricaoglu H, Tunali S, Bulbul E, White IR, Palali Z: Prevention of nickel-induced allergic contact reactions with
pentoxify1line, Contact Dermariris 39(5):244-247, 1998.
Thomsen MK, Thomsen HK: Histopathological changes in canine allergic contact dermatitis patch test reactions. A
study on spontaneously hypersensitive dogs, Acta Vet Scand 30(4):379-384, 1989.
27. FLEA ALLERGY DERMATITIS
Diane E. Bevier, DVM, DACVD
1. What is flea allergy dermatitis?
Flea allergy dermatitis (FAD) is the development of pruritic skin disease in the dog or cat
associated with allergic hypersensitivity to the saliva injected by the bite of the flea.
2.  Does dermatitis develop in all dogs and cats exposed to fleas?
No, but dermatitis rarely occurs in the absence of an allergic hypersensitivity reaction.
3. How important a problem is flea allergy dermatitis?
In many areas of the Umited States, fleas and flea-related diseases account for greater than
50% of dermatologic cases presented to veterinarians.
4. What is the most common flea species to parasitize dogs and cats?
Ctenocephalides felis is the most common flea species to parasitize dogs and cats.
5. What other species of fleas parasitize dogs and cats and how common are they?
·Ctenocephatides canis is rarely isolated from dogs and cats in the Umited States.
·Pulex irritans is found frequently on dogs, but seldom on cats.
· Echidnophaga galinacea parasitizes both dogs and cats.
6. Are fleas host-species specific?
No. C. felis is the least host-specific flea.
 7. What is the immunopathogenesis of flea allergy dermatitis? (ie., Why do some dogs
and cats become flea allergic?)
Numerous studies on the immunopathogenesis of FAD in guinea pigs, humans, and dogs
have been published, with lesser research available on the disease in cats. Saliva from the flea
Ctenocephafides felis contains numerous allergenic proteins. Cfell is a high-molecular-weight
protein in flea saliva and may be the major allergen in dogs. In the dog, FAD is due to an
FleaAllergyDermatitis
immediate type I hypersensitivity reaction with both a late-phase reaction and a delayed
cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity reaction. In the cat, some authors report only immediate
intradermal reaction to the flea, whereas others also mention delayed reactions.
Intermittent exposure to flea bites can cause the development of positive skin test reactions
hypersensitivity reactions develop in a random sequence. Continual exposure of dogs to flea
bites results in failure to develop hypersensitivity or delayed development of a lesser degree of
hypersensitivity.
 8. What are the important allergens that cause flea allergy dermatitis?
The allergens are contained in the flea saliva and include a low-molecular-weight hapten,
and at least two additional allergens of greater than 20,000-dalton molecular weight.
9. Do dogs and cats that have other allergic disease show a greater incidence of flea allergy
dermatitis?
Yes, a greater percentage of dogs and cats with atopy are also allergic to fleas.
10. Do certain environmental conditions favor fleas and the development of flea allergy
dermatitis?
Yes, a moist, warm environment with a relative humidity of 75% to 85% and a temperature
of 65 to 80" F is most favorable for the rapid completion of the life cycle of the flea.
control of the fleas?
The entire flea life cycle may be as short as 16 to 21 days under optimal conditions or as
long as a year when unfavorable conditions prevail. After hatching, the adult flea immediately
searches for a host. The flea is attracted to the host by the increase in carbon dioxide levels from
the breath of the host and changes in light intensity caused by the host. The entire life span of the
flea ranges from 6 to 12 months. Adult fleas in humid environments can live from 4 to 12 months
without nutrition.
12. What determines the severity of the clinical signs associated with flea allergy?
The dermatologic and other clinical signs related to flea allergy depend on the degree of
immunologic sensitivity and the level of flea exposure.
13. At what age does flea allergy dermatitis develop?
Flea allergy dermatitis may develop at any age in the dog or cat, but it is rare to see an
affected animal younger than 6 months old. The most common age of onset is 3 to 6 years.
14.  Are there gender or breed predilections associated with flea allergy dermatitis?
No gender or breed predilections have been reported in FAD. There may be an increased
incidence of FAD in long-haired dogs.
15. Is flea allergy dermatitis a seasonal disorder?
clinical signs seen in summer and fall. In warm climates, or where household infestation persists,
flea infestation and FAD may be non-seasonal problems.
16. What are clinical signs of FAD in the cat?
Clinical signs in the cat include:
Flea-bite dermatitis may cause mild-to-moderate pruritus and lesions associated with
210
Flea AllergyDermatitis
scratching. Small crusts (miliary dermatitis: see Chapter 28) are located primarily on the
head, neck, and dorsum of the body; papules may be located on the abdomen.
i s e  o nd s ue i   s u is d 
brown crust (Figure 27-1). Lesions are usually most severe on the neck, head, and dorsal
lumbosacral regions but have a tendency to generalize. The degree of alopecia is highly
variable.
Figure 27-1 Miliary dermatitis lesions in a cat with flea allergy dermatitis.
17. How do cats demonstrate that they are pruritic?
Cats manifest moderate-to-severe pruritus by licking, scratching, chewing, shaking of the
head, ripping hairs out, rippling of the skin on stimulation, or turning and violently attacking
areas of the skin without visible provocation.
18. What are additional non-dermatologic signs of feline flea infestation/allergy?
Additional clinical signs seen in the cat with flea bite dermatitis or FAD may include the
finding of segments of Dipylidiur caninum in the stool, the presence of gastric trichobezoars
pruritus and scratching combined with the anemia and intestinal parasitism.
19. What are clinical signs of FAD in the dog?
Clinical signs in the dog include:
Asymptomatic carriers of small to large numbers of fleas.
 In non-sensitized individuals, response to bites is minimal and results in mild pruritus
seborrheic changes, and excoriations. Some individuals may have a staphylococcal
folliculitis secondary to flea dermatitis.
 In the dog with flea-bite hypersensitivity, the severity of the dermatitis is determined by the
animal's immunologic status, flea burden, extent of self-trauma, other secondary lesions,
duration of disorder, and previous therapy.
When the flea bites a hypersensitive dog, a small wheal develops at the site of the bite that
either resolves, or if the animal has a delayed hypersensitivity response, develops into a
papule that later crusts over.
Flea Allergy Dermatitis
211
Figure 27-2  Flea allergy dermatitis in the dorsal
Jumbosacral area and caudal thighs in a dog.
The highly pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis is typically confined to the dorsal lumbosacral
area, caudomedial thighs, ventral abdomen, flank, and neck (Figures 27-2 and 27-3),
 In severely hypersensitive animals, generalized cutaneous signs may be seen.
Affected dogs show varying degrees of erythema, excoriation, and alopecia with stubbled
hairs due to chewing and licking. Secondary seborrhea may be mild to severe and an
offensive odor may be present.
Some animals experience recurrent episodes of acute moist dermati tis ("hot spots").
Long-standing pruritus and self-trauma may lead to marked secondary changes of acanthosis,
hyperkeratosis, lichenification, and hyperpi gmentation. Severely affected animals may
develop redundant folds of skin over the caudal back and caudomedial thighs.
z17
FleaAllergyDermatitis
Figure 27-3  Close-up view of the skin of a dog with flea allergy dermatitis
Staphylococcal folliculitis may accompany FAD.
Fibropruritic nodules are sometimes associated with FAD; these are most commonly found
in the lumbosacral region of flea-allergic German Shepherd Dogs.
20. What are additional non-dermatologic signs of canine flea infestation/allergy?
Additional systemic signs may include findings of Dipylidium caninum segments in the stool,
peripheral eosinophilia (observed in 13 to 20% of dogs and cats with FAD), anemia, and loss of
weight or general condition due to the pruritus and scratching.
21. How is the diagnosis of FAD made?
History and clinical findings.
Do not abandon the diagnosis if fleas are not present at the time of examination (especially in
(jaujuooia snonpie ol snp sieo
It may be difficult to locate fleas or excreta on a flea-allergic cat because of fastidious
groominghabits.
Examine the animal carefully for fleas, especially on the ventrum and the perineal region.
Use a fine-toothed metal comb (flea comb, 32 teeth/inch) to help pick fleas or flea excreta
out of the coat.
Intradermal skin testing with flea antigen (whole-body flea) at 1:1000 and 1 :4000 dilutions,
with reactions evaluated immediately and for delayed reactivity (48-72 hours)
22. Is there a blood test available for the diagnosis of FAD in the dog or cat?
There is an excellent new enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test offered by the
HESKA Corporation (Ft. Collins, CO) that measures IgE directed against flea saliva. All other
available tests measure IgE against whole flea extracts, which contain less than 0.5% flea saliva.
23. Can skin biopsy and dermatohistopathology help in the diagnosis of FAD?
 Skin biopsy is non-diagnostic and reveals perivascular dermatitis with eosinophils seen as
pathology consistent with secondary pyoderma and seborrhea.
24. What differential diagnoses must be considered in evaluating a case of FAD?
Differential diagnoses include atopy, food hypersensitivity, drug hypersensitivity, intestinal
parasite hypersensitivity, and folliculitis in the dog. In the cat, differential diagnoses include
Flea Allergy Dermatitis
213
cheyletiellosis, dermatophytosis, food hypersensitivity, trombiculiasis, parasite hypersensitivity,
drug hypersensitivity, bacterial folliculitis, atopy, and idiopathic miliary dermatitis.
25. How can FAD be differentiated conclusively from atopy?
intradermal skin testing. Many animals have both conditions.
26. What are the treatments available for FAD?
Treatment for FAD involves controlling the fleas on the animal and in the environment and
treatment for the inflammatory dermatitis, secondary seborrhea, and pyoderma. Parasiticides and
27. Are there ways in which the therapy for FAD differs from other allergic dermatitides?
In general, FAD is non-responsive to antihistamine and fatty acid therapy. If the fleas are not
controlled, response to corticosteroids may also be poor.
28. What about immunotherapy for FAD?
The most recent advance in therapy is an excellent double-blind placebo-controlled study
evaluating the use of flea saliva immunotherapy in flea-allergic dogs at Ohio State Umiversity
(Kwochka et al.). In a population of 21 dogs with FAD, this study showed that rush immuno-
therapy using a proprietary mixture of flea salivary antigens controlled clinical lesions and
pruritus signi ficantly better than a placebo. This response was verified during controlled experi-
mental flea challenge. At the current time, therapy using native flea salivary antigens is cost-
prohibitive and should be considered experimental, but, to my knowledge, this is the first study
to show effcacy, using immunotherapy, in naturally occurring canine FAD.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bowman DD: Georgi's parasitology for veterinarians, ed 6. Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, p 2.
Cook CA,Stedman KE,Frank GR,et al:Theinvitro iagnosis of flea bitehypersensitivity:flea saliva versus whle
170.
Frank GR, Hunter SW, Steigler GL, et al: Salivary allergens of Ctenocephalides felis: collection, purification and
evaluation by intrademal skin testing in dogs. In Kwochka KW, Willemse T, vonTschamer C (eds): Advances in
veterinary dermatology, vol 3, Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 201-212.
Grace SF: Fleas. In Norsworthy GD, Crystal MA (eds): The feline patient: essentiats of diagnosis and treamment,
Baltimore, 2003, Lippincott, Wiliams & Wilkins, pp 233-235.
Kwochka KW, McCall CA, Hillier A, et al: Flea salivary antigen rush immunotherapy for flea allergy dermatitis in
dogs: a double-blinded, placebo controlled clinical study. In: Proceedings of the 1998 Annual Members Meeting of
the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology and the American College of Veterinary Dematology, San
Antonio, TX, 1998, pp 107-108.
Norsworthy GD: Flea-allergic demmatitis in the feline patient. In Norsworthy GD, Crystal MA (eds): The feline
patient: essentiats of diagnosis and treatment. Baltimore, 2003, Lippincotl, Williams & wilkins, pp 229-232.
Paterson S: Skin diseases of the cat. Oxford, 2000, Blackwell Science, pp 235-236.
207-225.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Parasitic skin diseases. In Mutler and Kirk's smatl animat dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 490-500.
Vroom MW: Flea allergy dematitis. In Guaguere E, Prelaud P (eds): A practical guide to feline dermatology, New
York, 1999, Merial Publication, pp 9.1-9.6.
214
Miliary Dermatitis
28. MILIARY DERMATITIS
Diane E. Bevier, DVM, DACVD
1. What is miliary dermatitis?
Miliary dermatitis (MD) is a cutaneous reaction pattern seen in the cat characterized by
variable degrees of a pruritic, papulocrustous dermatitis (Figures 28-1 and 28-2). Feline MD is
not a single disease, but rather a disease complex. There are a number of specific diseases that
can cause this characteristic eruption (Table 28-1).
Figure 28-1 Lesions of miliary dermatitis on the back of a cat with flea allergy dermatitis.
Figure 28-2 Generalized miliary dermatitis on the back of a cat with cheyletiellosis.
Miliary Dermatitis
215
Table 28-1
Miliary Dermatitis (Papulocrustous Dermatitis) in the
Cat: Differe ntial Diagnosis
 Ectoparasiti sm
Fleas
Cheyletiellosis
Otodectic mange
Pediculosis
Demodicosis
Notoedric mange
Trombiculiasis
Cat fur mite
Hypersensitivity reactions
Flea allergy dermatitis
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
 Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
Intestinal parasite hypersensitivity
Pemphigus foliaceus
 Pemphigus er ythematosus
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
 Cutaneous drug reaction
Infectious
Dermatophytosis
Staphylococcal folliculitis
Viral dermatitis: herpes/calicivirus
 Dietary imbalance
Biotin deficiency
Fatty acid defciency
Neoplastic
 Mast cell tumors
Idiopathic
2. Why is the dermatitis called miliary?
The dermatitis is called miliary because the small crusted lesions are thought to resemble
millet seeds
 3. Which species get miliary dermatitis?
The cat is the primary species that develops miliary dermatitis.
4.What is the incidence of miliary dermatitis in the cat?
· To get an idea of the incidence of varying types of dermatitis and underl ying causes in the
cat, the best statistics are those resulting from an American Academy of Veterinary
Dermatology joint study that included eight institutions and private practices in the United
States, England, and the Netherlands and looked at the absolute and relative incidence of
skin diseases in 800 cats. The percentage incidence of the various causes of dermatitis in
these cats was as follows: parasitic 22.1%, miliary dermatitis 10.5%, eosinophilic
granuloma complex 9.9%, endocrine 9.5%, fungal 7.3%, allergic 6.4%, bacterial 6.1%,
neurodermatitis 4.5%, seborrhea 4.4%, idiopathic pruritic dermatitis 4.3%, neoplastic
3.3%, contact dermatitis 2.3%, autoimmune 1.4%, and other 8.0%. With the exception of
endocrine disorders, all these diseases have the potential to be pruritic.
· Note that many of the other diagnoses can show dermatitis characterized as a miliary
dermatitis.
+In another study at the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine (NYSCVM), MD
was the most common cutaneous reaction pattern. In a 2-year study conducted at the
NYSCVM, miliary dermatitis counted for 38. 1% of the feline dermatologic cases examined.
216
Miliary Dermatitis
The most common causes of feline MD in this study were fleabite hypersensitivity
(54.9% of the total), atopy (12.1% of the total), food hypersensitivity (10.6%), bacterial
folliculitis (3.9%), and otodectic mange (3. 1%).
 5. Is there any age, breed, or gender predilection for the development of miliary dermatitis?
MD occurs in any breed, age, or gender of cat, irrespective of neutering.
6.Are there certain areas of the body that are more likely to be affected with miliary
dermatitis?
The primary area(s) of the body affected by MD depends on the underlying cause (Table 28-2).
Skin lesions often begin over the dorsum of the cat (tailhead, head, and neck) but can become
generalized.
Table 28-2Areas of the Body Affected by Miliary Dermatitis: Regional Diagnosis
REGION
DISEASE
Head and ears
Otodectic mange
Demodicosis
 Food hypersensitivity
Dermatophytosis
 Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
Notoedric mange
Trombiculiasis
 Pemphigus foliaceus
 Pemphigus erythematosus
Mast cell tumors
 Viral dermatitis: herpes/calicivirus
Biotin deficiency
Oral cavity and mucocutaneous junctions
 Cutaneous drug reaction
Viral dermatitis: herpes/calicivirus
Chin and neck
Flea allergy dermatitis
Biotin deficiency
Flea allergy dermatitis
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
 Fatty acid deficiency
 Intestinal parasite hypersensitivity
Biotin deficiency
Dorsum
Cheyletiellosis
Pediculosis
 Flea allergy dermatitis
Trombiculiasis
Cat fur mite
Staphylococcal folliculitis
Ventrum
Atopy
Trombiculiasis
 Legs and paws
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
Biotin deficiency
7. Is miliary dermatitis pruritic?
MD is variably pruritic. The degree of pruritus is not necessarily related to the number and
type of lesions. Also, the underlying cause may influence the degree of pruritus.
Miliary Dermatitis
217
8. Is miliary dermatitis seasonal?
MD may be seasonal if the underlying cause is atopy, flea allergy, pediculosis, or mosquito
bite hypersensitivity; or non-seasonal if due to food allergy, dermatophytosis, bacterial folliculitis,
or endoparasitism.
9. What other historical aspects of the cat's miliary dermatitis may help discover the
underlying cause?
 If other animals and/or human contacts are affected, it suggests a contagious cause such as
fleas, cheyletiellosis, lice, and dermatophytosis.
A history of poor response to glucocorticoids may suggest idiopathic MD, dermatophytosis,
bacterial folliculitis, food allergy, or drug eruption.
10. What diagnostic tests should be done to diagnose the underlying cause of miliary
dermatitis?
Because of the myriad of potential causes for MD, diagnostics would include those as listed
 s  s       
causes that should be investigated.
Table 28-3 Diagnostic Tests Recommended in MD Cases
ALL
PRIMARY HEAD
PRURITIC
AND FACE MD
MILIARY
CRUSTING/
REACTION PATTERN
CATS
AND PRURITUS
DERMATITIS
SCALING
Diagnostic test
Physical examination
X
X
X
X
CBC count and profile
X
X
X
Skin scraping
X
X
X
X
Fecal examination
X
X
X
X
Dermatophyte culture
X
X
X
X
Tape preparation
X
X
KOH digestion
X
X
Flea I.D. test/Flea saliva
X
X
X
ELISA
Trial flea control
X
X
X
Hypoallergenic diet
X
X
X
1D. skin test
X
X
X
Antibiotic trial
X
X
Skin biopsy
X
X
X
Histopathology
X
X
X
Immunofluorescence
X
Antinuclear antibody
X
X
Urinalysis
X
X
X
Ear swab: mites
X
X
Ear s wab: Gram stain
X
X
Ear swab: culture and
X
X
sensitivity
Ear mite Rx trial
X
X
Cytology under crust
X
X
 Culture and sensitivity
X
X
CBC, Complete blood cell; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay: I.D., identification; KOH, potassium 
hydroxide.
218
Miliary Dermatitis
11. Can dermatohistopathologic studies help distinguish the various causes of miliary
dermatitis?
The histopathologic findings in MD of idiopathic, food allergy, drug eruption, Or
Cheyletiella spp. origins are very similar and are characterized by subacute to chronic, non-
suppurative dermatitis,with variable numbers of neutrophils, mast cells,and mono-
nuclear cells. Histopathologic findings in MD of flea, louse, or intestinal parasite origins
are similar to the above, except that eosinophils are a major, if not the major, inflammatory
cell component.
12. What is the treatment for miliary dermatitis?
· Treatment for MD involves identifying and treating the underlying cause(s) and manage
ment of the pruritus.
· Parasiticides and symptomatic management of pruritus are covered in the chapters on
13. How about adjunctive therapy and therapy for idiopathic miliary dermatitis?
the possibilities of underlying disorders in Table 28-1. Most important are a trial with flea
control for a 2-month period and an antibiotic trial for a period of 3 weeks.
· If a case of MD is determined to be idiopathic, corticosteroids can be tried, although may
be disappointingin some cases.
· Prednisone, prednisolone, and methylprednisolone given orally are ideal choices for long-
term corticosteroid use in cats. Unfortunately, they are not as routinely effective in cats as
in dogs. The recommended initial dose is 1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg every 12 hours until remission
of clinical signs occurs. At that time, the dosage should be gradually tapered until a
dosage of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg every 48 hours is reached. For cats in which prednisone or
cases of pruritus in cats will require the use of a more potent, longer acting oral gluco
a dosage of 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg every 24 hours for 7 days followed by maintenance therapy
twice weekly. Triamcinolone is given at 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg every 24 hours for 7 days then
two to three times weekly.
·Injectable corticosteroids are used frequently in cats. It is imperative to dose the cat using
its correct body weight, rather than some of the recommended dosage-per-cat guidelines
that are in the literature. Adult cats may vary from 3 to 10 kg in body weight; keeping this
in mind is critical if one is to achieve expected therapeutic results. Methylprednisolone
acetate is the most effective injectable corticosteroid for use in cats. It is dosed at 5 mg/kg
subcutaneously. If a favorable response is noted, the injection should be repeated twice
more at 2- to 3-week intervals. For long-term maintenance of miliary dermatitis cases, it
is recommended that this drug not be given more frequently than every 8 weeks and
preferably every 12 weeks. Alternatively, if methylprednisolone acetate injections have
become ineffective, injectable triamcinolone at a dose of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg may be used.
An excellent, short-lived anti-inflammatory response can be obtained with injectable
dexamethasone given at 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg subcutaneously.
· Antihistamines are also effective in some cats. Cats are not as predictable as dogs in
response to these drugs and have shown greater problems with adverse behavioral reactions
One study demonstrated an excellent response in 73% of atopic cats to chlorpheniramine
dosed at 2 mg/cat every 12 hours. Many other investigators have reported favorable response
to this antihistamine, but not in as high a percentage of cases. Cats weighing more than 6
kg may be dosed at 4 mg every 12 hours. Hydroxyzine at 2.2 mg/kg every 12 hours also
has been used, but will make an occasional cat aggressive and hyperactive. Clemastine, at
the dose of 0.67 mg/cat orally every 12 hours, was shown to control pruritus adequately
Miliary Dermatitis
617
in 50% of the cases treated. Side effects reported in cats with the use of antihistamines
have included anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and excitement.
some cats. Although fewer studies have been reported in cats than in dogs, non-
placebo-controlled studies would suggest that 50% to 75% of treated cats have a good
6-week trial before being declared ineffective. Some cats may benefit from the possibly
general, the quantity of fatty acid should be increased gradually over a 2-week period to
avoid the cat's tendency to reject dietary changes. Certainly, fatty acid supplements are an
extremely safe way to help control pruritus and should be tried as an initial treatment with
Or without antihistamines.
· Although pyoderma is a less common cause of MD, an occasional cat will respond well
to a 2- to 4-week course of appropriate anti-staphylococcal antibiotic therapy (such as
Clavamox, Lincocin, cephalexin, or Tribrissen). An antibiotic treatment trial should be done
especially in cats that start to require increasing dosages of corticosteroids to control theil
dermatitis or worsen after corticosteroid administration. Another indication that antibiotics
are required is the finding of neutrophils and coccal bacteria on cutaneus cytologic
evaluation.
· The progestational compound megestrol acetate can be a highly effective antipruritic and
anti-inflammatory medication in cats. Remission of clinical signs is achieved with an oral
dose of 2.5 to 5.0 mg/cat every 48 hours for 1 to 3 weeks followed by weekly maintenance
doses. Megestrol acetate is not licensed for use in cats and has the potential to cause
alarming side effects. These include polyphagia/weight gain, polyuria/polydipsia, personality
and behavioral changes, pyometra or stump pyometra, mammary hyperplasia, mammary
neoplasia, diabetes mellitus, and adrenal suppression. This drug should be reserved for
cases that have become refractory to glucocorticoids, have had a trial of antibiotic therapy,
 and have owners who have been informed of the life-threatening risks these drugs may
cause.
Topical therapy is not practical for the majority of cats but can be soothing and help to dry
the lesions of MD. Some cats are helped by the use of 10% hydrogen peroxide on a cotton ball
two to three times weekly. Although many cats resist bathing, for those that tolerate it, medicated
baths may be very helpful. Products containing sulfur, benzoyl peroxide, or salicylic acid are
acceptable for use in cats. Tar-containing products are potentially toxic to cats and should not be
used. Use of a soothing, antipruritic shampoo and spray containing colloidal oatmeal, combined
with the anesthetic agent pramoxine hydrochloride, may be beneficial.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bensignor E: Diagnostic approach to crusting dermatoses. In Guaguere E, Prelaud P (eds): A practicat guide to feline
dermatology, London, 1999, Merial, pp 20.1-20.4.
Mason KV, Evans AG: Mosquito bite caused eosinophilic dematitis in cats, JAVMA 198:2086-2089, 1991
MedlleauL,Hnilica KA:Differential diagnoses.InSmall animatdermatology:a cotor atlas and therapeutic guide
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, p 4.
 ae      a  e      
patient: essentiats of diagnosis and treatment, Balimore, 2003, Lippincotl, williams & wilkins, pp 229-232
Panel Report. Skin diseases in cats, Mod Vet Pract 66:900-906, 1985.
Paterson S: Skin diseases of the cat, Oxford, England, Blackwell Science, 2000, pp 235-236.
Scott DW: Feline demmatology 1900-1978: A monograph, JAAHA 16:303-459, 1980.
Scott DW: Unpublished observations. New York State College of Veterinary Medicine, 1985.
Scott DW: Feline demmatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." JAAHA 23:255-274, 1987.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Parasitic skin diseases. In Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th
ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 490-500.
220
Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
29. FELINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA
COMPLEX
Christine A. Rees, DVM, DACVD
1. What is feline eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC)?
This is a dermatologic term used to describe a skin problem in cats that involves several
different syndromes. These syndromes consist of the indolent ulcer (eosinophilic ulcer, rodent
ulcer), the eosinophilic plaque, and the eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma),
2. What is an indolent ulcer?
An indolent ulcer is a raised ulcerated lesion on a cat that occurs most commonly on the
upper lip (Figure 29- 1) but may also occur in the oral cavity. Although not as common, indolent
ulcers have occasionally been reported to occur on other areas of the body.
Figure 29-1Feline indolent ulcer on the upper lip of a cat's mouth.
3. What is an eosinophilic plaque?
A feline eosinophilic plaque is an erythematous, raised, flat, firm lesion on the skin.
The plaques can be either single or multiple. These lesions most commonly occur on the
abdomen (Figure 29-2) and medial thighs. Other affected areas may include the cornea and
conjunctiva.
Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
221
Figure 29-2 Eosinophilic plaque on a cat's ventrum.
4. What is an eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma)?
A eosinophilic granuloma consists of raised plaques that occur in a linear confguration.
These lesions can sometimes become eroded or ulcerated. Eosinophilic granulomas most
commonly develop on the caudal aspects of the cat's thighs (Figure 29-3) but may occur on the
face and in the oral cavity.
Figure 29-3 Linear granuloma down the back of a cat's leg.
222
FelineEosinophilicGranuloma Complex
5. What is the etiology of feline EGC?
Feline EGC has been associated with underlying allergies in cats. The types of allergies that
and atopy. The term idiopathic is used if an underlying allergy cannot be found. This basically
means that the cause for the cat having the EGC is not known.
6. Are there any other clinical signs other than skin lesions with feline EGC?
See Table 29-1.
Table 29-1
Clinical Signs of Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
EOSINOPHILIC
EOSINOPHILIC
CLINICAL SIGNS
INDOLENT ULCER
PLAQUE
GRANULOMA
 Pain
+/-
Pruritus
+/-
+++
 Peripheral
+-
lymphadenopathy
+, Mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; -, not present; +/, may or may not be present.
7. What are the differential diagnoses for EGC?
The differential diagnoses for EGC are infectious ulcers (feline leukeimia virus, feline
 mast cell tumor, cutaneous lymphoma).
8. What is the most useful diagnostic test for diagnosing feline EGC?
 The most useful diagnostic test for diagnosing ECG is a skin biopsy. The types of histologic
lesions vary with the type of complex that is present and chronicity of the lesions.
● Indolent ulcer: For the indolent ulcer, the histologic findings include hyperplastic, ulcerated,
superficial perivascular to interstitial dermatitis with eosinophils and mononuclear cells.
Fibrosis usually occurs when the lesions become more prominent. Tissue eosinophilia is
rare.
· Eosinophilic plaque: Tissue eosinophilia is common with eosinophilic plaques. A hyper-
plastic superficial to deep perivascular dermatitis with eosinophils is usually seen. An
interstitial to diffuse eosinophilic dermatitis will also be present. Flame figures may be
seen. Some cases of eosinophilic plaque will also have microvesicles or microabscesses,
which contain eosinophils.
· Eosinophilic granuloma: A nodular to diffuse granulomatous dermatitis with multifocal
and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells are common. Flame figures are possible.
Mucinosis of the epidermis and hair follicle of the outer root sheath is also common.
Focal eosinophilic folliculitis or furunculosis and panniculitis can occur. The eosinophils
appear to be less prominent in chronic lesions.
9. What are flame figures?
A flame fgure consists of a bundle of altered collagen that is surrounded by eosinophils
and eosinophilic granules. These lesions often resemble the shape of a starburst or have a flame
shape. The eosinophilic material can be either granular or amorphous. The canine and feline
dermatologic conditions that most commonly have flame figures as a histopathologic finding
are eosinophilic granulomas, insect and arthropod reactions, eosinophilic panniculitis, and
eosinophilic pustulosis.
Feline EosinophilicGranuloma Complex
223
10. How do you diagnose a flea allergy in a cat?
Flea allergy in a cat can be diagnosed several ways. If the cat is pruritic and has either fleas
    s           
easiest way to collect fleas and/or flea dirt on a cat is to use a flea comb. The material from the
flea comb is put on a white paper towel. The contents in the towel are then wetted with tap water.
If, when you press the wet dirt against the towel and you get a reddish color, then you are dealing
with flea dirt.
However, cats are excellent groomers and oftentimes fleas or flea dirt are not found on cats
The location of lesions on the body does not help you with the diagnosis. Unlike flea allergies in
the dog, which tend to occur on the caudal one third of the body, fleas and flea-associated lesions
Because anatomic location is not going to help you much, you need some other options in order
for fleas or an intradermal allergy test for fleas. I prefer an intradermal allergy test because this
test seems to be more sensitive. However, it is important to remember that feline mast cells appear
closely and take readings every 5 minutes for a total of 15 minutes. A wheal that is at least half
the size of the positive histamine control and the same firmness as the histamine control is
considered a positive reaction.
11. How do you diagnose a food allergy in a cat?
Food allergy in cats is diagnosed by giving the cat a hypoallergenic (restrictive) diet for 8
to 12 weeks. This hypoallergenic diet can be either a diet that consists of novel protein and
carbohydrate sources (commercially prepared or home-cooked) or a hydrolyzed diet (ZD, Hill's
Science Diet, Topeka, KS). It is important that the cat gets no treats or flavored medications while
the cat is on the hypoallergenic diet. At the end of the food trial, the cat is rechallenged to the old
diet and within 7 to 14 days, the skin condition recurs if the cat is food allergic.
12. How do you diagnose atopy in a cat?
The two diagnostic options for diagnosing atopy in a cat are serum allergy testing and
intradermal allergy testing (IDT). A lot of controversy exists as to whether feline IgE has been
isolated. For this reason and because I find the IDT to be more sensitive, IDT is recommended
Due to the difficulty in interpreting feline IDT reactions, refer cats for testing to a board-certified
veterinary dermatologist.
13. What is the treatment for EGC?
The treatment for EGC varies according to which allergy is present.
Treatment for flea allergy consists of flea control for the pet, any pets in the household,
and the environment. If the cat is extremely pruritic then oral or injectable steroids may
be used.
After a cat is diagnosed with food allergy, it can either be left on the hypoallergenic
(restrictive) diet or individually rechallenged to individual food ingredients. Most cat owners do
not want to rechallenge their cat to individual food ingredients. They usually stay on the special
diet for life. Because the hydrolyzed diets are new, it is not known what the long-term effects, if
any, are of keeping cats on these diet for life.
If the cat has atopy then the treatment options are either to use steroids, antihistamines, fatty
acids, and/or hyposensitization vaccines (immunotherapy). The recommended dose for cats being
the skin lesions, then a maintenance dose of 2 mg/kg every 48 hours orally. Methylprednisolone
maintenance dose of this same dose or the lowest possible dose that the cat will tolerate at an
every-other-day dosage schedule. Injectable steroids have also been used. Methylprednisolone
224
Canine EosinophilicFurunculosis
(DepoMedrol, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Ml) has been used at a dosage of 4 mg/kg
Several antihistamine treatment options exist for cats with atopy. The most commonly used
Sedation is the most common side effect of antihistamines. Another antihistamine that has been
used in cats is clemastine at a dosage of 0.15 mg/kg every 12 hours orally. The only reported side
effect in cats with clemastine is diarrhea. Diphenhydramine has also been used in cats. The dosage
for diphenhydramine is 2.2 mg/kg every 8 hours. Sedation is a side effect commonly reported
with diphenhy dramine administration.
Fatty acids supplementation alone has been reported to help up to 50% of pruritic
cats. However, in the case of atopic cats, I usually use the fatty acids in conjunction with an
anti-istamine. Previous studies have suggested that these two medications have a synergistic
activity.
   m nsn e n e n e s e j
dosage and frequency of vaccine administration varies. You should consult the serum allergy
company or a veterinary dermatology specialist with any questions concerning the vaccine schedule
that is provided to you.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Colombini S, Hodgin EC, Foil CS, et al: Induction of flea allergy dematitis and the incidence and histopathological
characteristics of concurrent indolent lip ulcers, Vet Dermatot 12:155-161, 2001.
Miller WH, Scott DW: Clemastine fumarate as an antipruritic agent in cats: Results of an open clinical trial, Car Vet
/ 35:502-504, 1994.
Rees CA: Canine and feline atopic dermatitis: a review of the diagnostic options, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
16(4):230-232, November 2001.
Rosenkrantz WS: Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex. In Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds):
Current veterinary dermatology: the science and art of therapy. St Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 319-324.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Miscellaneous skin diseases In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CW (eds): Muller
and Kirk's small animal dermatotogy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1148-1153
BO. CANINE EOSINOPHILIC FURUNCYLOSIS
Dennis W. Crow, DVM, DACVD
1. What is furunculosis?
Furunculosis is simply defined as a deep necrotizing form of folliculitis with pus accumulation.
The pus accumulation associated with eosinophilic furunculosis is, as the name implies, charac-
terized by eosinophils. This is a histologic classification.
2. How is the diagnosis of eosinophilic furunculosis made?
nodules progresses to hemorrhage and ulceration. These lesions are typically located on the face
(Figures 30-1 and 30-2), and may also be found around the eyes or on the trunk. The furunculosis
lesions may be painful. Diagnosis is supported by compatible impression cytology and cutaneous
biopsy results and by excluding other differentials.
224
Canine EosinophilicFurunculosis
(DepoMedrol, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Ml) has been used at a dosage of 4 mg/kg
Several antihistamine treatment options exist for cats with atopy. The most commonly used
Sedation is the most common side effect of antihistamines. Another antihistamine that has been
used in cats is clemastine at a dosage of 0.15 mg/kg every 12 hours orally. The only reported side
effect in cats with clemastine is diarrhea. Diphenhydramine has also been used in cats. The dosage
for diphenhydramine is 2.2 mg/kg every 8 hours. Sedation is a side effect commonly reported
with diphenhy dramine administration.
Fatty acids supplementation alone has been reported to help up to 50% of pruritic
cats. However, in the case of atopic cats, I usually use the fatty acids in conjunction with an
anti-istamine. Previous studies have suggested that these two medications have a synergistic
activity.
   m nsn e n e n e s e j
dosage and frequency of vaccine administration varies. You should consult the serum allergy
company or a veterinary dermatology specialist with any questions concerning the vaccine schedule
that is provided to you.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Colombini S, Hodgin EC, Foil CS, et al: Induction of flea allergy dematitis and the incidence and histopathological
characteristics of concurrent indolent lip ulcers, Vet Dermatot 12:155-161, 2001.
Miller WH, Scott DW: Clemastine fumarate as an antipruritic agent in cats: Results of an open clinical trial, Car Vet
/ 35:502-504, 1994.
Rees CA: Canine and feline atopic dermatitis: a review of the diagnostic options, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
16(4):230-232, November 2001.
Rosenkrantz WS: Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex. In Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds):
Current veterinary dermatology: the science and art of therapy. St Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 319-324.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Miscellaneous skin diseases In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CW (eds): Muller
and Kirk's small animal dermatotogy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1148-1153
BO. CANINE EOSINOPHILIC FURUNCYLOSIS
Dennis W. Crow, DVM, DACVD
1. What is furunculosis?
Furunculosis is simply defined as a deep necrotizing form of folliculitis with pus accumulation.
The pus accumulation associated with eosinophilic furunculosis is, as the name implies, charac-
terized by eosinophils. This is a histologic classification.
2. How is the diagnosis of eosinophilic furunculosis made?
nodules progresses to hemorrhage and ulceration. These lesions are typically located on the face
(Figures 30-1 and 30-2), and may also be found around the eyes or on the trunk. The furunculosis
lesions may be painful. Diagnosis is supported by compatible impression cytology and cutaneous
biopsy results and by excluding other differentials.
Canine EosinophilicFurunculosis
225
?
Figure 30-1 A, Crusted, erosive nodules on dorsal aspect of nasal bridge and periocular in a 2-year-old
female spayed Golden Retriever with eosinophilic furunculosis. B, Close-up view of nasal bridge lesions.
Figure 30-2 Patches of erosion and adherent crust on dorsal aspect of nasal bridge in a 3-year-old female
spayed mixed-breed dog with eosinophilic furunculosis. (Courtesy Dr. Randall C. Thomas.)
226
Canine EosinophilicFurunculosis
 3. What are differential diagnoses for eosinophilic furunculosis? How are these differential
diagnoses ruled out?
· Dermatophytosis can be ruled out by dermatophyte culture, trichography, and special
stains for fungal organisms on biopsy specimens.
of bacterial infection. Superficial bacterial infections, as a general rule, spare the head
and face.
· Drug eruption can be ruled in or out by a thorough history, in combination with histologic
findings.
· Pemphigus foliaceus or pemphigus erythematosus could be mistaken for this disorder;
planum. Biopsy is helpful in differentiating these immune-mediated dermatoses from
eosinophilic furunculosis in most cases.
 4. What can be done to increase the chances of a histologic diagnosis?
Whatever you do, don't scrub the biopsy area before the procedure! Select multiple clinical
stages of the lesions and obtain a biopsy specimen from each site. In general, a new lesion, a
middle stage lesion, and an older lesion should be sampled to maximize chances at a diagnosis.
Punch biopsy specimens 6 mm or greater will yield much greater information than smaller
specimens. Immediately place the specimens into buffered formalin. Write a good clinical
description for the pathologist, including time frame of lesion development, what regions of the
body are affected, and the specific locations from which the biopsy specimens were taken. Don't
forget to include your clinical differential diagnosis. A thorough history and lesion description is
one of the most important tools a pathologist will use in helping you arrive at a diagnosis. Do not
leave the history section blank on the pathology submittal form or expect a receptionist or
technician to fil out this section for you if you want the best chance at supporting your diagnosis
histologically.
5. Are certain breeds or ages of dogs over-represented?
Canine eosinophilic furunculosis is a syndrome noted primarily in young, large breed dogs
with access to the outdoors.
6. What are suspected inciting factors?
This is a good question and the reality is, we do not really know for sure. Arthropod stings
development of this syndrome is lacking; however, one study has reported known exposure to
arthropods within 24 to 72 hours of onset of clinical signs in most patients. Eosinophils are com
monly associated with allergic inflammation, especially in response to arthropod and parasitic
insults. Thus, the presence of eosinophils in these lesions would support an arthropod sting as an
etiologic factor.
 7. Describe the typical histopathologic findings in biopsy specimens of these lesions.
Eosinophils are the predominant inflammatory infiltrate and typically fill and surround hair
follicles (folliculitis). Many follicles are ruptured (furunculosis) and free keratin (hair) may be
seen in the dermis near a furuncle. Dermal edema is usually present and often severe. Mixed
superficial perivascular to diffuse infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages is
usually present, but far outshadowed by the intense eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis
(Figure 30-3). Bacteria and dermatophytes are not observed within the lesions.
8.What is the prognosis?
The prognosis is very good for full recovery. Most patients respond rapidly and completely
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Sgndrome
227
Figure 30-3 A, Biopsy of an eosinophilic furuncle (H&E x100). B, Higher magnification (H&E, x400)
of biopsy in A.
to anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. Patients have been reported to experience relapse
(presumably if re-exposed to arthropod stings).
9. What are some treatment options?
Current recommendations are systemic anti -inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. If a strong
historical link to arthropods is identified, reduction or elimination of exposure would make a
Telapse less likely. Some patients will spontaneously resolve within days to weeks without therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Curtis CF, Bond R, Blunden AS, et al: Canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis in three cases, / Small Anim
Pract 1995:119-123, 1995.
Fondati A, Mechelli L: Cutaneous arthropod reactions in the dog: 6 cases. In Kwochka K W, Willemse T, von
Tschamer C (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatotogy, vo1 3. Boston, 1996, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 576-577.
Gross TL: Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. In Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in
veterinary dermatology, vo12. New York, 1992, Pergamon, pp 239-246.
31, IDIOPATHIC STERILE GRANULOMA AND
PYOGRANULOMA SYNDROME
Dennis W. Crow, DVM, DACVD
1. What is idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome?
Based on the name alone, it is quite obvious that we know very little about this entity. The
disease is named based on histopathologic findings with appropriate clinical presentation and the
exclusion of other causes of granulomas and pyogranulomas.
2. When should I suspect this disorder?
Clinically, patients with this disorder present with firm, non-painful intradermal nodules or
plaques that typically affect the head. Pinnal flaps, third eyelids (Figure 31-1), and paws may also
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Sgndrome
227
Figure 30-3 A, Biopsy of an eosinophilic furuncle (H&E x100). B, Higher magnification (H&E, x400)
of biopsy in A.
to anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. Patients have been reported to experience relapse
(presumably if re-exposed to arthropod stings).
9. What are some treatment options?
Current recommendations are systemic anti -inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. If a strong
historical link to arthropods is identified, reduction or elimination of exposure would make a
Telapse less likely. Some patients will spontaneously resolve within days to weeks without therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Curtis CF, Bond R, Blunden AS, et al: Canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis in three cases, / Small Anim
Pract 1995:119-123, 1995.
Fondati A, Mechelli L: Cutaneous arthropod reactions in the dog: 6 cases. In Kwochka K W, Willemse T, von
Tschamer C (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatotogy, vo1 3. Boston, 1996, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 576-577.
Gross TL: Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. In Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in
veterinary dermatology, vo12. New York, 1992, Pergamon, pp 239-246.
31, IDIOPATHIC STERILE GRANULOMA AND
PYOGRANULOMA SYNDROME
Dennis W. Crow, DVM, DACVD
1. What is idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome?
Based on the name alone, it is quite obvious that we know very little about this entity. The
disease is named based on histopathologic findings with appropriate clinical presentation and the
exclusion of other causes of granulomas and pyogranulomas.
2. When should I suspect this disorder?
Clinically, patients with this disorder present with firm, non-painful intradermal nodules or
plaques that typically affect the head. Pinnal flaps, third eyelids (Figure 31-1), and paws may also
228
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Syndrome
Figure 3 1-1  Haired intradermal nodule with hemorrhagic crust and nodular episcleritis in a 3-year-old
male castrated Collie with sterile pyogranuloma syndrome. (Courtesy Dr. Reid A. Garfield.)
Spaniel with sterile pyogranuloma syndrome. (Courtesy Dr. Reid A. Garfield.)
be affected and occasionally nodules are noted on the trunk (Figure 31-2). Initial haired masses
 may progress to alopecic and ulcerated lesions as the disease develops.
3.What species are affected?
Dogs and cats have been reported with this condition. A similar “sterile” granulomatous
condition called sarcoidosis has been documented in human beings. Recent polymerase chain
reaction testing has identified several species of mycobacterial deoxyribonucleic acid from the
lesions of sarcoidosis in human beings.
4. What is the differential diagnosis list?
· Cutaneous and systemic histiocytic proliferative disorders
● Infectious causes of nodular pyogranulomas and granulomas:
-Nocardia spp.
-Actinomyces spp.
一
Blastomyces spp.
Coccoides immitis
-Histoptasma spp.
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Syndrome
229
Cryptococcus spp.
-Sporothrix spp.
-Basidiobotus and Conidiobotus spp.
Pythiumand Lagenidium spp.
-Fast- and slow-growing mycobacterial organisms
 Canine leproid granuloma syndrome
·Penetrating foreign bodies
 5. Describe how the diagnosis is made and supported.
The diagnosis is problematic. One must rule out all potential infectious causes of granulomas
and pyogranulomas with appropriate tissue cultures and special stains on histopathologic specimens,
and have compatible clinical and routine histologic changes (Figure 31-3) to amive at a firm
Figure 31-3 A, lntradermal pyogranulomatous foci from patient in Figure 31-1, consistent with sterile
dilated apocrine glands (H&E, x500).
230
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Syndrome
diagnosis of this syndrome. Histiocytic proliferative disorders can easily be confused with this
disorder histologically, and immunohistochemical markers may be of benefit.
6. What is the prognosis for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome
(ISGPS)?
Typically, these patients are expected to respond well to immunomodulatory (tetracycline
Most patients required prolonged therapy to maintain remission.
7. Are there breed or age predilections?
Any age, breed, or gender of dog may be affected; however, Boxers, Collies, Golden Retrievers,
Great Danes, and Weimaraners may be predisposed.
8. Compare and contrast idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome with
sa rcoidosis in human beings.
See Table 31-1.
Table 31-1 Sarcoidosis vs. Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Syndrome
SARCOIDOSIS IN
ISGPS IN DOGS AND
FEATURE
HUMANS
CATS
 Nonspecific constitutional signs (fever,
Possible
 Possible but uncommon
fatigue, weight loss)
Respiratory symptoms
Possible
Not reported
 Peripheral lymph nodes affected
Possible
Not reported
Spleen
Possible
Not reported 
Gastrointestinal tract
Possible
Not reported
Heart
Possible
Not reported
Musculoskeletal
Possible
Not reported
Kidneys
Possible
Not reported
 Salivary glands
Possible
Not reported
 Upper respiratory tract
Possible
Not reported
Endocrine glands
Possible
Not reported
 Nervous system
Possible
Not reported
 Hypercal cemia
Possible
One documented case
(dog)
Mycobacteria spp. present in tissue
Yes
Yet to be investigated
lesions*
* As by polymerase chain reaction technique.
ISGPS, Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
syndrome in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:540-543, 1997.
Scott DW, Buerger RG, Miller WH: Idiopathic sterile granulomatous and pyogranulomatous dermatitis in cats, Vet
Dermatot 1(3):129-135, 1990.
Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Miscellaneous skin diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Mutler
& Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1136-1140.
Shama OP: Sarcoidosis of the skin. In Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in
general medicine, 5th ed. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, pp 2099-2106.
Torres SM: Sterile nodular dematitis in dogs. In Campbell KL (ed): Veterinary Clinics of North America: small
animat practice, vo1 29(6). Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders, pp 1311-1323.
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
231
32. IMMUNE-MEDIATED SKIN DISEASES
Sheila Torres, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVD
1. What are the immune-mediated skin diseases?
The immune-mediated skin disorders are a large group of inflammatory diseases that have
in common the central participation of the immune system in their development. Most conditions
in this broad disease category are well recognized, but uncommon in dogs and cats.
2. How are the immune-mediated skin diseases classified?
They are classifed into primary or autoimmune, and secondary or immune-mediated. This
chapter will cover only the primary or autoimmune skin diseases (Table 32- 1).
Table 32-1 Autoimmune (Primary) and Immune-Mediated (Secondary) Skin Diseases
AUTOIMMUNE
IMMUNE-MEDIATED
 Pemphigus complex
Cutaneous adverse drug reaction
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Erythema multiforme
 Pemphigus erythematosus
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
 Pemphigus vulgaris
Vasculitis
Pemphigus vegetans
Auricular chondritis
 Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Alopecia areata
Subepidermal bullous diseases
 Sterile nodular panniculitis
 Bullous pemphi goid
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Linear IgA bullous dermatosis
 Mucous membrane pemphigoid
 Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
 Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
3. How do the autoimmune skin diseases develop?
They develop as a result of deregulation of the individual's immune system that for not well
known reasons fails to recognize his or her own tissue as self. Some of the abnormal mechanisms
speculated to participate in disease development are: (1) suppressor T-cell dysfunction or bypass;
(2) modification of self-antigen; (3) presence of exogenous antigens cross-reacting with self-
antigens; (4) abnormal expression or abnormal interaction of the major histocompatibility
complex IIl; (5) disclosure of non-tolerant T-cells to previously hidden self-antigens; and (6)
genetic predisposition or acquired genetic defects.
4.
What is the pemphigus complex?
The pemphigus complex or pemphigus diseases comprises four clinical presentations of
cutaneous autoimmune disorders; these include pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus,
pemphi gus vulgaris, and pemphi gus vegetans.
232
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
5. How common are the pemphigus diseases?
They are rare to uncommon skin disorders. Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common of
the pemphigus diseases and the most common autoimmune skin disorder of dogs and cats
Pemphigus erythematosus is the second most common, followed by pemphigus vulgaris and
pemphigus vegetans, which is very rare.
6.What do the pemphigus diseases have in common?
They have in common the formation of autoantibodies against keratinocytes and surface
attachment molecules (desmosomes). This results in destruction of the attachment molecules, a
process called acantholysis that gives rise to detached keratinocytes, called acantholytic cells.
This separation of keratinocytes results in the formation of spaces in the epiderrmis called vesicles
(when their content is predominantly clear fluid) or pustules (when their content is rich in
neutrophils). The vesicles and pustules will also contain the acantholytic cells, which are the
hallmark diagnostic finding for these diseases.
7. Do the skin lesions differ among the types of pemphigus?
Yes. The differences are highly associated with the depth of the epidermis where the
acantholytic process occurs and, therefore, where the pustules or vesicles are formed (Figure 32-1).
right beneath or within the stratum corneum, the outermost layer of the skin. In pemphigus
vulgaris, vesicles form directly above the basal cell layer, the deepest layer of the epidermis.
Based on the location of lesion formation within the epidermis; pemphigus diseases have been
further classified into superficial pemphigus (pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus erythematosus)
and deep pemphigus (pemphigus vulgaris). In pemphigus vegetans, lesions form in the middle of
the epidermis this disease has not been placed in the depth classification.
Pemphigus
foliaceus
Pemphigus
erythematosus
Pemphigus
vegetans
Stratum_
Basal
corneum
cell layer
Pemphigus
vulgaris
Figure 32-1  Pemphigus diseases. Location of lesions within the epidermis
 8. Describe the skin lesions associated with pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus
erythematosus.
In pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus erythematosus, the initial lesion is an intracorneal or
subcorneal pustule. This superficial pustule ruptures very easily, resulting in the formation of a
honey-colored to brown crust that is the most common lesion observed clinically (Figure 32-2).
The skin underneath the crust is often eroded and moist.
9. Are pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus erythematosus the same disease?
No. Pemphi gus erythematosus is considered a benign form of pemphigus foliaceus with the
skin lesions limited to the face. In people, pemphigus erythematosus has immunodiagnostic
features that cross over with lupus erythematosus (linear immunofluorescence staining of the
basement membrane and positive antinuclear antibody test). However, this has not been con-
sistently documented in the canine and feline cases, possibly because immunodiagnostic tests are
not performed routinely.
Immune-Mediated SkinDiseases
233
C
D
Figure 32-2 A, Pemphigus foliaceus. Yellowish-brown crusts localized predominantly on the bridge of
the yellowish-brown crusts on the pinna of the dog shown in A. C, Pemphigus foliaceus. Hyperkeratosis of
crust present on the nail bed of a cat (paronychia).
10. Describe the skin lesions associated with pemphigus vulgaris.
In pemphigus vulgaris the initial lesion is a suprabasilar vesicle. The vesicle ruptures very
easily, leaving behind deep erosions or ulcerations that constitute the most common lesions
observed clinically (Figure 32-3).
11. Do the lesions of pemphigus diseases occur in characteristic distributions?
Yes. Location of the lesions is helpful in differentiating these disorders (see Table 32-1,
Figures 32-2 and 32-3)
12. Is there a gender, age, or breed predilection for any of the pemphigus disorders?
No age, gender, or breed predilection has been reported. However, most cases have been
diagnosed in middle-aged animals (mean age: 4 years). In addition, pemphigus foliaceus has been
reported more frequently in Akitas, Chow Chows, Dachshunds, Bearded Collies, Newfoundlands,
Doberman Pinchers, Finnish Spitz, and Schipperkes.
13.  Are the pemphigus diseases pruritic or painful?
Pruritus and pain are variable. Pemphigus foliaceus usually causes lesions on the footpads,
which can be painful. Most dogs and cats are nonpruritic; however, some animals with
pemphigus foliaceus can present with moderate-to-severe pruritus.
234
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
A
B
Figure 32-3 A, Pemphigus vulgaris. Eroded to ulcerative lesions localized to the mucocutaneous
junctions of the eyes, lips, and nasal planum. B, Pemphigus vulgaris. Eroded to ulcerative lesions localized
to the oral mucosa. C, Pemphigus vulgaris. Eroded to ulcerative lesions at the mucocutaneous junctions of
the vulva covered with serosanguineous exudate.
14. Are secondary bacterial skin infections commonly seen with pemphigus disorders?
 Secondary bacterial skin infections may be present but they are not as common as one would
expect. Nevertheless, always look for their presence.
15. Are systemic signs present with the pemphigus diseases?
Severe and generalized cases of pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris may present
with fever, anorexia, depression, and lymphadenopathy.
16. Can the clinical signs of the pemphigus diseases wax and wane?
Yes. A waxing and waning course is characteristic of pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus
erythematosus.
17. Describe the first treatment choice for the pemphigus complex.
Oral Glucocorticoids
· Most commonly used drugs: prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone.
·Oral glucocorticoids work as the sole therapy in about 50% of cases.
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
235
·Induction dosage:
- Dogs: 2.2 to 6.6 mg/kg every 24 hours.
- Cats: 4.4 to 6.6 mg/kg every 24 hours.
· Re-evaluate response to treatment in 2 weeks. When remission is achieved, the ultimate
goal is to find the lowest dosage that maintains the disease under control and causes
minimal side effects. This maintenance dosage should be given every other day or less
frequently.
●If no significant improvement or intolerable side effects are seen after 2 weeks of therapy,
·Side effects: cushingoid changes.
18. Describe the other immunosuppressive drugs commonly added to the glucocorticoid
trea tment regimen.
Azathioprine
+ It is the first choice for dogs.
●Dose: 2.2 mg/kg every 24 to 48 hours, orally (PO).
· Remember that it has a lag phase of 4 to 6 weeks; therefore, do not expect a rapid response
and do not reduce the glucocorticoid dosage too quickly.
· Do not use azathioprine in cats because they are very susceptible to the bone marrow
suppression induced by this drug.
·Side effects: bone marrow suppression, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Chlorambucil
· It is the first choice for cats.
·Dose: 0.2 mg/kg every 24 to 48 hours, PO.
· Remember that it has a lag phase of about 4 to 6 weeks; therefore, do not reduce the
· Side effects: bone marrow suppression, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Gold Salts
· These can be used in dogs and cats in combination with glucocorticoids.
· Use the parenteral forms: aurothioglucose (Solganol) or aurothiomalate (Myochrysine).
● Induction dosage: 1 mg/kg per week given intramuscularly (IM) until clinical response is
noted.
· Maintenance dosage: 1 mg/kg IM once per month or as needed.
· Remember that gold salts have a lag phase of 6 to 12 weeks; therefore do not reduce the
·Side effects: hepatic necrosis, thrombocytopenia, stomatitis, and proteinunia.
19. Can any of the previously mentioned immunosuppressive drugs be initially used in
combination with glucocorticoid therapy to manage the pemphigus diseases?
Yes, some people will start treatment with glucocorticoids combined with another immuno-
suppressive drug. However, this protocol will increase therapy cost, add risk for development of
side effects, and it may not be necessary considening that approximately 50% of the cases respond
solely to glucocorticoids.
20. Describe the test protocol recommended to monitor for potential side effects associated
with the immunosuppressive drugs.
· Glucocorticoids: Complete blood cell (CBC) count, chemistry profile, urinalysis, and urine
culture every 6 to 12 months to monitor for cushingoid changes.
· Azathioprine and Chlorambucil: CBC and platelet count weekly to every other week for
the first 3 months to monitor for bone marrow suppression. Thereafter, every 2 to 4 months
236
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
Table 32-2CharacteristicDistribution ofLesions of thePemphigusDiseases
DISEASE
CHARACTERISTIC DISTRIBUTION*
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Ear pinnae, bridge of the nose, nasal planum,
footpads, nail beds (cats).
Pemphigus erythematosus
Ear pinnae, bridge of the nose, nasal planum
 Pemphigus vulgaris
Mucocutaneous junctions, oral cavity, groin, axillae
*One or more of these sites may be affected on any single animal. In addition, other body regions may be
involved, with the exception of pemphigus erythematosus, where lesions are limited to the face.
A chemistry profile should be performed monthly or more frequently to monitor for
hepatotoxicity that can result from azathioprine therapy.
· Gold salts: CBC count, platelet count, and urinalysis every 2 weeks for the first 16 weeks
Thereafter, every 2 to 4 months.
21. Are antibiotics routinely used in combination with the immunosuppressive drugs?
No. Antibiotics are used when secondary bacterial skin infection is documented.
22. Can topical therapy be used to manage the pemphigus complex?
Yes. Topical glucocorticoids can be used to treat small, localized lesions. However, prescribe
them judiciously because most preparations contain yery potent glucocorticoids and their
frequent application can cause skin atrophy and eventually cushingoid signs.
23. Can the pemphigus diseases be cured?
No. These diseases need lifelong therapy. The ultimate therapeutic goal is to find the lowest
dosage of the immunosuppressive agent(s) that controls the disease with minimal side effects.
Ideally, these medications should be administered every 48 hours or less frequently. Occasionally,
a case will undergo complete remission and therapy can be discontinued.
 24. What is paraneoplastic pemphigus?
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is a well-recognized skin disorder in humans only recently
described in dogs. As the name indicates, this autoimmune skin disease occurs in association with
neoplastic conditions, and there is evidence that the neoplasia is responsible for development of
the skin lesions.
25. How does paraneoplastic pemphigus develop?
The disease pathogenesis is not completely understood. However, it is hypothesized that
anti-tumor antibodies cross-react with epidermal antigens (e.g., desmosome molecules) and
cause the initial skin damage. As the disease progresses, the damaged keratinocyte membrane
allows for exposure of hidden (intracellular) antigens to the immune system which broadens the
 26. What neoplasms have been reported in association with paraneoplastic pemphigus in
ts8op
One case each of thymic lymphoma, Sertoli cell tumor, and mammary carcinoma.
27. What is the prognosis for this disorder?
Very poor unless the associated neoplasia is cured
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
237
28.  List the autoimmune subepidermal vesiculobullous diseases.
· Bullous pemphigoid
· Linear IgA bullous dermatosis
·Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
· Mucous membrane pemphigoid
 29.  Describe the similarities and differences among these diseases.
· They are all very rare autoimmune skin diseases.
· The skin lesions are very similar in all of them and are characterized by vesicles or bullae
that easily rupture and result in the formation of ulcers. The ulcers are the most common
lesions found on physical ex amination.
● Oral cavity involvement has been reported to occur with all forms of subepidermal
vesiculobullous diseases.
● Mucocutaneous junctions are affected in cases of mucous membrane pemphigoid and
bullous pemphigoid. In addition, axillae and groin areas are frequently affected in bullous
differentiated). A recent report states that mucosal and mucocutaneous invol vement occur
more often with mucous membrane pemphigoid than with bullous pemphigoid
      s
dermatosis have shown a more varied distribution of skin lesions.
· According to a recent report, most cases of mucous membrane pemphigoid appear to
occur in German Shepherds and most cases of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita appear in
Great Danes.
· The target antigens are localized in the skin basement membrane in all four disorders
However, the specific component of the basement membrane targeted by the immune
system is different for each disorder.
· Because the autoimmune attack occurs at the basement membrane, the routine histo-
pathologic findings are very similar among the four disorders and are mainly characterized
by a subepidermal cleft and vesicle formations.
· Similarly, the immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence results are characterized
by linear or reticulated staining of the basement membrane in all four diseases.
30. How are the autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases managed?
The same treatment protocol listed for the management of the pemphigus diseases (see
questions 17-19) can be applied for the management of the subepidermal bullous diseases.
31. How easy is it to manage the subepidermal bullous diseases?
Few reported cases of these diseases indicate that they are more diffcult to manage than the
immunosuppressive drug. Therefore, the prognosis for these diseases should be considered
guarded to poor.
32. List the cutaneous forms of lupus erythematosus.
·Discoid lupus erythematosus
·Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus, also known as "idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis
of Collies and Shetl and Sheepdogs'
of German Shorthaired Pointers'
It is important to mention that vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus and exfoliative
cutaneous lupus erythematosus were only recently suggested as subtypes of cutaneous lupus
 Future studies may support this classification or may place these disorders under a different
category.
238
Immune-Mediated SkinDiseases
Table 32-3 Clinical Signs of the Three Forms of Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus
DISEASE
LESIONS
DITRIBUTIONS
Discoid LE
Depigmentation, erythema,
Nasal planum (initially/
scales, erosion, ulceration,
common), bridge of the
Crust
nose, other sites (rare)
Vesicular cutaneous LE*
Vesicles/bulla (initially/
Groin/axillae (common),
transient), serpiginous
other sites (rare)
ulcers (common)
Exfoliative cutaneous LE f
Scale, crust, erythema
Face, ears and back
initially,then
generalized
*Also known as “idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs.
tAlso known as "hereditary lupoid dermatosis of Geman Shorthaired Pointers."
LE, Lupus erythematosus.
33.  Describe the clinical signs of the three forms of cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
See Table 32-3 and Figure 32-4.
34.  Are the cutaneous forms of lupus erythematosus common disorders?
 Discoid lupus erythematosus is the second most common autoimmune skin disorder of the
dog after pemphigus foliaceus. However, it is still uncommon.
Vesicular and ex foliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus are rare disorders.
 35. Is there any gender, age, or breed predilection for the development of these diseases?
Gender
· No gender predilection has been reported.
Age
● In discoid lupus erythematosus and vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus, the lesions
usually first appear at middle to old age.
In exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus, the lesions typically first appear before
1 year of age.
Breed
· Discoid lupus erythematosus has been reported more frequently in German Shepherds,
Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs, Siberian Huskies, and Brittany Spaniels.
 Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus has been reported only in Collies and Shetland
Sheepdogs.
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus has been reported only in German Shorthaired
Pointers.
 36. Can sun exposure aggravate the skin lesions of the cutaneous lupus erythematosus
diseases?
 Yes, in cases of discoid lupus erythematosus; however, not documented in the other two forms
of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. However, recrudescence of skin lesions has been reported to
occur more often during the summer months in cases of vesicular cutaneous lupus erythermatosus,
indicating that sun exposure aggravates the skin lesions.
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
239
A
Figure 32-4 A, Depigmentation, erythema, and
mild crusting of the nasal planum of a dog with
discoid lupus erythermatosus. Note that the normal
cobblestone appearance of the nose is lost on the
affected area. B, Coalescing circular to serpiginous
ulcerative lesions localized to the ventral abdomen
and groin of a Collie with vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus. C, Scales surrounding groups of hair
shafts of a German Shorthaired Pointer with ex-
foliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus. (Courtesy
Stephen White, DVM.)
37. List treatment protocols used to manage discoid lupus erythematosus.
Mild Cases
·Sun avoidance from 10:00 AM to 5:00 pm. If the dog is outside be sure to provide a shaded
area and to apply a sunscreen with a SPF of at least 15.
Aqueous vitamin E at the dosage of 400 to 800 1U every 12 hours orally can be used as
adjunctive therapy but it will not work as the sole therapy.
· Topical glucocorticoids:
-Initially stronger products (betamethasone, triamcinolone, fluocinolone acetonide,
clobestone propionate) should be applied once to twice daily until remission is reached,
usually in 10 to 14 days.
 Once remission is achieved, reduce the frequency to once every 48 to 72 hours and/or
switch to a milder topical product such as hydrocortisone 0.5% to 2.5%.
- Remember that nonjudicious use of topical glucocorticoids can result in skin atrophy
and cushingoid chan ges.
· Topical tacrolimus (Protopic):
- It is an immunomodulating drug with the mechanism of action similar to that of
cyclosponine.
240
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
- It has recently shown to work very well for cases of discoid lupus.
-Apply the formulation containing 0.1% or 0.03% to the affected areas at least twice
daily until remission is achieved and then reduce to the lowest frequency that keeps the
disease under control.
- It has the advantage of minimal to no side effects. However, the cost can be a limiting
factor.
·Tetracycline and niacinamide:
- They have an anti-inflammatory effect.
- Dosage: 250 mg of each PO three times daily in dogs <10 kg;
- 500 mg of each PO three times daily in dogs >10 kg.
- If no significant improvement is noticed after 2 months of therapy, consider another
treatment option.
- Side effects are rare and include vomiting and/or diarrhea. (Editorial comment
niacinamide has anecdotally been associated with an increased frequency of seizures
and should be used with caution in dogs with a history of seizures.)
Severe Cases or Cases Refractory to the Therapy Listed Above:
·Systemic glucocorticoids:
- Oral prednisone, prednisolone, or methylprednisolone.
- Induction dosage: 2.2 mg/kg for dogs or 4.4 mg/kg for cats until the disease achieves
remission, usually 10 to 14 days. Then reduce the dosage to the lowest dosage that
keeps the disease under control.
- A common practice is to combine the oral glucocorticoid with one or more of the
medications listed above with the ultimate goal of stopping the oral glucocorticoid once
the disease achieves remission.
·Sun avoidance as described above.
38. List treatment protocols for vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
with azathioprine.
·Pentoxify lline (Trental):
- It improves tissue oxygenation in addition to having an anti-inflammatory effect.
Dosage: 10 to 15 mg/kg orally two to three times daily.
· Tetracycline and miacinamide in combination can be tried in mild cases. However, the
erythematosus is disappointing.
· Topical tacrolimus (Protopic 0.1% or 0.03%) can be applied to treat more severe focal
lesions with good results.
·Sun avoidance.
·Lesions are often complicated with secondary infections. Identify and treat the secondary
infections appropriately.
+According to the author's experience, this condition can be challenging to manage.
39. List the treatment options for exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
· Most cases do not respond well to traditionally recommended therapies.
· The following medications have been tried with variable results:
- Immunosuppressive dosages of oral glucocorticoids.
-High dosages of omega-3 and/or omega-6 fatty acids.
-Vitamin A (retinol) or retinoic acids.
·Frequent baths with keratolytic and/or keratoplastic shampoos.
· Identify and treat appropriately secondary skin infections.
Immune-Mediated Skin Diseases
241
40. What are the prognoses for the three forms of cutaneous lupus erythematosus?
Good for discoid lupus erythematosus. However, vesicular and exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus are more diffcult to manage with the currently available therapies, and the
prognosis for disease control should be considered guarded. Therapy is lifelong for all three
forrms of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythermatosus can wax and
wane spontaneously
41. List the diagnostic tests used for the autoimmune skin diseases.
· Cytology
·Skin biopsy
·Immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry
·Indirect immunofluorescence
·Advanced immunologic tests:
- Immunoblotting
 Immunoprecipitation
- Enzyme-linked immunoassay
42. How beneficial is it to perform cytology in the diagnosis of autoimmune skin diseases?
It is very beneficial. The presence of sheets of acantholytic keratinocytes (Figure 32-5) with
if the history and clinical signs are suggestive of these disorders. In addition, the cytology can
provide information regarding the presence of secondary infections.
Figure 32-5 Groups of acantholytic keratinocytes associated with neutrophils (high-power field).
43. Is the presence of acantholytic keratinocytes pathognomonic for the diagnosis of
pemphigus diseases?
No. Small numbers of acantholytic keratinocytes can be rarely seen in cases of severe
Staphylococcus pyoderma. In addition, their presence has been reported in cases of dermato-
phytosis caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
44. How beneficial is it to perform a skin biopsy in the diagnosis of autoimmune skin diseases?
It is very beneficial. Skin biopsy for routine dermatohistopathology is the most common test
used in the diagnosis of the autoimmune skin diseases. Skin biopsies are sporadically used for
direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry.
45. How should a skin biopsy be performed to diagnose the autoimmune skin diseases?
● Use a 4-mm or 6-mm punch biopsy instrument. In some occasions, wedge biopsy may be
required to preserve primary lesions (e.g., vesicles, pustules)
242
Immune-Mediated SkinDiseases
· Ideally, biopsy samples should be taken when the animals are not being treated with
immunosuppressive therapy and after secondary skin infections have resolved.
· Administer the local anesthetic subcutaneously and not intradermally
· Do not surgically prepare the skin because it removes or destroys diagnostic lesions.
· When performing a biopsy of a crusty lesion do not remove the crust but rather include it
as part of your sample. Crusts often contain diagnostic elements.
immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence, when perilesional skin biopsy specimens
should be obtained in addition to lesions (vesicles, pustules) if they are present.
· For routine histopathology preserve samples in 1o% neutral formalin.
· For immunofluorescence, preser ve samples in Michel's fixative.
· For immunohistochemistry, preserve samples in l0% neutral formalin.
· Ideally, samples should be sent to a dermatohistopathologist with a complete history,
physical ex amination findings, and list of differential diagnoses.
46. How beneficial are direct immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry in the
diagnosis of the autoimmune skin diseases?
They can be beneficial to distinguish the pemphigus complex diseases (intercellular
staining) from the subepidermal vesiculobullous diseases (linear staining of the skin basement
membrane). However, results have to be interpreted cautiously due to the significant numbers of
false-positive and false-negative results. Currently, these tests are seldom used in the diagnosis of
the autoimmune skin diseases in veterinary medicine.
47. What sample should be collected for indirect immunofluorescence and how useful is
this test in the diagnosis of autoimmune skin diseases?
Indirect immunofluorescence investigates the presence of circulating autoantibodies;
therefore, a serum sample should be collected. This test is not routinely used in the diagnosis of
autoimmune skin diseases in animals due to poor sensitivity. However, a recent study demon-
strated good results with the use of canine lip as substrate. This immunologic method is beneficial
to distinguish some forms of subepidermal vesiculobullous diseases if the salt-split technique is
applied. Nevertheless, the routine use of indirect immunofluorescence in the diagnosis of auto-
immune skin diseases in animals awaits further investigation and easy accessibility to this test.
48. How beneficial are the advanced immunologic methods in the diagnosis of autoimmune
skin diseases?
These tests are beneficial in the identification of the specific antigens targeted by circulating
vesiculobullous disorders. Unfortunately, at present, they are only available at a few veterinary
research laboratories.
 49.  Is the antinuclear antibody test useful in the dia gnosis of the autoimmune skin disorders
discussed here?
No. If this test is performed, the results should be negative or have very low titers in all the
autoimmune skin disorders discussed here. Therefore, a positive test result should be considered
false or nonspecific.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Favrot C, Dunston S, Deslandes J, et al: Effect of substrale selection on indirect immunofluorescence testing of
canine autoimmune subepidermal blistering diseases, Car / Vet Res 66:26-30, 2002.
Jackson HA, Olivry T: Ulcerative dematosis of the Shetland Sheepdog and rough Collie dog may represent a nove]
vesicular variant of cutaneous lupus erythematosus, Vet Dermatot 12:19-27, 2001
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
243
Olivry T, Dunston SM, Savary KCM, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases:
Identification of targeted antigens defines novel clinicopathological entities, Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 13:80-81, 1997.
Olivry T, Jackson HA: Diagnosing new autoimmune blistering skin diseases of dogs and cats, Clin Tech Smalt Anim
Pract 16:225-229, 2001.
Olivry T, Luther PB, Dunston SM, et al: Interface dematitis and sebaceous adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (lupoid dermatosis) of German Shorthaired Pointers, Proc Arnu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot
Am Coll Vet Dermatot 15:41-42, 1999.
Poisson L, Olivry T, Lemons C: Subcomeal neutrophilic acantholytic pustular dematitis: an unusual manifestation
of dematophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceus. In Kwochka KW, Willemse T, Tschamer CV (eds):
Rosenkrantz WS: Pemphigus foliaceus. In Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Current veterinary
dermatology. St. Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 141-148.
   o          
veterinary dermatology. St. Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 149-153
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE: Immune-mediated disorders. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE (eds): Smatt
animal dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 667-779.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE: Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE (eds):
Smalt animat dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 913-1003.
33.ERYTHEMA MVETIFORMEAND TOXIC
EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS
Jan A. Hall, BVM&S, MS, MRCVS, DACVD
1. What is erythema multiforme?
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an uncommon, acute, self-limiting eruption of the skin and
mucous membranes and is characterized by distinctive, erythematous macules and characteristic
histopathology. Confirmatory diagnosis is usually made by histopathology. Drug administration,
systemic diseases, neoplasia, and idiopathic factors have been suggested as underlying causes.
Identification and removal of the offending trigger factor normally leads to recovery.
2. What is the pathogenesis of EM?
 The pathogenesis is not fully understood but likely involves an immunologic process. The
condition is believed to represent a host-specific cell-mediated reaction toward an unknown
antigen. Drugs, systemic disease, neoplasia, infections, and stress have all been implicated as
sources of the offending antigen. Generally there is a precipitating cause although it may be hard
to identify. Many cases end up being classified as idiopathic. This condition may well be multi-
factorial. Age, gender, and breed predilections have not been identified.
3. What is known about the possible immunologic basis for this disease?
 EM is believed to represent a host-specific cell-mediated reaction toward an unknown
anti gen. Recent immunohistochemical studies have suggested that the immunological reaction in
EM is similar to that noted in graft versus host disease (GVHD). GVHD results from the transfer
of immunologically competent donor cells into an immunologically incompetent host. The graft
cells recognize the host cells as antigenically different and respond by triggering an immuno-
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
243
Olivry T, Dunston SM, Savary KCM, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases:
Identification of targeted antigens defines novel clinicopathological entities, Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 13:80-81, 1997.
Olivry T, Jackson HA: Diagnosing new autoimmune blistering skin diseases of dogs and cats, Clin Tech Smalt Anim
Pract 16:225-229, 2001.
Olivry T, Luther PB, Dunston SM, et al: Interface dematitis and sebaceous adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (lupoid dermatosis) of German Shorthaired Pointers, Proc Arnu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatot
Am Coll Vet Dermatot 15:41-42, 1999.
Poisson L, Olivry T, Lemons C: Subcomeal neutrophilic acantholytic pustular dematitis: an unusual manifestation
of dematophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceus. In Kwochka KW, Willemse T, Tschamer CV (eds):
Rosenkrantz WS: Pemphigus foliaceus. In Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Current veterinary
dermatology. St. Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 141-148.
   o          
veterinary dermatology. St. Louis, 1993, Mosby, pp 149-153
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE: Immune-mediated disorders. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE (eds): Smatt
animal dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 667-779.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE: Congenital and hereditary defects. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin GE (eds):
Smalt animat dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 913-1003.
33.ERYTHEMA MVETIFORMEAND TOXIC
EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS
Jan A. Hall, BVM&S, MS, MRCVS, DACVD
1. What is erythema multiforme?
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an uncommon, acute, self-limiting eruption of the skin and
mucous membranes and is characterized by distinctive, erythematous macules and characteristic
histopathology. Confirmatory diagnosis is usually made by histopathology. Drug administration,
systemic diseases, neoplasia, and idiopathic factors have been suggested as underlying causes.
Identification and removal of the offending trigger factor normally leads to recovery.
2. What is the pathogenesis of EM?
 The pathogenesis is not fully understood but likely involves an immunologic process. The
condition is believed to represent a host-specific cell-mediated reaction toward an unknown
antigen. Drugs, systemic disease, neoplasia, infections, and stress have all been implicated as
sources of the offending antigen. Generally there is a precipitating cause although it may be hard
to identify. Many cases end up being classified as idiopathic. This condition may well be multi-
factorial. Age, gender, and breed predilections have not been identified.
3. What is known about the possible immunologic basis for this disease?
 EM is believed to represent a host-specific cell-mediated reaction toward an unknown
anti gen. Recent immunohistochemical studies have suggested that the immunological reaction in
EM is similar to that noted in graft versus host disease (GVHD). GVHD results from the transfer
of immunologically competent donor cells into an immunologically incompetent host. The graft
cells recognize the host cells as antigenically different and respond by triggering an immuno-
244
Erythema Mulfiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
with drug administration, viral infections, systemic disease, neoplasia, or idiopathic causes is
believed to trigger the immunological reaction.
The involvement of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes has been suggested in both GVHD and EM. It
has been shown that epidermal and follicular keratinocytes express the adhesion molecules,
ICAM-1 and MHC I1. Upregulation of these molecules is believed to occur during the early
stages of the disease process in response to antigenic stimulation. The upregulation may occur
through production of IFN-α and TNF-β from CD8+ (cytotoxic) and CD4+ T 1ymphocytes. It is
believed that the upregulated adhesion molecules trap cytotoxic lymphocytes attracted into the
epithelium, where they trigger apoptosis (programmed cell death) of the keratinocytes, leading to
epidermal damage and the progressive development of clinical disease.
4. How do the forms of EM described in humans compare with those in dogs?
Erythema multiforme was first described in humans in 1814, although reports of an EM-like
disease date back to antiquity. In humans, EM is divided into two subsets: a milder form, known
as erythema muftiforme minor, that is most often associated with viral infections, and a more
severe form, erythema muftiforme major, more often associated with drug reactions. An additional
severe form, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, has also been described; however, recent histopathologic
and immunohistochemical studies suggest that this is more likely a form of toxic epidermal
necrolysis (TEN).
The human classification of EM has been adopted for use in dogs. It has been suggested that
EM cases have flat or raised target or polycyclic erythematous macules, with less than 50% of
the body surface affected and less than 10% showing evidence of epiderimal detachment. EM
cases are classified as minor if one or no mucosal surfaces is affected and major if more than
one mucosal surface is involved. Stevens-Johnson syndrome/TEN cases refer to those in which
greater than 50% of the body surface is affected, with extensive mucosal involvement but no
target or polycyclic lesions. Using this system it has been shown that the vast majority of cases
associated with drug exposure have produced Stevens-Johnson syndrome/TEN lesions rather
than EM. However, there is quite clearly an overlap between these disease conditions.
not critical to be concerned about the exact classification of a particular case. From a clinical
point of view both EM and TEN will be included as differential diagnoses for individuals with
compatible skin lesions.
5.How common is EM in dogs and cats?
EM is an uncommon disease in dogs and cats. It has been recognised in dogs in association
with a wide variety of drugs, infections, and systemic diseases, including neoplasia although
idiopathic cases, where no causal agent can be identified, are common. EM has also been reported
in association with an adverse reaction to food. In cats, EM has been associated with drug therapy
and herpes virus infection. Reported causes of EM in dogs and cats are included
in Table 33-1.
6. What are the clinical features of EM?
The skin lesions in EM are usually characterized as bilaterally symmetrical erythematous
macules and papules, which often spread peripherally. Vesiculobullous lesions, ulcerations, and
epidermal collarettes may also be noted. Lesions may affect the skin and mucous membranes
at any location, but often the face, oral mucous membranes, and ventral abdomen are more
severely involved (Figure 33-1). Epidermal necrosis may occur with the development of eroded
and ulcerated lesions. Sloughing of skin may be noted. Secondary infections may occur because
of the destructive nature of the condition. The skin lesions may be painful although rarely
pruritic. Target lesions, Nikolsky's sign (the outer layer of the skin is rubbed off when pressure
signs are noted they usually reflect the underlying cause. In cats, the lesions are most often
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
245
Table 33-1
Reported Trigger Factors for EM and TEN in Dogs and Cats
TRIGGER FACTORS
SPECIES (D = DOG/C = CAT)
ANTIBIOTICS
Amoxicillin
D
 Clavulanic acid-potentiated amoxicillin
D
Cephalexin
D
 Chloramphenicol
D
Enrofloxacin
D
Erythromycin
D
Gentamicin
D
Lincomycin
D
Ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine
D
 Penicillin
D/C
Tetracycline
D
Trimethoprim-sul fadiazine
D/C
 Trimethoprim-sul famethoxazole
D/C
MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS
Aurothioglucose
D
 Chlorpyri fos
D
Heart worm preventative (beef)
D
 D-limonene
D
Griseofulvin
C
Ivermectin
D
Levamisole
D
L-Thyroxine
D
Ear drops
D
 Phenobarbital
D
Propylthiouracil
C
OTHER
Adverse food reaction
D
Anal sacculitis
D
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
D
Herpes virus
C
Idiopathic
D/C
Internal neoplasia
D/C
Pseudomonas otitis externa
D/C
 Staphylococcal dermatitis
D
vesiculobullous and/or ulcerative. The trunk and mucocutaneous junctions are most commonly
affected.
7. How do you diagnose EM?
The diagnosis of EM is normally made by histopathology. Historical features may include
acute onset, drug administration, infectious disease, stress, or systemic disease. Routine
hematologic studies, chemistry profle, and urinalysis may indicate changes associated with the
severe inflammatory nature of the condition or secondary illness. ANA titers are negative. Histo-
pathology may be diagnostic and reveal interface dermatitis, reflecting a cell-mediated immune
246
Erythema Multiforme and ToxicEpidermal Necrolysis
Figure 33-1l Erythematous maculopapular eruption of erythema multiforme on the ventral abdomen of a
Golden Retriever dog.
attack upon the epidermis (apoptosis of keratinocytes, which can be so severe that the epidermis
ulcerates, plus lymphocyte infiltration of the epidermis).
The differential diagnosis for EM includes bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis,
urticaria, and other vesiculobullous diseases including pemphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and TEN.
8. What are histopathologic changes noted in EM?
 p      pu so s a 
single cell necrosis (apoptosis) that may be noted at all levels of the epidermis with satellitosis of
lymphocytes and macrophages. A superficial interstitial or lichenoid band of inflammation may
be noted within the superficial dermis. The histopathologic findings may not be able to dis-
tinguish between mild and severe forms of the disease and may vary dramatically with the gross
morphology of the lesions.
9. How does the histopathology of EM differ from that of TEN?
Both EM and TEN are diagnosed by the microscopic features identified on histopathology.
In dogs with EM, the cellular infiltrate is of high density with large numbers of T-lymphocytes,
whereas in TEN a minimal infiltrate is noted. Apoptosis of keratinocytes is commonly noted in
cases of EM but not in TEN. In humans, the infiltrate in TEN has been shown to include mainly
macrophages and dermal dendritic cells, whereas in EM T lymphocytes are the prominent cell.
10. How do you treat erythema multiforme?
A thorough search for an underlying cause is crucial to a successful outcome. Unfortunately,
it is not unusual for this search to be fruitless, as many cases end up being classifed as idiopathic.
Potential triggering drug therapy should be discontinued. Symptomatic and supportive care is
recommended. Although the use of systemic glucocorticoids is controversial in human medicine,
immunosuppressive therapy has gained wide acceptance in veterinary dermatology because of
the presumed immunological etiology of the disease. Doses of prednisone starting from 2 mg/kg
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
247
per day have been recommended, with the addition of azathioprine in severe cases. The prednisone
dose is gradually weaned down based on response. Clinical improvement should be noticed in a
few days. Mild problems may be self-limiting, lasting up to 4 weeks. Severe problems may be
life-threatening. I routinely treat with prednisone at 2 to 4 mg/kg per day and azathioprine at
2.2 mg/kg every 48 hours, with excellent results. Other treatment options that have been
suggested include the use of cyclosporine and pentoxifylline. Pentoxifylline may be used as an
alternative to prednisone in mild cases. A strict exclusion diet trial has been suggested in
idiopathic cases to rule out an adverse reaction to food as the underlying cause. It is possible that
"idiopathic" EM may resolve spontaneously after a few weeks, suggesting that the unidentified
antigenic trigger has been eliminated.
11. What is toxic epidermal necrolysis?
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is rare, severe, vesiculobullous or ulcerative disease
affecting the skin and/or the oral mucosa, characterized by necrosis of the epidermis. The affected
skin may appear scalded. The condition has been reported in dogs, cats, and humans. TEN shares
many clinical features with EM, although whether they are truly related conditions is contro-
versial. It has been suggested that the severe form of EM, the Stevens-Johnson syndrome, may
suggested that many cases of TEN are drug-induced, although some are still classified as idio-
pathic. In humans, 80-95% of cases have a temporal association to drug use. Drugs incriminated
in the development of TEN are similar to those associated with EM (see Table 33-1).
12. What is the pathogenesis of TEN?
suggested. Because TEN shares some historical and clinical features with EM, a similar mechanism
involving apoptosis (programmed cell death) has been proposed, although this is very con-
troversial. It has been suggested that both EM and TEN represent a cutaneous toxicity reaction to
drug therapy metabolites. It has been proposed that the epidermal apoptosis noted in TEN is so
severe as to lead to the devitalisation of the affected epidermis, epidermal necrosis, and the
characteristic vesiculobullous and ulcerated lesions.
13. What are the clinical features of TEN?
The clinical signs of TEN are generally acute in onset. In humans, prodromal signs include
fever, inappetence, a burning sensation, or sensitive skin or joint pain. In animals, an erythematous
rash may develop over hours to days, although this may only be noted in the sparse areas of the
axilla and groin because of the extensive hair coat (Figure 33-2).
 Affected individuals normally present to the clinic with well-demarcated areas of erythroderma
that may have progressed to ulcerations, scaling, and crusting of the affected areas. Ulcerations
may involve the oral mucosal and mucocutaneous junctions. A truncal distribution is common
although some authors have reported that the face may be the first area affected. Increased
over a few days to sloughing lesions (Figures 33-3 through 33-5). Secondary pyoderma or yeast
d e xe ss  o q  sis s r  
Pain may be moderate to intense depending on the extent of the skin involvement.
14. How do you diagnose TEN?
Like EM, TEN is a disease that is definitively diagnosed by the results of histopathology.
Historical features usually include an acute onset, drug administration, infectious disease, stress,
or systemic disease. Routine hematology, chemistry profile and urinalysis may indicate changes
associated with systemic illness, severe nature of the condition (protein loss), or secondary
illness. ANA titers are negative.
248
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Figure 33-2 Erythematous rash in early stage of toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Figure 33-3
Full-thickness epidermal necrosis in advanced toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Figure 33-4Toxic epidermal necrolysis involving the back of a cat following a flea dip.
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
249
Figure 33-5 Extensive ulceration in toxic epidermal necrolysis after two injections of cephalothin given
to this cat in treatment of upper respiratory disease.
The histopathologic changes of TEN are pathognomonic for the disease, and characteristic
regar dless of the underl ying cause. Histopathology reveals full thickness eosinophilic coagulation
necrosis of the epidermis. Epidermal cleavage and cleft formation at the dermal-epidermal
 junction may be noted. The most characteristic lesion is a minimal dermal inflammatory infiltrate.
Skin biopsies taken at a later stage of lesion development may only reveal ulceration. The upper
third of the follicular epithelium may also be affected.
Differential diagnosis includes chemical/thermal burns, contact allergic and irritant reactions,
pemphigus vulgaris, subepidermal bullous diseases, SLE, candidiasis, thallotoxicosis, cutaneous
lymphomas and drug eruption.
15. How do you treat TEN?
The prognosis for TEN is guarded to poor. In humans the mortality rate may be as high as
50%. All cases of TEN should be regarded as potentially life-threatening. Any possible triggering
drug therapy should be discontinued and any underlying disease controlled. Treatment is geared
(fluid therapy, antibiotics, topical therapy). Systemic steroids may be critical to survival although
their use is controversial. Recommended treatment is prednisone starting from 2 mg/kg per day,
weaning down based on response. Clinical improvement should be noticed in a few days. The use
of whirlpool baths in the healing phase may be beneficial.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Affolter VK, Shaw SE: Cutaneous drug eruptions. In Ihrke PJ et al (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatotogy If.
New York, 1993, Pergamon, p 447.
Affolter VK, et al: Immunohistochemical characterization of canine acute graft versus host disease and erythema
multifome. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatology I!f. Boston, 1998, Butterworth-
Heinemann, p 103.
Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Erythema multifome. In Freeberg IM et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in
generat medicine, 5th ed. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, p 636.
Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Steven's Johnson syndrome and toxic epidemal necrolysis. In Freeberg IM, et al
(eds): Fitzpatrick's dermatology in generat medicine, 5th ed. New York, 1999, McGraw-Hill, p 644.
Hinn AC, et al: Erythema multifome, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidemal necrolysis in the dog:
Clinical classfication, drug exposure, and histopathologic correlations, J Vet Allergy Clin lmmunot 6:13, 1998.
250
Panniculitis
Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Erythema multifome in dogs and cats: Literature review and case material from the Comell
University Co1lege of Veterinary Medicine (1988-1996), Vet Dermatot 10:297, 1999.
Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Erythema multifome. In: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 729.
Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Muller and Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th
ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 740.
34. PANNICULITIS
Adam P. Patterson, DVM
1. What is panniculitis?
Panniculitis, a localized form of steatitis, is an uncommon inflammatory condition of the
subcutaneous fat tissue (panniculus adiposus) seen in dogs and cats. It is characterized by
cutaneous nodules that ulcerate and/or fistulate.
2. Is panniculitis a specific disease entity?
No. Panniculitis is a clinically descriptive term referring to lesions that have several possible
etiologies. It has been associated with numerous causes, including infectious organisms (bacteria,
mycobacteria, fungi), pancreatic disorders (inflammation, hyperplasia, necrosis, and neoplasia),
vasculitis, immunologic conditions (lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis), drug reactions,
neoplasia, nutritional disorders (vitamin E deficiency), and physiochemical factors (trauma, foreign
bodies, injections). The majority of cases are attributed to idiopathy and are referred to as sterile
nodular pannicufitis. A hereditary deficiency of o,-antitrypsin is a cause of panniculitis in humans
but has not been documented in dogs or cats.
 3. Describe what happens to the surrounding tissue when an adipocyte is damaged.
Adipocytes are very susceptible to trauma, ischemia, and inflammation. When damaged,
these cells release intracellular lipid that hydrolyzes into fatty acids and glycerol. Fatty acids
themselves can initiate or perpetuate regional inflammation because they are highly inflammatory
agents. As more and more adipocytes are damaged, an unrelenting granulomatous response may
ensue.
4. What cutaneous signs are suggestive of panniculitis?
Lesions consist of single or multiple deep-seated subcutaneous nodules that vary in size
(Figure 34-1, A). Early lesions tend to be well circumscribed and firm with older lesions becoming
soft and poorly defined as the nodule liquefies. Nodules that fistulate discharge an oily clear to
straw-colored material (Figure 34-1, B). When secondarily infected, the discharge is purulent.
The overlying skin may appear normal, or be alopecic, erythematous, scaly, crusty, hyperpig-
cats, nodules are commonly seen along the ventrolateral thorax, neck, and abdomen.
 5. Can patients with panniculitis present with systemic signs?
Yes. Noncutaneous clinical signs may be attributed to underlying diseases (e.g., systemic
infections, immune-mediated diseases, pancreatitis, etc.). Signs could include vomiting, abdominal
pain, polydipsia, polyuria, arthralgia, and/or lameness. Many times constitutional signs such as
fever, anorexia, depression, and lethargy are noted
250
Panniculitis
Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Erythema multifome in dogs and cats: Literature review and case material from the Comell
University Co1lege of Veterinary Medicine (1988-1996), Vet Dermatot 10:297, 1999.
Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Erythema multifome. In: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 729.
Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Muller and Kirk's small animat dermatology, 6th
ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 740.
34. PANNICULITIS
Adam P. Patterson, DVM
1. What is panniculitis?
Panniculitis, a localized form of steatitis, is an uncommon inflammatory condition of the
subcutaneous fat tissue (panniculus adiposus) seen in dogs and cats. It is characterized by
cutaneous nodules that ulcerate and/or fistulate.
2. Is panniculitis a specific disease entity?
No. Panniculitis is a clinically descriptive term referring to lesions that have several possible
etiologies. It has been associated with numerous causes, including infectious organisms (bacteria,
mycobacteria, fungi), pancreatic disorders (inflammation, hyperplasia, necrosis, and neoplasia),
vasculitis, immunologic conditions (lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis), drug reactions,
neoplasia, nutritional disorders (vitamin E deficiency), and physiochemical factors (trauma, foreign
bodies, injections). The majority of cases are attributed to idiopathy and are referred to as sterile
nodular pannicufitis. A hereditary deficiency of o,-antitrypsin is a cause of panniculitis in humans
but has not been documented in dogs or cats.
 3. Describe what happens to the surrounding tissue when an adipocyte is damaged.
Adipocytes are very susceptible to trauma, ischemia, and inflammation. When damaged,
these cells release intracellular lipid that hydrolyzes into fatty acids and glycerol. Fatty acids
themselves can initiate or perpetuate regional inflammation because they are highly inflammatory
agents. As more and more adipocytes are damaged, an unrelenting granulomatous response may
ensue.
4. What cutaneous signs are suggestive of panniculitis?
Lesions consist of single or multiple deep-seated subcutaneous nodules that vary in size
(Figure 34-1, A). Early lesions tend to be well circumscribed and firm with older lesions becoming
soft and poorly defined as the nodule liquefies. Nodules that fistulate discharge an oily clear to
straw-colored material (Figure 34-1, B). When secondarily infected, the discharge is purulent.
The overlying skin may appear normal, or be alopecic, erythematous, scaly, crusty, hyperpig-
cats, nodules are commonly seen along the ventrolateral thorax, neck, and abdomen.
 5. Can patients with panniculitis present with systemic signs?
Yes. Noncutaneous clinical signs may be attributed to underlying diseases (e.g., systemic
infections, immune-mediated diseases, pancreatitis, etc.). Signs could include vomiting, abdominal
pain, polydipsia, polyuria, arthralgia, and/or lameness. Many times constitutional signs such as
fever, anorexia, depression, and lethargy are noted
Panniculitis
251
Figure 34-1 A, Chihuahua with panniculitis involving the left shoulder. B, A close-up of one of the
Jesions on the shoulder of the dog in A. Note the "liquefied" fat appearance of the exudate. C, Cytology of
the exudate from the lesion in B. Note the foamy macrophages and non-degenerate neutrophils. D, Biopsy
from one of the early lesions of dog in A. Note the subcutaneous fat is infiltrated with neutrophils and
macrophages(H&E,×100).
6.Discuss any breed, age, or gender predilections associated with panniculitis.
Poodles and Dachshunds may be predisposed; however, any pure- or mixed-breed dog may
be affected. Otherwise, there are no predilections seen in dogs or cats.
 7. List a few differential diagnoses for nodular dermatitis.
See Table 34-1.
8.  A thorough diagnostic approach is warranted to identify etiologies associated with
panniculitis. Provide mandatory and ancillary diagnostic tests that could be used to
supportthediagnosis.
See Table 34-2.
252
Panniculitis
Table 34-1Differential Diagnosis of Nodular Dermatitis
 Bacterial
Bacterial folliculitis/furunculosis, abscess, mycobacteriosis, nocardiosis,
actinomycosis
Fungal
Dermatophytosis, eumycotic mycetoma, phaeohyphomycosis, pythiosis,
lagenidiosis, zy gomycosis, sporotrichosis, blastomycosis,
Cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, protothecosis
Parasitic
Demodicosis, Cuterebra, arthropod bite/sting
Neoplastic
Lipoma, histiocy tosis, fibrosarcoma, mastocytoma, cutaneous lymphoma,
melanoma, hair follicle tumors, internal neoplasia
Sterile
 Sterile nodular panniculitis, sterile granuloma, calcinosis cutis, drug
eruption, xanthoma, cysts
Table34-2
Testing to Support Diagnosis of Panniculitis
MANDATORY TESTS
ANCILLARY TESTS
Impression cytology
Complete blood cell count
 Fine needle aspirates including acid-fast
Serum chemistry with amylase and lipase
staining
Urinalysis
Bacterial (aerobic and anaerobic),
Serology (FeLV/FIV, ANA, rickettsial)
mycobacterial, and fungal culture of
titers
nodular tissue
 Direct immunofluorescence of biopsy
 Excisional biopsy for histopathology
 Diagnostic imaging
Ocular examination
Lymph node aspirates
9. Describe fine needle aspirate cytologic findings of panniculitis.
Suppurative, eosinophilic, granulomatous, pyogranulomatous, or mixed inflammation may
be seen on cytology depending on the etiology of the disease. Classically, cytology of sterile
nodular panniculitis reveals nondegenerate neutrophils, foamy macrophages, and no microorganisms
(Figure 34-1, C). However, if the nodule is open to the surface then it may be secondarily
infected. In this case, degenerate neutrophils with bacteria would be seen. It is important to
perform acid-fast staining on aspirate samples to rule out mycobacteriosis and nocardiosis.
10. Biopsy is the only way to definitively diagnose panniculitis. What is the pathologist
looking for to make a diagnosis of panniculitis?
Again, depending on the etiology the biopsy may show varying types and degrees of
inflammati on and necrosis. Regardless, the inflammation is in the panniculus and may extend in
any direction. In addition, vasculitis and/or interface dermatitis may be present when lupus
erythematosus is responsible for lesion development. Panniculitis may be septal, lobular, diffuse,
or a mixture of these patterns. Initially with sterile nodular panniculitis, the infltrate is pre-
dominantly neutrophils and macrophages (Figure 34-1, D). Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages tend to dominate in more chronic lesions. With time the panniculus is gradually
Teplaced with fibrous tissue. Special stains are used to evaluate for microorganisms. Polarized
light examination is used to evaluate for foreign bodies. Injection remnants, speci fically rabies
vaccine, may appear as shiny amorphous-to-globular gray-brown material within macrophages or
necrotic tissue.
Panniculitis
253
11. When can a diagnosis of sterile nodular panniculitis be given?
Sterile nodular panniculitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Supporting history, clinical signs,
histopathology, and negative culture and special staining results are needed to make the diagnosis.
12. List treatments for sterile nodular panniculitis.
·Surgical excision of solitary nodules may be curative.
·Prednisone orally at 2 mg/kg every 24 hours (dogs) or 4 mg/kg every 24 hours (cats) for
multiple nodules; give until 1esions resolve (4-8 weeks) then gradually taper (2-3 months)
to the lowest alternate-day dose that maintains remission
· Vitamin E orally at 400 IU every 12 hours given 2 hours before or after a meal.
· Tetracycline/niacinamide orally for dogs >10 kg 500 mg of each every 8 hours or dogs
<10 kg 250 mg of each every 8 hours; give until lesions resolve (2-3 months) then
gradually taper to once-daily administration of each drug for maintenance.
● Pentoxifylline orally in dogs at 10-15 mg/kg every 12 hours; used as adjunctive therapy
initially then possibly alone for maintenance.
·Antibiotics for secondary infection.
·Antimicrobial topical agents for secondary infection.
· Discontinue any drugs that may have been associated with lesion development.
13. Is therapy lifelong?
 Not necessarily. Many young patients experience permanent remission, thereby allowing
cess ation of therapy. Some patients may experience long-term remission with disease recurrence.
These patients will require therapy again and will probably need life-long maintenance therapy
lifelong to prevent sudden recurrence. In all cases, timely re-examinations are warranted to
evaluate disease status, medication dosages, and medication side effects.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brown PJ, Mason KV, Merrett DJ, et al: Multifocal necrotizing steatitis associated with pancreatic carcinoma in three
dogs, / Smatl Aninm Pract 35:129-132, 1994.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ. Diseases of the panniculus. In Reinhardt RW (ed): Veterinary dermatopathotogy: α
macroscopic and microscopic evatuation ofcanine and feline skin disease. St Louis, 1992, Mosby, pp 316-326
Hendrick MJ, Dunagan CA: Focal necrotizing granulomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous injection of
rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases (1988-1989), J Am Vet Med Assoc 198(2):304-305, 1991.
Mellanby RJ, Stell A,Baines E,et al:Panniculitis associated with pancreatitis in a Cocker Spaniel, /SmalAnim
Pract 44:24-28, 2003.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Psychogenic skin diseases. In Kersey R (ed): Multer & Kirk's smatt anina
dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1156-1162.
Torres SMF: Sterile nodular dematitis in dogs, Vet Clin North Am 29(6):1311-1323, 1999.
Youssef S, Archambault M, Parker W, et al: Pyogranulomatous panniculitis in a cat associated with infection by the
Mycobacteriumfortuitum/peregrinumgroup,Can VetJ43:285-287,2002
254
Vascalitis and Vasculopathy
35. VASCULITIS AND VASCULOPATHY
Daniel O. Morris, DVM, DACVD
1. What is vasculitis?
Vasculitis simply means "inflammation of vessels,”' but there is often misuse of terminology
that may lead to confusion. Perivasculitis is an example: this is a very common inflammatory
pattern seen in allergic dermatitis, where inflammatory cells are concentrated near small blood
vessels in the derimis, but there is no disruption of the vessels themsel ves. A true vasculitis results
in destruction of vessel walls by inflammatory cells, which disrupts blood flow and causes
hypoxia of the recipient tissues. Histologically, a pathologist should be describing changes such
as vessel wall necrosis, intramural inflammation (i.e., inflammatory cells within the vessel walls)
endothelial cell swelling, leukocytoclasia ("nuclear dust," which results from the breakdown of
inflammatory cell nuclei), and hemorrhage into the surrounding dermis or subcutis. However, not
all of these criteria will be present in every case of vasculitis. It is the responsibility of the
clinician to interpret the skin biopsy report and correlate this with the clinical signs to make a
diagnosis of vasculitis.
2. What is vasculopathy?
Vasculopathy would technically mean any pathologic process that involves blood vessels.
Clinically, we use this term when there are gross or histologic changes suggestive of tissue
hypoxia, but an active vasculitis cannot be appreciated histologically. The pathologist may use
terms such as dermal edema,"smudging" of collagen, atrophy of hair follicles (or "fading follicles"),
perivascular cuffing by inflammatory cells, degenerative changes of the vessel walls without
intramural inflammation, and hydropic degeneration of the basal cell layer of the epidermis
and/or hair follicles. The term vasculopathy is also used to refer to thromboembolic accidents,
such as occlusion of vessel walls by fibrin thrombi.
3. So, is a vasculopathy the same thing as a vasculitis, and we just can't prove it?
Possibly, although this will be highly variable depending upon the individual case and the
etiology of the problem. For example, dermatomyositis and rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis
with alopecia often meet only the histological criteria for “vasculopathy,” but in the rare case of
each, we find a very convincing vasculitis. I should also mention that in human beings, true
vasculitis is a fleeting lesion. When biopsy specimens of the skin lesion are obtained sequentially,
the inflammatory infiltrate shifts and eventually only "burned out" changes (that we as veterinarians
would refer to as vasculopathy)remain.
4. Are there any pathognomonic clinical signs? What does the lesion actually look
like?
Unfortunately, vasculitis/vasculopathy can present many faces. Lesions range from well-
demarcated crateriform ulcers to nondescript scaling and crusting. Punctate ulcers of the foot
pads and ischemic necrosis of pinnal margins are probably the most common lesions that I see
(Figures 35-1 and 35-2), after dermatomyositis and rabies vaccine-associated vasculopathy.
However, lesions may occur anywhere on the body, including mucocutaneous junctions and
within the oral cavity.
A rare presentation of vasculitis is hemorrhagic urticaria, which may involve any area of the
body. These are literally urticaria (welts) that are purpuric (deep red due to hemorrhage into the
dermis; see Ghersetich et al.'s article for more complete information).
Vasculitis andVasculopathy
255
Jeukocytoclastic vasculitis.
Figure 35-2 Pinnal margin ischemic necrosis in a mixed-breed dog with idiopathic leukocytoclastic
vasculitis.
The one forim that is very predictable is rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis. These dogs
develop an expanding focus of alopecia at the site of previous subcutaneous vaccination that is
often not noticed by the owner for 3 to 4 months after vaccination. The skin is typically erythemic
and mildly scaly in the acute phase, and becomes atrophic and hyperpigmented with chronicity
(see Ghersetich et al.'s article for more complete information). The alopecia is often permanent.
 5. How does one tell the difference between purpura and erythema?
Because purpura is caused by leakage of blood from damaged vessels into the surrounding
tissue, it will be very dark red. As the lesions age, bruising may become more apparent. However,
256
VasculitisandVasculopathy
I have seen cases in which skin that looked purpuric had no evidence of hemorrhage histologically
while hemorrhage does not. This simple test, referred to as diascopy, can be falsely negative in
cases with really intense inflammation and vascular dilation, so caution is warranted to avoid
overinterpretation.
6.What causes vasculitis in dogs and cats?
Vasculitis and vasculopathy are not specific diseases, but rather clinical signs. Most cases
probably result from an antigen-antibody response, where immune complexes become trapped in
vessel walls and provoke an inflammatory response (also referred to as hypersensitivity vasculitis).
Therefore, the vessels are "innocent bystanders" of a sort. Any foreign antigen that can provoke
(bacteria, rickettsia, fungi, protozoa, viruses), drugs and sera, foods and food additives, neoplasia,
and sources of autoantibody responses (lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, etc.). In my
experience, the most common causes in dogs are drugs (a very wide range of drugs!), rabies
vaccination, foods, and rickettsial diseases such as ehrlichiosis and Rocky Mountain spotted
(Figure 35-3). Food sensitivity seems to be associated with many cases of urticarial vasculitis. In
cats, vasculitis appears to be extremely rare. The cases I have seen have been associated with
routine vaccinations, drugs, and with neoplasia (lymphoma). I am also aware of canine cases that
were associated with lymphoma and possibly osteosarcoma. The bad news is that greater than
 50% of all cases will be idiopathic! The same is true for human cases.
the alopecic,hyperpigmented,and atrophic skin over the bridge of the muzzle,periocularly,and over the
occipital area. The pinnae are alopecic, cyanotic, and curling as a result of atrophy and ischemic necrosis.
7.  Are there other skin diseases that can be confused with vasculitis clinically?
Absolutely. I have mistaken cases of eosinophilic dermatitis (Wells-like syndrome) and
erythema multiforme for vasculitis. Both of these conditions can produce brightly erythemic lesions
that can appear to be purpuric, and may not blanche with diascopy. I have been fooled several
times, and the diagnosis was then made by the dermatopathologist. Interestingly, both of these
conditions are cutaneous reaction patterns that may be associated with some of the saime
VasculitisandVasculopathy
257
8. Give some examples of more common types of vasculitis/vasculopathy.
vasculitis (a histologic category that may result from any of the aforementioned etiologies), and
mononuclear vasculopathies associated with either familial dermatomyositis in Collies and
Shelties or rabies vaccine-associated vasculitis with alopecia. We can also see predominantly
eosinophilic vasculitis, or neutrophilic vasculitis that is non-cytoclastic. Whether there is any
difference in etiology between the leu kocytoclastic and the non-leukocytoclas tic cases is unknown.
9. Are there any other specific breeds that are at risk?
Specific "syndromes" have been reported in the Jack Russell Terrier, German Shepherd, and
in the Scottish Terrier breeds. Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs are the “classic" breeds at risk for
dermatomyositis, although other breeds (Beauceron Shepherd, German Shepherd, Welsh Corgi.
and Kuvasz among others) have been reported.
10. Are there specific drugs that have been implicated?
Many drugs have been implicated in the literature, and drug reactions can be difficult
to document definitively, since re-exposing the patient to a potentially reactive drug is considered
by most to be unethical. However, the temporal relationship between use of a drug and onset
of clinical signs is often impossible to deny. One drug that is well known to be associated
with cutaneous vasculitis is itraconazole (Sporanox), and this reaction appears to be dose-
dependent.
11. When I suspect a vasculitis, how can I assure a definitive diagnosis when I take the skin
biopsy?
 First the bad news: there are no guarantees, and clients should be warned that a skin biopsy
is a "test”’ without an absolute “answer" in many cases. Now the good news: with proper site
selection and use of a knowledgeable dermatopathologist, the important differential diagnoses
(erythema multiforme and eosinophilic dermatitis) can usually be excluded, and signs of
cases. One hint: do not biopsy the middle of ulcers or severely crusted central areas. Select areas
12. What other laboratory evaluations should be considered “standard" for every case?
The answer to this question can be highly variable, depending on the patient's history and
other (systemic) clinical signs. Certainly a skin biopsy is necessary to make the absolute diagnosis
of a vasculitis/vasculopathy. Once the diagnosis is in hand, the search for an etiology begins. The
minimum database suggested by Nichols et al. is a complete blood cell count with differential,
diseases in dogs and retroviruses in cats) should be ruled out by serology. Because bacterial and
fungal infection may cause either localized or more wi despread vasculitis, tissue cultures (bacterial,
fungal, and mycobacterial) should be recommended when serologic results are negative. To rule
out sources of autoantibody, tests such as Coombs', antinuclear antibody, and rheumatoid factor
be ruled out with blood culture. Food sensitivity is also an important differential diagnosis,
especially for dogs with urticarial vasculitis.
13. What should I do while the biopsy results are pending?
This depends on the physical status of the patient. I typically avoid the temptation to start
steroidal treatment, and simply provide good nursing care. Most patients will not be severely il1
If there is a history of drug administration, stop it immediately! If you suspect a rickettsial disease
could be the basis for the vasculitis, start appropriate antimicrobial therapy while results are
pending.
258
Vascalitis and Vasculopathy
14. Which drugs are appropriate for treating canine vasculitis/vasculopathy?
This will depend on the clinical and histologic type of vasculitis diagnosed. Obviously,
eliminating the primary source of antigen (drugs, foods, infectious agents) may be curative in
some cases. Pentoxifylline (Trental) is most commonly recommended for rabies vaccine-induced
vasculitis with alopecia, rabies vaccine-associated ischeimic dermatopathy, and for dermato-
myositis. The dosages used have been variable (Table 35-1). The addition of vitamin E has also
 been recommended; however, there is no hard evidence to support its added benefit.
Table 35-1
Drugs Used in the Treatment of Canine Vasculitis
DRUG
DOSE/ROUTE
INTERVAL
MONITORING
 Pentoxifylline
10-40 mg/kg PO
q8-12 h
Vomiting/nausea, hyperactivity
Sulfasalazine
15-22 mg/kg PO
q 8-12 h
CBC, LFTs, STT q 2 wk
initially
Dapsone
1 mg/kg PO
q24 h
CBC, LFTs, STT q 2 wk
initially
Tetracycline +
22 mg/kg PO
q8-12 h
Vomiting/nausea
 Niacinamide
22 mg/kg PO
q8-12 h
Auranofin*
0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO
q 24 h
CBC, Plt, UA q 2 wk initially
Aurothioglucose*
1 mg/kg IM
PLb
UA weekly; CBC q 2 wk
initially
Azathioprine
10-22 mg/kg PO
q 12-24 h
CBC, Plt, LFTs q 1-2 wk
initially
Chlorambucil*
0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO
q 24 h
CBC, Plt. weekly initially,
LFTs prn
Prednisone*
2 mg/kg PO
q12h
Glucocorticoid side effects
Triamcinolone*
0.22 mg/kg PO
q 24 h
Glucocorticoid side effects
Dexamethasonef
0.22 mg/kg PO
q12-24h
Glucocorticoid side effects
Cyclosporine A*
5-10 mg/kg PO
q12-24 h
Secondary infections and
neoplasia; papillomatosis;
plasma levels
Mycophenolate
10-20 mg/kg PO
q 8-12 h
CBC q 2 wk initially; diarthea
Methotrex ate
2.5 mg/m² PO
q 24 h
CBC, Plt weekly, LFTs q 2 wk 
+MIay be used in cats at the same dosage as dogs.
0l ioadsi um Aenpeis paiadei sg pinous seso ssop iog pais! sesop sui sqnop rses u! pasn sq Ae
clinical response, to the lowest possible maintenance dose and frequency of administration.
CBC, Complete blood cell (count); Ptt, platelet count; LFTs, liver function tests; STT, Schimer tear test.
For idiopathic vasculitides, most of which will be granulocytic (i.e., neutrophilic and/or
eosinophilic), a number of drugs have been used successfully in a limited number of cases. Anti-
granulocytic drugs are the first choice of the author, and may include sulfasalazine, dapsone, gold
compounds, or a combination of tetracycline/niacinamide. Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have
long been the mainstay of vasculitis therapy in humans and animals, and will often be prescribed
in combination with these other medications due to their rapid effect. For idiopathic cases, which
may persist for indefinite periods, nonsteroidal drugs should be used in combination with
steroidal drugs for their steroid-sparing effect. Reducing and eventually eliminating the steroid
should be the goal. However, the sulfa derivatives (sulfasalazine and dapsone) have serious side-
effect profles of their own which must be respected. These include bone marrow suppression and
hepatocellular toxicity (sulfasalazine and dapsone) and renal toxicity (dapsone). Careful
laboratory monitoring every 2 weeks initially, then at least quarterly with chronic use, is essential.
VasculitisandVasculopathy
259
Pentoxifylline has not been reported to be successful in managing granulocytic vasculitides;
however I still use it when the histologic inflammatory cell type is predominantly mononuclear
It should also be noted that in human beings, the inflammatory infiltrate shifts from granulocytic
to mononuclear over 48 hours in most cases of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Because the skin
ther apy upon this impression alone.
15. Can these same drugs be used in cats?
The literature is very sparse regarding the treatment of feline vasculitis. My experience has
been limited to the use of steroidal drugs and chlorambucil in feline cases. Gold salts (both oral
and parenteral) have been used in cats for other immune-mediated diseases, and could also be
considered in specific cases.
16. The treatment is not working...now what?
This is not an uncommon occurrence. Vasculitides can be extremely difficult to control!
drugs can be tried. Included in this class are azathioprine, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide,
in the treatment of human vasculitides, but information is extremely sparse on their use in
veterinary medicine. One caveat that the author would add from personal experience: when a
vasculitis is not responding to therapy, rule out underlying neoplasia as the source of antigen!
This is easier said than done in some cases, as tumors may not cause other clinical signs for
several months after a vasculitis has started.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fadok VA, BarrieJ: Sulfasalazine responsive vasculitis in the dog: A case report, JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 20:161-7,
1982
Ghersetich I, Comacchi C, Jorizzo J: Proposal for a working classification of cutaneous vasculitis, Clin Dermatot
17:499-503, 1999.
Legendre AM: Antimycotic drug therapy. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xll, smatl animat
practice. Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, pp 327-331
Lunardi C, Bambara LM, Biasi D, Zagni P, Caramaschi P, Pacor ML: Elimination diet in the treatment of selected
patients with hypersensitivity vasculitis, Clin Exp Rheumatot 10:131-135, 1992.
Morris DO, Beale KM: Cutaneous vasculitis and vasculopathy. In Campbell K (ed): Ver Clin North Am: Smalt Anim
Pract Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders, pp 1325-1335.
Nichols PR, Morris DO, Beale KM: A retrospective study of canine and feline cutaneous vasculitis, Vet Dermatot
12:255-264, 2001.
Parker WM, Foster RA: Cutaneous vasculitis in five Jack Russell Terriers, Vet Dermatol 7:109-115, 1996.
Vitale CB, Gross TL, Magro CM: Vaccine-induced ischemic dematopathy in the dog, Vet Dermatot 10:131-142,
1999.
Wilcock BP, Yager JA: Focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 188:1174-1177, 1986
Zax RH, Hodge SJ, Callen JP: Cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis: serial histo-pathologic evaluation demonstrates
the dynamic nature of the infiltrate, Arch Dermatol 126:69-72, 1990.
Section VII
Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
with Cutaneous Manifestations
36. THYROID DYSFUNCTION
Manon Paradis, DVM, MVSc, DACVD
1. Name the main thyroid dysfunctions and the species most commonly affected.
·Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
·Hypothyroidism is the most common endocrinopathy in the dog; however, it is extremely
rare as a naturally occurring disorder in cats. Conversely, hyperthyroidism is the most
common endocrine disorder in the cat, but quite rare in dogs.
2. What are the physiologic roles of thyroid hormones?
         
necessary for normal cell metabolism of virtually every tissue and organ. Receptors for these
hormones have been identified in almost all tissues, where they increase the metabolic rate and
excess (i.e., hyperthyroidism) they have catabolic effects on muscle and adipose tissues. Thyroid
hormones stimulate erythropoiesis, and regulate both cholesterol synthesis and degradation.
Thyroid hormones play a major role in the differentiation and maturation of skin as well as
maintenance of normal cutaneous functions. They are needed for the initiation of anagen hait
follicles and regulation of the cornification process and sebaceous glands secretion. In hypo-
thyroidism, epidermal atrophy and abnormal cornification occur because of decreased protein
synthesis, mitotic activity, and oxygen consumption.
In various animal models, it was shown that lymphoid tissue development depends on
thyroid gland integrity. Thyroidectomy results in hypoplasia of lymphoid organs, and depletion
of thyroid hormones results in alteration in neutrophils as well as B- and T-lymphocyte function.
3. What causes hypothyroidism in dogs?
 Hypothyroidism (i.e., decreased production of T4 and T3) can be primary (due to destruction
of the thyroid gland itself; this represents more than 95% of clinical cases of canine hypo-
thyroidism), secondary (decreased thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] from the pituitary gland,
less than 5% of the clinical cases) or tertiary (decreased thyroid-releasing hormone [TRH] from
the hypothalamus; not documented in dogs yet). The two most common causes of canine adult-
onset primary thyroid dysfunction are lymphocytic thyroiditis (apparently genetically programmed)
and idiopathic atrophy of the thyroid gland, which may be the end stage of lymphocytic thyroiditis
in an unknown percentage of cases (Box 36-1).
4. Which population of dogs is typically affected by hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism occurs most commonly in mid to large-size purebred dogs with an onset
between 3 and 8 years of age. Several breeds including Doberman Pinschers, Golden Retrievers,
Irish Setters, Airedales, Great Danes, Old English Sheepdogs, Borzoi, and Beagles are reported
to be at increased risk of hypothyroidism.
260
Thgroid Dysfunction
261
Box36-11
Etiologies of Canine Hypothyroidism
 Primary hypothyroidism
Lymphocytic thyroi ditis
 Idiopathic atrophy
 Abnormal hormonogenesis
Destruction by a neoplasm
Iatrogenic (e.g, surgical ablation, antithyroid drugs, radioactive treatment)
Secondary hypothyroidism
 Pituitary malformation (e.g., pituitary dwarfism of German Shepherd Dogs)
Pituitary destruction (e.g., neoplasm)
Suppression of pituitary thyrotrope cells (e.g., natural HAC, nonthyroidal illnesses)
 Iatrogenic (e.g., exogenous glucocorticoids, hypophysectomy, radiation therapy)
Tertiary hypothyroidism
Congenital hypothalamic malformation
Acquired hypothalamic destruction (e.g., neoplasm, hemorrhage, abscess, granuloma)
Congenital hypothyroidism
Thyroid gland dysgenesis (e.g., aplasia, hypoplasia, ectasia)
 Dyshormonogenesis (e.g., defective iodine organification)
Dietary iodine deficiency (congenital goiter)
 5. What is the typical signalment of dogs with hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism is characterized by a plethora of clinical signs affecting the skin and other
organ systems that occur with a deficiency of thyroid hormone activity (Table 36-1). However,
insidious.
Table 36-1
Clinical Signs of Canine Hypothyroidism
COMMON
UNCOMMON
RARE TO QUESTIONABLE
 Dull, dry, brittle hair coat
Alopecia
Hypothermia
Hypotrichosis
 Pyoderma
Bradycardia
Seborrhea
Facial myxedema (tragic look)
Ocular disorders
 Lack of hair regrowth after 
Ceruminous otitis externa
Reproductive disorders
clipping
Weakness
 Facial nerve paralysis
Weight gain/obesity
Cold intolerance
(without polyphagia)
Exercise intolerance
 Lethargy/mental dullness
Dermatologic signs of canine hypothyroidism are reported in approximately 80% of
cases. The initial dermatologic abnormalities include a dull, dry, brittle hair coat that gradually
If left untreated, a bilaterally symmetric truncal alopecia may eventually develop, as well as
alopecia on the bridge of the nose and tail, and myxedema. Ceruminous otitis externa can also
262
Thgroid Dysfunction
recurrent bacterial pyoderma, which may be the result of altered local immunity and/or impaired
systemic immunity. However, by the time pyoderma develops, these immunocompromised dogs
usually have other obvious clinical signs associated with hypothyroidism.
In addition to the dermatologic changes, dogs can have clinical signs associated with a
alertness is noticed after thyroid hormone supplementation is initiated); obesity or weight gain
despite normal or low caloric intake; weakness, and exercise intolerance. Less frequently,
findings include decreased heart rate and body temperature; cold intolerance; various neuro-
muscular disorders (facial and vestibular neuropathies, myopathies, etc.); central ner vous system
clinical signs; atherosclerosis (due to the altered lipid metabolism); reproductive abnormalities
lipid deposition, etc.
6.  How easily can I diagnose canine hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism is one of the most frequent endocrinopathies in the dog. However, due to
the diversity of the clinical signs and the unavailability of a perfect diagnostic test, hypo
thyroidism is also the most commonly misdiagnosed endocrinopathy in dogs.
7. Can I diagnose hypothyroidism in a 1-year-old dog?
 In a clinical context, hypothyroidism is virtually nonexistent in dogs younger than 2 years
of age. Congenital hypothyroidism is rare and results in disproportionate dwarfism with epiphy seal
dysgenesis, macroglossia, delayed dental eruption and cretinism, in addition to the aforementioned
symptoms.
8.  Can hypothyroid dogs be diagnosed on physical examination?
At best, it can only be strongly suspected in very chronic and severe cases when several
hypothyroidism, it remains difficult to diagnose because none of those symptoms is
pathognomonic.
9. What is the ideal test to evaluate canine thyroid function?
Unfortunately, of the many diagnostic tests available to evaluate thyroid function, no single
test is optimal at the present time. None can accurately confirm or rule out hypothyroidism in all
cases.
Definitive diagnosis of hypothyroidism can best be made, at this time, by a combination of
compatible clinical signs, abnormal specific thyroid test results (in absence of diseases or drugs that
can affect results), coupled with successful long-term response to levothyroxine supplementation
10. Which nonspecific laboratory findings am I expected to find in canine hypothyroidism?
A mild, nonregenerative anemia has been noted in approximately 30% of hypothyroid dogs.
A fasting hypercholesterolemia is present in up to 75% of hypothyroid dogs. However, these
findings can also be associated with other diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism; diabetes
mellitus; pancreatitis; and renal, hepatic, or enteric diseases.
11. Should I perform a hemogram, biochemical panel, and urinalysis on every suspected
caseofhypothyroidism?
These tests are not always part of the initial workup in a dermatologic patient, but are
Toutinely performed if the animal is presented to an internist for vague medical clinical signs.
strongly recommended before initiating thyroid hormone replacement therapy to support a
diagnosis of hypothyroidism and to rule out other disorders
Thyroid Dysfunction
263
12. How useful is a skin biopsy in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism?
It is most useful to rule out other diseases such as follicular dysplasia and sebaceous adenitis
o    a p  s  a 
Most frequently, dermatopathologic findings will reveal nonspecific changes of an endo-
crinopathy. Occasionally, however, some histologic changes can be more characteristic of hypo-
thyroidism (e.g., dermal thickening, myxedema, hypertrophy and vacuolation (controversial) of
arrector pili muscles).
14.  List the various diagnostic tests available for a biologic exploration of canine thyroid
function.
· Basal serum hormone concentrations
-Total thyroxine (TT4)
- Free thyroxine (FT4)
- Total and free triodothyronine (TT3 and FT3)
Reverse triiodothyromine (RT3)
- Endogenous canine TSH assays (cTSH)
·Dynamic tests
- TSH stimulation test
- TRH stimulation test
·Miscellaneous
-Antithyroglobulin antibodies (AtgA)
-Antithyroid hormone antibodies (AT3A/AT4A)
Asdoq pou -
- Scintigraphy
15. How useful is the measurement of basal total thyroxine (TT4) concentration?
Serum TT4 concentration, which represents the sum of both protein-bound and free
circulating hormones, is commonly measured to assess thyroid function, in spite of significant
overlap between euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs. It is most frequently analyzed with radio-
immunoassay (RIA), although an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method
is also available.
Basal TT4 concentration remains an excellent screening test for canine thyroid dysfunction.
unless anti-T4 antibodies are causing a spurious increase in TT4 value. This is a rare phenomenon,
and TT4 values are usually extremely high. Overall, with some patient preselection, one can expect
a diagnostic accuracy of approximately 80% when evaluating serum TT4 concentration alone:
· =99% of dogs with a TT4 concentration >15 nmol/L are euthyroid;
· >95% of the dogs with a TT4 concentration <5 nmol/L are hypothyroid;
·any results between 5 and 15 nmol/L are in the gray zone;
· the reference range for TT4 is usually 15-45 nmol/L for most laboratories.
16. How reliable is the in-house ELISA measurement of TT4 concentration?
The in-house ELISA kit is not accurate for determining serum TT4 concentrations in dogs
and cats. Indeed, it was recently shown that there were substantial discrepancies between ELISA
and RIA results for TT4 concentration. In addition, the degree of precision of ELISA kit findings
was poor. Therefore, measurement of TT4 by RIA is recommended.
17. Can TT4 be used as a single test to confirm hypothyroidism?
Basal TT4 can be an economical and valuable test, even if used alone, to rule out hypo-
thyroidism. However, a low TT4 does not imply hypothyroidism. In healthy euthyroid dogs, the
TT4 concentration may decrease below the reference range as much as 20% of the time (with no
264
Thyroid Dysfunction
predictable diurnal pattern) and over 50% of euthyroid dogs can have low serum basal TT4 at
some time during the day, reflecting the risk of establishing a diagnosis of hypothyroidism based
on a low TT4 alone.
 In addition, serum TT4 concentrations gradually decline with age, and in some breeds such
as Greyhounds and Scottish Deerhounds the basal TT4 is lower than in other breeds. New.
foundlands have also been mentioned as having lower basal TT4; however, another study reported
TT4 and cTSH values similar to those in other breeds.
In euthyroid dogs, thyroid hormone levels, and particularly TT4, often decreases below the
reference values following administration of certain drugs such as trimethoprim-sulfa (dermatologic
dose), glucocorticoids, phenobarbital, acetylsalicylic acid, and clomipramine.
18. What is “euthyroid sick syndrome"?
Several nonthyroidal illnesses (NTl) can cause a reduction of serum total T3 and T4
concentrations and an increase of serum rT3 concentrations (an inactive product) in euthyroid
dogs. In this situation, called "euthyroid sick syndrome," it is thought that there is a metabolic
switch in the sick patient to protect by counteracting the excessive calorigenic effects of T3 in
catabolic states. This leads to decreased production of T3 from T4, and decreased rT3 de-
gradation. Indeed, thyroid hormone concentration can significantly decrease below the reference
values in the presence of nonthyroidal systemic illnesses such as renal, cardiac, and hepatic in-
sufficiencies, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, neoplasia, and even pyoderma.
This is a common source of misdiagnosis (when basal serum TT3 and/or TT4 concentrations are
used to diagnose hypothyroidism). In these circumstances, the patients are euthyroid and in no
need of thyroid hormone supplementation.
19. What is free thyroxine?
Free T4 is the active fraction of T4 that is unbound to protein and constitutes less than 1%
of TT4.
 20. What is the advantage of measuring free thyroxine rather than total thyroxine?
In theory, FT4 is less influenced by nonthyroidal illnesses or medications than TT4. In a
TT4 levels, but only if measured by equilibrium dialysis (ED), a diagnostic technique that is
expensive, labonious, and not widely available. Most laboratories offering FT4 assays
unfortunately rely on a RIA method, which essentially does not give more precision than a basal
TT4 concentration. Nevertheless, even when FT4 is deterimined with ED, there is an overlap
between FT4 results in hypothyroid and euthyroid dogs (sensitivity of =0.98 and a specificity of
*0.92). Equilibrium dialysis assay is unaffected by anti-T4 antibodies.
By routinely measuring serum FT4 (ED) concentration instead of TT4 (RIA) levels, the
diagnostic accuracy will increase by a few percentage points, but also the expense in all patients
(FT4 by ED is typically two to three times more expensive than TT4 by RIA). Nevertheless, it
is advantageous when the presence of anti-T4 antibodies in suspected (because ED assay is
unaffected by AT4A).
 21. Comment on the usefulness of measuring total and free triodothyronine concentrations.
Serum TT3 concentration is not reliable as a screening tool to evaluate thyroid function,
because there is considerable overlap between values in healthy, hypothyroid and euthyroid sick
dogs. One study showed that up to 70% of normal dogs had low serum TT3 concentrations at
diagnostic usefulness of FT3 is available.
22. Comment on endogenous canine TSH assays (cTSH).
In humans, the diagnosis of primary hypothyroidism is often made when low serum FT4 and
Thyroid Dysfunction
265
high endogenous TSH concentrations are simultaneously found. Commercial endogenous cTSH
assays became available in dogs a few years ago, and their diagnostic potential has since been
evaluated in normal, hypothyroid, and euthyroid sick dogs. Unfortunately, the clinical usefulness
of cTSH did not meet our expectations:
· =25% of hypothyroid dogs have a serum cTSH concentration in the euthyroid range
(sensitivity, 0.63-0.87);
· =10% of euthyroid dogs have an increased serum cTSH concentration in the hypothyroid
range (specificity, 0.75-0.93);
· The usual reference range for serum cTSH concentration is 0.02-0.6 ng/mL.
In early thyroid failure in humans, TT4 is maintained in the normal range by an increase in
thyroid dysfunction should then be subclinical, and thyroid function would not normally be
evaluated at that stage
When assessing thyroid function in dogs, serum cTSH concentration should not be evaluated
alone but in association with other parameters such as TT4 or FT4 by ED, keeping in mind, as
and that in =l0% of euthyroid dogs, cTSH concentration will increase into the hypothyroid zone.
23. Describe the thyrotropin stimulation test.
The TSH test is considered the most reliable, noninvasive diagnostic test to evaluate thyroid
function in dogs, allowing differentiation, in most instances, between hypothyroid dogs,
euthyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with nonthyroidal illness
The most widely used protocol consists in the measurement of TT4 before and 4-6 hours
after administrating O.1 IU/kg of bovine TSH (bTSH) intravenously. However, a dose as low as
1 IU/dog (post-TSH TT4 sampled 4 hours later) is sufficient to achieve a maximal thyroidal TT4
response in large size (30-40 kg) euthyroid dogs, even if the bTSH had been frozen in aliquots
for up to 200 days.
 24. Why is the thyrotropin stimulation test not used routinely to evaluate canine thyroid
function?
It is because medical grade bTSH is no longer commercially available.A chemical-grade
bTSH (Sigma, not licensed for clinical use) is still used by some clinicians in selected cases
presenting a diagnostic dilemma, although anaphylactic reactions may occur. However, a recent
and other studies are in progress.
25. What is the significance of antithyroglobulin autoantibodies?
Antithyroglobulin autoantibodies (ATgA) can be found in up to 60% of hypothyroid
dogs and in =3% of normal dogs. A positive ATgA titer suggests the presence of autoimmune
lymphocytic thyroiditis; however, it is not an indicator of thyroid hypofunction. Clinical signs of
hypothyroidism are observed when more than 75% of thyroid function is lost, and this usually
occurs a long time after the pathologic process was initiated. Whether all dogs with ATgA
ultimately develop clinical hypothyroidism is not known. Therefore, we should never base a
clinical diagnosis of hypothyroidism on the sole presence of ATgA because this gives no
information on the capacity of the thyroid gland to synthesize thyroid hormones.
However, measurement of ATgA combined with the measurements of serum FT4 (ED) and
cTSH concentrations (OFA certification) has been advocated for screening breeding stocks of
breeds at risk such as Golden Retriever, Doberman, Beagle, and Borzoi with the aim of ultimately
eliminating heritable forms of thyroiditis
26. What is the significance of antithyroid hormone antibodies (AT3A and AT4A)?
These autoantibodies to T3 or T4 have been found in =4% and =0.2%, respectively, of
266
Thyroid Dysfunction
canine sera submitted for thyroid testing. AT3A or AT4A is present in less than 30% of
hypothyroid dogs. While probably of little physiological significance, the presence of AT3A or
AT4A can interfere with measurement of serum thyroid hormone concentrations, usually
27. List the most useful specific diagnostic tests for evaluating canine thyroid function and
name the main reasons why (Table 36-2).
Table 36-21
Diagnostic Tests for Evaluating Canine Thyroid Function
TT4 (RIA)
Economical
Relatively reliable in ruling out hypothyroidism
FT4 (ED)
Very good diagnostic accuracy in most cases
No interference with AT4A
Relatively expensive
cTSH
Useful when combined with TT4 or FT4
 TSH stimulation test
 Rarely performed
May regain popularity with rhTSH?
ATgA
For screening breeding stocks (combined with FT4 and cTSH)
28. What test would you recommend to diagnose hypothyroidism in the dog?
Recommendations depend on the availability of tests and the reasons for testing such as (1)
clinical signs suggestive of hypothyroidism but diagnosis unlikely; (2) clinical signs suggestive
of hypothyroidism and diagnosis probable; and (3) screening asymptomatic breeding stock.
Measurements of serum TT4 concentration along with the measurement of serum cTSH
concentration or serum FT4 concentration by ED are currently popular tests for evaluating
thyroid function in the dog. However, patient selection and results interpretation are overall
more important than which diagnostic test is chosen. Over-interpretation of any thyroid function
test should be avoided, especially in clinically ill dogs or in dogs receiving drugs such as
sulfonamides, phenobarbital, glucocorticoids, acetylsalicylic acid, and clomipramine.
For example, when serum TT4 and cTSH concentrations are measured, the diagnostic
precision will be =85%: i.e., =85% of the dogs will have either a diagnosis of euthyroidism (T4T
>15 nmol/L and cTSH < 0.6 ng/mL) or a diagnosis of hypothyroidism (TT4 <5 nmol/L and
cTSH >0.6 ng/mL). If there is discordance or if the results are in the gray zone, it is preferable
to resubmit blood samples a few weeks to a few months later or to perform additional tests such
as a hemogram and a biochemical panel including fasting cholesterol, FT4 by ED, ATgA or, in the
near future, thyrotropin stimulation test using rhTSH. As a last resort, a therapeutic trial with
levothyroxine can be tried if results are discordant or in the gray zone, but only if reliable clinical
signs are present to evaluate response to treatment. One must be careful if the only criterion is the
presence of endocrine type alopecia, because hair regrowth may be coincidental (canine recurrent
flank alopecia, telogen defluxion). Remember, any thyroid function test result (and response to
therapy) in dogs should be interpreted carefully, and always with a healthy dose of skepticism.
29. Before evaluating thyroid function in a dog, what should the clinician do?
The clinician should: (1) select patients with clinical signs and age (>2 years) that are
compati ble with hypothyroidism; (2) be aware of the several factors (mostly drugs and nonthyroidal
illnesses) that can alter the test results; (3) postpone, if possible, thyroid evaluation until resolution
of the illness or withdrawal of the drug: and (4) send the samples to a laboratory that has validated
assays for dogs and has established reference values.
Thyroid Dysfunction
267
30. What is the ideal treatment for canine hypothyroidism?
Levothyroxine (Thyro-Tab, Soloxine, Synthroid) is administered orally, at the induction
dose of 22 μg/kg (or 0.5 mg/m°) every 12-24 hours. For example, using a dose based on body
surface, a 30-kg (0.96 m²) dog would receive a dose of 500 μg instead of 660 μg; a 40-kg
(1. 17 m²) dog would receive a dose of 600 μg instead of 880 μg. Although in North America most
dogs are initially treated twice a day, it was recently proven that once-a-day administration of an
average dose of 22 μg/kg is adequate for most hypothyroid dogs.
31.When can we expect clinical remission?
Development of clinical signs of hypothyroidism is long and insidious; so is the response to
treatment. Although lethargy and mental dullness can resolve within a few days, body weight
reduction is gradual and it can take a few months for the hair coat to return to its normal
appearance.
32. How long do we need to treat?
Treatment of hypothyroidism is lifelong: hence the importance of a definitive diagnosis
before initiating treatment.
33. How do we determine if the levothyroxine dose regimen is adequate?
After replacement therapy has been administered for 4-8 weeks or when all the clinical signs
have resol ved, a post-pill serum concentration can be obtained, 4-6 hours after administration of
levothyroxine to determine if adequate concentration of hormone is present in the blood.
Typically, we aim for a TT4 in high normal range, or slightly above the normal range. In most
hypothyroid dogs, treatment can be reduced to (in dogs treated every 12 hours) or maintained on
once-a-day administration (=22 μg/kg every 24 hours) after an adequate clinical response is noted,
without reduction in efficacy.
The usefulness of serum cTSH measurements to determine if the dose of levothyroxine is
adequate is limited in dogs, because =25% of hypothyroid dogs already have cTSH concen-
trations within reference values before initiation of therapy. In addition, the assay currently
available is not sensitive enough to differentiate a normal cTSH concentration from a decreased
one. Because serum cTSH concentration should normalize with appropriate therapy, it can only
at best detect hypothyroid dogs that are undertreated. However, the assay cannot distinguish
between dogs that are adequately supplemented and those that are oversupplemented.
268
ThyroidDysfunction
Figure 36-2 A, Hypothyroid in a Doberman Pinscher. Note the "tragic" face with myxedema and
alopecia on the bridge of the nose. B, Trunk of the same Doberman Pinscher. Note the alopecia and seborrhea
on the flank.
34. Can I induce thyrotoxicosis if I overtreat or if my diagnosis is erroneous?
Thyrotoxicosis (PU/PD, weight loss, panting, nervousness, and tachycardia) is rare in the
dog, due to the rapid metabolism and renal and hepatic excretion of thyroid hormone. However,
we should be cautious in dogs suffering with kidney or hepatic diseases, diabetes mellitus, hypo-
adrenocorticism, and congestive heart failure. In these instances, it has been recommended that
levothyroxine therapy be initiated at 5 μg/kg every 12 hours, and then increased progressively
over the following 3 to 4 weeks. However, if therapy is induced at 22 μg/kg every 24 hours, instead
of every 12 hours, potential complications are unlikely.
35. Can a treated hypothyroid dog be used as a breeder?
Although hypothyroidism holds an excellent prognosis when appropriate and life-long
treatment is achieved, affected dogs should not be bred due to the hereditary nature of this
disorder.
36. What is the typical signalment of cats with hyperthyroidism?
Feline hyperthyroidism typically occurs in older cats. Common clinical signs include
polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss, hyperactivity, tachycardia, vomiting, and diarrhea.
37. What are the cutaneous abnormalities associated with feline hyperthyroidism?
 Dermatologic signs, which occur in approximately 30% of cases of feline hyperthyroidism,
include excessive shedding, matting of the hair coat and seborrhea, and focal or symmetric
alopecia caused by overgrooming. Increased rate of claw growth and thin, hypotonic skin can also
be seen.
38. What are the cutaneous abnormalities of feline hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism is extremely rare in cats. Dermatological abnormalities, which resemble
those of dogs, may include, in addition to dorsal matting of the hair coat due to decreased
grooming, dry and dull pelage, seborrhea, and poor hair regrowth after clipping. The skin can be
dry, scaly, and thickened, and facial myxedema can also be seen. Alopecia of the pinnae, pressure
points, and dorsal and lateral tail base region can develop. Although quite rare, a bilateral,
symmetric alopecia may develop.
Adrenal Dysfunction
269
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hypothyroidism. In Feldman EC, Nelson RW (eds): Canine and feline endocrinology and
reproduction. Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders, pp 68-111
Ferguson DC: Thyroid homones and antithyroid drugs. In Adams HR (ed): Veterinary pharmacology and
therapeutics, ed 8. Des Moines, Ia, 2001, Iowa State Press, p 626-648.
Gulikers KP, Panciera DL: Influence of various medications on canine thyroid function, Comp Cont Edu Sm Anim/
Exor 24:511-523, 2000.
Lurye JC, Behrend EN, Kemmppainen RJ: Evaluation of an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
for quantitative measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
221:243-249, 2002.
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Hauptman J, Watson GL: Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin in
dogs with non thyroidal illness, Am / Vet Res 59:951-955, 1998.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and
thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1396-1402, 1997.
euthyroid dogs, Can Vet J 41:215-218, 2000.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In Muller and Kirk's small animat
dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-885.
Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Guptill-Yoran L: Hypothyroidism. In Ettinger. SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Texthook of veterinary
internat medicine, ed 5. Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders, pp 1419-1429.
Scott-Moncrief JC, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, Williams DA: Comparison of serum concentrations of thyroid
stimulating homone in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease, / Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:387-391, 1998.
37. ADRENAL DYSFUNCTION
Rhonda L. Schulman, DVM, DACVIM
1. List the dermatologic manifestations of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
·Bilaterally symmetrical, truncal alopecia
· Involvement of the flank region, face, or legs has also been seen
· Moth-eaten appearance (short-coated dogs)
· Poor regrowth of shaved hair
· Hyperpigmentation
·Comedones
·Calcinosis cutis
·Bruising
·Seborrhea
· Secondary bacterial infections
· Adult-onset demodicosis
·Poor wound healing
·Striae
· Cutaneous phlebectasias
2. What is a phlebectasia?
Phlebectasias are erythematous vascular lesions, often found over the ventrum and medial
thighs. They can be up to 6 mm in diameter. They are asymptomatic. Phlebectasias are seen in up
Adrenal Dysfunction
269
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hypothyroidism. In Feldman EC, Nelson RW (eds): Canine and feline endocrinology and
reproduction. Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders, pp 68-111
Ferguson DC: Thyroid homones and antithyroid drugs. In Adams HR (ed): Veterinary pharmacology and
therapeutics, ed 8. Des Moines, Ia, 2001, Iowa State Press, p 626-648.
Gulikers KP, Panciera DL: Influence of various medications on canine thyroid function, Comp Cont Edu Sm Anim/
Exor 24:511-523, 2000.
Lurye JC, Behrend EN, Kemmppainen RJ: Evaluation of an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
for quantitative measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
221:243-249, 2002.
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Hauptman J, Watson GL: Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin in
dogs with non thyroidal illness, Am / Vet Res 59:951-955, 1998.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and
thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1396-1402, 1997.
euthyroid dogs, Can Vet J 41:215-218, 2000.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In Muller and Kirk's small animat
dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-885.
Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Guptill-Yoran L: Hypothyroidism. In Ettinger. SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Texthook of veterinary
internat medicine, ed 5. Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders, pp 1419-1429.
Scott-Moncrief JC, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, Williams DA: Comparison of serum concentrations of thyroid
stimulating homone in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease, / Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:387-391, 1998.
37. ADRENAL DYSFUNCTION
Rhonda L. Schulman, DVM, DACVIM
1. List the dermatologic manifestations of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
·Bilaterally symmetrical, truncal alopecia
· Involvement of the flank region, face, or legs has also been seen
· Moth-eaten appearance (short-coated dogs)
· Poor regrowth of shaved hair
· Hyperpigmentation
·Comedones
·Calcinosis cutis
·Bruising
·Seborrhea
· Secondary bacterial infections
· Adult-onset demodicosis
·Poor wound healing
·Striae
· Cutaneous phlebectasias
2. What is a phlebectasia?
Phlebectasias are erythematous vascular lesions, often found over the ventrum and medial
thighs. They can be up to 6 mm in diameter. They are asymptomatic. Phlebectasias are seen in up
270
Adrenal Dysfunction
to 40% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Phlebectasias result from weakening of vascular
collagen. They may not regress with treatment for hyperadrenocorticism.
Approximately 25% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism are pruritic. The pruritus can be
caused by pyoderma, seborrhea, calcinosis cutis, or demodicosis.
4.Why do dogs with hyperadrenocorticism bruise easily?
Fragility of both the skin and blood vessels causes these dogs to readily bruise (Figure 37-1)
Additionally, these patients have less subcutaneous tissue and thus less protection from trauma
5. What causes calcinosis cutis?
It results from calcium deposition in the dermis and subcutis. Lesions are usually found on
the head and neck, dorsal midline, and ventral abdomen. The lesions are firm and frequently gritty.
The lesions may appear as papules, plaques, or nodules and are yellowish in color (Figure 37-2).
The underlying pathogenesis is not known.
Figure 37-1Thin skin with fragile blood vessels on the abdomen of a dog with hyperadrenocorticism.
Figure 37-2 Calcinosis cutis on the dorsal neck of a dog
with hyperadrenocorticism.
Adrenal Dysfunction
271
6.  List other differential diagnoses for truncal alopecia.
·Hypothyroidism
·Hyposomatotropism
· Sex hormone imbalance
·Dermatophytosis
● Telogen or anagen defluxion
●Follicular dysplasia
·Demodicosis
 7. What are the other common clinical signs of canine hyperadrenocorticism?
·Polyuria-polydipsia
·Muscle weakness
·Polyphagia
·Lethargy
·Panting
·Anestrus
· Pot-bellied appearance
· Testicular atrophy
8.List other differential diagnoses for polyuria-polydipsia.
· Primary polydipsia
● Primary central diabetes insipidus (CDI)
· Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI)
-Renal insufficiency
- Pyelonephritis
- Postobstructive diuresis
- Hypoadrenocorticism
- Hyperthyroidi sm
-Hepatic insufficiency
Pyometra
Hypercalcemia
- Hypokalemia
-Glucosuria
- Renal medullary solute washout
- Primary NDI
9. Give two reasons why a dog with hyperadrenocorticism might become blind.
·Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
· Pituitary macroadenoma
10. What causes canine hyperadrenocorticism?
Hyperadrenocorticism may be naturally occurring or iatrogenic. In allcases, the clinical signs
are the result of hypercortisolemia. Of the naturally occurring cases, 80-85% are due to pituitary-
dependent disease. The hyperplastic pituitary secretes excessive ACTH, stimulating the adrenal
 glands to secrete excessive cortisol. In the other 15-20% of naturally occurring cases, the hyper-
adrenocorticism is the result of an adrenal tumor. Both adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas
may be hyperfunctional.
11. Other than dermatologic diseases, what significant pathologic complications may
result from hyperadrenocorticism?
·Systemic hypertension
·Urinary calculi
·Diabetes mellitus
· Pulmonary thromboembolism
· Urinary tract infections
12. Why might some dogs with hyperadrenocorticism develop neurologic signs? What is
Dogs with pituitary macroadenomas (masses >1 cm in diameter) may develop neurologic
signs secondary to their expanding masses. At least 10-15% of dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism can be expected to do so.
272
Adrenal Dysfunction
and 86% of untreated dogs. Hypertension can precipitate cerebral vascular accidents, which can
result in neurologic deficits
A less common reason for dogs with hyperadrenocorticism to display neurologic signs is as
a side effect of mitotane therapy. Signs such as head-pressing, ataxia, mental dullness, and circling
can rarely be seen as adverse side effects associated with mitotane therapy.
13. What is the difference between Cushing's syndrome and Cushing's disease?
Cushing's syndrome encompasses all of the clinical and biochemical findings that result from
excessive glucocorticoids. Cushing's disease specifes pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
14. Is it possible for a dog to have both pituitary-dependent disease and an adrenal tumor?
Additionally, dogs have been seen with bilateral adrenocortical tumors. There are also reports of
dogs with adrenocortical tumors and adrenomedullary tumors (pheochromocytomas).
15. Are there any age, breed, or gender predilections for canine hyperadrenocorticism?
Hyperadrenocorticism is seen in middle-aged and older dogs. There is a slight female pre-
dominance (55-65%). Many breeds are considered to be at increased risk: Poodles, Dachshunds,
Beagles, German Shepherds, Labrador Retrievers, and various terrier breeds. Pituitary-dependent
disease occurs more frequently in small dogs, with 75% of the patients weighing <20 kg.
Conversely, approximately one half of the dogs with adrenal tumors weigh >20 kg.
16. What is a stress leukogram? Why does it occur?
Stress leukograms reflect the effects of cortisol on the different pools of white blood cells.
On the complete blood cell (CBC) count, you will see a mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and
eosinopenia. Corticosteroids cause the release of neutrophils from the bone marrow and decrease
their migration into peripheral tissues, resulting in neutrophilia. Cortisol results in decreased
release of eosinophils from the bone marrow. The lymphopemia is related to corticosteroid-
endogenous corticosteroids; hypercortisolemia is not diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism
17. List the biochemical abnormalities seen in canine hyperadrenocorticism.
· Mild polycythemia possible
·Increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (often severe)
· Increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (not to the same degree as ALP)
·Hyperglycemia (mild-moderate)
· Hypercholesterolemia and hypertrigl yceridemia
· Increased bile acids
· Electrolyte changes (mild)—increased sodium, decreased potassium, decreased
phosphorus
· Increased lipase
· Decreased T4, decreased TSH
·Isosthenuria (on urinalysis)
18. List two reasons why dogs with hyperadrenocorticism are more susceptible to urinary
tract infections (UTIs). Does this affect how these patients should be monitored?
nuric. One of urine's protections against infection is being concentrated, thus dilute urine
predisposes these animals to urinary tract infections.
·Hypercortisolemia has deleterious effects upon the immune system.
Adrenal Dysfunction
273
Patients with hyperadrenocorticism may not be able to mount an effective immune response
against a UTI. Many of the typical signals for an infection such as pyuria are often not seen.
Because of the lack of signs of an active infection in combination with the predisposition to
infection, patients with hyperadrenocorticism should routinely have their urine cultured.
19. How do you diagnose hyperadrenocorticism?
Historical and physical examination findings should be consistent with a diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism. There are three tests used to confirm the diagnosis: urine cortisol:
test (Table 37-l). The urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is very sensitive but lacks specificity. It is
most useful as an early screening test. Dogs with excessive amounts of cortisol in their urine will
Table 37-1Assays for Adrenal Dysfunction
ASSAY
DOG PROTOCOL
CAT PROTOCOL
Screening Tests
ACTH stimulation test
Draw blood samples at 0 and
Draw blood samples at 0,
60 minutes.
60 and 90 minutes.
Administer synthetic ACTH
Administer synthetic
(Cortrosyn) 5 μg/kg IV or
ACTH (Cortrosyn)
IM immediately following
0.125 mg/cat IV
 obtaining baseline blood
immediately following
sample.
obtaining baseline blood
Alternatively, administer ACTH
sample.
gel 2.2 IU/kg IM and draw
Alternatively, administer
post-sample 2 hours later.
ACTH gel 2.2 IU/kg IM
and draw post-samples
1 and 2 hours later.
Urine cortisol:creatinine
Have owners collect the first
Have owners collect the
ratio
 morning urine at home
first morning urine at
home
Low-dose dexamethasone
Blood samples are collected at
 Blood samples are collected
suppression test
time 0, 4, and 8 hours after
at time 0, 4, and 8 hours
injection.
after injection.
Administer dexamethas one
Administer dex amethasone
0.01 mg/kg IV at time 0.
0.1 mg/kg IV at time 0.
Discriminatory Tests
Endogenous ACTH level
Collect blood into a prechilled
Collect blood into a
tube containing EDTA and
prechilled tube
immediately spin in a cold
containing EDTA and
centri fuge.
immediately spin in a
Some laboratories recommend
cold centri fuge.
the use of aprotinin as a
Some laboratories
preservative.
recommend the use of
aprotinin as a
preservative.
 Low-dose dexamethasone
Blood samples are collected at
Blood samples are collected
suppression test
time 0, 4, and 8 hours after
at time 0, 4, and 8 hours
injection.
after injection.
Continued
274
Adrenal Dysfunction
Table 37-1 Assays for Adrenal Dysfunction-Cont'd
ASSAY
DOG PROTOCOL
CAT PROTOCOL
Administer dexamethasone
Administer dexamethasone
0.01 mg/kg IV at time 0.
0.1 mg/kg IV at time 0.
High-dose dexamethasone
Blood samples are collected at
Blood samples are collected
 suppression test
time 0, 4, and 8 hours after
at time 0, 4, and 8 hours
(HDDS)
injection.
after injection.
Administer dexamethas one
Administer dex amethasone
0.1 mg/kg IV at time 0.
1.0 mg/kg IV at time 0.
need further confirmation before treatment is instituted. The low-dose dexamethasone test has a
very high specificity (95%) but is less sensitive than the ACTH stimulation test. This means that
there is more chance of false-positive results with a low-dose dexamethasone test whereas there
are more chances of a false-negative result with the ACTH stimulation test.
20. What test should be used to differentiate naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism
from iatrogenic causes?
ACTH stimulation test
21. What tests can be used to differentiate between pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
corticism and adrenal tumors?
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, the high-dose dexamethasone suppression
test, and endogenous ACTH levels can all be used to distinguish between the causes of naturally
occurring hyperadrenocorticism.
22. How do you interpret the results from a low-dose dexamethasone suppresion test?
The first question to be answered with this test is whether there is evidence of hyperadreno-
corticism. To answer this question, the cortisol results obtained 8 hours after dexamethasone
administration are analyzed. Normal animals will show suppression of cortisol secretion 8 hours
after dexamethasone administration; animals with hyperadrenocorticism will have elevated
cortisol levels. The concentration values as determined by the laboratory should be used for this
analysis (as opposed to comparing to baseline)—the absolute level of suppression is more
important than the percent of suppression.
The second question that can be answered with this assay is whether the hyperadreno-
corticism stems from pituitary or adrenal disease. If the 8-hour sample is consistent with
hyperadrenocorticism, the 4-hour sample is then examined for evidence of pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. If one of the following three criteria is met, it suggests the dog has pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism:
1. The 4-hour post-dexamethasone administration cortisol concentration is less than the
laboratory's reference range for post-samples.
2. The 4-hour post-dexamethasone administration cortisol concentration is <50% of the
baseline concen tration.
3. The 8-hour post-dexamethasone administration cortisol concentration is <50% of the
baseline concentration.
 23. How do you interpret the results from a high-dose dexamethasone suppression (HDDS)
test?
This test is used to discriminate between adrenal tumors and pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism. This test is only helpful after a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism has been
Adrenal Dysfunction
275
made. Serum samples are collected 4 and 8 hours after dexamethasone administration. For either
sample, if the absolute value for the cortisol concentration is less than the laboratory's cut-off
value, this indicates suppression and is consistent with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Similarly, if either cortisol concentration is less than 5o% of the baseline cortisol concentration,
dependent hyperadrenocorticism and an adrenal tumor.
 In the normal animal, the pituitary secretes ACTH to signal the adrenal glands to secrete
cortisol. The increase in cortisol levels negatively feeds back on both the hypothalamus and the
pituitary, with a subsequent decrease in ACTH. In animals with pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism, the pituitary releases excessive amounts of ACTH. Conversely, in patients with
an adrenal tumor, the hypercortisolemia from the autonomously functioning adrenal gland will
result in negative feedback at the level of the pituitary and minimal ACTH will be released
Endogenous ACTH levels <10 pg/mL suggest an adrenal tumor, whereas endogenous ACTH
levels >45 pg/mL are consistent with pituitar y-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
25. List potential causes for an enlarged adrenal gland.
· Adrenal cortex adenoma
· Lipoma
·Adrenal cortex carcinoma
·Hematoma
·Adrenal corticalhyperplasia
·Abscess
●Pheochromocytoma
· Granuloma
·Other neuroendocrine tumors
·Metastatic disease
·Cyst
·Pseudoadrenal mass (arising from elsewhere)
 26. When a calcified adrenal gland is found, does that indicate a malignant process?
No! Fifty percent of adrenal adenomas are calcified. The same percentage of adrenal
carcinomas are also calcified.
27. What are some different treatment options for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism?
· Mitotane, which is also known as Lysodren or o,p'-DDD
·Ketoconazole
·L-Deprenyl
· Trilostane
·Hypophysectomy
 28. Name an advantage to using ketoconazole as therapy for hyperadrenocorticism.
Ketoconazole reversibly inhibits cortisol synthesis. Because it's reversible, its effects can be
rapidly altered in case of overdosage.
29. Does the dose of ketoconazole for use in treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism
n  o a a  n   
The dose of ketoconazole used for treating hyperadrenocorticism ranges from 5 to 20 mg/kg
orally every 12 hours. It is recommended to start at the lower end of the dosage range and slowly
increase to the minimal dose that suppresses cortisol production in the patient. The dose used to
treat fungal infections varies with the different fungi but is often in the range of 5-20 mg/kg orally
once or twice daily.
ketoconazole?
Dogs are initially started on a dose of 5 mg/kg orally every 12 hours. If after 1 week, no
276
AdrenalDysfunction
adverse effects are noted (anorexia, vomiting, etc.), the dose is increased to 10 mg/kg orally twice
daily. After an additional 2 weeks at the higher dose, an ACTH stimulation test should be performed
The goal is for the cortisol levels to be slightly below normal on both the pre- and post-ACTH
serum samples. If the cortisol levels are still above the normal reference range, the ketoconazole
dose should be increased to 15 mg/kg orally twice daily and the ACTH stimulation test repeated
in another 2 weeks. In addition to monitoring for adequate suppression of cortisol levels, dogs
should be monitored for adverse drug reactions. Ketoconazole may cause gastrointestinal signs
and/or hepatotoxicity. Less common side effects include a whitening of the hair coat and bone
marrow suppression.
31. What are the two stages to mitotane therapy?
There are two phases to mitotane therapy: (1) induction and (2) maintenance therapy.
32. Describe the induction phase of mitotane therapy? When should it be stopped?
During induction therapy mitotane is given twice daily at a dosage of 25-50 mg/kg per day.
        r     
intake or increased lethargy, vomiting, or diarrhea. Daily contact with the owner is essential
during this period. If the owner notices any of these changes, he or she should be instructed to
stop the mitotane therapy immediately and to re-present the dog the next morning for another
ACTH stimulation test. If the owner does not observe any of these changes in their pet, the
induction phase should be stopped after a maximum of 7- 10 days and an ACTH stimulation test
repeated. The goal for the ACTH stimulation test obtained at the end of the induction phase is
to achieve subnormal results. Ideally the results will not be consistent with complete
hypoadrenocorticism, but instead show partial hypoadrenocorticism. Both the pre- and post
corticotropin administration cortisol values should fall within the acceptable range for baseline
cortisol. If the ACTH stimulation test is not consistent with hypoadrenocorticism, mitotane
therapy is continued. ACTH stimulation tests should be repeated frequently until the desired result
is achieved (e.g. test weekly or sooner if the dog shows any adverse signs). The clinician should
also re-examine his or her initial diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism for patients who fail to
respond to mitotane in the first 10 days of therapy.
33. Discuss maintenance mitotane therapy.
Dogs who respond to mitotane quickly (within the first week) or have very low cortisol
concentrations after induction should receive 25 mg/kg of mitotane weekly divided into two or
three doses. Dogs that require an induction phase of longer than 1 week or have higher cortisol
concentrations post-induction should receive 50 mg/kg of mitotane weekly divided into two or
three doses. An ACTH stimulation test should be repeated after 1 and 3 months of maintenance
therapy and then every 6 months. If the cortisol concentrations begin to increase over time, it
may be necessary to increase the maintenance dose of mitotane by 10-25%. If overt signs of
hyperadrenocorticism reoccur, the patient may require a repeat of the induction phase of mitotane
therapy.
34. Is concurrent glucocorticoid therapy required during mitotane induction therapy?
There are varied opinions regarding the use of supplemental glucocorticoids during the
induction phase. They are sometimes recommended to mitigate the deleterious effects of the rapid
fall in cortisol concentrations. The concern is that the routine use of physiologic doses of gluco-
corticoids will mask the early signs of iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism. Owners may not witness
a decrease in thirst or appetite and may only recognize a problem when the patient suffers a
hypoadrenocortical crisis. Regardless of whether they are instructed to routinely supplement with
cnisis develops.
Adrenal Dysfunction
 35. If a patient suffers from a mitotane overdose, is that patient likely to permanently
mineralocorticoid supplementation?
Permanent hypoadrenocorticism is rare and occurs in less than 5% of mitotane-treated dogs.
These dogs may require both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid supplementation. More
frequently, dogs on mitotane therapy will need transient glucocorticoid supplementation.
36. Other than overdosage, describe the potential side effects of mitotane.
Mitotane can cause central nervous system dysfunction such as apparent blindness, ataxia,
dullness, and circling. Mitotane can also cause gastrointestinal upset and lead to anorexia, vomiting.
diarrhea, weakness, and lethargy. Because these signs develop soon after mitotane therapy is
initiated, these side effects of the drug will have to be separated from those of an overdose.
37. What is a medical adrenalectomy?
A medical adrenalectomy is purposefully, permanently destroying the adrenal cortices with
mitotane. To accomplish this requires using doses of 50-100 mg/kg daily for 25 consecutive days.
needs to be instituted on the third day of mitotane therapy. The rationale for this approach is that
it is easier to treat hypoadrenocorticism than hyperadrenocorticism. Concerns include the expense
and the fact that hypoadrenocorticism can be much more life-threatening if not adequately
treated. Many dogs treated with the "medical adrenalectomy" protocol later relapse and need
further treatment for hyperadrenocorticism.
38. What do owners of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism need to monitor their pets for?
Pets being treated for hyperadrenocorticism need to be watched for both signs of hypo
adrenocorticism and hyperadrenocorticism. The risk of the patient developing hypoadreno-
treatment. Owners must be instructed to monitor for decreases in appetite or water intake as well
as the development of vomiting, diarrhea, muscle trembling, or lethargy. It is crucial that the
owners understand that a hypoadrenocortical crisis could be fatal if not treated appropriately.
 Owners should also monitor for evidence that the hyperadrenocorticism has become poorly
controlled. This will result in a resurgence of clinical signs such as polyuria-polydipsia and
polyphagia.
39. I've heard the average lifespan of dogs treated with mitotane for hyperadrenocorticism
isn't very different from that for non-treated dogs. What are the benefits of treatment?
Mitotane therapy will reduce the side effects of hyperadrenocorticism that are observable to
the owner and that may improve the dog's quality of life. The most noticeable improvements are
a reduction in polyuria-polydipsia, polyphagia, weakness, alopecia, and panting.
40. How does L-deprenyl work?
L-deprenyl irreversibly inhibits monoamine oxidase type B. Inhibiting this enzyme increases
dopamine in the central nervous system. Dopamine inhibits the release of ACTH from the pars
70% of the pituitary adenomas arise in the pars distalis, which is not under dopaminergic control.
41. What are the pros and cons regarding the use of L-deprenyl for the treatment of canine
hyperadrenocorticism?
The major advantage to L-deprenyl is that it has few adverse side effects. Gastrointestinal
side effects such as anorexia, vomiting and diarrhea have been rarely reported. Other adverse
reactions that have been noted include disorientation, restlessness, and hearing loss. The most
significant concern with the use of L-depreny1 is that it is often not effective.
278
Adrenal Dysfunction
  q  s  s     a 
L-deprenyl?
 Patients being treated with L-deprenyl need to be monitored for an improvement in clinical
signs. This medication has little effect on cortisol levels or biochemical values.
43. Are there possible drug interactions that clinicians need to be aware of when
prescribing L-deprenyl?
This medication should NOT be used in combination with other medications affecting CNS
neurotransmission. Thus do not use it in combination with antidepressants (e.g. tricyclic anti-
depressants and serotonin re-uptake inhibitors). It should also not be used in combination with
44. Discuss the treatment options for functional ad renal cortical tumors.
If surgical removal of the affected adrenal gland is possible, that is the preferred route of
levels). Dogs with adrenal tumors can also be treated with mitotane. Adrenal tumors may be more
necessary.
45. How should patients with both hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes melitus be
managed?
In patients presenting for the first time for these diseases, the diabetes mellitus should be
addressed first. Poor regulation of diabetes may skew results of adrenal function tests. Once the
diabetes is somewhat controlled, testing of the pituitary-adrenal axis can occur. Dogs with both
conditions will require higher insulin doses. When treatment begins for the hyperadreno-
corticism, the patient's insulin needs will change. Owners must be warned that the insulin
therapy have to be closely monitored. Urine samples should be checked two to three times
daily for the presence of glucose; if glucosuria is absent, the insulin dose needs to be decreased
by 10-20%. Induction therapy typically lasts the same time as in other dogs. Once the
hyperadrenocorticism is under control, the diabetes will need to be readdressed.
46. What are the signs of a pituitary macroadenoma? How are they treated?
Pituitary macroadenomas may cause both endocrine signs and signs consistent with a space
occupying mass. In addition to the changes typical of hyperadrenocorticism, dogs with macro-
adenomas may be mentally dull, lethargic, ataxic, and pace aimlessly. Signs may progress to
obtundation, blindness, seizures, head tilt, and circling. Macroadenomas are best treated with
radiation therapy. This will control the signs related to the space-occupying mass. Patients may
still require specific therapy to treat the endocrine imbalances.
47. Why are dogs with hyperadrenocorticism predisposed to pulmonary thromboembolism?
Dogs with hyperadrenocorticisim appear to have both an increase in procoagulation factors
II, V, VIl, IX, X, Xll, and fibrinogen as well as decreased levels of antithrombin.
48. Do cats get hyperadrenocorticism?What type?
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (75-80%) with the rest having adrenal tumors.
49. What are common concurrent diseases in cats? Does this affect clinical signs?
The majority of cats with hyperadrenocorticism also have diabetes mellitus. The polyuria-
polydipsia and polyphagia that they display can more likely be attributed to the diabetes as
opposed to the hypercortisolemia. Dermatologic signs are also commonly seen in cats (Figure 37-3)
Adrenal Dysfunction
279
Figure 37-3   This sparse unkempt hair coat is a feature of feline hyperadrenocorticism
50. What are the dermatologic manifestations of hyperadrenocorticism in cats?
·Alopecia
·Seborrhea
· Thin skin
·Hyperpi gmentation
·Fragile, easily torn skin
·Folded pinnae
·Rough or dry hair coat
51. What percentage of cats with hyperadrenocorticism also have diabetes mellitus?
>80%
52. Why is it less common for cats to have an increased alkaline phosphatase?
Cats do not have a corticosteroid-induced isoenzyme. The increases in liver enzymes may
Teflect the diabetes mellitus, not the hyperadrenocorticism.
53. How does performing an ACTH stimulation test differ in cats versus dogs?
The ACTH stimulation test is considered to be less sensitive than the dexamethasone
suppression test. Cats often have earlier peaks in cortisol values. Collecting two samples after
administration of ACTH is recommended (after 30 minutes and 1 hour if using Cortrosyn; 1 and
2 hours after administration of ACTH gel).
54. Are there any differences in dexamethasone suppression testing for cats? Why?
Cats receive a tenfold higher dose of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg for a low-dose dex amethasone
suppression test, 1 mg/kg for a high-dose dexamethasone suppression test). Cats have fewer
receptors for glucocorticoids than dogs and their receptors have weaker binding affinities.
 55. What is the treatment of choice for hyperadrenocorticism in cats?
Surgical adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice. For cats with pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism, bilateral adrenalectomy is performed, whereas in cats with a functional
adrenocortical tumor, only the affected adrenal gland is removed.
280
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
56. How are these cats managed postoperatively?
Cats that have undergone bilateral adrenalectomy will require mineralocorticoid and
glucocorticoid supplementation for life. Cats that have one adrenal gland removed will need
glucocorticoid supplementation for approximately 2 months. Those cats should have their
electrolyte levels closely monitored as well.
57. What are the complications associated with adrenalectomy?
The most common postoperative complications are sepsis, pancreatitis, and
thromboembolism.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ed 4. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 159-168.
Duesberg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Adrenalectomy for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in cats: 10
cases (1988-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1066-1070, 1995.
Duesberg CA, Peterson ME: Adrenal disorders in cats, Vet Clinr North Am (Small Anim Pract) 27:321-347, 1997.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome). In: Canine and feline endocrinology and
reproduction, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders, pp 187-265.
Guptill L, Scott-Moncrief JC, Widmer WR: Diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism, Vet Clir North Am Smatl
Anim Pract 27:215-235, 1997.
Jacoby RC, Owings JT, Ortega, et al: Biochemical basis for the hypercoagulable state seen in Cushing's syndrome,
Arch Surg 136:1003-1006, 2001
Mack RE, Wilson SM,Feldman EC: Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
16:311-328, 1994.
Myers NC: Adrenal incidentalomas, Vet Clinr North Am Small Anim Pract 27:381-399, 1997.
Robson M, Taboada J, Wolfsheimer K: Adrenal gland function in cats, Compend Conrin Educ Pract Vet 17:1205-
1214,1995
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Muller and Kirk's small animal
dermatotogy, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-886.
Zerbe CA: Screening tests to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism in cats and dogs, Compend Connin Educ Pract Vet
22:17-31,2000.
38.SEX HORMONE DERMATOSES
Linda A. Frank, MS, DVM, DACVD
1. What causes sex hormone dermatoses?
Sex hormones are produced from cholesterol by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex
and by the gonads. Pathways and intermediates in steroid hormone production are similar in all
steroid-producing tissues (Figure 38-1). Sex hormone dermatoses are due to the overproduction
of one or more of the sex hormones. This overproduction may arise from the gonads in intact
animals, the adrenal glands, or from exogenous administration.
2. How common are sex hormone dermatoses in the dog?
Sexhormone dermatoses are an uncommon cause ofendocrine alopecias in the dog
Cushing's syndrome and hypothyroidism are much more common.
280
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
56. How are these cats managed postoperatively?
Cats that have undergone bilateral adrenalectomy will require mineralocorticoid and
glucocorticoid supplementation for life. Cats that have one adrenal gland removed will need
glucocorticoid supplementation for approximately 2 months. Those cats should have their
electrolyte levels closely monitored as well.
57. What are the complications associated with adrenalectomy?
The most common postoperative complications are sepsis, pancreatitis, and
thromboembolism.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ed 4. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 159-168.
Duesberg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Adrenalectomy for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in cats: 10
cases (1988-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1066-1070, 1995.
Duesberg CA, Peterson ME: Adrenal disorders in cats, Vet Clinr North Am (Small Anim Pract) 27:321-347, 1997.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome). In: Canine and feline endocrinology and
reproduction, ed 2. Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders, pp 187-265.
Guptill L, Scott-Moncrief JC, Widmer WR: Diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism, Vet Clir North Am Smatl
Anim Pract 27:215-235, 1997.
Jacoby RC, Owings JT, Ortega, et al: Biochemical basis for the hypercoagulable state seen in Cushing's syndrome,
Arch Surg 136:1003-1006, 2001
Mack RE, Wilson SM,Feldman EC: Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
16:311-328, 1994.
Myers NC: Adrenal incidentalomas, Vet Clinr North Am Small Anim Pract 27:381-399, 1997.
Robson M, Taboada J, Wolfsheimer K: Adrenal gland function in cats, Compend Conrin Educ Pract Vet 17:1205-
1214,1995
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Muller and Kirk's small animal
dermatotogy, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-886.
Zerbe CA: Screening tests to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism in cats and dogs, Compend Connin Educ Pract Vet
22:17-31,2000.
38.SEX HORMONE DERMATOSES
Linda A. Frank, MS, DVM, DACVD
1. What causes sex hormone dermatoses?
Sex hormones are produced from cholesterol by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex
and by the gonads. Pathways and intermediates in steroid hormone production are similar in all
steroid-producing tissues (Figure 38-1). Sex hormone dermatoses are due to the overproduction
of one or more of the sex hormones. This overproduction may arise from the gonads in intact
animals, the adrenal glands, or from exogenous administration.
2. How common are sex hormone dermatoses in the dog?
Sexhormone dermatoses are an uncommon cause ofendocrine alopecias in the dog
Cushing's syndrome and hypothyroidism are much more common.
SexHormoneDermatoses
281
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17-hydroxypregnenolone
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS)
Progesterone
17-hydroxyprogesterone
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estradiol
Cortisol
Aldosterone
Figure 38-1Schematic of adrenal steroid hormone intermediates.
3. How common are sex hormone dermatoses in the cat?
Sex hormone dermatoses are rarely seen in the cat, probably because there are so few intact
felines. Most reports of sex hormone dermatoses in cats have been associated with exogenous
 presenting with clinical signs of Cushing's disease in which hyperprogesteronemia was found in
association with an adrenal tumor. This is discussed later in this chapter.
4. What are the major causes of overproduction of gonadal hormones in the dog?
In the male, testicular tumors are the most common cause of sex hormone dermatoses. The
most common hormone abnormality is hyperestrogenism usually arising from a Sertoli cell
tumor. Hyperandrogenism may also occur. It has been seen in association with interstitial cell
tumors and seminomas.
In the female, cystic ovaries and granulosa cell tumors are the most common causes of
hyperestrogenism.
5. Describe the clinical signs associated with Sertoli cell tumor in the dog.
Clinical signs associated with Sertoli cell tumor are due to hyperestrogenism. Dogs often
present with an endocrine pattern of alopecia (similar to Cushing's syndrome), which is a
 symmetrical alopecia that affects trunk and perineum, sparing the head and ex tremities (Figure
38-2). The coat may have a generalized dry or oily seborrhea. Comedones, representing a follicular
seborrhea, may be noted in the inguinal region. Variable degrees of hyperpigmentation may occur.
This may be in the form of diffuse hyperpigmentation in areas of alopecia or as macular melanosis,
which are hyperpigmented nonraised lesions of the ventrum and perineum (Figure 38-3). In
addition, feminization of the male dog may occur, consisting of enlargement of nipples and
attraction of other male dogs. When interpreting the enlargement of the nipples, be careful! Chronic
inflammation can also cause this presentation. In addition, the testicles will be abnormal on
palpation (Figure 38-4).
 A clinical presentation highly suggestive of hyperestrogenism in the male dog is linear
the ventral midline that extends from the tip of the prepuce towards the scrotum.
Elevations of estrogen, whether endogenous or exogenous, have been associated with bone
marrow suppression and aplastic anemia.
282
SexHormoneDermatoses
Figure 38-2
Truncal alopecia in a 7-year-old intact male poodle with Sertoli cell turmor. (Case material
courtesy of University of Tennessee.)
Figure 38-3 Macular melanosis of the ventrum in an ll-year-old intact male Golden Retriever with
interstitial cell tumor. (Case material courtesy of University of Tennessee.)
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
283
Figure 38-4 Asymmetrical testes in a 7-year-old intact male Poodle with Sertoli cell tumor (dog shown
in Figure 38-2). (Case material courtesy of University of Tennessee.)
asymmetry.
6. Would the clinical presentation of a female dog with hyperestrogenism be different
from that of a dog with Sertoli cell tumor?
A female dog with hyperestrogenism would have a very similar dermatological presentation
to the male dog. In addition, we would also see abnormalities in her heat cycle such as persistent
estrus and a swollen vulva.
7. How does hyperestrogenism result in the alopecia?
Estrogen is a known inhibitor of anagen initiation. Therefore, we assume that the alopecia
is due to the fact that the hair is no longer cycling. As hairs are shed, there are no new hairs to
Teplace them.
284
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
Figure 38-6 Perianal hyperplasia in a 10-year-old intact male mixed-breed dog. (Case material courtesy
of University of Tennessee.)
8.  Can other hormones arise from Sertoli cell tumors?
This is controversial. Sertoli cell tumors arise from estrogen-secreting cells. There is one
s     e  s    e go s
clinical signs were an endocrine pattern of alopecia and irregular, asymmetrical testes. It is
unknown if the Sertoli cell tumor was truly producing progesterone or inducing progesterone
synthesis by other tissues. It is also possible that some Sertoli cell tumors produce an estrogen-
like hormone that is physically active but does not cross-react with the existing hormone assays.
9. Describe the clinical signs associated with hyperandrogenism arising from a gonadal
tumor.
associated with hyperplasia and overproduction of the sebaceous and circumanal or hepatoid
punoe suu ,nnuop, e ui suginssi eiseldisdsy puela jeueued jo jsisuoo suoissl jeoidsl spuell
the anus (Figure 38-6), which can result in anal sac impactions. Dogs may also present with
diffuse seborrhea oleosa. In addition, alopecia and seborrhea may be seen on the dorsal aspect of
the tail approximately one third the distance from the base (Figure 38-7). This is the location of
the tail gland (supracaudal gland), an area of simple follicles with specialized sebaceous glands
similar to those found in the perianal tissue. These glands also become hyperplastic in response
to excess androgen stimulation.
Because hyperandrogenism in the intact dog arises most often from interstitial cell tumors,
the testicles may be abnormal on palpation.
10. How do you diagnose sex hormone imbalances in the intact animal?
First, a thorough history and physical examination will possibly lead you to suspect a sex
hormone imbalance because of findings such as asymmetrical testes in the male, or irregular heat
SexHormoneDermatoses
285
Figure 38-7 Tail gland hyperplasia in an 8-year-old intact male Golden Retriever. (Case material courtesy
of University of Tennessee.)
cycles in the female. If these clinical signs exist in an intact animal, then often response to
 ovariohysterectomy or castration will be enough to diagnose the condition.
If physical examination findings are normal with the exception of the dermatitis, then the
syndrome or hypothyroi dism and then investi gate sex homone imbalances. Once this is done, the
simple approach would be to neuter the animal and watch for resolution of the clinical signs. If
the owner is unwilling to neuter the animal, the diagnosis may sometimes be made by measuring
baseline estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone concentrations. If any of these hormones are
substantially elevated, then there is good reason to suspect a sex hormone imbalance as the cause
of the dermatosis. Again, confirmation is based on response to neutering! An alternate means of
confirmation would be treatment with an antagonistic hormone such as use of androgens in a dog
number one cause of sex hormone imbalances in the intact animal is gonadal tumors.
11. Can you see sex hormone imbalances in neutered animals?
Definitely, yes. The source of the sex hormones would be either ori ginating from the adrenal
glands or from exogenous administration.
12. What are some common exogenous hormones that result in sex hormone dermatoses?
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a hormone commonly used to control urinary incontinence in
neutered female dogs. Excessive use of this hormone has been reported to cause an endocrine
pattern of alopecia.
Megestrol acetate is a progestational compound that has been used to treat various
dermatoses in cats from allergic disease to psychogenic alopecia. Unfortunately, the side effects
286
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
13.  Are there any other potential side effects of using diethylstilbestrol or megestrol acetate?
Yes, excessive estrogen concentrations can cause bone marrow suppression. Therefore,
monitoring of complete blood cell counts while an animal is on estrogen supplementation is
ex tremely important.
Chronic administration of a progestational compound can induce diabetes mellitus and
the glucocorticoid receptors. It can also stimulate growth hormone production, resulting in
acromegaly
14. What sex hormone imbalances are associated with the adrenal glands?
Because the adrenal glands produce many of the same sex hormones as the gonads, we could
see increases of progesterone, testosterone, or estradiol originating from the adrenal glands.
15. What conditions may be associated with sex hormone imbalances of the adrenal glands?
The primary differential when we suspect excess hormone production from the adrenal
glands is Cushing's syndrome, either from an adrenal tumor or adrenal hyperplasia secondary to
a pituitary adenoma. With hypercortisolemia, sex hormone precursors may also be produced in
excessive amounts, resulting in some of the clinical signs we have discussed. In addition, we are
now just recognizing some forms of Cushing's disease in which the dog or cat presents with signs
typical of hypercortisolemia; however, increased concentrations of cortisol are not detected on
routine screening tests for Cushing's disease. Instead, these animals have increased concen-
trations of cortisol precursors such as progesterone or 17-hydroxyprogesterone. There are two
             ss
clinical presentation. In addition, there have been a few reports of dogs with both adrenal tumors
and pituitary adenomas in which cortisol was normal but there were substantial increases of
17-hydrox yprogesterone.
Another condition that may be associated with adrenal sex hormone imbalance is alopecia-X.
This is discussed further in Chapter 40.
16. How does hyperprogesteronemia cause alopecia?
The action of progesterone on hair growth is unknown. One mechanism may be due to its
ability to bind to the glucocorticoid receptor in the dog, thus blocking hair growth. Progesterone
can also cross-react with the testosterone receptor, which may either block or stimulate the
Teceptor.
17. Are there any other clinical signs that may be associated with hyperprogesteronemia
in cats?
 Because progesterone stimulates the glucocorticoid receptors, the clinical signs in the cat
reflect those seen with Cushing's disease. Cats may present with progressive truncal alopecia,
thin skin, and increased skin fragility. In addition, they often have overt diabetes mellitus.
18. If you see clinical signs of hyperandrogenism in a neutered dog, what differential
diagnoses should you consider?
Again, the first disease to investigate is that of Cushing's disease. Overproduction of androgens
secreting adrenal tumor.
19. How do you diagnose sex hormone imbalances in neutered animals?
Because sex hormones in neutered animals are originating from the adrenal glands, the best
method to document abnormal sex hormone concentrations would be to run a panel of steroid
hormone intermediates and cortisol. This panel includes the following hormones: progesterone,
17-hydrox yprogesterone, estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione, and cortisol.
SexHormone Dermatoses
287
 20. Can sex hormone imbalances still be the diagnosis in the face of normal hormone
concentrations?
Yes. It can be difficult to document specific sex hormone abnormalities. This is partly
because some sex hormones may be metabolized in the peripheral tissues to more potent
hormones (e.g., androgens to estrogens; testosterone to dihydrotestosterone). Measuring more
hormones increases the chances of finding an abnormality.
In addition, baseline hormone concentrations may be normal in the face of adrenal hyper
plasia or adrenal tumors. Abnormalities may only be detected with dynamic testing such as using
ACTH to stimulate the adrenal glands and measure a panel of sex hormones and intermediate
precursors to cortisol before and 1 hour after stimulation, just as you would for Cushing's disease.
some hormones and apparent breed variations. For definitive diagnosis, look for values
substantially greater than the normal range in post-stimulation samples.
21. Will histopathologic findings facilitate diagnosis of these conditions?
Histopathology is valuable to help you confirm your suspicion of an endocrine dermatosis
and to rule out non-endocrine causes of alopecia such as sebaceous adenitis or follicular dysplasia
However, with few exceptions, histopathologic findings won't differentiate between the various
endocn ne dermatoses.
22. Can a normal heat cycle be associated with alopecia?
In certain individuals of both dogs and cats, excessive shedding may occur during estrus,
pseudopregnancy, or pregnancy. This shedding can resemble a partial to complete molt. The exact
    s          
in women postpartum. In cats, the breeds most frequently affected by this include the Cornish and
Devon Rex. I am unaware of any specific dog breeds in which this routinely occurs.
23. Is pruritus ever associated with a sex hormone dermatosis?
Yes, pruritus can be seen in dogs with sex hormone dermatoses. There are a number of
possible explanations for this. First, concurrent pyoderma or seborrhea can cause pruritus in dogs
with an endocrine dermatosis. Second, the animal can have concurrent allergies. Third, there are
reports of hormonal hypersensitivity that may induce pruritus. This latter possibility is less well
described. A number of dermatologists have recognized bitches that developed pruritus during
estrus that resolved at the completion of their cycle or upon spaying. Whether or not this is a true
hormonal hypersensi tivity remains to be proven.
dermatoses?
While anecdotal reports exist of neutered dogs with alopecia that respond to hormone
supplementation, it is suspected that this does not represent a true deficiency but a "responsive'
condition (see Chapter 39).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Boord M, Griffin C: Progesterone secreting adrenal mass in a cat with clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:666-669, 1999.
Frank LA, Schmeitzel LP, Oliver J W: Steroidogenic response of adrenal tissues after administration of ACTH to dogs
with hypercortisolemia, / Am Vet Med Assoc 218:214-216, 2001.
Ristic JME, Ramsey FM, Heath HM, et al: The use of 17-hydroxyprogesterone in the diagnosis of canine
hyperadrenocorticism, / Vet Intern Med 16:433-439, 2002.
Rossmeis1 JH, Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Siems J, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism and hyperprogesteronemia in a cat with
an adrenocortical adenocarcinoma, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:512-517, 2000
288
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
Rosychuk RA: Cutaneous manifestations of endocrine disease in dogs, Compend SmatlAnim 20:287-302, 1998.
Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology,
ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-885.
Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, Rijnberk A: Progestin treatment in the dog II. Effects on the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenocortical axis,Eur / Endocrinot 131:422-430, 1994.
Syme HM, Scott Moncrieff JC, Thommpson MF, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism associated with excessive sex homone
production by an adrenocortical tumor in two dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1725-1728, 2001.
39. MISCELLANEOUS
HORMONE-RESPONSIVE ALOPECIAS
Manon Paradis, DVM, MVSc, DACVD
1.
How common are hormone-responsive alopecias?
Well, it depends on the species. In cats, with the exception of rare cases of hyperadreno-
corticism (HAC), hormone-responsive alopecia is virtually inexistent. Moreover, to be purist,
HAC is due to an "excess of hormones” (e.g, glucocorticoids) rather than being "hormone-
responsive."
 In the dog, alopecia is a frequent reason for veterinary consultation. Its major causes are
self-trauma associated with pruritus and alopecia due to infections (Figure 39-1). However,
Foca/ muitifocal
Symmetric/ diffuse
Congenital
Ectodermal
Alopecic
defect
breeds
Canine alopecia
Endocrinopathies
Autoinflicted
Hypothyroidism
Hypersensitivities
Hyperadrenocorticism
(atopy, food, fleas)
Sexhormone imbalances
parasites (Sarcoptes)
Acquired
Pituitary dwarfism
Infections
Follicular dysplasias
Staphylococci
 Color dilution alopecia
Demodex
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Dermatophytes
Recurrent flank alopecia
Inflammatory reactions/
Alopecia-X
Postinjection alopecia (rabies vaccine)
Miscellaneous
dermatomyositis
Telogen and anagen defluxion
alopecia areata
Canine pattern alopecia
sebaceous adenitis
 Neoplastic alopecia
Figure 39-1Schematic for the diagnosis of alopecia in the dog.
288
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
Rosychuk RA: Cutaneous manifestations of endocrine disease in dogs, Compend SmatlAnim 20:287-302, 1998.
Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology,
ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-885.
Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, Rijnberk A: Progestin treatment in the dog II. Effects on the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenocortical axis,Eur / Endocrinot 131:422-430, 1994.
Syme HM, Scott Moncrieff JC, Thommpson MF, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism associated with excessive sex homone
production by an adrenocortical tumor in two dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1725-1728, 2001.
39. MISCELLANEOUS
HORMONE-RESPONSIVE ALOPECIAS
Manon Paradis, DVM, MVSc, DACVD
1.
How common are hormone-responsive alopecias?
Well, it depends on the species. In cats, with the exception of rare cases of hyperadreno-
corticism (HAC), hormone-responsive alopecia is virtually inexistent. Moreover, to be purist,
HAC is due to an "excess of hormones” (e.g, glucocorticoids) rather than being "hormone-
responsive."
 In the dog, alopecia is a frequent reason for veterinary consultation. Its major causes are
self-trauma associated with pruritus and alopecia due to infections (Figure 39-1). However,
Foca/ muitifocal
Symmetric/ diffuse
Congenital
Ectodermal
Alopecic
defect
breeds
Canine alopecia
Endocrinopathies
Autoinflicted
Hypothyroidism
Hypersensitivities
Hyperadrenocorticism
(atopy, food, fleas)
Sexhormone imbalances
parasites (Sarcoptes)
Acquired
Pituitary dwarfism
Infections
Follicular dysplasias
Staphylococci
 Color dilution alopecia
Demodex
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Dermatophytes
Recurrent flank alopecia
Inflammatory reactions/
Alopecia-X
Postinjection alopecia (rabies vaccine)
Miscellaneous
dermatomyositis
Telogen and anagen defluxion
alopecia areata
Canine pattern alopecia
sebaceous adenitis
 Neoplastic alopecia
Figure 39-1Schematic for the diagnosis of alopecia in the dog.
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
289
disorders manifested by noninflammatory, nonpruritic symmetrical alopecia are relatively
common.
2. How do we define hormone-responsive alopecia?
It could be defined as an acquired alopecia, usually symmetrical/diffuse and nonpruritic that
would improve/resolve following a specific hormonal treatment regimen, implying there was a
hormonal deficiency. We realize, however, that we can observe improvement following non-
specific hormonal treatment (e.g., melatonin) in "non-endocrine" alopecic disorders, such as
color dilution alopecia and black hair follicular dysplasia.
3.Name the various hormonal responsive alopecias of the dog.
·Endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, sex hormone imbalances
due to functional gonadal neoplasms and pituitary dwarfism (see Chapters 36-38).
·Follicular dysplasia such as canine recurrent flank alopecia and alopecia-X
· Canine pattern alopecia
4. What is canine recurrent flank alopecia?
Canine recurrent flank alopecia (CRFA) is a skin disorder of unknown etiology charac-
terized by episodes of truncal hair loss that often occur on a recurrent basis. It has previously beer
described under several synonyms such as seasonal flank alopecia, seasonal growth hormone
deficiency, canine idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia, and cyclic follicular dysplasia.
 5. Describe the clinical features of canine recurrent flank alopecia.
CRFA is characterized by a nonscarring alopecia, most often confined to the thoracolumbar
region. Lesions are usually bilaterally symmetric, but in occasional dogs (or episodes) only one
side of the body is affected, or one side is more affected than the other. Alopecic lesions are
typically “geographic" in shape with well-demarcated borders and often markedly hyperpig-
mented (Figures 39-2 and 39-3). Occasionally, a more generalized pattern of alopecia involving
the dorsum of the nose, base of the ears, base of tail, and perineum can be seen in addition to the
thoracolumbar distribution. Alopecia in these unusual areas also manifests a cyclic pattern and
spontaneous regrowth.
For the majority of dogs, the onset of alopecia is between November and March (in the
Northern Hemisphere). Spontaneous regrowth of hair usually occurs in 3 to 8 months (range, 1
to 14 months). New hair usually consists of normal pelage density. Some individuals (particularly
Figure 39-2 Miniature Schnauzer with canine recurrent flank alopecia
290
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
Figure 39-3Boxer with canine recurrent flank alopecia. Note the marked hyperpigmentation.
may grow hair of a golden color (aurotrichia). In a few dogs, hair regrowth may become less
complete following several episodes. Rarely, some dogs eventually progress to an end stage-
permanent flank alopecia and marked skin hyperpigmentation.
Approximately 20% of CRFA cases may have only one isolated episode of flank alopecia
during their life. However, the majority of cases will develop recurrent alopecic episodes for
years. Some dogs have an occasional year when the alopecia does not recur. The degree of
alopecia is variable, with some dogs developing a virtually identical hair loss (size and duration)
year after year, and other dogs developing larger areas and/or longer episodes of hair loss as years
goby.
6. Name the breeds of dogs that are predisposed to recurrent flank alopecia.
CRFA is most commonly seen in Boxers, which may account for approximately half of all
cases, but other predisposed breeds include Airedale Terriers, English Bulldogs, and Schnauzers
(Miniature, Standard, and Giant). Although CRFA seems to affect virtually any breed, this
and Cocker Spaniels.
 7. Are females more frequently affected in canine recurrent flank alopecia?
Although initial reports suggested that CRFA was more frequent in ovariohysterectomized
females, dogs of either sex and of any reproductive status can be affected.
8. What is the age of onset for canine recurrent flank alopecia?
Mean age at the onset of the first episode is around 4 years, but it can be quite variable
(range, 8 months to 11 years).
9. What is the etiopathogenesis of canine recurrent flank alopecia?
The cause of CRFA is unknown. However, the high incidence in some breeds and the
familial character of CRFA observed in Boxer, Airedale, Griffon Korthals, Affenpinscher, and
 Bearded Collie, suggests a genetic predisposition.
The seasonal nature and annual recurrences also suggest that photoperiod may be involved.
There is definitely a higher incidence of CRFA at higher latitude (around or north of the
45 degrees parallel). In Australia and New Zealand, the onset of CRFA appears to be the reverse
of what we see in the Northern Hemisphere (also during their short photoperiod season),
MiscellaneousHormone-ResponsiveAlopecias
167
10. Name other diseases in which we can see spontaneous hair regrowth.
alopecia, erythema ad igne (radiant heat dermatitis), and some cases of demodicosis and
dermatophytosis. However, the distinctive history and clinical aspect of CRFA generally allow
differentiating from these conditions.
11.Name other differential diagnoses.
In a dog presenting with its first episode, other causes of alopecia, such as endocrinopathies
(hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism) or other types of follicular dysplasias, need to be
and therapeutic challenge!
12. How do you diagnose canine recurrent flank alopecia?
For most cases of CRFA, the diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, exclusion of
hypothyroidism (in dogs older than 2 years of age), and skin biopsies. Histopathologic findings
("witch's feet" or "octopus-like hair follicles") are suggestive, but not pathognomonic, of CRFA.
Moreover, these findings are not always present in cases of CRFA and they may be found with
low frequency in other alopecic diseases.
13. How do we treat canine recurrent flank alopecia?
The unpredictable course of CRFA and the spontaneous regrowth of hair render the
evaluation of any therapeutic agent extremely difficult, whether used to prevent CRFA or to
efficacious. The current recommendation is to use oral melatonin at the rate of 3-6 mg/dog every
8 to 12 hours for 1 to 2 months. The treatment should be initiated 1 to 2 months before or shortly
after the onset of alopecia.
14. What is the prognosis for canine recurrent flank alopecia?
CRFA is only an esthetic problem and benign neglect is a valid management alternative. In
addition, one must keep in mind that some dogs will have only one or a few episodes of flank
alopecia during their life.
15. What is alopecia-X?
            o    
really known or understood. This name was coined a few years ago to refer to the following
adult dog, growth hormone-responsive alopecia, castration responsive dermatosis, gonadal sex
hormone alopecia, sex hormone/growth hormone dermatosis, biopsy-responsive alopecia, post-
clipping alopecia (of plush-coated breeds), adrenal sex hormone imbalance, adrenal hyperplasia
syndrome, Lysodren responsive dermatosis, follicular dysplasia of Nordic breeds, Siberian Husky
follicular dysplasia, follicular growth dysfunction of the plush-coated breeds, and black skin
disease of Pomeramians. The diversity in names is merely descriptive and based on the differences
in endocrine evaluation results and/or clinical responses to various therapeutic modalities
16. Describe the clinical features of alopecia-X.
Initial clinical signs consist in loss of primary hairs (with retention of secondary hairs) in the
frictional areas (around the neck, caudomedial thighs, and tail). Gradually, all hair is lost in those
regions and eventually the truncal primary hairs are also lost, giving the remaining coat a puppy-
like appearance (or very old sheepskin rug appearance). With time (several months to years) the
in the remaining hair coat may be seen (Figure 39-4)
292
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
B
A
Figure 39-4 Neck (A) and hindquarters (B) of a Chow with alopecia-X.
The head and legs are usually spared. A tendency to regrow hair at the biopsy site following
skin biopsy or other external traumatic stimuli (skin scraping, sunburn, etc.) is a common finding
in this syndrome.
17. What is the age of onset for alopecia-X?
The age of onset is quite variable. It is seen more often in young adults, but has been seen
in dogs as young as 9 months to as old as 1l years. It is seen more frequently in neutered dogs.
18. Name the breeds of dogs that are predisposed to alopecia-X
Nordic breeds with plush coats such as Pomeranians, Chow Chows, Keeshonds, Samoyeds,
Malamutes, and Huskies have a higher risk of developing this syndrome. However, Miniature
Poodles are also predisposed to this disorder.
19. What is the etiopathogenesis of alopecia-X?
Etiopathogenesis of alopecia-X remains obscure. A genetic predisposition to an unidentified
hormonal imbalance and/or a change in receptor sensitivity at the hair follicle level is plausible.
Adrenal sex -hormone imbalance has been a popular hypothesis over the past decade.
Alopecia-X occurs most commonly in breeds bred for hirsutism, and it may be caused by a
primary follicular defect, similar to male pattern baldness, but with a sex hormone-related signal
for expression. Indeed, men with pattern baldness do not have elevated sex hormone concen-
trations; instead their hair follicles respond abnormally to a normal hormonal signal (e.g., receptor
problems). In any case, if the problem is a primary disorder of the hair growth cycle, various
stimuli (including different hormones) could draw hair follicles into anagen phase.
 It is conceivable that Miniature Poodles (anagen predominant hair cycle) have a different
clinicopathological entity than the plush-coated breeds (telogen predominant hair cycle). Ironically,
however, it was found recently in a retrospective evaluation of adrenal hormone panels that
adrenal sex hormone levels in Miniature Poodles most resemble those of Pomeranians.
It was recently suggested that the alopecia might be due to a mild but prolonged increase
in basal cortisol concentration, instead of adrenal sex hormone imbalance. This postulated patho-
genesis is based on work done in Miniature Poodles and Pomeranians with alopecia-X that
had increased urinary cortisol/creatinine ratios but normal post-ACTH stimulation cortisol
levels.
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
293
20. What is the differential diagnosis of alopecia-X?
It includes hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism (natural or exogenous), sex hormone
imbalance due to functional gonadal neoplasms, telogen defluxion, other follicular dysplasias,
and sebaceous adenitis.
21. How do you diagnose alopecia-X?
The diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings, ruling out of other diseases
(e.g., hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism), skin biopsies, and response to therapy. No
various reproductive hormones before and following ACTH administration has been proposed.
However, the main limitation to the routine use of this testing is the cost and difficulty in details
of shipping. In addition, the results are often inconsistent. Moreover, even when an abnormality
is demonstrated (after hypercortisolemia is ruled out), it rarely changes the treatment approach or
the outcome. Indeed, hypercortisolemia must first be ruled out because it was recently demon-
strated that concentrations of one or more adrenal sex hormones were substantially greater than
reference range values before and after administration of ACTH in neutered dogs with hyper-
cortisolemia. Therefore, these hormonal assays may be more useful in trying to understand
alopecia-X than in guiding treatment for a specific patient.
22. Name the dermatohistopathological changes associated with alopecia-X.
Examination of skin biopsies reveals changes consistent with endocrinopathies. Decreased
amount and size of dermal elastin fibers were reported (in chronic cases) in initial reports of
growth hormone deficiencies. Later, the presence of "flame follicles" (excessive trichilemmal
keratinization) gained popularity over the elastin fibers. It is not known whether the flame follicle
is simply a nonspecific expression of follicular growth arrest in these plush-coated breeds, or
whether haircoat abnormalities featuning flame follicles are united by a common etiopatho
genesis. However, even though flame follicles are neither pathognomonic nor observed in every
rule out other disorders such as sebaceous adenitis or other follicular dysplasias
23. How do you treat alopecia-X?
is usually recommended. Castration or ovariohysterectomy is generally the treatment of choice in
intact dogs, offering up to 75% chance of success, with hair growth achieved either for a few
dogs before the hair loss/alopecia-X develops.
In neutered animals, various treatment modalities such as exogenous estrogen, testosterone,
Or growth hormone have been proposed. However, these therapies are no longer popular due to
adverse effects, cost, availability, and/or poor effectiveness.
O,p'-DDD (Lysodren) is a relatively effective alternative when administered at 15-25 mg/kg,
once daily for 5 days, then every 7-14 days as maintenance (lower dose than for Cushing's disease).
Owners must be warned of the potential side effects (hypoadrenocorticism) before initiating this
treatrment.
"soe suuedop e (uduv) 1Aueidep-i pue undonopeuosgue ue eooe spondnet x-eroodoe
have been used with very limited to no success, respectively.
Trilostane, a competitive inhibitor of 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, which interferes with
adrenal steroidogenesis, has produced very encouraging results in Pomeranians and Miniature
Poodles, with approximately 80% success rate. This drug affects adrenal function only if thera-
Finasteride, a type II 5 c-reductase inhibitor, which prevents conversion of testosterone into its most
294
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
Melatonin has been used by several veterinary dermatologists over the last few years in several
dogs with alopecia-X. The current recommendation is to use oral melatonin at the rate of 3-6 mg
orally every 8 to 12 hours for up to 3 months. Success is achieved in approximately 33% of the cases.
If effective, this course of treatment can be reinstituted as needed. In spite of this modest success
rate, melatonin is a valuable therapeutic alternative to try because of its safety and low cost. The hair
growth observed in alopecic dogs treated with melatonin might be due to either modulation of sex
hormone levels; interference with cortisol production; action at the hair follicle level by blocking
estrogen receptors (estrogen can inhibit anagen initiation); or actual melatonin deficiency. However,
all of these proposed mechanisms are based on generalization of work done in other species.
24. What is the prognosis for alopecia-X?
Alopecia-X is only an esthetic problem and historically, due to cost, availability, and/or side
effects related to various treatments, owners often choose not to have their dogs treated. Indeed,
it is important to state that benign neglect is considered a valid management alternative. Rather
than promoting aggressive treatments (e.g. o,p'-DDD), one's efforts should be toward client
education and promotion of acceptance of the alopecia (i.e., buy your dog a sweater).
25. What is canine pattern alopecia?
Canine pattern alopecia (canine pattern baldness, CPA) is a relatively common disorder,
with unknown etiology, which presents clinically with several different syndromes.
26. Describe the most common syndrome of pattern alopecia.
The most common syndrome is characterized by an acquired alopecia developing at the
postauricular regions, along the ventral neck, thorax and abdomen, and on the caudomedial thighs
(Figure 39-5).
A
B
Figure 39-5Chihuahua with canine pattern baldness (ventral type).
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
295
27. What is the age at onset of canine pattern alopecia?
The hair loss starts around 6 months of age and gradually progresses over the following year,
but remains restricted to the described areas.
28. Name the breeds of dogs that are predisposed to canine pattern alopecia.
It is seen primarily in Dachshunds, but it is also recognized in several short-coated
breeds such as Chihuahuas, Miniature Pinschers, Whippets, Greyhounds, Boston Terriers, and
Boxers.
29. What is the differential diagnosis of canine pattern baldness?
Other causes of noninflammatory alopecia such as alopecia areata (pelade), follicular
dysplasias and endocrinopathies (hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism) are part of the differential
diagnosis. The bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound dogs is also included in the differential
diagnosis of CPA. It is characterized by hair loss at the caudolateral aspect of thighs but often
extending to the ventral abdomen and chest. It is most often seen in racing Greyhounds and hair
generally regrows (at least at the lateral aspect of thighs) when racing activity is stopped. It is
likely that most of these Greyhounds indeed have CPA but in a few of them the alopecia may be
due to either hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or alopecia associated with exogenous
testosterone admi nistration.
We cannot! It is probable that most cases of "classical" estrogen-responsive alopecia
diagnosed in the past were in reality cases of CPA. Indeed, the description of estrogen-responsive
alopecia in the literature seems to include cases of CRFA, alopecia-X and, more often, CPA. The
31. How do you diagnose canine pattern alopecia?
The diagnosis of CPA is based on the history, the dermatological examination, and exclusion
of other diagnosis. Histopathological findings are characterized by miniaturization of hair
follicles.
32. How do you treat canine pattern alopecia?
beneficial effect of melatonin. The current recommendation is to administer oral melatonin at the
rate of 3-6 mg/dog orally every 8 to 12 hours for 1 to 2 months, repeated once or twice a year.
This treatment regimen produces good to excellent results in over 50% of dogs (Figure 39-6).
Estrogen could also be effective if cases of so-called "estrogen responsive alopecia'
were indeed CPA. However, because of serious adverse reactions seen with exogenous
administration of estrogen, therapeutic trial with that hormone is not recommended for such a
benign disease.
33. Can I use a dog affected with CRFA, CPA, or alopecia-X for breeding purposes?
Because these three disorders appear to be genetically programmed, it is probably better to
avoid breeding affected animals.
34. How does melatonin work in the treatment of these various alopecias?
Melatonin is involved, by ill-defined mechanism, in the neuroendocrine control of
photoperiod-dependent molting and/or pelage color in many mammals. The hormone may act
growth in dogs, is now part of the treatment modality for various types of acquired alopecias in
dogs.
296
Miscellaneous Hormone-Responsive Alopecias
B
Figure 39-6A, Chihuahua with canine pattern baldness before melatonin treatment. B, After melatonin
treatment.
35.Where can I find melatonin?
Melatonin tablets are sold over the counter in health stores and drugstores in the United
States and several other countries, where it is considered a dietary supplement rather than a drug
(so it is not regulated as such). Constant-release melatonin implants are available in several
countries for mink and foxes to modulate fur growth cycle, or for sheep, goats, and deer to
dogs. Unfortunately, some dogs developed sterile abscesses or granulomas at the site of implan-
36. How safe is melatonin in dogs?
uoneo yim pesn sq pinous 1l yanoue sop ui anip aes Aioa e aq on sieodde uuoee
in diabetic dogs because it may cause insulin resistance. Due to the experimental nature of the
treatment, it is preferable to have a written consent from the ownet.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Curtis CF, Evans H, Lloyd DH: Investigation of reproductive and growth homone status of dogs affected by
idiopathic recurrent flank alopecia, / Small Anim Pract 37:417-422, 1996.
Daminet S, Paradis M: Evaluation of thyroid function in dogs suffering from recurrent flank alopecia, Car Vet J
4:699-703,2000.
with hypercortisolemia, / Am Vet Med Assoc 218:214-216, 2001.
Miller MA, Dunstan RW: Seasonal flank alopecia in boxers and Airedale Terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992), / Am Vet
Med Assoc 203:1567-1572, 1993.
Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders, pp 546-549.
Paradis M: Alopecia-X, Derm Diatog Summer 2002, pp 12-14.
Paradis M, Cerundolo R: An approach to symmetrical alopecia in the dog. British Small Animal Veterinary
A ssociation Manual, in press.
Schmietzel LP, Low throp CD, Rosenkrantz WS: Congenital adrenal-hyperplasia-like syndrome. In Bonagura JD
(ed): Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIl, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saumders, pp 600-604.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: In: Muller & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders.
Metabolic Epidermal Necrosis
297
40, METABOLIC EPIDERMAL NECROSIS
Stepharie R. Bruner, DVM, ACVD
1. What is metabolic epidermal necrosis?
Metabolic epidermal necrosis (MEN) refers to a collection of dermatologic clinical signs
and histologic changes associated with an internal disease process. MEN has historically been
Teferred to as superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND), diabetic dermatosis, necrolytic migratory
erythema (NME), and hepatocutaneous syndrome. In humans, NME is most often associated
with a functional pancreatic -cell tumor (glucagonoma) but has also been observed with various
hepatopathies, Crohn's disease, celiac sprue, malabsorption syndrome, and pancreatitis. Alter-
natively, MEN in dogs is most commonly associated with a hepatopathy and, much less
frequently, with glucagon-secreting tumors. The cause of the liver disease is idiopathic in most
affected dogs; however, anticonvulsant medications, copper storage disease, and mycotoxin
ingestion have been implicated in rare cases.
2. What causes the cutaneous changes of MEN?
Several pathophysiologic mechanisms are proposed for the dermatologic features of MEN.
The most frequently discussed are hyperglucagonemia, hypoaminoacidemia, and hypo-
albuminemia. Hyperglucagonemia may be due to a glucagonoma or hepatic impairment with
decreased degradation of glucagon fractions. Elevated glucagon levels result in excessive
necrosis.
plasma carrier protein, decreased albumin levels lead to altered zinc and fatty acid metabolism
and subsequent cutaneous changes. Parakeratosis, a histologic feature common to both MEN and
the zinc-responsive dermatoses, is an ex ample of these changes.
3. What are the differential diagnoses for MEN?
The primary dermatologic differential diagnoses for MEN include pemphigus foliaceus,
zinc-responsive dermatoses, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, bacterial folliculitis, contact dermatitis,
toxic epidermal necrosis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Many of these are ruled out based
on the history, clinical signs, and imitial diagnostic screening tests (e.g., skin scrapings, cutaneous
cytology, dermatophyte cultures, complete blood cell count, biochemical profile, and urinalysis).
With the exception of systemic lupus erythematosus, the differential diagnoses seldom have the
4. What are the signalment and clinical signs of dogs with MEN?
Dogs with MEN are typically middle-aged to geriatric animals with a history of relatively
acute onset of alopecic, erythematous, exudative, coalescing papules or plaques with crusts,
ulcers, and occasionally vesicles or bullae. Lesions may be located on the muzzle, distal
extremities, pressure points, and mucocutaneous junctions of the oral cavity, eyes, anus and
genitalia. The flanks and ventral abdomen may also be affected. Footpad hyperkeratosis with
  s   og  s        s
chief complaint. Other chief complaints may include polyuria, polydipsia, lethargy, decreased
appetite, or weight loss. Dermatologic changes may precede the onset of clinical signs of internal
disease. No gender predilections occur. Mixed-breed dogs and Terrier breeds are over-represented
in the literature.
298
Metabolic Epidermal Necrosis
5. What is the minimum database for initial evaluation of a patient suspected of having
MEN?
The minimum database includes a complete blood cell count, serum chemistry panel,
urinal ysis, deep skin scrapings, cytologic evaluation of the skin, and a dermatophyte culture. MEN
candidates with liver disease may demonstrate a nonregenerative anemia of chronic inflammation,
leukocytosis, elevated alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase, hypoalbuminemia,
mild-to-moderate hyperglycemia, and in some cases, glucosuria. Some patients have overt diabetes
mellitus.
Skin scrapings will typically be negative for ectoparasites, although concurrent demodicosis
may be present. This is especially true in a debilitated animal with a history of corticosteroid
therapy. Cutaneous cytology will often indicate a secondary Malassezia or bacterial overgrowth.
If vesicles are present, cytologic evaluation of their contents is acellular. Dermatophyte culture
Tesults are classically negative for the growth of pathogenic organisms.
6. How is the diagnosis of MEN confirmed?
Further evaluation for MEN candidates includes skin biopsies, to be submitted for derma
ultrasound, and subsequent lesion (usually liver) biopsy for histologic evaluation.
 Skin biopsy specimens are obtained from lesional but not ulcerated or openly fissured body
areas. Multiple specimens are collected, routinely fixed in 10% formalin, and submitted to a
veterinary dermatohistopathologist for evaluation. Because the affected areas, particularly
histologic cutaneous changes of MEN are characterized by a red, white, and blue pattern,
representing lymphoplasmacytic perivascular dermal infiltrates with lower epi dermal hyperplasia
(staining blue), intercellular and intracellular edema due to keratinocyte vacuolation in the upper
levels of the epiderrmis (staining white), and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (staining red). The
dermatohistologic diagnosis of MEN is not specific for either liver or pancreatic disease.
Elevations in fasting and postprandial bile acids are frequently noted. If the liver enzymes
and bile acids are normal but other clinical and laboratory parameters (i.e., hyperglycemia) are
suggestive of MEN, consider glucagonoma as the primary cause.
Abdominal ultrasound should evaluate all possible intra-abdominal structures, with particular
attention to the pancreas and liver. Hepatic architecture changes are most commonly observed in
MetabolicEpidermalNecrosis
the dog. Classically, a honeycomb or Swiss cheese liver echotexture represents a hyperechoic
network surrounding hypoechoic areas of parenchyma (Figure 40-2). Abdominal ultrasono
or hepatic metastases are detected.
Ultrasound-guided biopsies are indicated if any liver abnormalities are noted. Histologic
evaluation usually demonstrates an extensive portal-portal vacuolar hepatopathy with parenchymal
collapse and stromal condensation. Other reports have described these changes as hepatic
cirrhosis, vacuolar hepatopathy with cirrhosis, and vacuolar hepatopathy with parenchymal
collapse and nodular hyperplasia. Rare cases are consistent with toxic hepatopathy.
LIUER
metabolic epidermal necrosis.
 Plasma amino acids, plasma glucagon, and serum insulin concentration assays have all been
varying degrees have been reported with both liver- and pancreatic-associated MEN. Due to a
lack of specificity, the utility of these tests in diagnosing or treating MEN is limited at this time.
7. How is MEN treated?
disease process (when possible) and palliative care of the dermatologic manifestations. The
results of abdominal ultrasonography and histologic findings dictate the management of the
signs, although postoperative complications such as pancreatitis and biliary obstruction may
occur. Disease relapse is not uncommon and may be associated with the development of metastatic
disease.
Therapy for the dermatologic lesions is directed at pain management, treatment of any
secondary skin infections, and replacement of the nutritional deficits presumed to be the cause of
the primary skin lesions. The latter includes a high-quality protein diet rich in egg yolks or
Prescription Diet i/d or Prescription Diet a/d (Hill's Pet Products), dietary zinc supplementation
supplementation, available as a hypertonic 10% crystalline solution (Aminosyn, Abbott Labora
300
Paraneoplastic Skin Diseases
means of more rapidly decreasing pain and enhancing healing time of the skin lesions. Dosages
are empirical. Aminosyn is infused at a rate of 500 mL/dog or 25 mL/kg body weight intra-
venously over 6-8 hours for 1-3 days and repeated on an as-needed basis. Ideally, hypertonic
solutions are administered via a central venous catheter to avoid thrombophlebitis, although
short-term use of a peripheral vein may be feasible. Because Procalamine is less hypertonic, I
administer this product through a peripheral venous catheter at 1/-2 times maintenance fluid
rate over a 24-hour period with satisfactory outcomes. Procalamine is less cost-prohibitive than
Aminosyn
The use of somatostatin and its analogues for palliative control of glucagonoma-induced
MEN is anecdotal at this time. Expense and drug-resistance limit their use. Corticosteroids aid in
the resolution of the skin lesions but may exacerbate hyperglycemia and result in a diabetic crisis.
8. What is the prognosis for dogs with MEN?
The long-term prognosis for dogs with MEN, particularly if associated with end-stage liver
disease, is guarded to poor. Many dogs respond temporarily to palliative care but ultimately
succumb to their internal disease process.
9. Does MEN occur in cats?
MEN is rarely reported in the cat. Pancreatic carcinoma, hepatopathies, and thymic
amyloidosis have been associated with dermatologic changes characteristic of MEN. Clinical,
evaluation and proposed therapies are also comparable. To date, the prognosis for cats with MEN
is poor.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Byme KP: Metabolic epidemal necrosis-hepatocutaneous syndrome, Vet Clin North Am SmatlAnin Pract 29:1337-
1355, 1999.
Foster AP,Panciera DL,Cooley AJ: Recognizing canine hepatocutaneous syndrome,Vet Med 1050-1055,1997.
Jacobson LS, Kirberger RM, Nesbit JW: Hepatic ultrasonography and pathological findings in dogs with
hepatocutaneous syndrome: new concepts, / Vet Intern Med 9:399-404, 1995.
Kimmel SE, Christiansen W, Byme KP: Clinicopathological, ultrasonographic, and histopathological findings of
superficial necrolytic dermatitis with hepatopathy in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:23-37, 2003.
Langer NB, Jergens AE, Miles KG: Canine glucagonoma, Compend Cont Educ 25:56-63, 2003.
Patel A, Whitbread TJ, McNeil PE: A case of metabolic epidemal necrosis in a cal, Vet Dermatot 7:221-226, 1996.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds):
Mutter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 868-873
41. PARANEOPLASTIC SKIN DISEASES
Jen nifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. Give the definition of a paraneoplastic disorder.
A paraneoplastic disorder is a marker for cancer, in which clinical signs develop at a site that
is distant from the primary tumor or its metastases. Cutaneous paraneoplastic diseases are rare in
small animals
Pancreatic carcinoma and bile duct carcinoma.
300
Paraneoplastic Skin Diseases
means of more rapidly decreasing pain and enhancing healing time of the skin lesions. Dosages
are empirical. Aminosyn is infused at a rate of 500 mL/dog or 25 mL/kg body weight intra-
venously over 6-8 hours for 1-3 days and repeated on an as-needed basis. Ideally, hypertonic
solutions are administered via a central venous catheter to avoid thrombophlebitis, although
short-term use of a peripheral vein may be feasible. Because Procalamine is less hypertonic, I
administer this product through a peripheral venous catheter at 1/-2 times maintenance fluid
rate over a 24-hour period with satisfactory outcomes. Procalamine is less cost-prohibitive than
Aminosyn
The use of somatostatin and its analogues for palliative control of glucagonoma-induced
MEN is anecdotal at this time. Expense and drug-resistance limit their use. Corticosteroids aid in
the resolution of the skin lesions but may exacerbate hyperglycemia and result in a diabetic crisis.
8. What is the prognosis for dogs with MEN?
The long-term prognosis for dogs with MEN, particularly if associated with end-stage liver
disease, is guarded to poor. Many dogs respond temporarily to palliative care but ultimately
succumb to their internal disease process.
9. Does MEN occur in cats?
MEN is rarely reported in the cat. Pancreatic carcinoma, hepatopathies, and thymic
amyloidosis have been associated with dermatologic changes characteristic of MEN. Clinical,
evaluation and proposed therapies are also comparable. To date, the prognosis for cats with MEN
is poor.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Byme KP: Metabolic epidemal necrosis-hepatocutaneous syndrome, Vet Clin North Am SmatlAnin Pract 29:1337-
1355, 1999.
Foster AP,Panciera DL,Cooley AJ: Recognizing canine hepatocutaneous syndrome,Vet Med 1050-1055,1997.
Jacobson LS, Kirberger RM, Nesbit JW: Hepatic ultrasonography and pathological findings in dogs with
hepatocutaneous syndrome: new concepts, / Vet Intern Med 9:399-404, 1995.
Kimmel SE, Christiansen W, Byme KP: Clinicopathological, ultrasonographic, and histopathological findings of
superficial necrolytic dermatitis with hepatopathy in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:23-37, 2003.
Langer NB, Jergens AE, Miles KG: Canine glucagonoma, Compend Cont Educ 25:56-63, 2003.
Patel A, Whitbread TJ, McNeil PE: A case of metabolic epidemal necrosis in a cal, Vet Dermatot 7:221-226, 1996.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds):
Mutter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 868-873
41. PARANEOPLASTIC SKIN DISEASES
Jen nifer L. Matousek, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. Give the definition of a paraneoplastic disorder.
A paraneoplastic disorder is a marker for cancer, in which clinical signs develop at a site that
is distant from the primary tumor or its metastases. Cutaneous paraneoplastic diseases are rare in
small animals
Pancreatic carcinoma and bile duct carcinoma.
Paraneoplastic Skin Diseases
301
3. What is the pathogenesis of the alopecia seen in feline paraneoplastic alopecia?
alopecia is caused by an unknown circulating tumor-derived factor.
 4. What is the typical signalment of cats with paraneoplastic alopecia?
These cats are usually older (9 to 16 years of age). There is no breed or gender predilection.
5. List the systemic and cutaneous clinical signs that are associated with feline
paraneoplastic alopecia.
·Systemic: lethargy, anorexia, weight loss.
● Cutaneous: alopecia of the ventrum, legs, and face (Figure 41-1)
-The alopecic areas have a characteristic shiny appearance.
- The fur epilates easily.
- Erythema and scale (Figure 41-2)
- The paw pads may be shiny and smooth, with crusts and fissures.
-Some cats have secondary Malassezia spp. yeast infections
- Generally nonpruritic unless there is a secondary infection
6. How is feline paraneoplastic alopecia diagnosed?
1. Results of a complete blood cell (CBC) count, biochemical profile, and urinalysis are
nonspecific.
2. Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) test results are
negative.
hair follicle atrophy and telogenization. The surface keratin layer may consist of
alternating orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, or hypokeratosis. There may
also be a mild superficial lymphocytic perivascular dermal infiltrate.
4. To date, abdominal radiographs have been normal in the cats with paraneoplastic alopecia.
5. Abdominal ultrasonography can be used to evaluate for a mass or nodular lesions
consistent with neoplasia of the pancreas or liver. The absence of abnormalities does not
preclude a diagnosis of pancreatic or hepatic neoplasia.
302
Paraneoplastic Skin Diseases
Figure 41-2 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia; note the alopecia and scale on the rear limb.
6. Abdominal exploratory surgery with biopsies and histopathologic studies of abnormal
tissue may be required to identify the internal malignancy in some cats with paraneo-
plastic alopecia
 7. What is the prognosis for cats with paraneoplastic alopecia?
The prognosis for cats with paraneoplastic alopecia is grave because the tumor has often
metastasized by the time of diagnosis. Unfortunately, current chemotherapy is ineffective in cats
8.Name and describe a dermatologic syndrome that is associated with thymoma in cats.
Ex foliative dermatitis
·Affects middle-aged to old cats
·Nonpruritic erythema, scale, and alopecia
 Primarily affects the head and ear pinnae, but may progress to involve the entire body
· Brown waxy debris may accumulate around the mucocutaneous areas and clawbeds
9. List some differential diagnoses for feline exfoliative dermatitis
·Hypersensitivity (environmental, dietary, contact)
· Infectious (dermatophytosis, bacterial dermatitis, FeLV infection)
·Parasitic (Demodex, Otodectes, Cheyletiella)
· Adverse drug reaction
● Autoimmune disorder (pemphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus erythematosus)
●Neoplasia (cutaneous T-cell lymphoma)
·Paraneoplastic (thymoma)
10. What tests should be done if feline exfoliative dermatitis with thymoma is suspected?
·● Results of a CBC count, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis are usually nonspecific.
· FIV and FeLV negative.
· Cutaneous histopathology: cell poor interface dermatitis with apoptotic keratinocytes in
the stratum basale and stratum spinosum of the epidermis and in the follicular outer root
sheath.
·Thoracic radiographs may reveal a mediastinal mass.
Paraneoplastic Skin Diseases
303
11. How is feline exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma treated?
Surgical removal of the thymoma should be curative.
12. Paraneoplastic pemphigus has relatively recently been described in dogs. What
types of tumors have been associated with paraneoplastic pemphigus in dogs and
humans?
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is most often associated with lymphoma. Other malignancies
reported in dogs include a Sertoli cell tumor and mammary carcinoma. Other malignancies reported
in humans include thymoma, bronchogenic squamous cell carcinoma, poorly differentiated
sarcoma, and round cell lipos arcoma.
13. What is the proposed pathogenesis of paraneoplastic pemphigus?
The pathogenesis is not known. One theory is that the animal's immune response to tumor
anti gens cross-reacts with normal epithelial antigens. Another theory is that the tumor is secreting
excessive amounts of cytokines (i.e., IL-6) that stimulate the immune system, leading to immune-
mediated disease.
14. How are the target antigens and histopathology of paraneoplastic pemphigus different
from pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris?
See Table 41-1.
Table 41-1 
Distinction of Forms of Pemphigus
PEMPHIGUS
PEMPHIGUS
PARANEOPLASTIC
PARAMETER
FOLIACEUS
VULGARIS
PEMPHIGUS
 Target antigen
Desmoglein I
Desmoglein III
Envoplakin (210 kd)
(150 kd)
(130 kd)
Periplakin (190 kd)
 Desmoglein III
(130 kd)
Histopathology
Subcorneal or
Suprabasilar
Intraepithelial
intr agr anular
acantholysis
acantholysis,
acantholy sis
apoptotic
keratinocytes,
vacuolar interface
dermatitis
Indirect
Stratified squamous
Strati fied squamous
Stratified squamous
immuno-
epithelia
epithelia
and nonstratifed
fluorescence
squamous epithelia
15. What is the prognosis for an animal with paraneoplastic pemphigus?
Paraneoplastic pemphigus has a grave prognosis because it is generally
 unresponsive to
therapy. If the tumor can be completely cured, the prognosis may be better.
16. What tumors have been associated with nodular dermatofibrosis?
Refer to Chapter 13.
17. What are the cutaneous manifestations of adrenal adenocarcinomas in cats and dogs?
Refer to Chapter 37.
304
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brooks DG, Campbell KL, Dennis JS,Dunstan RW: Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia in three cats, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 30:557-563, 1994.
De Bruin A, Muller E, Wyder M, et al: Periplakin and envoplakin are target antigens in canine and human
paraneoplastic pemphigus, J Am Acad Dermatot 40:682-685, 1999.
Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis, / Smalt Anim
Pract 39:394-396, 1998.
Lenmens P, De Bruin A, De Meulemeester J, Wyder M, Suter MM: Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog, Vet
Dermatot 9:127-134, 1998.
Pascal-Tenorio A, Olivry T, Gross TL, Atlee BA, Ihrke PJ: Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with intemal
malignancies in the cat, Vet Dermatot 8:47-52, 1997.
Piscopo SE: Paraneoplastic pemphigus: a dangerous new disease variant, Vet Forum 3:55-61, 2000.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology,ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB
Saunders, pp 902-903, 693, 1049-1050.
Scott DW, Yager JA, Johnston KM: Exfoliative dematitis in association with thymoma in three cats, Feline Pract
23:8-13,1995
Tasker S, Griffon DJ, Nuttal TJ, Hill PB: Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia following surgical removal of a
pancreatic carcinoma in a cal, / Smatt Anim Pract 40:16-19, 1999.
42. ZINC-RELATED DERMATOSES
Rod A.W. Rosychuk, DVM, DACVIM
1. What skin diseases have been associated with zinc?
Several clinical syndromes have been associated with either proven or suspected zinc
and Malamutes. It has been suggested that affected individuals may have a defect in the gastro-
intestinal absorption of zinc. Most respond to zinc supplementation. A zinc-responsive dermatosis
is seen in young, rapidly growing puppies who have been fed diets low in zinc, or high in calcium,
phytates (e.g., cereal grain, soy-based, corn-based diets) or iron (well water), which may bind
zinc and prevent its absorption. Growing dogs do require more zinc than adults. Affected
individuals respond to the elimination of these dietary influences and zinc supplementation.
Following clinical remission, the supplementation can usually be discontinued. Bull Terriers with
acrodermatitis have been hypothesized to have a defect in the cellular uptake or utilization of
zinc, which is thought to play a significant role in the development of clinical signs. However,
perhaps because of this defect, these individuals do not respond to oral or intravenous zinc
supplementation. Metabolic epidermal necrosis (superficial necrolytic dermatitis, necrolytic
migratory erythema, hepatocutaneous syndrome) is a cutaneous manifestation of hepatic disease
to zinc therapy have been suggested to potentially play a role. Because zinc is an integral part of
many enzyme systems within the body (a cofactor in over 100 metalloenzymes), both systemic
and topical therapy with zinc have been suggested to improve overall coat and skin condition,
reduce pruritus, enhance wound healing, and have anti-microbial effects. While much of these
data is anecdotal or has been examined in other animal models, there are data to suggest that zinc
and reduce both scale and transepidermal water loss if used in conjunction with linoleic acid. This
effect was significantly greater than if the diet was supplemented with linoleic acid only
304
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brooks DG, Campbell KL, Dennis JS,Dunstan RW: Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia in three cats, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 30:557-563, 1994.
De Bruin A, Muller E, Wyder M, et al: Periplakin and envoplakin are target antigens in canine and human
paraneoplastic pemphigus, J Am Acad Dermatot 40:682-685, 1999.
Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis, / Smalt Anim
Pract 39:394-396, 1998.
Lenmens P, De Bruin A, De Meulemeester J, Wyder M, Suter MM: Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog, Vet
Dermatot 9:127-134, 1998.
Pascal-Tenorio A, Olivry T, Gross TL, Atlee BA, Ihrke PJ: Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with intemal
malignancies in the cat, Vet Dermatot 8:47-52, 1997.
Piscopo SE: Paraneoplastic pemphigus: a dangerous new disease variant, Vet Forum 3:55-61, 2000.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Mutler & Kirk's small animat dermatology,ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB
Saunders, pp 902-903, 693, 1049-1050.
Scott DW, Yager JA, Johnston KM: Exfoliative dematitis in association with thymoma in three cats, Feline Pract
23:8-13,1995
Tasker S, Griffon DJ, Nuttal TJ, Hill PB: Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia following surgical removal of a
pancreatic carcinoma in a cal, / Smatt Anim Pract 40:16-19, 1999.
42. ZINC-RELATED DERMATOSES
Rod A.W. Rosychuk, DVM, DACVIM
1. What skin diseases have been associated with zinc?
Several clinical syndromes have been associated with either proven or suspected zinc
and Malamutes. It has been suggested that affected individuals may have a defect in the gastro-
intestinal absorption of zinc. Most respond to zinc supplementation. A zinc-responsive dermatosis
is seen in young, rapidly growing puppies who have been fed diets low in zinc, or high in calcium,
phytates (e.g., cereal grain, soy-based, corn-based diets) or iron (well water), which may bind
zinc and prevent its absorption. Growing dogs do require more zinc than adults. Affected
individuals respond to the elimination of these dietary influences and zinc supplementation.
Following clinical remission, the supplementation can usually be discontinued. Bull Terriers with
acrodermatitis have been hypothesized to have a defect in the cellular uptake or utilization of
zinc, which is thought to play a significant role in the development of clinical signs. However,
perhaps because of this defect, these individuals do not respond to oral or intravenous zinc
supplementation. Metabolic epidermal necrosis (superficial necrolytic dermatitis, necrolytic
migratory erythema, hepatocutaneous syndrome) is a cutaneous manifestation of hepatic disease
to zinc therapy have been suggested to potentially play a role. Because zinc is an integral part of
many enzyme systems within the body (a cofactor in over 100 metalloenzymes), both systemic
and topical therapy with zinc have been suggested to improve overall coat and skin condition,
reduce pruritus, enhance wound healing, and have anti-microbial effects. While much of these
data is anecdotal or has been examined in other animal models, there are data to suggest that zinc
and reduce both scale and transepidermal water loss if used in conjunction with linoleic acid. This
effect was significantly greater than if the diet was supplemented with linoleic acid only
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
305
Figure 42-1Two-year-old neutered male
Siberian Husky with alopecia, inflartimation, and
adherent crust around the eyes and over the
bridge of the nose.
Figure 42-2 Close-up of clipped lesions on the head of the dog in Figure 42-1. Note inflammation and
characteristic adherent scale.
2. What are the clinical signs associated with zinc-responsive dermatoses in Siberian
Huskies and Malamutes?
Lesions are usually first noted in younger individuals (1-3 years of age), although any aged
individual is susceptible. In one retrospective study of 43 cases, age of onset ranged from
2 months to 1l years. Lesions consist of focal areas of adherent crusts and scale with attendant
variable degrees of hair loss (Figures 42-1 and 42-2). The involved skin is inflamed. Lesions are
306
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
Figure  42-3  Four-year-old spayed  female
Siberian Husky with characteristic periocular
alopecia, inflarimation, and adherent sc ale.
Figure 42-4 Five-year-old neutered male Malamute with asymmetric alopecia, inflammation, and
adherent crusts related to zinc-responsive dermatosis.
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
307
Figure 42-5 Hyperkeratosis of footpads
related to zinc-responsive dermatosis.
most commonly symmetric, primarily involving the periocular regions, chin, peri-oral muco-
cutaneous junctions, and both the medial and, less commonly, the lateral aspects of the pinna
(Figure 42-3). Other areas of involvement include pressure points (lateral elbows and stifles),
scrotum, prepuce, and vulva. Involvement of the trunk and distal extremities is also possible
Whereas the lesions are often symmetric on presentation, asymmetric lesions, especially around
the eyes and mouth, may be noted (Figure 42-4). Lesional pruritus is noted in approximately 50%
of the cases and is variably severe. The footpads may become hyperkeratotic (Figure 42-5). The
coat may take on a dry, generally dull appearance. Occasionally, an oily coat may be noted
Secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections are possible. Decreased ability to smell and/or
taste may be noted in some individuals.
3. Is zinc-responsive dermatosis seen in other breeds?
Yes, but rarely. It has been seen in Samoyeds, American Eskimos, White German Shepherd
Dogs, flat-coated retrievers, the Boston Terrier, Great Dane, Doberiman Pinscher, Labrador
Retriever, and in mixed-breed dogs.
4. Do the lesions tend to wax and wane?
Yes, they may. Exacerbations of the problem have been associated with stress, estrous
cycles, and pregnancy. Seasonal variation has also been noted (usually worse in winter).
 5. Why do they keep calling these problems zinc-responsive dermatoses rather than zinc
deficiencies?
The pathogenesis of these problems, with respect to documentation of true zinc deficiency,
has been difficult. There is some suggestion that the benefit of supplementation may be related to
308
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
Until the pathogenesis has been better established, the syndromes are perhaps best described by
their response to therapy.
6. What differential diagnoses must be considered for these clinical signs?
Major differential diagnoses include bacterial pyoderma, dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
Malassezia dermatitis, pemphigus foliaceus and metabolic epidermal necrosis.
 7. Is the footpad disease similar to what is seen with pemphigus or metabolic epidermal
necrosis (MEN)?
While the footpads do become variably hyperkeratotic with zinc responsive dermatoses,
they do not progress to the crusting and fissuring seen with pemphigus or metabolic epidermal
necrosis. In addition, whereas pad involvement may be the only presenting problem with MEN
or pemphigus, with zinc responsive dermatoses, more widespread skin lesions always accompany
the pad lesions
8. What are the clinical signs associated with this disease in young, rapidly growing dogs?
The clinical signs are similar, with lesions most commonly noted over pressure points.
Affected individuals may be somewhat stunted.
9. What are the clinical signs in Bull Terriers with acrodermatitis?
This is an inherited, autosomal recessive trait that is usually lethal for affected individuals.
Clinical signs are noted within weeks of birth and include a failure to grow; splayed feet; hyper-
keratosis and fissuring of the footpads; interdigital dermatitis and paronychia, a crusty dermatitis
of the muzzle, periauricular areas, and mucocutaneous junctions; and onychodystrophy (abnormal
nails). Affected individuals are very prone to secondary Malassezia infections and bacterial
die within several months. With treatment for secondary infections (both Malassezia and bacteria),
10. How are zinc-responsive dermatoses diagnosed in Siberian Huskies, Malamutes, and
the less commonly affected breeds?
The diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, rule-out (especially Demodex,
dermatophytosis, bacterial pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis), and by assessing response to
zinc supplementation. Because zinc concentrations in serum, plasma or hair are variable in
affected individuals (may be low or normal) and because of technical problems with sampling,
the measurements of zinc concentrations are usually not used as a diagnostic aid. Skin biopsies
should include samples from both lesional areas and the margins of lesions. Careful attention
should be given to obtaining crusts with the biopsies (i.e., biopsy through crusts). The most
keratosis, eosinophilic "laking” within keratinocytes and epidermal papillae with parakeratotic
"capping." Other concurrent, but less common changes include acanthosis (thickening of the
epidermis), epidermal and follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, and superficial epidermal
pallor. It is common to see dermal inflammation that is diffuse, perivascular and/or perifollicular
abnormalities may suggest the presence of secondary bacterial or Malassezia dermatitis.
Although the above histologic changes may suggest the presence of a zinc-responsive dermatitis,
supplementati on.
11. How is the disease treated?
Several forms of oral zinc supplementation have been noted to be effective. The two most
commonly used are zinc methionine and zinc sulfate. Zinc gluconate has also been effective. It
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
309
Table 42-1
Recommended Zinc Dosages
ZINC SUPPLEMENT (ZINC
RELATIVE ELEMENTAL ZINC
SALT OR AMINO ACID
CONTENT OF SALT OR
COMPLEX)
DOSAGE (MG/KG/DAY)*
AMINO ACID COMPLEX (%)
Zinc methionine
2
30
Zinc gluconate
5
14.3
Zinc sulfate
10*
23
*Important that this dosage be divided and given twice daily with food.
would appear that similar degrees of success have been associated with each, although most data
are available for zinc methionine and zinc sulfate. Recommended dosages for these supplements
vary because each formulation has a different degree of gastrointestinal absorption. In general,
the gas trointestinal absorption of zinc is poor. Zinc methionine, as a complex with the amino acid
methionine, has much more bioavailability than zinc sulfate. The bioavailability of zinc gluconate
appears to fall between the two. There is also some confusion with respect to dosing because
some recommendations are based on the amount of elemental zinc in the product, whereas others
can be made, noting the amount of elemental zinc in each as outlined in Table 42-1. However, in
reality, trying to make the conversions often does not correlate with the actual recommended
dosages that are given in the literature. Recommended starting dosages for elemental zinc are
from 1 to 3 mg/kg per day. In one study, the dosage range of zinc methionine required for control
(based on elemental zinc) was 1.2-6.8 mg/kg per day (mean, 3.1 mg/kg per day). For zinc sulfate,
it was 1.25-11.36 mg/kg per day (mean, 4.5 mg/kg). The author starts at 2 mg/kg/day. Recom-
mendations for the combinations are outlined in Table 42-1. The dosages of the combinations are
most commonly used in clinical practice. If zinc sulfate is used (the most poorly absorbed
source), then it is ideal to divide the dosage into two administrations over the day and have the
powder mixed with food. Although dosages for zinc methionine or zinc gluconate are often
divided and given twice daily, this is less imperative because they are better absorbed. These are
starting dosages; individual requirements may vary.
12. Are there any deleterious side effects of zinc administration?
irritation, which is manifest as nausea, vomiting, inappetence. This side effect is most commonly
noted with zinc sulfate. Giving the zinc supplement with food will decrease this tendency.
Problems may also be circumvented by decreasing the dosage or switching to a different zinc
source (especially to zinc methionine or gluconate). The hemolytic anemia and associated
nephropathy that has been associated with the ingestion of pennies and zinc oxide in large
quantities has not been noted with the zinc supplementation regimens previously recommended.
13.  Are there any adjunctive therapies that may enhance response to supplementation?
Fatty acid therapy (combination omega 3 and omega 6 supplements) has been noted to be a
benefit for some individuals, perhaps due to concurrent defects in fat absorption in affected
individuals. Routine dosages of any one of a number of commercial supplements may be con
sidered. In one case, fatty acid therapy allowed for the discontinuation of zinc supplementation.
14. How long before one should expect to first see response to therapy?
The onset of benefit should be noted within 6 weeks. Significant improvement is often noted
within the first 3-4 weeks.
310
Zinc-RelatedDermatoses
15. Should all the lesions resolve on therapy?
Yes, lesions resolve in the vast majority of patients. Some lesions may not totally resolve but
will have degrees of disease that are very acceptable. Total remission may be interspersed with
minor flares that spontaneously resolve, without dosage changes. These remissions usually occur
within a couple of weeks.
16. How is zinc supplementation managed on a long-term basis?
Therapy at the dosages noted above should be maintained until all lesions have resolved and
for at least several weeks beyond. It has been noted that discontinuation of medication at this time
is high. It is certainly reasonable to slowly reduce and then discontinue the medication. Recurrence
of signs would suggest the need for long-term maintenance therapy. Dosages may also vary over
time (may require more supplementation at times of stress or with seasonal changes) in some
individuals. Minor "flares" will often resolve with continuation of the maintenance dosages.
Intact females who are spayed may occasionally come off all supplementation.
17. What if my patient fails to respond to the previously mentioned supplementation?
The first consideration would be to re-evaluate your diagnosis. However, failure to respond
is not uncommon. Factors that could complicate therapy (use of zinc-binding dietary supplements,
females remaining intact) should be addressed. Consideration should then be given to increasing
the dosage of the supplement by 50-100% and re-assessing in 3-4 weeks. If this should fail, then
have been suggested to enhance zinc absorption and may benefit otherwise refractory cases.
Dosages used to initiate therapy are in the 0.5-1.0 mg/kg per day range for prednisone or
prednisolone, with the goal being to gradually reduce this over 3-4 weeks to the lowest every-
other-day dose required to control signs (goal is <0.2 mg/kg once every other day). Some
patients, however, must be maintained on low daily dosages. In my case files, two Siberian
Huskies requiring adjunctive glucocorticoid therapy were placed on a novel protein; non-fatty
soon thereafter stopped and they remained in remission. This may suggest that food sensitivity,
perhaps through the initiation of low-grade inflammatory bowel disease, may play a role in some
individuals.
18. Do you see patients that fail to respond even to these manipulations?
Yes, this also occurs and is seen most commonly in Siberian Huskies. In these patients,
need for gastrointestinal absorption. Sterile zinc sulfate is given intravenously (IV) at a dosage of
10-15 mg/kg as weekly injections for at least 4 consecutive weeks (until lesions resolve), then
once every l-6 months as maintenance dosages. A maintenance dose is given at the first sign of
recurrence of the problem. The zinc sulfate is diluted 1:1 with saline and given slowly IV over
10-15 minutes. Deleterious signs are few but include panting and cardiac arrhythmias. It is
imperative to note that zinc sulfate is very irritating and if allowed to leak into the perivascular
tissues will cause extensive necrosis. Oral zinc therapy is usually maintained to hopefully
increase the time between IV infusions. For those patients refractory to even this, or for whom
 IV zinc therapy is not an option or glucocorticoids are not well tolerated, consideration should be
given to the use of topical tacrolimus. The ointment (tacrolimus; Protopic O.1%; Fugisawa) is
applied very sparingly twice daily to initiate therapy until remission of the lesions is noted.
Frequency of application is then reduced to once daily and finally once every other day. Affected
areas are maintained with once every l- to 3-day therapy. It may be possible to stop treating a
given area (remains in remission). Owners are left to chase lesions as they arise. This therapy
appears to be very well tolerated and has been of benefit when all other manipulations have failed.
Zinc-Related Dermatoses
311
Although tacrolimus is expensive, one 30-g tube of this medication tends to last a long time
(weeks to months) and is worth the investment.
19. How are young, growing dogs on potentially zinc-binding diets or supplements or
zinc-deficient diets usually treated?
Zinc dosages are as noted in Table 42-1. A good quality diet is instituted. Supplements are
discontinued. Once clinical signs have resolved, supplementation may be slowly discontinued
over a few weeks. On a rare occasion, supplementation may be required until adulthood.
 20. What are the dosages of zinc used to treat metabolic epidermal necrosis?
 The dosages are as noted in Table 42-1. Zinc is usually given in conjunction with essential
fatty acids.
21. Should we consider using topical zinc therapy to increase wound healing, reduce
pruritus and for its antimicrobial effects, as has been suggested by some?
There are some experimental data to support these claims, but clinical experience in small
animals is largely anecdotal. As long as these products are monitored closely and more con-
ventional alternatives are concurrently used or are readily available, then further clinical trials
utili zing zinc appear to be warranted.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Burton G, Mason KV: The possible role of prednisolone in "zinc-responsive dermatosis" in the Siberian Husky, Aust
Vet Pracr 28(1):20-24, 1998.
Caldwel1 DE: Zinc toxicity in the dog, Canine Pract 19(6):6-7, 1994.
Columbini S, Dunstan RW: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in northem-breed dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996), J Am Vet Med
Assoc 211:451- 453, 1997.
Kunkle GA: Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current veterinary therapy Vll. Philadelphia,
1980, WB Saunders, pp 472.
Marsh KA, Ruedisueli FL, Coe SL, et al: Effects of zinc and linolenic acid supplementation on the skin and coat
quality of dogs receiving a complete and balanced diet, Vet Dermatot 11:277-284, 2000.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Nutritional skin diseases. In: Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG (eds): Mutter &
Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saumders, pp. 1112-1123.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Endocrine and metabolic diseases. In: Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG (eds):
Mutter & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 780-885
Smits B, Croft DL, Abrams-Ogg ACE: Lethal acrodermatitis in Bull terriers: a problem of defective zinc metabolism,
Vet Dermatot2:91-96, 1991
White SD, Bourdeau P, Rosychuk RAW, et al: Zinc responsive dermatosis in dogs: 41 cases and literature review,
Vet Dermatot 12:101-109, 2001
Willense T: Zinc-related cutaneous disorders of dogs. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current veterinary therapy
XIX, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders, pp 532-534.
Section Vlll
Miscellaneous Dermatoses
43. ENVIRONMENTAL DERMATOSES
Rod A.W. Rosuchuk, DVM, DACVIM
1. I have often heard the term actinic used when issues regarding solar damage to the
skin are discussed. What does actinic mean?
Actinic is synonymous with sunlight, or more specifically, sunlight that causes photo-
chemical effects.
 2. What are the solar dermatoses that are seen most commonly in clinical practice?
 Sunburn is seen in naturally nonpigmented or lightly pigmented skin that is thinly haired. It 
can also be seen in skin that has depigmented due to diseases such as discoid lupus erythematosus
or vitiligo. Acute sunburning is characterized by erythema and variable degrees of pain. Lesions
are self-limiting. Chronic sun exposure results in further changes to the epidermis and dermis
referred to as solar (actinic) dermatitis. In the dog, solar dermatoses tend to be divided into two
categories based on their distribution of involvement. Nasal solar dermatitis is most commonly
noted over the nasal planum and/or bridge of the nose, but may affect any area of the face that is
poorly pigmented (Figure 43-1). On a rare occasion, these lesions may undergo malignant trans-
Figure 43-1Five-year-old neutered male
Bull Terrier with nasal solar derrmatitis.
312
Environmental Dermatoses
18
Figure 43-2 Six-year-old spayed female
 Bull Terrier. Note the erytherma, comedo formation,
and deep pyogranulomatous dermatitis as a
result of solar damage.
formation, resulting in the development of squamous cell carcinoma. Solar dermatitis of the trunk
tends to involve the ventral abdomen, axilla, perineum, and flanks. Certain breeds appear to be at 
greater risk, including the Dalmatian, Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, White Boxer,
Whippet, Beagle, and German Shorthaired Pointer. In these areas, chronically affected lesions
may become thickened, fibrotic, and develop follicular plugging and a pyogranulomatous
furunculosis (Figures 43-2 to 43-4). Malignant transformation is possible. Squamous cell carcinoma,
hemangioma, and hemangiosarcoma have been noted as sequelae to actinic damage in these
314
EnvironmentalDermatoses
Figure 43-4Histopathologic section of skin from patient in Figure 43-2 showing follicular dilation and
hyperkeratosis plus a deep pyogranulomatous dermatitis as a result of follicular rupture.
Figure 43-5  Actinic dermatitis characterized by erythema restricted to nonpigmented skin.
areas. In cats, solar dermatitis is seen most commonly in white cats (especially if they have blue
eyes) or colored cats with white-haired areas (Figure 43-5). Lesions are most commonly noted
over the tips of the ears, lower eyelids, nose, and lips. Chronic lesions are also prone to the
development of squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 43-6).
 3. What is it in sunlight that results in sunburning and these other more serious sequelae?
The sunburn reaction is a classic phototoxicity related to light within the ultraviolet spectrum
(primarily UVB; to a lesser degree, UVA). Exposure results in vacuolation and apoptosis of
keratinocytes ("sunburn cells"). Damage to epidermal DNA may result in neoplastic trans-
formation. There is dermal vascular dilatation and leakage with the release of various mediators
of inflammation (e.g., prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and inflammatory cytokines) and the generation
 of various oxygen intermediates (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, superoxide radicals), which are destructive
to tissues. Dermal collagen and elastin is damaged and fragmented. Nomal immunologic functions
of the skin are compromised, which may also predispose to neoplastic transformation.
EnvironmentalDermatoses
315
Figure 43-6 Squamous cell carcinoma involving predilection sites for solar damage: nasal planum,
eyelids, and tips of ears.
4. What do the lesions look like as they progress?
Affected areas are initially erythematous and scaly. With chronicity, alopecia, thickening of
the skin, exudation and crusting, erosion, and ulceration may be seen. With more severe lesions,
tissues appear to be more prone to continued alteration by ultraviolet (U V) light. The process may
wax and wane with seasons (e.g, more severe in summer) and be more problematic at higher
altitudes or with reflected light from the snow. Adjacent pigmented skin should be normal. This
is a helpful tip-off to the presence of an actinic dermatitis.
 5. What are the major differential diagnoses for canine nasal solar dermatitis?
The major differential diagnoses include those diseases that depigment the skin and make it
more UV light sensitive. They include discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE; the most common
differential), pemphigus foliaceus (PF), pemphigus erythematosus, systemic lupus erythematosus,
dermatomyositis, and vitiligo.
6. How is sunburn of the planum or bridge of the nose differentiated from diseases like
DLE or PF on a clinical basis?
When sunburn is more likely to be the culprit, the owners should note that the affected areas
had never been pigmented. Inflammation, crusting, erosion, and ulceration develop slowly over
years. Adjacent skin should not be affected. For most cases of DLE or PF, the affected skin is
initially pigmented. The autoimmune diseases themselves cause depigmentation, which in turn
results in the relatively rapid loss of the cobblestone pattern of the planum, and with time,
inflammation, exudation, crusting, and erosion/ulceration. Once depigmented by these autoimmune
diseases, affected skin is more prone to sunburn. There may also be a greater than expected
316
EnvironmentalDermatoses
Figure 43-7 Pemphigus erythematosus at initial presentation
to UV light damage (Figures 43-7 and 43-8). If owners are not aware of the natural progression
of early disease, differentiation of a solar dermatitis from an underlying autoimmune disease may
be difficult. It is often left to skin biopsy.
7. Is increased sun sensitivity noted in all dogs with DLE?
No. There appears to be significant individual variation. Some dogs are not sensitized at all.
8.  How often does one see significant sunburn-related disease versus discoid lupus and
discoid lupus-like diseases affect the planum of the nose in the dog?
It is much more common to see DLE, primarily because most dogs normally have
pigmented nasal planums.
9. How common is it to see malignant transformation in chronic actinic lesions affecting
the planum or bridge of the nose?
As compared to solar dermatoses in the cat and truncal solar dermatoses, malignant trans
formation is rare. It is usually heralded by tissue that becomes inordinately thickened and usually
ulcerated. The lesion is often asymmetric.
10.  Why does chronic actinic damage over the ventrum and flanks of dogs result in comedo
formation and deep pyogranulomatous lesions in some dogs such as the Bull Terrier?
As the affected inflamed skin becomes more thickened (a combination of epidermal
thickening and dermal inflammation and scarring), it has been hypothesized that solar damage
causes a weakening of the opeming of the follicular structure. Keratogenous debris accumulates
EnvironmentalDermatoses
317
Figure 43-8 Pemphigus erythematosus 10 weeks after nothing but total restriction from sunlight exposure
within the follicle, resulting in comedo formation (see Figure 43-3). Eventually the follicular wall
is breached, resulting in variable degrees of inflammation within the surrounding dermis
(furunculosis) (see Figure 43-4). Bacteria within the follicles may predispose to a secondary deep
bacterial py oderma.
11. What is solar dermatitis over the ventrum of dogs most likely to be confused with on a
clinicalbasis?
It most closely resembles an allergic dermatitis with an associated deep pyoderma
12. Can these lesions be noted in other areas of the body?
Yes, it is possible to see similar lesions on the bridge of the nose, ear tips, or distal
extremities.
13. What should herald the transformation to malignancy?
More dramatic, usually focal skin thickening wherein the surface of the skin is irregular,
eroded and/or ulcerated should always make one think of either a premalignant or malignant
transformation. A biopsy specimen should be obtained from any suspicious lesion for confirmation.
14. What does solar dermatitis look like in cats?
The earliest changes are erythema, scaling, and hair loss (see Figure 43-5). With progression,
there is serum exudation and crusting. Lesions may be painful and/or pruritic. Neoplastic trans-
formation is often diffcult to differentiate from inflammation. Neoplastic lesions are crusty,
hemorrhagic, eroded, and ulcerative and indurated (see Figure 43-6).
318
EnvironmentalDermatoses
15. What are the histologic changes that suggest the presence of solar dermatitis?
Changes that are common to all forms (nasal, truncal, and feline solar dermatitis) include
epidermal hyperplasia, intraepidermal edema, and variable numbers of vacuolated and singly
apoptotic keratinocytes (sunburn cells). One of the most comimon changes is fibrosis within the
dermis. Solar elastosis, which is a basophilic degeneration of elastin noted in the superficial
dermis and is commonly seen in humans, is not commonly seen in the dog and cat. If present, it
is better observed with special stains. With truncal solar dermatitis there may also be solar induced
folliculitis, follicular cysts, and pyogranulomatous furunculosis.
16. I often hear the terms “actinic keratosis" and “squamous cell carcinoma in situ"
mentioned in relation to solar dermatoses. What do these terms mean?
An actinic keratosis is a focal area of marked epidermal hyperplasia, which is very prone to
neoplastic transformation. It is most commonly seen with canine truncal and feline solar
dermatitis and is manifest as a focal area of skin thickening. Squamous cell carcinoma in situ
refers to epidermis that has undergone neoplastic transformation (marked cellular atypia and
disorganization of cells), but no invasion of the underlying basement membrane. Invasive
squamous cell carcinoma disrupts the basement membrane and has invaded the dermis.
17.What are the therapies for nasal solar dermatitis in the dog?
Whenever possible, emphasis should be placed on sun restriction (indoors or in the shade),
especially during times of peak ultraviolet light exposure (9:00 AM to 4:00 pm). Although windows
bathing in a window may still be a significant perpetuator in susceptible individuals. Where
restriction is not possible, the use of a sunscreen or sunblock is recommended. Sunscreens absorb
ultraviolet light, thereby protecting the skin. Sunscreens should be labeled "broad spectrum" to
protect both from U VB and UVA light. A UVB sun protective factor (SPF) rating of 30 or greater
(absorbs > 96%) is recommended. For best results, the sunscreen should be applied 30-60 minutes
before exposure to the sun. For individuals that are outdoors throughout the day, the sunscreen
should be applied at least twice daily. Sunblocks contain titanium dioxide and/or micronized zinc
oxide and provide wide spectrum UVA and UVB protection. While very effective, they tend to
be messy. When inflammation is moderate to severe, consideration should be given to treating
with oral glucocorticoids, beginning at 1 mg/kg per day prednisone or predmisolone and decreasing
over 1-3 weeks. Consideration can be given to artificially pigmenting the skin. This can be done
be of benefit for prolonged periods (months to sometimes years), but emphasis must be placed on
normalizing the skin as much as possible before tattooing and spending enough time to do a very
thorough job. The procedure requires general anesthesia and can be very time-consuming for all
but the smallest of lesions.
18. What if therapy for nasal solar dermatitis appears to be failing?
is missed. Emphasis should be on obtaining biopsy specimens from affected individuals.
19. What are therapies for truncal solar dermatitis?
the use of sunscreens. Consideration should also be given to using t-shirts or UV-light protective
clothing that is manufactured specifically for the canine (e.g., www.doggles.com, www.pawgear.
com). Systemic antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections are often of benefit. Systemic gluco-
corticoids at anti-inflammatory dosages (i.e., prednisone or prednisolone beginning at 1 mg/kg
orally every 24 hours) can be used for more severe inflammation. Some have suggested that
β-carotene (30 mg orally every 12 hours for 30 days, then every 24 hours for life), in combination
Environmental Dermatoses
319
with anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone or prednisolone, can be used to control inflammation
and prevent progression to neoplasia in early cases. Nonsteroidal alternatives include the use of
the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) piroxicam, given at a dosage of 0.3 mg/kg
orally once every other day. This therapy has been of particular benefit to palliate those patients
be managed by other means. Dogs on piroxicam therapy should be momitored closely for gastro-
intestinal toxicity (complete blood cell counts monthly for development of anemia). Retinoids,
which have both anti -inflammatory effects and help to normalize the epidermis, have also been
of benefit for those individuals with dysplastic changes and/or folliculitis/furunculosis but are
very expensive for maintenance therapy. Acitretin is recommended at a dosage of 0.5-1 mg/kg
orally every 24 hours.
20. What can be done for cats with solar dermatitis?
mended as for the dog. β-Carotene or canthaxanthin at a dosage of 25 or 30 mg/cat orally once
per day or 30 mg/cat orally every 12 hours may be of benefit on a maintenance basis if squamous
cell carcinoma has not developed. The retinoid Acitretin can be used at 5-10 mg/cat orally every
 24 hours. Piroxicam can also be used in cats at a dosage of 0.3 mg/kg (usually 1 mg/cat) orally
every 24 to 48 hours. The piroxicam can be mixed with cod liver oil to facilitate administration,
but is less stable in tuna-based formulations. For problematic ear margin dermatitis, consideration
should be given to cosmetic ear tip amputation. For established squamous cell carcinoma,
Tadiation therapy and photodynamic therapy.
21. What agents are most frequently associated with burns to the skin?
Thermal burns are most commonly associated with fires, boiling liquids, hot semi-
liquids (e.g., tar), steam, hot metals (e.g., stoves), electric heating pads, and surgical lights.
the degree of damage to the skin. Burns may also be electrical or associated with various
chemicals.
22. Do we use the terms first-, second-, and third-degree to quantitate the amount of burn
damage to the skin?
Usually not. In dogs and cats, burns have most commonly been categorized as partial
thickness (epidermis or epidermis and superficial dermis) and full thickness (epidermis, dermis
and all structures therein).
23. How would a partial-thickness burn present clinically?
Superficial partial-thickness burns that affect the epidermis only are initially erythematous,
thickened, and painful. The epidermis desquamates and usually heals by re-epithelialization over
48 hours, areas of superficial tissue death will be better demarcated. Necrotic tissue will harden
and will often remain adhered to underlying tissue. As long as the tissue appears clean and
relatively dry, there is no need to remove this adherent eschar. Suppuration suggests the possibility
of secondary bacterial infection. This should be explored cytologically. With healing, the eschar
will simply peel off.
24. How are partial-thickness burns managed?
Affected areas should be gently clipped and kept clean (0.05% chlorhexidine diacetate;
0.1% povidone-iodine; hydrotherapy). Application of chilled saline or water immediately after
the burn may reduce pain and the progression of the burn. For superficial burns, topical aloe vera
320
EnvironmentalDermatoses
emboli). Especially for deeper partial thickness burns, topical silver sulfadiazine (broad-spectrum
anti biotic) is applied twice daily.
25. What is the prognosis for partial-thickness burns?
follicles and sebaceous glands and scarring is minimal to absent. Hair regrowth is usually good,
although with deeper dermal burns, there may be some hypotrichosis in affected areas.
26.  How would a full-thickness burn present clinically?
With thermal burns, affected skin is initially inflamed and somewhat thickened, but quickly
forms a dark brown, insensitive, leathery covering (eschar) over subcutaneous tissues. With
chemical or electric burns, lesions may be obviously severe and deep with overt tissue necrosis.
Individuals may also present with a more insidious course wherein overt signs are not noted until
about 48-72 hours after the burn (e.g., heating pad or surgical light burns) when the affected skin
becomes hard and dry.
27. How are full-thickness burns managed?
Special attention must be given to the extent of the burns (body surface area involved) and
fluid and electrolyte imbalances. They are more prone to shock, septicemia, anemia and renal
failure. Management of these systemic complications is discussed elsewhere. Lesions should be
kept clean (0.05% chlorhexidine, 0.1% povidone-iodine; hydrotherapy) and are treated with
which may herald secondary infection. Once areas of necrosis are well defined, the eschar should
be removed as soon as possible. The remaining defect can then be managed with a wet to dry
bandage (gauze wet in saline or 0.01% povidone-iodine, covered by dry gauze; held down by ties
through stent sutures) which is initially changed a couple of times daily. This management is
maintained until a good bed of granulation is noted. Gauze impregnated with hypertonic saline
(commercially available) may also be used over the wound for the first 2-3 days to hasten
the development of granulation. Although hypertonic saline is bactericidal, it may prove very
irritating and painful. The need for systemic antibiotics is controversial. The presence of
choice of a systemic antibiotic based on these data. A reasonable empiric choice pending culture
data would be a fluoroquinolone. Once a bed of granulation is established, a decision can be made
as to whether to resect the area and try for primary closure (if possible), consider skin grafts, or
manage the lesion with topical silver sulfadiazine and allow for second intention healing with
scar formation and scar retraction. Scars will likely be hairless and potentially prone to sunburn
28. What is the difference between a contact irritant dermatitis and a contact hypersensitivity
dermatitis?
 A contact irritant dermatitis is an inflammatory/degenerative process initiated and perpetuated
by the noxious aspect of the material coming in contact with the skin. A contact hypersensitivity
dermatitis has an immunologic pathogenesis, primarily mediated by lymphocytes.
29. What causes contact irritant dermatitis?
Ex amples include disinfectants, insecticide sprays, fertilizers, carpet cleaners, the ingredients
in various shampoos and soaps, flea collars, strong acids, and alkalies.
30. What causes contact hypersensitivity dermatitis?
The allergens that initiate these immunologic reactions are small molecules (referred to as
haptens) that bind to proteins to become complete antigens. These antigens then initiate a cell.
mediated (lymphocytic) immunologic response. Only relatively few cases have been well docu
EnvironmentalDermatoses
321
mented in the veterinary literature. They include various plants (wandering Jew, the leaves and
bulbs of Amaryllidaceae, spreading dayflower, doveweed, Asian jasmine, dandelion leaves),
cedar wood, cobalt chloride, nickel sulfate, rubber, wood alcohols, epoxy resin, formaldehyde,
cement, bleach, and neomycin. Others suggested to be problems include poison ivy, poison oak,
plastic products, detergents, cat litter, collars (leather, metal), other topical agents (bacitracin,
thiabendazole, tretinoin, miconazole, povidone iodine, tetracaine), shampoos (tars and benzoyl-
peroxide), petrolatum, lanolin, disinfectants, insecticides (shampoos, dips, sprays, "top spots"),
flea and tick collars and medallions.
31. How frequently are contact hypersensitivities seen in clinical practice?
They appear to be rare to uncommon in the dog and even less common in the cat, likely
because of the widespread hair cover in the cat. Their incidence is significantly higher in humans.
Contact irritant dermatitis is seen more commonly than true contact hypersensitivities. Contact
hypersensitivities appear to occur more commonly in atopic individuals.
32. Is it easy to differentiate a contact hypersensitivity from an irritant dermatitis?
No. The history, physical findings, and even histopathologic findings may be very similar.
33. What clinical findings are common to both contact irritant and contact hypersensitivity
dermatitis problems?
The distribution of lesions is similar, because areas affected are relatively hairless (making
them more prone to exposure to irritants and allergens), including the ventral abdomen, thorax,
axilla, flanks, scrotum, perineum, ventral neck and tail, point of the chin, interdigital spaces and
medial aspect of the pinna (in floppy-eared dogs). If the allergen/irritant is in liquid form, it may
penetrate through hairs and be seen on any area of the body. The distribution of lesions may also
be very restricted, depending on the areas of contact (e.g., ears for otic preparations; lips, chin for
 plastic food bowl hypersensitivities). Lesions are manifest as erythema, macules, papules, crusts,
hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and excoriation (Figures 43-9 and 43-10). Lesions may spread
out of the classic contact areas as the problem becomes more chronic and severe. Both forms of
contact dermatitis vary in severity of pruritus (may be mild to severe). Both are prone to
secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections.
Figure 43-9 Contact hypersensitivity derrmatitis manifest as diffuse derrmatitis with superficial epithelial
desquamation related to chronic topical neomycin application.
322
EnvironmentalDermatoses
Figure 43-10 Macular erythema caused by
topical contact hypersensitivity to propylene
gycol.
34. How are contact irritant and hypersensitivity dermatitis problems differentiated?
Differentiation may be very difficult. Contact irritant dermatitis usually occurs rapidly,
depending on the nature of the irritant, its concentration, and contact time (minutes to days to
weeks). Milder irritants may Tequire repeated exposure to create significant pathology. Contact
hypersensitivities usually develop after weeks (minimum of 3-5 weeks) to months or even years.
With respect to the feet, exposure to an irritant may produce pad lesions, whereas contact
hypersensitivities should not. Contact hypersensitivities usually only involve one sensitized
individual. Irritant dermatitis problems are more likely to affect multiple individuals if they have
similar exposure. Histopathology may help to differentiate cases early in their course (see below),
but changes are very similar with more chronic skin changes.
 35. How are contact irritant dermatitis problems diagnosed and managed?
 They are diagnosed primarily on the basis of history and physical examination, histopathology,
and provocative exposure. Histopathologic changes associated with more acute lesions include
epidermal edema (spongiosis) and the presence of neutrophils within the epidermis and dermis.
In milder reactions, neutrophils and lymphocytes predominate. In more chronic lesions, lympho-
cytes and macrophages may predominate. If provocative exposure is used to document the
irritant, then suspected irritants should be applied to both normal and diseased skin. Therapy
includes avoidance, bathing the affected areas to remove irritants, keeping the areas dry
(maceration enhances the effects of irritants). More severe lesions may require topical or systermic
glucocorticoids. Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg orally every 8 to 12 hours) may also be of benefit as
for contact hypersensitivities (see below).
36. What are common differential diagnoses for contact hypersensitivities?
These include contact iritant dermatitis, atopy, food sensitivity, canine scabies, hookworm
dermatitis, peloderma dermatitis, staphylococcal pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis.
EnvironmentalDermatoses
323
37. How are contact hypersensitivities diagnosed?
Diagnosis is based on history, physical findings, histopathology, provocative exposure, and
They include superficial perivascular dermatitis, with lymphocytes and macrophages predom-
inating. Eosinophils may be present in significant numbers. Diagnosis by provocative exposure
involves first bathing to remove allergens, then isolating the patient from potential allergens for
a period of 14 days. Suspected individual allergens are re-introduced once every 7-10 days. This
technique is controversial because it may not differentiate contact hypersensitivity from atopy or
an irritant dermatitis. Patch testing is performed by clipping hair over the dorsolateral thorax, then
applying a small amount of the test allergen to the skin. If it is diffcult to keep the material
localized in the area, it can be mixed with a small amount of petrolatum. This is covered with a
piece of sterile, non-adhesive gauze sponge. The corners of the sponge are taped down. The
procedure is repeated for all the test materials. The test sites are bandaged with gauze and secured
with an elastic bandage. An "E" collar should be worn to prevent self-trauma. The materials are
removed in 48-72 hours. The test sites are marked with a felt-tipped pen and then evaluated for
induration, erythema, and vesiculation every 24 hours for at least 3 days. Biopsy specimens
should be obtained when there are questionable reactions. False-positive results may be noted if
the material is too concentrated or irritating, if the test is done on inflamed skin, or if the site is
self-traumatized. It is ideal to perform the test in a control animal to ensure that the test materials
are not irritants. Standardized patch test kits are available for humans and can be used for dogs.
They use small wells (Finn Chambers), which are taped to the skin. They are prone to false-
positive results and often do not have the spectrum of allergens necessary for screening in the
dog. Allergens can be added to the kit by mixing each with a small amount of petrolatum.
Bandaging and reading are as noted previously. Open patch testing is mostly used for evaluating
sensitivities to liquids. The test material is rubbed into clipped skin and examined daily for 5
days. The patient must wear an "E" collar throughout the test time to prevent self-trauma
38. How are contact hypersensitivities best managed?
Avoidance is the ideal management technique. Because this may not be possible, the use of
topical glucocorticoids or oral glucocorticoids (starting at 0.5-1 mg/kg per day orally for 5-7 days,
Pentoxifylline has been noted to prevent the development of contact hypersensitivities in the dog,
but may not work as well in managing already existent lesions. It is given at a dosage of
10-15 mg/kg orally every 8 to 12 hours. Frequency of administration may be reduced for longer
term, maintenance therapy. Hyposensitization to contact allergens is not effective. Routine
bathing and the use of conditioners may be of some benefit.
 39. What conditions predispose to the development of frostbite?
Exposures to freezing temperatures or very cold metals are most commonly incriminated.
Several factors are noted to exacerbate this tendency at less severe temperatures. These include
cold winds, wetting of the tissue, a lack of acclimatization to cold temperatures, or the presence
of a vasculopathy or cryoglobulinemia.
40. Where and how is frostbite most likely to be manifest?
The tips of the ears, the tail tip, scrotum and digits are more prone, likely due to the relative lack
of hair cover and tissue covering blood vessels in these areas. After thawing, the skin may be
tissue may develop an eschar and partially slough or become completely gangrenous and slough.
41. How is frostbite best managed in the acute situation?
Tissues should be rapidly thawed with warm water. It has been suggested that the parenteral
use of aspirin and pentoxifylline (10-15 mg/kg orally every 8-12 hours) and the topical use of
324
Psychocutaneous Disorders
aloe vera for the first few days may improve tissue survival. It is imperative that patience be
employed while the demarcation between necrotic and viable tissue is established. This may take
as long as 3-6 weeks. Once the line of demarcation is established, necrotic tissue should be
Temoved. Previously frozen tissue may be more susceptible to future freezing. Amputation should
be performed up to haired skin, thereby allowing the hair to provide protection from future cold
exposure.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dunstan RW, Credile KM, Walder EJ: The light and the skin. In Kwochka KW, Willemse T, von Tschamer C (eds):
Advances in veterinary dermatology, vol 3. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 3-36.
Frank LA, Claderwood-Mays MB, Kunkle GA: Distribution and appearance of elastic fibers in the demis of
clinically nomal dogs and dogs with solar dermatitis and other dermatoses. Am / Vet Res 57:178-181, 1996.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS: Squamous cell carcinoma. In Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS (eds): Skin tumors of the
dog and cat. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 37-49.
Hargis AM, Ihrke PT, Spangler WL, et al: A retrospective clinicopathologic study of 212 dogs with cutaneous
hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas, Vet Pathot 29:316-328, 1992.
Marsella R, Kunkle GA, Lewis DT: Use of pentoxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reaction to plants of the
Commelincaeae family in dogs, Vet Dermatot 8:121-126, 1997.
Mason KV: The pathogenesis of solar induced skin lesions in Bull Terriers, Proc Ann Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 4:12, 1987
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Skin immune system and allergic skin diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin
CG (eds): Mutler & Kirk's smalt aninat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 543-666.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Environmental skin diseases. In: Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG (eds): Mutler
and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1073-1111.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA: Specific types of wounds. In Swaim SF, Henderson RA (eds): Smalt Animat Wound
Management, ed 2. Baltimore, 1997, Williams & wilkins, pp 87-141.
Walder EJ, Conroy JD: Contact dematitis in dogs and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental induction
and case reports, Vet Dermatot 5:149-162, 1994.
Vail DM, Withrow ST: Tumors of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smatt
animat clinical oncology,ed 3.Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders,pp 233-260.
44. PSYCHOCUTANEOUS DISORDERS
Adam P. Patterson, DVM
1. What are psychocutaneous disorders (psychogenic dermatoses)?
 Psychocutaneous disorders are self-induced skin conditions associated with underlying
behavioral problems, not primary dermatologic or physiologic diseases. Skin lesions are the
result of stereotypic behaviors that may be manifestations of an anxiety-related disorder and/or
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, some skin lesions may be the result of boredom
Or attention-seeking behavior.
2. What are the differences (if any) between stereotypic behaviors, anxiety, obsessions,
and compulsions?
· Stereotypic behaviors are excessive, relatively unchanging, repetitious motions with no
obvious intention or function that interfere with normal behavioral function. The pattern
of behavior is usually derived from normal behaviors. Examples include excessive licking,
sucking, chewing, biting, scratching, and hair pulling.
324
Psychocutaneous Disorders
aloe vera for the first few days may improve tissue survival. It is imperative that patience be
employed while the demarcation between necrotic and viable tissue is established. This may take
as long as 3-6 weeks. Once the line of demarcation is established, necrotic tissue should be
Temoved. Previously frozen tissue may be more susceptible to future freezing. Amputation should
be performed up to haired skin, thereby allowing the hair to provide protection from future cold
exposure.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dunstan RW, Credile KM, Walder EJ: The light and the skin. In Kwochka KW, Willemse T, von Tschamer C (eds):
Advances in veterinary dermatology, vol 3. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 3-36.
Frank LA, Claderwood-Mays MB, Kunkle GA: Distribution and appearance of elastic fibers in the demis of
clinically nomal dogs and dogs with solar dermatitis and other dermatoses. Am / Vet Res 57:178-181, 1996.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS: Squamous cell carcinoma. In Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS (eds): Skin tumors of the
dog and cat. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann, pp 37-49.
Hargis AM, Ihrke PT, Spangler WL, et al: A retrospective clinicopathologic study of 212 dogs with cutaneous
hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas, Vet Pathot 29:316-328, 1992.
Marsella R, Kunkle GA, Lewis DT: Use of pentoxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reaction to plants of the
Commelincaeae family in dogs, Vet Dermatot 8:121-126, 1997.
Mason KV: The pathogenesis of solar induced skin lesions in Bull Terriers, Proc Ann Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatot Am Coll Vet Dermatot 4:12, 1987
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Skin immune system and allergic skin diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin
CG (eds): Mutler & Kirk's smalt aninat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 543-666.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG: Environmental skin diseases. In: Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CG (eds): Mutler
and Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1073-1111.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA: Specific types of wounds. In Swaim SF, Henderson RA (eds): Smalt Animat Wound
Management, ed 2. Baltimore, 1997, Williams & wilkins, pp 87-141.
Walder EJ, Conroy JD: Contact dematitis in dogs and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental induction
and case reports, Vet Dermatot 5:149-162, 1994.
Vail DM, Withrow ST: Tumors of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smatt
animat clinical oncology,ed 3.Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders,pp 233-260.
44. PSYCHOCUTANEOUS DISORDERS
Adam P. Patterson, DVM
1. What are psychocutaneous disorders (psychogenic dermatoses)?
 Psychocutaneous disorders are self-induced skin conditions associated with underlying
behavioral problems, not primary dermatologic or physiologic diseases. Skin lesions are the
result of stereotypic behaviors that may be manifestations of an anxiety-related disorder and/or
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, some skin lesions may be the result of boredom
Or attention-seeking behavior.
2. What are the differences (if any) between stereotypic behaviors, anxiety, obsessions,
and compulsions?
· Stereotypic behaviors are excessive, relatively unchanging, repetitious motions with no
obvious intention or function that interfere with normal behavioral function. The pattern
of behavior is usually derived from normal behaviors. Examples include excessive licking,
sucking, chewing, biting, scratching, and hair pulling.
Psychocutaneous Disorders
325
·Anxiety is the apprehensive anticipation of impending doom. Anxiety may lead to displaced
(out of context) stereotypic behaviors.
· Obsessions are repeated impulses or thoughts that are interpreted as inappropriate, and
cause great anxiety. Although it is near impossible to prove in companion animals, some
 behaviorists believe that animals experience obsessions.
· Compulsions and stereotypic behaviors are used relatively synonymous in veterinary
medicine.
3. Why do animals with psychocutaneous disorders engage in stereotypic behaviors?
Although there is no definitive answer, neurochemicals, neurochemical metabolism, neuro-
chemical-receptor interactions, and altered receptor sensitivity in the central nervous system are
believed to be involved in anxiety, OCD, and other related behavioral disorders. Genetics probably
play a role as well. Current theories include dopamine hypersensitivity, reduced serotonin con-
centrations, and chronic opioid receptor stimulation by endogenous endorphins. Perhaps internal
Or external stress associated with these behavioral disorders, and/or continued stereotypic behaviors,
stimulate endorphin release which helps the animal cope with its perceived problem(s). Un
fortunately, endorphins may sensitize dopaminergic systems, thus reinforcing stereotypic behaviors
Additionally, the animal might become chemically dependent on endogenous endorphins. Con
current cutaneous trauma from stereotypic behaviors (licking, sucking, etc.) can result in secondary
infections, leading to pruritus as well. Consequently, stereotypic behaviors are continued and a
vicious circle develops.
 4. List the syndromes thought to represent psychocutaneous disorders in dogs and cats.
·Acral lick dermatitis (lick granuloma)
●Foot licking
● Feline psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis 
·Self-nursing
·Tail dock neuroma
·Anal licking
●Tail sucking (cats) and tail biting (dogs)
·Preputial licking
●Flank sucking
 5. List stressors that may provoke compulsive behaviors in dogs and cats.
·Inadequate socialization
·Overcrowding
· Isolation or confinement
· Territorial disputes
·Inadequate exercise
· Addition of family member or pets
· Boring environment
· Loss of family member or pets
·New environment
·Change of daily routines
·Status disputes
·Hospitalization
6. What type of information should one acquire from the client when faced with a patient
who might have a psychocutaneous disorder?
·Source of the pet
· Chronologic progression of problem behavior/signs
· Frequency and duration of problem behavior/signs
●Seasonal associations with problem behavior/signs
· Presence of skin lesions before problem behavior/si gns
+Previous skin and/or ear infections
· Other household pets ex periencing problem behaviors/signs
· People in household developing skin lesions
· Appropriate flea control used on all in-contact pets
·Dietary history
●Medical history
· Previous and current medications
· Response to any previously prescribed medication for problem behavior/signs
326
Psychocutaneous Disorders
Figure 44-1 Acral lick dermatitis on the
anterior metatarsus of a male Doberman Pinscher.
·Ease with which problem behavior may be interrupted
· Problem behavior elicited while the client is in the presence/absence of patient
· Deduce all potential social and environmental stressors
· Social interactions with people and animals
· Sleeping habits
7. Define acral.
Affecting the extremities
8. Describe the age of onset, gender predilections, breed predispositions, distribution of
skin lesions, and types of skin lesions of acral lick dermatitis and feline psychogenic
alopecia and dermatitis.
See Figures 44-1 and 44-2 and Table 44-1.
9. What are possible differential diagnoses of acral lick dermatitis?
·Folliculitis/furunculosis (bacterial, demodecosis, dermatophytosis)
·Underlying allergies (flea, food, environmental)
·Underlying endocrinopathy (hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism)
·Granulomas (pressure point, calcinosis circumscripta, fungal, mycobacterial)
·Neoplasia (histiocytoma, mast cell tumor, fibrosarcoma, melanoma)
●Underlying musculoskeletal disease (arthritis, osteomyelitis, implant pain or failure)
· Underlying nerve damage
·Trauma
10. List the possible differential diagnoses of feline psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis.
·Folliculitis (bacterial, demodecosis, dermatophytosis)
· Underlying allergies (flea, food, environmental)
Psychocutaneous Disorders
327
Figure 44-2 Feline psychogenic alopecia. This
cat had bilaterally symmetric generalized alopecia.
Table 44-1
Characteristics of Acral Lick Dermatitis and Feline Psychogenic
Alopecia and Dermatitis
FELINE PSYCHOGENIC
CHARACTERISTICS
ACRAL LICK DERMATITIS
ALOPECIA AND DERMATITIS
Age of onset
Anyage
Any age
 Gender predilection
Males are affected twice as
None
often as females
 Breed predispositions
Medium to large breed dogs;
Emotional and oriental breeds
Doberman Pinscher, Great
(Siamese, Aby ssinian,
Dane,Labrador Retriever,
Oriental)
Inish Setter, Golden Retriever,
German Shepherd Dog
 Distri bution
Usually unilateral; cranial
Easily accessible regions for
carpal, metacarpal, radial,
 cat to lick; medi al forelegs
metatarsal, and tibial
and thighs, caudal
regions
 abdomen, inguinal region,
dorsolumbar and tail
regions
Continued
328
Psychocutaneous Disorders
Table 44-1
Characteristics of Acral Lick Dermatitis and Feline Psychogenic
Alopecia andDermatitis-Cont'd
FELINE PSYCHOGENIC
CHARACTERISTICS
ACRAL LICK DERMATITIS
ALOPECIA AND DERMATITIS
Lesions
Firm, thick, alopecic, erosive
Symmetrical alopecia (broken 
to ulcerative, well-
hairs) with areas of hair
circumscribed, erythematous
regrowth (short, stubby
to brown nodular plaque
hairs that do not epilate
that may ooze; may have a
easily), ± excoriations, ±
hyperpigmented perimeter;
hyperpigmentati on, ±
surrounding hair is saliva-
lichenification, ± bright
stained
red, elongated, oval plaque
(eosinophilic plaque)
·Underlying parasites (internal, Demodex gatoi, Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Notoedres)
· Underlying systemic disease or endocrinopathy (hyperthyroidism)
+
Paraneoplastic alopecia
Eosinophilic plaque or granuloma
11. What diagnostics should be performed before a diagnosis of psychocutaneous disorder
is given?
made. Psychocutaneous disorders are diagnoses of exclusion not first time clinical impressions.
However, a secondary psychogenic component may be a contributing factor to one of the possible
differential diagnoses, specifically pruritic dermatoses. Additionally, a self-induced ps ychocutaneous
lesion may become secondarily infected because of chronic irritation. Consequently, diagnostics
should first focus on ruling out a potential primary dermatologic or physiologic disease. Diagnostics
to consider are: skin cytology (microorganisms?), skin scrapings (mites?), dermatophyte culture,
trichogram (broken/barbered hairs?), response to topical flea preventative, response to
ectoparasite therapy, deworming, elimination diet trial, environmental allergy testing, complete
blood count, chemistry profile, urinalysis, endocrine testing, skin lesion aspirate cytology ± acid
fast staining, skin biopsy for histopathology, bacterial/fungal culture and sensitivity, and extremity
radiography (bone involvement?). Occasionally, response to antihistamines and antipruritic doses
of steroids may be beneficial to rule out allergic dermatoses. If results of selected diagnostics for
the given patient are negative or inconclusive, then a psychocutaneous disorder becomes more
likely.
12. Describe the histopathologic features of acral lick dermatitis.
superficial dermis (Figure 44-3). The superficial epidermis is often ulcerated with an overlying
crust. There is a marked transition between the ulcerated and nonulcerated epi dermis. A superficial
perivascular dermatitis consisting of neutrophils and mononuclear cells is usually present. There
is prominent superficial dermal fibrosis. Collagen fibers in the dermal papillae are perpendicular
to the epidermis. It is not uncommon to see evidence of perifolliculitis, folliculitis, or furunculosis.
Hair follicles and sebaceous glands can appear hyperplastic. Varying numbers of plasma cells
may surround the epitrichial sweat glands. Note that there is no evidence of granulomatous
inflammation. The term lick granuloma is a clinical description of acral lick dermatitis, not a
histopathologic description.
Psychocutaneous Disorders
329
Figure 44-3 S
（H&E,×100.)
What considerations should one contemplate when managing a psychocutaneous
disorder?
· Identify and treat any primary dermatologic or physiologic diseases
· Identify and correct or eliminate, if possible, all stressors in the environment
Behavior modification incorporating counterconditioning and densensitization techniques
(positive reinforcement of new behaviors while gradually exposing patient to provocative
stimuli)
· Identify and treat any secondary complicating dermatoses
·If needed, behavioral pharmacotherapy
14. Describe different classes of behavioral pharmacotherapeutics, specific drugs of each
class, drug mechanism of action, and some potential drug side effects of agents used in
veterinary psychocutaneous disorders.
See Table 44-2.
Table 44-2
Characteristics of Various Pharmacotherapeutic Agents
SPECIFIC
MECHANISM OF
POTENTIAL SIDE
DRUG CLASS
EXAMPLES
ACTION
EFFECTS
Tricyclic
Amitriptyline
Block serotonin and
Tachycar dia,
antidepressants
Doxepin
 norepi nephri ne
prolonged car diac
Clomipramine
presynaptic
conduction,
 neurotransmi tter
hypotension,
 receptors in the
my driasis, dry
brain; block
mouth, reduced
muscarinic receptors;
tear production,
amitriptyline and
urine retention,
 doxepin also block
constipation,
histamine receptors
sedation, weight
gain
Continued
330
Psychocutaneous Disorders
Table 44-2
Characteristics of Various Pharmacotherapeutic AgentsCont'd
SPECIFIC
MECHANISM OF
POTENTIAL SIDE
DRUG CLASS
EXAMPLES
ACTION
EFFECTS
Selective
Fluoxetine
Selectively block
Anorexia, nausea,
 serotonin
Paroxetine
 serotonin
diarrhea, sedation,
reuptake
presynaptic
anxiety, agitation,
inhibitors
neurotransmi tter
insomnia,
receptors in the brain
xerostomia (cats)
Opioid antagonist
Naltrexone
Endorphin blocker
Relatively free of
side effects,
possible
abdominal
cramping, nausea,
vomiting,
nervousness,
rashes, pruritus,
hepatotoxicity
 Opioid agonist
Hydrocodone
Endorphin substitution
Sedation,
constipation,
vomiting,
antitussive action,
dependency
Dopamine
Haloperidol
Antagonist of
Hallucinations, limb
 antagonist
dopamine, may
twitches, ataxia
also desensitize
C-noradrenergic
receptors
15. Before administering behavioral pharmacotherapy, what precautions should one
consider?
One should become familiar with the route of metabolism and excretion, possible drug
interactions, window of therapeutic index, and contraindications before administration of these
medications. As a whole, they may potentiate cardiac arrhythmias and seizures, as well as
increase hepatic enzymes. In general, most of them have a narrow therapeutic index, and pre-
existing seizure disorders, cardiac disease, renal disease, and hepatic disease are contraindi-
cations. Concurrent admi nistration of tricyclic antidepressant drugs or selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (selegiline) should be avoided. Baseline bloodwork,
urinal ysis, thyroid function, and possibly electrocardiography are warranted before administration.
The use of these medications for psychocutaneous disorders is considered ex tra-label use.
16. What are the dosages of commonly prescribed behavioral pharmacotherapeutics for
psychocutaneous disorders in dogs and cats?
See Table 44-3.
17. Besides treating the psychogenic aspect of acral lick dermatitis, the lesion itself must
be treated. What are some therapeutic options?
· Treat any primary dermatologic or physiologic diseases.
Psychocutaneous Disorders
331
Table 44-3 Dosages of Commonly Used Pharmacotherapeutic Agents
DRUG
DOGS*
CATS*
Amitriptyline
1.0-3.0 mg/kg PO q 12 h
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
Doxepin
3.0-5.0 mg/kg PO q 8-12 h
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12 h for
predominantly
antihistaminic effects
Clomipramine
1.0-3.0 mg/kg PO q 12 h
0.5 mg/kg PO q 24 h 
 Start at 1.0 mg/kg and increase dose
by 1.0 mg/kg q 14 d; use minimum
effective dose
Fluoxetine
1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 24 h
Paroxetine
1.0 mg/kg PO q 24 h
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 24 h
Naltrexone
2.2 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
2.2 mg/kg PO q 24 h 
Hydrocodone
0.25 mg/kg PO q 8 h
0.25-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
+Initial trial period should be at least 3-6 weeks for most drugs. Try to use the lowest effective dose.
PO, Orally.
Collars, harnesses, muzzles, and bandages. Initially, these may be beneficial as adjunctive
therapy to prevent self-trauma, but are of no value when used alone.
· Systemic antibiotics. Acral lick dermatitis should be regarded as a deep pyoderma. Con-
sequently, oral antibiotics may need to be administered for 6-8 weeks. Ideally, antibiotic
selection is based on bacterial culture and sensitivity results.
·Topical therapy. Many different topical agents have been advocated. Unfortunately, none
of them is totally effective when used alone. Therefore they should be used as adjunctive
therapies. Products containing glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
DMSO, analgesics, and antibiotics either individually or in combination have been
recommended. These products are usually applied twice daily. Additionally, products that
are of poor taste (bitter apple) may be applied to the lesion to negatively reinforce problem
behavior.
·Intralesionaf injections. Early small lesions may benefit from intralesional injections of
triamcinolone acetonide or methylprednisolone acetate.
· Surgical excision. In most cases this is not a viable option due to the size, depth, and
location (distal extremity) of the lesion. Other complicating factors such as the need for
sutures, postoperative pain, and wound dehiscence secondary to excessive suture tension,
infection, and/or problem behavior make this option less than ideal. Occasionally, a full-
thickness skin graft/flap may be needed.
· Surgical COz laser resurfacing. This surgical procedure has become more popular in
recent years. Benefits of laser resurfacing may include less postoperative pain, less post-
operative swelling, less postoperative bleeding, vaporization of infected tissue, and perhaps
increased wound healing capabilities. Essentially the lesion is ablated down to the level
of the surrounding epidermis. Several surgical procedures may need to be performed to
achieve this goal. Additional adjunctive therapy is usually warranted.
·Radiation therapy This therapy may only be effective for small and relatively acute lesions.
Cryosurgery. This therapy is reserved for lesions that are extremely large and not
amenable to full-thickness skin grafts/flaps. Freezing procedures are usually repeated
multiple times.
332
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
18. What therapies have proved to be the most beneficial in treating cats with true
psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis?
Unfortunately, no therapy has been extremely successful. The most important part of
treatment is identifying and correcting or eliminating all possible environmental and social
stressors. Overlooking this facet of therapy can ultimately result in complete treatment failure.
Tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been used with varied
success. For cats in which the behavior is of recent (<6 months) onset, naltrexone may be tried
at 2.5-5.0 mg/cat daily for 7 days then once weekly until clinical signs resolve. If the behavior
has been present for > 6 months, haloperidol may be the first drug of choice. However, due to the
sometimes severe idiosyncratic adverse side effects, cats should be hospitalized for the first week
of treatment. An initial oral dose of 1.0 mg/kg twice daily is given and the cat monitored for
ataxia, limb flicks, and hallucinations. If adverse reactions are seen, the dose should be reduced.
Treatment should be continued for at least 2 months before evaluating the response to this drug.
Up to 50% of cats will be cured after 2-3 months, another 25% may require continued maintenance
therapy, and the remaining 25% do not improve.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Overall KL: Fear, anxieties, and stereotypies. In Dumcan LL (ed): Clinicat behavioral medicine for small arimals.
St Louis, 1997, Mosby, pp 209-250.
Overall KL, Dunham AE: Clinical features and outcome in dogs and cats with obsessive-compulsive disorder: 126
cases (1989-2000), / Am Vet Med Assoc 221(10):1445-1452, 2002.
Sawyer LS, Moon-Fanelli AA, Dodman NH: Psychogenic alopecia in cats: 11 cases (1993-1996), J Am Vet Med
Assoc 241(1):71-74, 1999
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Psychogenic skin diseases. In Kersey R (ed): Mutler & Kirk's small animad
dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1055-1072.
Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral phamacotherapy. Part I. Antipsychotics and antidepressants, Compend
Contin Educ Pracr Ver 18(10):1067-1081, 1996
Virga V: It's more than skin deep—behavioral dermatology: self-injurious, compulsive, and related behaviors,
A AVD/ACVD 15th Proceedings, 1999, pp 13-24.
Willemse T: Psychogenic alopecia in cats and the role of the opioid and dopaminergic systems. August JR (ed);:
Consuttations in fetine internat medicine, ed 3. Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, pp 224-230.
45. DISEASES OF THE CLAW AND CLAW BED
John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
1. Regarding the normal anatomy of the canine and feline claw, what is the ungual crest?
What is the corium?
The ungual crest is the crescent-shaped, dorsal process of the distal phalanx (P3). Failure to
remove the ungual crest during declaw procedures will result in regrowth of the claw. Injury to
this region may result in abnormal claw growth. The corium is a layer of tissue between the
overlying claw and the underlying P3. The corium is contiguous with the dermis. The corium and
underlying highly vascular periosteum supply blood to the growing claw; this is commonly
referred to as the "quick" (Figure 45-1).
2. The hardened claw material is analogous to what structure in the normal skin?
The horny claw material is analogous to the stratum corneum, and is the final product of
332
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
18. What therapies have proved to be the most beneficial in treating cats with true
psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis?
Unfortunately, no therapy has been extremely successful. The most important part of
treatment is identifying and correcting or eliminating all possible environmental and social
stressors. Overlooking this facet of therapy can ultimately result in complete treatment failure.
Tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been used with varied
success. For cats in which the behavior is of recent (<6 months) onset, naltrexone may be tried
at 2.5-5.0 mg/cat daily for 7 days then once weekly until clinical signs resolve. If the behavior
has been present for > 6 months, haloperidol may be the first drug of choice. However, due to the
sometimes severe idiosyncratic adverse side effects, cats should be hospitalized for the first week
of treatment. An initial oral dose of 1.0 mg/kg twice daily is given and the cat monitored for
ataxia, limb flicks, and hallucinations. If adverse reactions are seen, the dose should be reduced.
Treatment should be continued for at least 2 months before evaluating the response to this drug.
Up to 50% of cats will be cured after 2-3 months, another 25% may require continued maintenance
therapy, and the remaining 25% do not improve.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Overall KL: Fear, anxieties, and stereotypies. In Dumcan LL (ed): Clinicat behavioral medicine for small arimals.
St Louis, 1997, Mosby, pp 209-250.
Overall KL, Dunham AE: Clinical features and outcome in dogs and cats with obsessive-compulsive disorder: 126
cases (1989-2000), / Am Vet Med Assoc 221(10):1445-1452, 2002.
Sawyer LS, Moon-Fanelli AA, Dodman NH: Psychogenic alopecia in cats: 11 cases (1993-1996), J Am Vet Med
Assoc 241(1):71-74, 1999
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Psychogenic skin diseases. In Kersey R (ed): Mutler & Kirk's small animad
dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1055-1072.
Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral phamacotherapy. Part I. Antipsychotics and antidepressants, Compend
Contin Educ Pracr Ver 18(10):1067-1081, 1996
Virga V: It's more than skin deep—behavioral dermatology: self-injurious, compulsive, and related behaviors,
A AVD/ACVD 15th Proceedings, 1999, pp 13-24.
Willemse T: Psychogenic alopecia in cats and the role of the opioid and dopaminergic systems. August JR (ed);:
Consuttations in fetine internat medicine, ed 3. Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, pp 224-230.
45. DISEASES OF THE CLAW AND CLAW BED
John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
1. Regarding the normal anatomy of the canine and feline claw, what is the ungual crest?
What is the corium?
The ungual crest is the crescent-shaped, dorsal process of the distal phalanx (P3). Failure to
remove the ungual crest during declaw procedures will result in regrowth of the claw. Injury to
this region may result in abnormal claw growth. The corium is a layer of tissue between the
overlying claw and the underlying P3. The corium is contiguous with the dermis. The corium and
underlying highly vascular periosteum supply blood to the growing claw; this is commonly
referred to as the "quick" (Figure 45-1).
2. The hardened claw material is analogous to what structure in the normal skin?
The horny claw material is analogous to the stratum corneum, and is the final product of
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
333
Ungual crest
Claw fold
Cornium(dermis)
2
Non-cornefied
P3
epidermal layer-
Keratinized claw
(stratum corneum)
Digital pad
Figure 45-1 Schematic diagram of the normal canine claw.
of the claw, corium and claw plate, are contiguous with the dermis and epidermis of the adjacent
skin.
3. What is the most abundant protein in the claw material?
Keratin
4. What is the approximate growth rate of the canine claw?
Information on rate of claw growth in the veterinary literature is limited. Textbook
references describe the average rate of claw growth in Beagles younger than 2 years of age to be
1.9 mm per week. This rate declines with age to as slow as 0.8 mm per week. The implication of
this information is that recovery from claw abnormalities is prolonged; 10-12 weeks may be
needed for a diseased claw to regrow normally following resolution of the primary disorder.
5. What is the claw fold? What is different about the skin in this special area?
The claw fold describes the invagination of skin that covers the junction of cornified claw
with soft tissue at the dorsal aspect of the claw. This skin lacks hair follicles.
6. What is the term for sloughing of the claw?
Onycholysis refers to the separation of the cornified claw from underlying corium. Usually
this term is used when the claw is still attached proximally (Figure 45-2). When referring to
complete sloughing of the claw from the digit, the proper term is onychomadesis.
7. What is the term for abnormal claw formation?
Onychodystrophy (Figure 45-3)
8. What is the term for inflammation of the claw fold?
Paronychia is the correct term. Paronychia may be characterized by swelling of the soft
tissue surrounding the claw, or by discharge from underneath the claw fold. In many cases both
clinical signs are present.
9. What is the term for claw pain?
Onychalgia
334
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
Figure 45-2Multidigit onycholysis in a dog with pemphigus foliaceus. Note the purulent exudate under
the"hollow"claw.
Figure 45-3 Onychodystrophy in a dog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. 1n this case the soft,
10. What is the term for fungal infection of the claw?
Onychomycosis
11. Several additional terms are used to describe specific abnormalities of claw formation.
Define onychogryphosis, onychocryptosis, and onychorrhexis.
·Onychogryphosis: Hypertrophic claws with abnormal curvature
· Onychocryptosis: Ingrown claw. Typically this describes the situation where claws have
grown so long and curved that they penetrate the di gital paw pad of the same digit.
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
335
· Onychorrhexis: Brittle claw; specifically described as spontaneous splitting or fragmenting
of a claw on the longitudinal axis of the claw.
12. What physical examination features should be specifically noted when evaluating claw
or claw fold diseases?
· Single-digit involvement vs. multiple-digit involvement
·Symmetnic vs. asymmetric disease
·Does condition affect only the claw, only the claw fold, or both?
·Presence or absence of regional lymphadenopathy
· Presence or absence of concurrent skin disease
· Presence or absence of concurrent systemic illness
13. Give your top three differential diagnoses for claw or claw fold disease affecting a
single digit.
· Bacterial infection
·Trauma
· Neoplasia
14. Formulate a diagnostic plan for evaluation of a dog with pain, swelling, discharge, and
loss of claw affecting a single digit.
1. Cytofogy from discharge: Note type of leukocytes present, presence or absence of organisms
(bacteria, Malassezia, Blastomyces, etc.), presence or absence of acantholytic keratinocytes
(suggestive of pemphigus foliaceus, although usually have multiple-digit involvement).
2. Bacterial cutture and sensitivity: Perform if bacteria present on cytology. Since deep
infections of the digit and/or osteomyelitis of P3 frequently warrant prolonged periods of
antibiotic therapy (16-30 weeks or longer), specific antibiotic selection based on anti-
microbial susceptibility testing is preferred to empirical therapy
3. Radiograph: Evaluate radiograph carefully for evidence of bone lysis of P3. Osteomyelitis
amputation of P3 and submission for histopathologic diagnosis.
4. Biopsy: Histopathologic diagnosis is indicated for any condition involving bone lysis of
P3, suspected neoplasia, or chronic disease that has not responded to appropriate therapy
for presumptive diagnosis.
15. Bacterial infections are a common complication of claw or claw fold disease. List the
most common causes for bacterial infection of a single digit. What if multiple digits on
multiple paws are involved?
feline leukemia virus, or feline immunodeficiency virus; multifocal neoplasia; concurrent
Note: clipping claws too close may embed debris or contaminated material, resuling in a
single- or multiple-digit bacterial infection.
16. Purulent exudate from the claw fold may be an indication of infection, but not always.
What disease is the most common cause of purulent discharge from multiple claw folds
in a cat?
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF)
The index of suspicion for PF should be increased with involvement of the paw pad or
degenerate neutrophils supports a diagnosis of PF
336
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
17. What endocrine disorder is associated with symmetric hypertrophy of claws in cats?
Hyperthyroidism
18. Describe your best therapeutic plan for chronic bacterial infection of a single digit.
1. Avulsion of the claw under general anesthesia should be performed if separation is
present. Care should be taken to minimize disruption of the underlying corium; injury to
the corium may result in abnormal claw shape and integrity.
2. Systemic antibiotic therapy based on culture and susceptibility testing. Selection of an
antibiotic with good penetration to bone tissue is ideal, due to the possibility of
osteomyelitis of P3.
 3. Astringent soaks: Domeboro solution
 4. Antiseptic soaks: Chlorhexidine solution
 5. Onychectomy (by amputation of P3) is warranted in cases of chronic recurrence, chronic
 pain, or failure to respond to therapy.
19. After trauma the most common cause of single digit claw disease is neoplasia. Is
neoplasia of the digit more likely to be benign or malignant?
Neoplasia of the digits is more likely to be malignant. In a review of 124 cases of digital
masses in dogs, 61% were malignant neoplasms, 20% were benign neoplasms, and 19% were
pyogranulomatous inflammation. Therefore, of neoplastic lesions of the digit, approximately
75% are malignant.
 20. List the three most common types of malignant neoplasia in the claw bed of dogs.
1. Squamous cell carcinoma: 38% of cases
2.Melanoma: 32% of cases
3.Mast cell tumor:10% of cases
Other, less common tumors reported include nerve sheath tumor, myxosarcoma, atrichial
s weat gland adenocarcinoma, fibrosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma
21. Compare and contrast the clinical features of squamous cell carcinoma of the claw
with melanoma in the dog. Include breed predisposition, location of primary tumor,
radiographic findings, rates of metastasis, and survival.
See Table 45-1.
Table 45-1
Clinical Features of Squamous Cell Carcinoma vs. Melanoma
SQUAMOUS CELL
FEATURE
CARCINOMA
MELANOMA
 Breed predisposition
Black Poodles
None reported
Black Labrador Retrievers
Location
Two thirds ungual crest
Not reported
One third other location
 Radiographic findings
 Bone lysis of P3 is common
Bone lysis of P3 is uncommon
Metastasis
Uncommon
Common
22. Cats may develop metastatic adenocarcinoma in multiple digits simultaneously. What
 is the tissue of origin for this particular synd rome? What histopathologic feature may
be present that helps the pathologist determine this?
·Pulmonary
· Presence of cilia on neoplastic cells
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
337
 23.  In humans, onychomycosis due to dermatophyte invasion of the keratin claw is one of
the most common causes of chronic claw disease (both single or multiple digits). How
common is onychomycosis in dogs? In cats? What organisms have been reported?
Onychomycosis is an uncommon cause of claw or claw fold disease
· Dogs: 7 of 196 cases (3.5%); only three cases caused by dermatophyte
· Cats: 3 of 65 cases (4.6%); only one case caused by dermatophyte
Organisms reported: Trichophyton mentagrophytes (dog), Microsporum canis (cat), Candida
albicans, Malassezia pachydermatis,Sporothrix schenckii,Cryptococcus neoformans,
Blastomyces dermatitidis,Coccidioides immitis
Malassezia species may colonize the claw fold secondary to underlying hypersensitivity
disorders, such as atopy or adverse reactions to food; or immune-compromising disorders, such
as hypothyroidism. Overgrowth in this area may be characterized by erythema, swelling, pruritus,
significantly in the degree of erythema, swelling, and pruritus. Frequently affected dogs exhibit
brownish discoloration, or staining, of the keratin claw (Figure 45-4).
Figure 45-4Onychomycosis associated with colonization of the claw bed by Malassezia pachyde rmatis.
Note the brownish discoloration of the keratin claw. (Courtesy Dr. Adam Patterson.)
24. List 18 differential diagnoses for onychomadesis, onychodystrophy, or onychorrhexis
of multiple digits, with or without claw fold involvement.
1. Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
2. Systemic lupus erythematosus
3. Pemphigus foliaceus
4. Pemphigus yul garis
5. Cold agglutinin disease
6. Vasculitis
 7. Bullous pemphigoid
8. Epidermolysis bullosa
9. Drug eruption
10. Metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma
11. Multifocal squamous cell carcinoma
338
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
dermatitis, hepatocutaneous syndrome)
13. Thallotoxicosis
14. Ergotism
15. Severe nutritional deficiency
16. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
17. Zinc-responsive dermatosis
18. Leishmaniasis
25. Describe the clinical features of symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy, include reported
age, breed, or sex predispositions; progression of clinical signs; and any potential
causes implicated in the pathogenesis of this condition.
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy is a condition characterized by spontaneous onycho-
madesis of most, if not all claws, followed by regrowth of abnorimal, misshapen, brittle claws
(onychodystrophy). In published case series most animals were 3-8 years of age, although animals
as young as 6 months and as old as 10 years have been reported. Most commonly reported breeds
are German Shepherds, Rottweilers, Standard or Giant Schnauzers, but other breeds may be
affected. Of these breeds, German Shepherds are most consistently represented above reference
hospital populations. No gender predilection is reported.
Typical clinical signs of early disease are brownish-red to bluish discoloration of a single
claw, attributed to subungual hemorrhage. Onycholysis, separation of claw from corium, and
complete onychomadesis follow (Figure 45-5). Swelling of the claw fold, pain, or lameness is
variable. After the initial claw sloughs, the condition progresses rapidly, resulting in loss of all
claws in 2-9 weeks. A brownish, serosanguineous exudate is reported in some cases. Secondary
bacterial infections, characterized by malodorous, purulent discharge, may also occur. In some
cases the claw has separated from the corium but remains attached under the claw fold. This
situation can be painful for the patient. In some cases therapeutic avulsion of the claws under
Figure 45-5 Symmetric lupoid onychomadesis/onychodystrophy in a Miniature Schnauzer. Note the
brown,serous crust at the pointof separation of the keratin clawplatefrom the underlying corium
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
339
Figure 45-6 Therapeutic avulsion of the claw shown in Figure 45-5
general anesthesia is necessary to relieve discomfort and remove the dead keratin claw from the
claw bed to perrmit regrowth (Figure 45-6).
Following onychomadesis, claws may grow abnormally; typically affected claws are
misshapen, brittle, and dry (see Figure 45-3). Chronic pain may be a characteristic of the abnormal
claws in some dogs. Patients are typically free of concurrent dermatologic or systemic disease.
Most cases are idiopathic; however, in a case series four of 24 dogs demonstrated partial or
the original diet and relapsed; the other two owners were unwilling to perform provocative
challenge. This finding suggests adverse food reaction as a potential trigger.
26. What are the histopathologic features of symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy?
· Lymphocytic-plasmacytic, lichenoid dermal infiltrate. Infltrate is typically cell-rich;
however, cell-poor specimens may be obtained from affected individuals.
·Hydropic degeneration of basal keratinocytes
· Individual cell apoptosis in the basal cell layer
·Pigmentary incontinence
· Note: vacuolar changes and subepidermal clefting also may be seen in normal claws.
27. Describe five therapeutic options for treatment of symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy.
1. Essential fatty acid therapy: Dosage is typically based on eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
content. EPA given orally at approximately 20 mg/kg per day is a commonly used dosage
for immune-mediated and inflammatory dermatoses.
2. Tetracycline/niacinamide: Dogs <10kg receive 250 mg tetracycline and 250 mg
niacinamide orally three times daily. Dogs >10 kg receive 500 mg tetracycline and
500 mg niacinamide orally three times daily. If remission is achieved, frequency of
medication can be tapered to twice daily then once daily. Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea
are the most common adverse reactions. Tetracycline/miacinamide should be avoided in
dogs with seizure-disorders (unpublished observation).
340
Diseases of the Claw and Claw Bed
3. Pentoxifylline: 10 mg/kg orally every 8 to 24 hours. Pentoxifylline is a methylxanthine
derivative with immunomodulatory activity: decreased cytokine production and decreased
responsiveness of leukocytes. Additionally, pentoxifylline increases deformability of red
blood cells. The principal applications of pentoxifylline are in management of vasculitis,
peripheral vascular disease, and mild immune-mediated disorders, such as discoid lupus
 4. Prednisone: immune-suppressive doses (2-4 mg/kg per day) then tapered.
 5. Onychectomy: This therapy is reserved for cases that have failed medical management
and which are characterized by chronic pain.
28. What are the indications for biopsy for claw disease? What tissues must be included
for accurate diagnosis? Which digit should be selected in the dog?
Biopsy should be considered for any cases with suspected neoplasia, radiographic evidence
of bone lysis, suspected immune-mediated disease, or cases that have failed to respond to
appropriate empirical therapy based on presumptive diagnosis.
Biopsy specimens should include the claw fold, claw plate, corium, ungual crest, and all of
P3. This specimen ensures adequate evaluation of claw matrix area for evidence of immune
mediated disease, concurrent infection, or neoplastic tissue. Amputation at the articulation of P2
and P3 is the most commonly employed technique. An onychobiopsy without onychectomy
technique is descnibed using an 8-mm punch biopsy directed along the lateral aspect of the claw,
a portion of claw fold, claw plate, corium, ungual crest, and P3.
Biopsy of the most recently affected digit is ideal. Dewclaws are easiest to remove in their
preferred to the weight-bearing third and fourth digits.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Auxilia ST, Hill PB, Thoday KL: Canine symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy: a retrospective study with particular
reference to management, / Smatl Anim Pract 42:82-87, 2001.
Bergvall K: Treatment of symmetrical onychomadesis and onychodystrophy in five dogs with omega-3 and omega
6 fatly acids, Vet Dermatot 9:263-268, 1998
Boord MJ, Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz WS: Onychectomy as a therapy for symmetric claw and claw fold disease in the
dog, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:131-138, 1997
Vet Dermatot 10:55-59, 1999.
Mueller RS,Friend S, Shipstone M, Burton G: Diagnosis of canine claw disease - a prospective study of
24 dogs, Vet Dermatot 11:133-141, 2000.
Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 641-647.
Scott DW, Miller WH: Disorders of the claw and clawbed in cats, Compend Cont Educ 14:449-457, 1992.
Scott DW, Miller WH: Disorders of claw and clawbed in dogs, Compend Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Diseases of eyelids, claws, anal sacs and ears. In Scott Dw, Miller WH, Griffin
CE (eds): Mutter & Kirk's smalt animat dermatology ed 6, Philadelphia, 2001,WB Saunders,
pp 1185-1235.
 o sise sn  so  dno o     ss  o
cases (1989-1993), / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:194-201, 1995.
Perianal Fistula Disease
341
46. PERIANAL FISTULA DISEASE
Steven L. Marks, BVSc, MS, MRCVS, DACVIM
1. What is a perianal fistula?
The definition of a fistula is an abnormal passage between two internal organs or leading
from an internal organ to the body surface. Perianal fistulas are chronic inflammatory lesions
involving the perianal, anal, and perirectal tissues (Figures 46-1 and 46-2).
2. List the historical findings with perianal fistula disease.
The clinical history of dogs with this disease often includes tenesmus, dyschezia, consti-
 pation, increased frequency of defecation, perianal licking, self-mutilation, pain in the perianal
region, and scooting. Systemic clinical signs such as lethargy, anorexia, and weight loss may also
be reported.
3. Describe physical examination findings associated with perianal fistula disease.
The most common physical ex amination findings include pain associated with manipulation
of the perianal or perineal region, and painful ulcerative lesions around the perianal region. These
lesions may vary from small superficial lesions to large penetrating lesions. The area is often
malodorous and may involve the anal sacs. Rectal examination may indicate thickening and
fibrosis of the perirectal tissue.
4. What differential diagnoses should be considered with these clinical signs?
Differential diagnoses for the aforementioned clinical signs include anal squamous cell
carcinoma, perianal adenoma, anal sac adenocarcinoma, anal sac abscess, rectal and perianal
fistulas.
5.How is the definitive diagnosis made?
The definitive diagnosis is made based on history, physical examination, and histopathology.
If the history and physical examination are consistent with perianal fistula disease, then response
Figure 46-1  Multiple perianal fistulas in a Gerrman Shepherd Dog. (Courtesy Dr. Sandra Manfra.)
342
Perianal Fistula Disease
Figure 46-2 Extensively ulcerated perianal fistula disease in a German Shepherd Dog
to therapy may be supportive of the diagnosis. Histopathologic findings may include hidradenitis
necrotizing pyogranulomatous inflammation of the skin and hair follicles, cellulitis, dilated and
inflamed lymphatics, and fibrosis.
 6. What is the minimum database when evaluating a patient for perianal fistula disease?
The minimum diagnostic database is always at the discretion of the clinician but in most
patients, a complete blood count, serum biochemical analysis, and urinalysis will be beneficial to
rule out concurrent disease. Colonoscopy with biopsy will help exclude concurrent colitis.
7. Is this disease reported in the cat?
Idiopathic perianal fistula disease has not been reported in the cat. Other differential
diagnoses such as anal sac abscess and neoplasia should be considered.
8. Is there a breed predilection for this disease?
The German Shepherd appears to be over-represented in most clinical reports. Other breeds
that have been reported with this disease include the Irish Setter, Labrador Retriever, Old English
Sheepdog, and Border Collie as well as mixed-breed dogs.
9. Is there a gender or age predilection for this disease?
There does not appear to be a gender predilection for this disease, although several reports
have suggested it may occur more in males than females and more in intact animals. The reported
 mean age of dogs affected is 5-7 years, although there is a wide age range.
10. Is there a disease corollary in human medicine?
 A similar disease that exists in humans is granulomatous enteritis or Crohn's disease. This
disease may lead to fistula formation.
Perianal Fistula Disease
343
11. What is the etiology of perianal fistula disease?
There is currently no known underlying etiology that has been identified for this disease.
The current hypothesis is that it is a multifactorial immune-mediated disease process. There is
some information to suggest that the Geman Shepherd is predisposed to this disease due to
anatomic variations including a high density of apocrine sweat glands in the cutaneous region
bowel disease and bacterial overgrowth, which may have an immune-mediated component. It has
also been suggested that dogs with a broad-based or low carriage tail conformation may be
predisposed to this disorder.
12. List the strategies that have been used to medically manage perianal fistulas.
· Cyclosporine and ketoconazole
·Metronidazole
· Prednisone
· Stool softener
·Antimicrobial agents
·Azathioprine
●Dietary management
·Topical tacrolimus
13.  List the surgical treatments that have been described for treatment of perianal fistula
disease.
·Surgical excision
· Chemical cautery
· CO2 or yttrium-argon-garnet laser resection
·Tail amputation
·Cryotherapy
14. What possible complications can occur following surgical therapy for perianal
fistulas?
· Fecal incontinence
·Diarrhea
·Anal stenosis
· Constipation
·Flatulence
15. What is the current treatment of choice for perianal fistula disease?
For idiopathic cases (having ruled out underlying food allergies and colitis), the suggested
therapy at this time is cyclosporine plus ketoconazole. Surgical therapy should only be considered
if medical management fails. Cyclosporine is used at a dosage of 2-5 mg/kg orally every 12 hours
to achieve a serum trough concentration of 400-600 ng/mL. Ketoconazole is used at a dosage of
12-15 mg/kg orally every 24 hours.
16. What is the mechanism of action of cyclosporine?
Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive agent that inhibits the production and blunts the
response to interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-6, and gamma interferon by CD4 T lymphocytes.
17. List the side effects and possible complications of cyclosporine therapy.
anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Additional side effects occasionally reported in dogs include
tremors, bone marrow suppression, and a lymphoplasmacytoid dermatitis.
18. What is the mechanism of action of ketoconazole?
           
fungal agent in veterinary medicine. It has also been used as an alternative therapy for canine and
feline hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) due to its effect on steroid biosynthesis. In
combination with cyclosporine, ketoconazole has been used for its inhibitory effect of
cytochrome P-450. This allows the effect of cyclosporine to be prolonged and for lower dosages
to be used toreach therapeutic concentrations.
344
Blepharitis
19. What are the possible side effects of ketoconazole administration?
The side effects of ketoconazole include anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea, but these are
perianal fistula disease. Hepatotoxicity including cholangiohepatitis and increased liver enzyme
activity has been reported as has hepatic necrosis. These phenomena may be dose-related or
idiosyncratic.
20. How is cyclosporine therapy monitored?
Cyclosporine therapy is best monitored by following serum concentrations. Although there
is some difference of opinion, trough serum concentrations of 400-600 ng/mL seem ideal.
21. Is there an alternative to oral cyclosporine?
 sssns nn  un e si (do no son I o ss
activation and cytokine production. Its mechanism of action is similar to that of cyclosporine. Its
localized cutaneous lesions.
22. What is the prognosis for perianal fistula disease?
response to therapy; however, remission may only be temporary. Financial investment for both
medical and surgical treatment of this disease is high.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Shepherd dog, Am / Vet Res 46:1468-1472, 1985.
Day MJ: Immunopathology of anal furunculosis in the dog, / Small Anim Pract 34:381-389, 1993.
Day MI, Weaver BMQ: Pathology of surgically resected tissue from 305 cases of anal furunculosis in the dog,
/ Small Anim Pract 33:583-589, 1992.
Ellison GW: Treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1680-1682, 1995.
Griffiths LG, Sullivan M, Borland WW: Cyclosporin as the sole treatment for anal furunculosis: preliminary results,
/ Small Anim Pract 40:569-572, 1999.
Harkin KR, Walshaw R, Mullaney RP: Association of perianal fistula and colitis in the German Shepherd dog
response to high-dose prednisone and dietary therapy, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:515-520, 1996.
Mathews KA, Sukhiani HR: Randomized controlled trial of cyclosporine for treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1249-1253, 1997.
Matushek KJ, Rosin E: Perianal fistulas in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Smatt Anim Pract 13:621-627, 1991
Patricelli AJ, Hardie RI, McAnulty JF: Cyclosporine and ketoconazole for the treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs,
/ Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1009-1016, 2002.
47. BLEPHARITIS
Ralph E. Hamor, DVM, MS, DACVO
1. What is blepharitis?
Blepharitis is defined as inflammation of the eyelid. The inflammation can be focal or
diffuse and can involve one, multiple, or all four of the eyelids. Blepharitis can be the result of a
primary skin disease or can be secondary to another ocular or systemic disease process. Eyelid
344
Blepharitis
19. What are the possible side effects of ketoconazole administration?
The side effects of ketoconazole include anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea, but these are
perianal fistula disease. Hepatotoxicity including cholangiohepatitis and increased liver enzyme
activity has been reported as has hepatic necrosis. These phenomena may be dose-related or
idiosyncratic.
20. How is cyclosporine therapy monitored?
Cyclosporine therapy is best monitored by following serum concentrations. Although there
is some difference of opinion, trough serum concentrations of 400-600 ng/mL seem ideal.
21. Is there an alternative to oral cyclosporine?
 sssns nn  un e si (do no son I o ss
activation and cytokine production. Its mechanism of action is similar to that of cyclosporine. Its
localized cutaneous lesions.
22. What is the prognosis for perianal fistula disease?
response to therapy; however, remission may only be temporary. Financial investment for both
medical and surgical treatment of this disease is high.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Shepherd dog, Am / Vet Res 46:1468-1472, 1985.
Day MJ: Immunopathology of anal furunculosis in the dog, / Small Anim Pract 34:381-389, 1993.
Day MI, Weaver BMQ: Pathology of surgically resected tissue from 305 cases of anal furunculosis in the dog,
/ Small Anim Pract 33:583-589, 1992.
Ellison GW: Treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1680-1682, 1995.
Griffiths LG, Sullivan M, Borland WW: Cyclosporin as the sole treatment for anal furunculosis: preliminary results,
/ Small Anim Pract 40:569-572, 1999.
Harkin KR, Walshaw R, Mullaney RP: Association of perianal fistula and colitis in the German Shepherd dog
response to high-dose prednisone and dietary therapy, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:515-520, 1996.
Mathews KA, Sukhiani HR: Randomized controlled trial of cyclosporine for treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1249-1253, 1997.
Matushek KJ, Rosin E: Perianal fistulas in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Smatt Anim Pract 13:621-627, 1991
Patricelli AJ, Hardie RI, McAnulty JF: Cyclosporine and ketoconazole for the treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs,
/ Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1009-1016, 2002.
47. BLEPHARITIS
Ralph E. Hamor, DVM, MS, DACVO
1. What is blepharitis?
Blepharitis is defined as inflammation of the eyelid. The inflammation can be focal or
diffuse and can involve one, multiple, or all four of the eyelids. Blepharitis can be the result of a
primary skin disease or can be secondary to another ocular or systemic disease process. Eyelid
Blepharitis
345
disease process, the original disease process can be masked or complicated by secondary
infection, self-trauma, alopecia, erosion and/or exudates. In chronic cases, the original disease
to ocular disease. Always remember that the eyelids are part of the skin. Therefore, the clinician
needs to search for causes of generalized dermatitis and treat as he or she would for the
therapy used is not detrimental to the heal th of the globe.
2. What are the basic structures of the normal eyelid?
The outer surface is covered with haired skin and the inner surface is covered with
conjunctiva. Numerous muscles are present and serve to provide appropriate eyelid movement.
Cilia are present in the upper and/or lower eyelid depending on the species. Glands of Moll and
Zeis surround the follicle of the cilia or eyelash. A tarsal plate runs parallel to the edge of the
 s  n e u    os s d  
well as attachment for some of the eyelid musculature.
3. Why are normal eyelid anatomy, physiology, and function so important?
The eyelids, especially the eyelid margin, serve primarily to provide appropriate blinking.
Blinking physically protects the globe, spreads the tear film, and provides oxygen as well as other
metabolic needs to the cornea.
4. Where do different layers of the tear film come from?
The eyelid provides the inner (from the goblet cells of the conjunctiva) and outer (from
the meibomian glands) layers of the tear film. The inner layer aids in the attachment of the
to prevent evaporation of the middle or serous layer of the tear film. The middle layer of the
tear film is produced by the orbital lacrimal gland (65-70%) and the gland of the third eyelid
(30-35% ).
5. Name some common groups of diseases that can cause blepharitis.
·Traumatic
·Mycotic
·Bacterial
·Neoplastic
·Autoimmune
·Parasitic
·Allergic
+ Chalazion/hordeolum
6. What is a stye or hordeolum?
A stye is strictly defined as an infection, typically staphylococcal, of the glands of Moll
or Zeis. The glands of Moll and Zeis are associated with the hair follicle of the eyelashes
An external hordeolum (stye) is an infection of the glands of Moll or Zeis and an internal
hordeolum is an infection of the meibomian glands.
7. How do you treat a stye?
A stye can be treated with supportive therapy including hot compresses and topical
8.How is a hordeolum different from a chalazion?
A chalazion is a granulomatous inflammation of the meibomian gland, also typically
staphylococcal in origin. If the infection breaks out of the gland into the surrounding sub-
cutaneous tissue, it causes a significant granulomatous inflammatory reaction. A chalazion often
needs to be treated with surgical removal followed by topical and systemic antibiotic therapy
346
Blepharitis
Figure 47-1 This photograph shows the proper placement of a muscle hook in the nasal canthus to
"unzip" the eyelid margin in a puppy with neonatal ophthalmia.
9.What is ankyloblepharon or neonatal ophthalmia?
 Neonatal ophthalmia occurs in young puppies and kittens before the opening of their
eyelids. The eyelids are often profoundly swollen and there may be a fair amount of muco-
purulent discharge draining from the medial canthus (Figure 47-1). The cause of the syndrome is
inoculation of the eyelid with bacteria, or viruses, from the dam's genital tract.
10. How do you treat neonatal ophthalmia and why is it important?
This syndrome needs to be treated early and aggressively because the trapped infection can
cause significant damage to the cornea and may even result in blindness secondary to corneal
perforation. The best treatment is to manually open the eyelid margins and treat the infection
supportively with topical antibiotics (or antiviral agents if a virus is the cause of the infection).
The medial canthus of the eyelid margin is not completely sealed in neonates and this is where
to begin opening the eyelids. Sometimes the eyelid margins can be opened manually with your
fingers. Alternatively, the clinician can use a small blunt instrument like a muscle hook and insert
it between the eyelids at the medial canthus and "unzip" the eyelid margin from the medial to
lateral canthus.
11. Is trauma a common cause of blepharitis?
Self-trauma can be quite common especially if the patient is pruritic. Significant pruritus and
self-trauma may even mask the inciting cause of the blepharitis. An Elizabethan collar can be
quite beneficial to keep the patient from rubbing its eyelids and help to determine if the
blepharitis is primary or secondary. Primary traumatic blepharitis does occur and usually presents
as an acute problem.
12. How do you treat traumatic blepharitis?
Trauma can cause eyelid wounds. Abrasions and superficial wounds can be treated initially
by cleansing. Topical triple antibiotic ophthalmic ointment can be used on eyelid wounds, if
needed. Deep wounds may also require systemic anti biotics. Full-thickness eyelid wounds usually
require surgical as well as medical therapy. Full-thickness wounds should be closed in two layers:
absorbable to close the conjunctival layer and nonabsorbable to close the skin. Make sure that
absorbable sutures in the conjunctival layer are "buried" within the skin to keep the sutures from
Blepharitis
347
Figure 47-2 This dog has significant
blepharoederma secondary to an insect bite.
rubbing on the cornea. A figure-eight or cruciate suture is recommended at the eyelid margin to
achieve appropriate closure of the eyelid margin without any knots touching the cornea.
13. Can allergies cause blepharitis?
Yes. Allergic blepharitis can manifest in different ways depending on the cause of the
allergic reaction. Insect bites often demonstrate relatively mild signs of erythema and edema but,
in more severe cases, can also manifest with significant blepharoedema (Figure 47-2). These
cases usually resolve with supportive care (antihistamines and/or corticosteroids). Inhalant, food,
or contact allergic blepharitis may also cause signi ficant pruritus of the head and face as well as
secondary changes associated with self-trauma. With inhalant and food allergies, the patient
usually demonstrates other clinical signs of the allergy along with their ocular signs (i.e., pruritus
of the feet, ears, axillae, and inguinal areas). If possible, it is always best to identify and treat the
but can also interfere with appropriate diagnosis of the responsible allergen.
14.
What types of pemphigus usually involve the eyelids?
While all members of the pemphigus group of vesiculobullous epiderimal diseases can
involve the eyelid tissue, the facial lesions of pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus most
commonly involve the eyelids. Lesions typically include alopecia, exfoliative crusting, pustular
dermatitis, and erosion of the eyelid margin. The disease results from autoantibody production
against the intercellular matrix of the epidermis. Diagnosis is by skin biopsy, and treatment for
the eyelids is as for the rest of the skin.
15. What are common causes of bacterial blepharitis?
with Staphyfococcus being the most common. Acute cases demonstrate erythema, pustules and
crusting while more chronic cases may also have ulceration, fibrosis, and alopecia. The
348
Blepharitis
Figure 47-3 The center of the lower lid in this dog has an infected meibomian gland secondary to
the conjunctival surface.
meibomian glands may be infected and are best visualized by everting the lid margin (Figure 47-3)
Chemosis and purulent conjunctivitis can also be seen. As with other areas of the skin, diagnosis
is by culture and cytology of a pustule.
Therapy is based on culture and involves systemic antibiotic therapy. Topical antibiotics and
antibiotic/corticosteroid combinations may also be indicated if chemosis and conjunctivitis are
present but usually are not sufficient on their own. Staphage lysate, staphylococcal bacterins,
and/or systemic corticosteroids may also be used to treat advanced, chronic, or nonresponsive
cases of staphylococcal blepharitis.
16. What is juvenile pyoderma or juvenile cellulitis?
This syndrome is usually seen in puppies or very young dogs and manifests as generalized
pustular dermatitis of the eyelids, face, and muzzle (Figure 47-4). Advanced cases may even
Figure 47-4This puppy has severe pustular dermatis of both upper eyelids secondary to juvenile pyoderma.
Blepharitis
349
develop fistulous tracts.Regional lymph nodes are usually enlarged and the patient may be
lethargic and febrile. Diagnosis is by clinical signs, cytology, and culture. Therapy involves systemic
antibiotic and systemic corticosteroid therapy along with topical therapy. As with staphylococcal
blepharitis, topical therapy alone is insufficient. Systemic antibiotics should be continued until all
lesions are healed and systemic corticosteroids continued for 1-2 weeks after that.
17. Can a fungus cause blepharitis?
Microsporum spp. and Trichophyton spp. are the most common causes of mycotic blepharitis.
Affected patients usually demonstrate alopecia, crusting, and scaling. Lesions can be localized or
generalized. Diagnosis is usually by cytology and culture. Treatment is as for other areas of the
18. Which parasites commonly cause blepharitis?
Many different parasites can cause blepharitis as part of a generalized skin infection.
Sarcoptes scabiei vat. canis and felis can affect the eyelids as part of a generalized skin disease.
Clinical signs include intense pruritus with alopecia, erythema, scaling, and crusting. Self-trauma
often causes secondary ulceration. Diagnosis is as with other skin areas: skin scraping and
identification of the mite. Systemic therapy is generally preferred for the eyelids as it keeps
topical therapies from irritating the eye.
dogs, the lesions are often restricted to the face (Figure 47-5). Clinical signs include patches of
the mite. Localized infections can be self-limiting especially in very young animals. Again, be
sure that any topical therapy will not irritate the eye. Generalized infections usually occur in
immunosuppressed patients or patients with a T-cell deficiency. Therapy for the eyelids is as for
generalized skin infestation, with systemic therapy (e.g., ivermectin or milbemycin) usually
providing the best results.
19. Is eyelid neoplasia common in dogs?
Eyelid neoplasia is not uncommon especially in older dogs. The most common type of
Figure 47-5This young dog has periocular demodecosis involving both eyes
350
Blepharitis
from the meibomian gland.
eyelid neoplasm is a meibomian gland adenoma or adenocarcinoma (Figure 47-6). They usually
present as small tan to gray growths protruding from the eyelid margin. If the eyelid margin is
everted, the growth can usually be seen coming directly from the meibomian gland. Occasionall y,
the mass can be large enough to cause mild epiphora and conjunctival irritation. Other common
eyelid growths in dogs include papillomas, melanomas, and histiocytomas. In dogs, all of these
 masses typically demonstrate beni gn behavior.
20. Do malignant eyelid tumors also occur in dogs?
Malignant eyelid tumors do occur in dogs and most commonly include adenocarcinomas,
squamous cell carcinomas, mast cell tumors, and basal cell carcinomas. Depending on the type
of tumor and the amount of eyelid that is affected, therapy can include cryoablation, laser
ablation, surgery, or radiation therapy. Tumors involving 25% or less of the eyelid margin can
often be removed by a wedge resection without damaging eyelid function. Larger tumors usually
require more advanced blepharoplastic procedures such as an H-plasty or transpositional flap to
allow for adequate removal of the tumor with reasonable eyelid function after surgery.
21. Do cats develop different eyelid neoplasms than dogs?
In cats, eyelid neoplasia is much less common than in dogs and the tumors are much more
likely to be malignant (about 75%). One of the most common eyelid neoplasms in cats is
squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 47-7). It usually presents as a pink to white proliferative or
ulcerated mass. The patient may also demonstrate epiphora and conjunctivitis depending on the
size and severity of the mass. In some cases, the tumor can appear to be a chronic, non-healing
wound. Diagnosis is by cytology, aspirate, or biopsy, with a biopsy usually providing the most
accurate results. Other eyelid neoplasias in cats include basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, mast
 cell tumor, and fibroma/fibrosarcoma.
22. How do you treat eyelid neoplasia?
Treatment depends on the type of neoplasia. Benign lesions, like meibomian gland adenomas
in dogs, can be treated with removal and adjunctive cryotherapy. This can usually be performed
under local anesthesia and allows for effective therapy in an older patient. These growths can also
Blepharitis
351
Figure 47-7 This cat has a large squamous cell carcinoma of the lower eyelid.
be removed with a wedge resection of the eyelid margin but this requires general anesthesia and
may result in a defect in the eyelid margin.
Therapy for more advanced or malignant neoplasms, like squamous cell carcinoma, must
be more aggressive. If possible, surgical excision with 3-cm margins is best. Due to the proximity
of the globe, this is usually impossible without also removing the globe and potentially part
of the orbit. Therefore, early diagnosis is best if vision is going to be saved. Cryotherapy,
laser ablation, and radiation therapy can also be used in a patient with smaller lesions. As
with any malignant neoplasm, a full workup including bloodwork, thoracic radiographs, and
abdominal ultrasonography is necessary to search for any signs of metastasis.
23. What oral antibiotic has been associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
in dogs?
Oral sulfa drugs have been associated with the development of acute KCS in dogs. The
reaction is idiosyncratic and not associated with the overdosage of or extended use of sulfa drugs.
If possible, I would avoid the use of oral sulfa drugs especially in dog breeds that are prone to
KCS or dogs with low tear production. If sulfa drugs are required, a Schirmer tear test (STT)
should be performed before initiating therapy and performed at least weekly during therapy. If
the STT is low, another drug should be chosen. If the STT decreases dramatically during therapy
(<10 mm/min), the drug should be discontinued and tear replacement therapy begun. If the
glandular destruction is not discovered early, then permanent KCS is likely.
24. How do you diagnose uveodermatologic syndrome?
          
Affected dogs are often Arctic Circle breeds but this syndrome can be seen in any dog breed.
Affected dogs usually have depigmentation, ulceration, and alopecia of mucocutaneous junctions
including eyelid margins, lips, footpads, and scrotum (Figure 47-8). Many patients also exhibit
severe uveitis and, potentially, secondary glaucoma. The diagnosis can be confirmed by a skin
biopsy that demonstrates diffuse lichenoid interface dermatitis. Therapy includes immuno-
suppressive drugs including corticosteroids and azathioprine. Therapy often has to be chronic to
avoidarelapse.
352
Disorders of Pigmentation
Figure 47-8 Notice the depigmentation and ulceration of the eyelid margins, nose, and mucocutaneous
junction of this Akita with uveodermatologic syndrome.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bedford PGC: Diseases and surgery of the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary ophthalmotlogy, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1999, Lippincott williams & wilkins, pp 535-568
Gelatt KN: Diseases and surgery of the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN (ed): Essentiais of veterinary ophthatmology,
Philadelphia, 2000, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp 47-72.
Severin GA: Eyelids. In Severin GA (ed): Severin's ophthadmology notes, ed 3, Fort Colins, Colo, 1995, Veterinary
Ophthalmology Notes, pp 151-206.
Slatter D: Eyelids.In Slatter D (ed): Fundamentats of veterinary ophthadmology,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saumders, pp 147-203.
48. DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What factors control skin pigmentation?
Ultraviolet and visible light can be absorbed by skin components besides melanin, hemoglobin,
Or carotenoids. These include keratin, elastin, collagen, lipids, urocanic acids, and nucleic acids.
The color of the skin reflects the combination of multiple pigments: endogenous eumelanin
(black, brown) or pheomelanin (yellow, red), oxygenated hemoglobin present in capillaries (red),
reduced hemoglobin in venules (blue), exogenous carotenoids (yellows), oxygenated hemoglobin
in capillaries, and reduced hemoglobin in venules (blue).
Melanin, produced in melanocytes, makes the most significant contribution to skin color.
The color observed in the skin depends not only on the type of pigment produced (eumelanin vs.
352
Disorders of Pigmentation
Figure 47-8 Notice the depigmentation and ulceration of the eyelid margins, nose, and mucocutaneous
junction of this Akita with uveodermatologic syndrome.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bedford PGC: Diseases and surgery of the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary ophthalmotlogy, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1999, Lippincott williams & wilkins, pp 535-568
Gelatt KN: Diseases and surgery of the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN (ed): Essentiais of veterinary ophthatmology,
Philadelphia, 2000, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp 47-72.
Severin GA: Eyelids. In Severin GA (ed): Severin's ophthadmology notes, ed 3, Fort Colins, Colo, 1995, Veterinary
Ophthalmology Notes, pp 151-206.
Slatter D: Eyelids.In Slatter D (ed): Fundamentats of veterinary ophthadmology,ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saumders, pp 147-203.
48. DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
Karen L. Campbell, DVM, MS, DACVIM, DACVD
1. What factors control skin pigmentation?
Ultraviolet and visible light can be absorbed by skin components besides melanin, hemoglobin,
Or carotenoids. These include keratin, elastin, collagen, lipids, urocanic acids, and nucleic acids.
The color of the skin reflects the combination of multiple pigments: endogenous eumelanin
(black, brown) or pheomelanin (yellow, red), oxygenated hemoglobin present in capillaries (red),
reduced hemoglobin in venules (blue), exogenous carotenoids (yellows), oxygenated hemoglobin
in capillaries, and reduced hemoglobin in venules (blue).
Melanin, produced in melanocytes, makes the most significant contribution to skin color.
The color observed in the skin depends not only on the type of pigment produced (eumelanin vs.
Disorders ofPigmentation
353
pheomelanin), but also on the amount of melanin transferred to keratinocytes or contained in
within epidermal layers; and the thickness of various layers of the epidermis as well as the derimis.
2. What is the origin of cutaneous melanocytes?
Most melanocytes originate in the embryologic neural crest. Cells migrate from this site to
the uveal tract of the eye (iris, choroid), the stria vascularis of the ear (cochlear and vestibular
labyrinth), the leptomeninges of the central nervous system, the hair matrix, mucous membranes,
and the dermal-epidermal junction of the skin.
3. What are the differences between eumelanin and pheomelanin?
Eumelanin is produced by the oxidative polymerization of 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic
acid, a derivative of tyrosine. It is a solvent-insoluble, brown to black, semiquinone pigment
found in ellipsoidal melanosomes. Pheomelanin is an alkali-soluble, sulfur-containing, yellow to
red pigment found in spherical melanosomes. This pigment is also derived from tyrosine, but an
intermediate synthesis product, dopaquinone, combines with a sulfur-containing amino acid
(cysteine or glutathione) to make cysteinyl dopa, which is then oxidatively polymerized to make
pheomelanin. Mixtures of eumelanin and pheomelanin are common.
4. Where does pigment synthesis take place? How does pigment get into keratinocytes?
Pigment synthesis occurs within melanosomes. Melanosomes are cytoplasmic organelles
formed during melanocytosis. Mature melanosomes migrate to the dendritic processes of
melanocytes, where they are phagocytosed by keratinocytes; this process is termed cytocrinia.
5. What is an epidermal-melanin unit?
Each epidermal melanocyte secretes melanosomes into a limited number of keratinocytes,
forming an epidermal melanin unit. In humans, one melanocyte supplies melanosomes to 36
melanocytes, whereas one melanocyte transfers melanosomes to 10 to 20 keratinocytes in dogs.
6.  How does constitutive pigmentation differ from facultative pigmentation?
The amount and to a certain extent, the type, of melanin pigmentation synthesized in
accordance with the genetic predisposition of an individual is termed constitutive pigmentation.
Facultative pigmentation is inducible melanin pigmentation that reflects an individual's genetic
pigment production overlain by hormonal or nutritional effects or responses to ultraviolet
Tadiation.
Several gene loci control pigmentation, influencing the type and proportion of melanin
pigment, the size and shape of melanosomes, melanocyte morphology (specifically, dendrite
morphology), structure of tyrosinase, and regulation of copper transport (copper is a cofactor in
cause pigmentary abnormalities.
7. List the steps in melanin formation.
See Box 48-1.
8.What factors control pigmentation of the hair?
Hair pigmentation reflects polygenic controls of melanin formation, further influenced by
nutritional or hormonal factors. Pigmentation within a single hair can switch from eumelanin to
pheomelanin production. In mice, this is controlled by the agouti and extension gene products.
Interaction of c-melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) with the melanocortin l receptor
354
Disorders of Pigmentation
Box 48-1Steps in Melanin Formation
Step 1. Melanoblast migration from the neural crest or optic cup
Step 2.Differentiation of melanoblasts into melanocytes
Step 3.  Mitotic division of melanocytes
Step 4. Tyrosinase synthesis
Step 5. Melanosome matrix synthesis
Step 6. Tyrosinase transport
Step 7. Melanosome formation
Step 8.  Melanosome melanization
Step 9.Melanosome transfer from melanocyte to keratinocytes
Step 10. Melanosome degradation
expressed from day 4 to day 6 of the hair cycle; the end result is a black hair with a yellow tip.
Similar effects probably occur in dogs and cats.
Hair color in cats reflects the influences of at least 15 genes, several with more than two
alleles. The natural color of cats is tabby, the expression of which depends on at least three genes.
In solid colors, white is dominant, and masks other hair colors. The iris color is usually blue,
orange, or heterochromic; cochlear deafness can occur in solid white, blue-eyed cats because of
programmed cell death leading to degeneration of the hair cells in the inner ear after birth.
Dominant alleles are required on three genes to produce a solid black coat color: B (black), C (full
color expression), and D (dense coloration vs. dilute). Red and cream are produced by the orange
gene, O, which is sex-linked on X. A male with O on X will be red, females need to have O on
both Xs to be red,otherwise will be tortoiseshell. Cream colors reflect the action of the dilute
gene on the O locus. This gene leads to changes in the way melanin is distributed within hair
shafts. A mutation of the albino gene in Siamese, Himalayan, Balinese, and Burmese cats results
in tyrosinase that is inactivated at high temperatures (35-37° C). Pigment is produced in cooler
areas of the body (head, tail, extremities), but pi gment synthesis is inhi bited at higher temperatures
(trunk).
9. Do dogs express albinism? What is the difference between albinism and piebaldism?
 n            m
synthesis. Melanocyte numbers and morphologies are normal, but melanin is not produced in the
skin, hair, or mucous membranes. Unlike type I oculocutaneous albimism in humans, some inis
pigment is present in dogs, producing a blue eye color. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.
Tyrosinase deficiency in Chow Chows manifests as a transient depigmentation of the tongue,
mucous membranes of the mouth, and the hair. Color changes usually reverse within 4 months.
Piebaldism results from absence of melanocytes in patches on the body, leading to white
spots or patches. Inheritance is autos omal dominant.
10. What is a lentigo? Describe the clinical presentations of feline lentigo simplex and
canine lentigo simplex.
A lentigo is a benign proliferation of melanocytes. Lentigenes in both dogs and cats differ
from melanocytoma and malignant melanoma in signalment and lesion distribution, as well as
and are discussed in Chapter 51. The sharp circumscription and smooth texture of lentigenes
distinguishes them from acanthosis migricans and hyperpigmentation secondary to chronic
inflammation, both of which have vague, irregular borders and may have rough surfaces. Canine
macular melanosis is restricted to the skin of the scrotum, perianal region, groin, and tail. Unlike
Disorders ofPigmentation
355
Figure 48-1A 1-year-old domestic shorthair cat with lentigo simplex.
lentigenes, these macules develop rapidly in intact male dogs and should prompt examination for
testicular neoplasia. Histopathologic features will differentiate lentigo simplex from clinically
significant diseases.
 In feline lentigo simplex, orange, cream, or silver cats develop multiple, darkly pigmented,
well-circumscribed macules on the lips, gingiva, eyelids, and nasal planum before the age of
1 year (Figure 48-1). This melanocytic hyperplasia is restricted to the stratum basale of the
epidermis. Both size and number of lentigenes typically increase over time until middle age; some
macules reach 1 cm in diameter. Lentigenes are asymptomatic; thus, no treatment is required.
Canine lentigo simplex generally affects the ventral abdomen or nipples of older dogs.
Numbers of both melanocytes and melanosomes increase to forin multiple well-circumscribed
macules. Pigment is distributed throughout the epidermis, from the stratum basale to the stratum
corneum.
11. What is the pathogenesis of vitiligo? How is it treated?
Vitiligo is the progressive development of depigmentation of the hair (leukotrichia, poliosis),
skin (leukoderma), and mucocutaneous tissues; the disease reflects selective destruction of
melanocytes. In most individuals, depigmentation is symmetric, but can be patchy or generalized.
Asymmetric, unilateral presentations have been reported in humans. Predisposition to vitiligo in
humans is poly genic, controlled by at least three to four genes. A genetic predisposition to disease
development in dogs is suggested by increased incidence in Rottweilers (Figure 48-2), Doberman
Pinschers, Belgian Tervurens, Collies, German Shepherds, and Giant Schnauzers. In cats, female
 Siamese cats are predisposed. Disease development may reflect an underlying predisposition for
disease development. Vitiligo would be phenotypically manifest in individuals in whom an
underlying trigger for disease expression occurred. In humans, triggers include a stressful event 
with vitiligo developing 6 to 12 months following disease onset, melanocytoxic chemicals (e.g
hydroquinone or monobenzone derivatives), and other immune-mediated diseases (e.g., systemic
gravis).
Several different hypotheses have been proposed for the pathogenesis of vitiligo. Vitiligo is
associated with several immune-mediated disorders; antibodies directed against surface antigens
356
Disorders ofPigmentation
Figure 48-2Vitiligo affecting the head of a 2-year-old female spayed Rottweiler.
or antigens released by disruption of melanocytes have been identified in humans with vitiligo;
the antibodies do not necessarily target tyrosinase. These antibodies lead to melanocyte death in
vitro, are rare in individuals without vitiligo, and are sometimes identified in individuals before
the onset of clinical signs of vitiligo.
Melanin production generates a plethora of potentially cytotoxic intermediates. Synthesis
within melanosomes prevents cell damage under norimal circumstances. Release of these
compounds or disruption of a melanocyte's mechanisms to protect it from these compounds
would lead to pigment cell death. The occurrence of vitiligo in hyperpigmented skin supports this
hypothesis.
The neural hypothesis invokes a neurochemical mediator as a trigger to melanocyte
destruction. A benefit of this hypothesis is that it would explain segmental, unilateral mani-
festations of vitiligo that would not be produced from immune-mediated causes.
Some human patients with vitiligo experience psychological distress at the loss of pig-
mentation. Therapeutic management strategies include repigmentation or depigmentation to
make skin color more uniform. As clinical manifestations in dogs are cosmetic, no therapy for
vitiligo is required. Nevertheless, the observation of vitiligo in a canine or feline patient should
prompt a search for apparent triggers of depigmentation, including immune-mediated diseases
Disorders of Pigmentation
357
Figure 48-3 Uveodermatologic syndrome in a 2-year-old male castrated Akita; note the depigmentation
of skin and hair involving the periocular region and planum nasale.
such as systemic lupus erythematosus or endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism, diabetes
mellitus, or hypoadrenocorticism. Vitiligo can also be a cutaneous manifestation of underlying
neoplasia.
12. What is the "Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome?"
Clinical signs of the Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, or uveoderimatologic syndrome,
include vitiligo, poliosis (leukotrichia), alopecia, acute anterior uveitis (iriditis, choroiditis, cyclitis),
dysacusis, or hearing loss; humans also commonly have aseptic meningitis. This constellation of
signs results from melanocyte death in the skin and hair matrix, uveal tract, stria vascularis of the
ear, and the leptomeninges. Poliosis and cutaneous depigmentation in dogs usually occurs in
the eyelids, nasal planum, lips, scrotum, footpads; depigmentation may become generalized
(Figures 48-3 and 48-4). Ocular signs are severe; patients may present with acute blindness or
chronic uveitis. Affected breeds include the Akita, Samoyed, Golden Retriever, Irish Setter,
Siberian Husky, Saint Bernard, Australian Sheepdog, Shetland Sheepdog, and many others. Pro-
posed pathogenesis in humans is the development of cell-mediated or autoimmune attack against
melanocytes. Aggressive glucocorticoid or other immunosuppressive therapy is required for
ocular manifestations of this disease to prevent blindness. Cutaneous signs are cosmetic.
13. What are the canine breeds affected with color mutant alopecia? How is this disease
diagnosed and how are affected dogs managed?
358
Disorders of Pigmentation
Figure 48-4 Generalized poliosis (leukotrichia) in a Shetland Sheepdog associated with uveoder-
matologic syndrome.
Doberman Pinschers, Dachshunds, Chow Chows, Great Danes, Whippets, Irish Setters, Italian
Greyhounds, Standard Poodles, Miniature Pinschers, Yorkshire and Silky Terriers, Chihuahuas,
Boston Terriers, Salukis, Newfoundlands, Shetland Sheepdogs, Schipperkes, Bernese Mountain
Dogs, and mixed breeds. Although color dilutions occur in Weimaraners, associated hair loss
does not occur.
Hair color in several canine breeds can be modified by the action of a dilution gene at the
D locus; other loci may be involved as well. Black is diluted to blue, and brown is diluted to fawn
The genetic mutation affects the storage and transfer of melanosomes; clinical signs appear
between the ages of 6 months to 3 years. The result is the production of irregularly shaped
macromelanosomes, which are unevenly distributed, or clumped, within the hair shaft. Melanin
amounts are actually normal to increased in the color-dilute hairs; their uneven distribution is
responsible for the lighter hair color. The disease is diagnosed based on breed, coat color, and
finding hair shafts with macromelanosomes and fractured hairs on trichograms or skin biopsy
specimens.
Macromelanosomes disrupt the integrity of the hair shaft, with resulting hair breakage and
loss. This is exacerbated by rough grooming. Eventually, hair follicles become dilated, cystic, and
inactive. Bacterial folliculitis is common. The abnormal distribution and size of melanosomes is
visible microscopically and is diagnostic. Therapeutic management relies on slowing hair loss by
using only gentle shampoos and minimal brushing. Antibiotics can be used to treat secondary
bacterial py odermas.
14. What clinical abnormalities characterize Chediak-Higashi syndrome in cats?
Chediak-Higashi syndrome occurs in blue-smoke Persians with yellow eyes; inheritance is
autosomal recessive. Melanosome formation and degradation are abnormal; clumping macro-
DisordersofPigmentation
359
melanosomes result. Concurrent clinical signs may reflect abnormal production of other organelles
Or cell membranes. Granules are enlarged in neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils because of
defective granule fusion. Leukocytes contain abnormal lysosomes, are fragile, and may rupture
spontaneously. Chemotactive responsiveness, intracellular killing, and motility are reduced. The
ability of natural killer cells to combat viruses or tumors is greatly reduced. The combination of
reduced function of leukocytes, polymorphonuclear cells, and natural killer cells results in
profound immune deficiency and an increased susceptibility to infection. Cataract formation
causes platelet dysfunction despite normal platelet counts; affected cats develop hematomas at
injection sites and can die from acute hemorrhage. No treatment is available.
15. What is canine cyclic hematopoiesis? How is it treated?
Canine cyclic hematopoiesis, or gray Collie syndrome, is a lethal autosomal recessive
disorder in Collies. Neutrophil and platelet numbers wax and wane in a regular cycle. Every 11
to 12 days, neutrophil numbers drop for a duration of about 3 days. Cell numbers then become
elevated for about 7 days. Myeloperoxidase activity is reduced in neutrophils in all phases of the
cycle. The defect probably stems from abnormal maturation of neutrophil precursors in the bone
marrow. Affected puppies are uniformly silver gray (Figure 48-5), in contrast to the coloration of
blue merle Collies. Puppies fail to thrive, healing is delayed, and bouts of lymphadenitis, gastro-
enteri tis, respiratory infections, gingivitis, and arthralgia are frequent. Epistaxis and other bleeding
disorders are common.
Antibiotics are used to control recurrent infections. Administration of endotoxin, lithium
carbonate and recombinant human colony-stimulating factor can transiently stimulate the bone
marrow and stabilize platelet and neutrophil numbers, although the use of these agents is limited
by their toxicity and cost. The prognosis is poor; most patients die by the age of 3 years. Bone
marrow transplantation can be curative
Figure 48-5 Gray Collie. This coat color is a marker for cyclic hematopoiesis
360
Disorders of Pigmentation
16. Are there any additional genetic causes of pigmentary abnormalities?
Yes, see Table 48-1.
Table 48-1
Additional Genetic Causes of Pigmentary Abnormalities
OTHER
CUTANEOUS
CLINICAL
ABNORMALITY
SPECIES
BREEDS
SIGNS
SIGNS
COMMENTS
Acromelanism
Feline
Siamese
Hair over cool
None
Autosomal
 Himalayan
parts of body
recessive
Balinese
(face,
Burmese
extremities,
tail) darker
than that over
warmer areas
(trunk)
Urticaria
Feline
Sphinx
Pruritic,
No systemic
Diffuse
pigmentosa
maculopapular
involve-
infiltration
in generalized,
ment
of mast 
bilaterally
cells into
symmetric
 dermis and
distribution;
sub-
juvenile onset
cutaneous
tissues
Periocular
Feline
Siamese
Bilateral
Triggered
More common
depigmen-
periocular
by
in females
tation
depigmentation
systemic
than in
disease,
males
pregnancy.
Resolves
dietary
within
deficiency
two hair
cycles
Aguirre's
Feline
Siamese
Unilatera]
Horner's
disease
 periocular
syndrome,
depigmentation 
uveitis,
 or upper
respiratory
tract
infections
Premature
Canine
Golden
 Graying of the hair
Abnormality
Age-
graying
Retriever
 of the muzz]e
in mitotic
associated
German
and chin at 
division of 
graying
 Shepherd
a young age
melanocytes
also
Labrador
reflects
Retriever
decreased
 lrish Setter
mitotic
division of
melanocytes
ldiopathic graying  Canine
Newfound-
 Depigmentation 
Etiology
Distinguish
land
 starting on the
undeter-
from
nose, lips,
mined.
premature
eyelids; gray
 graying by
roan,rather
roan
than uniformly
 pattern,
gray
distribution
Occurs in young
 dogs, progressive
Disorders of Pigmentation
361
Table 48-1
Additional Genetic Causes of Pigmentary Abnormalities—Cont'd
OTHER
CUTANEOUS
CLINICAL
ABNORMALITY SPECIES
BREEDS
SIGNS
SIGNS
COMMENTS
Waardenburg-
Canine
Bull Terrier
Blue or
Defect in
No
Klein
Sealyham
heterochromic
mi gration
melanocytes
syndrome
Terrier
irises, white 
and
present in
Dalmatian
skin and hair,
differen-
affected
hearing loss
tiation of
skin;auto-
melano-
somal
blasts into
dominant
melanocytes
with
incomplete
 penetrance
Patchy
Canine
Labrador
Widespread
Etiology
Permanent
leukotrichia
 Retriever
 development 
undeter-
depig-
 of patches of
mined
mentation
light-colored
 of hairs.
hairs in 
Transient
chocolate or
manj-
black individuals
festation
reported in
one litter of
chocolate
Labradors
17. What is the pathogenesis of pigmentary changes associated with endocrinopathies?
Hyperpigmentation secondary to endocrinopathy can occur in dogs with hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, adrenal sex hormone abnormalities, and increased levels
of estrogen in patients with Sertoli cell tumors. Melanogenesis is stimulated by the effects of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) on melanocytes; other hormones may have similar effects.
Concurrent cutaneous infection augments endocrine-associated hyperpigmentation. Endocrine-
 associated alopecia contributes to facultative hyperpigmentation stimulated by ultraviolet li ght.
18. What diseases cause nasal depigmentation?
·Vitiligo
·U veodermatologic syndrome
· Drug reaction
·
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Epitheliotropic T-cell lymphoma
· Nasal solar dermatitis
· Immune-mediated diseases (systemic or discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus
or erythematosus)
 Increased licking or nasal discharge
· Breed-related seasonal changes-"Dudley nose" and "snow nose"
19. What is the difference between “Dudley nose” and “snow nose"?
 Dudley nose is a progressive condition and is probably a form of vitili go. It occurs in Afghan
Hounds, Doberman Pinschers, white German Shepherds, Golden Retrievers, Irish Setters, and
Pointers. Complete depigmentation of the nasal planum is the only clinical sign. Spontaneous
Temission and repigmentation has occurred.
362
Disorders ofPigmentation
 In contrast, "snow nose" is a cyclic hypopigmentation of the nasal planum of Bernese
Mountain Dogs, Golden Retrievers, Labrador Retrievers, and Siberian Huskies that occurs during
the winter months.
20. Describe the process of taking nasal biopsies.
 Nasal biopsies should be taken under general anesthesia; the nasal planum is sensitive and
highly vascular. Areas of partial depigmentation or hypopigmentation characterized by gray
coloration with a loss of the normal cobblestone texture should be biopsied. Ulcerated, scarred,
or completely depigmented sites should be avoided.
21. What is acanthosis nigricans?
Acanthosis migricans is characterized by bilateral hyperpigmentation and lichenification of
the axillary skin. Prevalence is highest in Dachshunds (Figure 48-6). A similar condition is also
observed in other breeds, usually secondary to a cutaneous infection, intertriginous friction,
ment depends on identification and treatment of any underlying predisposing or perpetuating
22. What causes hyperpigmentation after skin infections or hair loss?
 Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation reflects increases in cytokine amounts and activity
following infection or inflammation. Several cytokines, among them arachidonic acid, prosta-
glandin (PG) Ez, and PGDz, increase melanocyte proliferation. Melanocyte dendricity is
enhanced by PGEz, leukotriene (LT) C4, LTD4, and thromboxane 3 (TX3). Arachidonic acid, TX3,
LTD4, and LTC4 enhance the activity of tyrosinase. Melanocyte production is stimulated by LTD4
DisordersofPigmentation
363
Figure 48-7 Postinflammatory alopecia in the axilla of a West Highland White Terrier with chronic
allergies and Malass ezia dermatitis.
these cytokines inhibit melanogenesis. Thus, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or hypo-
pigmentation reflects the cytokine environment.
 Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is quite common (Figure 48-7). Its appearance is
similar to that of endocrine-associated hyperpigmentation. Both are diffuse, reticular, and poorly
circumscribed. Clinical history, cytology, and diagnostic tests for endocrinopathy will dif-
ferentiate the disorders, although they are not mutually exclusive. Hyperpi gmentation in a hypo-
thyroid dog with bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia probably reflects postinflammatory as well as
endocrine-related effects.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alhaidari Z, Olivry T, Ortonne J-P: Melanocytogenesis and melanogenesis: genetic regulation and comparative
clinical diseases, Vet Dermatot 10:3-16, 1999.
Bologna JL, Nordlund J, Ortonne J-P: Genetic hypomelanoses: disorders characterized by acquired depigmentation.
In: The pigmentary system, Oxford, 1998, Oxford University Press, pp 513-551.
Jimbow K, Quevedo WC Jr, Prota G, et al: Biology of melanocytes. In Freedburg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al:
dermatotogy in generat medicine,ed5, New York, 1999,McGraw-Hill,pp 192-220.
King RA, Townsend D, Oetting W, et al: Temperature-sensitive tyrosinase associated with peripheral pigmentation
in oculocutaneous albinism, / Clin lvest 87:1046-1053, 1991.
Mosher DB, Fitzpatrick TB, Ortonne J-P, et al: Nomal skin color and general considerations of pigmentary
disorders. In Freedburg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al: Dermatology in generat medicine, ed 5. New York, 1999,
McGraw -Hill, pp 936-944.
Nordlund JJ, Ortonne J-P: The nommal color of human skin. In Nordlund J, Boissy RE, Hearing VJ et al: The
pigmentary system, Oxford, 1998, Oxford University Press, pp 475-487.
Ortonne J-P, Nordlund JJ: Mechanisms that cause abnomal skin color. In Nordlund J, Boissy RE, Hearing VJ, et
al: The pigmentary system, Oxford, 1998, Oxford University Press, pp 489-502.
Ortonne J-P, Prota G: Hair melanins and hair color: ultrastructural and biochemical aspects, J lrvest Dermatot
101:82S-89S, 1993.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2001,
WBSaunders.
Voisey J, Van Daal A: Agouti: from mouse to man, from skin to fat, Pigment Celt Res 15:10-18, 2002.
364
Diseases of the Ear
49. DISEASES OF THE EAR
John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
1. The gross anatomy of the ear can be divided into five structural components; name the
five components and briefly describe anatomic features and boundaries of each
(Figure 49-1).
Pinna
The pinna, or auricle, together with the acoustic meatus, forms the external ear. In dogs there
is considerable variation in the shape and carriage of the pinna as the result of selective breeding
for appearance and functional characteristics. Generally, the pinna is a funnel-shaped appendage
that serves to focus sound vibrations toward the external canal. The pinna consists of a broad,
leaf-shaped extension of auricular cartilage called the scapha. This sheet of cartilage is covered
on both sides by normal dermis and epidermis. At the proximal region of the pinna, the cartilage
begins to scroll into a concave shape that is continuous with the vertical ear canal. The transition
Pinna
Auricular cartilage
Vertical canal
Auditory ossicles
Oval window
Round window
Annular cartilage
Horizontal canal
Tympanic membrane
Eustachian
Cochlearpromontory
tube
Tympanic bulla
Figure 49-1Schematic drawing of components of the canine ear.
DiseasesoftheEar
365
from pinna to vertical ear canal occurs at the level of the anthelix, a cartilage prominence on the
medial side of the canal, and the tragus, a prominence on the lateral side of the canal.
ExternalEar Canal
The external canal, also known as the external acoustic meatus, is an epithelial-lined,
cartilage tube that conducts sound vibrations to the tympanic membrane. Two telescoping
cartilage tubes define the canal; the proximal end of the scrolled auricular cartilage telescopes
over the narrower annular cartilage. The annular cartilage is attached at the distal end to the
auricular cartilage and at the proximal end to the skull by ligaments. The dimension of the canal
varies from 5 to 10 cm in length and from 4 to 5 mm in diameter. In the dog and cat the canal
contains an approximately 75-degree bend, which redirects the lumen horizontally and medially;
this bend divides the “"vertical canal" from the “"horizontal canal." The horizontal canal terminates
at the tympanic membrane. The tympanic membrane is recessed within the skull; therefore, the
most proximal portion of the horizontal canal is actually encompassed by bone rather than
cartilage.
Tympanic Membrane
positioned at an angle of up to 45 degrees to the long axis of the horizontal canal, such that the
dorsal aspect is closer in view than the ventral portion. In cats, the membrane is perpendicular to
the axis of the canal.
Middle Ear
The middle ear consists of the air-filled tympanic cavity, auditory ossicles, auditory
skull and is lined by ciliated, respiratory epithelium. This gourd-shaped cavity can be divided into
three anatomic compartments: (1) the narrow cavity, located dorsal to the tympanic membrane,
contains the auditory ossicles, the oval window, and the round window; (2) the middle portion
lies just ventral to the round window and is defined by the tympanic membrane on one side and
the bony protuberance of the cochlear promontory; and (3) the large, ovoid tympanic bulla, which
is ventral to the cochlear promontory and opening of the auditory tube.
InnerEar
The endolymph- and perilymph-filled inner ear is separated from the middle ear by two
membrane-covered openings (the round and oval windows). This bony labyrinth contains the
cochlea, vesti bule, and semicircular canals.
 2. Describe the muscles, sensory and motor innervation, and vasculature associated with
the canine pinna.
Ear movement is achieved by three sets of muscles located rostral, ventral, and caudal to the
pinna. Afferent branches of the trigeminal, facial, vagus, and second cervical nerve supply
sensory innervation; motor function is supplied by the facial nerve. Branches of the external
carotid and maxillary arteries provide a generous blood supply to the pinna. The majority of
blood arrives on the convex surface via the caudal auricular artery, which divides into three
branches: lateral, intermediate, and medial. The concave surface receives blood from arterioles
that traverse numerous small holes in the auricular cartilage or that pass around the helical
margins. Venous drainage of the pinna occurs via the internal maxillary vein.
3. Describe the epithelial lining of the external ear canal (external auditory meatus).
The external canal is lined by normal stratified epidermis and dermis similar to normal skin
elsewhere on the body. The dermis contains hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and modified
366
Diseases ofthe Ear
apocrine glands, known as ceruminous glands. In general the hair follicles and adnexal units are
smaller and less dense than their counterparts elsewhere. Follicular units are present along the
entire length of the canal, all the way to the junction with the tympanic membrane.
4.What glandular tissue produces cerumen?
Cerumen is formed by a combination of secretions from both the sebaceous and ceruminous
glands. Sebaceous secretions are thicker and contain primarily neutral lipids, while ceruminous
glands produce a thinner secretion containing phospholipids and mucopolysaccharides.
5. Name three beneficial functions of cerumen.
1. The cerumen coating the external canal protects the epithelial lining and the tympamic
membrane by trapping debris, parasites, and microorganisms.
 2. Cerumen also contains immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, and IgM) contributing to passive
local immunity. IgG is the predominant class found in normal and diseased ears; a
substantial increase in cerumen IgG occurs during otitis externa.
3. Cerumen covering keeps the tympanum moist and pliable by protecting this thin
membrane from desiccation.
6. How are debris and cerumen eliminated from the normal ear canal?
The stratified squamous epithelium lining the external canal slowly migrates laterally from
the deep canal to the opening of the ear canal. The keratinized stratum corneum, cerumen, and any
trapped debris from the canal is dispersed onto the pinna, where it can fall away harmlessly. This
of epithelial migration due to rupture of the tympanic membrane or chronic inflammation, injury
or scarring of the epithelial lining results in chronic accumulation of debris, cerumen, and
desquamated keratinocytes. Disruption of epithelial migration is a key concept in understanding
progression of chronic otitis.
7. The tympanic membrane can be divided into two discrete regions, the pars flaccida and
region.
of the tympanum. This tissue becomes edematous in response to inflammation and appears
for the pars tensa (Figure 49-2).
The pars tensa is the thin, translucent membrane that stretches across the opening to the
tympanic cavity. The membrane is attached to a fibrocartilaginous ring, which is attached to
the osseous ring arising directly from the skull. The manubrium of the malleus (the first of the
auditory ossicles) is embedded in the tough fibrous middle layer of the pars tensa; this structure
is visible on otoscopy as a white, hooked, finger-like projection coming down from the dorsal
junction with the pars flaccida, pointing rostrally. Small blood vessels and striations in the pars
tensa can be seen radiating from the manubrium (Figure 49-3). This region is also the location
for the germinal epithelium, from which perforations will heal. Damage to the manubrium may
  n   d         
vibrations funneled by the pinna and the external canal to the auditory ossicles.
8. On histologic cross-section, the pars tensa has four distinct layers. What are the four
layers? What are the unique features of these layers?
Starting from the external aspect the first layer encountered is a thin, epidermis-like,
stratified squamous epithelium, which is only a few layers thick. This layer is continuous with the
epithelial lining of the external canal.
DiseasesoftheEar
367
Figure 49-2
photograph because of shadowing from the pars flaccida and the 45-degree angle away from canal.
Figure 49-3 Video-otoscopic view of normal pars tensa in a dog. Note the clearly visible manubrium of
the malleus, fine vasculature of the germinal epithelium, and striations in the membrane. The cochlear
prormontory is visible through the tympanum.
368
Diseases of the Ear
Next is a layer of fibroblasts, fine nerves, and blood vessels analogous to and continuous
is the absence of hair follicles and glandular structures.
The third and thickest layer consists of dense fibers connecting to the fibrocartilaginous ring
these fibers optimizes transmission of vibrations.
The deepest layer is continuous with the respiratory mucosal epithelium that lines the
middle ear. This portion consists of a single layer of respiratory epithelium overlying a thin
lamina propria and contains no goblet cells or cilia. The epithelium is more squamous centrally,
becoming more cuboidal as it radiates outward, until it becomes columnar at the margins with the
nomal mucosa.
9. Name the three auditory ossicles found within the tympanic cavity.
The auditory ossicles are the malleus, incus, and stapes. Distally the manubrium of the
malleus is embedded in the pars tensa and proximally it articulates with the incus. The incus, in
turn, articulates with the stapes, which is attached to the oval (vestibular) window. The tensor
tympani is a muscular attachment to the ossicles that contracts in response to sudden, intense
sound vibrations.
10. There are four openings into the bony chamber of the tympanic cavity. What are they
and where do they lead?
openings and is covered by the tympanic membrane.
 2. The oval (vestibular) window is a membrane-covered opening separating the air-filled
tympanic cavity from the inner ear. Vibrations of the stapes are transmitted across this
membrane to the endolymph of the vestibule.
3. The round (cochlear) window is located ventral to the oval window, just dorsal to the
dissipated across this membrane from the inner ear into the tympanic bulla
4. The opening from the auditory tube is not covered by a membrane. This tube connects
the tympanic cavity with the nasopharynx, permitting movement of air.
11. What anatomic difference between dogs and cats increases the risk of iatrogenic
Horner's syndrome following ear flushing and bulla osteotomy in the cat?
 In the feline tympanic cavity there is a bony septum that separates the dorsal chambers
from the larger ventral chamber. There are prominent postganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers
running in the epithelium near this septum. Overaggressive ear flushing or intentional disruption
of the septum during bulla osteotomy may damage these nerve fibers, resulting in Horner's
syndrome (myosis, ptosis, and prolapse of the third eyelid). In most cases, this is a temporary
phenomenon.
12. How common is otitis externa in small animal practice?
Otitis externa is one of the most common conditions seen in small animal practice. An
estimated 5-20% of canine patients and 2-6% of feline patients experience clinically significant
otitis externa during their lifetime. A precise estimate of prevalence is difficult to determine due
for the challenge of defining diagnostic criteria is that otitis externa is a clinical sign rather than
a primary disease. Just as coughing can be a clinical sign of heart disease, tracheal collapse,
neoplasia, pneumonia, etc., otitis externa is a clinical manifestation of many diverse underlying
conditions.
Diseases of the Ear
369
13. In the conceptual approach to the pathogenesis of ear disease, proposed by August
(1988), there are three general categories: predisposing conditions, primary causes,
 and perpetuating factors. Define each category and give examples for each.
Predisposing conditions alone do not cause ear disease, but rather may make affected
individuals more susceptible to developing otitis externa or more likely to have more severe
disease when afflicted by primary causes.
Primary causes are conditions that directly resuit in the development of clinical disease in
otherwise normal individuals
Perpetuating factors are conditions that result from the primary causes or complications of
active ear disease that once established canmaintain,worsen,or prevent resolution even after the
primary cause has been resolved.
See Table 49-1 for examples of each category. Figure 49-4 illustrates severe proliferative
changes of the external ear canal.
Table 49-1 
Examples of Conditions Affecting Otic Health in Dogs and Cats
PREDISPOSING
PRIMARY CAUSES
PERPETUATING FACTORS
CONDITIONS
Conformation
Parasites
Bacteria
Stenotic canals
Foreign objects
Yeast
Pendulous pinna
Hypersensitivity disorders
Progressive pathologic changes
Excessive hair
Keratinization disorders
Failure of epithelial migration
 Increased moisture
Endocrinopathies
Edema
Swimming
Immune-mediated skin disease
 Glandular hyperplasia
 Cleaning with water
Neoplasia
Folding
 Inappropriate treatment
Trauma
Stenosis
Irri tants
Viral
Fibrosis
Overaggressive hair
Miscellaneous conditions
Ossification
plucking
Otitis media
Trauma from cotton
Cholesteatoma
swabs
Immune suppression
from systemic
disease or therapy
14. Explain how a low burden of Otodectes cynotis (two to three mites) could result in
severe bilateral disease in a canine or feline patient.
Several studies have shown that O. cynotis can induce both type I and type Ill hyper-
sensitivity reactions in veterinary patients. Type I hypersensitivity reactions result from antigen
specific IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation; vasoactive peptides released from mast cell
granules result in edema and inflammation of the external ear canal. Type Ill, or Arthus-type,
reactions occur when mite antigen and host antibody form immune complexes in the dermal
vessels or along the epidermal-dermal junction. Immune complex deposition triggers activation
of the complement cascade. The subsequent cytokine- and cell-mediated immune response
results in intense local inflammation, pruritus, and pain. Even a very low number of mites can
trigger these reactions (Figure 49-5).
15. How might Otodectes cynotis infections cause ongoing disease even after adult mites
within the ear canal are eliminated?
TreatmentFailureorReinfestation
A common problem with O. cynotis is inadequate treatment of all stages, all locations, and
370
DiseasesoftheEar
Figure 49-4Proliferative otitis externa in a dog as a result of underlying atopy.
Figure 49-5Photomicrograph of adult Otodectes cynotis.
all in-contact animals. Larval and adult stages are readily susceptible to most short-acting, topical
products (pyrethrins, organophosphates, or occlusive "smothering"” agents); however, these
agents are not ovicidal, and therefore, reinfestation may occur from newly hatched eggs. Adult
mites feed primarily on the epidermal debris and fluids of the external ear canal, but the mites
may migrate elsewhere on the host body, most commonly the dorsal neck and tail head. Local
treatments of the ear canal should be combined with an effective topical spray, foam, bath, or dip
Diseases ofthe Ear
371
highly contagious between animals. Because clinical signs are variable between individuals, all
dogs and cats in regular contact with the affected individual must be treated, even if they are
asymptomatic. Failure to recognize and treat asymptomatic carriers will reliably result in
LossofEpithelial Migration
Recurrent or severe inflammation may cause extensive damage to the epithelium of the
external ear canal, resulting in disruption of orderly epithelial migration. Instead of centripetal
after effective treatment for the ear mites, there can be ongoing failure of the normal clearance
mechanism. Debris consisting of keratin, cerumen, hair, and trapped material accumulate on the
ventral floor of the horizontal canal, forming a ceruminolith. Ceruminoliths and diffuse debris act
as a foreign obstruction or serve as a focus for bacterial and yeast overgrowth. Other changes
associated with chronic otitis externa, such as stenosis, fibrosis, and mineralization, may permanently
alter the external canal, perpetuating clinical disease in the absence of the primary cause.
OtitisMedia
During the primary infestation, secondary bacterial infection of the external canal may
weaken the tympanic membrane's normal barrier function, permitting infection to extend to the
tympanic cavity. After res olution of the primary infestation, failure to recognize and manage otitis
media results in recurrent bacterial infection and perpetuation of clinical signs of otitis externa.
16. What is the most common ear mite of rabbits?
Psoroptescunicufi
17. What primary conditions result in abnormal or excessive accumulation of cerumen
within theexternalear canal?
·Hypersensitivity reactions
·Sex-hormone imbalance
·Primary keratinization defects
·Otodectes cynotis
·Hypothyroidism
18. Discuss the role of atopy in the pathogenesis of otitis externa.
An estimated 10% of the canine population is affected by atopic dermatitis; 40-80% of these
animals exhibit otitis externa as part of their clinical disease. In 3-5% of animals with atopy, otitis
completely understood, but involve both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors, which
result in an adverse immunologic response to otherwise harmless environmental allergens. In the
ear canal, early pathologic changes include alteration of epidermal barrier function, changes in
cerumen composition, and narrowing of the canal lumen due to dermal edema and glandular
  s  o d s y   s 
toxins ex acerbating local inflammation, while narrowing of the canal and occlusion with ceruminous
primary atopic disease and secondary infection, resulting in progressive worsening of clinical
otitis externa. Secondary infections can perpetuate signs year-round even if the initial allergen
trigger is seasonal. In some cases, chronic allergen, bacterial, and yeast stimulation results in
of the canal lumen.
19. In addition to atopy, what other hypersensitivity reactions are considered primary
causes for otitis externa?
Although the immunologic mechanisms are not well understood, adverse food reactions
372
Diseases ofthe Ear
(food allergies or food intolerance) can result in similar clinical presentations to that seen in
atopic patients. In these cases, the antigemic trigger is dietary rather than environmental. Food
reactions are less common in the general population than atopy, but because ear disease is seen
in 80% of dogs and cats with food reactions, it is considered a common primary cause of chronic
otitis and should never be overlooked in the diagnostic approach to patients with clinically
significant oti tis ex terna.
Contact hypersensitivities are type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity reactions to topically
applied substances. In the case of otitis, contact reactions are rare. When present, reactions are
most commonly associated with topically applied medications used to treat otitis externa
failure when used on subsequent episodes. The owner or veterinarian may also notice extension
of inflammation to involve the pinna or other areas the medication is used. Neomycin is the most
commonly recognized cause of contact dermatitis, but other materials may also trigger reactions,
including silver sulfadiazine, other antibiotics, propylene glycol, plant extracts, topical anesthetics,
and topical insecticides. Definitive diagnosis can only be made by resolution with discontinuation
of the suspected agent and recurrence following provocative challenge. True contact hyper-
sensitivity and contact irritant reactions are difficult to differentiate, but both should respond to
removal of the inciting medication.
 20. Name a viral cause of otitis media in dogs.
Otitis media and otitis externa have been associated with the canine distemper virus. The
virus targets rapidly dividing epithelium of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract. Ascending
secondary bacterial infection from the nasopharynx or primary viral infection of the respiratory
and debilitation of the patient may also contribute to disease.
21. What are nasopharyngeal polyps and how do they develop?
Nasopharyngeal polyps are an uncommon disorder in cats characterized by the development
of a fleshy benign mass of fibrous connective tissue most often covered by ciliated respiratory
epithelium. Most often polyps originate from the lining of the tympanic cavity, but may also
develop from the lining of the eustachian tube or the nasopharynx. The etiopathogenesis of
injury to the mucosal surface by ascending viral upper respiratory infection, O. synotis extending
from the external canal, or other inflammatory trigger. Benign inflammatory polyps originating
from the tympanic cavity may also occur in dogs.
 22. Describe the clinical presentation of nasopharyngeal polyps in the cat.
Polyps are most commonly observed in young cats; there is no reported gender or breed
predilection. If the polyp extends from the middle ear into the nasopharynx, affected cats
commonly present for chronic signs of upper respiratory disease, including nasal discharge,
sneezing, and stertorous respirations. Other presenting complaints include dysphagia and recurrent
bouts of gagging. In some patients the polyp ruptures the tympanic membrane and protrudes into
deafness).
23. How are nasopharyngeal polyps treated in cats? What potential complications should
be discussed before treatment?
The location of the polyp and extent of involvement should be determined by otoscopy and
Diseases of the Ear
373
Figure 49-6 Video-otoscopic view of nasopharyngeal polyp in a cat.
anesthesia by gently retracting the soft palate with an atraumatic hook or tissue forceps. In some
cases radiographic imaging or computed tomography is necessary before surgery to determine
which bulla is involved. Ventral bulla osteotomy with curettage of the epithelial lining is the best
method for long-term management, because regrowth occurs frequently following removal by
traction alone.
in the epithelial lining of the tympanic cavity (see Question 1l) during curettage of the bulla,
affecting approximately 80-95% of surgical patients. The resultant Horner's syndrome is usually
temporary. In one study, 19 of 22 cats with this complication returned to normal in less than
1 month; 2 cases resolved in 2 months and 18 months; one case was 1ost to follow-up. Regrowth
of the polyp is another troublesome complication, which may occur in up to 50% of cats that do
not receive a bulla osteotomy at the time of removal. Recurrence decreases to approximately 5%
in cats with bulla osteotomy. Other potential complications include damage to the auditory
ossicles, vestibular dysfunction, deafness, and injury to the hypoglossal nerve, facial nerve, or
vascular structures in the soft tissue adjacent to the bulla during the approach.
 24. What is the most common malignant neoplasm associated with otitis externa in dogs
and cats? Describe the biologic behavior of the tumor.
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma is the most common malignancy of the external ear
canal in both species (Figure 49-7). Patients typically present for unilateral otitis externa with
purulent or hemorrhagic discharge. Secondary bacterial infections are common. In some cases,
tumors arise in patients suffering from long-standing bilateral otitis externa from other causes,
suggesting that chronic inflammation and cerumen gland hyperplasia are risk factors for
malignant transformation. Most tumors appear as iregular, friable, ulcerative masses, arising
from either the vertical or horizontal ear canal; however, malignant tumors may also mimic the
smooth, nodular appearance of the more common, benign masses such as polyps or ceruminous
gland adenomas (Figure 49-8).
374
DiseasesoftheEar
Figure 49-7Video-otoscopic view of ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma in a dog.
Figure 49-8 Video-otoscopic view of ceruminous gland adenoma in a cat.
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma tends to be locally invasive. Fortunately, in most cases,
the auricular cartilage acts as a termporary physical barrier, perimitting surgical intervention and
complete excision by total ear canal ablation with lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO). Without
treatment, the tumor will eventually breach the auricular cartilage and extend into the parotid
complete surgical excision is unlikely
In one study of 22 cats with ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma, patients with TECA/LBO
had a 42-month median disease-free interval and a 75% survival at 1 year. Only 25% of these cats
Diseases of the Ear
375
had recurrence of disease. In contrast, cats with lateral ear canal resection alone had a recurrence
rate of 66.7% and only 33.3% survival at 1 year; the median disease-free interval was 10 months.
This study clearly elucidates the advantages of aggressive surgical intervention in the
management of ear canal tumors.
Veterinarians and owners should also be aware that metastasis can occur to regional lymph
nodes, lungs, and viscera; however, reports of the frequency of metastatic disease vary
significantly.
25. List the other benign and malignant neoplastic conditions of the ear that occur in dogs
and cats.
In general, masses in cats are more frequently malignant than benign, and masses in dogs
are more frequently benign than malignant. However, clinical decisions should be made based on
histopathologic diagnosis in all cases (Table 49-2).
Table 49-21
Benign and Malignant Ear Conditions in Dogs and Cats
BENIGN
MALIGNANT
Dog
Fibrous polyp
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
 Papilloma
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Sebaceous gland adenoma
Round cell tumor
Basal cell tumor
Malignant melanoma
 Ceruminous gland adenoma
Hemangiosarcoma
Histiocytoma
Mast cell tumor
Plasmacytoma
Fibrosarcoma
Carcinoma of undetermined origin
Sarcoma of undetermined origin
Cat
Nasopharyngeal polyp
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
Ceruminous gland adenoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Papilloma
Sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma
Carcinoma of undetermined origin
26. Describe the role of bacteria in the pathogenesis of otitis externa.
Bacteria are rarely a primary cause of otitis externa. In most cases, bacteria contribute to
clinical disease following overgrowth and infection secondary to the primary cause. Normal
bacteria are present in small numbers throughout the external canal. Primary diseases result in
changes in the bacterial microenvironment favorable to overgrowth of native flora or colonization
mation in the ear, either ex acerbating the primary disease or maintaining clinical signs even after
the underlying condition is resolved. Treatment of only the bacterial infection will result in
recurrence of clinical signs if the primary disease is not managed; similarly focusing on only the
primary disease without attention to the bacterial component may result in treatment failure
(Figures 49-9 and 49-10).
27. What bacterial organisms are most commonly isolated from the ear canal of normal
dogs and dogs with active otitis externa or media?
Mixed infections with multiple different isolates are commonly observed in clinical cases
(Table 49-3). In one study of 22 dogs with otitis media the average number of isolates per case
was 2.4 from the horizontal ear canal and 2.0 from the middle ear. As many as five different
organisms were isolated from some patients.
376
DiseasesoftheEar
Figure 49-9Severe purulent otitis externa in a dog.
Figure 49-10 Photomicrograph of mixed bacteria seen on cytologic preparation from the external ear
canal of a dog (Wright's stain).
28. Is a culture/susceptibility sample taken from the external ear canal likely to be a
satisfactory predictor of species and antimicrobial susceptibility of organisms present
in the tympanic cavity of a dog with otitis media/externa?
No, both species and susceptibility to antimicrobial drugs may vary signi ficantly between
cultures taken from the horizontal ear canal and the middle ear in the same patient. In fact,
differences between the twolocations are so common(89.5%of cases) that difference rather than
similarity should be considered the norm. Likewise, isolates from one ear canal are frequently
different from isolates from the other ear canal in the same patient. Because culture from the
horizontal canal does not predict the species or antimicrobial susceptibility for the middle ear,
Diseases of the Ear
377
Table 49-3 Isolates from Ear Swab Specimens
ISOLATE
NORMAL EAR
OTITIS
OTITIS
CANAL(%)
EXTERNA(%)
MEDIA (%)
Staphylococcus spp.
15-48
30-80
37-54
Pseudomonas spp.
2-4
4-35
35-37
Streptococcus spp.
Not reported 
4-30
18-26
Proteus spp.
0-2
4-21
13-17
Escherichia coli
Not reported
3-14
5-9
Corynebacteria spp.
Not reported
1-4
2-13
rational antibiotic selection should be based on culture specimens obtained from tympanic cavity
via myringotomy or bulla osteotomy.
29. Explain the role of yeast in clinical ear disease.
Malassezia pachydermatis and other Malassezia species are common inhabitants of normal
external ear canals (Figure 49- 11). The pathogenesis of yeast overgrowth and infection is similar
to that of bacterial otitis externa; colonization and overpopulation occurs following alteration of
the microenvironment secondary to underlying primary disease. Once established, Malassezia
organisms stimulate an inflammatory response, which worsens or perpetuates clinical disease.
Figure 49-11 F
Photomicrograph of Malassezia spp. seen on cytologic preparation from the external ear
canal of a dog (Wright's stain).
Malassezia spp. can be isolated from the horizontal canal of dogs in 65-80% of chronic
cases of otitis externa, and from the tympanic cavity of dogs in 35% of otitis media cases.
Although yeast and bacterial overgrowth frequently occur simultaneously, Malassezia alone may
be the sole organism present in clinically significant otitis externa or otitis media.
 30. What is the likely pathogenesis of otitis media in a dog? How does this differ from otitis
media in humans?
In the majority of canine cases, otitis media is believed to result from direct extension of
378
Diseases of the Ear
otitis externa through a compromised tympanic membrane. Rarely is infection thought to occur
by hematogenous route or extension from the nasopharynx.
 In sharp contrast, otitis media in humans is most commonly the result of viral respiratory
disease, extending to the tympanic cavity via the eustachian tube. Primary or secondary bacterial
infection occurs by the same route.
31. How common is otitis media in dogs with clinical signs of otitis externa?
Otitis media may be present in 16% of acute cases and 52-83% of cases with recurrent or
continuous clinical signs of otitis externa for longer than 6 months. In one study, the tympanum
appeared to be intact in 71% of cases with otitis media, illustrating the important point that
observation of an intact membrane does not rule out concurrent otitis media. Otitis media should
be considered likely in any case of otitis externa persisting for 6 months or longer.
 32. Describe four findings commonly present on cytologic evaluation of otitis externa and
the significance of each finding.
1. Yeast: Malassezia pachydermatis is a normal inhabitant in the external canal, but
overgrowth is a frequent response to primary otitis externa. Presence of large numbers of
yeast warrants the addition of topical or systemic antifungal medication.
 2. Bacteria: Gram-positive coccoid bacteria are normal inhabitants in the external canal, but
act as a perpetuating factor in cases of overgrowth or secondary infection. While Gram-
negative rods may be found in a small percentage of normal ear canals, they are more
frequently associated with pathologic conditions. Identification of Gram-negative
 Organisms in abundance indicates the need for topical or systemic antibiotic therapy.
3. Parasites: presence of any parasite is considered pathologic and requires treatment.
 4. Leukocytes: White blood cells (WBCs) are not present in normal external ear canals and
are less frequently found in ceruminous otitis with bacterial or yeast overgrowth. The
finding of WBCs on ear cytologic studies may indicate a true infection rather than simple
overgrowth, particularly if intracellular or phagocytized bacteria are seen. Thus, the
finding of leukocytes on cytologic specimens indicates the need for systemic therapy in
addition to topical therapy.
 33. Describe the goals of ear flushing.
· Removal of debnis
· Improves visualization of canal and tympanic membrane (diagnostic goal)
· Decreases organic material that provides ideal microenvironment for bacteria and
yeast
·
Enhances efficacy of some topical antimicrobials. Debris decreases contact, physically or
by dilution, and may inactivate some anti biotics, such as polymy xin and aminoglycosides
· Better drainage and ventilation
●Direct antimicrobial activity of flushing agent
· Astringent action displaces water after swimming or bathing, which could predispose
patients to bacterial or yeast overgrowth.
34. What are the characteristics of an ideal ear-cleansing agent?
·Effective at removing tenacious, waxy debris
· Non-irritating to epithelial lining of external and middle ear
· Non-toxic to inner ear (cochlea and vestibular apparatus)
· Leaves no residue
·Leaves the canal dry
·Directly inhibits or kills microorganisms
·Acts synergistically with, or at least does not antagonize, other otic medications
· Inexpensive enough for owners and veterinarians to use liberally
DiseasesoftheEar
379
 35. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of available antiseptic cleansing agents.
Using an antiseptic cleaner has several advantages, including direct inhibition of micro-
organisms, synergism with topical antibiotics (TrisEDTA), and prolonged duration of action
(acidifying agents). However, there are potential disadvantages, such as irritation of tissues
(povidone-iodine, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, and weak acids), ototoxicity (chlorhexidine,
benzalkonium chloride, povidone-iodine), and potential inhibition of antibiotics (aminoglycosides
and fluoroquinolones in low pH). Knowledge of the specific properties of individual ingredients
should be applied to rational selection of appropriate ear cleaning products.
The largest group of antiseptic cleaning agents focuses on acidifying the ear canal.
Examples of acidifying agents include acetic acid, boric acid, malic acid, lactic acid, salicylic
acid, and benzoic acid. Many commercially available solutions contain two or more different
not thrive in acidic conditions. Large, rapid changes in pH may be directly fungicidal and
bactericidal for some isolates. In other cases, organisms are weakened or have decreased
reproduction. However, most of the common organisms found in normal and infected ears can
thrive at a wide range of pH if they are allowed to acclimate to pH changes gradually. Because it
is unlikely that 100% of organisms are eliminated during initial treatment; theoretically, the
remaining organisms can adapt to new pH environment with repeated therapy over a long time.
 In addition, two common classes of topical antibiotics, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones,
have decreased efficacy in an acidic environment. However, because topical application of
antibiotics frequently exceeds minimum inhibitory concentrations, the altered function in acidic
environment may not be clinically relevant. Acidifying agents are used routinely as the preferred
agent for most cases of Malassezia otitis and susceptible bacterial infections.
Chlorhexidine has activity against yeast and bacteria and these organisms do not develop
resistance to chlorhexidine over time. However, chlorhexidine can be toxic to cochlear and
vestibular hair cells. Experimental studies have failed to induce ototoxicity in normal dogs, but
deafness is reported in clinical cases of otitis externa/media. In most cases loss of function is
immediate. Additionally, chlorhexidine can cause fibrosis and ossification of the tympanic bullae
if left in the middle ear for prolonged periods. Consequently, the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration has eliminated chlorhexidine from human otic preparations, and veterinarians should use
available products with caution if the tympanic membrane is ruptured or if patency is not known.
TrisEDTA is an antiseptic solution that works at an alkaline pH; and therefore may be an
appropriate selection when therapy includes topical aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone
in the cell membrane of bacteria. This effect compromises the barrier function of the cell wall,
increasing permeability to intracellular antibiotics (e.g., tetracycline, chloramphenicol, amino-
glycosides, and fluoroquinolones), while acting synergistically with antibiotics that target the
bacterial cell wall (e.g-, penicillins and cephalosporins). TrisEDTA also inactivates P-glycoprotein
pumps in the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria, a mechanism for antibiotic resistance to fluoro-
quinolones. Consequently the principal use of TrisEDTA is in combination therapy with systemic
and topical antibiotics during the management of resistant bacterial infections.
 36. What role do ceruminolytic agents have in the management of otitis externa?
Ceruminolytic cleansers are typically detergents or surfactants designed to break up and
remove waxy, hydrophobic debris. Impacted cerumen may occlude the deep canal, resisting
flushing, or liquid cerumen and purulent exudates may cling tenaciously to the canal and
tympanum, resisting removal by flushing or curette. Examples of commonly used ceruminolytics
include squalene, propylene glycol, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DSS), and toluene. While
ceruminolytic agents are useful for removing debris, caution must be exercised when the tympanic
membrane is compromised. Except for squalene, all ceruminolytic agents are potentially ototoxic
or may result in severe inflammation of the respiratory epithelium lining the tympanic cavity.
Potent detergents left in the middle ear can be tremendously damaging. When performing an ear
380
Diseases of the Ear
cleaning under general anesthesia, ceruminolytics can be used first to remove tenacious debris,
followed by thorough rinsing to remove any remaining detergent. In general, potent agents should
be used only in the veterinarian's office if the tympanum is compromised or its condition is
unknown. If ceruminolytics are sent home, the owners should be instructed to follow cerumino-
lytic treatment by flushing with copious amounts of a second less-toxic flushing agent.
37. List the clinical indications for otoscopy and deep ear cleaning under full anesthesia.
· Suspected foreign objects
·Horner's syndrome
· Severe acute otitis
· Chronic or recurrent otitis
· Purulent otitis
· Suspected otitis media
●Vestibular symptoms
38. What precautions should always be taken during ear flushing of an anesthetized patient?
Always check the endotracheal tube for a functional cuff. If the tympanic membrane is
ruptured, fluid from the flush, mixed with bacteria and debris, may pass into the nasopharynx via
the eustachian tube. Without a good seal around the endotracheal tube the fluid could cause a
chemical pneumonitis or bacterial pneumonia. Note: Deeply sedated patients may lose the gag
Teflex. For this reason, full anesthesia and a controlled airway are preferred to sedation during ear
cleaning procedures.
Liberally apply sterile eye lubricant to protect the cornea from fluid run-off from the flush
corneal ulcer. This also helps avoid accidental exposure to Pseudomonas spp. and other bacteria.
39. What are the potential complications of overaggressive or inattentive ear flushing
under anesthesia?
· Rupture of tympanum and subsequent otitis media
·Excessive pain
· Horner's syndrome. Cats are especially prone to this complication (see Question 11)
●Vestibular signs (head tilt, nystagmus, and ataxia)
·Deafness (idiosyncratic ototoxicity)
·Bacterial otitis interna via damage to the oval or round windows
· Iatrogenic pneumonia (see Question 38)
● Iatrogenic corneal abrasion, ulceration, or infection (see Question 38)
40. List common classes of topical therapeutic agents and examples of each class.
Most commercial veterinary otic preparations are combinations of an antibiotic, antifungal
agent, and glucocorticoids (Table 49-4). For select antibiotics, off-label usage of ophthalmic
drops in the external ear canal is necessary when no otic preparation is available.
Table 49-4 Commonly Used Treatments
CLASS
EXAMPLES
Antibacterial
Gentamicin, neomycin, pol ymyxin B, enroflox acin, ciproflox acin,
chloramphenicol, ticarcillin, tobramycin, silver sulfadiazine
Antifungal
Thiabendazole, nystatin, clotrimazole, miconazole, silver sulfadiazine
Antinflammatory
Hydrocortisone, prednisone, dex amethasone, triamcinolone,
fluocinolone, betamethasone
Parasiticidal
Pyrethrins, organophosphates, thiabendazole, ivermectin, milbemycin,
selamectin (applied transcutaneously, not directly to ear canal)
Anesthetic
Tetracaine, benzocaine, proparacaine
Diseases of the Ear
381
41. What are some special considerations when selecting an aminoglycoside for topical
therapy?
· Inactivated by large amounts of organic debris →Avoid in cases with copious ceruminous
or purulent exudate
· Decreased efficacy in acidic conditions → Use in combination with TrisEDTA solution
(pH = 8.0) rather than acidifying ear flush solutions.
●May be ototoxic →→ Use with caution in animals with compromised tympanic membranes,
or avoid entirely.
· Neomycin is a potential contact sensitizing agent and may result in local contact
dermatitis → Switch to different product if initial improvement gives way to worsening
inflammation.
42. What guidelines should be followed when applying topical glucocorticoids?
Glucocorticoids are an important component of therapy for acute otitis and for maintenance
therapy for chronic otitis externa. Milder anti-inflammatory actions of hydrocortisone may be
changes. More potent glucocorticoids, such as betamethasone, triamcinolone, and fluocinolone,
should be used in severely affected patients. The immediate benefits are associated with
decreased edema, decreased cerumen production, decreased purulent exudate, and decreased pain
or pruritus. Longer courses of therapy are required to decrease proliferative changes in the
external canal. All potent topical glucocorticoids will absorb systemically, resulting in elevations
should be limited to short courses whenever possible. In general, use of topical therapy should
follow the same guidelines as oral or injectable glucocorticoids: avoid prolonged courses, switch
to alternate-day protocols, use with caution in patients sensitive to glucocorticoid effects such as
patients with diabetes mellitus, demodicosis, or history of calcium oxalate uroliths.
43.  Discuss miticidal therapy for management of Otodectes cynotis.
Regardless of which method is selected, in order to be effective, therapy should: (1) treat all in-
contact animals regardless of clinical signs, (2) take into account adult mites traveling on haired
skin outside the ear canal, and (3) continue beyond the length of the full life-cycle (approximately
21 days). O. cynotis is a relatively easy to kill parasite; treatment failure generally results from
failure toidentify and manage sources of reinfestation.
44. Define ototoxicity and discuss this complication to otic therapy.
Ototoxicity refers to damage to cochlear or vestibular functions as the direct result of
therapeutic agents, either systemic or topical. Loss of function may be unilateral, bilateral, partial,
directly toxic to hair cells of the cochlea and vestibular apparatus, resulting in either deafness or
vestibular signs. In experimental studies of normal dogs, aminoglycoside infused directly into the
middle ear failed to reliably produce ototoxic reactions, leading to speculation that inflammation
may affect permeability of the round or oval windows. In clinical practice, ototoxic reactions to
known ototoxic preparations are frequently used in cases with known or undiagnosed ruptures of
the tympamic membrane, without causing deafness or vestibular dysfunction; in other cases oto-
intact membranes. Toxicity to hair cells is known to be dependent on concentration of amino-
glycosides in the perilymph of the inner ear. Explanations for the observation of variable toxicity
may include individual differences in sensitivity to aminoglycosides or variation in diffusion,
metabolism, or elimination of the agent from the inner ear. Nevertheless, practitioners should
remain cautious in all cases of known or suspected compromise of the tympanic membrane.
382
Diseases of the Ear
45. What is the role of systemic antibiotics in treatment of otitis externa?
Systemic antibiotics are appropriate for patients with suspected or proven otitis media,
severe acute suppurative otitis externa, or chronic otitis with extension into para-aural soft-tissue.
Antibiotic therapy should be continued for at least one week beyond clinical resolution of
bacterial infection; 6- 12 weeks of continuous therapy is commonly required. Because of difficulty
reaching target organisms in the canal lumen and the tympanic cavity, anti biotics should be given
at the high end of the dosage range. In general, antibiotic selection, dosage, frequency, and
management of otitis media.
Because of the frequency of mixed infections and the presence of organisms with
unpredictable susceptibility patterns, whenever possible antibiotic selection should be based on
antimicrobial susceptibility results obtained from cultures of the middle ear. Cultures obtained
from the external ear canal are less valuable, as substantial differences in the species and
susceptibility patterns may exist between isolates from the external canal and isolates from the
tympanic cavity. See Table 49-5 for reported antibiotic susceptibility patterns of the two most
common bacterial isolates from otitis externa
Table 49-5
Percentage of Common Isolates Susceptible to Routinely
Available Oral Antibiotics
ORGANISM
%0S
50-90%
>90%
S.intermedius
Ampicillin
Cephalothin 
Amoxicillin-
Penicillin
Clindamycin
clavulanic acid
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Enrofloxacin
 Chloramphenicol 
Erythromycin
Tetracycline
Pseudomonas spp.
Enrofloxacin
None
None
46. Should systemic glucocorticoids be used to manage inflammation localized to the
external ear canal?
Mild inflammatory or infectious conditions do not require systemic therapy and can be
treated with topical glucocorticoids in combination with other appropriate therapies. However,
Table 49-6
Proposed Benefits of Systemic Glucocorticoid Therapy
ACTION
RESULT
BENEFIT
Inhibition of
Reverse tissue edema
More open canal
vasodilation and
Reduction of pain
capillary leakage
Suppression of
Less cerumen production
 Less organic debris
 cerumen gland
Decreased hyperplasia
 More open canal 
activity
Inhibition of leukocyte
Fewer neutrophils and
Reduction of pain
recruitment
eosinophils in tissue and
Less organic debris
canal lumen
Decrease tissue damage by
excess inflammatory
mediators
Inhibition of tissue
Less epidermal hyperplasia
Reversal of chronic
proliferation
Less fibrosis
proliferative changes
Diseases of the Ear
383
systemic glucocorticoids have a vital role in successful management of severe acute otitis externa
and chronic proliferative otitis externa. In severe cases, the canal lumen may be completely
occluded by edema, preventing diagnostic otoscopy or therapeutic flushing even under anesthesia.
Prescribing relatively high doses of prednisone (1.1-2.2 mg/kg orally every 24 hours) for
3-5 days will reverse edema, open the canal, and greatly enhance the value of the procedure
postponed to a later date. For owners attempting to clean painful ears at home the immediate
benefits of glucocorticoids are reduction of pain, opening of the canal, and reduction of purulent
and ceruminous debris. Higher doses and longer therapy may be necessary to reverse chronic
proliferative changes, such as epidermal proliferation and glandular hyperplasia. Glucocorticoids
will not reverse perrmanent changes such as calcification and long-standing fibrosis.
Glucocorticoids have numerous benefits that contribute to immediate and long-term
improvement in patient condition, but should never be used to relieve symptoms at the expense
of diagnosis and treatment of primary conditions. See Table 49-6.
47. Compare and contrast the indications, goals, and common complications of lateral ear
canal resection and total ear canal ablation.
See Table 49-7.
Table 49-7 Resection vs. Ablation
LATERAL EAR CANAL
RESECTION
TOTAL EAR CANAL ABLATION
Indications
 Anatomic deformity or obstructive
Irreversible changes to the horizontal
changes to the vertical canal
canal
 Benign neoplasia of the vertical
Neoplasia
canal
Goals
 Improved ventilation
Alleviate chronic pain
 Improved drainage of exudates
Eliminate nidus of chronic infection
Facilitate cleaning and topical
 Adequate margins for neoplasia of
therapy
ear canal
Complications
Fails to resolve clinical signs
 Change in appearance in breeds with
Progressive changes involve
erectpinnae
horizontal canal
Loss of hearing
Facial nerve dysfunction
Vestibular dysfunction
Draining fistula
48. What factors affect postoperative complications of surgical procedures?
The most common reason for complications is the failure to identify and treat the primary
cause of the disease. Lateral ear canal resection does not treat atopy, food allergy, hypo-
thyroidism, etc., and therefore should not substitute for proper diagnosis and management of
otitis externa.
Chronicity and severity may play a role in recovery, especially if inflammation,
proliferation, and dystrophic calcification entrap the facial nerve running near the junction of the
ex ternal canal and tympanic cavity.
Surgical technique is the most important factor in determining outcome. Poor attention to
detail and rough handling of tissues may worsen facial nerve and vestibular complications.
Contamination of surrounding tissue by debris may result in spread of bacterial infection. The
frustrating complication of a draining fistula is most often associated with incomplete removal of
secretory epithelium of the horizontal canal and tympanic cavity, rather than with inability to
resolve infection.
384
DiseasesoftheEar
BIBLIOGRAPHY
August JR: Otitis extema: a disease of multifactorial etiology, Vet Clir North Am Small Anim Pract 18:731-742,
1988.
Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski JJ, et al: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility pattems of
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media, J Am Vet Med Assoc
212(4):534-538, 1998.
Gotthelf LN: Smatt animal ear diseases: an illustrated guide, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche AJ: Ear diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, Iowa, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
Scott DW: Extemal ear diseases. In Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds): Mutler and Kirk's small animat
dermatotogy, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1203-1232.
White PD: Medical management of chronic otitis in dogs, Comp Cont Educ 21(8):716-728, 1999.
Section IX
Tumors of the Skin
50. NON-NEOPLASTIC TUMORS
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
Brett C. Wood, DVM
1. What is a cyst?
·A cyst is a nodule that contains semisolid material (Figure 50- 1).
·A cyst is a saclike structure with an epidermal lining or the cells of the structure from
which it developed (Figure 50-2)
·A cyst is non-neoplastic.
Figure 50-1 Epidermal cyst on the ventral tail of a dog.
2. What is an infundibular (epidermalepidermoid) cyst?
· This type is a simple cyst lined by stratified squamous epithelium.
· All four layers of the normal epidermis are present including the granular cell layer.
3. How does an infundibular cyst clinically present itself?
· A cyst is usually present within the dermis; however, large cysts may extend into the
panniculus.
·Cysts are solitary or multiple. They are usually unilocular.
· The cornified cells that occupy the cyst are found as basketweave (loose) or compact
(tight) orthokeratotic cells.
· The cyst must be entirely removed because rupture will evoke a granulomatous reaction
to the keratin; incomplete removal is the usual cause of a postsurgical recurrence.
4. How do endogenous “foreign'" bodies cause granulomas?
Endogenous substances produce a granulomatous reaction whenever there is exposure to
tissues that normally enclose them. An example of this is when an epidermal cyst wall ruptures
385
386
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Figure 50-2 Photomicrograph of a follicular cyst in canine skin. (H&E, x100.)
and its keratin contents come in contact with the derrmis. The most common cause of foreign body
reactions in the dog is rupture of hair follicles.
5. What is an isthmus cyst?
·An isthmus cyst is lined by cells that resemble the middle area of an anagen hair follicle
or the lower segments of a catagen hair follicle.
· An isthmus cyst is lined by stratifed squamous keratinizing epithelium, without a
granular cell layer.
· The cyst contents are typically less eosinophilic and not as compacted (laminar) as those
of an infundibular cyst.
6. What type of epidermal cells makes up the cyst lining of a panfollicular
(trichoepitheliomatous) cyst?
· The wall is made up of stratified epithelium with foci similar to infundibular and
isthmus cysts.
· However, a third type of cell lining the wall consists of primitive, small basophilic cells
that demonstrate abrupt keratinization. Intracytoplasmic trichohyalin granules can be
found between zones of infundibular and matrical keratinization.
·These cells may develop into trichoepitheliomas.
7. What is matrical keratinization?
Anatomic tissue of origin from which a structure develops, that is, hair matrix, claw matrix,
hair follicle isthmus.
8. What are dermoid cysts?
Dermoid cysts are congenital dermal and/or subcutaneous cysts lined by epidermis with
mature dermal and appendage (follicular, glandular, etc.), structures in the cyst wall.
In human medicine dermoid cysts are also known as pilonidal cysts.
9. Where are dermoid cysts most commonly found in animals?
Dorsal midline of young animals.
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
387
10. What other condition has been associated with dermoid cysts in Rhodesian
Ridgebacks?
The cystic lesions commonly extend to the level of the subarachnoid space and thus
predispose the dogs to meningitis.
Dermoid cysts in Rhodesian Ridgebacks should be evaluated with contrast radiography
(fistulography and/or myelography) to assess for communication with the subarachnoid space. If
there is communication noted, then surgical excision should be considered and in most cases is
curative
11. Are dermoid cysts as common as follicular cysts?
Dermoid cysts are rarely observed in dogs and cats. They are developmental anomalies and
are often congenital and hereditary. Most commonly reported in:
·Boxers
· Kerty Blue Termiers
· Rhodesian Ridgebacks
12. Dermoid cysts are inherited abnormality in which of the following breeds?
(a)Rhodesian Ridgeback
(b) German Shepherd
(c)Weimaraner
(d) Rottweiler
Correct answer is (a) Rhodesian Ridgeback
13. What are sebaceous duct cysts?
Cysts located in the dermis. The cyst wall is made up of basaloid cells and squamous cells
(sebaceous duct). The inner lining of the cyst is brightly eosinophilic and corrugated. Around the
cyst are hyperplastic sebaceous glands.
14. What are apocrine cyst(s)/apocrine cystomatosis?
●Solitary or multiple cysts that are filled with clear secretion.
·The cyst is lined with a single layer of apocrine secretory epithelium. This epithelium may
demonstrate function (decapitation), however, these cells often become nonfunctional due
to pressure atrophy.
· Multiple cysts at multiple sites are called apocrine cystomatosis.
● Clinically these cysts often have a "blue”" color (Figures 50-3 to 50-5).
388
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Figure 50-4Apocrine cystomatosis in a dog.
Figure 50-5Apocrine papillary cystadenomas on the shoulder and foreleg of a domestic shorthaired cat.
15. What type of structure is found surrounding a subungual epithelial inclusion cyst?
The subungual epithelial inclusion cyst is identical to the infundibular cyst, but is surrounded
by the bone of the third phalanx.
16. Rupture of a subungual epithelial inclusion cyst evokes a granulomatous response. What
important differential diagnoses should be on your list of masses associated with the digit?
·Melanoma
· Foreign body reaction
·Squamous cell carcinoma
·Deep bacterial/fungal infection and the like
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
389
17. What is the most common matrical or tissue matrix source of cutaneous cysts in the dog?
categorized by the level of the follicle from which they develop
●Infundibular: common (dog), uncommon (cat)
· Isthmus: catagen (trichilemmal) - common (dog), uncommon (cat)
●Matrical: uncommon (dog), rare (cat)
·Hybrid: uncommon (dog), uncommon (cat)
18. Where do follicular cysts most commonly occur?
·Head
·Trunk
·Neck
· Proximal limbs
19. What breeds of dog may be predisposed to follicular cysts?
·Boxers
·Shih Tzus
·Doberman Pinschers
·Miniature Schnauzers
20. What is the most common location of multiple congenital follicular cysts?
●Dorsal midline of young dogs
· Thought to be associated with trauma, fibrosis, and obstruction of affected follicle openings.
·Pressure points (especially elbows)
21. What is an epitrichial cyst?
Apocrine sweat gland cyst.
 22. Where do Persian and Himalayan cats commonly get apocrine gland cysts?
· Multiple apocrine gland cysts occur on the eyelids of these breeds of cats.
·Both eyelids are usually involved in affected cats.
· The medial canthus may also be invol ved.
23. How common are sebaceous gland cysts in the dog and cat?
These are rare in dogs and cats.
24. What is a hamartoma?
·A mass of disorganized but mature specialized cells or tissue
· Cells/tissue are indi genous to the particular site where they were found.
·However, the mass is an abnormal amount of tissue.
25. Why do we use the term hamartoma?
term nevus.
We hope to avoid possible confusion with the melanocytic cells that make up the pigmented
lesions referred to as nevi in man.
26. When are hamartomas recognized as clinical entities?
· Hamartomas are congenital.
· Many are not clinically diagnosed until later in life
27. How are hamartomas classified in veterinary literature?
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller & Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders:
· Collagenous nevi
· Epidermal nevi
· Organoid nevi
· Hair follicle nevi
390
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Vascular nevi
· Comedo nevi
· Sebaceous gland nevi
· Pacinian corpuscle nevi
Goldschmidt MH, Dunstan RW, Stannard AA, von Tscharner C, et al: Histological
classification of epithelial and melanocytic tumors of the skin of domestic animals,
AFTP, Am Reg Pathol WHO (Series 2), vol 3, Washington, DC, 1998:
· Epidermal hamartoma (pigmented epidermal nevus)
+Follicular hamartoma
· Sebaceous hamartoma
·Apocrine hamartoma
· Fibroadnexal hamartoma (adnexal nevus, focal adnexal dysplasia, folliculosebaceous
hamartoma)
28. Is there a form of multiple collagenous hamartomas in the dog that is associated with
renal disease and neoplasia?
·Yes, in German Shepherd Dogs (Figure 50-6)
· Syndrome is referred to as nodular dermatofibromas and includes multiple, spontaneous,
symmetrically distri buted collagenous hamartomas that often develop in dogs between the
ages of 3 and 7 years old.
· The lesions most frequently develop on the head, neck, and extremities.
·Affected German Shepherd Dogs virtually always develop bilateral renal disease that may
be polycystic kidneys or renal cystadenocarcinomas
· Intact females consistently develop multiple uterine leiomyomas.
· Syndrome is autosomal dominant in inheritance.
29. In what other breeds has this disorder been reported?
·Golden Retrievers
·Boxers
· German Shepherd Dog crosses
·Mixed breeds
30. Is adnexal dysplasia identical to organoid hamartomas?
· These two conditions may or may not be identical.
· Adnexal hamartomas are usually not inflamed, and the hyperplastic adnexal structures
maintain a normal anatomic orientation.
· Focal adnexal dysplasia is usually inflamed with fibrosis and is characterized by a bizarre
configuration of the adnexal structures (Figure 50-7).
● These lesions are generally solitary, firm, and well circumscribed.
· The distal limbs (pressure points and digits) are most commonly affected.
·Affected dogs are usually middle age or older.
· No gender predilection
· Doberman Pinschers and Labrador Retrievers are predisposed.
31. Are all hamartomas nodular?
No. Epidermal and organoid hamartomas may be linear. They may follow Blaschko's lines
which are the pattern of lines separating skin surface areas supplied by individual peripheral nerves.
 32. What is a melanocytic hamartoma ('melanocytic nevus')?
The term "melanocytic nevus" has been adapted for use in veterinary medicine; however,
most of these lesions are acquired and should be called "melanocytomas.” Congenital melanocytic
hamartomas are rarely recognized in animals.
Non-NeoplasticTumors
391
B
Figure 50-6A, German Shepherd Dog with nodular dermatofibrosis associated with a renal cyst
adenoc arcinoma. B, Closeup of the lesions of nodular derrmatofibrosis on the rear leg. C, Section through one
of the lesions of nodular dermatofibrosis. D, Photomicrograph of nodular derrmatofibrosis. (H&E, ×l00.)
392
Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Figure 50-7 Photomicrograph of adnexal dysplasia in canine skin. (H&E, xl00.)
33. Name four tumors or tumor-like lesions that are cystic and may have central pores.
· Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (ICE, also termed "infundibular keratinizing
·Pilomatrixoma
·Trichofolliculoma
· Dilated pore of Winer
 34. What are other tumor-like lesions (keratoses) that have been found or reported in
veterinary medicine ?
· Squamous papilloma
·Pressure point comedones
●Cutaneous horn
·Warty dyskeratoma
·Sebaceous hyperplasia (senile nodular sebaceous hyperplasia)
●Fibroepithelial "polyp" (cutaneous tag, skin tag, acrochordon)
·
Fibropruritic nodule
●Acral lick granuloma
35. How should cutaneous horns be managed?
·Excise with wide surgical margins
· Submit the cutaneous horn for histologic examination. Some cutaneous horns grow from
a mali gnant neoplasia base, for example, squamous cell carcinoma.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bevier DE, Goldschmidt MH: Skin tumors in the dog. 1. Epithelial tumors and tumor like lesions, Compend Cont Ed
Sm Anim Vet Med 3(5):389-399, 1981.
Bevier DE, Goldschmidt MH: Skin tumors in the dog. I1. Tunors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissues, Compend Cont
Ed Sm Anim Vet Med 3(6):506-520, 1981.
Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology secrets inr cotor, ed 2. Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus.
Goldschmidt MH, Bevier DE: Skin tumors in the dog. Ill. Lymphohistiocytic and melanocytic tumors, Compend
Cont Ed Sm Anim Vet Med 3:588-597, 1981
Epithelial Neoplasms
393
Goldschmidt MH, Dunstan RW, Stannard AA, von Tschamer C, et al: Histological classification of epithelial and
melanocytic tumors of the skin of domestic animals, AFIP, Am Reg Pathol WHO (Series 2), vol 3, Washington, DC
1998.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FA: Skin tumors of the dog and cat. Oxford, UK, 1992, Pergamon Press.
Gross TL,Ihrke PJ,Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathotogy:a macroscopic and microscopic evatuation ofcanine
and feline skir disease. St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Scolt DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saunders.
51. EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
1. What cell types are involved in epidermal neoplasia?
·Keratinocytes
·Langerhans cells
·Melanocytes
· Merkel's cells
These are the four main cell types normally found in the epidermis. This chapter focuses on
tumors of Merkel's cells and keratinocytes. Melanocytic neoplasms are presented in Chapter 56
2. What are Merkel's cells? What neoplasms arise from these cells?
 Merkel's cells are neuroendocrine dendritic cells that act as slow-reacting mechanoreceptors
hair cycle. Merkel's cells lie either immediately below or within the basal cell layer of follicular
cytes. Merkel's cells are distinguished morphologically from other cutaneous cells by the presence
of a large cytoplasmic vacuole that displaces the nucleus. In humans, Merkel cell carcinoma is a
rare, biologically aggressive tumor. Local recurrence and distant metastases are common despite
en bloc surgical excision and concurrent radiation therapy. Cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors in
dogs and cats probably arise from Merkel's cells. These neoplasms are rare and develop either
within the dermis or the epidermis. Most canine cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are malignant
and readily metastasize; however, benign neoplasms for which radical surgical excision is
curative do occur. In contrast, most feline cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are benign, although
a malignant Merkel cell tumor has been reported in an aged Maine Coon Cat. Differential
diagnoses in all species include basal cell neoplasms, histiocytoma, plasmacytoma, amelanotic
mel anoma, and epi theliotropic lymphoma.
3. How does ultraviolet radiation lead to epidermal neoplasia?
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation can cause epidermal neoplasia by several direct and indirect
mechanisms, including inhibition of DNA repair mechanisms by the formation of pyrimidine
dimers, production of free radicals, purine photoproducts, stimulation of enzymes that act in
(SCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) in humans. In humans, development of actinic keratoses,
SCC, and melanoma is associated with long-term exposure to U V radiation, whereas the develop-
ment of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) results from episodes of intense exposure, such as blistering
sunburn. Although the most reactive wavelengths are within the UVB band (290-320 nm),
radiation within the U VA range (320-400 nm) is also carcinogenic
Epithelial Neoplasms
393
Goldschmidt MH, Dunstan RW, Stannard AA, von Tschamer C, et al: Histological classification of epithelial and
melanocytic tumors of the skin of domestic animals, AFIP, Am Reg Pathol WHO (Series 2), vol 3, Washington, DC
1998.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FA: Skin tumors of the dog and cat. Oxford, UK, 1992, Pergamon Press.
Gross TL,Ihrke PJ,Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathotogy:a macroscopic and microscopic evatuation ofcanine
and feline skir disease. St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Scolt DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller & Kirk's small animat dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saunders.
51. EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
1. What cell types are involved in epidermal neoplasia?
·Keratinocytes
·Langerhans cells
·Melanocytes
· Merkel's cells
These are the four main cell types normally found in the epidermis. This chapter focuses on
tumors of Merkel's cells and keratinocytes. Melanocytic neoplasms are presented in Chapter 56
2. What are Merkel's cells? What neoplasms arise from these cells?
 Merkel's cells are neuroendocrine dendritic cells that act as slow-reacting mechanoreceptors
hair cycle. Merkel's cells lie either immediately below or within the basal cell layer of follicular
cytes. Merkel's cells are distinguished morphologically from other cutaneous cells by the presence
of a large cytoplasmic vacuole that displaces the nucleus. In humans, Merkel cell carcinoma is a
rare, biologically aggressive tumor. Local recurrence and distant metastases are common despite
en bloc surgical excision and concurrent radiation therapy. Cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors in
dogs and cats probably arise from Merkel's cells. These neoplasms are rare and develop either
within the dermis or the epidermis. Most canine cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are malignant
and readily metastasize; however, benign neoplasms for which radical surgical excision is
curative do occur. In contrast, most feline cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are benign, although
a malignant Merkel cell tumor has been reported in an aged Maine Coon Cat. Differential
diagnoses in all species include basal cell neoplasms, histiocytoma, plasmacytoma, amelanotic
mel anoma, and epi theliotropic lymphoma.
3. How does ultraviolet radiation lead to epidermal neoplasia?
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation can cause epidermal neoplasia by several direct and indirect
mechanisms, including inhibition of DNA repair mechanisms by the formation of pyrimidine
dimers, production of free radicals, purine photoproducts, stimulation of enzymes that act in
(SCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) in humans. In humans, development of actinic keratoses,
SCC, and melanoma is associated with long-term exposure to U V radiation, whereas the develop-
ment of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) results from episodes of intense exposure, such as blistering
sunburn. Although the most reactive wavelengths are within the UVB band (290-320 nm),
radiation within the U VA range (320-400 nm) is also carcinogenic
394
Epithelial Neoplasms
 4. What is actinic keratosis? What are the differential diagnoses for these lesions?
Keratosis is a proliferation of reactive keratinocytes; actinic keratosis results from reactions
to ultraviolet radiation. Actinic keratosis occurs in sun-exposed areas of glabrous or thinly haired,
unpigimented skin. The lesions are singular or multiple and can vary in appearance from slightly
erythematous patches of scale to thickened, keratotic, erythematous to pigmented plaques up to
several centimeters in diameter. Microscopically, the epidermis is hyperplastic and dysplastic,
with a loss of orderly keratinocyte maturation and normal stratification. Abnormal cells do not
ex tend below the basement membrane; dermal invasion signifies progression to SCC. In humans,
approximately 12% to 13% of untreated solar keratoses progress to SCC.
Middle-aged to older, light-colored dogs and cats with a propensity to sunbathe develop
actinic keratosis most commonly. Canine breeds at particular risk include American Staffordshire
Terriers, Beagles, Basset Hounds, and Whippets. No gender predilection has been demonstrated.
Normal window glass does not protect against ultraviolet radiation, thus indoor cats that sunbathe
are also at risk.
Differential diagnoses in dogs include solar-induced SCC, discoid lupus erythematosus
(DLE), cutaneous hemangiomas or hemangiosarcomas, and superficial or deep bacterial
folliculitis and furunculosis. Differential diagnoses in cats include solar-induced SCC, DLE, and
pemphigus foliaceus.
5. What are risk factors for SCC?
SCC makes up about 15% of feline and 5% of canine cutaneous neoplasia. Older animals
are at increased risk; the mean age in felines is 12 years and in canines is 8 years, although tumors
can occur in cats as young as I year of age. As in humans, SCC in dogs and cats is associated with
solar exposure and may progress from actinic keratoses; risk factors for actinic keratoses there-
fore also predispose to SCC. SCCs commonly occur in sun-exposed sites, including the eyelids,
nares, and pinnae of white-faced cats, and the nailbeds, ventral abdomen, scrotum, nose, and legs
of shorthaired, light-colored dogs. The incidence of SCC in white cats is reported to be 13.4 times
that in nonwhite cats. As in humans, incidence is higher in geographic locations that receive long
durations of intense solar radiation. Indoor cats are not protected from solar exposure: window
glass is not an effective filter against ultraviolet radiation. Association with p53 gene mutation has
been identifed in feline SCC. Solar-induced SCC is most common in light-colored or thinly
haired areas of Beagles, Basset Hounds, American Staffordshire Terriers, Dalmatians, and Bull
Terriers. Genetic predisposition is a risk factor in certain canine breeds. SCC unrelated to solar
exposure has an increased incidence in the Scottish Terrier, Pekingese, Boxer, Poodle, and
Norwegian Elkhound. Subungual SCC is prevalent in black Labrador Retrievers, black Standard
Poodles, Bouvier des Flandres, Giant Schnauzers, and Dachshunds. About 75% of subungual SCC
occurs in large dogs; approximately 66% of cases develop in black-coated dogs such as Standard
Poodles or Labrador Retrievers. Viral infection can be a factor in the development of SCC; several
different papillomaviruses in dogs (Table 51- 1) and the recently identified feline papillomavirus
Table 51-1
Summary of Canine Papillomas
CLINICAL
HISTOPATHOLOGIC
TYPE
FEATURES
FEATURES
ETIOLOGY
Canine oral
Single or multiple
Projections or fronds of
Canine oral
papillomatosis
 papillated masses 
heavily keratinized
papillomavirus
(exophytic
on face and/or
squamous
(COPV)
papilloma)
oral mucosa,
epithelium; may
occasionally other
contain giant
sites
keratohyalin
Epithelial Neoplasms
395
Table 51-1.
Summary of Canine PapillomasCont'd
CLINICAL
HISTOPATHOLOGIC
TYPE
FEATURES
FEATURES
ETIOLOGY
Typically <1 cm in
 granules and
diameter
koilocytes;
Generally regress
intranuclear
spontaneously
inclusions
Verruca plana
Flat warts
Keratohy alin granules,
May represent
 Papules to plaques on
koilocytes,
regression of
face and/or oral
intranuclear
exophytic
mucosa, generally
inclusions
papillomas
<0.5 cm in diameter
Cutaneous
Older male dogs,
Papillomavirus
 papilloma
Cocker Spaniels,
positive
Kerry Blue Terriers
Typically <0.5 cm in
diameter
Smooth to
papillomatous,
pedunculated
Cutaneous
Multiple, raised, firm
Flask-shaped core of
Papillomavirus
inverted
masses with a
keratin opening to
positive (not
papilloma
central pore, usually
umbilicated surface,
COPV)
 on ventral abdomen,
poorly defined
<2 cm diameter
intranuclear
inclusions
Footpad
Generally present on
Undetermined
 papillomas
multiple footpads,
paws; hyperkeratotic
 Pigmented
 Darkly pigmented,
Exophytic; abundant,
Genetic
epidermal
multiple,
enlarged
predisposition
plaques (PEP)
hyperkeratotic,
keratohy alin
(Pugs,
 papillomatous,
granules,
Miniature
wax y macules,
intranuclear
Schnauzers,
papules, plaques;
inclusion bodies
Chinese
on head, neck,
Shar Peis)
trunk, and limbs 
Association
Typically progressive
with immuno-
suppression,
papillomavirus
positive (not
COPV)
Pigmented papules
Round to coalescing,
Endophytic,
Papi llomavirus
 pigmented papules
keratohyaline
 positive (not
≤2 mm; ventral
 granules rare,
COPV,not
abdomen
intr acytoplasmic
PEP)
 and intranuclear
inclusion bodies
396
Epithelial Neoplasms
are associated with malignant transformation to SCC. The link between SCC and feline leukemia
virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is not clear; approximately 25% of FIV-positive
cats in a California study developed SCC. Chronic lesions, including otitis externa, burns, scars,
follicular cysts, and poorly controlled nasal lesions in dogs with DLE can progress to SCC.
Chemical carcinogens, such as arsenic, hydrocarbon, psoralens, nitrogen mustard, lead to SCC in
mice and humans, so are probable predisposing factors in feline and canine SCC as well.
6. How is SCC diagnosed?
Accurate diagnosis of SCC requires histopathology. Differential diagnoses include those
listed for actinic keratosis, along with other infectious or inflammatory dermatoses (Question 7).
Distinction between actinic keratosis and SCC requires microscopic examination to detect
cytologic characteristics of malignancy and abnormalities of tissue architecture, such as invasion
of neoplastic cells beneath the basement membrane into the underlying derrmis.
7. What are differential diagnoses for well-circumscribed ulcerative dermatosis of the
skin and mucocutaneous junctions of the face of a cat?
·Hypersensitivity: indolent ulcer, contact
·Neoplasia: squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor, epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma
· Infectious causes of ulcerative stomatitis and cheilitis:
-Viral: FeLV, FIV, feline pox virus, feline herpes virus-1, calicivirus
-Bacterial infections
- Fungal infections: candi diasis, systemic mycoses
·Metabolicdisease:uremia
· Immune-mediated disease: pemphigus vulgaris, systemic lupus erythematosus, drug reactions
·Thermal or electrical burns
· Periodontal disease
● Idiopathic plasmacytic stomati tis
8. What ancillary diagnostic tests should be performed in cases of SCC?
SCC is slow to metastasize, but typically occurs in middle-aged or older animals. Ancillary
tests to evaluate the patient's general health and suitability for therapy should therefore include
thoracic radiographs (three views), a complete blood count, general chemistry panel with
electrolytes, and urinalysis. Thyroxine levels should be measured in cats. In cases with deep
tissue invasion, a biopsy of draining lymph nodes should be performed. Radiographs should be
taken to detect bony involvement in digital lesions.
9. What is the clinical course of SCC in dogs and cats?
SCC lesions may be proliferative, producing plaques or exuberant cauliflower-like masses,
in dogs. Early lesions may simply be erythematous or hyperplastic crusts and may wax and wane
in response to solar exposure. Ulcerative lesions can progress to destroy substantial amounts of
adjacent and underlying tissues. Although solar-induced SCC is locally invasive, it tends to
metastasize slowly. Digital lesions, however, are characterized by a more aggressive biological
behavior and can produce bony lysis of the third phalanx. Subungual tumors can be singular or
multiple.
10. How are the stages of squamous cell carcinoma defined?
See Table 51-2.
11. What are the most common sites of squamous cell carcinoma in dogs and cats?
When all cases of canine SCC are considered, the nailbed is the most commonly affected
site. Solar-induced SCC in both species obviously arises in sun-exposed sites. Dogs that sunbathe
Epithelial Neoplasms
397
Table 5 1-2
Staging of Squamous Cell Carcinoma
STAGE
DIAMETER
DEPTH
Tis
In situ (is), does not extend beneath basement membrane
zone
T1
<2cm
Superficial (restricted to epidermis)
T2
2-5 cm
Minimal dermal invasion
T3
>5 cm
Invasion of subcutaneous tissues
Any diameter
Invasion of deep tissues (muscle, cartilage, bone)
Figure 51-1 :
Squamous cell carcinoma on the ear of a cat. (Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbell.)
on their backs develop SCC on their ventral abdomen, groin, and medial thighs. Lesions are most
common on the nose, eyelids, and pinnae of cats (Figure 51-1).
12. How is SCC treated?
Therapy depends on the nature of the skin and the size, shape, and location of the tumor.
Surgical excision is considered the treatment of choice. Pinnectomies and removal of the
nasal planum are often required in feline cases and result in median disease-free intervals of up
to 20 months. Laser ablation may be a useful alternative to surgical excision when lesions are
widespread; it allows rapid removal of multiple masses and causes less tissue destruction than
surgical excision. Cryosurgery using liquid nitrogen requires multiple treatments and does not
 achieve the median disease-free interval of conventional surgery.
Where available, concurrent radiation therapy is recommended. Several protocols have
proven to be effective. Superficial lesions can be treated with strontium-90 plesiotherapy using
handheld devices. Orthovoltage radiation (200-300 kV) delivers the maximum dose at the skin
surface and is commonly used to treat cutaneous neoplasia. Electron radiotherapy has replaced
398
Epithelial Neoplasms
orthovoltage radiation in human medicine, but is not yet available for veterinary patients.
Megavoltage radiation(>l MV)is not substantially better than orthovoltage therapy for
cutaneous lesions. Adverse effects of radiation therapy include cutaneous reactions ranging from
erythema and scaling to ulceration, crusting, and necrosis; local immunosuppression; and damage
to associated structures near the irradiated site. The risk of adverse effects is increased in FIV-
positivepatients.
Photodynamic therapy can be effective for in situ tumors as well as those in stages Tl and
T2. A photosensitizing agent is administered systemically; compounds such ethyl-Nile blue
sulfur are taken up preferentially by neoplastic tissues. The modality is therefore nondestructive
to adjacent tissues. The tissues are irradiated using light whose wavelength is absorbed by the
photosensitizing agent; the result is production of cytotoxic free radicals within the neoplastic
tissue. Multiple lesions can be treated simultaneously, the therapy can be given in conjunction
upper centimeter of tissue if surface radiation is used as a light source because of the penetration
depth of the wavelength absorbed by the sensitizer. This can be circumvented by placement of
intralesional fiberoptics. The best responses have been reported in lesions less than 0.5 cm in
diameter. This modality has been effective in treating early cases of invasive SCC in cats. Acute
hepatic necrosis resulted from the use of earlier photosensitizers, such as phthalocyanine dye.
Ethyl-Nile blue sulfur is cleared rapidly. Adverse effects include photosensitization for up to
4-6 weeks, facial edema, and erythema. The lesions may be painful when neoplastic tissues
necrose and slough. Current research in photodynamic therapy involves development of new
photosensitizers to improve energy delivery.
 Interferon (IFN)-o has both antiviral and antitumor properties and thus can be useful as an
adjunct to therapy for SCC that has developed secondary to papillomavirus (PV) infection. Low-
dose oral IFN-o has proved effective in prevention and therapy for viral diseases in several
species. When administered orally, IFN-c binds to cell receptors associated with mucosal
lymphoid tissue. Both local and systemic immunity are stimulated, additional IFN-o along with
IFN-β is produced, and a systemic Th, immune response is the result. Topical imiquimod is an
alternative. This imidazoquinoline amine has antiviral and antitumor effects caused by the
induction of several cytokines that stimulate both innate and cell-mediated immunity, including
IFN-α. In humans, topical application of imiquimod at a concentration of 5% (Aldara) has led to
remission in patients with Bowen's disease,PV infections, and SCC
 Oral and topical retinoid therapy has produced disappointing results in cases of SCC in cats
and dogs. Cell-mediated immunity is depressed by at least one member of the group, etretinate,
 thus retinoids could potentially enhance the progression and development of PV-associated lesions.
Results of systemic chemotherapy have been disappointing. Agents used with limited
success include bleomycin, bleomycin with doxorubicin, doxorubicin, and carboplatin in feline
SCC. Systemic cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) can be used to treat SCC in dogs, but should
not be used in cats: cisplatin can produce fatal pulmonary edema and 5-FU is neurotoxic in cats.
Intralesional chemotherapy (cisplatin and 5-FU) in a viscous gel has been used to treat both
  so    un  so e  o-   s
shown favorable responses.
13. What is Bowen's disease?
Bowen's disease in humans is a form of SCC characterized by multifocal hyperkeratotic
plaques and crusts. The lesions are referred to as "in situ" because neoplastic cells do not
penetrate the basement membrane. Sun-exposed skin is typically affected in humans. In cats,
disease. Unlike the human form of the disease, the feline disease is not associated with solar
exposure; development of multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in cats has been linked to
infection by feline papillomavirus. Dysplastic cells are confined to epidermal and follicular
epithelium and do not penetrate the basement membrane of the epidermis. Bowen's disease
Epithelial Neoplasms
399
occurs predominantly in middle-aged to older cats. Ages of affected individuals range from
 2 months to 20 years, with a mean of approximately 11.5-12 years. No predilections for sex or
coat color have been observed. The thickened and dysplastic epidermal and follicular infundibular
epithelium may be elevated, papillated, or form plaques. Crusts may form over ulcerated areas,
which may bleed and become painful when crusts are removed. Affected areas can be present for
months to years before diagnosis. Lesions are typically multifocal; over 30 tumors may be
present on a single individual, and plaques may coalesce. An irregular, but distinct, margin
surrounds the hyperkeratotic plaques and crusts, which may be pruritic. The lesions can originate
in haired or glabrous skin and may become partially alopecic. The most common sites are the
head, neck, shoulders, thoracic limbs, and digits; less common sites include ventral abdomen,
thighs, and oral mucosae.
14. How is feline Bowen's disease treated?
The preferred treatment for Bowen's disease in humans is surgical excision with wide
margins; other modalities include cryosurgery, laser surgery, electrodesiccation, radiation therapy,
and 5-FU, which is neurotoxic in cats. Because lesions are typically multiple in cats, surgical
reported for feline cases treated with alkylating agents, antibiotics, retinoids, and corticosteroids.
Photodynamic therapy has been used successfully in both human and feline Bowen's disease.
One disadvantage of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of feline Bowen's disease, however,
is that lesions commonly occur in pigmented tissues. Melanin absorbs light, thus preventing
activation of the photosensitizer. Because of the association with PV, IFN-o. might prove useful.
15. What are the different types of basal cell tumors in cats and dogs?
In veterinary medicine, the term "basal cell tumor" has been used to refer to several canine
and feline neoplasms that develop from both epidermal and adnexal basal epithelial cells. Current
preference restricts the term to the basal cell neoplasms of cats that lack adnexal features (feline
benign basal cell tumor). The tumors of low-grade malignancy that develop from pluripotential
epithelial cells in the basal layers of both the epidermis and adnexae are basal cell carcinomas.
Benign basal cell tumors of cats are uncommon, singular, conical masses up to 2 cm in
diameter. As these tumors can sometimes contain melanin, they may appear lightly to moderately
pigmented. The overlying epidermis is usually hairless and can ulcerate. Liquefactive necrosis of
the center of the tumor may make it appear cystic. These tumors are most common in Persian,
Siamese, and Himalayan cat breeds. Surgical excision is curative; observation without treatment
is an alternative. Differential diagnoses include basal cell carcinoma and its various adnexal
differentiates and trabecular trichoblastoma.
Basal cell carcinomas are considered the most common feline cutaneous neoplasm. They
can originate in basal cells in the epidermis, hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and sweat glands.
Siamese cats appear predisposed. These tumors are most common in middle-aged to older cats,
with no gender predilection. Biologic behavior is usually benign; malignant variants rarely
metastasize. The tumors are most commonly found on the head or neck. The tumors are typically
small, firm, circumscribed, and elevated. They may be pigmented, cystic, and/or lobulated.
Surgical excision is usually curative. Many tumors contain melanin. Cytology reveals basal cells,
several of which show evidence of mitosis. Despite a high mitotic index, however, basal cell
carcinomas in dogs and cats can have a variety of subtypes, depending on the degree to which the
basal cells present have matured or differentiated. These can have features of follicular or other
adnexal cells. Differential diagnoses include melanocytomas or malignant melanomas, apocrine
sweat gland tumors, sebaceous adenomas or adenocarcinomas, mast cell tumors, and other
tumors of hair follicles or adnex a.
Basal cell carcinomas are not common in dogs. A genetic predisposition is suggested from
its increased prevalence in Poodles, Siberian Huskies, Kerry Blue Terriers, Shetland Sheepdogs,
400
Epithelial Neoplasms
Cocker Spaniels, and English Springer Spaniels. Tumors develop on the thorax, head, and neck
of middle-aged to older dogs. No gender predilection has been determined. Clinical appearance
is similar to that of basal cell carcinomas in cats.
Causes of basal cell carcinoma in dogs and cats are unclear. In humans, UV light plays a
role, as discussed previously. Papillomavirus has been detected in some human basal cell
carcinomas, but not in canine or feline tumors. A genetic etiology is evidenced by the increased
frequency of tumors in some breeds of dogs and cats. The biologic behavior of BCC in humans
as been linked to alterations in the expression of some components of the basement membrane,
including bullous pemphigoid anti gen, epiligrin, and some integrins (o6 and β4). These alterations
could lead to structural defects in the lamina lucida and the hemidesmosome-anchoring fibril
complex that permit tumor invasion and metastasis.
16. What are the different types of papillomas in dogs?
Dogs can develop a variety of different papillomas (Figure 51-2); the best described types
are compared in Table 51-1. Although at least three distinct viruses have been detected, clarif-
cation of the role of individual viruses in canine papillomas awaits further genetic sequencing and
cloning
Figure 51-2 Papillomas associated with oral papillomavirus infection in a 9-week-old mixed-breed
puppy. (Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbel.)
17. What is a pigmented epidermal plaque?
Lesions formerly called pigmented epidermal nevi are now referred to as pigmented
epidermal plaques. Affected dogs have a widespread distribution of heavily pigmented, hyper-
plastic, cutaneous macules, papules, and plaques. A genetic predisposition is indicated by in-
creased prevalence in Miniature Schnauzers, Pugs, and Chinese Shar Peis; single cases have been
reported in other breeds as well (Figure 51-3). A papillomavirus distinct from the virus that
causes canine oral papillomatosis has been demonstrated in plaques from several affected
individuals. Acquired or congenital immunodeficiency may also play a role, possibly by facilitating
Epithelial Neoplasms
401
Figure 5 1-3  Pigmented epidermal plaques on the ventral abdomen of a Pomeranian. (Courtesy Dr. Karen
Carmipbell.)
viral progression, as in the human analogue, epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Therapy involves
identification and management of any underlying immunodeficiency and antiviral therapy using
IFN-α or imiquimod. Laser ablation is more appropriate than surgical excision for generalized
lesions that fail to resolve with antiviral therapy. A biopsy should be performed on ulcerated or
erythematous plaques to rule out neoplastic transformation to SCC.
18. What is the link between papillomavirus and cancer in dogs and cats?
The association between PV infection and the development of neoplasia has been documented
in several species. In cats, PV infection can lead to multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
Mechanisms of neoplastic transformation by PVs include interference with the functions of p53
gene products, leading to decreased tumor suppression. Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein is another
s
degradation, thereby facilitating cellular proliferation. Certain human PVs can also inhibit
regulation of the cell cycle by a negative-feedback, cyclin-dependent kinase.
19. How are papillomas treated in dogs and cats?
Therapy depends on the type of papilloma. Oral papillomas, resulting from canine oral
papillomavirus, commonly regress on their own. Nonspecific immunostimulants, such as low-
dose oral interferon-α, can hasten remission. Solitary papillomas, such as cutaneous inverted
papillomas or footpad papillomas, can either be surgically excised or observed without treatment.
More widespread papillomatoses, such as feline papillomas and pigmented epidermal plaques or
epidermal papules in dogs, are not amenable to surgical excision. Multiple lesions can be ablated
using a COz laser. The possibility of a predisposing underlying immunodeficiency should be
investigated and treated if identified. As with other viral-induced papillomas, interferon-α should
alternative to systemic cytokine therapy.
20. What is a cutaneous horn? What causes their formation?
Cutaneous horns are uncommon, solitary or multiple proliferations of basal cells that mature
to produce excess amounts of keratin, forming conical structures that can be several centimeters
epithelioma, and SCC. In dogs and cats, associations have been reported between cutaneous
horns and actinic keratoses or SCC, BCC, dilated pores, infundibular keratinizing acanthoma,
402
TumorsofAdnexal Origin
are restricted to subungual sites. Although cutaneous horns are themselves bemign, excisional
biopsy is recommended to determine their underlying cause.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Curiel-Lewandrowski C, Demierre M-F: Advances in specific inmmumotherapy of malignant melanoma, J Am Acad
Dermatot 43:167-185, 2000.
Fleischmann WR Jr, Koren S: Systemic effects of orally administered interferons and IL-2, J Interferon Cytokine Res
19:829-839, 1999
Goldshmidt MH, Shofer FS: Skin rumors of the dog and cat. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann.
Gross TL,Ihrke P, Walder E: Veterinary dermatopathology. A macroscopic and microscopic evaluation of canine and
feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Gupta AK, Browne M, Bluhm R: Imiquimod: a review, / Cut Med Surg 6:554-560, 2002.
the skin, ed 8, Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 685-746.
Le Clerc SM, Clark EG, Haines DH: Papillomavirus infections in association with feline cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma in situ, 13th Proceedings of the AAVD/ACVD, 1997, pp 125-126.
Le Net JL, Orth G, Sundberg JP, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules associated with a novel canine
papillomavirus in an immunosuppressed dog, Vet Pathot 34:8-14, 1997.
Nagata M, Nanko H, Moriyama A, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with papillomavirus infection in dogs: is this
epidemodysplasia verrucifomis? Vet Pathot 6:179-186, 1995.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Managing the veterinary cancer patent, Trenton, NJ, 1995, Veterinary Leaming Systems.
PenneysN: Diseases causedby viruses. In Elder E,Elenitsas R,Jaworsky C,et al (eds): Lever's histopathotogy of
the skin, ed 8. Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 569-589.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saunders.
Stokking LB, Campbell KL. Bowen's disease (multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ), Consutt Fet Intern Med
4:208-213, 2001
Sundberg JP, Smith EK, Herron AJ, et al: Involvement of canine oral papillomavirus in generalized oral and
Tanabe C, Kano R, Nagata M, et al: Molecular characteristics of cutaneous papillomavirus from the canine
pigmented epidemal nevus, / Vet Med Sci 62:1189-1192, 2000.
Teifke JP, Lohr CV, Shirasawa H: Detection of canine oral papillomavirus-DNA in canine oral squamous cell
carcinomas and p53 overexpressing skin papillomas of the dog using the polymerase chain reaction and non-
radioactive in situ hybridization, Vet Microbiot 60:119-130, 1998.
Tompkins W: Immunomodulation and therapeutic effects of the oral use of interferon α: mechanism of action, f
Interferon Cytokine Res 19:817-828, 1999.
52. TUMORS OF ADNEXAL ORIGIN
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
Brett C. Wood, DVM
1. Skin neoplasms (dog and cat) are accountable for the following approximate percentage
of all neoplasms:
Dog (skin neoplasms) = 30% of total neoplasms
Cat (skin neoplasms) = 20% of total neoplasms
The incidence of skin neoplasia is approximately six times greater in the dog than in
the cat.
402
TumorsofAdnexal Origin
are restricted to subungual sites. Although cutaneous horns are themselves bemign, excisional
biopsy is recommended to determine their underlying cause.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Curiel-Lewandrowski C, Demierre M-F: Advances in specific inmmumotherapy of malignant melanoma, J Am Acad
Dermatot 43:167-185, 2000.
Fleischmann WR Jr, Koren S: Systemic effects of orally administered interferons and IL-2, J Interferon Cytokine Res
19:829-839, 1999
Goldshmidt MH, Shofer FS: Skin rumors of the dog and cat. Oxford, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann.
Gross TL,Ihrke P, Walder E: Veterinary dermatopathology. A macroscopic and microscopic evaluation of canine and
feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Gupta AK, Browne M, Bluhm R: Imiquimod: a review, / Cut Med Surg 6:554-560, 2002.
the skin, ed 8, Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 685-746.
Le Clerc SM, Clark EG, Haines DH: Papillomavirus infections in association with feline cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma in situ, 13th Proceedings of the AAVD/ACVD, 1997, pp 125-126.
Le Net JL, Orth G, Sundberg JP, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules associated with a novel canine
papillomavirus in an immunosuppressed dog, Vet Pathot 34:8-14, 1997.
Nagata M, Nanko H, Moriyama A, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with papillomavirus infection in dogs: is this
epidemodysplasia verrucifomis? Vet Pathot 6:179-186, 1995.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Managing the veterinary cancer patent, Trenton, NJ, 1995, Veterinary Leaming Systems.
PenneysN: Diseases causedby viruses. In Elder E,Elenitsas R,Jaworsky C,et al (eds): Lever's histopathotogy of
the skin, ed 8. Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 569-589.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muller and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saunders.
Stokking LB, Campbell KL. Bowen's disease (multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ), Consutt Fet Intern Med
4:208-213, 2001
Sundberg JP, Smith EK, Herron AJ, et al: Involvement of canine oral papillomavirus in generalized oral and
Tanabe C, Kano R, Nagata M, et al: Molecular characteristics of cutaneous papillomavirus from the canine
pigmented epidemal nevus, / Vet Med Sci 62:1189-1192, 2000.
Teifke JP, Lohr CV, Shirasawa H: Detection of canine oral papillomavirus-DNA in canine oral squamous cell
carcinomas and p53 overexpressing skin papillomas of the dog using the polymerase chain reaction and non-
radioactive in situ hybridization, Vet Microbiot 60:119-130, 1998.
Tompkins W: Immunomodulation and therapeutic effects of the oral use of interferon α: mechanism of action, f
Interferon Cytokine Res 19:817-828, 1999.
52. TUMORS OF ADNEXAL ORIGIN
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
Brett C. Wood, DVM
1. Skin neoplasms (dog and cat) are accountable for the following approximate percentage
of all neoplasms:
Dog (skin neoplasms) = 30% of total neoplasms
Cat (skin neoplasms) = 20% of total neoplasms
The incidence of skin neoplasia is approximately six times greater in the dog than in
the cat.
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
403
 2. How are these skin neoplasms categorized (tissue of origin) in the dog and cat, and
what is the general prevalence of each type?
Dog: 55% mesenchymal, 40% epithelial, 5% melanocytic
Cat: 50% epithelial, 48% mesenchymal, 25% melanocytic
3. What are major characteristics of malignant neoplasia involving the skin or
subcutaneous tissue?
· Sudden onset
· Infiltrative growth
· Rapid growth
·Recurtence
· Ulceration, irritati on
· Metastasis
The most important criterion of malignancy is metastasis.
4. What is the key to appropriate management and accurate prognosis of cutaneous
neoplasms?
Specific diagnosis, which can only be achieved with surgical cutaneous biopsy sample,
histologic evaluation,and proper clinical staging when appropriate.
5. Is exfoliative cytology (aspiration and/or impression smears) accurate in all cases of
dermal neoplasia?
provide valuable information concerning cell type and differentiation in some instances
of dermal neoplasia (mast cell tumor, melanocytic tumors).
·However, ex foliative cytologic examination is inferior to and cannot substitute for histo-
pathologic diagnosis for most cases.
"A fump is a fump,until examinedhistologically.”"
6.  List some of the reasons for the growing importance of special stains (cytokeratins) and
immunohistochemical stains.
· These stains may help separate the more anaplastic tumors into specific categories.
●Predict future malignancy
·By more accurate diagnosis, treatment can be more specific
7. What is an intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (ICE) (keratoacanthoma,
 infundibular keratinizing acanthoma)?
· An uncommon, benign skin tumor seen in dogs
· Unsubstantiated reports in cats
· Occurs in dogs younger than 5 years of age
·Clinically may have a “rabbit's foot” appearance
 8. What forms does ICE occur in and in what breeds is it seen?
Solitary
Generalized
Collie
Norwegian Elkhound
Lhasa Apso
Keeshond
Yorkshire Terrier
 German Shepherd Dog
Old English Sheepdog
9. What are the treatment modalities available for both types of ICE?
Solitary
·Surgical excision using conventional methods
·Radiation therapy or laser therapy
· Cryotherapy is also useful for single, smaller lesions
404
TumorsofAdnexal Origin
Multiple
· Cryotherapy for a small number of multiple lesions 
· ICE therapy with vitamin A-related synthetic retinoids (isotretinoin, etretinate, Or
acretinoin) has been used with some success.
· CO, laser ablation
10. Surveys of hair follicle neoplasia in dogs and cats indicate that these neoplasms account
for
%of skin tumors?
Dogs =5%
Cats = 1%
11. What are neoplasms arising from the region of the hair follicle in the dog and cat?
·Tricholemmoma
· Trichoepithelioma
·Trichoblastoma
· Pilomatrixoma
12. With the reclassification of so-called basal cell tumors (see previous chapters), it seems
that the majority of previous reports of these neoplasms would currently be classified
as what type of neoplasia?
Trichoblastoma; therefore, neoplasms of the hair follicle are much more common than
recognized in earlier veterinary literature.
13. What are the characteristics of trichoblastomas?
·Common
●Usually benign
· Derived from primitive hair germ cells
·Poodle, Cocker Spaniel breeds are predisposed
·Solitary, dome shaped firm, 1-2 cm diameter
· Occur most commonly on the head, neck, or base of the ear
14. What are the characteristics of trichoepitheliomas?
·Usually solitary (Figure 52-1)
·Rarely invasive or metastatic (Figure 52-2)
+Dorsal lumbar, lateral thoracic, and extremities are common sites.
· Basset Hounds, Cocker and English Springer Spaniels, German Shepherd Dogs, Golden
Retrievers, Miniature Schnauzers, and Standard Poodles are predisposed.
Figure 52-1 Cross-section of canine trichoepithelioma.
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
405
Figure 52-2 Photomicrograph of canine trichoepithelioma (H&E ×100).
15. What are the characteristics of pilomatrixomas?
·Uncommon in dogs, rare in cats
· Predilection for neck, shoulders, lateral thorax, and back
16. Breeds predisposed to pilomatrixoma are:
·Kerty Blue Temier
· Poodle
· Old English Sheepdog
17. On cutting into a cutaneous neoplasm, it is found to be very firm, and the central core
shows areas of calcification. This is suggestive of which of the following tumors?
(a)  Trichoepithelioma
(b) Pilomatrixoma
(c)ICE
(d) Epidermal inclusion cyst
(e) Corynebacterium spp. infection
Correct answer is (b) Pilomatrixoma
18.  Incidence of sebaceous gland tumors, growths arising from sebocytes, is
in dogs
and
 in cats.
· Common in the dog, representing from 6-21% of all canine skin tumors
·Uncommon in the cat
19. What are the breeds most commonly affected with sebaceous gland tumors?
·Beagle
·Dachshund
·Cocker Spaniel
·Miniature Schnauzer
·Poodle
20. What is the percent occurrence of the different sebaceous gland tumors and their
breed associations (see previous question) and site predilections (if any)?
·Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia: 53%
·Sebaceous epithelioma: 37%,Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso,Malamute, Siberian Husky, Irish Setter
406
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
Figure 52-3 Sebaceous gland hyperplasia involving the medial canthus of an English Setter.
Figure 52-4 Nodule consisting of sebaceous gland hyperplasia on the paw of a Cocker Spaniel.
+
Sebaceous adenoma: 8%, Poodle, eyelid and limbs (Figure 52-3)
·Sebaceous carcinoma: 2%, Cocker Spaniel, head and limbs (Figure 52-4)
21. What happens to nodular sebaceous hyperplasia (is there a progression to neoplasia)?
Eighty-one percent of sebaceous epitheliomas and 54% of sebaceous adenomas had areas of
sebaceous hyperplasia peripheral to and often mixing into neoplastic areas.
These findings suggest that sebaceous hyperplasia may be a precursor to sebaceous
epitheliomas and adenomas.
22. Which of the following statements is most correct regarding sebaceous gland tumors in
2oop au
(a) All sebaceous glands are malignant
(b) Show no age or breed predilection; majority of tumors are malignant
(c) Mostly in older, giant breed dogs; majority of tumors are benign
 se si go o   s no un s ()
Correct answer is (d)
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
407
 23. Which of the following statements regarding perianal (hepatoid) gland tumors is
correct?
(a) Malignant, most commonly arise in the perianal areas of older male dogs
(b) Benign, most commonly arise in the perianal areas of older male dogs
(c) Malignant, most commonly arise in the perianal areas of older female dogs
Correct answer is (b)
24. Perianal (hepatoid) glandular tissue may be found on the dog around the:
(a)Anus
(d) Skin of the lumbar and sacral areas
(b)Prepuce
(e)All of the above
(c)Dorsal area of the tail
Correct answer is (e)
 25. What are therapeutic choices when treating perianal (hepatoid) gland adenomas?
(a) Castration is probably the single best initial choice. Tumors may regress spontaneously
over the l- to 2-month postoperative period or reduce greatly in size, making surgical
removal easier.
(b) Cryosurgery is used primarily for tumors that are less than 1-2 cm in diameter.
surgical debulking, but chronic use runs a substantial risk of bone marrow suppression.
(d) External beam radiation therapy has been reported in the treatment of benign and
malignant perianal/anal tumors but is used as more of a last resort due to increased cost
and possible morbidity associated with procedure.
26. Is there a gender predilection for perianal gland adenomas and adenocarcinomas in
the dog?
Perianal gland adenomas are nine times more common in male than in female dogs
(Figure 52-5).
27. How do circumanal gland (apocrine) carcinomas differ in their disease progression
compared to perianal gland adenomas?
·Grow more rapidly
·Grow larger
· Ulcerate
28. Are there prognostic indicators for dogs with perianal tumors?
Yes, Tumor Size
· Dogs with lesions greater than 5 cm. have an 1 1-fold higher risk of dying of tumor-related
causes; in particular, metastasis to sacral and sublumbar lymph nodes.
·Metastasis occurs in approximately 30% of cases.
29. How common are apocrine gland neoplasms of the dog and cat?
·Primary apocrine gland neoplasia is rare in dogs (approximately 2% of all skin tumors)
· More common in cats than sebaceous gland tumors.
· Adenocarcinomas are more common than adenomas (50-90% malignant),
apocrine gland tumors of the anal sac, that are more commonly seen in the veterinary patient.
30. What clinical features are consistently helpful in differentiating histologically benign
from histologically malignant tumors?
· There are no clinical features that help.
408
TumorsofAdnexal Origin
Figure 52-5 Perianal adenoma in an intact male dog.
Figure 52-6 Perianal adenocarcinoma in an intact female dog.
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
409
· Therefore, another reason for excisional biopsies with wide surgical margins.
· Unfortunately a common area on which adnexal tumors grow are the limbs; therefore
making complete surgical removal a more difficult, sometimes impossible procedure.
 Tissue flap/plastic procedures, radiation, or limb amputation would then be considered.
recommended.
31. What are some special stains that can sometimes differentiate apocrine (epitrichial)
adenomas from adenocarcinomas?
·Apocrine sweat gland (epitrichial) tumors are positive for cytokeratins.
 Carcinomas, not adenomas, are positive for carcinoembr yonic anti gen (secretory cell) and
vimentin (myoepithelial cell).
32. What are the most common neoplasms of the ear canal?
·Inflammatory polyps
· Papillomas
· Basal cell tumors
·Ceruminous gland adenomas (Figure 52-7)
Figure 52-7 Ceruminous gland adenoma (1 cm diameter) and ceruminous cysts (1 mm diameter) in the
external ear canal of a cat.
· Common malignant tumors found in the ear canal include ceruminous gland adeno-
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and carcinoma of undetermined origin.
33. What are the most common ear pinnal neoplasms?
DOG
CAT
Sebaceous gland tumors
Squamous cell carcinoma
Histiocytoma
Basal cell tumor
Mast cell tumor
Hemangiosarcoma
Melanocytic neoplasms
410
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
34. Are ceruminal gland tumors usually benign?
· Dog: ceruminal gland tumors are typically benign
· Cat: ceruminal gland tumors are malignant in 5o% of cases
35.What are common clinical observations in animals with ear canal tumors?
●Older animals
· Unilateral involvement only
· Head scratching/head-shaking behavior
· Occasionally cause bulging, ulceration/draining mass below ear in the parotid region of
the skull
· Neurologic signs (peripheral vestibular disease, facial nerve paresis, Horner's syndrome)
are noted in approximately 10% of dogs and approximately 25% of cats with ear canal
tumors.
36. What does proper clinical staging of an ear canal-based tumor include?
· Minimum database (complete blood cell count, serum biochemistry, urinalysis)
· Thoracic radiography
+ Fine needle aspirate or excisional biopsy of local lymph nodes
· Radiologic study of the skull: computed tomography of the ear canal and tympamic bullae
is recommended due to improved ability to evaluate soft tissue and bony changes and
evidence of local extension. Skull radiographs may be used to evaluate primarily for
evidence of bony changes and superimposition of anatomic structures may occur.
·Incisional biopsy may be recommended in cases of suspected neoplasia if owners are
37. What is the only effective therapy for an ear canal-based ceruminal tumor?
(TECA)
·● The best results are achieved with TECA and lateral bulla osteotomy.
· The approximate recurrence rate for ceruminous gland tumors after lateral ear resection
is 70%.
38. What is the most common signalment for anal sac gland tumors (apocrine)?
Older female dogs, often associated with hypercalcemia of malignancy (PTHrP).
39. In a female dog, which of the following tumors is most likely to show metastasis to
regional lymph nodes?
(a) Anal gland tumor
(b) Squamous cell carcinoma
(c)Papilloma
(d) Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma
Correct answer is (a)
40. What are common clinical signs noted in animals afflicted with anal sac adeno-
carcinoma?
· Palpable rectal mass noted in the region of the anal sac
●Perineal swelling
·Tenesmus
· Constipation/obstipation
· Change in the shape of stool
·Polyuria/polydipsia (associated with hypercalcemia)
Tumors of Adnexal Origin
411
41. What does the recommended clinical staging of an anal sac tumor include?
· Minimum database (complete blood cell count, serum chemistry, urinalysis)
·Thoracic radiography (low yield procedure)
·Abdominal imaging to evaluate regional lymph nodes
· In general, ultrasonography of the abdomen is considered superior to caudal abdominal
radiography for ex amination of regional lymphadenomegaly
· Rectal examination
· Exfoliative cytology of this region is usually unrewarding in differentiation between
benign and malignant processes in this region.
42. What is the general prognosis for animals with anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma?
            
12 months with local recurrence occurring in approximately 50% of operated cases.
mate 6-month survival vs 12-month survival times).
43. What are adjunctive therapies for anal sac adenocarcinoma?
External beam radiation has been offered as a monotherapy or as adjunctive therapy in cases
of incomplete resection with variable results. The efficacy for this tumor is unknown, but in most
44. Eccrine (atrichial) sweat gland tumors of the dog and cat:
· May be benign or malignant in the dog
·Almost always malignant in the cat
· Are restricted to locations on the paw pads or digits
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bevier DE, Goldschmidt MH: Skin tumors in the dog. I. Epithelial tumors and tumor like lesions, Compend Cont Ed
Smaltl Anim Vet Med 3(5):389-399, 1981.
Bevier DE, Goldschmidt MH: Skin tumors in the dog. II. Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissues, Compend Cont
Ed Small Anim Vet Med 3(6):506-520, 1981
Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth JH: Diagnostic cytotogy and hematology ofthe dog and cat.ed 2, St. Louis, 1999,
Mosby.
              
Goldschmidt MH, Bevier DE: Skin tumors in the dog. Part IIl: lymphohistiocytic and melanocytic tumors, Compend
Cont Ed Small Anim Vet Med 3:588-597, 1981
Goldschmidt MH, Dunstan RW, Stannard AA, von Tschamer C, et al: Histological classification of epithelial and
melanocytic tumors of the skin of domestic animals, AFIP, Am Reg Pathot WHO (series 2), vol 3, Washington, DC
1998.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FA: Skin tumors ofthe dog and cat. Oxford, 1992, Perganon.
Gross TL,Ihrke PJ,Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathology:a macroscopic and microscopic evaluation of canine
and feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler & Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000, WB
Saunders.
412
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
in the Dog and Cat
53. MESENCHYMAL NEOPLASMS AFFECTING
THE SKIN AND SVBCVTANEOUS
TISSUES IN THE DOG AND CAT
Timothy M.Fan, DVM, DACVIM
1.  What types of tumors may arise from the skin and subcutaneous tissues in dogs and cats?
All cell types that compose the skin and subcutaneous tissues possess the potential to
undergo malignant transformation. Tumors affecting the skin and subcutis may arise from
melanin-producing cells, cells of epithelial origin, and cells of mesenchymal origin. Mesenchymal
tumors involving the subcutis are referred to as soft tissue sarcomas. Based on histologic
morphology, soft tissue sarcomas may be described as being well, intermediate, or poorly
differentiated. Soft tissue sarcomas may arise from several tissue types including fibrous con
nective, neuronal, synovial, adipose, fascial, and neovascular tissues. The resulting neoplasms
possess variable biologic behavior, with some tumors adopting a benign phenotype, with others
being capable of early and aggressive metastasis (Table 53- 1).
Table 53-1.
Soft Tissue Sarcomas: Tissue of Origin, Biologic Phenotype,
and Metastatic Pote ntial
TISSUE OF ORIGIN
BIOLOGIC PHENOTYPE
METASTATIC POTENTIAL
Benign
Malignant
Fibrous tissue
Fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Low
Myxomatous tissue
Myxoma
My xosarcoma
Low-Intermedi ate
Blood vessel pericyte
Hemangiopericytoma
Low
Lymphatic vessel
Lymphangi oma
Lymphan giosarcoma
Intermediate
Blood vessel
Hemangioma
Hemangiosarcoma
Low-High
Adipose tissue
Lipoma
Liposarcoma
 Intermediate
Nerve
Neurofibrosarcoma
Low
Smooth muscle
Leiomyoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Low
Synovial cell 
Synovioma
Synovial cell sarcoma
Intermediate
Skeletal muscle
Rhabdomyoma
 Rhabdomyosarcoma
Intermediate
Adapted from Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE: Smalt animat clinicat oncology, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2001,
WB Saunders, p 284.
2. What are some general characteristics of soft tissue sarcomas?
Soft tissue sarcomas are raised, fleshy masses arising from the subcutaneous tissues. Tumors
can vary in size and physical appearance, as well as involve different anatomic sites (Figures 53-1
and 53-2). Tumors may be freely movable upon manipulation; however, more infiltrative lesions
can become solidly adhered to deeper structures. When surgically excised, soft tissue sarcomas
appear to be pseudoencapsulated. However, microscopically these tumors frequently have satellite
neoplastic cells peripheral to the primary lesion. Furthermore, neoplastic cells can infiltrate along
fascial planes, sometimes making complete surgical resection difficult. Incomplete surgical
Tesection of soft tissue sarcomas commonly results in a high rate of local tumor regrowth. Benign
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
413
Figure53-1
 A dog with a large, unresectable soft tissue sarcoma involving the right proximal hind leg.
Figure 53-2
A cat with a vaccine-associated sarcoma arising from the subcutaneous tissue of the right
Jateralhind leg
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
soft tissue sarcomas are not metastatic and if anatomically feasible, complete surgical resection
high metastatic potential. Approximately 25% of all malignant soft tissue sarcomas are capable
of metastasis, primarily by hematogenous routes.
3. How frequently do soft tissue sarcomas affect the dog and cat?
 Soft tissue sarcomas make up a minority of neoplasms affecting the subcutis of the dog and
cat. For canines, approximately 15% of all subcutaneous tumors may be categorized as soft tissue
sarcomas. In felines the incidence of soft tissue sarcomas is only 7% of all subcutaneous
neoplasms. Despite the relatively low incidence of soft tissue sarcomas that affect the dog and
cat, because of their invasive properties these tumors contribute significantly to patient morbidity
andmortality.
4. Are there known causative factors for the development of soft tissue sarcomas in the
dogandcat?
In the dog, the development of soft tissue sarcomas has been associated with exposure to
directly inducing DNA damage or promoting cellular proliferation subsequent to chronic inflam-
mation. Exposure to ionizing radiation can damage DNA, which may result in the development
of soft tissue sarcomas.Additionally,chronic inflammation secondary to parasitic migration,
foreign bodies, and metal implants has been reported to induce malignant transformation of bone
and associated soft tissue structures. Despite the recognition of physical carcinogens as a
potential risk factor, the etiology of soft tissue sarcoma development remains largely unknown in
dogs. Similarly in felines, only a few causes responsible for the development of soft tissue
sarcomas have been identified.Combined retroviral infections with feline sarcoma virus and
feline leukemia virus have been demonstrated to cause the spontaneous development of multiple
soft tissue sarcomas in cats. The administration of injections, vaccine and non-vaccine, have been
incriminated with the development of vaccine-associated soft tissue sarcomas in cats
5. How may soft tissue sarcomas be diagnosed?
When compared to round cell or epithelial neoplasms, mesenchymal tumors do not ex foliate
well. Because mesenchymal cells tend to adhere tightly with one another, cytologic evaluation of
suspect soft tissue sarcomas by fine-needle aspiration can be non-diagnostic or unreliable.
Sampling of tumor tissue via a biopsy for histologic evaluation is considered the most reliable
means for arriving at a definitive diagnosis. If the cancerous population is well differentiated,
identifying the exact cell of origin is possible. In some cases where soft tissue sarcomas are
poorly differentiated, routine histologic examination may not provide adequate information to
determine if the cancerous cells are mesenchymal, hematopoietic, or epithelial in origin. In these
circumstances, suspect mesenchymal tumors may be further characterized by the application of
antibodies specific for mesenchymal markers. Common immunohistochemical stains applied to
suspect mesenchymal tumors include vimentin, desmin, and actin. Undifferentiated mesenchymal
cancers may be diagnosed by the presence of the intermediate filament, vimentin. Additionally,
skeletal and smooth muscles contain the intermediate filaments actin and desmin, allowing for the
identification of poorly differentiated smooth muscle tumors (leiomyoma/leiomyosarcoma) and
striated muscle tumors (rhabdomyoma/rhabdomyos arcoma).
6. What factors may be useful for predicting soft tissue sarcoma metastatic potential?
biologic behavior. Although all malignant soft tissue sarcomas are capable of distant hematog-
enous metastasis, certain tumor types have been reported to possess higher metastatic rates than
others. Subcutaneous hemangiosarcoma, synovial cell sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma are three
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
415
soft tissue sarcomas reported to possess higher biologic aggressiveness with the formation of
distant metastasis in a majority of affected canine patients. Histologic grading of soft tissue
sarcomas can also be useful for predicting metastatic behavior. The assignment of histologic
grade depends on several histologic features including degree of morphologic differentiation and
mitotic index. Tumors may be categorized as being high-, intermediate-, or low-grade. The high-
grade tumors are most likely to be metastatic, while low-grade tumors tend to be locally confined.
7. What additional diagnostic tests should be recommended once a diagnosis of soft tissue
sarcoma has been reached?
Perforrming additional diagnostic tests on cancer patients is called clinical staging, and the
purpose is to determine the extent of neoplastic involvement. The thoroughness of clinical staging
is often dictated by the predicted biologic behavior of the tumor. In the case of benign soft tissue
sarcomas, the likelihood of distant metastasis is low; therefore attention should be focused
primarily on local disease control. For the successful management of local disease, accurately
assessing the extent of local tumor involvement is paramount for thorough surgical planning.
Routine radiographs as well as advanced imaging techniques such as computed tomography and
magnetic resonance imaging may be required to determine the feasibility of complete surgical
resection (Figure 53-3). Patients diagnosed with malignant, high-grade soft tissue sarcomas
should be thoroughly staged with a complete blood cell count, serum chemistry panel, urinalysis,
thoracic radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound.
Figure 53-3 The rapid and aggressive
development of a large, invasive soft tissue
sarcoma in a cat affecting the interscapular
region after vaccination.
416
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
8. When performing surgery on soft tissue sarcomas, is there a better chance of long-term
control with a single, aggressive surgery or with multiple, conservative resections?
As a rule of thumb, soft tissue sarcomas are best managed by a single, well-planned,
aggressive surgical resection. Given the rapidly infiltrative nature of many malignant soft tissue
sarcomas, it is not the best therapeutic option to perform several conservative cytoreductive
neoplastic cells along the entire incision line, ultimately favoring the spreading of local disease.
9. What types of therapeutic modalities are available for the long-term management of
soft tissue sarcomas in dogs and cats if surgical resection fails to be curative?
Unfortunately, because soft tissue sarcomas may arise from virtually any anatomic portion
of the body, some tumors are not amenable to complete resection. Tumors involving the
cranium, nasal passages, caudal mandible or maxilla may be particularly difficult to achieve
volume to microscopic disease, the adjunctive use of curative radiation therapy should be
recommended to maximize long-term local disease control. For large soft tissue sarcomas that are
not amenable to any surgical options, the use of radiation therapy in a palliative setting should
be offered as a therapeutic modality that may minimize rapid local tumor growth and associated
discomfort.
10. For dogs and cats with malignant soft tissue sarcomas that have metastasized to distant
sites, are there other treatment options that should be recommended in addition to
surgery and adjunctive radiation therapy?
Management of metastatic disease requires systemic chemotherapy. In human beings,
sarcoma burden including dox orubicin (Adriamycin), dacarbazine, and ifosfamide. Currently,
Adriamycin-based protocols are recommended for the treatment of both dogs and cats with
metastatic soft tissue sarcomas. Mitox antrone has been demonstrated to possess some therapeutic
efficacy for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas in both dogs and cats. The use of dacarbazine
for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas has not been described in the veterinary literature.
Ifosfamide can be safely administered to both dogs and cats,although its efficacy for the
11. In the cat, what type of tumors may form secondary to vaccination, and how common
is this undesirable complication?
Histologically, vaccine-induced sarcomas may arise from any tissue type normally found
within the subcutaneous space, including fibrous connective tissue and striated muscle.
Classically, tumors developing within the interscapular space anise from fibrous connective tissue
and develop into locally aggressive fibrosarcomas (Figure 53-4). Other tumor types that may
develop at the site of injections include poorly differentiated sarcomas and rhabdomyosarcomas.
Although these soft tissue sarcomas tend to be difficult to cure with even aggressive muli-
modality therapy including surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic chemotherapy, their overall
incidence remains relatively low. Estimated frequency for vaccine-induced sarcoma formation
has been reported to range from three to ten cats affected for every 1o,0o0 cats vaccinated.
12. Are there certain types of vaccines that have been more heavily incriminated in the
development of vaccine-associated sarcomas in the cat?
Analysis of various nisk factors thought to contribute to the development of vaccine-
associated sarcomas has been investigated. A greater relative risk for tumor formation has been
ascribed to the administration of rabies and feline leukemia virus vaccines compared to other
vaccination types. Although certain vaccines have been associated with greater risks for sarcoma
development, it should be emphasized that the steps in tumorigenesis are likely attributed to
Mesenchymal Neoplasms Affecting the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
417
Figure 53-4A transverse image acquired by computed tomography of a vaccine-associated sarcoma in a
cat permits accurate assessment of tumor invasiveness.
13. What is the biologic behavior of feline vaccine-associated soft tissue sarcomas?
surgical resections. Rapid tumor regrowth is common. The metastatic rate for vaccine-associated
sarcomas has been reported to be 15-25%. Multimodality therapy with surgery, curative radiation
therapy, and systemic chemotherapy offers the greatest survival times. Adriamycin in conjunction
with cyclophosphamide or carboplatin-based protocols have demonstrated efficacy for the
cytoreduction is generally short-lived.
14.  Hemangiopericytoma is a common malignant soft tissue sarcoma that affects the distal
extremities of older dogs. What is the cell of origin for this common tumor type and
what is its metastatic potential?
Hemangiopericytomas arise from adventitial pericytes of small vessels. Histologically, these
these tumors have an extremely low metastatic rate (<5%) and usually are cured with radical
excision. If complete surgical resection is not possible, curative radiation therapy for microscopic
residual disease affords long-term management.
15. How biologically aggressive are cutaneous and subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas
compared to hemangiosarcomas arising from the spleen?
splenic hemangiosarcoma have evidence of macroscopic metastatic disease at time of diagnosis
Hemangiosarcoma confined to the skin or dermis possesses a low metastatic potential, with
418
Cutaneous Mast Celf Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
Tadical surgical resection often being curative. On the contrary, hemangiosarcoma involving the
16. Are there differences between soft tissue sarcomas that arise from muscle cells?
Tumors that develop from muscle may arise from either smooth or striated muscle. Both
types of muscle tumors can adopt either benign or malignant phenotypes. Smooth muscle tumors
include leiomyomas (benign) and leiomyosarcomas (malignant). Often these smooth muscle
tumors involve the gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneal space, or visceral organ linings. Striated
muscle tumors include rhabdomyomas (benign) and rhabdomyosarcomas (malignant).
Rhabdomyosarcomas tend to affect young dogs and have a relatively high metastatic rate.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barber LG, Sorenmo KU, Cronin KL,et al: Combined doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for
nonresectable feline fibrosarcoma, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(5):416-421, 2000.
Forrest LJ, Chun R, Adams WM, et al: Postoperative radiotherapy for canine soft tissue sarcoma, / Vet lntern Med
14(6):578-582, 2000
Hendrick Ml: Historical review and current knowledge of risk factors involved in feline vaccine-associated
sarcomas, / Am Vet Med Assoc 213(10):1422-1423, 1998.
Kim DY, Hodgin EC, Cho DY, et al: Juvenile rhabdomyosarcomas in two dogs, Vet Pathot 33(4):447-450, 1996.
MacEwen GE, Powers BE, Macy D, Withrow SJ: Soft tissue sarcomas: In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smal
animat clinicat oncology, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, 283-304.
McEntee MC, Page RL: Feline vaccine-associated sarcomas, / Vet Intern Med 15(3):176-182, 2001.
Ogilvie GK, Obradovich JE, Elmslie RE, et al: Efficacy of mitoxantrone against various neoplasms in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 198(9):1618-1621, 1991.
Rassnick KM, Frimberger AE, Wood CA, et al: Evaluation of ifosfamide for treatment of various canine neoplasms,
Vet /ntern Med 14(3):271-276, 2000.
Vail DM, Powers BE, Getzy DM, et al: Evaluation of prognostic factors for dogs with synovial sarcoma: 36 cases
(1986-1991), / Am Vet Med Assoc 205(9):1300-1307, 1994.
Ward H, Fox LE, Calderwood-Mays MB, et al: Cutaneous hemangiosarcoma in 25 dogs: a retrospective study, / Vet
nterrn Med 8(5):345-348, 1994.
54. CUTANEOUS MAST CELL NEOPLASIA IN
THE DOG AND CAT
Timothy M. Fan, DVM, DACVIM
1. Where are mast cells found, and what are their normal functions?
Mast cells arise from the bone marrow as multipotential hematopoietic stem cells, migrating
to and maturing in connective and mucosal tissues. High concentrations of mast cells are
found in parts of the body that interface with the environment,allowing them to orchestrate
immunologic responses to invading pathogens. Mast cell activation results in the release of
several inflammatory mediators that enhance capillary membrane permeability and allow for the
efficient recruitment of additional host defense cells including macrophages, neutrophils, and
lymphocytes to sites of infection and inflammation. Mast cells play a critical role in many
inflammatory diseases including asthma, rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, urticaria, anaphylaxis, and
food allergies.
418
Cutaneous Mast Celf Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
Tadical surgical resection often being curative. On the contrary, hemangiosarcoma involving the
16. Are there differences between soft tissue sarcomas that arise from muscle cells?
Tumors that develop from muscle may arise from either smooth or striated muscle. Both
types of muscle tumors can adopt either benign or malignant phenotypes. Smooth muscle tumors
include leiomyomas (benign) and leiomyosarcomas (malignant). Often these smooth muscle
tumors involve the gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneal space, or visceral organ linings. Striated
muscle tumors include rhabdomyomas (benign) and rhabdomyosarcomas (malignant).
Rhabdomyosarcomas tend to affect young dogs and have a relatively high metastatic rate.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barber LG, Sorenmo KU, Cronin KL,et al: Combined doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for
nonresectable feline fibrosarcoma, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(5):416-421, 2000.
Forrest LJ, Chun R, Adams WM, et al: Postoperative radiotherapy for canine soft tissue sarcoma, / Vet lntern Med
14(6):578-582, 2000
Hendrick Ml: Historical review and current knowledge of risk factors involved in feline vaccine-associated
sarcomas, / Am Vet Med Assoc 213(10):1422-1423, 1998.
Kim DY, Hodgin EC, Cho DY, et al: Juvenile rhabdomyosarcomas in two dogs, Vet Pathot 33(4):447-450, 1996.
MacEwen GE, Powers BE, Macy D, Withrow SJ: Soft tissue sarcomas: In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smal
animat clinicat oncology, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, 283-304.
McEntee MC, Page RL: Feline vaccine-associated sarcomas, / Vet Intern Med 15(3):176-182, 2001.
Ogilvie GK, Obradovich JE, Elmslie RE, et al: Efficacy of mitoxantrone against various neoplasms in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 198(9):1618-1621, 1991.
Rassnick KM, Frimberger AE, Wood CA, et al: Evaluation of ifosfamide for treatment of various canine neoplasms,
Vet /ntern Med 14(3):271-276, 2000.
Vail DM, Powers BE, Getzy DM, et al: Evaluation of prognostic factors for dogs with synovial sarcoma: 36 cases
(1986-1991), / Am Vet Med Assoc 205(9):1300-1307, 1994.
Ward H, Fox LE, Calderwood-Mays MB, et al: Cutaneous hemangiosarcoma in 25 dogs: a retrospective study, / Vet
nterrn Med 8(5):345-348, 1994.
54. CUTANEOUS MAST CELL NEOPLASIA IN
THE DOG AND CAT
Timothy M. Fan, DVM, DACVIM
1. Where are mast cells found, and what are their normal functions?
Mast cells arise from the bone marrow as multipotential hematopoietic stem cells, migrating
to and maturing in connective and mucosal tissues. High concentrations of mast cells are
found in parts of the body that interface with the environment,allowing them to orchestrate
immunologic responses to invading pathogens. Mast cell activation results in the release of
several inflammatory mediators that enhance capillary membrane permeability and allow for the
efficient recruitment of additional host defense cells including macrophages, neutrophils, and
lymphocytes to sites of infection and inflammation. Mast cells play a critical role in many
inflammatory diseases including asthma, rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, urticaria, anaphylaxis, and
food allergies.
Cutaneous Mast Cell Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
419
 2. How are mast cells activated, and what types of mediators are they capable of releasing?
When mast cells are activated, they release cytoplasmic granules containing various
inflammatory mediators in a process called degranulation. Mast cells can be degranulated either
type I hypersensitivity reaction where mast cells release preformed and newly synthesized
inflammatory mediators in response to antigen cross-linking of receptor-bound IgE. Mast cell
degranulation can also be initiated by non-immunologic mechanisms including changes in
temperature and pressure, as well as by simple physical manipulation. Mast cell secretory granules
contain many preformed substances including histamine, heparin, chymase, tryptase, chondroitin
sulfate, and several other vasoactive amines. In addition to the release of preformed mediators,
mast cells are capable of de novo synthesis of inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis
factor and several interleukins that amplify the adaptive immune response.
 3. What causes a normal mast cell to undergo a malignant change that may result in the
development of a mast cell tumor?
Several genetic factors appear to be involved in the development of mast cell tumors. One
of the most recently identified mutations in the dog is a growth factor receptor called c-kit.
Mutations in c-kit result in a continuous proliferative signal, allowing for the transformation of
mechanism for malignant transformation in cats remains poorly defined due to the failure to
identify c-kit mutations in feline mast cell tumors.
 4. Have any breed predispositions been reported for the development of cutaneous mast
cell tumors in dogs and cats?
Cutaneous mast cell tumors can occur in any breed of dog or cat, however some breeds are
more commonly affected. In the dog, mast cell neoplasia appears to be over-represented in
Boxers, Boston Terriers, Labrador Retrievers, Beagles, and Schnauzers. Furthermore, mast cell
type. Chinese Shar Peis commonly present with extensive cutaneous tumor burden with early
metastasis to local and distant sites (Figure 54- 1). In the cat, cutaneous mast cell tumors can be
cell tumors.
5. What does a cutaneous mast cell tumor look like?
The majority of canine and feline mast cell tumors arise from the derimis and subcutaneous
tissues. Dogs and cats are generally presented for the evaluation of a cutaneous mass that may
rapidly change in size and coloration subsequent to intermittent mast cell degranulation. It is
physical characteristics. Most commonly, cutaneous mast cell tumors will appear as raised skin
lesions, which may rapidly increase in size and develop a vasodilatory blush (Darrier's sign)
when physically manipulated (Figure 54-2). Cutaneous mast cell tumors usually arise as solitary
lesions; however, it is not uncommon for patients, especially young cats, to manifest with
multiple tumors at the same time.
6.Anatomically, where are the most common sites of cutaneous involvement in the dog
and cat?
In the dog, cutaneous mast cell tumors are most commonly identified on the trunk and distal
extremities. Biologic aggressiveness of canine cutaneous mast cell tumors appears to be
influenced by the anatomic site of involvement. Canine cutaneous mast cell tumors arising from
the claw bed, oral cavity, and other mucocutaneous sites such as the prepuce, vulva, and perianal
420
Cutaneous Mast Cell Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
Figure 54-1Extensive and aggressive cutaneous mast cell neoplasia infiltration in a Chinese Shar Pei.
terized by early local metastasis. In the cat, cutaneous mast cell tumors most commonly involve
the head and neck regions (Figure 54-3); however, they can affect the trunk and extremities as
well. Unlike their dog counterpart, the biologic behavior of most feline cutaneous mast cell
tumors is beni gn with rare metastasis to local or distant sites.
7. How are cutaneous mast cell tumors diagnosed?
The diagnosis of a mast cell tumor is not difficult and can be achieved by either cytology or
histopathology. A sample obtained by fine-needle aspiration is often cellular enough to make a
definitive diagnosis. Cytologically, mast cells are characterized as discrete round cells with
abundant cytoplasmic granules (Figure 54-4). The classic metachromatic staining pattern observed
is due to the presence of negatively charged proteoglycans such as heparin that bind avidly to
cationic dyes. Poorly differentiated mast cell tumors may lack characteristic metachromatic
Cutaneous Mast Cell Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
421
Figure 54-2  Darrier's sign: significant inflammation and swelling of an interdigital mast cell tumor in a
dog subsequent to mast cell degranulation.
Figure 54-3Multiple independent primary mast cell tumors affecting the face of a cat.
422
Cutaneous Mast Celf Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
Figure54-4Cytologic appearance of a mast cell tumor specimen acquired by routine fine-needle
aspiration (Wright stain, xlooo). Note the monomorphic round cell population with discrete cytoplasmic
granules.
granules and require more specialized immunohistochemical staining techniques to determine the
ex act cell origin.
8. Is there an advantage of cytology versus histology for the diagnosis of mast cell tumors?
Cytology is easy and allows for a rapid diagnosis; however, standard cytologic evaluation
has not been demonstrated to accurately predict the biologic behavior of cutaneous mast cell
tumors. Histologic evaluation of canine mast cell neoplasia classifies tumors into three distinct
histologic grades (1, I, and Il) and provides a relatively accurate method of predicting biologic
aggressiveness. Grade I mast cell tumors tend to be locally confined to the skin and non-
with regional 1ymph node and distant organ metastasis. Grade Ill mast cell tumors tend to be
biologically aggressive with high metastatic rates to systemic sites. Unfortunately, the established
histologic grading scale does not seem to apply well to cutaneous feline mast cell tumors.
 9. What additional diagnostic tests should be recommended once a diagnosis of cutaneous
mast cell tumor has been reached?
should be dictated by the predicted biologic behavior of the tumor. Even with the implementation
of the established histologic grading scheme, predicting biologic behavior can sometimes be
difficult and inaccurate. For this reason, most dogs and cats diagnosed with cutaneous mast cell
tumors are routinely clinically staged with a complete blood cell count, serum chemistry panel,
urinalysis, and imaging studies (thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound). As clinically
indicated, lymph nodes draining the primary mast cell tumor should be cytologically evaluated.
10. What type of systemic clinical signs can be observed in a dog or cat manifesting with a
cutaneous mast cell tumor?
 Systemic manifestations from primary cutaneous mast cell tumors are rare. However, if the
of initial presentation. In dogs, neoplastic infiltration to the local draining lymph node is the most
comimon metastatic site for mast cell tumors. Distant visceral organ involvement may occur with
aggressive and advanced disease, manifesting in some dogs as vomiting, diarrhea, and melena
secondary to excessive histamine release from mast cell degranulation. In the cat, primary
Cutaneous Mast Celf Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
423
Figure 54-5 Cytologic appearance of a bone marrow aspirate specimen from a cat affected with advanced
cells mixed armong normal bone marrow precursor cells.
cutaneous mast cell tumors tend not to cause systemic illness due to their overall benign biologic
behavior. Some cats will manifest with visceral mast cell neoplasia, which can cause significant
morbidity and mortality due to extensive organ infiltration including the spleen, liver, intestines,
and bone marrow (Figure 54-5). Clinical signs observed in cats with visceral mastocytosis tend
to be nonspecific, such as weight loss, anorexia, vomition, diarrhea, and lethargy. Despite com-
monality of neoplastic mast cells, it remains unclear if feline cutaneous and visceral mastocytosis
are distinct disease processes or simply a continuum of one type of cancer.
11. What factors should be considered when outlining the optimal treatment path for a
dog or cat diagnosed with a cutaneous mast cell tumor?
Treatment options available for either curing or managing mast cell tumors include surgery,
radiation therapy, and systemic chemotherapy. Implementation of these therapeutic options alone
Or surgery plus radiation therapy usually provides excellent cure rates of greater than 95%. Mast
cell tumors that are metastatic may also be managed successfully with multimodality therapy, but
are rarely cured. The addition of systemic chemotherapy is strongly recommended for the treat-
12. For surgical resection of cutaneous mast cell tumors, what are the recommended
surgical margins?
With locally confined mast cell tumors, complete surgical excision has proven to be the most
curative therapeutic modality. All surgical margins should be histologically evaluated for
completeness of surgical excision. If histologic evaluation reveals an incomplete excision or
excision with a narrow margin, additional treatment modalities should be implemented to
max imize local tumor control. In amenable anatomic regions such as the trunk or flank, a second
surgical resections, including the distal extremities and head/neck areas, adjunctive curative
radiation therapy provides excellent local tumor control rates of greater than 95%.
13. When is it appropriate to recommend the use of systemic chemotherapy?
The use of antineoplastic agents should be reserved for the management of disseminated
424
Cutaneous Mast Cell Neoplasia in the Dog and Cat
visceral mastocytosis should be considered as candidates for systemic chemotherapy. Several
chemotherapeutic agents have been identified as possessing efficacy against mast cell neoplasia
in the dog and include combination protocols using prednisone, vinblastine, cyclophosphamide,
and lomustine (Table 54-1).
Table 54-1S
Systemic Chemotherapy for Macroscopic Mast Cell Tumor Burden
STUDY
SURVIVAL
DRUG PROTOCOL
SIZE
TIME
RESPONSE RATES
21-day cycle (Elmslie, 1996)
la Cyclophosphamide:
14 dogs
150 days
11/14 partial remission
250-300 mg/m2
Overall response rate: 78%
PO over 4 days, on day
8, 9, 10, and 11
Ib Vinblastine: 2-3 mg/m² IV
on day 1
Ic Prednisone: 1 mg/kg PO SID
(Thamm et al., 1999)
 2α Vinblastine: 2 mg/m² IV every 15 dogs
154 days
5/15 complete remission
7-14 days
 2/15 partial remission
 2b Prednisone: 2 mg/kg PO SID
Overall response rate: 47%
4 weekly treatments, followed
 by 4 biweekly treatments
(Rassnick et al., 1999)
3a Lomustine: 90 mg/m² PO
19 dogs
Not reported
1/19 complete remission
every 21 days
7/19 partial remission
Overall response rate: 42%
IV, Intravenously; PO, orally; SID, once a day.
14. In addition to chemotherapy for the management of systemic disease, are there other
drugs that can be used to provide symptomatic relief from advanced metastatic mast
cell neoplasia?
Advanced mast cell neoplasia is capable of causing systemic illness as a direct consequence
of vital organ infltration. Additionally, mast cell degranulation with the liberation of
inflammatory cytokines and histamine can lead to clinical signs of disease. The effects of massive
activation in vascular endothelium. Furthermore, histamine can lead to excessive hydrochloric
acid production by the gastric parietal cell with subsequent gastric ulceration due to histamine
type I1 (H2) receptor activation. Blockade of H1 receptors with diphenhydramine (2-4 mg/kg
orally thrice daily) may be implemented to prevent sudden hypotension associated with histamine-
induced vasodilation. Blockade of gastric H2 receptors with cimetidine (Tagamet; 5-10 mg/kg
orally every 6-8 hours), ranitidine (Zantac; 1-4 mg/kg orally every 8-12 hours), or famotidine
(Pepcid A/C; 0.3-0.6 mg/kg orally every 8-12 hours) should be implemented to minimize gastric
irritation from excessive parietal cell hydrochloric acid secretion.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A1-Sarraf R, Mauldin GN, Patnaik AK, Meleo KA: A prospective study of radiation therapy for the treatment of
grade 2 mast cel11 tumors in 32 dogs, J Vet intern Med 10(6):376-378, 1996.
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
425
Dank G, Chien MB, London CA: Activating mutations in the catalytic or juxtamembrane domain of c-kit in splenic
mast cell tumors of cats, Am / Vet Res 63(8):1129-1133, 2002.
Elmslie R: Combination chemotherapy with and without surgery for dogs with high-grade mast cell tumors with
regional lymph node metastases, Vet Cancer Soc Newstetter 6-7, 1996.
Frimberger AE, Moore AS, LaRue SM, et al: Radiotherapy of incompletely resected, moderately differentiated mast
cel1 tumors in the dog: 37 cases (1989-1993), / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(4):320-324, 1997.
London CA, Galli SJ, Yuuki T, et al: Spontaneous canine mast celltumors express tandem duplications in the proto-
oncogene c-kit, Exp Hematot 27(4):689-697, 1999.
Miller DM: The occurrence of mast cell tumors in young Shar-Peis, / Vet Diagn Invest 7(3):360-363, 1995.
Patnaik AK, Ehler WJ, MacEwen EG: Canine cutaneous mast cell tumor: morphological grading and survival time
in 83 dogs, Vet Pathot 21:469-474, 1984.
Rassnick KM, Moore AS, Williams LE, et al: Treatment of canine mast cell tumors with CCNU (lomustine),
J Vet Intern Med 13(6):601-605, 1999.
Thamm DH, Mauldin EA, Vail DM: Prednisone and vinblastine chemmotherapy for canine mast cell tumor: 41 cases
(1992-1997), / Vet Intern Med 13(5):491-497, 1999
Thamm DH, Vail DM: Mast cell tumors. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smalt animat ctinicat oncology, ed 3.
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 261-282.
55. LYMPHOHISTIOCYTIC NEOPLASMS
John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
Louis-Philippe de Lorimier, DVM, DACVM
1. What is a histiocyte?
The term "histiocyte" is used to describe three populations of cells derived from a common
bone-marrow precursor: (1) peripheral blood monocytes, (2) tissue macrophages, and (3) myeloid
dendritic cells. With use of light microscopy, macrophages and dendritic cells appear to be
virtually identical; moreover, other leukocytes and non-leukocytic cells can have morphologic
features similar to histiocytes. Therefore, additional phenotyping by immunohistochemistry Of
flow cytometry is required to differentiate the true origins of "histiocytic" cells seen on cytologic
or histologic studies.
 2. Which specific cell type causes the solitary cutaneous histiocytoma of young dogs?
onigin. Langerhans cells are tissue dendritic cells of the skin and are essential for induction of
processing, and antigen-presenting cells of the skin. Their main function is to educate naive
T cells during induction of the primary immune response and to serve as sentinels for recognition
of antigen, activating antigen-specific T cells during the secondary immune response upon
subsequent exposure
Most likely, the solitary cutaneous histiocytomas of young dogs are abnormal proliferations
of reactive Langerhans cells, rather than true neoplasms. Researchers studying this condition
have suggested that the term "epidermotropic Langerhans cell histiocytosis" be used instead of
"histiocytoma."
 3. What are the clinical characteristics of the canine cutaneous histiocytoma?
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is a common benign dermal growth, most often seen in dogs
younger than 3 years of age. Affected dogs typically develop a single, solitary mass on the head,
pinnae, distal limb, or scrotum; the majority of lesions occur on the cranial half of the body. The
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
425
Dank G, Chien MB, London CA: Activating mutations in the catalytic or juxtamembrane domain of c-kit in splenic
mast cell tumors of cats, Am / Vet Res 63(8):1129-1133, 2002.
Elmslie R: Combination chemotherapy with and without surgery for dogs with high-grade mast cell tumors with
regional lymph node metastases, Vet Cancer Soc Newstetter 6-7, 1996.
Frimberger AE, Moore AS, LaRue SM, et al: Radiotherapy of incompletely resected, moderately differentiated mast
cel1 tumors in the dog: 37 cases (1989-1993), / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(4):320-324, 1997.
London CA, Galli SJ, Yuuki T, et al: Spontaneous canine mast celltumors express tandem duplications in the proto-
oncogene c-kit, Exp Hematot 27(4):689-697, 1999.
Miller DM: The occurrence of mast cell tumors in young Shar-Peis, / Vet Diagn Invest 7(3):360-363, 1995.
Patnaik AK, Ehler WJ, MacEwen EG: Canine cutaneous mast cell tumor: morphological grading and survival time
in 83 dogs, Vet Pathot 21:469-474, 1984.
Rassnick KM, Moore AS, Williams LE, et al: Treatment of canine mast cell tumors with CCNU (lomustine),
J Vet Intern Med 13(6):601-605, 1999.
Thamm DH, Mauldin EA, Vail DM: Prednisone and vinblastine chemmotherapy for canine mast cell tumor: 41 cases
(1992-1997), / Vet Intern Med 13(5):491-497, 1999
Thamm DH, Vail DM: Mast cell tumors. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen GE (eds): Smalt animat ctinicat oncology, ed 3.
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 261-282.
55. LYMPHOHISTIOCYTIC NEOPLASMS
John C. Angus, DVM, DACVD
Louis-Philippe de Lorimier, DVM, DACVM
1. What is a histiocyte?
The term "histiocyte" is used to describe three populations of cells derived from a common
bone-marrow precursor: (1) peripheral blood monocytes, (2) tissue macrophages, and (3) myeloid
dendritic cells. With use of light microscopy, macrophages and dendritic cells appear to be
virtually identical; moreover, other leukocytes and non-leukocytic cells can have morphologic
features similar to histiocytes. Therefore, additional phenotyping by immunohistochemistry Of
flow cytometry is required to differentiate the true origins of "histiocytic" cells seen on cytologic
or histologic studies.
 2. Which specific cell type causes the solitary cutaneous histiocytoma of young dogs?
onigin. Langerhans cells are tissue dendritic cells of the skin and are essential for induction of
processing, and antigen-presenting cells of the skin. Their main function is to educate naive
T cells during induction of the primary immune response and to serve as sentinels for recognition
of antigen, activating antigen-specific T cells during the secondary immune response upon
subsequent exposure
Most likely, the solitary cutaneous histiocytomas of young dogs are abnormal proliferations
of reactive Langerhans cells, rather than true neoplasms. Researchers studying this condition
have suggested that the term "epidermotropic Langerhans cell histiocytosis" be used instead of
"histiocytoma."
 3. What are the clinical characteristics of the canine cutaneous histiocytoma?
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is a common benign dermal growth, most often seen in dogs
younger than 3 years of age. Affected dogs typically develop a single, solitary mass on the head,
pinnae, distal limb, or scrotum; the majority of lesions occur on the cranial half of the body. The
426
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
Figure 55-1 Ulcerated, solitary histiocytoma on the digit of a dog. (Courtesy Dr. Carlos Souza.)
nodule is usually small (less than 2 cm), erythematous, firm, well-circumscribed, hairless,
occasionally ulcerated, and freely movable over underlying tissues (Figures 55-1 and 55-2).
 Early growth of the lesion is often rapid, reaching maximal size in 1-4 weeks. This stage is
followed by spontaneous regression over 1-3 months. In exceptionally uncommon cases, regional
lymph node involvement may be seen. In these rare cases, lymphadenopathy typically resolves
as the primary lesion regresses.
 4. Describe the cytologic findings of a fine-needle aspirate specimen from a canine
cutaneous histiocytoma.
population of mononuclear round cells. Cytoplasm may be pale to basophilic. Nuclei are round
or indented, with rare nucleoli; chromatin appears finely granular (Figure 55-3). Binucleated cells
and mitotic figures can be observed, especially during the rapid growth phase. Lymphocytes
become more prominent in cytologic samples as the lesion ages and regresses.
5. Besides histiocytoma, name seven other differential diagnoses for dermal tumors of
dogs that exfoliate predominantly mononuclear, epithelioid round cells on fine-needle
aspirate specimen. In other words, give seven additional differential diagnoses for
"discrete cell" neoplasia.
· Mast cell tumor
·Plasmacytoma (Figure 55-4)
· Cutaneous lymphoma (Figure 55-5)
· Transmissible venereal tumor
·Melanoma
·Basal cell tumor
●Merkel cell tumor (a rare, neuroendocrine neoplasm)
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
427
Figure 55-2 Solitary histiocytoma on the hind leg of a dog. Note the classic, sharply dermarcated, raised,
erythermatous, alopecic appearance. (Courtesy Dr. Carlos Souza.)
Figure 55-3 Photomicrograph of a cytologic sample obtained by fine-needle aspiration of a solitary
cutaneous histiocytoma from a dog. (Courtesy Dr. Anne Barger.)
428
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
Figure55-4Photomicrograph of a cytologic sample obtainedby fine-needle aspirationof an
extramedullary plasmacytoma from a dog.
Figure 55-5 Photomicrograph of a cytologic sample obtained by fine-needle aspiration of an epithelio-
tropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma nodule. (Courtesy Dr. Anne Barger.)
6. Does the biologic behavior of canine cutaneous histiocytomas differ between young
dogs (<3 years) and older dogs (>5 years)?
As mentioned in Question 3, histiocytomas of young dogs tend to be solitary, do not usually
involve regional lymph nodes, and typically regress spontaneously in 1-3 months. While histio-
cytomas of older dogs may behave in the same benign fashion, there is an increased risk for
development of multiple histiocytomas and migration of Langerhans cells to regional lymph
nodes. Furthermore, cutaneous histiocytomas of older dogs are more likely to persist rather than
regress. Over time, these reactive lesions may convert to malignant neoplasia with metastatic
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
429
potential. Therefore all suspected histiocytomas of older dogs should be completely excised,
analyzed by histopathology, and monitored for recurrence.
specimens should be submitted for histopathologic diagnosis. Immunophenotyping may be
necessary to differentiate benign histiocytoma from malignant histiocytic neoplasia or other
histiocytic diseases with aggressive biologic behavior (see Question 15).
7. What is the histologic appearance of solitary cutaneous histiocytoma? Does the
appearance change with evolution of the lesion?
During the early growth phase histiocytomas appear as unencapsulated, but circumscribed,
dermal nodules, consisting primarily of monomorphic sheets or cords of large, histiocytic cells.
Typically the nodule is "top heavy," with a broad presence in the superficial epidermis that
narrows like a wedge toward the base in the deeper dermis. Classically, cords of histiocytic cells
are described as streaming down from the dermal-epidermal junction. Clusters of histiocytic cells
may also be present in the epidermis. In advanced lesions, the epidermis may be ulcerated. Hair
follicles and adnexa are usually obliterated within the tumor. The tumor may contain numerous
binucleated cells and mitotic figures
During regression, the tumor becomes infiltrated with lymphocytes (T cells), usually
anpou sun jnoyanoiun pineos suuooeg Aienpeia suaieu enenel pue dop su ne suuuiaeg
As the lesion involutes, lymphocytes may outnumber histiocytes, occasionally making definitive
diagnosis difficult. Neutrophils may be seen near the ulcerated surface. Plasma cells, eosinophils,
and mast cells are less common.
8. How should a solitary cutaneous histiocytoma be treated?
is purposeful bemign neglect. If desired, therapeutic intervention may include surgical excision,
Cryotherapy, electrosurgery, laser ablation, or topical corticosteroid in DMSO. As mentioned in
Question 6, older dogs with cutaneous histiocytoma are less likely to experience spontaneous
of older dogs should be completely excised.
9. What is the typical signalment of dogs affected by systemic histiocytosis?
Systermic histiocytosis is a non-neoplastic disease of reactive or proliferative histiocytes
Typical age of onset is 2-8 years. Male dogs are over-represented. The condition is most commonly
seen in Bernese Mountain Dogs, Rottweilers, Irish Wolfhounds, and Golden Retrievers. The con
dition has a strong familial tendency, suggesting a genetic predisposition. Although not clearly
identified, the mode of inheritance is not autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, or sex-linked,
suggesting a complex multiple gene contribution to inheritance.
10. Describe the lesions of canine systemic histiocytosis.
Dermal nodules are similar in appearance to those of solitary cutaneous histiocytomas, with
a similar body site predilection of head, pinna, limbs, and scrotum; however, systemic histio-
cytosis may also target subcutaneous tissue, lymph nodes, spleen, ocular tissue (conjunctiva and
sclera), nasal mucosa, and the lungs (Figures 55-6 and 55-7). Some cases of systemic histiocytosis
may represent reactive dysregulation of interstitial dendritic cells, rather than dissemination of
aberrant Langerhans cells from the epidermis. The clinical course may be waxing and waning,
but rarely resol ves spontaneously without future recurrence.
11. What is the typical histologic appearance of canine systemic histiocytosis?
Unlike solitary cutaneous histiocytomas, which tend to occur in the superficial dermis, the
histopathology of systemic histiocytosis is characterized by multicentric, diffuse, nodular
430
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
nodules. (Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbell.)
Figure 55-7 Close-up of systemic histiocytosis lesion affecting the nasal planum in the same dog as
shown in Figure 55-6. (Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbell.)
accumulations of histiocytic cells in the deep derimis and panniculus. Lymphocytes and
neutrophils frequently infiltrate the nodules. To a lesser extent, plasma cells and eosinophils
may also be present. Nodules may compress or displace follicles, adnexa, and adipose tissue
Invasion of blood vessels has also been described, which occasionally results in thrombosis and
ischemic necrosis.
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
431
12. Explain the treatment options available for management of systemic histiocytosis
in dogs.
considered to be completely effective, except in the mildest cases. Leflunomide was described as
effective in anecdotal case reports. Oral cyclosporine may also be useful. Treatment of ocular
lesions with cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment (Optimmune) may be palliative.
13. How does systemic histiocytosis differ from malignant histiocytosis (synonym: canine
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma)?
Unlike systemic histiocytosis, which is likely a phenomenon of dysregulation of dendritic
cells, malignant histiocytosis is a true sarcoma of myeloid dendritic cells. Canine disseminated
histiocytic sarcoma begins as a solitary invasive tumor of the deep dermis, subcutis, synovial
tissue, or internal organs, which metastasizes to regional lymph nodes and disseminates
throughout the body. Most histiocytic sarcomas are believed to arise from interstitial dendritic
cells, but malignant transformation of migrating dendritic cells in the lymph nodes is also
suspected to occur.
describing the morphology of sarcomas with histiocytic characteristics on light
microscopy?
"Malignant fibrous histiocytoma" is a descriptive term used for sarcomas of indeterminate
origin with a histiocytic morphologic appearance. Unfortunately, this description results in a
clustering of tumors with distinctly different biological behavior and prognosis under a single
umbrella term. Immunophenotyping of tumors previously described as malignant fibrous histio-
cytomas revealed a variety of different cellular origins, including fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, synovial cell sarcoma, and histiocytic sarcoma. Identification
 of cellular origin is beneficial to clinicians seeking to improve accuracy of prognosis, selection
of appropriate therapy, and advancement of future research.
15. How can immunohistochemical markers assist pathologists in the differentiation of so
many different diseases that appear to be “histiocytic"”’ on light microscopy, but vary
tremendously in biologic behavior and prognosis?
Advances in immunophenotyping with canine cell-surface molecules permit more accurate,
specific identification of cellular phenotypes of the various histiocytic diseases. As with
differentiating sarcomas with similar morphologic appearance, a better understanding of cellular
phenotype of different dendritic cell diseases improves accuracy of diagnosis, prognosis, therapy,
and knowledge of these conditions. Table 55-1 shows the phenotypic characteristics of cells
isolated from different canine histiocytic diseases.
16.  Should cutaneous histiocytoma or histiocytosis be a differential diagnosis for cutaneous
nodular disease in cats?
Yes. The veterinary literature contains limited reports of cutaneous histiocytic disease in
cats. A small number of feline cases with multiple cutaneous nodules on the head and neck have
been described. Histopathology of the lesions shows a proliferation of histiocytic round cells with
epidermal tropism; immunophenotyping suggests a dendritic cell origin. Two cases of dermal
have been reported. Solitary and disseminated histiocytic sarcomas have also occasionally been
observed in cats.
17. What is mycosis fungoides?
CTCL), first described in humans in 1806. The name, "mycosis fungoides,” was coined by an
432
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
Table 55-1
Cell Surface Phenotype of Canine Histiocytes in Normal
and Diseased States
NORMAL
SOLITARY
MALIGNANT
NORMAL
DERMAL
CUTANEOUS
SYSTEMIC
HISTIO-
LANGERHANS
DENDRITIC
HISTI0-
HISTI0-
CYTOSIS
MOLECULE
CELLS
CELL
CYTOMA
CYTOSIS
(SARCOMA)
CD1
+
+
+
+
CD4
+/*
+/-*
+
CD11
+
+
+
十
+
CD80/86
+/*
+/-
+/-#
+
not reported
CD90
MHC II
十
+
+
ICAM-1
+-
+/
+
E-cadherin
+
Data from Affolter VK, Moore PF: Histiocytes in skin disease. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds): Advances
in veterinary dermatology,ed 4, Oxford, 2002, Blackwell Science, pp 111-130; and Baines SJ, et al. Maturation
states of dendritic cells in canine cutaneous histiocytoma. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds): Advances ini
veterinary dermatology, ed 4, Oxford, 2002, Blackwell Science, pp 131-141.
'Expression depends on the maturation state of the cell. CD4, CD80, CD86, and ICAM-1 are up-regulated in
antigen-presenting states.
'During tumor regression cells express CD80, CD86 and ICAM-1; these molecules are absent during the early
stage of tumor development.
early observer describing the mushroom-like appearance of the nodular stage of the disease. The
term is retained in the human literature, but is now used to specifically describe epitheliotropic
CTCL with a CD4+ T cell phenotype affecting the skin or oral cavity. In veterinary literature, the
terrm mycosis fungoides has been applied to all forms of cutaneous or oral epitheliotropic CTCL
of all veterinary species regardless of specific cellular phenotype.
18. Define epitheliotropism.
Epitheliotropism refers to the movement of neoplastic cells toward and into an epithelial
layer. In the case of mycosis fungoides, the neoplastic T lymphocytes are seen on histopathology
to invade the epidermis (epidermotropism) or the follicular infundibulum. Non-epitheliotropic
cutaneous lymphoma also exists.
19. Describe the progression of clinical lesions for mycosis fungoides in humans.
Clinical signs of MF can be highly variable between individuals, as well as within the same
individual over time. However, some commonalties and generalizations have been made to
categorize the behavior of this tumor type. In 1870, Bazin described a natural progression of
clinical lesions, which continues to be used today with minor modifications. Affected individuals
progress from a "pre-mycotic" patch stage, followed by formation of slightly raised plaques, then
to a nodular or tumor stage, and finally to a fourth stage of disseminated disease, representing
metastasis to lymph nodes and viscera.
Progression from the patch stage to the plaque stage and beyond is highly unpredictable;
 before progression. Other patients suffer rapid progression from patch to plaque, to nodule, to
disseminated disease.
A folliculotropic variant of the disease is characterized by follicular papules, comedones or
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
433
these lesions likely represent a secondary epithelial disorder superimposed on MF lesions, rather
than a distinctive variant.
 20. Describe in detail the clinical appearance of the four stages of progression as outlined
in Question 19.
The early patch stage is characterized by well-demarcated erythematous macules, which
may be slightly scaly. The degree of redness is highly variable. Hypopigmentation may also be
observed in more highly pigmented individuals, as melanocytes drop out of the stratum basale in
lesional skin. The lesions are primarily distributed on the trunk and proximal ex treimities. At this
stage, the malignant T cell population is easily suppressed by ultraviolet radiation; therefore
 patches are most noticeable in areas covered by clothing.
The plaque stage describes development of sharply demarcated red to reddish-brown raised
lesions. These plaques may have a serpiginous or annular morphology, ulcerate, or have adherent
scale (Figure 55-8).
Figure 55-8Abdomen of a Shetland Sheepdog with epitheliotropic cutaneous T clllymphoma.Note the
generalized erythematous macules and ulcerated plaques. (Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbell.)
The third stage of progression describes the development of nodular lesions or tumors on the
surface of the skin. In most cases, the nodules coexist with residual patches and plaques.
Development of disseminated extracutaneous neoplasia during mycosis fungoides differs
from other types of lymphomas. Typically with lymphomas, such as Hodgkin's disease, extension
progresses predictably from the local site to regional lymph nodes to other tissues. In mycosis
fungoides, malignant T cells are not delayed by local lymph nodes; instead, true metastasis
appears to be rapid and generalized once the malignancy extends beyond the dermis. Dis-
rather than lymphatic route.
21. Define the term “erythroderma"” and describe the application of this term to mycosis
fungoides.
Erythroderma is a term used to describe lesions characterized by pruritus, exfoliation, and
erythema (Figures 55-9 and 55-10). Erythroderma in mycosis fungoides may occur as the sole
prognosis (Table 55-2).
434
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
Figure 55-9 Exfoliative erythroderma on the lateral thorax of a dog with epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell
lymphoma.(Courtesy Dr. Karen Campbell.)
Figure 55-10 Generalized scale on the trunk of a Scottish Terrier with epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell
ymphoma.
 22. What is the "d'emblee" variant of mycosis fungoides in humans?
 In most cases of mycosis fungoides the cutaneous tumor progresses from a patch or plaque
which the nodules develop without a pre-existing patch or plaque stage. This may represent a
distinct form of epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma rather than a variant of mycosis fungoides.
23.What are Sezary cells?
The term "Sezary cells" is used to describe small, 8-20 μm, malignant lymphocytes present
in circulation of a patient with mycosis fungoides. Classically, Sezary cells have a highly
convoluted, "cerebriform" nucleus. Sezary syndrome describes the leukeimic form of mycosis
fungoides: cutaneous lesions with Sezary cells identified on peripheral blood cytology
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
435
Table 55-2
TNM Classification System for Mycosis Fungoides in Humans
DESIGNATION
CLINICAL OR LABORATORY FINDING
Skin
T1
Patch or plaque covering less than 10% of body surface
T2
 Patch or plaque covering greater than 10% of body surface
T3
Nodule or tumor present
T4
Generalized ex foliative erythroderma
Lymph Node
NO
Lymph node not clinically involved
N1
Lymph node enlarged, but histologically clear
N2
Neoplastic lymphocy tes present, non-effacing architecture
N3
Clusters of neoplastic lymphocy tes
N
 Effacement of architecture by neoplastic lymphocytes
Viscera
M0
No visceral involvement
M1
Visceral metastasis
Blood
BO
No circulating neoplastic lymphocytes or less than 5% of total
B1
Circulating neoplastic lymphocytes greater than 5% of total
Data from LeBoit PE, McCalmont TH: Cutaneous lymphomas and leukemias. In Elder D, Elenitsas R, Jaworsky
C, Johnson B (eds): Lever's histopathotogy of the skin, ed 8. Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott Raven, pp 805-847.
 24. How does pagetoid reticulosis differ from other forms of epitheliotropic CTCL?
Pagetoid reticulosis is a clinical variant of epitheliotropic CTCL described in humans and
dogs. This variant typically exhibits extreme epidermotropism by malignant T lymphocytes with
minimal to absent dermal involvement. The malignant cells are often characterized by peri-
cellular halos within the epidermis. To early authors, the malignant cells of pagetoid reticulosis
were reminiscent of the histopathologic appearance of haloed malignant cells seen in Paget's
disease, a carcinoma of the breast seen in women.
 Two subtypes of pagetoid reticulosis occur: (1) a localized form (Woringer-Kolopp), which
can be cured completely by surgical excision if removed early in the disease progression; and (2)
a generalized form (Ketron-Goodman), which has a clinical course similar to mycosis fungoides.
 25. How common is epitheliotropic CTCL in dogs and cats?
 In veterinary oncology, malignant lymphomas are common, accounting for 7-24% of all
neoplasia in DOGS, and 33% of all neoplastic diseases in cats. However, the majority of these
are of B cell origin and infrequently invol ve cutaneous sites. Epitheliotropic CTCL represents
26. Describe the clinical presentation and progression of epitheliotropic CTCL in dogs.
In dogs, the clinical presentation and course is similar to that described in humans. Like
mycosis fungoi des in humans, canine epitheliotropic CTCL is highly variable between individuals.
The most common clinical sign in dogs is erythema, followed by varying degrees of scale,
pruritus, alopecia, papules, plaques, nodules, ulceration, and depigmentation (Table 55-3). Muco-
436
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
Table 55-3
Cutaneous Signs of Epitheliotropic Cutaneous
T Cell Lymphoma in the Canine
MORPHOLOGIC PRESENTATION
PERCENTAGE SEEN (N=26)
Erythema
80.8
Pruritus
38.5
Scaling
61.5
Crusting
38.5
Papules
15.4
Plaques
61.5
Nodules
57.7
Ulceration
42.3
Mucosal lesions
38.5
Adapted from Beale KM, Bolon B: Canine cutaneous lymphosarcoma: epitheliotropic and non-epitheliotropic,
a retrospective study. In Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatology, vol 2. New
York, 1993, Pergamon, pp 273-284.
cutaneous ulceration and depigmentation, as well as infltrative or ulcerative oral disease, are
also common. Foot pads, when they are involved, may appear depigmented, hyperkeratotic,
or ulcerated.
The early stages of solitary, erythematous patches are frequently missed under the thick coat
of many dogs; therefore, the disease is usually not recognized until more noticeable signs, such
as multifocal plaques or nodules, severe scaling, or pruritus, are present.
27. How does epitheliotropic CTCL present in cats?
In cats, sharply demarcated, annular areas of alopecia, erythema, scaling on the trunk or
ex foliative erythroderma of the head and neck are common initial signs. Some cats are presented
with eruptions easily confused with miliary dermatitis. Plaques, nodules, and oral lesions are
 observed less commonly in cats than in dogs and humans.
28. What are the principal differential diagnoses for cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell
lymphoma in dogs? In cats?
The order of most likely differential diagnoses will vary tremendously depending on the
clinical signs present at the time (Table 55-4). Since epitheliotropic CTCL may mimic clinical
signs or lesions of so many other diseases, veterinarians should consider CTCL as a differential
for patients that fail to respond to appropriate therapy for more common conditions. Failure to
consider the possi bility of epitheliotropic CTCL during management of other exfoliative, pruritic.
Or ulcerative diseases may delay biopsy, diagnosis, and appropriate therapy, potentially altering
the outcome of the case.
29. Is cutaneous lymphoma in cats associated with the feline leukemia virus (FeLV)?
Maybe. Most cats with epitheliotropic or non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma are
seronegative for FeLV. However, one study demonstrated the presence of FeLV antigen in
40% of the malignant cells isolated from cats with non-epitheliotropic CTCL. A separate
study reported the extraction of proviral DNA from the tumor cell DNA of a cat with
epitheliotropic CTCL.
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
437
Table 55-4
Important Differential Diagnoses for Epitheliotropic Cutaneous
TCell Lymphoma
PREDOMINANT
CLINICAL SIGN
DOGS
CATS
Ex foliative
Atopic dermatitis
 Miliary dermatitis
 er ythroderma
Adverse food reaction
Atopy
 Flea allergy dermatitis
Adverse food reaction
Pyoderma
Pyoderma
 Malassezia dermatitis
Dermatophy tosis
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
Demodicosis
 Demodex gatoi (short form)
Sarcoptes
Notoedres
Cheyletiella
Otodectes
Seborrhea
Cheyletiella
Sebaceous adenitis
 Lupus erythematosus
Papular dermatitis
Pyoderma
Pyoderma
Dermatophy tosis
Dermatophy tosis
Demodicosis
Miliary dermatitis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Comedones
Many others
Nasal
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Actinic dermati tis
 depigmentation 
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Immune-mediated diseases
Erythema multiforme
Cutaneous drug eruption
Vitiligo
Erythematous
Erythema multiforme
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
 macules and
Calcinosis cutis
Erythema multiforme
plaques
Granulomatous inflammation
Granulomatous inflammation
 Other depositional disorders 
Xanthomatosis
Other neoplasia
 Other depositional disorders
Other neoplasia
Oral or
 Pemphigus vul garis
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
mucocutaneous
Bullous pemphigoid
Stomatitis
ulceration
 Lupus erythematosus
 Lupus erythematosus
 Drug eruption
 Pemphigus vulgaris
Stomati tis
 Drug eruption
Uremic ulceration
Viral
All clinical signs
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
simultaneously
Pemphigus diseases
Pemphigus diseases
Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Drug eruption 
Erythema multiforme
Combination of diseases
Cutaneous drug eruption
This list is not intended to be exhaustive.
438
Lymphonistiocytic Neoplasms
30. Do dogs with epitheliotropic CTCL commonly develop hypercalcemia?
No. Hypercalcemia frequently associated with other T cell lymphomas is not a common
feature of epitheliotropic CTCL. Hypercalcemia of malignancy seen in veterinary lymphoma
(PTHrp).
31. Describe the histologic characteristics of cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma.
Histologic findings can be as varied as the clinical presentation. In general the classic
histologic findings are characterized by (1) epitheliotropism—malignant lymphocytes present in
the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, or follicular infundibulum; (2) Pautrier's microabscesses
clear lacunae within the epidermis occupied by an accumulation of two or more neoplastic
terized by hyperchromatic, indented nuclei, cerebriform convolutions, or finger-like projections;
and (4) a lichenoid band of pleomorphic lymphoid cells in the superficial dermis. Pigmentary
observed in specimens taken from recently depigmented lesions.
number of lymphocytes may be present in a linear arrangement on the epidermal side of the
dermal-epidermal interface; this "string of pearls" configuration in the basal layer of the epidermis
may be subtle and easily missed. Pautrier's microabscesses can be uncommon at the patch stage.
nuclear convolution relative to normal lymphocytes present in the dermis. Immunohistochemical
staining with CD3 and CD79a may be useful in differentiating lymphocytes and highlighting
epitheliotropic arrangement; T cells should be CD3+ and CD79a-.
As lesions progress to the plaque stage, increased epidermal hyperplasia coupled with a
dense, band-like infiltration of the superficial dermis develops. This dermal infiltrate, or lichenoid
band, parallels the dermal-epidermal junction. This stage may be diffcult to differentiate from
 other diseases that result in an interface dermatitis, such as lupus erythematosus, uveodermatologic
syndrome, erythema multiforme, severe pyoderma, or ectoparasitism.
The nodule stage is characterized by dense neoplastic infiltrate extending into the deep
dermis and panniculitis. Hair follicles and adnexa may be effaced, leaving only the glassy
membrane to indicate the presence of the former follicle.
32. When selecting sites for biopsy from a patient with multiple lesion types, which
lesion(s) are most likely to yield diagnostic histopathologic pattern? Which lesion(s) is
least valuable to biopsy?
 If present, nodular lesions are the preferred specimens for biopsy, followed by non-ulcerated
 If there are no nodules, plaques, or recently depigmented areas, then erythematous macules
or the erythematous region adjacent to ulcers should be selected. Taking multiple biopsy samples
from various different-appearing lesions will maximize the probability of obtaining a diagnostic
sample for the pathologist.
Ulcers are the least valuable lesions to biopsy, as the epidermis, and therefore evidence of
epitheliotropism, will be absent. In addition, ulcers are rapidly colonized by bacterial organisms,
resulting in an extensive dermal inflammatory infiltrate that will mask evidence of the primary
cause of the ulceration
33.How do the immunohistochemistry characteristics of canine epitheliotropic CTCL
differ from the human disease?
In humans, malignant T cells observed in epitheliotropic CTCL are most frequently
CD4+/CD8-, occasionally dual negative, and rarely CD4-/CD8+. In dogs, epitheliotropic CTCL
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
439
in Figure 5S5-10.
is most often found to be caused by CD4-/CD8+ malignant T cells. Additionally, the majority of
canine epitheliotropic CTCL T cells express y8 T cell receptor (TCR), rather than TCR-αβ.
34. What is the prognosis for a patient affected by epitheliotropic CTCL?
Because of the unpredictable clinical progression, discussing prognosis can be confusing for
clinicians, human patients, and pet owners. Since surgical excision is often not feasible and T cell
lymphomas are less responsive to chemotherapy, achieving a durable complete remission or cure
is rare. For this reason, many texts report the prognosis for epitheliotropic CTCL to be grave. On
the other hand, patients may remain in the patch or scaling stage of the disease for a long time,
with limited morbidity and no mortality; therefore, patients in the early stages may be considered
to have a fair prognosis. In fact, human patients with patch-only disease do not have significantly
different survival rates compared with age-matched control populations. Similarly patients with
solitary nodules or localized disease may be cured by surgical excision or local radiation therapy,
if the lesion is treated before dissemination. Unfortunately, many patients are not caught during
the early stages or their disease progresses rapidly from patches to multicentric advanced lesions
to systemic metastasis after only a short course. In general terms, the more advanced the lesions,
the worse the prognosis.
 In veterinary patients, euthanasia due to perceived poor quality of life determines survival
more often than death due to organ failure. Before systemic involvement, the degree of pruritus,
ulceration, oral lesions, and secondary infections have the largest impact on quality of life. Many
dogs with generalized alopecia, erythema, depigmentation, plaques, and nodules continue to
behave normally with no signs of systemic illness. As long as the owners accept the cosmetic
changes to their pet, prognosis may be considered fair. Therefore, survival times for epithelio-
tropic CTCL, in dogs and cats, may depend as much on the climician's ability to control pruritus
as the response of the malignancy to chemotherapy.
 35. Discuss the treatiment options available for management of epitheliotropic CTCL.
Therapy for epitheliotropic CTCL can be divided into two areas: chemotherapy aimed at
killing or inhibiting malignant cells and therapy designed to palliate quality of life factors, such
as pruri tus and secondary infections
440
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
In humans, one of the most common treatments during the patch stage is topical application
of the alkylating agent mechlorethamine hydrochloride, a form of nitrogen mustard. Humans in
prolonged contact may develop severe irritant dermatitis, urticaria, hyperpigmentation, bullous
eruptions, and secondary neoplasia. Because of the carcinogenic potential and other adverse
skin reactions to long-term exposure by the owner during application to the pet, topical
 mechlorethamine hydrochloride is not commonly used in veterinary patients.
Other therapies used in human oncology during the cutaneous stages include topical
carmustine (BCNU), oral lomustine (CCNU), topical and oral corticosteroids, topical or oral
retinoids, interferon-c2a, psoralen with U VA radiation, and total skin electron beam radiation. A
T lymphocytes expressing IL-2 receptors.
BCNU has fewer adverse side effects than mechlorethamine, but is still not commonly used
in veterinary patients because of the extensive haircoat that prevents thorough application.
Once extracutaneous involvement has occurred, single agent or combination systemic
chemotherapy is used. Oral corticosteroids are palliative in animals, and may be used alone (if no
other therapy is intended) or in combination with chemotherapy protocols, such as
cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin) and prednisone (COP), L-asparaginase plus COP, or
doxorubicin plus COP. Unfortunately these protocols have not been shown to be successful in
prolonging survival times in canine patients. Newer protocols utilizing CCNU are anecdotally
useful, but large prospective studies have not been published.
Additional therapy includes topical and systemic high-dose omega-3 and omega-6 fatty
acids, synthetic retinoids, cyclosporin, interferon, and dacarbazine.
 36. Are synthetic retinoids useful in management of epitheliotropic CTCL in veterinary
patients?
The effects and outcome in canine patients treated with retinoids are not well descri bed. The
efficacy of synthetic retinoids. In these accounts, oral retinoids are reported to be palliative
in some canine and feline cases. Retinoids alter replication, keratinization, and metabolism
of epidermal keratinocytes, normalizing the state of cells surrounding the malignant T cells,
palliating clinical signs of the disease. Theoretically, retinoids are most useful in cases associated
with exfoliative erythroderma rather than nodular or ulcerative disease. Malignant T cells do
have receptors for retinoids and may be directly affected as well. Bexarotene, a second-generation
RXR-specific retinoid, has been shown to induce apoptosis of malignant T cells. In
human clinical trials using bexarotene, response rates of previously treated CTCL cases exceeded
50%
Publications on the use of retinoids in cats are fewer still. Cats have increased sensitivity to
vitamin A toxicity than dogs, and theoretically could experience greater adverse side effects to
synthetic retinoid therapy.
37. Are all cutaneous lymphomas derived from T cells?
No. While, epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is always derived from T lymphocytes,
non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma may be T cell, B cell, natural killer (NK) cells, or
other null cells (non-T, non-B). Put another way, cutaneous T cell lymphoma may be either
epitheliotropic or non-epitheliotropic, but cutaneous B cell lymphoma is always non-epithelio-
tropic (Figure 55-12).
 38. How does non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma differ from epitheliotropic CTCL
in dogs and cats?
Not all cutaneous lesions caused by neoplastic lymphocytes are epitheliotropic. In fact, non-
epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is more common in cats than the epitheliotropic variety
Clinically, non-epitheliotropic lymphoma may be solitary or multicentric. While nodules are
LymphohistiocyticNeoplasms
441
Figure 55-12 Cutaneous B cell lymphoma on the hind limb of a Labrador Retriever.
almost invariably present with this neoplasia, the nodular lesions may be accompanied by
generalized erythroderma, pruritus, oral ulcerations, or bizarre, arciform, serpiginous plaques.
Histologically, the tumor consists of malignant lymphocytes distributed in nodular to diffuse
pattern in the dermis and subcutis, without the marked epidermotropism that characterizes
mycosis fungoides and its variants. In most cases, the uppermost dermis is typically spared,
leaving an observable "Grenz zone," defined as an area of unaffected dermis between the
epidermis and the dermal lesion. Less commonly, the infiltrate can extend up to the dermal-
epidermal junction. On rare occasions there is upward migration into the epidermis. Adnexa are
usually obliterated, but the follicular epithelium is normally left intact. Immunophenotyping
studies have demonstrated that the majority of these cases are T lymphocyte tumors, although, as
mentioned in Question 36, some varieties may be B cell, NK cell, or other null-cell.
If the lesions are solitary, surgical excision may result in cure or long-term remission.
Radiation therapy is often palliative for non-resectable solitary tumors. Multicentric tumors can
be treated with similar systermic protocols as described for epitheliotropic CTCL. Survival times
in dogs range from 4 to 8 months, from onset of clinical disease to euthanasia or death.
 39. What are the clinical features of cutaneous plasmacytomas in dogs and cats?
Cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma (EMP) is typically a solitary tumor of older dogs.
There is no reported gender predilection. Cocker Spaniels are believed to be over-represented
EMPs are usually small (1 to 2 cm), well-circumscribed, raised, smooth, and erythematous
also occur. There is a strong body site predilection for special sites such as digits, lips, and the
external ear canal (Figure 55-13). The tumor does not commonly arise on normal haired skin far
from mucocutaneous junctions. Metastasis is rare, so surgical excision is usually curative. For
non-resectable or incompletely resected tumors, radiation therapy should be considered because
EMPs tend to be highly sensitive to radiation
Although EMP is a relatively common dermal neoplasia of dogs, the condition has rarely
been reported in cats.
442
Lymphohistiocytic Neoplasms
Figure 55-13Extramedullary plasmacytoma on the lip of a Boxer.
40. Describe the cytologic and histiologic characteristics of a plasmacytoma.
Plasmacytomas typically exfoliate well on fine needle aspiration, revealing large numbers of
well-differentiated, round to oval cells with an eccentric single nucleus and a zone of perinuclear
clearing (see Figure 55-4). On histopathology, the tumor is made up of sheets, cords, or packets
of variably differentiated, monomorphic or pleomorphic malignant plasma cells. Approximately
10% of tumors contain amyloid; although EMP is Tarely associated with multiple myeloma.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
study. In Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in veterinary dermatology, vol 2, New York, 1993,
Pergamon, pp 273-284.
Goldschmidt MH. Cutaneous lymphosarcoma. In Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS (eds): Skir tumors of the dog and cat,
New York, 1992, Pergamon, pp 252-264
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ: Mycosis fungoides. In: Veterinary dermatopathology: α macroscopic and
microscopic evatuation of canine and feline skin disease. St Louis, 1992, Mosby, p 158-161.
LeBoit PE, McCalmont TH: Cutaneous lymphomas and leukemmias. In Elder D, Elenitsas R, Jaworsky C, Johnson B
(eds): Lever's histopathotogy of the skin, ed 8,Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott Raven, pp 805847.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Lymphohistiocytic neoplasms. In: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy
ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, pp 1330-1357.
Wail DM, MacEwen EG, Young KM: Canine lymphoma and lymphoid leukemias. In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG
(eds): Smatl animat clinicat oncology, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders, pp 558-589.
Wail DM, MacEwen EG:Feline lymphoma and leukemias.In Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds): Small animat
clinicat oncology, ed 3.Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saumders,pp 590-610.
Melanocytic Neoplasms
443
56. MELANOCYTIC NEOPLASMS
Laura B. Stokking, PhD, DVM
1. What are the differences between melanocytomas, melanomas, cutaneous melanomas,
malignant melanomas, and nevi?
All of these terms refer to proliferations of melanocytes. Normally, melanocytes are
restricted to the basal layer of the epidermis. The cells transfer melanosomes, melanin-containing
vesicles, to keratinocytes in the overlying spinous layer. A melanocytoma is a neoplastic pro-
liferation of melanocytes; the suffx "-cytoma" indicates that the neoplasm is benign. The use of
the terms "melanoma" and “cutaneous melanoma" to describe both benign and malignant pro-
liferations of melanocytes has produced some confusion. No misinterpretation exists if the term
"'malignant melanoma" is employed: the tumor described has aggressive biologic behavior and a
strong likelihood of metastasis.
In humans, a "nevus" is basically a birthmark: a congenital, abnormal proliferation of one
or more components of skin. In human dermatology, "nevus" is used to describe a plethora of
benign congenital or acquired proliferation or deficiency of any cell type present in the dermis or
epidermis (such as melanocytomas, hemangiomas, fibromas, lipomas, or proliferations of adnexal
components). The term "cutaneous hamartoma,” synonymous with nevus, is used more com-
monly in veterinary medicine; a hamartoma is a benign proliferation of cells within the tissue or
organ in which the cells would normally occur. Several common nevi in humans are pigmented;
the cells comprising them were thus originally named "nevus cells." Study of nevus cells in
culture demonstrated them to be melanocytes. The lesions formerly described as pigmented
epidermal nevi, renamed pigmented epidermal plaques, are discussed in Chapter 51.
2. What are the signalments of dogs and cats most commonly diagnosed with
melanocytoma and malignant melanoma?
Signalments and common locations of melanocytoma and mali gnant melanoma in dogs are
compared in Table 56-1. Clinical appearance alone should not be used to distinguish benign
melanocytomas from malignant melanomas.
Cats have no breed or gender predispositions for melanocytic neoplasms. Ages of cats with
cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms (benign and malignant) range from 6 months to 19 years, with
a median of about 10-12 years.
3. List differential diagnoses for melanocytic neoplasms in dogs and cats.
See Table 56-2.
4. Histopathologic descriptions of canine and feline melanocytomas and malignant
melanomas often include descriptors such as “junctional,” “compound, “dermal,"
“"signet-ring, “balloon cell, "or “"clear cell What is the meaning and prognostic
significance of these terms?
The terms "junctional,’ "compound," and "dermal" refer to the location of the melanocytic
neoplasm within the skin section. The tumor arises at the dermal-epidermal junction in junctional
neoplasms and within the derrmis in dermal tumors. Compound neoplasms contain clusters of
melanocytes within the epidermis, the dermis, or the epithelium of hair follicles. Junctional
tumors have not been reported in dogs. Tumor location within the skin section carries no
prognostic information.
444
Melanocytic Neoplasms
Table 56-1 
Signalments and Common Locations of Melanocytomas
and Malignant Melanomas in Dogs
TYPE
SIGNALMENT
LOCATION
Melanocytoma
Average age: 9 yt
Head (eyelid, muzzle)
Breed predisposition: Cocker Spaniels,
Trunk
Scottish Terfiers, Airedales, Boston
 Paws (interdigital)
Terriers, Springer Spaniels, Boxers,
Golden Retrievers, Miniature
Schnauzers, Irish Setters, Irish
Terriers, Chow Chows, Chihuahuas,
Doberman Pinschers
Gender predisposition: None proved
Malignant
Age: 9-11 yr, can be as young as 3
Eyelids
melanoma
Breed: Heavily pigmented Cocker
Digits
Spaniels, Scottish Terriers, Airedales,
Nailbeds
Boston Terriers, Standard and
Trunk
Miniature Schnauzers, Gordon
Oral cavity
Setters, Irish Setters, and Golden
Retrievers
Gender predisposition: None proved
Melanocytes are neuroectodermal in origin; thus can develop into either round, epithelioid,
Or spindled cells. Cells within the neoplasms can be pleomorphic; one morphology may pre-
dominate, several might be present within a single tumor. The predominant cell type does not
appear to predict biologic behavior. Balloon cells, also called clear cells, are large and either
round or polygonal. The nucleus is central or eccentric and can itself be pleomorphic. A single
nucleolus is usually present. The cytoplasm is clear and finely granular, with abundant vacuoles
produced by abnormal melanosome formation, lipids, or glycogen. Balloon cell malignant
melanomas are relatively common in cats, but rare in dogs.
signet-ring cells is pushed into a crescent shape at the edge of the cell by cytoplasmic inter-
mediate filaments (vimentin). Intracytoplasmic accumulations of many substances can create a
faintly pigmented. Several differential diagnoses should be considered, including lymphoma,
plasmacytoma, or other lymphoid tumors; adenocarcinomas of any origin; carcinomas (mammary,
gastric, intestinal); lipoma or liposarcoma; smooth muscle tumors; and other mesenchymal tumors.
5. What are risk factors for malignant melanoma in dogs and cats?
Risk factors for malignant melanoma in humans include light complexions, exposure to
ultraviolet radiation, a family history of malignant melanoma, multiple atypical or large congenital
melanocytic nevi, mutated or abnormal tumor suppressor genes, and exposure to chemical
carcinogens such as certain insecticides. The causes of benign or malignant melanocytic tumors
in dogs and cats are not fully known. Chemical mutagens may be involved: topical application of
tar extracts resulted in malignant melanoma in dogs. Increased prevalence in certain canine
breeds suggests a role of genetic predisposition to both melanocytoma and malignant melanoma
(see Table 56-1). Associations with aberrant function of tumor suppressor genes, such as p53,
retinoblastoma-l (Rb-/), and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor family, have been demon-
strated in malignant melanoma from several species.
Melanocytic Neoplasms
445
Table 56-2
Differential Diagnoses for Melanocytic Neoplasms in Dogs and Cats
PIGMENTED
UNPIGMENTED
CLAW BED
Melanocytoma
Melanocytoma (amelanotic)
Melanocytoma
 Malignant melanoma
Mali gnant melanoma
Malignant melanoma
(amelanotic)
Pi gmented hamartoma
Hamartoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell tumor (cats only)
 Basal cell tumor (cats only)
Keratoacanthoma
Basal cell carcinoma and
Basal cell carcinoma and
Mast cell tumor
maturational or adnexal
maturational or adnexal
variants
variants
Lentigo
Other adnexal tumors
Osteosarcoma
 Macular melanosis (dogs 
Infundibular keratinizing
Fibrosarcoma
only)
acanthoma
Pigmented epidermal
Squamous cell carcinoma
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
plaques (dogs only)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Hemangioma,
hemangiosarcoma
Hemangioma (cutaneous)
Mast cell tumor
Myxosarcoma
Hemangioma,
Neurofibroma
hemangiosarcoma
Plasmacytoma
Metastases from other sites
(usually carcinoma)
Fibroma/fibros arcoma
 Inverted squamous papilloma
Undifferentiated sarcomas
Osteomyelitis
Undifferentiated carcinomas
 Paronychia (bacterial or
fungal)
Granuloma (bacterial or
fungal)
6. What clinical features can be used to distinguish melanocytoma from malignant
melanoma in dogs?
The distinction between a benign melanocytoma and a malignant melanoma in both species
should made on the basis of histopathologic criteria rather than clinical signs.
 Signalment and site are the best clinical indicators of malignant potential in dogs, although
neither should be considered sufficient to diagnose a pigmented tumor as innocuous. Pigmented
masses on the haired skin of dogs are typically benign, whereas those within the mucous mem-
branes of the oral cavity, other mucocutaneous junctions, and the nailbeds should be considered
malignant until proven otherwise. Lesions should be biopsied carefully so that the exact site of
origin of the tumor can be determined. Distinctions must be made between tumors arising from
the oral mucous membranes versus haired skin of the lip, from conjunctiva versus palpebral
 i  r e s  s    r
within haired skin at any site on Scottish Terriers are probably malignant. Standard and Miniature
Schnauzers are predisposed to benign melanocytoma as well as to malignant melanoma of the
haired skin; thus lymph nodes and lungs should be evaluated for evidence of metastases at the
time of initial presentation. Male Miniature Schnauzers are more likely than females to have
malignant melanomas on the haired skin, particularly that of the forelimbs. In general, malignant
melanoma is more likely in older patients.
446
Melanocytic Neoplasms
Tumor color, size, or ulceration should never be used to assess biological behavior. Although
            
ex tremely aggressive, whereas large melanocytic neoplasms may prove benign.
 7. What clinical features can be used to distinguish a benign melanocytoma from
malignant melanoma in cats?
The distinction between a benign melanocytoma and a malignant melanoma in cats as in
dogs should made on the basis of histopathologic criteria rather than clinical signs. Approxi-
mately 50% of feline melanocytic neoplasms are malignant. The likelihood of malignancy
increases for pigmented tumors on the eyelid. Although the probability of metastasis, thus
malignancy, is greater in larger tumors, small masses can be extremely aggressive biologically,
whereas large melanocytic neoplasms may prove benign. The presence of ulceration or tumor
versus heavily pigmented neoplasms.
 8. What histologic features are most useful in distinguishing benign from malignant
melanocytic tumors in dogs?
See Table 56-3.
Table 56-3 Benign vs. Malignant Disease
BENIGN
MALIGNANT
Tissue architecture is symmetric
Neoplastic cells ex tend above dermal -epidermal
junction or deep into underlying tissues.
Margins well-defined
Neoplastic cells invade tumor margins
 Uniform nuclei
Nuclear atypia, anisokaryosis, hyperchromasia
Mitotic index* (MI) <2
MI ≥3
Uniform cells
Anisocytosis, cellular pleomorphism
Diploid DNA
Aneuploid DNA
*Total number of mitotic figures per ten high-power fields.
9. Can the histologic criteria of malignancy used for canine melanocytic neoplasms be
applied to feline tumors?
Characteristics of malignancy such as invasiveness and nuclear atypia are indeed predictive
of biologic behavior in feline melanocytic tumors. The significance of mitotic index, however, is
not as clear in neoplasms of cats as in those of dogs. Restriction of neoplastic cells to the dermal-
epidermal junction implies that the tumor is benign, whereas the presence of dermal inflam-
characterized by a large oval nucleus and abundant cytoplasm with melanin granules, indicated
malignancy; a later study failed to corroborate that correlation.
10. How are amelanotic melanomas or melanocytomas identified?
The paucity of melanin in poorly pigmented tumors makes identification of amelanotic
melanocytic neoplasms difficult (Figure 56-1) (see Table 56-2 for differential diagnoses). Both
benign and malignant tumors can lack pigment; abundance of melanin has no prognostic
significance. Many of the classic stains for melanocytic neoplasms, such as acid orcein-Giemsa,
Gomori's or Wilder's reticulin, and Fontana ammoniacal silver nitrate, require the presence of
melanin pigment, so will not identify amelanotic neoplasms of melanocytic origin. The DOPA
reaction tests the ability of a cell to produce pigment and is useful in identifying weakly
Melanocytic Neoplasms
447
melanotic neoplasms; however, poorly differentiated melanocytic neoplasms incapable of pigment
production might fail to react. Likewise, tyrosinase may be absent or abnomal in unpigmented
tumors. Monoclonal antibodies capable of detecting minute amounts of tumor-related antigens
commonly use a panel of several immunohistochemical markers when an amelanotic melanocytic
neoplasm is suspected. These include the following:
· S100: S100 is a calcium-binding protein found within cells of vertebral neuroectodermal
origin. S100 reactions are positive in most human, canine, and feline melanocytic neo-
plasms. Not only neural tissue and melanocytes react with anti-S100 antibodies; howevet.
Schwann cells, myoepithelial cells, skeletal muscle cells, Langerhans cells, sustentacular
cells, cartilage, and various adenocarcinomas and carcinomas may also be S100 positive.
Thus, anti-S 100 antibodies are sensitive, but not specific, melanocytic markers.
· Neuron-specific enolase (NSE): NSE is a glycolytic enzyme present in cells of neuro-
ectodermal origin. Anti-NSE antibody reactions are generally positive in melanocytes and
this marker is included in several immunohistochemical panels when melanocytic
neoplasms are suspected.
· Vimentin: Both neuroectodermal and mesenchymal cells contain the intermediate
mented melanocytic tumors, which then can be distinguished from mesenchymal
neoplasms by other methods.
· Melan-A (MART-1): Melan-A is a melanoma-specific antigen recognized by T cells
(MART); the function of this protein is not known. In humans, this marker is both highly
sensitive and highly specific for melanocytic tumors. Amelanotic melanocytic tumors in
both cats and dogs can be Melan-A negative. In cats, this marker consistently dis-
tinguished melanocytic neoplasms from pigmented basal cell tumors. Melan-A is more
specific but less sensitive than S100.
11. Do benign melanocytomas neoplastically transform to malignant melanoma?
Neoplastic trans formation of benign pigmented hamartomas to malignant melanoma in dogs
448
Melanocytic Neoplasms
Tecurrence of a pigmented mass previously classified by histopathologic criteria as benign should
prompt further biopsy and re-examination by a dermatopathologist.
12. Describe the clinical evaluation and staging of a dog or cat with a cutaneous melanocytic
neoplasm.
· Chart tumor location and size.
● Biopsy the mass and submit tissue to a dermatopathologist so that histopathologic criteria
of malignancy can be assessed.
●Evaluate local and regional lymph nodes for metastases by fine-needle aspiration cytology
or lymph node biopsies.
·Evaluate the general health of the patient: complete blood cell count, general chemistry
panel with electrolytes, urinalysis, thyroxine measurement in cats. The existence of
concurrent disease worsens the patient's prognosis, suitability for radical surgical excision
of a malignant tumor, and ability to tolerate radiation therapy or chemotherapy.
· Metastasis of malignant melanoma usually occurs by lymphatic routes, although hemato-
genous dissemination is possible as well. Tumor cells spread first to regional lymph
nodes, then to the lungs. More distant metastases affect the central nervous system, heart,
liver, kidney, and spleen. Check for metastases to lungs by performing radiography of the
thorax. Three views (ventrodorsal, left lateral, and right lateral) are required to detect
gross metastases. Any cardiac, hepatic, or renal abnormalities detected by physical
examination and diagnostic tests should prompt further evaluation using cardiac and/or
abdominal ultrasonography.
TumorStaging
 Classification of tumor stages in companion animals follows guidelines established by the
World Health Organization (WHO). Three factors are evaluated: the size and invasiveness of the
metastases (M). Stage is then assigned based on combinations of T, N, and M results:
T (Primary tumor)
Tis:
Pre-invasive (in situ)
TO:
 No evidence of tumor
T1:
Diameter <2 cm
T2:
Diameter 2-5 cm OR
Minimal invasion (any tumor size)
T3:
Diameter >5 cm OR
Invasion of subcutaneous tissue (any tumor size)
T4:
Invasion of fascia, muscle, bone, cartilage (any tumor size)
N (Regional lymph nodes)
NO:
No evidence of involvement of regional lymph nodes
N1:
Ipsilateral nodes are movable
N 1a: Nodes contain no histologic evidence of tumo
N 1b: Nodes contain histologic evidence of tumor
N2:
Contralateral or bilateral nodes are movable
N2a: Nodes contain no histologic evidence of tumor
N2b: Nodes contain histologic evidence of tumor
N3: Nodes are immovable, fixed
M (Distant metastasis)
M0: No evidence of distant metastasis
M1: Presence of distant metastasis (including distant lymph nodes)
MelanocyticNeoplasms
449
Stages (modified from stage groupings used in canine oral melanocytic tumors):
T
N
M
Stage 0:
Tis, TO
NO, N1a, N2a
M0
Stage I:
TO, T1
NO, Nla, N2a
M0
 Stage II:
T2
NO, N1a, N2a
M0
Stage III:
T3, T4
NO, N 1a, N2a
MO
Any T
N1b
MO
Stage IV:
Any T
Any N2b or N3
MO
Any T
Any N
M1
13. What is the most effective treatment for melanocytic neoplasms?
Radical surgical excision is the optimum therapy for benign and malignant tumors in both
dogs and cats; surgical margins should be at least 2 cm wide. The probability of recurrence and
metastases of mali gnant neoplasms correlates roughly with the degree of tumor invasiveness and
size. Approximately one third of subungual malignant melanomas have metastasized by the time of
initial diagnosis. For malignant neoplasms at other sites, postoperative median survival times
range from 4 months in dogs with large tumors to 12 months in those with smaller masses. In
cats, postoperative median survival times average only 4.5 months.
14. How effective is radiation in therapy for malignant melanoma?
 Radiation-induced cytotoxicity depends on the production of free radicals by interactions
between ionizing radiation and water within the cells. These unstable radicals react with and
break chemical bonds within tissue molecules. If bonds within DNA molecules are destroyed, the
cell is more likely to die at its next mitosis. Because neoplastic cells cycle more rapidly than most
normal tissues, neoplastic cells have less time to repair these DNA breaks before the next mitosis,
so are more likely to die from the effects of ionizing radiation. Malignant melanoma in all species
attri buted, at least in part, to tumor hypoxia. Hypoxia increases the resistance to a single dose of
radiation therapy by a factor of three. Decreased oxygen levels within a solid tumor result from
increased consumption of oxygen by the rapidly growing and actively metabolizing tumor cells
in conjunction with decreased delivery of oxy gen to the tumor cells. Most patients with malignant
neoplasia have concurrent anemia, either from chronic disease or from the effects of chemo-
therapy or radiation therapy on erythrogenesis. Low levels of hemoglobin lead to decreased
 oxygen delivery. Solid tumors can outgrow their vascular supply; areas within the tumor then
necrose, further limiting oxygen delivery. In addition, as the neoplastic cells proliferate away
from the tumor's blood supply, the distance through which oxygen must diffuse increases. This
is exacerbated by abnormalities in tumor vasculature because of faulty angiogenesis. Low oxygen
levels exert selection pressure that favors biologically aggressive cells and their clones. Radiation
surviving cells escape apoptosis and death. To minimize toxicity, the total radiation dose a patient
receives is divided into fractions, typically administered on a weekly basis. The resulting cycles
 of hypoxia followed by reoxygenation are mutagenic; free radical production is enhanced, but not
always to lethal levels. Time between administration of radiation fractions allows cells with
sublethal damage to self-repair before their next mitosis, thus enhancing the probability that
sublethal mutations, including mutations in p53 tumor suppressor genes, will be preserved.
Treatments to overcome the effects of hypoxia tried in human medicine include increasing
the partial pressure of oxygen in the tissues using hyperbaric oxygen therapy or inhalation of
   x x  s 
450
Melanocytic Neoplasms
niacinamide, for example; correcting anemia with blood transfusions or administration of
In humans, radiation therapy for malignant melanoma depends on several factors: tumor
volume, oxygenation status of the mass, total radiation dose, and dose administered per treatment
session (dose per fraction). Studies of radiation therapy for malignant melanoma have focused on
dogs with malignant melanoma in the oral cavity. In these patients, radiation therapy can be an
adjunct to mandibulectomy or maxillectomy. This modality is also used to debulk large masses
pre-operatively or as a palliative measure in tumors whose location or size make surgical excision
unfeasible. In humans and canines, remission rates improve when dose per fraction increases.
 Doses ≥8 Gray (Gy) per fraction led to substantial increases in response rates for humans with
malignant melanoma. Administration of 9 Gy weekly for 4 weeks resulted in complete remission
in 69% of dogs with oral malignant melanoma and partial remission in 25%. Adverse effects at
the radiation site were limited to superfcial cutaneous or mucocutaneous reactions. Treatment
with 4 Gy fractions every other day, to deliver a total of 48 Gy, resulted in fistula formation or
osteonecrosis in over 7% of canine patients.
15. How effective is chemotherapy in malignant melanoma?
Chemotherapy can be used as an adjunct to surgical excision or radiation therapy, but is not
carboplatin and intralesionally with cisplatin, methotrexate, or carmustine. Carboplatin induced
another study reported a response rate of <25%. Results of therapy with dacarbazine, melphalan,
and dox orubicin were disappointing.
Implantation within malignant melanoma of a gel containing epinephrine as a vasoactive
 o  e   j t n s   s  jo I n s
technique was decreased systemic adverse effects of the chemotherapeutic agents.
16. What new treatment modalities in humans may become available to veterinary patients
in the future?
Malignant melanoma cells contain several proteins that are highly antigenic, thus can be
targets of cell-mediated or humoral immunity. As a result, much current research on therapy for
malignant melanoma in humans focuses on identification and targeting of melanoma antigens and
stimulation of cytotoxic antineoplastic effector cells.
 In general, immunotherapy influences tumor growth by stimulating or inhi biting cytokine-
secreting immune cells. Endogenous immune cells can either be activated or suppressed.
effector cells. In adoptive cellular therapy, the patient receives sensitized anti-tumor cytotoxic
cells, such as CTLs, NK cells, tumor-infiltrating cells, and macrophages. Therapeutic use of
cytokines has focused on interferon-α (discussed in Chapter 5 1) and IL-2.
Current research in human oncology involves gene therapy that targets control of the cell
cycle and activation of cytotoxic cells.Other areas of study focus on enhancement of antigen
nition and destruction can be bypassed or overcome by exogenous administration of cytokines
that enhance the function of the patient's effector cells and optimize the patient's own cell-
mediated immunity. Tumor vaccines stimulate active speci fic immunity and are discussed in the
answer to Question 18.
T cell-associated cytokines with activities against malignant melanoma have been studied
in several species, including dogs. The different subtypes of helper T cells, Th1 and Th2, produce
cytokines that either enhance or inhibit tumor survival and proliferation. Cytokines produced by
Th1 cells include IL-2, IL-12, and IFN-, whereas those produced by Th2 cells include IL-4, IL-5,
MelanocyticNeoplasms
451
IL-6, IL-9, and IL-10. In general, Th1 activity favors the actions of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
Th2-associated cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 suppress Th1 activity, thus also inhibit CTL activity.
IL-2, a Th1-associated cytokine, has been studied extensively. Its primary antineoplastic
function is induction of NK cells, which are potent cytotoxic effector cells. IL-2 is toxic when
bypass its toxic systemic effects, neoplastic cells taken from a melanoma are incubated in vitro
for several weeks with IL-2 and tumor-derived lymphocytes. The resulting "hyperactivated"
tumor-infiltrating effector cells are then reinjected into the patient and specifically target the
patient's tumor and its clones. One experimental protocol uses IL-2 by inserting into the
melanoma genetically modified cells that secrete high levels of IL-2 within the tumor itself. IL-2,
melanoma cells to enhance their antigenicity, thereby making them more accessible to antigen-
presenting cells and more vulnerable to the cytotoxic activities of effector cells.
In several human cancers, including malignant melanoma and osteosarcoma, significant
anti-tumor effects are induced by post-operative intravenous injection of liposome-encapsulated
muramyl tripeptide-phosphatidylethanolamine (L-MTP-PE). Results of clinical trials of this
L-MTP-PE was injected either singly or in conjunction with recombinant GM-CSF. Macrophages
activated by these agents then secrete tumor necrosis factor-o and interferon, both of which
further stimulate antineoplastic cytotoxic activity. GM-CSF induces hematopoietic progenitor
cells to differentiate into dendritic cells, which are highly effective at antigen presentation.
Additional antineoplastic effects of GM-CSF are activation of eosinophils and neutrophils,
enhancement of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and increased cytotoxicity of circulating
lymphocytes. Administration of LT-MTP-PE significantly increased survival time in dogs with
stage I disease; 80% survived at least 2 years postoperatively, whereas only 25% of control dogs
survived for a similar amount of time. When administered with recombinant GM-CSF, pulmonary
alveolar macrophages were also activated; these have the potential to inhibit the growth or
development of pulmonary metastases. Results of this protocol were stage dependent: no
significant anti-neoplastic benefit was reported for dogs with advanced disease.
17. What is the role of antihistamines in therapy for melanocytic neoplasia?
The role of antihistamines as a chemotherapeutic or immunomodulatory adjunct in the
treatment of malignant melanoma in dogs and cats is unclear. The most commonly used antineo-
receptors (H2), which are expressed by suppressor T cells. When the receptors are blocked, the
suppressive effects of these T cells on cell-mediated immunity are inhibited, thus the patient's
cell-mediated, anti-tumor responses can be expressed. In human medicine, cimetidine is commonly
used as adjunctive therapy for gastrointestinal tumors. However, mixed results have been reported
from the use of cimetidine in equine melanomas, and antihistamines have not gained favor as
antineoplastic agents in therapy for canine and feline melanomas. Nevertheless, recent research
in human oncology has expanded the understanding of the role of histamine and may identify
future uses of H2 antagonists in veterinary medicine. Although best known for its activities in
allergy, inflammation, and gastric acid secretion, histamine functions in neurotransmission,
exerts both direct and indirect effects on the growth of melanocytic neoplasms in mice and in
humans. Melanoma cells express growth factors and cytokines not expressed by normal melano-
cytes; these factors both promote tumor growth and assist the escape of neoplastic clones from
decarboxylase, giving them the ability to synthesize histamine, a capability normal melanocytes
lack. The functions of histamine in tumor growth are not fully understood and reflect a complex
interplay between the different actions of histamine on H1 or H2 receptors expressed by normal
immune cells and by neoplastic melanoma cells. Additional differences in histaminergic effects
452
MelanocyticNeoplasms
reflect changes in the local cytokine microenvironment. Histamine exerts both direct and indirect
effects on malignant melanoma cells. When bound to Hl receptors, histamine inhibits cell
proliferation. In contrast, histamine bound to H2 receptors on the same cells enhances cell
proliferation. Which of the two effects the tumor manifests depends not only upon the balance
between the absolute numbers of H1 and H2 receptors, but also on their availability for histamine
binding. This is one point at which selective H2-blocking antihistamines, such as cimetidine,
might exert their effect.
When the indirect effects of histamine are considered, however, the outcomes are less
straightforward. Histaminergic responses of immune cells can be either pro-neoplastic or anti-
neoplastic. Activities that promote tumor growth thus could be targets of antihistamine therapy,
including H2-receptor-mediated inhibition of natural killer cells and suppression of the
production of several anti-neoplastic cytokines: IL-1β, IL-2, IL-12, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
C, and IFNy. The cytotoxic capability of macrophages is impaired by the action of histamine on
H2 receptors, which causes decreased production of oxygen-free radicals. In contrast, in certain
cytokine settings, histamine inhibits the growth of neoplastic cells. Stage IV malignant melanoma
in humans regressed after histamine was administered with IL-2 or IFN-o, both of which
stimulate natural killer cells. Tumors at that stage generally fail to respond to IL-2 or IFN-α
alone. Histamine also shifts the helper T cell response from one dominated by type 1 to type 2
cells; Th1-associated cytokines inhibit tumor proliferation, whereas Th2-associated cytokines
facilitate tumor growth and survival.
IL-6, a Th2-associated cytokine, influences the H1-H2 receptor balance on melanoma cells,
favoring H1. The effect of IL-6 on melanoma cell proliferation is concentration-dependent: high
levels of IL-6 inhibit cell proliferation via H1 receptors, whereas low levels facilitate cell growth
via H2 receptors. IL-6 stimulates the activity of histidine decarboxylase, the enzyme responsible
for histamine synthesis. Effectiveness of IL-6 activity against the malignant melanoma depends
advanced stages are stimulated by that cytokine.
18. How effective are tumor vaccines against malignant melanoma?
Tumor vaccines are injections of immunogenic components administered to stimulate active
immunity against a specific antigenic target.The presence ofmultiple antigenic moieties in
malignant melanoma cells makes them vulnerable to active specific immunity. Melanocyte- or
neuroendocrine-specific epitopes include tyrosinase, Melan-A, gp75, and gp100. Vaccines can
also target moieties found on several different types of neoplasms, including melanoma (tumor-
incompletely purified antigens. Neoplastic cells are extracted from the patient's melanoma to
create autologous vaccines; production of these vaccines requires a large tumor volume to yield
sufficient cells. Vaccines of this type have been used to treat equine melanomatosis. Cells derived
    s  o      
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I, are used to make allogeneic vaccines. Cell lysates
from allogeneic melanomas contain tumor particles that are engulfed by macrophages. This
enhances the presentation of tumor epitopes to cytotoxic effector cells. Research in murine and
cytokines and costimulatory molecules, including GM-CSF, IFNs, IL-2, and IL-6.
optimized by including haptens or adjuvants. GM-CSF is an example of a stimulatory cytokine
included in some autologous melanoma vaccines. Despite mixed responses to preliminary
clinical trials in humans and canines, tumor vaccines may prove to be beneficial therapeutic
adjuncts, especially in prevention or therapy for metastatic disease
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
453
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cangul IT, van Garderen E, van der Linde-Sipman JS, et al: Canine balloon and signet-ring melanomas: a
(eds): Lever's histopathology of the skin, ed 8. Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 625-684.
Falus A, Hegyesi H, Lazar-Molnar E, et al: Paracrine and autocrine interactions in melanoma: histamine is a relevant
player in local regulation, Trends /mmunot 22:648-652, 2001
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS: Skin tumors ofthe dog and cat, Oxford, 1998, Butterworth Heinemann.
GrossTL,Ihrke P,Walder E: Veterinary dermatopathology: amacroscopic and microscopic evaluation of canine and
feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Hogge GS, Burkhoder JK, Culp J, el al: Preclinical development of human granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stinulating factor-transfected melanoma cell vaccine using established canine cell lines and nomal dogs, Cancer
Gene Ther 6:26-36, 1999.
Kitchell BE, Brown DM, Luck EE, et al: Intralesional implant for treatment of primary oral malignant melanoma in
dogs, J Am Ver Med Assoc 204:229-236, 1994.
Koenig A, Wojcieszyn J, Weeks BR, et al: Expression of S10Oa, vimentin, NSE, and Melan A/MART-1 in
7 canine melanoma cell lines and 29 retrospective cases of canine melanoma, Vet Pathot 38:427-435, 2001.
Modiano JIF, Ritt MG, Wojcieszyn J: The molecular basis of canine melanoma: pathogenesis and trends in diagnosis
and therapy, / Vet Intern Med 13:163-174, 1999.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Managing the veterinary cancer patient. Trenton, NJ, 1995, Veterinary Leaming Systems.
Raros-Vara JA, Miller MA, Johnson GC, et al: Melan A and S100 protein immunohistochemistry in feline
melanomas: 48 cases, Vet Pathot 39:127-132, 2002.
Rassnick KM, Ruslander DM, Cotter SM, et al: Use of carboplatin for treatment of dogs with malignant melanoma:
27 cases (1989-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1444-1448, 2001
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WBSaunders.
Sulaimon S, Kitchell B: Canine melanoma: combating a destructive and deadly tumor, Vet Med 96:931-942, 2001.
van der Linde-Sipman JS, de Wit MM, van Garderen E, et al: Cutaneous malignant melanomas in 57 cats:
identification of (amelanotic) signet-ring and balloon cell types and verification of their origin by
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and in situ hybridization, Vet Pathot 34:31-38, 1997.
Vaupel P, Thews O, Hockel M: Treatment resistance of solid tumors: role of hypoxia and anemia, Med Oncot 18:243-
259, 2001.
57. MISCELLANEOUS CUTANEOUS
NEOPLASMS
Brett C. Wood, DVM
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is a naturally occurring allograft?
· Transmission occurring by transplantation of viable neoplastic cells to a susceptible host.
· Clinical example: transmissible venereal tumor (TVT)
· Immunohistochemical studies support a histiocytic origin for TVTs.
· TvT tumor cells contain 59 chromosomes as compared with the normal canine complement
of 78.
· Possible viral etiology; however, tumor has not been successfully transplanted with
particle-free tissue grafts.
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
453
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cangul IT, van Garderen E, van der Linde-Sipman JS, et al: Canine balloon and signet-ring melanomas: a
(eds): Lever's histopathology of the skin, ed 8. Philadelphia, 1997, Lippincott-Raven, pp 625-684.
Falus A, Hegyesi H, Lazar-Molnar E, et al: Paracrine and autocrine interactions in melanoma: histamine is a relevant
player in local regulation, Trends /mmunot 22:648-652, 2001
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS: Skin tumors ofthe dog and cat, Oxford, 1998, Butterworth Heinemann.
GrossTL,Ihrke P,Walder E: Veterinary dermatopathology: amacroscopic and microscopic evaluation of canine and
feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Hogge GS, Burkhoder JK, Culp J, el al: Preclinical development of human granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stinulating factor-transfected melanoma cell vaccine using established canine cell lines and nomal dogs, Cancer
Gene Ther 6:26-36, 1999.
Kitchell BE, Brown DM, Luck EE, et al: Intralesional implant for treatment of primary oral malignant melanoma in
dogs, J Am Ver Med Assoc 204:229-236, 1994.
Koenig A, Wojcieszyn J, Weeks BR, et al: Expression of S10Oa, vimentin, NSE, and Melan A/MART-1 in
7 canine melanoma cell lines and 29 retrospective cases of canine melanoma, Vet Pathot 38:427-435, 2001.
Modiano JIF, Ritt MG, Wojcieszyn J: The molecular basis of canine melanoma: pathogenesis and trends in diagnosis
and therapy, / Vet Intern Med 13:163-174, 1999.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Managing the veterinary cancer patient. Trenton, NJ, 1995, Veterinary Leaming Systems.
Raros-Vara JA, Miller MA, Johnson GC, et al: Melan A and S100 protein immunohistochemistry in feline
melanomas: 48 cases, Vet Pathot 39:127-132, 2002.
Rassnick KM, Ruslander DM, Cotter SM, et al: Use of carboplatin for treatment of dogs with malignant melanoma:
27 cases (1989-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1444-1448, 2001
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Mutler and Kirk's small animat dermatotogy, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WBSaunders.
Sulaimon S, Kitchell B: Canine melanoma: combating a destructive and deadly tumor, Vet Med 96:931-942, 2001.
van der Linde-Sipman JS, de Wit MM, van Garderen E, et al: Cutaneous malignant melanomas in 57 cats:
identification of (amelanotic) signet-ring and balloon cell types and verification of their origin by
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and in situ hybridization, Vet Pathot 34:31-38, 1997.
Vaupel P, Thews O, Hockel M: Treatment resistance of solid tumors: role of hypoxia and anemia, Med Oncot 18:243-
259, 2001.
57. MISCELLANEOUS CUTANEOUS
NEOPLASMS
Brett C. Wood, DVM
Thomas O. Manning, DVM, MS, DACVD
1. What is a naturally occurring allograft?
· Transmission occurring by transplantation of viable neoplastic cells to a susceptible host.
· Clinical example: transmissible venereal tumor (TVT)
· Immunohistochemical studies support a histiocytic origin for TVTs.
· TvT tumor cells contain 59 chromosomes as compared with the normal canine complement
of 78.
· Possible viral etiology; however, tumor has not been successfully transplanted with
particle-free tissue grafts.
454
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
2. What is the typical signalment of a dog affected with TVT?
· Intact male and female dogs
·
Spread primarily horizontal (by sexual contact)
· More common in regions where dog less domesticated, "no leash laws"
3. What are the most common locations of the lesions of TVT?
·External genitalia (Figure 57-1)
·Oral cavity
·Nasal cavity
· Skin (less common), face and limbs
4. How is the diagnosis of TVT made in most cases?
· TVT is usually easily diagnosed by exfoliate cytology
· Tissue is friable and bleeds easily
· Obtain samples by aspirati on/scraping/impression
·Round cell neoplasia, moderate amounts of cytoplasm (Figure 57-2)
· Cytoplasm contains small vacuoles
+Mitotic figures common
Figure 57-1 '
 Transmissible venereal tumor involving the penis of a dog.
Figure 57-2Impressions smear of a transmissible venereal tumor. Note that the round cells of this tumor
have abundant cytoplasm containing many vacuoles (×100)
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
455
 5. What are differential diagnoses to consider when evaluating a pink fleshy mass on a
dog's penis?
· Transmissible venereal tumor
·Transitional cell tumor (originating from penile urethra mucosa)
·Papilloma
· Squamous cell carcinoma
·Fibrosarcoma
·Histiocytic reticulocytoma
·Lymphoma
· Non-neoplastic conditions such as leishmaniasis, pythiosis, or granulation tissue
6. What is the biologic behavior of TVT?
●Metastasis uncommon, but may occur in approximately 17% of cases.
· Metastases are most common to local lymph nodes, skin, eyes, liver, and brain. In some
cases, spreading between the skin oral and nasal cavities is due to autotransplantation.
· Evaluate draining lymph nodes by fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and radiography of the
thoracic cavity and abdomen (ultrasonography) to screen for metastases.
· Some TVTs may synthesize and secrete erythropoietin and some affected animals may
have a paraneoplastic polycythemia.
7. Is there any relationship between the hormonal status of a dog and the progression
of TVT?
C     n n     s  
regional lymph nodes is common in intact female dogs.
· This activity may suggest that TVT is hormone dependent.
· Ovariectomy was reported to cause rapid reduction in size of TVT in intact females.
· Other veterinarians report that males are more susceptible to metastatic disease.
8. What is the therapy of choice for TVT?
●Vincristine (0.5-0.7 mg/m?intravenously weekly for 4-6 weeks) results in complete cure
in 90-95% of afflicted animals.
· Surgery effective for small localized tumors. However, in many cases surgery as a
monotherapy leads to a high rate of recurrence (20-60%).
· External beam radiation therapy is also curative in most cases, but its use is usually not
necessary due to efficacy of chemotherapy.
· Other chemotherapeutic agents used for TVT include cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
methotrexate, as well as certain biologic response modifiers (BCG and Staphylococcus
protein A). Although the chemotherapy agents are efficacious there have only been
inconsistent results noted with use of the immunomodulatory agents, and their use is not
recommended at this time.
9. Does the presence of metastases change the response to chemotherapy?
·In most cases, no
· The presence of metastasis does not affect effcacy of chemotherapy and dogs often have
a complete cure even in the presence of metastatic lesions.
10. Merkel's cells are found associated with the following sense organs:
associated with a tylotrich pad (Haarscheibe, touch corpuscle, touch dome, hair disk,
Pinkus corpuscle, Eimer's organ, Iggo dome, etc.).
· Tylotrich pads are composed of thickened epidermis underlayered by a fine connective
tissue (convex), which is highly innervated and vascularized.
·Merkel's cells serve as slow-adapting touch receptors.
456
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
11.  Tumors of neuroendocrine origin in dogs clinically present
· In solitary lesions
· In dogs older than 8 years of age
·In lips, ears, digits, oral cavity
12. What is the biologic behavior of neuroendocrine tumors?
·Malignant with metastases
Or
·Bemign
13. Histologic diagnosis of tumors of neuroendocrine origin may require:
· Histopathology: uniformly round tumor cells with abundant cytoplasm, high mitotic
index, giant/multinucleate tumor cells, hyperchromatic/vesicular nuclei
· Electron microscopic examination: cytoplasmic dense-core membrane bound granules
and perinuclear whorl of intermediate filaments, neurosecretory granules are often lost in
formalin-fixed routine histopathologic sections
14. List the important characteristics of cutaneous plasmacytoma in the dog and cat
(cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma).
· Common in the dog, extremely rare in the cat
· Occur at a later age, average 10 years old in the dog
+ Cocker Spaniels may be predisposed
·Usually solitary
· Perhaps associated with cutaneous areas of chronic inflammation/infection/irritation
15. Are any cutaneous areas predisposed to develop plasmacytomas?
·Digits
· Chin
·Lips
·Ears (especially external ear canal)
16. List some of the histologic/immunohistochemical markers reported in cutaneous
plasmacytoma?
· Immunoglobulin G: heavy and light chains
·CD 3 Tcells
·Vimentin
· CD 18 dendritic cells
·Thioflavin T
·Ki-67 antigen
·CD 79a
17. Are histologic grading systems of great benefit in assessing malignancy potential in
canine cutaneous plasmacytoma?
·No
+These neoplasms typically exhibit benign biologic behavior despite histologic malignant
appearance (Figure 57-3).
· Treatment of choice is surgical excision.
18. What is cutaneous angiomatosis?
· An uncommon condition involving a progressively invasive, non-malignant lesion
composed of proliferation of vascular tissue within the dermis or subcutis.
· Reported in several veterinary species, including the dog and cat
19. What is the preferred mode of therapy for these lesions?
Wide surgical excision or amputation is often recommended for control of the lesions
because of the recurrent nature of the disease and the afflicted regions (most commonly the dista
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
457
Figure 57-3
Photomicrograph of a canine cutaneous plasmacytoma. Note the multinucleated
nucleoli (×l00).
Figure 57-4  Metastatic anaplastic sarcoma in a dog.
limb in the cat). However, laser photocoagulation using a neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet
laser has replaced surgical excision as the recommended therapy for humans with highly vascular
dermal lesions. Animals treated with this modality have required multiple treatments and have
reported a good functional and cosmetic outcome in most cases.
 20. What are the broad categories of neoplasia involving the skin?
●Primary tumors: those tumors that arise primarily within the dermis, subcutis, or alveolar
tissue. A myriad of tumors occur in this region and can be benign or malignant.
·Secondary tumors: those tumors that develop at a distant site and metastasize to the skin.
 By definition these tumors are part of a mali gnant neoplastic process.
21. What is a rarely reported iatrogenic cause for metastatic spread to the integument?
Surgical transplantation of a neoplasm (tumor seeding) is rarely reported in dogs or cats
(Figure 57-4). If they occur, lesions appear most commonly in the healed surgical incision
through which the primary neoplasm was removed. Most cases reported invol ved urinary tract
carcinomas.
458
Miscellaneous Cutaneous Neoplasms
 22. What are some multicentric-type tumors that may involve the skin as a secondary,
metastatic site?
·Systemic histiocytosis
· Transmissible venereal tumors
·Lymphoma
·Various carcinoma/adenocarcinoma
·Hemangiosarcoma
· Mast cell tumor
 In some cases, especially lymphoma and MCT, it is difficult to clinically differentiate where
the neoplasia originated.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Small Anim Vet Med 3(5):389-399, 1981
Bevier DE, Goldschmidt MH: Skin tumors in the dog. I1. Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissues, Compend Cont
Ed Small Anim Vet Med 3(6):506-520, 1981.
Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth IH: Diagnostic cytology and hematology of the dog and cat, ed 2. St Louis, 1999,
Mosby.
Fitzpatrick JE, Aeling JL (eds): Dermatology secrets in cotor, ed 2. Philadelphia, 2001, Hanley & Belfus.
Goldschmidt MH, Bevier DE: Skin tumors in the dog. IIl. Lymphohistiocytic and melanocytic tumors, Comp Cont
Ed Small Anim Vet Med 3:588-597, 1981.
Goldschnidt MH, Dunstan RW, Stannard AA, von Tschamer C, et al: Histological classification of epithelial and
melanocytic tumors of the skin of domestic animals, AFIP Am Reg Pathot WHO (series 2), vol 3, Washington, DC,
1998.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FA: Skin rumors of the dog and cat. Oxford, 1992, Pergamon.
Gross TL,Ihrke PJ,Walder EJ: Veterinary dermatopathotogy:a macroscopic and microscopic evatuation of canine
and feline skin disease, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE: Muler & Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 6. Philadelphia, 2000,
WB Saunders.
INDEX
Adrenal glands
sex hormone imbalances
association.286
conditions, association, 286
Adrenal sex hormone imbalance, 291
Adrenal steroid hormone intermediates, schematic. 281f
Adrenal tumor
A
differentiation. See Pituitary-dependent disease
Abdomen, blood vessels, 270f
 simultaneous reports, posibility. See Pituitary-dependent 
Abdominal ex ploratory surgery. 302
disease
Abdominal radiographs. 176
Adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH). 83
Abdominal ultrasonography. 176. 301. 351
administration, 293
Abnormal claw formation, term, 333
eKce5s, 271
Abscessed lesion, swelling. 172f 
levels
Abscesses
decrease, 275
aerobic/anaerobic bacteria, isolation, 154 
Wage. See Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
characteristics. See Bacterial infections
release, 277
clinical appearance, description, 154
simulation test, 73-276. 279
differential diagnoses. 154
differentiation. See Cats
etiolog ies, 154
usage, 287
formation. pathophysiology. See Cutaneous abscess formation
Adriamycin-based protocols, 416
Acamhocheiionem recondirum,142
Adult dog5, cutaneous papilloma, 185f
Acantholytic keratinocytes. 19f, 32f. 118f
Adult-onset demodicosis, 269
definition, 18.33
Adult-onset generalized demodicosis, clinical significance, 129
pathognomonic presence. See Pemphigus diseases
Advanced/disseminated visceral mastocytosis, 423f
Acanthosis, 16f
Advancedetastimastellasmtmatl
acantholytic cells, sequela, 18
(drugs, usage), 424
nigricans, definition. 362
Advanced pHormula Spray. 75. 79
Advanced TEN, full-thickness epidermal necrosis, 248f
Acid-fast filamentous aerobes, 156
Adverse food reactions, atopy [differentiation). See Dog5
Acid mantle. See Skin 
Aerobic bacteria, isolation. See Abscesses; Cellulitis lesion
Acid orcein-Giemsa, 446
Akita, 95. 233
Acquired alopecia, types, 103104
veodermatolog ic synd rome
Acral, definition, 326
eyelid margins/nose/mucocutaneous junction,
Acral lick dermatitis. 331
epigmentatinlerationf
age onset, 326
skin/hairdepigmentation.357
breed predispositions, 326
Albinism., piebaldism, differentiation., 354
characteristics, 327t-328t
Alkaline aminotransferase [ALT). 272
differential diagnosis, 326
Alkaline phosphatase [ALP). 272
gender predilections36
Allergen, definition, 202
histopathologic features, description. 328
Allergic dermatitides, FAD differentiation. 213
lesions
Allergic reaction, contrast. See Irritant reaction
skin biopsy. 329f
Allerg ies
treatment,therapeutic ptions.330331
aopicdermatitisdifferentiationeeCntactallery
psychogenicasect, treatment30331
causes/pathogenesis. See Food allergy
skinlesion.types/distribution6
clinical presentation. See Dog5
Acral lick furunculosis, 144
clinical signs. See Cats
Acral lick granuloma, 392 
diagnostic process. See Cats/fleas
Acral mutilation syndrome. See Canir
cral muti lation sy ndrome
diagnostic tests, availability. See Food allergy
diagnosis process, 124
differential diagnoses. See Cats; Dogs
treatments, availability. 124
history. See Cats; Dogs
Acremonium yairum, 170
impact. See Blepharitis
Acrodermatitis, clinical signs. See Bull Terriers
insects.impact,133
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
esting. indications. See In vitro allergy testing.
Actinic, definition, 312
vaccine, effectivenes. See Contact hypersensitivity allergy
Actinic dermatitis, 3 14f 
Allermyl. 83
Actinic keratosis
Alopecia. See Color dilution alopecia; Color-linked alopecias;
definition, 318, 394
Congenital alopecia; Hormone-responsive alopecias; Nose;
lesions, differential diagnoses, 394
Symmetric alopecia
Actinic lesions, malignant transformation (comm
nness).See
area, sharp borders, 104f
Chronic actinic lesions
congenital hypotrichosis
Acute moist dermatitis, 211
age. onset, 120
Adipocyte [damage). description, 250
pattern, 120
Adipose fat tissue, subcutaneous layer. 1
definition. See Canine pattern alopecia; Pattern alopecia
Adnexal differentiates, 399
demarcated area, 145f
Ad nexal dysplasia
etiology. hyperprogesteronemia [impact), 286
organoid hamartomas, relationship. 390
heat cycle,association, 287
photomicrograph. See Canine skin
hyperestrogenism, result. 283
Adrenal adenocarcinomas,cutaneousmanifestationsSeeCats; Dogs
pathogenesis. See Feline paraneoplastic alopecia
Adrenal dy sfunction, 269-280
treatment, melatonin (impact). 295
assays.273t-274t
Alopecia-X
Adrenalectomy. See Medical adrenalectomy
age onset,. 292
complications, 280
breed predisposition. See Dogs
postoperative management. See Bilateral adrenalectomy
clinical features, 291-292
definition, 29]
Page numbers followed by f, t, and b indicate figures,
dermatohistopathological changes.293
diagnostic process, 293
tables, and boxed material, respectively.
differential diag nosis, 293
459
460
Index
Alopecia-X (conr'd)
Anti-Leishmamicr anti bodies. 187
etiopathogenesis. 292
titer, prog nosis, 187
prognosis, 294
Antimicrobial therapy. 57-64
treatment, 293294
Antimicrobial topical agents. 253
Alopecic area, biopsy (performing techniques). 28-29
Antinuclear antibody test, 257
Alopecic lesions
Antioxidants,usage.116-117
geographic shape. 289
Antipruritic
sampling process, 29
colloidal oatmeal, effectiveness, 2
Alpha-MSH.5.353
lime sulfur, usefulness, 83
ALT. See Alkaline aminotransferase
topical antihistamines, effectiveness. See Cats; Dogs
Amastigotes, yield. See Tissue 
Antiseptic cleansing agents,advantages/disadvantage379
Amblyomma mate uiar um, 131
Antiseptic soaks, 336
Amelanotic melanomas, identification process, 446-447
Antithyroglobulin antibodies [AtgA). 263.265
American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology. 40
Antithyroid hormone antibodies (AT3A/AT4A). 263
American College of Veterinary Pathology. 40
significance, 265-266
American National Standards Institute, 87
Anti-vimentin antibodies, 447
Aminoglycoside [selection), considerations. See Topical therapy
Anxiety, diferences. See Stereotypic behaviors
Aminosyn, 300
Apocrine carcinomas. See Circumanal gland carcinomas
Amitraz
Apocrine cystomatosis. 388f
action mechanism/side effects/antidotes. See Dogs
definition, 387
topicalapplication, sideeffects.eeGeneralizeddemodioss
Apocrine cysts, definition, 387
Amox icillinclavulanic acid, 154
Apocrine (epitrichial) adenomas, adenocarcinomas (stain
Amphotericin B.175. 176
differentiation}.9
Anagen, 6. 22t
Apocrine glands. See Pyogranulomatous nodule
defluxion, 29]
cysts, location. See Himalayancats; Persian cats
Anal licking.325
neoplasms, commonness. See Cats; Dog5
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
tumors, 407
adjunctive therapies. 411
Apoptosis, definition. 1718
clinical signs, 410
Apoptotic keratinocytes. See Epidermis
Anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma, prognosis, 411
Aqueous vitamin E. 239
Anal sac gland tumors. signalment, 410 
Arachidonic acid [AA), 48. 55 
Anal sac tumor, clinical staging. 411
Arctic Circle breeds, 351
Anaplasmosis, 132
Arthropod parasites. 126-132
Ancylostoma braxiliense, 141
Arthropods, insects (differentiation). 126
Anc yroxoma caimum, 141
Aspiration, usage. 403
Androgens. overproduction,286
Astringent soaks, 336
Anemia, 175
Asymptomatic carrier, definition. 160
Anaerobic bacteria, isolation. See Abscesses; Cellulitis lesion
Asymptomatic individuals. 134
Anesthetics, effectiveness. See Pruritus
AT3A.See Antithyroid hormone antibodies
Anesthetizedpatientaflushingrecautions
AT4A. See Antithyroid hormone anti bodies
Ankyloblepharon definition. 346
Atopic dermatitis. 52
Anopiura (sucking lice). 135
differentiation. See Contact allergy; Contact hypersensitivity
Antibacterial agents. See Shampoo
PCE,. role. See Canine atopic dermatitis
benzoyl peroxide,selection,75
pruritus (pathogenesis), PDE role, 54
usage. See Topical therapy
defect correction. pharmacologic therapies, 54
Antibacterial defense mechanisms, microbiota (impact). 143 
Atopic dogs
Antibacterial shampoos. 74t
cure, possibility, 193
Antibacterial therapy. indications. See Topical antibacterial
owner, advice, 193
therapy
seborrhea oleosa, 73f
Anti biotics
superficial pyoderma, 73f
effectiveness. See Pruritus
treatment, 194
ineffectiveness, reasons, 62
Atopic West Highland white Terrier Maiassezia (presence).
selection process. See Systemic use
76f
therapy, option. See Recurrent pyoderma
Atopy, 188-195
uage. See Pyoderma
canine diagnosis,history. 188
combination, occurrence. See Immunosuppressive dnugs
CSA dosage. 53
reasons. See Canine atopic dermatitis treatment
Atrichial tumors. See Eccrine sweat gland tumors
Anti biotic therapy. See Dermatology
Atrophy
impact. SeeYeast overgrowth predisposition
opposition.See Hypertrophy
Anti body antinuclear test, usefulness. See Autoimmune skin
result, 256f
disease diagnosis
Atropine,68
Antifungal agents. impact. See Pruritus
Atypical mycobacteriosis, treatment, 156
Antifungal drug. usage. See Oomycetes
Atypical oportunistic. organisms (cause). 155
Antifungal products, availability. See Maiasseziα
Auditory ossicles. See Tympanic cavity
Antigen
Auditory tube, opening. 368
definition, 202
Aurotrichia, 15
presentation, CSA interference, 53
Autogenous vaccination. 1&5
Anti histamines
Autoimmune skin disease diag nosis
action, mechanism, 49
advanced immunologic methods, benefits. 242
benefits, 52
antinuclear antibody test, usefulness, 242
dangers/side effects, 50
cytology (performing).benefits. 241
doses, 50-51
direct immunofluorescence
ffectiveness, 49. See aiso Cats; Contact hypersensitivity
benefits, 242
allergy; Dogs
sample,collection, 242
role. 5ee Melanocytic neoplasia
skin biopsy (performing). benefits/procedure, 24]-242
u5age. 50-51. 218-219. 5ee aixo Cats; Dogs; First-generation
Autoimmune skin diseases, 23 1t 
histamines
development process. 231
problems. See Second-generation antihistamines
diagnostic tests, 241
Index
461
Autoimmune subepidermal vesiculobullous diseases, 237
Bexarotene, 440
comparison/contrast, 237
BHFD. ee Black hair follicular dysplasia
management proces237
Bilateral adrenalectomy, cats postoperative management, 280
Autosomal recessive syndrome, 120
Bilateral erythematous pododermatitis. 191f
Avon Skin-So-Soff, 136
Bilateralhyperpigmentation32
Azathioprine, usage. 1 16. See αizo Pemphigus complex
Bilaterally symmetric generalized alopecia, 327f
Biochemical abnormalities. See Canine hyperadrenocorticism
B
Biochemical panel, usage. See Hypothyroidism
Babesiα, 132
Biochemical profile,175
Bacitracin, 58
Biologic phenotype. See Sof tissue sarcoma5
Bacteria
Biopsy
acid-fast species, 155
helpfulness. See Contact hypersensitivity
interpretation. See Skin
material, selection, 35
role. See Otitis externa
orientation.See Eliptical biopsy
Bacterial blepharitis, etiologies, 347-348
performing
Bacterial culture
indications. See Skin biopsy
nodule sample collection process,33
techniques. See Alopecic area, Hypotrichotic area
performing. infrequency (reasons). 62
process. See Nasal biopsies; Wedge biopsy
process, 33
results, nonspecific dermatitis (reasons). 20
Bacterial dermatitis, treatment. ee Concu rrent bacterial dermatitis
sample
Bacterial folliculitis (BOG),. 194, 358
 proces. 5ee Punch biopsy sample
Bacterial infections., 143-157 
sectioning. appearance, 37f
abscesses, characteristics, 156
election. See Lesions
definition/examples. See Deep bacterial infections; Supeficial
specimens, histopathologic findings. See Canine eosinophilic
bacterial infections; Surface bacterial infections
furunculosis
draining fistulae, characteristics, 156
timing. 34
nodules, characteristic, 156
tissues, special stains/IHC (differentiation). 20
products, availability See Localized bacterial infections
usage. See Panniculitis
Bacterial pneumonia, 380
Biopsy-responsive alopecia. 291
Bacterial pyoderma [treatment), Maiassezicr treatment
Biting fleas/mosquitoes, repellent products, 68
[differentiation). 168
Biting insects [control), insecticides [usage). 136
Bacterial skin disease. See Zoonotic bacterial skin disease
Black hair follicular dysplasia (BHFD). 99, 289
cccurrence
appearance/diag nostic features, CDA similarities, 99-10D
Bacterial skin infections,occurrence. See Pemphigus
teatment,posibilities100101
Bacterial species, list/identification. See Canine skin; Feline skin
Blasiomyces dermaniridi
Bacieroides, 153
diagnostic confirmation process, 174
Bald thigh syndrome. 103
impression smear, 175f
Balloon cell,meaning/significance, 443-444
predisposition, risk factors, 173
Bandages, usage. 331
Blastomycosis
Barrier therapy. 47
cutaneous manifestations. 173
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC). 393
draining tracts, association. 174f
biologic behavior, 40D
drug treatment. 174 175
Basal cell tumors, 409
Blepharedema [insect bite). 347f
reclassification, 404
Blepharitis, 344352
Basal keratinocytes, hydropic degeneration, 339
allergies, impact, 347
Basal serum hormone concentrations, 263
definition, 344345
Basal total thyroxine (TT4}
diseases, impact, 345
concentration [measurement, usefulness,263
etiologies. See Bacterial blepharitis
in-house ELISA measurement, reliability. 263
fungus.impact,349
Baseline blood work, 330
parasites, impact, 349
Basement membrane zone [BMZ),. structure (descri ption). 5
trauma, impact, 346
Basketweave, 17
treatment process. See Traumatic blepharitis
Basophilic viral intranuclear/intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies,
Blindness, 171, 173, 357
presence, 185
reasons. See Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism
Basset Hound, systemic histiocytosis, 430f
Blister, definition, 1 12
Bathing. 164
Blood-brain barrier, 51
BCNU, 440
Blood test
Bearded Collies, 233
availability. See Dogs/FAD
Beauceron, 113
Wage. See Contact hypersensitivity, Pythiosis
Behavioral disorders, CAD (relationship). 194 
Blood vessels, subcutaneous layer. 1
Behavioral pharmacotherapeutics. See Psychocutaneous disorders
BMZ. See Basement membrane zone
Behavioral pharmacotherapy administration precautions. 330
Body
Belly scratching. 196
areas, MD (impact), 216. 216t 
Benign familial chronic pemphigus. See Canine benign familial
fold, 146
ch ronic pemphigus
melanocytes, distribution, 4-5
treatment, 118
BOG. See Bacterial folliculitis 
Benign melanocytomas
Bone marrow
malignant melanocytomas, clinical feature differentiation, 446
aspirate specimen, cytologic appearance, 423f
neoplastic transformation, possi bility, 447-448
precursor cells, 423f
Benzoyl peroxide, 59
Boston Terrer (muzzle), amelanotic melanoma, 447f
chlorhexidine, differentiation. 75
Bottom scooting.
19%
ethyl lactate, differentiation. 75
Bowen’s disease
povidone-iodine, differentiation, 75
defi nition, 398-399
election.ee Antibacterial agents
teatment. See Feline Bowen's disease
usefulness, 73f
Boxer
Beta-hemolytic steptooccus. 57
CRFA.290f
Beta-lipoprotein. 5
lip. extramedullary plasmacytoma 442f
Betamethasone, 239, 381
marked hyperpigmentation, 290f
462
Index
Brachyeiafium spicjerum, 170
Canine ehrlichiosis {Ehrichia canix), 186
Bulla, 10t
cutaneous lesions, association, 186
definition, 112
Canine eosinophilic furunculosis, 224-227
Bulldog. facial/nasal fold dermatitis. See English Bulldog
breedsverepreentation226
Bullous impetigo.mpetigo [differentiation）. 148
histologic diagnosis [chances),increase, 226
Bullous pemphigoid. 337
inciting factors, 226
Bull Terriers
esions, biopsy specimens (histopathologic findings). 226
rdermatitislinical signs08
prognosis. 226-227
comedo formation,313f31637
teatment options. 227
deep pyogranulomatous dermatitis, 313f
Canine epidermis
deep pyogramulomatous lesions, 316-317
hematic, 2f
erythema, 313f
stratum corneum, basketweave keratin. 17f
lethal acrodermatitis, treatment recommendations, 123
Canine flea infestation/allergy non-dermatologic signs, 212
nasal solar dermatitis, 312f
Canine histiocytes, cell surface phenotype, 432t
puppieslthal acrodermatitis
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
hyperkeratosis,122f
age/breedgender predilections.72
solar damage. 313f
biochemical abnormalities, 272
Burns. See Skin
clinical signs., 270
clinical presentation/management. See Full-thickness burn;
dermatologic manifestations, 269
Partial-thickness burn
etiology. 271
owners. monitoring reasons. 277
C
treatment
CAD. See Canine atopic dermatitis
ketoconazole/fungal infections, differentiation, 275
Calcified adrenal gland (discovery). See Malignant process 
L-deprenyl usage advantages/disadvantages. 277
indication
Canine hypothyroidism
Calcinosis cutis 269. See aiso Dorsal neck; English Bulldog
clinical remisson,timing.267
etiology. 270
clinical signs, 261t
Calcinosis, definition, 17
diagnosis, ease, 262
Calicivinus, 396
etiologies, 261b
CAMP. 5ee Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
levothyroxine dose regimen, adequacy (determination process).
Cancer/papillomavinus, link. See Cats; Dogs
267
Canine acral mutilation syndrome
thyrotoxicosis induction (possibility). 268
breeds, irmpact, 123
treatment, 267
description,123
length,267
gender/age predilection,. 123
Canine lentigo simplex, clinical presentations, 354-355
Canine atopic dermatitis (CAD)
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome.229
clinical signs, 190-191
causative organism, 155
crisis, 193
clinical signs, description, 155
diagnostic criteria, 191f. 192f
transmission process 155
sensitivity/specificity, 190t
treatment,156
diagnostic mistakes, 192
Canine melanocytic neoplasms, malignancy histologic criteria
diagnostic process, 188-189
[usage). See Feline tumors 
minor forms, treatment (necesity). 194
Canine melanocytomas, histopathologic descriptions, 443-444
otitis extera clinical sign.191f
 Canine muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis, age/breed predisposition.
PGE, role, 55
153
presentation,complaints. 190-19]
 Canine nasal solar dermatitis, differential diagnoses, 315 
relationship. See Behavioral disorders
Canine oral melanocytic tumors, 449
steroid therapy necessity. 193
Canine papillomas, summary, 394t-395t
topical treatments, possibility. 194
Willemse's criteria, 190t 
Canine pattern alopecia (CPA}
Canine atopic dermatitis (CAD) treatment
anti biotics, usage (reasons), 194
age oset, 295
definition, 294
cyclosporine(CSA）usage95
diagnostic process, 295
failure, causes, 195
differential diag nosis. 295
imntaeftiv
differentiation. See Estrogen-responsive alopecia
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus. 117
treatment, 295
breeds, disposition. See Dogs
Canine pattern baldness. 294
diagnosis process, 118
ventral type. See Chihuahua
inheritance.mode.See Dogs
Canine perianal glands, cell type.6
skin lesions. types. 118
Canine pinna
Canine breeds, color mutant alopecia (impact), 357-358
muscles. 365
Canine circumanal glands, celltype. 6
sensory/motor innervation, 365
Canine claw
vasculature, 365
growth rate. 333
Canine recurrent flank alopecia [CRFA),. 101. 103, 289. See aiso
schematic diagram, 333f
Boxer; English Bulldog; Miniature Schnauzer
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
age onset, 290
biologic behavior, older dog differentiation. See Young dogs
clinical features, 289-290
clinical characteristics, 425-426
diagnostic process, 29]
fine-needle aspirate specimen, cytologic findings, 426
differential diagnoses, 291
Canine cutaneous plasmacytomas
etiopathogenesis, 290
malignancy potential. histologic grading systems (benefit). 456
females, predisposition, 290
photomicrograph. 457f
irmpact. See Dogs/breed s
Canine cyclic hematopoiesis
prognosis. 291
definition, 359
treatment, 29]
treatment process. 359
Canine rocky mountain spotted fever {Rickeia rickeni. 186
Canine disseminated histiocytic sarcoma. See Malignant
cutaneous lesions, association, 186
histiocytosis
Canine scabies
Canine ear, schematic drawing. 364f
differentiation. See Noroeafres cari
Index
463
Canine scabies (conr'df)
cutaneous histicytoma, differential diagnostic usage, 431
treatment
histiocytosis, differential diagnostic usage, 431
licensed/approved ingredients.67
cutaneous plasmacytomas
off-label 1% ivermectin [usage), considerations, 67
characteristics, 456
Canine skin
clinical features, 441
adnexal dysplasia photomicrograph. 392f
dermatitis (etiology). helminth organisms (impact), 142
bacterial species, list/identification, 143-144
dexamethasone suppression tests, differentiation, 279
follicular cyst. photomicrograph. 386f
dogs ACTH simulation test, differentiation, 279
structure,1f
earbenig/malignantneoplasticconditions375
Canine superficial bacterial folliulitis
ear flushing. 368
clinical signs. 148-149
eccrine [atrichial) sweat gland tumors, 411
cutaneous bacterial culture, indication, 149
EDS (forms), description. 105-106
diagnostic tests, 149
El. normal value, 107 
etiologies, 148
EM, commonness. 244
Canine systemic histiocytosis
epitheliotropic CTCL
histologic appearance, 429-430
commonness, 435
lesions, description, 429
presentation process 436
Canine thyroid function
face
biologic exploration, diagnostictests [availability). 263
rmucocutaneous junctions, differential diagnoses, 396
preevaluation procedure, 266
primary mast cell tumors, 421f
Canine thyroid function evaluation
fur mitesname/reginaldistributin paten/linical findings.
diagnostic tests, 266t
126-127
test, 262
hai r follicle
thyrotropin stimulation test, nonusage reasons, 265
neoplasia, surveys, 404
Canine trichoepithelioma
neoplasms, defining. 404
cross-section, 404f
hookworm larvae, exposure process 140
photomicrograph，405f
hyperprogesteronemia, clinical signs, 286
Canine TSH (cTSH). 264
hyperthyroidism. signalment.26
 &5ays, comments. See Endogenous canine TSH assays
hypothyroidism. signalment, 268
Canine vasculitis, treatment (drugs,usage). 258t
insect allergies.knowledge. 133
Canine vasculitis/vasculopathy. drugs [usage). 258-259
Leishmamia spp. susceptibility. 186
Canine viral infection, association. See Footpad hyperkeratosis;
Maiaseia cais,impact, 158
Nasal hyperkeratosis
Maiasseziα infections, clinical signs. 167
Canine viral papillomavinus
mali gnant earconditions,375f
age predisposition.184
mali gnant melanomas
lesionsassociation184
risk factors, 444
prognosis, 185
signalments, 443
Capillary membrane permeability, 418
malignant softissue sal
netastasis, treatrment options.
Carbamatesdiffrentiationeergaophosphates
416
Carbon dioxide (CO) lasers
MD
application, 88-89
historical aspects. 217
resurfacing. See Surgical CO, laser resurfacing
incidence, 215-216
usage. See Cats; Chronic otitis externa; Proliferative otitis
MD, differential diagnoses, 215t 
ex terna
melanocytic neoplasms, differential diagnoses, 443, 445t
Carboplatin-based protocols, 417
melanocytoma, signalment, 443
Castration, 293, 407
MEN, occurrence, 300
Catagen, 6, 389
mites,skin scraping techniques24t
Cats
mosquit bite hypersensitivity, diagnosis process 135
adrenal adenocarcinomas, cutaneous manifestations, 303
mycotic organisms. impact, 157
 al kaline phosphatase (increase), reduced incidence. 279 
nail bed, crusts, 233f
alopecia, owner concern, 99
nasopharyngeal polyps
 anatomic difference, impact. See latrogenic Horner's syndrome
clinical presentation, 372
antihistamines, usage. 51t
treatmet process/complications372373
anti pruritic topical antihistamines, effectiveness, 82
nodule, skin biopsy specimen (obtaining). 169
apocrine gland neoplasms, commonness,407
non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma, CTCL differentiation.
aopy. diagnostic process, 223
440-441
bacterial folliculitis. occurrence, 144
nonsteroidal antipruritic products, availability, B3
bacterial skin disease, occurrence, 144
nose, SCC debulking (CO, laser usage). &8f
basal celltumors, types, 399-400
Woroedres carr infestations, treatment options, 67
benign ear conditions, 375t 
omega 3, role, 55
bilateral disease, ear mites [low burden impact),. 369
oega 6, role, 55
breeds. EDS (impact). 106
onychomycosis, commonness. 337
89Xg
otitis externa, malignant neoplasms (lis/biologic behavior).
cancer/papillomavirus, link, 401
373-375
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, clinical abnormalities, 35&-359
paraneoplastic alopecia, 301f 
compulsive behavior, stressors, 325
prognosis. 302
cncurrent diseases, 278
perianal fistula disease, reports. 342
corticosteroids application, safety. 84
postoperative management. See Bilateral adrenalectomy
cryptococcosis
pruritus, demonstration process, 210 
clinical signs. 171
pruritus, treatment
occurrence, 171
process, 44
cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma, differential
topical corticosteroids, safety. 84
diagnoses, 436-437
psychocutaneous disorders
Cutaneous involvement, location, 419.420
behavioral pharmacotherapeutics, dosages, 330 
cutaneous mast cell neoplasia, 418-425
syndromes, 325
psychogenic alopecia/dermatiti s, therapies, 332
448-449
PUFAs, role, 55
cutaneous nodular disease
recurrent subcutaneous abscesses, laboratory tests, 154
464
Index
Cats (conI ’d)
Caudal dorsum, 121f
sebaceous gland cysts, commonness, 389
Caudal thighs, FAD. See Dog5
sebaceous gland tumors, incidence, 405
Caudo-lateral thighs.pattern baldness [etiology).See Racing
sexhormone dermatoses,commonness.281
grey hounds alopecia
solar dermatitis
CavalierKingCharlesSpanielsersistentcratching
appearance, 317
cerebellar herniation, diagnosis, 124
treatment,319
distribution. 124
squamous cell carcinoma
etiology. 124
clinical course, 396
treatment, availability. 124 
location, 396-397
CBC. See Complete blood cell
subcutaneous fungal infections. 171
CCNU, 440
subcutaneous infections, fungal pathogens [association). 170
CDA. See Color dilution alopecia
subcutaneous tissue
Celiac sprue. 297
mesenchymal neoplasms, impact, 412-4 18
Cell-mediated immunity. 451
tumors, occurrence, 412
Cell-mediated immunologic response, 320 
sweat glands, types/functions, 6
Cell renewal time [(CRT). 2-3. See aiso Epidermis
TCAs, impact. See Pruritic dogs/cats
influences. See Skin
temporal area5, sparsely haired areas (concern). 104 105
Cells
thymona, dermatologic syndrome (association). 302
differentiation. See Epidermis
ticks, irmpact, 131
type. See Canine circumanal glands; Canine perianal glands
ticks.treatment
Cell surface phenotype. See Canine histiocytes 
ingredients, safety. 67
Cellulitis
licensed/approvedingredients.66
definition. See Juvenile cellulitis
topical antipruritic products, availability. 82
dermatosis, 153
topical therapy. 73b
differential diagnoses. 154
effectiveness. See Longhaired cats
relation ship. See Subcutis
tips. 73b
Cellulitis lesion
types, usefulness, 72
erobic/anaerobic bacteria, isolation, 153-154
vaccination, tumor [secondary formation), 416
description, 153
vaccine-associated sarcomas, 416-417
Central nervous system (CNS). 52
vasculitis, etiology. 256
Cats/claw
effects, 51
Central pores, inclusion. See Cystic tumors; Tumor-like lesions
fold purulent exudate, 335
Cephalexin,154
metastatic adenocarcinoma
usage, reasons. See Superficial pyoderma
histopathologic features. presentation, 336
Cephalothin, injections. 249f
tissue etiology. 336
Cerumen
abnormal/excessive accumulation, conditions. 5ee External ear
Cats/cutaneous mast cell turmors
canal (external auditory meatus)
breed disposition, 419
beneficial functions, 366
systemic clinical signs, 422-423
elimination. See Ear canal
treatment factors, outline, 423
production. glandular tissue (impact),. 366
Cats/dermatoph ytosis
Ceruminal gland tumors, benign ocurrence, 410 
clinical signs, 159
Ceruminolytic agents, role. See Otitis externa
topical therapy.effectiveness.79
Ceruminous cysts. See External ear canal
treatment recommendations. 164165
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma, video-otoscopic view, 374f
Cats/FAD
 Ceruminous gland adenoma, 409. See aixo External ear canal
clinical signs, 209-210
videootoscopic view, 374f
development, 208
Cerminous otitis exteramanagement93
diagnosis, blood test [availability). 212
Chalazion, 345
Cats/fleas
differentiation. See Hordeolum
allergy. diagnostic process, 223
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, clinical abnormalities. See Cats
 parasitization species, 208
Cheilitis, 192f
treatment, 64
Chemical pneumonitis, 380
Cats/food allergy
Chemistry profile, 235
diagnoses, best way. 199
Chemotherapy
diagnostic process, 223
effectiveness. See Malignant melanomas
differential diagnoses.199
recommendation. See Systemic chemotherapy
history/clinical signs. 199 
response, change. See Transmissible venereal tumor
prognosis, 201
usage. See Systemic disease
Cats/hyperadrenocorticism
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, 100
contraction, 278
Cheyieriella, 23. 69
dermatologic manifestations, 279
eggs identification methods. 128
diabetes mellitus, concurrence, 279
mite5
treatment, 279
common species, 127
Cats/pythiosis
identification methods. 128 
clinical signs, 180
spp.
prognosis, 182
infestation, treatment ingredients,68-69
treatment recommendation. 182
origins, 218
Cats/skin
symptoms, hypersensitivity reaction. 24
disease, dermatophytes [impact). 158
Cheyierielia blakei. 127
mesenchymal neoplasms.impact, 412418
Cheyletiellosis, 214f
neoplasms, categorization/prevalence, 403
Chiari type I malformation, 124 
tumors, occurrence, 412
Chicken coops, 126
ulcerative dermatosis, differential diagnoses, 396
Chigger mites life cycle/clinical findings. 127
Cats/soft tissue sarcomas
Chihuahua
development, causative factors, 414
canine pattern baldnes
 impact, frequency. 414
pre-melatonin/post-melatonin treatment.296f
long-term management, therapeutic modalities, 416
ventral type. 294f
Index
465
panniculitis, 251f
Clobestone propionate, 239
rabies vaccine administration, ischemic dermatopathy. 256f
Ciosrrifium, 153
Chinese Shar Pei, cutaneous mast cell neoplasia infiltration, 420f
Clotrimazole, 78
Chlorambucil usage. See Pemphigus complex
CNS. See Central nervous system
Chloramphenicol. 154
CO. See Carbon dioxide
Chlorhexidine.59.77
Coagulase-positive staphylococcus species, 144
differentition. See Benzoyl peroxide
Coccidioidomycosis
product [strength}, decision, 75
clinical manifestations, 177
Chlorphenolac.161
diagnostic process, 177
Chow, alopecia-X. 292f
dnug treatment, 177
Chow Chows.113.233
risk factors. 176
Chromoblastomycosis, 170
Coccoides, 228
Chromomycoses. 170
Cochlear promontory, 367f
Chronic actinic damage. See Bull Terrier, Flanks; Ventrum
Cochlear window, 368
Chronic actinic lesions, malignant transformation (commonness.
Cocker Spaniel
316
erythematous alopecic nodules, 228f
Chronic claw disease. 337
paw (nodule), sebaceous gland hyperplasia, 406f
Chronic dermatitis. 16f
sterile pyogranuloma syndrome, 228f
Chronic otitis externa, proliferative tissue removal (CO laser
Cold agglutinin disease, 337
usage). 89f
Collagen disordes. 105112
Chronic pyoderma, 82f
Collagen fi bers, 328
 Chronic topical neomycin application, superficial epithelial
Collagenous nevi, 389
desquamation, 321f
Collagen, smudging. 254
Cigarette paper thin scars. 106
Collars, usage, 331
Cilia. presence, 336
Collection techniques. See Cytologic examination sample
Cimetidine, 150
Collies
 capability. See Immunoadjuvants
cyclic hematopoiesis,359f
Circumanal gland (apocrine) carcinomas, disease progression
haired intradermal nodule (hemorrhagic crust/nodular
[differentiation）.See Perianal gland adenomas
episcleritis.228f
Clavulanic acid, 154 
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis, 237
Clavulanic acid-potentiated amox icilin. 60
sterile pyogranuloma syndrome. 228f
Claw (digit)
ventral abdomen/groin. 239f
avulsion, 336
Colloidal oatmeal, 46t 
bacterial infections, etiologies, 335
effectivenessSee Antipruritic
bed
Colonies
colonization, onychomycosis, 337f
microscopic examination, 26
diseases, 332-340
benefits, 26
malignant neoplasia, types. See Dogs/claw
morphology. usage. See Dermatophytes
chronic bacterial infection therapeutic plan. 336
Colonoscopy usage. 342
differential diagnoses,335
Color dilution alopecia [CDA).23t, 99
endocrine disorder, association. 5ee Cats/claw
appearance/diag nostic features, similarity. See Black hair
formation
follicular dysplasia
abormalities 334-335
treatment, possibilities, 100-101
term. See Abnormal claw formation
Color-linked alopecias, 99 
fungal infection, term, 334
Color mutant alopecia
growth rate. See Canine claw
diagnostic process, 357-358
loss/pain/swelling/discharge, diagnostic plan. See Dogs/claw
impact. See Canine breed5
material
management. See Dogs
protein, abundance. 333
Comedo
stnuctural analogy. See Hardened claw material
formation. See Dogs
metastatic adenocarcinoma. See Cats
hematic, 15f
neoplasia. benign/malignant. 336
Comedones
pain, term, 33
formation, 84f
sloughing. term, 333
_primary/secondary lesion, definition. 14
quamous cell carcinoma/melanomalinical feature
Commelinα plant, leaves, 205f
differentiation, 336
Complete blood cell (CBC) count, 121. 149. 175. 235. 272
symmetric hypertrophy, endocrine disorder [association}. See
diagnosis, 415, 422
Cats
results, 30]
therapeutic avulsion, 339f
Compound, meaning/significance, 443-444
trauma, 336
Compulsive behavior, stressors. See Cats; Dog5
ulcerated solitary histiocytoma, 426f
Computed tomography. 415
Claw [digit) diseases, 332-340. See αizo Chronic claw disease
Concurrent bacterial dermatitis, treatment, 169
biopsy indications, 340
Concurrent glucocoricoid therapy, requirement. See Mitotane
diagnosis, tissue inclusion, 340
Congenital alopecia, 99
physical examination features, 335
Congenital conditions, possibility. 99
Claw fold
Congenital disorders, 119-125
definition, 333
Congenital hypotrichosis, 121f. See αiso Alopecia
diseases
breeds, irmpact, 120
bacterial infections, etiologies, 335
definition, 120
differential diagnoses. 335
diagnosis process, 120
physical examination features, 335
gender predilection. 120
inflammation, term, 333
Constitutive pigmentation
purulent exudate, 335. See αixo Cats/cla
defining. 5
Clear cell, meaning/sig nificance, 443-444
facultative pigmentation, differentiation process, 353
Clinical ear disease, yeast (role), 377
Contact allergen, 205f
Clipper blade marks, evidence, 104f
Contact allergy. atopic dermatitisdifferentiation).203
Clipping. 58, 164
Contact hypersensitivity. 202-208. 203f 204f. 322
CLM. See Cutaneous larva migran s
atopic dermatitis, differentiation, 207t
466
Index
Contact hypersensitivity (onr'f)
Cushing's disease, 286
blood test, usage, 206
differentiation. See Cushing's syndrome
cure, poss bility, 206
L-deprenyl treatment, monitoring. See Dog 5
definition, 202
Cushings syndrome.281
diagnostic process, 206.323
Cushing's disease, differentiation, 272
 biopsy helpfulness. 206
Cutaneous abnormalitie. See Feline hyperthyroidism; Feline
differential diagnoses, 322
hypothyroidism
etiologies. See Dogs; Humans
Cutaneous abscess formation. pathophysiology. 154
frequency. 321
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions. See Dogs
irritant dermatitis, differentiation [(ease). 321
Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy (CRCV}
management process, 323
 clinical signs. See Greyhounds
manifestation process, 203
etiologic agent. See Greyhounds
cccurrence, rate, 204
nonprofessional term. See Greyhounds
prevention, possibility. 206
reports. See Dogs
risk factors, 206
Cutaneous angiomatosis
 5ymptoms [reduction), dnugs [usage). 206
definition, 456
Contact hypersensitivity allergy
esions, treatment, 456457
allergy vaccine, effectiveness, 207
Cutaneous areas. plasmacytoma development [ predisposition), 456
anti histamines, effectiveness. 206-207
Cutaneous asthenia, differentiation, 109
improvement, 207
Cutaneous atrophy. 84f, 206
Contact hypersensitivity dermatitis
Cutaneous bacterial culture, indication. See Canine superficial
clinical findings.321
bacterial folliculiti s
differentiation. See Contact irritant dermatitis 
Cutaneous bacterial pathogen. See Dogs
 Cutaneous B cell lymphoma. See Labrador Retriever
manifestation, 321f
Cutaneous changes, etiology. See Metabolic epidermal necrosis
problems,differentiation322
Cutaneous cysts matricaltissue matrix source. See Dog5
Contact irritant dermatitis
Cutaneous dirofilariasis
 clinical findings. 321
diagnostic process, 142
contact hypersensitivity dermatitis, differentiation, 320
signs. 142
teatmemt,142
problems
Cutaneous disorders. See Endocrine disorders; Metabolic
diagnosis/management processes, 322
disorders, Psychocutaneous disorders
differentiation, 322
Cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma
Coombs test, 257
histologic characteristics,438
COP, 440
Cutaneous epitheliotropic T cellymphoma, diferential diagnoses.
Copper transport,regulation3
See Cats; Dog5
Corium, definition. 332
Cutaneous erythema, 186
Corneal ulcer, 179 
Cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma. 456
Corticosteroid-containing products, residual anti pruritic effect.
Cutaneous forms. See Lupus erythematosus
-
Cutaneous hamartoma, 443
Corticosteroids
Cutaneous hemangiosarcomas, biological aggressiveness 417-4 18.
aplica
See αiso Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas
inclusion, safety/effectiveness. See Shampoo
Cutaneous histiocytoma, differential diagnostic usage See Cats
Cowpox infection/virus. 5ee Feline cowpox infection, Feline
Cutaneous horns, 392
cowpox virus
definition, 401-402
COX. See Cyclo-oxygenase
formation,etiology, 401-402
CPA.See Canine pattern alopecia
management.392
Creams, usage,45t
Cutaneous infections. protection, 34
Creatinine ratio, 273
Cutaneous inverted papilomas
CRFA. 5ee Canine recurrent flank alopecia
age predisposition.185
CRCV. See Cutaneous and renal glomenular vasculopathy
clinicalapearance. 185
Crohn 's disease, 297
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM). 141
CRT. See Cell renewal time
Cutaneous lesions
Crusting. 115f
association. See Canine ehrlichiosis; Canine rocky mountain
Cnusts. 13t. 149f. 233f
aa pads
demarcated area, 145f
diagnostic process, 1&5
Cryoablation, 350
etiology.fiarial nematodes (impact), 142
Cryoglobulinemia. 323
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Cryosurgery, 331, 397, 407
clinical signs, 238, 238t
Cryotherapy. 350
diseases [aggravation), sun ex posure (impact). 238
Cryptococcosis172f
prognoses, 241
clinical signs. See Cats
treatment
cutaneous nodules, association, 172f
options. See Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
diagnostic confirmation process, 171-172
protocols. See Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
dnug treatmemt. 173
Cutaneous lymphoma association. 5ee Feline leukemia virus (FeLV}
occurrence. See Cats; Dogs
Cutaneous lymph vessels, functions, 8
Crypriococcus neojormans, capsule characteristic. 173f
Cutaneous mast cells
C&S. See Culture and susceptibility
appearance, 419
CSA. See Cyclosporine
neoplasia. See Cats; Dogs
CTCL. See Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
intiltration. See Chinese Shar-Pei
Crenrphaidesfelis, 208
Cutaneous mast cell tumors
Culture and susceptibility (C&S) testing. 62
breed disposition. 5ee Cats/cutaneous mast cell tumors; 
Culture media
Dogs/cutaneous mast cell tumors
advantages/disadvantages. See Fungal cultures
diagnostic process, 420-422
age. See Dermatophytes
diagnostic tests, recommendation,422
Curling.256f
surgical resection, surgical margins [recommendations), 423
Curly coated breeds, pattern alopecia, 103 
systemic clinical signs. 5ee Cats/cutaneous mastcelltumors;
Curvwiariaα genicuiarα, 170
Dogs/cutaneous mast cell tumors 
Index
467
Cutaneous melanocytes, etiology. 353
process/indications. 30-32
Cutaneous melanocytic neoplasm, clinical evaluation/staging. See
pxocessing. 32
Cats; Dog 5
Cytologic findings, description.See Canine cutane
Cutaneous melanomas, 443
histiocytoma, Panniculitis
differentiation. See Melanocytomas
Cytologic fungal specimen, evaluation process 163
Cutaneous mucinosis
Cytologic specimen. See Bone marrow
uage. See Malasezi ermatitis
diagnosis process. See Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
Cytologic testing. pifalls, 168
differential diagnoses, 119
Cytology
treatment. See Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
accuracy. See Dermal neoplasia
Cutaneous mycobacterial infections, treatment, 156
advantage. See Mast cell tumors
Cutaneous neoplasms, 453-458
definition, 30
calcification, indications, 405
intracellular/extracellular cocci. See Skin
indication. See Tumors
performing. benefits.See Autoimmune skin disease diagnosis
management/prognosis, 403
preparation, 118f
Cutaneous nerves
usage, 32
functions. 7
value, 30
neuropeptides production.7
Cytoplasmic granules. 419, 422
Cutaneous nodules, 177
Cytoplasm,vacuoles454f
association. See Cry ptococcosis
Cutaneous phlebectasias, 269
口
Cutaneous plasmacytomas
Dachshunds. 233
characteristics. See Cats; Dogs
pinnal alopecia, 103
clinical features. See Cats; Dogs
Dalmatian
histologic markers, 456
black hair follicular dysplasia, 10Df 
immunohistochemical markers, 456
pigmented spots, 100f
malignancy potential, histologic grading systems (benefit). See
Dampening, benefit, 165
Canine cutaneous plasmacytomas
Darrer's sign,419,421f
Cutaneous signs. See Panniculitis 
Debris, elimination. See Ear canal
percentage. See Visceral leishmaniasis
Deep bacterial folliculitis, bacteria, 151
Cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL). 302, 433. See aio
Deep bacterial furunculosis, bacteria, 151
Epitheliotropic CTCL
Deep bacterial infections
differentiation. See Cats; Dog5
defi nition/examples. 144
Cutis laxa, definition. 109
etiologies, 151
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), definition/usage. 54
es] fues uys asad s a 
Cyclic hematopoiesis. See Collies
Deep ear cleaning. clinical indications, 380
Cyclin-dependent kinase inhi bitor, 444
Deep folliculitis
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX). 55
clinical signs, 15 1-152
Cyclophosphamide. 417
dermatosis, 153
Cyclosporine (CSA}
diagnostic tests/treatment outline. See Dog5
action mechanism, 343
differential diag noses, 152
admini stration, disadvantages/side effects, 53-54
Deep furunculosis
alternatives. See Oral cyclosporine
clinical signs, 15 1-152
anti pruritic mechanism, 52
diagnostictests/reatment ouline.eeDogs
definition, 52
differential diagnoses, 152
dosage. See Atopy
Deep mycoses, 170-177
decrease. process. 54
definition, 170
effectiveness. See Dogs
Deep pyoderma lesion. qualities. 153
interference. See Antigen; T cells
Deep pyogranulomatous dermatitis. 314f See aoBul Teriers
prescribing.53
Deep pyogranulomatous lesions. See Bull Terriers; Flanks; 
side effects, decrease,54
ventrum
therapy.
DEET. 136
monitoring process, 344
Defecation infrequency. 197
side effects, 343
D'emblee variant. See Humans/mycosis fungoides
age. See Canine atopic dermatitis treatment
Demodfex,22t
Cystic tumors (types), central pores (inclusion), 392
Demodex cris, 23
Cysts, 11t
life stages, diferentiation [ importance). 128
commonness. See Cats; Dog5
Demodex cari 23. 130f
definition, 3&5. See aizo Apocrine cysts; Dermoid cysts,
Demodfex mites
diagnostic methods, advantages/disadvantages. 129
Infundi bular cyst; Isthmus cyst, Sebaceous duct cysts
intiltration. See Dog5
lining, epidermal cells. See Panfollicular cyst,
Demodicosis
Trichoepitheliomatous cyst
clinical findings. See Dogs
location. See Follicular cyst, Himalayan cats; Multiple
common names, 128
congenital follicular cysts; Persian cats
development. See Dogs; Littermate5
matrical/tissue matrix source. See Dogs
predisposition, 186
rupture, granulomatous response. See Subcutaneous abscess.
treatment, Amitraz topical application (side effects). 5ee
treatment plan
Ceneralized demodicosis
surrounding structure, type. 5ee Subungual epithelial inclusion
Dendritic cells, 425
cyst
Depressed lesions, examples, 10
Cytochrome P450 enzyme system, 50
Depression, 175
Cytokeratins. importance, 403
Dermacenior andersoni. 131
Cytokines, excess. 302
Dermacenor occidenalis, 13 1
Cytological fungal specimen, evaluation process, 163
Dermacenor variabiis, 131
Cytologic diag nosis, fallibility, 429
Dermal edema, 254
Cytologic evaluation, findings/significance. See Otitis externa
Dermal, meaning/significance, 443-444
Cytologic examination sample
Dermal neoplasia, exfoliative cytology (accuracy). 403
collection techniques. 30
Dermal tumors, differential diagnoses, 426-428
468
Index
Dermaryssus glie, importance, 126
Dermatophytosis, diagnosis
Dermatitis. See Atopic dermatitis; Miliary dermatitis
fungal cultures, usage. 24
contact hypersensitivity dermatitis differentiation. See Contact
trichogram cultures, usage. 24
irritant dermatitis
Wood's lampexamination, usage. 24
definition. See Interface dermatiti s 
Dermatoses. 3i2. See αiso Environmental dermatoses; Zinc-related
differential diagnoses.SeeNodular dermatitis
dermatoses
etiology. See Contact hypersensitivity dermatitis
hypoandrogenism/hypoestrogenism, reports, 287
helminth organisms, impact. See Cats; Dogs
Dermatosparaxis, differentiation, 109
lesions, clinical appearance. See Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis
Derm Caps. 219
lesions
Derm Duet, 26
reasons. See Biopsy
Dermis. 1. See aiso Epidermis
relationship. See Interface dermatitis 
Dermoid cysts
therapies.SeeDogs; Truncal solar dermatitis
abnormal inheritance, breed type. 387
topical therapy. indication. See Maiaxsezia
as5ociated conditions. See Rhodesian Ridgebacks
treatment. See Cats; Concurrent bacterial dermatitis
commonness, contrast. See Follicular cyst 
Dermatofi brosis, definition. See Nodular dermatofibrosis
definition, 386
Dermatohi stopathological changes. See Alopecia-X
kcation, 386
Dermatohistopathologic studies, helpfulness. See Miliary dermatitis
DES. See Diethylstilbestrol
Dermatohistopathology. helpfulness See Flea allergy dermatitis
Devon Rex, follicular dysplasia 102f
diagnosis
 Dexamethasone supression test. See High-dose
Dermatologic diseases
dexamethasone suppression; Low-dose dexamethasone
occurrence. See Hyperadrenocorticism
uossacins
trichogram findings. 22t-23t
differentiation. See Cats
Dermatologic lesions, association. See Leishmaniasis
Diabetes mellitus
Dermatologic problem, diagnostic tests (usage). 21
 concurrence. See Cats/hyperadrenocorticism 
Dermatologic signs. See Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
management, 278
Dermatologic syndrome, association. See Cats
Diagnosis, confirmation, 34
Dermatologic therapy. 43
Diatomaceous earth [usage), advantages/disadvantages. 5ee
Dermatologi sts/words
Environmental flea control
choice, reasons, 9
Dietary hypersensitivity. 196-201
mumber, reasons, 9
definition, 196
Dermatology
Diethylstilbestrol (DES). 85
anti biotic therapy. 61t
side effects, 286
antimicrobial therapy knowledge, importance. 57
DiffQuik,32.168
diag nostic techniques. 21-33
Diffuse dermatitis, 321f
language, learning process 10
Digital hyperkeratosis [footpad hyperkeratosis)
lasers, usage, 85
clinical signs, 93
parasiticides. 64-69
diagnosis process. See Primary digital hyperkeratosis
wocabulary. 9-21
management. See Primary digital hyperkeratosis
Dermatomyositis (DM). See Dogs
Digital lesions, 396
definition, 113114
Dilapidated brick wall. 118
diagnosis process. 114 116 
Dilated apocrine glands. See Pyogranulomatous nodule
gernetics.114
Dilated pore of winer, 392
skin lesions, association, 114
Dimethyl sulfoxide, 46t
treatment process. 116-117
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DsS),. 379
Dermatopathologic findings. See Hypothyroidism
Diperaionema reconefirum, 142
Dermaraphagoicfes farinae [house dust mites). 1&8. 189f
Dipercaionemx spp..138
 species/clinical significance, 127
Diphenhydramine.46t
Dermatophilosis. 144
Dipyiafium camirum, 2 10
causative agent, 15 1
Direct irmmunofluorescence, benefits. See Autoimmune skin
clinical signs, 151
disease diag nosis
pathogenesis. 15 1
Dirafiaria spp. 138
treatment. 151
Dirty face syndrome, PHSO (impact). 5ee Persian cats
 Dermatophyte infections. 164. See αiso Resistant dermatophyte
Discharge. cytology. 335
infections
Discoid Ilupus erythematosus (DLE). 19, 237. 394
diag nostic process, 160
differentiation, 3 15-316
establishment, factors, 158-159
ranagement, treatment protocols.39240
identification, laboratory tests. 160
sun sensitivity, increase. See Dogs
advantages/disadvantages. 161-162
Discoid lupus, occurrence See Nose
transmission process, 158
Discrete cell neoplasia, differential diagnoses, 426
Dermatoph ytes
Disseminated infection, mycobacteria (impact), 156
analysis, clues, 26
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 338
culturing. tips. 26
Distal extremities, malignant softissue sarcoma [impact). ee
diagnosis, culture media [usage). 25
Older dogs
impact. See Cats/skin; Dogs/skin
Distal phalanx [P3). 332
Dermatophytes, identification
Distant metastasis, 448
colony morphology,usage,25t
DLE. See Discoid lupus erythematosus
fluorescence, usage. 25t
DM. See Dermatomyositis
lactophenol cotton blue examination, 27t
DNA, 41-42
Dermatophyte test medium (DT M). 25. 26. 162
damage, 414. 449
Dermatoph ytosis. 22t
DNA-based assays, 42
 clinical signs. See Cats/dermatophytosis; Dogs/dermatophytosis
Doberman Pinschers. 233
differentiation. See Localized dermatophytosis
anterior metatarsus, acral lick dermatitis, 326f
infection. See Hair
dorsal trunk, white scales, 92f
self-curing. 163-164
hypothyroid.268f
topical therapy, effectiveness. 5ee Cats/dermatophytosis;
inheritance, 118
Dogs/dermatophytosis
Dog/cat anatomic difference, impact. See latrogenic Horners
treatment, reasons, 163-164
Index
469
Dog5
parasitization species, 208
ACTH simulation test, differentiation. See Cats
treatment, 64
active otitis externa/mediabacterial organisms isolation) 375
folliculitis, etiologies, 148
adenocarcinomas, gender predilection, 407
food reactions, atopy [differentiation}. 189-190
adrenal adenocarcinomas, cutaneous manifestations, 303
footpads, papilloma lesions [descri ption). 185
al binism, expression, 354
gonadal hormone overproduction etiology. 281
alopecia
hair follicle
diagnosis, schematic. 288f
neoplasia, surveys, 404
owner concem, 99
neoplasms, defining.404
Alopecia-X, breed predisposition, 292
heartworm disease, skin lesions [occurrence). 14]-142
anatomic difference, impact. See latrogenic Horner's syndrome
hepatoid glandular tissue, location, 407
anti histamines, usage. 50t-51t
hookworm larvae, exposure process, 140
anti pruritic topical antihistamines, effectiveness, 2
hormonal staus.TVT progression {relationship）.455
apocrine gland neoplasms, commonness, 407
hormone-responsive alopecias, list, 289
atopic dermatitis-induced pruritus, CSA effectiveness, 53
human EM forms, comparison. 244
atopy. similarity. 188
hypercalcemia, epitheliotropic CTCL (impact), 438
bacterial folliculitis, ocurrence. 144
hyperestrogenism/Sertoli celltumor. clinical presentation
basal cell tumors, types, 399-400
[differentiation). 283
benignear conditions.375f
insect allergies, knowledge. 133
benign melanocytic tumors, malignant melanocytic tumor5
itraconazole treatment, cutaneous adverse drug reactions. 177
(histologic feature differentiation), 446, 446t
KCS, oral antibiotic association, 35 1
 bilateral disease, ear mites (low burden impact). 369
lagenidiosis. symptoms. 180 
cancer/papillomavirus, link, 401
Leishmaipsusepibiity.186
canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
localized demodicosis, clinical findings., 128
breeds, disposition, 117
malignantear conditions, 375
inheritance,mode, 117-118
malignant eyelid tumors, occurrence, 350
canine pattern alopecia, breed predisposition. 295
mali gnant sof tissue sarcomas metastasis, treatment options.
caudal thighs. FAD, 211f
416
color mutant alopecia, management, 357-358
melanocytic neoplasms, differential diagnoses, 443. 445t
comedo formation, 316-317
melanocytoma, signalment, 443
compulsive behavior, stressors, 325
melatonin, safety. 296
contact hypersensitivity, etiology. 203
MEN, signalment/clinical signs, 297
corticosteroids application, safety. 84
mites, skin scraping techniques, 24t
CRGV reports. 124
mycotic organisms.impact157
cryptococosis, occurrence, 171
nasal folliculitis/furunculosis, breed predisposition, 152
cure, possibility. See Atopic dogs
nasal solar dermatitis, therapies, 318
Cushing 's disease, L-Deprenyl treatment [monitoring). 278
failure, 318
cutaneous bacterial pathogen.144
neoplasia, multi ple collagenous hamartomas [association), 390 
cutaneous cysts, matrical/tissue matrix source, 389
neuroendocrine tumors, clinical presence, 456
cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma, differential
nodular dermatofibrosis, diagnostic tests, 111
diagnoses, 436-437
non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma, CTCL differentiation.
cutaneous involvement, location, 419-420
440-441
cutaneous mast cell neoplasia, 418-425
nonsteroidal antipruritic products, availability, 3
cutaneous melanocytic neoplasm, clinical evaluation/staging.
omega 3, role, 55
448-449
omega 6, role. 55
 cutaneous papilloma. 5ee Adult dog5
onychomycosis,commonness.337
cutaneous plasmacytomas
papillomas, types. 400
characteristics, 456
papillomavirus-associated lesions, description, 185
clinical features, 441
paraneoplastic pemphigus,description,303
deep folliculitis/fununculosis
pedal folliulitisfuunculosis development, breed disposition.
diagnostic tests, 153
152
treatment, outline. 153
Peiodera dermatitis, diagnostic process. 139-140
Demodex mites, infiltration, 128
penis
demodicosis, development, 129
pink fleshy mass, differential diagnoses [consideration. 455
dermatitis (etiology). helminth organisms (impact). 142
transmissible venereal tumor, 454f
direct infection. See Humans
perianal adenocarcinoma, 408f
distal extremities, malignant sof tisue sarcoma (impact). 5ee
perianal adenoma, 408f
Older dog5
perianal gland adenomas. gender predilection. 407
distal legs, dermatomyositis. 115f
perianal glandular tissue, location, 407
DLE, sun sensitivity increase, 316
perianal tumors, prognostic indicators, 407
dorsal lumbosacral area, FAD, 211f
pruritus
Dracuncwx inignis, infestation proces. 137-138
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, usage. 52
development time. 138
treatment process, 44
ear
psychocutaneous disorders
benign/malignant neoplastic conditions, 375
behavioral pharmacotherapeutics, dosages, 330
canal, bacterial organisms [isolation). 375
syndromes, 325
eccrine [atrichial) sweat gland tumors, 41]
PUFAs. role. 55
El, normal value, 107
pyoderma recurrence, coping process, 62-63
EM, commonness. 244
pyotraumatic foliculitisfurunculosis, breed disposition. 152
epidermal lipids, components. 3
regional lymph nodes, tumors [metastasis). See Female dog
epitheliotropic CTCL
enal disease, multiple collagenous hamartomas [association},
clinical presentation/progression, 435-436
390
commonness, 435
Sarcapes scabiei var. camis, clinical symptoms, 1 30-131
eyelid neoplasia, commonness 349-350
rabies mites, clinical symptoms [development),. 131
face
ebaceous gland cysts, commonness, 389
DM. 115f
rbaceous gland tumors
inflammatory reaction. 161f
incidence, 405
fleas
cccurrence,406
470
Index
Dogs (co'f)
Dogs/malignant melanomas, 444t
Sertoli cell tumor, clinical signs, 281
clinical feature differentiation, 445-446
sexhormone dermatosescommoness0
risk factors, 444
 solitary cutaneous histiocytoma, cell type impact. See Young
signalments, 443
dog 5
Dogs/otitis externa
squamous cellcarcinoma
clinical signs, 378
clinical course, 396
malignant neoplasms (list/biologic behavior). 373375
location, 396-397
species/anti microbial susceptibility. 376-377
subcutaneous fungal infections. 171
Dogs/otitis media
subcutaneous infections, fungal pathogens (association). 170 
commonness, 378
subcutaneous tissue
differentiation. See Humans
mesenchymal neoplasms, impact, 412-418
pathogenesis, 377-378
occurrence, 412
speciesantimicrobial susceptibility376377
sweat glands, types/functions. 6
viral cause, 37 2
systemic histiocytosis
Dogs/pythiosis
management. treatment options. 431
prognosis, 182
signalment, 429
symptoms. 179-180
tail, dermatomyositis. 144f
treatment recommendation. 182
TCAs, impact. See Pruritic dogs/cats
Dogs/skin
ticks, impact, 131
disease, dermatophytes (impact),. 15&
ticks, treatment
resenchymal neoplasms, irmpact, 412-4 18
Amitraz, action mechanism/side effects/antidotes, 66-67
neoplasmscategorization/prevalence403
licensed/approvedingredients,66
tumors, occurrence, 412
topical antipruritic products, availability. 82
Dogs/soft tissue sarcomas
topical therapy. 73b
development, causative factors, 414
capability. 182
irmpact, frequency. 414
tips. 73b
long-term management, therapeutic modalities, 416
types, usefulness. 72
Dogs/superficial bacterial folliculitis
treatment, zinc binding diets (irmpact). 31]
bacteria, 148
TVT. signalment, 454
tests, consideration, 149-150
vasculitis, etiology. 256
treatment plan, 150
Dogs/breeds
Domestic animals (skin), epithelial/melanocytic tumors
alopecia-X, impact, 295
[histological classification), 390 
CPA, impact. 295
Dorsal lumbosacral area, FAD. See Dog5
CR FA, impact, 295
Dorsal neck, calcinosis cutis, 271f
EDS, impact, 106
Dracunculiasis
follicular cysts, predisposition, 389
definition, 137
multiplecollagenousamatomasrepor0
signs/diagnostic process/treatment. See Dogs/dracunculiasis
Dogs/claw
Dracunculus-infected ferrets, 138
bed.malignant neoplasia (types).336
Draewneuius insignis
loss/pain/swelling/discharge. diagnostic plan, 335
extraction, 138f
squamous cell carcinoma/melanoma, clinical features
infestation process. 5ee Dog5
differentiation, 336
larva, 139f
Dogs/cutaneous mast cell tumors
Drae une uius medinensis. 137
breed disposition, 419
Draining fistulae, characteristics. See Bacterial infections
systemic clinical sigms, 422-423
Draining tracts. 173
treatment factors, outline, 423
a5sociation. See Blastomycosis
Dogs/dermatophytosis
Drechslera spicijerum,170
clinical signs. 159
Drug enuption,337
topical therapy.effectiveness.79
DSS. See Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate
treatment recommendations. 164165
DTM. See Dermatophyte test medium
Dogs/dracunculiasis
Dudley nose now nose [differemtiation), 36]-362
diagnostic process, 138
Dust provocation tests, 133
signs, 137
Dynamic tests, 263
treatment, 138
Dyskeratosis, definition. 17-18 
Dogs/FAD
Dysplasia. See West Highland white Terriers
clinical signs, 210-212
definition. See Follicular dysplasia
development, 208
occurrence,20
diagnosis, blood test (availability). 212
Dysplastic cells. 398
Dogs/food allergy. 197f
Dyspnea, 173
diagnoses, best way. 199
Dystrophic calcification, 383
differential diagnoses. 199
dorsal forefoot, staining. 198f
E
history/clinical presentation,196-197
Ear. See Inner ear, Middle ear
 physical examination findings. 197-198
anatomic features/boundaries, 364365
prognosis. 201
cleaning. clinical indications. See Deep ear cleaning
ventral abdomen. postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. 198f
cleansing agent, characteristics, 378
Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism, 270f, 271f
conditions. See Cats; Dog5
blindness, reasons, 271
gross anatomy division, 364365
bruising. reasons, 270
pinnae, 121f
itchiness, reasons, 270
pinnal neoplasms, 409
neurologic signs, development [reasons). 271-272
SCC. 397f
Dogs/hypothyroidism
stnuctural components, 364365
diagnostic test, recommendation, 266
swab specimens, isolates, 377t 
etiology. 260
Ear canal. See Extermal ear canal
impact, 260
bacterial organisms, isolation. See Dog5
physical examination.impact.262
debris/cenumen, elimination process, 366
signalment, 261-262
ear mite infections, impact, 369-37 1
Index
471
neoplasms, 409
Endogenous canine TSH (cTSH) assays, comments. 264-265
tumors, clinical observations, 410
Endogenous eumelanin. 352
Ear canal-based ceruminal tumor, therapy. 410
Endogenousforeign bodies.impact.See Granulomas
Ear canalbased tumor, clinical staginginclusion}.410
English Bulldog
Ear diseases, 364-384
apocrine cysts,387f
pathogenesis, conceptual approach [August). 369
calcinosis cutis, 387f
perpetuating factors, 369
canine recurrent flank alopecia10
predisposing conditions, 369
facial intertrigo. 147f
primary causes, 369
facial/nasal fold dermatitis, 78
yeast, role. See Clinical ear disease
hyperadrenocorticism, 387f
Ear flushing. See Cats
English Setter, medial canthus (sebaceous gland hyperplasia), 406f
complications, 380
English Springer Spaniel. post-clipping alopecia, 104f
goals, 378
Engorged pars flaccida videotoscopic view, 67f
precautions. See Anesthetized patient
Enilconazole, 59, 79
Early papillomavirus lesions. See Creat Dane
usage, 166
Ear mites (Orodecies cyroris). See Rabbits
Enlarged adrenal gland, causes, 275
infections, impact. See Ear canal
Enlarged lymph nodes. 175
infestations, clinical symptoms [diversity). 127
Entomophthorales.170
life cycle, 127
Environmental allergy testing.328
low burden impact. See Cats; Dog5
Environmental conditions, impact. 5ee Flea allergy dermatitis; 
management, miticidal therapy. 381
Fleas
photomicrograph.370f
Environmental decontamination. impact. 165-166
reinfestation, 369-371
Environmental dermatoses, 312-324 
treatment
Environmental flea control
failure, 369-371
diatomaceous earth (usage), advantages/disadvantages, 66
licensed/approved ingredients, 68
sodium polyborate [usage), advantages/disadvantages, 66
EB. See Epidermolysis bullosa
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 68
Ecchymotic hemorrhages. 186
Environment decontamination, 166
Eccrine [atrichial) sweat gland tumors. See Cats; Dog5
Enzyme-linked immunoassay. 24 1
E. coli, 148
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). 131. 172.
Ectoparasites, skin scrapes. 153
180-182, 187
ED. See Equilibrium dialysis 
Eosinophilic furunculosis. See Canine eosinophilic furunculosis
Edema, 186. See arizo Dermal edema
22sdog
EDS. See Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
diagnostic process 224
Effect, summation (relationship). See Pruritus
differential diagnoses, 226
ECC. See Eosinophilic granuloma complex 
elimination, 226
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS)
Eosinophilic granuloma complex (ECC). See Feline eosinophilic
advice, 108-109
granuloma complex
classification. See Human Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
clinical signs. 222t
collagen fibril orientation, 108f
Eosinophilic granulomalineargranuloma).222
definition, 105
definition, 221
dermatologic signs, 106
Eosinophilic laking. 308
diag nosis, confirmation tests, 108
Eosinophilic plaque. 222. See aizo Ventrum
differential diagnoses, 107
definition, 220
differentiation, 109
Eosinophilic plaque-like lesions, 159 
EDS type VIIC. 109
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
forms, description. See Cats
Epidermal collarettes, 149f
impact. See Cats; Dogs/breeds 
lesion type. 14
noncutaneous signs, 106
Epidermal cyst. See Ventral tail
skin biopsy specimens,histopathologic changes [description). 107
definition, 385
skin hypersensitivity.107f
Epidermal DNA, 314
treatments, availability 108
Epidermal dysplasia. See West Highland white Terriers
Ehrlichia anis,132
diagnosis process. 97
El. See Extensibility index
Epidermal hyperplasia 329f
Eimer's organ, 455
Epidermal lipids, components. See Dogs
Elastin disorders. 105-112
Epidermal melanin unit, defining. 4
Electrolytes.change.272
Epidermal-melanin unit, definition, 353
Electromyography (EMC). 114
Epidermal necrolysis, 243-250. See aiso Toxic epidermal
Electron microscopy. sample submission process, 4]
necrolysis
Elevated lesions, examples, 10
Epidermal neoplasia
Elimination diet trial, 328
UV radiation, impact, 393
Elimination test diet, selection, 199-200
Epidermal neoplasia, cell types (involvement). 393
Elimination test trialifculty00
Epidermal nevi.389
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Epidermal plaque, definition. See Pigmented epidermal plaque
Elliptical biopsy, orientation (diagram), 39f
Epidermal turnover time, 2-3
Elliptically oriented skin biopsy, process, 39
Epidermis, 1
EM. See Erythema multiforme
apoptotic keratinocytes. 18f
EMC. See Electromyography
cells, differentiation. 2
EMP. See Extramedullary plasmacytoma
CRT. 2-3
Endocrine-associated hyperpigmentation. 363
rhematic. See Canine epidermis
Endocrine disorders
Epidermoid cyst, definition, 385
a5sociation. 5ee Cats/claw
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB)
cutaneous manifestations, 260
breeds/types. 112
Endocrine testing. 153
definition, 112
Endocrinopathies. 23t, 99. 326
diagnosis process. 113
pigmentary changes. pathogenesis, 361
 similarities. See Inherited EB
Endogenous ACTH levels. 274
treatment, 113
age. See Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
EpiSoothe, 82
472
Index
Epithelial lining. See External ear canal
culture/susceptibility sample. prediction ability. See Tympanic
Epithelial migration, loss. 371
cavity
Epithelial neoplasms.393402
cytologic reparatin36f
Epithelial tumors, histological classification. 5ee Domestic
epithelial ining.365-366
animals
inflammation management, systemic glucocorticoids (usage).
Epitheliotropic CTCL, 434f. 5ee aiso Scottsh Terer; Shetland
382-383
Sheepdogs
External otitis exterma, cause, 190
clinical presentation/progression.See Dogs
Extracellular coci. See Skin
commonness. See Cats, Dogs
Extramedullary plasmacytoma (EMP), 44 1442. 5ee αito Boxer
cutaneous signs, 436t
fine-needle aspiration, cytologic sample, 428f
differential diagnoses, 436t-437t
Exudate
differentiation. See Pagetoid reticulosis
cytology.251f
irmpact. See Dogs
liquefied fat appearance251f
manage me nt
Eyelid
syntheticretinoidsusefuless,440
anatomy/physiology/function, importance, 345
treatment options availability, 439440
margin s/nose/mucocutaneous junction.
nodule, fine-needle aspiration [cytologic sample) 42f
depigmentation/ulceration. See Akita
presentation process. See Cats
meibomian gland adenoma, 350f
prognosis, 439
neoplasia
Epitheliotropic T celllymphoma,434
commonness. Se Dogs
Epitheliotropism, definition, 432
treatment, 350-351
Epitrichial adenomas, stain diferentiation. See Apocrine
neoplasms,dog/cat differentiation0
adenomas
pemphigus (types),.involvement, 347
Epitrichial cyst, definition.389
pustular dermatitis, 348f
Equilibrium dialysis (ED). 264
SCC, 351
Erosion, 13t
strnuctures, 345
Erosive lesion, sampling process, 29
tumors, occurrence. See Dogs
Erythema, 115f
Eyes,mucocutaneous junctions.234f
demarcated area, 145f
distinction process. See Purpura
F
Erythema multiforme (EM). 1&f. 243-250 
Face
clinical features, 244-245
mucocutaneous junctions, differential diagnoses. See Cats
commonness. See Cats; Dog5
 primary mast cell tumors. See Cats
definition, 243
nubbing.19
diagnostic process. 245-246
Facial fold, 146
erythematous maculopapular eruption. See Colden Retriever
dermatitis. See English Bulldog
forms, comparison. See Dogs; Humans
Facial intertrigo. See English Bulldog
histopatologicchanges.246
Facial pruritus, 192f
histopathology. contrast. 5ee Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Facultative pigmentation
immunologic basis, knowledge. 243-244
defining. 5
pathogenesis, 243
differentiation processSee Constitutive pigmentation
reported triggerfactors.245t
FAD. See Flea allergy dermatitis
treatment process. 246-247
False-positive results, 323
Eryrhema muirjorme miror 244
False-positive titers, 182
Erythematous papules. 149f
Far-far-near-near suture pattern. 39
Erythroderma
Fatty acid supplements. 219
application. See Mycosis fungoides
Feline Bowen’s disease, treatment, 399
definition, 433
Feline cenuminous cystomatosis, &&
Eschar, 320
Feline cowpox infection
Escherichia coli, 57
causative agent, 183
Estrogen-responsive alopecia, canine pattern alopecia
dermatologic signs, description. 183
[differentiation), 295
Feline cowpox vins
Estrous cycles, 307
infection, diagnostic process. 13
Ethyl lactate, differentiation. See Benzoyl peroxide
transmission process, 183
Etiopathogenesis. See Alopecia-X; Canine recurrent flank 
Feline Demoaex mites, clinical presentation (difference). 129-130
alopecia
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex (ECC). 220-224
Eumelannmelanindifntiat
clinical signs, 222
Eumycotic pathogen, 170
definition, 220
Euthyroid sick syndrome, definition, 264
diagnostic test, 222
Excoriation, 13t
differential diagnoses. 222
Excretory urogram, 111
etiology. 222
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 237, 239f
skin lesions, 222
treatment options, 240
treatment, 223-224
Exfoliative cytology. 411
Feline exfoliative dermatitis
accuracy. See Dermal neoplasia
differential diag nosis, 302
Exogenous antigens. presence. 231
thymona
Exogenous carotenoids.352
association, treatment, 303
Exogenous hormones. See Sex hormone dermatoses
suspicion, tests, 302
Exposure, critical time, 158
Feline flea infestation/allergy, non-dermatologic signs, 210
Extensibility index (E1). 107. 107f
Feline hyperadrenocorticism, 279f
calculation. See Skin
Feline hyperthyroidism, cutaneous abnormalities. 268
normal value. See Cats; Dog5
Feline hypothyroidism, cutaneous abnormalities, 268
External auditory meatus. 5ee External ear canal
Feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV). 301. 396
External beam radiation therapy. 407
infections, skin diseases (association), 183
External ear canal (external auditory meatus), 365
Feline indolent ulcer, 220f 
cenumen, abnormal/excessive accumulation, conditions. 371
Feline lentigo simplex, clinical presentations, 435
cenuminous cysts, 409f
Feline leprosy
cenuminous gland adenoma, 409f
causative agent, 155
Index
473
clinical signs, 155
gender/breed predilections. 209
diagnostic process. 155
immunopathogenesis, 208-209
treatment.156
immunotherapy, effectiveness 213
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 301. 396
importance, 208
cutaneous ymphomaassociation437
incidence,increase,209
infections, skin diseases [association). 183
treatment, 213
Feline melanocytomas. histopathologic descriptions 443-444
Flea allergy dematitis(FAD) diagnosis
Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity 135f
blood test, availability. See Cats/FAD; Dogs/FAD
Feline oral ulceration, viral diseases (impact),. 184
dermatohistopathology helpfulness 212
Feline papillomaviuses, lesions [(association). 184
skin biopsy helpfulness, 212
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia, 302f
Fleas
alopecia, pathogenesis, 301 
allergy
cutaneous clinical signs, association, 301
clinical signs, severity (determination), 209
diagnostic process, 301-302
diag nostic process. See Cats
etiology. malignant tumors (impact),. 300
reasons, 208-209
systemic clinical signs, association, 301
control, 193, 209
Feline pox virus, 396
diatomaceous earth (usage), advantages/disadvantages. See
Feline preauricular alopecia, 104
Environmental flea control
Feline psychogenic alopecia, 325. 327f
5odium polyborate (usage), advantages/disadvantages. See
age onset, 326
Environmental flea control
breed predispositioms6
dip. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis
characteristics, 327t-328t
host'species specific. 208
differential diagnoses, 326-328
IGR5
gender predilections. 326
examples, 65
skin lesions, types/distribution, 326
inmpact, 133-134
Feline psychogenic dermatitis. 325. 327t-328t
increase, environmental conditions (impact). 209
age onset, 326
infestation/allergy. non-dermatologic signs. See Canine flea
breed predispositions,326
infestation/allergy;, Feline fleainfestationallergy
differential diagnoses. 326-328
IPM, definition, 66
gender predilections, 326
life cycle, 209
skin lesions, types/distribution, 326
description, 64
Feline scabiesassociation.See Noroefreai
parasitization species. See Cats; Dogs
Feline skin, bacterial species [list/identification). 143-144
repellent products. See Biting fleas/mosquitoes
Feline tumors, canine melanocytic neoplasms (malignancy
treatment. See Cats; Dog5
histologic criteria, usage). 446
Fluconazole, 171, 173. 176
Feline upper respiratory disease, viral diseases (impact),. 184
Flucytosine, 173
Feline vaccineassociated soft tissue sarcomas, biologic behavior.
Fluocinolone, 38]
417
etonide,239
Feline vasculitis. drugs [usage). 259
Fluorescence, usage. See Dermatophytes
FeLV. See Feline leukemia vinus
Fluoroquinolone anti biotics, 60. 61
Female dog. regional lymph nodes (tumors, metastasis), 410
Focal adnexal dysplasia, 390
Fibroepithelial polyp. 392
Focal metatarsal fistulation, etiology. See Cerman Shepherd Dog5
Fibropruritic nodules, 212
Folded pinnae, 279
Filarial nematodes, impact. See Cutaneous lesions 
Follicular cast, definition. 14
Fine-needle aspirate, 422f
Follicular cyst
Fine-needle aspirate specimen. See Mononuclearepithelioid round
dermoid cysts, commonness (contrast),. 387
cells
hocation, 389. See αiso Multiple congenital follicular cysts
cytologic findings. See Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
photomicrograph. See Canine skin
Fine-needle aspiration, cytologic sample. 5ee Extramedullary
predisposition. See Dogs/breeds
plasmacytoma
Follicular dilation, 314f 
Fine-needle cytologic findings,description.ee Panniculitis
Follicular dysplasia. See Dalmatian; Devon Rex; Non-
Finn Chambers, 323
cyclical/non-color-linked follicular dysplasias
Finnish Spitz, 233
definition, 101103
Fipronil, action mechanism/spectrum, 64-65
Follicular mange. 130f
First-generation antihistamines, usage. 51
Follicular plugging. 167
Fissure, 13t
Follicular nupture, 314f
Fistulas, differentiation. See Folliculitis
Folliculitis, 151. See aizo Mixed-breed dog
FI V. See Feline irmmunodeficiency virus
age predisposition. See Canine muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
Fixation.impact. 40
bacteria.SeeDeep bacterial folliculitis
Flame figures, definition, 222
breed predisposition. See Canine muzzle
Flanks
folliculitis/furnculosis, Dog5
chronic actinic damage. 316-317
clinical signs. See Deep folliculitis
deep pyogranulomatous lesions, 316-317
detinition. See Supeficial bacterial folliculitis
sucking. 325
development, breed disposition. See Dog5
Flat foot shape. 152
diagnostic tests. 5ee Dog5
Flat lesions, examples. 10
differential diagnoses. See Deep folliculitis
Flea allergy dermatitis (FAD). 208-213. 210f
etiologies. See Dog5
allergens, impact, 209
fi stulas, differentiation. 17
clinical signs. See Cats/FAD; Dogs/FAD
fununculosis, differentiation. 17
close-up view, 2 12f
simuses, differentiation, 17
definition, 208
Food allergy
development. 193. See aiso Cats/FAD; Dogs/FAD
causes/pathogenesis., 196
age. 209
clinical presentation.See Dogsifood allergy
environmental conditions, impact, 209
clinical signs. See Cats/food allergy
diagnostic process. 212
diagnosis
differetiatineeAllergicdermatitides
definitiveness,process, 200-201
Conclusiveness, 213
post-confirmation procedure, 201
evaluation, differential diagnoses [consideration), 21-213
test diets, availability, 200
474
Index
Food allergy (conr'd)
Cels, usage, 45t
diagnostic tests, availability. 199
Ceneralized demodicosis 
differential diagnoses. See Cats/food allergy; Dogs/fod allergy
clinical significance. See Adult-onset generalized demodicosi
historyee Cats/foodallergy;Dogs/fod allergy
treatment, Amitraz topical application (side effects). 68
physical examination findings. See Dogs/food allergy
Ceneralized dermatophytosis, differentiation. See Localized
prognosis. See Cats/food allergy;, Dogs/food allergy
dermatophytosis
Food trials, 150
Ceneralized MD, 214f 
Foot licking. 196, 325
Cenesis Topical Spray. 84
Footpad disease
Cenetic defects, 231
clinical signs, 308
Ceographic hot beds, 173
similarity. See Metabolic epidermal necrosis; Pemphigus
Cerman Shepherd Dogs (GSD)
Footpad hyperkeratosis
extensively ulcerated perianal fistula disease, 342f
canine viral infection, association, 183
inherited collagen disorders, 109 
clinical signs. See Digital hyperkeratosis
lateral thigh. moist pyotraumatic dermatitis. 145f
Footpads
multiple erianalfistulas.34f
hereditary disorderSeeCerman Shepherd Dogs
nodular dermatofibrosis
hyperkeratosis, 233f. 255f
description, 111
zinc-responsive dermatosis, 307f
renal cyst adenocarcinoma, association, 391f
metabolic epidermal necrosis. See Hyperkeratotic fissured
unilateral focal metatarsal fistulation, differential diagnoses, 110 
spedcog
ventral chest/axilla/foreleg. 179f
papilloma lesions, description. 5ee Dogs
Cerman Shepherd Dogs (GSD), focal metatarsal fi stulation 
punctate ulcers, 255f
clinical signs, 110
Free keratin, 226
diagnosis process, 110
Free thyroxine (FT4). 263
etiology. 110
definition, 264
reatment plan, 1 10
measurement, advantages. See Total thyroxine
Cerman Shepherd Dogs (CSD) footpads, hereditary disorder
 Free triodothyronine concentrations, measurement usefulness. 264 
clinical signs, 109
Frostbite
etiology. 109
development, predispositions, 323
systemic disease, 110
location/cause, manifestation, 323
teatment, 110
management, 323-324
Cerman Shorthaired Pointers
Full-thickness burn
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 238
clinical presentation, 320
hair shafts, scales, 239f
management process, 320
hereditary lupoid dermatosis, 237
Full-thickness epidermal necrosis. See Advanced TEN
Cerminal epithelium, vasculature, 367f
Functional adrenal cortical tumors, treatment options, 278
Cl. See Gastrointestinal
Fungal cultures
CLA. See Camma-linolenic acid
interpretation.See In-house fungal cultures
Clandular tissue, impact. See Cerumen
media, advantages/disadvantages, 25-26
Glucocorticoids (GCs), 46t
media, usage. 162
application guidelines. See Topical glucocorticoids
performing. 162. See riso In-house fungal cultures
opinions. See Pruritus
plates,163f
supplementation, necessity. See Hypoadrenocorticism
inoculation proces (toothbrushes, usage). 162
treatment regime, immunosuppressive drugs (inclusion). See
process, 25
Permphigus complex
ecommendation. 169
age. See External ear canal; Pemphigus complex; Pruritus;,
uage. See Dermatophytosis
Small animal practice
Fungal infections.SeeOpportunistic fungal infections
Clucocorticoids (CCs) therapy
 acquisition process See Subcutaneous fungal infection s
irmmunosuppressive drugs. combination. 5ee Pemphigus
term. See Claw
diseases
age. 5ee Canine hyperadrenocorticism
requirement. See Mitotane
Fungal specimen, evaluation proces. 5ee Cytological fungal
tests/monitoring. See Long-term CC therapy
specimen
GM-CSF, 45 1-452
Fungal vaccines, effectiveness. See Mariaxsezia camis
GMS, 20, 180
Fungus, impact. See Blepharitis
Coblet cells, 345
Fur, epilation. 301
Colden Retriever
Fur mites. See Cats
crusted erosive nodules, 225f
Furunculosis, 15l. See αiso Canine eosinophilic furunculosis;
eosinophilic fumunculosis, 225f 
Mixed-breed dog
interstitial cell tumor, 282f
age predisposition. See Canine muzzle folliculitis/furunculosis
nasal bridge lesions, 225f
bacteria. See Deep bacterial furunculosis
tail gland hyperplasia,285f
breed predisposition. See Canine muzzle
folliculitis/furunculosis; Dogs
246f
clinical signs. See Deep furunculosis
ventrum, macular melanosis. 282f
definition, 224
Cold salts, usage. See Pemphigus complex
development, breed disposition. See Dog5
Comori 's reticulin, 446
diagnostic tests. See Dogs
Conadal hormones [overproduction), etiology. See Dog5
differential diagnoses. See Deep furunculosis
Conadal tumor. impact. See Hyperandrogenism
differentiation. See Folliculitis
Conadectomy. 293
pathophysiology.151
Goodwinol ointment, defi nition, 68
Fusobacrerium, 153
Graft versus host disease [CVHD). 243-244
Cram-negative organisms, 378
G
Granulation
GABA binding sites, 65
differentiation. See Granulomatous
CABA-regulated chloride flux, 64
tissue, 455
Camma-linolenic acid [GLA). 55
Granulomas, endogenous foreign bodies (impact), 3&5-386
Castrointestinal (GI) disturbances, 50 
Cranulomatous. granulation [differentiation}. 19
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 178
Cranulomatous response.See Subungual epithelial inclusion cyst
CCs. See Glucocorticoids
Creasy kitten syndrome, etiology. See Persian cats
Index
475
Creasy seborrhea, treatment, 93
Hepatopathies, 297
Great Dane
Hereditary disorders, 119-125
CRGV. 124
etiology.SeeCerman Shepherd Dogs
early papillomavinus lesions. 184f
Hierog lyphics. 108
hypothyroid. 267f
High-dose dexamethasone suppression (HDDS), results
Greyhounds, alopecia See Racing Greyhound alopeca
(interpretation), 274-275
Greyhounds, CRGV
High-molecular-weight protein, 208
clinical signs, 125
Himalayan cats, apocrine gland cysts [location). 389
etiologic agent, 125
Hirsutism, 292
non professional term. 125
HistaCalm, 82
Griseofulvin microsize, 164, 165
Histamine, impact. See Inflammation
Grooming. attention, 169
Histiocytic characteristics, morphology. See Sarcoma5
CSD. See Cerman Shepherd Dog5
Histiocytoma, 409
CV HD. See Graft wersus host disease
cell type impact. See Young dogs
clinical characteristics. See Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
Histiocytosis
H1 blockers, effectiveness, 49
differential diag nostic usage. See Cats
H1 receptors, 49, 52
lesions, description. See Canine systemic histiocytosis
blockade, 424
signalment. See Dog5
Haarscheibe, 455
Histocompatibility complex Il abnormal expression/interaction,
HAC. See Hyperadrenocorticism
231
Hair
Histocyte, definition,425
dermatophytosis,infection，164
Histologically benign tumors, clinical features/differentiation,
differentiation. See Primary hairs; Sinus hairs
600
disk, 455
Histologically malignant tumors, clinical features/differentiation.
disorders, 99-105
600
growth cycle
Histologic appearance. See Canine systemic histiocytosis, Solitary
factors, impact, 6
cutaneous histiocytoma
stages, 6
Histologic changes. See Solar dermatitis
growth disorders, 99-105
Histologic characteristics. See Cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell
loss, 115f
lymphoma; Plasmacytomas
hyperpigmentation.cause.362-363
Histologic diagnosis
pigmentation, control factors. 353-354
chances, increase. See Eosinophilic furunculosis
regrowth.136f
requirements. See Neurcendocrine tumors
diseases, impact. See Spontaneous hair regrowth 
Histologic grading systems, benefit. 5ee Canine cutaneous
Hair coat,267f.See iso Unkempt hair coat
plasmacytomas
clipping. necessity. 164
Histology advantage. See Mast cell tumors
color. types, 5
Histopathologic changes, description. See Ehlers-Danlos
functions. 5
us
Haired intradermal nodule (hemorrhagic cnust/nodular
Histopathologic descriptions.See Canine melanocytomas,
episcleritis). See Collies
histopathologic descri ptions; Feline melanocytomas,
Hair follicles, 134f. 140f, 226
histopathologic description 5
fibrosis, 100
ospsa 
neoplasia, surveys. See Cats; Dog5
description. See Acral lick dermatitis
nevi, 389
presentation. See Cats/claw
Hamartoma
Histopathologic findings. See Canine eosinophilic furunculosis;
association. See Dogs
Sex hormone imbalances
clinical entities, recognitin, 389
Histopathologic pattern. yield, 438
definition, 389. See ciso Melanocytic hamartoma
Hisoplamaummpressionmear76f
nodular occurrence, 390 
Histoplasmosis
relationship. See Adnexal dysplasia
diagnostic process. 175-176
reports. See Dogs/breeds
drug treatment. 176
term, usage, 389
Histoplasmosis infections
veterinary literature classification, 389-390
clinical manifestations, 175
Hapten, definition. 202
risk factors, 175
Hard-bodied ticks, life cycle, 131
Hollow claw. purulent exudate, 334f
Hardened claw material structural analogy.332-333
 su ai   qu
Harnesses, usage. 331
ultrasound image, 299f
HDDS. See High-dose dexamethasone supression 
Hookworm dermatitis
H&E. See Hematoxylin and eosin
clinical signs, 141
Head shaking. 196
differentiation. See Peiodera dermatitis
Heartworm disease, skin lesions [occurrence). See Dogs
definition, 140
Helrminth dermatoses. 137-142
diagnostic confirmation process. 141
definition, 137
treatment, 141
Helminth organisms, impact. See Dog 5
zoonotic disease, relationship. 141
Hemangiopericytoma, cell origin/metastatic potential, 417
Hookworm larvae
Hemangiosarcomas, 409, 458
exposure process. See Cats; Dogs
biological aggressiveness. See Cutaneous hemangiosarcomas,
emoval process, 141
Spleen; Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas
Hordeolum
Hematopoiesis. See Canine cyclic hematopoiesis 
chalazion, differentiation, 345
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). 20
definition, 345
Hemography, usage. See Hypothyroidism
Horizontal canal, 365
Hemorrhagic crust. See Collies
Hormonal status, TVT progression (relationship). See Dog5
Hepatoid cells, relationship. See Tail glands
Hormone-responsive alopecias, 28&-2%6
Hepatoid gland adenomas, treatment, 407
commonness, 288-289
Hepatoid gland tumors, 407
definition, 289
Hepatoid glandular tissue, location. See Dogs
list. See Dogs
Hepatomegaly. 186
Hormones. impact. 5ee Pigmentation
476
Index
Horner's syndrome, 372-373. 380. See ariso latrogenic Horner's
Hyperprogesteronemia
ps
clinical signs. See Cats
Host-immune response, 160
irmpact. See Alopecia
Hot spots, 211
Hypersensitivity. See Contact hypersensitivity; Dietary
clinical appearance, descri ption. 5ee Moist pyotraumatic
hypersensiti vity
dermatitis lesions
definition, 202
House dust mites. See Dermarophagoicfes farinte
dermatitis. See Contact hypersensitivity dermatitis
Human Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classification, 106t 
diagnosis process. See Cats
Humans
owner disbelief. See Insects
canine EM forms, comparison. 244
reaction, 371. See αizo Cheyeriella; Otitis externa
canine epitheliotropic CTCL, IHC characteristics
s
[differentiation), 438439
cutaneous abnormalities. See Feline hyperthyroidism
contact hypersensitivity,etiology.203
signalment. See Cats
dog 5 
Hypertriglyceridemia, 272
direct infection, 179
Hypertrophy,atrophy(opposition).2]
otitis media, differentiation, 377-378
Hypoadrenocorticism.glucocorticoidmineralocorticoid
Lagerifium, infection, 179
supplementation (necesity). 277
mast cell inflammatory mediators, 49t 
Hypoallergenic diets, 193
mycosis fungoides, TNMB classification system, 435t
Hypoallergenic shampoo94
onychomycosis.commonness.337
Hypoaminoacidemia, 299
oomycetes infetion possibility. 179
Hypoandrogenism, reports. See Dermatoses
perianal fistula disease, corollary. 342
Hypoestrogenism, reports. See Dermatoses
products, contraindications [reasons). 72-74
Hypophysectomy.275
pythiosis,manifestation.179
Hypopigmentation.15
Pyrhium insidfioxum, infection. 179
Hyposomatotropism.291
sarcoidosis, idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.381
 syndrome (comparison/con trast), 230
Hypoth yroid dog. breeder usage. See Treated hypothyroid dog
vitiligo, 356
Hypoth yroidism. 371
Humans/mycosis fun goides
biochemical panel, usage. 262
 clinical lesions, progression, 432-433
confirmation, TT4 single test usage. 263264
d’emblee variant, 434
cutaneous abnormalities. See Feline hypothyroidism
progression stages, clinical appearance, 433
dermatopathologic findings. 263
Hydration, TEwL impact. See Skin
diagnosis, ease. See Canine hypothyroidism
Hydrolyzed diets. 193. 223
diagnostic test, recommendation. See Dogs/hypothyroidism
Hydropic degeneration. See Basal keratinocytes
etiology/impact. See Dogs/hypothyroidism
Hydrotherapy (water, usage), benefits. 72
hemography. usage. 262
Hyperglycemia. 272
signalment. See Dogs/hypothyroidism
Hyperadrenocorticism [HAC), 270f, 288. See αiso English
skin biopsy, usefulness, 263
Bulldog
urinalysis, usage, 262
blindness, reasons. See Dogs/hyperadrenocoticsm
Hypotrichosis. 267f
bruising, reasons. See Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism
Hypotrichotic area, biopsy (performing. techniques). 28-29
contraction. See Cats
dermatologic diseases, occurrence, 271
ermatologic manifestations. See Canine hyperadrenocorticism;
latrogenic causes. See Integument
Cats/hyperadrenocorticism
differentiation. See Hyperadrenocorticism
diagnostic process 273-274
latrogenic corneal abrasion,380
jatrgeniccausesdifferentiation4
latrogenic Horner's syndrome (increase), dog/cat anatomic
itchiness, reasons. 5ee Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism
difference (impact).368
management, 278
latrogenic pneumonia380
neurologic signs,development [reasons).See
ICE. See Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma
Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism
Ichth yosis
owners, monitoring reasons. See Canine hyperadrenocorticism
bathing. 94
pathologic complications,271
breeds, disposition, 94
pulmonary thromboembolism.predisposition (reasons). 278
definition, 93-94
therapy. ketoconazole [usage advantage). 275
diagnosis process, 94
treatment. See Cats/hyperadrenocorticism
management processes, description, 94
ketoconazole,monitoring.275-276
t6 'suodo
UT1 usceptibility, 272273
Icterus, 175
Hyperandrogeni sm
IDI. Ses Insect development inhibitor
clinical signs, differential diagnoses [consideration}. 5ee
Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis
Neutered dogs
breeds. impact. 119
clinical signs. gonadal tumor impact). 284
diagnosis process, 120
Hypercalcemia,438
treatment, 120
Hypercholesterolemia 272
Idiopathic EM, 247
Hyperestrogenism. 281
Idiopathic facial dermatitis (IFD). 98. See αiso Persian cats
result. See Alopecia
Idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis. See Yorkshire Terrier
Sertoli cell tumor, clinical presentation (differentiation). See
 pinnal margin ischemic necrosis. 5ee Mixed-breed dog 
Dog 5
Idiopath ic miliary dermatitis, adjunctive therapy (hel pfulness).
Hyperglucagonemia, 297
218-219
Hyperkeratosis. See Bull Terriers; Footpad5
Idiopathic mucinosis, clinical signs, 120
adjectives (usage), list/definitions, 16-17
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 27-
lichenification, differentiation, 16
230
Hyperkeratotic fissured footpads, metabolic epidermal necrosis.
breed/age predilections, 230
298f
comparison/contrast. See Humans
Hyperpigmentation. 15. 160f. See aiso Ventrum
definition, 227
cause. See Hair, Skin infection
diagnostic process, 229-230
Hyperplasia, ocurrence, 20. See alo Nodular sebaceous
differential diagnosis list, 28229
hyperplasia
disorder, suspicion (timing). 227-228
Index
477
prognosis. 230
Inflammation
species, impact, 228
creation, histamine (impact), 49
Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis. See Vesicular cutaneous lupus
menagement, systemic glucocorticoids [usage). See Ex ternal ear
erythermatosus
canal
associated skin lesions, types, 117
Inflammatory cell nuclei, breakdown, 254
definition/clinical signs. See Shetland Sheepdogs/collies
Inflammatory skin diseases. 188 
diagnosis process, 117
Infundi bular cyst
skin lesions, location, 117
clinical presentation, 385
treatment.117
deti nition, 385
IDT. See Interdermal testing; Intradermal allergy testing
Infundi bular keratinizing acanthoma, 392. 403
IgG autoanti bodies, 119
Inguinalreginueficialbacterialfolliulitis1f
Iggo dome, 455
Inheritance, X-linked recessive forms, 109
ICR. See Insect growth regulator
Inherited collagen disorders, 109 
IHC. See Immunohistochemistry
Inherited EB, similarities, 112-113
IL-2 synthesis, 71
Inherited vesiculobullous disorders, 1 12-1 19 
Imidacloprid, action mechanism/spectrum,6465
definition, 112
Immune-mediated diseases, 35 5
Inhibitory concentrations, 379
Immune-mediated skin diseases, 231-243. 231t 
In-house ELISA measurement, reliability. See Basal total
classification procedure, 231
thyroxine
definition, 231
In-house fungal cultures
Immune simulation, 185 
interpretation.162-163
Immunoadjuvants
performing.162
cimetidine,capability.70
Injectable corticosteroids usage,218
levamisole, action mechanism, 70
Inner ear, 365
process. 63
Insect development inhibitor (IDI). 65
Propionibaererium aenes, usage protocol. 70
Insect growth regulator (ICR)
Immunoadjuvant therapy. 69-7]
definition, 65
g0al, 69
differentiation. See Lufenuron
uage indications., 69-70
eamples. See Fleas
Immunoblotting. 241
impact. See Feas, Insects
Immunofluorescence, 241
Insecticides, usage. See Biting insects, Insects 
Immunoglobulins, 366
Insects, 132-137
lgE-mediated mast cell degranulation. 369
allerg ies
Immunohistochemical markers. See Cutaneous plasmacytomas
control, insecticides/insect repellents [usage). 133
usage variation, 431
knowledge. See Cats; Dog5
Immunohistochemical stains, importance, 403
eactions. types.132133
Immunohistochemistry (IHC). 20. 185. 24] 
control, topical spot-on products [usage). 133
benefits.SeeAutoimmune skindisease diagnosis
definition, 132
characteristics, diferentiation. See Humans
differentiation. See Arthropods
differentiation. See Biopsy tissues
hypersensitivity ownerdisbelief 136137
usage. See Proteins
IGRs, impact, 133-134
usefulness. See Ohomycetes
irmpact. See Allergies
Immunoprecipitation. 241
problem, isolation, 136
Immunologic methods, benefits. See Autoimmune skin disease 
transmission, diseases (relationship). 134
diag nosis
Integrated pest management (IPM)
Immunopathogenesis. See Fea allergy dermatitis
definition. See Fleas
Immunostimulant drugs, usage. 116
Integument, metastatic spread (iatrogenic cause), 457
Immunostimulation, Vitamin E (effects). 70
Interdermal testing (IDT), process. 19]-192
Immunosuppressive drugs
Interdigital mast cell tumor. inflammation/swelling. 42 1f
anti biotics(usage), combination [(occurrence). 236
Interface dermatitis
combination. See Pemphigus diseases
definition, 19
inclusion. See Pemphigus complex
dermatitis, relationship. 19
side efects [monitoring). test protocol 235-236
yyoderma,relationship.19
Immunotherapy
Interferon, 398, 401, 450-452
effectiveness. See Canine atopic dermatitis treatment; Flea
irmmu noadjunctive actions, 71
allergy dermatitis
therapy. irmpact. 71
usefulness. See Oomycetes
Interscapular region, post-vaccination415f
Impetigo. 144
Interstitial cell tumor. See Golden Retriever
definition, 147
Intertrigo. 78f. See aiso Skin fold infections
differentiation. See Bullous impetigo
Intracellular cocci. See Skin
 pathogenesis. See Kittens; Puppies
Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma (ICE). 392, 405. 410
treatment, 147-148
breeds, occurrence, 403
Impression smears. See Biaxromyees dermarirides; Hisropiasmα
definition, 403
casuaum
forms, occurrence, 403
cutaneous nodule. See India ink-stained impression smear
treatment modalities. See Solitary ICE: Multiple ICE
cytology. See Skin
Intracytoplasmic trichohyalin granules, 386
usage, 403
Intradermal allergy testing (IDT). 223
Incubation period. See Papillomaviruses
Intradermal pyogranulomatous foci, 229f
India ink-stained impresson smear, cutaneous nodule, 173f
Intralesional injections, 33 1
Indolent ulcer, 222
Intravenous (IV) hypersensitivity. 203
definition, 220
In vitro allergy testing. indications, 192
Infected meibomian gland, staphylococcal blepharitis, 348f
IPM. See Integrated pest management 
Infections, 183187
Irish Setters, autosomal recessive disease, 93
reservoir, 158
Iris-type scissors, 36
skin diseases. See Feline immunodeficiency vinus; Feline
Irritant dermatitis
leukemia virus
contact hypersensitivity dermatitis, differentiation. See Contact
Infectious skin diseases, 143
irritant dermatitis
Infective material, critical mass, 158
differentiation, ease. See Contact hypersensitivity
478
Index
Irritant reaction
stain, defi nition/usage. 163
allergic reaction diferentiation204205
Lageniefium infection. 181f
contagiousness possi bility, 205
Lagenidiosis, 178-183
symptoms.persistence.205
breed/gender/age predilection. 178
transferrencepossbility05
contraction, 179
Ischemic dermatopathy. See Chihuahua
definition, 178
Ischemic necrosis, 256f
development, speed, 180
Isolates, oral anti biotic susceptibility. 382t
diagnosis, serology (usefuless). 182
Isosthenuria, 272
diagnostic process, 180
Isthmus cyst. definition, 386
geographical differences178
Itch-scratch-itch cycle, 47
infection, occurrence, 178
Itraconazole, 168, 171-174, 176
easonality. impact, 178
treatment, cutaneous adverse dnug reactions. See Dogs
symptoms. See Dogs
Ivermectin {usage), considerations. See Canine scabies
Lagenifium, infection. See Human5
Ixodes dammini. 13]
Lakeland Terriers. 113 
lxodes scapuiaris, 131
Lameness, 175. 177
Langerhans cells. 1., 2, 4, 429, 447
J
functions. See Skin
Junctional, meaning/significance, 443-444
Lasers
Juvenile cellulitis, definition, 348-349
acronym, explanation, &5
Juvenile pyoderma, 348f
advantages. See Surgery
definition, 348-349
aplications.See COlasers
beam strength, variation, 87
K
interaction. See Tissue
Karonovsky's solution, 4]
lig ht, features, &5
KCS. See Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
risks/safety issues, 87
KCZ. See Ketoconazole
selection. See Tissue
Kerasolv, 93
therapy advantages/disadvantages, 89-90
Keratin claw, brownish discoloration, 337f
usage. SeeDermatology
Keratinization
usefulness, &5-86
definition. See Matrical kerati nization
Laser-safe endotracheal tubes, 87
disorders, 166
Lateral ear canal resection
Keratinization disorders, 91-99
indications/goals/complications, 383
appearance, process,9]
surgical procedures. postoperative complications, 383
definition, 9]
total earcanalablation [indications/goals/complications).
diseases clasification, 91
comparison/contrast, 383
importance, 9]
Lateral hind leg. subcutaneous tissue, 413f
Keratinocytes. pigment insertion process, 353
Lateral thorax, exfoliative erythroderma, 434f
Keratoacanthoma, 403
Latex agglutination, 172
Keratoconjunctivitis. 186
L-deprenyl. 275
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca [KCS), 351
advantages/disadvantages. See Canine hyperadrenocorticism
oral anti biotic [association). See Dogs
dnug interactions, 278
Keratohyalin granules, 17f
pxocess, 277
Keratolytic
treatment, monitoring. See Dog5
definition, 81
Leishmaiα antibody titer, prognosis. See Anti-Leishmaiα
role. See Seborrhea
antibody titer
t6'soodueus
Leishmaniasis, 338, 455
sulfur/salicylic acid. (combination usage, reasons). 81
cutaneous signs. percentage. See Visceral leishmaniasi5
Keratoplastic
dermatologic lesions, association, 186
agents.81
diagnostic tests, 187
definition, 81
irmpact. See Tissue
role. See Seborrhea
incubation period, length. 186
sulfur/salicylic acid, (combination usage, reasoms) 1
systemic signs, 186
Keratosis, definition. See Actinic keratosis
treatment, 187
Kerion reaction, definition. 160
U.S. distri bution. 186
Ketoconazole [KCZ). 46t, 54. 171. 174
Leishmania spp
action mechanism, 343
definition, 186
administration, side effects, 344
oganisms
monitoring. 5ee Hyperadrenocorticism
identification, stain [usage). 187
usage
transmission process. 186
advantage. See Hyperadrenocorticism
susceptibility See Cats; Dog5
differentiation. See Canine hyperadrenocorticism
Lentigenes. 355
 Ki-67 anti gen, 456
Lentigo
Kitte n s
clinical presentations. See Canine lentigo simplex; Feline
impetigo
bacteria, 147
definition, 354355
pathogenesis. 147
simplex. See Shorthair cat
PHSO management, 98
Leprosy. See Feline leprosy
syndrome. See Persian cats
Leptomeninges.353
treatment process. 165
Lesions. See Skin lesion
KTP. 5ee Potassium titanyl phosphate
appearance. See Sun burning
Kuvasz, 113
a55ociated diseases. See Primary lesions 
a5sociation. See Canine viral papillomavinus; Feline
L
papillomaviruses
Labrador Retriever. 10D
biopsy selection, 35
hind limb, cutaneous B cellymphoma, 441f
biopsy specimens (histopathologic findings). See Canine
 Lactophenol cotton blue
eosinoph ilic furunculosis
examination. See Dermatophytes
characteristic distributions. See Pemphigus diseases
Index
479
clinical appearance, descri ption. See Moist pyotraumatic
Lymphadenomegaly. 173. 177
dermatitis lesions
Lymph nodes, 171
definition. See Primary skin lesion, Secondary skin lesion
Lymphohistiocytic neoplasms, 425-442
descri ption. See Canine systemic histiocytosis; Vasculitis;
Lymph vesselsfunctions.SeeCutaneous lymph vessels
Vasculopathy
Lynarradovsk126f
examples. See Depressed lesions; Elevated lesions; Flat lesions
Lysodren responsive dermatosis, 291
increase/decrease. See Zinc-responsive dermatoses
life span, 35
M
location 232f. See also Solar dermatitis; Transmissible venereal
Macroadenoma, signs/treatment. 5ee Pituitary macroadenoma
Macrophages. 176f. 251f. 425
Pyrhium infection. 179f
Macroscopic mast cell tumor burden, systemic chemotherapy. 424t
qualities. See Deep pyoderma lesion 
Macular erythema, topical contact hypersensitivity, 322f
resolution, zinc therapy. 310
Macule, 1lt 
sampling process. See Alopecic lesions; Erosive lesion;
Maculopapular enuption, definition. 14-15
Ulcerative lesion
Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI), 415
type.See Epidermal collrette
Maine Coon Cat, 393
Lethal acrodermatitis. See Bull Terriers
Major histocompati bility complex [IMHC). 452
breeds, impact, 120
Malabsorption syndrome, 297
clinical symptoms. description. 121
Malamutes, 102, 304
diagnosis process. 121-122
ymmetric alopecia/inflammation/crusts.306f
pathogenesis/feature, 120
zinc-responsive dermatoses
 survival time. See Puppies
clinical signs, association, 305-307
treatmentrecommendations.SeeBullTerriers
diag nostic process, 308
Lethargy. 186
Malaseb pledgets, 97. 98
Leukocytoclasia, 254
Malaseb wipes, 146
Leukoderma, 15
Malassezia
Leukogram, definition/occurrence. See Stress leukogram
antigens, 167
Leukotrichia, 15
antimicrobial therapy usage. 63-64
Levamisole, 150
findings. See Skin 
action mechanism. See Immunoadjuvants
irmpact. See Cats
Levothyroxine dose regimen (adequacy). determination proces.
organisms, diagnostic test, 168
See Canine hypothyroidism
OTC antifungal creams, effectiveness. 78
Levothyroxine supplementation long-term response, 262
overcolonization. predisposition. See Skin diseases
Lice
paronychia.77f
eggs. 134f, 135f
pododermatitis. 77f. 197f
survival time, 135
residual activity, products [availability). 77-78
Lichenification. See Ventrum
skin biopsy, reliability, 168
diferentiation.See Hyperkeratosis
Lichenoid dermal infiltrate, 339
spp.
impact. See Skin diseases
Light microscopy usage. 431
yeast, 149, 301
Lime sulfur, 151
sp.. photomicrograph. 377f
usefulness. See Anti pruritic
teatment, antifungal products [availability). 77
Lime sulfur dip
yeast dermatitis. 121 
client complaints. 79
Maiassezitcaris, 25t. 27t
precautions/side effects, 69
impact. See Cats
Linear granuloma, 221f. See aiso Eosinophilic granuloma
infections prevention/treatment, fungal vaccines (effectiveness),
Linear preputial dermatitis See Pomeranian
165
Lipase, increase, 272
therapy. monitoring.165
Lip fold, 146
Mariassezic dermatiti s
Lipid seal, 4
etate tape preparation cytology.76f
Liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide-
chronic cases, management. 169
phosphatidylethanolamine (L-MTP-PE). 451
diagnosis cytologic specimen (usage). 167
Littermates, demodicosis [development), 129
diagnostic proces.167
Liver echotexture, 29
topical therapy. indication. 76-77
Liver enzymes, 165
treatment.169
L-IMTP-PE See Liposome-encapsulated muramyl
differentiation. ee Bacterial pyoderma
tripeptide-phosphatidylethanolamine
protocol, 168
Localized bacterial infections. products (availability). 75-76
Maiassezia gypewm. 25t. 27t
Localized demodicosis, clinical findings. See Dogs
Maiasseziar infections
Localized dermatoph ytosis
 clinical signs. See Cats
generalized dermatophytosis, differentiation. 159-160
establishment, factors, 166-167
spot therapy/topical ointment therapy. usage. 164
 predisposition. See Skin diseases
Longer hair-coated breeds, sebaceous adenitis (presentation), 95 
transmission process. 166
Longhaired cats, topical therapy [effectiveness). 79
Maiasezia pachydermaris, 337f, 377. 378
Long-term antibiotic therapy option. See Recurrent pyoderma
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma, term [disuse reasons), 431
Long-term CC therapy. tests/monitoring. 48
Malignant histiocytosis (canine disseminated histiocytic sarcoma).
Lotions, usage, 45t
431
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, results (interpretation).
 Malignant melanomas
274
chemotherapy, effectiveness, 450
Lufenuron, ICRs [differentiation). 65-66
differentiation. See Melanocytomas
Lunettes, 186
kocations, 444t
Lupus erythematosus, 256
radiation therapy, effectiveness 449450
clinical signs. See Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
risk factors. See Cats; Dogs/malignant melanomas
cutaneous forms, 237
signalments. See Cats; Dogs/malignant melanomas
commonness, 238
treatment modalities, availability, 450-45 1
gender/age/breed predilection, 38
tumor vaccinesffectiveness45
management, treatment protocols. 5ee Discoid lupus
Malignant neoplasia, 129
erythematosus
characteristics. See Skin; Subcutaneous tissue
480
Index
Malignant process indication, calcified adrenal gland (discovery).
melanomas, differentiation, 443
275
nevi, differentiation, 443
 Malignant softissue sarcomas
 signalment, 444t. 5ee aizo Cats, Dog5
 impact. See Older dogs
Melanocytoxic chemicals. 355
metastasis, treatment options. See Cats; Dogs
Melanomas. See Dogs/malignant melanomas
 Malleus, manubrium, 367f
differentiation. See Melanocytomas
Matiophaga (biting lice). 135
identification process. See Amelanotic melanomas
Mandibulectomy. 450
Melanoma-specific antigen recognized by T [IMART) cells, 447
Mange. See Follicular mange
Melanotrichia, 16
MART. See Melanoma-specific antigen recognized by T
Melatonin
Masson's trichrome stain, 107
impact. See Alopecia
 Mast cells
information, 101
activation process, 419
kcation, 2%
appearance. See Cutaneous mastcelltumors
safety. See Dogs
degranulation, 42 1f, 422. See aiso Immunog lobulin5
Membrane striations, 367f
inflammatory mediators. See Humans
 MEN. See Metabolic epidermal necrosis 
malignant change, etiology. 419
Menthol, 46t
mediators, release,419
Merkel's cells. 1. 2
neoplasia. See Cats; Dogs
as5sociation. See Sense organs
5ymptomatic relief, drugs [usage). See Advanced metastatic
complexes, 7
mast cell neoplasia
definition, 393
origin/function,418
function. See Skin
Mast cell tumors (MCTs)
impact. See Neoplasm5
burden, systemic chemotherapy. See Macroscopic mast cell
tumor, 426
tumor burden
Mesenchymal neoplasms, impact. See Cats; Cats/skin; Dogs;
cytology/histology. diagnostic advantage, 422
Dogs/skin
development,419
Metabolic di sorders, cutaneous manifestations, 260
inflammation/swelling. Se Interdigital mast cell tumor
Metabolic epidermal necrosis, 338
specimen, cytologic appearance, 422f
differential diagnoses. 297
Mastocytosis. See Advanced/disseminated visceral mastocytosis
hepatic ultrasound image. See Honeycomb pattern
Matrical keratinization, defi nition, 386
signalment/clinical signs. See Dog5
Maxillectomy.450
Metabolic epidermal necrosis (MEN). 297-300
Mc1r. See Melanocortin 1 receptor
cutaneous changes, etiology. 297
MCH II. 4
definition, 297
MCTs. See Mast cell tumors
diagnostic confirmation, 298-299
MD. See Miliary dermatitis
evaluation, minimum database, 298
Mechanoreceptors, types. See Skin
footpad disease, similarity, 308
Medial canthus, sebaceous gland hyperplasia. See English Seter
cccurrence. See Cats
Mediators, release. See Mast cells 
prognosis, 300
Medical adrenalectomy.277
treatment, 299-300
Medicated shampoos, 74
zinc dosages, 311
Megaesophagus. 114
 Metastasis. See Distant metastasis 
Megestrol acetate, 219
 Metastatic adenocarcinoma, tissue etiology. See Cats/claw
side effects, 286
 Metastatic anaplastic sarcoma, 457f
 Meibomian gland adenoma. 5ee Eyelid
Metastatic cutaneous mast cell tumors, 423
Melan-A (MART1),. 447
Metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 337
Melanins
Metastatic spread, iatrogenic cause. See Integument
formation, steps. 353. 354b
Methylprednisolone, 218. 224
functions.See Skin
differentiation. See Prednisolone
production, 356
Metronidazole, 154
types. 5
MHC. See Major histocompatibility complex
unit, definition. See Epidermal-melanin unit
Mlichele’s media, 40
Melanocortin 1 receptor [Mc 1r). 353
 Miconazole-based conditioner, 7 
Melanocyte dendricity. 362
Microbiota, impact. See Skin
Melanocytes
Mic rosporum canis,157
distribution. See Body
macroconidia, 28f
etiology. See Cutaneous melanocytes 
Microsporum gypeum, 157
mumbers, 354
macroconidia, 28f
origin. See Skin
Middle ear. 365
Melanocytic hamartoma [melanocytic nevus), definition, 390
Miliary dermatitis ( MD), 2 142 19. See αiso Ceneralized MD 
Melanocytic neoplasia (therapy), antihistamines (role), 45 1-452
adjunctive therapy.helpfulness. See Idiopathic miliary dermatiti
Melanocytic neoplasms, 409, 443453
causes, dermatohistopathologic studies (helpfulness), 218
differential diagnoses. See Cats;, Dog5
definition, 214
treatment, 449
development, age/breed/gender predilection. 216
 Melanocytic nevus. Se Melanocytic hamartoma 
diagnostic tests, 217, 217t
 Melanocytic tumors, histological classification. 5ee Domestic
differential diag nosis. See Cats
animals
historical aspects. See Cats
Melanocytomas
irmpact. 5ee Body
 clinical feature differentiation. See Benign melanocytomas
incidence. See Cats
cutaneous melanomas, differentiation, 443
esions, 167 210f, 214f
histopathologic descriptions. See Canine melanocytomas.
name, reason, 215
histopathologic descriptions; Feline melanocytoma5,
pruritic tendencies, 216
histopathologic descriptions
gasonal tendencies, 217
identification process, 446-447
species, infection, 215
locations, 444t
treatment, 218
malignant melanomas
Mineralocorticoid supplementation, necessity. 5e
clinicalfeaturedifferentiation.SeeDogs
Hypoadrenocorticism
differentiation, 443
Miniature Dachshund, acanthosis nigricans, 362f
Index
481
Miniature Schnauzer, 445
Mycobacteria, irmpact. 5ee Disseminated infection
CRFA, 289
Mycobacteriosis. See Opportunistic mycobacteriosis
symmetric Iupoid onychomadesis/onychodystrophy.338f
treatment. 5ee Atypical mycobacteriosis
IM ite s
Mycoses. See Deep mycoses
clinical findings.See Chigger mites
Mycosis fungoides
clinical presentation, difference. See Feline Demodex mites
 clinical lesions. progression. See Humans/mycosis fungoides
common species. See Cheyierielia
defi nition, 431-432
diagnostic methods, advantages/disadvantages. See Demodfex
d’emblée variant. See Humans/mycosis fungoides
erythroderma, application, 433
identificatinmethds.SeeCeylerie
 progression stages, clinical appearance. See Humans/mycosis
life cycle. ee Chigger mites; Ear mites
fungoides
name/regional distribution pattern/clinical findings. See Cats
TNM classification system. See Humans
 presence. See Deep dwelling mites; Superficial dweling mites
 Mycotic infections. See Superficial mycotic infections
techniques, 24
Mycotic organisms,impact. See Cats; Dogs
skin scraping techniques. See Cats; Dogs
Myeloperoxidase activity.359
species/clinical significance. See House dust mites
Myoepithelial cells, 447
Miticidal therapy.See Ear mites
Myxedema. See Nose
Mitotane, 275
induction therapy, concurrent glucocorticoid therapy
N
[requirement). 276
Nasal biopsies. process, 362
overdose, 277
 Nasal bridge lesions. See Colden Retriever 
potential side effects. 277
Nasal canthus, muscle hook placement, 346f
treatment, benefits. 277
Nasal cavity, 454
Mitotane therapy
Nasal depigmentation, diseases [impact). 36]
induction phase, 276
Nasal fold dermatitis. See English Bulldog
maintenance, 276
Nasal folliculitisfurunculosis, breed disposition. See Dogs 
stages, 276
Nasal hyperkeratosis, canine viral infection (association). 183
Mixed bacteria, photomicrograph, 376f
Mixed-breed dog
Nasal planum, 234f
crusting.239f
eosinophilic furunculosis, 225f
depigmentation. 239f.439f
erosion. patches. 225f
erythema, 239f
face (lateral aspect), deep folliculitis/furunculosis. 15 2f
mucocutaneous junctions, 439f
idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculiti s, pinnal margin ischemic
systemic histiocytosis lesion, 430f
necrosis, 255
Nasal solar dermatitis. See Bull Terriers
oral papillomavinus infection, 400f
therapies. See Dog5
papillomas, 400f
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis, 186
paw, cauliflower-life surface, 1&5f
Nasopharyngeal polyps
Peiodera dermatitis, 139f
cinical presentation.See Cats
perianal hyperplasia. 284f
defi nition, 372
Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis.See Cerman Shepherd Dogs
development process, 372
etiology/pathogenesis. 145
treatment process/complications. See Cats
Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis lesions (hot spots)
video-otoscopic view, 373f
clinical appearance, description, 145
Natural killer [NK) cells, 71. 440-441, 450 
margin, satelite papules (sinificance). 146
Naturally occurring allograft, definition, 453
treatment plan. proposal. 145-146
Nd:YAC. See Neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet
Moist pyotraumatic folii, 146
Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME). 297
Molecular age, submissions (providing). 4]
Neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet (Nd: YAG) lasers. 86
Monamine neurotransmitter. See Serotoni n
Neonatal ophthalmia
Monamine oxidase type B, 277
definition, 346
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor [ MAO). 66
teatmemt/importance. 346
Mononuclear epithelioid round cells, fine-needle aspirate
Neoplasia
specimen,426-428
benign/malignant. See Claw
Monouclear erivascularinfiltrate16f
categories. See Skin
Mosquitoes
celltypes, involvement.ee Epidermal neolasia
bite hypersensitivity, diagnosis process. See Cats
characteristics. See Skin, Subcutaneous tissue 
 repellent products. See Biting fleas/mosquitoes
commonness. See Dog5
MRI. SeeMagnetic resonance imaging
differential diag noses. See Discrete cell neoplasia
 Mucinosis. See Idiopathic cutaneous mucinosis, Idiopathic
exfoliative cytology, accuracy. See Dermal neoplasia
mucinosis
multiple collagenous hamartomas, association. See Dogs
Mucocutaneous junctions. See Nasal planum
ccurence,20
differential diagnoses.See Cats
 Neoplasms. See Cutaneous neoplasms; Ear canal; Epithelia
Mucorales, 170
neoplasms; Lymphohistiocytic neoplasms; Melanocytic
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
neoplasms
clinical signs. 118-119
a5sociation, reports. See Paraneoplastic pemphigus
definition, 118
classification, 404
diagnosis process, 119
dog/cat differentiation. See Eyelid
treatment.119
list/biologic behavior. See Cats; Dogs/otitis externa
Multicentric subcutaneous nodules, 430f
Merkel's cells, impact, 393
Multicentric-type tumors, skin involvement, 458
percentage skin neoplasms (impact), 402
Multifocal SCC, 337
Neoplastic T lymphocytes, 432
Multiple congenital follicular cysts, location, 389
Neoplastic transformation. 317
Multiple ICE, treatment modalities, 404
possibility. See Benign melanocytomas
Multiple lesion types, biopsy site selection, 438
 Neoplastic tumors. See Non-neoplastic tumors
Multiple perianal fistulas.SeeCerman Shepherd Dogs
Nephrectomy. 111
Mupirocin, 58
Nerves
penetration, 75
damage. 326
Muscle wasting. 186
functions. See Cutaneous nerves
Muzzles, usage. 331
subcutaneous layer. 1
482
Index
NESE. See Neuron-specific enolase
Nuclear dust, 254
 Neuroendocrine tumors
Nucleic acid storage/analysis, sample submission process 41-42
biologic behavior, 456
Nutritional deficiency. 338
clinical resence. See Dogs
histologi diagnosisrequirements456
Neurologic signs. 171 
Obsessions, differences. See Stereotypic behaviors 
development [reasons). 5ee Dogs/hyperadrenocorticism
Obsessive-compul sive di sorder (OCD), 324325
Neuron-specific enolase (NESE),. 447
Occipital area, 256f
Neuropeptides, production. See Cutaneous nerves
Occlusive smothering agents, 370
Neutered animals, sex hormone imbalances, 285
OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder
diagnostic process. 286
OCT, 41
Neutered dogs (hyperandrogenism clinical signs), differential
Octopus-like hair follicles, 291
diagnoses [consideration), 286
Ocular discharges. 175
Neutrophils. 118f, 429. See aiso Non-degenerate neutrophils 
Ocular disease, 17 3
acantholytic keratinocytes, association, 241f 
OFA certification, 265
inclusion. See Subcorneal pustule
Off-label 1% ivermectin (usage), considerations. See Canine
predominance, 20f
cabies
Nevi. See Collagenous nevi; Epidermal nevi; Hair follicles;
Ogawa yolk medium, 155
Organoid nevi
Ointments, usage. 45t
differentiation. See Melanocytomas
Older dog5
Newfoundlands, 233
canine cutaneous histiocytomas, differentiation. See Young dogs
New York State College of Veterinary Medicine (NYSCVM). 215
distal extremities, malignant soft tissue sarcoma (impact). 417
NF-AT transcri ption factor, 53
Omega 3 faty acids, usage. See Pruritus treatment
Niacinamide, 240, 25 3
 Omega 3 PUFAs. usage process. 56
 Nikolsky sign. 247
Omega 3, role. See Cats; Dog5
 Nitenpyram, usage (description). See Clinical seting
Omega6 PUFAs.55
NK. See Natural killer
effectiveness. See Pruritus
NME. See Necrolytic migratory erythema
usage. See Pruritus
Nocardfia Aerinobae illhs, 33
process. 56
Nodular dermatitis, 186
Omega 6, role. See Cats; Dog5
differential diagnoses, 251. 252t
Oncovin, 440
Nodular dermatofibrosis
Onychocryptosis, definition, 334335
definition, 110-111
Onychodystrophy. 197, 333. See also Symmetric lupoid
description, 111. See aizo Cerman Shepherd Dogs
Aqdouspoqofuo
diagnostic tests. See Dogs
clinical features/pathogenesis. See Symmetric lupoid
prognosis, 111
Aqdousfpouofuo
renal cystic disease, relationship. 111
differential diagnoses, 337-338
tumors, association, 303
Onychogryphosis, definition, 334-335
Nodular episcleritis. See Collies 
Onychomadesis, diferential diagnoses. 337-338
 Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia, occurrence 406
5
Nodules, 1lt. See arizo Bacterial infections
association. See Claw [digit)
skin biopsy. obtaining. See Cats
commonness. See Cats; Dogs; Humans
Nodule sample collction process. See Bacterial culture
Onychorrhex is
Nomads, differentiation. See Skin
definition, 334335
Noncutaneous signs. See Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
differential diagnoses, 337-338
Non-cyclical/mon-color-linked folliular dysplasias, 102
Oomycetes
Non-degenerate neutrophils. 251f
antifungal drug.usage.182
Non-endocrine alopecic disorders, 289
diagnostic tests.180
Non-leukocytic cells, 425
identification process, 180
Non-neoplastic conditions, 455
IHC, helpfulness, 180
Non-neoplastic tumors, 385-393
immunotherapy, usefulness 182
Nonpigmented skin. 314f
infection. possibilitySeeHumans
Nonprritic erythema,302
vaccines, usefulness, 182
Nonspecific dermatitis, reasons. See Biopsy
Ophthalmia, definition. See Neonatal ophthalmia
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory dnug (NSAID), 319
Opportunistic fungal infections.17]
Nonth yroidal illness (NT1). 264
Opportunistic mycobacteriosis
Non-tolerant T-cells, disclosure, 231
clinical signs. 155
Norepinephrine [NE). 52
diagnostic process 155-156
 Northern breeds, 104
lesions, 155
Nose
organisms,impact, 155
bridge
Oral antibiotics
alopecia/myxedema.268f
association. See Dogs
sunburn, differentiation, 315-316
Oral antibiotics, suscepti bility
cobblestone appearance, 239f
See Isolates
cnusts, 233f
 Oral cavity, 454
differentiation. See Dudley nose
Oral cyclosporin, 431
planum
Oral cyclosporine, alternatives. 344
discoid lupus, occurrence, 316
Oral glucocorticoids
sunburn, differentiation, 315-316
immunosuppressive dosages. 240
sunburm-related disease, occurrence, 316
age. See Pemphigus complex
Noloedfres, 23
Oral itraconazole, 97
Noloedfres cari
Oral ketoconazole, 97
feline scabies
Oral medications usage. 93
association, 131
Oral mucosa, 234f
canine scabies, differentiation. 131
Oral papillomavinus infection. 5ee Mixed-breed dog
infestations treatment option.SeeCats
Oral therapies. See Sebaceous adenitis
Novasomes, 72
Organoid hamartomas, relationship. See Adnexal dysplasia
 NSAID. 5ee Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory dnug
Organoid nevi, 389
Index
483
Organophosphates. 370
a5sociation. See Feline papillomavinuses
carbamates, differentiation, 68
link. See Cats; Dogs
Orthokeratotic cells, 38.5
transmission process, 184
Ossicles. See Tympanic cavity
Papovavius, transmission process, 184
Osteolytic bone lesions, 176
Papular eruptin, definition, 203
OTC. See Over-the-counter
Papular rash.See Perineal region
Otic health, conditions, 369t 
Papules. 1 lt. See aiso Erythematous papules, Ventrum
Otic therapy. ototoxicity (relationship), 381
Papulocrustous dermatitis, 215t
Otitis externa. See Severe purulent otitis externa
Parakeratosis, 16f
carbon dioxide laser usage. See Chronic otitis externa,
Parakeratotic capping. 308
Proliferative otitis externa
Paramite, 140
clinical sign. See Canine atopic dermatitis
Paraneoplastic alopecia. See Cats
cytologic evaluation, findings/significance, 378
prognosis. See Cats
malignant neoplasms list/biologic behavior. See Cats; Dogs
Paraneoplastic disorder definition, 300
 management, ceruminolytic agents (role), 379-380
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
pathogenesis
definition, 236
atopy. role,37]
description. See Dogs
bacteria, role, 375
development process. 236
primary causes, hypersensitivity reactions, 371372
reoplasms,association [reports).236
proliferative tissue, removal. See Chronic otitis externa
pathogenesis, 303
 species/antimicrobial suscepti bility. See Dogs
prognosis. 236.303
treatment. systemic anti biotics (role). 382
Paraneoplastic skin diseases, 300-304
Otitis media, 371. 380
Paraparesis. 177
pathogenesis. See Dogs/otitis media
Parasites, 152. See arixo Arthropod parasites
species/antimicrobial suscepti bility. See Dogs/otitis media
impact. See Blepharitis
viral cause. See Dogs/otitis media
Parasiticides. See Dermatology
Orobius megrini 131
Parasitic skin diseases. 126
Orodeies cyroris. See Ear mites
Parasitization species. See Cats/fleas
Otomax, 78
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrp). 410.438
Otoscopy, clinical indications, 380
Paronychia, 186, 233f. 5ee aiso Maiaxseziα
Ototoxicity
Purs faeeide
definition, 381
functional significance, 366
relationship. See Otic therapy
otoscopic appearance. 366
Ovariohysterectomy. 111
video-otoscopic view. See Engorged pars flaccida
Over-the-cou nter [OTC) antifungal creams, effectiveness. See
Purs Iensa
Maiassezia; Skin fold infections
functional significance, 366
Over-the-counter (OTC) products, 78, 82
layers, histologic cross-section, 366-368
contraindicationsreasons4
otoscopic appearance, 366
Oxacillin, 154
video-otoscopic view., 367f
Oxydex gel. 75
Partial-thickness burn
Oxygenated hemoglobin, 352
 clinical presentation, 3 19
management process, 319-320
P
prognosis, 320
P3. 5ee Distal phalanx 
PAS, 20
Pueciiomyces, 169
Pastes, usage, 45t
Pagetoid reticulosis, epitheliotropic CTCL (differentiation), 435
Pasleurelia mtrorifa, 57
Paint bnush lesion. 151
Patch. 12t
Palmar interdigital fur stai ning. 197f
Pathogens. See Dogs
Pancreatic alpha-cell tumor, 297
differentiation. See Skin
Pancreatitis, 297
Pathog nomonic clinical signs. See Vasculitis; Vasculopathy
Pantollicular cyst (lining). epidermal cells, 386
Pathologist
Panniculitis, 250-253. See aiso Chihuahua
expectations. 40-41
breed/age/gender predilections, 251
perspective. See Skin biopsy
cutaneous signs, 250
Pautrier microabscesses, definition, 1&
definition, 250
Pattern alopecia. See Curly coated breeds 
diagnosis. See Sterile nodular panniculitis
definition, 103
biopsy. usage. 252
diagnostic support, 252t
Pattern baldness, etiology. See Racing Crey hound alopecia
diagnostic tests. 251-252
PCR.See Polymerase chain reaction
etiologies, diagnostic approach, 251-252
PDE. See Phosphodiesterase
fine needle aspirate cytologic findings, description, 52
Pedal folliculitis/furnculosis development, breed disposition. See
specific disease entity. 250
Dogs
steatitis, differentiation, 20
Pediculosis, diagnosis process, 134
systemic signs, presentation poss bility. 250
Peiodera dermatitis. See Mixed-breed dog
Panniculus. 20f
definition. 138
differentiation. See Subcuti s
diagnostic process. See Dogs
Papillomatous masses. 184
hookworm dermatitis, clinical signs [differentiation). 14]
Papilomas. See Adult dogs
signs, 139
age predisposition. See Cutaneous inverted papillomas
teatmemt,140
clinical appearance. See Cutaneous inverted papilomas
zoonotic disease, relationship,. 140
lesions
Peiocdera larva, 140f
description. See Dogs
Peloderu sIrongyioides, 138
treatment, availability. 185
Pemphigus, 1l &f. See αiso Paraneoplastic pemphigus
types. See Dogs
disorders, secondary bacterial skin infections (occurrence). 234
Papillomavirus-associated lesions, description. ee Dogs
footpad disease, similarity, 308
Papillomaviruses
forms, distinction, 303t
incubation period. 184
suggestion, 32f
lesions. See Great Dane
types,involvement. See Eyelid
484
Index
Pemphi gus complex
PetechiaediferentiationeeTelangiectasia
Azathioprine, usage. 235
Petechial hemorrhages, 186
PF. 5ee Pemphigus foliaceous
definition, 231
PC. See Prostaglandins
PGESee Prostaglandine
(inclusion), 235
Pharmacotherapeutic agents
gold salts usage, 235
characteristics. 329t-330t
oral glucocorticoids, usage. 234235
dosages. 331t
topical therapy usage. 236
Pheomelanin, differentiation, 352. See ciso Eumelanin
treatment, 234235
pH, factors. See Skin
Pemphigus diseases, 232. 232f
Phiiemonium cwrvatum, 170
acantholytic kerati nocytes, pathognomonic presence, 241
Phiariemonium obovalum, 170
clinical signs, increase/decrease, 234
Phlebectasia, definition, 269-270
commonality. 232
Phosmet dip. 67
cure, possbility, 236
Phosphodiesterase (PDE}
CC therapy. immunosuppressive dngs (combination). 235
definition, 54
lesions, characteristic distributions, 233. 236t 
role. See Atopic dermatitis
pain, 233
Phospholipase A (PLA). 48
pruritic tendencies, 233
Photochemical interactions, B6
skin lesions, contrast, 232
Photodisruptive interactions, B6
systermic signs, 234
Photosensitizer, activation, 399
Pemphigus erythematosus, 316f, 317f
Photothermal interactions, B6
compari son. 5ee Pemphi gus foliaceous
PHSO. See Primary hereditary seborrhea oleosa
skin diseases,description.232
Physical examination, 185
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF). 19f. 233f. 335-337
findings. See Dogs/food allergy; Perianal fistula disease
differentiation, 315-316
impact. See Dogs/hypothyroidism
multidigit onycholysis, 334f
Piebaldism, differentiation. See Albini sm
pemphigus erythematosus, comparison, 232
Pigment
ski n diseases, descri ption, 232
insertion process. See Keratinocyte5
Pemphigus vulgaris. 234f. 337
synthesis, location, 353
skin lesions, description, 233
Pigmentary abnormalities. genetic causes, 360-361, 360t-36 1t
Penis. See Dogs
Pigmentary changes. pathogenesis. See Endocrinopathies
Pentoxifylline, 240, 253, 258
Pigmentary incontinence, 339
usage. 116
Pigmentation
Pepcid, 424
changes, terms [usage). 15-16
Pelosreococeus,153
control factors. 5ee Hair, Skin
Perianal adenocarcinoma. See Dog5
defining. See Constitutive pigmentation; Facultative
Perianal adenoma. See Dogs
pigmentation
Perianal fistula See Cerman Shepherd Dogs
differentiation. See Constitutive pigmentation
definition, 341
diseases, impact. See Nasal depigmentation
management strategies. 343
disorders, 352-363
surgical therapycomplications.343
hormones, irmpact, 5
Perianal fistula disease, 341-344. See ariso Cerman Shepherd Dogs
Pigmented basal cell tumors, 447
breed predilection, 342
Pigmented epidermal plaque. See Pomeranian
clinical signs, differential diagnoses [consideration), 34 1 
definition, 400-401
corollary. See Humans
Pilomatrixomas, 404
diagnostic process, 341-342
breeds, disposition, 405
characteri stics, 405
evaluation, database, 342
Pin kus corpuscle, 455
gender/age predilection342
Pinna, 364365. 5ee aizo Canine pinna 
historical findings. 34 1
Pinnae, crusts, 233f
physical examination findings. 341
 Pinnal margin ischemic necrosis. 5ee Mixed-breed dog
prognosis. 344
Pinnal neoplasms. See Ear
reports. See Cats
Piroxicam, 319
surgical treatments. 343
Pituitary-dependent disease, adrenal tumor
treatment, 343
differentiation, 274
Perianal gland adenomas
simultaneous reports, possibility 272
circumanal gland carcinomas, disease progression
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
[differentiation),. 407
adrenal tumor differentiation, endogenous ACT H levels usage.
gender predilection. See Dogs
275
treatment.407
teatment options. 275
Perianal gland tumors.407
Pituitary macroadenoma, signs/treatment, 278
Perianal glandular tissue location. See Dog5
PLA. See Phospholipase A
Perianal tumors. prognostic indicators. See Dog5
Plaque, 12t
Perineal region. papular rash. 204f
Plasmacytomas, 426. See aiso Canine cutaneous plasmacytoma;
Perineal sweling. 410
Cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma
Periocular alopecia, 186
clinical features. See Cats;, Dogs
Periocular demodecosis, 349f
description, 442
Perivasculitis, 254
development, predisposition. See Cutaneous areas
Perl 's iron, 20
histologic characteristics, 442
Permethrin, 68
Pododermatitis See Bilateral erythematous pododermatitis;
differentiation. See Pyrethrin
Malasseziα
Persian cats
Poi son ivy, animal development, 204
apocrine gland cysts, location, 389
Polycyclic erythematous macules, 244
dirty face syndrome, PHSO (impact). 98
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 187
greasy kitten syndrome, etiology 97-98
Polymyxin B. 58
IFD, 98f
Polyunsaturated faty acids (PUFAs). 55
Persistent scratching. etiology. See Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
effectiveness. See Pruritus
Index
485
involvement. See Pruritus
Proteins
role. See Cats; Dog5
identification, formalin fixation [usage). 4]
side effects/disadvantages, 56
investigation
Wage. See Pruritus
IHC, usage, 41
process, 56
sample submission process 41
Polyuria-polydipsia, 410
Proreuz mirabilis. 148
differential diagnoses, 270-271
Proviral DNA, 437
Pomeranian
Proximal hind leg. soft tissue sarcomas, 413f
linear preputial dermatitis3f
Pruritic diseases, 22t
testicular asymmetry. 283f
 Pruritus. See Facial pruritus
ventral abdomen.pigmentedepidermal plaques401f
association. See Sex hormone dermatoses
Poodle, %6. See ariso Standard Poodle 
barrier therapy impact. 47
asymmetrical testes, 283f
calses, 190t
Sertoli cell tumor, 283f
control, topical anesthetics [effectiveness), 83
truncal alopecia Sertoli celtumor, 82f
decrease
Porphryromonas.153
anti biotics, effectiveness, 47
Portal-poral vacuolarepatopathy.299
antifungal agents, impact 47
Positive skin scrapes, interpretation differences, 23-24
definition, 43
Post-ACT H sti mulation corti sol levels, 292
demonstration process. See Cats
Post-clipping alopecia. See English Springer Spaniel
effect, summation [relationship). 43
Post-dexamethasone administration, 274
pathogenesis,PDE role.ee Atopicdermatitis
Postinflammatory alopecia. See West Highland white 
PUFAs, involvement, 55
Terriers
reduction.topical zinc therapy (consideration). 31]
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. 363. See aizo Dogs/food
sensation, transmission process 43
allergy
skin scraping. 130f
Post-pill serum concentration, 267
symptomaticmanagement.4356
Potassium iodide, 171
symptomatic treatment, CCs (usage/opinions), 47-48
Potassium titanyl phosphate [KTP) lasers. B6
symptoms, manifestation process.44
Povidone iodine, 59, 151, 320
therapy. omega 6 PUFAs
diferentiation. See Benzoyl peroxide
effectiveness, 55
Powders, usage, 44t
usage, 55
Pramoxine hydrochloride, 46t, 83
threshold theory,meaning.43
Precursor cells. See Bone marrow
teatment,therapeutic ptions.193t
Prednisolone, 218
Pruritus treatment
methylprednisolone, diferentiation, 49
concepts. importance, 43
prednisone, differentiation. 49
omega 3 fatty acids, usage. 55
Prednisone, 218, 440
process. See Cats; Dogs
differentiation. See Prednisolone
topical corticosteroids, safety. See Cats
Pregnant animals, reatment process, 165
Preuefalleseheria boydi. 170
Pre-mycotic patch stage, 432
Pseuefomicrofochium suoni170
Preputial licking. 325
Pzeucfomonax spp. 57. 148
Pressure point comedones, 392
Psoriasis, 355
Prevoreliα, 153
Psychocutaneous disorders [psychogenic dermatoses),
Primary bacterial skin infection, secondary bacterial skin infection
324-332
[differentiation). 144
behavioral pharmacotherapeutics, 329
Primary digital hyperkeratosis
dosages. See Cats; Dog5
diag nosis process, 93
definition, 324
management. 93
drgs,action mechanisms/side effects329
Primary hairs, secondary hairs [differentiation). 5
information,acquisition325326
 Primary hereditary seborrhea oleosa (PHSO). 97
management,considerations,329
impact. See Persian cats
prediagnosis diag nostics, 328
management. See Kittens
stereotypicbehaviorsexplanation35
Primary keratinization defects371
syndromes. See Cats; Dog5
Primary lesions, associated diseases, 10t-12t 
Psychogenic alopecia/dermatitis,therapies.See Cats
Primary seborrhea, 80. 166
Psychogenic dermatitis 152
breeds, disposition, 9]
Psychogenic dermatoses. See Psychocutaneous disorders
clinical signs, 92
PTHrPSeeParathyroid hormone-relatedpeptide
definition, 9]
PUFAs. See Polyunsaturated fatty acids
diagnosis process, 92
Pulmonary thromboembolism. predisposition [reasons). 5ee
Primary/secondary lesion, definition. See Comedones
Hyperadrenocorticism
Primary skin diseases, 231t
Punch biopsy sample, 38f
Primary skin lesion
process. 36-39
defining process, 10-12
Puppies
definition, 10
acralmutilation syndrome
diseases, association. 10-12
clinical signs. 123 
Primary tumors, 448, 457
self-induced ulceration/partial amputation. 123f
Procoagulation factors, 27&
impetigo
Progestational compounds, 219
bacteria, 147
Progesterone, 286
pathogenesis, 147
Proliferative otitis externa, 370f
lethal acrodermatitis. ee Bull Terriers
CO, laser therapy. usage, 90f
lethal acrodermatitis
Propionibacterium acnes, usage protocol. 5ee Immunoadjuvants 
survival tirme, 123
Propionibacrerium αenes, 63. 70. 150
neonatal ophthalmia, 346f
Propylene glycol, 95. 322f. 379
teatment process, 165
Prostaglandin e, (PGE, ). 55
Purpura, erythema (distinction process), 55-256
role. See Canine atopic dermatiti s
Punulent otitis, 380
Prostaglandins ( PC). 55. 362
Pustular dermatitis. See Eyelid
Prostatitis, 173
Pustules, 12t, 84f
486
Index
Pyoderma. See Chronic pyoderma
Rhodesian Ridgebacks, dermoid cysts [associated conditions), 387
cephalexin usage reasons. See Superficial pyoderma
RIA. 264
definition. SeeJuvenile pyoderma
Rickerxia rickensi. See Canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever
elimination, systemic antibiotic (usage), 62
Rinses, usage, 45t
lesion, qualities. See Deep pyoderma lesion 
RNA analysis, 42
long-term antibiotic therapy. option. 5ee Recurrent pyoderma
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. 132
recurrence, coping process. See Dogs
Rottweiler, vitiligo. 356f
relationship. See Interface dermatitis
RSM. See Rapid sporulation medium
treatment., pH modulation (effectiveness). 75
RXR-speciic retinoid,440
Pyogranulomatous furunculosis, 313, 318
Pyogranulomatous nodule, dilated apocrine glands. 229
Pyrethrin, 68
S100, 447
action, mechanism/spectrum, 6465
Sab-Duets, 162
permethrin, differentiation. 65
plate, 163f
Pyrethrin-based products, examples/advantages/disadvantages, 65
Saddle region, 101. 102f 
Pyrethrins, 370
Sample submission process. See Electron microscopy; Nucleic
Pyrexia, 186
acid storage/analysis; Protein 5
Pyotraumatic folliculitis/furunculosis, breed disposition. See Dog 5
Sarcoidosis
Pythiosis, 178-183, 455
idiopathic sterile granuloma syndrome 
breed/gender/age predilection. 178
comparison/contrast. See Human 5
clinical signs. See Cats/pythiosis
diffe rentiation, 230t
contraction, 179
idiopathic sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
definition, 178
comparison/contrast. See Human 5
development, speed, 180
differentiation, 230t
diagnosis, blood test usage, 180-182
Sarcomas. See Malignant histiocytosis
diagnostic process. 180
biologic behavior. See Feline vaccine-associated softissue
geographical differences.178
arcomas
infection, occurrence, 178
characteristics. See Soft tissue sarcomas
manifestation. See Humans 
histiocytic characteristics. morphology 431
seasonality.impact, 178
Sarroptes. 23
5ymptoms. ee Dogs/pythiosis
Surcoples seabiei var. canis, 349
treatment recommendationSee Cats/pythiosis; Dogs/pythiosis
clinical symptoms. See Dogs
Pyrhium infection. See Lesions
Satellite papules, significance. See Moist pyotraumatic dermatitis
Pyrhium insidfiosum
505
infection. See Humans
Scabies
isolation processee Tissue
mites
location, 178
clinical symptoms, development. See Dog5
diagnostic methods, 131
R
teatment, licensed/approved ingredients. See Canine scabies 
Rabbits, ear mites. 371
Scale, 14t
Rabies vaccine administration, ischemic dermatopathy. See
Scar, 14t
Chihuahua
SCC. 5ee Squamous cell carcinoma
Racing Creyhound alopecia (caudolateral thighs). pattern baldness
Schipperkes. 233
(etiology). 103
Schnauzer comedo syndrome, 14
Radiation therapy. 331. 416
definition, 97
effectiveness. See Malignant melanomas
diagnosis process, 97
Rapid spomulation medium (RSM). 25. 26
treatment, 97
Rat tail appearance. 114f
Schwann cells, 447
Rectal examination, 411
Scintigraphy.263
Recurrent flank alpecia,breed predisposition20
Sclerosis, definition, 17
Recurrent pyoderma, long-term antibiotic therapy (option). 63
Scottish Terrier
Recurrent subcutaneous abscesses, laboratory tests. See Cats 
epitheliotropic CTCL,434f
Re-epithelialization, 319
trunk, generalized scale, 434f
Regional lymph nodes. 448
Scrapings. See Skin scrapings
tumors, metastasis. See Female dog
Scratching, etiology. See Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Renal cyst adenocarcinoma, association. See Cerman Shepherd
Seasonal flank alopecia, 101
Dog 5
Sebaceous adenitis. See Standard Poodle; Vizsla
Renal cystic disease, relationship. See Nodular dermatofibrosis
appearance. See Short-coated breeds
Renal disease, mu ltiple collagenous hamartomas (association). 5ee
diagnosis method, 95
Dog 5
long-term prognosis, 97
Resection, ablation (contrast), 383t
oral therapies.96
Resident bacteria, 143t-144t 
presentation. See Longer hair-coated breed5
transient bacteria, differentiation. 143
presenting signs, 94.95
Residual antipruritic effect. See Corticosteroid-containing products
treatments, 95-96
ResiPROX, 83
Sebaceous duct cysts, definition, 387
Resistant dermatophyte infections. 166
Sebaceous epithelioma, 405
Respi ratory epithelium, 365
Sebaceous glands
Rete ridge formation. 16f
cysts, commoness. ee Cats; Dogs
Retinoids, 185
functions, 6
Return protein, &
hyperplasia. See Cocker Spaniel; English Setter
Reverse triodothyronine (RT3). 263
Sebaceous gland tumors 
Rhabditic dermatitis. 139
breeds, disposition, 405
Rhabdomyomas, 418
incidence. See Cats; Dogs
Rhabdomyosarcomas, 418
crrence, 405-406. See o Dogs
Rheumatoid arthritis, 256
sebocytes, impact, 405 
Rheumatoid factor test, 257
site predilection, 405-406
Rhinosporidiosis. 170
Sebaceous hyperplasia, 392. 406
Rhipicephatu sanguineu。 131
occurrence. See Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
Index
487
Sebocytes, impact. 5ee Sebaceous gland tumors
therapy.usefulnes.See Skininfection
Seborrhea, 92f
topical corticosteoidsinclusion)safety/effectiveness3
benzoyl peroxide usefulness {reasons), 81-82
Shetland collies dipathic ulcerat dermatsis
control. topical therapy (role), 80
clinical signs. 117
cures, possi bility 0
definition, 117
definition, B0. See aizo Primary seborrhea
Shetland Sheepdogs
dry flaky case, treatment, 92-93
abdomen，epitheliotropic CTCL.433f
etiologies. See Secondary seborrhea
generalized poliosis, 358f
oleosa. See Atopic dog5
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis, 237
presentation, differences, 92
clinical signs, 117
tar products [usage). indications, 8]
definition, 117
treatment. See Creasy seborrhea
Ivedermatologic syndrome, 358
keratolytic, role, &1
Short-coated breeds, sebaceous adenitis (appearance), 95
keratoplastic, role, 81
Shorthair cat
Secondary bacterial skin infections
apocrinepapillarycystadenomasf
 differentiation. See Primary bacterial skin infection 
lentigo simplex, 355f
occurrence. See Pemphigus
Short-haired dogs. 148
Secondary cutaneous infections. 121
Siberian Huskies, 102, 304
Secondary hairs,differentiation.See Primary hairs
alopecia/inflammation/adherentcrust0f
Secondary lesion, definition. See Comedones
clipped lesions, 305f
Secondary seborrhea, 82f
periocular alopecia/inflammation/scale,306f
etiolog ies, B0t
zinc-responsive dermatoses
Secondary skin diseases,231t
clinical signs, association, 305307
Secondary skin lesion
diag nostic process, 308
characteristics, 13t-14t
Signet-ring.meaning/significance, 443-444
defining process. 13-14 
Sinuses, differentiation.See Folliculitis
definition, 13
Sinus hairs, tylotrich hairs [differentiation), 7-8, 7t-8t 
Secondary tumors, 457
Site preparation skin biopsy (usage). 35
Skeletal muscle cells, 447
Seizures. 177
Skin
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, usage. See Dogs
acid mantle, 4
Selemectin, action mechanism/spectrum, 6465
antibacterial defense mechanisms, microbiota [impact). 143
Selenium sulfide, 77. 81
antimicrobial functions. 3-4
indications, 82
bacteria
Self-antigen,modification.231
incidence. 143t-144t
Self-inducedulceration.ee Puppies
interpretation, 144
Self-nursing. 325
bacterial inhabitants, 143
Self-trauma. 145. 346
bacterial residents, nomads/transients/pathogen5
Sense organs, Merkel's cells [association}, 455
[differentiation), 4
bacterial species, list/identification. See Canine skin; Feline skin
completion, 202-203
barrier functions, 3
re-exposure clinical signs [development), 202-203
burns
time period, 202
agents, association, 319
Sensory innervation. See Canine pina
damage, amount, 319
Sequelae, sunlight (impact), 314
CRT, influences, 2-3 
Serology, usefulness. See Lagenidiosis
cytology. 328
Serotonin, 52
intracellular/extracellular cocci 30f
rmonamine neurotransmiter, 52
Maiasseziα, findings. 31f
reuptake inhi bitors, usage. See Dogs
extensibility index [E1}
Serous-sanguineous exudate, 234f
calculation, 107
Serpiginous ulcerative lesions, coalescing. 239f
normal value. See Cats; Dog5
Sertoli cell tumor. See Poodle
first-degree burn term [usage). 319
clinical presentation, differentiation. See Dogs
fold s. types. 146
clinical signs. See Dogs
function, 1-9
hormones, 284
histopathologic section,314f
Serum chemistry pane, 1415
hydration, TEWL impact, 3
Serum zinc/copper. 121
impression smearcytology.176
Severe purulent otitis extema, 376f
involvement. See Multicentric-type tumors
Sex horrmone dermatoses, 280-28&
Langerhans cells, functions, 4
 commonness. See Cats; Dog5
layers, 1
etiology. 280
Maiassezia spp.. 166
exogenous hormones, 285
malignant neoplasia, characteristics, 403
prnuritus, association, 287
mechanoreceptors, types, 7
Sex-hormone imbalance. 371
melanins, functions. 5
Sex hormone imbalances. See Neutered animals
melanocytes, origin. 4
association. See Adrenal glands
Merkel's cells, function. 4
 conditions, association. 5ee Adrenal glands 
neoplasia, categories, 457
diagnosis, usage, 287
neoplasms
diagnostic process, 284-285. See aiso Neutered animals
categorization/prevalence. 5ee Cats/skin; Dogs/skin
histopathologic findings. 287
impact. See Neoplasm5
Sezary cells, definition, 434
pH
Shampoo, 44t. See aizo Antibacterial shampoos; Medicated
factors, 4
modulation, effectiveness. See Pyoderma
formulation, antimicrobial agents, 59t-60t
pigmentation,121
ingredients, anti microbial activity. 59-60
control factors, 352-353
products
plane, 10
 antibacterial agents (list/differences). 74
role.SeeTemperature regulation
residual effects, 72
rapes, interpretation diferences. See Positive skin scrapes
488
Index
Skin (conr’df)
Soft tissue sarcomas. See Proximal hind leg
scrapings. 298
aggressive development, 415f
second-degree bum, term (usage) 319
biologic behavior. See Feline vaccine-associated soft tissue
solar damage.312
arcomas
structure, 1-9
biologic phenotype, 412t
third-degree burm term [usage). 319
development, causative factors. See Cats/soft tissue sarcomas;
tumors, 385
Dogs/soft tissue sarcomas
percentage.404
diagnostic process, 414
vascular plexuses, location/structure, 
diagnostic tests,recommendation,415
Asdog us
irmpact, frequency. See Cats/soft tissue sarcomas; Dogs/soft
advantages/disadvantages. 27
tissue sarcomas
definitive diagnosis. See Vasculitis
long-term management, therapeutic modalities. See Cats/soft
helpfulness See Dermatohistopathology
tissue sarcomas; Dogs/soft tissue sarcomas
methods, 27
metastasis, treatment options. See Cats; Dog5
pathologist, perspective,3442
metastatic potential, 412t
process. See Eliptically oriented skin biopsy
prediction factors, 414.415
reliability. See Maiassezi
muscle cell origin, differentiation, 418 
results, maximization, 29-30
surgery type. long-term control, 416
sample, line draing.36f
surgical resection, 416
specimens
tissue origin, 412t
histopathologic changes, description. See Ehlers-Danlos
Soft tissue sarcomas, characteristics, 412-414 
syndrome
Soil type, 173
obtaining. See Cats
Solar damage. See Skin
uage. See Site preparation
 predilection sites. See Squamous cell carcinoma
usefulness. See Hypothyroidism
Solar dermatitis
Skin biopsy performance
appearance.See Cats
benefits. See Autoimmune skin disease diag nosis
confusion. 5ee Ventrum
indications, 27
lesions
procedure, 29. See αaizo Autoimmune skin disease diag nosis
location, 317
 Skin diseases. See Immune-mediated skin diseases; Infectious skin
malignancy, transformation. 317
diseases; Inflarmmatory skin diseases; Paraneoplastic skin
presence, histologic changes. 31&
diseases; Parasitic skin diseases; Primary skin diseases;
therapies. See Dogs; Truncal solar dermatitis
Secondary skin diseases
treatrment. See Cats
association. See Feline immunodeficiency vinus; Feline
Solar dermatoses. 312-314
leukemia virus; Zinc
Solar-induced SCC. 394
confusion. See Vasculitis
Solitary cutaneous histiocytoma
dermatophytes. impact. See Cats; Dogs
cell type impact. See Young dogs
description. See Pemphigus erythematosus; Pemphigus
fine-eedleasirationcytlogisample
foliaceous
histologic appearance, 429
development process. See Autoimmune skin diseases
change. 429
human health concerns, 158 
treatment, consideration, 429
Maiassezit
Solitary histiocytoma, 427f 
infections/overcolonization, predisposition. 166
Solitary ICE, treatment modalities, 403
spp. impact, 166
Solitry papillomas, 401
cccurrence. See Cats
Special staining. 180
Skin fold infections (intertrigo)
Special stainsdiffeentiationeeBiopsy tissu
definition, 146
Species suscepti bility. See Dogs/otitis externa
diagnostic process 146
culture/susceptibility sample. prediction ability. See Tympanic
long-termmanagement,types.7879
cavity
OTC antifungal creams, efectiveness, 78
Spherulites.72
pathogenesis, 146
Spider bites, clinical symptoms. See Venomous spider bites
treatment, 146
SPL.See Staphage Lysate
Skin/hairdepigmentation.See Akita
Splayed feet.122f
Skin infection
Spleen, hemangiosarcomas (biological aggressiveness), 417-418
control, shampoo therapy (usefulness), 58
Splenomegaly. 186
hyperpigmentation,cause,362363
Spontaneous hair regrowth, diseases (impact). 29]
toicaltrnrt
Sporanox,257
treatment steps. 57
Sporothrix, 170
Skin lesion
Sporotrichosistreatment171
aspirate cytology. 328
Spot therapy, usage. See Localized dermatophytosis
a55ociation. See Dermatomyositis
Squalene, 379
contrast. See Pemphigus diseases
Squamous cell carcinoma [SCC), 393-398. 5ee aixo Ear; Eyelid
definition. See Primary skin lesion; Secondary skin lesion
ancillary diagnostic tests, 396
description. See Pemphigus vulgaris
clinical course. See Cats; Dogs
evolution, diagram, 35f
debulking. CO, laser [usage). See Cats
location. See Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis
diagnostic process, 396
types. See Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
kocation. See Cats; Dog5
association. See Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis
melanoma, clinical features differentiation, 36t. See αiso
Skin scrapings
Dogs/claw
process, 23
risk factors, 394396
tips. 23
in situ, definition, 318
uage. See Deep dwelling mites; Superficial dwelling mites
solar damage, predilection sites, 315f
SLE, 19
stages, definition process. 396
Small animal practice, CCs [usage). 48
staging. 397t
Snow nose, differentiation. See Dudley nose
treatrment, 397398
Societal conditions, atopy (relationship). 188
Squamous papilloma, 392
ssaeepespseae (aen] aeqiod us
Standard Poxdle, 97
Ervironmental flea control
scaling/alopecia, 96f
Index
489
sebaceous adenitis, 96f
Subungualepithelial inclusion cyst
trunk haircoat, crimp loss, 96f
differential diagnoses 388
Staphage Lysate [SPL). definition/process. 70
upture,granulomatous response,388
Staphylococcal blepharitis.See Infectedmeibomian gland
surrounding stcturetype.388
Staphylococcal folliculitis 212
Subu ngual SCC. 394
Staphylococcal infections,92
Sulfursalicylic acid, (combination usage, reasons). See
Staphyococcus reus,63
Keratolytic; Keratoplastic
Sraphryiococcuz irermefius, 57. 60. 74. 144
Summation of effect, relationship. See Pruritus
activity. 75
Sun avoidance, 239, 240
empirical antibiotics. 150b
Sunburn, differentiation. See Nose
infections, 110
Sunburning
Steatitis, differentiation. See Panniculitis
lesions, appearance. 315
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 244
sunlight. impact. 314
Stereotypic behaviors
Sun exposure impact. See Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
anxiety/obsessions/compulsions, differences, 324 325
Sunlight impact. See Sequelae; Sunburning
ex planation. See Psychocutaneous disorders
Superficial bacterial folliulitis, 144. See aizo Inguinal region
Sterile nodular panniculitis, 250-252
bacteria. See Dogs/superficial bacterial foliculitis
diagnosis, 253
definition, 148
therapy.length. 253
etiologies. See Canine superficial bacterial folliculitis 
treatment, 253
recurrent cases, treatment, 150-151
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome, 229f. See aixo Cocker Spaniel; 
sts, consideration.See Dogs/superficial bacterial folliculitis
Collies
Superficial bacterial infections, definition/examples. 144
Steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs. 258
Superficial dermal edema, 16f
Steroid-producing tissues, 280
Superficial dwelling mites [(presence), skin scraping [usage). 23
Steroids
Superficial epithelial desquamation. See Chronic topical neomycin
therapy. necessity. See Canine atopic dermatitis
application
usage, 116
Superficial mycotic infections, 157-170
Stimulation test. See Thyrotropin stimulation test
categories, 157
St. Louis encephalitis. 132
definition, 157
Stratum basale, 2. 2f
Superficial pyoderma. See Atopic dogs
hyperplasia.16f
cephalexin, usage [reasons). 62
Straturm corneum, 2
treatment options, 62
basketweave keratin. See Canine epidermi s
Suppressor T cells. 451
cells, exfoliation, 2f
Suppurative dermatitis 20f
nuclei, retention, 16f
Surface bacterial infections, definition/examples, 144
Stratum granulosum.2.2f
Surgery. lasers [advantages). 87
Stratum lucidum, 2
Surgical CO, laser resurfacing. 331
Stratum spinosum, 2
Surgical excision，331,343.456
hyperplasia.16f
Surgical procedures, postoperative complications. See Lateral ear
canal resection
Stressors. See Cats; Dogs
Surgical superglue, 37
Striated cuticle, 139f
Susceptibility test/testing
Stunted growth, 122f
performing. infrequency (reasons). 62
Stye
detinition, 345
process, 33
Suspensions, usage, 45t
treatment process.345
Sweat glands, types/function. See Cats; Dog 5
Subcormeal pustule (neutrophils incusion), 19f
Symmetric alopecia, 130f
Subcutaneous abscesses, 144
Symmetric hyperrophy,endocrine disorder[association）.See
treatment plan. 154 155
Cats/claw
Subcutaneous fat, 251f 
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. 337.See Miniature
Subcutaneous fungal infections. See Cats; Dogs
Schnazer
acquisition process, 170
clinical features, 338-339
clinical signs, 170
histopathologic features, 339
diag nostic confirmation process. 171
onychodystrophy. 334f
treatment, 171
pathogenesis,338-339
Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas, biological aggressiveness,
teatment, therapeutic options, 339-340
417-418
Symmetric lupoid onychomadesis. See Miniature Schnauzer
Subcutaneous infections, fungal pathogens (association). See Cats;
Systemic antibiotics, 168, 331
Dog 5
role. See Otitis externa
Subcutaneous layer. See Adipose fat tissue; Blood vesses;
therapy. 169, 336. 348
Nerves
Systemic antibiotics, usage. See Pyoderma
Subcutaneous tissue
Systemic antifungal therapy. 165
differentiation. See Subcutis 
Systemic chemotherapy. 5ee Macroscopic mast cell tumor
malignant neoplasia, characteristics, 403
burden
mesenchymal neoplasms, impact. 5ee Cats; Dogs
ecommendation. 423-424
Subcutis
Systemic disease, chemotherapy (usage). 424
cellulitis, relationship. 20
Systemic glucocoricoids, 240
organization, 9
therapy. benefits., 382t
panniculus, differentiation.19
Wage. See External ear canal
subcutaneous tissue, differentiation, 19
Systemic histiocytosis, 458. See aiso Basset Hound
Subepidermal bullous diseases. See Autoimmune subepidermal
lesion. See Nasal planum
vesiculobullous diseases
malignant histiocytosis, differentiation, 431
management, ease, 237
management, treatment options. See Dog5
Sublethal DNA damage. 449 
signalment. See Dogs
Submissions
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 337
process See Electronmicroscopy, Nucleic acid
S'ystemic therapy. 164165
storage/analysis; Proteins
 combi nation. See Topical therapy
 providing. See Molecular age 
Systemic use, antibiotic selection process, 60-61
490
Index
T
laser selection, 86
T4 tumor stage, 433
malignanteplasiaharacteristiceeSuutaneoustiss
Tacrolimus, 46t
Pyrhium inifiosum, isolation process, 180
Tagamet, 424
Tlymphocytes.202
Tail biting. 325
TNM classfication, 433
Tail dock neuroma, 325
Toluene, 379
Tail fold., 146
Tolypoadm inam, 52
Tail glands
Toothbrushes, usage. See Fungal cultures
hepatoid cells, relationship.7
Topical anesthetics, effectiveness. See Pruritus
hyperplasia.285f
Topical antibacterial therapy. indications. 74
Tail sucking. 325
Topical antihistamines, effectiveness. See Cats; Dogs
Tar products, usage (indications). See Seborrhea
Topical antipruritic agents, 46t
Tars, 46t
Topical antiprritic products, availability See Cats, Dog5
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
Topicalantipruritic therapy
T cells
advantages/disadvantages. 44
activation, CSA interference, 53
ingredients, listaction mechanism. 46
cutaneous lymphomas (derivation). 440
Topical contact hypersensitivity. See Macularerythema
dysfunction, 70
Topical corticosteroids
lymphoma. See Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
inclusion, safetyleffectiveness. See Shampoo
Tear fim (layers). etiology. 345
safety. See Cats
 TECA/LBO. See Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
usage. safety. 34
u010a150
Topical glucocorticoids. 239
Telangiectasia
application guidelines, 381
petechiaedifferentiation15
Topical ointment therapy usage. See Localized dermatophytosis
schematic, 15f
Topical spot-on products, usage. See Insect5
Telangiectasias, definition. 15
Topical tacrolimus, 239, 240
Telogen, 6. 22t
Topical therapeutic agents
defluxion.29]
classes/examples, 380
Temperature regulation, skin (role). 3
usage. 380t
Temporal areas, sparsely haired areas [concern). See Cats
Topical therapies.331
TEN. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis
formulations, 44t-45t
Tenesmus. 410
Topical therapy.164
Test diets
aminoglycoside [selection), considerations, 38 ]
availability. See Food allergy
antibacterial agents, usage, 58
selection. See Elimination test diet 
capability. See Dog5
Testicular asymmetry.SeePomeranian
considerationeeSkininfection
Tetracycline, 240. 253
effectiveness. See Cats; Dogs; Longhaired cats
TEWL. SeeTransepidermal water loss
indication. 71. See aiso Maiassezia
Thallotoxicosis, 33&
owner education, 72
Thoracic radiographs. 175
principles, 7 1
Thoracic radiography. 411
role. See Seborrhea
Threshold theory. See Pruritus
systemic therapy.combination.165
Thromboxanes (T XA). 55
types, usefulness. See Cats, Dog5s
Thymona
uage. See Pemphigus complex
dermatologic syndrome, association. See Cats
disadvantages, 72
 suspicion, tests. See Feline exfoliative dermatitis 
reason s, 72
Thyroid biopsy. 263
Topical therapy.formlations[list/differentiation)4445
Thyroid dysfunction, 260-269
Topical treatmentspossibilityeeCanine atopicdematits
naming.260
Topical zinc therapy
physiologic roles, 260
antimicrobial effects. 311
species.impact.260
 consideration. 5ee Pruritus; Wound healing
Thyroid function
Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO).
preevaluation procedure. See Canine thyroid function
Thyroid function, evaluation test. See Canine thyroid function
Total ear canal ablation (TECA). 374, 410
Thyroid-releasing hormone [TRH). 260
indications/goals/complications, comparison/contrast. 5ee
test, 263
Lateral ear canal resection
Thyroid-stirulating hormone (TSH). 260
Total thyroxine (TT4). 263
test, 263
measurement, free thyroxine (measurement advantage). 264
Thyrotoxicosis, induction (possibility). See Canine
Total triodothyronine concentrations, measurement usefulness,
spood
9
Thyrotropin stimulation test
Touch corpuscle, 455
description,265
Touch dome, 455
nonusage, reasons. See Canine thyroid function 
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). 244
Thyroxine (T4). 260
clinical features, 247
Ticks
definition, 247
diseases,transmission. 132
diagnostic process. 247-249
impact. See Cats; Dog5
EM histopathology. differentiation, 246
life cycle. See Hard-bodied ticks
erythematous rash. 248f
treatment
extensive ulceration. 249f
Amitraz, action mechanism/side effects/antidotes. 5ee
full-thickness epidermal necrosis. See Advanced TEN
Dogs
pathogenesis. 247
licensed/approved ingredients. See Cats; Dog5
post-flea dip. 248f
Tissue
reported triggerfactors, 245t
aspirate specimens, amastigotes [yield),. 187
teatment process. 249
damage
Tragic face, 268f
description. 250
Triamcinolone, 381
leishmaniasis, impact, 186
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL). 3
laser interaction, B6
impact. See Skin
Index
491
Transient bacteria, 144t-145t
anditory ossicles, 368
differentiation. See Resident bacteria
bony chamber. openings. 368
Transients, differentiation. See Skin
Transmissible venereal tumor (TVT), 453, 458. 5ee aiso Penis
sample (prediction ability). 376-377
biologic behavior. 455 
Tympanicmembrane.365
chemotherapy,response [change).455
division, 366
diagnostic process, 454
Tympanum, cochlear promontory. 367f
impression smears, 454f
Type Il hypersensitivity. 196
lesions. locations.454
Type-ll MHC antigens. 71
metastases (presence), 455
Type-I MHC antigens. 71
progression, relationship. See Dog5
Type 1 procollage-N-peptidase. 105
signalment. See Dog5
Type IV hypersensitivity. 372
therapy selection,455
Type V collagen, 106
Trauma, 326. See aiso Claw
Tzanck preparations, 92
Traumatic blepharitis, treatment process. 346-347
Trabecular trichoblastoma, 399
U
Treated hyothyroid dog.breeder usage. 268
Ulcer, 14t
TRH. See Thyroid-releasing hormone
Ulcerated perianal fistula disease. See Cerman Shepherd Dogs
Triamcinolone-containing ointment, ovenuse, 84f, 239
Ulcerated solitary histiocytoma. See Claw
Trichoblastomas, characteristics, 404
Ulceration, 3 B0. See αiso Tox ic epidermal necrolysis 
 Tricholemmoma, 404
Ulcerative dermatosis, differentiai diagnoses. See Cats/skin
Trichoepitheliomas, characteristics, 404
Ulcerative lesions, 234f
Trichoepitheliomatous cyst [lining). epidermal cells, 386
sampling process. 29
Trichofolliculoma, 392
Ulcer, definition. See Indolent ulcer
Trichogram
UItraviolet A [UVA), 314, 318, 440 
cultures, usage. See Dermatophytosis
UItraviolet B (UVB), 3 14, 318
definition/process, 21
Ultraviolet (Uv) light, 315
findings. See Dermatologic diseases
UItraviolet (UV) radiation. 393, 433
usage, 22-23
 impact. See Epidermal neoplasia
usefulness, 22-23
UItraviolet (UV) resistance. 136
Trichophyron infections, definition. 158
Uncinaria senocephaia, 141
Trhpyagt50
Ungual rest,definition32
macroconidia, 28f
Unilateral focal metatarsal fistulation, differential diagnoses. 5ee
Trichsoron sp dermatitis deinition. 169
Cerman ShepherdDogs
Triclosan, 59
Unkempt hair coat, 279f
Tri-colored breeds, 99
Upperrespiratory disease,treatment, 249
Tricyclic antidepresants (TCAs), 330
Upper respiratory signs. 171
danger/side effects. 52
Urinalysis, 235
definition, 52
age. See Hypothyroidism
impact. See Pruritic dogs/cats
Urinary tract infection (UTI). 272
Trigger factors. See Erythema multiforme; Toxic epidermal
suscepti bility. See Hyperadrenocorticism
necrolysis
Urine corti sol, 273
Triodothyronine (T3). 260
Urine culture, analysis, 235
concentrations, measurement usefulness. See Free
Urticaria pigmentosa
triodothyronine concentrations; Total triodothyronine
clinical signs, 124
concentrations
definition, 124
Trilostane, 275
teatment, possibilities, 124
TrisEDTA.379
UTI. See Urinary tract infection
Truncal alopecia
UV. See Ultraviolet
differential diagnosis, 270
Uveitis, 177
Sertoli cell tumor. See Poodle
Uveodermatologic syndrome. See Shetland Sheepdogs
Truncal solar dermatitis, therapies, 318-319
diagnostic process. 351
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone
eyelid margins/nose/mucocutaneous junction.
TT4. See Basal total thyroxine
depigmentation/ulceration. See Akita
Tularemia. 132
Tumor-like lesions (types), central pores (inclusion). 392
Vaccination. See Interscapular region
V
Tumors
adnexal origin, 402-411
mor, secondary formation. See Cats
benign occurrence. See Ceruminal gland tumors
Vaccine-associated sarcomas, 413f, 417. See aiso Cats
clinical observations. See Ear canal
computed tomography, transverse image. 417f
clinical staging. See Anal sac tumor
Vaccine-induced sarcomas, 416
inclusion. See Ear canal-based tumor
Vaccines
cutaneous neoplasms, indications, 405
effectiveness. See Malignant melanoma5
development. See Mast cells
uefulness See Oomycetes
diagnostic process. See Cutaneous mast cell tumors
Vacuolar changes. 339
invasiveness assessment, 417f
Vascular plexuses, location/strnucture. See Skin
metastasis. See Female dog
Vasculitis, 186, 254-259
neuroendocrine origin. presence. See Dogs
 biopsy, pending action. 257
secondary formation. See Cats
breeds, risk, 257
signalment. See Anal sac gland tumors
definition, 254
therapy. See Ear canal-based ceruminal tumor
dnugs
types, central pores (inclusion). See Cystic tumors
implication, 257
vaccines, effectiveness. See Malignant melanomas
usage. See Canine vasculitis/vasculopathy; Feline vasculitis
TVT. See Transmissible venereal tumor
etiology. See Cats; Dog5
TXA. See Thromboxanes
laboratory evaluations, 257
Tylotrich hairs, differentiation. See Sinus hairs
esions, description, 254-255
Tylotrich pad, 455
pathognomonic clinical signs, 254255
Tympanic cavity. 382
skin biopsy, definitive diagnosis. 257
492
Index
Vasculitis [conr′}
West Highland White Terriers
skin diseases, confusion, 256
axilla postinflammatory alopecia363f
suspicion, 257
chronic allergies, 363f
treatment. post-procedure,259
epidermal dysplasia. 97
types. 257
Malassezia
vasculopathy.comparison,254
dermatitis. 363f
Vasculopathy. 254-259, 323
presence. See Atopic West Highland white Terrier
breeds, risk, 257
Wet dressings, 44t
comparison. See Vasculitis
Wheal, 12t
definition, 254
White blood cells (WBCs), 378
drugs
White scales. 5ee Doberman Pinscher
implication, 257
wilder's reticulin, 446
usage. See Canine vasculitis/vasculopathy
Willemse's criteria. See Canine atopic dermatitis
lesions, description, 254255
Witch's feet, 291
pathognomonic clinical signs. 254-255
Wooxd's lamp examination
types. 257
advantages/disadvantages, 24-25
Venomous spider bites, clinical symptoms, 132
process, 24
Ventral abdomen/g roin. See Collies
uage. See Dermatophytosis
Ventral alopecia, 301f 
Wound healing (increase), topical zinc therapy (consideration),
Ventral neck, swelling. 172f
311
Ventral pattem alopecia103
Wrig ht's stain, 32. 376f, 377f, 422f
Ventral tail,epidermal cyst. 385f
Ventrum, 121f
chronic actinic damage. 316-317
X-linked recessive forms. See Inheritance
deep pyogranulomatous lesions, 316-317
Xyioypha biana. 170
eosinophilic plaque, 221f
papular/macular lesions, 203f
papules/licnifcatin/erpmetatonf
Yeast
solar dermatitis, confusion, 317
elimination, 77f
Vertebral neuroectodermal origin. 447
infections, 123
Vertical canal, 365
organisms. 176f
Vesicle, 12t
overgrowth predisposition, anti biotic therapy (impact). 169
definition, 112
refractile double-contoured broad-based budding. 175f
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (idiopathic ulcerative
Yeast-like organisms.169
dermatosis), 237
Yorkshire Terrier, idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis, 255f
treatment protocols. 240
Young dogs
Vesiculobullous disorders. See Inherited vesiculobullous disorders
canine cutaneous histiocytomas, older dog differentiation.
Vesiculobullous lesions, development, 117
428-429
Vestibular symptoms. 380
solitary cutaneous histiocytoma, cell type impact, 425
Vestibular window, 368
Vimentin, 447
Z
Viral diseases, impact. See Feline oral ulceration; Feline ue
Zantac, 424
respiratory disease
Zinc
Viral-induced papillomas, 401 
administration, side effects, 309
Visceral leishmaniasis, cutaneous signs [percentage). 186
binding diets, impact. See Dogs
Visceral mastocytosis, 423. See aizo Advanced/disseminated
dosages, 309t. See also Metabolic epidermal necrosis
visceral mastocytosis
meth ionine, 309
Vitamin A, usage, 93
skin diseases, association, 304
Vitamin E
sulfate, 308-310
deficiency.250
supplementation, 123
effects. See Immunostimulation
therapy. See Lesions
Vitiligo. See Humans; Rottweiler
Zinc-related dermatoses, 304-311
pathogenesis, 355-357
Zinc-responsive dermatoses, 338
treatment process355357
breed predilection, 307
Vizsla, %
clinical signs, association. See Malamutes; Siberian Huskies
dorsal head, alopecia, 95f
diagnostic process. See Malamutes, Siberian Huskies
scaling/alopecia.94f
differential diagnoses, 308
sebaceous adenitis, 94f 95f
deficiencies, 304
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, definition, 357
lesions, increase/decrease, 307
Vulvar fold, 146
treatment, 308309
zinc deficiencies, naming problem, 307308
VV
Zinc supplementation
Warty dyskeratoma, 392
enhancement, adjunctive therapies, 309
Water, usage. See Hydrotherapy
long-term management. 310
WBCs. See White blood cells
nonresponsiveness, 3 10-311
Wedge biopsy. process, 39
Zoonotic bacterial skin disease,
.156
Weight loss. 186
Zoonotic disease, relationship. See Hookworm dermatitis;
Wells' syndrome. 256
Peiodferar dermatitis
Welsh Corgis, 113
Zygommycoses. 170