VETERINARY
NEUROPATHOLOGY
ESSENTIALS OF THEORY AND PRACTICE
Marc Vandevelde · Robert J. Higgins · Anna Oevermann
TR
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
Veterinary Neuropathology
Companion website
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by the Division of Diagnostic Imaging,
Dept. clinical veterinary medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
The website includes
· Interactive MRI - Neuropathology Atlas
 A range of different pathologies
·+ Complete sequences to scroll through
+ Matching gross images
· Microscopic images of selected lesion sites
Website editors:
Johann Lang, Dr.med.vet, DECVDl Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Department of Clinical Veterinary
Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland
University of California, Davis, USA
Veterinary
Neuropathology
Essentials of Theory and Practice
Marc Vandevelde
Neurocenter, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
Robert J. Higgins
Department of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA.
Anna Oevermann
Neurocenter, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
8SQ, UK
Editorial offces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services and for information about how to apply
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any forrm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of
a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publicarion Data
Vandevelde, Marc, 1947-
Veterinary neuropathology : essentials of theory and practice / Marc Vandevelde, Robert I. Higgins,
Anna Oevermann.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
pathology. 3. Nervous system-Diseases. 1. Higgins, Robert J., 1941- II. Oevermann, Anna, 1974-
III. Title.
SF895.V36 2012
636.089'607-dc23
2012005850
A catalogue record for this book is available frorm the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Meaden Creative
Set in 10.5/12.5 pt Minion by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
12012
Contents
Preface
ix
Vascular disorders
38
1
 2.1 Pathophysiology of ischemia
38
Foreword
X
 2.2 General strategy for diagnosing vascular
lesions
38
 General neuropathology
1
2.3 Common vascular lesions
39
1.1  Principles of neuroanatomy for diagnostic
2.3.1 Vascular lesions of the brain
39
neuropathologists
1
2.3.2 Vascular lesions of the spinal cord
44
1.1.1 Anatomical orientation by using the
 2.3.3 Ischemia in the peripheral nervous 
ventricular system
1
 system and muscles
46
1.1.2 Major anatomical regions of interest
2
Further reading
46
1.1.3 Histological neuroanatomy
7
Cerebral infarcts
46
1.2 Neuropathological techniques
11
Hemorrhage
46
1.2.1 Necropsy techniques
11
Hypertensive encehalopathy
46
1.2.2 Brain sectioning, macroscopic
Fibrocartilagenous emboli
47
inspection and sampling
Aortic thrombosis
47
for histology
12
 Inflammatory diseases
48
1.3 Basic tissue reaction patterns
14
Y
1.3.1 Reactions of neurons to injury
14
3.1  Pathophysiology of inflammation
48
1.3.2 Oligodendrocytes
20
 3.1.1 Entry and effect of infectious
1.3.3 Astrocytes
20
agents in the nervous system
48
1.3.4 Microglia/macrophages
22
3.1.2 Immune reaction of the host
1.3.5 CSF spaces
23
 against the infectious agent in
1.3.6 Blood vessels
23
the CNS
48
1.3.7 Disturbance of water balance:
 3.1.3 Morphological aspects of the
edema
24
immune response
49
1.3.8 Artifacts, postmortem degeneration,
 3.2 General strategy for diagnosis of
 pseudolesions and old age
26
 inflammatory lesions
50
1.4 Recognizing major lesion patterns
28
 3.2.1 Recognizing major inflammatory
1.4.1 The major lesion patterns
28
reaction patterns
51
1.4.2 Lesion distribution pattern
31
3.2.2 Determining the distribution
1.4.3 Classification of neurological
pattern of the lesions
52
diseases
31
3.2.3 Specific features
52
1.4.4 General strategy
33
3.3 Common CNS infections
54
 1.5 Neuropathology in the clinics: magnetic
3.3.1 Neurotropic viral infections
54
resonance imaging (MRI)
33
3.3.2 Viral granulomatous inflammation
58
1.5.1 Basic MRI physics
33
3.3.3 Viral vasculitis
60
1.5.2 Principles of interpretation
34
 3.3.4 Viral leukoencephalitis
61
Further reading
36
 3.3.5 Bacterial infections
63
Neuropathology general
36
3.3.6 Mycotic and algal infections
68
Neurology/functional neuroanatomy
36
3.3.7 Protozoal infections
69
Neuroanatomy
37
3.3.8 Helminth infections
70
 Techniques for PNS and muscle
37
 3.4 Non-infectious and immune-mediated
 Basic tissue reaction patterns
37
inflammatory lesions
72
Edema
37
3.4.1 Definition
72
 Artifacts, pseudolesions, old age
37
3.4.2 Neurological diseases assumed
Magnetic resonance imaging
37
to be immune-mediated
73
V
vi   Contents
Further reading
79
Further reading
104
General
79
Neural tube dlosure defects
104
 Neurotropic viral infections
79
Defects of forebrain induction
104
Viral granulomatous infections
79
 Neuronal migration disorders and
Viral vasculitis
79
sulcation defects
104
Demyelinating viral infections
79
Encephaloclastic defects
104
Bacterial infections
79
Cerebellar hypoplasia
104
 Fungal infections
80
 Dandy Walker syndrome
104
 Protozoal infections
80
 Chiari malformation, Syringomyelia
104
Helminth infections
80
Hydrocephalus
104
Non-infectious and Immune-mediated
 Arachnoidal and ependymal cysts
105
inflammatory disorders
80
6
Metabolic-toxic diseases
106
4
Trauma
81
6.1  General strategy for diagnosis of
4.1 Pathophysiology of CNS trauma
81
metabolic-toxic lesions
106
4.1.1 Pathogenesis of brain trauma
81
6.1.1 The major patterns
106
4.1.2 Pathogenesis of spinal cord
 6.1.2 Further differential diagnosis
106
trauma
82
6.2  Encephalomalacias/myelomalacias
108
4.2 General strategy for diagnosis of
6.2.1 Polioencephalomalacia (PE)
 traumatic CNS lesions
84
or cerebrocortical necrosis (CCN)
108
4.3 Traumatic nervous system diseases
85
6.2.2 Polioencephalomalacia of
4.3.1 Trauma of the brain
85
subcortical structures and
4.3.2 Traumatic spinal cord lesions
87
brainstem
114
 4.3.3 Trauma in the peripheral nervous
6.2.3 Poliomyelomalacia
115
systerm
89
6.2.4 Leukoencephalomalacias
116
Further reading
90
6.2.5 Encephalomalacias involving
Pathophysiology of CNS trauma
90
both gray and white matter
117
Brain trauma
91
 6.3  Acquired metabolic-toxic selective
 Intervertebral disc disease
91
lesions
118
Spinal malformations
91
6.3.1 Neuronal degeneration
118
Wobbler syndrome
91
6.3.2 Axonal degeneration
121
Other causes of cord compression
91
6.3.3 Myelin degeneration
121
Cauda equina syndrome
91
6.4 Spongy degeneration
122
6.5 Metabolic-toxic lesions of the peripheral
Congenital malformations
92
 nervous system (PNS) and skeletal
5.1 Pathophysiology
92
muscle
124
5.1.1 Ontogeny of the CNS
92
 6.5.1 Metabolic-toxic neuropathies
125
5.1.2 Etiology
92
6.5.2 Metabolic-toxic myopathies
125
 5.2 General strategy for diagnosing
Further reading
126
anomalies of the CNS
93
General
126
5.3 Common malformations
93
 Polioencephalomalacia large animals
126
 5.3.1 Neural tube closure defects
93
 Polioencephalomalacia in small animals
126
5.3.2 Defects of forebrain induction
94
Hippocampal necrosis and sclerosis
126
 5.3.3 Neuronal migration disorders and
Subcortical and brainstem
sulcation defects
95
encephalomalacias
126
 5.3.4 Disorders of proliferation
 Selenium poisoning
126
or size
96
Equine leukomalacia
126
 5.3.5 Encephaloclastic defects
97
Enterotoxemia
126
5.3.6 Malformations in the caudal fossa
CO poisoning
127
and spinal cord
97
 Metabolic toxic neuronal degenerations
127
5.3.7 Congenital hydrocephalus and
Grass sickness
127
other anomalies of CSF pathways
100
Acquired lysosomal storage diseases
127
Contents
vii
Metabolic-toxic axonal degenerations
127
Choroid plexus tumors
155
 Irradiated feed-induced myelinopathy
Neuronal tumors
155
in cats
127
Embryonal tumors
155
 Toxic spongy degenerations
127
PNS tumors
155
Hepatic encephalopathy
127
Meningiomas
155
Toxic peripheral neuropathies
127
Granular cell tumor
155
Metabolic peripheral neuropathies
128
Mesenchymal tumors
155
Matabolic-toxic myopathies
128
Lymphomas and hemapoetic
tumors
156
Germ cell tumors
156
Neoplasia
129
Nephroblastoma
156
 7.1 General strategy for diagnosis
Metastatic tumors
156
of neoplastic lesions
129
 7.1.1 Clinic and diagnostic imaging
129
 7.1.2 Interpretation of gross findings
129
7.1.3 Diagnosis
8
 Degenerative diseases
157
130
7.1.4 Grading
133
8.1 General strategy for differential
 7.2 Tumors of neuroepithelial origin
133
 diagnosis of degenerative lesions
157
7.2.1 Astrocytomas
133
 8.1.1 Recognizing the major patterns
157
7.2.2 Oligodendroglioma
137
8.1.2 Further analysis
157
7.2.3 Mixed gliomas (oligoastrocytomas)
139
8.1.3 Diagnosis
159
7.2.4 Ependymoma
140
 8.2 Degeneration of neurons
159
7.2.5 Choroid plexus tumors
8.2.1 General aspects
159
(papillomas and carcinomas)
142
8.2.2 Motor neuron diseases
159
7.2.6 Neuronal and mixed neuronal-
8.2.3 Cerebellar degenerations
162
glial tumors
143
 8.2.4 Other neuronal degenerations
165
7.2.7 Embryonal tumors
144
8.3 Axonal degenerations
166
7.3 Tumors of cranial and spinal nerves
145
 8.3.1 Wallerian-like degenerative
7.3.1 Benign PNST
145
axonopathies
166
7.3.2 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath
8.3.2 Axonopathies with prominent
tumors (MPNST)
147
axonal swelling
171
7.4 Tumors of the meninges
147
8.4 Myelin disorders
173
7.4.1 Meningioma
147
8.4.1 Leukodystrophies
173
7.4.2 Granular cell tumor
150
8.4.2 Myelin dysgenesis
177
7.4.3 Mesenchymal tumors
151
8.5 Storage diseases
178
 7.5 Lymphomas and hematopoietic
8.5.1 Lysosomal storage diseases
178
tumors
151
8.5.2 Neuronal ceroid lipofucsinoses
7.5.1 Primary T and B cell
(NCL)
181
lymphomas
151
8.5.3 Lafora's disease
181
7.5.2 Intravascular lymphoma
151
8.5.4 Acquired lysosomal storage
7.5.3 Metastatic lymphoma
152
diseases
182
7.5.4 Primary CNS histiocytic sarcoma
152
 8.6 Spongiform encephalopathies
182
7.6 Germ cell tumors
152
 8.6.1 Transmissible degenerative
7.6.1 Germinoma
152
diseases
182
7.6.2 Teratoma
153
8.6.2 Neuropathology of TSE
183
7.7 Embryonal tumors of non-
8.6.3 TSEs in domestic animals
184
neuroepithelial origin
153
8.7 Spongy degenerations
185
7.7.1 Thoracolumbar spinal cord tumor
8.7.1 Definition and general
(ectopic nephroblastoma)
153
 morphological features
185
 7.8 Secondary or metastatic tumors
154
 8.7.2 Spongy degeneration in branched-
 Further reading
155
chain organic acidurias
186
General
155
8.7.3 Spongy degenerations of other
Glial tumors
155
causes
187
vili
 Contents
8.8 Selective symmetrical encephalomalacias
Wallerian-like axonal degenerations
190
(SSE)
187
 Degenerative myelopathy in old dogs
190
8.8.1 General morphological features
187
Wallerian-like degeneration in large
8.8.2 Mitochondrial encephalopathies in
animals
191
 people and similar lesions in
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy
191
animals
187
Leukodystrophies
191
8.9 Degenerative diseases of the peripheral
Dysmyelination
191
 nervous system and muscle
189
 Lysosomal storage diseases
191
 8.9.1 Degenerative polyneuropathies
189
Spongiform encephalopathies
191
 8.9.2 Degenerative myopathies
189
Spongy degenerations
191
Further reading
190
Selective symmetrical encephalomalacias
192
Motor neuron diseases
190
 Degenerative diseases of the PNS and
 Cerebellar degenerations
190
muscles
192
 Other neuronal degenerations
190
Alzheimer disease
190
Index
193
This book is accompanied by a companion website: which is maintained by
 the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Swifzerland.
www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Preface
This book has evolved in the frame of a veterinary neu-
lesions as encountered in a routine neuropathological
ropathology course of the European School of Advanced
examination. As neuromuscular pathology has become
Veterinary Studies (ESAVS), which has been taught reg-
a highly specialized field beyond the scope of this
ularly at the University of Bern in Switzerland since the
book we listed some key literature references on this
 early 1990s. The original participants were veterinary
 subject where appropriate. We thank all collegues who
pathologists seeking practical  training in diagnostic
contributed MRI and other images shown in this
neuropathology. Over the years, along with the intro-
book in particular Rosemarie Fatzer (Bern, Switzerland)
duction of MRI in veterinary neurology, more and more
and Rick Hayes (UC Davis) for preparing the line
neurologists and even diagnostic imaging specialists
drawings.
visited the course. Based on our experience to teach
 neuropathology to such a mixed audience, we decided
How to use this book
to expand and edit our course notes into a compact
book. This is a didactic book teaching a practical
The first chapter of this book covers the nuts and
approach to diagnostic neuropathology starting from
bolts of neuropathology including basic neuroanatomy.
the very basics for pathologists and clinicians with a
necropsy and sampling techniques as well as general
special interest in neuropathology It is also intended to
reaction patterns in the nervous system. At the end of
 support neurologists, radiologists, other MRI users, and
 this chapter is a very important section on classification
 residents in these disciplines who wish to deepen their
 of neurological diseases and recognition of major lesion
knowledge of the pathology and pathogenesis of neuro-
patterns, the stepping stone for the subsequent chap-
logical diseases.
ters which each address a certain disease category, for
While the factual information in this book is up to date,
example “ inflammation” or “neoplasia".
we did not intend to present a detailed account of the
In each of these following chapters we first present
accumulated veterinary neuropathological knowledge.
 general common features and disease mechanisms, dif-
 Complete and detailed coverage of the veterinary neu-
ferent lesion patterns encountered within the major
ropathological literature up to the mid 1990s is provided
category and strategies to solve diagnostic problems.
 in the excellent book of Brian Summers, John Cummings
 Subsequently we discuss the specific disease entities.
and Alexander de Lahunta: Veterinary Neuropathology,
Since advanced diagnostic imaging techniques and
Mosby St. Louis, 1995. This book, unfortunately out of
neuropathology increasingly overlap the reader will also
print, is the last of its kind and has been complemented
find MRI images in this book. However to do this field
with a good image database on the Cornell university
justice, far more information is needed. Therefore this
website. Since 1995, the veterinary neurological knowl-
book is linked to a companion website on interpreta-
edge has continued to expand and the internet now
tion of MRI images from a representative series of
allows easy and often free access to original publications.
neurological cases which also went to necropsy (www.
Those who study this book should be able to target
wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology).
additional information very quickly with a few mouse
 The MRI images are compared to the gross and micro-
clicks. Still, at the end of each chapter of our book a few
scopic findings of the very same cases with cross-refer-
selected references are listed, mostly reviews, recent case
encing to the corresponding sections in the book This
reports listing the literature on a particular subject and
MRI-pathology atlas has been prepared by our collegues
examples of good neuropathological practice. These are
of the diagnostic imaging departments in Bern and
not meant to be a comprehensive reference base but
Davis, with whom we have enjoyed an excellent collabo-
intended as “further reading” and to make the users of
ration for many years.
this book familiar with the current literature on the
subject.
Marc Vandevelde
The coverage of the pathology of the peripheral nervous
 Robert J. Higgins
system and muscles is limited to the most common
Anna Oevermann
ix
Foreword
Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins and Anna Oever-
 discovering what I thought was a unique malformation
mann have collaborated to write a very thorough trea-
in the necropsy room only to find a beautiful photo-
tise on veterinary neuropathology. “Essentials of theory
graph of that same lesion in this textbook by Frauchiger
and practice? in the title does not provide the credit this
 and Fankhauser. In 1962, Comparative Neuropathology
book deserves. This is a textbook by all definitions.
was published by JRM Innes and LZ Saunders. No
 It seems most appropriate that the authors based the
further textbook publications occurred that covered
origin of this text on the course material presented each
this subject until 1995 when Summers, Cummings and
year at the European School of Advanced Veterinary
n a, nd e 
Studies at the University of Bern, Switzerland. This
The three authors of this new textbook have carried
annual event was originally designed for the purpose of
on this tradition of excellence in neuropathology. They
training veterinary pathologists in diagnostic neuropa-
 have many years of hands on experience in neuropathol-
 thology. In 1930, the University of Bern established the 
 ogy and are well-recognized as experts in this specialty.
Institute of Comparative Neurology which was led by
With the Summer's textbook out of print, this is the only
Prof. Walden Hoffman, a veterinarian, and Prof Ernst
current textbook of neuropathology in English available
Frauchiger, a physician.This work was later continued
to the veterinary profession today.
by Prof Rudolph Fankhauser and then Prof. Marc
This text is well organized with many excellent illus-
Vandevelde in the Institute of Animal Neurology at
 trations and is easy to read and understand. It will be 
the Veterinary Faculty, University of Bern. Historically,
useful to all veterinary practitioners, neurologists and
the first major textbook of neuropathology of use to
pathologists and will be especially welcomed by the resi-
veterinarians was written by Ernst Frauchiger and
Aoooed pue ononau u luunn aads un s
1 congratulate Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins 
Neuropathologie des Menschen and der Tiere". This
and Anna Oevermann for their fine contribution to
 textbook served well the German speaking scholars and
the veterinary literature.
forced those of us dependent on English to revive our
German language training. I recall many occasions of
Alexander de Lahunta
General neuropathology
In this chapter, we will introduce the basic tools for
1.1.1 Anatomical orientation by using
diagnostic neuropathology starting with practical neu-
the ventricular system
roanatomy and neurohistology. In the following, we will
describe the process of collecting and sampling tissues
An effective approach to learning neuroanatomy is to
identify and correlate all of the CNS regions by their
and subsequently the basic histological reaction patterns
to injury of the different cell types of the nervous system.
relationship to the ventricular system of the brain (Fig.
Based on this information, we then describe a number
1.1). The CNS in the adult animal develops after closure
of basic lesion types or patterns of disease. We also show
of the neural tube. This tubular structure is still pre-
served in both the central canal of the spinal cord and
how neurological diseases are classified into different
 disease categories (e.g. inflammation, tumors, etc.) and
the aqueduct in the midbrain. During further develop-
which of the basic patterns can be expected to occur
ment of the brain the neural tube forms specific evagi-
 in each of these categories. Recognizing these patterns
nations caudally to rostrally: the fourth ventricle, the
and histological responses, together with a basic under-
third ventricle and, in the forebrain, bilateral ventricles
 originating from two vesicles bulging at the rostral end
standing of the classification system, provides a critical
diagnostic guide for classification of specific disease cat-
of the neural tube (Fig. l.lA). This basic structure
egories, each of which is covered in one of the subse-
undergoes further bending and distortion during subse-
quent development but remains recognizable in the
quent chapters.
postnatal animal. All anatomical structures originate
from the subependymal zone of the ventricular system.
1.1 Principles of neuroanatomy for diagnostic
This development is depicted in Fig. 1.1A. The lateral
neuropathologists
wall of the lateral ventricle develops into the cortex and
 The nervous system is anatomically immensely complex
 the basal nuclei. As a result of unequal growth the lateral
with important structural and biochemical differences
 ventricles assume a half-moon shape (Fig. 1.1B) and the
between its various regions. As a result these differ-
forebrain expands to cover the thalamus and midbrain.
ent regions have, to a certain extent, their own diseases.
The thalamus-hypothalamus develops around the third
Therefore, some basic understanding of neuroanat-
ventricle; the third ventricle becomes ring shaped
omy is essential for diagnostic neuropathologists. This
because the two halves of the thalamus connect in the
 includes the recognition of the major anatomic regions
midline (interthalamic adhesion) forming the dorsal and
of the central nervous system (CNS) and how they inter-
ventral lumens of the third ventricle. The midbrain
act both topographically and functionally. Such infor-
develops around the aqueduct, the medulla oblongata
mation will help to interpret the clinical information,
from the ventral part of the fourth ventricle. Dorsally it
to examine the brain in a standardized way and serve
gives rise to both a thin layer of tissue (the medullary
as a basis for using a brain atlas. Excellent concise and
velum) and to the cerebellum, which forms above the
schematic information in these topics can be found in
fourth ventricle (Fig. 1.1C). The spinal cord develops
 current text books of veterinary neurology.
from the central canal after closure of the caudal part
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
8
A
B
C
Fig. 1.1 Major divisions of the brain in relation to the ventricular system. A: Schematic drawing of the neural tube and its extensions
(dorsal view). The dotted line indicates developmental growth of the periventricular tissues with the cerebral hemispheres overlapping
the thalamus and midbrain. B: Schematic drawing of ventricular system dorsal and lateral view; different divisions of the ventricles are
color coded. C: Medial and ventral view of an adult brain. The different colored areas arose from their respective color-coded sections
of the ventricular wall. Yellow: olfactory bulb, tract and cortex; green: cerebral cortex; red: thalamus; dark blue: midbrain; brown: pons,
medulla and cerebellum: black: spinal cord: light blue: cerebrospinal fluid. (Adapted from M. Stoffel: Funktionelle Neuroanatomie fur
die Tiermedizin, Enke, Stuttgart, 2011.)
of the neural tube. Additionally, there are several other
midbrain, cerebellum, medulla oblongata and spinal
extensions from within the ventricular system such as
cord. To perform a competent neuropathological evalu-
the olfactory canal extending from the lateral ventricles 
ation, one should have at least a concept of how these
into the olfactory bulb, the infundibular recess extending
 major regions relate to each other topographically, pref-
ventrally from the third ventricle into the infundibulum,
erably in all three dimensions, and be able to recognize
 the lateral recesses of the fourth ventricle and the supra-
the major landmarks.
 pineal recess dorsally from the third ventricle, which is
 This level of neuroanatomy is sufficient to start. Fur-
best detected in sagittal magnetic resonance imaging
ther information can be found in neuroanatomy text-
(MRI) images. The choroid plexi in the walls of the
books and atlases, which should be consulted during the
lateral, III and IV ventricles develop from evaginations
neuropathological examination  to  acquire a  more
containing vessels and modified ependyma (telea choroi-
 detailed anatomical knowledge. This knowledge also
dea) into the wall of the appropriate neural tube vesicles.
needs to include the functional connections between
Thus when we transversely section the brain we can
certain structures, which are essential for the interpreta-
always identify some part of the ventricular system.
tion of secondary changes.
Keeping in mind a three-dimensional concept of the
ventricular system, as illustrated in Fig. 1.1, in each
The CNS on external gross examination
section we can thus correlate the shape of the ventricular
system with the corresponding level of the CNS and also
External views of the brain are illustrated in Fig. 1.2.
identify the relevant anatomical landmarks.
Dorsally the cerebral cortex of the cerebral hemi-
spheres is separated along the midline by the longitudi-
1.1.2 Major anatomical regions of interest
nal cerebral fissure and divided into frontal, occipital,
In this section we introduce the most diagnostically
 parietal and temporal lobes, the vermis of the cerebel-
useful neuroanatomical sites of the CNs. The major
lum and the brainstem. Ventral and lateral views illus-
regions of the CNS are the cerebral cortex and associated
trate the olfactory bulb and tract extending into a
white matter, basal nuclei, thalamus/hypothalamus,
bulbous structure, the piriform lobe representing the
General neuropathology  3
olfactory bulb
tall
culomotor nerve
B
medulla
pons
3B
4A
4B
5A 5B  6A 6B 7A 7B
7
Fig. 1.2 Brain as seen externally. Dorsal (A), ventral (B), medial (C) and lateral (D) view indicating the transverse section levels shown
in the subsequent figures (Figs.1.3-1.7).
most ancient part of the cortex (paleocortex) which is
is stained black This is usually how brain sections are
demarcated from the neocortex by the rhinal fissure. We
presented in a brain aflas and is somewhat remi-
need to recognize the optic chiasm, the pituitary stalk
 niscent of T2W MRI images (see explanation below).
and the oculomotor nerves arising from the midbrain.
On transverse sections of the forebrain we can roughly
The pons is the ventral bulge of white matter connecting
discern three divisions according to the subcortical
 the two cerebellar hemispheres, and also on the ventral
structures we can see: the frontal one-third containing
aspect of the brainstem are the prominent pyramids,
the largest extent of the basal nuclei (Fig. 1.3), the middle
which are white matter tracts connecting the forebrain
 one-third containing the thalamus/hypothalamus (Fig.
with the spinal cord. A medial view (Fig. 1.2C) following
1.4) and the caudal one-third containing the midbrain
sagittal sectioning reveals the details of the ventricular
(Fig. 1.5). Note that the caudal parts of the basal nuclei
system (as explained above), the corpus callosum, the 
 overlap with the thalamus and the caudal parts of the
interthalamic adhesion, the midbrain, brainstem and
thalamus with the midbrain. Caudally to the forebrain
cerebellum. Fig. 1.2 D illustrates the levels at which the
we identify the brainstem, covered on its dorsal aspect
brain has been transversely sectioned to produce Fig.
by the cerebellum (Fig. 1.6 and Fig. 1.7). While studying
1.3, Fig. 1.4, Fig. 1.5, Fig. 1.6 and Fig. 1.7.
the following transverse sections, keep the three-
 dimensional structure of the ventricular system in mind
The CNS in transverse sections
as the major feature for orientation to the major ana-
Serial transverse sections are illustrated in Fig. 1.3,
tomical landmarks. In Fig. 1.3, Fig. 1.4, Fig. 1.5, Fig. 1.6
Fig. 1.4, Fig. 1.5, Fig. 1.6 and Fig. 1.7. These brain slices
and Fig. 1.7 the colored drawing of the lateral view of
have been stained to enhance the contrast between white
the ventricular system (Fig. 1.1B) is shown indicating
and gray matter: the myelin content of the white matter
the level of sectioning.
4  Veterinary Neuropathology
tric
olfactory
peduncle
claustrun
hinal fissure
putamen
globus pallidu
opticchiasm
A
olfactory tract
Fig. 1.3 A and B: Transverse sections frontal lobe and basal nuclei. Levels of sectioning shown in schematic drawing of the ventricles
from Fig. 1.1.
Area of the basal nuclei (Fig. 1.3)
Area of the thalamus (Fig. 1.4)
· Section A transversely slices the prefrontal area;
 Both sections show the lateral ventricles and the third
the ventricles at this level consist of very narrow
ventricle. Section B slices through the lateral ventri-
canals in the olfactory bulb (not visible). Section B
cles at the level where they curve back ventrally and
transversely slices the rostral part of the lateral
rostrally; thus we see a dorsal and a ventral part. In
ventricles.
addition to the lateral ventricles we see the third ven-
● Section A, ventral aspect, illustrates the olfactory bulb
 tricle in the midline with - in section A slicing through
and associated tract (thin layer of white matter on the
the ring-shaped ventricle - a dorsal and a ventral
 outside) extending caudally into the piriform lobe, a
portion.
prominent bulbous structure best seen on ventral
· We can still see cortex, capsula interna and corpus
views (Fig 1.2B).
callosum. In the wall of the lateral ventricle we see the
● The cerebral cortex is the gray matter on the surface
caudal extension (the “tail") of the caudate nucleus;
 of the hemispheres folded into gyri separated by
lateral to the capsula interna the caudal portions of
sulci above the subcortical white matter. It has many
the other basal nuclei. Section A shows the full extent
functions associated with conscious perception of
of the piriform lobes which contain the amygdala,
sensory input, voluntary control of movement and
nuclear areas belonging to the limbic system.
behavior.
· In section B the hippocampus appears, the par-
· The basal nuclei consist of the caudate nucleus as a
ticular shape of which results from inward folding
large convex structure protruding in the lateral ven-
of the cerebral cortex in the medial wall of the lateral
tricle and the putamen/palidum/claustrum, distinct
ventricle. Envisage it as a sausage-shaped structure
gray matter areas on the lateral side of the capsula
following the half moon of the lateral ventricle. At
interna. They all play a role in the control of motor
this level the hippocampus is exposed in its dorsal
function as part of the extrapyramidal system.
and ventral aspect. The hippocampus is part of
· Along the midline ventrally and bulging into the
 the limbicsystem and plays an important role in
lateral ventricles are the septal nuclei, which belong to
memory.
the limbic system and are involved in emotion.
· The fornix forms flattened bands of white matter
● The corpus callosum is a large white matter tract con-
 attached to and containing the major connections of
 necting both hemispheres.
the hippocampus. They appear to be floating in the
· The capsula interna, a wide white mafter tract,
lateral ventricles.
bisects the deep gray matter nuclei of the hemi-
· The gray matter in the centre is the thalamus, the
spheres. It contains most connections from and to the
major relay station for all sensory input, before it is
cerebrum.
 projected in the cortex. The thalamus consists of
· The rostral commissure is a horseshoe-shaped band
 many nuclear areas, some of which are anatomically
 of white matter connecting both hemispheres
quite distinct, notably the geniculate bodies (see
ventrally.
 below). Other prominent structures are the habenula
General neuropathology
optic tract
ygdala
hippocal
hird ventricle
audalco
lateral ve
transverse fibers
R
of the pons 
B
Fig. 1.5 A and B: Transverse sections at the lel of the
Fig. 1.4 A and B: Transverse sections at the level of the
midbrain.
thalamus.
protruding medially into the third ventricle; they play
ally terminates at the lateral geniculate body, the
a role in control of circadian rhythms, emotional and
primary visual centre in the thalamus.
social behavior and movement.
 In section B of the thalamus we can see how the crura
+ The ventral extension of the gray matter on either side
cerebri are starting to form from the internal capsule.
of the ventral portion of the third ventricle is the
The crura cerebri contain motor fibers, which con-
hypothalamus which regulates endocrine and vege-
tinue into the spinal cord.
tative functions. Ventrally is the pituitary gland (not
Area of the midbrain (Fig. 1.5)
present), attached to the hypothalamus via the
infundibulum. When the latter is removed we can
 The ventricular system is limited here to the mesen-
look directly into the third ventricle from the ventral
cephalic aqueduct, around which the midbrain
surface.
developed. The lateral ventricles in the surround-
+
 The optic tracts are the caudal and flattened exten-
 ing occipital lobes reach their maximal size at this
sions of the optic nerves and optic chiasm (easily seen
level.
on the ventral view), which can be recognized as dis-
 This area contains the midbrain with, in its rostral
tinct white matter structures; the optic tract eventu-
part, the attached caudal extensions of the thalamus,
6  Veterinary Neuropathology
the lateral and medial geniculate bodies, which are
involved in visual and acoustic function respec-
tively. Section A shows the medial geniculate bodies.
 Note that the forebrain is no longer merged together
with the subcortical structures: the midbrain is
separated from the hemispheres by a meningeal
space.
cerebellar co
· In the lateral ventricle we can see the major extent of
the hippocampus, which now appears as a continu-
ous oval structure because it is sliced in its caudal
part.
· The colliculi are four rounded protrusions on the roof
fourth
of the midbrain and are associated with visual and
acoustic orientation.
· The crura cerebri (corticospinal tract) at the base
cerebellar white
matter
of the midbrain in the first section are the continua-
tion of the internal capsule containing connections
danial nerve
nuclei
pyramid
between forebrain and brainstem. In section B, these
tracts traverse the pons.
+ The red nucleus and the substantia nigra are promi-
nent well demarcated nuclei in the ventral part of the
 midbrain, which play an important role in control of
motor function (extrapyramidal system).
● In the caudal portion of the midbrain we discern the
 transverse fibers of the pons, a transverse protrusion
at the base of the brainstem, and white matter con-
nection between both cerebellar hemispheres. It also
lateralrece
contains the large pontine nuclei, the relay station
between forebrain and cerebellum.
Cranial nerve
Trigeminal
nuclei
 Spinal tract 
Area of the pons, medulla and cerebellum (Fig. 1.6)
reticular formation
B
pyramid
● The ventricular system expands into the fourth ven-
Fig. 1.6 A and B: Transverse sections through brainstem and
tricle seen in sections A and B. In section B it has a
cerebellum.
lateral extension on either side (the lateral recesses).
+ The cerebellar cortex is a strongly convoluted struc-
ture. It plays an important role in coordination of
movement. The center of the cerebellum consists of
white matter, and the embedded cerebellar nuclei.
Area of medulla and spinal cord (Fig. 1.7)
● In the brainstem, white and gray matter are intimately
mixed. The brainstem contains cranial nerve nuclei,
· In section A we can see the thin roof of the fourth
which are responsible for motor and sensory function
ventricle: the medullary velum. The ventricle becomes
of the head, e.g. chewing, swallowing, movement of
again surrounded by parenchyma in section B. At the
the lips. On either side of the midline is the reticular
level of the cord the ventricular system assumes a
formation, which plays an important role in control-
tubular configuration: the central canal.
ling the level of consciousness.
· Further prominent gray matter structures in the
· Further useful white matter landmarks are the caudal
medulla are the nuclei of the dorsal columns, the
cerebellar peduncle, the pyramids and the spinal tract
relay station for conscious proprioceptive impulses
 of the trigeminal nerve. The pyramids are prominent
from the spinal cord, and the olivary nuclei, connect-
triangular white matter tracts at the base on either
ing the cerebellum with the extrapyramidal system,
side of the midline. They are the continuation of the
on either side of the midline just above the pyramids.
crura cerebri containing motor connections between
The latter are quite large, triangular and can be easily
brain and spinal cord.
recognized.
General neuropathology
exemplified by the different sizes and shapes of neurons
and their arrangement in layers and nuclei. The basic
histological features of neurons as well as glial cells are,
however, very similar throughout the CNS.
Neurons are generally the largest cells and are dis-
tinguished by their cytoplasmic content of clumps of
Medullary velum
chromatin, called Nissl substance, formed by aggrega-
 tanial nerve nuclei
tions of rough endoplasmic reticulum with ribosomes.
 In some neuron subtypes (e.g- pontine nuclei, inferior
olivary nuclei), the Nissl substance is normally mar-
ginated (not to be confused with chromatolyis, discussed
in Section 1.3). The neuropil is the tissue between
Fourth
ventricle
olives
neurons formed of countless neuronal cell processes
(dendrites and axons) and synapses, which cannot be
A
pyramid
visualized on hematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FF-PE) sections.
Dorsal column nuclei
 In the neuropil are glial cells (oligodendrocytes, astro-
Fourth ventricle
cytes and microglia), of which there are almost ten
times the number of neurons. On routine HE stain,
we usually only see their nuclei. Oligodendroglia have
small, strictly round and hyperchromatic nuclei resem-
 bling nuclei of lymphocytes (Fig. 1.8A, small arrows),
 and their processes form myelinated internodal seg-
ments around axons (Fig. 1.9E,G). They are much
R
reticular fomation
more numerous in white matter. Astrocytes have round
dorsal horm
to oval nuclei that are larger, more irregular and paler
than those of oligodendrocytes with less dense chro-
matin (Fig. 1.8A, thick arrows). The astrocytes and
canal
 their processes basically occupy any remaining space
 in the neuropil, cover the surface of neurons and syn-
hom
apses, and form a continuous superficial layer (glial
limiting membrane) of endfeet processes under the pia
C
mater of the CNS. Either oligodendroglia and/or astro-
Fig. 1.7 A, B and C: Transverse sections through brainstem and
cytes can normally be located peripherally around
spinal cord.
neuronal cell bodies in the process of neuronal satel-
litosis. Microglia are small, thin, elongated cells without
●  In the cord, the gray matter is in the center with dorsal
apparent cytoplasm in both white and gray matter
and ventral horns containing neurons responsible for
and comprise up to 15% of all glial cells.
movement of the limbs; especially important are the
The gray matter is densely vascularized. The blood
cervical and lumbar swellings associated with the fore
vessels in both the gray and white matter consist of
and hind limbs.
  p s  n   
· The white matter on the outside of the gray matter
impermeable junctions, covered by a basement mem-
contains all connections between brain and spinal
brane and surrounded by pericytes and the endfeet of
cord neurons.
astrocytic processes. Together these structures form the
· Note also the spinal nerve roots as the origin of the
 blood-brain barrier (BBB). Large arteries penetrating
peripheral nerves; the dorsal nerve roots also contain
the cortex have a perivascular space, called the Virchow-
dorsal root ganglia.
Robin (VR) space, formed by an extension of the
arachnoid membrane, and which is continuous with
1.1.3 Histological neuroanatomy
the subarachnoid space. The VR space is no longer
Basic histological structure of the gray
present at the level of capillaries and its function is
matter
unknown.
There is a huge diversity in the histological appear-
 In the peripheral nervous system (PNS), the gray
ance of the various anatomical areas of gray matter
matter consists of ganglia (sensory and autonomic) and
8VeterinaryNeuropathology
Fig. 1.8 Microanatomy of gray matter. A: Dog. Cerebral cortex with several neurons and glial cells, of which only the nuclei are visible.
a uaamiaq aeds aui jo ison (smone ahiel) saose auo jap iahiel au (smoe eus) saopuanoo anu yip leus
neurons consists of neuropil (stars) and blood vessels. HE. B: Schematic drawing of gray matter structure with neurons (green), astro-
cytes (blue) making contact with neurons, blood vessels, oligodendrocytes and meninges. Oligodendrocytes (red) make contact with
neuronal perikarya and particularly with the axons, where their processes form myelin sheaths. The surface is covered by meninges.
C: Dog. Spinal ganglion. Neurons are surrounded by satellite cells. HE.
Fig. 1.9 Microanatomy of white matter. A: Dog. Longitudinal section of corpus callosum. HE. B: Dog. Transverse spinal cord section.
The structure of the fibers of central white matter is discernible. Oligodendroglial nuclei in corpus callosum aligned in rows. HE. C:
Dog. Longitudinal section of peripheral nerve. Note fishbone structure of myelin sheaths due to the Schmidt-Lantermann clefts. HE. D:
Dog. Peripheral nerve cross-section showing individual axons surrounded by myelin sheath. HE. E: Schematic drawing of white matter
structure with oligodendrocytes (red) covering axons (green) with myelin sheath segments separated by nodes of Ranvier, astrocytes
(blue) and blood vessels. F: Schematic drawing of Schwann cell wrapping around an axon. G: More detailed drawing of CNS white 
General neuropathology
other less well demarcated accumulations of neurons
(e.g. Auerbach's and Meissner's myenteric plexus in
the gut). These ganglionic neurons are each surrounded
by a layer of specialized Schwann cells called satellite
cells.
Basic histological structure of the white
matter
The white matter consists largely of tightly packed
axons surrounded by myelin sheaths. On HE sections
the myelin stains dark pink, although it is normally dif-
ficult to identify individual axons and their myelin
sheaths. The sheaths are produced by oligodendrocytes,
s e u sxe a pe sssd i dem 
50μm
fashion creating segments of myelin called internodes,
which are interrupted by the nodes of Ranvier. One oli-
godendrocyte can produce up to 60 internodes on
regional axons. In the white matter, most oligodendro-
cytes are arranged in longitudinal rows along axonal
CSF
tracts (Fig. 1.9). The white matter also contains many
astrocytes, whose processes cover the axons at the nodes
of Ranvier.
In the peripheral nerves, the myelin sheaths are pro-
 duced by Schwann cells, with each cell contributing only
one internode. Thinner non-myelinated axons are also
wrapped by Schwann cell processes. The peripheral
Fig. 1.10 CSF spaces. A: Schematic drawing of CSF flow (arrows).
CSF produced by choroid plexus (red) flows caudally through
nerves also contain connective tissue with the endone-
urial fibroblasts with their collagenous processes sepa-
the ventrides, and leaves the fourth ventricle into the arach-
noidal space. B: Dog. Choroid plexus with vascular stroma
rating individual axons, the perineurium formed by
covered by epithelial cells. HE. C: Dog. Fourth ventricle. Ciliated 
 modified Schwann cells isolating groups of axons as fas-
ependymal cells lining the ventricdle. HE. D: Schematic drawing of
ciclesand fibroblast-derived epineurium wrapped around
CSF resorption via the arachnoidal granulations protruding into
all the fascicles forming the peripheral nerve. In histo-
the venous sinuses (DM, dura mater; CV, bony cranial vault; CSF
logical sections, the individual nerve fibers can be more
cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid space; B, brain lined
 easily identified than in the CNS. In longitudinal FF-PE
by pia mater [yellow]). E: Dog. Meninges over the spinal cord d,
sections the normal myelin sheaths often exhibit a “fish-
dura mater or pachymeninges: a, arachnoid membrane with
multiple trabecula: p. pia mater immediately overlying the
bone” structure due to Schmidt-Lanterman's clefts within
neuropil. HE. The space between dura and arachnoidea is
the myelin internodes (Fig. 1.9C).
arteficial.
Intra- and extraventricular space and
The ventricular walls are generally lined by a single
cerebrospinal fluid
layer of ciliated ependymal cells. The choroid plexus con-
The leptomeninges form the outer (arachnoid mem-
sists of a vascular stroma covered by epithelial cells
brane) and inner (pia mater) border of the cerebrospinal
of ependymal origin evaginated into specific sites
fluid (CSF)-filled subarachnoid space around the brain
within the ventricular system. CSF produced by the
and spinal cord (Fig. 1.10). Surrounding the leptome-
choroid plexus through filtration from the blood flows
ninges is the pachymeninges or dura mater separated
caudally within the ventricular system and gains access
from the arachnoid membrane by the sudural space. In
to the extraventricular subarachnoid space through
the calvarium the inner periosteum is formed by the
the lateral foramina within the fourth ventricle. CSF is
dura mater but in the spinal cord the dura mater is sepa-
reabsorbed into the blood through the arachnoidal villi
rated from the vertebral bodies.
 protruding in the extracerebral veins and sinuses.
Fig. 1.11 Necropsy technique. Lateral (A) and dorsal (B) view of canine skull with lines marked in order (1, 2, 3 and then 4) for cuts
using an autopsy saw, for partly removing the skull to easily access the brain : #1, 2 and 3 are to remove the frontal sinuses when
present and #4 to remove the dorsal surface of the cranial vault. C: Removing the dura. D: Cutting the tentorium. E: Cutting cranial
nerves with head upsidedown. F: Lumbar vertebral body indicating the site of the cut (using a Stryker saw) starting at the articular
process (arrows) and extending down at an angle of about 30 degrees bilaterally resulting in a dorsal laminectomy and exposure of
Cutting spinal nerves.
General neuropathology
the cranial nerves and their foramina to detect any rel-
1.2 Neuropathological techniques
evant abnormalities. Sample the trigeminal (Gasserian)
1.2.1 Necropsy techniques
 ganglia, and in ruminants the rete mirabile caroticum,
which are both easily accessible at the base of the skull
 The CNS is protected by a solid bony calvarium and
lateral to the pituitary fossa. Examine the whole brain
by the vertebral bodies. Thus, the skull and vertebral
for external gross lesions after removal and before fixa-
column have to be opened by considerable mechanical
tion. Further detailed examination follows transverse
force to access the delicate CNS tissue. The latter is very
sectioning of the brain.
soft and friable and should always be handled with care
to avoid the many possible resultant artifactual changes.
The brain therefore needs to be minimally touched,
Removal of the spinal cord
pressed or stretched during removal. Additionally, the
Expose the dorsal aspect of the spinal vertebrae by
spinal cord should not be folded or bent, nor should
removing the paraspinal muscles. In small dogs and
 excessive pressure be placed on nerve roots during exci-
cats use rongeurs to remove the bone of the dorsal arch at
 sion from the spinal canal. Post-mortem degeneration
the lumbosacral junction until you can see the cauda
 progresses rapidly within a few hours in nervous tissue.
equina. Then, proceed cranially and remove the roof of
Thus, longer postmortem intervals considerably add to
each consecutive vertebra by cutting the lamina laterally
a range of artifactual changes.
on both sides without touching the cord (Fig. 1.11F-1).
In large dogs, use an electric Stryker saw and perform a
dorsal laminectomy by cutting through the lateral artic-
Removal of the brain
ular facets as an external guide, at approximately 30
Decapitate the animal by cutting ventrodorsally through
degrees, to remove the dorsal arch and upper part of 
the exposed soft tissues affer extending the neck, opening
 the vertebral arch. Once the cord is exposed, clamp the
the atlanto-occipital joint, separating the brain from the
meninges over the cauda equina with a forceps and pull
spinal cord before removing the head completely.
it gently horizontally, then, segment by segment in a
Remove all skin and muscle from the head to expose the
 cranial direction, cut the spinal nerve roots on each side
 calvarium. Remove the dorsal cranial vault by using a
with a scalpel blade or scissors, progressively lifting the
saw (e.g. electric Stryker saw or Dremmel high-speed
cord (which remains confined within the dura mater)
drill) cutting along the lines, as indicated in Fig. 1.11A
out of the spinal canal. When required for subsequent
and B, while avoiding contact with the underlying brain
 histological examination remove the dorsal root ganglia,
tissue. In very small animals, one can use a pair of
which occur as tan, nodular thickenings of the nerve
 rongeurs, starting at the medial side of one orbit until
roots.
the dura mater is exposed; than remove the bone towards
 In large animals, suspend the eviscerated animal
the foramen magnum. Always try to minimize touch-
head down with the hind limbs maximally spread. Cut
ing the surface of the brain by cutting outwards from
 the vertebral column parasagitally with an electric saw
the brain. Then incise and remove the dura mater, falx
 to leave the cord intact and avoid damaging the nerve
and tentorium by using forceps and scissors or a scalpel
roots (at least on one side). Alternatively use a band
(Figs 1.11C,D).
saw after removal of the vertebrae from the carcass and
Then turn the head upsidedown, tilt to one side
again cut the vertebral bodies parasagittally. Remove the
and shake gently to detach the brain from the skull
 cord by cutting the spinal nerve roots on the remaining
and expose the cranial nerves; cut these cranial nerves
intact side of the canal. Avoid excessive bending of the
transversely on the exposed side as close as possible to
labeled spinal cord segments for immersion fixation
their exit foramina (Fig. 1.11E). Repeat for the other
by placing labeled sections in a large rectangular flat
side.
container.
Keeping the head upsidedown, hold the nose and
Depending on the neurological diagnosis, evaluate
 shake gently; cut the remaining cranial nerves including
the vertebral canal and intervertebral foramina for any
the optic nerve and infundibulum and any other menin-
lesions that might cause stenosis; examine each interver-
 geal adhesions; detach the olfactory bulbs by arching the
tebral disc sagittally and the associated ligaments within
scissors or a wooden tongue depressor gently between
the floor of the vertebral canal.
bone and brain tissue; then shake gently to extract the
brain completely.
Evaluation of the neuromuscular system
Immediately after removal of the brain always examine
In neurologically  well documented cases  in  which
the cranial vault, meninges, pituitary gland and fossa,
neuromuscular disease is suspected, clinical biopsies of
12  Veterinary Neuropathology
muscle and nerve, or at postmortem, selected tissues
reexamination if necessary. Never make random cuts.
are sampled and processed for appropriate evaluation
Lay out the brain slices in their consecutive anatomical
(e.g. frozen sections for histochemistry, resin-embedding
order for macroscopic inspection and for selection of
for semi-thin and subsequent thin transmission electron
areas for histological examination. Following autopsy
microscope (TEM) sections, teased fiber preparations
and brain cutting affer fixation, all regions must be
for examining individual nerve fibers) in specialized
examined (cerebral cortex, corpus striatum, thalamus,
neuromuscular laboratories.
hippocampus, midbrain, cerebellum, brainstem and
 For initial histological examination, small pieces of
spinal cord). Pay attention to the following points, par-
muscle and nerve can be immersion-fixed in formalin
ticularly when MRI is available:
and embedded in paraffin. The orientation and quality
of such nerve and muscle samples can be optimized by
 Check the ventricular system for stenosis, dilatation,
attaching them (e.g. sufuring) outstretched on a solid
 compression and exudate. Examine the choroid plexi
loddns (snieiedde Asdonq aieu e 1o pieoqpieo 3a)
for swelling and congestion.
while fixing. For most effective evaluation by any tech-
 During the entire examination look for alterations of
nique, it is most important to include longitudinal as
all structures in size (e.g. aplasia, hypoplasia, atrophy.
well as transversely oriented sections from muscle and
swelling), shape (e.g. cerebellar coning) and symme-
nerve samples.
try of both sides of the brain.
· Look for space-occupying changes (e.g. a tumor,
Fixation procedures
abscess).
For routine diagnostic neuropathological evaluation,
Other questions to consider are:
immersion fixation of brain or spinal cord in 10:1 v/v
 of 10% buffered formalin solution to tissue is optimal.
· Is there loss of substance (e.g. a cavity)?
A single sheet of absorbent paper between the brain and
· Is there a change of color (e.g. red indicates hemor-
the bottom of the container will prevent adherence of
rhage, white or yellow necrosis)?
the brain and severe artifactual changes. Adequate
· Is there a change of consistency (hardening or
immersion fixation of brains in 10% formalin takes
softening)?
between 5 and 10 days for small and large animal brains
· Are changes well demarcated from surrounding
 respectively. For specialized laboratory techniques other
normal tissue?
fixatives or procedures (e.g. freeze drying) may be used.
 What is the pattern of distribution of the changes
Certain histological techniques require unfixed tissue,
(single, multiple, bilateral or unilateral, anatomical
 snap frozen and sectioned in a cryostat. Such frozen sec-
localization)?
tions have an inferior morphological resolution as com-
 pared with FF-PE sections.
Often one may find very litle change on macroscopic
 For TEM or scanning electron microscope (SEM)
examination of the brain even when severe histological
small pieces of fresh tissue can be immersion-fixed in
lesions are present.
buffered 3% glutaraldehyde, although more specialized
ultrastructural studies require perfusion fixation for
Sampling for histological examination
optimal preservation of detail.
When a definitive localization is suggested by neurologi-
cal examination and confirmed by MRl, the examina-
1.2.2 Brain sectioning, macroscopic
tion can be concentrated on that specific anatomical
inspection and sampling for histology
area. However, representative sampling is the standard
approach if no macroscopic lesions are present.
Macroscopic inspection
Neurological disease is almost never the result of a small
 Section the brain and cord only affer an appropriate
isolated single lesion except in the spinal cord. Small
fixation time. Use a very sharp knife to avoid compres-
lesions are clinically often silent and even large lesions
sion during sectioning. Specialized wide-blade brain
can remain unnoticed. When lesions of the CNS are the
knives are not necessary but do ensure a smoother cut
cause of neurological signs they are usually large or
surface which can be important for optimal photogra-
widespread. Still, often only specific regions are affected
phy. Always use the same standardized procedure: with
m ndde oss e i anp  po ui pu
the exception of very specific indications, make only
appropriate sampling is needed. Thus, where there are
transverse 3-4 mm thick slices starting at the frontal lobe
no grossly detectable lesions identified we aim to
and ending at the medulla so that one can always iden-
examine all the major divisions of the CNS histologi-
tify anatomical landmarks and reconstruct the brain for
cally. These (depicted in Fig. 1.12) include: the area of
General neuropathology
13
the basal nuclei (roughly rostral one third of the fore-
tions so that you consistently recognize where you are
brain), the thalamus (roughly in the middle of the fore-
anatomically. For documented cases of primary cerebel-
brain), the midbrain (roughly the caudal third), the
lar disease we recommend sagittally sectioning the
cerebellum-pontine area and the medulla oblongata.
vermis prior to transverse sectioning of the cerebellar
The first two areas include cerebral cortex. Make sure to
hemispheres.
include some hippocampus in the section of thalamus.
A somewhat more extensive survey additionally includes
Histological technique
 occipital and frontal cortex which would be included,
e.g. with either blindness or behavioral or/and cognitive
The routine technique consists of paraffin embedding of
deficits respectively detected clinically.
the formalin-fixed tissues. Briefly, fixed tissue samples
The spinal cord should be always examined when
are dehydrated in graded ethanols, cleared in xylene
 there are relevant clinical deficits. A representative survey
and infiltrated with paraffin. Sections are cut 3-5 μm
of the cord in the dog and cat includes at least one
thick from the paraffin blocks and stained. The standard
transverse and longitudinal section from each of the
routine stain is HE, which allows the detection of
following segments: upper cervical segments C1 and C4,
lesions in nearly all cases. Special histochemical and
cervical intumescence (C7), upper thoracic ( T4), lower
immunocytochemical stains are used to define and char-
thoracic (T12), lumbar intumescence (L5) and sacral
acterize the detected lesions more precisely. Reliable
segments (S1).
methods are: Nissl stain (cresyl Echt violet) for neurons,
 Depending on the size of the brain and the capabili-
luxol fast blue for myelin (best combined with HE),
ties of the histology laboratory, several alternative
Bielschowsky silver-based stain for axons, trichrome
 approaches are possible. Nowadays few laboratories can
(Gomorri) stain for connective tissue. However, special
process full transverse sections. Therefore, from the
silver impregnations for neurons and glial cells are often
large brain slices, take alternating halves; e.g. basal nuclei
difficult to reproduce and extremely cumbersome. Much
left, thalamus right. Always routinely mark one side of
more specific and reliable is the demonstration of cell-
the brain sections, either the left or right side, with an
specific antigens with immunohistochemical labeling
incision. These halves can be further divided in order
by relevant antibodies. The latter are referred to in the
to fit the size of the tissue cassettes; however, always
section on basic tissue reaction patferns. For special
standardize the system you use to cut the smaller sec-
 purposes, fresh unfixed tissues are snap-frozen but the
Fig. 1.12 Representative sampling. Serial sections of a fixed canine brain. The red boxes include the minimal areas of the brain which
must be trimmed in for histological processing. Appropriate levels of the spinal cord (green box) should be included whenever
possible.
 14  Veterinary Neuropathology
morphological resolution of such frozen sections is of
efficiency of this process is greatly enhanced by the pres-
much lower quality than paraffin sections.
ence of segmented myelin sheath internodes allowing
More precise structural resolution can be obtained by
saltatory conduction across these segments.
resin embedding (in which there is no fat extraction) for
A variety of molecular mechanisms have been
transmission electron microscopy. From such material
unraveled, which can impair structural and functional
so-called semi-thin sections can be cut and stained with
integrity of neurons. Two important ones are excito-
toluidine blue for microscope study.
toxicity and oxidative change. Neuronal excitotoxicity
depends on the excessive sustained release from neurons
Examining microsopic slides histologically
of certain excitatory neurotransmitters (e.g- glutamate,
At the microscopic level, scan all sections systematically,
 aspartate) and their decreased removal by astrocytes
most effectively initially with low- and then medium-
in the CNS in response to such factors as ischemia,
power magnification. In view of the great anatomical
anoxia or hypoglycemia. Subsequent binding of exces-
variations between the different regions, familiarity with
sive glutamate to various types of ionotropic receptors
the normal histological structure of all these regions
(e.g. for N-methyl-d-aspartate, NMDA) on neurons
helps to detect lesions. This familiarity comes only with
 results in transmembrane ionic fluxes with rising intra-
experience, best started in a mentored one-on-one
cellular levels of calcium leading to activation of pro-
setting. When scanning slides it helps to consciously and
teolytic enzymes, which then damage cell organelles.
constantly register microanatomical details. The mor-
Acidophilic neuronal necrosis is considered to be the
phology of reactions of the different cell types to injury
final common pathway resulting from neurotransmitter-
is described in Section 1.3.
induced neuronal excitotoxicity. Neurons are also par-
ticularly prone to oxidative damage, a final common
1.3 Basic tissue reaction patterns
S n      
During respiration mitochondria produce superoxide
The wide range of neuropathological entities in animals
anions which, under normal circumstances, are reduced
and man is due mainly to both the anatomical complex-
by superoxide dismutases (SOD) to HzO2. Under patho-
 ity and to inherent differences in vulnerability to injury
logical circumstances H,O, can be converted to hydroxyl
 in different areas of the nervous system. Cells in the CNS
(OH) radicals, which are highly reactive, particularly
can mount a relatively limited number of reactions in
with lipids (in which the nervous system is very rich)
response to injury: the same basic reactions can occur
inducing membrane damage and ultimately tissue
in different anatomical locations and combinations,
destruction. Another class of reactive oxygen species
thus giving the impression of a large variety of reaction
includes the nitric oxides (NO) generated by nitric oxide
 patterns. As with any other organ system in the body,
synthetases. Reaction of NO with H,O, can lead to the
the CNS is subject to pathologic changes depending on
formation of the highly toxic peroxynitrite. Cells have
genetic background (endogeneous causes: disease sus-
developed defense systems such as SOD against such
ceptibility, inborn degenerative diseases) of an individ-
toxic events. Breakdown of the equilibrium between
ual, and external causes (exogeneous: e.g. trauma, viral,
 oxygen radicals and such defense mechanisms leads to
bacterial or protozoal infections, and metabolic-toxic
cell pathology.
agents). We will briefly discuss the reactive changes in
A wide spectrum of neuronal changes to injury has
the major CNS cell populations of neurons, oligodendro-
been described but here we will describe only a few
 cytes, astrocytes, ependymal/choroid plexus cells, micro-
common patterns.
 glial cells and blood vessels to injury.
Intraneuronal inclusions
1.3.1 Reactions of neurons to injury
Intracytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusion bodies,
Microscopically the nervous system consists in part of
often with distinctive characteristic morphological, bio-
neurons whose axons can extend over enormous dis-
 chemical and ultrastructural features, can accumulate in
tances. This creates the problem of neurons having to
neurons/glial cells as a result of certain degenerative,
provide metabolic support in dendritic and axonal pro-
metabolic and viral diseases, and have often received the
cesses of the cell that are far removed from the peri-
 names of their discoverers (e.g. Negri and Lafora bodies).
karyon. Neurons are also highly differentiated and
Their usually distinctive morphology intracellular
functionally specialized cells, which are not capable of
localization (intranuclear versus intracytoplasmic or
regeneration to any significant extent. Another special
both) and biochemical and ultrastructural composition
feature of the CNS is the generation of action potentials
can be diagnostically important for specific diseases
and conduction of such signals along the axons. The
(Fig. 1.13A). Since most neurons are postmitotic, are
General neuropathology
Fig. 1.13 A: Dog with rabies virus infection. Cerebellum. Multiple intraneuronal intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Negri bodies) in
Purkinje cells. HE. B: Sheep with scrapie. Brainstem. Multiple intracytoplasmic intraneuronal vacuoles. HE.
usually not replaced and have no exocytic capability,
neuronal or glial cytoplasmic storage of metabolites
within hyperplastic lysosomes as a result of genetic or
acquired lysosomal enzyme defects can be quite spec-
 tacular in the CNS (see Chapter 8). Empty cytoplasmic
vacuoles in the neuronal cell body (Fig. 1.13B) and its
processes are characteristic of prion-induced transmis-
sible spongiform encephalopathies in animals, e.g.
scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy. However,
they may occur in limited numbers also as incidental
finding in normal cattle (e.g. in the red nucleus).
 Eosinophilic inclusion bodies (pseudo-Negri bodies)
 of unknown significance are often found in neurons of
the lateral geniculate body and hippocampus in cats and
occasionally in other species. Similar small inclusions
can occur in thalamic and cerebellar Purkinje cells in
Fig. 1.14 Sheep with copper deficiency. Spinal cord. Various
dogs. Widespread neuronal intranuclear inclusions were
stages of chromatolysis in ventral horn motor neurons. HE.
reported in a horse, resembling intranuclear neuronal
inclusion body disease in humans.
Dark brown neuromelanin granules are normally
ciency. It is also the result of a retrograde axonal reaction
found in the hypothalamus and sometimes in other
 to nerve root injury, e.g. affer brachial plexus avulsion.
neurons but rarely to the extent that it becomes grossly
The histochemical stain, cresyl Echt violet, is very useful
visible as in certain human neuroanatomical regions.
for visualization of the Nissl substance dispersion. This
 process can be either functionally and morphologically
Chromatolysis
reversible with treatment or eventually lead to neuronal
Central chromatolysis is a frequent reactive response
necrosis depending on the cause and severity of injury.
 in neurons. Histologically, there is an initial swelling of
The process of chromatolysis should not be confused
the cell body and processes, perinuclear dispersion of 
with the normal morphology of cranial nerve nuclei
Nissl substance with loss of ribosomes from the rough
(e.g. V, Vll) which normally have only a peripheral rim
endoplasmic reticulum (RER), a thin intact cytoplasmic
of Nissl substance but a centrally placed nucleus.
border of Nissl substance and peripheral margination
and flattening of the nucleus (Fig. 1.14). It can be com-
Acidophilic neuronal necrosis
monly seen in lower motor neurons of the spinal cord
Cell death of neurons can be either necrotic or
in ruminants with postnatally acquired copper defi-
non-necrotic. Necrosis is solely due to external factors
16
6  Veterinary Neuropathology
Global ischemia results in acidophilic neuronal necrosis
in specific neuroanatomical sites: cerebral cortex, hip-
 pocampus and Purkinje cells. Anatomically defined sites
of selective neuronal susceptibility to ischemia as in the
pyramidal neurons of the CA1 and CA2 sectors may be
explained by their high concentration of dendritic gluta-
mate receptors.
Apoptosis
 In non-necrotic cell death such as apoptosis, components
of the regulation of the cell cycle control the events
leading to programmed cell death. Neuronal apoptosis
is particularly common during fetal CNS development,
in degenerative and some viral diseases. The two most
important categories of molecules regulating apoptosis
are the Bcl2 family and the caspases. Morphologically it
is characterized by chromatin condensation, cytoplas-
mic blebbing, nuclear fragmentation and presence of
so-called “apoptotic bodies" However, in HE-stained
sections it might be difficult to definitely distinguish
Si sioidode aouu pue sisoidode pue sisoau uaamia
best confirmed with positive immunoreactivity to, for
example, activated caspase 3.
Neuronal loss
Irrespective of etiology, individual necrotic neurons in
 the neuropilare removed by the process of neuronophagia
mediated by activated phagocytic microglia, which
Fig. 1.15 A: Sheep with polioencephalomalacia. Cerebral cortex.
Acidophilic (ischemic) neuronal necrosis with shrunken eosi-
accumulate around the neuron as microglial nodules
nophilic neurons. HE. B: Dog with spinal cord infarct. Myelomalacia 
(Fig. 1.16). Such focal microgliosis is also one character-
with acidophilic neuronal necrosis. HE.
istic histological feature of the triad of meningoen-
cephalitis (perivascular cuffing, neuronal degeneration/
necrosis, microglial nodules) that are hallmarks of neu-
rotropic viral infections.
leading to membrane damage and cell swelling. Neurons,
Neurons do not regenerate as a general rule. Thus
 being primarily dependent on glycolysis for energy
 typically in the CNS, neuronal damage frequently results
are extremely sensitive to conditions interfering with
 in permanent loss of cells termed neuronal loss. There
glucose metabolism including ischemia, hypoglyc-
is a characteristic regional selective susceptibility of
neurons or nuclei to different etiologic agents. A com-
to anoxia/ischemia is acidophilic (ischemic) neuronal
bination of irreplaceable loss of certain nerve cell
necrosis with marked granular change and eosinophilia
 populations and Wallerian degeneration of their axons
of the cytoplasm in HE sections, acute swelling and later
results in neuropathological patterns which are highly
shrinkage of the cell body, as well as nuclear pyknosis of
typical of certain acquired or inherited degenerative dis-
the centrally placed nucleus (Fig. 1.15). This is an irre-
eases. Atrophy mainly occurs as a result of loss of trans-
versible lesion. Importantly from a diagnostic view, this
synaptic afferent input in anterograde and retrograde
change can only be detected after 6-8 hours following
 degeneration (see below) or geriatric change.
 the triggering injury. The underlying mechanism (e.g.
ischemia, hypoglycemia, anoxia, trauma, virus infection
etc.) is thought to be mediated by excessive sustained
Trans-synaptic degeneration
release of various excitotoxic neurotransmitters (e.g.
Neurons form interconnected networks, whereby axon
glutamate, aspartate), irrespective of the inciting event.
terminals of one neuron make synapses with other
General neuropathology
17
Fig. 1.16 Dog with neurotropic canine distemper virus encephalitis. Brainstem. Neuronophagia. Microglial nodule removing degener
ated neuron. HE.
 neurons. When a neuron and its processes degenerate,
nuclear groups the concept of trans-synaptic degen-
 afferent and efferent synaptic contacts from neurons
eration can help to interpret certain lesion distribution
in both anterograde and retrograde locations are also
patterns, e.g. Purkinje cell loss leads to anterograde
lost (Fig. 1.17). This bidirectional process results in 
trans-synaptic  atrophy and eventually  degeneration 
trans-synaptic neuronal  degeneration,  which maybe
 of the cerebellar nuclei and retrograde trans-synaptic
reversible depending on the primary injury. With a
atrophy of the cerebellar granule cells (see Chapter
 basic knowledge of neuroanatomical pathways between
8).
Myelinsheath
Internode
A
Retraction
Axonal
Lesion
of synaptic
necrosis
terminals
Terminal
degeneration
Myelin
Chromatalysis
degeneration
Transneuronal
Chromatolysis
degeneration
Anterograde
→Retrograde
Fig. 1.1 7 Trans-synaptic neuronal degeneration following Wallerian degeneration. Diagram illustrates three contiguous interconnnected
deuas auijo uoean ym uoeauaan uaa pue sisoau geuoxe si uoisal buasuen aui jo as aui on gesia  pue g 't suonau
junction and chromatolysis of the downstream neuron (C) in an anterograde direction. Upstream there is neuronal chromatolysis
(B) and retraction of synaptic contacts from A in a retrograde direction.
18Veterinary Neuropathology
Axon
 Axon crush
Basal lamina
Schwann cell
 nuclei
Axon necrosis and degeneration
Axonal sprouting
Macrophages
ProliferatingSchwanncells
Regeneration
Fig. 1.18 A: Schematic drawing of Wallerian degeneration. 1. Peripheral axon covered by myelin sheath formed by Schwann cells. 2.
Axon and myelin sheath distal to injury undergo degeneration. 3. Macrophages of blood monocyte origin ingest the axonal and myelin
debris. Schwann cells proliferate within the persisting endoneurial tube forming densely packed celchains, so-called Bungner's bands,
providing support for axon sprouts arising from the damaged axon. 4. New myelin segments are formed around regenerating axon.
Fig. 1.18 B: Brown Swiss calf with motor neuron disease. Wallerian degeneration in peripheral nerve, longitudinal section: segments
of fragmented axons in several fibers (arrows). HE. C: Dog with peripheral nerve injury. Longitudinal section. Wallerian degeneration,
intact myelin sheaths are stained red. Degenerated fibers are replaced by macrophages containing myelin debris (arrows). Masson's
trichrome stain.
General neuropathology
6L
 The axon can swell segmentally many times its normal
Axonal and dendritic changes
size and these axonal spheroids can be easily detected in
The axonal and dendritic processes of neurons can
a histological preparation (Fig. 1.19). Such swellings can
undergo degeneration independent of the neuronal
also result from intrinsic metabolic hereditary disorders
cell body. A typical reaction of the axon to a variety of
known as axonal dystrophies. Since there is little regen-
insults is Wallerian (or Wallerian-like) degeneration. This
eration in the CNS, axonal damage usually ends as
process consists of a series of degenerative and repara-
axonal loss, generally with a reactive astrogliosis, and can
tive histological events which occur to the axon and
be best detected by using a combination of axonal and
myelin sheath classically following primary traumatic
myelin stains.
injury to the axon or dendrite (Wallerian degeneration)
but may also occur following any other type of axonal
damage, e.g. ischemia, degenerative axonal disorders
Immunohistochemical identification
(so called Wallerian-like degeneration). Though these
of neurons and their processes
 changes occur also in the CNS, they are best studied in
For routine diagnostic purposes, currently the most
peripheral nerve injury. When a nerve fiber is focally
widely used antibodies for the immunocytochemical
damaged, the nerve process distal to the lesion under-
identification of neurons and their processes are those
goes anterograde degeneration due to interference with
 to synaptophysin; triple neurofilaments (NF-L, NF-M,
the vital mechanism of bidirectional axonal transport
NF-H molecular weights) either individually or in
systems. In Wallerian degeneration, the axons undergo
various cocktails, and also as phosphorylated or non-
focal segmental swelling forming axonal spheroids due
phosphorylated neurofilaments; and to Neu-N. There
to interference with axonal transport and subsequent
are, however, many more neuronal specific antigens,
 proximate metabolite accumulation, followed by dis-
e.g. neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAM) and
tension of the myelin sheath, necrosis of both structures
microtubule
associated  proteins (MAPs),
often
 o po s    p
requiring strict fixation techniques; these are mainly
 cyte origin or of microglial cells in the CNS (Fig. 1.18).
for experimental use. Cells of the neuroendocrine
In peripheral nerves, Schwann cells proliferate within the
system express synaptophysin, chromogranin A and
persisting endoneurial tube and form densely packed cell
neuron-specific enolase, which can all be visualized
chains, so-called Bingner's bands (Fig. 1.18). Complete
 immunocytochemically.
functional regeneration following axonal sprouting and
Axons (both normal and undergoing pathologi-
 segmental remyelination is possible in the peripheral
cal:
 changes) in the CNS/PNS are best visualized
nervous system but rarely happens in the CNS. The most 
immunocytochemically by antibodies to NF-200, and
conspicuous feature in the neuron whose nerve fiber has
triple neurofilaments either in a phosphorylated or non-
been injured close to the cell body can be retrograde
phosphorylated state. Amyloid precursor protein (APP)
chromatolysis (see above).
is a robust marker of early axonal injury.
Fig. 1.19 A: Horse. Trigeminal nerve compressed by an abscess. Many swollen eosinophilic and fragmented axons. HE. B: Bovine
with axonal dystrophy. Cerebellar cortex, axon swellings depicted by arrows. Holmes' silver stain.
20
0 Veterinary  Neuropathology
myelin sheath or oligodendrocyte in this primary
demyelinating process with axons remaining intact for
a long time. Secondary demyelination occurs affter
primary axonal necrosis with an obligatory loss of the
myelin sheath. Functional remyelination by oligodendro-
cytes can occur in the CNS but not to the same degree
as from their myelinating counterparts of Schwann
cells in the PNS. To demonstrate demyelination histo-
chemically the luxol fast blue/Holmes silver stain can
distinguish between primary and secondary demyeli-
 nation. In primary demyelination there is an absence of
blue-staining myelin sheaths but the black silver-
impregnated axons remain intact (Fig. 1.20B). In sec-
ondary demyelination there is a concommitant loss
both of axons and then of their myelin sheaths. In the
luxol fast blue/cresyl Echt violet/PAS stain (Kluiver-
Barrera) macrophages in the demyelinated area are
demonstrated to contain myelin debris. Alternatively
immunocytochemical procedures can be used to dem-
 onstrate specific antigenic markers for either axons (see
above) or myelin.
Leukodystrophy is the term applied to an intrinsic
dysfunction in oligodendrocytes  with formation  of
unstable myelin in contrast to demyelination where
 there is an acquired lesion affecting myelin from normal 
oligodendrocytes.
Fig. 1.20 A: Dog. Normal cerebellar white matter and adjacent
Immunohistochemical staining
granular layer. Oligodendrocytes (arrow) and myelin sheaths (big
arrow) are labeled with an anti-CNP antibody. B: Dog. Brainstem.
For routine diagnostic purposes (FF-PE tissue) there are
 Demyelinating lesion in canine distemper infection (m, unaffected
many antigenic markers for oligodendrocytes/myelin
white matter with dark-staining axons covered by green/blue-
sheath although no single specific unequivocal marker
stained intact myelin). In the demyelinating lesion there is focal
for oligodendrocytes. Some antigens expressed by oli-
loss of myelin staining but preservation of axons (arow). Luxol
godendrocytes include myelin basic protein (MBP),
fast blue-Holmes' silver stain.
myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG), and proteolipid
protein (PLP), galactocerebroside (GC), 2'-3'-cyclic
nucleotide-3'-phosphatase (CNP) (Fig. 1.20A), transfer-
rin and the transcription factor Olig2, as well as many
antibodies that are useful for more specialized experi-
1.3.2 Oligodendrocytes
mental purposes. Normal oligodendrocytes can be
These are highly specialized glial cells with small round
definitively labeled using in situ hybridisation for PLP
dark basophilic nuclei and short processes, the distal
mRNA.
ends of which flatten into wide membranous sheets
that form myelin sheaths as explained above or clusters
around neurons in the gray matter as normal satellitosis.
1.3.3 Astrocytes
Astrocytes play a critical role in many normal functions
Demyelination - primary or secondary
including intercellular homeostasis of ions, glutamine
When oligodendrocytes are damaged (e.g. by virus
and neurotransmitters and the detoxification of, for
infection or ischemia), their complex membranous
example, oxidants and ammonia. They insulate and
structures forming myelin internodes undergo degen-
isolate white matter tracts and are involved in inflam-
eration and phagocytosis in the process of primary
matory and immune responses, expressing cytokines,
demyelination (Fig. 1.20B). In contrast to Wallerian
growth factors and adhesion molecules. Astrocytes
degeneration, there is selective degeneration of the
 provide intrinsic structural support and guidance for
General neuropathology  21
fetal brain development. They form the glia limitans
 ment of the perikaryon with multiple thick short pro-
and perivascular foot processes, an integral compo-
cesses on HE sections (Fig. 1.21D) and chronically a
nent of the blood-brain barrier. They are morpho-
 morphological transformation to the fibrillary astrocyte
logically described as protoplasmic or fibrillary  in
with large numbers of glial fibrillary acidic protein
normal gray or white maffer respectively. The dis-
(GFAP)-containing thin elongate cel processes (Fig.
tinction between the two forms requires special
1.21C). Chronic fibrillary astrogliosis is also called scle-
stains.
rosis. On routine HE stains, astrocytosis is apparent as
an increased number of cell nuclei in the affected area
Gliosis
{Fig.1.21B}
Both protoplasmic and fibrillary astrocytes react simi-
Fluid accumulation in the CNS, edema, is associated
larly and non-specifically to almost any kind of damage 
with a spongy vacuolated appearance of the tissue (see
(e.g. edema, viral infections, malacia, degeneration) to
Section 1.3.7). In cytotoxic edema there is an accumula-
the CNS by either hypertrophy (astrocytosis) or prolif-
 tion of fluid within and marked swelling of astrocytic
eration (astrogliosis). There are basically two reactive
 cell bodies and processes. A special kind of reactive
forms: in acute injury the gemistocytic astrocyte, in which
 astrocyte is the so-called Alzheimer type Il cell found in
 there is substantial homogeneous eosinophilic enlarge-
clusters in gray mafter in metabolic encephalopathy
Fig. 1.21 Astrogliosis and astrocytosis. A: Normal dog. Hippocampus. Pyramidal cell layer. Relatively few glial cell nuclei. HE. B: Dog
nuclei. HE. C: Dog. Edge of old infarct. Fibrillary astrogliosis. HE. D: Dog with necrotizing encephalitis. Brainstem. Reactive gemistocytic
astrocytes. HE. E: Dog. GFAP immunostaining of reactive fibrillary astrocytes around an oligodendroglioma. IHC. F: Dog. GFAP immu-
noreactive gemistocytic astrocytes with thickened processes. IHC
22
2  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 1.22 A: Dog with viral encephalitis. Brainstem. Rod-shaped activated microglial cells. HE. B: Dog with cerebral infarct. Phagocytic
gitter cells. HE.
associated with hepatic and less often renal disease (see
Gitter cells and malacia
Chapter 6). These cells have large pale nuclei with
Acute necrosis of large areas of neuropil leads to almost
minimal cytoplasm. Rosenthal fibers are eosinophilic
bodies found within processes of fibrillary astrocytes in
complete loss of the original architecture of the affected
tumors, sites of chronic injury and in Alexander's
area. This necrotic tissue is called malacia, which can be
macroscopically visible when the lesion is large enough.
disease in the dog and sheep (see Chapter 8).
The necrotic (malacic) tissue is initially infiltrated by
densely packed actively phagocytic macrophages, also
Immunohistochemical stains
called gitter cells, which remove cell debris, axons and
The most widely used antigen detected immunocyto-
myelin (Fig. 1.22B). These cells are largely derived from
chemically for normal, reactive and neoplastic astrocytes
blood-borne monocytes and to a much lesser extent
is glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (Fig. 1.21E,F).
from residential microglial cells.
Vimentin and nestin can also be co-expressed with GFAP
Within weeks to months, a malacic area is completely
in reactive and neoplastic astrocytes. There is some
deared of all necrotic tissue and is replaced by a fluid-
cross-reactivity of GFAP with normal and neoplastic
filled cystic cavity. Chronically reparative attempts with
Schwann cells in the PNS.
neovascularization and astrogliosis result in a fibrillary
astroglial scar in and around the lesion and sometimes
1.3.4 Microglia/macrophages
additional fibrous connective tissue formed by perivas-
Microglia and neuronophagia
cular mesenchymal cells.
The CNS contains a population of resident phagocytes
the so-called resting microglia, derived from monocytes
of bone marrow origin entering the CNS during fetal
Identification by immunohistochemically
development. These cells are capable of reactive prolif-
detected markers
eration in a variety of conditions. Activated reactive
Both resting and activated microglia and macrophages
microglia, also called rod cells, appear as elongated, often
derived from blood monocytes in the canine CNS can
twisted nuclei with very scant cytoplasm (Fig. 1.22A).
be broadly identified immunocytochemically by anti-
This type of reaction occurs in more subtle lesions such
bodies to both CD18 and CD11d in conventional FF-PE
as in retrograde neuronal degeneration and often in
tissue. A fraction of microglia and macrophages may
some protozoal and viral infections. These reactive
stain with antibodies to CD68, lysozyme and MAC
microglia are mainly involved in removal of individual
(myeloid/histiocyte antigen). However antibodies capable
neurons in the process of neuronophagia mediated by
 of discriminating between these functional cell types in
 chemokine-induced clusters of microglial cells forming
the CNS (resting or activated microglia, macrophages)
microglial nodules.
are not yet available in the dog. Both activated microglia
General neuropathology  23
the CSF (blood-cerebrospinal fluid-barrier). Bacteria,
protozoa and viruses commonly invade the CNS by
infecting the choroid plexus and disseminating within
the ventricular system once the integrity of tight junc-
tions between the epithelial cells is compromised. Canine
distemper virus gains access to the CSF after productive
viral infection of the plexus epithelium and subsequent
dispersion of high titers of infectious viral particles into
the CSF Normal and neoplastic choroid plexus epithe-
lium is usually immunohistochemically reactive for both
low and high molecular weight cytokeratins while the
lamina is immunoreactive for collagen IV. Neoplastic
choroid plexus epithelium variably expresses GFAP.
Fig. 1.23 Dog. Fourth ventricle. Traumatic damage to the epend-
Meninges
yma leads to rosette formation, supra-ependymal astrocytosis
and partial occlusion of mesencephalic aqueduct. HE.
Leptomeninges (pia mater and arachnoid membrane)
  n ( ) sd  
mainly as meningitis in bacterial or viral infections
of the CNS associated with infection of the subarach-
and blood-borne macrophages express MHC class I and
noid space. The major reactive change of the leptome-
 II antigens, various adhesion molecules, chemokines
 ninges consists of fibroblastic proliferation and fibrous
and cytokines and can act as antigen-presenting cells in
collagenous thickening. In chronic inflammatory disease,
 modulating both inflammatory and immune responses.
 the latter may become very extensive and potentially
1.3.5 CSF spaces
occlusive.
Osteomyelitis, trauma and skull fractures may
Ependymal cells
impinge on the contiguous dura mater and focal
A single layer of usually ciliated ependymal cells lines
 fbroblastic proliferation of the inner surface of the
 the ventricles, mesencephalic aqueduct and central canal 
dura can occur in response to chronic dural irritation
 of the spinal cord, and allows for the regulated bidirec-
(tumors, vertebral subluxation, meningitis etc.). Dural
tional flow of proteins and fluid between the ventricles
metaplastic ossification can occur incidentally and mainly
and the interstitial space of the brain. Viral cytolysis,
 in large-breed dogs particularly in cervical and lumbar
inflammation (ependymitis) or traumatic loss of these
segments with formation of elongated bony plaques,
cells can lead to attempts at repair with rosette forma-
often containing hematopoietic bone marrow.
tion, sub- and supra-ependymal astrogliosis (Fig. 1.23)
Meningothelial cells express vimentin and variably
and occlusion with partial or complete obstruction of
cytokeratin.
CSF flow at critical stricture points and subsequent
non-communicating hydrocephalus. Atrophy with loss
1.3.6 Blood vessels
of cilia can occur with increased and sustained hydro-
Blood-brain barrier
static pressure of hydrocephalus. Normal and neoplastic
ependymal cells are variably immunoreactive for GFAP
The CNS is extremely well vascularized with a very
and more consistently positive for vimentin. The sub-
dense capillary network.
ependymal zone around the lateral ventricles is a niche
 In contrast to other organs, the endothelial cells of the
 environment for neural stem cell populations.
blood vessels in the nervous system are connected by
tight junctions creating an effective protective mechani-
Choroid plexus
cal and biochemical barrier between the blood and the
The choroid plexus develops from evaginations of blood
nervous tissue.  Lipid-mediated passive diffusion of
vessels covered by modified ependymal cells into specific
small molecules is possible but most traffc across the
sites within the lateral, third and fourth ventricles. The
BBB is by rate-limited, receptor- and carrier-mediated
modified ependymal epithelial cells secrete CSF that fills
transport of nutrients, proteins and electrolytes. Also
both the ventricular system and subarachnoid space.
involved in the BBB as a functional system are the peri-
The CSF delivers nutrients to and removes waste metab-
cytes, which - together with the endothelial cells - form
olites from the CNS. There is a tight-junction-mediated
a basement membrane, and the astrocytic foot processes,
barrier between epithelial cells of the choroid plexus and
which cover most of the external surface of the vessels.
24
4  Veterinary Neuropathology
with most disease categories described in subsequent
chapters. Classically, three different types of edema are
recognized depending on their pathogenesis, but fre-
quently these types co-exist.
Vasogenic edema
Vasogenic edema is the most common form of edema
nnl se ns snn jo sd Au u us si pue
focal and difuse inflammatory processes, tumors and
infarcts. The physical breakdown of the tight junctions
between endothelial cells of the BBB causes increased
vascular permeability with leakage of serum proteins
into the intercellular space of the neuropil (Fig. 1.25A).
The resulting increased osmotic pressure draws more
water into the intercellular space. There is a preferential
Fig. 1.24 Dog with chronic band-like (pseudolaminar) polioen-
focal or global accumulation of fluid in the white matter
cephalomalacia. Cerebral cortex. Marked neovascular prolifera-
since it has more extracellular space than gray mafter.
tion. HE.
Such edema is readily detected by MRI and gross exami-
 nation. Microscopically with HE staining, edema appears
In the normal state, little protein and a few inflamma-
as pale areas with widespread separation of myelinated
tory cells cross the BBB. Because of this blood-brain
axons by clear vacuolated spaces (Fig. 1.25B). In chronic
barrier the nervous system has been considered to be an
edema there is a reactive gemistocytic astrogliosis.
immunologically privileged site. However, as we will see,
this barrier can be breached rendering the CNS vulner-
Cytotoxic (cellular) edema
able to many immunopathologically mediated events. In
Cytotoxic edema occurs when the energy-dependent
 infectious/inflammatory diseases, the BBB plays a very
 ue pua un sdnd ssod pue no
 important role, regulating access of immune cells to the
cells are impaired. Intracellular accumulation of sodium
CNS. Endothelial cells are very active when homeostasis
ions leads to fluid retention resulting in intracellular
is lost: they react by upregulating MHC antigens and
swelling (Fig. 1.25A). This effect is first apparent in
adhesion molecules, and can express various cytokines
endothelial cells, then in astrocytes and subsequently in
such as IL-1, IL-6 and IL-8, hence mediating inflamma-
neurons and oligodendrocytes. The physical blood-
tion in the CNS as explained in depth in Chapter 3.
brain barrier remains intact and hence cytotoxic edema
has low protein content. This type of edema is seen in
Reactive blood vessels
various toxic and metabolic disorders (discussed in
The endothelial cells of the blood vessels of the CNS
Chapter 6). Furthermore, it occurs in combination with
react in a variety of conditions by hypertrophy and pro-
vasogenic edema in ischemia. Macroscopically, brain
 swelling appears generally less severe in cytotoxic edema
in upregulation of expression of vascular growth factors
than in vasogenic edema. Histologically, cytotoxic edema
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Such
causes a spongy state (status spongiosus) with sharply
 growth factors are important in development and home-
defined vacuoles in the white matter due to intramy-
ostasis and they can be affected by or participate in
elinic edema (Fig. 1.25C). Cell swelling can also be seen
tissue damage and repair. Proliferation of endothelial
as vacuoles within processes of perineuronal and
cells results in neovascularization, which is easily recog-
 perivascular astrocytes. Initially the status spongiosus is
nized in routinely stained HE sections and immuno-
devoid of reactive changes; in chronic edema diffuse
histochemically by antibodies to either CD31 or von
reactive astrogliosis becomes apparent.
Willebrand factor VIll related antigen.
Interstitial edema
1.3.7 Disturbance of water balance: edema
Interstitial ederma results from increased permeability of
Homeostasis of exchange of water and electrolytes
the desmosomal junctions between lining ependymal
between the blood and the CNS depends on complex
cells of the ventricular system. With increased intraven-
 mechanisms in which the BBB plays an important regu-
tricular pressure the ependymal lining ruptures and
latory role. Edema is the result of excess fluid accumula-
CSF accumulates interstitially in the periventricular
tion in the CNS parenchyma and is frequently associated
white matter. In contrast to vasogenic edema, interstitial
General neuropathology
25
Astrocyte
Capillary
Edematous
endothelial
Tight
cells
Opened
endothelial
 junctions 
Oligodendr
Leaking
tight
cells
ocyt
plasma filtrate
 junctions
Foot process
of astrocyte
Fig. 1.25 Edema. A: Schematic drawing: a: normal capillary with endothelial cells connected by tight junctions creating the blood-
brain barier (BBB), supported by astrocytic endfeet processes; b: opening of the BBB with leakage of plasma into the interstitium
(vasogenic edema); c: failure of ion/water pumps, water from blood enters the intracellular compartment (endothelial cells, astrocytes,
neurons) with swelling of cells resulting in cytotoxic edema.
Fig. 1.25 B: Dog with brain tumor. Vasogenic edema in peritumoral white matter, separation of axonal fibers by clear spaces. HE.
C: Calf with liver failure. Internal capsule. Spongy state with sharply delineated vacuoles. HE. D: Cat with brain tumor (meningioma
extending in lateral ventricle). Massive edema particularly in white matter with swelling of the left hemisphere associated with the
tumor. E: Dog with cranial trauma. Cerebellar coning with hemorrhagic necrosis of the herniated vermis and brainstem compression
resulting from severe brain edema. F: Dog with brain tumor. Caudal view of occipital lobes, herniated cerebral cortex (arrows) under-
neath tentorium (tentorium has been removed). G: Dog with brain tumor and high intracranial pressure. Medulla oblongata. Multiple
small hemorrhages (Duret hemorrhages).
edema has low protein content. Small pools of intersti-
causes increased intracranial or intraspinal pressure,
tial edema may coalesce leading to fluid-flled cavities
respectively, with life-threatening secondary complica-
 of various sizes eventually leading to macroscopically
tions as described in Chapter 4. The brain is compressed
visible cystic structures. In the spinal cord or brainstem
against the skull resulting in flattening of gyri and nar-
 such cavitations are called syringomyelia or syringobulbia
rowing of sulci. In transverse sections marked mechani-
respectively. In the brain, mostly connected to the lateral
cal distension, particularly of the white matter, and
ventricles, they are called diverticula.
variable compression of the ventricular system can be
observed (Fig. 1.25D). Global swelling of the cerebral
Effects of brain edema
hemispheres causes compression of the brainstem,
Edema may cause focal or global CNS swelling usually
which is flattened and distorted with close apposition of
associated with space-occupying masses such as abcesses,
rostral colliculi The mesencephalic aqueduct is nar-
tumors or hemorrhages. Because the brain and spinal
rowed, and in the brainstem and cerebellum small
cord are closely confined by meninges and the rigid
target hemorrhages (Duret hemorrhages) due to stretch-
calvarium and vertebrae, brain or spinal cord swelling
ing and necrosis of blood vessels may be present
26
6 Veterinary  Neuropathology
Fig. 1.26 Artifacts. A: Dog. Spinal cord. Advanced postmortem autolysis, marked vacuolation of gray (gm) and white (wm) matter,
the structure of the central canal (large arrow) is largely disorganized with only the nuclei of the ependymal and subependymal cells
indicating its presence. HE. B: Dog. cerebral cortex. Dark neurons (arrows) next to morphologically normal neurons. HE. C: Bovine.
Cerebellar cortex. Extensive postmortem lysis of cerebellar granule celayer, a common artifact in large animals. HE.
(Fig. 1.25G). The brain parenchyma expands caudally
nuclei. Artifactual vacuolation has to be distinguished
resulting in cerebellar vermal herniation (Fig. 1.25E) and
from pathological spongy state in the CNS as discussed
herniation of the cerebral cortex underneath rigid struc-
 in Chapter 6.
tures (e.g. tentorium cerebelli: transtentorial or subten-
 Purkinje cells undergo rapid perineuronal vacuola-
torial herniation (Fig. 1.25F); falx cerebri: subfalcine
 tion, and granule cell depletion is also common after a
herniation). Such herniation severely increases pressure
prolonged interval before fixation (Fig. 1.26C). With
 in focal areas leading to small hemorrhages and ischemic
advancing autolysis, neurons become pale and pink with
necrosis following disruption of blood supply with a
a slightly foamy cytoplasm. Sometimes, oligodendroglial
usually fatal outcome.
s      
 opaque material, rendering the impression of a swollen
1.3.8 Artifacts, postmortem degeneration,
cytoplasm. In advanced autolysis, the choroid plexus
and ependyma become denuded of their epithelial-
pseudolesions and old age
derived lining cells (Fig. 1.26A). A reliable sign of good
Artifacts
tissue preservation is the presence of cilia on ependymal
Postmortem autolysis progresses quickly in nervous
cells.
tissues leading to artifactual changes that may signifi-
Inadequate fixation either in time or in fixative
cantly interfere with detection and correct interpreta-
volume leads to blurring of structural detail in histologi-
tion of lesions (especially for the untrained eye). In
cal sections. Pale-basophilic staining, round structures
advanced autolysis, the CNS becomes mushy, macro-
(mucocytes, Buscaino bodies) may appear in significant
scopic structures may become ill defined and cavities are
 numbers in the parenchyma as an artefact of formalin
caused by gas-forming bacteria.
fixation, probably by reaction of myelin components 
The most common artifact of autolysis at the histo-
with formalin.
logical level is vacuolation (Fig. 1.26A). The latter can
A very common finding even in fresh, well fixed
be especially prominent in the white mafter. These
tissue are dark neurons. Their name derives from single
vacuoles are irregular in shape and size and often not 
or clusters of neurons anywhere in the CNS, which
well delineated. Also rough handling of the tissues
appear shrunken and strongly basophilic with corkscrew
causes mechanical tearing and disruption of the tissue
dendrites (Fig. 1.26B). Their significance has been hotly
architecture with increased intercellular space, separa-
debated but they are most probably artifact due to
tion of neuronal layers and vacuolation. Inadequate
tissue handling. Others interpret the uptake of the dye
processing (e.g. prolonged contact with 70% ethanol)
fluorojade as an early degenerative change in such
causes significant vacuolation principally of the white
neurons.
 matter. In the gray matter, there are excessively large
When such abnormalities are not associated with
dlear spaces around neurons, blood vessels and glial
reactive changes (e.g. invasion of macrophages, gliosis,
General neuropathology
27
Fig. 1.27 Pseudolesions. A: Young dog. Cerebellum with an external granule cell layer (arrows). HE. B: Dog. Subcommissural organ
(arrow) (cc, caudal commissure: Il, third ventricle). C: Dog. Caudate nucleus. Clusters of primitive neuroectodermal cells (arrows) in
the caudate nudleus in vicinity of lateral ventricle (lv). HE.
invasion of inflammatory cells, capillary proliferation)
· Eosinophilic intracytoplasmatic inclusion bodies
it is prudent to assume that they are artifacts unless they
occur occasionally in neurons (e.g. in the lateral
are found in optimally preserved and processed tissues.
 geniculate body) in different species, notably cats
(pseudo-Negri bodies).
Pseudolesions
Old age
 Be aware of some normal microanatomical features sug-
 gesting a lesion:
Tissue changes associated with old age are quite consist-
ent, and it is a quantitative problem whether to call them
 Very young animals may still have germinal cell layers
pathologic or simply physiologic attrition with age.
notably subpially in the cerebellar cortex (external
Old dogs often show a marked hydrocephalus and
granule cell layer) (Fig. 1.27A). The density of glial
apparent shrinkage of the cerebrum (Fig. 1.28B) without
cells in immature white matter is also much higher
ever having suffered from neurological signs during
than in adult brains.
their lives. Although there is gliosis and increased num-
· The circumventricular organs (CVO). These small,
bers of glial cell around neurons (satellitosis) in the gray
highly specialized structures in the wall of the third
matter in old dogs with brain atrophy, it is not clear
and fourth ventricles contain numerous capillaries
whether there is significant loss of neurons. Another con-
 without a blood-brain barrier. Ependymal and neural
spicuous feature in old brains is a diffuse status spongio-
cell processes contact the CVOs, which play a role in
sus of the white mafter (Fig. 1.28D), sometimes with
the coordination between neural and hormonal func-
fibrillary gliosis (*scar" tissue). This appears to be due to
tions. The CVOs include the organum vasculosum,
 degeneration and loss of myelin associated with deposits
the subfornical organ, the subcommisural organ (Fig.
of non-degraded ubiquitin-protein conjugates and
1.27B) and the area postrema in the fourth ventricle.
complex galactolipids. A consistent finding in all species
Focal accumulations of primitive undifferentiated glial
is the appearance of degenerated neurons and large sphe-
and neuronal cell precursor cells occur in the forebrain
roids in the accessory cuneate nucleus. The number of
in subependymal and perivascular sites around the
 so-called subependymal and cortical glial nests in old
lateral ventricles (Fig. 1.27C). They are very promi-
brains seems to be increased compared with younger
nent and dense in fetal and neonatal animals, also
animals (in the rhinencephalic cortex, ventricular angles,
occurring in the thalamus and midbrain; they may
caudate nucleus). A typical sign of old age is an accumu-
again increase in numbers with old age.
lation of lipofuscin granules in the cytoplasm of
· In the brainstem, neurons of certain nuclei such as
neurons, in particular in the brainstem nuclei (Fig.
the olivary and pontine nuclei uniformly lack the
1.28C).Around blood vessels one often sees macrophages
perinuclear Nissl substance; this is not to be confused
containing lipopigment. Senile plaques and congophilic
with chromatolyis.
angiopathy (Fig. 1.28F,G) have also been described in
· In certain mammalian species normal secretory
very old animals as discussed in Chapter 8 on degenera-
neurons of the hypothalamus and locus coeruleus
tive disease. There is also a fibrotic thickening of the
contain cytoplasmic melanin.
meninges and of the stroma of the choroid plexus.
28
3  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 1.28 Geriatric changes. A: Normal 2-year-old dog. Cross-section of forebrain. B: Normal 14-year-old dog. Section at the same
level, marked thinning of the cerebral cortex and subcortical white matter with compensatory enlargement of the ventricles C: Old
dog. Brainstem. Lipofuscin pigment accumulation (arrow) in a neuron. HE. D: Old dog. Cerebrum. Vacuolation and gliosis in the white
matter. HE. E: Old dog. Spinal nerve roots. Ballooning of myelin sheaths. HE. F: Old dog. Cerebral cortex. Senile plaque (accumulation 
of beta amyloid). Thioflavine stain, UV fluorescence. G: Vascular amyloidosis. Thioflavine stain, Uv fluorescence.
In old cats, we often see focal meningothelial
limited number of basic lesion types. Of course there are
proliferation/hyperplasia. In some species such as horses,
 myriads of morphological variations of these basic
there is mineralization and iron deposition in the walls
lesion types but it is possible and necessary to recognize
of blood vessel walls mainly in the basal nuclei. In the
their most essential common features or patterns. At the
PNS, old age is frequently characterized by extensive
macroscopic level we can recognize the following pat-
vacuolation of myelin sheaths particularly in nerve roots
terns: abnormal anatomy, space-occupying mass lesion,
(Fig. 1.28E).
hemorrhage, malacia/necrosis, pallor/soffening of the
white mafter. While even small hemorrhages can be
1.4 Recognizing major lesion patterns
seen with the naked eye, small foci of incipient malacia
may require microscopic detection. Major microscopic
Diagnostic neuropathology is based on the detection of
patterns include, apart from malacia: spongy change,
lesions and their subsequent interpretation. In addition
 intracellular accumulation of abnormal material, hyper-
to being familiar with the basic reaction patterns as
cellularity, selective loss of neurons, axons or myelin. All
described in Section 1.3, two further essential require-
these lesion patterns are briefly described below and
ments for a successful start in diagnostic neuropathol-
illustrated in Fig. 1.29.
ogy are: (a) being able to recognize the major gross and
histological lesion patterns and (b) a working knowl-
Deviation of normal anatomy
edge of the classification of neurological diseases includ-
With some basic knowledge of neuroanatomy, abnormal
 ing the major morphological hallmarks (lesion patterns)
 anatomic disturbances are readily identified macroscop-
 of each disease category.
ically as, for example, hydrocephalus or cerebellar hypo-
plasia. Deviation of the normal anatomy is most often a
1.4.1 The major lesion patterns
congenital malformation but can also be the result of
As we have seen in Section 1.3, the nervous system can
some other acquired pathological process leading to
only mount a relatively limited number of reactions to
atrophy of a certain region. Occasionally, part of the
injury. It follows therefore that there are also only a
brain or cord, or sometimes the whole brain, is swollen
 General neuropathology
29
→All categories
aneiauaba  saseasip abeiois 
→ Inflammatory
immune disorder —→ Inflammatory
 anneiauabag  uoneiauabap Abuods 
 spongiform change —→Degenerative
—→ Degenerative
 Degenerative
>Inflammatory
→Vascular
axon loss
dysmyelination -
infection—
edema
hypercellularity <
Accumulation of
spongy state
in CNS cells
selective loss
myelin/axons
material
Metabolic-toxic
→Metabolic-toxic
>≥ toxin deficency —→ Metabolictoxic 
mitochondriopathy →→Degenerative
→ Inflammatory
→ Neoplastic
Anomaly
→Vascular
→Vascular
 tirculation problem—→Vascular
→ Trauma
Vascular
 brain sweling
> toxin, deficiency —
deficiency/toxin-
contusion
infection —
ischemia
normal anatomy
deviation of
consieteacer
hemorrhage 
(microscopic)
malacia
malacia
interpretation.
30
0 Veterinary Neuropathology
due to mass lesions with cerebral edema. The resultant
accumulations or cuffing can often be detected at low-
increased intracranial pressure can force areas of the
power magnification and are highly characteristic for an
brain underneath the tentorium cerebelli (subtentorial
 inflammatory/infectious disorder but may also occur in
herniation) or the cerebellar vermis caudally through the
 a very limited extent in other disorders (e.g. hippocam-
foramen magnum (cerebellar vermal herniation). Also
pal necrosis in cats).
the cerebrocortical gyri are flattened and widened and
 the sulci compressed.
Spongy state (status spongiosus)
Space-occupying mass
This is a very common pattern resulting from many
 different types of injury and is also a common artifact.
 Such a mass is usually easy to detect. Space-occupying
The tissue looks moth-eaten, there is an excessive
mass lesions in small animals are generally due to
number and size of clear spaces around neurons, glial
cells and capillaries, and diffuse or distinct vacuoles in
with excessive focal accumulation of inflammatory cells
(abscess, granuloma) and result in a midline shiff.
the neuropil and or specifically in gray and/or white
matter. Such vacuolar change can be caused by postmor-
Malacia
tem artifact, (intra-myelinic) edema, loss of axons and/
 Malacia is defined as grossly or microscopically detected
or myelin, or vacuolation of neurons, glial cells or their
 processes. A guide to the interpretation of this spongy
softening and necrosis of the tissue resulting from
destruction of most cells in the affected area leading
state is extensively covered in Fig. 6.14.
to complete loss of the original architecture. Complete
Hypercellularity
destruction with cavitation is easy to detect grossly,
while acute lesions display a gelatinous consistency often
This is apparent as focal or extensive areas with increased
with a change of color to gray or yellow. Histologically,
numbers or density of cells. Usually, in HE sections the
malacic lesions are demarcated from normal tissue and
cell nuclei are most prominently stained, thus we detect
 appear paler or darker than their surroundings. The
too many nuclei. This change is very common and there
original architecture is lost, and the acutely affected
are several variations of this change.
tissue appears less compact, vacuolated and with wide-
spread cell necrosis.
+ Infiltration and accumulation of inflammatory cells.
Accumulation of large numbers of inflammatory
Pallor/softening of the white matter
 cells in the leptomeninges and subarachnoid space
Extensive lesions of the white matter are visible to the
can sometimes be detected on gross examination
naked eye. The white matter is normally brilliantly white
as a diffuse whitish or yellowish clouding of the
and in many areas is clearly demarcated from the gray
meninges.
matter. Following paucity/absence/loss of myelin the
· Astrogliosis or microgliosis (proliferation of astroglial
white matter becomes grayish, less distinguishable from
or microglial cells), a reactive change particularly of
the gray matter and may appear softened. Histologically
astrocytes or microglial cells, which can occur as a
 on HE, loss of myelin is characterized by pale staining.
result of any kind of injury Hypercellularity can thus
Specific myelin stains are very useful to detect and define
 be a feature of many disease categories.
this lesion.
·Proliferation of endothelial cells and increased density
of microvessels or neovascularization in the affected
Hemorrhage
 area is a common reactive change in different types of
Accumulation of erythrocytes outside the blood vessels
injury.
is usually grossly visible as red to dark brown in acute
 Diffuse neoplasia. While most tumors consist of
hemorrhage while orange/yellowish discoloration of the
compact expansile masses, in certain tumor types (e.g.
tissue is more indicative of chronicity. Hemorrhage
astrocytomas), neoplastic cells may diffusely invade
results from damage to the blood vessels and is usually
the tissue, leaving the original architecture of the
associated with malacia.
tissue more or less undisturbed.
 Perivascular cuffing
Accumulation of abnormal intracellular
Accumulation of inflammatory cells around the blood
material or bodies
vessels in the parenchyma is probably the easiest lesion 
 Such abnormal material can consist of inclusions, gran-
to detect at the histological level. Such perivascular cell 
ules, foamy material or clear vacuoles and is relatively
General neuropathology  31
easy to detect in neurons because of their size. Such
 ing that obtained from MRI images. With this approach
change can also be associated with swelling of cells and/
we can distinguish the following groups of diseases:
or displacement of other cell components such as the
vascular, inflammatory, traumatic, anomalous (malfor-
nucleus.
mation), metabolic-toxic, idiopathic, neoplastic, degen-
erative. The acronym VITAMIN D may be helpful as an
Selective changes in neurons/axons/dendrites
initial memory aid for the neurologist as well as the
pathologist.
Detection of this pattern requires careful histologi-
While diseases in this scheme are classified according
cal  examination and may be difficult without expe-
rience. The architecture of the tissue is changed,
to traditional pathologic criteria, these categories not
only have common morphological features (thus exhib-
regularity is disrupted, the tissue appears less compact
 and there is loss of certain tissue elements. Recognition
iting one or more of the above lesion patterns) but
 of these changes is greatly facilitated by knowing the
also include some common clinical neurological denom-
 inators or at least trends with respect to breed, age,
normal microanatomy of the various areas of the CNS.
onset/course, involvement of other organ systems,
 This knowledge is acquired by making it routine to
focal or multifocal localization and CSF evaluation
consciously register anatomical features while reading
changes.
histological slides. Special histochemical or immunohis-
tochemical stains for myelin and axons are very helpful
to recognize selective change in the white matter. For
Vascular diseases
example, such stains are required to distinguish between
The main lesions of the CNS vasculature include vascu-
primary or secondary demyelinating lesions.
litis, hemorrhage and infarction. The latter results from
focal vascular obstruction (e.g. septic or bland fibrin
 thrombi and emboli, fibrocartilage, atheroclerosis, intra-
1.4.2 Lesion distribution pattern
vascular lymphoma) or less commonly from global
As explained in later chapters, the anatomical distribu-
ischemia and consist of sharply demarcated areas of
tion paftern of the lesions is of paramount impor-
neuropil destruction termed malacia. Vascular diseases
tance in the differential diagnosis. Lesions which are
can occur in all age groups and provoke peracute, severe,
eithersingle (focal)ormultiple(multifocal-disseminated)
often lateralizing neurological signs which remain sta-
can already suggest different disease categories. Gener-
tionary for some time and may gradually regress.
 ally, bilateral involvement of specific anatomic areas is
Extraneural signs are found when the primary problem
typical for metabolic-toxic and degenerative diseases.
is located in the cardiovascular system, e.g. bacterial
Particularly in the latter the lesions are mostly, but not
endocarditis. Cerebrospinal fluid is usually altered with
always, symmetrical. Last but not least lesions may have
protein increase, excess red blood cells (RBCs) and
a predilection for either gray or white matter. As we will
sometimes pleocytosis with macrophages.
see, the specific anatomical location of lesions may be
highly diagnostic in many diseases.
Inflammatory diseases
The hallmark of this group is parenchymal invasion of
1.4.3 Classification of neurological diseases
blood-derived leucocytes around blood vessels (perivas-
Recognition of the major patterns is a first important
cular cuffing) and infiltrating into the parenchyma, as
step in neuropathological diagnosis. The recognized
well as proliferation of endogenous microglia (hypercel-
patterns must then be placed in the appropriate disease
lularity), resulting in encephalitis, myelitis, meningitis,
category against a background of historical and clinical
ependymitis, choroid plexitis and neuritis. Inflammatory
information. For diagnostic purposes, it makes sense to
lesions are most frequently associated with infections
categorize diseases according to their common charac-
but also with immune-mediated disorders. Infectious
teristics. To classify lesions, it is obviously best to con-
 iq dno ae Aue un oo ueo sN ai go saseas
sider disease mechanisms that are associated with
generally more frequent in young animals. They are
specific morphological changes, and thus with certain
usually of acute onset with rapid progression but a
pafterns of lesions as described above. This is true to a
subacute-chronic course may occur.  Infections can
certain extent, at least at the level of the large disease
be restricted to the CNS but may also be associated
categories. However we prefer to use a classification
with disseminated lesions in other organ systems.
 system based not only on morphological criteria but
Inflammatory lesions are generally multifocal, dissemi-
which also includes assessment of clinical data, includ-
nated or diffuse. Focal lesions may become space-
32
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
Occupying masses. Neurological signs may suggest
i n s a n  n
Idiopathic diseases
may predominate. Pleocytosis and protein increase in
Idiopathic means of obscure or unknown cause. Because
the CSF is typical of CNS inflammatory diseases.
this designation is still applicable for many animal CNS
diseases, idiopathic disorders comprise the single largest
Trauma
sui ou si uonudo mo ui ym sasea jo dnon
Cranial or spinal trauma results in mechanical disrup-
practical. Therefore we use the term idiopathic for a
tion of tissue compounded by traumatic injury to blood
 group of diseases with abnormal functional neurological
vessels resulting in hemorrhage and usually malacia.
signs but without morphologically detectable changes of
Trauma leads to peracute neurological signs, which in
the nervous tissue. Such syndromes or diseases are not
the case of hemorrhage, may rapidly worsen. The
 covered in this book. Examples are epilepsy, myasthenia,
 neurological signs may improve in the days and weeks
 narcolepsy and the scores of clinically ill defined “move-
following trauma. In the case of endogenous spinal
ment disorders" Such diseases often demonstrate clini-
cord trauma (e.g. intervertrebral disc disease) a suba-
cally a paroxysmal (e.g. seizures) or fluctuating course.
cute to chronic intermittent course is frequently seen.
 Routine CSF evaluation is unremarkable. It is important 
Neurological signs are mostly focal. CSF sampling is
to note that in such cases on neuropathological exami-
contraindicated in cranial trauma due to concurrent
nation no lesions are detected even though the animal
edema and raised intracranial pressure. In spinal
 may demonstrate severe neurological signs.
cord trauma various spectra of CSF changes may be
found.
Neoplasia
 Primary CNS tumors, pituitary tumors and metastatic
Anomalies or malformations
tumors originating from surrounding tissues (e.g. nasal
Abnormal development of the CNS in utero may lead
cavity) or from other organs all compromise the CNS
to gross or more subtle malformations or anomalies of
by either destructive invasion or compression by tumor
the normal anatomy, e.g. hydrocephalus, cyclopia, cere-
cell proliferation (hypercellularity). Such focal space-
bellar hypoplasia or spina bifida. Most malformations
occupying lesions can result in a rise in intracranial
occur as single point genetic mutations, and much less
 pressure and secondary peritumoral edema. Tumors can 
commonly as a result of intrauterine transplacental
also obstruct CSF flow with secondary distension of the
infections or intoxications. Malformations are usually
ventricular system. Tumors mostly affect older animals.
 clinically apparent at birth or within the first months of
The clinical course is usually subacute to chronic but a
life. Usually, neurological signs are focal and remain sta-
sudden increase in intracranial pressure may lead to
tionary, although some compensation or progression
rapid progression. Neurological signs are focal and lat-
may develop in time. Routine CSF evaluation fluid is
eralizing. In metastatic brain tumors, signs may be
unremarkable.
multifocal and clinical evidence of the primary tumor
may be found. CSF changes include mild to severe
Metabolic-toxic diseases
protein elevation, sometimes with exfoliation of tumor
Deficiencies and toxins can lead to acute destruction of
cells.
nervous tissue in certain anatomically restricted sites
in a bilateral, usually symmetrical distribution pattern.
Degenerative diseases
Tissue destruction is frequently severe with malacia,
These diseases are characterized by progressive degen-
cavitation and hemorrhage. An additional common
eration of specific cell types in the nervous system in a
microscopic lesion is a spongy vacuolar change. In some
 bilaterally symmetrical and restricted anatomical locali-
conditions lesions are more discrete and therefore
zation. Common patterns are: selective change of
resemble degenerative diseases. Metabolic-toxic diseases
neurons/myelin/axons with gliosis (hypercellularity),
 are usually in groups of animals, and of rapid onset and
spongy state, pallor or loss of white matter and abnor-
 progression reaching maximal clinical intensity within a
mal accumulation of material in neurons. Such lesions
short time. Surviving animals may gradually recover.
are attributed to specific gene defects. Most degenerative
Neurological signs reflect a particular localization but 
diseases occur in young animals in certain breeds.
without lateralization. There are usually non-specific
Sometimes they are of late onset. The course of the
 but marked changes in the CSF in both protein level and
disease is slowly progressive. Most degenerative diseases
cell content. Metabolic encephalopathies resulting from
are restricted to the CNS; however in lysosomal storage
primary extraneural organ failure (e.g. renal or hepatic)
diseases there is also selective involvement of extraneu-
exhibit a fluctuating course and diffuse localization.
ral tissues. Selective involvement leads to focal neuro-
General neuropathology  33
logical signs without lateralization. The CSF is usually
 images requires not only physical and neuroanatomical
normal.
but also neuropathological knowledge. Thus this is an
 area where diagnostic imaging and diagnostic pathology
1.4.4 General strategy
increasingly overlap. In fact, neuropathologists are often
Gross lesions
consulted to help in the interpretation of images and,
conversely, the MRI findings have become an integral
Recognition of the major lesion patterns and the ana-
 part of the documentation of neurological cases sub-
tomically based lesion distribution is the important first
mitted to necropsy. Therefore neuropathologists should
step and will direct the neuropathological assessment
become familiar with the principles of MR image
towards specific disease categories. The latter are covered
interpretation.
in the subsequent chapters of this book. It is important
t0 use this systematic stepwise approach before assess-
ing details. Fig. 1.29 shows examples of major lesion
1.5.1 Basic MRl physics
patterns. The first five images relate to recognizable
MRI generates sectional images of the body by exploit-
changes at the macroscopic level: deviation from normal
ing the nuclear magnetic resonance of atomic nuclei in
 anatomy, space-occupying mass, hemorrhage, malacia
the body. The most commonly used (and most abun-
 and selective white matter changes. When such changes
 dant) atom in this respect is hydrogen.
are seen, various diagnostic options are listed with their
According to the quantum theory, hydrogen nuclei act
respective VITAMIN D category.
 like rotating gyroscopes, which have a dipole moment 
At the next level, microscopic lesions are generally
about their rotational axis, the so-called nuclear spin. In
more difficult to interpret for beginners with one excep-
MRI, the rotational axis of the nuclear spin, which has
tion: it is easy to recognize perivascular cuffing, the
a random and disorganized orientation at rest, is polar-
hallmark of inflammatory diseases. With further experi-
-oau aunbaso pue pig oaueu uos e aq pa
 ence additional pafterns can be recognized including.
 gen nuclei of the body align along this field. This may
in increasing order of difficulty, microscopic malacic
occur in two directions: either parallel or anti-parallel to
lesions, spongy change, intracellular accumulation of 
the direction of the magnetic field, where they rotate
abnormal material, hypercellularity and selective lesions/
along their axis in a frequency that is defined by the
loss of neurons, axons or myelin.
strength of the magnetic field and the proton in question
The major patterns may offen occur in combinations,
(precession). Then, a short radio frequency pulse is
e.g. hemorrhage together with malacia or hypercellular-
emitted by a coil, which is placed around the body part
ity together with pallor of the white matter. It is impor-
 of interest. The hydrogen nuclei with the same frequency
tant to realize that lesions are dynamic processes and
as the emitted radiopulse will absorb the energy (reso-
their morphology can be modified with time.
nance frequency or “Larmor frequency") and as result
Detecting changes and recognizing the major pat-
 the nuclear spin changes its orientation in the magnetic
terns are both major steps towards diagnosing neu-
field (resonance). When the radio wave pulse is turned
ropathological problems. In the following chapters these
off resonating protons return to their original low-
basic patterns will be further subdivided and detailed
energy (equilibrium) state, a process called relaxation,
and their underlying mechanisms will be discussed. In
and the released energy can be registered by a receiver
approach, pattern recognition and understanding dis-
coil. An image can be produced because relaxation rates
ease mechanisms is most effective in achieving a neu-
of hydrogen protons vary depending on their chemical
ropathological diagnosis.
 binding in a given tissue and the water content of the
 latter. Therefore, with the additional help of paramag-
1.5 Neuropathology in the clinics: magnetic
netic contrast media, MRI is able to detect subtle differ-
resonance imaging (MRI)
ences between soft tissues. In the nervous system, this
method allows the direct and anatomically exact repro-
Johann Lang DECVDI, Department of Clinical Veterinary
 duction of gray and white matter, the ventricular system
Medicine, Division of Clinical Radiology, Vetsuisse Faculty
with the CSF the spinal cord, the spinal nerves, the
Univ. Bern
intervertebral discs and the surrounding fat. Only the
In recent years, MRI has become an essential non-
resolution of bony structures and bone/air interfaces
 invasive diagnostic method in veterinary neurology.
is poor.
This technique allows visualization of the nervous
Two relaxation components are differentiated: the so-
system in sections, very much like in the macroscopic
called T1 (or longitudinal) and the T2 (or transverse)
examination of brain slices. The interpretation of MRI
relaxations. The length of T1 relaxation (T1 relaxation
34  Veterinary Neuropathology
time) lies in the range of seconds for fluids but is much
than CSF, which has high signalintensity in this sequence,
shorter for soft tissues (tenths of seconds). The T2 relax-
resulting in good portrayal of the ventricular system.
 ation time, like the T1 relaxation time, has a great influ-
The contrast of the white to gray matter is reversed
 ence on the signal intensity of a given tissue and image
compared to TiW sequences: the gray matter is more
 contrast. In T2-weighted ( T2W) images, brain tissue has 
hyperintense than the white mafter on T2W images.
a short T2 relaxation time, whereas CSF has a long T2
T2W are sensitive for pathologies since they emphasize
relaxation time which is displayed as high signal inten-
change of water content as it occurs in most pathologies
sity structure (white).
including tumors, edema and inflammation. Increased
water content causes a prolongation of the T2 relaxa-
1.5.2 Principles of interpretation
tion times and therefore lesions are more hyperintense
Practical examples are shown in Fig. 1.30, Fig. 1.31 and
 on T2W images than normal tissues. Furthermore, iron-
Fig. 1.32. Please note that radiologists use the perspec-
containing structures such as the basal nuclei and
tive of the examiner standing in front of the animal. The
nuclei in the brainstem and cerebellum are hyperin-
right side of the image corresponds with the left side of
hunons a on panedoo sae Mzh u asu
the animal.
brain tissue.
The standard image planes in an MRI examination
 Special sequences and images using contrast agents
 are oriented in a transverse, sagittal and dorsal direction.
can selectively increase the contrast between different 
 However, any other sections are also possible. As these
tissue components and diseased versus normal areas.
slices have a certain thickness, MRI renders a two-
In the brain, the single most important sequence is
dimensional image containing all the information
 the FLAIR (fluid attenuated inversion recovery) sequence
within these tissue slabs. By using a variety of so called
which selectively suppresses the signal from free
sequences, the different components of the tissue can be
fluid such as the CSF but not of brain edema facilitating
seen in different ways. In the brain, the basic examina-
the detection of lesions in the subarachnoid space
 tion usually includes T1 W (read as T1-weighted) images,
and in the brain parenchyma close to the ventricular
T2W images and FLAIR (fluid aftenuated inversion
system.
recovery) images for the suppression of the signal from
 The diagnostic yield of a MRI investigation can be
free fluid such as the CSF.
enhanced with the injection of paramagnetic contrast 
e  r pasn Aisq ane s Mi
 agents such as gadolinium. Paramagnetic substances
from water and carry excellent anatomical information.
accelerate energy exchange of spins in the vicinity of the
Tissues with short T1 relaxation times such as fat or
contrast agent thus shortening the T1 relaxation time of
tissues that accumulate contrast agents have high signal
 the hydrogen protons and leading to increased signal
 intensity and appear bright, substances with a long T1 
intensity. Since the contrast agent does not penetrate the
such as CSF have low signal intensity. As the white
intact blood-brain barrier (BBB) of normal brain, only
matter in the brain contains more fat than the cortex
 structures without BBB will be hyperintense affter appli-
(due to its myelin content) and has therefore a shorter
cation of contrast media. Examples are the pituitary
T1 relaxation time, the T1W image provides good gray-
gland or the highly vascularized choroid plexus. In
white matfer contrast and hence an excellent anatomi-
pathological tissue with absence or disturbance of the
cal picture of the brain. Due to the usually increased
BBB, lesions will show high signal intensity and increase
water content causing prolongation of the T1 relaxation
the contrast to normal tissue thus enhancing the sensi-
time, most pathological changes appear as hypointense
tivity of an MR examination. The degree and pattern
structures compared to normal tissue.
   s o   s
 e  nss u s M u
 of abnormalities therefore increasing also the specifi-
shorter T2 relaxation time and lower signal intensity
city of the examination. See MRI Atlas.
Fig. 1.30 Male, 8-year-old crossbreed dog with clinical signs of central vestibular disease. MRI (High Field Open Magnet from Philips,
1 Tesla) including transverse T2W (A), FLAIR (B), T1 W pre- (C) and post-contrast (D) images of the posterior fossa. Diagnosis was choroid
plexus papilloma. There is a 1.5 × 2 cm extra-axial lesion in the left cerebellopontine angle causing mild right-sided deviation of the
medulla. The lesion has broad-based contact with the left petrosal bone, which is clearly delineated and has normal signal intensity
(Sl). The lesion shows high Sl in FLAlR and T2W images, and low Sl in the pre-contrast T1 sequence, and there is severe contrast
uptake of the lesion. Note the small triangular area dorsal to the medulla and continuous with the lesion (arrows) representing the
compressed fourth ventricdle. It displays the Sl of fluid with T2W hyper-, T1W hypo-, FLAlR hypointensity, and there is no contrast
aun yhnoun bunsino uas aq ue sainpns sengn pateauap Adieus pue asuaiunody au 'saas iseuon-isod aui ul suaanueua
lesion. The meninges surounding this lesion appear normal.
Fig. 1.31 Male, 7-year-old Flatcoated Retriever with reduced consciousness. MRl (High Field Open Magnet from Philips, 1 Tesla) including
transverse T2W (A), dorsal FLAIR (B), transverse T1 W pre- (C) and post-contrast (D) images of a severe vasogenic brain edema, located in
the white matter. It is hyperintense in T2W and FLAIR images with high contrast to the dark ventricles in the FLAIR studies. Typically, edema
is hypointense in T1 w images and shows no contrast uptake. Space occupying mass in right frontal lobe visible in dorsal FLAlR image.
36
 Veterinary Neuropathology
1 Tesla) including sagittal T2W (A) , dorsal FLAIR (B), dorsal T1W pre- (C) and post-contrast (D) images of the brain. Diagnosis was
meningioma. The paramedian sagittal T2 sequence reveals dilated right lateral ventricle with high Sl, and also ill defined high Sl in
the brainstem, cerebellum and spinal cord. In the center, there is arounded focal lesion delineated by a hyperintense rim. In the dorsal
FLAIR, the CSF in the ventricular system is suppressed, the perifocal edema presents hyperintense, and the well delineated extra-axial
lesion slightly hypointense compared to the edema. There is also hyperintense periventricular edema in the olfactory bulb bilaterally.
snoauabowoy aaissew si anau pue 'ueng au ol panedwon asuaiuoday Apu juasand ewapa pue uoisal 'abew ll iseuon-and aui u
contrast enhancement of the broad-based tumor.
Further reading
McGavin MD. Pathologic Basis of Veterinary Disease, 4th ed. St.
Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Neuropathology general
Mayhew J. Large Animal Neurology, 2nd ed. Chichester, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell 2008.
Bolon B, Butt MT. Fundamental Neuropathology for Pathologists
Perry A, Brat Dl. Practical Surgical Neuropathology: A
and Toxicologists. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2011.
Diagnostic Approach. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone/
DeLahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical
Elsevier, 2010.
Neurology, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
 Summers B, Cummings IF, deLahunta A. Veterinary Neuropathology.
Grant Maxie M. (ed) Jubb, Kennedy, and Palmer's Pathology of
St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1995.
 Domestic Animals, Sth ed. Edinburgh, New York: Elsevier Saunders,
http://www.vet.cornell.edu/oed/neuropathology/index.asp
2007.
Gray F, Poirier J, De Girolami U. Escourolle and Poirier's Manual of
Basic Neuropathology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Butterworth-
Neurology/functional neuroanatomy
Heinemann, 2003.
 Love S, Louis DN, Ellison DW. (eds) Greenfield's Neuropathology, 8th
DeLahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical
ed. London: Hodder Arnold, 2008.
Neurology, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
General neuropathology
37
 Platt, SR, Olby NJ. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Neurology,
Sofroniew MV, Vinters HV. Astrocytes: biology and pathology. Acta
 3rd ed. Quedgeley, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Neuropathol 2010;119:7-35.
2004.
Czeh M, Gressens P, Kaindl AM. The yin and yang of microglia. Dev
Lorenz MD, Coates JR, Kent M. Handbook of Veterinary Neurology,
Neurosci 2011;33:199-209.
 Sth ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012.
http://www.ivis.org/special_books/Braund/toc.asp
Edema
Neuroanatomy
 Lencean SM. Brain edema - a new classification. Medical Hypotheses
Canine brain transections. http://vanat.cvm.umn.edu/brainsect/
2003;61:106- 109.
Brain biodiversity bank. Michigan State University. https://www.msu.
Kimelberg HK. Water hormeostasis in the brain: basic concepts.
Neuroscience 2004;129:851-860.
edu/user/brains/
Comparative brain collections. http://brainmuseum.org/
Artifacts, pseudolesions, old age
DeLahunta A, Glass E. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical
Neurology, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
 Borras D, Ferrer I, Pumarola M. Age-related changes in the brain of
Jenkins TW. Functional Mammalian Neuroanatomy: with emphasis
the dog. Vet Pathol 1999;36:202-211.
on dog and cat, including an atlas of the central nervous system of
 a n s      d  ss
the dog, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1978.
the formation of “dark” neurons. Acta Neuropathol 2008;116:
463-464.
Kim RKS, Liu CN, Mofftt RL. A Stereotaxic Atlas of the Dog's Brain.
Springfield, Il: Charles C Thomas, 1960.
Garman RH. Histology of the central nervous system. Toxicol Pathol
 Leigh EJ, Mackillop E, Robertson ID, Hudson LC. Clinical anatomy
2011;39:22-35.
Head E. Neurobiology of the aging dog. Age (Dordr) 20ll;33:
Utrasound 2008;49:113-121.
485-496.
Singer M. The Brain of the Dog in Section. Philadelphia, PA: WB
 Kherani ZS, Auer RN. Pharmacologic analysis of the mechanism of
Saunders Company, 1962.
dark neuron production in cerebral cortex. Acta Neuropathol
2008;116:447-452.
Technigues for PNs and muscle
Pugliese M, Carrasco JL, Gomez-Anson B, Andrade C, Zamora A,
 Rodriguez MJ, Mascort J, Mahy N. Magnetic resonance imaging
 Shelton GD. Routine and specialized laboratory testing for the diag-
 of cerebral involutional changes in dogs as markers of aging: an
nosis of neuromuscular diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol
innovative tool adapted from a human visual rating scale. Vet J
2010;39:278-295.
2010;186:166-171.
Siso S, Jeffrey M, Gonzalez L. Sensory circumventricular organs in
Basic tissue reaction patterns
health and disease. Acta Neuropathol 2010;120:689-705.
Facecchia K, Fochesato LA, Ray SD, Stohs SJ, Pandey S. Oxidative
Magnetic resonance imaging
function and therapeutic strategies. J Toxicol 20ll; 683728. Epub
2011 Jul 14.
Gavin PR, Bagley RS. Practical Small Animal MRI. Ames, IO: Wiley-
Stetler RA, Gan Y, Zhang W, Liou AK, Gao Y, Cao G, Chen J. Heat
Blackwell, 2009.
shock proteins: cellular and molecular mechanisms in the central
 Elliott I, Skerritt G. Handbook of Small Animal MRI. Oxford, UK:
nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 2010;92:184-211.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland:
www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Vascular disorders
In this group of diseases there is a disturbance of blood
characteristic way. The change is called acidophilic netu-
circulation in the CNS. The lesions in these diseases
ronal necrosis. These cells show a sharply delineated
include ischemic damage to the nervous tissue resulting
shrunken cell body with a bright eosinophilic, homoge-
from a deficient blood supply and hemorrhage when
neous cytoplasm ("red and dead neurons") and pyknotic
blood vessels are injured. Vascular disorders are consid-
nuclei (see Chapter 1.3.1 ). These irreversible changes are
ered to be relatively rare in domestic animals as com-
induced after a few minutes of ischemia and become
pared to humans but are being recognized with
microscopically visible approximately 8 hours after the
increasing frequency as a result of advances in veterinary
insult. The pathogenesis of this change is complex and
diagnostic imaging.
not completely understood. The accepted mechanism
involves excitotoxicity as described in Chapter 1.3.1.
2.1  Pathophysiology of ischemia
Immediately adjacent to areas of complete ischemia
with irreversible tissue necrosis is a rim of tissue in
Because the CNS has a high glucose and oxygen demand
which the cerebral blood flow is only partially compro-
pue (Apoq ai aq paieau Aaua [eioi aul jo p e)
mised. This rim is called the penumbra, in which the
a very limited storage capacity, it is dependent on a high
damage may be reversible.
and permanent supply of oxygen and glucose by arterial
blood. Cerebral arterial blood flow remains relatively
A second wave of neuronal injury occurs during
reperfusion. Restored blood flow allows for influx of
constant despite significant changes in blood pressure.
blood-borne leukocytes and oxygen resulting in synthe-
It is maintained by the constriction and dilation of small
sis of reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide, edema
cerebral arteries and arterioles depending on whether
and hemorrhage, further exacerbating cell damage.
the systemic blood pressure rises or falls. This type of
“autoregulation" protects the brain from ischemia as
long as the cerebral blood flow is not reduced by more
2.2 General strategy for diagnosing vascular
than 60%. However, when the ischemic threshold is
lesions
exceeded, the supply of oxygen and glucose and also the
removal of potentially toxic metabolites are insufficient
· The typical clinical presentation is an animal of any
 and cellular damage occurs.
 age with a history of peracute/acute onset of neuro-
Global ischemia occurs following either severe loss
    e  ss d
of blood or decrease of blood pressure (e.g. cardiores-
 do not progress in severity. If the animal survives,
piratory arrest, heart disease, narcotic drug overdose),
signs may abate with time. Focal vascular insults
whereas local ischemia results from vascular occlusion
may be clinically silent and hence detected as an inci-
(infarct). Neurons, which are totally dependent on oxi-
 dental finding on MRI or on the neuropathological
dative glycolysis, are particularly vulnerable and there-
examination.
fore the first cell type to be affected by ischemia, followed
· Vascular lesions are often detected on gross examina-
 by oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia and endothe-
tion while sectioning the brain. In the spinal cord they
lial cells. Lack of oxygen, even for a few minutes, leads
may be easily overlooked unless there is a clear clinical/
to irreversible neuronal damage. Circulatory or respira-
imaging localization. If a spinal localization is sug-
tory disorders, as well as some toxins influencing the
 gested by the history, systematic sectioning of all seg-
oxygen content of the blood, affect the neurons in a
ments may be required.
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentials of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
38
Vascular disorders   39
HEMORRHAGE
focal
multifocal
 non-symmetrical
symmetrical
Trauma
 Trauma
Metabolic-toxic
-contusion
- coup-contre coup
 - thiamin deficiency
laceration
- equine leukoencephalomalacia
Inflammatory
- enterotoxemia
vascular
- spontaneous
- viral
hemorrhage
- bacterial
- hemorrhagic infarct
- fungal
- parasitic
Neoplastic
- hemangiosarcoma 
Vascular
- hemangioma
arteritis
coagulopathy
septicemia
Neoplastic
hemangiosarcoma
Fig. 2.1 Differential diagnosis of hemorrhage.
● The prevailing lesion patterns are gross or micro-
cular thrombosis or due to embolization of a process in
scopic well demarcated areas of malacia and/or
a distant organ (thromboembolism). Emboli arising
hemorrhage.
 from cardiac diseases, e.g. from chronic endocarditis of
· In most cases, these lesions are focal, but depending
the mitral valve or from mitral valve insuffciency, are
on the etiology (e.g. vasculitis, systemic hypertension,
 an important cause of vascular obstruction. Metastatic
global ischemia due to low blood pressure) they may
tumor emboli may occasionally obstruct major blood
be multifocal or (rarely) diffuse. Consult Fig. 6.1 for
vessels. Rarely, vascular lesions resulting from (acciden-
the differential diagnosis of malacia.
tal) intracarotid injections have been described in the
 For hemorrhagic lesions see Fig. 2.1 on the differential
horse. Vascular obstruction may also be caused by
diagnosis of hemorrhage.
a primary lesion of the cerebral blood vessel wall.
● The finding of focal or non-symmetrical multifocal
Inflammatory lesions of vessels occur in the frame of
malacic or hemorrhagic lesions quickly points to a
infectious/immune diseases and are covered in the
circulatory problem. The next step is to determine the
section on inflammation (Chapter 3). Vascular degen-
underlying primary disease. Optimally solid clinical
eration resulting from toxins is discussed in the section
or necropsy data may pinpoint a defined circulatory
on toxic-metabolic diseases (Chapter 6). Primary vas-
problem (e.g. cardiac disease) but this data is often
cular diseases such as atherosclerosis, arteriosclerosis
lacking. Searching for the cause of the problem in
and
arteriolosclerosis as it occurs in humans are
brain sections focuses then on finding vascular lesions
very rarely observed in domestic animals, possibly
or obstructions. Unfortunately these are often not
 due to their relatively low incidence of hypertensive
found and in many cases the vascular etiology remains
disease. Predisposing factors for brain infarction in
presumptive.
animals are hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism,
diabetes mellitus, hyperlipemia, hypercoagulative state
2.3 Common vascular lesions
and hypertension.
Focal ischemia leads to the formation of infarcts, a
2.3.1 Vascular lesions of the brain
circumscribed area of malacia. The localization of an
Ischemic brain infarct
 infarct depends on the arterial system involved. In all
Infarcts may occur as a result of vascular obstruction
species the brain receives blood from the basilar artery.
either due to local cerebrovascular disease causing vas-
In dogs, as in man, the brain circulation is additionally
40
0 Veterinary  Neuropathology
rostral cerebral
internal carotid 
middle cerebral
udalcerebral
rostralcerebellar
basilar
udal cerebellar
vertebral
Red: middle cerebral arteries. Violet: rostral cerebral arteries. Yellow: caudal cerebral arteries. Green: striate arteries. Blue: perforating
arteries. Gray: rostral cerebellar arteries. Orange: caudal cerebellar arteries. Brown: vertebral arteries
supported by the internal carotid artery; in cats and
 In the vast majority of cases, infarcts are solitary
sheep it is supported by the maxillary artery. A special
lesions. Ischemic infarcts occur extremely rarely in mul-
anatomical feature in ruminants, pigs and cats is the rete
tiple locations simultaneously. Occasionally, we have
mirabile, a mass of convoluted blood vessels in the area
 observed ischemic infarcts of different ages within the
of the sella turcica. In the dog, the brain is supplied by
same canine brain. Recurrence has also been observed
five pairs of large arteries (Fig. 2.2A). These branch off
in clinical MRI studies and pathological studies show
the arterial cerebral circle, a ring-shaped structure at the
infarcts of different stages to be common in aging
 base of the brain formed by the bifurcating basilar artery.
pigs.
the internal carotid arteries and communicating arteries
Macroscopically ischemic infarcts appear mostly as
 between them. The five main arterial systems are: the
single, well circumscribed areas of discoloration (tan)
rostral, middle and caudal cerebral arteries as well as the
and softening (malacia) predominantly of the gray
caudal and rostral cerebellar arteries. All these run dor-
matter but sometimes extending into the surround-
sally along the surface of the brain and give off superfi-
ing white matter (Fig. 2.3A,B). See MRI Atlas. Although
cial and deep perforating arteries to supply the deep
white matter is considered less vulnerable than gray
structures of the brain. Fig 2.2B shows the perfusion
 matfer to ischemic injury, isolated white matter infarcts
areas of the major arteries. Cerebral infarcts are less
(predominantly in the centrum semiovale) may occur in
common in dogs than in humans, presumably because
rare instances. Similar lesions may be seen in absence of 
of the presence of numerous vascular anastomoses and
 gray matter lesions following carbon monoxide intoxi-
lower prevalence of vascular and hypertensive diseases.
cation (see Chapter 6.2.5).
When a main artery is obstructed, a territorial infarct 
 In acute lesions there is often edema surrounding the
ensues; obstruction of the smaller perforating arteries
infarcted area. In HE sections, during the acute stage the
leads to lacunar infarcts. Watershed infarcts occur as a
infarcted area is pale compared to the normal brain and
result of global cerebral ischemia that is accentuated at
sharply demarcated (Fig. 2.3C). On higher magnifica-
the boundary between the territories of two major cer-
 tion, acidophilic neurons and swollen axons are observed
ebral arteries. The predilection site for ischemic infarc-
(Fig. 2.3D). Astrocytes may have swollen nuclei. The
 tion in that case is the internal capsule and surrounding
necrotic tissue is soon invaded by large numbers of mac-
area (terminal perfusion area of the rostral and middle
rophages removing the dead tissue (Fig. 2.4A). In the
cerebral arteries or middle and caudal cerebral arteries).
 penumbra there is vascular proliferation and astroglio-
In dogs, infarcts are most often found in the cerebellum
sis. In surviving animals, infarcts usually become cavities
and forebrain.
that  are  lined and  traversed  by dense astroglial scar
Vascular disorders  41
Fig. 2.3 Dog. Anemic infarct. A: MRI (T2W sequence) showing a well demarcated hyperintense lesion representing a lacunar infarct
involving a perforating artery of the rostral midbrain. B: Same animal as in A, well demarcated area of brownish discoloration on both
sides of the third ventridle extending into the substantia nigra of the right side. C: On HE the infarcted area appears well demarcated
wnauonua ydoaday ym saeden juauoid pue areis Auods suonau pudope sleaan ueuaew aubie :a aled pue
(arrow).
tissue (Fig. 2.4B). In many cases of suspected cerebral
cortex (Purkinje cells), the basal nuclei and thalamic
infarction the vascular obstruction is not found on his-
nuclei ("selective vulnerability"). Widespread ischemic
tological examination.
 damage with a bilateral distribution in the most vulner-
able areas can be seen e.g. following anesthesia acci-
dents and cardiac arrest, furthermore in neonatal
Ischemic encephalopathy
 maladjustment syndrome, severe anemia, hypotension
Global ischemia leads to widespread, bilaterally sym-
and hypovolemic shock. However, in animals dying
 metrical neuronal death in selectively vulnerable neuro-
immediately or within hours following the ischemic
 nal populations (in human medicine referred to as
insult, which is very often the case, there is not suffcient
ischemic encephalopathy). Generally, the brain is not
time for microscopic lesions to develop and the brain
uniformly involved, but due to the vascular anatomy and
 may appear normal. Depending on duration and inten-
varying vulnerability of neuronal subtypes, neuronal
sity of ischemia, the neuropathology varies from a few
 necrosis appears first in the cerebral cortex (in the so-
 necrotic neurons (only visible with the microscope) to
called watershed zones), where the hippocampus appears 
 pseudolaminar necrosis of the cerebral cortex (polioen-
to be the most sensitive part, followed by the cerebellar
 cephalomalacia) to global infarction of the brain, which
42
2Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 2.4 A: Dog. Anemic infarct. After several days, infarcted areas become infiltrated with gitter cells. Note the sharp demarcation 
between the infarcted and unaffected tissue. HE. B: Dog. Chronic cerebellar infarct in a dog involving the perfusion area of the right
rostral cerebellar artery. The right cerebellar hemisphere is largely replaced by a cystic area (now collapsed), note sharp demarcation
from the unaffected tissue.
can be appreciated macroscopically. Ischemic encepha-
 surviving animals, there is marked atrophy of one hemi-
lopathy has to be differentiated from metabolic toxic 
 sphere. The underlying cause is parasitic migration of
encephalomalacias which in the absence of adequate
Cuterebra larvae (see also Chapter 3.3.8). Presumably
 anamnestic information may be quite difficult. Consult
 toxic effects of the parasite induce vascular spasms
Fig. 6.1.
leading to ischemia.
Feline ischemic encephalopathy
Hemorrhagic brain infarcts
This condition is well known in the US in adult cats with
These may occur following thrombosis of veins (Fig.
acute forebrain signs, which may resolve in time. In
2.5A,B). Obstruction of large extracerebral veins, for
feline ischemic encephalopathy there is unilateral
example the dural venous sinus as in humans, has been
extensive infarction of the cerebral cortex and hippo-
 very rarely documented in animals. More common is
campus sometimes including the deeper structures. In
vascular damage with increased leakage of erythrocytes
Fig. 2.5 A: Dog. Left parietal cortex. Hemorrhagic infarct associated with brain swelling and midline shift. B: This infarct was caused
by venous thrombosis that was associated with a metastatic carcinoma. HE.
Vascular disorders   43
Fig. 2.6 A: Dog. Spontaneous hemorrhage in area of globus pallidus dissecting the internal capsule. B: Dog. Cerebral hemangioma
associated with spontaneous cerebral hemorrhage showing plexiform arrangement of numerous cross-sections of well differentiated
and thin-walled vessels. HE.
 when reperfusion occurs in focal ischemia. This leads to
ring hemorrhages which may coalesce to form larger
hemorrhagic lesions.  Hemorrhagic cerebral  infarcts
 must initially be differentiated from traumatic lesions
(frequently meningeal contact, meningeal hemorrhage,
 possibly “contre-coup" lesions in other locations) or
from embolic encephalitis following septicemia (mul-
tiple, less circumscribed hemorrhages) (see Fig. 2.1).
For septic encephalitis and trauma see chapters 3
and 4.
Hemorrhage/hematoma
Hemorrhage (Fig. 2.6A) is a common major lesion
paftern and can be caused by trauma, toxic-metabolic,
infectious/inflammatory vascular injury (e.g. septicemia
or vascular tumors). Consult Fig. 2.1 for differential
Fig. 2.7 Dog with septicemia. Cross-section of forebrain.
diagnosis. In contrast to humans, in which spontaneous
Multifocal and randomly distributed hemorrhages of varying size 
brain hemorrhage (hemorrhagic stroke) is a relatively
in the gray and white matter.
frequent cause of neurological dysfunction, sponta-
neous rupture of blood vessels is rare in domestic
indicate coagulation disorders induced by an imbalance
animals since the underlying combination of vascular
between coagulation and fibrinolysis (e.g. disseminated
 changes and primary hypertension as in humans is
 intravascular coagulation), toxins (e.g. dicumarol intox-
lacking. In animals, large space-occupying hematomas
ication), vasculitis (Fig. 2.7), trauma or metastatic vas-
can be caused by preexisting vascular pathologies such
cular tumors.
as vascular tumors (cavernous hemangiomas) and
 If the animal survives the initial vascular insult,
rarely malformations (vascular hamartomas or aneu-
 the hematoma becomes infiltrated by macrophages,
rysms). However, it is offen difficult to find evidence 
 which metabolize hemoglobin in various stages from
 of such vascular lesions amidst massive hemorrhage
 the phagocytosed erythrocytes to hemosiderin. The
in histological sections (Fig. 2.6B). In these cases,
 latter becomes visible in HE sections from about 3
hematomas are generally focal, mostly rounded
 days following hemorrhage and may persist throughout
 solitary lesions. See MRI Atlas. Multiple hemorrhages
life.
 44  Veterinary  Neuropathology
Fig. 2.8 Cat. Feline hypertensive encephalopathy A: Hyaline changes and thickening of arteriolar walls, secondary proteinaceous
exudation, edema and gliosis in the surrounding brain parenchyma. HE. B: Subarachnoidal arteries showing hyperplastic changes with
massive thickening of the wall due to adventitial fibroblast proliferation and subendothelial deposition of hyaline material. HE.
Perforating arteries arising from the dorsal and ventral
Feline hypertensive encephalopathy
spinal arteries supply specific areas of any given cord
Neurological signs compatible with hypertensive enceph-
segment as depicted in Fig. 2.9A.
 alopathy as it occurs in humans have been described
 in cats in association with systemic hypertension and
Fibrocartilagenous emboli (FCE)
renal failure. Hypertensive encephalopathy develops
with an abrupt and prolonged increase of systemic
Spinal cord infarcts resulting from fibrocartilaginous
blood pressure that overwhelms the autoregulatory
embolism are quite common in dogs and occur less
mechanisms of the brain. Neuropathologically, it is
frequently in other domestic animals. Animals with
characterized by hypertensive vascular changes in arter-
such spinal cord infarcts show peracute often lateralized
ies and arterioles (Fig. 2.8). These may present as hyali-
spinal signs without pain. The fibrocartilaginous emboli
nosis of the vessel wall (thickening due to leakage of
are histochemically identical to nucleus pulposus of the
eosinophilic material and its deposition in the vessel
 intervertebral discs, hence it is postulated that they orig-
 inate from this source. However, the precise mechanism
tic arteriolosclerosis (thickening of the vessel wall due
by which the emboli access the spinal cord blood supply.
to concentric hyperplasia of spindloid cells). Secondary
 particularly large-caliber arteries, from the nucleus pul-
 changes include severe vasogenic edema, hemorrhages 
 posus is unclear. It has been proposed that nucleus pul-
in the parenchyma and subarachnoid space that may
 posus material may penetrate into the vertebral vessels
be significant, and ischemic necrosis with influx of
or into the venous sinus of the bone marrow of the
phagocytes.
 vertebral body during trauma/exercise. From the latter
 it is claimed to enter arteries and veins by retrograde
flow through arteriovenous anastomoses. In people
the explanation is that Schmorl's nodules break off
2.3.2 Vascular lesions of the spinal cord
from the outer cartilaginous plate of the disc into the
The spinal cord is supplied by two dorsal (dorsal
 medulla of the vertebral body. Several other mechanisms
spinal arteries) and one ventral (ventral spinal artery)
have been proposed. Whatever the real mechanism
superficially located arteries formed by anastomosing
 and source of this fibrocartilagenous embolus is, occlu-
branches of the dorsal and ventral radicular arteries
sion of the arterial supply or venous drainage leads to
and extending over much of the length of the cord.
characteristic patterns of ischemic necrosis. Spinal cord
Vascular disorders   45
Fig. 2.9 A: Schematic representation of spinal cord perfusion areas (based on de Lahunta and Glass, Veterinary Neuroanatomy and
Clinical Neurology. Saunders Elsevier 2009). Red: central (sulcal) branch of the ventral spinal artery. Blue: circumferential branches
(arterial vasocorona) of the ventral radicular arteries. Green: circumferential branches (arterial vasocorona) of the dorsal spinal artery.
B: Dog. Spinal cord infarction due to showering of the circumferential branches of the dorsal spinal artery and the central branch of
the ventral spinal artery by fibrocartilagenous emboli. Relatively well demarcated areas of hemorrhage and malacia (brown discolora-
tion) are present in the right dorsolateral funiculi and in the central gray matter.
arteries have numerous anastomoses and hence it is
composed of fibrin clots and degenerated blood
likely that in order to cause spinal cord infarction
cells.
multiple vessels must be simultaneously occluded by a
 shower of fbrocartilageneous emboli. Depending on the 
Other causes of spinal cord infarction
size of the embolus, occlusion of the spinal artery or its 
Spinal cord infarction resulting from the same causes as
 central (sulcal) branches leads to necrosis of gray matter.
  d   i   
In contrast, occlusion of the circumferential branches
collateral circulation in the cord is well developed. It
(arterial vasocorona) of the spinal and radicular arteries,
might occur as a complication in severe cases of canine
which supply the white matter, leads to a restricted
steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis (SRMA, see
pattern of leukomyelomalacia. If both systems are
Chapter 3), in which thrombi occlude major perforating
involved in multiple showering then there is confluent,
 arteries as a result of arterial wall necrosis.
sharply defined myelomalacia. These resultant areas of
polio- or leuko- or confluent myelomalacia can be seen
Spinal cord hemorrhage
macroscopically, especially when they have become
Spontaneous hemorrhage may result from vascular mal-
cystic or hemorrhagic (Fig. 2.9B). Venous occlusion
formations or tumors as in the brain. Hematomyelia has
leads to hemorrhagic malacia. The emboli may involve
also been rarely seen in dogs with SRMA when the
several consecutive or multifocal segments and more
inflammatory process leads to rupture of a large artery
rarely the brainstem and cerebellum. Histologically, 
Extensive subarachnoid hemorrhage of the brain and
temporal features are similar to those described in cer-
spinal cord following myelography has been described
ebral infarcts.
in dogs. The pathogenesis is not clear: hemorrhage may
 Fibrocartilagenous emboli are generally, but not 
 be the result of traumatic injury of a vessel during
always, found in both arteries and veins (Fig. 2.10).
lumbar puncture or of an idiosyncratic response to the
Because this material stains metachromatically it can be
 contrast medium. Post-anesthetic hemorrhagic mye-
 best detected by Giemsa, toluidine blue or alcian blue
lopathy, with acute diffuse hemorrhagic myelomalacia
histochemical stains (Fig. 2.10D).
in many segments of the cord, occurs in horses undergo-
Sometimes no fibrocartilagenous emboli can be
 ing surgery in dorsal recumbency. The mechanism is not
detected in myelomalacia but just thrombi or emboli
understood.
46
6Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 2.10 Dog. Fibrocartilagenous emboli (FCE). A: White matter of the cord. Well demarcated area of pallor with edema, acute
necrosis and hemorrhage. Embolus occludes the dorsal radicular artery (arrow). HE. B: Infarcted area with edema, dilation of myelin
sheaths, fibrocartilagenous embolus (arrow). HE. C: A large fibrocartilagenous embolus almost completely occludes a subarachnoidal
vein. HE. D: Fibrocartilagenous emboli stain bright blue with alcian-blue stain.
Garosi LS, McConnell JF. Ischaemic stroke in dogs and humans: a
2.3.3 Ischemia in the peripheral nervous
comparative review. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:521-529.
system and muscles
Wessmann A, Chandler K, Garosi L. Ischaemic and haemorrhagic
Distal aortic thrombosis
stroke in the dog. Vet J 2009;180:290-303.
This is a relatively common disorder in cats associated
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and occurs rarely
Hemorrhage
in dogs. These cats show a sudden onset of paraparesis
Martin-Vaquero P, Moore SA, Wolk KE, Oglesbee MJ. Cerebral
to paraplegia with painful hard muscles and lacking a
vascular hamartoma in a geriatric cat. I Feline Med Surg 201l;
femoral pulse. The aortic thrombosis leads to acute
13:286-290.
ischemic necrosis of the tibial and peroneal nerves and
Packer RA, Bergman RL, Coates JR, Essman SC, Weis K, O'Brien
 of the muscles of the hindlimbs. The spinal cord is
DP, Johnson GC. Intracranial subarachnoid hemorrhage follow-
ing lumbar myelography in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
spared.
2007;48:323-327.
Further reading
Hypertensive encehalopathy
Cerebral infarcts
Brown CA, Munday JS, Mathur S, Brown SA. Hypertensive encepha-
Garosi LS. Cerebrovascular disease in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North
lopathy in cats with reduced renal function. Vet Pathol 2005;42:
Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:65-79.
642-649.
Vascular disorders
47
         s
Intern Med 1994;8:79-86.
Aortic thrombosis
Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA, Fine DM, Grumbles PL. Arterial
Fibrocartilagenous emboli
thromboembolisrm in cats: acute crisis in 127 cases (1992-2001)
 De Risio L, Platt SR. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy in small
and long-term managerment with low-dose aspirin in 24 cases. JI Vet
animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:859-869.
Intern Med 2003;17:73-83.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
 the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
www. wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
3
Inflammatory diseases
The term inflammation is currently often used in a
virus infections. Bacteria and fungi and some viruses
broad sense covering a wide range of reactive processes
(e.g. equine herpes virus) damage endothelial cells
resulting from tissue injury. In this chapter we focus on
with disturbance of blood vessel permeability with
inflammatory diseases in the traditional sense of the
resulting brain edema and/or hemorrhage. Some agents
word, i.e. lesions characterized by strong participation
may target the cells of the white matter causing myelin
of the immune system. Morphological evidence of such
destruction.
an immune reaction consists of accumulation of inflam-
matory cells in the meninges, around the blood vessels
3.1.2 immune reaction of the host against
and in the parenchyma. Most of these lesions are associ-
the infectious agent in the CNS
ated with infectious diseases but some result from
The innate immune system
 derangement of the immune system.
Similar to other tissues, the CNS also possesses an innate
3.1  Pathophysiology of inflammation
immune system represented by pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that
3.1.1 Entry and effect of infectious agents
are capable of recognizing certain molecular structures
in the nervous system
 on pathogens or altered tissue constituents. PRRs are
Hematogenous spread from other infected organs is
strongly expressed on microglial cells and also on astro-
common in bacterial infections with infected throm-
cytes. Recognition of pathogens by these receptors elicits
boemboli becoming lodged in small blood vessels in the
an immediate reaction with secretion of toxic molecules
CNS. Viruses can enter the CNS from the blood through
and swift recruitment of other cells such as neutrophils,
endothelial cell infection or penetration of the blood-
macrophages and natural killer cells. An example of such
brain barrier within circulating infected mononuclear
an innate immune reaction is the formation of micro-
cells. A few areas of the CNS (choroid plexus, circum-
abscesses in listeriosis.
ventricular organs) have fenestrated capillaries where
The adaptive immune response
 agents may access the brain directly. Some infectious
agents, such as herpes viruses and the Listeria bacterium,
Compared to other organs, the CNS seems poorly
can also enter the peripheral nerves to get into the CNS
equipped to participate in the adaptive immune
by traveling within axons. The agent is then carried
 response. A significant residential lymphocyte popula-
transsynaptically by axonal transport from one neuronal
tion, and lymphatic drainage system are lacking. A
pool to the next. Infectious agents can also spread
blood-brain barrier (BBB) effectively shields the CNS
through the CSF. This is common in bacterial infections,
from the blood and, normal CNS cells, with the excep-
once the agents have entered the cerebrospinal fluid
tion of microglia, do not express antigen presenting
compartment.
(MHC) molecules on their surface. Still, antigen can
 Many agents, especially viruses such as rabies virus,
drain from the CSF to the cervical lymph nodes or, in
have an affinity for neurons often with specific tropism
 the case of viruses replicating in endothelial cells, may
for certain neuronal populations. The process of viral
 be expressed at the luminal surface of the blood vessels
 replication may kil the neurons by apoptosis or necro-
in the nervous system, thus becoming recognizable by
sis leading to serious neurological signs. An extreme
circulating lymphocytes. Activated T cells spontane-
example is the severe cerebrocortical necrosis in herpes
ously cross the BBB and may accumulate when they
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
48
Inflammatory diseases:
49
recognize their antigen presented by microglial cells.
An important class of inflammatory mediators, which
The replication of agents in the CNS and changes directly
play a role in the regulation of the inflammatory response
induced by them leads to a range of complex reactive
 are the cytokines. This is a large group of compounds 
events.
with such widely diverging activities that their lumping
together in one class of molecules is rather arbitrary.
Invasion of immune cells in the nervous
Cytokines can promote inflammation, others are anti-
system
inflammatory. Some cytokines such as tumor necrosis
A range of molecules has been recognized to play a
factor alpha (TNF alpha) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) are
crucial regulatory role in CNS inflammation. These
involved in tissue damage by triggering the release of
include, among others, adhesion molecules, metallo-
toxic molecules from macrophages. However, cytokines
proteinases, chemokines and cytokines. All these mole-
not only enhance or induce tissue damage but are also
cules can be constitutively expressed by CNS cells, albeit
usually at low levels. Most play an important role in CNS
timing of the pathological process, amount of mediator
 development and homeostasis. Some are inducible by
produced and interaction with other molecules. An
certain stimuli and all can be upregulated by a wide
example for cytokine activity is the release of IL-8 in the
range of noxious events. Because of their potency, even
spinal fluid of dogs with steroid-responsive meningitis
in very small quantities, it is not surprising that the
 arteritis which leads to invasion of inflammatory cells
expression of these molecules is tightly regulated at
into the CSF compartment. In canine distemper infec-
several levels. This regulation is extremely complex.
 tion there is an upregulation of pro-inflammatory
These molecules frequently act by binding to their cor-
cytokines, whereas anti-inflammatory cytokines remain
responding receptors mediating signal transduction
at base level explaining the long-lasting nature of the
with upregulation of the cell's machinery, for example
disease.
 increased transcription activity. Frequently they are pro-
 All the complex molecular interactions described
 above finally lead to infltration of inflammatory cells
into their active form by specific enzymes which in turn
across the BBB.
are regulated by still other factors. Some are regulated
3.1.3 Morphological aspects of the immune
by specific inhibitors secreted by the CNS tissue.
Entry of inflammatory cells into the CNS across the
response
blood-brain barrier is an important first step in reaction
The major morphological hallmark of inflammation
to injury. Integrins, transmembranous molecules regu-
is accumulation of inflammatory cells around blood
lating communication between the extracellular com-
vessels or perivascular cuffing. The infltrating inflamma-
partment and the cytoplasm, and adhesion molecules,
tory cells also invade the perivascular parenchyma and
expressed by endothelial cells, play an important role in
the CSF spaces.
leukocyte trafficking across the blood-brain barrier.
The imported specifically sensitized immune cells
Matrix metallo-proteinases (MMPs) are enzymes which
quickly expand upon interaction with their target (anti-
can degrade the extracellular matrix in this way disrupt-
 gens of the infectious agent) , and many additional cells
ing the blood-brain barrier for entry of leukocytes into
 are recruited from the blood into the CNS. Following
the CNS parenchyma. The MMPs are present in an inac-
the cellular immune response (cytotoxic and helper T
tive form, which must be cleaved by other enzymes in
cells), a humoral immune response is initiated as B cells
 order become effective. They are additionally regulated
are recruited and develop  into  immunoglobulin-
by tissue inhibitors of metallo-proteinases (TIMPs) illus-
producing plasma cells. This leads to the intrathecal
trating the complex control mechanisms for such potent
 production of antibodies against the infectious agent,
compounds. MMPs are, for example, upregulated in
which can be detected in the cerebrospinal fluid in the
canine distemper virus infection along with the invasion
live animal.
of inflammatory cells through the blood vessel walls.
In the wake of the inflammatory response, with the
Cellular migration and chemotaxis (the process by
 presence of numerous highly active molecules, the local
which inflammatory cells are attracted to the brain)
residential cells are stimulated to participate. Proliferation
is further modified by chemokines and their receptors
 of glial cells can be diffuse but is often nodular along
expressed by glial cells in the CNS. Both can be upregu-
with the location of the infectious agent. These glial
lated by various inflammatory mediators. Each chemok-
nodules consist of a mixture of invaded inflammatory
 ine has its specific receptor but multiple receptor usage
cells, microglial cells/macrophages and astrocytes. The
is also possible, again providing a means for complex
 nodules are particularly prominent in neurotropic
regulation.
viral infections. Macrophages are usually strongly
 50  Veterinary Neuropathology
 upregulated in bacterial and fungal infections with the
 In some infections, invasion and proliferation of
formation of granulomas. As in other types of tissue
inflammatory cells is so intense that large space-
injury, endothelial cells can proliferate with formation 
occupying inflammatory lesions are formed. This is the
of capillary sprouts. Capillary proliferation is often a
case in granulomatous encephalitis or brain abscesses
 prominent feature in protozoal infections.
arising from bacterial and fungal infections. Space-
 Generally, the intrathecal immune response should
occupying lesions in the CNS cause compression of the
lead to clearance of the infection and recovery. Indeed,
surrounding tissues, formation of edema and rise in
this is frequently observed in immunohistochemical
 intracranial pressure, similar to neoplasms. Inflammatory
studies of infections, such as tick-borne encephalitis
changes in the CSF compartment can cause obstruction 
virus, which is usually rapidly eliminated. Also the
of CSF flow with development of hydrocephalus. This
bacterial load in encephalitis caused by Listeria mono-
happens frequently in feline infectious peritonitis
cytogenes decreases sharply during the course of the
(FIP) or bacterial CNS infections in neonatal food
disease. However, the extent to which an animal will
animals because the inflammation occurs within the
recover depends on the infectious load in the CNS.
CSF pathways.
When the immune response evolves very early and
rapidly, spread of the agent within the CNS is limited
3.2 General strategy for diagnosis
 and animals may only suffer from mild and transient
of inflammatory lesions
signs. If not, large or multiple areas of the CNS
become infected eliciting widespread inflammation. In
The typical presentation is an animal at any age
that case the immune response directed against intra-
with acute multifocal neurological signs, which usually
cellular agents can also induce significant damage to
 progress quite rapidly. Morphologically, the prevailing
 the tissue when cells are killed together with the agent.
major pattern is perivascular cuffing. Additional major
Immunopathologic complications can result in severe
 patterns which can be encountered are hemorrhage,
tissue damage with encephalomalacia or demyelina-
malacia, space-occupying lesion, hypercellularity and
tion. For example extensive tissue destruction associ-
loss of myelin. Thus there is a very large number of
ated with suppurative inflammation is common in
additional morphological features to be analyzed requir-
listeriosis.
ing a systematic approach outlined in Fig. 3.1.
perivascufar cuffing.
accumufation of infammatory celfs in meninges
infftration of inffammatory cefs in CNS tissue
: inflammation
Suppurative
 Eosinophilic
Suppurative ganulomatous
determine inflammatory pattern
Mononudlear 
Mononuclear granulomatous
 Polioencephalitis
asculitis
 Leukoencephalitis 
Meninges, brain,spinal cord,
 Nerves, gray/white matter 
 determine lesion distribution
Focal
Multifocal
 Dissiminated
Specific areas
Species
Epidemiology
Inclusion bodies
search for specific diagnostic 
Infectious agents in sections
features
histochemical  stains
 Immunohistochemistry 
 In situ hybridisation/PCR
Fig. 3.1 General strategy for diagnosis of inflammatory disorders.
Inflammatory diseases  51
Fig. 3.2 Examples of major inflammatory reaction patterns A: Bacterial sepsis. Bovine. Cerebral white matter. Suppurative inflamma-
tion. Focal infiltration with neutrophils. HE. B: Bovine. Brainstem. Sporadic bovine encephalitis. Perivascular cuffing with mononuclear
infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages. HE. C: Dog. Cerebral white matter. Granulomatous meningoencephalitis.
with intense accumulation of inflammatory cells within and around the arterial wall. HE. E: Necrotizing leukoencephalitis. Dog cerebel-
lum. Intense focal inflammation in the white matter (wm) (cc, cerebellar cortex). HE.
cific groups of organisms have a clear tendency to
3.2.1 Recognizing major inflammatory
induce specific patterns, there are no absolute rules!
reaction patterns
More than one paftern may occur in the same lesion.
 The invading inflammatory cells are reacting to the pres-
The next step is to determine the prevailing inflamma-
ence of an infectious agent and/or altered (and some-
tory pattern. The major patterns are briefly described
times normal) tissue constituents. Depending on the
here below and some basic morphological features are
particular disease there are a number of different basic
illustrated in Fig. 3.2.
reaction patterns which we can distinguish morphologi-
cally. In addition to the type of reactive paftern we can
Suppurative inflammation
also quickly distinguish some obvious trends for an
 In this type of inflammatory response polymorphonu-
 inflammatory process to specifically target certain tissue
clear leukocytes are the predominating cell type (Fig.
compartments: gray matter, white matter or blood
 3.2A). In suppurative processes, influx of inflammatory
vessels.
cells may be so intense that it is macroscopically visible
 Thus recognizing these patterns helps us to direct the
as clouding of the meninges. Large focal accumulations
further examination and diagnosis. However, while spe-
 of polymorphonuclear cells lead to formation of an
52
2  Veterinary Neuropathology
abscess. In the subacute and chronic stage of initially
Leukoencephalitis/demyelination
suppurative inflammation mononuclear cells with lym-
phocytes, histiocytes and plasma cells also participate
Some infectious diseases and immune disorders focus
-od e oi bupeal aqnu u asu Aenpna pue
on the white matter (Fig. 3.2E). Destruction of the
 granulomatous pattern.
myelin sheaths with sparing of the axons is called pri-
mary demyelination. In the context of inflammatory
 Non-suppurative (mononuclear) inflammation
diseases demyelination may be primary or secondary, in
Here mononuclear cells (lymphocytes, plasma cells,
 the latter case resulting from the inflammatory response
in which axons are affected as well.
monocytes) dominate the infiltrates (Fig. 3.2B). In viral
infections, this type of infltration is usually accompa-
Vasculitis
nied by specific involvement of certain cell populations:
Some inflammatory diseases are characterized by severe
neurons (neurotropic), endothelial cells (endothelio-
 lesions of the veins and arteries as a result of infiltration
tropic), white matter (demyelinating) leading to addi-
with inflammatory cells within the blood vessel walls
tional typical patterns discussed below.
(Fig. 3.2D). Damage of the blood vessel wall causes
Eosinophilic inflammation
leakage of plasma and blood cells with formation
of perivascular hemorrhages and/or ischemic tissue
This is a relatively rare type of inflammation. Significant
damage.
numbers of eosinophils in an inflammatory infiltrate are
A spectrum of diseases can be included within a
immediately apparent in histological sections. They are
major reaction pattern as shown in Table 3.1.
commonly associated with parasitic and also fungal
infections.
3.2.2 Determining the distribution pattern
of the lesions
Granulomatous inflammation
Inflammation may be focal but more often multiple
Granulomatous inflammation generally occurs with
areas of the CNS are affected with a multifocal (several
intracellular infectious agents, parasites and foreign
separate lesions), disseminated (many small lesions) or
bodies, but also in a modified pattern in immune-
diffuse (all areas affected) distribution pattern.
mediated disorders (e.g. GME). The characteristic
The anatomical distribution of the lesions is also
feature in this pattern is a marked accumulation/
very important. A specific infectious agent or immune
proliferation of activated histiocytic cells/macrophages
response may target specific areas of the nervous system.
(epithelioid macrophages) in the inflammatory infil-
This can be related to the mode of entry or, particularly
trates (Fig. 3.2C). The latter often invade the perivascu-
in the case of viruses, to a tropism for certain cell types,
lar tissue with formation of large, often macroscopically
such as for example motor neurons in the cord and
visible space-occupying lesions: granulomas. In some
brainstem. The latter will then lead to a distinct polioen-
lesionsmultinucleatedgiant cells are formed. Granuloma-
cephalomyelitis. Bacterial and fungal infections are gen-
 tous inflammation can be associated with suppurative
erally less selective because in most cases they invade the
or with non-suppurative infiltration of inflammatory
brain hematogenously, frequently causing widespread
cells. The former is also called pyogranulomatous
infection in the CSF pathways or abscesses and granu-
inflammation and represents the chronic stage of ini-
lomas. Immune-mediated diseases often have specific
tially suppurative lesions.
targets, e.g. the proximal portions of the motor nerves
in polyneuritis or the meningeal arteries in SRMA. Thus
Polioencephalitis
assessment of the anatomical location of the lesions
This is a frequent variant of non-suppurative inflam-
(CSF, gray or white mafter, nerves, blood vessels, specific
mation, particularly in viral infections that have an
anatomical areas) is helpful for the diagnosis of inflam-
affinity for neurons. Therefore, the lesions are often
matory disorders.
exclusively localized or most severe in the gray matter
(polioencephalitis/poliomyelitis).  Depending  on  the
3.2.3 Specific features
 agent, specific populations of nerve cells are targeted.
Since most infectious agents have a specific species spec-
Thus, the distribution pattern can indicate a specific
trum and varying geographical incidences, the species as
etiology. In neurotropic infections one finds varying
well as the local epidemiological situation have to be
degrees of neuronal degeneration with neuronophagia,
considered in the interpretation of pathological find-
neuronal loss and gliosis.
ings. Finally, demonstration of an agent allows a specific
Inflammatory diseases 
53
Table 3.1 Interpretation of inflammatory patterns (FIP feline infectious peritonitis: NE, necrotizing encephalitis: NME, necrotizing 
meningoencephalitis; SRMA, Steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis).
INFLAMMATORY PATTERN
ETIOLOGY
SPECIFIC DISEASES
Suppurative
Bacterial
Tuberculosis, embolic encephalitis, sellaturcica empyema (ruminants),
meningo-ependymitis during septicemia (food animals, horses).
listeriosis (ruminants); Streptococcosis, melioidosis
Fungal, algal
Aspergillosis, candidiasis, mucormycosis, blastomycosis,
coccidiodomycosis, protothecosis, cryptococcosis, encephalitozoonosis,
cladosporiodiosis, fusariosis
Non-infectious
SRMA (dog)
Viral
Arbovirus, herpesvirus (in peracute stage)
 Eosinophilic
Helmintic
Angiostrongyfus, Bayfisascaris, Spirocerca fupi (dog): Cuterebra (cat):
Strongylus, Angiostrongylus, Haficephafobus (horse); Setaria (horse,
sheep, goat ): Elaphostrongylus, Parelaphostrongylus (sheep. goat);:
coenurosis, cystecercosis (ruminants)
Protozoal
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, sarcosporidiosis (sheep),
toxoplasmosis (dog, cat), neosporosis (dog), amebiasis (dog, bovine,
equine)
Non-infectious
Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, eosonophilic granuloma (dog)
Suppurative-granulomatous
 Bacterial
Tuberculosis, abscess
Fungal, algal
Aspergillosis, candidiasis, mucormycosis, blastomycosis,
COccidiodomycosis, protothecosis, cryptococcosis, encephalitozoonosis,
cladosporiodiosis, fusariosis
Viral
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Non-suppurative
Viral
 Neurotropic, endotheliotropic, demyelinating 
Bacterial
Listeriosis
Protozoal
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, sarcosporidiosis (sheep).
toxoplasmosis (dog. cat), neosporosis, (dog), amebiasis (dog, bovine,
equine)
Non-infectious
NE, NME (dog)
 Polioencephalitis/-myelitis
Viral
Rabies, pseudorabies: spring-summer encephalitis, post vaccinal
distemper (dog): feline poliomyelitis, Borna disease (cat, horse, sheep):
West Nile virus (horse, cattle, sheep, dog, cat); Western, Venezuelan
and Eastern equine encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis virus, Hendra
virus (horse); bovine herpes 5, bovine paramyxovirus: louping ill
(sheep); teschovirus, rubola virus, encephalomyocarditis virus,
vomiting and wasting disease, swine vesicular disease (pig)
Non-infectious
Greyhound encephalitis
Non-suppurative-
Viral
Visna, caprine arthritis encephalitis, equine infectious anemia
granulomatous
Non-infectious
GME, NE, NME (dog): cauda equina neuritis
(Continued)
54  Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 3.1 (Continued)
INFLAMMATORY PATTERN
ETIOLOGY
SPECIFIC DISEASES
Vasculitis
Fungal
Aspergillosis, mucormycosis
Bacterial
Rocky mountain spotted fever (dog), thrombotic meningoencephalitis
(bovine), embolic encephalitis
Viral
Canine hepatitis, FIP equine herpes virus 1, malignant catarrhal fever
(bovine), classical swine fever, African swine fever
 Chlamydial
Sporadic bovine encephalitis
Protozoal
Equine trypanosomiasis
Non-infectious
SRMA (dog)
Leukoencephalitis/
Viral
Canine distemper, feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia virus
demyelination
myelopathy, visna, border disease
Non-infectious
Polyneuritis, allergic encephalitis, NE
etiological diagnosis. Using histochemical stains such
examination this disease has always to be included in the
as a Gram, GMS (Grocotrs silver-methenamine) and
differential diagnosis regardless of the species. No cor-
 Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS), bacteria and fungi are easier
relation may exist between the severity of clinical symp-
to detect. In the case of viral infections, the detection of
toms and the intensity of the inflammatory response.
inclusion bodies may be helpful. Specific immunohisto-
There is a polioencephalitis with perivascular mononu-
chemical (ICH) staining or in situ hybridization (ISH)
dlear cuffs and glial nodules, which is most obvious in
techniques, both of which work very well in paraffin
the brainstem but may be very discrete (Fig. 3.3A). In
sections, are available for a wide range of agents. Quite
horses, spinal cord involvement may be the main feature.
often, however, no infectious agents can be found and
Suspicion of rabies can be confirmed by finding typical
we are left with a morphological diagnosis and some
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in the neurons of the hip-
speculation as to the etiology In the immune-mediated
 pocampus and in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum
diseases, the nature and distribution of the lesions is
(Negri bodies) (Fig. 3.3B). Rabies antigen can be easily
usually quite typical, allowing a specific morphological
demonstrated with IHC in paraffin sections (Fig. 3.3C).
diagnosis.
Herpes virus infections
3.3 Common CNS infections
Neurotropic herpes viruses belong to the α-herpes
3.3.1 Neurotropic viral infections
viruses. The infection with suid herpes virus l, also
The typical neuropathological pattern in this group is
called pseudorabies virus (PRV), occurs in swine in many
a non-suppurative polioencephalitis/poliomyelitis with
areas of the world and may infect a wide variety of
 neuronal destruction, perivascular mononuclear cuff-
mammals and birds. Horses, primates and humans are
ing and glial nodules (neuronophagia). In particularly
resistant to infection. Most frequently, the virus spreads
 aggressive infections (as occurs for example in West Nile
to ruminants housed in the same premises or to dogs
Virus infection), widespread neuronal necrosis may
and cats by ingestion of contaminated raw pork meat.
elicit a transient invasion of neutrophils in the peracute
Pseudorabies or Aujeszky's disease in sows leads to
stage of the disease.
abortion and mummified fetuses; in piglets the mortal-
ity rate is high. In young pigs the encephalitis is located
Rabies
mainly in the cortex, most severe in the rhinencephalic
Rabies is caused by a lyssavirus of the family rhabdoviri-
parts and decreasing from rostral to caudal. There is
dae, which is pathogenic for all mammals and occurs
extensive neuronal degeneration and polioencephalo-
 around the world. When a polioencephalomyelitis, par-
malacia (Fig. 3.3D) with, in the peracute stage of the
ticularly of the brainstem, is detected on histological
disease, invasion of neutrophils.
Inflammatory diseases
55
Fig. 3.3 A-D: Rabies. A. Sheep. Level of basal nuclei and capsula interna. Perivas cular cuffing and gliosis (arrows) in grey matter.
'h '(smone) sainpou eoniu ess pue bun eapnuouo einsaad ym waisueg u suoisal Aoemeui aansa bog a
C: Bovine. Cerebellum. Rabies viral indlusion bodies (Negri bodies) in cytoplasm of neurons, HE. D: Cat. Brainstem. Intense concentra-
tion of rabies virus antigen in neurons. Immunohistochemistry.
Fig. 3.3 E-F. Pseudorabies. Pig. Cerebral cortex. Band of focal microgliosis (arrows) and massive mononuclear meningitis (thick arrow).
HE. F. same area as E, higher magnification. Degenerating neurons and diffuse infitration with inflammatory cells indluding
neutrophils
56  Veterinary  Neuropathology
Pruritus with violent scratching and automutilation
equine encephalitides), neutrophils invade areas of neu-
of the head, and death within 2 days is the typical clinical
ronal destruction. The distribution of the lesions varies
history in dogs and cats. The lesions in small animals
according to the agent. For example, in tick-borne
consist of mononuclear perivascular cuffs, neuronal
encephalitis in dogs there is a characteristic pathology
necrosis and gliosis with large clear astrocytic nuclei
of the cerebellar cortex with necrosis and loss of Purkinje
with a hyperchromatic nuclear membrane. Neuronal
cells, which are replaced by glial cells forming so-called
and glial nuclei may contain eosinophilic inclusions.
"glial shrubbery"” (Fig. 3.4A). There is mononuclear
Lesions are mostly localized in the brainstem but there
perivascular cuffing and often remarkable glial cell
is also inflammation of the spinal and trigeminal ganglia.
proliferation and neuronophagia in the brainstem.
Canine herpes virus encephalitis has only been
Hemorrhage may occur, and some neutrophils can be
 reported in North America in very young puppies below
found in the glial nodules and the perivascular cuffs.
the age of 6 weeks with widespread necrotizing poli-
 Meningitis usually is present. West Nile virus mostly
oencephalitis of the brainstem and cerebellar cortex.
targets the brainstem and spinal cord, and the equine
Primates, rabbits and hedgehogs are susceptible to
encephalitis viruses the cerebral cortex (Fig. 3.4B). A
human herpes simplex virus and show similar lesions of
acute cerebrocortical necrosis of neurons as in humans.
Equine herpes virus I targets blood vessels (see below).
type I and type 5 viruses and presents as a polioencepha-
lomyelitis in calves and occasionally adult animals with
intense involvement of the cerebral cortex. Type 5 is
ml
much more neurovirulent than type 1 and is an impor-
tant infection in developing countries, notably South
America.
Arthropod-borne encephalitides (arboviruses)
These comprise a large group of agents from various
viral families (Togaviridae, Bunyaviridae, Flaviviridae,
Reoviridae) causing epidemics in various parts of the
world in humans (with at least 80 different arbovirus-
induced diseases known) as well as in domestic and wild
animals. They are transmitted by arthropods such as
ticks and mosquitoes, and because of global ecological
changes their geographic distribution can shift dra-
matically. The most notorious example in this respect
is the recent massive West Nile virus encephalitis
epidemic in North America, and smaller outbreaks
in several European and African countries, affecting
humans, horses, birds, cattle, sheep and occasionally
small animals. Further important arbovirus infections
are the equine encephalitides in America (Western,
Venezuelan and Eastern equine encephalitis; WEE,
VEE, EEE) infecting horses and birds, and rarely other
domestic animal species such as dogs. Others include
Japanese encephalitis in Australasia infecting domestic
H
pigs (the main reservoir) and horses, louping ill in sheep
and Russian spring-summer encephalitis (tick-borne
Fig. 3.4 Arbovirus infections. A: Dog. Tick-borne encephalitis.
Cerebellum. Intensive microgliosis in Purkinje cell and molecular
encephalitis) in dogs, horses and occasionally other
layers (ml) of the cerebellum, degenerating Purkinje cells with
domestic animals in Europe.
intense eosinophilia (several depicted by arrows), but minimal
Arthropod-borne infections induce a polioencephali-
inflammatory infiltrate in meninges. HE. Inset: Neuronophagia in
 tis always with neuronal damage, mostly mononuclear 
brainstem (arrow) next to normal neuron. HE. B: Horse. West Nile
inflammation and gliosis. In infections with a peracute
virus infection. Spinal cord. Massive perivascular mononudlear
lethal course (frequent in West Nile virus infection and
cuffing in gray matter and focal microgliosis. HE.
Inflammatory diseases
57
final diagnosis in all these infections requires immuno-
histochemical and PCR identification of the agent.
Paramyxovirus infections
European sporadic bovine encephalitis with a subacute
to chronic course occurs in adult cattle in central Europe
and perhaps in other areas as well. A paramyxovirus was
isolated from a few cases in the 1970s but was not further
characterized. It is a disseminated non-suppurative
polioencephalomyelitis of variable extent from slight to
severe, with lympho-histio-plasmocytic meningitis and
 perivascular cuffs, gliosis as well as neuronal necrosis
and neuronophagia (Fig. 3.5A). The lesions are most
severe in the brainstem. In some cases marked destruc-
tion of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex, leading
t0 cerebellar atrophy (Fig. 3.5B), or of the neurons in the
hippocampus, with hippocampal sclerosis, are a pre-
dominant finding.
Post-vaccinal distemper has been reported in many
areas of the world associated with vaccination with
canine distemper virus (CDV) strains aftenuated in
 canine cell lines presumably retaining some virulent
 potential. Thus the lesions are caused by the vaccine
virus. Typically severe and lethal neural signs occur
within 2 weeks following vaccination. The lesions consist
of a non-suppurative polioencephalitis often with necro-
sis of the pontine nuclei. Large numbers of inclusion
bodies are found. CDV can be readily demonstrated with
Fig. 3.5 European sporadic bovine encephalitis. Cow. A:
IHC. Enhanced neuronotropism and polioencephalitis
Brainstem. Mononuclear cell perivascular cuffing and glial nodules
 may also occur during natural infection with certain
restricted to gray matter (wm, unaffected white matter). HE. B:
 canine distemper virus lineages. See MRI Atlas.
Cerebellum. Neuronophagia with loss of Purkinje cells in the
A porcine paramyxovirus (rubulavirus,“blue
cerebellum and marked microgliosis in molecular layer (ml,
eye
diseases") causes a combination of pneumonitis and
molecular layer; gl., granule cel layer). HE.
 encephalitis, the latter especially in young piglets.
Henipaviruses are zoonotic agents causing respiratory
and CNS disease in humans, horses (hendra virus) and
pigs (nipah virus).
Borna virus infection
Horses, sheep, cats are spontaneously affected by Borna
disease (“staggering disease") and it may rarely affect
cattle and dogs in several European countries. In horses,
sheep and cattle the disease is subacute to chronic and
 is characterized by a quite characteristic, very aggressive
polioencephalitis inducing severe lesions in the hippoc-
ampus and cerebral cortex, with thick mononuclear
cuffs, neuronal necrosis and loss as well as gliosis with
fibrillary astrocytes (sclerosis). The so called Joest-Degen
Fig. 3.6 Borna virus infection. Horse. Hippocampus. Widespread
inclusion bodies may be present in the nucleus and
neuronal loss and microgliosis in the pyramidal cell layer with
rarely in the cytoplasm of large neurons of the hippoc-
prominent perivascular cuffs of lymphocytes. HE. Inset: Two neu-
ampus, but often remain undetected (Fig. 3.6). In cats
rons each containing an intranuclear inclusion body (arrow). HE.
58  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 3.7 Teschovirus infection. Pig. A: Spinal cord. Poliomyelitis, with inflammatory infiltrates restricted to the ventral horn, white
matter (wm) is free of lesions. HE. B: Spinal cord. Perivascular mononudlear cuffing and microglial nodules in ventral horn. HE.
C: brainstem. Microlial nodule with degenerating neurons (arrows) in brainstem. HE.
the lesions are more restricted to the brainstem. Recent
virus and encephalomyocarditis virus (both belong-
studies indicate a Borna virus as the etiology of psitta-
ing to the picornaviridae) are known to cause non-
cine proventricular dilatation syndrome (PPDS), also
suppurative encephalitis mostly in piglets.
called macaw wasting disease, characterized by polyg-
 anglioneuritis, encephalitis, myocarditis and adrenalitis.
Feline polioencephalomyelitis
In cats and large felids in zoological gardens in North
Neurotropic viral infections in pigs
America and Europe a rare polioencephalomyelitis of
variable severity occurs. The course of feline polioen-
[  ad aed a ii sede sads s
cephalomyelitis is rather protracted. The lesions can be
CNS infections. In addition to the already described
mild and consist of disseminated, mononuclear perivas-
entities, many other viral agents cause CNS inflam-
cular cuffing and some gliosis with participation of
mation in pigs. Various porcine teschovirus strains
microglial cells. In the spinal cord, there can be consider-
(belonging to the picornaviridae) with varying degrees
able neuronal loss and sclerosis. Despite very extensive
of neurovirulence are known around the world. In par-
isolation studies in large felids, the cause remains
ticular teschen disease is highly virulent with a high
unknown, it has been speculated that this disease may
mortality rate. Lower brainstem, cerebellum and in par-
represent a form of Borna virus infection.
ticular ventral horns of the spinal cord are most severely
affected, which is reflected by the clinical symptoms. The
most striking feature is neuronal necrosis with glial
3.3.2 Viral granulomatous inflammation
nodules and neuronophagia. Talfan disease represents
The prevailing pattern in these diseases is strong partici-
the clinically milder form of porcine poliomyelitis,
pation of macrophages in the inflammatory infiltrate
which occurs sporadically but may be endemic in certain
possibly with formation of granulomas.
farms (Fig. 3.7).
Additional agents such as vomiting and wasting
Lentivirus infection of small ruminants
disease virus (also called hemagglutinating encepha-
Lentiviruses belong to the retroviridae and cause typi-
lomyelitis virus; coronaviridae), swine vesicular disease
cally a granulomatous leukoencephalitis. The designa-
Inflammatory diseases 
59
A
Fig. 3.8 Caprine arthritis encephalitis (CAE). Goat. Spinal cord. A: Granulomatous myelitis with numerous large perivascular cufs
white matter necrosis and unilateral swelling of the cord (courtesy of Dr. L. Cork, Stanford University CA). HE. B: Extensive tissue necrosis
with perivascular cuffing and dense granulomatous infiltrates. HE.
tion lentivirus points to the very long incubation time.
multinucleated giant cells and malacia of the white
Caprine arthritis encephalitis (CAE) virus causes severe
matter.
arthritis mainly in the carpal joints and mastitis in adult
goats in most industrialized countries. In goat kids up
Feline infectious peritonitis
to 6 months of age, the virus can cause a severe multifo-
There are several clinical manifestations of feline infec-
cal granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis, especially
tious peritonitis (FIP), a systemic disease caused by
in the brainstem, spinal cord and cerebral white matter.
feline coronavirus, which is ubiquitous around the world
Massive perivascular cuffs containing numerous macro-
especially where cat populations are dense. Neuro-
phages are associated with significant destruction of the
logical complications may accompany other extraneu-
nervous tissue (Fig. 3.8A,B). In sheep and rarely in goats
ral signs but, often, only neurological signs are noted.
two manifestations of maedi-visna virus infection are
The lesions in the CNS are probably to a large degree
known: maedi, a proliferative lymphohistiocytic pneu-
induced by virus-antibody complexes which get trapped
monitis, and visna, an encephalomyelitis. The disease
in post-capillary venules, inducing violent inflamma-
was endemic in Iceland, but has been eradicated. In
 tion following complement fixation. The dilated ven-
most other sheep-raising countries, except Australia and
tricles are sometimes filled with grayish-blue exudate,
New Zealand, both maedi and visna are still observed
 and the ependyma is thickened and glassy. Ependymal
sporadically. Both forms rarely occur together in the same
lesions in the mesencephalic aqueduct and fourth
 animal. Maedi-visna infection in sheep also induces a
ventricle lead to obstructive hydrocephalus (Fig. 3.9A).
 granulomatous inflammation, particularly around the
Histologically the meninges, choroid plexus, epend-
ventricles and in the spinal cord white matter; it can also
yma and subependymal parenchyma are transformed
cause primary demyelination as described in Section
into pyogranulomatous masses (Fig. 3.9) also con-
3.3.4.
taining many plasma cells. The subependymal lesion
may extend deep into the parenchyma. The number
of neutrophils varies from case to case. Vasculitis of
Equine infectious anemia virus
the immune-complex fype is frequently found in sub-
This retrovirus which occurs around the world has
ependymal sites, the meninges and choroid plexus
only a low neurotropism but occasionally can cause
(Fig. 3.9D). Formation of connective tissue is con-
a severe neurological disease characterized by intense
spicuous, sometimes with formation of fibrotic granu-
periventricular  granulomatous  inflammation   with
lomas space occupying. See MRI Atlas.
60  Veterinary Neuropathology
mo
Fig. 3.9 Feline infectious peritonitis. Cat. A: Transverse section at the level of midbrain. Accumulation of protein-rich fluid in dilated
ventricdes, malacia of periventricular tissue particularly around temporal hom of lateral ventricle (arrow). B: Fourth ventricle. Intense
granulomatous and lymphocytic chorioiditis, ependymitis and extension into the IV ventridle (arrows); destructive inflammation has
replaced the medulla under the fourth ventridle (c, cerebellar cortex; mo, medulla oblongata). HE. C: Mesencephalic aqueduct.
Pyogranulomatous inflammation with destruction of the ependymal lining (arrows) with massive perivascular mononuclear cuffing. HE.
D: Brainstem. Meningitis with acute fibrinoid necrosis of the vascular wall (arrow) with an intense infiltration of inflammatory cells in
the subarachnoidal space. HE.
3.3.3 Viral vasculitis
blood vessels throughout the body are the target tissue
of the disease, the lesions may occur in any location of
In this group of viral infections, the pattern of non-
the CNS, white and gray matter. Hemorrhages and
suppurative inflammation is associated with significant
microglial nodules accompany the vascular changes.
damage to the blood vessel walls. This may lead to hem--
 Similar lesions are found in African swine fever, an
orrhage and/or ischemic changes.
asfivirus, which is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa with
occasional outbreaks in European countries.
Classical swine fever
Classical swine fever (hog cholera) virus, a pestivirus, is
"Fox encephalitis", hepatitis contagiosa canis
closely related to bovine virus diarrhea/mucosal disease
 Contagious hepatitis or Rubarth's disease in dogs is
(BVD/MD) virus and occurs in most swine-raising
caused by canine adenovirus type I, which has a world-
countries around the world. As BVD/MD in cattle, clas-
 wide distribution. The targets are the blood vessels, and
sical swine fever virus in swine is teratogenic (see Chapter
 severe endothelial damage leads to hemorrhages, necro-
5) but in young and adult pigs it may also cause a dis-
 sis and edema throughout the body. The liver becomes
seminated vasculitis with perivascular, mostly lym-  necrotic, and a pathognomonic sign at necropsy is a
phocytic infiltration of the vascular adventitia. As all the  thickened wall of the gall bladder due to edema. The
Inflammatory diseases
Fig. 3.10 Viral vasculitis. A: Cow with malignant catarrhal fever. Rete mirabile of the carotid artery. Mononuclear arteritis, focal inva-
sion with inflammatory cells in the arterial wall. HE. B: Horse with equine herpes virus (EHV) infection. Brain. Sharply delineated infarct
in the brain with vascular trombosis. C: Same case. Spinal cord. EHV-induced vasculitis and perivascular leukomyelomalacia with axonal
necrosis, axonal spheroids and macrophage infiltrates. HE. Inset: EHV antigen in endothelial cells, IHC.
CNS vessels may be affected too, and the animals show
sheep, goats or wild ruminants, the reservoirs for the
nervous symptoms. The ensuing encephalitis is always
virus. The disease is acute to subacute, with fever, nasal
inconspicuous. It is a mononuclear vasculitis, with rarely
 discharge, mucosal ulcerations and characteristic corneal
more than a single layer of mononuclear cells and hem-
 opacity. CNS lesions are best seen in the arteries of the
orrhages. Large baso- or amphophilic homogeneous 
rete mirabile, a dense network of blood vessels surround-
inclusion bodies are found in the swollen nuclei of
ing the pituitary gland. It is a necrotizing and mononu-
endothelial cells.
dear vasculitis with a variable amount of neutrophils,
the pathogenesis of which is not clear (Fig. 3.10A). The
Equine herpes myelitis
 inflammatory vascular cuffs in the parenchyma of the
Equine herpes myelitis is caused by equine herpes virus
CNS are mostly mild but are offten accompanied by
(EHV) type I (α-herpes virus), which is ubiquitous in 
hemorrhage and leakage of plasma. Occasionally these
horse populations around the world. This currently re-
typical vascular lesions are accompanied by a dissimi-
emerging disease is thought to occur more frequently
nated polioencephalitis.
in mares in areas which experienced abortion storms.
Rapidly progressing weakness and ataxia are often
accompanied by cauda equina signs. Macroscopically,
3.3.4 Viral leukoencephalitis
one finds multifocal petechial or ecchymotic hemor-
The lesion pattern in this group is non-suppurative
rhages in white and gray matter of brain and spinal cord.
inflammation with destruction of the white matter. The
The brain may contain multiple, random foci of
 inflammatory component may be minimal in the initial
yellowish-gray malacia. Microscopically there is primary
 stages of the infection or may be lacking altogether.
vasculitis with endothelial cell necrosis and secondary
In this case we are not really dealing with an inflam-
thrombosis, edema, polymorphonuclear cell infiltration
matory disease but with virus-induced myelin degenera-
and hemorrhages. Primary vasculitis results in second-
tion similar to certain hereditary diseases covered in
ary ischemia with perivascular malacia often with axonal
Chapter 8.
spheroids particularly in the spinal cord. There can be
multinucleate syncytial cell formation (Fig. 3.10B,C).
Canine distemper virus (CDV)
Malignant catarrhal fever
The etiology of this worldwide disease of canids and
Malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) is due to an infection
other species is a morbillivirus belonging to the para-
with ovine herpes virus 2 (OHV-2), alcelaphine herpes
myxoviridae. Neurological signs in nervous canine
virus 1 (AHV-1) or caprine herpes virus 2 (CpHV-2),
distemper occur with or without preceding systemic
which occurs in cattle and cervids that have contact with
 disease consisting of gastrointestinal and respiratory
62  Veterinary  Neuropathology
Fig. 3.11 Canine distemper virus (CDV) infection. Dog. A: Cerebellar white matter. Demyelinated plaque with intense inflammation
(cc, cerebral cortex; cwm, cerebellar white matter; m, meningeal space). HE. Inset: Intranuclear viral inclusion bodies in astrocytes. HE.
B: Cerebral cortex. Polioencephalitis with perivascular cuffs and mild microgliosis. Inset: Neurons containing CDV antigen. IHC. C:
Medulla. Acute demyelination with spongy state of white matter and swollen gemistocytic astrocytes (arrows). HE. Inset: Microglial
Luxol fast blue-cresyl Echt violet.
signs. There are multifocal to disseminated lesions in the
 intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusion bodies in astro-
 gray and in the white matter. The highly characteristic C
cytes (Fig. 3.1lA inset). In the subacute and chronic
and unique lesion in this disease is primary demyelina-
 stage of the disease, perivascular cuffs (Fig. 3.11A) occur
 tion. In HE sections, primary demyelination impresses 
 often with progression of demyelination to frank necro-
 as multifocal areas of pale staining and vacuolation in
 sis. In the gray matter of the cerebral cortex and the
the white matter (Fig. 3.1lA,C), most prominently in
brainstem characteristic lesions are often located sub-
the cerebellar folia and around the fourth ventricle,
meningeally. They consist of perivascular cuffing, vascu-
optic tracts and spinal cord, often bordering the CSF
lar proliferation with swelling of endothelial nuclei, and
spaces. The myelin sheaths have disappeared, while the
 gliosis with intracytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusion
axons are still present. These foci of demyelination are
bodies in neurons (Fig. 3.l1B). Neurons may show
best visible with special myelin stains (Fig. 3.11D) The
degenerative changes. In very young puppies there is
lesions are accompanied by vascular proliferation, swell-
 polioencephalitis with secundary encephalomalacia. In
ing of endothelial nuclei, gliosis and macrophages,
a very rare variant of nervous distemper, so-called old
which often contain myelin debris, and intranuclear and
dog encephalitis, there is diffuse and equally severe
Inflammatory diseases   63
involvement of both gray and white matter with exten-
 shaker disease). Histologically there is hypomyelinogen-
sive tissue destruction and intense inflammation in
esis in the white matter throughout the CNS. If an
the forebrain with sparing of the cerebellum and
animal is kept alive long enough, the symptoms - under-
brainstem. See MRI Atlas.
weight, tremors, abnormal fleece - may gradually disap-
 pear within 3-4 months. The myelin defect is related
Maedi-visna
to hypothyroidism resulting from BDV infection in
In addition to the granulomatous inflammation
 the pituitary gland. A further example is a myelinopa-
described above (Section 3.3.2), in maedi-visna there
thy in Cretan puppies described to be associated
are also areas of primary demyelination which look very
much like those in CDV infection before intense inflam-
infection.
mation becomes apparent. In advanced inflammatory
3.3.5 Bacterial infections
lesions demyelination progresses to malacia.
The periventricular white mafter, rostral cerebellar
The  inflammatory  infltrate  in  bacterial  infections
peduncles and thoracic cord are predilection sites.
nearly always contains varying amounts of polymor-
Sometimes there are only spinal cord lesions. Spinal foci
phonuclear cells. In chronic infections and infections
 often are visible macroscopically as brownish, wedge-
with intracellular bacteria a non-suppurative inflamma-
 shaped unilateral swellings.
tory pattern with perivascular mononuclear cufing
and/or a granulomatous pattern is also seen. Throm-
Feline immunodeficiency virus
boembolic encephalitis is frequently associated with
Reports on the neuropathology of this worldwide infec-
vasculitis.
 tion are somewhat inconsistent. Microglial cells appear
Tuberculosis
to be a primary target of the infection. Early reactive
changes in experimental infection are infiltration of
All species are susceptible to Mycobacterium tuberculosis
lymphocytes in epineurium of the nerves, meninges
Both human and bovine tuberculosis (TB) have been
markedly reduced around the world, although in some
and choroid plexus. Later there is marked perivascular
cuffing, especially in the white matter, and gliosis. In
areas it is considered to be a re-emerging disease. Rarely
cases are seen in zoo animals including monkeys. An
advanced stages there is also pallor or vacuolation of the
infected animal shows the typical changes of TB in all
white matter and demyelination. These lesions can be
organs, including the CNS. The meninges are thickened
found in the brain as well as in the spinal cord.
and whitish, and encapsulated pyogranulomas might
Feline leukemia virus associated myelopathy
be present anywhere in the CNS. A typical feature
are the Langhans’ giant cells, large cells with a ring of
As a relatively rare complication of chronic feline leuke-
multiple, marginally located nuclei. Bacteria can be
mia virus (FeLV) infection, cats may develop lesions of
demonstrated with acid-fast stains within epithelioid
the spinal cord white mafter, particularly the ventrome-
macrophages and giant cells.
dial and dorsolateral columns with demyelination but
also axonal damage. These lesions are associated with
Streptococcal sepsis in piglets
infection of endothelial, glial and neuronal cells. There
Streptococcal chorio-meningo-ependymitis is caused
is no inflammation.
by Streptococcus suis serotype 2 and can occur in an out-
break like fashion in all swine-producing countries. As
Dysmyelination due to intrauterine infections
well as inducing bronchopneumonia and arthritis, the
Dysmyelination is a defect of myelin formation (see
 agent has an affiniry for the CNS. The same bacterium
Chapter 8). Some forms of faulty myelinogensis are
can also cause a CNS infection in humans, which is cur-
caused by intrauterine affects on the fetus (infections,
rently considered to be a re-emerging zoonosis. Piglets
intoxications). Congenital tremor type A in pigs, caused
up to 3 weeks of age, but sometimes also older animals,
by classical swine fever virus, is associated with weak
show severe neurological symptoms. Most animals die
myelination in the white matter of the spinal cord and
in the acute stage of the disease but a protracted course
also mild status spongiosus. Hypomyelinogenesis may
is also observed. At necropsy a massive ventricular
 m  a    o
dilation is observed; meninges, ependyma and choroid
viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) in calves and border disease
plexi are thickened and the ventricles are filled with
virus (BDV; flaviviridae) in lambs, which both have a
 suppurative exudate. Histologically there is a purulent
 worldwide distribution. The affected lambs have a gen-
chorio-meningo ependymitis with erosion of the epend-
 eralized body tremor and abnormal"curly” fleece (hairy
ymal lining and neuropil. This change is also present
64  Veterinary Neuropathology
in the central canal of the cord. In the subacute stage the
asuis. In addition to purulent meningitis with clouding
inflammatory infiltrate contains increasing numbers of
of the meninges (Fig. 3.12) there is also suppuration of
mononuclear cells.
the choroid plexus and ependyma with accumulation of
pus in the ventricles. As a result of the ependymitis, the
Bacterial meningitis and ventriculitis in large
subependymal parenchyma is destroyed and replaced
animals
by large abscesses. A thick granulomatous and fibrous
This disease in juvenile animals is caused by bacterial
 capsule around such abscesses indicates chronicity of
sepsis  with  suppuration  in  many  organ  systems.
the process.
Frequently isolated bacteria in calves are E. coli,
Salmonella and Pasteurella spp, in foals Salmonella spp
Embolic purulent encephalitis in dogs
and Actinobacillus equuli, in small ruminants also
and cats
Staphylococcus pyogenes and in swine Hemophilus par-
 In small animals, bacterial infections can affect the CNS
in septicemic patients or when bacterial thromboem-
boli, arising for example from valvular endocarditis, get
lodged in the cerebral circulation with spread of the
bacteria in the parenchyma. Macroscopically, in embolic
bacterial encephalitis foci of hemorrhagic malacia of
different sizes are found throughout the brain, particu-
larly in the gray matter (Fig. 3.13A). Histologically the 
hemorrhages are associated with necrotic vessels sur-
rounded by sheets of neutrophils (Fig. 3.13B). There is
formation of multiple small abscesses throughout the
brain and sometimes severe ischemic necrosis of the
parenchyma in affected areas.
Abscess
Many bacterialagents are known to cause brain abscesses,
e.g. Diplococci (Pneumococci), Arcanobacteriurm pyo-
Fig. 3.12 Acute suppurative bacterialmeningitis. Calf. Congestion
genes, Pasteurella spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
and whitish-yellow clouding of the meninges due to accumula-
Mycoplasma spp.) Agents may enter the CNS hema-
tion of predominantly polymorphonuclear inflammatory cells.
togenously and lead to a multifocal embolic purulent
Fig. 3.13 Embolic bacterial encephalitis. Dog. A: Transverse section at level of basal nuclei. Hemorrhagic and acutely malacic lesions
in cortex, caudate nucleus and internal capsule. B: Cerebral cortex. Invasion of inflammatory cells in the wall of a vein with subsequent
necrosis (arrows) and perivascular hemorrhage. HE.
Inflammatory diseases
65
Fig. 3.14 Brain abscess. A: Dog. Transverse section at level of basal nudlei. B: Pig. Sagittal section of the head. Abscess in the sella
turcica with marked dorsal compression of the thalamus. C: Deer. Cross-section at level of thalamus. Well encapsulated intradural
extra-axial abscess with marked right shift (courtesy of Dr. R. Lecouteur).
meningoencephalitis,  initially  small  foci  becoming
abscesses. Primary brain abscesses can arise as a conse-
quence of trauma, or by direct extension from the
sinuses. Otogenic abscesses occur in various species, in
particular swine, sheep and rabbits, and rarely in dogs
and cats. See MRI Atlas.
The infectious process starts in the middle and inner
ear with vestibular symptoms. It progresses along the
eighth cranial nerve and reaches the basolateral menin-
 ges of the medulla oblongata and from there spreads
into the parenchyma where it forms unilateral abscesses,
often of considerable size. Migrating grass seeds have
also been described as a cause of foreign body brain
abscesses. In the brain, an abscess has the same charac-
b
teristics as in other organs: a purulent mass with a
Fig. 3.15 Abscess. Dog. Cerebrum. Histological structure of an
and lymphocytes and a fibrous capsule on the outside
Aeied A papunons (au) laiua sanau ssansge paziuebio
degenerated neutrophils (neut), a granulomatous wall (gran)
(in chronic cases) (Fig. 3.15). Particularly in food animals
formed by macrophages and an outer fibrous capsule (fibr). HE.
(e.g. as a consequence of tail biting in swine or taildock-
ing in sheep), spinal abscesses occur with compression
and sometimes invasion of the spinal cord. In dogs, bac-
terial infection (most frequently staphylococci and
streptococci, and Brucella canis in endemic areas) of the
that the infection often remains local, encapsulated in
 spine may start as an infection of the intervertebral disc,
the sella turcica without spreading further (Fig. 3.14B).
which than spreads to the adjacent bone leading to
In other animals, however, abscessation of the adjacent
discospondylitis.
brain tissue and trigeminal nerves occurs.
Empyema of the sella turcica
Thrombotic meningoencephalitis
In food animals, the tissues in the sella turcica, a shallow
in cattle (TME)
groove of the sphenoid bone in which the pituitary
The agent, Histophilus somni, is a Gram-negative coc-
gland is located, may become infected presumably
cobacillus and a normal inhabitant of the respiratory
because the surrounding rete mirabile caroticum with
flora, but may cause respiratory and reproductive disease
its many convoluted vessels easily traps bacterial emboli.
 around the world, particularly in North American
The dura mater forms a strong barrier between the sella
cattle feedlots. It can also lead to acute vasculitis,
 turcica and the adjacent basal meninges and brain, so 
which primarily affects the CNS. Initially, the animals
6  Veterinary  Neuropathology
show high temperature, rapidly falling to normal or sub-
brainstem (listeric rhombencephalitis) in ruminants
febrile levels. After severe neurological signs and coma
(catle, goats and sheep); it is one of the most common
the animals die within a few to 48 hours. Macroscopi-
 neurological diseases in these species around the world
cally, in thrombotic meningoencephalitis multifocal,
and an important zoonotic infection. Silage has been
fairly well demarcated hemorrhages on surfaces and
suspected to be the carrier of the pathogen. The infec-
cut sections of brain and spinal cord are seen. The vas-
 tion spreads through cranial nerves from the oral cavity
cular lesions  result from interaction of the  bacterial
to the medulla oblongata and is thus often more marked
lipooligosaccharides with platelets and endothelial cells.
on one side. Invasion of the bacteria leads to focal
Histologically the hemorrhages are infiltrated with
suppuration with microabscesses sometimes aligned
neutrophils; ensuing necrosis is due to vascular throm-
along fiber tracts (Fig. 3.16A,C). Using immunohisto-
 bosis and necrosis. Foci of Gram-negative bacteria may
chemistry, bacteria can be seen in axons, neurons and
be seen.
microabcesses (Fig. 3.16D,E). Infection and suppuration
induce areas of malacia with prominently swollen axons
Listeriosis
(Fig. 3.16B). Simultaneously a strong cell-mediated
Listeria monocytogenes, a Gram-positive and faculta-
immune response is mounted with a mononuclear men-
tively intracellular bacterium, causes encephalitis of the
 ingitis, often most severe over the cerebellum, and large
Fig. 3.16 Listeriosis. Ovine. Brainstem. A: Widespread asymmetrical encephalitis. HE. B: Perivascular mononuclear cuffs (arrow), smal
granulomas (large arrows) and area of malacia with vacuolation and axonal spheroids (arrow heads). HE. C: Suppurative encephalitis
with microabscesses in acute lesion. HE. D: Listeria sp. bacteria in a neuron, immunohistochemistry. E: Listeria sp. bacteria inside
axons in medulla oblongata, IHC.
Inflammatory diseases   67
Fig. 3.17 Fungal encephalitis. A: Dog. Chladiophora bantianum infection. Cerebrum. Transverse MRI (FLAIR sequence) with multifocal
hyperintense lesions in brain. B: Gross image of same lesion as in A, multiple severe granulomatous necrotizing lesions. C: Dog.
Aspergillosis. Cerebellum. Two granulomas (arrows). D: Horse. Aspergillosis. Cortex. Fungal hyphae are present within the lumen and
invade vessel wall (arrows). HE. E: Dog. Chladiophora bantianum. Cerebrum. Granulomatous encephalitis with numerous pigmented
hyphae. HE. F: Dog. Aspergillosis. Brainstem. Predilection for invasion of vessel walls by fungal hyphae. GMS.
mononuclear perivascular cuffs (Fig. 3.16B).  In the
Miscellaneous bacterial infections
chronic stage, the neutrophils in the microabscesses
are gradually replaced with macrophages and astro-
Ehrlichiosis, caused by Ehrlichia canis, occurs in many
gliosis becomes prominent. The infection may spread
countries with warm climate around the world. It
from the brainstem to other rostral areas of the
 is a multisystemic infection in dogs including a non-
CNS. See MRI Atlas.
 suppurative meningoencephalitis mainly in the ventral
 portions of the brainstem and periventricular tissue.
Rickettsia infections of the CNS have been reported in
Melioidosis
different species in several areas of the world. Rocky
Melioidosis, which occurs in tropical and sub-tropical
Mountain spotted fever in dogs in North America is
areas, is caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei, a Gram-
caused by Rickettsia rickettsi and is associated with a
 negative facultatively intracellular bacterium. It causes
disseminated suppurative vasculitis. Salmon poisoning
a multisystemic disease in humans, and all domestic
(Neorickettsia helminthoeca) in dogs and foxes on the
animals, particularly ruminants and horses. The neu-
American Pacific coast is characterized by cerebellar
ropathology is somewhat similar to listeriosis with a
meningitis. A chlamydia (Chlamydophila pecorum) is
combination of suppuration and a cell-mediated mono-
the cause of sporadic bovine encephalitis (also called
nuclear meningoencephalitis.
Buss disease) in North America and some European
 68  Veterinary Neuropathology
countries, which is characterized by polyserositis and
tory foci, vascularlumina and necrotic walls as well as the
disseminated mononuclear-suppurative inflammation 
intravascular thrombi (Fig. 3.17D). If the lesions strongly
with  vasculitis and necrotizing lesions  throughout
 suggest of a mycotic infection but no fungal hyphae are
the neuraxis. Neuroborreliosis (Borrelia burgdorferi)
found a special silver stain like GMS (Fig. 3.17F) or PAS
 has been associated with suppurative-granulomatous
may be useful. In chronic lesions a granulomatous
meningoradiculitis in horses. Similar lesions have been
reaction prevails with formation of granulomas (Fig.
found in Bartonella spp infection in dogs.
3.17C,E) often containing multinucleated giant cells. See
MRI Atlas.
Bacterial myositis
Bacterial infections of the muscle tissue occur in large
Cryptococcosis
animals mainly caused by Clostridia and Streptococci
Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gati, ubiq-
 sp. There are varying degrees of myofiber necrosis, hem-
uitous yeasts, mostly affect dogs and cats and occa-
orrhages and infiltration with inflammatory cells.
sionally horses, generally in areas with a hot humid
climate. Clinically the symptoms of cryptococcosis
indicate involvement of various organ systems. CNS
3.3.6 Mycotic and algal infections
symptoms are due to a marked suppurative meningitis
The initial neuropathological pattern is suppurative
and submeningeal encephalitis, sometimes with epend-
inflammation. There is frequently vasculitis and signifi-
ymitis and plexus chorioiditis and involvement of the
cant parenchymal destruction. Protracted lesions exhibit
subependymal parenchyma. Occasionally, tumor-like
a marked granulomatous inflammatory pattern.
granulomas are formed (Fig. 3.18A). In the necrotic sup-
 purative masses and cavities formed by vastly expanded
Aspergillosis, mucormycosis
Virchow-Robin spaces, called pseudocysts, cryptococcal
organisms are found in large quantities (Fig. 3.18B,C).
The most common agents of mycotic CNS diseases are
Aspergillus, Mucorales and Candida spp, which occur
The organism is round and has a clear halo. This halo is
the polysaccharide capsule, which can be specifically
around the world. Any animal species is susceptible to
 mycotic infection, but cattle are the most important
stained with mucicarmine (Fig. 3.18B).
hosts with a variety of organs involved, including the
CNS. Even aborted fetuses have been found with mycotic
Encephalitozoonosis
encephalitis. In horses, CNS aspergillosis may originate
 Encephalitozoonosis is mostly found in rabbits, but
from guttural pouch mycosis. The histologic lesion is a  other species (dog, wild carnivores) around the world
necrotizing purulent meningoencephalitis with vascular
can be affected. The current name of the agent is
necrosis and often thrombosis and perivascular accu-
Encephalitozoon cuniculi, but in the older literature
mulation of neutrophils (Fig. 3.17D,F). The fungal 
the term of Nosema and nosematosis may also be
hyphae may be seen already in the HEstain in inflamma-
encountered. The organism is now considered to be
Fig. 3.18 Cryptococcosis. Dog. Frontal lobe. A: Transverse section of frontal lobes. Massive accumulation of gelatinous material in the
meninges with a large, left-sided space-occupying mass within the olfactory peduncle. B: Histologically there are numerous Cryptococcus
neoformans organisms embedded in a chronic granulomatous inflammatory response. Mucicarmine stain. C: High magnification
showing granulomatous inflammation and characteristic yeasts with an outer clear capsule. HE.
Inflammatory diseases 
69
fungal (belonging to the microsporidia). Granulomas of 
often marked capillary proliferation (Fig. 3.19D). The
various sizes throughout the brain are the main
lesions are similar to those of viral encephalitides.
 constituent of the CNS lesions. Nodules consisting of
 Characteristic parasitic cysts composed of tightly packed
epithelioid histiocytes, so-called “"hepatoid” foci because
they look like liver tissue, are characteristic. The
3.19D inset) or the presence of tachyzoites within a
 organisms are very diffcult to find, because they do not
parasitophorous vacuole confirm the histological diag-
stain with HE. “Empty" spaces may be seen in the 
 nosis. In older animals, pure CNS involvement may
inflammatory foci or the adjacent tissue at low magni-
occur with highly destructive lesions. In histological
fication; at higher magnification these contain loosely
sections of the latter cases, a granulomatous and
arranged oblong parasites, which stain positively with
necrotizing encephalitis is present usually without
 Ziehl-Nielson and Gramstain.
special anatomical predilection. However, in a peculiar
form of canine protozoal encephalitis the cerebellar
Other mycotic infections
cortex  is  specifically  affected  with macroscopically
These include blastomycosis, coccidiodomycosis
visible cerebellar atrophy (Fig. 3.19A). Foci of necrosis
and histoplasmosis as common infections in endemic
are accompanied by thick mononuclear perivascular
areas. Further reported entities include cladosporiodio-
cuffs, marked gliosis mixed with inflammatory mono-
sis, fusariosis and sporadic cases of infection with, for
nuclear cells, neutrophils and eosinophils (Fig. 3.19E).
example, Ochroconis and Cladophialophora sp. Such sys-
There is also vascular proliferation and connective tissue
temic infections with multiple organ involvement occur
formation. In cats, encephalomyelitis caused by Toxo-
mostly in small animals in endemic areas; in the CNS
plasma gondii (and related organisms) is very rare.
they all cause pyogranulomatous lesions in which the
A peculiar segmental protozoal myelitis has been
agents can be detected.
 reported in this species. See MRI Atlas.
Algal infections
Sarcosporidia, sarcocystis
Prototheca spp. are algal agents, which cause systemic
infection with colitis, ocular and CNS involvement,
Very often reactionless protozoal cysts, intensely
mainly in dogs in tropical and subtropical areas around
basophilic, are found particularly in the cerebral cortex
the world. There are disseminated necrotic-inflammatory
of ruminants. They apparently do not cause clinical
lesions in the brain and spinal cord containing protothe-
disease in most animals. Equine protozoal encephalo-
cal cells, which are easily recognized on HE-, PAS- and
myelitis caused by Sarcocystis neurona and, much less
GMS-stained sections.
commonly, Sarcocystis hughesi occurs in North America.
The lesions are more marked in the spinal cord (Fig.
3.19B) than the brain and are characterized by necrotiz-
3.3.7 Protozoal infections
ing inflammation in both gray and white matter with
These infections often elicit a non-suppurative inflam-
mononuclear perivascular cuffs and infiltration of the
mation pattern very much like viral infections. They can
parenchyma with neutrophils, eosinophils and occa-
 also induce a suppurative paftern associated with severe
sional giant cells. The sarcocystis organisms can be dem-
tissue necrosis. The inflammatory infiltrate sometimes
onstrated in neurons, mononuclear cells and vascular
contains significant numbers of eosinophils.
endothelial cells. This CNS infection may also occur in
the dog. In sheep, protozoal encephalomyelitis is caused
Toxoplasmosis, neosporosis
by Sarcocystis tenella.
Toxoplasrma gondii replicates in the gut of cats but
rarely causes disease in this species. Toxoplasma gondii
and Neospora caninum cause identical CNS lesions in
Amoebic infections
dogs. Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis occur worldwide
Amoebiasis been described in several animal species
and can be distinguished from each other by serologi-
and occurs worldwide albeit rarely. Identified causes
cal testing, immunohistochemistry and most reliably
include Acanthomoeba in sheep and dogs, Naegleria
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The typical
species in cattle and horses and Balarmuthia sp in
presentation is one of rapidly progressive myositis, with
dogs and primates. CNS infection in humans is known
 as primary amebic meningoencephalitis. The lesions
Histological examination reveals destructive myositis
 consist of a focal and severe necrotizing pyogranulo-
(Fig. 3.19C) and multifocal lesions throughout the
matous meningitis and encephalitis (Fig. 3.20A).
CNS and peripheral nerves. These CNS lesions consist
Amebae, which resemble large macrophages and stain
of perivascular mononuclear cuffing, gliosis and
with PAS, can be found in the lesions (Fig. 3.20B). A
 70  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 3.19 Protozoal infections. A. Dog. Transverse section of cerebellum and brainstem. Severe necrosis of the cerebellar cortex due
to Neospora canis encephalitis. B: Horse. Equine protozoal myelitis. Spinal cord. Multifocal granulomatous myelitis with hemorrhages
due to Sarcocystis neurona. C: Dog. Skeletal muscle. Necrotizing non-suppurative myositis with Neospora canis organisms (arrow). HE.
numerous protozoal cysts (arrows). HE. Inset: Protozoal cyst IHC for Neospora canis. E: Dog. Brainstem. Acute necrotizing encephalitis
due to Neospora with inflammatory cell infiltrates including macrophages, lymphocytes, eosinophils, gemistocytic astrocytes, protozoal
organisms (arrow) and endothelial cell proliferation (arrowhead). HE.
specific diagnosis requires immunocytochemistry (Fig.
with CNS inflammation but the neuropathology of such
3.20C).
infections has not been well defined.
3.3.8 Heiminth infections
Miscellaneous protozoal infections
The inflammatory pattern is suppurative with variable
Trypanosomiasis associated with Trypanosoma evansi
 numbers of eosinophils. Chronic lesions may develop a
infection was reported to cause a severe multifocal hem-
 granulomatous component.
orrhagic necrotizing encephalitis, particularly of the cer-
ebral white matter, in Brazilian horses. Leishmaniosis in
Nematodes
dogs occurs mostly in southern countries worldwide
Migration of enteric nematode larvae into the CNS
 and has been found to cause epidural granulomas in the
 often occurs in aberant hosts. Ascaris sp. invasion in the
spine and granulomatous meningitis. Agents like Babesia
CNS is rare in small animals but can result in small,
 and Theileria are considered to be potentially associated
often clinically irrelevant, granulomas. Better known
Inflammatory diseases
71
Fig. 3.20 Amebiasis, Neagfeari fowleri. Bovine. A: Cerebral cortex. Pyogranulomatous meningoencephalitis. HE. B: Histologically the
ameba resemble macrophages with foamy cytoplasm and a large eccentric nucleus. HE. C: Positive immunoreactivity of Naegferia
fowleri in lesions. (Courtesy of Dr H. Kinde, CAHFS, San Bernadino, CA).
are  verminous encephalitis caused by Strongylus
spinal cord, are described in small ruminants and
sp, in the brain of horses (see MRI Atlas), Elapho-
in horses (Kumri) in Asia, caused by the microflaria
strongylus (in Europe) and Parelaphostrongylus (in
of Setaria sp. Microflaria occasionally are found in
North America), especially in the spinal cord of
 the blood vessels of different species including birds
wild and domestic small ruminants. Baylisascaris procy-
without obvious parenchymal lesions. In subtropical
 onis infection has been described in North American
and tropical areas, Spirocerca lupi has been found
 dogs exposed to raccoons. Angiostrongylus vasorum and
to invade the spinal cord of dogs with formation of
Angiostrongylus cantonensis have also been reported to
granulomas.
induce neurological complications in dogs and foals
respectively. Halicephalobus gingivalis (synonym Hali-
Coenurosis, echinococcosis, cysticercosis
cephalobus deletrix, Micronema deletrix) can induce a
Coenurus, Echinococcus and Cysticercus are the larvae of
granulomatous encephalomyelitis in horses.
tapeworms of the family the Taenidae; e.g. those of
Migrating parasites induce areas of malacia mostly in
Multiceps multiceps (Coenurus cerebralis), Echinococcus
the white matter with prominently swollen axons and
granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularisand Taenia solium
various degrees of hemorrhage (Fig. 3.21B,C). These
(Cysticercus cellulosae). They also migrate and reach
malacic/hemorrhagic lesions are round or elongated
various organs, in particular liver and CNS. In the target
 Organ, they form single or multiple cysts of different size,
sectioned (Fig. 3.21C). The migration tracks induce
sometimes very large, which clinically act as a space-
reactive changes including vascular proliferation, inva-
occupying process. Echinococcosis is a problem in
 sion of macrophages and perivascular cuffing, con-
human medicine and affects also dogs and non-human
taining varying amounts of eosinophils. Sometimes,
primates. Most important in veterinary medicine is
histological slides contain sections of the parasite but
coenurosis in sheep caused by Coenurus cerebralis.
they often do not (Fig. 3.21D). It is thought that the
A characteristic symptom is walking in circles, hence
parasites may leave the brain affer death, even when
-d su sio cass , su a
immersed in fixative. Indeed parasites may be detected
cally disappeared in developed countries as a result
in the fixative following centrifugation. Similar lesions
 of better surveillance and treatment. At necropsy
but with more hemorrhage, especially affecting the
the cysts can be seen bulging from the brain surface,
72
2  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 3.21 Helminth infections. A: Sheep. Coenurus cyst in occipital lobe. Note clusters of white scolices in the wall of the cyst. B:
Horse. Transverse section of frontal lobes. Verminous encephalitis caused by migrating aberrant strongyle larvae. Multiple hemorrhagic
foci in the white matter. C: Goat. Spinal cord. Elaphostrongylus migration tracks in white matter with multiple areas of leukomyeloma-
lacia containing swollen axons (arrows) and gitter cells. HE. D: Dog. Cerebellum. Several cross-sections of Baylisascaris procyonis larvae
surrounded by an intense inflammatory reaction. HE.
flled with a clear fluid and with white granules fixed
3.4 Non-infectious and immune-mediated
to the cyst walls (Fig. 3.21A). These granules are scolices
of immature growing tapeworms, which are infectious.
inflammatory lesions
Compression, abscessation, granulomatous inflamma-
3.4.1 Definition
tion and hemorrhage may surround the cysts.
 As with other organ systems, the nervous system can be
 targeted by the immune system leading to severe neuro-
Cerebrospinal cuterebriasis
logical disease. The prototype of immune-mediated
In cats in North America, the larvae of the Cuterebra fly
CNS  disease is experimental allergic encephalitis
may invade the CNS probably through the nasal cavity.
(EAE), a multifocal demyelinating disease which can be
Additionally to parasitic migration tracks similar to
induced by parenteral injections of CNS white matter
those in other helminth infections, there is extensive
-e ua se sn a e  lus
brain infarction, multifocal superficial cerebrocortical
 gens. EAE in small rodents is probably the most intensely
necrosis and widespread subependymal rarefaction. The
studied animal model of T cell mediated autoimmune
cerebral lesions are also known as feline ischemic
disease and has fostered an enormous body of knowl-
encephalopathy. The pathogenesis is not clear: putative
edge on neuroimmunology. Allergic encephalitis also
 larval toxins in the CSF inducing vasospasms and direct
used to occur as a complication of rabies vaccination in
tissue damage have been proposed.
 people and animals but has largely disappeared since
Inflammatory diseases   73
current rabies vaccines no longer contain brain tissue.
One of the most important neurological diseases in
3.4.2 Neurological diseases assumed to be
humans resembling EAE is multiple sclerosis (MS). MS
immune-mediated
is characterized by multifocal inflammatory demyelinat-
The most frequent pattern observed in this group of
 ing lesions, which are thought to result from autoim-
 diseases is non-suppurative inflammation, offen associ-
munity against myelin. Interestingly, epidemiological
ated with variable degrees of granulomatous inflamma-
studies have shown that an environmental factor (infec-
 tion. In some diseases we find a suppurative or rarely an 
tion?) precipitates the disease. A spontaneous MS-like
eosinophilic inflammation paftern.
disease occurs in certain viral infections (e.g. canine
Steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis
distemper) in domestic animals.
The diseases reviewed in this section represent a
Steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis (SRMA) is a
rather heterogeneous group of lesions affecting either
 sporadic but not uncommon disease in dogs, which
the meninges, the blood vessels, the brain/cord tissue or
occurs more frequently in certain breeds (e.g. Boxer,
the peripheral nerves and muscles. Common to all these
 Bernese Mountain Dog, Labrador Retriever) and may
diseases is infiltration of inflammatory cells often associ-
sometimes exhibit a familial pattern, e.g. in Boxers and
ated with damage to the target tissue. They are assumed
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers. In the latter genetic
to be immune-mediated because all attempts to con-
factors have been identified that seem to correlate with
vincingly demonstrate infectious agents in such lesions
the disease. SRMA was first noticed in laboratory dog
or to isolate infectious agents from affected tissues have
colonies (Beagle pain syndrome). The underlying
so far failed. Furthermore, many of these conditions are
mechanism is excessive IgA production probably as a
responsive to treatment with corticosteroids or other
result of immune dysregulation with a skewed Th2
immunosuppressants. However, the underlying immu-
response. Mostly young adult dogs are affected with
nological mechanisms are only partially understood
acute relapsing fever, neutrophilia, neck pain and reluc-
in a few of them. Cases are mostly sporadic and there
 tance to move. In chronic cases, additional neurological
 may be a higher incidence in certain breeds or families.
signs with paresis and ataxia may be detected. The
Most intriguing in this respect is the challenging and
 disease is glucocorticosteroid responsive but relapses
emerging group of canine non-infectious inflammatory
can occur despite treatment.
encephalitides: granulomatous meningoencephalomy-
Histologically there is suppurative inflammation of
elitis (GME), necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME)
the meninges especially of the spinal cord. In subacute
and necrotizing encephalitis (NE). The latter two condi-
 cases mononuclear infiltrates dominate and meningeal
tions were initially called “breed-specific"” (in Pugs and
fibrosis becomes apparent. There is necrotizing arteritis
Yorkshire Terriers respectively).
(immune complex type) ofthe spinal arteries (Fig.3.22A);
rach
A
Fig. 3.22 Steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis (SRMA). A: Dog. Acute SRMA. Large spinal meningeal artery (partially thrombosed
lumen); muscular layer (media, m) with focal acute fibrionoid necrosis (arrows), with intense inflammation in surrounding meninges
(arach). HE. B: Dog. Chronic SRMA. Chronic stenosing arterial lesion. The original structure of the media (m) with concentrically arranged 
smooth musdle cells is intact. Between the media and the endothelium there is a massive layer of cell infiltration with sub-intimal
fibrosis and stenosis of the vascular lumen. There is some non-suppurative inflammatory cell infiltrate in the meninges and perivascularly
(arrows). HE
74  Veterinary  Neuropathology
sometimes there are meningeal hemorrhages or even
sification of reticulosis as a primary CNS B cell lym-
hematomyelia. Chronic arterial changes are character-
phoma. Surprisingly, use of the term reticulosis has
ized by sub-intimal proliferation of spindle cells and
 persisted in dogs despite a lack of any similarities to the
stenosis (Fig. 3.22B). Sometimes there is extension of the
human lesion. GME has worldwide distribution, has no
inflammation to the cerebral meninges, choroid plexus
defined breed or gender specificity, and is characterized
and periventricular tissues.
by a unique angiocentric granulomatous encephalitis
consisting of a perivascular accumulation of macro-
phages often admixed with lymphocytes and plasma
Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis
cells (Fig. 3.23). Focal excentric nodular accumulation/
Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis (EME) has been
proliferation of histiocytic cells within the perivascular
described in young male dogs, particularly Golden
cuffs is characteristic in early lesions (Fig. 3.24). The
Retrievers and Rottweilers and rarely in cats; there
perivascular cuffs may leave the Virchow-Robin space,
are acute progressive neurological signs and CSF pleo-
 invade the parenchyma and coalesce with neighboring
cytosis with many eosinophils.  Pathologically there
 cuffs eventually with destruction of the tissue. Currently
is an intensive meningitis and periventriculitis with
three major patterns of histologic lesion distribution in
eosinophils in part infiltrating in the underlying
brain and spinal cord have been described: (1) the
 parenchyma. In one report, eosinophilic granulomas
 common disseminated form, in which the most intense
were described in Tervueren Shepherd Dogs. The
lesions occur in the cranial cervical spinal cord, brain-
cause is not known but an allergic mechanism is
stem and midbrain, offen with less severe extension ros-
口
suspected. See MRI Atlas.
trally into hemispheric white matter; (2) a disseminated
form with angiocentric expansion forming multiple
coalescing mass lesions of similar distribution; and (3)
Canine granulomatous meningoencephalitis
a focal form in which single discrete mass lesions occur
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) is the
in either the spinal cord, brainstem, midbrain, thalamus,
current term for a disease probably first described in
 optic nerves or cerebral hemispheres, without dissemi-
1936 and still attracting a confusing and lengthy number
nation. It remains contentious whether the last is a neo-
plastic rather than an immunoproliferative process.
ulosis, neoplastic reticulosis) reflecting changes only in
Preliminary immunophenotyping studies on each of
immunological terminology. Reticulosis is a term that
 these disease pafterns suggest that both disseminated
was introduced in human neuropathology by 1950, and
forms exhibit similar phenotypic profiles. However,
then was essentially discarded by 1980 with the reclas-
the focal form appears to be a neoplastic histiocytic
Fig. 3.23 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME). Dog. A: Transverse MRI FLAIR sequence of cerebellum with multifocal hyper-
intense lesions. B: Same dog. Cross-section of cerebellum and medulla. Disseminated angiocentric granulomatous lesions revealed by
immunohistochemistry for CD 18.
Inflammatory diseases  75
Fig. 3.24 GME. Dog. A: Cerebellum. Disseminated angiocentric lesions in the cerebellar white matter and meninges. HE. B: Brainstem.
Perivascular cuffing around one vessel (arrow) of mostly lymphocytes but also an eccentric focus of macrophages. HE. C: Brainstem.
Coalesence of expanding angiocentric cuffing by macrophages. HE. D: Brainstem. Eccentric perivascular cuffing with macrophages
(histiocytes) in both longitudinal section and cross-section of affected vessels. HE. E: These macrophages are strongly immunoreactive
with CD18. IHC.
dendritic cell phenotype. The pathogenesis of GME
histology NME has been recognized in other small-
remains obscure though an autoimmune encephalitis
 breed dogs including Maltese, Chihuahua, Pekingese,
induced by anti-GFAP antibodies in CSF, or a T cell 
 Boston Terrier, Shih Tzu, Coton du Tulear and Papillon
 mediated delayed hypersensitivity mechanism have
 breeds. The pathogenesis and etiology remain obscure.
been suggested. PCR-based screening for viral DNA
NME has both a characteristic anatomic distribu-
(e.g., herpes, adeno- or parvoviruses) has been nega-
 tion pattern and unique histological lesions not previ-
tive. See MRI Atlas.
ously seen in other canine encephalitides of known
etiology. Clinically the disease occurs in either gender
but intriguingly so far only in small-breed dogs. Gross
Canine necrotizing meningoencephalitis
e e    o 
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME) is a world-
 of either acute encephalitis or chronic foci of malacia,
wide disease originally recognized in dogs in the US
 necrosis and collapse of hemispheric gray and white
in the 1970s as a Pug dog, breed-specific disease, collo-
 matter decreasing in intensity rostrocaudally (Fig.
'6861 aus csdaua Sop 8d, se umou Aenb
 3.25). See MR1 Atlas. Histologically there is a unique
based on morphologically defined lesion patterns and
 combination of focal meningitis and polio- and
76  Veterinary Neuropathology
C
Fig. 3.25 Canine necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME). Pug dog. A: Cerebrum.Transverse MRI FLAIR sequence showing massive
acute hyperintensive bilateral lesions in cerebral cortex and subcortical white matter. B: Lateral view of the brain. Gross lesion in
temporal lobe with multifocal areas of discoloration and underlying cortical necrosis. C: Histological section of the same dog at the
same level as in B. Extensive destruction of cortex on right side and subcortical white matter on left side. D: Frontal lobe. Severe
lymphocytic meningitis and polioencephalitis with necrotizing leukoencephalitis in underlying white matter. HE.
leukoencephalitis of adjacent white matter. The lesions
asymmetric bilateral malacic necrotizing lesions are
are intensely inflammatory with meningitis and paren-
confined to hemispheric white matter (Fig. 3.26A,B)
chymal histiocytic, microglial infiltrates accompanied by
and the brainstem. See MRI Atlas. There is an intense
perivascular cuffing of lymphocytes and plasma cells  histiocytic, microglial and macrophage cellular infil-
(Fig. 3.25D). An acute non-suppurative encephalitis in
 trate with loss of white matter and thick perivascular
the hippocampus, septal nuclei, and thalamus can coexist 
lymphocytic cuffing (Fig. 3.26C). Other areas have
with chronic lesions. Usually, few inflammatory lesions
 acute exudation, severe edema, necrosis and eventual
are present in cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord.
cyst formation, with a dramatic gemistocytic astroglio-
sis, histiocytes and gitter cells intermixed with thick
perivascular lymphocytic cuffing (Fig. 3.26E, Fig. 3.27).
Canine necrotizing encephalitis
Characteristically the overlying cortex and meninges are
Necrotizing encephalitis (NE) was first described in
 not involved. Multifocal intense inflammatory cell infil-
1993 in Yorkshire Terriers, and has been reported recently
 trates of macrophages with dramatically thick perivas-
in the French Bulldog and Pomeranian. The pattern
cular lymphocytic cuffing are seen in the midbrain,
and histological type of the lesions are strikingly
brainstem and cerebellum. Thus, the classical lesions in
different from those of NME. Grossly the large focal
NME and NE are distinctly different based on both dis-
Inflammatory diseases
77
Fig. 3.26 Canine necrotizing encephalitis (NE). Dog. Yorkshire Terrier. A: Transverse MRl FLAIR image at level of basal ganglia
Hyperintense lesions in cerebral white matter. Destructive grey matter lesions on the right side. B: Similar case. Chronic lesion with
Cystic malacia and associated cerebral atrophy. C: Cerebrum. Destructive lesion with intense diffuse infiltration with inflammatory cells
and several very prominent perivascular cufs comprised mainly of lymphocytes. HE. D: NE. Dog. Yorkshire Terrier. Subcortical white
matter. Severe diffuse infiltration with inflammatory cells in parenchyma at the edge of a malacic lesion. HE. E: "Burnt out" cystic lesion
 tribution paftern and microscopic appearance. As with
 a litter are affected. There is a diffuse mononuclear
NME, limited immunophenotyping that has been
encephalitis with severe gliosis predominantly in the
restricted to paraffin-embedded specimens is consistent,
 cerebral cortex, caudate nucleus and periventricular gray
but not diagnostically useful. Similarly to NME, neuro-
matter of the brainstem but no evidence of neuronal
logical signs, results of CSF analysis and neuroimaging
 targeting as in neurotropic viral infections. All efforts to
findings vary with intensity and location of lesions.
detect infectious agents have been unsuccessful.
Whether these diseases (NME, NE) represent a much
wider emergent spectrum of a single disease, or consti-
Acute polyneuritis
tute a separate and unique disease manifestation, adds
Acute polyneuritis or polyradiculoneuritis is consid-
to the diagnostic dilemma presented by these encepha-
         
litides, and underlines an urgent need for a comprehen-
sive review of existing information in order to establish
dogs and cats, very rarely in other animal species. The
 cause in mostly not known. In North America hunting
working guidelines for classification and investigation of
dogs biten by raccoons may develop polyneuritis, in 
these entities.
this case called coon hound paralysis. Presumably.
antigens in raccoon saliva elicit an immune response
Meningoencephalitis in Greyhounds
which cross-reacts with PNS components. A similar
This appears to be a disease entity restricted to young
disease in humans is also called Guillain-Barre syn-
Greyhounds in Ireland. Frequently, several pups within
 drome. Clinically there is ascending paresis-paralysis of
78  Veterinary Neuropathology
the limbs developing in a few days and areflexia with
Sensory polyganglioneuritis
normal nociception. Recovery occurs within several
weeks but relapses are possible. In the motor nerves,
Sensory polyganglioneuritis is a rare disease in dogs of
especially the proximal portions (spinal nerve roots),
unknown etiology with severe mononuclear inflamma-
there are perivascular and interstitial lymphocytic infl-
tion and axonal degeneration in the dorsal spinal root
trations (Fig. 3.27), demyelination and axonal necrosis.
ganglia, trigeminal ganglia and associated nerves. There
In rare cases there may be prominent involvement of the
is also marked Wallerian degeneration of the dorsal
cauda equina or cranial nerves.
columns.
Chronic hypertrophic polyneuritis
Polyneuritis equi
Chronic hypertrophic neuritis is a very rare condition
Also called cauda equina neuritis, this is a rare sporadic
disease in horses, of possibly autoimmune, perhaps
in dogs with marked concentric proliferation of Schwann
cells ("onion bulbs") associated with chronic mononu-
 post-infectious (e.g. herpes, adenovirus) origin. Mostly
dlear inflammation in cranial and spinal nerve roots
adult females are affected. The disease is chronic and
occasionally leading to space-occupying lesions.
progressive, with tail and sphincter paralysis and
paresthesia/analgesia in the perineum. There is marked
swelling of the cauda equina nerves with destructive
inflammation of the nerves. The inflammation is often
granulomatous with occasional multinucleated giant
cells and massive fibrosis (Fig. 3.28). Occasionally there
is involvement of the cranial nerves.
Autoimmune myositis
Autoimmune inflammation with destruction of muscle
fibers has been described mostly in dogs and rarely in
cats. Three distinct syndromes are recognized in skeletal
muscles. In polymyositis all muscles of the body are
affected with infltration of T cells in the muscle tissue
and variable degrees of tissue destruction. In mastica-
tory myositis and extraocular muscle myositis only
highly specific muscle groups are targeted by a severe
 destructive inflammatory process. Interestingly, specific
Fig. 3.27 Acute polyradiculoneuritis. Dog. Spinal nerve root.
autoantibodies against  certain muscle components
Diffuse lymphocytic infiltration (large arrow), several degenerat-
have been demonstrated and since specific breeds are
ing axons (arrows) within the fascicdle. HE.
 more affected than others genetic factors appear to be
M
Fig. 3.28 Cauda equine neuritis. Horse. A: Massive enlargement of lumbosacral spinal nerves outside of the dura mater. B: Histologically
there is a multifocal fibrosing, granulomatous and necrotizing polyneuritis sometimes with multinucleated giant cells (arrow). HE.
Inflammatory diseases 
61
involved. This seems to be particularly true in Hungarian
Viral vasculitis
Vizlas.
Gilkerson JR, Barrett EJ. Equine herpesvirus neurological disease.
Equine Vet J 2008;40:102-103.
Further reading
Nelson DD, Davis WC, Brown WC, Li H, O'Toole D, Oaks JL. CD8(+)/
  () n    (
General
cells, infiltrate vasculitis lesions of American bison (Bison bison)
Greene C. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. St Louis,
with experimental sheep-associated malignant catarrhal fever. Vet
MO: Elsevier, 2012.
Immunol Immunopathol 2010;136:284-291.
Wilson EH, Weninger W, Hunter CA. Trafficking of immune cells in
the central nervous system. J Clin Invest 2010;120:1368-1379.
Demyelinating viral infections
Neurotropic viral infections
Anderson CA, Higgins RJ, Smith ME, Osburn BI. Border disease.
Bukovsky C, Schmoll F, Revilla-Fernandez S, Weissenbock H. Studies
 on the aetiology of non-suppurative encephalitis in pigs. Vet Rec
hypomyelination. Lab Invest 1987;57:168-175.
Benavides J, Garcia-Pariente C, Fuertes M, Ferreras MC,
2007;161:552-558.
Garcia-Marin JF, Juste RA, Perez V. Maedi-visna: the menin-
Cantile C, Del Piero F Di Guardo G, Arispici M. Pathologic and
140:1-11.
virus infection in horses. Vet Pathol 2001;38:414-421.
Carmichael KP, Bienzle D, McDonnell JI. Feline leukermia virus-
Del Medico Zajac MP, Ladelfa MF, Kotsias F, Muylkens B, Thiry J,
associated myelopathy in cats. Vet Pathol 2002;39:536-545.
Thiry E, Romera SA. Biology of bovine herpesvirus 5. Vet J
 Fletcher NF, Brayden DJ, Brankin B, Callanan J. Feline immunodefi-
2010;184:138-145.
ciency virus infection: a valuable model to study HIV-1 associated
Gosztonyi G. Natural and experimental Borna disease virus infections
- neuropathology and pathogenetic considerations. APMIS Suppl
encephalitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2008;123:134-137.
Headley SA, Amude AM, Alfieri AF Bracarense AP, Alfieri AA,
2008;124:53-57.
Summers BA. Molecular detection of Canine distemper virus and
Kamata H, Inai K, Maeda K, Nishimura T, Arita S, Tsuda T, Sato M.
the immunohistochemical characterization of the neurologic
Encephalomyelitis of cattle caused by Akabane virus in southern
lesions in naturally occurring old dog encephalitis. J Vet Diagn
Japan in 2006. J Comp Pathol 2009;140:187-193.
Invest 2009;21:588-597.
Martella V, Blixenkrone-Moller M, Elia G, Lucente MS, Cirone F
Schaudien D, Polizopoulou Z, Koutinas A, Schwab S, Porombka D,
Decaro N, Nielsen L, Banyai K, Carmichael LE, Buonavoglia C.
Baumgartner W, Herden C. Leukoencephalopathy associated with
Lights and shades on an historical vaccine canine distemper virus,
parvovirus infection in Cretan hound puppies. J Clin Microbiol
the Rockborn strain. Vaccine 201l;29:1222-1227.
2010;48:3169-3175.
 Staeheli P, Rinder M, Kaspers B. Avian bornavirus associated with
Vandevelde M, Zurbrigen A. Demyelination in canine distemper
fatal disease in psittacine birds. J Virol 2010;84:6269-6275.
virus infection: a review. Acta Neuropathol 2005;109:56-68.
Stein LT, Rech RR, Harrison L, Brown CC. Immunohistochermical
study of rabies virus within the central nervous system of domestic
and wildlife species. Vet Pathol 2010;47:630-633.
Bacterial infections
Theil D, Fatzer R, Schiller I, Caplazi P, Zurbriggen A, Vandevelde M.
Barber RM, Li Q, Diniz PP, Porter BF, Breitschwerdt EB, Claiborne
Neuropathological and aetiological studies of sporadic non-
MK, Birkenheuer AJ, Levine JM, Levine GJ, Chandler K, Kenny P,
suppurative meningoencephalomyelitis of cattle. Vet Rec 1998;143:
Nghiem P, Wei S, Greene CE, Kent M, Platt SR, Greer K, Schatzherg
244-249.
SJ. Evaluation of brain tissue or cerebrospinal fluid with broadly
Weaver SC, Reisen WK Present and future arboviral threats. Antiviral
Res 2010;85:328-345.
reactive polymerase chain reaction for Ehrlichia, Anaplasma,
spotted fever group Ricketsia, Baronella, and Borrelia species in
Yamada M, Kozakura R, Nakamura K, Yamamoto Y, Yoshi M, Kaku
canine neurological diseases (109 cases). J Vet Intern Med 2010;
Y Miyazaki A, Tsunemitsu H, Narita M. Pathological changes in
24:372-378.
pigs experimentally infected with porcine teschovirus. J Comp
Baums CG, Valentin-Weigand P. Surface-associated and secreted
Pathol 2009;141:223-228.
factors of Streprococcus suis in epidemiology, pathogenesis and
vaccine development. Anim Health Res Rev 2009;10:65-83.
Viral granulomatous infections
Beineke A, Bennecke K, Neis C, Schroder C, Waldmann KH,
Benavides J, Garcia-Pariente C, Fuertes M, Ferreras MC, Garcia-
Baumgartner W, Valentin-Weigand P, Baums CG. Comparative
Marin JF, Juste RA, Perez V. Maedi-visna: the meningoencephalitis
evaluation of virulence and pathology of Streprococcus suis sero-
in naturally occurring cases. J Comp Pathol 2009;140:1-11.
types 2 and 9 in experimentally infected growers. Vet Microbiol
Brown MA. Genetic determinants of pathogenesis by feline infectious
2008;128:423-430.
peritonitis virus. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 201l;143:265-268.
Corbeil LB. Histophilus sormni host-parasite relationships. Anim
Oaks JL, Long MT, Baszler TV. Leukoencephalitis associated with
Health Res Rev 2007;8:151-160.
selective viral replication in the brain of a pony with experimental
Fecteau G, George LW. Bacterial meningitis and encephalitis in
chronic equine infectious anemia virus infection. Vet Pathol
ruminants. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2004; 20:363-
2004;41:527-532.
377.
Poncelet L, Coppens A, Peeters D, Bianchi E, Grant CK, Kadhim
Oevermann A, Di Palma S, Doherr MG, Abril C, Zurbriggen A,
H.Detection of antigenic heterogeneity in feline coronavirus nucle-
Vandevelde M. Neuro pathogenesis of naturally occurring encepha-
ocapsid in feline pyogranulomatous meningoencephalitis. Vet
litis caused by Listeria monocytogenes in ruminants. Brain Pathol
Pathol 2008;45:140- 153.
2010;20:378-390.
80
0 Veterinary  Neuropathology
cerebral haemorrhages in two dogs in Germany: a clinical case
Fungal infections
study. Vet Parasitol 2009;160:100-108.
Snowden KF, Lewis BC, Hoffman J, Mansell J. Encephalitozoon cuniculi
Dvir E, Perl S, Loeb E, Shklar-Hirsch S, Chai O, Mazaki-Tovi M, Aroch
      ss     s
I, Shamir MH. Spinal intramedullary aberrant Spirocerca lupi
225-231.
migration in 3 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:860-864.
Stenner VJ, Mackay B, King T, Barrs VR, Irwin P, Abraham L, Swift
Wessmann A, Lu D, Lamb CR, Smyth B, Mantis P, Chandler K, Boag
N, Langer N, Bernays M, Hampson E, Martin P, Krockenberger MB,
A, Cherubini GB, Cappello R. Brain and spinal cord haemorrhages
Bosward K, Latter M, Malik R. Protothecosis in 17 Australian
associated with Angiostrongylus vasorurm infection in four dogs. Vet
dogs and a review of the canine literature. Med Mycol 2007;45:
Rec 2006;158:858-863.
249-266.
Sykes JE, Sturges BK, Cannon MS, Gericota B, Higgins RJ, Trivedi SR,
Non-infectious and immune-mediated
Dickinson PJ, Vernau KM, Meyer W, Wisner ER. Clinical signs,
inflammatory disorders
imaging features, neuropathology, and outcome in cats and dogs
with central nervous system cryptococcosis from California. J Vet
Aleman M, Katzman SA, Vaughan B, Hodges J, Crabbs TA, Christopher
Intern Med 2010;24:1427-1438.
 MM, Shelton GD, Higgins RJ. Antemortem diagnosis of polyneuri-
tis equi. J Vet Intern Med 2009;23:665-668.
Protozoal infections
Anfinsen KP, Berendt M, Liste FJ, Haagensen TR, Indrebo A,
Lingaas F, Stigen O, Alban L. A retrospective epidemiological
Alves L, Gorgas D, Vandevelde M, Gandini G, Henke D. Segmental
study of clinical signs and familial predisposition associated with
meningomyelitis in 2 cats caused by Toxoplasma gondi. I Vet Intern
aseptic meningitis in the Norwegian population of Nova Scotia
Med 2011;25:148-152.
duck tolling retrievers born 1994-2003. Can J Vet Res 2008;72:
Caldow GL, Gidlow JR, Schock A. Clinical, pathological and epide-
 miological findings in three outbreaks of ovine protozoan mye-
350-355.
Cuddon PA. Acquired canine peripheral neuropathies. Vet Clin North
loencephalitis. Vet Rec 2000; 146:7-10.
Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:207-249.
Dubey JP, Chapman JL, Rosenthal BM, Mense M, Schueler RL.
Evans J, Levesque D, Shelton GD. Canine inflammatory myopathies:
Clinical Sarcocystis neurona, Sarcocystis canis, Toxoplasma gondii,
a clinicopathologic review of 200 cases. J Vet Intern Med 2004;
and Neospora caninur infections in dogs. Vet Parasitol 2006;
18:679-691.
137:36-49.
 Shelton GD. From dog to man: the broad spectrum of inflammatory
 Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Saville WJ, Reed SM, Granstrom DE, Speer CA.
myopathies. Neuromuscular Disorders 2007;17:663-670.
     s   
 Shiel RE, Mooney CT, Brennan SF Nolan CM, Callanan JI. Clinical
cephalitis (EPM). Vet Parasitol 2001;95:89-131.
 and clinicopathological features of non-suppurative meningoen-
Garosi L, Dawson A, Couturier J, Matiasek L, de Stefani A, Davies E,
 cephalitis in young greyhounds in Ireland. Vet Rec 2010;167:
 Jeffery N, Smith P Necrotizing cerebellitis and cerebellar atrophy
333-337.
caused by Neospora caninum infection: magnetic resonance
Talarico LR, Schatzberg SI. Idiopathic granulomatous and necrotising
 inflammatory disorders of the canine central nervous system:
Med 2010;24:571-578.
a review and future perspectives. J Small Anim Pract 2010; 51:
Rodrigues A, Fighera RA, Souza TM, Schild AL, Barros CS.
138-149.
 Neuropathology of naturally occurring Trypanosoma evansi infec-
Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ. An update on steroid responsive meningitis-
tion of horses. Vet Pathol 2009;46:251-258.
arteritis. J Small Anim Prac 2010;51:150-154.
Williams JH, Koster LS, Naidoo V, Odendaal L, Van Veenhuysen A, de
Heiminth infections
Wit M, van Wilpe E. Review of idiopathic eosinophilic meningitis
Denk D, Matiasek K, Just FT, Hermanns W, Baiker K, Herbach N,
in dogs and cats, with a detailed description of two recent cases in
Steinberg T, Fischer A. Disseminated angiostrongylosis with fatal
dogs. I S Afr Vet Assoc 2008;79:194-204.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
Www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Trauma
Traumatic lesions of the nervous system result from
 ruption of blood vessels resulting in ischemia and thus
 direct mechanical impact applied to the head, spine or
 depletion of energy stores. Consequently, energy-
peripheral nerves. In addition, during sudden accelera-
dependent ion pumps break down with depolarization
tion or deceleration the skull and vertebral bone collide
 of membranes and excessive release of excitatory amino
against the inert brain and spinal cord. Apart from direct 
 acids leading to exitotoxicity (see Chapter 1). When
mechanical disruption of the tissue (laceration), there is
 anti-oxidative defense mechanisms (e.g superoxide dis-
damage to the blood vessels leading to ischemia, hemor-
mutase) become depleted, oxygen radicals induce per-
rhage and secondary changes. The space-occupying
oxidation of membranes of neural as well as vascular
effect of the latter may cause additional injury of the
 elements resulting in necrosis and can also initiate apop-
 gray and white matter because the CNS is located in the
tosis. The altered tissue environment, e.g. with high
narrow confines of the skull and spine.
 levels of inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandin,
can lead to vasospasm a few days after the frauma, aggra-
4.1  Pathophysiology of CNS trauma
vating the already compromised blood supply to the
Causes of brain trauma, commonly called traumatic
traumatized tissue. Membrane damage at the level of the
blood-brain barrier leads to vasogenic and cytotoxic
brain injury (TBl), in animals include car accidents,
brain edema, within the confined space of the skull,
falls, bites, kicks, gun shots and blows to the head. The
 further compromising tissue perfusion. Thus, much of
extent of injury varies considerably with severity, speed
and duration of the distortion. A special case is iatro-
 the pathogenesis of TBI is basically due to ischemia. The
destructive changes will eventually lead to an inflamma-
genic trauma associated with CSF puncture inadvert-
 ently penetrating the medulla.
tory reaction elicited by release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines with initial influx of neutrophils followed by
4.1.1 Pathogenesis of brain trauma
 macrophages removing cell debris and blood.
Primary and secondary injury
Since only little free space is present within the rigid
cranial vault, TBl-induced mass hemorrhage acts as a
The molecular pathogenesis of trauma is highly complex
space-occupying lesion increasing intracranial pressure.
 and only in part understood. Mechanical distortion of
The latter may further reduce cerebral perfusion leading
the tissue leads to lesions of the microvasculature with
to vascular leakage, ischemia and edema formation,
leakage of blood and plasma into the tissue. Following
increasing the intracranial pressure still more. This may
the immediate effect of sheer forces with disruption
eventually lead to significant brain swelling with midline
of neurons and other cells besides blood vessels (primary
shift and herniation of the occipital lobes underneath
brain injury), a range of secondary events leads to
 the tentorium cerebelli, resulting in lethal brainstem
additional damage within hours and days following the
compression. The same mechanisms may result in
 traumatic event. The secondary brain damage may sig-
caudal herniation of the cerebellum through the foramen
nificantly aggravate the initial traumatic injury and is
magnum.
frequently fatal. TBl induces disruption of cerebral
blood flow autoregulation and an abrupt rise in catecho-
lamines causing a rapid increase in blood pressure,
Mechanics of brain trauma
which may cause life-threatening brain edema. These
Traumatic  lesions  can  occur  immediately  below  the
changes are compounded by the direct mechanical dis-
site of impact (coup), on the opposite side of impact
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
81
82  Veterinary  Neuropathology
(contre-coup) or both as shown in Fig. 4.1. It is generally
the inert brain is bounced against the inner surface of
accepted that coup lesions are most severe and contre-
the calvarium or tentorium either on the side of impact
coup lesions are small when a stationary (but mobile)
 or on the opposite side. Additionally, the physical prop-
head is hit by a moving object. In contrast, contre-coup
erties of cerebrospinal fluid and tensile forces resulting
 lesions generally are more prominent than coup lesions
in stretching of vessels and brain parenchyma (when the
when a moving head bounces against a stationary object.
brain moves away from the skull) have been implicated
The pathomechanism of coup and contre-coup injuries
 in the development of contre-coup contusions. Thus,
 is still under debate, but it is widely accepted that inertia
the distribution pattern of lesions is offen complex
of the brain is involved in the pathogenesis. The brain is
-s dp ose iq sie gns Ao pou h
suspended in the cerebrospinal fluid and therefore freely
tures of the brain (Fig. 4.1D).
movable within the skull and thus subject to a range of
different forces (e.g. linear and angular acceleration 
4.1.2 Pathogenesis of spinal cord trauma
forces; shearing, rotational and tensile forces) in trauma.
Trauma to the spinal column may result in spinal cord
When the head is suddenly accelerated or decelerated
injury following vertebral fractures, luxations, subluxa-
Fig. 4.1 Coup/contre-coup. A-B: Cat hit by car. A, dorsal and B, ventral view of the brain showing coup and contre-coup lesions.
C: Simplified illustration of the coup/contre-coup mechanism during closed head trauma. Following impact the brain moves at a dif-
ferent speed to the skull because of its inertia and is bounced against the internal side of the skull resulting in contusion. The contusion
may occur dlirectly below (coup) or at the opposite side (contre-coup) of the impact. D: Horse. Severe closed head trauma (fell on 
obstadle in jumping competition) with a superficial wedge-shaped lesion in left hemisphere (probable coup) but also severe hemor-
rhagic lesions in the deep brain structures illustrating the frequently complex lesion distribution in cranial trauma.
Trauma83
Fig. 4.2 Spinal cord contusion. A: Dog. Spinal cord. Focal area of hemorrhagic malacia (dura mater has been incised and opened).
B: Dog. Cross-sections of spinal cord. Hemorrhagic myelomalacia more pronounced in center of the cord and gray matter. C: Transverse
axons in the white matter in acute lesion. HE. E: Loss of tissue architecture with infiltration by macrophages. HE. F: Ascending hemor-
rhagic myelomalacia within the dorsal columns and central canal. HE.
tions and intervertebral disc herniations. Even without
ing the traumatic event are based on the same mecha-
mechanical deformation of the spinal canal a sudden 
nisms as described in brain trauma. As in the brain,
blow to the vertebral column may lead to severe cord
hemorrhage is associated with acute ischemic necrosis
lesions. In addition, traumatic lesions often lead to nar-
of the tissue (Fig. 4.2). See MR1 Atlas. The clinical con-
rowing of the spinal canal exerting continuous pressure
 sequences of hemorrhagic myelomalacia are frequently
 on the cord. Thus, basically two pathogenetic mecha-
severe and have a bad prognosis. A peculiar secondary
nisms have to be considered in cord trauma: contusion
change in the cord is that the hemorrhage can extend
and compression. Often both mechanisms act synergis-
over several segments from the site of impact thus pro-
tically. This is particularly true in intervertebral disc
ducing ascending or descending hemorrhagic myelomala-
disease.
cia (Fig. 4.2F) often along the central canal and dorsal
columns. The mechanism of this phenomenon is yet
Contusion
unknown, but vascular damage, hemorrhage, excitotox-
Following impact, the cord, which is suspended and
icity inflammatory mediators and reactive oxygen
hence movable within in the spinal canal, collides with
species likely contribute. In the worst of cases, it may
the bony wall of the spinal canal because of inertia
involve many segments or even the whole cord.
resulting in contusion. At the site of impact there is
damage to the microvasculature leading to intramedul-
lary hemorrhage, which is typically more pronounced in
Compression
the gray than in the white matter. This is because the
Compression of the cord occurs when the spinal canal
 gray matter is far more vascularized than the white
is narrowed, for example by a protruding intervertebral
matter. Secondary changes in the hours and days follow--
disc. The resulting pathology depends on the speed with
 84   Veterinary Neuropathology
rise in
intraspinal
cord
compression 
pressure
Further
volume
reduced
increase
perfusion
stasis/
edema
congestion
increased
hydrostatic
pressure
Fig. 4.3 Spinal cord compression. A: Wobbler syndrome. Horse. On the right side a compressed spinal cord segment with marked
congestion and swelling compared to normal cord segment on the left. B: Acute Hansen's type I intervertebral disc herniation. Dog.
Spinal cord. Marked spongy state of the white matter due to edema and swelling of myelin sheaths as well as axonal degeneration 
(vh, ventral hom). HE. C: Diagram of the events in the vicious closed cycle with the lesions induced by hemodynamic changes during
compression.
which the compression develops. This is called the
pression, the destructive component may be more or less
dynarmic factor. Acute compressions that happen within
pronounced. In severe lesions, we may find extensive
seconds initially induce lesions very much like those
necrosis of both gray and white matter. In compressive
described in spinal cord contusion. More often, we are
lesions of sudden onset, we find evidence for both con-
dealing with compressive lesions that develop within
tusion and compression.
hours, days or even weeks. Chronic ("chronic" as
Depending on the stage of the spinal cord injury, we
 opposed to a sudden blow) compression in this case
find reactive changes such as invasion of neutrophils
leads to hemodynamic changes depicted in Fig. 4.3.
initially followed by macrophages, vascular proliferation
Important to understand the pathogenesis of chronic
 and gliosis. In animals that survive for several days or
compression is that the cord is encased by the spinal
more, Wallerian degeneration is present in the ascending
canal, a rigid tunnel of bone, in which there is little spare
and descending tracts of the cord. In fact, if the primary
space. Any pathological process, which occupies space
lesion has been overlooked, Wallerian degeneration
will sooner or later compress the cord. This will then
indicates its presence. In chronic compressions, we often
lead to perfusion failure, vascular stasis, leakage of
 find loss of neurons and gliosis in the gray matter (see
plasma proteins and increased osmotic pressure in the
Fig. 4.8C) and we occasionally see enlargement of the
tissue, leading to edema further increasing intraspinal
central canal in the area of the lesion. The ependymal
 pressure, thus establishing a vicious circle (Fig. 4.3C).
lining of the canal may rupture with leakage of spinal
For that reason, decompressive surgery is the treatment
fluid in the tissue (interstitial edema) and formation of
of choice in many cases.
a fluid-filled cavity (syringomyelia).
On histological examination, the lesions are more
In slowly progressive compression, e.g caused by
 obvious in the white matter. The involved cord segments
tumors of the meninges or nerve roots, the cord can be
show a marked spongy state of the white matter, which
 remarkably attenuated with mild evidence of ongoing
is most pronounced immediately adjacent to the com-
destruction but severe atrophy.
 pressive force. The spongy state is caused either by
edema, visible as extensive vacuolation of the tissue with
4.2 General strategy for diagnosis
“empty” vacuoles and little evidence of lysis of cellular
elements and reactive changes, or by destructive lesions,
of traumatic CNS lesions
 including demyelination and axonal disruption/swelling
 The diagnosis of CNS trauma does not pose any
(Fig. 4.3B). Usually there is a mixture of both compo-
problem when an animal is submitted with a clear
nents. Depending on the severity and duration of com-
history of a traumatic event or when other signs of
Trauma 85
mechanical injury are present such as skin abrasions,
may reveal a macroscopic change. If not, the presence
limb fractures etc. In domestic animals this is fre-
 of Wallerian degeneration in the routine histological
quently not the case. Animals such as livestock on
sections indicates the presence of a focal lesion some-
 pou uo are siad u-aa no sanisd
where in the cord. If this primary lesion is not included
 close surveillance. A blunt trauma may not cause any
in the original sections there may be an indication to
externally visible mark The only available history
trim in more spinal cord tissue.
may be that neurological signs suddenly appeared.
 The predominant lesion pattern in trauma is hemor-
4.3 Traumatic nervous system diseases
rhage often associated with malacia ("hemorrhagic
4.3.1 Trauma of the brain
malacia"). Thus when hemorrhagic lesions are seen,
trauma can be suspected. However, there are many
Concussion
other causes of hemorrhage or hemorrhagic malacia.
Concussion is the mildest form of head injury and is
A differential diagnosis of hemorrhagic lesions in the
 defined as temporary impairment of neurological func-
CNS is presented in Fig. 2.1. Further information can
 tion following rapid acceleration/deceleration during
be obtained in Fig. 6.1.
 head trauma. Axonal injury may be involved in concus-
+ Areas of dark brown, orange or yellowish discolora-
 sion. Mild lesions may be present on MRI, and hemor-
tion are highly suggestive of an old hemorrhage,
rhages and axonal/neuronal damage may be seen with
 potentially due to trauma.
light microscopy. This type of trauma is well known in
 Spinal cord injury of various causes discussed below
 human medicine, but data on animals are lacking.
is probably the most common cause of neurological
Hemorrhage/hematoma
disease in animals. A correct clinical localization in
the spinal cord is often available. If not, whenever
 The common visible evidence of trauma is hemorrhage,
there is a history of paresis or paralysis in the hind
- ss se a n ais r a r
limbs or all four limbs, the spinal cord (and spinal
 rhage (hematoma) that results from rupture of large
canal) should be examined as outlined in Chapter 1.
 blood vessels. The hemorrhage may be localized in the
● Traumatic lesions in the cord and surrounding tissues
epidural or subdural space, but in animals occurs most
are often visible with the naked eye and spinal cord
commonly as extensive subarachnoid or intracerebral
can be sampled accordingly.
hemorrhages. The latter are observed in the cortex
· In the absence of a clinical or external macroscopic
with contact to the leptomeninges, in the subcortical
localization, systematic sectioning of all segments
white matter or in the deeper structures (Fig. 4.4A,B).
Fig. 4.4 Acute cerebral trauma. Dog. hit by car. A: Dorsal view on the brain. The right hemisphere is covered by a large subdural
hematoma. B: Transverse section of the same brain. The subdural hematoma compresses the right parietal lobe. Contusive hemorrhages
are found in the cortex and subcortical white matter (arrows). The cortex is swollen, and the boundary between white and gray matter
blurred (asterisk) indicating edema and necrosis. C: Same case. Histologically, in this area focal hemorhages (asterisk) border a large
area of spongy state (arrows). The overlying subarachnoid space is infiltrated by macrophages. HE.
86  Veterinary Neuropathology
Frequently, hemorrhages are particularly extensive or
separation of contusion from hematoma is ambiguous
even selectively localized in the gray matter because the
since intraparenchymal hemorrhage occurs in both.
latter is much more vascularized than the white matter.
latrogenic trauma
Contusion, laceration
A particular type of trauma is laceration and hemor-
Contusions and lacerations result from blunt trauma to
rhage of the brainstem or spinal cord during CSF punc-
the head and consist of focal to extensive parenchymal/
ture. Such lesions may be an incidental finding during
arachnoidal hemorrhages and tissue necrosis  (Fig-
the neuropathological examination, but may also be
4.4A,B,C). In lacerations, the arachnoidal membranes
associated with significant neurological deficits. On
and the underlying brain parenchyma are disrupted (e.g.
gross  examination  longitudinal  hemorrhage  corre-
due to a skull fracture), whereas in contusions the arach-
sponding to the needle track is observed near the midline
noidal membranes are intact. Both conditions are
(Fig. 4.5).
accompanied by significant edema, which may result in
life-threatening increase in intracranial pressure. The
Old trauma
 If an animal is well nursed during the acute post-
traumatic phase it may recover depending on the site of
the lesion, sometimes with only minor residual neuro-
logical deficits. In surviving animals hemorrhages and
destroyed tissue are removed by macrophages. As is
usually the case in massive destruction of CNS tissue,
because neural tissue cannot regenerate, cystic lesions
are formed with atrophy of the involved area (Fig.
4.6A,B). The edges of such cysts are often decorated
with hemosiderophages (Fig. 4.6C). These are macro-
phages that have phagocytosed and digested the eryth-
rocytic hemoglobin. In HE sections they contain
yellow to brownish-orange granules of blood break-
down products. These hemosiderophages may persist
throughout life in the scar tissue formed by fibril-
lary astrocytes. See MRI Atlas.
Diffuse traumatic axonal injury
Apart from direct mechanical disruption, axons in mul-
Fig. 4.5 latrogenic trauma. Cat. latrogenic laceration and hem-
tiple areas of the traumatized brain may undergo degen-
orrhage of the brainstem resulting from two misguided attempts
eration called traumatic axonal injury (TAl), which
using a biopsy needle for CSF collection.
results from shearing forces during rapid acceleration or
Fig. 4.6 Previous old trauma. A: Cat. A depressed area of focal, chronic encephalomalacia in the right frontal lobe with loss of tissue.
Note yellowish-brown discoloration of lesion. B: Dog. Spinal cord. Chronic cystic myelomalacia following spinal cord contusion. HE.
'h saheydone buieiuon-uaisoay snoanu buuieiuon anss poose Ag pau s! (ysaise) is y xao egaia boa 
Trauma87
A
Fig. 4.7 Intervertebral disc disease. Dog. Spinal cord. A: Acute disc extrusion. Extruded intervertebral disc material and associated
hematoma over the ventral surface of the cord attached to the dura. Note diffuse subdural hemorrhage. B: Chronic disc extrusion.
There is ventrodorsal compression of the spinal cord due to a mass of granulation tissue, disc material and hemorrhage. C: MRl sagittal
T2W sequence of the spine of a dog with an explosive disc extrusion. Focal hyperintensity of the cord and the nucleus pulposus of
one disc has a comparatively diminished signal (arrow). D: Traumatically induced (explosive, high velocity) disc extrusion with severe
unilateral, well demarcated focal spinal cord necrosis and hemorhage.
 deceleration. In severe cases this change may be wide-
dystrophic breeds there is loss of notochordal cells and
spread ("diffuse axonal injury"), a clinically relevant 
often mineralization of the nucleus pulposus, which
       
 retains its volume. In non-chondrodystrophic breeds
also known from experimental trauma in animals. The
 there is rather atrophy of the disc. Associated degenera-
lesion  starts  as  focal  axonal  swelling resulting  from
tion and weakening of the annulus fibrosus may result
impaired axonal transport and progresses to axonal dis-
 in rupture of the annulus fibrosus and extrusion of
connection and Wallerian degeneration.
degenerated disc material in the extradural space
(Hansen type I, Fig. 4.7A,B). Alternatively, the weakened
4.3.2 Traumatic spinal cord lesions
annulus fibrosus containing degenerated nucleus pulpo-
sus protrudes in the spinal canal (Hansen type II hernia-
Intervertebral disc disease
tion). Most of these herniations occur spontaneously
Endogenous cord trauma associated with intervertebral
without history of previous trauma between the T10
 disc diseaseis particularly common in dogs. Degenerative
and L3 vertebrae but also in the cervical area. Whereas
changes in the intervertebral disc occur as an aging
the relatively large extradural space around the cervical,
change in non-chondrodystrophic dog breeds and very
cranial thoracic and caudal lumbar spinal cord segments
-  ( lx) ss   si  
may accommodate a relatively large amount of herni-
maturely at early age (2 months in Dachshunds) in
ated disc material without causing significant compres-
chondrodystrophic breeds (Dachshund, Basset, Beagle,
 sion, herniated disc material in the upper lumbar and
Pug, Pekingese, Poodles, Cocker Spaniels and others).
lower thoracic spine quickly causes significant compres-
The degenerative process in the intervertebral disc starts
sion and neurological deficits due to the small extra-
with degradation and loss of proteoglycans, a change
dural space at these sites.
from collagen type ll to type I and proliferation of
On postmortem examination a disc extrusion
chondrocyte-like cells. This is associated with appear-
(Hansen type I) is easily recognized. In view of the
ance of clefts within the intervertebral disc. In chondro-
 relatively small volume of the nucleus pulposus, surpris-
88 Veterinary  Neuropathology
 ingly large amounts of extradural material are frequently
Abnormal vertebrae (hemivertebrae, wedge vertebrae,
found attached to the dura because of extensive hemor-
centrum defects,block and transitional vertebrae) may
rhage and inflammatory reaction. In chronic extrusions,
cause stenosis of the spinal canal with spinal cord com-
the nucleus pulposus material may get organized by
pression as well as kyphosis and scoliosis, especially in
 granulomatous inflammation and fibrous tissue that
small dog breeds. Arachnoidal cysts are discussed in
adheres the disc material firmly to the dura (Fig. 4.7B).
chapter 5.3.8.
Disc protrusions are characterized by bulging of the
Wobbler syndrome (cervical
intervertebral disc, which maintains a smooth surface
and generally does not adhere to the dura. Along with
spondylomyelopathy, cervical stenotic
 compression, acute and large disc extrusions often also
myelopathy)
 cause contusion of the cord with hemorrhage, edema
 In horses and large dog breeds (e.g. Dobermann, Great
 and extensive necrosis of gray and white matter (Fig.
Dane), static or dynamic stenosis of the cervical spinal
4.2). Rarely, pulposus material penetrates the dura mater
canal causes spinal cord compression, neck pain, paresis
and can even enter the cord tissue.
and ataxia (known as Wobbler syndrome). The defini-
 tion of cervical spondylomyelopathy and its pathogen-
Spinal trauma
esis are controversial. Genetic, dietary etiologies and
congenital anomalies (such as congenital vertebral canal
Fractures, subluxations and luxations of the spine
 stenosis in Dobermanns) have been proposed.
cause contusion but are also frequently associated with
Static stenoses have been divided into osseous- and
cord compression. The latter may develop due to pres-
disc-associated compressions. The former are observed
ence of bone fragments, narrowing of the canal resulting
from instability, massive extradural hemorrhage or
predominantly in young adult animals and have their
origin in vertebral malformations that are frequently
delayed stenosis of the canal as a result of callus forma-
associated with degenerative changes of the facet joints
tion. Trauma may also cause extrusion of a degenerated
that narrow the spinal canal. Furthermore, synovial cysts
intervertebral disc causing similar pathology as described
secondary to the degenerative synovial joint changes
above (contusion and compression). In recent years
and hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum may compli-
extrusion of healthy nucleus pulposus tissue ("explosive
disc" “high-velocity disc extrusions") following trau-
cate  the compression.  Disc-associated compressions
occur in adult dogs that are born with a congenital ver-
matic rupture of the annulus fibrosus has been increas-
o ds i ad ae sh  sios de 
ingly recognized as a frequent event in spinal trauma.
 compression due intervertebral disc protrusions because
This type of disc herniation may also occur following
 of the relatively small extradural space. Disc-associated
intensive exercise. The extruded nucleus pulposus may
compressions generally occur at the transition between
even perforate the dura. The lesions can be extremely
C5-C6 and C6-C7. Dynamic compression of the spinal
destructive, strongly lateralized and well demarcated
cord occurs with cervical extension and flexion over a
resembling an ischemic infarct (Fig. 4.7C,D). It is not
compressive lesion within the spinal canal and signifi-
associated with compression, because the gelatinous
cantly contributes to spinal cord damage in cervical
口
nucleus pulposus diffuses in the epidural space and hence
spondylomyelopathy.
does not accumulate. See MRI Atlas.
Neuropathological changes in the spinal cord depend
 on the duration and severity of compression. They may
Spinal malformations
vary from focal axonal degeneration and edema to
In canine toy breeds, such as Miniature Poodles, Maltese
marked malacia, gliosis and atrophy of gray and white
 and Yorkshire Terriers, atlanto-axial subluxation with
matter (Fig. 4.8C).
dorsal displacement of the axis leads to cervical spinal
cord compression and severe ambulatory problems. The
Synovial cysts
cause of the dorsal displacement in toy breeds includes
Spinal synovial cysts arising from the intervertebral
malformation (aplasia, hypoplasia) of the dens or its
joints and bulging in the spinal canal may be causative
postnatal progressive degeneration, and absence of the
for or contribute to cervical spondylomyelopathy. They
transversal ligament of the atlas. In other dog breeds,
are a frequent cause of spinal cord compression in riding
atlanto-axial subluxation may occur with incomplete
horses. In this species, they occur at the level of the
ossicification of the aflas. Furthermore, it may result
vertebral articulations C4-C7 and result from chronic
from traumatic injury causing fracture/avulsion of the
inflammation of the intervertebral joints (Fig. 4.8B). In
dens or rupture of the transversal ligament.
dogs, they can be associated with cervical stenotic mye-
Trauma  89
Fig. 4.8 A: Dog. Sagittal section of spine. Discospondylitis of two discs and osteomyelitis of the adjacent vertebral bodies. B: Horse.
Synovial cyst of the articular facet joint (arrow) in the cervical spinal canal. C: Dobermann. Chronic canine wobbler syndrome. Marked
dorsoventral flattening and atrophy particularly on the left side, cystic poliomyelomalacia with gliosis. HE.
lopathy (see above), but may occur along the entire
4.3.3 Trauma in the peripheral nervous
 spinal cord.
system
Discospondylitis
General
Discospondylitis is mostly a problem in dogs resulting
Peripheral nerve injury is a frequent complication in
from hematogenous embolic infection of the disc by
trauma of the extremities such as fractures and luxa-
bacteria (e.g. Brucella canis) or fungi (e.g. Aspergillus
tions. Superficial nerves can be directly traumatized.
tereus), frequently at multiple sites. Typically the infec-
Neuropraxia occurs in crush injuries in which the nerve
tion and associated inflammation lead to lysis of the disc
 remains intact but with interruption of conduction
and osteomyelitis of the adjacent endplates of the verte-
resulting  from  compression/ischemia.  There  is  no
bral bodies (Fig. 4.8A). In the chronic stage sclerosis and
Wallerian degeneration and function returns within
 spondylosis occur. There is usually only moderate steno-
hours to weeks. More severe is axonotmesis, where
sis of the canal.
axons are destroyed but anatomical continuity of the
connective tissues of the nerve remains preserved. This
Abscess of the spine
leads then to  Wallerian degeneration and retrograde
 Bacterial infection with abscess formation in the spine
changes as explained in Chapter 1. Regeneration occurs
is an important cause of spinal cord compression in
but takes months to years depending on the distance
livestock animals.
from the nerve's target. The most severe type of injury
with rupture and loss of continuity of the nerve or
Tumors
extensive destruction of the connective tissue structures
Neoplastic disease of the spine and other tissues sur-
is called neurotmesis. Histological changes consist of
rounding the cord are discussed in Chapter 7.
axonal swelling and fragmentation, loss of myelin sheaths,
90
0 Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 4.9 Peripheral nervous system trauma. A: Dog. Ventral view of the cervical intumescence with brachial plexus avulsion. Four
nerve roots of the right side are avulsed and replaced by hemorrhagic stumps. B: Dog. Cauda equina compression. Sagittal MRl T1W
of L7-S1 disc protrusion in a dog with complete loss of signal of the cauda equina and dural sac at the level of the disc lesion. C:
Dog. Chronic cervical nerve root compression. Marked loss of nerve fibers, edema and hyperplasia of Schwann cells. Many remaining
axons are swollen (arrows). HE.
invasion of macrophages in the degenerating fibers and
duration, lesions range from disseminated degeneration
Schwann cell proliferation.
of fibers to extensive loss of nerve fibers and fibrosis.
Brachial plexus avulsion
Cervical spinal root compression
Avulsion of the brachial plexus is the most frequent
Compression of cervical nerve roots with radicular pain
cause of monoplegia in small animals. Extreme sudden
("root signature"), lameness and muscle atrophy in the
abduction of a frontlimb during an accident can pull
affected limb is quite common in dogs. The lesions are
 one or more spinal nerve roots of the brachial plexus
usually associated with cervical disc disease, instability
and other causes of hypertrophy of the soft tissues
Fig. 4.9A). In cases of complete interruption the prog-
leading to stenosis of the intervertebral foramina.
 nosis is bad because regeneration is not possible.
 Lesions range from mild loss of fibers to complete nerve
root degeneration and fibrosis (Fig. 4.9C).
Avulsion of cauda equina nerves
Further reading
Cauda equina nerve avulsion (most commonly puden-
dal and coccygeal nerves) is often associated with
Pathophysiology of CNS trauma
fractures/subluxations in the lumbosacral area or avul-
 Drew LB, Drew WE. The contrecoup-coup phenomenon: a new
sion of the tail (the latter particularly in cats).
understanding of the mechanism of closed head injury. Neurocrit
Care 2004;1:385-390.
Compression of cauda equina
Greve MW, Zink BJ. Pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury. Mt
This lesion, commonly called cauda equina syndrome
Sinai J Med 2009;76:97-104.
 is a frequent neurological problem especially in large-
Nag S, Kapadia A, Stewart DJ. Review: molecular pathogenesis of
breed dogs. The cause is stenosis of the lumbosacral
 blood-brain barrier breakdown in acute brain injury. Neuropathol
Appl Neurobiol 201l;37:3-23.
canal and/or associated intervertebral foramina result-
Okada M, Kitagawa M, Ito D, Itou T, Kanayama K, Sakai T. Magnetic
ing from pathology in the intervertrebral disc (L7/S1),
 resonance imaging features and clinical signs associated with
intervertebral joints, vertebral bone or associated liga-
presumptive and confirmed progressive myelomalacia in dogs:
mentous structures (Fig. 4.9B). The pathophysiology of
12 cases (1997-2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;237:1160-
1165.
nerve compression within the confined space of the
 Sande A, West C. Traumatic brain injury: a review of pathophysiology
spinal canal is similar to what has been described for
and management. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2010;20:
spinal cord compression. Depending on severity and
177-190.
Trauma  91
Brain trauma
Spinal malformations
Barkhoudarian G, Hovda DA, Giza CC. The molecular pathophysi-
Warren-Smith CM, Kneissl S, Benigni L, Kenny PJ, Lamb CR.
ology of concussive brain injury. Clin Sports Med 20ll;30:
Incomplete ossification of the atlas in dogs with cervical signs. Vet
33-48
Radiol Ultrasound 2009;50:635-638.
Maruta J, Lee SW, Jacobs EF, Ghajar J. A unified science of concussion.
Westworth DR, Sturges BK. Congenital spinal malforrmations in small
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;1208:58-66.
animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:951-981.
Lujan Feliu-Pascual A, Garosi L, Dennis R, Platt S. Iatrogenic brain-
stem injury during cerebellomedullary cistern puncture. Vet Radiol
Wobbler syndrome
Utrasound 2008;49:467-471.
da Costa RC. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobbler syndrome) in
Meythaler JM, Peduzzi JD, Eleftheriou E, Novack TA. Current con-
dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:88 1-913.
cepts: diffuse axonal injury-associated traumatic brain injury. Arch
Sale Cs, Smith KC. Magnetic resonance imaging features of cervical
Phys Med Rehabil 2001;82:1461-1471.
stenotic myelopathy in 21 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 200l;42:
20-27.
Intervertebral disc disease
Other causes of cord compression
Bergknut N, Rutges JP, Kranenburg HJ, Smolders LA, Hagman R,
Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Berry WL, Vernau KM, Koblik PD,
Smidt HJ, Lagerstedt AS, Voorhout G, Hazewinkel HH,
Lecouteur RA. Extradural spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs. J Small
Grinwis GC, Creemers LB, Meij BP, Dhert WJ. The dog as an
Anim Pract 2001;42:502-509.
animal model for intervertebral disc degeneration? Spine 2012;
Forterre F, Kaiser S, Garner M, Stadie B, Matiasek K, Schmahl W,
37:351-358.
Brunnberg L. Synovial cysts associated with cauda equina syn-
Brisson BA. Intervertebral disc disease in dogs. Vet Clin North Am
drome in two dogs. Vet Surg 2006;35:30-33.
Small Anim Pract 2010;40:829-858.
Tipold A, Stein VM. Inflarmmatory diseases of the spine in small
De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, McConnell FJ. Association of clini-
animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:871-879.
cal and magnetic resonance imaging findings with outcome in
Cauda equina syndrome
extrusion: 42 cases (2000-2007). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;234:
 Meij BP, Bergknut N. Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Vet
495-504.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:983-1009.
McKee WM, Downes CJ, Pink JI, Gemmill TJ. Presumptive exercise-
Worth AJ, Thompson DJ, Hartman AC. Degenerative lumbosacral
associated peracute thoracolumbar disc extrusion in 48 dogs. Vet
stenosis in working dogs: current concepts and review. N Z Vet J
Rec 2010;166:523-528.
2009;57:319-330.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
Www. wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
5
Congenital malformations
Congenital malformations of the CNS are structural
 inherited single point gene mutations or chromosomal
abnormalities of prenatal origin present at birth. In
abnormalities. A rapidly increasing number of such
 general, they seriously interfere with postnatal viability
mutations is being characterized, including the proteins
or normal physical function. Broadly across domestic
they code for, leading to a fundamental molecular
 animal species, such malformations may account for up
understanding of many developmental abnormalities.
to 5% of all neonatal deaths and for an undetermined
 In contrast, secondary malformations are those acquired
 incidence of abortions.
from exposure to known teratogens, including transpla-
cental viral infections, ionizing radiation, hyperthermia,
5.1 Pathophysiology
known toxic or some therapeutic chemicals, hypothy-
 roidism, vitamin deficiencies, plant toxins etc., although
5.1.1 Ontogeny of the CNS
the cause of many malformations still remains enig-
Some knowledge of the mechanism and sequence of
matic. Thus, an etiologic classification of all animal
 normal mammalian embryological development is criti-
CNS malformations is not possible with currently avail-
cal to even a basic understanding of CNS malforma-
able information. Classifications are essentially based
tions. The CNS develops from primitive neuroectoderm
Jo puoeq e isue sudsp oionoudou uodn
with initial staged neurulation finally resulting in closure
normal fetal CNS development. This allows then a broad
to form the neural tube. Neural crest cells then separate
 from the tube to form neurons of peripheral autonomic
mations. Current evidence suggests that most defects are
 ganglia and sensory nerve roots. From a subependy-
 probably the result of interactive combinations of both
 mal germinal cell layer, there is a massive proliferation
 genetic and environmental factors.
in successive waves of immature neurons and then
Critical features of teratogenesis that largely deter-
glioblasts, which migrate along radial glial processes
 mine the type of fetal CNS malformation are:
guided to predetermined locations in gray and white
matter. Functional cell maturation then follows with
· a longer period of development and maturation and
populations of postmitotic neurons, astrocytes and
therefore greater time for susceptibility to injury com-
oligodendrocytes forming myelin with increasing mor-
pared to other organ systems;
phological and functional complexity.  During this
 most severe defects occur in the first trimester during
development all these cells have different vulnerability
this critical period of morphogenesis;
to various teratogenic agents at different stages of matu-
there is changing individual cell susceptibility to
ration leading to a vast array of acquired malformations,
various insults at different stages of development;
 depending as much on the time of insult as on any spe-
+ the type of malformation depends more on the criti-
cific teratogen.
cal timing of the insult in relation to ontogenesis than
the nature of the insult;
5.1.2 Etiology
+ because domestic animal species are born at different
The major classification of malformations into two
stages of CNS maturation, postnatal myelination and
 groups is based on presumed differences in etiology.
neuronal cell traffcking can still provide targets of
Primary malformations are caused by spontaneous or
opportunity for teratogens.
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentials of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
92
Congenital malformations  93
lack of the development of the brain. There is also
5.2 General strategy for diagnosing anomalies
no induction of the calvarium. Anencephaly is probably
of the CNS
preceded by exencephaly, with complete exposure of
· The typical clinical presentation is an immature
the dysraphic neural plate, which then degenerates
animal with neurological signs occurring immedi-
resulting in anencephaly. Anencephaly must be differen-
ately after birth or within the first weeks or months
tiated from holoprosencephaly, in which the cerebral
of life. Signs are usually non-progressive with com-
hemispheres fail to develop but the structures of the
pensation in some animals that survive for longer
midbrain, brainstem and cerebellum are intact. Exposure
periods of time. In some malformations signs may
of amniotic fluid to CSF results in elevated maternal
progress rapidly. In others (e.g. Arnold Chiari, syrin-
serum levels of α-fetoprotein which is a commonly used
gomyelia) signs may occur later in life.
diagnostic tool for most forms of human NTDs in con-
 The basic neuropathological pattern is deviation of
junction with ultrasound or MRl. Numerous gene
normal anatomy. The detection of such anomalies is
mutations have been associated with anencephaly in
in most cases not a problem. Malformations may be
humans and mice.
apparent from the outside or be revealed by section-
Cranium bifidum
ing the brain and cord. Some malformations may
be quite subtle and require a good knowledge of
With cranium bifidum there is a focal osseous defect in
neuroanatomy.
the cranial vault through which there is eversion of some
 The next step is to place the detected lesion in one of
of the underlying brain and meninges into a large
the major malformation categories. This morphologi-
CSF-containing fluctuant subcutaneous sac called a
cal classification is set in the context of CNS ontogeny
meningoencephalocele (Fig 5.1A). A cranial menin-
as briefly described above: certain types of gross
gocele results from the same process but without the
malformations occur as a result of interference with
concurrent eversion of any brain tissue. Both occur
 normal sequences at certain stages of fetal CNS devel-
mainly in the frontal midline region in piglets, kittens
opment. These categories include:
and calves.
o defects of neural tube closure;
Spina bifida
o defects of forebrain induction;
0 neuronal migration disorders and sulcation defects;
 In spina bifida with absence of one or more segments
o disorders of proliferation or size;
 of the dorsal arch, usually in the lumbosacral segments,
o encephaloclastic defects;
there is a number of possible malformations (schematic
 0 cerebellar and spinal malformations;
representation in Fig. 5.1B):
0 congenital hydrocephalus and cysts.
· Spina bifida occulta is the least clinically severe
5.3 Common malformations
variant with skin covering a segmental loss of the
dorsal arch but without dorsal herniation of the
The following is only meant to be a guide to the classi-
meninges or spinal cord (Fig. 5.1B,b).
fication system for common malformations in animals
● In spina bifida aperta the still open neural tube is
and not an exhaustive documentation of all anomalies
visible in the spinal canal through a contiguous defec-
reported.
tive closure in the overlying skin (Fig. 5.1B,a).
· A meningocele results from an arachnoid- and dura
5.3.1 Neural tube closure defects
mater-lined fluid-filled subcutaneous sac protruding
 Interference with neurulation, with failure of complete
from the spinal canal through the segmental defect or
dlosure of the neural groove to form a neural tube (CNS
absence of one or more dorsal arches (Fig 5.1B,d).
dysraphism) at various sites and stages, results in various
· A meningomyelocele is a more severe variant with
neural tube defects (NTDs) of the brain and/or spinal
inclusion of spinal cord in the herniated cyst (Fig
cord. In NTDs there can be focal defective induction of
5.1B,c).
mesodermal tissue forming the cranial vault and spinal
vertebrae resulting in the lesions of cranium bifidum
Various forms of spina bifida occur in calves, lambs,
and spina bifida respectively
foals, and in English Bulldogs. Hydromyelia and syrin-
gomyelia are often found in the underlying spinal cord
Anencephaly
Anencephaly is an uncommon malformation in puppies
Weimaraners the spine is intact but a variety of midline
and calves and of unknown cause, with the complete
anomalies can be found in the cord (fig 5.1D).
94  Veterinary  Neuropathology
C'M
Fig. 5.1 Neural tube closure defects. A: Newborn calf. Head. Meningoencephalocoele. There is partial protrusion of the parietal lobes
through a midline defect in the overlying calvarium [cranial bifida], into a large subcutaneous sac lined by meninges once dilated with
CSF. B: Diagram of common types of dysraphic malformations of the spinal cord associated with spina bifida a: spina bifida aperta
with a lack of closure of the neural tube b: spina bifida occulta c. meningomyelocoele d: meningocoele. C: English bulldog. Spina bifida
occulta. Dorso-ventral Xray of thoracolumbar vertebrae, with loss of the dorsal arch and dorsal process over two vertebrae (arrows).
compared to adjacent vertebrae with normal dorsal spinous process (arrow head). D: Weimaraner puppy. Spina bifida, absent dorsal
arch with a syringomyelic cavity in dorsal columns, HE. E: Kitten with spinal bifida and myelomeningocoele in lower lumbar segments.
Note the disorganized tissue mass comprised of cord and meninges
abnormalities, e.g. cyclopia, a proboscis and loss of
5.3.2 Defects of forebrain induction
many facial bones including the premaxilla (Fig. 5.2A).
Holoprosencephaly
Mid- and hindbrain and cerebellum are usually normal
The forebrain (prosencephalon) arises from bilateral
(Fig. 5.2B). In man, there is a wide variety of fetal tera-
vesicular evaginations of the rostral neural tube in
togens, including diabetes, infections and alcohol, as
extremely complex patterns of development. In animals
well as chromosomal abnormalities and several genetic
one of the more common malformations of this process
 mutations in different loci. In animals, holoprosenceph-
is holoprosencephaly, in which there is variable failure
aly is most commonly seen in fetal lambs, associated
 in cerebral hemispheric sagittal cleavage. A small mono-
with cyclopia and other characteristic facial defects, fol-
ventricular cerebrum remains undivided into two hemi-
lowing a narrow window of opportunity during early
spheres. The spectrum of subtypes of holoprosencephaly
 pregnancy (around 14 days) of maternal exposure to the
range from a complete absence of development, holo-
plant Veratrum californicum. Experimentally the alka-
prosencephaly (Fig 5.2A), to a minimal abnormality
loids cyclopamine and jervine inhibit cholesterol syn-
such as agenesis of the olfactory bulbs or lobes. Usually
thesis. Inhibition of the Patched receptor associated
holoprosencephaly is associated with midline facial
 with low cholesterol levels may then inhibit transcrip-
Congenital malformations   95
Fig. 5.2 Defects of forebrain induction. A: Neonatal alpaca. Head. Phenotype for holoprosencephaly with cyclopia, maxillary dysplasia
and mandibular micrognathia (Reproduced with permission from Dr A. Mete, CAHFS UC Davis.) B: Alpaca brain. Holoprosencephaly
with no development of the cerebral hemispheres and thalamus. Rostrally there is a small melanin-pigmented cyst while the mid- and
hindbrain and cerebellum are intact. C: Neonatal dog. Brain. There is agenesis of the corpus callsum and hydrocephalus. There is
pachygyria of the opposing midline cortex corresponding to the normal precingulate gyri. Note also the characteristic abnormal "bat
wing" shape of the lateral ventridles
tion of the Sonic hedgehog gene Shh, responsible for a key
Agyria (lissencephaly) and pachygyria
signaling molecule in early forebrain induction in
mammals.
Agyria, or the more common designation lissenceph-
aly, is a malformation with a complete lack of the normal
number and thickness of cerebral hemispheric gyri
Agenesis of the corpus callosum
(Fig. 5.3A). On transverse sections of brain there is a
Agenesis of the corpus callosum occurs in young dogs
 thickened cortex with an underlying reduction in the
and in most other domestic animals, usually in conjunc-
white matter. In lissencephaly there is characteristically
tion with a variety of other malformations including
a thin heterotopic laminar layer of white matter embed-
hydrocephalus, agenesis of the septum pellucidum and
ded within the cortex (Fig. 5.3B). Bilateral hydroceph-
 often abnormal gyral patterns in opposing parasagittal
alus of the lateral ventricles is common. There are at
midline gyri (Fig. 5.2C).
least four genetic mutations associated with different
human phenotypes of lissencephaly. Lissencephaly is
5.3.3 Neuronal migration disorders and
common in Lhaso Apso dogs and manifested from birth
sulcation defects
by severe cognitive dysfunction, but the genetic defect 
This group contains primary malformations with
 is unknown. However, as a word of diagnostic caution,
genetic defects resulting in interference with the normal
rodent and rabbit brains normally lack any gyral
 migration of postmitotic neuroblast and glioblast pop-
formation.
ulations, derived from the subependymal plate zone.
 In pachygyria there are abnormally fewer but widened
The neuroblasts are guided by radial glial processes by
 gyral convolutions with shallow sulci (Fig. 5.3C). On
receptor-dependent  signaling  to  form  the  layers  of
 transverse sections the cortex is abnormally thickened
the mature cerebral  cortex and subsequently  the
with reduced neuronal layers and the underlying white
glioblasts to form the white matter of the cerebral
matter is reduced in thickness; focal neuronal heteroto-
hemipheres.
pias are often embedded in this white matter.
96  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 5.3 Disorders of neuronal migration and sulcation. A: 6-month-old Lhaso Apso dog. Brain with agyria (lissencephaly). Note
the lack of any hemispheric gyral formation and slight collapse of cerebral hemispheres suggestive of some degree of hydrocephalus.
B: Same dog, transverse section through the cerebral hemispheres with complete lack of gyral formation. Note thickened cortex and
and a bilateral midcortical laminar layer of aberrant white matter The subependymal white matter is relatively thin and there is bilateral
slightly asymmetrical hydrocephalus. HE-LFB stain. C: Newborn goat. Brain. Pachygyria. Normal cortical gyri are replaced by fewer
greatly thickened gyral convolutions bilaterally in the cerebral hemispheres. There is also a severe cerebellar hyoplasia. D: Calf brain.
Polymicrogyria. There are multifocal random areas of small disorganized cortex with smaller gyri in the cerebral hemispheres.
Polymicrogyria
5.3.4 Disorders of proliferation or size
 Polymicrogyria is due to excessive cortical folding with
Megalencephaly
 gyral fusioning with an increase in numbers of smaller
Megalencephaly is an absolute increase in the size of
irregularly  convoluted  cortical  gyri.  The  microgyrial
 patterns of distribution can be focal, random, bilateral
the brain while megaloencephaly refers to an enlarge-
 ment of the head irrespective of cause, e.g. congenital
 and/or symmetrical (Fig. 5.3D). Clinical blindness has
 been associated with occipital lobe involvement in the
hydrocephalus.
dog. On transverse sections the cortex can be extremely
convoluted  but  thinner  and  more laminated  than
Microencephaly
normal. It has a multifactorial etiology in people, seen
Microencephaly is a congenital defect resulting in a
with familial genetic syndromes, metabolic diseases,
brain of smaller than usual size and weight, due to rela-
infectious agents and ischemia.
 tive lack of both gray and white matter, mainly affecting
Congenital malformations  97
Fig. 5.4 Encephalocdlastic defects. A: Dog. Brain. Porencephaly. There is a single, once fluid-filled, cyst in both white and gray matter
but without connections to either the ventricde or subarachnoid space. B: Neonatal calf. Hydranencephaly. This calf was transplacentally
infected with modified live bluetongue virus at 60 days' gestation. The cerebral hemispheres have been essentially destroyed and there
are residual cystic meningeal sacs, which have collapsed. The cerebellum and brainstem appear normal.
the cerebrum. It can be found in conjunction with
 can be residual peripheral evidence of an inflammatory
cerebellar anomalies from teratogenic virus infections
or ischemic process with gifter cells, mineralization and
in lambs, calves and piglets. Cerebral convolutions are 
gliosis in any surviving brain parenchyma. The lateral
very simplified and have abnormal anatomical gyral
ventricles remain intact. Many fetal transplacental virus
patterns.
infections, including those of wild and modified blue-
tongue,Wesselbron,Akabane,Cache River Valley,bovine
5.3.5 Encephaloclastic defects
virus diarrhea and Border disease are associated with
These are classified as secondary malformations which
hydranencephaly in ruminants. Hydranencephaly has
 occur probably as a result of an acquired transplacental
been associated with feline parvovirus infection (see
and destructive process in pre-existing brain tissue.
Table 5.1). Experimental induction of hydranencephaly
by timed transplacental bovine fetal infection of blue-
Porencephaly
tongue virus (at 50-70 days' gestation) suggests selective
Porencephaly isa usually single, cystic, fluid-flled cavity
viral homing, targeting and subsequent endothelial cell
of varying size, in the wall of the cerebral hemispheres,
cytolysis in the germinative subependymal zone with
usually in one frontal lobe (Fig. 5.4A). Uncommonly,
ischemia as the precipitating event in tissue destruction.
there may be connections between the cyst and with
The ependymal lining of the lateral ventricles remains
both or either the ventricular and subarachnoid space.
intact though there maybe ex vacuo dilation of the lateral
Typically it involves mainly white matter. Occasionally
ventricles. In contrast, transplacental bovine fetal infec-
the cystic cavities may be bilateral and symmetrical as
 tion at between 75 and 100 days gestation induces por-
occurs with both fetal Border disease infection, sway-
encephaly, illustrating that teratogens can cause different
back with in utero copper deficiency, and in fetal
 malformations presumably due to a temporal change in
hyperthermia. The cystic wall is smooth surfaced and
cell susceptibility to viral infection.
 ss n l q os 
not lined by ependyma.
5.3.6 Malformations in the caudal fossa
Hydranencephaly
and spinal cord
Hydranencephaly is caused by a more globally destruc-
 A rather large group of anomalies in the brainstem,
tive event within pre-existing tissue of the cerebral hem-
cerebellum and spinal cord is difficult to classify accord-
ispheres in which there is massive bilateral symmetrical
 ing to the scheme described above, because of their com-
 necrosis with almost complete loss of pre-existing tissue
 plexity with simultaneous occurrence of diverging types
 o sis   aq so 
 of lesions. Such malformations are collectively discussed
 the intact leptomeninges (Fig. 5.4B). Sometimes there
 in this section.
98  Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 5.1 Some important fetal teratogenic virus infections in different species.
VIRUS
SPECIES
CNS LESIONS
Feline panleukopenia virus (Parvovirus)
Kitten
Cerebellar hypoplasia, dysplasia, Purkinje cell loss,
hydranencephaly
Classical swine fever virus (Pestivirus)
 Piglet
Dysmyelinogenesis, cerebellar hypoplasia
Bovine virus diarhea virus (BVDV)
Calf lamb
Hydrocephalus, cerebellar hypo- or aplasia, prosencephaly
(Pestivirus)
in calves: hypomyelination, porencephaly in lambs
Akabane virus, Cache Valley virus
Lamb, calf 
Hydranencephaly arthrogryposis, cerebellar hypoplasia,
(Orthobunya virus)
porencephaly
Bluetongue virus (Orbivirus)
Lamb, calf 
Hydranencephaly
Canine parvovirus (Parvovirus)
Puppy
Cerebellar hypoplasia, dysplasia
Chuzan virus (Orbivirus)
Calf
Hydranencephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia
Aino virus (Orthobunyavirus)
Calf 
Arthrogryposis, hydranencephaly. cerebellar hypoplasia
Border disease virus (Pestivirus)
Lamb
Porencephaly, hypomyelination
Wesselbron virus (Ffavivirus)
Calf 
Hydranencephaly, porencephaly
Cerebellar agenesis
In complete cerebellar agenesis there is complete
absence of any cerebellar tissue. This malformation is
well known in calves, particularly of the Simmental
breed. Characteristically, these calves are unable to stand
after birth or even to right themselves in a sternal posi-
tion. In cerebellar vermal agenesis there is a selective
agenesis of the vermal lobules even though the lateral
lobes appear morphologically intact and of normal size 
(Fig. 5.5A).
Granule cell hypoplasia or aplasia
Granule cell hypoplasia can be classified as either a
primary genetic or secondary malformation. Anato-
mically all or parts of the cerebellum can be affected.
H
This group of cerebellar disorders is common in many
Fig. 5.5 A: Puppy with selective cerebellar vermal agenesis com-
 pure-breed dogs but presents with a bewildering range
pared with an age-matched control normal dog on right. B: Dog.
of clinical signs, onset, progression and lesions. The
Cerebellar hypoplasia. In the brain on the left there is hypoplasia
underlying genetic basis identified for a similar range of
affecting both the vermis and lateral lobes without any apparent
human spinocerebellar ataxias transformed both the
pattern compared with an age- and breed-matched control cer-
classification and pathogenesis of these diseases and
ebellum (right).
 such information and similar resolution can be expected
in the dog eventually.
Equine cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia occurs as a
Cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia
familial entity in Arab and Arabian crossbred foals. The
Cerebellar folial hypoplasia, where only parts of the
folial dysplasia with massive disorganization of the
 cerebellar folial cortex are affected, is one of the most
Purkinje cell layer and a hypoplastic granule cell layer is
common malformations in the dog and ruminants.
most likely the result of defective signaling of the radial
Congenital malformations  99
Fig. 5.6 Cat. Virus-induced cerebellar hypoplasia. A: Kitten. Normal neonatal cerebellum including the folial cortex. HE. B. Kitten with
extreme cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia from in utero transplacental feline panleukopenia virus infection. HE. C: Newborn kitten.
Cerebellum. Feline panleukopenia virus intranuclear viral inclusion bodies and cytolysis of the subpial neuroblast layer. HE. D: Kitten.
Extreme cerebellar folial dysplasia and hypoplasia with almost non-existent granular layer and dysplastic disorganized Purkinje
cells. HE.
glia, which provide a scaffold for the normal inward
 a maternal viral infection is transmitted transplacentally
late the granule cell layer. In turn the resultant interfer-
 precursors prior to their centripetal migration to form
 the cerebellar folia. The viral-induced cytolysis results in
migration leads to their aberrant location. A similar
massive loss of subpial neuroblasts, which were destined
 pathogenesis has been demonstrated in the homozygous
 to populate the granular cell layer, which therefore
Weaver (Wv/Wv) mouse. It remains to be determined
 becomes hypoplastic and dysplastic (Fig. 5.6). Migration
whether there may be an overlap between this disease
 of Purkinje cells to their destination is disrupted and
and cerebellocortical degeneration in Arabian horses
disorganized due to the distortion of receptor-mediated
(discussed in Chapter 8).
signaling from the defective granular layer, which com-
Certain types of cerebellar hypoplasias or dysplasias
pletes the spectrum of widespread cerebellar folial dys-
 are due to specific maternal transplacental teratogenic
plasia and hypoplasia. Sometimes there is histological
viral infections (Table 5.1). At defined gestational
evidence of non-suppurative encephalitis. Such grossly
 windows of opportunity in dogs, cats, calves and piglets,
 obvious cerebellar hypoplasia/dysplasia can affect all
100
0 Veterinary Neuropathology
 or parts of the vermis and lateral lobes (Fig. 5.5B). Such
commonly associated with hydrocephalus, and menin-
lesions result from transplacental fetal virus infection
 gomyelocele with spina bifida. In the most comparable
with feline panleukopenia virus (parvovirus) in kittens
malformation in dogs (Arnold Chiari type Il), the caudal
(fig 5.6), canine parvovirus in puppies, pestivirus infec-
fossa is shallow and of reduced volume with elongation
tion (bovine virus diarrhea virus) in calves and with
of the cerebellar vermis and of the medulla with their
classical swine fever virus (pestivirus) in piglets.
combined displacement into the cervical spinal canal
 Cerebellar hypoplasia and hypomyelination occurs 
(Fig. 5.8). In the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with
in piglets from sows treated with an organophos-
Arnold Chiari-like type ll malformation, using three-
 phate insecticide (Neguvon) during the second half
 dimensional MRl, the caudal fossa is proportionately
of gestation. Piglets are born with a congenital tremor
smaller than in other breeds while the ratio of the
syndrome. The CNS of affected piglets shows various
 parenchymal tissue volume to that of the caudal fossa is
degrees of cerebellar hypoplasia mostly involving
critically higher. In these dogs with associated syrin-
Purkinje cells and generalized hypomyelinogenesis. Viral
 gomyelia, the width of the syrinx directly correlates
-induced hypomyelinogensis is discussed in Chapter 3,
with the increased size of the fourth ventricle of the
the neuropathology of abnormal myelination is dis-
caudal fossa. See MRI Atlas.
cussed in Chapter 8.
Defects of the spinal cord
Dandy-Walker syndrome
These include myelodysplasia usually associated with
Dandy-Walker syndrome is a rare midline defect of
spina bifida (see above) and diastematomyelia which
the cerebellum most commonly identified in the foal,
 means complete duplication of the spinal cord which is
calf and lamb and of unknown etiology. It has also
sometimes seen in foals and calves. Diplomyelia occurs
been reported in dogs. The three essential lesions to
in foals and calves where there is histologically a dysplas-
confirm a diagnosis are cerebellar vermal agenesis,
tic mixture of gray and white matter of two partially
cystic dilation of the expanded fourth ventricle and
merged spinal cords (Fig. 5.9A). Segmental aplasia,
enlargement of the caudal fossa (Fig. 5.7). Hydroceph-
where whole segments of the cord and vertebral column
alus and polygyria of cerebral convolutions can occur
are lacking, can occur at any level, preferentially in the
concurrently.
lumbar segments, e.g. sacrococcygeal agenesis in Manx
cats (Fig. 5.9B) or perosomus elumbis in calves, in
Arnold Chiari malformation
which the whole lumboscral and coccygeal spine is
The Arnold Chiari malformation in people is classified
absent.
into three different phenotypes of cerebellar deformities
5.3.7 Congenital hydrocephalus and other
anomalies of csF pathways
Hydrocephalus is one of the most common congenital
anomalies in all domestic animals especially in the dog.
Hydrocephalus is defined as the enlargement of all or
part of the ventricular system in the brain and spinal
cord, due in most cases to the rate of production of
cerebrospinal fluid exceeding its rate of removal. There
is a wide spectrum of ventriculomegaly associated with
hydrocephalus. Knowledge of the normal intraventricu-
lar anatomy and of the sites of production, flow and
absorption of cerebrospinal fluid is essential to interpret
the various causes and manifestations of hydrocephalus
(see Chapter 1). Also critical to the evolution of most
forms of hydrocephalus is a constant or episodic period
of raised intraventricular pressure. Hydrocephalus can
Fig. 5.7 Neonatal foal. Dandy-Walker syndrome. There is marked
be classified by different criteria but we will start with
vermal cerebellar agenesis with cystic distension of the fourth
the concept of it either being communicating with no
ventride
 detectable pathological lesions or non-communicating
Congenital malformations
101
Fig. 5.8 Dog. Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Brain and cervical spinal cord. Arnold Chiari-like type Il malformation. A: MRl. Sagittal
section. A T2W image illustrates the abnormal cerebellar crowding in the small-sized caudal fossa with herniation of vermis through
foramen magnum (arrowhead), and a syrinx in the cervical spinal cord (small arrow). B: Same case. Brain and cervical spinal cord.
There is marked enlargement of cranial cervical cord segments associated with hydro- and syringomyelia. C: Same dog. Transverse
section of CSF-filled syringomyelic cavity in cervical spinal cord. D: Newborn calf. Arnold Chiari-like malformation with massive cerebellar
coning through the foramen magnum on to the cervical spinal cord segments.
(either partial or completely obstructive) due to defined
lesions.
Communicating hydrocephalus
Communicating hydrocephalus is not common and
usually assumes the form of bilateral and symmetrical
dilation of the ventricular system without any detectable
macro- or microscopic lesions (Fig. 5.10). Most toy
breed (Chihuahua, Yorkshire Terrier, Shi Tzu etc.) and
some brachycephalic breed (e.g. Boxer) dogs from birth
have much larger intraventricular volumes compared
with their cohorts but this distension may be just a
normal physiological finding. However, if clinical neu-
rological signs occur then such ventriculomegaly would
be classified as a primary malformation of communicat-
ing idiopathic hydrocephalus.
Non-communicating hydrocephalus
The secondary   teratogen-induced type of non-
Fig. 5.9 A: Neonatal foal. Spinal cord. Diplomyelia. Transverse
communicating hydrocephalus is generally a result of
section through the lumbar spinal cord illustrating the severe
 partial or complete obstruction to normal CSF flow at
dysplasia, partial duplication and disorganization of both white
any of several critical stricture points within the intra-
and gray matter. HE-LFB. B: Manx cat. Lumbar cord. Segmental
ventricular pathways or in the extraventricular sub-
agenesis of the lumbar spinal cord distal to L4 segment.
arachnoid space (Fig. 5.11). Diagnostic neuroimaging
102
2veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 5.10 Puppy. Communicating hydrocephalus. There is marked distension of the ventricular system and no apparent gross or
microscopic lesion to account for the obstruction.
(MRl)  is  extremely  useful  for  clinical  detection  and
Hydrocephalus ex vacuo
for identification of intra- or extraventricular sites of
obstruction based on the specific pattern of ventricu-
A third form of congenital or post natal hydrocephalus
 is classified as compensatory or ex vacuo hydrocepha-
lomegaly (Fig. 5.10). The major intraventricular sites
 of potential obstruction include either of the interven-
lus, in which primary loss of brain tissue leads to a local
distension of the ventricle into the lesion site of cavita-
tricular foramina between the lateral and third ventri-
tion. This form of hydrocephalus is not necessarily
cles, the mesencephalic aqueduct (Fig. 5.11C,D), or
lateral foramina of the fourth ventricle. Fusion of the
dependent on any change in hydrostatic pressure or in
rostral colliculi is also observed associated with stenosis
obstruction/production of CSF.
of the aqueduct (Fig 5.11C). The main extraventricular
site for lesions is in the subarachnoid space of the brain
Secondary lesions of hydrocephalus
and spinal cord where the arachnoid villi mediate CSF
The sequence of pathological effects of hydrocephalus
transfer into the dural venous sinuses. The timing, site
 starts with increased ventricular hydrostatic pressure
and degree of obstruction in the fetus determines the
 proximal to the site of obstruction, flattening, loss and
severity of the hydrocephalus and effect, e.g. of prenatal
increased permeability of the lining ependymal cells,
doming of the skull due to increased intraventricular
periventricular  interstitial  edema  with  demyelination
 pressure inhibiting the normal closure of sutures of the
 and axonal atrophy and eventual loss in subependymal
cranial vault. Acquired congenital hydrocephalus is con-
 white matter and induced ventriculomegaly. The cortex
sidered a secondary malformation due to the fetal lesions 
is last and least affected (Fig. 5.10 and Fig. 5.11).
from a wide variety of teratogens. Transplacental viral
 Externally the gyri may appear flattened. The lesions are
(see Table5.1)or protozoal (e.g. Neosporaand Toxoplasma
irreversible. A common secondary effect with bilateral
sp) infections can result in fetal aqueductal subependy-
lateral ventricular hydrocephalus is loss of the septum
mal gliosis and stenosis, porencephaly, ependymitis and
pellucidum (Fig. 5.10 and Fig. 5.11). Rapidly progress-
possibly loss of arachnoid villi in the subarachnoid
ing hydrocephalus with high intraventricular pressure in
space, all of which can result in some form of congenital 
young puppies may lead to rupture of the ependyma
hydrocephalus. Rarely neonatal tumors of probable fetal
 with formation of CSF-filled clefts and diverticula in
 onset (e.g canine thalamic leiomyosarcoma) can result
the brain parenchyma as well as hemorrhage, especially
 in obstructive hydrocephalus.
in the area of the caudate nucleus and capsula interna
Congenital malformations 
103
Fig. 5.11 A: Puppy. Brain. Congenitally acquired hydrocephalus. MRl with a FLAlR sequence illustrating the bilateral symmetrical
hycdrocephalus in lateral ventricles and secondary diverticula through the basal nuclei and internal capsule. B: Same puppy. Brain at
same slice level. There is massive enlargement of the ventricles. In the area around the internal capsule there is obvious bilateral cleft
discoloration indicates old hemorrhage. C: Dog with obstructive hydrocephalus, midbrain. There is fusion of rostral colliculi and stenosis
of the mesencephalic aqueduct, which inhibits normal CSF flow caudally with subsequent rostral distension of the lateral ventricles.
D: Same dog as in C. Mesencephalic aqueduct. Histologically there is loss of patency of the collapsed aqueduct due to destruction of
most of the ependymal lining and subependymal gliosis. HE
(Fig. 5.11B). Because of variable degrees of associated
breeds. In ACM in CKCS, syrinx formation has been
 suppurative and non-suppurative inflammation these
 attributed to altered CSF dynamics due to compression
lesions are also known as hydrocephalus associated
of the subarachnoid space after obstruction of the
with periventricular encephalitis.
foramen magnum by the herniated cerebellar tissue (Fig.
5.8). See MR1 Atlas. Syringobulbia results from the
formation of fluid-filled slit-like cavities in the medulla,
Hydromyelia
which usually communicate with the lumen of the
Congenital hydromyelia is a focal or generalized dila-
tion of the central canal most common in lumbar seg-
fourth ventricle.
ments. Thinning or compression of the ependymal cell
Arachnoidal and ependymal cysts
lining and loss of cilia can be the result of increased
These are CSF-filled cavities (strictly speaking not true
sustained intraventricular pressure within the central
canal as often occurs with hydrocephalus. Alternatively,
cysts) arising from the arachnoid membrane or recesses
of the ventricles, some of which maybe of congenital
it may result from proximal strictures or occlusions of
derivation. Ependymal cysts are extremely rare in
the central canal associated with concurrent malforma-
 tions, for example Arnold Chiari malformations (ACM,
animals (see MRI Atlas) but arachnoidal cysts are rela-
tively common in the meninges of the spinal cord of
see above).
dogs. Spinal arachnoidal cysts may compress the spinal
cord leading to often fluctuating but generally progres-
Syringomyelia and syringobulbia
sive signs. The diagnosis is best based on MRl. At
 Syringomyelia is defined as a cystic fluid-filled tubular
necropsy such cysts usually collapse following exposure
 cavity within the spinal cord extending over several seg-
 and removal of the CNS. The main finding at the site of
ments. As mentioned in Section 5.3.1 it may occur as a
the cyst is a compressed spinal cord, the lesions of which
primary inherited malformation most commonly asso-
 are discussed in Chapter 4 on Trauma.A further common
ciated with NTDs. Acquired syringomyelia is usually
location of cysts in dogs is the space dorsal to the roof
preceded by hydromyelia and results from rupture of the
of the midbrain (consisting of the colliculi or lamina
ependymal cell lining and secondary cavitation into
 quadrigemina) between the occipital lobes and cerebel-
either gray or white matter of the cord. Chronically the
lum. This space also contains an extension of the third
 cavities can be lined by reactive astrogliosis. This lesion
ventricle (suprapineal recess) and the pineal gland.
has been most intensively studied in Cavalier King
Cysts in this area are usually called quadrigeminal cysts.
Charles Spaniels (CKCS) with ACM (Fig. 5.8C) but this
Large cysts may cause seizures or cerebellar signs. These
syndrome has been reported in a wide variety of dog
lesions are easily detected on MR1 (Fig. 5.12A). Some of
104
1 veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 5.12 Puppy with quadrigeminal cyst. A: Sagittal MRl with the T2W image revealing the patent connection between the lumen
of the quadrigeminal cyst and the third ventridle. The cerebellar vermis is herniated through the foramen magnum. B: Gross image of
the same puppy as in A. The cyst has collapsed but leaves a markedly enlarged space (arrow) with obvious induced compression of
the occipital lobes and cerebellum with cerebellar coning. There is also dilatation of the lateral ventride
them communicate with the third or fourth ventricle
Bielefeldt-Ohmann H, Tolnay AE, Reisenhauer CE, Hansen TR,
(and may be partially lined by ependyma). At necropsy
Smirnova N, Van Campen H. Transplacental infection with non-
s s a  n  so a
cytopathic bovine viral diarrhoea virus types 1b and 2: viral spread
and molecular neuropathology. J Comp Pathol 2008;138:72-85.
from compression atrophy of the occipital lobes and
Vercauteren G, Miry C, Vandenbussche F, Ducatelle R, Van der
cerebellum (Fig. 5.12B). See MRI Atlas.
Heyden S, Vandemeulebroucke E, De Leeuw I, Deprez P, Chiers K,
De Clercq K. Bluetongue virus serotype 8-associated congenital
hydranencephaly in calves. Transbound Emerg Dis 2008;55:
Further reading
293-298.
Neural tube ciosure defects
Cerebellar hypoplasia
M. Huisinga et al. Anencephaly in a German Shepherd dog. Vet Pathol
 Résibois A, Coppens A, Poncelet L. Naturally occurring parvovirus-
2010;47:948-951.
associated feline hypogranular cerebellar hypoplasia - a compari-
Kiviranta AM, Lappalainen AK, Hagner K, Jokinen T. Dermoid sinus
and spina bifida in three dogs and a cat. J Small Anim Pract
Pathol 2007;44:83 1-841.
2011;52:319-324.
Dandy Walker syndrome
Defects of forebrain induction
Wong D, Winter M, Haynes J, Sponseller B, Schleining J. Dandy-
Welch KD, Panter KE, Lee ST, Gardner DR, Stegelmeier BL, Cook D.
Walker-like syndrome in a quarter horse colt. J Vet Int Med
Cyclopamine-induced synophthalmia in sheep: defining a critical
2007;21:1130-1134.
414-421.
Chiari malformation, Syringomyelia
Neuronal migration disorders
Driver CJ, Rusbridge C, Cross HR, McGonnell I, Volk HA. Relationship
of brain parenchyma within the caudal fossa and ventricle size to
and sulcation defects
syringomyelia in cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Small Anim Prac
Saito M et al. Magnetic resonance imaging features of lissencephaly
20 10;51:382-386.
 in 2 Lhaso Apsos. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2002;43:331-337.
Park C, Kang BT, Yoo JH, Park HM et al. Syringomyelia in three small
Jurney C, Haddad J, Crawford N, Miller AD, Van Winkle TJ, Vite CH,
breed dogs secondary to Chiari-like malformation: clinical and
Sponenberg P, Inzana KD, Cook CR, Britt L, O'Brien DP.
diagnostic findings. J Vet Sci 2009;10:365-367.
Polymicrogyria in Standard Poodles. I Vet Int Med 2009;23:
Wolfe KC,Poma R. Syringomyelia in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel
871-874.
(CKCS) dog. Neurology 2010;51:95-102.
Encephaloclastic defects
Hydrocephalus
 Montgomery DL, Van Olphen A, Van Campen H, Hansen TR. The
Rekate HL A contemporary definition and classification of hydro-
fetal brain in bovine viral diarrhea virus-infected calves: lesions,
cephalus. Semin Ped Neurol 2009;16:9-15.
distribution, and cellular heterogeneity of viral antigen at 190 days
Thomas WB Hydrocephalus in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Small Anim
gestation. Vet Pathol 2008;45:288-296.
20 10;40:143- 159.
Congenital malformations 105
Winschmann A, Oglesbee M. Periventricular changes associated
Matiasek LA, Platt SR, Shaw S, Dennis R. Clinical and magnetic reso-
with spontaneous canine hydrocephalus. Vet Pathol 200l;38:
nance imaging characteristics of quadrigeminal cysts in dogs. J Vet
67-73.
Intern Med 2007;21:1021-1026.
Wyss-Fluehmann G, Konar M, Jaggy A, Vandevelde M, Oevermann
Arachnoidal and ependymal cysts
A. Cerebellar ependymal cyst in a dog. Vet Pathol 2008;45:
 Skeen TM, Olby NJ, Mufiana KR, Sharp NJ. Spinal arachnoid cysts in
910-913.
17 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003;39:271-282.
This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Metabolic-toxic diseases
In this group of diseases, the lesions are caused by either
selective necrosis or loss of neurons, axons or myelin;
toxins or deficiencies. Intoxications are caused by expo-
and (3) spongy state. Most of these diseases result in
sure to organic (e.g- pesticides) and inorganic (e.g. lead)
lesions that occur in an anatomically restricted bilater-
compounds, or naturally occurring plant, microbial or
ally symmetrical pattern although sometimes they can
animal poisons. Deficiencies result from inadequate
be unilateral.
intake of certain minerals and vitamins. Endogenous
intoxications or deficiencies may occur when metaboli-
cally important organs such as the liver or kidney fail to
6.1.2 Further differential diagnosis
function properly.
 These diseases generally cause acute neurological
A classification of the differential diagnosis of candidate
 diseases based on each of the three major morphological
- soin s nsn n pe s
patterns and lesion types is shown in Fig. 6.1.
ing specific anatomic areas of the brain and/or spinal
cord. The strikingly selective vulnerability may be due
With malacia as the predominant lesion, the specific
to factors including regional differences in vascular
 perfusion patterns or the differences in distribution/
anatomical distribution pattern (e.g. cerebral cortex,
subcortical white matter, white matter, spinal cord)
concentration of receptors for toxic molecules. Lesions
provides diagnostically important etiological infor-
vary according to the etiology and stage of the disease.
The precise molecular mechanisms of cellular damage
mation (see Fig. 6.1). Malacic lesions caused by
metabolic-toxic problems have to be differentiated
to primary targets such as neurons, glial cells or blood
from other conditions as shown in Fig. 6.1.
vessels are, however, poorly understood. Intriguingly,
 In cases of selective lesions without marked destruc-
the same toxins or deficiencies may induce different
tion and loss of the normal tissue architecture deter-
 types of pafterns and lesions in different species. Much
can be learned in this respect from experimental
mine whether either neurons, axons or myelin are
toxicology.
primarily involved. Since this type of lesion is also
found in degenerative diseases, see Fig. 8.1.
● When spongy state of the tissue is the most striking
6.1 General strategy for diagnosis
change, determine first whether there are any under-
of meta bolic-toxic lesions
lying cellular changes since spongy change can be a
reactive event to, for example, neuronal necrosis.
6.1.1 The major patterns
Spongy state also occurs in other categories of dis-
The typical clinical presentation is of an animal (of any
eases. Consult Fig. 6.14 for the differential diagnosis
age) with peracute/acute onset of signs and a frequently
of spongy state in the CNS.
fatal outcome. The disease may affect a single animal
From the morphological classification, there is some
or more likely occur as an outbreak. There are three
 Overlap between lesions of toxic-metabolic cause and
major types of gross or microscopically detected lesions,
those included as degenerative diseases. This overlap
which are (1) malacia, sometimes with hemorrhage; (2)
is not surprising as most degenerative diseases involve
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentials of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
106
Metabolic-toxic diseases
107
Table 6.1 Overview of metabolic-toxic diseases of the CNS according to major lesion patterns.
PATTERN
METABOLIC
TOXIC
Malacia (see Fig. 6.1)
Gray matter
Thiamin deficiency in ruminants
Sulfur (ruminants)
Thiamin deficiency in camivores
Carbamate (carnivores)
Water deprivation (pig. bovine)
Lead (all)
Hippocampal sclerosis (dog. cat)
Mercury (all)
Seizures (dog, cat)
 Selenium (pig)
Hypoglycemia (all)
Cyanide (dog. cat)
Hydrogen sulfide (ruminants, pigs)
Metronidazole (dogs, cat)
Nigropallidal encephalomalacia (horse)
Annual ryegrass staggers (ruminants)
Aeschynomene indica (pig)
 Feline hippocampal necrosis
White matter
Swayback (sheep)
Equine leukoencephalomalacia
Both
Enterotoxemia (ruminants, pig)
co (all)
 Selective changes (see Fig. 8.1)
Neurons
 Enzootic ataxia (goat, sheep)
Aspergilus clavatus (ruminants)
Equine motor neuron disease 
Phafaris grass staggers (ruminants, horse)
Crysocoma tenuifofia (sheep)
Dysautonomia (horse, cat, dog)
Toxic lysosomal storage (ruminants)
Axons
Cobalamin deficiency (cat)
Zamia staggers (ruminants)
Vitamin A deficiency (pig)
Sorghum (horse, ruminants)
Vitamin E deficiency (dog.
Halinium braziiense (sheep)
horse)
Perennial ryegrass staggers (ruminants, horse)
Tibufus terrestris (sheep)
Organophosphates (all)
Tri-nitro (pig)
Myelin
Hound ataxia
Irradiated feed (cat)
Spongy state (see Fig. 6.14)
Liver failure (all)
Hexachlorophene (dog. cat)
 Renal failure (all)
Ammonia (ruminants, pig)
Closantel (goat, sheep)
Bromethalin (dog. cat)
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum (ruminants)
 Stypandra sp (ruminants)
Sporadic brain edema in Swiss cattle
108
3 Veterinary Neuropathology
 genetically determined metabolic abnormalities of
cephalomalacia, poliomyelomalacia), the white matter
specific cell populations or cell organelles. Therefore,
(leukoencephalomalacia) or both (encephalomalacia).
 anamnestic and clinical data are also important for
Common to these diseases is their acute or peracute
etiological clarification. Whereas degenerative dis-
onset and extensive tissue destruction resulting in grossly
eases generally occur in young animals, possibly as
 detectable malacia in a bilateral, often symmetrical dis-
familial clusters, metabolic-toxic diseases are acquired
tribution pattern. Note that malacia is a final common
and may affect animals of any age. Furthermore,
pathway of a variety of insults including toxins, deficien-
 degenerative diseases commonly have an insidious
cies and ischemia. In peracute cases, there may be no
onset and a slowly progressive course in contrast to
macroscopic lesions yet and microscopic changes may
 metabolic-toxic diseases with their more acute onset
be very subtle. For the differential diagnosis of malacia
 and rapid clinical progress.
see Fig. 6.1.
● Although some toxic-metabolic disorders can be
diagnosed from specific topography and type of
 lesions, determining the etiology requires an analy-
6.2.1 Polioencephalomalacia (PE) or
 sis of combined anamnestic, clinical and pathologi-
cerebrocortical necrosis (ccN)
cal data.
General morphological features
In many toxic-metabolic disorders the cerebral cortex
(including hippocampus) is primarily affected and this
is commonly called either cerebrocortical necrosis or
6.2  Encephalomalacias/myelomalacias
polioencephalomalacia. However, other areas such as
Encephalomalacia is defined as grossly observable sof-
basal and thalamic nuclei, colliculi and cerebellar cortex
tening of the brain and is a descriptive term for
 may also be involved. Grossly and externally, the brain
 necrosis. It can be the result of many different types
 may be acutely swollen with cortical gyri appearing
 of insults. Malacia may affect the gray matter (polioen-
flattened and wider than normal, while the sulci are
HEMORRHAGIC MALACIA
Focal
Multifocal
Symmetrical
Non-symmetrical
Trauma
Toxic-metabolic
Vascular
>Contusion
 >Hemomhagic infarcts
>Vasculitis
Vascular
 >Hemorrhagic infarct 
Grey matter
Grey and white matter 
Trauma
>Thiamine deficiency
>Enterotoxemia
>Coup-contre coup
(carmivores)
Infection
>Vasculitis 
>Septicemia
Toxic-metabolic
>Equine
Leukoencephalomalacia
Fig. 6.1 Differential diagnosis of malacia.
 Metabolic-toxic diseases 
　109
NON-HEMORRHAGIC MALACIA
Focal
Multifocal
Symmetrical
Non-symmetrical
Toxic-metabolic
Inflammatory
>Equine leuko-
>Necrotizing encephalitis (NE)
encephalomalacia
>Necrotizing meningo-
encephalitis (NME)
Vascular
>Visna, CAE
>Ischemic infarcts
Vascular
Inflammatory
 >Ischemic infarct
>NE, NME, Visna, CAE
Gray matter
White matter
Gray & white matter
Metabolic toxic
Metabolic toxic
>Carbon monoxide
>Enterotoxemia
>Swayback
>Carbon monoxide
Cortex
 Deep grey matter
Spinal cord
Toxic-metabolic
Toxic-metabolic
Toxic-metabolic
>Sulfur
>Thiamine
 >Selenium intoxication 
>Salt intoxication
deficiency
>Carbamate
(camivores)
>Lead
>Mercury
>Aeschynomene
indica
>Carbon monoxide
 >Nigropallidal
 >Feline hippocampal
encephalomalacia
necrosis
>Thiamine
Degenerative
deficiency (ruminants)
 >Focal symmetrical
>Hypoglycemia
encephalomalacia
>Seizures
Vascular
>Global ischemia
Fig. 6.1 Differential diagnosis of malacia. (Continued)
110  Veterinary Neuropathology
 compressed.  Additionally, a bilaterally symmetrical
water) and dietary  thiamin deficiency are  incrimi-
yellowish discoloration of the gray matter may be
nated as major causes in sheep and catfle; thiamin
observed (Fig. 6.2A). In severe cases, brain edema
inactivation may also be involved in sulfur intoxica-
causes subtentorial herniation of the occipital lobes
tion. Since under physiological conditions rumenal
 and cerebellar vermal herniation through the foramen
bacteria are able to produce thiamin, thiamin deficiency
magnum. Later there is a strict line of demarcation of
in ruminants is a relative deficiency due to imbalances
the malacic gray mafter from the underlying intact
between thiamin-producing and  thiamin-destroying
white matter. Chronically, cystic fluid-filled cavitaties
bacteria. It occurs mainly in cattle fed concentrated
are observed.
feed with high carbohydrate content and little rough-
Histologically, acutely there is edema and acido-
age, resulting in rumenal acidosis and overgrowth of
philic neuronal necrosis (Fig. 6.3A,B), of varying sever-
thiaminase-producing bacteria (e.g. Clostridium spo-
ity. These neurons initially have a swollen granular
 rogenes, Bacilus thiaminoolyticus). Additionally, grazing
cytoplasm and centrally placed karyorrhectic nuclei (see
of thiaminase-containing plants (e.g. bracken fern,
Chapter 1). Astrocytes become reactive and have vesic-
 nardoo) or exposure to the coccidiostatic amprolium,
ular nuclei. There is also prominent vascular endothe-
 a thiamin antagonist, may result in cerebrocortical
lial hypertrophy and hyperplasia (Fig. 6.3A,B). Edema
 necrosis. Neuronal necrosis is observed mainly in the
and neuronal necrosis can occur in a band-like (pseu-
cortex (Fig. 6.3), but may sometimes also affect other
dolaminar) pattern parallel to the gyral surface (Fig.
areas, including basal and thalamic nuclei, colliculi
6.3A) or can affect the full thickness of the cortex.
and brainstem nuclei. In acute cases, a macroscopic
-o -o   e 
diagnosis of CCN may be confirmed by bright green
phages infiltrate the necrotic neuropil and become are
fluorescence of affected cortex of either fresh or formalin-
actively phagocytic as gitter cells (Fig. 6.4C). In chronic
fixed brain exposed to ultraviolet light (Wood’'s
cases, the fluid-flled cystic spaces are bordered and tra-
lamp) (Fig. 6.2B). Necrotic areas appear green due
versed by astroglial processes.
to autofluorescence.
 In acute lead poisoning, initial microscopic changes
include vascular congestion with endothelial hyper-
PE or CCN in large animals
trophy and capilary hyperplasia. Salt poisoning of
CCN or PE in cattle and sheep is caused by a variety
swine and ruminants (also water deprivation enceph-
of toxins and deficiencies. Currently, sulfur intoxi-
-  s ( , 
cation (due to consumption of sulfate-rich diets or
 ing excessive salt intake. More commonly the PE is the
Fig. 6.2 Polioencephalomalacia. Sheep. A: Cerebrum at level of basic nuclei. Note the bilaterally symmetrical yellowish-tan discolora-
 tion of the cortical gray matter in the parietal cortex. B. Same level as in A. Transverse section of fresh brain under UV light. Strong 
greenish autofluorescence of the bilaterally symmetrical lesions in the cerebral cortex.
Metabolic-toxic diseases   111
m
Fig. 6.3 Polioencephalomalacia. A. Bovine. Cerebrum with two cortical gyri on either side of meningeal sulcus. Marked change in
staining intensity, partial spongy state and hypercellularity of both superficial cortical layers in a band-like pattem ("pseudolaminar")
(cc, cerebral cortex; wm, white matter). HE. B: Sheep. Cerebral cortex. Acute cerebrocortical necrosis. Widespread acidophilic neuronal
necrosis. Perineuronal edema. Capillaries are prominent due to endothelial hypertrophy and hyperplasia. HE. C: Pig. Chronic polioen-
cephalomalcia in salt intoxication. Most of the cortex is completely malacic and basophilic due to massive infitration with macrophages
replacing the necrotic parenchyma. HE. D: Pig. Acute polioencephalomalacia in salt intoxication. Prominent perivascular cuffing contain-
ing eosinophils and some acidophilic necrotic neurons. HE.
result of sustained water deprivation (e.g. broken pipes,
causes degeneration of cardiac Purkinje cells and fibri-
freezing) resulting in hyperosmolarity of the brain. If
 noid necrosis in the walls of the leptomeningeal arteries.
animals have subsequently excessive water intake, water 
Other known but rare causes of PE include hypoglyc-
follows the osmotic gradient into the brain leading to
emia (e.g pregnancy toxemia of ewes, newborn piglets),
cerebral edema and necrosis. Lesions are of polioen-
manure gas intoxication (hydrogen sulfide), closantel
cephalomalacia (Fig. 6.3C), and in pigs there are also
intoxica tion, cyanide poisoning and peracute Phalaris
pathognomic eosinophilic cell infltrates in the paren-
poisoning (see below).
chyma and perivascular spaces (Fig. 6.3D).
Organomercurial poisoning occurs after consump-
PE or CCN in small animals
 tion of contaminated feed. In cattle and pigs, in addition 
Sporadic PE of unknown cause in dogs and cats is
to PE, cerebellar granule and Purkinje cell necrosis, it 
dinically characterized by severe seizures and also
112
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 6.4 Carbamate poisoning. Dog. A: Cerebellum. Purkinje cells showing acidophilic neuronal necrosis in the cerebellar cortex
(arrows). HE. B: Cerebral cortex. Pyramidal neurons are chromatolytic with peripherally displaced nuclei. HE.
status epilepticus. It remains uncertain whether such
are widely used as pesticides, data on the lesions of car-
PE is the cause or the result of seizure activity. The
bamate intoxication are unavailable. In the dog, we have 
currently accepted mechanism of seizure-induced aci-
seen acute brain edema and PE beginning with wide-
dophilic neuronal necrosis is that due to excessive
 spread neuronal chromatolysis and acidophilic necrosis 
 neurotransmitter-induced excitotoxicity. Although light-
of Purkinje cells (Fig. 6.4A,B). The mode of action is
microscopic lesions are commonly absent in dogs with
similar to the one of organophosphates but the binding
“idiopathic” seizures, acidophilic neuronal necrosis in
to acetyl cholinesterase is reversible. Extensive acido-
the hippocampus, piriform lobe and other sites in the
 philic neuronal degeneration in cerebrum, cerebellum
cerebral cortex and cerebellum - predilection areas in
 and brainstem occurs in organic mercury poisoning.
epileptic humans and some animal seizure models - can
particularly in cats. Experimental induction of the
occur in animals with status epilepticus or severe cluster
lesions in cats led to the identification of organic mercury
seizures.
as the etiology of the infamous Minamata disease in
In hypoglycemia, neuronal injury is due to excitotox-
people in Japan due to the ingestion of contaminated
icity as a result of energy deprivation with aspartate
sea food.
acting as the main excitatory amino acid. Cerebral cortex
 and hippocampus (in rodents particularly the dentate 
Feline hippocampal necrosis
gyrus) have been defined as predilection sites for
 In domestic cats, hippocampal necrosis is a relatively
hypoglycemic injury of neurons, but there are also
frequent neurological disorder in several European
reports of involvement of basal nuclei and cerebellum.
countries. The cause is unknown but cluster analysis
Therefore, hypoglycemia cannot be reliably discrimi-
 indicated a toxic environmental factor. Cats typically
nated from ischemia based on light microscopy. The
exhibit aggressive behavior and complex focal seizures.
latter is discussed in Chapter 2 (vascular disorders).
The lesions are mainly restricted to the hippocampus
Hypoglycemia occurs with functional β-cell tumors
bilaterally (Fig. 6.5A), but may also extend into the para-
of the pancreas or with iatrogenic insulin overdos-
hippocampal and piriform cortex. There is neuronal
age. Furthermore, it is commonly seen in puppies
chromatolysis (Fig. 6.5B) followed by acidophilic neu-
of miniature dog breeds (Chihuahua, Yorkshire Terrier,
ronal necrosis (Fig. 6.5C) and, in severe cases, complete
Miniature Poodle) during their first months of life. In
hippocampal necrosis. In chronic cases, there is vascular
these dogs, polioencephalomalacia is associated with
proliferation and both micro- and astrogliosis. In some
microvacuolar hepatocellular degeneration.
cases these lesions are accompanied by remarkable
Cyanide poisoning has been reported as a cause of
perivascular mononuclear cuffing that  may occur  in
PE in dogs and cats. Although carbamates (e.g. aldicarb)
the acute phase. See MRI Atlas.
Metabolic-toxic diseases   113
Fig. 6.5 Hippocampal necrosis. Cat. A: T2W MRl sequence. Note the bilateral diffuse hyperintensity of the hippocampi. (Reproduced
with permission from Dr. Frank Steffen.) B: Initial changes of hippocampal necrosis consist of neuronal swelling and chromatolysis in
the pyramidal cell layer. Neuronal nuclei are displaced to the periphery. Nudei of astrocytes are swollen (arrows). HE. C: Acidophilic
neuronal necrosis of most pyramidal neurons. Capillaries are distended and show endothelial hypertrophy. HE
always present: hippocampal sclerosis can occur without
Hippocampal sclerosis
seizures and vice versa. Hippocampal sclerosis and
 Hippocampal sclerosis is well known in humans with
atrophy (Fig. 6.6A,C) can be found in dogs and cats with
temporal lobe epilepsy. The lesion is characterized by
 a long history of generalized seizures refractory to antie-
necrosis and loss of neurons in the pyramidal cell layer
 pileptic treatment. Atrophy and asymmetry of the hip-
 of the hippocampus unilaterally or bilaterally. It is
os  r o a s q o 
believed that neuronal loss is due to severe and pro-
in severe cases. In contrast to PE associated with seizures
longed seizures, particularly severe febrile seizures 
as described above, there are no malacic lesions. In most
during childhood. However such a correlation is not 
 cases, lesions are only detected microscopically and
Fig. 6.6 Hippocampal sclerosis. Dog with chronic seizures. A: Pyramidal neurons are lost and replaced by a band of gliosis (arrows).
HE. B: Compare with the normal canine hippocampus. Note the pyramidal neuron layer (arrows). HE. C: The density of neurons in the
pyramidal cell layer is severely reduced. Reactive astrocytic gliosis is prominent. Most of the remaining neurons are shrunken and
deeply basophilic (neuronal atrophy, arrows). HE. D: Normal appearance of the pyramidal neuron layer in the canine hippocampus. HE.
114  Veterinary Neuropathology
consist of diffuse loss of pyramidal cells in the hippoc-
rhages in the brainstem are present (Fig. 6.7A,B).
ampus of varying severity with extensive gliosis (Fig.
Histologically, there is PE with edema and varying
6.6C). As this is a progressive disease, remaining neurons
degrees of hemorrhage, capillary endothelial hyper-
 may exhibit acidophilic neuronal damage.
trophy and hyperplasia with a proteinaceous exudate
(Fig. 6.7C). In chronic lesions, neuronal loss, vacu-
olation of the neuropil and intense astrogliosis are
6.2.2 Polioencephalomalacia of subcortical
found.
structures and brainstem
Thiamin deficiency in carnivores
Equine nigropallidal encephalomalacia
In contrast to ruminants, carnivores are dependent
Equine nigropallidal encephalomalacia (yellow star
on an adequate dietary supply of vitamin B1. Dietary
thistle poisoning) has been described in the USA, South
thiamin deficiency can occur with ingestion of food
America and in Australia, where horses in arid areas feed
containing thiaminase (e.g. fish) or deficient in thiamin
 on pastures containing Centaurea solstitialis (yellow star
 or if thiamin is inactivated by preservation procedures
thistle) or C. repens (Russian knapweed). Affer pro-
(e.g. by heating or sulfur dioxide). In wild and farmed
longed ingestion horses show abnormal tongue and
foxes and mink, thiamin deficiency is called Chastek's
mouth
1 movements, with difficulty in prehension,
paralysis. In domestic carnivores, thiamin-deficiency
swallowing  and  drinking.  In the brain  characteristic
encephalopathy occurs relatively commonly in starved
lesions evident both on MRI and grossly are of bilater-
cats, but is very rare in dogs. As in ruminants, thiamin
 ally symmetrical acute malacic or chronic cystic poli-
deficiency causes necrosis of the gray matter (poli-
oencephalomalacia in the substantia nigra and the
oencephalomalacia) but the topography and nature
globus pallidus (Fig. 6.8A,B). Unilateral lesions can
of lesions is different. The periventricular gray matter
occur. Microscopically, well demarcated necrosis is
is bilaterally symmetrically affected and the caudal
infarctive in type with widespread acute acidophilic
colliculi, medial vestibular nuclei and lateral genic-
ulate bodies are consistent target regions (Fig.
viving blood vessels. Repin has been postulated as the
6.7A,B). See MRI Atlas.
causative neurotoxin but the pathogenesis is unknown.
The diagnosis can frequently be made macroscopi-
The malacic nature of the lesions is very different in
cally if the characteristic, bilaterally symmetrical hemor-
extent and type from the selective loss of dopaminergic
Fig. 6.7 Thiamin deficiency. Cat. Brainstem. A: Bilateral and almost symmetrical foci of hemorrhage and malacia in the brainstem.
B: Section of the same brain with bilateral hemorrhages. In some nuclei foci of pallor and spongy state indicating edema and necrosis
(arrows). HE. C: Hemorrhage and edema in the caudal colliculus. Neuronal loss is accompanied by marked astrocytic gliosis and micro-
gliosis. Capillaries are prominent due to endothelial hypertrophy (arrows). HE.
Metabolic-toxic diseases  115
stantia nigra. B: Same case as in A. Bilaterally symmetrical and well demarcated areas of polioencephalomalacia with brownish dis-
coloration and cystic malacia in the globus pallidus (left section) and substantia nigra of the midbrain (right).
neurons in the substantia nigra in human Parkinson's
Metronidazole toxicity
disease.
Metronidazole is widely used in the treatment of infec-
tions with anaerobic bacteria or protozoa. Metronidazole
PE with Aeschynomene indica
neurotoxicity has been frequently reported in men,
dogs and cats, but the pathogenesis is currently not
Aeschynomene indica is a weed, which frequently grows
 known. There is little information on the neuropathol-
in rice paddies in South America, Africa, Asia and
ogy likely because metronidazole toxicity is reversible
Australia. Intoxication has been reported in pigs fed rice
when drug administration is discontinued and fatal
contaminated with seeds. The pathogenesis is unknown.
cases are rare. In humans, peripheral neuropathies and
Neurological signs occur within hours of ingestion
reversible bilaterally symmetrical MRI changes in the
and are initially not associated with neuropathological
brain, mainly affecting the cerebellar nuclei, are reported.
changes. In more protracted cases, histologically there
In dogs and cats, metronidazole poisoning causes ataxia,
are bilaterally symmetrical areas of malacia in vestibular,
nystagmus, head tilts, tremors and seizures. The few
cerebellar, oculomotor and red nuclei, substantia nigra,
available reports describe Purkinje cell degeneration/
putamen and cortex. Acute lesions include edema, con-
 loss and axonal degeneration in the cerebellovestibular
gestion and hemorrhage, which are followed by necrosis,
 infiltration with gitter cells and capillary prominence
white matter tracts of dogs. One report on metronida-
zole intoxication in a cat describes demarcated, rather
with endothelial hypertrophy.
 non-symmetrical areas of necrosis in the thalamus, mid-
brain and medulla.
Annual ryegrass staggers
Encephalomalacias due to genetic mutations
 A tremorgenic syndrome in ruminants, horses and pigs
Note that symmetrical encephalomalacia can also be
called annual ryegrass staggers is caused by coryne-
caused by genetic disorders (see Chapter 8).
toxin. This toxin is produced by Rathayibacter toxicus,
a bacterium that is carried by the nematode Anguina
agrostis, which parasitizes annual ryegrass (Lolium 
6.2.3 Poliomyelomalacia
rigidum). Ingestion of infected ryegrass causes vascu-
 Poliomyelomalacia due to iatrogenic selenium poison-
lar injury with secondary proteinaceous edema and
ing occurs in pigs. Characteristic lesions affect the cervi-
ischemic damage in the cerebellum with necrosis and
cal and lumbar intumescences of the spinal cord (Fig.
loss of Purkinje cells.
6.9). There is focal and bilaterally symmetrical necrosis
116
6veterinary Neuropathology
6.2.4 Leukoencephalomalacias
Equine leukoencephalomalacia
Equine leukoencephalomalacia or moldy corn disease,
a fatal neurological disorder with sudden onset, is
observed in horses and donkeys worldwide that have
ingested moldy corn contaminated with the fungus
Fusarium moniliforme. The fungus produces the myco-
toxin fumonisin Bl, which is believed to cause vascular
damage selectively in the white matter with secondary
encephalomalacia. However, the exact pathogenesis is
not known.
 The toxin may also cause concurrent hepatic necrosis.
Macroscopically, lesions are characterized by bilateral
but fairly asymmetrical areas of leukoencephalomalacia
Fig. 6.9 Selenium poisoning. Pig. There is bilaterally symmetrical
in the centrum semiovale and corona radiata (Fig.
loss of staining in the ventral horns of the cervical intumescence
cue to poliomyelomalacia (arrows). HE-LFB.
6.10A) and sometimes in the brainstem and cerebellar
white matter. Acutely malacic foci are yellowish-brown
to hemorrhagic, soft and progress to form fluid-filled
cavities. Histologically in acute cases, vessels are necrotic
with intravascular thrombi. The white matter is necrotic
and massively infiltrated with gitter cells and some neu-
with gross softening and cavitation of the ventral horns.
trophils. In the periphery of the necrosis, proteinaceous
Microscopically initial lesions include neuropil vacuola-
edema dissects the white matter and vessels are sur-
tion, necrosis of glial cells, capillary hypertrophy and
rounded by small hemorrhages and cuffs of eosinophils,
 neuronal degeneration. In the chronic stage, the picture 
lymphocytes and neutrophils (Fig. 6.10B).
is predominated by neuronal loss and extensive gliosis
with capillary proliferation in the ventral horns. In addi-
Swayback
tion, many brainstem nuclei and cerebellar roof nuclei
Congenital copper deficiency affects lambs and rarely
may be similarly affected. Similar syndromes of bilateral
 goat kids, which are born with neurological signs called
poliomyelomalacia affecting the ventral horns of the
swayback. It develops in utero during which time ewes
 spinal cord have been described in other species (e.g.
 are fed a copper-deficient or molybdenum-rich diet, the
sheep, goats and Ayrshire calves), but their etiologies 
latter antagonizing copper solubility and absorption in 
remain unknown.
the digestive tract. Affected animals are blind and show
Fig. 6.10 Leukoencephalomalacia. A: Horse. Equine leukoencephalomalacia (moldy corn poisoning). Massive swelling of the left
of equine leukoencephalomalacia are characterized by vascular damage (as indicated by the hemorrhages and fibrin exudation).
acidophilic neuronal necrosis, capillary hypertrophy and hyperplasia, marked edema and necrosis. HE. C: Sheep. Swayback in a newborn
lamb. Bilateral loss and cyst formation of the cerebral white matter.
Metabolic-toxic diseases   117
 severe incoordination progressing to complete immobil-
E-toxin-producing Clostridium perfringens type D. The
ity and death. Grossly, there is bilaterally symmetrical
neurotoxicity is likely due to injury of microvascular
cavitation of the periventricular white matter in the cer-
endothelium and neuronal excitotoxicity of e-toxin. In
ebrum with associated ventricular distension (Fig.
peracute cases with high toxin levels, macroscopic
 6.10C). The histological lesion is a severe rarefaction and
lesions may be absent but microscopic lesions consistent
edema of the cerebral white matter resulting in cavita-
with vasogenic edema are observed. Focal symmetrical
tions that are traversed by axons and astrocytic pro-
areas of malacia, sometimes hemorrhagic, affecting
cesses. Neuronal necrosis can be observed in the
 gray and white matter occur in subacute to chronic cases
overlying cortex. The pathogenesis is unknown.
(Fig. 6.11A) in the corona radiata, basal nuclei, internal
capsule, thalamus, midbrain and cerebellar pedun-
6.2.5 Encephalomalacias involving both gray
dles. See MR1 Atlas. Microscopically, these sharply
and white matter
demarcated areas of necrosis (Fig. 6.11B) contain vacu-
Enterotoxemias
olated white matter, axonal spheroids and necrotic
 In enterotoxemias, the intestine is excessively colonized
 neurons and glial cells. Vascular endothelium is hyper-
by toxin-producing bacteria. Enterotoxins are absorbed
trophic and vessels are surrounded by proteinaceous
from the gut and distributed hematogeneously caus-
edema and hemorrhages (Fig. 6.11B). With time, numer-
ing a systemic toxemia and resulting widespread tissue
ous macrophages and neutrophils infltrate the necrotic
damage. In the brain, enterotoxemias present as bilater-
foci and capillaries become prominent.
ally symmetrical encephalomalacias.
 Edema disease (cerebrospinal angiopathy) occurs in
Focal  symmetrical  encephalomalacia (
feeder pigs in the first weeks affer weaning following
(FSE)
111
 ruminants affects mainly well nourished animals fed
small intestinal colonization by verotoxin-producing
 diets high in carbohydrate content (crops, grain), and
Escherichia coli (VTEC) and systemic absorption of the
therefore is also called overeating disease. Such diets
verotoxin (verotoxin or shiga-like toxin type 2e; Stx2e).
create optimal conditions for intestinal overgrowth of
This toxin causes widespread injury of small arteries and
Fig. 6.11 Enterotoxemia due to Clostridlium perfringens type D intoxication. Focal symmetrical encephalomalacia. A: Sheep.
Consecutive transverse sections of the brain. Bilateral and fairly symmetrical areas of malacia and hemorrhage in basal nuclei, thalamus
and midbrain. B: Same case as in A. Acute focal encephalomalacia with vascular necrosis, small hemorrhages and massive polymor
phonuclear cell infiltrates. HE.
118
3Veterinary Neuropathology
animals. The pathogenesis is not entirely understood.
 CO binds avidly to the binding site for oxygen in hemo-
globin and myocardial hemoglobin and thus causes
severe hypoxia.  Neuropathological changes include
acute neuronal necrosis in the cerebral cortex, caudate
nucleus, globus pallidus, thalamic nuclei and cerebel-
lum. Furthermore, bilaterally symmetrical demyelina-
tion and sharply demarcated areas of necrosis in the
deep periventricular white matter are observed in
animals which survive for a longer time period.
6.3 Acquired metabolic-toxic selective lesions
Selective lesions, which to a certain extent morphologi-
Fig. 6.12 Porcine edema disease. Pig. Chronic. A medium-sized
cally resemble the hereditary conditions described in
artery has a severely thickened wall(large arrow). In the Virchow-
Chapter 8, can occur as a result of intoxications or meta-
Robin space and in the surrounding parenchyma there are many
bolic deficiencies. The clinical signs may be acute as in
brightly eosinophilic (protein-rich) droplets (arrows). Spongy state
the diseases described above but also subacute to chronic
with large and small vacuoles indicating edema and malacia. HE.
and progressive. Some of these lesion patterns are also
discussed in more detail in Chapter 8 on degenerative
diseases.
6.3.1 Neuronal degeneration
arterioles resulting in edema and ischemic damage of
Enzootic ataxia
tissues including the brain. The pathogenesis is multi-
factorial involving genetic (e.g. the expression of the F18
 In contrast to congenital copper deficiency ("swayback")
 receptor on the intestinal epithelium), nutritional (e.g.
see Section 6.2.4), enzootic ataxia results from postnatal
diet changes, high-energy diets allowing proliferation of
copper deficiency. Goat kids and lambs are normal at
E. coli) and environmental (weaning) factors.
birth, but develop progressive paraparesis and ataxia at
3-12 weeks of age. However, there may be a certain
Macroscopically  bilaterally  symmetrical  areas  of
malacia with tan-grayish discoloration may be observed
overlap between the neuropathology of swayback and
in the brainstem. These may extend rostrally into the
that of enzootic ataxia. Histopathologically, enzootic
 basal nuclei. Microscopically, the characteristic lesion is
ataxia resembles a motor neuron disease (MND) with
 that of a bilaterally symmetrical malacia due to necrosis
neuronal swelling, chromatolysis and eosinophilia (Fig.
of arterial smooth muscle cells. The initial lesion is
6.13A). Neuronal changes are found in the ventral horns
a perivascular edema with protein-rich, eosinophilic
and various brainstem and midbrain nuclei. Additionally,
 droplets. Then fibrinoid vascular necrosis is accompa-
there is axonal degeneration with demyelination of the
nied by infiltration of the vascular wall and adventitia
Wallerian type in the dorsolateral and ventromedial
with neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages as well
funiculi of the spinal cord.
as endothelial hypertrophy. Edema and necrosis of the
parenchyma are secondary to the vascular changes. In
Equine motor neuron disease
animals surviving for a prolonged time, necrotic areas
Equine motor neuron disease (EMND) was originally
are infiltrated by macrophages and arteries are thickened
described in North America but occurs in several
(Fig. 6.12).
 European countries. The condition shares clinical and
neuropathological findings with all other MND (see
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Chapter 8.2) including chromatolysis, nuclear changes
Fatal exposure to carbon monoxide (CO) is generated
and eventually loss of spinal cord and brainstem motor
following incomplete oxidation of hydrocarbons due to
neurons (Fig. 6.13B) as well as Wallerian degeneration
lack of oxygen. It occurs for example during fires or
in respective nerve roots and nerves. In EMND there
when wood stoves are used in closed or poorly ventilated
is also conspicuous accumulation of lipopigment in
 spaces. In human medicine CO poisoning is one of the
neurons and endothelial cells. Retinal changes in EMND
most common intoxications. It is rarely described in
resemble those found in experimental vitamin E defi-
Metabolic-toxic diseases   119
Fig. 6.13 Neuronal degeneration. A: Goat. Midbrain. Enzootic ataxia. Most motor neurons in the red nucleus exhibit various stages
of chromatolysis. HE. B: Horse. Spinal cord. Equine motor neuron disease. A chromatolytic degenerating neuron in the ventral horn
containing numerous eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. Neurons also contain excessive lipofuschin pigment (arrow). HE. C: Bovine.
Brainstem. Aspergillus clavatus intoxication. Large motor neurons in the brainstem are chromatolytic and swollen with pale eosi-
nophilic cytoplasm. Some contain cytoplasmic vacuoles. HE. D: Horse. Mesenteric ganglion. Acute grass sickness. Most ganglionic
neurons are chromatolytic and many contain intracytoplasmic eosinophilic spheroid indlusion bodies. Nuclei are displaced to the
periphery. There are numerous axonal spheroids between the neurons. HE.
ciency in dogs, suggesting that these diseases share a
neurons are severely swollen and chromatolytic. They
common pathogenesis.
show either a brightly eosinophilic, homogeneous cyto-
plasm or cytoplasmic pallor and contain numerous
Aspergillus clavatus intoxication
large intraneuronal vacuoles (Fig. 6.13C). Occasionally,
A tremorgenic syndrome has been described in rumi-
necrotic neurons with shrunken, deeply eosinophilic
nants fed beer by-products, sprouted barley or grain
cytoplasm and peripheral, karyopyknotic nuclei are
contaminated with Aspergillus clavatus. The fungus pro-
observed.
duces various toxins including patulin. In Aspergillus
clavatus intoxication, in addition to degeneration and
Chrysocoma tenuifolia intoxication
necrosis of skeletal muscle, widespread degeneration of
Vacuolation and chromatolysis of spinal cord neurons,
large motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord is
particularly motor neurons of the ventral horns,
found associated with Wallerian degeneration in the
has been described in lambs in South Africa graz-
spinal cord and peripheral nervous system. Degenerated
ing Chrysocoma tenuifolia. Neuronal degeneration is
120 Veterinary Neuropathology
associated with Wallerian degeneration in lateral and
disease remains unknown. There have been recent
ventral funiculi.
attempts to associate feline dysautonomia to Clostridium
botulinum C/D toxico-infection.
Dysautonomia
Canine dysautonomia has been described worldwide,
Neuronal degeneration in the autonomic nervous system
but in contrast to dysautonomias in other species more
is the main feature of dysautonomias. Acute neuronal
frequently occurs in the USA than in Europe.
degeneration is seen in autonomic (sympathetic and
 Dysautonomias have been described in other species
parasympathathetic) neurons of the PNS and in the
 including rabbits, hares, sheep (abomasal-emptying
CNS. Dysautonomias have been reported in a variety of
defect) and South American camelids.
domestic animals but also in wild species. They occur
 aq pasn ad ae pe aos
Phalaris grass intoxication
undefined toxins. Clinical signs refer to autonomic dys-
Canary grass (Phalaris) poisoning has been reported
function. Pathological findings in autonomic ganglionic
worldwide and affects sheep, catfle and horses. Phalaris
and enteric neurons and central autonomic neurons
 grass poisoning manifests in one of two neurological
include neuronal degeneration with swelling, chroma-
syndromes. In the peracute form, also referred to as
tolysis  with  central  eosinophilic spheroidal  bodies,
"sudden death” or “polioencephalomalacia-like sudden
foamy cytoplasm and eccentric nuclei (Fig. 6.13D). All
death", animals die within hours. Neuropil vacuolation
these changes lead to neuronal loss and reactive gliosis/
and swollen astrocytes with a vesicular nucleus may be
 satellite cell proliferation in chronic cases. These changes
observed in the deep cerebrocortical layers. Occasional
are similar in all dysautonomias.
necrotic neurons are present.
Equine dysautonomia or grass sickness (mal seco
The second form is a tremorgenic syndrome referred
in South America) was the first identified dysautonomia
to as Phalaris grass staggers. Phalaris contains tryp-
in animals. It is generally fatal and occurs mainly in
tamine alkaloids structurally resembling serotonin, and
grazing horses and donkeys in the UK, continental
 it is thought that neurotoxicity is the result of agonistic
Europe and South America. Sporadic cases have been
interaction of the toxin with serotonergic receptors.
 reported in the USA. Endemic areas have been identified
Macroscopically, pigment accumulation representing an
in several countries. Depending on the severity of the
indolin-like molecule may be appreciated as greenish-
lesions, there is an acute form, with animals dying within
 gray discoloration of the kidney, brainstem and spinal
days affer onset, and a milder chronic form with signs
cord. Histologically a granular cytoplasmic pigment
 lasting for weeks and months, from which animals may
accumulates bilaterally symmetrically in specific neuron
recover. In addition to the neuronal degeneration in
 populations of the brainstem and spinal cord. Neuronal
autonomic neurons, other neurons in various motor
necrosis may be present.
nuclei of the brainstem and spinal cord show extensive
chromatolysis, although this change may not progress to
Acquired lysosomal storage diseases
 neuronal degeneration. The gold-standard diagnosis is
Acquired lysosomal storage can be induced by plant
toxins in various herbivorous species. It occurs mainly
used successfully for antemortem diagnosis of grass
in the USA, South America, Australia and Africa. Plants
sickness. Synaptophysin has been proposed as a marker
of the genera Swainsona, Astragalus, Oxytropis, Ipomea,
for degenerated neurons in diagnosis of grass sickness.
Sida and Turbina contain lysosomal glycosidase inhibi-
The cause of grass sickness is still unknown, although
tors including swainsonine. These alkaloids are potent
epidemiological studies of this sporadic disease have
inhibitors of, for example, Q-mannosidase and Golgi
identified a number of risk factors. The most favoured,
mannosidase Il. The resulting lysosomal accumulation
 although not finally proven etiology is a toxicoinfection
 of mannose leads to neuronal vacuolation mimicking
with Clostridium botulinum type C that is acquired
the lesions of inherited mannosidosis (described in
during grazing. Recently, high levels of heavy metals
Chapter 8).
in the herbage and high representation of Ranunculus
Cerebellar signs in ruminants have been associ-
sp in the pasture have been associated with grass
ated with the ingestion of Solanurm spp. Gross lesions
sickness.
are absent, but histologically cytoplasmic vacuolation,
Feline dysautonomia (Key-Gaskell syndrome) is a
degeneration and loss of Purkinje cells are observed.
sporadic disease of cats occuring throughout the world.
Ultrastructurally,thesevacuoles consist of lipids, electron-
A large number of cases were detected during the 1980s
 dense granules and membraneous debris. Secondary
in the United Kingdom but since then the incidence of
axonal swelling and Wallerian degeneration occur in the
the disease has decreased considerably. The cause of the
cerebellar white matter.
Metabolic-toxic diseases  121
 Such lesions have been associated with Vitamin E defi-
6.3.2 Axonal degeneration
ciency (likely genetically determined) in animals, par-
Wallerian-like long tract degeneration
ticularly horses (see Chapter 8).
Long tract degeneration of the Wallerian type
The ingestion of the endophytic fungus Neoty-
throughout the spinal cord has been found in a wide
phodium (previously Acremonium) loli that grows on
variety of deficiencies and intoxications in all domestic
-n e ss (ad ) ss 
animal species. The basic lesion is fragmentation and
 genic syndrome associated with neuroaxonal-dystrophy-
loss of axons, secondary demyelination and reactive
like lesions in domestic ruminants, horses and deer.
phagocytosis/gliosis in a specific distribution pattern,
Perennial ryegrass staggers occurs mainly in Aus-
depending on etiology and species. Very similar lesions
tralia and New Zealand, but is also described in other
are illustrated in Chapter 8. Plant-induced axonal degen-
continents.  Neotyphodium  lolii produces neurotoxic
eration in ruminants occurs following Tribulus terres-
alkaloids that are tremorgenic (lolitremes) and cause
tris intoxication; axonal degeneration is also seen in
K+-channel dysfunction.  Associated  neuropathologic
Zamia staggers following cycade poisoning. In horses
changes include swollen axons (torpedos) within the
and sheep it is associated with sorghum poisoning.
 granular cell layer of the cerebellum and vacuolar
Long tract degeneration was found in cats with cobala-
degeneration of Purkinje cells. Similar tremorgenic
min deficiency, in dogs with vitamin E deficiency and
syndromes have been reported in association with
pigs with vitamin A deficiency or 3-nitro poisoning (an
feedstuffs contaminated with other fungi (e.g- Aspergillus
organic arsenic compound).
spp, Penicillium spp., Claviceps paspali) able to produce
Organophosphates (OPs) are widely used (anthel-
 tremorgenic toxins (e.g. verrucologen, penitrem A) but
minthics, lubricant oils, pesticides) and are inhibitors
information on neuropathology is scarce. In dogs, such
 of acetylcholinesterase. Apart from acute intoxica-
intoxications have been seen following ingestion of
tions with abrupt onset of clinical signs, various OPs
 moldy cream cheese, moldy walnuts and garbage.
have been associated with delayed neurotoxic syn-
 In sheep grazing Sorghum spp. dystrophic axons occur
dromes
(organophosphate-induced  delayed  axon-
in the cerebellar roof nuclei, red nucleus, brainstem
opathy).Clinical signs may develop slowly and are
 nuclei and spinal cord. Additionally mild neuronal
progressive over a few weeks. Common clinical signs
necrosis can be observed.
are ataxia and weakness in the pelvic limbs that usually
 progresses to paraplegia. Delayed organophosphate
Halimium brasiliense
poisoning conforms broadly to dying-back polyneu-
 ropathy in the CNS and PNS caused by inhibition of
A particular type of axonal degeneration with axonal
 the neuropathy target esterase. Axons of long and large
vacuolation throughout the brain and spinal cord has
 been reported in Brazilian sheep grazing on pastures
nerve fibers both in the central and peripheral nervous
 system are affected, and lesions are predominantly in the
with Halimium brasiliense. It is associated with white
distal portions of the axons, therefore called distal axon-
matter  vacuolation and lipofuscin  accumulation  in
 neurons and astrocytes.
opathy. Hence, axonal degeneration in the spinal cord is
most prominent in the dorsal and superficial dorsola-
teral (ascending) tracts of the cervical spinal cord and
6.3.3 Myelin degeneration
in the ventral and deep lateral (descending) tracts of the
lumbar spinal cord. Histologically this axonopathy is
Hound ataxia
characterized by Wallerian-type degeneration of distal
Primary myelin degeneration has been described in
axons with secondary myelin degradation. Neuronal
hound ataxia, a disease of adult Harrier Hounds, Beagles
degeneration and chromatolysis are observed in the
and Foxhounds kept in hunting packs. The disease is
spinal cord and brainstem.
characterized by gradual onset of ataxia and spastic
 paresis. Microscopic findings are confined to the spinal
Neuroaxonal-dystrophy-like lesions
cord and are most prominent in the ventral and lateral
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy is defined as focal axonal swell-
tracts. Intact axons in vacuolated myelin sheaths
 ing (spheroids) in both specific nuclei and tracts follow-
and variation in myelin sheath thickness suggest a
ing disruption of axonal transport usually due to
primary myelinopathy. However, some axonal degen-
metabolic derangement of the neuron. The basic lesion
eration is present. It has been suggested that this mye-
is discussed and illustrated in Chapter 8. It may occur in
lopathy is caused by methionine deficiency and altered
the gray or white matter and is a feature of various toxic
 methionine synthetase activity resulting from feeding
and metabolic conditions or genetically determined.
rumen.
122
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
closantelintoxicationand poisoningwith bromethalin-
Irradiated feed in cats
derived rodenticides. Some plants have also been impli-
Primary demyelination of the brain and spinal cord has
cated: Helichrysum argyrosphaerum intoxication and
 been described in cats (leukoencephalomyelopathy)
 s i  ds pn
that have been experimentally given irradiated feed
in ruminants. Sporadic brain edema in ruminants is a
during pregnancy. Non-pregnant cats, male cats and
sporadic condition of unknown etiology usually in adult
their offspring did not develop neurological signs. White
animals, which occurs in Switzerland. The condition is
matter vacuolation, demyelination and remyelination
  a o snds s a 
with relative sparing of axons occur mainly in the lateral
the cerebral white matter and the brainstem (Fig. 6.15A).
and ventral columns of the spinal cord, corona radiata,
In the cerebrum, the status spongiosus follows the
crus cerebri and optic nerve. Other authors describe
border between cerebral cortex and subcortical white
outbreaks of leukoencephalomyelopathy in cat colonies
matter. In mild cases, this status spongiosus or edema
related to irradiated feed. Non-pregnant cats were
is restricted to the substantia nigra in the lateral mid-
affected and, interestingly, primary axonal degeneration
brain. It occurs occasionally combined with neuronal
of Wallerian type in spinal cord and brain is described.
degeneration in brainstem nuclei. The cause of this
However,the distribution is similar to that in the primary
quite common brain condition of Swiss ruminants is
demyelination described above with lateral and ventral
unknown. Although it is neuropathologically similar to
columns being mainly involved. The syndrome could be
the vacuolation occurring in metabolic encephalopathy
reproduced by giving cats irradiated feed with elevated
liver lesions have not been demonstrated in these
 peroxide and reduced vitamin A levels. Therefore, it is
animals. In birds, epidemics of avian vacuolar myelin-
suspected that free-radical formation causes axonal
opathy in the USA have been associated with cyanobac-
degeneration of the Wallerian type. A similar leukoen-
teria growing on invasive exotic aquatic plants (Hydrilla).
cephalomyelopathy has been reported in various large
felid species and vitamin A deficiency has been
Metabolic encephalopathy
implicated.
Metabolic encephalopathy results from hepatic (hepatic
encephalopathy) or renal (renal encephalopathy) failure.
6.4 Spongy degeneration
Hepatic encephalopathy is recognized in all domestic
animal species. It may be caused either by a portosys-
Spongy state is one of the most common neuropatho-
temic shunt (congenital or acquired) or result from
logical changes. A wide array of mechanisms/causes
infectious/metabolic/toxic/degenerative  liver diseases.
 can produce vacuolation of the white or gray mafter. An
The pathogenesis has not been entirely unraveled but it
 overview of the differential diagnosis of spongy state
is accepted that in liver failure, bypassing or injury of
in the CNS is presented in Fig. 6.14. In this section we
hepatocytes hampers the detoxification of ammonium,
cover spongy changes, also called “spongy degeneration",
which is neurotoxic at elevated concentrations. Excess
which occur as a primary morphological change, not
ammonium enters the brain and is metabolized by
associated with destructive lesions of neurons or myelin.
astrocytic glutamine synthetase to noxious glutamine.
This lesion is characterized by bilaterally symmetrical
Glutamine acts as an osmolyte causing astrocytic swell-
vacuolation more often in white than gray maftter. The
 ing. It is transported into mitochondria and there again
vacuoles are sharply defined and vary in size. In severe
split into glutamate and ammonium ("Trojan horse
cases vacuoles may coalesce. In the acute stage there are
 hypothesis"), which induces generation of free radicals
no reactive changes: there is no axonal swelling, invasion
that damage mitochondrial membranes, finally resulting
with macrophages or gliosis. The latter may occur later
in astrocytic dysfunction and brain edema. Additionally,
in longstanding severe lesions. The basic lesion is prob-
inflammatory mediators contribute to astrocytic swell-
ably cytotoxic edema (see Chapter 1 on general neu-
ing and edema.
 ropathology) in the white matter with myelin splitting
In renal failure, the resulting encephalopathy is
and vacuolation. The lesions can be widespread in the
thought to result from accumulation of neurotoxic
CNS but may target specific areas. Macroscopically
aq se unu oads ou na se inq oe
brain swelling may be observed. Myelin vacuoles are also
identified.
present in the PNS.
Gross lesions are lacking in metabolic encephalopa-
thy Depending on the animal species there are varying
Intoxications
 degrees of white matter vacuolation. The spongy state
Spongy degeneration of the white matter can result from
with numerous clearly defined vacuoles of varying size
ammonia poisoning, hexachlorophene intoxica tion,
is reminiscent of cytotoxic edema and particularly affects
Metabolic-toxic diseases
123
SPONGY STATE IN GRAY
MATTER
Reactive changes
 No reactive changes
Symmetrical
Non-symmetrical
Symmetrical
 Non-symmetrical
>Edema
> Spongy degeneration 
>Autolysis
>TSEs
Associated with other
Specific topography
ll-dlefined vacuoles, other signs
Specific topography.
pathologies (e.g. neoplasia,
 sharply demarcated 
of autolysis
vacuolation of neuropil and 
neurons, PrP accumulation
inflammation)
vacuoles
> Spongy degeneration 
In advanced cases (initially no
reactive changes)
>Secondary
In severe met.-toxic neuronal
lesions
SPONGY STATE IN WHITE
MATTER
Reactive changes
No reactive changes
Symmetrical
Non-symmetrical
Symmetrical
 Non-symmetrical
>Spongy degeneration
> Spongy degeneration 
>Edema
>Autolysis
Sperific topog raphy.
Ill-defined vacuoles, other signs
In advanced cases initially no
Associated with other
reactive changes)
sharply demarcated
of autolysis
pathologies (e.g. neoplasia,
inflammation)
vacuoles
>Myelin degeneration
 >Demyelination
Special stains show significant 
>Autolysis
Axon stains show
myelin loss
No clear pattern, other
preserved axons
signs of autolysis
>Axonal degeneration
>Wallerian degeneration 
Spheroids, special stains show
 Associated with a proximal
 sig nificant axonal loss 
axonal lesion
>Old age
Diffuse, discrete gliosis, other
old age changes
Fig. 6.14 Differential diagnosis of spongy state in the CNS
124
4  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 6.15 Spongy degeneration. A: Bovine. Cross-section of forebrain. Sporadic brain edema. Massive spongy state in large areas of
the white matter. HE. B: Calf. Hepatic portosystemic shunt. Cerebral cortex. Prominent vacuolation in the deep layers of the cerebral
cortex. HE. C: Same case as B. Spongy state with clear, empty vacuoles in the white matter in the internal casule. HE. D: Horse. Globus
pallidus. Hepatic encephalopathy. Many Alzheimer type Il cells single or in small groups (arrows). HE. Inset: Their nuclei are swollen
and open-faced with marginalized chromatin. HE.
boundary areas between gray and white matter in a
 nuclei typically have marginalized chromatin and a clear
bilaterally symmetrical pattern (Fig. 6.15B,C). In small
center. Alzheimer type II cells occur as single cells, in
animals this is often most prominent in the cerebellar
short chains or small groups of two to six cells through-
nuclei and brainstem nuclei. In large animals there may
out the gray matter, particularly in the cerebral cortex
be widespread spongy degeneration of the white matter.
 and basal nuclei. The Alzheimer type II cells are also seen
This is conspicuous in the subcortical white matter (Fig.
when spongy degeneration is only minimal or even
6.15B), internal capsule, thalamus, cerebellar medulla
absent, and may thus be the only change indicative of
and brainstem (Fig. 6.15C). In the spinal cord, lesions
metabolic encephalopathy (particularly in horses).
are prominent in the fasciculus proprius. Additionally.
 in rare cases, occasional necrotic neurons, with shrunken,
6.5 Metabolic-toxic lesions of the peripheral
bright eosinophilic cytoplasma and pyknotic nuclei,
nervous system (PNS) and skeletal muscle
may be found.
Histological changes in metabolic encephalopathy
Several toxins and deficiencies selectively or primarily
include the presence of astrocytes with swollen nuclei
affect the PNS. Any diagnostic assessment of the PNS
referred to as Alzheimer type II cells (Fig. 6.15D). Their
 requires electrodiagnostic testing, systematic sampling
Metabolic-toxic diseases   125
of proximal and distal portions of the nerves, semithin
Similar lesions in the distal nerves of the hind limbs
sectioning and teased fiber preparations. For the latter
have been described in horses worldwide with Australian
two methods the reader is referred to more specific lit-
stringhalt, a disease with sudden onset occurring as
erature. Here, the histopathological changes of the most
herd outbreaks in late summer. The CNS remains unaf-
common toxic-metabolic disorders affecting the PNS
 fected. It has been associated with grazing on pastures
and skeletal muscle are briefly described.
contaminated with Hypochaeris radicata, Taraxacum
offcinale and Malva parviflora.
6.5.1 Metabolic-toxic neuropathies
Salinomycin poisoning
Metabolic neuropathies in small animals
In canine hypothyroidism various neurological com-
plications have been reported including myxedema,
used as coccidiostatic drugs in poultry and as growth
coma, brain infarcts subsequent to atherosclerosis of the
promoters in ruminants. These compounds are toxic in
cerebral vasculature  and  vestibular disease.  Clinical
other species such as cats, horses and dogs. Salinomycin
 e au - eduod sp sns
chelates monovalent cations, thereby facilitating cation
 the cranial nerves - and myopathy in dogs, which oth-
transport across cell membranes. This affects the electri-
erwise show  no  clinical  signs of hypothyroidism.
cal potential and energy metabolism, eventually leading
However, the little pathological information existing on
to structural damage to muscle (skeletal and cardiac)
both canine and human pathology is inconsistent,
 and axons. Animals with salinomycin poisoning show
ranging from absent neuropathological changes to
paraparesis to tetraplegia resulting from widespread
 demyelination and axonal degeneration.
primary axonal degeneration in the PNS involving
 Diabetic polyneuropathy occurs in diabetes mellitus
both sensory and motor nerves. Additionally, Wallerian-
in people but also, rarely, in dogs and particularly cats.
type axonal degeneration is present in the dorsal tracts 
 In the latter species, it is clinically characterized by para-
of the spinal cord. Outbreaks in cats have occurred as a
 paresis with a characteristic plantigrade posture of the
result of errors in industrial feed production.
hind limbs. Neuropathological changes in peripheral
Axonal degeneration of peripheral nerves has been
nerves may vary from case to case and include axon
described in vincristine poisoning of cats. Here, focal
degeneration/regeneration and myelin degeneration/
axonal swelling and demyelination occur in motor and
regeneration. These are associated with an endoneurial
sensory nerves. In the more distal portions of the nerves,
microangiopathy.
Wallerian degeneration is observed.
Paraneoplastic neuropathy is a rare complication in
animals with tumors outside of the nervous system
Organophosphate poisoning
(insulinoma, carcinoma, melanoma, lymphoma). The
Axonal degeneration in the distal portions of peripheral
pathogenesis is not clear; presumably there is an immune
 nerves is also a feature of organophosphate poisoning
reaction against tumor antigens, which cross-reacts with
in several animal species. In advanced stages, peripheral
normal peripheral nerve antigens. Morphologically, in
nerves show Schwann cell proliferation with Bingner's
 paraneoplastic neuropathies there is usually a combina-
bands and nerve fiber regeneration. In the PNS, this 
tion of axonal loss and demyelination together with
distal axonopathy produces a clinical picture of polyneu-
reactive changes in the form of Schwann cell and
ropathy in man and animals, in which sensory and
endoneurial  cell  proliferation.  In  hyperinsulinemia
motor disturbances develop in the distal limbs (feet and
associated with islet cell tumors, a widespread necroti-
hands) then progress with time to involve the proximal
zing neuropathy may occur.
limbs (legs and arms).
6.5.2 Metabolic-toxic myopathies
Presumptive toxic polyneuropathies of horses
The range of histopathologic changes in metabolic-
A polyneuropathy in Norwegian horses has been
toxic myopathies is limited and there is no paftern spe-
described in animals on a diet of big bale hay (probably
cific for a toxin or deficiency. The identification of the
bad hay) with symmetrical weakness of the digital exten-
d    s a 
sor muscles. In the sciatic nerve large swollen axons
examination is impossible and, hence, anamnestic data
and distended myelin sheaths with myelinophages were
are crucial. In very acute cases, no gross lesions may be
noted. In chronic cases loss of nerve fibers and fbrosis
seen. A few days after the insult pale, dry streaks are
were present. Swollen axons were also found in the
identifiable in the swollen skeletal muscle. Interfascial
lumbar spinal cord.
edema may be present. In some cases, mineralization is
126
6 Veterinary Neuropathology
seen as chalky deposits. In protracted cases, fibrosis and
Polioencephalomalacia in small animals
muscle atrophy occur.
Microscopically, myofiber degeneration is character-
Auer RN. Hypoglycemic brain damage. Metab Brain Dis 2004;19:
169-175.
ized by paleness, swelling and vacuolation of the cyto-
Frazier K, Hullinger G, Hines M 2nd, Liggett A, Sangster L. 162 cases
plasm. In frank necrosis the typical cross-striations
of aldicarb intoxication in Georgia domestic animals from 1988-
disappear and the cytoplasm acquires a hypereosi-
1998. Vet Hum Toxicol 1999;41:233-235.
nophilic, hyaline and fragmented/flocculated aspect.
Shimada A, Morita T, Ikeda N, Tori S, Haruna A. Hypoglycaemic
 Nuclei are pyknotic and undergo rhexis. Strong varia-
brain lesions in a dog with insulinoma. J Comp Pathol 2000;
tion in myofiber size may be apparent with both swollen
122:67-71.
 and shrunken fibers. Mineralization of myofibers may
Hippocampal necrosis and scierosis
accompany these changes and can be prominent in
Fatzer R, Gandini G, Jaggy A, Doherr M, Vandevelde M. Necrosis of
certain intoxications. Signs of regenerative attempts may
hippocampus and piriform lobe in 38 domestic cats with seizures:
be observed including central position and proliferation
a retrospective study on clinical and pathologic findings. J Vet
of nuclei and increased basophilia of the cytoplasm. In
Intern Med 2000;14:100-104.
the later phase of toxic insult, infltration of phago-
 Kuwabara T, Hasegawa D, Kobayashi M, Fujita M, Orima H. Clinical
cytes and reparative processes (fibrosis) become more
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2010;51:485-490.
apparent.
Pakozdy A, Gruber A, Kneissl S, Leschnik M, Halasz P, Thalhammer
Monophasic lesions (all necrotic
Cmyofibers are
JG. Complex partial cluster seizures in cats with orofacial involve-
in the same phase of degeneration/necrosis) indi-
ment. J Feline Med Surg 201l;13:687-693.
cate acute intoxication or exertional rhabdomyolysis.
Toxins include ionophores (e.g. monensin, salinomycin,
Subcortical and brainstem encephalomalacias
lasalocid, nystatin), Cassia spp (e.g. Cassia occidentalis,
Chang HT, Rumbeiha WK, Patterson JS, Puschner B, Knight AP.
annual plants occurring in the United States) and lichen
horses with nigropallidal encephalomalacia. Vet Pathol 2012;49:
(Xanthoparmelia chlorochroa). Exertional rhabdomy-
398-402.
olysis is frequent in horses and capture myopathy is
Finnie JW. Review of corynetoxins poisoning of livestock, a neuro-
 seen in birds, and involves stress-related shock, meta-
logical disorder produced by a nematode-bacterium complex. Aust
bolic acidosis and hyperthermia.
Vet J 2006;84:271-277.
Polyphasic muscle necrosis is mainly observed in
Malik R, Sibraa D. Thiamine deficiency due to sulphur dioxide pre-
servative in “pet meat” - a case of deja vu. Aust Vet J 2005;83:
vitamin E/selenium deficiency (white muscle disease)
408-411.
in horses, ruminants, pigs and birds. Inadequate intake
Olson EJ, Morales SC, McVey AS, Hayden DW. Putative metronida-
 of vitamin E/selenium results in decreased sequestration
zole neurotoxicosis in a cat. Vet Pathol 2005;42:665-669.
and neutralization of free radicals resulting in mem-
Riet-Correa F Timm CD, Barros SS, Summers BA. Symmetric focal
brane damage and subsequent myofiber necrosis. In
 degeneration in the cerebellar and vestibular nuclei in swine caused
by ingestion of Aeschynorene indica Seeds. Vet Pathol 2003;
white muscle disease, mineralization of necrotic fibers
40:311-316.
may be prominent.
Woodruff BK, Wijdicks EF, Marshall WF Reversible metronidazole-
induced lesions of the cerebellar dentate nuclei. N Engl J Med
2002;346:68-69.
Further reading
Selenium poisoning
General
Casteignau A, Fontan A, Morillo A, Oliveros JA, Segalés J. Clinical,
Bolon B, Butt MT. Fundamental Neuropathology for Pathologists and
Toxicologists. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2011.
toxicosis case in feeder pigs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
2006;53:323-326.
Polioencephalomalacia large animais
Equine leukomalacia
Bourke CA, Colegate SM, Rendell D, Bunker EC, Kuhn RP. Peracute
Caloni F, Cortinovis C. Effects of fusariotoxins in the equine species.
ammonia toxicity: a consideration in the pathogenesis of Phalaris
Vet J 2010;186:157-161.
aquarica “Polioencephalomalacia-like sudden death” poisoning of
sheep and cattle. Aust Vet I 2005;83:168-171.
Enterotoxemia
McKenzie RA, Carmichael AM, Schibrowski ML, Duigan SA, Gibson
 JA, Taylor JD. Sulfur-associated polioencephalomalacia in cattle
Dorca-Arevalo J, Soler-Jover A, Gibert M, Popoff MR, Martin-Satue
grazing plants in the Family Brassicaceae. Aust Vet J 2009;87:
M, Blasi J. Binding of epsilon-toxin from Closridium perfringens
27-32.
in the nervous system. Vet Microbiol 2008;131:14-25.
Sakhaee E, Derakhshanfar A. Polioencephalomalacia associated
Lonchamp E, Dupont JL, Wioland L, Courjaret R, Mbebi-Liegeois C,
with closantel overdosage in a goat. J S Afr Vet Assoc 20l0;81:
Jover E, Doussau F, Popoff MR, Bossu JL, de Barry J, Poulain B.
116-117.
  sn a sr  a sad 
Metabolic-toxic diseases
127
mouse cerebellum and stimulates glutamate release. PLoS One
2010;5.pi:e1 3046.
Metabolic-toxic axonal degenerations
Moxley RA. Edema disease. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
Imlach WL, Finch SC, Dunlop J, Meredith AL, Aldrich RW, Dalziel
2000;16:175- 185.
 JE. The molecular mechanism of ryegrass staggers," a neurological
disorder of K+ channels. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008;327:
657-664.
CO poisoning
Jortner Bs. Mechanisms of toxic injury in the peripheral nervous
Weiss AT, Graf C, Gruber AD, Kohn B. Leukoencephalomalacia and
system: neuropathologic considerations. Toxicol Pathol 2000;28:
laminar neuronal necrosis following smoke inhalation in a dog. Vet
54-69.
Pathol 2011;48:1016-1019.
Riet-Correa F, Barros SS, Mendez MC, Gevehr-Fernandes C, Pereira
 Neto OA, Soares MP, McGavin MD. Axonal degeneration in sheep
caused by the ingestion of Halimiurm brasiliense. J Vet Diagn Invest
Metabolic toxic neuronal degenerations
2009;21:478-486.
Binder EM, Blodgett DJ, Currin JF, Caudell D, Cherney JH, LeRoith
Salvadori C, Cantile C, De Ambrogi G, Arispici M. Degenerative
T. Phalaris arundinacea (reed canarygrass) grass staggers in beef
myelopathy associated with cobalamin deficiency in a cat. I Vet
cattle. J Vet Diagn Invest 2010;22(5):802-805.
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2003;50:292-296.
Bourke CA, Colegate SM, Rendell D, Bunker EC, Kuhn RP. Peracute
ammonia toxicity: a consideration in the pathogenesis of Phalaris
Irradiated feed-induced myelinopathy in cats
aquarica “Polioencephalomalacia-like sudden death" poisoning of
Cassidy IP, Caulfield C, Jones BR, Worrall S, Conlon L, Palmer AC,
sheep and cattle. Aust Vet J 2005;83(3):168-171.
Divers TJ, Cummings JE, de Lahunta A, Hintz HF, Mohammed HO.
Vet Pathol 2007;44:912-916.
Evaluation of the risk of motor neuron disease in horses fed a diet
Caulfield CD, Kelly JP, Jones BR, Worrall S, Conlon L, Palmer AC,
low in vitamin E and high in copper and iron. Am I Vet Res 2006;67: 
120-126.
Cassidy IP. The experimental induction of leukoencephalomyelop-
athy in cats. Vet Pathol 2009;46:1258-1269.
Loretti AP, Colodel EM, Driemeier D, Correa AM, Bangel JJ, Ferreiro
Duncan ID, Brower A, Kondo Y, Curlee JF Schultz RD. Extensive
L. Neurological disorder in dairy cattle associated with consump-
remyelination of the CNS leads to functional recovery. Proc Natl
tion of beer residues contaminated with Aspergillus clavarus. J Vet
Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:6832-6836.
Diagn Invest 2003;15:123-132.
Sabater-Vilar M, Maas RF, De Bosschere H, Ducatelle R, Fink-
s sa sas u a pd ud i s
Toxic spongy degenerations
from feed containing malting residues associated with a lethal neu-
Ecco R, de Barros CS, Graca DL, Gava A. Closantel toxicosis in kid
rotoxicosis in cattle. Mycopathologia 2004;158:419-426.
goats. Vet Rec 2006;159:564-566.
Wiley FE, Twiner MJ, Leighfield TA, Wilde SB, Van Dolah FM, Fischer
JR, Bowerman WW. An extract of Hydrilla verricillata and associ-
Grass sickness
ated epiphytes induces avian vacuolar myelinopathy in laboratory
Edwards SE, Martz KE, Rogge A, Heinrich M. Edaphic and phyto-
mallards. Environ Toxicol 2009;24:362-368.
chermical factors as predictors of Equine Grass Sickness cases in the
UK. Frontiers in Predictive Toxicology 2010; 10.3389/fphar.2010.
Hepatic encephalopathy
00122.
Albrecht J, Zieliniska M, Norenberg MD. Glutamine as a mediator
Hahn CN, Mayhew IG, de Lahunta A. Central neuropathology of
of ammonia neurotoxicity: a critical appraisal. Biochem Pharmacol
equine grass sickness. Acta Neuropathol 2001;102:153-159.
2010;80:1303-1308.
Milne EM, Pirie RS, McGorum BC, Shaw DJ. Evaluation of formalin-
Prakash R, Mullen KD. Mechanisms, diagnosis and management
fixed ileum as the optimum method to diagnose equine dysautono-
of hepatic encephalopathy. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;7:
mia (grass sickness) in simulated intestinal biopsies. J Vet Diagn
515-525.
Invest 2010;22:248-252.
Waggett BE, McGorum BC, Shaw DJ, Pirie RS, MacIntyre N, Wernery
Toxic peripheral neuropathies
U, Milne EM. Evaluation of synaptophysin as an immunohisto-
Domange C, Casteignau A, Collignon G, Pumarola M, Priymenko N.
284-290.
Longitudinal study of Australian stringhalt cases in France. J Anim
Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2010;94:712-720.
Hanche-Olsen S, Teige J, Skaar I, Ihler CF Polyneuropathy associated
Acquired lysosomal storage diseases
with forage sources in Norwegian horses. I Vet Intern Med 2008;22:
Armien AG, Tokarnia CH, Peixoto PV, Frese K. Spontaneous and
178-184.
experimental glycoprotein storage disease of goats induced by
Jortner BS. Mechanisms of toxic injury in the peripheral nervous
Ipormoea carnea subsp fishulosa (Convolvulaceae). Vet Pathol 2007;
system: neuropathologic considerations. Toxicol Pathol 2000;28:
44:170-184.
54-69.
Dantas AF, Riet-Correa F Gardner DR, Medeiros RM, Barros SS,
 Pakozdy A, Challande-Kathman I, Doherr M, Cizinauskas S, Wheeler
Anjos BL, Lucena RB. Swainsonine-induced lysosomal storage
SJ, Oevermann A, Jaggy A. Retrospective study of salinomycin toxi-
disease in goats caused by the ingestion of Turbina cordata in
cosis in 66 cats. Vet Med Int 2010;2010:147142.
Northeastern Brazil. Toxicon 2007;49:111-116.
Van der Linde-Sipman JS, van den Ingh TS, van nes JI, Verhagen H,
Van der Lugt JI, Bastianello SS, van Ederen AM, van Wilpe E.
 Kersten JG,Beynen AC, Plekkringa R. Salinomycin-induced
Cerebellar cortical degeneration in cattle caused by Solanur
polyneuropathy in cats: morphologic and epidemiologic data. Vet
kwebense. Vet J 2010;185:225-227.
Pathol 1999;36:152-156.
128
3 Veterinary Neuropathology
Metabolic peripheral neuropathies
Matabolic-toxic myopathies
Estrella JS, Nelson RN, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, Williams DC,
Barth AT, Kommers GD, Salles MS, Wouters F, de Barros CS. Coffee
 LeCouteur RA, Shelton GD, Mizisin AP. Endoneurial microvascular
Senna (Senna occidentalis) poisoning in cattle in Brazil. Vet Hum
 pathology in feline diabetic neuropathy. Microvasc Res 2008;75:
Toxicol 1994;36:541-545.
403-410.
Dailey RN, Montgomery DL, Ingram IT, Siemion R, Vasquez M,
Mizisin AP, Nelson RW, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, Lecouteur RA,
Raisbeck MF Toxicity of the lichen secondary metabolite (+)-usnic
Williams DC, Burgers ML, Shelton GD. Comparable myelinated
acid in domestic sheep. Vet Pathol 2008;45:19-25.
nerve pathology in feline and human diabetes melltus. Acta
Neuropathol 2007;113:431-442.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
 the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Neoplasia
Nervous system tumors are classified either as primary,
(Table 7.1), realizing nevertheless that prospective
when derived from cells of neuroectodermal origin, or
canine studies are urgently needed to validate such
secondary, when originating from non-neural tumor
extrapolation.
cells, and which subsequently gain access to the nervous
system by different routes. Up to one half of all nervous
7.1 General strategy for diagnosis
system tumors are of primary type. Although primary
of neoplastic lesions
tumors do not spontaneously metastazise outside of the
CNS, some tumors have a tendency for metastasis and
7.1.1 Clinic and diagnostic imaging
dissemination within the CSF pathways (e.g. oligoden-
 In the dog and cat, mass lesions are easily detected by
drogliomas, choroid plexus carcinomas).
MRI, but neuroimaging profles alone can at best provide
 All tumors behave as space-occupying mass lesions,
 only a differential diagnosis of possible tumor types.
usually with secondary manifestations of mechanical
However, because most primary tumors have distin-
 compression including hemorrhages, edema, distur-
guishing features such as breed, age and sites of ana-
bances of CSF circulation (e.g. hydrocephalus), cerebral
tomical localization, integration of such information
midline shifts and herniations. Most tumors also com-
on each tumor together with the imaging profle can
 press or infiltrate with eventual destruction of nervous
 provide a reasonably accurate differential clinical diag-
tissue.
nosis. Clinically, CSF cytological analysis can also be
 Both primary and secondary tumors of the nervous
useful in diagnosis of some tumors. However, a specific
 system occur in all domestic animal species, although
 diagnosis depends finally on histological classification
they are most common and best characterized and
of both tissues and smears obtained from surgical
studied in the dog. Reported incidences of primary
 biopsy or from CT- or MRI-guided stereotactic biopsy
brain tumors in dogs vary up to 1.9% of all tumors.
techniques.
These tumors generally affect adult to old animals, but
there are a few exceptions that tend to occur preferen-
7.1.2 Interpretation of gross findings
tially in young animals (e-g. medulloblastoma, other
primitive neuroectodermal tumors, and ectopic neph-
At necropsy, one is generally confronted with mass
roblastoma). There is an increase in frequency of most
lesions, which are easy to detect when gross examination
tumors with age (particularly after 5 years) and a notably
of the CNS/PNS is performed systematically and then
higher predisposition for glial tumor types (up to 25
correlated with MR images as described in Chapter 1.
times) in some brachycephalic breeds (Boxer, English
 Diffusely growing tumors may not be recognized ini-
 Bulldog, Boston Terrier, etc.) compared with other
 tially but careful evaluation will detect one or more of
breeds.
the features induced by the mass effect. Several gross
 features may help to direct the diagnosis. An overview
biological behaviour strikingly similar to those in people,
of such features and their interpretation is shown in
although their frequencies differ in some types. Because
Fig. 7.1.
of these shared similarities we have applied the latest
human 2007 World Health Organization (WHO) clas-
 A single mass generally suggests a primary CNS
sification and grading system criteria to these tumors
tumor, whereas multiple masses favor a provisional
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
129
130  Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 7.1 Outline of the human 2007 WH0 classification of human nervous system tumors adapted for the histological
dlassification and grading of canine primary nervous system tumors.
Tumors of neuroepithelial tissue
Tumors of cranial and paraspinal nerves
Astrocytomas
· Schwannoma
· Pilocytic astrocytoma
· Neurofibroma
· Gemistocytic astrocytoma
·Perineurioma
- Subependymal giant cel astrocytoma
- Malignant PNST
· Diffuse astrocytoma
Tumors of the meninges
· Anaplastic astrocytoma
Meningiomas
· Glioblastoma
· Transitional
 Gliomatosis cerebri
·Fibrous
Oligodendroglial tumors
·Angiomatous
· Oligodendroglioma
-Psammomatous
· Anaplastic oligodendroglioma
·Meningothelial
Mixed gliomas
- Microcystic
Ependymal tumors
· Chordoid
· Ependymoma
·Atypical
· Cellular
。Papillary
·Papillary
。Malignant
·Clear cell
 Granular cell tumor
Choroid plexus tumors
Mesenchymal tumors
。Papilloma
· Leiomyosarcoma
·Carcinoma
· Hemangiosarcoma
Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial tumors
· Ganglioglioma
Lymphomas and hemopoietic tumors
·B and T cell lymphoma
· Gangliocytoma
·Neurocytoma
·Histiocytic sarcoma
- Paraganglioma
Germ cell tumors
Embryonal tumors
·Germinoma
·Medulloblastoma
·Teratoma
· PNET [Neuroblastoma]
Miscellaneous tumors
· Ectopic neuroblastoma
Metastatic tumors
diagnosis of a metastatic tumor. The intra- or extra-
plexus tumor, meningioma), but some fumors (e.g.
axial site of the tumor provides the first algorithm to
diffuse astrocytoma) diffusely infiltrate and obliterate
be applied. Extra-axial tumors originate from sites on
 the CNS architecture and thus may only be detected
the outer surface of the CNS (e.g. lepto- or pachyme-
by the asymmetry of the cerebral hemispheres found
ninges, nerve roots) whereas an intra-axial location
on transverse sections.
indicates that the tumor has originated from within
· Tumor consistency and color are other features that
the CNS parenchyma.
 may indicate specific tumor types, e.g. a gelatinous
● The specific anatomical location of primary tumors
 and grayish translucent appearance is common in oli-
 may suggest a certain tumor type reflecting their pre-
godendroglioma, while choroid plexus tumors are red
ferred occurrence in specific predilection sites. Such
with a granular roughened texture;  whitish yellow
examples would be intraventricular neoplasms arising
areas of necrosis and variegated hemorrhage are
from the choroid plexus or ependyma (choroid plexus
 expected features of, e.g., high-grade gliomas.
tumors or ependymomas) or meningiomas from the
olfactory bulb.
7.1.3 Diagnosis
· The type of demarcation from adjacent normal tissue
After excluding a metastatic tumor based on multiple
can provide further clues. Primary CNS tumors grow
sites and histological diagnosis, the histological classifi-
in most cases as compact mass lesions (e.g. choroid
cation of primary brain tumors is more challenging.
 Neoplasia
131
Intraaxial:
- Parenchyma: glioma, embryonal
tumors,primary CNS lymphoma, histiocytic 
sarcoma, teratoma,ganglioglioma
DEFINE THE LOCATION
- Choroid pfexus: choroid plexus tumor.
- Ventricles: ependymoma, choroid plexus tumor
 Extraaxial: meningioma, PNSTs, granu lar cell 
tumor, ectopic nephroblastoma, germinoma,
paraganglioma
 Well demarcated: choroid plexus tumor.
 meningioma, oligodendroglioma, ependymoma,
 DEFINE THE DEMARCATION
nephroblastoma 
Poorly delineated: astrocytoma.
oligodendroglioma, embryonal tumors, primary 
CNS lymphoma 
 Soft: ependymoma, oligodendroglioma,
astrocytoma, primary CNS lymphoma, choroid 
plexus tumor , histiocytic sarcoma 
 Gelatinous: oligod endroglioma
DEFINE THE CONSISTENCY
 Brain-like: astrocytoma, embryonal tumors
 Firm/fibrous: meningioma, PNST
 Red areas (hemorrhage): glioblastoma,
 anaplastic oligodendroglioma, ependymo ma,
dhoroid plexus carcinoma 
 DEFINE THE COLOR
 Brain-like: gliomas, embryonal tumors 
Whitish: meningioma, PNST, primary CNS
lymphoma
 Tan: choroid plexus tumor
PRESENCE OF NECROSIS?
 Yes: glioblastoma multiforme, anaplastic
 oligodendroglioma, ependymoma
Confirmation of intraaxial/extraaxial location
 Confimation of primary tumor versus metastatic
Structure and growth pattern
HISTOLOGICAL EXAMINATION
Presence of abnormal vasculature, hemorrhage,
Cellular morphology
Mitotic activity
 Immunohistochemistry 
Fig. 7.1 Strategy for the diagnosis of primary CNS tumors.
132
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
Essentially this still relies on the recognition of the his-
cell-specific antigenic markers (Table 7.2) or less com-
tological similarity of neoplastic cells to either normal
monly by tumor-specific ultrastructural features by
 glial or neuronal cell phenotypes. In many tumors (espe-
TEM. Recent advanced molecular genetic and biology
cially the more malignant grades), this similarity may
not be obvious. Further criteria used include the pat-
 provide a more accurate classification and prognosis
terns of growth and infltration, the formation of sec-
than that from conventional histology. However, such
ondary structures of Scherer, cytological characteristics,
 molecular techniques are not yet available in veterinary
 and abnormal blood vessels or necrosis.
oncology, so here we rely on conventional histological
Confirmation of the histological classification can be
interpretation supported mainly by immunohistochem-
made either by immunohistochemical visualization of
ical techniques.
Table 7.2 Some routine cell-specific antibodies for diagnostic immunohistochemical
confirmation of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded primary nervous system tumors.
TUMOR TYPE
ANTIBODYTO
Gliomas
Astrocytomas
GFAP Vimentin
Oligodendrogliomas
 Olig2, GFAP
Ependymomas
GFAP Vmentin, CK
 Choroid Plexus tumors
CK, GFAP
 Neuronal tumors
Ganglioglioma
SYN, NeuN, NFP GFAP
Gangliocytoma
SYN, NeuN, NFP
Neurocytoma
SYN, Olig2, NeuN
 Paraganglioma
CG, SYN, NFP
Embryonal tumors
Medulloblastoma
SYN, NeuN, GFAP NFP NSE
PNET
SYN, NeuN, GFAP
Tumors of peripheral nerves
Schwannoma
S-100, GFAP Laminin, Collagen IV
Neurofibroma
S-100, Laminin, Collagen IV
Perineurioma
Laminin, TNF Vmentin, S-100
PNST
Vimentin, Collagen IV, Laminin
Meningiomas
CK, Vimentin
 Granular cell tumor
S-100, Ubiquitin, α-1-AT
Mesenchymal tumors
Leiomyosarcoma
Vimentin, SMA
Hemangiosarcoma
Factor VIll, CD31
 Primary lymphomas
B and T cell lymphomas
CD79a, CD3, CD18, CD20
Histiocytic sarcoma
CD1c, CD11b, CD11c, CD18
Gem cell tumors
Germinoma
AFP PLAP c-kit
Teratoma
CK, Vimentin, neuronal panel
Embryonal tumors
Nephroblastoma
WT-1, Vimentin, CK
CK: cytokeratin low and high MW(Lu 5 or AE1/AE3): SYN: synaptophysin: TNF: triple
neurofilament protein; CG: chromogranin A; NSE: neuron specific enolase; c-1-AT: c-1-
antitrypsin; SMA: smooth muscle actin: AFP: alpha fetal protein: PLAP: placental alkaline 
phosphatase; WT-1: Wilms tumor 1 antigen.
Neoplasia  133
 difficult to pinpoint precise margins since they eventu-
7.1.4 Grading
ally obliterate underlying gray and white matter land-
Most human classification and grading systems provide
 marks. Characteristically, they do not invade ventricles.
very reliable and accurate predictive and prognostic
There are three major astrocytoma subtypes: diffuse,
 information resulting in the application of appropriate
anaplastic and glioblastoma (so-called glioblastoma
therapeutic protocols. These systems grade tumors
multiforme (GBM)) in order of increasing malignancy
 grades I-IV. Increased cell density, nuclear atypia, and
cal feafures, e.g. cytological differentiation, necrosis,
increased numbers of normal and abnormal mitotic
mitotic index, cell patterns, neovascularization etc.,
figures each correlate directly with more aggressive
although the relevance of each of these criteria varies
behavior (in people) and are some of the histological
according to the fumor type. Although grading systems
features used for grading. The higher-grade tumors
are being increasingly used, there is still no scientifically
exhibit a highly infiltrative mode of growth and expan-
validated system applicable to animal nervous system
sion. Secondary structures of Scherer comprising tumor
tumors. Many veterinary neuropathologists now classify
cell neuronal satellitosis, perivascular infiltration and
and grade canine nervous system tumors according to
subpial migration and accumulation are also features
the latest human 2007 WHO classification and grading
of higher tumor grades. Glial cell pseudopalisading
system. However, the remarkable prognostic accuracy of
around areas of necrosis and/or microvascular prolifera-
 this proven human system awaits comparable prospec-
tion are exclusively characteristic of the grade IV gliob-
tive studies. Since veterinary neuro-oncologists now
lastoma. Gross features of glioblastoma can include
have neuroimaging (MRl, CT) techniques and stereo-
hemorrhages, cysts and focal yellow-white areas of
tactic brain biopsy devices for in vivo diagnosis of
necrosis. The proliferative index (Pl), as defined by
tumors becoming available, it is hoped that with further
MIB-1 immunoreactivity, ranges from between 5 and
education an accurate standardized grading system for
35% for grades II-IV respectively. Most astrocytomas
such tumors will be developed.
exhibit GFAP immunoreactivity.
7.2 Tumors of neuroepithelial origin
Well circumscribed astrocytomas
7.2.1 Astrocytomas
 Pilocytic astrocytoma ( WHO grade I)
Pilocytic astrocytomas are extremely rare in dogs
General features and subtypes
and are well circumscribed tumors, which on MRI
In dogs, astrocytomas have an overall incidence of
 have T2w hyperintensity and strong contrast enhance-
about 15% of all primary nervous system tumors. They
ment usually with characteristic multiple small cysts.
They occur mainly in the thalamus. Grossly, tumors
breeds (Boxer, Boston Terrier, Bulldog etc.) have a much
are discrete, gray to white, often with macrocysts (Fig.
higher risk of occurrence (up to 25 times greater) than
7.2A). Microscopically, they have low cellularity with a
 other breeds. MRI features are not exclusively diagnos-
bipolar, fibrillary, predominant GFAP-immunoreactive
tic. Some astrocytoma subtypes have also been described
cell but with areas of varying cell density and sometimes
in cats, cattle, horses and pigs. Macroscopically they can
Rosenthal-like fibers (Fig. 7.2B). However, vascular pro-
be large, unilateral, and most subtypes have usually a
liferation and necrosis (both described in human pilo-
preferential anatomical localization and a distinctive
cytic astrocytomas) have not yet been noted in the
histological appearance.
canine tumor. There can be admixed cells with a hyper-
Astrocytomas are a diverse subgroup of gliomas
chromatic and enlarged nuclei. Cysts appear empty but
(the other subgroup being oligodendrogliomas) with
o       o
subtypes that are either well circumscribed (pilocytic,
round cells with fibrillary processes. Mitoses are rare and
 gemistocytic or subependymal giant cell) or more
PI is up to 1%.
commonly a continuum of diffusely infiltrating astro-
cytomas (diffuse, anaplastic astrocytoma, glioblastoma
and gliomatosis cerebri). As a general group astrocyto-
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA)
mas share some common features - their incidence
(WHO grade I)
increases with age, and they generally arise supratentori-
These are rare, well defined, solitary, circumscribed
ally within the white matter of cerebral hemispheres and
 grade I astrocytomas in the cat and dog restricted to
less common caudally in the thalamus, midbrain, brain-
 subependymal locations medially around the lateral
 stem and spinal cord. On cut surface, astrocytomas are
ventricles sometimes with distortion of the third ven-
firmer than normal brain tissue and white, but it can be
tricle. In the dog, SEGA also occur subependymally
134Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.2 Dog. Thalamus. Pilocytic astrocytoma. A: There is a well circumscribed whitish solid mass with multiple empty cysts of varying
size. B: Elongate astrocytoma cells with marked nuclear pleomorphism and fibrillary processes with smaller cells in cyst-like spaces. HE.
with expansile growth into the fourth ventricle. This
secondary intraventricular growth offen results in an 
are of non-contrast-enhancing masses, isointense on
associated obstructive hydrocephalus. Histologically, the
-ns s M asuada A nq se L
discrete mass is composed of gemistocytic, spindle and
gesting intra- and slight peritumoral edema. Canine
ganglioid-like astrocytoma cells in irregular nests sepa-
 gemistocytic astrocytomas have a well defined border,
rated by fibrous tissue. Many cells are large and irregular
 are white to tan and with a roughened cut surface (Fig.
with abundant cytoplasm and prominent nuclei with
 7.3A). They are composed of a distinctive population
some weak patchy GFAP immunoreactivity. Mitoses are
of cells most closely resembling gemistocytic astro-
absent and PI is low (<2%).
cytes with a variable amount of angular-shaped, swollen,
homogeneous and glassy eosinophilic and consist-
Gemistocytic astrocytoma (WHO grade II)
ently strongly GFAP-immunoreactive cytoplasm, with
These uncommon astrocytomas are classified as grade I1
multiple short processes (Fig. 7.3B). Cells have one
and in the dog usually occur in the cerebellum and less 
 or multiple eccentrically located nuclei with a large
Fig. 7.3 Dog. Cerebellum. Gemistocytic astrocytoma. A: In the cerebellar cortex there is a sharply demarcated, tan-colored mass with
focal yellowish areas of necrosis and small cystic spaces. B: Most of the neoplastic cells phenotypically resemble gemistocytes with an 
eccentric nucleus and large amount of homogeneous eosinophilic-staining cytoplasm. No mitotic figures. HE.
Neoplasia  135
 prominent nucleolus. Mitotic activity is minimal and
the PI is <2%.
Diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas
Diffuse astrocytoma ( WHO grade II)
This diffusely infiltrating glioma arises most commonly
nq saqoi eodan ue eu ai u Andns
can occur in the brainstem and spinal cord. On
MRI, diffuse astrocytomas are generally mildly hypoin-
tense on T1W and moderately hyperintense on T2W
images with no or minimal contrast enhancement (Fig.
7.4A). Grossly on transverse sectioning, there is blur-
ring of anatomical boundaries due to the infiltrating
pattern of growth with initial enlargement and eventual
obliteration of normal anatomical gray and white
matter boundaries. Macroscopically, the tumors are
firm and whitish with indistinct borders (Fig. 7.4B).
Microscopically, they are composed of a uniform popu-
lation of infiltrating neoplastic fibrillary astrocytes
 giving the impression of an increased diffuse cellularity
in an otherwise normal brain (Fig. 7.5A). Smears from
stereotactic biopsy characteristically have a dispersed,
elongate, uniform cell population with many refrac-
tile processes (Fig. 7.5E). Cells have elongate, enlarged
hyperchromatic nuclei with scant cytoplasm but whose
fibrillary processes are best visualized by their uniform
and relatively strong GFAP (Fig. 7.5C) and vimentin
immunoreactivity. These tumor cells tend to stream
in parallel alignment along white matter tracts (Fig.
7.5A). Mitotic figures are very rare or absent with
minimal nuclear atypia. Their Pl is about 2-4% (Fig.
7.5D). In genomic DNA extracted from nine canine
grade ll astrocytomas, no TP53 mutations involving
 exons 3-9 were found. This strongly contrasts with anal-
Fig. 7.4 Dog. Diffuse astrocytoma gracde ll. A: MRl. In the left 
ogous human astrocytomas, where there is a frequency
temporal lobe on the T2W image there is mild uniform hyperin-
of about 60%, suggesting that alternative mecha-
tensity characteristic of a grade ll astrocytoma. B: Transverse
nisms of p53 inactivation are present if p53 func-
section through the frontal lobe. There is a whitish, poorly defined
space-occupying mass on the right side with obliteration of
tion contributes significantly to oncogenesis of canine
normal gray and white matter boundaries and a marked left-
astrocytomas.
sided midline shift.
Anaplastic astrocytoma (grade III)
MRI is similar to grade II tumors except that they can
exhibit mild to markedly non-uniform contrast enhance-
and with prominent nucleoli, while their fibrillary
ment or have a ring of peripheral contrast enhance-
cytoplasm is best defined by GFAP or vimentin
ment on T2W images. See MRI Atlas. These tumors
immunoreactivity.
arise preferentially in the same locations as grade II
astrocytomas and appear grossly similar, but are charac-
Glioblastoma (astrocytoma grade IV)
terized histologically by markedly increased cellularity
 Glioblastoma, also known infamously in people as GBM,
 and cell density; cells have minimal cytoplasm on HE
 is common in the dog and like the human counterpart
but show nuclear atypia, mitotic figures and a higher
is the most malignant astrocytoma. The major predilec-
proliferative activity (PI of 5-10%) (Fig. 7.5B). Nuclei
tion sites in the frontal and temporal lobes of the cere-
vary in size and shape, are more hyperchromatic
brum parallel those of lower-grade astrocytomas. On
136  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.5 Dog. Astrocytoma. A: Diffuse astrocytoma, grade Il, with diffuse infiltration with cells with an elongate nucdleus and little
detectable cytoplasm often aligned within white matter tracts. HE. B: Increased cell density, prominent nuclear atypia and some mitotic
figures compatible with an anaplastic astrocytoma, grade Ill. C: Diffuse astrocytoma with strong uniform reactivity of astrocytoma cell
 eanu a o pas  inoge poid eym llapn ese ana    paensa id oi sassd
reactivity. IHC. E: Smear from CT-guided stereobiopsy with elongate cells and prominent refractile processes from a diffuse astrocytoma.
grade ll. HE.
MRI with T1W images, there are central areas of
 spread regional heterogeneity of neoplastic cell types
hypodense necrosis but usually with striking partial or
with considerable nuclear and cytoplasmic pleomor-
complete contrast ring enhancement; T2W images are
 phism including round, fusiform and polymorphic cells.
heterogeneous and hyperintense, with sharp margins
Foci of oligodendroglial-like differentiation can occur
(Fig. 7.6A); and FLAIR images demonstrate considera-
with  interstitial  accumulation  of myxoid material.
ble peritumoral edema. Macroscopically, there are areas
Intravascular fibrin  thrombi may be associated  with
of hemorrhage and necrosis within well defined bound-
areas of confluent, often serpentine, hypoxic necrosis
aries (Fig. 7.6B). Microscopically, there is hypercellular-
and with acute focal hemorrhage (Fig. 7.7A). The micro-
 ity, prominent nuclear atypia, abundant normal and
vascular proliferation is composed of glomeruloid-like
abnormal mitotic figures, and essential features for
clusters and lines of endothelial and smooth muscle cells
 glioblastoma of either microvascular proliferation and/
from paracrine secretion by the tumor of growth factors
 or glial cell pseudopalisading around extensive areas of
VEGF and PDGF respectively. Human histological vari-
coagulative necrosis (Fig. 7.7A,B). There can be wide-
 ants rarely seen in dogs include small cell GBM, astrob-
Neoplasia  137
Fig. 7.6 Dog. Glioblastoma (astrocytoma, grade IV). A: MRl, T2W image. B: Transverse section of the same sharply demarcated mass
jo uoisip bupnun s auu aaissu e si anaun sish Aidua lws pue aheuowu jenog sisonau jo seane ysmoa yi 
the hippocampus, fimbria, midbrain and lateral ventricles.
 lastoma, gliosarcoma and giant cell glioblastoma. Canine
low-grade and high-grade tumors according to the
glioblastomas are strongly immunoreactive to GFAP,
 astrocytoma grading system. An oligodendroglioma in a
IGFBP2 and EGFR but more variable with PDGFR-α
 dog has been described with a similar diffuse infiltrating
antibodies. Extensive peritumoral tumor cell migration
pattern to that of gliomatosis cerebri. Also a cluster of
can lead to the formation of the so-called secondary
this tumor has occurred in young sibling Bearded Collie
 structures of Scherer in grossly normal tissue (see Fig.
 dogs in Switzerland, suggesting a familial inheritance.
 7.10C). The PI can be up to 40% with abundant normal
It is possible that these tumors are another variant of
and abnormal mitotic figures (Fig. 7.7C). Olig2 nuclear
widely disseminated astrocytomas.
immunoreactivity can be up to 40% in each of these
astrocytoma subtypes.
Gliomatosis cerebri
7.2.2 Oligodendroglioma
In people, this neoplasm is defined as a glioma charac-
 Oligodendroglioma is the other glioma subtype, whose
terized by a remarkably widespread, diffuse, uniform,
incidence increases with age, and is the second most
confluent, bilateral growth in at least three cerebral
common primary tumor (20%) in the dog. It also
hemispheric lobes of the brain, but frequently also
occurs infrequently in cattle, cats and horses. Certain
involving the cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord
 brachycephalic dog breeds (Boxers, Bulldogs, Boston
(Fig. 7.8A). Gliomatosis cerebri presents most com-
Terriers etc.) have a remarkably higher susceptibility
monly with an astrocytic phenotype, although in the
than other breeds. Predilection sites of oligodendroglio-
original description in the dog these cells were mistak-
mas are in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes
enly identified as microglial cells and the disease called
and regionally in both white and gray matter around the
microgliomatosis.
lateral  ventricles.  Their overall  frequency decreases
MRI findings are considered to be characteristic of
caudally throughout the brain and spinal cord. Secondary
an astrocytoma but with much more widely dissemi-
 dissemination within the ventricular system, including
nated involvement. See MRI Atlas. The tumor cells have
the central canal, and also local invasion into or
elongate, enlarged, often twisted mildly hyperchromatic
widespread metastases to the meninges is common in
 nuclei without detectable cytoplasm on HE staining and
canine and feline grade Ill tumors. On MRl, oligoden-
with variable cell density (Fig. 7.8B,C). Formation of
drogliomas are moderately hypointense on T1W, and
secondary structures of Scherer are common. Tumor 
 markedly intense on T2W images. Contrast enhance-
cells can be immunoreactive for GFAP, and molecu-
 ment is variable with intense central non-uniform and
lar genetic studies in human tumors confirm their
 peripheral ring enhancement expected in grade III
astrocytic derivation. Gliomatosis cerebri is graded into
tumors (Fig. 7.9A). See MRI Atlas. Focal or regional
138
3Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.7 Dog. Glioblastoma (astrocytoma, grade IV). A: Areas of serpentine necrosis bordered by glial cell pseudopalisading. B: Higher
magnification illustrating the glial pseudopalisading bordering an area of necrosis and also some underlying microvascular proliferation.
Both these features are dharacteristic of glioblastomas. HE. C: The Pl is up to 30% in this glioblastoma compared with the much lower
activity in a grade Il tumor (see Fig. 7.5D).
contrast enhancement is distributed within the tumor
basophilic nucleus, vacuolated or eosinophilic cyto-
 often in a serpentine paftern. Intratumoral hemorrhage
 plasm and a well defined cytoplasmic border (Fig.
is common. Macroscopically,  oligodendogliomas are
7.10A). If formalin fixation is delayed more than a few
well circumscribed, sharply demarcated, usually gelati-
hours, artifactual cellular changes include a nucleus that
nous or translucent, soft gray to white and have a prefer-
is condensed, round, densely basophilic and surrounded
ence for intraventricular growth from their primary site
by empty clear cytoplasm but with prominent cytoplas-
as well expansion to the cortical surface (Fig. 7.9B).
mic membranes producing a halo or “honeycomb"
Generally, there are intratumoral cystic myxoid areas,
effect. There can be different patterns of cells arranged
multifocal hemorrhages and whitish-yellow areas of
in rows, clusters or parallel columns. Smears from
necrosis in the grade 1ll tumors (Fig. 7.9B).
 surgical or stereobiopsy are very characteristic with
Microscopically,  oligodendrogliomas  have  mono-
widely dispersed round cells with an eccentric
morphic densely packed cells with a uniformly round
eosionophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 7.10F). Extracellularly,
Fig. 7.8 Dog. Gliomatosis cerebri. A: Transverse section illustrating the extensive tumor celinfiltration of both hemispheres blurring 
the gray and white matter boundary. B: There is diffuse infiltration of the white matter tracts by elongate neoplastic cells. HE. C: Higher
magnification of the very elongate pleomorphic cells some with a twisted nucleus without obvious cytoplasm. HE.
Neoplasia 139
Fig. 7.9 Dog. Oligodendroglioma. A: MRI findings of T1W post-contrast enhancement with dharacteristic hypointense center and a
bright homogeneous uniform ring-enhancing lesion. B: Transverse section through an oligodendroglioma with well demarcated borders,
a grayish translucent mass with focal yellowish areas of necrosis, mucinous small cysts and multifocal hemorrhage typical of grade Ill
tumors.
there is a bluish-staining myxoid matrix, which can form
with astrocytomas (see above) (Fig. 7.10E). Most oli-
cyst-like lakes throughout the tumor (Fig. 7.10D). All
godendrogliomas are also consistently and strongly
tumors have thin-walled branching capillaries (“chicken-
immunoreactive to PDGFR-α. PI indices (MIB-1) range
wire” vessels) (Fig. 7.10A). In contrast to the grade II
from 5% to beyond 15% in grade II and grade I1I tumors
oligodendrogliomas, classification of grade Ill tumors
respectively. The differential diagnosis needs to exclude
depends on a prominent microvascular proliferation
the very rare canine neurocytoma which can be confi-
(Fig. 7.10B) often in long curving lines, foci of dissecting
 dently done with the latter tumor having positive
or serpentine coagulation necrosis with frequent intra-
immunoreactivity to synaptophysin and negative immu-
vascular thrombosis and multifocal hemorrhage, and
noreactivity to Olig2.
conspicuous abnormal and normal mitotic figures.
Nuclear atypia and multiple large-walled vessels are also
7.2.3 Mixed gliomas (oligoastrocytomas)
features; also secondary structures of Scherer are often
 seen peritumorally in the grade IlI tumors (Fig. 7.10C).
 Mixed gliomas are a type of diffusely infiltrating glioma
From the primary site local expansion with spread into
composed of a mixture of two distinct tumor popula-
the adjacent subarachnoid space in the meninges and
tions consisting usually of both a well differentiated
into the ventricular system can occur. Metastatic dis-
astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma. In the dog they
semination within the CSF pathways is also common in
represent about 5% of all the gliomas. These mixed
grade Ill tumors, particularly on the ependymal floor of
gliomas basically have all of the features of their com-
 the fourth ventricle and within the central canal of the
ponent tumors including MRI profile, adult onset, pre-
spinal cord. In direct contrast to their low incidence in
dilection sites and gross appearance. They can only be
people, over 90% of canine tumors are classified as grade
diagnosed histologically based on their concurrently
IIl tumors. GFAP immunoreactivity can identify reac-
occurring astrocytoma and  oligodendroglial pheno-
tive astrocytes massing at the tumor periphery as well as
 types, which occur in either a diffuse or biphasic (colli-
 trapped in isolation within the tumor. There can also be
sion) growth pattern. Less commonly, there can be an
a small population of minigemistocytes, which are
ependymal component. There are currently opinions
round tumor cells lacking cellular processes but with a
 only on what tumor population fractions are required
GFAP-positive cytoplasm. Oligodendrogliomas are gen-
for this diagnosis but at least 30% of either type makes
erally diagnosed confidently on HE-stained sections.
 this diagnosis appear unequivocal. Thus, mixed gliomas
About 75-100% of tumor cells are also Olig2 immuno-
 can present a clinical diagnostic challenge when only
 reactive, although this antibody can also immunoreact 
 needle biopsy sampled tissue is evaluated. In the most
140  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.10 Dog. Oligodendroglioma. A: Histological features of a grade Il oligodendroglioma with uninterrupted monotonous sheets
of tumor cells with a round uniform nucleus, variable amount of faintly staining or vacuolated cytoplasm, sharp cytoplasmic border,
thin-walled capillaries ("chicken-wire" vessels) and interstitial accumulation of blue myxoid-staining exudate. B: Grade Ill oligodendro-
glioma with prominent microvascular proliferation, densely packed cells with nuclear atypia. C: Structures of Scherer in an oligoden-
droglioma with neoplastic cell infiltrates around neurons (tumor satellitosis) and perivascular invasion. These are characteristic features
of high-grade infiltrating gliomas. D: Mucinous interstitial material which accumulates into cystic lakes in oligodendrogliomas but also
can occur in astrocytomas. E: Olig2 nuclear immunoreactivity in an oligodendroglioma of about 60% in this tumor. IHC. F: Smear from
CT-guided stereobiopsy of an oligodendroglioma with dispersed round cells with a basophilic nudleus and eccentric homogeneous
eosinophilic-staining cytoplasm. HE.
common diffuse form, the astrocytoma is usually a
 cal distinction between glioblastoma and anaplastic
fibrillary or less often a gemistocytic subtype and both
mixed gliomas.
are strongly immunoreactive to GFAP antibody. Mitotic
figures are rare, there is minimal cell pleomorphism and
7.2.4 Ependymoma
Pl is less than 2%, which together attracts a grade II
Ependymomas arise from the ependymal lining cells of
classification. However, with anaplastic mixed gliomas,
the ventricular system and are comprised of neoplastic
in which there is nuclear atypia, cellular pleomorphism,
ependymal cells usually as a supra- or subtentorial
increased cellularity, mitotic figures and often microvas-
expansile mass within the lateral, third or fourth ventri-
cular proliferation, the differential diagnosis must
dle in the dog. Ependymomas are reported also in the
include a glioblastoma. Differences in molecular genet-
 cat, horse and cattle. Depending on their size and loca-
ics, such as 1p19q deletion in oligodendrogliomas, may
tion, obstructive hydrocephalus and ventricular dis-
 be a more reliable guide in the future than any histologi-
 placement may result. They have a very low frequency
Neoplasia  141
of about 2% of all primary canine tumors. Their MRI
 profile is mildly hypointense on T1W, while T2W images
are moderate to markedly hyperintense with intense
heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Macroscopically
they are large, well demarcated, soff, tan, intraventricu-
lar masses (Fig. 7.1lA) sometimes with a granular
texture to the cut surface in the papillary subtype (Fig.
7.11B). There can also be focal hemorrhage, white to
yellow areas of necrosis, and fluid-filled cysts. Invasion
of and extension within CSF pathways or meninges
may occur. Histologically, the monomorphic cells have
round to oval nuclei with fine granular chromatin and
 a prominent nucleolus. A key feature is the formation
of perivascular pseudorosettes around blood vessels
with a characteristic nuclear-free perivascular zone,
which is GFAP immunoreactive. Occasionally, there can
be ependymal rosettes with a single layer of ependy-
moma cells lining a central lumen. In the dog there are
three main histological subtype patterns:
· The papillary subtype is formed of finger-like or
papilliform processes lined on their outer surface by
ependymal cells anchored to the central blood vessel
by strongly GFAP-immunoreactive fibrillary pro-
cesses (Fig. 7.12A).
+ The most frequent cellular subtype has round to elon-
 gate cells with dense monomorphic cellularity and
nuclei-free perivascular spaces (Fig. 7.12B). Areas of
necrosis without peudopalisading can occur.
Fig. 7.11 Dog. Ependymoma. A: Cellular ependymoma occupy-
+ The clear cell ependymoma subtype occurs in the
ing most of the fourth ventridle. B: Papillary ependymoma pro-
lateral ventricle, where it forms oligodendroglial-
like cells with round nuclei, clear empty perinuclear
truding into the third ventricle and with a granular papilliform
appearance on cut surface.
halos and well defined cytoplasmic borders, but with
Fig. 7.12 Dog. Ependymoma. A: Papillary ependymoma subtype with characteristic papilliform pattern with tumor cells supported by
a gliofibrillary stroma around a central vascular core. HE. B: Cellular ependymoma with cells interspersed between blood vessels, which
sometimes have cell-free clear zones. HE. C: Clear cell ependymoma with periventricular neoplastic cells, which have round nuclei.
intermediate filaments. Electronmicrograph (courtesy of Dr. A Traslavina).
142
2Veterinary Neuropathology
GFAP-immunoreactive eosinophilic material eccen-
hydrocephalus and hydromyelia depends largely on the
trically placed in the cytoplasm (Fig. 7.12C). This
site and size of the tumor irrespective of the histological
tumor subtype is best differentiated from an oli-
grade. For a provisional clinical diagnosis, analysis of
godendroglioma by the GFAP cytoplasmic positivity
 r sns  pe d n r 
and on TEM by the intercellular zona occludens
grade I have a maximum protein concentration of less
bridging between cells (Fig. 7.12D), aggregates of
than 80 mg/dl compared with a minimum of 108 mg/dl
intermediate GFAP-immunoreactive filaments and
for grade Il1 CPC. Likewise critical CSF cytological eval-
microvilli anchored by blepharoblasts.
uation has shown that at least 47% of carcinomas have
exfoliated tumor cells not present with papillomas (Fig.
7.2.5 Choroid plexus tumors (papillomas and
7.14D). A provisional clinical tumor classification and
carcinomas)
grade can be then confirmed by histological examina-
Choroid plexus tumors (CPT) are intraventricular neo-
tion of highly characteristic smears and tissue from a
plasms arising from the epithelium of the choroid plexus
surgical or stereotactically derived biopsy (Fig. 7.14B).
in the lateral, third and fourth ventricles. In the dog, they
Macroscopically, CPP are granular, rough textured,
comprise about 7% of all primary tumors and have been
 circumscribed gray to reddish masses, well delineated
documented sporadically in the horse and cow. Most
from the ventricular wall, while CPC additionally can
CPT occur in middle-aged dogs (median 6 years) with
 have areas of necrosis and focal hemorrhage and can be
a breed predilection in the Golden Retriever. There is a
infiltrative and adhered to the adjacent brain (Fig.
higher frequency of carcinomas (CPC) than papillomas
7.13B). Primary CPC in the brain also have a predilec-
(CPP). Most tumors occur in the fourth ventricle with
tion for metastases down the length of the spinal cord
a decreasing incidence rostrally in the third and lateral
meninges or over the cerebral convexities (Fig. 7.13C,D).
ventricles. Extrusive unilateral growth through the
Microscopically, CPP grade I recapitulate normal
lateral aperture of the fourth ventricle is common. On
choroid plexus with papilliform fronds, with a dense
MR1, CPT may be hypo-, iso- or hyperintense on T1W
connective tissue core around a central vessel, and
images and generally hyperintense onT2W images. They
covered by a single layer of cuboidal to columnar neo-
are generally intensely and uniformly strongly contrast-
plastic epithelium (Fig. 7.14A). Mitotic figures are rare
enhancing as are the intraventricular and subarach-
and the PI is less than 1%. No canine CPT with the
noid metastases characteristic of carcinomas (Fig.
characteristic features for the atypical human WHO
7.13A,B,C,D). Development of secondary obstructive
 grade I classification have been identified to date. CPC
Fig. 7.13 Dog. Choroid plexus tumors. A: MRI illustrating T1 W post-contrast imaging of a choroid plexus carcinoma within the fourth
of the parenchyma around the lateral aperture of the fourth ventricle. C: Spinal cord. Extensive subarachnoid metastases with local
cord invasion from this carcinoma and some cyst-like structures. D: Ventral view of the brain from this tumor with extraventricular
growth and numerous subarachnoid metastases on the basilar area and scattered randomly on the temporal lobes.
Neoplasia  143
Fig. 7.14 Dog. Choroid plexus tumors. A: Comparison of the similar histology of the normal choroid plexus (right side) with that of
leauda jo dn bud s! aaui apuan qunoj au u ewoupien snxald piooup e jo Asdoiq ieibins :g 3h 'ljal ay uo ewoded e
cells, mitotic figures >2 per 400X HPF and some cell sheeting. HE. C: Low and high Mw (Lu5) cytokeratin immunoreactivity in a dhoroid
plexus papilloma. IHC. D: Neoplastic epithelial cells from a cytospin preparation of CSF from a choroid plexus carcinoma. Wright's stain.
 pilocytic-like or fibrillary-like astrocytoma cell compo-
10 high-power fields (HPF)), nuclear atypia, increased
 nent admixed with the neoplastic ganglion-like cells
cell density, focal loss of papillary formation with cell
and usually with multiple cyst formation. Neurons are
sheeting, necrosis and increased layering of epithelium
immunoreactive for common neuronal markers synap-
(Fig. 7.14B). Aggressive local brain invasion is dramatic
tophysin, NeuN and neuroflament proteins, while the
but is not included in the 2007 WHO criteria for either
glial component is GFAP immunoreactive. Mitotic
a grade II or Ill classification. CPT can be further defined
figures are rare and the Pl is up to 2%.
by the immunoreactivity of their epithelium to CK
(Lu-5) (Fig. 7.14C), E-cadherin and variably and focally
Neurocytoma
to GFAP, while their connective tissue core is vimentin
This is a rare tumor in people, and only one case has
positive.
been reported in the dog. Central neurocytomas occur
mainly in the lateral or third ventricle with an intrapa-
7.2.6 Neuronal and mixed neuronal-glial
renchymal component, occur in young adults and are
tumors
comprised of round isomorphous cells with expressed
Ganglioglioma and gangliocytoma
neuronal antigenic differentiation. As a result of fixation
These are both well differentiated, slow growing,
artifact, their cytological characteristics can appear like
extremely rare tumors in dogs and cats, comprised of
oligodendrogliomas or clear cell ependymomas from
mature ganglionic-like multipolar neurons (gangliocy-
which they can be differentiated by their strong diffuse
 toma) or also mixed with a neoplastic glial cells (gang-
immunoreactivity to synaptophysin and NeuN while
lioglioma). Less well differentiated cellular blast forms
being consistently immunonegative for Olig2 and GFAP
are described in younger animals. Their histogenesis
respectively.
remains unresolved. Most have occurred in the thalamus
 Paraganglioma
with extension rostrally. Macroscopically, they are poorly
 defined often with intratumoral cyst formation.
Paraganglioma of the CNS in the dog generally occur
 Histologically, they are composed of increased num-
as well defined intradural tumors within the spinal cord
bers of scattered pleomorphic neurons with bizarre or
 presumed to arise from neural crest cell derivatives asso-
binucleate forms, marginated or irregularly dispersed
ciated with regional autonomic nerves and blood vessels.
Nissl substance, and clusters in abnormal locations.
 In the PNS, these tumors occur in autonomic ganglia as
Gangliogliomas have an increased cell density from a
well as in sites such as the carotid body (chemodectoma)
144Veterinary Neuropathology
stroma. HE. B: The supporting fibrovascular stroma contains the cells within islands or nests. Reticulin silver stain. C: Strong cytoplasmic
immunoreactivity to chromogranin (illustrated) and to synaptophysin is expected in most cells. IHC.
and adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma). Micro-
7.2.7 Embryonal tumors
scopically, the neoplastic chief cells form typical neu-
Medulloblastoma
roendocrine cell nests or lobules separated by a delicate
fbrovascular stroma and surrounded by an outer layer
Medulloblastomas are rare malignant embryonal
of sustentacular cells (Fig. 7.15A,B). The predominant
 tumors of the cerebellum with a predilection for young
chief cells are round to polygonal with round nuclei
animals and with predominant neuronal differentia-
in a finely granular wispy cytoplasm. They are strongly
tion. They have been reported in the dog, cat, cow and
immunoreactive for chromogranin A and B, synap-
pig. Twin calves at birth have each been reported
tophysin and TNF (Fig. 7.15C). There is a variable posi-
with medulloblastomas. Macroscopically, the tumors
tive immunoreactivity of the peripheral sustentacular  are large, fleshy, soff, gray well circumscribed, offen
cells to S-100. A reticulin stain distinctively outlines 
 located midline in the vermis and can secondarily invade
the stromal component around each of the cell nests 
the fourth ventricle and lateral  cerebellar hemi-
(Fig. 7.15B). Mitotic activity is very low and the P1 less 
spheric lobes (Fig. 7.16A). See MR1 Atlas. Micro-
than 1%.
 scopically, medulloblastomas are densely cellular, offen
Fig. 7.16 Neonatal calf. Cerebellum. Medulloblastoma. A: The midline vermal location and subsequent growth with destruction of
much of the cerebellum and intraventricular spread of a medulloblastoma. B and C: These tumors are characterized by intense basophilic
staining of the nuclei of the small elongate or round cells hence their name as "small blue tumors". HE.
Neoplasia  145
in sheets with ovoid, elongate to round deeply basophilic
Schwann cells, perineurial cells or fibroblasts. Hence,
hyperchromatic nuclei and  with minimal  cytoplasm
benign PNSTs are more accurately further divided
(so-called “small blue tumors") (Fig. 7.16B,C). Homer-
according to their cell of origin by immunochemistry or
Wright (neuroblastic) rosettes are sometimes found.
ultrastructural evaluation.
Mitotic figures are common. Expansion into adjacent
folia is common  with strikingly cell dense subpial,
7.3.1 Benign PNST
leptomeningeal and subependymal infiltration. Other
histological subtypes in animals include anaplastic
Schwannoma
medulloblastoma, nodular patterns with astrocytic
 These are benign slow-growing, encapsulated tumors
islands (Fig. 7.16B) or with myogenic differentiation.
within peripheral nerves that arise from Schwann cells.
Immunoreactivity for NSE, synaptophysin, chrom-
In the dog, most occur in the spinal nerve roots of
 ogranin A and B, and/or TNF is confirmation of their
 the brachial plexus with much lower frequency within
predominant neuronal differentiation. In the nodular
the cranial nerve roots V and Vlll and the sciatic nerve
form GFAP immunoreactivity can be demonstrated
plexus (Fig. 7.17A,B,C). Their occurrence increases with
around neuronal tumor nodules.
 age with an overall incidence of about 5%. Schwannomas
commonly expand by infiltration centripetally within
Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET)
 the nerve roots, non-invasively displacing and com-
pressing the spinal cord (Fig. 7.17A,B). They can also
Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (neuroblastomas)
spread centrifugally away from their primary site micro-
are found in mostly young animals, are extremely rare
scopically. Schwannomas are firm with a rubbery texture,
and comprised of poorly differentiated neuroepithelial
 cells often with multiple divergence along neuronal,
circumscribed, well encapsulated, smooth-surfaced,hard,
astrocytic and ependymal cell lines. Some may be so
whitish-gray nodular masses and usually found associ-
ated with a peripheral nerve (Fig. 7.17A,B,C). They can
undifferentiated that they are immunonegative to all
be molded into a characteristic dumbbell shape as
conventional antigenic markers. They are considered the
the affected nerve is compressed while traversing the
 supratentorial equivalent of medulloblastomas though
intervertebral foramina (Fig. 7.17A). Schwannomas can
less well differentiated. They occur in the dog, cattle and
occur in subcutaneous sites. On MRI, tumors are isoin-
horse. They can be large, fleshy, soft, well demarcated,
tense on T1W and hyperintense on T2W images and
whitish, supratentorial masses with variable necrosis
many lesions have heterogeneous contrast enhance-
and hemorrhage. The cells have small uniform elongate
ment. See MRI Atlas.
to ovoid hyperchromatic, basophilic dark blue nuclei
Two histological types of biphasic cell patterns can be
with little definable cytoplasm and poorly defined or
found within schwannomas:
absent cytoplasmic borders (Fig. 7.16C). True neurob-
lastic Homer-Wright (HW) rosettes are specifically
Antoni type A: the most common with compact, long,
diagnostic but are rare. Mitotic figures are common, and
bipolar spindle cells with tapering ends forming whorls
the Pl can be up to 30%. Immunoreactivity for many
or bundles intersecting at various angles, an elongate
neuronal and glial cell antigenic markers is highly vari-
ovoid nucleus, poorly defined cytoplasm, and with
able and depends on the degree of differentiation. In
variable amount of extracellular collagen (Fig. 7.18A).
animals because of the relatively few cases, neuroblasto-
Rarely in dogs there is a palisading effect with parallel
mas are currently classified depending on their location
arrangement of nuclei to form either a herring-bone
and/or histologic appearance as:
pattern or in bundles to form Verocay bodies;
+ olfactory neuroblastoma - arise in the olfactory neu-
· Antoni type B: this is much less common with
roepithelium of nasal cavity and HW rosettes and
marked cell pleomorphism with plump or stellate
perivascular pseudorosettes are common;
cells embedded in low density in a fine eosinophilic
● cerebral neuroblastoma - found mainly in the fron-
lacy matrix.
toparietal lobes of the cerebral hemispheres.
Other histological features include acute necrosis, acute
7.3 Tumors of cranial and spinal nerves
or chronic hemorrhage, foci of cartilage or osteoid, col-
lagenous or mucoid-staining matrix, often with multifo-
In the peripheral nerves, tumors arise within the nerve
cal perivascular lymphoplasmacytic cell infiltrates. Most
sheaths (peripheral nerve sheath tumors, PNST) from
cellular schwannomas are comprised of just the Antoni
one or more populations of endogenous cells, including
type A pafttern with marked hypercellularity and nuclear
146  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.17 Dog. Schwannoma of the brachial plexus. A: There are multiple spinal nerves (C7-T1), which are thickened by and contain
nodular masses, which extend both centripetally into the intervertebral foramen and centrifugally into the lower spinal nerve branches.
B: Spinal cord segment C7 with neoplastic infiltration of the left ventral nerve roots by this schwannoma and then subdural growth
compressing the spinal cord. C: Dog. There is a large bulging but contained schwannoma of the trigeminal nerve root.
atypia. A melanocytic variant can occur in the skin not
Without immunocytochemical or ultrastructural con-
to be confused with a melanoma. A diagnosis of schwan-
firmation of a basal lamina around each of the neoplas-
noma can be confirmed by immunoreactivity to laminin
tic Schwann cells, the diagnosis of either a benign or
 or collagen IV both of which strongly and uniformly
malignant PNST implies a probable origin from an
delineate the basal lamina outside of the cytoplasmic
endoneurial or epineurial fibroblast. Mitotic figures are
membrane of each neoplastic Schwann cell (Fig. 7.18C).
minimal in schwannomas.
Up to 30% of tumors can have GFAP and sometimes
 S-100 immunoreactivity, though the latter is much less
Neurofibroma
consistent than in human schwannomas. Ultrastruc-
 Neurofibromas are much less common in the dog and
turally, a continuous or segmented basal lamina can 
1 are intraneural encapsulated tumors or skin nodules
be demonstrated outside the cytoplasmic membrane.
 consisting of different mixtures of cell types, which may
leodia pue jpnu aiehuoa ym slan padeus-apuids po pasuduon ane sioum asau Ajejhojoish :y ewouuemus boa st'e b
cytoplasmic processes, which form patterns of intersecting bundles, streams or whorls. B: Dog. Neurofibroma. These tumors have very
low cell density forming spindle-shaped elongate cells (of Schwann or fibroblast cell origin) with abundant collagen arranged isomor
phically. C: Immunoreactivity to laminin in the pattern of each cell bordered by a thin lamina is confirmation of a schwannoma. IHC.
Neoplasia  147
include neoplastic Schwann cells, perineurial cells and/
processes were connected by junctional complexes and
or least commonly fibroblasts. They can be found in the
surrounded by a continuous basal lamina.
same locations as schwannomas but more commonly as
a circumscribed mass in other individual cranial or
7.3.2 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath
 spinal nerves.
tumors (MPNST)
Histologically they are composed of cells with thin
elongate wavy nuclei and fibrillary processes. They are
A malignant PNST is usually defined as a tumor with
d es e    s 
nerve sheath differentiation and neoplastic cell invasion
within a mucoid or eosinophilic matrix and produce
beyond the confines of the epineurium. Grossly, these
tumors lack an epineural tumor capsule and may aggres-
variable amounts of stromal collagen (Fig. 7.18B).
 Immunoreactivity to S-100 and laminin is patchy or
sively invade the surrounding structures. Foci of hemor-
 absent depending on their Schwann cell content.
rhage and necrosis are common. Intradural tumors may
In mature cattle, similar tumors can occur in multiple
show brain or spinal cord invasion. Histologically,
 sites (brachial plexus, intercostal nerves, tongue, cardiac
MPNSTs vary widely in appearance. They originate
muscle and other spinal nerve roots) and are classified
within nerve fascicles but generally invade the surround-
simplistically as benign neurofibromatosis or multiple
ing structures. Mitotic figures are common in malignant
PNST.
PNST with a PI of up to 6%.
Perineurioma
7.4 Tumors of the meninges
 The canine perineurioma is an exceedingly rare tumor,
which probably has previously been misdiagnosed as
7.4.1 Meningioma
canine local hypertrophic neuropathy. An intraneural
Meningiomas are probably derived from cells of either
 perineurioma caused focal cylindrical unilateral thick-
 the leptomeninges or from various cell types forming
 ening in an L5-6 spinal nerve root in a middle-aged dog
arachnoid granulations. They are the most common
with progressive unilateral paresis. MRI revealed pro-
 intracranial and intraspinal primary CNS tumor in both
found ipsilateral muscle atrophy and thickening of the
dogs (40% of all primary tumors) and cats, and are
 nerve roots. Histologically there were distended fascicles
reported sporadically in horses, cattle and sheep. In dogs
due to widely separated axons surrounded by concentric
and cats, there is an increasing frequency with age.
lamellations of processes formed by neoplastic perineu-
Golden Retriever and Boxer breed dogs tend to be
rioma cells in a myxoid stroma (Fig. 7.19). These cells,
most susceptible. As in people there is a strikingly
being modified Schwann cells, were strongly immuno-
decreasing incidence in their localization from the olfac-
reactive for laminin (Fig. 7.19). Ultrastructurally, the
tory bulbs caudally, which correlates directly with the
decreasing density of arachnoid villi. Canine menigi-
omas are most common over the cerebral convexity, less
 so parasagitally and intraventricularly and intraorbitally,
but can also form plaque-like lesions from the basilar
meninges and dura mater. Cats can have multiple well
 demarcated tumors of varying size usually restricted to
the cerebral convexity. MRI characteristics include T1 W
iso- to hyperintense profiles, while contrast enhance-
ment on TiW images is always strong and in either
hetero- or homogeneous patterns, and most tumors
have sharply defined borders (Fig. 7.20A). On FLAIR
sequences, either peritumoral or more diffuse intersti-
tial edema is characteristic in surrounding white matter.
On MRI, the intradural extramedullary masses were
strongly contrast enhancing many with so-called dural
tails (Fig. 7.20A). See MRI Atlas.
Macroscopically
 canine meningiomas are well
 defined, lobulated, firm, often granular, white to tan-
Fig. 7.19 Immunoreactivity to laminin in the concentric pattern
colored masses with a broad-based attachment to the
formed by neoplastic perineurioma cells of Schwann cell deriva-
meninges (Fig. 7.2oB). Supratentorial meningiomas
tion confirms a diagnosis of perineurioma. IHC.
are more common over t
 the meningeal-covered
148
3 Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 7.20 Dog. Meningioma. A: MRl of fairly homogeneous uniform T1 W post-contrast enhancement on a broad meningeal base is
highly suggestive of a meningioma. B: Transverse slice from the tumor in A with a meningioma adhered to the ventral left side of the
brainstem. C: Smear from CT-guided stereobiopsy of a canine meningioma. Round to elongate cells with some with intranuclear cyto-
plasmic evaginations and longitudinal nudear folds. HE
convexities than those in basilar or parasagittal sites.
Histologically, because of their striking gross and
microscopical similarities to human tumors, canine
 sion. In the basilar meninges, predilection sites are the
 meningiomas are currently classified and graded by
suprasellar meninges, while subtentorially plaque-like 
criteria of the 2007 human WHO system. Grade I
or globular masses can expand dorsally into the brain
tumors exhibit a diverse array of subtypes histologi-
stem. Intra-axial meningiomas induce extensive peritu-
cally, although this does not reflect their common clini-
moral vasogenic edema. In the cat, meningiomas are
cal behavior, while grade 1l atypical and grade II1
usually supratentorial, globular, well defined, hard,
malignant tumors have fewer histologically classified
solid, yellow-gray, intra-axial masses, which expand by
categories.
compression and which can occur in varying sizes
Meningiomas are the most common primary CNS
simultaneously in multiple sites. Uncommonly menin-
tumor in the spinal canal of dogs. Most occur from C1-4
 giomas, arising from the telea choroidea of the choroid
cord segments and decrease in frequency caudally These
plexus, develop in the lateral or fourth ventricles.
 tumors are much less amenable to the well recognized
Cytological evaluation of smear preparations from
histological classification of intracranial meningiomas
biopsy techniques also has proved to be diagnostically
because of their histological diversity. Most tumors in
very accurate for meningiomas irrespective of histologi-
 the cervical cord are grade I while those more caudally
cal classification (Fig. 7.20C).
 are grade I1. For a detailed histological classification of
Neoplasia  149
Fig. 7.21 Dog and cat. Meningioma. Some common histologic subtypes grade I. A: Transitional. B: Meningothelial. C: Psammomatous.
D: Fibrous. E: Microcystic. F: Chordoid grade Il. G: Transitional meningioma with focal polymorphonuclear cell accumulations. H: Feline
meningioma with whorls, cholesterol clefts, mineralization and fibrous spindle cell population
these tumors the reader is referred to the human 2007
 psammomatous - large numbers of psammoma
WHO system.
bodies (Fig. 7.21C);
+ fibrous - streams of elongate cells with prominent
Grade I meningiomas
extracellular collagen fibers (Fig. 7.21D);
With meningiomas there is a very diverse array of his-
angiomatous - dominant vascular component;
tological subtypes which is often complicated by differ-
 microcystic - widespread intracellular and interstitial
ent patterns occurring within one tumor. Tumors are
vacuolation (Fig. 7.21E).
therefore classified by their predominant histological
pattern.
Grade Il meningiomas
 The most common histologic subtypes in dogs are:
Histological canine subtypes identified include:
● transitional - common with islands or nests in whorls
· chordoid - cords or columns of eosinophilic vacu-
or crescents (Fig. 7.21A) and not infrequently with
 olated cells in a mucoid basophilic matrix (Fig. 7.21F);
focal accumulations of polymorphonuclear leuko-
+ atypical - with nuclear atypia, areas of necrosis, sheet-
cytes (Fig. 7.21G);
like patterns of cells, more than 4 mitotic figures per
· meningothelial - common with sheets of cells with no
10 HPF (400X) and increased cellular density with
underlying pattern (Fig. 7.21B);
smaller cells.
150  Veterinary Neuropathology
Grade Ill meningiomas
mineralization, often prominent necrosis, some clusters
of cholesterol cleft-like crystals but few psammoma
These tumors are classified as:
bodies (Fig. 7.21H). Their lack of nuclear atypia and
mitotic figures, relative uniform cell type and density
· malignant - characterized by mitotic figures >20
 and benign behavior are most consistent with a grade
per 10 HPF (400X) and with extreme anaplastic
I tumor.
cytological features compared  with the atypical
subtype;
+ papillary subtype - distinctive but rare in the dog.
7.4.2 Granuiar cell tumor
Granular cell tumors (GCT) in the dog are of uncer-
tain histogenesis; in the CNS they occur in the neu-
Diagnosis
rohypophysis of the pituitary gland, combined with
 In human meningiomas, immunoreactivity to epithelial
meningiomas, or as primary monomorphic tumors
membrane antigen (EMA) is found in the vast majority
mainly superficially over the cerebral hemispheres. In
of meningiomas and considered a reliable antigenic
humans, GCT are described concurrently within astro-
diagnostic marker but unfortunately this antigen is not
cytomas and oligodendrogliomas. Grossly, most canine
expressed in dogs. Canine meningiomas are strongly
tumors occur in meningeal sites diffusely over the cer-
and uniformly immunoreactive for vimentin and some
ebral convexities, intra-axially within the frontal lobe
express focal reactivity to CK (Lu-5). However, the most
and infrequently within the pituitary gland as focal
reliable confirmation of a diagnosis of a canine menin-
mass lesions. Exclusive involvement of lumbar spinal
gioma still relies on TEM with the highly distinctive and
nerves has been reported. The GCT profile on MRI
 consistent features of interdigitating cytoplasmic mem-
is distinctive and diagnostically exclusive with robust
 branes with normal and abnormal gap and desmosomal
P s M pe Mi oq uo ad
 junctions. Early loss of tumor suppressor genes NF2,
with TiW strong uniform contrast enhancement (Fig.
4.1B and TSLC1 is a frequent occurrence in canine men-
 7.22A). There is usually a broad-based meningeal
ingiomas. Exonic mutational frequency of the TP53
attachment. Grossly, GCT are either firm, well demar-
 gene is only 3.0%.
cated, non-encapsulated lesions or involve thickened
Histologically, in striking contrast to the dog, all cat
 meninges. Microscopically, solid sheets of the large
meningiomas have a remarkably consistent and uniform
 polygonal granule cells have an eccentrically placed
histological pattern, with prominent whorling of elon-
 nucleus with a very granular, eosinophilic, abundant
gate cells in a collagen-rich matrix rather similar to a
 cytoplasm containing distinctive periodic acid-Schiff
fibrous meningioma, elongate linear patterns of focal
(PAS) positivity resistant to diastase digestion (Fig.
Fig. 7.22 Dog. Granular cell tumor. A: MRI findings of a broad meningeal-based tumor with T1 W post-contrast enhancement. B: Some
of these tumors have a concurrent meningioma component. C: Granular cell tumors have diastase-resistant PAS staining. D: This tumor
can be diagnosed by the characteristic granular cells in CSF cytological analysis or from biopsy smears as large round cells with an
eccentric nucleus and intensely eosinophilic and granular cytoplasmic content
Neoplasia 151
Fig. 7.23 Dog. Lymphoma. A: Primary CNS lymphoma as a single mass lesion without any extraneural involvement. B: Histologically.
the cells are either lymphoblastic or more cytologically mature lymphocytes and dharacterized by extensive individual necrosis, high
mitotic rate and spread by perivascular infiltration. C: Endotheliotrophic (angiocentric) lymphoma with intravascular accumulation and
thrombosis resulting in secondary infarction.
7.22B,C). The characteristic cells are readily identi-
spinal cord. Pituitary gland involvement is not uncom-
fied in smears from stereotactic-guided biopsy tissue
mon. On MRl, most primary lesions are either iso-
and from CSF cytological preparations (Fig. 7.22D).
or hypointense on unenhanced T1W images, mildly
The cells are S-100, ubiquitin and α-1-antitrypsin
s    s   n
immunoreactive but are immunonegative for GFAP
peritumoral edema. See MRI Atlas. Macroscopically,
 and routine canine-specific leukocyte and macrophage 
 they are grayish, soft and poorly defined and can have
 markers. Ultrastructurally, the granules appear to be
 areas of whitish yellow necrosis (Fig. 7.23A). Microscopi-
derived from autophagic lysosomes irrespective of their
cally, lymphomas form dense sheets of cells, which at
varied tissue location.
their periphery-characteristically expand from neoplas-
tic perivascular infiltration (Fig 7.23B). Concentric
bands of reticulin within angiocentric infiltrates are
7.4.3 Mesenchymal tumors
highly suggestive of lymphoma. Intratumoral necrosis is
Primary mesenchymal tumors of the CNS are rare in
 common. The nuclei are large, round to angular, densely
animals. In the dog, primary leiomyoma, leiomyosar-
basophilic often with a prominent nucleolus and hetero-
coma and hemangioblastoma have been described.
chromatin, minimal cytoplasm and characteristically
have a high mitotic rate and with a striking degree of
individual cell necrosis (Fig. 7.23B). The PI can be up to
7.5 Lymphomas and hematopoietic tumors
75%. Most primary lymphomas can be identified clini-
Lymphomas may occur in the CNS as either primary or
cally from characteristic CSF cytology Immunoreactivity
metastatic tumors.
for antibodies to CD79a and CD3 can suggest either B
or T cell canine lymphomas respectively but ideally this
 provisional diagnosis must be confirmed by demonstra-
7.5.1 Primary T and B cell lymphomas
tion of clonal B or T cell receptor rearrangements. Most
 Primary lymphomas are single mass lesions within the
canine lymphomas are of B cell origin while T and B cell
CNS in the absence of any extraneural involvement as
phenotypes are common in the cat. No underlying
 defined by a rigorous necropsy examination. They are
immunosupression has been detected in dogs.
rare tumors (3% of all primary tumors) in the dog
and cat, and occur less often in cattle and the pig.
 Primary lymphomas mainly target supratentorial deep-
7.5.2 lntravascular lymphoma
seated sites close to the ventricular system as in human
This is usually a B cell lymphoma, which has a predi-
tumors, but they can occur also in the midbrain and
lection for the lumens of small vessels (synonyms
152
2Veterinary Neuropathology
B
Fig. 7.24 Dog. Primary CNS histiocytic sarcoma. A: MRl with T1W post-contrast ring enhancement which can be confused with a
high-grade glioma. B: Histology with cells with eccentrically placed, oval to reniform pleomorphic nudlei, multinucleate cells and numer-
ous mitotic figures. HE. C: CD18 immunoreactive neoplastic histiocytes. CD18 IHC
are angiocentric, endotheliotropic, intravascular lym-
MRI is not exclusively diagnostic, with T1W isoin-
phoma) in various organs but sometimes exclusively
tensity and T2W hyperintensity and sometimes with
within the nervous system (Fig. 7.23C). In the dog, cat
 marked homogeneous contrast ring enhancement (Fig.
and sheep, primary CNS vascular involvement leads to
7.24A). However, the broad-based meningeal involve-
 secondary induced thrombosis with occlusion of vessels
 ment and signs of a dural tail requires consideration of
and widespread infarction particularly of the cerebral 
of a meningioma as a differential radiological diagnosis.
 cortex. T cell lymphomas have been seen in both dogs
A diagnosis can be made from examination of either
and cats, and non-T, non-B cell lymphomas have been
CSF cytospin smears or stereotactically derived biopsy
seen in the dog.
tissue based on the characteristic cellular features of his-
tiocytic sarcomas.
Histologically, neoplastic histiocytic cells have eccen-
7.5.3 Metastatic lymphoma
trically placed oval to reniform, pleomorphic nuclei
In contrast to primary CNS lymphomas, CNS met-
with eosinophilic cytoplasm and sharp cytoplasmic
astates of systemic lymphomas are restricted to the dura
borders (Fig. 7.24C). Phagocytosis of nuclear debris and
s  mos  q sn p
cells is evident in their cytoplasm. Bi- or multinucleate
parenchymal invasion. Histopathologically, metastatic
giant cell are frequent. Both normal and abnormal
lymphomas are identical to primary lymphomas.
mitotic figures are numerous (Fig. 7.23C). The PI is
between about 10 and 40%. CD1c, CD11b and CD11c
7.5.4 Primary CNs histiocytic sarcoma
are considered to be definitive canine diagnostic markers
Primary histiocytic sarcoma of the CNS, without
 on frozen fresh tissue while CD18 immunoreactivity on
demonstrable extraneural lesions, occurs in intracranial
 FFPE tissue is circumstantial evidence for this diagnosis
and intraspinal sites in older dogs with a predilection
(Fig. 7.24B).
for certain breeds including Bernese Mountain Dog,
Rottweiler, Dobermann, Pembroke Welsh Corgi and
7.6 Germ cell tumors
some Retrievers (Golden, Flat-coated and Labrador).
The lesions form single, large, broad-based masses,
7.6.1 Germinoma
mainly intracranial and less commonly within the spinal
Canine germinomas occur in lateral suprasellar sites
cord, originating either subdurally or within the lep-
or the thalamus and are derived from extraneuraxial
 tomeninges and usually with secondary deep focal infil-
gonadal germ cells. On MRl, they appear as a solid
tration into the underlying brain or spinal cord.
isodense mass with uniform TiW post-contrast
Neoplasia   153
7.6.2 Teratoma
Intracranial mature teratomas are comprised of disor-
 ganized mixtures of fully differentiated mature tissues
from cell lines including ectodermal, mesodermal and
endodermal derivation; grossly, they usually include
cyst formation (Fig. 7.25). They occur in a wide variety
 of animals and in birds. Brain, choroid plexus, glandular
tissue, cartilage, osteoid tisue, fat, hair follicles, skeletal
and smooth muscle, bone with hemopoietic tissue etc.
can be found in varying proportions within these mass
lesions often in the cerebral hemispheres. Immature ter-
 atomas contain less well differentiated areas.
7.7 Embryonal tumors of non-neuroepithelial
Fig. 7.25 Rabbit. Intracranial teratoma in frontal lobe. Transverse
origin
section with multiple variegated masses with characteristic fluid-
7.7.1 Thoracolumbar spinal cord tumor
filled cysts.
(ectopic nephroblastoma)
enhancement. Macroscopically, they have an irregular
This putative ectopic nephroblastoma, located between
rough border, are infiltrative, closely attached to the
T9 and L3 spinal cord segments, occurs mainly in
meninges and gray colored. In both their location and
large-breed dogs (e.g. German Shepherd Dog, Golden
MRI profile they must be differentiated from menin-
Retriever, Boxer) between 5 and 48 months of age
giomas. Histologically, they consist of large cells in
(median 14 months). Intraspinal metastases or a second
sheets or lobules separated by a thin fibrovascular stroma
 primary site have occurred at L4-6. The incidence is less
with large nuclei and copious homogeneous faint-
than 1% of all primary tumors. It remains uncertain
staining cytoplasm. Infiltrating T lymphocytes can accu-
whether the tumor originates within either an intra-
mulate in large numbers within the fibrovascular stroma
dural extramedullary or intramedullary site. MRI and
 in a biphasic tissue pattern. Some clusters of germinoma
contrast myelography have indicated both possibilities
cells are immunoreactive with antibody to c-kit and also
(Fig. 7.26A). Grossly, there is a pinkish-gray discolored
exhibit nuclear reactivity to OCT4.
 bulging mass, which can be restricted to either site, up
Fig. 7.26 Dog. Ectopic nephroblastoma spinal cord. A: MRl of T2W image with a subdural single well demarcated hyperintense
mass at L2 segment. B: Dorsoventral aspect of the cord with a large well defined brownish subdural mass. C: Histologically, there is
widespread tubular and acinar formation somewhat resembling renal glomeruli embedded in a more compacted cell population. HE.
D: CK-immunoreactive epithelial cells forming acini. IHC Lu5. E: Strong immunoreactivity of the acinar cells to WT1 suggestive of a
renal tissue origin for this tumor. IHC WT-1.
154  Veterinary Neuropathology
to 2 cm long, as well as possible extradural growth (Fig.
7.26B). Microscopically, there is a mixture of both a
glandular epithelial and a more solid mesenchymal
stromal pattern. The glandular pattern consists of
tubules and acinar structures sometimes containing a
glomeruloid-like component resembling fetal glomeruli
(Fig. 7.26C). Mitotic figures are numerous particularly
in the epithelial cell component which also has a high
PI of about 30%. These epithelial cells are also immu-
noreactive to antibodies to CK (Lu-5) (Fig. 7.26D) and
to WT-1, the Wilm's nephroblastoma tumor gene
product (Fig. 7.26D). The second pattern is composed
of sheets or interlacing fascicles of spindloid cells with
ovoid nuclei and minimal cytoplasm, which are immu-
noreactive only for vimentin. A canine renal Wilm's
tumor with a spinal cord metastases has been described
once. The pathogenesis remains an enigma. These
tumors have not been reported in people.
7.8 Secondary or metastatic tumors
 In a recent institutional large case series, the overall
incidence in dogs of secondary tumors was about
equal to that of primary tumors of the CNS. Most
 secondary tumors are considered to arise from hema-
togenously(
 disseminated metastases  from primary
extraneural tumors in descending order of frequency
of hemangiosarcomas (29%, Fig. 7.27A), carcino-
mas (12%, Fig. 7.27B) (mammary, lung and kidney),
metastatic lymphomas (12%), nasal tumors, dis-
Fig. 7.27 Dog. Metastatic CNS lesions. A: Metastatic heman-
seminated histiocytic sarcomas, malignant melano-
giosarcoma  with preferential distribution  of lesions in the
mas  as well as many individual miscellaneous
gray matter. B: Multiple foci of a metastatic mammary
tumors. See MRI Atlas.
adenocarcinoma.
Local extension
 Secondary tumors can also arise by local extension par-
ticularly in the spinal cord from, for example, osteosar-
Most secondary tumors have multiple sites of varying
comas, chondrosacromas and histiocytic sarcomas,
size and in accordance with hematogenous access tend
while secondary extension from the nasal cavity through
to involve gray rather than white matter (Fig. 7.27A).
the cribiform plate is seen with chondro- and fbrosar-
Metastatic  lymphomas  characteristically  have  wide-
comas, nasal carcinomas and neuroendocrine carcino-
spread meningeal dissemination, while vascular occlu-
mas. Intracranial multilobular bone tumors can arise
sion from endotheliotropic lymphomas leads to
from the cranial vault. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas
 multifocal infarction. Although an unknown percentage
can arise from the deep intraorbital sites before second-
of secondary tumors are solitary lesions, multiple sites
ary extension into the brain. Most canine pituitary
are usually indicative of metatastic spread. On MRI,
tumors arise from the adenohypophysis (25%) with sec-
hemangiosarcomas have mixed signal intensity on both
ondary midline dorsal extension into the hypothalamic
T1 W and T2W images with marked, non-uniform or
region.
 peripheral contrast enhancement, depending on the
degree of hemorrhage. Other tumor types do not have
Hematogenous spread
characteristic diagnostic profiles. However, most metas-
Hemangiosarcoma is consistently the most common
tases retain their primary histological characteristics,
type of metastatic CNS tumor in dogs (29%) with a
although, for example, pulmonary carcinomas may
breed predilection for both Boxers and Golden Retrievers.
 mimic choroid plexus tumors. Focal hemorrhage and
Neoplasia  155
necrosis are common. Immunohistochemistry is often
Kuwamura M, Kotera T, Yamate J, Kotani T, Aoki M, Hori A.
useful to distinguish primary from secondary tumors in
Extraventricular neurocytoma of the spinal cord in a dog. Vet
the CNS or to confirm the site of origin of a suspected
Pathol 2008;45:63-66.
Uchida K, Nakayama H, Endo Y, Kai C, Tatewaki S, Yamaguchi R, Doi
metastasis.
K, Tateyama S. Ganglioglioma in the thalamus of a puppy. J Vet
Med Sci 2003;65:113-115.
Further reading
Embryonal tumors
General
Headley SA, Koljonen M, Gomes LA, Sukura A. Central primitive
neuroectodermal tumor with ependymal differentiation in a dog.
Louis DN, H. Ohgkaki, OD Wiestler, WK Cavenee. (eds) The WHO
J Comp Pathol 2009;140:80-83.
Classification of Tumours of the Central Nervous System, 4th ed.
Kitagawa M, Koie H, Kanayamat K, Sakai T. Medulloblastoma in
Lyon, France: IARC, 2007.
a cat: clinical and MRI findings. J Small Anim Pract 2003;44:
Vernau KM, Higgins RJ, Bollen AW, Jimenez DF, Anderson IV, Koblik
 PD, LeCouteur RA. Primary canine and feline nervous system
139-142.
Steinberg H, Galbreath EJ. Cerebellar medulloblastoma with multiple
tumors: intraoperative diagnosis using the smear technique. Vet
differentiation in a dog. Vet Pathol 1998;35:543-546.
Pathol 2001;38:47-57.
Wisner ER, Dickinson PJ, Higgins RJ. Magnetic resonance imaging
PNS tumors
features of canine intracranial neoplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2011;52,Suppl.1:52-61.
Gaitero L, Afior S, Fondevila D, Pumarola M. Canine cutaneous
spindle cell turmors with features of peripheral nerve sheath tumors:
a histopathological and immunohistochemical study. J Comp
Glial tumors
Pathol 2008;139:16-23.
 Higgins RJ, Dickinson PJ, LeCouteur RA, Bollen AW, Wang H, Wang
Higgins RJ, Dickinson PJ, Jimenez DF, Bollen AW, Lecouteur RA.
H, Corely LJ, Moore LM, Zang W, Fuller GN. Spontaneous canine
Canine intraneural perineurioma. Vet Pathol 2006;43:50-54.
gliomas overexpression of EGFR, PDGF alpha and IGFBP2 dem-
Schoniger S, Summers BA. Localized, plexiform diffuse and other
onstrated by tissue microarray immunophenotyping. I NeuroOncol
variants of neurofibroma in 12 dogs, 2 horses and a chicken. Vet
2010;98:49-55.
Pathol 2009;46:904-915.
Lipsitz D, Higgins RJ, Kortz GD, Dickinson PJ, Bollen AW, Naydan
DK, LeCouteur RA. Glioblastoma multiforme: clinical findings,
Meningiomas
Dickinson PJ, Surace El, Cambell M, Higgins RJ, Leutenegger CM,
2003;40:659-669.
 Porter B, de Lahunta A, Summers B. Gliomatosis cerebri in six dogs.
Bollen AW, LeCouteur RA, Gutmann DH. Expression of the tumor
Vet Pathol 2003;40:97-102.
suppressor genes NF2, 4.1B, and TSLC1 in canine meningiomas.
 Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ. Canine
Vet Pathol 2009;46:884-892.
intracranial primary neoplasia: 173 cases. J Vet Int Med 2006;20:
Ide T, Uchida K, Suzuki K, Kagawa Y, Nakayama H. Expression of cell
669-675.
adhesion molecules and doublecortin in canine anaplastic menin-
Stoica G, Levine J, Wolff J, Murphy K. Canine astrocytic tumors: a
giomas. Vet Pathol 201l;48:292-301.
comparative review. Vet Pathol 201l;48:266-275.
Petersen SA, Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Pollard RE, Kass PH,
Wong M, Glass E, DeLahunta A, Jackson B. Intracranial anaplastic
Kent M, Vernau KM, Lecouteur RA, Higgins RJ. Canine intraspinal
astrocytoma in a 19 week old boxer dog. J Small Anim Pract
meningiomas: imaging features, histopathologic classification
 P   I s  n a - p
2011;52:325-328.
York D, Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Wolfe AN, Grahn R, Olby N,
946-953.
Campbell M, Dickinson PJ. TP53 mutations in canine brain
Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Bollen AW, Koblik PD, Kass PH, Kortz GD,
tumors. Vet Pathol 2012;24:14-22.
Vernau KM, Knipe MF, Lecouteur RA, Higgins RJ. Magnetic reso-
nance imaging and histological classification of intracranial men-
ingiomas in 112 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:586-595.
Choroid plexus tumors
Ide T, Uchida K, Kikuta F, SuzukiK,NakayamaH.Immunohistochemical
Granuiar cell tumor
characterization of canine neuroepithelial tumors. Vet Pathol
Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Vernau KM, Sturges BK, Obradovich JE,
2010;47:741-750.
Bollen AW. Granular cell tumor of the canine CNS: two cases. Vet
Nentwig A, Higgins RJ, Francey T, Doherr M, Zurbriggen A,
Pathol 2001;38:620-627.
Oevermann A. Aberrant E-cadherin, β-catenin and GFAP expres-
Rao D, Rylander H, Drees R, Schwarz T, Steinberg H. Granular cell
sion in canine choroid plexus tumors. IVDI 20l2; in press.
 tumor in a lumbar spinal nerve of a dog. I Vet Diagn Invest 2010;
Westworth DR, Dickinson PJ, Vernau W, Johnson EG, Bollen AW, Kass
22:638-642.
PH, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, Lecouteur RA, Higgins RJ. Choroid
plexus tumors in 56 dogs (1985-2007). I Vet Int Med 2008;22:
Mesenchymal tumors
1157-1165.
Cantile C, Baroni M, Tartarelli CL, Campani D, Salvadori C, Arispici
Neuronal tumors
91-94.
Kuwamura M, Kotera T, Yamate J, Kotani T, Aoki M, Hori A. Cerebral
 Zabka TS, Lavely JA, Higgins RJ. Primary intra-axial leiomyosarcoma
ganglioneuroblastoma in a golden retriever dog. Vet Pathol 2004;4 1:
282-284.
2004;131:334-337.
156
6Veterinary Neuropathology
Valentine BA, Summers BA, deLahunta A, White CL, Kuhajda FP.
Lymphomas and hemapoetic tumors
 Suprasellar germ cell tumors in the dog: a report of five cases and
Lapointe JM, Higgins RJ, Kortz GD, Bailey CS, Moore PF Intravascular
a review of the literature. Acta Neuropathol 1988;76:94-100.
malignant T-cell lymphoma (malignant angioendotheliomatosis).
Vet Pathol 1997;34:247-250.
Nephroblastoma
McDonough SP, Van Winkle TJ, Valentine BA, vanGessel YA, Summers
Brewer DM, Cerda-Gonzalez S, Dewey CW, Diep AN, Van Horne K,
BA. Clinicopathological and immunophenotypical features of
McDonough SP. Spinal cord nephroblastoma in dogs:ll cases
canine intravascular lymphoma (malignant endotheliomatosis).
(1985-2007). JAVMA 2011;238:618-624.
J Comp Pathol 2002;126:277-288.
Tzipory L, Vernau KM, Sturges BK, Zabka TS, Highland MA, Petersen 
Metastatic tumors
SA, Wisner ER, Moore PF Vernau W. Antemortem diagnosis of
localized central nervous system histiocytic sarcoma in 2 dogs.
Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ.
J Vet Int Med 2009;23:369-374.
Secondary intracranial neoplasia in the dog; 177 cases ( 1986-2003).
Van Wettere AJ, Linder KE, Suter SE, Olby NJ. Solitary intracerebral
J Vet Int Med 2008;22:172-177.
 plasmacytoma in a dog: microscopic, immunohistochemical and
 molecular features. Vet Pathol 2009;46:949-951.
Germ cell tumors
Chenier S, Quesnel A, Girard C. Intracranial teratoma and dermoid
cyst in a kitten. I Vet Diagn Invest 1998;10:381-384.
 This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
 the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
Www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Degenerative diseases
This chapter covers a complex group of diseases, which
8.1 General strategy for differential diagnosis
are broadly characterized by selective degeneration and
of degenerative lesions
loss of cells or cell components (e.g. axons, myelin
sheaths) in a bilaterally symmetrical fashion. These dis-
8.1.1 Recognizing the major patterns
eases have usually a slowly progressive course and, with
 e a  e s sd li  
some exceptions, commonly start at a young age. Most
 young age, with slowly progressive symmetrical neu-
 po jo e n a o pdss a ae
rological signs.
 origin. In some, a breed or familial susceptibility for
· The lesions are often subtle and not visible on
 presumably environmental factors modifying degenera-
macroscopic examination (or MRl). To search for
tion appears to exist.
degenerative lesions, systematic sampling as explained
The pathophysiology of most degenerative diseases is
in Chapter 1 is essential. It is very important to
 only partly understood. However, in recent years consid-
include spinal cord sections because several diseases,
erable progress has been made. In a rapidly growing
e.g. axonopathies, are much easier to detect in cross-
number of degenerative diseases in humans and in
sections of the cord. HE sections must be system-
domestic animals, the genetic defect has been localized
 atically scanned for neuronal, glial, axonal or myelin
and characterized. In several the corresponding protein
changes.
defect is known and in some the biochemical disease
The lesions are almost always bilateral and symmetri-
 mechanism has been unraveled with the promise of spe-
cal: they are often found in selected areas or with a
cific therapies in the foreseeable future. Since this is a
specific pattern of distribution and require systematic
widely diverging group of diseases, pathogenetic aspects
careful histological examination.
will be referred to in the respective sections of this
 The major specific patferns are: loss of neurons/
chapter where appropriate.
axons/myelin, pallor of white matter, spongy state,
Hundreds of different degenerative diseases have been
intracellular storage and malacia. Since these are
recognized in domestic animals. Rapid progress in the
slowly progressive diseases, signs of active degenera-
molecular genetic characterization of these diseases will
tion may be minimal since the rate of removal of dead
affect their diagnosis and future classification. At present
cells by macrophages keeps pace with the degenerative
there is no standardized terminology to name these dis-
process. For the same reason, macrophages seldom
eases, which makes this field somewhat confusing. In
accumulate in large numbers. However, degeneration
this chapter, we classify these diseases according to their
is often indicated by an associated astrogliosis. Thus,
main cellular target and/or lesion patterns. In the CNS,
hypercellularity is an important marker of these
we distinguish the following major groups: neuronal
diseases.
degenerations, axonal degenerations, myelin disorders,
 storage diseases, spongiform encephalopathies, spongy
degenerations and selective symmetrical encephaloma-
lacias. At the end of the chapter we very briefly discuss
8.1.2 Further analysis
some degenerative diseases in peripheral nerves and
· When abnormalities are found, proceed diagnosti-
muscles.
 cally according to Table 8.1, which lists the prevailing
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
157
158  Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 8.1 Major degenerative lesion patterns.
DEGENERATIVE PATTERNS IN GRAY MATTER
Pattern
Interpretation
 Disease examples
Neuronal changes!
Neuronal degenerations
Neuronal loss
Motor neurons
Hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy
 Purkinje cells 
Cerebellocortical atrophy in Arabian foals
Granule cells
Cerebellar granule cell degeneration in
Collie dogs
Other neurons
Multisystem neuronal degeneration in
Cocker Spaniels
Accumulation of axonal spheroids
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
NAD in Rottweiler dogs
Spongy state
Spongiform encephalopathy
Scrapie in sheep
Spongy degeneration
 1-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria in Staffordshire
Terriers
Accumulation of material in neurons
Storage disease
GM1 gangliosidosis in Siamese cats
Malacia
Selective symmetrical encephalomalacia
Alaskan Husky encephalopathy
DEGENERATIVE PATTERNS IN WHITE MATTER
 Pattern
Interpretation
Disease examples
Pale staining white matter, spongy
Axonopathy
Hereditary ataxia in Jack Russell Terriers
state
Myelin disease
Leukoencephalomyelopathy in Leonberger
s6op
Accumulation of axonal spheroids
Axonopathy
Progressive axonopathy in Boxer dogs
 Spongy state
Spongy degeneration
Citrullinemia in Friesian Holstein cattle
Malacia
Leukodystrophy
Afghan dog myelopathy
Pallor of white matter
Dysmyelination 
 Shaking pups in Springer Spaniels
lesion patterns either in the gray or in the white
from spongy degeneration). Special histo- or immu-
matter. However, be aware that combinations of white
 nohistochemical stains are useful to evaluate whether
and gray matter lesions may occur. Recognizing these
axons or myelin or both are affected.
patterns focuses the neuropathological examination
 Swollen axons are a common finding in all types of
on certain groups of diseases.
CNS diseases. When these spheroids are particularly
· If depletion of neurons in a certain area is suspected,
large and occur in large numbers, they are indicative
it is often useful to compare with sections of normal
 of a primary axonal pathology.
animals.
● For the differential diagnosis for a spongy state pattern
● The pattern of “"intracellular storage" is not difficult
consult Fig. 6.14. In the gray matter, the distinction
to recognize. Neurons appear swollen and the nucleus
between spongy degeneration and spongiform degen-
is displaced by a cytoplasmic accumulation of abnor-
eration is important.
mal, granular material.
· For the differential diagnosis of the pattern of
● White matter degeneration (axons, myelin or both) is
"malacia”" consult Fig. 6.1.
usually associated with pale staining (on HE) and
 Grossly visible pallor and softness of the white matter
variable degrees of a spongy state (to be differentiated
is indicative of developmental myelin disorders.
Degenerative diseases
159
to classify neurodegenerative diseases according to neu-
8.1.3 Diagnosis
roanatomical criteria thus to the specific cell population
● The final step is to allocate the lesions to one of the
affected ("system disorder"), which also reflects the clini-
major degenerative disease categories (neuronal,
cal presentation (Table 8.2). However, while many neu-
axonal or spongy degenerations, myelin disorders,
storage diseases, spongiform encephalopathies, or
 neuronal type, it is becoming more apparent that many
selective symmetrical encephalomalacias) and then
affect several functionally different neuronal popula-
to one of the specific diseases listed in Tables 8.2-8.6.
tions simultaneously and these are therefore classified as
 Based on the nature and distribution of the lesions, a
multisystem neuronal degenerations. Some disorders
morphological diagnosis can be made and, depend-
involve not only the CNS but also the peripheral and/or
ing on the species/breed, the findings may fit one
autonomic nervous systems. It must be stressed that
of the more common well known diseases. It is
combinations of primary axonal and neuronal lesions
extremely helpful to consult published lists of inher-
also occur. In addition, as explained in Chapter 1, we
ited diseases for the respective species/breed, which
should remember that significant loss of neurons can
are available in either neurology text books or on
lead to degeneration in the anterograde tracts emanat-
the  internet (http://www.vet.cam.ac.uk/idid/http://
ing from these neurons or nuclei. In addition, primary
sydney.edu.au/vetscience/lida/). The chances are good
 axonal and neuronal lesions can also lead to retrograde
that the lesion has been described and previously
neuronal changes. A list of well known hereditary (or
characterized.
 probably hereditary) neuronal degenerations is pre-
· When a degenerative condition is suspected at
sented in Table 8.2.
necropsy, it is important to correctly collect, freeze
and store fresh tissues for later biochemical and
8.2.2 Motor neuron diseases
 genetic examination.
· As discussed in the chapter on toxic-metabolic dis-
General features
eases, it is not surprising that similar lesions can be
Motor neuron diseases (MND) are degenerative disor-
 caused by certain toxins or deficiencies targeting the
 ders of the CNS affecting motor neurons of spinal cord,
same molecular mechanisms affected by genetic
brainstem and motor cortex. Human MND subtypes are
 defects. Thus, it is important to keep in mind the
distinguished by their major anatomical site of degen-
 possibility of a toxic-metabolic etiology (Chapter 6)
eration. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the
when encountering one of the morphological pat-
most common human motor neuron disease, there is
terns described in this chapter.
involvement of upper and lower motor neurons, while
in progressive spinal muscular atrophy and related
8.2 Degeneration of neurons
syndromes the motor neurons in the spinal cord are
primarily involved. The underlying molecular defect is
8.2.1 General aspects
known in some of these diseases. For instance mutations
 In this section, we focus on degenerations of the neuro-
in the superoxide dismutase (SOD 1) gene in familial
nal cell body caused by an intrinsic inherited biochemi-
ALS suggest that neurons might die of oxidative stress.
cal defect. Such a genetic defect can lead, for example,
Transgenic mice expressing analogous SOD defects
to deficient transcriptional regulation, aggregation and
exhibit similar motor neuron lesions. In general all
abnormal clearance of proteins, alterations of calcium
animals with MND show signs of weakness of the limbs,
 homeostasis, activation of pro-apoptotic routes or an
and muscles of the head with paresis and paralysis and
abnormal structure/function of a protein (such as an ion
 progressive muscular atrophy. Because of severe neu-
channel), all of which will eventually lead to death of the 
rogenic atrophy, these diseases are also named spinal
cell. The characteristic morphological hallmark of these
muscular atrophies (SMA). Morphologically, all these
diseases is degeneration and loss of neurons in specific
 conditions are similar. The motor neurons appear
anatomical structures. Consistent with the slowly pro-
 swollen, chromatolysis is a consistent finding starting
gressive nature of these diseases, various stages of the
focally and gradually involving all of the Nissl substance
 process can be seen in the same section. It is usually the
(Fig. 8.1). Affected neurons exhibit nuclear changes (Fig.
reactive changes consisting mostly of diffuse micro- and
 8.1) with peripheral eccentric displacement, flattening
astrogliosis in the affected areas that indicate a lesion.
and pyknosis of the nucleus. Some neurons are eosi-
Sometimes in advanced cases, there is macroscopically
 nophilic, while others assume a glassy ghost-like appear-
visible evidence of atrophy. Clinical signs reflect the
 ance. Neuronophagia, neuronal depletion and marked
affected neuronal populations. A traditional approach is
gliosis are common features of advanced stages of MND
160
0 Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 8.2 Neuronal degenerations.
SUBTYPE
NAME OF DISEASE
SPECIES/BREED
Motor neuron 
Hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy
Brittany Spaniel
disease (MND)
Hereditary progressve neurogenic muscular
 Pointer
atrophy
Familial motor neuron disease
Rottweiler dog
Asymmetrical spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
 German Shepherd Dog
Stockard's paralysis
Great Dane-Saint Bernard crossbreeds
Hereditary progressive neurogenic muscular
 English Pointer
atrophy
Hereditary neuronal abiotrophy
Swedish Lapland Dog
Multisystem axonopathy and neuronopathy
Golden Retriever
Multisystemic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration
Cairn Terrier
Inherited motor neuron disease
Domestic cats
Bovine SMA
Brown Swiss, Holstein, Friesian, Red Danish
Hereditary porcine neuronal system degeneration
Pigs
Lower motor neuron disease with
Yorkshire pigs, Hampshire pigs
neurofilamentous accumulation 
Cerebellar
Cerebellar cortical abiotrophy (CCA) dogs
Scottish Terrier Chow Chow, Airedale Terrier, Border
 Purkinje cell
Collie, Rough-Coated Collie, Lagotto Romagnolo, Beagle,
 degeneration 
Rhodesian Ridgeback, Australian Kelpie, Gordon Setter,
 Old English Sheepdog. Labrador Retriever, Finnish harrier
CCA horses
Arabian horse, Gotland pony
CCA bovines
Holstein, Shorthorn, Hereford, Angus
CCA pigs
Yorkshire, Large White
CCA sheep
Merino, Coriedale
Hepatocerebellar degeneration,
Bemese Mountain Dog
 Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
Cats
Striatonigral and cerebello-olivary degeneration,
Chinese Crested dog. Kerry Blue Terrier
Late-onset progressive spinocerebellar
 Brittany Spaniel
degeneration 
(eixeie seiapueg) eixele neagaan eieuoan
Coton de Tuléar
Multisystem neuronal abiotrophy
Miniature Poodle
Cerebellar
Cerebellar granule cell degeneration
Border Collie, Coton de Tuléear, Bavarian Mountain Dog.
granule cell
Lagotto Romagnolo
degeneration
Other
 Multisystem neuronal degeneration
Cocker Spaniel
neuronal
Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar
Rottweiler dog.Siberian Husky Boxer dog
 degenerations
degeneration
Hypertonicity syndrome
Labrador Retriever
Degenerative diseases
161
with chromatolysis. HE. B: Cat. MND. Chromatolysis in motor neuron with eccentric nucleus and peripheral margination of Nissl sub-
SMA. One dark-staining acutely degenerating neuron (large arrow) and two glial nodules, one containing neuronal remnants (small
arrows). HE. E: Cat. MND. Two motor neurons with abnormal accumulation of of agyrophilic fibrillary material (neurofibrillary accu-
mulation) in cytoplasm, Holmes silver stain. F: Same cat as in E with cytoplasmic accumulation of neurofilaments. Electron micrograph.
G: Dog. Chronic MND. Spinal cord. Massive loss of motor neurons and gliosis with only one surviving neuron. HE. H: Brown Swiss
calf. SMA. Sciatic nerve. Acute Wallerian degeneration of some myelinated nerve fibers. HE. I: Brown Swiss calf. SMA. Skeletal muscle.
Group fiber atrophy typical of neurogenic disease, HE.
(Fig. 8.1). Wallerian degeneration in the peripheral
are also associated with the disease. In the accelerated
motor nerves and neurogenic atrophy of the muscles are
form, which resembles Werdnig-Hoffman disease in
also conspicuous features (Fig. 8.1). In several condi-
children, abnormal axonal internodes are distended
tions, accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated neu-
and a massive accumulation of neurofilaments is the
rofilaments in swollen degenerated motor neurons has
 most conspicuous lesion. The intermediate form, which
been described (Fig. 8.1). This condition has been
shows nerve cell loss and smaller numbers of axonal
termed lower MND with neurofibrillary accumulation
 swellings, resembles human juvenile MND forms.
thought to be associated with abnormalities in the syn-
Both phenotypes exhibit growth arrest and axonal
thesis, catabolism or transport of the neuroflaments.
 atrophy suggesting that motor axons failed to reach
 However, it is also possible that this change is secondary
normal size as well an impairment of axonal trans-
 t0 a primary axonal transport defect.
port resulting in an accumulation of neuroflaments.
Other studies indicate a defect in neurofilament assem-
MND in small animals
bly. Recent studies suggest that the motor failure in
Hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy (HCSMA),
HCSMA is due to a primary failure of neuromuscular
a disease in Brittany Spaniels, is the best studied MND
synaptic transmission preceding nerve and muscle
in domestic animals. HCSMA is an autosomal dominant
pathology.
inherited disorder, displaying varying degrees of severity
 Probably the longest known MND in veterinary med-
ranging from mild exercise intolerance to tetraplegia.
icine was Stockard's paralysis in Great Dane-Saint
Atrophy of the tongue, masticatory and facial muscles
Bernard or Great Dane-Bloodhound crossbreeds with a
162
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
complex mode of inheritance. A further example of
There is no evidence of actual neuronalloss. Interestingly,
MND is familial motor neuron disease in Rottweiler
 large numbers of chromatolytic neurons have also been
dogs, which resembles HCSMA in Brittany Spaniels
 found in spinal, autonomic and myenteric ganglia. In
 and is associated with megaesophagus due to degener-
hereditary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland
 ating neurons in the nucleus ambiguus. Hereditary
dogs, an autosomal recessive disease, degenerative
 progressive neurogenic muscular atrophy in English
oe inq suonau loo u punoy Auo jou aam satue
 Pointer pups is an autosomal recessive disease showing
in spinal ganglia, Purkinje cells and deep cerebellar
all the clinical hallmarks of motor neuron disease, but 
there is no actual loss of motor neurons but rather an
dorsal funiculus of the spinal cord and spinocerebellar
accumulation of numerous membranous cytoplasmic
tracts, as well as in trigeminal, optic and vestibuloco-
bodies reminiscent of a storage disease. Other canine
-ns sm uond q ,  sau ra
MNDs include a number of cases without genetic
 gested. This implies that the initial lesion occurs in
information including MND in the following breeds:
the terminal portion of the axon and then proceeds
Dobermann, Griffon Briquet Vendeen, Collie sheepdog.
 retrogradely towards the neuronal cell body. In multi-
Pug, Dachshund, Fox Terrier and Saluki. A curiosity is
system axonopathy and neuronopathy  in  Golden
an asymmetric MND with focal involvement of the
Retrievers, there is extensive motor neuron disease
cervical cord described in German Shepherd Dogs.
 combined with a severe axonopathy in the spinal cord
MNDs have also been described in cats as sporadic
 predominantly affecting the lateral and ventral columns.
cases sometimes with adult onset. The inherited
A similar distribution of degenerative lesions was found
motor neuron disease in domestic cats has an auto-
in pigs with hereditary porcine neuronal system
somal recessive mode of inheritance and is characterized
degeneration.
by rapid early progression followed by stabilization
 of signs and prolonged survival times. The disease is
associated with a deletion in the LIXl gene, which is
8.2.3 Cerebellar degenerations
believed to be involved in RNA metabolism in motor
Purkinje cell degenerations
neurons.
These diseases are also referred to as cerebellar corti-
MND in large animals
cal abiotrophies (CCAs), and are probably the most
Bovine spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) has been
common type of neurodegeneration in domestic
described in a variety of breeds. An autosomal recessive
animals, resulting from primary Purkinje cell loss.
inherited bovine MND reminiscent of juvenile human
CCAs have been reported in many different dog breeds.
MND was described in Brown Swiss cattle, while a phe-
The hereditary (mostly autosomal recessive) or at least
 notype resembling Werdnig-Hoffman disease in humans
familial nature of the disease has been shown in
has been identified in Holstein-Friesian calves. Further
Scottish Terriers, Airedales, Border Collies, Rough-
affected breeds include Herefords and Red Danish cattle.
Coated Collies, Lagotto Romagnolos, Beagles, Rhodesian 
A missense mutation in the 3-ketodihydrosphingosine
Ridgebacks, Australian Kelpies, Gordon Setters, Old
reductase FVT1 has been proposed as a candidate
 English Sheepdogs, Labrador Retrievers, Chow Chows 
INW v Xqdoe ienosnu juds auoq ioy uoen 
and Finnish Harriers. In addition, there are numerous
of suspected hereditary origin, lower motor neuron
 case reports in other breeds. The disease is much rarer
disease with neurofilamentous accumulation, has been
in cats, although hereditary feline CCAs have been
described in Yorkshire and Hampshire breeds of pigs.
 recently reported. CCA is also well known in several
cattle breeds (e.g. Holstein, Shorthorn, Hereford and
MND combined with degeneration
Angus, in the latter associated with seizures) and sheep
of other systems
(Merino, Corriedale) breeds, Arabian horses, Gotland
 Multisystemic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration
ponies and swine (Yorkshire, Large White). It is quite
 in Cairn Terriers is also termed progressive neuronopa--
possible that there is considerable genetic overlap
thy. The clinical signs suggest spinal muscular atrophy.
between the different CCAs described in various breeds
 Microscopically, chromatolytic changes are confined not 
and species, but there are certainly differences in onset,
only to motor neurons of the spinal cord and brainstem
course and severity of the signs/lesions suggesting a
nuclei (including red nucleus), but involve also the tha-
 spectrum of different disease mechanisms.
lamic and deep cerebellar nuclei. Ultrastructurally, chro-
The clinical signs in cerebellar degeneration are
matolytic neurons of the dorsal and ventral horns of the
usually quite dramatic and include cerebellar ataxia
spinal cord show dispersion and loss of ribosomes
with head tremor, truncal ataxia, symmetrical hyperme-
accompanied by excessive numbers of mitochondria.
tria, spasticity and broad-based stance and gait. In
Degenerative diseases  163
 general, cerebellar cortical degenerations have an early
loss of granule cells (which project on the Purkinje cells)
onset of clinical signs between weeks and months after
is usually associated with Purkinje cell degeneration
birth, tending to progress, slowly or rapidly. Very early
(Fig. 8.2). Other common changes secondary to Purkinje
onset (neonatal cerebellar cortical atrophy) has been
cell loss include shrinkage of the molecular layer in
seen in Beagles, Samoyeds, Rhodesian Ridgebacks and
severely affected cerebellar areas, proliferation of so-
 Irish Setters (hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia).
called Bergmann astrocytes in folia where significant
 Purkinje cell loss has occurred (Fig. 8.2), empty basket
example in adult Gordon Setters and Old English
cells and spheroids or “torpedo" formation (swollen
Sheepdogs.
Purkinje cell axons) in the granule cell layer and/or
Neuropathological changes are similar in all CCAs.
cerebellar white matter. Cerebellar nuclei are often
Purkinje cells are primarily affected with a progressive
 gliotic, but obvious loss of neurons in these nuclei due
reduction in their population. There are variations in
 to transynaptic neuronal degeneration is rare. In CCA
lesion distribution pattern within the cerebellum among
in Scottish Terriers, there are also numerous polyglu-
the different CCAs, but the lesions generally occur
 cosan bodies in the molecular layer. Putative retrograde
earlier and/or are usually more severe in the vermis and
 neuronal degeneration in olivary nuclei from primary
paramedian lobes than in the lateral hemispheres.
Purkinje cell loss has been described in Labrador
Purkinje cells show various stages of degeneration
 Retrievers and in cats.
(e.g. chromatolysis, necrosis). In advanced cases, nearly
Breeding studies, pedigree analysis or segregation
all Purkinje cells may be lost and the cerebellum is 
 analysis in the majority of the reports describing multi-
grossly reduced in size (Fig. 8.2). See MR1 Atlas.
ple cases of cerebellar cortical abiotrophies have either
 Secondary transneuronal retrograde degeneration and
suggested or established an autosomal recessive mode of
Fig. 8.2 Cerebellocortical degeneration. A: Dog. Normal brain. Sagittal section. B: Dog. Cerebellar atrophy. MRl. T2W image illustrates
marked widening of CSF-filled sulci between atrophic cerebellar folia. C: Same dog as in B. Grossly, there is marked thinning of some
cerebellar folia; compare to normal cerebellum in A. D: Dog. Histology of normal cerebellum. Cortex with intact Purkinje cells (ml,
molecular layer; Pk, Purkinje cell layer: gl, granule cell layer). HE. E: Dog. Cerebellar atrophy. There is complete loss of Purkinje cells
and gliosis in molecular layer, depletion of granule cells and atrophy of the molecular layer. HE.
164  Veterinary Neuropathology
inheritance. However, the underlying defect in most cer-
tion of the olivary nuclei, neuronal loss and gliosis in
ebellar cortical abiotrophies in domestic animals remains
 the substantia nigra and acidophilic neuronal degenera-
unknown. In CCA of Arabian horses, a mutation has
tion in the caudate nucleus. A suspicion of increased
been recently found affecting expression of MUTYH, a
functional demand on caudate neurons and Purkinje
DNA-repairing enzyme, which has been implicated in
cells was suggested by mitochondrial enlargement in
human Parkinson's disease. It remains to be shown at
their dendrites. The disease is related to a defect in the
the molecular level whether some of the animal cerebel-
canine gene, which is homologous to the Park2 gene, a
lar cortical degenerations are comparable in molecular
defect associated with an hereditary form of Parkin-
terms to the group of human spinocerebellar ataxias
son's disease in people.
caused by triplet nucleotide repeats. The triplet (CAG)
Late-onset progressive spinocerebellar degenera-
repeat disorders have inserts in certain CNS genes
tion in Brittany Spaniels is clinically characterized by
leading to altered function and neurotoxic effects of the
excessive hypermetria in the front limbs (saluting
corresponding proteins. In Finnish Harriers a mutation 
disease). Dogs between 8 and 11 years of age are affected.
in the SEL1L gene has been discovered, which is thought
There is a major loss of Purkinje cells, associated with
to lead to endoplasmatic reticulum stress. In CCA in
bilateral and symmetrical neuronal degeneration  in
Staffordshire Terriers and Pit Bull Terriers, Purkinje cell
 sensory neuronal systems of the medulla oblongata and
degeneration is associated with ceroid lipofuscinosis, in 
spinal cord, together with secondary axonal degenera-
which the neuronal storage process predominantly
tion. Accumulation of phosphorylated neurofilaments
targets the Purkinje cells (see Section 8.5.2). A further
 appears to precede Purkinje cell degeneration.
variation is hepatocerebellar degeneration in Bernese
 In multisystem neuronal abiotrophy in Miniature
Mountain Dogs, a phenotypic replica of the human dis-
 Poodles, CCA is combined with degenerative changes
order. In Rhodesian Ridgebacks, CCA has been associ-
throughout the cerebral cortex.
ated with coat color dilution.
A special case is the neonatal cerebellar ataxia
Cerebellar granule cell degeneration
(Banderas neonatal ataxia), an autosomal recessive
A few familial/hereditary conditions have been described
hereditary disease caused by a mutation in the GRM1
in a small number of canine breeds, in which there is
gene (which codes for the metabotropic glutamate
primary cerebellar granule cell degeneration.
receptor 1) in Coton de Tulear dogs, showing severe
Neuropathologically, this degeneration is character-
cerebellar signs soon after birth, which may stabilize
ized by progressive loss of granule cells, thinning of the 
without further deterioration. In these dogs, no histo-
granule cell layer and astrogliosis (Fig. 8.3). In Collies,
logical changes were found despite severe clinical signs.
the condition was suspected to be associated with a
 Electron microscope studies in these puppies revealed
loss of synaptic terminals, varicosities in the parallel
fibers and lamellar bodies in Purkinje cells.
Combined degeneration of Purkinje cells and
other systems
In olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA) in cats with
progressive cerebellar signs, loss of Purkinje cells, basket
cells, Golgi cells, stellate cells and granule cells was
observed. Pontine nuclei and the olivary complex were
also severely depopulated. Dominantly inherited late-
onset OPCAs observed in humans are caused by
expanded triplet repeats in one of the ataxin genes.
However, characteristic ubiquitinated nuclear inclusions
as well as Purkinje cell axon torpedoes, as observed in
human OPCA, were absent in cats. Whether the condi-
tion in cats is sporadic rather than genetic remains to be
confirmed.
Striatonigral and cerebello-olivary degeneration is
an autosomal recessive disease in Kerry Blue Terriers and
Fig. 8.3 Dog. Lagotto Romagnolo. Cerebellar granule celdegen-
Chinese Crested Dogs. In addition to degeneration of
eration. The Purkinje cell layer is intact, but there is massive
Purkinje cells, there is severe neuronal loss with cavita-
depletion of granule cells (compare to Fig. 8.2D). HE.
Degenerative diseases
165
defect in potassium ion channels, and recent descrip-
Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar
tions in a family of Border Collie dogs suggested simi-
degeneration in dogs
larities with the homozygous weaver mouse. An inbred
metabolic error in granule cells was suspected in a
Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degener-
Brittany Spaniel and in Bavarian Mountain Dogs. A
ation was originally described in Rottweiler dogs
congenital immune-mediated response against granule
from 3-8 months of age. A similar condition has been
cells was proposed in Coton de Tulears and Lagotto
seen in Boxers, Siberian Huskies and mixed breed
Romagnolos affected by granule cell atrophy, because of
dogs. Clinically, there is weakness and ataxia in the
diffuse invasion by T cells in the lesions.
 pelvic limbs progressing within weeks to severe gen-
eralized ataxia, tetraparesis and laryngeal paralysis.
Acquired cerebellar degeneration
 Intracytoplasmic neuronal vacuolation and mild spong-
As discussed in Chapter 6, certain plant poisons can
iform change have been found in the cerebellar nuclei
and in nuclei of the extrapyramidal system, thalamus,
cause Purkinje cell degeneration in herbivores.
ventral and dorsal horns of the spinal cord as well as in
spinal ganglia and ganglia of the autonomic nervous
8.2.4 Other neuronal degenerations
system (Fig. 8.4). In some areas there is also both
Multisystem neuronal degeneration
neuronal chromatolysis and degeneration (Fig. 8.4).
in Cocker Spaniels
Vacuolation, neuronal degeneration and axonal tor-
An inherited multisystem neuronal degeneration was
 pedoes can be seen in Purkinje cells in advanced cases.
found in young Cocker Spaniels that showed slowly pro-
 Thegraymatterchanges are accompanied by Wallerian-
gressive neurological signs with ataxia and mental dete-
like degeneration in the ventromedial and dorsolateral
rioration. Pathologically, the lesions consisted of diffuse
white matter tracts of the spinal cord. There are also
neuronal loss and gliosis in the septal nuclei, globus pal-
changes in the PNS with Wallerian-like degeneration.
lidus, subthalamic nuclei, substantia nigra, mesen-
Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration
cephalic tectum, medial geniculate bodies and the
is inherited but the mode of transmission remains to be
 cerebellar and vestibular nuclei. Axonal degeneration
determined. There is no accumulation of prion protein
and demyelination were also found. Pedigree analysis
as in transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (see
strongly suggests a hereditary cause for this disease.
Section 8.6), no abnormalities have been found at the
Fig. 8.4 Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration. A: Dog. Siberian Husky. There are intracytoplasmic neuronal and
parenchymal vacuoles in brainstem neurons. HE. B: Dog. Rottweiler. Peripheral chromatolysis in a brainstem neuron. HE. C: Same dog
as in B. A necrotic neuron. HE.
166  Veterinary Neuropathology
level of presynaptic membranes, and ubiquitin inclu-
metabolites are produced in the cell soma, elaborate
sions or markers for apoptotic neurons are absent.
mechanisms evolved to transport materials away from
(anterograde) or towards (retrograde) the cell body.
Hypertonicity syndrome in Labrador
Such mechanisms include molecular motors (e.g. dynein,
Retriever dogs
kinesin) transporting a variety of metabolites along
Male Labrador Retrievers between 2 and 16 months of
tracks provided by the cytoskeleton. In view of the high
 age showed extreme generalized muscle stiffness associ-
complexity of this system it is not surprising that a mul-
titude of defects occur. In this group of diseases, the
ated with continuous motor unit activity in the electro-
mylogram (EMG), which ceased under anesthesia.
axon is primarily involved with either sparing or retro-
Histologically, diffuse gliosis was found in the spinal
grade degeneration of its soma. They are generally mul-
cord gray matter, reticular formation and basal nuclei.
 tisystem disorders because axons from widely diverging
Neuronal numbers were decreased in specific Rex lamina
neuronal populations are usually simultaneously
 of the cord. The hypertonicity syndrome in Labrador
affected. Typically, young animals are affected. The signs
Retrievers is thought to be an X-linked hereditary
have an insidious onset and usually start in the hind
condition.
limbs and progress relentlessly until animals become
severely incapacitated. Proprioceptive deficits with pres-
Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like lesions.
ervation of nociception are frequent findings. Depending
Probably the most important group of neurodegenera-
on the affected systems, a marked cerebellar clinical
tions in people comprises Alzheimer's disease (AD) and
component may be apparent.
other forms of presenile dementia. In AD, there is an
Morphologically, we distinguish two major groups: 1)
axonopathies which look like Wallerian degeneration
accumulation of β-amyloid protein, which is derived
from a normal neuronal precursor protein, and becomes
and therefore manifest themselves primarily in the white
transformed into an insoluble conformation consist-
mafter and 2) axonal diseases with conspicuous focal
swellings of the axon (axonal spheroids). This change
ing of amyloid fibrils. β-Amyloid is concentrated in
 can be found in the white matter but when such swelling
senile plaques (focal accumulations) and around blood
begins at the distal end of the axon (where they synapse
for neurons particularly in the cerebral cortex. An
with their target neurons) the lesions are most obvious
additional finding are the so-called neurofibrillary
in the gray matter.
The distinction between these groups is not always
tangles (NFT) in neurons, which are derived from the T
(tau) protein, a microtubule-associated molecule. Such
dlear since, in several conditions, features of more
changes are also found in the brains of mentally normal
than one subgroup may be present and in some condi-
elderly people but in AD the lesions are far more wide-
tions also neuronal cell bodies are affected. A list of well
spread and start at an earlier age. Familial predisposition
known axonal diseases in presented in Table 8.3.
for AD has been linked to defects in certain genes coding
for proteins called presenilins.
 a   , s
8.3.1 Wallerian-like degenerative
in dogs, although the cognitive decline is clinically less
axonopathies
well defined in this species. A true clinical and patho-
 In the CNS, axonal necrosis, segmentation of myelin
logical correlate to AD has not been found in dogs or in
with removal of myelin and axonal debris by hematog-
other domestic animals. Nevertheless, while NFT are
enous macrophages over the whole length of an axon
very rare in dogs, congophilic angiopathy and diffuse
 but not neuritic amyloid plaques occur in elderly dogs
distal to a site of injury is called Wallerian-like degenera-
(see Chapter 1), and according to some studies their
tion (see Chapter 1). Many degenerative axonopathies
exhibit the typical morphological features of Wallerian-
extent may correlate with declining cognitive functions.
like degeneration. Microscopic lesions consist of diffuse
Such a correlation has also been reported with decreas-
 axonal and secondary myelin degeneration in ascending
 ing neuronal numbers in certain nuclei. These lesions in 
or/and descending fibers, thus usually involving multi-
dogs are considered to be an important model for AD
ple anatomical systems (multisystem axonal degeneration
and have been used in experimental treatment and pre-
 or MAD). Astrogliosis, axonal swelling and status spon-
vention studies.
giosus with macrophage invasion are common. The
8.3 Axonal degenerations
primary insult is not known in most of these diseases in
 animals. The initial lesion may be either in the proximal
Neurons are the largest cells in the body some with their
 or distal parts of the axon, or in different sites simultane-
axons extending over enormous distances. Since all
ously. In some of these conditions it appears that the
Degenerative diseases
167
Table 8.3 Axonal diseases.
SUBTYPE
NAME OF DISEASE
SPECIES/BREED
Wallerian-like axonal
 Hereditary ataxia
Smooth-haired Fox Terrier, Jack Russell Terrier,
degeneration
Ibizan Hound
Sensory ataxic neuropathy
Golden Retriever
Labrador Retriever axonopathy
Labrador Retriever
Peripheral and central axonopathy
Birman cat
Degenerative myelopathy of large breed-dogs
German shepherd, Boxer, Rhodesian Ridgeback,
Chesapeake bay retriever, Hovawart, Siberian 
Husky, Bemese mountain dog
Degenerative myelopathy
Pembroke Welsh Corgi
Bovine progressive degenerative
Brown Swiss cattle
myeloencephalopathy
Degenerative axonopathy in neonatal calves
Friesian Holstein cattle
Inherited progressive spinal myelinopathy
Murray Grey cattle
Degenerative axonopathy
Tyrolean Grey cattle
Familial degenerative neuromuscular disease
Gelbvieh cattle
Central peripheral axonopathy
Rouges des Pres cattle
Myelopathy
Holstein X Gir cattle, Merino sheep
Axonopathy with
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
Rottweiler dog. Papillon, Chihuahua, Collie
 axonal swelling
sheepdogs, Jack Russell Terrier; tricolored Domestic
 Shorthair cat, Domestic Shorthair cat, Siamese cat;
Suffolk, Merino sheep
Equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy
Morgan, Mongolian, other breeds
(EDME)
Giant axonal neuropathy
German Shepherd Dog
Central axonopathy
Scottish Terrier
Progressive axonopathy
bop Jaxog
Segmental axonopathy
Merino sheep
 most distal parts of the axon are the first to degenerate,
as myelopathies (spinal cord degenerations), or mye-
possibly as a result of a metabolic defect in the neuronal
loencephalopathies when involvement of the brain also
cell body. This defect presumably makes it difficult for
is found. Both motor and sensory systems can be
the cell to support its most distal parts, neurons being
involved. This is reflected in the clinical presentation in
exceptionally large cells with processes extending over
which abnormalities of gait with weakness and incoor-
many centimeters or even meters in large animals. Thus,
 dination prevail.
in ascending tracts (e.g. spinocerebellar tracts) the
A prototype of MAD is illustrated in Fig. 8.5. There
lesions are more severe in the cervical spinal cord and
is bilaterally symmetrical loss of axons and myelin with
in descending tracts (e.g. rubrospinal tracts) in the
reactive gliosis in selected areas of the white matter of
lumbar cord. This concept of dying back axonopathy has
the spinal cord. The lesions are usually visible on HE
 been studied in toxic models such as organophosphate
sections as pale staining and hypercellularity and become
 intoxication. The lesions become particularly conspicu-
 much more obvious with myelin- and/or axon-specific
ous where affected axons are in functional bundles or
 stains (Fig. 8.5). All these different diseases differ from
tracts and therefore many of these diseases are classified
each other mainly with respect to their clinical course,
168
3  Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 8.5 Wallerian-like degeneration. Tyrolean grey cow. Degenerative axonopathy. A: Transverse section of spinal cord. There is a
bilaterally symmetrical loss of white matter in lateral and ventral columns with replacement by astrogliosis in most severely affected
areas. Box indicates area shown in subsequent images. LFB-HE. B: Loss of myelin and marked gliosis in affected area, sharply demar
Gated from adjacent normal dorsal column. HE. C: Same site as in B. There is a diffuse loss of myelin staining. LFB-HE. D: Same site.
There is marked axonal loss as compared to adjacent dorsal column white matter. Bielschowsky silver stain.
the distribution of the lesions in the spinal cord and
tracts (Fig. 8.6). Thus there are some features of neu-
whether there is additional neuropathology in other
roaxonal dystrophy as described in Section 8.3.2.
structures of the CNS or PNS. Examples of such diseases
Degeneration of spinal nerve root and nerves can also
are presented below.
- s s e  ss aitd sd aa
 gested that more than one gene defect may be involved.
A very similar lesion distribution pattern has been found
Hereditary multisystem axonal degenerations
in families of Ibizan Hounds, in which the mode of
(MAD) in small animals
 inheritance appears to be autosomal recessive.
In hereditary ataxia in Smooth-Haired Fox Terriers
 In sensory ataxic neuropathy in Golden Retrievers
and Jack Russell Terriers there is involvement of ventral
there is degeneration of central and peripheral axons.
and lateral columns especially in the cervical cord
Proprioceptive fibers are most severely affected. Affected
(spinocerebellar tracts) and central auditory pathways
 dogs show decreases in mitochondrial ATP production
with numerous axonal spheroids in the dorsal nuclei of
rates and respiratory chain enzyme activities and muscle
the trapezoid body, cochlear nuclei and their connecting
changes typical of mitochondrial pathology. A deletion
Degenerative diseases
169
Fig. 8.6 Ataxia in Jack Russell Terrier. A: Brain. Dorsal nuclei of the trapezoid body contains numerous dystrophic axons (arrows) and
there is prominent gliosis. HE. B: Multiple axonal spheroids (arrows) in auditory tract. HE.
in the mitochondrial tRNA (Tyr) gene is the causative
Degenerative myelopathy (DM) of old dogs
mutation.
 Labrador Retriever axonopathy is thought to be
Degenerative myelopathy is a rather common condi-
a recessively inherited condition with clinical signs
 of spasticity and progressive gait problems starting
ticular German Shepherd Dogs. Other affected breeds
soon after birth. In addition to extensive myelopa-
are Boxers, Rhodesian Ridgebacks, Chesapeake Bay
thy, all animals show aplasia or hypoplasia of the
Retrievers, Hovawarts, Siberian Huskies and Bernese
corpus callosum, cerebellar involvement and olivary
Mountain Dogs. At this stage it is not clear whether all
neuronopathy.
the reported cases called DM represent one and the same
Late-onset spinal cord degeneration has also been
disease. Common to all is the late onset, slow progres-
described in small-breed dogs. A late-onset hereditary
sion of spinal signs and Wallerian-like degenerative
condition in Pembroke Welsh Corgies (PWC) called
 lesions in the spinal cord.
degenerative myelopathy of PwC dogs is an autosomal
Typically, signs consistent with weakness and ataxia
 recessive condition of late onset with progressive ataxia
of the hind limbs begin at the age of 7 years or older
and weakness in elderly dogs. There is symmetrical sys-
with an insidious onset and progressive deterioration
 temic degeneration of ascending as well as descending
over several months to years. DM in large dogs is also
long tracts in the spinal cord. A mutation in the super-
known as chronic degenerative radiculomyelopathy
oxide dismutase (SOD) 1 gene has been found. Since
because nerve roots may also be involved, which may
SOD1 mutations are present in about 2% of all human
explain the clinical hyporeflexia sometimes recorded.
ALS cases (see Section 8.2.2 on motor neuron diseases)
It may be difficult to distinguish such PNS lesions from
degenerative myelopathy of PWC dogs was considered
age-related changes (see Section 1.3.8). Different from 
to be similar to ALS in humans. However, there is no
the hereditary conditions described above, lesions in
loss of motor neurons in degenerative myelopathy,
the spinal cord of large dogs with DM are more diffuse,
although there appears to be aggregation of SOD1
not as sharply defined and often not symmetrical. In
protein in neurons as in certain forms of human ALS
 longitudinal sections, the lesions do not always seem
 and murine experimental models.
to be continuous. Mild numbers of axonal swellings
Peripheral and central axonopathy in Birman kittens
and demyelination are found in all funiculi of the spinal
is a suspected hereditary multisystem degeneration
cord, being most prominent in the mid and caudal
with a distribution pattern of the lesions suggestive of a
thoracic segments. In advanced cases, lesions become
distal axonopathy. Both the central nervous system and
also visible in the lumbar and cervical areas. The dor-
peripheral nerves are involved.
solateral and ventromedial columns appear to be the
170
 Veterinary Neuropathology
bilateral but not totally symmetrical loss of myelin staining most severe in the dorsolateral and ventromedial columns. There is also
myelin loss and vacuolation in both ventral and dorsal nerve roots. LFB-HE. Box indicates area described in B. B: Marked vacuolation
and gliosis of white matter. HE. C: Longitudinal section of dorsolateral column with severe patchy loss of myelinated fibers (areas of
axonal loss and demyelination are stained pink). HE-LFB
most consistently affected area (spinocerebellar, corti-
tions collectively called DM in various breeds are patho-
cospinal, rubrospinal and reticulospinal tracts). In
genetically related.
advanced cases bilateral, more or less symmetrical focal
areas of intense degeneration and gliosis are found in
MAD in large animals
these areas (Fig. 8.7). The lesions can be particularly
Bovine progressive degenerative myeloencephalopa-
well seen in longitudinal sections of the cord. Neuronal
thy or bovine weaver syndrome is an autosomal reces-
degeneration and loss may occur in the vestibular and
sive hereditary condition in Brown Swiss cattle known
red nuclei.
in many parts of the world. All spinal cord funiculi and
 In most cases of DM in large dogs, the disease appears 
 many tracts in the brainstem are severely affected.
to be sporadic and may be acquired. Because of immu-
Lesions have also been found in sensory nerves and
nohistochemical  evidence  for  immunoglobulin  and
myoneural junctions. Dystrophic axons are present in
complement deposition in spinal cord lesions, and
the cerebellar granule cell layer and there is patchy loss
detection of oligoclonal bands in the CSF, some authors
 of Purkinje cells. The number of synapses in the cerebral
suggested that this condition is associated with a dis-
cortex appears to be decreased. Ultrastructural changes
turbed immune response. While some studies indicated
 may suggest a disturbance of axoplasmic transport and
that vitamin E deficiency may be involved, others showed
subsequent axonal degeneration.
that the gene of the canine α-tocopherol transfer protein
Spinal cord degeneration has been reported in
is normal. Genetic factors could play a role in view of
Friesian-Holstein cattle (degenerative axonopathy of
 the higher incidence of DM in specific breeds. One study
neonatal Friesian-Holstein calves) with clinical onset
 in a family of Siberian Huskies suggested hereditary
soon after birth. In so called inherited progressive
transmission. The same mutation as in DM in PWC
spinal myelinopathy in Murray Grey cattle, axonal
dogs described above was found in a population of large
lesions are also associated with chromatolyis in the red
dogs with DM, but the association between the SOD1
nucleus, various brainstem nuclei and spinal cord gray
mutation and the phenotype of DM was weak. This was
mafter. In central peripheral axonopathy in Rouges des
thought to be due to age-related incomplete penetrance,
Prés cattle, peripheral nerves are clearly involved and the
but could also indicate that DM in PWC and DM in
lesions are more severe in the distal than in the proximal
large dogs are unrelated conditions. Recently, another
parts of the axons. In addition, there are also prominent
 SOD1 mutation was found in Bernese Mountain Dogs
dystrophic axons in certain brainstem nuclei, which is a
with DM. It remains to be seen whether all the condi-
feature of neuroaxonal dystrophy (see Section 8.3.2).
Degenerative diseases
171
Axonal degenerations occur  in Holstein-Gir and
swollen, eosinophilic, homogeneous or granular, and
Gelbvieh cattle. The latter is associated with myopathy.
contain variable amounts of ubiquitin-immunoreactive
 nephropathy and PNS lesions and thought to be caused
deposits as well as numerous synaptic proteins. Ubiqui-
 by hereditary hypovitaminosis E. A degenerative axon-
 tination indicates involvement of the intracellular pro-
 opathy in Tyrolean Grey catle (Fig. 8.5) is associated
tease degradation system. In Chihuahuas and Papillons
with a translationally silent variant in the mitofusin 2
with NAD, dystrophic axons are also widespread in the
 gene (MFN2). A spinal cord degeneration of unknown
white matter of the brain. NAD in the sensory relay
 z  s g  sis o ls m 
 nuclei of the brainstem has been found in English
 of age has been described in Merino sheep.
Cocker Spaniels with primary metabolic vitamin E
deficiency and retinal pigment epithelium dystrophy.
Acquired long tract degenerations
An autosomal recessive infantile form of NAD with
 As mentioned in Chapter 6, axonal degeneration of
severe neurological dysfunction already  present  at
long tracts may also result from intoxications and
 birth occurs in Beagles and is similar to human infan-
deficiencies.
tile NAD.
NAD in tricolored Domestic Shorthair cats, an auto-
8.3.2 Axonopathies with prominent axonal
somal recessive disease, is associated with inner ear
swelling
abnormalities. Mild cerebellar atrophy with Purkinje cell
and granule cell loss can be present. Multiple spheroids
Neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD)
are found in the olivary, cerebellar and lateral cuneate
in small animals
nuclei, brainstem tegmentum and the spinal cord. They
The term neuroaxonal dystrophy is used for the mor-
are also seen in some white matter tracts, dorsal roots
 phological alterations of axons leading to swelling,
and spiral ganglion and can contain a PAS-positive core.
atrophy and/or degeneration. A prototypic change is the
 Ultrastructurally, the swollen axons are covered by a thin
axonal spheroid, a localized swelling of the axon with
myelin sheet. Feline NAD of unknown genetic back-
 distal atrophy and secondary myelin degradation. NADs 
 ground has been described in Domesic Shorthair and
panboe no palaqu jo dnoa e dn axeu sueunq u
Siamese cats (Fig. 8.8).
neurodegenerative diseases with infantile and juvenile
forms. The axonal changes start at the preterminal por-
NAD in horses
tions of the axon and in the synaptic terminals resulting
in axonal transport impairment. Therefore, dystrophic
Equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy (EDME)
axons in NAD are mostly found in the nuclei of the
was originally reported in North America but has been
gray matter in the brain and spinal cord (Fig. 8.8).
since recognized in several European countries. The
Degeneration of the axon progresses proximally, even-
disease occurs sporadically in many breeds but clusters
tually resulting in death of the neuronal cell body. In
 have been described. The underlying cause is currently
addition to the gray mafter changes there is offen also
thought to be an hereditary defect (a familial predisposi-
degeneration of white mafter tracts. Electron micros-
tion was noticed earlier in some breeds such as Morgan
 copy studies have shown that dystrophic axons contain
and Mongolian horses), which predisposes to pathology
tubulovesicular structures as well as accumulations of
related to an environmental or nutritional factor. In this
smooth membranes, membranous aggregates remi-
respect an association between EDME and vitamin E
niscent of myelinic and residual bodies, and a few
deficiency has been demonstrated in several studies. Low
neuroflaments.
NAD is best known in young Rottweilers, although it
the first months of life. Clinical signs usually start at the
 has also been described in Chihuahuas, Collie sheep-
 age of 6 months but later onset has also been observed.
dogs, Papillons and Jack Russell Terriers. Typically, in
There is ataxia and tetraparesis. Dystrophic axons with
Rottweiler NAD signs start at the age of 1 year with
neuronal degeneration are encountered in the thoracic
hypermetria of the front limbs, and progress to a full
nucleus of the spinal cord, the medial and lateral (acces-
 cerebellar syndrome over 1-2 years. Sensory systems are
sory) cuneate and gracilis nuclei (Fig. 8.8D). Large sphe-
 predominantly affected with dystrophic axons in areas
roids and neurons may undergo vacuolar degeneration.
such as the nucleus thoracicus, dorsal horns of the spinal
 In addition, there is extensive Wallerian-like degen-
cord, dorsal column nuclei, sensory trigeminal nucleus,
eration in the spinal cord white matter, particularly
cerebellar granular layer, vestibular nuclei and genicu-
in the dorsal spinocerebellar and in the ventromedial
late bodies. Sometimes there is loss of Purkinje cells
tracts (Fig. 8.8C). Excessive lipofuscin pigment accumu-
 in the vermis and flocculus. Dystrophic axons appear
lation is prominent in endothelial cells, neurons and
172
2Veterinary Neuropathology
Fig. 8.8 A: Cat. Neuroaxonal dystrophy. Large numbers of eosinophilic swollen dystrophic axons (arrows) in the accessory cuneate
nucleus. HE. B: Same cat as A, cerebellar cortex. There are numerous dystrophic axons throughout the granule cellayer and one has
also vacuolar degeneration (arrow). HE. C: Quarter Horse. EDME. Thoracic cord segment T8. Bilateral and symmetrical axonal loss and
Large numbers of swollen and vacuolated axons and necrotic neurons and mild astrogliosis and microgliosis. HE.
macrophages in affected nuclei. Remember that in all
domestic animal species relatively large numbers of
Acquired NAD
spheroids and degenerating neurons can be found in
(NAD)-like lesions with numerous swollen axons
increasing concentrations with age in the lateral cuneate
throughout the neuraxis occur in various intoxications
nucleus without causing clinical symptoms.
as discussed in Chapter 6.
NAD in sheep
Giant axonal neuropathy in German
Typical NAD has been described in 4-7-month-
Shepherd Dogs
old Merino lambs and in Suffolk sheep of 1.5 and 5
months of age that developed a progressive ataxia finally
First reported in humans, giant axonal neuropathy
becoming recumbent. It is considered to be hereditary.
(GAN) is a generalized disorder of cytoplasmic interme-
Lesions are similar to those observed in Rottweilers
diate filaments affecting the peripheral nervous system
and primarly involve afferent systems involved in
particularly, but  also  the  brain  and  spinal cord  in
proprioception.
advanced cases. Giant axons accumulate neuroflaments.
Degenerative diseases   173
This is similar to neuroaxonal dystrophy, in which mito-
in the pathogenesis of this disease. An axonopathy
chondria and organelles also accumulate.
 sharing more similarities to the progressive axonopathy
GAN has been described in young adult German
of Boxers than to the polyneuropathy of Rottweilers has
Shepherd Dogs showing hind limb weakness and ataxia
been described in a Rottweiler pup.
with progressive loss of patellar reflexes and placing
reactions. GAN in German Shepherd Dogs is character-
Segmental axonopathy in Merino sheep
ized by swollen axons containing excessive and disor-
 s s    
ganized neuroflaments in the spinal cord, mainly at the
cally manifest with progressive ataxia at 3.5-6 years of
distal portions of long neuronal fiber tracts but also in
age. Microscopically, cerebellar abiotrophy is accompa-
the PNS. The fasciculus gracilis and dorsal spinocerebel-
 nied by widespread segmental axonal ballooning, or
lar tracts are affected only in the cranial cervical spinal
spheroid formation, in the white matter of the brain and
 cord while the lateral corticospinal tract is principally
 spinal cord as well as in the PNS. This condition, which
 involved in the lower thoracic and lumbar spinal cord.
is inherited and thought to be due to a cytoskeletal
Myenteric and sympathetic axons are also affected.
 defect, is distinct from other neuroaxonal dystrophies
 observed in sheep.
Central axonopathy in Scottish Terriers
A central axonopathy, which differs from previously
8.4 Myelin disorders
reported NAD in dogs, has been described in Scottish
 In this group we distinguish between disorders with
Terrier puppies from three different but related litters.
severe destruction of the myelin sheaths, often also
Clinical signs consisted of severe whole body tremor and
leading to loss of axons, and diseases with insuffcient
ataxia first detected at the age of 10-12 weeks. Signs
or retarded production of myelin. These diseases are
worsened with activity and excitement and diminished
listed in Table 8.4.
during rest or sleep. Neuropathological examination
revealed primary axonal damage and secondary vacu-
8.4.1 Leukodystrophies
olation and gliosis in the white matter of the spinal cord,
brain stem, cerebellum and cerebrum. Many axons in
Definition
the lateral and ventral columns had an enlarged diam-
Leukodystrophies are disorders of myelin synthesis
eter without signs of fragmentation. Dystrophic axons
and  maintenance  affecting  bilaterally  symmetrical
were prominent in the brainstem nuclei, thalamus, cer-
selective areas of the white matter, with destruction
ebellum and cerebral white matter. Their myelin sheaths
of myelin and eventually axons. In most human leukod-
 appeared thin. The condition is probably hereditary but
ystrophies myelin, is initially formed to a variable extent
the mode of transmission is not known.
but subsequently degenerates soon after birth. Micro-
scopically, axons lacking sheets are admixed with numer-
Progressive axonopathy in Boxer dogs
 ous macrophages, containing myelin debris, and reactive
Progressive axonopathy in Boxer dogs is clinically
astrocytes. In animals, similar lesions occur, which are
characterized by hind limb ataxia starting around 3
mostly ill characterized in molecular terms. The diseases
months of age as well as signs of skeletal muscle dener-
listed here below include a very heterogeneous collec-
vation. CNS and PNS are both affected. Spheroids and
tion of lesions, which can be broadly classified under the
axonal degeneration are prominent in the lateral and
Common to all are bilaterally symmetrical areas of
ventral funiculi of the spinal cord, in several brainstem
massive degeneration of the white matter, which is often
nuclei, cerebellar white matter and optic pathways. The
macroscopically visible. The distribution pattern of the
autonomic nervous system is also affected and distal
limb muscles show varying degrees of neurogenic
lesions is often selective or even bizarre and therefore
atrophy. In the PNS, paranodal axonal swellings occur
difficult to explain by a general defect at the level of
in the extradural spinal nerve roots, most consistently in
myelin metabolism.
the lumbar region. The occurrence of proximal axonal
Necrotizing myelopathy
 swelling of nerve roots, together with distal hypoplasia
 suggests impaired transport of neurofilaments that are
Necrotizing myelopathy is an  autosomal recessive
major determinants of axon growth. Further immuno-
disease, which has been described in young Afghan
chemical studies that focused on cytoskeletal proteins
Hounds, Kooikers and sporadically in Miniature Poodles
such as tubulin, neurofilaments, actin and fodrin, con-
with rapidly progressing spinal signs. Lesion distribu-
firmed that defects in slow axonal transport are involved
tion is bizarre: there is bilaterally symmetrical lysis
174  Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 8.4 Myelin disorders.
SUBTYPE
NAME OF DISEASE
SPECIES/BREED
Leukodystrophy
Cavitating leukodystrophy
Dalmatian dog, Labrador Retriever
Necrotizing myelopathy
Afghan dog. Kooiker dog. Miniature Poodle
Leukomyeloencephalopathy
Rottweiler dog,Leonberger dog
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
West Highland White & Caim Terrier, Australian Kelpie,
Irish Setter
Leukodystrophy
Crossbred Maltese dog
Fibrinoid leukodystrophy
Labrador Retriever, Merino sheep
Progressive ataxia
Charolais cattle
 Oligodendroglial dysplasia
Bull Mastiff
Myelin dysgenesis
Dysmyelination
Chow Chow, Weimaraner dog. Lurcher dog. Samoyed dog.
Bernese cattle dog. Siamese cats
 Shaking pups
Springer Spaniel
CNS hypomyelination
Rat Terrier
Congenital tremor
Jersey. Holstein-Friesian, Angus, Shorthorn, Hereford cattle
Congenital tremor type Alll 
Landrace pig
Congenital tremor type AIV
Saddleback pig
Congenital bovine spinal dysmyelination
Brown Swiss cattle
C8
T2
T4
T10
patterm (cord segments C8, T2, T4, T10). LFB. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Alexander de Lahunta.)
of white matter in the whole circumference of the
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
mid-thoracic cord with tapering of the lesions cranially
 and caudally involving only ventral or dorsal funiculi in
 Rottweiler and Leonberger dogs with leukoencepha-
cervical and lumbar segments (Fig. 8.9). Rarely, there is
some focal involvement of the brainstem. The fasciculus
1.5 and 4 years of age. There are destructive lesions
proprius is relatively spared. Destruction of white matter
of the white matter in the spinal cord and brain-
is associated with invasion of macrophages and vascular
stem (Fig. 8.10), generally in a bilaterally symmetrical
proliferation. The initial lesion appears to be splitting of 
pattern, but at some levels of the cord lesions are
the myelin sheath along the intraperiod line. Gray matter
dearly asymmetrical. See MRI Atlas. The myelin is
involvement is uncommon involving the dorsal nuclei
primarily affected with initial preservation of axons
of the trapezoid body and periphery of the ventral
(Fig. 8.10). There is demyelination and remyelination,
horns.
ultrastructurally confirmed because many axons are
Degenerative diseases  175
covered by very thin myelin sheaths. Although this is
disease resulting from galactocerebroside beta-galactosi-
clearly a myelin lesion, in the spinal cord only certain 
 dase deficiency (see Section 8.5). There is marked degen-
areas of the lateral columns are affected, suggesting
 eration and loss of white matter in the cord and brain
that the primary defect may be located in neurons,
(Fig. 8.11). Perivascular accumulation of“globoid cells",
leading to defects in axonal signals required for normal
large macrophages flled with PAS-positive storage
myelination.
 material, is characteristic of globoid cell leukodystrophy
(Fig. 8.11).
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Globoid cell leukodystrophy or Krabbe's disease occurs
Hereditary "cavitating" leukodystrophy
 as an autosomal recessive disorder in people, dogs ( West
Hereditary cavitating leukodystrophy, transmitted by
Highland White Terrier puppies and some other breeds
 autosomal recessive inheritance has been described in
such as Beagle, Australian Kelpie, Bluetick and Irish
Dalmatian dogs between 3 and 5 months of age. A
Setters) and sporadically in cats. It is a lysosomal storage
similar disease has been seen in Labrador Retrievers.
Fig. 8.10 Dog. Leonberger. Leukoencephalomyelopathy. Spinal cord. A: Bilaterally symmetrical areas of myelin degeneration in the
lateral columns. HE-LFB. B: Spinal cord. Sharply delineated area of pale staining and hypercellularity in the spinal cord white matter.
HE. C: Spinal cord. MRl. T2W transverse slice revealing bilateral areas of hyperintensity corresponding to the areas of myelin degenera-
tion in A. D: White matter spinal cord. Transverse section. There are intact axons in various stages of demyelination (large arrow) and
TB stain.
176  Veterinary Neuropathology
A
Fig. 8.11 Dog. West Highland White Terrier. Globoid cell leukodystrophy. A: Spinal cord. Diffuse bilaterally symmetrical degenera-
tion with demyelination of the peripheral areas of the spinal cord white matter. HE. B: Cerebellum. Marked symmetrical loss of white
matter in brainstem and cerebellum. LFB-HE. C: Perivascular accumulation of large macrophages containing myelin debris ("globoid
cells"). PAS.
Particularly the white matter of the cerebrum (centrum
ovale), most prominently in the occipital lobes, is
affected with malacia progressing to cavitation of
the affected areas. The subcortical fibers are spared.
Microscopic lesions are found in the white matter of
the basal nuclei and ventral horns of the cord. Initially
there is degeneration of myelin with sparing of the
axons.
Fibrinoid leukodystrophy
Very rare cases of fibrinoid leukodystrophy, also named
Alexander's disease in people, have been described in
male, black Labrador Retriever littermates, a Scottish
Terrier, a Miniature Poodle, a Bernese Mountain Dog
and Merino sheep. There is involvement of the cerebral
white matter but also of other areas. In fibrinoid leukod-
ystrophy, the myelin lesions are associated with Rosenthal
fiber formation. These are string-like depositions of
brightly eosinophilic amorphous ovoid bodies especially
perivascularly and below the pia and ependyma (Fig.
8.12A). They contain alpha beta crystalline, GFAP and
ubiquitin. A mutation of the GFAP gene as in people
was not found in Merino sheep with Alexander's disease.
Leukodystrophy in crossbred Maltese dogs
In leukodystrophy of crossbred Maltese dogs changes
are mainly found in cerebellum and spinal cord. In addi-
tion to myelinolytic lesions there are areas of intense
Fig. 8.12 Dog. Alexander's like disease (fibrinoid leukodystro-
astrogliosis in the white matter, which appear to precede
phy). A. Distinctive eosinophilic staining of Rosenthal-like fibres
myelin breakdown.
in astrocytic foot processes lining blood vessels and in the
neuropil, which contains many abnormally large hypertrophied
Progressive ataxia in Charolais cattle
astrocytes. HE. B: Cow. Charolais ataxia. Brain. Semithin section
Progressive ataxia in Charolais cattle starts with ataxia
illustrating focal areas in the white matter devoid of myelinated
 at the age of about 8 months. Signs are progressive and,
fibers surrounded by normally myelinated axons. TB.
Degenerative diseases   177
if the animal is supported, end with paralysis after 1-2
 tal tremor"), which increase with excitement and disap-
years. The lesions are very characteristic. The white
pear at rest.
mafter of spinal cord and brainstem is interspersed with
round or oval areas, which remain pale following stain-
Dysmyelination in small animals
ing for myelin or axons (Fig. 8.12B). At higher magnifi-
In Chow Chows, Springer Spaniels, Weimaraners,
cation, a finely granular or fbrillar structure can be
Lurchers, Samoyeds, Bernese Cattle Dogs, Siamese cats
demonstrated. Ultrastructurally the areas are composed
and some other dog breeds hereditary (or suspected
 of disorganized myelin sheaths and hypertrophied oli-
hereditary) forms of dysmyelination have been reported.
godendrocytic processes. It is suspected that initially
 The cause is a congenital defect at the level of structural
normal myelin becomes unstable and degenerates due
myelin proteins and/or metabolic defects of the oli-
to an as yet unknown genetic defect. A similar lesion
 godendrocyte. Shaking pups (Springer Spaniels) have
has been seen in oligodendroglial dysplasia in Bull
an X-linked recessive defect with mutations in the
Mastiff dogs.
proteolipid protein and DM-20 protein resulting in
abnormal oligodendrocyte differentiation and forma-
8.4.2 Myelin dysgenesis
tion of immature myelin. Inadequate myelination/dys-
This is also called hypomyelinogenesis or retarded mye-
myelination is visible macroscopically, the white matter
linogenesis. Histologically, the two forms are very similar,
assuming a grayish translucent appearance (Fig. 8.13B).
but in the course of time the symptoms of hypomy-
On HE sections there is pallor of the white matter.
elinogenesis remain unchanged whereas in retarded 
Depending on the particular disease some areas may be
 myelinogenesis they resolve and eventually disappear.
 more affected than others. Special myelin stains and
Dysmelinogenesis is well known in a variety of species
 especially semi-thin sections and electron microscopy
and breeds. The symptoms are severe tremors of the
help to define the defect (Fig. 8.13C,D,E,F). As a rule,
whole body (e.g. trembling lambs and piglets,“congeni-
the PNS is normally myelinated. In some conditions
Fig. 8.13 A-C: Hypomyelination. Lack of myelin development in a Dalmatian puppy with congenital tremor. A: Age-matched
normal brain at same level showing distinct contrast between grey and normal white matter. B: Bilaterally symmetrical lack of white
matter development. C: Complete lack of myelin staining in the spinal cord in contrast to normally myelinated spinal nerve roots. LFB.
D-F: Dysmyelination. Dog. Chow Chow. Spinal cord. D: Defective myelin formation in peripheral layers of spinal cord. LFB. E: Semithin
section of same dog as in D. There are few myelinated fibers in contrast to adjacent spinal nerve fibers (arrow), all of which are nor
mally myelinated. Toluidin blue stain. E: Electron micrograph of the lesion in D reveals that most axons (a) are naked or have only very
thin myelin sheaths compared with other normally myelinated axons (arrows).
178   Veterinary Neuropathology
such as in the male shaker pups of Springer Spaniels.
ine transplacental viral infections. These diseases are
 animals exhibit severe neurological signs for their (short)
covered in Chapter 3 on inflammatory diseases.
life, in others such as in Chow Chows, animals gradually
myelinate normally ("retarded myelination") and
Astrocytic hypertrophy of the white matter
An autosomal recessive disease occurs in Gordon Setter
Terriers is associated with a congenital goiter and a muta-
 puppies starting with weakness and continuous vocal-
tion in the thyroid peroxidase gene.
izing at a few weeks of age, which progresses rapidly to
Dysmyelination in large animals
recumbency. The only change found is a diffuse mor-
phometrically confirmed hypertrophy of the astrocytes
This condition, commonly referred to as congenital
 predominantly in the white matter of the CNS.
tremor, has been described in calves from a number of
bovine breeds (e.g. Jersey, Angus, Shorthorn, Hereford).
Congenital bovine spinal dysmyelination in American
8.5 Storage diseases
Brown Swiss cattle and crossbreeds is characterized by
8.5.1 Lysosomal storage diseases
congenital recumbency with spasticity and opistho-
tonus. The myelin lesions affect the dorsomedial, dorso-
Mechanism
latereral and ventromedial columns in the cord and are
 Due to a congenital defect at the level of the lysosomal
also associated with axonal degeneration. The disease is
hydrolase enzyme system, certain cellular molecules
caused by a missense mutation in the SPAST gene, whose
cannot be degraded and recycled and thus accumulate
human ortholog is associated with hereditary spastic
in the lysosomes. Common to most storage diseases in
 paraplegia.
man and animals is the early onset of progressive neu-
 In swine, a sex-linked condition has been described
rological symptoms.
in Landrace and Landrace crosses (congenital tremor
The primary enzymatic defect can be localized at
type AlIl) and an autosomal recessive disease in
different levels, e.g. a mutation in the enzyme itself, a
Saddleback pigs (congenital tremor type AIV), in which
post-translational modification, a defective transporter
myelin is thought to be unstable and is therefore prone
protein or a defective activator protein. As a result, there
to degeneration soon after synthesis.
is progressive accumulation, or “storage", of non-degra-
dable material in lysosomes in the affected cells.
Viral-induced dysmyelination
Depending on the specific molecular defect, several spe-
Abnormal myelination similar to the hereditary condi-
cific cell and tissue types in the body can be involved.
tions discussed here above can be induced by intrauter-
Skeletal/connective tissue abnormalities, for example, in
taining storage material with displacement of Niss substance and the nucleus. LFB-CEV. B: Alpha-mannosidosis. The storage material
exhibits a distinct granular appearance within densely packed lysosomes. HE. C: A lipid stain confirms the neuronal accumulation of
lipid storage material. Sudan black. D: Axonal "torpedos" of affected cerebellar Purkinje cells in a storage disease. Bielschowsky silver
stain
Degenerative diseases
179
Table 8.5 Lysosomal storage diseases.
DISEASE TYPE
NAME
ENZYME DEFECT
SPECIES/BREED
Glycoproteinoses
Fucosidosis
C-L-fucosidase
 English Springer spaniel
Mannosidosis
Cx-mannosidase
 Domestic short hair cat (DSH),
Domestic long hair cat Persian
cat, Aberdeen-Angus cattle,
Murray grey cattle, Galloway
cattle
B-mannosidase
Nubian goat, Salers calves
Galactosialidosis
neuraminidase-β-
Schipperke dog
galactosidase
Sphingolipidoses
GM1 gangliosidosis
B-galactosidase
Siamese cat, DSH, Korat cat,
 English Springer spaniel,
Beagle, Portuguese water dog.
Friesian cattle, Suffolk cross
sheep
GM2 gangliosidosis
B-hexosaminidase
DSH, Korat cat, Pointer dog.
Yorkshire pigs
activator protein
Japanese spaniel
Globoicdcell-leukodystrophy
B-
West Highland white terrer
galactocerebrosidase
(WHWT), Cairn terrier
Beagle, Poodle, DSH,
Dorset sheep
Gauchers disease
glucocerebrosidase
Sycdney silky terrier
Niemann-Pick disease
sphingomyelinase
Balinese cat, Siamese cat,
dholesterol-
Boxer dog. DSH
esterification
Mucopolysaccha
MPSI (Hurler)
C-L-iduronidase
DSH, Plott hound
ridoses
MPSIl (Hunter)
iduronate-2-sulfatase
Labrador retriever
MPS III (San Filippo)
sulfamidase
Wire-haired-dachshund,
Nubian goat
MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy)
arylsulfatase B
Siamese cat
MPS VII (Sly)
B-glucuronidase
Mixed breed dog
(Continued)
180   Veterinary Neuropathology
Table 8.5 (Continued)
 DISEASE TYPE
NAME
ENZYME DEFECT
SPECIES/BREED
Glycogenoses
type la (von Gierke)
glucose-6-
Canine toy breeds
(Oligosaccharidoses)
phosphatase
type Il (Pompe)
Q-1.4-glucosidase
Lapland dog, DSH, Shorthorn
beef cattle, Braham cattle,
Corriedale-sheep
type Il (Cori)
amylo-1.6-
German shepherd dog. Akita
glucosidase
bop
type Illa
glycogen-
Curly coated retriever
debranching-enzyme
type IV (Anderson)
glycogen branching 
Norwegian forest cat
enzyme
type VlI
phosphofructokinase
English Springer spaniel,
American Cocker spaniel
Proteinoses
Ceroid-lipofuscinosis
range of defects
Pit bull terrier, Staffordshire
terrier, American Bulldog, Irish
setter, English setter, Tibetan
terrier, miniature dachshund 
and other dog breeds.
Siamese cats, Devon cattle,
 South Hampshire, Borderdale
and Ramboulliet sheep,
Nubian goat
than others. Other cell types such as glial, endothe-
logical signs by compressing nervous tissues.
lial and choroid plexus epithelial cells can be affected
When neurons, which cannot regenerate, are affected
depending on the type of storage defect. Secondary
by a lysosomal storage disease, severe progressive neuro-
changes are axonal swellings (Fig. 8.14D) meganeurites,
logical deficits are eventually fatal.
which are fusiform enlargements of the initial axon
segment and loss of synapses and dendritic spines. Loss
Classification and morphology
of neurons and atrophy of certain populations also
Depending on the specific enzyme defect, the accumu-
occurs in some storage diseases. In mannosidosis, there
lated material can consist of glycolipids, carbohydrates,
is also deficient myelination and axonal degeneration in
 proteins etc. Accordingly, storage diseases are classified
the white matter. A special case is globoid cell leukodys-
 as glycoproteinoses, sphingolipidoses, mucopolysac-
trophy (galactosylceramidase 1 deficiency), in which the
charidoses, glycogenoses and proteinoses. Within
storage disease leads to severe degeneration of the white
these major groups, the storage diseases are then named
matter with the perivascular accumulation of large dis-
according to either the storage product, the name of the
tended macrophages ("globoid cells") (Fig. 8.11C).
discoverer or just a number. Table 8.5 lists some exam-
Many different storage diseases have been identified
ples of storage diseases.
 in animals; in several types their biochemical and genetic
Neuropathological features are easy to recognize.
defects have been elucidated (Table 8.5). In routine
 Storage in neurons is characterized by massive cytoplas-
examination from biopsy tissue, the biochemical identi-
 mic accumulation of granular or vacuolar-like inclu-
fication of the storage product can be partially identified
sions with dislocation of other cell organelles (Fig. 8.14).
 by special stains and lectin binding patterns. Electron
The neurons appear swollen. Lesions are usually wide-
 microscopy can also help to identify the specific defect,
 s  a  se s i 
but specific characterization requires biochemical and
Degenerative diseases   181
 molecular biological examination. For an increasing
CLN2) has been found in Miniature Dachshunds with
number of conditions DNA tests are available for
NCL, a mutation in the CLN8 gene in English Setters
animals.
and in the cathepsin D gene in American Bulldogs.
Tibetan Terriers with late-onset NCL have a truncating
mutation in ATP13A2. NCL in American Staffordshire
8.5.2 Neuronai ceroid lipofucsinoses (NCL)
Terriers has been linked to sulfatase deficiency (a lyso-
Definition and mechanism
somal enzyme) resulting from an arylsulfatase G muta-
 Neuronal ceroid lipofucsinoses are a special group
 tion. However, as in people, it is not always clear whether 
of storage diseases characterized by accumulation of
lysosomal catabolism is involved in NCL. In sheep, a
autofluorescent lipofuscin pigment-like material, with
large portion of the storage material consists of subunit
characteristic ultrastructural  lamellar profiles, in
c of mitochondrial ATP synthase.
neurons and other cells of the body, followed by cell 
 Animals affected by NCL are usually young adults
degeneration. In people, NCL were classified into infan-
(about 1-2 years of age) at the start of clinical signs,
tile, late infantile, juvenile (Batten disease) and adult
although some dogs may be much older at onset. As
(Kuff's disease) types, according to the age of onset and
 in other storage diseases, accumulation of abnormal
the ultrastructural morphologic fearures of the storage
material in neurons is easily detected (Fig. 8.15B,C).
material. Current classification of human NCL is based
 A special feature is the autofluorescence of this mate-
on eight main genetic forms (CLN1-8). In contrast to
rial under UV light (Fig. 8.15C). NCL is usually associ-
 most other storage diseases, the underlying pathogenesis
 ated with severe progressive atrophy of involved areas
of NCL has not been entirely clarified. Some studies
which can be seen on MRI or macroscopically (Fig.
 suggested that the primary defect in NCL may involve
8.15A). See MR1 Atlas. In the American Staffordshire
 mitochondria rather than lysosomal catabolism.
Terriers and American Staffordshire Terrier-Pit Bull
Terrier crosses, storage primarily affects Purkinje cells
 and certain thalamic nuclei leading to thalamic and cer-
NCL in domestic animals
ebellar atrophy.
NCL occurs in domestic animal species including several
dog breeds (such as Pit Bull Terriers, Staffordshire
8.5.3 Lafora's disease
Terriers and Irish Setters), Siamese cats, Devon cattle,
South Hampshire, Borderdale and Ramboulliet sheep.
People
The molecular genetics are being characterized in a
Lafora's disease is another special type of storage disease
rapidly increasing number of these diseases. For example,
with accumulation of polyglucosan as small and large
a frame shift in the TPP1 gene (the ortholog of human
inclusions in neuronal cell bodies and dendrites. In
Fig. 8.15 Ceroid lipofuscinosis. Dog. Tibetan Terrier. A: MRl. A T2W transverse image of cerebral atrophy associated with neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis with marked distension of sulci filled with CSF and dilated ventrides from the brain atrophy. B: Dog. Dachshund.
emission.
182
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
people, the disease depends on defects in the genes
metrical, slowly evolving non-inflammatory lesions in
coding for laforin (a phosphatase) and malin (ubiquitin
 the gray matter. Some human SE are hereditary diseases,
ligase), which control proteins that affect glycogen
 and SE in small ruminants are under tight genetic
metabolism.
control. However, SE of domestic animals as well as
of humans can be transmitted to other animals at
Canine Lafora's disease
 least under experimental conditions and are therefore
In dogs, the disease has been described as an inherited
called: transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
problem in Beagles, Basset Hounds and Miniature
(TSE) (Table 8.6).
 Rough-Coated Dachshunds. In the latter, the genetic
 TSE are progressive lethal diseases with very long
defect has been identified as the first triplet repeat disor-
incubation periods (years) with a spongy state of the
CNS in the absence of inflammation. The development
der to be discovered in domestic animals. In contrast to
 of the disease is associated with a conformational change
humans, in dogs the clinical signs start late in life with
(as in children) myoclonus epilepsy. The neuronal inclu-
of a normal GPl-anchored cellular protein called prion
 sions have a characteristic morphology allowing diag-
protein, abbreviated PrP (c stands for cell), which
nosis from HE sections and electron microscopy (Fig.
undergoes a conformational change resulting in the
 accumulation of a protease-resistant isoform called PrPd
8.16). Polyglucosan bodies are sometimes found in the
 brain of aging dogs and cats not associated with Lafora's
(d stands for disease). This accumulation is visible as
disease.
amyloid fibrils in histological plaques, which occur in
certain human and experimental TSE diseases. These
scrapie-associated fibrils (SAFs) can also be seen by elec-
8.5.4 Acquired lysosomal storage diseases
tron microscopy following density gradient centrifuga-
These have been reported to result from ingestion of
tion of homogenized brain. Thus the pathogenesis is
plant toxins. These toxins affect lysosomal enzymes by
similar to other so-called protein conformation disorders
various herbivorous species as discussed in Chapter 6.
such as Alzheimer's disease (see Section 8.2.4). Unique
to TSE is that the accumulated amyloid can transmit the
disease to other animals. The prion theory postulates 
8.6 Spongiform encephalopathies
that PrP', also called prion, is capable of initiating its
8.6.1 Transmissible degenerative diseases
 own replication by acting as a template for further PrPe
From a pathological view, spongiform encephalopa-
molecules to become abnormally folded. Thus, accord-
thies (SE) are clearly degenerative diseases with sym-
ing to the prion theory the infectious agent of TSE
Fig. 8.16 Lafora's disease. Dog. Basset Hound. Thalamus. A: Typical Lafora body intraneuronal inclusions with a solid dark centre and
outer light halo. HE. B: Ultrastructurally. the inclusions consist of an electron-dense core surrounded by a fibrillar matrix. Electron
micrograph. (Reproduced with permission from Dr Schwarz-Porsche.)
Degenerative diseases
183
Table 8.6 Tansmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
SPECIES
DISEASE: TRANSMISSION
Human
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), sporadic, familial
Kuru, food bome (cannibalism)
Variant CJD, food borne infection (BSE)
Gerstmann-Staussler-Scheinker (GSS), hereditary
Familial fatal insomnia (FFI), hereditary
Small ruminants 
Classical scrapie, natural infection
Atypical scrapie, transmission mode unknown
Cattle
Classical bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), fod borne infection 
Atypical BSE, transmission mode unknown
Mink
Transmissible mink encephalopathy. food borne infection (scrapie?)
Zoo ungulates
BSE, food borne infection
Domestic cats, zoo felids
Feline spongiform encephalopathy, food borne infection (BSE)
 American mule deer/elk
Chronic wasting disease (CWD), natural infection
 consists solely of protein. Genetics of the PrP gene and
turally, the vacuoles are located in neuronal cell
experiments with transgenic mice lend support to the
processes. The neuroanatomical localization of spongi-
prion theory. The major argument against it is the exist-
form change depends on the species and TSE strain. In
ence of strain-dependent variation. How exactly the
 BSE, this change is predominant in the brainstem with
PrPd accumulation leads to vacuolation of neurons is
the nucleus of the solitary tract and the spinal trigeminal
not clear.
nuclei as the first consistently affected areas.
As a result of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy
 In scrapie, lesion distribution depends on the strain.
(BSE) outbreak in the late twentieth century, these TSEs
 In feline spongiform encephalopathy (FSE), spongiform
received enormous attention of the media, politics and
 changes are invariably found in the caudate nucleus, but
consequently research funding organizations, fostering
 they are widespread and also often encountered in the
an immense flood of scientific information. As a result
 thalamus, cortex and brainstem. Spongiform change may
of eradication measures, the incidence of TSEs declined
sometimes be confused with spongy degeneration, brain
rapidly back to pre-BSE levels, again being very rare
edema and postmortem degeneration (see Fig. 6.14 for
 diseases of limited economic importance but remaining
 differential diagnosis of spongy state in the CNS).
a public health issue.
The second hallmark of TSE is vacuolation of neuronal
cytoplasm. This change is exceedingly rare in conditions
8.6.2 Neuropathology of TSE
other than TSE and rarely occurs in postmortem degen-
The basic neuropathology of TSE is very similar in all
eration. However, few intracytoplasmic neuronal vacu-
these conditions both in humans and animals. The
 oles are a frequent finding in the brainstem and midbrain
 major differences between species and between TSE
of normal ruminants. Neuronal vacuoles can vary in
strains within a species, apart from the length of incuba-
size, they can be single or multiple and are frequently
tion time, only relate to the distribution of the lesions
not associated with neuronal degeneration (Fig. 8.17C).
in the CNS and to the morphology and biochemical
 Neuronal vacuoles are mostly empty; occasionally gran-
profiles of the PrPd accumulations. The morphological
ular or amorphous inclusions may be found within
hallmark of TSE is spongiform change of specific areas of
them. Neuronal vacuolation occurs in areas of predi-
the gray matter, which is always bilaterally symmetrical.
lection. In BSE, the most important locations are the
This lesion consists of vacuolation of the neuropil,
vestibular nuclei, followed by the reticular formation,
which can readily be detected at low power magnifi-
 parasympathetic nuclei of the vagus and nuclei of the
cation (Fig. 8.17A,B). These vacuoles are rather uniform
hypoglossus nerve. In scrapie, the TSE of small rumi-
in size, well delineated and they appear empty. Ultrastruc-
 nants, brainstem nuclei are also frequently affected. In
184  Veterinary  Neuropathology
Fig. 8.17 Spongiform encephalopathy. Cow. BSE. A: There is a characteristic gray matter localization of a spongy state (sn, solitary
tract nucdeus: vn, nudleus vagus; st, solitary tract). HE. B: A higher magnification of the spongiform change with associated astrogliosis.
HE. C: Intracytoplasmic neuronal vacuolation in a brainstem nucleus. HE. D: Immunohistochemical visualization of PrpPd accumulation
with a bilaterally symmetrical pattern of distribution (IV, fourth ventricde). IHC Inset: typical linear PrPd pattern of localization. IHC.
feline spongiform encephalopathy, neuronal vacuoles
ated with cell processes, assuming a fibrillar and linear
are mostly found in the nuclei of the caudal brainstem,
 pattern (Fig. 8.17D, inset). Some material is amorphous
red and vestibular nuclei.
and aggregates in plaques. Plaques are frequently seen in
In bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), neuro-
the cerebellum of sheep with scrapie. The amount of
nal loss may occur in the lateral vestibular nucleus.
  s  si  s s
Astrocytic proliferation  is typically  found  in  areas
correlate with the extent of the lesions.
undergoing spongy degeneration (Fig. 8.17B). Gliosis is
 not restricted to the areas of spongiform degeneration
8.6.3 TSEs in domestic animais
 or neuronal vacuolation, however, but frequently also
Scrapie
involves other areas in a widespread fashion. In fact, in
some scrapie forms, astrogliosis is much more promi-
The oldest known TSE is scrapie in sheep and goats.
nent and precedes the vacuolar changes. Some investiga-
More than 20 different scrapie strains are known, which
tors believe that astrocytosis in TSE may be a primary
differ from each other only in respect to the length of
 change and not merely a reaction to neuronal damage.
 the incubation time and the distribution pattern (lesion
Bilaterally symmetrical PrPd accumulation is gener-
profile) of the spongiform lesions. Scrapie in small
ally found in areas where spongiform changes occur.
ruminants is a naturally occurring disease usually with
Using immunohistochemistry for PrPd most immuno-
a low incidence within a herd. There is a clear genetic
reactive material is found in the neuropil between
 predisposition in sheep associated with polymorphisms
neurons (Fig. 8.17D). The material appears to be associ-
 at the level of at least three codons in the prion protein
Degenerative diseases 185
 gene. In scrapie, there is replication of the infectious
older than in classical BSE. Reliable information on neu-
agent in the lymphatic tissues prior to invasion of the
ropathology and PrP deposition patterns is very limited.
CNS. There is also considerable replication of the agent
in the placenta, which accounts for vertical transmis-
8.7 Spongy degenerations
sion, probably during the perinatal period, as well as
horizontal transmission through contaminated pas-
8.7.1 Definition and general morphological
tures. Clinically, animals show ataxia with hypermetria,
features
tremor and pruritis.
The morphological hallmark of these diseases is spongy
state in the CNs. This change may be more or less severe
and affects either gray or white mafter or both, as always
Atypical scrapie
in degenerative diseases, in a bilateral and symmetrical
In the frame of vast surveillance schemes for TSE in
fashion (Fig. 8.18). Basically, the spongy state is due t0
Europe, in the wake of the BSE epidemic, “atypical"
cytotoxic edema. Fluid accumulates predominantly in
scrapie was first identified in 1998 in Norwegian sheep
 astrocytes as a result of disruption of osmoregulation
and, therefore, this condition is also called Nor98. By
and also in the white matter between myelin lamellae
active surveillance, similar cases have been detected in
with splitting and ballooning of the myelin sheets.
Europe since 2002 and, in some European countries, the
numbers of atypical cases even exceed those of classical
scrapie cases. There are several differences from classical
scrapie. Arypical scrapie animals are generally older
and the salient clinical sign, whenever reported, is ataxia
whereas pruritus and wool loss are not observed. As a
rule, single animals within a herd are affected and, at
present, although atypical scrapie can be experimentally
 transmitted, natural transmission between animals has
not been shown. From the neuropathological point of
view, in contrast to classical scrapie, lesions and PrPd
deposits are mostly very mild in the brainstem, but most
 pronounced in the cerebellum.
BSE
 More than 200 000 cases of bovine spongiform enceph-
alopathy (BSE) have been diagnosed since 1985. BSE
was transmitted by animal protein supplements in the
form of meat and bone meal (MBM). Interruption of
the chain of infection by prohibiting feeding of animal
 proteins to ruminants and later to all farm animals lead
to a remarkable decrease of BSE incidence. The disease
is now nearly eradicated. BSE had also spread to about
10 other animal species, mostly sporadic cases in ante-
lopes in zoological gardens, but also to domestic cats
and captive felides causing feline spongiform enceph-
alopathy (FSE), and to humans (variant CJD) mostly in
the UK.
Atypical BSE
By means of active surveillance for BSE, at least two
Fig. 8.18 Spongy degeneration. A: Norfolk Terier pup with
 atypical forms of BsE have been detected in cattle: the
bilaterally symmetrical severe spongy state in the oculomotor
L-type (BASE) and the H-type, where L and H refer to
nudei (aqueduct depicted by arrow). HE. B. Dog. Spongy degen-
the lower and higher molecular mass of PrPd, respec-
eration of gray matter with sharply defined empty vacuoles and
tively, in the Western blot. Affected cattle are generally
 no reactive changes. HE.
186   Veterinary Neuropathology
The vacuoles in the tissue are sharply delineated and
recognized to be associated with a group of metabolic
empty (Fig. 8.18). Oten there is neither degeneration of
diseases, the so-called branched-chain organic acidurias.
neurons/axons nor of the white matter; apart from
 The latter result from an abnormality of specific enzymes
astrocytic hypertrophy described in some conditions,
involving the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids
reactive changes are usually lacking, at least in the early
(leucine, isoleucine, valine). Maple syrup urine disease
stages of the disease. In severe cases with a long clinical
(MSUD), isovaleric acidemia (IVA), propionic aciduria
history, destructive lesions, presumably resulting from
(PA) and methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) represent the
compression or poor perfusion, may occur, with degen-
most common human organic acidurias.
eration of neurons, axons and myelin and even frank
 Congenital neuraxial edema/spongy
malacia. Reactive changes in this case consist of invasion
of macrophages, vascular proliferation and gliosis. Thus,
degeneration in cattle
morphologically there may be some overlap between
Spongy degeneration of the CNS has been recognized as
this group of diseases and the selective symmetrical
an autosomal recessive hereditary disease in Hereford
encephalomalacias (SSEs) (Section 8.8) depending on
cattle since the 1960s and was originally named con-
the severity and stage of the disease. In the case of white
genital cerebral edema or hereditary neuraxial edema.
matter involvement there may some resemblance to leu-
The lesions affect the gray and white matter and are
kodystrophies (Section 8.4.1). In several reports, the
severe. Later it was shown that this lesion in Hereford
term spongiform degeneration has been used to denote
and red poll cattle was caused by a branched-chain keto
 n os ,   s 
acid decarboxylase deficiency, also named maple syrup
reserved for the TSEs discussed in Section 8.6.
urine disease. In addition citrullinemia, an inherited
 It is important to differentiate spongy degeneration
aminoacidopathy, has been recognized in Friesian calves
from spongiform encephalopathy and various lesions of
with argininosuccinatesynthetase deficiency. The latter
 the white matter associated with status spongiosus (see
induces  accumulation  of citrulline  and  subsequent 
Fig. 6.14).
spongy degeneration.
 Spongy degenerations are listed in Table 8.7.
Organic acidurias in dogs
As in cattle, organic acidurias have also been discovered
8.7.2 Spongy degeneration
in small animals. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-
in branched-chain organic acidurias
HGA), a hereditary neurometabolic disorder, has been
Organic acidurias in people
described  in  Staffordshire  Bull  Terriers and West
In people, these diseases have been known for a long
Highland White Terriers; it also occurs in people. In
time as spongy degeneration of van Bogaert-Bertrand
dogs, an analogous mutation has been found in the L-2-
type or Canavan's disease. Later, such lesions were
hydroxyglutaric acid dehydrogenase gene. Marked spongy
Table 8.7 Spongy degenerations.
SUBTYPE
DISEASE
SPECIES/BREED
Organic acidurias
L-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria
West Highland White Terrier, Staffordshire 
Bull Terrier
Methylmalonic/malonic aciduria
Labrador Retriever
Maple syrup urine disease
Hereford, Red Poll cattle
Citrullinemia
Holstein-Friesian cattle
Mitochondrial encephalopathy
Canine spongiform leukoencephalomyelopathy
Shetland Sheepdog. Australian cattle dog
Unknown cause
Familial cerebellar ataxia with hydrocephalus
Bull Mastiff
Spongy degeneration with cerebellar ataxia
Malinois dog
Congenital status spongiosus
Gelbvieh cattle
Degenerative diseases
187
changes predominantly affect the gray matter of the
Toxic-metabolic causes of spongy
 cerebral cortex, thalamus, cerebellum and brainstem.
degeneration
Methylmalonic and malonic aciduria has been observed
 in Labrador Retrievers with spongy degeneration.
In view of the fact that many different insults may
compromise the function of astrocytes to support water
8.7.3 Spongy degenerations of other causes
homeostasis in the brain, it is not surprising that a
Dogs and cats
number of toxic-metabolic conditions can induce very
 similar lesions; these are discussed in Chapter 6.
 In canine spongiform leukoencephalomyelopathy in
Shetland Sheepdogs and Australian Cattle Dogs, spongy
degeneration of the white matter has been linked to a
8.8 Selective symmetrical encephalomalacias
 missense mitochondrial DNA mutation in cytochrome
(SSE)
b. In humans, there are also certain mitochondrial
encephalopathies (see Section 8.8.2) targeting the white
8.8.1 General morphological features
matter with spongy degeneration (e.g. Kearns-Sayre
Neurological  syndromes  characterized  by  sharply
syndrome).
defined areas of encephalomalacia in a bilaterally sym-
Spongy degeneration of unknown cause has been
metrical fashion in selective anatomical areas of the
 described in sporadic cases or small, perhaps familial,
brain and spinal cord have been described in several
clusters in several dog breeds and cats. Predominantly
animal species (Table 8.8) and humans, mostly in juve-
 gray matter involvement has been reported in Malinois,
nile individuals. We prefer the term SSE to distinguish
Saluki and Bull Mastiff puppies and in Birman, Persian
these diseases from enterotoxemias and other acquired
and Shorthair kittens. Spongy degeneration of the white
forms, called focal symmetrical encephalomalacia (FSE).
 matter has been seen in Silky terriers, Samoyed puppies,
The pathology of these diseases is quite characteristic,
Labrador Retrievers , Border terriers and Egyptian Mau
consisting of focal symmetrical areas of malacia in
kittens and adult Ragdoll cats. In Bull Mastiffs (famil-
specific gray matter areas of the CNS (Fig. 8.19). The
 ial cerebellar ataxia with hydrocephalus), Malinois
lesions vary in intensity from spongiosis to cavitation of
(spongy degeneration with cerebellar ataxia) and
the tissue. Interestingly, in areas of malacia, neurons are
 Border terriers (spongiform leukoencephalomyelopa-
frequently spared. Reactive changes include vascular
thy) the disease is hereditary. We have seen sporadic
proliferation, astrogliosis, and sometimes perivascular
cases in other dog breeds, Domestic Shorthair cats and
mononuclear cuffing. Astrocytes can be vacuolated.
rabbits. A common clinical manifestation is congenital
Consult Fig. 6.1 for the differential diagnosis of malacia
tremor: animals show a generalized body tremor which
in the CNS.
 increases with excitement and disappears at rest. The
spongy changes in all these conditions varies in severity
8.8.2 Mitochondrial encephalopathies
and distribution pattern.
in people and similar lesions in animals
Cattle
Leigh syndrome
Congenital status spongiosus of Gelbvieh-cross cattle
Mitochondrial protein defects have been  frequently
is probably a genetically transmitted disease, which is
associated with muscle diseases in people and animals
not associated with organic aciduria.
(mitochondrial myopathies). Such defects are also the
Table 8.8 Selective symmetrical encephalomalacias (SSE).
SUBTYPE
DISEASE
SPECIES/BREED
Mitochondrial (possibly)
Hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy
Australian Cattle Dog
Alaskan Husky encephalopathy
Alaskan Husky
Subacute necrotizing encephalopathy
Yorkshire Terrier
Multifocal symmetrical necrotizing encephalomyelopathy
Angus cattle
Multifocal subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy
Simmental cattle
Encephalomyelopathy
Simmental/crosses
188   Veterinary Neuropathology
cause of a variety of brain or PNS lesions in people
and cerebellar nuclei and gray matter of the spinal cord
and in domestic animals, as shown in Sections 8.3.1
(most severely in segments C7-T1 ) (Fig. 8.19C). Electron
(sensory ataxic neuropathy in Golden Retriever dogs)
microscopy reveals abnormally high numbers of swollen
and 8.7.3 (canine spongiform leukoencephalomyelopa-
mitochondria in astrocytes.
thy). In Leigh syndrome in children, focal symmetrical
 In Alaskan Husky encephalopathy, macroscopic cav-
 encephalomalacia is associated with molecular defects
itating, bilaterally symmetrical, malacic lesions are con-
in respiratory enzymes of mitochondria. Other con-
sistently found in the thalamus (Fig. 8.19A,B). Other
firmed human mitochondrial encephalopathies with
 affected areas include the caudate nucleus, putamen,
gray matter disease are MELAS (Mitochondrial enceph-
midbrain, pons, medulla, base of the cerebral sulci and
alomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes),
midline cerebellar gray maffer as well as sometimes the
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with red ragged fibers)
cervical spinal cord white matter. In the lesions, there is
and Alper's syndromes.
spongiosis, vascular proliferation, astrogliosis and in
some lesions perivascular invasion with inflammatory
SSE in small animals
cells (Fig. 8.19D). Neurons may be remarkably preserved
Sporadic cases of selective symmetrical encephaloma-
within severely affected areas. Reactive astrocytes are
lacia have been reported in several dog breeds and
 occasionally vacuolated. Very similar lesions occur in
in cats. In hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy of
subacute necrotizing encephalopathy in Yorkshire
Australian Cattle Dogs, lesions occur in the brainstem 
Terriers. In the latter, evidence was claimed for mito-
D
tive characteristic bilaterally symmetrical areas of malacia in thalamus. B: Dog. AHE. Corresponding transverse slice through the tha-
lamus with bilateral cystic encephalomalacia. C: Australian Cattle Dog. Spinal cord. Hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy. There are
bilaterally symmetrical areas of myelomalacia. LFB-HE. D: AHE. Histology of the thalamus with malacia, infiltration of gitter cells,
neovascular proliferation, mild perivascular mononucdear cell cuffing and marked reactive gemistocytic and fibrillary astrocytosis.
Morphologically intact neurons can be found in these lesions. HE.
Degenerative diseases
189
chondrial abnormalities, namely reduced activity of
eases. The reader is referred to the specialized literature
respiratory chain complexes I and IV. However, while
for further information. Whenever a suspicion of a neu-
morphological changes have been seen in mitochondria
romuscular disease exists, appropriately sampled mate-
in several of these conditions, all efforts to identify une-
rial should be retained and stored for subsequent
quivocal biochemical and/or molecular biological mito-
evaluation by specialized laboratories. Routinely FF-PE
 chondrial defects, similar to those in Leigh syndrome
tissue can reveal some changes but is replete with arti-
have been unsuccessful.
facts and mostly inadequate for a specific diagnosis.
SSE in large animals
8.9.1 Degenerative polyneuropathies
Angus calves which developed ataxia, nystagmus, tetanic
The classification and diagnosis of degenerative diseases
spasms and episodic convulsions at 2-6 weeks of age
of the PNS is based on several criteria: histopathological
died within 1 week affer the onset of clinical signs. The
 changes, distribution pattern of the lesions (either prox-
multifocal  symmetrical  necrotizing encephalomy-
imal or distal parts of the nerves are primarily involved),
elopathy in Angus calves affected the parasympathetic
whether sensory or motor nerves are involved and
vagal nucleus, lateral cuneate and olivary nuclei in the
whether there are additional lesions in the spinal cord
medulla oblongata and sometimes the spinal cord, sub-
and brain. Several degenerative polyneuropathies in
stantia nigra and cerebellar peduncles.
dogs appear to be distal axonopathies, with degenera-
In multifocal subacute necrotizing encephalomy-
 tion beginning at the distal end of the nerve fbers.
elopathy in Simmental calves and Simmental-crosses,
An important clinical presentation in this respect is
such lesions were most consistently located in the olivary
laryngeal paralysis. Animals with motor and mixed
nuclei but also in other brain regions and in the thoracic
spinal cord.
and neurogenic atrophy of the muscles. Sensory nerve
A similar condition, encephalomyelopathy of Sim-
involvement is characterized by ataxia and abnormal
 mental and Simmental-cross calves, a more protracted
sensation, sometimes leading to automutilation. Another
disease, occurs in 5-12-month-old animals in New
distinguishing feature is whether axons or myelin sheaths
Zealand, Australia and the US, with ataxia, dullness
are primarily involved. In routine diagnostic work on
and emaciation developing over up to 6 months. The
HE sections from FF-PE tissue, axonal degeneration,
 encephalomalacic lesions are found in the basal nuclei,
demyelination, fiber loss and Schwann cell prolifera-
 brainstem and spinal cord gray matter. Abnormal mito-
tion can be detected in all these conditions. A precise
chondria are found in muscle tissue but not in the CNS.
diagnosis, however, requires both specialized expertise
 A similar syndrome has been seen in Limousin cattle in
and correct tissue sampling, storage and processing.
Great Britain, but in these animals there is more involve-
8.9.2 Degenerative myopathies
ment of the white matter.
An impressive spectrum of hereditary muscle diseases
Acquired FSE
occurs in domestic animals; these are clinically charac-
As discussed in Chapter 6, bilaterally symmetrical areas
terized by exercise-induced weakness, muscle atrophy or
of encephalomalacia occur in a number of conditions
sometimes hypertrophy and muscle pain. All these dis-
caused by intoxications and deficiencies, notably in
eases have been described in specific breeds, mostly in
small ruminants. Consult Fig. 6.1 for the differential
dogs and cats. Many of these are functional disorders,
diagnosis of malacia.
but several are associated with degenerative changes in
the muscle tissue, which can be seen in muscle biopsies.
8.9 Degenerative diseases of the peripheral
Among these, muscular dystrophies are an important
 group, particularly in dogs but also in cats associated
nervous system and muscle
with hereditary dystrophin deficiency, dystrophin being
 In recent years, enormous progress has been made in the
 a major muscle protein. In addition, mutations of other
 recognition, description and molecular genetics of dis-
muscle proteins (e.g. alpha 2 laminin, sarcoglycan
eases of the peripheral nervous system and muscle in
complex) have been identified. Histologically, there is
domestic, mostly small animals. The diagnosis of these
degeneration and regeneration of muscle fibers with
diseases  requires  in-depth  neurological  assessment,
reactive changes, and atrophy and sclerosis in advanced
including electrodiagnostic testing and specialized his-
 stages. These dystrophin deficiencies in dogs and cats are
tological, histochemical, immunohistochemical and
very similar to their human counterparts and have been
ultrastructural techniques. Below, we very briefly review
developed as important animal models for pathogenesis
a few aspects of classification and nature of these dis-
 and therapy.
190
0 Veterinary Neuropathology
Metabolic myopathies result from inborn metabolic
O'Brien DP, Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, Khan S, Coates JR, Johnson
 defects. In mitochondrial myopathies, there is massive
GC, Taylor JF Genetic mapping of canine multiple system
degeneration and ectodermal dysplasia loci. J Hered 2005;96:
proliferation and enlargement of mitochondria in tissue
727-734.
sections leading to a typical pattern called red ragged
Urkasemsin G, Linder KE, Bell JS, de Lahunta A, Olby NJ. Hereditary
fibers (RRFs). Lipid storage myopathies are charac-
cerebellar degeneration in Scottish terriers. J Vet Intern Med
terized by accumulation of lipid droplets. Muscular
2010;24:565-570.
 glycogen storage diseases occur in small animals and
are quite common in horses resulting from mutations
Other neuronal degenerations
in the glycogen synthase I gene. The disease can be
Geiger DA, Miller AD, Cutter-Schatzberg K, Shelton GD, de Lahunta
diagnosed by finding amylase-resistant PAS-positive
 A, Schatzberg SJ. Encephalomyelopathy and polyneuropathy asso-
inclusions in type II fibers; it does not necessarily cause
ciated with neuronal vacuolation in two Boxer littermates. Vet
clinical signs but appears to predispose the animal to
Pathol 2009;46:1160-1165.
Vanhaesebrouck AE, Shelton GD, Garosi L, Harcourt-Brown TR,
other muscular problems such as exercise-induced
Couturier J, Behr S, Harvey RJ, Jeffery ND, Matiasek K, Blakemore
rhabdomyolysis (leading to myoglobinuria). The latter
WF, Granger N. A novel movement disorder in related male
is characterized by acute muscle fiber necrosis, the
Labrador Retrievers characterized by extreme generalized muscular
pathogenesis of which is complex. A particularly severe
stiffness. J Vet Intern Med 2011;25:1089-1096.
form of rhabdomyolysis is equine atypical myopathy.
Exertional  
rhabdomyolysis also occurs in
1racing
Alzheimer disease
Greyhounds and sled dogs. Further examples of rare
Cotman CW, Head E. The canine (dog) model of human aging and
myodegenerative diseases in small animals, which can be
disease: dietary, environmental and immunotherapy approaches.
diagnosed on biopsies, are nemalin myopathy (nemalin 
J Alzheimers Dis 2008;15:685-707.
Insua D, Suarez ML, Santamarina G, Sarasa M, Pesini P. Dogs with
rods in muscle fibers), myofibrillar myopathy with
canine counterpart of Alzheimer's disease lose noradrenergic
desmin storage in muscle fibers and centronuclear-like
neurons. Neurobiol Aging 2010;3 1:625-635.
myopathy.
Further reading
Wallerian-like axonal degenerations
Awano T, Johnson GS, Wade CM, Katz ML, Johnson GC, Taylor JF,
Motor neuron diseases
Perloski M, Biagi T, Baranowska I, Long S, March PA, Olby NJ,
Da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, de Lahunta A. Multisystem axon-
Shelton GD, Khan S, O'Brien DP, Lindblad-Toh K, Coates JR.
Genome-wide association analysis reveals a SODl mutation in
opathy and neuronopathy in Golden Retriever dogs. J Vet Intern
canine degenerative myelopathy that resermbles amyotrophic lateral
Med 2009;23:935-939.
sclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:2794-2799.
Fyfe JC, Menotti-Raymond M, David VA, Brichta L, Schaffer AA,
Agarwala R, Murphy WJ, Wedemeyer WJ, Gregory BL, Buzzell BG,
Baranowska I, Jaderlund KH, Nennesmo I, Holmqvist E, Heidrich N,
Drummond MC, Wirth B, O'Brien SJ. An approximately 140-khb
Larsson NG, Andersson G, Wagner EG, Hedhammar A, Wibom R,
deletion associated with feline spinal muscular atrophy implies an
 Andersson L. Sensory ataxic neuropathy in golden retriever dogs is
caused by a deletion in the mitochondrial tRNATyr gene. PLoS
essential LIXl function for motor neuron survival. Genome Res
Genet 2009;5(5):e1000499. Epub 2009 May 29.
2006;16:1084 1090.
Green SL, Westendorf JM, Jaffe H, Pant HC, Cork LC, Ostrander EA,
Jaderlund KH, Orvind E, Johnsson E, Matiasek K, Hahn CN, Malm
Vignaux F, Ferrell JE Jr. Allelic variants of the canine heavy neuro-
S, Hedhammar A. A neurologic syndrome in Golden Retrievers
filament (NFH) subunit and extensive phosphorylation in dogs
 presenting as a sensory ataxic neuropathy. I Vet Intern Med 2007;21:
with motor neuron disease. J Comp Pathol 2005;132:33-50.
1307-1315.
He Q, Lowrie C, Shelton GD, Castellani RJ, Menotti-Raymond M,
 March PA, Coates JR, Abyad RJ, Williams DA, O'Brien DP, Olby NJ,
Murphy W, O'Brien SJ, Swanson WF, Fyfe JC. Inherited motor
 Keating JH, Oglesbee M. Degenerative myelopathy in 18 Pembroke
neuron disease in domestic cats: a model of spinal muscular
Welsh Corgi dogs. Vet Pathol 2009;46:241-250.
Rohdin C, Lidtke L, Wohlsein P, Jaderlund KH. New aspects of hered-
atrophy. Pediatr Res 2005;57:324-330.
Krebs S, Medugorac I, Rother S, Strasser K, Forster M. A missense
itary ataxia in smooth-haired fox terriers. Vet Rec 20l0;166:
mutation in the 3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase FVT1 as can-
557-560.
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:6746-6751.
Degenerative myelopathy in old dogs
Coates JR, Wininger FA. Canine degenerative myelopathy. Vet Clin
Cerebellar degenerations
 North Am Small Anim Pract 2010;40:929-950.
Brault LS, Cooper CA, Famula TR, Murray JD, Penedo MC. Mapping
Johnston PE, Barrie JA, McCulloch MC, Anderson TJ, Griffiths IR.
of equine cerebellar abiotrophy to ECA2 and identification of a
Central nervous systerm pathology in 25 dogs with chronic degen-
potential causative mutation affcting expression of MUTYH.
erative radiculomyelopathy. Vet Rec 2000; 146:629-633.
Genomics 2011;97:121-129.
Kamishina H, Oji T, Cheeseman JA, Clemmons RM. Detection of
Flegel T, Matiasek K, Henke D, Grevel V. Cerebellar cortical degenera-
oligoclonal bands in cerebrospinal fluid from German Shepherd
tion with selective granule cell loss in Bavarian mountain dogs.
dogs with degenerative myelopathy by isoelectric focusing and
J Small Anim Pract 2007;48:462-465.
immunofixation. Vet Clin Pathol 2008;37:217-220.
Degenerative diseases
191
congenital goiter and a mutation in the thyroid peroxidase gene.
Wallerian-like degeneration in large animais
Vet Pathol 2007;44:50-56.
 Drogemiller C, Reichart U, Seuberlich T, Oevermann A, Baumgartner
Thomsen B, Nissen PH, Agerholm JS, Bendixen C. Congenital bovine
M, Kihni Boghenbor K, Stoffel MH, Syring C, Meylan M, Muiller
spinal dysmyelination is caused by a missense mutation in the
S, Miller M, Gredler B, Solkner J, Leeb T. An unusual splice
SPAST gene. Neurogenetics 2010;11:175-183.
defect in the mitofusin 2 gene (MFN2) is associated with degen-
Yaeger MJ, Majercik K, Carter M, Rothschild M. An autosomal reces-
erative axonopathy in Tyrolean Grey cattle. PLoS One 201l;6(4):
sive, lethal, neurologic disease of Gordon Setter puppies. J Vet
el8931.
Diagn Invest 2000; 12:570-573.
Moisan PG, Steffen DJ, Sanderson MW, Nietfeld JC, Finley MR,
Grotelueschen DM, Andrews GA, Johnson G, Williamson L,
Lysosomal storage diseases
Rushton SD, Hall DG, Harmon BG. A familial degenerative neu-
Abitbol M, Thibaud JL, Olby NJ, Hitte C, Puech JP, Maurer M, Pilot-
romuscular disease of Gelbvieh cattle. J Vet Diagn Invest 2002;14:
 Storck F Hedan B, Dreano S, Brahimi S, Delattre D, André C, Gray
140-149.
F, Delisle F Caillaud C, Bernex F, Panthier JI, Aubin-Houzelstein G,
Timsit E, Albaric O, Colle MA, Costiou P, Cesbron N, Bareille N, Assié
Blot S, Tiret L. A canine arylsulfatase G (ARSG) mutation leading
S. Clinical and histopathologic characterization of a central and
to a sulfatase deficiency is associated with neuronal ceroid lipofus-
peripheral axonopathy in Rouge-des-prés (Maine Anjou) calves.
cinosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107: 14775- 14778.
J Vet Intern Med 201l;386-392.
Haskins M. Gene therapy for lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) in
Jarge animal models. ILAR J 2009;50:112-121.
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
Lohi H, Young EJ, Fitzmaurice SN, Rusbridge C, Chan EM, Vervoort
Aleman M, Finno CJ, Higgins RJ, Puschner B, Gerocota B, Ghohil K,
M, Turnbull J, Zhao XC, Ianzano L, Paterson AD, Sutter NB,
LeCouteur RA, Madigan JE Neuroaxonal dystrophy in Quarter
Ostrander EA, Andre C, Shelton GD, Ackerley CA, Scherer SW,
horses JAVMA 2011;239:823-833.
 Minassian BA. Expanded repeat in canine epilepsy. Science 2005;
Fyfe JC, Al-Tamimi RA, Castellani RJ, Rosenstein D, Goldowitz D,
307:81.
Siso S, Navarro C, Hanzlicek D, Vandevelde M. Adult onset thalam-
 Henthorn Ps. Inherited neuroaxonal dystrophy in dogs causing
lethal, fetal-onset motor system dysfunction and cerebellar hypo-
ocerebellar degeneration in dogs associated to neuronal storage of
 ceroid lipopigment. Acta Neuropathol 2004;108:386-392.
plasia. J Comp Neurol 2010;518:3771-3784.
Warren CD, Alroy J. Morphological, biochemical and molecular
Jolly RD, Johnstone AC, Williams SD, Zhang K, Jordan TW.Segmental
 biology approaches for the diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases.
axonopathy of Merino sheep in New Zealand. N Z Vet J 2006;54:
J Vet Diagn Invest 2000;12:483-496.
210-217.
McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Mayhew IG, Elks R, Lybaert P, Watte C,
 Bedford PG. Clinical and pathological observations in English
Spongiform encephalopathies
cocker spaniels with primary metabolic vitamin E deficiency and
Aguzzi A, Calella AM.Prions: protein aggregation and infectious dis-
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet Rec 2003;153:287-392.
eases. Physiol Rev 2009;89:1105-1152.
Nibe K, Kita C, Morozumi M, Awamura Y, Tamura S, Okuno S,
Jeffrey M, Gonzalez L. Classical sheep transmissible spongiform
Kobayashi T, Uchida K. Clinicopathological features of canine neu-
roaxonal dystrophy and cerebellar cortical abiotrophy in Papillon
ical disease. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2007;33:373-394.
and Papillon-related dogs. I Vet Med Sci 2007;69:1047-1052.
 Jeffrey M, McGovern G, Siso S, Gonzalez L. Cellular and sub-cellular
Leukodystrophies
logical changes, accumulation of abnormal prion protein and clini-
cal disease. Acta Neuropathol 20ll;12l:113-134.
Fletcher JL, Williamson P, Horan D, Taylor RM. Clinical signs and
neuropathologic abnormalities in working Australian Kelpies with
form encephalopathies in ruminants: a challenge for disease sur-
globoid cell leukodystrophy (Krabbe disease). J Am Vet Med Assoc
veillance and control. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2010;22:823-842.
2010;237:682-688.
Surguchev A, Surguchov A. Conformational diseases: looking into the
Kessell AE, Finnie IW, Manavis J, Cheetham GD, Blumbergs PC. A
eyes. Brain Res Bull 2010;81:12-24.
Rosenthal  fiber encephalomyelopathy resermbling Alexander's
Vidal E, Acin C, Foradada L, Monzon M, Marquez M, Monleon E,
disease in 3 sheep. Vet Pathol 2012;49:248-254.
Pumarola M, Badiola JJ, Bolea R. Immunohistochermical charac-
Morrison JP, Schatzherg SJ, De Lahunta A, Ross JT, Bookbinder P,
terisation of classical scrapie neuropathology in sheep. J Comp
Summers BA. Oligodendroglial dysplasia in two bullmastiff dogs.
Pathol 2009;141:135- 146.
Vet Pathol 2006;43:29-35.
Wemheuer WM, Benestad SL, Wrede A, Wemheuer WE, Brenig B,
Oevermann A, Bley T, Konar M, Lang J, Vandevelde M.A novel leu-
Bratherg B, Schulz-Schaeffer WJ. Detection of classical and atypi-
cal/Nor98 scrapie by the paraffin-embedded tissue blot method.
2008;22:467-471.
Vet Rec 2009;164:677-681.
Siso S, Botteron C, Muhle A, Vandevelde M. A novel leukodystrophy
in a dog. I Comp Pathol 2005;132:232-236.
Spongy degenerations
Li FY, Cuddon PA, Song I, Wood SL, Patterson JS, Shelton GD, Duncan
Dysmyelination
ID. Canine spongiform leukoencephalomyelopathy is associated
Millan Y, Mascort J, Blanco A, Costa C, Masian D, Guil-Luna S,
with a missense mutation in cytochrome b. Neurobiol Dis 2006;
    s si    
21:35-42.
Weimaraner dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2010;51:594-598.
Penderis J, Calvin J, Abramson C, Jakobs C, Pettitt L, Binns
Pettigrew R, Fyfe JC, Gregory BL, Lipsitz D, Delahunta A, Summers
MM, Verhoeven NM, O'Driscoll E, Platt SR, Mellersh CS.
 BA, Shelton GD. CNS hypomyelination in Rat Terrier dogs with
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: characterisation of the molecular
192
2 Veterinary Neuropathology
defect in a spontaneous canine model. J Med Genet 2007;44:
Filosto M, Tomelleri G, Tonin P, Scarpelli M, Vattemi G, Rizzuto N,
334-340.
Padovani A, Simonati A. Neuropathology of mitochondrial dis-
Scurrell E, Davies E, Baines E, Cherubini GB, Platt S, Blakemore W
eases. Biosci Rep 2007;27:23-30.
Williams A, Schoniger S. Neuropathological findings in a Staf-
 Philbey AW, Martel KS. A multifocal symmetrical necrotizing enceph-
fordshire bull terrier with l-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. J Comp
alomyelopathy in Angus calves. Aust Vet J 2003;81:226-229.
Pathol 2008;138:160-164.
 Skvorak KJ. Animal models of maple syrup urine disease. J Inherit
Metab Dis 2009;32:229-246.
Degenerative diseases of the PNs and
Windsor P, Agerholm J. Inherited diseases of Australian Holstein-
muscles
Friesian cattle. Aust Vet J 2009;87:193-199.
Coates IR, O'Brien DP Inherited peripheral neuropathies in dogs and
Selective symmetrical encephalomalacias
cats. Vet Clin Small Anim 2004;34:1361-1401.
Dixon PM, Hahn CN, Barakzai SZ. Recurrent laryngeal neuropathy
Baiker K, Hofmann S, Fischer A, Godde T, Medl S, Schmahl W, Bauer
 (RLN) research: where are we and to where are we heading? Equine
MF, Matiasek K. Leigh-like subacute necrotising encephalopathy in
Vet J 2009;41:324-327.
Yorkshire Terriers: neuropathological characterisation, respiratory
Shelton GD. Routine and specialized laboratory testing for the diag-
chain activities and mitochondrial DNA. Acta Neuropathol 2009;
nosis of neuromuscular diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol
118:697-709.
20 10;39:278-295.
Brenner O, Wakshlag JJ, Summers BA, de Lahunta A. Alaskan Husky
 Shelton GD. What's new in muscle and peripheral nerve diseases? Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2007;20:249-255.
subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy (Leigh syndrome).
Shelton GD, Engvall E. Canine and feline models of human inherited
Acta Neuropathol 2000;100:50-62.
muscle diseases. Neuromuscul Disord 2005;15:127-138.
This book is accompanied by a companion website which is maintained by
the Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Dept of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland.
Www.wiley.com/go/vandevelde/veterinaryneuropathology
Page numbers in italics refer to figures and those in bold to tables, but note that figures and tables are only indicated when they are
separated from their text references.
abscess 52, 64-5
Arabian horses
axonal degenerations (axonopathies)
Acanthamoeba 69
cerebellar cortical abiotrophy 164
166-73
acidophilic neuronal necrosis 14, 15-16,
 cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia
in toxic metabolic diseases 121
38,110,111, 112
98-9
axonal spheroids 19, 121, 158,166,171,
 also see ischemic neuronal necrosis
arachnoidal cysts 103-4
172
acute polyneuritis/polyradiculoneuritis
arachnoid membrane 9
axonotmesis 89
77-8
arboviruses 56-7
adaptive immune response 48-9
Arnold Chiari malformation 100, 101
Babesia 70
Aeschynomene indica 115
 arterial blood supply
bacterial infections 63-8
Afghan dog, necrotizing myelopathy
brain 39,40
Balamuthia sp 69
173-4, 174
spinal cord 44,45
Banderas neonatal ataxia 160, 164
agyria 95,96
arteriolosclerosis 39
basal nuclei 4
Aino virus 98
arteriosclerosis 39
basilar artery 39-40
Akabane virus 97,98
arthropod-borne encephalitides 56-7
Batten disease 181
Alaskan Husky encephalopathy (AHE)
artifacts 26-7
Baylisascaris procyonis 71,72
188
Ascaris 70
 Beagle pain syndrome 73
alcelaphine herpes virus 1 (AHV-1) 61
ascending myelomalacia 83
 Bergmann astrocytes 163
Alexander's disease (fbrinoid
aspergillosis 67, 68
β-amyloid protein 166
leukodystrophy) 174, 176
Aspergillus clavatus intoxication 119
Birman cats, peripheral and central
algal infections 53, 69
astrocytes 7、 8
axonopathy 167,169
allergic encephalitis 72-3
endfeet processes 7,25
blastomycosis 69
Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like lesions
fibrillary 21
blood-brain barrier (BBB) 7,23-4,25
166
gemistocytic 21
disturbances 24, 25, 34
Alzheimer type II cells 21-2, 124
immunohistochemical stains 22
inflammatory cell trafficking 49
amebiasis 71
reactions to injury 20-2
blood vessels 7,23-4
 amebic infections 69-70
astrocytic hypertrophy of white matter,
increased permeability 24
anmmonia poisoning 122
Gordon setter 178
reactive changes 24
β-amyloid protein 166
astrocytoma 133-7
blue eye diseases 57
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
anaplastic 135
bluetongue virus 97,98
159
diffuse 135,136
border disease (virus) 63, 97,98
anatomy see neuroanatomy
gemistocytic 134-5
Borna disease 57-8
anemia 41,42
pilocytic 133,134
Borrelia burgdorferi 68
anencephaly 93
subependymal giant cell (SEGA)
bovine herpes virus encephalitis 56
anesthesia accidents 41
133-4
bovine progressive degenerative
aneurysms 43
astrogliosis 21
myeloencephalopathy 167, 170
Angiostrongylus 71
atherosclerosis 39
bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Angus calves,
atlanto-axial subluxation 88
(BSE) 183, 184, 185
congenital tremor, 178, 174
Aujeszky's disease 54
 bovine virus diarrhea/mucosal disease
mannosidosis 179
Australian Cattle Dog,
(BVD/MD) virus 63, 97,98, 100
multifocal symmetrical necrotizing
canine spongiform
Boxers, progressive axonopathy 167, 173
encephalomyelopathy 189
leukoencephalomyelopathy 187
brachial plexus avulsion 90
annual ryegrass staggers 115
hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy
brain abcess 64-5
anomalies see congenital malformations
188
brain atrophy, old dogs 27,28
aortic thrombosis, distal 46
Australian stringhalt 125
brain edema 25-6,81, 110, 122,124
 apoptosis, neuronal 16
autoimmune myositis 78-9
cytotoxic (cellular) 21, 24,25
aqueduct, mesencephalic 5
autolysis, postmortem 26
interstitial 24-5
senosis 102,103
avian vacuolar myelinopathy 122
vasogenic 24,25,35
Veterinary Neuropathology: Essentiais of Theory and Practice, First Edition. Marc Vandevelde, Robert J. Higgins, and Anna Oevermann.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
193
194 Index
brain infarction 39-43
central peripheral axonopathy 167, 170
claustrum 4
 branched-chain organic acidurias 186-7
centronuclear-like myopathy 190
closantel intoxication 111, 122
 Brittany Spaniels,
cerebellar agenesis 98
Clostridium botulinum type C 120
hereditary spinal muscular atrophy
cerebellar cortex 6
Clostridium perfringens type D 117
167
cerebellar cortical abiotrophy (CCA)
cobalamin deficiency 121
 late-onset progressive spinocerebellar
160, 162-4
coccidiodomycosis 69
degeneration 164
neonatal 163
Cocker Spaniels, multisystem neuronal
bromethalin-derived rodenticides 122
cerebellar degenerations 160, 162-5
degeneration 165, 160
Brown Swiss cattle
acquired 165
coenurosis 71-2
Congenital bovine dysmyelination 174
combined with other systems 164
colliculi 5, 6
 progressive degenerative
cerebellar dysplasia 98-100
concussion 85
myeloencephalopathy
170
cerebellar folial hypoplasia 98
congenital bovine spinal dysmyelination
 spinal muscular atrophy 161, 162
cerebellar granule cell degeneration 160,
174, 178
BSE see bovine spongiform
164-5
congenital neuraxial edema/spongy
encephalopathy
cerebellar hypoplasia 98-100
degeneration in cattle 186
Bull Mastiffs,
and dysplasia, equine 98-9
congenital status spongiosus 186
familial cerebellar ataxia with
and hypomyelination ,swine 100
congenital tremor 174, 177, 178
hydrocephalus 187
cerebellar vermis agenesis 98
type A 63, 178
oligodendroglial dysplasia 177
cerebellar herniation 25, 26, 30
congophilic angiopathy 27,28, 166
Bungner's bands 18, 19
cerebral blood flow 38
contagious hepatitis canine 60-1
Burkholderia pseudormallei 67
cerebral cortex 2, 3, 4
contre-coup injuries 82
cerebral peduncles 5, 6
contusion
Cache River Valley virus 97,98
cerebrocortical necrosis (CCN) 108-14
brain 86
Cairn Terriers,
large animals 110-11
spinal cord 83
 multisystemic chromatolytic neuronal
small animals 111-12
coon hound paralysis 77-8
degeneration 162
see also polioencephalomalacia
copper deficiency
goboid cell leukodystrophy 174
cerebrospinal angiopathy 117-18
congenital (swayback) 116-17
 canary grass (Phalaris) intoxication 111,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 9, 23
postnatally acquired 15, 118
120
collection, iatrogenic trauma 86
corpus callosum 3, 4
 canine adenovirus type 1 60-1
pathways, congenital anomalies 100-4
agenesis 95
canine distemper virus (CDV) 61-3
spaces 9, 23
corynetoxin 115
post-vaccinal distemper 57
ceroid lipofuscinosis 164, 180, 181
Coton de Tuléar dogs, Banderas neonatal
canine dysautonomia 120
cervical spinal root compression 90
ataxia 164
canine herpes virus encephalitis 56
cervical spondylomyelopathy 88
coup brain injuries 81-2
canine parvovirus, 63,98, 100
cervical stenotic myelopathy 88
cranial meningocele 93
canine spongiform
Charolais cattle, progressive ataxia 174,
cranium bifdum 93, 94
leukoencephalomyelopathy 186,
176-7
Cretan puppies, myelinopathy 63
187
Chastek's paralysis 114
cryptococcosis 68
caprine arthritis encephalitis (CAE) 59
chemodectoma 143-4
Cuterebra larvae (cuterebriasis) 42, 72
caprine herpes virus 2 (CpHV-2) 61
chemokines 49
cyanide poisoning 111, 112
 capture myopathy 126
chemotaxis 49
cyclopia 94
carbamate intoxication 112
Chladiophora bantianum 67
cysticercosis 71-2
carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning 118
Chlarrydophila pecorum 67-8
cytokines 49
carcinoma, metastatic 154
chondrosarcoma 154
cytotoxic edema 21,24,25
cardiac arrest 41
choroid plexus 2,9, 23
Cassia intoxication 126
carcinoma (CPC) 142-3
Dandy-Walker syndrome 100
cauda equina
papilloma (CPP) 35,142,143
deficiencies 106-126
compression 90
chromatolysis, neurons 15
degenerative axonopathy
nerve avulsion 90
chronic degenerative radiculomyelopathy
neonatal Friesian-Holstein calves 167,
neuritis 78
see degenerative myelopathy
170
cauda equina syndrome 90
chronic hypertrophic polyneuritis 78
Tyrolean Grey cattle 167, 168, 171
caudate nucleus 4, 5
Chrysocoma tenuifolia intoxication
degenerative diseases 157-192
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, Arnold
119-20
degenerative myeloencephalopathy
Chiari-like type II malformation
Chuzan virus 98
167
(ACM) 100, 101, 103
circling disease 71-2
bovine progressive 167, 170
cavernous hemangiomas 43
circumventricular organs (CVO) 27
equine (EDME) 167,171-2
cavitating leukodystrophy,hereditary
citrullinemia 186
degenerative myelopathy (DM) 167
174, 175-6
Cladophialophora 69
old large breed dogs 167, 169-70
central axonopathy Scottish Terriers
cladosporiodiosis 69
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi (PWC) dogs
167, 173
classical swine fever virus 60, 63, 98, 100
167, 169
Index 195
degenerative myopathies 189-90
enterotoxemias 117-18
forebrain induction, defects of 94-5
dementia 166
enzootic ataxia 118, 119
foreign body brain abscesses 65
demyelination
eosinophilic inflammation 52,53
fornix 4, 5
inflammatory diseases 51, 52,54
eosinophilic meningoencephalitis (EME)
fourth ventricle 6
irradiated feed in cats 122
74
"fox encephalitis" 60-1
primary 20
ependymal cells 9
fractures, spinal 88
secondary 20
reactive changes 23
 Friesian-Holstein cattle,
descending myelomalacia 83
ependymal cysts 103-4
bovine spinal muscular atrophy 160,
diabetic polyneuropathy 125
ependymitis 23
162
diastematomyelia 100, 101
ependymoma 140-2
citrullinemia 186
diffuse traumatic axonal injury 86-7
epineurium 9
congenital tremor 174
diplomyelia 100
equine atypical myopathy 190
degenerative axonopathy 167, 170
discospondylitis 65, 89
 equine cerebellar hypoplasia and
GM1 gangliosidosis 179
distemper, canine 61-2、73
dysplasia 98-9
fuicosidosis 179
post-vaccinal 57
equine degenerative
fungal infections 67, 68-9
diverticula 25
myeloencephalopathy (EDME) 167,
fuisariosis 69
dorsal column nuclei 6, 7
171-2
Fusarium moniliforme 116
dural metaplastic ossification 23
equine dysautonomia (grass sickness)
dura mater 9, 23
119, 120
galactosialidosis 179
Durett hemorrhages 25-6
equine herpes virus myelitis 61
gangliocytoma 143
 dying back axonopathies 167
equine herpes virus (EHV) type 1 61
ganglioglioma 143
dysautonomia 120
equine infectious anemia virus 59
Gaucher's disease 179
dysmyelination 174, 177-8
equine leukoencephalomalacia 116
Gelbvieh cattle
 congenital bovine spinal 174, 178
 equine motor neuron disease (EMND)
 Familial degenerative neuromuscular
large animals 178
118-19
disease 167,170
small animals 177-8
 equine protozoal encephalomyelitis 69,
Gelbvieh-cross cattle, congenital status
viral intrauterine infections 63, 178
70
spongiosus 187
dysmyelinogenesis see myelin dysgenesis
Escherichia coli, verotoxin-producing
German Shepherd dogs
dysraphism, CNS 93
(ETEC) 117-18
asymmetric motor neuron disease
dystrophin deficiency 189
 European sporadic bovine encephalitis
160,162
57
degenerative myelopathy 167,
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) 56
excitotoxicity 14
169-70
echinococcosis 71-2
exertional rhabdomyolysis 126, 190
giant axonal neuropathy 167,
edema 24-6
 experimental allergic encephalitis (EAE)
172-3
see aiso brain edema
72
germ cell tumors 152-3
cytotoxic (cellular) 21, 24,25
explosive disc 87, 88
germinoma 152-3
interstitial 24-5
extraocular muscle myositis 78
giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) 167,
vasogenic 24,25, 35
172-3
edema disease 117-18
familial cerebellar ataxia with
gitter cells 22
ehrlichiosis 67
hydrocephalus 186, 187
gial cells 7,8
Elaphostrongylus 71.72
 familial degenerative neuromuscular
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 21,
emboli 39
disease 167
22
fbrocartilagenous 44-5,46
familial motor neuron disease 160, 162
glial limiting membrane 7
thromboembolism 39,48,64
feline coronavirus 59
gial nodules 49
tumor 39
feline dysautonomia 120
"glial shrubbery” 56
embolic purulent (bacterial) encephalitis
feline hypertensive encephalopathy 44
gioblastoma 133,135-7,138
64
feline immunodeficiency virus 63
gliomas 133-40
embryonal tumors 144-5, 153-4
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) 59, 60
mixed 139-40
empyema of sella turcica 65
feline ischemic encephalopathy 42, 72
see also astrocytoma;
encephalitozoonosis 68-9
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) associated
 oligodendroglioma
encephalitis 48-80
myelopathy 63
giomatosis cerebri 137, 138
encephaloclastic defects 97
feline panleukopenia virus 98, 99, 100
gliosis 21-2
encephalomalacia 108-18
feline parvovirus infection 97,98
globoid celleukodystrophy 174, 175,
focal symmetrical (FSE) 187, 189
feline polioencephalomyelitis 58
176, 179, 180
selective symmetrical (SSE) 187-9
feline spongiform encephalopathy (FSE)
gycogenoses (glycogen storage diseases)
encephalomyocarditis virus 58
183, 184, 185
180, 190
endoneurial fbroblasts 9
fibrinoid leukodystrophy 174, 176
gycoproteinoses 179, 180
endothelial cells 23-4
fbrocartilagenous emboli 44-5, 46
GM1 gangliosidosis 178, 179
 proliferation 30.50
focal symmetrical encephalomalacia
GM2 gangliosidosis 179
reactive changes 24
(FSE) 117,187,189
goiter, congenital 178
196 Index
Golden Retrievers
hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia,
innate immune system 48
 multisystem axonopathy and
Irish setter 163
internal capsule 4, 5
neuronopathy 162
herniation
internodes 9
sensory ataxic neuropathy 168-9
cerebellar 25,26, 30, 100,110
interstitial ederma 24-5
Gordon Setters,
sub/transtentorial 26,30, 81, 110,
interthalamic adhesion 1, 3
Cerebellar Purkinje cell degeneration
129
intervertebral disc disease 87-8
160,162
subfalcine 26
 congenital vertebral canal stenosis and
astrocytic hypertrophy of white matter
herpes simplex virus 56
88
178
herpes virus infections 54-6
explosive disc extrusion 87, 88
 granular cell tumors (GCT) 150-1
hexachlorophene intoxication 122
Hansen type I (extrusion) 84, 87-8
granule cell hypoplasia/aplasia 98
hippocampal necrosis, feline 112
Hansen type I (protrusion) 87, 88
 granule cell layer, external 27
hippocampal sclerosis 21, 113-14
Intoxications 106-128
granulomas 52
hippocampus 4,5, 6
intracarotid injections, accidental 39
granulomatous inflammation 51, 52,53,
histiocytes 51, 52
intracellular material, accumulation of
58-9.
histiocytic sarcoma
29, 30,33
granulomatous meningoencephalitis
disseminated 154
intracerebral hemorrhages 85-6
(GME),canine 51,74-5
primary CNS 152
intrauterine infections
grass sickness 119, 120
secondary 154
dysmyelination due to 63
Greyhounds, meningoencephalitis 77
Histoplasma somni 65-6
viral teratogenic 97,98, 99-100
Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) 77-8
histoplasmosis 69
ionophores 126
hog cholera 60
Irish setter quadriplegia and amblyopia,
habenula 4-5
see also classical swine fever virus
hereditary 163
hairy shaker disease (border disease) 63,
holoprosencephaly 94-5
irradiated feed, cats 122
97,98
hound ataxia 121
ischemia pathophysiology 38
Halicephalobus gingivalis 71
hydranencephaly 97
ischemic encephalopathy 41-2
Halimium brasilense 121
hydrocephalus
head trauma see traumatic brain injury
associated with periventricular
Japanese encephalitis 56
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum intoxication
encephalitis 103
Joest-Degen inclusion bodies 57
122
communicating 101,102
helminth infections 53, 70-2
congenital 100-3
Key-Gaskell syndrome 120
 hemangiosarcoma 154
εx vacuo (compensatory) 102
Krabbe's disease see globoid cell
hematoma, see hemorrhage/
non-communicating 101-2、103
leukodystrophy
hematomyelia 45
secondary lesions 102-3
Kuff's disease 181
hematopoietic tumors 151-2
hydromyelia 101, 103
Kumri 71
hemivertebrae 88
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria 186-7
hemorrhage 29, 30
hypertensive encephalopathy, feline 44
Labrador Retrievers
differential diagnosis 39
hypertonicity syndrome 160, 166
axonopathy 167,169
in trauma 81-91
hypoglycemia 111, 112
cavitating luekodystrophy 174,
in vascular diseases 38-47
hypomyelination, central nervous system
175
hemorrhagic brain infarcts 42-3
(CNS) 174, 178
cerebellar Purkinje cell degeneration
hemorrhagic malacia 85, 108
hypomyelinogenesis 177
160, 162
hemorrhagic myelomalacia 83
hypotension 41
fibrinoid leukodystrophy 174, 176
ascending, descending 83,83
hypothalamus 5
hypertonicity syndrome 166
hemosiderin 43
hypothyroidism, canine 125
mucopolysaccharidosis 179
hemosiderophages 86
hypovolemic shock 41
lacerations, brain 86
hendra virus 57
lacunar infarcts 40,41
henipaviruses 57
immune-mediated inflammatory
Lafora's disease 181-2
hepatic encephalopathy 122-4
diseases 72-9
late-onset progressive spinocerebellar
hepatitis contagiosa canis 60-1
immune response 48-50
degeneration 160, 164
hepatocerebellar degeneration 160, 164
 inclusions, intraneuronal 14-15
lateral geniculate body 6
hereditary ataxia 167, 168, 169
infarction 31
lateral ventricles 4, 5
hereditary canine spinal muscular
brain see brain infarction
lead poisoning 110
atrophy (HCSMA) 160, 161
spinal cord 44-5
Leigh disease 187-8
hereditary neuronal abiotrophy 160, 162
infections 48-80
leishmaniasis 70
hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy
inflammatory diseases 48-80
lentivirus infection, small ruminants 
188
infundibular recess 2
58-9
 hereditary porcine neuronal system
 inherited motor neuron disease,
Leonberger dogs.
degeneration (HPNSD) 160, 162
domestic cat 160, 162
leukoencephalomyelopathy 174-5
 hereditary progressive neurogenic
 inherited progressive spinal
leptomeninges 9, 23
muscular atrophy 160, 162
myelinopathy 167, 170
leukodystrophies 20, 173-7
Index  197
leukoencephalitis 51, 52, 54,61-3
meningomyelocele 93,94
myofibrillar myopathy 190
leukoencephalomalacia 116-17
 Merino sheep, segmental axonopathy
myositis
leukoencephalomyelopathy 122,
167, 173
autoimmune 78-9
174-5
mesenchymal tumors 151
bacterial 68
Lhasa Apso dogs, agyria 95, 96
metabolic encephalopathy 122-4
lichen 126
metabolic myopathies 190
Naegleria 69,71
lipid storage myopathies 190
metabolic toxic diseases 106-128
 nasal tumors, metastatic 154
lipofuscin granules 27,28
metastatic tumors 154-5
necrosis, neuronal see neuronal necrosis
lissencephaly 95, 96
methylmalonic/malonic aciduria 186,
necrotizing encephalitis (NE), canine 21,
Listeria monocytogenes 50, 66-7
187
51, 76-7
listeric rhombencephalitis 66
metronidazole toxicity 115
 necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME),
listeriosis 66-7
microencephaly 96-7
canine 75-6
liver disease 122
microflaria 71
necrotizing myelopathy 173-4
louping ill 56
microglia 17,22-3, 30
Negri bodies 15, 54, 55
 lower motor neuron disease with
midbrain 3,5-6
Neguvon 100
neurofbrillary accumulation 160,
Minamata disease 112
nemalin myopathy 190
161,162
mitochondrial encephalopathies 186,
nematodes 70-1
lumbosacral stenosis 90
187-9
neonatal cerebellar ataxia 160, 164
luxations, spinal 88
mitochondrial myopathies 190
neonatal cerebellar cortical abiotrophy
lymphoma 151-2
moldy corn disease 116
163
intravascular 151-2
mononuclear inflammation 51, 52
neonatal maladjustment syndrome 41
metastatic 152,154
motor neuron diseases (MND)
neoplasia (tumors) 32, 129-55
primary 151
159-62
neosporosis 69,70
lysosomal storage diseases 178-81
mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) 179
Neotyphodium loli 121
acquired 120,182
mucormycosis 68
neovascularization 24, 30
multifocal subacute necrotizing
nephroblastoma, ectopic 153-4
macaw wasting disease 58
encephalomyelopathy 189
neural tube 1-2,92
macrophages 22-3,49-50
multifocal symmetrical necrotizing
neural tube defects (NTDs) 93, 94
maedi 59
encephalomyelopathy 189
neuraxial edema, congenital, cattle 186
maedi-visna virus 59, 63
multiple sclerosis 73
neuroanatomy 1-9
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
 multisystem axonal degenerations
neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD) 167,
33-4
(MAD) 166-71
171-2
malacia 22,30
multisystem axonopathy and
-like lesions, metabolic-toxic 121, 172
differential diagnosis 108-9
neuronopathy 160, 162
neuroblastoma 145
eaas aas suu
multisystemic chromatolytic neuronal
neuroborreliosis 68
malformations
degeneration 160, 162
neurocytoma 143
malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) 61
multisystem neuronal abiotrophy 160,
neuroendocrine carcinoma 154
malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
164
neurofibrillary tangles 166
tumors (MPNST) 147
 multisystem neuronal degeneration 160,
neurofbroma 146-7
mal seco (grass sickness) 119, 120
165
neuromuscular disease 124-6, 189-90
Maltese crossbred dogs, leukodystrophy
Murray Grey cattle,
neuron(s) 7,8
of 176
inherited progressive spinal
acidophilic necrosis 14, 15-16,38
mannosidosis 178, 179, 180
myelinopathy 170
chromatolysis 15
 manure gas intoxication 111
Mannosidosis 179
dark 26
Manx cats 100, 101
muscular dystrophies
189
inclusion bodies 14-15
 maple syrup urine disease 186
muscular glycogen storage diseases
necrosis see acidophilic necrosis
masticatory myositis 78
190
reactions to injury 14-19
medial geniculate body 5, 6
MUTYH gene mutations 164
trans-synaptic degeneration 16-17
medullary velum 1, 6. 7
mycotic infections 68-9
vacuolation 183-4
medulloblastoma 144-5
myelin degeneration, 173-8
neuronal abiotrophy, hereditary 160,
megalencephaly 96
in metabolic-toxic diseases 121-2
162
megaloencephaly 96
myelin dysgenesis 174, 177-8
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
meganeurites 180
see also dysmyelination
181
melanoma, malignant 154
myelinogenesis, retarded 177, 178
neuronal degenerations 159-66
melioidosis 67
myelinolytic diseases see
in metabolic-toxic diseases 118-20
meninges 9, 23
leukodystrophies
neuronal-glial tumors, mixed 143-4
meningioma 147-50
myelinopathy, Cretan puppies 63
neuronal migration disorders 95-6
meningitis 23.64
myelin sheaths 8, 9
neuronal necrosis 15-16
meningocele 93,94
myelodysplasia 100
acidophilic see acidophilic neuronal
meningoencephalocele 93, 94
myelomalacia, 83,86
necrosis
198
 Index
neuronal satellitosis 7
peripheral nerve injury 19, 89-90
protein conformation disorders 182
neuronal tumors 143-4
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST)
proteinoses 180
 neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar
145-7
Prototheca 69
degeneration 160, 165-6
benign 145-7
protozoal encephalomyelitis 69
neuronophagia 16,17
malignant 147
protozoal infections 53, 54, 69-70
neuropathies, metabolic-toxic 125
peripheral nervous system (PNS) 7-9
 protozoal myelitis, segmental 69 
neuropil 7,8
degenerative diseases 189
pseudolesions 27
neuropraxia 89
geriatric changes 28
pseudo-Negri bodies 15, 27
neurotmesis 89-90
inflammatory diseases 77-8
pseudorabies 54, 55
neurotropic viral infections 54-8
ischemia 46
pseudorabies virus (PRV) 54
Niemann-Pick disease 179
metabolic-toxic lesions 124-5
psittacine proventricular dilatation
 nigropallidal encephalomalacia, equine
neoplasms 145-7
syndrome (PPDS) 58
114-15
trauma 89-90
pug dog encephalitis 75, 76
nipah virus 57
perosumus elumbis 100
Purkinje cell degenerations, cerebellar
Nissl substance 7
Phalaris grass intoxication 111, 120
160, 162-4
3-nitro poisoning 121
Phalaris grasstaggers 120
putamen 4
nodes of Ranvier 8, 9
pheochromocytoma 144
pyogranulomatous inflammation 52
nosematosis 68-9
pia mater 9
pyramids 3.6
pigs see swine
Ochronis 69
piriform lobe 2-3
quadrigeminal cysts 103-4
old age 27-8
pituitary gland 5
quadriplegia and amblyopia, hereditary
old dog encephalitis 62-3
pituitary tumors 154
Irish setter 163
olfactory bulb 2, 3, 4
polioencephalitis/poliomyelitis 52, 53
oligoastrocytoma 139-40
polioencephalomalacia (PE) 108-15
rabies 15, 54
oligodendrocytes 7,8, 9, 20
large animals 110-11
red nucleus 6
 oligodendroglial dysplasia 174, 177
small animals 111-12
D61 (sh siaqy pasei pat
oligodendroglioma 137-9, 140
 polioencephalomyelopathy, hereditary
renal encephalopathy 122-4
olivary nuclei 6, 7
188
reperfusion injury 38
 olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA)
poliomyelomalacia 115-16
repin 114
160, 164
 polymicrogyria 96
rete mirabile caroticum 11, 40
optic tracts 5
polymyositis 78
 malignant catarrhal fever 61
 organic acidurias 186-7
polyneuritis
 sella turcica empyema 65
 organomercurial poisoning 111, 112
acute 77-8
reticular formation 6
 organophosphate (OP) poisoning 121,
chronic hypertrophic 78
reticulosis 74
125
polyneuritis equi 78
rhabdomyolysis, exertional 126, 190
osteosarcoma 154
polyneuropathies
rhabdomyosarcoma 154
otogenic brain abscesses 65
degenerative 189
rhinal fissure 3
overeating disease 117
toxic,ofhorses 125
Rickettsia infections 67
ovine herpes virus 2 (OHV-2) 61
polyradiculoneuritis, acute 77-8
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 67
oxidative damage 14
pons 3, 5, 6
rod cells 22
 porcine neuronal system degeneration,
Rosenthal fbers 22, 176
pachygyria 95
hereditary (HPNSD) 160, 162
rostral commissure 4
pachymeninges 9, 23
porcine paramyxovirus 57
Rottweiler dogs
paleocortex 2-3
porencephaly 97
familial motor neuron disease 160,
pallidum 4
 post-anesthetic hemorrhagic myelopathy.
162
paraganglioma 143-4
horse 45
leukoencephalomyelopathy 174-5
paramyxovirus infections 57
 post-vaccinal distemper 57
neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD) 171
 paraneoplastic neuropathy 125
primitive neuroectodermal tumors 
Rouges des Prés cattle, central peripheral
parasite infections 69-72
(PNET) 145
axonopathy 170
Parelaphostrongylus 71
prion 182-4
Rubarth's disease 60-1
patulin 119
 progressive ataxia, Charolais cattle 174,
rubulavirus 57
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi (PWC) dogs,
176-7
 Russian knapweed 114
degenerative myelopathy 167,
progressive axonopathy, Boxers 167, 173
Russian spring-summer encephalitis 56
169
 progressive neurogenic muscular
ryegrass staggers
penumbra, ischemic 38
atrophy, hereditary 160, 162
annual 115
perennial ryegrass staggers 121
progressive neuronopathy (multisystemic
perennial 121
perineurioma 147
chromatolytic neuronal
perineurium 9
degeneration) 160, 162
sacrococcygeal agenesis 100
peripheral and central axonopathy.
progressive spinal muscular atrophy see
salinomycin poisoning 125
Birman cats 167, 169
 spinal muscular atrophy
salmon poisoning 67
Index 199
salt poisoning 110-11
spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) 159
swine vesicular disease virus 58
saluting disease (late-onset progressive
asymmetric, German Shepherd dogs
synovial cysts, spinal 88-9
spinocerebellar degeneration) 160,
160, 162
syringobulbia 25, 103
164
bovine 160, 161, 162
syringomyelia 25,103
Sarcocystis 69,70
hereditary canine (HCSMA) 160, 161
syrinx formation 84, 103
Sarcosporidia 69
spinal nerves,tumors of 145-7
satellite cells 8, 9
spinocerebellar degeneration, late-onset 
Talfan disease 58
satellitosis, neuronal 7
progressive 160, 164
telea choroidea 2
Scherer, secondary structures of 137,
Spirocerca lupi 71
teratogenesis 92
140
spongiform change 183, 184, 186
teratoma 153
Schmidt-Lanterman's clefts 8, 9
spongiform encephalopathies 182-5
territorial infarct 40
Schwann cells 8, 9
spongy degenerations 185-7
Teschen disease 58
schwannoma 145-6
 branched-chain organic acidurias
teschovirus infections 58
sclerosis 21
186-7
thalamus 4-5
 Scottish Terriers,
toxic-metabolic causes 122-4
Theileria 70
 central axonopathy 167, 173
spongy state (status spongiosus) 29, 30
thiamin deficiency 110, 114
cerebellar cortical abiotrophy 160,
differential diagnosis 123
thiamin-deficiency encephalopathy 114
162
 sporadic bovine encephalitis 51, 67-8
third ventricle 4, 5
fbrinoid leukodystrophy 176
European 57
thoracolumbar spinal cord tumor
scrapie 15, 183, 184-5
 Springer Spaniels.
153-4
scrapie-associated fibrils (SAFs) 182
Fucosidosis 179
thromboembolism 39
secondary tumors 154-5
shaking pups 177-8
thrombotic meningoencephalitis (TME)
segmental aplasia, spinal cord 100,101
staggering disease 57-8
in cattle 65-6
 segmental axonopathy, Merino sheep
 aleis Asuods aas snsoiguods snieis
tick-borne encephalitis 50, 56
167, 173
steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis
tight junctions 23、25
segmental protozoal myelitis 69
(SRMA) 45, 73-4
torpedoes, axonal 163, 178
selective symmetrical encephalomalacias
Stockard's paralysis 160, 161-2
toxic polyneuropathies of horses 125
(SSE) 187-9
 storage diseases 178-82
toxoplasmosis 69
large animals 189
acquired 120,182
transmissible spongiform
small animals 188-9
 streptococcal chorio-meningo-
encephalopathies (TSE) 15, 182-5
selenium
ependymitis 63-4
trans-synaptic neuronal degeneration
deficiency 126
streptococcal sepsis in piglets 63-4
16-17
poisoning 115-16
Streptococcus suis serotype 2 63-4
transtentorial herniation 26
sella turcica, empyema of 65
 striatonigral and cerebello-olivary
trauma, brain and spinal cord 32, 81-90
senile plaques 27,28, 166
degeneration 160, 164
pathophysiology 81-4
 sensory ataxic neuropathy, golden
Strongylus 71
traumatic axonal injury (TAI), diffuse 
retriever 167,168-9
Stypandra sp. intoxication 122
86-7
sensory polyganglioneuritis 78
subacute necrotizing encephalopathy
traumatic brain injury (TB1) 81-2,85-7
sepsis,bacterial 51, 64
188-9
tremor, congenital see congenital tremor
septal nuclei 4
subarachnoid hemorrhage 45, 85
tremorgenic syndromes 121
Setaria 71
 subarachnoid space 9
Tribulus terrestris intoxication 121
shaking pups 174, 177-8
subcommisural organ 27
triplet repeat disorders 164, 182
Simmental/Simmental-cross calves
subdural hematoma 85
trypanosomiasis 70
complete cerebellar agenesis 98
 subependymal giant cell astrocytomas
tuberculosis 63
encephalomyelopathy 189
(SEGA) 133-4
tumor emboli 39
 multifocal subacute necrotizing
subfalcine herniation 26
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha)
encephalomyelopathy
189
subluxations, spinal 88
49
Solanum intoxication 120
substantia nigra 5, 6
Tyrolean Grey cattle, degenerative
 sorghum poisoning 121
subtentorial herniation 26, 29
axonopathy 167, 168, 171
spastic paraplegia, hereditary 178
suid herpes virus 1 54
sphingolipidoses 179, 180
sulcation defects 94-5
Vacuolation see spongy state
spina bifida 93, 94
sulfur intoxication 110
vascular diseases 38-47
 spinal cord degenerations see
superoxide dismutase (SOD) 14
vascular hamartomas 43
degenerative myelopathy
superoxide dismutase (SOD) 1 gene
vasculitis 51, 52,54
spinal cord hemorrhage 45, 83
mutations 159, 169, 170
viral 60-1
spinal cord infarct 44-5
suppurative inflammation 51-2,53
vasogenic edema 24,25, 35
spinal cord compression 83-4
suprapineal recess 2
Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE)
 spinal dysmyelination, congenital bovine
swayback 116-17
56
174, 178
 Swedish Lapland dogs, hereditary
venous thrombosis 42-3
spinal dysraphism 93, 94
neuronal abiotrophy 162
ventricular system 1-2
200
Index
ventriculitis, bacterial, in large animals
vitamin E deficiency 121, 126, 170, 171
Western equine encephalitis (WEE) 56
64
vomiting and wasting disease virus 58
West Nile virus encephalitis 56
Veratrum californicum 94
white muscle disease 126
verminous encephalitis 70-1, 72
Wallerian degeneration 18, 19
wobbler syndrome 84, 88,89
verotoxin-producing Escherichia coli
Wallerian-like degeneration 19
World Health Organization (WHO)
(ETEC) 117-18
degenerative axonopathies
classification of tumors 129,
vertebrae, malformed 88
166-71
130
vertebral canal stenosis 88
in metabolic-toxic disorders 121
vimentin 22
water balance, disturbances 24-6
Xanthoparmelia chlorochroa 126
vincristine poisoning 125
water deprivation encephalopathy
viral infections 54-63,97,98,99-100,
110-11
yellow star thistle poisoning 114-15
102
watershed infarcts 40
Yorkshire Terriers, subacute necrotizing
Virchow-Robin (VR) space 7
weaver syndrome, bovine 170
encephalopathy 188-9
visna 59, 63
Werdning-Hoffman disease 161
vitamin A deficiency 121, 122
Wesselbron virus 97,98
 Zamia staggers 121