with
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of
LABORATORY
PROCEDURES
Brianne Bellwood and Melissa Andrasik-Catton
WILEYBlackwell
Veterinary Technician's
Handbook of
Laboratory Procedures
Veterinary Technician's
Handbook of
Laboratory Procedures
Brianne Bellwood
Melissa Andrasik-Catton
WILEY Blackwell
This edition first published 2014 @ 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Editoriaf offices: 1606 Golden Aspen Drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8sQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of
specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing. provided that the base fee is paid directly to
the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those
are ISBN-13: 978-1-1183-4193-3/2014.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks,
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding.
and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or
promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by health science practitioners for any
particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim
all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular
purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental
regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment,
and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package
insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any
changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions.
Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or
Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information
does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or
Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that
Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work
was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional
statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages
arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Catafoging-in-Pubfication Data
Bellwood, Brianne, author.
Veterinary technician's handbook of laboratory procedures / Brianne Bellwood, Melissa
Andrasik-Catton.
pages ; cm.
ISBN 978-1-118-34193-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) - ISBN 978-1-118-72604-4 (epub) -
2. Veterinary medicine-Laboratory manuals. I. Andrasik-Catton, Melissa, author. ll. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Clinical Laboratory Techniques-veterinary-Handbooks. 2. Animal
Technicians-Handbooks. SF 772.6]
SF772.6.B45 2014
636.089'607-dc23
2013024790
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Jen Miller Designs
12014
To my family. for the continued support and encouragement they've shown me in aff my
endeavors. To my pasf instructors, who insfifled in me fhe passion for veterinary medicine
and inspired me fo pursue a teaching career. To my colfeagues and students at Lakeland
College, with whom I have had the privilege of sharing this passion.
BrianneBelfwood
and fhe amazing veterinary community l have been privileged fo grow with has provided
me invaluabie teachings: allowing me to share that knowledge with other technicians
overthesemanyexcitingyears.
MetissaAndrasik-Caffon
Contents
Preface
xi
Acknowledgments
xii 
About the Companion Website
XY
Laboratory Equipment
3
Laboratory equipment
3
Microscope
3
Centrifuge
9
Refractometer
11
Chemistry analyzers
13
Hematology analyzers
13
Coagulation analyzers
14
Quality control of all laboratory equipment
14
Blood Analysis
17
Hematology
17
Proper blood collection and handling techniques
17
Blood collection tubes
17
Peripheral blood smears
18
Staining
22
Packed cell volume (PCV)
23
Red blood cell count
26
Red blood cell indices
28
Reticulocyte count
29
 Corrected reticulocyte percentage
30
Reticulocyte production index (RPl)
31
White blood cell count
31
White blood cell differential
33
 Calculations
34
White blood cell estimate
35
Corrected white blood cell count
36
Platelet count
37
Platelet estimate
38
Normal species variation of leukocytes
40
Neutrophil maturation
44
Abnormal morphological changes in leukocytes
45
Erythrocyte morphologies
46
Evaluating a blood film to complement automated analyzers
51
vii
vii
Contents
Clinical chemistries
52
Coagulation testing
53
Activated clotting time
54
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
54
Automated clotting tests
55
Urinalysis
57
Sample collection
57
Free catch (voided sample)
57
Bladder expression
57
Catheterization
58
Cystocentesis
59
Sample preservation
59
In vitro changes occurring in unpreserved urine
60
Refrigeration
60
Freezing
61
Toluene
61
Formalin (40%)
61
Boric acid (0.8%)
61
Commercial preservation tablets
61
Physical examination of urine
62
Volume
62
Color
62
Turbidity
62
Odor
63
Specific gravity (SG)
64
Chemical examination
65
Glucose
66
Bilirubin
66
Ketones
67
Blood
67
pH
67
Protein
67
Urobilinogen
67
Nitrite
68
Leukocytes
68
Sediment examination
68
Materials required
68
Sediment stain
68
Procedure for microscopic examination of urine
69
Reporting of findings
70
Microscopic elements of urine sediment
70
4
Parasitology
77
Collection
77
Pooled samples
77
Contents
ix
Gross examination
78
Consistency
78
Color
78
Blood
78
Mucous
78
Gross parasites
78
Microscopic examination
79
Direct fecal smear
79
Simple fecal flotation
80
Centrifugation technique
81
Baermann technique
83
Common parasites of domestic species
83
Canine and feline
83
Ruminants
106
Equine
113
5
Cytology
121
Sample collection
121
Swabs
121
Fine needle biopsy
123
Tissue biopsy
125
Imprints
127
Centesis
128
Scrapings
129
Smear preparation
130
Feather smear method
130
Line smear method
131
Compression (or squash) method
131
Modified squash method
133
Starfish method
133
Staining
135
Romanowsky stains (wright's and Diff-Quick)
135
New methylene blue
135
Microscopic evaluation of cytology slides
136
Pyknosis and karyorrhexis
136
Karyolysis
138
 Classifying cell types
138
Inflammation
138
Other cell types
140
Neoplasia
140
Reporting your findings
144
Laboratory submissions
144
Ear cytology
144
 Slide preparation and staining
145
Microscopic findings
145
Vaginal cytology
145
Contents
Collection methods
147
Cell types seen
148
Stages of estrous
152
Semen evaluation
154
Slide preparation
154
Live/dead sperm ratio
155
Sperm morphology
155
Appendix
159
Temperature conversions
159
Metric conversions
159
Length
159
Weight
160
Volume
160
Metric system
160
Glossary
161
Bibliography
169
Index
171
Preface
Laboratory procedures are an essential diagnostic component of veterinary medicine.
The role of the veterinary technician is to collect and process samples and then analyze
many common laboratory tests, and serves as an excellent companion to full textbooks.
The following chapters incorporate discussions on the use of common laboratory equip-
ment, proper quality control methods, blood analysis, urinalysis, parasitology. and
cytology.
Useful characteristics of this handbook,whether used in school or a clinic setting, are
step-by-step procedures, discussions of common mistakes and errors, tips and tricks,
and plenty of reference images. Color images are invaluable when trying to identify an
In contrast to other texts available, this book provides needed information quickly
and at a glance.
An accompanying website provides additional images and study tools for students,
BrianneBeffwood
Metissa Andrasik-Catfon
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Lakeland College's Animal Health Technology Program and its staff
and faculty for assistance in providing resources and samples for this book.
B.8.
resources found in this book.
M.A.-C.
About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/bellwoodhandbook
The website includes:
Case studies provided in Powerpoint files
 Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
Crossword puzzles and answers as PDFs
Videoofanearmite
● Powerpoints of additional figures for downloading
Veterinary Technician's
Handbook of
Laboratory Procedures
Chapter 1
Laboratory Equipment
Laboratory equipment
The variety of sophisticated laboratory equipment in a veterinary practice will depend
largely on the size and scope of the practice itself. There are several pieces of core
equipment that are expected in every practice that performs in-house testing and
analysis.
Microscope
Purpose
The microscope is the most important piece of equipment in the veterinary clinic labo-
ratory. The microscope is used to review fecal, urine, blood, and cytology samples on
a daily basis (see Figure 1.1). Understanding how the microscope functions, how it oper
ates, and how to care for it will improve the reliability of your results and prolong the
life of this valuable piece of equipment.
Parts and functions of a compound microscope (Figure 1.1)
(A) Arm: Used to carry the microscope.
(B) Base: Supports the microscope and houses the light source.
(C) Oculars (or eyepieces): The lens of the microscope you look through. The ocular
also magnifies the image. The total magnification can be calculated by multiplying
the objective power by the ocular power. Oculars come in different magnifications,
but 10x magnification is common.
aul poaioo oi s! iuawisnipe jaidoip aul lo asodund aul uawnsntpe jaidoid (o)
(E) Interpupillary adjustment: This allows the oculars to move closer or further away
from one another to match the width of an individual's eyes. when looking through
the microscope,one should see only a single field ofview.When viewing a sample,
'awl so poad e jaao uienis aaa anes ueo aaa auo buisn 'sasa yiog asn saemie
(F) Nosepiece: The nosepiece holds the objective lenses. The objectives are mounted
on a rotating turret so they can be moved into place as needed. Most nosepieces
can hold up to five objectives.
(G) objective lenses: The objective lens is the lens closest to the object being viewed
and its function is to magnify it. Objective lenses are available in many powers, but
Veterinary Technician's Hancbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
4   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
CH30
Figure 1.1Compound microscope.
4x, 10x, 40x, and 100x are standard. 4x objective is used mainly for scanning. 10x
referred to as "oil immersion."Once magnified by the objective lens, the image
100× objective lens with 10 xoculars = 1000xtotal magnification.
(H) stage: The platform on which the slide or object is placed for viewing.
(l) Stage brackets: Spring-loaded brackets, or clips, hold the slide or specimen in
place on the stage.
souy loiuos abeis aul ane abeis aul molag isnt paieool isgouy losuos abeis (r)
These knobs move the slide or specimen either horizontally (x-axis) or vertically
(y-axis) when it is being viewed.
Laboratory Equipment 
(K)Condenser: The condenser is located under the stage.As light travels from the
illuminator, it passes through the condenser, where it is focused and directed at
the specimen.
(L) Condenser control knob: Allows the condenser to be raised or lowered.
the beam of light. Generally, they do not need much adjustment unless the micro-
scope is moved or transported frequently.
(N) Iris diaphragm: This structure controls the amount of light that reaches the
specimen. Opening and closing the iris diaphragm adjusts the diameter of the
light beam.
height. When a higher power objective is in place (1oox objective for example),
break the slide and scratch the lens surface.
stage height. Fine adjustment is used for more delicate, high power adjustment
that would require fine tuning.
(P) mluminator: The illuminator is the light source for the microscope, usually situated
in the base. The brightness of the light from the illuminator can be adjusted to suit
your preference and the object you are viewing.
Kohler illumination
What is Kohfer ilfumination?
Kohler illumination is a method of adjusting a microscope in order to provide optimal
illumination by focusing the light on the specimen. When a microscope is in Kohler,
specimens will appear clearer, and in more detail.
Process of setting Kohler
Materiais required
● Specimen slide (will need to focus under 10x power)
Compound microscope.
Kohier illumination
(1) Mount the specimen slide on the stage and focus under 10x.
(2) Close the iris diaphragm completely.
(3) If the ball of light is not in the center, use the condenser centering screws to move
it so that it is centered.
(4) Using the condenser adjustment knobs, raise or lower the condenser until the edges
of the field becomes sharp (see Figure 1.2 and Figure 1.3).
(5) Open the iris diaphragm until the entire field is illuminated.
When should you set/check Kohler?
● After the microscope is moved/transported
ag pinoo Aaul se dueus se jeadde jou op sioaigo joadsns noa jarauaum o
6  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 1.2 Note the blurry edges of the unfocused light.
Figure 1.3 Adjusting the condenser height sharpens the edges of the "ball of light."
Microscope care and maintenance
Routinecare andpropermaintenance of microscope willensure goodperformanceover
ered when routine techniques fail to produce optimal performance of the microscope.
Laboratory Equipment 
Cleaning and maintenance supplies
Dust cover: when not in use, a microscope should be covered to protect it from dust,
hair, and any other possible sources of dirt. It is important to note that a dust cover
should never be placed over a microscope while the illuminator is still on.
Lens tissue: Lint-free lens tissues are delicate wipes that would not scratch the surface
Lens cleaner: Lens cleaning solution assists in removing fingerprints and smudges on
thesurface.
pressed air is clean, and avoids possible contamination of saliva particles.
Maintenance tips
(1) whenever the microscope is not in use, turn off the illuminator. This will greatly
extend the life of the bulb, as well as keep the temperature down during extended
periods of laboratory work.
(2) When cleaning the microscope, use distilled water or lens cleaner. Avoid using other
chemicals or solvents, as they may be corrosive to the rubber or lens mounts.
(3) After using immersion oil, clean off any residue immediately. Avoid rotating the
40x objective through immersion oil.If this should occur,immediately clean the
40x objective with lens cleaner before the oil has a chance to dry.
(4) Do not be afraid to use many sheets of lens tissue when cleaning. Use a fresh piece
(or a clean area of the same piece) when moving to a different part of the micro-
scope. This avoids tracking dirt/oil/residue to other areas of the microscope.
position (4x or 10x). This placement allows for the greatest distance between the
stage and the objective. If the microscope is bumped, the likelihood of an objective
becoming damaged by the stage surface will be greatly minimized.
Troubleshooting
"I can focus my slide under 1ox, but not under 40x."
A common reason for this is that the slide is upside down. Double check which side the
smear is on (may not be the same side as the labe!) and try focusing again.
Another cause could be dried immersion oil on the 4ox objective that is obstructing
your view. When switching from oil immersion (100x) to 40x, there is a good chance
that the tip of the 40x objective could be dragged through some immersion oil. If it is
not immediately cleaned off, it will dry, producing a thick haze.
cleaning, use a dry piece of lens paper to polish the objective.
100x objective and any heavy oil present on the slide before moving back down to
40xobjective.
8 Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 1.4 Water artifact seen on the surface of the red blood cells (1ooox magnifi
cation).
"In hematology, when I focus under 4ox, my red blood cells appear shiny.
This is most likely due to water artifact during the staining and drying process (see
Figure 1.4). To make visualization of the cells easier, add a small drop of immersion oil
of excess oil using the side of your finger. Be very gentle when doing this, and use a
clean finger each fime you wipe. Wiping too hard or rough will cause your smear to rub
off. This technique will leave a very thin layer of oil on your smear. The film is thin
enough that you can use the 40x objective without running the risk of the lens becom-
ing contaminated with oil.
Try focusing under 40x again, and the shininess should have been resolved.
'There's no light coming from the illuminator.'
The first assumption is always that the bulb is burnt out, but it is a good idea to check
a couple of other possibilities as well.
If the iris diaphragm is closed and the brightness of the illuminator is at its lowest,
the light may be so small that it appears as if there is no light present.
Check to make sure the cord is fully plugged into the back of the microscope. This
plug can become dislodged slightly during transport and microscope set up.
If your microscope is the type that uses fuses, it may be the fuse-not the bulb-that
needsreplacing.
Laboratory Equipment 
9
life of the bulb.
Clean up
When the use of the microscope is complete, following proper clean up procedures will
improve the quality of images that are viewed and extend the life of the microscope
and its components:
(1) Remove the slide from the stage and dispose of it properly.
surface.
(3) Lower the stage and move the smallest objective into place.
(4)Clean the objectivelens and oculars after every use.The order in which they are
cleaned is important. Cleaning the 100x objective first and then moving onto other
tissue and lens cleaner, begin with cleaning the oculars, then the 4x objective, the
10x objective, 40x objective, and finish with the 100x objective lens.
Centrifuge
trifuge types exist for different purposes, such as those for microhematocrit, fecal,
urine, and blood samples. It is not uncommon to use a multiuse centrifuge that can be
maintenance, and cleaning instructions.
Microhematocrit centrifuge
This centrifuge is used exclusively for spinning down microhematocrit tubes (see Figure
also provide a plasma sample for protein analysis.
Clinical centrifuge
Clinical centrifuges are available in two main types: a variable angle centrifuge or a
fixed angle centrifuge.
The variable angle centrifuge (also called a horizontal centrifuge) has swinging
tube to form the sediment (see Figure 1.6). Once the rotation stops,the buckets return
in a slight remixing of the sample. This effect should be taken into consideration when
preparing a sample.
The fixed angle centrifuge has buckets that are in a fixed position, typically about
50°(see Figure1.7).The specimen tubes are held in this position for the entire centrifu
gation process.
Figure 1.5 Microhematocrit centrifuge. This centrifuge is used for spinning microhema
tocrit tubes only. It is preset to 10,0o0rpm.
DYNACIICeI
Figure 1.6
Variable angle centrifuge. Buckets swing out horizontally during the centrifu
gation process.
10
Laboratory Equipment
DYNACIlCentrifu
Figure 1.7 Fixed angle centrifuge. Buckets are at a fixed angle (typically about 5oo) and
do notmove during the centrifugationprocess.
StatSpin
Another option is the StatSpin (see Figure 1.8). This centrifuge is a fixed angle centrifuge
designed for small samples. It has a faster spinning speed, and as a result, a shorter
processing time. These qualities could be beneficial in a small animal or exotic veteri-
nary practice.
Refractometer
The purpose of a refractometer is to measure the refractive index of a solution. When
measuring a solution (i.e., urine), light passes through the sample and bends. The angle
of this refraction is visualized as a shadow and correlates to the concentration of the
solution. Veterinary specific refractometers are now on the market allowing for minor
differences between dog and cat urine specific gravity and total protein values (see
Figure 1.9).
The most common use of a refractometer in veterinary laboratories is to measure
urine specific gravity and plasma total protein. Refractometers have built-in scales to
measure both of these, and some brands of refractometers will also possess a refractive
index scale. This scale, with the use of an appropriate conversion chart, can be used to
measure the concentration of many other solutions.
Tips: Cover the entire prism with the liquid (urine or plasma) being examined.
Reading urine and plasma at room temperature will provide the most accurate
results.
12   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
atSpin
Figure1.8
StatSpin.Another type of fixed angle centrifuge.
Calibration
It is good practice to calibrate the refractometer at the beginning of each day. This is
achieved by applying a large drop of distilled water on the prism and adjusting the blue/
white line to read exactly 1.ooo on the scale. The adjustment knob or screw is located
on various places of a refractometer: therefore, the manufacturer's guide will need to
be consulted.
Laboratory Equipment   13
Figure 1.9 Refractometer.
Chemistry analyzers
There are a wide variety of chemistry analyzers available for veterinary use. Most use
the principles of photometry to quantify analytes, such as enzymes, proteins, and other
constituents in the blood. Electrochemical methods are used to analyze ionic com-
analyzers, or they may be combined into one.
Another variation among analyzers is the way they facilitate the photometry testing
procedure.A sampleneeds tobe added to a substrate to initialize the test.Examples
include slides, rotors, or cartridges (see Figure 1.10).
Depending upon the analyzer or the analyte being tested, a serum or plasma sample
type of anticoagulant recommended should be confirmed by reviewing the manufac-
turer recommendations.
according to the manufacturer's recommendations. with such a wide variety of analyz
ers available, this book cannot describe the operation, maintenance, and cleaning of
maintenance is essential for ensuring the precision and accuracy of the analyzer. It may
also be necessary for complying with the manufacturer's warranty.
Hematology analyzers
As with chemistry analyzers, there are many types of hematology analyzers to choose
from. There are several different types of technology used to quantify cell types, and
14   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 1.10 Testing supplies for various types of chemistry analyzers.
are impedance, laser-based, and optical fluorescence. An analyzer may use one, or a
combination of these technologies to detect and enumerate the cells present in the
sample.
While the analyzers can provide a large amount of information about the patient, it
is recommended to follow up with a manual examination to confirm readings, and review
morphologies.
Coagulation analyzers
boplastin time (aPTT), and fibrinogen can be performed using fresh or citrated whole
blood.
quality controlprocedures to ensure the accuracy andprecisionof the equipment.
Quality control of all laboratory equipment
at regular intervals, calibrated and cleaned as recommended by the manufacturer, and
used properly. In addition to properly functioning equipment, there are things the tech-
nician can do to improve the accuracy of their test results:
(1)Follow manufacturer directions precisely.
(2) Become familiar with normal and abnormal findings.
(3)Log all activity of equipment,including daily.weekly,and monthly servicing
Laboratory Equipment15
(4) Standardize test methods within the hospital.
(a) Perform urinalysis, fecal analysis, packed cell volume and total protein analysis,
and cytology in the same manner no matter who is conducting the test.
findings.
Remember, all laboratory equipment and its results are only as reliable as the
human operating the equipment!
Chapter 2
Blood Analysis
Hematology
Proper blood collection and handling techniques
Blood is collected from animals in order to conduct many tests, ranging from hematol-
ogy parameters to clinical chemistries, and even to evaluate coagulation disorders.
Good technique when obtaining blood samples is important to maximize the reliability
of the results.
Blood can be collected from many sites on animals; however, the most common for
amphibian, and avian species have different locations for blood collection specific to
the species. It is important to collect a sufficient quantity of blood for all the tests to
be conducted.
tainer technique is preferred,as this reduces the chance for a clotted sample, draws
the accurate amount into the tube, and is considered sterile. Anticoagulant blood tubes
should be gently inverted a number of times immediately after collection.Utilizing a
blood rocking machine may be useful; however, overmixing or prolonged mixing of a
sample can cause cellular damage.
Some tests require an anticoagulated sample (whole blood) or plasma, while others
compounds within the blood mixed in a solution that will not allow the sample to clot.
This can be spun down in a centrifuge to separate the cells (white blood cell [WBC], red
blood cell [RBC], etc.) from the liquid (plasma); but remember, even when spun down,
the sample has not clotted,it is just separated.Serum is often used for chemistries and
is theliquid portion ofablood sample affer it has clotted.The difference between
serum does not, because those clotting factors are caught up in the clot.
Blood collection tubes
The tubes used to collect both types of samples (anticoagulated = whole blood and
plasma; clotted = serum) come in many different colors and contents. It is important to
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
7
18  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
maintain the proper blood:anticoagulant ratio when collecting a sample. Underfilling a
tubes used in veterinary medicine, the color of the tube, what is in it, and what it's
used for:
is not unusual to find human blood tubes with different colors. READ LABELS.
tests,and blood typing.
reptilian/amphibian blood smear, and plasma for specific tests.
Red top: Plain-for clotting a blood sample but does not separate the clot from the
serum. Serum is used to run chemistries. Red tops are often used for sterile urine
collection and other bodily fluids.
a blood sample; separates the clot from the serum. Used for most tests requiring
serum. Some tests require no gel separator during centrifugation and transportation.
Use a plain red top in these cases.
Blue top: Sodium citrate-for coagulation profiles on any species.
Gray top: Boric acid-urine preservative. Preserves cellular material in urine, but you
Tips
in EDTA anticoagulant blood tubes.Heparin anticoagulant is preferred whenperforming
lant can have its uses in mammalian hematology as well. An extracellular RBC parasite,
Mycoplasma, has the tendency to fall off the cells when exposed to EDTA. Using
heparinized blood can make the identification of Mycoplasma easier. If hemoparasites
s a   asa s  aa  a   ss a
immediately after collection, before any anticoagulant is added. Using fresh blood
immediatelyaftercollectionwillalsodecreaseplateletclumping
Peripheral blood smears
Purpose
teristicsevaluatedaccurately.
majority of counts and evaluations will be performed in this area, also known as
the "read area.
Blood Analysis ■  19
30° - 40°
Figure 2.1 Technique for preparing a peripheral blood smear.
Materials required
●Well-mixed anticoagulated whole blood
Glass microscope slides
● Capillary tube
● Lens tissue.
Procedure
(1) It is important to begin with two clean, dust free microscope slides. If slides are
dirty or dusty, polish them using lint-free lens tissue.
(2) Using a capillary tube, obtain a sample of whole blood. Ensure that the blood is
well mixed by gently inverting it several times before sampling with the capillary
tube.
(3) If blood is not well mixed, cells begin to settle causing the cell distribution on your
PBS to be inaccurate.
(4) Place a small drop of blood (2-3mm) at the end of your slide.
(5) The second slide is used as a "spreader" slide and should be held at a 30o-400
angle. See "Tips" below for additional points.
spreader slide into the blood drop. (see Figure 2.1)
(7）Pause at the blood dropfor a brief second,and in a smooth fluid motion,advance
the spreader slide to the end.
(8) Be sure not to change your angle or lift the spreader slide off of the bottom slide.
There are many techniques for creating a smear. Different methods should be practiced
to determine which is most comfortable for the technician.
Characteristics of a good smear (See Figure 2.2)
● Covers 3/4 of the slide
● Symmetrical, bullet-shape
● No tails or ridges
●Microscopically: should have an even distribution of cells.
20    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 2.2
Example of a good quality PBS. Stained with Diff-Quick.
Troubleshooting
Table 2.1
Common errors in preparing a blood smear.
Description
Cause/tips
Tails
Tails may be caused by lifting
the spreader slide up at the
end of the spreading motion.
Debris present on the slide.
Tails can also be the result of
nicks in the edge of the
spreader slide.
Figure 2.3
"Tails" present on
feathered edge.
Table 2.1
(Continued)
Error
Description
Cause/tips
Long and
Results when pushing the blood
narrow
drop too soon before the blood
has spread along the edge of
the spreader slide.
To fix:
● Pause longer when backing
into the drop.
Slow your speed slightly
when moving the spreader
slide forward.
Figure 2.4
Long and narrow.
Short and
If the spreader slide is held at
wide
an angle greater than 30°, the
blood is not pushed out over
the length of the slide. This
causes a small, narrow
monolayer.
● Spreading too fast
Figure 2.5
Short and wide.
Square
When backing into the drop,
the pause was too long
Forward spreading speed was
tooslow
Figure 2.6
Square.
(Continued)
21
22■
1 Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 2.1
(Continued)
Description
Cause/tips
Half-bullet
Uneven downward pressure on
spreader slide (left to right)
Figure 2.?
Half-bullet.
Holes
Iftheslidehasdirtyora
greasy film, a smear with holes
will result.
Holes may also occur if there
are fat particles in the blood
Figure 2.8
Holes.
Tips
The blood of an anemic or dehydrated patient may be thinner or thicker than usual.
loweringthe anglewhenusing thickerbloodwillhelpspreadoutthecells.
Staining
After a smear has completely air dried,it must be stained to identify cells and their
characteristics. A Romanowsky-type stain, Wright's stain, is used in hematology to stain
blood smears. A commercial stain that is commonly used is Diff-Quick, which is a modi-
fied Wright's stain (see Figure 2.9).
The stain consists of three solutions that fix and stain various components of the
cells. The first solution, a fixative, consists of 95% methanol. The second solution, eosin,
has an acidic pH and stains cell cytoplasms and eosinophilic granules. The third solution,
methylene blue, has an alkaline pH and stains the nuclei of the cells.
The slide exposure time to each solution varies slightly depending upon the desired
result or sample being stained. Typically, dipping a slide into each solution five times
Blood Analysis  23
J-322-1
J-322-2
J-322-3
DipQuick Stain
DipQuick Stain
DipQuick Stain
#1-Fixative
Forivtro LabUse Only
ForInvitroLabUse Only
180mL
180mL
180mL
Jorgonsen Laborac
sen Labo
Figure 2.9Diff-Quickstain set(DipQuick).
for one second each time dip will give adequate staining. This can be adjusted to
alter the appearance of cells. It is important to rinse the slide after the last dip
into stain #3. Distilled water is preferred. The now stained smear should be allowed to
air dry. Rapid drying, such as a hair dryer or waving the slide, will cause crenation
(distortion) of the RBCs.
Tip: Have one set of stains for blood and "clean" cytology specimens. Keep another
set of "dirty" stains for fecal and ear cytology.
Tip: Old stain may precipitate, causing artifacts to appear on your smear. Replace/
Filter stain routinely depending upon usage.
Packed cell volume (PCV)
Materials required
Well-mixed,anticoagulatedwholeblood
●Clay
●Reader card
Centrifuge
● Capillary tubes.
24
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Procedure
(1) Begin with well-mixed, anticoagulated blood.
(2) Fill two capillary tubes 3/4 full with blood, and seal one end with clay. Filling a
second tube serves two purposes:
(a) Serves as a counterbalance for centrifugation
(b) Serves as a quality control to ensure accuracy.
(3) Place tubes in the groves of the centrifuge, directly across from one another, with
the clay pointing towards the outside (see Figure 2.10).
(4) Close centrifuge lid(s).
Speed: 10,000rpm
Time: 5 minutes.
(Speed and time may vary depending on the unit.)
Figure 2.10
Proper placement of PCV tubes into a microhematocrit centrifuge.
Blood Analysis   25
Plasma
Buffy Coat
Red Cell layer
Figure 2.11L
Layers of a PCV after centrifugation: plasma, buffy coat, and red cell layer.
Readings
After centrifugation, the blood in the microhematocrit tubes is separated into three
Using a reader card, align the top of the plasma layer with the 10o line, and the bottom
Measurement istaken at the top oftheredcell layerwhere theredcells andplasma
rh aneig aas) abeiuaoiad e se passaidxa si pue paa
Repeat for tube no. 2.
For quality control purposes, each reading should be within 1% of the average.
Sources of error
·Excessive anticoagulant in the blood sample.
●Using poorly mixed blood.
· Misalignment of tubes with the reader card.
● Including the buffy coat layer in your PCV measurement.
begin to slant, making reading difficult.
Tip: The hemoglobin value of a patient can be estimated by dividing the PCV reading
by 3.
Plasma evaluation
Total Protein (Total Serum Protein) can be assessed by utilizing the plasma portion of
the PCV tube. One of the capillary tubes can be broken above the red cell line, and the
26   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30-
20
10
0
Figure 2.12 PCV reading technique. Note the bottom of the red cell layer is at O and the
top of the plasma is at 100.
plasma (liquid) can be placed on a refractometer to determine the protein concentra-
and report the number in g/dL (g/1o0mL).
The color of plasma can yield information about the patient's health. Below are colors
and associated disorders:
Normal: Clear or light straw-yellow (horses have very deep yellow)
Deep yellow plasma: Icteric; liver or hemolytic disorders
Red plasma: Hemolyzed; artificial from poor blood collection technique or hemolytic
disorders
Milky plasma: Lipemic; artificial due to recent meal or high cholesterol and triglycer-
ides, which may be due to liver or pancreatic issues.
A combination of these can be seen in samples from patients with multiple
abnormalities.
Red blood cell count
Materials required
●Anticoagulated whole blood
●Ery-TIC test kit (Bioanalytic GmbH, Umkirch/Freiburg, Germany)
●Coverslip (specific for a hemocytometer)
● Microscope with 40x objective lens
Cell counter.
Blood Analysis   27
USSER
MPROVED
SCIENTIFIC
NEUBAUER
ADEIN USA
MACYTOMETER
Figure 2.13
 Improved Neubauer bemocytometer.
Figure 2.14 Red blood cell counting area, indicated by "R."
Procedure
(1) Follow Ery-TlC instructions for proper filling of the vial.
(3) Mix the Ery-TIC vial, and flood one side of the hemocytometer counting chamber
using capillary action.
(4) Count the RBCs within five group squares (each consisting of 16 smallest squares)
(see Figure 2.14).
(5) Repeat this count on the second side of the hemocytometer.
(6) Calculate totals for Side 1 and Side 2 of the hemocytometer grid.
28   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Calculations and quality control
QC: Side 1 and Side 2 totals should be within 10% of the average.
Average x10
=__×10°/μL
1000
Sources of error
● Improper mixing of whole blood or prepared solution
● Improper filling of Ery-TlC vial
● Incomplete filling or overfilling of the hemocytometer chamber
Usinga dirtyhemocytometercancausedifficultywithdifferentiatingbetweenRBCs
and debris.
Red blood cell indices
Purpose
Calculating the RBC Indices can be a useful tool when examining cases of anemia. They
can give insight to the size and hemoglobin concentration of the average RBc in the
calculated when a CBC analyzer is used.
Information required
●Packed cell volume (L/L)
●Hemoglobin concentration (g/L)
●RBC count (10°/μL).
MCV (mean corpuscular volume)
Being an indicator of volume, McV can provide information regarding the size of the
average RBC in a sample.
Formula:
RBC Count (10°/μL)
Interpretation
Value lower than normal = microcytic: red cells are smaller than normal for that
species.
MCH (mean corpuscular hemoglobin)
MCH can provide information regarding the weight of hemoglobin within the average
RBC.
Formula:
Hemoglobin (g/L)
Blood Analysis   29
Interpretation
Value lower than normal = red cells contain less than the average weight of hemoglobin
for that species.
Value higher than normal = red cells contain more than the average weight of hemo
globin for that species.
MCHC (mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration)
MCHC provides information regarding the concentration of hemoglobin within the
size of the average red cell.
Formula:
Hemoglobin (g/ L)
Interpretation
tion of hemoglobin for that species
globin for that species.
Reticulocyte count
Purpose
Performing a reticulocyte count is indicated in cases of anemia, to determine whether
Important notes
Two forms of reticulocytes exist: punctate and aggregate (see Figure 2.15). In cats, only
the aggregate forms should be counted.
Materials required
● New methylene blue (NMB) stain
●Whole blood
● Microscope slides
● Sterile red top tube
● Microscope with 100x objective
Cell counter.
Procedure
Before preparing slides, the NMB stain should be filtered. This process will minimize
artifacts such as stain precipitate, which may be falsely recorded as reticulocytes.
(1) Mix equal parts whole blood with filtered NMB stain in a sterile red top tube.
Ap Jie ol molle pue 'sad e lol pinom noA se sleaws oml aledaid (e)
30     Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 2.15F
Punctate reticulocyte (arrow); aggregate reticulocyte (arrowhead).
(4) Reticulocyte counts are made by recording the number of reticulocytes seen per
500 RBCs under 1000x magnification.
(5) Repeat this process on smear no. 2.
Calculations and quality control
QC: Smear 1 and Smear 2 totals should be within 2o% of each other before taking an
average.
Total(Slide 1+Slide 2)
Relative:
×100=_%
1000
Relative(%)
Absolute:
xRBC Count(10°/μL) x1000= __x10² /μL
100
Corrected reticulocyte percentage
Purpose
In cases of anemia, a reticulocyte percentage can be misleading, since the total number
of RBCs is decreased. Correcting your reticulocyte percentage takes into account the
decreased totalmature RBCnumbers circulatingin the anemicpatient.
 Calculation
Observed PCV
Observed Retic % x
_%
Normal SpeclesPcv
Blood Analysis   31
For dogs: A PCV of 45% is used in the equation
For cats: A PCV of 35% is used in the equation.
Reticulocyte production index (RPl)
Purpose
Prematurely released reticulocytes have a longer life span than mature erythrocytes.
Calculating the RPl accounts for this extended survival time and gives insight into
whether the regenerative response to anemia is adequate.
Calculation:
Corrected Retic %
RP|=
Retic Maturation Time
Table 2.2
 Reticulocyte maturation time factor.
Patient PCV
Maturation time factor
45%
1
35%
1.4
25%
2
15%
2.5
For example:
Corrected reticulocyte % = 5%
Patient's PCV = 15% (maturation time factor = 2.5).
RP|=
2.5
Table 2.3
Reticulocyte Production index (RPl) interpretation.
Dogs
RPI<1
Nonregenerative anemia
RPI1-2
Responsive bone marrow
RPI>2
Accelerated erythropoiesis
RPI≥3
Significant regeneration
White blood cell count
Materials required
● Whole blood
●Leuko-TIC test kits (Bioanalytic GmbH)
32   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 2.16 
Microscopic view of hemocytometer grid with white blood cells.
●Improved Neubauer hemocytometer
● Coverslip (specifc for a hemocytometer)
● Microscope with 10x objective lens
● Cell counter.
Procedure
(1) Follow Leuko-TlC instructions for proper filling of the vial.
(2) Place a clean coverslip on top of the hemocytometer.
(3) Mix the Leuko-TlC vial, and flood one side of the hemocytometer counting chamber
using capillary action.
(4) Using the 10x objective lens, count the WBCs contained within each the four big
corner squares of the grid. (see Figure 2.16 and Figure 2.17).
(5) Repeat this count on the second side of the hemocytometer.
Calculations and quality control
Calculations should be made using the average between Side 1 and Side 2.
QC: Side 1 and Side 2 totals should be within 10% of each other before taking the
average.
Average x50
_10²/μL
1000
Blood Analysis   33
W
W
W
M
Figure 之.17
White blood cell counting area, indicated by "w."
Sources of error
Improper mixing of whole blood or prepared solution
● Improper filling of Leuko-TIC vial
● Incomplete flooding over overfilling of the hemocytometer chamber
●Using a dirty hemocytometer can cause difficulty with differentiating between WBCs
and debris.
White blood cell differential
Purpose
A wBC differential count gives us information regarding the proportion and numbers
 of individual leukocytes in the patient's sample, including significant morphological
changes. This can provide useful diagnostic information in cases of inflammation, infec-
tion, and antigenic responses.
Materials required
● Stained PBS
· Microscope with 100x objective lens
● Cell counter.
Procedure
 It is important that examination and counts be performed within the monolayer area
of your slide (see Figure 2.18).
34   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 2.18 Read area (monolayer).
 a o    n  i  e i  a  
area twice.
evaluating morphology. 1ooox magnification should be used.
(2) Count a minimum of 100 WBCs. (ff the fotaf WBc Count is increased, 200 cells shouid
be counted to maintain accuracy.)
Calculations
Relative count:
No. of Cell Type Seen
%
100
Absolute count:
Relative (%)
xWBC Count(10²/μL)= —_×10²/μL
100
Note: Check your math:
·Relative counts of each cell type should add up to equal 100.
●Absolute counts of each cell type should add up to equal your WBC count.
Blood Analysis   35
White blood cell estimate
Purpose
Performing a WBC estimate can be useful as a quick evaluation of a patient's leukocyte
numbers if the materials required for a count are not available. Estimates can also be
done if an analyzer's wBC count is questionable or is flagged.
Materials required
● Stained PBS
● Microscope with 40x objective lens
● Cell counter.
Procedure
Examine a stained blood smear under 4o0x magnification.
(1) Count the number of leukocytes seen per field within the monolayer of the
smear.
(2) Count 10 fields and calculate the average number of cells seen per field.
Averagex1.5=__x10²/μL
Sources of error
●Poorly made smear
●Counting in areas too thick or too thin (see Figure 2.19).
Figure 2.19
Area of the smear that is too thick (left) and too thin (right).
36   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 2.2O Nucleated red blood cell or NRBC.
Corrected white blood cell count
Purpose
anemia and in some bone marrow disorders. NRBCs can alter the accuracy of your WBC
count. This is because they are a nucleated cell (like a WBC), and are mistakenly
recorded as such by the analyzer. This results in a falsely high wBC count.
Performing a corrected white blood count adjusts your WBc count to account for
these NRBCs.
Materials required
● Stained blood smear
● Microscope with 100x (oil immersion) objective lens
● Cell counter.
Procedure
NRBCs are first noted during your slide evaluation, usually while performing a WBC
differential count.
(1) During your 100 cell differential count, record the number of NRBC seen.
(2) Nofe: Do not include NRBCs as a part of your 1o0 cell wBC differential. Record them
separately.
100
xWBC Count(10²/μL) = __×10²/μL
(100+No.of NRBC)
Blood Analysis   37
Patelet count
Materials required
● Whole blood
●Thrombo-TIC test kit (Bioanalytic GmbH)
● Improved Neubauer hemocytometer
● Coverslip
● Microscope with 40x objective lens
 Cell counter.
Procedure
(1) Follow Thrombo-TlC instructions for proper filling of the vial.
(2) Place a clean coverslip on top of the hemocytometer.
(3) Mix the Thrombo-TIC vial, and flood one side of the hemocytometer counting
chamber using capillary action.
(4) Count the platelets within 25 group squares (each consisting of 16 smallest squares)
(see Figure 2.21).
(5) Repeat this count on the second side of the hemocytometer.
Counts should not be done if platelet clumping is seen. If clumping is noted, repeat
the dilution or collect a new blood sample if clumping persists.
(6) Calculate the sum of the 25 group squares for Side 1 and repeat for Side 2 of the
hemocytometer grid.
Figure 2.21
Patelet counting area, indicated by "p."
38   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Calculations and quality control
QC: Side 1 and Side 2 totals should be within 10% of each other before taking the
average.
Average = —_ x10²/μL
Sources of error
● Improper mixing of whole blood or prepared solution
● Improper filling of Thrombo-TIC vial
● Incomplete flooding or overfilling of the hemocytometer chamber
platelets and debris
● Platelet clumping present due to collection and/or handling of the blood sample.
Platelet estimate
Purpose
Performing a platelet estimate is a quick and simple way to verify adequate platelet
numbers in a patient's sample. It is also useful when errors and flags arise during auto-
mated analysis of blood. Depending upon the analyzer, megathrombocytes, which are
Materials required
●Stained PBS
● Microscope with 100x objective lens
● Cell counter
Procedure
(1)First, scan the edges of the smear under low power for platelet clumps.
Because clumps are larger than individual cells, they will be pushed to the outer
edges of the smear.
Tip: Platelet clumping is a common occurrence following the collection of blood
If no clumping is seen, proceed with the estimate.
(3) Count the number of platelets seen per field within the monolayer of the smear.
(4) Count 10 fields and calculate the average number of cells seen per field.
Average x20 = _—_x10² /μL
Sources of error
· Poorly made smear
· Counting in areas too thick or too thin
◆Platelet clumping present (see Figure 2.23).
Figure 2.22
Megathrombocyte (giant platelet) (1ooox magnification).
Figure 2.23
Platelet clumping (1ooox magnification).
34
40   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Normal species variation of leukocytes
Table 2.4 
Canineleukocytemorphology.
Figure 2.24
Canine neutrophil.
Figure 2.25
Canine eosinophil.
Figure 2.26
 Canine basophil.
Figure 2.2?
Canine Iymphocyte.
Figure 2.28
Canine monocyte.
Note "teardrop"-shaped Barr body on the nucleus of a canine neutrophil (Figure 2.24). Occurs in females
only.
Table 2.5
Feline leukocyte morphology.
.00
O
Figure 2.29
Feline neutrophil.
Figure 2.30
Felineeosinophil.
Figure 2.31
Feline basophil.
Figure 2.32
Felinelymphocyte.
Figure 2.33
Felinemonocyte.
Note the Howell-Jolly body (arrowhead) present in the red blood cell adjacent to the lyrmphocyte
(Figure 2.32).
Table 2.6
Equine leukocyte morphology.
Figure 2.34
 Equine neutrophil.
Figure 2.35
Equine eosinophil.
Figure 2.36
Equine basophil.
Figure 2.37
Equine Iymphocyte.
Figure 2.38
Equine monocyte.
42
Table 2.7
Bovine leukocyte morphology.
Figure 2.39
Bovine neutrophil.
Figure 2.40
Bovine eosinophil.
Figure 2.41
Bovine basophil.
Figure 2.42
Bovine Iymphocyte.
Figure 2.43
Bovine monocyte.
43
44
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 2.8
Ovine leukocyte morphology.
Figure 2.44
Ovine neutrophil.
Figure 2.45
Ovine eosinophil.
Figure 2.46
Ovine basophil.
Figure 2.47
Ovine Iymphocyte.
Figure 2.48
Ovine monocyte.
Neutrophil maturation
Table 2.9
The neutrophil in various stages of maturation. (Youngest to oldest, left to right.)
Figure 2.49
Figure 2.50
Band
Figure 2.51
Hypersegmented
Metamyelocyte.
neutrophil.
neutrophil.
Blood Analysis   45
Abnormal morphological changes in leukocytes
Table 2.10
Abnormal leukocytemorphology.
Toxic neutrophil
Cytoplasmic basophilia
and vacuolation; Dohle
bodies
● Associated with
increased neutrophil
production and
shortened
maturation time.
Figure 2.52
Toxic neutrophil.
Note Dohle body present in the
cytoplasm.
Atypical
Azurophilic cytoplasmic
lymphocyte
granules seen.
● Associated with
chronic antigenic
stimulation.
Figure 2.53
Atypical lymphocyte.
Reactive
Increased cytoplasmic
lymphocyte
basophilia is seen.
● Associated with
antigenic stimulation
secondary to
vaccines or infection.
Figure 2.54
Reactive lymphocyte.
46    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Erythrocyte morphologies
Table 2.11
Variations in erythrocyte chromasia (color).
Hypochromic (pale)
Figure 2.55
Hypochromicerythrocyte.
Polychromic (bluish)
Figure 2.56
Polychromic erythrocyte.
Table 2.12
Variation in erythrocyte size(anisocytosis).
Macrocytic (large)
Figure 2.57
Macrocytic erythrocyte.
Microcytic (small)
Figure 2.58
Microcyticerythrocyte(arrow).
Table 2.13
Erythrocyte inclusionbodies.
Basophilic stippling
Figure 2.59
Basophilic stippling.
Howell-Jolly bodies
Figure 2.60
Howell-Jolly body.
Heinz bodies
(Diff-Quik stain)
Figure 2.61
Heinz body (Diff-Quick stain).
Heinz bodies (new
methylene blue stain)
Figure 2.62
Heinz body (new methylene
blue stain).
47
Table 2.14
Small animal hemoparasites.
Babesia canis and Babesia
gibsoni
Figure 2.63 Babesia canis (left) and Babesia
gibsoni (right) present on a canine blood film
(from Thrall, Mary Anna, Weiser, Glade, Allison,
Robin W., and Campbell, Terry W. 2012. Veterinary
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. 2nd ed. Ames:
Blackwell Publishing).
Cytauxzoan
Figure 2.64 Cytauxzoan organisms on a feline
blood film (from Thrall, Mary Anna, Weiser, Glade,
Allison, Robin W., and Campbell, Terry W. 2012.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, 2nd
ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Mycoplasma haemofelis
(Figure 2.65) and
Mycoplasma haemocanis
(not shown)
Figure 2.65
Mycoplasma haemofelis organisms
appear as small, ring-shaped or rod-shaped
structures. Organisms can be found on the
surface or the edge of erythrocytes. Organisms
also seen on the surface of "ghost" cells
(arrowhead) (from Thrall, Mary Anna, Weiser,
Glade, Allison, Robin W, and Campbell, Terry W.
2012. Veterinary Hematology and Clinical
Chemistry, 2nd ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
48
Table 2.15
Erythrocyte poikilocytosis (shape).
Dacrocyte
Figure 2.66
Dacrocyte.
Echinocyte
Figure 2.67
Echinocyte.
Schistocyte
Figure 2.68
Schistocyte.
(Continued)
49
Table 2.15
(Continued)
Acanthocyte
Figure 2.69
Acanthocyte.
Spherocyte
Figure 2.70
Spherocyte.
Keratocyte
C
Figure 2.71
Keratocyte.
Codocyte
Figure 2.72
Codocyte.
50
Blood Analysis  51
Table 2.15
(Continued)
Stomatocyte
Figure 2.73
Stomatocyte.
Ovalocyte
Figure 2.74Ovalocyte.
Evaluating a blood film to complement automated analyzers
Automatedanalyzersare afastandconvenientway toevaluate apatient'sbloodvalues.
With this being said, analyzers should not completely eliminate the need to visually
examine the blood smear microscopically. Microscopic examination accomplishes two
important things: (1) you can confirm automated data, and (2) it allows you to evaluate
the morphology of the blood cells. Performing a manual examination does not have to
take much time, and the more often it is performed, the more proficient a technician
will become.
Erythrocytes
Under 1ooox magnification, examine the erythrocytes for their size and color. This will
help to confirm the MCV and MCHC values calculated by the automated analyzer. A
large variation in anisocytosis should be reflected in the analyzer's RDw (red cell dis-
tribution width) value.Increased numbersof polychromatophils can suggest anincreased
reticulocyte count and should be confirmed with a manual reticulocyte count if your
analyzer is unable to perform this function. In addition, examine the erythrocytes for
abnormal morphological characteristics and parasitic/infectious inclusions. Currently,
52  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Leukocytes
Examining the numbers and distribution of the leukocytes will confirm the analyzers
WBC count.Finally,examine themorphology of theleukocytes.Morphologiesshould be
and severity of an inflammatory response.
Thrombocytes
is largely in part to their tendency to clump. Examine your blood smear under 10o0x
a normal canine sample should have 10-35 platelets/1000x field.
The presence of large platelets, or megathrom bocytes, is a typical finding in cats, but
Tips for evaluating PBs
Perform a smear evaluation on all samples to complement the analyzer's readings-not
value for a technician to familiarize themselves with what is considered "normal." Once
this is achieved, "abnormal morphologies or abnormal counts will be instantly obvious
efficiently.
Clinical chemistries
To evaluate the function of most body systems, serum and/or plasma is evaluated for
Chemistries (often called panels, databases, or profiles) are most frequently conducted
on an in-house analyzer or sent to a reference laboratory. These chemistries reveal the
ence range for that species. Below is a list of the most routinely conducted chemistries
and the organ or system they are associated with:
Table 2.16Common clinical chemistry tests and their associated body system or organ.
Chemistry (and common abbreviation)
Body system or organ
Glucose (Glu, BG)
Required for every cell in the
body-energy source
Urea nitrogen (BUN)
Kidney
Creatinine (Creat)
Kidney (waste product produced by
the muscle)
(Continued)
Blood Analysis   53
Table 2.16
(Continued)
Chemistry (and common abbreviation)
Body system or organ
Total protein (TP, TS)
Proteins in fluid portion of blood-
albumin, globulin and others
Albumin (Alb)
Protein in blood, produced by the
liver
Globulin (Gb, GIb)
Protein in blood associated with the
immune system
Bilirubin, total (TBil, Total Bili, TB)
Liver (waste product from breakdown
of RBC)
Alkaline phosphatase (Alk phos, ALP)
Liver and bone
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST,
Liver (also found in heart)
SGOT)
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
Most commonly associated with the
liver(also found in kidney)
Calcium (Ca, Ca²t)
Mineral for muscles, nerves, heart,
clotting and bones
Phosphorus (Phos, P, Ph)
Kidney, liver and bone
Sodium (Na, Na+)
Electrolyte for normal processes in
cells
Potassium (K, K+)
Electrolyte for metabolism in cells
Chloride (Cl, CI-)
Electrolyte for acid-base balance in
cells
Bicarbonate (CO)
Electrolyte for acid-base balance in
cells
Amylase (Amyl, Amy)
Pancreas
Lipase (Lip)
Pancreas and upper Gl
Creatine phosphokinase (CK, CPK)
Enzyme for heart, brain and skeletal
muscle
Thyroid panel (T4, Free T4, TSH)
Thyroid function
Typically. the veterinarian will decide which combination of tests will be run
based on the presenting complaint from the owner and the physical exam findings.
Because testing procedures vary widely between analyzers and reference labs, they will
not be covered.
Coagulation testing
In certain situations,animals require coagulation testing to determine if the clotting
factors and platelets are working properly. Normal clotting function is a complex
54    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
process (clotting/coagulation cascade) and requires many compounds and steps to
should be avoided as the collection vessel for anypatients witha suspected coagulopa
thy, and a bandage should be applied to the venipuncture site.
Activated clotting time
Purpose
An activated clotting time (ACT) is an in-house test that is used to determine how por-
tions (clotting factors) of the clotting cascade are working. The ACT will be prolonged
in patients with faulty clotting factors and a low platelet count. Automated analyzers
are becoming more common, making this test obsolete.
Materials required
●ACT tube (gray top)
Vacutainer
● Warm water bath (body temperature of the species you are testing)
● Timer.
Procedure
(1) Perform a "clean" stick into the vein without poking or searching for the vessel.
This will increase clotting factors and platelets erroneously.
(2) Allow the tube to fill to the volume according to the manufacturer.
(3) Begin gently mixing as soon as the collection is complete.
every 5 seconds until a noticeable clot has formed. Do not shake or invert the tube
a clot. Clotting times vary by species; however, a dog's blood should clot within 120
seconds and a cat's within 9o seconds.
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Purpose
The buccal mucosal bleeding time(BMBT) test is used to determine primary hemostasis
platelet numbers but questionable platelet function. This can also be used to diagnose
von Willebrand disease seen primarily in Dobermans.
Materials required
●Gauze to tie the lips of the muzzle upward
● BMBT lancet (only a specific lancet for this test should be used; other devices will
cause too deep of an incision)
● Filter paper or once-folded paper towel
Timer.
Blood Analysis  55
Procedure
(1) Tie the muzzle of the dog closed with gauze with the lips turned upward. Cats and
other species will likely need sedation.
(2) Utilizing the lancet, make a small, uniform incision on the underside of the lip. Bleed-
ing will occur.
(3) Gently dab blood that flows from the incision with the paper. Do NoT touch the
(4) Time how long it takes for no more drips of blood to form at the incision. Dogs <4
minutes, cats <3.5 minutes.
Important notes
if left inplace toolong.
Automated clotting tests
Purpose
Many reference laboratories and in-house analyzers can perform tests to establish if
clotting issues are present. A blue top tube is collected and analyzed for activated
partial thromboplastin time (pTT, apTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin time (TT).
or may not be working properly.
Definitions
● Activated partial thromboplastin time: Measures the intrinsic factors and common
pathways of the cascade.
● Prothrombin time: Measures the extrinsic factors and common pathways of the
cascade.
●Thrombin time: Measures the functional activity of the final common pathway,
namely fibrinogen.
this sectionis meant to provide a basic understanding of coagulation tests,along with
how and why they are performed.
Chapter 3
Urinalysis
Sample collection
The method in which a urine sample is obtained is very important to the interpretation
of the urinalysis itself. The method of collection should afways be noted on the urinalysis
requisition at the time of analysis.
Free catch (voided sample)
Free catch samples are the easiest to collect and are often brought in by owners. They
culturing. Owners can be instructed on how to collect samples at home in a manner
that still maintains adequate quality control. A midstream, first-morning collection will
provide the best sample for analysis (see Table 3.1).
Materials required
● Collection cup or ladle
● Pie plate or shallow dish (useful for female dogs)
● Nonabsorbent litter for collections in cats
Specimen container
Good container choice for owners
● Leak proof with a tight-fitting lid
●Opaque
● Clean, and well rinsed of any previous contents or detergents
container will have residue present that can cause microscopic lipid molecule con-
tamination. This can lead to erroneous interpretations.
● For cats: Commercial nonabsorbent litter for urine collection is available. As a sub-
stitute, well-rinsed aquarium gravel or Styrofoam chips can be used as well.
Bladder expression
In small animals, bladder expression can be performed if a free catch sample is not
possible. Like free catch samples, this collection method provides an adequate sample
for routine urinalysis, but is not appropriate for bacterial culturing (see Table 3.2).
Veterinary Technician's Hancbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
57
58
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 3.1 Advantages and disadvantages of a free catch (voided) sample.
Free catch (voided sample)
Advantages
+ No risk or complications to the patient.
+ Can be used by the client.
Disadvantages
+ High amount of contamination of cells, bacteria and debris from the
genitourinary tract, surrounding fur and the environment.
+ Sample is unsuitable for culture.
Table 3.2 Advantages and disadvantages of bladder expression.
Bladder expression
Advantages
+ Decreased risk of trauma (if done correctly).
+Sample can be obtained when needed.
Disadvantages
+ Excessive pressure can result in trauma to the patient.
+ If the bladder does not contain sufficient quantities of urine at the time,
expression may not be successful.
Same amount of contamination seen as with a voided sample.
+ Sample is unsuitable for culture.
For collection, the animal is standing or placed in lateral recumbancy, and the bladder
is palpated. Once it is located, gentle, steady pressure is applied to the bladder until the
animal begins to urinate. It is important not to apply too much pressure as bladder
rupture may occur. This method should never be used in patients with suspected
obstruction or fragile bladders due to increased risk of rupture.
Materials required
● Collection dish
● Assistance with restraint
Catheterization
Catheterization involves inserting a rubber catheter into the urethra and feeding it up
to the bladder of the patient to collect a sample. A sterile syringe is attached to the end
of thecatheter and urineisdrawn out.Thisprocedurevaries slightly depending upon
species and sex. In any case, sterility is important. Sterile catheters, sterile lubricant,
and sterile gloves should be worn to prevent infection. For female animals, a speculum
Urinalysis   59
Table 3.3 Advantages and disadvantages of catheterization.
Advantages
+ Sample is collected in a sterile manner; therefore, it is suitable for culture.
+ Can collect urine sample when bladder volume is low.
Disadvantages
+Increased risk of an iatrogenic infection or trauma.
Difficult toperform infemale animals.
Materials required
●Sterile polypropylene or rubber catheter
● Sterile lubricant
●Sterile gloves
● Sterile syringe for collection
●Speculum (for female patients)
Cystocentesis
Cystocentesis is another method for collecting a sterile urine sample, and therefore is
easily restrained animals. Sedation may be required to achieve this. Typically. the
patient is restrained in dorsal recumbancy and the bladder is palpated. An ultrasound
may also be used to visualize the bladder and help guide the needle. The site should
be cleaned with 70% alcohol and aseptic techniques should be followed. A 1"-1 1/2",
25-22 gauge needle, attached to a syringe, is inserted through the abdominal wall and
into the bladder. Once inserted, the needle is never redirected as this could cause
the syringe is retracted and urine is drawn out. Once the sample has been obtained,
For female dogs and cats, the needle is inserted along the midline of the caudal
abdomen. For male dogs, the needle is inserted caudal to the umbilicus, just off to the
side of the sheath (see Table 3.4).
Materials required
 1"-1.5", 25-22 gauge needle
●10-12 mL syringe
●Assistance with restraint.
Sample preservation
Fresh urine should be examined within 20 minutes of collection. If that is not possible,
then a method of preservation should be considered.
60   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 3.4 Advantages and disadvantages of cystocentesis.
Advantages
+ Less of a risk of causing an iatrogenic infection (compared with catheterization).
+ No contamination of urine; therefore, the sample is suitable for culture.
Disadvantages
+ Requires adequate volume of urine within the bladder.
May cause microscopic hematuria.
Before choosing a preservative, consider the following:
(1) The method of sample collection used
(2) The analyses to be performed
(3) The biochemical method that will be used
(4) The time delay between urine collection and analysis.
Note: Always indicate the type of preservative used on the requisition.
In vitro changes occurring in unpreserved urine
Physical characteristics
Turbidity:Increase-as bacteria,and possibly crystals,multiply.the turbidity of the
sample increases.
Odor: Becomes stronger smelling, as microbes cause increased amounts of ammonia
to be produced within the sample.
Chemical characteristics
Glucose:Decrease-asit is metabolized by cells and microbes.
Bilirubin: Decrease-bilirubin levels decrease in the presence of direct light.
Nitrite: Increase-if it is produced by the types of microbes present in the sample.
Sediment characteristics
Cellular structures: Decrease-cells begin to deteriorate in concentrated, dilute, or
acidic urine.
Crystals: Increase or decrease-depending on the solubility and pH of the sample, the
numbers of various crystals may change over time.
Refrigeration
Refrigerating a urine sample is an adequate form of preservation for up to 6 hours.
Before analyzing the sample, be sure to allow it to return to room temperature first.
Urinalysis ■  61
This is important for the enzymatic reactions that occur during the chemical examina-
tion ofurine.Generally,enzymaticreactions occur at a slowerrate whenthe sample is
at a lower temperature. This results in false readings.
Lowering the temperature may also encourage crystal formation. As the sample
returns to room temperature, these crystals will dissolve.
     o      
promised when analyzing a sample that is below room temperature.
Freezing
by the actions of microbes. Freezing is also adequate for most chemical tests and pre
serves the mineral content of urine. Freezing, however, is an unsuitable method of
preservation for sediment and hormonal analyses due to the resulting cellular and
protein damage.
Toluene
Toluene is an organic solvent that can be used to preserve a urine sample. Toluene
floats on the surface of the sample, preventing the loss of acetone and contamination.
Two milliliters of toluene will be adequate for 1oo mL of urine. Toluene is suitable for
preserving the chemical profile of the urine sample; however, it would not prevent the
invitro growth of microbes present in the sample.Due to the fact that toluene is a
the urine.
Formalin{40%)
for sediment analysis. Formalin prevents microbial growth, therefore preserving the
cellular integrity of various structures within the sample. Formalin is a reducing agent,
so it doesinterfere with the chemical analysis of substances that use thisprinciple in
The use of enough formalin can result in a false negative.
Boric acid (0.8%)
The addition of boric acid to a sample will inhibit bacterial growth. Boric acid is an
appropriate preservative for sediment analysis and, with the exception of pH, chemical
analysis as well.
Commercial preservation tablets
Commercial preservation tablets are designed to inhibit microbes and control the pH
tion of urine sediment, such as leukocytes, erythrocytes, casts, and crystals.
62  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Physical examination of urine
The physical examination of urine consists of assessing the volume,color,turbidity,
odor, and SG of a urine sample.
Volume
An accurate representation of urine volume should be assessed over a period of 24
plements). Normal daily urine output can be calculated using a rate of 1mL/kg/h.
Terminology related to urine volume
Polyuria: Increased amounts of urine volume
Oliguria: Decreased amounts of urine volume
Anuria: No urine production.
Color
Normal urine is described as being straw colored. The pigment of the urine often cor-
relates with the concentration of the sample, but this should still be confirmed with a
SG reading
To avoid discrepancies among technicians, use standard color terms when recording
your findings (see Table 3.5 and Figure 3.1).
Table3.5Commonurine colors and associated causes.
Straw
Normal
Colorless-pale
Dilute urine
Deep yellow
Concentrated urine; bilirubinuria
Orange-red
Hematuria; hemoglobinuria
Red-brown
Myoglobinuria
Milky white
Pyuria
Turbidity
Turbidity refers to the "cloudiness" of urine. An increase in turbidity in the urine can
be caused by cellular elements, crystals, microorganisms, or mucous. When examining
the turbidity of a sample, there are a few key points to remember:
the bottom of a standing sample.
Assessturbidityonaroomtemperaturesample.
Urinalysis  63
Figure 3.1 Urine color variations. From left to right: straw, pale yellow, and orange-red.
Examinetheturbidityina clearcontainer of a standard depth.Agoodchoiceis a
urine tube or sterile red top blood collection tube.
specles.
To examine turbidity:
(1) with the sample in a clear tube, invert several times to ensure the sample is well
mixed.
(2) Hold the sample up in front of a piece of paper with text on it.
(4) Record as clear (0), slightly cloudy (1), cloudy (2), or turbid (3).
Odor
The odor of urine can provide insight into possible conditions that should later be con-
firmed through chemical and sediment analysis.
Again, it is important to use standard terminology to minimize discrepancies among
technicians:
Strong odor: The urine of intact male animals, especially cats and goats, is often quite
strong and should be described as such.
Ammonia: Ammonia-scented urine can be associated with cystitis. Some species of
64    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
CLEAR
Figure 3.2 Assessing turbidity.
The presence of bacteria should be confirmed during the sediment examination or
with a urine culture.
Putrid: Putrid- (or foul-) smelling urine is associated with the degradation of protein.
This can occur during infections, and should be confirmed with further testing.
Fruity:Increased ketones present inthe urine give off a fruity odor. This odor may
Specific gravity (SG)
SG is determined by assessing the density of a liquid (in this case, urine) compared with
the density of distilled water.
Measuring SG requires the use of a refractometer (see Figure 3.3).
In a correctly calibrated refractometer, distilled water should read 1.ooo. Calibration
should be checked regularly to ensure accuracy.
If the urine sample that is being tested exceeds the maximum limit of the refractom-
eter, an accurate SG can be achieved by following these steps:
(1) Mix equal portions of urine with distilled water.
(3) Multiply the last two digits of the reading by 2 in order to obtain the estimated SG
Terminology related to SG
s i  a    a a   ue a
>1.030; cats: >1.035).
Hyposthenuria: The SG of the urine is lower than the glomerular filtrate (<1.o08).
Urinalysis  65
Figure 3.3 Refractometer.
Isosthenuria: The SG of the urine is equal to that of the glomerular filtrate
(1.008-1.012).
Tips for accurate SG readings
·Ensure the sample is well mixed before reading.
● Ensure the sample is at room temperature if it was previously refrigerated.
·Practice good equipment maintenance.
Specific gravity readings using reagent strips
sample. This method of measurement differs from the refract meter method and has
(1) The principle of the test involves the use of a pH indicator to produce a degree of
color change associated with a SG value. Urine samples with a pH of 6.5 or higher
could result in erroneous findings.
(2) The highest SG reading the strip can measure is 1.030, which is below the capacity
of dogs and cats.
Chemical examination
The chemical examination of urine is usually performed by the use of reagent strips.
66    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
SIEMENS
Multistix105G
Figure 3.4 Multistix 10.
for a specific urine constituent. Commercial examples would be Multistix or Chemstrip
(see Figure 3.4).
There are individual tests available that can be used as well. Depending upon the
constituent tested, these alternative methods may be more/less specific or may simply
be useful as a confirmatory test.
Whichever method is chosen, it is important to review the package insert and make
note of the testing time required and any possible false positives or false negatives that
can occur.
Glucose
The term used to describeglucose in theurine is glucosuria.The reagentstrip method
for detecting glucose is specific for glucose, meaning no other sugar will cause a posi-
tive result.
Possible causes of false positives with the reagent strips are contamination with
detect any sugar (or reducing substance) in the urine, and therefore are not specific to
glucose.
Bilirubin
When bilirubin is present in the urine, the term "bilirubinuria" is used. Bilirubin is unsta-
ble in sunlight or artificial light and should therefore be tested immediately. Delaying
testing will result in false negative values.
Urinalysis67
Ictotesttablets are availabletotestforthepresenceofbilirubinin a urinesample.
quantities of bilirubin.
Ketones
There are three ketone bodies that are produced: acetone, acetoacetic acid, and
β-hydroxybutyric acid. Most reagent strips are sensitive to acetoacetic acid, less sensi-
tive to acetone, and do not detect β-hydroxybutyric acid. The presence of ketone bodies
in the urine, or ketonuria, is often accompanied by a fruity odor.
Acetest relies on the same testing principle as the reagent strips, but is more sensitive.
Blood
oa        aa u  
anb sl jsal ayl adwes auun e ul (eunuigoboiw) uigoboaw pue '(eunuigoboway)
Hematest tablets that were originally developed for detecting blood in feces can be
Certain microbes and cells, if present, can produce the enzyme peroxidase, which will
result in a false positive. Another source of a false positive is contamination with oxidiz
ing disinfectants.
pH
a pH range of 5.0-8.5. Results are read at 0.5 intervals on the pH scale. Care should
buffer contained within the neighboring protein pad.
Protein
When protein is present in the urine, the term proteinuria is used. Reagent strips are
tiveforglobulins andmucoproteins.
False negatives may occur due to the low concentration of protein contained within
For the detection ofmicroalbuminuria,certainin-houseenzyme-linked immunosorb-
ent assay (ELlSA) test kits are able to detect the trace amounts of albumin that would
be missed by the reagent stripmethod.
Urobilinogen
When testing for urobilinogen, the same light-sensitivity precautions used for bilirubin
   o   o a  sau     o
preservative.
68Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Nitrite
Nitrites are productsformed fromnitrates by the actions ofcertain species ofbacteria.
only, but there are several factors to consider when recording nitrite levels as negative.
First, only certain species of bacteria will convert nitrate to nitrite. Second, it takes time
for this to occur.A short urine retention time within the bladder may not beadequate
for this conversion to take place.
Leukocytes
Leukocytes present in the urine are termed pyuria. The reagent strip method for detect-
ing leukocytes relies on the detection of a leukocyte esterase enzyme. Unfortunately,
this test is insensitive in dogs, and almost always gives a positive result for feline
Sediment examination
Sediment examination is the final step of a complete urinalysis. A sediment exam not
it also serves to confirm suspected findings during the physical and chemical examina-
tions previously conducted.
The SG of the sample itself can have an effect on the appearance of some structures,
s        s   
samples with a SG >1o20, these cells will begin to appear smaller, distorted, and
shriveled. In more dilute urine, (<1.010), the cells will swell and may eventually rupture
if given enough time.
Before examining the sediment, we must first concentrate the sample. This is done
by centrifuging the urine. After centrifugation, the urine will be separated into two
portions: the supernatant and the sediment(see Figure 3.5).
Materials required
● Conical urine tubes
● Centrifuge
●Microscope
● Slides and cover slip
● Sediment stain (if preferred).
Sediment stain
Sedimentstain canbea useful tool inthe examination ofurine.Manymicroscopicele
ments are translucent, and stain can provide some color or contrast to make visualiza
tion easier.If using stain,it is still a good practice to prepare one sample without stain
and one with stain, then examine and compare both.
Urinalysis  69
Figure 3.5 Urine after centrifugation. Sediment is concentrated at the bottom (arrow).
Stain can bring with it some undesirable findings as well. Older stain can precipitate,
causing clumps which could obscure or interfere with your readings. Stain can also
microscopic examination. Comparing a stained sample with an unstained sample can
help in eliminating these false positives.
To maintain good quality control, check your stain regularly. Examine the stain by
adding one drop to a slide, add a coverslip, and view under 40x power. Scan the area
for bacteria and stain precipitate. If these contaminants are found, discard the stain.
Sediment stain is relatively inexpensive and should be routinely replaced on a monthly
basis.
Procedure for microscopic examination of urine
(1) Pour 10 mL of the urine sample into a labeled conical centrifuge tube. If 10 mL is not
available,note thevolume usedonyourrequisition.
(2) Centrifuge the sample for 5 minutes at 1500rpm.
(3) Decant the supernatant leaving approximately O.5-1mL in the tube.
(4) Resuspend the sediment by flicking the tube with your fingers or gently mixing the
sediment and supernatant with a pipette.
(5) Transfer a drop of resuspended sediment near the end of a microscope slide with
a transfer pipette and place a coverslip over it.
(6) Opfionar: Add one drop of sediment stain to one drop of urine sediment on the
other end of the microscope slide and place a coverslip over it.
70  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
(8) Scan the entire slide under low power (10x) for the presence of large formed ele-
ments, such as casts, crystals, and clusters of cells.
(9) Using a grid pattern, examine the entire specimen under the coverslip (both stained
and unstained samples)using high power (40x) to identify and semi-quantify formed
elements.
Tip: To verify the presence of cellular components, make a blood smear with the
Reporting of findings
field. Red blood cells and white blood cells are evaluated as the average number seen
per high power field (40x). Other elements, such as bacteria and crystals, are also
examined under high power (40x), and reported as occasional (1+), few (2+), moderate
(3+), or many (4+).
Microscopic elements of urine sediment
Table 3.6
Cellular constituents of urine sediment.
Figure 3.6
Red blood
Figure 3.7
Red blood
Figure 3.8
Red blood
cells (unstained urine).
cells (unstained urine).
cells (stained urine).
Figure 3.9
White
Figure 3.10White blood
Figure 3.11
White blood
blood cells (arrows) in
cells (arrow), red blood
cells (arrow), red blood
unstained urine. Red
cells, and bacteria present
cells, and bacteria
blood cells and bacteria
in unstained urine.
present in stained urine.
are present as well.
Table 3.6
(Continued)
Figure 3.12
Squamous
Figure 3.13
snowenbs oml
 Figure 3.14
Renal tubular
epithelialcell.Bacilli
epithelial cells, and one
cells.
bacteriaandwBCsare
smaller, transitional
also present.
epithelial cell.
Table 3.7
Urinary casts.
Hyaline cast
Figure 3.15 Hyaline cast (from Hendrix, Charles M. and
Sirois, Margi. 2007. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary
Technicians, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Epithelial cast
Figure 3.16
Epithelial cast (from Hendrix, Charles M. and
Sirois, Margi. 2007. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary
Technicians, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Granular cast
Figure 3.17 Granular cast (from Hendrix, Charles M. and
Sirois, Margi. 2007. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary
Technicians, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Table 3.8
Urinary crystals.
Type
PH
Ammonium urate
Acidic/neutral
Figure 3.18
Ammonium urate
crystals (from McCurnin, Dennis M.
and Bassert, Joanna M. 2006.
Clinical Textbook for Veterinary
Technicians, 6th ed. St. Louis:
Saunders-Elsevier).
Amorphous urate
Acidic/neutral
Figure 3.19
Amorphous urate
crystals.
Bilirubin
Acidic
Figure 3.20
Bilirubin crystals.
Calcium carbonate
Neutral/alkaline
Figure 3.21
Calcium carbonate
crystals (spherical and dumbbell
forms) present in equine urine.
72
Table 3.8
(Continued)
Type
PH
Calcium oxalate
Acidic/neutral
dihydrate
Figure 3.22
Calcium oxalate
dihydrate crystals.
Calcium oxalate
Acidic/neutral
monohydrate
Figure 3.23
Calcium oxalate
monohydrate.
Cholesterol
Acidic/neutral
Figure 3.24
Cholesterol crystal.
(Continued)
73
Table 3.8
(Continued)
Type
pH
Cystine
Acidic/neutral
Figure 3.25
Cystine crystal.
Magnesium
Neutral/alkaline
ammonium
phosphate
Figure 3.26
Magnesium
ammonium phosphate (struvite)
crystal.
Sulfa metabolite
Acidic/neutral
Figure 3.27
One form of sulfa
metabolite crystal.
74
Table 3.9
 Miscellaneous findings in urine sediment.
Figure 3.28 A chain of cocci bacteria
Figure 3.29
Bacilli bacteria
present in a urine sample. Rod-shaped
(arrows) and RBCs also
bacilli and RBCs are also present.
present.
28mm
Figure 3.30
Dioctophymarenale ovum
(from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary
Figure 3.31
Spermatozoa.
A. 2012. Veterinary Cfinical Parasitology.
8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Figure 3.32
Artifact: bubbles.
Figure 3.33
Starch granules.
75
Chapter 4
Parasitology
Collection
important in achieving accurate results.
In small animal medicine, fecal samples are often brought in by clients. These samples
    a       aa 
ahead of time.
● The sample should be fresh. If samples cannot be examined within 2 hours, they
larvate and oocysts sporulate.
● Samples obtained later from the yard, pen, or litter box are not acceptable.
●The volume of sample should be adequate.A minimum of 10g of fresh feces should
be collected.
messy to retrieve a sample from for analysis.
Pooled samples
Pooled fecal samples describes a collection of fecal samples obtained from a group of
cific individual is identified, rather the sample represents the group. It is important to
for the parasite. When collecting these samples, the label should clearly state:
● Owner
Date/time of collection
●Pen number
Number of animals contained within this pen.
Veterinary Technician's Hancbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
7
78   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Name Nom Nombre
F/M
Dacha
Figure 4.1 Specimen container suitable for fecal collection.
Gross examination
Upon receipt of a fecal sample, a gross exam should first be performed to examine the
physical characteristics.
Consistency
Comment on the consistency of the fecal sample. Is it soft, watery, or hard? Keep in
Color
Unusual color should be noted,as it could give insight into other underlying conditions,
for example, gray stool can indicate pancreatic insufficiency.
Blood
Note any blood present. Blood may appear bright red (frank), or black (melena or
melanous) and have a tar-like consistency.
Mucous
Mucous may be present on the surface of fresh feces. This should be noted.
Gross parasites
Parasites may be visible upon gross examination of the stool. Most commonly seen in
Parasitology ■ 79
Microscopic examination
There are many methods of preparing and performing a microscopic examination. The
goal of each is to detect parasite ova or oocysts in the patient's sample.Depending
upon the suspected parasite, the sample, or equipment available, one method may be
preferred over another.
ent. Examine the entire coverslip, working in a methodical grid pattern to ensure
Direct fecal smear
technique can even be used on the small amount of fecal material found on the end of
a thermometer. The downside to this technique is that with such a small sample, the
Materials
● Microscope slides
●Coverslip
●Saline
● Wooden applicator stick
Procedure
(1) Using a wooden applicator stick, mix a small amount of fecal material into a few
drops of saline in the center of a slide.
(2) Blend gently until the mixture is homogenous
(3) Spread out the mixture to a thin layer.
(4) Remove any large fecal pieces.
(6) Examine microscopically.
This technique is particularly useful for viewing live, motile, trophozoites (e.g.,
Giardia).
Figure 4.2 Mounted direct smear.
80   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Simple fecal flotation
There are several types of fecal flotation solutions that are used as a semi-quantitative
method of evaluating a fecal sample. In these methods, an estimate is made of the
number of parasite ova per gram of feces.
The principle behind this method is to use the differences in specific gravity of para
site eggs and cysts from that of fecal debris and the solution. A fecal sample is mixed
its specific gravity. Parasite eggs and cysts float to the surface, while most fecal matter
sinks to the bottom.
A common flotation medium is sodium nitrate solution. It can be purchased already
Other popular solutions include Sheather's solution and zinc sulfate.
Sheather's solution, also known as sugar solution, can be messy to work with as it is
quite sticky. It tends to float fewer eggs as compared with sodium nitrate, but it does
not distort roundworm eggs. It is readily available and inexpensive.
Zinc sulfate does an excellent job in concentrating cystic forms of protozoans. Zinc
sulfate is available from veterinary suppliers.
Figure 4.3 Simple fecal flotation.
Parasitology  81
Materials (commercially available fecal flotation kits may be used in place
of these supplies)
● Two specimen containers (or wax paper cups)
● Tongue depressor
●Flotation solution
● Fecal shell vial (or test tube)
●Metal tea strainer
● Coverslip
● Microscope slide.
Procedure
(1) Add 2g of fresh feces to a container, such as a specimen container or a wax paper
cup.
(2) Add flotation solution to the feces and mix well using a tongue depressor.
(3)Strainthis mixture through a metaltea strainer into the second specimen
container.
(4) This strained mixture is then added to the fecal shell vial (or test tube).
(5) Add more flotation solution to the shell vial until a meniscus is formed.
depending upon which type of solution is used).
(7) After the allotted time, remove the coverslip by lifting it directly upwards.
(8)Place the coverslip onto a microscope slide.When laying the coverslip down,place
trapped underneath the coverslip.
(9) Examine microscopically.
Note: It is important not to delay examination. Depending upon the type of flotation
crystallize.
There are many commercial kits available on the market that utilizes this same prin
Centrifugation technique
In comparison with the simple flotation method, the centrifugation technique is more
efficient at recovering parasite ova from a sample. It does, however, require a little
more specialized equipment.
Materials
●Two specimen containers (or wax paper cups)
●Metal tea strainer
● Tongue depressor
● Test tubes
●Flotation solution
82■
 Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
● Coverslip
●Microscope slide.
Procedure
(1)Mix1g of feces in 10mL of flotation solutionin a specimen container or waxpaper
cup until a suspension is formed.
(2) Pour the mixture through the metal tea strainer. Using the tongue depressor, press
(3) Pour the liquid into a centrifuge tube and centrifuge the sample at 15o0 rpm for 3
minutes (remember to always counter balance).
(4) Decant the supernatant, and add flotation solution. Mix well into the sediment. Add
more flotation solution until a meniscus is formed.
(5) Place a coverslip over the meniscus.
minutes. (remember to counter balance)
(a) Note: It is important that you use a centrifuge with swinging buckets, not sta-
tionary buckets. During the centrifugation process, tubes will swing out hori-
zontally and the coverslip will be held in place (see Figure 4.4).
(7) After centrifugation, remove the coverslip by lifting straight upwards. Place the
coverslip onto the slide and examine microscopically.
Figure 4.4
4Centrifugation technique. A variable angle centrifuge is necessary for this
technique.
Parasitology  83
Baermann technique
In contrast to the previous methods mentioned earlier, the Baermann Technique is used
to recover parasite larvae, not ova.
Materials
● Baermann apparatus: Consisting of a funnel, support structure, short length of
tubing at the end of the funnel, and a clamp at the end of the tubing.
● Gauze or cheesecloth
●Warm water
● Microscope slide
● Coverslip.
Procedure
(1) Wrap 5g of feces in gauze or cheesecloth and lay on the support screen inside the
funnel of the Baermann apparatus.
the sample is covered.
(3) Allow the sample to sit for at least 8 hours (or overnight).
(4) After the appropriate time has lapsed, loosen the tubing clamp slightly to withdraw
a large drop of liquid onto a slide.
(5) Add a coverslip to the sample and examine microscopically.
Common parasites of domestic species
Canine and feline
Nematodes
Table 4.11
Toxocara species: Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati, and Toxascaris leonina (see
Figure 4.5, Figure 4.6, Figure 4.7, Figure 4.8, and Figure 4.10).
Common name
Roundworms
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of parasite egg containing the larval stage
of the parasite; transmission through placenta and
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.5
Toxocara canis (roundworm).
Figure 4.6
Toxascaris leonina (roundworm).
84
m
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 4.7
Adult roundworm.
Adult worm in
intestine
Human
Larva migrates to the
lungs, and are coughed
up then swallowed
Eggs in feces
 Egg containing 
larva is ingested
Larva migrate
through the tissues
Figure 4.8
Life cycle of a canine roundworm.
85
Table 4.2
Ancylostoma species: Ancylostoma caninum, Ancylostoma tubaeforme,
Ancylostoma braziliense, and Uncinaria stenocephala (see Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10).
Commonname
Canine and feline hookworm
Host
U. stenocephala and A. caninum (canine),
A. tubaeforme (feline), A. braziliense (canine and
feline)
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of eggs; placental; milk; through the skin
Distribution
Ancylostoma spp. (worldwide); U. stenocephala
(North America)
Figure 4.9
Ancylostoma spp.
86
36μm
Figure 4.10
Ancylostoma spp. (A), Toxocara canis (T), and Cystoisospora (l) (from Zajac,
Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A. 2012. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Black-
well Publishing).
Table 4.3
Strongyloides species: Strongyloides stercoralis and Strongyloides
trumiefaciense.
Common name
Threadworms
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Milk; through the skin
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.4
Trichuris species: Trichuris vulpis,Trichuris campanula,and Trichuris serrate
(see Figure 4.11).
Common name
Whipworm
Host
I. campanula and T. serrate (feline); T. vulpis (canine)
Parasite location (adult)
Colon
Transmission
 Ingestion of eggs
Distribution
Worldwide
7
Figure 4.11
Trichuris spp.(whipworm).
Table 4.5
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus.
Common name
Feline lungworm
Host
Feline
Parasite location (adult)
Bronchioles
Transmission
Ingestion of larvae
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.6
Fifaroides species: Fifaroides osleri, Fifaroides hirthi, and Fifaroides milksi.
Common name
Canine lungworm
Host
Canine
Parasite location (adult)
Trachea; lungs; bronchioles
Transmission
Ingestion of stage 1 larvae
Distribution
North America,Europe,Japan
88
Parasitology
Cestodes
Table 4.7
Dipylidium caninum (see Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13).
Common name
Double-pored tapeworm; flea tapeworm
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of infected adult flea (intermediate host)
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.12 Dipylidium caninum (flea tapeworm).
Adult worm in the
sm. intestine
Tape worm matures
into an adult within the
sm.intestines
Eggs or gravid proglottids
are passed in the feces
Definitive host ingests
the intermediate host.
 Eggs are ingested by
 intermediate host
Figure 4.13
Life cycle of Dipylidium caninum (flea tapeworm).
Table 4.8
Taenia species: Taenia pisiformis, Taenia hydatigena, and Taenia ovis.
Common name
Mutton tapeworm of dogs (T ovis)
Host
Dogs
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of infected intermediate host (rabbits,
ruminants, and sheep, respectively)
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.9
Taenia taeniaeformis (see Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15).
Common name
Feline tapeworm
Host
Feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestines
Transmission
Ingestion of infected intermediate host (rats and mice)
Distribution
Worldwide
90
20μm
Figure 4.14 Taenia spp. ova (from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A. 2012. Veterinary
Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
3
Figure 4.15Adult tapeworm.
92■
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 4.1o Echinococcus species: Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus
multilocularis (see Figure 4.16).
Common name
Unilocular tapeworm (E. granulosus) and multilocular
tapeworm (E. multilocularis)
Host
Canine (E. granulosus) and feline (E. multilocularis)
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of infected intermediate host (E. granulosus:
cattle, sheep; E. muftifocufaris: rats, mice)
Distribution
Worldwide (E. granulosus); Northern hemisphere
(E.muftilocularis)
Figure 4.16
Echinococcus spp.
Trematodes
Table 4.11
Alaria.
Common name
 Intestinal flukes
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of infected intermediate host (frog, snake
or mouse)
Distribution
Northern United States and Canada
Parasitology
■93
Table 4.12
Paragonium kelficotti (see Figure 4.17).
Commonname
aynjy bun7
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Lung
Transmission
Ingestion of infected intermediate host (crayfish)
Distribution
North America
Figure 4.17
Paragonimus kelficotti (from Hendrix, Charles M. and Robinson, Ed. 2012.
Diagnostic Parasitology for Veterinary Technicians, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Protozoans
Table 4.13
Giardia (see Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.35).
Common name
Giardia
Host
Canine, feline, equine, and ruminants
Parasite location (adult)
Intestinal mucosa
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
O
Figure 4.18 
Giardiacvst.
Table 4.14
Cystoisospora (formerly isospora) (see Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.10).
Common name
Coccidia
Host
Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion ofoocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.19(
Cystoisospora felis (coccidia).
94
Table 4.15
Toxoplasma gondii (see Figure 4.2o).
Common name
Toxoplasma
Host
Feline (can occur in other species)
Parasite location (adult)
Intestines
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
30um
Figure 4.2o Small Toxoplasma oocysts. Also present is a larger isospora oocyst (arrow)
(from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A. 2012. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed.
Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Table 4.16
Cryptosporidium (see Figure 4.21).
Common name
Crypto
Host
Canine, feline, ovine, and swine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
95
96    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 4.21(
Cryptosporidium (from Hendrix, Charles M. and Robinson, Ed. 2012. Diagnos-
tic Parasitology for Veterinary Technicians, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Fleas
Table 4.17
Ctenocephalides species: Ctenocephafides canis and Ctenocephalides fefis
(see Figure 4.22 and Figure 4.23).
Commonname
Flea
Host
Canine (C. canis); canine and feline (C. felis)
Parasite location (adult)
Adults found on host. Eggs, larvae, and pupae are
found in the environment
Transmission
Host to host contact; contact with eggs, larvae or
pupae in the environment
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.22
Ctenocephafides (flea).
Adults take a
blood meal on the
host
Female flea lays
Larvae molt into pupae
eggs
Eggs fall off host
Larvae develops a
cocoon
Larvae hatch in the
environment and feed
 on organic material
Figure 4.23
Life cycle of the flea.
98    Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Ticks
Table 4.181
Rhipicephalus sanguineus (see Figure 4.24).
Common name
Brown dog tick
Host
Canine
Parasite location (adult)
Attaches to the body
Transmission
Directcontactwithinfectedenvironment
Distribution
North America
Significance
Intermediate host for Babesia canis
Figure 4.24 Female ticks of various species. (right) ixodes scapularis (deer tick); (bottom)
Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick); (left) Amblyomma americanum (Lone Star
tick); (top) Rhipicephalus sanguineus (brown dog tick) (photo courtesy of Dr. Susan Little,
Oklahoma State University. Stillwater, OK).
Table 4.19
(xodes scapularis (see Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.25).
Commonname
Deer tick, black-legged tick
Host
Canine, equine, ruminants, deer, and humans
(intermediate host: mice)
Parasite location (adult)
Attaches to host for feeding
Transmission
Direct contact with infected environment
Distribution
Eastern United States
Significance
Vectors for:
+Babesia microti
●Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Transmits Ehrfichia
Figure 4.25
ixodesspp.
Table 4.20
Dermacentor variabifis (see Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.26).
Common name
Wood tick, American dog tick
Host
Canine, ruminants, small mammals, and humans
Parasite location (adult)
Attaches to host when feeding
Transmission
Direct contact with infected environment
Distribution
Eastern United States
Significance
Vector of Rocky Mountain spotted fever
99
Figure 4.26 
Dermacentor variabilis (wood tick/American dog tick).
Table 4.21
Dermacentor andersoni (see Figure 4.27).
Common name
Rocky Mountain wood tick
Host
Canine,equine,bovine,ovine,and humans
(intermediate hosts: small rodents)
Parasite location (adult)
Attaches to the host
Transmission
Direct contact with infected environment
Distribution
Rocky Mountain regions
Significance
Vector of Rocky Mountain spotted fever
100
Figure 4.27
Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick).
Table 4.22
Amblyomma americanum (see Figure 4.24).
Commonname
Lone Star tick
Host
Mammals, including humans (intermediate hosts: small
mammals)
Parasite location (adult)
Attaches to the host. Often found near the ear
Transmission
Direct contact with infected environment
Distribution
Southern United States, Midwestern United States
Significance
Vector of:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Tularemia
101
102
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Lice
Table 4.23
Trichodectes canis (see Figure 4.28).
Common name
Biting louse
Host
Canine
Parasite location (adult)
Adults, nymphs and eggs (nits) all found in the hair.
Transmission
Host to host, or via shared materials (ex: grooming
tools)
Distribution
Northern hemisphere
Table 4.24 
Linognathus setosus (see Figure 4.29).
Common name
Sucking louse
Host
Canine
Parasite location (adult)
Adults, nymphs, and eggs (nits) all found in the hair
Transmission
Host to host, or via shared materials (e.g., grooming
tools)
Distribution
Northern hemisphere
Significance
Has been implicated as an intermediate host of
Dipyfidium caninum
Table 4.25
Various louse species of domesticated animals: Trichodectes canis (biting
louse of dogs), Linognathus setosus (sucking louse of dogs), and Bovicola bovis (biting
louse of cattle).
Trichodectes canis
Figure 4.28
Trichodectes canis (biting louse
of dogs).
Linognathus setosus
Figure 4.29Linognathussetosus(sucking
louse of dogs).
Bovicola bovis
Figure 4.30
Bovicolabovis(biting louse
of cattle).
103
104   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Mites
Table 4.26 Sarcoptes species: Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis and felis (rare)
(see Figure 4.31).
Common name
Scabies mite
Host
Canine (canis);: feline (fefis)
Parasite location (adult)
Mites burrow in the superficial epidermal layers
of the skin
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.27
Demodex canis (see Figure 4.32).
Common name
Follicular mange mite
Host
Canine
Parasite location (adult)
Hair follicles; sebaceous glands
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.28(
Otodectes cynotis (see Figure 4.33).
Common name
Ear mite
Host
Feline and canine
Parasite location (adult)
Ear canal (external)
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.29
Cheyletiella parasitovorax (see Figure 4.34).
Common name
Walking dandruff
Host
 Canine and feline
Parasite location (adult)
Skin surface and hair coat
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.30
Various mite species of domesticated animals: Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies
mite), Demodex canis (follicular mange mite), Otodectes cynotis (ear mite), and
Cheyletiella parsitovorax ("walking dandruff").
Sarcoptes scabiei
Figure 4.31
Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies mite).
Demodex canis
Figure 4.32
Demoxex canis (follicular mange mite).
Otodectes cynotis
Figure 4.33
Otodectes cynotis (ear mite).
Cheyletiella parsitovorax
Figure 4.34
Cheyletiella parsitovorax (walking
dandruff) (from Hendrix, Charles M. and Robinson,
Ed. 2012. Diagnostic Parasitology for Veterinary
Technicians, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier.)
105
106
 Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Flies
Table 4.31
Cuterebra species.
Common name
Warbles
Host
Small mammals, occasionally canines and felines
Parasite location (larva)
Burrows into the skin. Location can be found by
observing a small fistula the larva uses as a
breathing hole.
Transmission
Direct contact with larva in the environment.
Distribution
North America
Ruminants
Nematodes
Table 4.32
Nematodirus.
Common name
Trichostrongyleswith large eggs
Host
Bovine, ovine, and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
 Abomasum, small and large intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of ova
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.33
Strongyloides papillosus (see Figure 4.35).
Common name
Bovine threadworm
Host
Bovine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of larva; penetration of skin by larva
Distribution
Worldwide
20μm
Figure 4.35 Larvated Strongyloides egg (S); collapsed Giardia cysts (G); Eimeria oocysts
(E) (from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A. 2012. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th
ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Table 4.34
Trichuris ovis (see Figure 4.36).
Common name
Whipworms
Host
Bovine,ovine,and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Cecum and colon
Transmission
Ingestion of ova
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.36
Trichurisovis(sheepwhipworm).
107
Table 4.35
Trichostrongyle species: Bunostomum, Chabertia, Cooperia, Haemonchus,
Oesophagostomum, Ostertagia, and Trichostrongylus (see Figure 4.37).
Common name
Trichostrongyles
Host
Bovine,ovine,and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Abomasum, small and large intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of ova
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.37
Trichostrongyle-type ova.
Table 4.36
Dictyocaulus.
Common name
Lungworm of cattle
Host
Bovine, ovine, and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Bronchi
Transmission
Ingestion of larvae
Distribution
Worldwide
108
Parasitology
109
Cestodes
Table 4.37
Moniezia benedini (see Figure 4.38).
Common name
Ruminant tapeworm
Host
Bovine and ovine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of intermediate host (grain mite)
Distribution
Worldwide
Figure 4.38
Moniezia benedini (ruminant tapeworm).
Table 4.38
Thysanosoma actinoides.
Common name
Fringed tapeworm
Host
Bovine, ovine, and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Bile and pancreatic ducts, and small intestines
Transmission
Ingestion of intermediate host
Distribution
North and South America
H0
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Protozoans
Table 4.39
Eimeria (see Figure 4.35 and Figure 4.39).
Common name
Coccidia
Host
Ruminants
Parasite location (adult)
Cecum and colon
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
14um
Figure 4.39 Eimeria spp. (coccidia) (from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A. 2012.
Veterinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Table 4.40
Cryptosporidium (see Figure 4.21).
Common name
Crypto
Host
Canine, feline, ovine, and swine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
See Figure 4.21.
Ticks
Dermacentor spp. and ixodes spp. have been previously discussed (see Table 4.19, Table
4.20, and Table 4.21).
Parasitology  111
Lice
See Table 4.25.
Table 4.41
Bovicola bovis (see Figure 4.30).
Common name
Biting louse
Host
Bovine, ovine, and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Usually head, neck, and brisket area.
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.42
Sucking lice of ruminants: Linognathus vitufi and Haematopinus eurysternus.
Common name
Sucking louse: L. vitufi (long-nosed cattle louse),
H. eurysternus (short-nosed cattle louse)
Host
Bovine, ovine, and caprine
Parasite location (adult)
Usually head, neck, and brisket area.
Transmission
Host to host
Mites
See Table 4.30.
Table 4.43
Sarcoptes species: Sarcoptes scabiei var. bovis and ovis.
Common name
Mange mite of cattle (rare) and sheep
Host
Bovine (S. scabiei var. bovis), ovine, and caprine
(S. scabiei var. ovis)
Parasite location (adult)
Superficial layers of the epidermis, primarily the face
in sheep.
Transmission
Host to host; fomites
Distribution
Worldwide
112
冏■
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 4.44P
Psoroptes species: Psoroptes ovis and Psoroptes bovis.
Common name
Scabies mites of sheep or cattle
Host
Ovine (P.ovis);bovine (P.bovis)
Parasite location (adult)
Skin surface; neck regions
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.45
Chorioptes species: Chorioptes bovis and Chorioptes ovis.
Common name
Leg mange
Host
Bovine (bovis); ovine (ovis)
Parasite location (adult)
Legs
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Fies
Table 4.46
Myiasis-producing (species in which larvae invade the tissue), biting and
nonbiting flies.
Category
Scientific name
Common name
Myiasis-producing flies
Hypoderma spp.
Cattle grubs; heel fly
Cochfiomyia hominivorax
Screw-worm fly
Estrus ovis
Nasal bot fly
Lucifia, Calfiphora, Phormia
Blowflies
Biting flies
Simufium spp.
Black flies
Cuficoides spp.
No-see-ums
Anopheles, Aedes, Culex
Mosquitoes
Tabanus
Horseflies
Stomoxys calcitrans
Stable fly
Haematobia irritans
Horn fly
Melophagus ovinus (see
Sheep ked (wingless flies)
Figure 4.40)
Nonbiting flies
Musca domestica
House fly
Musca autumnalis
Face fly
Parasitology
113
Figure 4.40 Melophagus ovinus (sheep ked).
Equine
Nematodes
Table 4.47
Habronema species (Habronema microstoma and Habronema muscae)
and Draschia species (Draschia megastoma).
Common name
Stomach worms of horses
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Stomach
Transmission
Ingestion of house fly or stable fly larvae.
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.48
Trichostrongylus axei.
Common name
Stomach worms ofhorses
Host
Equine, bovine, ovine, and porcine
Parasite location (adult)
Stomach
Transmission
Ingestion of larvae
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.49
Parascaris equorum (see Figure 4.41 and Figure 4.42).
Common name
Horse roundworm
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine 
Transmission
Ingestion of ova
Distribution
Worldwide
inson, Ed. 2012. Diagnostic Parasitology for Veterinary Technicians, 4th ed. St. Louis:
Mosby-Elsevier).
14
Adults worms in
 small intestines 
Larvae are coughed
up and swallowed
Eggs passed
Larvae migrate to
in feces
thelungs
Larvae develop
Larvae travel through
the portal vein to reach
the liver
 Eggs containing larvae 
are ingested
Figure 4.42
Life cycle of Parascaris equorum(horse roundworm).
Table 4.50
Strongylus species: Strongylus vufgaris, Strongylus edentaus,
and Strongylus equinus (see Figure 4.43).
Common Name
Horse strongyles
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Large intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of larvae
Distribution
Worldwide
115
Figure 4.439
Stongylus spp. (horse strongyles).
Table 4.51
Strongyloides westeri (see Figure 4.44).
Common Name
Horse threadworm
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Trans-mammary through milk; larval penetration
of the skin
Distribution
Worldwide
20μm
Figure 4.44
Stongyloides westeri (from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy, Gary A.2012. Vet-
erinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
116
Table 4.52
Oxyuris equi (see Figure 4.45 and Figure 4.46).
Common Name
Horse pinworm
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Cecum, colon and rectum
Transmission
Ingestion of ova
Distribution
Worldwide
36μm
Figure 4.45 Oxyuris ova (from Zajac,Anne M.and Conboy,Gary A.2012.Veterinary
Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
METRIC1
2
3
Figure 4.46
Adult Oxyuris equi (horse pinworm).
17
118
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Table 4.53
Dictyocaufus arnfieldi.
Common name
Horse lungworm
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Bronchioles
Transmission
Ingestion of larvae
Distribution
Worldwide
Cestodes
Table 4.54
Equine tapeworms: Anoplocephala perfoliata, Anoplocephala magna,
and Paranoplocephala mamillana (see Figure 4.47).
Common name
Equine tapeworm
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Small and large intestine (A. perfoliata); small intestine
and stomach (a. magna and P mamillana)
Transmission
Ingestion of grain mite
Distribution
Worldwide
22μm
Figure 4.47 Anoplocephala spp. (equine tapeworm) (from Zajac, Anne M. and Conboy,
Gary A. 2012. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology, 8th ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
Parasitology
■19
Protozoans
Table 4.55
Eimeria leuckarti.
Common name
Equine Coccidia
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Small intestine
Transmission
Ingestion of oocysts
Distribution
Worldwide
See Figure 4.39.
Lice
Table 4.56
Haematopinus asini.
Common name
Horse-sucking louse
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
Hair roots of mane and base of tail.
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
Table 4.5?
Damafinia equi.
Common name
Horse-biting louse
Host
Equine
Parasite location (adult)
On the body, commonly seen on the sides of the neck
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
See Table 4.25.
Mites
Table 4.58
Chorioptes equi.
Common name
Leg mange
Host
Equine (common in heavy breeds)
Parasite location (adult)
Distal limbs
Transmission
Host to host
Distribution
Worldwide
See Table 4.30.
120  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Flies
In addition to many of the cattle flies (see Table 4.46).
Table 4.59
9Gastrophilus (larvae) (see Figure 4.48).
Commonname
Stomach bots
Host
Equine
Parasite location (larva)
Stomachmucosa
Transmission
Ingestion of ova (attached to the hairs on a horse's leg)
Distribution
Worldwide
mm
10
20
Figure 4.48 
Gastrophilus larva (bots).
Chapter 5
Cytology
Sample collection
Swabs
Swabs are used as a collection method for sites such as body cavities or fistulous tracts.
The goal of this method is to collect superficial cells or bacteria for preliminary or
should be taken during collection. Examples of locations where this method is ideal
would be the nasal cavity (i.e., looking for fungal spores) (see Figure 5.1) or vagina (i.e.,
establishing which phase of the estrous cycle) (see Figure 5.33).
Materials
●Cotton swabs (sterile swabs if culturing is desired or utilize a commercial culturette)
● 0.9% Saline
● Microscope slides.
Procedure
(1) Moisten the swab using O.9% saline. Using an isotonic solution, such as saline, will
preserve cell integrity and assist in microscopic evaluation.
(2) If the sample will be used for culture, a sterile swab should be used for collection
and the sample stored in the appropriate culture media. When culturing an infected
area, the mucopurulent secretions should be avoided, as these contain dead bac-
teria, yeast, microbes, and wBCs. Sampling the reddened surface of the infected
tissue will yield the microbe(s) responsible for the infection.
ficial cells. with the swab moistened, cell damage will be reduced during collection
and smear preparation.
(4) To transfer the collected cells onto microscope slides, gently roll the swab along
the length of the slide. Using a rolling technique versus rubbing the swab onto the
slide will minimize cell damage (see Figure 5.2).
(5) Allow slide to air dry and stain.
Melissa Andr asik-Catton.
 2014 John wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
121
Figure 5.1
Swab collection of the nasal cavity.
Figure 5.2 Using the rolling technique used to transfer collected material from the swab
onto theslide.
122
Cytology ■ 123
Tip: Avoid using "clean stains" for this procedure, as they will become contaminated.
An alternate method that will avoid this contamination is to use a pipette to flood the
slide with stain versus dipping the slide into the stain itself.
Fine needle biopsy
Fine needle biopsies may be obtained from various masses, lymph nodes, organs, and
nodular lesions. The principle behind a fine needle biopsy is that cells are sampled from
within the target area itself, which avoids surface contaminants, such as debris, bacte
rial contamination, or cellular contamination.
There are two methods of fine needle biopsy collection: the aspiration technique and
the nonaspiration technique.
Site preparation
The preparation required depends on the collection site and the tests to be performed.
If any body cavity is to be penetrated (such as the peritoneal or thoracic cavity)，a
to be done, a surgical prep is also warranted. Any other sampling site requires no more
Materials
● Microscope slides
● Surgical prep materials (if required)
21-to 25-g needle
Needle gauge selection is important and varies depending upon the mass. Gener-
ally,the softer the mass,the smaller-gauge needle is used. Using a larger needle
often results in more bleeding. In addition to blood contamination of the sample,a
large needle is less likely to collect individual cells for evaluation. Instead, it has the
tendency to collect a small biopsy of tissue. For certain masses (i.e., mast cell
tumors), a smaller needle, in conjunction with the added pressure of aspiration, could
result in degranulation of the cells.
3-to 12-cc syringe
Syringe selection also depends upon the mass. A large syringe has the potential
for creating greater amounts of negative pressure. Softer masses do not require as
much negative pressure as firmer masses.
Also consider the fact that controlling the syringe during the collection procedure
needs to be performed with one hand. Choose a syringe size that can be comfortably
handled with one hand, yet provide you with the desired negative pressure.
Fine needle biopsy: Aspiration technique
(1) with one hand, stabilize the mass.
(2) Insert the needle into the mass.
(3) Retract the plunger of the syringe to create negative pressure (see Figure 5.3).
(4) while maintaining negative pressure and without exiting the mass, redirect the
needleseveral times.
(5)Release theplunger of the syringe.
124   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.3 Fine needle biospy: Aspiration technique.
Figure 5.4
Expelling aspirated material onto a slide.
(6) Exit the mass.
(7) Remove the needle from the syringe, and fill the syringe with air.
(8) This expulsion of contents can be attempted multiple times until all cells from the
needle have been expelled (see Figure 5.4).
(9) Smear the sample using desired method.
(10) Allow to air dry.
Cytology  125
Figure 5.5 Fine needle biopsy: Nonaspiration technique.
masses. The technique is somewhat similar, with the main difference being the lack of
negative pressure used during collection. Cells are collected by capillary action and
gather within the bore of the needle.
(1) with one hand, stabilize the mass.
(2) Insert the needle into the mass. Use only the attached barrel of the syringe without
the plunger inserted. An alternate method is to use the needle alone (see Figure
5.5).
(3) Redirect the needle several times.
(4) Exit the mass.
(5) Remove the needle from the syringe (if using this method), and fill the syringe with
air.
(6) Reattach the needle and eject the sample onto the slide as in the previous
method.
(7) Smear the sample using desired method.
(8) Allow to air dry.
Tissue biopsy
A tissue biopsy involves sampling a small section of tissue, rather than individual cells.
biopsied include superficial locations, such as skin or masses, internal organs (using
ultrasound-guided biopsy techniques), and intestinal biopsies using an endoscope.
126   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.6 Various sizes of punch biopsies.
Site preparation
If an external mass or a skin biopsy is desired, the hair should be clipped. Cleansing
or scrubbing of the site should be avoided, as it may distort elements of clinical
significance.
For organ biopsies, a surgical prep is required.
Tissue biopsy: Wedge
Wedge biopsies are collected using a scalpel blade to excise a small piece of tissue
When selecting the tissue to excise, be sure the sample contains tissue from the lesion,
the transition zone, and normal tissue. This will allow the pathologist to examine the
microscopic features as they transition from normal to abnormal.
Tissue biopsy: Punch
A biopsy punch is a useful tool for collecting small, round biopsy specimens. Punches
gentle rotation (see Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7)
Materials
● Biopsy punch of desired size
●Thumb forceps
● Tissue scissors.
Procedure for a skin biopsy using the biopsy punch
(2) Gently rotate the punch in one direction until the tissue layer has been sectioned.
Cytology ■ 127
Figure 5.? Punch biopsy circular cutting blade.
(3) Remove the punch.
(4) Grasp the edge of the sample with fine-toothed tissue forceps.
(5) Trim any subcutaneous tissue attached to the biopsy sample.
should be fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin.
Imprints
Imprints, or impression smears, can be made of external lesions, or of biopsies and
excised masses. Superficial cells are transferred onto a slide with little cellular disrup-
nique, and they may not be representative of the entire lesion. with certain masses,
the veterinarian may have you cut the biopsy in half and make imprint slides of the
inside surface as well. This will yield further cellular components that may not have
been present on the superficial surface.
Procedure for external lesions
(1) For external lesions, little preparation is required. Any fluid or blood should be
dabbed off prior to sampling
(2) Place a slide face down onto the lesion and press. Do not rub or scrape the slide
across the lesion.
(3) Lift the slide off and air dry before staining.
(4) Repeat this procedure a few times to create several slides for examination.
128   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.8 Biopsy imprints.
Procedure for biopsies
impressions (see Figure 5.8).
(3) If the sample is large, continue onto another slide to create more impressions.
(4) Allow slides to air dry before staining.
Centesis
Centesis is a process that involves the collection of bodily fluids with the use of a needle
inserted into a body cavity. Examples include peritoneal fluid from the abdominal cavity
(abdominocentesis or paracentesis), pleural fluid from the thoracic cavity (thoracocen-
spinal fluid (cisternal puncture).
Site preparation
When inserting a needle into a body cavity, the site should be aseptically prepared and
sterile protocols followed.
Materials
● Needle or butterfly catheter
6- to 60-cc syringe
● Microscope slides
● Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) collection tubes and plain red top tubes
Cytology  129
Tip: The gauge of needle or butterfly catheter will vary with the sample collection site
and the patient being sampled. A safe way to withdraw large amounts of fluid is to use
A syringe is attached and fluid is drawn out.
Smears should be made immediately after fluid is collected, and any remaining fluid
aa pinous uoeuiwexa leoisaud t 'sagni doi pau uieid pue tlai ui paoeid ag pinous
made on the fluid and noting color,turbidity,and volume collected.A total protein or
specific gravity should be performed on the fluid. During slide analysis, total nucleated
cell counts, types, and morphological assessments should be performed.
In samples with low cellularity, a portion of the collected fluid can be centrifuged to
concentrate the cellular components. After centrifugation, the sediment is examined
microscopically. The remaining, unspun sample should be saved for other methods of
analysis.
Scrapings
Scrapings performed on external lesions yield a high number of cells, but are limited to
Materials
· No. 10 scalpel blade
● Microscope slides.
Procedure
(1) Anchor the lesion or skin with one hand for stability.
Figure 5.9 Skin scraping technique using #10 scalpel blade.
130   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.10 To examine the scraping for Demodex canis, spread the collected material
onto slide and mix into the mineral oil.
(3) Scrape the blade horizontally across the tissue.
(5) Spread the sample onto a slide, using the blade to thin the sample.
(6) Use the compression technique (see Figure 5.14) to make a smear.
This technique is also used in the diagnosis of skin mites, such as Demodex canis (see
Figure 5.11). The collection procedure is the same, but when transferring the sample
onto a slide, it is helpful to use a drop of mineral oil on the slide and mix the sample
into it. Use the blade to thin the sample (see Figure 5.10).
Tip: To aid in the collection of cells, a drop of mineral oil can be added to the blade
of thescalpelprior to scraping.
Smear preparation
Because cytological specimens vary in consistency, there are several different methods
to the thickness of the sample and the planned evaluation and staining procedure to
with them (i.e. lymph node aspirates and various centeses would need to be smeared.
Imprints from biopsies are never smeared).
Feather smear method
This method is useful in samples that are presumed to be highly cellular. The technique
slide atthefeathered edgewhere the cells are dispersed evenly.
Cytology  131
Figure 5.11 Demodex canis.
Line smear method
The line smear method is used in sample with a low cellular content. Cells are pushed
to the end of the smear and concentrated for easier evaluation.
Procedure
(1) Add a drop of sample to the slide, near the frosted end.
(2) Using a spreader slide, back into the drop of sample and allow the sample to spread
horizontally along the width of the slide (see Figure 5.12).
Figure 5.13).
components.
Compression (or squash) method
The compression method is used in samples that are suspected of having cellular
tification. Care should be taken not to apply too much force to the slides during the
process, as this could cause cell rupture.
Procedure
(1) Transfer the collected sample onto a clean slide toward the frosted end of the slide.
(2) Use a second slide, perpendicular to the first (see Figure 5.14). Lay this slide on top
of the sample and allow the weight of the slide to "squash'" the sample. Do not apply
Figure5.12
Line smear. Backing spreader slide into the drop of sample.
Figure 5.13L
Line smear. Stopping before creating a feathered edge.
132
Cytology ■ 133
Figure 5.14 Compression smear technique.
(3) Pull the spreader slide across, smearing the sample onto its underside (see
Figure 5.15).
(4) Allow the slide to air dry, then stain.
Modified squash method
Procedure
(1) Transfer the sample near the center of the slide.
(2) Add a second slide on top of the first slide, and allow the sample to squish between
the two slides. As in the compression technique, do not use any additional down-
ward force.
(3) Rotate the two slides to 45? to spread the sample (see Figure 5.16).
(4) Lift the second slide directly off of the first, and allow it to air dry before
staining.
Starfish method
The starfish method can be useful to gently spread samples onto a slide.
Procedure
(1) Add the sample to the middle of a slide.
(2) Use the tip of a smaller-gauge needle to spread the material outwards in several
directions. (see Figure 5.17)
(3) Allow the slide to air dry.
Figure 5.15
Compression smear technique.
Figure 5.16
 Modified squash technique.
134
Cytology 135
Figure 5.17 Starfish technique.
Staining
After the slide has been made, allow it to fully air dry. Avoid the use of hair dryers or
open flames to speed up the drying process, as this can cause cell distortion.
The two most common staining types are Romanowsky stains and new methylene
blue (NMB).Each has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Romanowsky stains (Wright's and Diff-Quick)
Romanowsky stains will stain both the cytoplasms and nuclei of cells present in the
sufficient for the cytological determination of inflammation or neoplasia.
Regardless of the type of Romanowsky stain used, a general rule to follow is to
New methylene blue
NMB stains cytoplasms weakly, but provides excellent nuclear detail. Because of this,
NMB is useful in samples with high amounts of blood contamination. The red blood cells
do not take up much stain and therefore will not obscure the nucleated cells when
observed microscopically.
136  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Wet mount technique (NMB)
(1)Add one drop of NMB stain to an air-dried cytology slide.
(2) Place a coverslip over the drop, and allow the stain to disperse. Let the stain sit for
2-5 minutes to facilitate stain uptake. This will result in easier examination of the
cells.
(3) Examine microscopically.
Tip: NMB stain should be filtered first to eliminate any stain precipitate that may
interfere with the microscopic evaluation.
Microscopic evaluation of cytology slides
The microscopic evaluation of a stained slide should begin with scanning under 10x
objective power to locate areas where cells are evenly spaced and can easily be evalu-
ated. Use 40x and 100x objective powers to identify, classify, and evaluate cell types.
Many familiar blood cell types will be present, and in addition, certain tissue cell types
will be seen (see Figure 5.18 and 5.19).
Many cells will have undergone morphological changes associated with degeneration
and disease. Pyknosis, karyolysis, and karyorrhexis should all be noted if seen.
Pyknosis and karyorrhexis
Pyknosis is associated with slow cell death (aging of a cell). Characteristics include
Figure 5.20).
Figure 5.18 Mast cells.
Figure 5.19 Macrophage present in peritoneal fluid (also present: degenerating neu
trophils and red blood cells).
Figure 5.2o Pyknotic neutrophil displaying karyorrhexis.
137
138   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.21 Perionteal fluid: Neutrophils displaying karyolysis.
Karyolysis
inflammatory reactions. Characteristics include a swollen nucleus without an intact
stain as intensely as other cells.
Classifying cell types
Inflammation
Cells seen in inflammatory cases include:
●Neutrophils (see Figure 5.22)
●Red cells (if hemorrhage has occurred)
●Eosinophils may be present
● Mononuclear cells, such as macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells (see
Figure 5.23)
●Bacteria and other microorganisms (see Figure 5.24).
The classification of the type of inflammation present can be made by the proportions
of the cell types seen. Relative differential counts should be performed and cell mor-
phology noted. Bacteria should be classified as either cocci or bacilli, and if they are
single, in pairs, or chains. Comments should also be made if the bacteria were found
extracellular or intracellular.Pay closeattentionduring the slidereview as certain
fungal organisms can be difficult to spot.
Figure5.22
 Neutrophils present in an abdominocentesis sample.
Figure5.23
Red blood cells and a macrophage present in an abdominocentesis sample.
(Note the phagocytosed neutrophil within the macrophage.)
139
140   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.24 Bacteria should be noted whether it is seen free in the fluid or within the
cell following phagocytosis. This is intracellular bacteria.
Other cell types
in clumps. Mesenchymal cells are of connective tissue origin and tend to exfoliate singly.
Round cells are found individually, and hold a round shape.
Neoplasia
In many cases, our cytology specimens are collected from suspected neoplastic lesions.
Cells seenare evaluated formalignant characteristics.Compared withaninflammatory
sample, a neoplastic sample will have a more homogenous population of cells. However,
neoplasia and inflammation can occur concurrently.
Malignant characteristics
●Macrocytosis
●Anisokaryosis (see Figure 5.28)
●Pleomorphism
●High nucleus to cytoplasm ratio
● Increased mitotic activity (see Figure 5.29)
●Large or irregularly shaped nucleoli
● Coarse chromatin
●Anisonucleosis (see Figure 5.30)
●Multinucleation.
Figure 5.25 Ciliated epithelial cell (from Hendrix, Charles M. and Sirois, Margi. 2007.
Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary Technicians, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier).
Figure 5.26
Lipoma. Mass consisting of adipocytes, which are a mesenchymal-type cell
(from Rosenfeld, Andrew J. and Dial, Sharon M. 2010. Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary
Team. Ames: Blackwell Publishing).
141
Figure 5.27
Round cells from a lymph node aspirate.
Figure 5.28 A neoplastic cell displaying anisokaryosis.
142
Figure 5.29
Mitotic figure.
Figure 5.30 Anisonucleoliosis.
143
144   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Reporting your findings
Submission of your findings should include comments on the following information:
(1) Cellularity: Low, moderate, or high (low: 0-3 cells/hpf, moderate: 3-5 cells/hpf, high:
>5/hpf)
(2) Relative differential count of cell population
(3)  Cellular morphology
(4) Comment on nuclear characteristics
(5) Microorganisms.
Laboratory submissions
If biopsies or slides are to be submitted to a reference laboratory for analysis, there
are several important points to consider:
· Provide a detailed patient history pertaining to the lesion (duration of problem,
growth rate, is the animal pruritic or painful, etc.)
● Comment on the physical appearance of the lesion. (ls it a tumor, nodule, or cyst?
Is there alopecia, hyperpigmentation, etc.?)
● Describe the location of the lesion, or mark the location on a diagram. If a repre-
sentative sample of a larger lesion is being sent, indicate the size of the original
lesion.
tories may recommend a specimen be fixed in formalin for 24 hours, and then
ment, and it should be indicated on the requisition form.
be submitted air dried or fixed in alcohol. This should be noted on the requisition
form. If a staining procedure is used prior to shipment, this also should be indicated
on the form.
● Unstained slides should not be packaged with or kept near formalin vapors. Formalin
will alter the proteins within the sample, and this in turn will affect the staining
procedure.
Ensure all slides and containers arefully labeled with patientinformation,date,and
sample type.
Ear cytology
diagnosicpurposes.Abnormalfindingscanincludeinflammatoryreactions,abundance
of Mafassezia organisms, bacterial infections, or parasites like Ofodecfes cynofis
(ear mite).
Cytology   145
Slide preparation and staining
Materials
● Swabs
● Microscope slides.
Procedure
(1) Collect the samples using the swab technique, but there is no need to moisten the
swab with saline.
(2) Collect the samples from the ear canal, generally where the vertical canal and the
horizontal canal meet.
the slide in the shape of an "R," and the sample from the left ear onto the other
end of the slide in the shape of an "L." Using this method will aid in distinguishing
differences between the left and right ear.
(4) Stain using the Diff-Quick method and examine when dry.
Heat fixing: Heat fixing is not recommended when staining ear swab slides. If
there is a large amount of cerumen present on the slide, gently heating the slide
staining. The gentle heating of the slide in this manner will avoid damaging cellulan
structures.
Modified collection procedure if mites are suspected
(1) Before collecting the sample, add a drop of mineral oil to a slide.
(2) Collect a swab sample of debris from the ear canal.
(3) Add the sample to the mineral oil and emulsify it into the oil and spread the sample
so it is not thick.
Figure 5.31) parasites or ova.
Microscopic findings
Abnormal findings can implicate the causative agent of the inflammation. These would
include Malessezia or bacteria. white blood cells should not be seen on a normal or
infection (see Figure 5.32).
Vaginal cytology
estrous cycle of canines reflect the changes of estrogen throughout the heat cycle.
determining a canine's fertile period.
Figure 5.31
Otodectes cynotis (ear mite).
Figure5.32
Epithelial cells and peanut-shaped Malessezia organisms from an ear swab.
146
Cytology■147
Collection methods
Collecting vaginal samples is accomplished by using the swab collection technique.
Materials
Swab (moistened with saline)
● Microscope slides
● Speculum (if desired).
Procedure
(1) Moistened the swab with O.9% saline.
(2) If necessary, have someone restrain the dog.
cone) to avoid contamination with hair or debris.
(4) Insert the swab at a relatively steep angle upwards (see Figure 5.33).
(5) After the swab is inserted roughly 1inch, lower the angle to approximately 45? and
from a couple of inches to several inches.
(6) Once the swab is inserted, rotate the swab two or three times then remove the
swab.
(7) Transfer the sample onto the slides in the manner described in the "Swab Sample
Collection" section of this chapter.
(8) Using proper slide staining techniques, stain the slide with a Diff-Quick type stain.
Figure 5.33
Vaginal swab collection.
148   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.34 Parabasal vaginal epithelial cells (arrows) with small intermediate cells
(arrow heads).
Cell types seen
The majority of the cells seen microscopically when evaluating a vaginal smear are
vaginal epithelial cells. These cells are present in their various stages of development,
classified as parabasal cells, intermediate cells, and superficial cells. Other cells that
may be seen are neutrophils, red blood cells, bacteria, and a few contaminating cells.
Parabasal cells
Parabasal cells (see Figure 5.34) are the smallest cells and are typically round with a
than the larger vaginal epithelial cells.
Intermediate cells
Intermediate cells vary in size and shape and can be further classified as small inter-
mediate (see Figure 5.35) and large intermediate (see Figure 5.36). Small intermediate
cellsretain around to ovalshape with a large nucleus,while large intermediate cells
Superficial cells
Superficial cells are the largest vaginal epithelial cells. They are thin, have sharp,
angular borders and are seen with dark, condensed, pyknotic nuclei (see Figure 5.37).
Figure 5.38). Superficial cells may become folded or rolled up during the collection and
slide preparation process.
Figure 5.35
Small intermediate vaginal epithelial cell (arrow). RBCs are also present
(arrowhead).
Figure 5.36
Large intermediate vaginal epithelial cells.
149
fied superficial cell is also present (arrow head).
Figure 5.38
Cornified superficial vaginal epithelial cell.
150
Cytology■151
Other cellular findings
Figure 5.39
 Neutrophils and a small intermediate cell present on a vaginal smear.
Figure 5.40
 Neutrophils and red blood cells present on a vaginal smear.
152   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.41
Bacteria noted on a vaginal smear. In this case, it is adhered to the surface
of a cornified superficial cell.
Stages of estrous
Anestrus (duration: 3-5 months)
· Parabasal and intermediate cells predominate.
● Superficial cells are absent or present in very few numbers.
●Neutrophils may or may not be present.
Proestrus (duration: 4-13 days) (see Figure 5.42)
● In early proestrus, parabasal cell numbers begin to decrease as small and large
intermediate cells predominate.
● In late proestrus, a shift from small intermediates to large intermediates and super-
ficial cells starts to occur.
● Red blood cells are present.
● Neutrophils and bacteria are present.
Estrus (duration: 4-13 days) (see Figure 5.43)
· Superficial cells predominate, and many are fully cornified.
Diestrus (duration: 2-3 months) (see Figure 5.44)
●Dramatic decline in the number of superficial cells is seen.
● Parabasal and intermediate cells return and predominate.
Figure 5.42 Proestrus. A mixed population of small and large intermediate cells are
seen. Red blood cells are also present.
Figure 5.43
Estrus. Superficial cells make up the vast majority of the cells seen. Many
arealsocornified.
153
154   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Figure 5.44
Diestrus. Parabasal and intermediate cells return. Superficial cells are
absent.
Semen evaluation
a comprehensive breeding soundness evaluation. After collection, the quality of a
tration, motility, live/dead ratio, and morphology are evaluated in conjunction with a
physical and behavioral examination of the individual animal. For the purposes of this
section, the focus will be on the microscopic evaluation of semen morphology and the
live/deadratio.
Slide preparation
Once the sample has been collected, a smear should be made immediately using a vital
dye. An eosin/nigrosin stain is a popular vital dye for this purpose, as it provides a visual
discrimination between live and dead spermatozoa.
A small drop of warm stain is added to a drop of semen on a warmed microscope
le aunsua oi suejodw Aiaa si ll paneaws pue jauaboi paxiu ane sdoup omi aul 'aplls
supplies are warm. Spermatozoa are quite sensitive to cold shock, and if they are
found. Changes in morphology will also occur. Once a smear has been made, the micro-
live/deadratiocountandthemorphologyexamination.
Cytology  155
B
Figure 5.45 Live/dead staining using eosin/nigrosin stain. (A) Live spermatozoa appears
Live/dead sperm ratio
or dead is made by assessing the stain uptake. Live sperm resist stain uptake and appear
white against the purple-stained background. On the other hand, dead sperm take up
Counts are made by examining 200 cells under 400x magnification. Live sperm counts
are expressed as a percentage.
Sperm morphology
was used for the live/dead ratio. The slide is examined under 4o0x magnification, and
themorphology of the spermatozoa are evaluated,counted,and expressed as a
percentage.
The anatomy of spermatozoa cell is comprised of several structures. The cell is com-
prised of a head, acrosome, midpiece, and tail. The tail can be further divided into the
principal piece and a terminal piece (see Figure 5.46).
When evaluating morphology, any abnormalities are classified as either primary
or secondary. Primary abnormalities occur during the spermatozoa cell formation
the epididymis to the collection and handling of the specimen. Secondary abnormali-
ties can occur due to rough handling of the sample, cold shock or overuse of the
sire animal. Primary abnormalities are considered more serious than the secondary
abnormalities.
156   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Acrosome
Head
Midpiece
Principal Piece
Tail
Terminal Piece
Figure 5.46 Anatomy of a sperm cell.
Acrosomal abnormalities are important to note as they are directly related to
after the thawing process. The practice of freezing, storage, and thawing can have
an effect on the integrity of the acrosome, and therefore affecting the breeding
success rate (see Figure 5.49).
Cytology ■ 157
Primary and acrosomal spermatozoal abnormalities
D
Figure 5.47
Primary cell defects: (A) double head; (B) macrocephalic; (C) microcephalic
(D) narrow head.
Figure 5.48
Primary cell defects: (A) bent midpiece; (B) coiled midpiece and tail; (C)
offset midpiece; (D) double midpiece; (E) pear-shaped head.
Figure 5.49
Acrosomal defects: (A) knobbed acrosome; (B) ruffled acrosome; (C) loose
cap.
158   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Secondary spermatozoal abnormalities
Figure5.5o
Secondary cell defects: (A) double tail; (B) coiled tail; (C) bent tail; (D) pro-
toplasmic droplet; (E) detached head.
Appendix
Temperature conversions
℃=(°F-32)x
5
6
(6×0)
F=
+ 32
5
Table A.1
Degrees Celsius
Degrees Fahrenheit
36.0
96.8
36.5
97.7
37.0
98.6
37.5
99.5
38.0
100.4
38.5
101.3
39.0
102.2
39.5
103.1
40.0
104.0
40.5
104.9
41.0
105.8
Metric conversions
Length
1m = 39.37 in
30.48cm = 1ft
2.54cm =1in
Veterinary Technician's Hanobook of Laboratory Proceoures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andr asik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
159
160   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Weight
1kg = 2.2 1bs 
1g = 0.035 oz
Volume
3.785 L = 1 gal
0.946L =1quarts
29.57 mL = 10z
5 mL = 1 teaspoon
15 mL = 1tablespoon
Metric system
Table A.2
Factor
Symbol
Prefix
10-15
f
femto
10-12
P
pico
10-9
n
nano
10-6
μ
micro
10-3
m
milli
10-2
C
centi
10-1
d
deci
10
ep
deka
102
h
hecto
103
k
kilo
106
M
mega
109
G
giga
1012
T
tera
1015
P
peta
Glossary
Activated clotting time (ACT)
A simplified version of the activated partial
thromboplastin time test. Assesses the intrinsic
coagulation pathway.
Activated partial
A clotting test that assess the intrinsic coagulation
thromboplastin time (APTT)
pathway of whole blood.
Anemia
A condition in which the oxygen carrying capacity
of blood is decreased due to low hemoglobin
content or low red blood cell numbers.
Anestrus
No visible signs of estrus.
Anisocytosis
Variation in red blood cell size
Anisokaryosis
A variation of the size of a nucleus among cells.
Anisonucleosis
A variation of the size of the nucleoli within the
nucleus of a cell.
Anuria
No urine formation or excretion.
Barr body
A small piece of chromatin seen during interphase
of female cells. Typically seen in a drumstick shape.
Bilirubinuria
Excess bilirubin present in the urine.
Buffy coat
The middle layer of a packed cell volume that
contains the leukocytes and thrombocytes.
Centrifuge
A piece of laboratory equipment designed to rotate
solutions at high speeds and subjecting them to
high centrifugal forces.
Veterinary Technician's Hancbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
161
 Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Chromasia
Referring to the variation in cell color.
Cisternal puncture
A procedure in which a needle puncture is
performed to collect cerebrospinal fluid.
Condenser
A lens system that concentrates (focuses) light into
a pencil-shaped cone that passes through the
specimen and enters the objective. It controls the
contrast seen on the specimen
Cystitis
Inflammation of the urinary bladder.
Cytoplasm
The portion of the cell that surrounds the nucleus;
may contain various organelles.
Definitive host
The host that harbors the adult or sexual stage of
the parasite.
Diestrus
The period following estrus. Ovulation has occurred,
and blood levels of estrogen are low and
progesterone levels are high.
Diopter adjustment
Allows for the focusing of each individual ocular
lens. Compensates for differences in right and left
vision acuity of the user.
Dohle bodies
An accumulation of residual endoplasmic reticulum
found in mature neutrophils. Associated with
toxemia.
EDTA
Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid. An anticoagulant
used in blood collection tubes to prevent clotting.
Electrolytes
Inorganic compounds that disassociate in bodily
fluids and carry a positive or negative.
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; used to
detect or measure antigens or antibodies.
Erythropoiesis
The formation and production of erythrocytes.
Estrus
The time during the reproductive cycle when the
female displays interest in mating. Ovulation is
about to or has just occurred.
Fibrinogen
A plasma protein that is involved in the clotting
process. Under the influence of thrombin, fibrinogen
is converted into fibrin.
Glossary
163
Frank blood
Bright red blood present on the surface of the stool.
Glomerular filtrate
The filtrate of plasma that passes through the
glomerulus.
Glucosuria
Excess glucose present in the urine.
Hematuria
Presence of intact red blood cells in the urine.
Hemocytometer
An instrument used to count cells in a variety of
fluids. Consist of a counting chamber etched with a
grid, covered by a cover slip.
Hemoglobinuria
Presence of free hemoglobin in the urine.
Hemolyzed
Referring to the rupturing of red blood cells.
Hemoparasites
Parasites found in the blood.
Heparin
An anticoagulant used in blood collection tubes.
Sodium heparin and lithium heparin are two
available forms.
Hypersthenuria
Increased specific gravity of the urine.
Hypochromic
A red blood cell that has decreased hemoglobin
content and therefor appear pale in color.
Hyposthenuria
Decreased specific gravity of the urine.
lcteric
A term used to describe the brightyellow coloring
of mucous membranes or a plasma sample;
associated with increased levels of bile pigments.
Intermediate host
The host that harbors the immature or asexual
stage of the parasite.
Isosthenuria
The range of in which the urine-specific gravity
equals that of the glomerular filtrate, meaning no
dilution or concentration has occurred.
Karyolysis
Dissolution of a cell nucleus.
Karyorrhexis
Fragmentation of a cell nucleus.
Ketonuria
Presence of ketones in the urine.
164   Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Ketosis
Accumulation of large quantities of ketones bodies.
Kohler llumination
Setting the microscope to align and focus the light.
This maximizes both the brightness and uniformity
of the specimen.
Lipemic
Referring to the presence of fatty material, or
lipids, in plasma or serum.
Malassezia
A type of yeast that is often found in the infected
ears of dogs and cats.
MCH
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin; refers the average
hemoglobin content of a red blood cell.
MCHC
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; refers
to the average hemoglobin concentration of a red
blood cell.
MCV
Mean corpuscular volume; refers to the average
volume of a red blood cell.
Megathrombocyte
An enlarged platelet.
Melena
Dark, tarry feces consisting of digested blood.
Meniscus
The curved upper surface of a liquid in a tube.
Microcytic
A red blood cell that has a smaller diameter than
what is considered normal for that species.
Monolayer
An area of a peripheral blood smear where the
blood cells are evenly distributed.
Multinucleation
A cell containing more than one nucleus.
Myoglobinuria
Presence of the muscle protein, myoglobin, in the
urine.
Neoplasia
General term to describe a growth, usually a tumor;
may be malignant or benign.
NMB
New methylene blue. A stain used in blood, vaginal
 smears, and cytology. Provides high nuclear detail.
NRBC
Nucleated red blood cell. Also referred to as a
metarubricyte, these are immature, nucleated red
blood cells.
Glossary
165
Nucleus
A body within a cell that contains the chromosomes
and nucleoli.
Objective lenses
The lens or series of lenses of a microscope that is
nearest to the sample being examined.
Objective power
The strength or magnification of the objective lens.
Ocular power
The magnification of the oculars. Total
magnification of an image is calculated by
multiplying the objective magnification by the
ocular magnification.
Oliguria
 Decreased amounts of urine that is being produced
and excreted.
Oocyst
A structure in which sporozoan zygotes develop.
Otitis externa
Inflammation of the ear.
PBS
Peripheral blood smear.
Photometry
The measurement of the intensity or brightness of
light.
Plasma
The fluid portion of whole blood before coagulation.
Platelet clumping
An aggregation of platelets visualized on a blood
smear.
Poikiloc ytosis
Referring to abnormally shaped red blood cells.
Polychromatophil
A cell displaying polychromasia.
Polychromic
A variation in the staining pattern of the red blood
cell. Typically appears more purple in color.
Polyuria
The formation and excretion of increased amounts
of urine.
Pooled fecal sample
One fecal sample consisting of multiple samples
from multiple individuals.
Proestrus
The period preceding estrus.
Proglotids
Each segment of a tapeworm, containing a
complete sexually mature reproductive system.
166  Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures
Proteinuria
Presence of abnormal levels of protein in the urine.
Prothrombin time (PT)
A clotting test use to measure the activity of
clotting factors V, Vll, and X, prothrombin, and
fibrinogen.
Pyknosis
Condensed nuclear chromatin within a degenerating
cell.
Pyuria
Pus in the urine.
RDW
Red cell distribution width; a measure of the
variation in size of red blood cells.
Read area
The area of a peripheral blood smear where counts
are performed and morphologies are assessed.
Red blood cell indices
Blood test and calculation that provide insight into
the size and hemoglobin content of the average red
blood cell in a sample.
Reducing agent
Substances that act as electron contributors.
Refractive index
Refers to the degree in which light will bend,
relative to air, as it travels through a solution.
Refractometer
An instrument for measuring the concentration of
solutes.
Regenerative
Meaning renewal. In hematology, refers to the
increase production of new cells to replace the ones
that have been lost.
Reticulocyte
An immature erythrocyte that no longer contains a
nucleus.
Romanowsky stains
A group of eosin and methylene blue stains used in
hematology and cytology. Examples include Giemsa,
Wright, and Leishman stains.
RPI
Reticulocyte production index; corrects the
reticulocyte count by taking into account the
presence of anemia. Gives a more accurate
representation of red cell regeneration.
RPM
Revolutions per minute.
Glossary
167
Sediment
After the centrifugation process, the solution is
divided into two portions. The supernatant is the
liquid portion on the top: the sediment is at the
bottom and consists of the solids.
Serum
The fluid portion of coagulated blood. Does not
contain any coagulation proteins.
Sodium citrate
An anticoagulant used in blood collection tubes.
Typically used to collect blood for coagulation
studies.
Solubility
The degree of which a substance is easily dissolved.
Specific gravity
The weight of a solution as compared with distilled
water.
Spermatogenesis
The formation and production of sperm cells.
Stain precipitate
Stain particles that settle out in the solution. A
source of artifact.
Supernatant
After the centrifugation process, the solution is
divided into two portions. The supernatant is the
liquid portion on the top: the sediment is at the
bottom and consists of the solids.
Trophozoites
A growing stage in the life cycle of some parasites.
Turbidity
The cloudiness of a solution.
Vacuolation
The process of forming vacuoles, or a cavity within
the cytoplasm of a cell.
Volatile
Evaporates rapidly.
Bibliography
Bassert, Joanna M. and McCurnin, Dennis M. 2O10. Clinicaf Textbook for Veterinary Techni-
cians, 7th ed. St. Louis: Saunders-Elsevier.
Harvey, John W. 2OO1. Atfas of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
           
cians, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier.
Hendrix, Charles M. and Sirois, Margi. 2o07. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary Techni-
cians, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier.
cians, 6th ed. St. Louis: Saunders-Elsevier.
Osborne, Carl A. and Stevens, Jerry B. 1999. Urinalysis: A Clinicaf Guide to Compassionate
Patient Care, Shawnee Mission: Bayer Corporation.
  e    s       '
Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Sutton, Ted. 1998. fntroduction to Animaf Reproduction: A Workbook, Vermilion: E.l. Sutton
Consulting Ltd.
Thrall, Mary Anna, Weiser, Glade, Allison, Robin W. and Campbell, Terry W. 2012 Veterinary
Hematofogy and Clinicat Chemistry, Znd ed. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Zajac,Anne M.and Conboy.Gary A.2012. Veterinary Clinicaf Parasitofogy.8th ed.Ames:
Blackwell Publishing.
Veterinary Technician's Handbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and
Melissa Andr asik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
169
Note: Italicized page locators indicate figures/photos; tables are noted with t.
Abdominocentesis, 128
Anemic patients, characteristics of blood
Abdominocentesis sample
from, 22
neutrophils present in, 139
Anestrus, 152
red blood cells and a macrophage in, 139
defined, 161
Absolute count, white blood cell differential
Aniocytosis, defined, 161
and, 34
Anisokaryosis, 140, 142,161
Acanthocyte, 50
Anisonucleosis, 140, 143,161
Acetest, 67
Anoplocephala magna, 118t
Acetoacetic acid, in urine, 67
Anoplocephala perfoilata, 118t
Acetone, in urine, 67
Anoplocephala spp., 118, 118t
Acrosome
Anticoagulated samples, 17
spermatozoa cell, 155, 156
Antigenic responses, white blood cell
knobbed, ruffled, and loose cap, 157
differential and, 33
Activated clotting time (ACT)
Anuria, 62,161
defined, 161
aPTT. See Activated partial thromboplastin
purpose, materials required, and procedure
time
for, 54
APTT. See Activated partial thromboplastin
Activated partial thromboplastin time, 14, 55,
time
161
Arm, of compound microscope, 3
Adipocytes, mass consisting of, 141
Arthrocentesis, 128
Aefurostrongyfus abstrusus, 88t
Aspartate aminotransferase, 53t
Aggregate reticulocytes, 29,30
Aspiration technique, fine needle biopsy. 123,
Air duster, compressed, for microscope, 7
124
Alaria, 92t
Atypical lymphocyte, 45
Albumin, 53t, 67
Automated analyzers, complementing,
Alkaline phosphatase, 53t
evaluating a blood film and, 51-52
Ambryomma americanum, 98, 101t
Automated clotting tests, purpose of and
American dog tick, 98, 99t, 100
definitions for, 55
Ammonia-scented urine, 63
Ammonium urate crystals, 72
Babesia canis, on canine blood film, 48
Amorphous urate crystals, 72
Babesia gibsoni, on canine blood film, 48
Amylase, 53t
Bacilli, 1138
Analyzers
Bacilli bacteria, in urine sediment, 75
chemistry. 13
Bacteria
coagulation, 14
free in fluid or within cell following
hematology, 13-14
phagocytosis, 140
Ancylostoma spp., 86, 86t,87
in inflammatory cases, 138
Anemia
in unpreserved urine, 60
defined,161
on vaginal smear, 152
red blood cell indices and, 28-29
Baermann technique, materials and procedure
reticulocyte percentage for, 30
for,83
Veterinary Technician's Hancbook of Laboratory Procedures, First Edition. Brianne Bellwood and 
Melissa Andrasik-Catton.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
171
172  Index
Band neutrophils, 44,52
white blood cell count, 31-33
Barr body, defined, 161
white blood cell differential, 33-34
Base, of compound microscope,3
white blood cell estimate, 35
Basophilic stippling. 47
Blood collection
Basophils
 proper locations and handling techniques
bovine, 43
for, 17
canine, 40
tubes for, 17-18
equine, 42
Blood film
feline, 41
 evaluating, to complement automated
ovine, 44
analyzers, 51-52
Beta-hydroxybutyric acid, in urine, 67
erythrocytes, 51
Bicarbonate, 53t
leukocytes, 52
Bilirubin
thrombocytes, 52
total, 53t
tips for evaluating PBS, 52
in urine, 66
Blood rocking machine, 17
unpreserved, 60
Blue top blood collection tubes, 18
Bilirubin crystals, urinary. 72
BMBT. See Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Bilirubinuria, 66, 161
Boric acid (0.8%), urine preservation
Biopsies
and, 61
fine needle, 123-125, 124, 125
Boric acid-urine preservative, gray top blood
imprints, 127-128, 128
collection tubes and, 18
intestinal, 125
Bovicola bovis, 103, 111t
laboratory submissions, 144
Bovine leukocyte morphology. 43
tissue, 125-127
Bovine threadworm, 106t
Biopsy punch, procedure for skin biopsy
Breeding soundness evaluation, semen
with, 126-127
evaluation and, 154
Biting louse, 102t, 11t
Brown dog tick, 98,98t
of cattle, 103
Bubbles, in urine sediment, 75
00 'sbop jo
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Black-legged tick, 99t
procedure for, 55
Bladder expression, 57-58
purpose and materials required for, 54
advantages/disadvantages of, 58t
Buffy coat, 25,161
materials required for, 58
BUN. See Urea nitrogen
Blood, in urine, 67
Blood analysis
Calcium, 53t
clinical chemistries, 52-53
Calcium carbonate crystals, urinary. 72
coagulation testing, 53-55
Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals,
corrected reticulocyte percentage, 30-31
urinary,73
corrected white blood cell count, 36
Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals,
evaluating blood film to complement
urinary, 73
automated analyzers, 51-52
Call capillary technique, 125
hematology, 17-18
 Canine leukocyte morphology, 40
MCH (mean corpuscular hemoglobin), 28
Canine lungworm，88t
MCHC (mean corpuscular hemoglobin
Canine reproduction, vaginal cytology
concentration), 29
and, 145
MCV (mean corpuscular volume), 28-29
Casts, urinary. 71
normal species variation of
Catheterization, 58-59
leukocytes, 40-51
advantages/disadvantages of, 59t
packed cell volume, 23-26
supplies for, 59
peripheral blood smears, 18-22
Cats,corrected reticulocyte percentage
platelet count, 37-38
for,30-31
platelet estimate, 38-39
Cattle flies, 112t
red blood cell count, 26-27
CBC. See Complete blood count
red blood cell indices, 28-29
Cell, spermatozoa cell, 155, 156
reticulocyte count, 29-30
Cell types, classifying, 138-144
reticulocyte production index, 31
epithelial, 140
staining, 22-23
inflammation, 138
Index  173
mesenchymal, 140
Coccidia
neoplasia, 140
canine and feline, 94t
reporting your findings, 144
equine, 119t
round cells, 140
ruminant, 11o, 110t
Cellular constituents, of urine sediment, 70
Codocyte, 511
Celsius degrees, 159, 159t
Columnar epithelial cells, 140
Centesis, 128-129
Complete blood count, 18
examples of, 128
Compound microscope, parts and functions
materials for, 128-129
of,3-5,4
site preparation for, 128
Compressed air duster, for microscope, 7
Centrifugation technique, in
Compression (or squash) method, procedure
parasitology. 81-82, 82
for, 131, 133, 134
Centrifuges, 9-11
Condenser, of compound microscope, 5
clinical, 9
Condenser centering screws, of compound
defined, 161
microscope, 5
fixed angle, ff
Condenser control knob, of compound
microhematocrit, 9, 10
microscope, 5
PCV tubes properly placed in, 24
Condenser height, microscope, adjusting, to
purpose of, 9
sharpen edges of "ball of light," 6
Statspin, 11, 12
Cornified superficial vaginal epithelial cell,
variable angle, 10
150
Cestodes
Creatine phosphokinase, 53t
canine and feline, 89-92
Creatinine, 52t
equine, 118
Crypto
ruminant, 109
canine, feline, ovine, and swine, 95t
Chemistry analyzers
ruminant,110t
description of and maintenance for, 13
Cryptosporidium, 95t, 96, 110t
testing supplies for various types of, 14
Crystals
Chemistry tests, common clinical, and
urinary, 72-74
associated body system or
unpreserved, 60
organ, 52t-53t
Ctenocephafides species, 96t
Cheyletieffa parasitovorax, 104t, 105
Cuboidal epithelial cells, 140
Chloride, 53t
Cuterebra species, 106t
Cholesterol crystals, urinary. 73
Cystine crystal, urinary. 74
Chorioptes equr, 119t
Cystitis
Chorioptes species, 112t
ammonia-scented urine and, 63
Chromasia, defined, 162
defined, 162
Ciliated epithelial cell, 141
Cystocentesis, 128
Cisternal puncture, 128, 162
advantages/disadvantages of, 60t
Clinical centrifuges, types of, 9, 10
description of and materials for, 59
Clinical chemistries
Cystoisospora, 87,94t
common tests and their associated body
Cystoisospora felis (coccidia), 94
system or organ, 52t-53t
Cytauxzoan organisms, on feline blood
conducting, 52-53
film, 48
Clinitest tablets, for detecting glucose in
Cytology, 15, 121-158
urine, 66
classifying cell types, 138-144
Clotting cascade, 55
ear, 144-145
Coagulation analyzers, 14
laboratory submissions, 144
Coagulation testing, 53-55
microscopic evaluation of cytology
activated clotting time, 54
slides, 136-138
automated clotting tests, 55
reporting your findings, 144
buccal mucosal bleeding time, 54-55
sample collection, 121, 122, 123-130
Coarse and fine focus adjustment knobs, of
semen evaluation, 154-158
compound microscope, 5
smear preparation, 130-135
Cocci,138
staining, 135-136
Cocci bacteria, chain of, in urine sediment,
vaginal, 145-154
75
Cytoplasm, defined, 162
174  lndex
Dacrocyte, 49
Eosin/nigrosin stain, live/dead staining
Damaflnia equi, 119t
with, 155
Databases, 52
Eosinophils
Deer tick, 98,99t
bovine, 43
Definitive host, defined, 162
canine,40
Dehydrated patient, characteristics of blood
equine,42
from,22
feline, 41
Demodex canis, 104t, 105
 in inflammatory cases, 138
diagnosis of, scraping technique and, 130,
ovine, 44
131
Epithelial cells
Dermacentor andersoni, 1oot, 101
ciliated, 141
Dermacentor spp., 110
in cytological samples, 140
Dermacentor variabilis, 98,99t, 100
Epithelial urinary cast, 71
Diagnoses, laboratory findings and, 14
Equine coccidia, 119t
Diatomaceous earth, gray top blood collection
Equine leukocyte morphology. 42
tubes and, 18
Ery-TIC test kit, 26
Dictocaufus arnfiefdi, 118t
Erythrocyte chromasia, variations in, 46
Dictyocautus, 108t
Erythrocyte inclusion bodies, 47
Diestrus, 152, 154,162
Erythrocyte poikilocytosis, 49-51
Diff-Quick stain, 22, 23, 135
Erythrocytes
Dioctophymarenale ovum, in urine sediment, 75
examining,51
Diopter adjustment
variations in size of, 46
of compound microscope, 3
Erythropoiesis, defined, 162
defined, 162
Estrous stages
Dipylidium caninum, 89, 89t
anestrus, 152
life cycle of, 90
diestrus, 152
Direct fecal smear, in parasitology, 79
estrus, 152
Dogs, corrected reticulocyte percentage
proestrus,152
for, 30-31
Estrus, 152, 153,162
Dohle bodies, defined, 162
Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid
Double-pored tapeworm, 89t
defined, 162
Draschia megastoma, 113t
purple top blood collection tubes and, 18
Draschia species, equine, 113t
Eyepieces, of compound microscope, 3
Dust cover, for microscope, 7
Fahrenheit degrees, 159, 159t
Ear cytology. 144-145
Feather smear method, 130
microscopic findings, 145
Fecal analysis, 15
slide preparation and staining: materials
Fecal collection
and procedure for,145
instructions for, 77
Ear mites, 104t, 105,144, 146
pooled samples in, 77
Echinococcus granufosus, 92t
specimen container suitable for.78
Echinococcus murtfocufaris, 92t
 Feline leukocyte morphology. 41
Echinococcus species, 92. 92t
Feline lungworm, 88t
Echinocyte, 49
Feline tapeworm, 90t
EDTA. See Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid
 Fibrinogen, 17
EDTA tubes, centesis and, 128,129
defined, 162
Electrochemical methods, chemistry analyzers
test for, 14
and, 13
Fifaroides hirthi, 88t
Electrolytes, defined, 162
Filaroides miiksi, 88t
ELISA
Fifaroides osteri, 88t
defined, 162
Fifaroides species, 88t
test kits for detecting microalbuminuria, 67
 Fine needle biopsy, 123-125
Eimeria, f10,110t
aspiration technique, 123, 124
Eimeria feuckarti, 119t
expelling aspirated material onto slide, 124
Eimeria oocysts, 107
materials, 123
Endoscope, intestinal biopsies and use of, 125
nonaspiration technique, 125, 125
Eosin, in stain, 23
site preparation for, 123
Index  175
Fixed angle centrifuge, 9, 11
Hematology
Flea tapeworm, 89,89t
analyzers, 13-14
life cycle of, 90
blood collection tubes, 17-18
Fleas
 proper blood collection and handling
canine and feline, 96t, 97
techniques, 17
life cycle of, 97
tips, 18
Flies
Hematuria, 67,163
canine and feline, 104
Hemocytometer, defined, 163
equine, 120
Hemocytometer grid, microscopic view of, 32
ruminant, 112
Hemoglobinuria, 67, 163
Flukes
Hemolyzed, defined, 163
intestinal, 92t
Hemoparasites, defined, 163
lung, 93t
Hemoparasites, small animal, 48
Follicular mange mite, 104t,105
Heparin, defined, 163
Formalin (40%), urine preservation and, 61
Hookworm, canine and feline, 86t
Formulas
Horizontal centrifuge, 9, 10
MCH,28
Horse-biting louse, 119t
MCV. 28
Horse strongyles, 115t, 116
Frank blood, defined, 163
Horse-sucking louse, 119t
Free catch (voided sample)
Horses
advantages/disadvantages of, 58t
lungworm in, 118t
good container choice for owners, 57
pinworm in, 117t
materials required for, 57
roundworm in，f14,114t,115
Freezing, urine preservation and, 61
stomach worms in, 113t
Fringed tapeworm, 109t
threadworm in, 116, 116t
Fruity odor, in urine, 64
Howell-Jolly body, 41, 47
Hyaline urinary cast, 71
Gastrophius (larvae), 120, 120t
Hypersegmented neutrophils, 44
Giardia. 79, 93t, 94
Hypersthenuria, 64, 163
Giardia cysts, collapsed, 107
Hypochromic, defined, 163
Globulin,53t
Hypochromic erythrocyte, 46
Glomerular filtrate, defined, 163
Hyposthenuria, 64, 163
Glucose
test for, 52t
Icteric, defined, 163
in urine, 66
Ictotest tablets, for detecting bilirubin in
unpreserved, 60
urine, 67
Glucosuria, 66,163
Muminator
Granular urinary cast, 71
of compound microscope, 5
Gray and red top blood collection tubes,
no light coming from, troubleshooting, 8-9
18
Impedance technology, hematology analyzers
Gray top blood collection tubes, 18
and, 14
Green top blood collection tubes, 18
Imprints (impression smears), 127-128, 128
procedure for biopsies, 128
Habronema microstoma, 113t
 procedure for external lesions, 127
Habronema muscae, 113t
Infection,white blood cell differential and， 33
Habronema species, equine, 113t
Inflammation, 138
Haematopinus asini, 119t
neoplasia concurrent with, 140
Haematopinus eurysternus, 11t
white blood cell differential and, 33
Head
 Intermediate cells
spermatozoa cell, 155, 156
description of, 148
detached,158
diestrus, 154
double, macrocephalic, microcephalic,
Intermediate host, defined, 163
narrow, and pear-shaped, 157
Interpupillary adjustment, of compound
Heat cycle, vaginal cytology and, 145
microscope, 3
Heinz bodies
Intestinal biopsy. 125
Diff-Quick stain, 47
Intestinal flukes, canine and feline, 92t
new methylene blue stain, 47
Iris diaphragm, of compound microscope, 5
176  Index
Isospora. See Cystoisospora
stopping before creating a feathered
Isosthenuria, defined, 163
edge, 132
Ixodes scapularis, 98,99t
Linognathus setosus, 102t, 103
lxodes spp., 99, 110
Linognathus vituf, 1lt
Lipase, 53t
Kaolin, gray top blood collection tubes and, 18
Lipemic, defined, 163
Karyolysis, 136
Lipoma, 141
defined, 163
Live/dead sperm ratio, 155
neutrophils displaying, 138
Lone Star tick, 98,101t
septic inflammatory reactions and, 138
Lung fluke, 93t
Karyorrhexis
Lungworm
defined, 163
canine,88t
pyknosis and, 136
cattle, 108t
pyknotic neutrophil displaying, 137
feline, 88t
Keratinized epithelial cells, 140
horse, 118t
Keratocyte, 511
Lymph node aspirate, round cells from,
Ketones
142
in urine, 67
Lymphocytes
unpreserved, 60
atypical, 45
Ketonuria, defined, 163
bovine, 43
Ketosis, defined, 163
canine, 40
Kohler illumination
equine, 42
adjusting condenser height, 6
feline, 41
blurry edges of unfocused light, 6
in inflammatory cases, 138
defined, 5,163
ovine, 44
process for setting, 5
reactive, 45
time to set/check, 5
Macrocytic erythrocyte, 46
Laboratory equipment, 3-15
Macrocytosis, 140
centrifuge, 9-11
Macrophages
chemistry analyzers, 13
 in abdominocentesis sample, 139
coagulation analyzers, 14
in inflammatory cases, 138
hematology analyzers, 13-14
Magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite)
microscope, 3-9
crystal, urinary. 74
quality control of, 14-15
Malassezia, defined, 163
refractometer,11-13
Mafassezia organisms
Laser-based technology, hematology
ear samples and, 144,145
 analyzers and, 14
from ear swab, 146
Leg mange
Mange mite, of cattle and sheep, 11t
bovine, ovine, 112t
Mast cells, 136
equine, 119t
MCH (mean corpuscular hemoglobin)
Lens cleaner, for microscope,7
defined, 164
Lens tissue, for microscope, 7
formula for and interpretation of, 28
Leukocyte counts, 35
MCHC (mean corpuscular hemoglobin
Leukocytes
concentration)
abnormal morphological changes in, 45
defined, 164
examining, 52
formula for and interpretation of, 29
normal species variation of, 40-51
MCV (mean corpuscular volume)
in urine,68
defined, 164
Lice
formula for and interpretation of, 28
canine and feline, 102-103
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin. See MCH (men
equine, 119t
corpuscular hemoglobin)
ruminant,111
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration.
Line smear method 
See MCHC (mean corpuscular
backing spreader slide onto drop of
hemoglobin concentration)
sample, 132
Mean corpuscular volume. See MCV (mean
procedure for, 131
corpuscular volume)
Index  177
Megathrombocytes
Mites
bone marrow response and, 52
canine and feline, 104-105
defined, 164
equine, 119t
false readings and, 40, 40
ruminant, 111-112
Melena, defined, 164
Mitotic figure, 143
Mefophagus ovinus, 113
Modified squash method, procedure for, 133,
Meniscus, defined, 164
134
Mesenchymal cells, in cytological samples, 140
Moniezia benedini, 109, 109t
Metamyelocyte, 44
Monocytes
Metarubicyte, 164
bovine, 43
Methanol, in stain, 22
canine, 40
Methylene blue stain, 22. See aiso New
equine, 42
methylene blue (NMB) stain
feline, 41
Metric conversions
ovine,44
length, 159
Monolayer
volume, 160
defined, 164
weight, 160
peripheral blood smear, 18
Metric system, factor, symbol, prefix, 160t
Multilocular tapeworm, 92t
Microalbuminuria, 67
Multinucleation, 140, 164
Microcytic, defined, 164
Mutton tapeworm of dogs, 90t
Microcytic erythrocyte, 46
Mycoplasma haemocanis, 48
Microhematocrit centrifuge
Mycoplasma haemofeis organisms, 48
PCV tubes properly placed in, 24
Myiasis-producing biting and nonbiting
use for, 9
flies, 112t
Microscope
Myoglobinuria, 67,164
care and maintenance of, 6-7
clean up for, 9
Nasal cavity, swab collection of, 122
compound microscopy. parts and functions
Nematodes
of, 3-5, 4
canine and feline, 83-88
Kohler illumination, 5
equine,113-118
prolonging life of bulb, 8-9
ruminant, 106-109
purpose of，3
Nematodirus, 106t
troubleshooting tips, 7-9
Neoplasia
water artifact seen on surface of red blood
defined, 164
cells, 8
malignant characteristics, 140
Microscopic evaluation of cytology
Neubauer hemocytometer
slides, 136-138
improved, 27
karyolysis, 138
red blood cell count and, 26
pyknosis and karyorrhexis, 136
Neutrophils
Microscopic examination, benefits with, 51
in abdominocentesis sample, 139
Microscopic examination in
bovine, 43
parasitology. 79-83
canine, 40
Baermann technique, materials and
equine, 42
procedure for,83
feline, 41
centrifugation technique, 81-82, 82
hypersegmented, 44
materials for, 81-82
in inflammatory cases, 138
procedure for,82
maturation stages for,44
direct fecal smear, materials and procedure
ovine,44
for, 79
red blood cells and, present in vaginal
mounted direct smear, 79
smear, 151
simple fecal flotation, 80-81, 80
small intermediate cell and, present in
fecal flotation solutions, 80
vaginal smear, 151
materials for, 81
toxic, 45
procedure for, 81
New methylene blue (NMB) stain, 29
Midpiece
defined, 164
spermatozoa cell, 155, 156
nuclear detail and, 135
bent, coiled, offset, double, 157
wet mount technique, 136
178  Index
Nitrates, 68
Paranopfocephala mamilfana,118t
Nitrites
Parasitology
in urine, 68
canine and feline
unpreserved, 60
cestodes, 89-92
NMB stain. See New methylene blue (NMB)
fleas, 96-97
stain
flies, 106
Nonaspiration technique, fine needle
lice, 102-103
biopsy. 125, 125
mites, 104-105
Nosepiece, of compound microscope, 3
nematodes, 83-92
Nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs), 36, 36,
protozoans, 93-96
164
ticks,98-101
Nucleus, defined, 165
trematodes, 92-93
equine
Objective lenses
cestodes,118
of compound microscope, 3-4
flies, 120
defined, 165
lice, 119
Objective power
mites, 119
defined, 165
nematodes, 113-118
types of, 4
protozoans, 119
Ocular power, defined, 165
gross examination, consistency, color,
Oculars (or eyepieces), of compound
blood, mucous, and parasites, 78
microscope, 3
microscopic examination, 79-83
Odor
ruminants
of urine, 63-64
cestodes,109
unpreserved, 60
flies, 112
Oil immersion, 4
lice, 111
Oliguria, 62,165
mites, 111-112
Oocyst, defined, 165
nematodes, 106-108
Optical fluorescence technology, hematology
protozoans,110
 analyzers and, 14
sample collection in, 77
Otitis externa, defined, 165
Pascaris equorum, f14, 114t
Otodectes cynotis, 104t, 105,144, 146
life cycle of, 115
Ovalocyte, 51
PBS. See Peripheral blood smear
Ovine leukocyte morphology, 44
PCV. See Packed cell volume
Oxyuris equr, 117t
Peripheral blood smear, 18-22
adult, 117
characteristics of, 19
ova, 117
defined, 165
evaluating, tips for, 52
Packed cell volume, 23-26
good quality, example, stained with
analysis, 15
Diff-Quick,20
layers of, after centrifugation: plasma,
holes, causes/tips, 22, 22
buffy coat, and red cell layer, 25
 materials required for, 19
materials required for, 23
preparing, technique for,19
placement of tubes into microhematocrit
procedure for,19
centrifuge. 24
purpose of，18
plasma evaluation, 25-26
tips, 22
procedure for, 24
troubleshooting. 20-22
reading technique, 26
half-bullet, causes/tips, 22, 22
readings for, 25
long and narrow, causes/tips, 21, 2f
sources of error in, 25
short and wide, causes/tips, 21, 21
Panels, 52
square, causes/tips, 21, 21
Parabasal vaginal epithelial cells, 148, 148
tails, causes/tips, 20, 20
description of, 148
 Peritoneal fluid
diestrus, 154
macrophage present in, 137
Paracentesis, 128
neutrophils displaying karyolysis in,
Paragonium kelficotti, 93, 93t
138
Index  179
pH
Putrid urine, 64
testing for urine, 67
Pyknosis, 136, 166
of unpreserved urine, 60
Pyuria, 68, 166
of urinary crystals, 72-74
Phosphorus, 53t
Quality control, for laboratory
Photometry, defined, 165
equipment, 14-15
Photometry testing procedure, chemistry
analyzers and, 13
RDW. See Red cell distribution width
Pinworm, horse, f17, 117t
Reactive lymphocyte, 45
 Plasma
Read area
deep yellow, disorders associated with, 26
defined，166
defined, 165
peripheral blood smear, 18
milky, disorders associated with, 26
Reagent strips
normal, 26
for detecting glucose in urine, 66
red, disorders associated with, 26
specific gravity readings with, 65
serum vs., 17
Red blood cell count, 27-28
Plasma cells, in inflammatory cases, 138
calculations and quality control for, 28
Plasma evaluation, 25-26
materials required for, 26
Plasma total protein, refractometer and
procedure for, 27
measurement of, 11
sources of error with, 28
Platelet clumping, 40, 40, 165
Red blood cell counting area, 28
Platelet count, 37-38
Red blood cell indices, 28-29
calculations and quality control for, 38
defined, 166
materials required for, 37
information required for, 28
procedure for，37
purpose of，28
sources of error in, 38
Red blood cells
 Platelet counting area, 37
in abdominocentesis sample, 139
Platelet estimate, 38-39
easier visualization of, 8
materials required for,38
in urine sediment, 70
procedure for, 38
water artifact seen on surface of, 8
purpose of, 38
Red cell distribution width, 51, 166
sources of error in, 38
Red cells, in inflammatory cases, 138
Platelets, 52
Red top blood collection tubes, 18
Poikilocytosis, defined, 165
Reducing agent, defined, 166
Polychromatophil, defined, 165
Refractive index, defined, 166
Polychromic, defined, 165
Refractometer, 11-12, 13, 65
Polychromic erythrocyte, 46
calibrating, 12
Polyuria, 62,165
defined, 166
Pooled fecal samples, 77, 165
purpose of, 11
Potassium, 53t
Refrigeration, of urine samples, 60-61
Principal piece, spermatozoa tail, 155, 156
Regenerative, defined, 166
Proestrus, 152, 153, 165
Relative count, white blood cell differential
Profiles, 52
and, 34
Proglotids, defined, 165
Renal tubular cells, urine sediment, 71
Proteinuria, 67, 166
Reticulocyte count, 29-30
Prothrombin time, 14,55,166
calculations and quality control for, 30
Protoplasmic droplet, spermatozoa cell, 158
important notes about, 29
Protozoans
materials required for, 29
canine and feline, 93-96
procedure for, 29-30
equine, 119
purpose of, 29
ruminant, 110
Reticulocyte maturation time factor, 31t
Psoroptes species, 112t
Reticulocyte percentage, corrected, 30-31
PT. See Prothrombin time
Reticulocyte production index
Punch biopsies, 126, 126, 127
defined, 166
Punctate reticulocyte, 29,30
interpretation of, 31t
Purple top blood collection tubes, 18
purpose of and calculation for, 31
180
■Index
Reticulocytes
Simple fecal flotation, in parasitology. 80-81,
defined, 166
80
types of,29,30
Slides
Revolutions per minute, defined, 166
focusing.7
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 98,98t
laboratory submissions, 144
Rocky Mountain wood tick, 100,100t
 Small animai hemoparasites, 48
Romanowsky stains, 135, 166
Smear preparation, 130-131
Round cells
compression (or squash) method, 131, 133,
in cytological samples, 140
134
from lymph node aspirate, 142
feather smear method, 130
Roundworms, 83t,84
line smear method, 131, 132, 133
adult, 85
modified squash method, 133, 134
canine, life cycle of, 85
starfish method, 133, 135
in dog and cat feces, 78
Sodium, 53t
in horses, 114, 114t, 115
Sodium citrate, defined, 167
RPl. See Reticulocyte production index
Sodium nitrate solution, 80
RPM.See Revolutions per minute
Solubility, defined, 167
Specific gravity
Sample collection (cytology)
accurate readings, tips for, 65
centesis, 128-129
defined, 167
fine needle biopsy. 123-125
reagent strips for reading, 65
irnprints, 127-128
terminology related to, 64-65
scrapings, 129-130
Sperm cell, anatomy of, 155, 156
swabs, 121, 122
Sperm morphology, primary and secondary
tissue biopsy. 125-127
abnormalities, 155
Sarcoptes scabei, 105
Spermatogenesis, defined, 167
Sarcoptes scabeie var. bovis and ovis, 111t
 Spermatozoa
Sarcoptes species, 104t
bent midpiece, 157
Scabies mites
bent tail, 158
of domesticated animals, 104t, 105
coiled midpiece and tail, 157
of sheep or cattle, 112t
coiled tail, 158
Schistocyte, 49
cold shock and, 154, 155
Scrapings, 129-130
detached head, 158
materials for, 129
double head, 157
procedure for, 129-130, 130
double midpiece, 157
skin scraping technique using # 10 scalpel
double tail, 158
blade, 129
knobbed acrosome, 157
Sediment, defined, 167
live/dead staining using eosin/nigrosin
Sediment examination, urinalysis, 68-75
stain, 155
materials required for, 68
loose cap. 157
microscopic elements of urine
macrocephalic,157
sediment, 70-75
microcephalic, 157
reporting findings, 70
narrow head, 157
sediment stain, 68-69
offset midpiece, 157
urine after centrifugation，69
pear-shaped head, 157
Semen evaluation, 154-158
primary and acrosomal cell defects, 157
acrosomal abnormalities, 156
 protoplasmic droplet, 158
live/dead sperm ratio, 155
ruffled acrosome, 157
slide preparation, 154
secondary abnormalities, 158
sperm morphology. 155
in urine sediment, 75
Serum
Spherocyte, 51f
defined, 167
Squamous epithelial cells, 140
plasma vs., 17
urine sediment, 71
Servicing of laboratory equipment, 14
Stage, of compound microscope, 4
SG. See Specific gravity
Stage brackets, of compound microscope, 4
Sheather's solution, 80
Stage control knobs, of compound
Sheep ked, 113
microscope, 4
Index  181
Stain precipitate, defined, 167
Thoracocentesis, 128
Staining, 22-23, 135-136
Threadworms
Diff-Quick stain set, 23
bovine, 106t
new methylene blue stains, 135
equine, 116,116t
Romanowsky stains, 135
Thrombin time, 55
solutions for, 22-23
Thrombo-TIC test kit, 37
Starch granules, in urine sediment, 75
Thrombocytes, examining, 52
Starfish method, procedure for, 133, 135
Thyroid panel, 53t
Statspin, 11, 12
Thysanosoma actinoides, 109t
Stomach bots, equine, 120,120t
Ticks
Stomach worms of horses, 113t
canine and feline, 98-101
Stomatocyte, 51
female, of various species, 98
Strongyfoides egg, larvated, 107
ruminant, 110
Strongyfoides papilfosus, 106t
Tissue biopsy. 125-127
Strongyfoides species, 87t
punch biopsy. 126, 126, 127
Strongyfoides stercorafis, 87t
 site preparation, 126
Strongyfoides trumiefaciense, 87t
wedge biopsy. 126-127
Strongyfoides westeri, 116, 116t
Toluene, urine preservation and, 61
Strongyfus edentaus, 115t
Total protein, 53t
Strongyfus equinus, 115t
Total protein analysis, 15
Strongyius species, horse, 115t, 116
Total Serum Protein, assessing, 25
Strongyfus vufgaris, 115t
Toxascaris feonina, 83t, 84
Sucking lice, 102t, 11t
Toxcara species, 83t
of dogs, 103
Toxic neutrophil, 45
of ruminants, 111t
Toxocara canis, 83t,84.87
Sugar solution, 80
Toxocara cati, 83t
Sulfa metabolite crystal, urinary. 74
Toxoplasma, feline, 95t
Superficial vaginal epithelial cells, 148, 150
Toxoplasma gondii, 95t
Supernatant, defined, 167
Toxoplasma oocysts, small, 95
Swabs for sample collection
TP. See Total protein
materials and procedure for, 121
Transitional epithelial cells, in urine
nasal cavity, 122
sediment,71
rolling technique to transfer collected
Treatment plans, laboratory findings and, 14
material from swab onto slide, 122
Trematodes, canine and feline, 92-93
Tricharis spp., 88
Taenia hydatigena, 90t
Trichodectes canis, 102t, 103
Taenia ovis, 90t
Trichostrongyfe species, 108t
Taenia pisiformis, 90t
Trichostrongyle-type ova, 108
Taenia species, 90t
Trichostrongyles, 108t
ova from, 91
with large eggs, 106t
Taenia taeniaeformis, 90t
Trichostrongyfus axei, 113t
Tail
Trichuris campanufa, 87t
spermatozoa cell, 155, 156
Trichuris ovis, 107,107t
double, coiled, and bent, 158
Trichuris serrate, 87t
Tails, blood smear, causes/tips, 20, 20
Trichuris species, 87t
Tapeworms
Trichuris vuipis, 87t
adult, 91
Trophozoites, 79.167
in dog and cat feces, 78
TT. See Thrombin time
equine, 118t
Turbidity
feline, 90t
defined, 167
fringed, 109t
of urine, 62
multilocular, 92t
assessing, 64
ruminant, 109,109t
examining, 63
unilocular, 92t
unpreserved, 60
Temperature conversions, degrees Celsius and
degrees Fahrenheit, 159, 159t
Ultrasound-guided biopsy techniques, 125
Terminal piece, spermatozoa tail, 155, 156
Unilocular tapeworm, 92t
182 ■ lndex
Urate crystals
collection methods, materials and
ammonium, 72
procedure for, 147, 147
amorphous, 72
estrous stages, 152, 153-154
Urea nitrogen, 52t
 intermediate cells, 148
Urinalysis, 15, 57-75
parabasal cells, 148
chemical examination, 65-68
superficial cells, 148
physical examination of urine, 62-65
Vaginal epithelial cell
sample collection, 57-59
cornified superficial, 150
bladder expression, 57-58
large intermediate, 149, 153
catheterization, 58-59
small intermediate, 149, 153
cystocentesis, 59
superficial，150
free catch, 57
Variable angle centrifuge, 9, 10
sample preservation, 59-61
Volatile, defined, 167
boric acid (0.8%). 61
commercial preservation tablets, 61
Walking dandruff, 104t, 105
formalin (40%), 61
freezing, 60-61
Warbles,106t
Wedge biopsies, 126
refrigeration, 60-61
toluene, 60-61
Wet mount technique, new methylene
in vitro changes in unpreserved
blue,136
urine, 60
Whipworms
canine and feline, 87t, 88
sediment examination, 68-75
Urinary casts, 71
ovine, 107,107t
Urinary crystals, 72-74
White blood cell count, 31-33
Urine
calculations and quality control for,
32
after centrifugation, 69
chemical examination of, 65-68
corrected,36
materials required for, 36
bilirubin, 66-67
procedure for,36
blood, 67
purpose of, 36
glucose, 66
materials required for, 31
ketones, 67
procedure for, 32
leukocytes, 68
nitrites, 68
sources of error with, 33
White blood cell counting area, 33
pH, 67
White blood cell differential, 33-34
protein, 67
urobilinogen, 67
absolute count, 34
materials required for, 33
color of, 62,62t, 63
microscopic examination of, 69-70
procedure for,33-34
purpose of， 33
odor of, 63-64
physical examination of, 62-65
read area (monolayer), 34
relative count, 34
specific gravity of, 64-65
turbidity of, 62-63
White blood cell estimate, 35
area of smear that is too thick and too
unpreserved
clinical characteristics of, 60
thin,35
physical characteristics of, 60
materials required for, 35
procedure for, 35
sediment characteristics of, 60
purpose of，35
volume of, 62
Urine specific gravity, refractometer and
White blood cells
microscopic view of hemocytometer grid
measurement of, 11
for, 32
Urobilinogen, testing for, 67
in urine sediment, 70
Whole blood samples, 17
Vacuolation, defined, 167
Wood tick, 99t, 100
Vacutainer technique, for blood draws, 17
Wright's stain, 22, 135
Vaginal cytology. 145,147-154
canine reproduction and, 145
cell types seen in, 148, 149-152
Zinc sulfate, 80
Keep up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
 and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALwAYS respect your e-mail
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
MWILEY
exchange your e-mail address to any
 Outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
WILEY-
VBLACKWELL
www.wiley.com/email