BEALE
CO ROM
HULSE
octedes
SCHULZ
WHITNEY
SmallAnimal
Arthroscopy
CIUSTRATEOYLDOYAEANDF.SCHUL
SAUNDEHS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
SAUNDERS
An Imprint of Elserier Science
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106
Copyright @ 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
No part of this publicarion may be reproduced or rransmirted in any forrm or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval systen,
without permission in writing from the publisher (W.B. Saunders Company, The Curtis Centet.
Independence Square West, Philadelphia, PA 19106-3399).
NOTICE
Veterinary Medicine is an ever-changing feld. Standard safety precautions niust be
followed, but as new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes
in treatment and drug therapy may becone necessary or appropriate. Readers are
advised to check the rnost current product information provided by the manufacrurer
of each drug to he administered to verify the recommended dose, the method and
duration of administration, and contraindicatious. It is the responsibility of the treating
veterinarian, relying on experience and knowledge of the animal, to determine dosages
and the best treatmenr for each individual animal. Neither the Publisher nor the editor
assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to animals or properry arising from
this publieation.
The Pubtisber
Library of Congrcss Cataloging in Publication Data
Sumall animal arthroscopy / Brain S. Beale ... et al.].Ist ed.
P.cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-7216-8969-8
I. Beale, Brian.
SF991.5585 2003
636.70897-de21
2002066972
Arquisitions Editor: Raymond R. Kersey
Senior Developmental Editor: Denise I eMelledo
RT/QWK
Printed in the United Sates of America
Last digit is the print number:987654321
This book is dedicated to
 our families for their
understanding and support,
 our fellow arthroscopists for
their inspiration and
perseverance, and our
clients for entrusting us with
their canine companions.
Foreword
It is a great pleasure to be asked to write a foreword to the text of Small
Animat Arthroscopy. It is also pleasing to see the coming of oge of
I arthroscopic surgery in the dog, and I am confident that this text will
enable many small animal surgeons to achieve experise in arthroscopy. When
I wrote rhe First edirion of Diagnostic and Surgical Arthroscopy in the Horse in
1984, I did so in response lo numerous requests for the photos and diagrams
from our courses. Budding arthroscopists need clarification of the exact
locations for portals, knowledge of the unique arthroscopic anatomy, and the
techniques available to them in real time. I am confident that Smalf Animal
Arthroscopy will be used constantly in small animal surgery practices.
There are many challenges lo the surgeon learning arthroscopic surgery.
including exactly locating porials, relearning anatomy, developing the unique
hand-eye coordination that goes with minimally invasive surgery, and 
operating off a video screen. The advanlages of arthroscopy over arthrotomy
diagnostic evaluation of joints, and an enhanced success rate. However, there
is a price to pay including the cost of the equipment and the time investment in 
learning and training. Ultimately, such challenges should not prevent surgeons 
from embracing this technique.
I predict that there wilbe resistance to acceptance of the technique in
some quarters. There will be those who say, "l want to do an arthrotomy and
really see the joint," when you actually see so much more with the
arthroscope. Small animal arthroscopic surgeons will be accused of using the
technique to get cases and to make money or of promoting a gimmick; I know
because we heard these accusations when we started performing equine
arthroscopy. The truth is that the naysayers have a fear of the new, do not
Jeul jo ssaelpiobey abuoyo ol quom lou op jo 'sanbiuyoa mau uinal ol juom
age, surgeons should embrace this new— though difficull— technique for the
viliFOREWORD
welfare of the dog. Arthroscopy in the dog has arived and will take its piace
as the only way to perform joint surgery in the dog, as it has in the horse. 1
congratulate the authors on achieving the skills, developing the techniques,
and now wifing the text.
Wayne Mctlwraith
Preface
spoiad buaxa sou au jo auo sdouiad uaag anoy sinan sl isol ay
 in veterinary orthopedic medicine. During this period the profession
 has witnessed tremendous odvances in techniques, including total joint
Buypouaui puo buu 'buibow! lplalaysonosnw pasuoapo 'Oidl 'uawarodal
nail fracture fixalion, and limb spare procedures. Not the least of hese
advances has been the growth of the use of arthroscopy in the diagnosis and
 treatment of articular diseases in the dog.
The application of arthroscopy fo the relatively small joints of the dog has
been made possible through the development of small joint arthroscopy
equipment and the perseverance of pioneers in the field such as George
Seimering. Myron Person, Jean Francois Bardet, Henri Van Bree, ond
Bernadette Van Ryssen. The outcome of their work and that of others is a
practical and invaluable method for the visual evaluation and treatment of 
diseases of the major joints of the dog.
Arthroscopy has become the modality of choice for the diagnosis and
treatment of many diseases of the joint in dogs. Arthroscopic surgery is
minimaly invasive, thus reducing postoperalive pain and accelerating
recovery. Arthroscopy improves visualization by magnifying and intensely
lluminating the joint within its natural Hluid medium. Finally, because of its low
morbidity, arthroscopy is an excellent choice when it becomes necessary to
treat two or more joints af the same time.
The benefits of complete visualization and magnification of aricular
surfaces and structures cannot be overslated. In parlicular, arthroscopy gives
the surgeon a new understanding of osteoarthritis. This condiion is the most
prevalent of all orthopedic diseases of the dog. and before the advent of
arthroscopy, the presence and severity of osteoarthritis was judged almost
exclusively on radiographs. Arthroscopy complements radiography as a means
X PREFACE
aujuoo yo juawssasso ay u! piopuois plob ay so i aooldal uoos Aow puo suyuooaiso jo bujbois puo uooniosa jo
osteoarthritis.
The use of arthroscopy has had a paricularly significant impact in the diagnosis and treatment of lameness of the
forelimb. In our practices, before the use of arthroscopy, α significant percentage of adult canine forelimb lameness
went undiagnosed. The use of arthroscopy on the forelimb has enabled greater awareness of osteoarthritis of the
elbow, diseases of the biceps tendon and bursa, and injuries of the supporting structures of the shoulder. While
arthroscopy has greatly enhanced our ability to diagnose these problems, the challenge now is to develop effective
therapies for these widespread conditions
The goal of the authors was to produce a book that was easy to read, welillustrated, and practical in nahure.
Chapters describing arthroscopy of the joints were organized in a uniform fashion and include sections on
instrumentation, patient preparation, anesthesia and pain control, portal sites, surgical anatomy, and surgical treatment.
The text is written with some duplication so that the reader rarely needs to refer to other sechions of the book. A large
number of ilustralions are presenied because arthroscopy is very visual in nature and is iniially lechnically demanding.
Although we have attempted to provide a thorough written description of each technique, the illustrations in each
chapter simplify the learning process and present information that words could never provide. Graphics and
photographs were contribuled by all the authors, but speciol recognition goes to John Doval for the many hours put into
the development of these quality illustralions. A compact disc has been developed to complement the textbook wih
short video clips of topics addressed in the book.
 The book contains chapters on the hisiory of arthroscopy; equipment and instrumentation; shoulder, elbow,
carpus, hip, stifle, and tarsus arthroscopy; clinical arthroscopic cases; and medical management of ostecarthritis.
We are particularly pleased with Chapter 9, which discusses clinical arthroscopic cases. The conlent of this chapter
meets our goal of providing clinically relevant material that can be used on a regular basis in the private praclice
setting. All authors contributed to all chapters, alhough each chapler was assigned to a primary author for initial
organizalion and composition.
We have decided to use a format for references and further reading that has been popular in other recent
veterinary textbooks. Specific perlinent references are included at the end of each chapter either as references
[specilic studies] or as suggested readings [important related publications]. Reference numbers are not used in the body
Of the text.
Authors
Acknowledgments
W
 would like to recognize the hard work, dedication, and
 patience of Denise leMelledo of W. B. Saunders and Ray Kersey
 of VW. B. Saunders for giving us the opportunity to produce this 
book. Thanks also to Peggy Gordon of P. M. Gordon Associates. We aiso
thank all the veterinary arthroscopists around the world who collaborated with
us over the years. Much of the information included in this textbook is the result
of inspirational discussions with our colleagues, offen lale at night ond in a
mulitude of venues. Lastly, we hank our families for the support and
understanding they provided during the many hours required to complete
this project.
About the Authors
Brian S. Beale, DVM, Diplomate ACVS, Gulf Coast Veterinary Surgery.
completing his residency and serving on the faculty of the University of
Florida's College of Veterinary Medicine. Brian has a special interest in
arthroscopy, minimally invasive fracture management, medical management of 
osteoarthiis, and perioperative pain management. He has authored many
publications and speaks internationally on these lopics. Brian is an adjunct
assistant professor at Texas A&M College of Veterinary Medicine. He is past
president of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, is president of the Gulf Coas!
Veterinary Education Foundation, serves on the credentials committee of the
American College of Veterinary Surgeons, and is a member of AO-Vet.
Donald A. Hulse, DVM, Diplomate ACVS, Professor, Department of
Small Animai Medicine and Surgery. College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas
and research in small animal orthopedics. He served as Section Chief of
commitee of the ACVS from 1992 to 1996. He was a member of the
board of directors of he Veterinary Orthopedic Society from 1984 to 1987.
Don is an active member of AO-Vet and serves on the VEEG committee
He is a frequent nafional and international lecturer on orthopedic,
arthroscopic, and physical rehabilitation topics.
Kurt S. Schulz, DVM, Diplomate ACVS, Assistant Professor,
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, School of Velerinary
Medicine, Universily of California, Davis. Kurt has an extensive research
program and speaks internationally on arthroscopy, canine elbow dysplasia,
and joint replacement. He served as Chief of Small Animal Surgery from
1999 to 2003. He is an active member of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society
AO-Vet, Orthopedic Research Sociely, and the ACVS.
XiV B ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Wayne O. Whitney. DVM, Diplomate ACVS, Gulf Coast Veterinary
Surgery, Houston, Texas. Alter completing his residency at the Animal Medicai
Center in New York, Wayne started with Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists at
its inception in 1989. There he developed α special interest in arthroscopy.
the development of arthroscopic techniques, canine cruciate disease, and
injuries of the athletic sporting breeds. He is a recognized speaker on these
topics both nationally and internationally. Wayne chairs the arthroscopy
Coast Veterinary Education Foundation, and is a member of the Veterinary
Orthopedic Society.
John Doval, Senior Artist, Department of Surgical and Radiological
Sciences, School of Velerinary Medicine, Universily of California, Davis. John
has been producing a variety of instruclional and publication media since
1984. These include illustrations, photography and video, compuler-based 
multimedia, and CD-ROM
A
PTE
History of Arthroscopy
Introduction.
In the years just before World War Il, several surgeons
from the United States and Europe continued to investi-
Curiosity about the inspection of body cavities can be
gate and publish reports on the use of rigid endoscopes
traced to ancient Roman times, but it was not until the
t0 examine joints. The War brought a halt to advances
early 19th century that an instrument was developed to
in almost all biologic sciences, including arthroscopy.
look into the human bladder. The instrument was called
After the War, Wantanabe, of Tokyo, continued the work
a lichtleiter and was presented by Bozzini to the Rome
of Takagi and further advances in arthroscopy occurred.
Academy of Science in 1806. The instrument generated
Wantanabe, who is considered the father of modern
much talk and curiosity, but was not accepted by the
arthroscopy, developed arthroscopes using emerging
scientific community as a clinically useful item. During
the early 19th century, few advances were made in the
 developed a number of arthroscopes, and in 1959, he
produced the first commercial arthroscope (the no. 21
an adequate source of illumination. Until the invention
arthroscope). The same year, Wantanabe also published
of the incandescent light bulb in 1879, the only sources
the first atlas on arthroscopic surgery. In 1964, Jackson
of illumination were combustion of fuel and candlelight.
completed a surgical scholarship in Tokyo, and after
Neither source provided adequate illumination, and
observing Wantanabe, recognized the value of looking
combustion of fuel was often dangerous to the patient!
inside a joint. Jackson returned to Toronto with a no. 21
Shortly after the invention of the light bulb, a cystocope
arthroscope and introduced arthroscopy to North
was developed in Germany that used an incandescent
America. Technology and expertise in human arthroscopy
light source. After that time, cystoscopy slowly developed
developed slowly through the late 1960s and 1970s.
and eventually was regarded as a reasonable diagnostic
Surgeons responsible for pioneering arthroscopy in
and therapeutic tool.
humans include such prominent orthopedists as
 In the early 20th century, tuberculosis was a common
O'Conner, 
who  developed instrumentation
for
cause of knee osteomyelitis and ankylosis in humans. A
arthroscopic meniscectomy; Johnson, who introduced
stiff knee was a serious disability for a population that
the needle arthroscope; and Jackson, who organized
relied on the ability to perform physical work. In Japan,
 many instructionai courses in diagnostic arthroscopy.
Takagi attempted to diagnosis tuberculosis in its early
Arthroscopic techniques and instrumentation continue
S s sise ae id o n ue u s
to be refined, and today, arthroscopy is considered one
inspired to use a cystoscope to look inside the human
 of the most significant advances in human orthopedics.
knee and did so for the frst time in 1918. Subsequently,
Takagi began the development of the arthroscope. He
In the early 1970s, the frst reports of large animal
continued to improve the design of the arthroscope and
arthroscopy appeared in the German and English
arthroscopic instrumentation until the outbreak
of
European literature. In the United States, use of the
World War I. During the same period, Bircher from
arthroscope to diagnose equine carpal disorders was
Switzerland and Kreuscher from the United States
 x   ah    P
investigated the possibility of using arthroscopy to treat
Mcllwraith  i
in 1978. Early reports were met with
knee disorders in humans. Kreuscher is considered the
skepticism,
.but by the mid-1980s, targe animal
first American pioneer in arthroscopy and was the first
arthroscopy was becoming more common. Although
author to publish an article on arthroscopy in the
initially used as a diagnostic tool, as surgical expertise
English literature.
developed and equipment improved, therapeutic
2 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
procedures became common. Prospective and retrospec-
fewer painful nerve endings than does conventional
tive studies have substantiated the value of therapeutic
 open arthrotomy. The use of smaller portals leads to
arthroscopy in large animal surgery. In general, the
much less postoperative pain, increased postoperative
initial optimism and suggested advantages have been
limb use, and improved recovery.
substantiated and criticisms refuted.
Although the advantages of arthroscopically assisted
Smail animal arthroscopy was slow to develop com-
surgery outweigh the disadvantages, some important dis-
pared with the development of arthroscopy in humans
advantages deserve comment. The foremost disadvantage
and large animals. The belief that arthroscopy was not
is the learning curve associated with arthroscopically
needed or was not practical in small animal orthopedics
assisted joint surgery. A number of factors contribute to
prevailed, and early reports in the literature were met
this steep learning curve. First is the coordination needed
with skepticism. The first report of arthroscopic surgery
to move the hand and instrumentation in the proper
in small animal orthopedics was in 1978. Siemering
direction_ while  viewing the  i
instruments through
a
used a 1.7-mm arthroscope to evaluate 180 stifle joints
monitor. Second, canine joints offer little space in which
and concluded that arthroscopic examination of the
to work. Skili and training are required to manipulate
stifle joint in dogs was both beneficial and useful. About
the arthroscope and instrumentation within the joint
the same time, Bennett and Kivumbi from the United
without causing iatrogenic injury to the cartilage surface.
Kingdom explored the usefulness of the arthroscope as
Skill can be increased through early participation in con-
a diagnostic aid in the stifle joints of dogs, They also
tinuing education courses that offer cadaver laboratories.
concluded that arthroscopy was likely to become a
 Perhaps early training should focus on the more acces-
useful rool in the assesment of joint disease. They wrote
sible joints (shoulder and elbow). Once the surgeon is
that arthroscopy in the canine required patience and a
accomplished in procedures involving these joints, those
long, diffcult learning curve. Small animal arthroscopy
requiring more skill and specialized instrumentation
continued to be a topic of conversation, but few sur-
(knee and tarsus) can be studied. Practicing on cadaver
geons were interested in pursuing this new technology.
 specimens is recommended until the surgeon can easily
One of the few early 1
 pioneers in small animal
establish egress, arthroscope, and instrument portals.
arthroscopy was Person, who in the mid-1980s, began t0
 The surgeon always should be prepared to convert the
publish a series of articles on the use of the arthroscope
arthroscopic procedure to an open arthrotomy. The sur-
in small animal joint surgery. Person initially described
geon may choose to perform only diagnostic arthroscopy
the use of the arthroscope in the stifle joint of dogs.
(egress and arthroscope portais) early in the period of
He described both normal and pathologic findings in
training and to perform therapy with an open arthrotomy.
168 examinations and concluded that the arthroscope
As the surgeon gains experience in exploring the joint
allowed a thorough, efficient, and atraumatic evaluation
and identifying abnormal pathology without causing
 Of the canine stifle joint. Person followed with a descrip-
iatrogenic trauma, therapeutic arthroscopy can be used.
tion of the normal arthroscopic anatomy of the canine
The time needed to become skilled in diagnostic and
shoulder joint and coxofemoral joint. In later reports,
therapeutic arthroscopy varies with the number of arthro-
both Person and Goring described arthroscopic treat-
 scopic cases attempted. The surgeon must continue to
ment of osteochondritis dissecans of the shoulder.
practice, even though operative time initially will be
Even with these early reports of success, arthroscopy
longer than it would be for a similar procedure per-
in small animal orthopedics did not gain widespread
formed through an arthrotomy. With time and patience,
popularity. It was not until van Bree and van Ryssen
arthroscopic procedures will require the same or less
reported the successful use of the arthroscope to treat
operative time compared with open arthrotomy.
joint pathology in dogs that arthroscopy began to receive
A second disadvantage of arthroscopically assisted
attention from small animal orthopedists. These authors
 also offered the frst courses on arthroscopic surgery.
maintaining the necessary equipment and instrumen-
tation. For example, a pair of grasping forceps or a hand-
held curerte may cost as much as 1000 Us dollars.
Advantages and Disadvantages
Motorized shavers and radiofrequency thermal probes
are disposable items (although they can be reused if not
Arthroscopy is a modality to perform joint surgery
damaged) and cost 100 to 500 US dollars each. Because
that offers the advantages of enhanced visualization,
the instruments and equipment needed for small animal
lower patient morbidity rates, and increased precision.
arthroscopy are small, they can be damage easily. Break-
Enhanced visualization and increased precision are pos-
age or damage can occur during setup, during surgery,
sible because of the surgeon's view of the joint surfaces
O
during cleaning and sterilization after surgery.
is magnified through the arthroscope. Additionally, the
Proper training of the technical staff in the handling.
small size of the arthroscope and sheath allows the
sterilization, and storage of instruments and equipment
 surgeon to place the arthroscope into various compart-
is essential.
ments of the joint for assessment. Decreased postopera-
tive pain with arthroscopically assisted joint surgery is
well documented in humans. Anecdotal information
Potential Complications
and early objective evidence suggest that the same is
true for small animals. Small porral entrance sites
The most common complication of arthroscopic
through the inflamed joint capsule invade and transect
joint surgery is extravasation of fluid into the tissues
HISTORY OF ARTHROSCOPY 3
surrounding the joint. Although unsightly, fluid accu-
joints and dogs of different sizes. Purchase of ar least rwo
mulation outside the joint is a minor complication, and
arthroscopes is suggested: a 1.9- or 2.4-mm arthroscope
fluid usually is completely absorbed within 24 hours.
(see Chapter 2) for smaller joints and animals and a 2.7-
Fluid extravasation causes the joint capsule to collapse
0r 4.0-mm arthroscope for larger joints and animals. It
into the joint. As a result, visualization is decreased, and
is also important to know the outside diameter of the
the surgical procedure is prolonged. Extravasation of
arthroscope sheath. Some manufacturers offer a small-
fluid outside the joint also causes collapse of the tissue
diameter arthroscope (2.4 mm), but only a high-flow
walls of an instrument portal. If the surgeon is working
arthroscope sheath (3.2 mm). Although the arthroscope
through an open instrument portal or inadvertently dis-
in the example is appropriate for small joinrs, the
lodges a cannulated instrument portal, reentry into the
arthroscope sheath is not.
joint may become increasingly diffcult as the walls of the
Another common error made by inexperienced
portal collapse. All of these factors increase both surgical
surgeons is scarifying the articular cartilage by excessive
time and the accumulation of fluid outside the joint.
movement of the arthroscope tip within the joint or by
Fluid extravasation usually is caused by lack of flow
inappropriare movements with intra-articular instru-
through the egress portal or excessive ingress fluid flow.
ments. This problem is particularly likely within the
Often, an egress portal becomes obstructed with debris
osteoarthritic cartilage because the surface is soft as a
or is dislodged from the joint early in the procedure,
result of chondromalacia. This error can be avoided by
usually when a hypodermic needle is used for the egress
 adequate practice on cadavers before the surgeon per-
cannula (shoulder or elbow). The surgeon must monitor
forms clinical cases. Also, proper draping, patient posi-
fluid egress during the procedure and acr quickly to
tioning, and correct limb position during surgery are
correct a dislodged or obstructed needle. Often flushing
essential in preventing articular damage.
the needle with sterile fluid corrects an obstruction,
A third complication associated with inexperience is
whereas redirecting a dislodged needle corrects a mal-
failure to recognize lesions or to treat therm appro-
positioned egress needle. As the procedure progresses
priately. All lesions may not be preventable. With the
and an instrument portal is established, fluid egress
exception of 1- or 2-day arthroscopy courses for those
occurs through this site. It is advisable to maintain an
beginning their training, most veterinary surgeons learn
egress portal to help evacuate fluid. A large entry sur-
through experience. It is important to provide follow-up
rounding the arthroscope porral or instrument portal
of all surgical cases. If the outcome is less than optima!
may allow fluid to leak around the arthroscope sheath
 or if a complication arises, a thorough workup is neces-
or instrument cannula. This leakage can be prevented
sary to determine the reason for the failure. Perhaps the
by using the scapel blade to incise the skin and subcu-
 goal of the initial surgery was not accompished.
taneous tissues to a depth superficial to the joint capsule.
 Bipolar and monopolar radiofrequency units
are
The capsule is then penetrated with the arthroscope
dig adosre aues u s  rendod uo
sheath and attached obturator. High ingress fluid pres-
units function by heating fluid berween the electrodes
sure can cause fluid extravasation. This situation is more
in the tip of the ablation probe. Monopolar units
common with the use of a fluid pump and rarely occurs
function by heating interstitial fluid. These units are
with gravity (pressure bag) flow. To prevent fluid extra-
helpful, but must be used cautiously because both types
vasation associated with the use of an ingress pump, the
can cause severe articular damage if they are not care-
surgeon must be familiar with the pump systern being
fully controlled. Monopolar units must actually touch
used. (See the discussion of fluid pumps in Chapter 2.)
the cartilage to cause damage, whereas bipolar units
The most common serious complication associated
cause cartilage damage even as far as 1 mm away from
with arthroscopy is iatrogenic trauma of the articular
the surface.
surface. Most procedures cause minor abrasion of the
surface (arthroscope tracks). These abrasions do not
lead to degenerative arthritis. However, the potential for
Suggested Readings
severe iarrogenic damage is real, and this damage is
often caused by a combination of surgeon inexperience,
Bircher E: Die arthroendoskopie. Zentralbl Chir 48:1460-1461,
inappropriate equipment, and small joint spaces (as seen
1921.
in the canine). A common mistake is to force a large
Burman MS: Arthroscopy or direct visualization of joints. An
arthroscope into a small joint space (elbow or tarsus). In
experimental cadaver study. J Bone and Joint Surg 13:669-695,
this situation, it may be possible to hear the arthroscope
1931,
Jackson Rw: The introduction of arthroscopy to North America.
sheath grinding the surface as it enters the joint. The
Clin Orthop 374:183-186, 2000.
result is severe cartilage abrasion. This error is often
Kreuscher P: Semilunar cartilage disease: a plea for early recognition
caused by the use of an arthroscope or arthroscope
by means of the arthroscope and early treatment of this condition.
sheath that is too large. Often, when initially purchasing
Ill Med J 47:290-292, 1925.
 Melwraith CW: Diagnostic and Surgical Arthroscopy in the Horse,
equipment, the surgeon will purchase a single 2.7-mm
2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1989.
arthroscope. However, smaller dogs and joints (elbow.
Smith M: Arthroscopy in large animals. Proccedings of the 11th
or tarsus) may not accommodate this size equipment. If
  a   
the larger arthroscope is forced into the joint, significant
Takagi K: Practical experience using Takagi's arthroscope. J Jpn
Orthop Assoc 14:359-441,1933.
damage is likely to occur. An accomplished arthroscopic
 surgeon must have arthroscopes and instruments for
J Jpn Med Instr 2s:11, 1954.
R
Arthroscopic Instrumentation
Introduction
flow must be established and maintained. Fluid flow is
dependenr on the ingress and egress (inflow and out-
The technique of arthroscopy was pioneered in the
flow) system and the gravity or fluid pump system.
carly 1920s by Kenji Takagi, a Japanese physician at the
Finally, success in biopsy or therapy requires small,
University of Tokyo who adapted a cystoscope for exam-
high-quality hand instruments. Appropriate selection
ination of the knee. Starting with a 7.3-mm-diameter
and care of the appropriate equipmenr will permit years
scope, his design progressed to a 3.5-mm system that
of accurate arthroscopic diagnosis and therapy with
included lenses for magnification. Independently, Eugene
 minimal iatrogenic joint trauma.
Bircher of Switzerland used a laparoscope to examine
the knee joint in 1921. The first full arthroscopic surgery
was performed by Masaki Watanabe, a student of Takagi.
Arthroscopes
ln 1955, Watanabe successfully removed a necrotizing
xanthomatous giant cell tumor from a parient's knee.
The modern arthroscope is a fine-diameter telescope
Watanabe's development of the "needlescope,”" a fiberoptic
that includes an outer fiberoptic portion that transmits
instrunient with tip diameters of 2.2 mrn and 1.7 mm,
light into the joint and a series of inner lenses that
marked the beginning of the moderu age of arthroscopy
transmir an image to the eye or camera (Fig. 2-1).
and the evolution of instrumentation that permits evalu-
Arthroscopes are commonly described by three
ation of small joints, including those of the dog.
measurements: telescope diameter, distal lens angle
Understanding arthroscopic equipment and selection
(viewing angle), and working length (Fig. 2-2). The
of appropriate equipment are vital to the success of an
telescope diameter is the outer diameter of the tubular
arthroscopy program. Of primary importance is the
portion of the arthroscope without the accompanying
quality of the optical system. The equipment must pro-
cannula. Arthroscope diameters commonly used in canine
vide an excellent image to enable precise visualization,
arthroscopy include 1.9 mm, 2.3 mm, and 2.7 mm.
diagnosis, and therapy. The qualiy of the visualization
These instruments are commonly considered to be forms
is supported by appropriate fluid management. To main-
tain visualization during the procedure, adequate fluid
2.7mm
B
125mm
FIGURE 2-1 A 2.7-mm long 30-degree oblique arthroscope. A. Tele-
FIGURE 2-2   A 2.7-mm long 30-degree oblique arthroscope. demon-
scope; B, lens; C, fiberoptic light fiber5.
strating bevel angle, length, and diameter.
6I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
C
FIGURE 2-5
A 2.7-mm long 30-degiee oblique arthroscope with
q closeup view of the external end. A, Eyepiece: B. lIight post; C. telescope 
FIGURE 2-3  A. 1 .9-mm short 30degree oblique (Dyonics) arthroscope:
(Stryker Endoscopy).
B. 2 3-rmrn short 30-degree oblique (Shyker Endoscopyl orthroscope:
C., 2.7-mm long 30-degree oblique (Stryker Endoscopyl arthroscope.
 Both short and long arthroscopes are used in small
of needle scopes or small-joint arthroscopes (Fig 2-3).
animal orthopedics. Short arthroscopes allow greater
Smaller arthroscopes minimize joint trauma and allow
tase of handling in smaller joints, such as the elbow, and
greater mobiliry in small joints, such as the elbow or
these scopes may be less susceptible to damage from
hock. Larger arthroscopes permit a larger feld of view
bending. Longer arthroscopes are necessary for larger
and offer greater resistance to bending and, therefore,
 and deeper joints, such as the shoulder and knee.
greater durability.
The external end of the scope includes an eyepiece, a
The selection of appropriate arthroscopes is discussed
light source post, and a cannula interlock (Fig. 2-5).
in the following chapters. Generally, arthroscopy of the
The arthroscopic image can be viewed directly through
shoulder is performed with a 2.7-mm long arthroscope
the eyepiece, but because of concerns about sterility and
in most dogs; however, in some smaller dogs, the use of
case of visualization, this method is impractical for
a 2.3-mm scope rmay be more appropriate. Arthroscopy
modern arthroscopy. Instead, the eyepiece is connected
of the elbow is usually performed with a 1.9-mm short
directly to a camera and the image projected onto a
arthroscope. Larger scopes, including 2.7 mm, are also
monitor.
used for this procedure, bur the smaller scope provides
The connection between the arthroscope and the
excellent visualization, improved manipulation, and
 camera is available in rwo styles. The most common
significantly
less iatrogenic trauma than larger
type is a standard or clip-on adapter (Fig 2-6). The
arthroscopes. Arthroscopy of the knee is most often
performed with a 2.7-mm long arthroscope, although
(Fig 2-7). The standard system has a spring-loaded clip
the use of a 2.3-mm or smaller arthroscope may
be
that attaches to the eyepiece of a traditional arthroscope.
appropriate in miniature and small breed dogs.
The direct-coupling system is connected by screwing the
Lens angle is the angle between the center of the view-
 arthroscope onto the camera. The arthroscope and the
ing range and the axis of the telescope (see Fig. 2-2).
camera used for this type of system are unique in that
The most common angles available in arthroscopes are
the arthroscope does not have an eyepiece for direct
0 degrees, 30 degrees, and 70 degrees. The 30-degree
viewing (without video) and the direct-coupling camera
arthroscope is the most common type used in canine
cannot be connected to a traditional arthroscope. It is
arthroscopy. Working length is the overall length of the
shaft of the telescope and is usually designared as
"short" or “long." Short arthroscopes have a working
length of approximately 8.5 cm; long arthroscopes have
a working length of approximately 13 cm (Fig. 2-4).
A
B
FIGURE 2-4  A. 2.7-mm long 30-degiee oblique IKal Storz GmbH
& Co) arthroscope; B. 2.7-mm short 30-degree ohique (Kad Storz GmbH
& Col arthroscope.
FIGURE 2-6Clioon arthroscopy syslem.
ARTHROSCOPICINSTRUMENTATIONI?7
separating the light post from the remainder of the
arthroscope.
Caninula interlock designs vary between manufac-
turers, with designs ranging from simple J-locks to more
dexterity in handling the interlock is an important basic
skill in assembly of the arthroscopy system. J-locks are
simple to operate; however, they require a flexible
washer that can be lost or dropped if it becormes loose.
More complex spring-loaded designs do not require a
washer but can be slightly more difficult to assemble.
Arthroscopes are available fron numerous manu-
facturers, with moderate variations in design and cost.
(See the Appendix.) The choice of which arthroscope to
purchase is affected by numerous factors. The first
consideration is the diameter and length of arthroscope
that is desired. If arthroscopy of all three of the most
common joints (shoulder, elbow, stifle) will be per-
formed, then it is advisable to purchase both 1.9-mm
short and 2.7-mm long scopes (see Fig. 2-3). If a large
volume of arthroscopic cases is anticipated, then it is
advantageous to have a 2.3-mm short scope available,
although this size is not commonly used. Generally, all
small animal arthroscopy is performed with 30-degree
FGURE 2-7 Glass-on-glass arthroscopy syslern.
scopes, and although other angles are available, they are
 not frequently used.
Both 1.9-mm-diameter and 2.7-mm--diameter arthro-
estimated that 50% to 90% of human arthroscopists
scopes are available from most manufacturers. The
use standard clip-on arthroscopes because of the ease of
choice of manufacturer should depend on the quality
switching arthroscopes during a procedure and the
and reputation of the product; the warranty and repair
lower cost of the system. In general, direct-coupling
record; the price of the individual arthroscopes, either
arthroscopes are more expensive. The potential advan-
 individually or combined with an arthroscopy package;
tages of glass-on-giass arthroscopes are more reliable
 and surgeon preference. T
The optical quality of the
coupling and decreased incidence of fogging as a result
 arthroscopes of the companies listed in the Appendix is
of water penetration. Fogging of arthroscopes occurs
excellent, and it may be difficult for beginning arthro-
infrequently, but can be frustrating because it signif-
 scopists to recognize a significant difference. Most arthro-
cantly obscures the operator's view. Fogging is caused
scopes come with full, long-term warranties against
by two mechanisms. The most common is differences in
 scope failure except for that caused by misuse or inad-
temperature (8 T) between the tip of the scope, inside
vertent damage. Typically, most damage to arthroscopes
the joint, and the opposite end of the arthroscope. This
is caused by the surgeon and not as a result of manu-
type of fogging is not entirely elirninated with the glass-
facturing problems. Regardless of the cause of damage,
on-glass system. Cameras designed for standard mount-
however, the manufacturer or a qualifed repair company
ing may have a suction port on the side to help control
should be able to provide a loaner unit for use while
fogging. Fogging may aiso occur if water from the sur-
the primary arthroscope is being repaired. Excellent
gical procedure infltrates the scope-ro-camera linkage.
and responsive service is a high priority in the use of
This type of fogging is substantially limited by the glass-
arthroscopy equipment. Used and restored arthroscopes
on-glass system. Some brands offer improved image
are often available for less cost; however, it is imperative
clarity with the glass-on-glass system. Selection of the
 to ensure that the units still have outstanding optics and
glass-on-giass system versus the standard system should
 are backed by an adequate warranty.
be based on cost and consultation with a reputable
The only differences in handling of arthroscopes from
arthroscopy equipment representative.
different manufacturers are slight variations in telescope
The light post is the S
site of attachment of the
length and the manner of interlock of the cannula and
fiberoptic cable that provides lighting within the joint
light post. Familiarity with a particular model or prefer-
(see Fig. 2-5). Light post connections are available in
ence for one system over another may affect the purchase.
threaded and snap-on varieties, and adaptors are avail-
 Some manufacturers provide demonstration equipment
able to accommodate various cable designs. Familiarity
that can be used clinically for several days or weeks to
with the function of the light post can be important in
aid in the selection of equipment. Although most
the selection of compatible light cables and in avoidance
surgeons purchase their original equipment primarily
of problems with assembly and disassembly of the
from one manufacturer, it is possible to select different
arthroscopy system. Specifically, it is important that the
components of the arthroscopy system from multiple
light cable be separared from the light post versus
 manufacturers. Most arthroscopes are adaptable to any
8 SMALLANIMALARTHROSCOPY
cannula must be appropriate for the arthroscope as
well. Because cannulas are specifcally designed for their
accompanying arthroscope, there are few options in
their selection; however, manufacturers offer cannulas
of different diameters to allow different levels of fluid
ingress. For example, Storz manufactures a high-flow
一
cannula for its 1.9-mm and 2.4-mm arthroscopes.
The functions of the cannula include maintenance of
the arthroscope portal, protection of the arthroscope.
and ingress of fluid. An arthroscope should never be
inserted jnto a joint without a cannula because the lens
may be damaged and the telescope bent during insertion.
The cannula is inserted frst to establish a portal into the
joint. The portal is initiated by incision with a scalpel
blade, followed by insertion of the cannula combined
with an obturaror or trocar (Fig. 2-10). The trocar
reinforces the cannula during insertion and provides a
FIGURE 2-8
Large orthroscope cannula system. A, Trocar: B. canula;
tip for ease of insertion. Sharp and blunt trocars are
C, assembled cannula and trocar (Stryker Endoscopyl.
available for most cannulas (Fig. 2-1l). Blunt trocars
are used most frequently in small animal arthroscopy;
sharp trocars tend to cause greater carrilage damage.
video camera system; however, light cable attachments
Sharp trocars are rarely necessary, but it is helpful to
may vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, and it is
have them available in case they are needed. Like the
important to ensure that an adaptor is available or to
arthroscope and the cannula, the trocar and cannula
purchase a separate light cable.
 are specifically designed for each other and must have
appropriate interlocks, lengths, and diameters.
Arthroscopic Gannulas
Care and Handling of the
The arthroscope is inserted into the joint through a
cannula that serves multiple functions (Figs. 2-8 and
Arthroscope and Cannula
2-9). The cannula is a steel tube that is slightly larger
than the arthroscope. lt permits fluid to run into the
The arthroscope is likely the most fragile and expen-
joint in the space between the telescope and the cannula.
sive component of the arthroscopic equipment. It may
The far end of the cannula is beveled to the angle of the
Aq auu 1oyo Xue ie no Ailins gunp pseep aq
arthroscope. The near end of the cannula has an inter-
bending the telescope shaft or by cracking or scratching
lock mechanism that allows connection to the arthroscope
the lens. Specific protocols should be established to
 and artachment of a fluid line. Cannulas are designed to
 avoid damage to the arthroscope. It is advisable to have
match a specific arthroscope and usually are not inter-
small cases for each arthroscope that can secure the
changeable. The cannula and arthroscope interlocks
must be compatible, and the length and diameter of the
B
FIGURE 2-9 Smallarthroscope connula system. A, Trocar; B, cannula;
FIGURE 2-10
Close-up view of the lip of an arthroscopic. carn.le
C, assembled cannula and trocar.
and a sharp Irocar (Stryker Endoscopyl.
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATION IIB 9
A
B
FIGURE 2-13  Soaking process for enzymatic cleaner.
and eyepiece may be gently cleaned with a cotton ball
and distilled water. The cannulas and trocars are cleaned
FIGURE 2-11 Close-up view of hocar 1:ps. A, Shorp: B. blun!
in a similar fashion. Sterilization may be performed
(SirykerEncoscopyl
by several methods. Cold sterilization is performed by
placing the arthroscope, cannula, and trocars in a 14-
day glutaraldehyde solution (e.g., Cidex, Johnson &
arthroscope, cannula, and trocars for sterilization and
Johnson) fo1 no more than 30 minutes (Figs. 2-13 and
storage (Fig. 2-12). The cases should be sturdy and
2-14). The arthroscope also may be sterilized by ETO
have a means to secure the instruments within the case.
gas, Steris, or Sterad, depending on the recommen-
The arthroscope should be returned to the case imme-
dations of the manufacturer. Most arthroscopes are not
diately after use to avoid damage while the remainder
 autoclavable; even those that are may be damaged by
of the surgical table is cleared. All junctions on the
 repeated autoclaving because it causes gradual destruc-
 arthroscope, including those between the light post and
tion of the glue.
the scope or between the eyepiece and the telescope,
should be checked regularly for tightness. Loose junctions
s no nl pd e u a  p nd e
Arthroscopic Cameras
transmission. Bending of an arthroscope may be evident
by the appearance of a black crescent at the periphery
The image from the arthroscope is projected onto a
of the field of view. A bend will also result in the
television screen with an endoscopic video camera
arthroscopic image migrating across the monitor screen
system. The camera system includes a control unit and
as the arthroscope is rotated. Severe bending will cause
a camera head (Figs. 2-15 and 2-16). The camera head
complete obliteration of the view. A bent instrument
includes an electronic chip and a lens adaptor that clip
should be sent to a qualified repair facility. Unqualifed
onto the ocular end of the arthroscope and a cable that
personnel who attempt to straighten the instrument may
connects this assembly to the control box. The electronic
cause permanent damage.
chip is a semiconductor that converts the image to an
Arthroscopes should be cleaned by hand with an
enzymatic cleaner and distilled water. Cleaning should
be performed as soon as possible after the procedure to
remove blood or other body fluids or tissues. The lens
FIGURE 2-12 Arthroscope case (Herzog Surgicall.
FIGURE 2-14 Rinsing process for enzymatic cleaner.
10 I· SMAlL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
ue suiseund una adosse rg dn ias si in
initial camera system, a single-chip camera with a simple
control box is adequate.
The cost of camera systems (head and control box)
varies primarily based on the number of digital chips
and functions. Secondhand or rebuilt equipment may be
 adequate if it has been restored to excellent operating
condition.
The camera head and cable may be damaged by drop-
ping or mishandling. The camera head contains a lens
 and a prism that may be damaged if dropped or handled
roughly. The camera cord contains delicate wires, and
the connection may have fine pins. The camera cord
should never be bent or wound too tightly, and the cap
FIGURE 2-15_Carerc neod fcr velerinary videc camera system IKarl
should be replaced on the connector when it is not in
Stcrz Gmbl I & Col.
use. Camera heads may be sterilized by autoclave, ETO
gas, or cold sterilization, according to manufacturer's
electronic signal. Most cameras contain either one or
recommendations.
three semiconducting chips. Three-chip cameras give
greater resolution than one-chip caineras; however,
three-chip cameras can be significantly more expensive.
Monitors
Single-chip cameras provide an excellent image and are
appropriate for most applications. Most camera heads
The final arthroscopic image is visualized on a stan-
ft most arthroscopic eyepieces, regardless of manu-
dard analog color monitor. Most monitors sold in the
facturer, although it is advisable to ensure compatibility
 medical field are manufactured by the Sony Corporation
before purchasing components from different manu-
and are of very high quality. These monitors may be
facturers. Some camera heads have controls that permit
purchased independently or in combination with an
white balance, image printing, or zoom. These camera
entire arthroscopy package. Monitors for arthroscopy
heads may be signifcantly more expensive, however, and
should have a high horizontal resolution of at least 450
these features are not necessary for basic arthroscopy.
lines and a tube size of 33 cm or larger. Most monitors
The end of the cable that plugs into the control box has
have S-VHS or composite inputs that allow higher-
a cap that protects the connecting pins or card edge con-
quality video imaging. No other design factors need
nector from damage during sterilization and handling.
to be considered in the selection of a monitor. Used or
During an arthroscopic procedure, the cap should not
reconditioned monitors are adequate if the picture
be removed by the surgeon because the inside is not
quality is not compromised.
sterilized. Instead, a technician removes the cap after
this end of the cable is passed off the table.
The control box converts the electronic image
Light Sources
information into a standard video signal and relays the
image to the monitor. The control box is usually specific
t0) the camera head; therefore, the camera head and
for visualization. The light source box contains the
control box must be frorm the same manufacturer. The
lamp and intensity regulators (Fig. 2-17). Lamps may
box may have controls that specify the type of
be tungsten-halogen or xenon. Most new light sources
endoscopy, color balance, and white balance. In most
cases, only the white balance function is used once the
STORZ
n175
20132020
STORZ
M
FIGURE 2-16Contr<ol box lor ve'erina'y vicieo camera system (Karl
Sorz GmbH & Coj
FlGURE 2-17 Xenon 175 light source (Karl Storz GmbH & Coj.
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATIONE?11
use xenon rather than tungsten-halogen lamps. Xenon
 or wound too tightly. Fiberoptic cables also heat up
lamps provide increased light intensity and higher color
significantly and should not be placed directly against
temperature and, therefore, higher visual clarity and
the patient because it may cause burning.
color rendition, Xenon light sources are more expensive
but are recommended for superior image quality. Most
light sources include automatic intensity control through
Dacumentatian
feedback from the camera video output system. This
feature is important for maintaining appropriate image
Documentation of arthroscopic procedures provides
intensity throughout an arthroscopic procedure. Lamp
a permanent visual record that allows historical archiv-
wattage may vary from 175 to 250 W, depending on the
ing of arthroscopic fndings and therapy and facilitates
p  ro ra e  a s 
client and professional communication. Applicable media
ing on usage. Newer units may provide lamp-hour
for arthroscopic imaging include videotape recording,
displays, and it is important to have a supply of spare
digital capture of still images, and color printing. Each
lamps in case of burnout during a procedure. Used units
system has advantages and disadvantages, and although
are often available and often are adequate. Recommen-
 one system is adequate for most arthroscopy programs,
dations for the selection of a light source include a xenon
some surgeons may elect to use more than one method.
lamp with limited controls and a lamp-hour display.
The light from the light source is conveyed to the
arthroscope through a fberoptic cable that attaches to
Video Recording
the light post on the arthroscope (Fig. 2-18). The
connection on the light source may be specifc to the
Videotape or digital video recording of arthroscopic
rmanufacturer; however, many light sources have a
procedures allows the entire surgical procedure to be
spring-release connection that permits use with almost
recorded with minimal interruption. Unlike with other
any fiberoptic light cable. The type of connection
modes of imaging, the surgeon does not need to
between the lighr cable and the arthroscope varies with
remember to caprure specific images. Video recording
the manufacturer and the size of the arthroscope. For
is particularly valuable for demonstration, review, or
example, the Dyonics 1.9-mm arthroscope uses a small-
 teaching of arthroscopic techniques and therapies. How-
diameter light cable that screws onto the arthroscope,
ever, it is less practical for documentation of specific
whereas the Stryker arthroscope uses a larger-diameter
lesions and client communication. Disadvantages of
cable that snaps onto the arthroscope. In some situa-
analog video recording include the complexity of
tions, more than one type of light cable may be needed.
creating print images from videotape recording and the
Alternatively, appropriate adaprors can be used. Light
necessity to review the tape to find specifc images of
cables may cost as much as several hundred dollars
interest. Advanced digital video systems simplify the
when purchased new. They may be obtained more
process of reviewing and printing images.
inexpensively either used or as part of packages that
Video recording of arthroscopic procedures should be
include a light source. Used fiberoptic light cabtes are
not recommended because degradation or fber break-
resolution. S-VHS and digital systems are recoimmended
age may occur. Light cables may be sterilized by ETO
and are compatible with most arthroscopic camera
gas, soaking, or autoclave, depending on manufacturer
systems. The most practical method is to use a separate
recommendations. A light cable is composed of numer-
videotape or disc for each patient, noting in bilateral
 ous glass fibers that may be broken if the cable is bent
cases the order of joint operation. The recorder should
be placed high on the arthroscopic tower to avoid poten-
tial water damage. Medical-grade recording cquipment
is not necessary, and no advanced features are required,
unless video editing is anticipated.
Video Printers
For many years, video printers were the standard
method for capturing arthroscopic images (Fig. 2-19).
These units produce a 5 x 7-inch glossy color print from
B
the video signal that exits the camera. Most of these
units are manufactured by Sony and vary in price. Used
units are available for substantially lower prices. A video
printer can quickly provide a full-color print without the
need for other hardware. In addition, when purchased
in combination with a camera system, the camera may
have an integrated remote control button for making
FIgure 2-18 
Fiberoptic light cables. A, large (Stryker Endoscopyl;
prints. Disadvantages of video prinrers include the
B, small (Dyonicsl.
relative high cost per print and the potential for image
12 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FGURE 2-20  Device to coplure stll images [Sony Coro.).
FIGURE 2-19
Arihroscopy printer |Sony Corp.
fading with time. If multiple copies of an image are
that provide a thumbnail of each image, methods for
needed, they must be made at the time of the procedure
assigning key words, and search functions that permit
 Or reproduced with digital scanning or color copying.
the user to find all of the images of one type, for
Because most printers are manufactured by the same
example, images of a torn meniscus.
company (Sony), few options are available. There are
ducing more than 700 lines. Similarly, there are minor
Arthroscopic Irrigation
differences in printer speed, with most units printing the
image in less than 30 seconds. If video printing is the
Constant, reliable flow of fluid across the tip of the
only means of documentation, then an adequate supply
arthroscope and through the joint is vital to adequate
of printer ink and paper cartridges should be available.
visualization. Fluid expands the joint, provides clear
fluid for visualization, and clears the joint of debris and
contamination. lrrigation also provides a tamponade
Digital Capture of Still Images
effect to minimize bleeding during the procedure. Irri-
 gation systems must provide enough pressure to distend
Digital capture of still images is rapidly becoming a
the joint and maintain flow without increasing the cx-
preference in arthroscopic imaging. This method may
travasation of fluid into the soft tissue. The recommended
be used independently or in combination with video
pressure in most human arthroscopic procedures is
recording (Figs. 2-20 and 2-21). In these systems, small
between 40 mm Hg and 100 mm Hg. Fluid is directed
or medium fle-size images are captured and stored on
into a Luer-Lok connector on the arthroscopic cannula.
digital media. These systems offer numerous advantages
It enters the joint through the space berween the tele-
Over other methods of documentation. Digital images
scope and the cannula. In some cases, a separate inflow
may be enhanced with either Macintosh or PC-based
cannula may be used to introduce larger volumes of fluid.
computers. Most systems store images as JPEG or TIFF
Indications for the use of a separate inflow cannula
fles. These files can easily be imported into software,
include lavage of a blood-flled or septic joint. Fluid
such as Adobe Photoshop, which can improve image
usually must be pushed into the joint under pressure to
quality through cropping or alteration of contrast or
achieve adequate flow. Fluid may be pressurized by
presentations,linked to e-mail, or incorporated into Web
have advantages, and selecrion often depends on the
pages. These images can often be used in conjunction
joint being operated on as well as surgeon preference.
with computer-based medical records systems. If a color
printer is availabie, digital images also permit greater
flexibility in reproducing the image. The two broad cate-
sd e sss  a n o ss
medical systems and consumer items. Medical systems,
such as the Stryker system, store images on lomega Zip
SDO
disks or CDs in standard fie formats (see Fig. 2-21).
Storage of digital images is more convenient than
storage of prints, and the images are more durable.
Each patient may be assigned a single floppy disk or CD
that can be accessed with a personal computer. Disks
are readily copied and sent to clients or colleagues.
Large volumes of images can be cataloged for numerous
FIGUrE 2-21
Digital video camera and device to caplure srill irages
 uses with software programs, such as Extensis Portfolio,
iStryker Endoscopyi
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATION13
Gravity is an effective method of fluid delivery for
procedures that do not involve fluid suction or long-
term use of shaving devices. Gravity flow is appropriate
for diagnostic procedures and procedures with lower
fluid outflow rates. Hospitals that anticipate a high
volume of arthroscopic procedures will likely require a
fluid pump system.
Gravity and Gravity Assist
Gravity flow is administration of fluid directly from
FIGURE 2-23Conltrol box for an arthroscopic pump IArthrex].
the fluid bag to the cannula with a simple administration
set. The diameter of the administration set determines the
fluid flow rate. Large-diameter tubing for arthroscopy is
available. The rate of fluid flow also may be increased
course of long surgical procedures. Gravity and graviry
by placing the fluid bag in a pressure bag (Fig. 2-22).
assist systems require much greater user attention than
Gravity flow also may be increased with commercially
do pump systems once the system is started. Use of a 3-
available gravity assist devices. These sterile bulbs are
or 5-L bag may improve pressure and decrease the need
placed in line with the fluid administration set and
for a technician to replace fluid bags or reinflate pressure
permit intermitrent increases in fluid flow. Advantages
bags. Also, Y-adaptors permit multiple bags to be hooked
of gravity flow include the relative simplicity of the
up at the initiation of the surgical procedure. Elevation
system, low cost, and safety against overpressurization.
of fluid bags to as high as 8 or 9 feet is recommended to
Gravity systems are easy for the surgeon and technician
achieve adequate pressures. However, graviry systems
to learn and to use. In addition, they are easy to main-
may not be able to keep up with fluid outflow if suction
tain and do not require additional space in the operating
devices are applied to the joint.
room or on the arthroscopy tower.
Disadvantages include poor control of pressure,
Fluid Pumps
relatively low maximum pressures, and the inabiliry to
maintain high fluid pressures and flow during the
Fluid pumps permit precise control over inflow rate,
inflow pressure, and in some cases, outflow rate (Fig.
2-23). Fluid pumps permit selection of both fluid flow
rate and fluid pressure. Most are pressure priority,
which means that the selected pressure in the joint will
be maintained, and when the pressure drops below this
level, the fluid will be pumped in at the selected flow
rate. Fluid pumps are superior to gravity at maintaining
pressure when suction or shaver systems are in use. When
the pump improves visualization and clarity, significantly
less time may be needed for the surgical procedure.
Disadvantages of fluid pumps include their initial cost
and the cost of the administration sets, the moderate
complexity of tube setup, and the space requirements.
 Many manufacturers supply the pump free of charge
with the purchase of a minimum number of tubing sets.
Some tubing systems include additional extensions thar
permit the same basic tubing set and fluids to be used
for other patients within 24 hours.
The most basic pump designs, pressure control pumps,
maintain articular pressure at a preset flow rate. Newer
pumps, known as inflow control pumps, allow selection
of both inflow pressure and flow rate. More sophisti-
cated pumps (inflow/outflow control) also allow selec-
tion of outflow rate, although this expensive, complicated
feature is not necessary for most small animal arthroscopy.
Additional features include pressure-relief mechanisms
and air-infusion protection systems. Most pumps operate
by either a centrifugal impeller or a peristaltic roller.
Peristaltic systems provide better pressure maintenance
and therefore are preferable ro impeller-driven devices.
FIGURE 2-22 Fluid compression bog.
A peristaltic inflow control pump is usually preferred
14I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
for small animal arthroscopy. The selection of a pump
 is determined by the features desired, the frequency of
use, and the tube or pump contract rate.
C
Egress Systems
B
Adequate outflow, or egress, must be established to
maintain appropriate fluid flow through the joint
FIGURE 2-24 Mulifeneshrated outflow cannula. A, Trochar; B, fencs
during arthroscopy. Maintenance of fluid ourflow can
trations: C, stopcock IStr yker Endoscooyi.
be particularly challenging in small animal arthroscopy
because of the small size of the joints. The use of standard
outflow cannulas in smaller joints, particutaily the elbow,
 can be effective, although there are two precautions.
may cause significant iatrogenic cartilage trauma. The
 First, in small joints, the weight and presence of the tube
use of needles or catheter stylets may minimize trauma
 may cause needle tips to contact the articular cartilage
due to size, although the sharp tips may damage the
and result in more iatrogenic damage. Second, when
cartilage and the thin diameter may become clogged
gravity flow is used, the outflow rate increases as a
frequently. Selection of the appropriate outflow instru-
result of siphoning. As a result, air may be drawn into
ment is based primarily on the size of the joint.
the joint if the flow rate from the gravity system cannot
Commercially available outflow cannulas are steel
keep up with the outflow rate. When an outflow tube is
tubes with outer diameters that range from approxi-
used, it is helpful also to use a clamping device to slow
mately 2.5 mm to more than 6.0 mm (Fig. 2-24). The
the outflow rate. The clamp reduces the amount of air
far tip of the canrula usually is not beveled, and the tip
 that is drawn into the joint, decreases the turbulence of
may have multiple side fenestrations to increase fluid
fluid in the joint, and permits greater pressurization
flow. The close end of the cannula may have a Luer-L.ok
when desired.
for artaching rubing. The close end also may have a
stopcock mechanism to control flow. Cannulas are sold
with an appropriately sized sharp or blunt trocar. Other
Hand Instruments
commercially available fluid cannulas are made of clear
or opaque plastic, and some have threads or a flange to
Hand instruments for small-joint arthroscopy rmust
prevent them from falting out. More complex cannuias
combine small diameter with excellent mechanics to
have side ports at the close end to permit fluid inflow or
provide high accuracy and reliabiliry while minimizing
outflow while the cannula is used for instrumentation.
the likelihood of iatrogenic trauma and instrument
 For arthroscopy of small joinrs, such as the human
failure. The basic recommended arthroscopic hand rools
wrist or canine elbow, standard outflow cannulas may
 include probes, grasping forceps, and biting forceps.
be too large for the joint space. In these cases, needles
Most probes are of a right-angle design with a tip that
or catheter stylets may be used. Relatively large gauges
is approximately 3 mm long (Fig. 2-26). Probes are
(14-18) are used to minimize clogging with synovium or
used to palpate surfaces and manipulate tissues within
shavings. Plastic catheters also may be used if they are
the joint.
. In small animal arthroscopy, right-angle
large enough and stiff enough to avoid clogging and bend-
 probes are used to palpate articular cartilage to detect
ing. General recommendations for outflow cannulas in
pathology and to manipulate osteochondritis dissecans
 small animal arthroscopy include the following:
flaps, meniscal injuries, and bone fragments. Probes
arc manufactured in variable thicknesses, and it is
Shoulder: large-gauge catheter stylet, small outflow
recommended to purchase one of moderate stiffness t0
catheter, or teat cannula
avoid bending and breaking of the instrument. It is also
Elbow: large-gauge needle
Hip: large-gauge catheter stylet or spinal needle
Stifle: multifenestrated outflow cannula
Fluid may be scavenged from the outflow in several
ways. In some situations, the table and drapes can be
positioned so that fluid from the cannula drips into a
wastebasket on the floor. Alternatively, the fluid may
be allowed to flow onto the floor and then be scavenged
by a suction device. Numerous reusable floor suction
devices are available, and selection often depends on
which one performs best given the specific flooring
material (Fig. 2-25). A tube may be attached to the our-
flow cannula or needle and then connected to a suction
device or drained into a wastebasket. This technique
FIGURE 2-25 Floor suclion unir (Linvotecl.
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATION ?■ 15
A
B
FIGURE 2-26
FIGURE 2-28 Arthroscopic. punch forceps with a closeup view of the
Right-angle probes with close-up views of the lip5.
A. Plain (Dr. Fritz GmbH]: B. measured (Arthrex).
tip IStryker Edoscopy].
recommended to purchase a probe with measurement
that a basic arthroscopic surgery pack include a very
markers on the shaft. These markings aid determining
 narrow alligator forceps and a slightly larger and sturdier
the size of lesions within the joint. Probes and other
arthroscopic grasping forceps. The grasping surface may
instruments are available in silver, black, or gold. Some
 d   e n   m a
manufacturers claim that black or gold instruments
 most small animal applications, pointed forceps with-
create less glare than silver during the arthroscopic
out teeth are recommcnded.
procedure. Grit biasting and other surface-roughening
 Locking forceps are advantageous in many arthro-
techniques are used on some instruments to reduce
scopic procedures involving the removal of bone or
giare. Manufacturers often provide a handle that may
cartilage flaps. Locking mechanisms vary significantly,
be attached to the probe and other instruments, such as
and the choice may be based on cost and surgeon
hooks and knives.
preference. Many forceps designs are available in long
Grasping forceps are available as locking and non-
and short lengths. Again, selection is based primarily on
locking types (Fig. 2-27). Nonlocking types inciude
surgeon preference, although a shorter working length
standard alligator forceps and those designed specifically
is recommended for smaller joints.
for arthroscopic use. Most grasping forceps designed for
Biting, or punch, forceps are used to debride soft
arthroscopic use have an enclosed operating mechanism
tissues and also may be referred to as basket forceps
that avoids interference berween the mechanism and
(Fig. 2-28). Punch forceps have a sharp, hollow lower
surrounding tissues. However, standard surgical alligator
s aaoan oi pasn si ieui yound iaddn ue pue jaue
forceps are adequate for some small animal arthroscopic
pieces of soft tissue, including synovium and meniscus.
techniques. Graspers vary in size and length,
and
Variations in design include straight and side-biting and
selection depends on the joint, the specific procedure
differences in diameter and length. A smail- or medium-
being performed, and the preference of the surgeon.
 diameter straight punch forceps is useful in small animal
Arthroscopic graspers tend to be larger than surgical
arthroscopy for debriding synovium that is obscuring
alligator forceps because of the enclosed mechanism
the view, obtaining a synovial biopsy specimen, and
and also because most arthroscopic instruments are
debriding a meniscal injury. Suction punch forceps
designed for human use. However, newer designs for
provide suction at the tip to immediately remove the
debrided material (Fig. 2-29). These instruments are
diameters as narrow as 2 mm. The smaller-diameter
larger and much more expensive than standard punch
forceps have distinct advantages in procedures on small
forceps, and they currently have limited application in
animal joints. However, these instruments may bend or
small animal arthroscopy.
break within the joint, and the smaller mechanism pro-
vides less grasping power. It is therefore recommended
FIGURE 2-27
Arthroscopic grosping forceps with a close-up view of
the tip (Arth'exi.
FIGURE 2-29  Arthroscopic suction punch.
16I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
D
A
B
FIGURE 2-32
 Arthroscopic hand burr wilh a close-up view of the tip
[Dr. Fritz GmbH].
(Fig. 2-32). The instrument is a round burr on the end
of an arthroscopic handle. Alternatively, a burr from a
power shaver may be used.
FIGURE 2-30
Arthroscopic knives. A, Hook knife; B. meniscal knife;
In human arthroscopy, microfracrure of rhe subchon-
C, boyonet knife; D, handle IDr. Fritz GmbH].
dral bone bed is routinely performed with angled awls
and a maller. Awls for small animal use are available
Arthroscopic knives are useful in small animal
from Storz (Fig. 2-33). Alternatively, a small (0.035- to
arthroscopy for treating meniscal injuries, performing
0.045-inch) K-wire may be bent at the tip and secured
tenodesis, and cutting soft tissue attachiments to bony
in a Jacobs chuck for small-joint microfracture.
fragments (Fig. 2-30). Knives may be straight, curved,
0r hooked, and the choice depends on the procedure
being performed. Manufacrurers often also provide a
Instrument Cannulas
handle for the knife, but the handle is nor necessary
for most procedures. A knife set is not mandatory for
Arthroscopic instruments may be inserted into the joint
basic small animal arthroscopy, although purchase of
through a portal with or without a cannula. The major
straight and hook knives is recommended for advanced
advantage of working through a cannula is the ease of
techniques.
instrument insertion. Without a cannula, it may be
Small-diameter curettes are useful in small-joint
diffcult to switch instruments and identify the portal,
 arthroscopy. These instruments are used to elevate bone
particularly if the portal was poorly made. Repeated
fragments and debride cartilage and bone (Fig. 2-31).
attempts to insert an instrument through a poorly
In most cases, a small (5-0) surgical curette works,
defined portal can lead to soft tissue trauma and fluid
although the large diameter of the shaft limits its use to
extravasation. The major disadvantage of using a
portals without a cannula. Smaller-diameter (2.5-mm)
 cannula is that some instruments may be too large to
arthroscopic curettes are available that may ft through
permit insertion.
larger cannulas. A straight curette is easier to insert into
Instrument cannulas are available in numerous
the joint and is adequate for most applications.
An
diameters and lengths (Fig. 2-34). For small-joint
angled curerte is more diffcult to insert through the
portal, but may be useful for working at difficult angles.
Loop or ring curettes are also available specifically for
arthroscopic use. These instruments are recommended
for advanced arthroscopic techniques, including carti-
lage debridement.
Curettage and abrasion of bone or cartilage can be
 performed with a hand burr available from Dr. Fritz
B
A
B
C
FIGURE 2-31 Arthroscopic ring IA} and closed |8) curetes wirh close
FIGURE 2-33
3 Arthroscopic micropick and a close-up view of the lip
up view of the rips IDr. Fritz GmbH); C, 5-0 surgical curette.
angles (Karl Storz GmbH & Co].
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATIONI?17
C
FIGURE 2-36   Smalljoint hondpiece for an arthroscopic shaver [Karl
Storz GmbH & Co].
elbow, shoulder, and knee. Large-joinr shavers are used
D
B
A
in the canine knee for debridement of the fat pad.
FIGURE 2-34  Veterinary smalljoint cannula syslem. A, Cannulas:
Power shavers include a control box, a handpiece,
B, krocar; C, switching sticks: D. assembled system IDr.Friz GmbH]
and a shaver tip. The control box includes the power
supply and basic operational controls (Fig. 2-35). Most
shavers permir the operator to vary both the speed and
arthroscopy, cannulas with an inner diameter of 2.3 to
the direction of the instrument, and options include
3.5 mm are most appropriate. Lengths of 4 to 5 cm are
forward, reverse, and oscillation. Speed control is impor-
appropriate. Most cannulas come with both sharp and
blunt obrurators, although the blunt obturator should be
Variation in direction may not be necessary in small-
used whenever possible. Some larger cannulas also may
joint procedures, but this feature is standard on most
have a removable diaphragm that permits insertion of the
units. Controls may be located on a foot pedal or the
instrument while limiting loss of fluid from the joint.
handpiece.
 Small-joint cannula systems should include a set of
The handpiece secures the shaver to the unit (Fig.
switching sticks or tubes (see Fig. 2-34). This system
2-36) and should have an insertion point for tubing
permits progressive dilation of the portal and sub-
that directs suction to the tip of the shaver. A suction
sequent insertion of larger cannulas. To use this system,
regulator may be found on the handpiece as well. The
a relatively small cannula, with an obturator, is inserted
handpiece is supplied by an electrical cord thar has a
into the joint. A switching stick is placed through the
capped connector that inserts into the control box. As
cannula, and the cannula is withdrawn. A larger cannula
with all arthroscopic clectrical connections, the cap should
or dilation tube is placed over the stick, and the process
be removed by a nonsterile assistant rather than by the
is repeated until the desired cannula is in place. The use
surgeon because the inside of the cap is not sterile.
of cannulas depends on the joint, the instruments being
Shaver tips are available in numerous styles that are
used, and the surgeon's preference. Although a cannula
designed for either soft tissue or hard tissue debride-
system is not necessary for small-joint arthroscopy, it is
ment (Fig. 2-37). Soft tissue shavers include guarded
useful to have a system available for special situations,
sharp cutters and aggressive cutters. Sharp cutters have
and it may be easier for beginning arthroscopists to
a simple sharp-edged cup, whereas aggressive cutters
work through cannulas.
C
Power Shavers
B
 Power shavers are designed to rapidly debride soft
A
and hard tissues. Power shavers are separated into
small- and large-joint instruments. Small-joint shavers
are appropriate for procedures on the small animal
FIGURE 2-35
Control box for an arthroscopic shaver Korl Storz
FIGURE 2-37 Arthroscopic shaver tips. A. Radial shaver; B. burr;
GmbH & Col.
C., aggressive shaver [Linvalec].
18 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
B
FIGURE 2-38 Elecirocautery tips. A. Standardi: B. arthroscopic
have a toothed cup. The toothed cup is more useful for
debridement of fat or synovium in small joints. When
an aggressive cutter is used to debride the fat pad of the
stifle, limited suction is used and the shaver is operatcd
at a relatively slow speed. Operation of the shaver at
higher speeds limits the amount of tissue that can be
drawn into the blade. Shaver tips used for debridement
of bone are round or oval guarded burrs.
FIGURE 2-40 Unipolar radiofrequency _nstruments with α close-up
Shaver systems are available either new or used.
view of the rips. A. Ablation; B. shrinkage (Oratec).
 p d a ns sn 
  o  e m  o  x
chase of the shaver tips. The shaver tips are intended for
through the body, to a grounding plate (Figs. 2-39 and
single use, but may be reused if they are resterilized by
2-40). Heat is generated in the tissues because their
Sterad or gas. Shaver tips are two-piece units that are
resistance is higher. Bipolar units create an arc of energy
separated for cleaning.
 through the arthroscopic fluid that can be directed through
tissues (Figs. 2-41 and 2-42).
Electrocautery and
Joint capsule collagen is primarily type I. When radio-
frequency probes are used on a joint capsule, collagen
Radiofrequency Devices
undergoes denaturation in response to the heating in
association with breaking of some crosslinks within
Electrocautery and radiofrequency are used to gener-
the triple-helix structure. Crosslinks berween collagen
ate heat for cauterization of vessels, debridement of
molecules are maintained and cause contraction, or
tissues, or shrinking of collagen. Elcctrosurgical tips
shrinking, of the tissue.
specifically designed for underwater arthroscopic appli-
The effect of radiofrequency on shrinkagc and tissue
cation are available for use with standard eletrocautery
strength depends in part on the temperature of the
generators (Fig 2-38). These instruments may be used
probe. Optimum temperatures are from 6s*C to 75°C.
for cautery of small vessels, and special tips are designed
Higher temperarures cause greater weakening of tissues.
to cut soft tissues.
 Collagen and the tissues undergoing shrinkage are weaker
Radiofrequency devices transfer energy by using
than normal for 6 to 12 weeks after the procedure. In
electromagnetics to produce molecular friction in the
 addition, it is not know how long shrinkage of treated
intracellular and extracellular environment. Monopolar
units generate an alternating current that runs from the
tip of the probe to the joint capsule or other surface,
rthroCare
FIGURE 2-39 Unipolcr rodiofrequency unit (Oralec].
fIGURE 2-41
Bipolar rodiofrequency unit (ArthroCare).
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATION19
FIGURE 2-42Bipolar radiofrequency tips (Arthrocarel.
A
B
M
(1or2:150 curete;j, sugical blodesblade nos.11 nd 15);Kbladehnde[1:,18gauge eedes8);M6m syringes
[3): N. 1 2-ml syringes (3l.
20 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
tissues persists. In human orthopedics, the most common 
Right angle probes (1)
use of radiofrequency is in the management of shoulder
Suture scissors (1)
instability in association with rotator cuff injuries. In
Tissue forceps (1)
these cases, the joint capsule of the shoulder is treated,
causing immediate shrinkage of tissue accompanied by
Towel clamps for surgical drapes (8)
increased stability. Although shrinkage of as much as
6-mI. and 12-mL syringes (4 each)
50% can be achieved experimentally, clinical shrinkage
18-gauge needles (4)
is normally 15% to 25%.
In addition to shrinkage, a radiofrequency unit may be
Additional equipment needed for a shoulder or
used to ablate tissues, including proliferative synovium,
elbow pack may include an instrument cannula set.
 Additional equipment for a knee pack may include an
lesions. Routine applications in human orthopedics
include imbrication of the shoulder joint by capsular
egress cannula set.
shrinkage, thermal chondroplasty to remove partial-
thickness cartilage, partial meniscectomy, debridement
Towers
of damaged ligaments, synovectomy, and debridement
Of labral injuries in the shoulder and hip joints.
 An arthroscopic tower is the cart and associated control
Radiofrequency probes were only recently introduced
boxes and monitor. Used carts are often available.
into veterinary arthroscopy and orthopedics; however,
Purchase of a heavy-duty cart is important because the
several useful applications have been identified and
control boxes and monitor are heavy (Fig. 2-44).
 numerous experimental applications are being considered.
In the stifle joint, radiofrequency is used in combination
with power shavers to rapidly remove the fat pad and
permit evaluation of the joint. Radiofrequency probes
also are used to perform partial meniscectomy of torn
meniscus and to debride damaged cranial cruciate
ligaments. Potential uses include imbrication of joint
capsules in combination with other stabilizing techniques
or tibial plateau leveling osteotomy.
Radiofrequency units include a control box, a con-
necting cable, and a tip. Most manufacturers supply the
control box with a contract to purchase a minimum
number of tips. Variations in tip design include shrink
tips versus ablation tips, and tips are available in differ-
ent shapes, sizes, and angles. Tips can be resterilized,
although they cannot be reused if the insulating cover is
B
damaged.
C
Instrumentation Sets
D
 Numerous methods are used to organize arthroscopic
equipment for surgery, but it is important to limit
E
 os ad a  pu si m c a
instrumenrs may be found quickly and easily.
The
F
surgeon may elect to have specifc packs for each type of
joint (i.e., elbow pack, shoulder pack, knee pack) or
G
may choose to have a standard arthroscopy pack, with
other equipment packaged separately. The contents of
these packs must be cleaned and sterilized routinely.
H
A standard arthroscopy pack (Fig. 2-43) includes the
following:
Alligator forceps (1)
 Allis tissue forceps for securing cords (2)
Blade handle (1)
5-0 curette (1)
Grasping forceps (1)
FIGURE 2-44 Arthroscopic lower. A. Monitor; 8, controf box for c
No. 11 and no. 15 blades (2 each)
camera; C. device lo caplure still images: D. videocassette recorder:
E. light source: F. radiofrequency unit; G. fluid pump; H, control box lor
Needle holder
a shover.
ARTHROSCOPIC INSTRUMENTATION I? 21
Suggested Readings
Editors: Arthroscopic irrigation/distention systems. Health Devices
28:242, 1999.
Ogilvie-Harris DJ, Weislander L: Fluid pump systems for
Chamness CJ: Endoscopic instrumentation. In Tams TR (ed): Small
animal endoscopy, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2001, pp. 1-16.
arthroscopy: a comparison of pressure control versus pressure and
flow control. Arthroscopy 11:s91, 2001.
HA 
P
DTEI
R
Arthroscopically Assisted
Surgery c
of the Shoulder Joint
Introduction
structures in the joint and to discuss common conditions
affecting the shoulder joint.
Arthroscopy of the shoulder joint is one of the most
common indications for rigid endoscopy in the dog.
Arthroscopic Surgery of the
Juvenile orthopedic condition (OCD) and diagnostic
arthroscopy (ligament or muscle injury) are two
Shouldar Joint
conditions for which rigid endoscopy is useful. As
veterinary surgeons become more adept with
the
Equipment and Instrumentation.
The surgical table
arthroscope and instrurmentation, new treatment
should be capable of being lowered, raised, and tilted in
modalities will emerge. The advantage of arthroscopy
at least one direction. During shoulder arthroscopy, the
for the shoulder joint is the same as for the other joints:
table should be adjusted to a position that allows the
decreased morbidity, visualization, and the ability
to
surgeon and assistants to hold the arms as close to the
thoroughly inspect the joint. The latter is particularly
body as is possible. The shoulders should be in neutral
evident when one considers the occurrence of ligament
 position, with the elbows close to 90 degrees. This posi-
and soft tissue injuries about the joint.
tion prevents fatigue and improves effciency. The imaging
The specific aims of this chapter are to introduce the
tower is positioned opposite the surgeon for unilateral
reader to the proper placement of portals and manip-
procedures and at the head or end of the surgical table
ulation of the camera and light post used to explore all
for bilateral shoulder procedures (Fig. 3-1). A well-
Tower
Anesthetist
Instrument
table
Anesthesia
machine
FIGURE 3-1  Arrangement o the oper-
qting room for g unilateral procedure. Note
the posilions of he operating tearm and the
monitor. Figure 4-1 shows the arrange
ment of the operating room for α bilateral
shouider prccedure.
Assistant
Surgeon
24 I SMALL ANiMAL ARTHROSCOPY
 organized instrument stand should be within easy reach
motorized shavers. Instruments can be inserted into the
of
joint through an open instrumenr port, instrument
delicate arthroscopy instruments. Fluid ingress
is
cannulas, or a combination of the two. The use of an
achieved with a pressurized gravity bag or an infusion
instrunent cannula requires the availability of cannulas
fluid pump thar is introduced through the arthroscope
of different sizes and switching sticks (see Fig. 3-2B and
cannula (see Chapter 2). Fluid can be evacuated by
C). An assortinent of operating cannulas of different
allowing it to flow freely through the cgress needle (or
diameters and lengths is ideal because the cannula must
working cannula); evacuation of fluid can be assisted
be long enough to enter the joint (e.g., shoulder, hip).
with suction attached to the egress needle (or cannula).
Suction must be set at a low level, or bubbles will be
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
produced that obscure the surgeon's view.
Management.
Preoperative laboratory workup is
A 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is commonly
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
used in the shoulder joint. In most dogs, a 2.7-mm
Most dogs undergoing shoulder arthroscopy are young,
arthroscope is easily inserted into the joint space (Fig.
healthy patients with no underlying systemic problems.
3-2A). In small breeds, the use of a 2.4-mm or a 1.9-mm
These patients require minimal laboratory workup.
arthroscope is suggested to prevent iatrogenic damage
Older dogs should undergo a complete blood screen,
to the cartilage during insertion or manipulation
of
urinalysis, chest radiographs, and electrucardiogram.
the cartilage during surgery. In giant breeds, shoulder
Table 3-1 shows a standard anesthetic protocol, including
arthroscopy can be performed with a 4.0-mm arthro-
prcemptive pain medication. Postoperative pain
is
scope. The larger scope offers superior viewing arca and
controlled with cold therapy, opioids, and nonsteroidal
depth of focus. Whichever size arthroscope is chosen, it
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). If arthroscopy is
is important to consider the outside diameter of the
completed early in the day, the patient may be dismissed
arthroscopic cannula because it too must enter the joint.
from the hospital that same afternoon; if arthroscopy is
-qo sunq e yim py si ejnuu sidoosore qoeg
completed later in the afternoon, the patient is dis-
rator and a sharp trocar. lf a sharp trocar is used, caution
charged the next day. In all cases, during recovery, cold
must be exercised when entering the joint to prevent
therapy is applied to the operative site by alternating
iatrogenic damage to the cartilage. In most cases, it is
15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for rwo applications.
not necessary to use the sharp trocar to enter the joint,
A commercial cold pack or a package of frozen vegetables
and a conical, blunt obturator is recommended.
(e.g, peas) can he used. To increase comfort, a thin
 An assortment of hand instruments is necessary for
layer (e.g., towel, rissue) is placed between the cold pack
shoulder arthroscopy. Recommended are instruments
and the skin surface. The cold pack is applied, followed
to assist in the inspection of intra-articular structures
by layers of towels to insulate the area from surround-
(probes), grasping forceps for removal of free bodies,
ing room temperature. Cold therapy is continued by the
biopsy forceps, and instruments for surface abrasion
client at home for the frst 2 days after surgery, using the
(see Fig. 3-2D to F). Instruments commonly used for
same protocol.
abrasion arthroplasty are handheld burrs, curettes, and
All patients receive preemptive analgesic drugs as part
Of their premedication protocol. Buprenorphine
1S
preferred by this author because of its relatively long
mode of action (6 to 8 hours) and its effectiveness in
patients that experience mild to moderate postoperative
pain. When the dog is dismissed from the hospital,
a
NSAIDs and oral butorphanol (Table 3-2) are dispensed
for administration at home. NSAIDs are continued for
5 days, and butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours.
If the dog remains in the hospital overnight, a second
dose of buprenorphine is administered in the evening.
d
NSAIDs and butorphanol are prescribed for home
administration. Alternate methods of pain management,
such as transdermal fentanyl patches, are available. The
fentanyl patch can be applied the day before surgery.
Patient Preparation and Positioning.
The patient is
clipped and prepared for open shoulder arthrotomy in
case the arthroscopic proccdurc must he aborted for
technical reasons and an open arthrotomy performed.
This situation is most likely
ywhen the surgeon is
beginning to learn arthroscopy. Two methods for linb
preparation are used,
with
1 the choice of method
FIGURE32Insirumentation commonly uscd forshoulder cahrascopy.
depending on the desired level of limb maneuverability.
Arthoscope [a). switching stick Ibl, instrument cannula system (cl. graspers
For maxinum maneuverability of the limb during
[o), small curete lel, ond small handheld burr il.
surgery, a hanging limb preparation is recommended.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT I■ 25
TABLE
3
 Suggested Protocols for General Anesthesia and Preemptive Pain Managetment
PURPOSE
 MEDICATION AND DOSAGE
Premedication
Glycopyrrolate 0.005-0.011 mg/kg SC or IM
or atropine 0.02-0.04 mg/kg SC ar IM
 Preemptive pain management 
Hydromorphone 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
ou 6y/6w g0'0 auizowoidaoo snd wl 1o 5s by/bw 1 0-s0 0 auoydhowkxo jo
to exceed a total dose of I mg SC or IM
Buprenorphine 0.005-0.02 mg7kg IM, SC or IV q 4-8 hr 
Alternalive preemptive pain medication
 Epidural morphine Ipreservalive freel O. 1 mg/kg
with the dose for each drug adjusted to accommodate the total joint volume
Brachial plexus block (bupivacaine, maximum 2 mg/kg)
Induction
Thiopenigl 10-12 mg/kg IV to effect
or propofol 4-6 mg/kg IV ta effeci
Maintenance
Isoflurane, sevoflurane, or halothane
 Postoperative pain management
First 24 hr
administer one of fhe folwing during recovery: singledose IV NSAIDs
 or carprofen 4 mg/kg 
 or meloxicam O.2 mg/kgl Note: None of these are opproved for use in the dog
Or cat in the US.
Morphine 0.4 mg/kg SC or IM q 4-6 hr
Oxymorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC or IM q 4-6 hr
Afer 24 hr
Carprofen 1 mg/lb bid or 2 mg/lb PO qd for 5-7 days
Deracoxib 3-4 mg/kg PO qd lor 5-7 days
Elodolac 5-7 mg/kg PO qd for 5-7 days
Butorphanol O.5 mg/kg PO q 4-6 hr PRN plus NSAID if needed for additional
comfort
IA, inmuscuy; I, ivensy; HSD, nonsteridal aninmmaty drug g, every; SC, sutaneosy.
As the surgeon becomes more experienced and adept at
 procedure if necessary. The dog is positioned in lateral
recuinbency, with the limb to be operated on uppermost
and a lateral limb preparation can be done for each limb
(Fig. 3-4). The limb is supported in a neutral position
(Fig. 3-3). The lateral limb preparation is still done in
(humerus parallel to the ground) or slightly adducted. If
a way that allows the surgeon to perform an open
both limbs need arthroscopic intervention, the dog is
FIGURE 3-3 lateral posilion and
Japnoys iof uooideid quy loeiol
puo peddp s qu eui Adoso
prepared so that a lateral arthrotomy
ppeau j pad aq o
lower limb is supported on a Mayo
sland to keep the shoulder joint in
neutral posifion.
26 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
TABLE
 Suggested Protocol for Postsurgical Rehabilitatian 
PHASE
DURATION AND GOALS
THERAPY
The duration varies with procedures ond
Always assess limb function at she beginning of each session!
cases. The goal is to have the dog bear-
Warm up for 2-4minutes with genile masage and smoil flexion and extension
ing weight with each step while walk-
dnwm au ol pappo s! Adojau loay 's Aop uojuiol panloaui aul jo suawanou 
ing at a normal poce 120 minutes 2-3
session.
times doily].
For the first week, exercise therapy is limited to slow leash walking on a flot surface
for 10 minutes. Teach the dog fo walk beside the owner on a loose lead; do not
let the dog *drag"the owner around for 10 minutes!
It is more dificult for the dog lo "skip" off the leg at a slow pace.] If the dog does
Bal aui buisn lou si bop au Hl 'aood ay mols 'dais yoba ym ybiam 1baq iou
properly the owner can *bait the dog with a lowcalorie freat to allow them lo
waik one step at a lime and keep the dog's mind focused on something other than
the leg!
 Increase the walking lime and pace as the days pass; if, at any lime, the dog skips 
off the leg, return to a slower pace.
If the dog will not bear weight on the leg and no problem is nohed with ihe surgical
 site, a syringe cap can be taped between the fooipads on the normal limb. The
capwill nofhurt the dogbutwil cause anunusual sensalionhamakes thedog
rake weight off the normal limb ond place it on the operated limb.
Alter walking, use cold therapy to provide comfort and prevent rebound sweling.
The exercise session is repeated 2-3 times daily, depending on the clienr's
availability. Between sessions, the dog is confined to a small area and allowed
no free octivity
The duration varies with procedures ond
Always assesslimb function at the beginning of eoch session!
cases. At the end ol phase 2. the dog
should be atble to bear weighr with
Exercisetherapybeginswithawalkatabrisk paceonaneven surfacefor2-3
each step while walking at a brisk pace
or froting for 10 minutes. The exercise
move to o surface of higher grass or brush and walk for 1-2 minutes. The high
surface is high grass or brush.
The
surface is used lo increase the range of joint motion and the endurance of
height of the grass can vary, bur should
muscles. Altenative exercises are swimming, walking in shalow water, and using
be at leas above the carpus or larsus.
 an underwater treadmill.
Ater thewalkingexercises arecompleted, static strength and balance exercises re
initiated. The forelimb muscles are strengthened with g "wheelbarrow" stance
[simply raise the dog's hindquarters and push forward]. The rear limb muscles are
strengihened by dancing [simply raise the dog's Forelimbs and push backword].
A good strength exercise is a "down-to-sit" motion. When moving from a down
posiionsitingposiion,thedogwilpushweighfmtheindquresth
q osayd o um payon ain uodanooid puo aupg ol a asoau
s uuo o bop ay moo puo joq a uo sqwoj jo sqw oa ay ad
position as best as possible.
Afer the exercises re completed, passive srech is aplied.Place thejoint hrough
Soy uoisod a poy voisuaixe jo jwl ayi nv uouow jo sbuoi agouojuos o
seconds; at the limit of flexion, hold the posilion For S seconds. Repeat the possive
 strelch 4--5 times.
This exercise session is repeated 2-3 times daily, depending on the client's
Qvailability. Belween sessions, he dog is confined to a smoll area.
The duration varies berween procedures
Always assess limb fynction at the beginning of each session!
and cases. At the end of phase 3, the
Warm up with heat therapy, massoge, and walking.
dog should be able to undergo con-
Exercise therapy begins with the same exercises as in phase 2: the difference
trolled exercise for 20 minutes and free
between phase 1 and phase 2 is the pace and amount of time spent in each
activity for 10 minutes. No lameness
activilty.
should be noliceable at the end of the
The exercises moy vary, bur each exercise session should inciude activities to
therapy session.
increase range of mofion, strength, endurance, and balance.
rolled over to the opposite side and the second side
biopsy or treatment of joint pathology is needed, then
 prepared for sterile surgery.
an additional instrument portal is required.
The egress portal is established first. Either a hypo-
Portal Sites.
 Two or three portal sites are used for
dermic needle (16- or 18-gauge, 1.5-inch) or an egress
shoulder arthroscopy, depending on the purpose of
cannula (2.4 to 2.7 mm) is used. Most surgeons prefer a
arthroscopic intervention. If visual exploration of the
hypodermic needle. The shoulder is palpated to locate
shoulder joint is all that is required, an egress portal and
the superior ridge of the greater tubercie, and the needle
 an arthroscope portal are necessary. However, if tissue
is inserted at the craniocaudal midpoint of the ridge.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT I 27
FIGURE 3-4  Proper sterile draping
prccedure. A clear adhesive drape is
used to cover the shouider and the dog.
The needle is directed caudally and medially at a 70-
aspirated. In most cases, when the egress portal is
degree angle from the perpendicular (Figs. 3-5, 1; 3-6, a;
properly placed, synovial fluid is easily aspirated. If
and 3-7A). To ensure placement within the joint, a
synovial fluid is not aspirated and the surgeon believes
syringe is attached to the needle and the synovial fluid
that the joint has been entered, lactated Ringer's
Suprascapulara.&n.
Axillarya.&n.
FIGURE 3-5  Position of the porial sites relalive to bony landmarks
FIGURE 3-6  Placement of tho egress needle (o]. arhroscope (bl. and
instrument probe [c) wihin the proper portal sites.
ment poital: 4, portal site for access to the biceps lendon.
28 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
to the needle. It is not advisable to enter the joint with
the scalpel blade because extravasation of fluid outside
the joint cavity is more likely. The needle is removed,
and the arthroscope is inserted with the attached conical
blunt obturator. When the arthroscope cannula is
inserted, the limb should be in neutral position
(humerus parallel to the table) and the assistant should
place slight traction on the limb. These maneuvers make
insertion easier and decrease the likelihood of iatrogenic
damage to the cartilage. When a conical blunt obturator
is used, pressure must be applied to penetrate the joint
capsule. Holding the cannula with the thumb and index
finger approximately 1 inch from the tip prevents
overpenetration into the joint. With experience, the
surgeon will learn to feel when the joint is entered. After
the joinr is entered, the obturator is removed from the
cannula. Fluid will flow freely from the cannula,
confirming correct placement. The fluid ingress line is
attached to the cannula, and the arthroscope is inserted
(see Fig. 3-7B).
The instrument portal is established, if necessary. The
7Surgical preparalion showing the egress needle IA).
craniocaudal and proximodistal positions of the instru-
FIGURE 3-7
arthroscope (Bl, ond instrument IC} in the porial sites relative lo bony
 ment portal relative to the acromium can be estimated
landmarks.
from the lateral radiograph. This site is often approxi-
mately 2 cm caudal and slightly distal to the caudal edge
of the acromium."
These numbers are only estimares,
solution can be instilled into the joint. If the needle is
and vary with the size of the dog and the size of the
located in the joint, fluid is easily instilled. Also, as the
au aenue on ueal 0i isq si ii paen q oi uoii
joint cavity begins to fili with fluid, reverse pressure is
instrumenr portal site relative to the position of the
felt on the syringe plunger from the instilled fluid. This
arthroscope tip within the joint. A 20-gauge, 2- or 3-
pressure also ensures proper placenent of the needle
inch, spinal needle is used as a guide needle to locate the
into the joint. The joint cavity is distended with 10 to
appropriate site for the instrument portal. The guide
12 mL lactated Ringer's solution, and the distension is
needle must penetrate the skin surface at a 75- to 90-
degree angle and maintain this orientation through the
needle (the assistant must maintain pressure on the
soft tissues (see Figs. 3-5C and 3-6C). As the needle
plunger). Distension simplifies correct positioning of the
enters the joint and is seen on the monitor (as long as
arthroscope porral. Once the arthroscope and fluid
the scope and light post are directed toward the point of
ingress are established, the syringe is removed from the
entry), the surgeon can assess the placement of the
needle to allow evacuation of fluid. This evacuation of
 portal relative to the lesion. The needle appears to be
fluid maintains fluid flow through the joint, enhancing
entering at a very oblique angle. This illusion is created
visualization. Intravenous (IV) or suction tubing can be
by the 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope and does not
attached to the needle to capture fluid as it leaves the
reflect the actual penetration angle. The most common
joint. Alternatively, fluid is allowed to spill onto the
reason for failing to locate the appropriate instrument
floor to be captured by a floor suction unit or towels.
 portal site is entering the skin and soft tissue at too
The arthroscope portal is cstablished second.
. The
oblique an angle. When the angie of entry is too oblique,
arthroscope cannula, with the attached trocar, conical
the triangulation needle (to locate the instrument port)
obturato1, or blunt obturator, is inserted first. In most
"crosses" the arthroscope and cannot be visualized on
cases, the conical blunt obturator is used. The proper
the monitor. If the triangulation needle cannot be seen,
position for the arthroscope portal is directly distal or
the needle should be inserted at a different location and
1 to 2 mm cranial to the acromial process of the scapula
at a 75- to 90-degree angle to the skin surface.
(see Figs. 3-5,2 and 3-6,b). The acromium is located,
After the appropriare site for the instrument portal is
and the space just craniodistal to its border is palpated.
confirmed by observation of the needle on the monitor,
A 20-gauge (1.5-inch) needle is used to confirm the
the portal site is prepared as appropriate for the surgery
position. The needle is inserted perpendicular to the
being performed. For example, to remove loose carti-
skin surface, and this orientation is maintained through
lage_associated with an osteochondritis dissecans
the soft tissues as the needle enters the joint. Iactated
(OCD) lesion, a no. 11 Bard-Parker scalpel blade can
Ringer's solution (previously used to distend the joint)
be inserted adjacent to the needle. The opening can then
flows through the needle once the joint is entered,
be enlarged with Metzenbaum scissors or a series of
marking the point of entry for the arthroscope. A no. 11
cannulas of increasing diameter (see Fig. 3-7C).
Bard-Parker blade is used to make a small entry wound
Alternatively, the surgeon may reduce the size of the
through the skin and the superficial soft tissues adjacent
cartilage flap with curettes or an arthroscopic knife
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT II 29
inserted through a cannula. If different-sized cannulas are
orientation on the monitor. Orientation is correct when
needed, a switching stick is used to change the cannulas.
the monitor shows right to the right, left to the left,
ventral down, and dorsal up. The fore-oblique direction
Surgical Anatomy.  Because it is a ball-and-socket
is dependent on the surgeon's preference, but most
joint, the shoulder joint is well suited for movement in
prefer to initially view 30 degrees down (with the light
all directions. Although ir is capable of movement in all 
post in the dorsal position). Proper spatial orientation
directions, however, the shoulder primarily moves
in
 and the fore-oblique view are obtained when the buttons
flexion and extension. Joint stability is provided through
 on the camera head are upright and the light post is in
a combination of passive and active mechanisms. Passive
the upright position. With the camera and light post in
mechanisms include the medial and lateral glenohumeral
this position, the initial view will be just cranial to the
ligaments, surrounding joint capsule, joint conformation,
apex of the humeral head dome. Often, the tip of the
and synovial fluid cohesion. The medial collateral liga-
arthroscope initially lies close to the medial joint capsule,
ment (MCL) commonly appears as a Y-shaped figure,
giving a view of soft tissue only. The arthroscope is
with the cranial arm coursing caudally from its origin at
slowly retrieved to visualize the articular cartilage of the
the medial surface of the supraglenoid tubercle (Fig.
humeral head. Once the articular surface of the humleral
3-8). The caudal arm of the MCL originates from the
head is identified, spatial orientation is easier to achieve.
medial surface of the scapular neck and joins the cranial
As the surgeon views straight ahead (medially), the
arm to insert onto the humeral neck. The lateral
cranial arm of the MCL, subscapularis tendon of inser-
collateral ligament (LCL) originates from the lateral rim
tion, and medial joint capsule are visible (Fig. 3-9A).
of the glenoid and extends ventrally to insert onto thc
The position of the camera head is maintained, and
humerus at the caudal region of the greater rubercle (see
the light post is rotated to the ventral position to view
Fig. 3-8). The joint capsule originates from the periphery
the articular surface of the medial glenoid (Fig. 3-10A
of the glenoid cavity. Medially, the joint capsule forms a
and B). Next, the light post is rotated caudally and the
synovial recess because it is attached several millimeters
camera head is moved slightly caudal to visualize the
proximal to the glenoid rim. The concavity of the glenoid
Cranial compartment of the shoulder. As the light post is
and the fit of the humeral head into the glenoid provide
turned ventrally, the origin of the biceps tendon is seen
joint stability, particularly when compression across the
(Fig. 3-11A and B). As the light post is rurned dorsally,
joint is enhanced by active muscle contraction. Dynamic
the tendon is seen as it courses down the bicipital groove
active glenohumeral stabiliry is provided by contraction
(Fig. 3-12A and B). As the arthroscope tip is moved
of the surrounding cuff muscles. These include the
cranial and lateral to the hiceps tendon and the light post
biceps brachi muscle, subscapularis muscle, teres minor
is turned, the joint compartment cranial to the biceps
muscle, supraspinatus muscle, and infraspinatus muscle.
tendon is seen (see Fig. 3-12C).
Active contraction of all or selective cuff muscles induces
The arthroscope and light post are rerurned to the
compression across the shoulder joint and increases
original entry position to begin exploration of the
tension in the joint capsulc.
caudal compartment of the joint. The camera head is
When the arthroscope enters the joint, the camera
moved cranially and the light post adjusted to view the
ds radod siand se ain e u puod si
articular surface of the caudal gienoid (light post is
moved ventrally) or the articular surface of the humeral
head (light post is moved dorsally; Fig. 3-13A and B).
The tip of the arthroscope is moved medially to view the
medial compartment between the humeral head and
joint capsule.
The limb is abducted and then adducted to allow
inspection of the medial joint capsule. The operator
gently advances the tip of the arthroscope caudally and
rotates the light post to view the caudal, medial, and
lateral surfaces of the humeral head. Often, the assistant
must adjust the limb position to make inspection easier.
MCI
The tip of the arthroscope is advanced along the caudal
LCL
slope of the humeral head until the caudal and medial
gutters are visualized. The capsular recess is adjacent to
the inscrtion of the joint capsule onto the humeral head
(Fig. 3-14A and B). The camera head and light post are
returned to the original entry position. The arthroscope
is slowly withdrawn to visualizc the lateral joint com-
partment (Fig. 3-15A). The light post is adjusted to view
the latcral articular surface of the glenoid and humeral
head, craniolateral joint capsulc, and caudolateral joint
capsule. Caution must be used when viewing the lateral
FIGURE 3-8 Ventral view of fhe gross anatorly ol the shoulder joint.
joint compartments because the tip of the arthroscope is
Note the posilion cf the medial colloteral ligarerl [MCl] ard lateral
colloteral ligoment (LCL].
easily displaced from the joint, and extravasation of
30 ?? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
a
b
C
d
A
B
FIGURE 3-9 A. Arthroscopic view
of the craniomedial compartmenr cf tne
shoulder joint. Glenoid (o]. cran:a arm
cf the medial collateral ligcment (MCL)
[b]. subscapularis tendon Icl. cnd
humeral head (d]. B, Arrhroscopic view
of the cen*romedial compartment of ne
shoulaer jain. Glenoid lal, certromedic!
orea of the MCL (bl. and humeral hecc
Icl. C, Arhroscopic view of the caudo-
medial compartiment o: the shiouler
joint.Glenoid (o).cadomedaeo
of the MCL [b]. and humeral heod Ici.
D. Arthroscopic view of the cranial com
 pariment of the shoulder cint. Cranial
arm of the MCL (al. insertion of e
subscapularis tendor (bl. and numeral
D
head (c).
fluid is more likely when the tip of the arthroscope is in
shoulder arthroscopy include OCD, bicipital tenosyn-
the lateral compartment. For this reason, the lateral
ovitis, shoulder instability (e.g, joint capsule or liga-
 compartment is usually inspected last.
ment tears), and diagnostic examination (e.g., biopsy of
bone, cartilage, or the soft tissue cnvelope).
Indications for Arthroscopic
Surgery of the Shoulder Joint
Osteochondritis Dissecans
OCD is a manifestation of osteochondrosis in which
Arthroscopy is a relatively new treatment modality
a fragment of cartilage is lifted from the articular surface.
in small animal surgery, and numerous indications
Osteochondrosis is thought to result from a disturbance
for shoulder arthroscopy are described in the lirerarure.
in endochondral ossification. Aberrant endochondral
As small animal surgeons become more adept
at
ossification leads to multiple areas of cartilage islands
arthroscopy, it will be used to trear more conditions,
on1
the surface and within the humeral epiphysis
 either alone or as an assistive modality. Indications for
that have not undergone normal maturation to bone
A
FIGURE 3-10  A. Arthroscopic
view of the mediocentral glencid.
Mediocenral glenoid [a) and cianicl
arm of the medial colioteral ligament
[b]. B. Arnhroscopic view of the central
glenoid. Mediccentral glenoid lo) and
cranial arm of the media. collaeral
B
ligament [b].
A
FIGURE 3-11A. Arthroscopic
view of the biceps origin. Supraglenoid
tuberosity [ol. labral origin of the
biceps ibi. and biceps tendon (c).
B. Arthroscopic view of the biceps
origin. Supraglenoid luberosily lal and
fateraf labial origin of the biceps (b].
B
32 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
FIGURE 3-12 A. Ar:hroscopic
view of the biceps tendon The biceos
tendon as it courses into the bicpital
groove (ol. B, Arthroscopic view of the
Craniomedial compartment. Biceps
tendon [a). inserlion of the subscapu-
laris tengon [bj. and craniomediai joint
b
capsule (c). C. Arthroscopic. view cf the
craniomedial  compartment.  Crorial
B
copsule (b). and biceps tendon (c).
FIGURE 3-13 A, Arthroscopic view
of the caudocentral humeral head.
Coudal arm of she medial collateol
ligoment iol and bumeral heac [5j].
B. Arhroscopic view of the caucal
B
hurmeral head. Humeral head (co) cnd
mediol joini capsule (bl.
FIGURE 3-14
A, Arthroscopic
view of the caudal humerai head.
Humeral head [o] and coudomedial
joint capsule (bl. B. Arthroscopic view
of the medial gulter. Humerol head (c)
and media! gulter [b].
B
(Fig. 3-16). Zones of abnormal ossifcation lead to
History and Signalment.
 Large and giant breed dogs
increased thickness of the articular cartilage and are
are commonly affected, and males are more often affected
susceptible to fissure and loosening. The abnormal
than females. Clinical signs often develop between 4 and
cartilage may fissure as the deeper chondrocytes
8 months of age; however, some dogs may not present
undergo necrosis as a result of an inadequate nutrient
for evaluation until they are mature or middle-aged.
supply. The peripheral area of thickened cartilage
Affected animals are presented for examination because
 separates because of increased local shear stress. As a
 of unilateral forelimb lameness. Owners usually report
result, a loose fragment of cartilage elevates into the
a gradual onset of lameness thar improves after rest and
joint or completely detaches from the underlying bone.
worsens after exercise.
Free cartilage becomes lodged in the caudomedial joint
pouch or, less commonly, adjacent to the biceps tendon.
Physical Examination Findings.
 On physical exami-
Despite unilateral lameness, this condition is often
nation, the shoulder is palpated and moved through
bilateral.
a complete range of motion. Crepitation or palpable
a
FIGURE 3-15 A, Arthroscopic view of the
lateral colateral ligament. Lateral collaterol liga-
ment [a), insertion of the loteral collateral liga-
ment onto the glenoid rim (bl. and glenoid (c).
34 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
panosteitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy, bicipital
tenosynovitis, and shoulder instability, can occur con-
currenrly with shoulder OCD. The diagnosis of OCD is
based on signalment and history and physical findings,
 and confrmed radiographically.
Treatment.  Medical treatment of OCD consists of
anti-inflammatory medication and moderate exercise.
An carly hypothesis of treatment was that exercise would
dislodge tht catilage flap that would then undergo
enzymatic resorption. One difficulty with this hypothesis
is thar the inflammatory process cannot distinguish
berween normal cartilage and the dislodged carrilage
flap. Additionally, ongoing inflammation could lead to
osteoarthritis. Surgical intervention is the treatment of
choice. Nevertheless, conscrvative management may be
necessary if financial constraints preclude surgical inter-
vention. Removal of loose or dislodged cartilage coupled
with curettage or microfracture of the lesion bed leads
to an excellent prognosis for return of clinical function.
FIGURE 3-16 Comouted toriogrophy of a shculder diagnosed with
Anesthetic Considerations and  Perioperative Pain
csleochondritis dissecons. Note the iocio ucen' zore exiending trom: the
Management. Most dogs with shoulder OCD are young,
sisydirda ciauny ay oui doop ooouns
healthy patients, and require minimal preoperative labo-
ratory screening. Table 3-1 shows a standard anesthetic
protocol, including preemptive pain medication.
swelling of the joinr is seldom cvident, but affected
animals may exhibit pain when the shoulder is moved
into hyperextension or extreme flexion. Often the
examiner detects muscle atrophy of the forelimb when
muscle mass is lost adjacent to the spine of the scapula.
Diffcrcntial Diagnosis.   The differential diagnosis
includes osteochondrosis, bicipital renosynovitis, shoulder
instability, ostcoarthritis, panosteitis, and elbow
dysplasia.
Radiographic Findings. Despite apparent lameness
in one limb, both shoulders are radiographed. Sedation
may be required to obtain quality radiographs, particu-
larly in large, hyperactive dogs. The earliest radiographic
sign of OCD is flattening of the caudal humeral head
(Fig. 3--17). This flattening is caused by thickening of
the articular cartilage and deviation of the subchondral
bone line. As the disease progresses, a saucer-shaped
radiolucent area in the caudal humeral head may be
visualized. Calcifcation of the flap may allow visuali-
zation of the flap, either in situ or within the joint, if it
has detached from the underlying bone. In chronic
cases, large, calcifed joint mice are often observed in
the caudoventral joint pouch or craniaily within the
bicipital groove. (
Osteophytes are occasionally noted
adjacent to the bicipital groove or the caudal region of
shows multiple areas of abnormal ossifcation through-
out the epiphysis.
Diagnosis. A complete orthopedic cxamination is
essential because other juvenile orthopedic conditions,
FlGURE 3-17 Laterol rodiogiaphic projeclion of the shoulaer joint
such as elbow dysplasia [fragmented medial coronoid
'n a case with osteochcnditis dissecans. Nole the flattening and the
process (FCP) or ununited anconeal process (UAP)],
radiclucent zore oi the caudal hurmeral heaa.
Surgical Intervention. S
Surgery is the treatinent of
 and pushed, the fragment may break off as a single large
choice. Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed
piece. In many cases, it breaks off and is removed in two
earlier. With the advent of arthroscopy, both shoulders
Or three sections (Fig. 3-20). Whether the fragment is
are treated at the same time if the condition is bilateral.
removed as one large section or two or three smaller
The operative site is clipped and prepared according
sections, the surgeon must be careful when extracting it
to the amount of limb maneuverability desired during
through the capsule opening. If the opening is not large
surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides the greatest
enough or if the surgeon does not have a firm hold on
degree of freedom for manipulating limb position. A
the fragment, it may slip from the forceps and become
lateral limb preparation allows less maneuverability, but
a free joint mouse. Removing a free fragment often
requires less time and provides a more cosmetic appcar-
ance (see Fig. 3-4). Even with a lateral lirmb preparation,
As an alternative to the open portal, the surgeon may
liberal clipping and thorough sterile preparation are
choose to work through an instrument cannula. If so,
needed because an open arthrotomy may be required. In
the small instrument cannula with a sharp trocar is
most cases, a 2.7-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope
inserted inro the joinr adjacent to the guide needle.
is used. Basic instrumentation includes probes to inspect
Larger cannulas are placed with the use of switching
the cartilage surface or help raise a cartilage flap, graspers
sticks, but the smallest instrument cannula through
to remove the cartilage flap, and a hand curette or hand
which the surgeon can treat the lesion is used. A hand
burr to prepare the lesion bed (see Fig. 3-2A to F). If the
curette, hand burr, or motorized shaver is passed through
surgeon chooses to work through an instrument cannula,
the cannula and used to break the cartilage flap into
different-sized cannulas and switching sticks facilitate
small pieces. In most cases, the pieces are small enough
surgery. A motorized shaver can be helpful, but is not
to flow out the instrument cannula. lf a piece is to0
essential for arthroscopic debridement of the lesion bed.
large to pass freely through the cannula, small grasping
The dog is positioned in lateral recumbency, with the
forceps are inserted and used to capture the fragment.
leg to be operated on uppermost. The limb is supported
The fragment is pulled next to the instrument cannula,
in neutral position to prevent excessive adduction or
and the cannula and forceps are removed at the same
abduction, which will close the joint line between the
time. The instrument port is reestablished by placing a
glenoid and humeral head.
switching stick and then the cannula into the joint. The
Egress is established with a needle or cannula, lactated
Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint, and the
pieces until the cartilage thar lines the periphery of the
arthroscope site is established (see Fig. 3-7B).
The
lesion bed is frmly attached to the underlying sub-
arthroscope is insertcd, and ingress flow is established
chondral bone.
through the arthroscope cannula. The medial compart-
Occasionally, the cartilage fragment is no longer
ment is inspected for evidencc of inflammation, followed
attached at the lesion periphery. When this occurs, the
by inspection of the cranial compartment. The region of
fragment is most commonly located in the medial joint
the biceps tendon is thoroughly inspected for inflam-
recess (Fig. 3-21B to D). The free fragment is retricved
mation and the presence of free cartilage pieces (Fig.
before the lesion bed is addressed. As surgery timc
3-18B). The camera head and light post are positioned
 passes, the joint villa becomes increasingly inflamed and
to identify and determine the extent of the OCD lesion
may obscure vision adjacent to the joint capsule.
To
(see Fig. 3-18C to E). The arthroscope is placed such
capture the free fragment, fluid ingress is increased and
that the lesion is clearly visible, and a guide needle is
the instrument cannula is positioncd to serve as
used to triangulate the position for the instrument port
vacuum. The free fragment moves in the direction of
(see Fig. 3--18G). The most common reason for failing
fluid outflow. Once the fragment is seen, the ingress
to visualize the guide needle inside the joint is "crossing"
flow is slowed, and graspers are inserted through the
the arthroscope. Once the position for the instrument
instrument cannula. Care must be taken to ensure that
portal is established, the surgeon must decide whether
the opening, in the
joint capsuie will accommodate
to work through an open instrument portal,
an
extraction of the free fragment. If possible, the fragment
instrument cannula, or a combination of the two. If the
is grasped and rwisted on its long axis; most times, the
surgeon chooses to work through an open portal site, a
fragment has lost flexibility and does not roll. If the
no. 11 Bard-Parker scalpel blade is uscd to make a 0.5-
fragment is located too far cranially to allow access
to 1-cni soft tissue tunnel adjacent to the guide needle
through a caudal instrument port, the surgeon must
(Fig. 3-19). Small Metzenbaurn scissors can be used to
switch the arthroscope and instrument portals. The
enlarge the opening through the joint capsule. If the
cranial instrument port will allow acccss to fragments
cartilage fragment is still attached {usually cranial or
that are displaced in the craniomedial recess or those
medial), a probe or elevator is inserted ro begin freeing
adjaccnt to the biceps tendon.
the edge of the fragment. The fragment is not freed con-
Whether an open portal or an instrument cannula is
pletely bur is left attached at one site. Grasping forceps
used to facilitate removal of the cartilage flap, treatment
are inserted and used to hold the cartilage fragment.
of the lesion bed is best accomplished through an instru-
To facilitate removal of the fragmcnt, the forceps are
ment cannuia. If the surgeon has worked through an
twisted to fold the fragment along its long axis. Pushing
 open portal to remove the cartilage flap, an instrument
the cartilage fragment forward helps to break any
cannula must be inserted over a switching stick. The
remaining peripheral artachment. When it is twisted
surface of the lesion must be treated with abrasion or
36I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
一
FIGURE 3-18 A. Arhroscopic
view  of the caudocentral humeral
head. Caudal arm of the medial
colloteral  ligament  loi  and  humeral
head (b}. 8. Armroscopic view of the
biccps region in o cose with osteo-
chondritis dissecans IOCDl. Nate the
 fragment of free cartilage adjacent to
the biceps lendon. Biceps lendon_c)
gng Fragment of ree carilage ib). C t
E. Arthroscopic view of an OCD lesion
in situ. F, Arthroscopic. view of an OCD
lesion in which the cartilage flap has
broken free. G, Arthroscopic view of a
triangulation needle entering the jcint to
locate a silte for the instrumient poral
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT I?? 37
FIGURE 3-19  Arthroscopic view of a no. 11 scalpel plade cnlering
FIGURE 3-20 Arthiroscopic view of a grasping forceps hoiding free
the joint to establish on open instr urment portoi.
carlilage (ssociated with an osleochonoritis dissecans tesion,
B
FIGURE 3-21  A. Arthroscopic view
of the mecical gutter. Humeral head lai
and medial gutter (b]. B to D, Arthro-
showing fiugments of Ffree cafilage.
D
38  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
against the inside of his own elbow for 30 seconds to
ensure that it is not too hot. Then the warm pack is
placed over the animal's shoulder area for 10 minutes.
Afterward, the warm pack is removed and gentle flexion
and extension movements of the shoulder joint are
 begun. Thc owner is instructed to begin with small move-
ments and gradually increase movements to the limit of
comfort over a 1- to 2-minute period. At the limit of
comfort, the joint is held in position for 10 seconds. The
motion and stretch exercise is repeated five times two or
three times daily. ln addition, the owner should examine
FIGURE 3-22
Arthroscopic view (er (ure:tagc of the lesion. Note
the porral sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
Ine: small pleedirng vesses ini te lesion bed.
Exercise is limited to controlled walking on a leash
for the first 4 weeks after surgery. Dogs undergoing
arthroscopy will use the affected leg immediately after
microfracture techniques (Fig. 3-22). Surface abrasion is
surgery. To increase the weightbearing load on the limbs,
performed with a hand curette, hand burr, or motorized
walking at a slow pace is recommended. As postopera-
shaver. The surgeon continues to abrade the surface until
tive time increases, the pace can be hastencd. To increase
the underlying bone bleeds freely. Ir may be necessary to
the range of motion in the shoulder when walking, ask
stop the ingress fluid to observe the extent of bleeding
the client to walk the dog in high grass (e.g., weeds).
bone. Although it is important to avoid abrading the
thereby forcing the dog to pick up the feet and step
surface too aggressively, abrasion should continue until
high with the legs. After 4 wecks, the owner should begin
bleeding is observed throughour the lesion surface. A
limited amounts of free activity with controlled walk-
microfracture pick and mallet are used to treat the lesion
ing, starting with 5minutes of free activity and increasing
bed with this technique. The point of the microfracture
to 30 minutes over the next 2 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks,
pick is positioned, and the handle is tapped with the
free activity is gradually increased to normal levels. If
mallet until the point impales the surface to a depth of
during any exercise period (controlled or free activity),
1 to 2 mm. After surface abrasion or microfracture is
the dog becomes sore at the end of the exercise period
completed, small bone or cartilage fragments are flushed
or is sore the next day, the owner should decrease the
from the joint by increasing the ingress flow and allow-
 pace and return to controlled activity for 2 to 3 days.
ing egress through a large instrument cannula. The joint
is inspected for remaining bone or cartilage fragmenrs
Complications.
Complications are unusual after
and the arthroscope and instrument cannula are removed.
shoulder arthroscopy. Occasionally, in the immediate
Finally, the portals are sutured with nonreactive, non-
postoperative period, excessive fluid extravasation occurs
absorbable suture material.
and results in swollen soft tissues around the shoulder.
This fluid resorbs within the first 24 hours. Residual mild
 Postoperative Care. Cold therapy is applied to the
swelling adjacent to the portal sites may be noticeable
shoulder during rccovery to provide pain relief and
for the frst 48 hours.
reduce swelling. Cold therapy is applied by alternating
15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for two applications.
Prognosis.  The prognosis for normal limb function
Commercial cold packs or a commercial circulating
with OCD of the shoulder is good. After surgery, most
cold water pack can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped
dogs become sound within 4 to 8 weeks. In one srudy of
in a towel or packs of frozen vegetables can he used. To
44 shoulders treated with open arthrotomy to remove
increase comfort, a thin towel is placed next to the skin
cartilaginous flaps, 75% had excellent function and
surface before the ice pack is positioned. Next, a thick
22.5% had good function on long-term evaluation
laycr of towels is placed to prevent loss of cold to the
(Rudd, Whitehair, Margolis, 1990).
environment. If the dog is dismissed from the hospital
the day of surgery, NSAIDs and oral butorphanol (see
Table 3-2) are dispensed for administration at home. If
Bicipital Tenosynovitis
the dog remains in the hospital ovcrnight, buprenorphine
is administered in the evening and NSAIDs and butor-
Bicipital tenosynovitis is an inflammation of the
phanol are dispensed for administration at home.
biceps brachi tendon and its surrounding synovial
NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, whereas butorphanol
sheath. It is caused by either direct or indirect trauma to
is discontinued after 48 hours. Cold therapy is continued
the bicipital tendon or tendon sheath. Direct trauma
by the client at home for the initial 2 days after surgery
from repetitive injury may be an inciting factor and may
using the protocol described earlier. After the surgical
cause partial or complete tearing of the tendon. Indirect
swelling is gone (48 to 72 hours), the owner should begin
trauma as a result of proliferative fbrous connective
heat therapy and passive motion and stretch exercises.
tissue, osteophytes, or adhesions betwecn the tendon
The owner should apply moist heat to the shoulder region
and sheath limit motion and cause pain. Mineralization
with a commercial heat pack or moistened warm towel.
 of the supraspinatus tendon also may cause secondary
The owner should be instructed to hold the warm pack
mechanical bicipital tenosynovitis.
History and Signalment.  Affected dogs are usually
these results, initiating treatinent with one or two steroid
medium to large and middle-aged or older Working and
injections is a reasonable approach. If the outcome is
active dogs are more commonly affected, and there is no
not favorable, surgical intervention is advised; if steroids
predisposition for either sex. Intermittent or progressive
had been used previously, white intra-articular deposits
forelimb lameness that worsens after exercise is common.
may be present.
The owner may relate the lameness to trauma, but
usually there is slow onset of clinical signs.
Anesthctic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
Management. Preoperative laboratory workup is
Physical Examination Findings.H
Forelimb lameness
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
is usually evident, The animal is weightbearing, but is
Young, healthy patients with no underlying systemic
visually lame during ambulation. Pain may be elicited
during direct palpation over the bicipital tendon, espe-
dogs should undergo a complete blood screen, urinalysis,
cially with flexion and rotation of the shoulder joint.
chest radiographs, and electrocardiogram. Table 3-1
Atrophy of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles
shows a standard anesthetic protocol, including pre-
may be palpable.
 emptive pain medication.
Differential Diagnosis.
. The differential diagnosis
Surgical Intervention.
Portal sites and surgical
includes acute or chronic strain of the supraspinatus
 anatomy were discussed earlier. The operative site is
tendon, shouider instability, OCD, calcifying tendinopathy
clipped and prepared as necessary to provide the desired
of the biceps tendon, and elbow dysplasia.
amount of limb maneuverability during surgery.
A
hanging limb preparation provides the greatest degree
Radiographic Findings. Radiographic views should
off
freedom for manipulating limb position. Liberal
include standard lateral projections of both shoulders.
clipping and thorough sterile preparation are necessary
A craniocaudal projection of the humerus with the
because an open arthrotomy may be required. In most
shoulder flexed (skyline view) can be used to identify
cases, a 2.7-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is
the bicipital groove. Bone proliferation or resorption of
used. Basic instrumentation includes probes to inspect
the supraglenoid tuberosity at the origin of the biceps
the biceps tendon and a handheld cutting instrument
tendon indicates inflammation at the origin of the biceps
to release the tendon. If the surgeon chooses to work
tendon. This inflammation is usually caused by complete
through an instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas
or partial rupture of the biceps tendon. Calcification of
and switching sticks facilitate the surgery. A motorized
the biccps tendon sheath or osteophytes in the inter-
shaver can be helpful to debride synovial proliferation,
tubercular groove may be evident. Arthrography can be
but it is not essential. The dog is positioned in lateral
used to outline the tendon and show irregularities
and
    i    
flling defects that suggest synovial hyperplasia, tendon
The limb is supported in neutral position to prevent
rupture, and joint mice. Caution must be exercised when
excessive adduction, which will ciose the joinr line
interpreting the finding of mineralization adjacent to the
between the glenoid and humeral head.
bicipital groove as being within the biceps tendon
Egress is established with a needle or cannula, and
sheath. More often, mineralization in this area involves
lactated Ringer's solution is instiled to distend the joint.
the tendon of insertion of the supraspinatus muscle.
A guide needle is used to locate the joint line and correct
the position for the arthroscope portal. The surgeon
Diagnosis. A complete orthopedic examination is
may find it beneficial to establish the arthroscope portal
essential because other orthopedic conditions may be
more caudal than the standard position when operating
found concurrently with bicipital tendon injury. OCD,
on the cranial shoulder joint. To place the arthroscope
elbow dysplasia (FCP, UAP), panosteitis, hypertrophic
portal more caudal, a site 0.5 to 1 cm caudal to the
osteodystrophy, and acute or chronic strain of the
acromium is used. The arthroscope is inserted, and
supraspinatus tendon are some of these conditions. The
ingress flow is established through the arthroscope
diagnosis of bicipital tendon injury is based on signal-
cannula. The arthroscope and light post are positioned
ment and history, physical findings, and radiographic
to visualize the cranial compartment. The origin of the
appcarance consistent with acute or chronic bicipital
biceps tendon is inspected for partial or complete tears,
and the bicipital groove is inspected for fibrous prolifer-
evident in contrast to the opposite normal limb. The
ation and osteophyte formation (Fig. 3-23A to C). The
diagnosis is confirmed through direct visualization
arthroscope is positioned such that the biceps tendon is
during arthroscopy.
clearly visible, and the guide needle is used to triangu-
late the position for the instrumcnt port. The instrument
Treatment.
Both medical and surgical approaches
port is located either just cranial to the acromium
are successful in the treatment of bicipital tenosynovitis.
(cranial to the arthroscope portal) or medial to the
Medical treatment consists of injecting methylpred-
lateral humeral tuberosity over the proximal bicipital
nisolone acetate into the tendon sheath and restricting
 groove. The latter is shown as portal position 4 in
activity for 3 weeks. In one report, Stobie (1995) reported
Figure 3-5. The guide needle is visualized as it enters the
that the outcome was good to excellent in 50% of dogs
joint. Once the position for the instrument portal is
treated medically and in all dogs treated surgically. Given
established, the surgeon must decide whether to work
40 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
a
A
FIGURE 3-23A. Arthroscooic view
of the biceps origin.  Supraglenoid
tuberosity [o]. laoral origin cf the biceps
(bl. and biceps tendon [ct. 8, Arthro
scopice v ew of an irjurec bceps tendor.
Ncie the irayed appearance o the
ligament. C. Arrhroscopic vicw of ar
B
injured biceps tendon. Note me slum.ps
of complete ligament tear.
through an open instrument portal, an instrument
the standard technique, but recent clinical experience
cannula, or a combination of the two. If the surgeon
 indicates that it is not necessary.
chooses to work through an open portal site, a no. 11
Bard-Parker scalpel blade is used to make a 0.5- to 1-cm
Postoperative Care. Cold therapy is applied to the
soft tissue tunnel adjacent to the guide needle. Blunt
shoulder during recovery to relieve pain and reduce
dissection with a pair of small Metzenbaum scissors may
swelling. Cold therapy is applied by alternating 15
be used to establish or enlarge the instrument portal. A
probe is inserted through the instrument portal to allow
Commercial cold packs or a commercial circulating
inspection of the biceps tendon and surrounding soft
cold water pack can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped
tissue. A motorized shaver may be inserted through the
in a towel or frozen packs of vegetables can be used.
instrument portal to debride synovial and tendon hyper-
 If the dog is dismissed from the hospiral the day of
plasia. The bicipital tendon may show partial tearing of
surgery, NSAIDs and oral burorphanol are dispensed
either the tendon fbers or the fibrocartilaginous origin
for administration at home. If the dog remains in the
of the biceps tendon at the supraglenoid tuberosity. If
hospital overnight, buprenorphine is administered in
the biceps tendon shows evidence of partial or complete
 the evening and NSAIDs and butorphanol are dispensed
tearing, the tendon is released from its origin at the
for administration at home. NSAIDs are continued for
supraglenoid tuberosity. Likewise, if there is evidence of
5 days, but butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours.
synovial proliferation, mineralization, and osteophyte
Cold therapy is continued by thc client at home for the
formation within the bicipital groove, the tendon is
first 2 days after surgery using the protocol described
released from its origin. Tendon release may be per-
earlier. After the surgical swelling is gone (48 to 72
formed with a blade instrument (e.g., banana knife, no.
hours), the owner should begin heat therapy and passive
11 scalpel blade), motorized shaver, or radiofrequency
motion and stretch exercises. For post-op rehabilitation,
unit. After the tendon is released, the joint is flushed by
         
increasing the ingress flow and allowing fluid egress
shoulder region with a commercial heat pack or
through a large instrument cannula. The joint
IS
moistened warm towel. The owner should hold the
inspected for remaining pathology, and the arthroscope
warm pack against the inside of her own elbow for
and instrument cannula are removed. The portals
6are
qn 1auy ‘oy oo1 1ou sl 1! re ainsua o1 spuosas 00
sutured with nonreactive, nonabsorbable suture material.
owner places the warm pack over the dog's shoulder
Some surgeons make a small craniomedial incision for
area for 10 minutes. Afterward, the owner removes the
bicipital tendon tenodesis; others do not. Tenodesis is
warm pack and begins gentle flexion and extension
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT I? 41
movements of the shoulder joint. These exercises begin
can be affected, and either medial or lateral instability
with small movements, gradually increasing moverments
 may be present. In one series (Barder, 2000), the ages of
to the limit of comfort over a 1- to 2-minute period.
the dogs ranged from 18 months to 13 years, with a
At the limit of comfort, the joint is held in position for
mean of 5 years.
10 seconds. The motion and stretch exercise is repeated
five times. Additionally, the client should examine the
Physical Examination Findings. Gait analysis may
portal sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
show obvious lameness; more often, however, lameness
Exercise is limited to controlled waiking on a leash
is difficult to detect during walking or trotting and is
for the first 4 weeks after surgery. Dogs undergoing
apparent oniy after exercise. Pain on manipulation of
arthroscopy use the affected leg imnediately after
the shoulder and muscle atrophy are evident in most
surgery. To increase the weightbearing load on the limb,
cases. In toy breeds, circumduction of the shoulder may
walking at a slow pace is recommended. As postoperative
elicit subluxation. Circumduction rarely elicits insta-
time increases, the pace can be hastened. To increase the
bility of the shoulder in large breeds. Examination with
range of motion in the shoulder when walking, the
anesthesia shows a side-to-side difference in abduction/
client should walk the dog in high grass (e.g., weeds),
adduction sta bility and craniocaudal stability. To perform
shallow water, or sand, thus forcing the dog to pick up
an abduction/adduction test, the animal is placed in
the feet and step high with the legs. After 4 weeks, the
lateral recumbency. The elbow and shoulder joints are
 owner should begin limited amounts of free activity with
positioned in extension, and the scapula is stabilized
controlled walking, starting with 5 minutes free activity
with one hand. With the limb in extension, an abduction
and increasing to 30 minutes free activity over the next
force (upward) is exerted on the limb, followed by an
2 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks, free activity is gradually
adduction force (downward). If the joint is unstable,
increased to normal levels. If the dog becomes sore
excessive abduction or adduction is present relative to
during any exercise period (controlled or free activity)
the normal contralateral side. To perform a craniocaudal
or is sore the next day, the owner should decrease the
stabiliry test, one hand is positioned to stabilize the
pace and return to controlled activity for 2 to 3 days.
scapula and the other hand is placed to exert a cranio-
caudal force on the shoulder joint. The normal shoulder
Complications.
 Complications are unusual after
is compared with the affected shoulder to detect
shoulder arthroscopy. Occasionally, in the immediate
abnormal craniocaudal translation.
postoperative period, excessive fluid extravasation occurs
and leads to swollen soft tissues around the shoulder.
Differential Diagnosis.  The differential  diagnosis
This fluid resorbs within the first 24 hours. Residual
includes OCD, bicipital tenosynovitis, and acute or
 mild swelling adjacent to portal sites may be noticeable
chronic strain of the supraspinatus tendon.
for the first 48 hours.
Radiographic Findings.  Radiographic views should
Prognosis.
 The prognosis for normal limb function
include standard lateral projections of both shoulders.
with bicipital tenosynovitis of the shoulder is dependent
The findings may be unremarkable except for the
 On the degree of pathology. In most cases, with bicipital
finding of degenerative osteoarthritis in long-standing
tendon release, the source of discomfort is eliminated
cases (Fig. 3-24). Arthrography can be used to outline
and good to excellent function is restored. After surgery,
the joint and show irregularities and filling defects that
most dogs become sound within 4 to 8 weeks.
suggest synovial hyperplasia, tendon ruprure, and joint
mice.
Diagnosis. A complere orthopedic examination is
INJURY OF THE SOFT TISSUES OF THE
essential to exclude other shoulder problems. Abduction/
SHOULDER JOINT
adduction and craniocaudal stability of the shoulder
should be assessed with the dog anesthetized. Often, the
The fibrous joint capsule, collateral ligaments, and
diagnosis is made by exclusion of other, more common
surrounding cuff muscles of the shoulder joint are some-
shoulder lesions and verification of a torn ligament or
times injured. If the joint capsule or collateral ligaments
capsule through arthroscopy.
are torn, shoulder instability occurs. If one of the sur-
rounding cuff muscles is strained, fbrosis and ininer-
Treatment.
. Medical management usually is not
alization of the muscle tendon unit can occur.
successful in cases with shoulder instability as a result of
capsule or ligament injury. Arthroscopic diagnosis
followed by open medial or lateral reconstruction
is
Shoulder instability
the most common surgical intervention. Arthroscopic
reconstruction of capsular tears is often carried out in
History and Signalment.
 Dogs present with chronic
humans and is in the future for larger dogs. Capsular
foreleg lameness, some as long as 2 years before diag-
thermal contracture is also carried out to trear mild to
nosis and treatment. Often, the patient has no history of
moderate joint laxity in humans. Thermai contracture is
a single traumatic event. Lameness does not respond to
feasible in the dog with laxity as a result of capsular or
anti-inflammatory medication. Any age or breed of dog
ligament stretching.
42 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Egress is established with a needle or cannula, and
Ringer's lactated solution is instilled to distend the joint
(see Fig. 3-7). A guide needle is used ro locate the joint
line and the correct position for the arthroscope portal.
The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow is
established through the arthroscope cannula. The
arthroscope and light post are positioned to visualize
the mediai compartment. With a guide needle, the surgeon
triangulates the position for the instrument port. The
most common reason for failure to visualize the guide
needle in the joint is crossing the arthroscope. To prevent
crossing the arthroscope with the guide needle, the
needle is inserted perpendicular to the skin surface and
this position is maintained through the soft tissues. Once
the position for the instrument portal is established, a
 probe is inserted through a cannula or open portal. The
MCL and adjacent medial joint capsule are visualized
and inspected with the probe (see Fig. 3-9B). Next, the
arthroscope tip is positioned cranially and the light post
is turned caudally to view the craniomedial joint capsule
and subscapularis tendon (see Fig. 3-9A). The instrument
probe is then used to inspect the latter structures. Next,
the arthroscope is positioned caudal to the dome of the
humeral head and the light post is turned caudally to
visualize the insertion of the medial joint capsule at the
humeral neck (see Fig. 3-14B). Finally, the LCL and
instability. Notle the mild radiographic changes characteristic of degener-
lateral joint capsule are visualized (see Fig. 3-15A).
ative joini disease.
Tears in the ligament or capsule may be partial
or
complete (Fig. 3-25A to E). If a partial tear is identified,
a thermal probe is used to ablate the torn ligament
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
 or capsule remnants. Ablation is followed by thermal
Management.
The preoperative laboratory workup is
contracture of the remaining ligament or capsule (see
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
Fig. 3-25F). If a complete tear is identified, it is best
Young, healthy patients with no underlying systemic
to stop the arthroscopic procedure immediateiy to pre-
probiems require minimal laboratory workup. Older
vent excessive extravasation of fluid through the torn
dogs should undergo a complete blood screen, chest
joint capsule into the surrounding soft tissue. A medial
radiographs, and an electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows
arthrotomy is performed to reconstruct the medial joint
a standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive
restraints. An approach to the craniomedial shoulder
pain medication.
joint is used to expose the luxated joint. If the labrum
is worn, the prognosis for successful stabilization of the
Surgical  Intervention.
Portal sites and surgical
shoulder is poor. The tendon of the coracobrachialis
anatomy were discussed earlier. The operative site is
muscle may be torn and retracted with traumatic
clipped and prepared according to the amount of limb
 luxations. The joint is reduced, and the capsule and sub-
maneuverability desired during surgery. A hanging limb
scapularis tendon are imbricated with nonabsorbable
preparation provides the greatest degree of freedom for
mattress sutures. In addition, the MCL is reconstructed
manipulating the limb position. Liberal clipping and
with suture anchors and nonabsorbable suture material
thorough sterile preparation are necessary because an
(see Fig. 3-25G). Additional support may be achieved
 open arthrotomy may be required. In most cases, a 2.7.
through transposition of the biceps brachi tendon. The
mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is used. Basic
 transverse humeral ligament is incised over the biceps
instrumentation includes probes to inspect the joint
tendon. A small incision is made in the joint capsule
capsule. If the surgeon chooses to work through
an
under the biceps tendon to free this tendon and move it
instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas and switch-
medially. A small groove is created in the humerus at the
ing sticks facilitare the surgery. A motorized shaver is
site at which the tendon will be transposed. The tendon
   r   
is secured to the humerus with a bone screw and a
instrument is not essential. If tissue ablation or thermal
spiked washer. The same techniques can be used to treat
contracture is indicated, a radiofrequency unit is
LCL or capsular injuries. An approach to the cranial
necessary. The dog is positioned in lateral recumbency,
region of the shoulder joint is used to expose the
with the leg to be operated on uppermost. The limb is
luxated or subluxated joint. This approach is also used
supported in neutral position to 1
prevent excessive
to approach cranial luxations of the shoulder. It may be
adduction, which closes the joint line between the
helpful to reduce the joint before the approach is made
glenoid and humeral head.
to reestablish normal anatomic relationships. The skin
ARTHROSCOPICALIY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINT I■ 43
A
B
FIGURE 3-25 A. Arthroscopic view
of the centromedial compariment of the
D
E
shoulder joint. Glenoid (o]. centro
medial area_of the medial collateral
ligamenl (MCi} (b). and humeral head
[c). B, Arthroscopic view of α complete
tear [o)] in the ceniral body of the MCL.
d  uis  io '
tear and fraying of the MCi. Craniol
arm of the MCL (o). D, Arthroscopic view
showing @ partial tear of the cronial arm
-qns au jo bu puo (ol jw ayo
scapularis tendon [b). E. Arthroscopic
view showing a partial tear of the lateral
collatergl ligament lal. Lateral rim of the
glenoid (bl. F, Arthroscopic view of the
MCL afteradiofequency capsuloraphy.
Glenoid Ial. MCL (b), and humeral head
[cl. G. Postoperatlive rodiograph after
reconstruction of the MCL with a suture
anchor.
44 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
and subcutaneous tissues are incised, and the incision is
should begin with 5 minutes and increase to 30 minutes
deepened through the pectoral muscles. An osteoromy
over the next 2 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks, free activity
of the greater tubercle is performed and includes the
is gradually increased to normal levels. If during any
supraspinatus muscular insertion. The joint is reduced,
exercise period (controlled or free activity), the dog
and the capsule is imbricated with nonabsorbable
becomes sore or is sore the next day, the owner should
mattress sutures. The LCL is reconstructed with suture
decrease the pace and return to controlled activity for 2
anchors and nonabsorbable suture material. Additional
to 3 days.
support can be achieved by transposition of the biceps
brachii tendon. A small incision is made in the joint
Complications.
Complications are unusual after
capsule under the biceps tendon to free this tendon and
shoulder arthroscopy. Occasionally, excessive fluid
move ir laterally across the osteotomy site. While the
extravasation occurs and causes swollen soft tissues
tendon is held in place, the osteotomy is reduced and
around the shoulder in the immediate postoperative
stabilized with Kirschner wires and a tension-band wire
period. This fluid resorbs within the first 24 hours.
or lag screw.
Residual mild swelling adjacent to the portal sites may
be noticeable for the first 48 hours. Complications with
Postoperative Care.
 Cold therapy is applied to the
shoulder arthrotomy are also uncommon. Occasionally,
shoulder during recovery for pain relief and to reduce
 a screw used for tenodesis of the biceps tendon becomes
swelling. Cold therapy is applied by alrernating
15
loose. This situation is resolved by removal of the screw.
Commercial cold packs or a commercial circulating
Prognosis. The prognosis for normal limb function
cold water pack may be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped
with shoulder instabiliry varics depending on the degree
in a towel or frozen packs of vegetables can be used. If
of injury of the medial or lateral restraints. If stretching
the dog is dismissed from the hospital on the day of
of the soft tissues is the only pathology, treatment with
surgery, NSAIDs and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-2)
imbrication or thermal contracture is usually successful.
are dispensed for administration at home. If the dog
In the case of more extensive soft tissue injury or wearing
remains in the hospital overnight, buprenorphine is
of the labrum, the prognosis is fair to good.
administered in the evening. NSAIDs and butorphanol
are dispensed for administration at home. NSAIDs are
Strain of the Supraspinatus Insertion
continued for 5 days, and butorphanol is discontinued
after 48 hours. Cold therapy is continued by the client
History and Signalment.
Dogs present with chronic
at home for the first 2 days after surgery. After the
foreleg lameness. Some dogs exhibit periods of lameness
surgical swelling is gone (48 to 72 hours), the 0wner
and inabiliry to bear weighr. Any age or breed of dog
should begin heat therapy and passive motion and
can be affected, but the condition is more common in
stretch exercises. The owner should apply moist heat to
large breeds.
the shoulder region with a commercial heat pack or a
moistened warm towel. The owner should hold the
 Physical Examination Findings. Gait analysis usually
warm pack against the inside of his own elbow for 30
shows visible lameness. Some dogs are lame ouly after
seconds to ensure that it is not too hot. Then the warm
exercise. Manipulation of the shoulder (e.g., flexion,
pack is placed over the shoulder area for 10 minutes.
extension, rotation) may elicit discomfort in most dogs.
Afterward, the warm pack is removed and gentle flexion
and extension movements of the shoulder joint are
Differcntial Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
begun. The owner should begin with small movements
includes OCD, bicipital tenosynovitis, and shoulder
that gradually increase to the limit of comfort over a
instability.
period of 1 to 2 minutes. At the limit of comfort, the
joint is held in position for 10 seconds. The motion and
Radiographic Findings. Radiographic views should
stretch exercise is repeated five times. In addition, the
include standard lateral projections of both shoulders.
 owner should examine the portal sites daily for signs of
Mineralization is seen adjacent to the grcater tubercle
irritation or drainage.
of the humerus. Patterns of mineralization are either
Exercise is limited to controlled walking on a leash
irregular and nonhomogeneous or well circumscribed
for the frst 4 weeks after surgery. Dogs undergoing
with dense foci (Fig. 3-26). A skyline view of the bicipital
  s an ae a  asn aoss
groove is helpful to delineate the location of dystrophic
open arthrotomy was performed, the dog may
be
mineralization (Fig. 3-27). Arthrography can be used to)
unable to bear weight for as long as 1 week. To increase
outline the bicipital groove to determine whether irregu-
the weightbearing load on the limb, walking at a slow
larities or filling defects that suggest bicipital tenosyn-
pace is recommended. As postoperative time increases,
ovitis are present. Computerized tomography of the
the pace can be hastened. To increase the range of
shoulder is an excellent method to delineate the position
motion in the shoulder when walking, the client should
of dystrophic mineralization.
walk the dog in high grass (e.g., weeds),which forces
the dog to pick up the feet and step high with the legs.
Diagnosis.
The diagnosis is based on radiographic
After 4 weeks, the owner shouid begin limited amounts
findings and direct observation of mineralized foci in
of free activity with controlled walking. Free activity
the tendon of insertion of the supraspinatus muscle.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE SHOULDER JOINTI45
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
Young, healthy patients with no underlying systermic
problems require minimal laboratory workup. Older
dogs should undergo a complete blood screen, chest
radiographs, and electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a
standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain
medication.
Surgical Intervention.
 Surgical intervention entais
 inspection of the joint to confirm the absence of signif-
cant pathology. The surgeon must carefully inspect the
cranial compartment in the region of the biceps tendon.
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed earlier.
The operative sites are clipped and prepared according
to the amount of limb maneuverability desired during
surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides the
greatest degree of freedom to manipulate limb position.
Liberal clipping and thorough sterile preparation are
necessary because an open arthrotomy may be required.
A 2.7-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is used
FIGURE 3-26 lateral radiograph showing mineralization |α and b]
in most cases. Basic instrumentation includes probes to
near the insertion of the supraspinarus tendon.
inspect the joint capsule. If the surgeon chooses ro work
through an instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas
and switching sticks facilitate the surgery. A motorized
History and signalment and physical findings typically
shaver is helpful to debride synovial proliferation but is
are compatible with chronic strain of the supraspinatus
not essential. The dog is positioned in lateral recumbency
tendon of insertion.
with the leg to be operated on uppermost. The limb is
supported in neutral position to prevent excessive adduc-
Treatment.
Medical management is not successful
 tion, which closes the joint line berween the glenoid and
in many cases. Arthroscopic intervention to visualize
humeral head.
the biceps tendon and bicipital groove is recommended
 Egress is established with a needle or cannula, and
to determine whether local pathology is present. If the
lactated Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint
bicipital groove is irregular and has caused a bicipital
(see Fig. 3-7). A guide needle is used to locate the joint
tenosynovitis, tendon release is recommended. If the
line and the correct position for the arthroscope portal.
bicipital groove and tendon are normal, the arthroscopic
The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow is estab-
 procedure is discontinued. After arthroscopic inter-
lished through the arthroscope cannula. The arthro-
vention, a medial approach is made to the insertion of
scope tip is positioned cranially, and the light post is
the supraspinatus tendon insertion site. The tendon is
turned caudaily to view the biceps tendon and bicipital
isolated and a tenectomy of the supraspinatus insertion
 groove. It is important to inspect the area cranial to the
performed.
tendon and deep within the bicipital groove (see Figs.
3-11 and 3-12). If pathology is found, bicipital tendon
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
release is performed through an instrument portal. After
Management. Preoperative laboratory workup
1S
arthroscopic intervention, a craniomedial incision is
 made to expose the insertion of the supraspinatus tendon
at its inserrtion onto the greater tubercle of the humerus.
After the tendon is isolated, it is released by removing a
1- to 2-cm section of tendon at its insertion (Fig. 3-28).
The surgical wound is closed with standard methods.
Postoperative Care.  Cold therapy is applied to the
shoulder during the recovery period to provide pain
relief and reduce sweling. Cold therapy is applied by
alternating 15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for two
applications. Commercial cold packs or a commercial
circulating cold water pack may be used. Alternatively,
ice wrapped in a towel or frozen packs of vegetables can
be used. If the dog is dismissed from the hospital the day
of surgery, NSAIDs and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-2)
are dispensed for administration at home. If the dog
FIGURE 3-27
Skyine view of the case shown in Figure 3-26 showing
remains in the hospital overnight, buprenorphine is
mineralizaf cor near the insertion of the supraspinatus tendon (al.
administered in the evening and NSAIDs and butorphanol
46I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Complications.
Complications  are unusual after
shoulder arthroscopy. Occasionally, excessive fluid
extravasation occurs and causes swollen soft tissues
around the shoulder immediately afrer surgery. This
fluid rcsorbs within the fist 24 hours. Residual mild
swelling adjacent to portal sites imay be noticeable for
the first 48 hours. Complications with shoulder arthrot-
omy are also uncommon.
Prognosis.
 The prognosis for normal limb function
with chronic supraspinatus sprain is good to excellcnt.
Incomplete Fusion of the Caudal Glenoid
Ossification Center
The presence of a secondary caudal glenoid ossif-
FIGURE 3-28
 Histologic specimen showing chronic mineralization of
he inserion of the supraspinatus tendon characlerislic of chronic insertional
cation center is described in the dog. Incomplete fusion
an
 appears radiographically as a small radiodense projection
located just caudal to the glenoid. In most cases, incom-
plete fusion of the caudal ossification center may be
an incidental finding on radiographic examination of
are dispensed for administration at home. NSAIDs are
the shoulder. L.ameness occurs when an osteochondral
continued for 5 days, and butorphanol is discontinued
fragment is loosely embedded in the joint capsule. An
after 48 hours. Cold therapy is continued by the client
unstable osteochondral fragment acts as a free body in
at home for the frst 2 days after surgery. After the
the joint and causcs synovitis and pain.
surgical swelling is gone (48 to 72 hours), the owner
should begin heat therapy and passive motion and stretch
History and Signalment. Most cases occur in large
exercises. Moist heat is applied to the shouider region
breeds (e.g., rottrweiler, German shepherd), but the con-
with a commercial heat pack or a moistened warm
dition is seen in small breeds as weil (rterrier, corgi). The
towel. The owner should hold the warm pack against
 age at the time of clinical onset varies, but the condition
the inside of her own elbow for 30 seconds to ensure
is usually diagnosed in young dogs. Low-grade and
that it is not too hot. The warm pack is then placed over
periodic lameness may be present from a few weeks to
the dog's shoulder area for 10 minutes. Afterward, the
more than a year before diagnosis.
warm pack is removed and gentle flexion and extension
movements of the shoulder joint are begun, starting with
Physical Examination Findings.
Weightbearing
small movements and gradually increasing movement to
lameness is associated with pain on flexion and
the limit of comfort over a period of 1 to 2 minutes. At
extension of the shoulder. Mild to moderate muscle
the limir of comfort, the joint is held in position for
atrophy is evident as well, depending on the duration of
10 seconds. Five repetitions of this exercise are performed
clinical signs.
two or three times daily. The client also shouid examine
the portal sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
 Exercise is limited to controlled walking on a leash
includes acute or chronic strain of the supraspinatus
for the first 4 weeks. Dogs undergoing arthroscopy use
tendon, shoulder instability, OCD, calcifying tendinopathy
 s   re  i 
of the biceps tendon, and elhow dysplasia.
weightbearing load on the limb, walking at a slow pace
is recommended. As postoperative time increases, the
Radiographic Findings. Radiographic views should
pace can be hastened. To increase the range of motion
include standard anteroposterior and lateral projections
in the shoulder when walking, the owner should walk
of both shoulders and both elbows. The lateral pro-
the dog in high grass (e.g., weeds), thus forcing the dog
jection of the shoulder will show a radiodense projection
to pick up the feet and step high with the legs. After 4
adjacent to the caudal edge of the glenoid (Fig. 3-29).
weeks, the owner can introduce limited amounts of free
Care is taken to exclude other causes of shoulder and
activity with controlled walking. Free activity should
elbow pathology as a cause for the lameness because
begin with 5 minutes and increase to 30 minutes over
 incomplete ossification can be an incidental radiographic
the next 2 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks, free activity is
finding. Lameness can be attributed to incomplete fusion
gradually increased to normal levels. If during any
only after other causes of forelimb lameness are excluded
exercise period (controlled or free activity), the
edog
and a loose osteochondral fragment is found arthroscopi-
becomes sore or is sore the next day, the owner should
cally. A nuclear scan is useful to exclude other sources
 decrease the pace and return to controlled activity for 2
of inflammation, as is computed tomography of the
to 3 days.
elbows to exclude in situ osteornalacic medial coronoid.
a
FIGURE 3-30
Arthroscopic view showing the caudal edge of the
glenoid [a] anda large,unstoble osteochondral fragment (bl adiacent t
the gleno:d.
chondral fragment. The dog is positioned in lateral
recumbency, with the leg to be operated on uppermost.
The limb is supported in neutral position to prevent
excessive adduction, which closes the joint line between
the glenoid and the humeral head.
Egress is established with a lleedle or cannula, and
lactated Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint.
A guide needle is used to locate the joint line and the
correct position for the arthroscope portal. The arthro-
 scope is inserted, and ingress flow is established through
'piouolb oyt jo sbpe [opnoo ay o uaoolpr quawbo
the arthroscope cannula. All compartments of the joint
are thoroughly examined. The arthroscope and light
post are positioned to visualize the caudal glenoid. The
osteochondral fragment is probed to determine
its
Diagnosis.
A complete orthopedic examination is
essential because other orthopedic conditions may be
attachments (Fig. 3-30).
seen concurrently with incomplete fusion of the caudal
ossifcation center. OCD, elbow dysplasia (FCP, UAP),
Postoperative Care. Cold therapy is applied to the
panosteitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy, and acute or
shoulder during recovery to relieve pain and reduce
chronic strain of the supraspinatus tendon are some of
swelling. Cold therapy is applied by alternating 15
these conditions. The diagnosis is based on history and
minutes on and 10 minutes off for two applications.
signalment, physical findings, radiographic appearance,
Commercial cold packs or a commercial circulating
and the arthroscopic confirmation of a loose osteo-
cold water pack can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped
chondral fragment. As noted before, this condition may
in a towel or frozen packs of vegetables can be used. If
 be an incidental finding, so other, more common causes
the dog is dismissed from the hospital the day of surgery,
of forelimb lameness must be excluded before the diag-
NSAIDs and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-2) are dis-
nosis can be made.
pensed for administration at home. If the dog remains
in the hospital overnight, buprenorphine is administered
Surgical  Intervention.
Portal  sites and  surgical
in the evening and NsAIDs and butorphanol are dis-
anatomy were discussed earlier. The operative site is
pensed for administration at home. NSAIDs are continued
clipped and prepared according to the amount of limb
for 5 days, and butorphanol is discontinued after 48
maneuverability desired during surgery. A hanging limb
hours. Cold therapy is continued by the client at home
preparation provides the greatest degree of freedom
for the first 2 days after surgery. After the surgical
for manipulating limb position. Liberal clipping and
swelling is gone (48 to 72 hours), the owner should begin
thorough sterile preparation are necessary because an
heat therapy and passive motion and stretch exercises.
open arthrotomy may be required. A 2.7-mm, 30-degree
The owner should apply moist heat to the shoulder
fore-oblique arthroscope is used in most cases. Basic
region with a commercial heat pack or a moistened warm
instrumentation includes probes to inspect the osteo-
towel. The owner should hold the warm pack against
chondral fragment and a handheld cutting instrument
the inside of her own elbow for 30 seconds to ensure
(e.g., banana knife) to remove the fragment. If the sur-
that it is not too hot, then place the warm pack over the
dog's shoulder area for 10 mitutes. Afterward, the warm
different-sized cannulas and switching sticks facilitate
 pack is removed and gentle flexion and extension move-
the surgery. A motorized shaver is helpful to debride
 ments of the shoulder joint are started, beginning with
synovial proliferation and remove the loose osteo-
small movements and gradually increasing movements
48 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
to the limit of comfort over a period of 1 to 2 minutes.
client should walk the dog in high grass (e.g., weeds),
Ar the limit of comfort, the joint is heid in position for
shallow water, or sand, thereby forcing the dog to pick
10 seconds. The motion and stretch exercises are per-
up the feet and step high with the legs. Afrer 4 weeks,
formed for five repetitions. The owner should examine
the owner should resume limited amounts of free activiry
the portal sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
with controlled walking, beginning with 5 minutes free
For the first 4 weeks after surgery, exercise is limited
activiry and increasing to 30 minutes free activity over
to controlled walking on a leash. Dogs undergoing
the next 2 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks, free activity is
arthroscopy use the affected leg immediately after
 gradually increased to normal levels. If the dog becomes
surgery. To increase the weightbearing load on the limb,
sore during any exercise period (controlled or free
walking at a slow pace is recommended. As postoperative
activity) or is sore the next day, the owner should
time increases, the pace can be hastened. To increase the
decrease the pace and rerurn to controlled activity for 2
range of motion in the shoulder when walking, the
to3days.
Suggested Readings
Person MW: Arthroscopy of the canine shoulder. Comp Cont Ed
8:537-546,1986.
Person MW: Arthroscopic treatment of OCD in the canine shoulder.
Barber FA, Byrd JW, Wolf EM, et al: How would you rcat the
Vet Surg 18:3, 175-189, 1989.
partially torn biceps tendon. Arthroscopy 17: 636-639, 2001.
Rudd RG, Whitehair JG, Margolis JH: Results of Imanagerment of
Bardet J: Arthroscopy of the shoulder in dogs and cats: A six year
retrospective study of 221 cases.Proceedingsof theVerterinary
0steochondritis dissccans of the humeral head in dogs: 44 cases
(1982-1987). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26(2):173-178, 1990.
Orthopedic Society, Val d’Isere, France 2000, p 19.
Cook JT: Arthroscopic treatment of shoulder instability using
Stobie D, Wallace I., Lipowitz A, et al: Chronic bicipital
tenosynovitis in dogs: 29 cases. JAVMA 207:201-207, 199.5.
radiofrequency induced thermal modification. Proceedings of the
yan Bree H, van Ryssen B: OCD lesions of the canine shoulder:
Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Lake Louise, Canada 2001, p 37.
Correlation of arthrography and arthroscopy. Vet Radiot
Goring RL, Pierce C: Arthroscopic examination of the canine
Ultrasound 33:342-347, 1992.
scapulohumeral joint. J Am Anitm Hosp 3:S51-555, 1986.
Innes JF:Advanced arthroscopy in the dog.Proceedings of European
van Rysscn B, van Bree H: Successful arthroscopic treatment of
shoulder OCD in the dog. J Smaill Anim Pract 34:521-528, 1993.
Sociery of Vererinary Orthopedics and Traumatology, Munich,
Viguier E: Arthroscopic study of shoulder diseases in rhe dog.
Germany 2000, p 51.
Proceedings of the European College of Vererinary Surgeons,
Kriegleder H: Mineralization of the supraspinatous tendon: Clinical
Velberr, Germany 2001, p 49.
observations in 7 dogs. VCOT 8:91, 1995,
Whitney WO, Beale B, Hulse DA: Arthroscopic release of the biceps
Olivieri M, Vezzoni A, Marcellin-Little D: lncomplete fusion of the
tendon for treatment of bicipital injury in the dog. Procedings of
caudal glenoid ossifcation center in 5 dogs. Proceedings of the
Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Val d'Isere, France 2000, p 20.
the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Lake I.ouise, Canada 2001, p 3.
HAP
R
.
Arthroscopically
 Assisted
Surgery c
f the Elbow Joint
of
Introduction
should be adjusted to a position that alows the surgeon
and assistants to hold the arms as close to the body as
The canine elbow is potentially the simplest joint
possible. The surgeon's shoulders should be in a neutral
t0 examine arthroscopically. Usually there is only thin
position, with the elbows close to 90 degrees. This
soft tissue, and there are clean anatomical landmarks,
position prevents fatigue and improves the efficiency of
so insertion of the arthroscope is relatively easy.
the operating team. The imaging tower is positioned at
Arthroscopic treatment in the canine elbow can be
the back of the patient or opposite the surgeon for
straightforward or very complex, depending on the
unilateral cases and at the head of the patient or at the
disease and its severity. Outcomes with canine elbow
end of the surgery table for bilateral procedures (Figs.
arthroscopy are nor predictable and depend largely on
4-1 and 4-2).
the nature of the disease being treated. Canine elbow
Canine elbow arthroscopy was originally described
arthritis remains a disease of uncertain cause, and the
using a 2.7-mm, 30-degree rigid arthroscope. A 1.9-mm,
associated osteoarthritis can involve substantial portions
30-degree short arthroscope is recommended (Fig. 4-3A).
of the articular cartilage, making successful treatment
The smaller size significantly decreases cartilage trauma
difficult with any modality. In addition to its use in
while allowing greater visualization and closer inspection
elbow dysplasia, arthroscopy is used in the canine elbow
of the joint. The 1.9-mm arthroscope also allows inter-
for management of septic arthritis, assistance in repair
vention into the elbows of smaller breeds, such as the
of condylar fractures, and incompiete fusion of the
Shetland sheepdog, Border collie, and Australian cattle
humeral condyle.
dog. Appropriate fluid flow is necessary in arthroscopy.
with gravity flow alone; howevet, smaller joints, such as
Arthroscopy of the Elbow Joint
the eibow, require higher fluid pressures and may bave
more tenuous outfiow. The use of a fluid pump for
Equipment and Instrumentation.
The surgical table
 canine elbow arthroscopy may increase the reliability of
should be one that can be lowered and raised and
fluid flow. Most arthroscopy pumps have both pressure
Tower
instrument
Anesthesia
table
machine
FIGURE 4-1 :
Ariangement of the
operating room for bilaterol elbow
arthroscopy.For unilateralelbow
Surgeon
arthroscopy, the lower may be placed
Assistan
on the side of the tabie opposite the
limb that is being trealed [see Fig. 3-I1.
52SMALLANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 4-2   Posifioning of the
dog and surgicol equipmeni used tor
draping is performed. The ler elbow
joint is positioned over an elbow brace
that is used os a fulcrum point.
and flow control. Pressure is the priority setting. For
A simple instrumentation pack (see Chapter 2) is all
smaller joints, such as the canine eibow, pressure between
60 and 70 mm Hg is preferred and flow is kept relatively
should include srmall, high-quality arthroscopic hand
low (10% to 20%) to avoid sudden surges of fluid. If a
tools that are specified for canine arthroscopy. Basic
fluid pump is not available, a pressure bag can be used
hand tools used for canine elbow arthroscopy include a
to deliver an adequate volume of pressurized fluids.
curette, right-angle probe, and grasper (see Fig. 4-3).
Other helpful instruments include a manual or power
hand shaver, hand bitel, cannulas, and switching sticks.
The curette is used to debride damaged cartilage and
diseased bone. Standard small surgical curertes are
a
suitable for elbow arthroscopy. The most appropriate
size is S-0 and smaller. Angled curettes also may be
useful, but are more diffcult to insert into the portal or
cannula. A small-joint, right-angle probe is used to
C
palpate joint surfaces and manipulate fragments. Some
probes have measuring marks that aid in determining
lesion size. A high-quality small-joint grasper is another
C
necessary tool (see Fig. 4-3C). It should be very small in
diameter (2.5 to 2.9 mm) and have a smooth, enclosed
locking mechanism. A delicate grasper must be used
carefully. Overaggressive use can damage the grasping
mechanism and may lead to the need for costly repair or
replacement. A second, larger grasper is often useful to
grasp and remove larger fraginents. Traditional snall
alligator forceps can be used, but are more difficult to
manipulate because the unenclosed mechanism may not
9
operate correctly in small portals and joints and also
because the jaws cannot be locked. Additional hand
h
instruments that may be helpful include a hand burr to
destroy fragments and perform abrasion arthroplasty
and a small-joint biter to perform soft tissue excision
FIGURE 4-3 Instrumentation lon elbow arthroscopy. A 1.9-mm. 30
and biopsy.
degiee sho1 arthoscope [o]: arthroscopic micropick Jb): smalljoint
 Many elbow arthroscopy procedures in dogs can be
jamod (y ung puoy t) aqod auoiou (pl aans o-s ) sedso
shaver igl: oggressive cutter tip for a power shaver [h); bur lip for a
completed without the aid of power instruments. How-
power shaver [il.
ever, some procedures, such as fragment removal and
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINTII? 53
 bone or cartilage debridement, can be performed more
quickly and with less trauma with the aid of a power
shaver (see Fig. 4-3G to I). The small size of the canine
elbow necessitates the use of small-joint shaving equip-
ment. The most useful power shavers in this setting
are an aggressive cutter and a burr. The cutter is most
useful for debridement of diseased cartilage, and the burr
is used to remove cartilage or bone. Most hand shavers
have suction attachments to help evacuate debris.
Arthroscopic cautery units and radiofrequency instru-
 pose a risk to the nearby median and ulnar nerves.
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperativc Pain
Management.
Most dogs that undergo elbow
arthroscopy are younger than 2 years of age and have
minimal medical problens. For this reason, little diag-
nostic testing is normally required. Additional blood
tests, urinalysis, and radiography may be indicated for
older patients undergoing anesthesia and arthroscopy,
particularly if neoplasia, infection, or immune-mediated
joint disease is suspected.
 In most cases, preoperative pain management during
hospitalization is not a concern, although many patients
may have had recent administration of NsAIDs,
including carprofen, aspirin, and etodolac. The effect of
aspirin on platelets and the heparin-like action of etodolac
may increase the risk of operative hemorrhage. For
this reason, these medications are usually discontinued
FIGURE 44  Technique for intraarticular injection of local analgesic
approximately 2 weeks before surgery. A standard anes-
far the canine elbow. The needle is placed adjacenf or just proximal to
theanconedlprocess.Joint fluid isaspirated before injecion to ensure
thetic protocol, including preemptive pain medication,
is shown in Table 3-1. There are no specific anesthetic
proper location.
requirements for elbow arthroscopy. Most patients are
comfortable and fully ambulatory shortly after recovery,
surgery. Alternatively, the joint may be infused with the
and in many cases, they are discharged from the hospital
bupivacaine through one of the portals at the end of the
the same day. For this reason, short-acting anesthetic
procedure. This practice allows greater absorption of
regimens with rapid recovery rates are recommended
the drug, although the late timing of delivery is not ideal
(see Table 3-1). Perioperative pain management usually
and some drug may leak out through the portals and
includes general anesthesia and local analgesia (Fig. 4 4).
into the periarticular space.
Brachial plexus blocks may be used, but their effective-
Most patients require minimal postoperative pain
 management. Administration of NSAIDs usually suffices.
In addition, many cases of elbow arthroscopy are bilateral
Cold therapy may be applied to the elbows during
and require bilateral blocking. Because local blocks may
recovery to reduce pain and swelling. This treatment
last for S ro 6 hours, an animal that has a brachial
is administered by alternating 15 minutes on and 10
plexus block may have diffculty ambulating for several
 minutes off for two applications. Commercial cold packs
hours after anesthetic recovery.
or ice wrapped in a towel can be used. Ar home, the
Alternatively, infusion of the joint with bupivacaine is
owner continues cold therapy for the first 2 days after
simple and effective (see Fig. 4-4). Bupivacaine may be
surgery. When the dog is dismissed from the hospital,
administered either preoperatively, after clipping and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and oral
scrubbing are complete, or at the end of the procedure.
butorphanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for adminis-
The maximum recommended dosage is 2 mg/kg, which
tration at home. NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and
is divided between the two elbows if bilateral arthroscopy
butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours. If the dog
is performed. Preoperatively, bupivacaine is injected
remains in the hospital overnighr, buprenorphine 
1s
either medially or laterally. The needle is inserted as for
administered in the evening. NSAIDs and butorphanol
arthrocentesis; it is placed just aside the olecranon and
are prescribed for home administration. Fentanyl
directed distally and axially into the joinr (see Fig. 4-4).
transdermal patches also are used for postoperative
The joint is aspirated before injection to observe for joint
pain managcment.
fluid and confirm proper needle location. Bupivacaine
usually requires approximately 20 minutes to take effect,
Antibiotic
Treatment.
The risk of infection with
and when it is injected preoperatively, the bupivacaine
routine arthroscopic surgery is probably less than that
is diluted or flushed out of the joint ar the initiation of
associated with opcn surgery; however, the use of
54 ID SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
 prophylactic perioperative antibiotics is recommended.
In most cases, administration of cefazolin 22 mg/kg at
the time of induction and every 2 hours during the proce-
dure is adequate.
 Patient Preparation and Positioning. The patient is
clipped and prepared for an open elbow arthrotomy in
case the arthroscopy procedure needs to be aborted for
technical reasons and an open arthrotomy performed.
This situation is more common when the surgeon is
beginning to learn arthroscopy. The dog is positioned in
dorsal recumbency, and the fur is clipped from the
midantebrachium to the level of the shoulder joint (see
Fig. 4-2). The remaining fur on the lower portion of the
legs is wrapped. As the surgeon becormes more experi-
enced and adept at elbow arthroscopy, less maneuver-
ability is needed and a medial limb preparation can be
done for each limb.
In the operating room, dorsal recumbency is the
standard position for both unilateral and bilareral elbow
arthroscopy. Another option is positioning the dog in
lateral recumbency with the affected limb downward.
This position allows the use of the surgery table edge as
a fulcrum for distraction of the joint. For positioning with
FIGURE 4-5 Uso of cuslom-made braccs (s o fulcrum for eibow
dorsal recumbency, sandbags may be used as a fulcrum
u:hroscopy. Braces are mianufactured fram wood blocks that are covered
with toam anc vinyl and altachec to right-ange brockels.
 or elbow braces may be constructed and placed under
each elbow to provide a fulcrum for joint distraction
(Fig. 4-5).
partment of the elbow joint (see Fig. 4-6). Additional
The patient is draped according to the standard tech-
internal rotation of the limb also enlarges the joint space
nique for open arthrotomy. Stockinet or sterile adhesive
for instrumentation. The relative positions of the surgeon
draping may be used at the discretion of the surgeon
and assistant, cranial or caudal to the limb, depend on the
(Fig. 46). After the patient is fully draped, the limb is
handedness of the surgeon, the specifc procedure being
rotated down until it is parallel to the floor. The limb is
performed, and the surgeon's preference (see Fig. 4-1).
placed in a normal standing position relative to the joint
angles, with the elbow joint positioned over the fulcrum
Portal Sites. Two or three portal sites are used for
device or table edge. The assistant places moderate
elbow arthroscopy, depending on the purpose of the
downward (lateral) pressure to open the medial com-
procedure. If visual exploration of the elbow joint is all
FIGURE 4-6  Polierst prevared fo!
elbow orthrcscopy with pasic <ache-
sive drapes. The use cf pastic dres
helps *o keep the patienr dic: o?
wairnor than slandard draping methcxds.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT E? 55
that is required, an egress portal and an arthroscope
portal are necessary. However, an additional instrument
portal is required for tissue biopsy or treatment of joint
pathology.
The egress site is established first (Figs. 4-7 to 4-9).
With the joinr in a standing position and the medial
compartment forced open with moderate downward
pressure, a needle (25- to 18-gauge) is inserted in a
craniodistal and slighr lateral direction, beginning just
proximal or adjacent to the anconeus. The needle is
directed to place the tip in the joint pouch just proximal
to the anconeus.
To ensure placement within the joint, a syringe is
attached to the needle and used to aspirate synovial fluid.
In most cases, when the egress portal is properly placed,
synovial fluid is easily aspirated. If synovial fluid is not
aspirated and the surgeon believes that the joint has
been entered, lactated Ringer's solution can be instilled
into the joint. If the needle is located in the joint, fluid
is easily instilled. Also, as the joint cavity flls with fluid,
reverse pressure is felt on the syringe plunger. This
sensation ensures that the needle is placed properly. If
the needle is placed incorrectly, fluid may be injected
around the joint instead of into the joint, making the
procedure much more diffcult. In some cases, even when
the needle is positioned properly, it may be impossible
to aspirare any joint fluid. Joint infusion and lavage are
 performed with lactated Ringer's solution, which may
FIGURE 4-8 Bone model showing 0 miedial view of the positioning
of instruirents for ;oint arthroscopy of the conine elbow.
cause less damage to cartilage than saline. The joint is
Ulnar n.
filled until moderate pressure is felt against the plunger.
Mediann.
Underflling makes cstablishment of the arthroscope
portal more diffcult and traumatic, and overfilling may
lead to rupture of the joint cavity and loss of fluid into
the periarticular soft tissues. The volume of fluid that is
Mediana.
needed may vary tremendously between joints. Normal
or mildly pathologic joints nay require only several
mililiters of lactated Ringer's solution, whereas more
diseased joints may require as much as 20 mL fluid.
After adequate pressure is reached, an assistant should
hold the syringe under pressure or cap off the needle to
maintain joint pressurization during insertion of the
arthroscope portal.
The arthroscope portal is established next. The
arthroscope cannula with the attached blunt obturator
is inserted first. The standard arthroscope insertion site
is based on localization of the medial epicondyle and
approximation of the location of the joint surface. The
beginning arthroscopist should be careful to localize the
medial epicondyle before the joint is infused because
joint distension may make palpation more difficult. A
finger should be placed on the medial epicondyle and
drawn down distally unril the approximate level of the
joint is reached. This level is estimated by evaluating
the lateral radiographic view. Next, the finger is drawn
FIGURE 4-7Medial view of porial localions and perlinent anatomy
oyu Z ood sseie puo uosnyu't Adosouue moqe auuoo io
approximately S mm caudal to this point for arthroscope
scope portal: 3, instrument porlal.
insertion (see Figs. 4-7 to 49). The exact location of
56I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
effect and draw air bubbles into the joint. Alternatively,
the fluid can be allowed to flow onto the floor for
removal with a floor scavenging system or towels.
The instrument portal is established if a biopsy speci-
men of intra-articular tissue is needed or if treatment of
joint pathology is required. Instrumentation portals are
used to insert a variery of instruments, including small-
joint graspcrs, right-angle probes, simall-joint shavers,
and curettes. I.ess often, a radiofrequency probe, biopsy
punch, or soft tissue biter is used. Aftcr the joint is
thoroughly explored, the arthroscope is positioned 10
visualize the craniomedial portion of the joint (Fig.
4-10A). The feld of view should include the cranial
aspect of the medial coronoid, An 18- to 20-gauge needle
is inserted into the joint in the region of the medial
collateral ligament (see Figs. 4-7 to 4-9). Successful
visualization and manipulation of the needle by the
arthroscope is referred to as triangulation. The most
FIGURE 4-9
 Medial view of the positioning of instrurents for joint
common reason for failure to triangulate is inadvertent
a:hroscopy of +he canine elbow.
crossing of the needle and arthroscope within the joint.
It is surprising how relatively parallel in the transverse
 plane the arthroscope and instrument need to be. When
this insertion may be modifed according to the disease
attempting to triangulate the position for the ports, the
being freated. For example, the arthroscope portal may
surgeon should observe the location and direction of the
need to be moved further caudal to allow visualization
actual instruments instead of watching the monitor. The
of an entire humeral osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD)
needle is inserted at the same proximodistal level and
lesion. An 18- to 2S-gauge needle may be inserted at the
proximodistal angle as the arthroscope (see Fig. 4-9).
location of the proposed port to ensure thar the level is
The needle should be inserted nearly parallel to the
correct. The needle should pass easily inro the joint with
arthroscope in the craniocaudal plane. Insertion of the
a minimum of proximodistal angulation. To insert the
 needle at too oblique an angle to the arthroscope causes
arthroscope, a small blade (no. 15 or no. 11) is used
crossing of the needle under the arthroscope. In this
to make a short (2- to 3-mm) proximodistal incision
situation, it is impossible to visualize the necdle with the
through the skin and superficial soft tissues. The incision
arthroscope, although the surgeon may be able to feel
should not be continued through the entire joint capsule,
the rwo rub against each other. Ideally, the arthroscope
O1 the joint distension will be eliminated and excessive
and needle are both perpendicular to the long axis of
extravasation of fluid will occur into the surrounding
the limb. The specifc craniocaudal position of entry on
soft tissues. The assistant should maintain a valgus force
the linb varies with the size of the dog and the disease
(downward pressure) to the foot to open the medial
being treated. The surgeon's hands should be positioned
compartment of the joint. The arthroscope cannula is
a comfortable distance apart to permit ease of manipu-
fitted with a blunt obturator and inserted through the
lation. This ease of manipulation occurs with proper
incision and into the joint. The ideal angle of insertion,
portal sites, but should not be the determining factor in
perpendicular to the limb, perimits maximum manipu-
portal placement. After the needle is inserted into the
lation and visualization, with minimal trauma. When a
 joint, the surgeon should look at the monitor to deter-
blunt conical obturator is used, pressure is applied to
mine whether the needle tip is in view (see Fig. 4-10B).
penetrate the joint capsule. The cannula and blunt
If the needle tip cannot be seen, in most cases, it is not
obturator are inserted with the fingers braced against
productive for the surgeon to manipulate the arthro-
the limb to avoid overpenetration, which can damage
scope to look for the needle tip. Typically, it will not
the carilage. With experience, the surgeon will learn to
be visible, and if it is, it will usually be in an inappro-
feel when the joint is entered. After entry is confirmed,
priate position. In other words, the surgeon should keep
the obturator is removed from the cannula. If the
the arthroscope view constant and reinsert the ncedle
cannula is placed correctly, fluid flows freely from the
correctly.
cannula. The fluid ingress line is artached to the cannula,
After the needle is visualized and the internal and
 and the arthroscope is inserted.
external positioning is satisfactory, a no. 15 or no. 11
If gravity flow is used, a 10-drop/mL administration
blade is used to make a 3- to 5-mm longitudinal incision
set is used wide open. If a fluid pump is used, relatively
directly adjacent to the needle. An assistant should
high pressures (60 to 75 mm Hg) and low flow (10% to
remove the needle so that the surgeon may immediately
20%) are recommended. The egress needle is uncapped
insert a small blunt trocar at a similar angle to the
at this point. Sterile extension tubing can be attached to
needle (see Fig. 4-8). If an instrument cannula is needed,
the outflow needle to scavenge fluid into a canister (see
it is inserted at this timc. Once inserted, the trocar is
Fig. 4-9); however, in low-flow situations, particularly
gently rnanipulated to further cnlarge the portal while
with gravity flow, the rubing may establish a siphon
avoiding damage to the articular cartilage. The portal is
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT I? 57
A
B
FIGURE 4-10 
 Posilioning   and
normal ioint findings for arthroscopic
evaluation of the medial portion of the
coronoid process. radial head, and
distal trochlear noich; A, Cranial aspect 
of the normol medial coronoid process.
B. Visualizalion of q needle over the
cronial aspect of a normal medial coro-
noid process. C, Normal annular ligo-
ment larrowl. The collateral ligamenr is 
behind the fat. to the right of the
annular ligament. D, Commissure of the
coronoid process and caudal aspect of
the rodial head. E, Use of a rightangle
probe to palpale the commissure and
laleral aspect of he medial coronoid
D
process.
now ready for use. A cleanly created, large portal allows
joint. The surgeon also may use both a cannula portal
easy insertion of all necessary instruments without the
and an open portal, depending on the procedure.
 need for a cannula. A larger portal also allows more
effective drainage of egress fluid, with less extravasation
Surgical  Anatomy.
.The initial step in elbow joint
into the subcutaneous tissues. The ease of insertion
arthroscopy is thorough exploration of the joint. It is
through the instrument portal usually improves as the
important to apply downward pressure to maintain
surgery progresses, unless the portal is handled roughly
adequate opening of the medial joint to allow maximum
and fluid extravasates into the adjacent tissues.
manipulation of the arthroscope with minirmal trauma
The decision to use a cannula in small animal
to the cartilage. The surgeon also should feel comfort-
arthroscopy is based on the individual surgeon's prefer-
able in manipulating the light post of the arthroscope to
ence. A cannula allows instruments to be inserted easily
rotate the bevel and maximize visualization. As the
and avoids extravasation of periportal fluid. However,
arthroscope is manipulated and the light post is rotated,
many instruments used in elbow arthroscopy are too
the camera is maintained in an upright position so that
large for a cannula that can be easily inserted into the
the proximal aspect of the joint is always at the top of
58SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 4-11 Arihroscopic manipulalion of the camera (nd arthro
 scope. The camera is aiways maintained in an upright posilion so that the
lop of the image on the screen is always dorsol, The arthroscope is twised 
relative to the camera by rolating the light and fluid posts.
A
B
FIGURE 4-12
Positioning ond
normal joint findings for arthroscopic
evalualion of the anconeus and
trochlear notch. A, Normal anconeal
process and trochlear notch with ful
carilage coverage. B, Normal centrai
trochiear notch with Full cartilcge
coverage. C, Exlreme proximal aspeci
of rhe anconeus. The elbow is mildly
Hlexed to bring the proximal tip into
view. D, Normal trochlear notch with
absence of cartilage in the central
E
notch.  E, Distal trochlear nolch ond
caudol radial heod.
the screen (Fig. 4-11). This position aids significantly in
monitor. The light post is rotated craniodistally (with
maintaining orientation. Developing a standard pattern
 the bevel directed caudodorsally) and the camera head is
for examination of the joint helps the surgeon to improve
 moved craniodistally to view the anconeus (Fig. 4-12A
arthroscopic skills and also ensures that all accessible
and B). The camera head is moved slightly proximally
areas of the joint are examined. Standard images of
 and the light post is rotated cranially to observe the
specific regions are routinely obtained, even when these
medial and axial portions of the central trochlear notch
areas are normal. In addition to documenting the type,
(see Fig. 4-12C and D). In normal joints, this area is
severity, and location of lesions, imaging and reporting
 often devoid of cartilage. The underlying subchondral
these findings aids in determining the degree of iatrogenic
bone is smooth and different in color than the bone that
trauma to the cartilage at the conclusion of the primary
is exposed during osteoarthritis. The area around the
surgery and aids in conducting assessments of healing
exposed bone is free of fbrillation, which is also unlike
or progression during second-look arthroscopy.
An1
the appearance of diseased cartilage.
example of standard examination of the medial elbow
The light post is rotated proximally and the camera
joint is to visualize and image each area of the medial
head is moved slightly proximally to visualize the distal
joint as follows:
trochlear notch (see Fig. 4-12E). In this view, the
caudomedial edge of the radial head and the medial
1. Anconeus
coronoid also become apparent. Advancing the arthro-
2. Trochlear notch
scope slightly deeper allows the lateral coronoid and
3. Lateral coronoid
lateral humeral condyle ro be visualized (Fig. 4-13).
4. Central medial coronoid
External rotation of the elbow may aid advancement of
5. Cranial medial coronoid
the arthroscope.
6. Radial head
The articurar surface of the medial coronoid is examined
7. Cranial medial humeral condyle
by moving the camera head caudally and keeping the
 8. Central medial humeral condyle
light post proximal (see Fig. 4-10). The area is closely
9. Caudal medial humeral condyle
examined for cartilage damage, including fibrillation,
10. Lateral condyle (axial region)
excoriation, and full-thickness injury. The central and
cranial aspects of the medial coronoid are examined
When the arthroscope enters the joint, the camera is
next by advancing the arthroscope further into the joint
positioned to provide proper spatial orientation on the
and moving the camera head further caudal. The area is
A
FIGURE 4-13 Positioningand
normal joint findings for arthroscopic
jouodu jouo
the coronoid process. A, Normgl lateral
coronoid process; B, normol loterol
coronoid process showing the radial
orticular surfoce; C, insertion of the
annular ligamenl on the lateral coronoid
B
C
process.
6OI SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
examined again for cartilage damage and fragmentation
(see Fig. 4-14B and C). Careful attention must be paid
of the craniolateral aspect of the medial coronoid. In a
to the region that articulates with the medial coronoid
normal joint, the radial head is also visible at this point.
of the ulna. The central portion of the area is a common
 In some cases of fragmentation of the medial coronoid
site for partial- or full-thickness cartilage defects, and
 process (FCP), the elevated or large fragment obscures
the medial aspect is a common site for osteochondrosis
the radial head.
(see Fig. 414D and E). The surgeon must be careful not
The entire visible aspect of the humerus is examined
to pull the arthroscope out of the joint when evaluating
for osteoarthritic lesions and OCD (Fig. 4-14). The light
this region. Other structures that may be examined in
post is rotated distally to allow observation of the inter-
the medial compartment of the elbow joint include the
condylar region (see Fig. 4-14A). The camera head is
synovium, medial collateral ligament, and annular and
progressively tilted cranially to view the central and
oblique ligaments (see Fig. 4-10C). The synovium is
caudal portions of the humeral condyle (see Fig. 4-14B).
seen most easily cranial to the medial coronoid and
Then the light post is rotated caudally and the camera
radial head. The light post is faced caudally and the
head is moved distally to view the most proximal portion
 camera head is moved caudally. Rotating the light post
A
B
FIGURE 4-14 Positionirng cncd
normal joint findings for arthroscopic.
evaluation of the humeral condyle.
A, Craniodistal area; B. central areq:
C. proximal aspect (a, gnconeus: b.
humerusl: D ond E, medial ospecl. in
E
the regicn typicol for osteochondros
dissecans.
slightly proximally allows the annular and oblique liga-
Fragmentation of the Medial
ments to be visualized as they cross between the radial
Coronoid Process
head and the medial coronoid (see Fig. 4-10C). Pulling
the arthroscope out slightly may allow the cranial branch
This condition is characterized by fragmentation of
of the collateral ligament to be visualized.
the cartilage and subchondral bone in the lateral aspect
Joint Lavage and Closure. The conclusion of elbow
of the medial coronoid and grade II to grade IV erosion
 of the cartilage over the center of the medial coronoid
arthroscopy includes joint lavage, surgical wound closure,
(Table 4-1). Its pathophysiology is not well defined, but
and injection of local analgesic. If an instrument cannula
is used, the joint can be lavaged with inflow through the
arthroscope cannula and outflow through the instruiment
transarticular pressure. A well-accepted hypothesis is
cannula. If the surgeon does not use an instrument
that developmental incongruity of the elbow predis-
poses certain areas of the joint to degeneration under
cannula, lavage can be achieved by connecting the fluid
physiologic loads. Two potential types of incongruity
line to the egress needle and removing the arthroscope
from its cannula, leaving the cannula in the joint. Suction
aap dans e si asuosu seunoipe 'pasodond ane
can be held at the end of the arthroscope cannula during
between the proximal articular surfaces of the radius
and ulna. Humeroulnar incongruity is an irnperfect
lavage. This method is recommended when an instru-
match berween the curvaturc of the trochlear notch of
 ment cannula is not used because the large diameter of
the ulna and the trochlea of the humerus. Signifcant
the arthroscope cannula allows more effcient lavage
and the removal of larger debris than is possible through
the egress needle. After the joint is thoroughly lavaged,
subchondral bone and erosion of the adjacent articular
the arthroscope cannula is removed and the arthroscope
the coronoid process, The lesions of FCP are varied and
and instrument portals are sutured with nylon in a
complex. Although the common name for this disease
cruciate pattern through the skin if needed. Closure of
might suggest that the loose fragment is the source of
deeper layers usually is not necessary. Bupivacaine may
be injected into the joint through the egress cannula
pain, the associated osteoarthritis and joint capsular
or needle, which is then removed. Postoperatively, a
distension is more likely to be the cause of chronic
bandage is placed on the limb for 24 hours if there is
disability. Arthroscopy of the canine elbow has dramati-
cally increased the ability to evaluate most joint surfaces.
significant swelling around the joint as a result of fluid
Through these evaluations, surgeons can observe the
extravasation.
severe degradation of cartilage that often accompanies
FCP. Although loose bodies of FCP can be removed
simply and rapidly, the challenge to the surgeon is the
Indications for Arthroscopic
lifelong management of the associated osteoarthritis.
Surgery of the Elbow Joint
History and Signalment. H
 FCP is reported in many
Indications for elbow arthroscopy in dogs and cats
purcbred and mixed-breed dogs; however, it is most
include the diagnosis and therapy of infectious, neoplastic,
common in Labrador retrievers, rottweilers, Bernese
traumatic, developmental, and degenerative diseases.
Arthroscopy provides a means of minimally invasive
synovial biopsy in cases of immune-mediated arthritis
TABE 4-l
or neoplasia. Biopsy specimens of the synovium are
Proposadl Grading of Artirular Cartilage Lesion
Chapter 2). The sharp biting action on these instruments
with Arthroscopy
permits several biopsy specimens to be obtained rapidly
and in a single step. Cartilage or soft bone biopsy may
GRADE
FINDING
 be performed with very small trephines or a meniscal
0
Normal cartilage
vascular punch. Biopsy specimens are easiest to obtain
 Chondromalacia Isofening and swelling!
at the periphery of the joint surface, and the portal for
-od on pyou aq on pu u junnsu asdotq ar
Fibrilltion
vide a proper angle for the instrument. After the area
 Superficial issures with α velverlike appearance 
for biopsy is identifed, a needle is inserted into the joint
"auosalggos, o io Bumd ysm uoisoa joiyadns
to identify a portal that allows the instrument to contact
appearance
the area at an angle that is as close to perpendicular
Lesions that do not reach the subchondral bone
as possible.
The most common application of elbow arthroscopy
IF
Deep fissures that reach the subchondral bone
 in small animal surgery is to diagnose and treat develop-
Deep ulceration that does not reach the subchondrai
mental and degenerative diseases, specifically OCD, FCP,
bone
IV
Exposure of the subchondral bone, wih or wihout
ununited anconeal process (UAP), and osteoarthritis.
These diseases are often grouped together as canine
bone cavilation
elhow dysplasia.
Eburnated bone
62 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
mountain dogs, and golden retrievers, and has been
dogs. Clinical signs may become apparent as early as 4
or 5 months of age, but patients may present at any time
after this age. The history usually includes unilateral or
bilateral lameness and exercise intolerance. In mild cases,
lameness is apparent only after extensive exercise.
Physical Examination Findings. Physical exami-
nation usually shows generalized muscle arrophy of the
affected limbs that is most apparent over the scapular
spine and acromion process. Manipulation of the elbows
elicits pain and decreased range of motion, primarily in
flexion. Palpation of the elbow joint may show mild to
severe effusion. As the disease progresses, the effusion
changes to fibrosis and then to bony proliferation, which
can be differentiated by palpation. In mild cases, minimal
 abnormal findings are noted on orthopedic exarmination.
Differential Diagnosis.  The differential diagnosis
includes osteochondrosis, UAP, osteoarthritis, panosteitis,
septic arthritis, and immune-mediatcd joint disease.
FIGURE 4-16 Flexed ateral view o' 0 conine elbow wirh mcderale
osteoarthrilis and a fragmented medial coronoid procoss, showing carly
Diagnosis. Diagnostic tests for elbow dysplasia
osleophytosis on the anconeus [a) cnd lcck of clariry in the region of the
include radiography, arthrocentesis, nuclear scintigraphy,
mecial coronoid process Ib].
and computed tomography (CT). Radiographic findings
vary dramatically with the severiry of disease. In the
mildest cases, only sclerosis of the ulna in the region of
of osteoarthritis, with a predominance of inature mono-
the medial coronoid process is visible (Fig. 4-15). This
nuclear cells.
finding is best seen on a lateral radiograph and is often
CT allows visualization of the fragment that usually
the earliest radiographic sign of disease. More advanced
is not possible with plain films (Figs. 4-17 and 4-18).
findings include blunting of the region of the coronoid
CT also may show an abnormally shaped media!
and osteophytosis. The initial site of osteophyte
 coronoid or an alteration in bone densiry. A high degree
production is the proximal aspect of the anconeal
 Of suspicion of FCP may be based on radiographs alone
process, which is best visualized on a flexed lateral view
hecause of the development of characteristic secondary
(Fig. 4-16). Craniocaudal views show lipping and
 changes. Therefore, CT is not necessary to justify arthro-
osteophytosis in the region of the medial coronoid
 scopic exploration. In most, but not all, cases, CT and
process and epicondyles. Arthrocentesis usually shows
arthroscopy findings concur. In a few cases, howeve,
cell counts of 2000 to 5000/μl and differentials rypical
CT shows fissuring of the medial coronoid process that is
not visible or palpable arthroscopically. This discrepancy
in fndings is most likely the result of incomplete frag-
mentation of the coronoid. Computerized tomography
findings may include partial fraginentation, a full non-
displaced fragment, migrated fragments, a misshapen
medial coronoid, abnormal bone density, or incongruity
of the articular surfaces of the humerus, ulna, and radius.
Treatiment. Medical treatment of FCP consists of
anti-inflammatory medication and control of activity
and body weighr.
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
Management.
 In general, juvenile dogs with FCP are
young, hcalthy patients requiring minimal preoperative
laboratory screening. A standard aesthetic protocol
including preemptive pain medication is used. Post-
operative pain is controlled with cold therapy, opioids,
and NSAIDs.
FIGURE 4-15  Lateral view of a corine elbow with mild osteoarthrilis
anda fragmentedmediol coronoidprocess,showingmild scerosis
Surgical Intervention. Arthroscopy allows a much
and lack of clarity in the region of the medial coronoid process (bl.
 greater apprcciation of the variety of lesions that occur
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT■ 63
condyle is also seen in many cases, and its arthroscopic
management is described later. These accompanying
lcsions adversely affect the prognosis. In fact, osteo-
arthritis probably has a much greater effect than frag-
mentation on the prognosis of elbow dysplasia.
FCP may involve only the most craniolateral portion
or a much larger section, Numerous variations occur in
the appearance of the fragimentation. Variations in disease
of the medial coronoid process include the following
(see Figs. 4-19 and 4-20):
Chondromalacia
Avascularity of bonc
Incomplete fragmentation
Fragment in situ
Minimally migrated fragment
Fully migrated fragment
In most cases, the radiographic fndings cannot be
correlated with the type of coronoid disease. Direct
visualization of the region of fragmentation is difficult,
and other factors may affect radiographic changes. CT
aids in differentiation of the type of coronoid disease in
many cases, but is not as conclusive as direct arthro-
scopic visualization.
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed
earlier. With the advent of arthroscopy, in bilareral cases,
both elbows are treated simultaneously. FCP is often
 bilateral, and radiographic and clinical changes may be
FIGURE 4-17  Computed tomography of α conine elbow with mild
fragmertarion of the medial coronoid process. A line of fragmontation
[arrow] is visibie on the craniola*eral exlent of the medial coroncid
process.
in association with FCP than does open arthrotomy.
Although the definitive benefit of surgical management
 over medical management is not known, arthroscopic
management of FCP is growing in populariry. The use
of arthroscopy to manage FCP is justified based on its
ability to provide minimaily invasive assessment of
disease, remove fragments, and debride diseased
cartilage.
A rremendous variation of combinations of lesions
may be identified in cases of FCP. The major categories
of lesions identified are as follows (Figs. 4-19 and 4-20):
Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process
Osteochondrosis of the humeral condyle
Osteoarthritis of the humeral condyle
Osteoarthritis of the medial coronoid
Osteochondrosis of the humeral condyle is identified
FIGURE 4-18Computec lomogrophy of α canine elbow wm
in a significant percentage of cases, and management of
this lesion is described later. Osteoarthritis of the medial
frogmient jorrow is visibie or the crarial exter of the med'a coroncid
coronoid process or the medial portion of the humeral
proce55
64  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
E
FIGURE 4-19Positioning
fo
arthroscopic evaluation of the mediol
coronoid process. Abnormal joint
Findings are shown. A. Grace Il io Ill
fibrillation of the mediolcoronoid
process.B,Abrasinarhroplasy of the
medial coronoid proces with a power
bone after obrasion arthroplasty of the
 medial coronoid process. Strands of the
D. Line of fragmentotion farrow) of the 
intacr articulor corilage. E, Elevoted
fragment of the medialcoronoid
process showing the ypical yellow
discoloration of avascutar bone. F and
G, In siu fragment of the medidl 
F
G
coronoid process.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT I65
A
B
FIGURE 4-20 Positioningfor
orthroscopic evaluation of the medial
coronoid process. Aonormal joint
findings qre showr. A. Elevation of α
E
fragment from cranial to caudal with an
D
arthroscopic curette. B, Retrievol of a
fragment  with  grosping forceps
C, Minimally migrated frogment o. the
medial coronoid process showing both
the   cartlage  and  underiying   bone.
D. Annula: and collatera! ligaments after
the remova of c migrated osteochondral
fragment  of  he  medial  coronoid 
process. E. Fully migrated osteochondrol
hragment of the mediai coronoid
process. The radial head is obscured
from view by the large fragment.
F,Second-lcok arthroscopy showing
the medial coronoid process. G, Second-
look arh:coscopy showing foilure of
healing of the medial coronoid cnd a
humeral grade IV carilage iesion.
F
G
66I SMALLANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
subtle, so after achieving proficiency with arthroscopic
texture, mild chondromalacia, or mild fissuring (see Fig.
techniques, the surgeon may choose to routinely examine
4-19A and Table 4-1). If chondromalacia is present, the
both elbows. The operative sites are clipped and prepared
cartilage is soft and fragile when carefully palpated with
as described above. A hanging limb preparation provides
a right-angle probe. If the cartilage is obviously diseased,
the greatest degree of freedom for manipulating limb
it is debrided, and yellowed avascular bone may be
position. Liberal clipping and thorough sterile prcpa-
visible beneath the cartilage. In these cases, the bone is
ration are recommended because an open arthrotomy
removed with the burr attachment of a small-joint
may be required. A 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique
shaver, a hand curetre, or hand burr (see Fig. 4-19B). A
arthroscope is used in most cases. Basic instrumentation
 S-0 curerte is inserted into the joint, and the malacic or
includes probes to inspect the cartilage surface or help
fbrillated cartilage is gently scraped to expose the under-
raise a fragment, graspers to remove the fragment, and
lying avascular bone. The avascular bone is removed
a hand curette or hand burr to prepare the lesion bed
until the remaining bone is pale red or bleeding is
(see Fig. 4-3). A hand burr or power bur can be used
apparent (see Fig. 4-19C). When this type of procedure
to grind down large fragments. If the surgeon works
is performed in a small joint, such as the elbow, the
through an instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas
egress needle may become clogged with debris and may
and switching sticks facilitate the surgery. The dog is
need to be flushed. Alternatively, the fluid flow may be
positioned in dorsal recumbency, and the first limb to be
switched intermittently (in through the egress needle
operated on is placed over a sandbag or an elbow brace
and out through the arthroscope cannula) and the arthro-
(see Fig. 4-6).
scope removed from the cannula to thoroughly flush
 Egress is established with a needle or cannula (sce
thejoint.
Figs. 4-7 to 4-9), lactated Ringer's solution is instilled
Fluid flow to the joint is stopped intermittently to
to distend the joint, and the arthroscope site is
allow the surgeon to evaluate the vascularity of the
cstablished. The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress
 bone without the positive pressure created by the irri-
flow is established through the arthroscope cannula.
 gation fluid. It is important to preserve as much normal
The caudoproximal portion of the joint, including the
bone and cartilage as possible. The efficacy of removing
anconeus, trochlear notch, and caudal aspect of the
avascular bone in this disease has not been determined,
humeral condyle, is inspected for evidence of inflam-
but removing this marerial may allow revascularization
mation or cartilage disease. The region of the lateral
 and healing with bone and fbrocartilage. Because of the
coronoid is inspected for cartilage damage (see Fig.
mild and presumably early nature of these lesions,joints
4-13). The lighr post is rotated distally, and the medial
usually have minimal preoperative effusion and are
portion of the humeral condyle is inspected for OCD of
arthroscopically tighr. For this reason, insertion of the
osteoarthritic lesions. The camera head and the light post
arthroscope and instrumentation is difficult and much
are positioned caudaily to visualize the craniomedial
more likely to damage the cartilage. The surgeon must
portion of the joint. If the radial head is visible, the size
minimize further cartilage damage during arthroscopy.
and location of fragmentation must be evaluated. If no
In tighr joints, this goal is best achieved by slowly
fragment is visible, the most cranial aspect of the medial
fatiguing the joint with valgus pressure and using the
coronoid is inspected for evidence of cartilage disease Or
smallest possible instruments with gentle, precise
avascular bone (see Fig. 4-19). Avascular bone appears
movements.
as a slight yellow discoloration visualized through the
 In another variation of FCP, avascular bone is visible
articular cartilage. The condition of this region of the
through the cartilage. The CT and arthroscopic findings
are similar to those described earlier, but arthroscopy
The arthroscope is positioned such that the cranio-
shows a fine, yellowed line of avascular bone that is
medial region of the joint is clearly visible. With the
visible through the thinned but intact articular cartilage
guide needle, the surgeon triangulates the position for
(see Fig. 4-i9D). In some cases, the entire fragment
the instrument port (see Figs. 4-7 to 4-9). The most
region appears avascular, but is palpably stable. In these
common reason for not visualizing the guide needle in
cases, the lesion is likely to progress, and removal of the
the joint is crossing the arthroscope. After the position
avascular bone is recommended. In most of these cases
for the instrument portal is established, the surgeon must
and those described earlier, additional arthritic lesions
decide whether to work through an open instrument
 are rare, presumably bccause the underlying abnormality
portal, an instrument cannula, or a combination. If the
is mild. A small curette is carefully inserted into the
surgeon chooses to work through an open portal site, a
joint to remove the cartilage and avascular bone (see
no. 11 Bard-Parker scalpel blade is used to make a 3- to
Fig. 4-19E). If the surgeon is unsure whether the bone
7-mm soft tissne tunnel adjacent to the guide needle. A
is vascular or avascular, it is best left alone and medical
ap o jeod aun ynon paiasu si joieio jun
treatment instituted. If lameness worsens or persists, the
the soft tissue tunnel. Alternatively, the obturator and
region is reassessed with second-lok arthroscopy.
instrument cannula may be inserted at this time.
In FCP, when a fragment initially separates, it may
In the mildest cases of FCP, no lesion is visible arthro-
remain in its original location (in situ) (see Fig. 4-19F
scopically, although CT shows a minor fissure, hypodense
and G). A small (s-O) curette is inserted into the joint,
bone, and adjacent regions of hyperdense bone. A right-
and the tip is placed cranial to the tip of the coronoid in
angle probe is inserted to palpate the medial coronoid
the region of fragmentation (see Fig. 4-20A). The curette
surface. Palpation of the cartilage may show normal
1! ysnd on suaugeny qyi moaq pue jo juoy u! pasn s!
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT?67
toward the arthroscope. This approach is usually easier
 and 10 minutes off for two applications. Commercial
and safer than pushing the fragment from caudal to
 cold packs or a commercial circulating cold water pack
cranial, is less likely to cause iatrogenic damage to the
 can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or
cartilage, and places the fragment in a location that
 packs of frozen vegetables can be used. If the dog is
allows easy retrieval (see Fig. 4-20B). The curette is
dismissed from the hospital the day of surgery, NSAIDs
removed, and a small-joint grasper is inserted to retrieve
 and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for
the fragment in whole or in parts. During the retrieval
administration at bome. If the dog remains in the
process, fluid flow may cause fragment pieces to float
hospital overnight, buprenorphine is administered in
into other portions of the joint. This problem can be
 the evening. NSAIDs and butorphanol are dispensed for
diminished by slowing or stopping the fluid flow for a
 administration at home. NSAIDs are continued for 5 days,
short time during fragment retrieval or by reversing the
whereas butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours.
direction of flow (in through the egress portal) to push
At home, the owner continues cold therapy for the first
the fragments back toward the working space. Twisting
2 days after surgery. A high-quality chondroprotective
the small-joint grasper during retrieval of the fragment
complex (glucosamine/chondroitin) may be used for
can free it from small areas of synovial attachment if
 additional anti-inflammatory effects and to promote the
present.
healing of cartilage lesions. After the surgical swelling
Partiaily migrated fragments are usually small and
is gone (48 to 72 hours), the owner should begin heat
easily retrieved (see Fig. 4-20C). However, they may
therapy and passive motion and stretch exercises. First,
have soft tissue attachments, particularly to the annular
the owner applies moist heat to the elbow region with a
ligament. The surgeon inserts a smali-joint grasper,
commercial heat pack or moistened warm towel. The
grasps the fragment, and locks the grasper. The grasper
owner should hold the warm pack against the inside of
his own elbow for 30 seconds to ensure that ir is not to0
tissue attachments (alligator roll), and the fragment is
hot. Then the warm pack is placed over the patient's
removed. When using and rotating a grasper, the surgeon
elbow area for 10 minutes. Afterward, the owner removes
must be careful to avoid damaging adjacent cartilage.
the waim pack and begins gentle flexion and extension
The serrated jaws of a grasper can be particularly
1novements of the elbow joint, starting with small move-
damaging to articular cartilage, and can leave partial-
 ments and gradually increasing to the limit of comfort
thickness linear abrasions that will not heal and may
 over a period of 1 to 2 minutes. At the limit of comfort,
contribute to long-term morbidity.
the joint is held in position for 10 seconds. The motion
Larger, more chronically migrated fragments are more
and stretch exercises are repeated five times two to three
difficult to remove because of their size, location, and
times daily. The client should examine the portal sites
soft tissue attachments (see Fig. 4-20D). Once migrated,
daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
fragments may continue to grow and may become very
 Exercise is limited to controled walking on a leash
large (see Fig. 4-20E). To remove these fragiments with
for the first 4 weeks. Dogs undergoing arthroscopy use
a grasper alone, the surgeon inserts a locking grasper
the legs immediately after surgery. To increase the
and removes the fragment in one piece. Alternatively,
weightbearing load on the limbs, walking at a slow pace
the grasper is used to break the fragment into smaller
is recommended. As postoperative time increases, the
parts, being careful to avoid damage to adjacent carti-
pace can be hastened. To increase the range of motion
lage. Alternatively, the surgeon can insert a smalljoint
in the elbow when walking, the client should walk the
shaver with a shielded burr and suction. With the shield
dog in high grass (e.g., weeds), shallow water, or sand,
protecting the radial head, humerus, and remaining
which forces the dog to pick up the feet and step high
coronoid, the surgeon burrs the fragment down to a size
with the legs. After 4 weeks, the owner should intro-
that can be removed or burrs away the entire fragment
duce limited amounts of free activiry with controlled
(see Fig. 4-19B). Fragments may migrate cranially to a
walking, starting with 5 minutes of free activity and
point where they cannot be reached with a burr or
increasing to 30 minutes over the next 2 weeks. After 6
grasper In this case, a 5-0 curette is inserted, and the tip
t0 8 weeks, free activity is gradually increased to normal
is passed medial and cranial to the fragment. The tip of
levels. If during any exercise period (controlled or free
the curetre is used to push parrs of the fragment or the
activity), the dog becomes sore or is sore the next day,
entire fragment back into the working space. This tech-
the owner should decrease the pace and return to con-
nique can be difficult at frst, but once mastered, permits
trolled activity for 2 to 3 days. Swimming is encouraged
retrieval of most cranially migrated fragments.
if the dog can enter and exit the water without causing
After the fragments are completely removed, joint
 stress to the joints. Enrollment in a professional physical
lavage is performed to remove remaining bone debris. If
therapy program also may be of beneft.
OCD or additional cartilage damage is identified, treat-
Patients are routinely examined 12 weeks post-
ment is provided as described in the following sections.
 operatively and should undergo evaluation by palpation
At the conclusion of the procedure, the surgeon injects
and force plate analysis. Continued deterioration or lack
bupivacaine, if desired, and closes the skin wounds.
 of improvcment at this time is an indication for second-
Postoperative Care.(
 Cold therapy is applied to the
debridement of any unhealed lesions, and for potential
elbow during recovery to relieve pain and reduce swelling.
corrective or modifying osteotomies to alter loads on
Cold therapy is applied by alternating 15 minutes on
the areas of diseased cartilage (see Fig. 4-20F and G).
68I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Complications.(
Complications are rare and usually
OSTEOCHONDROSIS OF THE
minimally significant. A relatively common complication
HUMERAL CONDYLE
is extravasation of fluid into the soft tissues surround-
ing the joint. This situation is managed by postoperative
 Osteochondrosis is a common disease of the canine
bandaging and usually resolves within 24 hours. As with
elbow that occurs alone or in combination with FCP. In
all surgical cases, the owners are warned of the risk of
 affected dogs, a region of abnormaly thickened carti-
infection, although the incidence in elbow arthroscopy
lage at the most medial and distal region of the humeral
appears low. Nerve damage is reported secondary
to
condyle separates partially or completely from the sub-
human arthroscopy, but the risk of this complication
chondral bone. Potential mechanisms of this disease
in canine clbow arthroscopy appears low. The most
include abnormal maturation of cartilage, compromised
common complication is likely iatrogenic damage to the
vascular supply to the region, trauma, nutrition, and
articular cartilagc as a result of the insertion and manipu-
genetic predisposition.
lation of instruments. Some degrec of cartilage daniage is
unavoidable. The magnification provided by arthroscopy
History
and Signalment.  Like FCP, the most
shows cartilage damage that likely occurs similarly
commonly affected breeds include Labrador retrievers,
with routine arthrocentesis and open surgery. It is the
rottweilers, Bernese mountain dogs, and golden
surgeon's responsibility to minimize this damage and
retrievers. Affected dogs may have a history of unilateral
thus to avoid significant contribution to the progression
or bilateral lameness and exercise intolerance stating as
of osteoarthritis. This goal is achieved through the use
early as 3 to 4 months of age, although most dogs are
of appropriately sized instruments, adequate joint dis-
 presented for treatment several months later.
tension and positioning, and gentle manipulation within
the joint.
Differcntial Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
includes fragmented coronoid process, UAP, osteo-
Prognosis.
 The prognosis after arthroscopic manage-
arthritis, panosteitis, and septic arthritis.
ment of FCP is not known and likely yaries tremen-
dously with the severity of disease, the function of the
Diagnostic Findings.
Physical examination findings
animal, postoperative management, and the patient's
include generalized forelimb muscle atrophy, pain and
temperanent. Although many dogs with mild disease
decreased range of motion of the elbow joints, and mild
return to normal function without analgesic therapy,
t0) severe lameness. OCD can cause complete recumbency,
some show progressive lameness. Similarly, although
especially when multiple joints are affected. Diagnostic
the most severely affected dogs rypically are given the
tests include radiography, arthrocentesis, and CT. Radio.
worst prognosis, especially dogs with moderate to
graphic findings vary dramatically with the severity of
severe elbow effusion, many of these dogs also show the
disease. The typical finding is a region of subchondral
greatest improvemenr after arthroscopy. Owners who
bone loss on the distal and medial portion of the humeral
are considering arthroscopic treatment for FCP should
condyle (Fig. 4-21) that is hest appreciated on a cranio-
be given the following information:
caudal radiograph. More advanced findings include
sclerosis around the affected region and osteophytosis.
1. Elbow arthroscopy is minimally invasive and has
The initial site of osteophyte production is the proxinal
minimal risk of morbidiry.
aspect of the anconeal process, which is best visualized
2.
The outcome cannor be predicted, particularly
 on a flexed lateral view. Arthrocentesis usually shows
withour arthroscopic visualization of the severity
cell counts of 2000 to 5000/μl and differentials typical
of cartilage defects.
Of osteoarthritis, with a predominance of mature mono-
3. In clinically and radiographically mild cases,
nuclear cells. CT confrms the area of subchondral bone
arthroscopy offers at least a 50% chance of
loss and sclerosis.
improvement, and in some cases, the signs
resolve without the need for analgesic therapy.
Treatment.
 Medical treatment of OCD consists of
4. In clinically and radiographically severe cases,
anti-inflammatory medication and control of activity
the prognosis for complete resolution of signs is
and body weight.
poor. However, arthroscopy provides important
inforimation about the severity of disease and is
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
part of the long-term management of elbow
Management.
. In general, juvenile dogs with OCD are
Osteoarthritis.
young, healthy patients requiring minimal preoperative
5.
 Elbow osteoarthritis may require lifelong
laboratory screening. A standard anesthetic protocol
management that may include additional
including preemptive pain medication is used. Post-
arthroscopy, corrective or modifying osteotomies,
operative pain is controlled with cold therapy, opioids,
physical therapy, and medical management.
and NSAIDs.
6. It is advisable to address osteoarthritis as early
as possible, and given the minimal morbidiry
Surgical  Intervention.
Portal sites and surgical
associated with arthroscopy, it plays an
anatomy were discussed earlier. With the advent of
important role in the management of this
arthroscopy, both elbows are treated simultaneously if
disease.
the condition is bilateral. The condition is often bilateral,
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT? 69
complete visualization of the caudal portion of the flap.
With the aid of switching sticks, the instrument and
arthroscope portals can be reversed to permit visuali-
zation of the caudal area of the lesion.
The surgeon inspects the caudoproximal portion of
the joint, including the anconeus, trochlear notch, and
caudal aspect of the humeral condyle for evidence of
inflammation or cartilage disease. The camera head is
moved caudally and the light post is rotated distally to
bring the most distal portion of the humeral condyle
into view (Fig. 4-22). The lesion may appear as soft,
proliferative cartilage ar the medial extent of the joint or
as an obvious flap of cartilage at the medial extent of
the joint (see Fig. 4-22A and B). The lesion may be as
large as 15 mm long and 5 mm or more wide. The rest
of the joint is explored for additional lesions, including
FCP and cartilage damage.
After the joinr is thoroughly explored and the extent
of the lesion defined, an instrument portal is created
with or without a cannula. If the lesion is partially
detached, graspers are inserted to grip the flap (see Fig.
4-22C). With the graspers locked on the flap, the sur-
geon peels the flap from the underlying bone, working
around the periphery of the lesion. Because normal car-
tilage does not peel off, there is little risk of additional
cartilage damage with this technique. The flap may be
removed in one piece or in multiple smaller pieces. After
the flap is removed, the difference berween an OCD
lesion and other types of cartilage damage is obvious. A
FIGURE 4-21
Craniocaudal radiograph of a canine elbow wih mild
crater is caused by the absence of norimal subchondral
 osteoarthritis crd osteochondrosis dissecens larrowl.
bone thickness. This crater does not occur with most
other types of cartilage disease (see Fig. 4-22D and E).
The surgeon palpates the edges of the lesion with a right-
and radiographic and clinical changes may be subtle,
angle probe or a small curette, removes any remaining
so once proficiency with the technique is achieved, the
loose cartilage, and creates edges that are relatively per-
r o     
pendicular to the joint surface (see Fig. 4-22F). If bleed-
on both elbows. The operative site is clipped and pre-
ing of the subchondral bone bed is not apparent when
pared as described earlier. A hanging limb preparation
fluid inflow is stopped, then microfracture or abrasion
provides the greatest degree of freedom for manipu-
with a burr or curette is indicated. This technique is
lating limb position. Liberal clipping and thorough sterile
described later (see Fig. 4-22G).
preparation are necessary because an open arthrotomy
After the fragments are removed, the joint is lavaged
may be required. A 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique
to remove remaining bone debris. If FCP or additional
arthroscope is used in most cases. Basic instrumentation
cartilage damage is identified, treatment is instituted as
includes probes to inspect the cartilage surface or help
described later. At the conclusion of the procedure,
raise a fragment, graspers to remove the fragnent, and
bupivacaine is injected if desired, and the skin wounds
a hand curette or hand burr to prepare the lesion bed. If
are closed.
the surgeon works through an instrument cannula,
different-sized cannulas and switching sticks facilitare
Postoperative Care.I
 Postoperative management is
the surgery. The dog is positioned in dorsal recumbency,
identical to that of FCP.
and the first limb to be operated on is abducted over a
sandbag or an elbow brace.
Complications.(
Complications associated with elbow
Egress is established with a needle or cannula, lactated
OCD arthroscopy are rare and usually of litrle signifi-
Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint, and the
cance. A relatively common complication is extravasation
arthroscope portal is established (see Figs. 4-7 to 4-9).
of fluid into the soft tissues surrounding the joint. This
The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow
is
may be managed by postoperative bandaging and usually
established through the arthroscope cannula. When a
resolves within 24 hours. The most common compli-
standard medial portal is used, OCD of the humeral
cation associated with elbow arthroscopy is iatrogenic
condyle is most commonly seen directly adjacent to the
damage to the articular cartilage. This damage occurs
site of insertion of the arthroscope. Becausc of the
with insertion of needles and cannulas and manipulation
location and size of these lesions, the arthroscope portal
of instruments. It is the surgeon's responsibility
to
should be placed further caudal in the joint to permit
ensure minimization of this damage to avoid significant
70 I· SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
FIGURE 4-22 Posilioring lor arthiro
scopic evalualion or the media. porion
of the hurneral condyle. Abnormcl joirl
findings are shown. A, osteochoncrosis
dissccans (OCD) Hlap. The edges are
easiy yisible thiough the arthroscope.
B, OCD Hap. In the elbow. the tlap
offen appears as ar irregular surface cot
cartilage direcily above ihe arthroscope
tip. C, Tho use of grasping forceps ir
the conine clbow for removal o an
OCD Hlap. D. Subchondral boorne bed
gfter remova! of an OCD flap. E, Sub·
chondal bonebed after removal of ar
OCD flap. The obvicus margins of the?
lesions are not cs apparent with osteo-
arthritic carlilage diseuse. F, Lse of c
curelte to ieave tho edges of the OC[
bed at right angles to the bone surfae.
G. Bleeding of the ODC bed alter
一
Cureliage ond discontinuation of Hluid
G
nflow.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT O? 71
contribution to the progression of osteoarthritis. This is
arthritis, with a predominance of mature mononuclear
achieved through rthe use of appropriately sized instru-
cells. CT confirms the area of subchondral bone loss
ments, adequate joint distension and positioning, and
and sclerosis.
gentle manipulation within the joint.
Treatment.
Medical treatment of OCD consists of
Prognosis.
The extent of cartilage damage in elbow
anti-inflammatory medication, and control of athletic
OCD may be more severe than that seen in FCP; how-
activity and body weight.
ever, the quality of bleeding of the subchondral bone
bed is often better. Second-look arthroscopy confrms
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
that these lesions tend to fll with fbrocartilage, although
Management.
 In general, juvenile dogs with UAP are
no data are available from long-term second-look studies
to demonstrate the durability of this healing. Like FCP,
laboratory screening. A standard anesthetic protocol
the prognosis is variable. Some dogs show continued
including preemptive pain medication is used. Post-
deterioration, whereas others show significant improve-
 operative pain is controlled with coid therapy, opioids,
ment. Early clinical findings are often related ro the size
and NSAIDs.
of the lesion. Management of these cases must be con-
sidered a lifelong process, and reevaluation is indicated
Surgical Intervention.
 Reported surgical therapies
to determine whether the patient needs second-look
include fragment removal, screw-and-pin fixation, and
arthroscopy or osteotomies to alter the loads on the
ulnar osteotomy to reduce pressure on the process and
healing regions of cartilage.
encourage healing. None of these approaches alone has
provided satisfactory results in a substantial case series,
UNUNITED ANCONEAL PROCESS
arthritis with variable degrees of disability. An ulnar
osteotomy  in combination  with an anconeal com-
Little anecdotal or published information is available
pression screw provided successful results in two clinical
On the use of arthroscopy to manage UAP in dogs,
studies. This method is currently the treatment of choice.
although arthroscopy provides visual access to the lesion
Arthroscopy may be used in conjunction with this treat-
and theoretically may play a role in treatment.
ment to visualize the fragment during screw fxation and
decrease the risk of damage to the articular surface.
History and Signalment.
 UAP is primarily a disease
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed
of Gernan shepherds. The center of ossification of the
earlier. The operative site is clipped and prepared as
anconeus should unite with the proximal ulna at
described earlier. A hanging limb preparation provides
the greatest degree of freedom for manipulating limb
later in German shepherds and greyhounds. Failure of
 position. Liberal clipping and thorough sterile prepa-
unification can be definitively diagnosed after 5 months
  do  q s a 
of age and may be caused by failure of endochondral
be required. A 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthro-
ossification or joint incongruence that places excessive
scope is used in most cases. In larger dogs, a 2.7-mm
pressure on the process. Dogs often present between 6
arthroscope may be used. The dog is positioned in dorsal
and 18 months of age with unilateral or bilateral fore-
recumbency and the limb to be operated on is abducted
limb lameness. Other clinical signs include elbow joint
 Over a sandbag or an elbow brace.
pain, effusion, and decreased range of motion as well as
Egress is established with a needle or cannula (see
generalized forelimb muscle atrophy. The diagnosis is
Figs. 4-7 to 4-9), lactated Ringer's solution is instilled
usually easily confirmed by a lateral or flexed radio-
to distend the joint, and rhe arthroscope site is established.
graph of the elbow that shows the failure of unification
The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow is established
(Fig. 4-23A).
through the arthroscope cannula.
The cranial portion of the joint is inspected for OCD,
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
FCP, and other cartilage disease. The camera head is
includes fragmented coronoid process, UAP, osteo-
moved caudodistally, and the light post is rotated distally
arthritis, panosreitis, septic arthritis, and immune-
to bring the anconeal process into view. The UAP lesion
mediated joint disease.
appears as a line of fbrous tissue and irregular cartilage
between the anconeus and the remainder of the uina
Diagnostic Findings.1
Physical examination findings
(see Fig. 423B). A small Kirschner wire is inserted,
include generalized forelimb muscle atrophy, pain, and
beginning at the caudal aspect of the ulna. The pin is
decreased range of motion of the elbow joints as well as
directed perpendicular to the line between the ulna and
mild to severe lameness. Radiography is the diagnostic
the anconeal process. Through the arthroscope, the
method of choice. The primary finding on a lateral
surgeon can observe the pin passing between the ulna
radiograph is a radiolucent line between the anconeal
and the anconeus (see Fig. 4-23C). A second Kirschner
process and the olecranon (see Fig. 4-23A). Additional
wire is inserted parallel to the first, but 5 to 10 mm
radiographic findings include generalized osteophytosis
distally. If a cannulated drill system is available, a 2.5-mm
and sclerosis. Arthrocentesis usually shows cell counts
cannulated drill bit is used over the Kirschner wire to
 of 2000 to 5000/μl and differentials typical of osteo-
drill a hole to the tip of the anconeus. Alternatively,
72W SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
E
FGURE 4-23 Radiographic and
arhroscop'c findings ond trectmert of
a canine elbow with jnunited ancorieal
process. A, lateral view showing the
fissure 'ine |arrowl berween ihe anconeus
and the rcmainder of the ulna; B, arhro
scopic view of the fissure line ol an
ununited onconecal process; C, crthiro
scopic view of a orthopedic pin placed
ocross tne fissure line; D. arthroscopic
view of a bcne screw crossing he
fissure line; E. arthroscopic view alfe*
the bone screw is tightened anc the
fiinng
view of carly healing of lag sc'ew
fixation anc ulnar osteotomy.
the Kirschner wire is removed and a standard 2.5-mm
but had some impairment after heavy exercise. Their
drill bit is used to make the hole. The depth of the hole
outcome was considered good. In a second study of four
is measured, and if a partially threaded 3.5-mm can-
cases, clinical outcome as assessed by the owner and
cellous bone screw has appropriate thread length, it is
veterinarian was excellent in all cases.
used to compress the nonunion site. Alternatively, the
proximal segment is overdrilled with a 4.0-mm drill and
a fully threaded cancellous bone screw is inserted in
Osteoarthritis of the Elhow
lag fashion. The drill and screw are observed through
the arthroscope to avoid additional articular injury (see
In many cases of FCP and some cases of OCD, osteo-
Fig. 4-23D).
arthritic lesions are identifed on the medial portion of
The skin is incised along the caudolateral aspect of
the humeral condyle and the medial coronoid process.
the joint, beginning at the level of the coronoid process
These lesions are the likely source of chronic disability.
and ending at the junction of the proximal and middle
Thei1 cause remains unknown, but they are typical of
thirds of the ulna. The muscles are dissected off of the
lesions associated with increased transarticular pressure
ulnar diaphysis at a level approximately 2 to 3 cm distal
as a result of joint incongruence or malalignment. Intra-
to the level of the coronoid process, and the ulna is
articular arthroscopic management of these lesions is
isolated with small Hohman retractors. A power oscil-
routinely recommended in the treatment of arthritis in
lating saw is used to cut the ulnar diaphysis in a caudo-
humans,
although the long-term benefits are not
proximal to craniodistal direction. The proximal segment
known. If the underlying cause is eliminated (e.g., acute
is gently levered dorsally with an osteotome or periosteal
trauma, loose body abrasion), then arthroscopic treat-
elevator. A small (5/64-inch) Steinmann pin is inserted
ment of the arthritic lesions may aid in reformation of a
down the ulnar shaft to avoid rotation of the proximal
low-friction surface of fibrocartilage. If the underlying
segment. Bending over the proximal aspect of the pin
cause of damage to bone and cartilage is not eliminated,
prevents migration of the distal pin and allows easier
howevet, the disease process will be perpetuated and the
removal after the osteotomy heals (see Fig. 4-23F).
lesions are less likely to heal adequately. The primary
cause of these lesions in canine FCP is unknown, and it
Postoperative Care. A bandage may be placed on
is not known whether the underlying cause manifests
the limbs for 24 hours to decrease swelling. Cold therapy
only during skeletal development or persists after
is applied to the elbow during recovery to relieve pain
skeletal growth is complete.
and reduce swelling. The rest of the immediate post-
Numerous scales are used to grade gross arthritic
operative protocol is identical to that for FCP.
lesions (Figs. 4-24 and 4-25). One recommended scale
 Exercise is limited to controlled walking on a leash
is shown in Table 4-1. The surgeon must assess the
for the first 6 weeks. Radiographs of the elbow are
lesions and decide whether arthroscopic debridement
obtained at this time to evaluate for healing of the
 and treatment will contribute to the healing of the joint
osteotomy and union of the UAP. If healing of the
or potentially contribute to degeneration. Partial-
osteotomy has occurred, the intramedullary pin
15
thickness cartilage lesions that do not penetrate the
removed. After 6 weeks, the owner should begin limited
tidemark do not heal as readily as those that penetrate
amounts of free activity with controlled walking,
this mark. The surgeon may remove partial-thickness
starting with 5 minutes of free activity and increasing to
lesions in an effort to promote healing by remporarily
30 minutes over the next 2 weeks. After 8 weeks, free
increasing the severity of the defect.
activity is gradually increased to normal levels. If during
Management of articular cartilage lesions is based on
any exercise period (controlled or free activiry), the dog
the idea thar healing, through the formation of
becomes sore or is sore the next day, the owner should
fibrocarrilage, is promoted when the lesion is exposed to
decrease the pace and return to controlled activity for 2
blood that contains mesenchymal stem cell precursors.
t0 3 days. Swimming may be encouraged if the dog can
Several methods are used. Abrasion arthroplasty involves
enter and exit the water without causing stress to the
the uniform removal of subchondral bone until bleeding
joints. Fnrollment in a professional physical therapy
is achieved (see Fig. 4-24A). In the canine elbow, either
program may be of significanr benefit.
a curette or a burr attachment on a small-joint shaver is
used. The shaver is usually more rapid and efficient and
Complications.
 Complications are similar to those
just as accurate. Another method used to treat grade
described for elbow arthroscopy. In addition, there may
IV lesions is microfracture. Numerous microcracks are
be  significant  complications  associated
with the
created in the subchondral bone plate to allow bleeding
stabilization technique and osteotomy. These include
at the lesion surface (see Fig. 4-24B). Microfracture
nonunion and infected nonunion. Other complications
awls are available for use in small-joint arthroscopy.
are implant failure or migration, particularly of the
Alternatively, a small microfracture pick may be created
intramedullary pin.
by bending the end of a 0.035- or 0.045-inch K-wire
to approximately a 45-degree angle. The wire is then
Prognosis. Early treatment with ulnar osteotomy
secured into a Jacobs chuck. A final technique used to
combined with lag screw fxation appears to provide the
best prognosis. In one study of 26 dogs, 87% had an
drilled in the subchondral bone. In humans and horses,
excellent outcorme. Three dogs were free of lameness 
this technique leads to the formation of cystic lesions.
74 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
D
FIGURE 4-24 Arthroscopic firdings
and treotment of canine elbows wilin
E
一
osteoarthritis. A, Use of a power burr on
0 grade IV osteoarthritic lesion; B. use
of a micropick on a grade IV osteo.
arthritic lesion; C, grade Ill osteoarthritis
showing fine fibriltion of the carilage
surface;Dgadellosteoarthrits shw
the "cobblestone" appearance of the
carilage; E.  grade ll osteoarthritis
to lhe depth of the subchondral bone;
F. grade IV osteoarthritis showing. Q
large area of subchondral bone adia-
osteoarthrilis  showing
Fuli-th:ckness
linear excoriations with some carilage
remaining: H, grade IV osteoarthritis
showing subchondral bone adjacent to
H
the hyalin cartilage and a large osteo
G
chondral fragment.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT I? 75
A
B
FIGURE 4-25  Arthroscopic findings
and trealment of canine elbows with
Osteoarthriis. A, Grade IV osteoarthritis
showing subchondral bone on both the
humeral cordyle and the opposing
coronoid process: 8. bleeding atter
obrasion arthraplasty or microfracture
gnd cessarion of fluid flow; C, clot
formation in the subchondrol bone
bed after abrasion arthroplashy Of
microfracure.
History and Signalment.  Osteoarthritis of the elbow
Diagnosis.
 Diagnostic tests include radiography and
joint may occur in any dog as a result of traumatic,
arthrocentesis. Radiographic findings vary dramatically
infectious, immune-mediated, or developmental causes.
with the severity of disease. In the mildest cases, only
Treatment is most often indicated in dogs that have
sclerosis of the ulna in the region of the medial coronoid
developmental diseases of the elbow (FCP, OCD, UAP).
 process is visible. This finding is best appreciated on a
Clinical signs may become apparent as early as 4 or
lateral radiograph and is often the earliest radiographic
5 months of age, but patients may present at any time
sign of disease. As the osteoarthritis progresses, osteophy-
after this age. The history usually includes unilateral
tosis, sclerosis, and radiolucency increase. Arthrocentesis
or bilateral lameness and exercise intolerance. In mild
usually shows cell counts of 2000 to 5000/μl, with a
cases, lameness may be apparent only after aggressive
 predominance of mature mononuclear cells.
exercise.
Treatment.
Medical treatment of eibow osteo-
Physical Examination Findings. Dogs with elbow
arthritis consists of anti-inflammatory medication and
arthritis usually have generalized muscle atrophy of the
control of activity and body weight.
affected limbs. The atrophy is usually most apparent
Over the scapular spine and acromion process. Manipu-
Anesthetic  Considerations  and  Perioperative Pain
lation of the elbows causes pain and decreased range of
Management.
A standard anesthetic protocol including
motion, primarily in flexion. Palpation of the elbow
preemptive pain medication is used. Postoperative pain
joint may show mild to severe effusion. As the disease
is controlled with cold therapy, opioids, and NSAIDs.
progresses, the effusion changes to fibrosis and then to
bony proliferation, which can be differentiated by pal-
Surgical Intervention.
.Portal sites and surgical
pation. In mild cases, minimal abnormal findings may
anatomy were discussed earlier. With the advent of
be noted on orthopedic examination.
arthroscopy, both elbows may be treated simultaneously
if the condition is bilateral. However, in severe cases,
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
the surgeon may elect to stage the joints to limit post-
includes osteochondrosis, fragmented coronoid process,
operative weightbearing on the treated limb. A hanging
UAP, neoplasia, immune-mediated arthritis, panosteitis,
limb preparation provides the greatest degree of freedom
and septic arthritis.
for manipulating limb position. In most cases, a 1.9-mm,
76 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is used. Basic instru--
the pressure in the joint. When bleeding is observed
 mentation includes probes to inspect the cartilage surface
diffusely from the lesion bed, the joint is lavaged to
or help raise cartilage fragments, graspers to remove
remove the remaining bone debris, and then it is closed
fragments, a hand burr or power burr to perform
rourinely (see Fig. 4-25B and C).
abrasion arthroplasty, and a micropick set and mailet to
To perform microfracture, an appropriately angled
perform microfracture. The dog is positioned in dorsal
micropick is inserred into the joint, and the tip is pressed
recumbency, and the first limb to be operated on is
against the subchondral bone surface. An assistant should
abducted over a sandbag or an elbow brace.
tap the pick handle once or rwice (see Fig. 4-24B). The
Egress is established with a needle or cannula,
pick should be held securely to avoid gouging the sur-
lactated Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint,
face and adjacent healthy cartilage. The surgeon applies
and the arthroscope site is established. The arthroscope
the micropick diffusely across the diseased area and
is inserted, and ingress flow is established through the
checks for resulting bleeding frequently by stopping the
arthroscope cannula. The caudoproximal portion of the
inflow of fluid and ensuring that outflow is adequate.
joint, including the anconeus, trochiear notch, and caudal
When bleeding is observed diffusely from the lesion bed,
aspect of the humeral condyle, is inspected for evidence
the surgeon lavages the joint to remove the remaining
of inflammation or cartilage disease. The camera head
bone debris and then performs routine closure (see Fig.
is moved caudally, and the light post is rotated distally
4-25B and C).
to bring the most distal portion of the humeral condyle
The production of diffuse effective bleeding is more
into view. This area of the canine eibow is a common
diffcult in some joints than in others. Combining
site for cartilage disease. The camera head and the light
abrasion and microfracture may increase subchondral
post are positioned caudally to visualize the craniomedial
bleeding. However, in cases of eburnation, it may be
portion of the joint. The medial coronoid process will be
diffcult or impossible to obtain significant bleeding
in view and is the other major site of cartilage damage
with these techniques.
in the canine elbow.
After the joint is thoroughly explored and the extent
Postoperative Care.
 Postoperative management and
of the lesion defined, an instrument portal is created
complications are identical to those of FCP. In most
with or without a cannula. Palpation of lesions with a
 cases, osteoarthritis requires lifelong medical manage-
right-angle probe may be performed through an instru-
ment. Treatment includes control of body weight,
ment cannula; however, most power shavers and micro-
exercise and physical therapy, and NSAIDs and
picks do not fit easily through a small-joint cannula.
chondroprotective medications.
The surgeon should visually evaluate and palpate areas
of cartilage damage and note the size and severity of the
Complications.
Complications 
of arthroscopic
lesion based on the scale shown in Table 4-1.
management of osteoarthritis are similar to those
The surgeon must decide whether to debride grade I
 described for management of FCP. Controversy remains
lesions with chondromalacia. Small areas of grade ll
in the human and veterinary fields as to the success of
fbrillation in the absence of other lesions also may be
these treatment modalities. Additional potential com-
left undisturbed (see Fig. 4-24C and D). Larger areas of
plications include the formation of subchondral bonc
grade II cartilage disease can be treated similarly
to
cysts and the acceleration of cartilage disease and joint
grade Il lesions, at the discretion of the surgeon. Grade
space collapse.
II lesions are areas of full-thickness fibrillation (see Fig.
4-24E). A curerte or burr is used to remove the diseased
Prognosis.
The efficacy of arthroscopic treatment to
cartilage, with care taken to avoid damaging the more
manage osteoarthritis of the elbow is unknown; how-
normal surrounding cartilage. The resulting subchondral
ever, this treatment is likely to be much more effective
bone bed is treated in the same way as grade IV lesions.
when it is combined with medical management, physical
Grade IV cartilage damage is full-thickness loss of carti-
therapy, and weight control. S
Severe cases may
be
lage in addition to exposure and, in some cases, ebur-
unresponsive, and many patients may require additional
nation of the subchondral bone (see Figs. 4-24F to H
surgical intervention, including corrective osteotomies,
and 4-25A). These lesions are treated with abrasion or
arthrodesis, or joint replacement.
microfracrure until adequate bleeding occurs (see Fig.
4-25B and C).
To perform abrasion arthroplasty, the surgeon inserts
Articular Pressure and
a hand burr or, preferably, a power shaver burr through
Osteotomies in the Management of
the instrument portal. Because either method produces
significant bone debris that can clog the egress portal
FCP, 0cD, and Eihow Osteoarthritis
 and impede visualization, it is important to monitor and
maintain fluid flow through the joinr during this proce-
Osteotomies are used to treat joint diseases by altering
dure. The surgeon should spin the burr to remove sub-
joint congruency, transarticular load, or both. Healing
chondral bone over the area of the lesion (see
Fig.
of subchondral bone and cartilage defects depends on
4-24A). In addition, the surgeon should check 
for
the loads experienced by the healing tissues. Fibrocartilage
resuiting bleeding frequently by stopping the inflow of
and hyalin cartilage do not heal under supraphysiologic
fluid and ensuring that outffow is adequare to decrease
loads, and arthritic lesions and angular joint deformity
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINTII77
B
D
FIGURE 4-26 Radiographic and arthroscopic find'ngs of canine elbows wirh c humeral condylar
fracrure and incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle. A. Preoperative radiograph showing raclure of
the lateral portion of the humeral condyle: B. arthroscopic view of the fracture line: C, postoperative radio-
78IE SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
continue to progress. Excessive articular loads establish
laterally when an intramedullary pin was not used.
a
destructive cycle whereby increased load leads to
 Nonunion and infected nonunion can occur with this
articular cartilage degeneration, which leads to collapse
procedure, and the definitive benefit of ulnar osteotomy
of the joint at the site of the lesion and subsequently to
is not known.
further increased articular loads. Therefore, a basic prin-
Alternatively, an ostectomy may be performed on the
ciple in the management of articular cartilage lesions is
distal segmental of the ulna. This procedure involves
the normalization of loads at the site of healing carti-
removing a small segment of bone in the distal third of
lage. Numerous osteotomies are used to manage diseases
the diaphysis and avoids many of the potential
of the canine elbow.
complications of proximal ulnar osteotomy. However,
 Ulnar osteotomy is used to treat FCP, both alone and
the interosseous ligament may limit significant move-
in combination with fragment removal. This surgery is
 ment of the proximal segment. In vitro studies confirm
based on the theory that radioulnar incongruence leads
the limitations of movement with the distal ostectomy
to FCP and degradation of the adjacent cartilage.
in the acute setting, although in the live animal, gradual
Shortening the uina decreases pressure on the medial
fatigue of the interosseous ligament may permit greater
coronoid, thereby permitting healing of the lesions or
movement.
minimization of progression. If this type of incongruence
 Lengthening of the radius is used to treat premature
exists at the time of surgery and adequate congruence
closure of the radial growth plates. In this traumatic
can be restored, the procedure may be of benefit. How-
disease, the medial coronoid process is fragmented,
ever, few studies have evaluated the outcome of this
supporting theories of radioulnar incongruence in
procedure, and this technique may inadvertently increase
elbow dyspiasia. The lengthening treatmenr appears to
 o  u  u sd e
be successful in the management of subluxation of the
joint, thereby hindering the healing of the arthritic
elbow joint. Radial lengthening may have a role in the
lesions. A study of joint surface contact that simulated
management of canine elbow dysplasia, but degradation
radioulnar incongruence showed that regions of normal
of cartilage in traumatic cases has not been described,
contact can be restored by proximal ulnar osteotomy in
and overlengthening of the radius would contribute to
an in vitro model. However, removal of a segment of the
varus deformity and overload of the medial compartment.
ulna may lead to varus deformity at the elbow joint.
This deformity would shift the axis of loading medially
and increase pressure in the medial compartment.
Future Applications of Elbow
Proximal ulnar ostectomy is performed with a caudal
approach to the ulna. The incision is centered over the
Arthroscopy
distal aspect of the elbow joint and extends several
centimeters in either direction. Subperiosteal elevation
Arthroscopy is used to manage articular fractures in
of muscles is perforrmed on either side to provide access
humans and may have a role in closed management
to the cranial aspect of the bone. Small Hohman
of canine humeral condylar fractures (Fig. 4-26A to C).
retractors may be placed on either side of the bone to
In these cases, arthroscopy may be used to aid in
protect muscle from the saw blade. An oblique cut is
alignment of the articular surface in combination with
made with an oscillating saw, beginning at the distal
closed implant placement, as was described in the dog.
level of the elbow joint caudally on the uina and ending
Arthroscopy is also used to diagnose incomplete ossifi-
several centimeters distally on the cranial extent of the
cation of the humeral condyle (see Fig. 4-26D). Humeral
elbow joint. In mild cases, the kerf of the blade may
condylar fractures are one of the most common fractures
allow for adequate distal movement of the proximal
of the canine forelimb. Methods of repair include open
segment. In more severe cases, a thin section of bone
reduction and fixation and closed fluoroscopically guided
may be removed. The oblique nature of the cut elimi-
reduction and fixation. Despite the obvious benefits of
nates the risk of failure associated with the pull of the
closed reduction and fixation, accurate reduction with
triceps. An intramedullary pin may be placed down the
fluoroscopic guidance is difficult and fluoroscopy is not
ulna to increase stabiliry, but the pin increases the risk
readily available. Arthroscopy may improve the ourcome
of implant complications. However, in vitro studies
of the closed technique by allowing direct visualization
showed that the proximal segment was displaced
of the fracture surfaces.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE ELBOW JOINT? 79
Suggested Readings
Ness MG: Trearment of fragmented coronoid process in young.
dogs by proximal ulnar osteotomy. J Small Anim Pract 39:15,
1998.
Bardet JF: Arthroscopy of the elbow in clinically normal dogs using
Roy RG, Wallace LJ, Johnston GR: A retrospective long-term 
the caudal portals. Vet Comp Orthop Traum 13:87, 2000.
evaluation of ununited anconeal process excision on the canine
Bouck GR, Miller CW, Tares Cl: A comparison of surgical and
elbow. Vet Comp Orthop Traum 7:94-97, 1994.
medical treatment of fragmented coronoid process and
Mason D, Schulz KS, Samii V: Sensitivity of radiography to radio-
osteochondritis dissecans of the canine elbow. Vet Cornp Orthop
ulnar incongruence. Ver Surg 31:125-132, 2002.
Traum 8:177-183, 1995.
 Sjostrom L, Kasstrom H, Kallberg M: Ununited anconeal process in 
Boulay JP: Fragmented medial coronoid process of the uina in the
the dog. Pathogenesis and treatment by osteotomy of the ulna.
dog. Vet Clin N Am 28:S1, 1998.
Ver Comp Orthop Traum 8:170-176, 1995.
Fox SM, Burbridge HM, Bray JC: Ununited anconeal process:
Thomson, M. J. and Robins, G. M. Osteochondrosis of the elbow,
lag-screw fixation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:52-S6, 1996.
a review of the pathogenesis and a new approach to treatment.
Hornof WJ, Wind AP, Wallack ST: Canine elbow dysplasia: the early
Aust Vet J 72: 375-378. 1995.
radiographic detection of fragmentation of the coronoid process.
Turner BM, Abercromby RH, Innes J: Dynamic proximal ulnar
Vet Clin N Am 30:257-266, 2000.
Krotscheck U, Hulse DA, Bahr A: Ununited anconeal process: lag
osteotomy for the treatment of ununited anconeal process in
17 dogs. Ver Comp Orthop Traum 11:76-79, 1998.
screw fixation with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Vet Comp Orthop
Van Ryssen B, van Bree H: Arthroscopic fndings in 100 dogs with
Traum13:212-216,2000.
elbow lameness. Vet Rec 140:360, 1997.
 Nap RC: Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of canine elbow
dysplasia. Vet Comp Orthop Traum 9:58, 1996.
H
R
Arthroscopically
Assisted
Surgery c
t the
Carpal Joint
Ot
Introduction
space (Fig. 5-2). In large breeds, a 2.4- to 2.7-mm
arthroscope may be used. In general, a smaller scope is
 Carpal arthroscopy is a new treatment modaliry in
suggested to prevent iatrogenic damage to carrilage
small animal surgery. Potential indications for carpal
p s go  o u s
arthroscopy include evaluation of ligamentous damage,
 surgery. In choosing which arthroscope to use,
the
intra-articular fractures, septic arthritis, and removal of
surgeon must consider the outside diameter of the
small bone chips. Technically, carpal arthroscopy is
arthroscope cannula because it too must enter the joint.
relatively easy to perform, and little special instrumen-
Each arthroscope cannula is fitted with a blunt
tation is required. Arthroscopic exploration of the
 obturator and a sharp trocar. In most cases, it is not
carpus allows a thorough evaluation of the radiocarpal
joint for evaluation of the distal radius, distal ulna,
surgeon chooses fo use the sharp trocar, caution must be
radiocarpal, ulnar carpal, and accessory carpal bones.
exercised when entering the joint to prevent iatrogenic
Ligamentous structures can also be evaluated and
damage to cartilage. A blunt conical obturator is the
synovial biopsies obtained.
recommended instrument for use in entering the joint.
If the surgeon experiences difficulty in entering the joint,
Arthroscopy of the Carpal Joint
Equipment and Instrumentation. The surgical table
should be one that can be lowered, raised, and tilted in
at least one direction. For carpal arthroscopy, the surgery
Anesthesia
machine
table should be adjusted to a position that allows the
surgeon and assistants to hold their arms as close to the
body as possible. The surgeon's shoulders should be in
neutral position, with the elbows close to 90 degrees.
nstrumenl
uoeuns
This position prevents fatigue and improves the efficiency
table
of the operating team. The imaging tower is placed at
the back of the patient or opposite the surgeon (Fig.
 5-1). Fluid ingress is achieved with a pressurized gravity
bag or an infusion fluid pump administered through the
arthroscope cannula. Fluid can be evacuated by allowing
Towel
it to flow freely through the egress needle (or cannula)
 or through a working cannula; evacuation of fluid can
Assistant
be assisted with suction attached to the egress needle (or
cannula). If suction is used, it must be set at a low level
 or bubbles will be produced that obscure the surgeon's
view.
A 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is commonly
used in the carpal joint. In most dogs, a 1.9-mm arthro-
scope is the best choice for the small radiocarpal joint
FIGURE S-1 Arangement of the operoting room for carpal arthroscopy
82 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
instrument cannulas, or a combination of the two. If the
surgeon works through an instrument cannula, different-
a
size cannulas and switching sticks are necessary.
b
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
Management. Preoperative laboratory workup is based
on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Most
dogs undergoing carpal arthroscopy are young, healthy
patients with no underlying systemic problems. These
cases require minimal laboratory workup. Older dogs
should undergo a complete blood screen, urinalysis, chest
radiographs, and electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a
standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain
medication. Postoperative pain is usually minimal but
can be controlled with opioids and nonsteroidal anti-
 inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as needed. If arthroscopy
e
is complered early in the day, the patient may be dis-
missed from the hospital thar same afternoon unless a
FIGURE 5-2  Instrumentation for corpal arthroscopy. A 1. 9-mm arihro-
surgical procedure is performed and requires hospital-
scope is ideol for most patients [a]. A blunt probe is used to evoluate the
articularcatilage and ligaments[bl. Grasping forceps reused oremove
ization. If arthroscopy is completed later in the after-
small osteochondral frogments or synovium (c]. A curete is used for
 noon, the patient is discharged the next day.
puy  ipl auog paunga jo sbain puo abouoo yo juwapig
All patients receive preemptive analgesic drugs as
burr is used for debridement of articular carilage and eburnated bone [e).
part of their premedication protocol. Buprenorphine is
preferred because of its effectiveness in patients that
experience mild to moderate postoperative pain and
a no. 11 scalpel blade can be used to make a small stab
its prolonged mode of action (6 to 8 hours). When the
incision in the joint capsule to ease placemenr of the
dog is dismissed from the hospital, NSAIDs and oral
obturator and cannula.
butorphanol (see Table 3-1) can be dispensed for admin-
An assortment of hand instruments is necessary for
istration at home as needed. NSAIDs are continued for
carpal arthroscopy. Recommended are instruments to
5 days, and butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours.
assist in the inspection of intra-articular structures
If the dog remainis in the hospital overnight, a second
(probes), grasping forceps for removal of free bodies,
dose of buprenorphine is adininistered in the evening.
biopsy forceps, and instruments for surface abrasion
NSAIDs and butorphanol are prescribed for home
and synovectomy (see Fig. S-2). Instruments can be
administration. Fentanyl transdermal patches can also
 inserted into the joint through an open instrument port,
be considered for postoperative pain management.
FIGURE 5-3  Positioning of the dog
for carpal arthroscopy before draping .
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE CARPAL JOINT I·83
Patient Preparation and Positioning. The patient is
clipped and prepared for open arthrotomy in case the
arthroscopy procedure needs to be aborted for technical
 s d e o  pe s
ation is more common when the surgeon is beginning to
learn arthroscopy. The surgeon must accurately identify
the region of the articular surface that is damaged by
thoroughly assessing the joint radiographically before
surgery. The radiocarpal joint is the only joint within
the carpus that can be readily evaluated with the arthro-
scope. The patient should be positioned in ventral
recumbency, with the carpus and foot protruding off the
end of the table (Fig. 5-3). This position allows adjust-
  sd  sd so  po 
lation of the scope by avoiding interference of the scope
with the surgical table. The carpus can be draped in a
similar fashion to that used for open surgery (Fig. 5-4).
Some surgeons prefer translucent drapes because of
their water-repellant properties (Fig. 5-5).
Portal Sites. Two portal sites are typically used for
carpal arthroscopy, but three can be used if the surgeon
prefers. If visual joint exploration of the carpal joint is
FIGURE 5-4 Patient prepared for carpal arthroscopy wih four
all that is required, an egress portal and an arthroscope
goodmanipulationo thelimbdringarthroscopyndallowshesurgeon
portal are necessary. However, if tissue biopsy or treat-
ment of joinr pathology is undertaken, then an additional
is ideal ior arthroscopy of the carpus and subsequent carpal arthrodesis.
instrument portal is required. Alternatively, the egress
portal may be converted into an instrument portal.
When a cannula system is used, the egress of fluid and
instrumentation can be accomplished through a single
the medial aspect of the joint is to be viewed. The
portal.
extensor tendons should be avoided because they course
The egress portal is usually established frst, followed
over the dorsal aspect of the carpus. Many surgeons
by the scope portal. The two commonly used scope
start with one scope portal and switch to the opposite
portals are the dorsolateral and dorsomedial (Figs. 5-6
 porral to thoroughly evaluate the radiocarpal joint. In
to 5-9). The scope portal is usually located lateral if the
this situation, the scope and egress portals are simply
lateral aspect of the joint is to be viewed and medial if
interchanged.
FIGURE 5-5 Palient prepored for
carpal arthroscopy with a clear adhe-
sive sterile drape. This drope repels
woter.keeping the patient dry ond
reducing the opportunity for contami-
nation from wet towels and drapes.
84 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Superficialradial
Cranial superficial
Lateral
antebrachiala.
digitalextender
Cephalicv.
Common
digitalextender
FIGURE 5-6
Portol locations and pertinent gnatomy for conine
FIGURE 5-8 Portal locations cnd perfinert cnctomy fo: canine ccipul
carpal arthroscopy. 1, Dorsoicleia: portal iocation; 2. dorsomedial portal
grthroscopy. 1, Dorsomedial arthroscope porta location; 2. dorsolateral
locatior.
nstrumert portal iocation.
Dorsolateral Scope Portal. If an instrument portal
is needed, the cgress portal should be located adjacent
to the instrument portal. If necessary, the egress portal
can be relocated to a more convenient location. Alter-
 natively, the egress portal and the instrument portal can
function through a single portal, as described earlier.
The arthroscope cannula and blunt obturator are intro-
duced lateral to the common extensor tendons (see Figs.
S-6 and 5-7). The cannula is directed toward the radio-
carpal joint in a palmaromedial direction (see Figs. 5-7
and 5-9). The tip of the cannula and scope can be care-
fully moved to view the central and lateral aspects of the
joint. The post cable is rotated to increase the total view-
ing angle (see Fig. 5-9). The dorsolateral scope portal is
commonly used to assess the dorsolateral joint compart-
ment, the synovium, the ulnar carpal bone, the distal
ulna, the accessory carpal bone, a portion of the radio-
carpal bone, the ligaments to thc accessory carpal bone,
the palrmar radiocarpal ligament, and the palmar ulno-
carpal ligament (Figs. 5-10 and 5-11). The synovial
reflection ar the level of the proximal intercarpal joint
also can be visualized. The basic technique for establish-
ing portals was described earlier.
Dorsomedial Scope Portal.
. The egress portal is
established frst. If an instrument portal will be used, the
egress portal should be located adjacent to the instru-
FIGURE 5-7Portal locations ond pertinent anatomy lor canine carpal
 ment portal. The egress portal can be relocated to a more
instrument portal location 
convenient location as needed. Alternatively, the egress
FIGURE 5-9  Dorsolateral arthror-
scope portal and dorsomedial instrnument
portals for canine carpal arthroscopy.
portal and the instrument porral can function through
lactated Ringer's solution can be instilled into the joint.
a single portal, as described earlier. The arthroscope
If the needle is located in the joint, fluid is easily instilled.
cannula and blunt obrurator are introduced medial
As the joint cavity is filled with fluid, reverse pressure is
to the extensor tendons (see Figs. 5-6 and 5-8). The
felt on the syringe plunger from the instilled fluid. This
cannula is directed in a palmarolateral direction toward
 sensation ensures that the needle is placed properly into
the radiocarpal joint. The tip of the cannula and scope
the joint. The joint cavity should be distended with 3 t0
can be carefully moved to view the central and medial
6 mL lactated Ringer's solution. Joint distension is main-
aspects of the joint. The post cable is rotated as needed
tained by leaving the syringe artached to the needle (the
to increase the total viewing angle. The dorsomedial
assistant needs to keep pressure on the plunger). The fluid
scope portal is commonly used to assess the dorsomedial
ingress line can be temporarily attached to the egress
joint compartment, the synovium, the radiocarpal bone,
needle (replacing the syringe) to sustain joint distension
the distal radius, a portion of the ulnar carpal bone,
while the scope cannula is being inserted. The needle
the palmar radiocarpal ligament, the palmar ulnocarpal
should be maintained as the egress cannula. Evacuation
ligament, and the accessory carpal bone (Fig. 5-12).
of fluid maintains fluid flow through the joint and
The basic technique for establishing portals was
enhances visualization. Intravenous or suction tubing
described earlier.
can be attached to the needle to capture fluid as it leaves
the joint. Alternatively, fluid can be allowed to spill
General Surgical Procedure.
An 18- to 20-gauge
 onto the floor for capture by a floor suction unit, basin,
spinal needle (1.5-inch) is used to distend the joint with
or towels.
saline and function as an egress cannula. This needle is
A guide needle (20- to 22-gauge) is inserted at the
positioned on the opposite side of the joinr from the
intended site for the scope portal. If the needle is
intended location of the scope portal. For instance, if
positioned correctly, fluid should leak from its huh. A
the scope portal is dorsomedial, the egress portal would
no. 11 Bard-Parker blade is used to make a small entry
be dorsolateral. If the need for an instrument portal is
wound through the skin and superficial soft tissues
anticipated, the egress cannula can be located in an
adjacent to the needle. It is not advisable to enter the
alternative position to allow three functional portals. In
joint with the scalpel blade because doing so may cause
this case, the egress needle is located adjacent to the
extravasation of fluid outside the joint cavity. The needle
instrument portal.
is removed, and the arthroscope cannula is inserted with
The surgeon palpates the radiocarpal joint while
the attached pointed, blunt obrurator in the same
flexing the carpus and inserts the needle into the joint,
direction as the needle. When a pointed, blunt obturator
perpendicular to the surface of the skin. The surgeon
is used, pressure must be applied to penetrate the joint
often feels a popping sensation when entering the joint.
capsule. With experience, the surgeon will learn to feel
To ensure placement within the joint, the surgeon attaches
when the joint is entered. After the joint is entered, the
a syringe to the needle and aspirates synovial fluid. In
obturator is removed from the cannula. Fluid will flow
most cases, when the needle is properly placed, synovial
freely from the cannula, confrming, correct placement.
fluid is easily aspirated. If synovial fluid is nor aspirated
 The fluid ingress line is attached to the cannula, and the
and the surgeon believes thar the joint has been entered,
arthroscope is inserted.
86 ■ SMALl ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
nd
pr
A
ac
uc
B
nd
ac
ac
uc
D
E
UC
FIGURE 5-10 Posilioning and normal joint findings for arthroscopic evaluation of ihe left radiocarpal
joint using g dorsolateral arrhroscope porial. A, Patmar radiocarpal [pn and ulnocarpal ligaments [pul.
B,Origin of the palmar ulnocarpal ligament arising from thedistal ulna.C,Distal ulna Iul ulnar carpal bone
paoupapo s adoss ay o du eui 'g (nd) suawobil odipooun jowiod pun poi auog odios Aiossoo (on)
in α palmar direction to view the articulation between the accessory carpal bone [ac) and the uinar carpal
bone [uc]. The edge of the palmar ulnocarpal ligament [pu] is visible. E, More palrmar view of the accessory
carpal bone [ac)] showing a lateral ligament and the ulnar corpal bone [uc].
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE CARPAL JOINT  87
ac
UC
A
lig
lig
U
ac
nd
B
C
C
rC
rc
D
E
FIGURE 5-11Posilioning and rorrnal joint findings for arrhroscopic evaluation of the lefft radiocorpal
joint using a dorsolateral arthroscope portal. A. Distal ulna (vl, accessory carpal bone jacl, and ulnor carpal
bone [uc). 8, Proximal medial aspect of the accessory corpal bone [oc] with the medial ond dorsal ligaments
owod  jo ubuo ay ioau ] oun puo p snpoi jpisp ay uaaaq yl uoun snoqy aul  (l
ulnocarpal ligament [pu) can be viewed by rotating the light post downward. D, Distal radius (rl. radiocarpal
bone Ircl, and origin of the polmar rodiocarpal ligoment lprl. E, Distal rodius (rn and radiocarpal bone (rc).
88SMALLANIMALARTHROSCOPY
rc
pr
rc
rc
B
pu
pr
ac
rc
uc
D
E
joint using a dorsomedial arthroscope portal. A. Radius [rl. radiocarpal bone (rc), and intra-articular fat f.
jodinooipni iniuod puo "pr) auoq ipdioooipoi y) snipoy ' [py] auoq jodioooipoi puo [l smpoy '6
ligament (prl. D, Radiocarpal bone Irc). insertion of the palmar radiocaipal ligament [(prl. palmur u riocarpal
ligament (pu), ond ulnar corpal bone [ucl. E, Accessory carpal bone (ac) and ulnar carpal bone luxcl.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE CARPAL JOINTI■89
rc
B
Ipn, palmor ulnocarpal ligament Ilpul, and fibrous junction beween radius and ulna [fi. B, Gross anatomy of the right carpus with the palmar radiocarpal
ligoment removed. Radius [r1]. ulna |u], radiocarpal bone [rcl], uinor carpal bone luc], accessory carpal bone [ac)], palmar ulnocarpal ligament lpul. and
fibrous junction berween the radius and ulna Ifj.
An instrument portal is established if a biopsy of intra-
 gulation needle used to locate the instrument port crosses
articular tissue is needed or if treatment of joint pathoiogy
the arthroscope and cannot be visualized on the monitof.
is required. Like the egress portal, the instrument portal
If the triangulation needle cannot be visualized, it should
is usually placed on the side of the limb opposite the
be inserted at a different location at a 75- to 90-degree
scope portal (e.g., a dorsomedial instrument portal would
angle to the skin surface.
be used with a dorsolateral arthroscope portal). The
instrument portal also may be placed directly adjacent
Surgical Anatomy.
The carpus is a complex hinge
to the arthroscope portal if this location will facilitate
 joint composed of many individual smaller joints. The
the needed manipulation. If three portals will be used,
carpus primarily moves in flexion and extension, and
 the position of the scope and instrument portals must be
more than 95% of the range of motion occurs at the
established to permit visualization and treatment of the
radiocarpal joint. The radiocarpal joint is usually ame-
lesion. The position of the egress needle can be shifted
nable to arthroscopy, but the other joints are not. The
to a convenient location that provides egress drainage
 joint capsule, the collateral ligaments, the intercarpal
but does not interfere with the other rwo portals. The
and carpometacarpal ligaments, and the strong palmar
egress portal also can function as an instrument portal.
ligaments provide joint stability. Structures that usually
can be evaluated arthroscopically include the distal
whose size may cause diffculty in establishing and
ulna, distal radius, ulnar carpal bone, radiocarpal bone,
maintaining three functional portals. A cannula system
accessory carpal bone, palmar radiocarpal ligament,
allows good egress while permitting the introduction of
 palmar ulnocarpal ligament, and synovium (Fig. 5-13).
instruments into the joint. The surgeon must learn to
During arthroscopic evaluation of the carpus, the
triangulare the instrument relative to the position of the
anatomic structures located on the same side of the joint
tip of the arthroscope within the joint. It is helpful to
as the scope portal can be viewed more easily and
use a 20-gauge (1.5-inch) hypodermic needle as a guide
completely than those located on the opposite side. A
needle to locate the appropriate site for the instrument
 portion of the anatomic structures on the opposite side
portal. The guide needle must penetrate the skin surface
of the joinr also can be viewed, but a thorough exam-
at a 75- to 90-degree angle and maintain this orientation
ination of the joint may require multiple scope portals.
through the soft tissues. As the needle enters the joint
When the arthroscope enters the joint, the camera should
and is seen on the monitor, it appears to be entering af
be positioned to provide correct spatial orientation when
a very oblique angle. However, this ilusion is created by
viewing the monitor. Typically, surgeons prefer the fore-
the 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope and does not
 oblique direction, but most prefer to begin the procedure
represent the actual angle of penetration. The most
with a view that is 30 degrees down. The correct spatial
common reason for failing to locate the appropriate
orientation with a fore-oblique view is obtained when
instrument portal site is entering the skin at too oblique
the controls on the camera head are upright and the
an angle. When too oblique an angle is used, the trian-
light post is in the upright position (see Fig. 5-8). With
9O I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
the camera and light post in this position, the articular
Fractures and Instability of the Carpus
surface of the radiocarpal bone is visible. If necessary, the
scope can be carefully withdrawn a very small distance
History and Signalment, Dogs have acute lameness
to increase the size of the field of view. Slight flexion
of the front leg; most exhibit non-weightbearing lame-
and extension can improve visualization or vary the
ness. In most cases, lameness occurs after a traumatic
region of articular surface that is visible. The position of
incidenr and does not respond to anti-inflammatory
the camera head is maintained and the light post is
 medication. Any age or breed of dog may be affected.
rotated ventrally to provide a more complete view of the
articular surface of the distal radius. The ulnar carpal
Physical Examination Findings. Gait analysis shows
bone, intercarpal ligaments, distal ulna, and accessory
visibie lameness. Swelling is usually palpable in the
carpal bone can be evaluated by advancing the tip of
carpal region. Manipulation of the carpus elicirs dis-
the scope and adjusting the position of the post cable
comfort in most dogs. Collateral instability is charac-
slightly. The medial and lateral collateral ligaments also
terized by excessive valgus or varus deviation when the
 may be visible.
joint is stressed. To better evaluate the function of the
short and long components of the collateral ligament
complex, collareral instability should be assessed in
extension and flexion, Injury to the palmar ligaments
Indications for Arthroscopic
leads to hyperextension of the carpal joints. Subluxation
Surgery of the Carpal Joint
or luxation of the affected joint may occur at any level
of the carpus, depending on the location of ligament
Carpal arthroscopy is a new treatment modality in
damage.
small animal surgery. As small animal surgeons become
more adept at arthroscopy, more conditions will be
Differential Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
treated arthroscopically or with arthroscopic assistance.
 includes septic arthritis and immune-mediated arthritis.
Potential indications for carpal arthroscopy include
intra-articular fractures, osteoarthritis, joint instability,
Radiographic Findings.  Lateral and anteroposterior
and diagnostic examination (biopsy or culture of hone,
radiographic views are often insufficient to yield a
carrilage, or synovial membrane). The arthroscope also
defnitive diagnosis. Occasionally, these views suggest
can be used to place a drain within the joint capsule
collateral ligament injury by the presence of soft tissue
m sd u re s e s moe n
 sweling or evidence of an avulsion fragment in the area
septic arthritis. Another potential application is evalu-
 Of the collateral ligament. Stress radiographs may show
ation of the radiocarpal joint in patients with obvious
collateral and palmar ligamentous instability. While an
carpometacarpal or intercarpal instability. If radiocarpal
anteroposterior radiographic view is ohtained, a valgus
involvement is confirmed arthroscopically, pancarpal
or varus stress can be applied to check for injury to the
arthrodesis, rather than partial arthrodesis, may be the
lateral and medial collateral ligaments, respectively (Fig.
treatment of choice.
5-14). A lateral view that is obtained while the joint is
FIGURE 5-14 Radiograpn from ①
dog withi a teor of the medial collareral
ligament of the carpus. A. Survey pre
aperative radiograph. 8. A valgus siress
is applied lo the carpus, revealing
instability of the medioalside of the
radiocarpol joint and presence
multiple avulsion bone fragments. C. A
valgus shress is applied to the carpus
B
the medicl coilateral igamen1. Good
stobility has been cchieved.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE CARPAL JOINT I■ 91
Surgical Intervention, Carpal instability or fracture
is usually treated with an open approach using
arthrodesis or ligamentous reconstruction techniques.
Many collateral ligament injuries are repaired with
ligament reconstruction. Palmar ligament damage
usually requires partial or pancarpal arthrodesis. These
techniques are described in detail in veterinary surgical
texts. Currently, arthroscopic intervention is used
primarily for diagnostic and adjunctive purposes.
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed
earlier. The surgeon must decide whether to use a
dorsolateral or dorsomedial scope portal. To improve
visualization or access to the affecred structures, the
 scope and egress portals can easily be exchanged during
surgery. The operative site is clipped and prepared
according to the amount of limb maneuverability desired
during surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides
the greatest degree of freedom for manipulating limb
position and is recommended in most cases. Liberal
clipping and thorough sterile preparation are necessary
because an open arthrotomy may be required. in most
cases, a 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is
used. Basic instrumentation includes probes to inspect
FIGURE 5-15
5Some stab fraclures of the carpus may best be
the joint capsule.If the surgeon works through an instru-
visualizec using a skyline view.
ment cannula, different-sized cannulas and swirching
sticks facilitate the surgery. A mororized shaver is helpful
to debride synovial proliferation but is not essential.
The dog is positioned as described for the anticipated
hyperextended may show palmar ligament injury. A
site of the lesion.
lateral flexed view, skyline view, or oblique view may
Egress is established as described earlier, and the joint
be helpful in assessing carpal slab or chip fractures
is distended with saline. A guide needle is used to locate
(Fig. 5-15).
the joint space and the correct position for the arthro-
scope portal. The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress
Diagnosis. Carpal instability and fractures are diag-
flow is established through the arthroscope cannula. The
nosed based on the history, physical fndings, and radio-
arthroscope and light post are positioned to visualize
 graphic findings.
the articular surfaces of the radiocarpal bone, ulnar
carpal bone, distal radius, distal ulna, accessory carpal
Treatment.
 Medical management can relieve pain,
bone, synovial membrane, palmar radiocarpal ligament,
but defnitive therapy requires coaptation or surgical
palmar radiocarpal cruciate ligaments, ligaments of the
stabilization, depending on the severity of the injury.
accessory carpal bone, intercarpal ligament, and collat-
Arthroscopic intervention can aid in visualizing the
eral ligaments (see Figs. 5-10 to 5-13; Fig. 5-16). The
condition of the collateral ligaments, removing small 
light post is rotated 360 degrees to allow complete evalu-
avulsion fragments, reducing an avulsed fragment, and
ation of the joint, and the scope is tipped in different
examining the articular surfaces of the radiocarpal joint.
directions and retracted or advanced to enhance the
Arthroscopic evaluation of the palmar ligaments may
view of the structures. The medial and lateral collateral
aid in the assessment of patients with hyperextensional
ligaments are examined in extension and partial flexion
carpal injury. If these ligaments or other structures in
(see Fig. 5-16). The surgeon should look for avulsed
the radiocarpal joint are injured, the surgeon may choose
fragments and assess the practicality of stabilization
to perform pancarpal arthrodesis rather than partial
versus removal of the fragment (see Fig. 5-14). In
arthrodesis.
addition, the surgeon should assess the condition of the
articular cartilage and evaluate the fracture fragments
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
to deterrmine the degree of reduction or the need for
Management.
Preoperative laboratory workup is bascd
removal.
 on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Young,
 If an instrument porrtal is needed, a guide needle is
healthy patients with no underlying systemic problems
used to triangulate the position for its placement. The
require minimal laboratory workup. Older dogs should
most common reason for failure to visualize the guide
undergo a complete blood screen, chest radiographs,
needle in the joint is crossing the arthroscope.
To
and electrocardiogram. A standard anesthetic protocol,
prevent crossing the arthroscope with the guide needle,
including preemptive pain medication, is provided in
the needle is inscrted perpendicular to the skin surface
Table 3-1. Postoperative pain is controlled with cold
and this orientation is maintained through the soft
therapy, opioids, and NSAIDs.
tissues. After the position for the instrument portal is
92  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
rc
uc
rc
uc
B
C
syn
FIGURE 5-16 Positioning ard
abnormal joint findings for arthroscopic
lcl
evaluation of thecarpus using
uc
dorsolateral arthroscope portal in a dog
ac
thar had incidental trauma while pla?
ing.A,Freeffoating oseochondraag
ment of.most likely originating from
nd
the sire of an intercarpal ligament tear.
B. Tear of the intercarpal liganent (i)
D
E
between the radiocarpal [rc) and uina
carpal tuc] bones. C, Because of insto:
bility caused by tearing of the intercarpa
ligament li. the spoce berween the
rodiocarpal   rc]  and   ulnocarpai 
pn]
bones wicdens when stress is applied.
pu
D, Hyperemia al the craniolateral pole
pr
of the accessory carpal bore lacl as a
syn
rc
ment. The radius tr and palmar ulnc-
carpat (pu) ligament are visible. E. The
lateral collateral ligament (icl] is normal.
The synovium (syn] and ulnar carpal bone
[uc] are visible. F, The medial collateral
mcl
ligament (mc) is normal.The synovium
ac
uc
[syn] and radial carpal bone Irc] are
visible. G, The palmar radiocarpal [prl
and pafmar ulnocarpal Ipu ligamenis are
F
G
normol. The accessory carpal [ac) and
ulnar carpal lucl bones are alsc visible.
established, a probe is inserted through a cannula or an
cannot be achieved or if the dog has multiligamentous
open portal.
injury, arthrodesis may provide the best functional out-
If the articular surfaces of the radiocarpal joint show
come. A good functional outcome is usually associated
excessive wear, arthrodesis rather than stabilization
with arthrodesis of the carpus. The level of carpal
should be considered. If open reduction and stabilization
instability should be assessed carefully to determine
are necessary, useful techniques include ligamentous
whether pancarpal or partial arthrodesis is indicated. A
reconstruction, transarticula1 fixation, and arthrodesis.
good prognosis is typical if fractures can be reduced
These techniques are described in detail in various
anatomically and rigidly stabilized.
veterinary surgical textbooks and journals.
Postoperative Care. Cold therapy can be used
Inflammatory Arthritis
during recovery to relieve pain and reduce swelling.
Cold therapy is applied by alternating 15 minutes on
History and Signalment.  Septic arthritis and immune-
and 10 minutes off for two applications. Commercial
mediated arthritis are inflammatory arthropathies.
cold packs or a commercial circulating cold water pack
 Immune-mediated arthritis often presenrs as a poly-
can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or
arthritis, affecting more than one joint. Dogs present
frozen packs of vegetables can be used. If the dog is
with lameness of one or more limbs. The lameness may
dismissed from the hospital the day of surgery, NSAIDs
be weightbearing or non-weightbearing and is often
and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for
characterized as episodic or shifting from one leg to
administration at home. If the dog remains in the
another. The lameness usually responds to antibiotics,
hospital overnight, buprenorphine is administered in
corticosteroids, or NSAIDs, depending on its etiology
the evening. NSAIDs and butorphanol are dispensed for
and severity. Any age or breed of dog may be affected,
administration at home. NSAIDs are continued for 5
but small breeds are more susceptible to immune-
days, and butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours.
mediated polyarthritis.
Adjunctive coaptation can be used for various lengths of
time, depending on the severity of injury. If adjunctive
Physical Examination Findings.(
Gait analysis shows
coaptation is not performed, coid therapy can be con-
visible lameness. Swelling is usually palpable in affected
tinued by the owner at home for the fist 2 days after
joints, and manipulation of affected joints elicits dis-
surgery if needed. In addition, the owner should examine
comfort in most dogs. In addition, the joints may be
the portal sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
warm to the touch.
Leash walking is recommended for 4 to 8 weeks,
followed by a progressive increase in activity. To increase
Differential Diagnosis.T
The differential diagnosis
the weightbearing load on the limb, walking at a slow
includes traumatic joint injury.
pace is recommended. As postoperative time increases,
the pace can be hastened. To increase the range of motion
Radiographic Findings.
 Radiographic evaluation
in the carpus when walking, the client should walk the
usually shows soft tissue swelling of affected joints as a
dog in high grass (e.g., weeds), shallow water, or sand.
result of synovial effusion. A narrowed joint space may
Walking on this type of surface forces the dog to pick up
be evident in dogs that have septic arthritis or erosive
the feet and step high with the legs. After 6 weeks, the
immune-mediated arthritis as a result of articular carti-
 owner should begin limited amounts of free activity
lage erosion. If erosive immune-mediated arthritis be-
with controlled walking, starting with 5 minutes of free
comes chronic, joint instability and luxation may occur.
activity and increasing to 30 minutes over the next
2weeks.Afweeksree activity is raduallyncreasd
Diagnosis.
 The history, physical fndings, and radio.
to normal levels. If during any exercise period (controlled
or free activity), the dog becomes sore or is sore the next
matory arthritis. A definitive diagnosis usually requires
day, the owner should decrease the pace and return to
synovial fluid analysis, culture, and sensitivity as well
controlled activity for 2 to 3 days.
as a complete blood count, serum chemistry profle,
urinalysis, and serologic evaluation for a variety
ot
Complications.
 Complications are unusual. Occa-
immune tests (rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody)
sionally, in the immediate postoperative period, exces-
and infectious agents (tickborne agents). Synovial biopsy
sive fluid extravasation occurs and causes swollen soff
is also helpful. Veterinary textbooks should be consulted
tissues around the carpus. This fluid resorbs within the
fo1 a comprehensive review of pathophysiology and
first 24 hours. Residual mild sweling adjacent to portal
diagnostic tests.
sites may be noticeable for the frst 48 hours.
Treatment.
 Medical management is routinely used
Prognosis. 
 Depending on the severity of injury and
in the initial stages of treatment. Septic arthritis is treated
the surgical procedure required, the prognosis for satis.
with appropriate antibiotics, based on the results of
factory limb function after the treatment of ligamentous
culture and sensitivity tests, and with joint lavage and
instability or carpal fracture is fair to excellent. Most
drainage where appropriate. Arthroscopy can be used
dogs have a good outcome if collateral ligamentous
to assess the condition of the articular cartitage, remove
reconstruction is performed satisfactorily. If good stability
fbrinous debris, and lavage the joinr. A closed-suction
94 ?? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
drain also can be inserted under arthroscopic visuali-
according to the amount of limh maneuverability desired
zation. Treatment of immune-mediated arthritris is usually
during surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides
 initiated with immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroid
the greatest degree of freedom for manipulating limb
drugs. Veterinary textbooks can be consulted for drug
 position and is generally recommended. In most cases,
dosages and treatment protocols.
 a 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is used.
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
joint capsule and biopsy forceps. If the surgeon works
Management.
Preoperative laboratory workup is based
through an instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas
on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Young,
and switching sticks facilitate the surgery. A motorized
heaithy patients with no underlying systemic problems
shaver is helpful to debride synovial proliferation.
require minimal laboratory workup. Older dogs should
The egress needle is established as described earlier,
have a complete blood screen, chest radiographs, and
and the joinr is distended with saline. A guide needle is
electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a standard anesthetic
used to locate the joint space and the correct position
 protocol, including preemptive pain medication. Post-
for the arthroscope portal. The arthroscope is inserted,
operative pain is controlled with cold therapy, opioids,
and ingress flow is established through the arthroscope
and NSAIDs.
cannula. The arthroscope and light post are positioned
to visualize the articular surfaces of the radiocarpal bone,
Surgical Intervention.
 Arthroscopic intervention is
ulnar carpal bone, distal radius, distal ulna, accessory
currently used primarily for diagnostic and adjunctive
carpal bone, synovial membrane, palmar radiocarpal
purposes. It can be used to evaluate the condition of
ligament, palmar radiocarpal cruciate ligaments, liga-
articular cartilage and synovium (Fig. 5-17). Synovial
ments of the accessory carpal bone, intercarpal ligament,
biopsy specimens can be harvested arthroscopically for
and collateral ligaments (see Fig. 5-16). The light post
histopathologic evaluarion (see Fig. 5-17).
is rotated 360 degrees to allow thorough evaluation of
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were
described
the joint, and the scope is tipped in different directions
earlier. The surgeon must decide whether to use a
 and retracted or advanced to enhance the view.
 dorsolateral or dorsomedial scope portal. If necessary,
 If an instrument portal is needed, a guide needle is
the scope and egress portals can be exchanged during
used to triangulate its position. The most comnion
surgery to improve visualization or access to the affected
reason for failure to visualize the guide needle in the
structures. The operative site is clipped and prepared
 joint is crossing the arthroscope. To prevent crossing the
syn
rc
er
A
FIGURE 5-17 Posilioning anG
synov
abnormal joint findings for orthroscopic
evaluation of the carpus using a dorsco
medial arthroscope portal in a dog wifti
immunemediated polyarthritis. A, Erosion
rc
ler of the periphera arlicular cartilage
of the radiocarpal bone rc] ar lhe edge
Houed g (tuns! snund jpinous ayn jo
ac
thicknesserosionof thearticular cortiloge
of the radiocarpal bone Irc). C. Use cof
biopsy forceps to harvest synovium synov
near the accessory corpal (oc) and Llnar
B
C
uc
caipoal  uc]  bones for  histopathologic
evaluation.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE CARPAL JOINT I95
arthroscope with the guide needle, the needle is inserted
addition, the owner should examine the portal sites
perpendicular to the skin surface and this orientation is
daily for signs of irritation or drainage.
maintained through the soft tissues. After the position
for the instrument portal is established, the instrument
Complications.
Complications are unusual. In the
 is inserted through a cannula or an open portal.
immediate postoperative period, excessive fluid extrava-
sation may occur and cause swelling of the soft tissues
Postoperative Care. Cold therapy can be applied to
around the carpus. This fluid resorbs within the first
the carpus during recovery to relieve pain and reduce
 24 hours. Residual mild swelling adjacent to portal sites
swelling. Cold therapy is administered by alternating
may be noticeable for the first 48 hours.
15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for two applications.
Comnercial cold packs or a commercial circulating
Prognosis.
The prognosis depends on the underlying
cold water pack can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped
 etiology, the response to treatment, and the condition of
in a towel or frozen packs of vegetables can bc used. If
the articular cartilage at the time of initial therapy. If
the dog is dismissed from the hospital the day of surgery,
septic arthritis is treated early, the prognosis is usually
 oral butorphanol (see Table 3-1) is dispensed for admin-
good. Patients with immune-mediated arthritis may need
istration at home. If the dog remains in the hospital
long-terin therapy with corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs.
overnight, buprenorphine is adiministered in the evening
Nonerosive forms of immune-mediated arthritis usually
and butorphanol is dispensed for administration
at
 have a fair to good prognosis, whereas the prognosis for
home. If necessary, cold therapy can be continued by the
erosive forms is usually guarded to poor. Veterinary
owner at home for the first 2 days affer surgery.
L1
textbooks can be consulted for additional information.
HAP
TEI
R
Arthroscopically Assisted
Surgery of the Hip Joint
Introduction
at least one direction. During hip arthroscopy, the surgery
tabie should be adjusted to a position that allows the
The hip joint is difficult to examine arthroscopically
surgeon and assistants to hold the arms as close to the
in dogs that have thickened joint capsules as a result of
body as is possible. The surgeon's shoulders should be
chronic osteoarthritis. However, in young dogs with hip
in neutral position, with the elbows close to 90 degrees.
m prad aq ues Adosre dy axei ot
This position prevents fatigue and improves the efficiency
minimal diffculty. Arthroscopy of the hip is in its
 of the operating team. The imaging tower is positioned
infancy, and future applications will grow as surgeons
at the back of the patient or opposite the surgeon
gain expertise and experience.
(Fig. 6-1). Fluid ingress is achieved with a pressurized
gravity bag or an infusion fluid pump and administered
through the arthroscope cannula. Fluid can be evacuated
Arthroscopic Surgery of the
by allowing it to flow freely through the egress needle
(or cannula) or through a working cannula. Fluid evacu-
Hip Joint
ation can be assisted with suction attached to the egress
needle (or cannula). If suction is used, it must be set at
Equipment and Instrumentation.
The surgical table
a low level or bubbles will be produced that obscure the
should be capable of being lowered, raised, and tilted in
surgeon's view.
口
Tower
Anesthetist
Instrument
table
Anesthesia
Machine
FRGURE 6-1  Arrangement of the operating foom
Assistant
for hip orthroscopy.
Surgeon
98 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
in the inspection of intra-articular structures (probes),
grasping forceps to remove free bodies, biopsy forceps,
and instruments to perform surface abrasion and
synovectomy (Fig. 6-2). Instruments can be inserted into
the joint through an open instrument port, instrument
cannulas, or a combination of the two. If the surgeon
B
works through an instrument cannula, different-size
cannulas and switching sticks are necessary.
C
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
Management.
Preoperative laboratory workup is
D
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
Young, healthy patients with no underlying systemic
FIGURE 6-2  lastrumenration for hip arhroscopy. A, A 1.9- to 2.7 mm
problems require minimal laboratory workup. Older
arthroscopeissed.dependingone seofhe patient.An18
dogs require a complete blood screen, urinalysis, chest
22-gauge spiral neccle is used for or egress cannula. C. A bunt probe
radiographs, and an electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows
is useful for evcluatirg the round ligamenl, articular carilage, and lobr.m.
D, Radiofrequency units can be used to perform synoveclomy.
cornto
a standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive
bleedirg. ord shrink redundant oint copsule crd round Igoment.
 pain medication. Depending on the procedure performed,
perioperative pain is controlled with various combi-
nations of intra-articular analgesics, epidural analgesia,
 A 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is commonly
opioids, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
used in the hip joint. In most dogs, a 2.7-mm arthro-
(NSAIDs). Intra-articular bupivicaine administered before
scope is easily inserted into the joint space. In small
the arthroscopic procedure is effective in controlling
breeds, the use of a 1.9- to 2.4-mm arthroscope
1S
surgical pain (Fig. 6-3). Minimal analgesia is usually
suggested to prevent iatrogenic damage to the cartilagc
necessary for diagnostic arthroscopy alone. If arthros-
during insertion or manipulation of the cartilage during
copy is completed early in the day, the patient may be
surgery. Whichever size arthroscope is chosen, the out-
dismissed from the hospital the same afternoon unless a
side diamcter of the arthroscope cannula must be con-
surgical procedure requires hospitalization. If arthros-
sidered because it must enter the joint. Each arthroscope
copy is completed later in the afternoon, the patient is
cannula is fitted with a blunt obturator and sharp trocar.
discharged the next day.
In most cases, it is not necessary to use the sharp trocar
All patients receive preenptive analgesic drugs or
to cnter the joint. When the sharp trocar is uscd, caution
epidural analgesia as part of the premedication protocol.
must be cxercised to prevent iatrogenic damage to the
Epidural analgesia is preferred if hip arthroscopy
is
cartilage. The authors recommend entering the joint with
coupled with a surgical procedure (e.g., triple pelvic
a blunt conical obturator.
osteotomy). Buprenorphine also can be used because it
An assortment of hand instruments is necessary for
is effective in patients that have mild to moderate post-
hip arthroscopy. Recommcnded are instrurnents to assist 
 operative pain and it has a relatively long mode of action
FIGURE 6-3 Technique *oi irilc?
grticular injection <cof local analges'c
for hip arthroscopy.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE HIP JOINT ?? 99
(6 to 8 hours). When the dog is dismissed from the
with the limb to be operated on positioned uppermost.
hospital, NSAIDs and oral butorphenol (see Table 3-1)
The limb is supported in neutral position, with the
are dispensed for administration at home. NSAIDs are
femur parallel to the ground, or is slightly adducted
continued for 5 days, and butorphenol is discontinued
(Fig. 6-5). Ir is also helpful to flex the hip to open the
after 48 hours. If the dog remains in the hospital over-
 joint space. If both limbs need arthroscopic intervention,
night, a second dose of buprenorphine is administered
the dog is rolled over to the opposite side and the second
in the evening. NSAIDs and butorphenol are prescribed
sidc is prepared for sterile surgery. As the surgeon
for home administration. Fentanyl transdermal patches
becomes more experienced, the area of clipped hair may
also can be used to manage postoperative pain.
be reduced to a small square area that is suitable for
arthroscopy but unsuitable for arthrotomy. If a small
Patient Preparation and Positioning.
Thepatient
area is clipped and the arthroscopic procedure must be
is clipped and prepared for open craniolateral hip
converted to an arthrotomy, the dog can be prepared for
arthrotomy (Fig. 6-4) in case the arthroscopy procedure
an arthrotomy in routine fashion after the arthroscopic
needs to be aborted for technical reasons and an open
procedure is completed.
arthrotomy performed. Arthroscopy is most commonly
used as a diagnostic or assessment tool in the hip and
Portal Sites. Depending on the purpose of arthro-
not as a definitive surgical treatment. The method of
scopic intervention, two or three portal sites are used
limb preparation used depends on the amount of limb
(Fig. 6-6). If visual exploration of the hip joint is all that
maneuverability desired by the surgeon. If the surgeon
is required, an egress portal and an arthroscope portal
wishes to have maximum maneuverability during the
are necessary. If tissue biopsy or treatment of joint
procedure or if a surgical procedure is to be performed
pathology is undertaken, then an additional instrument
at the time of arthroscopic examination, a hanging limb
portal is created. The egress and instrument portals can
preparation is recommended (Fig. 6-5). The hanging
be converted to a single portal when a cannula system is
limb preparation is the preferred method in most clinical
used. A clock face analogy is helpful when planning the
patients. As the surgeon becomes more experienced and
location of portals. For the right hip, the arthroscope
adept at hip arthroscopy or if only diagnostic arthros-
portal is placed at 12 o'clock, the instrument porta! at
copy is needed, less maneuverability is required and a
2 o'clock, and the egress portal at 5 o'clock (Fig. 6-7).
lateral limb preparation can be used. A small area is
For the left hip, the arthroscope, instrument, and egress
clipped over the hip, and a sterile adhesive drape may be
portals are placed at 12 o'clock, 10 o'clock, and 7 o'clock,
used. The lateral limb preparation also allows the
respectively. The positions of the arthroscope and instru-
surgeon to convert to an open procedure if needed. In
ment portals can be switched with switching sticks to
either case, the dog is positioned in lateral rccumbency
 provide access to different parts of the joint. Landmarks
FiGURE 6-4
 Positioning of the dog
for hip arihroscopy belore draping.
10O ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 6-5 A pclient prepared for hip
D puo samoj uoponb ny qm Adosopo
sterile drape. This method of preparation
permits goodmanipulation of the limb during
arthroscopy and ollows the surgeon to conver:
the procedure to ar open arthrotomy if needec.
This posilioning is ideal for arthroscopy of ne
hip and subsequen triple pelvic osteolomy.
are intended to be used only as starting points; optimal
an assistant. Little manipulation of the limb is possible
instrument portal placeiment can be verifed intra-
when the traction device is in use. The hip is palpated,
articularly by visualizationn of a guide needle.
and the needle is inserted at the midpoint of the proximal
The scope portal is established 6rst (Fig. 6-8). An 18-
edge of the greater trochanter. The needle is inserted
to 22-gauge spinal needle (2.5- to 3-inch) can be used as
perpendicular to the skin surface, and this orientation is
a guide to confirm the position for this portal. An
maintained through the soft tissues as the needle enters
 assistant should apply traction to the leg while applying
the joint. The surgeon may experience a popping sen-
countertraction to the inguinal region to separate the
   o n si ri n  
joint surfaces and ease the insertion of the guide needle
needle is placed within the joint, a syringe is attached to
 and arthroscope. The hip is flexed slightly, and the femur
the needle and synovial fluid is aspirated. In most cases,
is positioned parallel to the table to maximize the width
when the needle is properly placed, synovial fluid is
Of the joint space. If the knee is flexed, the tibia can be
tasily aspirated. If synovial fluid is not aspirated and the
used as a handle to place traction on the hip. A traction
surgeon believes that the joint has been entered, lactated
device has been developed that elininates the need for
Ringer's solution can be instilled into the joint. If the
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE HIP JOINT I■ 1O1
Caudal gluteala.
Ischiaticn.
Cranialgluteala.&n
Femorala
FIGURE 6-6 Portal localrions and pertinent anatcony for
canine hie arthroscopy. 1. Arthrcscope poral location; 2. insu
ais s ppeu s ud ui ou y uoo d 
is used as :he egress porhall: 3. egress portal localion.
needle is located in the joint, fluid is easily instiled. If
through the skin and superficial soft tissues adjacent to
joint fluid is not aspirated, the needle is withdrawn
the needle. A scalpel blade should not be used to enter
slightly and aspiration is repeated. Occasionally, during
the joint because it is likely to cause cxtravasation of
insertion, the needle is advanced into the ligament of the
fluid outside the joint cavity. Another concern is the pre-
head of the femur, preventing fluid aspiration. Also, as
vention of iatrogenic injury to the sciatic nerve, which
the joint cavity fills with fluid, reverse pressure is felt on
courses caudal to the joint in the ischiatic notch. Because
the syringe plunger from the instilled fluid. This sen-
 of the location of this nerve, caudal portals to the hip
sation ensures proper placement of the needle into the
 are not recommended (see Fig. 6-6). To ease insertion
joint. The joint cavity is distended with S to 10 mL lac-
of the arthroscope cannula in heavily muscled dogs,
tated Ringer's solution. Joint distension is maintained
blunt dissection with sinall Metzenbaum scissors can be
by leaving the syringe attached to the needie (the assist-
perforimed through the stab incision. This method avoids
ant must keep pressure on the plunger). Distension aids
injury from traumatic insertion thar may occur when
excessive force must be applied. The needle is removed,
Bard-Parker blade is used to make a small entry wound
and the arthroscope cannula with the attached blunt
FIGURE 6-7  Bone model showing the posilioning of instru
ments for hip cartihroscopy.
102? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Surgical Anatomy. Because the hip is a bal-and-
socket joint, it is wcll suited for movement in all
directions. However, although the hip can movc in all
directions, it primarily moves in flexion and extension.
A combination of passive and active mechanisms pro-
vides joint stability. Passive mechanisms include the
ligamentum teres, surrounding joint capsule, joint con-
formation, and synovial fluid cohesion. The ligamentum
teres appears thick and courses from the fovea capitis
of the femoral head to its origin in the acetabular fossa.
The joint capsule originates from the periphery of the
acetabulum, dorsal acetabular rim, and labrun. The
labrum is a well-defined fibrocartilaginous band located
between the acetabular rim and the joint capsule. The
labrum continues as a free ligament (the transverse
acetahular ligament) across the acetabular notch. The
FIGURE 6-8  Instrumenl posilioninig ior hip arhroscopy on a dog.
concavity of the acetabulum and the fit of the femoral
head into the acetabulum provide joint stability. Con
traction of the surrounding hip muscles provides dynamic
conical obturator is inserted in the same direction as the
active coxofemoral stability. These muscles include the
needle. The tip of the blunt obturator can be walked off
gluteal, obturator, iliopsoas, and adductor muscles. Active
the lateral edge of the dorsal acerabular rim to aid in
contraction of the imuscles of the hip causes com-
localization of the joint space. When a blunt conical
pression across the hip joint and increases tension in the
obturator is used, pressure is applied to penetrate the
joint capsule.
joint capsule. With expericnce, the surgeon will learn
When the arthroscope enters the joint, the camera
to determine by feel when the joint is cntered. After
should be positioned to provide correct spatial orien-
the joint is entered, the obturator is reimoved from the
tation when viewing the monitor. The proper sparial
cannula. Fluid flows freely from the cannula, confrning
orientation and fore-oblique view is obtained when the
correct placement. The fluid ingress line is attached to
controls on the camera head and the light post are up-
the cannula, and the joint is lavaged for 10 to 15 seconds
right (see Fig. 6-7). When the camera and light post are
before the arthroscope is inserted ro help obtain a clear
held in this position, the ligamentum teres and acetabular
fluid fieid.
fossa are visible (Fig. 6-9). The articular cartilage of the
The egress portal is established second (see Fig 6-8). A
medial and deep portions of the femoral head and
18- to 22-gauge (2.5- to 3-inch) spinal needle is inscrted
 acctabulum also can be seen (Fig. 6-10). The scope can
approximately 2cm_cranial and 2 cm distal to the
be carefully withdrawn slightly to visualize the remaining
arthroscope portal. To avoid interfering with the lighr
surfaces of the articular cartilage on the proximal and
post, a needle that extends only slightly above the level
lateral aspects of the femoral head and acetabulum, To
of the skin is used. The needle is directed perpendicular
inprove visualization of the articular surfaces, the limb
to the limb. If the needle is placed properly, fluid flows
can be distracted to separate the joint surfaces and the
from the needle hub. Evacuation of fluid maintains fluid
hip can be adductcd and rotated internally. The light
flow through the joint and enhances visualization. Intra-
post is positioned caudally to visualize the cranial com-
venous or suction tubing can be attached to the needle
partrment of the hip (Fig. 6-11). The surgeon should note
to capture fluid as it leaves the joint. Alternatively, fluid
the articular cartilage of the femoral head, the synovial
inay be allowed to spill onto the floor for capture by a
membrane, and the recess of the joint capsule as it
floor suction unit, a basin, or rowels.
attaches to the femur cranially (sce Fig. 6-11). The tip
The instrument portal is established if a biopsy of
of the arthroscope is moved caudally and the light post
intra-articular tissue is needed or if treatment of joint
is turned cranially to view the caudal joinr compartment
pathology is required (see Fig. 6-8). If a cannula systen
(Fig. 6-12). The surgeon should note the articular carti-
is used, the egress portal is converted to a portal that
lage of the femoral head, the synovial membrane, and
the recess of the joint capsule as it attaches to the femur
a cannula system is not used, a new egress portal is
caudally (see Fig. 6-12). The arthroscope and light post
created slightly distal to the original portal and the
are returned to the original entry position to begin explo-
instrument portal is placed at the site of the original
ration of the acetabulum, the dorsal acetabular rim, the
egress portal. The craniocaudal and proximodistal
labrum, and the dorsal attachment of the synovial mem-
position of the instrument portal relativc to the grcater
brane (Figs. 6-13 and 6-14). The tip of the arthroscope
trochanter can be estimated from the lateral radiograph.
is slowly and carefully retracted a small distance to
This site is often approximately 2 cm cranial to the
avoid inadvertent displacement of the scope from the
scope portal. These numbers are only estimates, and the
joint. Maintaining distraction of the limb can help to
actual numbers will vary with the size of the dog. It is
prevent displaceinent of the scope from the joint. The
best to triangulate the instrument portal site relative to
tip of the arthroscope is gently moved dorsally to view
the position of the arthroscope tip.
the dorsal compartment and joint capsule. The light
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE HIP JOINT ?1O3
FIGURE 6-9 Positioning and normal
joint findings for arthroscopic evaluation of
ihe ligamenium teres [round ligament].
post is turned to view cranially or caudally. An example
Indications for Arthroscopic
of a standard hip arthroscopic examination is to visualize
Surgery of the Hip Joint
and image each area of the joint as follows:
Hip arthroscopy is a new treatment modality in small
1.
Ligamentum teres
animal surgery. As small animal surgeons gain skili
2.
 Femoral head
 Cranial joint pouch
and experience, more conditions will be treated arthro-
3.
scopically or with arthroscopic assistance. Potential indi-
4.
 Caudal joint pouch
cations include hip dysplasia, evaluation of the joint
5.
Acetabulum
before triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO), osteoarthritis, hip
6.
Acetabular labrum
dislocation, and diagnostic examination (biopsy or cul-
7. Synovial membrane
ture of bone, cartilage, or synovial membrane). In patients
A
FIGURE 6-10 Positioning and normal
joint findings for arthroscopic evaluation of
the femora: head. A, Articular surface of the
midportion of the femoral nead; B, coudal
B
aspect o: the femoral heod.
104 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
1
FIgure 6-11
Posior ing arc rormol
joint indings for arthicscooc evaiJct r
ollthe crania join: pouch of the hip. A.
Nornal synevium ond crf cuar carilkige
Of the femorai hoad: B, rorma’ appect
once of the craniul aspect of the
ocetobs.um [ l] cnd femoral nead 12].
C. normal appecionce of the <icria
B
[oint pouch and synovial altacrments to
Phe ocetabulum arid femo'ol hecd.
FIGURE 6-12 Posirioning crd rcY-
mol joint findings for arihroscopic.
cvcoluar'on cf the caudol joint pouch of
the hip A. Tronsvese cetcsbulcr igc.
ment (l),exending from the corilage
abrur 21:B.normcl apperance of
:he ccudal lemoral heod l. cuda
ocetabulum [2l. corilage labrum 13].
B
and syncvium [4].
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE HIP JOINTI1O5
A
FIGURE 6-13
 Positioning and nor-
mal joint Findings for arthroscopic evalu-
alion of the acetabulum. A, The origin of
the round ligomenl in the acetabular
fossa [l}, B, normal oppearonce of the 
articular surface of the acetabulum
Il} adiacent lo the acetabular fossa [2];
C, normal ariculation of the acelabulum
[ I] and femoral head [2).
B
FIGURE 6-14
Posilioning and normal
joint findings for arhroscopic evaluation of
the dorsai acetabular rim I ll. the labrum [2],
and femoral head [3].
106I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
with septic arthritis, arthroscopy also can be used to
especially if TPO is being considered (Figs. 6-15
place a drain within the joint capsule to allow ingress
through 6-21).
and egress flushing.
Treatment. Medical management provides symp-
tomatic relief but cannot resolve hip dysplasia.
Management includes NSAIDs, nutraceuticals, and other
Hip Dysplasia
chondroprotectant agents. By improving joint congruity
History and Signalment.
 Dogs present with a wide
and stabiliry, in many cases, TPO decreases the progres-
variety of historical and clinical signs. Depending on the
severity of hip instability and osteoarthritis, dogs may
replacement or femoral head and neck osteotomy may
have symptoms that range from no known problem to
 be performed in dogs that do not meet the criteria for
marked lameness and difficulty rising. The condition is
TPO or those that have osteoarthritis that is not ame-
more common in large breeds, but any age or breed can
nable to long-term medical treatment. Thermal con-
be affected. Commonly affected breeds include the
traction of a stretched ligamentum reres or joint capsule
German shepherd, Labrador retriever, golden retriever,
can be performed arthroscopically with a radiofrequency
rottweiler, and chow chow. The owner typically reports
unit, but the clinical efficacy of this procedure is unknown
a slow, progressive onset of clinical signs that may
(see Fig. 6-15G).
include difficulty rising, reluctance to play, decreased
activity, reluctance to jump, hindlimb stiffness or lame-
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
ness, pain, and a bunny-hopping gait.
Management.
.Preoperative laboratory workup is based
on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Young,
Physical Examination Findings.
Gait analysis may
healthy patients with no underlying systemic problems
show obvious lameness; more often, however, lameness
require minimal laboratory workup. Older dogs should
is diffcult to detect during walking or trotting and is
undergo a complete blood screen, urinalysis, chest radi-
apparent only after exercise. Pain on extension of the
 graphs, and an electrocardiograin. Table 3-1 shows a
hip and muscle atrophy are evident in most cases. Pain
standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain
also may occur on abduction or rotation of the hip. An
medication. Postoperative pain is controlled with
Ortolani test may show hip instability. The patient may
epidural analgesia, cold therapy, opioids, and NSAIDs.
assume an abnormal posture in the hindquarters, often
standing with an archcd low lumbar spine and the hind
Surgical Intervention.E
 Portal sites and surgical
feet shifred cranially.
anatomy were discussed earlier. The operative site is
clipped and prepared according to the amount of limb
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
maneuverabilitry desired and the surgical procedure
includes lumbosacral disease, rupture of the cranial cru-
needed. A hanging limb preparation provides the
ciate ligament, discospondylitis, disease of the interver-
 greatest degree of freedom to manipulate the limb and
tebral disk, septic arthritis, sprain of the iliopsoas muscle,
is recommended. Liberal clipping and thorough sterile
and strain of the ligamentum teres and joint capsule.
 preparation are necessary because an open arthrotomy
may be required. In most cases, a 2.7-mm, 30-degree
Radiographic Findings.
Radiographic views include
fore-oblique arthroscope is used. Basic instrumentation
standard vcntrodorsal and lateral projections of the
includes probes to inspect the joint capsule. If the sur-
pelvis, As the condition progresses, radiographic changes
geon works through an instrument cannula, different-
include coxofemoral subluxation and osteoarthritis.
sized cannulas and switching sticks facilitate the surgery.
PENNHIP stress views, as described by Smith et al., can
A motorized shaver is helpful to debride synovial pro-
be used to evaluate the joint more completely and assist
liferation, but is not essential. If tissue ablation or
inl prognostication. The condition of the dorsal
thermal contracture is indicated, an electrothermal radio-
acetabular rim can be evaluated with a skyline view
frequency unit is necessary. The dog is positioned in
(DAR view), as described by Slocun and Slocum.
lateral recumbency, with the leg to be operated on placed
upperimost. The limb is supported in neutral position to
Diagnosis. A complete orthopedic examination is
prevent excessive adduction, which closes the joint space
essential to exclude other orthopedic problems. Hip
between the acetabulum and the femoral head. The limb
stability should be assessed while the patient is ade-
also should be prepared in a manner that permits traction
quately sedated or anesthetized. The 
hip should be
by an assistant or a traction device to separate the joint
assessed with an Ortolani test as well as by flexing,
surfaces and allow easier insertion and manipulation of
extending, abducting, and rotating the joint. The hip
the arthroscope.
should be palpated to identify crepitus and estimate the
A guide needle is used to locate the joint space and
depth of the acerabulum. The opposite hip also should
the correct position for the arthroscope portal. Lactated
be palpated because many cascs are bilateral. Radio-
Ringer's solution is instilled to distend the joint. The
graphic evaluation is used to confrm the diagnosis.
arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow is established
Arthroscopic evaluation of the articular surfaces, dorsal
through the arthroscope cannula. The egress needle is
acetabular rim, ligamentum teres, and joint capsule
established as described earlier. The arthroscope and
may be useful in assessing a paticnt with hip dysplasia,
light post are positioned to visualize the ligamentum
A
B
D
E
FIGURE &-15  Posilioning and abnor
mal joint findings for arthroscopic evalu
msui s iuo
trauma and hip dysplasia. A, Swelling
and neovascularizalion of the ligament;
B, sweling and hemorrhage of the liga-
ment; C,mild pai aro thligment;
D, moderate partial teor of ihe
liga
ment; E, severe portial tear of the ligo-
ment; F, complete tear of the ligamenf in
Q dog with a traumatic craniodorsal hip
dislocation; G, shrinkage and debride
ment of the igament wih  rodiofrequency
probe.
G
108ISMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
FGURE 6-16  Positioning crd abnor-
mal joint findings for crthroscopic evalu
ation of the femoral head in dogs with
Irauma and hip dysplasia.A,Fibrilltior cf
the arficular cartilage lgrade 2); 8, nec-
vascularization and early remcdeling:
C. partial-thickness carilage erosion
[grade 3): D, Fullthickness cariloge
erosion (grade 4): F. arhroscopic view
E
of luxated coxofemoral joint.
teres and the articular surfaces of the medial compart-
used to triangulate the position for the portal. The most
ment. The post cable is rotated cranially and the arthro-
common reason for failure to visualize the guide needle
scope tip is positioned caudally to allow the surgeon to
in the joint is crossing the arthroscope. To prevent cross-
examine the articular surfaces and joint capsule in the
ing the arthroscope with the guide needle, the needle is
posterior compartment. The articular surfaces and joint
inserted perpendicular to the skin surface. This orien-
capsule in the anterior compartment are examined by
tation is maintained through the soft tissues. To verify the
rotating the post cable caudally and positioning the
 angle and the position for treatment with an instrument,
scope tip cranially. The dorsal acetabular rim and joint
the surgeon can simulate treatment with a guide needle.
capsule of the dorsal compartment are examined by
After the position for the instrument portal is established,
withdrawing the scope slightly and positioning the tip
a probe is inserted through a cannula or an open portal.
dorsally. The post cable should be rotated in all direc-
Palpation and visualization may identify stretching of the
tions to allow thorough evaluation of this region. If an
ligamentum teres or joint capsule, but these conditions
 instrument portal is required, a guide needle should be
 are not direct contraindications to TPO (see Fig. 6-15).
A
FGURE 6-17  Posilioning ard cbngr.
mol join fi dings for orthroscopic eval.
otion cf the cranial joint pouch in dogs
pusospwssd
femoral head remodelirg; &. mila corli-
loge wear igrade 1) and remodeling:
C.mild synoviis (I） and wear of he
B
crcrial margin of the ccetabulrn I2).
If the articular surfaces of the acetabulum or femoral
going arthroscopy use the leg immediately after surgery.
head show excessive wear (see Figs. 6-16 to 6-21), the
Leash walking is recommended for 10 to 14 days before
surgeon should consider abandoning a planned TPO.
the patient resumes normal activity.
Other potential contraindications include rearing of the
After TPO, activity is restricted to leash walking for
cartilaginous labrum, joint capsular tears, and wear of
 6 to 8 weeks. If the joint capsule is treated with thermal
the dorsal acetabular rim (see Fig. 6-20). A radio-
 contracture, activity is restricted for 6 weeks to prevent
frequency unit may be used to contract the stretched
overloading and stretching of the contracted collagen
connective tissue structures (see Fig. 6-15).
use the leg immediately after surgery. Those that
Postoperative Care. Cold therapy can be applied to
undergo TPO may be unable to bear weight initially,
but usually can bear partial weight. To increase the
ing. Cold therapy is applied by alternating 15 minures
weightbearing load on the limbs, walking at a slow pace
on and 10 minutes off for two applications. Commercial
is recommended. As postoperative time increases, the
cold packs or a commercial circulating cold water pack
pace can be hastened. To increase the range of motion
can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or
in the hip, the owner should walk the dog in high grass
frozen packs of vegetables can be used. lf the dog is dis-
(e.g., weeds), shallow water, or sand, which forces the
missed frorm the hospital on the day of surgery, NSAiDs
dog to pick up the feet and step high with the legs. Afrer
and oral butorphenol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed
6 wecks, thc owner should begin limited amounts of free
for administration at home. If the dog remains in the
activity with controlled walking, starting with 5 minutes
hospital overnight, buprenorphine is administered in the
of free activity and increasing to 30 minutes over the next
evening as needed. Epidural administration is especially
2 weeks. After 8 to 10 weeks, free activity is gradually
helpful for patients that undergo TPO. NSAIDs and
increased to normal levels. If during any exercise period
butorphenol are dispensed for administration at home.
(controlled or free activity), the dog becomes sore or is
NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and butorphenol is
sore the next day, the owner should decrease the pace
discontinued after 48 hours. Cold therapy is continued
and return to controlled activity for 2 to 3 days.
by the client at home for the first 2 days after surgery if
needed. In addition,the client should examine the portal
Complications.
 Complications after hip arthroscopy
sites daily for signs of irritation or drainage. Dogs under-
are unusual. Occasionally, in the immediate postoperative
110 O SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
FIGURE 6-18 Positioning and abnor-
mal joint findings for arthroscopic evalu
otion of the caudal joint pouch in dogs
with hip dysplasia. A, Chronic synovitis;
B. mild synovitis and wear of the carti-
loge of the femoral head; C, mild synovitis
and normal carilage; D, mild tear of the
labrum, synovitis, ond gcelabular carti
lage wear; E. marked synovitis and
D
E
normal cartilage.
period, excessive fluid extravasation occurs and results
extensive soft tissue injury, the prognosis is fair to good.
in swollen soft tissues around the hip. The use of instru-
If substantial wear of the articular cartilage of the
ment cannulas can reduce this complication. This fluid
acetabulum or femoral head is noted, the prognosis is
resorbs within the first 24 hours. Residual mild swelling
 guarded. The prognosis after total hip replacement and
adjacent to the portal sites may he noticeable for the
femoral head and neck excision is good.
first 48 hours. Complications after TPO are uncommon
as well. Occasionally, seromas occur and screws loosen
Hip Dislocation
prematurely. These conditions are treated conservatively
by restricting activity in most patients.
History and Signalment. Dogs present with acute
hindlimb lameness. Most dogs cannot bear weight.
Prognosis. The prognosis for satisfactory limb
Lameness is usually associated with a traumatic incident
poos aie neu shund u poo s! Odi rae uouny
and is not responsive to anti-inflammatory medication.
candidates for the procedure. In patienrs with more
Any age or breed of dog can be affected.
A
B
D
E
FIGURE 6-19
 Posilioning and abnor-
mal joint findings for arthroscopic evalu-
ation of the acetabulum in dogs with hip
dysplasia. A, Mild carilage wear Igrade
1); B, mild cortilage wear lgrade 21;
and fibrilltion lgrode 4;D,synoviis,
mild tear of the labrum, and mild carri.
E, parlialthickness erosion of the articular
carilggrad;lthikes
lage erosion lgrade 4);: G, extensive
口
he ocetabulum
G
112  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
FIGURE 6-20 Positioning and abno
mal jcint findings for arthrcscopic evaly-
alion of the labrum and dorsal rim of +he
acetabulum in dogs with hip dyspiasia.
A. Synovilis and tearing of the crania.
aspect of the labrum; B. early mild tear ol
the labrum: C. severe tear of the labrum;
D. synovitis and mild tear of the labrum:
E
E.mild tear and neovascularizotion of
D
the labxum.
A
B
FGURE 6-21 Arthroscopic evaluation
of the hip can be used to help determine
whether 0 patient is a candidate for triple
pelvic osteotomy [ITPO]. A. Preoperalive
dy  bop  jou
dysplasia. 8, Postoperalive radiograph.
alfter TPO of the right hip: the left hip was
not considered a candidate because the
cartilage labrum and crticular carfilge
were dcmaged (see D). C. Arthroscopic
image of the r.ght hip showing orly mild 
wear of the cartilage labr.um; this hio is
considered an acceptable candidate for
TPO suigery. D. Arihroscopic imoge of
the labrur and erosion of the ocetabular
carlilage: this hip is considered an
unacceptable candidale for TPO surgery.
D
Physical Examination Findings.
Gait analysis shows
should be carefully evaluated for preexisting hip
visible lameness. Swelling is usually palpable in the hip
dysplasia and osteoarthritis.
region. Manipulation of the hip elicits discomfort in most
dogs. Most dislocations are craniodorsal. The grcater
Treatment.
 Medical management can relieve pain,
trochanter can be palpated in a more craniodorsal
but defnitive therapy with closed reduction or surgery
position when its position is compared with the wing of
 is needed. Initially, closed reduction should be attempted
the ilium and the ischiatic tuberosity. The limb is usually
 in the anesthetized patient. Traction is applied while the
held slightly abducted and externally rotated. The limb
limb is maintained in external rotation and adduction.
appears shortened as a result of dorsal displacement of
Countertraction is placed on the inguinal region to facili-
the femoral head. Ventral hip dislocations are much less
tate hip reduction. As the femoral head is repositioned,
common. The limb is usually abducted and the greater
the limb is rotated internally and abducted to reduce the
trochanter is displaced slightly medially.
femoral head within the acetabulum. If the reduction is
secure, an Ehmer sling is applied for 10 to 14 days.
Differential  Diagnosis.  The differential diagnosis
Alternatively, an ilioischial pin (Devita pin) is placed in
includes hip dysplasia, pelvic or femoral fracrure, and
closed fashion. Currently, arthroscopic intervention is
sacroiliac luxation.
used on a limited basis to visualize the condition of the
articular surfaces of the coxofemoral joint and remove
Radiographic Findings.  A lateral radiographic view
avulsion fragments. This method may be used more
is usually diagnostic. A displaced fermoral head can
extensively in the future (see Figs. 6-15 and 6-16).
be seen in the craniodorsal or ventral position. A
ventrodorsal radiograph clearly shows the dislocation
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
but may be painful to acquire if the patient is not
Management.
 Preoperative laboratory workup is based
anesthetized or heavily sedated.
on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Young,
healthy patients with no underlying systemic problerms
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on the history,
require minimal laboratory workup. Older dogs should
physical findings, and radiographic findings. The patient
undergo a complere blood screen, chest radiographs,
114 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
and an electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a standard
trochanrer. The femoral head is evaluated with a scope
anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain medi-
 portal that is placed in the typical position in relation to
cation. Postoperative pain is controlled with epidural
the greater trochanter. Traction is applied to the limb to
analgesia, cold therapy, opioids, and NSAIDs.
return the femoral head to as near a normal anatomic
 position as possible. The femoral head can be evaluated
Surgical Intervention.
 Other comprehensive small
 arthroscopically, but the acetabulum may be diffcult to
animal surgery texts describe specific methods of sur-
examine because of the malpositioned femoral head. If
gical repair. Arthroscopy is nor routinely used to manage
reduction is possible, routine arthroscopic evaluation can
hip dislocation. Early experience with arthroscopy in
be performed to evaluate the condition of the articular
 pas si i ieui sisins uonosp d ym so
surface. If reduction is not possible, a craniolateral
evaluating the condition of the articular surfaces and
approach to the hip should be performed to evaluate the
removing ayulsion fragments. Other applications may
condition of the articular surface.
become available in the future.
 If an instrument portal is required, a guide needle is
Portal sites and surgical anatomy were discussed
used to triangulare the position for the instrumenr port.
earlier. The operative site is clipped and prepared accord-
To prevent crossing the arthroscope with the guide
ing to the amount of limb maneuverability required
 needle, the needle is inserted perpendicular to the skin
during surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides
surface, and this orientation is maintained through the
the greatest degrec of freedom for manipulating limb
soft tissues. Afrer the position for the instrument portal
 position and is usually recommended. Liberal clipping
is established, a probe is inserted through a cannula
and thorough sterile preparation are necessary because
Or an open portal. If the articular surfaces of the
an open arthrotomy may be required. In most cases, a
acetabulum or femoral head show excessive wear, the
2.7-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is used.
surgeon should consider arthroplasty rather than
 Basic instrumentation includes probes to inspect the joint
reduction and stabilization.
capsule. If the surgeon works through an instrument
 If open reduction is necessary, the surgeon must decide
cannula, different-sized cannulas and switching sticks
whether to reduce and stabilize the hip or perform a
facilitate the surgery. The dog is positioned in lateral
total hip replacement, femoral head and neck excision,
recumbency with the leg to be operared on placed upper-
 or TPO. The surgeon may use a variery of techniques to
most. The limb is supported in neutral position to
stabilize the hip joint after open reduction, including
prevent excessive adduction, which closes the joint line
placement of a prosthetic joint capsule, imbrication of
between the acetabulum and the femoral head.
the joint capsufe, placement of a toggle-pin, transposition
If possible, closed reduction is performed before
 of the greater trochanter, placement of an iliofemoral
 arthroscopic evaluation is done. The femoral head and
antirotational suture, and TPO. These techniques are
ligamentum teres can be evaluated in an extra-articular
 described in detail in veterinary surgical textbooks and
position (see Figs. 6-15 and 6-16). The scope is inserted
journals.
after careful palpation of the dislocated hip. A guide
needle is used to locate the joint space and the correct
 Postoperative Care. If an Ehmer sling is not used,
position for the arthroscope portal if reduction is
cold therapy can be applied to the hip during recovery
accomplished. The arthroscope is inserted and ingress
to relieve pain and reduce swelling. Cold therapy is
flow is established through the arthroscope cannula.
applied by alternating 15 minutes on and 10 minutes
The egress needle is established as described earlier.
off for two applications. Commercial cold packs or a
Extravasation of fluid is likely to occur if the joint
commercial circulating cold water pack can be used.
capsule tears. Excessive extravasation can make surgical
Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or frozen packs of
intervention more difficult. The arthroscope and light
vegetables can be used. If the dog is dismissed from the
post are positioned to visualize the torn ligamentum
hospital the day of surgery, NSAIDs and oral butorphenol
teres and articular surfaces of the femoral head (see
(see Table 3-1) are dispensed for administration at
Figs. 6-15 and 6-16). The articular surfaces and joint
home. If the dog remains in the hospital overnight,
 capsule in the posterior compartment are examined by
buprenorphine is administered in the evening. NSAIDs
rotating the light post cranially and positioning the scope
and butorphenol are dispensed for administration at
tip caudally. The articular surfaces and joint capsule in
home. NSAIDs are continued for S days, and butorphenol
the anterior compartment are examincd by rotating the
is discontinued after 48 hours. Cold therapy is continued
light post caudally and positioning the scope tip cranially.
by the client ar home for the initial 2 days after surgery
The dorsal acetabular rim and joint capsule of the dorsal
if needed. The client also should examine the portal sites
compartment are examined by withdrawing the scope
daily for signs of irritation or drainage. Leash walking
slightly and positioning the scope tip dorsally. The light
is recommended for 4 weeks before the dog resumes a
a moe oi suonaip le ul paeoi aq pnous sod
progressive increase in activity. To increase the weight-
surgeon to evaluate this region thoroughly.
bearing load on the limbs, walking at a slow pace is
If closed reduction is not possible, the scope portal is
recommended. As postoperative time increases, the pace
established near the normal location. If the femoral
can be hastened. To increase the rangc of motion in the
head is located craniodorsally, the scope enters the
hip when walking, the client should walk the dog in
acetabulum in a portal that is caudal to the greater
high grass (e.g., weeds), shallow water, or sand to force
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE HIP JOINT I? 115
the dog to pick up the feet and step high with the legs.
used, but may include recurrent dislocation, implant
After 6 weeks, the owner should begin limited amounts
failure, seroma, and infection.
of free activity with controlled walking, starting with
5 minutes of free activity and increasing to 30 minutes
Prognosis.
Unless preexisting hip _dysplasia is
over the next 2 weeks. After 8 weeks, free activity is
present, the prognosis for satisfactory limb function
gradually increased to normal levels. If during any
after reduction of a dislocated hip is good. If the hip
exercise period (controlled or free activity), the dog
remains reduced 1 month after closed or open reduction,
becomes sore or is sore the next day, the owner should
recurrent dislocation is uncommon. If the articular
decrease the pace and return to controlled activity for
cartilage of the acctabulum or femoral head shows
2 to 3 days.
substantial wear, the prognosis is guarded because of
the probability of progressive osteoarthritis.
Complications.
Complications are unusual. Occa-
sionally, excessive fluid extravasation occurs and results
in swollen soft tissues around the hip in the immediate
References
postoperative period. This fluid resorbs within the first
24 hours. Residual mild swelling adjacent to portal sites
Slocum B, Slocun TD: Pelvic osteotomy for axial rotation of the
may be noticeable for the first 48 hours. Complications
acetabular segment in dogs with hip dysplasia. Vet Clin North Am
with closed reduction of a traumatic dislocation are
Small Anim Pract 22(3):645-682, 1992.
Smith GK, Beiry DN, Gregor TP, et al: New concepts of
usually associated with recurrent dislocation or wounds
coxofemoral joinr instability and the development of a clinical
associated with bandaging. Complications associated
stress-radiographic method of quantitating hip joint laxity in the
with open reduction and surgery vary with the technique
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 196:59, 1993.
HA 
PTEE
R
Arthroscopically
Assisted
Surgery of the Stifle Joint
Wayne 0. Whitney
Introduction
visualization. Providing arthroscopic fluid support,
offering external technical support, and monitoring the
Before they attempt to treat clinical cases, surgeons
patient are denanding tasks for the circulating nurse.
must master basic triangulation skills and become
Without appropriate teamwork, the length of the proce-
familiar with arthroscopic equipment, instrumentation,
dure, the number of complications, and the level of
and viewing angles. A quality instructional course is well 
frustration are all increased. However, after the team
worth the investment. Surgeons who master the basic
masters the necessary skills, arthroscopy rypically pro-
skills can practice the techniques on bell peppers, saw-
vides accurate joint examination and treatment with
bones, and cadavers.
 minimal invasion, scarring, and patient discomfort, and
Unlike the shoulder and elbow, adequate stifle visuali-
rapid return to function.
zation requires the use of a motorized shaver and electro-
cautery as well as flow management. Each of these
Arthroscopic Surgery of the Stifle
components has an associated learning curve. Another
difference berween these joints is that the stifle readily
Joint
bleeds during arthroscopic examination as a result of
hyperemia of the synovium and patellar fat pad in
 Equipment and lnstrumentation.
Appropriate high-
response to inflammation. Quick, effective, and precise
quality equipment is essential. Necessary components
intraoperative hemostasis is necessary. The formation of
include a high-resolution monitor, light source (at least a
periarticular osteophytes is rapid and intense.
In
 300-W halogen lamp; xenon is better), high-quality light
addition, periarticular fibrosis and thickening may be
cable, motorized shaver, sharp shaver blades (disposable),
pronounced in chronic cases and may make arthroscopy
and tissue ablation unit.
 A 2.7-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is ideal
access the medial and lateral compartments. if the
for most stifles. Both long and short scopes are accept-
surgeon has little experience with stifle arthroscopy or
able. Longer scopes offer better depth of field and reguire
if arthroscopic treatment does not resolve the problem,
less focusing, but both types have adequate length for
the surgeon should be prepared to convert the procedure
large dogs. Short scoops are preferred by some surgeons
to an open arthrotomy. In addition, the surgeon should
because they can be easier to manipulate. Arthroscopes
expect initial cases to proceed slowly and therefore
that screw directly into the camera are preferred (Fig.
should schedule plenty of time. Once the techniques are
7-1A). Scopes with long eyepieces also work well, are
mastered, arthroscopic examination and treatment
less expensive, and are preferred by some surgeons (see
procedures often are much quicker and more accurate
Fig. 7-1B); however, they require a coupler that increases
than conventional arthrotomy, and the need to convert
the distance between the camera and the light post. This
to an open procedure is rare.
increased distance makes it difficult to rotate the light
High-qualitry supporr staff and precision teamwork
post (to change viewing direction) with the same hand
 q a ds pe d n ssa a
that holds the camera. The inabiliry to rotate the light
rious and can greatly lengthen anesthesia times if the team
post with one hand becomes a problem when the
is not well trained. The surgeon is highly dependent on 
opposite hand is holding a treatment instrument. Also,
a trained assistanr because it is not practical for the
couplers occasionally pose fogging problems that are
surgeon to reach for instrurments. The assistant plays a
not encountered with C-mount scopes. Extremely long
vital role in intraoperative limb positioning for proper
scopes tend to flex considerably and make it more
118SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
h
FlGURE 7-1  Instrumentation for stifle arthroscopy. α, A C-mount arthroscope with a camero alached. The scope
screws directly into the camera. b, A 2.7-mm, 30·degree short arthroscope with a coupler and camera altached.
and 5-O curette [right. j, Bipolar radiofrequency probe. k, Monopolar radiofrequency probe.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I? 1 19
difficult ro cross the trochlear ridges to enter the lateral
Useful hand instruments include a small-joint probe,
and medial compartments from the trochlear groove.
 Blades of many types, names, and sizes are available
a small clamshell forceps to obtain biopsy specimens,
for specialized use; however, a 3.5- or 4.0-mm full-radius
blade works for most problems encountered in most
punch) (see Fig. 7-1E through I). However, even the
stifle joints. Shaver blades can be resterilized and reused
smallest instruments usually are too large to perform
rwo or three times, but this practice is not ideal. Small
motorized shaver handpicces commonly used in the
and scissors often are too large to opcn without causing
elbow and shoulder can be used, but larger motorized
iatrogenic damage to the articular cartilage. Tissue abla-
shaver handpieces are quicker and more durable and are
tion wands are both ideal and necessary for this purpose
preferred for use in the stifle. After the surgeon becomes
but require the use of a separate console (see Fig. 7-1]
comfortable with this blade, more aggressive “toothed"
and K). Many have fine tips that can be used for both
shaver blades (see Fig. 7-iC) can be used to shorten
intra-articular electrocautery and tissue ablation, elimi-
debridement time, but these teeth can more easily cause
 rn r    i a  
iatrogenic damage to the articular cartilage. More
stasis alone. The same console accepts slightly larger tips
aggressive (quicker) shaving of tissue is possible with a
for wider ablation needs. The most important attribute
large handpiece and a larger (4.0-mm) aggressive blade.
of the tissue ablation wand is its size because it is used
 In giant breeds 5.0-mm blades can be used. Soft tissue is
primarily for partial meniscectomy within a tight joint
removed in oscillatory mode, and bone and firm carti-
space.A robe that is mallable is also important, e
lage are removed in forward mode. For aggressive bone
cially for partial meniscectomy. Very fine tips are used
removal, such as notchplasty, a hooded burr can be used
to incise the separare “handles" of bucker handle tears,
in high-speed forward mode. Alternatively, a blade can
and slightly larger (approximately 2-mm) rounded-tip
be used in high-speed forward mode.
probes are ideal for ablation. Both bipolar (ArthroCare)
Although it is not mandatory for other joints, some
(see Fig. 7-1/) and monopolar (Vulcan EAS by Oratec.
form of specialized intra-articular electrocautery is neces-
Smith and Nephew) versions are available (see Fig. 7-1K).
sary to control intraoperative hemorrhage in the stifle
Tissue ablation wands can be used to ablate the fat pad
(see Fig. 7-1D, J, and K). Many instruments are avail-
and the cruciate ligamenr remnants, but this procedure
able as disposable handpieces that fit electrocautery
often is faster with a motorized shaver and blade.
consoles that are available in most operating rooms (see
A large-diameter fenestrated cannula (Fig. 7-2A) is
Fig. 7-1D). Although these units work well for hemo-
needed for outflow because hyperplastic synovium often
stasis, they are inadequate for most tissue ablation needs
obstructs a single opening. A conical-tipped switching
(e.g., partial meniscectomy).
stick (see Fig. 7-2B) is used to place the outflow cannula.
FIGURE 7-2Ouflow instrumentation
tor sile orthroscopy. A, A 4.Omm-
00
diameter mulifenestrated cannula.B.
Conicalt pped obturator [switching stick]
for an cuflow cannula. C, Outflow con.
nula in the medial compartment of me
stifle joint. adjacent to perigarlicular osteo-
phytes Ipo]. O. Cannula that is partially
obstrucled by the synovium loo]. show-
ing the need for multiple fenestrations.
C
D
120 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A fluid ingress pump is helpful but not mandatory.
is placed berween the cold pack and the skin. The cold
The additional cost of specialized large-diameter intra-
 pack is applied, followed by layers of towels to insulate
venous tubing usually is recovered with saved time for
the area from the surrounding room temperature. The
both the surgeon and the support staff. A large-volume
cold therapy is continued at home when possible for the
collection bottle is helpful for the same reason. If gravity
first 2 days after surgery, especially after walking.
ingress is used, large-diameter tubing is necessary to
All patients receive preemptive analgesic drugs
distend the joints adequately.
part of the premedication protocol. Buprenorphine is
preferred because of its effectiveness in patients that have
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
mild to moderate postoperative pain and its relatively
Management. Preoperative laboratory evaluation is
long mode of action (6 to 8 hours). When the dog is dis-
based on the patient's physical status and surgical risk.
missed from the hospital, NSAIDs and oral burorphanol
Older dogs should undergo a complete blood screen,
(Table 3-1) are dispensed for administration at home.
urinalysis, chest radiographs, and an electrocardiogram.
NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and butorphanol is
Table 3-1 shows a standard anesthetic protocol, including
discontinued after 48 hours. If the dog remains in the
preemptive pain medication. Long-acting epidural anal.
hospital overnight, a second dose of buprenorphine is
gesia is routinely used when more severe postoperative
administered in the evening. NSAIDs and butorphanol
pain is anticipated [e.g., tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
are prescribed for home administration. Alternate
(TPLO)], but is not necessary for less involved proce-
methods of pain management, such as transdermal
dures [e.g., osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), diagnostic
fentanyl patches, can be applied the day before surgery.
or second-look arthroscopyl. If an epidura! is not
performed, local anesthetic (bupivacaine) is instilled into
Patient Preparation and Positioning. Figure 7-3
the joint at the conclusion of the procedure. Post-
shows the arrangerment of the operating room for right
operative pain is controlled with cold therapy, opioids,
stifle arthroscopy. The leg is prepared as for open
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). If
arthrotomy, and the patient is positioned in dorsal
arthroscopy is completed early in the day, the patient
recumbency on a vacuum beanbag so that both legs can
may be dismissed from the hospital that same afternoon;
hang from the end of the table. The table is tilted head-
if arthroscopy is completed later in the afternoon, the
 up approximately 30 degrees. The beanbag is positioned
patient is discharged the next day. In all cases, cold
to allow the leg to hang_ straight without deviating to
therapy is recommended as often as possible for 48 hours
one side (Fig. 7-4A and B). The opposite leg is secured
by alternating 15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for two
laterally, and the front legs and beanbag are stabilied
applications. Commercial cold packs or crushed ice in
to prevent the patienr from sliding off the table (see
Ziploc bags can be used. To increase comfort, a thin towel
Fig. 7-4A and B). Alternately, a metal leg-holding device
Assistant
Surgeon
Instrument
Anesthesia
table
machine
Ring
stano
FIGURE 7-3 Arangement of the oper
ating room for right stifle arh.roscopy. Tne
ring stond is used lo hold the crthroscope
Tower
and shaver whier they cre not in use.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I? 121
FIGURE 7-4 Positioning of the
dog for stifle arhroscopy before
draping. A. The table is tilted headup
opproximately 30 degrees, and a
ay Jepun pesod st boquoaq wnnooa
treated leg to allow it to hong frely.
The contralateral leg is placed in an
ourof-therway position. The table and
chair are adjusted to a comfortable
height for the surgeon and assistant,
table is positionedi over fie patient,
and theleg is hung for aseplic
prepororion.
affixed to the table can be used. These devices are not
Portal Sites. To treat stifle pathology (especially
readily available commercially and must be constructed.
The leg is aseptically prepared, and 10 to 15 mL
than what was originally described for diagnostic
bupivacaine and epinephrine can be instilled (optional)
arthroscopy. Once the technique is mastered, portals
intra-articularly before the setup procedure is completed
can be established in less than 1 minute. The disadvan-
(15 to 20 minutes before surgery). The patient is draped
tage of more distal placement of the cranial medial and
as for open surgery because in many cases an additional
cranial lateral portals is that the fat pad interferes with
open procedure is performed (Fig. 7-5). A sterile fluid
visualization. As a result, a motorized shaver, intra-
collection bag may be placed below the stifle (see Fig.
articular electrocautery, and proper flow management
7-5) to aid in keeping the operating area dry. When
are essential for adequate visualization. More distal
bilateral stifle arthroscopy is indicated, both legs are
placement of the portals allows better diagnostic probing
 prepared in a similar fashion.
and treatment angles for meniscal pathology. Figure 7-6
122 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 7-5  Serie prepGrgrion ol 
o palient for sille arhroscopy. Tne eg
is  draped   with  water impermearle
diopes. and a fluid collction oog
ghoched to suclion is posilioned
below the sli.e.
shows the landmarks, order and location of portal place-
menisci. A portal that is too proximal will cause diffi-
ment, and important neurovascular anatomy.
culty in visualizing and treating the menisci. A portal
The craniolateral portal is established first. Just lateral
that is too far lateral may make it difficult to enter the
to the patellar tendon, an eminence of the tibial plateau
 medial compartment and can be interfered with by the
(known as Gerdy's tubercle in man, unnamed in the
 long digital extensor tendon. A single (no. 11 blade) stab
dog) is appreciated with deep palpation. This landmark
incision is made into the joint capsule at the level of
is important because it corresponds ro the level of the
Gerdy's tubercle, just lateral (1 ro 2 mm) to the straight
patella tendon (see Fig. 7-6). It is not necessary to first
place a needle into the joint because the palpable land-
marks are reliable and further distending the joint with
fluid may make Gerdy's tubercle difficuit to appreciate.
Before the arthroscope is introduced, a conical-tipped
switching stick is inserted to establish the proximal
Saphenous a.
Popliteala
medial outflow portal. The leg is placed in extension,
and the switching stick is gently directed into the cranial
schiaticn
lateral portal and through the femoropatellar joint
directly beneath the patella until it exits the skin just
medial to the quadriceps tendon. The tip of the switch-
ing stick is forced bluntly through the joint capsule and
skin (Figs. 7-7A and 7-8A). If the tip of the switching
stick is blunt instead of conical, it may be necessary to
incise the skin. Failure to position the leg in full exten-
sion to relieve tension on the quadriceps and patella will
make insertion more difficult as well as increase the
likelihood of iatrogenic trauma to the articular carti-
lage. To prevent enrrapment of the skin, the proxima!
outflow cannula must be sized appropriately ro fit tightly
over the exposed tip of the switching stick. The cannula
is slid over the switching stick and into the joint until
the cannula tip rests directly beneath the patella (see
Figs. 7-7B and 7-8B). The switching stick is removed,
and the outflow cannula is repositioned deep into the
mcdial joint compartment adjacent to the medial troch-
lear ridge of the fcmur (see Fig. 7-7C and 7-8C). The
FGURE 7-6 Cranicl view of a bonc rode: sncwing he portal
cannula tip usually must be placed slightly cranially to
locct.ons, order of ponai eslabl shment, anc peiren cnotemy ho con ne
sile arhroscopy. 1. Prirary citrroscopy poral: 2, ouplow onl;
help it slide over the medial trochlear ridge of the femur,
3. or'mary insrumen1 portal.
 again with the leg in full extension.
A
B
FIGURE 7-7 Bone model showirig le esablishmen ol c proxirnu cufow cannulc and inserton of an
arthroscope cannula. A, Winh the srfle in ful extensicr, lhe conica Ipoed swilchng srck is irserted through the
quadriceps tendon. 8, The ouflow cannula is slid over tho switc.hing stick anc agvanced ire Ire pcoi! l.rlilirs ip res's
directly beneath the patelo. C ~he swichirg st ck is removoc. and the cannula tip is reposiiored decp wihin le
medial joint compartment. D. Tne arhroscope carnula with c blun ooturctor is irsered in a similor fashion hrough
payool Jesg sou ,oua poep. 0 .oy soziubosa Aonsn uoa5ins
Again with the leg in full extension, the scope cannula
and somewhat translucent, with few shorr villi. Thc
is introduced with a conical or blunt obturator into the
exception is in the most distal aspects of the medial and
same craniolateral portal and slowly advanced beneath
lateral pouches, where villi are more prominent (both
the patella until the tip rests on the midline in the
in length and number) but are still thin, wispy, and fila-
proximal aspect of the proximal pouch (see Figs. 7-7D
mentous in the norimal joint. Tiny blood vessels usually
and 7-8D). A “dead end" usually can be appreciated.
can be seen within the villi. With pathology, especially
The obturator is removed, and inflow is established
pathology involving the cranial cruciate ligament, the
through the scope cannula with lactated Ringer's
synovium quickly undergoes hyperplastic change and
solution. Standard suction tubing is used to attach the
becomcs more reddened, vascular, and less translucent.
outflow cannula to a high-volume suction bortle or
The villi become much longer and thicker but are still
another collection mechanism. The joint is lavaged with
filamentous. With more chronic change, the villi become
lactated Ringer's solurion for 15 to 20 seconds to clear
more club-shaped, appear thicker, and soinetimes appcar
the joint of synovial fluid and blood before the arthro-
shorter. In chronic cases, the villi may appear slighrly
scope and light source are attached. Figures 7-9, 7-10,
grayish,
and 7-11 show correct arthroscopic positioning, proper
It is not uncommon to see a mixed population of
orientation of the light post, and normal findings in the
these changes in thc villi. These changes are not unique
proximat joint as well as routine findings in the same
to the stifle and may be similar, but less intense, in the
anatomic locations in stifles with acute compared to
shoulder and elbow. A horizontal plica may be seen as a
chronic changes.
variation of normal in the superior pouch, just proximal
to the proximal pole of the patella and just caudal to the
Surgical Anatomy.T
The most significant difference
quadriceps tendon (see Fig. 7-9B). Synovial changes
between open arthrotomy and arthroscopy is the
also are seen adjacent to large periarticular osteophytes.
increased ability to see synovial changes, abnormalities
Occasionally, the synovium has a fibrotic, cobblestone
of the articular cartilage, and more subtle meniscal and
appearance, with few villi where it chronically rubs against
ligamentous tears with arthroscopy. This increased visi-
the osteophytes. The intensity of the synovial reaction
bility occurs primarily because the anatomy, particularly
may vary, but the locations of the changes are consistent.
the synovium and articular cartilage, is greatly magnified,
Early synovial changes may be reversible if the under-
intensely illuminated, and seen floating within a fluid
lying condition is detected and resolved promptly.
environment. The arthroscopic appearance of normal
Intra-articular fat is normally yellowish, light and frothy,
synovium is dependent on the area of the joint that is
and similar to a Nerf ball in appearance (Fig. 7-12A).
being inspected. It is predominantly pale pink, smooth,
Similar fat often is seen in the normal suprapatellar (or
124 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 7-8Establishment of a proximal ouflow cannula and insertion of an arthroscope cannula with a blunt
obhuratcr in α live dog. A. A switching stick obturator is inserted through the lateral portai, under the patella, and
through the joint capsule and skin. It exits just medial to the quadriceps rendon. B, An ouflow cannu.la is plcced over
the switching stick obturator until the tip of the cannula is directlybeneath he patella.C,The ouflow cannulas
repositioned into the medial join compartmenl. D. The arhroscope cannula is shown in the lateral portal after the
blunt obturalor is removed and ingress is established through the scope canrula. The joint is lavaged and the ouflow
cannula is altached to o high-volume suclion colleclion botle.
supratrochlear) joint pouch, proximal to the trochlear
7-10C, and 7-11C). The size and number of changes
groove (see Fig. 79A). If pathology is present in the
are directly related to chronicitry. In some joints, they
stifle, the hypertrophic synovitis quickly becomes
 occur within the rrochlear notch. If examination is per-
intense throughout the knee, especially just caudal to
formed before osteophytes develop, neovascularization
the fat pad (see Fig. 7-12B). The fat pad may become
of the articular cartilage may occur in the location of
much more dense and vascular as a result of chronic
future osteophyte sites. Neovascularization is seen as
inflammation (steatitis). If chronic disease is present, the
 small spider web-like networks of vessels that appear on
fat pad may become fibrotic and thickened but usually
 the surface and penetrate the periphery of the articular
is still vascular.
cartilage on the medial and lateral femoral condyles and
In dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injury, peri-
 at the proximal extent of the trochlea (see Figs. 7-9C,
articular osteophytes form rapidly and are apparent
7-10B, and 7-11B).
arthroscopically within 3 to 4 weeks. These changes are
Because of this intense inflammatory reaction in patho-
not specifc to cranial cruciate ligament injury but are
logic joints, only the proximal joint is examined before
less intense when seen with other stifle pathology. They
the anterior medial instrument portal is established.
occur in three predicable locations: the proximal troch-
Examination of the intra-articular ligaments, menisci,
lear groove, the medial trochlear ridge of the femur, and
and  weightbearing surfaces requires arthroscopic
the lateral trochlear ridge of the femur (see Figs. 7-9D,
debridement and hemostasis.
A
FIGURE 7-9 Posilioning of the
B
arihroscope. orientation of the light
posl, and superior supropatelr pouch
views of typical findings during explo-
ration of the proximal stifle in a normal
dog. a dog wih an acute (<3 weeks)
cranial cruciate ligament injury, and a
dog with a chronic craniai cruciate liga-
ment [months inury. A,Normol findings.
B, A horizontal plica. which is a vari-
afion of normol. The quadriceps tendon
is seen_direcily obove the horizontal
plica. C. Acute changes. Neovascula-
rization of the orticular cartilage is seen
belore osteophytes develop.D. Chronic
changes. Periasricular osteophytes and
hyperplastic synoviris are seen. Note
the penetration of blood vessels into the
articular cortiloge.
D
Arthroscopic Exploration of the Proximal Stifle.
osteophytes commonly forin in these areas. The sy-
The proximal stifle (supratrochlear pouch, lateral and
novium is inspected in all pouches, and the articular
medial pouches) is explored before the craniomedial
cartilage is examined for evidence of neovascular inva-
instrument portal is established. The cruciate ligaments
sion, chondromalacia, and fibrillation. Figures 7-9 to
and menisci usually cannot be examined at this time
 7-11 show the proper scope positioning and light post
because they are obscured by hyperplastic synovium
 orientation to provide ideal viewing angles (scope direc-
and the far pad. A 2.7-mm short or long, 30-degree
tion). The light post is rotated 180 degrees to visualize
oblique arthroscope is introduced, and the proximal
the quadriceps tendon, the proximal and distal poles of
joint is systematically explored in the following order:
the patella, and the articular surface of the patella and
superior (supratrochlear) pouch and proximal trochlear
its articulation with the trochlear groove. Photographs
groove (see Fig. 7-9), lateral pouch and lateral trochlear
Of the proximal stifle should be taken for the medical
ridge (see Fig. 7-10), and medial pouch and medial
record and should include the proximal trochlear groove,
trochlear ridge (see Fig. 7-11). The trochlear ridges of
patella, and the proximal and distal aspects of the
the femur are closely inspected because periarticular
medial and lateral trochlear ridges. Attempts to inspect
A
FIGURE 7-10 Posiltionng. c hie
arthroscope, orientarion of the light
post. and lateral pouch vews of tyuical
Fndings during exporation of Ine proxi
mol sille in a rormal dog. ( dog wih
ar acute [<3 weeks) crarial cuciat
ligoment injury, and c dog with a chroric.
(months) cranial crtciate ligoment injjry.
A. Normal indings. 8, Acute changes.
Neovasculari/ation and slight inrcgu
larity of the art.cular carilage arg scen
betore osteophytes develop.C. Chreric
B
changes. Periarricular osteophyres and
hyperplastic syrovifs are seen.
A
FIGURE 7-11 Posilioning of the
arthroscope. orientarion or the light
post, and medial pouch views of lypical
findings during exploration of the prox-
mal stile in a normal dog. a dog with 
an ocute [<3 weeks] cranial cucice
ligament injury, and a dog w-th a chrconic.
Imonths] cranial cruciate ligament injury.
A. Ncrmal findings.B,Acute chcnges.
Neovascularization and  slight irregu-
laily of the aricular cortlage arc seen
bcfore osteophyres develop. C, Cnrenic
B
changes. Periaricular osteophytes and
hyperplastic syrovitis are seen.
126
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I? 127
pathologic joints further without debridement with a
with the obturator tip and then to slide the obturator
motorized shaver are time-consuming and frustrating.
toward the scope tip to bring it into view. After the tip
Figures 7-9 to 7-11 show the typical appearance of a
of the obturator is in view (Fig. 7-13), the surgeon should
normal proximal stifle as well as acute (<3 weeks) and
steady the leg and the scope, remove the obturator, and
chronic ((months) cranial cruciate ligament injuries.
introduce a motorized shaver (3.5- to 4.0-mm full-
radius blade) at the same angle and direction (see Fig.
Cranial Medial Portal Establishment.
The cranial
7-13). The orifice of the shaver is visualized (positioned
medial portal is the primary instrument portal; however,
up) (Fig. 7-14A), suction is attached, and the fat pad is
sometimes it is beneficial to inrerchange the scope and
carefully debrided to crcate a “viewing window” just
instrument portals. The tip of the arthroscope 
is
cranial to the intercondylar notch. The shaver should be
positioned just cranial to the intercondylar notch, with
the norch in the field of view (Fig. 7-12). To minimize
Fig. 7-14B). Initially, the shaver is held steady while
obstruction by the inflamed synovium and fat pad, the
suction pulls adjacent tissue into the orifice for debride-
tip of the arthroscope is placed close to the midline of
ment. As debridement proceeds, the shaver is slowly
the trochlear articular cartilage and the knee is slowly
rotated and moved to enlarge the viewing window. Once
flexed to bring the notch into view. Often, the notch
the femoral articular cartilage is in view, debridement
cannor be visualized if marked synovitis is present.
can proceed more aggressively, although the surgeon
Occasionally, the notch is visible only as a tiny slit as a
must take care not to debride the remnants of the cranial
result of the formation of osteophytes within the troch-
cruciate ligament before they are inspected and photo-
lear notch.
graphed. Adequate flow is imperative because hemor-
Without moving the scope or the limb, the cranio-
rhage is likely. Before attempting to cauterize bleeders,
medial portal is established with a similar stab incision
the surgeon should artempt to obtain a viewing window
just medial to the straighr patellar tendon and at the
that is at least three times the diameter of the shaver.
same level as the cranial lateral portal. A blunt obturator
With a smaller window, the sourcc of bleeding is much
is inserted as a “trailblazer,” and its tip is visualized just
more difficult to locate. Small bleeders are managed by
cranial to the intercondylar notch. Visualization at this
increasing the flow rate while the viewing window is
point may be almost completely obliterated by inflamed
created. Large bleeding vessels are controlled with
synovium and a frothy or steatoric fat pad (see Fig.
electrocautery or a radiofrequency unit through the
7-12). Often, it is helpful to "feel" the shaft of the scope
same craniomedial portal. Inflow may be temporarily
FIGURE 7-12 Positioning ofi the arthroscopc
the mediol instrument portal is estabished. The inter-
trochanter:c notcn is olten obliteratec by a frothy Fa
pad in pe rormal joint (Al cnd by hyperploslic
synovium n dogs with cranial crucicte ligarmien
B
injury (B).
128 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 7-13  Estcblishmerit o c
media irstrument portal cnc insertion of
α molorized shaver. A blun: obhuratcr
lob) is irserted into she medicl portal.
and its ip is visualied within Fe cot
mesopo pauo jsod s. aacus at_ pod
lo e cbturotor ot the some crige ond
direclior, ang Ihe ooluratoy is rerroved.
increased to dilute hemorrhage and to slow the rate of
Of the normal cruciate ligaments. The two distinct bands
of the cranial cruciate ligament are readily apparent.
bemostasis is obtained with electrocautery. To prevent
Articular cartilage is carefully inspected and probed for
subcutaneous extravasation of fluid, lower flow rates
areas of chondronalacia, fbrillation, or eburnation.
are restored after hemostasis is obtained. The viewing
These lesions are described in the section on osteo-
window must be developed distally enough to allow
arthritis. Correcr portal placement is critical to allow
proper visualization and treatment of the menisci. This
for adequate visualization and treatment of menisci.
treatment includes removal of the tough, leading caudal!
edge of the fat pad just proximal to the intermeniscal
Inspection of the Medial Meniscus.  Visualization of
ligament. Ir is often helpful to partially remove
or
the caudal aspect of the medial meniscus often is best
transect this tissue with a punch or an ablation wand to
obtained with the joint in approximately 30 degrees of
give the shaver an “edge” to facilitate shaving. Alter-
flexion, external rotation, and valgus stress. The light
nately, this tissue can be caramelized with a tissue
post is positioned medially (3 o'clock for a right leg
ablation wand.
and 9 o'clock for a left leg). The arthroscope must be
maneuvered laterally and just cranial to the insertion of
Arthroscopic Exploration of the Intra-articular Struc-
the cranial cruciate ligament to obtain the desired view
tures. After the viewing window reaches the level of
(Fig. 7-15). Visualization is much easier if the torn
the intermeniscal ligament and hemostasis is achieved,
cranial cruciate ligament is debrided (see the discussion
the cranial cruciate ligament and caudal cruciate ligament
of cranial cruciate ligament injuries). With the caudal
are inspected. Each structure is palpated with a small-
aspect of the medial meniscus visualized, the cranial
joint probe. Figure 7-14C shows the typical appearance
tibial thrust maneuver is performed several times to aid
882TE
FIGURE 7-14Establishment of 
medial instrument poral., inserlion of @
molorized shaver. and debridement of
the fat pad. The obturator is removed.
and the shaver is insered at rhe same
angle and direction. A, Afer the orifice
of the shaver is visualized, the shaver is
altached to suction and shaving is begun
with minimol movement. B, Affer enough
fc
lissue is removed to improve visualization,
cdcl
the shaver is moved and rotaled until a
viewing window [ww is esiablished to
reveal the femoral condyle fc). The sur-
aul jo auipaddo ay alou pinus uoa
femoral articular cartilage. C, Normal
crcl
jo sg sup o y uus ]
VW
the cranial cruciote ligamen1.
B
in the detection of nondisplaced bucket handle tears.
photographs are taken at this point. If pathology is
The menisci are probed carefully to detect tears. The
detected, photographs are taken both before and after
oyster curl, or flounce, of the meniscal edge is normal
treatment. The anterior horn of the medial meniscus
(see Fig. 7-15) but is not always seen and can be
usually is best seen with the light post at the 10 o'clock
influenced by stressing the joint. Inspection is often
position for a right leg and at the 2 o'clock position for
aided by hooking the anterior horn of the meniscus with
a left leg. Various types of meniscal tears and the
a probe and retracting it cranially. If the tissue is normal,
principles of treatment are discussed later.
FIGURE 7-15 Positioning of the
atthroscope and orientalion of the light
post for visualizafion of the caudal
aspect of the mediol meniscus. Valgus
Valgus
 stress is placed on the distal limb. The
medial meniscus, including the oyster
stress
curl. or flounce, is normal.
13O SMALLANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Jnspcction of the Lateral Meniscus. Figure 7-16
tear of the cranial cruciate ligament is common, but the
shows the proper arthroscope position and light post
diagnosis is often delayed. Unlike in humans, osteo-
orientation for inspection of the lateral meniscus. Varus
arthritis advances rapidly (within weeks) in large-breed
stress is applied with the knee in approximately 30 degrees
dogs thar have complete rupture of the cranial cruciate
of flexion, although the angle can vary. If the cranial
ligament. Osteoarthritis also advances rapidly in pal-
cruciate ligamenr has been debrided, the large, easily
pably stable stifles that have only partially torn cranial
identified meniscofemoral ligament (see Fig. 7-16B) is
cruciate ligaments, emphasizing the need for early diag-
inspected first. For a left leg, the light post is positioned
nosis and treatment. Many veterinarians are reluctant
in the 9 o'clock position. The 3 o'clock position is used
to perform exploratory arthrotomy in the absence of
for a right leg. The meniscal edge is followed antero-
laterally by slowly withdrawing the arthroscope to
invasive means of obtaining an early diagnosis of partial
visualize its termination at the meniscotibial attachment
tears before these changes occur; moreover, it is readily
cranially. Common arthroscopic appearance and treat-
accepted by pet owners. Arthroscopic examination of a
rment recommendations are discussed later.
normal joint causes minimal postoperative lameness or
morbidiry that typically resolves within a day. Compared
with arthrotoiny, arthroscopy allows for more accurate
assessment of partial tears of the cranial cruciate liga-
Indications for Arthroscopic
ment, synovial pathology, articular cartilage pathology,
Surgery of the Stifle Joint
and meniscal injuries. Meniscal tears can be treated
more precisely, and partial or complete cranial cruciate
In humans, the knee is the most common site for
ligament remnants can be more thoroughly debrided
arthroscopic procedures. The most common procedures
than with an open technique. When used in conjunction
are reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament and
with various intra-articular and extra-articular tech-
treatment of meniscal injury. Although isolated meniscal
niques, arthroscopy reduces morbidity. Regardiess of
injury is not common in dogs as it is in humans, the
the surgeon's preference of stabilization technique,
incidence of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs is
 arthroscopy allows for more precise assessment, intra-
high. Cranial cruciate ligament rupture represents both
articular debridement, and meniscal treatment without
the greatest need and the greatest challenge in canine
the pain associated with cutting the highly innervated
arthroscopy. Lameness caused by complete or partial
 joint capsule as performed with traditional arthrotomy.
meniscofemoral
ligament
Varus
stress
A
FiGURE 7-16
Poasilioning of the orthroscope
Gnd orientatior of the ight post for visualizaticn o?
she loteral meniscus. Varts stress is placed cn the
distal linb. and he crarial cruciate ligament rem
nants have been removed. A, The meniscofemoral
ligamen' iorrowl at the caudal horn. This structure
must be visualized (nd preserved during debride-
ment of the remnan's of the cranial cruciate liga
ment. B, The midbody of the latera! meniscus is
ngunul. The arthroscope is maneuvered medially 0
folowthe edgeoftheriscs cranialiyovisualize
the anterior hor, lhe area where radical tears are
B
commonly seen. The curved arrow represents che
path of the arthroscope.
ARTHROSCOPICAILY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT ? 13 1
 Other successful applications of arthroscopy in the
partial tear is confirmed. This approach decreases both
stifle include the diagnosis and treatment of OCD lesions
surgical morbidity and the advancement of osteoarthritis
of both the lateral and medial femoral condyle, repair
due to delayed intervention. It is a common misconcep-
and debridement of avulsion fractures of the cranial
tion thar a "wait-and-see" approach with symptomatic
cruciate ligament and caudal cruciate ligamenr, debride-
treatment is appropriate if the knee lacks cranial drawer.
 ment of septic osteomyelitis, removal of implanrs, and
 The primary advantage of arthroscopically assisted
percutaneous placement of temporary transarticular pins.
treatment is more accurate assessment and more precise
The benefts of arthroscopic synovectomy as an adjunct
treatment of intra-articular pathology, especially if the
to the medical managerment of chronic osteoarthritis are
menisci and articular surfaces are affected. Also, torn
just beginning to be realized. Poststabilization late-onset
ligament remnants can be more thoroughly debrided.
Additionally, scarring is minimal, and postoperative lame-
cruciate ligament rupture can be readily diagnosed and
ness and pain are greatly reduced because disruption of
treated without arthrotomy. Finally, the research impli-
the highly innervated joint capsule is minimized.
cations for arthroscopically transected cranial cruciate
ligament and caudal cruciate ligament studies, meniscal
History and Signalment. All breeds are affected,
studies, drug efficacy studies, and serial reevaluations to
spayed females are overrepresented, and dogs can be
evaluate the response to various osteoarthritis treatments
 affected at any age over 1 year of age. The incidence of
 and stabilization procedures are tremendous. However,
avulsion fractures is higher in juvenile dogs. Most dogs
the greatest benefits of arthroscopy are more accurate
have laneness of varying degree. Many cases are precipi-
patient assessment, more precise intra-articular treat-
tated by adrenalin-associated everyday activities, such as
ment, decreased postoperative pain, earlier return to
a quick start or torsional movement, bur in some cases,
function, preservation of range of motion, and minimal
no precipitating event is associated with the onset of
scarring.
lameness. In competitive athletes, such as field trial
participants, lameness may become apparent during or
Injuries of the Cranial Cruciate Ligament
after work,
 Many clinicians are concerned about the increasing
weightbearing lameness that may be intermittent and
incidence of cranial cruciate ligament injuries in healthy
that usually can be overridden with excitement. Lame-
athleric dogs, especially retrievers, and the growing inci-
 ness often resolves with rest and NSAIDs and is exacer-
dence of this injury in younger adult dogs. The etiology
bated by exercise. Occasionally, dogs are sound for
Of these injuries is unknown. Several authors speculate
several days or weeks before they have a recurrence.
that increased tibial slope predisposes dogs to rupture of
Dogs may sit with the affected leg slightly extended
the cranial cruciate ligament, although the role of tibial
laterally because they are reluctant to fully flex the
slope in this injury is not known. Neutralization of active
stifle. Dogs that have partial tears usually present with
cranial tibial thrusr likely plays an important role in the
 low-grade to moderate lameness, but some may have a
efficacy of stabilization techniques, especially in light of
short history of inability to bear weight. In many cases,
 patient compliance, which is typically poor.
the excitement associated with the hospital visit masks
The cranial cruciate ligament loses strength with age,
the lameness. Bilateral partial tears are occasionally seen,
and this degenerative process likely plays a significant
and dogs may have a history of shifting leg lameness,
role in its clinical pathophysiology. Most cranial cru-
diffculty rising, and reluctance to ger up or walk. In
ciate ligament injuries likely begin as partial tears that
addition, many dogs have a history of low-grade uni-
eventually become complete tears. Most clinicians believe
lateral rear leg lameness. As noted earlier, most partial
that partial tears seldom heal with conservative treat-
tears eventually progress to complete tears.
 ment and almost invariably become complere tears. This
 Dogs that have complete tears may have acure or
tendency may explain why many dogs have a history of
chronic weightbearing or non-weightbearing lameness.
low-grade interrmittent lameness before they become
In some reporredly acute cases, careful review of the
dysfunctional and require treatment. Clinicians must
history shows previous intermittent low-grade lameness
recognize the signs of partial cranial cruciate ligament
 prior to becoming more severely lame. Some cases truly
ruptures to aid in early diagnosis. Arthroscopic examin-
are acute or appear acute because a partial tear becomes
ations of dogs with chronic lameness as a result of
a complete tear or sudden meniscal damage occurs.
partial cranial cruciate ligament ruptures show severe
With time, most non-weightbearing cases become par-
synovial hyperplastic changes, the formation of peri-
tially weightbearing, but lameness persists. Most dogs
articular osteophytes, and advanced osteoarthritis, even
sit with the hock and affected stifle extended away from
though these dogs have palpably stable knees under
the body, and some owners report an audible popping
general anesthesia. However, radiographic findings are
that usually is related to displacemcnt of a bucket handle
rarely normal in dogs with partial tears, although
1the
tear of the medial meniscus. Bilateral complete tears are
abnormal findings may be subtle. Early intervention with
common and are often misdiagnosed as spinal cases
arthroscopic examination is recommended to confrm
 because the dog may appear ataxic or paretic as a resuit
partial tears prior to the rapid onser of osteoarthritis.
of the effort to bear as much weight on the front legs as
Arthroscopic examination has negligible morbidity (if
 possible. These patients often have a history of unilateral
negative), and most stabilization techniques can be arthro-
rear leg lameness, and many are unable or unwilling
scopically assisted during the same examination when a
to rise.
132  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Physical Examination Findings.
Weightbearing
the fat line of the gastrocnemius muscle planes in the
lameness is the most comimon finding, but some dogs
popliteal fossa. Similar soft tissue swelling causes loss of
have non-weightbearing lameness. Most patients have
the rriangular detail of the infrapatellar fat pad in the
palpable joint effusion, which may be subtie. In chronic
cranial joint (Fig. 7-17B). The soft tissue changes are
cases, a palpable medial buttress routinely can be appre-
the same for partial and complete tears. In some cases
ciated by simuitaneously palpating each stifle for medial
of complere rupture, cranial and proximal translation of
thickening. Thickening is most apparent in dogs with
the tibia in relation to the femur is seen as mild to severe
chronic complete rupture but occurs to a lesser extent in
subluxation (see Fig. 7-17C). In subacute cases (3
to
those with chronic partial rupture.
6 weeks), early formation of osteophytes may be noted,
Classically, dogs with complete tears have a palpable
especially on the proximal and distal poles of the patella
anterior drawer and a positive finding on the crania!
 and the medial and lateral trochlear ridges of the femur
tibial compression test (cranial tibial thrust). This result
(see Fig. 7-17D). In chronic cases (months), these osteo-
may be diffcult to appreciate in large dogs unless they
phytes may be large and may be accompanied by similar
are under anesthesia or heavy sedation, or in chronic cases
changes along the medial, lateral, and caudal aspects
due to fibrosis of the joint capsule or other secondary
of the tibia (see Fig. 7-17E). Subchondral sclerosis may
restraint mechanisms. In dogs with a bucket handle tear
be present.
of the medial meniscus, a dull pop may be palpated during
the cranial tibial compression test or cranial drawer
Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical
testing. Most cases have palpable stifle joint effusion,
findings, radiographic fndings, and if necessary, con-
but this finding may be subtle. Most are uncomfortable
firmation during arthroscopic examination.
when the stifle is manipulated, especially in hyper-
extension, but this discomfort may be difficult to elicit.
Treatment.(
Conservative treatment consists of
Partial tears are difficult to diagnose. A high index of
NSAID therapy, chondroprotective agents, weight con-
trol, and reguiar low-impact exercise. Without surgical
Occult rear leg lameness have partial cruciate tears. Joint
intervention, most patients have persistent lameness and
effusion may be appreciated with palpation. Asymmet-
rapid progression of osteoarthritis. Large dogs appear
rical stifle discomfort on hyperextension is a reliable
to progress more rapidly than smaller dogs but studies
sign and usually exacerbates lameness. This test can be
 documenting this are lacking. Some small patients even-
performed in sedated dogs that are difficult to examine.
tually become sound without treatment, but recovery is
Flexion may cause a painful responste, and flexion testing
greatly hastened by surgical intervention, If advanced
for 20 to 30 seconds may exacerhate lameness. Most
 osteoarthritis is present, surgery may not alleviate the
dogs sit with the affected leg extended, with the hock
need for concurrent conservative treatment.
positioned away from the body. Patients with partial
tears may have no cranial drawer or only subtle cranial
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
drawer. Because of this, patients should be carefully
Management.
 Aspirin is discontinued at least 1 week
examined under general anesthesia. Testing should be
before surgery. Ideally, Cox II inhibitor NSAIDs are dis-
performed in both flexion and extension and compared
continued 1 to 2 days before surgery, but discontinuation
to the contralateral stifle. If the anterior medial band
is nor mandatory. Healthy, young patients require mini-
is markedly torn, examination shows subtle anterior
mal preoperative laboratory evaluation. Older patients
drawer in flexion only with an ill-defined endpoint. It is
should be adequately screened to exclude underlying
metabolic disorders. Preferred pain management includes
 stable knees in both flexion and extension.
preoperative long-acting epidural opioid therapy, cold
therapy for 48 hours (20 minutes on and 20 minutes off
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
 as often as possible), use of a fentanyl transdermal patch
includes medial patellar luxation, osteochondrosis, hip
for 4 days, and administration of NSAIDs for 15 to
dysplasia, panosteitis (in young dogs), lumbosacral
30 days. Alternately, parenteral and oral opioids can
disease, intervertebral disk disease (in bilateral cranial
be used, with or without NSAID therapy, especially in
cruciate ligament ruprure), septic discospondylitis, cal-
patients that are sensitive to NSAIDs. Surgical pain is
caneal tendon disease, and septic arthritis.
reduced considerably when the intra-articular component
 Of the procedure is performed arthroscopically because
Radiographic Findings. Must partial and complete
disruption of the highly innervated joint capsule is mini-
ruptures can be preliminarily diagnosed radiographically.
mized. Additionally, intra-articular injection of 10 to
Radiographs typically show nonspecific changes that
15 mL bupivacaine with epinephrine 15 to 20 minutes
suggest cranial cruciate ligament rupture. Radiographic
before and immediately after surgery provides analgesia
diagnosis is based on the finding of swelling of the joint
to help reduce the concentration of inhalant anesthetics
capsule, formation of periarticular osteophytes, and
and improve recovery in patients not treated with
occasionally, cranial and proximal translation of the
epidural opioids. Intra-articular opioids such as morphine
tibia.
may also be given and may be superior to other routes
The first and most subtle radiographic finding in acute
of administration.
cases is soft tissue swelling in the caudal joint. Lateral
radiographs show increased soft tissue density in the
Surgical Intervention.
Most small dogs (<15 kg)
caudal joint causing obliteration or caudal deviation of
undergo repair with various open lateral imbrication
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I 133
B
D
FIGURE7-17Lateral sile radiographs showing a nomol sife ond he progression
showing the smooth poles of the patell, the triangular inrapatellar fat pad [patellor
tendor fo weightbearing aticular surfaces), and the close, distinct approximalion of
 Sop o joydiid gsns upns euj luaay
joint efusinbu wihut stephyionhwing jin swelingcoudlevi
ton. cand pxarial obliteration of the fat line in the caudal joint [arrowsl. Obliteration
of the fot line may be he most reliable indicator of early joint effusion. In the cranial
aapoi jo si p so isi s! iy laodoui au  jap inbio aui uio!
comparible withi acute porial or complete tears. C. Lateral radiograph of α stifle
showing marked cranial and distal ranslation that often is associated with complete
Formafen spperts the diagnosis of acue injury. D. Radiographic changes ypical of
poles ot the patella and a row of osteophytes along the frochlear ridges of the fermur.
Eifusion is evident. These chonges are compotible with chronic parial or complete
E
irstobility of :ho cranica! cruciate ligarnent.
134 I! SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
cdcl
Ifc
crcl
cdlb
crmb
A
mfc
mm
crcl
mm
B
FIGURE 7-18 Positioning of trt:
arthroscope, orienlation of the Tight post.
ard normal and abnomo’ findings 'r.
dogs wih injuries of the croniol crcicte
Igament. A. Nomc arhroscopic cppeor
ance cf he coudal cruc alc ligamie
(cocll qid cronicl cruciote ligamen
[crcl.
cronial crucicte ligament [craniomodic!
band (crmbi, cajdolateral bard (cdibsl]
D
E
the broad origin o the caudal cruc.icnte
ligamen', onc ihe lateral femoral conayc
[ic) are seen. B. Normal insertion of
the craniai cruciate ligament lcrcj. Tne
croniol cruciate ligamen nasses directy
beneath the edge of the cran.al hcrn cf
the medial meniscus [rmmj before it inser*s.
The medial ferroral condye (mfc) also is
shown C, Complete chronic. tear cf Ihe 
cranial cruc:ae ligamert with c nodu a
formoticn ICyclopes lesionl on the end
ohe onligamen.D,Acute corplete
tear with swelirg and hemcrrhcgeat e
end of the ligomert. ±. Compete lea
wihcut associcted nemomage. F, lcrc
gen'c lesior caused by, preoperativr:
arthrocenlesis. G. Paricl tear o the
posteror latera. oond. Note the bowed.
stretched-out appearance of the remgir-
G
ing norfrctional ligamert.
techniques or with open TPLO that is performed with
motorized shaver (2000 to 2700 RPM, oscillatory mode)
small instruments and implants. If the tibial slope is
and should be performed before the menisci are inspected
severe, TPLO is preferred, especially for revision. Arthro-
to facilitate their examination. When stable knees are
scopic examination and treatment can be performed in
examined for partial tears, the surgeon should carefully
small dogs and cats if desired. In medium (>15 kg) and
au jo spunq qoq go uoasu! pue uio aun aqoid
larger dogs, stabilization techniques are conbined with
cranial cruciate ligament to locate rears and ensure the
arthroscopic cxamination and treatment of the intra-
 stability of intact ligament. When a tear is identifed in
articular structures. In dogs >15 kg, arthroscopic intra-
 a palpably stable knee, the surgeon should debride only
articular therapy is preferred to reduce surgery-related
the torn portion with tissue ablation probes, leavc the
lamencs, reduce scarring, improve visualization, and
remaining portion intact, and perform TPLO. TPLO
This
alters the mechanics of the stifle joint and improves
therapy includes examination of the joint, debridement
stahility of the joint under weightbearing load. Because
of the remnants of the cranial cruciate ligament, and
stress on the remaining fbers of the cranial cruciate
treatment of the meniscus. Osteotomy to level the tibial
ligament is reduced, the ligament remains intact in most
plateau is the treatment of choice, although other
cases. Some report that saving the partially torn cranial
techniques also may provide satisfactory results. When
 s   s  
TPLO is performed on dogs with complete rupture and
it is unnecessary to compromise the function of the
intact medial menisci, the meniscus can be released
meniscus by releasing it.
arthroscopically if the surgeon elects to do so. As in
In some cases, arthroscopy shows a normal-appear-
humans, intra-articular allografts, autografts, and
ing cranial cruciate ligament, despite knee instability.
syntheric grafrs are placed arthroscopically within bone
The cranial cruciate ligament must be carefully palpated
tunnels with mixed results. Fibular head transposition
for stretching and attenuation. These ligaments likely
and extracapsular prosthetic ligament techniques
have significant interstitial tears, are nonfunctional,
(imbrication techniques) can also be used to stabilize thc
and should be treated as complete tears when palpable
stifle after the intra-articular procedure is performed
instability is present (Fig. 7-20).
endoscopically to reduce surgical morbidiry.
The articular surfaces of the joint are
carefully
examined and palpated to detect areas of chondro-
Arthroscopic Technique. Positioning, portal place-
malacia, fbrillation, or eburnation, and these lesions are
ment, and systematic arthroscopic examination and
 documented. The arthroscopic appearance, grading, and
 photographic documentation of the joint were described
management of these lesions are discussed in Chapter 4
earlier.
and later in this chapter.
With few exceptions, dogs with complete or partial
tearing of the cranial cruciate ligament also have patho-
Meniscal  Examination and Treatment.
Proper
logic changes in the proximal comparrments. H
Figures
inspection of the menisci is one of the most difficult
7-18 and 7-19 show thc typical appearance of common
 arthroscopic procedures performed on the canine stifle.
partial and complete tears of the cranial cruciate liga-
The surgeon must have thorough knowledge of the
ment. Occasionally, some fraying of the caudal cruciate
arthroscopic anatomy as well as excellent assistance to
 provide proper limb positioning. Both valgus and varus
rupture.
stress are required to allow visualization and probing
In cases of complete rupture, the cranial cruciate liga-
of both menisci. Proper visualization requires careful
ment should be removed completely, although the value
attention to the placement of the arthroscope, the orien-
of removing the ligament remnants in decreasing joint
tation of the light post, and the position of the limb.
inflammation is nor known. Debridement of the cranial
Placement of the portal in an overly proximal location
cruciate ligament is most quickly accomplished with the
 and failure to debride the hyperplastic synovium and fat
FGURE 7-19  Portial cranial cruciate
ligament tcars. A, Partial tear ot inserfion
with hemorrhage and cclive infammalior.
ot craricl crucicte ligament inserlion.
B. Smol. partia tear of she anterior
medial oand by probing beneath the
postlaelanSmetesidfic
A
lo differenticte which band is korr.
B
136I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 7-20 A and B. NorfLnc-
tiongl tears ol te crarial cruciate Iga-
menl. These fissues may appear inact
iniliolly, oul ca:eful palparion shows c
shretched-out, altenuated ligament, Jsuc 
A
B
associated wn visiblo parta tcars. n
qcdilion, the kree is palpably urstaale.
pad far enough distally may preclude effective visuali-
the cranial cruciate ligament has been debrided, then
zation and treatment of the menisci. To maintain visuali-
 inspection begins posteriorly with the large, easily iden-
zation during treatment and avoid iatrogenic injury to
tified meniscofemoral ligament (see Fig. 7-22B). The
the cartilage, proper instrumentation must be teamed
arthroscope is maneuvered medially to follow the edge
with appropriare operative assistance. Inspection of the
of this ligament anterolaterally to the lateral meniscal
menisci is more diffcult with intact cranial cruciate
edge and continued to its termination at the meniscotibia!
ligament tears but still almost always possible.
attachment cranially. In a series of 1o0 consecutive cases
of naturally occurring tears of the cranial cruciate
Inspection of the Medial Meniscus.
Visualization of
ligament (79 complete, 21 partial), 77 had some degree
the caudal aspect of the medial meniscus is best obtained
of lateral meniscal tearing (most simall) compared with
in approximately 30-degree flexion with external rotation
58 medial meniscal tears in the same popularion. Most
and valgus stress and with the light post at 3 o'clock for
of these are short, radial tears of the cranial horn and
a right leg and 9 o'clock for a left leg. In most cases,
may not be clinically significant (see Fig. 7-22D). How-
the arthroscope must be maneuvered laterally ro obtain
ever, several were long tears that had a macerated
adequate visualization. When the caudal aspect of the
component and likely were painful (see Fig. 7-22F). The
medial meniscus is visualized, the cranial tibial thrust
significance and etiology of these radial tears are not
maneuver is used scvcral times to aid in the detection of
thoroughly understood. Many small tears may be clini-
nondisplaced bucket handle tcars. Careful probing of
cally insignificant, but some may propagate with time.
the menisci is critically inportant. The oyster curl,
For this reason, and because debridement is performed
or
flounce, of the meniscal edge is normal (Fig. 7-21A) but
quickly and easily with a tissue ablation wand, debride-
is not always seen and can be influenced by stressing the
ment is recommended. These lesions may be caused by
joint. Photographic documentation is performed at this
the combination of pivot shift and rotational instability
point if the tissue is normal and both before and after
and cranial tibial thrust that causes the anterior horn of
debridement if pathology is detected. Figure 7-21 shows
the lateral meniscus to slide repeatedly up the lateral
proper scope position and the typical arthroscopic
tibial spine. This sliding has been visualized arthroscopi-
appearance of a normal medial meniscus, a typical
cally during a cranial tibial compression test (Fig. 7-23A
bucket handle tear, an oblique tear, alld a conplex
and B). The same edge of the anterior horn of the lateral
degenerative meniscal tear. Meniscectomy 1
imay
meniseus is sometimes visualized being pinched berween
performed with small-joinr hand instruments, but this
the lateral tibial spine and lateral femoral condyle during
procedure ofren ca uses iatrogenic trauma to the articular
full extension with cranial tibial thrust. In humans,
surface, especially in caudal tears. A small, malleable
meniscal edges caughr between articular surfaces are
tissue ablator is used in conjunction with a small-joint
painful. Deep areas of chondromalacia and fbrillation
grasper, and even the most caudal tears are accessible in
often are seen on the lateral tibial spine and lateral
dogs as small as 10 to 15 kg. The anterior horn of the
femoral condyle in conjunction with these tears (see Fig.
medial meniscus usually is best seen with the light post
7-23C). These lesions may be caused by abrasive wear
at the 10 o'clock position for a right leg and at the
from the lateral meniscus, direct impact frorm the articular
2 0'clock position for a left leg, with the arthroscope
cartilage surfaces, or abrasive wear from the lateral band
 oriented slightly decper within the joint.
of the cranial cruciate ligament on the lareral femoral
condyle during roration, which has also been visualized
Inspcction of the Lateral Meniscus.
Figure 7-22
 arthroscopically. It is not known whether these chondral
shows proper arthroscope position and light post
lesions cause symptoms in dogs.
orientation for examination of the lateral meniscus.
Lateral meniscal tears have been seen in conjunction
Varus stress is applied with the knee in approximately
with OCD lesions of the lateral femoral condyle, but
30 degrees of flexion, although the angle can vary. If
rarely. Bucket handle tears and horizontal cleavage tears
Valgus
stress
A
B
D
E
FIGURE 7-21
1  Positioning of the arhroscope, orientation of the light post, and lypical findings during inspection
of the medial meniscus in a valgus-shressed sifle. A. Normal medial meniscus. The oyster curl., or flounce, of the 
C. Typical bucket handle tear thal is displaced cranially with a probe. D, Oblique flap tear. or porrot beak tear, of
the midbody. E, Moceraled complex degenerative tear.
(see Fig. 7-22C) sometimes are seen in the lateral menis-
1. Vertical longitudinal tears include the common 
cus in conjunction with rupture of the cranial cruciate
bucket handle tear (see Figs. 7-21C and 7-24A)
ligament.
and many variations, including short vertical
tears that have not yet become displaced bucket
Classification of Meniscal Tears.
 Although variations
handle tears and incomplete vertical tears.
and combinations occur, there are four basic types of
Incomplere vertical tears usually can be seen or
meniscal tears (Fig. 7-24). The fifth type is typically a
 palpated only by carefully probing a well-
complex combination of the four, resulting in a macerated
stressed joint and, as a resuit, are easily missed.
 meniscus. These may also be termed degenerative tears.
Vertical tears may progress to become oblique or
138 W? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
cdcl
Ifc
Varus
stress
A
B
D
E
FIGURE 7-22
 Positioningof the
arthroscope, orientation of the light posl,
and ypical findings during inspection
of thelateral meniscus in a varus-stressed
stifle. A. Normal meniscofermoral liga-
menl tprobel in caudaf aspect of joint in
relation to the caudal cruciate ligoment
[cdc] and lateral femoral condyle Ilfcl.
The cranial cruciate ligament remnants
have been debrided with a motorized
shaver. B. Normal lateral meniscus.
C, Horizontal cleavage tear of the mid-
body. The arthroscope is moved
ol  u p m
follow the meniscal edge to the cranial
horn. D, Radial rear of the cranial horn.
E, The radial tear shown in D affer
radiofrequency ablation. F, long radial
F
tears of the anterior horn with a degen+
erative and maceraled componenf.
Ifc
Its
m
A
B
FIGURE 7-23 Chondral lesions
 commonly seen on the lateral femoral
condyle and lateral tibial spine in
cranial crucicteligament-deficient stifles.
A and B, Fibrillation and chondro
malacia of the lateral tibial spine. The
cranial horn of the lateral meniscus [m]
slides up the tibial spine [ts, arrow]. The
ossocialed chondromalacia of the cdia-
cen lateral femoral condyle [Ifc) is shown.
C, Chondromalocia and fibrillation of
the lateral femoral condyle. The close
approximation of the lateral band of the
ing the lesion with exiernal rotation of
the distal limb.
FIGURE 7-24 Classification of meniscal
tears. A. Longitudinal vertical tear commonly
called α bucket handle tear. B, Oblique, or
flap, tear. Short oblique teors offen are called
"parrot beak tears.C.Radiol bear. In dogs,
these teors commonly occur in series on the
cranial horn of the lateral meniscus associated
with tears of the cranial cruciate ligamenf.
D
D, Horizontal, or horizontal cleavage, tear.
139
140 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
flap tears, or when chronic, degenerative or
control of activity is not possible in dogs, and limited
macerated tears. Approximately half of medial
visualization makes repair demanding in the few tears
meniscal tears are bucket handie tears. In some
that are suitable for treatment. In humans, meniscectomy
cases, two bucket handle tears are seen on the
leads to significant long-term osteoarthritis; the same is
same meniscus.
likely true in the canine stifle.
2.
Oblique, or flap, tears may be single or double,
and include parrot beak tears (see Figs. 7-21D
Principles of Arthroscopic Meniscectomy. 
The prin-
and 7-24B). Many flap tears probably start as
 ciples of arthroscopic meniscectomy are as follows:
vertical tears, become bucket handle tears, and
then break off at either handle end to become a
1. Mobile fragments that displace beyond the
flap or break off midway to become a double
normal rim of the meniscal edge are removed
flap. As the dog continues to walk on the injured
because they may become caught between joint
area, many of these tears have a macerated
surfaces and cause pain and propagation of the
component as well.
tear.
 3. Radial, or transverse, tears most commonly
2. Sudden changes in the rim contour must be
occur as a series of tears in the anterior horn of
corrected. It is not necessary to leave the
the lateral meniscus (see Figs. 7-22D and F and
meniscus the same width rhroughout, but a long,
7-24C). These tears may propagate if left
slow, gentle curve shouid be reestablished.
untreated. it is not known how long they must
3. A perfectly smooth rim is not necessary.
become to cause lameness.
4.
Horizontal, or horizontal cleavage, tears (see
the rim will become smooth in 6 to 9 months,
Figs. 7-22C and 7-24D) are less common and
although similar studies are lacking in the dog.
often occur in conjunction with other tears,
4. Probing should be performed frequently to
especially after they become macerated or
evaluate the area for mobility and texture. When
degenerative. Incomplete horizontal tears are
possible, the surgeon should probe and inspect
probably present in many cases but go
the area or blindly probe the underside of the
undiagnosed. This may play a role in late-onset
rmeniscus and apply cranial traction to test for an
meniscal tears that occur after surgical
unstable but nondisplaced tear.
stabilization. These tears can be visualized with
5. The texture of the meniscus should guide
magnetic resonance imaging in humans and
evaluation and treatment. Soft, mushy tissue
likely in dogs as well. To diagnose these tears
should be excised, whereas firm areas should be
arthroscopically, the surgeon must probe the
left undisturbed. This guideline primarily applies
edge of the meniscus and view it end-on rather
to procedures that are performed with hand
than from above.
 instruments. Texture is more diffcult to
5. Degenerative, or macerated, tears (see
appreciate when an ablation wand is used.
Figs. 7-21E and 7-22F) can be seen with any
However, with some effort, texture can be
type of tear and often resurt from delayed
appreciated with the probe. Close inspection of
treatment and chronic trauma when dogs
the meniscal surface often shows roughness
continue to walk on injured menisci. These tears
 associated with an underlying incomplete tear.
have numerous filamentous strands and often
Horizontal probing of this area often shows a
occur in conjunction with adjacent articular
soft spot that tears easily with continued
cartilage chondromalacia, fbrillation, and
probing.
occasionally, eburnation.
6.
The meniscocapsular junction must be protected.
If the surgeon is uncertain, then more,rather
The source of meniscal pain in dogs is not well under-
than less, meniscal rim should be left. This
stood. Humans who have meniscal tears and undergo
principle is violated when meniscal release is
arthroscopy under local anesthesia feel no pain when
 performed, which can also be done
the flaps are moved, although traction on the flap causes
arthroscopically. Studies of the long-term effects
sensations similar to the clinical symptoms. Therefore,
of meniscal release are needed as well as studies
most authors believe that pain from meniscal tears is
documenting the effcacy of meniscal release in
caused by repeated traction on the capsule and synovial
preventing future tears.
border when the flap is caught in the joint. The situation
7.
 Iatrogenic damage to the articular cartilage can
s   si i s i s   
be avoided if care is taken to use small tissue
on the intensity of meniscal pain during cranial tibial
ablation wands, to avoid placing the camera
thrust in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament-deficient
tip too close to the articular cartilage, and to
stifles. In humans, meniscal tears usually are repaired if
avoid the use of jawed instruments in the joint 
the patient is young and the tear is neither too complex
space when their opening is traumatic to
nor macerated. Postoperative patient compliance, which
adjacent articular cartilage. Further, the
ranges from the use of crutches to the need for reduced
surgical assistant should manipulate the joint
activity for as long as 6 weeks, is also required. Most
slowly and carefully, and only when the
canine tears do not fit these criteria, similar postoperative
surgeon is prepared.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT IE?1 41
Partial Medial Meniscectomy of Bucket Handle Tears.
performed at the same time as osteotomy to level the
Bucket handle tears of the medial meniscus often are
tibial plateau. This procedure is considered when the
seen during canine stifle arthroscopy, and their treatment
knee is unstable and the medial meniscus is intact.
can be technically demanding. The use of proper instru
The efficacy of this procedure and the long-term effect
mentation and sequential technique aids in visualization
on the articular cartilage are unknown, and the tech-
and instrumentation, facilitates removal, and signif-
nique is controversial. Some argue that meniscal release
cantly reduces iatrogenic damage to cartilage. Cutting
 renders the meniscus nonfunctional and predisposes the
the bucket handles out of order may cause obstruction
patient to osteoarthritis, whereas others argue that the
of the view by the meniscal fragment. Adequate synovial
incidence of meniscal tears after TPLO is unacceptably
debridernent, especially distally and laterally, must be
high without release. When partial meniscectomy
is
performed before rhe meniscus is grasped.
required for significant naturally occurring tears, release
The step-by-step procedure for removal of a typical
 is not indicated. Instead of meniscal release, some sur-
bucket handle tear is listed below.
 geons elect to perform prophylactic partial meniscectomy
on uninjured menisci. In dogs that have partial tears, but
1. A probe is used to displace the tear forward.
palpably stable knees, TPLO usually saves the ligament,
Cranial traction on the probe is maintained
and some consider meniscal release unnecessary. Clini-
while the grasper is inserted through the same
cally soine dogs that undergo meniscal release later tear
portal.
the imeniscus, whercas tears do not always occur in other
2.
A locking small-joint grasper is inserted through
dogs that do not undergo the procedure. Controlled
the same portal. The midportion of the tear is
studies are needed to determine the need, efficacy, and
grasped, and the probe is removed. Ideally, the
induced morbidity associated with this procedure. Release
surgeon will obtain a strong bite on the first
of the medial meniscus can be performed arthroscopically
attempt. Smaller bites invariably give way, and
by transecting the caudal meniscotibial ligament or by
iatrogenically damaged tissue may be diffcult to
transversely incising the meniscus caudal to the attach-
 grasp again. The assistant should maintain
ment of the medial collateral ligament. It is not known
traction on the grasper.
whether either location of release is superior or whether
3.
While the assistant applies cranial traction with
meniscal release is superior or inferior to prophylactic
the graspers, the joint is stressed slightly valgus
partial ablation.
and the abaxial handle is visualized at its
Medial meniscal release is most quickly and easily
attachment to the body of the meniscus, which
 performed at the caudal meniscotibial ligament.
usually is near the medial collateral ligament.
To release the caudal meniscotibial ligament, a pal-
Occasionally, additional hyperplastic synovium
pation probe is placed directly beneath the ligament at
must be debrided for adequate visualization. The
its origin on the meniscus, and its caudal border is hooked
abaxial handle is incised with the tip of the
with the probe. While craniodistal traction is applied on
smallest tissue ablation wand, cutting from
the probe handle, a fine-tipped radiofrequency ablation
cranial to caudal. Larger wands may obstruct the
wand is inserted through the same portal (craniomedial
 surgeon's view. The wand is inserted through the
portal) and an incision is made directly over the probe
shared craniomedial portal, proximal to the
(Fig. 7-25A and B). A distinct pop can be felt when the
grasper. Occasionally, the probe must be bent to
meniscus is released and the tension on the palpation
make a precise cut. In rare cases, a smail-joint
probe is suddenly relaxed. The caudal horn of the medial
punch can be used, but care must be taken to
meniscus should displace caudally and medially when
avoid causing iatrogenic damage to the articular
the meniscotibial ligament is completely transected, and
cartilage,
the meniscus can be seen actively moving during direct
4.
Finally, the axial bucket handle is incised,
arthroscopic visualization while the cranial tibial com-
usually near its tibial attachment caudally.
pression test is applied.
Gentle traction is directed proximally on the
For midbody release, a radiofrequency probe is used
grasper to allow visualization of the attach-
to make a transverse incision of the medial meniscus,
ment berween the handle and the caudal horn
caudal to its attachment to the medial collateral liga-
of the meniscus. Then the ablation wand is
ment. This procedure can be performed arthro-
introduced distal to the grasper, within the
scopically, although this technique may be difficult to
shared anterior medial portal. After
visualize peripherally. Alternatively, the meniscus can be
transection is performed, the ablation probe is
incised with a no. 11 scalpel blade that is introduced
rermoved, followed by the grasper holding the
through the skin into the joint from the caudomedial
fragment. The joint is opened again, with
aspect of the stifle. The meniscus is visualized arthro-
valgus stress, and reexamined and reprobed to
scopically while a 22-gauge spinal needle guide is inserted
reveal additional tears. The remaining
just caudal to the medial collateral ligament, over the
meniscal edge is sculpted according to the
intended site of meniscal transection. The no. 11 biade
principles of meniscectomy.
is introduced alongside the guide needle into the joint.
The meniscus is transected as pressure is applied to
Release of the Medial Meniscus.
To prevent future
the blade (see Fig. 7-25C and D). When the meniscal
tearing of the medial meniscus, meniscal release is often
incision is complete, the caudal horn of the meniscus
142SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
mfc
A
B
FIGURE 7-25 IwO cchn ques of
[neniscal elease for prophy aclic. trcar-
D
menl of the medial reniscus aro I bicl 
plaleaj leveling osteolory. A. Site c:
reecse of he nedial meriscus ct
the cot.del reniscoferoral I gorerl.
B.Coidal reda menisccl reess.
A probe is ploced beneln lie menl.s
cotibia ligomert.  ord Iransecl cn
oerlormed with o lirelioped iodc
eauency probe. C, Midbody rediol
menisccl ielecse. Guded by cr g+
scopicallyvisualizedneede that
5
insertec perculaneojsly usl caudl k
the med al collcteral ligamenl., ( 1o.
blace is inserted percutgreot.sly to t:an
sec! the meniscus. D. After rhe midnocy
is releasec, commp ete ransection creates
a vstal gap. . Pophylacric parral
meniscectomy. A raciofreauency oiob=
E
is jsed to aolate he coudal asoect o!
the ojter thid of +he meriscJs.
displaces caudally and a gap is seen in the body of the
Surgical stabilization is performed after joint debride-
meniscus (see Fig. 7-25D).
ment and meniscal treatment, according to the surgeon's
Partial meniscal ablation can be performed in lieu of
 preferred technique. TPLO is currently the treatment of
meniscal release. Meniscal ablation may better preserve
choice, but other techniques provide satisfactory resulrs
meniscal function by maintaining the hoop-stress
in many cases.
mechanism that is lost when transverse tearing of the
 Postoperative Care. lntra-articular bupivacaine with
meniscus occurs. This procedure is performed with a
or without morphine is injected at the conclusion of
radiofrequency probe (see Fig. 7-2SE). The inner third
surgery if an epidural was not performed. The appli-
of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus is ablated to
cation of a Robert Jones bandage for the first 12 to
remove the rcgion of the meniscus that is most suscep-
 24 hours is optional, but bandaging helps allviate
tible to tearing. Meniscal ablation is used to discourage
discornfort from postsurgical swclling. Preferred pain
meniscal tears after osteotomy to level the tibial plateau,
management includes prcoperative long-acting epidural
but future tears may occur despite the use of this
07 pue uo sau o) adesun pos Xdeiau pioido
technique.
minutes off as often as possible) for the first 48 hours,
the use of a fentanyl transdermal patch for 4 days, and
variables, trearment results for uncomplicated rupture
administration of NSAIDs for 15 to 30 days. Alternately,
 of the cranial cruciate ligament rupture are good if
parenteral and oral opioids can be used in patients that
 Osteoarthritis is absent or minimal, and many dogs do
are sensitive to NSAIDs or in conjunction with NSAID
well despitc having advanced osteoarthritis at the time
therapy when additional analgesia is necded. Bandages
of intervention,
usually are not necessary in isolated meniscal treatment
or simple diagnostic or second-look arthroscopy. These
Avulsion Fractures of the Cruciate
cases are routinely treated on an outpatient basis with
Ligament
NSAIDs alone. Most cranial cruciate ligament repair
patients are released the morning after surgery.
Avulsion fractures of the cruciate ligament can be
repaired successfully with rraditional open arthrotomy,
Complications.
Complications  associated
with
an arthroscopic procedure, or a combination of tech-
arthroscopy are minimal and uncommon. The most
niques. If the knee is stable and the avulsion fragment
common complication is swelling as a result of sub-
is small, treatment may involve only removal of the
cutaneous fluid extravasation. Edema is uncomfortable,
arthroscopic fragment and rest. If all or much of the liga-
and these cases benefit from the application of a Robert
ment is avulsed, treatment options include open repair
Jones bandage for 24 hours. If the patient is released
augmented with extracapsular techniques or external
from the hospital with a bandage the owners should be
coaptation, complete removal and stabilization, and
cautioned that slippage is likely as the swelling subsides
arthroscopic repair. Ideally, for repair, the entire liga-
and if it occurs the bandage should be removed. Some
auo u pue siel si uoisn auoq aun pue neut s su
piece. Unfortunately, this situation does not always
operative days as a result of gravitatrion of subcutaneous
occur, and the ligament should be closely examined for
fluids.
 latrogenic damage to the arricular cartilage
structural damage. The avulsions may be seen from both
usually occurs when the stifle is not fully extended while
the proximal and distal ends of both the cranial cruciate
instruments or arthroscopes are manipulated beneath
ligament and caudal cruciate ligament. Involvement of
the patella, when the tip of the scope is allowed to get
the caudal cruciate ligament must be excluded before
too close to the articular cartilagc during attempts to
osteotomy to level the tibial plateau is considered for
view the menisci, and as a result of instrument manipu-
stabilization. These patients often have open growth
lation during parial meniscecromy. Most hand instru-
plates that may contraindicate some techniques. Finally,
ments are too large for use in atraumatic partial
if repair of the avulsion fragment is too tenuous or if the
meniscectomy in dogs. The use of small tissue ablation
ligament is severely damaged, removal and traditional
wands has almost eliminated this problem. Extreme
repairs for ligament-deficient stifles are warranted unless
caution must be exercised to avoid thermal injury to the
 growth plate ssues prevail. The age and growth potential
articular cartilage. Electrocautery burns may occur if
 of the dog should be considered when these decisions
patients are not properly grounded when necessary.
are made.
Infections are rare. Meniscal injuries can be overlooked
if the meniscus is not thoroughly probed and carefully
History and Signalment.   Avulsion fractures are seen
inspected. The reader is referred elsewhere for compli-
cations associated with various stabilization techniques.
because juvenile bones are softer than adult bones. They
sometimes occur in older dogs and may be related to
Prognosis. The prognosis depends on many factors,
violent trauina, such as vehicular accidents. Otherwise,
including the timing of intervention, the degree of oste-
the history and signalment are the same as for other
arthritis present at the time of surgcry, the size of the
cruciate ligament injuries.
patient, and the severity of meniscal injury. Other
factors that affect outcome include whcther the disease
Physical Examination Findings.
.Lameness ranges
is unilateral or bilateral, whether the patient has under-
from partial ro non-weightbearing. Avulsions are often
gone previous stifle surgery, whether concurrent stifle
associated with effusion or hemarthrosis, and the joint
pathology is present, and whether additional orthopedic
is often painful on manipulation. lnstability is usually
problems are present. In addition, the experience of the
pronounced and depcndent on which ligament (cranial
surgeon, the activity level of the dog, and the stabili-
cruciate ligament or caudal cruciare ligament) is avulsed.
zation technique used may affect the prognosis. Exccssive
Isolated tears of thc caudal cruciate ligament are stable
tibial slope may play a role in the prognosis of non-TPLO
in extension, but have marked drawer in flexion, with a
procedures. Finally, the individual willpower, drive, and
sharp cndpoint created by the intact cranial cruciate
pain tolerance of the patient likely affect the outcome,
ligarment. Cranial cruciate ligament instabilities have
but these factors are difficult to measure or predict. It is
drawer in both flexion and extension and usually have
not known whether meniscal release affects prognosis.
a positive result on cranial tibial compression test. Find.
Many experienced clinicians believe that it reduces the
ings should always be compared to the contralateral
incidence of latc-onset meniscal tears, whereas others
limb as many puppy stifles have considerable laxity.
argue that it may predispose the patient to osteoarthritis
by rendering the meniscus nonfunctional because the
Differential  Diagnosis.
The differential  diagnosis
hoop-strcss mechanism is disrupted. Despitc these
includes medial patellar luxation, septic arthritis, hip
144I SMALL ANIMALARTHROSCOPY
surgery, surgery does not alleviate the need for con-
current conservative treatment.
Anesthetic Considerations and  Perioperative Pain
Managcment.
Cox II NSAIDs are discontinued 1 to
2 days before surgery, although discontinuation is not
mandatory. Healthy, young patients require minimal
preoperative laboratory evaluation. Older patients are
adequately screened to exclude underlying metabolic
disorders. Routine chest radiographs are recommended
if vehicular trauma is the causc of injury. Preferred pain
management is preoperative administration of long-acting
epidural opioids, cold therapy for 48 hours, application
of a fentanyl transdermal patch for 4 days, and NSAID
administration for 15 days. Altcrnately, parenteral and
oral opioids can be used, with or without NSAID therapy.
Surgical pain is reduced considerably when the intra-
articular component of the procedure is performed
endoscopically because joint capsule disruption
1is
minimized.
FIGURE 7-26 latc:al radiograph of a 3-month-cold labrndor retricvcr
Surgical Intervention.
The avulsion fragment is either
hrcogiment 's visible wih'n the joint larrowi. Note the marked subuxation.
removed or incorporated into the repair. Small dogs
(<15 kg) are usually treated with open arthrotomy for
fragment removal and extracapsular stabilization. In
dysplasia, panosteitis (in young dogs), lumbosacral
larger dogs, options include open primary repair with
disease, and tibial tuberosity avulsion.
adjunctive lateral imbrication or external coaptation,
fragment removal and stabilization, arthroscopic debride-
Radiographic Findings. 
Bony avulsion is usually
ment and extracapsular stabilization, and arthroscopic
apparent on quality films with standard projections
(Fig. 7-26). Other radiographic signs include swelling
is considered ideal if the avulsion fragment is large. Dogs
of the posterior joint capsule, loss of triangular detail of
usually do well with caudal cruciate ligament-deficient
the infrapatellar fat pad, and formation of periarticular
stifles if the bony avulsion fragment is removed, although
osteophytes if chronic. Cranial and proximal translation
when feasible, it is preferable ro repair the avulsion and
of the tibia in relation to the femur is appreciated as
save the ligament. In addressing avulsion fracture injuries,
mild to severe subluxation. In some chronic cases, early
it is important to confim that the ligament has not been
osteophyte formation is noted off either or both poles of
torn in conjunction with avulsion. In these cases, the
the patella and along the medial and lateral trochlear
avulsion fragment is debrided and stabilization is per-
ridges of the femur. In more chronic cases, these osteo-
formed when indicated.
phytes may be large and may be accompanied by similar
Positioning, portal placement, and systematic arthro-
changes along the medial, lateral, and caudal aspects of
 scopic examination and photographic documentation
the tibia. However, unlike most cases of cranial cruciare
are performed. Most avulsion cases are acute, and the
ligament rupture, these cases present acutely.
patient may
have minimal  proximal compartment
changes. The joint is aggressively lavaged before the
Diagnosis.
The diagnosis is based on the history,
arthroscope is introduced because these patients often
physical findings, radiographic findings (see Fig. 7-26),
have marked hemarthrosis. The avulsion fragment
is
and if necessary, confirmation during arthroscopic exami-
identified, and the associated ligament is prohed to verify
nation. When trauma is involved, the full extent of injury
that it is intact (Fig. 7-27A). The avulsion bed and avul-
must be determined to exclude stifle derangement of
sion fragment are debrided of hematoma and fbrous
multiple ligaments, especially if both the cranial cruciate
tissue. Care must be taken to avoid removing soft under-
ligament and caudal cruciate ligament or the collateral
lying cancellous bone (see Fig. 7-27B). A probe is used
ligaments are involved.
to inspect the area of avulsion to identify its boundaries
and exclude comminution. With the probe, the fragment
Treatment. If marked swelling is present, a Robert
is maneuvered over the avulsion bed to confirm its fit
Jones bandage may be applied for 24 to 48 hours to
and anatomic orientation (see Fig. 7-27C). For distal
reduce swelling. NSAIDs, with or without opioids, are
avulsions of the cranial cruciate ligament, the switching
used to control pain. Conservative treatment consists
stick is used to establish an additional instrument portal
of NSAID therapy, chondroprotective agents, weight
immediately lateral to the patella. A small metal instru-
control, and regular low-impact exercise. Without sur-
ment cannula is slid over the switching stick, and the
gical intervention, most dogs have persistent lameness.
switching stick is removed. The cannula tip is used to
In dogs that have advanced osteoarthritis at the time of
hold reduction of the fraginent under direct visualization.
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 7-27 Arthroscopic repoir of α disiol avulsion fracture ot the cranial cruciale ligorent. A, The fracture frog-
is centered rhrough rhe fragment. driven until it exits the ribia: cortex and skin, ond withdrawn cistaly until only 1 mm
 o al pu po o 'y ris ui ua s! a pa u i uy Aq yi wy si
fragment, ard threaded with cerclage wire. F. The eyed pins are wilhcrawn distally ond rhe wires twisted to com-
plete the modified tension band.
146 ! SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
The lumen of the cannula is centered over the bulk of
the fragment. While reduction is held with the cannula,
an appropriately sized small K-wire (usually 0.045 t0
0.0625 inches) is inserted through the cannula and drilled
with power until it exits the medial cortex proximal
to the tibia and skin (see Fig. 7-27D). The exposed
proximal tip of the pin is clipped with pin cutters. The
proximal instrument portal is maintained, and the drill
is placed on the distally protruding pin. Under dircct
arthroscopic visualization, the pin is slowly advanced
distally until only 2 mm of the pin protrudes from the
fragment. With a similar technique and the additional
instrument portal, a small eyed K-wire is drilled on each
side of the fragment (medial and lateral) until the eyed
portion of the K-wire protrudes slightly above the frag-
ment (see Fig. 7-27E). A grasper is used to insert the tip
of a cerclage wire (0.8 to 1.0 mm) through the anterior
medial porral and through the tip of one of the eyed K-
wires. The involved pin is removed with a Jacobs hand
chuck, without twisting, until the cerclage wire exits the
skin. The cerclage wire is tagged with a hemostat. These
steps are repeated for the other end of the cerclage wire
and the other eyed pin (see Fig. 7-27E). To employ a
modifed tension band principle, the cerclage wire must
pass caudal to the tip of the K-wire exposed within
the joint. The skin is incised between the ends of the
cerclage wire. The wire is hand twisted until the loop
appears tighr around the avulsion fragmenr (see Fig.
7-27F). The opposite (distal) ends of the K-wires are
bent onto the tibial cortex to prevent migration into the
joint (Fig. 7-28).
 If the animal has signifcant growth potential, the pin
FIGURE 7-28
8Postoperative radiograph after arthrcscopic. repai ot 
and tension band device are removed affer acceptable
a distal ovulsion hracture of the cranial ciuciale ligament.
radiographic union is achieved. For avulsion fracrures
of the proximal cranial cruciate ligament, the knee must
Postoperative Care. Lateral fiberglass splintage is
be flexed for adequate visualization. Because of the very
maintained for 2 to 4 weeks if the patient's age and skin
caudal location of the origin of the cranial cruciate liga-
will allow. Sedatives are prescribed if necessary to
ment, adequate visualization is difficult if the instrument
prevent overactivity. If necessary for growth, the pins
cannula is used for reduction. A notchplasty is performed
and wires are removed after healing is confirmied
[0 aid visualization. If the fragment is large enough, it
radiographically.
is helpful to pull the avulsion fragment through the
anterior medial portal, drill a small transverse hole, and
Complications.
 The primary complication is pulj-
place a no. 0 or no. 2 nylon suture through the hole. An
Out of the avulsion fragment, which is most likely to
eyed K-wire is drilled through the avulsion bed, the
Occur when pin fixation is used without the addition of
suture is threaded onto the eye, and the pin is pulled with
cerclage wire and a tension band. Overactivity in young
a Jacobs chuck until it exits proximally. The suture is
animals also may contribute to this complication and
pulled to aid in reduction of the fragment. When
must be avoided. This problem should be taken into
reducrion is accomplished, it is held with the instrument
consideration when deciding when to attempt repair.
cannula. The previously described technique is used to
stabilize the fragment with a modified tension band. If
Prognosis. The prognosis is good to excellent for
necessary, the suture is removed immediately before the
full return to function.
K-wire is drilled. For avulsion fractures of the proximal
caudal cruciate ligament, pins are run proximafly to exit
Tear of the Caudal Cruciate Ligament
the medial distal femur. The routine portals are used,
but the camera is switched to the instrument portal and
Isolated caudal cruciate ligament tears are rare. Most
are caused by violent trauma to the cranial tibia while
caudal cruciate ligament-deficient stifles, and excision
the knce is in flexion and are scen in conjunction with
 of the ligament and avulsion is another option. For
Othct, more serious ligamentous injuries. Dogs do well
avulsion fracture of the distal caudal cruciate ligament,
clinically without a caudal cruciate ligament. During
this method is preferred because of the inaccessibility of
physical examination, caudal cruciate ligament injury is
the injury for repair.
easily misdiagnosed as cranial cruciate ligament injury.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I? 147
Osteotomy to level the tibial plateau is contraindicated
Treatment. If concurrent ligamentous injury O1
in the caudal cruciate ligament-deficient stifle.
meniscal injury is not overlooked, most dogs do well
without surgical stabilization. Arthroscopic examination
History and Signalment. Any age, sex, or breed may
is preferred to confirm the diagnosis, debride the rem-
be affected. Vehicular trauma is often involved.
nants of the caudal cruciate ligament, and treat or
exclude meniscal injury.
Physical Examination Findings.  The stifle is carefully
palpated for concurrent injuries, especially instability of
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
the collateral ligaments. Most caudal cruciate ligament
Management. Cox II NSAIDs are discontinued 1 to
tears occur in conjunction with other ligamentous
2 days beforc surgery, although this practice is nor man-
   t   s
datory. Young, healthy patients require minimal pre-
have a marked drawer motion in flexion that is easily
operative laboratory evaluation, Older patients should
confused with cranial drawer. To differentiate between
be adequately screened to exclude underlying metabolic
these two conditions, careful palpation is performed in
disorders. Surgical pain is minimal, and NSAID adminis-
both flexion and extension. Complete caudal cruciate
tration for 15 days in conjunetion with cold therapy for
ligament tears have marked drawer in flexion that has a
48 hours usually provides adequate pain relief. Alter-
sharp endpoint created by the intact cranial cruciate
natively, parenteral or oral opioids or a fentanyl trans-
ligament. The knee is stable in extension. Cranial
dermal patch can be used, with or without NSAID
cruciate ligament tears have drawer in both flexion and
therapy. Surgical pain is reduced considerably when the
extension and usually have a positive result on the
procedure is performed endoscopically because it mini-
cranial tibial compression test, whereas caudal cruciate
mizes disruption of the highly innervated joint capsule.
ligament injuries do not. Partial cranial cruciate liga-
ment tears involving the anterior medial band are stable
Surgical Intervention. Positioning, portal placement,
in extension and have drawer in flexion with an ill-
systematic arthroscopic examination, and photographic
 defined endpoint. Careful palpation is always performed
documentation of the joint are performed. In patients
under general anesthesia, and the findings arc compared
with isolated caudal cruciate ligament injury, the
with the contralateral lirmb.
ligament remnants are debrided arthroscopically with a
 motorized shaver. At the same time, meniscal injuries
Differential Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
are inspected and treated. If avulsion of the proximal
- dn n ni ainrs  sn
origin is present and the fragment is large, repair is
mentous instability, and concurrent meniscal injury.
preferred if the ligament is intact (see section on avul-
sion fractures). Stabilization techniques may be used if
Radiographic Findings. Findings are usually unre-
the response to treatment is inadequate.
markable but may include mild joint swelling. Chronic
cases do not have the advanced periarticular osteo-
Postoperative Care, Cold therapy is provided for
 phytes typically seen in cases of cranial cruciate ligament
48 hours, and Cox II NSAIDs are administered for 15
days. Immediate weightbearing is allowed. The dog is
rupture.
restricted to controlled leash walking for 2 weeks, and
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on the history,
normal activity is gradually resumed as tolerated. If the
physical examination findings, and resulrs of direct
avulsion fragment is repaired, lateral splintage and exer-
arthroscopic examination (Fig. 7-29).
cise control are used. Unless significant growth is antici-
pated, removal of the implant is not necessary.
Complications.  One potentially serious complication
is misdiagnosing a caudal cruciate ligament injury as a
cranial cruciate ligamenr injury and treating it with
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. Collareral ligament
tears can be easily overlooked.
Prognosis.  The prognosis is good for full return to
crcl
function. Radiographic follow-up does not show the
 ss a  e s ss
cranial cruciate ligament tears.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Stifle
OCD lesions are the result of a failure of endochondral
ossification in the epiphyseal complex of developing
FIGURE 7-29 Arthroscooic appearance of the lef srifle of a 2-yea-
bones. The unmineralized endochondral cartilage and
old bulldog with spontaneous rupture of the caudal cruciate ligarment
its overlying articular cartilage become too thick to
[cdci]. The contalaieral limb had c similar lesion. The case was freated
with debrdement alone.
receive adequate nutrition from the synovial fluid and
148 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
subchondral bone. The result is chondrocyte death, lack
 5 to 7 months) but may not present for treatment until
of structural support, cleft formation, cartilage collapse,
much later. Common complaints include early morning
and flap development. The etiology of OCD is unknown,
 si  and i , a  ss
and most cases are likely multifactorial. Contributing
bated by exercise. The lameness is usually helped by
factors include genetic predisposition, rapid growth, over-
NSAIDs and rest, but it rerurns when activity is resumed.
nurition, and activity. Everyday trauma likely precipi-
tates the condition clinically. As the cartilage becomes
Physical Examination Findings. Most dogs show
more unstable and the fissures and clefts comumunicate
weightbearing lameness of various degrees that may be
with the joint, the products of cartilage degradation
exacerbated by hyperflexion of the stifle. Effusion is
reach the joint and mediate inflammation. Mechanical
often present and is more prominent in chronic cases.
incongrucncy develops and results in a corresponding
The knee is palpably stable, although joint laxity is
increase in cartilage wear Clinical signs can be secn
i 'usnd aq e pue sop ari un uoo
even when only partial flap detachment occurs. Localized
 patella tracks normally, and the dog is afebrile.
syovitis is seen arthroscopically adjacent to the lesion
during partial detachment and may become generalized
Differential Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
if the condition becomes chronic. Left untreated, flaps
includes medial patellar luxation, panosteitis, hip dys-
may detach or collapse and may become mineralized.
plasia, septic arthritis, and partial tearing of the cranial
OCD is much less common in the stifle than in the
cruciate ligament.
shoulder. Although it usually involves the medial aspect
of the lateral femoral condyle, it is seen in the medial
Radiographic Findings.T
The condition is often bilat-
femoral condyle as well. Bccause the condition is ofren
eral. Quality radiographs in the two standard projections
bilateral, the contralateral limb must be evaluated
are usually adequate for the diagnosis. The lateral view
carefully.
typically shows a radiolucent concavity or flattened area
of the lateral or medial femoral condyle (Fig. 7-30A).
History and Signalment.
Large and giant purebred
Radiographic evidence of joint effusion is often present.
dogs are most commonly affected, both males and
In chronic cases, other degenerative changes, such as
females. Common breeds include the rottweiler, Iabrador
periarticular osteophyte formation and subchondral
retriever, golden retriever, and Great Dane. Most dogs
sclerosis, may be present. Only rarely are mineralized
joint mice seen.
B
FIGURE 7-30 Radiograpnic ond
arthroscopic images of o dog wih
osteochonditis dissecans of the slile
A. Lateral radiograph showing α radio-
lucent rogion of the medial femoral
condyle. B. Arthroscopic view of an
osteochondritis dissecans lesion of the
mediol femoral conayie wih me um
stoble flap in place. C, Medial fencra
condyle affer removol_ o! the Fiap.
curettage, and forage. D, Secondlook
arhroscopy of the lesion, 3.5 months
later, showing islands of fibrocartlcge
stimulased by Forage
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT I? 149
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on radiographic
chondral pick can be used for microfracture technique,
findings in dogs with appropriate history, physical fnd.
or a small Kirschner wire can be used for forage to
ings, and signalment. A complete orthopedic cxami-
stimulate fibrocartilage response (see Fig. 7-30C and
nation is performed to exclude other juvenile orthopedic
D). Follow-up arthroscopic examination in dogs shows
conditions. The contralateral stifle is examined as well.
earlier development of fbrocartilage in areas treatcd
If the condition is bilateral, both stifles are routinely
with these techniques compared with areas treated with
treated during the same anesthetic procedure. Occasion-
abrasion chondroplasty alone (see Fig. 7-30D). The
ally, asymptomatic radiographic lesions are seen on the
posterior pouch occasionally
/contains fragments of
contralateral limb. If articular cartilage "blisters" are
cartilage. These fragments can be accessed by inserting
seen, these lesions are carefully palpated arthroscopically
the arthroscope berween the cruciate ligaments and into
and treated during the same procedure. If no lesion is
the caudal pouch of the knee. In some cases, a smaller
detected arthroscopically, morbidity as a result of diag-
(1.9-mm) scope must be used to gain access into the
nostic arthroscopy during the same anesthetic episode is
caudal pouch. If fragments are seen, it may be necessary
negligible.
to establish a caudal portal for instrument retrieval,
taking care to avoid the popliteal artery.
Treatment.
Conservative treatment includes NSAID
therapy, chondroprotective agents, weight control, and
Postoperative Care.
 Soft, padded bandages are
regular low-impact exercise. Most dogs have persistent
applied for the frst 24 hours. Cold therapy (20 minutes
lameness and more rapid progression of osteoarthritis
 on, 20 minutes off) is applied as often as possible for the
without surgical intervention, but in most cases, surgery
first 48 hours. Controlled leash walking is allowed as
does nor alleviate the need for concurrent conservative
necessary for elimination. NSAID therapy with Cox II
inhibitors is recommended for 2 to 4 weeks but may be
treatment.
needed for a longer period.
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
Long-term management often includes chondropro-
Management. Cox II NSAIDs are discontinued 1 to
tective agents, weight control, and regular low-impact
2 days before surgery. Aspirin therapy is discontinued at
exercise. In most cases, surgery does not alleviate the
least 1 week before surgery. Healthy young patients
need for concurrent conservative treatment.
require minimal preoperative laboratory evaluation.
Surgical pain is minor and is easily controlled with pre-
Complications.
 Complications are rare, but swelling.
emptive opioid pain medication, NSAIDs, intra-articuiar
and soreness as a result of hermarthrosis may occur if
long-acting local anesthetics, and optional cold therapy.
the patient is not confined for the first 2 weeks post-
operatively. Seromas are seen in dogs treated with
Surgical Intervention.
These lesions can be treated by
 osteochondral autografting techniques, but this compli-
open arthrotomy, but surgical morbidity is considerably
cation is less common when the donor site is packed
higher. Osteochondral autografting techniques and open
with generous amounts of Gelfoam after the graft is
arthrotony have been used to treat a limited number of
harvested.
larger, more severe weightbearing defects, with promising
results. Portal placement, complete cxamination, and
Prognosis.
 The prognosis for OCD of the stifle is
documentation of the proximal joint were discussed
not as favorable as it is in the shoulder. Without treat-
earlier.
 ment, most dogs have persistent lameness and advance-
 Depending on chronicity, varying degrees of hyper-
ment of osteoarthritis. With surgical treatment, some
plastic synovial changes are routinely seen, but they
 dogs become asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic,
usually are not as intense as with cranial cruciate
despite the inevitable advancement of osteoarthritis.
ligament rupture. The fat pad is partially debrided, and
Most dogs are helped, but not cured, and eventualy
the cruciate ligaments and menisci are inspected. OCD
experience recurrent stiffness and lameness. Although
affects both the medial (see Fig. 7-30A and B) and lateral
patients no doubt have carlier return to function and
femoral condyles. The lateral site is more common.
less short-term morbidity and pain, no studies have
These lesions are readily visualized and treated arthro-
compared long-term results for cases treated with
scopically, but a considerable amount of flexion, often
arthroscopic versus open procedures.
more than 90 degrees, is needed to see the entire lesion
in some cases, Varus and valgus stress are applied as
needed. Free fragments are easily removcd with loose
Osteoarthritis of the Stifle
body forceps and small grasping forceps. Nondetached
cartilage is removed in small bites with a grasper or a
With few exceptions, osteoarthritis of the stifle is a
motorized shaver. The underlying bed is debrided with
secondary condition. It develops rapidly in the dog and
the shaver or a small hand curette until bleeding sub-
is most common in those with cranial cruciate ligament
 chondral bone is seen. To avoid overaggressive debride-
injury. Although it appears to develop most severely and
ment, inflow is periodically discontinued to check for
rapidly in the cranial cruciate ligament deficient stifle,
bleeding. Care is taken to avoid freeing fragmenrs
the changes are similar with other conditions. It is rarely
before they are grasped. Srnoothing of the bed is best
primary
in young patients and is usually presenr to
accomplished with the shaver in reverse mode. A
some degree in older patients. Although this condition
150 W? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
D
E
F
A.Normal articular carlage of he femoral condyle.B.Marked reovasculcrizalion and pcnnus ol tne pioxirn
trochlear groove. C, Chondromalacia with fissures of the prcxima rochlear groove. D. F'ne fibrillation anc chiondro-
leveling osteotomy. Note Ihe unheaied midbody medial meniscal release site. E. Deep fibrilation of the med:cl roc"1-
lear ridge of the femur associated with mediol pu'ellor luxation. F, Full-hickness ebu:ngtion of ihe latercl femorci
condyie of a 2-year-oid Blue Healer hat hcad αa poilial <icarial <uc:atc 'igamert etr <and a palpab'y staole sifle
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT · 151
is most common in association with cranial cruciare
 a mixture of grades. Also, some authors prefer to grade
the lesion after treatment rather than before, further
osteoarthritis is sinilar, regardless of etiology.
confusing the issue.
The anatomy and pathology of the articular cartilage
 Periarticular osteophytes form rapidly and become
is underappreciated with open arthrotomy. The articular
large in the canine stifle. Osteophytes occur at four
cartilage is snooth and white and indents only slightly
primary sites: the proximal trochlear groove, the medial
when palpated with a probe (Fig. 7-31A). The articular
and lareral trochlear ridges of the femur, and within the
 intercondylar notch. In addition to their location, osteo-
especially cranial cruciate ligament pathology. Early in
phytes are classified as follows:
stifle osteoarthritis, the articular surface may show neo-
vascularization or pannus formation (see Fig. 7-31B) at
Early: osteophytes are barely visiblc (Fig. 7-32B)
three primary sites: the rnedial trochlear ridge of the
Advanced: a few isolated osteophytes are seen; thcy
femur, the lateral trochlear ridge of the femur, and the
are clearly visible and mostly smooth (see Figs.
trochlear notch. In most cases, this change is seen as a
7-31B and 7-32C)
small network of vessels on the surface and penetrating
Severe and coalescing: a continuous series of
the periphery of the articular cartilage, on the medial
medium to large osteophytes is seen; they havc
and lateral femoral condyles, and at the proximal extent
a knobbly appearance (see Fig. 7-32D).
of the trochlea. These sites represent the location of future
osteophytes as the condition becomes more chronic.
Documenting changes in articular cartilage, including
Occasionally, this network of vessels is superfcial and
osteophytes, helps to determine the efficacy of treatment
only loosely adhered to the articular surface, especially
when sccond-look arthroscopy is performed and allows
when it arises from a synovial tag in the area of the troch-
the actual findings to be compared with the preoper-
lear notch. Closer inspection of the adjacent articular
ative radiographic assessment. Osteophytes may be
cartilage usually shows chondromalacia (see Fig. 7-31C).
visible arthroscopicaily before they are readily apparent
Arthroscopically, the articular cartilage is less smooth
radiographically.
and has a slight cobblestone appearance, is slightly gray,
and may contain small fissures (see Fig. 7-31C). Classi-
History and Signalment. 
In most cases, osteo-
cally, it appears soft when probed and marks easily.
arthritis of the stifle joinr is caused by cranial cruciate
Lesions of the articular cartilage are graded on a scale
ligament insufficiency, but it may occur in any dog as a
of I to V, using a modifed Outerbridge system. Accord-
result of traumatic, infectious, immune-mediated, or
ing to this system, chondromalacia is a grade I lesion
developmental causes. Some dogs have subtle to severe
(Table 4-1). A grade II lesion has superficial fissures (see
lameness; others have difficulty rising without lameness.
Fig. 7-31C) that may be obvious but more often are
discrete and easily overlooked. For proper examination
exercise and sit with the affected leg away from the body.
and grading, the cartilage must be inspected closely and
 In mild cases, lameness may be apparent only after
at a tangent angle. Grade Ill lesions have full-thickness
aggressive exercise. Dogs commonly “override” their
fissures down to the subchondral bone as well as more
lameness (completely or partially) with excitement.
obvious fbrillation. Often, it is helpful to stop inflow
temporarily to allow close inspection of the articular
Physical Examination.
 Physical examination find-
cartilage for fibrillation. High fluid flow causes invisible
ings are dependent on the etiology and chronicity of the
movement of the fine fibrillation (see Fig. 7-31D). In
condition. Manipulation of the stifle may show pain
the dog, it is diffcult to differentiate grade II lesions
during hyperextension or hyperflexion or decreased
from grade III lesions because the articular cartilage is
range of motion, primarily in flexion. Palpation of the
so thin. For most practical purposes, if fbrillation is
stifle joint may show mild to severe effusion. As the
easy to see,he lesonisclassifed as grade I and it
disease progresses, palpable thickening as a result of
is diffcult to see, the lesion is classified as grade I1.
fbrosis and bony proliferation may become apparent,
Grade IV lesions are full-thickness regions of deep fbril-
especially medially. Muscle atrophy is common. In mild
lation (see Fig. 7-31E). They are identifed arthro-
cases, minimal abnormal findings may be noted on
orthopedic examination.
exposed bone. Grade V lesions are areas of full-thickness
articular cartilage loss. They have a polished appearance
Differential  Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
(eburnation) and often have corresponding kissing lesions
includes osteochondrosis, rupture of the cranial cruciate
(see Fig. 7-31F).
ligament, neoplasia, immune-mediated arthritis, medial
When describing articular cartilage lesions, grade
patellar laxation, panosteitis, septic arthritis, lumbosacral
refers only to depth, The size and location of the lesions
discase, hip dysplasia, and neurologic disease.
also must be noted. Also, some lesions contain mixed
grades of cartilage injury. For this reason, the use of
Diagnostic Findings.  Diagnostic tests include radiog-
descriptive terms, such as "chondromalacia,” “fssuring,"”
raphy and arthrocentesis. Radiographic findings vary
"fbrillation," and "eburnation," in conjunction with
dramatically with the severity of diseasc, As the osteo-
the size and location of the lesion is often less confusing
arthritis progresses, osteophytosis and sclerosis increase.
than attempting to refer to a lesion as a specific grade or
Arthrocentesis usually shows cell counts of 2000 to
152  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
femoral
condyle
A
B
FIGURE 7-32 Arthroscopic imoges
of osteophytes of ihe lateral trochieor
idge of the lemoral condyle. A. Nomal:
C
D
B, early: C. advanced; D. severe cnd
coolescing.
5000/μL, with a predominance of mature mononuclear
maximal portals may be necessary for effective removal
cells.
of hyperplastic synovium in the proximal compartments.
A motorized shaver is used in oscillatory mode to remove
Treatment.
Medical treatment consists of anti-
as much hyperplastic synovium as possible. Arthroscopic
inflammatory medication and control of activity and
synovectomy should be recommended as an adjunct
body weighr. Surgical treatment is direcred toward the
to medical management, weight control, and physical
underlying cause of the osteoarthritis in conjunction
therapy. The procedure may be repeated periodically if
with arthroscopic treatment of identified articular carti-
results are rewarding and clinical signs return. After the
lage and synovial pathology.
joint is thoroughly explored and the extent of the lesion
is defined, an instrument portal is created. The surgeon
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
should visually evaluate and palpate the areas of carti-
Management. A standard anesthetic protocol, including
lage damage and note the size and severity of the lesion
preemptive pain medication, is used (see Table 3-1).
based on the scale shown in Table 4-1.
Postoperative pain is controlled with cold therapy,
Areas of chondomolacia and mild fbrillation (grades
opioids, and NSAIDs.
I to Il) are generally Ieft undisturbed. Grade Il lesions
are areas of full-thickness fibrillation and may be treated,
Surgical Intervention.
Portal sites and surgical
although the efficacy of treatments is controversial. A
anatomy were discussed carlier. With the advent of
curette or burr is used to remove the diseased cartilage,
arthroscopy, in bilateral cases, both stifles may
be
taking care to avoid damaging the surrounding, more
treated simultaneously. In more severe cases, the joints
 normal cartilage. The resulting subchondral bone bed is
may be staged to limit weightbearing on the operated
treated by abrasion or light curertage to expose bleeding
limb postoperatively. Standard portal placement and
subchondral bone. Microfracture technique or forage
complete stifle examination and documentation of the
may be added for larger lesions. Grade IV cartilage
joint were discussed earlier.
damage is full-thickness loss of cartilage and exposure,
In humans, pain is significantly reduced by aggressive
and, in some cases, eburnation of the subchondral bone.
removal of hyperplastic synovium in affected joints.
These lesions are treated in similar fashion.
Although total synovectomy is not possible, aggressive
To perform abrasion arthroplasty, a hand burr, or
subtotal synovectomy has been used successfully itl dogs
preferentially, a power shaver used in forward mode
with mixed but generally favorable results. Additional
with a blade or hooded burr, is inserted through the
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINT IO■ 153
instrument portal. Because both methods produce
Idiopathic sepric arthritis of the stiffe occasionally is
significant bone debris that can clog the egress portal
seen in young dogs and sometimes is related to hema-
and impede visualization, it is important to monitor and
togenous osteomyelitis of the metaphysis. Unfortunately,
maintain the flow of fluid through the joint. The burr or
in most cases, there is no good alternative to treating the
blade is spun to remove subchondral bone over the area
aftermath of septic arthritis in the stifle. Placement of
of the lesion. Inflow of fluid is stopped periodicaily
to
implants to provide arthrodesis in a previously infected
allow the surgeon to check for resulting bleeding.
[n
area must be recommended cautiously and only after
addition, adequate outflow must be ensured to decrease
months of successful antibiotic therapy. Successful stifle
the pressure in the joint. When bleeding is observed
arthrodesis eliminates pain, but causes considerable gait
diffusely from the lesion bed, the joint is lavaged to
abnormality. Amputation is an altrernative that satis-
remove the remaining bone debris and routine closure
factorily
relieves pain and should be considered,
is performed.
especially
y in cases of life-threatening sepsis. Another
To perform microfracture, an appropriately angled
alternative for salvage is aggressive arthroscopic debride-
ssd s d  e     s 
ment of infected cartilage and diseased tissues combined
against the subchondral surface of the bone.
An
with medical management and physical therapy. Although
assistant should lightly tap the pick handle with a mallet
this procedure does not result in a normal joint, many
once or twice. The pick must be held securely to avoid
dogs have a surprising amount of function, even after
gouging the surface and adjacernt healthy cartilage. The
aggressive removal of large amounts of arricular carti-
micropick is applied diffusely across the diseased area.
lage. The owner must understand that this procedure is
The surgeon should check for resulting bleeding often
a salvage attempt and should realize that amputation or
by stopping the inflow of fluid and ensuring adequate
arthrodesis may be the final outcome.
ourflow. When bleeding is observed diffusely from the
lesion bed, the joint is lavaged to remove the remaining
History and Signalment. Any age, sex, or breed can
bone debris and routine closure is performed.
be affected. Most cases present with lameness and may
 In some joints, it is relatively easy to produce diffuse,
have a history of a puncture wound, bite wound, or
effective bleeding, whereas in others, it is much more
draining tract. Most spontaneous cases occur in
difficult. Combining abrasion and microfracture may
immature dogs, although the majority of cases are asso-
increase subchondral bleeding. If eburnation is present,
ciated with previous stifle surgery. Lethargy, depression,
the surgeon may have dificuity achieving significant
and anorexia also may be present. Affected dogs may
bleeding with these techniques. The forage technique
have responded well to previous antibiotic therapy.
can be used in lieu of microfracture to alow deeper
penetration of subchondral bone. After abrasion
Physical  Examination.
Most patients are non-
chondroplasty is performed, a small K-wire (0.045- to
weightbearing. Manipulation of the joinr elicits pain,
0.0624-inch) is used to drill small, equally spaced holes
 and effusion is evident. Popliteal lymphadenopathy may
in the lesion (see Fig. 7-30C and D and Fig. 7-33B).
be evident as well. In long-standing disease, pitting
edema of the distal extremity may be present and the
Postoperative  Management and Complications.
limb may be warm to the touch. Pyrexia is common.
Postoperative management and complications are iden-
tical to those associated with routine stifle arthroscopy.
Differential Diagnosis.   The differential diagnosis
Typically, osteoarthritis requires lifelong medical manage-
includes immune-mediated joint disease, fractures of the
ment. Treatment includes exercise, physical therapy, and
stifle, OCD, avulsion fractures of the cruciate ligaments,
control of body weight in combination with NSAIDs
 panosteitis, injury of the collateral ligaments, patellar
 and chondroprotective medications.
tendon injury, partial cruciate tears, and neoplasia.
Prognosis. The efficacy of arthroscopic treatment in
Radiographic Findings. Radiographs are usually
the management of osteoarthritis of the stifle is unknown.
unremarkable but may show soft tissue swelling. Most
The efficacy is likely to be much greater when combined
cases present acutely. Bony lysis may be evident if hema-
with medical management, physical therapy, and weight
 togenous metaphysea! osteomyelitis is present or is the
control. Severe cases may be unresponsive, and some
source of disease or if osteomyelitis is associated with an
cases may require additional arthroscopic debridement
implant. Lytic changes in the area of the intercondylar
or surgical intervention, including corrective osteotomy,
notch or implants may be the result of previous intra-
arthrodesis, or joint replacement.
articular repair of a cranial cruciate ligament injury.
Diagnosis.  Diagnosis is based on the history, physical
examination findings, and arthrocentesis resulrs. Joint
Septic Osteomyelifis
fluid is typically yellow or brown and cloudy, has poor
In cases of septic arthritis, arthroscopic evaluation
viscosity, and is increased in volume. Fluid analysis is
allows precise assessment of the articular surface and
usually diagnostic. Cytology shows large numbers of poly-
improves prognostic accuracy. Large-diameter catheters
and high flow volumes are effective in joint lavage after
many of which are usually toxic. Cases that were treated
specimens are collected for culture and sensitivity tests.
and responded to long-term antibiotic therapy may be
154 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 7-33
A, Septic osteomyeitis
of the interrochanteric notch befcre trear-
menl. B, The same lesion after biopsy,
culture, aggressive shaver debridement,
A
B
and forage. The caudal cruciate ligorrent
is intact.
less obvious. Figure 7-33A shows the typical appear-
necessary.
The surgeon may find it helpful to
ance of an area of septic osteomyelitis.
 periodically change ingress from one portal ro the other
and even to provide ingress through the superior portal
Treatment.  These cases are treated as surgical emer-
to help dislodge fibrinopurulent material from the joint
gencies. The joint is aggressively lavaged as quickly as
pouches. In severe cases, superior portals are established
possible to minimize damage to the articular cartilage.
both medially and laterally. High inflow rates are used,
Culture and sensitivity testing should be performed
    r s   
used to remove and suction fibrinopurulent material. In
broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics that provide
addition, the caudal pouch is inspected as described
good aerobic and anaerobic coverage is initiated imme-
earlier, and an additional caudal instrument portal is
diately. When osteomyelitis is involved, long-term anti-
established for removal of fbrinopurulent material if
biotic therapy is necessary, and antibiotic selection is
indicated.
based on the results of aerobic and anaerobic culture
The goal of arthroscopic treatment is to identify the
and sensitivity testing.
nidus of infection and debride it and the infected tissue.
If the infection is diagnosed early, no nidus may be
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
identifiable, especially in spontaneously occurring septic
Management.
A complete blood count and chemistry
arthritis. In previously operated cases, pieces of suture
panel should be obtained, but processing of laboratory
or areas of necrotic bone may be found. If intra-
tests should not delay intervention. If the source of infec-
articular grafts have been implanred, osteomyelitis of
tion is unknown, urinalysis, blood cultures, abdominal
the intracondyla1 notch may be identified. This tissue is
ultrasound, and thoracic radiographs may be necessary.
usuaily readily identifable as abnormal and may have a
Cox I1 NSAIDs, in conjunction with opioids, are used
covering of inflamed granulation tissue, with or without
to control pain. Alternately, parenteral or oral opioids
synovial adhesions (see Fig. 7-29A). The tissue should
or a fentanyl transdermal patch can be used, with or
be debrided aggressively with a motorized shaver until
withour NSAID therapy. Most cases are painful acutely,
healthy, bleeding subchondral bone is seen. To avoid
but treatment relieves pain and improves atritude
excessive debridement, the surgeon should periodically
dramatically.
discontinue the ingress and check for bone bleeding.
Involved articular cartilage is debrided similarly.
To
Surgical Intervention. I
 Positioning, portal placement,
stimulate the response of fbrocartilage, a small K-wire
and systematic arthroscopic examination and photo-
is used to drill several closely spaced holes (forage) in the
graphic documentation of the joint were discussed
denuded subchondral bone to stimulate fibrocartilage
earlier. Before the arthroscope is introduced, the joint is
response (see Fig. 7-33B). Alternately, a chondral pick
aggressively lavaged with large volumes of lactated
is used to perform microfracture. The joint pouches are
Ringer's solution. If the patient has sepsis and is systemi-
checked for fbrinopurulent material and it is removed
cally ill or has severe periarticular swelling, treatment is
when found. At the conclusion of the procedure, the
staged. A large-diameter cannula system is used to lavage
joint is lavaged aggressively.
the joint and arthroscopic examination is delayed until
the patienr is more stable and the swelling subsides. If
Postoperative Care.
. Aggressive intravenous antibiotic
swelling is severe, prearthroscopic intravenous antibiotic
therapy with good aerobic and anaerobic coverage is ini-
therapy with a bandage and drainage (grenade) for 24
tiated pending culture and sensitivity results. Antibiotic
to 48 hours may facilitate arthroscopic examination,
treatment is adjusted based on culture and sensitivity
which can be performed later. The joint is examined
resulrs. Bandage and drainage (grenade) are optional
arthroscopically, diseased tissue is debrided, the artic-
 but may not be necessary if aggressive debridement and
ular cartilage is evaluated, and implants are removed if
lavage were performed. The recommended approach is
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE STIFLE JOINTI155
to leave the porrals open, perform aggressive hydro-
fracture, contusion, and injury to the quadriceps tendon
therapy and massage postoperatively, and allow walking
or patellar tendon.
as tolerated. Aggressive postoperative physical therapy
is ideal. Intravenous antibiotics should be maintained
Radiographic Findings.  Radiographs are performed
for several days prior to switching to longer term oral
to exclude fracture. Usually, they are normal or show
antibiotics.
mild effusion. Skyline views may be beneficial.
Complications. Complications include residual infec-
Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis is based on the history, physical
tion, recurrent infection, persistent lameness, osteo-
findings, and exclusion of other causes of lameness.
arthritis, and osteomyelitis. Residual lameness may be
caused by previous or secondary cranial cruciate liga-
Treatment. Conservative treatment with Cox II
ment rupture; however, septic joints usually undergo
NSAIDs should be attempted before surgical inter-
considerable periarticular fbrosis that leads to stabili-
vention is performed, especially in patients with grade I
zation. Defnitive stabilization procedures such as TPLO
luxation.
may be required after the infection is resolved.
Anesthetic Considerations and  Perioperative Pain
Prognosis.
 The prognosis is good to excellent if
Management.
. NSAIDs are discontinued 1 to 2 days
treatment is provided before significant articular carti-
before surgery, although discontinuation is not manda-
lage damage occurs and if the intra-articular ligaments
tory if Cox II NSAIDs are used. Young, healthy patients
are intact. It is guarded in patients that have significant
require minimal preoperative laboratory evaluation.
articular loss. The prognosis also depends on the integ-
Older patients should be adequately screened to exclude
rity of the intra-articufar and collateral ligaments. The
underlying metabolic disorders. Administration of
 prognosis may be refined after the articular surfaces are
NSAIDs for 15 days in conjunction with cold therapy
examined arthroscopically.
for 48 hours is usually adequate. Alternately, parenteral
 Or oral opioids or a fentanyl transdermal patch can be
used, with or without NSAID therapy.
Medial Patellar Luxation
Surgical Intervention. Positioning, portal placement,
Most cases of medial patellar luxation are too severe
systematic arthroscopic examination, and phorographic
to be treated arthroscopically. The exception may be
documentation of the joint were described earlier. How-
I pue I apens pue suoexng remaed snn anoe
ever, the technique is modified slightly to place the
luxations in dogs that have good conformation. These
superior portal lateral to the quadriceps tendon instead
cases may be treated arthroscopically, but case selection
of mediai. The articular cartilage of the medial trochlear
is critical and results are mixed in a small number of
ridge of the femur and the lateral articular cartilage of
cases. Additional work is needed to determine the ideal
the patella are inspecred carefully. In chronic cases,
case selection and effcacy. Procedures have been per-
fibrillation or eburnation may be present in both areas
formed with complete informed consent by the owners
(Fig. 7-34A). The joint shouid be maximally distended
and with the understanding that this technique is new
and the light post positioned in the 6 o'clock position
and unproven and that more invasive open procedures
for adequate visualization. Under direct arthroscopic
may be necessary if reluxation occurs. Although scar-
visualization, a hook-tipped electrocautery or radio-
ring is minimal, the benefit of decreased pain is not as
frequency probe is inserted through the instrument portal
remarkable with this procedure as with
1moststifle
and placed just medial to the cranial pole of the patella.
arthroscopic procedures because the highly innervated
The joint capsule and medial retinacular tissue are incised,
joint capsule is incised.
including the medial fibrocartilage wing of the patella
and the medial femoropatellar ligament from inside to
History and Signalment.
 Any age, sex, or breed may
out (see Fig. 7-34B and D). Care is taken not to include
be affected. If the cause of injury is traumatic, lameness
the skin. The incision is continued distally, in a straight
may be severe and is often intermittent. Grade I and II
line adjacent to the patellar tendon, to the instrument
congenital patellar luxations may cause low-grade lame-
portal. If the incision is adequate, extravasation of fluid
ness that may be chronic or intermittent and associated
into the subcutaneous tissue should be evident.
Arthroscopicaily, an obvious dark subcutaneous cavity
with exercise.
is seen as fluid flls the subcutaneous space. The goal of
Physical Examination Findings. F
 Physical exami-
the procedure is to release the tissues medially to allow
nation shows grade I to II medial patellar luxation and
 dynamic realignment of the patella.
weightbearing lameness. Swelling and discomfort are
Postoperative Care.
A Robert Jones bandage is
often present in traumatic cases. Some cases are not
obviously lame until the patella is manipulated during
applied for the first 24 hours to reduce swelling. The
examination,
bandage is changed and maintained for an additional
5 days. The patella may reluxate during the frst 1 to 2
Differential Diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis
postoperative weeks. As discormfort resolves and muscle
includes partial rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament,
function improves, realignment usually ensues.
156 BU SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
O
pfi
A
B
FIGURE 7-34 Arthroscopic images
of pathology associated with medici
patellar luxalion and arthroscopic release
of the medial retinaculum. A. Eburnalion 
of the medial trochlear ridge (ir) of the 
femur  and  corresponding  eburnaticn
of the lateral aspect of the oatella ipl.
B. Intraoperalive view of arthroscooic
release of the medial rerinaculum with @
hooktipped radiofrequency probe imme 
SO
dialely before transeclion of the patello-
femoral ligament Ipf). C. The same view
immedialely after freatment, showirg ihe
transecled ligament [arrows]. D. Com 
pleted procedure ofle the remaining
retinacular lissue is releosed. showing
D
the dark cavily formed by exiravasaion
of fluid into the subcutaneous space Isql.
Complications.  Overaggressive electrosurgical inci-
least 1 month before the result is considered a failure
sion can result in cutting through the skin. The most
because this dynamic realignment requires adequate
common complication is reluxation, which is directly
reestablishment of muscle function.
related to incorrect case selection. These cases often
require more invasive surgical procedures (e.g., tibial
Prognosis.
The prognosis is excellent if reluxation
tuberosity transposition, wedge recession trochleoplasty).
does not occur. Patients that have significant articular
This procedure is more painful than routine arthroscopic
cartilage show significant improvement, likely because
examination because the highly innervated joint capsule
direct bone-on-bone contact is reduced and the force is
is incised. Physical therapy should be provided for at
redistributed to healthier articular cartilage.
Suggested Readings
Siemering GB: Arthroscopy of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
172:575-$77,1978.
Siemering GB, Eilert RE: Arthroscopic study of cranial cruciare
Beale BS: Arthroscopic-assisted stabilization of the cruciate-deficient
ligament and tmedial meniscal lesions in the dog. Ver Surg
stifle in dogs using a percutaneous prosthetic ligament-suture
15:265-269, 1986.
anchor technique. Vet Surg 29(5):457, 2000.
Van Gestel, MA: Arthroscopy of the canine stifle joint. Vet Q
Chandler JC, Whitney WO, Bcale BS: Management of partial cranial
7:237-239,1985,
cruciate ruptures with arthroscopic assisted tribial plateau leveling
Van GestelMA:Diagnostic accuracy of stifle arthroscopy in the
osteotomy. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:757-763, 1985.
Veterinary Orthopedic Society, The Canyons, Utah, 2002.
Hulse DA, Beale BS: Arthroscopically assisted “under and over"
Whitney WO: Arthroscopic reconstruction of the cranial cruciate
ligament in the dog. Procedings of the Eighth Annual ACVS
reconstruction of the cranial cruciate ligament in the dog.
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the Veterinary
Whitney WO:Arthroscopy of the canine stifeProceedings of the
Orthopedic Sociery, Val d'Isere, France, March 2000, p. 22.
Third Annual lInternational Arthroscopy Workshop,Ghent,
Kivumbi CW, Bennett D: Arthroscopy of the canine stifle joint. Vet
Belgium, 1998.
Rec 109:241-249, 1981.
Whitney WO:Basic arthroscopy of the canine stifle.In Slatter
Lewis DD, Goring RL, Parker RB, et al: A coimparison of diagnostic
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
methods used in the evaluation of early degenerative joint disease
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:305-315, 1987.
in press.
Whitney WO: Basic arthroscopy of the canine stifle.Arthroscopy
MeGinty, John B. M.D.: In Operative Arthroscopy, Preface 10
Proceedings of the Nineth Annual ACVS Symposium, Sa
Second Edition, Philadelphia, Lippincott-Ravcn, 1996.
McLaughlin RM, Hurtig RM, Fries CL: Operative arthroscopy in
Francisco, 1999.
Whitney WO: Arthroscopic observation in dogs with cranial cruciate
the trcatment of bilat stifle osteochondritis dissecans in a dog.
ligament deficient strifles. Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACVS
Vet Compar Orthop Traum 4:158-161, 1989.
 Miller CW, Presnell KR: Examination of the canine stifle:
Symposium, Arlington, Virginia, 2000.
Whitney WO: Principles of arthroscopic meniscal treatment and
 arthroscopy versus arthrotomy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
stifle debridement. Proceedings of the 2001 Advanced
21:623-629, 1985.
International Arthroscopy Workshop, Ghent, Belgium, 2001.
Person MW: A procedure for arthroscopic examination of the canine
Whitney WO, Chandler JC, Beale BS: Proceedings of the First
stifle jojnt. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:179-186, 1985.
World OrthopaedicVeerinary Congress,Munich,Germany,
Ralphs SC, Whitney WO: Arthroscopic evaluation of meniscal tears
September 2002.
in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injuries: 100 consecutive
cases.Acceted for publication,JAmVerMedAssoc,02.
HAPTE
R
Arthroscopically Assisted
Surgery of the Tarsal Joint
Introduction
allows the surgeon and assistants to hold the arms as
close to the body as possible (Fig. 8-1). The surgeon's
The canine tarsal joint is challenging to cxamine
shoulders should be held in neutral position with the
arthroscopically. An experienced surgeon can use
elhows close to 90 degrees. This position prevents fatigue
arthroscopy to evaluate the articular surfaces of the
and improves the efficiency of the operating team. The
tibiotarsal joint, remove osteochondral flaps associated
imaging tower is positioned at the head of the patient
with osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), and remove or
 or opposite the surgeon. Fiuid ingress is achieved with
assist in the reduction of fracture fragments. Early inter-
a pressurized gravity bag or an infusion fluid pump
vention is recommended because arthroscopy becomes
adiministered through the arthroscope cannula. Fluid
more difficult as joint capsule fibrosis and osteoarthritis
can be evacuated by allowing it to flow freely through
progress. Arthroscopy of the tarsus is only in its infancy;
the egress needle (or cannula) or through a working
future applications will grow as expertise and experience
cannula. Evacuation of fluid can be assisted with suction
are gained.
aftached to the cgress needle (or cannula). If suction is
used, it must be set at a low levei or bubbies will be
prodnced that obscure the surgeon's view.
Arthroscopy of the Tarsal Join!
A 30-degree fore-oblique arthroscope is commonly
used. Because the ribiotarsal joint space is small, in most
Equipment and Instrumentation. For tarsal arthro-
dogs, a 1.9-mm arthroscope is the best choice. In large
scopy, the surgery table is adjusted to a position that
breeds, a 2.4- to 2.7-mm arthroscope may be used
nstrument
table
Anesthesia
 machine 
Assistant
Tower
FIGURE 8-1
Arrangement of the operaling room for tarsol
arhroscopy.
160  SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
successfully if the joint capsule can be distended. Fven
hospitalization. If arthroscopy is completed later in the
in large dogs, a smaller scope is suggested to prevent
afternoon, the patient is discharged the next day.
iatrogenic damage to the cartilage. Whichever size arthro-
All patients receive preemptive analgesic drugs as part
scope is chosen, the surgeon must consider the outside
of the premedication protocol. Buprenorphine is the
diameter of the arthroscope cannula because it too must
preferred agent because of its effectiveness in dogs that
enter the joint. Each arthroscope cannula is fitted with
have mild to moderate postoperative pain and
its
a blunt, canonical obturator and a sharp trocar. In most
relatively long mode of action (6 to 8 hours). When the
cases, the sharp trocar is not needed to enter the joint.
dog is dismissed from the hospital, NSAIDs and oral
When it is used, caution must be exercised to prevent
 butorphanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for adminis-
iatrogenic damage to the cartilage. A blunt, conical
tration ar home. NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and
obturator is recommended for entering the joint.
 butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours. If the dog
Tarsal arthroscopy requires an assortment of hand
remains in the hospital overnight, a second dose of
instruments (Fig. 8-2). Recommended are instruments
buprenorphine is administered in the cvening, and
to assist in the inspectionl of intra-articular structures
NSAIDs and butorphanol are prescribed for home
(probes), grasping forceps to remove free bodies, biopsy
 administration. Fentanyl transdermal parches also may
forceps, and instruments to perform surface ahrasion
 be used to manage postoperative pain.
and synovectomy. Instruments can be inserted into the
joint through an open instrument port, jnstrument
 Patient Preparation and Positioning.
The patient is
cannulas, or a combination of the two. If the surgeon
clipped and prepared for open arthrotomy in case the
works through an instrument cannula, different-sized
arthroscopy procedure must he aborted for technical
cannulas and switching sticks are helpful.
reasons and an open arthrotomy performed. This situ-
 ation is more common when the surgeon is beginning to
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperativc Pain
 learn arthroscopy. The damaged region of the articular
Management.
 Preoperative laboratory workup is based
surface is identified by thoroughly assessing the joint
on the patient's physical status and surgica! risk. Young,
radiographically before surgery. The tarsus is divided
healthy patients with no underlying systemic problems
into the following four quadrants for evaluation: dorso-
require minimal laboratory evaluation. Older dogs should
medial, plantaromedial, dorsolateral, and plantarolateral.
undergo a complere blood scrcen, urinalysis, chest radio-
Once a lesion is classified to a specifc region of the
graphs, and an electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a
tarsus, a surgical approach or an arthroscopic portal
standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain
can be selected that gives access to the area of interest.
medication. Postoperative pain is minimal, but pain
A hanging limb preparation is recommended. If the
management with epidural analgesia, opioids, and non-
dorsal aspect of the joint is to be approached, the patient
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be used
is positioncd in dorsal recumbency with the hind legs
if necessary. If arthroscopy is completed early in the day,
extended (Fig. 8-3). If the plantar aspect of the joint is
the patient may be dismissed from the hospital the same
to be approached, the patient is best assessed in ventral
afternoon unless an associated surgical procedure requires
recumbency with the hind legs extended (Fig. 8-4).
Ventral or dorsal recumbency allows for bilateral tarsal
arthroscopy and may allow easier manipulation of work-
 ing instruments. An experienced arthroscopist may be
able to access all four portals from either a dorsal or a
a
ventral recumbency position by flexing or extending the
joints of the hindlimb as needed to gain access to the
b
underside of the joint. Although this approach may be
awkward for the beginning arthroscopist, it avoids
C
the need to reposition the dog and allows access to all
regions of both hocks. Lateral recumbency with the
affected leg placed uppermost can be used if only one
tarsus needs to be evaluated. It is often helpful to allow
the tarsus and foot to protrude past the end of the table.
By preventing the surgical tabie fron interfering with
the scope, this position allows adjustment of the tarsus
position and greater manipulation of the scope. The leg
is surgically draped with four quadrant towels and a
e
sterile cloth, paper, or adhesive drape. A clear adhesive
sterile drape repels water, keeps the patient dry, and
FIGURE 8-2 Instrumentalion for lorsal arthroscopy. A 1.9-mm arthro
reduces the opporrunity for contamination from wet
scope la) 's ideal for most paliens. A blun! probe [b] is useful tor
towels and drapes (Figs. 8-5 and 8-6).
[ sdio uds suoipuo ao u  o uoorpae
are used to remove small osteochondral fragmenis or synovium. A curclle
id is used for debriderment of damaged corilage and curetage of
 Portal Sites. Depending on the purpose of arthro-
eabunated bone. A hand bur le) is used or debridement of damaged
scopic intervention, two or three portaf sites are used.
(cartiloge and eburnated oone.
Visual exploration requires an egress portal and an
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE TARSAL JOINT ?I■ 161
FIGURE 8-3  Positionirnig of the
dog before draping  forbilateral
arthrascopy of the dorsal portion of
the tibiotarsol joint.
arthroscope portal. However, if tissue biopsy or treat-
lateral aspect of the tibiotarsal joint. When this technique
ment of joint pathology is undertaken, then an additional
is used to examine the joint, a longer length of the scope
instrument portal is required. Alternatively, the egress
is located inside the joint and inadvertent dislodgement
 portal may be converted to an instrument portal.
is less likely. The necessary regions of the joint also can
The egress portal usually is established first, followed
be examined with an arthroscopic portal that is made
by the scope portal. The four commonly used scope
directly over the affected quadrant of the joint. For
portals are the dorsomedial, dorsolateral, plantaromedial,
example, a plantaromedial scope portal can be used to
and plantarolateral portals (Figs. 8-7 and 8-8). The
view an osteochondrosis flap that is located on the
scope portal usually is located medially if the lateral
plantar aspect of the medial trochlear ridge. With this
aspect of the joint is to be viewed and laterally if the
technique, a shorter length of the scope sits in the joint,
media! aspect of the joint is to be viewed. For example,
increasing the likelihood of accidental dislodgement. A
a dorsomedial scope portal is used to view the dorso-
dorsolateral or dorsomedial scope portal can be used to
FIGURE 8-4Posilioning of the dog
before droping for bilateral arthro-
scopy of the plantar portion of the
tibiotorsal join1.
162 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 8-5  A palient prepcred
for tarsal arhroscopy of the corscal
aspect of the joint wit. fo quadiant
towels and a ciear adhesive slerile
drape. The drape repels wo'er. keep-
ing thepatient dry andreducing e
opportunity for contamination rom
wet lowels and drapes. This method
ol prepgration permits good manip.J-
lotion of he limb during orthrosccpy
and allows he surgeon to convert to an
open arthrotomy if needed. The tarsus 
is extended for dorsal crthroscopy.
examine the dorsal aspect of the joint. Examination of
tarsus, such as OCD, arthroscopic treatment is a viable
the plantar aspect of the joint requires a plantarolateral
alternative to arthrotomy. Arthroscopy is flexible and
or plantaromedial portal. The surgeon should be familiar
effective and has a low morbidity rate.
with all of the arthroscopic portals of the tarsus because
complete visualization and access to the joint may
General Surgical Procedure. An 18- to 20-gauge
require the use of multiple portals. If visualization is
(1.5-inch) spinal needle is used ro distend the joinr with
inadequate or if the scope is difficulr ro maintain in an
saline. This needle functions as an egress cannula and is
intra-articular position, the surgeon should not hesitate
 positioned on the side of the joint opposite the intended
to) change to a new portal. Often, different portals allow
location of the scope portal. For example, if the scope
access to similar regions of the tarsus. With time and
portal is dorsomedial, the egress portal is dorsolateral.
cxperience, the surgeon will leain which portals to use
If an instrument portal is needed, the egress cannula can
for specific applications. For conditions that affect the
be placed in a different location to allow three func-
FIGURE 8-6  A patient prepcred
for tarsal arthroscopy of the planiar
aspect of the joint wiah four quodrant
towels qnd a clear odhesive slerile
drape. The drape repels water.
keeping the patient dry and reducing
the opportunity forconamination from
wet towels and drapes. This method of
preparation permits good manipulation
of the limb during arthroscopy and
allows the surgeon to convert to cn
open arthrotomy if needed. The tarsus
is flexed for plantar arhroscopy.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE TARSAL JOINT?163
ment of the needle into the joint. The joint cavity is
distended with 3 to 6 mL lactated Ringer's solution, and
distension is maintained by leaving the syringe attached
Cranial tibiala
Superficial
to the needle (the assistant maintains pressure on the
plunger). The fluid ingress line can be temporarily
peronealn.
artached to the egress needle (replacing the syringe) to
Deepperonealn
sustain joint distension while the scope cannula
Long distal
1is
inserted. The needle is maintained as the egress cannula.
extensor
Evacuation of fluid maintains fluid flow through the
joint, enhancing visualization. Intravenous or suction
Lateral distal
tubing can be attached to the needle ro capture fluid as
extensor
it leaves the joint. Alternatively, fluid is allowed to spill
onto the floor for capture by a floor suction unit, a
basin, or towels.
A guide needle (20- to 22-gauge) is inserted at the
intended site for the scope portal. If the needle is
positioned correctly, fluid leaks from its hub. A no. 11
Bard-Parker blade is used to make a small entry wound
through the skin and superfcial soft tissues adjacent to
the needle. A scalpel blade should not be used to enter
the joint because extravasation of fluid outside the joint
cavity is more likely. However, in patients that have
marked thickening of the joint capsule, a small stab
incision made into the joint capsule can greatly
Iaid
atraumatic insertion of the arthroscope cannula. Fluid
cxtravasation is not a problem if the incision is small
and good egress flow is maintained. The needle is
removed, and the arthroscope cannula is inserted with
rhe attached pointed, blunt obturator in the same
Saphenous a.
ibial n.
FGURE 8-7Portal locations and pertinent anaromy for canine tarsal
arthroscope portal location.
Superficial
Flexor hallicus
digitalflexor
longus
tional portals. For example, to treat an OCD lesion that
involves the plantaromedial aspect of the trochlea, the
following portals are established: a plantarolateral scope
portal, a plantaromedial instrument portal, and a dorso-
lateral egress portal.
The tibiotarsal joint and the trochlear ridge of the
talus are palpated. These structures may be easier to
identify if palpation is performed while the joint is flexed
and extended. The needle is inserted perpendicular to
and just over the palpable ridge of the trochlear ridge
into the joint. The surgeon often feeis a popping sen-
sation when the joint is entered. To ensure placement
within the joint, a syringe is attached to the needle and
synovial fluid is aspirated. In most cases, when the needle
is properly placed, synovial fluid is easily aspirated. If
synovial fluid is not aspirated and the surgeon believes
that the joint has been entered, lactated Ringer's solution
is instilled into the joint. If the needle is located in the
joint, fluid is easily instilled. Also, as the joint caviry
fiGUrE 8-8 
Portal locations and pertinent anatomy for canine tarsal
begins to fill with fluid, reverse pressure is felt on the
arhioscopy. 1, Plantaromedigl arthroscope portal location; 2. plantaro-
syringe plunger. This sensation ensures proper place-
latcrcl arthroscope porlal location.
164 SI SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
direction as the needle. The tip of the blunt obturaror
the instrument port) crosscs the arthroscope and cannot
can be walked off the edge of the trochlear ridge to aid
be visualized on the monitor. If the triangulation needle
localization of the joint space. When a pointed, blunt
cannot be visualized, the needle is inserted at a different
obturator is used, prcssure inust be applied to penetrate
location at a 75- to 90-degree angle.
the joint capsule. With experience, the surgeon will
learn to feel when the joint is entered. After the joint is
Dorsomedial Scope Portal. The egress portal is estah-
entered, the obturator is removed from the cannula.
lished first. If an instrument portal is needed, the egress
Fluid flows freely from the cannula, confirming that
placement is correct. The fluid ingress line is attached to
laterally. If an instrument portal is not needed, the
the cannula, and the arthroscope is inserted.
egress portal can be located in a dorsolateral position.
Manipulation of the arthroscope should be minimized
The scope portal is placed second, medial to the extensor
to avoid inadvertent damage to the cartilage surface and
tendons (Fig. 8-9). The instrument portal is placed last,
reduce the likelihood of accidental dislodgement of the
lateral to the extensor tendons (see Fig. 8-9). The dorso-
arthroscope. The tip of the scope can be tipped slightly
medial scope portal commonly is used to assess the
or carefully advanced and withdrawn to increase the
dorsolateral joint compartment, the dorsal aspect of the
viewable area. The lighr post is rotated to change the
lateral trochlear ridge, and the trochlea of the talus.
orientation of the oblique lens to further increase the feld
The dorsal aspect of the medial trochlear ridge also can
Of view. If the cartilage surface is diffcult to visualize as
be evaluated, but inadvertent dislodgement of the arthro-
a result of synovial proliferation, the joint is distended
scope tip is likely. The arthroscope cannula and blunt
further by temporarily occluding the egress cannula. If
obturator are introduced medial to the extensor rendons,
the view remains obstructed, a mitni-shaver is inserted
just over the palpable medial trochlear ridge and cranial
through an instrument porrtal and synovectomy is per-
to the medial malleolus. The cannula is directed laterally,
formed. Fluid ingress flow is increased as needed to
below the extensor tendons. The tip is directed into the
control intra-articular hemorrhage. Intra-articular
 dorsolateral compartment. The obturator is removed and
cautery can be used to control bleeding. Systeinatic
replaced with the scope. The tip of the scope is tipped
exploration of all accessible intra-articular structures is
slightly or carefully advanced and withdrawn to increase
recommended.
the extent of viewable area. When the dorsal aspect of
The instrument portal is established if biopsy of intra-
the tarsus is viewed, the tibiotarsal joint is extended to
articular tissue or trcatinent of joint pathology is
maximize the viewable area of the trochlea. The basic
required. Like the egress portal, the instrument portal
technique for establishment of portals was described
usually is made on the side of the linb opposite the scope
earlier.
portal. To improve access to the necessary structures,
the instrument portal can be made directly adjaccnt to
Dorsolateral Scope Portal.
The egress portal is estab-
the scope portal. For arthroscopy of the tarsus, the
lished first. If an instrument portal is needed, the egress
locations of the portals may need to be adjusted because
portal is located either plantaromedially or plantaro-
of variations in the locations of pathologic lesions, subtle
laterally. If an instrument portal is not needed, the egress
anatomic differences, thickening of the joint capsule,
 portal can be located in a dorsomedial position. The
 and the range of motion of the joint. If three portals are
scope portal is placed second, lateral to the extensor
used, the position of the scope and instrument portals
tendons (Fig. 8-10). The instrument portal is placed
must be established to permit visualization and treat-
last, lateral to the extensor tendons (see Fig. 8-10). The
ment of the lesion. The egress needle can be shifted to a
dorsolateral scope portal often is used to assess the
convenient location that allows drainagr but does not
dorsomedial joint compartment, the dorsal aspect of
interfere with the other two portals. The cgress portal
the medial trochlear ridge, and the trochlea of the talus.
also can function as the instrument portal, especially in
The dorsal aspect of the lateral trochlear ridge also can
small dogs in which the surgeon has diffculty estab-
be evaluated,比
but inadvertent dislodgement of the
lishing and maintaining three functional portals. The
arthroscope tip is likely. The arthroscope cannula and
surgeon must learn to triangulate the instrument relative
blunt obrurator are introduced lateral to the extensor
to the position of the arthroscope tip within the joint. A
tendons, just over the palpable lateral trochlear ridge and
20-gauge (1.5-inch) hypodermic ncedle is helpful to use
cranial to the lateral malleolus. The cannula is directed
as a guide needle to locate the appropriate site for the
medially, below the extensor tendons. The tip is directed
instrument portal. The guide needle must penetrate the
into the dorsomedial compartment. The obrurator is
surface of the skin at a 75- to 90-degree angle and main-
removed and replaced with the scope. The tip of the
tain this orientation through the soft tissues. As the
scope can be tipped slightly or carefully advanced and
needle enters the joint and is seen on the monitor, it
withdrawn to increase the extent of viewable area. When
appears ro be entering at a very oblique angle. This
the planter aspect of the tarsus is viewed, the tibiotarsal
illusion is created by the 3
 30-degree fore-oblique
joint is a flexed to maximize the viewable area of the
arthroscope and does not represent the actual angle of
trochlea. The basic technique for establishment of portals
penetration. The most common reason for failing to
was described earlier.
locate the appropriate instrument portal sire is entering
the skin at too obligue an angle. When the angle of
Plantaromedial Scope Portal.
The egress portal is
cntry is too oblique, the triangulation needle (to locate
established frst. If an instrument portal is needed, the
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE TARSAL JOINT I? 165
FIGURE 8-9 Dorsomedial arthro-
ment portol for canine tarsal arthros.
copy. The farsus is @valuated in an
exiended position. The articular sur-
foce of the cdistal tibio is viewed Iwith
the light post down) while the crlicular
cartilage is probed.
egress portal is located in either a dorsomedial or
malleolus. The plantar aspect of the medial trochlear
dorsolateral position. The egress portal can be located
ridge also can be evaluated, but inadvertent dislodge-
in a plantarolateral position if an instrument portal is
ment of the arthroscope tip can occur in this position.
not needed. The scope portal is placed second, medial to
This portal is often used to view lesions associated with
the flexor tendons (Fig. 8-11). The instrument portal is
OCD, especially if a plantarolateral portal provides an
placed last, lateral to the flexor tendons (see Fig. 8-11).
 inadequate view because of synovial hyperplasia and
The plantaromedial scope portal often is used to assess
diminished range of motion. The scope is directed
the plantarolateral joint compartment, the plantar aspect
laterally, below the extensor tendons. The tip is directed
of the lateral trochlear ridge, and the trochlea of the
into the plantaromedial compartment, and the obrurator
talus. The arthroscope cannula and blunt obrurator are
is removed and replaced with the scope. The tip of the
introduced medial to the extensor tendons, just over the
 scope can be tipped slightly or carefully advanced and
 palpable medial trochlear ridge and caudai to the medial
withdrawn to increase the extent of viewable area.
FIGURE 8-10 Dorsolateral orthro
Scope porta. and dorsomedial instru-
ment po:ai tor conine larsal arthros-
u pna si ss ai doo
extended posilion. the arlicular su1
face of rhe distal ibia is viewed iwith
the light post down] while the arlicula?
cartiloge is probed.
166 ?■ SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE   8-11 Partaromedicl
abroscope portol gud plomtaro cleral
instrurnerl portalfo: ccnine carsc
cthroscopy. The kysus is ev acelec ir
0 flexed posilon. ihe carticulkar sur face
of the distel libia is viewed Iw th he
light pos dowrl while the articlar
cartilkige is probed.
When the dorsal aspect of the tarsus is viewed, the
placed last, lateral to the flexor tendons (see Fig. 8-12).
tibiotarsal joint is extended to maxinize the viewable
The plantarolateral scope portal is commonly used to
area of the trochlea. The basic technique for establish-
assess the plantaromedial joint compartment, the
ment of portals was described earlier.
plantar aspect of the medial trochlear ridge, and the
trochlea of the talus. The plantar aspect of the lateral
Plantarolateral Scope Portal.
The egress portal is
trochlear ridge also can be evaluated, but inadvertent
established frst. If an instrument portal is needed, the
dislodgement of the arthroscope tip can occur in this
egress portal is located in either a dorsomedial or dorso-
position. The arthroscope cannula and blunt obturator
lateral position. The egress portal can be located in a
are introduced lateral to the flexor tendons, just over
plantaromedial position if an instrument portal is not
the palpabie lateral trochlear ridge and caudal to the
needed. The scope portal is placcd second, latcral to the
lateral malleolus. The scope is directed medially, below
flexor tendons (Fig. 8-12). The instrument portal is
the flexor tendons, with the tip directed into the
FIGURE   8-12   Plantoroloteral
arthrcscope porta! cnc planrcrcmedigll
nstrument portcl for canine lcrsa
outhroscopy. Tne arsus is cvaluaoc ir
q fexed position. The articuiar surface
of the distol tibia is viewed lwih che 
light post dowr! while the <ric.lk
cort lage is prcbed.
plantaromedial compartment. The obturator is removed
Indications for Arthroscopic
and replaced with the scope. The tip of the scope can be
Surgery of the Tarsal Joint
tipped slightly or carefully advanced and withdrawn to
increase the viewable area. When the planter aspect of
Tarsal arthroscopy is a new treatment modality in
the tarsus is viewed, the tibiotarsal joint is flexed to
small animal surgery. As small animal surgeons become
maximize the viewable area of the trochlea. The basic
technique for establishing portals was described earlier.
more adept at arthroscopy, more conditions will be
 treated arthroscopically or with arthroscopic assistance.
Surgical Anatomy.
The tarsus is a complex hinge
Potential indications include OCD, malleolar and intra-
articular fractures, osteoarthritis, joint instabiliry, and
joint that is composed of many individual smaller joints.
diagnostic examination (biopsy or culture of bone, carti-
It primarily moves in flexion and extension, and more
lage, or synovial membrane). The arthroscope also can
than 95% of the range of motion occurs at the tibio-
tarsal joint. Unlike other joints, the tibiotarsal joint
be used to place a drain within the joint capsule to allow
usually is amenable ro arthroscopy. The mortise character
ingress and egress flushing in patients with septic arthritis.
of the joint, the joint capsule, the collareral ligaments,
the intertarsal and tarsometatarsal ligaments, and the
Osteochondritis Dissecans
strong plantar ligaments provide joint stability.
When the tarsus is evaluated arthroscopically,
OCD is a manifestation of osteochondrosis in which
anatomic structures on the side of the joint opposite the
a flap of cartilage is lifted from the articular surface.
scope portal usually are viewed more easily and more
The loose flap is often composed of both bone and
completely than structures on the same side as the
cartilage. Osteochondrosis is believed to precede OCD
portal. Multiple scope porrals may be needed ro permit
and is caused by a disturbance in endochondral ossifi-
thorough examination of the joint. When the arthro-
cation. The articular cartilage becormes thickened and is
scope enters the joint, the camera is positioned in a way
susceptible to fissure and loosening as the deeper chon-
that provides proper spatial orientation on the monitor.
drocytes undergo necrosis as a result of inadequate
Orientation is correct when right is shown on the right,
nutrition and a suboptimal microenvironment. In the
left is shown on the left, ventral is shown down, and
tarsus, osteochondrosis is usually evidenced as a flap of
dorsal is shown up on the monitor The controls on the
cartilage found on the plantar aspect of the medial
camera will face upward. Most surgeons initially prefer
trochlear ridge. Osteochondral flaps associated with
to view 30 degrees down. The proper spatial orientation
OCD have been reported to occur in all four quadrants
and fore-oblique view are obtained when the light post
 Of the trochlea of the talus (plantaromedial, dorsomedial,
and the controls on the camera head are upright. When
plantarolateral, and dorsolateral). The abnormai carti-
the camera and light post are in this position, the articular
lage may fissure and cause a loose flap of cartilage to
surface of the distal tibia and the trochlear ridges of the
protrude into the joint, or the cartilage may detach from
talus are visible. If necessary, the scope is carefully with-
the underlying bone and float within the joint pouch.
drawn slightly to increase the viewing window. To
The condirion may be unilateral or bilateral. The patient
improve visualization of the articular surfaces, the joint
is evaluated carefully for evidence of OCD in other
may be hyperflexed and hyperextended to separate the
joints, including the shoulder, eibow, and stifle.
joint surfaces and increase the amount of articular sur-
face visible from each portal. When the dorsal (cranial)
History and Signalment.
Large and giant breed dogs
aspect of the tibiotarsal joint is viewed, the tarsus is
are most commonly affected, and males are affected
extended. The position of the camera head is mainrained,
more often than females. Rottweilers and Labrador
and the lighr post is rotated to the side to view other
retrievers are overrepresented. Any breed of dog may be
regions of the trochlear ridges, trochlear sulcus, synovial
susceptible to OCD, including smaller breeds, such as
membrane, and collateral ligaments (Figs. 8-i3 and
the Australian cattle dog, Border collie, chow chow, and
8-14). The articulation of the tibia, fbula, and talus is
American pit bull. Clinical signs often develop between
visible as weli. As the light post is rotated to the ventral
4 and 8 months of age; however, some dogs may not be
position, the articular surface of the distal tibia is seen.
presented for veterinary evaluation until they are mature
When the planta1 (caudai) aspect of the tibiotarsal joint
Or middle-aged. Dogs usually are presented for exami-
is viewed, the tarsus is positioned in flexion. The position
nation because of unilateral or bilateral hindlimb lame-
of the camera head is maintained, and the light post is
ness. Owners usually report a gradual onset of lameness
rotated to the side ro view other regions of the trochlear
that improves after rest and worsens after exercise.
ridges, trochlear sulcus, flexor hallucis longus tendon,
synovial membrane, and collareral ligaments (Figs. 8-15
and 8-16). The articulation of the tibia, fibula, and talus
 sh  xy s a m ss
is also visible. As the light post is rotated to the ventral
 a straight-legged conformation of the hindlimbs. Most
position, the articular surface of the distal tibia is seen.
dogs have weightbearing or non-weightbearing lameness
The articular cartilage of the trochlear ridge, the synovial
that is exacerbated by exercise. On physical examination,
membrane, and the recess of the joint capsule as it
the tarsus is palpated and moved through a complete
attaches to the tibia and talus are seen as well. The
range of motion. In most cases, crepitation or palpable
medial and lateral collateral ligaments also are visible.
 swelling of the joint is evident, and pain is elicited when
168 I! SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
mr
sm
A
Ir
ts
mr
B
FIGURE 8-13
Posilicning and
norma? joint findings for arthroscopic.
evaluation of the Teff tbiotorsal joint
using a dorsomedial portal. The images 
 are obtained by rotating the light post in
Q counterclockwise direcion from its
starting posilion. A. Medial collateral
ligament [ml. synovial membrane (sml.
medial aspect of the distal ibia lti, and
medial trochleor ridge (mr).B.Distal
tibia (l and medial trochlear ridge [mrl.
C, Intermediate ridge of the disial libic
ir] and trochlear sulcus [rs] beweer the
medial and lateral trochlear rdges.
D, lateral trochlear ridge Il and distal
tibia [l. E. Lateral rochlear ridge [l ond
D
E
lateral malleolus of rhe fibula (?l.
the tarsus is moved into hyperextension or forced flexion.
graphic assessment usually requires standard cranio-
Loss of range of motion is common, especialy loss of
caudal, mediolateral, oblique, and skyline views. The
flexion. Muscle atrophy of the hindlimb is evidenced by
defect is localized ro one of the four quadrants of the talus
 loss of muscle mass, most noticeably in the thigh region.
(dorsolateral, dorsomedial, plantarolateral, or plantaro-
medial). The earliest radiographic sign is flattening of
Differential Diagnosis.T
The differential diagnosis
the trochlear ridge and apparent widening of the tibio-
 includes osteoarthritis, joint instability, and septic
tarsal joinr space (Fig. 8-17) as a resulr of thickening of
arthritis.
the articular cartilage and deviation of the subchondral
bone line. Soft tissue swelling often is visible as a result
Radiographic Findings.
 Although lameness may be
of synovial effusion and the proliferation of periarticular
apparent in only one limb, both tarsi should be radio-
fibrous tissue. If the flap is calcified, it may be visible in
 o s  s  n
situ. If the flap has detached from the underlying bone,
Sedation may be required to obtain quality radiographs,
it may be visible within the joint. Osteophytes may be
particularly in large or hyperactive dogs. Complete radio-
seen as well.
B
FIGURE 8-14  Positioning and normol
joint findings for arthroscopic evaluotion
of the lef ibiotcrsal joint using a dorso·
lateral arthroscope portol. The images
dre obtained by rotating the light post in
a ciockwise direction from its staring
position. A, lateral collateral ligament
[l and lateral trochleor ridge [n. 8, Distal
mr
fibula [f) and lateral trochiear ridge Irl.
C, laterol trochlear ridge [in and lateral
aspecr of the distal ibia (r). D, Inter-
mediote ridge of the distal tibia linl and
trochlear sulcus [tst between the medial
and lateral trochlear ridges. E, Medial
D
E
 trochleor ridge (mrl.
Diagnosis. A complete orthopedic examination is
orthopedic specialists perform early surgical removal of
essential because other conditions may occur in asso-
osteochondral flaps, followed by symptomatic treat-
ciation with tarsal OCD. These conditions include
ment of osteoarthritis as needed with NSAIDs and
shoulder OCD, elbow dysplasia [fragmented medial
chondroprotectant therapy (oral and injectable). Whether
coronoid process (FCP), ununited anconeal process
treated medically or surgically, these patients also require
(USP)], panosteitis, and hip dysplasia. The diagnosis of
controlled exercise to maintain function of the joint.
OCD is based on signalment and history and physical
fndings, and confirmed radiographically. Radiographic
Anesthetic  Considerations  and Periopcrative  Pain
evaluation often requires oblique and skyline views in
Management.
Young, healthy patients require minima!
 addition to traditional survey views.
preoperative laboratory evaluation. Table 3-1 shows a
standard anesthetic protocol, including preemptive pain
Treatmment.
 OCD is usually treated with a combi-
medication. Postoperative pain is controlled with cold
nation of medical and surgical approaches. Most
therapy, opioids, and NSAIDs.
170? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
ml
mr
A
mr
mr
B
C
FIGUre 8-15
Posilioning (no
normol joint findngs for orh:cscopoic
ol jpsiooq la eu jo uonooe
using α plantarormediol arhroscoge
rorating the lighf posr in α ckockwise:
fh
diecion from its starting position.
A. Medial collaterol ligomert [mi; and
meaial trochlear ridge (mr. B, Distal
libio Il) and medial trochlear ridge Imrl.
tS
C, Distai tibia [1] and medial trochlear
ridge (mrl while the joint is Ful:y Hlexed
D."Trochlear sulcjs (isl berween she
medial and lateral trochlear rdges.
E, Lateral rochleor ridge Ill and flexoi
E
heallicis orgus tenidon Ifhl.
Surgical Intervention.S
Surgery  is performed
to
fore-oblique arthroscope is used. A 2.4- or 2.7-mm
reduce pain and inflammation and slow the progress of
scope may be used in larger dogs. Basic instrumentation
osteoarthritis. Portal sites and surgical anatomy were
includes probes to inspect the cartilage surface or help
discussed carlier. With the advent of arthroscopy and
raise a cartilage flap, graspers to remove the cartilage
minimally invasive surgical approaches, both tarsi are
flap, and a hand curette or hand burr to prepare the
treated at the same sitting if the condition is bilateral.
lesion bed. Instrument cannulas are used in some larger
The operative site is clipped and prepared according
 patienrs, but the sinall tibiotarsal joint space present in
to the amounr of limb maneuverability desired during
most dogs often precludes their use. A motorized shaver
surgery. A hanging limb preparation provides the greatest
can be helpful but is not essential, The shaver may be used
degree of freedom to manipulate the limb. Liberal clip-
for synovectomy to improve visualization, to debride
ping and thorough sterile preparation are necessary
the osreochondral flap, and to abrade the subchondral
hecausc an open arthrotomy may be required if arthros-
bed. The dog is positioned as described earlier, based on
 copy is unsuccessful. In most cases, a 1.9-mun, 30-degree 
the anticipated location of the lesion.
ARTHROSCOPICALLY ASSISTED SURGERY OF THE TARSAL JOINT I? 171
sm
A
r
B
FIGURE 8-16  Positioning andi normal
joint findings for arthroscopic. evaluation
of the left ibiotarsal joint using a plantaro
ore obtained by rotating the light post in
d clockwise direction From is staring
position. A. Synovial membrane [sm] and
oteral trochlear ridge [ir). 8, Distal tibia
[fl and lateral rochlear ridge [r. C, Distal
ribia (f) and lateral trochlear ridge [r).
D,Intemediatridgefhedistalti
mr
[ir) and trochlear sulcus [ts] between the 
medial ond saleral trochlear ridges.
E. Distol tibia [l and mediai trochlear
ridge [mrl.
D
E
Egress is established with a needle or cannula. The
ment cannula, or a combination. If the surgeon works
joint is distended with lactated Ringer's solution, and
through an open portal site, a no. 11 Bard-Parker scalpel
the arthroscope is inserted. Ingress flow is established
blade is used to make a 0.5- to 1l-cm soft tissue tunnel
through the arthroscope cannula. The imedial and lateral
adjacent to the guide needle. If the cartilage flap is still
joint compartments are inspected for evidence of inflam-
attached, a probe or small elevator is inserted to partially
mation and an osteochondral flap. The arthroscope is
free the edge of the flap. The cartilage Flap is not freed
positioned to provide a clear view of the lesion, and a
completely but is left attached at one or more sites.
guide needle is used to triangulate the position for the
Grasping forceps are inserted, used to hold the cartilage
instrument port. The most common reason for inability
flap, and removed. To facilitate removal of the flap, the
to visualize the guide needie in the joint is crossing
forceps are twisted to release the flap from the talus,
the arthroscope. After the position for the instrument
fold the flap longirudinally, and ease its passage through
portal is established, the surgeon must decide whether
the joint capsule. The cartilage flap may be removed as
172 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
If a piece of cartilage is roo large to pass freely through
the cannula, small grasping forceps are inserted and
used to capture the fragment. The fragment is pulled
next to the instrument cannula, and the cannula and
forceps are removed at the same time. The instrument
port is reestablished by placing a switching stick into
the joint, followed by the cannula. The cartilage flap is
broken into small pieces until the surgeon sees that the
cartilage that lines the periphery of the lesion bed is
frmly attached to the underlying subchondral bone.
Then the subchondral bed is treated by surface abrasion
or microfracture. To optimize healing, a curette is used
to debride the edges of the lesion to form a perpendicular
edge of healthy articular cartilage at the periphery of the
lesion. A handheld curette, handheld burr, or motorized
shaver is used to abrade the subchondral bone surface
of the lesion until the underlying bone bleeds freely. The
surgeon stops the flow of ingress fluid frequently to
observe the extent of bleeding bone, and abrasion arthro-
plasty is stopped after multifocal pinpoint bleeding is
observed. Further abrasion may deepen the defect,
inhibit recovery, and increase instability of the joint.
After surface abrasion arthroplasty or microfracture is
completed, fragments of bone or cartilage are flushed
from the joint by increasing the ingress flow and
allowing egress through a large instrument cannula. The
joint is inspected for remaining bone or cartilage
fragments, and the arthroscope and instrument cannula
are removed. If necessary, the portals are sutured with
nonreactive, nonabsorbable suture.
Postoperative Care...
 To relieve pain and reduce swell-
ing during recovery, cold therapy is applied by alternating
15 minutes on and 10 minutes off for rwo applications.
Commercial cold packs or a circulating cold water pack
can be used. Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or
packs of frozen vegetables can be used. If the dog is dis-
missed from the hospital onthe dayof surgery,NAIDs
and oral butorphanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for
D
administration ar home. If the dog remains in the hospital
FIGURE 8-17 Radiographs of a canine farsus with osteochondritis
overnight, buprenorphine is administered in the evening.
NSAIDs and butorphanol are dispensed for adminis-
fragrrent over the medial rochlear ridge larrowl. B. Lcteral view showing
laltening and iregularity on he ridge of the taljs Larowl. C. Medial
tration at home. NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and
plque vew showing Hatening and ireguaity on he lidge of he als
 butorphanol is discontinued after 48 hours. Cold therapy
jorrowl. D. Lateral cblique view shows normal lateral troch:ea! ridge
is continued at home for the first 2 days after surgery.
After the surgical swelling is gone (48 to 72 hours), the
owner should begin heat therapy and passive motion
and stretch exercises. Moist heat is applied to the tarsus
(Figs. 8-18 and 8-19). To ease removal of the flap, the
 region with a commercial heat pack or a moistened warm
tips of small Metzenbaum scissors can be used to enlarge
towel. The owner should hold the warm pack against
thc instrument portal. In patients with plantaromedial
the inside of his own elbow for 30 seconds to ensure
OCD, thc joint can be hyperflexed to better separate the
that it is not too hot. Then the owner holds the warm
joint surfaces and improve access. If the surgeon works
pack over the patient's tarsus arca for 10 minutes. After-
through an instrument cannula, a small cannula with
ward, the warm pack is removed and gentle flexion and
a sharp trocar is inserted into the joint adjacent to the
extension movements of the tarsus joint are begun,
guide needle. Larger cannulas can be placed with switch-
starting with small movements and gradually increasing
ing sticks, but the smailest possible instrument cannula
to the limit of comfort over 1 to 2 minutes. At the limit
is used. A hand curette, hand burr, or motorized shaver
of comfort, the joint is held in position for 10 seconds.
is passed through the cannula and used to break the
The motion and stretch exercise is repeated five times.
cartilage flap into small pieces. These pieces are usually
The owner should examine the portal sites daily for
simall enough to flow out through the instrument cannula.
signs of irritation or drainage.
of
A
FIGURE 8-18 Positioning. and ab
normal joint findings for arthroscopic
evoluation of the right tarsus using α
plantarolaterai arthroscope portal in a
Labrador retriever with osteochondritis
dissecans.A.Freefloatring osteochan
dral fragment |of] griginating fror. rhe
plantar aspect of the medial trochlear
ridge of the talus. B, Carilaginous debris
that is seen in addition to the mgin frag
ment is removed by lavage, with a mini
mr
shover, o: with a grasping forceps.
C, Subchondrol defect of the medial
trochlear _ridge [mr afier  fragment
removal. Cariloge erosion is seen on the
distal tibia Il opposite the osteochondral
B
ragment
 For the first 4 weeks, exercise is limited to controlled
with long-term intermittent or persistent lameness. How.
leash walking. Arthroscopically treated dogs usually
ever, many dogs have adequate function if strenuous
use the affected leg immediately after surgery.
To
 activity is avoided.
increase the weightbearing load, walking at a slow pace
is recommended. As postoperative time increases, the
pace is hastened. To increase the range of motion in the
Fractures and instability of the Tarsus
tarsus, the owner should walk the dog in high grass
(e.g., weeds), shallow water, or sand, which forces the
History and Signalment. Dogs have acute lameness
dog to pick up the feet and step high with the legs. After
 Of the hindlimb. Most exhibit non-weightbearing lame-
4 weeks, a limited amount of free activity is added to
ness that is associated with trauma and does not respond
the controlled walking, beginning with 5 minutes and
to anti-inflammatory medication. Any age or breed of
increasing to 30 minutes over the next 2 weeks. After 6
dog may be affected.
to 8 weeks, free activity is gradually increased to normal
levels. If, during any exercise period (controlled or free
Physical Examination Findings.
 Gait analysis shows
activity), the dog becomes sore or is sore the next day,
visible lameness. Swelling is usually palpable in the
the pace is decreased and the dog returns to controlled
tarsus region. Manipulation of the tarsus usually elicits
activity for 2 to 3 days.
discomfort and crepitus. Collateral instability is charac-
terized by excessive valgus or varus deviation when the
 Complications. Complications are unusual. Occasion-
joint is stressed. To evaluate the function of the short and
ally, excessive fluid extravasation occurs and results in
long components of the collateral ligament complex,
swollen soft tissues around the tarsus in the immediate
collateral instability is assessed in flexion and extension,
postoperative period. This fluid resorbs within thc first
respectively. Injury to the plantar ligaments leads to
24 hours. Residual mild swelling adjacent to portal sites
hyperextension of the intertarsal and tarsometatarsal
may be noticeable for the first 48 hours.
joints. Injury to multiple ligaments may cause sublux-
ation or luxation at any level of the tarsus.
Prognosis.
 The prognosis for normal limb function
is variable. Dogs that have small lesions and are treated
Differential  Diagnosis.
The  differential  diagnosis
early usually improve and do well. Large osteochondral
includes OCD, septic arthritis, and immune-mediated
defects and advanced osteoarthritis may be associated
arthritis.
174 ■ SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
of
mr
A
OC
OC
B
D
E
FIGURE 8-19
Positioning and abnormal joint findings for arhroscopic evaluation of the lef tarsus Jsing a
plantarolateral arthroscope portal in a labrador relriever with osleochondritis dissecans. A, Free-floating osreochon
dral fragment [ofl originating from the plantar aspect of the medial trochlear ridge of the talus, subchondral defect of
of the lesion and hyperflexion of the libiotarsal joint. C. Insertion of a grasping Forceps alongside the fragments.
Aadon oi jadsib au yum sidwaue adne anbai suse Auw '3 uawoy o jo lpoal pun uidsi 'q
remove free-floating Fragments.
Radiographic Findings. Lateral and anteroposterior
joint line and the correct position for the arthroscope
views may be insufficient to yield a defnitive diagnosis.
portal. The arthroscope is inserted, and ingress flow is
     a i p a
established through the arthroscope cannula. The arthro-
show soft tissue swelling or evidence of an avulsion
scope and light post are positioned to allow the surgeon
fragment in the area of the collateral ligament. Stress
to visualize the trochlear ridges of the talus, the distal
radiographs often show instability of the collateral and
tibia, the fibula, the flexor hallucis longus tendon, the
synovial membrane, and the collateral ligaments. The
medial collateral ligaments, respectively, varus or valgus
light post is rotated 360 degrees to allow thorough
stress can be applied while an anteroposterior view is
evaluation of the joint. The scope is tipped in different
obtained. lnjury to the plantar ligament is shown by a
directions and retracted or advanced to enhance the
lateral view that is obtained while the tibiotarsal joint is
view of the structures. The medial and lateral collateral
hyperflexed. A skyline or oblique view also may be
ligaments are examined in extension and partial flexion.
helpful in assessing tarsal fractures.
During this examination, the surgeon looks for avulsed
fragments and assesses the practicality of stabilization
Diagnosis.  The diagnosis of tarsal instability 0r
versus fragment removal (Fig. 8-20). The condition of
fracture is based on the history and signalment, physical
the articular cartilage is assessed, and fragments are
findings, and radiographic findings.
examined to determine whether reduction or removal is
needed.
Treatment.
 Medical management relieves pain, but
 If an instrument portal is needed, a guide needle is
definitive therapy with coaptation or surgical stabili-
used to triangulate its position. The most common
zation, depending on the severity of the injury, is neces-
reason for inability to visualize the guide needle in the
joint is crossing the arthroscope. To prevent crossing the
the collareral ligaments, remove small avulsion frag-
arthroscope with the guide needie, the needle is inserted
ments, help to reduce an avulsed fragment, and examine
perpendicular to the skin surface. This orientation is
the articular surfaces of the tibiotarsal joint. Articular
maintained through the soft tissues. After the position
fractures require anatomic reduction and rigid stabili-
for the instrument portal is established, a probe is inserted
zation to reduce the chance of debilitating osteoarthritis.
through a cannula or an open portal. If the articular
surfaces of the tibiotarsal joint show excessive wear,
Anesthetic Considerations and Perioperative Pain
arthrodesis rather than stabilization is considered.
Management.
 Preoperative laboratory workup is bascd
 In patients that require open reduction and stabili-
on the patient's physical status and surgical risk. Young,
zation, useful techniques include ligamentous reconstruc-
healthy patienrs with no underlying systemic problems
tion, transarticular external fixation, and arthrodesis.
require minimal laboratory evaluation. Older dogs should
These techniques are described in detail in various
undergo a complete blood screen, chest radiographs, and
veterinary surgical textbooks and journals.
an electrocardiogram. Table 3-1 shows a standard anes-
thetic protocol, including preemptive pain medication.
Postoperative Care.
 Cold therapy is applied during
Postoperative pain is controlled with cold therapy,
recovery to relieve pain and reduce swelling. Cold therapy
opioids, and NSAIDs.
is applied by alternating 15 minutes on and 10 minutes
off for two applications. Commercial cold packs or a
Surgical Intervention.
 Tarsal instability or fracture
commercial circulating cold water pack can be used.
usually is treated with an open approach. Repair may
Alternatively, ice wrapped in a towel or frozen packs of
include ligamentous reconstruction, fracture reduction
vegetables can be used. If the dog is dismissed from the
and stabilization, or arthrodesis. Arthroscopy is used
hospital on the day of surgery, NSAIDs and oral butor-
primarily for diagnostic and adjunctive purposes. Portal
 phanol (see Table 3-1) are dispensed for administration
sites and surgical anatomy were discussed earlier. The
at home. If the dog remains in the hospital overnight,
operative site is clipped and prepared according ro the
buprenorphine is administered in the evening. NSAIDs
amount of limb maneuverability desired during surgery.
and butorphanol are dispcnscd for administration at
A hanging limb preparation provides the greatest degree
home. NSAIDs are continued for 5 days, and butorphanol
of freedom to manipulate the limb and is recommended.
is discontinued after 48 hours. If adjunctive coaptation
Liberal clipping and thorough sterile preparation are
is nor used, cold therapy can be continued by the owner
necessary because an open arthrotomy may be required.
at home for the first 2 days after surgery. In addition,
In most cases, a 1.9-mm, 30-degree fore-oblique arthro-
the owner should examine the portal sitcs daily for signs
scope is used. Basic instrumentation includes probes to
 of irritation or drainage. Leash walking is recommended
inspect the joint capsule. If the surgeon works through
for 4 to 8 weeks, followed by a progressive increase in
an instrument cannula, different-sized cannulas
 and
activity. To increase the weightbearing load on the limb,
switching sticks facilitate the surgery. A motorized shaver
walking at a slow pace is recommended. As postoperative
is helpful to debride synovial proliferation but is not
time increases, the pace can be hastened. To increase the
essential. The dog is positioned as described carlier, based
range of motion in the hip when walking, the owner
on the anticipated site of the lesion.
should walk the dog in high grass, shallow water, or
The cgress needle is established, and the joint is
sand. Walking on this type of surface forces the dog
distended with saline. A guide needle is used to locate the 
 to pick up the feet and step high with the legs. After
176 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
FIGURE 8-20 Posirioning onc ab
nermial joint fincirgs for orhroscopic.
evaluation of the right hcisus Jsing a
dorsolaieral orhroscope portcel ii
Lobrador retriever thct was injured while
playing. A. Free-floating osteochoncdra
hiagmen  (ofl originatirg rom the
nserior of a porlion of the media
collatera Igoment lavulsion fracture}
The fragren' is disolaced with a probe.
8, Fibers associcted wirh the medial
coliatercl fgament altcched o he
fragrert and adjacent to the orobe.
B
C, Debridement and romova of he
fragment with a mini-shaver.
6 weeks, a limited amount of free activity is introduced
 postoperative period. This fluid resorbs within the frst
in combination with controlled walking. The owner
24 hours. Residual mild swelling adjacent to the portal
should begin with 5 minutes of free activity and increase
sites may be noticeable for the first 48 hours.
to30 minutes over the next 2 weeks. After
8 weeks, free activiry is gradually increased to normal
Prognosis.
 The prognosis for satisfactory limb
levels. If the dog becomes sore during any exercise period
(controlled or free activity) or is sore the next day, the
fracture of the tarsus is fair to good, depending on the
owner should decrease the pace and return to controlled
severity of injury and the surgical procedure required.
activity for 2 to 3 days. Adjunctive coaptation can be
Most dogs that undergo successful reconstruction of the
used for various lengths of time, depending on the
collateral ligaments have a good outcome. If arthrodesis
severity of injury.
is ecessary, functional outcome is usually fair because
Of the loss of range of motion in the tarsus. A good prog-
Complications.
Complications are unusual. Occa-
nosis is typical if fracrures can be reduced anatomically
sionally, excessive fluid extravasation occurs and results
and rigidly stabilized.
in swollen soft tissues around the joint in the immediate
Suggested Readings
trochlear ridges of the talus in rwo dogs. IAAHA 37:75-80, 2001.
Goring RL, Beale BS: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
ridges of the talus in the dog: Part 2. Dorsolateral and
Beale BS, Goring RL: Exposure of the medial and lateral trochlear
plantarolateral surgical approaches to the lateral trochlear ridge.
ridges of the talus in the dog: Part 1. Dorsomedial and
JAAHA 26:19-24, 1990.
plantaromedial surgical approaches to the medial trochlear ridge.
JAAHA 26:13-18, 1990.
osteochondral lesions. Ver Clin North Am Simall Anim Pract
Beale BS, Goring RL, Herrington J, et al: A prospective evaluation
28:161-189, 1998.
of four surgical approaches to the talus of the dog used in the
van Ryssen B, van Bree HJ, Vyt P: Arthroscopy of the canine hock
trearment of osteochondritis dissecans, JAAHA 27:221-229, 1991.
joint. JAAHA 29:107-115, 1993.
Cook Jl., Tomlinson JL, Stoll MR, et al: Arthroscopic removal and
 curettage of osteochondrosis lesions on the lateral and medial
HAPTER
Case Studies
Clinical Case Study 1
Therapy. The embedded cartilage fragment was
removed, and the lesion bed was treated with surface
Traumatic Displacement of an
abrasion until bleeding cancellous bone was reached.
Osteochondritis Dissecans Fragment
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from the
Signalment.  The patient is a 16-month-old, 30-kg
hospital the day of surgery with instructions for rehabili-
female Gordon setter.
tation for 6 weeks. Rehabilitation included restricted
leash walking, active and passive range of rmotion exer-
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is acute-onset
cises, and flexion and extension stretch exercises.
weightbearing lameness of the right forelimb.
Outcome.
The dog had a grade Ill of V lameness
History. One week before presentation, the dog
for the first postoperative week. The lameness resolved
returned from playing in the yard with non-weightbearing
gradually over the ensuing 4 weeks. Six months after
lameness of the right forelimb. The yard is an enclosed
surgery, the dog showed no lameness and had normal
2-acre area, and the dog plays vigorously with three
range of motion in the shoulder joint.
other dogs. The dog was given carprofen (Rimadyl) for
5 days, which improved the patient's condition, but did
 not resolve the lameness.
Orthopedic Findings.  The dog had a grade Hl of V
lameness of the right forelimb. Flexion of the shoulder
elicited a painful response. No other shoulder movements
or palpation of the biceps tendon elicited discomfort.
Three weeks before presentation, the dog underwent
a thorough yearly physical examination that included
shoulder manipulation. The findings were normal.
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right
shoulder showed a lesion compatible with osteochondritis
dissecans (OCD) (Fig. 9-1).
Arthroscopic Findings. Arthroscopic examination
of the right shoulder showed an OCD lesion bed in the
caudocentral region of the humeral head. A free carti-
lage flap characteristic of OCD was not present, and the
surface of the lesion showed evidence of neovasculari-
zation (Fig. 9-2). Further examination showed that the
FIGURE 9-1  Laleral radiograph of the shouider joint showing he
cartilage flap was ermbedded in the caudal arm of the
typical appearance of coudocentral osteochondritis dissecans of the
medial colliateral ligament (Fig. 9-3).
humeraFhead.
180 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Chief Complaint.  The chief complaint is weight-
bearing lameness of the left hindlimb.
History.
Five months before evaluation, the dog
showed weightbearing lameness associated with moder-
ate activity. With rest, the dog returned to normal weight-
bearing, but the lameness recurred with activity. As time
passed, the lameness progressed and discomfort was
noticeable even with decreased activity. The dog was
given carprofen, which improved the condition but did
not resolve the lameness.
neovascularization
of lesion surface
Orthopedic Findings.
All  findings were normal
except those thar involved the left hindlimb. The dog
had a grade II of V lameness and had moderate muscle
 atrophy of the left hindlimb. Palpable thickening of the
FIGURE 9-2Amoscopic view of the lesicn bec. Neovascuarizatior:
 joint capsule and medial restraints (medial buttress) was
is cor:sistent with acute raumalic displacement of lhe surface cartilage.
noted. When the dog was asked to sit, he sat with incom-
plete flexion of the stifle joint and rotated the stifle
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
externally (negative sit test). No pain or crepitus was
confirm and treat an unusual case of developmental
noted with manipulation of the stifle joint. The range of
joint disease. Classically, clinical signs associated with
motion was normal, and no abnormal craniocaudal trans-
shoulder OCD occur in dogs that are younger than
lation was present.
1 year of age.The lameness is slow in onset and initially
improves with rest. This dog was clinically sound and
Diagnostic Findings.
Radiographs of the left stifle
had normal findings on physical examination 3 weeks
-ond aaydoso pu pue uosna uo! pmous nuo!
before the onset of acute non-weightbearing lameness.
duction (Fig. 9-4).
Arthroscopically, the surface of the lesion showed signs
of neovascularization and the cartilage fragment was
Arthroscopic Findings.
Arthroscopic examination
enbedded in the medial collateral ligament. The pre-
of the left stifle joint showed mild to moderate synovial
sumption is that this dog had traumatic displacement of
inflammation, osteophytes adjacent to the medial and
a nonclinical OCD lesion. The advantage of arthroscopy
lateral trochlear ridges, and a proliferative far pad. The
in this case is the ability to examine the internal struc-
cranial cruciate ligament was intact (Fig. 9-5). Further
tures of the entire shoulder joint and locate and remove
inspection of the lateral compartment showed a radial
the fragment from an atypical location.
tear of the lateral meniscus (Fig. 9-6).
Therapy.   The dog underwent radiofrequency ablation
Clinical Case Study 2
of the torn portion of the meniscus (Fig. 9-7).
Radial Tear of the Lateral Meniscus
Signalment. The patient is a 5-year-old, 35-kg male
boxer.
osteophytes
effusion
displaced cartilage
FIGURE 9-3 Arthroscopic view of the medial joint capsule and the
Coudal arm of the medial collateral ligament. Carlilage I*) is embedded
FIGURE 9-4  Lateral radiograph of a sile joinr showing the ypical
in the mediol coliateral ligomenl.
I+] uooy ydoso puo [*** uisra uil jo auadd
CASE STUDIES  181
CdCL
lateralfemoralcondyle
CrCL
tibial plateau
FIGURE 9-5 Arthroscopic view cf the anterior cirucictc ligamenl
showing the normal aopearance of the cranial cruciate lgcmerf ;CrCl)
and the ccudal cruciare ligament ICdCll.
FIGURE 9-7
Arthroscopic view showing abiatior of the lon porticn o?
 the posterior body of the lateral meniscus.
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from the
hospital the day after surgery with instructions for reha-
bilitation for 6 weeks. Rehabilitation included restricted
Clinical Case Study 3
leash walking, active and passive range of motion exer-
cises, and flexion and extension and stretch exercises.
Coxofemoral Osteoarthritis Caused by
Femoral Malunion
Outcome. The dog had a grade III of V lameness
for the first postoperative week. The lameness resolved
Signalment.
The patient is a l-year-old, 22-kg
gradually over the ensuing 4 weeks. Six months after
spayed female German shepherd mix.
surgery, the referring veterinarian reported normal func-
tion with the limb except for occasional soreness after
Chief Complaint.  The chief complaint is intermittent
strenuous exercise.
weighrbearing lameness of the left hindlimb.
Comments.
 In this case, arthroscopy was used to
History.
The dog was adopted from a shelter
explore the stifle joinr thoroughly. This dog had clinical
approximately 2 months before the onser of lameness.
symptoms and diagnostic features that were charac-
The dog walked normally but collapsed intermittently
teristic of a partial cranial cruciate ligament tear.
on the left hindlimb when running. The gait abnormality
Although no side-to-side difference in joint stability was
did not improve with the administration of nonsteroidal
noted and the dog had a palpably stable joint, a partial
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
tear of the cranial cruciate ligament was suspected.
Arthroscopically assisted intervention allowed thorough
Orthopedic Findings.
 All findings were normal except
inspection of the joint and led to the correct diagnosis
those thar involved the left hindlimb. The dog had
 and successful treatment.
moderate internal rotation of the limb when standing or
walking. A grade I of V lameness and moderate muscle
atrophy of the left hindlimb were observed, and mild
pain occurred on hyperextension of the left coxofemoral
joint.
Diagnostic Fiudings.
 Radiographs of the left coxo-
femoral joint showed evidence of a previous fracture of
lateral femoral condyle
the proximal femur, including malunion and mild osteo-
arthritis of the joint (Fig. 9-8). A skyline view of the left
femur showed severe anteversion (104 degrees) (Fig. 9-9).
Arthroscopic Findings.
Arthroscopic examination
of the left coxofemoral joint showed mild synovial
inflammation and grade I to II cartilage disease (mild to
moderate fbrillation) (Fig. 9-10). The ligament of the
head of the femur was intact.
Therapy.  Because the ligament of the femoral head
FIGURE 9-6 
.Arthroscopic view of tne lcteral compertmert o the joint
was intact and the cartilage did not show scvcre
showing a rodial tear of the lateral ireniscus.
damage, corrective osteotomy of the proximal femur
182 I! SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 9-8  Preoperative latera (Al
ond ventrodorsol (8) radiographs of a
1yearold dog with femoral malunion
ond osteoarthris of the leff coxofemoral
B
joint.
was performed with derotation and stabilization with
Outcome.
.The dog had a grade IlI of V lameness
an interlocking nail (Fig. 9-11).
for the first postoperative week.
Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
explore the coxofemoral joint thoroughly and deter-
strict exercise restriction for 6 weeks.
mine the condition of the cartilage. Dogs that have hip
dysplasia and are candidatcs for triple pelvic osteotomy
(TPO) are evaluated similarly. When electing to perform
corrective osteotomy, the surgeon must decide indepen-
dently how much cartilage damage is permissible. No
specific guidelines are in place. In this case, the surgeon
decided to perform corrective osteotomy because the
patient had no deep fissuring or full-thickness cartilage
loss.
Glinical Case Study 4
Osteoarthritis of the Tarsus
Signalment.  The patient is a 4-year-old, 32-kg male
Border collie mix that is a working cattle dog-
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is intermirtent
weightbearing lameness of the right hindlimb.
History.  The dog had a 4-month history of a grade
III of V lameness of the right hindlimb that was severe
enough to limir the dog's ability to work cattle. An initial
diagnosis of chronic partial tearing of the medial collat-
eral ligamenr was made based on equivocal instability
FIGURE 9-9
Coronal view of the leff femur sh:owing anteversion of
and radiographic evidence of osteophytosis in the region
104 degrees.
of the medial malleolus. The dog was discharged with
em
B
syn
C
FIGURE 9-10 Ashroscopic view of the leff coxofeniciu! o'nt. A. The acetabulum jaci and tre igament of rhe
[osl. B. The femoral head (fem) shows mild fibrilation [fibl. C. Tne transverse acerabula ligcment (lig). moderare 
 synovitis Isyn] and early osteophytosis losl are seen at the base of tne termioral head.
B
FIGURE 9-11 Latercl [A]. ventrodorsal [B). ano corcnal IC] views <ofter ostectomy, corection of excessive
anteversion, and stabiizarion with an interlocking nail.
183
184 ·E■ SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FlGURE 9-13 Arthroscopic evalalion of the ca.uda asoect of re
tibioarsal join snowing partialthckness carilkage loss in the d stel libia
[fbl ano full-thickness carilage loss in :he tcius fjiol.
Therapy.  Because damage to the cartilage was severe,
pantarsal arthrodesis was performed (Fig. 9-14).
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
strict exercise restriction and maintenance of external
FIGURE 9-12  Craniocaudal IAl and lateral (8} rodiographs of the 
rignt tarsus showing osteoarhrilis of ine ibiolarsal joint.
instructions for severe restriction of activity and adminis-
tration of NSAIDs. The owner did not notice significant
improvement, and the dog was presented for further
evaluation.
Orthopedic Findings.
Allfindings were norimal
except those that involved the right hindlimb. The dog
had a grade I of V lameness and moderate muscle
atrophy of the right hindlimb. Mild thickening and pain
were noted on manipulation of the right tarsal joint.
Diagnostic Findings.
 Radiographs of the right
tibiotarsal joint showed degenerative changes, including
osteophyte formation along the medial malleolus and
proliferative new bone along the cranial and caudal
aspects of the distal tibia. Also apparent was irregular
mineralization of the soft tissue along the plantaromedial
aspect of the calcaneus (Fig. 9-12). On the craniocaudal
projection, valgus stress caused the medial aspect of the
tarsocrural joint to open slightly more than the lateral
aspect. On the varus-stressed views, this area opened
slightly more than on the contralateral linb.
Arthroscopic Findings.   Arthroscopic examination of
the tibiotarsal joint showed mild synovial inflammation
and a grade IV of V cartilage disease (complete cartilage
FIGURE 9-14  Postoperative radiographs showing ocntorsal arthrodesis
loss with early eburnation) (Fig. 9-13).
with a 3.5-m:n dynamic compression plate.
CASE STUDIES·185
coaptation for 6 weeks. After that, radiographic evalua-
weightbearing lameness of the left hindlimb. Moderate
tion was performed to derermine the adequacy of healing.
swelling and pain on manipulation of the lefr stifle joint,
equivocal proximal displacement of the patella, and
Outcome.  Healing was evident after 8 weeks of exer-
 evidence of a small, healed wound on the lateral aspect
cise limitation. Over the following 4 months, the dog
of the stifle were noted.
was progressively rehabilitated to return to working
cattle.
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the left stifle
joint showed multiple bone fragments associated with a
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
comminuted fracture of the distal aspect of the patella.
explore the tibiotarsal joint thoroughly and determine
The proximal fragment was displaced slightly proxi-
the condition of the cartilage. In this case, the surgeon
needed to choose between ligament reconstruction and
tendon was swoilen, but intact (Fig. 9-15).
arthrodesis. Although the joint ultimately required an
arthrotomy to perform arthrodesis, had the joint been
Arthroscopic Findings. Arthroscopic examination
salvageable, an arthrotomy would have been avoided.
 of the stifle joint showed synovial proliferation with
This case shows that arthroscopy can determine the
 multiple small fragments of the distal aspect of the
severity of cartilage damage more accurately than
patella. Most of the patella was intact, and numerous
radiography.
hairs were identifed in the joint (Fig. 9-16).
Therapy. The comminuted fragments of the patella
Clinical Case Study 5
and the hairs contaminating the joint were removed
Fracture of the Patella
surgically and tenodesis was performed with a locking
loop suture pattern. A box wire was placed proximal to
Signalment.
 The patient is a 4-year old, 23-kg spayed
the patella and then through the tibial crest (Fig. 9-17).
female German shorthaired pointer.
Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is traumatic
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
injury to the left stifle.
strict exercise restriction and maintenance of external
coaptation for 6 weeks. Radiographic evaluation was
History. The dog has been non-weightbearing on
performed to assess the adequacy of healing 6 weeks
the limb since she fell out of the back of a pickup truck
postoperatively.
1 week earlier.
Outcome.
The wire was removed 6 weeks post-
Orthopedic Findings.  All findings were normal except
 Operatively, and the dog underwent physical therapy for
those that involved the left hindlimb. The dog had non-
rehabilitation. By 2 months postoperatively, the dog
FIGURE  9-15  Craniccaudal [A)
and lateral (B] radiographs of the left
stifle of a dog with iraumalic fracture
B
of the patella.
186 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
pat
A
B
frag
FIGURE 9-16 Arthroscopic evalLa
tion of the lefftstifle. A. Aricular surface
pat
of the patella showing a fissure line
[arow]. B. Contaminalion of the stifle 
joinf with_ hairs as a resull of ooen
hrauma.  The potella[pot] is visibie
C. The dista! frogment (frag! and he
remaining body of the patella ipafl.
D.Patella (potl and fracure surface Ifxl
C
D
offe the visible fragments were removed.
FIGURE 9-17
Postoperarive icteral
[A] and craniocaudal (B; radiographs
after the visible fragments were
removed arthroscopically  and the
patellar tendon was protected with α
box wire. Several fragments remained
 jo asg ing ajedoiso
posilion, they were not likely lo cause
additiona! damage to the corflage
surface.
CASE STUDIES187
resumed normal function without lameness or evidence
Arthroscopie Findings. Arthroscopic examination of
of patella alta.
the right shoulder joint showed mild synovial inflamma-
tion and a partial tear of the biceps tendon (Fig. 9-20).
Comments. In this case, joint trauma was managed
Arthroscopic cxamination of the left shoulder joint
with arthroscopic assistance. Arthroscopy enabled
showed a complete tear of the biceps tendon with adher-
complete debridement of the joint without disruption of
cnce of the teudon to the bursal wall (see Fig. 9-20).
the joint capsule. The patellar tendon had been partially
torn, and arthrotomy would have contributed to the
Therapy..
On both sides, the tendons were completely
instability of the patella and the entire joint.
transected below the level of disease and resection of
(Fig. 9-21).
Clinical Case Study 6
Postoperative Care.  The dog was disinissed from
Bilateral Biceps Tendonitis
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
stricr exercise restriction for the first week followed by
Signalment. The patient is a 9-year-old, 36-kg cas-
a gradual increase in controlled activity. Professional
trated male Rottweiler mix.
physical therapy was reconnended but was not within
the fnancial limitation of the owner.
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is a 1-year
history of progressive shifting forelimb lameness.
Outcome. Lameness incrrased signifcantly during
the first 48 hours after surgery, and the dog occasionally
History. The referring veterinarian evaluatcd this
collapsed on the forelimbs. After approximarely 3 weeks,
dog 1 year before presentation for progressive shifting
the dog showed less lameness than he had shown pre
forelimb lameness. At that time, manipulation of both
operatively, and episodes of forelimb collapse were rare.
shoulder joints elicited pain. The dog was treated with
Occasionally, the dog escaped from confinement and ran
strict rest and administration of NSAIDs. This treat-
without lameness, although mild lamcness was evident
ment resulted in improvement, but not resolution, of the
in the evening after these episodes.
lameness. The dog was given intra-articular steroid
injections that resulted in resolution of the lameness.
Comments. I
 In this case, arthroscopy was used to
After approximately 1 month, the lameness recurred,
explore the shoulder joint and defnitively diagnose and
particularly in the left limb. The dog underwent arthro-
treat disease of the biceps tendon. Biceps tendonitis may
centesis of the left shoulder, which showed hemarthrosis.
be primary or secondary to other diseases of the shoulder
Again treatment with strict rest was implemented. The
joint and rotator cuff. Arthroscopy can be used to eval-
left limb appeared to improve; however, the lameness in
uate the joint for multiple problems wirhin the shoulder.
the right limb worsened significantly.
Transection of the biceps tendon is well accepted as
treatment of biceps tenosynovitis in hunans and also
Orthopedic Findings. All paramerers were normal
appears to have an excellent outcome in dogs.
except those that involved the forelimbs. The dog had a
grade IV of V lameness and severe muscle atrophy of
the right forelimb and moderate atrophy of the left
Clinical Case Study 7
forelimb. Manipulation of the right shoulder elicited
severe pain. Manipulation of the left shoulder elicited
Occult Dysplasia of the Elbow
mild pain.
Signalment.  The paticnt is a 10-year-old, 27-kg male
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the shoulders
vizsla.
showed focal regions of increased opacity within the
bicipital grooves and an angular osseous densiry asso-
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is chronic
ciated with the supraglenoid tubercle (Fig. 9-18). Mild
recurrent lameness of the right forelimb.
periaticular remodeling was seen at the caudal aspect
of the humeral head and glenoid. Ultrasound scans
History.   The dog participated in agility training for
showed a large volume of fluid within the bicipital
9 years. Two years beforc presentation, the dog showed
bursa of the right shoulder (Fig. 9-19). The fiber pattern
vague signs of lamencss, including crying out when
of the biceps tendon was disrupted near its origin at the
landing frorm a jump and hunching of the back. The dog
supraglenoid rubercle, and a large spur of bone projected
was treated with rest, acupuncture, and glucosamine
off the supraglenoid tubercle. On the left shouldel, the
administration. Approximately I year before presen-
volume of fluid within the bicipital bursa was slightly
tation, the dog showed ohvious laimeness of the right
increased. A large zone of fiber disruption was seen within
forelimb. Biceps tendon discase was diagnosed based on
the proximal aspect of the biceps tendon, and multiple
the arthrographic finding of narrowing of the biceps
sites of dystrophic mineralization were seen throughout
tendon. Intra-articular corticosteroid injection was imple-
the biceps tendon. In both shoulders, the bicipital groove
mented and resulted in minimal inprovement. Trear-
showed significant sclerosis and bone reactivity.
ment with NSAlDs resulted in mild improvement.
188 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
FIGURE 9-18  tef IA] and right (B)
loteral radiographs and skyline view
[C] of the shoulders of a dog_ with
bilateral biceps tenosynovitis. Focal
regicns of increased opacity lorrowl
are seen in the bicipetal groove.
Orthopedic Findings.
 All parameters were normal
shoulder were compatible with signifcant atrophy of the
excepr those thar involved the right forelimb. The dog
muscles. No other abnormalities were seen (Fig. 9-23).
had a grade I of V lameness and severe muscle atrophy
Of the right forelimb. The degree of atrophy did not
Arthroscopic Findings.
Arthroscopic examination of
coincide with the degree of lameness. Manipulation of
the shoulder joint showed no abnormalities. Arthroscopic
the right shoulder and elbow elicited equivocal pain.
examination of the elbow joint showed grade IV disease,
or full-thickness cartilage loss, of the medial coronoid
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right
process (Fig. 9-24).
shoulder were within normal limits. Radiographs of the
right elbow showed subtle changes that included mild
Therapy.
Because the cartilage damage was severe,
lipping of the medial coronoid process and mild sclerosis
microfracture was performed until adequate bleeding of
in the ulnar notch (Fig. 9-22). Ultrasound scans of the
the subchondral bone was achieved.
CASE STUDIES ■ 189
bt
D
glen
BT
hum
BURSA
bg
bt
glen
hum
FIGURE 9-19
Transverse (Al and longitudinal (B) ulrasound scans of
the right shoulder oint. A large volume of fluid Ibf is 5een within she
bicipiol bursa of the right shoulder. The fiber pattern of the biceps lendon
Ibt] is dis'upted near its origin. The bic:pita. groove [bgl, supraglenoid
tubercle iglenl. and humerus [humi olso are visible. Longiludinal ulrasound
scan IC) of the leff shoulder show:ing a large zone of disruption of the
biceps terdon Fiber within the proximol aspect of the biceps lerdor and
muliole sires of dystrophic mirneralization throughout the biceps terdon.
Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
the elbow joint even when radiographic changes are
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
mininal. Arthroscopic inspection of the elbow joint is
professional physical therapy beginning 5 to 7 days post-
recommended in any dog thar has forelimb lameness of
operatively. The dog was also treated with NSAIDs and
unknown origin.
glucosamine and chondroitin.
Outcome. Arthroscopic and medical management
Clinical Case Study 8
 combined with intensive professional physical therapy
resulted in significant improvement in lameness and
Multiple Ligamentous and Tendinous
restoration of function. As a result, the dog was able to
Injury of the Right Shoulder
resume agility work.
Signalment.
The patient is an 8-year-old, 67-kg
Comments.
In this case, arthroscopy was used to
castrated male Rottweiler-German shepherd mix.
perform a thorough workup of forelinb lameness. In
many animals with forelimb lameness, the injury may
Chief Complaint.
The chief complaint is a 4-month
be difficult to localize on physical examination. Shoulder
history of persistent weightbearing lameness of the left
ultrasound, full-limb radiographs, and joint taps are
forelimb.
recommended, followed by arthroscopy of the shoulder
and elbow. Bone scans also may be useful. This case also
History.
 The patient underwent right-sided cemented
shows the value of shoulder joint ultrasound over arthro-
total hip replacement 2 years earlier without compli-
grams in thoroughly evaluating the joint. Finally, this
cation. Lameness of the left forelimb has been present
case shows the possibility of severe cartilage disease in
for 4 months and has not responded to carprofen
19O SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
glen
aiceps
biceps
humerus
B
A
FIGURE 9-20
Arthroscopic views of
craricl region of the shoulder showing
the suprogenoid tuberosily  (glen].
hurnerus. intact biceps tendon (biceps)
cranigl region of the shoulder showing
yp sdag aui jo buay aaduo
from the supraglencid ubercle and sub.
sequent adherence of the biceps k> Ihe
bursal wall (bicepsl. C, Caudal humo'cl
C
head showing carilage cracks asso-
ciated w'th mid chronic osteoarihritis.
therapy. The owner reported possible right forelimb
findings were normal cxcept those that involved the fore-
lameness this morning as well as previous intermittent
limbs. The left hindlimb showed mild muscle atrophy.
lameness of the left hindlimb.
Diagnostic Findings.
 Radiographs of the shoulders
Orthopedic Findings.  Palpation of the righr shoulder
showed bilateral focal regions of increased opacity in the
elicited pain, especially when the shoulder was rotated
region of the greater tubercle (Fig. 9-25). Radiographic
internally or externally while flexcd. The left hip was
i sd s     
painful on extension. Severe weighthcaring lameness
ing and osteophyte proliferation, consistent with hip dys-
(grade IV of V) of the right forelirmb was evident. All
plasia. Radiographic evaluation of the right hip showed
biceps
syn
FIGURE 9-21
Arthroscopic views of
 the locations of biceps tenotomy. A. Proxi-
mal ospect ot the righr biceps tencion
{bicepsl showing he level where tram-
seclion is performed larrowl. 8, Proxima
aspect of the leff biceps tendon (bic]. A
humerus
reedle inl is visible through the prolifer-
A
B
 ative synovium (synl where transeclion is
pertormed.
CASE STUDIES191
cor
FIGURE 9-22
Laterol [A] cnd craniocaudal B] radiograprs of the right elbow joint. Lateral (C] and
puo (oun] oun jeuixaicouio ay jo Aorbani epqns bumous uiof moga ja eu po sydobopoi ial lppnooouo
mild sclerosis of the coroncid region [corl of the right elbow compared wih the leff elbow. Note osteophyte
formation larrow) causing a "lipping" appearance at the medial coronoid process in Fig. 9-22B.
no problems with the previous total hip replacement. A
tissue were noted. Arthroscopic examination of the left
force plate evaluation confirmed right forelimb lameness.
shoulder joint with supraspinatus tenotomy was
 postponed because multipie problems were detected in
Arthroscopic and Surgical Findings. Bilateral arthros-
the right shoulder and the prognosis was uncertain.
copy of the shoulder with possible bilateral supraspinatus
tenotomy was planned. Arthroscopic examination of
Therapy. The insertion of the right supraspinatus
the right shoulder joint showed mild synovial inflam-
tendon was transected. The abnormal portion of the
mation, partial tearing of the lateral glenohumeral
tendon was resected and submitted for histopathologic
ligament, mild fraying of the subscapularis tendon, and
diagnosis. The torn fbers of the lateral glenohumeral
remodeling and full-thickness erosion of the cartilage
were debrided with a radiofrequency probe.
of the humeral head (Fig. 9-26). A minimally invasive
approach was made to the right supraspinatus tendon.
Histopathologic Diagnosis. Histologic changes in
Thickening of the tendon and proliferation of fibrous
the right supraspinatus tendon included severe, chronic,
192 ?? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
the patient was much improved but still exhibited a
 grade II of V lameness.
Comments.
 In this case, arthroscopy was used to
explore the shoulder joint and identify multiple patho-
bt
logic findings. Without arthroscopic assistance, these
jntra-articular abnormalities may have been overlooked
glen
hecause the patient had an obvious supraspinatus tendon
injury that was identified and treated with a minimally
hum
invasive surgical approach. Arthroscopy is recommended
to evaluate the shoulder joint to detect rmultiple problems.
Transection of the supraspinatus tendon is proposed as
a treatment for supraspinatus tendon tears and miner-
alization. The long-term prognosis of this patient
is
FIGURE 9-23 Ullrasound of the right sholder showirg no abno-
unknown at the present time. Future reevaluation and
maliries. The suoraglenoid hubercle (glen]. biceps tendon (bl and humerus
treatment, including reconstruction of the lateral gleno-
huml are visible.
humeral ligament and total replacement of the left hip.
may be necessary.
traumatic degeneration. Dystrophic mineralization and
fibrocartilaginous metaplasia were noted among tendon
Clinical Case Study 9
fibers (Fig. 9-27).
Bilateral Tearing of the Biceps Tendon
Postoperative Care.
The dog was dismissed fron
and an Avulsion Fracture
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
strict exercise restriction for 2 months followed by a
Signalment.
The patient is a 5-year-old, 31.2-kg cas-
gradual increase in controlled activity.
trated male Labrador retriever-chow chow mix.
Outcome. No change was seen during the first
Chief Complaint.  The chief complaint is a 5-month
S n r  s   s
history of right forelimb lamcness.
improved slowly over the next 6 weeks and then suddenly
became more severe after the dog returned from unsuper-
History.
Acute onset of right forelimb lameness
vised activity in the yard. Four months following surgery,
occurred 5 months before presentation. The lameness
A
B
FIGURE 9-24 Arthroscopic views of the right elbow and shculder. A. Arhroscopio
view of the right shouler showng a normel biceps tendon [bicl and supraglenoid
tupercle [glen] crd mild fibrilarion of the bicipital groove huml. 8. Arthroscopic view
of the right elbow. Severe medicl comparhinental osteoarhritis is seen as full-thickness
Carilage loss (grade IVl of the medial aspect tbone! ond mild corilage damage
lgrade ll af the lateral aspect (cort). C. Arthroscopic view of the craniomedicl region
C
of the right elbow showing fullthickness corilage loss of rhe humerus and coronoid as
well cs an osteoctondral fragment between the joirt sJrfaces.
CASESTUDIES193
jo uoozioiauw lapi ym bop 0 yo sapincys lai el puo i1 yb: au jo sydoioipoi oaio  5-6 aan
usually was weightbearing but occasionally was non-
surgery. The lameness improved progressively and dis-
weightbearing. Its severity was constant. NSAID therapy
appeared approximately 6 weeks after surgery.
resulted in partial improvement.
Comments.
 In this case, arthroscopy was used to
Orthopedic Findings.
All findings were normal except
explore the shoulder joint and definitively diagnose and
those that involved the forelimbs. The dog showed a
treat disease of the biceps tendon. Arthroscopy is recom-
grade IV of V lameness and muscle atrophy of the right
mended for thorough evaluation of the joint for multiple
forelimh. Extension, flexion, abduction, adduction, inter-
problems within the shoulder. Transection of the biceps
nal rotation and external rotation of the right shoulder
tendon is well accepted as treatment of biceps teno-
elicited moderate pain.
synovitis in humans and appears to have an excellent
outcome in dogs as well.
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right
shoulder showed a supraglenoid tuberosity avulsion
fracrure (Fig. 9-28).
Clinical Gase Study 10
Arthroscopic Findings.  Arthroscopic examination of
the right shoulder joint showed moderate synovial inflam-
Incomplete Ossification of the Humeral
mation and a partial tear and hemorrhage of the biceps
Condyle
tendon. An avulsion fragment from the supraglenoid
tuberosity was seen within the joint. Osteophytes were
Signalment.
The patient is a 5-year-old, 22-kg intact
seen along the caudal aspect of the humeral head. The
castrated male Brittany spaniel.
medial glenohumeral ligament and subscapularis ten-
don showed mild inflammation and fraying (Fig. 9-29).
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is chronic,
intermittent lameness of the right forelimb that has
Therapy.
 The avulsion fragment was removed, and
lasted for several months.
complete transection of the biceps tendon was performed
arthroscopically.
History.
Acute onset of weightbearing lameness of
the right forelimb occurred 3 months before presentation.
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from
The lameness was intermitrent, but persistent, and became
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
more severe 2 weeks before presentation.
leash walking for 4 weeks.
Orthopedic Findings.  The dog had a grade Il of V
Outcome.
 The dog had weightbearing right forelimb
lameness and muscle atrophy of the right forelimb.
lameness equal ro the preoperative status 24 hours after
Extension of the righr elbow elicited moderate pain.
194SMALLANIMALARTHROSCOPY
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 9-26
 Arthroscopic views of rhe right shoulder joint. A. Torn fibers of the right lateral glenohurmeral
ligament and mild synovitis. B, Torn fibers of the right lateral glenohumeral ligament. C, Full-hickness erosion of the
the subscapularis tendon. E, Remodeling of the caudol aspect of the humerol head ossociated with osteoarthritis.
F, Remodeling of the glenoid fossa and humeral head associoted wirh osteoarthritis.
CASE STUDIESD195
FIGURE 9-27
Histopathologic changes associated with the torn right supraspinatus lendon at 1Ox [Al] ond 20x
[B]includedegenerationof heendonwithdystrophicmineralizatinandibrocarilaginousmetaplasiarepacing
tendon fibers.
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right elbow
appeared normal. No evidence of IOHC was seen on
showed a probable radiolucent line within the humeral
arthroscopic examination of the left elbow (see Fig.
condyles, consistent with incomplere ossification of the
9-31B).
humeral condyle (IOHC) (Fig. 9-30).
Therapy.
 A 3.5-mm transcondylar lag screw was
Arthroscopic Findings. A caudomedial arthroscope
placed percutaneously from lateral to medial. Initially, a
portal was used for each elbow. Arthroscopic exami-
drill bit broke during attempted screw insertion and
nation of the right elbow joint showed mild synovial
could not be retrieved. Typically, the bone of the humeral
inflammation and a fissure of the articular surface of the
condyles is dense, especially in patients that have IOHC.
humeral condyle, just lateral to the central sulcus (Fig.
A standard 3.5-mm cortical screw was placed in lag
9-31A). No apparent displacement associated with a
fashion by overdrilling the near cortex and redirecting
fracture was seen, and the remaining articular surfaces
the screw (Fig. 9-32).
poualboidns eyi jo einooi uoisa us p ym bop o po japinoys yeu aui jo ydoibopoi iaion '  s-6 aansi
tuberosily and partial tearing of the biceps rendon. A periosteal bone reaction is seen at the supraglenoid tuberosity
tarrowl. B Magnified view ofrhe supraglenoid huberosity showing bony changes [arowl associated wih a minimlly
disploced, chronic avulsion fracture of the supraglenoid tuberosily.
196SMALL ANIMALARTHROSCOPY
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 9~29 Arthroscopic views of the right shoulder joint. A, The origin of the biceps tendon shows areas of
i au jo uoui pun buo pw '3 uwy au arwai puo cisi o pesn si sdaoy buidsnin  d
glenghumeralligament and subscapularis tendon. F, Parialthickness wear of the carilage of the glenoid ad humeral
head [grade lI adiacent to the medial glenohumeral ligament.
CASE STUDIES ■? 197
FIGURE 9-30
Cranioccudal and lcteral radiographs of the right anid leff elbows of a dog with incomplete
ossification of the right elbow. A and B, Anterogosterior view cof Ihe righl elbow showing c rad olucent line (arrowl
between the medial and lateral condyles. C. and D, The normal left elbow.
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from the
transcondylar lag screw, the radiolucent line often per-
hospital the day after surgery with instructions for leash
sists indefinitely.
walking for 8 weeks.
Comments.
 In this case, arthroscopy was used to
Outcome.
 The weightbearing right forelimb lame-
explore the elbow joint and provide defnitive diagnosis
ness was equal to the preoperative status 24 hours after
and treatment of incomplete ossifcation of the humeral
surgery. The lameness improved progressively and dis-
condyle. This case is interesting because lameness attri-
appeared approximately 4 weeks after surgery. The dog
butable to IOHC was successfully diagnosed and treated
returned to running and jumping with no adverse effects.
hefore a potentially severe fracture of the elbow occurred.
A radiolucent line betwccn the humeral condyles of the
IOHC can be difficult to diagnose radiographically.
right elbow was seen radiographically 12 months post-
Arthroscopic examination can confrm or exclude the
operatively (see Fig. 9-32). Despite compression with a
condition.
FIGURE 9-31
Arhroscopic views
of the right and ieff elbow join's with a
caudomedicl scope ponial. A. A fissure
associated with incomplete ossilicalion
of the humeral condyle is seen just laleral
to the centai sulcus of he trochlea of
the distal humerus and odiacent to ine
A
B
Irochlear notch of the ulnc. 3. The normal
aric:ular surface of the left distal numerus.
was placed lo treat incomplete ossificalion of the numeral condyle. A drill bit that brcke and could not be retrieved
during altempted inserion of the first cannulated screw into the dense cortical bone of Mhe humeral condyle is seen
The screwwas redirected on rhe second atempt at inserion.C and D.Followup radiographs 1 year afler surgery
show incomplete healing of the fissure affer a lag screw was placed.
198
CASE STUDIES !! 199
Clinical Case Stutdy 11
moderate synovitis was seen. The remaining articular
surfaces appeared normal.
Osteochondrosis of the Elbow
Therapy.
.A craniomedial instrument portal was
Signalment. The patient is an 11-month-old, 35-kg
used. The loose cartilage fragment was elevated with a
male black Labrador retriever.
banana knife and removed with grasping forceps. A
motorized mini-shaver and curette were used to treat the
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is weight-
subchondral bed with surface abrasion until bleeding
bearing lameness of the left forelimb.
cancellous bone was achieved (Fig. 9-35).
History.  Left forelimb lameness began 4 months
Postoperative Care.
The dog was dismissed from the
before presentation. No evidence of trauma was
hospital the day of surgery with instructions for rehabili-
observed, and the dog was restricted to a fenced yard.
tation for 6 weeks. Rehabilitation included restricted
The lameness did not respond to NSAID and antibiotic
leash walking, active and passive range of motion exer-
therapy.
cises, and flexion and extension strerch exercises.
Orthopedic Findings...
 The dog had a grade IlI of V
Outcome.
The dog had a grade Ill of V lameness
lameness of the left forelimb. Extension and flexion of
for the frst postoperative week. The lameness gradually
both elbows elicited pain. Distension of the joint capsule
resolved over the ensuing 2 weeks. The dog presented
was palpable in both elbows. The remaining orthopedic
3 weeks postoperatively with bilateral hindlimb lameness
findings were normal.
and stiffness. The cause was suspected to be panosteitis,
but the results of diagnostic tests were inconclusive. The
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs showed a subtle
lameness resolved spontaneously. One year after surgery,
lesion compatible with OCD involving the medial
the dog showed no lameness and had normal range of
humeral condyle of the left elbow and possibly the right
motion in the elbow joints.
elbow as well (Fig. 9-33).
Comments, In this case, arthroscopy was used to
Arthroscopic Findings.  A caudomedial scope portal
confirm the diagnosis of elbow OCD and also to treat
was used. Arthroscopic examination showed a loose OCD
the condition. Arthroscopic removal of osteochondral
fragment on the weightbearing surface of the medial
 fragments from the elbow can be performed completely
humeral condyle of each elbow (Fig. 9-34). Generalized
 and atraumatically. The subchondral bed can be treated
B
FIGURe 9-33 Anteroposterior radiographs of the left (Al and right (Bl elbows show the ypiccl oppecrance of
subchondral defecrs dje to osteochondritis dissecans of the medial humeral cordyle [arrows].
2OOSMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
FIGURE 9-34  Arthroscopic views of the right elbow. A, A loose flap of carilage is slightly elevated from the
articular surface of the medial humeral condyle. B, Moderate synovitis is seen throughout the joint. Subchoncdal bone
of the medial hu meral condyle is seen affer flop removal.
B
C
D
FIGURE 9-35
Arthroscopic views of the right elbow. A. A bonana knife is used to elevate the flap, leaving it
altached to the subchondral bed by a smgll mount of tisue. B, The Flp is secuied wih grasping forceps. C. The
Hap is removed by wisting and retcing the forcepsrom the join. D. Thc subchondl bedis redied wih abrasin
arthroplasty and cureltge to provide a blood supply to the delect. This reatmentis caried o a level at which bleed?
ing is first recognized. Excessive removal of bone can be detrimental.
CASE STUDIES· 201
to encourage fibrocartilage repair of the defect. A good
 Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right carpus
long-term clinicai result can be achieved if the lesion
showed osteoarthritis of the intercarpal and carpometa-
is small or medium and if osteoarthritis is minimal at
 carpal joints. The joint spaces appeared decreased, and
the time of treatment. Early arthroscopic intervention is
osteophytes were evident (Fig. 9-36). The radiocarpal
recommended in patients with elbow OCD.
joint showed minimal evidence of osteoarthritic cha nges.
 Stress views did not show obvious instability.
Clinical Gase Study 12
Arthroscopic Findings.I
 Dorsomedial and dorsolateral
scope portals were used. Arthroscopic examination of
Ligamentous Injury of the Carpus
the right radiocarpal joint showed partial tearing of the
palmar radiocarpal ligament and accessory carpal bone
Signalment. The patient is a 9-year-old, 43-kg
ligaments. Generalized synovitis was evident. A small
 neutered male English sheepdog.
area of articular cartilage erosion was present on the
distal radius and ulnar carpal bone (Fig. 9-37).
Chief Complaint.  The chief complaint is chronic
weightbearing lameness of the right forelimb.
Therapy.  Because the radiocarpal joint was damaged,
the surgeon elected to perform pancarpal arthrodesis
History. Right forelimb lameness began acutely
rather than partial arthrodesis. Pancarpal arthrodesis
1 month before presentation. No evidence of trauma
was performed through a standard dorsal approach
was observed, but the dog had free roam outside before
using a 10-hole, 3.5-mm broad plate and 10 screws
the lameness occurred. Response to NSAID therapy and
(Fig. 9-38).
rest was poor.
Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
Orthopedic Findings. The dog had a grade V of V
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
right forelimb lameness. Extension and flexion of the
rehabilitation for 12 weeks. A fiberglass splint was
right carpus elicited a painful response. When the dog
placed on the palmar aspect of the carpus for 4 weeks.
stood, the right carpus appeared hyperextended. Bilateral
Rehabilitation included restricted leash walking, active
hip dysplasia and secondary osteoarthritis also were also
and passive range of motion exercises, and flexion and
seenl.
extension stretch exercises. Activity was restricted to
B
FIGURE 9-36Anterior posterior (A4} ond lareral IB) rodiographs of the right carpus showing osteoarthritis of the
radiocarpal joint shows minimal evidence of osteoarthritic changes.
2O2 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
A
B
FIGURE 9-37 Aithroscopic v:ews
of he right corpus. A, Mild erosion of
the distal rodius ond synovitis within the
radiocarpal joint. B. Portial earing of me
polmar uinocarpal ligarnent. C. Parlial
learing_ ot the palrnar gdiocoipal liga-
ment. D, Parial teoring of she proxincl
ligament jlig) of ihe accessory copal
C
D
bone [ac].
short leash walks for 8 weeks, followed by a gradual
Chief Complaint.
The chief complaint is inability to
increase to normal activity over a period of 4 weeks.
walk on the front legs.
Outcome.  The dog walked with a grade Il of V
History.  The patient was a rescue case; therefore, a
lameness while the splint was in place. The lameness
complete history is not available. The owner reported
was increased for the first week after splint removal but
all inability to walk and a splaying out of the front legs
improved to a grade I of V lameness by 3 months post-
since the rabbit was adopted 1 week before presentation.
operatively. At that time, the dog was willing to run and
jump on the affected leg.
Orthopedic Findings. Palpation of the shoulders
elicited mild pain that was more severe on the right. The
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
rabbit was unable to walk on the front legs. Both front
confrm the presence of intra-articular carpal ligainent
legs splayed out as a result of abduction of the shoulders.
damage of the radiocarpal joint. Identification of damage
Severe medial instability and excessive abduction of the
to this joint was an important factor in the decision to
shoulders were palpable under anesthesia and were most
perform pancarpal arthrodesis rather than partial
severe on the right (Fig. 9-39).
arthrodesis. The usc of both a dorsomedial and a dorso-
lateral scope portal allowed quick and thorough evalu-
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the shoulders
ation of the radiocarpal joint.
showcd osteoarthritis of both shoulder joints. Instabiliry
 of the shoulders was not seen radiographically (Fig. 9-40).
Clinical Case Study 13
Arthroscopic and Surgical Findings. Arthroscopic
cxamination of the right shoulder was perforrmed with
Tear of the Subscapularis Tendon and
aui on peisip isn! paieooi [eiod sdoss [eioiel piepueis e
Medial Glenohumeral Ligament in the
acromion process. A 1.9-mm arthroscope was used.
Shoulder of a Rabbit
Arthroscopic examination of the right shoulder joint
showed moderate synovial inflammation, a complete
 Signalment.
The patient is a 5-year-old, 2.0-kg male
tear of the subscapularis tendon, an advanced partial
rabbit.
tear of the medial glenohumeral ligament, and wear of
CASE STUDIES  2O3
B
fIGURE 9-38
Postoperative anerior posteror (Al cnd lolevol 8; raxliogroph:c views ot te right carpus after
pancorpol arthrodosis.
the cartilage of the humeral head and glenoid fossa (Fig.
Therapy.  Thc owner elected shoulder arthrodesis
9-41). Medial instability of the shoulder was noted
rather than ligamentous reconstruction because of the
arthroscopically while the medial side of the joint was
severity of the instabiliry and a requirement for only one
 stressed during surgery.
 surgical procedure. Arthrodesis was initially attempted
FIGURE 9-39
A, The right forelimb of a rabbit with mediai shoulcer instab:liry in the normal latercl position. B,
The right forelimb of the same rabbit placed in c slressed position, showing excessive cbcuction and medial instability
of the shoulder.
204 I? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
fixator combined with an intramedullary pin placed in
the humerus was used to perform the arthrodesis and
repair the humeral fracture. Cancellous bone graft was
 placed at the arthrodesis and fracture sites.
Postoperative Care.  The fabbit was discharged
from the hospital 5 days after surgery with instructions
for cage rest for 2 months. The rabbir was placed on a
balanced diet to improve bone quality.
Outcome.
The rabbit was improved and using the
arthrodesis of the left shoulder is planned.
Comments.
In this case, arthroscopy was used to
explore the shoulder joint in a rabbit. An adequate joint
space was present to allow visualization of all intra-
FIGURE 9-40Radiograph of the shoulders of a rabbit with bilateral
articular structures that are normally visible arthro-
cult to confirm radiographically.
scopically in other species.
Clinical Case Study 14
with a 2.0/2.7-mm veterinary cuttable plate, but compli-
cations occurred. Because of osteopenia, the quality of
Fracture of the Supraglenoid Tuberosity
the cortical bone was insuffcient to secure the screws.
In addition, a proximal humeral fracrure occurred during
Signalment.
The patient is a 5-month-old, 11.0-kg
tightening of one screw. A transarticular tie-in external
female bullterrier.
A
B
FIGURE 9-41   Arthroscopic views of
the right shoulder loint of a rabbin with
medial shoulder instability. A. Normal
biceps lendors adiacent to the cranial
edge of the torn subscapularis tendon.
8, Torn fibers of the right subscapularis
tendon.CTornfibers and hemorhage
associgted with an advanced partiol
tear of the medial glenohumeral liga·
ment. Carilage wear also involves the
media: lip of the glenoid cavity. D, Ca:ti-
lage wear involves the fateral lip of the
glenoid cavily. The articular carilage of
鲁
D
the humeral heod oppears normol in this 
region.
CASESTUDIES2O5
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is acute onset
the shoulder. Other findings of physical examination
of left forelimb lameness.
were normal.
History..
Acute onset of non-weightbearing lameness
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the left shoulder
of the left forelimb occurred the day before presentation.
showed an avulsion fracture of the supraglenoid tuber-
No trauma was observed, and the dog was confined to
osity (Fig. 9-42).
the house.
Arthroscopic Findings.   The supraglenoid tuberosity
Orthopedic Findings.
Non-weightbearing lameness
was easily visualized with a 1.9-mm_arthroscope
(grade V of V) of the left forelimb was observed.
 positioned in a standard lateral portal (Fig. 9-43). A
Marked pain was present on flexion and extension of
fracture hematoma was present at the fracture line and
B
FIGURE 9-42  Lateral radiographs of the left shoulder of a dog with o fracture of the supraglenoid tuberosity
A. Fracture of the leff supragleroid tubeiosiy. B. Postoperative radiogragh affer percutaneous K-wire Fxation of the
fracture. C, Sixweek follow-up rexdiograpn showing healing of the fracture ard migration of the implant. The *rogment
appearance after removal of the impiant.
206 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
A
C
FIGURE 9-43 
Arthroscopic views
of the lef shoulder joint. A. The frachure
line associated with an arlicular fracture
of the supraglenoid tuberosity. A frac·
lure hematora is seen. B, The froclure
henaloma was removed with a blrt
probe and graspers. C. The fraclure
aiter removal of the facture hemotcmg.
D. A guide needle is ploced anci
viewed arthroscopicaliy ro assist in the
orientation of the percufaneously placed
K-wire in the fracture fragment. E, The
position of the K-wire is assessed arthro-
scopically as it exis the fracture line.
F, The fracture is reduced and the K-
wire is driven into the bone of the distal
5capula. Anatomic reduction ot the 'evel
of the joint surface can be documented
E
arhroscopically.
was removed with a blunt probe and graspers through
wire was placed percutaneously (Figs. 9-42 to 9-44). A
a craniolateral instrument portal.
radiofrequency probe was used to transect the biceps
tendon arthroscopically at its origin. The K-wires were
Therapy.
 A 22-gauge guide needle was placed along-
left long to facilitate removal of the implant.
side the fragment to use as a guide for positioning the
K-wire. A 0.045-inch K-wire was placed in the fragment
Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
percutaneously. When viewed arthroscopically, the point
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
of the wire could be seen exiting the fracture line. The
leash walking for 4 weeks.
fracture was reduced by digital pressure under arthro-
scopic visualization. After reduction of the fracture was
Outcome.
The dog had weightbearing left forelirmb
confirmed, the wire was driven into the scapula. With
lameness equal to the preoperative status 24 hours after
the first wire used as a guide, a second 0.04s-inch K-
surgery. The lameness improved progressively, but mild
CASE STUDIES? 2O7
tation. The lameness occurred while the dog was running
unobserved in a fenced yard.
Orthopedic Findings. Non-weightbearing lameness
(grade V of V) of the right forelimb was observed. Flexion
kW
and extension of the righr elbow elicited marked pain
and crepitus. Other findings were normal.
Diagnostic Findings. Radiographs of the right elbow
gn
showed a iateral condylar fracture of the humerus with
minimal displacement (Fig. 9-45).
Arthroscopic Findings.
The fracture line was
visualized with a 1.9-mm arthroscope positioned in a
standard caudomedial elbow portal (Fig. 9-46). A frac-
FIGURE 9-44The faclure of the supraglenaid tuberosity is stabilized
ture hematoma was present at the fracture line but was
difficult to remove completely because of the duration
A guide needle [gnl is placed alongside the fragment and used as a
of the fracture.
guide to inser the perculaneous Kwire (kw that is used lo stabilize the
fraclure. The guide needle is ploced under orthroscopic visualization.
Therapy.
The fracture was redticed by digital pres-
and rhe Kwire is placed into the frogment in ihe same direclion as the
sure under arthroscopic visualization. Reduction was
guidewire.
maintained and compression was applied across the frac-
ture line with a vulsellum forceps (Fig. 947). A 4.0-mm
partially threaded screw was placed percutaneously in
lameness persisted at follow-up radiographic examination
routine fashion. A 0.062-inch K-wire was placed percu-
6 weeks postoperatively. Radiographic evaluation shlowed
taneously across the lareral epicondylar crest to provide
healing of the fracture and migration of one K-wire.
adjunctive stabilization. As the screw was tightened,
Both K-wires were removed. Lameness resolved within
compression of the fracture line was observed arthro-
2 weeks, and no gait abnormalities were evident at walk,
scopically. As compression occurred, the fracture
trot, or run 2 months later.
hematoma bulged from between the fragments.
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
Postoperative Care.  The dog was dismissed from
evaluate, reduce, and stabilize an intra-articular frac-
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
ture. Initially, a lag screw technique was planned, but
leash walking for 6 weeks.
this technique was abandoned because the fragment was
small and an appropriately sized implant was not avail-
Outcome.
.Follow-up radiographs 6 weeks postopera-
able. Divergent K-wire fixation provided adequate fixation
tively showed healing of the fracture (see Fig. 9-45).
and good postoperative function. The biceps tendon
The dog had mild weightbearing right forelimb lame-
was transected to remove a potential distractive force
ness at this time. The lameness improved progressively
from the stabilized fragment. Transection of the biceps
over the subsequent month. Two years postoperatively,
tendon is used to treat fractures of the supraglenoid
the dog occasionally favors the leg after hard exercise
tuberosity in horses. Although this patient had a good
but does not show lameness with normal activity.
outcome, stabilization with a lag screw is the preferred
technique because of the benefits of interfragmentary
Comments.
.In this case, arthroscopy was used to
compression on bone healing and fracture reduction.
evaluate, reduce, and stabilize an intra-articular frac-
ture. Lateral condylar fractures with minimal displace-
ment are candidates for this technique. Arthroscopic
visualization of the fracture line at the level of the
Clinical Case Study 15
articular cartilage ensures anatomic reduction and heips
to avoid step defects that may lead to osteoarthritis.
Lateral Condylar Fracture of the Distal
Percutaneous fixation of lag screws can be performed if
Humerus
the lateral and medial epicondyles are readily palpable
or if fluoroscopic imaging is available.
Signalment.
 The patient is a 3.5-month-old, 12.0-
kg female Labrador retriever.
Clinical Case Study 16
Chief Complaint.  The chief complaint is acute onset
of lameness of the right forelimb.
Ununited Anconeal Process
History. Acute onset of non-weightbearing lame-
Signalment.  The patient is an 8-year-old, 42.0-kg
ness of the right forelimb occurred 4 days before presen-
male German shepherd.
208 I! SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
B
FIGURE 9-45Radiographs of the right elbow of a dog with a fracture of the lateral condyle of the humerus.
A. Minirmally displaced fracture of the right lateral humeral condyle. B. Radiograph after arhroscopically assisted
fixalion of the frackure with a percutaneols lag screw and K-wire. C, Six-week follow-up adiograph showing healing
of the fraclure.
Chief Complaint. The chief complaint is acute onset
Extension of the right elbow caused marked pain, The
 of right forelimb lameness.
Other findings were formal.
History.
Acute onset of weightbearing lameness of
Diagnostic Findings.  Radiographs of the right elbow
the right forelimb occurred 1 week before presentation.
showed a chronic ununited anconeal process and mild
The owner reported a history of chronic, mild, intermit-
osteoarthritis (Fig. 9-48).
tent forelimb lameness. No trauma was observed, and
the dog was confined to the house and a fenced yard.
Arthroscopic Findings.  The ununited anconeal pro-
cess was visualized with a 1.9-mm arthroscope positioned
Orthopedic Findings..
Weightbearing lameness
in a standard caudomedial portal (Fig. 9-49). Full-
(grade Il of V) of the right forelirmb was observed.
thickness erosion of the articular cartilage on the caudal
FIGURE 9-46Arthroscopic views
of the left elbow joint. A. The fracture
line associated with an articular frachure
of the laterai condyle of the ebow
shows a fracture hematoma. B. The
frachure hemakoma bulges as com-
pression is placed across the fractre
Fracture reduction can be cssesscd
A
B
arthroscopicaly
CASE STUDIES209
FIGURE 9-47 Arthroscopically assisted
stabilization of a lateral condyle fracture
of the eloow. A. A standard caudomedial
orthroscope portal is used. The fracture is
reduced with digiral pressure while the
articular surrace is viewed arthroscopically.
Anatomic. reduction is maintained with
vulsellum forceps. B, A log screw is placed
percutaneously, with the lateral and mediol
epicondyies used os landmarks. The screw
is placed across the condyles cronial and
distol lo the epicondyles and can be
placed from the medial or lateral side. A
K-wire alsc is placed perculaneously
across the lateral epicondylar crest inot
shown] (see Fig. 9-45B}.
A
B
aspect of the humeral trochlea was seen, and mild
the fragment was observed (see Fig. 9-49). Anatomic
synovitis was present.
reduction was confirmed arthroscopically. A proximal,
dynamic ulnar osteotomy  was preformed in routine
Therapy.  A 22-gauge guide needle was placed along-
fashion. The proximal ulna shifted a small distance proxi-
side the medial aspect of the anconeal fragment to use
mally immediately after the osteotomy was completed.
as a guide for positioning a lag screw. A 0.045-inch
The osteotomy was not stabilized.
threaded K-wire was placed percutaneously in the frag-
ment. The point of the wire was seen exiting the anconeal
 Postoperative Care. The dog was dismissed from
process when viewed arthroscopically (see Fig. 9-49).
the hospital the day after surgery with instructions for
The fragment was reduced under arthroscopic visual-
leash walking for 8 weeks. No bandage was used.
ization by placing the elbow in extension and applying
counterpressure with a Freer elevator that was placed
Outcome.
 The dog had weightbearing lameness of
into the joint through a caudal instrument portal. After
the left forelimb equal to the preoperative status 24 hours
the fragment was reduced, the wire was driven inro the
after surgery. The lameness improved progressively, but
fragment. A self-tapping, self-drilling, cannulated 4.0-
mild intermittent lameness was seen 2 imonths post-
mm lag screw was threaded onto the guide wire and
operatively. Radiographic evaluation 8 months post-
inserted into the fragmenr (see Fig. 9-49). As the screw
operatively showed complete bony union of the anconeal
was tightened, the gap narrowed and compression of
 process but incomplete union of the ulnar osteotomy.
FIGURE 9-48lateral rodiographs oi the right elbow of a dog with an ununited anconedl process. A.
Preoperative radiograph showing an ununited anconeal process and mild osleoarthris. B. Radiograph offer
arthroscopically assisted percutaneous fixarion of the ancorea! orocess with a 4.Ofmm cannulated lag screw and
dynamic proximal ulnar osteotomy. C, Eight-monlh followup radiogroph showing healing of the ancoreal proce55.
but incomplete healing of the unar osteolomy.
21OISMALLANIMALARTHROSCOPY
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 9-49 Arthroscopic views of the righi elbow. A. Fullthickness erosion of the orticular carilage of
inserted into the joint to apply counterpressure to the anconeal fragment during stabilization. C, A threoded K-wire pro-
E, The screw is partilly engaged, and the fragment gap is beginning to close. F, The frogment gop is closed, and 
compression of the fragment line is seen arthroscopically os the screw is lighlened. Anatomic reduction also is
confirrned arthroscopically.
CASE STUDIES ■ 211
The dog was doing well clinicaly but continued to have
aspect of the humeral trochlea. Follow-up radiographs
mild lameness after exercising. Lameness was not pre-
 8 months later showed incomplete healing of the ulnar
sent during normal daily activity. Pain was not evident
osteotomy. Placement of a small-diameter intramedul-
when digital pressure was applied to the proximal ulna.
lary pin in the ulna may have aided bony healing while
allowing dynamic adjustment of the olecranon. The mild
Comments. In this case, arthroscopy was used to
intermittent lameness noted after exercise may be caused
evaluate, reduce, and stabilize a fragmented anconeal
 by mild osteoarthritis or by incomplete healing of the
process. A cannulated lag screw was used to stabilize
ulnar osteotomy.
the process and provide compression, with good long-
term results. The reason for the exacerbation of clinical
lameness at 8 years of age is unknown, but the ununited
Acknowledgments
fragment may have been dislodged by incidental trauma,
     d e s
The authors thank D1. Jeff Edwards, DVM, Diplomate
 performed to release tension on the stabilized anconeal
ACVP with Antech Diagnostics for the histopathologic
interpretation and histologic photomicrographs in
articular erosion was present on the proximal and caudal
Clinical Case Study 8.
TEF
R
10
Postoperative Management and
Treatment After Arthroscopy
Intraduction
Medical Therapy
Many patients that undergo arthroscopy have pre-
NONSTEROIDAL ANTHINFLAMMATORY
existing osteoarthritis or will develop it in the future.
Although arthroscopic treatment may be used as the sole
DRUGS
method of managing a specifc joint problem, a treat-
ment plan that includes arthroscopy, medical therapy,
NSAIDs have long been the gold standard for treating
proper nutrition, and physical rehabilitation usually
osteoarthritis in humans and domestic animals. These
leads to a higher level of performance. In addition,
drugs reduce the synthesis of prostaglandin (primarily
combining modalities may reduce the need for certain
types of treatment. For example, attention to weight
Oxygenase. Many types of NSAIDs are available. Aspirin
loss and proper nutrition may reduce the necessary dose
and phenylbutazone were the first NSAIDs to be widely
or frequency of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
used in dogs. Recently, NSAIDs have been developed with
(NSAID) therapy. In addition, adequate postoperative
analgesia with NSAIDs and opiates may encourage the
the past, most NSAIDs inhibited both cyclooxygenase I
patient to participate in physical rehabilitation exercises.
(Cox I) and Cox II. Inhibition of Cox I leads to wide-
The use of chondroprotectant drugs and nutraceuticals
 spread inhibition of PGE2, including prostaglandins
 may reduce the need for NSAIDs or enhance the response
that are found in the gastrointestinal tract, joints, and
to medical therapy. Physical rehabilitation usually im-
kidneys and provide homeostatic functions. Cox II
proves performance, decreases the need for medication,
 inhibitors act predominantly on Cox II, an enzyme that
and encourages weight loss by increasing activity level.
 produces inflammatory prostaglandins in the joint and
Arthroscopy enhances the surgeon's ability to evaluate
Other tissues. The use of NSAIDs that selectively inhibit
the condition of the articular surface and synovium and
Cox II should reduce side effects that involve the gas-
formulate an appropriate postoperative plan. Patients
trointestinal tract, platelets, and kidneys.
with traumatic injury or osteoarthritis are best served
by a management plan tailored to the individual, A
Carprofen.
Carprofen, a relatively new NSAID,
cookbook approach toward treatment may lead to
relieves the clinical signs of osteoarthritis in dogs and
excessive, inadequate, or inappropriate treatment
causes fewer gastrointestinal side effects than NSAIDs
because of variations in patient signalment, severity of
 that inhibit both Cox I and Cox II. Carprofen is rapidly
disease, duration of disease, and tissues involved (e.g.,
 replacing aspirin as the veterinarian's first choice of
cartilage, synovium, bone). Patients with mild disease
 NSAID for the treatment of osteoarthritis. Carprofen is
may need only short-term postoperative management,
 routinely used for preemptive and postoperative anal.
whereas severely affected patients may require lifelong
 gesia. In addition, it is administered after arthroscopy to
management of osteoarthritis. This chapter provides an
reduce synovitis and swelling of periarticular tissues.
introduction to a variety of modalities that may improve
 Reducing postoperative inflammation encourages earlier
clinical resulrs. Veterinary textbooks and journal articles
use of the affected joint. Depending on the severity of
provide more detailed information.
the condition, some patients may require NSAID therapy
214 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
for several weeks or months postoperatively. Gastro-
is 10 to 20 mg/kg with food every 48 hours. Aspirin
duodenal protection occurs as a resuit of the enhanced
is available plain, buffered, or combined with various
Cox IIl activiry offered by carprofen. In dogs, carprofen
stomach protectants. Side effects include gastrointestinal
is administered at a dose of 2.2 mg/kg orally every
 irritation, platelet inhibition, and renal toxicity.
12 hours or 4.4 mg/kg orally every 24 hours. The
flexibility to administer the drug once or twice a day is
Phenylbutazone. I
Phenylbutazone is an older
advantageous. Patients having clinical signs only at a
NSAID that does not preferentially inhibit Cox II. In
particular time of the day may benefit from once daily
dogs, it is given at a dosage of 10 to 22 mg/kg body
dosing, whereas patients having persistent problerms
weight divided three times a day. When the higher dose
may do better with twice daily dosing. The flexibility in
is used, after 48 hours, it is decreased to the lowest effec-
dosing also can be advantageous in meeting
the
cu o8 jo esop xp ienoi e paaxa oi nou jaal a
scheduling needs of pet owners. Plasma and serum con-
regardless of patient body weight. The reported dose in
centrations of carprofen are consistent throughout the
cats is 6 to 8 mg/kg orally every 8 hours, but its use is
treatment period. Serum concentrations peak at 2 hours,
not recommended in cats. Because of the potential for
and synovial concentrations peak berween 3 and 6 hours
gastric ulceration, NSAIDs are used cautiously in dogs
after administration. In both normal and osteoarthritic
with orthopedic problems.
joints, the synovial concentration of carprofen reaches
therapeutic levels during the treatment period.
At
therapeutic doses, carprofen significantly reduces the
Other NSAIDs Used in Dogs
production of PGE2 from chondrocytes. A rare, idio-
syncratic side effect of carprofen in dogs is hepatoxicity
Other promising new Cox II NSAIDs, such as
leading to icterus and elevation of alkaline phosphatase
deracoxib and meloxicam, are anticipated to be avail-
and hepatic transaminase levels. The incidence of this
able in the United States in the near future. These drugs
effect and other side effects is low (<1%), and many
are available for use outside of the United States.
affected patients recover with symptomatic therapy and
discontinuation of carprofen. In recent studies, carprofen
had little effect on kidney and platelet function and was
Other NSAIDs Used in Humans
found to support cartilage metabolism and proteoglycan
synthesis. The chondroprotective effects of carprofen are
Although dosages have been suggested for naproxen,
particularly important if long-term NSAID use
is
piroxicam, ketorolac tromethamine (Toradol), and
anticipated. In anecdotal reports, carprofen at a dose of
ibuprofen in dogs, their use is discouraged because they
12.5 mg orally every 5 days was used successfully in the
appear to have greater ulcerogenic potential than aspirin.
treatment of osteoarthritic and postoperative pain in
cats. No severe adverse reactions were reported at this
dose. However, this drug is not approved for use in cats,
and no clinical research data are available to substantiate
STEROIDAL DRUGS
the anecdotally reported regimen. Cats are sensitive to
NSAIDs because of differences in liver metabolism of
 Steroidal drugs, such as prednisone, prednisolone, and
this type of drug. NSAID toxicity in cats may
be
dexamethasone, are not typically used after arthro-
manifested in many ways, including gastrointestinal,
scopic surgery unless immune-mediated polyarthritis is
hepatic, and renal dysfunction.
suspected. Steroid drugs can substantially inhibit the
 production of proteoglycan as a result of down-regulation
Etodolac. Etodolac is another relatively new NSAID
of chondrocytes. Depletion of the extracellular matrix
that inhibits Cox II preferentially and ameliorates the
may increase the chance of cartilage erosion. If inflam-
clinical signs of osteoarthritis in dogs. It is administered
mation is severe and does not respond to NSAIDs, a
at a dose of 10 to 15 mL/kg every 24 hours. Like
short course of steroids can be considered to break the
carprofen, etodolac has a favorable Cox II:Cox I ratio.
cycle of inflammation and osteoarthritis. A common
Side effects are uncommon but are rypical of those seen
dose for prednisone is 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg orally divided
with NSAIDs, with gastrointestinal ulceration the most
twice a day. Intra-articular injections of steroids should
common. Gastrointestinal ulceration can be severe at
be avoided, 6
 especially if long-term administration is
dosages well above the labeled dose. The effect of
anticipared. Intra-articular injection of steroids may
etodolac on proteoglycan synthesis and cartilage
increase the likelihood of septic arthritis or may inhibit
metabolism is not clea1. The use of etodolac in cats has
the metabolic processes of the cartilage. If short term
not been reported.
anti-inflammatory treatment is required, intra-articular
steroid injections can be considered. Intra-articular
Aspirin.
Aspirin is commonly used but is not
steroids must be administered aseptically. Methyl
prednisolone (SoluMedrol) and triamcinolone acetate
does not inhibit Cox Il preferentially. In dogs, aspirin is
(Vetalog) (0.5 to 2.0 ml depending on patient size) are
recommended to be administered with food at a dose of
options for steroid drugs suitable for intra-articular
25 mg/kg body weight every 12 hours. In cats, the dose
administration.
CHONDROPROTECTANTS
or broad descriptive terms (e.g., chondroprotectant,
SADMOA). In this chapter, the trerm cbondroprotectant
Optimal recovery from musculoskeletal disorders
is used to bridge the information presented here with
requires attention to mechanical, environmental, and
 that reported elsewhere. Chondroprotective agents have
biologic factors. Changes in one factor often affect
three primary effects:
other factors. For example, attention to mechanical and
environmental factors improves the biologic environ-
1. Support or enhance the metabolism of
ment of injured joinrs. Mechanical factors that enhance
chondrocytes and synoviocytes (anabolic)
recovery may include an appropriate level of physical
2. Inhibit the degradative enzymes within
activity to build endurance, the use of special exercises
 the matrix of synovial fluid and cartilage
to increase the range of motion in the joint, exercises to
(catabolic)
increase strength, and the use of aids to protect from or
3.
 Inhibit the formation of thrombi in the small
alleviate pain. Environmental factors that affect rehabili-
blood vessels that supply the joint 
tation include patient compliance, owner compliance,
(antithrombotic)
weather conditions, terrain, and household environ-
ment. Biologic factors that affect the local environment
Many compounds are purported to have chondro-
of the joint include the quality and quantity of synovial
 protective effects, including glycosaminoglycans, amino
fluid, the presence of degradative enzymes within the
sugars, structural proteins, enzymes, minerals, prepa
synovial fluid and articular cartilage, the condition of
rations of whole tissue, and semisynthetic compounds.
the extra-articular matrix of articular cartilage, and the
These compounds are available in oral and injectable
metabolic state of the chondrocytes. Nutraceuticals and
forms. Most oral chondroprotectants are classified as
chondroprotectants may enhance joint health and pro-
dietary supplements. A subset of oral chondroprotectant
mote healing by improving biologic factors.
agents is designated as nutraceutical. The North
Chondroprotectants and nutraceuticals can be an
American Veterinary Nutraceutical Council defned a
attractive adjunctive or alternative treatment for cats
veterinary nutraceutical as "a nondrug substance that is
and dogs that undergo arthroscopy or that have osteo-
produced in a purified or extracted forrm and administered
arthritis. Chondroprotectants are available as oral nutra.
orally to provide compounds that are required for normal
ceuticals and as oral and injectable pharmaceuticals.
body structure and function with the intent of improving
Because direct comparisons of these products have not
heafth and well-being." Injectable chondroprotectants
been made, selection of the optimaf chondroprotectant
 are drugs; these include glycosaminoglycan polysulfate
for a particular animal is not known. In addition, it is
ester, pentosan polysulphate, and hyaluronic acid.
not known when different mediators of osteoarthritis
play an important role. Different mediators of pain and
cartilage degradation (e.g., prostaglandins, free radicals,
Regulation
metalloproteinases, serine proteases) may play a role at
different points during the course of disease. Ideally, if
 In the United States, dietary supplements for humans
the predominant mediators in an individual with osteo.
are regulated under the Dietary Supplements Health
arthritis are known, the most appropriate product can
and Education Act (DSHEA). This law was enacted to
be selected for treatment. The best recommendation is to
assist consumers in making purchasing decisions about
use products that have undergone well-designed experi-
supplements. Although these products must be safe, no
mental and clinical research to evaluate their efficacy and
 prermarketing approval is required as is required for
safety as well as products that are manufactured under
pharmaceuticals. The DSHEA does not apply to veteri-
the high quality standards practiced by the pharma-
nary dietary supplements. Strict inrerpreration of the
ceutical industry.
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act classifies oral veterinary
The term chondroprotectant is applied to various
 compounds as foods, food additives, or pharmaceuticals.
compounds that are proposed to promote the health
Therefore, the same dietary supplements sold legally
and metabolism of chondrocytes and synoviocytes. This
broad definition encompasses a wide variety of veterinary
veterinary pharmaceuticals when sold for treatment in
products that differ considerably in structure, function,
animals. However, to date, the Center for Veterinary
and degree of purity. A number of other terms are used to
Medicine has exercised regulatory discretion in allow-
describe these types of products, including slow-acting,
 ing veterinary dietary supplements to be used to promote
disease-modifying osteoarthritic agent (SADMOA),
the health and well-being of animal patients. Veterinary
structure-and disease-modifying anti-osteoarthritis drug
dietary supplements have not been forced to withdraw
(S/DMOAD), and symptomatic slow-acting drug for
from the marker if they are safe, if they pose no risk
osteoarthritis (SYSADOA). Because of variations in the
to the human food supply, and if they do not claim to
nomenclarure and molecular structure of these com-
 prevent, treat, cure, or mitigate a disease. Chondro-
pounds, care must be taken when one chondroprotectant
protective agents that are administered by routes other
agent is compared with another, When discussing the
than the oral route (e.g., topical or injectable agents) are
effects or comparing the merits of these agents, it is best
considered drugs and are regulated by the Food and
to use generic compound names rather than trade names
Drug Administration.
216 SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
Manufacturing and Quality Control
of cartilage. Cosequin contains glucosamine, which is
described as the building block of the matrix of articular
The manufacturing processes used to produce chon-
cartilage. It is a preferential substrate and stirmulant of
droprotectant products vary widely. Manufacturers of
proteoglycan biosynthesis, including the synthesis of
chondroprotectant products should follow high stan-
hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate. Cosequin also
dards of quality similar to those practiced by the pharma-
contains chondroitin sulfate, mixed glycosaminoglycans,
ceutical industry. To ensure the label accuracy of the
and manganese ascorbate to promote the production
product that reaches the consumer, validated analytical
 of glycosaminoglycan. Chondroitin sulfate appears to
methods should be used to test both the raw materials
inhibit degradative enzymes associated with osteo-
and the finished product for purity and consistency.
arthritis, including metalloproteinases and collagenases.
Problems have been reported with truth-in-labeling and
These degradative enzymes break down the cartilage
qualiry control of oral chondroprotectant products.
and hyaluronan in synovial fluid. The combined action
Unforunately, the consumer cannot always be certain
Of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfare is synergistic.
that the ingredients listed on the container actually are
Manganese is a cofactor in the synthesis of glycosamino-
present in the product at the claimed concentration or
glycans, and manganese supplementation may aid in the
purity. The results of clinical and experimental research
synthesis of the cartilage matrix. Manganese is also
on one product cannot be extrapolated to another similar
necessary for the synthesis of synovial fluid and may
product because of inconsistencies in manufacruring
have antioxidant properties as well. Overdose safery
and quality control standards. Until regulation of these
studies have been conducted with Cosequin in the dog,
products improves, it is probably best to heed the recom-
cat, and horse. These studies found no persistent hemato-
mendation found in the Arthritis Foundation's Guide to
logic, serum chemistry, or hemostatic abnormalities.
 s ins e a, sa a
 In addition, no clinically significant side effects were
studied with good results, fnd out which brand was
reported in cats or dogs.
used in the study, and buy that brand."
Clinical and experimental studies support the use of
glucosamine hydrochloride, chondroitin sulfate, and
Mechanism of Action
manganese ascorbate in combination or as individual
 components. Leeb et al. performed a meta-analysis of
The mechanism of action of many of these products
the clinical efficacy of chondroitin sulfate in humans.
is unknown, whereas other products have been evaluated
Sixteen published studies were examined, and seven trials
with experimental and clinica! trials. Dietary supple-
of 372 patients were selected for rhe meta-analysis. All
ments and nutraceuticals cannot be sold as a treatment
of the selected studies were randomized, double-blind
  s s  s e 
designs in parallel groups; however, like human clinical
marketed with the intent to diagnose, treat, cure, or pre-
studies, rescue medication (analgesics or NSAIDs) was
vent disease. They must be marketed as nutrients that
permitted. According to the Lequesne index (a validated,
support or improve the normal structure and function
subjective assessment of pain associated with osteo-
of the joint.
arthritis), chondroitin sulfate was significantly superior
Chondroprotective agents presumably influence the
to placebo. Patients in the chondroitin sulfate group
metabolism of cartilage by providing substrate and up-
showed at least a 50% improvement in study variables
regulating chondrocytes. They also appear to inhibit
compared with the placebo group. A double-blind
degradative enzymes, i
including metalloproteinases,
clinical study in horses showed the efficacy of Cosequin
serine proteases, and free radicals. Finally, some of these
for the treatment of OA associated with navicular
products inhibit the formation of microthrombi in the
disease. Cosequin was given to dogs with osteoarthritis
periarticular vasculature, thus supporting a normal blood
that was induced experimentally through transection of
supply to the joint tissues. The mechanism of action of
the cranial cruciate ligament. In these dogs, the concen-
 specific products is discussed later.
thesis of the cartilage matrix. Glucosamine, chondroitin
Nutraceutical
sulfate, and manganese ascorbate may act as signaling
molecules for up-regulation of the genes for aggrecan
Glucosamine Hydrochloride, Chondroitin Sulfate,
and collagen If, not just as substrates for carrilage
and Manganese A
Ascorbate.
The combination of
production. Cosequin also suppresses the inflammatory
glucosamine hydrochloride, chondroitin sulfate, and
effects of chemically induced acute synovitis and experi-
manganese ascorbate is the most commonly used nutra-
mental immune-mediated arthritis.
ceutical in companion animals that have osteoarthritis.
The fate of orally administered chondroitin sulfate
A patented combination of high-puriry glucosamine,
appears to be affected by the molecular weight of the
low-molecular-weight chondroitin sulfate, and manga-
molecule. Low-molecular-weight chondroitin sulfate is
nese ascorbate (Cosequin, Nutramax Laboratories,
Edgewood, MD) is an important part of the management
the serum over time. Its estimated bioavailabiliry is 200%.
of osteoarthritis in dogs and cats.
Glucosamine hydrochloride is also absorbed in less
Cosequin is marketed as a glycosa minoglycan enhancer
than 2 hours, but does not accumulate over time. Orally
that provides raw materials that are needed to synthesize
administered glucosamine is readily absorbed and reaches
 tndogenous synovial fluid and the extracellular matrix
the highest concentrations in the articular cartilage.
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT AFTER ARTHROSCOPY I 217
Mixed Glycosaminoglycan Products.
 Many other
cytes in cell culrure. Orally or parenterally administered
oral glycosaminoglycan or glucosamine products are
glucosamine has good bioavailability and good distri-
available alone or as multiple-ingredient products. Most
bution to all body tissues. It reaches the highest concen-
giycosaminoglycan products contain chondroitin sulfate
trations in the liver, kidney, and articular cartilage. Oral
or “mixed” glycosaminoglycans, and different glucosa-
glucosamine has an intestinal absorption rate of 87%.
mine salts are available. There is controversy about the
In clinical and experimental studies in humans, orally
purity, concentration, and type of glycosaminoglycan or
administered glucosamine sulfate protected cartilage
glucosamine product necessary to provide beneficial
and relieved the clinical signs of osteoarthritis. Although
effects to cartilage.
glucosamine acts more slowly than ibuprofen
1n
The New Zealand
 green-lipped mussel  (Perna
 relieving the clinical signs of osteoarthritis, two clinical
canaliculus) contains
glycosaminoglycans, omega-3
trials in humans found that the long-term effcacy was
fatty acids, amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. This
equal. Oral glucosamine improved clinical performance
product is available as a sole dietary supplement or as
in humans with osteoarthritis. The use of this product
an additive in canine diets. P. canalicuius may have mild
as an individual agent in animals has been proposed,
anti-inflammatory and chondroprotective actions, but
but adequately controlled clinical studies are needed to
these effectrs have not been proven in humans and
substantiate its efficacy.
animals. One study showed beneficial effccts in humans
with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. A recent
Chondroitin Sulfate.
Chondroitin sulfate is a pre-
study in dogs found improvement in joint pain and
dominant glycosaminoglycan that is found within the
swelling in arthritic dogs that were fed a complete diet
extracellular matrix of articular cartilage. Oral supple-
containing 0.3% P. canaliculus. No effect was seen on
mentation with exogenous chondroitin sulfate has been.
joint crepitus, range of motion, or mobility scores.
advocated anecdotally for many years as a trearment for
Although the study concluded that a diet supplemented
osteoarthritis in humans and animals. This compound is
with P. canaliculus can alleviate symptoms of arthritis in
often found in combination with other nutraceuticals,
dogs, several aspects of the study may be questioned.
such as glucosamine and free radical scavengers.
The dogs used in the study were not defnitively diag-
Chondroitin sulfate decreases the production of
nosed as having osteoarthritis. Joint swelling, which is
interleukin-1, blocks complement activation, inhibits
not a consistent finding in osteoarthritic joints, was
 metalloproteinases, inhibits histamine-mediated inflam-
 mation, and stimulates glycosaminoglycan and collagen
of motion, and crepirus, which are commonly associated
synthesis.(
 Oral absorption of chondroitin sulfate is
with osteoarthritis, showed no improvement. Addition-
reported with a variery of techniques. The fate of
ally, control dogs showed marked worsening in joint
chondroitin sulfate after oral administration is not
pain and swelling over the 6-week study period, which
known. Various methods have been used to show that
is inconsistent with dogs selected for a chronic, slowly
chondroitin sulfate is absorbed intestinally, but it is not
 progressive condition such as osteoarthritis. This study
known whether most of the chondroitin sulfate is
also included a subjective scoring system, with scores
absorbed intact or as a subunit of chondroitin sulfate. A
for individual joints added to obtain a total score within
highly pure, low-molecular-weighr form of chondroitin
the animal. However, certain scores, such as swelling of
sulfate has good absorption and bioavailability, and
the hip and shoulder joints, would be diffcult to obtain
clinical studies showed that humans who received
accurately or consistently. For this reason, the validiry
chondroitin sulfate supplementation had improvement
of the scoring system can be questioned. Further study
 in the clinical signs of osteoarthritis.
is warranted before this substance can be recommended
as a chondroprotective agent or nutraceutical for dogs
Free Radical Scavengers..
Another class of nutra-
with osteoarthritis.
ceutical that may reduce inflammation is free radical
scavengers, such as superoxide dismutase, bioflavonoids,
Glucosamine.
Glucosamine salt supplements are
glutathione, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Oxygen-
usually available as glucosamine hydrochloride
or
derived free radicals (e.g., superoxide, hydrogen peroxide,
glucosamine sulfate. Although both forms are readily
hydroxyl radical) may play a role in the progression
available, the hydrochloride form provides
more
of osteoarthritis through their ability to damage cells
glucosamine per unit weight than the sulfate form.
by oxidative injury. Oxidative injury leads to depoly-
Another form, N-acetylglucosamine, appears to have
merization of hyaluronic acid, destruction of collagen,
less activity than the hydrochloride and sulfate forms.
and decreased production of proteoglycans. Superoxide
Glucosamine is commonly found in combination pro-
dismutase and glutathione are endogenous antioxidant
ducts that include chondroitin sulfate and manganese
enzymes that are present in mammalian cells and inhibit
ascorbate. Glucosamine is an amino sugar that is a pre-
the production of oxygen free radicals. Those enzymes
cursor to glycosaminoglycans that are present in the
stabilize phagocyte cell membranes and lysosomes and
extracellular matrix of articular cartilage. Normal
reduce the level of superoxide radicals in tissues. The
chondrocytes synthesize glucosamine, but osteoarthritic
 efficacy, bioavailability, and safety of many oral anti-
-s oi e paeap e a o se ar
 oxidants are unknown. In addition, because of problems
size glucosamine. Exogenous glucosamine stimulates the
with manufacturing or storage, less active ingredient may
production of proteoglycans and collagen by chondro-
bc available than is indicated on the label. A recent study
218 ? SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
found discrepancies in the certifcate of analysis and
relieves pain and inflammation are based on the results
labeled contents in six superoxide dismutase products.
of studies conducted with DMSO, and little is known
Since this study was conducted, several new products
abour the safety of the product. MSM is sold in capsules
have becoime available that may have resolved this
for human use and in powder form, tablets, and capsules
problem.
for use in horses and small animals. Although manu-
DMSO,
which is used as a topical agent to treat
facturer recommendations for dosage should be followed,
musculoskeletal disorders, penetrates most tissues,
the use of MSM cannot be unequivocally recommended
including skin. Topical application of 20 mL/day of a
because littie is known about its safety and efficacy.
medical grade DMSO (70% to 90% solution) every 6 10
8 hours for as long as 14 days is recommended to treat
Omega-3 Fatty Acids.(
 Omega-3 fatty acids recently
local inflammation, S
 Side effects with topical use are
gained popularity for their potential use in animals with
minimal but include a garlic odor to the breath.
osteoarthritis. These products are available naturally in
Superoxide dismutase is an endogenous antioxidant
fish and plant sources and commercially as nutraceu-
that is present in mammalian cells and inhibits the pro-
tical supplements. Omega-3 farry acids are desaturated
duction of oxygen free radicals. This enzyme stabilizes
in the body to produce eicosapentaenoic acid, which is
phagocyte cell membranes and lysosomes and reduces
an analog of arachidonic acid. Prostaglandins, throm-
tissue levels of superoxide radicals, with a resultant
boxanes, and leukotrienes are produced from both of
decrease in the generation of free radicals. The effcacy
these compounds through the action of cyclooxygenase
of exogenous superoxide dismutase is unknown, One
and lipoxygenase. The products of arachidonic acid
author rccommends giving 5 mg subcutaneously for
metabolism are proinflammatory, proaggregatory, and
6 days in the dog, followed by alternate-day therapy for
immunosuppressive. In contrast,_ the 
metabolic
by-
8 days. The inanufacturer reconmends giving 2.5 mg/kg
products of eicosapentaenoic acid are less inflamma-
subcutaneously fve times a week for 2 weeks to treat
tory, are vasodilatory, are antiaggregatory, and are not
spondylitis or disk disease. Oral superoxide disimutasc
immunosuppressive. Theoretically, omega-3 fatty acids
products should be given based on manufacturer
could benefir dogs and cats with osteoarthritis by
recommendations.
decreasing inflammation and reducing the occurrence
Bioflavonols are also reported to have strong anti-
of microthrombi. However, objective data are lacking.
Oxidant properties. They are believed to scavenge free
The ideal ratio of N6:N3 fatty acids in the canine diet is
radicals, alleviate inflammation caused by oxidative
controversial, but one current recommendation is
damage, and inhibit degradative enzymes released by
between 10:1 and 5:1. A recent study reported a lower
oxidative celis. One double-blind, randomized study in
PGE2 level and reduced clinical and radiographic signs
 dogs reported improveiment in the clinical signs of hip
of osteoarthritis in experimental dogs that underwent
osteoarthritis in dogs given a supplement containing
transection of the cranial cruciate ligament while being
bioflavonoids, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione.
fed a diet low in N6 fatty acids.
Other clinical studies reported improved function and
decreased pain after 2 to 3 weeks of administration in
dogs and horses with osteoarthritis. Grapeseed umeal is
Chondroprotectant Drugs
a rich source of bioflavonols. Bioflavonols are available
commercially, usually in combination with glucosamine
Polysulfated Glycosaminoglycan.
Adequan (Luitpold
and hydrolyzed collagen or an assortment of other anti-
Pharmaceuticals, Shirley, NY) is a glycosaminoglycan
oxidants, including selenium, vitamin E, and superoxide
polysulfate ester (GAGPS) that is available for use in
dismutase.
dogs. It is reported to be both chondroprotective and
chondrostimulatory. It provides chondroprotection by
Mcthylsulfonylmethane.
Methylsulfonylmethane
inhibiting various destructive enzymes and prostaglandins
(MSM) is a white, crystalline, water-soluble, odorless,
that are associated with synovitis and osteoarthritis.
rasteless compound that is sold as a supplement. Ir is
GAGPS
inhibits neutral metalloproteinases (e.g.,
suggested for use in the management of pain and
stromelysin, collagenase, elastase), serine proteases,
inflammation and as an antioxidant. According to the
hyaluronidase, and a variety of lysosomal enzymes.
11
manufacturer and others, MSM can correct a dietary
also inhibits the synthesis of PGE2, the generation of
sulfur deficiency. MSM is a metabolite of industrial-
Oxygen-derived free radicals, and the complement cas-
grade DMSO. Although MSM is found naturally
in
cade. In numerous studies, gross and histologic exami-
certain foods, it is destroyed during processing. DMSO
nation also showed protection of articular cartilage.
is a byproduct of the wood pulp processing industry
GAGPS stimulates anabolic activity in synoviocytes and
and also is available in a medical grade. In the United
chondrocytes. Chondrostimulatory effects are charac-
States, it is approved only for the treatment of interstitial
terized by increased secretion of hyaluronate
by
cystitis. After experimental oral administration of MSM
synoviocytes and enhanced production of proteoglycan,
in guinea pigs, radiolabeled sulfur was found in the
hyaluronate, and collagen by articular chondrocytes.
amino acids (methionine and cysteine) of the animals'
GAGPS also has anticoagulant and fibrinolytic properties
proteins. No controlld experimental or clinical studies
that facilirate the clearing of thrombotic ermboii that
supporr the use of MSM for the management of osteo-
are deposited in the subchondral and synovial blood
arthritis in dogs. Manufacturers' claims that MSM
vessels. Although most experimental and clinical studies
support the premise that GAGPS promotes chondro-
The actions of exogenous and endogenous hyaluronan
protection and chondrostimulation, some studies show
appear to be similar. Sodium hyaluronate is recommended
either no benefit or a detrimental effect on cartilage
for mild to imoderate synovitis and capsulitis rather than
metabolism.
osteoarthritis. It appears to have a chondroprotective
A clinical study in dogs with hip dysplasia found the
effect, but it is unclear whether this effect is direct or is
greatest improvement in orthopedic scores at a dose of
a byproduct of the effcct of the drug on the articular
4.4 mg/kg (2 mg/lb) given intramuscularly evcry 3 to)
soft tissues. Sodium hyaluronate is administered intra-
5 days for eight injections. The use of GAGPS in cats
also has been reported at the same dose. Another study
administered intra-articularly in experimental dogs at
reported less coxofemoral subluxation in growing pups
a dose of 7 mg per joint once weekly, the progress of
that were susceptible to hip dysplasia and were given
osteoarthritis was slowed.
GAGPS 5.0 mg/kg intramuscularly rwice weekly from
6 weeks to 8 months of age. The duration of relief
provided by GAGPS is unknown. Most studies have
Postoperative Physical Rehabilitation and
evaluated only its short-rerm effect. In anecdotal reports,
Chondroprotectant Use
the duration of amelioration of the clinical signs ranged
from days to months. In addition, it is not known whether
The goal of rehabilitation programs is to improve
the cormplete series of injections is needed once the
function and decrease pain in dogs and cars that have
clinical signs return or whether a shorter regimen would
 musculoskeletal compromise or have undergone ortho-
suffice.
pedic surgery. Rehabilitation includes a variety of physi-
Side effects of GAGPS in dogs include short-term
cal modalities that are designed to improve strength,
inhibition of the intrinsic coagulation cascade and
flexibility, and coordination. Chondroprotectants can
inhibition of platelet aggregation when given at a dose
be used concurrently. These drugs accelerate and enhance
of 5 mg/kg or 25 mg/kg intramuscularly. Also, GAGPS
recovery by the following mcchanisms:
inhibits neutrophils and complement, which may
predispose the patient to infections, especially when the
1. They relieve pain to increase the patient's
drug is injected inrra-articularly under contaminated
willingness to perforin rehabilitation exercises.
conditions. GAGPS causes sensitization reactions
2.
 They reduce the levels of degradative and
humans, but this effect has not been reported in dogs.
inflammatory enzymes to help protect the
cartilage.
Pentosan Polysulphate.
Pentosan  polysulphate
3. They stimulate the production of synovial fluid,
(Cartrophen-Vet, Biopharm Australia, Sydney, Australia)
proteoglycan, and collagen to promote repair of
is a polysaccharide sulfate ester with a mean molecular
the cartilage matrix.
weighr of 6o00 daltons that is prepared semisyntheti-
cally from beech hemicellulose. The drug is approved in
Agents that reduce the expression of inflammatory
Australia for use in dogs and horses. Like Adequan, it is
mediators or up-regulate the normal expression
of
used to relieve the clinical symproms of DjD. Pentosan
chondrocytes may provide a microenvironment that is
polysulphate is administered intra-articularly, intramus-
favorable for optimal homeostasis of cartilage and
cularly, subcutaneously, or orally. The recommended
connective tissue. A recent study evaluated the effect of
intra-articular dose is 5 to 10 mg per joint weekly, as
a nutraceutical on intra-articular graft ligamentization
necessary. The intramuscular or subcutaneous dose in
in dogs that underwent unilateral transection of the
dogs is 3 mg/kg once weekly for 4 weeks. This regimen
cranial cruciate ligament. Cosequin appeared to have
is repeated as necessary. A double-blind study
that
two primary effects in this study. It returned the joint
evaluated the efficacy of this drug in the treatment of
capsule or reconstructed cranial cruciate ligament com-
osteoarthritis in dogs found this dose to be ideal, This
plex to a more physiologic state, and it reduced the
dose also has been used anecdotally in cats. Oral calcium
severity of osteoarthritis in the treared joints. After tran-
pentosan polysulphate at a dose of 10 mg/kg weekly for
section of the reconstructed cranial cruciare ligaments,
4 weeks, repeated every 3 months, reduced the presence
translation was similar in the Cosequin group and the
of cartilage breakdown products in osteoarthritic
control group, suggesting preservation of a more normal,
cartilage.
physiologic joint capsule. Dogs thar did not receive
Cosequin had less translation after transection of the
lubrication, increase the endogenous production
of
reconstructed cranial cruciate ligament, suggesting
hyaluronate, decrease prostaglandin production, scav-
thickening and fbrosis of the joint capsule. Dogs chat
enge free radicals, inhibit the migration of inflammarory
received Cosequin had lcss severe osteoarthritis, both
cells, decrease the permeability of the synovial mem-
subjectively as judged by morphologic observation and
brane, protect and promote healing of the articular
according to mean modifed Mankin scores.
cartilage, and reduce joint stiffness and the formation of
The rreated limb may be immobilized postoperatively
adhesions between tendons and tendon sheaths. The
to provide adjunctive support, restrict use, reduce pain,
molecule lines the synovial membrane and acts like a
treat open wounds, or control swelling. Whatevcr the
sieve that prevents bacteria and inflammatory cells from
indication, immobilization can adversely affect joint
reaching the synovial compartment by steric hindrance.
health. Joint immobilization reduces the production of
220 I SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
synovial fluid and leads to depletion of proteoglycan as
Some dogs have a restricted, stiff gait rather than
a result of decreased loading. The changes seen are
obvious lameness. Many dogs have trouble rising or
similar to those observed in osteoarthritic carrilage.
posturing to eliminate. Some dogs have a history of
 Chondroprotectant treatment may reduce damage
to
joint trauma (e.g., intra-articular fracture, ligamentous
the joint during periods of immobilization. To improve
injury, dislocation), osteochondral disease (e.g., osteo-
and speed joint recovery, immobilization should be
chondrosis, l
ununited anconeal process, fragmented
limited to the shortest possible time.
coronoid process), or congenital deformiry (e.g., patellar
uxation, hip dysplasia). Cat owners may report that the
animal seems ro be getting old or frequently seems tired.
Nutrition and Body Condition
Traditional methods of minimizing functional loss
secondary to joint disease include eliminating underlying
Obesity increases the progression of osteoarthritis in
causes of disease (e.g., stabilizing the joint, removing an
humans and likely in animals as well. After weight loss
Osteochondral flap, improving joint congruity), opti-
of 5 kg or more, humans who have arthritis experience
mizing body weight (e.g., weight loss), and administcring
decreased pain, improved fuaction, and reduced need
drug therapy (e.g., NSAIDs, chondroprotectants).
for medical therapy. Similar improvement is seen
in
Physical therapy is an important adjunctive therapy
obese, osteoarthritic dogs that undergo weight loss. Body
for the treatment of orthopedic disorders in humans.
conditioning scores for dogs and cats are available to
Recently, the importance of incorporating exercise and
help assess, document, and monitor the patient's initial
physical modalities into the treatment of musculoskeletal
body condition as well as changes in body condition
disorders in dogs has been recognized.
over time. On a scale of 1 to 5, a score of 3 is considered
Physical rehabilitation can take many forms. Rehabili
ideal. The ideai conformation is as follows: the ribs are
tation may require loss of excess body weight, improved
paipable but not visible; a waistline is seen behind the
cardiovascular conditioning, a supervised exercise
ribs when viewed from above; and the abdomen is tucked
 program, concomitant medical therapy, and a variety of
up when viewed from the side. An important com-
topically applied physical modalities (e.g, cold therapy,
ponent of a successful weight loss program is careful
heat therapy, ultrasound therapy, and magnet therapy).
counseling of the owner. The owner needs to understand
When used in reference to animals, the term physical
the importance of the program and must be committed
rehabilitation is preferred to physical therapy because,
t0 adhering to its guidelines. Proper body condition
unlike in humans, no formal licensure is available. The
should be maintained in dogs with joint disorders. Over-
term rehabilitation also conveys a broader scope of
weight dogs are more susceptible to osteoarthritis and
management than the term therapy. To obtain the best
exhibit pain and lameness more readily.
 results, each patient must he assessed independently and
 Dogs and cats should be fed a fresh, high-quality
a program designed to meet the patient's specifc needs.
food. Many good choices are available from reputable
The use of a cookbook approach that is the saine for
pet food manufacturers. Foods can be selected to match
evcry patient leads to suboptimal results.
the animal's phase of growth, age, physical condition,
and general health. Dogs and cats that have joint dis-
Exercise.
Although once contraindicated in patients
orders may benefit from low-calorie foods. Some foods
with osteoarthritis, exercise is now believed to be bene-
also contain supplements (nutraceuticals, such as N-3
ficial. Frequent, low-impact exercise is preferable
to
fatty acids, chondroitin sulfate, and glucosamine) that
high-impact or prolonged exercise. Moderate exercise is
are purported to improve joint heaith, although the
believed to diminish the likelihood that osteoarthritis
effectiveness of these dicts is unknown.
will develop. Exercise offers several benefits. Moderate
Owners should be assisted when developing and
activity enhances chondrocyte metabolism, leading t0
implementing a weight management plan for a pet. The
increased production of proteoglycans. In contrast,
management plan should include dietary modifcations
proteoglycan content is decreased in the articular
and recommendations for exercise. Realistic goals should
cartilage of immobilized joints. Joint motion is also
be set, and regular follow-up visits should be scheduled
important for optimal cartilage nutrition. Nutrients
to assess the animal's progress.
diffuse from the synovial fluid into the cartilage. This
action is enhanced by a pumping motion that is created
during joint motion. Exercise benefits the joint and
Physical Rehabilitation
irnproves muscle strength and flexibility. Because
muscles and ligaments work together to support the
Dogs and cats are often affected by conditions that
joint, it is important to encourage good muscle tone and
compromise joint function. Osteoarthritis alone likely
resiliency.
affects more than 20% of dogs. Osteoarthritis in cats
The goals of therapeutic exercise are to reduce body
appears to occur much more commonly than previously
weight, increase joint mobility, improve cardiovascular
thought. Regardless of the etiology, chronic
joint
condition, and reduce joint pain through the use of non-
disease or inflammation often leads to decreased range
weightbearing or low-impact weightbearing exercises
of motion, chronic pain, and secondary muscle atrophy.
that are designed to strengthen supporting muscles. How-
Stiff, painful joints and loss of muscle mass dramatically
ever, before an exercise program is initiated, underlying
affect a dog's qualiry of life and athletic performance.
inflammation or predisposing problems must be treated.
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT AFTER ARTHROSCOPYI221
 20 minutes two to three times daily until inflammation
corrected surgically. Initiaily, anti-inflammatory drugs
and edema resolve.
should nort be administered before exercise because it is
important to determine whether the exercise program is
Other Modalities
too strenuous and causes pain. After the appropriate
level of exercise is determined, oral anti-inflammatory
Massage, hydrotherapy, shock wave, ultrasound, and
drugs are administered about 1 hour before exercise as
electrotherapy also can help to rehabilitate patients with
necessary. Acceptable forms of exercise include walking
musculoskeletal compromise. The use of these modalities
on a flat surface, walking in high grass or sand to
requires special training. This training can be obtained
increase the range of motion in the joint, walking in a
through the University of Tennessee College of Veterinary
pool, swimming, slowly climbing a ramp or stairs,
Medicine (Dr. Darryl Milis) or at various national
sitting and standing repeatedly, hoiding up the opposite
veterinary meetings.
Indications and methods
are
limb, performing passive range of motion exercises, and
described elsewhere.
wheelbarrow walking. Exercise sessions should be short
initially, usually 5 to 10 minutes. The length and intensity
Suggested Readings
of the session can be increased slowly as tolerated. A 5-
to 10-minute cooldown period is recommended after
Adebowale A, Cox D, Liang Z, et al: Analysis of glucosamine and
each exercise session is completed.
External devices are used topically to encourage joint
chondroitin sulfate content in marketed products and the Caco-2
permeability of chondroitin sulfate raw materials. JANA 3:37-44,
and muscle health. The use of most of these devices
2000.
requires appropriate education and proper training.
Altman RD, Dean DD, Muniz OE, et al: Prophylactic treatment of
Modalities that have been proposed for rehabilitation
canine osteoarthritis with glycosaminoglycan polysulfuric acid
include superficial heat therapy, superficial cold therapy,
ester. Arthritis Rheum 32:759-766, 1989.
Altman RD, Dean DD, Muniz OE, et al: Therapeutic treatment of
massage, hydrotherapy, ultrasound therapy, and electro-
canine osteoarthritis with glycosaminoglycan polysulfuric acid
therapy. Most of these techniques are unproven in dogs,
ester. Arthritis Rheum 32:1300-1307, 1989.
and their use is extrapolated from their application in
Anderson MA: Oral chondroprotectant agents: Part 1. Compend
humans.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 21:601-609, 1999.
Auer DE, Ng JC, Seawright AA: Effect of palosein (superoxide
dismutase) and catalase upon oxygen derived free radical induced
Topical Treatment
degradation of equine synovial fluid. Equine Vet J 22:13-17, 1990.
Basleer C: Stinulation of proteoglycan production by glucosamine
Superficial  Application of Heat.
Application of
sulfate in chondrocytes isolated from human osteoarthritic
superficial heat is recommended after inflammation and
articular cartilage in vitro. Osteoarthritis Cartil 6:427-434, 1998.
BealeBS:Evaluationof active enzyme in six oral superoxide
edema subside. Because heat is soothing and increases
 dismutase products. Veterin Comparative Orthopaedics and
blood flow to the affected region, it decreases pain,
Traumatology 11(4):A68, 1998,
increases the range of motion in the joint, and improves
 Beale Bs: The role of chondroprotectants and nutraceuticals in
muscle flexibility.
 Superficial heating agents rypically
(steoarthritic dogs and cats. In Millis D, Taylor R (eds): Physical
Rehabilitation in Dogs and Cats. Philadelphia, WB Saunders (in
heat the skin and subcutaneous tissue to a depth of 1 to
2 cm, although deeper tissues may be heated through
press).
Beale BS, Clemmons RM, Goring RL: The effect of a semi-synthetic
conduction, especially
with long application times.
polysulfared glycosaminoglycan on coagulation and primary
Usually, the tissue is heated to 40° to 45*C for 15 t0
henostasis in the dog. Vet Surg 19:57, 1990.
 Beale BS, Goring RL: Degenerative joint disease. In Bojrab MJ (edj:
20 minutes one to two times daily to promote hyperemia.
 Disease Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, Lea
Heat may be applied with hot warer packs; moist, heated
and Febiger, 1993, pp 727-736.
towels; heated, rice-filled stockings; or circulating water
 Beren J, Hill SL, Diener-West M, et al: The effect of pre-loading oral
blankets. To prevent accidental burns, the temperature
glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate/manganese ascorbate combination
of the heating instrument should be tested by holding
on experimental arthritis in rats. Exp Biol Med 226:144-152,
it against the therapist's skin for 30 seconds. Electric
2001.
Boothe DM: Nutraceuticals in veterinary medicine: Part 1. Compend
blankets are not recommended because of the increased
Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:1248-1255, 1997.
chance of burns.
Bourgeois P, Charles G, Dehais J, et al: Efcacy and tolerability of
chondroitin sulfate 1200 mg/day vs 3 x 400 mg/day vs placebo.
Superficial  Application of  Cold.
Osteoarthritis Cartil 6(Suppl A):25-30, 1998.
 Application of
Bucsi L, Poor G: Effcacy and tolerability of oral chondroitin sulfate
superficial cold is usefui if inflammation or edema is
as a syimptomatic slow-acting drug for osteoarthritis (SYSADOA)
present. This therapy is especially valuable for the first
in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartil 6
2 to 3 days after surgery. Cooling the affected tissue
[Suppl A):31-36, 1998.
causes vasoconstriction and reduces vascular perme-
Budsberg S, Barteges J, Schoenher W, et al: Effects of different
N6:N3 fatty acid diets on canine stifle osteoarthritis.Proceedings
ability. As a result, swelling and inflammation are
of the 28th Annual Veterinary Orthopedic Society Meting,
decreased. Cold therapy is applied with commercial
Feb. 24Mar. 3, 2001, Lake Louise, Canada, p 40.
cold packs, towels soaked in cold water, or plastic bags
filled with water and ice. The affected area also can be
(Perna canaliculus) in alleviating signs of arthritis in dogs. Poster
immersed in a cold water bath. To increase comfort, a
at Experimental Biology 2000 (meeting), April 15-18, 2000, San
Djego, CA, program 160.9,
thin cloth towel can be placed on the skin before the
Burkholder W, Taylor L, Hulse D: Weighr loss to optimal body
cold pack is applied. Cold therapy is applied for 15 t0
condition increases ground reactive force in dogs with OA.
222 D SMALL ANIMAL ARTHROSCOPY
 Procedings of the Purina Nutrition Symposium, St, l.ouis, MO,
hydrochloride and manganese ascorbate on synovial fluid
August 2000.
chondroitin sulfate 3B3 and 7D4 epitope in a canine cranial
Canapp SO, McLaughlin RM, Hoskinson J, et al: Scintigraphic
cruciate transection model of osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartil
evaluation of glucosamine HCL and chondroitin sulfate as
9:1421, 2001.
treatment for acute synovitis in dogs. AJVR 60:1552-1557, 1999.
Karzel K, Domenjoz R: Effect of hexosamine derivatives and uronic
Carreno MR, Muniz OE, Howell Ds: The effect of
 acid derivatives on glycosaminoglycan metabolism on fibroblast
glycosaminoglycan polysulfuric acid ester on articular cartilage in
cultures. Pharmacology S:337-345, 1971.
experimental osteoarthritis: effects on morphological variables of
Kirker-Head RP: Safety of an oral chondroprotective agent in
disease severity. J Rheumatol 13:490-497, 1986.
horses. Vet Ther 2:345-353, 2001.
D'Ambrosio E, Casa B, Bompani R, et al: Glucosamine sulfate: a
Kuck JC, Mulnix JA: Clinical evaluation of an antioxidant joint
controlled clinical investigation in arthrosis.
nutrient and relief of the signs of pain associated with
Pharmacotherapeutica 2:S04-508, 1981.
osteoarthritis and gait irregularities in the horse, Proprietary data.
Das AK, Hammad TA: Effcacy of a combination of FCHG49TM
Animal Health Options, Golden, CO, 2001.
Kuck JC, Mulnix JA: Clinical evaluation of an antioxidant joint
sodium chondroitin sulfate and manganese ascorbate in the
nutrient and relief of the signs of pain associated with
management of knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartil
osteoarthritis in the dog. Proprietary data. Animal Health
8:343-350, 2000.
Options, Golden, CO, 2001.
Davidson G: Glucosamine and chondroitin suifate, Compend Contin
Leeb BF, Schweitzer H, Montag K, Smolen J: A metaanalysis of
Educ Pract Vet 36:454458, 2000.
chondroitin sulfate in the treatment of osteoarthritis. J Rheumatol
de Haan JJ,Goring RL,ealeBS:Evaluationof polysulfatd
27:205-211,2000.
glycosaminoglycan for the treatment of hip dysplasia in dogs.
Leffler CT, Philippi AF, Leffler SG, et al: Glucosamine, chondroitin
Vet Surg 23:177-181, 1994.
and manganese ascorbare for degenerative joint disease of the
Detimer N, Nowack H, Raake W: Platelet aggregation by heparin
knee or low back: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
and arteparon. Munch Med Wochenschr 125:540-542, 1983.
pilot study. Mil Med 164:85-91, 1999.
Edington ND, Du J, Liang Z, er al: Bioavailability and disposition
Li Hirondel JL: Double-blind clinical study with oral administration
of the dietary supplements TRH 122 Glucosamine and FCHG 49
Of chondroitin sulfate versus placebo in tibiofemoral gonarthrosis.
Chondroitin sulfate in dogs after single and rmultiple dosing. Amer
Litera Rheumatol 14:77-82, 1992.
Assoc of Pharmaceutical Scientists 3(3): W417, 2001.
Lippiello L, Woodward J, Karpman R, et al: Chondroprotection and
Egg D: Efecrs of glycosaminoglycan polysulfate and two
metabolic synergy of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfare. Clin
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on prostaglandin E2
Orthop 381:229-240, 2000.
synthesis in Chinese hamster ovary cell cultures. Pharmacol Res
Lust G, Williams AJ, Burton-Wurster N, et al: Effects of
15:709-717,1983.
Felson DT, Zhang Y, Anthony JM, et al: Weight loss reduces the risk
on signs of incipient hip dysplasia in growing pups. Am J Vet Res
for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in women. Ann Intern Med
53:1836-1843, 1992.
116:535,1992.
McGoey BV, Deitel M, Saplys RJ, et al: Effect of weight loss on
Ghosh P, Smith M, Wells C: Second-line agents in osteoarthritis.
musculoskeleral pain in the morbidly obese. J Bone Joint Surg Br
In Dixon JS, Furst DE (eds): Second-Line Agents in the Treatrment
72:323,1990.
Of Rheumatic Diseases. New York, Marcel Dekker, 1993,
MeNamara PS, Barr SC, Erb HN: Hematologic, hemostatic and
pp 363-427.
 biochemical effects in dogs receiving an oral chondroprotective
Hannen N, Ghosh P, Bellenger C, et al: Systemic administration of
agent for thirty days. AJVR 57:1390-1394, 1996.
glycosaminoglycan polysulphate provides partial protection of.
McNamara PS, Barr SC, Erb HN, et al: Hematologic, hemostatic
articular cartilage from damage produced by menisectomy in the
and biochemicaleffects in cats receiving anoral chondroprotective
canine. Orthop Res 5:47-59, 1987.
agent for thirty days. Vet Ther 1:108-117, 2000.
Hansen RR, Smalley LR, Huff GK, et al: Oral treatment with a
McNamara PS, Johnston SA, Todhunter RJ: Slow-acting, disease-
glucosamine-chondroitin sulfate compound for degenerative joint
modifying osteoarthritic agents. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
disease in horses: 25 cases. Equine Pract 19:16-22, 1997.
Pract 27:863-867, 951-952, 1997.
HellioMP,Vigron E,Annefeld M:Theeffects of glucosamine on the
Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical modalities in
human osteoarthritic chondrocyte: In vitro investigations.
 the treatment of osteoarthritis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Proceedings of the9th Eular Symposium,BaselSwitzerland,
Pract 27:913-930, 1997.
1996, pp 11-12.
Mulnix JA: Promotion study, canine formula. Proprietary data.
Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. Body Condition Scoring System Poster,
Animal Health Options, Golden, CO, 2001.
Topeka, KS, 1996.
Nishikawa H, Mori I, Umemoto J: Influences of sulfated
Howard RD, Mcllwraith CW: Sodium hyaluronate in the treatment
glycosaminoglycans on hyaluronic acid in rabbit knee synovia.
 of equine joint disease. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 
Arch Biochem Biophys 240:146-148, 1985.
15:473-481, 1993.
O'Grady CP, Marwin SE, Grande DA: Effects of glucosamine
Hulse DA, Hart RC, Slatter M, et al: The effect of Cosequin in 
hydrochloride, chondroitin sulfate, and manganese-ascorbate on
cranial cruciate deficient and reconstructed stifle joints in dogs.
cartilage metabolism, Proceedings of the 68th Annual Meeting of
Veterinary Comparative Orthopedics and Traumatology
the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, San Francisco,
11(4):A68, 1998.
CA, 2001, p 157.
Hulse Ds: Treatment methods for pain in the osteoarthritic patient.
Rashmir-Raven AM, Coyne CP, Fenwick BW, et al: lnhibition of
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:361, 1998.
equine complement activity by polysulfated glycosaminoglycans.
Hungerford D, Navarro R, Hammad T: Use of nutraceuticals in the
Am J Vet Res 53: 87-90, 1992.
management of osteoarthritis. JANA 3:23-27, 2000.
Read R, Cullis-Hill D: The systemic use of the chondroprotective
Impellizeri JA, Lau RE, Azzara FA: A 14 week clinical evaluation of
agent pentosan polysulfate in the treatment of osteoarthritis:
an oral antioxidant as a treatment for osteoarthritis secondary to
Results of a double-blind clinical trial in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 
canine hip dysplasia. Vet Q 20(Suppl 1): S107-108, 1998.
37:108-114, 1996.
Innes JF,arrAR,SharifMficacyoforalcalcium pentsan
Schiavinato A, Lini E, Guidolin D, et al: Intraarticular sodium
polysulphate for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the canine stifle
hyaluronate injections in the pond-nuki experimental model of
joint secondary to cranial cruciate ligament deficiency. Vet Rec
osteoarthritis in dogs: II. Morphological findings. Clin Orthop
146:433-437, 2000.
241:286-299, 1989.
Jimenez SA, Dodge GR: The effects of glucosamine on human
Setnikar I, Giaccheti C, Zanolo G: Pharmacokinetics of
chondrocyte gene expression. Proceedings of the 9th Eular
glucosamine in dog and in man. Arzneimittelforschung Drug Res
Symposium, Basel, Switzerland, 1996, pp 8-10.
36:703-705, 1986.
 Johnson KA, Hulse DA, Hart RC, et al: Fffects of an orally
Setniker I, Giaccheti C, Zanola G: Pharmacokinetics of glucosamine
adrinistered mixture of chondroitin sulfate, glucosamine
in the dog and in man. Arzneimittelforschung 36:729, 1991.
Smith G: Influence of diet and age on subjective hip score and hip
Verbruggen G, Goemaere S, Veys EM: Chondroitin sulfate:
OA: a life long study in Iabrador retrievers. Proceedings of the
S/DMOAD (strucrure/disease modifying anti-osteoarthrosis drug)
29th Annual Meeting of the Vererinary Orthopedic Sociery, The
in the treatment of finger joint OA. Osteoarthritis Cartil 6
Canyons, Utah, March 3-8, 2002, p 41.
(Suppl A):39-46,1998.
Smith MM, Ghosh P: The effect of polysulfated polysaccharides on
Verbruggen G, Veys EM: The effect of sulfated glycosaminoglycan
hyaluronate (HA) synthesis by human synovial fbrobiasts. Agents
on the proteoglycan metabolism of synovial lining cells. Acta
Actions 18:55-62, 1986.
Rheumatol Belg 1:75-92, 1971.
Tsuboi I, Matsuura T, Shichijo I, et al: Effects of glycosaminoglycan
Verbruggen G, Veys EM: Treatnent of chronic degenerative joint
 polysulfate on human neutrophil function. Jpn J inflamm
disorders with a glycosarminoglycan polysulfare. In Proceedings of
8:131-135, 1988.
the Euler IX Europcan Congress on Rhcumatology. Basel,
Vaz AL:Double-blind clinical evaluation of the relative efficacy of
Switzerland, 1980, pp 51-69.
ibuprofen and glucosamine sulphate in the management of
von der Mark K: Collagen synthesis in culrures of chondrocytes as
osteoarthrosis of the knee in outparients. Curr Med Res Opin
effected by arteparon. In Proceedings of the Euler IX European
8:145-149, 1982.
Congress on Rheumatology.Basel,Switzerland,1980,pp 39-50.
Manufacturers of
ADpenoix:
Lrthroscopic
Eguipment
Arthrex
ORATEC Interventions, Inc.
2885 South Horseshoe Drive
3700 Haven Court
Naples, FL 34104
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Phone: 800-934-4404
Phone: 888-996-1996 0r 650-369-9904
Fax: 800-643-9310
Fax: 650-369-9913
http://www.arthrex.com/
http://www.oratec.com/
ArthroCare Corporation
Richard Wolf Medical Instruments Corporation
680 Vaqueros Avenue
353 Corporate Woods Parkway
Sunnyvale, CA 94085-3523
Vernon Hills, IL 60061
Phone: 800-348-8929 or 408-736-0224
Phone: 847-913-1113
Fax: 408-736-0226
Fax: 847-913-1488
http://www.arthrocare.com/
http://www.richard-wolf.com/
Instrument Makar, Inc.
Smith-Nephew, Inc.
2950 East Mount Hope
150 Minuteman Road
Okemnos, M1 48864
Andover, MD 01810
PO Box 885
Phone: 800-343-5717
Okemos, M1 48805
Fax: 978-748-1599
Phone: 517-332-3593
http://www.smith-nephew.com/
Fax: 517-332-2043
http://www.instmak.com/
Spectrum Instruments (Dr. Fritz. distributor)
4575 Hudson Drive
Karl Storz Veterinary Endoscopy
Stow, OH 44224
175 Cremona Drive
Phone: 800-444-5644 or 330-686-4550
Goleta, CA 93117
Fax: 330-686-4555
Phonc: 800-955-7832 or 805-968-7776
E-mail: sales@spectrumsurgical.com
Fax: 805-685-2588
http://www.spectrumsurgical.com/
E-mail: info@karlstorzvet.com
http://www.ksvea.com/
Strykcr Endoscopy
2590 Walsh Avenue
Linvatec Customer Service
Santa Clara, CA 95051
Phone: 800-237-0169
Phone: 800-624-4422 0r 408-567-9100
Fax: 727-399-5256
Fax: 800-729-2917 0r 408-567-2503
E-mail: cust_serv@linvatec.com
http://www.strykerendo.com/
http://www.linvatec.com/
3M Corporation
Phone: 888-364-3577
http://www.3m.com/US/
Index
 Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate an illustration; page nunbers followed by t indicate a table.
Abrasion arthroplasty
Arthroscopy (Continued)
Carpal joint, arthroscopy of (Continued)
of elbow joint
conplications of, 2-3
ini fractures, 90-91,90f-92f, 93
in medial coronoid process
disadvantages of, 2
indications for, 90
fragmentation, 64f
history of, 1-2
in instability, 90-91, 90f-92f, 93
in osteoarthritis, 76
Articular surface, damage of, 3, 8
instrumentation for, 81-82,81f, 82f
in osteochondrosis, 199, 199f, 200f,
Aspirin, 214
in ligamentous injury, 201-202.
201
Atropine, for premedication, 25t
201f-203f
of stifle joint
Avulsion fractures
pain management in, 82, 90, 91,93
in osteoarthritis, 152-153
of cruciate ligament, 143-146, 144f, 146f
portal sites for, 83-85, 84f-88f, 89
in osteochondritis dissecans, 149
of shoulder joint, 192-193, 195f, 196f
positioning for, 82, 83, 83f
Accessory carpal bone, anatomy of, 86f-88f
Awls,16, 16f
postoperative care in, 93, 95
Acepromazine, for pain management, 25t
preparation for, 82, 83, 83f
Acetabular ligament, transverse, anatomy of,
surgical procedure for, 85, 89
102,104f
Biceps tendon
Carprofen,for pain management, 25,
Acetabulum, anatomy of, 102,104f, 105f
anatomy of,29, 31f, 32f
213-214
Adequan (polysulfated glycosaminoglycan),
tears of, 192-193, 195f, 196f
Cartilage
as chondroprotectant, 218-219
tendonitis of, bilateral, 187, 188f-190f
fibrillation of
Anconeal process, ununited, 71, 72f, 73,
tenosynovitis of, 38-41, 40f
in clbow osteoarthritis, 73, 74f
202-204,203f, 204f
Bioflavonols, as chondroprotectants, 218
in hip osteoarthritis, 183f
Anconeus, anatomy of, 58f, 60f
Biopsy, of clbow joint, 61
in stifle ostcoarthritis, 149-150, 150f
Anesthesia,for arthroscopy,24,25ee
Biting forceps, 15, 15f
lesions of, grading system for, 61t
also specific joint.
Blades, 118f, 119
protective agents for. See
Annular ligamenr, of elbow joint, anaromy
Bucket handle tear, of meniscus, 137, 139f,
Chondroprotectants.
of, s7f, 59f
140, 141
Cartrophen-Vet (pentosan polysulphate), as
Antibiotics
Bupivacaine, for pain management, 25t, 53
chondroprotectant, 219
for arthroscopy, of elbow joint, S3-54
Buprenorphine, for pain management
Case studies, 179-211
for osteomyelitis, of stifle joint, 154
in carpal joint, 82, 91
Catheters, in outflow systems, 14, 14f
Arthritis
in shoulder joint, 24
Cefazolin, for arthroscopy, 54
degenerative. See Osteoarthritis.
in stifle joint, 120
Chondroitin sulfate, as chondroprotectant,
inflammatory, of carpal joint, 93-95, 94f
Burrs, 16, 16f
216,217
Arthrodesis
Butorphanol, postoperative, 25t
Chondromalacia, of stiffe joint, 1.50f
of carpal joinr, in ligamentous injury,
for carpal joint, 93
Chondroprotectants, 215-220
201-202,201f-203f
for hip joinr, 99
advantages of, 215
of shoulder joint, in extensive injury,
for shoulder joinr, 24
definition of, 215
202-204, 203f, 204f
drugs as, 218-219
 of tarsal joint, in osteoarthriris, 184, 184f
manufacture of, 216
Arthroscopes. See also instrumentation for;
Cameras, 9-10, 10f
mechanisim of action of, 216
specific anatomic location.
arthroscope connection with, 6-7, 6f, 7f
nutraceuticals as, 216-218
camera connection for, 6-7, 6f, 7f
Cannulas, 8-9, 8f, 9f, 16-17, 17f. See aiso
physical therapy with, 219-220
cannula interlock mechanism of, 7
instrumentation for; specific
quality control of, 216
cases for, 8-9, 9f
anatomic location.
regulation of,215
cleaning of, 9, 9f
inflow, 12
rehabilitation with, 219-220
description of, S6, 5f, 6f
interlock mechanisn of, 7
Closed curertes, 16, 16f
length of, 6, 6f
outflow, 14,14f
Cold therapy, 221
light post of, 6, 6f, 7
in sets, 19f, 20
for carpal joint, 93, 95
manufacturers of, 7, 225
Carpal joint, arthroscopy of, 81-95
for elbow joint, 67
selection of, 6, 6f
anatomic considerations in, 84f, 86f-89f,
for hip joint
sterilization of, 9, 9f
89-90
in dislocation, 114
Arthroscopy
anesthesia for, 82, 90, 93
in dysplasia, 109
advantages of, 2
in arthritis, 9395, 94f, 201-202, 201f-203f
for shoulder joint, 24
228INDEX
Cold therapy (Continned)
Debridement (Continned)
Flap tear, of meniscus, 139f, 142
 in bicipital renosynoviris, 40
in osteomyelitis,154,154f
Flexor hallucis longus rendon, f tarsal
in caudal glenoid ossifcation center
Degenerative tear, of meniscus, 137f, 139f,
joine, anatomy of, 167, 170f
incomplete fusion, 47
140
Floor suction mir, for fluid recovery, 14.
in instabiliry, 44
Diet, for joint protetion, 220
14f
in ostcochondritis dissecans, 38
Digital cameras, 12, 12f
Fluid managemenr, instrumentation for,
in supraspinatus strain, 45
IDimethyl sulfoxide, as chondroprotectant,
12-14, 13f, 14f
for stifle joint, 120
217-218
Fogging, of arthroscopes, 7
for tarsal joint
Documentation, 1I-12, 12f 
Forceps, 15,15f
in fracture, 175
in sets, 19f,20
in osteochondritis dissecans, 172
Fractures
Collagen, heat effects on, 18-19
Egress systems, 14, 14f
of carpal joint, 90-91, 90f-92f, 93
Collateral tigaments
Elhowjoint,arthroscopy of 79
of cruciate ligarment, 143-146, 144f, 146f
of carpal joint
anatonic considerations in, 55f, 57,
of humeral condyle, 77f, 78, 207, 208f
latcral, anatomy of, 92f
59-60, 58f-60f
lareral, 207, 208f, 209f
medial
anesthesia for, 53, 53f, 70
of patella, 185, 185f, 186f, 187
anatomy of, 92f
antibioties for, 53-54
of shoulder joint, 192-193, 195f, 1961
tcars of, 90f
articular pressure and, 76, 78
of srifle joint, 185, 185f, 186f, 187
 of elhow joint, anatomy of, 57f
for biopsy, 61
of supraglenoid ruberosity, 204-207,
of shoulder joint
closure in, 61
205f,206f
lateral, anatomy of, 29, 29f, 31f, 33f
in dysplasia, 187-189, 191f, 192f
of tarsal joint, 173-176, 176f
medial
future applications of, 77f, 78
Free radical scavengers, as
anatomy of,29,30f-32f
in hurmeral condyle fractures, 77f, 78,
chondroprotectants, 217-218
tear of, 42, 43f
207,208f
of tarsal joint, anatomy of, 267,
in humeral condyle osteochondrosis,
168f-170f
68-71, 69i, 70f
Glenchumeral joint. See Sheoulder joint.
Conputed tomography, in medial coronoid
in incomplere ossiication, 193, 195, 197,
Glenohumeral ligament, medial, tear of,
process fragmcntation, 62, 63f
197f, 198f
202-204,203f, 204f
Coronoid process
indicarions for, 61
Glenoid, anatomy of, 29, 30f, 31f
anatomy of,57f, 59f
instrumentation for, 51-53,51f,52f
Glenoid ossifcation center, incomplete
medial
lavage of, 61
fusion cof, 46-48, 47f
dysplasia of, 187-189, 191f, 192f
in medial coronoid process fraginentation,
Glucosamine hydrochloride, as
fragmentation of, 61-68, 61f6Sf, 61t
61-68, 61f-65f, 61t
chondroprotectanr, 216, 217
steoarthritris of, 73-76,74f,75f
in osteoarthritis, 73-76,74f,75f
Glucosamine sulfate, as chondroprotectant,
Corticosteroids,214
in osteochondrosis, 199, 199f, 200f, 201
217
Cosequin, as chondroprotectant, 216, 219
osteotomy in, 76. 78
Gilycopyrrolare, for premedication, 25t
Coxofenoral joint, osteoarthritis of,
pain management in, 53, S3f
Glycosaminoglycan, polysulfated, as
181-182, 182f, 183f
portal sites for,54-57,55f-57f
chondroprotectanr, 218-219
Cruciate ligaments, of stifle joint
positioning for, 54, 54f
Glycosaminoglycan produets,ixe, as
avulsion fractures of, 143-146, 144f, 146f
preparation for,54,54f
chondroprotectants, 217
caudal, tear of, 146-147, 147f
standard exanination procedure for, 59
Grapeseed meal, as chondroprotectant, 218
cranial
in ununited anconeal process, 71, 72f, 73,
Grasping forceps, 15, 15f
anatomy of,134f
207-210,209f,210f
Gravity, in fluid flow, 13, 13f
injuries of
Electrocautery devices, 18, 18f, 19f, 20
arthroscopic technique in,
Equipment. See Instrumentation,
134f-136f,135
Erodolac,for postoperative pain,25t,214
Halothane, for anesthesia maintenance, 25t
conservative treatment of, 1.32
Exercise, postoperative, 26t
Hand instruments, 14-16, 15f, 16f
differential diagnosis of, 132
benefts of, 220-221
Heat therapy, 221
history of, 131
for carpal joint, 93
for elhow joint, in medial coroneid
inspection of, 127-130, 128f-130f
devices aiding, 221
process fragmentarion, 67
meniscal examination and rreatment
for elbow joint, 67
for shouldcr joint, 40-41, 46, 47
in, 135-137, 137f-139f, 140-142,
goals of, 220-221
for tarsal joint, in osteochondritis
142f
for hip joint, 109, 114-115
dissccans, 172
Osteoarthritis development in, 149
for shoulder joint
Hip joint, arthroscopy of, 97-115
(steophytes in,124,125f,126f
in bicipital tenosynovitis, 41
anatonic considerations in, 102,
partial tears in, 132
in incomplete fusion of caudal glenoid
103f-10sf
physical examination in, 132
ossifcation center, 47-48
anesthesia for, 98-99, 98f. 106, 113-114
postoperative care in, 142-143
in osteochondritis dissecans, 38
in dislocation, 107f, 110,113-115
prognosis for, 143
in shoulder instahility, 44
in dysplasia, 106-110, 107f-11.3f
radiographic findings in, 132, 133f
in supraspinatus insertion strain, 46
indications for, 103, 106
risk factors for, 131
for tarsal joint, 173, 175-176
instrumentation for,97-98,97f,98f
signalment of, 131
Extravasation, 3, 68, 69
in osteoarthritis, in temoral malunion,
Curettes, 16, 16f
Eyepiece, 6,6f
181-182,182f, 183f
pain managemenr in, 98-99, 98f, 106,
109, 11.3-114
Debridement
Fat, in stife joint, 123-124, 127f
portal sites for, 99-102, 101f-105f
in ellhow osteoarrhritis, 76
Fatty acids, oncga-3, as chondroprotectanrs,
positioning for99,99f100f
power shavers for, 17-18, 17f
218
postoperative care in, 109, 114-115
of stifle joint, 127, 128f, 129f
Femoral head
preparation for, 99, 99f, 100f
in caudal cruciate ligament injury,
anatomy of,102,103f-105f
Horizontal tear, of meniscus, 139f, 142
146-147,147f
malunion of, osteoarthritis in, 181-182,
Humerus
in cranial cruciate ligament injury, 135,
182f,183f
condyle of
1.36
Fentanyl,for shoulder arthroscopy,24
anatomy of,60f
in osrcochondritis dissecans, 149
Fiheroptic calles, 11, 11f
fractures of, 77f, 78, 207,208f
INDEX229
Humerus (Contimued)
Meloxicam, for postoperative pain, 25t
Osteochondrosis
incomplete ossification of, 193, 195,
Meniscotibial liganent, caudal, release of,
of elbow joint, 199, 199f, 200f, 201
197,197f,198f
141. 142f
of humeral condyle, 68-71, 69f, 70f
0sreoarthritis of,73-76,74f, 75f
Meniscus
Osteomyelitis, of stifle joint, 153-156, 154f,
ostcochondrosis of, 68-71, 69f, 70f
excision of, 140-143, 142f
156f
head of, anatomy of, 29, 30f, 32f, 33f
inspection of, 134f-138f, 135-137
Osteophytes
Hyaluronates, as chondroprotectants, 219
lateral
classification of, 150f, 151,152f
Hydromorphone, for pain management, 25t
inspection of, 130,130f, 136-137,
in cranial cruciate ligament injury, 124,
1.38f, 139f
125f,126f
radial rear of, 180-181, 180f, 181f
in medial coronoid process fragmentation,
Immune-mediated arthritis, of carpal joint,
medial
62,62f
93-95, 94f
anatomy of, 134f
Osteotomy
Inflammatory arthritis, of carpal joint,
inspection of, 128-129, 129f,136-137,
tibial plateau leveling, in stifle joint
93-95, 94f
138f,139f
lesions,135,141
Instrumentation, 5-21. See also specifc
partial excision of, 141
triple pelvic, for hip dysplasia, 113f
anatomic focation, eg., Shoulder
release of, 141-142,142f
ulnar
joint.
pain related ro, 140
procedure for, 78
arthroscopes. See Arthroscopes.
tears of, classifcation of, 135, 13sf, 137,
in ununited anconeal process, 71, 72f
cannulas. See Cannulas.
1.39f,140
73,207-210,209f,210f
care f, 8-9, 9f
Methylprednisolone, 214
Outerbridge system, for osteoarthritis
costs of, 2
for bieipital tenosynovitis, 39
classifcation, 150f, 151, 152f
damage of, 2
Methylsulfonylmethane, as
Outflow systenms, 14, 14f
for documentation, 11-12, 12f
chondroprotectant, 218
for stifle arthroscopy 119-120,119f
egress systems, 14,14f
Microfracturing
Oxymorphone, for pain management, 25t
electrocautery devices, 18, 18f, 19f, 20
in elhow arthroscopy, 75f, 76
hand, 14-16,15f, 16f
in srifle arthroscopy, 152-153
for irrigation, 12-14, 13f, 14f
Monitors, for arthroscopes, 10
Pain management, in arthroscopy, 24, 25t
light sources,10-11,10f 11f
Morphine, for pain management, 2t
carpal joint,82,90,91,93
manufacturers of, 7-8, 225
in arthriis, 93
monitors,10
in fractures, 91, 93
power shavers, 17-18, 17f
Nail fixation, of femoral malunion, 182, 183f
drugs for, 213-214
pumps,13-14,13f
Needles, in outflow systems, 14, 14f
clbow joint, 53, 53f
radiofrequency devices, 18, 18f, 19f, 20
Neutraceuricals, 2 16-218
 in medial coronoid process
sets of. 19f, 20, 20f
New Zealand grcen-lipped mussel ( Perml
fragmcntation, 62, 67
for shoulder joint, 23-24, 23f, 24f
Canalicutus), in dietary
hip joint, 98-99, 98f, 106, 109, 113-114
size of, 3
supplements, 217
in dislocation, 113-114
tower arrangement of, 20, 20f
Nonsteroidal anti-inflarmrmatory drugs, fot
in dysplasia, 106, 109
trocars. 8, 8f, 9f, 17f
postoperative pain, 25r, 213-214
shoulder joint
lntercarpal ligaments, tears of, 92f
in cruciare ligannent fractures, 144
in bicipital tenosynovitis, 40-41
lrrigation, instrumentation for, 12-14, 1.3f,
in elbow arthroscopy, 53
in incomplete fusion of caudal glenoid
14f
in shoulder arthroscopy, 24
ossifieation center, 47-48
lsoflurane, for anesthesia maintenance, 25t 
Nutrition, for joint protection, 220
in osteochondritis dissecans, 34, 38
in shoulder instability, 44
in supraspinatus strain,45-46
joinr capsule
Obesity, osreoarthriris in, 220
stiffle joinr, 120, 132, 144, 147,149,
of hip, anarormy of, 102
Omega-3 farty acids, as chondroprotectants,
152-1.5.5
of shoulder, anatomy of,29,32f33f
218
 in caudal cruciate ligament tears, 147
Ossifeation, incomplere
in cranial cruciate ligamenr injury, 1.32,
of elbow joint, 193, 195, 197, 197f, 198f
142-143
Ketoprofen, for postoperative pain, 25t
of glenoid, 46-48, 47f
in cruciate ligament avulsion fracture,
Knives, arthroscopic, 16, 16f
Osteoarthritis
144
of carpal joint, 201-202, 201f203f
in media patellar luxation, 155
chondroprotectants for,215-220
insteoarthritis,152,153
Lahrum, of hip joint, anarormy of, 102, 104.
of elbow joint, 73-76, 74f, 75f
in osteochondritis dissecans, 149
10sf
exercise for,220-221
in septic osteomyelitis, 154
Lamps, for arthroscopes, 10-1l, 10f, 11f
grading of,73,74f,75f,1.50f,1.51, 152f
Pannus, in stifle joint, 149, 150f
Lens angle, 6
of hip joint, in femoral malunion,
Parrot beak teat, (of meniscus, 139f, 142
Ligamentum teres (round ligament),
181-182,182f,183f
Patellar luxation, rmedial, 155-156, 156f
anatony of, 102, 103f, 105f
nonstcroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for,
Patient preparatin.Seeunder peif joint.
Light post, 6, 6f, 7
213--214
Pentosan polysulphate, as
Light sources,10-11、10f,11f
of shoulder joint, 202-204, 203f, 204f
chondroprotectant,219
Locking forceps, 15, 15f
Of stifle joint, 149-153, 150f, 152f
Perna canaliculns, in dierary supplements.
Longitudinal vertical (bucket handle) tear, of
tof tarsal joint, 182, 184-185,184f
217
meniscus, 137, 139f, 140, 141
topical rreatment for, 221
Phenylbutazone, 214
wcight control for, 220
Pin fixation, of ununited anconeal process,
Ostcochondritis dissccans
71,72f,73, 207-210, 209f, 210f
Macerated tear, of meniscus, 137f, 139f,
of elbow joint,68-71,69f.70f
Plate fixation, for tarsal joinr arrhrodesis,
140
of shoulder joint.30,33-35,38,34f,
184.184f
Mallets, 16,16f
36f-38f
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan, as
Manganese ascorbate, as chondroprotectant,
traumatic fragment displaceinent in,
chondroprotectant, 218-219
216
179-180,179f,180f
Portal sites
 Manufacturers, of equipment and
of stifle joint, 147-149, 148f
for carpal joint, 83-85, 84f-88f, 89
instrumentation, 7-8, 225
of tarsal joint, 167-173, 172f, 174f
for elbow joint, 54-$7, 55f-57f, 70f
230INDEX
Portal sites (Contimmed)
Radiofrequency devices, 18, 18f, 19f, 20
Srifle joint (Contimed)
in rmedial coronoid process
Radiouinar ligaments, anatomy of, 92f
instrumentation for, 117, 118f,
fragimcntation, 64f, 65f, 66
Radius
119-120,119f
in ununited anconeal process, 72f
distal, anatomy of, 86f-89f
intra-articular exploration in, 128, 129F
for hip joint, 99-102, 101f-105f
head of, anatomy of, 57f
lateral meniscus inspection in, 130,
for shoulder joint, 26-29,27f, 28f
lengthening of, 78
130f, 136-137, 138f, 139f
in bicipital tenosynovitis, 39-40, 40f
Rehabilitation, 26t, 220-221, See also
in lateral meniscus tear, 180-181, 180f,
 in incomplete fusion of caudal glenoid
Exercise.
181f
ossifcation center, 47
chondroprotectants in, 219-220
medial meniscus inspection in,
in osteochondritis dissecans, 35, 36f,
Ring curettes, 16, 16f
128-129,129f, 136-137,138f,
37f
139f
in shoulder instability, 42, 43f
in medial patellar luxarion, 15$-156,
in supraspinarus inscrtion strain, 45,
Scissors, 19f, 20
156f
46f
Serew fixation
in osteoarrhritis, 149-153, 150f, 152f
for stifle joint, 121-123, 122f-124f,
of humeral condyle incomplete
in ostcochondritis dissccans, 147-|49,
126f-129f,127-128
ossification, 195, 198f
148f
cranial medial, 127-128, 127f-129f
of ununited anconeal process, 71, 72f, 73,
in osteomyelitis, 153-156, 154f, 156f
for tarsal joint, 160-162, 163f, 164-167,
207-210, 209f, 210f
pain managemenr in, 120, 132, 144,
165f,166f
Septic arthritis,fcarpal joint,939594
147,149, 152-155
Positioning, for arthroscopy. See specifc
Seprie osteomyelitis, of stifle joint, 153-156,
in patellar fractures, 185, 185f, 186f,
dnaromic location, e.g., Shoulder
154f, 156f
187
joint.
Sers, instrumentarion,19f, 20, 20f
portal sites for, 121-123, 122f-124f,
Postopcrative care, in arthroscopy, 26t. See
Sevofluranc, for anesthesia maintenance, 25t
126f-129f,127-128
also specific case studies in Chapter
Shavers, power, 17-18, 17f
positiningfor,12011120f
9.
Shoulderjoint, arthroscopy of,2349
postoperative care in, 142-143, 146,
carpal joint, 93, 95
anatomic considerations in, 29-30, 29f,
147, 149, 153-155
chondroprotectants in, 215-220
30f
preparation for, 120-121, 120f, 121f
ellow joint
anesthesia for,24,25t,34,39,42,45
proximal, 125, 125f, 126f, 127
 in medial coronoid process
in avulsion fractures, 192-193, 195f, 196f
neniscus of. See Meniscus.
fraginentation, 67
in biceps tendon tears, 192-193, 195f,
Subscapularis tendon
in ununited anconeal process, 73
196f
anatomy of,29,30f,32f
hip joint, 109, 114-115
in biceps tendonitis, 187, 188f-190f
tear of, 42,43f, 202-204, 203f, 204f
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in,
in bicipital tenosynovitis, 38-41, 40f
Suction punch forceps, 15, 15f
213-214
it glenoid ossificarion center incomplete
Superoxide dismutase, as
nutririon in, 220
fusion, 46-48, 47f
chondroprotectant, 218
physical therapy in, 221. See also Cold
indications for, 30
Supraglenoid tuberosity fracrure, 204-207,
therapy; Exercise; Heat therapy.
insrrumentation for, 23-24, 23f, 24f
205f,206f
shoulder joint
inl multiple ligarmenrous and rendinous
Supraspinarus tendon
in bicipital tenosynovitis, 40-41
injury, 189-192, 193f-195f
degcnerarion of, 189-192, 193f-195f
in incomplete fusion of caudal glenoid
in osteoarthritis, 202-204,203f,204f
strain of, 44-46, 45f, 46
ossihcation center, 47-48
in osteochondritis dissecans,30,33-35,
Switching sticks, for cannulas, 17, 17f
in osteochondritis dissecans, 38
34f, 36f-38f, 38, 179-180, 179f,
Synovectoiny, in stifle joint osteoarthritis,
in shoulder instability, 44
180f
152
in supraspinatus insertion strain, 45-46
pain manageinent in. See rnder Pain
Synovitis
steroidal drugs in, 214
management.
in hip joint, 110f-112f
stifle joint
portal sites for. See under Portal sites.
in stifle joint, 124
jn caudal cruciate ligament tears, 147
positioning for, 24-26,2Sf,27f
 in cranial cruciate ligament injury,
postoperative care in. See zinder
142-143
Postoperative care.
Tarsal joint
in cruciate ligament avulsion fractures,
prcparation for, 24
arthrodesis of, in osreoarthriris, 184, 184f
146
in shoulder instability, 41-42, 43f, 44
arthroscopy of, 159-177
in medial patellar subluxation, 155
in supraglenoid tuberosity fracure,
anatonic considerations in, 163f, 167,
in osteoarthritis, 153
204-207, 205f, 206f
168f-171f
in osteochondritris dissecans, 149
in supraspinarus insertion strain, 4446,
anesthesia for, 160, 169, 175
in osteomyelitis, 155
45f, 46f
complications of, 173, 175-176
weight control in,220
Sling, for hip dislocation, 114
in fractures, 173-176, 176f
Power shavers, 17-18, 17f
Sodium hyaluronate, as chondroprotectant,
indications for, 167
Prednisone,214
219-220
in instability, 173-176,176f
Preimedication, 24, 25t
Splints, for cruciate liganent fractures, 146
instrumentation for,159-160,160f
Printers, for documentation, 11-12, 12f
Sterilization, of instrumentation, 9, 9f
in oste0arthritis, 182, 184-185,184f
Prohes, 14-15, 15f
Steroidal drugs, 214
in ostcochondritis dissecans, 167-173,
Propofol, for anesthesia induction, 25t
Stifle joint
172f, 174f
Pumps, fluid, 13-14, 13f
arthroscopy of117-157
pain management in, 160, 169, 175
Punch forceps, 15, 15f
anatomic considerations in, 122f,
portal sites fot,160-162,163f,
123-124, 125f, 127f
164-167, 165f, 166f
anesthesia for,120,120f, 132,144,
positioning for, 160, 161f, 162f
Rabbit, shoulder injury of, 202-204, 203f,
147,149, 153-155
postoperativc carc in, 172-173,
204f
in candal cruciare ligamenr tear,
175-176
Radial tear, of meniscus, 139f, 142
146-147, 147f
preparation for, 160, 161f, 162f
Radiocarpal bone
in cranial cruciate ligament injuries,
procedure for, 162-167,165f, 166f
anatony of, 86f, 87f
131-143, 133f-139f, 142f
prognosis for, 173, 175-176
erosion of, 94f
in cruciate liganent fractures, 143-146,
Telescope, 5, 5f, 6f
Radiocarpal joint. See Carpal joint.
144f,146f
Tendonitis, biceps, bilateral, 187, 188f-190f
Radiocarpal ligaments, anatomy of, 86f-89f
indications for, 130-131
Tenosynovitis, hicipital, 38-41, 40f
INDEX·231
Thiopental, for anesthesia induction, 25t
Ulna
Weight management, for joint protection, 
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, in stifle
distal, anatomy of, 86f, 87f
220
 joint lesions, 135, 151
osteotomy of
Wire fixation, of fractures
Tower, arthroscopic, 20, 20f
procedure for, 78
cruciate ligament, 144,145f,146,146f
Traction, for hip dislocation, 114
in ununited anconeal process, 71, 72f,
humeral condyle, 207, 208f, 209f
Triangulation, 56
73, 207-210, 209f, 210f
patellat, 185, 186f
Triple pelvic osteotomy, for hip dysplasia,
Ulnar carpal bone, anatomy of, 87f-89f
supraglenoid tuberosity, 205f, 206
113f
Ulnocarpal ligarments, anatomy of, 86f-89f
Trocars, 8, 8f, 9f, 17f
Trochlear notch, anatomy of, 57f, 58f
Xenon lamps, 10-11, 10f, 11f
Trochlear ridges, of tarsal joint, anatomy of,
Video equipment, 11-12, 12f
167, 168f-171f
Villi, in stifle oint,123
Trochlear sulcus, of tarsal joint, anatomy of,
167,168f-171f
Tungsren-halon lamps, 10-11, 10f, 11f 