Atlasof
SMALLANIMAL
WOUND
MANAGEMENTG
RECONSTRUCTIVE
SURGERY
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Atlasof
Small Animal Wound
Management and
Reconstructive
Surgery
Third Edition
Michael M. Pavletic DVM
 Diplomate American College of Veterinary Surgeons
Director of Surgical Services
Angell Animal Medical Center
Boston, Massachusetts
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Atlasof
Small Animal Wound
Management and
Reconstructive
Surgery
Third Edition
Atlasof
Small Animal Wound
Management and
Reconstructive
Surgery
Third Edition
Michael M. Pavletic DVM
 Diplomate American College of Veterinary Surgeons
Director of Surgical Services
Angell Animal Medical Center
Boston, Massachusetts
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
 First edition first published 1993, W.B. Saunders Company.
Second edition first published 1999, W.B Saunders Company.
Third edition first published 2010.
@ 2010 Michael M. Pavletic
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwel's publishing program has been merged with
Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell
Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC,a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee
code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1124-6/2010.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their prod ucts are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names
used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in thisbook. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering.
 professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be
sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Pavletic, Michael M.
 Atlas of small animal wound management and reconstructive surgery / Michael M. Pavletic. - 3rd ed.
p. / cm.
Rev. ed. of;: Atlas of smallanimal reconstructive surgery / Michael M. Pavletic. 2nd ed. c1999.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1124-6 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-1124-4 (alk. paper)
animal reconstructive surgery. Il. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Dogs-surgery-Atlases. 2. Animals, Domestic-surgery-Atlases. 3. Cats-surgery-Atlases. 4. Reconstructive Surgical
Procedures-veterinary-Atlases. 5. Surgical Flaps-veterinary-Atlases. 6. Wounds and Injuries-veterinary-Atlases. SF 991 P338ab
2010]
SF991.P38 2010
636.089'71-dc22
2009021678
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
Set in 9.5/12 pt Palatino by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited.
Printed in Singapore.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended
particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of
particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow
vided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instruc-
tions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The
fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not
mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may
work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither
the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
12010
Dedication
This book is dedicated to my wife Adria; my daughters
Afton and Maylin; my parents Merle and Gerry; my
mother-in-law Mary; my brothers Frank, Jeff, Mark,
and Briant; and my sister Eileen for their love, help,
encouragement and support. Gone, but not
forgotten, I also dedicate this book to my late
father-in-lawFrank.
contents
Preface
xiii
4.1
Wound Care Products and
Their Use ..
51
Wound Drainage Systems  52
1. The Skin..
Topical Wound Care Products  61
Skin Function  4
Alternative Forms of Wound Therapy
76
Skin Structure   4
Concluding Remarks  76
Cutaneous Adnexa  7
Plate l: Vacuum-Assisted Closure 78
The Hypodermis 10
Cutaneous Circulation  10
 5. Dressings, Bandages,
Congenital Skin Disorders  14
External Support, and Protective
Devices
81
2. Basic Principles of Wound
Introduction 82
Healing.
Composition of a Bandage  82
17
Preventing Bandage Displacement  
66
Introduction 18
Tie-over Dressing/Bandage Technique
100
Wound Healing  18
Pressure Points: Bandage Options
100
 Species Variations in Wound Healing  Z
28
Bandage "Access Windows"
100
Artificial Skin  28
Bandaging Techniques for Skin Grafts
101
Bandaging Techniques for Skin Flaps  101
Splints, Casts, Reinforced Bandages 101
3. Basic Principles of Wound
Miscellaneous Protective Devices
102
Management
31
 Plate 2: Basic Bandage Application for
Introduction  32
Extremities 110
 Patient Presentation3
32
 Plate 3: Tape Stirrups and Padding Dos and
 Mechanisms of Injury and Wound
Don'ts 112
Terminology
Plate 4: Elasticon Bandage Platforms and
Wound Classification
33
Saddles 114
Options for Wound Closure 
35
 Plate 5: Spica Bandages/Splints  116
"Pointers" in Selecting the Proper Closure
Plate 6: Schroeder-Thomas Splint 118
Technique 42
 Plate 7: Schroeder-Thomas Splint: Security
 Basic Wound Management in Six Simple
 Band Application 122
Steps  43
Plate 8: Body Brace 124
vii
vii
Contents
6. Common Complications in
Plate 12: Effects of Skin Tension on Wound
Wound Healing. . .
127
Closure 250
 Plate 13: Patient Positioning Techniques
 Improper Nutritional Support  128
252
 Plate 14: Undermining Skin
254
Medications and Their Influence on
Plate 15: Geometric Patterns to Facilitate
Healing 129
Wound Closure 256
Hypovolemia and Anemia 130
Plate 16: V-Y Plasty
258
The Nonhealing Wound: General
Plate 17: Z-Plasty (Option I)
260
Considerations 130
Plate 18: Z-Plasty (Option I)
262
Failure to Heal by Second Intention 132
Plate 19: Multiple Z-Plasties
264
Scarring and Wound Contracture  138
 Plate 20: Relaxing/Release Incisions 266
Infection  138
Plate 2l: The "Hidden" Intradermal Release
 Draining Tracts
145
Incision 268
 Use of Tourniquets for Lower Extremity
Plate 22: Multiple Release Incisions for
Procedures 149
Extremity Wounds
270
Seromas 150
 Plate 23: Walking Suture Technique 272
Hematomas 151
Plate 24: Skin Stretchers to Offset Incisional
Exposed Bone 151
Tension
274
Wound Dehiscence 153
Plate 25: "Tension" Suture Patterns 
276
Plate 26: Retention Sutures  278
7. Management of Specific
Plate 27: Stent
280
Wounds.
159
Plate 28: Skin "Directing" for Maximum
Coverage
282
Bite Wounds
160
 Plate 29: Relaxing Incision to Reduce Flap
Burns 170
Tension
Inhalation Injuries 181
284
Chemical Burns 182
10. Skin-Stretching
Electrical Injuries
184
Radiation Injuries
187
Techniques. .
287
Frostbite
191
 Physiology of Skin Stretching  288
Projectile Injuries
193
Presuturing
¥288
 Impalement Injuries
Skin Stretchers 288
Pressure Sores  216
Skin Expanders 293
Hygroma
221
 Plate 30: Presuturing Technique
296
Snakebite 224
 Plate 3l: Application of Skin
Brown Recluse Spider Bites  2
225
Stretchers
298
Porcupine Quills  225
Plate 32: Skin Stretcher Substitution for
 Plate 9: Pipe Insulation Protective Device:
Presuturing 300
Elbow 230
Plate 33: Skin Expanders 302
8. Regional Considerations....
233
11. Local Flaps. .
307
The Canine and Feline Profiles 234
ntroduction 308
Plate 10: Surgical Technique Menu 236
Advancement Flaps  309
Rotating (Pivoting) Flaps  309
9. Tension Relieving
Plate 34: Single Pedicle Advancement
Flap318
Techniques..
241
 Plate 35: Bipedicle Advancement Flap
320
Introduction 242
 Plate 36: Transposition Flap (90
 Skin Tension in the Dog and Cat 242
degrees)322
Plate 1l: Tension Lines 248
 ( )    
Contents
ix
Plate 38: Interpolation Flap 328
14. Free Grafts..
403
Plate 39: Rotation Flap 332
Free Skin Grafts 404
 Plate 40: Forelimb Fold Flap
334
Classification of Free Grafts  404
Graft Thickness  405
12. Distant Flap Techniques....
337
 Partial-Coverage Grafts
405
Distant Flaps  338
Dermatomes
405
Direct Flaps 338
 Preservation by Refrigeration
1409
Indirect Flaps 338
Intraoperative Considerations
409
The Delay Phenomenon 3
342
Bandaging Technique for Skin Grafts 
4
411
 Plate 41: Direct Flap: Single Pedicle (Hinge)
Plate 60: Punch Grafts
416
Flap 344
Plate 6l: Pinch Grafts 418
 Plate 42: Direct Flap: Bipedicle (Pouch)
Plate 62: Strip Grafts 420
Flap348
Plate 63: Stamp Grafts
422
 Plate 43: Indirect Flap: Delayed Tube
Plate 64: Sheet Grafts 424
Flap354
Plate 65: Dermatome: Split-Thickness Skin
Graft Harvesting
426
13. Axial Pattern Skin Flaps....
357
Plate 66: Mesh Grafts (With Expansion
Units) 428
Introduction: Axial Pattern Flaps 358
Plate 67: Mesh Grafts (With Scalpel
Island Arterial Flaps 358
Blades) 430
Reverse Saphenous Conduit Flaps 358
Secondary Axial Pattern Flaps  358
15. Facial Reconstruction.. . .
Plate 44: Four Major Axial Pattern Flaps of
433
the Canine Trunk 370
Introduction: Facial Reconstructive
 Plate 45: Skin Position and Axial Pattern Flap
Surgery
434
Development 372
Plate 68: Repair of Lower Labial
Plate 46: Omocervical Axial Pattern Flap
374
Avulsion
446
Plate 47: Thoracodorsal Axial Pattern Flap
376
Plate 69: Repair of Upper Lip Avulsion 448
Plate 48: Lateral Thoracic Axial Pattern
Plate 70: Wedge Resection Technique 450
Flap378
Plate 7l: Rectangular Resection
 Plate 49: Superficial Brachial Axial Pattern
Technique  452
Flap380
Plate 72: Full-Thickness Labial Advancement
Plate 50: Caudal Superficial Epigastric Axial
Technique (Upper Lip) 454
Pattern Flap 382
Plate 73: Full-Thickness Labial Advancement
 Plate 51: Cranial Superficial Epigastric Axial
Technique (Lower Lip)  456
Pattern Flap 384
 Plate 74: Buccal Rotation Technique
458
 Plate 52: Deep Circumflex Iliac Axial Pattern
 Plate 75: Lower Labial Lift-Up
 Flap: Dorsal Branch
386
Technique
460
Plate 53: Deep Circumflex lliac Axial Pattern
 Plate 76: Upper Labial Pull-Down
Flap: Ventral Branch 388
Technique 462
Plate 54: Flank Fold Flap: Hind Limb
390
Plate 77: Labial/Buccal Reconstruction with
Plate 55: Genicular Axial Pattern Flap
392
 Inverse Tubed Skin Flap
464
Plate 56: Reverse Saphenous Conduit
Plate 78: Skin Flap for Upper Labial and
Flap 394
Buccal Replacement (Facial Axial Pattern
Plate 57: Caudal Auricular Axial Pattern
Flap) 468
Flap396
 Plate 79: Cleft Lip Repair (Primary Cleft,
 Plate 58: Superficial Temporal Axial Pattern
Cheiloschisis, Harelip) 470
Flap 398
Plate 80: Rostral Labial Pivot Flaps  472
Plate 59: Lateral Caudal (Tail) Axial Pattern
Plate 8l: Oral Commissure Advancement
Flap400
Technique 474
Contents
X
Plate 82: Brachycephalic Facial Fold
18. Foot Pad Reconstruction.... 535
Correction 476
Introduction 536
Plate 83: Cheilopexy Technique for
Pad Laceration and Lesion Excision 536
Drooling  478
Digital Pad Transfer 538
Metacarpal/Metatarsal Pad Transfer  538
Accessory Carpal Pad  538
16. Myocutaneous Flaps and
Pad Grafting
538
Muscle Flaps .
481
Digital Flaps for Wound Closure 538
Introduction 482
Fusion Podoplasty  538
Myocutaneous Flaps  482
 Plate 102: Digital Flap Technique: Major
Muscle Flaps  482
Digital-Interdigital Defects  546
 Plate 84: Latissimus Dorsi Myocutaneous
 Plate 103: Digital Flap Technique: Major
Flap490
Defects of Digits Two or Five 548
 Plate 85: Cutaneous Trunci Myocutaneous
 Plate 104: Digital Pad Transfer 550
Flap492
Plate 105: Metatarsal/Metacarpal Pad
Plate 86: Latissimus Dorsi Muscle
Transfer 552
Flap494
Plate 106: Pad Grafting
554
 Plate 87: External Abdominal Oblique
 Plate 107: Segmental Pad Grafting
Muscle Flap 496
Technique  556
Plate 88: Caudal Sartorius Muscle
 Plate 108: Fusion Podoplasty 558
Flap498
Plate 89: Cranial Sartorius Muscle
Flap 500
19. Major Eyelid Reconstruction  561
 Plate 90: Temporalis Muscle Flap 502
Introduction 562
Plate 9l: Transversus Abdominis Muscle
The Eyelids 562
Flap504
Plate 109: Lip-to-Lid Procedure 564
Plate 92: Semitendinosus Muscle and
Plate ll0: Oral Mucosal Graft onto Skin
 Myocutaneous Flaps  506
Flap 568
Plate 93: Flexor Carpi Ulnaris Muscle
 Plate 11l: Third Eyelid-Skin Flap
Flap508
Reconstruction of the Lower Eyelid 570
17. Oral Reconstructive Surgical
20. Nasal Reconstruction
Techniques.....
511
Techniques.....
573
Introduction 512
Introduction: Nasal Anatomy  574
Plate 94: Mucosal Flaps 518
Traumatic Wound Management 574
 Plate 95: Palatoplasty: Bipedicle
Neoplasia 576
Advancement 519
Neoplasms and Surgical Margins  576
 Plate 96: Cleft Palate Repair: Mucoperiosteal
Nasal Reconstruction Options  577
Flap Technique 522
Plate ll2: Septal Coverage Using Cutaneous
Plate 97: Palatine Mucosal Flap 524
Advancement Flaps 584
 Plate 98: Soft Palate/Pharyngeal Mucosal
Plate 113: Bilateral Sulcus Flap Technique 586
Flaps 526
Plate 114: Septal Resection Technique  588
 Plate 99: Full-Thickness Labial Flap Closure
Plate 115: Alar Fold Flaps 590
of Oronasal Fistulas 528
Plate ll6: Musculofascial Island Labial
 Plate 100: Cartilage Grafts for Palatal
Flap592
Fistulas 530
Plate 117: Cantilever Suture Technique
596
Plate 10l: Angularis Oris Mucosal
Plate 1l18: Labial Mucosal Inversion
Flap532
Technique 6
009
Contents
xi
21. Cosmetic Closure
Plate 126: Urethral Reconstruction for
Techniques... .
603
 Subanal Hypospadias  642
 Plate 127: Preputial Urethrostomy
Cosmetic Considerations 604
Technique 644
Causes of Scars 604
 Minimization of Scarring  604
23. Miscellaneous Reconstructive
Plate 119: Scar Concealment 608
Plate 120: W-Plasty 610
Surgical Techniques. ...... .
647
Plate 121: Dog Ear: Surgical Correction 612
Omentum 648
Scrotum  649
Tail Fold Intertrigo (Screw Tail)  650
22. Preputial Reconstructive
Vulvar Fold Pyoderma 651
Surgery....
615
 Closure Options for Defects of the Pinna
657
Introduction 616
Plate 128: Omental Flap Options  658
 Plate 129: Scrotal Flap Technique 660
Surgical Conditions
616
Surgical Techniques
Plate 130: Caudectomy for Tail Fold
625
 Plate 122: Preputial Ostium
Intertrigo 662
632
Plate 131: Episioplasty 664
Erlargement
Plate 123: Preputial Ostium Reduction 634
 Plate 132: Closure Options for Select Pinnal
 Plate 124: Preputial Advancement
Defects 666
Technique
636
 Plate 125: Phallopexy
640
Index...
669
Preface
nce considered a small niche of veterinary
The reader will also note the expanded number of
medicine, plastic and reconstructive surgery
case-based photographs that are now in color to com-
has expanded dramatically over the past three
 plement both the text and the plate illustrations. Forty
decades.
additional plates have been added, including new sec-
 This third edition of my Atlas includes additional
tions on bandage/splint techniques, reconstructive
wound management and reconstructive surgical tech-
surgery of the prepuce, and the management of prob-
niques that have evolved since the 1999 edition. I have
lematic skin fold conditions. I trust that the reader will 
 expanded the text to include the most current informa-
find this book a practical, informative, and single-
tion on the management of problematic wounds and
source reference for the surgical restoration of our
wound care products available to the small animal
small animal patients.
surgeon. Information boxes are included throughout
 I would again like to thank my artist, Sandra Durant,
the text to emphasize important points and to add
for her invaluable assistance in creating this third
 personal observations based on my 35 years of experi-
edition.
ence and insight in wound management and recon-
structive surgery.
xiii
Atlas of
Small Animal Wound
Management and
Reconstructive
Surgery
Third Edition
The Skin
Skin Function 
4
Skin Structure
4
Cutaneous Adnexa
The Hypodermis  10
Cutaneous Circulation 10
Congenital Skin Disorders  14
4
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
SKIN FUNCTION
such as around the hair follicle orifices. These two
layers are well developed in the footpads, but are absent
 in the planum nasale. Epidermal pegging, evident in
The integument is the largest organ of the body and
 serves as the body's first line of defense against
the footpads, planum nasale, and lip of the dog, is not
 microorganisms. It comprises 24% of body weight of
present in the hairy skin. In contrast, the dermal-
 the puppy but only 12% of that of an adult dog. The
epidermal junction of hairy skin is thrown into folds
 outer horny layer, the stratum corneum, provides pro-
that parallel the skin surface. Small tactile elevations
termed epidermal papillae are found over hairy skin sur-
tection against desiccation and hydration.
The skin is a sensory receptor for touch, pressure,
faces of the dog and cat. The epidermis is generally
vibration, pain, heat, and cold. Its multiple functions
thicker in areas that lack a thick hair coat and
thinner in regions with a dense hair growth (Fig. 1-1
include vitamin D production; storage of water, fat,
electrolytes, carbohydrates, and proteins; a barrier
and 1-2). The nose and digital pads have the thickest
against chemicals and radiation; and along with the
epidermis.
subcutaneous fat, insulation.
The Dermis
SKIN STRUCTURE
 The skin is composed of an outer stratified epithelium
The dermis (corium) is composed of collagenous, retic-
(epidermis) and an underlying fibrous dermis (corium).
ular (precollagen), and elastic fibers within a muco-
polysaccharide  ground  substance.  This  ground
The epidermis is derived from ectoderm, whereas the
substance is composed of hyaluronic acid and chon-
dermis is of mesenchymal origin. Each of these two
droitin sulfuric acid; it is the major component of the
layers will be discussed separately.
dermis. Ninety percent of the dermal fibers are com-
posed of collagen. Fibroblasts, macrophages, plasma
Epidermis
cells, and mast cells present throughout the dermis are
more numerous in the superficial dermal layer. Occa-
sionally chromatophores and fat cells are noted. The
The epidermis originates as a single layer of cuboidal
dermis contains the cutaneous capillary network, lym-
ectodermal cells that becomes stratified as the fetus
phatics, nerve components, arrector pili muscles, hair
matures. In hair-bearing areas, the epidermis of hairy
follicles, and glandular structures.
skin, consists of three major layers: the stratum cylin-
The dermis of the dog and cat is divided into the
dricum (stratum basale), the stratum spinosum
superficial stratum papillare and the deep stratum
(stratum malpighi or prickle cell layer), and the
reticulare. The stratum papillare has fine elastic and
stratum corneum. The combined stratum cylindricum
reticular fibers in densely interwoven collagenous
and stratum spinosum layers form the stratum germi-
bundles. The basement membrane is formed from
nativum. Mitotic activity in both layers is responsible
reticular fibers and a viscous ground substance, and
for proliferation of epidermal cells.
the stratum cylindricum is attached to the basement
membrane via cytoplasmic processes. The stratum
reticulare is composed of coarse, densely interwoven
collagen bundles.
Surgical Relevance
The most pliable skin (axilla, flank, dorsum of the
 In full-thickness skin wounds, the stratum germi-
neck) has small and more loosely woven dermal col-
nativum along the viable skin margin is the source
 lagen bundles and greater numbers of elastic fibers in
of epithelial cells to cover the exposed vascularized
the papillary layer (Fig. 1-3). Less pliable skin (tail, ear,
wound bed.
digital pads) have wider, more closely packed collagen
bundles with fewer elastic fibers. Collagen fibers in
areas of thick skin (head, dorsal body surfaces) are
roughly parallel to the cutaneous surface.
Melanocytes, which originate from the neural crest
 Skin of animals essentially is a nonhomogenous vis-
of the embryo, are located in the stratum cylindricum
coelastic tissue with the combined characteristics of a
 and the lower layer of the stratum spinosum. In a
viscous fluid and elastic solid. The inherent elasticity
few hairy areas, the stratum granulosum and stratum
of the skin describes the natural ability of skin to
lucidum are found where keratinization is retarded,
stretch or deform during normal activities.
ERS
HG. 1-1 (A, B) Histologic slide of canine skin identifying the following structures: E, epidermis; D, dermis; HYP, hypodermis; CHF,
compound hair follicle; ERS, external root sheath; SG, sebaceous glands; DCA, direct cutaneous artery; DCV, direct cutaneous vein;
PC, panniculus carnosus muscle; APM, arrector pili muscle. (Slides courtesy of Melanie A. Buote, DVM, DACVP.)
HYP
一
HG. 1-2 (A, B) Histologic slide of feline skin identifying the following structures: SC, stratum corneum; E, epidermis; D, dermis;
HYP, hypodermis; CHF, compound hair follicles; SWG, sweat glands. (Slides courtesy of Melanie A. Buote, DVM, DACVP.)
6
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 1-3 (A) Lateral and (B) anterior view of a German shepherd demonstrating the inherent elasticity of the skin in the cervical
region.
 tor pili muscles also are larger than those in the dog.
Surgical Relevance
The stratum papillare of feline skin contains fine, more
Surgeons normally assess the inherent elasticity of
uniform collagenous fibers, which usually parallel the
skin by grasping and lifting the skin or by pushing
epidermis. In the stratum reticulare, these fibers are
the skin with the index finger toward the direction
dense, irregularly arranged, and three times larger
of the proposed surgical site. Potential lines of
than those of the papillary layer. In the most flexible
 tension are assessed, better allowing the surgeon to
cutaneous areas of the cat—the dorsal neck, scapular
decide on how to close the surgical defect. (See
region, and lateral upper forelimb—the collagen
Plates 11, 12, and 28.)
bundles are smaller and more loosely arranged.
The thickness of the skin is directly related to the
The skin's extensibility or ability to stretch is
thickness of the dermal layer and varies according to
dependent upon three factors occurring consecutively
body area, sex, breed, and species. In thick skin, the
as a load (stretching force), applied to the skin, is pro-
dermis usually is thicker than 1mm, whereas in thin
 gressively increased: (1) convolutions in dermal col-
skin, the dermal thickness is less than 1mm. The
lagen progressively straighten; (2) dermal collagen
thickest skin of the dog and cat is located over the
aut jo uonnaip au u iao yoea o laeied uaie siaq
head and the dorsum of the neck, back, and sacrum.
applied load; and (3) fully aligned collagen fibers
The thinnest skin is located along the ventral body
U saseau jeano jo uonesidde uodn Aquo puaxa
surface, the medial surface of the limbs, and the inner
tension. As a result, it is possible to mechanically
pinna.
stretch skin sufficiently to facilitate wound closure by
the processes of mechanical creep and stress relaxation.
Surgical Relevance
(See Chapter 10.)
The durability of fur-bearing skin is primarily the
result of the dermal thickness. Skin thickness is
Surgical Relevance
taken into consideration when closing wounds in
Skin can be manipulated to stretch beyond the
 body areas more subject to direct trauma, including
limits of its inherent elasticity by the application of
skin overlying bony prominences. Dense hair
a force that stretches skin progressively over time.
 growth also affords some degree of protection.
 This newly recruited skin can be used to close prob-
lematic wounds. Examples include presuturing
(Plate 30), skin stretchers (Plates 24, 31, 32), and
The Extracellular Matrix
tissue expanders (Plate 33). Details are discussed in
Chapters 9 and 10.
The tissue component outside the cellular walls of
 organs is referred to as the extracelular matrix (ECM):
 Cat skin contains collagen bundles, which are gen-
the noncellular components of the dermis are the ECM
erally coarser and denser than canine skin. The arrec-
of the skin. Tissues cells and the ECM are in a state of
The Skin
"dynamic reciprocity." In embryonic development,
develops into the hair bulb. The hair bulb molds
their interaction plays an essential role in cellular dif-
 aroumd a mesenchymal papilla. These germinative
ferentiation and function. Cells in turn secrete macro-
cells give rise to the inner epithelial root sheath and
 molecules into their immediate environment, forming
the hair shaft. The outer epithelial root sheath, which
a matrix between the developing cells. The regional
encircles the hair shaft, is a continuation of the stratum
embryonic mesenchymal tissue induces epithelial cell
cylindricum.
differentiation: epithelial cells, in turn, influence the
development and structure of the mesodermal tissues.
The ECM includes the fibrillar proteins and gly-
Surgical Relevance
 a    () s
 In partial thickness skin losses, both the epidermis
forming proteoglycans. The dermal ECM can be
and variable portions of the dermis have been
described as a network of fibrillar proteins organized
destroyed. The epithelial cells comprising the
- o a so go p ar e m
extermal root sheath of the compound hair follicles
cipal types of the skin's ECM are the basement mem-
are the primary source of epithelial cells required
brane (or basal lamina) in contact with the basal epithelial
for reepithelialization of partial thickness skin
cells and the underlying stromal or connective tissue.
defects. (See Fig. 1-4.)
The stromal tissue provides structural integrity and
support to the cellular components of the skin. Colla-
gens are the major proteins of the ECM. However, the
Sebaceous glands develop as extensions of the outer
ECM comprises a variety of extracellular proteins that
root sheath at the upper part of the follicle In dogs and
may be classified on a functional basis: structural
cats, an apocrine sweat gland develops with each hair
(basal lamina and connective tissue) or adhesive (fibrin
follicle and extends into the hypodermis. The duct
and fibronectin); remodeling  or counteradhesive
empties into the common portion of the follicle complex
(thrombospondin, tenascin, SPARC—secreted protein
between the skin surface and sebaceous gland orifice.
acidic and rich in cysteine); proteolytic (serine proteases,
The arrector pili muscles originate in the dermal
pioaoidiue pue ([Nnl saseaoidoteja xiie
papillary layer and insert in the connective tissue of
(serpins, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, tissue
the hair follicle. They are anchored by elastic fibers at
inhibitors of metalloproteases [TIMPs]). These pro-
their attachments and are innervated by the autonomic
teins have a complex interrelationship during wound
nervous system. The arrector muscles are especially
 healing that will be discussed in Chapter 2.
well developed along the back of the dog and cat,
causing the hair to bristle upon their contraction.
In the newborn animal, hair follicles develop from
CUTANEOUSADNEXA
a simple follicle containing a single hair to a com-
pound follicle containing 7-10 hairs emerging from a
The cutaneous appendages (adnexa) of hairy skin
common follicle orifice. This occurs at 28 weeks of age
include the hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous
as a result of accessory buds arising from the original
glands. Other cutaneous glandular structures include
follicle. Sebaceous glands also become compound,
the mammary glands, supracaudal (tail) glands, anal
emptying where the hairs are contained as a single
sacs, superficial circumanal glands, and perianal (deep
tubular follicle. The compound follicle contains a main
circumanal) glands. All these structures are ectoder-
Aoom tau jo aqumu e Aq papunoims iu pren8 10
mal in origin.
lanugo, or underhairs. Although the hair shafts share
the same external follicular orifice, they branch into
their own respective hair follicles below the level of the
Hair
sebaceous glands. The guard hair follicle is larger and
penetrates into the subcutaneous tissue.
The hair follicles are the units of hair production. They
 Feline hairs are arranged in clusters of two, three,
are located in the lower portions of the dermis but also
four, and five, grouped around a central guard hair.
extend into the subcutaneous tissue (subcutis, hypo-
Clusters of two and three are more common on the
dermis). The wall of the hair follicle is continuous with
dorsal aspect of the feline body; clusters of four and five
 the epidermis and is divided into inner and outer root
usually occur on the ventral body and lower extremi-
sheaths. During fetal development hair follicles origi-
ties. Each lateral group contains 3 primary hairs sur-
nate from clusters of germinative cells in the epider-
rounded by 6 to 12 lanugo hairs. In adult dogs, 3 to 15
mis. These ectodermal cells sink into the dermis and
hairs are noted in each compound follicle, whereas in
form a cylindrical epidermal peg, the base of which
cats, the compound follicles contain 12 to 20 hairs.
ASC
FIG. 1-4 (A) A compound hair follicle (HF) with its associated sebaceous gland (SG), apocrine sweat gland (ASG), and arrector pili
muscle (APM). Note the epidermal cellular components of these cutaneous adnexa, which are continuous with the epidermal surface
"(siapunes M eudiapeual pa puz fua8.ms puruy us fo yoqx pa Ha ial1els :u1 suaunau au eo6t NN oaaed) (s)
[xa a  o ad   da a ) a  hans pe sida a go s 
root sheath of each hair follicle.
The Skin
Sebaceous Glands
Surgical Relevance
Siamese cats have a temperature-dependent coat
Sebaceous glands commonly originate from the exter-
color, owing to an enzyme that converts melanin
nal root sheath. They produce an oily secretion that
precursors to melanin at lower temperatures. As a
exits through the pilosebaceous canal to keep the skin
result hair coats can grow back darker after clip-
and hair soft and pliable and to protect them from
ping, a fact best explained to the owner prior to the
excessive moisture and drying. Sebaceous glands are
surgical procedure.
particularly in the tail gland area.
The sebaceous gland complex in the cat is smaller
Vibrissae are larger, more prominent tactile or sinus
and simpler in structure than that of the dog. Larger
 hairs involving the muzzle and facial area. They allow
sebaceous glands are found in association with the hair
dogs and cats to locate and assess the proximity of
follicles of the upper jaw, prepuce, and dorsal tail
adjacent objects.
surface. Sebaceous glands not associated with hair fol-
Hair growth rates vary seasonally among breeds.
licles include the meibomian, or tarsal, glands of the
Hair growth in male beagles has been noted to be
eyelids and glands of the labia, vulva, anus, prepuce,
0.4mm/day in the winter and 0.34 mm/day in the
glans penis, and external ear canal. These holocrine
summer, whereas greyhounds have a growth rate of
glands empty directly onto the epithelial surface.
0.18mm/day in the fall and 0.04mm/day in the
 Circumanal glands (superficial sebaceous glands)
 summer. Hair growth is more rapid in the winter. As
and perianal glands (deep sebaceous glands) are modi-
a rule, short canine hair coats take approximately 130
fied sebaceous glands located at the mucocutaneous
days to regrow. However, as long as 18 months is
junction of the anus. Perianal glandular tissue also can
required for regrowth of the hair coat in long-haired
be found in the skin of the prepuce and groin. Circum-
breeds such as the Afghan. These facts must be taken
anal glands have well-defined ducts and contain fat.
into account prior to clipping a patient, particularly
Perianal glands have solid ducts and show no secre-
when dealing with show dogs and cats.
tory activity. Circumanal glands contain fat, unlike the
 The characteristics of the hair coat in dogs and cats
deeper perianal glands. Perianal gland cells are filled
vary with the location on the body. The hair coat is
with proteinaceous cytoplasmic granules.
usually thicker over the back and sides of the body,
whereas the hair inside the ears and on the flanks,
ventral abdomen, and underside of the tail is thinner.
Cosmetic wound closure should account for variations
Sweat Glands
in growth patterns and direction of growth of the coat.
Sweat (sudoriferous) glands are apocrine and mero-
crine (eccrine) in nature. Cutaneous apocrine sweat
glands are large, simple, saccular or tubular structures
Surgical Relevance
with a coiled secretory portion and a straight duct. The
When attempting to close major wounds, hair
glands may be tortuous or serpentine. The apocrine
growth pattern usually plays a secondary role in
sweat gland duct opens at the external root sheath
selecting the method of closure. The surgeon and
between the skin surface and pilosebaceous canal.
owner must consider the safest, simplest, and most
Merocrine glands are coiled, simple, tubular glands
economical method to effectively restore function
found mainly in the footpads of the dog and empty
to the affected area. It is the author's experience
directly onto the epidermal surface. Sweat glands are
that changes in regional hair growth color and
 better developed in the long, fine-haired dog breeds.
sramo jad jo urasuon snonas e jou are naed
Sweat glands in the hairy skin of dogs and cats do
not participate actively in the central thermoregulatory
mechanism but protect the skin from an excessive rise in
Cutaneous Glands
temperature. This is in contrast to human beings, in
whom the cutaneous sweat glands are vital for vapori-
The glandular structures of the skin include the seba-
zational heatloss to cool the body at high temperatures.
ceous glands, sweat glands, supracaudal (tail) glands,
A number of apocrine glands have specialized
anal sacs, circumanal glands, and mammary glands.
structures and functions. These include Moll's glands
These ectodermally derived structures form by the
of the eyelids, the ceruminous glands of the external
 downgrowth of epidermal cells into the dermis during
ear canal, the anal sac, and the glands of the prepuce,
embryonic development.
vulva, and circumanal region.
10
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
The mammary glands of the skin are compound
in the dog and cat (Fig. 1-1 and 1-2). The panniculus
tubuloalveolar apocrine glands resembling sweat
muscles in the head and neck regions are the platysma,
 glands in their mode of development. They undergo
sphincter colli superficialis, and sphincter colli profun-
up pue Auand up saro snonnsun
dus. The cutaneous trunci is the major cutaneous
and after lactation in the female. They remain rudi-
muscle of the body, extending from the gluteal region
mentary in the male dog and cat.
cranial and ventral to the pectoral region. It is not
Anal sacs have a thin, stratified squamous epithelial
present beneath the skin over the middle and lower
lining that includes sebaceous and apocrine sweat
portions of the limbs. Fibers from this muscle make up
 glands. Sebaceous glands tend to line the neck of the
the preputialis muscle in the male dog and the
sac, whereas the apocrine glands are concentrated in
supramammarius muscle in the female dog.
the fundus.
The cat has a similar cutaneous muscle distribution.
The cutaneous trunci (cutaneous maximus) of the cat
extends over the thoracic and abdominal regions of the
Surgical Relevance
body. The platysma in the cat covers the head and
 Increased secretory function of the sebaceous and
neck. In the cervical region, the platysma can be sub-
aprocrine sweat glands is noted with inflammatory
divided into the supercervicocutaneous muscle and
processes involving the skin, especially where a
cervicofacial muscle along a line of attachment to the
large number of these glandular structures are
skin. The associated sphincter colli superficialis muscle
assembled. During these inflammatory processes,
is smaller and of irregular occurrence. The feline pan-
more frequent bandage changes may be expected
niculus muscle is a component of the stratum fibrosum
Wound care is important to the prevention of tissue
subcutis, the deep connective tissue layer of the
maceration and infection secondary to moisture
hypodermis.
accumulation.
 Parmiculus muscle fibers are very irregular and
tend to run transversely. Fibers penetrate the dermis
and allow voluntary movement of the skin. The cuta-
THE HYPODERMIS
neous trunci is used to shake the skin in response to
irritating or noxious stimuli. Repeated contraction
The hypodermis (subcutis) is associated with the over
(shivering) of this muscle can increase heat production
lying dermis. This subcutaneous tissue is composed
in cold animals. The platysma muscle moves the
primarily of fat with loose collagenous trabeculae and
vibrissae and gives expression to the face. The prepu-
elastic fibers. It varies in thickness regionally but is
tial muscle in dogs helps to draw the prepuce over the
poorly developed beneath the eyelids, ears, and
glans penis after erection. The supramammary muscle
scrotum, and other areas where the skin is closely
aids in the support of the mammary glands and
attached to underlying structures.
 perhaps in milk ejection in the bitch.
The inherent elasticity of the skin; its lack of firm
attachments to bone, muscle, and fascia; and the length
and extensibility of the direct cutaneous vessels
Surgical Relevance
account for the high degree of mobility of skin over the
The direct cutaneous vascular supply and associ-
head, neck, and trunk of the dog and cat. In one histo-
ated subdermal plexus of the skin are closely asso-
logical study, two distinct layers of the hypodermis
ciated with the parniculus muscle layer, where
were reported: the stratum adiposum subcutis (con-
present. Preservation of this thin muscle layer with
taining fat) and a deeper stratum fibrosum subcutis,
the overlying skin helps preserve cutaneous circu-
which includes the panniculus muscle layer.
 lation during the surgical manipulation of the skin
The hypodermis is closely associated with normal
(e.g, skin flaps, tissue undermining). See Figures
skin function. Direct cutaneous vessels must traverse
1-5 and 1-6.
this layer to supply the overlying skin. In this respect,
the panniculus muscles play an important role during
the surgical elevation of the skin (Fig. 1-1 and l-2).
CUTANEOUS CIRCULATION
The cardiovascular system is the first major system to
Panniculus Muscles
function during embryonic development. The heman-
gioblast is believed to be the precursor to blood vessels
The panniculus muscle (panmiculus carnosus) is a col-
and blood cells during embryonic development. Blood
lection of thin muscles beneath some cutaneous areas
vessels are constructed by two processes: vasculogene-
The Skin
11
sis and angiogenesis. In vasculogenesis, blood vessels
are created de novo from the lateral plate mesoderm.
Hemangioblasts formed from these splanchnic meso-
dermal cells condense into "blood islands." The inner
cells of these blood islands become hematopoetic stem
cells, the precursors of blood cells. The outer cells
become angioblasts, the precursors of blood vessels.
Angioblasts differentiate into endothelial cells.
Endothelial tubes form and interconnect to form the
primary capillary plexus. Angiogenesis is the process in
which this primary capillary network is remodeled
FIG. 1-5 Skin reflected from the back of a cat cadaver. Blue
 and pruned into distinct arteries, veins, and capillary
beds. The developing vascular network is essential to
latex has been injected into the arterial system to highlight the
supplying the tissues with the necessary oxygen and
direct cutaneous arteries. The thin cutaneous trunci
nutrients essential to fetal development. Cytokines or
(panniculus) muscles on each side of the cat join over the
 growth factors play a central role in the initiation of
dorsal midline (small arrows). A direct cutaneous artery can be
vasculogenesis.
seen approaching the panniculus muscle and overlying skin in 
The cutaneous vascular system is divided into three
parallel fashion (large arrow). As it arborizes, terminal
interconnected levels:
branches "form" and supply the subdermal plexus. Note the
1.
The deep, subdermal, or subcutaneous
"mirror" image formed by the direct cutaneous vasculature on
plexus
each side of the midline. (Pavletic MM. 2003. The integument.
2.
The middle, or cutaneous plexus
In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed.,
3.
The superficial, or subpapillary plexus
250-9. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.)
 This general vascular arrangement is present in the
hairy skin. Variations in the arrangement are noted in
the canine external ear, footpad, nipple, and the muco-
cutaneous junctions of the nostril, lip, eyelid, prepuce,
vulva, and anus.
Cutaneous (Middle) and
Superficial Plexuses
The Subdermal Plexus
The subdermal plexus supplies the hair bulb and folli-
cle, tubular glands, and deeper portions of the ducts as
The subdermal plexus is the major vascular network
well as the arrector pili muscle. Branches of the subder-
 to the overlying skin. The vessels of this plexus gener-
mal plexus ascend into the dermis to form the middle,
ally run in the subcutaneous fatty and areolar tissue
or cutaneous plexus located at the sebaceous glands.
on the deep face of the dermis of the middle to distal
Branches fromthecutaneousplexus ascend and descend
portions of the limbs where no panniculus muscle is
into the dermis to supply the sebaceous glands and
present. Where there is a layer of cutaneous muscle,
reinforce the capillary networks around the hair folli-
the subdermal plexus lies both superficial and deep
cles, tubular gland ducts, and arrector pili muscle. The
to it (Fig. 1-5). An experimental study (Pavletic) on
middle plexus shows developmental and positional
the misapplication of subcutaneous pedicle flaps in the
variations according to the distribution of the hair fol-
 dog demonstrated the vital relationship between the
licles in the skin. Radicals from the middle plexus
parmiculus muscle and the overlying skin. Complete
ascend to supply the superficial plexus. The superficial
severance of the parniculus muscle results in necrosis
plexus lies in the outer layer of the dermis. Capillary
of the island flap, whereas preservation of the muscu-
loops from this plexus project into the dermal papillary
lar layer assures its survival by preserving the subder-
bodies to supply the epidermal papillae and adjacent
mal plexus. The skin should always be undermined in
epidermis. However, the capillary loop system and
the fascial plane beneath the cutaneous musculature to
papillary bodies are poorly developed in the dog and
preserve the integrity of the subdermal plexus. In areas
cat, umlike the human, anthropoid ape, and pig, all of
devoid of this muscle layer, one should undermine in
which have well-developed capillary loops. This ana-
the fascial plane well below the dermal surface to pre-
tomical difference explains why canine skin generally
serve it (Fig. 1-6).
does not normally blister with superficial burns.
12
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
DOG & CAT
EPiDERMIS
SUPERfICIaL PLeXUS
DERMIS
[MIDDLe PlEXUS
PANNICULUS
DEEP OR
HYPODErMiS
MUSCLE 
SUBDERMAL PLEXUS
DIReCt CUtaNEOUS
SKELETAL
MUSCULATURE
ARTERY AND VEIN
FIG. 1-6 Cutaneous circulation in the dog and cat. The subdermal plexus is supplied by terminal branches of direct cutaneous
vessels at the level of the panniculus muscle in the dog and cat. Note the parallel relationship between the direct cutaneous vessels
and the overlying skin. This is unlike the perpendicular orientation of musculocutaneous vessels in the human. (Pavletic MM. 2003.
The integument. In Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 250-9. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.)
lying muscle mass before ascending to the subdermal
Surgical Relevance
plexus. Direct cutaneous arteries run parallel to the
Split-thickness skin grafts are normally harvested
 pareduos us au jo eare iajeana e Aiddns pue us
with the use of a dermatome. The depth of the
with a single musculocutaneous artery but play a sec-
dermal incision will expose different levels of the
omdary role in the total cutaneous circulatory pattern
dermal vascular network. For example, thinner
in the human (Fig. 1-5 and 1-6).
grafts expose the finer, numerous vascular chan-
 Hughes and Dransfield divided arteries supplying
nels of the superficial plexus. Exposure of the
the canine skin into two groups: mixed cutaneous
 graf's vascular channels increases the probability
arteries and simple cutaneous arteries. Mixed cutane-
of successful revascularization. For this reason, thin
 ous arteries run through a muscle mass and supply a
split-thickness skin grafts reportedly have a higher
 significant number of branches to it before emerging
 probability of revascularization when compared to
and supplying the skin. Simple cutaneous arteries give
thicker skin grafts. The bleeding pattern on the cut
few branches to muscles, between which they run,
dermal surface will reflect the depth of the graft
before supplying the skin. Despite the descriptive sim-
harvested.
ilarities to the perforator-musculocutaneous and per-
forator-direct cutaneous systems of humans, all vessels
in the skin of dogs and cats approach and travel paral-
Cutaneous Arteries
lel to the skin and are direct cutaneous arteries (Figs.
1-7 and 1-8). Standard anatomy texts illustrate the
superficial arteries of the canine trunk (Fig. 1-9).
Segmental vessels arising from the aorta, well beneath
the body muscle mass, give off perforator branches
that traverse the skeletal muscle to supply the subder-
mal plexus. Two types of arteries supply the cutaneous
circulation in the human: musculocutaneous arteries
Clinical Relevance
and direct cutaneous arteries.  Musculocutaneous
By far, the single most important consideration in
arteries are the primary vascular supply to the skin of
reconstructive surgery is preservation of the circu-
humans, apes, and swine. Perforator arteries send
lation. Because of differences in skin circulation,
several branches to the overlying muscle mass before
care must be taken when attempting to adapt
terminating as musculocutaneous arteries perpendicu-
human reconstructive surgical techniques to the
lar to the skin. Direct cutaneous arteries arise from
dog and cat.
perforator arteries that send few branches to the over-
HG. 1-7 (A) Inner thigh of a greyhound illustrating several direct cutaneous vessels traveling parallel to the overlying skin surface.
'sassa oseida deiadns ieueno pue lepne suaund suensuouap iaaaat pauus-u e un uae enuaa (g)
HG. 1-8 (A) Elevation of a skin flap illustrating a large direct cutaneous artery and vein (large arrow). Small direct cutaneous vessels 
(small arrows) also are noted. (B) Intraoperative view of the ventral branch of the deep circumflex iliac artery and vein in a cat. The
 skin is being elevated to close a skin defect involving the left mid-thigh region.
13
14
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 1-9 Superficial arteries of the canine trunk. 1, Superficial cervical branch of omocervical; 2, cranial circumflex humeral; 3, caudal
circumflex humeral; 4, proximal collateral radial; 5, lateral thoracic; 6, cutaneous branch of thoracodorsal; 7, cutaneous branch of
lateral coccygeal (Evans HE. 1993. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders).
CONGENITAL SKIN
Documented  biochemical disorders in  humans
DISORDERS
have included type III collagen synthesis (EDS IV),
asexopay [s (A Sa) Auaap asepxo ls
deficiency (EDS VI), a type I collagen defect (EDS I, II,
Cutaneous Asthenia
 II), and a procollagen peptidase deficiency (EDSVII).
 In humans, EDS can result in joint hypermobility,
Cutaneous asthenia is a congenital hereditary collagen
congenital vascular fragility, bowel ruptures, ocular
defect in humans and animals that is highlighted by
lesions, and hernias. Hernia repairs in human patients
fragile, hyperextensible skin. The condition is analo-
normally require the use of reinforcement mesh.
gous to Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS), an eponym for
However, increased skin fragility with hyperelasticity
eight variations (EDS I-VI) of this disorder in humans.
U Saa jo amieay resru Aied a si Aixel pue
Other names include dermatosparaxis and dermat-
humans. Extracutaneous collagen fragility has been
 osparaxis and collageneous tissue dysplasia in sheep, cats,
noted in the mesentery, intestinal wall, aorta, and
sheep, and catle, a condition similar to EDS I in
 muscle attachments in dogs.
humans. The disease is generally considered auto-
Hyperlaxity may increase with age in dogs: the skin
 somal dominant with incomplete penetrance in dogs,
may appear excessive, hanging in folds, especially
cats, and mink. Dematosparaxis in some cats, catfle,
around the limbs. Affected animals usually have a
and sheep may be a recessive trait. (In humans, EDS I,
history of lacerations and abscesses. The skin tears
I, Il, and VIII are considered autosomal dominant;
 easily with comparatively minor trauma. Scars appear
EDS V X-linked recessive; EDS VI and VII autosomal
,roumonas, "(siess us-uouo) uru-raded anss
recessive.)
formation secondary to vascular fragility may be
Canine breeds affected with cutaneous asthenia
noted.
include springer spaniels, beagles, Manchester terriers,
 Histologically, the dermis and epidermis may have
Welsh corgis, German shepherds, dachshunds, boxers,
variable thickness. The most notable alteration is the
St. Bernards, and mixed breeds. It has been reported in
size, shape, and orientation of the collagen bundles.
Persian, Himalayan, and domestic short-haired cats.
Many collagen fibers appear smaller in diameter than
The Skin
15
normal, and larger collagen fibers may be fragmented.
the condition is limited to a few areas, wound closure
Collagen bundles may be dissociated and haphazardly
techniques may be considered. Breeding of affected
arranged and lack the normal characteristic interwo-
animals is inadvisable.
 ven appearance seen in normal skin. Abnormalities in
dermal collagen packing into fibrils and fibers have
been noted in mixed-breed dogs. A decrease in acid
Suggested Readings
glycosaminoglyan also has been reported without his-
tological evidence of collagen fiber disorders. The col-
lagen may also lack normal staining uniformity. A skin
Al-Bagdadi F. 1993. The integument. In: Evans HE, ed.
Miler's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
 extensibility index greater than 17% correlates consist-
Saunders.
 ently with collagen packing defects.
Gilbert ST. 2006. Developmental Ermbryology, 8th ed. Sunder-
The prevention and management of skin injuries is
land, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
of primary concern in dogs and cats. Care is required
Hughes HV, Dransfield JW. 1959. The blood supply of the
to prevent trauma to the skin from clippers. Use of
skin of the dog. Brit Vet I 115:1-12.
Lanza PP, Langer R, Chick WL. 1997. Principles of Tissue Engi-
atraumatic or reverse-cutting needles are used to help
neering. Austin, Texas: RB Landes Company.
prevent suture pull-out. Combining an intradermal
Moore KL, Persaud TVN. 1998. The Developing Humuan, 6th
aq ae uad amns ss leraa e wm ua
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
advisable to reduce the risk of dehiscence. In cats, dec-
Pavletic MM. 1980. The vascular supply to the skin of the
lawing the patient can reduce self-inflicted trauma
dog: a review. Vet Surg 9:77-82.
Pavletic MM. 1982. Misapplication of subcutaneous pedicle
from scratching. An Elizabethan collar also should be
flaps in the dog. Vet Surg 11:18-22.
considered to prevent licking and chewing at any sur-
Pavletic MM. 1991. Anatomy and circulation of the canine
gical area. Interestingly, wounds can heal readily by
skin. Microsurg 12:103-107.
Pavletic MM. 1994. Surgery of the skin and management of
similar to unaffected skin. Tensile strength of healed
wounds. In: Sherding RG, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Management, 2nd ed., 1601-1629. New York: Churchill 
wounds appears comparable to the surrounding skin.
Livingstone.
The hereditary nature of this disorder would preclude
Pavletic MM. 2000. Use of an extermal skin-stretching device
breeding affected animals.
for wound closure in dogs and cats. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
217(03):350-354.
Pavletic MM. 2003. The integument. In: Slatter DH, ed. Text-
bok of Small Animal Surgery,3rd ed.,250-259. Philadelphia:
Epitheliogenesis Imperfecta
WB Saunders.
Sadler TW. 2004. Langrmarn's Medical Embryology, 9th ed.
 Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams, Wikins.
Epitheliogenesis imperfecta is a heritable condition
highlighted by areas of skin and mucosa lacking an
Scott DW. 1980. Normal integument (feline dermatology). J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:333-339.
epidermis. It has been reported in cats, lambs, and
Taylor GI, Minabe T. 1992. The angiosomes of the mammals
horses. Skin ulcerations are susceptible to infection. If
and other vertebrates. Plast Reconstr Surg 89:181-215.
2
Basic Principles of
Wound Healing
Introduction 18
Wound Healing 18
Species Variations in Wound Healing  28
Artificial Skin  28
18
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
 Prostaglandins and leukotrienes also appear to play
a role in the healing processes. Prostaglandins of the E
Ry definition, a wound is a break or loss of cellular
series may be involved in the inflammatory phase of
and anatomic continuity. Trauma, by definition, is
healing, while the later anti-inflammatory effects may
a physical injury or wound caused by external force or
be due to prostaglandins of the F and possibly A series.
violence. In common usage, trauma is used to indicate
the general aspects of a physical injury, whereas wound
Cytokines and Wound Healing
is used to describe a more specific lesion.
Wounds to the skin, subcutis, and underlying
paan sannju uounon jsou au Suoure are aosnu
As noted, cytokines play a major role in regulating the
by veterinarians. The causes are many, including bites;
processes of wound repair. Growth factors are cytokines
automobile accidents; lacerations from sharp objects;
that bind to cell surface receptors and serve as impor-
penetration by bullets, sticks, metal objects; and
tant regulators of cell function and growth. These
thermal injuries. Surgical wounds are created in
extracellular proteins originate from a variety of tissues
and often exist as several isoforms. The most notable
the process of resecting diseased or damaged skin
growth factors include the following:
regions.
All wounds are the result of the absorption of
 energy transferred to the body, whether it is from a
Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF)
projectile, electrical current, or a surgeon's scalpel
Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
blade. The severity of the insult depends upon the
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
01 pasiadsip st h moy 'aimos Aaiaua aut jo yauans
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF)
the body, and the specific tissue(s) absorbing it. Under-
standing the processes of wound repair is essential to
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)
a thoughtful approach to wound care.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
Nerve growth factor (NGF)
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)
WOUND HEALING
Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-α)
 Significant advances in cellular and molecular biology
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β)
over the past several years have improved our under
standing of the processes of wound healing and tissue
Other cytokines include tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
regeneration. Wound healing is a complex dymamic
interleukins, interferons, and colony-stimulating
process that integrates the functions of formed blood
factor. Cytokines generally have more than one effect
elements, the extracellular matrix (ECM) (see Chapter
omn the healing processes. Their cellular effects include
1), parenchymal cells, and soluble mediators. In
chemotaxis, promoting mitosis (mitogenic properties),
ucomplicated wounds, the repair process follows a
cellular stimulation and activation, and regulatory
fairly consistent time sequence. There are a number of
properties on different components of the wound-
factors that are capable of delaying healing, and these
healing process.
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
 Growth factors hold promise in the management of
For the sake of simplicity, healing can be divided
nonhealing wounds. In experimental rabbit and rat
into three phases: the inflammatory phase, the prolif-
studies, PDGF significantly accelerated the healing
erative phase, and the maturation/remodeling phase.
response: there was an increased rate of granulation
However, these phases are not mutually exclusive, but
tissue formation and the formation of procollagen-
overlap in time.
laden fibroblasts in a dose-dependent manner. Chal-
 Each phase of wound healing is regulated in large
lenges in their clinical use include the manufacturing
part by mediators termed cytokines. Cytokines can act
of specific growth factors while providing a stable and
on the cells responsible for their release (autocrine),
effective vehicle for their application to problematic
adjacent cells (paracrine), or distant cells (endocrine).
wounds. Selection and application of exogenous
Intracrine refers to intracellular cytokines that exert
growth factors may be an oversimplistic approach to
their effect within the cell. Cytokines can direct cells to
problematic wounds due to the complex interrelation-
produce proteins, enzymes, proteoglycans, attachment
ship between the cytokines. Regranex (becaplermin;
glycoproteins, and other components required in the
manufactured by Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical, Inc,
repair of the extracellular tissues.
Raitan, NJ) has had variable results in the management
Basic Principles of Wound Healing
19
 of diabetic ulcers in humans. Regranex is a human
phocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and other
recombinant platelet-derived growth factor in a gel
tissues) also stimulates keratinocyte migration as well
vehicle for application. The author has been encour-
as angiogenesis, wound contraction, and matrix depo-
aged by its use in problematic extremity wounds in a
sition. FGF appears to be mitogenic for cells of mesen-
few small exotic animals, both in its stimulation of a
chymal and neuroectodermal origin. CTGF (derived
healthy granulation tissue and subsequent epitheliali-
from endothelial cells and fibroblasts) has chemotactic
zation of the slow-healing cutaneous defects. Control-
and mitogenic properties for various connective tissue
led studies are needed to determine its efficacy
cells. Insulin-like growth factors IGF-1 and IGF-2
compared to other modalities of wound management.
(derived from macrophages, fibroblasts, liver, pan-
 Instead of exogenous sources of growth factors, a great
creas, and other tissues) stimulate the synthesis of col-
deal of research has focused on topical agents that are
lagen, sulfated proteoglycans, fibroblast proliferation,
 capable of stimulating cytokine production by the
and keratinocyte migration. Tumor necrosis factors
patient.
TNF-α and TNF-β (derived from macrophages, mono-
PDGF, for example, is strongly chemotactic for
cytes, mast cells, T lymphocytes) activate macrophages
monocytes, neutrophils, fibroblasts, and 
smooth
 and stimulate angiogenesis and fibroblast mitosis, but
muscle cells. It has mitogenic properties, promoting
also have a regulatory effect on other cytokines. TNF
the mitosis of fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and smooth
appears to play a role in collagen remodeling by stimu-
muscle cells. It stimulates angiogenesis, wound con-
lating collagenase production. Colony-stimulating
traction, granulation tissue formation, and wound
factor (CSF) (derived from a variety of cells) modulates
remodeling. PDGF also stimulates the production of
monocyte and macrophage function and promotes dif-
fibronectin, hyaluronic acid, and matrix metalloprotei-
ferentiation and proliferation of granulocytes. Nerve
nases (MMPs). It also inhibits platelet aggregation and
 growth factor (derived from neural and glial cells) is a
regulates integrin expression. Originally isolated from
neurotrophic factor that modulates neuronal cell
 platelets, other cells produce PDGF, including tissue
survival.
macrophages, endothelial cells, keratinocytes, and
Interleukins (IL-1) (derived from macrophages,
smooth muscle cells.
mast cells, keratinocytes, lymphocytes, etc.) are chem-
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), and its
otactic for fibroblasts and polymorphonuclear cells.
three isoforms, are derived from platelets, T lym-
They also stimulate angiogenesis, MMP-1, and TIMP
phocyctes, macrophages, endothelial cells, keratino-
synthesis. They play a regulatory role with other
cytes, smooth muscle cells, hepatocytes, eosinophils,
cytokines. Interferons (IFN) (derived from lym-
and fibroblasts. TGF-β has similar chemotactic proper-
phocytes and fibroblasts) activate macrophages; they
ties to PDGF, including lymphocytes. It has a powerful
play an inhibitory role in fibroblast proliferation and
mitogenic effect on macrophages, smooth muscle cells,
the synthesis of MMPs. Like interleukins, they also
 and osteoblasts. Like PDGF, it stimulates angiogenesis
regulate other cytokines.
and fibroplasia as well as keratinocyte migration. It
The exact mechanisms that lead to cessation of
also stimulates TIMP (tissue inhibitor of matrix metal-
healing in problematic wounds occasionally remains
loproteinase) synthesis and regulates integrin (see Pro-
elusive. There are a number of recognizable factors
liferative Phase below) expression and other cytokines.
(poor nutritional support, improper wound care, etc.)
TGF-β has an inhibitory effect on the production of
that negatively impact wound healing. When all iden-
MMP, keratinocyte proliferation, endothelial cell
tifiable causes are eliminated, concern is directed at the
 growth, lymphocytes, and epithelial cells.
possibility of healing deficiencies at the cellular level.
Epidermal, keratinocyte, connective tissue, endothe-
A lack of, or an imbalance of cytokines may be a factor
lial cell, and fibroblast growth factors have mitogenic
in these challenging cases.
 properties for their named cellines, but they also have
stimulatory properties for other aspects of wound
Phases of Wound Healing
healing. EGF (derived from platelets, and macro-
 phages), for example, stimulates keratinocyte migra-
Inflammatory Phase
tion and granulation tissue formation. KGF (derived
from fibroblasts) stimulates keratinocyte migration,
The inflammatory phase is occasionally referred to as
proliferation, and differentiation. KGF may stimulate
as ueau jo asmd fioindand ro asnyd S a
progenitor cells within the hair follicles and sebaceous
tissue trauma causes the disruption of blood vessels
 glands. Thus, it may play an important role in adnexal
with the extravasation of blood constituents. Vasocon-
reepithelialization of partial-thickness skin wounds.
striction is the immediate response to injury, lasting
FGF (derived from macrophages, mast cells, T lym-
for 5-10 minutes, followed by vasodilatation. Blood
20
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
clotting within the vessel lumen reestablishes hemo-
 grate to the injured tissues, but neutrophils arrive in
stasis, whereas the extravascular clot will later provide
greater numbers due to their abumdance in the circula-
a provisional matrix or scaffold for cellular migration.
tion. Chemotactic substances (complement factors,
The extravascular clot is an important component of
 IL-1, TNF-α, PDGF, TGF-β, platelet factor-4, fibri-
the inflammatory response. Platelets facilitate the for
nopeptides, fibrin degradation products, and bacterial
 mation of this hemostatic plug while secreting vasoac-
 products) stimulate neutrophil migration. PDGF, col-
tive mediators and chemotactic factors to recruit
lagen fragments, elastin, fibronectin, enzymatically
leukocytes. Fibrin in concert with fibronectin will later
active thrombin, and TGF-β serve as chemoattractants
serve as a provisional matrix for the migration of
for monocytes. Monocytes entering the wound pro-
monocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. Cell
gressively become activated, transforming into tissue
migration is dependent upon the formation of integrin
macrophages.
receptors on the surface of each cell. Integrin receptors
Neutrophils release proteinases to degrade necrotic
recogmize and attach to the molecular structure of
tissue, which in turn serves as a chemoattractant for
fibrin, fibronectin, and vitronectin. Proteolytic enzymes
additional neutrophil migration. Neutrophils at the
(proteases) later assist in removing these proteins in
 wound site destroy contaminating bacteria via phago-
preparation for the proliferative phase of wound
cytosis and enzymatic and oxygen radical mecha-
healing. Two major classes of proteases of the extracel-
nisms. Neutrophils also remove damaged cells and
lular matrix include serine proteases and MMPs.
 denatured extracellular matrix. Interestingly, provided
MMPs require calcium or zinc for activation. Some
that infection is not present, neutrophils are not essen-
proteases (certain collagenases) can be highly specific
tial to the healing process.
in their lytic activity, whereas others (including strome-
Neutrophils within the tissue undergo programmed
lysins) are more general. Protease inhibitors (anti-pro-
cell death (apoptosis) within a few days. These effete
teases), including serine protease inhibitors (serpins)
neutrophils are subsequently phagocytosed by tissue
and TIMPs bind directly to the proteolytic enzyme to
macrophages. However substantial contamination
 block its activity. Thus, normal wound healing involves
 (bacteria, foreign debris, necrotic tissue) can propagate
the proper balance between proteolytic enzymes and
a neutrophil-rich wound environment until particle
their inhibitors.
 clearance has been completed. Macrophages continue
Within 30-60 minutes after injury, leukocytes
to survive and begin to dominate numerically by the
adhere to the endothelium (termed margination) of the
fifth day in uncomplicated wounds.
vessels at the injury site; this especially is evident
Pus is the liquid product of inflammation and is
along the venules. Gaps between endothelial cells
composed of tissue fluid, dead and degenerated neu-
allow for the escape of tissue fluid and macromole-
 trophils, and albuminous substances. An abscess is the
cules including plasma proteins, complement, anti-
lbcalized collection of pus in any part of the body.
bodies, water, electrolytes, and circulating humoral
Although most abscesses are associated with bacterial
substances. Histamines, serotonin, and kinins released
infection, they can form under sterile conditions in the
primarily from mast cells act on the venous side of
presence of a foreign irritant. Prompt medical and sur-
capillary loops of 20 to 30 microns in size, resulting in
 gical intervention in acute injuries can reduce the like-
 a separation of contacts between endothelial cells: this
lihood of infection.
in turn allows blood components to escape from the
The macrophage has been described as the "diges-
 vascular lumen. Transudation increases in magnitude
tive tract" of the wound. It also has been referred to as
for approximately 72 hours. Damaged endothelial cells
'ssaond Suaumom a go ,osa puo, a
release phospholipids from the cell membrane and are
 Macrophages are capable of surviving in an oxygen-
subsequently converted into arachidonic acid. Arachi-
depleted environment, removing bacteria, contami-
 donic acid is an important mediator in platelet aggre-
nants, and tissue debris by phagocytosis. They also
 gation, and vascular tone.
release proteases (including collagenase, elastase, and
Leukocytes pass through the basement membrane
plasminogen activator), facilitating wound debride-
 of the vessel wall by diapedesis. Endothelial cell
ment: excessive release of these enzymes is also
surface receptors (selectins) assist neutrophil adher-
capable of damaging healthy tissues. In uncomplicated
 ence to the endothelium, whereas integrin receptors on
wounds, the macrophage population will decline as
the neutrophil cell surfaces assist in their binding to
the inflammatory phase subsides. In the face of exten-
the extracellular matrix. Activated neutrophils release
sive foreign debris, contaminants, and necrotic tissue,
elastase and collagenase molecules, which facilitate
their penetration through the blood vessel basement
 lular indicator" associated with chronic inflammatory
membranes. Both neutrophils and monocytes emi-
conditions.
Basic Principles of Wound Healing
21
Wound debridement and lavage can significantly
genesis. The blood clot (specifically the fibrin and
reduce the volume of necrotic tissue and contami-
fibronectin network) serves as a provisional extracel-
nants, thereby facilitating the healing processes. The
lular matrix. The fibrin and fibronectin form a scaffold
removal of dead tissue and debris also plays an impor-
to support and guide low-impedance cell migration 
tant role in preventing and controlling infection.
(macrophages, fibroblasts) and collagen deposition. As
Macrophages may coalesce to form multinucleated
noted, integrins are cell membrane receptors necessary
giant cells designed for the phagocytosis of foreign
for cell binding or adherence to specific glycoproteins
debris. Macrophages also have the capacity to differ-
of the ECM matrix. The fibronectin receptor complex
entiate into epitheloid cells and histiocytes. Some mac-
binds the cell wall to fibronectin as well as cytoskeletal
jsou um paanoaui Ained aq ot readde saeudon
proteins on the inside of the cell. As a result, contrac-
defense and cell-mediated immunity, whereas other
tion of intracellular actin microfilaments can move the
cells are involved in tissue growth and repair. Thus,
cell through anchorage to the fibronectin and other
ECM proteins. Thus, integrins are receptor proteins
and play a pivotal role in the transition between
that integrate the extracellular and intracellular scaf-
 inflammation and repair. Macrophage-derived growth
folds, allowing them to work in concert. Once fibro-
factors are essential to the initiation and propagation
blasts and endothelial cells express the proper integrin
of new tissue formation, including fibroplasia and
receptors under stimulation of cytokines and provi-
angiogenesis. The macrophages also release lactate
sional matrix proteins, they are capable of moving into
into the wound environment which stimulates fibro-
the wound environment.
 plasia and subsequent collagen production.
The four key processes associated with the prolif-
 The inflammatory, or lag, phase lasts for approxi-
erative phase of wound healing will be discuss as
mately 5 days in experimental wounds.
subsets, including (1) neovascularization/angiogen-
The classic signs of inflammation (redness, swell-
esis; (2) fibroplasia and collagen deposition; (3) epithe-
ing, heat, pain) are the result of vasodilation, fluid
lialization; and (4) wound contraction (Fig. 2-1).
escape, and obstruction of the local lymphatic chan-
nels. Lymphatics are fragile and easily injured; fibrin
(1) Neovascularization: Angiogenesis
formed at the wound site can plug these channels and
enhance local fluid retention. Pressure, chemical stim-
A key event in the healing process is new blood vessel
ulation, and stretching of nerve endings results in
formation, termed angiogenesis. Without adequate cir-
 pain. Circulatory compromise will lower wound pH
culation, fibroblasts cannot survive in the wound
due to accumulation of lactic acid. This wound envi-
environment: in short, no fibroblasts, no collagen. Epi-
ronment is ideal for bacterial infection. Rough hand-
thelialization also is dependent on the presence of a
ling of these compromised tissues may be the factor
vascularized ECM.
that "tips the scale" in favor of tissue necrosis and
Angiogenesis is a complex process and depends on
subsequent infection.
four interrelated phenomena, including (1) cell pheno-
type alteration, (2) chemoattractant-driven migration,
(3) mitogenic stimulation, and (4) the local develop-
Proliferative Phase
ment of a supportive extracellular matrix. Growth and
The proliferative phase is usually considered to be
chemotactic factors within the wound prompt local
5-20 days after injury.
endothelial enzyme release. The local wound environ-
The term grarulation fissue is derived from the gran-
ment also potentiates angiogenesis, including the pres-
ular appearance of newly forming tissue when incised
ence of low oxygen tension, biogenic amines, and lactic
acid. The low oxygen tension likely stimulates macro-
and its edge is visually examined. The surface of a
well-developed granulation bed often assumes a fine
phages to produce and secrete angiogenic factors.
pebble-grain or granular appearance
Plasminogen activator and collagenase released
 In a simple wound, the acute inflammatory reaction
from endothelial cells (located at the venule side closest
subsides and early repair commences in 3-5 days after
to the angiogenic stimulus) transit through the
 the initial insult. Approximately 4 days after an uncom-
 degraded basement membrane. Endothelial cells
 plicated injury, early granulation tissue begins to form.
project pseudopodia through the weakened basement 
Macrophages,
fibroblasts, and 
capillary  buds
membrane and migrate into the perivascular space.
migrate into the wound as a unit or "wound module,"
Endothelial cells from the parent vessels proliferate by
underscoring their interdependence during tissue
the second or third day after injury and serve as a cell
repair. The cytokines secreted by the macrophages
source during angiogenesis. Capillary buds extend
 play a key role in stimulating fibroplasia and angio-
into the matrix, where their tips eventually branch and
22
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
punom au uoe paou si (smoe) uoezauda pnm Aeg unn auueo au uaoai paq uoener (a 'v) t-z 5
Susixa wog suippnq Aq saneideo jo sumoino jo pasoduoo aejans seinuena ao ,urers-aqqad , iousip au aon 'suaeu
connect, forming capillary loops. New branches extend
collagenase (MMP-1), gelatinase (MMP-2), and strome-
from the loops to form a capillary plexus.
lysin (MMP-3)—to facilitate their migration through
The ECM has a strong influence on endothelial cell
this filamentous fibrin-linked jungle. After migration
 morphology and function. A rich fibronectin matrix
 into the wound, fibroblasts gradually shift to protein
around the endothelial buds helps support and guide
synthesis. Initially, fibroblasts secrete large quantities
 endothelial cell movement. This neovasculature depos-
of fibronectin, forming a loose ECM: a collagenous
its its own matrix of proteoglycans and fibronectin,
matrix follows.
ultimately forming its owm basement membrane.
eudie aaru u pasuee uanoidokia e si uaseo
chains forming a spiral or helix. The collagen molecule
is composed of 33% glycine, 33% proline, and the
(2) Fibroplasia and Collagen Deposition
remaining 33% is a variety of other amino acids. The
Fibroplasia is the component of granulation tissue that
amino acids proline and lysine must be hydroxylated
includes  the fibroblasts and  the  associated  ECM.
when they are incorporated into the alpha chains by
Fibroblasts originated from the viable "peri-wound"
pue asexorpu dond sazua a iseqoqy a
tissues, although other viable mesenchymal cells are
lysyl hydroxylase are necessary for this essential step
capable of differentiating into fibroblasts. Cytokines
in collagen formation. Oxygen, ferrous iron, alpha
and the provisional matrix stimulate proliferation of
ketoglutarate, and a reducing agent such as ascorbate
fibroblasts, express the formation of integrin receptors,
(vitamin C) or light-activated riboflavin are necessary
and ultimately migrate into the wound space. Fibrin
for the enzymatic hydroxylation process. Vitamin C is
adheres to fibrin, and fibronectin cell receptors allow
essential for optimum collagen production. If the
fibroblasts to move through the filamentous scaffold.
hydroxylation process is not completed, the collagen
 Fibroblasts also have integrin receptors allowing them
molecule cannot be excreted from the fibroblast.
to attach directly to fibrin and other protein strands.
Although the dog and cat generally possess adequate
Fibroblasts will advance toward the chemotactic gradi-
levels of vitamin C, it is worthy to consider its sup-
 ent by extending lamellipodia toward the stimulus.
plementation in severely stressed patients that have a
The integrin bonds will release and reform as the
 poor nutritional status.
fibroblast creeps forward. Fibroblasts release proteo-
Upon hydroxylation, a galactose molecule is
lytic enzymes—plasminogen activator,  interstitial
attached to the assembled intracellular collagen mole-
Basic Principles of Wound Healing
23
cule, which is then excreted. This extracellular mole-
fibroplastic phase lasts for 2-4 weeks, depending on
cule is termed procollagen. Terminal or registration
the wound size. The termination of this phase is noted
 peptides are cleared from this molecule by procollagen
by a decline in the number of capillaries and fibro-
 C-proteinases and procollagen N-proteinases. When
 blasts and by a greater deposition of collagen.
this occurs, the procollagen molecule aggregates to
 Over time, chronic granulation tissue will form in a
form tropocollagen fibers. The tropocollagen molecules
uapel are spaq rens rapio pumom uado Surieauuou
 in turn assemble to form fibrils. This assembly or aggre-
with collagen, while the fibroblast and the capillary
gation, due to lysine-lysine amino acid cross-linkage, is
populations have declined. As a result, chronic granu-
responsible for a major portion of the strength in the
lation tissue does not support epithelialization or
collagen fibril. A variety of diseases and drugs can alter
wound contraction without surgical intervention.
this orderly process, resulting in potentially
serious
wound healing and functional complications.
 During the wound remodeling process previously
(3) Epithelialization
discussed, a primitive collagen gel (collagen Il) or
Wound healing is incomplete without restoration of
matrix initially is deposited only to be resorbed by
the epithelial surface. One or two days after injury.
collagenase enzymes as a stronger collagen (collagen
epithelial cells begin to proliferate in the basal zone
I) is laid down over a period of weeks to months fol-
and overlying prickle cellayer along the viable border
 lowing an injury (see the Maturation and Remodeling
of the skin defect. The epithelial cells dissect clot and
Phase discussion, below). Sources of collagenase 
in
damaged stroma by secreting proteolytic enzymes
the wound are inflammatory cells, endothelial cells,
(collagenase, plasminogen activator) as they attempt
fibroblasts, and keratinocytes. Collagenase activity is
to repave the viable tissue surface.
closely controlled by cytokines. As noted, the net result
 Epithelial cells undergo a marked phenotypic alter-
of the process is less collagen compared to the original
ation. They lose their tenacious binding with the
dermis and lose their apical-basal polarity. They
 greater tensile strength due to its structurally superior
advance over the viable tissue surface by extending
basket-weave design. Collagen generally realigns to
pseudopods along the basolateral sides of the wound.
form sheets parallel to physiologic tension lines using
Epithelial cells will enlarge and flatten during migra-
 ss o p ass  
tion over the vascular wound bed as they lose their
bundles. This is readily evident in the normal control-
attachments to the basement membrane and adjacent
 led healing process during tendon repair.
epithelial cells. Chalone (water-soluble glycoproteins)
Day 4-5 after surgery is a critical juncture in surgi-
found in the epidermis normally inhibits mitosis; it is
cal wound repair. Prior to this, sutures primarily main-
diminished in wounds, allowing epithelial cells at the
tain alignment of the tissues. Day 4-5 is the time at
perimeter of the wound to undergo mitosis and
which fibroplasia and early collagen deposition are
migrate onto the adjacent granulation tissue (or viable
noted. Tensile strength increases rapidly after this
vascular tissue). As the cells slide forward, collagenase
is released to facilitate their migration beneath any
point.
Although wound dehiscence can occur at any point 
scab present on the wound surface. Integrin receptors
of the healing process, it is the author's clinical experi-
facilitate their movement over the wound surface and
ence that most cases of wound dehiscence occur 3-5
the bed of fibrinogen, fibronectin, and type 1 collagen.
days postoperatively. For problematic wound clo-
Epithelial migration is guided by collagen fibers.
sures, the first 5 days of healing (inflammatory phase)
 In sutured wounds with a minimal dermal gap,
requires the surgeon's closest attention.
epithelial cells can bridge the minor gap by 48 hours.
Collagen is directly responsible for the tensile
 In moderate to large wounds, epithelial migration
strength of a healing wound. A lack of collagen or its
        
improper formation can lead to wound dehiscence.
 open wound. Thus, the process of epithelialization can
As collagen is deposited by fibroblasts, fibrin
extend from the proliferative phase well into the matu-
strands are removed. Net collagen 
1synthesis
is
 ration phase of healing in problematic wounds.
 increased for at least 4-5 weeks after wounding, span-
The surface of epithelialized wounds (scar epithe-
ning the proliferative and maturation phases of
lium) is normally characterized by thinness and fragil-
healing.  Increased  collagen  deposition 
is
due
to
ity. The initial epithelial layer is only one cell layer
increased fibroblast numbers and increased collagen
thick, but gradually thickens to a variable degree as
deposition from each cell. Collagenase activity in
additional cell layers form. On "protected" areas of the
advancing epithelial cells and in adjacent fibroblasts is
animal, the durability of scar epithelium may be satis-
important in controlling collagen deposition. This
factory. In body areas subject to periodic trauma,
HG. 2-2 See legend on opposite page.
24
Basic Principles of Wound Healing
25
abrasive surfaces, or solar exposure, the same scar
margins. However, without appropriate collagen dep-
surface may ulcerate. Hair growth is minimal within
osition below the epidermal surface, the wound has a
the epithelialized scar. Given these considerations,
low tensile strength and is subject to dehiscence with
coverage with full-thickness skin (flaps, grafts, skin
premature suture removal.
advancement) may be advisable, depending upon the
This has been noted in dogs on high levels of corti-
location and magnitude of the cutaneous defect, the
costeroids over a prolonged period of time. Pseudo-
durability required to withstand wound breakdown,
healing also has been reported in cats as a result of the
and the cosmetic results desired.
Aeap e uam sassanord luneau rameis aiaaneredn
The source of epithelial cells varies according to the
in wound healing is suspected, sutures should be
thickness of the skin defect (see Chapter 1.) The viable
retained for a longer period of time (3 weeks sug-
skin perimeter is the source of epithelial cells in full-
 gested) to reduce this risk. Additionally, intradermal
thickness skin defects. Partial-thickness wounds (loss
sutures can be used to support incisional healing, fol-
 of the epidermis and portions of the dermis) can pre-
lowed by skin sutures. The intradermal pattern can
dominately reepithelialize from viable dermal adnexa,
reduce incisional tension  and provide additional
especially the external root sheaths of the compound
hair follicles. (See Chapter 3) (Fig. 2-2).
measure can be used in problematic healing cases:
Partial-thickness loss of skin is commonly seen with
alternate skin sutures can be removed, followed by the
deep dermal abrasions and second-degree burns
remaining half 2-3 days later.
Despite the loss of the epidermis, adnexal reepitheli-
alization is considerably faster than comparable full-
(4) Wound Contraction
thickness skin defects. In the more superficial injuries,
healing may occur with little scarring and surprisingly
By definition, wound contraction is the process in
which the skin peripheral to a full-thickness defect
good cosmetic results.
advances in a centripedal fashion toward the center of
the wound. Wound contraction spans both the prolif-
PSEUDO-HEALING
erative and maturation phases of healing (Fig. 2-2).
Sutured wounds can appear healed after epithelializa-
 After migration into the ECM, fibroblasts change to a
tion has occurred at the junctional gap of apposed skin
profibrotic phenotype during which collagen (type I
FIG. 2-2 (A) Extensive thermal wound in a dog, maliciously set on fire using a flammable agent.
(B) Large granulation bed formed after aggressive debridement of an extensive full-thickness burn to the trunk, 1 week later. Islands
of epithelium are forming in the central area of the wound bed (arrows).
(C) Close-up view of these epithelial islands demonstrate that hair follicles (arrow) surviving in deep dermal and hypodermal tissue
after debridement are the source of these epithelial cells. Combined cutaneous closure techniques were necessary to cover this
massive defect.
(D) Intraoperative view of deep circumflex iliac island arterial flap (ventral branch). The flap was rotated 180 degrees to cover the
dorsal pelvic portion of this sizeable skin defect.
(E) Combined closure employing a thoracodorsal axial pattern flap (open arrow), deep circumflex iliac island arterial flap (ventral
branch) (solid arrow), and advancement of the lateral thoracic skin using "walking sutures." Islands of epithelium (noted in C,
above) were harvested and reimplanted as punch grafts in the remaining granulation bed.
playing a secondary role in this instance. (From Pavletic MM. 1990. Massive trunk wound secondary to thermal trauma. Vet Med
Report 2:59.)
26
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
and IIl) is deposited. During the second and third
wounds in which wound contraction is considered
week of repair, fibroblasts develop smooth muscle
the best option to close a problematic wound.
properties as contracile proteins (F-actin microfila-
After 6 weeks, any remaining skin defect will need to
 ments) develop along the cytoplasmic face of the base-
close by epithelial cell migration (without surgical
ment membrane. These contractile fibroblasts are
 intervention). In some cases, the surgeon may elect to
called myofibroblasts.
manage a problematic wound by promoting the
Myofibroblast integrins link the cells to the fibronec-
process of wound contraction. If the wound closes sig-
tin network and the collagenous fibrils in the ECM.
nificantly during this time, any remaining defect will
 Collagen bundles in turn interlink within the granula-
be smaller and more amenable to a simpler closure
tion tissue and the dermal layer of the bordering
technique.
skin margins. These cell-cell, cell-matrix, and matrix-
Contracture is the loss or inhibition of motion or
matrix interconnections result in the ability of myofi-
function as a result of excessive scar tissue or muscle
broblasts to apply a traction force onto this pericellular
atrophy or fibrosis. Wound contraction also can con-
matrix. This force is exerted as myofibroblasts align
tribute to contracture formation when skin tension
with the wound contraction lines. As the myofibro-
secondary to this healing process limits function (espe-
blasts extend and contract their pseudopods, the col-
cially involving the extremities). This will be discussed
lagen bundles aligm and condense in concert. Cytokines
in greater detail in Chapter 6.
(especially  PDGF  from  macrophages)  likely are
Puppies and kittens have the remarkable ability to
involved in activation of these processes. Earlier
close wounds primarily by the process of wound con-
reports suggest fibroblasts also are capable of contrib-
traction (Fig. 2-3). Provided with a healthy diet and
uting to the process of wound contraction in the
proper wound care, surprisingly large skin wounds
 appropriate ECM components, and cytokine sigmnals
can close within weeks after injury. During this process
are present.
log Aeiponad puaned a ssasse on pueiodu si !
The cross-linkage of collagen and fibronectin with
signs of wound contracture.
myofibrolastic attachments is analogous to a fishnet
Wound contraction is remarkably effective in loose-
 used in commercial fishing. Traction on the net draws
skinned, fur-bearing animals compared to the human.
 or drags anything trapped or attached to the fishnet.
As a result, surgical intervention using skin grafts
In wound contraction, the skin margins interlinked
and flaps is more common for larger wounds in
with the collagen network are literally dragged toward
humans, whereas wound contraction may be consid-
the center of the granulation bed.
ered a useful option in many veterinary patients.
The timing of wound contraction has been reported
Interestingly, square and rectangular wounds contract
to be between the 3rd and 42nd day in experimental
more effectively than circular skin defects, based
rabbits. By contrast, the lag phase in dogs is 5-9 days.
on animal studies. The linear edges favor the linear
As the skin is stretched in a centripetal fashion, both
traction forces of the myofibroblasts. By contrast, cir-
the epidermis and dermis narrow in response to the
cular wound margins are pulled simultaneously,
tension. The term intussceptive growth describes the
with the skin margin binding from the offset or
process  of  epithelial  proliferation  and  C
 collagen
angular contractile forces applied to its edge. From a
deposition that occurs within the stretched skin to
wound management standpoint, any remaining
 bolster and restore cutaneous areas that are under sig-
skin defect would need to heal by epithelial cell migra-
nificant tension. As will be discussed in Chapter 10,
tion. (For this reason, a circular skin wound is used to
skin also is capable of stretching beyond its inherent
accommodate a colostomy stoma in humans. A
or natural elasticity by application of external forces,
linear incision or square skin defect created at the
including the use of skin stretchers and tissue
stoma is more likely to contract and form a
expanders.
constriction.)
 The independent healing processes of wound con-
traction and epithelialization will affect the cosmetic
outcome in wound closure. Skin wounds that close
WOUND CONTRACTION: CLINICAL
       
CONSIDERATIONS
hairless epithelialized scar. Adjacent hair growth may
Experimentally, wound contraction proceeds at a rate
cover over this hairless area. In contrast, wounds that
sheadde uogoenuoo pumom Xep rad unu gz'o-9'o jo
heal to a significant degree by epithelialization will
to decline after 42 days in experimental rabbits; it
have a comparatively large, thin, hairless surface.
also decreases in other animals over time. Therefore, 6
From a cosmetic and functional standpoint, this is less
weeks is a general guideline on what to expect for
favorable.
Basic Principles of Wound Healing
27
HG. 2-3 (A) Extensive thermal burn as a result of an electrical heating pad in this retriever puppy.
[epadpuao Aq syaam g ixau au Suunp passarsond uonoe.quoo punom uauopqe pue xe.ou samol aut jo mala dn-aso (a)
unq au uo pasn sem auzeipens ias pauad sem juauapiqap leas us asool lexaudad jo suaaueape
(C) The thermal wound closed predominately by contraction.
(D) A small epithelialized scar eventually can be seen after parting the hair. (From Parritz DL, Pavletic MM. 1992. Physical and
chemical injuries: heatstroke, hypothermia, burns and frost bite. In: Murtaugh R, Kaplan P, eds. Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Medicine. St. Louis: Mosby-Yearbook.)
Maturation and Remodeling Phase
tional collagen fibers are broken down by these proteo-
lytic enzymes within the ECM.
During the transition from granulation tissue to scar
Collagen deposition is directly related to the tensile
maturation, collagen remodeling occurs, with a balance
strength of a wound. Three weeks after injury, the scar
between collagen deposition and collagen catabolism.
has 20% of its final strength. Thereafter, gains of tensile
Type Il collagen gradually decreases as type I collagen
strength occur at a much slower rate. Over the next
increases. Specific collagenase enzymes (metallopro-
several weeks, a scar will achieve only 70%-80% of the
teinases) from macrophages, fibroblasts, and epider-
tensile strength of normal skin. Tensile strength is pri-
mal cells cleave type I, I, III, X, and XII collagens.
marily associated with collagen remodeling, resulting
Balancing the degradation of collagen are tissue inhibi-
in larger collagen bundles and intermolecular cross
tors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Cytokines and the
links with adjacent collagen fibers. In the end, there is
ECM play an important role in this process. Nonfunc-
less collagen than initially noted in the early healing
28
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
 process but with a structurally superior configuration.
ARTIFICIAL SKIN
As maturation progresses, the dense capillary network
of healthy granulation tissue progressively declines.
Research has focused on the creation of a three-dimen-
The maturation and remodeling phase is generally
 sional synthetic collagen weave similar to the ECM of
considered to take place from day 20 to approximately
the dermis. This matrix allows tissue cells, including
1 year after injury.
fibroblasts and macrophages, to assemble and develop
As noted, chronic, nonhealing wounds develop
2
in this synthetic stroma to form a more normal dermal
fibrotic matrix highlighted by collagen deposition and
structure. As discussed, the ECM has a critical influ-
a decline in the capillary population. Chronic wound
Ul ,oedeo roioa, e ul saaias pue shan u an
beds usually lack the vascularity to support epitheli-
cellular function and the deposition of collagen, elastin,
alization or the application of a skin. Tangential exci-
fibronectin, laminin, and proteoglycans. Endothelial
sion of the chronic granulation bed down to the
cells enter the matrix to revascularize the forming
otherwise healthy underlying tissue plane can induce
ECM. In turn, this revascularized "neodermis" will
formation of a healthy vascular granulation bed. In
support epithelial coverage. Reformation of a base-
less than 1 week, the reconstituted granulation bed
ment membrane over the neodermis improves the
usually is able to support free graft application.
likelihood that the epidermis will reform in a manner
similar to normal skin. By contrast, wounds lacking
SPECIES VARIATIONS IN
this artificial lattice (such as extensive burns) will
deposit collagen that lacks any similarity to normal
WOUND HEALING
 dermal architecture. Because dermal integrity plays an
important role in epidermal cell attachment and orien-
Differences in the anatomy and circulation to the skin
tation, epithelialized scars are less durable and more
have been well recognized both in mammals and other
 prone to epidermal trauma.
species. Variations in wound healing also can be
In humans DermagraffTM and Skin2TM have been
expected. One study in cats indicated that formation
desigmed to replace the loss of the dermis in persons
of granulation tissue is slower in cats compared with
sustaining serious thermal injuries or suffering from
dogs (7.5 days in dogs versus 19 days in cats). Granula-
chronic skin ulcers. Human diploid fibroblasts are
tion tissue appeared to originate from the entire wound
grown on a polymer scaffold to which growth factors
01 pareadde anssh uogemueia searaum soop ul paq
and matrix proteins are added. Once developed, the
develop along the wound border and progressively
artificial dermis is packaged and kept frozen (-70°C)
advance over the wound in a centripetal fashion.
umtil needed. Because of the low antigenic properties
Overall, the development of granulation tissue, wound
of Dermagraft, there is no rejection of this neodermis.
 contraction, and epithelial cell migration in cats lagged
Application of epithelial cells from the patient will
 behind dogs. Wound epithelialization and total healing
 repopulate the surface. Although studies are not com-
were greater for the dog than the cat over a 21-day
plete, dermagrafts may improve the cosmetic and
 so   sm s om 
functional outcomes in those patients with problem-
cats at day 7, but not at days 14-21. As a result, the
atic skin wounds.
tensile strength of feline incisions was substantially
less (approximately 50%) than canine subjects in this
study. Furthermore, removal of the subcutaneous
tissues at wound closure may slow the processes of
Suggested Readings
healing, especially in cats. Due to the limitations of this
study, additional research is required to explain these
Bohling MW, Henderson RA. 2006. Differences in cutaneous
 physiologic differences in healing.
wound healing between dogs and cats. Vet Clin No Am
 As discussed, when there is a concern regarding the
36:687-692.
 Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim ST, et al. 2004. Cutane-
completeness in wound healing, skin sutures can be
ous wound healing in the cat: a macroscopic description
retained well beyond the time sutures are normally
and comparison with cutaneous wound healing in the dog.
removed. Prolonged retention of skin sutures can
Vet Surg 33:579-587.
result in more prominent suture scars, which is not a
Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim ST, et al. 2006. Com-
major concern in fur-bearing animals.
 parison of therole of the subcutaneous tissues in cutaneous
Intradermal skin sutures can provide supplemental
wound healing in the dog and cat. Vet Surg 35:1-12.
Bucknall TE, Ellis H. 1984. Wound Healing for Surgeons. Phila-
support to skin closures and significantly reduce the
delphia, PA: Bailliere Tindall.
risk of wound dehiscence after external skin sutures
Epstein FH. 1999. Cutaneous wound healing. N Eng I Med
are removed.
341:738-746.
Basic Principles of Wound Healing 
29
Gilbert SF. 2006. Developmentat Embryotogy, 8th ed. Sunder-
Clinical Management, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill
 land, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Livingstone.
 Fitch RB, Swaim SF. 1995. The role of epithelialization in
Peacock EE. 1984. Wound Repair. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA:
  o a    m
WB Saunders.
167-177.
Probst CW. 1993. Wound healing and specific tissue regen-
Hosgood G. 1993. The role of platelet derived growth factor
eration In Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
and transforming growth factor beta. Vet Surg 22:
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
490495.
 Robson MC. 1997. The role of growth factors in the healing
 Hosgood G. 2002. Wound repair and specific tissue response
of chronic wounds. Wound Repair Regen 5(1):12-17.
to injury. In: Slatter D, ed.Textbook of Small Animat Surgery,
Sadler TW. 2004. Langman's Medical Embryology, 9th ed. Phila-
3rd ed., 66-86. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier
delphia, PA: Lippincott Williams Wilkins.
Sciences.
 Schilling_ JA. 1976. Wound healing. Surg Clin No Am
 Hosgood G. 2006. Stages of wound healing and their clinical
5:859-874.
relevance. Vet Clin No Am 36:667-685.
 Steed DL. 1997. The role of growth factors in wound healing.
Hunt TK, Dunphy JE. 1979. Fundamentats of Wound Manage-
Surg Clin No Am 77:575.
 rent. New York: Appleton & Lange.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1997. Srmall Ariral Wound Man-
 Johnston DE. 1990. Wound healing in skin. Vet Clin No Am
agement, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
20:1-25.
and Wilkins.
Lanza PP, Langer R, Chick, WL. 1997. Principles of Tissue
Tredget EE, Nedelec B, Scott PG, et al. 1997. Hypertrophic
Engineering. Austin, TX: RG Landes Company.
scars, keloids, and contractures. Surg Clin No Am
Pavletic MM. 1985. Introduction to wound healing and
77:701-730.
wound management. In Proceedings of the American
Witte MB, Barbul A. 1997. General principles of wound
Animal Hospital Association. Lakewood, CO: AAHA.
healing. Surg Clin No Am 77:509-528.
 Pavletic MM. i993. Surgery of the skin and management of
wounds. In: Sherding RG, ed. The Cat: Diseases and
3
Basic Principles of
Wound Management
Introduction  32
Patient Presentation 32
Mechanisms of Injury and Wound Terminology
32
Wound Classification  33
Options for Wound Closure  35
"Pointers" in Selecting the Proper Closure Technique
42
Basic Wound Management in Six Simple Steps 43
31
32
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
managed with a simultaneous team approach employ-
ing the critical care, surgical, and radiology staff.
jou aaey juaaseuu pumom jo sandioud au
Assessment of the critical care patient's airway, breath-
L sigmificantly wavered from those advocated by
ing, and circulatory status is performed as supportive
 Esmarch and Halsted decades ago (Tables 3-1 and 3-2).
care is instituted, including the insertion of one or
more intravenous catheters. Collection of samples to
Although many of the wounds seen by the clinician
 are not life-threatening, proper assessment and man-
determine the baseline complete blood count, serum
agement of the wounds will have a significant impact
chemistry profile, and urinalysis should be considered
on their outcome. Many smaller wounds can heal
for each patient. Subsequent or serial reassessments
despite the misguided efforts of disinterested clini-
are predicated on a patient's intraoperative and post-
cians. Careless wound management of more serious
operative status.
 Some injuries may require immediate emergency
injuries can promote multiple wound complications,
surgery following initial efforts to stabilize the patient.
including tissue necrosis, infection, and wound dehis-
For unstable patients with nonthreatening open
cence. More importantly, further trauma by the veteri-
narian may be the "death blow" to a body region
wounds, basic wound care and bandage application
already suffering from circulatory compromise sec-
can suffice until definitive wound exploration and
ondary to disease or injury. The tissue death that
closure can be attempted. Analgesics and sedation
follows may result in the need to amputate an affected
should be considered, provided that medication does
limb, precipitate the need for costly treatments, or
not impair the ability to fully assess the critical patient.
 In general, analgesics and /or sedation should be initi-
result in the death of the animal (Fig. 3-1).
 Consistently, successful results in wound manage-
ated as soon as patient assessment is complete. Specific
 ment require practice, attention to small details, and
details on wound care are discussed later in this
adherence to the basic principles of wound care.
chapter.
PATIENT PRESENTATION
MECHANISMS OF INIURY
AND WOUND
When a traumatized patient is first presented to the
TERMINOLOGY
surgeon-practitioner, a complete medical history must
 be obtained, including specific details pertaining to the
In humans, three basic forces have been described that
cause of the injuries. A detailed physical examination
result in injury to the skin: shearing, compression, and
is performed on all patients. Patients with minor
tension. Shearing injuries are the result of sharp objects,
-uasand uo juauean Aouasiaa cu armbai umen
tion. Patients that present with severe trauma are best
TABLE 3-1
Halsted's principles of surgery.
A. Minimal surgical trauma (gentle tissue handling)
B.
 Accurate hemostasis
C.1
 Preservation of an adequate blood supply
D.
 Aseptic surgical technique
E.
No tension on tissues
F.
 Careful tissue approximation
G. Obliteration of dead space
TABLE3-2
Esmarch's principles of wound management.
HG. 3-1 Shar-Pei with massive facial injury secondary to
A. Nonintroduction of anything harmful
vehicular trauma. Despite the shearing wound to the face, the
B.
 Tissue rest
C.
Wound drainage
excellent blood supply to the head maintained tissue viability.
D.
 Avoidance of venous stasis
Atraumatic surgical technique is important to minimize further
E. Cleanliness
circulatory compromise to these traumatized tissues.
Basic Principles of Wound Management
33
including knives, glass, and other cutting surfaces.
TABLE 3-3
Because energy is dispersed along a more finite area,
Descriptive terminology in wound
minimal tissue destruction may be noted. Tension
management.
injuries arise from the tangential or angular impact
Abrasion
from a blunt or semiblunt object or surface. The skin
· Skin wounds caused by tangential trauma to the
is under tension at the point of impact, and the skin
epidermis and dermis.
splits. Partial avulsion of skin or traumatic flap forma-
 Skin is rubbed against a resistant surface in a rubbing
tion may be noted. Large avulsion wounds often result
 or scraping fashion.
in the tearing of regional circulation: a variable degree
Note: Minor abrasions to the skin also may be noted with
of tissue necrosis should be anticipated. Compression
removal of an adhesive agent (adherent bandage, surgical
injuries occur when an object or surface strikes the skin
adhesive, etc.)
at a right angle, resulting in a ragged edge to the skin.
The effects of tissue compression or crushing may
Avulsion
result in significant circulatory compromise to the
Complete αvulsion: Complete displacement or tearing of
 area, with an increased risk of necrosis and infection.
a tissue segment or portion of the body
Bite wounds, for example may have compression and
Partiat aouision: Partial detachment of a tissue segment
tension forces applied to regional tissues. Circulatory
or portion of the body (for example, traumatic skin
flap)
compromise and tissue necrosis, combined with the
Degloving injury: Traumatic partial avulsion of skin
introduction of oral bacterial flora, is an invitation to
from an extremity in a circumferential fashion,
infection.
 resembling the peeling off or removal of a glove
 There are several terms generally used to describe
specific wounds (Table 3-3). They are useful for accu-
Incision
rately describing this subset of injuries commonly seen
· A cut of orderly depth with a sharp instrument
in small animal practice.
Laceration
·An irregular cut of nonorderly depth; a jagged wound
WOUND CLASSIFICATION
1m3 10
Four Basic Wound Classifications
punom aound
· A hole or wound created by a sharp pointed object.
The surgeon is faced with a variety of issues when
·Penetrating wound: A puncture wound in which the
managing an open wound. Clearly, the severity of
object enters a given issue plane or structure but does
tissue trauma, degree of contamination, and the pres-
not emerge beyond it
Perforating wound: A puncture wound in which the
ence of or potential for infection are factors in deter-
object enters and exits a given tissue plane or structure
mining the most appropriate wound care. The
(a "through-and-through" wound to the involved tissue
intraoperative assessment of the wound after explora-
plane or structure)
tion, debridement, and lavage is the best time to deter-
mine if wound closure should be attempted now or at
Contusion (Bruise)
a later time.
An nq nou st us an m u Ai u
 Thorough debridement of necrotic tissue and
exemplified by swelling, pain, and discoloration
cleansing—lavage to remove contaminants—may
 (capillary rupture with escape of blood)
convert a contaminated wound to a surgicially clean
wound that is suitable for primary closure.
 From the information gathered from the history and
It is occasionally difficult to accurately select the
physical examination, a wound can be classified into
exact category based on gross assessment of the degree
one of four basic categories according to its condition.
of contamination and the time that transpired after
These four categories, in their increasing order of
injury. When in doubt, it is best to downgrade the
severity, are the following:
wound's classification and treat it accordingly. Clean,
clean-contaminated and contaminated wounds would
Clean
generally be considered to have fewer than 100,000
Clean-contaminated 
bacteria per gram of tissue. Because bacterial counts
   n  a r 
Contaminated
can reduce the likelihood of infection. See the section,
Dirty and Infected
Age of the Wound: Clinical Significance below.
34
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
The basic question on the mind of the doctor is: Can
without a breech in sterile surgical technique, wounds
I close the wound primarily or should the wound be
 made for access to the lumen of the colon may belong
managed as an open wound for a variable period of
in this category (Fig. 3-4).
time? Wound classifications are a useful guideline for
au isaq si pmom uaan e mou Suaap
Dirty and Infected Wounds
Selection of the most appropriate method of closure is
best determined after definitive wound exploration
Dirty and infected wounds include old traumatic
and initial management of the wound.
wounds and those involving clinical infection or per-
forated viscera. The definition of this classification
ad susuea1o 000'001 ue 1ajea1a 1eu sisa8ns
Clean Wounds
 gram of tissue are present in the wound before the
 A clean wound is a nontraumatic, uninfected opera-
 operation, or that pus has contaminated the wound
tive wound in which neither the oro-pharymgeal cavi-
(Fig. 3-5).
ties nor the respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary
tracts are entered. Clean wounds are made under
Age of the Wound:
 aseptic conditions. They are usually primarily closed
Clinical Significance
(Fig. 3-2).
Many pet owners have no exact knowledge of the time
Clean-Contaminated Wounds
a given injury occurred, especially in those unsuper-
Clean-contaminated wounds are operative wounds in
vised animals allowed to roam outdoors for extended
which the respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary
 periods of time. In those cases, the clinician must
tract is entered without unusual contamination.
rely on his/her clinical assessment of the patient to
Wounds with minor contamination or a clean wound
determine the best method to manage the open
with a "minor" break in sterile surgical technique may
wound.
be classified in this category (Fig. 3-3).
 Clean-contaminated wounds generally are consid-
ered a wound less than 6 hours old. Wounds less than
6 hours old also are refered to as class 1 wounds.
Contaminated Wounds
Some subdivide contaminated wounds into wounds
Contaminated wounds include open traumatic
6-12 hours old (class 2) and greater than 12 hours
wounds, wounds made in operations during which
old (class 3). However, time in and of itself is not an
there was a major break in sterile technique, and inci-
accurate guideline in determining the classification
 sion wounds made in areas of acute, nonpurulent
of a given wound and the appropriate method of
inflammation or made in or near contaminated or
dosure.
inflamed skin. Unless the procedure is performed
 The time frame of less than 6 hours has been referred
au ui Sujeau pumom jo ,poiad uaplos, au se o1
literature: the bacterial inoculum is likely to be below
the threshold of infection (<10° per gram of tissue).
a anpan ren poad ana s um nouaara
risk of establishing infection. Research has indicated
rad ssno on  arad un eaq r
gram of tissue to over 100,000 organisms per gram
within 6 hours.
There are a variety of factors that influence the
risk of infection. Surgeons experienced in wound
- pom    p  
Jo anuasand 'paanoau unaan Apoq 'uo
necrotic tissue, and circulatory compromise are
greater considerations than time, both in classifying a
wound and selecting the appropriate method of
closure.
 To reduce the likelihood of wound infection, early
FIG. 3-2 A clean wound (arrow) is one created under sterile
medical and surgical intervention is preferable to
su rgical conditions.
 uaaeue pumom uado un seap Aessanaun
Basic Principles of Wound Management
35
C
HG. 3-3 (A) Example of a clean-contaminated wound. This pit bull presented shortly after lacerating the skin of his inner thigh and
knee while leaping over a cyclone fence. Minimal contamination was evident in this fresh wound.
(B) The wound was protected with a sterile, moistened saline gauze pack prior to the liberal removal of fur and surgical preparation.
(C) Damaged and devitalized tissue was excised upon removal of the gauze sponges. The wounds were lavaged under pressure with
sterile saline
(D) The wound was closed primarily; a Penrose drain was used to control dead space and prevent serum accumulation. Note only
the distal portion of the drain is exposed. The proximal end is secured with a single suture placed through the skin (arrow).
The body region involved in the injury also impacts
all devitalized tissue is removed;
whether primary closure or delayed closure options
all contaminants and debris are removed;
should be considered. For example, the head has a
the tissues appear healthy with a viable
superior blood supply compared with the distal
extremities.  Primary closure may be a suitable
circulation; and
option for many older head wounds whereas a similar
there is no evidence of infection.
wound involving the lower extremities may be better
suited to open wound management for a variable
OPTIONS FOR WOUND
period   of   time  before 
woumd
closure
contemplated.
CLOSURE
Any wound (regardless of the time of injury) after
aggressive cleansing, irrigation, and debridement can
Classification of a wound will enable the clinician to
be considered for primary closure if:
logically decide on the proper method of management.
FIG. 3-4 See legend on opposite page.
36
Basic Principles of Wound Management
37
 For a given wound, there may be more than one option
Primary Closure
to achieve closure. The four basic options for closure
 of an open wound include:
 Primary closure or healing by first intention is the
direct closure of a recently created wound. Wounds
1.
primary closure,
 considered for primary closure include the following:
2.
delayed primary closure,
3.
secondary closure, and
Wounds with little or no contamination
4.
 healing by second intention.
and minimal tissue trauma
Contaminated wounds converted to
A variation of second intention healing is adnexal
"clean" wounds with judicious
re-epithelialization of partial-thickness skin losses. The
debridement and copious lavage with
choice among these four basic methods of closure
sterile isotonic solutions (Fig. 3-4)
depends upon the wound size, location, and
condition.
Skin defects after complete excision of
 Over the years, one factor stands out as a major
smaller, localized areas of contamination
reason to avoid primary closure in favor of open
and infection
wound management: the presence of dying or devital-
Adjacent skin available to close the
ized tissue. Wound healing is impaired with its pres-
wound without undue tension (see
ence, and bacteria thrive on the retention of this
Chapter 9, Tension-Relieving Techniques;
substrate.
Chapter 11, Local Flaps)
HG. 3-4 (A) Example of a contaminated wound involving the lateral thorax and abdomen. The skin was avulsed when it was
hooked on a metallic object as the dog was running.
(B) The avulsion wound involving this dog's lateral thorax and abdomen was contaminated with bark and dried leaves adhered to
the exposed subcutaneous tissues (arrows).
(C) A sterile wet (saline-chlorhexidine) dressing was temporarily applied to the wound prior to anesthetic induction.
ys aaissaiase aon iaains o a aut ie Auqeia uys duuatap ui atense Aiuaisisuos pou si upaaq jo yoe[ o auasad
(E) Contaminated subcutaneous fat overlying the skeletal muscle was excised tangentially.
(F) Debridement was followed by copious pressure lavage. Contaminants that adhered to the partially avulsed skin segment (arrow)
were carefully removed with forceps in order to avoid further circulatory compromise. The avulsed skin flap was partially debrided
back to a bleeding skin margin, providing sufficient skin for surgical closure.
(G) Primary closure of this contaminated wound was successfully accomplished after prompt surgical intervention and attention to
thorough removal of contaminants and necrotic tissue. A Penrose drain was used in this case; a closed suction unit would have been
more appropriate to control this wide area of dead space.
(H) Healed wound. The thin skin of the lower abdomen readily shows subcutaneous hemorrhage.
B
FIG. 3-5 (A) Example of an infected wound. A bacterial infection with necrotic skin was the result of bite wounds improperly
managed 4 days prior to presentation.
(B) Wound debridement of the necrotic skin and subcutis.
(C) Wet-to-dry dressings, changed twice daily, were used to mechanically debride residual necrotic tissue for 3 days. This was
followed by the topical application of an enzymatic debriding agent (trypsin).
(D) Six days following surgical debridement, a healthy granulation bed has formed.
oenuen aut jo suood pawouad sem anso Aipuoas aou ie punom au aeueui ot asap ou pey laumo au asneg (a)
bed and fibrotic skin borders were excised to facilitate accurate skin apposition with sutures. A Penrose drain exits ventral to the
wound. Healing proceeded without incident.
38
Basic Principles of Wound Management
39
Delayed Primary Closure
Secondary closure can be attempted by one of two
methods: (1) direct suture apposition of the two granu-
-ue1a (z) 1o (uoquaut pi Aq Sureau) sasejms uone
As the term implies, wound closure is delayed for a
ulation tissue excision and primary closure. The latter
3- to 5-day period in order to manage and reassess the
sueumy noy suoams Aueu Aq paajaid st anbruuoa
wound during daily bandage changes. Sterile dress-
because of the relative ease in mobilization of the
ings/topical agents are inserted into the wound cavity
and changed one to three times per day, depending on
wound edges for closure, the better cosmetic results,
and the lower incidence of infection after excision of
the condition of the wound. Delayed closure provides
the granulation tissue (Fig. 3-5). The author uses a
optimal drainage to the area, time for inflammation to
combination of both variations by removing sufficient
subside, and circulation to improve before closure.
scar tissue to facilitate closure of the defect. Complete
Consequently, tissue resistance to infection improves
 excision of a healthy granulation bed generally is
dramatically, thereby reducing the likelihood of infec
unnecessary.
tion after closure. Common wounds considered for
delayed primary closure include the following:
Second-Intention Healing:
Wounds with borderline contamination
Contraction and Epithelialization
despite initial wound exploration,
debridement, and lavage
Wounds with moderate tissue trauma or
Healing by second intention or contraction and epithe-
considered at risk of infection after wound
lialization is a commonly employed method to close
exploration, debridement, and lavage
problematic  wounds in  veterinary medicine.  With
appropriate management, the proceses of myofibro-
Wounds in which there is a question as
blastic wound contraction and epithelial cell migration
to the tissue viability at the wound site
over the external surface of granulation tissue is pro-
Wounds that require additional (serial)
moted (see Chapter 1). Second intention healing is
debridement beyond initial wound
 generally reserved for the following wounds:
cleansing and debridement
Wounds in which significant tissue
Dirty and infected wounds in which
closure by the previous three techniques
swelling precludes primary closure
is unadvisable.
By day 4-5 after injury, capillary buds, fibroplasia,
Cutaneous defects that cannot be closed
tissue macrophages, and associated cytokines are
adequately using conventional surgical
present within the wound. As a result, tissues are more
techniques. This is particularly true for
resistant to infection at this time. If the tissues are
skin defects located in areas lacking a
viable and swelling has declined without evidence of
source of loose elastic skin to facilitate
infection, successful closure is likely (Fig. 3-6)
primary closure (mid- to lower
extremities, tail wounds, large trunk
Secondary Closure
wounds, etc.).
Wounds that would benefit from surgical
Secondary closure is attempted between the fifth and
closure, but could heal by second intention.
 r e d s g  r  
In many cases, financial constraints
tion bed normally is developing over the open wound
surface.
management until contraction and
Secondary closure is reserved for problematic
epithelialization is complete.
wounds in which
Many moderate to large trunk wounds in
delayed primary closure is not possible,
puppies and kittens have a remarkable
ability to heal by second intention.
usually as a result of persistent infection;
persistence of necrotic tissue requires
Skin tension around a wound (inherent elasticity of
additional serial debridement and wound
the skin) can be assessed by manually pushing the
care beyond 5 days; and
wound border to determine the degree of laxity
there is persistence of a moderate to
required for wound contraction to occur unimpeded.
severe inflammatory response.
 Skin tension is best assessed only after tissue swelling
40
FIG. 3-6 (A) Delayed primary closure of a burn. This thermal wound was sustained when the cat contacted an automobile muffler.
(B) The burn eschar was excised and the wound treated with topical medicated wet dressings to facilitate debridement.
(C) A transposition flap was elevated on day 4 from the lateral abdominal wall prior to its placement (arrow) on the recipient bed.
wounds. In Sherding RG, ed. The Cat: Disease and Clinical Management, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone.)
subsides. If sufficient peripheral skin laxity is present,
 Skin tension is best assessed only after tissue swell-
unimpeded wound contraction can be expected in
 ing subsides. (Edema separates the dermal collagen
many cases. Otherwise, epithelialization must cover
and elastin fibers. The collagen and elastin fibers also
the remaining deficit once contraction ceases (Fig. 3-7).
retract away from the wound, exaggerating the mag-
This may be an impossible task in large defects.
nitude of the skin defect in the early days of injury.)
The clinical question, "Can this wound heal by
Skin tension around the wound can be determined
second intention?" can be partially answered by
by lifting or pushing the local skin toward the center of
assessing the skin tension (inherent skin elasticity) bor-
the defect. If the opposing skin edgescan be compressed
dering the defect. As will be discussed in Chapter 6,
 into the defect, a variable degree of wound contraction
Common Complications in Wound Healing. a lack of
is likely to occur. In irregularly shaped wounds, nar-
mobile skin can effectively neutralize the centripetal
rower areas are more likely to heal by second intention
force exerted on the skin by myofibroblastic contrac-
before the widest part of the wound defect.
tion. This is particularly evident when assessing mod-
Experimentally,  wound  contraction 
normally
erate-sized defects involving the lower extremities.
slows 42 days (6 weeks) after injury. Epithelial cell
Basic Principles of Wound Management
41
HG. 3-7 (A) Full-thickness skin loss sustained in an automobile accident. A healthy granulation bed has formed. Edema has
subsided, allowing for assessment of peripheral skin tension. Narrow areas of the wound bed (arrows) are expected to epithelialize
Suoe[dsp pue siapioq punom aup Suidsen8 Auas (a) leay ot ise[ au aq llm punom aut jo eane isapim au Aipideu penuos pue
skin toward the central defect indicates sufficient skin laxity is present to promote wound contraction. Epithelialization will cover the
remaining portions of the wound.
migration must cover the remaining open wound at
may not necessarily heal to completion. Wound con-
this point, unless surgical intervention is considered
traction can direct regional elastic skin centripetally to
(see Chapter 2).
reduce the size of a wound substantially. When con-
 In many cases, second intention healing is a practi-
traction slows or stops, and epithelialization is not
cal and economical method of effecting closure, pro-
likely to close the remaining defect, surgical closure
vided that adequate wound care is administered.
may be attempted. By delaying surgery, a smaller skin
There are cases, however where healing is prolonged,
flap or skin graft may now used, thereby reducing the
and the attendant costs of hospital visits, bandage
cost associated with final closure. This technique is not
materials, and topical medications meet or exceed the
used for closing large regional wounds that have little
cost of surgical closure.
or no likelihood of partial closure by second intention
aui ponas Aq [eay on paioadxa spumom Ie ioN
healing. In these more problematic cases, definitive
tion will close in optimal fashion. Wounds that heal
surgical closure becomes the first choice of managing
primarily by epithelialization will have a larger hair-
the wound.
less scar compared to those defects that close primarily
by myofibroblastic contraction. Fragile epithelialized
 scars exposed to mild external trauma may abrade or
Healing by Adnexal
split. As noted in Chapter 2, excessive scarring or con-
Re-Epithelialization
traction resulting in restricted motion to a limb or
other body region is called wound contracture (see
Not all wounds involve the entire thickness of the skin.
also Chapter 6). Cosmetic and functional results may
Tangential loss of a portion of the skin layers may
be unsatisfactory.
result in the partial loss of the epidermis or complete
 Preliminary studies by Bohling et al. suggest that
loss of the epidermis and a variable degree of dermal
cutaneous wound healing proceeds more slowly in
destruction. Examples of partial thickness skin losses
cats than in dogs. Slower gains in tensile strength and
 include the following:
healing by second intention is also noted in cats when
compared to dogs. The authors speculate that loss of
Superficial burns (first-degree burns)
subcutaneous tissues appears to retard healing in cats
 Partial-thickness burns (second-degree
more so than in dogs (see Chapter 2.)
Second intention healing can be used as a means of
burns)
reducing the size of some problematic wounds that
Abrasions or scrapes of varying depth
42
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Chemical burns (including turpentine and
provided that sufficient skin is available. Most lightly
other chemical irritants)
contaminated wounds with minor tissue necrosis can
be closed primarily after single-stage debridement and
Split-thickness skin graft donor site
wound lavage.
 Local skin flaps or tension-relieving techniques may
Cutaneous burns and abrasions of the skin may be
 be used to close wounds where incisional tension may
categorized as superficial, partial-thickness, or full-
be problematic. If edema and contusions are evident,
thickness according to the depth of injury (see Chapter
 delayed primary closure may be advisable, allowing
7). Superficial cutaneous loss includes loss of the epi-
time for the circulation and lymphatic drainage to
thelium but sparing of the germinal layer. Re-epitheli-
improve in this 4- to 5-day period.
alization  originates  from  this  surviving  epithelial
Small contaminated or infected wounds can be
layer. A partial-thickness loss results in the loss of the
completely excised and the area closed primarily. This
entire epithelial surface and a variable portion of the
is a useful technique for wounds located in body
dermis. In this case, surviving adnexal structures (hair
regions with sufficient skin laxity to facilitate "en bloc"
follicles, sebaceous glands, sweat glands) located in
resection of the area.
the remaining dermis and subcutaneous tissue are the
The most important factor in determining the best
source of epithelial cells for healing (see Chapter 2.)
The donor site from which a split-thickness graft is
method of closure is the final assessment of the wound
after proper exploration, debridement, and copious
harvested will heal as a partial-thickness wound. Simi-
 pressure lavage of the wound.
larly, the donor site, however, has the advantage of
minimal tissue injury because the wound is made
Many of the larger grossly contaminated and
 infected wounds are not difficult to assess: the poor
under aseptic conditions with minimal trauma. One
Ae Amfui anon-ienred Aue je naquaan jsnu
state of the regional tissues clearly precludes primary
be converted to a full-thickness loss by infection or
closure. Whether the wound can be handled by delayed
improper wound management (Fig. 3-8).
primary closure, secondary closure, or healing by
second intention is determined as wound manage-
ment progresses.
"POINTERS" IN SELECTING
 Those wounds that require closer assessment are
grossly contaminated wounds. Infection may not be
THE PROPER CLOSURE
evident, but contamination with grit, dirt, and organic
TECHNIQUE
matter has been present in the wound for a variable
period of time. Close postoperative assessment for
Clean wounds and wounds with minimal surface con-
infection is necessary. If there are any doubts, the
tamination are natural candidates for primary closure,
paaepap) pumom uado ue se pageue aq pmous pumom
FIG. 3-8 (A) Partial-thickness abrasions to the lower extremities of a Doberman secondary to being struck by an automobile
Partial- and fullthickness skin wounds are evident. (B) Donor site after harvesting a split-thickness skin graft. This partial-thickness
wound will heal readily by adnexal reepithelialization.
Basic Principles of Wound Management
43
healing).
thickness wounds when sufficient skin is present.
The surgeon must determine the probable viability
Most wound contaminants can be eliminated with
of the tissues in the wound. If tissue survivability
debridement and pressure lavage. Complete tissue
 cannot be accurately assessed at this time, open wound
viability and the elimination of necrotic tissue are the
management is advisable. Otherwise, aggressive
two key points in determining whether early wound
debridement can be considered for those traumatized
closure can be attempted. Wounds closed with the
tissues considered expendable.
 presence of necrotic tissue are candidates for infection,
If small areas of necrotic tissue cannot be excised
dehiscence, and drainage. Removal of dead tissue dra-
without causing unnecessary tissue injury, open
matically reduces the primary source of nutrition and
wound management is again advisable. Serial (scalpel,
 shelter of bacteria. However, with the presence of
scissors) or mechanical debridement (wet-to-dry dress-
infection at the time of intervention, open wound man-
ings) techniques are used to remove necrotic tissue
agement for a variable period of time is the safest
remnants, provided that significant collateral tissue
method to reduce or eliminate the risk of perpetuating
trauma can be avoided. More selective forms of debri-
an infection once final closure is attempted. Open
dement (autolytic, enzymatic) are very useful once the
 pue aheuenp [eundo sapraond juawaseueu punom
bulk of necrotic tissue is removed. Selective debride-
allows the surgeon to inspect the wound daily.
ment should be considered in wounds where delicate
 tissue structures may be otherwise damaged by surgi-
BASIC WOUND
cal/mechanical debridement techniques. The presence
of necrotic tissue is particularly problematic since the
MANAGEMENT IN SIX
risk of infection increases. Timely removal of dead
SIMPLE STEPS
 tissue can dramatically reduce the bacterial population
in a wound
Establishment of a healthy vascular wound bed, free
 It is important to note that secondary closure is the
of necrotic tissue and infection, allows the surgeon to
next step if delayed primary closure is not advisable.
consider all options for fnal wound closure. Initial
In turn, second intention healing is the next option if
management of open wounds can be summarized in 
secondary closure is not feasible. Surgical closure is
six simple steps (see Fig. 3-4):
considered for those cases in which contraction and
epithelialization carnot close a wound effectively. Sur-
1.
Prevent further wound contamination
gical intervention can be performed at the point at
2.
Debride dead and dying tissue
which there is an absence of infection and tissue viabil-
ity is assured.
3.
Remove foreign debris and contaminants
Granulation tissue is a key indicator of tissue viabil-
4.
Provide adequate wound drainage
ity. Granulation tissue forms only from the viable vas-
cularized tissues comprising the base and the margins
5.
Establish a viable vascular bed
of the wound. Its presence over the surface of the
6.
Select the appropriate method of closure
wound is the "surgeon's indicator" that necrotic tissue
has been eliminated.
Preventing Further Wound
Granulation tissue is a natural barrier to invasive
Contamination
infection. Once granulation tissue covers the wound,
systemic antibiotics can be eliminated in favor of
topical antimicrobial agents. Exceptions to this general
On admission, the patient's wounds should be tempo-
rule would include those patients with other underly-
rarily protected from further trauma and hospital-
ing infections or health issues that require continued
borne bacteria with a topical antimicrobial, sterile
systemic antibiotic therapy.
dressing, and protective wrap (Figs. 3-3 and 3-4; see
With partial-thickness skin wounds, gentle cleans-
also Chapters 4 and 5). Sterile gauze moistened with
ing of the wounds with sterile saline/lactated Ringer's
saline that contains an antibiotic or a nonirritating anti-
( aeu) sa su pom [nao e 10
microbial agent are useful, especially to maintain
followed by an appropriate topical dressing and
tissue hydration and control infection until definitive
-nau spuan lada a ioddns ues uae ienn
wound repair can be performed later in the day.
essary for reepithelialization of the area. Depending on
Stock povidone iodine solution can be diluted to 1
the depth of injury, this process usually occurs within
part solution to 9 parts saline. This 0.1% solution has
2 to 3 weeks after injury. However, the veterinarian
antimicrobial properties and will not cause tissue
44
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
injury. Stock chlorhexidine diacetate solution can be
1
surgical (scalpel, tissue excision) and
diluted to a 0.05% solution by adding 1 part solution
2.
mechanical (wet-to-dry dressings)
to 40 parts sterile saline. This solution also has antimi-
debridement.
crobial properties and will not cause tissue injury.
 In preparation for definitive wound cleansing and
Selective debridement is a less aggressive and
surgical management, the exposed wound is covered
slower method for removing necrotic tissue. The
with sterile gauze pads impregnated with sterile K-Y
Jelly Johnson & Johnson, Langhorne, PA), sterile
upside is that necrotic tissue is targeted and viable
saline, or an antimicrobial solution prior to liberally
tissue trauma is minimized. The three basic forms of
clipping the skin and preparing the defect for surgery.
selective debridement are
Sterile K-Y Jelly can be applied to the fur along the
wound borders before clipping (No. 40 clipper blades).
1
autolytic (use of topical gels, dressings)
The gel facilitates clumping of the fur and reduces
2.
enzymatic (use of topical enzymes), and
airbome hair fragments from being deposited onto the
 adjacent wound surface. The temporary wound cover
3.
biotherapeutic (maggot debridement
minimizes further open wound contamination from
therapy).
clipped hair fragments and topical debris when pre-
 paring the area for surgery.
Surgical and mechanical debridement  are two
Fur should be liberally removed around the wound
forms of nonselective debridement. Surgical debride-
area. A circumferential clip is recommended when
ment normally employs the use of scalpel blades, sur-
managing extremity wounds. Fur adjacent to wounds
gical scissors, and forceps to lift and excise the tissue.
has a tendency to retain discharge from the wound
The most common form of mechanical debridement is
surface, potentiating tissue maceration and bacterial
the use of wet-to-dry dressings: serial dressing changes
proliferation: its removal also facilitates periodic
pull or lift attached necrotic tissue that is adhered to
the gauze. If overused, this technique also irritates and
impermeable drapes are ideally used to drape off the
damages local tissue (see Chapter 5). However, both
surgery site; the temporary protective dressing is then
methods are able to quickly and effectively remove
removed.
necrotic tissue. The judicious use of nonselective
debridement in the first few days of wound manage-
ment causes minimal collateral damage. The rapid
Debridement: Selective versus
removal of necrotic tissue facilitates granulation tissue
formation and opens the possibility of early wound
Nonselective
closure. Small areas of necrotic tissue may be effec-
tively managed with many of the topical agents pro-
There are two broad categories of wound debride-
moting autolytic debridement. Indeed, surgeons may
ment: selective and nonselective. Selective forms of
disagree on which method to use on a given wound
wound debridement more specifically target the pres-
 containing necrotic tissue. It is the author's contention
ence of necrotic tissue. Nonselective debridement is
that large areas of necrotic tissue are best excised; wet-
considered less precise, since it inadvertently damages
to-dry dressings can be used to remove residual areas
viable tissue to a variable degree within the wound.
of necrotic tissue for an additional 3- to 5-day period.
 Forms of selective debridement include the use of gels
Alternatively, topical autolytic debridement agents
and dressings that create an ideal medium for
and dressings can be substituted for wet-to-dry dress-
autolytic debridement. Enzymatic debridement is a
ings when minimal amounts of necrotic tissue are
second form of selective debridement, using exoge-
 present, according to the preference of the clinician. In
nous proteolytic enzymes to separate nonviable tissues.
 general, selective debridement techniques alone are
Biotherapy, using maggots, is a third form of selective
not ideally suited for the removal of large areas of
debridement. (See Chapters 4 and 5 for details per-
dead tissue.
taining to selective debridement techniques and
products.)
 Nonselective debridement is a more aggressive and
Surgical Debridement
faster method of removing necrotic tissue. The down-
side is that nonselective debridement may traumatize
The surgeon's ability to remove necrotic and severely
viable tissues in the wound to a variable degree. The
compromised tissues is a major determinant for
two forms of nonselective debridement include
whether primary closure should be considered. Areas
Basic Principles of Wound Management
45
of questionable viability may be excised if the tissue is
traumatized skin (Fig. 3-4). It is also no guarantee that
not essential to healing or function (see Fig. 3-4).
blood is not being shunted away from the nutrient 
Areas of the body with loose, elastic skin permit a
circulation of the skin. Vasospasm and pronounced
more aggressive approach to debridement, whereas
hypotension may cause a temporary drop in local cuta-
extremity wounds warrant a more cautious approach
neous circulation with a misleading decline in bleed-
when tissue viability cannot be determined
uO
ing from the wound edge. Furthermore, the presence
presentation.
of circulation within a skin area at the time of initial
 It is not always possible, however, to accurately
examination also is no assurance that trauma, edema,
assess tissue viability at the time of initial wound
infection, venous compromise, or progressive throm-
exploration, and it may take 24 hours or longer to
bosis will not subsequently obstruct the circulation.
dlearly delineate devitalized tissues. It would be
 Feline skin generally bleeds less than canine skin when
 appropriate to consider delayed primary closure until
incised.
tissue survival is assured, especially when important
Early visual indicators play a role in assessing skin
structures are involved. Daily wound assessment and
viability after initial injury. For example, large avul-
serial surgical debridement can be used to remove
sion wounds in which significant loss of segmental
devitalized tissue as it becomes identifiable.
 direct cutaneous vessels is noted would suggest a vari-
Is this skin viable? Assessment of skin viability, in
able portion of the terminal "traumatic flap" will
the early stages of trauma can be difficult. Black to an
undergo necrosis. Additionally, stripping of the under-
ashen gray are the characteristic colors of necrotic skin,
lying subcutaneous tissues is an indicator of vascular
although pale (pearl) white is noted in skin devoid of
compromise via loss of the subdermal plexus and sup-
circulation.
Skin pigmentation can obscure color
porting direct cutaneous vasculature. The options are
assessment. Deeply contused (bruised) skin may
to wait and reassess the skin over the next 4 to 5 days
precede skin necrosis, although circulation may
or to consider partial resection of the compromised
aeunouau ie puu u daay sases auos u raaonan
tissue.
beneath thin skin (especially the lower abdominal
 Restrained debridement is initiated by excising the
skin) is easily visualized and may not reflect skin
terminal edge of the traumatized skin, looking for
viability.
indications of edge bleeding. The excision is performed
When large amounts of devitalized tissue are
in a stepwise fashion. Excision is stopped at the point
present, removal of the tissue is facilitated by locating
at which primary closure can still be accomplished
a definable underlying fascial plane. Debridement of
with minimal tension. Excision obviously can be
full-thickness skin necrosis is facilitated by undermin-
stopped before this point, if bleeding is noted at the
ing at the level of the hypodermis. In turn, necrotic
incised edge of the traumatic flap. At this point, the
hypodermal tissues are resected; the underlying
wound may be closed or left open and reassessed over
muscle fascia (epimysium) and muscle tissues are
the next 4-5 days for final debridement and wound
assessed for viability and managed accordingly. This
closure. During the next few days, the remaining skin
 stepwise, downward excisional technique is occasion-
is assessed for viability before final closure (see Chapter
ally referred to as "layered debridement."
1 regarding circulation to the skin.)
Exposed contaminated and compromised subcuta-
neous fat overlying skeletal muscle can be safely
excised, thus removing the devitalized tissue and the
Removing Foreign Debris and
embedded debris. However, excision of subcutaneous
Contaminants
fat and portions of parniculus muscle attached to the
dermal surface of traumatized skin is best avoided if
possible: debridement under these circumstances may
Dirt, clay particles, and organic debris promote infec-
further compromise the traumatized skin's blood
tion and delay wound healing. Radiographs can be
supply (subdermal plexus and associated direct cuta-
used to locate radiopaque materials including glass
neous vessels). Wound lavage and careful removal of
fragments, grit and gravel, and metallic objects. Ultra-
topical debris (with forceps) from partially avulsed
sonography is useful in detecting radiolucent objects
skin is preferable. The area can be reassessed with
and abscesses.
subsequent bandage changes.
Gross contaminants adhered to adipose tissue over-
Although bleeding along the skin margins is con-
lying muscle surfaces may be removed more easily by
sidered a desirable intraoperative clinical sign of ade-
excising this tissue tangentially (Fig. 3-4). As previ-
quate cutaneous arterial circulation, it provides no
ously noted, debris adhered to the subcutis of skin
information as to venous return when dealing with
should be manually removed to better preserve cuta-
46
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
neous circulation. Manual removal of gross debris
which residual contamination may precipitate infec-
followed by pressure lavage with isotonic solutions
tion with their use.
will  remove  additional  microscopic contaminants
 remaining after the initial debridement. Small- to mod-
 erate-sized wounds are generally lavaged with 500 to
Provision of Adequate
1000ml normal saline or lactated Ringer's solutions.
Wound Drainage
Additional lavage solution is employed for large
wounds. The author has had excellent clinical results
As a general rule, leaving a wound open provides
with the use of isotonic solutions in contaminated
optimal drainage for problematic wounds with the
wounds under pressure, using an 18-gauge needle
presence of contaminants/infection. At the time of
attached to a 35-ml syringe. Full force of the plunger
closure, drains may be used to control dead space and
will effectively deliver 8 pounds per square inch (psi)
provide an outlet for the removal of tissue fluids that
to the wound surface when the needle is placed imme-
may accumulate in the area. In the face of infection
 diately perpendicular to the wound surface. This is
without devitalized tissue and foreign debris,
 considered the appropriate pressure for wound lavage.
 drains can provide an outlet for purulent discharges
The addition of a three-way stopcock attached to a
 sterilized intravenous fluid line will enable the surgeon
that otherwise may accumulate or spread into adjacent
tissues.
to refill the syringe more quickly during lavage. Funnel
Drains can be divided into two basic types: passive
tip syringes also can be adapted to pressure lavage
drain systems and active drain systems. Each system
with a catheter adaptor (Fig 3-9). The surgeon should
has specific advantages and disadvantages. (See the
cup a hand around the area to minimize overspray.
 discussion in Chapter 4 regarding wound drainage
Commercial lavage units also are available for clinical
systems.)
 use for those practices that have a caseload capable of
supporting their cost. Stryker Corporation sells a dis-
 posable pressure lavage unit (Surgilav) that connects
Promotion of a Viable
to intravenous fluid bags (Fig 3-10).
Vascular Bed
It is important for the surgeon to separate and
elevate the wound edges gently to examine adjacent
fascial planes that are likely to be harboring debris.
Removal of necrotic tissue, debris, and contaminants
However, indiscriminant dissection is to be avoided in
minimizes the risk of infection and delayed healing.
the interest of preventing additional tissue trauma and
Similarly, adequate postoperative wound drainage
contamination to uninvolved areas.
provides a route for the escape of debris and tissue
It is best to avoid or minimize the use of deep
fluid, and this can further reduce the likelihood of
 dermal or subcutaneous sutures in those wounds in
abscessation. Dressings and bandages help protect the
wound from additional contaminants and trauma.
Under these circumstances, circulation to the remain-
ing viable tissues can improve and support the devel-
 opment of a granulation bed. Thus, the veterinarian's
pue Aip isou jo juawageueu au ui joa 1ofe
infected wounds is to promote a healthy vascular
(granulation) bed. At this point, the appropriate
method for closing the wound can be chosen.
Exposed Bone
Although exposed bone stripped of the periosteum
 cannot easily support a granulation bed, the adjacent 
viable soft tissue will often form healthy granulation
tissue that creeps over the bone surface (Fig. 3-11).
 Small holes may be drilled into the cancellous layer of
FIG. 3-9 Funnel-tip syringe, with catheter tip adaptor, for
the bone to promote granulation tissue coverage of the
pressure lavage. A gunshot wound over the left scapula is
exposed cortical surface. This technique is usually
being lavaged with a chlorhexidine-saline solution after
reserved for large exposed bone surfaces or smaller
debridement.
areas in which healing is delayed. Care must be taken
HG. 3-10 (A) Surgilav debridement unit (Stryker Instruments, Kalamazoo, M1). Note the hand piece connected to the battery-
powered motor unit. The blue-tipped tubing is connected to a vacuum canister.
(B) Detachable funnel tip with spray jets.
(C) The motor unit is inserted into an intravenous fluid bag.
(uolan requni [eiae hal aui sunaloaun punom uoisnae pateueuoo e ueao ot pasn Suiaq hun aenlins (a)
(E) Close-up view of the funnel tip in contact with the tissue surface. The cone prevents overspray from the fluid nozzle; a vacuum
port in the attachment simultaneously sucks fluid away from the wound and into the vacuum canister.
47
48
/31
/3X
C
FIG. 3-11 (A) Shearing wound to the left rear paw secondary to vehicular trauma. The size of the wound is exaggerated by edema
and elastic retraction of the cutaneous borders. (B) Debridement and copious lavage were used to remove necrotic tissue and
contaminants. (C) Skin borders were tacked to adjacent fascia. (D) After 2 weeks, the edema has subsided, and the small remaining
wound will heal by second intention.
to avoid fracturing narrow, compromised bone seg-
the surgeon may note that the wound is considerably
ments such as the metacarpal or metatarsal bones. In
smaller than originally ascertained and that it may
some areas, muscle flaps can be rotated over an
heal by  contraction  and epithelialization  without
exposed bone to improve circulation to the wound
further surgical intervention (Fig. 3-11). Secondary
area and provide a vascular surface, if needed. (See
closure may be attempted if there is adequate skin
 Chapter 6 for additional details in managing exposed
adjacent to the wound. Skin flaps or free grafts should
bone.)
be considered for larger defects, for which healing by
second intention may be prolonged or expensive.
These reconstructive techniques also are advisable
Selection of Appropriate Method
when wound contracture or a fragile epithelialized
of Closure
scar may occur. As discussed, surgeons will occasion-
0l saam maj e roy spumom uado auos aeueu Ale
The true magnitude of the defect is best determined
determine whether healing by second intention will
 once tissue swelling subsides and the wound is devoid
reduce the magnitude of the wound before final surgi-
of necrotic tissue. This is particularly evident when
cal closure is attempted. This option often is consid-
 managing open wounds of the lower extremities. At 
ered for some small- to moderate-sized skin wounds
'(mu e au ae sep ii ot / Aeauaa) ais s
(not located in a critical area), in which sufficient
Basic Principles of Wound Management
49
 peripheral skin is present to help promote contraction
Hunt TK, Hopf HW. 1997. Wound healing and wound infec-
and epithelialization.
tion: what surgeons and anesthesiologists can do. Surg Clin
No Arm 77:587-606.
Pavletic MM. 1985. Introduction to wound healing and
wound management. In Proceedings of the American
Suggested Readings
Animal Hospital Association. Lakewood, CO: AAHA.
Pavletic MM. i993. Surgery of the skin and management of
wounds. In: Sherding RG, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Bohling MW, Henderson RA. 2006. Differences in cutaneous
 Marnagerment, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone.
 o u ia sies e sp uamiq Sui pnom 
Pavletic MM. 1995. Bite Wound Management in Smal Animals.
36:688-692.
American Animal Hospital Association, Professional
Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim ST, et al. 2004. Cutane-
Library Series. Lakewood, CO: AAHA.
ous wound healing in the cat: a macroscopic description
Peacock EE. 1984. Wound Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA:
 and comparison with cutaneous wound healing in the dog.
WB Saunders.
Vet Surg 33:579-587.
Robson MC. 1997. Wound infection. Surg Clin No Armt
Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF, et al. 2006. Compari-
77:637-650.
son of the role of the subcutaneous tissue in cutaneous
Swaim SF. 1980. Surgery of Traumatized Skin: Management and
wound healing in the dog and cat. Vet Surg 35:1-12.
Reconstruction in the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, PA: WB
 Dernell WS. 2006. Initial wound management. Vet Clin No
Saunders.
Am 36:713-738.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1993. Small Animal Wound Man-
 Hosgood G. 2006. Stages of wound healing and their clinical
agement. Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins.
relevance. Vet Clin No Am 36:667-685.
Trott AT. 2005. Wourds and Lacerations. Philadelphia, PA:
Hunt TK, Dunphy JE. 1979. Fundamentals of Wound Marage-
Elsevier Mosby.
ment. New York: Appleton & Lange.
4
Wound Care Products
and Their Use
Wound Drainage Systems  52
Topical Wound Care Products 61
Alternative Forms of Wound Therapy  76
Concluding Remarks  76
PLATE
Plate 1: Vacuum-Assisted Closure  78
51
52
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
WOUND DRAINAGE
SYSTEMS
Passive Drains
The simplest and most economical of the passive
I drains employed in small animal surgery is the
Penrose drain (Tyco/Kendall Healthcare, Mansfield,
MA), a soft tubular strip of radiopaque latex that is
sold in various widths. In small animal practice, only
 the 1/4-inch Penrose drain is considered useful; larger
drains are rarely needed (Fig. 4-1). Penrose drains
allow for the passage of fluids by capillary action
over the outer surface of the drain. Fluid then
HG. 4-1 Penrose drains are composed of radiopaque latex.
gravitates dowmward and out of the dependently
They come in a variety of sizes. Examples include the 1/4-inch
 placed exit incision. Cutting holes in a Penrose drain
and 3/8-inch Penrose drain. In small animal surgery, the
-pesip pappe aut seu pue aaeueip aaoidul jou saop
1/4-inch Penrose drain is the preferred size.
vantage of increasing the drain's susceptibility to
tearing if traction is applied to the exposed end. The
FIG. 4-2 (A) Method for inserting Penrose
drains into dead-space pockets and seromas
using Allis tissue forceps. The Penrose drain is
grasped at its end with the forceps. A portion of
the drain is tucked into the space between the
jaws of this instrument.
(B) The Allis forceps and drain are inserted
through a stab incision created in the dependent
area of the surgical site. The forceps are inserted
into the cavity. The forceps are palpable beneath
the skin. As a suture needle is inserted through
the skin, the Allis forceps are rotated slightly,
allowing the needle to pass through the
instrument gap where the drain has been
tucked. The end of the needle is then pushed
partially through the skin. Leaving the needle in
position, the Allis tissue forceps are removed.
The drain is gently tugged to confirm the suture
needle has captured or secured the drain.
(C) The drain is sutured into position, including
a suture placed at the exit wound. This
technique is both simple and effective in blind
placement of Penrose drains.
Wound Care Products and Their Use
53
dorsal/proximal end of the buried drain is secured
location of the incision or wound in relation to the
with a single skin suture; a second suture is used to
necessary dependent exit site of a drain can make the
secure the drain to the skin as it exits ventrally /distally
above rule of thumb impossible to follow. Despite the
(Fig. 4-2).
potential problems noted, the author has not found
that having a drain cross an incision line poses a sig-
nificant problem to wound healing.
There are surgeons who prefer to secure the dorsal/
 Penrose drains are adequate for the drainage of
proximal drain in the deeper tissues, using a fine
smaller dead-space areas but are less than ideal for
absorbable suture (usually 4-0 chromic catgut).
Si aeuirp pauonond uaum Aiennadsa 'seare ralie
 When the drain is no longer required, a firm tug is
anticipated. Penrose drains are normally retained for
used to break the retention suture and remove the
3 to 5 days, depending upon the volume of fluid
drain. The author does not advise using this tech-
exiting the area. They can be removed by the second
rique for one simple reason: there is a risk of
day if drainage is minimal. In general, the longer the
tearing the drain, with retention of a fragment in
drain is retained, the greater the likelihood of ascend-
 the wound. Retrieval of retained drain fragments
ing infection from contamination at the drain exit (Fig.
can be surprisingly difficult. Blind retrieval can be
4-3). When possible, the exposed end of a Penrose
attempted by inserting forceps through the exit
drain should be covered with a sterile dressing and a
wound; fluoroscopy also has been used to locate
topical antimicrobial agent, although this is not easily
 problematic drain fragments. Partially reopening
accomplished in some body regions (e.g., inguinal and
the original surgical incision or using a smaller
axillary areas). If left exposed, it is advisable to gently
access incision over the location of the drain frag-
cleanse the exit area with sterile saline (with the addi-
ment is a last resort.
tion of povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine) followed by
a topical antimicrobial agent three times daily (Fig.
4-4). Using an Elizabethan collar is advisable to prevent
 In general, placement of a Penrose drain beneath
the patient from chewing or removing the drain. If a
the incision line or across the suture line is best avoided.
patient should tear a portion of the drain, radiographs
The drain may irritate the tissues in contact with the
may be necessary to confirm retention of the radio-
drain and possibly interfere with healing of the closed
paque fragment.
 incision. Healing of the skin incision to the underlying
 Penrose drains function suboptimally in body areas
tissue plane also may be impaired. More commonly.
where gravitational drainage cannot be provided.
careless suturing of the skin may inadvertently snag
Moreover, they permit the entry of air into a wound
the underlying drain, making subsequent drain
area and cannot be used in thoracic wounds in which
removal difficult. [Note: tugging on the drain usually
pneumothorax may occur. In flank wounds, the exit
will "wiggle" the offending suture(s).] In practice, the
site of the drain occasionally can create a sucking
HG. 4-3 (A) Forelimb amputation; premature removal of a surgical drain resulted in seroma formation. (B) Allstissue forceps were
used to replace a Penrose drain, followed by an external bandage to help control dead space.
54
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 4-5 Example of the Jackson-Pratt 100-ml vacuum
reservoir and attached drain tubing. Composed of silicone, the
FIG. 4-4 For smaller dead space areas, Penrose drains can be
reservoir and tubing can be cleaned and autoclaved. Several
used very effectively. In this example, a 1/4-inch drain is used
companies supply this economical vacuum drain system.
to control the dead space below the transposed flap and the
donor area.
wound, with subsequent development of subcutane-
ous emphysema to a variable degree. Closed suction
asa u pakondua isaq ane suasks aseurep
situations.
There are two common errors noted with the use
of Penrose drains: (1) improper placement (a
'mental disorientation" error) of the exit site asso-
ciated with the position of the surgical patient and
(2) having both the proximal/dorsal and distal/
ventral ends of the Penrose drain exit the skin.
HG. 4-6 Examples of the Johnson & Johnson J-Vac closed
In the former, a patient is in dorsal recumbency
 (  - pe -o) s ae
and the surgeon accidentally directs the exit wound
cannot be resterilized in the autoclave. The larger reservoir is
 in the inappropriate (dorsal/proximal) location.
 too large for routine small animal usage.
This placement error usually is discovered only
after the patient is being placed in lateral recum-
bency during anesthetic recovery.
canister allow the surgeon to determine the relative
amount of fluid accumulated. A spout permits empty-
ing of fluid or any air accumulated in the vacuum
Active Drains
chamber; the reservoir is collapsed and closed to rein-
stitute this active drainage system (Figs. 4-5 and
Closed suction drainage devices are active drain
4-6). The Jackson-Pratt Active Drain System (Cardinal
systems that operate on the principle of creating a
Health, McGaw Park, IL) is one of the more common
vacuum in a chamber that draws fluid from the body
systems currently
y  used  in  veterinary   surgery
area through a rigid fenestrated drain placed beneath
(Fig. 4-5).
the skin. Most chambers are collapsible plastic canis-
 The best wound drains are silastic (silicone) materi-
ters that rely on an internal spring mechanism or the
als with multiple holes and recessed grooves to mini-
inherent tendency of the chamber wall to expand
mize obstruction. The fenestrated portion of the drain
outward in order to create a vacuum. A one-way
is placed in the wound; the nonfenestrated portion
(antireflux) valve prevents reflux of fluid from the
exits the area through a small stab wound in the skin.
chamber back to the wound. Milliliter markings on the
The fenestrated tubing can be shortened to accommo-
Wound Care Products and Their Use
55
date to the wound space. A purse-string skin suture
TABLE 4-1
provides an airtight seal, and the suture strands are
Vacuum drain instructions for pet owners.
then looped around the drain and tied to prevent tube
 The oval reservoir holds 100ml (about 3oz) of fluid. A
displacement (sometimes called the "Roman sandal"
milliliter scale is marked on the side of the reservoir.
knot or "Chinese finger-trap knot"). Redundant exter-
2. To open the reservoir, remove the attached stopper
nal tubing is cut off with scissors before attaching this
from the spout. Next, look at the scale and note the
nonfenestrated segment to the vacuum canister. The
volume of fluid in the chamber.
canister or reservoir is secured to a bandage or an
3. Record in a notebook the fluid volume and the date
adhesive band placed around the trunk or cervical
and time of removal.
area. Closed suction units can be used for several days
4. To empty the reservoir canister, pour the liquid into a
with minimal risk of ascending infection. In general,
disposable container (e.g., a Dixie cup). This fluid can
they are used for 3 to 5 days.
then be fhushed down the toilet and the paper cup can
be discarded.
5. To reactivate the vacuum inside the reservoir chamber,
Vacuum drains have several advantages over
 squeeze the air out of the chamber and insert the
Penrose drains:
to be collapsed.
They function independent of gravity.
6. The entire drain system (reservoir and tube) can be
removed when the amount of drainage decreases
They allow the surgeon to quantify fluid
significantly. Contact your doctor to determine when
volume.
to removed the drain.
They eliminate the need for bandages and
7. The surgeon can remove the drain on an outpatient
 nursing care associated with the external
 basis: in most cases drain removal will take less than 5
drainage associated with Penrose drains.
minutes.
With basic instructions, they are easy for
most owners to manage at home.
The risk of ascending infection is minimal.
punom deap buuieip lot inesn Aaa are aau
pockets and abscess cavities devoid of
necrotic tissue and contaminants.
The vacuum draws tissue planes together,
thereby eliminating the need for internal
"tacking" sutures to eliminate subcutaneous
dead space.
If so desired, silicone drains and reservoirs can
be cleaned and autoclaved for additional usage.
Vacuum drainage systems are remarkably effective
in removing fluid from wide surface areas (Fig. 4-7).
 Most owners are capable of managing vacuum drains
The milliliters of fluid removed, as well as its color
at home (see Table 4-1 for instructions). The author
and clarity, are recorded along with the time the
also has used vacuum drain systems for managing
reservoir is emptied by the owner The drain can
mild cases of peritonitis and various abdominal
be removed when the volume declines to several
abscesses over the past 20 years and has found them
milliliters over a 24-hour period.
quite effective.
On occasion, obstruction of the fenestrated drain
 In the presence of active bleeding, clotted blood can
can be misread as a decline in fluid volume. One
obstruct the drain holes. Tissue debris occasionally
indication of tube obstruction is any visible/palpa-
obstructs the drain. In many cases this problem can
ble accumulation of fluid at the surgical area. As
be remedied by removing the drain from the
noted, "retro-flushing" of the drain can be used to
reservoir and flushing it with several milliliters of
clear obstructed channels and reinvigorate the
sterile saline to clear tube fenestrations. The vacuum
vacuum system. If this maneuver fails, drain
is reactivated and watched closely for any future
replacement may be necessary.
obstructions.
FIG. 4-7 (A) Massive abscess of the left femoral area. The exact cause of this infection was unknown, although a penetrating wound
was suspected in this farm dog. Note the pitting edema of the lower extremity. Ultrasonography outlined a deep U-shaped abscess
cavity, curving from the hip down the femoral shaft area.
(B) The depth and location of the abscess was determined with a syringe needle. When the abscess cavity was located, pus can be
seen exiting the needle hub. A scalpel blade is used to incise down to the cavity, using the intact needle as a depth guide. Blunt 
dissection with Metzenbaum scissors was performed to approach this long abscess cavity from two sites.
(C) A finger was inserted into the depth of the abscess: aerobic and anaerobic cultures were obtained from the deep abscess cavity.
(D) All pus was aspirated and flushed from the abscess pocket. The interconnecting access incisions facilitated drainage and visual
inspection of the cavity.
 (E) The drain tubes exited through two small separate stab incisions and were secured to the skin with a purse-string suture and
Roman sandal suture.
(F) Close-up view of the surgical area. Access incisions were closed, and the reservoirs were attached to the drain tubes. The drains
were left in the area for 6 days after insertion.
56
Wound Care Products and Their Use
57
A common complication noted in the immediate
nal tubing, and the reservoir must be examined to
postoperative period is air entering the wound through
locate the source of the air leak. On occasion, a few
the closed skin incision, inactivating the reservoir
drops of surgical soap can be applied to confirm the
vacuum required to remove fluid. The chamber
potential site of an the air leak in the external tube
expands with air when there is an incisional leak, loose
segment. When the vacuum chamber is activated, the
 connection, or hole in the external drain tubing/reser-
area is assessed for bubbles, sigmifying a source of air
voir. The skin incision, exit site of the drain, the exter-
entry.
Long incisions are more prone to cumulative air
Apply a "caulking bead" of ointment over the
entry between individual skin sutures or staples,
incision line and repeat as necessary. fUsually a
unti a fibrin seal forms along the incision line
fibrin seal will be noted by the following day.!
na a sanesau Anua iv Aiams re smou
Depending on the length of the incision, a
within the reservoir, necessitating its evacuation
surgical cyanoacrylate glue may be applied over
and vacuum reactivation. To prevent this, the
the suture/staple line.
author has used a few techniques that can be
effective in sealing air entry along an incision line
If an exact area of air leakage is seen between
sutures, additional reinforcing sutures or skin 
(Fig. 4-8).
staples may be applied.
HG. 4-8 (A) J-Vac used to control dead space beneath a caudal
ae nsuosai ii pasn de uraned ieixe oseaida eadns
flank area after wide tumor resection.
(B) The combined closure of the long donor and recipient areas
increases the probability of air seepage between skin sutures/
staples. Until a fibrin seal forms, application of an incisional
sealant may be needed to prevent inactivation of the reservoir
vacuum. Topical ointment or the application of a surgical glue
over the closed incisions can be effective for this purpose.
Adhesive plastic drapes can be used, although the cost of
maintaining them may be greater.
(C) Close-up view of a drain tube leading to a reservoir. To
maintain the position of the tubing, tape strips can be applied to
the tube and sutured or stapled to the skin.
58
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Although closed suction devices are somewhat
 coated with PHMB (polyhexamethylene biguanide) is
more expensive than Penrose drains, they are consid-
considered an ideal material.
ered indispensable for the proper treatment of many
 Foam or gauze serve as a platform for distributing
of the larger, more serious wounds encountered in
the vacuum force uniformly to the surface of the
s Au ae aau Kep a Ar
wound, both drawing and retaining fluid (wound dis-
available for use with variable prices: silicone models
charge, tissue fluid-edema) into its matrix. Pressures
are capable of being cleaned and resterilized.
-uos pandde pue (8Huu ooz- o1 0s-) paisn!pe aq ues
tinuously or intermittently Intermittent application of
the vacuum (3 minutes on, 5 minutes off) was demon-
Noncommercial Active
strated to have beneficial effects on blood flow, granu-
Drain Systems
lation tissue formation, and skin flap survival in
experimental animals. Removal of the extracellular
A small vacuum collection system can be made from
a 35- to 60-cc syringe to manage small wounds. A
fluid, in particular, can significantly improve microcir-
vacuum chamber is created from the syringe by
culation to edematous tissues.
During the "off period" of the pump, the foam re-
 drawing and securing the inner syringe plunger to the
expands, and this motion does cause pain in human
outer cylinder, thereby creating a static vacuum
patients. In most cases, continuous suction is used
chamber. Commercial tubing can be partially fenes-
 trated with scissors and inserted into the wound (Fig.
without adverse results. A negative pressure of
-125 mmHg is most commonly used in human and
4-9). This device can be used effectively for small
veterinary patients. A lower negative pressure of
wounds, especially when a comparatively small
-50mmHg is selected for wounds with excessive
volume of fluid is anticipated.
serous drainage and the postoperative prevention of
Originally reported for use in human pediatric
fluid accumulation (seroma, edema). The polyurethane
 surgery, Vacutainer tubes can be adapted for draining
foam or gauze variation usually is replaced every 2-3
small dead space pockets. A partially fenestrated drain
is created with a butterfly catheter, removing the
days with the patient under heavy sedation.
Increased bacterial clearance from the wound bed
syringe hub and partially fenestrating a portion of the
 is an advantage to vacuum-assisted closure. However,
tube. The tubing is secured to the surgical area and
these systems are not a replacement for surgical de-
the needle is inserted into the Vacutainer. As fluid
bridement of devitalized tissues. Removal of necrotic
accumulates, the Vacutainer suctions the fluid into its
tissue is necessary before using these negative pres-
chamber. The author has found this to be unreliable,
sure systems.
.Highly contaminated and infected
largely due to the narrow-diameter tubing frequently
wounds may require daily changes. Malodorous
 plugging. The reservoir capacity also is quite small. As
changes would indicate more frequent bandage
 a result, its routine use is inadvisable.
changes are needed. In many cases the bandage is
changed a total of 2-3 times before the wound is ready
for surgical closure.
Vacuum-Assisted Closure
 The vacuum systems (-125mmHg) also can be
(VAC) Systems
used as a dressing to secure free grafts. However, care
is required when changing the foam or gauze in order
Vacuum-assisted wound drainage systems (KCI USA,
to avoid displacement of the graft. Application of a
 Inc., San Antonio, TX; Venturi, Talley Medical, Lansing.
nonadherent petroleum dressing (Adaptic, Johnson &
M) have been developed to manage problematic
 Johnson, Langhorne, PA) over the graft may prevent
wounds in humans. The KCI system includes (1) a
polyurethane foam or cotton gauze adherence to
e (sazis a) aaus oy lan uao aamaio
exposed granulation tissue.
can be trimmed with sterile scissors to conform to the
Complications associated with vacuum systems
wound surface; (2) a firm plastic tube that attaches to
include the ingrowth of granulation tissue and super-
the foam pad; (3) a vacuum pump with a fluid reser-
ficial tissue trauma associated with the embedment of
voir; and (4) a plastic sheet with a topical adhesive that
the foam or gauze into the wound surface. Forceful
 overlaps the foam and tubing, forming an air-tight seal
removal usually results in minor bleeding. This is
over the entire wound area. Lastly, the external tube
more commonly noted if the bandage is left in place
is connected to the vacuum pump that applies subat-
a anegau ues sxeal ine aaieT 'sAep C ueu anow 10y
 mospheric pressure to the foam chamber created (Fig.
vacuum; small air leaks may cause the adjacent skin to
4-10). The Talley Medical Venturi system utilizes
已
dry from the continuous passage of air over the area.
gauze matrix placed under negative pressure. Gauze
 Negative pressure systems are expensive: the vacuum
一
HG. 4-9 (A) Chronic radiation ulcer in the popliteal area of a dog, secondary to ortho-voltage therapy for mast cell tumor.
(B) Surgical debridement and lavage. The skin borders were partially undermined to facilitate wound closure.
(C) Insertion of 5-mm round fenestrated tube; the tube was shortened to fit into the small dead space pocket prior to skin closure.
(D) A purse-string suture and Roman sandal knot were used to secure the drain tube exiting the small stab incision. Skin closure
pocket and prevent seroma formation in this clean-contaminated wound. Use of a three-way stopcock facilitates use of this simple
drainagesystem.
(E) Safety pins are useful to maintain the vacuum chamber. This "lock" pin can be shifted eccentrically to empty the syringe without
its removal.
59
60
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 4-10 (A, B) The VAC or vacuum-assisted closure system. The system comprises sterile polyurethane (open cel) foam, an
attachable vacuum tube, and an adherent plastic drape designed to envelope the foam and adjacent wound margins. Foam pads
come in different sizes and can be trimmed to fit a specific wound bed.
(C) Close-up view of perforated adhesive disc that attaches to the foam surface. The opposite end of the tube is attached to the VAC
pump, which provides continuous or intermittent subatmospheric pressure to the foam. A plastic adhesive drape overlaps the
 peripheral skin and forms an airtight canopy over the foam, tubing, and wound. Activation of the vacuum pump removes air
beneath the plastic cover, collapsing the foam. Fluid accumulating on the wound surface (wound discharge, serum, edema-tissue
fluid accumulation) is drawn into the foam. Excessfluid is collected in the pump reservoir. As discussed, gauze-based systems
appear to have comparable clinical results.
 pumps can be leased or purchased. Patients normally
and commercial vacuum pumps to create an economi-
require continuous supervision during their hospitali-
cal alternative to the VAC. It must be kept in mind that
 zation to assure proper function. (There are veterinar-
this alternative may involve patent infringement.)
However, changes staged every 2-3 days will reduce
polyurethane foam or gauze, plastic adhesive drapes,
the costs otherwise associated with wound care tech-
Wound Care Products and Their Use
61
niques that require daily bandage replacements. It is
is a mere fraction of this burgeoning market. In veteri-
possible to change the foam or gauze through a small
nary medicine, most information pertaining to wound
central access incision in the overlying plastic seal,
care products is largely based on professional experi-
thereby eliminating the need to redo the entire replace-
ence. The lack of well-designed comparative studies of
ment process: after its replacement, a second adhesive
wound-healing products in dogs and cats is in large
sheet can be used to seal the area. In general, two o1
part due to a lack of research funding. Most pharma-
three changes may be needed before wound closure
ceutical research uses rats, rabbits, and pigs. Variations
can be performed.
in research protocols make accurate comparisons of
As noted, negative pressure wound therapy systems
products difficult. Although clinical applicability of
are not a substitute for the proper surgical debride-
studies between species is open to debate, research
ment and lavage of contaminated and infected open
results can serve as general guidelines regarding the
wounds. They may be most useful for large, deep-
use of wound care products in veterinary patients. In
pocketed contaminated and infected wounds. These
systems must be used with caution if thoracic or
cacy of a given product.
abdominal viscera risk contact with the foam. Thin and
compromised skin can be traumatized with negative
pressure therapy. Lastly, they should not be used on
wound surfaces containing cancerous tissue (see
Problems with Veterinary Medicine
Plate 1).
and Current Research on Wound
Healing
Species differences
TOPICAL WOUND CARE
Variations in wound depth, size, and body
PRODUCTS
location
Overview
In vivo vs. in vitro
Experimental vs. clinical wounds
Historically, a variety of topical agents have been used
Clinical case variables
in managing open wounds, and the list of these prod-
Research design flaws
ucts is rather long. Some of the more unusual remedies
Limited number of subjects
noted by Rudolph and Noe in their book, Chronic
Problerm  Wounds (see Suggested Readings) have
There is a true need for evidence-based medi-
included carrots, turnips, bread, egg white, gold leaf,
aluminum foil, linseed oil, pectin paste, silicone spray.
cine, allowing us to incorporate new information
and technology and allowing veterinarians to inte-
chlorophyl, tannic acid, yeast extract, wine and
 grate the best research evidence with our clinical
vinegar, frankincense and myrrh, mud, oil and grease,
beer, dung, fresh meat, heavy metals, saliva, sesame
expertise.
oil, willow leaves, rust, soot, onion, garlic, cinnamon
and other aromatic spices, licorice root, and rose water.
Although not advocated for use, there is some
scientific basis underlying the variable benefits of these
Wound-healing models for assessment of epitheli-
products.
alization normally are based on the creation of partial-
There is a renewed interest in the use of honey and
thickness skin wounds in research animals using a
sugar for topical wound care. In more recent years,
dermatome. (Most wound closure in humans relies
Preparation-H (Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Richmond,
more heavily on epithelialization than wound contrac-
VA; live yeast cell derivative, phenylephrine HCl,
tion.) Partial-thickness skin defects epithelialize in a
shark liver oil) anecdotally has been used for open
fashion different from full-thickness wounds (see
Chapter 2).
lized (boiled) potato peelings have been used as a
In fur-bearing animals, second intention healing is
poultice in burn management. Unfortunately, the true
 often dominated by myofibroblastic contraction.
Aaeme aq o sinpnnd eidon ie jo e
Because  epithelialization occurs  independent  of
assessed without well-designed comparative studies.
wound contraction (and vice versa), research pertain-
Wound care products are a multi-billion dollar
ing to rates of epithelialization often fails to address
industry in human health care: the veterinary market
rates of wound contraction.
62
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Providing an optimal environment for epithelializa-
to wound contraction and epithelialization of the
tion may not necessarily be ideal to wound contrac-
defect. Delayed healing dictates elimination of poten-
tion. For example, rigid adherent dressings may impair 
tial causes, and the possible use of topical agents to
the centripetal movement of skin (splinting the skin
"jump start," enhance, or supplement the processes of
margins) but provide a moist environment for
wound healing. In a number of cases, surgical closure
epithelialization.
of the wound can preclude the cumulative expense of
To date, there is insufficient evidence to suggest
 ments, and transportation costs in more problematic
whether a given wound care product is superior to
wounds.
others in open wound care.
General Definitions to Remember
As discussed in Chapter 3, initial wound manage-
Aerosols: Medicinal agents incorporated in a
ment is directed at removing devitalized tissue and
suitable solvent and packaged under pressure
with a propellant. Wwide, uniform dispersion and
contaminants, thereby improving the likelihood that
earliest possible wound closure can be achieved. In
ease of application are advantages to the use
of aerosol compounds.
turn, veterinary clinicians seek out the simplest
effective means of closing the wound and restoring
Cleansing agents: A broad class of agents used
function to the injured area. Most open wounds in
to facilitate the removal of debris and
small animals in fact heal using basic wound care
contaminants from the surface of the skin or
principles outlined in Chapter 3. Confusion often
open wounds. Agents may contain surfactants,
arises when attempting to select the best wound care
antibacterials, or particulate materials to
product for more problematic wounds from an
facilitate wound cleansing prior to open wound
array of topical agents currently available in the health-
management or surgical closure.
care market. The variety of topical products available
Cream: A water-oil emulsion containing a drug or
adds to the confusion regarding which products to
chemical. Evaporation of the water leaves an
select. Brochures demonstrating the superior "before
oily film. Creams often are easier to apply than
and after" benefits on clinical cases do not always hold
ointments.
up to closer clinical scrutiny. With a lack of accurate
Collodion: A drug in an ethereal solution of
comparative research, veterinarians are naturally
inclined to use products they have had success with in
cellulose acetate. After application, the ether
the past, but look for other options only when results
evaporates, leaving a flexible coating on the
are suboptimal for a given patient.
skin surface.
 In determining the most appropriate topical wound
Gel: A clear, jellylike topical agent, usualy with a
 product, there are a few basic questions to ask.
 greaseless water-soluble base. Medicinal
agents may be dispersed in the base.
Is there devitalized tissue or tissue of
1.
Liniments (braces): Liquid or semisolid
questionable viability?
preparations to be applied to the skin with 
2.
Is the skin wound partial or full-thickness?
rubbing finunction). Most contain
 Is infection present, or is it a significant 
counterirritants to relieve muscle or tendon
3.
pain. Liniments are more commonly employed
concern?
in horses.
What stage of wound healing is present?
4.
_otion: A solution or suspension of soothing
5.
Is wound healing progressing normally?
substances applied to the skin without friction.
 Ointment (salve, unguent: A semisolid greasy
These questions will help direct you to selecting the
preparation in which the drug is dispersed in a
-beueu 1oy apisuon oi sjuaae enidot aiedoidde jsou
suitable base; the base may be an oleaginous 
ing an open wound. Devitalized tissue will require
substance (petroleum, lard, or lanolin) to which
the medication is added. Ointments also may
ment agents (discussed later in this section.) Infection
have a water-soluble base, such as polyethylene
must be managed or prevented, often with topical/
glycol. Ointments normally are denser and less 
systemic antibacterial medications. Otherwise healthy
easily spread over the skin or wound surface
wounds normally require a protective moist environ-
than are creams and gels.
ment to support the normal healing processes leading
Wound Care Products and Their Use
63
Topical Enzymatic Debridement
tion from the underlying viable tissues (see Table 4-2).
Agents
Collagen fibers form attachments between the viable
wound bed and overlying necrotic tissue; degradation
of these collagen bonds facilitates separation of the
Enzymatic debridement usually refers to the topical
necrotic tissue. Maggot (biologic) debridement therapy
application of proteolytic enzymes to degrade nonvi-
is another option to consider in problematic cases (see 
able proteins within the wound, facilitating its separa-
below).
TABLE4-2
Enzymatic debridement agents.
Papain-urea
Accuzyme Ointment, Accuzyme SE, Healthpoint Ltd., Fort Worth, TX; Ethezyme, Ethex Corp.,
St. Louis, MO; Kovia Ointment, Stratus Pharmaceuticals, Sonar Products Inc., Carstadt, NJ.
Cost: Accuzyme 30-g ointment tube++++
Applicatior: Papain is derived from the papaya (pawpaw) Carica papaya. The proteolytic enzymes
papain and chymopapain are present in this fruit. Activity level is over a pH range of 3 to 12.
Urea molecules disrupt cross-linking bonds in collagen, allowing the proteins to unfold.
Unfolding of the collagen fibrils allows the enzyme papain to digest the exposed proteins.
layer of ointment is applied to the wound and covered with a dressing. Debris is flushed from
the wound and the ointment reapplied once or twice daily. Papain may be inactivated by salts
of heavy metals (lead, mercury, silver). Hydrogen peroxide also inactivates this enzyme.
Papain-urea,
Panafil, Panafil SE, Healthpoint Ltd; Ziox Ointment, Stratus Pharmaceuticals, Sonar Products,
chlorophyllin
Inc. Cost: Panafil 30-g tube*
copper complex
 Application: In addition to papain-urea, chlorophyllin copper complex (CCC) reduces fibrin
sodium
formation, reportedly facilitating macrophage migration and fibroblast activation for collagen
deposition. Copper reportedly enhances structural integrity of the deposited collagen matrix.
CCC also is reported to promote healthy granulation tissue, control local inflammation, and
reduce wound odors. CCC inhibits the hemagglutination and inflammatory properties of
protein degradation products in the wound, including the products of enzyme digestion.
Wound cleansing precedes application of the ointment, once or twice daily. Longer intervals
between redressings (2-3 days) also may prove to be satisfactory, depending on the condition
of the wound.
Trypsin, balsam of
Granulex-V, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, PA; Xenaderm, Healthpoint Ltd (Fig. 4-11). Cost:
Peru, castor oil
Granulex V, 1-oz bottle+; 4-oz spray
 Application: Balsam of Peru is a capillary bed "stimulant'" and has mild antibacterial properties.
Castor oil forms an oily barrier, providing a moist environment for promoting
epithelialization. Providing a moist environment also reduces local wound pain. Trypsin is the
mild enzymatic debriding agent.
Collagenase
 Santyl, Healthpoint Ltd. Gladase, Smith & Nephew Inc., St Petersburg, FL. Cost: Santyl 15-g
ointment tube+++
range is 6-8. Avoid use with heavy metal ions, detergents. Compatible with Dakin's solution,
hydrogen peroxide. Apply once per day. Thick eschars should be incised (cross-hatched) with
 to facilitate enzymatic debridement. Wounds are cleansed prior to application of ointment.
Topical antibiotic powder may be applied to the wound prior to ointment application. The
medicated wound is covered with a dressing. The bandage is changed on a daily basis.
Desoxyribonuclease,
Elase; Astellas, Deerfield, IL. Cost: 15-g tube+++; Elase-Chloromycetin 15-g tube+++
with fibrinolysin
Applicatior: Fibrinolysin derived from bovine plasma; desoxyribonuclease derived from bovine
pancreas. Combined actions include breakdown of fibrinous material and nucleoprotein
(DNA). Fibrinolytic activity is primarily directed at denatured protein. The wound is cleansed
prior to application once or twice daily. Elase would appear to be less commonly employed
than other enzymatic debriding agents noted.
Cost: + <$10.00; ++ <$20.00; +++ <$30.00: ++++ <$40.00; +++++ <$50.00; *>$50.00; **>$75.00: ***>$100.00.
64
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 4-11 (A) Application of Granulex
enzymatic spray, containing trypsin, balsam of
Peru, and castor oil.
inoum Aidde ot Asea st Aeads au1 (g)
contaminating the nozzle for future use.
Granulex was used to remove a small area of
residual necrotic tissue and provide a moisture
barrier to prevent wound desiccation. A
nonadherent dressing and light bandage were
used to help keep the medication in continuous
contact with the wound surface. There are other
enzymatic agents available for more aggressive
removal of necrotic tissue (see text).
Surgical debridement is more effective than enzy-
Enzymatic debridement is considered a selective
matic debridement for the rapid removal of large areas
method of debridement since it specifically targets
devitalized tissue only, sparing the adjacent viable
of necrotic tissue, especially in septic patients. The
more potent enzymatic debriding agents can be expen-
tissues. (As a comparison, wet-to-dry dressings are
sive (see Table 4-1) to use and normally require a
considered nonselective, since this technique can
dressing or bandage wrap to assure their prolonged
remove viable tissues adjacent to the necrotic
tissues.)
contact with the exposed wound surface.
Pharmaceutical websites are available for readers
Advantages of selective debridement include
interested in these products.
little or no hemorrhage or pain, and the avoidance
 of any trauma to important tissue structures during
surgical debridement. However, careful surgical
Topical Products Promoting
debridement can rapidly eliminate major amounts
Autolytic Debridement
 of devitalized tissue: this may enhance the eficacy
of enzymatic agents or eliminate their need.
Autolytic debridement (necrotic tissue autolysis) refers
to the body's natural process of debridement at the
 In the natural healing process (autolytic debride-
cellular level within the wound. Moisture-retaining
ment), collagenase and other proteolytic enzymes
gels and dressings can be used to promote this form
within the wound break the peptide bonds in collagen
of selective debridement by optimizing the softening
to facilitate its detachment from the wound surface.
 or maceration of devitalized tissues, facilitating phago-
Some topical agents are designed to facilitate autolytic
cytic cells, and proteolytic enzyme liquefaction of the
debridement by providing an optimal wound environ-
nonviable tissues.
ment for this to occur.
Enzymatic debridement is most commonly reserved
for use in patients that are not suitable candidates for
 surgical debridement. Because these enzymatic agents
Autolytic debridement is considered a selective or
gentler method of debridement since it specifically
do not damage viable tissues, they can be used in areas
targets nonviable tissues only, sparing adjacent
where bleeding, pain, and collateral damage associ-
viable tissues. Advantages include less hemor-
ated with surgical debridement are best avoided.
 rhage, pain, and collateral trauma that may be asso-
Removal of a necrotic eschar can be facilitated with the
use of collagenase, papain, or trypsin. Fibrinolysin is
ciated with surgical debridement. However, there
useful for the removal of fibrin or blood. Incising or
is a risk of promoting infection with autolytic deb-
ridement, particularly with the presence of signifi-
cross-hatching the surface of necrotic eschars can facil-
cant amounts of devitalized tissue.
itate topical enzyme penetration.
Wound Care Products and Their Use
65
Many of these topical gel-like compounds also have
Hydrogels provide a moist substrate to hydrate
been laminated to synthetic membranes, forming a
wounds but normally have modest capacity to
dressing platform for easier application to flat wound
 absorb and retain discharge from the wound (Fig.
surfaces. Similarly, other moisture-retaining barrier
4-12).
dressings (occlusive and semiocclusive) can be used to
 Gel application is restricted to the wound surface
since prolonged exposure to the adjacent skin can
Chapter 5). There are a variety of topical hydrophilic
cause skin softening secondary to overhydration. A
wound gel products available for use in humans, most
topical dressing and light bandage usually are required
of which are applicable to animals (see Wound Gels
to help maintain gel contact with the wound bed. Gels
below.)
will soften and may drain from beneath the overlying
Wrap, depending on the location of the wound.
Depending on the condition of the wound, gels nor-
mally are applied once or twice daily.
Gels can be used for autolytic debridement as
 described above, or as a topical agent on healthy gran-
When possible, performing surgical debridement
can dramatically reduce the volume of necrotic
ulation beds or partial thickness skin wounds. The
tissue and better control bacterial proliferation. In
following is a partial list of gels available on the market:
turn, both enzymatic and autolytic debridement
are more effective when the devitalized tissue
Curafil Wound Gel (Tyco/Kendall Healthcare):
burden  is sigmificantly  reduced by  surgical
0.5-, 1-, 3-oz tubes++
debridement.
Curasol Gel Wound Dressing (Healthpoint Ltd.,
Wet-to-dry dressings or mechanical debridement
Fort Worth, TX): 90-g tube+
of residual necrotic tissue is an economical alterna-
Intrasite Hydrogel (Smith & Nephew Inc., St
tive to enzymatic and autolytic debridement,
especially after surgical debridement has been per-
Petersburg, FL): 15-g tube+
formed to reduce the volume of necrotic tissue (see
NuGel Collagen Wound Gel (Johnson &
Chapter 5). Wet-to-dry dressings are considered a
Johnson/Ethicon, Cornelia, GA): 90-g tube++
form of non-selective debridement: both necrotic
tissue and local viable tissue (epithelium, granula-
Other agents, such as the following, can be added to a
tion tissue) may be inadvertently removed during
 gel base to enhance its healing properties:
the process of removing the gauze packing. For this
reason, the author uses wet-to-dry dressings for no
Maltodextrin (lntracell Gel, Macleod
more than 3-5 days. If minimal necrotic tissue
 Pharmaceuticals Inc., Fort Collins, CO): 3-oz
remains, products promoting autolytic debride-
tube++
 ment can be substituted for wet-to-dry dressings.
It is the author's opinion that, in many cases of
Acemannan (CarraVet, Carrington Laboratories
 open wound management (in healthy patients), the
Inc., Irving, TX): 3-oz tube++ (see Fig. 4-12)
combination of surgical debridement and the short
Acemannan (Carra Sorb M, Carrington
term use of wet-to-dry dressings (3-5 days) is one
Laboratories Inc.): 4-inch tubet
of the fastest and most economical methods of
Collagen (Collagen Hydrogel, Coloplast Corp.,
establishing a healthy wound bed. Thereafter, other
Minneapolis, MN): 3-oz tube++
topical agents may be used or surgical closure
Collagen (Medifil Collagen Gel, BioCore
attempted after development of a healthy wound
bed.
Medical Technologies Inc., Elkridge, MD):
 9-cc syringe++++
Tripeptide copper complex (lamin Hydrating
Gel, ProCyte Corp., Kirkland, WA): 0.5-0z
Wound Gels
tube ++
Chitosan (Ultrasan, BioSyntech Inc., Laval,
There are a variety of gel-like products on the market
for wound management.
Quebec)
Hydrogels are compounds containing water (80%-
Bercaplermin (Regranex, Ortho-McNeil
[a8 paseq-uasal8 e a1e ssuissaip [asoipAy (%06
 Pharmaceuticals, Raritan, NJ): 15-g tube
 laminated onto a synthetic membrane (see Chapter 5).
[0.01 %)
CURAFIL
Gel WoundDressing
Pansement deplaie en gel
FIG. 4-12 (A) Curafil hydrogel. Hydrogels are applied liberally to the wound and usually are covered with a nonadherent dressing
alou auinbal Aeu pue iakel asepueq Aiepuoas au otu ureap ot Aouapual iateats e aeu lm slagoupkh deum asepueq pue
(B, C) Example of a hydrogel (Carravet) with a tube of generic triple-antibiotic ointment. Hydrogels will hydrate tissues but have
limited ability to absorb significant amounts of discharge. Triple-antibiotic ointment has a white petrolatum base, combined with the 
 effect). The ointment and wound discharge will be wicked into the secondary bandage layer over time.
66
Wound Care Products and Their Use
67
(See the price code included in Table 4-2 to deter-
into the wound; this in turn increases cytokine levels.
mine the cost associated with the products listed above.)
Maltodextrin also has been reported to have antibacte-
These products and their uses will be discussed
rial and bacteriostatic properties. Hydrolysis of this
below. The above list is not exclusive: there are a
polysaccharide may provide a source of glucose to the
number of companies now incorporating collagen,
cells. As a powder (Multidex, De Royal Industries,
maltodextrin, aloe vera (acemannan), and tripeptide
Powell, TN) or incorporated into a gel (Intracell,
copper complex in their individual product lines. An
Techni-Vet Inc., Burnswick, ME; McLeod Pharmaceu-
Internet search can locate these products.
ticals Inc.), it can be used for enhancing autolytic deb-
ridement and may be used as a topical agent in the
latter phases of wound healing. It can reduce odor,
Hydrophilic Pastes and Powders
swelling, and infection and may enhance epithelializa-
tion. A topical dressing and supportive bandage is
Hydrophilic pastes and powders are available to fill
exudative wound cavities or pockets. As they absorb
necessary to maintain contact of a 5- to 10-mm layer of
discharge from the wound surface they form a gel.
maltodextrin compounds with the wound surface.
 Saline is used to flush residual gel from the wound
Like the hydrogels noted above, they facilitate
autolytic debridement. Examples include Duoderm
prior to reapplication on a daily basis (See Absorptive
Hydroactive Sterile Paste (Convatec, Skillman, NJ),
Beads and Powers for Exudative Wounds, below).
Acemannan (acetylated marman or mannose) is
Coloplast Comfeel Sterile Paste, Avalon Copolymer
derived from the aloe vera plant. It reportedly serves
Flakes (Summit Hill Lab, Tinton Falls, NJ),and Colo-
plast Comfeel Sterile Powder (Coloplast Corp.).
as a growth factor and increases levels of the cytokines
(interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor-c). These factors
in turn are known to stimulate fibroblast proliferation,
Topical Wound-Healing Enhancers
epidermal growth and motility, neovascularization,
and collagen deposition. It may also bind growth
factors, prolonging their stimulating effect on granula-
While the term enhancers may be a debatable descrip-
tion tissue. Acemanman in gel or dry wafer form (Car-
tion for some of these agents, the following have been
ravet, Carra Sorb M, Carrington Laboratories Inc.) can
reported to accentuate components of the wound
be used for autolytic debridement and throughout the
healing process: maltodextrins, acemannan, collagen,
management of open wounds (Fig. 4-12). Its greatest
 tripeptide copper complex, chitosan, and bercaplermin.
effect may be during the first 7 days of application
(See Absorptive Beads and Powders for Exudative
Wounds, below.)
Wound Care Products: Do They
 Bovine collagen gels, powders, sheets, wafers, and
Enhance, Accelerate, or Promote
-aseueu pumom uado ul pafoidua uaaq aaey sasuods
Wound Healing?
ment (Kollagen, Medifil, BioCore Medical Technologies
By definition, the word erhance means to increase,
Inc.; Collamend, Genitrix Ltd., Billingshurst, UK; Col-
make greater, or augment. Accelerate means to
lasate, PRN Pharmacal, Pensacola, FL; Hycure, HyMed
increase the speed of, to cause to occur sooner than
Group, Bethlehem, PA; FasCure, KenVet, Greeley, CO,
expected, to cause to develop or progress more
etc.). The hydrophilic property of topical collagen
quickly. The term promote means to contribute to
products helps maintain a moist wound environment
the progress or growth of something. These terms
for autolytic debridement while possibly providing a
are often used in describing the benefits of many
protective environment  for epithelialization  in the
wound-healing products, not always accurately.
latter phases of healing (Fig. 4-13 and 4-14). It may
Most wounds managed in practice heal unevent-
initiate an inflammatory response, stimulating fibro-
fully using basic wound care techniques. Delays in
plasia and providing a scaffold for fibroblast migra-
 healing may be the result of a variety of factors that
tion. Hydrolyzed collagen may provide a substrate for
are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
fibroblasts and subsequent collagen deposition. Like
a aepueq rno pue ussap e 'siae lendon rao
required to help maintain product contact with the 
 Maltodextrin is a D-glucose polysaccharide derived
wound: bandages are changed daily. (See Absorptive
from the hydrolysis of corn or potato starch. It absorbs
Beads and Powders for Exudative Wounds, below.)
moisture, forming a protective cover on wound sur-
Tripeptide  copper complex  (glycyl-L-histidyl-L-
 faces. It is reported to have chemoattractant properties,
lysine-copper) has been reported to stimulate several
attracting neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes
mechanisms essential to wound healing, including
68
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
二
FIG. 4-13 (A, B) Application of collagen gel to shearing wounds using a dispensing syringe. Following application, a nonadherent
dressing and light bandage were used to keep the gel in continuous contact with the wound surface.
stimulating neovascularization, collagen deposition,
ity diabetic neuropathic ulcers in humans that extends
wound contraction, and epithelialization. It is a chem-
into the subcutaneous tissues or the viable tissues
oattractant for mast cells, monocytes, and macro-
beyond. It is an adjunct to ulcer management. Clinical
phages. Copper is needed by enzymes involved in
studies have demonstrated increased neovasculariza-
collagen cross-linking. It can be applied in a hydrogel
tion, epithelialization, and wound contraction in
base (Iamin, ProCyte Corp.). Only one study in dogs
shi unoe 'sisq Ap e uo padde uaum su
demonstrated greater granulation tissue formation
overall efficacy in humans is variable. The cost of a
with its use at day 7 compared to the vehicle/base and
15-g tube is over $100 to the doctor. The over-the-
control. However, by day 14 and 21, there was no
counter price at pharmacies is substantially greater.
notable difference in the contraction and epithelializa-
The author and exotic medicine clinicians at Angell
tion of the four groups. (Despite early granulation
Animal Medical Center have used it in a long-stand-
tissue formation, another interpretation of the results
 ng, nonhealing lower-extremity ulcer in a chinchilla
would suggest that tripeptide copper complex did not
and a wing wound in a cockatoo (secondary to feather
improve the final outcome of wound healing.)
picking). Healing was complete within six weeks of
Chitosan (glucosamine, polysaccharide) is prima-
initiation of therapy in both patients. There is one
rily derived from the chitin exoskeleton of shellfish. It
aq pau e sop om u Ais s
results in promoting epithelialization. Bercaplermin
n-acetyl-d glucosamine that is usually derived from
 may be worth considering for use in small problematic
the chitin-rich crab shell. Topically, it is reported to
wounds in which surgical alternatives are not feasible
enhance the function of inflammatory cells (neu-
or ideal.
trophils, macrophages), fibroblasts, and cytokines
(transforming growth factor, platelet-derived growth
factor). There is one small study using three research
Natural Products
dogs that claims beneficial healing results. There is one
chitosan dressing currently available for wound care
Honey and Sugar
(HemCon, HemCon Medical Technologies Inc., Port-
land, OR)
Unpasteurized honey and sugar are ancient remedies
 Bercaplermin (Regranex, Ortho-McNeil Pharma-
pue auoy qog 'spmom tado jo jameuew a u
sugar are hygroscopic agents that have been used to
 growth factor for topical management of lower extrem-
reduce local tissue edema. Both have the capacity to
op su u eae sauuon a au uuaao sem punm us ai au enen inaa o Aepuoas s us () ti '
(B) Following surgical debridement of the necrotic skin, collagen powder was applied to this moist wound surface, followed by a
nonadherent dressing secured with a padded tie-over dressing.
(C) Development of a healthy granulation bed.
(D) Closure with a left deep circumflex iliac axial pattern flap (dorsal branch).
(E) Collagen powder also can be applied to cavitated wounds in a packet form: a clear, perforated Telfa membrane contains the
collagen medication.
69
70
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
draw and retain tissue fluid, facilitating autolytic deb-
soaked in honey can be used to simplify application to
ridement. The gram-positive and gram-negative anti-
the wound, keeping in mind the gauze may adhere to
bacterial properties of honey may be related to its
viable tissues and cause pain and irritation during its
natural hydrogen peroxide (inhibine) content (glucose
removal. Sugar can be poured into the wound
-ord apixoiad uaboipay u Summsai Aauoy ui asepxo
with a 1-cm plus layer over the wound surface, fol-
duction) as well as its high osmolarity and acidity (pH
deim asepueq pue Surssaip [esidoi e Kq pamo[
3.6-3.7). There are a variety of umpasteurized honeys
Bandage changes are typically performed two to three
 available in the world, and their antibacterial proper-
times per day.
ties can vary considerably. Manuka honey, derived
Because some human patients complain of discom-
from the flowers of the Manuka or tea tree (Leptosper-
rens mgued ssal e 'rens jo uogendde Sump og
mum scoparium) is considered the most useful of the
paste has been used to facilitate its application to open
topical honey products.
wounds. The product comprises 400g castor sugar,
Glucose content in honey (40% glucose, 40% fruc-
600g icing sugar, 480ml glycerin BP, and 7.5ml of 3%
tose, 20% water) provides an alternate source of energy
 hydrogen peroxide. Reports on its use in animals are
 both to the viable tissues and bacteria. Bacteria may
lacking.
utilize glucose over the amino acids present in the
When a healthy granulation bed forms, surgical
wound and may in turn produce lactic acid rather than
closure can be considered or open wound manage-
malodorous discharge  from putrefaction of the
ment continued with other topical products. Caution
nonviable tissue. In contrast, sugar primarily reduces
a8iel uo ieans pue Aauoq Susn uaum paimba1 Si
bacterial proliferation due to its high osmolarity
surface areas. Loss of fluid, protein, and electrolytes
thereby reducing moisture content in the wound.
can be considerable, necessitating close assessment of
 Other wound-healing attributes of honey include its
the patients.
reported  stimulation  of macrophage migration,
angiogenesis, and fibroplasias as a result of hydrogen
Live Yeast Cell Derivative
peroxide production. Sugar also is reported
lto
enhance macrophage migration, granulation tissue
Live yeast cell extract (brewer's yeast, Saccharormyces
formation, and epithelialization. Like honey, sugar
cerevisiae) contained in Preparation H (Whitehall Labo-
may serve as a nutrient substrate for bacteria, reducing
ratories, New York, NY), may stimulate oxygen con-
the malodorous bacterial putrefaction of devitalized
sumption, epithelialization, and collagen production
tissues.
in wounds. (Note: Not all formulations of Preparation
Comvita Medical (USA distributor, Derma Sciences
H contain live yeast extract.) No research study
Inc., Princeton, NJ) offers a natural honey-based
has demonstrated its clinical efficacy, although
barrier dressing that does not stick to the wound.
auua on parodmd uaaq seu h Ainopsae
Apinate dressings contain manuka honey in an algi-
epithelialization.
nate base. Besides the presence of hydrogen peroxide,
 Comvita's Woundcare 18+ manuka honey contains a
Aloe Vera
very high level of an antibacterial agent UMF (unique
manuka factor) with an antiseptic potency equivalent
Aloe vera extract has antithromboxane and antipros-
to an 18% solution of phenol. Manuka honey is com-
taglandin properties. It is useful to reduce inflamma-
mercially available for oral consumption and topical
a rae Aaaaau Ae nq (smq eadns) uo
use and has a variety of UMF ratings, some of which
'pumom uado ue bubeueu uam aseud Aro
have a 25+ rating.
Aloe vera is commonly added to a variety of commer-
cial products.
APPLICATION
Absorptive Beads and Powders for
Large areas of necrotic tissue are best surgically debri-
 ded prior to application of honey and sugar. Both
Exudative Wounds
should be applied liberally to the wound, followed by
the application of a dressing and a thick outer absorp-
These products are generally used with exudative
tive layer to help retain discharge from the wound
wounds; they are contraindicated in wounds with
surface. Bandage changes two to three times daily may
minimal discharge, since they would have a drying
be necessary to assure the wounds are continuously
effect on the wound. The wounds normally have been
covered with these hygroscopic agents. Wounds are
debrided of most devitalized tissues and cleansed
lavaged and inspected prior to reapplication. Gauze
 prior to their application.
Wound Care Products and Their Use
71
 Debrisan Pharmacia & Upjohn Ltd., Milton Keynes,
its development. Cuterebrα sp. is one example of oblig-
UK) comprises small polysaccharide beads that are
atory myiasis (Fig. 4-15).
0.1-0.3mm in diameter. The dextranomer beads will
Maggots ingest only dead cells, exudates, secre-
absorb four times their weight in tissue fluid and exu-
tions, and debris. The release of proteolytic enzymes
 dates. A minimum 3-mm-thick layer is applied to the
facilitates the liquefaction and subsequent consump-
wound and covered with a retention dressing. At the
tion of necrotic tissue. Second- and third-stage larvae
time of dressing change, the beads are flushed from
of myiasis-producing flies have mouthparts capable of
the wound surface prior to application of an additional
rasping the skin and inflicting considerable damage.
layer of beads. As a result, Debrisan is used on moist,
Tissue trauma and secondary infection can result in
exudative wounds to draw tissue fluid and debris
extensive tissue destruction (Fig. 4-15).
from the wound surface: a form of "internal flushing."
Not all larvae have an adverse effect on the proc-
 Dressings are changed once or twice per day. As the
esses of wound healing. As early as the 16th century.
wound improves, changes can be extended to alternate
maggots were used as a form of biotherapy to remove
day treatments.
gangrenous tissue, thereby facilitating the process of
There are several manufacturers of particulate or
0 dn aumsuo Aeu jou yeg ureu puom
 powdered bovine collagen (Kollagen, Medifil, Biocore
75mg of necrotic tissue per day. Monarch Labs
Medical Technologies Inc.; Collamend particles, Bio-
(Irvine, CA, www.MonarchLabs.com) is the exclusive
Vet Inc, Blue Mounds, WI; Genitrix Ltd., etc.). These
supplier of disinfected, medical-grade maggots (Phae-
dry collagen materials may be applied in a fashion
nicia sericata, or green blow fly) in the United States.
similar to Debrisan. The collagen material is highly
Maggot debridement therapy (MDT) has been used in
absorptive: Collamend is reported to absorb up to 60
veterinary medicine to a limited degree. This tech-
times its weight in fluid. The wound surface is cleansed
nique may be particularly useful for chronic, problem-
 and slightly dabbed of excess moisture before apply-
atic wounds in which effective debridement is
ing the collagen powder. A layer up to 1/4-inch thick
difficult.
may be used, depending on the amount of exudates.
 Highly exudative wounds may be covered with gauze
to help retain the fluid. A retention dressing is used to
APPLICATION
maintain contact with the wound bed. The collagen
powder may be flushed and the wound dabbed of
Medical maggots arrive in a sterile container. If they
 excess moisture before reapplication on a daily basis.
have not hatched, they can be placed in a warming
Less frequent changes are required as the condition of
incubator (37*C). Normally, maggots should be used
the wound improves.
within 24 hours of receipt. A specialized dressing is
Maltodextrin powder with 1% ascorbic acid (Multi-
needed to confine the maggots to the wound. The
dex [DeRoyal Industries] also can be used as a
shape of the wound or ulcer is cut out of the center of
hydrophilic powder in exudative wounds. The gel
a hydroactive dressing (Duoderm, Convatec). This is
form of this product is used for dry wounds. A 1/4-
applied over the wound, leaving the ulcer exposed.
sunapuu e ym pamas si rapmod jo rae you
Maggots are applied by removing (with a moistened
nonocclusive dressing. Dressing changes are similar to
sponge) five to ten larva per square centimeter of
those using Debrisan and collagen powders.
wound surface area and applying them to the wound
Freeze-dried acemarman powder (Carra Sorb M,
u no) ysa uo un jo yd v anes
Carrington Laboratories) can be applied to wounds.
 stocking) is applied over the hole, followed by a semi-
This hydrophilic powder is used in exudative wounds
permeable transparent adhesive dressing (Tegaderm,
in a marner similar to that of the other products in this
Tegapore, 3M, St. Paul, MN). A central hole is pro-
section.
vided in this last dressing layer to provide aeration for
padde si sauods aznes go ra hy shoi a
Biologic Debridement: Maggot
over this containment dressing with tape. The outer
 gauze pads absorb discharge from the wound via the
Debridement Therapy
are Aa oussaip pazennads s u lunado ienuan
changed as needed. Maggots are removed every 48
Small  animal  veterinarians
normally
encounter
auL am1 lerauag e se (smou Z wmuxeu) smou
maggots (fly larvae) infesting open wounds, primarily
maggots are removed with moistened sponges and
 in warm weather. Facultative or opportunistic myiasis
cotton swabs; the maggots and bandage material are
    s   s  
secured in a plastic bag prior to disposal. The wound
of a fly's life cycle is dependent on the animal host for
is gently cleansed and inspected before reapplication
C
HG. 4-15 (A) Cuterebra sp. in a young dog, located beneath the cervical skin. Note the small sinus opening.
created by this larva is flushed with an antiseptic solution: the wound normally heals uneventfully.
U sisdas uuaeau-al un hnsan ues eanel A aaiseaun pue 'uoaun 'sisonau anss sioleu suuieuos spunom us paoajun ()
Apoq suaelpe apeaui Aeu osie Aaui suoiseo aneu uo (suoiai Apoq iauo oui aeratuu so sapuem ueo stose stuaed leuue leus
orifices, including the anus and vulva.
72
Wound Care Products and Their Use
73
 of additional maggots. Normally three to five replace-
cipitate in electrolyte solutions and will not affect its
oa aeaa a a on pasn ar sana a
potency.
blematic wound. Medical maggots (250-500)
cost
approximately $80.00; Monarch Labs sells the "Crea-
APPLICATION
ture Comforts" sterile Dacron chiffon dressings ($4.00
to $8.00 each) and sterile nylon stocking dressings
Stock chlorhexidine solution can be diluted (1 part
($10.00). Shipping costs are $40.00-$80.00, depending
chlorhexidine to 40 parts sterile water or saline) for use
on the method used. Current costs can be determined
pue shussaip jam-oi-lam uogngos aaeael pumom e se
 at the company's website.
wet-to-dry dressings. The resultant 0.05% concentra-
tion is effective against bacteria without causing
damage to viable tissue.
Common Topical Antiseptic
Solutions
Povidone-Iodine Solution
Povidone-iodine is a commonly used surgical scrub
Chlorhexidine Diacetate
and prep solution that has the bactericidal activity of
iodine. Iodine is slowly released from this polymer: a
Chlorhexidine diacetate is an effective gram-positive
 and gram-negative antibacterial agent used both as a
7.5% povidone-iodine solution releases 0.75% iodine.
surgical scrub and topical solution (Fig 4-16). It main-
tains bactericidal activity in the presence of blood or
bacteria, fungi, viruses, yeasts, and protozoa. The pres-
ence of organic material does not affect the efficacy of
pus. A 0.05% solution was compared to a 0.1% povi-
povidone-iodine. Povidone-iodine has less bacterial
done-iodine solution in one study. The in vivo study
activity and a shorter duration of efficacy compared to
indicated that chlorhexidine diacetate had greater bac-
chlorhexidine diacetate in a previous study.
terial activity over a longer time frame (6 hours) com-
pared with povidone-iodine. The addition of Tris
EDTA (see below) reportedly enhances bacterial sus-
Application
ceptibility to destruction by 1000-fold, compared to
A dilution of 1 part povidone-iodine solution to 9 parts
0.05% chlorhexidine alone. It reportedly
lyses
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coliand Proteus vul-
sterile saline can be used as a lavage solution without
causing significant harm to viable tissues. This solution
garis on contact. Like chlorhexidine alone, it will pre-
can be used in wet-to-wet and wet-to-dry dressings.
Tris [Hydroxymethyl]
Aminomethane-EDTA
Tris buffer  (tris [hydroxymethyl]  aminomethane
buffer) enhances the antimicrobial properties of EDTA
(disodium-calcium salt of ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid). Tris-EDTA in sterile water readily lyses P aeru-
ginosa, E. coli, and Proteus vulgaris. Tris-EDTA syner-
gism against E. coli is noted with penicillin,
oxytetracycline, and chloramphericol. Similarly, it has
symergistic properties against P vulgaris when com-
bined with gentamycin, oxytetracycline, polymyxin B,
nalidixic acid, and trip sulfonamide.
Application
This broad spectrum lavage solution is inexpensive
s1 Jo 8g0'9 ym VII Jo 8z'1) pa1eda1d A1sea pue
HG. 4-16 Chlorhexidine solution, with a 1:40 dilution with
added to one liter of sterile water for injection). The
sterile saline, is an effective and economical cleansing agent for
pH is adjusted to 8.0 with a dilute solution of sodium
open wounds. It also can be used in wet-to-wet and wet-to-dry
hydroxide. The solution is autoclaved for 15 minutes
dressings.
after mixing.
74
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Wound-Cleansing Solutions
A variety of solutions have been advocated for cleansing
harmful to exposed tissues, has been advocated by some
for the removal of gross contaminants adhering to open
Wounds. A comparison of tap water versus sterile saline
 in irrigatingexperimental woundsin ratsindicated both
were similar in their ability to reduce bacterial counts.
However, an in vivo study demonstrated that tap water
(hypotonic, alkaline pH) is notably cytotoxic to fibrob-
lasts. Sterile saline (0.9% NaCl, unbuffered, acidic pH)
also displayed cytotoxic effects to fibroblasts; no nega-
Consta
tive effects were associated with phosphate-buffered
Clens"
saline and Ringer's lactate.
Sterile saline is most commonly used to swab or
flush wounds in veterinary medicine; under pressure
(8psi is ideal), it can be effective in displacing micro-
scopic contaminants. Antiseptic solutions (listed
above) are frequently used to cleanse wounds.
HG. 4-17 One example of a wound-cleansing agent. Many
Although uncommonly used in veterinary medicine,
come in a convenient pump-spray bottle. Wound cleansers
hydrotherapy is used to facilitate the removal of devi-
 talized tissue, primarily in human burn patients with
commonly contain water, a surfactant, humectants, and an
large surface thermal injuries.
antimicrobial agent.
There are a number of commercially available
wound-cleansing agents used to facilitate the removal
of surface contaminants and wound exudate. They are
ment or cream base can provide a moisture-retaining
most commonly used to clean a wound prior to the
barrier to prevent tissue desiccation, promoting epi-
reapplication of a topical agent and dressing.
thelialization. They are capable of delivering concen-
Wound cleansers basically contain water, sur-
 trated amounts of the antibacterial agent directly to the
factants (sodium lauryl sulfate, etc.), salt, and a pre-
wound surface.
 servative. Some cleansers include antimicrobial agents
 Removal of debris and necrotic tissue will enhance
(triclosan, chlorhexidine gluconate, chloxylenol, etc.).
pmom suean pue huuaaand ui yoq Arega ra
Humectants may be added for their moisturizing
infections.
property (glycerin, methyl glucose esters, lactates,
There are a variety of economical topical antimicro-
lanolin derivatives, mineral oil, etc.). Various alcohols
bial agents on the market
 may be added for their antibacterial properties and to
serve as an emollient or thickening agent. Common
 Chlorhexidine ointment (Nolvasan 1 %, Fort
wound-cleansing products include CuraKlense and
Dodge Labs, Fort Dodge, IA)
Constant Clens (Kendall Co., Mansfield, MA), Allclenz
Gentamycin ointment
(HealthPoint Co.), Sur-Clens (Convatect), UltraKlenz
Nitrofurazone cream/ointment
and CarraKlenz (Carrington Laboratories Inc.), and
Dermagran (Derma Sciences Inc.). In one study, Con-
Povidone-iodine ointment
 stant Clens was considered the most biocompatible.
Silver sulfadiazine (see Fig. 4-18)
 Most wound-cleansing products come in a convenient
 Triple antibiotic ointment
pump spray or squeeze botle for application to the
wound surface (Fig. 4-17).
Note that there are a variety of manufacturers for most
of these products.
Topical Antimicrobial Agents
Chlorhexidine ointment is currently manufactured
by Fort Dodge Labs (Nolvasan 1%). Chlorhexidine,
Topical antimicrobial agents are used both to prevent
silver sulfadiazine, and povidone-iodine ointment are
and to manage infections in open wounds. The oint-
hydrophilic (water-miscible) ointments that are easily
Wound Care Products and Their Use
75
flushed from the wound surface to facilitate inspec-
Pseudomonas spp. and Staphylococcus spp. Nitrofura-
tion. Oil-based (hydrophobic) topical antimicrobials,
zone has both gram-positive and gram-negative
including gentamycin ointment and triple-antibiotic
activity. It has broad-spectrum antibacterial proper-
an jadan A 1e w Asea e wnoy uauo
ties, but has lile effect against Pseudomonas spp. Its
solutions. The author finds water-miscible agents
hydrophilic polyethylene base enables it to draw and
useful in cases of delayed primary closure: they are
retain body fluid and discharge from the wound
easily flushed from the wound surface, allowing for
surface. Topical povidone-iodine ointment also has a
easier assessment of the tissues during subsequent
broad-spectrum  of activity against a variety
of
bandage changes. In turn, oil-based products are pre-
microorganisms.
ferred on healthy granulation beds for their better
 Triple antibiotic ointment (neomycin sulfate, baci-
ability to maintain a protective film on the wound
tracin zinc, polymyxin-B sulfate) is both economical
surface. In most routine cases, triple-antibiotic oint-
and readily available in pharmacies and veterinary
ment is both effective and economical to use.
supply houses. The combination of these three antibi-
otics has a synergistic effect against a variety of bacte-
ria, although less so against Pseudomonas spp.
In practice, the use of "community jars" of oint-
Triple-antibiotic ointment can enhance reepithelializa-
ment is best discouraged due to the potential of
tion but may have a slight retardant effect on
contraction.
introducing contaminants. The author has wit-
Silver sulfadiazine is effective against a variety of
nessed a number of occasions when busy veterinar-
microorganisms including Pseudomonas spp. The
ians use an index finger to dispense a dollop of the
 medication directly onto a wound or dressing. Jars
author normally reserves its use for burns (Chapter 7).
In vitro studies indicate it has toxicity to human kerati-
are best used exclusively for a single patient. Auto-
 claved tongue depressors can be used for removing
nocytes and fibroblasts and an inhibitory effect on neu-
the ointment, especially when dealing with large
trophils and lymphocytes that can be reversed with
aloe vera. Clinically, it remains one of the most effec-
open wounds (burns). Individual tubes of topical
tive topical agents in the management of thermal
antimicrobials reduce the risk of contamination
and can be devoted to individual patients with
injuries.
smaller wounds.
Triple antibiotic ointment is economical, easily
 Chlorhexidine has a broad spectrum of activity
accessable, and economical. The author commonly
against microorganisms. Gentamycin has efficacy
uses it for smaller wounds and for the protection
against gram-negative microorganisms, including
of free grafts. The sticky petroleum base provides
 protection against tissue desiccation. Combined
with a nonadherent dressing and protective
 bandage, it has a semiocclusive effect on the grafted
area.
Prior to the closure of a granulation bed, the
liberal application of a topical broad-spectrum anti-
biotic 24-48 hours before surgery can substantially
reduce the residential bacterial population prior to
the final surgical preparation of the area.
Topical antimicrobial agents can have variable
effects on the processes of wound contraction and epi-
thelialization. In general, comparative studies are
HG. 4-18 Application of water-miscible silver sulfadiazine
lacking to determine which ointment or cream has the
ointment to a burn. Silver sulfadiazine is most commonly used
 greatest wound-healing benefits: it is unlikely there is
in the management of burn wounds.
a dramatic difference between these products.
76
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF
 been used to induce hyperthermia, thereby improving
epithelialization in wounds involving rabbits and
WOUND THERAPY
humans.
 Evidence of the true clinical eficacy of using laser,
Hyperbaric Oxygen
photodynamic, electromagnetic, and microwave irra-
diation is lacking. The reader is reminded that the vast
Chronic wounds may lack the circulation required to
majority of wounds seen in veterinary practice can be
 deliver oxygen to the ischemic tissues. Hypoxic tissues
managed successfully without the use of these devices.
cannot heal optimally and are more susceptible to
Additional research is needed to prove their clinical
infection. Oxygen tension above 40mm Hg promotes
worth.
healing: chronic wounds may have oxygen tensions
below 20mm Hg. Traumatic and infected wounds typ-
ically have oxygen tension values less than 30 mm Hg.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Considering that active cell division requires a
minimum of 30mmHg, the normal processes of
Wound drainage is an important component of man-
healing are jeopardized in chronic nonhealing wounds.
Hyperbaric oxygen increases dissolved oxygen in
aging wounds. Penrose drains, vacuum drains, and
plasma, stimulating the growth of new capillaries, and
more recently vacuum-assisted closure are options to
may have special use in the management of ischemic
consider, depending on the size, location, and condi-
wounds. Hyperbaric oxygen has been used to salvage
tion of the wound.
skin compromised by external trauma, disease, or
There are a variety of topical agents that may be
surgery (e.g., skin flaps, skin grafts, muscle flaps). In
employed in the management of open wounds. They
two animal studies, however, hyperbaric oxygen
often have multiple effects on wound healing. Removal
therapy failed to improve flap and graft survival.
of necrotic tissue is a vital step in reducing the pres-
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been used with
ence or risk of infection; its removal also promotes the
some success for problematic wounds in humans.
formation of a healthy granulation bed in most cases.
Smaller units are available for small animal patients.
Both selective and nonselective debridement tech-
niques may be used in veterinary patients. Surgical
Although detailed information pertaining to their clin-
ical efficacy in veterinary medicine is lacking, the main
 debridement remains the quickest means of removing
major areas of devitalized tissue. Topical agents may
deterrent to their use is their high cost in relation to
the comparatively low numbers of animals that would
be used to facilitate the removal of smaller areas of
Adenau uaxe seqrady uo nauaq Aqrssd
 necrotic tissues (topical enzymatic debridement, auto-
lytic debridement). Infection can be managed with a
variety of topical antibacterial agents, depending on
Mechanical Stimulants
the condition of the wound. Topical agents that report-
edly enhance or accelerate healing are worth closer
asd p (eraioud)  ras sua-mo
scrutiny by the veterinary clinician. The bottom line is
the final point of wound closure; early benefits seen in
electromagnetic fields (0.5-18Hz) have been used
a comparative study mean lile if the final outcome is
 experimentally to stimulate the normal healing proc-
the same. Without well-desigmed research models and
esses. Low-level laser therapy reportedly induces the
dinical data, the selection of topical wound products
proliferation of fibroblasts. It reportedly can shorten
is largely based on the information provided by the
the inflammatory phase of healing and enhance the
company and the experience of the clinicians who use
release of factors that stimulate the proliferative phase
 a given product. Fortunately, most wounds heal with
of healing. There was a synergistic effect reported
basic surgical and medical care.
when laser therapy was combined with photosensi-
 tizer drugs in experimental rats.
 Electrical stimulation, including the use of pulsed
Suggested Readings
electromagnetic fields, has been demonstrated to
improve microvascular flow while activating fibro-
blasts. One study indicated that pico-tesla electromag-
Adkesson MJ, Travis EK, Weber MA, et al. Vacuum-assisted
closure for treatment of a deep shell abscess and osteomy-
netic field treatment improved wound strength and
elitis in a tortoise. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 231:1249-1254.
speeded contraction of open wounds in rats. Another
American Pediatric Surgical Nurses Association. All about
 study reported enhancement of wound epithelializa-
Dressings. Available at: http: // www.apsna.org/mc/page.
tion in dogs. Similarly, microwave irradiation has
do?sitePageld=24204.
Wound Care Products and Their Use
77
Armstrong DG, Mossel J, Nixon BP, et al. 2002. Maggot
Morykwas M, Argenta L, Shelton-Brown E, et al. 1997. Vac-
debridement therapy—a primer. J Arm Podiatr Med Assoc
uum-assisted closure: a new method for wound control
92:398401.
and treatment: animal studies and basic foundation. Arr 
Ashworth CD, Nelson DR. 1990. Antimicrobial potentiation
Plast Surg 38:553-652.
of irrigation solutions containing tris [hydroxymethyl]
Moscati R, Mayrose J, Fincher L. 1998. Comparison of normal
aminomethane-EDTA. JAVMA 197:1513-1514.
saline with tap water for wound irrigation. Ar J Ermerg Med
Ben-Amotz R, Lanz OI, Miller JM, et al. 2007. The use of
16:379-381.
vacuum-assisted closure therapy for the treatment of distal
Rodeheaver GT. 2001. Wound cleansing, wound irigation,
extremity wounds in 15 dogs. Vet Surg 36:684-690.
wound disinfection. In: Krasner DL, Rodeheaver GT,
 Braakenburg A, Obdeijn MC, Feltz R, et al. 2006. The clinical
Sibbald GR, eds. Chronic Wound Care: α Clinical Source
efficacy and cost effectiveness of the vacuum-assisted
Book for Healthcare Professionats. Wayne, PA: HMP
closure technique in the management of acute and chronic
Communications.
wounds: a randomized controlled trial. J Plast Reconstr
Rudolph R, Noe JM. 1983. Chronic Problerm Wounds. Boston:
Surg 118(2):390-397.
Little, Brown and Co.
Buffa EA, Lubbe AM, Verstraete FJM, et al. 1997. The effects
 Sartipy U, Lockowandt U,Gabel J, et al. 2006.Cardiac rupture 
of wound lavage solutions on canine fibroblasts: an in vitro
during vacuum-assisted closure therapy. Arn Thorac Surg
study. Vet Surg 26:460-466.
82:1110-1111.
Canapp SO, Farese JP, Schultz GS, et al. 2003. The effect of
Scardino MS, Swaim SF, Sartin EA, et al. 1998. Evaluation of
 topical tripeptide-copper complex on healing of ischemic
 treatment with a pulsed electromagnetic field on wound
open wounds. Vet Surg 32:515-523.
healing, clinicopathologic variables, and central nervous
 Elkins AD. 1997. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy: potential vet-
system activity in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 59(9):1177-
erinary applications. Compend Contin Edu Pract Vet
1181.
19:607-612.
 Sherman RA. 1997. A new dressing design for treating pres-
Fahie MA, Shettko D.2007. Evidence-based wound manage-
sure ulcers with maggot therapy. Plast Reconstr Surg
 ment: a systematic review of therapeutic agents to enhance
100:451-456.
granulation
1 and epithelialization. Vet Clin No Amer
Sherman RA. 2002. Maggot versus conservative debridement
37:559-577.
therapy for the treatment of pressure ulcers. Wound Repair
Guille AE, Tseng LW, Orsher RJ. 2007. Use of vacuum-
Regen 10:208-214.
l punom us aoet e jo juaaseue rog ainso pnsisse
Subrahmanyam M. 1996. Honey dressing versus boiled
a cat. I Amn Vet Med Assoc 230(11):1669-1673.
Hendrix CM. 1991. Facultative myiasis in dogs and cats.
omized study. Burns 22:491-493.
Compend Contin Edu Pract Vet 13:86-93.
Swaim SF, Bradley DM, Spano JS, et al. 1993. Evaluation of
Hosgood, G. 1993. The role of platelet-derived growth factor
multipeptide-copper complex medications on open wound
and transforming growth factor beta. Vet Surg 22:
healing in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:519-525.
490495.
Swaim SF, Gillette RL. 1998. An update on wound medica-
 Hosgood G. 2003. Wound repair and specific tissue response
tions and dressings. Compend Contin Eau Pract Vet
to injury. In: Slatter D (ed). Textbok of Small Animat Surgery,
20:1133-1145.
 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Swaim SF, Gillette RL, Sartin EA, et al. 2000. Effects of a
Jonsson K, Jenson JA, Goodson WH Il, et al. 1991. Tissue
hydrolyzed collagen dressing on the healing of open
 oxygenation, anemia, and perfusion in relation to wound
wounds in dogs. AJVR 61:1574-1578.
healing in surgical patients. Arr Surg 214(5):605-613.
Swaim SF, Riddell KP, McGuire JA. 1992. Efects of topical
Kerwin SC, Hosgood G, Strain GM, Vice CC, et al. 1993. The
medications on the healing of open pad wounds in dogs.
effect of hyperbaric oxygen treatment on a compromised
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:499-502.
axial patterm flap in the cat. Vet Surg 22:31-36.
Tibbles PM, Edelsberg JS. 1996. Hyperbaric-oxygen therapy.
Krahwinkel DJ, Boothe HW. 2006. Topical and systemic med-
N Eng I Med 334(25):1642-1648.
ications for wounds. Vet Clin No Am 36:739-758.
Trostel CT, McLaughlin RM, Lamberth JG, Cooper RC,
Lee AH, Swaim SF, Yang ST, et al. 1984. Effects of gentamicin
et al. 2003. Effects of pico-tesla electromagnetic field
solution and cream on the healing of open wounds. Arm I
treatments on wound healing in rats. Am J Vet Res 64:
Vet Res 45:1487-1492.
845-854.
Lee AH, Swaim SF, Yang ST, et al. 1986. The effects of petro-
 latum, polyethylene glycol, nitrofurazone, and a hydroac-
wound healing applications of chitosan. Adv Drug Detiv
dso my y f ueay punom uado uo Sussap aa
Rev 52(2):1005-1015.
Assoc 22:443-451.
Ueno H, Yamada H, Tanaka I, et al. 1999. Accelerating effects
Lemarie RJ, Hosgood G, VanSteenhouse J, et al. 1998. Effect
of chitosan for healing at early phase of experimental open
 of hyperbaric oxygen on lipid peroxidation in free skin
wound in dogs. Biomaterials 20:1407-1414.
grafts in rats. Am J Vet Res 59(7):913-917.
Webb LX. 2002. New techniques in wound management:
Lucroy MD, Edwards BJ, Madewell BR. 1999. Low-intensity
vacuum-assisted wound closure. J Arm Acad Orthop Surg
laser light-induced closure of a chronic wound in a dog.
10:303-311.
Vet Surg 28:292-295.
Wheeler JL. 2007. Vacuum-assisted wound closure and initial
experience in small animal surgery. North American Vet-
Sugar. Compend Contin Eau Pract Vet 24:41-50.
erinary Conference Post Graduate Institute, Pp 170-174.
 Mathews K, Binnington A. 2002. Wound management using
honey. Compend Contin Edu Pract Vet 24:53-59.
78
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 1
Vacuum-Assisted Closure
DESCRIPTION
Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC, KCI, USA) refers to a simple drainage system comprising open cell
surface is partially retained in the foam, whereas excess tissue fluids are retained in the vacuum pump
reservoir. The VAC is best considered for large, deep, or cavitated wounds; it may also be used to secure
skin grafts to a recipient bed. VAC is capable of reducing edema during open wound management. A similar
alternative is a gauze-based system (Venturi, Talley Medical) more recently introduced into the veterinary
market.
TECHNIQUE
(A) Example of a large cavitated wound involving the left flank and lateral abdominal area. The skin has
been widely clipped of fur and cleaned with a surgical scrub and isopropyl alcohol swabs: the skin
must be completely dry.
(A)  After initial surgical management of the wound (removal of necrotic tissue and debris), the VAC foam
 pad is trimmed to the size of the wound. An adhesive medallion secures the flexible plastic tubing to
g oseid aue jo aneid u pasn aq ueo azne aeuana ueog auuaaniod aut jo anens a
 sheet. Gauze sponges impregnated with PHMB may be most useful.
sealant paste used for colostomy bags (Stoma Paste, Salts Healthcare, Birmingham, UK; Stomadhesive,
Convatec; Adapt Paste, Hollister Inc., Libertyville, IL) can be applied to better secure the perimeter
against an air leak
(C)
 The adherent plastic drape is applied to seal the entire area. A spray adhesive may be used on the skin
to improve adherence of the plastic drape to the skin (Vi-Drape, Medical Concepts Development, St
Paul, MN; Vi-Drape, The Clinipad Corp, Norwich, CT). The exit tube is inserted into the vacuum
pump/reservoir. A continuous vacuum pressure of -125 mmHg is most commonly used. (See fext for
a pue paueuo si aznea no weog aui (saisss annssand aaeau jo asn aui uo seiap ieuope
Danqoid aeueuu on panbai are saueuo nun oi om Aeun srep e Aaaa panoadsu punom
aznea io weoy mau e jo uoeddeai sumoog punom aun joadsu pue aznea io weoy au aaoua
dressing, a second plastic drape is applied over the hole created in the first plastic cover: the vacuum is
then reactivated. Patients are normally kept in an intensive care ward for continuous monitoring of the
Adeau punom anssaid anesau
COM MENT S
KCI USA Inc. (San Antonio, TX) sells the components of this wound drainage system and leases the pump
apparatus. Talley Medical (Lansing, MI) sells their pump and its components. Although the basic
components of the system are commercially available, including polyurethane open cell foam, gauze rigid
o u aq Aeuu sauu sn u wau sun 'sdund unnn pipuns pue 'sadep iens sseid suqn
of a company's patent rights. Veterinarians are encouraged to contact company representatives for the
purchase and use of their devices.
 The primary question regarding negative pressure wound therapy is its real niche in veterinary surgery.
Most of the wounds noted in lectures and journal articles have been (and can be) handled by other means
that are often more economical. Necrotic tissue and debris still must be removed from the wound prior to
the use of these systems. It is the author's impression that the systems would be most effective in deep.
pue aeep araum (oan yun repau aun ou supuaxa spunom yue alre saa) spunm pane
 wound care are especially problematic. Both systems have been reported to be effective means of
Wound Care Products and Their Use
79
Plate 1
A
B
80
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 1
(Continued)
immobilizing free grafts in a problematic body region: when used for this purpose, a nonadherent dressing
pinom osie Aaui'eae jenans aui oi suaupe woy azne no weog aun juaaand oi ye aun iaao padde s
be useful for reducing edema in open wounds with extensive soft tissue swelling. The surgeon must assess
the advantages of negative pressure wound therapy versus other methods of wound care based on (1)
wound size, location, and classification and (2) all costs (including time and labor) associated with the use of
these systems versus alternative methods. Clinicians are often enamored of new products and technology:
only by their clinical use will veterinarians determine the long-term merits of vacuum-assisted closure.
5
Dressings, Bandages,
External Support, and
Protective Devices
Introduction82
PLATES
Composition of a Bandage  82
Plate 2: Basic Bandage Application
Preventing Bandage
for Extremities 110
Displacement  99
Plate 3: Tape Stirrups and Padding
Tie-over Dressing/Bandage
Dos and Don'ts  112
Technique 100
Plate 4: Elasticon Bandage Platforms
Pressure Points: Bandage
and Saddles   114
Options  100
Plate 5: Spica Bandages/
Bandage "Access Windows" 100
Splints  116
Bandaging Techniques for Skin
Plate 6: Schroeder-Thomas
Grafts 101
Splint  118
Bandaging Techniques for Skin
Plate 7: Schroeder-Thomas Splint:
Flaps  101
Security Band Application
122
Splints, Casts, Reinforced
Plate 8: Body Brace 124
Bandages 101
Miscellaneous Protective
Devices  102
81
82
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
direct application to a wound. Some companies refer to
their topical agents (pastes, gels, etc.) as vwound dressings.
Randages are an integral part of wound manage-
No single dressing is suitable for all types of wounds.
Different dressings may be needed during the various
plain and medicated dressings in place, support or
phases of wound management. In general, dressings
immobilize a body part, apply pressure to control
perform one or more of the following functions: absorb
and retain discharge from the wound, provide a moist
hemorrhage, obliterate dead-space or cavities, and
lonpod e apiaoid uleu anouid on juauuonua
protect a wound from external trauma and contamina-
that promotes the healing process, provide protection
tion (Fig. 5-1).
A dressing refers to a material that is applied
from bacteria and other contaminants, absorb wound
directly to the surface of the wound. Some dressings
odor, provide insulation and mechanical protection,
 are designed for direct application to a wound without
and facilitate wound debridement.
ssuissaip ison deim aaqioddns rano ue ioy paau a
require the added support of a bandage to prevent
Is there a perfect wound dressing? The answer is
their displacement, optimize their contact with the
no: different dressings may be useful for different
wound bed, and potentially serve as an outer absorp-
phases of the wound healing process.
tive layer for retention of any discharge. As a result,
 If the ideal dressing existed, it would have all of
the dressing is part of the anatomy of a bandage.
 the following properties:
 Bandages have three defined layers: the primary
Is safe (nontoxic, nonirritating)
(contact dressing) layer, the secondary (intermediate)
layer, and the tertiary (outer) layer.
Maintains a moist environment
Has low or nonadherence*
COMPOSITION OF A
Provides thermal Insulation
BANDAGE
Provides protection from external contaminants
Provides mechanical protection
The Primary Layer: Wound
 Has good absorptive properties (exudative wounds)
Dressings
 Provides comfort to the patient
Is easy to use and change
The primary layer lies in direct contact with the wound.
Most commonly, this involves the application of a
Conforms easily to the wound surface
 topical wound dressing. The term dressing has changed
Requires infrequent changes
somewhat in its usage over the past several years.
Is affordable and cost-effective to use
Wound dressings are normally considered topical
membranes, gauze materials, or pads designed for
*Adherent dressings are used as a form of mechani-
cal debridement.
Dressings will be discussed in the following
categories:
Adherent dressings
Nonadherent dressings
Absorptive dressings
Semiocclusive dressings
Occlusive dressings
I Moisture-retaining dressings
These broad categories overlap to a variable degree:
a given dressing can have more than one property and
function. Moreover, as discussed in Chapter 4, various
FIG. 5-1 Spica bandage for a lizard. Bandages can be a critically
topical agents can have an effect on wound healing
important component to wound management in small animals.
similar to the dressings discussed in this section. For
Dressings, Bandages, External Support, and Protective Devices
83
 example, a topical gel applied to a wound may have
Wet-to-dry
 dressings are gauze pads moistened
the same basic properties as a hydrogel dressing. The
with Ringer's lactate or sterile saline and applied
primary difference is the external membrane of the
directly to the wound surface. (A 0.05% chlorhexidine
 dressing with its adherent gel compared to the use of
 diacetate or 0.1% povidone iodine solution may be
 a gel and the retention layer (gauze or dressing) placed
used; see Chapter 4). The moist sponges initially
over it. In deeper wounds, gel may be preferable to a
hydrate the wound environment and dilute the puru-
hydrogel dressing whereas shallower wounds may be
lent discharge, facilitating its absorption into the
 managed more easily by using a hydrogel dressing.
gauze.
Watery gels will tend to gravitate from beneath
a
topical dressing or bandage, thus requiring more fre-
Comprised of readily available surgical gauze and
quent application.
sterile isotonic fluids, wet-to-dry dressings are eco-
nomical to use. Costis primarily determined by the
rauaisap, jo Aarea e jo uonraoid piden au
 frequency and duration of dressing changes.
pappe sey sramoejmueu aidnmu Aq ,ssuissaip
Wet-to-dry dressings can be used effectively in
an element of confusion to the process of selecting
wounds with low to high amounts of exudates:
the best dressing for a given set of circumstances.
they hydrate, dilute tenacious exudates, and have
 a high capacity to wick and retain the discharge.
Alginates, collagen, and starch copolymers alone or
 n combination have been added to moisture -reten-
Over several hours, moisture partially evaporates
tive dressings. Which hydrogel or hydrocolloid
through the outer surface of the dressing. As it (par-
dressing is best? It is impossible to say. How one
 dressing compares to another dressing cannot be
tially) dries, the gauze has a tendency to adhere to the
ascertained without comparative studies.
wound surface and necrotic tissue in contact with its
surface. As the gauze is lifted from the wound, adher-
Dressings either play a relatively passive protective
ent necrotic tissue is stripped from the viable tissues.
function (passive products, such as plastic membranes,
The process is repeated, ideally two to three times per
nonadherent dressings) vis-a-vis the wound or play an
day (Fig. 5-2).
 interactive role in promoting wound healing (interac-
tive products, such as hydrogels, foam dressings, etc.).
Sponges impregnated with the antimicrobial agents
Such "interactive dressings" can provide a substrate
polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB; The Kendall
or microenvironment supportive of the wound-
Co.) can be moistened with Ringer's lactate or
healing process (e.g., bioactive products, such as
sterile saline for immediate application to the open
hydrocolloids, alginates, collagens, chitosan, etc.).
wound. These sponges also have been used in con-
Adeiau pumom amssand aagesau wm uonoun!
Adherent Dressings
See Chapter 4.
To reduce the risk of wicking bacteria into the
Adherent dressings are used for the mechanical deb-
wound (strike-through) an outer wrap should be
ridement of necrotic tissue and the absorption of dis-
Auouos rone aul ouissap jam e oh padde
charge from the wound surface. Wet-to-dry and
uses surgical paper drapes secured with tape to
dry-to-dry bandages fall into this category. Both band-
cover the wet-to-dry dressing.
ages use coarse or wide-mesh cotton gauze as the
contact layer with the wound surface.
Wet-to-dry dressings have been criticized primarily
for causing a variable degree of trauma to the adjacent
viable tissues. Removal can be transiently painful to
Mechanical debridement refers to the removal of
 necrotic tissue and foreign material from a wound
the patient.
It is the author's contention that surgical debride-
 by physical force. This includes the use of wet-to-
ment should be used to reduce the bulk of devitalized
dry dressings: removal of the adherent gauze also
tissue in problematic wounds; wet-to-dry dressings,
removes necrotic tissue and topical debris adhering
used for no more than 3-5 days, is an easy and economi-
to its surface. Hydrotherapy and wound irrigation
cal method of removing the residual necrotic tissue in
also are forms of mechanical debridement. These
the wound. Short-term use, as described, does not sig-
modes of debridement are considered "non-
nificantly interfere with the emerging granulation
selective" since their use can indiscriminately
damage local healthy tissues at the same time they
tissue and has minimal effect on epithelialization.
 Thereafter, other topical agents or dressings are used
remove devitalized tissues.
on the wound.
84
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
a u suase eonue uv unm uado ue sssap ot sod sped an alais jo aeed e ot aues unidv () zs 
added to the solution to treat a bacterial infection (see Chapter 4). (B) Application to a cervical bite wound.
exudative wound. The gauze absorbs the tissue fluids,
Judicious surgical debridement, combined with
 and moisture islost from evaporation from the bandage
wet-to-dry dressings, is one of the faster methods
H Ap (aered) paaoua are sasueds azne anems
 of preparing wounds for eventual closure. There is
is the author's opinion that wet-to-dry dressings are
no indication for their use on healthy wound beds.
used only when mechanical debridement is required
Wet-to-dry dressings are often used for unrea-
to remove adherent residual necrotic tissue. In the
sonably long periods of time by many veterinari-
 absence of necrotic tissue, adherent dressings serve no
ans. Short-term use, for no more than 3-5 days, is
practical purpose in open wound care over other
strongly recommended to avoid prolonged trauma
dressings discussed below. Moisture-retaining dress-
to the emerging granulation tissue and epitheliali-
 ings can be used to facilitate autolytic debridement
zation noted during the proliferative phase of
wound healing.
once most of the necrotic tissue has been removed
surgically or mechanically. They should not be applied
The negative effects of wet-to-dry dressings
 in the presence of moderate amounts of devitalized
have been seriously overstated both in the litera-
 ture and by the manufacturers of wound dressings.
tissue.
The key to the effective use of wet-to-dry dressings
is that application should be limited to the first few
days of managing the problematic wound contain-
Warm sterile saline or lactated Ringer's solution
 ing necrotic tissue. Prolonged use clearly is detri-
can be used to reduce gauze adherence to the
 mental to the overall healing process.
wound. Keep in mind, however, that adherence is
necessary to optimize mechanical debridement.
 Oversoaking should be avoided.
 Alternatively, 2% lidocaine can applied topically
to the gauze. Lidocaine also can be diluted with
uado u pasn Aquouon jou are souissaip Arp-oi-Ai
sodium bicarbonate (9:1 mixture ratio) to reduce
wound management. Technically a dry-to-dry dress-
the stinging sensation occasionally noted with the
ing would describe simple gauze application to a
subcutaneous injection of 2% lidocaine as a local
closed wound. In practice, dry-to-dry describes the
block.
 application of dry sponges to a low-viscosity, highly
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
85
ing secondary (absorptive) layer of a protective
bandage. Over time, as the topical medication and dis-
charge pass into the overlying absorptive layer, its
occlusive properties diminish.
Despite their name, nonadherent dressings do
occasionally adhere to portions of the wound
a ,anio, ues aiepnxa pap pue uqi aoems
 dressing matrix to the wound surface. Granulation
 tissue can imbed into the open channels, forming
"keys" that make removal difficult without causing
a small amount of bleeding. Warm saline can be
applied to soften the fibrin and dried discharge to
HG. 5-3 Application of nonadherent Telfa pad over a wound
facilitate their removal. More frequent dressing
A collagen gel has been applied to the wound surface before its
changes can reduce this complication. Dressings
application. An outer bandage wrap is required to maintain the
such as Telfa have smaller pores than Adaptic and
 position of the dressing.
may reduce granulation tissue embedment.
However, the large openings in Adaptic provide
superior drainage. The clinician must judge which
Nonadherent or Low Adherent
dressing is most useful for a particular wound.
Dressings
 Nonadherent (or more properly, low adherent) dress-
 Other dressings, including occlusive dressings, may
have nonadherent or low adherent properties, but they
or skin graft to facilitate dressing removal with minimal
Aiaeredas passnssip Araredodde arou ane
 disturbance to the underlying tissue. These dressings
 are usually comprised of a treated fabric mesh impreg-
Absorptive Dressings
nated with paraffin or petrolatum. Examples include
 cotton leno-weave fabric impregnated with paraffin,
In the first week of wound management, wounds tend
such as tulle gras dressings, including Jelonet and Bac-
to be more transudative or exudative as a result of
tigras dressings (Smith & Nephew) and Sofra-Tulle
inflammation, infection, venous congestion, and local
(Hoechst Marion Roussell Ltd., Uxbridge, UK); knitted
lymphatic compromise. The volume of fluid released
acetate fabric impregnated with a petrolatum emul-
can be retained and controlled by the use of an absorp-
sion (Adaptic, Johnson & Johnson); and a fine mesh
tive dressing and/or the overlying secondary (absorp-
nsa % pue umennad ym paeuandu aznes
tive) layer of a bandage.
tribromophenate (Xeroform, Kendall Co.). Telfa
 Both wet-to-dry and dry-to-dry cotton dressings are
(Kendall Co.) consists of a thin layer of absorbent
highly absorptive; as noted, wet-to-dry dressings can
cotton fibers enclosed in polyethylene terephthalate.
hydrate and dilute thick exudates and facilitate their
This perforated plastic film has reduced adherence to
absorption into the gauze matrix. In the presence of
the wound surface while allowing the passage of exu-
necrotic tissue, they provide mechanical debridement.
dates into the cotton backing of the dressing (Fig. 5-3).
However, there are other dressings that may be used
The author finds Telfa nonadherent strips and Adaptic
to withdraw and retain discharge from the wound and
nonadherent dressings the most flexible and useful of
are better suited to promote the natural process of
 the nonadherent dressings.
(selective) autolytic debridement of residual devital-
Nonadherent dressings are commonly used in con-
ized tissue.
junction  with topical wound healing ointments,
creams, and gels to help maintain their contact with
POLYURETHANE FOAM
the wound surface (see Chapter 4). This combined
effect can create a partial- or semiocclusive dressing
Polyurethane foam is highly absorbent and able to
that helps provide moisture retention while protecting
retain several times its weight in fluid. It can be very
the area from desiccation. The porous or perforated
useful in managing wounds releasing large volumes
surface of the nonadherent dressing allows for the
of tissue fluid. Foam can be used in conjunction with
passage of tissue fluids and exudates into the overly-
 an overlying absorptive layer of bandage material.
86
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
C
FIG. 5-4 (A) Use of polyurethane foam on a highly exudative wound. (B) The foam was cut to the shape of the wound and secured
with a tie-over dressing. (C) Dressing change 24 hours later: note the high absorptive capacity of this dressing.
 Because of its fine porous surface, it is basically non-
ent dressing, absorptive dressing, semiocclusive dress-
adherent. Foams are less effective in debridement
ing, and moisture-retentive dressing, depending on
 compared to alginate and hydrocolloid dressings (e.g.
the wound environment (Fig. 5-4). Examples of this
 promoting autolytic debridement). Polyurethane foam
product include Hydrosorb, Flexipore (Advanced
can be moistened and applied to hydrate dry wounds.
Medical Solutions, Cheshire UK), Allevym (Smith &
Because of their partial retention of moisture, they can
Nephew), and Sof-Foam (Johnson & Johnson).
be considered semiocclusive  in nature. Hydrosorb
(Tyco/Kendall Co.) has a smooth, soft, nonirritating
surface. It can be useful in protecting the skin over
flexion surfaces from the abrasive effects of bandage
Polyurethane foam is most useful for highly exuda-
material during ambulation. Because of their elastic
 tive wounds. In low exudative wounds, it also may
nature, they do not readily contour to irregular surface
 be premoistened before application.
wounds without the application of an outer wrap to
Frequency of dressing changes will depend on
 maintain their position. They can be used to cover a
the volume of discharge absorbed by the dressing.
healthy granulation bed, although other products may
As a healthy granulation bed forms, the frequency
be more useful for this purpose. Based on the physical
of dressing changes normally declines.
 properties of the material, polyurethane is a nonadher-
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
87
B
HG. 5-5 (A) Feline paw wound managed with an alginate dressing. Note the excellent granulation bed and peripheral
ALGINATE DRESSINGS
It is common to cover alginate dressings with an
outer absorptive bandage to maintain the position of
Alginate dressings are comprised of alginic acid
the dressing and assist in the absorption of excessive
derived from algae (Phaeophyceae) found in various
discharge from a wound surface. Alginates and colla-
varieties of seaweed. Alginic acid consists of a polymer
gen commonly are added to various moisture-
containing mannuronic and guluronic residues. Algi-
retentive dressings. Upon absorption of moisture, the
nates rich in mannuronic acid form soft flexible gels,
dressings tend to soften into a gel-like compound that
whereas those rich in guluronic acid form firmer gels.
has the capacity to trap and store bacteria to a variable
Zinc, sodium, and calcium salts are added to the
degree. With loss of moisture, alginate dressings can
alginic acid polymer. Silver ions also have been added
dry, forming a sticky plaque that requires traction with
to alginate dressings to enhance their antibacterial
forceps during removal. Saline can be used to facilitate
- ( sssra r as) 
separation. Because of their absorptive properties, they
nate-maltodextrin dressings have been introduced to
can dehydrate the surface of low exudative wounds.
the wound-healing market (Caligtrol DX, Magnus Bio-
The author has also used lightly moistened alginate
medical, Pasadena, CA).
Arenuo spaq uonemuena Auleau raos ot suissanp
Retained alginate is broken down by the cells into
to one report, the author has seen no adverse effects to
sugars without eliciting a foreign body reaction. Algi-
the skin peripheral to a wound if an alginate dressing
nate dressings (especially containing zinc) have a
overlaps the area. The flat dressings however can be
topical hemostatic effect by activating prothrombin.
trimmed to better conform to the surface of a wound.
Alginate dressings are commonly used in flat sheets,
Dressings normally are changed every 3-4 days. In
although a rope form is available for packing deeper
heavily exudating wounds, changes one or twice a day
wounds. Alternatively, the flattened sheet can be
are advisable. It is the author's opinion that alginate
rolled and inserted into narrow cavities.
dressings are best used in wounds affter early forma-
tion of a granulation bed (Fig. 5-5.). Examples include
Curasorb ZN (Tyco/Kendall Co.), Nu-Derm (Johnson
& Johnson), Sorbsan (PharmaPlast Ltd., Alexandria,
Eygpt), and Tegaderm alginate (3M). Alginate dress-
 Because of their highly absorptive nature (20-30
ings that include an absorbent backing also are avail-
able for heavy exudative wounds (Sorbsan Plus;
times their weight), they are very useful for mod-
Pharmplast Ltd.). Alternatively, an absorbent layer of
erately exudative wounds.
 gauze or absorbent pads can be applied over the algi-
If applied to low exudative wounds, they can be
 premoistened before application.
nate dressing to help retain the anticipated wound
drainage. Apinate dressings, made by Comvita
88
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Medical (distributed by Derma Sciences) is a combina-
branes of occlusive dressings prevent or minimize
tion of a calcium alginate dressing and manuka honey.
penetration of contaminants. Low oxygen tension
(See Chapter 4 regarding manuka honey).
beneath an occlusive dressing stimulates macrophage
activity, fibroblast proliferation, and neovasculariza-
tion. The rate of epithelialization is reportedly twice as
HYPERTONIC SALINE DRESSINGS
fast as for wounds left exposed to the air. Partially
Hypertonic saline dressings are coton gauze sponges
occlusive dressings may be gas permeable or moisture
saturated with 20% sodium chloride. The hypertonic
vapor permeable—allowing moisture beneath the
saline has an absorptive osmotic effect on the wound
dressing to escape from the membrane. Because they
and can be useful in reducing edema secondary to
retain and hydrate tissues, these dressings facilitate
trauma. In drawing water from the wound, it can facil-
natural autolytic debridement of residual necrotic
itate the hydration of devitalized tissue and its subse-
tissue adhered to the underlying viable wound surface.
quent mechanical debridement during bandage
Hair should be clipped from around the wound liber-
changes. The hypertonic saline also blunts the ability
ally to improve their adherence to the adjacent skin to
of bacteria to proliferate. Unfortunately, these dress-
facilitate wound care.
 ings also have the potential to dehydrate viable tissue
Dressings with a low moisture vapor transmission
 in the wound. As moisture is drawn into the dressing.
have a higher retention of water and are better able to
the salt concentration will progressively decline, neces-
maintain a moist wound environment. Moisture is
sitating periodic bandage changes every 3 days or less,
typically lost through normal skin, and this can be
depending on the volume of fluid. Curasalt (Kendall
quantified as transepidermal water loss. Intact human
Co.) is marketed to veterinarians. (In essence, hyper-
skin has a transepidermal water loss of 4-9g/m²/h,
tonic saline-impregnated gauze dressings are a varia-
whereas water loss increases dramatically in partial
tion of the wet-to-dry dressing previously discussed.)
and full-thickness skin wounds (80-90 g/m2/h). Dress-
ings that have a low moisture vapor transmission
Moisture-Retentive Dressings and
value less than 35g/m?/h are considered moisture
retentive. Dressings that retain the tissue fluids also
Occlusive Dressings
 help contain both the cellular and extracellular compo-
 Providing a protected, moist wound environment can
nents (cytokines, etc.) of wound healing (see Chapter
 optimize the processes of wound healing. The mois-
 3) that naturally support the healing process.
ture-retentive dressings are soothing to sensitive
wound surfaces and reduce patient discomfort. These
Moisture Transmission Values of
properties also may be accomplished with topical
Common Dressings in g/m’/h
medications (see Chapter 4) or by using specialized
Normal skin: 4.0-9.0
moisture-retentive dressings.
There is a broad range of dressings that fall into the
Hydrocolloid dressing: <12.5
Polyurethane film: 12.5-33
tive dressings also may have variable moisture-
Polyurethane foam: 33.4-208
retentive properties.
Cotton gauze: 67
Hydrocolloid and hydrogel dressings have a mois
s rano ue cn padde x Suna
WETTO-WET DRESSINGS
membrane. In effect, they are similar to comparable
 Wet-to-wet dressings are particularly useful to hydrate
topical agents designed to provide a moist environ-
dry or mummified necrotic tissue, thereby facilitating
 ment for optimal healing. This group of dressings
its removal. This normally can be accomplished in 24
may be easier to apply and change compared to the
hours. A wet-to-wet dressing includes the application
reapplication of a comparable topical gel for
of moistened gauze sponges secured to the wound
shallow wounds. Topical gels may be more useful
with an outer wrap or "tie-over" dressing (see below).
for more cavitated defects with a dressing and
Sponges are periodically moistened with Ringer's
paauonond na uuieu diaq on padde asepuq
lactate or saline during this time. An antimicrobial
contact with the wound surface.
solution (chlorhexidene or povidone-iodine) may be
used, or antimicrobial polyhexamethylene biguanide-
 Many moisture-retaining dressings are occlusive or
impregnated gauze sponges can be substituted for
semiocclusive by nature. The outer synthetic mem-
standard cotton sponges (Kendall Co.; see Antimicro-
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
89
C
HG. 5-6 (A) Extensive skin loss involving the hind paw of a cat. A wet-to-wet dressing was applied to hydrate the mummified
necrotic skin overlying the metatarsal area.
pue azne ou puaiaupe-jas jo sake[ e Aq pamooy Suqnt au sao paddeum sem sauods go akel leuoe uy uataue xaqn.d 
autoclaved Vetrap.
g Aaa paeadau sem stul aepueq au Suxa pua ataueo padd-lauun aut ous patoalun sem aules jo [uot Aiateuxoddv () 
hours.
(D) After 24 hours, the patient was sedated and the bandaged removed. The hydrated necrotic tissue easily peeled off the paw with
forceps. The foot was closed with a mesh graft a few days later.
bial Dressings, below). The author prefers to insert
When the wet-to-wet dressing is removed, the
sterile fenestrated tubing between gauze layers to
necrotic skin and underlying tissues are invariably
facilitate injecting additional fluid into the bandage
softened from the absorption of water, facilitating their
a       so g 
surgical removal. Heavy sedation or general anesthe-
level (Fig. 5-6 and 5-7). Alternatively, fluid can be
sia facilitates the bulk removal of devitalized tissue. If
s e m a a o p ro pa
residual necrotic tissue remains, wet-to-dry dressings,
90
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 5-7 (A) Large right flank and thigh wound extending to the knee due to secondary vehicular trauma.
(B) After initial surgical debridement, a wet-to-wet dressing was used to facilitate subsequent removal of residual necrotic tissue.
 Saline-moistened laparotomy pads were applied to the wound, followed by a fenestrated red rubber tube. A second moistened pad
was applied over the coiled tubing.
(C) The wet-to-wet dressing was secured to the area with a tie-over. A caudal superficial epigastric flap was later used to close this
large skin defect.
hydrating topical agents (see Chapter 4), or a moisture-
-oipay 'fenaua u (asorpy ueuomeu) su paseq
retaining dressing (below) can be used to facilitate its
gel dressings essentially are sheets of cross-linked
removal.
polymer gels. (Note: superabsorbent polymers are also
Supniout 'sionpond aualahu leuosiad Aueu u pasn
baby diapers.) Many of these dressings are semitrans-
HYDROGEL DRESSINGS
parent, which facilitates initial wound inspection (Fig.
 Hydrogel dressings are primarily comprised of water
5-8 and 5-9). Some hydrogel dressings contain other
(70%-95%) that is retained in a fiber network of
products: Nu-Gel (Johnson & Johnson) and Purilon
humectants, and various superabsorbent hydrophilic
(Coloplast Corp.), for example, also contain alginate in
their hydrogel matrix. Nu-Gel also comes in a dressing
 oxide, starch-grafted copolymer, polyvinyl alcohol
 containing collagen in order to enhance the otherwise
copolymers, etc.) that absorb aqueous solutions by
 modest absorptive capacity of the dressing. Antimicro-
hydrogen bonding with water. However, SentrX
bial agents, such as silver, metronidazole, and silver
Animal Care (see below) makes a product line of gel
 sulfadiazine, have been added to hydrogel dressings
dressings containing cross-linked hyaluronic acid-
to prevent or manage low-grade infections (see Anti-
Dressings, Bandages, External Support, and Protective Devices
91
 microbial Dressings, below). Most hydrogel dressings
 Hydrogel dressings form a protective gel covering
require an outer bandage or wrap to secure them to
with a somewhat limited capacity to absorb exudates.
the wound surface. Hydrogels are relatively easy to
They can be considered an "interactive dressing.
apply to flat wound surfaces. Overlapping the adjacent
Their ability to hydrate a wound facilitates autolytic
skin margins of a wound should be minimized, since
 debridement of residual necrotic tissue. They support
the skin may contribute to maceration.
healing by second intention and reduce patient dis-
comfort. In one experimental study (Ramsey et al.
Unstable dressings can be secured to a wound
1995), they appeared to promote wound contraction
surface with surgical staples or sutures. This is par
on extremity wounds, but less so for trunk wounds in
ticularly useful in assuring the dressing will not
dogs. They are best employed for wounds free of infec-
slip off the wound surface when infrequent dress-
tion and excessive necrotic tissue. Dressings are nor-
ing changes are necessary.
mally changed every 3 or 4 days for most noninfected
wounds. Saline or a wound-cleansing agent (see
Chapter 4) can be used to prepare the wound for the
replacement dressing. Because of their occlusive prop-
erties, their use in infected wounds is not advisable. In
one study, wounds covered with hydrogel dressings
displayed greater wound contraction compared to
hydrocolloid and polyethylene dressings. A few exam-
ples of hydrogel dressings include Biodress (DVM
Pharmaceuticals, Miami, FL), Vigilon (Bard Medical
Division, Covington, GA), Tielle (Johnson & Johnson),
Aquasorb (DeRoyal Industries),
，Curagel (Tyco/
Kendall Co.), Curity Conforma Gel (Kendall Canada),
 and Nu-Gel Dressings Johnson & Johnson).
SentrX Corporation (Salt Lake City, UT) has a
product line of disulfide cross-linked hyaluronan
HG. 5-8 Examples of a hydrocolloid (left) and hydrogel
(hyaluronic acid-based films) hydrogel dressings for
dressing (right). A protective cover is peeled off the dressing.
use in small animals (canitrX, felitrX) and horses
exposing the sticky contact surface of the dressing for
(equitrX). Control studies between the various hydro-
 placement over an open wound.
 gel products are lacking.
HG. 5-9 (A) Mesh graft application to a
problematic inner thigh defect. (B) In this case a
hydrogel dressing was stapled over the grafted
area to maintain hydration of the area and
 promote epithelialization. The hydrogel was
successfully used, but was not considered any
better than the customary use of a nonadherent
dressing (Adaptic) combined with triple
antibiotic ointment.
92
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 5-10 (A) Application of a hydrocolloid
dressing (Duoderm, ConvaTec) to a lower
extremity wound. (B) The dressing overlaps the
 skin and adheres fairly well to the area. Tape
aul ansse ot pasn aq ueo deum suoil e io sdius
dressing does not shift. The rigidity of this type
一
of dressing may impede wound contraction.
HYDROCOLLOID DRESSINGS
 wound-cleansing agents (see Chapter 4) may be used
to remove the somewhat tenacious gel-exudative
Hydrocolloid dressings contain a variety of constitu-
debris that forms on the wound surface during their
ents, including sodium  carboxymethylcellulose,
 use. Hydrocolloid dressings may adhere to the wound
gelatin, pectin, and polyisobutylene. Gelatin, pectin,
without a secondary wrap. When used on the lower
elastomers, alginates, silver, and other materials can be
extremity, tape strips can be used for added security.
added to these substrates. The tacky matrix is affixed
ds, Ae shssp as jo ssas aen a
to a polyurethane film or foam backing for easy appli-
the wound, thereby impeding myofibroblastic con-
cation to flat wound beds. The outer cover forms a
traction of the skin bordering the wound (Fig. 5-11).
protective barrier against external moisture and con-
taminants (Fig. 5-8 and 5-10). Hydrocolloid dressings
A few examples of hydrocolloid dressings include
Duoderm or Granuflex (Convatec), Restore Hydrocol-
tend to be stiffer than most hydrogel dressings: they
will soften to some degree when warmed by simply
loid Dressing (Hollister Inc.), Nu-Derm (Johnson &
Johnson), Tegaderm I
Hydrocolloid Dressing
(3M
compressing the dressing between the hands for a
Health), Replicare Hydrocolloid Dressing (Smith &
couple minutes before application. Hydrofiber pads or
Nephew), and Invacare Hydrocolloid Dressing
ribbons can be formed from sodium carboxymethyl-
(Invacare Corp., Cleveland, OH).
cellulose fibers.
Hydrocolloid dressings have some capacity to
absorb exudates from the wound surface, forming a
gel over time. For this reason, they are also consid-
ered to be an interactive dressing. Hydrocolloid dress-
In early wound care, considerable effusion may be
 sd h se ad n i Aa  s
noted, and overwhelm the fluid retaining capacity
their individual absorbency, fluid-handling character-
of hydrogel and hydrocolloid dressings. More
istics, and physical properties. The moist environment
absorptive dressings would be advisable until cap-
facilitates autolytic debridement. However, they are
illary stability and fluid reduction is noted. This is
best used for wounds with minimal necrotic tissue;
usually associated with the development of a
they should be avoided in the presence of wound
infection.  Hydrocolloid  dressings 
healthy granulation bed. This general rule of thumb
are normally
also would be applicable to highly exudative
applied to a wound by slightly overlapping the skin
wounds. As a result, the use of these dressings may
that makes up the perimeter of the wound. Excessive
be more suitable for granulation beds free of excess
 overlapping may overhydrate the adjacent skin. Most
necrotic tissue and contaminants.
dressings are changed every 34 days. Saline or
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
93
HG. 5-11 (A) Application of a hydrocolloid dressing (Duoderm) to a problematic skin defect in a cat. Note the hydrocolloid 
discharge onto the lower adjacent skin surface.
(B) The wound remained unchanged after 4 weeks. A transposition flap was later used to successfully close this defect. This example
underscores the fact that many wounds will remain challenging despite the development of multiple wound dressings and topical
agents designed to promote healing.
VAPOR-PERMEABLE FILMS
Post-OP from Smith & Nephew). Polyurethane dress-
ings also are used as protective containment barriers
Vapor-permeable films generally allow for the passage
to secure other dressings (e.g., alginates, gauze, etc.)
-eauad rodea taaamoH uaaAxo pue rodea Ianem jo
and topical medications. Tegaderm and Opsite are two
bility, adhesivenes, and conformability vary with a
examples of polyurethane dressings (Fig. 5-12). These
 given product. The term film dressings refers to thin,
film dressings are frequently used to protect a skin
transparent polyurethane membranes coated with a
incision from moisture and topical contaminants post-
layer of adhesive to secure it to the bordering skin
 operatively, rather than as a dressing for open wounds.
surface. The film can be used as a protective membrane
Plastic drapes primarily used in orthopedic proce-
over minimal exuding wounds or as a protective
dures can be adapted to maintaining dressings and
barrier (e.g., closed incisions).
bandages in problematic body areas. Ioban (3M), Vi-
Polyurethane is the most commonly used transpar-
Drape (Medical Concepts Development, Woodbury.
ent plastic film barrier to protect wounds. Polyurethane
MN), and Opsite Incise Drapes (Smith & Nephew) are
is permeable to gas, but protects the wound from
examples of plastic drapes used in surgery. Surgical
external contaminants (water, bacteria). Polyurethane
drape adhesives can be used sparingly to enhance the
films are considered semiocclusive, allowing water
adherence of these plastic films to the skin (Vi-Drape).
vapor to escape from their surface. They have no
They may be useful for securing dressings and band-
absorptive capacity, and moisture can accumulate
agesto the lateral surfaces of small animals. Subsequent
beneath polyurethane, potentially promoting the pro-
Sus Aq ais pae aq u se ss
liferation of skin organisms
the plastic drape to gain access to the wound. The drape
The film may be applied to superficial wounds with
opening is retaped after changing the dressing.
minimal exudates and it has an adhesive to secure the
dressing to the skin surrounding the wound borders
Miscellaneous Dressings
(minimum 1 inch overlap). Removal of fur, followed
by cleansing and drying the skin, wil facilitate its
ANTIMICROBIAL DRESSINGS
adherence. In general, film does not adhere and
 It has long been recognized that silver ions possess
conform well to mobile body regions and skin folds.
 broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties, including
The use of film alone should be avoided in the pres-
efficacy against Pseudomonas aeruginosa methicillin-
ence of infection, necrotic tissue, or highly exudative
resistant Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin-resist-
wounds. Some polyurethane films contain a light
ant Enterococcus, and Candida sp. Silver ions also may
gauze dressing and can be used as protective barriers
mitigate inflammation by inhibiting matrix metallo-
over a sutured incision (Tegaderm from 3M; OpSite
proteinase activity.
94
POLYSKINI
MinistuinVaporPermea
FIG. 5-12 (A, B) Tegaderm + Pad (3-M) and Polyskinll (Kendall Co.) dressings. The coated paper backing is peeled off the adhesive
surface and applied over the surgical site. Note the Tegaderm (B) has a thin gauze pad embedded into the center of this plastic
Silver-impregnated dressings are available in a
Nephew). Polytracin dressings (polymyxin B, baci-
variety of forms. Examples include the following anti-
tracin zinc, neomycin sulfate) are also available from
microbial alginate dressings: Silvercel Johnson &
Galaxy Medicare Ltd. (Orissa, India).
Johnson), Algicell (Derma Sciences Inc.), Calgitrol
Cadexomer iodine also has been used in wound
(Magnus Biomedical), Seasorb-Ag (Coloplast Corp.),
dressings (Iodosorb Sheet Dressing, Smith & Nephew)
Sorbsan Silver (Unomedical Ltd., Reddich, UK), Silver-
and as an ointment or powder (Iodosorb Ointment/
lon CA (Argentum Medical LLC, Geneva, IL), and
Iodosorb Powder, Smith & Nephew). Cadexomer
Maxorb Extra Ag (Medline Industries Ltd., Mundelein,
iodine is a biodegradable mixture of cadexomer
IL);90% collagen-10% alginate wound dressing (Fibra-
polysaccharide beads as a carrier for 0.9% iodine.
col, Johnson & Johnson) collagen-oxidized regenerated
Cadexomer iodine-based products slowly release
cellulose dressing containing 1% silver (Prisma,
iodine, unlike povidone-iodine dressings, which
Johnson & Johnson); Actisorb silver antimicrobial
 deposit their iodine immediately on application to the
binding dressing using an activated charcoal woven
wound. They have a high rate of fluid absorption for
 uoso am Aq as %to un sr
exudative wounds. Dressings with cadexomer iodine
-Bas) aans Sunuejuos Suissap [asoipay (uoso
should be used cautiously over large surface areas due
sorb, Medline Industries Ltd.); nylon impregnated
to the risk of iodine toxicity.
dressings (Silverlon Negative Pressure Dressing.
Argentum Medical LLC); and foam products Algidex
AG (DeRoyal Industries), Polymem Silver (Ferris Man-
BIOACTIVE DRESSINGS
ufacturing Co., Burr Ridge, IL); and a highly absorbent
sodium carboxymethylcellulose hydrofiber dressing.
Dressings composed of materials that originate from
living tissue are called bioactive dressings. The follow-
Aquacel (Convatec).
ing are examples of this family of dressings. They may
 As noted previously, gauze impregnated with the
have properties similar to other dressings discussed.
antimicrobial  agent  polyhexamethylene  biguanide
Occasionally, companies will combine bioactive prod-
(PHMB), can be used to manage or help prevent infec-
pue soussap iaoapau ro pronoorpay m sin
tion. PHMB is a cationic surface-active agent (related
to chlorhexidine) that irreversibly destabilizes cyto-
topical agents.
plasmic membranes of bacteria. Chlorhexidine acetate
has been formulated into topical dressings to protect
Collagen (Extracellular Matrix Bioscaffold) Dressings.
minor wounds from infection (Bactigras, Smith &
Bovine collagen can be used as a topical agent: it may
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
95
be applied as a powder, gel, pad, or packet form for a
 Equine amnion dressings have been used experi-
variety of applications (see Chapter 4). However, col-
mentally as occlusive dressings. They were noted to be
Ae jeu suissap [esiojoiq e se pandde aq ues uae
effective in promoting contraction and epithelializa-
serve as a scaffold to facilitate wound healing. The
tion in experimental dogs.
organized collagen fibrils serve as a substrate or fila-
mentous network for fibroblast, endothelial, and epi-
With the presence of other economical dressing
thelial cell migration. Research into skin substitutes
alternatives, the routine clinical use of these prod-
has focused on the use of artificial dermal scaffolds
ucts is unclear.
that better mimic the natural properties of the dermis,
 in contrast to organized scar tissue secondary to gran-
ulation tissue maturation. These products are reported
to promote angiogenesis and the chemotactic recruit-
4, Topical Agents), Chitosan is derived from chitin, a
ment of white cells and fibroblasts (see Chapter 2).
natural polysaccharide biopolymer originating from
Prisma Johnson & Johnson) for example is a composite
crustacean shells. Partial deacetylation of chitin gives
dressing with 55% collagen, 44% oxidized regenerated
rise to a linear polysaccharide with interspersed D-
 cellulose, and 1% silver. Prisma is used in the manage-
glucosamine and acetyl-D-glucosamine units. Chitosan
ment of chronic ulcers and other open wounds. Bio-
has antimicrobial properties and is biodegradable. It
brane (Smith & Nephew) is a biosynthetic wound
may improve the strength of newly formed collagen in
dressing constructed of a silicone film and a nylon
granulating wounds and enhance the fumction of
complex three-dimensional  trifilament network to
inflammatory cells, cytokines, and fibroblasts. It has
which collagen is chemically bound. Blood and sera
been used in a variety of biomedical, nutritional, and
will clot in this matrix, firmly adhering the dressing to
cosmetic products.  Chito-Seal  Topical  Hemostasis
the wound surface: the moist environment created
Pads (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) has been
 promotes epithelialization.
designed to manage actively bleeding wounds: posi-
Porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) has been
tively charged chitosan molecules attract negatively
 integrated into an extracellular wound matrix dressing
charged red blood cells and platelets. The HemCon
(e.g., Oasis-Healthpoint CO., Cook Biotech Inc., West
Dressing (HemCon Medical Technologies Inc.) is a
Lafayette, IN; CollaMend—Bard Medical Division,
commercially available chitosan dressing in the United
Genitrix Ltd.; Vet BioSISt, Smith's Medical PM, Wauke-
States.
sha, WI) that provides a three-dimensional collagen
-ieg pue uonisodap uaseos ,iarp, dau on proes
SPRAYON AND LIQUID DRESSINGS
tate the in-growth of cells and capillaries into this
matrix for partial or full-thickness wounds. (SIS com-
Spray-on and topical dressings are available for pro-
prises type I, II, IV, V, VI, and VIII collagen; fibronec-
viding a protective film on minor abrasive wounds,
tin; hyaluronic acid; chondroitin sulfate; and heparin.)
small nicks or cuts, and sutured incisions. OpSite
It has been used to assist in the repair of hermia and
 Spray (Smith & Nephew) is a fast-drying transparent
chest wall defects in humans. Acellular urinary bladder
film that is permeable to vapor and air. A variety of
matrix or submucosa (UBM or UBS) also has been used
over-the-counter liquid bandages are available (Band-
as an inductive scaffold for tissue replacement. Acell
Aid, New-Skin, Newphase, Skin Shield, 3M Pet Care,
Vet (Acell Inc., Columbia, MD) has been advocated for
Scientific Angler Spray On, 3-M Nexcare, Invacare,
a variety of soft tissue and orthopedic procedures.
Johnson & Johnson Liquid Bandage) that reportedly
Both SIS and UMB/UBS reportedly also contain
form a breathable and flexible seal. Most liquid band-
growth factors to promote wound healing.
ages are cyanoacrylate formulations that polymerize,
 These bioscaffold dressings can be integrated into
usually with an activator. They may be useful in pro-
the healing process; as healing progresses, an addi-
tecting incisions or minor nicks and scrapes in areas
tional layer of these materials can be placed over the
where contact contamination would be a concern.
 original dressing without its removal. Loose dressings
Alternatively, surgical cyanoacrylate glues can be used
or hydrolyzed fragments can be removed prior to
over skin sutures or staples to provide an incisional
replacement with a fresh dressing at the time of
seal.
bandage change.
 A study using porcine-derived SIS on exposed bone
SILICONE DRESSINGS
in dogs failed to demonstrate its effectiveness in pro-
moting wound contraction and epithelialization. A
 Silicone dressings are used primarily to reduce the
 study in horses also failed to demonstrate efficacy.
formation of hypertrophic and keloid scarring in
96
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
humans. Silicone dressings have been used to reduce
CELLULOSE DRESSINGS
 exuberant granulation tissue formation in horses. Sili-
Hydrogel and hydrocolloid dressings may contain
 cone may promote hydration of scar tissue. It is pos-
carboxymethylcellulose. A woven microfiber cellulose
tulated that the silicone dressing occludes microvessels,
dressing has also been developed with both absorbent
gradually decreasing oxygen tension in the tissues,
and hydrating properties (XCell, Xylos Corp., Lang-
 reaching a point of anoxia in which fibroblasts cannot
horne, PA). As a result, it can be used to promote
function and undergo apoptosis. There is no informa-
autolytic debridement and absorb discharge from the
tion regarding the linical use of silicone dressings in
wound surface. The fine microfiber reduces wound
small animals.
adherence.
Cost Factors
Is special wound preparation required?
Is it easy to apply?
Is it easy to remove?
How frequently must it be changed?
Is a supportive bandage required to maintain dressing?
What is the length of use in relation to the changing wound environment?
Is it readily available?
Is it the best product for the task?
Is this a problematic wound that requires a more innovative approach to facilitate closure?
Is surgical excision/closure of a problematic wound a better altemative at a given stage of open wound
management?
Some Practical Considerations
Is a small amount of necrotic tissue present?
Consider moisture retentive dressings and topical products, including hydrogels, hydrogel dressings, and 
hydrocolloid dressings
Use wet-to-dry dressings on a limited basis to facilitate removal of necrotic tissue.
Is infection present?
Early femoval of necrotic tissue dramatically reduces bacterial numbers.
Are these moderately exudative and effusive wounds?
Consider dressings and topical products that facilitate absorption and retention, including alginates and
polyurethane foams.
Is there a healthy granulation bed?
Consider moisture-retentive dressings and topical products, including semiocclusive and occlusive
dressings.
Are these low-moisture or dry wounds?
 Consider moisture retentive dressings.
 Note: As wounds respond in a positive fashion to appropriate therapies, dressings can be changed to support
the current status of a given wound.
Dressings, Bandages, External Support, and Protective Devices 
Z6
The Secondary Layer
ondary bandage layer can be reduced as the amount
of discharge progressively declines. As the discharge
 The secondary layer of a bandage is the bulk or absorp-
 decreases, moisture retaining or absorptive dressings
are better able to contain the fluid for a greater period
tive layer. Roll cotton, cast padding, absorptive com-
of time with less spill-over into the secondary bandage
bination pads, gauze pads, and roll gauze usually
layer. Both dressing and bandage changes may be
comprise this layer of the bandage. The bulk or thick-
reduced to every 24 days in many cases, depending
ness of this layer will depend on the function of the
bandage.
on the products used.
Factors Influencing the Thickness of
Frequency of Bandage/Dressing
the Secondary Bandage Layer
Changes in Open Wound Care
Must it secure the primary dressing layer?
During the first week of open wound
To what extent does it need to protect or
management, bandage changes are normally
shelter traumatized tissues?
required on a daily basis fone to three times
How great is the volume of wound
per day depending on the condition of the
wound and dressing required).
discharge?
 During the second week, granulation tissue
Is there dead space to be controlled?
has formed, and the volume of discharge 
Is it intended to immobilize a given body region?
normally declines. Bandage changes may be
Is it necessary to control local bleeding?
extended to every second day in many
Are there drains or exposed surgical devices
cases, depending on the severity of the
that need protection from contamination or
wound and the types of dressings used.
patient tampering?
By the third week, wound contraction and
epithelialization usually assume prominent
In a wound with a copious discharge, the secondary
roles in wound closure. As they occur the
layer can facilitate the wicking and retention of tissue
surface area of the open wound progressively
fluids from the wound surface. Moisture retention in
declines. In many cases, the bandage/
this intermediate layer depends on the volume released
dressing change interval may be extended to
from the wound surface, the absorptive or retentive
every third or fourth day.
properties of the dressing, and the rate of moisture lost
As noted, a variety of dressings and topical
by evaporation through the outer tertiary wrap. For
products are available for use as a healthy
this reason, larger woundsin the early stages of healing
granulation bed is forming isee Chapter 4).
(first week) generally require more frequent bandage
The frequency of bandage changes also is
changes.
dependent on how often a given wound
product requires reapplication based on the
Practice Tip
manufacturer's suggestions.
When a large bandage is used to immobilize an
 When using moisture-retaining dressings on 
area while also managing a wound, the area overly-
healthy granulation beds, changes normally
ing the wound can be cut out, creating an access
 window to the wound. The soiled bandage area can
are scheduled every 3-5 days. This is a
relatively safe time to reassess an otherwise
be removed and redressed without necessarily
uncomplicated open wound.
removing the entire supportive bandage.
The
access window is more easily created at the time of
bandage application. See Chapter 12, Plate 41 as an
Application of the Secondary Layer
 example of this technique.
As noted in Plate 2, cotton padding is overlapped by
As a healthy granulation bed forms during the
 50% to provide an orderly, more umiformly thick sup-
second week after injury, the volume of discharge
portive layer. On the extremities, materials are applied
decreases as the capillary bed matures, and the surface
from a distal to proximal direction. Tape stirrups and
area of the wound begins to decrease by wound con-
 traction and epithelialization. Unless a thicker bandage
prior to application of the secondary layer. (see Plate
is required for immobilization, the volume of the sec-
3). Additional absorbent pads may be imbedded in the
98
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
secondary layer or applied over the wound area before
application of the roll cotton. Following one or two
revolutions of cotton padding, self-adherent gauze
helps stabilize the cotton layer before additional
cotton/gauze layers are applied. The final outer cover
of gauze provides a suitable substrate for application
of the tertiary layer of the bandage. This layered appli-
cation also provides more uniform compression,
improving stability and reducing the risk of applying
a bandage too tightly. Thicker secondary layers reduce
the risk of circulatory compromise that otherwise may
occur if the outer elastic cover is applied with moder-
ate tension.
HG. 5-13 Vetrap (3M). Vetrap adheres to itself but does not
adhere to the skin. Vetrap can be autoclaved and used as a
Baby Diapers?
For large exudative wounds involving the trunk
(including the management of peritonitis with the
 open abdomen technique), diapers may be used as
an economical outer absorbent and protective
layer. A sterile primary and secondary bandage
layer may be followed by integrating the diaper
 into the outer nonsterile secondary layer of the
bandage.
The Tertiary Layer
HG. 5-14 Elasticon 2-inch, 3-inch, and 4-inch widths. Elasticon
is a durable, elastic adhesive wrap that is effective for a variety
 The outer or tertiary layer serves as a binding or secu-
of uses, including as a durable outer bandage wrap; for a
rity layer for the contact and absorptive layers of the
variety of sling applications; and as a supplemental adhesive
bandage. There is a wide variety of elastic products on
layer to prevent band age slippage.
the market, many of which come in an array of colors.
Most tertiary wraps are self-adherent as a result of
Caution
their texture and slightly tacky surface properties
 Elastic wraps provide a risk to the patient. Exces-
(Vetrap, 3M Animal Care Products) (Fig. 5-13). For
sive use of elastic tension during application can
pets that chew at their bandages, Petflex "No Chew"
(Andover Healthcare, Salisbury, MA) is flexible, co-
compromise circulation, especially for bandages
hesive bandaging impregnated with a bitter chemical
involving the extremities. This is more commonly
to discourage this behavior. Other products adhere to
Aas u Aanna e tim seq un ss
the contact layer of the secondary bandage layer
bandage layer.
(usually gauze) with a tenacious adhesive (for example,
 Elasticon from Johnson & Johnson) (Fig. 5-14). Stand-
Most outer wraps are porous or breathable, allow-
ard (porous or nonporous) surgical tape (Zonas,
 ing a variable amount of moisture to evaporate from
Johnson & Johnson) also may be used as a tertiary
the secondary bandage layer. Unfortunately, they also
Wrap. Elastic wraps have the advantage of compress-
permit wicking to occur, thereby promoting contami-
aaeu pue laael aaepueq Arepuosas Suiapum au Su
nation from absorption of fluid into the bandage unless
 better conformation to the contour of the body region.
precautionary measures are taken. Occlusive (nonpo-
They also provide a pleasing "tailored" appearance to
rous) tapes may be advisable for areas in contact with
the completed bandage compared to surgical tape
moisture only if the veterinarian remembers that
alone.
excessive use of this tape will also restrict evaporation
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
99
 from the secondary layer, necessitating more frequent
bandage changes from moisture retention. The author
 generally limits the use of occlusive (nonporous) tape
to that portion of a bandage susceptible to fluid con-
tamination (e.g., lower foot): a breathable outer wrap
is used for the remaining bandage area.
Elasticon (Johnson & Johnson) and similar materi-
als can be expensive, but the materials are quite
durable. They are most useful for bandages and
 slings that do not require frequent changes. Because
 of their sticky backing, they will adhere to the skin
(see Fig. 5-14).
Vetrap (3M Animal Care Products) and similar
FIG. 5-15 Elasticon can be used to secure the Vetrap-encased
products are thinner and more elastic than Elasti-
con. They do not adhere to the skin. They are more
bandage to the proximal skin. Elasticon has excellent adherent
 economical to use in those cases requiring more
properties and is one of the most durable tertiary wraps
 frequent bandage changes.
available for bandages, splints, and slings.
Standard surgical tape (1 or 2 inch) is economi-
cal, but lacks the physical advantages of Elasticon
fur may be clipped shorter, thereby improving adher-
and Vetrap. It is useful for those cases that require
ence of sticky or adhesive tape materials.
frequent (daily) bandage changes.
u pasn Aaaoaa aq uen uonsea pue dean
combination. Vetrap can be used for the bulk of the
The Double-edged Sword of
tertiary wrap; strips of Elasticon can be used to
 secure the Vetrap to the adjacent skin to prevent
Aggressive Tape Adhesive
bandage slippage.
Adhesive bandage materials (Elasticon, Johnson &
Johnson, being one of the best) are very effective in
securing bandage borders to the skin. Removal of
PREVENTING BANDAGE
the tape, especially in contact with bare skin, can
DISPLACEMENT
be difficult and painful to the patient. Adhesive
tape solvents (Mueller Tape Remover, etc.) can
Bandages can shift or slip as a result of a number of
facilitate its removal. If the tape is adhered to the
fur, gently pulling the tape off in the direction of
factors including the contour of the body region band-
aged, the lack of a frictional body surface to resist
 hair growth also facilitates its removal. The under-
slippage, the normal effects of gravity and body
lying fur also may be judiciously trimmed with
motion, subsequent stretching and loosening of the
scissors in problematic areas to facilitate removal
bandage layers, or forcible removal or partial destruc-
 as slight traction is applied to the adhesive tape.
tion by the patient. (Cats, for example, are notorious
for "flicking" bandages off their extremities using a
Skin staples also may be used to secure dressings
(qul paanoaui a jo uonou Suddeus piden jrous
Aeioadsa are Aau rianaon siasel aznes yul pue
 Resolution of edema, and variable degrees of disuse
useful for skin graft bandages. Casts and splinting
muscle atrophy also contribute to bandage laxity and
materials can be used to further immobilize body
displacement over time. Periodic bandage inspection
regions, thereby reducing motion and subsequent
is required by the owner and veterinarian to assure
stretching of bandage layers.
bandages are properly maintained. However, there are
 Bandage displacement from chewing can be
techniques that can be used to reduce the likelihood of
restricted or eliminated by the judicious use of E-
aden pue sus 'saeiq Apoq 'saenq yoau 'sies
bandage slippage including tape stirrups for extremity
bandages (see Plate 3); elastic adhesive tape (Elasticon)
stirrups (see Miscellaneous Protective Devices). Foul-
to join bandage borders to the adjacent skin (Fig. 5-15);
tasting topical agents can be used to discourage
adhesive tape "friction saddles" (trunk) and anchor
licking or chewing of exposed bandages (bitter apple,
bands (trunk, tail, limbs) (see Plate 4); spica bandage
etc.). Metallic splints and fiberglass casting material
extensions (limbs) (see Plate 5); and figure 8 or "ban-
also can be applied to the tertiary layer, forming a
 delero" adhesive straps for thoracic bandages. Long
barrier to chewing.
100
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
TIE-OVER DRESSING/
identical fashion using this technique (Fig. 5-17). Prac-
titioners will find this dressing technique to be simple,
BANDAGE TECHNIQUE
economical, and very effective for areas otherwise dif-
ficult to bandage. Motivated owners can be instructed
 The tie-over dressing/bandage is a method of securing
to change bandages (in cooperative pets) with minimal
Jo seare pue Apoq aut jo seaie juapuadap ol sabepueq
difficulty.
the trunk, head, or neck where conventional bandage
wraps have limited effective use. In humans, the tie-
over dressing uses sutures to secure the perimeter of
PRESSURE POINTS:
the graft. The sutures are left long and are gathered
BANDAGE OPTIONS
(twisted) together over the top of a small preformed
dressing or bandage. A removable metallic clip is
 applied to the twist to secure the dressing. Unfortu-
See the Chapter 7 discussion of pressure sores. (See
also see Plate 9, Pipe Insulation Protection Technique
nately, this technique is tedious to execute (Fig. 5-16).
A variation of the conventional tie-over technique,
for Elbow Wounds.)
developed by the author, uses a series of 2-0 monofila-
ment suture loops placed in the skin surrounding the
BANDAGE"ACCESS
wound (or graft area), approximately 2-3 cm from the
wound border. A loop (with a 10- to 15-mm profile
WINDOWS"
above the skin surface) is created to facilitate insertion
 of a strand suture or umbilical tape using forceps or
Apoq e azqounnl ot pasn si asepueq asiel e uauM
mosquito hemostats.
region and also protect an open wound, constructing
The dressing or light bandage is applied to the
 an access window at the time of its initial application
wound surface prior to lacing the suture or umbilical
can facilitate wound inspection without removal of the
tape between opposing loops in a crisscross or zigzag
entire bandage. With this technique, the bulk of the
fashion. A piece of water-resistant paper surgical
 bandage is applied, leaving an area (access window)
 drape also can be placed over the gauze or bandage
over the open wound. With completion of thisbandage.
,      
a local dressing, secondary padding, and outer cover
through." As a result, a tie-over dressing immobilizes
can be placed in the access window and secured with
the immediate wound without restricting regional
adhesive tape. Subsequent bandage removals require
motion. Bandages are removed and easily replaced in
 removal of the local wound bandage only, saving both
FIG. 5-16 (A) Conventional tie-over dressing. Suture strands that secure the graft are used to secure the dressing into place
(B) Ointment, a nonadherent dressing, and a layer of gauze cut to the dimensions of the wound bed are applied. Suture strands are
twisted and tied. Alternatively, a removal clip can be used if replacement of the bandage is required. A sterilized coin or metallic disc
 can be inserted into the middle layer for added rigidity.
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
101
HG. 5-17 (A) Author's tie-over dressing technique. Suture loops (eyelets) placed around the graft site secure the dressing by lacing
sdool siapoq punom au wo uoe- Aaeuxodde paea aie sdoo 'sdoo susoddo uamiaq adet [eoqun io [eaeu ainns
Sem adeap lerins haded aais jo aaid v (a) aen lequn so spues ans jo aessed had o aa un tot ae
applied prior to final application of umbilical tape to minimize contamination to the gauze layer.
time and money during open wound care. Alterna-
excessive motion or trauma could compromise post-
tively, the surgeon may cut a window in the bandage
operative healing.
segment overlying the wound and replace the local
 Bandages are used in distant direct flaps in which
dressing and bandage as described at the time of the
the involved limb is secured beneath a skin flap ele-
first change. (See Plate 41.)
vated on the side of the dog and cat. These bandages
are important to support the elevated extremity and
prevent the patient from displacing the flap from the
BANDAGING TECHNIQUES
wound site (see Plates 41 and 42 on distant flap
FOR SKIN GRAFTS
techniques).
 See Chapter 14 for specific details on bandaging skin
SPLINTS, CASTS,
grafts.
REINFORCED BANDAGES
BANDAGING TECHNIQUES
The bandage is the most common method of protect-
FOR SKIN FLAPS
ing and supporting the injured area. As previously
noted, inappropriately applied bandages can be detri-
As a general rule, the author avoids applying band-
san ues sasepueq nuoi oueau pumom 0n leuau
ages over most skin flaps. When properly developed,
circulation. Loosely fiting bandages, however, may
skin flaps have an inherent blood supply. Bandages
permit regional motion resulting in rubbing and abra-
and splints, unless carefully applied, could compro-
sion of the wound surface, especially wounds involv-
 mise vital circulation to the flap
ing the joints and mobile areas (flank, axilla, neck, etc.).
 Unlike free grafts, flaps do not require a bandage
Additional immobilization or rigidity of the bandaged
for their early revascularization and survival. On occa-
area may be advisable under these circumstances.
sion, a protective bandage and splint are used to
Half-shell or clamshell fiberglass casts (Scotchcast
protect a flap over a flexion surface (e.g., carpus,
Plus, 3M), plastic or aluminum Mason metasplints
tarsus) (Fig. 5-18). The author also has carefully con-
(metal splints by Surecraft, Upton, MA), tongue
structed bandages reinforced with splints to protect
 depressor splints, aluminum bars (aluminum rods,
local flaps and axial pattern flaps placed in areas where
Burns Veterinary Supply, Jericho, NY), and heat-
102
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
B
 aa () d ods e ym as pe ixg () e (o a aao 1  () l- 
un uoou azuuu on aepueq aoaoad e saao padde sem sudseia e 'seans ede au iaao Aap sem ans
suture removal.
malleable plastic (Orthoplast, Johnson & Johnson) are
Thomas splint is excellent for immobilizings the elbow,
effective for immobilizing lower limb wounds when
carpus, knee, and tibiotarsal joint and allows the vet-
applied just inside or outside of the tertiary bandage
layer.
the splint (Fig. 5-19 and 5-20). The bars provide protec-
tion to these body regions from direct impact. See
Splinting in Soft Tissue Wound Care
Plates 6 and 7.
When external fixation is used for fracture immo-
Spica bandages or splints also are effective in immo-
bilization, excessive padding between the bone and
bilizing the upper extremities. The spica bandage
splint reduces its efficacy in immobilizing the frac
envelopes the limb and trunk, restricting motion to the
ture site.
shoulder or hip joint. It can be reinforced with an
In contrast to fracture stabilization, supplemen
aluminum bar or a thin plywood silhouette of the
tal splinting of soft tissue bandages is primarily
'1- si) Aiin ids asau ch ql pae
used to minimize joint movement and motion of
5-22.). In the more difficult wound closure areas,
the bandage in relation to the wound surface. As a
including the flank, inguinal, and axillary areas, com-
result, splints can be applied over thicker soft tissue
bined bandaging techniques may be required for
bandages safely and effectively.
achieving optimal healing results. See Plate 5.
External splints can compress the underlying
tissues, depending on the thickness of the second-
ary bandage layer. To reduce the risk of pressure
MISCELLANEOUS
necrosis over bony prominences (olecranon, tarsus,
accessory carpal pad), supplemental padding
PROTECTIVE DEVICES
should be place around the base of bony depres-
sions; this padding reduces the pressure cone effect
Body (Side) Brace
that otherwise can occur between the bony promi-
 nence and overlying splint. See Plates 2 and 3.
On occasion, a body or side brace fashioned with alu-
minum rods is useful to prevent dogs from licking or
Schroeder-Thomas splints provide excellent immo-
chewing at wounds involving their caudal trunk and
bilization to the limbs, using aluminum rods or sturdy
hindquarters. An aluminum rod is fashioned into a
coat hangers for smaller dogs and cats. The Schroeder-
circular central loop to fit over the head and around
二
C
E
HG. 5-19 (A) Nonhealing wound overlying the fibular tarsal bone in a Sheltie. No loose skin was available for closure with a pedicle
graft.
and tralima.
(C) The graft on day 5 with 100% viability.
(D) Note that the local bandage overlying the graft can be replaced without removing the splint. Stockinette strips and tape were
used to secure the limb to the splint.
(E) Reapplication of thebandage.
protection.
103
104
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 5-20 (A) Mesh graft application to the forelimb. Immobilization of the carpus and elbow were considered essential to graft
FIG. 5-21 (A) A spica bandage of the hind limb,
encircling the trunk of a cat. This bandage was
used to immobilize a difficult wound closure.
 Note the vacuum drain, using a syringe. Spica
bandages are commonly used for grafts that
extend into the proximal area of the limbs. This
is especially true for cats who have a propensity
to remove bandages.
(B) A large flank wound was temporarily
covered with a spica bandage. Note the
bandage encircles the trunk for added security
to prevent the bandage from slipping.
Reinforcement material can be incorporated into
the bandage if rigid immobilization is required.
In this example, a tie-over dressing could have
been more effectively used.
the neck of the dog. Padding is applied to the cervical
midthoracic and lateral abdominal area. Padding is
ring. The remaining left and right aluminum "arms"
 applied to its surface. Elastic adhesive tape is used to
are bent and positioned along the lateral thorax and
secure the brace to the dog by applying strips
abdomen. A second extension piece of aluminum can
between each bar above and below the trunk. Tension
be added using surgical tape if the arms are too short
on each elastic strip can be adjusted to position the
to complete a dorsal support arch. The aluminum
aluminum arms at the midthoracic/abdominal region
extension contours the dorsal lumbar area and is suf-
to inhibit the dog from bending its trunk (Fig 5-23). See
ficiently long to allow the lateral bars to rest in the
Plate 8.
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
105
B
HG. 5-22 (A) Cat, inner thigh, and inguinal wound (see Fig. 5-9). A full-thickness mesh graft was applied to the large defect. Skin
staples were used to secure nonadherent dressings. A tie-over dressing was applied over the nonadherent dressing before application
oy pasn sem dn-ias su sdnaas aden ym smed seau au ot painoas ieq n unununie ue Aq papuadsns aram ssal aul eoids aut jo
subsequent bandage changes, by suspending the bar base, to which the paws were taped.
(B) The spica bandage was complete, followed by the application of each arm of the aluminum bar with Elasticon tape.
(C) Caudal view of the spica splint. Note this spica bandage kept the limbs apart, approximating the width of the pelvis. Waterproof
white tape was applied to the bandage around the perineal area to facilitate cleaning around the area. The cat was placed on baby
diapers to collect urine and feces. The patient was turned every 2 hours. This device was removed 2 weeks after surgery.
Tape Hobbles
tape pattern has less likelihood of restricting circula-
tion; swelling is better able to spread or separate the
Tape hobbles have been employed to restrict limb
tape-to-tape interface.
abduction and motion of the forelimb or hindlimb.
They also can be used to prevent the dog from using
his front or hind paws to scratch at a surgical site. The
Elizabethan Collars
author also has used rear leg hobbles to restrict cats
from licking at perineal wounds and urethrostomy
Ssoe  m pne are saou an susi
Several commercial Elizabethan collars (Butler Animal
limbs in a normal vertical position in relation to the
Health Supply, Dublin, OH, etc.) are available to vet-
trunk width. Tape bands are applied below the oppos-
erinarians to prevent dogs and cats from licking or
chewing at surgical sites. Alternatively, the plastic
dangerous circular ring pattern around the limbs.
 collar can protect the head and neck from scratching
Rather, tape ends arc around the limb and the adhesive
 and rubbing.
106
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 5-23 (A) Open wound on the left rear limb. The dog chewed the surgical area apart where a skin tumor was resected. This
occurred despite the use of an appropriate sized Elizabethan collar. Infection was treated before closure was attempted.
og suaed au suaaaid o pauonusey sem aeaq Apoq v () oajap us stu as ot pasn (moue uado) de uoisodsuei (a)
repeating his earlier performance.
e aanraa Airemonied ane saop ie aquauan isn
Note:
bending plastic collars against cage doors, pushing the
Elizabethan collars also can be effectively used to
collar backward, or chewing the collar borders suffi-
 reduce the risk of being bitten by more aggressive
ciently to gain access to their bandage and surgical
dogs and cats.
Aadid pue pade Aiaeiondde uam suisiu
maintained, Elizabethan collars can be very effective
in protecting wounds, although the veterinarian must
 be certain the patient is capable of eating and drinking
while wearing one (Fig. 5-24). Owners may need to
X-ray film can be fashioned into Elizabethan collars
elevate food and water bowls. In cooperative animals,
for cats and small dogs. Plastic buckets can be effec-
the collar  may  be temporarily removed  when the
tively used in a similar fashion for larger dogs. Butler
 patient is fed. Owners are warned that removal of a
Animal Health Supply also sells a soft, coated fabric
 collar requires direct supervision of their pet; leaving
variation of the classic Elizabethan collar that may be
an adue mone uen ,anunu e roy, uaaa woon a
better tolerated by some feline patients. Veterinarians
for the patient to damage the surgical site.
used to close an extensive flank defect. Note the reservoir of the closed suction unit attached to the patient's collar.
(B) Pipe insulation used to pad the edge of an Elizabethan collar. A transposition flap was used to close a problematic wound of the
left forelimb. Duct tape also can be used to create a softer edge to the collar. (Pipe insulation is best avoided if a patient has a history
of chewing and consuming foreign objects. From the author's experience this is a rare occurrence.) (C) Close-up view of the flap, 10
dayspostoperatively.
107
108
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
motion and weight placement on the limb, placement
Elizabethan Collar Tips:
of the limb in extreme flexion is unwarranted. Mild
Selection of the appropriate size is critical to pre-
elevation of the limb is capable of restricting motion
venting the dog and cat from licking at a surgical
and preventing weight-bearing without compromis-
area. The edge of an Elizabethan collar can be
ing comfort.
 somewhat sharp, and some dogs occasionally will
Slings must be assessed closely to assure they do
accidentally rub it on the surgical site. In some
not cause swelling to the lower extremity, compromise
cases dogs will learn to use the collar to scratch at
regional circulation, or irritate the underlying skin.
 an irritated area. This can be detrimental to a flap.
Slings must be kept clean and dry to prevent dermati-
graft, or open wound. Pipe insulation (see Chapter
tis. Similarly, skin folds and flexion creases should be
7, Plate 29; Armacell Self-Seal Pipe Insulation,
assessed for moisture accumulation and dermatitis.
Armacell Engineered Foams, Mebane, NC) can be
Talcum or medicated powders may be useful in man-
purchased at most hardware stores and home
aging these skin fold areas until sling removal. In
supply businesses. This versatile material can be
general, the author rarely uses slings.
 applied around the perimeter of the collar. Duct
tape can be used to enhance its adherence to the
Eizabethan collar border. The soft layer prevents
Miscellaneous Commercial
rubbing and is sufficiently light that it does not
Protective Devices
weigh down the collar excessively. Alternatively,
duct tape can be folded lengthwise around the
A variety of protective devices are available for use in
perimeter of the collar, creating a softer, flexible
dogs, including elbow pads, protective boots, and
edge to reduce abrasiveness (Fig. 5-24).
com; Handicappedpets.com). Wound care dressing
holders (Tapeless Wound Care Products; www.tape-
Cervical Collars
lesswoundcare.com) are also available to help main-
tain the position of dressings/bandages. Many of these
Cervical collars (Bitenot Collar, Butler Animal Health
products can be examined at major veterinary confer-
Supply) provide another option to reduce or prevent
ences to determine their potential usefulness for a
patients from licking or chewing at a bandage, wound,
given veterinary practice.
or surgical area. The efficacy of cervical collars has had
mixed reviews from veterinarians. They normally are
considered for those patients in which the Elizabethan
Suggested Readings
collar is ineffective.
Anderson DM, White RAS. 2000. Ischemic bandage injuries:
a case series and review of the literature. Vet Surg
Slings
29:488-498.
Bohling MW. 2007. Open wound care. NAVC Clinician's Brief
 Jan:19-21.
 Slings have limited use for most wound closures. They
Campbell BG. 2006. Dressings, bandages, and splints for
m q e jo oo psa c paa aq 
wound management in dogs and cats. Vet Clin No Armt
movement could promote wound dehiscence. Exam-
36:759-791.
ples include axillary, inguinal, and flank wounds
MJ, ed. Current Techriques in Small Animat Surgery, 4th ed.
closed under tension. The sling should not be applied
1298-1299. Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins.
in a position that could interfere with regional circula-
DeCamp CE. 2002. Extermal coaptation. In: Slatter DS, ed.
tion (extreme flexion) or healing of the affected limb.
Textbok of Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. 1835-1848. Phila-
The Velpeau sling can be used for the forelimb. The
delphia: WB Saunders.
Ducharme-Desjarlais M, Celeste CJ, Lepault E, et al. 2005.
hind limb sling can be fashioned with a loop of elastic
Effect of a silicone containing dressing on exuberant gran-
adhesive tape from the lower foot over the lumbar area
ulation tissue formation and wound repair in horses. Arm [
to prevent weight-bearing (usually for flank wounds
Vet Res 66:1133-1139.
closed under tension). For a male dog, the rear limb
Eaglstein WH, Falanga V. 1997. Chronic wounds. Surg Clir
must be positioned so that the patient does not urinate
No Am 77:689-700.
 Fahie MA, Shettko D. 2007. Evidence-based wound manage-
on his foot or the sling. (A variation of this simple sling
is the Robinson Sling; see Robinson and McCoy 1975).
granulation and
epithelialization. Vet Clin No Am
If the sling is intended simply to limit a wide range of
37:559-577.
109
Gomez JH, Hanson RR. 2005. Use of dressings and bandages
Ramsey DT, Pope ER, Wagner-Mann C, et al. 1995. Effects
in equine {
wound
I management.
VetClinNoAm
 of three occlusive dressing materials on healing of full-
21(1):91-104.
thickness skin wounds in dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:
Gomez JH, Schumacher J, Lauten SD, et al. 2004. Effects of 3
941-949.
biologic dressings on healing of cutaneous wounds on the
Robinson GW, McCoy L. 1975. A pelvic limb sling for dogs.
limbs of horses. Car I Vet Res 68:49-55.
In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techniques in Small Animal
Hodge S, Degner D. 2006. A novel bandaging method. NAVC
Surgery, 567-569. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
Clinicians Brief Oct.:7-9.
Simpson AM, Beale BS, Radlinsky MA. 2001. Bandaging in
Knecht CD. 1981. Fundamental Techniques in Veterinary
 Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Vet 23(1):12-16.
 Krahwinkel DJ, Boothe HW. 2006 Topical and systemic medi-
 Simpson AM, Radlinsky MA, Beale BS. 2001. Bandaging in
cations for wounds. Vet Clin No Am 36:739-757.
dogs and cats: extermal coaptation. Comperud Contin Ed Pract
Lee AH, Swaim SF, McGuire JA, et al. 1987. Effects of non-
Vet 23(2):157-163.
adherent dressing materials on the healing of open wounds
 Swaim SF. 1990. Bandage and topical agents. Vet Clin No Am
in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 190:416-422.
20:47-65.
Lee AH, Swaim SF, Yang ST, et al. 1986. The effects of petro-
Swaim SF, Gillette RL. 1998. An update on wound medica-
 latum, polyethylene glycol, nitrofurazone, and a hydroac-
tions and dressings. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet
tive dressing on open wound healing. I Am Anim Hosp
20:1133-1144.
Assoc 22:443-451.
 Swaim SF, Henderson R. 1990. Small Animat Wound Manage-
Lee AH, Swaim SF, Newton JC, et al. 1987. Wound healing
ment, 9-11, 33-40. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
 over denuded bone. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:75-84.
Vermeulen H, Ubbink D, Goossens A, et al. 2006. Dressings
Lee WR, Tobias KM, Bemis DA, et al. In vitro efficacy of a
and topical agents for surgical wounds healing by second-
polyhexamethylene biguanide impregnated gauze dress-
 ing against bacteria found in veterinary patients. Vet Surg
Available
at:
http:/ /www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/
33(4):404-411.
ab003554.html.
Morgan PW, Binnington AG, Miller CW, et al. 1994. The
Winkler JT, Swaim SF, Sartin EA, et al. 2002. The effect of a
effect of occlusive and semi-occlusive dressings on the
 porcine-derived
1  small  intestinal
submucosa product
healing of acute full-thickness skin wounds on the fore-
on wounds with exposed bone in dogs. Vet Surg 31:
imbs of dogs. Vet Surg 23:494-502.
541-551.
Pavletic MM. 1993. Surgery of the skin and management of
www.dermnetnz.org—Synthetic Wound Dressings
wounds. In Sherding RG, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinica!
Maragemernt, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone.
110
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 2
Basic Bandage Application
for Extremities
DE SC RIP TIO N
Basic bandage application can be uncomplicated if a few general rules are followed.
TECHNIQUE
(A) In this example tape stirrups have been applied prior to the application of standard cast padding
 panedan si ssoid si l au dn paends s reane ai se oos Aq uonaai yoea de
every subsequent layer applied. Note that the skin depression around the accessory carpal pad was
padded (arrow) prior to application of the roll cotton, preventing a"pressure cone"effect on the
accessory carpal bone.
(B) Note that the axillary skin fold can be pressed or flattened with the index finger, thereby allowing the
     e    
(C) In the hind limb, the flank fold is pushed upward, facilitating the more proximal extension of the
piou pue paneredas aq uen sdus dns aden a anon uoar yan iaddn aun ou aepuea
proximally prior to application of roll gauze, giving added security to keep the bandage from slipping off
the foot.
(D) When possible, exposure of the central two toes allows the veterinarian and owner to assess the lower
extremity for soft tissue swelling. In the average dog, the index figure can be inserted between the
central toes. Excessive swelling would preclude this maneuver. The exposed digits also can be examined
more closely for swelling. If swelling is present, immediate bandage removal and inspection of the limb
is indicated.
C O MMENT S
When building a bandage, cotton cast padding is commonly used as the bulk of the secondary bandage
Jo sael e Aa pamog si sui anei yea jo ssaun pue yuas an suan os Aq luddeaao rei
 self-adherent or elastic gauze; this roll gauze is used to compress the cast padding as each subsequent
cotton/gauze layer is applied. Bandage thickness is dependent on the purpose of the bandage. As
Aaissaaoid um padde aq ues aznee 'saseau ssauun sepueq aue pue pappe are siarei suanbasans 
 greater tension. An outer tertiary wrap (Vetrap, Elasticon, etc.) completes the bandage.
 For greater security, distal extremity bandages are more secure if the bandage is extended proximal to the
carpal or tarsal joints. Small, tight bandages are best avoided for lower extremity wounds.
111
Plate2
112
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 3
Tape Stirrups and Padding Dos
and Don'ts
DESCRIPTION
ade pssnosp ae suaud uoa go uooand pue sdns aden on uuad sd Aaes uo
stirrups help prevent bandages from slipping off the limb and secure bandages to coaptation splints. Stirrups
uaum qu e puadsns Aeoduan oi pasn aq Aeu pue Auaxa an on uooe auaa Adde oi pasn aq u
changing dressings/bandages.
BANDAGING TECHNIQUES
(A, A2) Tape stirrups can be placed on the paw in two fashions: (1) over the anterior and posterior surfaces
of the paw and (2) over the lateral and medial aspects of the paw. The strips cover the metacarpal
 and metatarsal surfaces. (Warning: Do not apply a caudal tape stirrup over the accessory carpal
amo a on lesp isn padde si adet au ped au jo sisonoau ainssid u nsai uen uooen ped
border of the accessory pad.) Their placement may be determined in part by the condition of the
application: these conjoined strips can be secured to the secondary layer of the bandage with tape.
Altermatively, each stirrup strip of tape may be separately reflected back and incorporated into the
compressing into the adjacent toe, causing pain, skin inflammation, local ischemia, and infection
that can lead to tissue necrosis. Traction on stirrups placed over the cranial-caudal surface of the
paw does not cause this problem.
(B)
ann e huenn 'us un Aaun 'uon sapun papnoae aq sn adn no spueq uu '1
effect. If left undetected, ischemia and necrosis of the paw can occur.
 2. A safer altermative is an open spiral strip that can help secure the stirrup without the risk of
creating a tourniquet.
(C, D)   A key point in protecting bony prominences is to pad the depressions around their base. Placement
of padding over the surface of a bony prominence actually can enhance the pressure cone effect on
the overlying skin, especially if a cast or rigid splint material is applied over these structures.
surface, rather than over the bony prominence exclusively. Examples include padding around the
point of the elbow, fibular tarsal bone, accessory carpal pad, and first digit. Padding between the
toe pads, and metacarpal/metatarsal crease (arrows) can reduce moisture accumulation and
COM M E NT S
Tape stirrups are not necessary or practical for every bandage application but can provide added security to
o pdde Aadndu wog ase suoennduon jo iaqunu lusdins y udds uog sepuq e suad
supervised bandages. Wet bandages secondary to extemal contamination or progressive moisture
accumulation within the bandage can have an adverse effect on the skin. The problems noted in this section,
namely skin infections, skin necrosis over bony prominences, necrosis of the accessory carpal pad, necrosis
of the paw, and skin necrosis involving the digits have been seen by the author. These problems could have
adoe amo au Aq anuel pue auuauu sadoid pue uedde alepuea inaeo Aa papioae uaa
bandage care should be discussed with the owner; basic handouts on proper bandage and splint care are a
useful reference for veterinary clientele.
113
Plate3
B.
B
114
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 4
Elasticon Bandage Platforms
and Saddles
DESCRIPTION
and tail, for example, are difficult to maintain as a result of slippage secondary to gravity and motion of the
patient. Adhesive Elasticon (Johnson & Johnson) can be used to create a platform for bandage application.
The bandage proper overlaps the Elasticon base: subsequent bandage changes are performed without
removing the Elasticon until healing is complete.
TECHNIQUE
(A) An Elasticon"saddle"is applied over the back of the dog or cat by running strips parallel or 
perpendicular to the long axis of the body. In most cases, this elastic adhesive tape is applied to a clean,
flat hair coat. The rough surface of Elasticon provides a friction surface to help maintain the bandage in
an encircling band of Elasticon to the cranial and caudal borders of the bandage and adjacent skin can
further reduce the tendency of the trunk bandage to slide caudally.)
 go uoedde ot aod punom qun e ot esp pue ieuad pdde ae sds usa omi (a) 
bandage.
(C) Note: Elasticon is sandwiched to itself when applied to the limbs and tail to reduce the risk of circulatory
compromise, rather than being wrapped around the limb in a circular fashion (cross-sectional view).
The bandage subsequently overlaps the Elasticon anchors, preventing bandage displacement. The
Elasticon is lef in place during subsequent bandage changes.
(D) As with the forelimb, this technique can be effectively applied to secure bandages to the tail.
COM M E NT S
forelimb, less bandage material is required when compared to applying a bandage encompassing its entire
direction of hair growth. Elasticon applied directly to the skin surface is best removed using commercially
available medical solvents (see text).
115
Plate4
116
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 5
Spica Bandages/Splints
DE SC RIP TION
au pue Auaa ue sadoaaua jeu se io 'suds aaepuq e aquosap ot pasn si (uee o iea 'uel) eids 
circumference of the trunk. It is especially useful for immobilizing the upper extremity and restricting motion
 of the entire limb. In cats the spica technique can effectively prevent the patient from removing bandages of
the extremities, a particularly important consideration when skin grafting the limbs.
TECHNIQUE
(A) The bandage is applied by adding alternate layers of cast padding and self-adherent gauze. The
thickness of that portion of the bandage overlying the limb is built up so that it better approximates the
lateral shoulder silhouette. Layers of the cast padding, roll gauze, and outer wrap are extended around
the trunk.
(B) On the forelimb, the spica encircles the trunk behind the opposing leg. On the hindlimb, the bandage
encircles the trunk cranial to the opposifte leg. Care must be taken to avoid compression of the penis
and provide access for normal urination. Elasticon (Johnson & Johnson), Vetrap (3M) or a combination
of materials can be used for the tertiary layer. Note: Care must be taken to assure the bandage is not
and bunch, causing abrasive injuries or cuts to the skin in these areas. Owners should be instructed to
watch these areas closely for signs of skin irritation.
Alternatively, a rigid aluminum bar can be bent and curved at the top of the arch to conform to the
scapular area and curvature of the back. Although rarely used today, 1/4-inch plywood can be used to
uen siossandap anuoi 'shop leus pue sieo u Apiau pappe aoy qul aue jo ananous mou e wog
be overlapped and taped to the outer bandage.
COMMENT S
Spica bandages are a must when grafting the forelimb or hind limb in the cat. This effectively prevents
immobilizing and protecting surgical areas susceptible to movement and trauma (for example, the elbow). In
require replacement within 2 weeks: bandage materials have a tendency to stretch and loosen from the
117
Plate5
118
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 6
Schroeder-Thomas Splint
DESCRIPTION
The Schroeder-Thomas splint is a modification of the Thomas splint used to stabilize fractures in humans.
Dr. Erwin F. Schroeder, a former staff member at Angell Memorial Animal Hospital, modified and adapted
this splint for fracture repair in small animals. In the 1958 edition of Canine Surgery (Lacroix IV, Reiser WH.
Fractures. In: Mayer K, Lacroix JV, Hoskins HP, eds. Pp. 636-642. Canine Surgery, 4th ed. Santa Barbara:
American Veterinary Publications.), the Schroeder-Thomas splint was called"one of the most widely used
and adaptable splints for small animals," permitting both traction and fixation of many types of fractures. A
variety of angles can be bent into the aluminum bars to facilitate fracture alignment, depending on the
nature and location of a fracture.
 Proper design and application of this splint is now a lost art due to the advent of superior intermnal and
immobilizing the forelimb and hind limb for problematic wound closures, especially those involving the
elbow, fibular tarsal bone, and knee. It also can be used to immobilize grafts applied to the radial and ulna
splint specifically crafted to conform more exactly to the shape of the patient's extremity. Construction of the
splint does require more time and patience compared to other bandage and splinting techniques used to
protect problematic wound closures in small animals.
SPLINT TECHNIQUE
(A)
aun punoie spueu ano luiou Aq passasse ane anuaranunuo ienue qu puu pue qunog au
upper extremity. This will serve as a general guideline regarding the size and shape of the aluminum
ring needed to conform to the upper extremity. (The Thomas ring molds-if they still make them-
are not necessary for proper ring formation.) The forelimb ring forms an oval, whereas the hind limb
ring is circular in shape.
(B)
The center of an aluminum bar of sufficient rigidity (Burns Veterinary Supply Inc., Guilderland
 Center, NY) is the starting point for bending the ring. As the ring is symmetrically bent, it is
Aaose pasne adeus sh pue (uaqunoai ierae u juaed) qu au oi pdde Aepoad
Allowance must be made for padding the ring, if so desired (see comments). Once the ring is of
sufficient size to comfortably slide over the upper extremity, the limbs of the bar are initially bent at
 approximately a 30-degree angle at the midpoint of the ring. The base of the ring will partially
contact the lower thorax and pelvis. The angle can be adjusted so that the limbs or the aluminum
bar will support the affected limb, parallel to the lateral silhouefte of the trunk.A rubber hammer
and vise can be used to slightly bend or cup the lower ring border to better conform to the lower
thorax and pelvis if necessary (arrow).
(C, D) The limbs of the aluminum bar are bent to conform to the elbow, knee, and tarsus as illustrated.
Otherwise, the bars remain parallel to each other. The end of each bar is bent at right angles and
overlaps wifth the opposing bar end as illustrated. If the aluminum limbs are too short, a common
ea deaao on juaa s seq unnie go juauas ous puonas e 'suaed paa-uoi u waoid
tape. Note: It is important that an index finger can be comfortably inserted between the inner ring
and thigh (G) to prevent fissue compression.
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
119
Plate 6
B
120
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 6
(Continued)
(E)
A long tape stirrup is applied to the cranial and caudal aspects of the paw. Warning: Do not extend
the tape over the accessory carpal pad, as this can lead to pressure necrosis.The tape stirrups are
compressed together and split down the middle lengthwise to the level of the central toes.
(F)
The stirrups are crisscrossed over the inner bar and tied together in a knot on the central area of the
bar. Note that the outer overlapped bar protects the stirrup from erosion when the dog bears weight
on the splint (or simply drags ift over the floor). The stirrup is important to the proper alignment and
security of the limb to the splint.
(G, H) Support bands are positioned to keep the limb cradled between the bars while providing exposure of
the wound closure site. Note: An Elasticon band (G) is applied to the caudal portion of the ring to
 prevent its tendency to rotate forward. Bandage changes can be performed without disturbing the
dorsal aspect of the forelimb ring and wrapped around the thorax to neutralize the tendency of the
splint to pivot forward over the shoulder.
C OM ME NT S
See Plate 7 regarding the proper application of the Schroeder-Thomas splint bands. The splint requires the
close attention of the clinician and owner to assure no swelling of the toes is noted and that the tape
stirrups and bands remain in place. In intact male dogs, it is important to make certain the scrotum and
testicles are not accidently trapped between the ring and inner thigh. Because the limb bends to the shape
of the bars, there is a tendency to overestimate the length of the splint. Unnecessarily long splints make ift
difficult for the dog to ambulate. Fortunately, the length can be adjusted by shortening the terminal portion
of the splint, as needed.
so jo iasel e jo uoendde ot nod penauu aue iaao aden reins bukidde Aq papped aq ueo su a
padding, gauze, and a tertiary wrap (Elasticon or Vetrap). Padding the ring may not necessarily improve
patient comfort: the padding can chafe the inner inguinal and axillary skin, whereas the smooth aluminum
surface does not rub or irritate the skin. Most patients do not fully bear weight on the Schroeder-Thomas
splint and have a tendency to push or drag it.
Dressings, Bandages, Extermal Support, and Protective Devices
121
Plate 6
122
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Schroeder-Thomas Splint: Security
Plate 7
Band Application
DESCRIPTION
Many veterinarians unfamiliar wifth the Schroeder-Thomas splint aftempt to secure the limb to the bars wifh
 gauze and tape, encircling the splint and leg together. The proper method of applying rings is discussed.
TECHNIQUE
shq unuunie aun saao palends no paumpus si aden am jo sael e uoendde pueq on soe ()
(arrows): this creates a friction surface to assure bands do not slip on the otherwise smooth surface of
the aluminum rod. The bands are applied only after securing the paw's tape stirrup to the bottom of the
splint (see Plate 6). In this example, the band is folded or looped around the front bar wifth the end
tucked securely medial to the limb. The band is comprised of stockinetfe (Tex-Care Stockinette, Tex-
Care Medical, Burlington, NC; 3M Stockinet, 3M Healthcare, St. Paul, MN). In general, 1 inch is used in
small dogs and cats; 2-3 inches in medium sized dogs; 3-4 inches in large breed dogs.
(B) The band completes one revolution around the limb and the front bar.
(C) Under slight tension or traction, the band is rotated around the lateral aspect of the back bar and
directed forward to the front bar.
(D) The band is continued around the lateral surface of the front bar and the limb.
(E) Under traction the band rotates around the back bar a few centimeters.
(F) A long strip of surgical tape is used to secure the band.
COMMENT S
Stockinette is the most effective product to create bands for the Schroeder-Thomas splint. Note that this
the bars of the splint. Splints normally will maintain themselves over a 2-week period before adjustment of
the stockinette bands is necessary. Weekly examinations of the splint coincide with assessment/management
au ao puds aue ro reaouai anbau pou op saueuo aepueq juanbasqns pauad aq uen eare jeins
security bands, greatly simplifying wound care.
Upon completion of the splint and bandage application, a strip of wide stockinette can be stretched over
secured to the top of the ring with a few loops of umbilical tape. The bottom of the stockinette can be
yoos anauyoois aut pue panouai aq ueo aden aul :aeld oju paden pue suds aut jo pua aut iaao papio
rolled up to expose the bandage as needed
123
Plate7
124
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Body Brace
Plate 8
DE SC RIP TION
The body brace is a simple aluminum bar device designed to prevent the dog from twisting its body to reach
a caudal body region. They are most commonly used to prevent a patient from disturbing a surgical area or
surgical drain involving the hind limbs and perineum when other protective devices have failed.
TECHNIQUE
(A) An aluminum bar (Burns Veterinary Supply Inc., Guilderland Center, NY) of appropriate rigidity is
selected. The diameter of the bar circle must accommodate the passage of the patient's head and neck.
As the estimated circle is progressively bent (beginning at the center of the length of the bar), it is
periodically passed over the patient's head and neck to ensure it comfortably encircles the lower cervical
area. (Keep in mind the ring diameter will require adjustment in size if padding is applied.) The two
straight arms are bent backward, at the midpoint of the aluminum ring. The angle of the bar limbs,
irritating the neck. A second "back bar"is bent in a curve to rest over the mid- to lower lumbar area,
anterior to the hind limbs.
(B) The body brace is aligned in place prior to taping the two components together. Note the long arms of
the bar run along the mid- to upper third of the lateral thoracic and abdominal walls.
(C) Elasticon (Johnson & Johnson) is used to create an adhesive sling support: bands are secured to one bar
and run over the back to the opposite bar. This is alternated with bands placed over the lower thorax
and abdomen in a similar fashion.
COMMENT S
Although uncommonly required, the body brace is highly effective in preventing dogs from reaching their
hind limbs and perineal area. It is normally reserved for those clever dogs adept at removing Elizabethan
collars or bending the collar and contorting their body sufficienfly to reach the surgical area. The material
costs are relatively modest, but it does take about 30 minutes to properly shape and apply the body brace.
log anesuaduoo ot pue poguoo pappe iog papped Auo aq ueo ieq yoeq au jo don pue luu iepian au
 punoe papeds si aden peonans (aidxa sun u paiensnil sou si suppen) uisap sh ul snoa s
ring and back bar to create a nonslip surface prior to applying a layer of cast padding gauze, and outer wrap
(Vetrap, 3M).
125
Plate 8
Common Complications
in Wound Healing
Improper Nutritional Support 128
Medications and Their Influence on Healing  129
Hypovolemia and Anemia 130
The Nonhealing Wound: General Considerations 130
Failure to Heal by Second Intention  132
Scarring and Wound Contracture 138
Infection
138
Draining Tracts
6145
Use of Tourniquets for Lower Extremity Procedures 149
Seromas
150
Hematomas 151
Exposed Bone  151
Wound Dehiscence
153
127
128
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
IMPROPERNUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
e ui leay suad Aieaaa mo jo Aof a
I normal and predictable fashion. As a result of
improved health care and nutrition, pets are generally
healthier today than at anytime in the past. Despite this,
a percentage of pets fall outside this category due to
neglect and/or ignorance on the part of the owners.
Disease, trauma, and prolonged stress increase the
nutritional needs of veterinary patients. A malnour-
ished patient, under these adverse circumstances, is at
significant risk for delayed healing with an increased
risk of infection.
HG. 6-1 Siamese cat approximately 1 year of age. The patient
weighed less than 1kg. A chronic rhinitis was present as a
The following are common examples of patients
result of a congenital cleft palate. The poor nutritional status of
that may present malnourished to referral centers:
the patient resulted in serious stunting of growth as noted in
Neglected stray animals
the facial features of this adult cat. Any elective surgical
Animal cruelty/starvation cases
 procedure should be preceded by a balanced nutritional
Chronic gastrointestinal anomalies/disorders
program to correct the long-standing effects of protein
depletion and imbalance.
Oral anomalies (major palatal defects, etc.)
Advanced neoplasia
animal. Prompt enteral or parenteral feeding is par-
ticularly important to the seriously ill or injured surgi-
The first year of life is particularly critical to the
cal patient in order to minimize delays in wound
 growth and normal development of the dog and cat.
healing and reduce the risk of complications during
Nutritional  impairment from  congenital  defects,
hospitalization. Whether the patient is healthy or mal-
disease, or neglect not only restricts growth and devel-
nourished, severe stress, illness, and trauma increase
opment of the patient but also can have serious adverse
the metabolic demands on the patient and the need for
effects on wound healing. In animals suffering from
supplemental nutritional support. Urgent or emer-
protein depletion, particularly actively growing
gency surgical procedures require thoughtful use of
animals, impairment of collagen production may delay
surgical materials that will support tissue apposition
healing. This has been reported to occur if serum
for prolonged periods of time as a result of a delay in
protein concentration falls below 2g/100ml. While
healing. For example, a bowel anastomosis, hernia
feeding DL-methionine or cysteine alone can prevent
repair, or routine closure of a laparotomy incision
a delay in healing in protein-deficient animals, a bal-
would necessarily require the selection of nonabsorb-
 anced nutritious diet is indicated. A plasma protein
able (or very slowly absorbed) suture material that
level of 6.0g/dl slows healing (normal is 7.0-7.5g/dl):
would retain tensile strength well beyond the normal
 plasma protein levels below 5.5g/dl increases the risk
range of healing in a healthy patient.
of wound disruption by 70%.
Sufficient calories must be provided to help spare
 The following should be considered for prolonged
body protein from being metabolized to supply amino
nutritional support for those patients that will not
acids for gluconeogenesis. Glucose is the primary
or cannot ingest food to maintain their normal
source of energy for fibroblasts and leukocytes and its
 nutritional intake. Selection is based on the specific
loss will impair cellular function. Although this break-
down of body protein does yield substrate for wound
needs of the patient.
repair, it places the patient in a harmful state of nega-
Esophagostomy tubes 
tive nitrogen balance. In malnourished animals skin
Gastrostomy tubes
and muscle protein is preferentially metabolized. The
 Jejunostomy tubes
patient is in particular jeopardy of healing complica-
Pharyngostomy tubes
tions (Fig. 6-1). It is advisable to delay performing an
Total or partial parenteral nutrition
elective surgical procedure in an undernourished
 Common Complications in Wound Healing
129
Vitamins are essential to proper wound healing.
reduce vascular permeability; inhibit macrophage
Vitamin C, required for hydroxylation of proline and
migration, fibroplasia, and collagen deposition; and
lysine for collagen synthesis, is normally not required
 delay angiogenesis. Early suppression of the inflam-
as an exogenous source in the dog and cat. However,
matory phase of healing delays the subsequent onset
supplementation should not be overlooked in severely
of the proliferative and maturation phases of healing.
stressed, debilitated, or traumatized patients with a
These negative effects are less pronounced if cortico-
history of inadequate nutritional support.
steroids are administered in the latter phases of wound
Vitamin Bz and folate are required for normal
healing. As an immunosuppressant, they have the
 protein synthesis, vitamin Bg is necessary for amino
potential to promote wound infection. If a patient has
acid metabolism, and iron is required for hemoglobin
been on corticosteroids for an extended period of time
production and cellular respiration. Excessive vitamin
and requires surgery, nonabsorbable or slowly absorb-
A labilizes lysosomes, thereby enhancing inflamma-
able suture materials should be considered. Skin
tion. Vitamin A at high levels can counteract the effects
sutures or staples should not be removed in 8-10 days:
of corticosteroids, which stabilize lysosomes. Vitamin
rather, it may be advisable to leave the skin sutures in
E at high levels also stabilizes lysosomes: like corti-
place for at least 3 weeks as a cautionary measure. An
 sone, excessive vitamin E can inhibit wound healing.
intradermal suture pattem in conjunction with skin
Vitamin A can counteract the effects of vitamin
E
sutures or
staples also can reduce the risk of
which may or may not be beneficial to a given patient.
dehiscence.
Zinc has been reported to be necessary for normal
epithelial and fibroblastic proliferation. Absence of
trace amounts of zinc slows epithelialization, fibro-
blast multiplication, and impairs protein synthesis.
Case Example
However, oversupplementation of zinc stabilizes lyso-
At one time, prolonged use of corticosteroids was
 somal and cell membranes and can inhibit macrophage
common in conjunction with laminectomy proce-
 dures for patients with thoracolumbar disc disease.
function, thereby reducing phagocytosis. High zinc
levels may interfere with collagen cross-linkage. Since
There were a few occasions where patients had skin
small amounts are required for patient health, most
sutures removed 8-10 days postoperatively. As the
balanced diets contain sufficient zinc without the need
dogs walked to the owner's vehicle, the skin inci-
sion  spontaneously  separated.  Although 
for additional supplementation.
the
While the healthy patient normally obtains ade-
patients recovered after resuturing the incisions,
quate amounts of these vitamins and elements, the
this problem could have been avoided.
 Leaving sutures in the skin several days beyond
debilitated patient may not be in a position to meet the
 the last dose of corticosteroids is a practical option
increased demands of disease, chronic wounds, and
 to reduce the risk of wound dehiscence; reinforcing
previous nutritional inadequacies. In these patients,
supplemental water- and fat-soluble vitamins are as
the skin closure with an intradermal pattern pro-
essential for a favorable surgical outcome as the caloric
vides an added measure of safety.
 From the author's experience, leaving sutures in
and protein supplementation.
the skin for long periods of time has no adverse
effect on the skin, although suture scars may be
more pronounced. Epithelial cells will migrate
MEDICATIONS AND THEIR
down the suture tract, which may elicit an inflam-
INFLUENCE ON HEALING
matory reaction along with the retained suture. In
fur-bearing animals, this is normally a minor
consideration.
Some medications can interfere with appetite and gas-
trointestinal function of the patient, thereby reducing
the total amount of food ingested and possibly
absorbed. Drugs used in veterinary medicine that may
Chemotherapeutic agents in cancer therapy can
have this effect include adrenal corticosteroids, chlo-
interfere with B, B2, folic acid, ascorbic acid, zinc, and
ramphenicol, sulfonamides, diuretics, salicylates, tet-
iron metabolism to variable degrees. Prolonged use of
racyclines, and trimethoprim.
these drugs warrants close assessment of the patient's
Moderate levels of exogenous corticosteroids can
nutritional status and, possibly, nutrient supplementa-
have an adverse affect on the early stages of healing.
tion. Although chemotherapy has the potential to
 especially administered prior to surgery and over a
interfere with wound healing, there are no exact
prolonged period of time. A single dose of corticoster-
wound-healing guidelines pertaining to its use. Again,
oids will not impair healing. Corticosteroids can
if a healing delay is of potential concern, use of non- or
130
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
A
B
FIG. 6-2 (A) Patient being treated for carcinoma; the biopsy site became infected after initiation of chemotherapy. The patient became
profoundly septic. (B) Massive tissue necrosis, secondary to a fulminating infection, necessitated wide excision of necrotic tissue.
(C) Initial use of a medicated tie-over dressing secured with skin stretchers (see Chapter 9). The patient died within 24 hours from
overwhelming sepsis.
slowly absorbable sutures may be advisable. Like cor-
output, and the nutrient supply are adequate. Impair-
ment of oxygen delivery has been reported when
 phamide, methotrexate, and doxorubicin) may exert
the hematocrit is below 15%. However, considering
their greatest negative effect in the early phase of
blood loss and the dilutional effects associated with
wound healing. Perhaps the greatest concern with
intravenous fluid therapy, whole blood transfusion
drugs that cause immunosuppression is the risk of
cannot be ruled out based on the initial hematocrit
infection (Fig. 6-2).
alone.
Extravasation of chemotherapeutic agents may
result in tissue necrosis and wounds that are slow to
heal. Doxorubicin, vincristine, and vinblastine are
THE NONHEALING
three commonly used drugs known to cause tissue
WOUND: GENERAL
CONSIDERATIONS
surgical closure of the defect (see Perivascular Injec-
tion of Irritating Drugs, below).
The term chronic wound is used to describe wounds
that fail to heal in a timely fashion. A variety of factors
have the potential to impede key steps in the three
HYPOVOLEMIA AND
phases of wound healing. Successful management
ANEMIA
requires their identification and elimination.
 In otherwise healthy patients, the surgeon has the
 Dehydration can lead to tissue breakdown, poor appe-
ability to minimize or eliminate many of the complica-
tite, constipation, and renal impairment. Hypovolemia
tions noted in wound healing by adhering to the basic
can be particularly devastating to healing by reducing
surgical principles outline by Halsted and Esmarch
circulation to the wound. Without an adequate blood
(see Chapter 3). Healthy tissue is surprisingly resistant
supply to provide oxygen and nutrients, healing can
to infection. As previously discussed, the presence of
come to a complete standstill. Surprisingly, anemia
necrotic tissue can have a devastating effect on the
must be relatively severe before it has a significant
wound environment. Dead tissue promotes bacterial
effect on healing as long as blood volume, cardiac
infection and delays healing. Surgical closure carnot
Common Complications in Wound Healing
131
be performed without completely excising areas of
requires less physiologic effort compared to healing by
necrotic tissue. Injuries heal more slowly and are more
second intention.
susceptible to infection in the presence of ischemia:
minimizing surgical trauma is essential to the promo-
 Neoplasia can be mistaken for a chronic nonhealing
tion of optimal healing.
wound, abscess, or ulcer. Chroric nonhealing
A necessary component to wound management is
wounds also can result in the development of
proper assessment of the injury and the patient's
malignant tumors (e.g., squamous cell carcinoma
history to determine whether surgical closure of a
[Marjolin ulcer] in chroric burn wounds.} If there
wound is the best option. Surgery can bypass the dif-
is any doubt, submit tissue samples for histopatho-
ficulties associated with prolonged management of an
logic examination (Fig. 6-3).
 open wound. In a debilitated patient, primary closure
HG. 6-3 Example of neoplasms mistaken for infection. (A) An acute nail bed infection was later diagnosed as squamous cell
carcinoma, with significant bone lysis noted on radiographs.
   ss s    a  a  se p  e  e   )
regional lymph node. The small ulceration on the nose was the primary site of the neoplasm. Squamous epithelium can elicit a
foreign body reaction, resulting in abscessation. A secondary bacterial infection, based on culture, masked the underlying cause until
biopsies confirmed neoplasia.
large, irregular kidneys secondary to renal lymphoma. This case underscores the importance of a complete physical examination.
132
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FAILURE TO HEAL BY
Chronic (collagen laden) granulation tissue is char-
SECOND INTENTION
acterized by a dull, pale pink to gray wound bed
as a result of a decline in the capillary population.
There are a variety of reasons for failure to heal by
The wound is fibrotic and is an unsuitable wound
second intention. Granulation tissue and the processes
bed for supporting epithelial cell migration. The
of wound contraction and epithelialization will be dis-
collagen dense bed lacks the environment neces-
cussed separately.
sary for wound contraction.
If the underlying tissues are healthy, chronic
granulation tissue can be excised tangentially: a
Problems in Granulation
healthy granulation bed quickly reforms 4-5 days
Tissue Formation
after chronic wound excision (Fig. 6-4).
A healthy granulation bed is comprised of a well-
A healthy granulation bed serves as a vascular scaf-
developed capillary network; fibroblasts, macro-
 fold for epithelial cell survival and migration toward
phages, and neutrophils; and an extracellular matrix.
the center of the defect. Independently, myofibroblasts
Granulation tissue develops only from viable vascular-
within the granulation bed promote wound contrac-
ized regional tissues. Once formed, the granulation
tion. Delay in formation of granulation tissue usually
bed affords significant protection from microorgan-
is due to a lack of vascularity in the wound bed. Deb-
isms that survive on the surface transudate. Its forma-
ridement of necrotic tissue, control of local infection,
pue saiddnd Aueaq ul pidei Aiousidms si uon
 preservation of regional tissue viability, and mainte-
kittens. In adult animals, early granulation tissue for-
nance of normal cardiovascular output are practical
mation may be noted as early as 4-5 days in an uncom-
 measures to promote a granulation bed.
plicated open wound. (Chapter 2 details wound
On occasion, local tissue injury and circulatory
healing in the dog and cat.) Granulation tissue serves
compromise may result in a wound area incapable of
'pumom au um sdeo u Suy ,nd Apoq, e se
forming and supporting healthy granulation tissue. A
Collagen deposition increases tensile strength within
chronic irradiated wound bed is one such example (see
the area as healing progresses.
Chapter 7). Under these circumstances, local muscle
In time, capillary channels and fibroplasia subside
flaps, omental transplantation, or skin flaps (local or
as collagen content increases in the older wound. In a
axial pattern flaps) may be required since they have an
long-standing open wound, a chronic granulation bed
forms, which is poorly suited to healing without
transfer. Muscle flaps and omental flaps are capable of
 appropriate surgical intervention (Fig. 6-4).
"bringing" new circulation to the area; in turn, the
HG. 6-4 (A) Dense fibrotic bed involving
the antecubital surface of a dog. The pale
collagen-laden bed was tangentially
excised down to the viable underlying
tissues to stimulate formation of a new
granulation bed. (B) A healthy vascular 
granulation bed reformed within 5 days,
suitable for closure.
 Common Complications in Wound Healing
133
surface of the muscle or omentum can support the
best therapeutic measure. Doxirubicin, however, is an
survival of a skin graft. However, distant direct flaps
exception.
and free grafts placed on an ischemic wound cannot
The chemotherapeutic agent doxirubicin is capable
survive long term, since their revascularization is
of causing massive tissue sloughing; dying cells can
dependent on the recipient bed.
release the drug. helping to perpetuate the cycle of
tissue destruction. (Note: At the time of perivascular
injection of doxirubicin, the area should be aseptically
prepared for surgery. A skin incision is used to expose
Perivascular Injection of
the area, allowing for the surgical debridement of the
Irritating Drugs
involved tissues, including the infused vein. Skin deb-
ridement is kept to a minimum, and open wound man-
 Some intravenous drugs are capable of causing exten-
 agement is initiated for several days before closure is
sive tissue trauma and necrosis if accidentally injected
attempted.)
 into the perivascular tissues (read the drug insert) (Fig.
The brown recluse spider bite is another example of
 6-5). The extent of tissue injury is, in part, dependent
a toxin capable of destroying tissue and impairing the
 on the pH, volume, and concentration of the drug.
 normal healing process. Debridement of the damaged
Diluting the offending agent by instilling sterile saline
and necrotic tissue may be advisable to prepare the
or lactated Ringer's solution into the area is the single
way for the healing (see Chapter 7).
HG. 6-5 (A) Extravasation of adriamycin, resulting in a nonhealing slough. (B) Excision of necrotic tissue was performed, down to
(u nuaouo te) snns sse eaa yim paad sem anso () sanss a
134
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Failure in Wound Contraction
Wounds that close primarily by wound contraction
are far more cosmetically pleasing than defects that
As discussed in Chapter 2, myofibroblasts are respon-
heal by epithelial cell migration. Epithelialized
sible for wound contraction. The contractile properties
scars are thin, hairless, and relatively sensitive to
of these cells "pull" the skin toward the center of the
external trauma. Wound contraction literally pulls
 defect in a centripetal fashion. Experimentally, square
 healthy, fur-bearing skin centripetally, covering the
wounds contract more readily than round wounds
defect. As a result, the cosmetic outcome may be
since the linear borders of skin do not impair skin
remarkably good.
advancement. By 42 days, wound contraction is nearly
complete. Thereafter, the body must rely on epitheli-
alization to close the remaining defect. Wounds on
animals less than 1 year of age (especially within the
first 6 months of life) demonstrate a remarkably rapid
ability to contract.
Failure in Epithelialization
 Keep in mind that wound contraction has a time
Wound epithelialization is independent of wound
limitation. As a general rule, the maximal amount
contraction. As noted in Chapter 2, cells from the ger-
of contraction is within 6 weeks of injury. Any
minal epithelial layer migrate down the dermal edge
remaining defect likely will need to heal by epithe
omnto the granulation surface as they extend toward the
lial cell migration after this time. Surgical interven-
center of a full-thickness skin defect. Partial-thickness
tion may be advisable if epithelialization is unlikely
wounds that have viable hair follicles (external root
to complete this final task.
sheaths) are capable of re-epithelializing the exposed
dermis. In some situations, deeper hair follicles located
in the hypodermis may survive after complete loss of
the overlying skin. Small islands of epithelium may be
uado ump sdojaaap paq uogennueio e se paiou
The two most common factors that halt wound con-
wound management (see Fig. 2-2)
traction are (1) significant peripheral skin tension
Epithelial cells require direct contact with a viable
(countertension from a lack of loose/elastic skin),
vascular tissue bed for survival. Epithelialization
which neutralizes  myofibroblastic contraction  and
occurs optimally in a protective moist environment.
(2) restrictive fibrosis (within the granulation bed
 Necrotic tissue and dense fibrotic scar tissue are inca-
and adjacent skin border), which mechanically
impairs skin advancement. A thickened eschar can
without debridement and promotion of a vascularized
 pe sur pmm a ,huds, Anoa
wound bed. One of the more common factors impair-
contraction. Similarly, rigid adherent hydrocolloid
ing epithelialization  in  small  animal  practice  is
-pueq pandde Aiadoidun 'eumen anejmns paadan
the centripetal advancement of the cutaneous
ages may abrade the wound surface, preventing
margins.
normal healing by second intention.
 Unless surgical intervention (e.g., flaps, grafts, scar
The epithelial layer overlying scar tissue is only a
 Excision, release incisions, cutaneous undermining) is
few cell layers thick: this thin layer of coverage is much
performed, the burden of wound coverage is depend-
more susceptible to external trauma compared to
ent upon epithelial cell migration alone. Complete epi-
normal skin. As a result, epithelialized scars overlying
thelialization is not likely to occur in many of the
bony prominences and body regions subject to
larger defects encountered in small animals.
repeated "use and abuse" are susceptible to abrasion
It also must be kept in mind that excessive contrac-
and ulceration. Similarly, improperly applied band-
 tion and scarring may cause sufficient tissue distortion
ages and dressings can abrade migrating epithelial
(e.g., contracture formation) to warrant surgical cor-
cells from the wound bed during normal body
rection in these situations (see Wound Contracture,
movements. External fixation or immobilization with
 below.) Periodic assessment of the patient during the
splints and bandages are occasionally necessary to
healing process is necessary so that corrective surgery
provide
local
wound
 protection for optimal
can be performed in a timely fashion.
epithelialization.
Common Complications in Wound Healing
135
HG. 6-6 (A) Geriatric German shepherd with
nonhealing skin wounds, secondary to vehicular
trauma. Contraction and epithelialization failed
to close these comparatively small wounds
Multiple topical ointments touted to promote
healing failed. Occlusive dressings failed.
(B) Closure was accomplished successfully by
 full-thickness mesh grafting and proper
bandage application.
Antecubital wounds are particularly challenging
beneath the skin margin. These indolent wounds are
most commonly seen in the cat.
and are quite susceptible to bandage trauma.
Normal wound contraction and epithelialization
Flexion of the forelimb places direct bandage pres-
cannot occur properly because the elevated skin has
sure over the wound. Rubbing and abrasion to the
not attached to the granulation surface overlying the
wound surface occurs during ambulation. Immobi-
'assedu ue saoan Amb Suea 'anenns Apoq
lization of the elbow is needed to prevent this
Myofibroblastic contraction is limited to the skin
problem from occurring.
margins, causing the cutaneous surface to curl inward
If second intention closure fails, a local skin flap
on itself. Similarly, epithelial cells migrate down the
often can be used to effectively close these small
inner  (granulation-covered)  dermal  surface.  The
but problematic skin wounds.
inguinal, axillary, and flank areas appear to be espe-
cially prone to pocket formation. Why the dermal
surface and underlying granulation bed fail to heal
Aq [eay ot punom uado ue ioy pojiad peugdo aul
together remains uncertain. Infection with enzymatic
second intention is finite; repeated interference or
fibrinolysis may destroy this component of the extra-
 insults in the wound-healing process will result in the
cellular matrix necessary for fibroblast migration and
formation of an indolent ulcer (Fig. 6-6). The use of
collagen deposition. Motion between the surfaces also
 exogenous growth factors, and more effective topical
may impair healing of the two granulation surfaces.
Ae uognpoid roioey ymona ,aeus, ie suae
Successful closure of indolent wounds is possible
provide a future role in the closure of many problem-
using a few basic surgical techniques, depending on
atic wounds (see Chapter 2, Chapter 4, and Chapter 5).
the size and location of the defect. Any infection must
Until then, there are a variety of effective surgical
be addressed with appropriate wound care and
options to close these challenging defects.
topical/systemic antibiotic therapy. Dead space after
closure is best controlled with a vacuum drain: evacu-
ation of residual air and fluid by the vacuum will draw
Indolent "Pocket" Wounds
the wound surfaces together. The fibrotic epithelial-
ized skin margins are excised. If sufficient skin is
On occasion, skin wounds fail to contract and epithe-
present, the skin margins can be sutured together to
lialize despite the presence of a healthy granulation
close the defect. If the underlying dermal collagen
 bed surrounded by pliable skin. The surrounding skin
surface is impairing skin elasticity, carefully placed
remains separated from the underlying muscle fascia
release incisions can be used to divide the restrictive
 despite the formation of granulation tissue on oppos-
dermal granulation surface. Incising the restrictive
ing surfaces. The wound forms a pocket or pouch
"dermal scar" surface requires a delicate touch, using
一
FIG. 6-7 (A) Example of a feline indolent pocket ulcer secondary to a bite wound sustained 6 months previously.
(B) The nonhealing wound involving the ventral thorax and abdomen.
(C) After topical antimicrobial management, 48 hours prior to surgery, the patient was anesthetized. Note the subcutaneous pocket
lined by a flat granulation bed.
(D) Release incisions were made in horizontal and vertical directions through the restricting membranous connective tissue layer,
with care taken to avoid division of direct cutaneous vessels in the overlying subcutis.
(E) The wound was primarily closed. However, because of excessive tension, a portion of the wound was left open, although skin
borders were sutured directly to the granulation bed.
complete the closure (See Fig. 5-11).
136
Common Complications in Wound Healing
137
B
C
HG. 6-8 (A) Chronic, nonhealing axillary ulcer in a cat.
(B) Close-up view of this chronic granulation bed.
(C) En bloc excision of the entire wound bed, down to healthy tissue.
tension, (2) use of a two-layer closure to maintain accurate apposition, (3) accurate skin apposition, and (4) cage confinement of the
cat to minimize activity for 1 month postoperatively. (Cats often prefer a small box they can crawl into for privacy, thereby reducing
are not necessary to close these challenging wounds.
a no. 15 scalpel blade: the granulation surface is lightly
anchored to the granulation bed to promote wound
incised until the overlying subcutaneous fat is seen.
closure (Fig. 6-7).
Care is taken to avoid a deeper incision that may com-
 Local skin flaps or axial pattern flaps are practical
 promise circulation to the skin. Successful division of
choices when primary closure cannot be achieved by
the scar surface will result in widening of the surgical
scar release and skin advancement (Fig. 6-8). Skin
 gap as the skin is retracted. A series of parallel and
grafts also are a consideration when skin flaps are not
perpendicular grid incisions can be used to improve
feasible. As discussed in Chapter 10, elastic skin
skin advancement to close the defect. Skin margins
stretchers can be used to prestretch skin in combina-
must be sutured directly to each other or firmly
tion with scar release to achieve closure.
138
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
In more difficult wounds, omentum (see Plate 128)
by physical therapy, can prevent wound contracture.
passed through a slit created in the abdominal wall
Scar excision, partial myotomies, flap or free graft cov-
can be used to manage problematic pocket wounds:
e anuo paimbai aq Aeu Aderau [esiskud pue 'asena
the omentum obliterates the cavity and is a supple-
contracture has developed (Fig. 6-9 and 6-10). Tempo-
mental source of circulation to the area. While
rary traction or splintage to the area occasionally is
omentalization of feline axillary wounds has been
used to combat recurrence umtil healing is complete
reported, the author has not found this technique
necessary.
therapy can be effective in modifying collagen deposi-
tion and cross-linkage to improve mobility of the
affected region. Early resumption of normal physical
SCARRING AND WOUND
activity in a staged fashion generally is the best form
CONTRACTURE
of physical therapy for veterinary patients.
Formation of scar tissue is a normal response to
INFECTION
 healing. While scarring is beneficial in some injuries,
its formation in other wounds is undesirable. Forma-
tion of granulation tissue and deposition of collagen is
Bacterial infection results in the release of toxins and
 desirable for many shearing injuries involving the
associated inflammatory infiltrates that can result in
cell death and vascular thrombosis. Resistance to infec-
carpal or tarsal joints. Collagen deposition improves
joint stability and creates a soft tissue surface promot-
tion and promotion of healing critically depends upon
ing closure of the defect. Large skin defects, particu-
maintaining adequate circulation to the wound. Deliv-
ery of antibiotics also depends on maintaining per-
larly those involving flexion surfaces (usually of the
fusion to the compromised tissues. Infection can be
extremities), may result in restrictive scar formation
during second intention healing. The term wound con-
considered as an imbalance between bacterial popula-
tracture implies a loss or restriction of motion and func-
tion and virulence versus host resistance. The mere
tion to an area (e.g., joint), usually as a result of
 presence of organisms is less important than the level
of bacterial growth. Bacterial growth greater than
excessive scarring. Muscle atrophy and fibrosis also
 may contribute to contracture formation. Infection can
100,000 organisms (10°) per gram of tissue is necessary
prolong the inflammatory response and further con-
to cause wound infection. Although surgeons carnot
tribute to scar tissue deposition.
alter systemic host defense factors in many trauma
cases presented, they can play a significant role in
adversely affecting local wound properties that can
Large skin wounds involving a flexion surface are
 promote infection and deter host defense mechanisms
most susceptible to contracture formation. From
in the wound.
the author's experience, this is most evident when
 dealing with large skin defects involving the pop-
liteal area.
Quantitative cultures, based on the gram weight
 Patients will naturally hold the involved area in
of tissue samples submitted, is an experimental
flexion, which decreases pain by reducing the
gold standard of confirming infection. Clinically,
surface area exposed to the environment and
this technique is rarely used or needed. Its use
reduces movement.
may be limited to particularly problematic wounds,
Unfortunately, collagen deposition "connects"
the identified 
presence of resistant/virulent
 the contact surfaces of the wound, resulting in con-
tracture formation. Surgical division of the scar fol-
patients.
lowed by closure of the skin defect usually prevents
useful in accelerating recovery.
Although a laceration and puncture wound may
have the same degree of tissue injury, the environment
 Prevention of wound contracture requires early rec-
of each wound is vastly different. Open wounds rarely
 ognition of the developing problem and the proper
are the source of invasive infection. A puncture
steps to combat it In veterinary medicine, early appro-
xodu pason e soy ap Suoel puom
 priate coverage of open wounds with skin flaps and
 pocket that provides an ideal environment for bacte-
related Z-plasty techniques or by free grafts, followed
rial proliferation unless steps are taken to prevent
Common Complications in Wound Healing
139
pue xeou [eae u a ot unq ped uneau eaa ue ot aepuoas iaaaa uapil e ui aneuos Susmog (v) eg 
abdomen. Healing was incomplete after 1 year
(B) The restrictive scar seriously impeded use of the involved limbs.
[epnes au Supnus 'sdey us o salas e ym paso sem poajap aaie[ au 'anss xes aut jo [eaowau leiaans Sumooa (a')
qu puu pue qua uu au ot uoou jo auen au jo uoesai aon 'de uaned eixe oseaida eyadns
Bacterial Cellulitis: Treat with
Antibiotics?
Whether or not to treat bacterial cellulitis with
infection (open, lavage, debride, establish drainage)
antibiotics is a common clinical question. In the
(Fig. 6-11). Chronic infections can be more problematic
presence of a foreign body, abscess formation 
Arojeuuegu pasuolond au jo 1nsan e se aseueu ol
will inevitably result following cessation of antibi-
response and fibrosis associated with this condition.
otic therapy. Early cellulitis without foreign bodies
may be more responsive to antibiotics than cases of
value to blunt the occurrence of infection if tissue
advanced cellulitis, in which edema, inflammation,
levels can be achieved within 4 hours of wounding.
 and fibrosis are noted during examination (palpa-
After this time, bacterial lodgement will occur: antibi-
tion, ultrasonography). In the latter case, infection
 otics at this point generally are ineffective in prevent-
is coalescing into an abscess: warm compresses
ing infection. Cases of cellulitis associated with early
alone (usually for 12-24 hours) may be considered
bacterial colonization may respond to antibiotics,
to facilitate abscess formation. Surgical drainage.
whereas a purulent discharge or abscess (loculation)
bacterial cultures, debridement, lavage, topical
requires the wound to be opened for inspection,
therapy, and systemic antibiotics can then effec-
lavage, debridement, and drainage.
tively resolve the definable abscess.
凸
FIG. 6-10 (A) Note contractures behind each knee of a cat,
Aq padeueu aam sainioeuoo suunq aaisuaixa on Aiepuosas
incising the scar, thereby "releasing" the restrictive tissue bands.
ut iaueay, aeu ot pasn sem apeia [adieos st ou v (a)
incisions through the restrictive granulation layer without
damaging the underlying musculature. Traction is applied to
straighten the leg as the scar bed is incised. A mesh graft was
Oh pasn sem suds eids y 'ahs uea ot padde Anssns
keep each limb extended and immobilized (see also Figs. 5-9
and 5-22).
(C) A second example of wound contracture in a gold retriever
puppy. The dog fell onto a sump pump motor, burning the left 
inner thigh on the exposed hot metal. A severe contracture
restricted motion of the left hind limb and contributed to severe
25 ±10:51 AM
C
angular limb deformities that necessitated its amputation.
FIG. 6-11 (A) Finishing nail driven deeply through the metacarpal pad (arrow). (B) A severe cellulitis culminated into an abscess
proximal to the metacarpal pad (arrow). The area proximal to the metacarpal and metatarsal pads is a common area for abscesses to
"point.
140
Common Complications in Wound Healing
141
B
HG. 6-12 (A) Abscess as a result of a bite wound from another cat. (B) After sterile surgical preparation, a scalpel blade was inserted
a auxa pue aondxa a o ieisu e jo uorasun aq pamo peneaa sem se ssasqe al jo eare suapuadap aun oun
cavity. A few millimeters of skin were excised (dotted line) to enlarge the drainage site.
Abscesses
Cervical-pharyngeal abscesses in the dog are most
Abscess formation is common in dogs and cats. Cat
commonly seen in the late summer/early fall in
 New England. They are usually attributed to dogs
abscesses are commonly the result of bite wounds
eating stiff, dry blades of grass, fragments of which
from other cats. The small puncture holes readily seal,
 perforate the pharyngeal mucosa and migrate into
and the closed wound pocket is an ideal incubator for
bacterial infection. Common examples of infectious
the cranial cervical region. This abscess is charac-
terized by a rapidly forming, firm edematous
microorganisms include Staphylococcus spp. (including
swelling. (Many patients have a history of chewing
MRSA—methacillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus-
'ds snoodans '(yqesau, se panunouod Auouruos
wood and grass.) A variation of this condition is
 the retrobulbar abscess. With retention of this plant
and Pseudomonas sp. Pasteurella spp is a common oral
material, infection commonly recurs with antibiotic
contaminant in small animals and frequently is respon-
 sible for bite wound infections. Uncommonly seen,
therapy alone. In these cases, the abscess should be
 other infections include norcardiosis, actinomycosis,
 opened, explored, debrided, lavaged and drained.
(In a low percentage of these cases, the grass frag-
and atypical mycobacterial infections.
 ment can be identified floating in the pus being
Areas of cellulitis eventually coalesce to form the
evacuated from the abscess cavity.) Owners are
abscess cavity. Abscesses are drained ventrally once
aen rn sassn wm ,paud, aa Aa
informed that recurrent abscess formation is likely
if any foreign debris remains (Fig. 6-13).
their coalescence. Many of the smaller abscesses in
small animals readily respond to this regimen fol-
lowed by gentle exploration, flushing, debridement,
Larger abscess cavities can be packed open for 2 or
and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic support for 7
 3 days with moistened medicated cotton gauze packs,
to 10 days (Fig. 6-12). Warm compresses, as discussed
changed two or three times daily over a 3- to 5-day
below, are useful to promote drainage, maintain clean-
period. Partial drying of the pack facilitates the absorp-
liness to the area, improve regional circulation, and
tion of the discharge and helps to strip out necrotic
promote healing.
tissue adhered to the cotton fibers (Fig. 6-13). Other
142
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 6-13 (A) Deep ventral cervical abscess from a migrating fragment of grass. In New England, cervical abscesses are most
eoad pue ueauad ieson ie suie sas ane sd sse p au y Aea pue ras ae a un uaas u
(B) The abscess cavity was explored, lavaged, and suctioned. Surgical debridement also was performed.
(C) The cranial and caudal wound borders were partially closed, and this was followed by the placement of suture loops around the
periphery of the wound (arrows).
(D) Tie-over dressing. A medicated wet dressing was inserted into the cavity and secured by lacing suture material through opposing
loops. Wet-to-dry dressings were used to mechanically debride the cavity for 48 hours. Thereafter, sutures were placed through
punom xped ot pasn sasuods azne8 jo 1aqunu auf sunoo ot 1uejuodui s! HI sapa punom a4euxoudde AIasool ot sdool Sussoddo
cavities in order to prevent their accidental retention into the healing wound
useful packing materials include alginate dressings
matory tissue fluids for several days, but only after
and absorptive foam pads after surgical exploration-
necrotic tissue and any foreign debris have been
debridement. Thereafter, periodic warm compresses
removed to help ensure their more effective use (See
(three times daily for 10-15 minutes) are followed by
Fig. 4-7).
the application of a topical antimicrobial agent to
Culture and sensitivity testing and Gram stains
protect the developing granulation bed from desicca-
usually are not warranted for the smaller abscesses
tion until second intention healing is complete. In
seen in small animal practice: deep abscesses, recur-
some deeper body abscesses, closed vacuum drains
rent infections, persistent or recurrent draining
ut pue snd aaouan oi paoidua Aaaaa aq ue
tracts, and potentially life-threatening infections do
Common Complications in Wound Healing
143
HG. 6-14 (A) Diffuse suppurative abscesses involving the skin and subcutis of a domestic short hair. (B) Close-up view revealed
multiple small abscesses coalescing and interconnecting through numerous tracts. Histopathologic analysis and aerobic and
anaerobic cultures were submitted revealing Nocardia asteroides. The patient was negative for feline infectious peritonitis,
toxoplasmosis, and feline leukemia virus.
Fungal infections can mimic bacterial infections,
and culture and biopsy samples should be taken when
this condition is suspected. Fungal infections have a
regional incidence pattern in the United States (Fig.
6-16). A detailed patient history should include the
pet's travel history.
Fungal Infections
Blastomycosis
 Coccidioidomycosis
Histoplasmosis
HG. 6-15 Multiple draining tracts entering the thoracic wall of
Mycetomas
a walker hound (hunting dog). Diagnosis was actinomycosis
Phaeohyphomycosis
 secondary to imbedded wood fragments.
Pythiosis
Sporotrichosis
warrant these additional diagnostic techniques. These
Zygomycosis
clinical observations should alert the practitioner that
the condition is not a "minor" local infection, but one
that warrants a detailed clinical work-up, examination,
As discussed, neoplasia with an ongoing infection
 and, if necessary, surgical exploration (Fig. 6-14 and
can be diagnosed with the submission of appropriate
6-15). Aerobic and possibly anaerobic cultures should
biopsy samples. Immunosuppression by various
be submitted for bacterial analysis under these circum-
stances. The most effective method of obtaining an
feline leukemia, feline infectious peritonitis) may
accurate culture from an infected pocket is by taking
explain an animal's susceptibility to infection and poor
a sample of the abscess wall for culture. Deep aspira-
healing, and these possibilities should be investigated.
tion of the cavity is preferable in order to obtain a
Autoimmune disorders and immune-mediated vascu-
representative culture. Cultures obtained from the
litis can present as a cellulitis with progressive necro-
purulent drainage are more likely to contain bacterial
sis. Appropriate diagnostic tests (antinuclear antibody
contaminants  rather  than  the primary  organism
[ANA], direct antiglobulin test, Coombs test) should
responsible for infection.
be performed (Fig. 6-17).
B
nweeu e jo wnueaq iuut pue exe ay Sualoaui ssen Suueap adnu ym sseu snopeuonuna aaieg (v) it-g '5
[exe [esopoesoun e ym ainso pue uosioxa apim 'daa sisosuosaud paleaai saldues Asdoq jo sisieue sioouedois
pattern flap was curative. (From Pavletic MM, Maclntire D. 1982. Phycomycosis of the axilla and inner brachium in a dog: surgical
excision and reconstruction with a thoracodorsal axial pattern flap. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1197.)
(B) Expanding, ulcerated mass overlying the lateral aspect of the left elbow. Histopathologic analysis revealed cutaneous
B
FIG. 6-17 (A, B) Two case examples of
immune-mediated vasculitis resulting in loss of
digits to the hind limbs. Both patients were
positive on the Coombs test and for the
presence of antinuclear antibodies. (See foot pad
salvage techniques in Chapter 18.) (C) Infarction
and mummification of the entire cartilaginous
external nose secondary to immune-mediated
vasculitis.
144
 Common Complications in Wound Healing
145
DRAINING TRACTS
 0l paimban si Aiaams 'sases isou un uonoajun ioe
locate and remove the retained material.
Persistent or intermittent sinus tracts have been seen
with the presence of necrotic tissue that carmot be
 expelled by the body; osteomyelitis and bone seques-
Although uncommon today, braided nonabsorba-
tra; bone fragments harboring bacteria; bacterial or
ble suture materials used in ovariohysterectomies
fungal organisms resistant to the current treatment
have the potential of initiating a draining tract.
Tracts involving the ovarian pedicle normally drain
regimen; and foreign bodies (grass fragments, wood,
 grass awns, porcupine quills [see Chapter 7], etc.).
through the sublumbar area; the uterine pedicle
These tracts also ocur in conjunction with tooth frag-
may form tracts exiting the caudal abdominal area.
Surgical correction requires removal of all suture
ments retained in the patient (especially between the
 material fragments.
se qons saipoq uaiaioy leoiams (eum pue snipn
implants or braided nonabsorbable suture material
(silk, Vetafl, cotton, polyester, etc.; Fig. 6-18A,B); and
neoplastic conditions (with or without the presence of
 Radiographs occasionally reveal radiopaque objects
microorganisms)  that mimic infection or foreigm
amenable to removal. Contrast studies (fistulogram or
bodies. A sinus tract is essentially a fibrotic tunnel
sinogram) occasionally are useful in highlighting
lined by granulation tissue, allowing accumulated dis-
foreign bodies, determining the magnitude of the
charge from around the offending object to exit via the
tract(s), and examining their relationship with regional
skin surface. Occasionally the inciting cause may
anatomy (Fig. 6-18C). Ultrasonography may be useful
extrude spontaneously with resolution of the sinus
in select cases. Although cannulation and injection of
282:40PM
A
HG. 6-18 (A, B) Draining tract and subcutaneous abscessation
secondary to the use of braided nonabsorbable suture material
from an ovariohysterectomy. Computed tomography facilitated
location of the granulomatous area in the abdomen.
Cannulation of the sinus tract and subcutaneous abscess
helped confirm this location as the likely source of infection.
The granuloma was excised, and the infected tract was
successfully managed postoperatively with a vacuum drain.
(C) Foley catheter insertion into fistula in the flank of a
retriever for injection of diatrizoate meglumine. The
fistulogram revealed a diffuse tract extending from the
inguinal area to the midlumbar vertebrae. The cause was a
migrating porcupine quill.
146
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
dyes such as sterilized methylene blue can stain the
Many surgical implants have the potential to
tracts, facilitating their removal, the author has not
considered this technique useful or necessary (Fig.
develop draining tracts, secondary to tissue irrita-
6-19). Deep wound biopsy cultures should be obtained
tion, foreign body reaction, and/or secondary
infection.
for aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms. Fungal cul-
tures also should be considered based on geographic
 The accidental retention of Pernrose drains or
 location and historic exposure.
fragments of the drain will initiate a foreign body
reaction and formation of a sinus tract. Radio-
graphs normally will highlight these radiopaque
Definitions to Remember
drains. Their removal is normally curative (Fig.
6-21).
Sinus: A canal or passage leading to an abscess.
Fistula: An abnormal tubelike passage from a
Dermal Sinuses
normal cavity or tube to a free surface or to
another cavity. They may be the result of a
congenital anomaly, trauma, infection, or
A pilonidal sinus (dermoid sinus) is a congenital defect
other inflammatory processes.
in which ectodermal cells fail to cleanly separate from
the neural tissue during embryogenesis. As a result, an
epithelial tube forms below the skin surface to variable
Foreign bodies can be elusive by migrating through
depths; in extreme cases it can extend to the dura
tissue planes or they can be hidden by layers of scar
mater. Because the sinus tract is lined by cutaneous
tissue and necrotic debris (Fig. 6-20). The most direct
epithelium, hair and epithelial debris will accumulate
approach is to canmulate the tract and dissect around
 in the tract and elicit a foreign body reaction. Bacteria
the tract while minimizing spillage of its contaminated
can secondarily infect the sinus tract, compounding
contents into the neighboring tissues. Dissection is
the problem. Although rare, for those cases in which
extended down to the base or origin of the sinus tract
the sinus attaches to the dura mater, a septic meningi-
 and the entire area excised. Upon completion of the
tis and the onset of neurologic signs may be noted.
surgical procedure, the excised tissue is open and
 Rhodesian ridgebacks most commonly present
examined, culture samples are taken, and the tissue
with this condition, and it is considered a simple
submitted for histopathologic examination.
recessive mode of inheritance (Fig. 6-22). However, the
 aqueu yal au ot lepneo poe Suuneap sruou ioe.n suuieap e huisne (eaeu sueld yo aiduexa ase (v) bi-g d
fistulogram demonstrated a linear object medial to the digastricus muscle. A metallic probe was inserted into the tract, serving as a
guide during surgical dissection. (B) The tract led to a small cavity containing several fragments of plant material. The owner later
reported the cat had a habit of chewing on a broom used for sweeping ashes from the fireplace. Surgeons must look closely for more
than one foreign body, as this case demonstrated.
21
3:19PM
.31PH
D
i xq e n e s a o p   () ss t  o dxa  o oa 
attempts to locate the source of the infection failed to locate the cause.
(B) Careful dissection of the draining tract uncovered a "teriyaki" bamboo stick of the sort the owner frequently used for barbecuing.
through the gastric wall, resulting in abscess formation.
(D) Insertion of a hypodermic needle to locate the depth of the abscess cavity after surgical preparation of the area. The needle is left
in place, serving as a guide for surgical incision. The white pointer denotes the outer abscess wall.
147
41PM
FIG. 6-20 Continued (E) The abscess pocket was suctioned; digital palpation located the teriyaki stick segment, and forceps were
uused to remove this foreign body.
(F) After flushing and suctioning the abscess cavity, the wound was closed, using a vacuum drain. The patient healed uneventfully.
Note: The author strongly advises owners to immediately dispose of teriyaki sticks by placing them in a secure refuse container. Dogs
love to chew on the sticks, which absorb the flavor of the meat and marinade. Teriyaki sticks can perforate the gastrointestinal tract
 or esophagus and migrate to a variety of body regions. Please see suggested readings: Hunt et al. 2004, Pennick and Mitchell 2003,
and Walmsley et al. 2009.
一
seoen aeado (a) uenp suuui enaas jo euoy moqa ue ym paeosse sien snns ad () ig 
uisioxg (moue) sseuu snoieuonuert au u paueiai uieap asonuad anbedopeu e patensuouap auoq suapun aun ssasse oi uaet
'aaeans sem (euosay moqia au aseueu ot idwae eonins snoaaid e uou) ureap pue euonuea aliel au jo
148
Common Complications in Wound Healing
149
 condition also has been reported in other dog breeds,
plete suture line in the nasal septum. In the young
including the boxer, chow chow, English bulldog, shih
adult golden retriever with NDSC, a sebaceous dis-
tzu, Siberian husky, and springer spaniel. (The author
charge may be noted caudal to the nasal planum. Sur-
has removed one pilonidal sinus from the dorsum of
 gical removal is indicated, with the assistance of a
the head of a black Labrador retriever, with the
probe or catheter to facilitate dissection of the entire
winding tract terminating at the level of the occipital
tract. Communication with the meninges has been
crest.) The mode of inheritance in these breeds is
reported in humans; although meningitis has been
unknown. In Rhodesian ridgebacks, the sinus opening
au u pajodan uaaq jou seu i 'sueumq ul pajodan
is usually found along the spinal column and normally
dog to date.
opens in the midst of a whorl of hair. Palpation of the
subcutaneous tissues between the thumb and index
finger often reveals a cordlike structure extending into
USE OF TOURNIQUETS FOR
the deeper tissues.
LOWER EXTREMITY
Radiographs can be taken to assess the underlying
 spinal column. Contrast studies have been suggested
PROCEDURES
to outline the extent of the tract, although filling of the
cavity with a contrast medium can be problematic due
A tourniquet is useful in creating a bloodless field for
to the accumulation of discharge and tissue debris. If
exploration of draining tracts for foreign bodies in the
neurologic signs are present, CT and MRI are advisa-
limbs of small animal patients. However, tourniquets
ble to assess the extent of the condition prior to surgery.
should be avoided in traumatized limbs or limbs with
Surgical excision is the best course of managing a
vascular injury or circulatory compromise. Pneumatic
 pilonidal sinus. The area should be liberally clipped to
tourniquets are the best available method of applying
compensate for the occasionally irregular course of the
umiform pressure to a wide area. Venous blood is
tract. A circular skin incision is made around the sinus
expelled prior to tourniquet application by elevating
-odxa Adus on pasn aq uen suisiu us rouuado
the affected limb for 5 minutes.
sure of the deeper aspects of the sinus tract. Most pilo-
 An Esmarch bandage or elastic wrap can be used as
nidal sinuses tend to taper as dissection progresses
into the deeper tissues (Fig. 6-22). Insertion of a feline
proximally without excessive tension (or tissue com-
urinary catheter or metallic probe can orient the
pression). An Esmarch bandage can be used alone or
surgeon during this process. Self-retaining retractors
in conjunction with a pneumatic cuff. Exsanguination
improve visualization of the deeper portions of the
should not be done in the presence of local suppura-
tract. If the sinus extends to the dura mater, a small
tion, deep venous thrombosis, or neoplasia. A thin
dorsal laminectomy may be needed to assure that com-
layer of cotton padding may be applied before wrap-
plete removal of the sinus is accomplished. A culture
ping the limbs for more uniform pressure distribution.
of the deeper portion of the sinus tract is advisable in
The elastic wrap is removed upon inflation of the
the face of infection; broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy
pneumatic cuff. The cuff is positioned at the point of
can be initiated pending the final culture results.
maximal limb circumference where the bulk of the
In general, it has been the author's experience that
muscle protects underlying nerves and vessels from
removal of most pilonidal sinuses is not difficult
compression over bone.
surgery, but complete removal of the entire tract is
 Tourniquets are not without risk. Muscle ischemia,
critical for a successful outcome.
nerve palsies, and tissue necrosis may result from
-jumot jo asesn paguoroid 1o uogeoidde 1adoidu
quets. When using a pneumatic cuff, pressure should
Nasal Dermoid Sinus Cyst
 be kept to the minimum required to provide a blood-
less field; pressures greater than 300 mm Hg should be
Nasal dermoid sinus cysts (NDSCs) are uncommon
avoided. While a properly applied tourniquet can be
 congenital lesions similar to the embryologic origin of
applied for up to 3 hours, the surgeon should mini-
the pilonidal sinus. NDSC is recogmized in golden
mize its usage. Some recommend releasing the tourni-
retrievers. During embryologic development, the
noe uonu jo mou aiaaa rg sanuu ni lanb
meninges in the frontal bones protrude through the
the benefits of this maneuver are questionable. Fortu-
foramen cecum. This canal normally closes, but per-
nately, most cases of tract exploration involving the
sists in NDSC cases. As a result, a sinus opening can
extremities can be performed within 30 to 45 minutes.
be found in the dorsal midline of the skull, caudal to
Vetrap (3M Corp.) can be autoclaved and used
the external nares. The sinus passes through an incom-
effectively as a short-term tourniquet to obtain a
150
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 6-22 (A) Pilonidal sinus in a Rhodesian
ridgeback. (B) Close-up view of the tract.
(C) The tract was cannulated with a tom-cat
catheter to outline the tract. A circular incision
was made around the sinus tract; skin incisions
can be used to improve exposure. The entire
pue paraden Aaaissaaoud ,sapuo, snuss
ended dorsal to the vertebral surface.
Epithelium, hair, and tissue debris are
commonly observed when the tract is dissected
open.
relatively bloodless surgical field. After wrapping the
and areas subject to constant movement also contrib-
limb, beginning at the toes and working proximally,
ute to seroma formation. Small seromas beneath the
scissors can be used to cut the Vetrap and expose the
skin are of no major consequence and resolve in time.
surgical area for exploration. Care must be taken to
Larger seromas on many occasions will require drain-
 avoid excessive elastic tension during application and
age (in Chapter 4, see the sections Passive Drains and
minimize the time of application, as discussed above
Active Drains). Postoperative seroma of an abdominal
incision may be difficult to distinguish from a hernia.
Careful aspiration can help confirm a seroma; removal
SEROMAS
of the fluid can facilitate palpation of the abdominal
incision for any hernia ring or herniated tissue in the
Seromas are pockets in which serum accumulates,
area.
usually as a result of trauma. Seroma formation is most
where considerable dissection has been performed,
Microscopic examination of fluid from a seroma
leaving a dead space or pocket where serum can accu-
normally shows a variable number of red blood
mulate. Capillary leakage and lymphatic injury sec-
cells and very few white blood cells. They are easily
ondary to inflammation result in fluid accumulation.
Traumatic surgical technique, harsh wound-cleansing
distinguished from infection, where the neutrophil
 population clearly predominates.
techniques, the presence of foreigm debris and irritants,
 Common Complications in Wound Healing
151
Treatment and Prevention
Drains are most commonly required both to prevent
and treat seromas. A Penrose drain is retained for 2 to
 5 days in most cases. When applicable, a compression
A single aspiration is generally insufficient for treat-
 bandage is useful to protect the drain from contamina-
 ment of large seromas. On occasion, the application of
tion, restrict movement, and collapse the dead space.
to control dead space to promote healing of the sepa-
Alternatively, closed suction units can be highly effec-
rated tissue planes. Intermittent seroma drainage by
tive in removing fluid and obliterating dead space
instead of Penrose drains. As noted in Chapter 4,
aspiration every few days is occasionally successful
syringes (35, 60cc) can be adapted as closed suction
(usually over a 2-week period): however, rapid fluid
reservoirs for smaller seromas, but are considered
reformation (usually within 24 hours) after initial aspi-
inferior to the commercially available vacuum drain
ration is a clear indication that drain insertion is
system. Compression bandages, Penrose drains, or
required to definitively manage the serum pocket.
close suction units should be employed any time the
Prior to any attempt at aspiration, the area must have
surgeon feels that the accumulation of fluid is likely in
a basic surgical preparation before introducing a sterile
an area where dead space is present.
hypodermic needle. An 18-gauge hypodermic needle
 and 35- to 60-cc syringe may be used to aspirate the
Buried "tacking" sutures also can be employed to
discourage seroma formation in small, sterile, dead
serum pocket; the addition of a three-way stopcock
space areas. However, large areas of dead space may
will facilitate evacuation of the syringe. Butterfly cath-
be impossible to tack down completely. Excessive use
eters are useful for aspiration in restless patients, since
of buried sutures may promote wound infection and
the tube extension reduces the risk of needle displace-
cannot be advocated for routine use in contaminated
ment during movement. Larger-gauge needles or a
wounds. Buried sutures also may result in the forma-
trocar (14- to 6-gauge) can facilitate drainage but
-nuon pou A jeu siaxod euoias nas jo uo
would require a lidocaine block at the point of inser-
nicate with one another for simple drainage.
tion. Serum may be allowed to escape passively from
the dependently placed trocar (facilitated by the
manual compression of the serum pocket) or by appli-
HEMATOMAS
cation of a syringe and three-way stopcock or vacuum
dau oi pandde aq Aeui asepueq uoissarduos y dund
Hematomas usually are the result of external trauma
 prevent reformation. There is minimal risk of infection
or hemorrhage secondary to incomplete hemostasis
after seroma aspiration provided that strict aseptic
after completion of a surgical procedure. Small hemato-
technique is maintained.
mas normally require no specific treatment. Large
hematomas, however, are capable of pushing tissue
planes apart and creating pressure beneath the suture
Aspiration is a simple method of managing
line. Large clots can take considerable time to resorb
seromas, but is frequently unsuccessful. Rapid ref-
and delay the normal healing of the tissues displaced
ormation (less than 24 hours) after aspiration is an
by their presence. When feasible, the surgical area
ndicator that a drain is required. (This should be
clearly stated to the owner prior to using this tech-
should opened, the hematoma evacuated, and the area
suctioned and lavaged. Bleeders should be identified
nique.) Aspiration with a syringe can be frustrated
-nenonala on puodsai Aeu siapaalq leurs paies pue
by the bevel of the hypodermic needle contacting
soft tissue as the fluid pocket collapses during aspi-
tery. A vacuum drain can be inserted into the dead
space prior to closure of the surgical incision.
ration. The needle will require repositioning within
the fluid pocket to continue serum removal. Owners
that travel a distance to your practice may prefer
EXPOSED BONE
the more reliable drain.
Nearly all seromas respond well to the use of a
Exposed bone is most commonly associated with
Penrose or vacuum drain system, depending on the
size and location of the seroma. Vacuum drains are
shearing and avulsion injuries to the lower extremities.
preferred for large seromas; Penrose drains (1/4-
The metacarpal and metatarsal surfaces are especially
inch) are useful for smaller seromas. Depending on
the patient, sedation/lidocaine block or general
beneath the tire of a moving vehicle. The foot is com-
anesthesia can be used to insert a surgical drain as
pressed and ground into the pavement, avulsing skin
and grinding soft tissue and bone. Avulsion of skin
a day case or on an outpatient basis.
 over bone surfaces lacking muscle immediately
152
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 6-23 (A) Severe shearing injury to the lower portion of a canine hind limb. (B) A close-up view revealed 50% of the metatarsa)
aeateales Aeuaod sem sal au Kanun stue jo Aiaaas aun adsa pasodxa suof ardnu uaeal 'o paieaus aram sauoq
However, the owner's financial restrictions required hind limb amputation.
exposes the periosteum or cortex to the external envi-
 aas spnm ueus Aaxa namon sso
ronment (Fig. 6-23).
practice can heal by second intention; skin grafts can
 In the dog and cat, most exposed viable bone will
be considered for the more extensive injuries. Joint
be covered by granulation tissue, arising from the
instability of the tarsal joint, secondary to loss of col-
viable periosteum, the exposed viable medullary
lateral ligamentous support, may require wire stabili-
  ,aao a, q ro a
zation using cortical screws to serve as anchors for
tissue arising from viable soft tissue adjacent to the
(20- to 22-gauge) stainless steel orthopedic wire placed
bone surfaces. Tissue between exposed metatarsal and
in a figure 8 pattem. Over time, collagen deposition
metacarpal bones frequently is the source of granula-
can stabilize the joint, usually by the time the wire
tion tissue coverage after road pavement shearing
fractures due to cyclic stress within weeks after place-
injuries. In many of these cases, the periosteum and
ment. Alternatively, prolonged splint support can be
bone below the wound surface are viable despite the
used to stabilize an unstable joint. Failure in obtaining
significant loss of the outer "half" of their circumfer-
sufficient stability may necessitate arthrodesis once
 ence. Because portions of the periosteum and the corti-
skin closure is complete.
cal and medullary bone are destroyed in these injuries,
there is a potential for osteomyelitis or sequestrum
Despite the rather gruesome appearance of lower
formation. However, most cases encountered in the
extremity shearing wounds, most heal satisfacto-
dog and cat do not require the removal or "decortica-
rily by second intention using the basic wound
tion" of exposed bone (Fig. 6-24).
management principles previously discussed. The
Surgical promotion of a granulation bed over
rate of infection is remarkably low, and the wound
exposed bone can be accomplished by drilling a
size is exaggerated by the soft tissue swelling that
 series of small holes with a 1/16-inch Steinmann pin
normally accompanies these wounds.
or drill bit into the vascular medullary canal of
 After debridement and lavage, partial approxi-
the bone. These channels facilitate capillary bud for-
mation of portions of the wound, without excessive
mation from the vascular medullary tissues to
tension, will reduce the magnitude of the defect.
promote granulation tissue formation over the
This can shorten the time required for second inten-
exposed cortical surface. A blood clot may form over
tion healing. Drainage is preserved through the
the bone, providing an extracellular matrix for the
open portions of the wound.
ingrowth of fibroblasts and capillary buds. The result-
 Serial applications of medicated dressings can
ant granulation bed can, in turn, support a free graff.
-emueia jroddns ot umipau aagoajeid e apraoid
 Caution must be exercised, however, when using this
tion tissue formation, wound contraction, and epi-
technique for metatarsal and metacarpal bones due to
thelialization. In turn, fibroblasts will provide the
the risk of fracturing bones already weakened by
collagen needed to stabilize the exposed joint(s).
trauma.
Common Complications in Wound Healing
153
HG. 6-24 (A) Healing shearing wound overlying the metatarsal surface. Metatarsal bones and first phalanges were exposed. Over
the next 4 weeks, a healthy granulation bed formed from viable softissue surfaces. Granulation tissue slowly covered the exposed
bone. (B) A skin graft was applied to the granulation bed. Slits were created in the graft over areas of exposed bone. Note that bone
coverage by granulation tissue is nearly complete, with final wound coverage over the bony surface by second intention healing.
 Devitalized bone thatis protruding above thewound
is not likely to be covered by granulation tissue (Fig.
6-25). This exposed, desiccated bone, which is not inte-
gral to the surgical salvage of the extremity, should be
excised below the surface of the granulation bed with
 bone rongeurs or bone-cutting instruments (Fig. 6-26).
WOUND DEHISCENCE
Wound dehiscence, or the disruption of apposed sur-
faces of a wound, is the result of several factors, either
alone or in combination. The following are the most
common causes noted by the author:
FIG. 6-25 Massive skin loss to the rear paw of a cat. A healthy
granulation bed has formed although the exposed third
1.
Wound closure under excessive tension,
phalanges were nonviable. The exposed bone was resected
with suture cut-out, secondary to
below the granulation surface, and a full-thickness mesh graft
ischemic necrosis.
was used to close the wound.
2.
Suture placement too close to incisional
border with cut-out (collagenase activity
within 5-mm cutaneous zone bordering
4.
Closure of severely compromised skin,
skin incision).
with subsequent necrosis.
5.
 Suture placement, compromising
3.
Improper suture material selection (size,
cutaneous circulation.
tensile strength, suture pattern,
placement, rate of resorption/
6.
Moisture accumulation contributing to
degradation).
tissue overhydration, maceration.
154
FIG. 6-26 (A) Devitalized metatarsal fragment: granulation tissue typically will not fully cover necrotic bone; in this case the
Granulation tissue will circumvent completely devitalized bone.
7.
Underlying pocket of infection, necrosis,
minimizes postoperative swelling, thus enabling the
foreign body, neoplasia.
surgeon to place sutures that more effectively appose
and immobilize the incision.
Lack of postoperative protection/support
Suture cut-out can occur from placement too close to
from motion, licking, external trauma.
the incision. Because collagenase activity remains high
9.
Premature suture removal.
within 5 mm of the skin incision, sutures placed near or
10.
Delayed healing precipitated by
within this zone are more likely to cut through the
corticosteroids and other agents.
weakened dermal collagen weave, especially in the
Suture placement in scar tissue, which
presence of motion and incisional tension. Larger
11.
has poor suture-holding ability.
suture bites are less likely to pull out. Cutting needles
have the cutting edge within the curvature of the
12.
Underlying healing disorder or delay in 
 needle. Under tension, with placement in susceptible
healing, excluding the above causes,
skin, the suture is more likely to cut along the V-shaped
suspected.
cut created by the suture, in the direction of the incision.
Today, most surgeons use reverse cutting needles
Critical evaluation of the separated wound can
(cutting edge on the outer curvature of the needle)
assist the surgeon in determining the most likely
almost exclusively, since the flat edge of the needle hole
cause(s) of dehiscence. Incisional gaps with absent
facing the incision line is more resistant to tissue tear.
sutures suggests the premature removal of sutures,
It is useful to select an elastic suture material that
usually by the patient. Presence of the sutures often
can stretch to a limited degree to accommodate pos-
demonstrates suture cut-out from one side of the inci-
 sible tissue swelling, but of sufficient size and strength
sion, with an irregular right-angle tear from the suture
to prevent permanent stretch deformation. Suture
hole to the incision. An intact suture with the presence
material size and selection should be tailored to the
of an incisional gap usually is associated with stretch-
skin thickness, durability, location, and the anticipated
ing or deformation of suture material (from incisional
 postoperative incisional forces that require neutraliza-
tension, or sutures deliberately placed loosely) (Fig.
6-27). Often a veterinarian may place sutures loosely
skin closure. This preference may be based on the
when edema of the skin is evident or anticipated.
materials with which they were trained and the sur-
 When swelling subsides, the incisions retract, leaving
ad (  am  s
an  incisional   8
Unfortunately, many
ties of the product. While many of us prefer
surgical
instructors at teaching institutions overemphasize
monofilament nylon and polypropylene for closure,
 loose suture placement to offset anticipated swelling.
other materials may be quite acceptable for many of
It is the author's opinion that surgical instructors
the wounds encountered. In more difficult wound
should emphasize a traumatic surgical technique that
 closures, complete familiarity with the physical prop-
Common Complications in Wound Healing
155
aje siep leaaas suapiaa si aouasuaa Aijuanxa iaddn pue iapinous iepneo au Suole uoneiaoe Suol e jo ansoi (v) iz-g 'H
surgery. (B) A close-up view reveals no sutures cut out. Rather. the 30 monofilament nylon has stretched as a result of patient
activity. Sutures also were placed loosely for anticipated postoperative swelling. Intradermal sutures, the addition of vertical mattress
sutures, the use of 2-0 monofilament material, restricted activity, and other methods to offset incisional tension could have prevented
this case of dehiscence.
erties of a given suture material is essential for more
skin necrosis would suggest preceding trauma was
consistent success in wound closure.
primarily responsible for necrosis. In areas with ample
Closure of an incision under moderate tension
regional skin, aggressive debridement could prevent
increases the likelihood of dehiscence. Closure under
dehiscence by removal of compromised or potentially
tension, with the addition of motion, can further
compromised tissues. Necrosis limited to the suture
promote suture serration of the skin and cut-out.
site would be compatible with suture compromise to
Although mechanical creep and stress relaxation of
the skin (Fig. 6-28).
skin can, almost miraculously, reduce incisional
 Underlying pockets of infection, necrotic tissue, or
tension within hours after closure, a veterinarian
foreign bodies will result in persistent wound drain-
cannot rely on this natural dermal collagen phenom-
age at the expense of incisional closure until the
'samson imoyp e rog ,ino iea, aiqeian e se uoua
underlying causes are alleviated. Future continuous
Techniques to offset skin tension should be considered
discharge and prolonged moisture exposure can
(see Chapter 9) in concert with immobilization of the
hydrate or soften the skin, enhancing the likelihood of
 area to promote uncomplicated healing.
suture cut-out. As a result, failure in abiding by basic
 Delays in healing from inflammation, trauma, or
malnutrition, for example, will further increase the
cascading effect on wound healing and closure until
likelihood of dehiscence. Suture placement, pattern,
the problems are recogmized and remedied.
and selection are particularly important under these
 Finally, proper bandage and external support can 
circumstances. It is not always clear at the time of
be critically important in preventing dehiscence in
traumatic wound closure whether the onset of necrosis
areas subject to motion or weight bearing. Care is used
was the result of "dying skin" or additional ischemia
to avoid circulatory compromise during bandage
 precipitated by tight suture placement. Large areas of
application along with proper bandage care.
156
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 6-28 (A) Closure of a laceration over the right stifle area, secondary to vehicular trauma. Early dehiscence noted approximately
48 hours later.
(B) Horizontal mattress sutures were placed too snugly, aggravating tissue swelling as a result of circulatory compromise. Early
interrupted sutures, would have been a better choice for stabilizing the incisional border. In cases of moderate trauma and swelling.
of subsequent successful skin closure.
Suggested Readings
Delany HM, Demetrius AA, Teh E, et al. 1990. Effect of early
postoperative mutritional support on skin wound and
colon anastomosis healing. I Parenter Enter Nutri 14:357-361.
Amalsadvala T, Swaim SF. 2006. Management of hard-to-
Hong A-H, Khanna C. 2003. Chemotherapy of neoplasia. In:
heal wounds. Vet Clin No Am 36:693-711.
Slatter D,ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 2352. Phila-
Atkinson JB, Kosi M, Srikanth MS, et al. 1992. Growth
delphia: WB Saunders Co.
Hunt GB, Worth A, Marchevsky A. 2004. Migration of
malnourished rats treated with corticosteroids. J Pediatric
Wooden skewer foreign bodies from the gastrointestinal
Surg 27:1026-1028.
tract in eight dogs. J Sm Anim Pract 45:362-367.
Beardsley SL, Schrader SC. 1995. Treatment of dogs with
Hunt TK, Dunphy JE. 1979. Fundarentats of Wound Manage-
wounds of the limbs caused by shearing forces: 98 cases
ment. New York: Appleton and Lange.
(1975-1993). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 207:1071-1075.
Hunt TK, Williams H. 1997. Wound healing and wound
 Blass CE, Moore RW. 1984. The tourmiquet in surgery: a
infection. Surg Clin No Am 77:587-606.
review. Vet Surg 13:111-114.
Johnston DE. 1990. Care of accidental wounds. Vet Clin No
 Bradley DM, Swaim SF, Stuart SW. 1998. An animal model
Am 20:27-46.
for research on wound healing over exposed bone. Vet
Johnston DE. 1990. Wound healing in skin. Vet Clin No Ar
Comp Orthop Traumatot 1l:131-135.
20:1-25.
Brockman DJ, Pardo AD, Conzemius MG, et al. 1996. Omen-
Jyung RW, Mustoe TA, Busby WN, et al. 1994. Increased
tum-enhanced  reconstruction of chronic 
nonhealing
wound-breaking strength induced by insulin-like growth
wounds in cats: techniques and clinical use. Vet Surg
      a 
25:99-104.
binding proteins-1. Surgery 115:233-239.
Carlson MA.
. 1997. Acute wound failure. Surg Clin No Am
 Lavy U1. 1972. The effective oral supplementation of zinc
77:607-636.
Suns f iug ‘sien ui Sueay punom Ard uo aens
 Clark GN.2001. Bone perforation to enhance wound healing
59:194-196.
over exposed bone with shearing injuries. J Arm Anirm Hosp
Lee AH, Swaim SF, Newton JC, et al. 1987. Wound healing
Assoc 37(3):215-217.
over denuded bone. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23(1):75-84.
 Common Complications in Wound Healing
157
Nwomeh B, Yager DR, Kelman CL. 1998. Physiology of the
Walmsley GL, Scurrell E, Summers BA, et al. 2009. Foreign
chronic wound. Clin Plast Surg 25(3):341-356.
 body induced neuritis masquerading as a canine brachial
Pavletic MM. 1995. Bite Wourd Maragement in Srmall Anirmats.
plexus nerve sheath tumour. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
The Professional Library Series. Denver: American Animal
5:427-429.
Hospital Association.
White RAS. 2003. Surgical treatment of specific skin disor-
Pavletic MM. 2005. Preventing wound dehiscence: tension-
ders. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
relieving and closure options. Stand Care 7(10):7-10.
3rd ed., 339-355. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Peacock EE. 1984. Wound Repair, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
White, RAS. 2006. Management of specific skin wounds. Vet
Saunders.
Clin No Am 36:895-912.
 Pennick D, Mitchell SL. 2003. Ultrasonographic detection of 
White RAS, Williams JM. 1995. Intracapsular prostatic omen-
ingested and perforating wooden foreign bodies in four
talization: a new technique for management of prostate
dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 223:206-209.
abscess. Vet Surg 24:390-395.
Robson MC. 1997. Wound infection. Surg Clin No Am
Wusteman M, Hayes A, Stirling D, Elia M. 1994. Changes in
77:637-650.
Rudolph R, Noe JM. 1983. Chronic Problem Wounds. Boston:
injury." J Surg Res 56:331-337.
 Little, Brown and Co.
Wykes PM. 1982. Cutaneous sinus tracts of the dog. Corpend
 Stanley BJ. 2007. Nonhealing wounds. Clinician's Brief 5(5):
Contin Educ Pract Vet 4(4):293-296.
67-71.
Zaizen Y, Ford EG, Costin G, et al. 1990. Stimulation of
 Swaim SF, Angarano DW. 1990. Chronic problem wounds of
wound bursting strength during protein malnutrition. J
dog limbs. Clin Dermatot 8(3/4):175-186.
Surg Research 49:333-336.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1997. Srmall Arirmal Wourud Mar-
 Zaloga GP, Bortenschlager L, Black KW, et al. 1992. Immedi-
agerment, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
 ate postoperative enteral feeding decreases weight loss
Temple WJ, Voitk AJ, Snelling CFT, et al. 1975. Effect of nutri-
 and improves wound healing after abdominal surgery in
 tion, diet and suture material on long term wound healing.
rats. Crit Care Med 20:115-118.
Ann Surg 182:93-97.
Management of
Specific Wounds
Bite Wounds  160
Pressure Sores   216
Burns 170
Hygroma 221
Inhalation Injuries 181
Snakebite  224
Chemical Burns 182
Brown Recluse Spider Bites 25
Electrical Injuries  T
184
Porcupine Quills  225
Radiation Injuries
187
PLATES
Frostbite 191
Plate 9: Pipe Insulation Protective
Projectile Injuries  193
Device: Elbow 230
Impalement Injuries  214
159
160
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
BITE WOUNDS
ries may be a few puncture wounds confined to the
skin. Wounds may be covered by a thick hair coat and
Introduction
 go unrecognized. The skin and underlying issues can
be lacerated, stretched, crushed and avulsed. Circula-
 tory compromise from the division of vessels and com-
Qite wounds are among the most serious injuries
promise to collateral vascular channels can result in
】
seen in small animal practice, and account for 10%
massive tissue necrosis. It may take several days before
to 15% of all veterinary trauma cases. The canine teeth
the severity of tissue loss becomes evident. All bites
are designed for tissue penetration, the incisors for
are considered contaminated wounds: the presence of
grasping, and the molars/premolars for shearing
bacteria in the face of vascular compromise can pre-
tissue. The curved canine teeth of large dogs are capable
cipitate massive infection.
of deep penetration, whereas the smaller, straighter
canine teeth of domestic cats can penetrate directly into
tissues, leaving a relatively small cutaneous hole. The
Wild Animals and Bite Wounds
jaws of larger dogs in particular can generate tremen-
dous crushing (up to 450 psi and shearing forces, and
the canine teeth can tear and lacerate the skin, hypoder-
Bite wounds from black bears (lrsus americanus) and
mis, and underlying musculature.
the grizzly bear (Ursus arctos horibilis) are infrequent,
 A struggling victim may promote additional tissue
-nsum 1o ssop Suqumu uI uaas Aquouuos isour are inq
injury while attempting to wrest free of its attacker.
pervised dogs where these bear species are most prev-
Small dogs and cats are at special risk since most por-
alent. Although bears frequently attack the head and
e Aq padseio Aiaanduon aq ues Apoq nia jo suon
neck area, hunting dogs may be bitten in the trunk and
large dog (Fig. 7-1). In one study, male dogs weighing
 pelvic regions, most likely when the bear lunges at a
less than 10kg presented with more severe multiple
retreating dog. Tissue trauma can be massive. Coyote
bite wounds. (Miniature pinchers, Pekinese, and small
(Canis iatrans) attacks on dogs and cats have been
terrier breeds were overrepresented.) Many of these
reported throughout the United States as a result of
victims are lifted and violently shaken by the attacker.
their expanding range. Wolves (Canis spp.) are less
 Direct and indirect trauma to internal organs fre-
prevalent and are limited to selective areas of the
 quently occurs. The kidneys in small animals are par-
northern United States. Attacks from other large car-
ticularly susceptible to bite wounds over the back. In
nivores, including mountain lions (Felis concolor), alli-
addition, bone fractures, joint injuries, and spinal
gators (Alligator
mississippiensis), and crocodiles
trauma also may occur.
(Crocodylus acutus) are far less prevalent due to their
The untrained observer can mistakenly dismiss the
 gravity of the bite wounds since the only obvious inju-
Of particular concern are bite wounds from wild
HG. 7-1 (A, B) Medial and lateral view of extensive tissue necrosis to the left forelimb of a Scottie. A neighborhood pit bull attacked
[edieo aut jo uoonnisap yrim 'sisouoau auoq pue 'aosnu 'uys aaisualxa ot ana 'qu s,suaed aut jo ot ial ot pasnjau pue sop au
paojad sem uoeindue (smoue) suo!
Management of Specific Wounds
161
animals, including raccoons, skunks, and bats, in
tion and observation may demonstrate muscle tears or
which rabies is an endemic problem, (see Rabies and
hernias.
the Transmission of Infectious Diseases below).
Keep in mind that Elizabethan collars also can be
useful in shielding veterinary personnel from being
Initial Patient Assessment
pue auues aissae ssal a u Aoadsa ua
feline patients.
A complete physical exam is required. A history of the
attack may help in locating the body region(s) bitten.
 Care must be taken to minimize pain to the patient
Latex gloves must be worn during the examination
and avoid manipulating unstable fractures or spinal
and management of open wounds.
injuries. Analgesics or sedation may be used in an
otherwise stable patient. (A neurologic examination
would be advisable prior to using medications that
A complete medical history should include the
could obscure these injuries.)
 Blood loss, shock, respiratory distress (including
patient's medical history and current rabies vacci-
laryngeal wounds, tracheal injuries, pneumomediasti-
nation status.
num, pneumothorax, hemothorax, flail chest) are
emergency situations that frequently require the clini-
cian's immediate attention before completing the
The patient's head should be restrained or muzzled
examination (Fig. 7-2 and 7-3). The prognosis of the
during examination to protect the practitioner from
patient, definitive course(s) of action required, and
injury. The hair coat must be parted and skin areas
 potential complications in managing the patient are
visualized. Small spots of dried blood and matted hair
Essential to the owner's decision regarding whether or
frequently overlie puncture wounds. Careful palpa-
pamu Aisnoas au u juauean yim paaoid oi jou
HG. 7-2 (A) Massive cervical trauma to the trachea and cervical muscles as a result of a dog fight. The patient was administered
oxygen prior to anesthesia. The cervical area was prepared for surgery. Anesthetic induction was immediately followed by a cervical
tube. Once the patient was stable, the technician passed a sterile endotracheal tube through the larynx. The surgeon then guided the
tube past the tracheal tear.
(B) Surgical repair included tracheal anastomosis, thorough debridement of necrotic muscle, copious lavage, and delayed primary
closure. Small puncture wounds were uncapped and locally assessed using a pair of mosquito hemostats as tissue retractors. These
wounds were left open to heal by second intention. However, complete excision of small puncture wounds can permit primary
closure.
162
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 7-3 (A) Puncture to the cervical trachea as a result of a dog bite: intraoperative view. A canine tooth created the opening that
puncture site halted the air excursion until anesthesia and intubation could be accomplished. (B) Closure was accomplished by
conservative debridement of the wound borders followed by placement of 3-0 polydioxanone sutures.
pet. In the interim, basic life-support procedural guide
normally is a regional response to injury becomes an
lines include the following areas of emergency resus-
exaggerated systemic inflammatory response second-
citation: (1) airway, (2) breathing, (3) cardiac function,
ary to extensive tissue trauma. Resection of necrotic
and (4) hemorrhage control. Intravenous fluid support
tissue and aggressive management of infection is criti-
and whole blood would be indicated in the presence
of extensive tissue trauma and blood loss. Details on
tion. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) may
pepus ui paueqo aq uen puaaeu Auaraa
be noted as a sequela to SIRS.
textbooks. A complete blood count, serum chemistry
 profile, and urinalysis can serve as baseline data for
the seriously injured patient.
Bite Wound Management
All penetrating bite wounds are ideally explored
 Treatment of hemorrhage requires (1) recognition
under anesthesia. If the patient is in critical condition,
exploration, debridement, and definitive repair may
of the condition, (2) control of further blood loss,
be necessarily delayed until the patient can be stabi-
and (3) intravenous fluid support to treat the
lized. However, basic wound management can be
patient's hypovolemia.
 In many cases, blood loss is not the result of an
instituted in the interim. The procedures for short-
term treatment before definitive exploration are
be difficult to quantitate. Individual bite wounds
described below.
may result in lile hemorrhage; collectively, multi-
ple bite wounds can result in a sizeable loss of
Temporary Bite Wound Care in the
blood.
Critical Patient
The following steps should be taken for the initial
management of bite wounds in the critical-care patient
Systemic Effects
in which general anesthesia cannot be administered.
Multiple and severe bite wounds can initiate a sys-
1
Minimize further contamination of open
temic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). What
wounds prior to preparing the wound for
Management of Specific Wounds
163
surgery. Cover the open wound with
Definitive Management:
sterile gauze sponges; sterile water-
Bite Wound Exploration
soluble gel or saline is applied to the
The following steps summarize the approach for the
gauze before application.
 definitive management of bite wounds.
2.
 Liberally clip hair around each puncture
wound.
1.
General anesthesia.
3.
Gently cleanse the skin around each
wound with warm sterile saline and a
2.
Open wounds should be temporarily
 surgical preparation solution.
covered or packed with sterile gauze
 sponges moistened with saline; a
4.
Inject small amounts of lidocaine with a
water-miscible lubricant can be applied
25-gauge hypodermic needle into and
to the sponges in place of saline in order
around the bite wound punctures. Trim
to protect individual wounds from
off any tattered borders. Insert a pair of
 contamination associated with preparing
sterile hemostats and inspect the
the area for surgery.
underlying tissues.
3.
The bite wound area should be clipped
5.
 Perform liberal pressure lavage of the 
fiberally. In particular, the thoracic and
 puncture site using an 18-gauge needle
abdominal area should be completely
and 35-cc syringe with warm sterile
clipped and prepared for surgery in the
saline. The wound should be opened
 sufficiently to permit fluid to flow out 
event the exploration requires
freely. A three-way stopcock valve
conversion to a thoracotomy or
 connected to sterile intravenous tubing
exploratory laparotomy. The surgical area
then is prepared and draped for aseptic
can be used to facilitate refilling the
surgery.
syringe. A dilute povidone-iodine (1 %:1
 part solution/9 parts sterile saline) or
4.
 Puncture wounds are "uncapped" using
chlorhexidine (0.05%:1 part solution/40
a scalpel blade by excising the puncture-
parts sterile saline) solution can be made
wound borders, thereby creating a
by adding these stock solutions to the
1.0-cm-plus circular opening. Sterile
lavage receptacle. The access site must
 mosquito hemostats are inserted into
be sufficiently large to allow the lavage
the opening and spread to expose the
solution to exit the area.
Underlying hypodermis, fascial tissues,
and muscle. Wounds with little or no
6.
Apply a topical antimicrobial ointment and
Underlying tissue damage may be left
dressing over the open wound.
open to drain and heal by second
Systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics may
intention or may be closed with one or
 be administered if deemed necessary
two skin sutures after lavaging the
(see below).
wound.
The primary goal of this short-term therapy is to
5.
 If significant tissue damage is
suspected, a skin incision is made over
reduce the amount of contamination present and
reduce the possibility of further contamination from
the puncture site; tissue retractors are
 organisms in the hospital environment (nosocomial
inserted to permit exploration and
debridement of traumatized tissues.
infection).
Adjacent puncture wounds may be
 Once stabilized, the patient can be anesthetized for
wound exploration if necessary. (See the next section.)
connected with a single incision to
facilitate exploration (Fig. 7-4). Care must
On occasion, critically injured patients with serious
be taken not to inadvertently divide
underlying injuries cannot be stabilized to the desired
 direct cutaneous arteries, especially
degree. Under these circumstances surgical interven-
those vessels supplying skin already
tion would be necessary since these wounds are the
primary cause of the patients deterioration (bowel
compromised by bite wound trauma.
rupture, sepsis, etc.). Such a serious endeavor requires
6.
Any hair or foreign debris is removed.
the coordinated efforts of the emergency clinician,
Shredded or necrotic muscle, fat, and
 anesthesiologist/anesthetist, and the surgeon.
fascia are excised. A more aggressive
B
C
D
uannd suassad e son uoneuasaid aoaq yaam L pauesns sem Aanun au qull pu al au duanoaui punom at (v) tl d
discharge. Arrows denote the four canine puncture wounds.
(B) A close-up view of the puncture wounds. The comparatively benign appearance of these injuries masks the more serious
underlying tissue destruction.
(C) Two parallel incisions were made between the respective left and right canine puncture wounds, demonstrating a layer of
necrotic subcutaneous fat. This tissue was excised and the wound lavaged.
(D) Partial closure was performed; the lower 2cm (arrows) were left open for drainage. The narrow tracts were poorly suited to drain
insertion.
164
Management of Specific Wounds
165
debridement can be performed for those
"Uncapping" the Puncture Wound
tissues of questionable viability that are
A simple method of assessing a puncture wound is
not essential to normal function. As
noted, additional care is warranted when
by lifting the puncture site with forceps and excis-
ing the area with a scalpel blade, thereby creating
exploring bite wounds over the thorax.
Retraction of muscle and fascia may
a 10- to 15-mm opening to inspect the underlying
tissues. A mosquito hemostat can be inserted and
unseal penetrating thoracic wounds.
Sucking sounds may emanate from the
spread open, serving as a tissue retractor or specu-
area as air enters the thoracic cavity.
lum to examine the subcutaneous tissues and
underlying muscles. If the subcutaneous fat is
necessitating assisted ventilation,
undisturbed, the wound is considered minor. If the
aspiration of the thorax, or temporary
 fat has been separated and fragmented, the under-
insertion of a thoracostomy tube.
lying muscle is examined. Lavage and suctioning
7.
Debridement ideally is accomplished in
facilitate visualization of the tissues by removal of
one stage, especially in critical areas
tissue fragments and debris.
(thoracic cavity and abdominal cavity
 If tissue damage is minor, the wound can be
involvement) where the presence of
lavaged and apposed with one or two skin sutures;
necrotic tissues can promote life-
if there are any doubts, the wound may be left open
threatening sepsis. In less critical areas,
to maintain postoperative drainage and open
such as the extremities, a more
wound care.
conservative daily or staged debridement
If more sigrificant tissue trauma is noted or sus-
(open-wound management followed by
pected, a scalpel blade is used to incise over the
delayed primary closure, secondary
area for wound inspection, debridement, lavage,
closure, healing by second intention) is
and repair. Adjacent punctures can be connected
indicated for tissues of questionable
through a single incision.
viability, where important muscle
 groups and the limited availability
of skin could compromise salvage of
the limb.
Prolonged wound drainage is common after exten-
sive muscle trauma and formation of dead space. It is
8.
Skin viability may be difficult to
not unusual to retain use of drains for several days
determine on initial presentation.
under these circumstances. Closed suction units (as
Necrosis may not be evident for 5 to 7
discussed in Chapter 4) limit the risk of ascending
days after injury. The loose skin available
infection and can be used to prevent air entry into the
over the cervical area and trunk permits
wound cavity. Subcutaneous emphysema associated
more aggressive debridement of skin of
with sucking wounds of the flank and axilla may be
questionable viability. However, a more
prevented with vacuum drains. Similarly, they can
conservative "wait and reassess"
provide wound drainage overlying the thorax or tho-
approach is indicated for compromised
racic inlet where air entry (with the use of Penrose
skin of the lower extremities. With the
 drains) may result in pneumothorax. Vacuum drains
limited amount of loose skin available for
can be used effectively for the drainage of abdominal
closure, unnecessarily wide debridement
wall wounds and the abdominal cavity simultane-
will increase the likelihood that
ously (as needed).
reconstructive surgery will be required to
close the resultant defect.
9.
Wound drainage is necessary in areas
Regional Considerations
where dead space is present, especially
after wide debridement of contaminated
Head and Neck
bite wounds. Closed vacuum drains or
Penrose drains may be considered (see
The head and neck areas are most commonly attacked
Chapter 4).
by predators. Small dogs and cats can sustain skull
fractures from larger predators (Fig. 7-5). Injury to eyes
10.
Open wound management is advisable
and ears are occasionally noted. Bite wounds involv-
in the presence of infection and tissues
ing the pinna are common; occasionally, the ear canal
of questionable viability (see Chapter 3),
will sustain punctures, lacerations, or avulsion injuries
166
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 7-5 (A) Bite wounds involving the larynx and pharynx should be explored.
(B) Pharyngeal tears permit extensive tissue exposure to saliva and oral contaminants.
(C, D) Debridement, closure of the pharyngeal laceration, and repair of the damaged hyoid apparatus was followed by wound lavage
and closure over a closed suction unit. Skin hooks are invaluable in elevating the borders of the pharyngeal mucosa, facilitating
suture apposition of this surface.
(at the junction of the vertical and horizontal ear canal,
Extremities
or canal avulsion at the external acoustic meatus). Cer-
vical wounds must be closely assessed for injuries to
The comparatively narrow diameter of the extremities
the trachea, larynx, esophagus, pharynx, major vessels,
make them particularly susceptible to extensive bite
and salivary glands, in particular. The spinal column
wound trauma (crushing, laceration), especially in the
is most susceptible to trauma in small dogs and cats.
smaller patients. Circulatory compromise to the skin,
 Skin and muscle are most prone to injury. A tracheos-
muscle, and bone can result in massive necrosis, neces
 rndsan rdn m rssaau aq  
sitating limb amputation in many cases. Overlooked
tress is evident. Traumatic division of the trachea may
puncture wounds involving the elbow, carpal, knee,
require a prompt cervical incision upon anesthetic
and tarsal joints may result in problematic infections.
redan leauen arojaq uoneqniu nadond rog uononpu
A complete neurologic examination of the involved
can be instituted. Alternatively, an endotracheal tube
limb and close assessment of circulation is in order in
can be temporarily inserted into the tracheal tear to
the days following bite wound care. Fracture repair
stabilize the patient until proper placement can be
and stabilization normally is performed at the time of
instituted intraoperatively (Fig. 7-2). Puncture or lac-
bite wound exploration. However, in the face of
eration of the rigid trachea also can result from pene-
extensive swelling and circulatory compromise, a
 trating canine teeth without tearing of the overlying
delay in fracture repair may be advisable: surgical
skin (Fig. 7-3).
trauma could further compromise circulation to the
Management of Specific Wounds
167
lower extremity and precipitate loss of the limb. As
would suggest pneumothorax, whereas dull areas of
discussed, when debriding extremity wounds, a more
percussion would suggest fluid accumulation in the
conservative approach is in order when tissue viability
dependent areas of the thoracic cavity. In relatively
is equivocal. (See Orthopedic Injuries and Spinal
 calm and stable patients, a lateral thoracic radiograph
Trauma, below).
may be obtained to confirm each condition. Thoraco-
centesis can be used to initially alleviate respiratory
Retention of fractured teeth is rarely seen in small
animals. The dense interosseous ligament between
the radius and ulna is the most common region
where the tip of a canine tooth can be broken off.
Its retention will result in a draining tract. Radio-
graphs will easily identify the denser tooth frag-
ment in contrast to the adjacent bone (Fig. 7-6).
Thoracic Trauma
Small patients are more susceptible to thoracic wall
 trauma, although the canine teeth in larger dogs are
capable of penetrating the intercostal area of most
dogs. Open wounds at the thoracic inlet can result in
 pneumomediastinum; direct open wounds involving
the thoracic wall can result in fatal pneumothorax. On
FIG. 7-6 Radiographs of the distal forelimb in a dog.
occasion, flaps of tissue may overlap and seal the tho-
demonstrating retention of the tip of a canine tooth in the
racic wall defect, limiting the severity of the pneumo-
interosseous ligament between the radius and ulna. The tooth
thorax until surgical repair can be performed.
Both pneumothorax and hemothorax should be
fragment and associated draining tract were removed. The
immediately suspected in patients presenting with res-
 greater density of the retained canine helps to distinguish it
piratory distress. Pyothorax may be noted in patients
from the adjacent bone. (Radiographs courtesy of Dr. Paul
with older bite wounds (Fig. 7-7). Hyperresonance
Gambardella.)
Se ssasp Aioeandsan ym pauasaid sop aul ueuasad on sod sep t unuais au Sunaao (smoue) spunom aa () i-l 
a result of pyothorax. Necrotic sternal bone was excised followed by a thoracotomy. (B) A restrictive pleuritis (arrows) was noted as
ans q pamou sem sped anee um sae st o ua anss aoas snoq aa pue usdap u go han e
after placement of a thoracostomy tube for continuous closed suction postoperatively
168
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
distress and confirm the presence of air or fluid. The
 Stainless steel orthopedic wire (22-gauge) is commonly
diameter of a bronchus noted on radiographs can
used to realign the rib segments; overtightening should
serve as a relative guideline for estimation of the size
be avoided in this soft bone. In most cases of flail chest,
 of the thoracostomy tube that may be required. Imme-
 preoperative extemal stabilization of the area is usually
diate placement of a thoracostomy tube may be prefer-
umnecessary.
able  when  tension pneumothorax or significant
Bite wounds involving the caudal thoracic and
hemothorax is diagnosed at presentation. The tube can
ranial abdominal areas are capable of tearing the
be connected to a continuous thoracic suction unit in
uderlying diaphragm: the pars costalis and pars ster-
more serious cases. Drainage may be continued for 48
nalis are relatively superficial at the area of the xiphoid
hours after cessation of air leakage. Significant, una-
and caudal thoracic cage. Rents in the diaphragm may
bated leaks beyond the initial 72-hour period may
not be visible on initial thoracic radiographs; addi-
require surgical (re)intervention. Similarly, brisk con-
tional radiographs are indicated if deterioration of
tinuous hemorrhage following initial evacuation of
dlinical signs warrants reevaluation of the patient. The
 blood in the thoracic cavity would justify prompt sur-
-roidxa Surmp paioadsu aq shemie pmous usenyde
gical intervention.
 atory laparotomy.
The hypodermic needle or, preferably, butterfly
Abdominal Trauma
catheter, attached to a three-way stopcock and 35-
The larger canine teeth are capable of deep penetration
to 60-cc syringe, can be used for thoracocentesis.
through the soft and compressible abdominal wall into
The needle is angled slightly with the bevel toward
the peritoneal cavity, especially in smaller patients. It
the patient to reduce the risk of lung laceration.
 is important to note that the skin and abdominal wall 
 Plastic intravenous catheters also may be used to
uen sueaio [euau qonoule joeui aq on readde Aeu
reduce the risk of lung laceration.
be crushed. The kidneys, bowel, mesenteric vascula
ture, spleen, and liver can be traumatized by direct
If the patient is in lateral recumbency. air is
contact with the canine teeth or indirectly as a result
drawn from the central third of the
of the stretching and tearing of tissues if the patient is
midthorax.
shaken during the attack. Ultrasonography may be
If the patient is standing. air is withdrawn
used to assess the integrity of the internal organs;
from the upper third of the midthorax.
abdominal radiographs can be used to assess the
If the patient is standing or in lateral
abdomen and determine the presence of free air and
fluid. An intravenous pyelogram may be used to assess
recumbency, fluid is removed from the lower
 traumatized kidneys based on these findings.
third of the thorax, between the third and
eighth ribs. Care is required to prevent
advancement of the needle into the
pericardium.
 Internal hemorrhage can have an insidious onset
and can be easily overlooked in the trauma patient.
A fist-sized hematoma may vary from 300 to 500
Open skin wounds can be temporarily stapled or
-euanv Xiaams oi rond Anua ie sul oh pamins
be apparent on physical examination. For example,
 g  a e  aq e 
half the patient's blood volume (40 ml/kg body
can be cupped over the wound temporarily. Bite
opqe praao asnen ci asard aq isn (iuiam
wounds entering the thoracic cavity are best explored,
distention. If 20% to 25% of the blood volume is lost
due to the significant risk of tissue necrosis and pyo-
or sequestered over a 10-minute period, profound
thorax present in these cases. Surgical staplers (TA,
hypovolemic shock will occur.
Covidien/USSC/Kendall) are useful in removing
 It is also worthy to note that small volumes of
traumatized pulmonary tissue.
blood loss from multiple small bite wounds and
Fractured ribs with significant displacement can be
contusions cumulatively can result in a significant
repaired at the time of exploration. Sharp, pointed
loss of red cells.
edges can be trimmed with rongeurs to reduce the risk
of lung laceration. Cases of flail chest can be stabilized
in a similar fashion with fine wire or nonabsorbable
A midline celiotomy is advisable when teeth have
suture to realign the fracture segments. Holes can be
 penetrated or crushed the abdominal cavity (as occa-
drilled approximately 1cm from the fracture ends.
sionally noted in small dogs and cats). Superficial bite
Management of Specific Wounds 
169
HG. 7-8 (A) Bite wounds to the perineum completely severed the rectum from the anocutaneous junction; as noted by passage of a
sanins o-e auouoxepkiod unat au ate[ndueu ot pasn auam sxooy urs (g punom atq aut osui snue aut woxy aipuey yooy Aeds
were used to repair this laceration. Skin wounds were only partially closed. It is best not to attempt primary skin closure with
grossly contaminated rectal wounds.
wounds limited to the outer abdominal wall can be
Infection and Bite Wounds
managed as discussed above. However, the abdomen
should be prepared for possible exploratory surgery in
The polymicrobial flora of the oral cavity can inoculate
the event that more sigrificant trauma is noted during
wounds with aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Bite
surgery.
wounds resulting in perforation of the gastrointestinal
tract can result in the spillage of additional bacterial
contaminants (Fig. 7-8.) In human studies, aerobic
Orthopedic Injuries and
infections are more common than anaerobic infections
Spinal Trauma
alone. (Bite wounds have a 5% to 10% risk of infection
in humans; nonbite lacerations have an infection rate
 As discussed, smaller dogs and cats are more suscep-
of 5% by contrast.) However, with the presence of
tible to injury as a result of direct trauma (crushing.
anaerobic bacteria, the severity of the infection is often
penetration) or indirect trauma (violent shaking of the
increased. Pasteurella spp. are gram-negative nonmo-
victim with wounds created distant to the point of
tile pleomorphic coccobacilli that are commonly iso-
direct contact). Most fractures can be stabilized at the
lated from the oral cavity of dogs and cats. In one
time of bite wound management. External fixators
report, up to 50% of canine and 90% of feline bite
 may be particularly useful in fracture stabilization,
wound infections in humans were the result of Pas-
thereby reducing the risk of internal fixation in prox-
teurella spp. Management of Pasteurella infections in
imity to a contaminated bite wound. As noted, surgery
humans can be problematic, especially in older, debili-
should be delayed in those cases where circulatory
tated patients; individuals with orthopedic implants
 compromise to the lower extremity is of concern. Reso-
and internal prosthetic devices; and persons with a
lution of tissue swelling normally follows improve-
compromised immune system.
ment in circulation and lymphatic drainage. A modified
aq Aeu suds aanroddns no aepueq sauof iaqo
used to stabilize the fracture while managing the bite
The risk of infection is affected by several factors,
including
wounds.
A complete neurologic examination is essential to
 Overall health of the patient
diagnosing spinal trauma. Radiographs and supple-
Body region bitten 
mental diagnostic imaging are used to confirm verte-
bral fracture/luxations. Depending on the nature of
Severity of tissue trauma
the injury and the severity of clinical signs, external
Bacterial inoculum and virulence
stabilization, internal stabilization, and/or decom-
Delays in proper medical management
pression of the spinal cord may be necessary.
170
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
In the face of this acute tissue trauma, the selection
Rabies and the Transmission of
and use of antibiotics remains somewhat controversial.
Infectious Diseases
 Over the last decade, the prophylactic use of antibiotics
has been demonstrated to be of limited clinical eficacy
Of the infectious diseases transmitted by bite wounds,
in preventing infection. Prophylactic use of antibiotics
rabies is the single greatest concern because of the
is of proven value only for carefully selected high-risk
procedures  when  properly  administered  before
human health implications of this viral disease.
surgery. Antibiotics are normally administered after
It has been recommended that unvaccinated pets
 bitten by a wild mammal (unavailable for testing)
bite injuries, and several hours may transpire before
should be euthanized. If the owner refuses, the pet
administration and effective blood levels are achieved.
must be isolated for 6 months and vaccinated 1 month
In general, 3 hours is considered the maximum accept-
able delay in administration of antibiotics in bite wound
before release.
management. To avoid the several-hour delay to
Vaccinated pets should be revaccinated immedi-
achieve an adequate serum level associated with oral
ately, confined by the owner, and monitored carefully
antibiotics, intravenous administration is advisable for
for 45 days. For specific details, the veterinarian should
consult with local and state authorities to ensure that
seriously injured patients and is 4 to 12 times faster than
intramuscular administration for developing an effec-
 regulations are precisely followed.
tive tissue-fluid concentration at the wound.
Cats can transmit feline leukemia virus and feline
Bacteriocidal antibiotics are best employed in bite
immunodeficiency virus through bites. Assessment of
wounds. Cephalosporins, ampicillin, and penicillin
transmission can be evaluated by serologic testing 6
rapidly enter the wound (within 1 hour). In contrast,
months after the injury. These two diseases can result
erythromycin and gentamicin take 24 hours for
in nonhealing wounds.
wound concentrations to match serum concentrations,
whereas tetracycline and clindamycin never reach
BURNS
wound levels equivalent to serum levels. Cepha-
losporins are generally effective against Pasteurella
Veterinarians see few burns compared to human phy-
 spp. and a variety of other microorganisms. Amoxicil-
sicians. Most burns seen by the author are not life-
lin or clavulanate potassium can be useful against Pas-
threatening but are referred for definitive closure of
teurella multocida resistant to penicillins and β-lactamase
the wound.
rog mjasn are sauonoumboron dds snoooudos
resistant gram-positive and gram-negative infection.
Types of Burns Seen in Veterinary
In the presence of gram-negative organisms,
e
Practice
 aminoglycoside such as gentamicin should be consid-
1. Fire/flame burns
 ered. Antibiotics are not a substitute for the appropri-
ate surgical management of bite wounds.
 Scalds
In the presence of infection, wound
I cultures
3.
Electrical heating pads
(aerobic, anaerobic) are advisable in order to select the
4.
 Hot air dryers
 most appropriate antibiotic(s), especially in the septic
5.
Heating lamps
patient. Culturing the acute uninfected bite wound is
 useless in determining the potential infection organ-
6.
 Exothermic (chemically activated) heat packs
isms. Culture samples should be submitted from deep
7.
Electrical cords
within the wound by aspiration or incision, drainage,
and exploration of the area. Aspiration of lymph nodes
8.
 Faulty electrocautery units
or areas of cellulitis also can be employed to obtain
9.
 Wood-burning stoves
accurate culture samples. More superficial wound cul-
10.
 Household radiators
tures are more likely to include contaminants that will
lead to misleading results. The most accurate source
11.
Stove tops
for culturing infected wounds is from tissue samples
12.
 Automobile mufflers
from the abscess wall.
13.
 Solar (actinic) radiation
Although
1 umcommonly performed in practice,
 Gram stains may be useful in determining the type of
14.
 Chemical burns
 organisms present and the most appropriate initial
15.
 Radiation burns
antibiotic selection prior to obtaining definitive culture
16.
Automobile muffler burns
and sensitivity results.
Management of Specific Wounds
171
B
SOLR
HEAT.
InstantHeat
HG. 7-9 (A, B) Contact burns involving a foot
of a feline patient recovering from anesthesia.
(C) Unfortunately, chemically activated heat
packs were placed in direct contact with the
 foot, resulting in fullthickness skin necrosis.
 Hot water bottles and other supplemental heat
sources should be well covered with towels to
C
prevent burns from occurring.
Ironically, the most common thermal injuries seen
vascular stasis with compromised tissue perfusion,
by the author are caused by veterinarians using various
and an outer zone of hyperemia. Progressive circula-
heat sources to warm the patient (Fig. 7-9). Electrical
tory compromise can result in necrosis extending into
heating pads in particular can generate considerable
the middle zone, in an outward direction.
heat: prolonged contact in combination with local
Superficial bums (first degree) are burns confined
tissue retention of heat can produce full-thickness
to the outermost epidermis. The skin can appear ery-
burns of considerable dimension (Fig. 7-10). Less com-
thematous and is hyperesthetic to the touch. Properly
monly seen are faulty ground plates used with electro-
managed, healing can be rapid and complete within a
cautery units, resulting in contact burns (Fig.7-11).
week after injury. Partial-thickness burns (second
degree) involve a variable depth of the dermis. Burns
confined to the more superficial layer normally have a
favorable outcome when properly managed, with
Burn Classification
healing noted 3 weeks after injury. Deep dermal burn
healing, however, is more problematic, especially
The severity of the burn is evaluated by the degree or
when involving large surface areas. Systemic effects
depth of the injury, as well as the percentage of the
may be noted under these circumstances. Healing can
surface area involved. A full-thickness burn site
be prolonged since the epidermis and a majority of 
usually has three concentric zones of tissue injury: a
 compound hair follicles, residing in the dermis, are 
central zone of coagulative necrosis, a middle zone of
destroyed.
172
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
sm us ason suas ieun pasans punom au po suassasse aso (a) aood e un unq ped sueau lesaa () oi-/ 5
present for closure by wound contraction and epithelialization. (From Parritz DL, Pavletic MM. 1992. Physical and chemical injuries:
heat stroke, hypothermia, burns and frostbite. In: Murtaugh R, Kaplan P,eds. Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Medicine. St.
Louis, MO: Mosby Year Book.)
FIG. 7-11 Improperly grounded electrocautery units can result
HG. 7-12 Muffler burn in a dog. Animals can tumble beneath
in contact burns, as noted in this patient. The eschar was
 excised and the wound was closed primarily.
Animals also may suffer from deep abrasions when dragged
beneath the car for a distance.
Burn Classification Based on Depth
Full-thickness burns involve the complete destruc-
of Injury
tion of the epidermis, dermis, and possibly underlying
 Superficial (first degree): Limited to the
hypodermal tissues (Fig. 7-12 and 7-13). In large areas
epidermis.
involving major surface areas of the body, systemic
signs may be noted. Closure of the lost skin may
Partial-thickness (second degree): Epidermis
require plastic surgery for the larger wounds. Full-
and a variable portion of the dermis.
thickness burns involving greater than 20% of the total
Full-thickness (third degree): Complete
body surface area can result in a cascading series of
involvement of the entire skin thickness,
pathophysiologic changes that require considerable
 Fourth-degree bums are those that extend to
medical management in addition to the challenges 
the deeper tissues, including muscle and
 associated with the surgical management and closure
bone.
of the wounds.
Management of Specific Wounds
173
can be determined using the rule of nines. Patient man-
agement is primarily directed at the patient's needs
and response during the course of therapy. This esti-
mate will serve as the initial point for fluid therapy in
patients with probable full-thickness burns over
'ea1e aeyms Apoq iia jo %oz ue raneano
Speaking to the Client
After evaluating a patient with extensive burns, it
is critically important to discuss the care required
and costs associated with managing the pet. The
cost of managing these patients can easily run into
thousands of dollars.
HG. 7-13 Thermal injury in a dog struck by an automobile.
When a major surface area of the patient is
The burn was sustained by friction/abrasion on the road
involved with probable full-thickness burns, eutha-
 pavement. This wound had a central third-degree burn (note
nasia becomes a realistic option. When in doubt,
burn eschar) with more peripheral second- and first-degree
consult with a board-certified surgeon familiar
burns. (From Parritz DL, Pavletic MM. 1992. Physical and 
with these injuries.
chemical injuries: heat stroke, hypothermia, burns and
frostbite. In Murtaugh R, Kaplan P,eds. Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Year Book.)
Burn Pathophysiology
us san ln no jo onoisdod a
create serious metabolic derangements beyond the
margins of the wound. Among the potential problems
associated with partial- and full-thickness burns
Estimating the Surface Area of
involving a wide surface area (greater than 20%) are:
the Burn
hypovolemic burn shock; sequestration of fluid in the
extravascular extracellular space; red cell destruction;
An estimation of the size of the burn can be somewhat
myocardial depression (negative inotropy), arrhyth-
subjective in animals that have comparatively greater
mias, and high output cardiac failure; postburn
amounts of loose elastic skin covering their body (as
pneumonitis, acute respiratory insufficiency, and
compared with humans). A basic estimation of the
ani, a suoidua Aq pauaiap aq ues aie aneyms
tion of leukocytes, macrophages, and T cells; reticu-
of nines" formula commonly used in humans. Accu-
loendothelial cells; fluid and electrolyte derangements;
rate assessment of the depth of the burm, however, can
acid-based  imbalance; disseminated  intravascular
 be problematic in the first several days after sustaining
coagulation and thromboembolism; hepatic and renal
 a thermal injury.
failure; adrenal insufficiency; increased gastrointesti-
nal mucosal permeability with disruption of the intes-
tinal  barrier;  and  gastrointestinal 
ulceration or
Rule of Nines: Surface Areas
Curling's ulcers; burn sepsis; hypermetabolism; non-
Estimates Based on Body Region
healing wounds, contracture, and Margolin's ulcer
Each forelimb: 9%
(squamous cell carcinoma); scarring; and poor cos-
Each hind limb: 18%
metic results.
Experimentally, dogs that sustain 50% scald burns
Head and neck: 09%
without intravenous fluid support demonstrate a
Dorsal half of the trunk: 18%
sharp decline of cardiac output and an abrupt rise in
Ventral half of the trunk: 18%
hematocrit value from a loss of plasma volume.
Although the body can institute compensatory mecha-
nisms to improve cardiac output, early aggressive
Although conversion charts and surface area for
intravenous fluid replacement therapy is essential to
mulas are available (see Table 7-1), a working estimate
correct the abnormalities noted.
174
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
TABLE 7-1
Clinical Observations
Body weight-to-surface area conversion.
A number of referral burm patients who have sus-
Body Weight
Surface Area*
tained burns estimated to be somewhat greater
Square
Square
than 20% of their body surface area have been
Kilograms
 Pounds
Centimeters
Meters
noted to be surprisingly stable (oftentimes days
after injury) despite the fact they received little or
4.4
1600
0.16
no fluid therapy.
4
8.8
2500
0.25
 This may have to do with the fact that most dogs
6
13.2
3800
0.33
and cats have loose, elastic skin, resulting in a ten-
 dency for clinicians to overestimate theburn surface
8
17.6
4000
0.40
area.
10
22.0
4600
0.46
Appropriate medical therapy should be insti-
12
26.6
5200
0.52
tuted to ensure the patient is in the best possible
14
30.9
5800
0.58
health for the wound care/surgical procedures
16
35.3
6400
0.64
 required to close the cutaneous defects.
18
39.7
6900
0.69
20
44.1
7400
0.74
Fluid Therapy for Major
22
48.5
7900
0.79
Thermal Injuries
24
52.9
8300
0.83
57.3
8800
0.88
After sustaining a serious burn, capillary permeability
28
61.7
9000
0.92
increases rapidly, not only at the burn site itself, but also
30
66.1
9700
0.97
throughout the body, resulting in a free exchange of all
32
70.6
10,100
1.01
noncellular elements of the blood within the extravas-
34
75.0
10,500
1.05
cular space. The loss of plasma, electrolytes, and plasma
 proteins (less than 350,000 Daltons) occurs at a rate of 4
36
79.4
10,900
1.09
to 4.5ml/kg/h during fluid administration of seriously
38
83.8
11,300
1.13
burned humans. This extracellular fluid (edema) is
40
88.2
11,700
1.17
 sequestrated from the vascular compartment propor-
42
92.6
12,100
1.21
tional to the severity of the burn. The dramatic loss of
44
026
12,500
1.25
plasma volume results in a notable rise in hematocrit,
46
101.4
12,800
1.28
despite the fact that red cells have been destroyed, and
their life span is reduced to 30% of estimated normal
48
105.6
13,200
1.32
value. The loss of fluid combined with polymerization
50
110.0
13,500
1.35
of plasma protein increases blood viscosity. However, 
52
114.4
13,900
1.39
capillary integrity does improve 18 to 24 hours after the
54
118.8
14,300
1.43
burn. Adequate fluid replacement at this time results in
56
123.2
14,700
1.47
early restoration of cardiac output. After 24 hours, col-
 loids may be useful in expanding plasma volume as
58
127.6
15,000
1.50
capillary permeability declines.
60
132.0
15,300
1.53
The fluid loss of burn patients is essentially iso-
62
136.4
15,700
1.57
osmolar; isotonic fluids are used as the basic replace-
64
140.8
16,000
1.60
ment solution. Hypertonic saline also has been used to
66
145.2
16,300
1.63
a lesser degree. During the first 24 hours, lactated
68
149.6
16,600
1.66
 Ringer's solution is commonly used for volume expan-
sion. To maintain normal renal function, fluid admin-
70
154.0
17,000
1.70
istration should be adjusted to maintain a urine output
 Calculated from the following equation: Area (in meters) = 0.1 x
of 1ml/kg/h. In the first 24 postbum hours, fluid
Wt.2/3 (in kilograms).
Modified from Davis LE. Thermal burns. In: Swaim SF, ed. 1980.
input may be as much as 3 to 4 times urine output (3
Surgery of Traumatized Skin: Management and Reconstruction,222.
 to 4ml/kg/h) because of the increased capillary per-
 Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
meability. An initial shock dose of 80-90ml/kg intra-
venously may be indicated during the first hour of
critical presentation.
Management of Specific Wounds
175
Fluid Resuscitation Formulas
lytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, blood
glucose, blood gas determination; and serum/urine
Burn formulas (Parkland and modified Brooke formu-
osmolality are closely monitored to determine the
las) have been developed as a general guideline for
adequacy of fluid administration. BUN, hematocrit,
rofe suiisns suad uumu jo juann 
total protein, and blood glucose samples can be
burns. These formulas combine both maintenance and
repeated throughout the day until chemistry profile
replacement volumes based on the weight of the
results are obtained. Blood chemistry units that are
 patient and surface area burned. The Parkland formula,
common in many veterinary hospitals can be used for
auaad a sasn 'sumy u paonda Auoun
more frequent testing if necessary.
of surface area burned to estimate fluid needs: 4ml/
After 48 hours, mobilization of burn wound edema
kg body weight x percentage of burn area. Half of this
occurs and the body weight gradually returns to
volume is given within the first 8 hours after injury.
preburn levels over the following days. Less intrave-
One quarter of this volume is given during the second
nous fluid support is required as the patient begins
 S-hour period, followed by the remaining quarter in
eating and drinking during this resorptive phase,
the last 8 hours. Delayed presentation of the patient
although evaporative water loss must be assessed
would require a more aggressive approach. Colloid,
during this period. Continued analysis of blood and
plasma, or 5% albumin can be administered in this last
-nf si Aderau pmi ressaau are sands aum
8-hour period if urine output remains below normal
ciously tailored to maintain serum values in a low
value. Although this formula has been adapted to
normal range as edema fluid is mobilized. Urine
small animals, treatment must be tailored to the indi-
output is closely monitored. It is desirable to maintain
vidual needs of the patient. Central venous pressure
serum protein between 3.5 and 6.5 gm/dl and a hema-
monitoring may be useful in assessing the rate of fluid
tocrit above 25% to prevent hypoxia during the
administration.
patient's hypermetabolic state. Anemia may become
apparent in this stage, necessitating packed red cells
All formulas are potentially imprecise. Treatment
 or whole blood transfusions.
 is based on the patient's response to treatment,
monitoring by
Common Fluid and
Vital signs
Electrolyte Problems
Mental status
Hypernatremia
Serial blood work
Blood gas analysis
Hypernatremia is the most common electrolyte abnor-
mality encountered in human burn patients, and it is
Central venous pressure
a result of unreplaced evaporative water loss from the
Urine output and analysis
 burn surface. It can be noted in dogs under similar
circumstances. The clinical response to this fluid deficit
Adjustments in the rate of fluid administration are
is loss of weight and blood volume. There is a rise in
based on the serial measurements of these
serum sodium and chloride above 145mEq/l and
parameters.
110mEq/l, respectively. There is a concomitant rise in
 BUN as well as serum and urine osmolalities. Osmotic
When capillary permeability returns to near normal
 diuresis can cause similar signs in uncontrolled hyper-
levels after 24 hours, less Ringer's intravenous fluid
alimentation regimens and sepsis. Serum sodium
support is required for intravascular volume expan-
levels rising to 170-180mEq/l leads to delirium, con-
sion and urine output. With evaporative loss of water
vulsions, and death.
through a large burn surface area, 5% dextrose in
Electrolyte-free fluids (5% dextrose in water; D5W)
water is additionally used to offset this deficit in the
or hypotonic solutions are used to re-expand the extra-
second 24-hour period: 1-2ml/kg X percentage of
cellular fluid loss and correct this abnormality.
burn per day. If needed, colloid or plasma at 0.3-
0.5ml/kg per percentage of burn or 0.5% albumin at
Hyponatremia
1g/kg/d has been used in persons during this time
 period. They also have potential use in the veterinary
Hyponatremia, or water intoxication, is most preva-
patient. Body weight; urine output; and blood analysis
lent in children who receive large volumes of
of hematocrit, serum protein and albumin, electro-
electrolyte-free (D5W) or hypotonic solution during
176
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
resuscitation. Dogs allowed to consume large amounts
fluids (containing 4-5 mEq/l potassium) with mainte-
of water before proper fluid resuscitation may also
nance fluids (containing 13-35mEq/l) on an equal
manifest this condition. Convulsions ensue when
basis.
serum sodium and chloride levels plummet below
130mEq/l and 80mEq/l, respectively. Serum and
Acidosis
urine osmolalities decrease and an increase in urine
output with low specific gravity can be seen. This
Acidosis is most commonly seen in the early postburn
 problem can be corrected by restriction of free water
 period. Metabolic acidosis is the result of poor tissue
and sodium replacement (3% to 5% solution) adminis-
-Ioe Aiojeiidsa1 Aq papunoduos aq Aeu jnq uoisnjad
tered slowly over 6-12 hours.
dosis secondary to smoke inhalation or pulmonary
disease. Patients attempt to compensate with an
 increased respiratory rate to reduce pCO2. Blood and
Hyperkalemia
urine pH may drop below 7.35 and 5.5, respectively.
A modest degree of hyperkalemia is a common result
Treatment consists of improving tissue perfusion,
of hemolysis and tissue necrosis in the first 48 hours
maintaining adequate oxygen saturation, and the judi-
 in burned animals. Acidosis can enhance potassium
cious use of sodium bicarbonate, if necessary, based
elevation. Renal failure can cause a dramatic rise in
om a blood gas analysis and base-deficit calculations.
serum potassium levels. Adrenocortical insufficiency
 in humans can promote hyperkalemia. Electrocardio-
Overload Syndrome
grams can reflect the severity of hyperkalemia. Therapy
for hyperkalemia is directed at protecting the heart
Administration of crystalloids and colloids in excess of
 from potassium's depressive action on the conducting
volume losses results in overexpansion of extracellular
system and toward reducing those levels, while cor-
fluid spaces. One should be suspicious of fluid over-
recting the underlying cause(s). Serious cardiac con-
 lbad if urinary output approaches intravenous fluid
duction toxicity can be reversed with the judicious
administration. In animals, rales on thoracic ausculta-
 administration of calcium. Serum potassium can be
tion and the appearance of pulmonary edema on radi-
decreased by sodium bicarbonate or glucose and
ographs are most commonly noted. Peripheral edema
insulin to promote the shift of potassium from the
pads aum paseaap e Kmfut umq a oi paelaum
extracellular space. Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis,
gravity, and an elevated serum sodium level should
and cation-exchange resins have been used in severe
alert the clinician to this complication. Treatment con-
 cases of hyperkalemia in humans.
sists of decreasing volume replacement, diuretics, and
Potassium levels are ideally maintained at 3.5-
closely monitoring serum electrolytes.
4.5mEq/l. Intravenous administration of fluids low in
potassium, including 0.9% saline or lactated Ringer's,
Oliguria
should be used.
The most frequent causes of oliguria is hypovolemia
Hypokalemia
from inadequate fluid resuscitation in relation to fluid
losses from evaporative water loss, diarrhea, hemor-
After 48 hours, renal excretion of potassium is acceler-
rhage, and increased capillary permeability. Acute
-addns ssaun eualeody u insan Aeu pue paie
tubular necrosis due to myoglobin casts in the kidney
mentation is instituted. Potassium (15-20 mEq/l)
or administration of nephrotoxic drugs can result in
may be added to commercial replacement solutions
complete renal failure.
(4-5mEq/l) to maintain serum potassium in the
Increased fluid volume replacement can reverse
normal range. Supplementation should be increased to
 prerenal oliguria by improving renal blood flow and
 80mEq/l if serum potassium falls below 2.5 mEq/l as
restoring vascular volume. Additional medical man-
long as renal function is maintained and an electrocar-
agement directed at improving renal perfusion may be
diogram is monitored for signs of potassium toxicity
necessary, including the judicious use of intravenous
(mild hyperkalemia: peaked T waves, widening QRS,
dopamine. Mannitol or furosemide can be instituted.
decreased P wave; moderate hyperkalemia: amplitude
 Failure to respond suggests acute renal tubular necro-
sis. Acute renal shutdown necessitates intensive moni-
lation, asystole). A safe rate of potassium administra-
toring and dialysis to maintain the patient until renal
tion is 0.5mEq/kg/h.
function (if possible) can improve. Acute renal tubular
A second method to maintain adequate potassium
 necrosis in face of major thermal injuries is particularly
levels is that of alternating commercial replacement
foreboding in the veterinary patient.
Management of Specific Wounds
177
Anemia
ity of the burn. Weighing patients is useful to deter-
mine how they are responding, keeping in mind that
 Assuming patients have a normal hematocrit in the
resorption of extravascular extracellular fluid after 48
 preburn period, anemia in severely burned patients is
hours will account for initial weight reduction to a
the result of direct red cell destruction and a significant
preburn weight.
reduction of the life span of red cells. Following suc-
cessful fluid resuscitation, the artificially high hemat-
ocrit noted in the early postburn period will decline
Assessment of the Thermal Injury
after 48 hours. Hemolysis from sepsis, internal bleed-
ing, and related complications can enhance the anemia.
Following initial patient stabilization, the primary goal
Whole blood or packed cell replacement should be
in the management of all burn patients is early wound
 instituted to maintain a hematocrit above 25%. Sup-
closure. Bum depth and regional involvement must be
plemental  oxygen  is  advisable  in  seriously  burned
determined in order to develop a proper medical/
patients due to increased oxygen consumption in
surgical plan.
their hypermetabolic states. Conditions contributing
 Early assessment of burn depth can be difficult.
to red cell destruction or a fall in production require
Pinching of the skin to assess burn depth by the fissure
correction.
created is inaccurate in the early hours after injury
unless the wound is obviously deep. Advanced fuli-
thickness thermal necrosis is distinguishable as a
Nutritional Support
thickened, leathery, brown-black eschar (Fig. 7-13). In
some cases full-thickness burns are a bloodless "pearl"
 In view of the hypermetabolic state of the severely
white. A fissure or separation at the interface between
burned patient and the expenditure of energy from
viable and nonviable tissue commonly forms within
evaporative heat loss through the burn wound, efforts
7-10 days after full-thickness thermal injury. Superfi-
must be initiated to keep the patient in a state of posi-
cial burns may appear as reddened, inflamed skin with
a thin scab or crust formed on the surface. Partial-
protein diets can be introduced provided that renal
thickness (second degree) burns, however, may be
and liver function is adequate. A balanced diet can be
indistinguishable grossly from full-thickness (third-
offered in increasing amounts after 48 hours. Vitamin
degree) burns in the initial days until separation of
supplements can be added to the nutritionally bal-
 viable and nonviable tissue occurs. Unsinged hair may
anced diet. Keeping the room temperature at 31 °C can
 be plucked effortlessly from deep partial thickness and
reduce the caloric expenditure of the patient. Patients
full-thickness burns (Fig. 7-14). Adding to the confu-
who are able to display a healthy appetite are intro-
 sion is the fact that progresive circulatory compro-
duced to greater amounts of food up to 2-2.5 times
mise from thrombosis may result in further tissue loss
 maintenance requirements, depending upon the sever-
within the first 72 hours after injury. Depending on the
HG. 7-14 (A, B) Hair easily plucks out of the third-degree scald injury on the shoulder of this cat.
178
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
heat source and its application, the veterinarian may
 management is instituted to control infection, promote
see a halo effect of first- and second-degree burns sur-
separation of the nonviable surface, and promote epi-
rounding a third-degree burn.
thelialization of the denuded areas.
 Extensive burns generate extensive costs. Materials,
supplies, medication, surgery, and hospitalization 
Partial or Full Thickness?
easily can result in bills up to several thousand dollars.
With the presence of a burn eschar, it is not possible
 Owners must be prepared for the financial and emo-
to determine immediately the amount of dermis
tional commitment they will face in seriously burned
damaged or destroyed. During conservative man-
animals. In some cases euthanasia is a humane and
agement, the necrotic surface may delaminate over
lbogical alternative.
several days, allowing assessment of the surviving
tissues.
At the time of surgical debridement, a scalpel
Initial Wound Management
blade can be used to partially incise through a
portion of the eschar, giving a cross-sectional view
 After excessive hair is carefully clipped from the burn
of the skin edge. In the case of partial-thickness
area, the wound is examined to help determine its
burns, viability can be observed in the lower
depth and extent. Because skin has low thermal con-
dermal segment. The thicker skin overlying the
ductance and releases retained heat slowly, thermal
dorsum of the trunk and cervical areas is easier to
-addy Amu ienu au rae anuuos ues aeup
visualize.
pmom mq au on am no as pa go g
within 2 hours after injury can decrease the duration
of thermal retention and reduce the depth of tissue
 injury. The optimal liquid temperature is 3 °C-17°℃,
As noted in Chapter 1, the poorly developed capil-
and the burned area should be cooled by immersion
lary loops of the superficial plexus explains the general
or compresses for at least 30 minutes. (Unfortunately,
lack of blister formation with thermal injuries.
most cases are not presented promptly).
Extreme burns can result in destruction of tissues
-0id jeu areme aq pue ani ul seare Suyoed pioay
below the skin (fourth-degree burns). A detailed phys-
longed cold may further injure compromised tissues.
ical examination is required to assess other regional
Discretion must be employed when cold fluid is
structures, including the eyes, ears, oral cavity, respi-
applied over a broad burn area in order to avoid hypo-
ratory tract, urogenital tract, anus, and footpads
thermia in a shocky patient. Topical cool water with a
 However, patients may be subject to multiple forms of
spray nozzle also is useful in removing caustic agents
trauma simultaneously: neurologic injuries, fractures,
from the skin surface.
and other internal injuries should not be overlooked.
 Analgesics are an integral part of burn wound man-
 agement. Sedatives or general anesthesia also may be
required during procedures in which pain may be
Burn Wound Infection
inflicted. Good systemic analgesics include the follow-
 ing: oxymorphone at 0.02-0.06 mg/kg IV every 4 hours
Aisnonas a cn pear saiean a shasard sisdas
(dogs); butorphenol 0.05-0.20 mg/kg IV every 6 to 12
 burned patient. Protection from sepsis includes con-
hours (dogs, cats); and morphine sulfate 0.20-0.50 mg/
tainment and control of bacteria colonizing the burn
kg SQ, IM every 4 hours (dogs). Consultation with an
wound, prevention of the accumulation of purulent
anesthesiologist is advisable not only to discuss
-ponas jo uonuaaard 'pumom umq a uo aaeus
optional analgesics and dosages but also to select the
ary contamination, avoidance of additional tissue
most appropriate anesthetic protocols for surgery.
 trauma, promotion of an environment conducive to
healing, and removing all nonviable tissue as early as
 possible. In the case of large areas of necrotic skin, the
Topical Agents
 author firmly believes in early surgical excision of the
necrotic eschar. Early eschar removal does more to
Detergents,
peroxides, and harsh antimicrobials
control infection and promote a viable vascular bed
should not be applied to burns. Additional tissue
 suitable for closure than any other treatment modality.
trauma and circulatory compromise can convert a
 This is reserved only for areas of distinguishable full-
partial-thickness burn to a full-thickness loss. Copious
thickness skin necrosis. Superficial- and
1 partial-
lavage with sterile isotonic solutions followed by a
thickmess burns are not routinely excised: topical
broad-spectrum antimicrobial ointment is satisfactory
Management of Specific Wounds
179
for small superficial and  partial-thickness thermal
sepsis and the promotion of a viable vascular bed suit-
injuries. Until the veterinarian can clearly delineate
able for surgical closure.
between partial-thickness and full-thickmess thermal
injuries, “this initial conservative approach
is
Conservatioe Debridement
appropriate.
Topical agents can be applied beneath a bulky.
Conservative debridement  in  veterinary medicine
sterile, protective bandage. This is most effective when
 includes the use of enzymatic debriding agents, the
dealing with the lower extremities in order to protect
application of weting agents to the injured area by
the wound from contamination and external trauma.
immersion into water or isotonic solutions (hydrother-
Extensive burns involving multiple regions are more
apy), and the application of wet dressings. All three
difficult to cover. In many cases, topical agents may
methods can be used to facilitate softening and separa-
uado, asepueq e inoum Aisea arou padde aq
tion of necrotic tissue from the surrounding and
therapy" by buttering burn ointment on the areas with
underlying viable tissues.
a sterile glove or applicator can be performed two or
 Stainless steel surgery buckets can be sterilized and
three times daily. Areas can be gently dabbed or rinsed
used effectively for the cat and smaller dog (Fig. 7-15).
with warm isotonic solutions to remove debris prior
Small containers also can be covered with sterile plastic
to reapplication of the ointment. Serial debridement 
liners. The patient is immersed in warm sterile saline
also may be performed as necrotic tissue separates.
for 15-30 minutes once or twice daily. Following soaks,
A variety of nonirritating topical antimicrobial
loose necrotic tissue is removed with thumb forceps
agents are available on the market. Selection is of
and scissors. Floating the affected area improves visu-
 u sa  rs u a 
alization of strands of attached necrotic tissue for
thermal wounds, a broad-spectrum ointment that is
removal. Hydrotherapy is most difficult and time con-
easily applied and rinsed is desirable. Furthermore,
suming in large dogs. After dabbing water from the
the ointment should be nonpainful, nonirritating, min-
patient's body, silver sulfadiazine ointment is applied
 imally absorbed systemically, and nontoxic. Of the
prior to returming the patient to a heated cage. The
 agents commonly available, including polymyxin-
cage must be cleaned with antiseptic agents periodi-
bacitracin, furacin, povidone-iodine, gentamicin, maf-
cally to prevent wound contamination from urine and
enide (Sulfamylon), and silver sulfadiazine (Silvadene);
feces.
only silver sulfadiazine fulfills most of these criteria.
Wet-to-wet dressings are an alternative to immer-
This water-miscible ointment is sold in jars or small
sion hydrotherapy. They are best used for extremities
tubes (see Chapter 4).
or local areas of the trunk. Periodic application of
sterile saline or lactated Ringer's solution using
a
syringe is necessary to offset moisture evaporation
Escharotomy
A burn eschar that embraces the circumference of the
trunk or extremity can form a biologic tourniquet that
impairs blood and lymphatic flow. In the thoracic area,
respiration can be impaired. Although a rare event in
veterinary medicine, an escharotomy (eschar-relaxing
incision) is indicated. Escharotomy incisions can be
used to facilitate the penetration of enzymatic debrid-
ing agents (see Chapter 4).
Debridement
 Debridement, the removal of devitalized tissue, is a
key component to management of partial-thickness
FIG. 7-15 Kitten with extensive burns. The patient was
and full-thickness burn areas. Conservative mechani-
immersed in warm saline placed in a sterilized stainless steel
cal debridement (e.g., wet-to-dry dressings), aggres-
sive surgical debridement, and enzymatic debridement
bucket. This facilitated softening dried, necrotic skin adhered
are commonly employed to remove necrotic tissue.
to the wounds. Forceps and scissors were used to trim off the
Removal of dead tissue is essential to the control of
tissue in a serial fashion.
180
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
 from the bandage surface. Alternatively, a plastic per-
servative treatment. Under these circumstances,
forated catheter can be incorporated into the second-
surgical excision using general anesthesia has the
ary or absorptive layer of the bandage for easier fluid
potential to eliminate the necrotic wound in a single
ae saepuea (s randeu aas) aas e yim uisn
stage. Grafing knives can facilitate tangential excision
left on the wound for several hours. Antimicrobial
of the nonviable tissue at the level of the hypodermis
agents can be included in the wetting agent employed.
(Fig. 7-16). Ahealthy granulation bed , suitable for flap
Wounds can be debrided during bandage changes as
or graft closure, rapidly forms within 5-7 days. Elec-
required.
uassa are samiein pue sdi remssea Kranenon
Conservative debridement is used by the author
for hemostasis.
when aggressive surgical debridement is difficult or
inadvisable. This includes the removal of small areas
Wound Closure Options
 of necrotic tissue adherent to tendons, ligaments, or
underlying body structures where no clear delineation
of a fascial plane can be employed for accurate exci-
Once a viable vascular wound bed is free of necrotic
sion. When necrotic tissue is largely removed and
tissue and infection, there are several options for
 infection is under control, other topical dressings and
closure. Superficial- and partial-thickness burns fre
 agents also may be considered (see Chapter 4).
quently re-epithelialize within 3 weeks with support-
ive care. Deep dermal partial-thickness burns take
Aggressive Debridement
longer. Full-thickness skin defects may heal by con-
traction and epithelialization from the bordering skin.
Aggressive debridement or "wound excision" is the
Extensive burns usually require closure with skin
removal of the entire burn. Large areas of full-thick-
grafts or skin flaps, depending upon the extent and
ness skin necrosis impede granulation bed formation
lbocation of the wound(s).
and dramatically increase the risk of infection. Several
While allografts and xenografts have been used for
days or weeks may pass before spontaneous separa-
temporary coverage of thermal injuries in humans,
tion of the necrotic tissue can occur with more con-
autogenous free grafts are required for permanent cov-
A
FIG. 7-16 (A) Extensive thermal wound in a dog. The burn eschar contained numerous abscesses. (B) A graft knife facilitated
excision of the necrotic skin and hypodermis. A healthy granulation bed formed within 1 week, which was suitable for wound
6 n saaed wog) (e-z lg aas) sena yound pue suauaueape uys 'sdey uaned [eixe jo uoeunquos e Suisn ainson
Massive trunk wound ca used by thermal trauma. Vet Med Report 2:159).
Management of Specific Wounds
181
 erage of large full-thickness thermal wounds. Partial-
bined with inhaled particulate matter (superheated
thickness grafts harvested with a dermatome and
 soot) can reach the pulmonary tissue, causing serious
meshed with a 3:1 ratio is considered the best free-
 damage. Bronchial spasm, laryngeal spasm, pulmo-
 grafting technique for resurfacing large wounds. On
nary edema, mucosal edema, loss of ciliary function,
occasion, axial pattern flaps can be used alone or in
and compromised pulmonary surfactant will aggra-
combination with free grafts and/or skin advance-
vate hypoxia associated with a smoke-filled room.
ment techniques.
Hot, dry air has a low specific heat, and respiratory
Excessive scarring and wound contracture are
injuries are confined to the upper respiratory tract.
seriouscomplicationsin theburned patient, often occur-
Live steam, with a high specific heat, is capable of
ring when preventative medical/surgical intervention
causing atelectasis, severe pulmonary edema, and
was not instituted for serious wounds. Areas subject to
alveolar damage.
constant motion, such as flexion surfaces, are most
susceptible to wound contracture developmentif major
Dogs and cats trapped in buming buildings often
cutaneous losses occur. Splints, braces, and other
have a strong smoke odor. The hair coat may have
 devices have been employed to minimize these compli-
soot particles. Pets close to flames may have singed
 cations in humans. Z-plasty, pedicle grafts, and free
hair. These clinical findings should alert the clini-
uaand oi Aessaa aq Aeu uoisiaip rns ym shn
cian to closely assess the patient for smoke and
and treatcontractures. Prevention of contracture is obvi-
heat-related pulmonary injury.
 ously preferable to their treatment after formation.
Cosmetic results depend upon the extent of the
Pulmonary parenchymal dysfunction from severe
burn. In contrast to the human, hair growth is an
smoke inhalation is frequently fatal in humans. Hypox-
essential component to the cosmetic outcome of the
veterinary patient. Superficial and minor partial-thick-
-sane sanmban euapa Areuoumd/wsedsousuoq go
ness burns may heal and retain a majority of their hair
follicles for regrowth of the hair coat. Deeper burns
sive treatment to save the patient. High mortality rates
(60%-70%) are associated with humans who develop
result in a greater loss of dermis and hair follicles.
 pulmonary edema within 72 hours after injury.
Complete surgical coverage with skin flaps and full-
thickness grafts can provide an adequate hair coat,
whereas split-thickness grafts provide fewer follicles
Clinical Signs
 and are less durable than fullthickness skin coverage.
Overt clinical signs in dogs suffering from smoke
On occasion, wound contraction, combined with the
inhalation include coughing, gagging, and respira-
overlapping of hair, can reduce the visibility of the
tory distress. Occasionally, ataxia, foaming at the
burn scar with a satisfactory cosmetic outcome. It is
 mouth, rubbing at the eyes, and nasal bleeding are
important to discuss cosmetic results with owmers who
noted.
may have unrealistic expectations.
Overt clinical sigms in affected cats suffering
-jd s sumq jo juawaseueu lesrams Kreuums u
marily limited to fullthickness skin wounds, espe-
from smoke inhalation include dyspnea, vocaliza-
tion, open mouth breathing, lethargy, wheezing.
cially when the wound involves a significant area of
 gagging, nasal mucoid discharge, third eyelid pro-
the patient. Once defined, large burn eschars are best
trusion, and foaming at the mouth.
treated by surgical excision; a healthy granulation bed
 Loss of consciousness may be indicative of
is expected within 5 to 7 days after careful and thor-
hypoxia and possible brain injury.
ough debridement of the dead skin. Topical silver sul-
 In two case reviews in the dog and cat (Drobaz),
fadiazine, with nonadherent dressings, is commonly
most patients with nonthreatening smoke inhala-
employed to protect the wound and reduce the bacte-
tion clinically improved within 24 hours: severe
rial population until split-thickness mesh grafts, axial
cases worsened within this time frame.
pattern flaps, or skin undermining and advancement
can be employed for wound closure.
With major inhalation injuries, an adequate airway
mustbe established. Intubation and ventilatory support
INHALATION INJURIES
with positive-pressure ventilation is indicated in severe
cases. Temporary tracheostomy should be considered
 Smoke contains several toxic gases including CO, SO4
for problematic patients; ventilatory support also can
NO2, aldehydes, HSO4, HCl, benzene, halogens, and
be used in conjunction with the tracheostomy tube. In
hydrogen cyanide. Many of these compounds com-
mild cases of smoke inhalation and direct thermal
182
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
injury, oxygen therapy alone may suffice. Nebulization
tion of contact and penetration, and its particular
of saline and coupage may facilitate clearance of respi-
 mechanism of action. Chemical agents damage the
ratory secretions. In most cases, the tissue injury associ-
skin by oxidation or reduction, dehydration, protein
ated with mild direct thermal injury resolves within 5
 denaturation, corrosion, or vesication. Drain cleaners
days. Serial thoracic radiographs are useful in assess-
and oven cleaners may contain caustic soda, causing
un Adossououoig ioen Aroiendsan a u saueuo bu
tissue corosion. Phenolic disinfectants also may exert
be used to assess the severity of injury. It may be advis-
a corrosive effect on tissues. Sulfuric acid and hydro-
able to transfer the more serious patients to a veteri-
chloric acid may be found in cleaning compounds and
paddmba raaq st ieut auan leajai Aouaiaua Areu
 exert a dehydrating effect on tissues. Hypochlorite,
 to handle these challenging cases.
potassium permanganate, and chromic acid are oxi-
Carbon monoxide poisoning is suspected if the
-uos un uonemseon uanond asnes pue spuase Su
 mucous membranes and blood are cherry red. Carbon
 trast, picric acid, tannic acid, acetic acid, formic acid,
monoxide blocks the oxygen-carrying capacity of
and hydrofluoric acid cause protein denaturation.
hemoglobin. Blood oxygen levels may be low despite
Halogenated hydrocarbons, gasoline, ethylene oxide,
 normal levels of dissolved oxygen in the bloodstream.
and catharides are vesicants, liberating tissue amines
 Carbon monoxide poisoning requires 100% oxygen
(histamine and serotonin) and creating vesicles or blis-
therapy to rapidly reduce the level of carboxyhemo-
ters from tissue contact. Some solvents used for paint-
globin. Mild cases may benefit from an oxygen cage
ing (turpentine, mineral spirits), furniture strippers,
alone. In humans, the half-life carboxyhemoglobin is 4
and concentrated flea dip solutions are examples of
hours breathing room air, whereas this is dramatically
household chemical agents also capable of causing
reduced to 45-60 minutes with oxygen administration
superficial and partial-thickness skin injuries with pro-
 by mask or nasal tube. If accessible, hyperbaric oxygen
longed contact.
can reduce the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin to 30
 In general, caustic agents can be divided into strong
minutes or less. Carboxyhemoglobin can be measured
acids and strong alkalis. Most of these agents destroy
to assess the severity of carbon monoxide poisoning
skin by coagulation necrosis. Vascular thrombosis may
 and progress in treatment of the patient. Local human
be noted with prolonged exposure to stronger agents.
hospitals may be required for precise measurements in
Strong alkalis in particular are capable of causing
problematic patients.
deep-tissue destruction by colliquation, extraction of
As previously stated, additional caution is neces-
water, and precipitation of protein (Fig. 7-18). An
sary during the administration of intravenous fluids.
alkali-albuminate bond may form and redissolve in
Efficacy with short-term (12-24 hours) use of corticos-
Excess water. Alkalis form soluble soaps and protein
teroids is questionable: prolonged use can compound
complexes within the tissues, which facilitate the
the immunosuppression already seen with concomi-
-uos ul siakel 1adap opu suoi [AxoipAu jo aessed
tant major thermal injuries. Diuretics (furosemide)
 trast, hydrogen ions from acids are not complexed.
may decrease intravascular volume without signifi-
The medical history may reveal the nature of the
cant benefits in the treatment of pulmonary edema.
injury, the chemical concentration, and duration of
 Bronchodilators (albuterol) and expectorants may be
contact. However, most cases of caustic burns noted
beneficial. Prophylactic antibiotics are ineffective and
by the author are the result of malicious attacks in
may select out resistant organisms. Their use should
which the agent in question is unknown. Inhalation of
 be based on airway culture. Many respiratory infec-
vapors or consumption of the material should be
tions in animals are noted to be caused by gram-
 determined by physical examination, thoracic radio-
 negative bacteria. Because respiratory equipment is a
 graphs, and oral/laryngeal/pharyngeal examination.
potential source of bacterial infection, care must be
Eyes should be examined very closely.
taken to ensure that sterile tubes and uncontaminated
equipment are used.
Management of Chemical Burns
CHEMICAL BURNS
 Most chemical burns encountered should be lavaged
with large volumes of water. Eyes are best lavaged
Many caustic agents are available for home and indus-
copiously with sterile saline when available. Under
trial use. On occasion these chemicals cause "burns"
 experimental conditions, the results of chemical burn
to animals accidentally or from their malicious appli-
treatment required returning skin pH to normal and
cation to pets (Fig. 7-17). The extent of the injury
varied between acid and alkali bums. While lavage of
depends upon the chemical, its concentration, dura-
30% acid bums for 2 hours returned the skin to normal
Management of Specific Wounds
183
HG. 7-17 (A) Acid burn to the face of a golden retriever. (B, C) Debridement and open wound management were followed by closure
with a local transposition flap.
(D) Close-up view after early hair growth. (From Pavletic MM. 1993. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.)
pH, it took over 12 hours of lavage to reestablish
Over the area for 20 minutes. This may be repeated if
normal pH following a burn with 50% sodium hydrox-
necessary. Table 7-2 summarizes several chemical
ide. Deep chemical burns, especially alkali compounds,
 compounds and their neutralizing agents.
seu poeuon a j uoisixa [enims daap armbai Aeu
Removal of fur facilitates close examination of the
been prolonged.
skin surfaces. Management of superficial and partial-
 Neutralizing agents are occasionally useful in limit-
thickness chemical burns, excluding the potential sys-
ing the extent of injury. They are not a substitute for
temic effects of absorption, is similar to thermal burns.
copious lavage and should never be applied to undi-
 Once defined, deeper necrosis involving the skin and
luted chemical. If used, they can be applied to the
underlying tissues is best managed by excision and
wound in the form of gauze sponges loosely wrapped
closure, unless the minor size, depth, and location of
184
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
C
FIG. 7-18 (A, B) Patient that fell into a caustic soda pit at a petrochemical plant. Extensive chemical burns were present. The patient 
was bathed extensively with a water spray to remove any residual caustic soda. (C) Close-up view of the patient demonstrating
coagulation of the dermis. The patient went into acute renal failure despite aggressive medical therapy and was euthanized.
the wound warrants spontaneous separation and
cellular, ischemic, and muscular damage. The severity
healing by second intention.
of the electrical injury is dependent upon the type of
circuit, voltage, amperage, duration of contact,
pathway of the current, tissue resistance, and the tis-
ELECTRICAL INJURIES
sue's spatial relationship with the current. Electrical
injuries are classified as low-voltage (<1000V) or high-
Electricity can cause electrothermal burns due to
voltage (>1000V). Most dogs and cats present with
arcing of the current between the source and the con-
low-voltage (alternating household current in the
 ductor or when the arc crosses a flexor surface, causing
United States) injuries. High-voltage injuries are rarely
 flame burns when the arc ignites materials adjacent to
seen but are often fatal: wild birds, cats, and
it. It can cause deep thermal burns, with cellular and
 animals capable of climbing poles occasionally contact
vascular destruction of tissue in the path of the current;
high-tension power lines, usually causing instant
 and crushlike injuries occurring secondary to massive
death.
TABLE 7-2
Injurious chemical agents.*+
Mechanism of
Systemic
Agent
Clinical Presentation 
Toxicity
 Immediate Cleansing 
Neutralization 
Common Acids
Sulfuric, nitric,
Yellow, brown grey
Vapor
deos pue iaiem
Mg(OH)z or NaHCO
hydrochloric,
 or black eschar
solution
trichloracetic
Hydrofluoric
 Erythema with central
 None
Water
Calcium gluconate
necrosis
(10%) subcutaneously
Oxalic
Chalky white indolent
 Ingestion only
Water
 Calcium gluconate
ulcers
(10%)
Phenol (carbolic) and
 Painless, white or
 Skin absorption
Water
Ethyl alcohol (10%) or
analogs
brown skin burm
glycerol
Chromic
Ulceration, blisters 
Vapor
Water
 Sodium hyposulfite
Hypochlorous (Clorox)
Second-degree
None
Water
Sodium thiosulfate (1%)
Other Acids
Tungstic, picric, tannic,
Hard eschar
 Skin absorption
Water
Cover with oil
cresylic, formic,
(cavity fluid)
Lyes
NaOH, KOH, Ba(OH),
 Bullous erythema;
 Ingestion only
Water
Weak(0.5%-5.0%) acetic
Ba(OH), LiOH
 slimy or slick
 acid; lemon juice
eschar
Ammonia (NH4OH)
 Bullous erythema;
Vapor
Water
Weak (0.5%-5.0%) acetic
 slimy or slick
acid, lemon juice
eschar
Lime
 Bullous erythema;
 Ingestion only
 Brush off lime in
Weak (0.5%-5.0%) acetic
 slimy or slick 
water
acid; lemon juice
eschar
Alkyl mercury salts
Erythema, blisters
 Skin absorption
Water and remove
Copious irrigation
 from blisters
blisters
Sodium metal
 Painful deep burns
None
Cover with oil
 None, except excision
Vesicants
Mustard gas
 Painful bullae
Vapor
Water; open vesicles
 British antilewisite
snodos Sup
(BAL)
lavage
Tear gas
Erythema, ulcers
Vapor
Water
 No specific agent 
Phosphorus
Erythema to
Tissue
Water; cold water
Copper sulfate (CuSO4)
third-degree
absorption
 packs
for identification only
bum
Ethylene oxide (ETO)
Erythema to third-
None
Allow to vaporize;
 No specific agent 
 degree burm
 then water lavage
*For complete discussion of chemicals and antidotes see Jelenko C. 1974. Chemicals that burn. J Traumo 14:65-73.
*A complete listing and description of injurious chemical agents may be found in the Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materiols, 7th ed.
National Fire Protection Association, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, MA 02210.
185
186
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Aqueous electrolyte solutions are relatively good
tive prostanoid that causes vasoconstriction, thrombo-
electrical conductors with electrical current carried by
sis, and ischemia, enhances tissue necrosis.
mobile ions rather than free electrons. The frictional
The majority of smal animal electrical injuries in
 interaction of colliding molecules generates heat. An
the United States are associated with low-voltage
electrical current generates heat as it passes through
household alternating current (60Hz) within the fre-
body tissues. The rate of heating tissues depends upon
 quency range known to cause striated muscle tetaniza-
the current intensity, the electrical and thermal proper-
tion and nervous tissue paralysis. The heart and
ties of the tissues, and the spatial relationship of the
respiratory centers are more sensitive to alternating
tissue with the current. Tissues have different electrical
current than direct current. Low-amperage 60-Hz
conductivities and dissipate heat at different rates. In
current passing through the head of the dog and cat
tissues electrically parallel relative to the source of the
produce convulsions and respiratory paralysis. Low-
current, heat generation occurs at a rate directly pro-
voltage current is capable of causing fatal ventricular
portional to tissue conductivity In tissues that are
fibrillation, whereas high voltage (>1000V) can
-d Aasa s rnra ieau 'saas u ar
produce respiratory and cardiac arrest. Ventricular
portional to tissue  conductivity.  In  experimental
rhythm may resume in those cases when the high-
models, muscle generates the highest temperatures; on
voltage current is removed. Cardiopulmonary resusci-
cessation of the current, the muscle can heat other
tation may be necessary once the patient is separated
adjacent tissues, including bone. Convective transport
from the electrical source.
of heat through blood is critical for rapid cooling.
Resultant low-voltage oral burns commonly involve
Tissue injury is severe where the current density is
the commissure of the lips, gums, tongue, and palate
greatest—at the point of contact. Electrical contact
in small animals (Fig. 7-19). A centroneurogenic-
with a small surface area results in a concentration of 
 mediated increase in peripheral vascular resistance
 energy that causes coagulation necrosis. As a result,
 has been implicated as the cause of the fulminating
injuries to the tissue deep to the contact burn can be
pulmonary edema occasionally seen with oral electri-
 extensive. Electrical contact with a broad surface area
cal burns in young dogs and cats that bite live electrical
 of the body decreases the current density with dissipa-
 cords. Pulmonary edema would appear to be a greater
tion of the energy. No burns may be noted in these
problem in dogs. Aggressive treatment with oxygen,
diuretics, and corticosteroids is indicated (see below).
More recent studies indicate the local electrical field
 As noted, high-voltage current injuries are uncom-
can be of sufficient magnitude to cause electrical
mon in pets and are usually fatal. The contact or entry
breakdown of cell membranes. Muscle destruction
point is usually depressed, charred, and leathery,
may be caused in part by electroporation, in which elec-
whereas the exit wound at the ground point may be
trical current causes the formation of enlarged pores
explosive. Electrical current also can arc to an adjacent
in the lipid cell membrane: this results in cellular
area if immediate grounding does not take place.
rupture. Muscle and nerve cells appear to be more
Among the organs injured in association with high-
vulnerable to electrical breakdown.
 Electrical current follows the path of least resist-
are the esophagus, pancreas, gall bladder, small intes-
ance, particularly with low-voltage sources. Skin
tine, colon, skeleton, and lungs; depending upon the 
resistance is lowered, however, when the surface is
point of contact, course of the current through the
wet. Neurovascular channels offer the least resistance
body, and the point of exit. Immediate and delayed
followed by muscle, skin, and bone. Nerves and vessels
spinal cord injuries have been reported in humans
 are particularly sensitive to electrical injury whereas
 from vascular and thermal damage. Such injuries may
bone is least sensitive to injury. Studies suggest that all
be temporary or permanent.
tissues beneath the skin function as a single conductor
Necrosis of small intestine, secondary to low-
(or resistor). Tissue damage is the result of converting
voltage injury has not been reported in animals, but
 electrical current to heat. Current intensity is greater
has been reported in humans. This may be explained
in small cross-sectional areas such as the extremities,
by current passage down the anterior mesenteric
whereas large areas dissipate current over a wider
 artery, with heat dissipation in the terminal arteriolar
 area. Small vessels undergo thrombosis, whereas large
branches causing bowel infarction. Paralytic ileus may
vessels may maintain blood flow despite the occa-
also be noted. Despite the fact that this injury has not
sional formation of mural thrombi. Small nutrient
been noted in small animals, the veterinarian should
vessels in skeletal muscle are particularly sensitive to
be alert to vomiting and abdominal pain that may
thrombosis, resulting in deep muscle necrosis in
 suggest bowel injury to animals known to have been
selected cases. Production of thromboxane A, a vasoac-
injured by electrical current.
Management of Specific Wounds 
187
HG. 7-19 (A) Electrical cord burn involving the
oral commissure. Note the pale, bloodless
wound. (B) Other electrical burns can appear 
 brown to black, with possible local hemorrhage.
Management of Electrical Wounds
surgical debridement. Oronasal fistula development in
dogs and cats requires closure with mucosal flaps,
labial advancement flaps, or skin flaps (Fig. 7-20).
Typically, the owner will report seeing their pet bite
Damage to the adjacent dental arcade in young dogs
 an electrical cord or encountering their pet in a state
and cats can result in deviation of teeth, possibly
of tetany with the cord in its mouth. After disconnect-
necessitating their extraction.
ing the cord from the electrical outlet, many dogs will
 Like other major thermal injuries, large areas of
resume breathing. On occasion, owners will report
that they resuscitated their dog or cat by breathing
necrosis warrant debridement and eventual closure as
the severity of the wound becomes more apparent. In
through the pet's nose. Intravenous fluid therapy must
pam roy panmban aq se Aosey 'smu
be performed with caution, since many dogs and cats
muscle groups in order to prevent development of the
will develop pulmonary edema, as discussed above.
compartmental syndrome secondary to high-voltage
Close auscultation of the patient for moist rales is
electricity.
indicative of edema which can be confirmed with tho-
racic radiographs.
 In the presence of life-threatening pulmonary
RADIATION INIURIES
edema, oxygen therapy and the intravenous adminis-
tration of a fast-acting diuretic, such as furosemide
Radiation is a general term for any form of radiant
(Lasix, Butler, Dublin OH), are indicated. Corticoster-
 energy emission from roentgen ray tubes, radioactive
oids may be useful. Analgesics (morphine, etc.) are
elements, luminous bodies, or fluorescent substances.
useful to reduce pain and patient anxiety. Morphine
Burns from solar (actinic) radiation are not a common
can have a sympatholytic and vasodilatory effect;
problem in veterinary medicine; however, in regions
bronchodilators (aminophylline) also may improve
where solar intensity is the greatest, body areas lacking
 respiration and cause vasodilation. In refractory cases,
hair and pigmentation are susceptible to actinic injury
sodium nitroprusside has been cautiously adminis-
(Fig. 7-21). The majority of the discussion in this
tered. Readers are directed to standard medical text-
section, however, is devoted to complications associ-
books for further information.
ated with radiotherapy. Radiation injury concerns the
As noted, most electrical burns from household
veterinary surgeon from two perspectives: first, its
current occur in and around the oral cavity. The burns
pue Aams ym uonenosse u Suney uo anuanu
are pale yellow, tan, or gray and are usually slow to
second, management of nonhealing radiation ulcers.
slough and heal (Fig. 7-19). Many of the mild injuries
Radiation particles are composed of one of three
slough and heal within 3 weeks without the need for
particles: alpha particles, beta particles, and gamma
188
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 7-20 (A) Oronasal fistula in a cat secondary to biting an electrical cord. (B) Full-thickness necrosis of the hard palate is evident.
Closure was accomplished with a labial advancement flap (see Plate 99).
FIG. 7-21 (A, B) Repeated blistering and ulceration of an epithelialized scar in a field trial dog from prolonged solar exposure (actinic
radiation). The scar was the result of the dog falling out of a moving pickup truck several months before presentation. Scar excision
and advancement of hair-bearing peripheral skin was curative. Tissue was submited for histopathologic examination to assure
squamous cell carcinoma was not present.
particles. Alpha (helium nuclei) particles emitted by
may be useful for superficial neoplasms. If used for
radium implants have limited penetrating ability. Beta
more invasive tumors, use of excessive doses can
particles (negatively charged electrons) can penetrate
tissue 1-2cm; its use in radiation therapy generally is
Orthovoltage is uncommonly used today in favor of
limited to skin cancer and other superficial lesions.
megavoltage therapies.
Gamma particles are capable of deep tissue penetra-
 Megavoltage radiotherapy is delivered by radioiso-
tion and are the major form of therapeutic radiation
 tope teletherapy or linear accelerator units in the form
for cancer. Orthovoltage radiotherapy is delivered by
of high-energy X-rays, gamma rays, or electrons.
X-ray-producing units, capable of a power range of
ue aaey shm aeoaeaau Aq papraond suoou
 250-500kV. Photons at this energy level are concen-
energy range of 1-35 million volts. High-energy
 trated in the skin and superficial tissues. Orthovoltage
-us e pue uonenauad iadaap jo alqedes are suoioud
Management of Specific Wounds
189
sparing effect. Neutron radiotherapy involves neutron
Acute skin reactions generally heal within 10-14
bombardment of tissues but is not commonly used
days after cessation of therapy, except in the more
these days in veterinary medicine.
severe injuries. Most cases of simple radiation derma-
The success of radiation therapy resides in applying
titis can be managed with a variety of basic topical
lethal doses to cancer cells, while subjecting normal
agents. Surgeons, however, are concerned with the
tissues to sublethal levels. Unfortunately, because
management of the more severe wounds, particularly
higher doses of radiation may be required to achieve
 in chronic ulceration where healing is problematic.
cancer control, there is an increased likelihood of
Late or chronic changes noted in previously irradi-
damage to normal tissues, including tissue necrosis,
ated skin include thinning and flattening of the epider-
extensive fibrosis, and compromise to local tissue
mis, a decline in adnexal structures, and obliteration
circulation.
 of rete pegs. Grossly, the skin may demonstrate
 Changes occur in irradiated tissue that can have
drynes, thinming, induration and loss of pliability
early or delayed effects on healing. The acute reactions
from fibrosis, and increased pigmentation with a
to skin or mucosa are erythema and desquamation.
reduction of hair growth (Fig. 7-23).
Acute radiodermatitis has been classified into four
 The most significant late change is a progressive
degrees: a first-degree reaction is cutaneous redden-
decline in circulation over time. Chronic obliterative
ing: a second-degree reaction is characterized by a dry
endarteritis is noted, characterized by endothelial pro-
desquamation resulting from a loss of the outer epi-
 liferation, subintimal fibrosis, and gradual reduction 
dermis; a third-degree reaction is characterized by
in lumen diameter. Perivascular infiltrate also is
moist desquamation resulting from destruction of the
present. The ischemia that ensues will impede healing
basal epidermal layer; and a fourth-degree burn is
to a variable degree. If incising into a previously irradi-
characterized by complete skin necrosis (Fig. 7-22).
ated field is unavoidable, the surgeon should avoid or
These changes are dose related. Severe erythema
minimize surgical maneuvers that may further com
shortly after radiation therapy indicates a more serious
promise tissue. Precautions are essential to prevent
 burn injury Other changes observed following radia-
contamination during surgery, since ischemic tissues
tion therapy include hair loss and alterations in skin
are more susceptible to infection. Open wounds have
pigmentation, depending upon the radiation dose,
-uau puosas Aq oueaq aun ioy Airenied e
area irradiated, and individual sensitivity. Hair-
tion, since neovascularization, wound contraction
covered skin is less sensitive compared to hairless skin.
(myofibroblastic activity), fibroplasia, and epitheliali-
 Surviving germinal cells repopulate areas when epi-
zation are impaired. A loss of fibroblasts and their
thelial cells are destroyed. Severe radiation damage
stem cells also impair formation of blood vessels. The
can result in acute ulceration with a loss of germinal
low capillary content and collagen-laden wound bed
cells required for epithelial repopulation.
present form an unstable base for migrating epithelial
HG. 7-22 (A) Erythema and moist
desquamation after completion of orthovoltage
 therapy for the treatment of a nasal carcinoma.
(B) The patient 10 days later. Moist crust
 patches have disappeared, the result of
reepithelialization from germinal epithelial cells
of the epidermis and cutaneous adnexa.
190
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 7-23 Chronic ulcer several months after completion of
HG. 7-24 Necrosis of skin, muscle, and tendon overlying the
radiotherapy (arrow). Note the sparse hair growth,
carpus as a result of radiation therapy. Necrotic tissue,
 nonpigmented hair at the periphery of the radiation field, and
infection, and impaired regional circulation create a major
the dry, flaky epithelial surface.
 sdue oum uoains osed reaaa au oi a 
close this wound.
 cells. Any epithelialized surface formed is more sus-
irradiated wound bed. It must be noted that more
ceptible to trauma. Split-thickness grafts and direct
powerful radiotherapy units can damage deeper
distant flaps carnot be sustained on wound beds char-
tissues, making complete excision down to viable vas-
acterized by these chronic changes (Fig. 7-24).
cular tissue difficult or impossible. Tissue excised
 In general, an uncomplicated closed surgical wound
should be submitted for histopathologic examination
can safely receive radiotherapy as early as 1 week
to assure neoplasia has not recurred. Additionally,
postoperatively. Similarly, elective surgery can be
neoplasms can develop as a result of irradiation or
performed 4-8 weeks after radiation therapy is discon-
chronic inflammation such as Margolin's ulcers (squa-
tinued because inflammation secondary to irradiation
 mous cell carcinoma) in nonhealing burn wounds.
is subsiding and circulation is still satisfactory. As time
Skin flaps, myocutaneous flaps, muscle flaps, and
passes, however, tissue looses vascularity to a degree
omentum may be used to close chronic ulcers. Prop-
proportional to the radiation source, size of the
erly created flaps have their own inherent circulation
area irradiated, fractionation of the total dose, and
and do not require circulation provided by the wound
length of time during which the total dose was
bed, as long as their vascular pedicle is maintained.
administered.
Local skin flaps can be attempted in order to close
smaller debrided ulcers, although the veterinarian
must consider that the regional skin also may have
Management of Radiation Wounds
been affected by the previous radiation treatment.
Local flap failure is more likely than flaps created
Radiation ulcers can develop 10-20 years after expo-
outside the general region irradiated. Axial pattern
sure in humans. In small animals, ulceration is more
flaps may be ideally suited due to their excellent cir-
likely to occur within weeks to months after therapy.
culation and length compared to flaps based upon the
Treatment includes debridement of necrotic tissue,
subdermal plexus alone. Muscle flaps can contribute
control of infection, and early wound closure. If the
circulation to ischemic areas and provide a vascular
wound can be excised down to healthy vascular tissue,
surface for free graft coverage. Myocutaneous flaps
skin grafts can survive. However, skin grafts are
can provide simultaneous wound coverage while pro-
unlikely to survive on an incompletely excised, chronic,
viding a muscle surface to supply circulation to
Management of Specific Wounds
191
ischemic areas. Omentum can be mobilized and passed
mation. Endothelial cell injury may precipitate throm-
 through a smal abdominal access incision, delivering
bosis. Arteriolar vasospasm combined with shunting of
this vascular tissue to poorly vascularized ulcers
 blood from arterioles to venules directs oxygen, nutri-
ents, and warmth from the frozen tissue in an effort to
will enable the surgeon to apply a graft to the viable
preserve central core temperature. Ischemia-reper-
omental surface, if needed.
fusion injury likely plays a sigrificant roll in the loss of
tissue. As blood viscosity increases, sludging and
 Ischemic radiation ulcers normally do not support
thrombosis also may occur. Unless the source of cold is
free grafts. Local flaps may not be possible if the
removed, tissues continue to freeze, and the depth of
skin peripheral to the ulcer also was exposed to the
the damage increases with prolongation of contact.
radiation field. Distant direct flaps will likely fail,
since division of the pedicle(s) relies on revasculari-
Frostbite Assessment
zation of the transferred flap from the recipient
 bed. As a result, any tissue flaps require an intact
Frostbite in small animals is not particularly common in
the United States. In veterinary practice, it is usually
s A     s
diagnosed in retrospect. Animals are most susceptible to
frostbite during bitterly cold days with high winds.
FROSTBITE
Animals lacking shelter and protection from the ele
ments combined with a prolonged exposure period may
Frostbite is the freezing of, or effect of freezing on, a
suffer frostbite to the toes, tips of the ears, scrotum, tip of
part of the body. Contact with metal and other materi-
the tail, preputial orifice, flank skin, or other cutaneous
als that rapidly conduct cold, including water, gaso-
surfaceslacking an adequate protectivehair coat. Unless 
line, and other industrial chemicals, can rapidly
    as   
accelerate the freezing process. The thermal conductiv-
the injury will remain undiagnosed and untreated until
ity of water, for example, is 32 times greater than still
tissue separation becomes evident days later.
 air. Cold air alone, however, is not nearly as dangerous
Upon initial manual examination, superficial frost-
a freezing factor as the combination of chilling air and
bite is classically characterized by soft and resilient
wind. Animals who lose their insulation properties are
tissues underlying the outer layer of rigid tissue. Deep
susceptible to hypothermia and frostbite as peripheral
frostbite is characterized by firm or stiff tissue beneath
circulation is diverted to maintain body core tempera-
the outer rigid tissue layer. Unless the injury is obvi-
ture. Accidental or inappropriate use of liquid nitro-
ously minor, the severity of the frostbite injury
gen and nitrous oxide during cryosurgical procedures
cannot be determined initially. Frostbite classification
can result in serious injury to adjacent healthy tissues
is made retrospectively: first-degree results in cutane-
as well. In all, the type and duration of cold contact are
ous erythema after warming; second-degree, in cuta-
the two most important factors in determining
neous blistering patchy skin; third-degree, in skin
frostbite.
necrosis; and fourth-degree, in soft tissue loss or gan-
High-altitude locations with lower oxygen content
 grene of the extremity. Mild and severe cases of frost-
in the air can increase the likelihood of cold injury in
bite may be indistinguishable for several days.
animals and persons unaccustomed to it. Exertion and
Conservative therapy is advisable until the severity of
labored breathing in this environment accelerate heat
the injury is clearly defined (Fig. 7-25).
loss through the lungs. Inadequate caloric intake can
reduce the ability of the animal to generate heat. The
heat production capacity of the body and the ability to
Management of Frostbite
conserve heat are two of the most important factors in
the prevention of cold injuries. Frostbite can occur in
If there is no chance that the tissues will later refreeze,
above-freezing temperatures from prolonged immer-
the affected area(s) should be rewarmed. Immersion of
sion in animals who lack the insulation and protective
the affected area in a receptacle of sufficient volume
physiologic mechanisms other species possess for
to maintain a umiform temperature of 104 °F-108°F
adverse conditions.
(40°C-42°C) for approximately 20 minutes or until
 Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain
rewarming is judged complete is ideal. Tissues should
tissue injury and death after exposure to cold. Extracel-
never be rubbed or massaged. Soft, dry protective
lular ice crystal formation may damage cells. Rapid
bandages are indicated in small animals. Restriction
freezing can result in fatal intracellular ice crystal for-
of activity is required when the feet are involved.
192
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
D
FIG. 7-25 (A) Close-up view of a kitten with severe frostbite to its paws as a result of being trapped in a freezer for several hours.
poa uado sop au al uap s laumo au uaum eaa au ou paqu Apaa suaed au paou sl epa aaisuax
 contact with the cold metallic shelving enhanced the freezing process.
(B, C) Within days, a clear demarcation of viable and nonviable tissue was noted: digits on all four paws subsequently sloughed.
(D) Necrotic tissue was trimmed; portions of the skin wounds were sutured. Other areas healed by second intention. The patient did
well as a house cat despite these unfortunate circumstances. A similar injury in larger dogs would be considered catastrophic.
Maintaining hydration and a balanced diet are essen-
no beneficial effect has been consistently demon-
tial. Analgesics may be indicated. Topical antiseptics
strated. Chemical sympathectomy  with the use of
and judicious debridement of necrotic tissue or rup-
alpha-blocking agents has shown promise when treat-
tured blisters is advisable. Systemic antibiotics are
ment has been instituted between 2 and 10 days after
indicated for cases where sepsis is noted.
injury in humans. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
 Rapid rewarming causes vasodilation, capillary
drugs may have some benefit in blocking inflamma-
 extravasation, and vascular stasis. Treatment for per-
tory products of cyclooxygenases, prostaglandin F2-α,
sistent vasospasm at one time regularly included
 and thromboxane A, thereby reducing platelet aggre-
heparin or low-molecular-weight dextrans. However,
 gation and thrombosis. The methylxanthine derivative
Management of Specific Wounds
193
 pentoxifylline alone or in combination with aloe vera
cream has shown promise in a rabbit ear model. A rat
foot model demonstrated less tissue necrosis when
'uequon ul pasn aram udse pue auxoad
Controlled clinical trials are required to confirm these
previous reports and the treatments' efficacy in small
animals.
As noted, because of the low incidence of frostbite
in small animals and the initial lack of its recognition
by most owners, the veterinarian is usually contacted
only after signs of necrosis become evident. Surgical
debridement or amputation of the affected area may
be necessary if natural separation has not occurred.
PROIECTILE INJURIES
参
Gunshot wounds to pets and wildlife are not uncom-
mon in rural and inner city areas of the United States.
Most veterinarians have limited knowledge of the
subject of ballistics and the treatment of projectile inju-
ries. This section reviews the basic concepts of this sur-
FIG. 7-26 Cross-section of three cartridges (rounds)
Ballistics is the science of motion of a projectile
demonstrating the components of a cartridge: primer, case,
 during its travel through the barrel of a firearm (inte-
powder, and bullet. The example includes (left) a .22 caliber
rior ballistics), its subsequent path through the air
hollow-point rimfire cartridge, (center) a .38 caliber partially
(exterior ballistics), and its final path into the target
jacketed centerfire handgun cartridge, and (right) a .30 caliber
(terminal ballistics). The seriousness of bullet wounds
partially jacketed centerfire hunting rife cartridge. The priming
often is considered to be limited to those tissues in the
direct path of the projectile. However, under some
mixture in the .22 rimfire is located at the rim base of the
circumstances, the wounding potential of projectiles
cartridge case, unlike the centrally located primer in the
can occur beyond the pathway of a projectile.
centerfire cartridges. (From 1981 Winchester Sporting Arms
Missiles are any projectiles, including bullets,
and Ammunition Catalog, Olin Corp., Winchester Group, New
pellets, fragments from grenades, and explosive shells.
Haven, CT. Modified with permission.)
A cartridge (round) is composed of four basic compo-
nents: primer, case, powder, and bullet. The primer,
located at the base of a centerfire or rimfire cartridge,
weapons and replicas. Spiral grooves cut in the interior
usually contains the compounds lead styphnate,
 bore or barrel (rifling) impart rotation or spin along the
barium nitrate, and antimony sulfide. Small arms car-
 bullet's longitudinal axis, thus stabilizing its fight in 
 tridges are classified as centerfire or rimfire, depending
 a gyroscopic fashion. The metal between the "twist"
 on the location of the primer. In centerfire cartridges,
or length of a complete revolution of rifling varies by
there are two types of primers: Boxer and Berden.
manufacturer. The grooves are called lands.
American centerfire cartridges are Boxer primers.
The three basic theories that have been used to
When struck, the primer at the cartridge base explodes
explain the wounding capacity of projectiles in the
and ignites the powder charge (propellant) in the
medical literature include the momentum theory.
casing as the flame passes through the flash hole(s)
kinetic energy theory, and the power theory. None
(Fig. 7-26). Black powder, a mixture of charcoal, sulfur,
takes into account all factors that influence bullet
and potassium nitrate was the propellant used until
destructiveness. The kinetic energy theory, however,
the end of the 19th century. Moderm weapons use
is the most popular and is considered the most accu-
smokeless powder, comprised of a single- or double-
rate in describing the potential lethal effects of
base nitrocellulose. Burning of the propellant within
projectiles.
the confines of the casing releases gas to propel the
bullet. Pyrodex, a synthetic black powder, has replaced
Massx Velocity2
the orignal black powder for older black powder
2g [where accleration of gravity (32.16ft s*)]
194
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
The formula demonstrates an important fact per-
with a slug weight of 55 grains. Hunting bullets range
taining to the kinetic energy of a given projectile: dou-
from 50 to 350 grains, depending on their intended
bling the missile mass increases the energy of the
use. Shotguns are measured according to their gauge
projectile by a factor of 2, but doubling the velocity
arepue
capable of firing pellets of  variable
quadruples the kinetic energy. Lighter bullets can be
diameters.
driven at greater velocities and maintain a commensu-
Low-velocity projectiles travel less than 1000ft/s,
 rately lower chamber pressure than can larger projec-
medium-velocity projectiles between 1000  and
tiles, with a lower recoil or rifle "kick." Moreover, a
2000ft/s, and high-velocity projectiles faster than
smaller projectile traveling at a high velocity has a
2000ft/s. However, 2500ft/s and above generally is
flatter trajectory for greater accuracy. The mass, shape,
selected as the designated speed for high-velocity pro-
design, and composition of a bullet also will influence
jectiles. Most handguns fire bullets in the low- to
its function and capacity to inflict trauma.
medium-velocity range, whereas most rifles fire bullets
in the medium- to high-velocity range. The projectile
desigm and composition also will influence how
Projectile Caliber and Design
rapidly the bullet loses its velocity and the wounding
capability upon impact. High-velocity bullets are of
Bullet caliber generally is considered the diameter of
two basic designs: full patch (military) and expanding
the slug or weapon bore (from land to land) measured
 (hunting). In 1908 the Hague Convention (and the sub-
in millimeters or thousandths of an inch (2 digits, hun-
sequent 1949 Geneva Convention), recognizing the
dredths; 3 digits, thousandths). However, caliber may
horrendous wounding potential of expanding (deform-
be given in terms of bullet, land, or groove diameter.
 ing) bullets, advocated the use of fully jacketed (full
 Unfortunately, caliber specification using the U.S.
 patch) bullets in warfare (Fig. 7-27). The outer jacket,
system is neither accurate nor consistent. Although
 composed of metals with a higher melting point than
U.S. ammunition has been measured in fractions of an
the lead alloy core (copper, cupronickel, brass, soff
 steel), restricts bullet deformation during passage
nology, including the 5.56 mm M-16 and 7.62 NATO.
through the barrel, lead residue fouling of the barrel,
For historic reasons, some cartridges corresponding to
and deformation on impact with the target. Most
caliber .30 rifles show cartridge designations made of
bullets are composed of 90% lead with 10% antimony
two figures: the first referring to the caliber and the
or tin employed as a hardener. However, some are
second to the year of introduction or the original
composed of zinc, magnesium, clay, wood, plastic,
 powder charge. For example, a cartridge designated
'odmd papuau nau ue Supuadap 'xem io raqqni
.30-06 means a .30 caliber bullet introduced in the year
Fully jacketed bullets have greater penetration into the
1906. This is a common cartridge employed in the M-1
 target than partial or nonjacketed bullets which flatten
and other rifles. A .30-30 and .30-40 designation indi-
 or "mushroom" to a variable degree on impact, thus
cates the caliber and the number of grains of gun
increasing their resistance during penetration and
powder (30gr, 40gr) in the cartridge. Occasionally, the
passage(Fig. 7-28).
second number indicates the muzzle velocity of the
 The conically shaped tract formed by mushrooming
projectile (250 to 3000ft/s). Some of the caliber .30
hollow-point, or soft lead-tipped, partially jacketed
designations include the name of the manufacturer or
sa 0t oh dn spumom wnoy uen sannoalond Suumu
person who developed the cartridge (.30 Remington,
the volume of a military bullet of similar weight and
.30-30 Winchester, .30-40 Krag, .30-06 Springfield, etc.).
velocity, although the full-patch projectile also is
U.S. cartridges that originally used black powder are
capable of causing sizable tracts due to flight instabil-
designated by caliber, powder charge, and bullet
ity and occasional fragmentation achieved at very high
weight (for example, .45-70-405). Some manufacturers
velocities.
refer to bullet caliber and cartridge length. In all, liter-
As noted, bullets can be modified in various fash-
ally thousands of handgun and rifle cartridges have
ions to enhance deformation by exposing a variable
been developed over the years, with nomenclatures
-oe! Aenred) dn au ie koe peal hos au jo uoniod
that are modified and formulated by manufacturers.
eted bullet), by designing bullets with an exposed
It is important to note that bullets of the same
hollow tip, or by flattening the bullet and scoring two
caliber can vary according to their weight, velocity.
crossed grooves on its surface (improperly termed
design, shape, composition, and accordingly, potential
dum-dums). Other bullet designs are on the market that
wounding capacity. Most military rifle bullets through-
 promote deformation upon impact. A hollow point
out the world weigh between 40 and 200 grains,
soft-tip bullet can expand twofold to threefold. A
including the .223 caliber (5.56mm) M-16 cartridge
partial jacket may be included to protect the soft lead
Management of Specific Wounds
195
DgivB
SPORTiNG-Expanding
Ogive
MILITARY-Full Jacket
FIG. 7-28 Ilustration of bullet performance on impact with
(Boat-tail)
bone. The bullet on the left is an unjacketed .22 handgun bullet
that traversed the abdomen of a cat before striking the wing of
the ilium. The bullet on the right is a .25 caliber fully jacketed
bullet that fractured a lumbar vertebra. Note the lack of
deformation compared with the soft-lead .22 slug. (Pavletic
 MM. 1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine: projectiles
MILITARY RIFLE
ballistics-part I. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 8:47.)
HG. 7-27 Cross-section of the sporting or hunting bullet and
military fully jacketed (full-patch) spitzer bullets. Note the
exposed soft-lead tip in the hunting bullet, which promotes
expansion (mushrooming) and fragmentation on impact. Fully
jacketed bullets have the lead core encased in an outer metallic
sheath to minimize expansion on impact; however, many
military bullets have been known to fragment on impact at
high velocity. The boat-tail design has a minor influence on the
bullet's velocity. (From DeMuth WE. 1966. Bullet velocity and
design as determinants of wounding capability: An
experimental study. J Trauma 6:222. Modified with permission.)
FIG. 7-29 Various rifle rounds (from left to right): 5.56mm
from deformation and fouling during its passage
full-patch M-16; .243 Winchester hunting; 6.0mm hunting; .30
through the barrel and to provide controlled expan-
sion and penetration in the target. Rapid deceleration
Marlin hunting; .45-70 Government hunting. The partial copper
and instability of the expanding bullet as it passes
jacket of the sport or hunting bullet provides controlled
through the target may promote bullet fragmentation
expansion of the exposed lead core on impact. (Pavletic MM.
and enhance tissue destruction (Fig. 7-29 and 7-30).
 Some bullets are not jacketed, but have an outer metal-
1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine: projectiles
 lic plating (copper, copper-zinc) and lubricant as
ballistics—part I. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 8:47.)
exemplified by the common .22 caliber rimfire car-
tridge (Fig. 7-31). These thin "protective veneers" do
not restrict bullet collapse on impact. Air-powered
called cannelures, in which a lubricant is inserted to
projectiles, shotguns, and exploding bullets have a few
improve passage through the barrel. A cannelure may
unique features that are worthy of discussion sepa-
be present to allow the casing to crimp onto the bullet
rately. Bullets may have circumferential indentations,
and seal the propellant.
P
B
e (unod moloy ael leed 'unue se :(tu ot hal uo) spunou unpueq snonea jo smaa don (a) pue apis (v) oe-/ 5
.44 Remington Magnum; 45 caliber full-patch military; .45 copper jacketed hollow point; 45 caliber unjacketed; .45 caliber unjacketed.
Each bullet varies in weight, velocity, and performance on impact. Bullets with an exposed lead core, especially with a hollow point,
aea aay ot paadxa a pnom pq yoed- au aq yed-g e ym paied pedu uo up ot papadxa aq piom
Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 8:47.)
ea gs (e') u's (uh ot ha spno aul go suisap pue szis nea au aesuop sapies 2 asau t- 
n  d mou  a smd u a  s  a f    ao e
 a uuna  pe hasa h au aa pea paeoun ym a uo h iunod mo ue ge oa yy 'a m
metallic coating that has little influence on minimizing bullet deformation. The decorative coating is reported to shun dirt, grit, and
lint. A waxy coating or priming on the rimfire long rifle illustrated lubricates the bullet and minimizes fouling of the gun barrel.
Note that the .22 designation does not indicate the projectile's weight, composition, design, or velocity, only its diameter. (Pavletic
MM. 1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine: projectiles ballistics—part 1. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 8:47.)
196
Management of Specific Wounds 
197
Air-Powered Projectiles
spring-air system, or the gas-compression system.
Despite their modest size, velocity, and poor aerody-
Air-powered rifles, developed in 16th-century
namic design, air-driven pellets are capable of causing
serious injuries and fatalities at close range. Indeed,
Germany, use compressed air to drive the projectile in
place of gases released by exploding powder. Today.
many air pistols and rifles have muzzle velocities com-
parable to the low-velocity bullets propelled by gun-
air rifles, air guns, and air pistols are used for target
powder. The skinhas the ability to absorba considerable
shooting and small-game hunting. The air gun is dis-
amount of energy and will limit the penetration of
tinguished from the air rifle in that the gun is a smooth-
low-velocity projectiles. It is not uncommon to find air
bored barrel, whereas the rifle has a rifled barrel. Air
pellets or BBs on radiographs, residing in the hypoder-
pistols may have a smooth or rifled barrel. Standard
mal and adjacent muscle/fascia.
calibers for air arms in the United States include .177,
.22, and .20 (5 mm). The basic types of air gun ammuni-
q paid asa ros ,a e, pe a a are uo
Shotguns
are steel of .175 caliber. The most common missile
employed in the air rifle is the waisted diabolo pellet,
Shotguns, by design and function, differ from hand-
possessing an hourglass shape. The diabolo pellet
 guns and rifles. Shotguns are smooth-bored long-bar-
weighs an average of 8.2 grains in .177 caliber and 15.0
reled guns designed to fire a shot charge consisting of
 grains in .22 caliber. The Sheridan rifle employs a .20
a large number of small spheres that form a pattern
 or 5mm pointed conical bullet weighing 15.3 grains
depending on the distance and "choke" of the barrel.
with a hollow base that expands to seal the bore and
Although there are handgun and rifle cartridges that
 engage the rifing (Fig. 7-32). Because of their extremely
fire bird shot, the comparatively low number of these
light weight, these pellets rapidly lose velocity and
small pellets limits their effective use to small
become nearly harmless at 100 yards.
All moderm air rifles operate on one of three gas-
varmints.
 The shotgun shell is composed of a paper or plastic
compressing systems: the pneumatic system, the
casing, fused into a metallic cup or base that contains
a centerfire primer. Brass or steel casings occasionally
are employed outside North America. In the bottom of
the shell casing, the powder charge is located adjacent
to the primer Wads of plastic, felt, paper, or cork are
used to compartmentalize the powder and shot charge:
the wadding also plays a role as a compressor or shock
absorber to improve shot dispersion. The shot charge
is in turn sealed within the casing by a thin wad or by
crimping the end of the shell casing (Fig. 7-33). Upon
discharge, the shot and wadding materials in front of
the propellant are pushed forward. At close range, this
wadding may enter the body, along with the advanc-
ing shot charge or deer slug.
In the United States and other countries the caliber
of shotguns is expressed in gauge or bore. This unit of
measurement is derived from the early 19th-century
HG. 7-32 Side view of air-powered projectiles (from left to
method of measuring the weight of one cannon ball in
right): .20 (5mm) Sheridan pellet; .22 diabolo pellet; .177
pounds; the caliber of a shotgun is a comparison with
diabolo pellet; .175 BB copper-plated steel sphere. Each pellet
lead balls of the same diameter contained in 1lb of lead
has a hollow base. Sheridan pellets are harder than the
for a specific gauge. A 12-gauge shotgun, for example,
conventional diabolo pellet. These projectiles are commonly
has a caliber corresponding to the diameter of a lead
ball, 12 of which are equivalent to 1lb.Shotgun gauges
encountered as incidental findings subcutaneously or in a
muscle during radiographic examination. At close range, these
in common use are the 10 (.775 inch), 12 (.73 inch), 16
(.670 inch), 20 (.615 inch), and 28 (.550 inch). Another
 projectiles are capable of seriously wounding or killing small
common shotgun is the .410, a number that designates
animals. (Pavletic MM. 1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary
a caliber of 410 thousandths of an inch.
medicine: projectiles ballistics—part 1. Compend Contin Ed Pract
aauon e ui alzznu a wong peards sasreuo jous
Vet 8:47.)
fashion. The pattern is influenced by the shotgun's
198
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
B
C
A
sd (s) pue pem ssd () sadod apmodun (e) tad () eau eia () aus unous jo uoas-sso () / 
baffle, (6) shot,(7) plastic collar, (8) outer plastic hull.
(B) Cross-section of shotgun shell with (4) cardboard wadding. The other numbers correspond to the descriptions in (A). (Diagram
redrawn from 1981 Winchester Sporting Arms and Ammunition Catalog).
(C) Cross-sectional view of a shotgun shell. A portion of the casing was removed to show its contents. Compare this shell to (B).
choke or constriction at the barrel end. Choke varia-
 Charges fired from shotguns of all types have a
tions include full-choke (maximal constriction or
muzzle velocity between 1100 and 1350ft/s, although
tighter cluster pattern over a greater distance),
rifle slugs may reach a velocity of 1850ft/s. Strikes to
modified choke, improved cylinder, and skeet-bore or
an animal in which the shot patterm is contained within
cylinder-bore (little or no constriction with a wide
a 12-inch diameter will have a velocity of 1000 to
aea au u “(auei ason 1e Sunumu 1oy uaed
1350ft/s (Fig. 7-36). Considering that a single pellet or
field, 30 to 40 yards is the effective range for most
shot imparts a striking force of 9.56 ft-pounds at a
shotguns. Within 20 yards the dense pattem is too
muzzle velocity of 1295 ft/s and the combined force of
 destructive, whereas beyond 40 yards the wide disper-
235 pellets at point blank range delivers 2247 ft-
sion of shot and the loss of velocity limits its
pounds, there is a formidable comparison to the
effectiveness.
muzzle energy of the 1250 ft-pounds of an M-16 rifle.
Various gauge shotguns are capable of firing a
Buckshot and slugs, by virtue of their greater mass,
variety of pellet or shot sizes (Fig. 7-34). Occasionally,
maintain their velocity more effectively at longer
shotguns are used for hunting large animals by shoot-
 ranges. Considering that large shot can have a weight
 ing buckshot or single slug loads. Foster "deer" slugs.
comparable to a .22 bullet, with a velocity over
most commonly used in North America, compare
1000ft/s, the combined wounding potential of the
favorably with high-powered rifles at ranges of 100
larger shot is evident.
yards, but perform poorly past that range due to their
The use of shotguns as weapons against dogs is not
mass and design, resulting in rapid dissipation of
umcommon. The variety of loads, pellet sizes, and their
energy (Fig. 7-35). Although uncommonly used,
wounding capability in relation to the distance from
shotgun shells desigmed to fire metallic arrowlike
the muzzle adds a number of additional factors for the
darts, called flechettes, have been employed primarily
veterinarian to consider when confronted with such
 as a military weapon.
injuries.
Management of Specific Wounds
199
COMPARATIVE SHOT SIZES
71/2
BB
01
Ho.0
No 00
SIZE
Dia. in
.08
.09
.095
.11
12
13
15
18
24
25
.30
.32
.39
Inches
permission).
1
Thii till i!:
world: (1) pumpkin ball, (2) rifle slug, (3) Brenneke slug, and
(4) Balle Blondeau. (From DeMuth WE. 1979. The mechanism of shotgun wounds. J Trauma 1l:219. Redrawn with permission).
Sherman and Parrish classified shotgun wounds
ranges, the shotgun is one of the most destructive
 into three basic types based on the pattern of distribu-
weapons available (Fig. 7-37 and 7-38).
tion, depth of penetration, and range. Type I injuries,
reflecting a relatively long distance between animal
Exploding Bullets
and shooter, are wounds in which the subcutaneous
tissue and deep fascia are penetrated; type II injuries,
 produced at closer range, perforate structures beneath
Although presently illegal to purchase and very diffi-
the deep fascia; and type III wounds, inflicted at point
cult to attain, exploding bullets were available in the
blank range (less than 3 yards), produce an extensive
1980s for defense purposes to the public and law
central zone of tissue destruction with a small periph-
enforcement sectors. Exploding bullets initially were
eral halo of pellet holes. Extensive tissue destruction
developed by the British in the early 1800s to penetrate
at close range is due to the high velocity and wider
 barriers and ignite enemy powder caissons. They were
total surface area formed by the pellet group in flight 
subsequently employed in limited quantities during
as compared to a single projectile. Thus, at very close
the American Civil War for antipersonnel use. There
200
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
SHOT PATTERN AT ＶARYING
   DISIANCES
10 Yards - 7"circle
40 Yards- 36" circle
 FIG. 7-36 Shot pattern at varying distances (Drawing modified from Bell, Mj. 1981. The management of shotgun wounds. J Trauma
11:522.)
 detonate on impact with the patient: rough handling
of the projectile during retrieval can result in their
 Explosion. Undetonated bullets retained in the animal
present a potential hazard to the patient and the
 surgeon attempting to remove them. Exploding bullets
generally are semijacketed hollow point bullets filled
as e Aq paraao au rapmo aaisndxa ue ym
lead shot and a percussion cap (or simply a primer
anvil) covered by a wax coat. Deceleration of the bullet
on impact ignites the percussion cap or primer, result-
ing in the explosion of the powder charge. From a
historical perspective, the .22 bullet that struck Presi-
dent Reagan contained an aluminum canister in its
FIG. 7-37 Shotgun (type I) injury to the flanks caudal lumbar
nose filled with the explosive lead azide that is deto-
nated by impact or high heat. Bullet deformation and
area and hind limbs (No. 6 birdshot). The dog presented
the release of projectile fragments on impact report-
several weeks after injury: considerable skin loss had occurred.
edly increases the local tissue destruction compared to
Healing by second intention was nearly complete. The shotgun
 a regular bullet of similar size. However, this conten-
blast occurred at the level of the deep circumflex iliac artery
tion has been questioned by some authorities.
and vein. Destruction of these major direct cutaneous vessels
and regional collateral circulation was the major factor
Interior and Exterior Ballistics
involved in the skin loss.
Modern bullets are fired from barrels that contain
are several variations of exploding bullets. Bullets
helical grooves (rifing) that serve to spin the projectile
have been designed to split or fragment on impact.
omn its longitudinal axis to stabilize its flight. Rifling
 Alternatively, bullets containing an explosive charge
 improves the flight characteristics of a bullet in much
Were designed to explode on impact. These latter pro-
the same way the helical fletching of an arrow serves
jectiles can be somewhat troublesome if they fail to
to improve its flight. Despite rifing, projectiles
Management of Specific Wounds 
201
E
HG. 7-38 (A) Massive softissue injury and a comminuted tibial fracture were the result of a (type Il) shotgun injury. Some pellet
entry wounds are still evident. Maggots were present, but manually removed during the initial debridement procedure. (B) Serial
debridement was performed on a daily basis. (C) The wound healed by second intention. However, the external fixation was later
replaced by internal fixation with a bone plate and cancellous bone graft (successfully).
 traveling at a high velocity can become unstable in
by creating a larger wound cavity and enhancing
flight. A bullet can deviate from its longitudinal axis:
 energy absorption by the tissue. The tissue trauma
it can yaw or tumble prior to or after impact with a
from low-velocity projectiles primarily is restricted to
body region, thereby increasing its profile in contact
the crushing and laceration of tissues at the permanent
with tissues, resulting in greater tissue trauma. Flight
tract. By comparison, high-velocity projectiles can
 instability enhances the likelihood of greater tissue
expend considerable energy to adjacent tissues in the
destruction and promotes bullet fragmentation.
form of shock waves and cavitation. Cavitation, a tem-
From an "offensive" standpoint, the ideal projectile
porary cavity (5- to 30-microsecond duration) up to 30
has the following characteristics: (1) good ballistic
times the diameter of the projectile, is most evident as
shape (needlelike design); (2) high sectional density
a projectile's velocity markedly increases (Fig. 7-39).
(ratio of projectile mass to area of presentation); (3)
Following the temporary lateral and cranial expansion
high velocity; and (4) the capability of deep penetra-
of the surrounding tissues, a negative pressure forms
tion with a controlled expansion.
with a sucking effect that has the potential of drawing
debris and contaminants into the wound. The stretch-
ing and compression of tissues as a result of cavitation
Terminal Ballistics
can enhance the magnitude of tissue destruction, espe-
cially if circulatory compromise occurs secondary to
The seriousness of bullet wounds is often considered
vascular disruption or thrombosis: fractured bones,
only in relation to those structures in the path of the
torn vessels, bowel ruptures, and contusions of the
bullet. Although this generally is true for low-velocity
heart and lungs may occur without direct contact from
 projectiles and stab wounds, it does not account for the
high velocity projectiles.
severity of injuries associated with some high-velocity
A projectile may penetrate or perforate various
 missile injuries. Bullets damage tissue in three ways:
tissues or structures, depending on its impact velocity.
tissue laceration and crushing, shock waves, and cavi-
mass, design, and composition of the target struck. A
tation. Both low- and high-velocity projectiles create
'a ou um juod Anua ue seu pumom suenauad
permanent tracts as they pass through tissues. Expand-
xa pue Anua ue seu pumom Suqenojiad e searaum
ing bullets increase the tissue damage of a projectile
(through-and-through) without the projectile's reten-
202
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
tion in a specified structure or region. To avoid confu-
sion, it is best to restrict the terms penetrating and
perforating to the anatomical structure in question. Pro-
jectiles that exit the body make it more difficult to
determine the weapon involved. Projectiles retained in
the patient without impacting bone are more likely to
be lower-velocity projectiles.
 Besides velocity and mass, three factors are respon-
sible for the greater destructiveness of projectiles,
A
   o r  
to impact, which permits a variety of positional con-
tacts with the tissues; flight instability, apart from
-oid au jo uonou leuonppe ue Suppe snu guqum.
jectile; and secondary projectiles formed by missile
fragmentation and bone shattering (Fig. 7-40).
The entry wound usually is smaller than the exit
wound because bullet tumbling, distortion, fragmen-
tation, and secondary projectile formation increases
the bullet's destructiveness in a conelike fashion as it
passes through the body. This general rule on wound
size, however, is misleading. If the gun muzzle is
placed very close to the target when fired, expanding
gases are released that accentuate the size of the entry
wound, and powder burns also would be noted. The
magnitude of the temporary cavity is proportional to
8888888888
the energy imparted by the projectile during target
B
penetration, with the missile's energy decreasing
FIG. 7-39 (A) Note low velocity, no cavitation, and small
Exponentially with the distance penetrated. Smaller
entrance and exit. (B) Greater cavitation is noted as velocity
projectiles may dissipate their energy more rapidly
anaid y sana ienba m sanald rarn u
increases. Note that the size of the exit wound is influenced by
that has expended a majority of its energy in the center
(1) target thickness or depth, (2) tissue density, (3) projectile
 of the target may exit without the gaping exit wound
velocity and composition, and (4) the amount of kinetic energy
expected.
expended as the projectile(s) exit the target area. (From Swan
The specific gravity of the tissues struck also will 
KG, Swan RC. 1980. Gunshot Wounds. Littleton, MA: PSG
influence the wounds produced. Tissues with greater
Publishing. Modified with permission.)
TUMblING
FIG. 7-40 Schematic diagram illustrating tumbling (forward rotation around the center of the mass). This unstable flight pattern
increases the projectile's surface presentation to the target, enhancing tissue damage. (From Swan KG, Swan RC. 19s0. Gunshot
Wounds. Litleton, MA, PSG Publishing. Modified with permission).
Management of Specific Wounds
203
density, such as bone, are affected more adversely than
 Stretching and tearing of the vessels can occur, result-
are soft tissue structures. The retentive forces that
ing in hemorrhage or thrombosis of the damaged
combat the disruptive forces of the projectile also vary
vessel. The resulting damage has been likened to a
with the tissue struck. Skin and lung have elastic prop-
crushing-type injury. However, the large arteries, such
erties that better accommodate the energy insult which
as the canine femoral artery, are more resistant to indi-
helps maintain the organ's integrity. Liver and muscle
rect trauma. Circulatory insult and tissue necrosis
have a similar specific gravity and absorb energy from
increases the likelihood of infection. Various studies
a high-velocity projectile in similar fashion. However,
using the thigh muscles of goats and dogs for high-
the temporary cavity and permanent tract formed in
velocity projectile studies have demonstrated the sur-
the liver are greater in magnitude compared to skeletal
prising resilience of wound healing in the face of
muscle because the liver parenchyma is less cohesive
moderate trauma, as long as the circulation to the area
and resilient. Cavitation in pulmonary tissue is com-
remains predominantly intact. From clinical experi-
paratively minor due to the elastic fibers within the
ence in humans, it is known that the extent of devitali-
spongy network of their parenchyma.
zation is affected by time.
At high velocities, cavitation has also been recorded
 Many researchers contend that bullet fragmentation
in bone. The explosive effect on the bone drives splin-
better explains the size and severity of high-velocity
ters of bone ahead of the projectile, increasing the mag-
projectile wounds. Bullet fragmentation and the dis-
xa au Aiqissod pue aeuep anssh yos jo apniu
persion of secondary projectiles causing muscle tearing
wound. Greater fragmentation will occur where corti-
enhances the absorption of the projectile's energy by
cal bone predominates. Thus, long bones composed of
the target and is more likely responsible for the mag-
large amounts of cortical bone have greater density as
nitude of the large conical-shaped tracts formed by
 compared to flat bones, such as the ribs, with a greater
hunting bullets. In these cases, radiographs can help
proportion of cancellous bone. High-velocity rounds
define the boundaries of the wounded tissue for
are more likely to cause massive tissue destruction
debridement by the location of metallic fragments
when bone is struck. Paradoxically, any high-velocity
deposited in the area. Fragmentation of projectiles, in
rounds can pass through soft tissue structures and exit
association with bone impact and fragmentation, best
the body without resulting in massive tissue necrosis.
a  pou e aiss a snxa
This can be explained primarily by the fact that a con-
rounds and the more powerful handguns.
siderable proportion of the projectile's kinetic energy
The severity of tissue injury by a given projectile in
,Aq pamides, 1o ,u pasodap, ou st (Aoaa 'sseu)
large part is determined by the total kinetic energy
the body.
absorbed by the patient. For example, a jacketed, high-
High-velocity projectile injuries to the abdomen of
pe Aaxa raddn ue senad pe amq Aoa
anesthetized cats have demonstrated that the abdomen
exits intact without a significant loss in velocity would
swells immediately and collapses, followed by a
cause substantially less tissue injury compared to a
-ond e um nq suau ssal jo uoisuedxa puosas 
bullet that deforms and rapidly decelerates in the same
longed duration. Damage to the abdominal contents
tissue. If this projectile is completely retained, the area
can occur with the first expansion, but the explosive
has absorbed the damaging energy of the round. Thus,
injury noted develops during the second expansion.
tissue trauma is better understood in terms of how
Intestinal gas expands, resulting in multiple bowel
rapidly and completely the energy is lost (absorbed by
perforations. The explosive shock wave displaces
the body) and the tissues in which the energy is dis-
viscera, tears the mesentery, and can rupture blood
sipated. As noted, certain body tissues that are elastic
vessels away from the permanent tract. The extent of
and maintain their architectural integrity better sustain
 soft tissue necrosis associated with high-velocity pro-
projectile trauma.
jectiles is variable and can be difficult to assess. Muscle
tissue is extremely resilient, and damage may occur
only a few centimeters from the muscle tract. The
tissue destruction occasionally noted hours to days
Gunshot Wound Infection
later in some high-velocity injuries, most likely is
atributable to progressive vascular compromise to the
All gunshot wounds are contaminated. Low- and
tissues involved. Cavitation and the associated shock
high-velocity projectiles are capable of driving or drag-
wave apparently result in blunt contusion of the asso-
uaad a oui (a  ) sap  a
ciated tissues. The volume of necrosis is influenced by
tract. Bacteria also are driven into the wound. As
the severity of the vascular compromise. Vessels need
noted, the negative pressure formed during formation
al aoai e Aq aa anns aq ru
of the temporary cavity associated with high-velocity
204
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
 projectiles also is capable of "sucking" contaminants
history, skin wounds may be mistaken for bite wounds
into the wound to a variable degree. The notion that
or vehicular trauma. There are occasions in which the
projectiles, especially high-velocity projectiles, are
owner, a wimess, or police officer may provide specific
sterile due to heat generated during passage of the
information pertaining to the weapon. Knowledge of
bullet through the barrel and air is a fallacy. The risk
the weapon can help the veterinarian determine the
 of infection is more likely in the case of high-velocity
-ueu lesrams aedoidde pue aseuep anssh lenuaiod
projectile injuries where extensive tissue damage and
agement of the injuries.
circulatory embarrassment in the region are more
 Most gunshot wounds to dogs and cats in a city are
likely. In general, the incidence of infection associated
due to low-velocity handguns (Figs. 7-41 and 7-42).
with low-velocity rounds limited to skin, muscle, and
High-velocity gunshot wounds from hunting rifles are
fascia is remarkably low.
seern more commonly in rural areas. Data from Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital indicated that shotgun
 wounds occurred in urban, suburban, and rural areas.
Diagnosis and Management
 Radiographs of the patient are useful to determine
Considerations
the presence and location of retained bullets or
fragments.
In many cases, the owner is unaware of their pet being
Low-velocity projectile injuries cause compara-
shot; clearly, pets that are allowed to roam unsuper-
tively less tissue destruction, except to those tissues in
vised are at greatest risk of being shot. Without a
their path (Fig. 7-43 and 7-44). Such wounds confined
FIG. 7-41 (A) German shepherd shot in the
C
lower cervical area during a robbery attempt.
(B, C) The .38 caliber round entered the thoracic
inlet and passed through the anterior
mediastinum before coming to rest in the triceps
 musculature. Because the projectile round
passed through soft tissue only, without exiting
the body, it was considered a low-velocity
round. Treatment consisted of only local wound
 preparation, lavage, and application of a sterile
dressing. The pneumomediastinum resolved
without incident. No attempt was made to
remove the projectile.
Management of Specific Wounds
205
to the skin and underlying muscle generally are treated
by local debridement of the entry and exit wound (if
present), local wound lavage, and the application of a
sterile dressing. Systemic antibiotics may be advisable
in selected cases. Bullets that are easily and safely
accessible can be removed. They generally are not
pursued unless they involve a joint or vital structure.
Attempts to probe and explore the wound simply to
find a bullet should be discouraged to reduce the likeli-
hood of further tissue damage and infection. Occasion-
ally, however, bullet retrieval may be required for
legal purposes.
High-velocity projectiles, because of their greater
 kinetic energy, may require wound exploration and
HG. 7-42 Example of a .44 magnum handgun round to the
debridement due to the greater tissue destruction
foot of a German shepherd. The dog was shot by the owner's
present. This is most evident when bone is struck,
former boyfriend during a heated argument. The considerable
allowing the effect of the projectile's kinetic energy to
power of the .44 magnum is evident. The paw was suspended
be more fully expressed. Many of these cases may
by remnants of two metatarsal bones and soft tissue. The limb
require considerable debridement, orthopedic repair,
and a variable amount of open wound management.
required amputation.
HG. 7-43 (A) Cervical gunshot wound with extensive
subcutaneous emphysema.
(B) Compression of the skin easily displaces the extensive
pocket of air.
(C) Tangential perforation of the trachea by the handgun round.
This area was minimally debrided and sutured closed. Within
24 hours, over half the air was resorbed; by 48 hours most of
the subcutaneous air was gone. (A large-gauge needle and 
vacuum pump can remove a portion of the air that has
accumulated in patients with extensive subcutaneous
emphysema. With closure of the air leak, the ability of the
 patient to resorb the air can be dramatic.) (From Pavletic MM.
1996. Gunshot wound management. Compend Contin Edu Pract
Vet 18:1285-1299.)
206
The amount of kinetic energy lost by a bullet depends
omn four factors: (1) the kinetic energy possessed by the
bullet on impact; (2) deviation of the longitudinal path
 of the bullet (yaw, tumble) enhancing projectile retar-
sse jamq jo sso Aq rraa sau go ssol (e) onp
and shape during passage through tissues; (4) the
  e s  snss
High-velocity hunting bullets, with an exposed soft
lead tip or hollow point, can deform and fragment
readily secondary to flight instability and tissue retar-
dation, especially when bone is struck. A direct hit on
dense cortical bone will cause a catastrophic decelera-
tion of the bullet and its fragmentation. Bullet frag-
ments and shards of bone are driven into the adjacent
soft tissues (Fig. 7-45 and 7-46). Disruption and pulpi-
fication of tissues combined with circulatory com-
promise results in massively destructive wounds.
Skin, muscle, and fascia are sufficiently elastic to
absorb a portion of this energy while maintaining their
FIG. 7-44 Great Pyrenees with a urethral tear dorsal to the
integrity, although cavitation is a major disruptive
scrotum. A second hole was noted in the tail. What initially
appeared to be two gunshot wounds was actually one. The dog
through tissues. Passage of a high-velocity round
through the soft tissue of the upper thigh, for example,
was shot from the rear with his tail between his legs. The hole
 may not result in a wound that necessarily will require
in the patient's tail lined up with the cutaneous hole above the
wide debridement: treatment may be more conserva-
scrotuim.
tive than that suggested by the literature.
HG. 7-45 (A) High-velocity rifle round to the head of a German shepherd farm dog. Arrows denote the pathway of the projectile.
Massive bone and soft tissue destruction were evident. (B) Lateral view demonstrates the large exit wound through the bony orbit
with destruction of the right eye. A long incision was made connecting the entry/exit wounds, and bone fragments and necrotic soft
tissue excised. The cosmetic and functional results were comparable to a patient subjected to eye enucleation.
Management of Specific Wounds
207
HG. 7-46 (A) Extensive trauma secondary to a high-velocity rifle round. The entry wound was on the left side of the face of this
Labrador. Note the extensive trauma to the mandible. (B) The large irregular exit wound is noted on the right. There were fine
fragments of the projectile associated with the bilateral mandibular fractures. The majority of the high-velocity round exited the
patient, despite impact with this dense bone.
FIG. 7-47 (A) Air-powered BB gun injury to a Siamese cat. Note the small, semingly innocuous-appearing entry wound. The
'sisuoiseue pue uonoasal [eunsau Sunduoud (saqoid Aq pauaulu) saoe[d omi u patenoad sem lem jamoq au paleaaa
Prompt surgical intervention prevented development of peritonitis. However, veterinarians should be aware that retained air-
 powered projectiles are a common incidental finding.
With few exceptions, gunshot wounds to the brain
atory laparotomy is advisable (Fig. 7-47 and 7-48). Tho-
and abdominal cavity require surgical exploration in 
racic gunshot wounds in the human are second in
the human. This approach can be justified in the small 
fatalities only to bullet wounds to the brain. Paradoxi-
 cally, many of the cases in the human and the dog may
successful management of gunshot wounds to the
be treated by conservative management. A chest tube
brain, primarily because of their grim outcome in most
may be required to treat a hemothorax and pneumo-
cases. Because abdominal gunshot wounds carry a
thorax, but a thoracotomy is often unnecessary unless
high incidence of bowel injury and peritonitis, explor-
the esophagus has been penetrated or perforated,
208
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 7-48 (A) A .22 Rimfire round to the lower abdomen of a cat. The bullet lodged against the wing of the ilium. The owner's
boyfriend accidentally shot the cat with his handgun. (B) The owner elected to euthanatize the cat. The abdomen was opened on
[upqe aup snounout suauas umadet jo auaaid au um (sisaise) suoesad Hamoq adnu ueaaau uaounsd
cavity (arrow). Exploration is mandatory for projectile wounds to the abdomen.
the heart was struck, a major tear in the tracheobron-
A Few Tips
chial tree has occurred, or hemorhage and air leakage
If a projectile enters and exits a soft tissue
into the thoracic cavity remains unchecked. Gunshot
 wounds to the neck in humans are explored routinely
area, it may not be possible to determine low
by many surgeons due to the risk of esophageal injury
versus high velocity by examination of the
entry and exit wounds.
and the presence of vital vessels. However, it is con-
troversial whether mandatory cervical exploration is
If a projectile enters soft tissue and is
justifiable in small animals, depending on the severity
retained in the tissues, it is most likely a
of the wound and the neurological status of the animal.
low-velocity projectile.
If the bullet cannot be located, it has either exited
 If a projectile impacts dense bony structures 
the body or has passed into another area of the body.
 and exits the body, the projectile is likely a
The body compartment above and below the area shot
high-velocity round.
should be radiographed in these situations. A bullet
 passing through the thorax into the abdomen will, at
Keep in mind that high-velocity rounds
the very least, require an exploratory laparotomy,
decelerate over a distance and can impact a
although a bullet passing in the opposite direction
target with a significantly lower velocity.
 does not automatically mandate a thoracotomy. Bullets
have been known to migrate and embolize if they gain
Arrow Wounds
access to the circulatory system. Major vascular
obstruction may lead to serious consequences. Simi-
larly, bullets have been known to enter the tracheo-
The bow and arrow has been an effective weapon for
bronchial tree only to be coughed up and swallowed
centuries. Despite its primitive origins, the bow and
by humans (Fig. 7-49).
arrow is a highly lethal weapon in the hands of an
Management of Specific Wounds
209
B
HG. 7-49 (A) An unusual case of a migrating projectile. A Sheridan pellet was retrieved via urethrotomy at the level of the os penis.
 The dog presented with an acute urinary tract obstruction during a walk with the observant owner.
pu lop aui ress Aua paleau e paeaaan lem ieunqe ierael au jo uounxa as raad au paaap suderdope (a)
apparently been shot some weeks before, with the pellet entering the urinary bladder. Its abrupt passage into the urethra caused the
immediate urinary obstruction.
experienced archer. Arrows lack the knockdown
compound bow can fire a bolt with velocities of over
power and destructive capacity of high-velocity rifles.
250ft/s with an amazingly flat trajectory and short-
'sm eare la e uns uo Aai smone a
range accuracy. Crossbows have been criticized as
heart, major vessels, liver, etc.), resulting in fatal hem-
silent, accurate, and highly lethal weapons that could
orrhage. If an arrow weighing 450 grains has a velocity
be used to advantage by poachers. However, studies
of 250ft/s, it generates only 26ft-pounds of kinetic
have indicated they are not silent and can be a difficult
energy, considerably smaller than that generated by
weapon to master. Furthermore, rifles, especially of a
rifles.
lower caliber with a sound suppressor, are a preferred
 Bows are measured by their draw weight, which
weapon for illegal hunters, compared to a single-shot
is the number of pounds required to pull the draw-
crossbow. Crossbows are required by law to have a
string to a full draw (full length of the arrow). In
ro uef u hq a jo areuosp paaad ci aes
order to reduce the effort required to draw the bow-
dropping. Many states restrict the ownership and use
string of a conventional longbow or recurve bow,
of crossbows for hunting.
compound bows  were developed  in 1967 that
Arrows vary in length, weight, shaft composition,
employ a series of pulleys, elliptical wheels, and
fetching, nock style, and arrow point (head). Arrow
cables. Improvements in the compound bow can
shafts are commonly composed of cedar, aluminum,
reduce draw weights from 50% to 86%. Some states
or carbon fiber. Composite arrows of aluminum-car-
limit compound bows to those with a reduction of
bon fiber or wood-fiberglass also have been intro-
no greater than 65%.
duced. Shaft length, width, and weight can be varied
A variation of the longbow is the crossbow. A
depending on the game hunted and bow employed
-ndod paue 1 'plo sreas oooz Aateuxoidde uodeam
(Fig. 7-50).
larity in the Middle Ages. The crossbow fires a bolt or
quarrel approximately half the length (14-18 inches) of
imparting twist or rotation to the shaft to stabilize its
the average longbow arrow. A crossbow can have a
flight, similar to the rifling previously discussed.
draw weight from 125 to 200 pounds. One crossbow
Turkey feathers once were the material of choice for
has been developed with a draw weight of 300 pounds,
Aq paseldan Aiaaissaaoid uaaq aaeu inq lua
whereas the upper draw weight of a longbow is around
plastic because of its durability and greater availability
70 pounds. A 125-pound draw crossbow produces the
(Fig. 7-51). The arrow nock adjacent to the fetching is
same energy as a 60-pound draw compound bow. A
the portion of the arrow that is notched to engage the
210
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 7-50 Arrows of various designs and materials. Note the
HG. 7-51 Fetching departs spin on the arrow to improve flight
short (aluminum) quarrel of the crossbow (top) and 1800s
stability. The left and middle arrows have plastic fletching; the
North Dakota Sioux Indian arrow, second from top (the
right arrow has turkey feather fletching.
feathered fetching has long since deteriorated). The remaining
arrows are composed of wood, fiberglass, and aluminum. The
bow-fishing arrow was composed of heavier fiberglass for
greater penetration through water.
"serving" area of the bowstring. The nock design
varies according to the personal preference and
requirements of the archer (Fig. 7-52).
The head or point is the engaging end of the arrow
and varies in shape, design, and weight. The arrow-
heads made by the early American Indians were
chipped into points using flint, obsidian and other
hard rock, antler, and bone. Indians later created metal
points from scraps of iron. Some primitive tribes use
wooden tips formed by tapering the shaft that lacks
FIG. 7-52 The arrow nock. Right is an example of the Sioux
fetching.
arrow.
Modem arrowheads are exclusively metal, and are
s su ue sd p  as iqs
(broadheads). Field points lack cutting blades, but
have a pointed or dull tip for small game or target
practice (Fig. 7-53). In contrast, broadheads generally
have two to four balanced cutting blades for larger
 game. There are a wide variety of broadhead designs.
 Many arrow shafts have threaded tips that allow the
hunter to change hunting heads. Some of the older
arrows have a tapered shaft with the head applied
with adhesives and crimping. Broadheads are usually
    r ds r
 Broadheads are usually designed to slide past bone
(ribs) to assure a clean strike to a vital spot. Broad-
heads are of three general types. Fixed-blade broad-
heads are fixed to the shaft and sharpened manually.
FIG. 7-53 Field points and arrowhead for bow fishing. Field
Modular broadheads contain a center column or
points have a round silhouette that lacks cutting blades. Note
ferrule holding three to four replaceable blades.
Mechanical broadheads are designed to have recessed
the bow-fishing arrow has a metallic barb to capture the fish
blades that fly open on impact: in a closed position,
upon penetration.
Management of Specific Wounds
211
they have excellent ballistic properties. Barbed heads
gunshot wounds. Few cases are reported in the human
are illegal for hunting game (except for bow fishing)
 and veterinary medical literature. Many cases go
since the head will not work out of a wounded animal
unreported.
that receives a nonfatal shot (Fig. 7-54).
Arrow wounds in humans and companion animals
Management of Arrow Wounds
are uncommon in the United States compared to
Most arrows are not barbed and may be able to be
removed without great difficulty. Target arrows have
a smooth field point equal to the diameter of the shaft
and should slide out unimpeded. Broadheads with
the body, making removal more difficult. Their razor-
sharp cutting edges have the potential to lacerate
tissue when withdrawn. If the arrow is lodged near a
 vital area or vessel (based on radiographs and exami-
nation), surgical exploration and removal are advisa-
ble. There are reported instances when vital organs
(e.g., heart) have been penetrated with a foreign object,
which paradoxically plugs the hole created and pre-
vents fatal hemorrhage by its presence. Surgical explo-
ration and removal is obviously the safest option in
this situation.
HG. 7-54 Broadheads vary in shape, design, weight, and
From the surgical standpoint, retention of the arrow
would allow the clinician to determine the depth and
number of blades (usually two, three, or four). Broadheads are
location of the arrow wound prior to exploration (Fig.
frequently threaded and screwed onto the arrow shaft. The
7-55). Owners may have removed the arrow before the
broadhead, third from the left, has three blades that open in a
animal is brought to the clinic. In the field, removal can
tripod fashion (fourth from left) upon penetration in order to
be attempted if the arrow is lodged in a nonvital area
enhance its cutting surface area.
to facilitate transport of the animal. Alternatively, the
Ue uou iaunu e Aq sous sem suaed aut paisaans moue aul jo Aioafei 'eaie iequn au iaao punom mouv (v) s-/ 
elevated position. Note the "cross" wound (arrows) created by a four-blade broadhead hunting arrow (symmetrically placed blades).
 Management consisted of local wound debridement, lavage, and a sterile dressing. Because of the large lacerations created, it was
possible to close the skin wounds with establishment of separate ventral drainage.
(B) Lumbar arrow wound: the triangular cut was created by a broadhead arrow with three blades.
212
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
exposed shaft can be cut off to prevent accidental
cials is advisable to assure evidence is obtained,
jarring of the arrow. The animal should be immobi-
handled, and transferred properly to assure legal
lized to prevent additional injury with a retained
aspects of the case are properly maintained. Other
arrow during transport. In the emergency clinic, bolt
cutters can be used to divide the exposed shaft. Seda-
affected the circumstances of the animal's demise.
tives, analgesics, and /or general anesthesia should be
Tissue samples are taken to confirm the presence
used when manipulating the patient.
of any suspected diseases, determine the age of a
 Radiographs and a complete examination are fol-
wound, and help distinguish entry from exit wounds.
lowed by surgical preparation of the area, exploration,
Tissue
 samples occasionally are taken for more
and extraction of the arrow. If the arrow has perforated
detailed testing and analysis by  law-enforcement
a structure, and the broadhead is accessible, it can be
officials.
unscrewed from the threaded shaft or cut off with bolt
 Information commonly requested in court relates to
cutters to prevent further trauma as the shaft is
the number and location of wounds, features of the
withdrawn.
wounds and related tissue areas, course of the projec-
Wide aggressive surgical debridement is not indi-
tiles, angle of fire, projectiles and foreign debris recov-
cated for most arrow wounds. Wound lavage and
 ered, cause and time of death, and details pertaining
establishing adequate drainage are important. Explo-
to the handling and disposition of specimens collected.
ration is necessary when major organs or structures
Entry wounds are closely inspected to determine the
are involved. Like other penetrating/perforating
proximity of the weapon to the animal. A 15-cm square
abdominal wounds, laparotomy is indicated (Fig. 7-56
around entrance wounds should be removed, pinned
and 7-57).
to a piece of rigid material, and then frozen for analysis
to determine the presence of propellant and projectile
residue. This tissue specimen should not be washed or 
placed in formalin.
Legal Considerations
Careful examination and collection of tissues sur-
rounding the path of a projectile are useful in deter-
In today's litigious society, veterinarians can find
e Aq pa Asa uq sey a raam su
themselves involved in lawsuits, primarily to present
 gun during restricted bow-hunting seasons. Some
testimony as to the physical findings of a given case.
hunters insert a broadhead arrow into a gunshot
Forensic evidence of a shooting may be requested by
wound to mask the nature of the weapon. Flesh along
 OWners, game wardens, and attorneys. Veterinarians
the path of the bullet can be collected to recover parti-
 must be able to document such evidence or request
cles of lead released by frangible projectiles. Lead
 assistance from an experienced pathologist. Basic pro-
 residue can be identified by atomic absorption spectro-
tocols and responsibilities involved with handling
photometry in tissue surrounding the tract. Tissue
forensic evidence must be followed, or legal cases will
samples taken from a separate, uninvolved body
be contested easily. Detailed records should include
region of the carcass serve as a control. Examination
notes of conversations.
of gastric contents can also help the pathologist deter-
A complete set of quality radiographs and color
mine the circumstances of the incident.
photographs of the entire animal should be taken to
The lands (elevated borders) and grooves of a rifled
illustrate the general position of the injuries. This will
 barrel embed marks on jacketed and nonjacketed
help orient those reviewing the case. Close photo-
 bullets. Occasionally, the lead core separates from the
 graphs of individual injuries should include an area
outer jacket. Retrieval of the jacket is of great impor-
15 cm around the wounds. A metric ruler should be
tance because the rifling marks are scored on its outer
 included in the photographs to indicate scale. The pho-
surface. The bullet should be washed with water and
tographs are labeled with the date, case number, and
alcohol and then allowed to air dry. The washing
examiner's initials. Projectiles should be photographed
removes blood and tissue fragments. The bullet can be
 in situ before their removal. Flexible plastic probes are
marked on its base (bottom) to ensure that it can be
best used to highlight the course of a projectile. Care
identified later Close-up photographs of the bullet
must be taken to avoid scratching projectiles with
may help ensure its identification.
metallic instruments that could distort rifling marks.
Projectiles can be wrapped in facial tissues and
When feasible, an experienced, board-certified
placed in vials or containers that can be sealed with
veterinary pathologist should perform the detailed
tape. Some pathologists place projectiles in sealed
postmortem examination. Consultation with the
envelopes. The body region from which each projectile
pathologist and knowledgeable law enforcement offi-
was retrieved must be clearly identified and each
HG. 7-56 (A) A broadhead arrow wound entering the abdominal
cavity of a dog. The arrow initially perforated the stifle area before
penetrating the abdomen. A neighbor admitted to shooting the
dog for "self defense." However, entry of the arrow from a caudal,
lateral direction would suggest the dog was not in an offensive 
position when struck.
(B) Note the triangular entry wound to the abdomen created by
the three blades of the broadhead arrow.
(C) Under anesthesia, the arrow was cut with bolt cutters and
removed just prior to the laparotomy.
 e a o da pead me a (a)
(intraoperative view) cutting the liver and diaphragm (arrow).
(E) Exploration of the knee. Note the patellar tendon was severed
(grasped with forceps) from its attachment to the patella (arrow).
213
214
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 7-57 (A) Field point arrow wound. The
arrow traversed the thoracic and abdominal
cavities. (B) The arrow exited the anus.
(C) Radiograph of the patient with the arrow.
Despite the gruesome nature of the wound, the
patient recovered completely following
exploratory surgery and repair. Field points
 pierce tissue, but lack the cutting blades of
broadheads (hunting arrows). If no vital
structures are impacted, soft tissue trauma is
relatively minor. (Slides courtesy of Gary
B
Spodnick, DVM, DACVS.)
 projectile must be placed in a separate, marked con-
contact with the entrance environment, or manipula-
tainer. The container is identified with the date, time.
tion by individuals. Depending upon the exact nature
case number, and owner's name, and it is initialed by
of the case, arrows can be removed without touching
those present at the necropsy. An indelible marker
 the shaft and placed in a secure area for presentation
should be used on the container or on a nonremovable
to law-enforcement officials.
label. The projectiles should be secured from tamper-
Under no circumstances should the projectile be
ing or access by other individuals. Projectiles are
 transfered to the owner, thereby reducing the credi-
turned over only to a qualified law-enforcement
bility of the evidence gathered.
officer. Any persons receiving the specimens must add
the time and date of the transfer and their initials to
the container.
IMPALEMENT INIURIES
Attention to the legal issues discussed in this section
will help clinicians avoid the embarrassing errors and
Impalement by definition is to pierce or transfix with a
 pitfalls associated with inappropriate case preparation
sharp object. In dogs and cats, this is most commonly
in a court of law.
the result of running or falling onto a sharp object.
Arrows can have latent fingerprints on the shaft,
Dogs in particular are more susceptible to oropharyn-
'sanssg Apoq yonoru asessed Aq pamiq ssaqum
geal and esophageal impalement wounds when
Management of Specific Wounds
215
chasing or carrying sticks. There are two common sce-
focused on the exact path and optimal approach to its
narios. (1) Dogs occasionally run after a stick or piece
removal. This also facilitates lavage, debridement,
of wood tossed by the owner: as the object tumbles or
tissue repair, and postoperative drainage. If the object
 momentarily imbeds into the ground the dog grabs the
has been removed, examination of the object by the
end in its mouth. The momentum of the dog drives the
surgeon combined with the owner's description of the
stick through their oropharynx, in many cases deep
wound can help determine the relative depth and
into the cervical tissues (Fig. 7-58). (2) Dogs occasion-
direction of the impalement tract. Radiographs and
ally run with a stick or piece of wood in their mouth:
ultrasonography of the involved region(s) can be
if the end of the stick strikes the ground while the dog
useful in determining the best surgical approach to
is rurning, the dog again impales their oropharynx.
problematic impalement wounds. Endoscopic exami-
Dogs occasionally run into a stationary pointed
nation also may be useful in assessing the location of
object, resulting in an impalement wound usually
an esophageal tear. Magnetic resonance imaging has
involving the head, neck, or anterior thorax (Fig. 7-59).
been suggested for better defining the location of prob-
 Dogs can impale their trunk by chasing and overrun-
lematic esophageal injuries, although most tears
ning a tumbling stick tossed by the owner One end of
should be visible by surgical exploration of the cervical
the stick contacts the ground while the vertical end of
area. Radiographic evidence of cervical emphysema is
the stick impales the pet (Fig. 7-60). Rarely, dogs and
a frequent finding with acute penetrating oropharyn-
cats impale themselves by falling from an elevated
geal and esophageal impalement. Repair of esopha-
position, striking fencing or other objects upon impact.
 geal tears can be challenging, depending on the size
Impalement injuries, especially those involving
and location of the tear. Most oral impalement wounds
sticks, should be explored to assure that no plant mate-
necessarily require debridement and closure of the
rial (bark, wood splinters, leaf fragments, pine needles)
mucosal wound to prevent oral contaminants from
is retained in the body. Such retained material nor-
gaining acces to the underlying tissues.
 mally results in abscess formation and draining tracts.
Overlooking retained sticks or delays in treatment
Smooth surfaced objects (finished lumber, metal,
 of oropharymgeal/cervical esophageal tears can result
plastic) are less problematic. Deeper cervical wounds
in life-threatening infection and extension into the
 should be explored through a ventral midline cervical
anterior mediastinum. Prompt intervention can dra-
approach. More superficial oropharymgeal wounds
matically reduce this risk.
ndde ero ue ym pandan pue paoidxa aq uen
 Cervical exploration includes careful inspection for
It is an advantage for the surgeon to have the
retained plant material and debris. Following closure
impalement object left in place: exploration can be
of the  oropharyngeal/esophageal defect, copious
A
HG. 7-58 (A). This canine patient chased an arrow in flight. When the arrow struck the ground the dog grabbed the nock end of the
arrow. His body momentum drove the arrow through his oropharynx deep into the cervical tissues. (B) A ventral cervical incision
paleael sem punom eoraian aul 'painins sem ieat [easufieydouo aul loenl punom aul poadsui pue moue au aaowal ol pasn sem
and closed with a vacuum drain. The patient made a complete recovery.
216
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 7-59 (A) Thoracic impalement on a stick. The dog staggered back to the owner after running into the neighboring woods. The
aua aut jo uoendxa aee o aed u fa sem ys au ( 'ai ueudep aut o aa au ot a seu aut paiaa ss
wound. A thoracotomy also was performed to ensure no fragments of bark or wood splinters remained. The patient made a complete
recovery.
lavage and suction of the area is indicated. A closed
mation, unless close attention is given to their
vacuum drain can be very effective in controlling dead
prevention.
space and assessing the fluid volume/composition
Sick, debilitated, and paralyzed dogs are most sus-
retained in the reservoir after completion of surgery.
ceptible to their formation. Weight loss, protein deple-
Most dogs do not require a gastrostomy tube, depend-
tion, and poor nutritional support increases the
ing on the assessment of the esophageal repair. Broad
likelihood of their development. Loss of subcutaneous
 spectrum antibiotic administration is advisable.
fat and muscle mass enhances the silhouette of
bony prominences including the greater trochanter,
ischial tuberosity, acromion, lateral tibial condyle,
PRESSURE SORES
lateral humeral epicondyle, tuber coxae, olecranon
and calcaneal tuber, 
lateral malleolus, lateral
 Pressure sores (decubital ulcers) are considered a sign
surface of the fifth digit, and the sternum. Denervated
pasuolond Aq pasnen are AauL ares Suis.mu iood jo
skin may be more prone to trophic ulcer
compression of the skin over bony prominences,
development.
resulting in progressive ischemia. Pressure sores do
 Casts and splints are capable of causing pressure
not occur in healthy ambulatory animals who are
sores by compression of the skin overlying a bony
properly housed. Animals incapable or unwilling to
 prominence. Most commonly, this involves the acces-
change body positions are prone to pressure sore for-
sory carpal pad (Fig. 7-61). Prevention is directed at
Management of Specific Wounds
217
proper padding around the bony prominences to
most common site for their development. Ischial tuber-
avoid a pressure cone effect to the area.
osity pressure sores are more common in smaller para-
Large dogs are more prone to pressure sore forma-
plegic dogs who have a tendency to sit up on their
tion due to their greater weight (Fig. 7-62). Debilitated
perineal region for prolonged periods of time on
 greyhounds and other breeds with thin skin and a
unpadded surfaces. Cats rarely develop pressure sores
sparse hair coat may be prone to pressure sore forma-
due to their small size and less frequent spinal cord
tion. The skin overlying the greater trochanter is the
injuries.
HG. 7-60 Impalement on a piece of wood. The dog overran
the piece of lumber, tossed by the owner, with the stick
penetrating the left flank area. Sticks and twigs are more likely
to leave fragments of plant material behind and warrant closer
FIG. 7-62 Pressure sore (grade Il) over the elbow of a large
inspection than finished lumber, metal, or plastic. The author
Labrador retriever. The dog developed the wound during its
has removed bark, wood slivers, pine needles, and leaf
hospitalization for a serious illness. Closure required the
fragments, all associated with stick-impalement injuries.
application of a skin flap.
A
B
a jo Susuanois (a) snaueseo aut SuAao iaon (v) Supped/sunseo iadodui um paeiposse saios aunssaid ig-l 5H
accessory carpal pad.
218
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Nursing care is more difficult for larger dogs.
Properly maintained, a closed collection system can
prevent urine scalding and skin maceration in patients
aes aut jo ino pasaeip Aiaieiidoiddeur aq Aeu Aa
incapable of urinating voluntarily. The perineal area
for treatments and cleaning. The fragile skin overlying
can be clipped of hair to facilitate cleansing in the
the bony prominences then is stretched and abraded
event of fecal incontinence. Water mattresses are useful
 against the floor surface. Moisture accumulation on
as long as they support the weight of the dog. Covers
the skin from sweating, environmental moisture,
should be applied over the mattresses to protect them
urine, and feces can promote tissue maceration and
from punctures and to facilitate cleaning. Unfortu-
infection. A dense hair coat affords some natural
nately, many dogs will bite, chew, and scratch mat-
 (padding) protection but may promote moisture reten-
tresses and foam pads. Because replacement can be
tion, mask early stages of pressure sore formation, and
 costly, one option is to have the owner purchase pads,
 delay institution of additional preventative measures.
which they later can take home with them when the
dog is discharged from the hospital. Many dogs will
not cooperate with periodic attempts to change body
Prevention
position unless barriers (cardboard boxes, pads, etc.)
 are used to restrict their movements. Providing large
 patients with appropriate nursing care is time consum-
pue pajeonpa ue sarmbai saros amssaid jo uonuaaaid
 ing and expensive. However, the cost of pressure sore
devoted nursing staff, veterinarian, and owner. The
treatment far outweighs the cost of prevention.
following management steps should be implemented.
1.
Provide proper nutritional and fluid
Pressure Sore Classification
support.
2.
Keep the patient's skin clean and dry.
Pressure sore gradation is done according to the depth
of injury to tissues overlying bony prominences
3.
Change the patient's body position every
(grades I to IV) (Fig. 7-63). Table 7-3 summarizes this
2 hours (left lateral, sternal, right lateral).
classification.
4.
Keep the patient on padded surfaces
(artificial washable fleece pads placed
over easily cleaned support pads) placed
Management of Pressure Sores
on elevated grates or racks to separate
the dog from urine and feces; water or air
 Permanently debilitated or paralyzed dogs prone to
mattresses; disposable absorbent foam
pressure sore formation also are prone to redevelop-
egg crate sheets (convoluted foam pads,
ment of them after successful closure. Patients who
Allegiance Health Care Corp., Wilsonville,
regain ambulation have the greatest likelihood of
 OR); or coated or closed cell foam pads
maintaining permanent closure. Until patients reach
(Dubicrest Padding 4700, Alpha Protech,
this point, continuous preventative medicine is
Tulsa, OK).
 required to protect the area from reulceration. Several
Assess skin overlying bony prominences
options are available for management of pressure
5.
daily for erythema, the first sign of
sores; selection of the appropriate technique depends
pressure sore development.
upon the severity of the lesion.
6.
Avoid dragging over or dropping the
1.
 Open wound management—healing by
patient on hard surfaces. If the patient
second intention
cannot be lifted, slide the dog on a rug or
2
Delayed primary closure
fleece pad to prevent cutaneous abrasion.
3.
 Secondary closure
 Place weak or paralyzed dogs in a sling 
support for 2-4 hours daily to reduce
 Excision of the bony prominence in
pressure on lateral bony prominences.
combination with (2) or (3)
Periodically, use hydrotherapy to keep the
5.
Muscle flap coverage of the bony
8.
patient clean while improving muscle
prominence in combination with (2), (3),
tone and circulation to the skin. The
or (4)
patient must be dried appropriately after
 Skin flap coverage in combination with
1
each session.
(2), (3), (4), 0r (5)
Management of Specific Wounds
219
?
HG. 7-63 (A) Debilitated geriatric patient with a pressure sore over the left acromion. Note the dog placed on a sheepskin. (B) A
(1l apeid) un au jo unm au aao paou aram osie saios ainssaid omi () (moue) aos ainsand ll apeid e saleiun maa haso
and greater trochanter (grade I progressing to a grade Il) (arrows).
TABLE7-3
closure, delayed primary closure, or secondary closure
Pressure sore classification.
(Fig. 7-64). Grade Il, grade IV, or recurrent pressure
sores may require open wound management to control
Grade I
Erythema; superficial to partial thickness
infection followed by excision of a portion of the bony
skin loss.
prominence. A local muscle flap may be used to add
Grade II
 Full-thickness skin loss with variable
padding between the bone and skin. Muscle flaps can
involvement of subcutis.
contribute circulation to diseased bone and help
Grade III
 Ulceration extends to deep fascia overlying
 the bony prominences.
control chronic infection. The outer muscle surface in
turn provides a stable vascular bed for skin flaps or
Grade IV
Ulceration extends to bone. Osteomyelitis or
cutaneous advancement.
joint infection may be present.
Healing by second intention may not provide a
durable surface to prevent reinjury. Skin closure tech-
niques that place the incision line directly over the
 Grade I and grade II pressure sores may be amena-
bony prominence increase the likelihood of dehiscence
 ble to second intention healing, unless they are persist-
unless additional wound protection is provided. Skin
ent or recurrent ulcers. In many cases, grade II pressure
flaps (including local flaps and axial pattern flaps) can
 sores are better closed by wound excision and primary
provide a layer of subcutaneous tissue to cushion the
L
FIG. 7-64 See legend on opposite page.
220
Management of Specific Wounds
221
skin over the bony prominence. Moreover, rotational
when the dog is placed in lateral recumbency.
flaps can provide full-thickness skin coverage while
However, they can be difficult to properly maintain.
 placing the suture line peripheral to the bony promi-
Their use is controversial since the doughnut ring can
nence. Even then, postoperative protective measures
Supumims us a raao uissarduon ,oeu, e aean
must be instituted to avoid trauma and ischemia to the
the bony prominence and compromise the cutaneous
flap until the animal becomes ambulatory.
circulation required to promote healing to the injured
area. Doughnut rings require close observation when
used. Another option is the use of parallel pads made
from gauze rolls. These pads can provide protection
 Pressure sores over the elbow can be particularly
without the complete skin encirclement of doughnut
challenging, especially in thin-skinned breeds such
rings. Spray adhesive used for plastic surgical drapes
 as the greyhound.
can be applied around the neighboring skin followed
 In many cases, local flaps can be used to close
by the application of surgical tape (Fig. 7-64).
the defect, the simplest being the use of bipedicle
Soft foam pads, spicas, and tie-over dressings may
advancement flaps (release incisions). The thoraco
be used to protect bony prominences on the lateral
dorsal axial pattern flap is considered only for the
surface of the trunk and limbs. Schroeder-Thomas
 most problematic skin defects overlying the elbow
splints may be useful to manage pressure sores
 area. See Plate 9.
overlying the olecranon and calcaneal tuber after sur-
gical closure. The author has developed a simple
foam padding system to protect the elbow region
while allowing the dog to ambulate normally (see
Postoperative Care
Plate 9).
 Once healing is completed and sutures removed,
Preventative measures, as described in the previous
splints and protective bandages may be removed on a
section, must be continued. In addition, bandages are
 trial basis, although proper nursing care is continued
advised in order to protect the healing wound from
for as long as the dog is not ambulatory.
moisture, microorganisms, and compression and
shearing forces that promote ischemic necrosis and
dehiscence. Soft, thick, "doughnut rings" fashioned
HYGROMA
from roll gauze have been used to protect the tro-
chanteric area and lateral prominence of the limbs. The
 An elbow hygroma is a serous subcutaneous fluid
ring encircles the circumference of the bony promi-
pocket overlying the olecranon in large to giant breed
nence and protects it from contact with hard surfaces
dogs (great Danes, Irish wolfhounds, St. Bernards, and
o uoezenndsoy Suunp Aisnoaaid punom au padolaaap sop aul iaueuoon iaeaa aup saao anos ainssaid suou (v) tg-t 'dh
the repair of pelvic fractures.
(B) Complete excision of the pressure sore was performed. Electrocautery and ligatures were required to control the considerable
hemorrhage that occurred during this procedure.
(C) Skin borders were undermined, advanced, and oposed with a subcuticular suture pattern, followed by skin sutures (vertical
mattress and simple interrupted suture patterns). A Penrose drain was used to control dead space.
(D) A nonadherent dressing was applied over the incision. Two 6-inch soft gauze rolls were placed in parallel fashion cranial and
caudal to the incision.Spray adhesive, used for the application of plastic surgical drapes, was used to stick the gauze sponges into
position.
eaie aul laao paoe[d adet [eoiains aul ot iamod aaisaupe [euotippe aplaoud ot pasn sem aaisaupe Aeids (g)
(F) The wound 14 days later. The ability of the patient to freely move and ambulate is critical to the treatment and prevention of
recurrence of pressure sores.
222
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Newfoundlands), usually less than 2 years of age.
followed by a firm, bulky protective
Hygromas form as a result of repeated blunt trauma
bandage. Apply ample padding over the
from the patient striking and compressing the skin
elbow.
 against hard floor surfaces. The skin and subcutis in
8.
 Inspect the bandage every 4-5 days. The
turn is compressed against this bony prominence (Fig.
bandage overlying the drain site requires
local removal and replacement due to
overlying the carpus, nuchal crest, os calcis, and tuber
 accumulated discharge from the drain
ischium.
sites.
a suonn ssud are snu iso
6
Continue this procedure for 3-4 weeks.
 a   a n a s
size. Over time, hygromas can enlarge and ulcerate
The drains are removed at the time of the
as the overlying skin thins and stretches over the
last bandage change. Thereafter, elbow
fluid pocket. Ulcerated hygromas frequently become
pads and soft bedding are advisable to
 infected. Poor aseptic technique from attempted fluid
prevent recurrence.
 aspiration can result in abscess formation; this problem
may be compounded by futile attempts at prevention
The Penrose drain provides continuous wound
by injecting corticosteroids into the hygroma pocket.
drainage while the compressive wrap helps to com-
 Both techniques are not advisable.
press the dermal surface to the opposing side of the
Conservative prevention and management
hygroma. Collagen will connect the surfaces together,
are
essentially the same: soft padded bedding (see bedding
obliterating the hygroma dead space (Fig. 7-65).
options for pressure sores above) and protective elbow
pads (protective dog leggings, HandicappedPets.com;
www.dogleggs.com). This would be the initial treat-
Surgical Resection
 ment of choice for small hygromas. Larger, persistent 
hygromas are likely surgical candidates. Similarly.
Problematic hygromas less commonly present with
large, ulcerated, and infected hygromas normally
ulcerated skin, draining tracts, and an ongoing bacte-
 require more aggressive surgical intervention.
rial infection. Considerable scarring may be noted in
 the area. Under these circumstances, surgical resection
of the ulcerated skin and underlying fibrotic scar
Penrose Drain Technique
should be considered. This surgical procedure runs the
risk of wound dehiscence if skin closure is performed
Large, uncomplicated hygromas are managed with the
under tension. A Schroeder-Thomas splint or rigid
prolonged use of Penrose drains. (See Fig. 7-65.)
spica bandage may be needed for 2-3 weeks to prevent
elbow flexion during the healing process. An incision
1.
Liberally clip the elbow area.
lateral to the olecranon is best used to dissect the
2.
Use sterile surgical preparation and
underlying diseased tissues from beneath the skin. (An
draping.
incision directly over the olecranon has a higher prob-
ability of dehiscence.) Surgical efforts must be directed
3.
Make a stab incision in the proximal and
distal borders of the hygroma.
at preserving healthy elbow callus and as much skin
coverage as possible. Failure to do so will likely result
4.
 Drain the fluid and inspect the interior of
in wound dehiscence. Postoperatively, wound drain-
the hygroma.
age (vacuum drains or Penrose drains) and protective
5.
Remove fibrinous debris with forceps and
bandaging are essential to control dead space and
sharp scissors.
minimize motion until suture removal. Closure of
Direct one 1/4-inch or two 1/4-inch Penrose
smaller skin defects overlying the olecranon may be
drains through both stab incisions.
achieved with the assistance of lateral/medial release
incisons. In extreme cases, wide skin resection will
6.
3-4 centimeters of the drain length
require reconstructive surgery, usually with the thora-
should extend from each drain hole and
is secured to the skin with 2-0
that the veterinarian consult with a board-certified
monofilament sutures at each end of
surgeon before undertaking surgical removal of prob-
the hygroma.
lematic hygromas. It is worth remembering that large
7.
Apply a nonadherent dressing and topica
elbow wounds are among the most difficult defects to
 antimicrobial ointment over the area,
dlose successfully.
一
HG. 7-65 (A) Elbow hygroma in a young St. Bernard. (B) Stab incisions are made with a No. 10 blade at the proximal and distal
ends of the swelling. Hemostats can be used as a tissue retractor to examine the cavity Insertion of two 1/4-inch Penrose drains.
Sutures are used to secure both ends of the drains. (C) Application of a bulky compression bandage. The bandage extends down to
the paw to prevent distal limb edema.
223
224
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
SNAKEBITE
in the more toxic rattlesnake and water moccasin
envenomation (Fig. 7-66).
Although relatively uncommon, snakebites are occa-
Elapid venom may have a delayed onset of 1-7.5
asou u Ad saeis pan a u uas Aeis
 sive behavior, followed by convulsions, quadriplegia,
 areas populated with poisonous snakes. An estimated
15,000 domestic animals are bitten by snakes annually
and respiratory paralysis. Fortunately, documented
in the United States. There are two main families of
coral snake envenomation is rare.
 Baseline blood work (complete blood count, profile)
venomous snakes.
and a urinalysis should be submitted on presentation.
 A coagulation profile is also advisable. Hemoconcen-
Elapidae: Elapids include coral snakes,
tration, leukocytosis, echinocytosis ("burred" red
cobras, mambas, kraits, and the tiger
blood cells may be noted 24-48 hours after envenoma-
snake. Coral snakes can be found in the
tion), hypokalemia, elevated creatine kinase, hematu-
southeastern areas of the United States.
ria, and myoglobinuria, may be noted. Prolongation of
Vipers: Rattlesnakes, copperheads, and
activated clotting time (ACT), prothrombin time (PT),
cottonmouths (water moccasins) are
partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and increased fibrin
found in various areas throughout the
degradation products (FDPs) also may be noted.
United States. Copperheads have a
Therapeutic goals include prevention of hypoten-
relatively low order of toxicity. Toxicity
sion (monitor blood pressure, electrocardiograms) and
can vary between species. Rattlesnakes
neutralization of the local and systemic effects of the
account for 80% of the poisonous
venom. Crystaloids (lactated Ringer's solution, or 0.9%
 snakebite wounds in North America.
saline) comprise the bulk of intravenous fluid support,
with the use of colloids and plasma as needed. Urine
In North America, 90% of snake bites occur between
output is closely monitored.
April and October. Toxicity is increased in young or
Antivenin (polyvalent Crotalidae) can be adminis-
very large snakes during the springtime.
 tered to critical patients. One to three vials is typically
Toxins in elapids are neurotoxic and hemolytic in
given to dogs: there is no specific dosage. Antivenin
nature; viper toxins cause local tissue damage (necro-
administration is based on patient response in humans.
 genic) and may initiate systemic bleeding/coagulation
One canine study involving eastern diamondback rat-
(vasculotoxic). Diamondback rattlesnake venom may
contain a myocardial depressant factor that can result
in cardiac dysrhythmias. Fang marks are a distinguish-
ing feature of vipers; nonvenomous snake bites are
characterized by a series of small punctures that reflect
the curvature of the mouth. Almost one in four bites
of vipers are "dry," with little or no envenomation of
the dog or cat. Coral snakes have short fangs and a
small mouth, leaving a characteristic convex row of
pinpoint puncture wounds.
Unless witmessed by the owner, snakebites can be
difficult to diagnose. Typically, viper bites cause local
swelling, pain, erythema, petechiae, or ecchymoses,
and later cyanosis with subsequent tissue necrosis.
Close inspection may reveal fang marks. Most dogs are
bitten in the head and facial area and less commonly
the paws. Facial swelling may be pronounced, and the
 patient's airway is closely monitored in the event a
tracheotomy is needed. In severe cases tissue around
the fang marks may darken and ooze dark blood.
HG. 7-66 Louisiana dog that sustained a copperhead bite: note
Swelling may worsen over the first 24-48 hours, and
the facial swelling. No tissue loss was noted: copperhead
the damaged tissues may form a hematoma. Copper-
head bites, from the author's limited experience, pri-
venom has a relatively low order of toxicity compared to
marily result in regional tissue swelling to the dog, but
rattlesnakes. Supportive fluid therapy resulted in complete
lack the severity of local and systemic changes noted
recovery.
Management of Specific Wounds
225
tlesnake poisoning found an S0% survival when anti-
Brown recluse spiders prefer dry undisturbed areas,
venin was administered within 30 minutes
of
including woodpiles, sheds, garages, closets, and
envenomation. The survival rate dropped to 62% if
cellars. They favor cardboard and paper piles, but
 given 4 hours after envenomation. Antivenin is admin-
can be found in shoes, dressers, behind baseboards,
istered slowly intravenously; it can cause an anaphy-
and near furmaces. They have a wide distribution,
lactic reaction. Unfortunately, antivenin is expensive
from the s
southern Midwest to the Gulf 
of
(up to $300.00 per vial) and has limited availability.
Mexico. They are rarely found west of the Rocky
(Fort Dodge Veterinary Supplies carries antivenin for
Mountains.
veterinary use; Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, Philadel-
Recluse spiders are a variable brown to a deep
phia, PA, carries antiverin for humans.) In emergen-
yellow, and usually have a violin-like marking on the
cies, veterinarians can contact human medical
dorsal side of the cephalothorax, with the neck of the
facilities to obtain antivenin. Pain control (opiates),
w oz on 9 woy Aiea AauL Aiepnes Supuaxa uoi
corticosteroids, and antibiotics (cephalosporins) are
(1/4 to 3/4 inch). Multiple websites have photographs
advisable.
of this spider to facilitate identification.
 Most patients recover from viper envenomation.
The known presence of recluse spiders, possible
Tissue necrosis can be significant and will require
exposure of the pet to an area frequented by this arach-
standard wound care. Reconstructive surgery may be
nid, and any supporting clinical signs would reinforce
required for the larger tissue defects (Fig. 7-67).
sumu un spumom aa sisoep ,ioeya-ae, s
can result in sigrificant medical complications; this
does not appear to be the case in small animals. In
humans, wounds can be slow to slough and subse-
BROWN RECLUSE
- s j a e a a i Ab
cated for treatment of verified acute brown recluse
SPIDER BITES
bites in humans; this is not the case in veterinary
patients. Areas of necrotic tissue and any slow healing
Although there are a number of poisonous insects in
wound usually can be excised and closed in veterinary
the United States, only the brown recluse has surgical
patients with little difficulty.
significance due to its potential to cause tissue necro-
sis. The brown recluse (Loxosceles reclusa) venom con-
tains a variety of enzymes (sphingomyelinase-D)
hyaluronidase, esterase, alkaline phosphatase,5' ribo-
PORCUPINE OUILLS
nucleotide phosphorylase, necrotizing enzymes, and
several proteins/polypeptides) capable of causing cir-
 Porcupine quill injuries are normally noted in dogs,
cular areas of skin necrosis that are slow to heal
the majority of wounds being in the facial area. Occa-
(referred to as loxoscelism or dermonecrotic arach-
sionally, some owners will attempt to remove quills
nidism). Potency varies between species of this spider:
with pliers, but most will seek out veterinary assist-
the Arizona recluse (L. rufscens), desert recluse (L.
ance, especially when multiple quills are embedded in
deserta), and Mediterranean recluse (L. arizonica) spider
their pet.
envenomations are less potent.
Quills vary from 2-10 cm in length. Heavy sedation
The characteristic coloration of the bite wound in
 Or general anesthesia is advisable since quill extraction
humans (central red area inflammation; white middle
can be painful. The fur should be parted to visualize
ring ischemia; and outer blue ring thrombosis) may be
embedded quills; fingers are carefully run through the
noted 3-8 hours after envenomation. Systemic signs
fur to identify the exposed point of shorter or more
that may be noted from the bite include hemolytic
 deeply embedded quills. Needle holders can be used
anemia, thrombocytopenia, hematuria, pyrexia, and
to grasp and remove each quill. Lightly embedded
myalgia. The hair coat of fur-bearing animals effec-
quills can be extracted with a firm tug, whereas deeply
tively conceals the bite wound; owners note the
embedded quills can be extracted with quarter turns
 problem only when a circular necrotic patch of skin
 of the wrist. A No. 11 scalpel blade can be aligned
becomes evident. Lesions may be 1-25 cm in diameter.
along the surface of problematic quills to create a small
The diagnosis of dermonecrotic arachnidism is nor-
cutaneous stab incision to facilitate their removal. Few
s ro rm  sis i, e A
quill sites become infected after their removal; sys-
are ruled out.  Methacillin-resistant  staphylococcal
temic antibiotics may be administered along with
infections (MRSA) in humans can mimic recluse
analgesics when the patient is discharged from the
lesions.
hospital.
HG. 7-67 See legend on opposite page.
226
Management of Specific Wounds
227
HG. 7-67 (A, B) Rattlesnake bite to a 6-year-old wired haired fox terrier. The dog was bitten rostral to the right eye. The dog
hours after envenomation, the local skin darkened with serous exudation from the area. Photograph of the necrotic wound at 2
weeks.
(C) The wound at 6 weeks. Debridement and open wound management resulted in a healthy granulation bed.
(E) Completion of the surgical procedure. The small remaining area will heal by second intention.
(F) The patient, 14 weeks after injury. (From Kostolich M. 1990. Reconstructive surgery of a ratlesnake bite. Canine Pract 15:15-19.
Case slides courtesy of Marilyn Kostolich, DVM, DACVS.)
(Fig. 7-68). A careful and complete examination of the
entire dog is advisable.
Suggested Readings
Bite Wounds
August JR. 1988. Dog and cat bites. J Amt Vet Med Assoc
193:13941398.
Cowell AK, Penwick RC. 1989. Dog bite wounds: a study of
93 cases. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1l:313-320.
 Davidson EB. 1998. Managing bite wounds in dogs and cats.
Part II. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:974-991.
Kolata RJ, Kraut NH, Hohnston DE. 1974. Patterms of trauma
HG. 7-68 Porcupine quill in the left cranial lung lobe resulting
in urban dogs and cats: a study of 1000 cases. I Am Vet Med
Ass0c 164:499-502.
in pneumothorax. A detailed history revealed the dog
McKierman BC, Adams WM, Huse DC. 1984. Thoracic bite
 encountered a porcupine some months before presentation for
wounds and associated intermal injury in 1l dogs and 1 cat.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:959-964.
pneumothorax.
Neal TM, Key JC. 1976. Principles of treatment of dog bite
wounds. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:657-660.
Pavletic MM. 1990. Bite Wounds. In: 2nd Interrationat Veteri-
nary Emergency and Criticat Care Symposium. Lakewood,
Contrary to popular folklore, cutting a quill does
CO:AAHA.
Pavletic MM. 1995. Bite Wound Management in Small Animals.
not cause the quill to deflate, facilitating its removal.
AAHA Professional Library Series. Denver: American
Animal Hospital Association.
Shahar R, Shamir M, Johnston D. 1997. A technique for man-
agement of bite wounds of the thoracic wall in small dogs.
Vet Surg 26:45-50.
The frictional surface of quills can facilitate their
Shamir MH, Leisner S, Klement E, et al. 2002. Dog bite
migration deep into the body. A porcupine quill was
wounds in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 196
removed from a canine brain abscess on postmortem
cases. I Vet Med 49:107-112.
examination of a patient at Angell Memorial Animal
Swaim SF. 1980. Surgery of Traumatized Skin: Management and
Hospital: the quili had migrated through one of the
Reconstruction in the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, PA: WB
formina of the skull. The author has also removed
Saunders.
Talan DA, Citron DM, Abrahamian FM, et al. 1999. Bacterio-
quills from the lungs of dogs that have presented with
logic analysis of infected dog and cat bites N Engt I Med
spontaneous pneumothorax and lung abscessation
340:85-92.
228
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Thermal, Chemical,Radiation Burns
Pope ER. 2003. Burms: thermal, electrical, chemical and cold
Baxter CR. 1970. Present concepts in the management of
injuries. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Arimal Surgery,
major electrical injury. Surg Clin No Am 50:1401-1418.
3rd ed., 356-372. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Bedenice D. 2007. Smoke inhalation. In: Cote E, ed. Clirica!
Reedy LM, Clubb FJ. 1991. Microwave burms in a toy poodle:
Veterinary Advisor, 1011-1012. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
a case report. JArt Arim Hosp Assoc 27:497-500.
 Bostwick SA. 1987. Comprehensive rehabilitation after burm
Reinsch JF, Puckett CL. 1984. Management of radiation
injury. Surg Clirn No Am 67:159-166.
wounds. Surg Clin No Am 64:795-802.
Coyne BE, Bednarski RM, Bilbrey SA. 1993. Thermoelectric
Rudolph R, Noe JM. 1983. Chronic Problem Wounds. Boston:
:sn Aianeoa jo supuni iadodu uoy sung
Little, Brown and Co.
two case reports. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:7-9.
Thrall DE. 1982. Radiation therapy in the dog: principles,
 Demling RH. 1983. Improved survival after massive burms. J
 indications, and complications. Compend Cont Educ Pract
Trauma 23(3):179-184.
Vet 4:652-660.
 Demling RH. 1987. Fluid replacement in burn patients. Surg
Clin No Am 67:15-30.
Frostbite
Demling RH, Buerstatte RPH, Perea A. 1980. Management of
Bejerke HS, Tevar A. 2006. Frostbite. www.emedicine.com
hot tar burms. J Trauma 20:242.
Carpenter HM, Hurley IA, Hardenbergh E, et al. 1971. Vas-
Dermell WS, Wheaton, LG. 1995. Surgical management of
cular injury due to cold: effects of rapid rewarming. Arch
Pathot 92:153-161.
17:181-187.
Hummel RP. 1982. Clinicat Burr Therapy. Boston: John Wright
Dermell WS, Wheaton, LG. 1995. Surgical management of
PSG.
Johnston DE. 1985. Burms, electrical, chemical and cold inju-
17:499-510.
ries. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Smalt Animul Surgery.
Dhupa N, Pavletic MM. 1997. Burms. In: Morgan R, ed. Hand-
516-533. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
book of Small Anirmal Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Lapp NL, Juergens JL. 1965. Frostbite. Mayo Clin Proc 40:932.
Saunders.
Lathrop T. 1975. Hypothermia: Killer of the LInprepared. Port-
 Dow KD, Bucholtz JD, Iwamoto R, et al. 1997. Nursing Care
land, OR: The Mazamas.
in Radiation Oncology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Martinez A, Golding MR, Sawyer PN, et al. 1966. The specific
Drobaz KJ, et al. 1999. Smoke exposure in dogs: 27 cases
arterial lesions in mild and severe frostbite: effect of sym-
(1988-1997). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 215:1306-1311.
pathectomy. I Cardiovasc Surg 7:495-503.
Drobaz KJ, et al. 1999. Smoke exposure in cats: 22 cases
McCauley RL, Hing DN, Robson MC, et al. 1983. Frostbite
(1986-1997). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 215:1312-1316.
injuries. A rational approach based on the pathophysiol-
ogy. J Trauma 23:143-147.
toxicities. Vet Clin No Am 27:37-46.
Pope ER. 2003. Bums: thermal, electrical, chemical, and cold
 Heimbach DM. 1987. Early burm excision and grafting. Surg
injuries. In Slatter, DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
Clin No Am 67:93-107.
3rd ed., 356-372. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Hummel RP 1982. Clinical Burn Therapy. Boston: John Wright
Washburn B. 1975. Frostbite. Boston: Museum of Science.
PSG.
Wellehan JFX. 2003. Frostbite in birds: pathophysiology and
Johnston DE. 1985. Burms, electrical, chemical and cold inju-
treatment. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 25:775-780.
ries. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Anirmal Surgery.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Projectile Injuries
Kolata RJ, Burrows CF. 1981. The clinical features of injury
Barnes EC. 1997. Cartridges of the World, 8th ed. Northbrook,
by chewing electrical cords in dogs and cats. I Ar Anim
IL: DBI Books.
Hosp Assoc 17:219-222.
Combs R. 1987. Crossbows. Northbrook, IL: DBI Books.
Ladue TA. 2007. Radiation therapy: adverse reactions. In:
DiMaio VJM. 1993. Gurshot Wounds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Cote E, ed. Clinical Veterinary Advisor, 940-943. St. Louis,
Press.
MO: Mosby.
 Dodd GD, Budzik RF. 1990. Identification of retained firearm
 Lee RC, Kolodney MS. 1987. Electrical injury mechanisms:
 projectiles on plain radiographs. AJR 154:471-475.
dynamics of the thermal response. Plast Reconstr Surg
Fackler ML. 1996. Gunshot wound review. Ann Ermerg Med
80:663-671.
28:194-203.
Lee RC, Kolodney MS. 1987. Electrical injury mechanisms:
Ferguson T. 1991. Modern Law Enforcerment Weapons and
electrical breakdown of cell membranes. Plast Recorstr
Tactics, 2nd ed. Northbrook, IL: DBI Books.
Surg 80:672-679.
Heard, BJ. 1997. Hardbook of Firearms ard Ballistics. New York:
Luce EA. 1984. The irradiated wound. Surg Clin No Am
 John Wiley and Sons.
64:821829.
James MR. 1992. The Bowhunter's Harubook. Iowa, WI: DBI
Luce EA, Gottlieb SE. 1984. "True" high tension electrical
Books.
injuries. Ann Plast Surg 12:321-326.
 Kettner F, Kirberger RM. 2006. Aortic foreign body (airgun
Monafo WW, Freedman B. 1987. Topical therapy in burms.
pellet) embolism in a cat. J Sm Anim Pract 47:221-225.
Surg Clin No Am 67:133-145.
Pavletic MM.1985. A review of 121 gunshot wounds in the
O'Toole TE. 2007. Burms. In: Cote E., ed., Clinical Veterinary
dog and cat. Vet Surg 14:61-62.
Advisor, 164-166. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
Pavletic MM. 1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine:
 Pasulka PS, Wachtel TL. 1987. Nutritional considerations for
the burmed patient. Surg Clin No Am 67:109-131.
8:47-60.
 Pavletic MM. 1990. Management of thermal injuries. In: 2nd
 Pavletic MM. 1986. Gunshot wounds in veterinary medicine:
projectile ballistics—Part I1. Compen Contin Ed Pract Vet
sium. San Antonio, TX.
8:125-134.
Management of Specific Wounds
229
Pavletic MM. 1996. Gunshot wound management. Cormpend
Snakebite
Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:1285-1299.
Hackett TB, et al. 2002. Clinical findings associated with
Pavletic MM, Trout N. 2006. Bullet, bite and burm wounds.
prairie rattlesnake bites in dogs: 100 cases (1989-1998). J
Vet Clin No Am 36(4):873-893.
Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1675-1680.
Wallentine D.1988. Making Indian Bows and Arrows ... The Otd
Hudelson S, Hudelson P. 1995. Pathophysiology of snake
Way. Liberty, UT: Eagle's View Publishing Co.
envenomization and evaluation of treatments: Parts I,II, &
II1. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 17:889-897, 1035-1040,
1385-1396.
Impalement Injuries
 Kostolich M. 1990. Reconstructive surgery of a snake bite 
Doran IP, Wright CA, Moore AH. 2008. Acute oropharyngeal
wound. Canine Pract 15:15-19.
and esophageal stick injury in forty-one dogs. Vet Surg
Paul A, Rozanski E. 2007. Snakebite. In: Cote, E, ed. Clinica!
37:781-785.
Veterinary Advisor, 1012-1014. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Griffiths LG, et al. 2000. Oropharyngeal penetrating injuries
 Peterson ME. 2001. Snake bite: pit vipers and coral snakes.
In: Peterson ME, Talcott PA, eds. Small Animal Toxicology,
695-720. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Pressure Sores
Waldron DR, Zimmerman-Pope N. 2002. Superficial skin
Brunner LS, Suddarth DS. 1986. Manual of Nursing Practice,
wounds. In: Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animat Surgery,
 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott.
267-268. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
 Daniel RK, Hall EJ, MacLeod MK. 1979. Pressure sores—a
Willey JR, Schaer M. 2005. Easterm diamond rattlesnake (Cro-
reappraisal. Ann Plast Surg 3:53-63.
talus adamanteus) envenomation of dogs: 31 cases (1982-
Griffith BH. 1979. Pressure sores. In: Grabb WC, Smith JW,
2002). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:22-33.
eds. Plastic Surgery. Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
Nwomeh B, Yager DR, Kelman CL. 1998. Physiology of the
Spider Bite/Brown Reciuse
chronic wound. Clin Plast Surg 25(3):341-356.
Amalsadvala T, Swaim SF. 2006. Management of hard-to-
Swaim SF, Hanson RR, Coates JR. 1996. Pressure wounds in
heal wounds. Vet Clin No Am 36(4):704.
animals. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:203-218.
Dunayer, EK. 2007. Spider envenomation. In: Cote E, ed.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1997. Srall Aniral Wound Mar-
Clinical Veterinary Advisor, 1020-1021. St. Louis, MO:
 agement, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Mosby.
Swaim SF, Lee AH, Henderson RA. 1989. Mobility vs immo-
Roder JD. 2004. Spiders. In: Plumlee KH, ed. Clinical Veteri-
bility in the healing of open wounds. J Am Arir Hosp Asoc
nary Toxicology, 111-113. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
25:91-96.
Porcupine Quills
Pavletic MM. 2002. Penetrating wounds. In: Wingfield WE,
Hygroma
 Raffe MR, eds. The Veterinary ICLI Book, 966. Jackson Hole:
Johnston DE. 1975. Hygroma of the elbow in dogs. J Am Vet
Teton Newmedia.
Med Assoc 167:213-219.
Grahn BH, Szentimrey D, Pharr JW, et al. 1995. Ocular and
White RAS. 2006. Management of specific skin wounds. Vet
prs aasadsonat e :shop os ui snb audnrod teiqno
Clin No Am 36:905-907.
Car Vet I 36:488-493.
230
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 9
Pipe Insulation Protective
Device: Elbow
DESCRIPTION
Pipe insulation is used by plumbers and homeowners to insulate water pipes. There are a few varieties
available at hardware stores. Black plastic foam pipe insulation (Armacell Self-Seal pipe insulation available
 at Home Depot) is a soft, light, flexible foam, with a linear split to facilitate its application around a pipe.
 The split edges have a self-adherent glue, allowing the insulation to completely encase a pipe upon
and 1-inch diameters. In medium to large dogs, 3/4-inch and 1-inch sizes are the most appropriate. The
dogs, usually for the management/closure of pressure sores.
TECHNIQUE
(A) Cut two pieces of Pipe insulation. Measure the shorter internal piece below the flexion surface of the
 qu aun on (uosuuof zy uosuof 'seuoz) aden jeoans youiz jo sdns Aidde 'shop alrel on unpau u (a)
a linear fashion. On patients with longer hair coats, remove the fur. The parallel strips of tape begin
below the flexion surface of the antecubital area, down to the metacarpal-phalangeal joints. Avoid
o uodde ig anns u e sug aden jo iae s ped peden aosse au rao aden udn
the pipe insulation.
(C) The inner segment of pipe insulation is cupped around the extremity. In this example, the open split of
the insulation is positioned over the anterior surface of the forelimb. (The thin plastic strip is removed
from the insulation adhesive that covers the split border of the insulation.) Use strips of Elasticon
aspect of the limb. Contact of the Elasticon to the white tape prevents the pipe insulation from slipping.
Cut the longer (outer) piece of pipe insulation to comfortably overlap the entire olecranon, extending
approximately 2-3 inches (5-8 cm) proximally. (In this illustration, this outer pipe insulation layer is
transparent, allowing us to see the short pipe segment secured with bands of Elasticon.) Secure the
insulation to the exposed surgical tape in a fashion similar to that of the first layer. Avoid excess tape
application over the carpus to maintain limb mobility.
(D) To change wound dressings, temporarily fold down the proximal end of the foam insulation, which
forms an"overlapping shield"for the elbow, to change dressings. Once released, the foam springs back
thin protective dressing/bandage layer. A non-adherent dressing, topical ointment, a light layer of cast
padding and a gauze wrap is normally used to cover the wound. Do NOT apply a tight bandage that will
rub on the elbow during ambulation and elbow flexion. It is important NOT to use a thick bandage that could
change this simple bandage daily over the first 7-10 days and every 2 days thereafter.
Management of Specific Wounds
231
Plate 9
：
232
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate9
(Continued)
COMMENT S
With a cost around $1 per foot, pipe insulation is both cheap and economical to apply. The pipe insulation
bandage is light and flexible, enabling the dog to use the leg unimpeded.The author prefers to use this
protective device when wound closure is achieved without excessive incisional tension, or to protect a
healing wound.
The overlapping layers of the foam insulation effectively elevate the olecranon and lateral epicondyle
from directly contacting hard flooring. A third, shorter layer can be applied to the outer layer of pipe
insulation if additional protection is considered necessary. Soft bedding also is recommended. Owners are
advised to keep the patient's activity level to a minimum.
Normally, Pipe Insulation Protection for the Elbow (PIPE) will maintain itself for 3 weeks, at which time
the entire protective wrap is replaced, as the adhesive tape applied to the skin surface loosens. Moreover,
skin free of moisture to reduce the likelihood of dermatitis. The black foam can temporarily stain the skin,
but most of this residue can be washed off wifth surgical soap and tap water.
For more problematic closures, a reinforced spica bandage (Plate 5) or a Schroeder-Thomas splint (Plates
6 and 7) can be considered if immobilization of the elbow joint is deemed necessary. Most dogs, however,
have difficulty ambulating with these latter forms of elbow protection.
Regional Considerations
The Canine and Feline Profiles 234
PLATE
Plate 10: Surgical Technique Menu 236
233
234
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
THE CANINE AND FELINE
such as dachshunds, is capable of extending to the
PROFILES
foot, whereas the same flap employing identical ana-
tomic guidelines may not extend beyond the knee in a
 dog with long extremities, such as an Irish wolfhound.
Description
In the cat, this same flap normally can extend to the
 metatarsal region. Clearly, careful preoperative meas-
urements are required to determine wound coverage.
In dogs the thinmest skin is located along the ventral
body surface, the medial surface of the limbs and
 inner pinna. Thicker skin is located along the dorsum.
The elastic properties of skin vary based on the
The most pliable skin regions include the axilla, flank,
species, breed, individual, and body location. These
 and dorsum of the neck. The hair coat is thicker over
elastic properties can be manipulated in some cases
the back and sides of the body, with thinner hair
for the closure of problematic wounds by using
growth located inside the ears, on the inner surfaces of
skin-stretching techniques discussed in Chapter 9.
the flanks, along the ventral abdomen, and beneath the
 tail. Optimal cosmetic results are achieved by selecting
Although dog and cat breeds generally conform to
closure techniques that match skin thickness and hair
most of the flap techniques discussed, one clinical
 growth patterm (hair length, color, and growth direc-
Exception is the greyhound. The author has found that
tion). By using skin adjacent to a defect, one is more
the thin, delicate skin of the greyhound is more prone
likely able to achieve these goals. However, large
to dehiscence and partial flap necrosis compared to
defects frequently warrant skin coverage from a distant
other breeds. This likely is the scenario for similar
source. In this situation, closure and restoration of
breeds such as the whippet and Italian greyhound.
 function should be accomplished by the simplest tech-
Care must be taken to use meticulous surgical tech-
niques that minimize stress and discomfort to the
nique, avoid unnecessary tissue manipulation, mini-
patient, rather than by techniques selected primarily
mize the size (especially length) of skin flap dimensions
for achieving the optimum cosmetic result.
(when feasible), and keep skin tension to a minimum
during wound closure.
Over the years, the author has found that clients
Certain skin regions are closely attached to the
have not complained about hair growth variations
underlying bone, muscle, and fascia. These areas
since the results are far more pleasing than the
include the skin over the dorsum of the muzzle, the
wound or disease process that has been corrected.
caudolateral aspect of the upper thigh (overlying the
Owners recogrize normal variations in their
biceps femoris,
 semitendinous/semimembranous
pet's hair coat and generally accept these variations
muscles), and the skin overlying portions of the super-
when the facts are explained prior to the
ficial pectoral muscle. Undermining skin in these
procedure.
regions is more difficult; care must be taken to avoid
 injury to the subdermal plexus when elevating the skin
free from the underlying structures. In some cases, it
Both the dog and cat have pliable and elastic skin
may be advisable to retain the epimysium of the
over most areas of the body, except for extremely
underlying muscle with the skin used for pedicle
obese individuals. Skin laxity varies in each body
grafts. From a clinical perspective, the author has
region along with skin thickness and hair growth.
noted that skin around the caudal thigh and perineum
Variations naturally occur between species, breeds,
are not particularly amenable to local flap develop-
and individual animals.
ment. Subdermal plexus flaps developed in these
regions are more prone to partial necrosis compared
 Pronounced obesity in dogs and cats will dramati-
to similar flaps created in other body regions. This is
 most likely attributable to regional variation in cutane-
cally reduce skin laxity. As a result, wound closure
can be problematic in these patients, unlike their
ous circulation.
normal-weight counterparts.
Ample loose skin is located over the dorsal and
lateral aspects of the neck and trunk. Even moderate-
sized skin defects are frequently amenable to primary
These cutaneous variations also make universal
closure. Second intention healing can take advantage
rules pertaining to flap size and regional applicability
of neighboring loose elastic skin for optimal wound
difficult. For example, a caudal superficial epigastric
contraction. When skin is required for coverage of
 axial pattern flap in long-bodied dogs with short legs,
large wounds involving the extremities, the trunk is
 Regional Considerations
235
the obvious source of donor skin in the form of axial
Large defects involving the ventral thorax (sternal
pattern flaps, free grafts, and the less-frequently used
region), dorsal pelvic, and inguinal area are similarly
distant flap techniques. Wounds involving the most
 troublesome, although somewhat more amenable to
distant areas of the body, including the rostral facial
closure due to their proximity to the loose skin of the
area, tail, distal extremities, and ears are naturally
lateral thorax and abdomen. The axilla, flank, and
more difficult to close due to the paucity of loose skin
inguinal areas present closure difficulties in associa-
and their greater distance from potential donor areas.
tion with patient ambulation unless restriction of activ-
As skin loss approaches 180 degrees of the circumfer-
ity is achieved by cage rest or limb immobilization.
ence of an extremity, some form of skin flap or free-
 Similarly, wounds involving joints may require post-
 grafting technique will be necessary.
operative immobilization to prevent wound dehis-
cence. Special care must be taken to assess range of
motion during closure of defects involving the limbs,
eyelids, and oral cavity to avoid distortion of anatomic
Skin loss of the distal extremities need not be great
structures and compromise to normal function.
to create wound-closure difficulties. Wounds less
 than 90 degrees of the circumference have potential
to heal by second intention. As wounds approach
180 degrees, closure will require a skin graft or
 possibly skin flap.
Assessment of true wound size is exaggerated
by edema. The surgeon should defer closure deci-
sions until improvement in circulation is followed
 by resolution of tissue swelling. Tissue edema can
%Z Apaneuixoidde readde spumom uado axeu
 greater than their true size: skin margins retract
 and dermal fluid accumulation pushes collagen
fibers apart.
236
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
 Plates 10A and 10B Surgical Technique Menu
DESCRIPTION
mucosal, and epifhelial defects. Selection of the technique(s) depends upon the size of the defect, the
regional skin tension, regional and distant cutaneous circulation, and the practicalities and individual
limitations of the technique(s) selected. Other techniques, however, may be employed in selected cases
based on the individual surgeon's preference and needs of the patient. Open wound management is not on
the technique menu, although it remains as a viable option for wound closure using the guidelines
previously described. The reader is directed to the respective sections illustrating these surgical techniques.
1. Tension-Relieving Techniques (Chapter 9)
A. Undermining
B. Relaxing/release incisions
C. Multiple relaxing incisions 
 D. Subcuticular suture patterms
E. Walking sutures
F.Z-plasty
G. W-plasty
H. V-Y advancement
1. Stents
 J. Skin stretchers
 K. Hidden dermal release incision
2. Skin-Stretching Techniques (Chapter 10)
A. Skin expanders
 B. Presuturing technique
C. Skin stretchers: open wound management
D. Skin stretchers: preoperative use
3. Local Flaps (Chapter 11)
 A. Single pedicle advancement flap
 B. Bipedicle advancement flap
C. Rotational flap
D. Transposition flap
E. Interpolation flap
F.  Forelimb fold flap
4. Axial Pattern Flaps (Chapter 13)
A. Omocervical
B. Thoracodorsal
C. Deep circumflex iliac (dorsal branch)
D. Deep circumflex iliac (ventral branch)
E. Deep circumflex iliac (ventral branch)
(Flank fold flap (hindlimb)
F.
 Caudal superficial epigastric
G. Cranial superficial epigastric
H. Brachial
I. 
 Genicular
 J. Reverse saphenous
 Regional Considerations 
237
Plates 10A and 10B
K. Caudal auricular
L. Lateral caudal (tail)
M. Superficial temporal
5. Free Grafts (Chapter 14)
A. Punch/pinch grafts
B. Strip grafts
C. Stamp grafts
D. Sheet grafts
E. Mesh graft—mesh graft expansion unit 
F. Mesh graft—hand mesh
6. Distant Flaps (Chapter 12)
A. Direct flap
B. Indirect flap
 7. Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps (Chapter 16)
A. Latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap
 B. Cutaneous trunci myocutaneous flap
C. Latissimus dorsi muscle flap
 D. External abdominal oblique muscle flap
E.
 Caudal sartorius muscle flap
F.
 Cranial sartorius muscle flap
G. Temporalis muscle flap
 H. Transversus abdominis muscle flap
1. 
 Semitendinosus muscle flap
 J. Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle flap
8. Facial Reconstruction (Chapter 15)
A. Labial avulsion closure techniques
B. Triangular excision/closure—lip
C. Rectangular excision/closure—lip
D. Labial advancement—upper lip 
E. Labial advancement—lower lip 
F.
 Buccal rotation technique—lip and cheek
G. Labial lift-up technique
 H. Labial pull-down technique
 Skin substitution for oral mucosa
 J. Labial/buccal reconstruction with skin flaps
K. Cleft lip repair
L. Rostral labial pivot flap
M. Oral commissure advancement
 N. Brachycephalic facial fold resection
 O. Cheilopexy technique
9. Oral Reconstruction Surgical Techniques (Chapter 17)
A. Oral mucosal flaps 
 B. Palatoplasty: bipedicle advancement 
C. Mucoperiosteal flap technique
238
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plates 10A and 10B
(Continued)
 D. Palatine (artery) mucosal flap
E. Soft palate and pharyngeal mucosal flaps
F.Full-thickness labial advancement flap
G. Cartilage graft technique
H. Angularis oris mucosal flap
10. Nasal Reconstruction Techniques (Chapter 20)
A. Septal resection technique
 B. Septal coverage: cutaneous advancement flap
C. Bilateral sulcus flap
D. Alar fold flap
E. Musculofascial island labial flap
 F.  Cantilever suture technique
G. Labial mucosal inversion technique
11. Foot Pad Reconstruction (Chapter 18)
A. Digital pad transfer
B. Metatarsal/metacarpal pad transfer
C. Whole pad grafting.
 D. Segmental pad graft
 E. Digital flap technique—interdigital defects
F. Digital flap technique—digit 2, 5 defects
G. Fusion podoplasty
12. Major Eyelid Reconstruction (Chapter 19)
A.""Lip-to-lid procedure"
 B. Mucosal graft/transposition flap reconstruction
C. Third eyelid reconstruction of lower eyelid
13. Preputial Reconstructive Surgery (Chapter 22)
A. Preputial ostium enlargement
B. Preputial ostium reduction 
C. Preputial advancement technique
D. Phallopexy
E. Urethral reconstruction for subanal hypospadias
 F. Preputial urethrostomy technique
14. Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques (Chapter 23)
A. Omental Flaps
B. Scrotal Flaps
C. Caudectomy for tail fold intertrigo
D. Episioplasty
COMMENTS
 The surgical menu serves as a general site reference for the surgeon. Only the most common techniques are
identified on a regional basis. Other techniques can be used for specific defects in a variety of body areas.
ains at go anuaagand au pue seare suop ieuoan go uuon aul ioagap aue go uoenol pue azis au
 generally dictate the selection of the technique(s).
 Regional Considerations
239
Plate 10A
4-M
3A-E
SE
2B-D
1
4D
1A, E, J
7A.E
8A-
4C
3A-E
1A, J
4F
3A-
2C, D
4C
7C
4C
4A,B
1A.
35
4G
3F
7A,B
1A,
2A/D
7H
1A, E, J
2A-D
/3A-E
4B
14A
2 B-D
3A-E
5A-F
6A, B
3A-E
6A, B
5A-F
2A, B
2A,B
1A,
4E
7F
13A-FMALE
11A-G
11A-G
3A-E
2B-D
14B MALE
4F
14D
GA.B2A
B
10A-F
2A
4M
7G
12A, B
8A-KI
3A-E
2A
8A-K
10A-F
2C,D
12A, B
1A, E, J
4A, B
11A-D
40
2C, D
1A.E.
7J
4A, B
2A
2A, B
A,E
4B
4H
3A
3A
1A, E, J
3A-E
4F
4H
7A, B
2B-D
SE
7A, B
3F
1A, E, J
4C
2C, D
1A,
3A-
1A,E,
5A-F
11A-G
240
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 10B
2A
4K
8M
4M
12A,B
3D
4A
3A-E
1A, B, E, J
4M
12A-C
4A
10A-
2A
3A-E
2C, D
1A, B,E, J
8A-D, F H, I, J
3D
8M, O
2C, D
8A-C,E
4K
3D
2A
12A,
1A, B, E, J
12A-C
4A
10A-B
3A
3A-E
8L
1A, B, E, J
2C, D
3D
10A-G
4A, B
1A, B, E, J
2C, D
8A-D, F, H, I, J
8G, H
8l, K
9A-F
8B, C, E,G, I, J
9A,F
8A
Tension Relieving
Techniques
Introduction 242
Plate 21: The "Hidden" Intradermal
Skin Tension in the Dog and
Release Incision   268
Cat  242
Plate 22: Multiple Release Incisions
for Extremity Wounds  270
PLATES
Plate 23: Walking Suture
Plate 11: Tension Lines 248
Technique 272
Plate 12: Effects of Skin Tension on
Plate 24: Skin Stretchers to Offset
Wound Closure  250
 Plate 13: Patient Positioning
Incisional Tension  274
Plate 25: "Tension" Suture
Techniques 252
Patterns 276
Plate 14: Undermining Skin 254
Plate 26: Retention Sutures 278
Plate 15: Geometric Patterns to
Plate 27: Stent 280
Facilitate Wound Closure  256
Plate 28: Skin "Directing" for
Plate 16: V-Y Plasty  258
Plate 17: Z-Plasty (Option I)
Maximum Coverage 282
260
Plate 29: Relaxing Incision to
Plate 18: Z-Plasty (Option II)
262
Reduce Flap Tension 284
Plate 19: Multiple Z-Plasties
264
Plate 20: Relaxing/Release
Incisions
266
241
242
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
SKIN TENSION IN THE DOG
AND CAT
xcessive tension during wound closure can result
Cin circulatory compromise, retarded 
pumom
Patient Variations
healing, dehiscence, and skin necrosis. Tissue swell-
ing, underlying hematomas, and increased collagenase
Skin differs in thickness, pliability, and tension in
activity within the 5-mm border of the wound edges
various body regions, and there are also variations
also can contribute to sutures "cutting out" (see
between breeds and species. Bloodhounds and Basset
Chapter 6). Tension-relieving techniques are methods
hounds, for example, have ample loose skin over many
of reducing wound tension or distributing the tension
body regions, whereas whippets and greyhounds have
more uniformly in order to prevent the complications
comparatively less skin. Whippets and greyhounds
associated with wound separation (see Chapter 6). In
also have considerably thinner, less durable skin com-
veterinary medicine, the most common method used
pared to other dogs. As a result, skin repairs can be
to mobilize cutaneous margins for wound closure is
more problematic in these canine patients.
undermining. However, studies have demonstrated
Dogs and cats have a similar cutaneous distribu-
juanauu, io [emeu sh puoaq yians ues us ie
tion, although feline skin appears to be more pliable
elasticity" by the processes of mechanical creep and
and the limbs more flexible than the average dog.
 stress relaxation when continuous tension is applied
Extremely obese animals can lose considerable skin
over time to the cutaneous tissues. Skin stretchers
laxity from heavy deposits of fat beneath the dermis
(Skin Stretchers, Pavletic, Angell Animal Medical
(Fig. 9-1). As discussed in Chapter 10, the skin is
Center, Boston, MA) and tissue expanders are exam-
stretched in obese animals, potentially making wound
ples of techniques  that mobilize skin  for  wound
dlosure more problematic.
closure, using these processes. Skin stretchers can be
used to stretch prior to wound closure; they also may
be used postoperatively to reduce incisional tension
(see Chapter 10).
Surgical Considerations
Various suture patterns can be used to help offset
and distribute tension during wound closure. Relaxing
Skin over the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the trunk
(release) incisions, V-Y advancement, and Z-plasty can
is pliable in a craniocaudal and dorsoventral direction.
be used to reduce tension on the incision. This section
The excision and closure of small wounds in this area
discusses techniques for assessing and minimizing
is not critical. As one removes larger areas of skin in
skin tension for successful skin closure.
an elliptical fashion, the length of the incision is best
a ade araum seae un asn p aa isal jo sr s padaus ua e un ix s jo adxi a ') le 
skin prevails.
Tension Relieving Techniques
243
created (when feasible) parallel to the lines of greatest
close small defects. Alternatively, the versatile trans-
tension: this facilitates mobilizing the more elastic skin
position flap can be used to mobilize loose skin when
for apposition of the cutaneous borders of the wound
created parallel to the axis of the limb (Fig. 9-3). Care
 created. If the elliptical excision is created at an angle
must be exercised to avoid closing wounds under
to the lines of tension, angular tension lines may
excessive tension that may result in compromise to the
promote closure in a curvilinear fashion. The flank and
circulation and lymphatic drainage to the distal
axillary skin folds are elastic and mobile skin areas that
extremity below the closure site.
aq pmom us si qno uoo qu o isne
considered a potential "donor" area for wound closure,
the closed donor site is more prone to dehiscence in an
 Excessive circumferential skin tension on the lower
active pet. The author avoids using this area for most
,lanbrumet [eiopoiq, e u nmsan ues Ainuanxa
closure techniques.
effectively compromising venous and lymphatic
return from the distal extremity. Swelling will then
 Closure of wounds resulting in intersecting inci-
collapse arterial circulation. Partial wound closure
-rand si semie uisan anam ou m
sions is occasionally necessary, creating a T junc-
tion. Placed under tension from various traction
ble to complete closure under questionable tension.
forces, wound dehiscence most commonly begins
at this weakest point of the closure, at the "T" inter-
section. For this reason, closure of wounds in a
 Under these circumstances, wounds are better left
linear or curvilinear fashion is preferable.
(partially) open than closed under excessive tension.
Release incisions also can be used to offset local inci-
sional tension (Fig. 9-4).
The middle and distal portion of the extremities
have a paucity of loose skin. However, skin can be
mobilized to a limited degree in a craniocaudal plane
The author has developed a variation of the stand-
whereas little skin can be elevated in a proximal-distal
ard release incision: the hidden release incision.
direction (Fig. 9-2). As a result, small advancement
(See Plate 21.)
flaps can be created perpendicular to the limb axis to
HG. 9-2 (A) Note the inability to grasp any
loose skin in a proximal-distal direction on the
rear limb of a greyhound. (From Pavletic MM.
1990. Skin flaps in reconstructive surgery. Vet
Clin No Arm 20:81.) (B) A ridge of skin can be
elevated in the cranial-caudal plane. This
 parallel fold of skin can be used for
transposition flap elevation. This fact is contrary
to the tension lines noted in Plate 1. (From
Pavletic MM. 1990. Skin flaps in reconstructive
surgery. Vet Clin No Am 20:81.)
FIG. 9-3 (A) Lower extremity defect in a cat. (B)
A transposition flap was elevated parallel to the
limb axis with the base or pedicle of the flap
based distally. Carefully measured prior to
elevation, the available loose circumferential
skin allowed for closure of the donor and
recipient beds.
(B) Release incision made over the lateral surface of the elbow region, creating a bipedicled advancement flap. The flap was advanced
over the elbow defect and sutured into position. The lateral donor defect is left open to heal by second intention. A Schroeder-
Thomas splint was used to immobilize the elbow until suture removal.
(C) Healing of the lateral release incision occurred without complication. Use of the thicker lateral skin is preferable over the thinner
medial skin of the extremity. Bilateral release incisions also can be used to facilitate closure of problematic elbow defects.
244
二
C
1/8x
E
FIG. 9-5 (A) Radiation ulcer over the dorsal lumbar area of a cat. A carcinoma was surgically removed from the area and the surgical
field irradiated. A slowly expanding radiation ulcer developed several months later.
(B) Wide resection of the ulcer and bordering epithelialized scar. Tissues resected did not reveal tumor recurrence, based on
histopathologic analysis.
(C) Wound closure was accomplished, but the incision was under moderate tension.
od e io sqe sela go uedde q pamn si au ot deae pdde aiam sped iaupias us jo aed omi a
uaed aul jo uoeuuexaai on rond paisnipe jou aram sanqeo yalqeo yoea ot pandde sem uoisuat jo junoue pu y duissaup uonos
the following day.
(E) Dorsal view of the patient, 24 hours after surgery.
(F) Uncoupling of the stretcher cables at 24 hours. Note the relaxation of the skin along the border of the incision. Pads and cables
't Aep Aq paaouau aam sainns us iasins aje sinou z paaouau aiam
245
246
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Harnessing the Viscoelastic
techniques (release incisions, Z-plasty, V-Y-plasty)
Properties of Skin
divide collagen fibers and partially reduce tension in
a fashion similar to cuting a rubber band. Z-plasty and
some local flap techniques transpose additional skin
As discussed in Chapter 1, the skin, and dermis in
 into a skin tension plane perpendicular to an incision.
particular, is a viscoelastic medium, based on the
Simply undermining skin will improve elastic advance-
physical properties of collagen and the surrounding
du unan aun uip q us go p
mucopolysaccharide ground substance. Regional vari-
dermal/fascial attachments to the dermis. Skin can
ations in skin thickness and pliability primarily are the
then be shifted or directed into adjacent defects by
result of collagen fiber size and weave. While skin
taking advantage of its regional and directional elastic
 normally stretches and deforms during normal physi-
properties (Fig. 9-6).
cal activity and pregnancy, research has demonstrated
 Tension suture patterns and walking sutures reduce
that these inherent properties also can be harnessed to
tension, in large part, by distributing tension more
promote wound closure. Skin can be "prestretched"
uniformly to the surrounding cutaneous tissue surface
ssal napun anson pumom aounnd on smou um
by variable degrees. Skin stretchers recruit the viscoe-
tension. A skin-stretching device (Skin Stretchers, Pav-
lastic properties of regional skin by distributing tension
letic) also can be used to effectively offset incisional
over the comparatively large footprint of contact
tension postoperatively (Fig. 9-5).
between the skin pad and skin surface. Tension sutures
Those techniques discussed in this chapter offset
also achieve some incisional tension reduction in a
skin tension by a few basic mechanisms. Incisional
similar fashion.
FIG. 9-6 (A) Multiple skin wounds: the dog was tied to the car bumper and accidently dragged. (B) Initial debridement was followed
by wet-to-dry dressings. (C) The large left shoulder and thoracic wound was closed by directing the adjacent elastic skin toward the
center of this large wound. (See Plate 28).
Tension Relieving Techniques
247
In face of excessive tension, tension sutures cannot
Suggested Readings
 accentuate skin deformation as effectively as skin
stretcher pads due to their small point of contact with
Bailey JV, Jacobs KA. 1983. The mesh expansion method of
the skin and limitations in their physical placement in 
suturing wounds on the legs of horses. Vet Surg 12:78-82.
the areas surrounding the surgical site. Unlike skin
Hamilton HL, McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD,et al. 1998. Surgi-
stretchers, skin sutures placed under great tension can
cal reconstruction of severe cicatricial ectropion in a puppy.
"cut-out" and cause circulatory compromise to the
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:212-217.
 Johnston DE. 1990. Tension relieving techniques. Vet Clin No
skin.
Am 20:67-80.
Selection and use of the following techniques will
Pavletic MM. 1986. Undermining for repair of large skin
depend upon the individual circumstances of a given
defects in small animals. Mod Vet Pract 76:13-16.
wound closure, the condition of the skin, and regional 
Pavletic MM. 1990. Skin flaps in reconstructive surgery. Vet 
circulation. With experience, surgeons develop their 
Clin No Am 20(1):81-103.
 Pavletic MM. 1994. Surgery of the skin and management of
own preference(s) for the techniques listed.
wounds. In: Sherding RD, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Managemert, 2nd ed., 1969-1997. New York: Churchill
Livingstone.
Pavletic MM. 2003. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook
Positioning of the patient on the surgery table can
of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 292-321. Philadelphia, PA:
 have a significant effect on wound closure. For
WB Saunders.
example, a common error in closing a large skin
Pavletic MM. 2003. Skin and adnexa. In: Slatter DH, ed.
defect over the dorsal-lateral pelvic area is the
Textbook of Srmall Animat Surgery, 3rd ed., 250-273.
 placement of the patient in sternal recumbency.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
 Swaim SF. 1979. A "walking" suture technique for closure of
with the rear limbs in a "frog leg" position. This
large skin defects in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
greatly reduces dorsal skin tension, facilitating
12:597-599.
closure. The postsurgical problem is discovered by
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1997. Srmall Ariral Wound Man-
the surgeon only after surgery is completed: skin
 agement, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins.
Vig MM. 1985. Management of integumentary wounds of
closure tension results in the abduction of the rear
 limb(s), necessitating immediate revision of the
h e i ps riudxa ue hop u saaxa
Hosp Assoc 21:187-192.
dlosure.
This can be avoided by closing the defect with
the patient in lateral recumbency (giving a true
picture of regional skin tension). Thoughtful preop-
erative plarning can prevent this problem regard-
 less of patient positioning.
248
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Tension Lines
Plate 11
DESCRIPTION
Dominant lines of skin tension in the dog. (Redrawn from Irwin DHG. 1966. Tension lines in the skin of the
dog. JSm Anim Pract 7:595-598.)
SURGICAL CONSIDERATION
(A) Ventral view, lines of greatest tension.
(B) Dorsal view, lines of greatest tension.
(C) Lateral view, lines of greatest tension.
COMMENT S
The lines of tension illustrated were determined by the use of stab incisions in canine cadaver skin.
Separation of wound edges indicated the direction of tension "bands."Although similar studies in human
cadavers have been considered somewhat inaccurate, these anatomic maps do serve as general guidelines
for the small animal surgeon. It must be noted that many small- to moderate-sized skin defects can be
bands to facilitate closure. However, there is greater loose skin around the circumference of the limbs
compared to the proximal-distal direction. (See Chapter 1.)
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
249
Plate 11
TENSION LINES
VENTRAL
DORSAL
LATERAL
250
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 12
Effects of Skin Tension on
Wound Closure
DESCRIPTION
Elliptical excision and the effects of skin tension.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Elliptical excision perpendicular to lines of greatest tension results in widening of the defect as a result of
elastic retraction of the skin borders.
will note less tendency for the wound to spread open from elastic retraction.
(C) Elliptical excision created at an angle to the lines of tension causes disparate traction of the incision.
Closure of the wound will assume a wavy or curvilinear appearance.
COMMENT S
Closure of a skin defect is primarily determined by the size, shape, and location of the wound. In elective
s ieuai jo aeupe aei oi ae aq Ae uoains aue 'srong us jo uoisixa e yns 'sanpanod
laxity and elasticity to minimize tension on the closure. Cosmetic closure includes positioning the scar so
  o e  n  n   m  n   r  n
in expansion of the width of the scar. (From Burges AF. 1975. Elective Incisions and Scar Revision. Boston:
Little Brown & Co. Modified wifth permission.)
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
251
Plate 12
252
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Patient Positioning Techniques
Plate 13
DE SC RIP TIO N
When closing defects over the back, ventral abdomen, or lateral surface of the trunk of a large animal,
undermining and advancement of skin may be impaired by the animal's weight, which can pin mobile skin
 against the surgery table. This can significantly impair wound closure. Sandbags, beaded"vacuum" bags, or
rolled-up towels can be placed ahead and behind the surgical region, to elevate the skin trapped against the
table.
POSITIONING TECHNIQUES
punom arel e jo ainsoo ioy saiad pue wnajs jenueno au yeauaq juaaneid joddns pappe (v)
overlying the back.
(B) Padded supports beneath shoulders and pelvis for ventral thoracic and abdominal wound closure. This
is ideal for unilateral or bilateral chain mastectomies when closure tension occasionally is a problem.
(C) Padded supports are placed beneath the lateral pelvis and shoulder for closure of large lateral thoracic
or abdominal wall defects.
COMMENT S
lo gaeun lunp sop sare u panou Auon jsou si su pasn se juaed aul go suosod
bilateral chain mastectomy. The surgeon can further reduce skin tension in the inguinal or axillary/sternal
regions by loosening rope ties used to secure the respective hind limbs/forelimbs.
 Tension Relieving Techniques
253
Plate 13
254
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Undermining Skin
Plate 14
DESCRIPTION
The loose skin over the neck and trunk in the dog and cat permits the veterinary surgeon to close many skin
defects by undermining alone.The key to the successful surgical elevation of skin is preserving its blood
plexus. The following points can be employed by the clinician as general guidelines for undermining skin in
small animals.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Skin should be undermined below the panniculus muscle layer, when present, to preserve the
subdermal plexus and associated direct cutaneous vessels.
(B) Skin without an underlying panniculus muscle layer (middle and distal portion of the extremities)
should be undermined in the loose areolar fascia beneath the dermis to preserve the subdermal plexus.
(C) Preserve direct cutaneous arteries and veins whenever possible during undermining.
(D) Skin closely associated with an underlying muscle should be elevated by including a portion of the
Outer muscle fascia with the dermis rather than undermining between these structures. This may help
minimize injury to the subdermal plexus.
COMMENT S
Avoid direct injury to the subdermal plexus by using atraumatic surgical technique. Avoid or minimize the
contusions, edema, and infection.
Blunt-tipped Metzenbaum scissors are almost universally employed for undermining skin by alternately
opening and closing the scissor blades to separate the loose areolar connective tissue. Dense fascial
underlying fascia by dense scar tissue. This sifuation is most commonly seen in a 1- or 2-cm border of skin
around chronic granulation beds.
 Tension Relieving Techniques
255
Plate 14
256
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Geometric Patterns to Facilitate
Plate 15
Wound Closure
DESCRIPTION
 Cutaneous wounds of an irregular shape can be converted to a simpler geometric pattern to facilitate wound
 suoo jsq ien uaned oua e uoaias Aq pasixa aaq un uoai snoauno e ies 'anso 
its shape.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Triangular closure resulting in a Y-shaped scar.
(B) Rectangular closure resulting in an X-shaped scar.
(C) Elliptical closure resulting in a linear scar.
(D) Crescent closure resulting in a U-shapeded scar.
aas) pasioxa aq uen siea-aop are panou aq Ae siea-aop ios ieaul e ui unsan uoisioxa ieno ()
Chapter 21).
COM MENT S
The surgeon should not rely solely on the use of simple geometric designs as the preferred method of
wound closure. There are many circumstances where skin flaps may be more reliable for closure of the skin
defect. Regional skin laxity or elasticity dictates, to a considerable degree, the method(s) of closure. (See
 Plate 28, Skin"Directing" for Maximum Coverage.)
 It generally is preferable to close wounds in a linear or curvilinear fashion, since wound dehiscence is
most likely to occur when two incisions intersect (X or Y closures). The point of intersection is a common
location for incisional separation due to the difficulty in accurately suturing this area and the increased
susceptibility to additional distracting forces.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
257
Plate 15
HIIIIIE
258
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
V-Y Plasty
Plate 16
DE SC RIP TION
V-Y advancement is a lengthening procedure occasionally used to relieve minor tension to a limited area.
Conversely, Y-V closure can be used to increase local skin tension. Both techniques are used to alter tension
to a narrow band of skin where minor tension modification is desirable.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A V incision is made no closer than 3 cm from the skin incision (as a general guideline). The edges are
carefully undermined, if necessary.
(B) Closure of the outer incision edges beginning at the tip of the V incision pushes the inner triangular
skin flap forward to reduce tension within the plane of the incision.
(C) A Y configuration is created with advancement of the triangular flap.
COMMENT S
V-Y plasty is marginally effective in relieving skin tension; it cannot dramatically reduce tension over a wide
technique to execute.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
259
Plate 16
260
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Z-Plasty (Option I)
Plate 17
DESCRIPTION
 Z-plasty is used to (1) alter skin tension adjacent to an incision, (2) lengthen restrictive scars, and (3) change
the direction of a linear scar into a less discernable patfterm. In the latter case, the human eye has greater
difficulty following a zigzag design compared to a linear scar, especially one that crosses a natural skin line
 Or fold in a relatively hairless area. As a result, Z-plasty can change the position of the scar into a less
conspicuous skin fold or line. The conventional Z-plasty technique involves forming two equilateral
triangles. Each limb and the central member of the Z incision are equal in length; each limb extends at a
zone is approximately 75% .
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)
  jau = a - gv rusp pus ae pue eu ui a umiaq yu u ana
practice, the actual gain is less than the theoretical gain).
(B)
A"Z" is drawn onto the skin. Each limb of the Z and the central member are equal in length. Each
limb is drawn at a 60-degree angle to the central member. The Z design is posifioned so that the
central member overlies the restrictive scar (shaded area). The thin scar band is normally excised
jo dn au spaq iouop Susoddo aui ou pajejoi pue pauuapun st ( pue 1) dey nensueu yeg (a-o)
each flap can be trimmed (rounded) to preclude the occasional necrosis noted in this area. Lastly, the
individual flaps are sutured into place.
COMMENT S
 Most Z-plasty procedures are used to increase the length of a skin area, thereby improving mobility.
tension is the most common use in veterinary medicine. Z-plasty actually is the simultaneous transposiftion
 of two equilateral triangular local flaps. As each flap is transposed, additional skin is placed in the previously
restricted zone from the immediate area. The resultant scar also is more pliable than the previous linear scar.
 One or two standard transposition flaps actually may be more capable of lengthening more diffuse
restrictive scars.
 Z-plasty is somewhat confusing to clinicians unfamiliar wifh its design and execufion. Practicing Z-plasty
 designs on thin sheets of elastic cloth or foam rubber is the best way to understand this procedure before
atftempting its use in a clinical sifuation.
 Human reconstructive surgery textbooks demonstrate multiple variations in this standard Z-plasty
is sufficient for most siftuations where Z-plasty is indicated. Although the creation of wider angle flaps 70-90
degrees, can increase the theoretical length of gain to 100% and 120%, respectively; transposing these wider
flaps is more difficult, except for areas of thin, elastic skin.
 demonstrated that the actual gain of a 60-degree angle Z-plasty with 8-cm limbs was 28% less than
theoretical measurements (a 45% gain as opposed to 73%). As the limb length decreased, the percentage of
E sienba '%sh ssl 'uie %e) paseinies uu ue ssal %st pey squ w-I ym Aiseid-z 'paseaop uis
total gain of 28%).
For Z-plasty to work properly, the skin in the base of the flaps created must be loose and elastic enough
to rotate and stretch into its new posifion. If skin is under tension perpendicular to the central member of
the Z, it may be impossible to transpose these flaps.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
261
Plate 17
AB
CD
Gain
262
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 18
Z-Plasty (Option II)
DE SC RIP T IO N
 Z-plasty can be used to reduce tension on wound closures otherwise difficult or impossible to close in a
given area.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The 60-degree angle Z-plasty is drawn onto the skin, with the central member of the Z parallel and
overlying the line of greatest tension. It is desirable to create the Z incision no closer than approximately
3cm from the primary incision. Each triangular flap is gently undermined.
(B) As the primary incision is sutured closed, each flap will begin to transpose into its appropriate position.
(C) Upon completion of the closure of the incision, the Z-plasty incisions are sufured to complete the
this area.
COM MENT S
See Plate 17. Placement of the Z-plasty incision must take into consideration regional blood supply.
especially major direct cutaneous arteries.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
263
Plate 18
264
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Multiple Z-Plasties
Plate 19
DE SC RIP TIO N
Multiple small Z-plasties have been advocated for use in those areas where insufficient skin is present for
using a single large Z-plasty procedure. Multiple small Z-plasties have a cumulative effect in lengthening
restrictive areas.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) Small 60-degree angle Z-plasties are created using the design illustrated.
u panns pue pasodsu uoisiou an go pua auo je suuuaq paela Aenppu ae sde pan (a)
place.
COM M E NT S
ua u u ea e spd isd-z -g ae aus e jen uus au sop u suag
compared to a series of eight 60-degree-angled Z-plasties with 1-cm limbs (see Plate 17). However, in areas
with sparse hair growth, the resultant scar may be superior to one large Z-plasty.
 Tension Relieving Techniques
265
Plate 19
B
266
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 20
Relaxing/Release Incisions
DESCRIPTION
A relaxing or release incision is, by design, a skin incision created parallel to the length of a wound to
facilitate closure of the primary defect. This bipedicle flap is carefully undermined and advanced over the
wound. A secondary defect is created by this maneuver, which may be either closed primarily by
undermining adjacent skin or left open to heal by second intention.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Illustration of a wound in which the line of greatest tension (perpendicular to the length of an
elongated defect) is located at the widest portion of the defect.
(B) If the skin edge bordering the wound is thickened or fibrotic, it should be excised with a scalpel blade
to improve marginal pliability. A skin incision is then created parallel to the primary defect in a staged
fashion, beginning in the center of the zone of greatest tension. In this example, the width of the flap
approximates the width of the wound. The cutaneous borders of the wound and bipedicle skin flap
created can be gently undermined to facilitate their advancement.
(C) Towel clamps may be used to initially oppose wound borders. The relaxing incision is extended
Buun an uo uoisua aaai on panbai se (g up u aul pap) suaa u asmua
portion of the wound.
(D) Upon closure of the wound, the secondary defect can be left open to heal by second intenfion. If
sufficient skin is available, the adjacent skin can be undermined and the secondary defect closed
directly.
COMMENT S
The release incision is a simple and useful procedure to immediately decrease incisional skin tension. A
ae saupina on essanau j punom e jo apis ansoddo au uo paneaio aq uen uoisiou luxelan punas
available to describe how close the relaxing incision should be to the wound. In practice, most relaxing
laxity, and the intended position of the secondary defect.
second wound appears illogical. However, there are occasions where closure of a wound that exposes
essential tendons, ligaments, nerves, and vessels justifies primary closure in exchange for a defect in a
relatively unobtrusive location. Wound closure may be essenfial to prevent contamination and infection of
surgical implants while creating a wound over a muscle surface where second intention healing can occur
 more easily. Skin coverage over a bony prominence may be necessary for proper healing compared to a
defect created in a"protected" region.
Other wounds susceptible to external trauma and infection can be closed primarily at the expense of
creating a secondary defect in an area where an epithelialized scar is less susceptible to future injury or
where such a wound would be easier to manage postoperatively. Lastly, chronic nonhealing wounds (as a
result of recurrent trauma, radiation, etc.) may heal primarily by using single or paired relaxing incisions
ns  u am u a  ane a ie (sde s adq o)
 defect in a region with sufficient circulation to heal by second intention. Most of these secondary defects, leff
unsutured, will heal wifhin 3 to 6 weeks.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
267
Plate 20
268
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 21
The "Hidden" Intradermal
Release/Relaxing Incision
DESCRIPTION
The standard skin release incision is created by incising through the epidermis and dermis. If regional skin
tension is not excessive, this incision can be resutured, usually by undermining the adjacent skin to offset
the deficit associated with advancing the bipedicled advancement flap. The author's dermal release incision
is useful for similar cases, thereby eliminating the need for resufuring a full-thickness incision.
In place of incising the skin through its surface, a no. 15 scalpel blade is used to gently incise the dermis
via the hypodermis. Care is taken not to cut through the thin, overlying epidermal layer. As a result, modest
skin relaxation can be obtained without the need to suture the skin, creating an additional scar.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The skin bordering the wound is undermined and elevated with one or more skin hooks. The area for
creating the dermal release is identified (see guidelines in Plate 20). A no. 15 scalpel blade is used to
 incise the dermis with a few delicate strokes to avoid incising completely through the epidermis. Scalpel
strokes are repeated until a dermal gap can be seen (visualization is easier in thicker skin). The dermal
release incision is made no closer than 3cm to the cut skin margin.
(B) The epidermal surface is viewed as the dermis is progressively incised. The blade can be seen tenting
the epidermal surface during this process. In this illustration, the epidermal surface remains intact:
traction on the skin demonstrates the dermal gap or release created (dashed lines).
(C) Completion of the incisional closure, revealing the modest tension relief achieved. Because the
epidermis is preserved, no suturing is required when using this technique.
COMMENT S
Properly executed, the"hidden" dermal release incision provides a modest gain in skin laxity. This dermal
release technique does not provide the degree of skin relaxation noted when the release incision is left open
to heal by second intention (see Plate 20). Yet, it is a useful way to reduce tension in those cases requiring a
comparatively modest reduction in wound closure tension. If the surgeon inadvertently perforates the
epidermis, the area can be sutured. There are three modest advantages of this technique: no sufuring is
required; open wound care is not required, unlike open release incisions; no visible scar is noted with
preservation of the epidermal surface.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
269
Plate 21
270
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 22
Multiple Release Incisions for
Extremity Wounds
DESCRIPTION
Multiple relaxing incisions have been described for closing wounds involving the lower extremities. Multiple
small stab incisions can be placed parallel to the long axis of the wound in a staggered fashion to promote
skin advancement without the creation of a single, large secondary defect. The single relaxing incision,
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Multiple Relaxing Incisions
(A) Skin sutures, stay sutures, or towel clamps are used to intermiftently atfempt apposifion of the wound
borders during the meshing procedure. Skin borders are carefully undermined.
(B) Mesh incisions are placed no closer than 1cm from the skin edge. In general, they are approximately
1cm long, and no closer than 1 cm apart. If additional rows are required, holes are made approximately
1-2cm from the initial row in a staggered fashion. A greater number of holes are usualy required at the
widest area of the defect under greater tension. When sufficient tension has been relieved, the skin
borders are sutured. A medicated nonadherent dressing is applied to the wound before the limb is
immobilized in a bandage or splint.
Single Relaxing Incision
(C) In this example, illustrating a nonhealing wound involving the forelimb, a relaxing incision is made
along the caudal aspect of the limb.
(D) The interposing skin is undermined and the two bipedicle flaps are advanced over the prepared wound
bed and sutured together. The solitary defect created on the caudal aspect of the limb (dotted line)
generally is managed as an open wound to promote wound contraction and epithelialization.
COMMENT S
Although multiple incisions have been used clinically, there is a significant risk of circulatory compromise to
the incised skin by accidental division of direct cutaneous vessels and impairment of the cutaneous
microcirculation traveling parallel in the skin. A wider dispersion of the multiple incisions would be
preferable to minimize this risk, although the gain in tension relief would be less.A single, long, relaxing
be less likely to cause major circulatory compromise to the skin adjacent to the defect.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
271
Plate 22
272
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Walking Suture Technique
Plate 23
DESCRIP TION
wide surface area when skin undermining and suture closure techniques alone are insufficient for wound
apposition. Individual"walking" sutures pull the skin toward the defect in small increments. Multiple
sutures have a cumulative effect in maintaining the undermined skin in posiftion as it is advanced to the
center of the defect.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable suture material is usually selected. Suturing begins at the distant limits of the
undermined skin. The skin is elevated as the needle is inserted into the dermis. Sutures may pass
through portions of the panniculus muscle to gain access to the dermis.
(B) The needle is then inserted into the underlying muscle fascia, generally or 2 or 3 cm closer to the
midpoint of the wound. Deep placement of the needle into connective tissue is necessary when suture
material is placed into a granulation bed in order to prevent suture pull-out.
(C) Walking sufures are no closer than 2 or 3cm apart. Affer the"deep"row of sufures is tied, a second
series of walking sutures are staggered with the first row.
(D) The skin on the opposite side of the wound can be advanced or"walked"in similar fashion.
(E) Completion of the wound closure. Note the skin depressions or dimples created from this buried suture
pattern. A bandage can be used to control dead space with or without evacuation drains.
COMMENT S
Walking sutures are a simple and effective method to stretch skin over a wide defect and anchor the skin
 into position as gains in skin advancement are made. However, not all wide defects require the use of
walking sutures.
 Skin"dimples" or indentations are noted over the location of walking sutures. These disappear in time
for formation of separate seromas or abscesses that would be difficult to drain separately. Careful placement
 of sutures and avoiding excessive numbers of walking sutures can minimize circulatory compromise. Clinical
results to date have shown that multiple fluid pockets are not a major postoperative complication.
Skin stretchers (Skin Stretchers, Pavletic Angell Animal Medical Center, Boston, MA) may be used to
prestretch the skin alone or in conjunction with walking sufures, in order to facilitate skin advancement.
Skin stretching also may be used to promote wound closure without the use of walking sutures (see Plate 31
and 32).
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
273
Plate 23
Wound
D
274
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 24
Skin Stretchers to Offset
Incisional Tension
DESCRIPTION
 Skin stretchers (Pavletic) can be used to offset incisional tension after wound closure. Skin pads, posiftioned
on opposing sides of the incisional segment under tension, are connected with a segment of elastic cable.
 Pads may be left in position for 3-5 days, unless conditions dictate their prolonged placement.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)
A large flank laceration has been prepared for debridement and surgical closure. The skin has been
clipped liberally in preparation for skin stretcher pad application.
(B, C) Closure was accomplished with using an absorbable intradermal suture pattern followed by
altermating simple interrupted and vertical mattress skin sutures. Drains may be advisable to help
prevent seroma formation.
(D)
 Skin pads are secured approximately 5cm from the incision (see Plate 31) using cyanoacrylate
adhesive.
COM MENT S
Skin pads have a large"footprint"of surface area contact with the skin, compared to retention sutures
(Plate 26). Pad size can be adjusted according to the location of the wound, size of the patient, and degree
of adherence required. Larger pads naturally have a larger surface area, thereby facilitating adherence to the
skin when elastic (tension) cables are applied.
 Because of the large surface area of contact with the stratum corneum and the ability to place them at
variable locations around the wound, skin pads are capable of recruiting a larger area of elastic skin to offset
incisional tension. The use of this device can accelerate mechanical creep and stress relaxation, often within
hours of application, in a fashion similar to the presuturing technique (Plate 30).
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
275
Plate 24
276
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
"Tension" Suture Patterns
Plate 25
DESCRIPTION
The simple interrupted sufure pattern is the simplest and most common pattern used for accurate apposiftion
of skin. Skin staples also can achieve closure rapidly and effectively. However, wounds under moderafe
s anqsp pue uodde anssi ueuu oi ae ianaq sh jeun uaed ainns e anbn Ae uoisun
tension and that is less likely to cut through the skin edges.
Vertical mattress sutures and the "far-near-near-far"or"far-far-near-near"suture techniques are useful
cutaneous blood flow. Vertical matftress sutures may be used alone or alternated with simple interrupted
skin sutures. This combines the tension-reducing capacity of the matress suture with the cosmetic
advantages of the simple interrupted paftern, which more accurately aligns fhe skin borders directly.
sus au asodde Aanennne pue au annns e huoe uoisun annpan oie Aru sanns pape
 Intradermal sutures can be followed by simple interrupted sutures for added security.
 on uns au ue am sn spun spa us usoddo ag isn anb ae sd pm
sutures. The two-point contact of towel clamps causes minimal trauma.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The continuous intradermal suture pattern is placed in the deep dermal surface.
(B) The interrupted intradermal suture pattern is placed in the deep dermal surface.
(C) The vertical mattress suture pattern.
rubber tubing stents (see also Plate 26).
COMMENT S
needles generally are more difficult to pass through skin but produce a circular hole that is more resistant to
this problem. Because of increased collagenase activity within 5mm of the wound border, sutures are better
placed outside this zone to reduce the risk of dehiscence. Keeping the skin clean and dry will help prevent
tissue maceration that may promote dehiscence from suture cut-out.
Selection of suture material for skin closure is largely a matter of personal preference. Absorbable suture
material is commonly used for intradermal patterns (3-0 or 4-0), whereas monofilament or braided
nonabsorbable materials are employed for skin closure (2-0 or 3-0). The author's preference for skin sutures
is swaged-on monofilament nylon or polypropylene because of its strength, elasticity, and low coefficient of
friction. Size 2-0 is occasionally used in the thicker skin over the back of the dog, whereas size 3-0 is used
for most other wounds. Small-diameter materials enable the surgeon to place greater numbers of sutures.
However, finer sufure materials (4-0, 5-0) are used only for cosmetic closure where there is an absence of
skin tension. Cotton bandages can help to protect the wounds and limit motion.Areas subject to motion
apposed wound borders.
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
277
Plate 25
278
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 26
Retention Sutures
DE SC RIP TIO N
Retention, stay, or echelon sutures provide a secondary suture line at a distance from the primary closure to
relieve excessive tension on the healing wound and prevent cutaneous dehiscence. In small animal surgery.
soft rubber tubing, Penrose drains, and buttons have been incorporated into the retention sufure patterm as
 bolsters to prevent sutures from cutting into the skin under stress. Suture materials are usually O0 to 0
diameter.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Vertical matfress retention sutures (echelon pattern) placed around a length of Penrose drain (Penrose
drain stents).
(B) Large, interrupted, retention sutures with skin bolsters or bumpers to prevent cutting into the skin.
(Note: In cases in which the patient is obese and prone to abdominal dehiscence after laparotomy.
retention sufures may be incorporated through all layers of the abdominal wall or deep fascial layers
prior to standard closure of the laparotomy incision (see also Plate 27).
COMMENT S
Retention sufures are not routinely required except for wounds under moderate tension. They can be
employed in the primary closure or set back from the incision line as secondary support. When used alone
they are usually removed 3 or 5 days later as swelling and skin tension decrease. Retention sutures can be
left in for a longer period of time, if warranted. A continuous line of firm tubing connected with a series of
mattress sufures should be used with caution, especially when a firm bandage is applied over the enfire
cutaneous circulation from the drain to the incision. It may be better to use soft tubing or multiple short
segments of soft tubing to avoid this situation. A noninvasive, altermative consideration would be skin
stretchers (see Plate 24).
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
279
Plate 26
280
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Stent
Plate 27
DESCRIPTION
A stent, by definition, is any material used to hold tissue in place, control dead space, or to provide support
to a wound after closure. The most common wound stent in veterinary medicine employs rolls of soft cotton
gauze that are secured over a closure site.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) After wound closure, soft sterilized rolls of self-adherent gauze are laid over the wound. There are three
common options to secure the gauze roll over the wound, as described below.
(B) Through-and-through retention sutures, incorporating all tissue closure layers, can be tied over the
gauze rolls.
(C) Suture loops or eyelets can be placed 3-4cm from the incision: suture material or umbilical tape is
placed through opposing loops in a"shoelace" fashion.
(D) A continuous zigzag pattern is commonly used to secure the stent into position.
COMMENT S
ua  spunom jond o Alns ee ale u pondua un au ae sus punom
n az no ns  s  psn non jou  au nn pa p 
have the potential to promote incisional infection unless they are kept dry and unsoiled. Of the two most
common suture techniques used to secure stents, technique C gives the surgeon easier access to the gauze
rolls for replacement, should contamination occur.
 Tension Relieving Techniques
281
Plate 27
282
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 28
Skin "Directing" for
Maximum Coverage
DE SC RIP TION
When attempting closure of large irregular wounds, skin tension is manually assessed to determine areas
where loose, elastic skin can be undermined and advanced over the defect. Smaller areas of the wound may
be easily undermined and closed directly by taking advantage of the loose skin available. However, simple
closure maneuvers may limit the ability to maximize use of the elastic skin to cover major (or more
important) portions of the defect.
The loose skin available for wound coverage is determined by lifting the skin surrounding the wound and
pushing the loose elastic skin border toward the central area of the major defect. This will better determine
When the surgeon has an estimation of whether undermining alone can achieve optimal wound
coverage, it must be determined whether a skin flap employing the elastic donor area(s) would afford better
wound coverage over undermining alone, such as that achievable with axial pattern flaps.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) This is a clinical example of a skin wound as a result of an automobile accident.
(B) No flap design was determined to give better wound coverage than undermining. The temptation to
initially sufure the smaller area closed was rejected, since this maneuver would have restricted
advancement of the most elastic skin to cover the largest skin defect overlying the shoulder.
(C) Directing the most mobile skin over the largest area of the defect provides maximum wound coverage.
The smaller area was easily closed by undermining the dorsal skin bordering this defect.
COMMENT S
The surgeon should not rule out using a combination of closure techniques including undermining, tension-
relieving techniques, skin flaps, second intention healing, and skin grafts. Closure should be accomplished
in the simplest fashion that will restore regional integrity with the least stress to the patient. Lastly,
achieving these goals.
If a flap is considered as an option for closure, the surgeon should attempt to reduce the total surface
 Tension Relieving Techniques
283
Plate 28
Yes
284
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 29
Relaxing Incision to Reduce
Flap Tension
DESCRIPTION
Improperly designed flaps occasionally result in a flap too short to completely cover a wound. A line of
tension can be noted along the length of the extended flap (line of greatest tension). A small, carefully
 placed, stab incision can reduce tension thereby preserving cutaneous circulation.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A no. 11 or no. 15 scalpel blade is used to make a small stab incision perpendicular to the line of
greatest tension (located from the pivot point of the flap to its most distant edge). The resultant wound
heals by second intention.
(B) A similar altemative is to incise the neighboring cutaneous surface in line with this tension band.
COMMENT S
Care must be taken to avoid dividing direct cutaneous vessels or creating unnecessarily long flap incisions
  d  g s  a d  i s ns s ss  s
inspected to assure the stab incision will not divide any direct cutaneous vessels. The lafter technique (B)
 Tension Relieving Techniques 
285
Plate 29
二
10
Skin-Stretching
Techniques
Physiology of Skin Stretching  288
Presuturing 288
Skin Stretchers 288
Skin Expanders 293
PLATES
Plate 30: Presuturing Technique 296
Plate 31: Application of Skin Stretchers  298
Plate 32: Skin Stretcher Substitution for Presuturing 300
Plate 33: Skin Expanders 302
287
288
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
PHYSIOLOGY OF
risking tissue tearing, pain, and infection. Due to this
limited skin-anchor interface, care must be taken to
SKIN STRETCHING
limit the "cable tensions" generated. The simplest and
most effective device for animal use is the skin-stretcher
C urgeons rely on the inherent elastic properties of
cable system discussed in this chapter. This externally
the skin to close wounds secondary to trauma or
applied device disperses cable tension over a large
the removal of diseased tissues. The skin's inherent
footprint on the skin surface area. Skin will not tear
elasticity can vary between species, individuals,
with this painless device.
body regions, patient age, body conformation, and
pathologic(
conditions  involving t
the cutaneous
tissues. To minimize tension during basic wound
PRESUTURING
closure, surgeons may attempt to place incisions paral-
lel to lines of maximum tension. The undercutting of
The technique of presuturing is another surgical
skin margins can further mobilize skin, although the
method that in part uses the biomechanical properties
combined effects of excessive undermining and wound
of mechanical creep and stress relaxation to facilitate
closure under tension can result in circulatory
the closure of skin wounds. Presuturing relies on the
compromise.
use of tension mattress sutures to imbricate the skin
Skin is capable of further extension beyond its
 Mm opposing sides of cutaneous lesions. The sutures
inherent elasticity from the application of a stretching
primarily exert their effect on the healthy skin imme-
or tension force over time. This phenomenon, termed
diately adjacent to the proposed surgical site. The force
mechanical creep, is complimented by stress relaxation or
required to close surgical wounds can be markedly
the progressive reduction in force required to keep the
'undde ains rae smou i um panpan
stretched dermal collagen fibers at a given length.
based on studies performed in swine, with positive
During this process, tissue fluid is slowly displaced
benefits noted as early as 2.5 hours after application in
from around the randomly arranged convoluted
humans and pigs (Plate 30). Skin stretchers can be
dermal collagen filaments as they progressively align
used as an alternative to the presuturing technique
and compact longitudinally in the direction of the
(Plate 32).
stretching force. This increase in cutaneous length can
be measured within minutes after load application: the
greater the force applied to the skin, the sooner
SKIN STRETCHERS
maximal extension can be achieved over time.
There are a number of natural examples of skin
 The externally applied, noninvasive skin-stretching
expansion beyond its normal estimated limits in
humans and animals including advanced pregnancy.
device described in this chapter is capable of rapidly
obesity, and the expansion of large subcutaneous neo-
stretching skin, both adjacent to and distant from a
 plasms. This form of cutaneous surface area enlarge-
surgical site in animals (Fig. 10-3). Unlike those tech-
niques used to manipulate skin bordering wound
ment is the result of biologic creep, a slower physiologic
 margins, this method and device has the capability of
mechanism of tissue accommodation (Fig. 10-1).
 The basic concept of surgically expanding skin,
described by Neumarn in 1957, led to the develop-
skin mobilization by recruitment from large surface
areas of skin. This device can be employed to close
ment of the modern tissue expander by Radovan and
moderate to large wounds prior to elective surgical
Austad in the 1970s. Recruitment of skin from tissue
expansion is the result of a combination of acute
procedures or during the course of open wound man-
agement (see Plate 31 and 32). Postoperatively, the
stretch, the recruitment of adjacent elastic skin, and
true expansion as a result of the biomechanical proper-
device also can be used to reduce incisional tension
ties of stress/relaxation previously described (Fig.
(see Plate 24).
 The basic device, as it is presently designed, applies
10-2).
continuous, adjustable tension to skin by means of the
In the literature, various devices have been used
following two components:
 experimentally and clinically to stretch human skin.
These systems involve the insertion of needles, metal-
lic loops, or other invasive cutaneous anchoring tech-
1
Adherent skin pads or anchors applied to
opposing sides of a surgical site.
niques. Sutures or elastic bands are used to connect
anchors and are periodically tightened. Urfortunately.
2.
Adjustable, elastic tension straps or
the force becomes concentrated on a small area of skin,
cables that engage the skin pads.
Skin-Stretching Techniques
289
C
HG. 10-1 (A-C) Massive lipoma attached to the skin below the vulva, 1 year-plus in duration. Note how the skin overlying the
sut un aou e paaeld 'nd leueaena ym padnos quauaieua euodi , daano siooq, Aq eaie aoejns st! paseaous sey soun
 process. The mass was successfully removed.
(D) Small terrier with recurrent infiltrative lipoma involving the left upper forelimb. The skin overlying the area has increased its
surface area by slow biologic creep. Infiltrative lipomas usually are problematic to remove; recurrence is likely unless surgical
margins can be obtained.
 Skin pads and the cable devices are made in a variety
natural curvature of the body region: alternatively.
of embodiments, depending upon the size of the
 small scissor cuts can be used to improve skin surface
wound, amount of skin recruitment desired, and their
contact. Cyanoacrylate adhesive is used to enhance
intended use.
 pad adherence to the skin as needed.
 The predetermined cutaneous sites for pad applica-
The pile pad surface attached to the elastic cables
tion are prepared by removing hair and cleaning the
engage the paired cutaneous "hook" pads positioned
skin with a surgical soap and isopropyl alcohol swabs.
 on opposite sides of the surgical site. The elastic cable
The skin is allowed to dry completely before pad
is attached to one pad and stretched prior to engaging
application. Multiple adherent pads can be applied to
the opposing pad in order to generate moderate cable
the skin local to and distant from the surgical site,
tension. As the skin areas progressively stretch from
depending on the amount of skin available or required
the force applied, cable tension is adjusted every 6 to
for recruitment. Skin pads can be contoured to the
8 hours to generate optimal tension forces during the
290
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
C
FIG. 10-2 (A, B) Tissue expanders can be purchased or specially designed in a variety of shapes and sizes. Sterile saline or lactated
iseg () aqnt auos e Aq patoauo pod uooaun ue ynout soatasai au ateu Aiaissardoid ot pasn st uonos s, iaur
aedoidde aut on aqni uoisuaixa au uatrous on uoalins aun sunqeua 'aotds sleiau e apnui t sapuedxa-ansst e jo stuauoduo
length.
brief period of application. Elastic cable also helps
sq ro sssap A po sod a u
placed over the surgical site: wounds can be easily
inspected at the time of cable adjustment. Sufficient
-dde rae sou i um pama aq A us
tion, although the devices were maintained up to 96
hours in some subjects (Fig. 10-4)
Upon completion of the stretching procedure,
elastic cables are removed; skin pads are peeled from
the skin surface or removed with a glue solvent on the
anesthetized patient. Pads left on the skin will begin
 to separate within days after application, as the outer
corneal layer desquamates. After surgical preparation
of the patient, the recruited skin is advanced to close
the skin wound. Generally, little or no cutaneous
undermining is required in small animal patients. As
 noted, skin pads and cables also can be used postop-
HG. 10-3 Components of the skin-stretching kit, including
aaissaxa paso on poad Aep-g on -Z e raao Aaaaa
self-adherent skin pads,elastic connecting cable, supplemental
incisional tension (see Plate 31).
glue, and glue applicators.
HG. 10-4 (A) Burn scar overlying the dorsal lumbar and pelvic regions in a beagle. the inherent elasticity of the skin was insufficient 
for wound closure without resorting to extensive undermining of the skin.
(B, C) Application of large skin pads onto the left and right sides of the dog.
(D) Attachment of a wide elastic cable to the left and right pads, under moderate tension. A second set of pads was applied caudal
surface.
291
pad (arrows). Cables were adjusted every 6 hours for a total of 72 hours.
(F) After 72 hours, note the skin bordering the lesion is approximated with minimal effort.
(G) Complete surgical removal of the scar. Incisions were made in the adjacent skin.
(H) Wound closure was accomplished with minimal cutaneous undermining.
292
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
293
HG. 10-5 (A) Undermining the skin in preparation for tissue expander insertion. The pocket size should be limited to the minimum
area needed to accommod ate this implant.
(B) Placement of a collapsed 100-cc tissue expander into a pocket created over the lateral tibial region.
(C) Proximal pocket created to accommodate injection port.
 During tissue expansion, a variable change is noted
Today, the author uses skin stretchers for nearly all
in epidermal thickness. Epidermal mitosis temporarily
large skin defects involving the trunk and cervical
increases following each inflation: the intercellular dis-
area. It is a fast, efficient, and economical method
of closing problematic wounds. It reduces surgical
tance increases and the basal lamina displays increased
undulation. The dermis displays a variable decrease in
trauma to the patient by reducing the need for
thickness during expansion. Large, compact bundles
more invasive closure techniques.
of collagen fibers are oriented in an orderly fashion
over the implant surface, forming a dense, fibrous
capsule (Plate 33).
SKIN EXPANDERS
The subcutaneous fat decreases. Skeletal muscle
 above or below the expander can undergo pressure
Tissue expansion is based upon the inherent ability of
 atrophy without loss of function. Initially, this muscle
skin to respond to mechanical stresses. Small animal
has the capability of regaining mass after implant
veterinarians have long noted the ability of skin to
removal. A transient neuropraxia may be noted in
stretch and accommodate to underlying expanding
nerves immediately adjacent to the expander.
tumors. Inflatable skin expanders can mimic this phys-
Interestingly, the vascular supply to the overlying
iologic process.
skin and compressed musculature remains intact. Cir-
294
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
HG. 10-5 Continued (D) Double-layer closure of the small access incision. Injection
of saline in the injection port.
(E) Example of inflated tissue expander, lateral aspect of the lower hind limb.
(F) Transposition flap elevation, upon completion of the period of expansion.
(G) Use of a transposition flap to close a defect overlying the carpal area. (From
Spodnick G, Pavletic MM. 1993. Controlled skin expansion to mobilized skin in the
G
distal extremities. Vet Surg 22:436.)
culation to the skin demonstrates enhancement similar
Despite the relative simplicity of their use, tissue
to what is seen with delayed flap procedures. Experi-
expanders have failed to gain popularity in veteri-
-edxa, jo Aqei rajeano e anesipu saipnis jeua
nary medicine. This is likely due to the cost of the
 paeap pue pasien Apannoe cn paneduon sdeg ,uois
implants and the general lack of familiarity with
flaps. Skin expanders are best employed for secondary
their use by veterinarians. Moreover, there are a
reconstructive surgery rather than for acute post-
variety of reconstructive techniques that can be
trauma construction. Skin showing irritation prior to
used in place of this device. Nonetheless, it can be
surgery is best avoided in tissue expansion. Skin
a valuable option in closing some of the more
expanders have potential use in small animals, par-
challenging
ticularly for lower extremity defects in dogs (Fig.
extremity
wounds occasionally
encountered.
10-5).
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
295
Suggested Readings
Liang MD, Briggs P, Heckler FR, et al. 1988. Presuturing: a
 new technique for closing large skin defects: clinical and
experimental studies. Plast Reconstr Surg 81:694-702.
Johnston D. 1990. Tissue expanders. Vet Clin No A
 Pavletic MM. 2000. Use of an extermal skin-stretching device
20:227-234.
for wound closure in dogs and cats. I Arn Vet Med Assoc
Keller WG, Aron DN, Rakich PM, et al. 1994. Rapid tissue
217(3):350-354.
expansion for the development of rotational skin flaps in
 Spodnick G, Pavletic MM. 1993. Controlled skin expansion
the distal portion of the hindlimb of dogs: an experimental
 to mobilize skin in the distal extrermities of dogs. Vet Surg
study. Vet Surg 23:31-39.
22:436-443.
296
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Presuturing Technique
Plate 30
DE SC RIP TIO N
The presuturing technique employs large matfress sutures to stretch skin on opposing sides of an elective
surgical site prior to the actual procedure. Skin can stretch by the processes of mechanical creep and stress
relaxation when continuous tension is applied to the skin over time. Research in a swine model, and
subsequent clinical studies in humans, indicate that this technique can reduce skin tension and thereby
facilitate wound closure within 24 hours after application.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) In this illustration, the presuturing technique will be used to reduce skin tension prior to surgical
removal of this cutaneous lesion. Using reverse cutting needles, 0 or 00 suture materials may be used
for presuturing. Lidocaine anesthetic blocks, sedation, or light anesthesia are used to reduce patienf
discomfort during suture placement. Vertical mattress suture"bites" are applied approximately 3-5 cm
from the proposed borders of resection. The number of sutures employed will vary with the length of
(B) As the sufures are tied, the skin around the immediate surgical area is placed under tension.
(C) A cross-sectional view of the presutured area. Imbrication of the skin places tension on the adjacent
skin.
COMMENT S
The presuturing technique underscores the potential for skin to deform or stretch beyond the boundaries of
its inherent elasticity. Presuturing is effective only in those body regions where elastic skin is somewhat
limited, such as the extremities. As such, its practical use is limited to smaller skin defects. Presuturing will
not be effective or even necessary in most body regions where elastic or redundant skin is present.
Skin stretchers (Plate 32) can be a more effective substifute for the presuturing technique described
above. The adjustable cables permit the veterinarian to maintain moderate to high levels of skin tension
continuously to enhance gains in skin mobilization for successful wound closure. The presuturing technique
is not adjustable and its stretching effects are limited to the skin immediately adjacent to the site of suture
wound closure siftuations.
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
297
Plate 30
298
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 31
Application of Skin Stretchers
DESCRIPTION
(Plate 30), the skin stretchers developed by the author employ externally applied adhesive pads. Elastic
cables are attached to cutaneous pads that have been placed on opposing sides of a surgical site. The
surgeon can adjust the elastic force applied to the skin to maintain a continuous high-tension load in order
to accelerate skin stretching or deformation. In 24-96 hours the mobilized or recruited skin is used to close
the cutaneous defect.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Ilustration of a skin wound. The fur has been liberally clipped around the area. Surgical soap and water
are used to remove cutaneous oils and debris. Isopropyl alcohol can be used to swab the skin to further
clean the skin and facilitate drying. The skin must be completely dry before skin pad application.A
marking pen can be used to mark the proposed sites of pad application.
(B) The hooked pads can be applied to the skin after peeling off the protective tab. However, a
commercially available cyanoacrylate glue is best applied to enhance its adherence to the skin in the
 dog and cat.A thin layer of cyanoacrylate glue is spread onto the base of the pad and applied
immediately to the designated skin site.
(C) Note the long axis of the rectangular pads have been placed parallel to the direction of tension in order
to minimize the potential for pad separation or displacement. Pads are placed approximately 10-20 cm
 from the wound margins. An additional row or tier of pads can also be applied outside this suggested
zone, if additional skin recruitment is required or feasible (e.g., the trunk). In this illustration, one elastic
cable has been attached to paired pads. A small protective bandage has been placed over the wound
surface.
increased every 6 to 8 hours as the skin stretches. One end of the elastic cable is disengaged from a skin
pad, stretched, and recoupled to the skin pad, as illustrated.
(E) At the completion of the procedure (24-96 hours), skin pads can be peeled off the skin. Nail polish
remover can be used to facilitate their separation (although the author has found this to be
aun dus Aeuu saanaueu sun ynoue pauoad si Aeuou sped aui go jeaouan penue (ressnauun
outer corneal layer of the skin. (This outer epithelial layer reforms rapidly.) In this example, all four
sides of this rectangular wound were advanced to accomplish closure. Note that two pads and a short
segment of stretcher cable were reapplied postsurgically in order to reduce incisional tension.
COMMENT S
As a general observation, the greatest gains in skin mobilization occur by 72-96 hours. Occasionally, skin
pads will separate from the skin, necessitating their reapplication with additional adhesive. The greatest
gains in skin stretching are in body regions where it is possible to mobilize large surface areas, both local
 Skin stretchers are least effective in the lower extremities. The amount of undermining required, at the time
of wound closure, usually is minimal after the use of skin stretchers.As noted, skin stretchers also can be
used to reduce incisional tension postoperatively for a few (3-5) addifional days. In Plate 32, skin stretchers
are used to stretch skin prior to elective surgical procedures to facilitate closure.
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
299
Plate 31
A
300
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 32
Skin Stretcher Substitution for
Presuturing
DESCRIPTION
Skin stretchers can be quite effective in recruifing skin prior to elective surgical procedures. This is
particularly true when removing diseased skin, including neoplasms.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
applied around the lesion.
(B) Dorsal view of the stretcher pads.
(C) Elastic cables cross over to the opposing (paired) pads.
every 6-8 hours for 24-96 hours before surgery. Skin pads are stripped off the patient after anesthetic
induction.
(E) After resection of the mass, the wound is closed using an intradermal suture patterm followed by simple
interrupted sufures. Vertical matfress sutures can be altermated with a simple interrupted paftern if
tension is present at a given point of wound closure. Skin stretchers can be used to further offset skin
tension as previously noted (Plate 24). A closed vacuum drainage system may be employed to control
dead space.
COM MENT S
Skin mobilization is optimal over the neck and trunk of the dog and cat. Stretchers are least effective in the
lower extremities, where minimal loose skin is available. Skin stretchers can be very useful to prestretch the
thoracic and abdominal skin prior to unilateral or bilateral chain mastectomies.
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
301
Plate 32
302
Plate 33
Skin Expanders
DE SC RIP TIO N
tube, and a self-sealing inflation reservoir that serves as an injection port. There are, however, other tissue
expanders designed with an injection port incorporated in the reservoir. Self-inflating tissue expanders also
have been used in humans. The basic unit described in this plate is the most practical design for veterinary
 patients. Controlled inflation of this device is capable of creating sufficient donor tissue to elevate an
advancement of transposifion flap to close an adjacent skin defect (traumatic or surgically induced).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) In this example, a skin incision is made for the insertion of a 100-cc tissue expander (length: 6.0cm;
width: 4.7 cm; height: 5.3 cm; Mentor Corporation, Goleta, CA) in a medium-sized dog. Metzenbaum
scissors are used to develop a pocket of sufficient size to accommodate the collapsed expander. Note
the access incision is posiftioned for eventual incorporation into the flap incision. The incision is not
affected by the inflated expander.
(B) The index finger is inserted into the pocket to assess its size and feel for fascial bands that require
division.
(C) The collapsed expander bag is partially folded and moistened wifth sterile saline to facilitate its insertion.
The thick silastic base is posifioned against the limb. The connecting tube is cut centrally and trimmed
incision. The ends of the connecting tube are joined by a metallic connecting insert. Two small 3-0
monofilament nonabsorbable ligatures are used to secure the tube ends from leakage or separation.
Care is taken to avoid creation of a large pocket that may cause the components of the expander to
migrate. The incision is closed with a subcuticular suture pattern and skin sutures.
(D) View of the tissue expander during expansion. A 23- to 25-gauge hypodermic needle is inserted into the
movement. Sterile saline is injected. From the author's research using 100-ml expanders, initial
expansion can be instituted beginning 48 hours after insertion. Injection rates of 10-15ml every 2 days
are equally successful. Flap elevation is initiated 48 hours after the last injection.
skin incision. Care is taken to avoid damaging the expander during its removal. The tube connector is
separated to drain the saline from the reservoir, and the unit is withdrawn. In this case, a single pedicle
 advancement flap is being created to cover the craniomedial skin defect created by the simultaneous
removal of diseased skin. In some cases, a distally based transposition flap can be created for lower limb
defects (inset). (See Plate 36.) In this example, a dorsally based transposiftion flap is inadvisable since the
access incision would be at the base of the flap, interfering with normal cutaneous circulation.
COMMENT S
There are a variety of standard expanders of variable sizes and shapes for surgical implantation. Specialized
designs can be ordered from manufacturers.At present, the cost of these implants is high and can amount
to several hundred dollars, depending on the size and design of the expander. High cost and a lack of
  n a s n  n  sa as p  sp   
that they can be autoclaved and reused multiple times with appropriate care.
Skin expanders require a degree of skin laxity to accommodate the mass of the collapsed unit. For skin
skin. The loose elastic skin of the neck and trunk would preclude the need and effective use of skin
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
303
Plate 33
304
Plate 33
(Continued)
expanders in most cases. The greatest clinical potential for skin expanders is in moderate-sized defects of the
middle to lower extremifies, where primary closure is not feasible and altermate closure options are less
satisfactory.
 It is unrealistic to expect a skin expander to be effectively employed for large defects of the extremity.
They do not permit one-stage surgical reconstruction and are best used for secondary restorative procedures
rather than in acute traumatic injuries
The size of the implant generally is determined by the size of the defect. The flat base of the implant
O siapuedxa us arou no omi palas on alaissod si hI 'aeaao aaauoe ot panbau azis aul go lapuedxa
accomplish this goal. Skin expanders can be hyperinflated beyond their designated volume capacity by
20%-25% for additional tissue gains. The 100-cc expander used in medium-sized dogs, placed in the
such expanders in some situations where additional skin is desirable.
Variable rates of inflation have been used in human surgery. Although a slow rate of expansion may be
preferable in elective reconstruction surgical procedures where time is not critical, other situations demand
more rapid rates of expansion. The author's research demonstrated that 100-cc expanders can be inflated
inflate the expander upon initial implantation although it can be performed to slightly stretch loose skin
overlying the implant, potentially saving 2 days. However, a more cautious rate would be indicated in
delicate cutaneous tissues, especially those previously compromised by trauma. Their use in previously
irradiated tissues is best avoided.
Owners can be trained to inject the expander or the patient can be handled on an oufpatient basis.
Clinical guidelines for expansion rates in humans include change in skin coloration (ischemia or cyanosis)
and patient discomfort. In the author's study, no patient displayed discomfort during injection. Skin
an on paneduos uys papuedxa au go ymoa seu papadun panou pou sem sisoue io suouea
regional skin, suggested skin circulation and viability were not compromised throughout the procedure.
The advancement flap design is simple to execute if the expander can be satisfactorily positioned adjacenf
to the recipient area. When used for advancement as illustrated, at least one-third of the circumference must
be preserved to provide an adequate base to support circulation to the flap. The transposifion flap can be
rotated into lower extremity defects, thus enabling the surgeon to develop a donor source proximal to the
recipient area. As noted, the inifial skin incision used for insertion of the implant should not be incorporated
into the base of the skin flap.The author has seen circulatory compromise in flaps that incorporated a linear
scar perpendicular to the length of the flap body.
Complications noted wifth skin expanders include dehiscence, implant extrusion, seroma, infection,
implant failure (leakage), and skin necrosis. A thick, fibrous capsule forms around the implant, which
   o   o     a  e i a
defects necessarily require flap or grafing procedures.Skin expanders do enable the surgeon to create
fullthickness donor skin of similar color, hair growth, and texture adjacent to a defect where no flap can be
noue ains Areuaan u aneld e aaeu ruea siapuedxa us 'are ieey iesu aun sdeuad pue (ies
its niche is smaller than for human patients.
 Skin-Stretching Techniques
305
Plate 33
C
11
Local Flaps
Introduction  308
Advancement Flaps  309
Rotating (Pivoting) Flaps 309
PLATES
Plate 34: Single Pedicle Advancement Flap 318
Plate 35: Bipedicle Advancement Flap  320
Plate 36: Transposition Flap (90 degrees) 322
Plate 37: Transposition Flap (45 degrees)326
Plate 38: Interpolation Flap 328
Plate 39: Rotation Flap 332
Plate 40: Forelimb Fold Flap 334
307
308
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
whenever possible. Unfortunately, the consistent
development of axial pattern flaps requires predictable
anatomical landmarks and proper patient positioning.
 pedicle graft or skin flap is a partially detached
When possible, it may be beneficial to position the base
L segment of skin and subcutaneous tissue: the base
of local flaps in the direction of known, direct cutane-
or pedicle of the flap maintains circulation to the skin
ous vessels arborizing in their general vicinity, thus
during its elevation and transfer to a recipient location.
improving the perfusion pressure to the pedicle graft.
Pedicle grafts developed adjacent to the recipient bed
Increasing the width of a pedicle graft does not
 are termed local flaps. They represent one of the most
increase its total surviving length. Flaps created under
practical methods of closing defects that cannot be
the same conditions of blood supply survive to the
approximated by simple undermining and suturing.
same length regardless of flap width. Increasing the
The effective use of these flaps usually depends on
width of the pedicle graft only permits the chance of
forming a flap in a neighboring area in which loose,
including direct cutaneous vessels in the flap. More-
elastic skin prevails. Any secondary defect created by
over, the cutaneous circulation differs regionally, and a
the transfer of the flap to the defect can be closed
set length/width ratio is not applicable. Narrowing of
directly. Local flaps are both simple and economical to
a pedicle can reduce blood perfusion to the body of the
perform. They are more likely to maintain a similar
flap and increase the likelihood of necrosis. Procedures
pattem of hair growth and color than distant flaps.
that narrow the pedicle, such as the back-cut technique
Local flaps have been effectively used to close defects
(counterincisions) are best avoided. Axial pattern flaps
in dogs, cats, birds, and other species. The 90-degree
are an exception to this rule, as long as the direct cutane-
transposition flap is particularly useful in this context.
ous artery and vein are preserved. Creating unduly
Local flaps are classified according to their method
long subdermal plexus flaps also can result in necrosis.
of transfer: flaps that advance in a forward direction
As a rule, the author recommends the following:
are aduancement flaps and those that rotate or pivot into
position are rotating flaps. Most local flaps are based
1
Create flaps with a base slightly wider
over the subdermal plexus circulation unless a direct
than its body to avoid inadvertent
cutaneous artery and vein are fortuitously included in
narrowing of the pedicle.
the base of the flap.
2.
 Limit flaps to the size required to cover
Ideal donor areas have ample skin available to
the recipient bed without undue tension.
elevate a flap without creating a secondary defect
(donor bed) unamenable to simple closure. Donor sites
Two or more small flaps may be preferable to a
subject to excessive motion and stress should be
 single, large pedicle graft whose effective circulation
avoided whenever possible, as they are prone to
at the end of the flap may be questionable.
wound dehiscence or can compromise local mobility.
Exceptions include cases in which closure of a wound
for the protection of exposed structures has priority
 A key point in skin flap survival is to keep the
 over the creation of a secondary defect. The secondary
length of a skin flap to a minimum. In other words,
defect, in turn, can be closed by undermining and
a e asop on anaissod su jious su dmf aun day
primary closure, a second flap, a free graft, or healing
wound without excessive tension.
by second intention.
 Local flap procedures begin with assessment of
lines of greatest versus least tension. Local flaps are
The surgeon should consider the use of bipedicled
designed to advance or rotate into place. An advance-
flaps when longer flaps are required. A "delay proce-
ment (sliding) flap is developed parallel to lines of least
dure" should be considered when there is a concern
tension, to facilitate its forward stretch over the wound
regarding the flap's circulation and survival if trans-
A 90-degree transposition flap is aligned parallel to the
ferred in a single stage to the recipient site. Careful
lines of greatest tension, to obtain the bulk of the flap
planning and meticulous, atraumatic surgical tech-
required to cover the defect. When the transposition
nique are necessary to prevent excessive tension,
flap is rotated into place, the donor site can be closed
kinking, and circulatory compromise to the flap.
directly because minimal tension lines are perpendicu-
All measurements of the defect and proposed flap
lar to the suture line.
are recorded in centimeters. As a precaution, a cloth or
Factors that maximize the circulation to the pedicle
foam rubber template of the flap can be made to rep-
graf should be considered during flap planning. Large
resent the proposed dimensions of the defect and the
flaps should include a direct cutaneous artery and vein
additional skin required for the flap to reach the recipi-
Local Flaps
309
ent bed from the proposed donor site. The flap tem-
distant wound margin. This must be anticipated before
plate is positioned over the defect, and the base of the
a single pedicle advancement flap is employed in cases
flap model is held in a fixed position as the model is
in which postoperative tension could distort neighbor-
transferred to the proposed donor site. This procedure
ing structures (e.g., eyelid margins). In these areas, a
is repeated until the template is an accurate model for
transposition flap would be a better option.
successful flap transfer. The flap is drawn on the skin
with a marking pen to provide reference lines for the
skin incision. Once one becomes familiar with
The single pedicle advancement flap (SPAF) prima-
certain flap techniques, the measurements can be
rily closes wounds by stretching over the defect.
drawn directly on the skin without resorting to the
Postoperatively, the collagen fibers will exert a trac-
templates.
tion force that has the potential to distort the recipi-
Atraumatic surgical technique is essential to the
ent bed. The bottom line is use this flap with caution
successful execution of local flaps. Their comparatively
limited blood supply from the subdermal plexus
around areas where mild retraction of the flap
requires greater care in their development and trans-
could distort function. This problem is most com-
monly noted when a SPAF is elevated perpendicular to
fer. Skin hooks and Adson-Brown forceps are best
the eyelid margin to close a problematic cutaneous eyelid
used to manipulate the skin flaps. In general, flaps
should be kept as short as possible in order to assure
defect. Consider the use of a 90 degree transposition flap
optimal perfusion to the distant edge.
in its place.
ADVANCEMENT FLAPS
ROTATING (PIVOTING)
FLAPS
The single pedicle advancement flap, bipedicle
advancement flap, and the V-Y advancement flap are
examples of pedicle grafts moved forward into a
Rotation flaps, transposition flaps, and interpolation
wound without lateral movement. The single pedicle
flaps are the three basic flaps that rotate on a pivot
advancement flap (sliding flap) is probably the most
point. The rotation flap is a semicircular flap that
     n 
rotates into the adjacent recipient bed (see Plate 39).
because of its simple design and lack of a secondary
Single or paired flaps can be employed to close trian-
defect requiring closure (Fig 11-1). Paired single-pedi-
gular defects. As a general rule, no secondary defect is
cle advancement flaps can be employed to close square
created with the rotation flap in the dog or cat .
or rectangular defects, resulting in an H closure design
The transposition flap is a rectangular pedicle graft
(H-plasty). (See Plate 34.) V-Y advancement is a trian-
commonly rotated within 90 degrees of the wound's
gular, single pedicle advancement technique primarily
axis. (See Plates 36 and 37.) The transposition flap is
the most useful of the rotating flaps (Figs. 11-3 through
employed to relieve tissue tension; it has limited effi-
11-9). Z-plasty, a modification of the transposition flap,
cacy in wound closure.
The bipedicle advancement flap is constructed by
is discussed in Chapter 9. A modification of the trans-
making a skin incision parallel to the long axis of a
position flap technique is exemplified by the forelimb
defect, with a flap width generally equal to the width
fold flap (see Plate 40).
of the defect. (See Plate 35.) The undermined skin
segment is advanced into the recipient bed. The bipedi-
cle advancement flap has the advantage of two sources
The 90-degree transposition skin flap is by far the
 of circulation to maintain a longer flap body. The relax-
most useful flap technique available to close a
 ing (relief or release) incision used to aid in wound
variety of the small- to moderate-sized problematic
closure is a bipedicle advancement flap by design (Fig
wounds.
11-2). (See Plate 20.)
It must be noted that advancement flaps, despite
their simple design and application, have limitations
 that preclude their routine use. The advancement flap
The interpolation flap is a rectangular flap rotated
into a nearby, but not immediately adjacent, defect. (See
 over the defect. As a result, an opposing elastic retrac-
Plate 38.) A portion of the flap must pass over the skin
tion occurs along the length of the flap. Excessive
between the donor and recipient beds. The exposed
retraction can promote dehiscence or distortion of the
 subcutaneous surface of this flap segmentis usually left
C
HG. 11-1 (A) Squamous cell carcinoma involving the left nasal planum and adjacent skin. (B) Wide resection of the mass, including
underlying bone. (C) Closure of lower gingival-labial mucosal defect. Staged elevation of a single pedicle advancement flap below
the platysma muscle layer. (D) Closure of this wound, with the advancement flap, underscores the considerable cutaneous elastic
advancement present in most feline patients.
HG. 11-2 (A) Bipedicle advancement flap used
 to cover a large skin defect overlying the
calcaneus. A Schroeder-Thomas splint was used
to immobilize the tarsal area until incisional
healing was complete. (B) A release incision is a
bipedicle advancement flap by design. Note that
the flap provides durable full-thickness skin
coverage over this potentially problematic bony
prominence. The exposed lateral (donor area)
and medial granulation beds quickly healed by
second intention.
310
HG. 11-3 (A) Skin loss over the calcaneus in a
Doberman. Skin loss of this magnitude over a
bony prominence is unlikely to heal by second 
intention without surgical intervention. (B)
Sufficient circumferential skin was available to
facilitate closure of this defect, using a 90-degree
transposition skin flap. The donor area closed
primarily. See Figure 1l-2 as an alternative 
option, depending on the availability of loose,
elastic skin.
HG. 11-4 (A) Cutaneous neoplasm involving
the distal left tibiotarsal area. (B) Excision of the
 mass. (C) Rotation of a 90-degree transposition 
flap. (D) Closure of the donor and recipient
beds. Developed after careful measurement, the 
transposition flap can be effectively employed
for many of the smaller- to moderate-sized
defects of the limbs.
311
FIG. 11-5 (A) Benign neoplasm involving the right nasal region. (B) Resection of the tumor. (C) Closure with a 90-degree
sh d usodsuen aiap-oh au 'ns au jo sixe an ot aue iuiu e ie si azz au jo Axe us ieu aon 'd usodsun
ideally suited to closing smaller problematic defects in this general region.
312
口
FIG. 11-6 (A) Antecubital skin defects can be challenging to close. (B) Marking pen used to outline a 90-degree transposition flap,
parallel to the long axis of the limb. (C) Successful closure. An Elizabethan collar was used to prevent licking. Severe exercise
restriction was imposed until suture removal 2 weeks later.
313
一
E
FIG. 11-7 (A) Expanding granulomatous mass in a 1-year-old Irish setter. (B) Mass resection. (C) Outline of a 90-degree transposition
shortened 2cm to help assure complete flap survival. (E) Closure was achieved without distorting the function of the upper eyelid.
Due to the surgical dead space, a drain is important to prevent seroma formation.
314
B
HG. 11-8 Two examples of transposition flaps for closure of pinnal defects. (A) Loss of the caudal aspect of the pinna secondary to a
bite wound in a German shepherd. Note the incisional outline of the flap. (B) Completion of closure. Note the effectiveness of this
simple flap technique to reconstruct the pinna. (C) Resection of a small mast cell tumor, including the underlying cartilage proximal
to the external ear canal. Elevation of a transposition flap. (D) Successful closure (see Plate 132).
315
FIG. 11-9 (A) Limb wound in a red-tailed hawk. Open wound management was performed until a healthy granulation bed formed.
(B) Closure of the wound was accomplished with a 90-degree transposition flap (upper area) and a full-thickness free graft (lower
area). The free graft was harvested from the left lateral thorax.
(C) Complete survival of the graft and flap. The small remaining defect healed by second intention healing.
techniques are applicable to a variety of species.
316
Local Flaps
317
open, although it may be covered temporarily with a
Suggested Readings
free graft. This redundant portion of the flap is later
excised once healing onto the recipient defect is com-
 Hunt GB. 1995. Skin-fold advancement flaps for closing large
plete. A second option is the use of a bridge incision
sternal and inguinal wounds in cats and dogs. Vet Surg
discussed in Chapter 13, Plate 55. Interpolation flaps
24:172-175.
are uncommonly employed in veterinary medicine,
Hunt GB, Tisdall PLC, Liptak JM, et al. 2001. Skin-fold
advancement flaps for closing large proximal limb and
although this general design is employed in tubed flaps
 trunk defects in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 30:440-448.
 and some axial pattern flap techniques.
 Pavletic MM. 1990. Skin flaps in reconstructive surgery. Vet
Clin No Am 20:81-103.
 Pavletic MM. 1994. Surgery of the skin and management of
wounds. In: Sherding RD, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Think local flap first before considering more elaborate
Maragement, 2nd ed., 1969-1997. New York: Churchill
flap techniques. For example, a dorsal cranial defect
Livingstone.
 can be closed by a caudal auricular axial pattern
 Pavletic MM. 1998. Skin. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techriques
flap (CAAPF). Half the length of the CAAPF is
in Small Animat Surgery, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and
Febiger.
 needed simply to traverse the area between the
Pavletic MM. 2003. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook
base of the flap and the caudal border of the defect.
of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 292-321. Philadelphia, PA:
In contrast, a smaller transposition flap developed
WB Saunders.
adjacent to the pinna can cover the defect com-
Stanley BJ, Read RA, Egar CE, et al. 1991. Bilateral rotation
pletely. The transposition flap is smaller, easier to
flaps for the treatment of chronic nasal dermatitis in four
 elevate, and the time associated with skin closure 
dogs. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 27:295-299.
is less.
318
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 34
Single Pedicle Advancement Flap
DE SC RIP TION
 aue sna i de uisp aq sde i ae go jsads ae si d je aad aus a
poaap aun ou de aun aueape pue yas o panbar sunoe au aq paep si yual de raap au jo
without excessive tension.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
toward the cenfer of the defect to determine final flap orientation.
flap is carefully undermined and the skin progressively incised until the flap is sufficiently mobile to
stretch over the defect.
placed in the corners of the flap to minimize circulatory compromise to the flap corners.
(D) An alternate technique is to use two single pedicle advancement flaps on each side of the wound. This
technique is called H-plasty based on the resulting H-shaped closure achieved.
C OM ME NT S
Although the single pedicle advancement flap is a simple flap technique to master, it has significant
limitations dictated by the availability of loose elastic skin immediately adjacent to the defect. The single
pedicle advancement flap does not bring addifional"loose"skin to the wound site; successful closure
requires the flap to stretch over the defect. There is a tendency for the advancement flap to retract due to
the inherent elastic nature of the skin. This must be anticipated before it is used in areas where
may be advisable to avoid closure wifth a single, long advancement flap. A disadvantage of H-plasty is the
greater amount of suturing required and the formation of two"incisional intersects,"which are more prone
to dehiscence.
Although the use of Burow's triangles has been advocated to prevent dog-ear formation and to improve
flap mobility, they are rarely required to prevent dog-ears or puckers and are minimally effective in relieving
tension. Only flaps created with the thicker, less-elastic skin of the neck and back in the dog are likely to
benefit most from their use in minimizing dog-ears. Even then, most dog-ears flatten in time without
surgical removal.
Local Flaps
319
Plate 34
320
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 35
Bipedicle Advancement Flap
DE SC RIP TIO N
The bipedicle advancement flap is a local flap constructed wifth two bases or pedicles. Each pedicle is a
source of circulation to the body of the flap. The circulation is derived from the subdermal plexus, unless a
direct cutaneous artery is incorporated into one pedicle. The bipedicle advancement flap is constructed by
making a skin incision parallel to the long axis of the wound, with the flap width generally equal to the
width of the defect. The undermined flap is advanced into the recipient bed and sutured. The donor defect
created is usually closed primarily.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Flap orienfation is determined by the shape and location of the defect in relation to the availability of
long axis of the defect, taking advantage of areas where loose elastic skin prevails. Digital manipulation
of the skin (arrows) is used to assess skin tension and the feasibility of using this technique.
(B) The proposed flap is drawn onto the skin with a marking pen. Flap width generally equals the width of
Ke jeu sde mou Ansnun pioae saamo 'ap au go yual au senba yua de unm a
have questionable circulation. Flap advancement (arrow) can be facilitated by curving the outer
"relaxing incision"slightly outward so that the convex side of the incision is away from the defect. If the
 Jo apioq sauui uape-iess au asioxa oi Aressanau aq Aewu n 'paq uoeinueo supueis-luoi e sl punom
the flap to improve its mobility.
(C) The flap is carefully undermined, advanced over the wound, and sutured into place.
(D) The secondary defect (donor bed) generally is closed by undermining the remaining skin border and
closing the wound primarily.
COMMENT S
advisable when the wound is too wide for unilateral application of this technique. Although bipedicle
advancement flaps have two sources of circulation, the"central body"of the flap can undergo ischemic
necrosis if flaps are excessively long. This may be avoided by creating flaps that are as short as possible,
 and vein into one pedicle when feasible. It may not be possible to close the donor site after flap transfer by
undermining when there is a lack of loose, elastic skin available. The area may be left open to heal by
second intention, closed wifth a free graft, or closed wifth an addifional local flap.
 The relaxing or release incision employed to relieve tension on a closure site is a bipedicle advancement
flap by design. Relaxing incisions are frequently left open to heal by second intenfion in those cases in
which the excessive tension at the closure sife is considered more important than the secondary defect
created at another location. These secondary defects may be more suitable to contraction and
ueun Aiddns pooiq ianaq e aaeu pue eunen oi joalqns ssal eaie Apoq e u are Aau uaum uoezieauida
the closure site in question. (See Plate 20: Relaxing/Release Incisions, in Chapter 9).
Local Flaps
321
Plate 35
322
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 36
Transposition Flap (90 degrees)
DESCRIPTION
The transposition flap is a local flap technique with a wide variety of uses. It is a rotating flap that is
applicable in most body regions in the dog, cat, and other species, including birds. When it is based on the
'sde uaed pe uu paul aou si azs shl 'uein jo anos Aeud shl se snxaid peupans
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
defect to determine the laxity and elasticity present. The elevated skin fold indicates a transposifion flap
can be created parallel to this cutaneous ridge without sacrificing the ability to close the donor bed.
(B) The width of the flap, which equals the width of the defect, is measured and marked off along fhe
baseline. This corresponds to the pivot point of the flap. The base or pedicle of the transposition flap is
aligned along the lower border of this defect (upper dashed line). The transposition flap is developed
 within 90 degrees to the long axis of the defect (lower dashed line), depending on the loose, elastic skin
available for wound closure.
(C) Flap length is determined by measuring from the pivot point to the most distant portion of the defect.
This measurement, in furn, begins at the established baseline. Two parallel lines are drawn using the
measured length dimension.
Local Flaps
323
Plate 36
Pivot point
Vidtt
324
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 36
(Continued)
(D) The flap is drawn with a marking pen prior to incising the skin. (Note that the transposition flap shares
a common border wifth the defect.) The skin is carefully undermined using Metzenbaum scissors. Thin
triangular"tips"of skin created during the elevation of the flap are trimmed or rounded off since they
are prone to ischemic necrosis
(E) The flap is sutured into place using a simple interrupted suture pattern.
(F) The donor bed is closed in a similar fashion. A half-buried horizontal mattress suture is used to appose
the junction of the flap and donor bed closure.
COM MENT S
The transposition flap is a rotating flap by design and is considered by the author to be the most versatile of
the local flaps for wound closure. Although transposition flaps can be pivoted up to 180 degrees to cover a
 defect, a considerable loss of flap length occurs as it bends and kinks to extreme rotation.As a result, most
sde uodn punm au ro (yua se au oi saaap n um padoaap are sde uodsn
bring addiftional skin to the defect, unlike the single pedicle advancement flap, which relies upon the
stretching of the elastic skin. For this reason, transposition flaps are best employed for wounds in which
postoperative skin tension could cause distortion or compromise function. The fransposition flap is
 apo u qu at go yua au on pad de aun suoap Aq squ au o siap ias o aendepe
take advantage of the limited circumferential skin laxity present in the dog and cat. While there is a certain
degree of skin elasticity around wounds involving the trunk, which can compensate for small errors in flap
error in measurement can result in the inability to completely close the donor or recipient site.
u go soq suisp aun sue asea us jo sunoe a e anou u uns au uoseno uo
cutaneous defect. Note: Whenever possible, it is advisable to shorten the premeasured flap accordingly to
improve the probability of maintaining adequate circulation to the terminal flap border.
Local Flaps
325
Plate 36
326
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 37
Transposition Flap (45 degrees)
DESCRIPTION
The 45-degree angle transposition flap is developed at a more acute angle to the axis of the defect compared
to the preceding right-angle variation. Its use is more commonly associated with closure of triangular
defects.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Flap development is similar to the 90-degree angle transposition flap. The flap is created at a 45-degree
angle to the axis of the defect.
(B) The flap is pivoted and sutured into the prepared recipient bed.
(C) The donor site is closed primarily after undermining the bordering cutaneous tissue.
COMMENT S
The 45-degree angle transposition flap variation generally is used to close triangular wounds where local
skin immediately adjacent to this wound is ample to support its development. The 90-degree angle
more distant donor site.As a result, the 90-degree transposiftion flap is better able to close wounds that
require more skin for closure or wounds in which wound tension must be avoided to prevent regional
distortion and functional impairment.
Local Flaps
327
Plate 37
328
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Interpolation Flap
Plate 38
DE SC RIP TIO N
The interpolation flap is a variation of the transposiftion flap, but it lacks a common border with the defect.
As a resulf, a portion of the flap must traverse an area of skin interposed between the donor and recipienf
beds. The design and execution of the interpolation flap is nearly identical to a transposition flap. However,
the length of the interpolation flap must include the additional length required to extend over the
intervening skin segment.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) Local skin tension is assessed by grasping between the thumb and index finger the skin adjacent to the
defect and determining the laxity and elasticity present. The donor location is positioned to use the
(loose) skin ridge grasped (dashed line).
(B) The width of the flap, which equals the width of the defect, is measured and marked off at the
predetermined baseline (dashed line). Note the base of the flap is aligned with the lower border of this
defect. Flap length is determined by measuring from the pivot point (distant edge of the proposed
pedicle or base) to the most distant portion of the defect. (Note: Flap length includes the addifional
baseline.
(C) The flap is drawn with a marking pen prior to incising the skin.The two parallel lines forming the flap
are equal to the length measurement in (B).
Local Flaps
329
Plate 38
330
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 38
(Continued)
(D) The skin is then carefully undermined with Metzenbaum scissors and rotated into posifion. The flap is
sutured into place with a simple interrupted suture pattern. The donor bed is closed in a similar fashion.
A small triangular segment of skin is excised to facilitate donor bed closure.
(E) The redundant portion of the flap, overlapping the interposing skin between the donor and recipient
sites, is excised in approximately 14 days once the flap has completely healed to the wound bed. Skin
incisions are sufured to complete the transfer
C OMMENT S
veterinary surgery because, unlike their human counterparts, dogs and cats have a greater availability of
flap coverage of distant recipient areas.
The exposed portion of the interpolation flap is subject to local infection, but a granulation surface will
segment will control this condition. Unless the distant portion of the interpolation flap has healed over the
wound with formation of collateral vascular channels to support this flap segment, severance of the pedicle
could result in necrosis. Two weeks is a general clinical guideline for this maneuver.
the donor and recipient beds to which the flap borders are sufured (see Plate 56 in Chapter 13). Therefore,
it may not be necessary to excise the redundant flap segment except for cosmetic purposes. Tubing the
surfaces are less practical options to consider for this local flap technique.
Local Flaps
331
Plate 38
332
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Rotation Flap
Plate 39
DESCRIPTION
 s n s    n   d s e s d  s
incision arc is four times the length required to rotate the flap into the defect. In veterinary practice, a curved
incision is created in a stepwise fashion, and the flap is undermined until it covers the wound wifhout
excessive tension.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) Skin tension is assessed by grasping the adjacent skin between the thumb and index finger. The
rotational flap will be positioned to take full advantage of this loose skin. A marking pen can be used to
draw a circle that incorporates the triangular wound.
(B) The skin is incised over the outlined semicircle and undermined in increments until the flap rotates and
stretches over the defect without undue tension
(C) The flap is secured with a simple interrupted sutured pattermn.
COM MENT S
The rotation flap in design and execution combines the properties of the transposifion flap and advancement
flap: skin rotates and stretches to close the triangular wound without creating a secondary defect requiring a
separate closure. A variation of the rotation flap usage includes paired rotation flaps created on each side of
 o a  q se nr s o pa aa u s ui o 
surface areas formed by a diagonal line across opposing corners of the defect. Because of the loose elastic
skin in the dog and cat, most rotation flaps do not require complete elevation of the arc outlined with the
marking pen.The author finds no particular advantage in the use of this technique over the transposition
flap.
Local Flaps
333
Plate 39
Pivot
point
334
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Forelimb Fold Flap
Plate 40
DESCRIPTION
The forelimb skin fold, loosely overlying the triceps musculature, can be elevated as a transposition flap and
used to close skin wounds in the adjacent axillary area of the dog and cat.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) The forelimb skin fold is grasped to determine the amount of skin that can be harvested as a skin flap.
 Manipulation of the limb will help determine the width of flap that can be elevated without creating
excessive tension upon closure of the donor site. Symmetrical lateral-medial skin incisions are outlined
with a marking pen and reassessed before incising the prepared skin. Incisions are connected in a U
fashion, proximal to the elbow.
(B) The flap is carefully undermined and elevated. An axillary wound has been prepared for flap placement.
(C) The flap is transposed and sutured into position.
COMMENT S
Described by Hunt, this transposition flap technique uses the thin, elastic skin fold of the forelimbs. Paired
forelimb fold flaps can be transposed to cover larger defects that encroach on the axillary and sternal areas
of the dog and cat. Flap size and length will vary with the body conformation of the individual patient.
Local Flaps
335
Plate 40
12
Distant Flap Techniques
Distant Flaps 338
Direct Flaps 338
Indirect Flaps  338
The Delay Phenomenon  342
PLATES
Plate 41: Direct Flap: Single Pedicle (Hinge) Flap 344
Plate 42: Direct Flap: Bipedicle (Pouch) Flap 348
Plate 43: Indirect Flap: Delayed Tube Flap 354
337
338
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
DISTANT FLAPS
 Direct flaps have the disadvantage of requiring pro-
longed immobilization of the affected limb to assure
flap survival and healing over the wound. The author
istant flaps are constructed at a distant location
from a skin defect. They are used almost exclu-
has noticed mild muscle atrophy of the limb until
 normal use of the leg is regained. Dermatitis secondary
sively for wounds that involve the middle to lower
extremities. The skin of the lateral thorax and abdomen
to skin-to-skin contact and moisture accumulation
are the most frequently used donor sites. Distant flaps
requires the doctor's close attention. Because multiple
are subdivided into direct flaps and indirect flaps, based
stages and prolonged hospitalization are required to
 on the method used to transfer the distant flap to the
complete their transfer, the cost to the owner is moder-
recipient bed.
ate. The transplanted skin assumes the same hair
growth characteristics despite its new location on the
Distant flap techniques were originally developed
limb (Fig. 12-2).
for use in human patients and were modified for use in
the dog and cat. They provide full-thickness skin cover-
 age for wounds and a means of successfully transplant-
ing skin without resorting to the more exacting surgical
skills and postoperative care required for successful
Today, direct flaps are considered for problematic
 coverage with a free graft. Like other multistaged surgi-
extremity wounds in which other flap and grafting
cal procedures, they are time-consuming and expen-
techniques are not feasible or in which their use is
sive to perform. In the case of direct flaps, there are
 some canine and feline (especially) patients who will
hampered by the wound's location and size.
not tolerate having a limb immobilized against their
chest or abdomen for an extended period of time
Over the past several years, new reconstructive sur-
 gical techniques have evolved that are simpler and
more economical to perform. Axial pattern flaps and
INDIRECT FLAPS
replaced the need for distant flaps. Nonetheless, there
Indirect flaps are almost entirely of the tubed-flap
 are occasional cases in which these procedures can be
used effectively (see Figure 18-5.) Elevation of massive
design, in which a bipedicle flap is sutured into a tube
skin losses overlying the knee, for example, may be
prior to its eventual transfer to the recipient bed after
amenable to elevation to a lateral abdominal wall
a delay procedure. (see Plate 43). Tubing the flap pre-
(direct) flap. In one reference (White 1999), an external
vents it from healing to the donor bed, minimizes
fixator was used to maintain the hind limb in a fixed
infection, and facilitates eventual transfer to the recipi-
 position while using this direct flap technique to close
ent bed. Most long tubed flaps require a 2- or 3-week
"delay" to enhance their circulation before one pedicle
a skin defect over the stifle area.
can be severed and advanced toward the defect.
Although tubed flaps can be "walked" great distances
DIRECT FLAPS
by periodically severing each pedicle alternately and
advancing the freed end toward the recipient bed at
Direct flaps include the single pedicle (hinge flap) and
2-week intervals, it is both time consuming and
 the bipedicle (pouch flap) designs developed for using
impractical. Each successive step increases the likeli-
the middle to lower lateral surface of the thorax or
hood of partial flap necrosis from an ineffective delay
abdomen. The affected limb is lifted and the recipient
period, accidental kinking or twisting of the intact
bed is sutured to the elevated flap (Fig. 12-1). The
pedicle, trauma, or infection. As a result, tubed flaps
pedicles are eventually divided in stages to complete
are best developed close enough to the recipient bed
the transfer in a 2- to 3-week time frame, provided that
to allow their immediate application to the wound
vascularization and healing occur between the flap
after the initial delay period. Tubed flaps shrink or
and the wound bed. Direct flaps are used successfully
contract prior to their transfer and should be made
in small animals, although cats are better anatomically
larger than the recipient bed and longer than the length
 suited to this technique than dogs because of their size,
required to reach the defect increasing the size by 25%
flexible limbs, and the ample loose, elastic skin avail-
of the exact measurements taken helps compensate for
able over the trunk. However, some, cats in particular
the shrinkage factor Like direct flaps, the color and
poorly tolerate the immobilization of their limbs in an
quality of hair growth after transplantation of the flap
elevated position (see Plates 41 and 42).
are maintained despite its new location (Fig 12-3).
D
HG. 12-1 (A) Pressure sore over the elbow of a Labrador. Epithelialized scar tissue and the chronic granulation tissue were resected;
within days, a healthy granulation bed formed, suitable for closure.
 prolonged bandaging, hospitalization, and staged transfer were costly. Today, a thoracodorsal axial pattern flap likely would be the
best method to close this difficult wound.
(C) By day 11, the flap has healed onto the underlying granulation surface.
(D) By day 14, the pedicle was divided in stages: one-half the pedicle, 2 days apart. Following division and closure of the donor area,
the incised edge was sutured to the wound border, completing the transfer. The elbow was protected with a padded bandage for an
paslape sem Suppaq papped yos pazeunen ou sem de ueisip au pansse dn-moloi aso poad yaam-Z [euomppe
339
一
FIG. 12-2 (A, B) Circumferential degloving injury to the forelimb of a mixed-breed dog. Contracture of this chronic wound resulted 
in distal limb edema. Lateral (A) and medial views (B). The epithelialized border was resected prior to direct flap application.
(C) Elevation of a single pedicle direct (hinge) flap. Securing the limb to the side required an elaborate bandage, as noted in Plates 41
and 42.
(D) At 2 weeks, the hinge flap has healed to the lateral half of the wound.
(E) The pedicle is extended and partially divided.
au on painns sem de au jo jeu suueuan au pue papaip sem apad au po eq suureuai aun sael shep e Aiateuxonddy ()
medial side of the defect. Partial necrosis of the terminal flap occurred; second intention healing of this site completed the closure.
Today a mesh graft would be one of the best choices for closing this wound. (From Pavletic MM. 1985. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH,
ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.)
340
HG. 12-3 (A) Forelimb defect in a mixed-breed dog, secondary to vehicular tra uma.
(B) Staged elevation of an (indirect) delayed tube flap developed over the left shoulder region. At week 3 the final segment of the
proximal pedicle was divided.
(C) The tubed flap was carefully incised over the "seam" of the tube.
(D) The partially contracted tube was opened.
(E) The flap was sutured into position.
(F) The end of the flap necrosed: second intention healing of this area occurred without incident. The distal tube segment of the
healed flap site was resected 1 month after transfer to the recipient bed. This wound today could have been closed more easily and
341
342
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
THE DELAY
The optimal time for transfer varies among species;
PHENOMENON
for example, the maximum delay effect in rabbits and
dn parmbai sier seanaum 'shep iig u smsso auims
to 6 weeks. One-week, 2-week, and 3-week time inter-
vals have been suggested as satisfactory before flap
Large flaps (without inclusion of direct cutaneous
transfer in the dog. A 3-week delay is the safest inter-
vessels) gradually developed in two or more stages
val for the dog, based on Hofmeister's research. At 18
prior to transfer are more likely to survive than
days, the author divides one half of the pedicle; the
pedicle grafts transplanted at the first operation. The
second half is severed 3 days later to complete the
physiologic mechanism(s) of augmenting flap sur-
delay. Long-tubed flaps may also require staged eleva-
vival is called the delay phenomenon. The improved cir-
tion to avoid an ischemic crisis from immediately
a as dau a aa p e e r
 tubing the bipedicle flap.
hazards of torsion and tension upon flap transfer.
Sphygmomanometer cuffs, rubber-padded intesti-
This delay effect also may contribute to skin flap sur-
 nal clamps, and Penrose drain tubing have been
vival with the use of tissue expanders: expanders in
renssea uo Aan ol aqnl e ,uren, on pakoidua
the latter phases of inflation create episodes of
support from one pedicle by applying these com-
ischemia that may enhance neovascularization of the
pressive devices around the opposite pedicle. Com-
overlying skin.
pression can be applied for progressively longer
Studies have focused on the microcirculatory
periods of time until the tubed flap circulation can
mechanisms that account for delay and the optimal
survive on the unclamped pedicle. As noted, delayed
time for flap transfer. Selective division of the nerve,
tube flaps have been largely abandoned for clinical
artery, and vein in neurovascular island flaps of rats
usage  in  veterinary  and human 
1 reconstructive
has demonstrated that both denervation (sympathec-
surgery with the advent of axial pattern flaps, myo-
tomy) and ischemia play major roles in the delay
 cutaneous flaps, and improvements in free-grafting
phenomenon. Although the exact delay mechanism
techniques. However, deciphering this phenomenon
still is unclear, sustained vasodilation is currently
Keu jeu snip Suoaas on Aax a plou Ae
believed to be the cause of improved flap survival.
 mimic this physiologic response in order to salvage
Delay is a two-phase response, the second phase
skin  flaps 
with  serious circulatory compromise.
being vasodilation of microcirculation from causes
 s mos  s g aa e yn
other than changes in the flap'sS
sympathetic
improving survival of failing flaps, results have
innervation.
been inconsistent, and at times refuted by subse-
 Angiography and functional studies employed to
quent studies.
examine the developing circulation within canine
tubed flaps (8-10cm long, 3-3.5cm wide) as well as
tubed flaps in rabbits have demonstrated that
vessels in the subcutaneous tissue (corresponding to
Suggested Readings
the subdermal plexus) increased in size and number
with parallel reorientation or main vascular chan-
nels to the long axis of the flap. The longitudinal
Pavletic MM. 1990. Skin flaps in reconstructive surgery. Vet
vascular arrangement in delayed flaps is most
Clin No Am 20:81-103.
Pavletic MM. 1994. Foot salvage and delayed reimplantation
evident in loose-skinned research subjects (dog, rat,
of severed metatarsal and digitial pads, using a bipedicled
rabbit).
direct flap technique. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:539-549.
If ischemia and denervation are the stimuli for
Pavletic MM. 1994. Surgery of the skin and management of
effective delay, tubed flaps of variable length, located
wounds. In: Sherding RD, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Management, 2nd ed., 1969-1997. New York: Churchill
in different regions of the body and on different
Livingstone.
animals, have variable circulatory efficiency. Flaps
Pavletic MM. 1998. Skin. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techrniques
in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea &
from a surgical delay compared with ischemic flaps.
Febiger.
As a result, the variable tubed flaps employed clini-
Pavletic MM. 2003. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook
cally and experimentally suggest that the shorter delay
of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed.,292-321. Philadelphia, PA:
WB Saunders.
period employed for short-tubed flaps (2 weeks or
Spodnick G, Pavletic MM. 1993. Controlled tissue expansion
less) may be insufficient for long-tubed flaps with
to mobilize skin in the distal extremities in dogs. Vet Surg
 greater ischemia.
22:436-443.
 Distant Flap Techniques
343
Swaim SF, Henderson RA. 1997. Small Anirmal Wourd Man-
White RN. 1999. Management of proximal pelvic limb skin
 agement,2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins.
laceration in a dog using a skin flap and an extermal fixator.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA, Sutton HH. 1980. Correction of
I Sm Anim Pract 40:84-87.
 triangular and wedge shaped skin defects in dogs and cats.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:225-232.
344
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 41
Direct Flap: Single Pedicle
(Hinge) Flap
DESCRIPTION
The hinge flap is a single pedicle, direct flap generally used to close limb defects at or below the elbow or
knee. (It is rarely used to resurface large defects involving the pinna.) The base of this pedicle graft can be
limb is elevated to the trunk and the defect positioned beneath the flap.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The affected limb is lifted up to the lateral surface of the trunk to determine the proper location for flap
development. The width of the flap equals the dorsoventral borders of the defect, including any
epithelialized wound borders that require excision. An addiftional 1 or 2cm is added to this
measurement to offset elastic contraction and stretching of the flap associated with limb placement. The
flap is carefully drawn onto the skin of the donor site. Flap length is determined from the desired
location of the flap base to the most distant edge of the defect. A cloth template is useful to determine
this measurement.
(B) The flap is incised and elevated beneath the cutaneous trunci muscle. The donor bed is partially closed.
 Epithelialized wound borders are excised to assure complete flap coverage of the entire defect.
(C) The flap is sutured to the wound borders.
Distant Flap Techniques
345
Plate 41
B
346
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 41
(Continued)
(D) To prevent shifting and slippage of the extremity from beneath the flap, elastic adhesive tape is folded
 Over the lower extremity and continued around the circumference of the trunk. Two or three large stay
or retaining sufures (size 1-0 or 2-0) are additionally placed through the skin adjacent to the defect and
into the skin of the trunk to prevent the limb from shifting ventrally and placing tension on the flap
pedicle. Cotton padding is placed between the limb and trunk to prevent moist dermatifis.
(E) Soft cotton padding, self-adherent gauze, and elastic adhesive tape encompass the limb and trunk. An
access window may be cut into this protective wrap later for local wound care and for replacement
 a z Aaa pd ae Aa so apa po ap aa a u pn
 days. Excitable or uncooperative patients should be sedated and restrained to avoid struggling during
local wound care.
 pue sapa us umiq luea ssaun ains ie shep iot ses u pap si aad au ()
underlying wound bed is incomplete. One-half of the pedicle is divided (dotted line) followed by the
apoq punom usoddo aui oi painns si sapioq paan aui (sysuaise) iapel saep e io z jeu suueun
Removal of a portion of the granulation bed may be necessary to facilitate closure of the donor sife.
C OMMENT S
Division of the flap pedicle can be performed more rapidly than the suggested guidelines indicate, although
there is a greater likelihood of necrosis. Considering the time and cost invested in this procedure, the few
outward, making proper flap application more difficult. Carefully applied bandages can help offset this
support flap survival when the pedicle is completely divided. For example, this flap would be a poor choice
to close an ischemic wound bed secondary to radiation therapy.
 Hinge flaps are better suited for defects on the lateral surface of the limbs, although carefully designed
likely to suffer a degree of necrosis due to insufficient circulation. (See Plate 42, Direct Flaps: Bipedicle
Distant Flap Techniques
347
Plate 41
348
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Direct Flap: Bipedicle (Pouch) Flap
Plate 42
DESCRIPTION
The pouch flap is a bipedicle direct flap beneath which the limb wound is posifioned. Its development,
location, and execution is similar to that of the hinge flap.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
The limb is flexed to simulate the maneuver required to comfortably position the extremity defect
'ng jo paddo Auanoioun are eare souop pue qu panoage aui de ynod pasodoid au yeaua
(B) The width of the flap corresponds to the dorsoventral dimension of the limb defect. It is advisable to
create a flap 1 or 2cm wider than measured to offset elastic contraction and stretching of the flap
Two parallel incisions are extended in increments.
(C) The pedicle graft is undermined beneath the cutaneous trunci muscle. Sufficient room is created for
limb placement beneath the flap without excessive tension, yet allowing optimum contact between the
opposing surfaces. Epithelialized wound borders are excised to provide complete flap coverage. The flap
is sutured to the proximal and distal borders of the limb defect. The ventral openings formed by
"tenting" of the flap serve as drainage sites for the surgical area.
Distant Flap Techniques
349
Plate 42
350
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 42
(Continued)
(D) To prevent shifting and slippage of the extremity from beneath the flap, elastic adhesive tape is folded
 over the lower extremity and continued around the circumference of the trunk. Two or three large stay
or retaining sufures are additionally placed through the skin adjacent to the defect and into the skin of
the trunk to prevent the limb from shifting ventrally and placing tension on the flap pedicles. Cotton
padding is placed between the limb and trunk to prevent moist dermatitis.
 yun pue qu aun sassedua aden aaisaue ssia pue 'snee juaraupe-fas upped uoos o ()
access window may be cut into this protective wrap later for local wound care and replacement without
necessarily removing the entire bandage (see Plate 41). Local bandage changes generally are performed
 pae oi pauisan pue pnepis a pinous shued aaadoooun ao aqeoxg sep e ro z Araaa
struggling during local wound care.
Distant Flap Techniques
351
Plate 42
352
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 42
(Continued)
edges and underlying wound bed in contact with the flap is incomplete. One-half of the lower pedicle
is divided (asterisks), followed by division of the second half 2 days later (dotted line). Delayed division
(circular and oval dots). The freed edges of the flap are sutured to the opposing wound border with
each division.
(G) The donor site usually is laden with granulation tissue. Excision of portions of the wound bed may be
required to facilitate closure. In the event of a circumferential wound to the limb, the length of each
paddm si de aad papaxa eg () u sure passasns aue puoaa papuaxa aq ueo apad
medially to close the remaining defect. Unless circulation from the wound bed to the flap is adequate,
partial necrosis of the ends of the medially placed pedicles may be noted.
COMMENT S
The advantages and disadvanfages of pouch flaps and hinge flaps are nearly identical. They are tedious,
time consuming, multistaged procedures. Maintaining the limb in a fixed position is a challenge in the
mass is eventually regained with exercise.
When dealing with more proximal limb defects, ift may be impossible to flex the limb of the dog
sufficiently to tuck the extremity into the pouch created. This maneuver is less of a problem in the cat. The
hinge flap is best used when an unduly long flap is not required to cover a given defect and is more
sde auu pue ynod yog de aada e yeauaa pauod aa pouo jeue sioaap ag pasn auo
are ideally suited for lateral defects of the extremities.
Elevated limbs have a natural tendency to rotate outward, which occasionally makes application to
wounds more difficult. Carefully applied bandages can reduce this effect. Pouch flaps, like other distant flap
flap techniques is preferable.)
Distant Flap Techniques
353
Plate 42
Variation
354
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Indirect Flap: Delayed Tube Flap
Plate 43
DESCRIPTION
Indirect flaps are almost entirely of the delayed tube flap design in which a bipedicle flap is sutured into a
tube prior to its eventual transfer to the recipient bed. A delay period prior to transfer is used to enhance
circulation to those flaps in which adequate blood flow to portions of the flap is questionable. This is
particularly important for long flaps whose circulation is based on the subdermal plexus.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Delayed tube flaps are best developed close enough to the defect to allow its immediate application
(tumbling) to the wound after the initial delay period. Loose, elastic skin is required for flap
development and donor bed closure. Tube flaps can be rotated up to 180 degrees as long as care is
Flap width equals the width of the wound: an addiftional 2 or 3cm are added to this measurement to
offset flap"shrinkage"secondary to fibrosis and loss of skin elasticity. Additional width should be
considered to assure no circumferential tension is present when the flap is sufured into the tube
m a on sss d  o  a     sn  d 
(transfer pedicle) and the length required to arc or rotate the flap into its new posiftion. This is best
determined with the use of a foam rubber model. An additional 2 or 3 cm are also added to this
 measurement to offset flap shrinkage.
(B) Two parallel incisions are made based on these measurements. Alternatively, central pedicle(s) can be
created temporarily to protect the central area of a long flap from necrosis. This central pedicle is
divided in 1 week and the tubed flap maintained for an additional 2-week delay period.
(C) The bipedicle flap borders are sufured together, creating a tube. The donor bed is undermined and
closed directly. Altermatively one (or both) sides of the donor bed can be converted to an advancement
flap to facilitate closure if necessary. Three weeks is the delay period for long tube flaps.
(D) The pedicle farthest from the defect is divided in two stages. On day 19, one-half of the pedicle is
divided and sufured back into place temporarily with the patient under sedation with a 2%
(subcutaneous) lidocaine block to the pedicle area to be divided. On day 21, the remaining half of the
pedicle is divided and flap transfer can be initiated under general anesthesia. However, final severance
lo Suiams aqnt j au jo pouad aauol e iog pauodisod aq uen apipad aun jo jeu suuai aun jo
ischemia are recognized.
A variation of this technique is the creation of a"pancake"extension on the end of the tube (outer
dashed line) beyond the normal level where the pedicle is divided (inner dashed line). This round skin
extension may be used to cover a wider defect without necessarily using the entire body of the tube
flap.
(E) The recipient site is prepared for surgery prior to final division of the pedicle. Epithelialized borders are
excised. The tube is incised along the original incision line, carefully dissected open, and sutured into
(F) The redundant portion of the tube flap is usually excised when the flap has healed completely to the
wound bed. The author usually divides the pedicle, in stages, no sooner than 4 weeks after transfer.
Distant Flap Techniques
355
Plate 43
356
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 43
(Continued)
COMMENT S
Delayed tubed flaps are used to transfer skin to a distant recipient site if there is no immediate need to cover
an area. They are used almost exclusively for lower limb defects and employed only if simpler methods of
skin transfer are unable to close the defect satisfactorily. In this clinical example, a brachial axial pattern flap,
thoracodorsal axial pattern flap, or free graft technique would be preferable options for closure.
Tubed flaps are moved by migration in dogs and cats by one of three techniques: caterpillaring, zoaltzing.
or tumbling. Caterpillaring entails moving one end of the flap close to the other; in essence, doubling the
flap on itself. Affer a second delay procedure, the other pedicle is severed, and the freed end is extended
toward the defect. Waltzing requires the alternate movement of each pedicle in a lateral motion, whereas
tumbling entails severing one pedicle and extending it forward, thereby advancing the flap directly toward
the defect. Of the three, tumbling is the most direct method of transfer, especially when it is developed close
to the defect, thus enabling immediate application of the flap to the recipient bed after a single delay period.
Although modifications in the basic design have been reported, the standard technique illustrated is 
satisfactory for most cases requiring this procedure. Removal of subcutaneous fat has been advocated to
facilitate the tubing of flaps in obese human patients but this is rarely considered necessary in the dog.
Moreover, the removal of subcutaneous fat and the associated panniculus muscle can inadvertently damage
the subdermal plexus and the associated vasculature, significantly compromising flap circulation. If adipose
tissue might impair tubing, the flap should be designed so that it is wide enough to avoid this problem.
Each pedicle does not necessarily have the same circulatory contribution to the flap body. The
"dominant" pedicle, which has greater blood perfusion, is best preserved, whereas the nondominant pedicle
can be divided with less danger of distal flap necrosis after the delay procedure. Unfortunately, flap design is
between these factors.
Tube necrosis can occur at the vascular interface between the two pedicles; this does not occur at the
tube can be instituted 10 to 14 days after transfer, the author generally waits a minimum of 1 month.
Excluding cosmetic considerations and possible dermatitis, the tubed transfer pedicle can be retained on
the patient indefinitely. It may be preserved (as a spare tire) if future regional reconstructive surgery is
 anticipated (e.g., local tumor recurence). It, too, can be employed for additional coverage of any portion of
the wound that remains uncovered, or it can be left intact to maintain flap circulation in those wounds
these sifuations, a bridge incision (see Plate 56) could be used to eliminate a free-standing tube segment.
Postoperatively, the tube must be protected from trauma and supported with a soft cotton bandage,
depending on its position on the body. Soft cotton rolls are usually taped on each side of the tubed flap.
followed by a soff cotton bandage over the area, until the flap is transferred. A bandage applied after flap
transfer should place no pressure on the flap. Elizabethan collars are advisable to prevent self-mutilation.
13
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
Introduction: Axial Pattern
 Plate 51: Cranial Superficial
Flaps 358
Epigastric Axial Pattern Flap
384
Island Arterial Flaps 358
Plate 52: Deep Circumflex Iliac
Reverse Saphenous Conduit
Axial Pattern Flap: Dorsal
Flaps 358
Branch 386
Secondary Axial Pattern Flaps 358
Plate 53: Deep Circumflex Iliac
Axial Pattern Flap: Ventral
PLATES
Branch 388
Plate 44: Four Major Axial Pattern
Plate 54: Flank Fold Flap: Hind
Flaps of the Canine Trunk 370
Limb 390
Plate 45: Skin Position and Axial
Plate 55: Genicular Axial Pattern
Pattern Flap Development  372
Flap 392
Plate 46: Omocervical Axial Pattern
Flap374
Plate 56: Reverse Saphenous
Conduit Flap 394
Plate 47: Thoracodorsal Axial
Pattern Flap 376
Plate 57: Caudal Auricular Axial
Pattern Flap 396
Plate 48: Lateral Thoracic Axial
Plate 58: Superficial Temporal Axial
Pattern Flap 378
Pattern Flap 398
Plate 49: Superficial Brachial Axial
Plate 59: Lateral Caudal (Tail) Axial
Pattern Flap 380
Pattern Flap 400
Plate 50: Caudal Superficial
Epigastric Axial Pattern Flap
382
357
358
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION: AXIAL
 used to silhouette the outlined flap to avoid losing the
markings of the predrawn flap. Because axial pattern
PATTERN FLAPS
flaps rotate into adjacent defects, guidelines for local
a sn pu asna d ososn
A n axial pattem flap is a pedicle graft that incorpo-
equally applicable to their planning.
rates a direct cutaneous artery and vein into its
base. The vessels extend up the length of the flap to a
variable degree, the terminal branches of which supply
ISLAND ARTERIAL FLAPS
blood to the subdermal plexus. As a result, axial
pattern flaps have better perfusion as compared to
Island arterial flaps can be developed from axial
pedicle grafts, whose circulation is derived from the
pattern flaps by dividing the cutaneous pedicle but
subdermal plexus alone (subdermal plexus flaps).
preserving the direct cutaneous artery and vein enter-
Experimental studies and clinical trials have demon-
ing the newly created "skin island." Although island
strated that large axial pattern flaps can be safely ele-
arterial flaps have considerable mobility tethered to
vated and transferred in a single stage for closure of
the direct cutaneous vessels, their routine clinical use
major cutaneous defects within their general radius.
is unnecessary. One exception involves large defects
There are several axial pattern flaps that have been
that encroach upon the origin of a direct cutaneous
formally researched and designed for clinical use in
artery and vein. Under these circumstances, it is pos-
the dog. They are based on the following direct cutane-
sible to rotate an island arterial flap (the base of which
ous arteries: the omocervical artery, thoracodorsal
 shares a common border with the wound) 180 degrees
artery, lateral thoracic artery, superficial brachial
over the defect (Fig. 13-8 and 13-9).
artery, caudal superficial epigastric artery, cranial
Island arterial flaps have potential for use in free
superficial epigastric artery,  deep  circumflex iliac
flap development and transfer, using present-day
 artery, genicular artery, caudal auricular artery, lateral
microvascular surgical techniques; however, the surgi-
caudal (tail) artery, and superficial temporal artery.
cal training, skill, equipment, and cost involved in
The caudal superficial epigastric artery (Figs. 13-1-13-
microvascular surgery restrict such techniques to the
3) and thoracodorsal artery (Figs. 13-4-13-6) have the
largest  academic 
institutions.
.Fortunately, most
greatest clinical promise for axial pattern develop-
-uosa au wim Asea anow paipuey aq uen spumom
ment, both in the cat and dog (see Table 13-1). Other
structive techniques covered in this textbook.
axial pattern flap techniques, such as the genicular
(Fig. 13-7), cranial superficial epigastric (Fig. 13-8), and
deep circumflex iliac (Fig. 13-9) (dorsal and ventral
 branches) are effective for a more selective group of
REVERSE SAPHENOUS
defects based on their size and location. A variation of
CONDUIT FLAPS
the ventral deep circumflex iliac, the flank fold flap
(Fig. 13-10), can be useful for defects involving the
A variation of the axial pattern flap, the reverse saphe-
caudal abdomen and inguinal area.
nous conduit flap, has clinical application for wounds
Axial pattern flaps are generally rectangular in
 involving the tarsal and metatarsal areas of the dog.
shape (standard peninsula configuration), although
This flap is based over the saphenous artery and
they can be modified with a right-angle extension (L)
medial saphenous vein, which supply small direct
or hockey-stick configuration). The right-angle design
cutaneous vessels to the overlying skin. Upon division
enables the surgeon to cover irregular or wider defects
from the femoral artery and vein, circulation flows in
that may not be completely covered by the standard
reverse fashion through the saphenous vessels via
perinsular design. Furthermore, this latter design can
anastomoses with  collateral  vascular  tributaries
avoid encroachment upon the other side of the patient
(Fig.13-11).
whereby the opposite direct cutaneous vessels may be
necessarily sacrificed during flap elevation.
Axial pattern flap development and
Itransfer
SECONDARY AXIAL
requires careful planning. Measuring and drawing the
flap on the patient's skin prior to surgery minimizes
PATTERN FLAPS
errors. Alcohol-resistant marking pens (VWR markers)
VWR Scientific, San Francisco, CA) are preferable
A secondary axial pattern flap is a modification of the
when isopropyl alcohol is used for surgical prepara-
axial pattern flap design. Skin segments positioned
tion of the skin. Alternatively, skin staples may also be
over vessels or tissue containing a major artery and
HG. 13-1 (A) Wide resection of fibrosarcoma involving the left flank and lateral abdomen. (B) The external abdominal oblique 
 muscle also was resected. (C) Elevation of the left caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap. (D) Closure of the wound. 35W skin
aam suqnt wnnea au ot padde sdis aden reoo s,sop aut ot panoas sem ureap aul de au ainoas ot pasn aram sadens
secured to the thoracic skin with staples. (E) Complete survival of the flap.
359
FIG. 13-2 (A, B) Extensive burn sustained by a cat. Necrotic tissue debridement was facilitated by warm saline baths in a sterilized
stainless steel bucket (Fig. 7-15). Wound closure was attempted when a healthy granulation bed formed. Contractures in the popliteal
areas were released; mesh grafts were applied to the rear extremities.
(C) Elevation of a caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap. Note branching of the epigastric vasculature.
(D) A slit was created in the flap, between branches of this direct cutaneous artery and vein, to accommodate the prepuce and penis.
(E) The flap was carefully fashioned around the anus and prepuce.
(F) The patient a few months later, completely rehabilitated. The medical and surgical management of the wounds (flaps/grafts) and
years after the surgery, the patient is in excellent health.
360
HG. 13-3 (A, B) Massive circumferential loss of skin from the rear leg of a German shepherd, secondary to vehicular trauma.
(C, D) Successful coverage with two caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flaps, in a double-helix fashion. The second flap was
delayed for approximately 5 days to allow mobilization of additional abdominal skin with skin stretchers. This maneuver was
needed to assure the ventral abdominal donor site could be closed after recruitment of both flaps, which accounted for the skin of the
361
FIG. 13-4 (A) Nonhealing, traumatic antecubital defect in a German shepherd.
(B) Tubed thoracodorsal axial pattern flap coverage of the defect.
(C) Close-up view of the tubed pedicle. At the time of surgery, a tubed transfer was considered easier to position the flap, compared
to a bridge incision.
(D, E) Two months after transfer, the tubed pedicle was divided at both ends to complete the transfer. The dorsal end of the flap was
divided first, and the thoracodorsal vessels were ligated. Note the "reverse" bleeding from the cut end of the tube.
(F) Completion of the tube resection.
362
small portion of the terminal flap underwent necrosis, necessitating debridement and resuturing. Note early epithelialization of the
exposed granulation bed. (B) Healing of the area was complete within 4 weeks after surgery. The flap provided a durable coverage to
the elbow region of this greyhound.
B
Huaelpe aut jo uoenou Aq pamooy sem uosioxa apim (g uonaai iapinous yal au Suatoaun sount lo ise (v) g-el '5H
Xdeiauowaup pue Adeau uoneipen suamiapun iae suaned aul de uaned lexe lesopoe
363
TABLE 13-1
 Summary of guidelines for axial pattern flap development.
Artery
Anatomic Landmarks
Reference Incisions
Potential Uses*
Cervical
 Spine of the scapula
Caudat incision: spine of the scapula in a
Facial defects
cutaneous
Cranial edge of the scapula
dorsal direction
Ear reconstuction
branch of the
(cranial shoulder depression)
Craniat incisior: parallel to the caudal
Cervical defect
 omocervical
 Dogs in lateral recumbency,
incision equal to the distance between
Shoulder defect
artery
skin in natural position,
the scapular spine and cranial scapular
Axillary defects
thoracic limb placed in
edge (cranial shoulder depression)
relaxed extension
Flap length: variable; contralateral
Vessel originates at location of
scapulohumeral joint
the pre-scapular lymph node
Thoracodorsal
Spine of the scapula
Craniat incisior: spine of the scapula in a
 Thoracic defects
artery
Caudal edge of the scapula
dorsal direction
Shoulder defects
(caudal shoulder depression)
Caudat incisior: parallel to the cranial
Forelimb defects
 Dog in lateral recumbency, skin
incision equal to the distance between
Axillary defects
in natural position, thoracic
the scapular spine and caudal scapular
limb in relaxed extension
 edge(caudal shoulder depression)
Vessel originates at caudal
Flap length: variable; can survive ventral
shoulder depression at a
 to contralateral scapulohumeral joint
level parallel to the dorsal
 point of the acromion
Superficial
 Flexor surface of elbow
Incision Lines: Flap base includes flexor
 Antebrachial defects
brachial
Humeral shaft
 surface of elbow, anterior one-third
Elbow defects
artery
Greater tubercle
 Lateral and medial incisions parallel
 humeral shaft Flap is progressively
 tapered approaching greater tubercle
Flap Length: Variable, flap ends at level of
greater tubercle
Caudal
Midline of abdomen
Medial incision: abdominal midline
Flank defects
superficial
Mammary teats
 In the male dog, the base of the prepuce
 Inner thigh defects
epigastric
Base of prepuce
is included in the midline incision to
Stifle area
artery
 preserve the adjacent epigastric
 Perineal area
vasculature
 Preputial area
Lateral incisior: parallel to medial incision
at an equal distance from the mammary
teats
Flap tergth: variable: may include the last
four glands and adjacent skin
Cranial
Hypogastric region
Base of flap: location in hypogastric region
Closure of wounds
epigastric
Abdominal midline
Mediat incisior: abdominal midline
 overlying stermal
artery
Mammary teats
Lateral incisior: parallel to midline incision
region
Base of prepuce
at an equal distance from mammary
teats
Flap length: glands 2, 3, 4; anterior to
prepuce
Deep
Cranial edge of wing of ilium
Caudal incisior: midway between edge of
Thoracic defects
circumflex
Great trochanter
 wing of ilium and greater trochanter
Lateral abdominal 
iliac artery
 Dog in lateral recumbency, skin
Craniat incisior: parallel to caudal incision
wall defects
(dorsal
in natural position, pelvic
 equal to the distance between the
 Flank defects
branch)
 limb in relaxed extension
caudal incision and cranial edge of the
Lateral/medial
Vessel originates at a point
iliac wing
thigh defects
cranioventral to wing of the
Flap length: dorsal to contralateral flank
 Defects over the
ilium
fold
 greater trochanter
Deep
Anatomic landmarks of flap
Caudal incision: Extends distally, anterior
 Lateral abdominal
circumflex
base are the same as dorsal
to cranial border of femoral shaft
wall defects
iliac artery
 branch of deep circumflex
Cranial incisior: Parallel to caudal incision
Pelvic defects
(ventral
iliac artery
Flap length: proximal to patella
Sacral defects—as
branch)
Shaft of femur
an island arterial
flap
364
TABLE 13-1
 Summary of guidelines for axial pattern flap development. Continued
Artery
Anatomic Landmarks
Reference Incisions
Potential Uses*
Genicular
Patella
Base of the flap: 1lcm proximal to the
Lateral or medial
Tibial tuberosity
patella and 1.5cm distal to tibial
aspect of the
Greater trochanter
tuberosity (laterally)
lower limb, from
Flap borders: extend caudodorsally parallel
the stifle to the
 to the femoral shaft. Flap terminates at
tibiotarsal joint
the base of the greater trochanter
Lateral caudal
Proximal third of tail length
Incisior: dorsal or ventral midline skin
Perineum,
arteries (left
Transverse processes of
incision, depending on intended flap
caudodorsal trunk
and right)
vertebrae
usage; careful dissection along deep
caudal fascia of the tail; vessels located
 lateral and slightly ventral to transverse
processes, in proximal tail region;
amputation of tail at third to fourth
intervertebral space, preserving skin
Flap tergtr: proximal third of tail length
Caudal
Wing of atlas
Base of flap: palpable depression between
Facial area
auricular
Spine of the scapula
lateral aspect of wing of atlas and
Dorsum of head
vertical ear canal: flap centered over
Ear
wing of atlas
Width of flap: central "third" of lateral
 cervical area over lateral aspect of wing
of atlas: in cats, dorsal border close to
 dorsal midline
Flap lengtr: up to spine of scapula
(survival length variability)
Reverse
 Inner thigh
Proximal incision: central third of inner
 Defects of
saphenous
Tibial shaft
thigh at level of patella; ligate
tarsometatarsal
conduit flap"
saphenous artery and vein at level of
regions
femoral artery and vein
Note: use of flap
Cranial and caudal incisions: skin incisions
requires intact
extended distally in converging fashion,
collateral blood to
0.5-1.0 cm cranial and caudal to cranial
lower extremity
and caudal saphenous artery and
medial saphenous vein; flap
undermined beneath saphenous
vasculature; ligate and divide peroneal 
artery and vein
Flap tergth: variable, base of flap at level
 of anastomosis of cranial branches of
medial and lateral saphenous veins 
 Superficial
 Caudal edge of zygomatic arch
 Base of Flap: level of zygomatic arch; flap
Defects over dorsal
temporal
Lateral border of caudal orbital
Width of Flap: approximates width of
nasal area, lateral
rim
zygomatic arch
facial area
Incisions: parallel incisions from
 landmarks, extending over dorsum of
head towards opposing landmark, to
the mid-dorsal orbital rim of the
opposite eye. Undermine below
frontalis muscle layer
Lateral thoracic
Axillary skin fold
Base of Flap: axillary skin fold;
 Elbow; axilla, upper
 Deep pectoral muscle
Ventral border: parallel to dorsal border
extremity
 of deep pectoral muscle
 Dorsal border: below origin TDA
Flap length: terminates at/before costal
arch; second teat not included
*Major defects only
**Axial pattern flap variation
365
一
 FIG. 13-7 (A) Elevation of a genicular axial pattern flap to close a skin defect secondary to sarcoma removal. (B) The flap was
sul ccessfully transposed into the defect.
B
 FIG. 13-8 (A, B) Wide mast cell tumor resection over the sternal area and closure with the cranial superficial epigastric axial pattern
flap, island arterial flap variation. Today, the author would have used skin stretchers to prestretch the skin of the thorax 72 hours
 prior to excision to facilitate wound closure. Nonetheless, the cranial epigastric axial pattern flap can be useful for closing the more
challenging skin defects in this area.
366
C
HG. 13-9 (A) Excision of a chronic granulomatous lesion overlying the left dorsolateral pelvic region.
ssa sut o youeaq lenaa au uo paseq uea de heare pueis 'de uraed eixe se xao dap e jo uoea (a)
Note the base of the flap shares a common border with the defect, thereby creating an island arterial flap.
(C) A small dorsal portion of this skin defect was closed by direct apposition of the adjacent skin margins. The bulk of the defect was
succesfully closed with this flap.
367
0:51AM
FIG. 13-10 (A, B) Cat with lower abdominal wall defect: dehiscence secondary to sarcoma resection. The wound contracted and
primary source of circulation to this flap is derived from the ventral branch of the deep circumflex iliac artery and vein. This
techniq ue is a variation of the axial pattern flap.
FIG. 13-11 (A, B) Example of the reverse
saphenous conduit flap for closure of a
metatarsal defect. The other common method of
closing large defects in this area is a full-
thickness mesh graft using a no. 15 scalpel
blade to create the holes.
368
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
369
vein can be transferred as a unit at a later time. Once
Hunt GB. 1995. Skin fold advancement for closing large
circulation is established between the dermal circula-
stermal and inguinal wounds in cats and dogs. Vet Surg
24:172.
tion and underlying vasculature, the elevated skin
Jackson AH, Degner DA, Jackson IT, et al. 2003. Deep circum-
island tethered by the long vessels can be rotated into
flex iliac cutaneous free flap in cats. Vet Surg 32:341-349.
a regional defect or transferred using microvascular
 Kostolich M, Pavletic MM. 1987. Axial pattern flap based on
surgical techniques. One example of a secondary axial
gop au u Arare snouaydes au ro youerq renoma au
pattern flap includes skin segments developed over an
Vet Surg 16:217-222.
Lidbetter DA, Williams FA, Krahwinkel DJ, et al. 2002.
omental pedicle that includes the epiploic vessels.
Radical lateral body-wall resection for fibrosarcoma with
Unfortunately, two-staged development and transfer
reconstruction using polypropylene mesh and a caudal
is slow and comparatively expensive. It cannot be used
superficial epigastric axial patterm flap: a prospective clini-
 for immediate closure of wounds, unlike the other flap
cal study of the technique and results in 6 cats. Vet Surg
and free graft techniques discussed in this book.
31:57-64.
Mayhew PD, Holt DE. 2003. Simultaneous use of bilateral
caudal superficial epigastric axial patterm flaps for wound
closure in a dog. I Sm Anim Pract 44:534-538.
Flap guidelines are simply that: guidelines. Use of
Pavletic MM. 1980. Caudal superficial epigastric arterial
 pedicle grafts in the dog. Vet Surg 9:103-107.
the longest variations of ary flap includes the risk
 Pavletic MM. 1980. Vascular supply to the skin of the dog. A
of partial necrosis of its terminal end, secondary to
review. Vet Surg 9:77-82.
ischemia. Traumatic surgical technique, improper
 Pavletic MM. 1981. Canine axial patterm flaps, using the
flap elevation and transfer, infection, and insuffi-
omocervical thoracodorsal, and deep circumflex iliac direct 
cient postoperative care can contribute to circula-
cutaneous arteries. Am J Vet Res 42:391-406.
 Pavletic MM. 1982. Combined closure techniques for a large
tory compromise to the terminal end of the flap. In
skin defect in a cat. Feline Pract 12:16-22.
most axial pattern flaps, this usually amounts to the
 Pavletic MM. 1994. Surgery of the skin and management of
last few centimeters. Debridement and resuturing
wounds. In: Sherding R, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinicat
 may be required for full-thickness skin loss. In
Management, 2nd ed., 1969-1997. New York: Churchill
some cases, skin loss is partial thickness, with
Livingstone.
Pavletic MM. 1998. Skin. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techrniques
resultant survival of a portion of the dermis: resec-
in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed., 585-603. Baltimore, MD:
tion is not necessary in these cases. If the terminal
Williams & Wilkins.
 end of a longer flap is considered vital to the closure
Pavletic MM. 2003. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook
of a problematic area, a delay procedure (see
of Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed., 292-321. Philadelphia, PA:
Chapter 12) may should be considered.
WB Saunders.
Pavletic MM, MacIntire D. 1982. Phycomycosis of the axilla
and inner brachium in a dog. Surgical excision and recon-
struction with a thoracodorsal axial patterm flap. J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 180:1197-1200.
Suggested Readings
Pavletic MM, Watters J, Henry RW, et al. 1982. Reverse
saphenous conduit flap in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
182:380-389.
Anderson DM, Charlesworth TC, White RAS. 2004. A novel
Reetz JA, Seiler G, Mayhew PD, Holt DE. 2006. Ultrasono-
 axial pattern skin flap based on the lateral thoracic artery
 graphic and color-flow Doppler ultrasonographic assess-
in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatolot 17:73-77.
ment of direct cutaneous arteries used for axial pattern
Aper R, Smeak D. 2003. Complications and outcome after
skin flaps in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 228:1361-1366.
Remedios AM, Bauer MS, Bowen CV. 1989. Thoracodorsal
skin defects in 10 dogs, 1989-2001. Vet Surg 32:378-384.
u sde us uaed ierxe oinseiida reiradns repnis pue
Cormell K, Salisbury K, Jakovljevic S, et al. 1995. Reverse
cats. Vet Surg 18:380-385.
saphenous conduit flap in cats: an anatomic study. Vet
SaifzadehS, Hobbenaghi R, Noorabadi M.2005. Axial patterm
Surg 24:202-206.
flap based on the lateral caudal arteries of the taif in the
 Degner DA, Bauer MS, Cozen SM. 1993. Reverse saphenous
dog: an experimental study. Vet Surg 34(5):509-513.
conduit flap: a case report in a cat. Vet Cormp Ortho Trau-
Smith MM, Carrig CB, Waldron DR, et al. 1992. Direct cuta-
matol 6:175-177.
neous arterial supply to the tail of dogs. Arn J Vet Res
Fahie MA, Smith MM. 1997. Axial patterm flap based on the
53:145-148.
superficial temporal artery in cats: an experimental study.
 Smith MM, Payne JT, Moon ML, et al. 1991. Axial patterm flap
Vet Surg 26:86-89.
based on the caudal auricular artery in dogs. Arm J Vet Res
Fahie MA, Smith MM. 1999. Axial pattern flap based on the
52:922.
cutaneous branch of the superficial temporal artery in
Spodnick GS, Hudson LC, Clark GN, et al. 1996. Use of a
dogs: an experimental study and case report. Vet Surg
caudal auricular axial patterm flap in cats. J Am Vet Med
28:141-147.
Assoc 208:1679-1682.
Henney LHS, Pavletic MM. 1988. Axial patterm flap based on
Stiles J, Townsend W, Willis M, et al. 2003. Use of a caudal
the superficial brachial artery in the dog. Vet Surg
auricular axial patterm flap in three cats and one dog fol-
17:311-317.
lowing orbital exteneration. Vet Ophthatm 6:121-126.
370
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 44
Four Major Axial Pattern Flaps of the
Canine Trunk
DESCRIPTION
The comparative positions of the omocervical (O), thoracodorsal (T), deep circumflex iliac (dorsal branch)
paesnl are sdey uaned exe () ouseaida jeoadns iepnen pue '(aa)
SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
(A) The left side of the dog demonstrating the relative location of the respective axial pattern flaps.
and right angle (L hockey-stick) variations.
(C) The position of the underlying superficial cervical branch of the omocervical artery (O), thoracodorsal
artery (T), dorsal branch (DD) of the deep circumflex iliac artery and its ventral branch (DV) of the deep
paesn are ( Aane rseia ieadns iepne ae pue ae oi xan
COMMENT S
 Careful measurement of the defect and flap are required. measurement tapes are ideal for this purpose. The
  as n a  sp - a    e s isp d d
a wider regional defect if the inner flap angle is sutured to itself. Advantages of each technique is discussed
individually in this chapter.
 Axial Patterm Skin Flaps
371
Plate 44
DD
DD
372
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 45
Skin Position and Axial Pattern Flap
Development
DESCRIPTION
The proper position of the skin in relation to the underlying anatomic structures is essential to locating the
direct cutaneous arteries for appropriate axial pattern flap development on the canine trunk.
SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
(A) Outline of the omocervical and thoracodorsal axial pattern flaps requires the skin overlying the scapula
to remain in a natural position in relation to the underlying scapula. The forelimb is placed in relaxed
extension. The skin over the scapula is grasped, lifted, and allowed to spontaneously retract to its
natural undistended position before outlining the flap with a felt-tipped marking pen.
(B) The elevation of the deep circumflex iliac axial paftern flap similarly requires placement of the hind limb
in relaxed extension. The skin overlying the lateral pelvis is grasped, lifted, and allowed to retract into
its natural position.The flap is outlined on the skin using the anatomic landmarks discussed in this
chapter.
COMMENT S
The donor area must be thoroughly clipped. Cleansing the skin with isopropyl alcohol-impregnated gauze
sponges will help to remove natural oils that impair use of felt-tipped marking pens. Alcohol-resistant 
marking pens are preferable since the flap outline is less likely to rub off during the surgical preparation of
the skin (VWR Marker, VWR Scientific, San Francisco, CA)
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
373
Plate 45
374
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Omocervical Axial Pattern Flap
Plate 46
DE SC RIP TION
The omocervical axial patftern flap incorporates the superficial cervical branch of the omocervical artery and
 its associated vein. The vessels originate adjacent to the prescapular lymph node and arborize dorsally just
cranial to the scapula.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The anesthetized patient is placed in lateral recumbency. The forelimb is placed in relaxed extension
perpendicular to the trunk. The cervical and thoracic skin is grasped, lifted, and allowed to
spontaneously retract to normal posifion to assure the loose skin is not shifted or distorted in relation to
the anatomic landmarks (see Plate 45). A line is drawn over the spine of the scapula with a marking
pen, forming the caudal border of the flap (arrow). The cranial shoulder depression is palpated. The
cranial incision is drawn on the skin, parallel to the caudal incision site, equal to the distance from the
cranial shoulder depression (prescapular lymph node) to the caudal incision line.
(B) The reference lines are extended to the dorsal midline and down the opposifte side to the contralateral
Note that this variation does not extend down to the contralateral scapulohumeral joint: this surface
 area is"converted"to the angular extension (B2).
(C) The flap is undermined below the level of the sphincter coli superficialis muscle, beginning at the
distant end of the flap. Care must be taken to avoid any trauma to the direct cutaneous vessels.
Elevation of long omocervical axial pattern flaps necessitates division of the opposite omocervical direct 
cutaneous artery and vein.
(D) The omocervical axial pattern flap can be rotated into a variety of positions.
(E) As the flap is being sutured into the recipient bed, the donor site is closed with a subcuticular pattern
followed by skin sutures or staples. Drains are employed to control dead space and reduce the
likelihood of seroma formation.
COMMENT S
The omocervical axial pattern flap has potential use for large skin defects within its arc of rotation, including
wounds involving the face, head, ear, shoulder, neck, and axilla. The more robust thoracodorsal axial pattern
flap is preferred over the omocervical flap for the closure of defects within their mutual areas of coverage.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
375
Plate 46
B
B
376
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Thoracodorsal Axial Pattern Flap
Plate 47
DESCRIPTION
The thoracodorsal axial pattern flap is based upon the cutaneous branch of the thoracodorsal artery and
associated vein. The moderately sized thoracodorsal direct cutaneous artery arborizes in a dorsal direction
behind the scapula.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) With the dog in lateral recumbency, the lateral cervical and thoracic skin is grasped, lifted, and allowed
to spontaneously retract to a normal posifion. The forelimb is placed in relaxed extension perpendicular
to the trunk (see Plate 45). A felt-tipped marking pen is used to draw a line over the spine of the
scapula, forming the cranial border of the flap. (The thoracodorsal vessel that originates at the caudal
shoulder depression is palpated.) The caudal incision is drawn onto the skin parallel to the cranial
incision, equal to the distance from the cranial incision to the caudal shoulder depression. The reference
incision lines extend to the dorsal midline.
(B) The standard peninsular (B,) or hockey-stick (L) configuration (B) can be created, depending on the
location and size of the defect.
(C) The flap is elevated below the level of the cutaneous trunci muscle, beginning at the end of the flap.
Great care must be taken to avoid injury to the thoracodorsal artery and vein: subcutaneous fat
frequently obscures the ability to visualize them. The thoracodorsal flap can be pivoted into a variety of
defects. The flap may be partially tubed to reach a distant defect or sutured to a bridge incision to
traverse the skin interposed between the donor and recipient sites
COMMENT S
Note that the peninsular design can extend down to the contralateral scapulohumeral joint, whereas the
hockey-stick variation is shortened to accommodate the angular extension. Both flap configurations,
developed to cover defects involving the shoulder, forelimb, elbow, axilla, and thorax in the dog and cat.
branch of the thoracodorsal arfery and vein. When feasible, it is preferable to posifion forelimb defects for
immediate flap transfer rather than repositioning the patient intraoperatively. The thoracodorsal axial pattern
flap is a robust flap capable of covering a variety of defects in the dog and cat. Distal limb coverage is
dependent upon body conformation and limb length for the dog. In the cat, this flap can extend to the level
of the carpus.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
377
Plate 47
B1
B2
378
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Lateral Thoracic Axial Pattern Flap
Plate 48
DESCRIPTION
The lateral thoracic artery [LTA; see (A) below] arises from the caudal aspect of the axillary artery, adjacent
to the cranial border of the first rib. The cutaneous branch extends in a caudal direction, supplying the
cutaneous trunci muscle and overlying skin caudal to the axillary skin fold. The LTA is noted to enter the
skin cranial and ventral to the origin of the thoracodorsal artery. The resultant flap has potential for closing
defects involving the elbow region and other problematic wounds wifhin its arc of rotation.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Outline of the LTA axial pattern flap. The ventral margin of the flap, caudal to the axillary skin fold
(ASF), follows the palpable ( dorsal ) border of the deep pectoral muscle. This border is outlined with a
marking pen. The dorsal border of the flap is drawn parallel to the outlined ventral flap border,
beginning slightly ventral to the origin of the TDA (see Plate 47, Thoracodorsal Axial Pattern Flap). The
outlined flap inclines toward the nipple of the second mammary gland, which is not included into the
body of the flap. The distal end of the flap terminates at the level of the costal arch.
(B) Elevation of the lateral thoracic axial paftern flap for closure of a defect overlying the lateral elbow
region. A small segment of interposing skin (crosshatched area) or a bridge incision can be used to
facilitate flap placement onto the recipient bed.
(C) The flap, sutured into place.
COMMENT S
The size and distribution of the lateral thoracic artery was somewhat inconsistent in the study performed by
Anderson. This has been the author's experience in previous anatomic studies, and this should be
considered when using this technique. Doppler may be useful in confirming the presence of this vessel prior
to surgery. This small axial pattern flap would be useful for closure of problematic wounds in the elbow
region, based on its proximity to the area. The skin is not as thick as the skin associated with the more
dorsally located thoracodorsal axial pattern flap, a consideration in heavy, large-breed dogs. Failure of this
shop eun pansasans sem h 'sodai stun un 'de uaned eixe jesioposeoun aui susn apnioaid jou pinom des
with underdeveloped or ill-defined skin folds may be a poor candidates for use of the lateral thoracic axial
on the lateral thoracic artery in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2:73-77.)
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
379
Plate 48
TA
ASF
380
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 49
Superficial Brachial Axial
Pattern Flap
DESCRIPTION
The superficial brachial artery branches from the brachial artery, approximately 3cm proximal to the elbow
joint in the average-sized dog. A cutaneous branch of this vessel supplies the craniomedial antebrachium.
vessel has special use for closure of antebrachial wounds.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The anatomic landmarks for flap outline include the elbow, humerus, and scapulohumeral joint. The
posiftion. The entire limb is clipped and vacuumed.
(B) The base of the flap is centered over the anterior third of the flexor surface of the elbow. Lateral and
medial incision lines are drawn proximally, parallel to the humeral shaft. However, the lines are drawn
to gradually converge, tapering the flap proximally in order to facilitate closure of the donor bed. Both
lines are connected at or below the proximal point of the greater tubercle.
 The flap is elevated from the end of the flap toward its base. Care is taken to avoid injury to the
subdermal plexus, superficial brachial vasculature, and adjacent cephalic vein.
(C) The flap is rotated laterally into the adjacent defect and sutured into posifion.
COMMENT S
 Note that proximal antebrachial defects that approach the base of the superficial brachial axial pattern flap
can be closed by its island flap variation. The vessel is capable of supporting an axial pattern flap of sufficient
subsequent survival preclude its use for coverage of the carpal area. Because of the small size of this vessel,
meticulous surgical technique is critical in the preservation of the microcirculation to the flap
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
381
Plate 49
382
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 50
Caudal Superficial Epigastric Axial
Pattern Flap
DESCRIPTION
This flap includes the last three or four mammary glands (glands two through four in the cat) and is
nourished by the caudal superficial epigastric vessels arising at the inguinal canal. The wider arc of rotation
of this flap facilitates its placement for closure of a number of caudal trunk and pelvic extremity wounds.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A midline abdominal incision is drawn with a felt-tipped pen, beginning just behind the last mammary
of the prepuce to preserve the epigastric vasculature (inset). If a rear limb defect requires coverage, the
flap. Depending on the length required, the reference incision line is drawn between glands one and
two or glands two and three and continued as the lateral incision, parallel to the medial incision line, at
an equal distance from the mammary teats.
(B) The flap is undermined below the supramammarius muscle and above the aponeurosis of the external
abdominal oblique muscle progressively in a caudal direction. The epimysium of the superficial pectoral
muscle (closely attached to portions of the overlying skin) may be included with the flap in order to
ou paeioi aq uen de oseida ieadns jepneo auipazenn pou si snxaid peapans au annsse
a variety of positions when care is taken to preserve the direct cutaneous vessels from excessive kinking
or twisting
(C) This example demonstrates its use for coverage of a medial thigh defect.
COM MENT S
Wider flaps are possible if adequate skin remains to close the donor bed. Because mammary tissue is
functional in its new location, ovariohysterectomy is recommended. Ovariohysterectomy can be performed
through the medial incision at the time of flap elevation.
e jo ans iog  apad aes u e si de uaned pxe ssia ans ipn a
skin defects of the caudal abdomen, flank, inguinal area, prepuce, perineum, thigh, and rear limbs. Flap
length and width will vary according to the patient's body conformation, the availability of loose skin, and
the size required to reach/cover a given defect. Long bodies and short limbs in some dogs, for example,
enable the surgeon to develop a flap of sufficient size to extend along the length of the limb. In cats, and
extend at or below the level of the tibiotarsal joint. An ample amount of loose, elastic skin in patients
enables the surgeon to create wider flaps than the guidelines suggest for flap development.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
383
Plate 50
External
pud endial 
Caudal superficial
artery
epigastric artery
and vein 
Scrotum
Abdominal
Prepuce
midline
Caudal
preputial
 Preputial 
incision
branches
384
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 51
Cranial Superficial Epigastric Axial
Pattern Flap
DESCRIPTION
The cranial superficial epigastric axial pattern flap is based over the short cutaneous branches of the cranial
superficial epigastric artery located in the hypogastric area caudal to the ventral border of the thoracic cage.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
of the cranial epigastric vessel, entering the skin lateral to the abdominal midline and a few
centimeters caudal to the cartilaginous border of the ventral thorax. The midline of the abdomen
the midline to the mammary teats serves as the reference of measurement for the lateral incision. The
flap length includes the mammary glands three, four, and possibly five. In the male, the end of the flap
should be situated cranial to the prepuce due to the risk of necrosis and difficulty associated with
(su aas andand au go yl au ot ed ppuxa sde go ano 
(B) The flap is elevated in a cranial direction beneath the panniculus muscle layer, beginning at the
terminal end of the outlined flap. Great care should be taken as undermining approaches the
hypogastric origin of the cranial epigastric artery and vein. In this example, a peninsular flap design is
employed.
(A2) In this second variation, an island arterial flap is ouflined for elevation. Note that the caudal border of
the defect encroaches on the base of the flap, in essence dictating that a cranial epigastric island
arterial flap is required to close this sternal wound.
(B2)  Closure of the defect after pivoting the island arterial flap into position. Additional care must be taken
to avoid stretching or kinking of the cranial epigastric vessels to which this island flap is tethered.
COMMENT S
E sy siassaa sseida jeadns iepnen aui se Suoi se Aueau jou ane uan pue Aae sseida peuno a
o susu de a usns pou sae snono pap as ssaun r anssand uonad ae 'nsn
the caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap. Keeping the flap length as short as possible to accomplish
wound closure is advisable since a variable degree of flap necrosis occasionally is noted. The location of the
 In one research subject, a second or supplemental direct cutaneous artery and vein were noted caudal to the
small cranial epigastric artery. Although this flap lacks the size and versatility of the caudal superficial
should review the use of skin stretchers (see Plate 31): the author has successfully closed similar wounds in
this area without the need of the cranial superficial epigastric axial pattern flap.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
385
Plate 51
A2
B2
Inset
386
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 52
Deep Circumflex Iliac Axial Pattern
Flap: Dorsal Branch
DESCRIP TION
The deep circumflex iliac artery (and paired vein) exits the lateral abdominal wall, cranioventral to the wing
of the ilium. It divides to form a dorsal and ventral branch. Each vessel can be used independently for axial
pattern flap development.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) With the dog in lateral recumbency, the lateral thoracic and abdominal skin is grasped, lifted, and
allowed to spontaneously retract to a normal posifion. The hind limb is placed in relaxed extension
perpendicular to the trunk (see Plate 45). A felt-tipped marking pen is used to draw the caudal
reference incision line between the cranial border of the wing of the ilium and the greater trochanter.
The cranial incision is drawn parallel to the caudal reference incision line and equal to the distance
between the iliac border and caudal incision line.
(B) The reference lines are extended to the dorsal midline.At this point, the standard peninsula design can
be created, depending on the location and size of the defect.
 o uosn u eare ans ses an anon 'aue  e ie pea aq un de an ann )
peninsula flap design.
(D) Flaps are elevated below the level of the cutaneous trunci muscles and fascia, beginning at the distant
border of the flap. The resultant flap can be rotated into a variety of defects encountered within its arc
of rotation.
COMMENT S
The shorter dorsal branch has general application for defects involving the ipsilateral flank, lateral lumbar
s so non isn aadsa d sun spu one a ere oiad pe iun ieae xu ppnin ere
defects overlying the greater trochanter and associated lateral pelvic area.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
387
Plate 52
388
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 53
Deep Circumflex Iliac Axial Pattern
Flap: Ventral Branch
DESCRIP TION
The ventral branch of the deep circumflex iliac artery extends down the lateral flank and craniolateral thigh
for axial pattern flap development.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The dog is positioned as previously discussed in Plate 52. Landmarks for establishing the width of the
flap are identical. The caudal incision line is drawn from the midpoint between the wing of the ilium
and greater trochanter and directed distally, cranial to the border of the femoral shaft. The cranial
incision line extends from the established base point (in relation to the wing of ilium), extending down
the flank/thigh region, parallel to the caudal flap border. The flap terminates above the patella by a
connecting line drawn between the cranial and caudal flap borders.
(B) The deep circumflex iliac flap (ventral branch) in its peninsular or island arterial flap configurations can
be used to close defects within its 180-degree arc of rotation.
(C) The island arterial flap is elevated, beginning at the distal border, and carefully pivoted over the
preserved direct cutaneous artery and vein. It is important to fully assess skin tension and elasticity prior
to surgery. Flap dimensions may require modification to assure closure of the donor bed can be
achieved without difficulty. Excessive wound tension upon closure of the donor site will compromise
limb function and increase the risk of dehiscence.
(D) The island arterial flap is sutured over the dorsal pelvic surface. Drainage is established to prevent
seroma formation.
COMMENT S
Perhaps the greatest use of the ventral flap is in the creation of an island flap for closure of major sacral and
lateral pelvic skin wounds that preclude the use of the dorsal branch of the deep circumflex iliac artery for
axial pattern flap development.
 The hind limb flank fold flap (Plate 54) is a variation of the ventral deep circumflex iliac axial pattern flap.
u oi pa si azis de aue nq ae snoauno poap st go Aoan an sapnu uar pio yu au
confines of the flank fold for transposition into inguinal defects.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
389
Plate 53
390
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Flank Fold Flap: Hind Limb
Plate 54
DESCRIPTION
The dog and cat have a natural fold of skin located in the flank area, dorsal and anterior to the knee. The
lower branches of the ventral branch of the deep circumflex iliac artery supply this cutaneous area. It is
possible to elevate and transpose this fold of skin (as reported by Hunt) to cover defects in the inguinal area,
especially when the caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap is not feasible.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The flank fold can be genfly grasped to determine the amount of skin that can be harvested. The leg is
manipulated during this maneuver, to assure that sufficient skin is present to permit closure of the
donor site without undue tension. The lateral to medial (dashed line) U-shaped fold flap is drawn onto
the clipped skin.
(B) A caudal inguinal defect is noted in this example. Note the relationship of this wound to the proposed
flank fold flap.
(C) The flap is elevated; the small patch of skin (lined area) is resected to allow the transposition of the flap.
(D) The elastic flank fold flap is sutured into position.
(E) Lateral view of the limb, after transposifion of the flap and closure of the donor site
COMMENT S
This flank fold flap is a more restricted variation of the ventral deep circumflex iliac axial pattern flap. It can
be effectively used to close the more difficult wounds encountered in the inguinal area. This thin, elastic skin
can conform readily to wounds in this area. Careful measurement of the flap is required in this area.
Excessive tension during closure of the donor site can result in restricted movement of the involved limb,
risking dehiscence: open flank wounds can be quite difficult to close.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
391
Plate 54
C
392
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Genicular Axial Pattern Flap
Plate 55
DESCRIPTION
The genicular axial patftern flap originates over the short genicular branch of the saphenous artery and
medial saphenous vein. The genicular artery extends cranially over the medial aspect of the stifle and
terminates over its craniolateral surface.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The dog is placed in lateral recumbency and the rear limb is clipped and prepared for surgery in routine
pue ened aun on peund u i juod e je uad padd-hn e um pa si de an go aseq au 'uousg
1.5 cm below the tibial tuberosity. Two lines are extended on the lateral thigh parallel to the femoral
shaft to the base of the greater trochanter.
 yeaq aid pnsey reore ssoi au u us aun huun aa pnea anan si d au (a)
dermis.
(C) In this example, the flap is rotated into the lower limb defect and sutured into place. The donor site is
closed with a subcuticular pattern and skin sutures to minimize the risk of dehiscence.
COMMENT S
The genicular artery, like the superficial brachial artery, is not a large vessel capable of supporting circulation
to a large segment of skin. However, it usually is sufficient to support flaps for closure of wounds of the
lateral or medial tibial regions, as well as flaps capable of extending distally to the level of the tibiotarsal
e us se sde us ua sud auun  o u ienu an un auuadp s
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
393
Plate 55
394
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 56
Reverse Saphenous Conduit Flap
DESCRIPTION
The reverse saphenous conduit flap incorporates branches of the saphenous artery and medial saphenous
vein, which in turn supply and drain the overlying skin by means of direct cutaneous vessels. By division of
vascular connections wifth the femoral artery and vein, blood flow is maintained in reverse by distal
anastomotic connections (1) between the cranial branch of the saphenous artery and the perforating
metatarsal artery by way of the medial and lateral plantar arteries and (2) between the cranial branch of the
medial saphenous vein and the cranial branch of the lateral saphenous vein, and other venous connections
with the cranial and caudal branches of the medial saphenous veins distal to the tibiotarsal joint
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)
Measurements are taken to determine the flap required to reach and cover the lower limb defect.
The flap width is tapered distally, owing to the limited skin available for flap development. A skin
the patella.
(B)
Metzenbaum scissors are used to expose the underlying saphenous artery, medial saphenous vein,
and nerve (at the level of the femoral artery and vein) prior to their ligation and division. Two
 incisions are extended distally in convergent fashion, 0.5-1.0cm cranial and caudal to the borders of
the cranial and caudal branches of the saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein, respectively.
The flaps are undermined beneath the saphenous vasculature. To avoid injury to the caudal branch
of the saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein during progressive raising of the pedicle graft, a
portion of the medial gastrocnemius muscle fascia is included with the flap. Below this point, the
tibial nerve merges with the descending caudal branches of the saphenous artery and medial
saphenous vein and can be preserved by meticulous dissection between these structures. Ligation
and division of the peroneal (fibular) artery and vein are necessary to facilitate flap mobility. Flap
elevation is completed proximal to the anastomosis between the cranial branch of the medial
saphenous vein and the cranial branch of the lateral saphenous vein.
skin sutures, using 3-O suture material at the end of the transplantation. The "transfer pedicle" can
be tubed to traverse the skin between the donor and recipient beds. Care is taken to ensure that the
tubed pedicle is not under undue tension on extension of the tibiotarsal joint.
(E,2)
 A bridge incision connecting the donor and recipient beds is an optional method to traverse the skin
between donor and recipient beds.
COM ME NT S
Slightly longer flaps are possible, if required. The resultant flap with a distally based pedicle has potential for
use in major cutaneous defects at or below the tarsus, especially wounds overlying the metatarsal surface.
When the reverse saphenous conduit flap is considered for use on skin defects secondary to extensive
trauma, angiography should be considered to ensure that anastomotic connections are intact and that the
saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein are not the major routes of circulation to the lower limb. Based
on anatomic studies, the vascular supply and general guidelines for flap development in the cat are
remarkably similar to the dog.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
395
Plate 56
Donor bed
B
Branch of .
tibial nerve
Tubed
'transfer pedicle”
Elevated flap
Recipient
(subdermal surface)
bed
E2
Donor bed
Transfer pedicle
sutured to bridge
incision edgesA
Tubed
 Bridge
andB
pedicle'
incision
Completion of
Recipient
flap transfer 
bed
Recipient
bed
396
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Caudal Auricular Axial Pattern Flap
Plate 57
DESCRIPTION
The caudal auricular axial pattern flap incorporates the sternocleidomastoid branches of the caudal auricular
artery and vein located in the palpable depression between the lateral aspect of the wing of the atlas and the
vertical ear canal.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)  The anesthetized patient is placed in lateral recumbency. The forelimb is placed in relaxed extension,
ansse oi p pue pads si us au un aun oi rnuadiad endess u usod aqaru
there is no distortion of the cervical skin to the underlying anatomic landmarks. The flap base is
centered over the palpable lateral wing of the atlas. Two parallel lines are positioned in the central
one-third of the lateral cervical profile of the dog. Wider flaps are possible. The two lines are
connected to complete the outline of the flap, at the level of the scapula.
(A2) The general outline of the flap in the cat is similar to the dog. The flap is centered over the lateral
border (wing) of the atlas. Based on the feline anatomy, the dorsal line (border) of the flap is closer to
the dorsal midline. The ventrolateral incision is posifioned at the same distance measured from the
dorsal line to the point of entry of the caudal auricular artery (a palpable depression at the midpoint
 between the base of the pinna and lateral wing of the atlas).
 e r   a a a a   a s
 se n s   si  s go a  o  q o d p  (a)
the flap has been rotated rostrally to close a large facial defect secondary to wide tumor resection in a
cat. The flap spans any interposing skin between the donor and recipient site with a bridge incision or
the flap can be partially tubed to"caterpillar"over this region. Vacuum drains are ideally suited for
 controlling dead space and fluid accumulation, although Penrose drains may be satisfactory.
COMMENT S
 Described by MM Smith et al., the caudal auricular axial pattern flap can be used to reconstruct the ear,
dorsum of the head, or extend further rostrally to close defects overlying the orbital area as illustrated in
en sisoau de reed go poo au sanpai arssod se pous se de au suda sde ao al (a)
occasionally is noted when the caudal auricular axial pattern flap is extended to the cranial and midscapular
(o nds e p  da ss ns ae  e g sa s  ae n 's
transposition flaps, created in the lateral facial area or dorsal aspect of the head, can be used to close small
span over interposing skin in order to achieve closure of a defect. Despite this caveat, the caudal auricular
or tumor resection.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
397
Plate 57
398
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 58
Superficial Temporal Axial
Pattern Flap
DE SC RIP TIO N
The cutaneous branch of the superficial temporal artery can be developed into an axial pattern flap using the
skin over the temporal muscle area.The flap has potential use for facial defects wifhin its arc of rotation.
General guidelines for the dog and cat are identical.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) General outline of the flap, dorsal view. The flap is outlined on the skin prior to incising if.
(B) Lateral view. The base of the flap is located at the level of the zygomatic arch. The width of the flap
approximates the length of the zygomatic arch: the caudal orbital rim is the rostral border of the flap,
uo paseq 'ylual de 'ureu deu iepnen aui sjuasaidan yoie seuosrz aun jo joadse jepnen aun pue
research by Fahie et al., is the mid-dorsal orbital rim of the opposite eye (see A). The flap is elevated
deep to the frontalis muscle to help preserve its blood supply. The flap is elevated from the distant end
Of the flap toward its base.
(C) The flap rotated over the dorsal muzzle to close a large skin defect after tumor resection.
COM MENT S
As noted, anatomic landmarks and guidelines for this flap are identical in the dog and cat. Inclusion of the
 frontalis muscle makes this flap somewhat a hybrid between a myocutaneous flap and axial patterm flap.
 However, the muscle is included to help preserve the vasculature rather than contributing to the circulation
to the overlying skin.
Use of the superficial temporal axial paffern flap may be most useful for midfacial defects. Lateral facial
pe azis an uo upuadap (uoodsuen no juaauape) de ieo iandus e ym pasoi aq euu sioaap
location of the wound. Care must be taken to avoid wide flaps that could compromise function of the upper
eyelid(s). Skin tension in this region should be closely assessed prior to elevating this flap.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps 
399
Plate 58
400
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Lateral Caudal (Tail) Axial
Plate 59
Pattern Flap
DESCRIP TION
 e n   a s   e    s   
of the tail skin. Each vessel resides in a lateral location, ventral to the transverse processes of the caudal
vertebrae in the proximal tail region; in the distal tail, the vessels course dorsal to the transverse processes.
Based on these two direct cutaneous arteries and associated veins, the tail skin can serve as a source of skin
for difficult wounds associated with the perineum and caudodorsal pelvic region.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Profile of the tail, demonstrating the caudal tail vessels and related anatomy. The dashed line
illustrates the limits of the proximal one-third of the tail. In this example, the length of the flap is
limited to this designated length.
(B)   A dorsal midline incision is made in preparation for coverage of a dorsal pelvic defect.
(C)
 Dissection is directed down to the level of the deeper tail fascia. The subcutaneous tissue interface is
the subcutis. Upon completion of the procedure, the tail proper is amputated at the caudal third or
fourth intervertebral space.
(D)  The flap is advanced over the caudodorsal aspect of the pelvis in this example.
(A) In this example, the flap was developed as noted in Aj-D. A ventral midline incision effectively
"bi-valves"the flap. Each half is supplied by its own lateral caudal artery and vein.
COMMENT S
 By highlighting the direct arterial blood supply to the tail, MM Smith et al. established an effective method
of harvesting this source of skin with a greater probability of flap survival. The entire tail length potentially
can be used for flap development, although the circumference of the proximal one-third of the tail is the
largest source of skin. In some dogs, the proximal tail can provide a surprising amount of skin for closure of
challenging wounds in the caudal pelvic area. Other flap techniques may potentially overlap the"cranial
territorial limits"of this flap without the need to amputate the tail (a point of contention for some owners)
h um siaap snoauino susoi iog ingasn Aaa aq uen de uaned exe repnes jeaiel aue 'ssalauaun
arc of rotation especially in those cases when disease/frauma preclude the effecfive use of other closure
opfions.
This axial pattern flap can be elevated using a ventral incision alone, if the surgeon does not wish to
flap down the middle allows the surgeon to wrap the flap around the anus at the time of wound closure.
Axial Pattern Skin Flaps
401
Plate 59
4
4
14
Free Grafts
Free Skin Grafts  404
PLATES
Classification of Free Grafts 404
Plate 60: Punch Grafts  416
Graft Thickness  405
Plate 61: Pinch Grafts  418
Partial-Coverage Grafts 405
Plate 62: Strip Grafts 420
Dermatomes  405
Plate 63: Stamp Grafts
422
Preservation by Refrigeration
409
Plate 64: Sheet Grafts
424
Intraoperative Considerations
409
Plate 65: Dermatome:
Bandaging Technique for Skin
Split-Thickness Skin Graft
Grafts 411
Harvesting  426
Plate 66: Mesh Grafts
(With Expansion Units)428
Plate 67: Mesh Grafts (With Scalpel
Blades)
430
403
404
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FREE SKIN GRAFTS
Antibiotics and Skin Grafting
All granulation beds are contaminated with bacte-
ree grafts are segments of skin completely detached
ria. Surgeons have their preference for whether to
use topical and systemic antibiotics in skin-grafting
from one area of the body and used to resurface
procedures. Surgeons occasionally culture the
another body area lacking an epithelial surface. Free
grafts lack a vascular attachment upon transfer to the
granulation bed prior to skin grafting to assure
recipient graft bed. They must survive by absorbing
appropriate treatment can be instituted prior to
graft application. (The author does not culture
tissue fluid from the recipient bed by capillary action
during the initial 48 hours after transplantation.
wound beds before grafting in most routine clinical
 During this period, capillaries from the recipient bed
cases.) In humans, group A beta-hemolytic strepto-
unite with the exposed graft plexuses to reestablish
cocci (Streptococcus pyogenes) is the biggest culprit
for graft dissolution. Topical and systemic penicil-
vital circulation. New capillaries later grow into the
graft and the vascular channels remodel. In addition,
lin can be used to control this organism prior to
fibrous connective tissue forms to hold the graft
grafting. Other organisms, including Pseudomonas
sp. and Kebsiella occasionally are problematic for
securely in place. Grafts assume a pink color in 48
hours if circulation is adequate. Grafts with venous
graft survival.
The following is the author's method: Once a
healthy granulation bed is obtained, apply a heavy
improves.
Any accumulation of material such as pus, serum,
layer of silver sulfadiazine or triple antibiotic oint-
blood, hematoma, or foreigm matter between the graft
ment over the recipient bed, followed by a nonad-
and recipient bed will delay or prevent graft revascu-
herent dressing and protective bandage. This
should take place 24-48 hours prior to grafting.
larization. This delay often results in graft necrosis.
Motion between the graft and the recipient bed has
Place most patients on a broad-spectrum antibiotic,
a similar effect. Fibrinolysis secondary to bacterial
usually Cephazolin (Novaplus, Sandoz Inc., Broom-
infection destroys the early fibrin "glue" between the
field, CO), 20mg/kg TID, prior to surgery and
graft and the bed, resulting in motion and graff
postoperatively for 1 week.
At the time of surgery, cover the recipient bed
necrosis. Improper contact between the graft and the
recipient bed prevents  proper  surface-to-surface
with sterile gauze when fur is clipped. Thoroughly
cleanse the skin and graft bed with a chlorhexidine-
interdigitation and poor graft revascularization. This
saline (or lactated Ringer's solution) in a 1:40
occurs if the graft is stretched over the bed like a drum
 on pdde s hero are iaaissanxa ue j io us
dilution.
graft folds that lack proper recipient bed contact. Non-
 Use gauze sponges to gently scrub the granula-
viable grafts are white or black in appearance when
tion bed. After transfer to the recipient bed, cover
the graft with a layer of triple antibiotic ointment,
assessed after sufficient time has progressed for their
revascularization.
followed by a nonadherent dressing and protective
bandage wrap.
Although free skin grafts require a vascularized
recipient bed for survival, granulation tissue is not
'asn Aea pandde si heno e aronaq Aiessau
'ena us e poddns uen uouaad pue 'umaisoad
CLASSIFICATION OF
lent recipient bed for skin grafts. Pale, collagen-laden
FREE GRAFTS
Aiddns remssea 1ood e seq anss uogemueng sruonp
and should be excised to promote formation of healthy
Free grafts can be classified according to the source of
granulation tissue. Contamination and infection
the graft, the graft thickness, and the graft shape or
should be controlled, and any "epithelial cover" can
design. Although autogenous grafts are used for per-
 be excised with a scalpel blade before graft application.
manent free graft coverage in small animals, allografts
Skin grafting in dogs, cats, and birds can be highly
(homografts) and xenografts (heterografts) can be used
successful
1once the surgical details
LIO
1graft
as temporary biologic dressings until an autogenous
harvesting, application, and bandaging are mastered.
  s aa ae Assans aq n n
Fortunately, the learning curve is not particularly
harvested as full- or split-thickness skin grafts. Split-
steep.
thickness grafts are harvested with razor blades, graft
kmives, or a dermatome. Graft knives and razors are
difficult to master and rarely harvest the quantities of
Free Grafts
405
split-thickness skin grafts required for larger skin
with the more complete coverage of full-thickness
wounds that occasionally justify their use. Uniform
 grafts. The author prefers to use full-thickness mesh
thickmess and adequate harvesting of split-thickness
 grafts to close wounds of the lower extremities and to
grafts require the use of the more expensive gas- or
use punch or strip grafts for smaller wounds that are
electric-powered dermatomes.
not located over areas where durability is essential
 Grafts usually are applied immediately after har-
(Fig. 14-1 and 14-2). Thin split-thickness mesh grafts
vesting. Under unusual clinical circumstances, the har-
are used for extensive body defects, particularly those
vested skin can be temporarily refrigerated until
resulting from burns (Fig. 14-3).
 application can be completed.
Punch, pinch, and strip grafts are primarily used to
GRAFT THICKNESS
facilitate epithelialization of problematic wounds.
They lack the durability achieved with sheet grafts
Graft thickness varies according to the amount of
and [Q]mesh grafts which cover the majority of the
dermis included with the overlying epidermis. The
wound with full-thickness skin.
donor bed of a split-thickness graft bed can be excised
Punch graft "Induction": There have been several
and closed, or it may be left to heal by adnexal regen-
cases, over the years, in which punch graft place-
eration  and  epithelialization.  Thin  split-thickness
ment dramatically induced the processes of wound
'shna ss-ig u Aean aro ,ai, shena
contraction and epithelialization in chronic open
but they lack durability and proper hair growth, and
extremity wounds (see Fig. 14-1). Epithelialization
from the perimeter of the wound quickly expands
tion. Full-thickness grafts are preferred by many
toward the center of the wound, oftentimes more
veterinarians for these reasons. From the author's
so than the epithelial contributions of the punch
n sena ssau-e paredard aadrd anuaadxa
grafts themselves. The cause of this dramatic
achieve survival rates comparable to thinner grafts in
healing process remains unclear. Grafts may
the dog and cat. Free grafts can be applied as a sheet
enhance the release of cytokines to promote
 Over the entire recipient bed, or they can be cut into
epithelialization or possibly they serve as anchors
various shapes or patterns.
for more effective myofibroblastic contraction.
The full-thickness hand or scalpel mesh graft is
a highly effective technique for closing defects
Of the various grafting techniques discussed, full-
involving the lower extremities (see Plate 67).
thickness skin grafts harvested manually are most
useful in closing moderate skin defects involving the
extremities. Full-thickness and split-thickness grafts,
PARTIAL-COVERAGE
meshed with a scalpel blade, are practical and effective
in providing a more durable skin coverage in small
GRAFTS
animals than are punch and strip grafts. Hair growth
is fair, but does not achieve the density provided by a
 Punch grafts, pinch grafts, strip grafts, stamp grafts,
skin flap (Figs. 14-1-14-6).
and mesh grafts are commonly used as partial-cover-
age grafts to increase the total recipient surface area
that a small graft harvest can cover.
DERMATOMES
Although these grafts can vary in thickness, they
are frequently full-thickness grafts. With these grafts,
There are several dermatomes available commercially
open spaces between the graft perimeters allow for
for human use. The Brown Electric dermatome has
drainage until the granulation tissue bed is covered by
 been the most commonly used unit in veterinary prac-
the advancing sheet of epithelial cells originating from
tice. The author has used the Zimmer Electric Der-
the graft. For this reason, partial-coverage grafts are
matome (Zimmer USA, Warsaw, IN) and has found
useful for recipient beds with low-grade infections.
this instrument to be superior in its ability to harvest
Small grafts also conform to irregular recipient beds
split-thicknes skin grafts in the dog and horse (Fig.
and are simple to apply. Widely placed graft segments
14-7). Although uncommonly used on a routine basis,
unfortunately can produce an epithelialized surface
large practices may find this instrument worthwhile to
that lacks the functional and cosmetic results achieved
have on hand.
1:38PM
2:14PM
1412:25PM
FIG. 14-1 See legend on opposite page.
406
HG. 14-2 Pinch graft application. This technique is used for
thinner granulation beds. A no. 15 blade is used to make a small
pocket for insertion of a small pinch graft.
HG. 14-1 (A) Chronic,fibrotic forelimb wound of several months duration. Multiple topical wound-healing stimulants and dressings
'ae ou on sueau uouaun puoas aoud ot iduane ue un pasn aiam
(B) Close-up view of the wound, note the perimeter of old epithelial coverage.
(C) A 4-mm disposable skin biopsy punch (Sklar Tru-Punch, Sklar Instruments, West Chester, PA) was used to create holes in the
oo anss uoenuea jo ao ae o un on pasn aq ueo sossis sn les aede u iaeoidde 'paq uoeinen yin
0 pasn aq ueo apaau anes-oz e pue auas y dupaana louo on pasn ane sasuods pauatsiou ym uoissaiduoo deoidot o sqems
flush clotted blood from the holes with sterile saline prior to graft insertion.
annns uolu 0-e a[luss y 'punom aut ot [ewxoid anou urys Auleay aul ui shnid us isaaiey on pasn sem ypund Asdonq wu-g v (a)
is used to close each donor hole. The punch grafts are kept between two moistened sponges prior to their insertion. The plugs are
inserted, followed by the application of a nonadherent Adaptic pad (Adaptic, Johnson & Johnson) with a layer of triple antibiotic
au yreauaq atedds suaaaid ot punom aun on leaudiad us au ot paideis si ped ondepy aui 'aoeans shl aao padde suauun
outer protective bandage. The patient was discharged the same day.
(E) Recheck 5 days later. The wound has dramatically decreased in size as a result of wound contraction and epithelialization. The
author has occasionally seen this phenomenon of rapid epithelialization and wound contraction after the use of punch grafts to
promote epithelial coverage to lower extremity wounds and calls this phenomenon punch graft induction.
(F) Complete closure at a 2-week recheck. Prolonged use of an Elizabethan collar is acdvisable to prevent the patient from licking at
the healed wound.
407
607P
2:13PM
FIG. 14-3 See legend on opposite page.
408
Free Grafts
409
PRESERVATION BY
lism. Grafts were refrigerated at 4 °C. Graft acceptance
was good to excellent up to the 3-week limit of the
REFRIGERATION
study. For humans, successful graft storage has been
reported up to 6-8 weeks. McCoy's 5A Medium con-
In veterinary medicine, there is little need to refriger-
tains phenol red as an indication of catabolite produc-
 ate harvested skin: in most cases grafts are harvested
tion. A color change of cherry red to orange-yellow is
and applied directly to the wound in one surgical pro-
an indication of catabolite buildup, necessitating
cedure. If there is extra skin and the possible need for
replacement of half the media volume; complete
additional grafting, short-term refrigeration can be
change of the medium may have an adverse effect on
used to preserve the tissue (Fig. 14-8). In the event of
graft survival.
a need to abort the grafting proced ure, the skin can be
In small animal surgery, careful preparation of the
refrigerated and reapplied at a later time in a more
patient and recipient bed can eliminate the need for
stable patient. In humans, excisional defects may be
graft storage and the costs incurred with graft prepara-
complicated by excessive bleeding or the graft may be
tion/refrigeration.
necessarily delayed if the recipient bed is considered
unsuitable for successful grafting. Careful planning
can minimize these intraoperative errors.
 Storage of grafts may reduce the phase of plasmatic
INTRAOPERATIVE
imbibition by the production of anaerobic metabolites
that stimulate early vascularization of the graft. This
CONSIDERATIONS
may be a benefit in those areas in which immobiliza-
s  s p ao  d si o
Strict aseptic technique is mandatory. The harvested
meshed skin grafts were refrigerated in a tissue culture
graft must be kept moistened at all times with sterile
medium composed of a balanced electrolyte solution
saline or lactated Ringer's solution. Unless immedi-
with amino acids, vitamins, and dextrose (McCoy's 5A
ately applied, harvested skin is placed in moistened
Medium, Flow Laboratories Inc, McLean, VA). Grafts
 gauze pads and secured to the surgery table cover with
were rolled in moistened gauze and placed in a sterile
forceps to assure the sponge is not accidentally used
plastic container with 1.0-1.5ml of McCoy's Medium
and discarded. To save time, an assistant can close
per square centimeter of skin graft tissue; air was
large donor sites while the surgeon prepares and
included in the container to support cellular metabo-
applies the harvested graft to the recipient site.
HG. 14-3 (A) Miniature pinscher with a large circumferential skin defect of the left forelimb, secondary to vehicular trauma.
 aded a saao ieins aas jo aoed e woy sau saded suaqosqe aun susn pateao si punm aul go aeiduan v (a)
applied to the wound surface, leaving an outline of the moist wound surface. The paper is trimmed and placed over the lateral trunk
eueu st axa au jo ued ymoa au aqeuoseai e iu ainsse diau on t aie um eane
(C) The harvested graft is placed on a 4-inch roll of autoclaved Vetrap (3M Animal Care Products), exposing the subcutaneous
 su de aue o e au uood ot pasn are (aqidanse osie are ss) sdeis us e us au jo aeanss
simplifies the removal of the subcutaneous tissues down to the dermal surface.
Sh apea st ou e ssaod ,dueap, aul go uoaduo uodn uoeisap suaaand ot Aeoad ea au on padde si aues (a 'a)s
used to create a series of 1-cm stab incisions in a staggered row configuration. Upon completion, the "hand mesh graft" is positioned
over the viable granulation bed.
182:34PH
182:38PM
FIG. 14-4 See legend on opposite page.
410
Free Grafts
411
BANDAGING TECHNIQUE
staples or "tacking" sutures can be used
to prevent shifting of the dressing. (The
FOR SKIN GRAFTS
author prefers Adaptic, Johnson &
Johnson.)
Few bandages require more exact application than a
 bandage used to secure and immobilize a body region
3.
Absorptive/padding layer. Sterile 4 × 4
after application of a free graft. Most skin grafts are
gauze sponges are unfolded to 4 × 8
lengths. Usually two sponges are spiraled
performed on the extremities. All three layers of a
oduo ,'atel, mgssassns e rog ienuassa are aepueq
around the circumference of the
nents of the bandage include the following (see Fig.
extremity to cover the dressing. Sterile
14-4):
self-adherent gauze is used to secure the
pads around the extremity (or body part
1.
Ointment. An antibiotic ointment (oil
grafted). Layers of nonsterilized cast
base) is applied to a nonadherent
padding normally is used in conjunction
dressing uniformly. The ointment protects
with layers of roll gauze for the bulk of
the graft from desiccation and helps to
the bandage. This layering process is
reduce bacterial proliferation. (The author
repeated until a thick, firm secondary
normally prefers triple antibiotic ointment.)
layer of gauze and cotton is created to
Nonadherent dressing. The dressing
immobilize the graft against the recipient
2.
overlaps the entire graft. It is applied
bed and discourage motion. The bandage
evenly over the grafted surface, without
is extended above the adjacent joint in
wrinkles or folds. The nonadherent (or
the process of application.
more properly called low-adherent 
4.
Elastic wrap. An outer elastic wrap is
dressing helps prevent the bandage from
applied to the bandage. Adhesive elastic
sticking to the graft area during
is used to secure the bandage to the fur
subsequent bandage changes. Skin
and skin to prevent slippage. (The author
application. Uniform tension is applied to the graft to assure it conforms to the wound bed without excessive tension; the stab
incisions are allowed to gap slightly open to facilitate drainage from beneath the graft. The graft should directly contact the
irregularities of the recipient wound bed. The graft slightly overlaps the adjacent skin bordering the wound bed; staples are used to
aanxa ami  jo aaa ae siad he a araum ast ot he an aas ot pasn oe ae sadeis er au ais
defect.
paeads si uisap ueg (uosuof ay uosuo shussap sdepv yug x e ot Aeraa padde si suauno soaue aidn ()
around the graft in a flat, uniform fashion. Staples are used to secure dressings to each other as well as to the skin bordering the
grafted area.
(D) Sterile 4 x 8-inch surgical sponges are opened and spiraled over the Adaptic dressing (two layers).
(E) This can be followed by two or more layers of 4-inch wide cast padding (Specialist Cast Padding, BSN Medical, Brierfield,
England) secured with roll gauze to form a firm bandage.
(F) Elasticon (Johnson & Johnson) forms the tertiary wrap. Note the tape overlaps the skin above the bandage for added security.
Tongue depressors are added to the Elasticon with 1-inch surgical tape for added bandage rigidity.
9:41AM
31
1:40PM
B
a m   e  m I e  a t     sd a o  ( ') h 
survival or "take."
FIG. 14-6 (A, B) Hand mesh graft application to
the lower extremity of a dog. External fixators
used in fracture repair provide an additional
" security anchor" for the graft band age.
(C) Approximately 5 days after graft
application. Grafts that survive have a pink to
lavender hue at the time of initial
revascularization. Full-thickness mesh grafts are
among the most useful techniques for closure of
distal extremity defects.
412
HG. 14-7 (A) The Zimmer Dermatome is an excelent unit for harvesting split-thickness skin grafts.
(B) The width of the graft harvested is determined by which base plate is selected (A). Each plate has a slot that determines the
amount of skin exposed to the dermatome blade.
(C) The Padgett Mesh Graft Expansion Unit (3: 1 ratio). The Teflon roller compresses the graftinto the staggered blades.
(D) The meshed skin graft elevated from the Padgett Expansion Unit.
(E, F) The graft can be expanded (stretched) up to three times the original surface area of the graft, depending upon the desired
coverage.
413
414
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 14-8 (A, B) Fresh avulsion wound involving the rear leg of a small dog, as a result of a dog fight. This specific type of injury is
occasionally referred to as a deglooing injury, in which the skin is circumferentially avulsed or pulled distaly in the fashion of
removing a glove. Although this skin theoretically could be prepared (even preserved) and grafted back to the leg, it is best to
discard this contaminated and traumatized tissue. The wound should be prepared for surgical closure using a freshly harvested skin
graft. In this case, one or two caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap(s) also is an option (with or without the addition of a
skin graft.)
prefers Elasticon, although a combination
48-hour period of the graft
of Vetrap and Elasticon also can be used
revascularization is not disturbed. Patients
effectively.)
should be sedated and restrained during
bandage changes to avoid accidental
5.
Additional immobilization. Slings, Mason
trauma to the graft site. General
metasplints, spicas, Schroeder-Thomas
anesthesia is recommended for excitable/
splints, tongue depressors, plywood
aggressive patients. Care must be taken 
coaptation splints, or reinforcement rods
are used if additional rigidity or
not to pull or lift the graft from the
underlying wound bed during dressing
immobilization is necessary. Skin grafts
removal. In most cases, adherence of the
applied over, or adjacent to, a joint
topical dressing is the result of dried blood
surface usually require additional support
binding exposed areas of the granulation 
or immobilization. A spica bandage/splint
bed to the interstices of the dressing.
may be advisable for grafts applied to the
These areas can be softened with warm
proximal portions of the limb to avoid
saline and "unbuttoned" with gentle
slippage and help restrict regional motion.
traction applied to the dressing. If the
Cats are quite adept at "flicking'
dressing is particularly tenacious, the
bandages off their extremities, but cannot
dressing may be left on the graft followed
remove spica-style bandages (see Plate
 by the addition of topical ointment on top
5). Tie-over dressings can be effective in
 of this dressing, before reapplication of
immobilizing grafts, especially in difficult 
the secondary and tertiary bandage layers.
areas (inner thighs, upper limbs, etc.).
As noted in Chapter 4, VAC style devices
6.
 Postoperative care. Bandages may be
(see Plate 1) also have been used to
changed as early as 48 hours after graft
secure skin grafts.
application. However, it is safer to wait for
The frequency of bandage changes
a minimum of 3 days to assure the critical
varies with the patient and graft
Free Grafts
415
techniques used. Unless infection is a
Viable grafts assume a pink to lavender
concern, bandage changes can be timed
hue depending upon the state of
every 3-4 days after the initial change.
vascularization. Dead skin assumes a
 Once healing is complete, bandaging can
white or black color. Early signs of
be discontinued (usually by 2 weeks after
superficial graft necrosis are discouraging,
mesh graft application). However, the
but not always catastrophic, because hair
author has protected grafts up to 1
follicles and cutaneous adnexa in the
month, usually in conjunction with
deep portion of the graft may survive and
prolonged use of Elizabethan collars, in
may serve as a source for wound
active patients with a propensity to lick or
epithelialization.
chew at themselves.
Cage/run confinement. Dogs and cats are
confined to their cages. They are kept on
 Suggested Readings
a leash when taken outdoors to urinate
and defecate. Minimal activity is essential
Aragon CL, Harvey SE, Allen SW, et al. 2004. Partial-thick-
to graft survival, especially in the first
 ness skin grafting for large thermal skin wounds in dogs.
 48-hour period of graft revascularization.
Compend Contin Edu Pract Vet 26:200-212.
Minor soiling of the outer bandage does
 Pavletic MM. 1993. Surgery of the skin and management of
wounds. In: Sherding RD, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinica!
not necessitate a complete bandage
Management, 2nd ed., 1991-1996. New York: Churchill 
change, as the heavy padding and the
Livingstone.
outer wrap usually limit the depth of
Pavletic MM. 1998. Skin. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techriques
 contamination. However, bandages 
in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed., 599-602. Philadelphia, PA:
should not be allowed to get soaked with
Lea & Febiger.
Pope ER. 1990. Mesh skin grafting. Vet Clin No Ar
water or urine. A plastic bag can be
20:177-187.
applied temporarily to the bandaged foot
Schumacher J, Chambers M, Hanselka DV, et al. 1987. Pres-
when the dog is exposed to wet
ervation of skin by refrigeration for autogenous grafting in
surfaces. It must be remembered that
the horse. Vet Surg 16:358-361.
motion can result in bandage materials
Schumacher J, Ford TS, Brumbaugh GW, et al. 1996. Viability
rubbing on the graft site. This has been
of split-thickness skin grafts attached with fibrin glue. Can
I Vet Res 60:158-160.
recognized as a cause of graft failure in
Swaim SF. 1990. Skin grafts. Vet Clin No Arm 20:147-175.
active patients.
Swaim SF. 1997. Small Animat Wound Management, 2nd ed.,
 330-333. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Swaim SF. 2003. Skin grafts. In Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of
With cooperative patients and
Small Animul Surgery, 3rd ed., 423-476. Philadelphia, PA:
compliant pet owners, the patient can be 
WB Saunders.
discharged from the hospital after the
White RAS. 1991. Skin grafting in the dog. Waltham Focus
first bandage change. Again, the key
1:2-8.
factor is minimizing activity and local
motion to assure graft survival.
416
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Punch Grafts
Plate 60
DE SC RIP TION
Punch grafts are small circular full-thickness grafts used to seed a granulation bed with"epithelial islands."
Suitable numbers are used to reepithelialize the interposing granulation surface. A biopsy punch can be
used to harvest tissue and create holes in a thick granulation bed.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Fur is clipped sufficienfly close to leave a short stubble that serves as an"angle guide" for plug
snid yeia uys jsaaieu on pasn are (uot-g) yound Asdonq e pue sdaniog umog-uospy lusaaiu
The pinch is angled parallel to the hair shafts. Scissors are used to lift and cut the skin plug from its
subcutaneous aftachments. Subcutaneous fat is trimmed from the base of each plug (inset). Harvested
Donor beds are closed with individual sutures.
p a o so rn n on pasn si (s  aed ynd sdoq rs  ()
aou  oi sere moe ot pue busaaieu uodn uoeuo yei ioy ajesuaduos oi paq uoeinueo
snuggly into each hole. Grafts are spaced about 1-2cm apart. Rows are staggered using the same
guidelines. Forceps and fine-tipped sharp-sharp scissors are used to remove the plug of granulation
fissue. Sterilized cotton swabs are inserted (for 5 minutes minimum) into the individual granulation
holes created to control hemorrhage.
(C) Harvested grafts are inserted into the granulation bed level to its surface. A sterile nonadherent
dressing, antibiotic ointment, and firm cotton bandage is applied to the area to secure the grafts into
their new position and immobilize the area. The bandage is changed 3-5 days postoperatively and every
2 or 3 days thereafter until epithelialization is complete.
COMMENT S
baldness. Unlike humans, however, the purpose of punch grafts for animals is to promote wound
epithelialization and not hair growth. The technique is simple to execute and is easily performed on an
sedation.
snid gea aul jo sueas un mone jeu spaq uoeinua ia oi aqedde aou ane sea youn
with a no. 15 scalpel blade, as described in Plate 61. Holes are created beginning at the lower border of the
wound so that bleeding does not obscure the area as additional grafts are applied.
punom pazauda ue pue shnsai oas od apnou shea yound go saeupesp ole au
surface that lacks the durability of flap or full-thickness graft coverage of the entire wound. They are best
used for smaller wounds located in areas not subject to excessive wear or extermal trauma. In large wounds,
the harvesting and insertion of multiple punch grafts is tedious. Under these circumstances, mesh grafts are
comparatively easy to perform and provide a more suitable outcome.
Free Grafts
417
Plate 60
SUBCUTANEOUS
FAT EXCISED
t
C
418
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Pinch Grafts
Plate 61
DESCRIPTION
Susaeu jo pouau aun yanoue 'anbiuan yeia yound aun jo uoeen e ane (shea paas) sea you
the skin segments differs. Pinch grafts are inserted into angular pockets in the granulation bed formed wifth
a no. 15 scalpel blade.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
s apaau annns paan o apaau sapod y uusy aunu u Ans a paedand s us a ()
 grasped with a needle holder. The needle is inserted into the skin and elevated. The"tented" skin 
segment is harvested with a scalpel blade (dotted line). Donor areas are closed with skin sutures.
Subcutaneous fat is excised before wrapping the skin segments in gauze sponges, moistened with sterile
saline or lactated Ringer's solution.
compression is used to control bleeding.
(C) The small grafts are inserted into the angular slits followed by application of a snug bandage (previously
described under punch grafts).
COMMENT S
Stab incisions in the granulation bed are begun at the most dependent position to prevent hemorrhage from
for the grafts. Hemorrhage must be controlled prior to insertion of the graf, otherwise the graft can float out
with active bleeding. The depth of the stab incision is adjusted by the angle of blade insertion. Shallow
Pinch grafts have the same general advantages and disadvantages as punch grafts, although harvesting is
less uniform than the latter technique.
Free Grafts
419
Plate 61
420
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Strip Grafts
Plate 62
DE SC RIP TION
Strip grafts are a variation of the punch graft technique. Narrow strips of harvested skin are placed in
parallel grooves or furrows cut into the granulation surface. They are most commonly employed to cover
longer wounds.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A rectangular segment of skin is harvested equal to the length (long axis) of the defect. The width of
skin harvested is estimated by the number of strips required, the width of the skin strips, and the space
harvested skin graft. The harvested graft is divided into strips 3-5 mm wide. If necessary, wider strips
can be developed.
(B) A no. 11 or 15 scalpel blade is used to cut furrows into the recipient granulation bed, approximately
ds a  smon   sog 'ss  an  on noa am p dap 
10-15 mm apart. Strips of gauze or umbilical tape are compressed into these grooves to control
an u Ain uen uans ae ian 's ds ae jo pu yea u paneid aq un anns as 
bandage alone to secure the grafts into the granulation furrows.
COMMENT S
sa ds sera yud pue yund a pasap asu on iuis ae seuepesp pue seuee 
may be more applicable to long narrow wounds involving the extremities, although the selection among
Free Grafts
421
Plate 62
DONOR
BED
RECIPIENT BED
422
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 63
Stamp Grafts
DE SC RIP TION
Stamp grafts are yet another method of providing coverage to wounds by placing"postage stamp"segments
ans uoenn pasodxa au ag unauda go sanos se aas sipioq ai piq pnom e aao us gos
granulation beds.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
stamp-sized segments. Size can be somewhat varied.
ede u t Aaeidde pid Auoon ane she des 'aeuns punom aun ouo piel ae ser (a)
g ,ane, uau ae hun uod sde au uuu on an yea u pad aq un sannns a
between the wound bed and overlying graft. A nonadherent dressing and protective wrap are used to
restrict motion.
(C) Altermatively, the surgeon can resect a thin portion of a wound bed to recess the graft, thereby reducing 
the likelihood of surface motion. This more tedious technique will necessitate control of hemorrhage
before graft application. It is rarely required.
COMMENTS
Suoeds Aq paproid si aeuea 'spaq punom oi sgee aay suidde go pouau iauoue jaA are shena duens
them apart. They technically combine the advantages of the simpler punch, pinch, and strip graffting
en uudo soune aut si fn suea ysau pue jaaus Aa papoe aleaaon ianea au ym snuuoa
s pue 'oud rund ae go Aus ae ye pue sea ysa saao saeuape junis ou aa ae
techniques. Cosmetic results vary with their thickness and proximity of placement.
Free Grafts
423
Plate 63
C
424
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Sheet Grafts
Plate 64
DESCRIPTION
Sheet graffs are used to completely cover a recipient bed with a uniform layer of skin. Skin thickness can be
varied according to the individual needs of the patient. When possible, full-thickness skin grafts are usually
selected for their durability and hair growth. The vascular wound bed must be free of debris, epithelial
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE (FULL -THICKNESS GRAFTS)
(A) Using sterile paper (from a surgical glove package) or gauze, a template is made of the recipient bed by
pressing the material onto the wound. When the material is lifted off the bed, it has the moistened
impression of the defect. The template is positioned on the selected donor sife and is oriented to match
the hair growth at the recipient area. A marking pen can be used to outline the template onto the donor
site, about 1cm outside its border to assure adequate wound coverage. In general, a rectangular
segment embracing these dimensions is removed to facilitate closure of the donor defect. Redundant
(excessive overlapping) skin is excised during graft application.
fissue, including any panniculus muscle by using Metzenbaum scissors. Initial fat removal can be
achieved by securing the harvested skin (dermal surface up) to a 4-inch roll of autoclaved Vetrap with
scissors across the graft for close fat excision from the dermis.
Some surgeons try to defat the graft with a scalpel blade during its harvest. The blade is used to cut
the hypodermis from the dermis, rather than simply undermining the skin.A Zimmer Dermatome also
could be set to remove a thick split-thickness skin graft to avoid the need to defat the graft.
The defatted dermal surface exposed assumes a cobblestone appearance after scissors resection of the
u a sp au a s aa n (s p se a se  snss r
to a light source, the resultant graft appears opaque. Grafts are periodically immersed in a bowl of
sterile saline or lactated Ringer's solution to keep the graft moist, rinse off fragments of subcutaneous
fat, and visualize strands of attached subcutaneous tissue requiring removal. It is useful to have a
second bowl of saline for a final graft rinse before its placement onto the recipient bed
(C) The graft is laid over the wound, enabling it to contact the irregular surface of the vascular recipient
 s  a   n  an    o s s   a s
wound slightly to assure complete wound coverage. Simple interrupted sutures or skin staples are used
COMMENT S
Although grafts prepared in this fashion are considered full-thickness grafts, in reality they vary in thickness
depending upon the amount of dermis inadvertently removed during the removal of the subcutaneous
He e j id aa sn  a sau nu ns go iaqu an m s ym  sns
times during the procedure by periodically bathing the graft with cool, sterile saline or lactated Ringer's
solution. Skin grafts must not be applied too loosely or too tightly. The graft must contact the wound bed
uniformly. Properly applied, the graft has the mobility of the skin over the back of your hand when
improves, skin color becomes normal and hair growth resumes.
the graft borders, especially in those cases where there is limited skin for wound coverage. With a successful
"take,"the overlapped skin border sloughs and will peel off during suture removal 7-10 days later.
The author favors mesh grafts over sheet grafts because of their better drainage. The multiple slits help
prevent fluid accumulation; drain holes rapidly close upon a successful graft "take.
Free Grafts
425
Plate 64
426
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 65
Dermatome: Split-Thickness Skin
Graft Harvesting
DE SCRIPTIO N
There are several dermatomes available commercially for harvesting split-thickness grafts. Use of the Brown
Dermatome and newly redesigned Zimmer Dermatome are discussed.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
 The surgeon must be familiar with the components and setting adjustments of any dermatome prior to
surgery. Practice in its use can be obtained on fresh cadaver specimens.The width of the graft is adjusted on
the dermatome. Graft thickness can be adjusted to between 0.015 and 0.030 inches thick depending on the
thickness of the donor skin and the graft thickness desired.The author usually selects a graft 0.015 inches
(0.38mm) thick
Basic preparation and use of the newer Zimmer Dermatome is similar to that of the Brown Dermatome.
exposure of the skin to the oscillating blade to control the width of the graft harvested.
The dermatome is ideally suited to harvesting skin from a long, flat surface. Selection of a donor site(s) is
a matter of availability. In general, it is preferable to select a suitable donor site in a location or locations that
are easily assessable and that do not require the intraoperative reposifioning of the patient.
structures that impede advancement of the dermatome or alter the angle of the oscillating blade.
n  e np aui ao pdde si (o id j e go ia u e a  pau ps
smooth advancement of the dermatome. A sterile water-soluble lubricant also can be substituted for mineral
oil, although the author prefers an oil-based lubricant.
Two towel clamps are placed ahead, and two behind the path of the dermatome. Traction on the towel
s aneuap au paeaua si auoeuap aul se aneuns uys aun ouo ku passand pue panue si apea 
advanced forward on its base.The graft is grasped with forceps as it emerges from the unit.The graft harvest
moistened wifth sterile saline or lactated Ringer's solution during ifts application to the recipient bed.
COMMENT S
The Zimmer Dermatome is easy to use and cuts the skin of the dog remarkably well. It is superior to the
Brown Dermatome. Graft knives are difficult to use in animals and have inconsistent results. Injection razors
and safety razors can be modified to harvest small segments of skin, but the harvest is unrewarding for the
larger wounds for which split-thickness grafts are most applicable. Long segments can be difficult to obtain
from cats and small dogs. The relatively firm, flat surface of the epaxial muscles lateral to the dorsal spinous
 process and lateral thigh are among the best areas for harvesting long strips of skin. The skin is thicker over
the back and more amenable to split-thickness skin graft harvesting. The lateral surface of the upper
extremities also can be used. The flexible abdominal wall can be a difficult area from which to harvest skin
with a dermatome. The ribs also limit the effective ability to harvest a graft from the lateral thorax despite
injection of saline subcutaneously.
Ad  s i  ap ss p  u ss a s ss u
skin from the donor area. The partial-thickness defect created can reepithelialize within 3 weeks. It is
possible to harvest additional thin split-thickness grafts from the same donor site upon healing.
 Full-thickness grafts, properly prepared and applied, have a survival rate comparable to split-thickness 
 -aus panan si ge e uaum ymo iu ianaa pue Anp go aepe pppe aue um 'shea
moderate-sized defects usually are closed with full-thickness grafts; large defects can be closed with split-
thickness grafts.
Free Grafts
427
Plate 65
428
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 66
Mesh Grafts (With Expansion Units)
DESCRIP TION
s ,ans apudxa,ue u pu e on paaan aq u s ssau-ds pasaa
ideally suited for large surface wounds, wounds with irregular surface contours, or the presence of a low-
 grade infection for which postoperative drainage is critical to graft survival.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
(A) A split-thickness graft or appropriately prepared full-thickness graft is positioned on the mesh graft-
expansion unit, dermal surface down.
The Teflon rolling pin is rolled over the cutting bed with steady, firm, uniform pressure. The
 graft is completely cut; the blades must be kept sharp for optional effectiveness.
(B) The graft is lifted off the expansion unit with forceps. Restrictive graft borders are cut off with scissors.
[npipu 'anaissod uaum siaproa punom au suddeaao 'paa punom aun saao pndde s gena au
sutures or staples are used to secure the graft to the skin bordering the wound. Mesh grafts placed
maj e ym paq uoeinue aut on panoas Anjanen aq uen punom arel e jo suoiai peuan aui uodn
sutures. Care is taken to limit bleeding during this maneuver. The graft is kept moist with sterile saline
or lactated Ringer's solution during the entire procedure. The wound is covered with a sterile bandage.
COMMENT S
 Graft expansion using mesh graft-expansion units provides a uniform means of increasing the surface area
s isudxa r (aesn hn au uun iao sun usuxa- ysau ae aa se us go
largely in the lateral direction in relation to the instrument. In small animal surgery, these grafts are
without the complete loss of skin. However, full-thickness grafts can be meshed when the surgeon wishes
which optimal drainage can prevent pus or discharge accumulation beneath the graft. Although there are
expansion units (Mesh Graft II Dermatome, Zimmer Manufacturing) that vary the mesh expansion ratio
(3 :1, 6:1, 9:1), the 3:1 ratio is selected as the most useful design for sufficient coverage to promote prompt
 epithelialization. Mesh grafts do not require maximum expansion unless optimum coverage is required.
will not elect to purchase these surgical devices. Animals requiring expansion grafts are best referred to a
local surgical referral practice or institution equipped with these specialized instruments.
Free Grafts
429
Plate 66
430
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 67
Mesh Grafts (With Scalpel Blades)
DESCRIPTION
Multiple small (1cm) incisions can be used to improve drainage beneath a graft and obtain limited
grafts.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
(A) See Plate 64, Sheet Grafts, for the technique of graft preparation.The prepared graft is laid on a firm
blades are used to create small parallel incisions approximately 1 cm long and less than 2cm apart, over
s u paraeis aiaeae are sao uep go smou jaed suanasns 'gen ae go yaual a
fashion, less than 2cm apart. The graft is stretched between the thumb and index finger to facilitate this
procedure.
(B) The graft is sutured into place. Suturing or stapling one side of the graft enables the surgeon to slightly
shapiog ene aun sdeaao Aenaual rone aul 'srao susoddo pue sapis suuuan aul nog paneadan
slightly as described in Plate 52. A bandage is applied to secure the graff.
COMMENT S
"Hand"mesh grafts expand in one direction, but are not as expansible as grafts that have been meshed
enable the slit to gape open a few millimeters. With a successful"take,"these holes contract and
over other free grafting techniques for moderate-sized defects involving lower extremities. As noted in Fig.
14-3, harvested grafts can be secured to autoclaved Vetrap to remove the subcutaneous fat. Stab incisions
are easily performed by pushing the no. 15 scalpel blade through the grafft and into the underlying Vetrap.
Free Grafts
431
Plate 67
15
Facial Reconstruction
 Introduction: Facial Reconstructive Surgery 434
PLATES
Plate 68: Repair of Lower Labial Avulsion 446
Plate 69: Repair of Upper Lip Avulsion 448
Plate 70: Wedge Resection Technique 450
Plate 71: Rectangular Resection Technique 452
Plate 72: Full-Thickness Labial Advancement Technique (Upper Lip) 454
Plate 73: Full-Thickness Labial Advancement Technique (Lower Lip) 456
Plate 74: Buccal Rotation Technique  458
Plate 75: Lower Labial Lift-Up Technique 460
Plate 76: Upper Labial Pull-Down Technique462
Plate 77: Labial/Buccal Reconstruction with Inverse Tubed Skin Flap  464
P   p        
Pattern Flap)468
Plate 79: Cleft Lip Repair (Primary Cleft, Cheiloschisis, Harelip) 470
Plate 80: Rostral Labial Pivot Flaps 472
Plate 81: Oral Commissure Advancement Technique  474
Plate 82: Brachycephalic Facial Fold Correction 476
Plate 83: Cheilopexy Technique for Drooling 478
433
434
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION: FACIAL
can affect the method of closure. For example, the
RECONSTRUCTIVE
cocker spaniel's large lips and cheeks are more ame-
nable to simpler closure techniques, whereas a collie's
SURGERY
-oqea anou e anmban Aeu uogeuojuos ieiey rasuo
rate restorative procedure.
here are a variety of defects of the lips, cheek, and
Restoration of function is the primary goal of the
I planum nasale encountered in the dog and cat.
veterinarian. Although our patients have no interest in
Defects resulting from trauma, chronic inflammation/
the cosmetic outcome, most owmers do have a variable
 infection, wide tumor resection, and congenital disor-
 degree of concerm about their pets' appearance, espe-
ders are particularly challenging to the veterinarian
dially as it pertains to the face. Most clients readily
faced with restoration of function of the oral cavity and
accept cosmetic imperfections when the potential
achieving satisfactory cosmetic results for the con-
outcome is discussed prior to surgery. Most cases
cerned owner (Figs. 15-1-15-3).
involving wide tumor resection and single-stage
 Dogs are graced with large upper labial and buccal
reconstruction result in  very acceptable cosmetic
surfaces, which facilitate closure of moderate-sized
results, especially when the surgeon and client recog-
defects. Cats, with their more refined facial conforma-
nize the notable improvement in appearance com-
tion, lack the fullness and elasticity of the canine lips
pared to the injury or disease process being corrected
 and cheeks. Although dogs generally present with the
(Fig. 15-4).
greater number of wounds and oral neoplasms of the
 The large adjacent donor areas of skin and mucosa
lips and cheeks, the techniques discussed in this section
facilitate wound closure without resorting to multi-
 are applicable to the dog and cat.
staged reconstructive procedures used in human
Selection of the most appropriate method of closure
plastic surgery (Figs. 15-5-15-7). Dense fur growth
is based on the size and location of the defect, the
helps to cover scars and mask deficits. Unlike the
donor tissues available for closure, and the inherent
flatter, completely exposed, hairless human face, the
tissue elasticity unique to the species, breed, and indi-
 elongated muzzle of the dog and cat essentially divides
vidual patient. Skin defects of the face are generally
the facial area into halves and makes any facial asym-
closed with skin flaps (see Chapters 11 and 13). One
metry less obvious to the human eye. This chapter will
 novel closure noted in the literature used a pinnal flap
discuss wound closure techniques and corrective pro-
to close an extensive facial burn in a dog (Swainson et
cedures for the variety of defects encountered in
al. 1998). Anatomic differences between breeds also
surgery (Fig. 15-8 and 15-9).
FIG. 15-1 (A) Lip fold pyoderma (labial fold intertrigo), secondary to chronic exposure of the lower labial skin to the overlapping
upper labial tissues.
(B) Elliptical excision of the inflamed segment. The tissue may be removed with a scalpel blade with electrocautery to control the
multiple bleeders normally associated with removal of this chronic inflammatory tissue. A surgical laser also may be used. It is
recommended that both intradermal sutures and skin sutures are used together: healing may be delayed based on the location of the
su rgical incisions.
C
D
HG. 15-2 (A) Lower labial avulsion in a stray cat. This wound is several days old. The cat also had lacerations and a partial avulsion
of thetongue.
as og punom stu aredaid ot papaau aram atae pue suaapiqaa maa dn-as (a)
(C) A 22-gauge wire is suitable for realigning and stabilizing a separated mandibular symphysis. The author prefers to twist the wire
lapun pauad Aisea st leaouan auim aul azqeis in pasn ane sistmi aim anos in aau uoeaaoel lenaul pioae ot Aeuaa
sedation.
(D) Completion of the closure. See Plate 68. (From Pavletic MM. 1990. Reconstructive surgery of the lips and cheek. Vet Clin No Arm
20:201-226.)
435
FIG. 15-3 (A) Upper labial avulsion.
(B) Closure is comparatively easy: gravity helps maintain tissue alignment whereas gravity has a tendency to pull lower labial
avulsion closures apart. See Plate 69.
(C) Massive avulsion of the upper labial and nasal tissues.
(D) The incisive foramina (arrows) can be used to loop two absorbable sutures through the palate and into the septal tissues to
stabilize the nasal area. These stabilizing sutures are tied in the oral cavity. The mucosal laceration is then closed, completing the
procedure. (See Plate 69.)
436
 HG. 15-4 Resection of a labial neoplasm. The surgeon elected to 
close the wound by apposing the adjacent muzzle skin to the 
remaining mucosa. Cosmetic results are poor; patient function was
adequate, although leakage of oral contents occasionally was
noted. A buccal rotational flap (Plate 74) could have resulted in
improved cosmetic results and reduiced the loss of oral contents
from the labial defect.
border. (D) Closure of the mucosa was followed by skin closure.
437
FIG. 15-6 (A) Stray golden retriever with a rostral labial defect. The owner reported food and water would run out of the labial
defect.
(B) Elevation of the labial advancement flap.
(C) Forward advancement with a skin hook.
(D) Suture closure of the mucosal, musculofascial, and cutaneous layers.
(E) Note the small area of dehiscence at the time of suture removal, secondary to the dog rubbing his nose; a longer Elizabethan
 collar would have been advisable (From Pavletic MM. 1990. Reconstructive surgery of the lips and cheek. Vet Clin No Arm 20:201-226.)
(See Plate 72.)
438
2010:38AM
B
2011:09 AM
D
2011:31 AM
HG. 15-7 (A) Labial mast cell tumor (grade Il) resection.
(B) Excision with a CO laser.
(C) Demonstration of one option, labial pivot flap (see Plate S0). This would have required partial resection of the labial border.
opposing half of the rostral labial area. This patient underwent subsequent radiation therapy.
439
440
ansse ol eaibung quaoelpe pue di addn au Suraloau! 'euouoieo ao snouenbs asnp e jo uoisioxa [eqel apim (v) 8-sl '5H
complete removal, the involved dental arcade and adjacent hard palate were excised with the involved labial tissue.
(B, C) With two-thirds of the upper lip resected, the cheek is rotated rostrally (arrow). A portion of the labial border is resected for
apposition to the remaining rostral labial segment. The mucosal border of the rotated check is sutured to the palatal border and
Mef au ins us aq uau pue iaaen lnse aiu au jo ans Aq pamog si s saas dl iensu aut jo eson esn
was manipulated intraoperatively to assure that a reasonable range of motion was preserved during closure.
(D) Completion of closure. Lymph node biopsy was negative for metastatic disease
(E) The patient had no recurrence 1 year after follow-up. Note the new oral commissure is advanced forward using this technique
(arrow) (see Plate 74).
Anatomic Considerations
forming the commissures of the lips (commissurae
labiorum). A deep, straight cleft, the philtrum, marks
 A basic understanding of the anatomy of the lips and
the union of the halves of the upper lips rostrally. The
oral cavity is essential to the understanding of the tech-
s  e su d rd a o as sso
niques discussed in this section. The lips (labia oris)
area compared with the lower lip, which tapers in
form the anterior and most of the lateral boundaries of
width anteriorly. The lower lip has a firm attachment
the vestibule. The upper and lower lips (labia maxil-
to the gum between the lower canine and first
laria et mandibularia) join caudally at acute angles,
premolar (interdental  space). This interdental
dachshind.
(C, D) Closure of the mucosa defect was accomplished with oral commissure reformation, followed by inverse tube flap closure of
the mucosal defect. The dorsal border of the flap was sutured to the hard palate; the ventral border was sutured to the gingival
border of the mandible. Skin was advanced over the area to complete the closure.
(E, F) Labial and frontal view of the dachshund at suture removal. Functional and cosmetic results were excelent. The skin flap
replaced the massive mucosal defect. (This elaborate reconstructive surgical technique is discussed in Plate 77).
41
442
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
attachment maintains the position of the lower lip and
Miscellaneous Labial and
prevents it from sagging. When lower labial recon-
Facial Procedures
struction surgery is undertaken, this tissue attach-
Cleft Lip (Cheiloschisis, "Harelip")
sutures.
The lips and cheeks have two epithelial surfaces:
Cleft lip is a congenital defect that may be the result
the outer skin and inner mucosa. Between these two
of either a recessive or irregular dominant trait. Hor
surfaces are two thin muscles, the outer orbicularis oris
monal, nutritional, and mechanical factors also may
and the inner buccinator. Other facial muscles insert at
play a role in their formation. Cleft lip is more common
this level, including the levator nasolabialis, caninus,
in brachycephalic breeds. Cleft lip (primary palate)
levator labii maxillaris, platysma, zygomaticus, and
also may be seen in conjunction with cleft palate (sec-
sphincter colli profundus-pars palpebralis. The cheeks
omdary palate). Cleft lip usually is unilateral, although
(buccae), which form the lateral walls of the vestibular
au Aq uaas pue paliodan uaaq seu di hal eraieig
cavity, are morphologically similar to the lips with
 author. Unilateral cleft lip repair is facilitated by using
which they are continuous.
the opposite half of the nose as a visual guideline for
A rich arterial and venous network supplies the
tissue realignment. Textbooks vary on the ideal time
skin, mucosa, and fibroelastic tissue of the lips and
to consider repair. Because cleft lip patients can eat
cheeks. The facial artery divides to form the superior
and drink without difficulty, the author prefers to wait
labial artery, inferior labial artery, and the angularis
until the patient is 5-6 months of age (Fig. 15-11). At
oris artery. The infraorbital artery contributes circula-
this age, tissues are better developed and sutures are
tion to the upper lip and cheek. The posterior, middle,
less likely to "cut-out." Owners should be made aware
and anterior mental arteries supplement circulation to
of the fact that most dogs will have a slight deviation
the anterior aspect of the lower lip. Because of this
 of the external nose toward the side of the cleftlip. The
tremendous collateral circulation, the larger flaps
upper lip on the affected side may be somewhat under-
developed for labial and buccal defects have a high
developed when compared to the opposite side. These
probability of survival when care is taken to incorpo-
cosmetic imperfections are less noticeable compared to
rate one or two branches of these vessels into the flap
the presenting labial defect; with successful closure,
base.
 owners are generally quite pleased with the overall
The parotid duct opens into the buccal cavity oppo-
surgical result.
lo renouad raddn ymoy a jo ure lepnen a a
shearing tooth. On occasion, it is necessary to excise
Oral Commissure Adoancement
this area during tumor removal. Although the duct
may be ligated, it can easily be preserved by relocating
Loss of a significant portion of the mandible, second-
the duct through a small mucosal incision, spatulating
ary to tumor resection or trauma, can result in loss of
its end and securing it to its new position with 4-0
lateral lingual support, causing a tendency for the
or 5-0 absorbable sutures, using a simple interrupted
patient's tongue to slip or loll to the side (Fig. 15-12).
 pattem. In cases of severe upper labial/nasal avulsion,
The tongue slides to the cormer of the mouth, displac-
sutures are used to reattach soft tissues and assure the
ing the buccal area caudally. Dogs usually adapt to this
nasal passages are properly realigned. Upward septal
 problem by learning to retract and lift their tongue to
and vomer avulsion will result in significant lateral
a variable degree. In some patients, prolonged expo-
instability of the nasal region. The paired palatine fis-
sure of the tongue can dry its epithelial surface, neces-
sures can be useful in stabilizing the avulsed septum
sitating periodic application of water. Drooling and
jasu oi Suuado lemeu e se Suaias Aq rauoa pue
the spillage of water and food during mastication also
 stabilizing sutures. Two suture loops can be preplaced
may be noted after hemi-mandibulectomy. It is best to
from the oral side of one fissure, into the septum/
discuss these potential complications with the owner
 vomer and back out the opposing foramen. The absorp-
prior to surgery.
tive sutures can be tied within the oral cavity to
improve stability. This is followed by suture apposi-
The author does not routinely perform this proce-
tion of the mucosal tear (Fig. 15-3).
dure with every mandibulectomy performed. It
Veterinarians should note that skin flaps can be
may be more useful in large breed dogs that have
 used as substitutes for large oral mucosal defects. The
greater lingual length and mass. Oral commissure
 ample loose skin in the facial/cervical area permits the
advancement can be performed at a later date for
 development of advancement and transposition flaps,
those dogs with persistent overexposure.
discussed in Chapter 11 (Fig. 15-10).
Facial Reconstruction
443
HG. 15-10 (A) Reconstruction of the upper lip after removal of a soft tissue sarcoma.
l po asq an  pn si ya d anss eo aa a ym pae aseq d au m 'de us e jo a 
flap to the remaining rostral labial border. Flap width equals the combined width of the labial mucosa and outer cutaneous defect.
(C) The dorsal border of the flap is sutured to the mucosal defect. The skin flap is then folded lengthwise, with the lower flap border
sutured to the upper limits of the cutaneous defect.
(D) Immediate postoperative view. Postoperative swelling and gravitational pull improved subsequent coverage of the partially
exposed left upper canine.
 The angles of the mouth (angularis oris) where the
Cheilopexy for Drooling
upper and lower lips join are called the oral commis-
sures. Resection of the labial border of the oral commis-
In certain breeds (St. Bernards, Great Pyrenees, etc.)
sure and a variable portion of the upper and lower
the overabundance of everted lower lip, rostral to the
labial borders will allow the surgeon to suture the
 oral commissures, can impair normal retention of
incised mucosal and cutaneous surfaces together This
saliva. Excessive drooling may result in moist derma-
creates a forward extension of the cheek as the oral
titis of the lower labial skin. When the dog shakes its
 commissure is advanced rostrally. In essence, a "sling
 head, many owners find long strands of saliva being
effect" is created to support the tongue within the
 distributed over their furniture and house guests to be
mouth. The length required to support the tongue
rather distasteful.
is estimated at the time of surgery, which may be one-
 Cheilopexy is a surgical technique designed to lift
half to two-thirds the length of the lower labial
and support the lower labial border by surgically
border.
attaching a portion of the everted lower lip to the
mucosa of the upper lip. This technique is reportedly
effective in reducing excessive drool. In patients with
C
11
9-s punoue sdi yap Suaedar spuauuoa Aeusou xoune au sop urejunou asauiag pio-yuoui-g e u di ya (v) ll-sl 'SH
months of age because the tissues are better able to retain sutures without tearing.
(B) Close-up view.
(C) Intraoperative view of the defect.
(D)Preplacement of sutures after creating the required surgical incisions to close the oronasal defect.
(E) Completion of the closure.
(F) View of the patient at suture removal. Note that the nose tends to tilt toward the side of the original defect in cleft lip patients.
This is due to loss of normal tissue support. As in this case, you may also note the upper lip on the involved side is somewhat
shorter dorsoventrally when compared to the opposite side. (See Plate 79.)
444
Facial Reconstruction
445
A
二
HG. 15-12 (A) Hemimandibulectomy for osteosarcoma in an
old English sheepdog.
(B, C) Front and side views of the dog. Without support from
the left mandible, the tongue deviates laterally. The mass of the
tongue displaces the oral commissure caudally. Most dogs will 
learn to retract their tongue to a variable degree; problematic
cases may benefit from oral commissure advancement (See
C
Plate 81).
nonunion mandibular fractures, cheilopexy can create
chronic pyodermas, the skin surface underlying the
a supportive sling to the affected side (see Plate 83).
crease or trough also requires removal to alleviate this
problem (see Plate 82).
Cheilopexy is not a commonly performed proce-
dure in veterinary practice. Most owners familiar
Suggested Readings
 with these breeds simply accept drooling as a part
of pet ownership. Owners also may be unaware of
Howard DR, Davis DG, Merkley DF, et al. 1974. Mucoperio-
cheilopexy as an option to control this problem.
steal flap techmique for cleft palate repair in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 165:352-354.
Brachycephalic Facial Fold Surgery
Pavletic MM. 1983. Nasal and rostral labial reconstruction in 
the dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 19:595-600.
uaaq sey soop oieudanauoenq u Aiagms pioy leroeg
Pavletic MM. 1987. Plastic surgery of the head. In Proceed-
 advocated for two reasons: (1) fur overlying the ridge
ings of the American Animal Hospital Association, 392-
(top) of a large skin fold that causes ventromedial
397. Lakewood, CO: AAHA.
 Pavletic MM. 1990. Reconstructive surgery of the lips and
corneal irritation/ulceration (keratitis) and (2) chronic
cheek. Vet Clin No Am 20:201-226.
face fold pyoderma (chronic intertriginous infection)
Salisbury SK. 1975. Oral cavity. In: Bojrab MJ, ed., Current
involving the crease or trough of a skin fold. One or
Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 151-159. Phila-
delphia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
two skin folds may be noted overlying the muzzle of
a given brachycephalic patient. Face folds may uni-
Smeak DD. 1989. Anti-drool cheiloplasty: clinical results in 6
dogs. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 25:181-185.
formly span the width of the face or partially dissipate
Stoll SG. 1975. Cheiloplasty. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Tech-
at the midmuzzle area.
niques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 286-292. Philadel-
Previous  veterinary  articles describe  complete
phia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
removal of the facial fold for these two conditions.
Swainson SW, Goring RL, deHaan JJ, et al. 1998. Reconstruc-
tion of a facial defect using the ear pinma as a composite
Unfortunately, this can negatively alter the normal
flap. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 34:399-403.
 appearance of the patient. Partial resection of the face
Yates G, Landon B, Edwards, G. 2007. Investigation and clini-
fold can correct these two face fold problems while still
cal application of a novel axial pattern flap for nasal and
maintaining the classic facial features of the patient. In
facial reconstruction in the dog. Austr Vet J 85:113-118.
446
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Repair of Lower Labial Avulsion
Plate 68
DESCRIPTION
Avulsion wounds of the lip most commonly occur along the gingival border of the lower incisors, although
jsou si uoisinae jenqel iamo suoan eou pue reouand juanepe aun anloau on Aepnen puaxa Aeu Aaul
commonly seen in cats, with the patient presenting with the lip and lower chin hanging beneath the
mandible.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Affer judicious debridement and copious pressure lavage with sterile saline, the lip is gently grasped
with skin hooks or Adson-Brown thumb forceps and elevated to the level of the incisor teeth.
(B) Wifh liffle or no soft tissue to which the lip can be sufured, horizontal matfress sufures are looped
around the intact incisors by driving the needle as close to the mandible as possible.
(C) If teeth are missing, small holes can be driven into the border of the mandible, using a K-wire or a
1/16-inch Steinmann pin to permit passage of the suture material.
(D) Absorbable or nonabsorbable 3-0 suture material may be used. A Penrose drain can be inserted through
a cutaneous stab incision to manage dead space. Drains are usually removed by the third day.
COMMENT S
 Because of the excellent collateral circulation to the lips, massive tissue sloughing is uncommon. Major skin
loss generally requires closure with a local skin flap.
From the author's experience, lower labial avulsions are more common in cats. They are usually the resulf
of the animal being struck from the rear by a vehicle, driving the head downward and forward into the
pavement or falling face forward from an elevated position. Although these injuries are rather gruesome to
Symphyseal fractures may be seen in conjunction with lower labial avulsion wounds. Bone reduction
forceps can stabilize the fracture, allowing cerclage wire (20- or 22-gauge) stabilization of the realigned
mandibles before suture repair of the avulsion wound.
Facial Reconstruction
447
Plate 68
448
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 69
Repair of Upper Lip Avulsion
DESCRIPTION
Avulsion of the upper lip is less common than lower labial avulsion injuries. The gingival border is pulled
free of the upper incisors. Exposure of the dorsal surface of the incisive bone is noted when the nasal
se uoenuasand peu uodn juaredde Aean aa jou Aeu punom aui pal Aua pue padsea si aen
the nasal cartilage can be avulsed with portions of the upper lip.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) After judicious debridement and copious pressure lavage, the lip is positioned in its appropriate
position.
(B) Absorbable horizontal mattress (3-0) sutures are looped around the intact incisors by driving the needle
as close to the incisive bone as possible. Small holes can be driven into the border of the mandible if
teeth are missing, using a K-wire or a 1/16-inch Steinmann's pin to permit passage of the suture
material. (See Plate 68, Repair of Lower Labial Avulsion).
(C) Sutures are tied to complete the closure.
COMMENT S
The causes of upper lip avulsion are identical to lower labial avulsion injuries. Upon impact, the nose is
driven caudally and dorsally, resulting in separation of the gingival border. Suturing the lip back into
posifion stabilizes the nasal cartilage and prevents it from being displaced by normal activities of the dog or
nostrils. As previously discussed, more severe avulsions, including the nasal septum, may require stabilizing
Fig. 15-3).
Facial Reconstruction
449
Plate 69
450
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Wedge Resection Technique
Plate 70
DESCRIP TION
Wedge resection entails full-thickness excision of a lip segment. The remaining labial borders are apposed
directly wifhout the use of release/relaxing incisions to facilitate tissue apposifion.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) The size and location of the excision are determined with particular attention to obtaining adequate
surgical margins in fhe resection of the neoplasm. A scalpel blade is used to incise through fhe entire
thickness of the lip.
(B) The labial margins are accurately aligned with the first suture to avoid creation of an offset (stair-step)
defect.
[esoonu aut ueai oi saae jesoonuqns aut u paneld ane sannins (o-e) aqeqnosqe paidnau aldus ()
surface.
(D) Additional sutures are used to realign subcutaneous tissues and fascia if necessary, prior to closure of
 the skin using 3-0 nonabsorbable suture material.
COM MENT S
Wedge resection is easy to perform, especially in the dog. Irregular defects or lacerations can be debrided
 and closed in this fashion. However, the surgeon should consider rectangular excision (see Plate 71) to
assure adequate tissue margins are obtained with malignant tumor excision.The mouth should be
manipulated intraoperatively to assure that a normal range of motion is maintained without excessive
tension on the incision.
Facial Reconstruction
451
Plate 70
452
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 71
Rectangular Resection Technique
DESCRIPTION
Rectangular resection entails full-thickness excision of a lip segment. The remaining labial borders are closed
in a Y fashion, unlike the linear closure achieved with a wedge resection.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The margins of the excision are determined with particular attention to obtaining adequate surgical
 margins when a neoplasm is removed. A scalpel blade is used to incise through the entire thickness of
the lip.
(B) Labial margins are accurately aligned with the first suture to avoid creation of an offset (stair-step)
defect.
(C) The surgeon may note the oral commissure advance forward during the closure.
(D) Simple interrupted absorbable (3-0) sutures are placed in the submucosa to realign the mucosal
surfaces, beginning in the upper corners of the defect. Closure progresses ventrally resulting in a Y
closure.
(E)  Addifional sutures are used to realign subcutaneous tissues and fascia as necessary, prior to closure of
 the skin using 3-0 nonabsorbable sutures.
COM MENT S
wedge resection. Wider surgical margins can be obtained around malignant tumors.The mouth should be
manipulated intraoperatively to assure that a normal range of motion is maintained wifthout excessive
tension on the incision. This technique can be combined with partial maxillectomy. Under these
circumstances, the upper mucosal margin is sutured to the palatal tissue to complete the closure of the
oronasal defect.
Facial Reconstruction
453
Plate 71
454
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 72
Full-Thickness Labial Advancement
Technique (Upper Lip)
DESCRIPTION
The labial advancement flap entails complete elevation of the entire thickness of the upper lip to maximize
anape ue annsse oi diau uan pue Aae jee noadns aui sioagp reqen iesoi ou juaauape si
blood supply is present during this surgical maneuver.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) This is an example of full-thickness rectangular excision of a malignant neoplasm of the upper lip.
(B) The upper lip is incised down to the mucosa. The scalpel blade is redirected slightly to leave a 5-mm
strip of mucosa along the gingival border. (The mucosal strip is better able to hold sutures than the
gum.) The length of the full-thickness labial advancement flap varies with the size and location of the
defect, as well as the flap length required to stretch over the wound without excessive tension.
(C) Any tension bands of tissue palpated as the flap is stretched must be carefully divided at the base of the
flap to avoid compromise to the blood supply. Note the rostral advancement of the oral commissure.
(D) A small, wedge-shaped area can be trimmed off the rostral border of this "composite"flap to better
(E) The mucosal surface is initially closed with 3-0 absorbable sutures in a simple interrupted pattern.
(F) The skin is closed in similar fashion with 3-0 nonabsorbable sutures. Tension sutures may be used in
any area under moderate tension, if necessary. The jaw should be manipulated during closure to ensure
 mobility is maintained without excessive tension placed on the surgical margins.
COM MENT S
The labial advancement flap is ideal for defects involving the rostral one-third of the upper lip. It can be
combined with partial maxillectomy if a neoplasm extends beyond the labial tissue. Elastic retraction of the
flap can cause unilateral distortion of the nasal planum. However, this deviation usually subsides over the
next 2 or 3 weeks.An Elizabethan collar is advisable until suture removal because a number of patients will
Facial Reconstruction
455
Plate 72
456
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Full-Thickness Labial Advancement
Plate 73
Technique (Lower Lip)
DESCRIPTION
Lower labial advancement entails mobilization of the lower lip to close rostral labial defects. The inferior
labial artery and vein help to assure an adequate blood supply is present during this surgical maneuver. The
lower lip is easier to mobilize and advance compared to the upper lip, with the mucosa/submucosa being
esi aziu oi panan jou si usu us hui e 'nsai e s aii anss usi noe al
advancement of the lip.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) This is an example of full-thickness labial excision of malignant neoplasm.
 A skin incision of variable length is created as the lower lip is advanced forward.
(C) Rostral traction on the lower lip determines the length of the incision required to advance the mucosa
and skin into the rostral defect.
(D) The mucosal incision is closed initially with 3-0 absorbable sufures. Offset placement of these sutures
(by taking a suture bite along the gingival reflection rostral to the labial mucosa) can facilitate forward
advancement of the lip into the defect. Sutures are used to recreate the labial aftachment at the
the lip to sag.
(E) A 1/4-inch Penrose drain is used to control dead space prior to closure of the skin with nonabsorbable
(3-0) sutures. In most cases, the drain is removed by day 3.
COMMENT S
Compared with upper labial advancement flaps, lower labial advancement flaps require less dissection. The
skin, mucosa, and interposing tissue of the lower lip are not as closely joined compared to those of the
upper lip; the inner elasticity of the skin of the lower lip enables the surgeon to advance it rostrally, without
creating a long skin incision comparable to the length made in the mucosal surface.As noted, care must be
taken to recreate the interdental attachment to prevent drooping of the lower lip. The lateral surface of the
mandible is completely exposed during this procedure in the event that adjunctive surgery is required on
this structure.
Facial Reconstruction
457
Plate 73
B
Skin
incision
458
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 74
Buccal Rotation Technique
DE SC RIP TION
The buccal rotation technique was developed for reconstruction of large upper lip defects in which
insufficient tissues are present for effective use of the labial advancement technique.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
sd ssod a ou s e go usxa i ssa- go adxa u si s ()
a durable 5-mm mucosal margin along the gingival border is useful for suture closure of the defect.
(B) After removal of a major portion of the upper lip, wound closure is assessed by grasping and rotating
the cheek margin 90 degrees.
(C) A portion of the labial border is excised of sufficient length for apposition to the rostral labial margin.
(D) Opposing gingival and labial surfaces are apposed with 3-0 absorbable sutures with an interrupted
patterm.
(E) Skin is apposed with simple interrupted sutures. Areas under tension are apposed with vertical mattress
 sutures. In this example, a half-buried horizontal mattress suture is used on the upper corner of the
flap.
COM MENT S
The buccal rotation technique is employed for reconstruction of large upper labial defects. The oral
commissure advances rostrally during this surgical maneuver. However, the facial asymmetry created is not
readily noticeable except by the more discriminating observer. This procedure also can be combined with
simultaneous excision of the regional dental arcade and maxilla for more extensive neoplastic processes.
Although it is possible to enlarge the advanced oral commissure by incising and suturing the
Facial Reconstruction
459
Plate 74
460
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Lower Labial Lift-Up Technique
Plate 75
DE SC RIP TION
The lower labial lift-up technique is used to remove masses involving the gingival and the ventral portion of
the lower lip. The upper margin of the lower lip can be preserved with excellent cosmetic results.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
(A) The lip is incised parallel to the labial border above the mass.
(B) The bipedicle labial flap created is lifted dorsally. The diseased tissue is excised.
(C) After removal of the mass, the mucosal margins are reapposed with simple interrupted absorbable
sutures.
(D) The skin is closed with simple interrupted sutures. A Penrose drain may be employed to control dead
space.
COM M E NT S
 This technique enables the surgeon to preserve the normal labial border for optimal cosmetic results.
 Caution must be exercised to assure adequate tissue margins are obtained when malignant tumors are
excised.
Facial Reconstruction
461
Plate 75
462
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 76
Upper Labial Pull-Down Technique
DESCRIPTION
al jo uood jesiop au ou puaxa Aeuoiseooo auoq suanepe pue 'eaiue eixeu jenael au jo soun
ansoxa peupe uqo in enus essaau aq Au d iesp ae go ud e go peaou d saddn
surgeon to retract or pull-down the upper lip.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A, B) Full-thickness excision of a dorsal labial lesion (dashed lines).
(C)
that removal of the dental arcade, maxilla, and adjacent skull may be necessary to obtain margins
 around infiltrative neoplasms.
(D)
The labial mucosa is sutured to the adjacent oral mucosal border after resection of the lesion. The
labial mucosa can be sutured to the palatal tissue, when tumor extension requires resection of the
adjacent facial bone and hard palate.
(E)
The skin is closed with a simple interrupted suture pattern. A drain may be inserted to control dead
space, if necessary.
COMME NT S
This technique permits the surgeon to preserve the labial margin and the majority of the upper lip. Caution
is warranted to assure that adequate tissue margins are obtained when resecting neoplasms.
Facial Reconstruction
463
Plate 76
464
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Labial/Buccal Reconstruction with
Plate 77
Inverse Tubed Skin Flap
DESCRIPTION
Occasionally, there is insufficient skin and/or mucosa available for closure of the lips or cheeks. This occurs
with the removal of wider diffuse neoplasms, extensive facial trauma, and those cases in which cancer
recurrence necessitates removal of additional tissue. Local transposifion flaps are particularly useful to close
the cutaneous surface; they also can be used to replace major mucosal defects involving the oral cavity.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)
This is an example of full-thickness buccal and upper labial defect after tumor resection.
(B)
Partial closure of the defect is achieved by apposing remaining borders of the upper and lower lip.
(C)
A local transposition flap is carefully measured for use in replacing the remaining mucosal defect.
Facial Reconstruction
465
Plate 77
466
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 77
(Continued)
(D, D2) A portion of the transposition flap is partially tubed in inverse fashion to pass the body of the flap
into the oral cavity for replacement of large mucosal defects of the cheek, lip, and adjacent palate
(D). Simple interrupted (3-0) absorbable sutures are used to secure the skin flap to the remaining
mucosal borders (D).
(E)
 The skin is advanced over the transposition flap and inverse tube segment. Note the narrow
opening of the epithelial lined skin tube (arrow). If necessary, this short, tubed segment can be
'h jeue pannsse Krqeuoseai si de aun ot uoezenisoau pue anaduoo si sueau uaum pasxa
4-6 weeks postoperatively.
C O M ME NT S
 Small gaps in the mucosal surface can heal by second intention, with the exposed dermal or muscular 
heal by second intention wifhout causing significant contraction, scarring, and distortion of the overlying
fissues. A skin flap can be used as a satisfactory substifufe for the mucosal lining. Skin flaps also have been
used successfully by the author to close oronasal fistulas when insufficient mucosa is available. This
technique also can be used for closure of defects after wide tumor resection that includes partial
maxillectomy (see Fig. 15-9).
Facial Reconstruction
467
Plate 77
D1
D2
468
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 78
Skin Flap for Upper Labial and Buccal
Replacement (Facial Axial Pattern Flap)
DESCRIPTION
Occasionally, major segments of the upper lip and adjacent cheek require resection for diffuse neoplasms. A
cutaneous transposiftion flap can be used to reconstruct the skin and mucosal surfaces simulfaneously. Yates,
Landon, and Edwards (2007) better defined the blood supply to this flap technique and created anatomic
 guidelines for flap development based on this study.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Wide resection of this neoplasm required excision of 75% of the upper lip and adjacent cheek.
(B) Standard guidelines for transposition flap development are used. In this example, the width of the flap
ideally should be twice the width of the lip excised, since"half" of the flap is required to replace the
mucosal defect.
 Defined guidelines for outlining the flap are as follows: the dorsal border of the outlined flap parallels
the ventral border of the zygomatic arch, and the ventral outlined border of the flap parallels the lower
border of the mandible. The base of the flap incorporates the oral commissure and the adjacent upper/
lower labial margins. Branches of the angularis oris vessels and interconnecting cutaneous vasculature
of the labial vessels supply the base of this flap. Take care to preserve these vessels at the approach to
  aunsp pnsea au aa pauap s yua dee pun unp d s go aseq a
base of the flap to the rostral facial defect. Flap length is normally within the defined limits of this flap
design, using the vertical ear canal as the anatomic landmark as a general guideline for flap length.
(C) The upper border of the replacement flap is sutured to the remaining borders of the mucosa with 3-0
absorbable suture material, using a simple interrupted pattern.
 nonabsorbable suture material. A Penrose drain may be inserted prior to completion of the closure.
COMMENTS
other techniques discussed in this chapter. It can be combined with partial maxillectomy when more
extensive tumors are encountered. Flap dimensions can be tailored to the defect based on the general
guidelines provided. The skin serves as an adequate replacement for oral mucosa, although use of mucosa is
preferable whenever possible.The flap also may be used to close large cutaneous facial defects within its arc
of rotation. Yates, Landon, and Edwards (2007) confirmed the efficacy of this technique for canine facial
reconstruction, identifying the rich vasculature entering the base of this flap, including the angularis oris
of the flap has collateral support from branches of the tranverse facial artery and masseteric artery: these
branches are sacrificed during elevation of this flap.
By definition, this skin flap qualifies as an axial pattern flap based on branches of the facial artery (facial
axial pattern flap).
Facial Reconstruction
469
Plate 78
470
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 79
Cleft Lip Repair (Primary Cleft,
Cheiloschisis, Harelip)
DESCRIPTION
A cleft rostral to the incisive foramina and involving the lip is termed cleft lip. Cleft lip can vary in depth and
severity. Most cases are unilateral. Cosmetic results in the dog depend upon accurate tissue apposition in
on aqduon uaned ymoa u peuou e pue 'uoeuauid qeuou aus jey uiuu on apo
the opposite side.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
e se aaas d pue aso an o ju asoo ai aan usog e u aneid g iranen ()
guidelines.
(B) Reflection of lips demonstrating oronasal communication. Malaligned incisors are occasionally present
and may require extraction to facilitate closure.A mucosal incision is created (dashed line): 3-0 to 4-0
absorbable sutures are preplaced. When tied, the linear incision is folded in half to close the oronasal
communication.
(C) Upon closure of the oral cavity from the nasal cavity, the epithelial borders of the labial/nasal cleft are
excised.
(D) The labial mucosal surfaces are sufured with 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable sutures. The intermediate layer is
closed with buried interrupted sutures in similar fashion. Accurate alignment of the labial border is
simple interrupted nonabsorbable sutures. Vertical mattress sutures may be alternated with simple
interrupted sutures to offset regional tissue tension.
COMMENT S
human are completely unnecessary in the dog. There are different cosmetic considerations and anatomic
variations between the face of the human and dog that obviate the necessity of more complicated closure
options in most cases.
Facial Reconstruction
471
Plate 79
472
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Rostral Labial Pivot Flaps
Plate 80
DESCRIPTION
With resection of the rostal portion of the upper lip, closure can be accomplished with labial advancement
 regional tissue tension and which technique can more easily restore function with reasonable cosmetic
results.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Neoplasm involving the rostral labial area.
(B) Following full-thickness resection, the lower margins are rotated dorsally (arrows).
(C) The opposing labial borders are resected in preparation for closure (dashed lines). The length resected
(D) Mucosal borders are sutured, using 3-0 (slowly absorbable) sutures in a simple interrupted fashion. The
dorsal labial mucosal border is sutured to the mucosa reflecting off the gingiva, followed by apposition 
of the opposing labial mucosal margins.
(E) Completion of the closure.
COMMENT S
A single pivot flap can be used for unilateral defects encroaching on the midline of the upper lip or
bilaterally for centrally located defects as noted in this plate.
Like other facial and oral procedures, an appropriate-sized Elizabethan collar should be used to minimize
pawing or rubbing at the surgical area postoperatively.
Facial Reconstruction
473
Plate 80
B
D
474
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 81
Oral Commissure Advancement
Technique
DESCRIPTION
 Oral commissure advancement is occasionally used to maintain the position of the tongue after hemi-
mandibulectomy. It can be performed at the time of hemi-mandibulectomy or postoperatively as an elective
unilaterally or bilaterally, often in older patients wifh nonunion mandibular fractures secondary to advanced
dental disease or trauma.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) After hemi-mandibulectomy, the length and mass of the tongue has caused it to persistently shift out of
the oral cavity. The patient may not have adapted to maintaining its tongue primarily in its mouth.
(B) Partial resection of the upper and lower labial margins, including the oral commissure. General
guidelines for the length of the excision can be determined by the length of the tongue relative to the
length of the labial borders. In general, the caudal one-half to two-thirds of the upper and lower
margins may be resected to create adequate lateral support of the tongue. The base of the lingual
 an g   as e se pasn a  o (e na 
required for commissure advancement to support the tongue.
(C) Closure is accomplished by suturing the upper and lower labial mucosal margins with 3-0 (slowly
absorbable) sutures in a simple interrupted pattern.
ed pndnu ands e usn es paso s us a (a)
COMMENT S
The dog has the remarkable ability to vary the posiftion of the oral commissure: commissure retraction
a aaap usudns e oi sdi samoi pue saddn ae go yual an asodxa pue unans ueo (suus auuen,)
decision whether or not to include this procedure at the time of hemi-mandibulectomy is based on the
preference of the surgeon. It may be most useful in large dogs, where the overall size of the tongue may
predispose them to lingual deviation. As noted, it also is used in older dogs that may have mandibular
instability secondary to nonunion mandibular fractures. In the case of bilateral mandibular fractures, oral
commissure advancement creates a supportive sling. This improves the comfort of the pet, their cosmetic
appearance, and enables the patient to eat and drink more effectively.
Facial Reconstruction
475
Plate 81
476
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 82
Brachycephalic Facial Fold Correction
DESCRIPTION
Brachycephalic dogs normally have one major facial fold; there can be a notably smaller facial fold rostral to
the larger fold, adjacent to the dorsal nasal surface. The largest fold may uniformly cross the face or flatten
to a variable degree over the middorsal nasal surface. The rostral "trough"or"valley"of the large skin fold
occasionally is the location of dermatitis (intertrigo). Surgery focuses on removal of this trough and the
lower, rostral portion of the largest skin fold.
There are occasions where the"ridge" of the larger skin fold and fur will rub on the patient's eyes,
causing corneal irritation or ulceration. Surgical removal of a portion of the ridge can eliminate contact with
the eye. This also can be accomplished by removing the rostral trough and a portion of the adjacent ridge
 Upon incisional closure, the resultant linear scar is recessed in the trough or valley for a satisfactory
functional and cosmetic outcome.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) In this example, the patient has a prominent facial fold. There is a pyoderma involving the rostral
trough of this large fold of skin.
(B) Elevation of the rostral surface of the fold, exposing the infected intertriginous zone. The dashed line
can be fibrotic, and its resection can be problematic.) A scalpel blade may be needed to tangentially
"shave" or resect the skin surface in preparation for closure. (Electrocautery is needed to control the
multiple small bleeding vessels when resecting chronic inflammatory tissue.)
appearance of the dog. The scar is less conspicuous, residing in the depression between the two skin
folds.
COMMENT S
unfortunate result of dramatically changing the facial appearance of the pet. It also is unnecessary: the above
reduction technique effectively corrects the two problems occasionally noted wifth prominent facial folds
(intertrigo and corneal irritation) and better conceals the surgical scar.
Facial Reconstruction
477
Plate 82
478
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 83
Cheilopexy Technique for Drooling
DESCRIPTION
This technique, described by Stoll, can be used to reduce excessive drooling in the larger dogs possessing
redundant labial tissue. It is a simple linear "labial pexy" of the lower labial border to the upper labial/buccal
mucosal area. As a result, it lifts the lower lip, thereby creating a more effective lower labial retention barrier
as saliva accumulates. In turn, the dog can swallow the saliva rather that constantly drooling on the
neighboring environment.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The lower labial border can be assessed with the patient under anesthesia. Forceps are used to grasp
the caudal aspect of the lower lip and elevate it dorsally, to get a general idea of where to create the
cheilopexy. The mouth is opened to assure that range of motion is reasonably preserved and excessive
tension is avoided after completing the cheilopexy.
To facilitate locating the appropriate site, a line can be drawn from the medial canthus to the oral
commissure (dashed line). A full-thickness labial incision is initiated immediately cranial to this
guideline: the incision is 3-5 cm dorsal to the upper labial border. This incision itself is 2-4cm long and
is parallel to the labial margin. A comparable incision is made in the lower labial margin below the
upper labial/buccal incision (arrow). This incision is dissected open to facilitate suturing; alternatively, a
scalpel blade can be used to resect the immediate labial border. A skin hook or long-handled forceps
can be used to lift the lower labial incision through the full-thickness upper labial incision.
(B) The mucosal incision of the lower lip is sutured to the labial mucosal border of the dorsal labial incision
with a series of interrupted (slowly absorbable) 3-0 sutures. Large suture bites help assure adequate
security of this cheilopexy.
(C) Affter suturing the two mucosal incisions together, the dorsal skin incision is sufured to complete the
procedure.
COM MENT S
Properly positioned, the above suture closure should maintain the cheilopexy until healing is complete. Only
the skin sutures require removal. More elaborate mattress suture techniques are noted in the veterinary
literature and also are acceptable. Postoperatively, wrinkling of the cheek may be noted, but normally
flattens over time. Local dermatitis of the lower labial skin overlapped by the upper labial mucosa appears
not to be a serious problem in these patients. Should there any problem with cheilopexy, reversal of this
procedure would be easy to perform.
Jo ped peou e se suop suaqun an ydaooe Anaue shop asaun go siaumo pue anbuuoan sun go
owning a particular breed (St. Bernard, mastiffs, Newfoundlands, etc.). It may be the first-time owner,
unpleasantly surprised by this problem, who is more receptive to a discussion of corrective cheilopexy by the
 attending veterinarian.
Facial Reconstruction
479
Plate 83
16
Myocutaneous
sFlaps and
Muscle Flaps
Introduction482
Myocutaneous Flaps  482
Muscle Flaps  482
PLATES
 Plate 84: Latissimus Dorsi Myocutaneous Flap  490
Plate 85: Cutaneous Trunci Myocutaneous Flap
492
Plate 86: Latissimus Dorsi Muscle Flap 494
Plate 87: External Abdominal Oblique Muscle Flap 496
Plate 88: Caudal Sartorius Muscle Flap 498
Plate 89: Cranial Sartorius Muscle Flap
500
Plate 90: Temporalis Muscle Flap  502
Plate 91: Transversus Abdominis Muscle Flap 504
Plate 92: Semitendinosus Muscle and Myocutaneous Flaps  506
Plate 93: Flexor Carpi Ulnaris Muscle Flap  508
481
482
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
The more superficial muscles in the body are best
used for myocutaneous flap development. A vascular
/yocutaneous (musculocutaneous) flaps are flaps
pedicle sufficient to maintain circulation is required to
Iin which a skeletal muscle and the overlying
facilitate rotation of a muscle into potential defects
within the arc of rotation. Free flap transfer using
skin are elevated simultaneously. In humans, the intact
 muscle circulation supplies blood to the skin through
microvascular surgical technique would enable myo-
cutaneous flap placement to distantlocations, although
musculocutaneous arteries exiting the muscle surface.
there are far simpler techniques to close wounds in
In dogs and cats, direct cutaneous arteries exit the
muscle to supply the overlying skin.
most clinical cases.
 Muscle flaps and, to a lesser degree, myocutaneous
    r s  s
MUSCLE FLAPS
structive surgery. Several individual muscles in the
dog and cat are expendable without sacrificing regional
Individual skeletal muscles can be used to repair body
function. These same muscles could be pivoted into an
defects beneath the skin secondary to trauma or the
adjacent defect tethered by a vascular pedicle capable
 of maintaining circulation to the muscle unit using
surgical removal of damaged or diseased tissue.
basic surgical instrumentation. Muscular/fascial flaps
Muscle-tendon units have been transposed to treat
paralysis of the extensors of the carpus (radial nerve)
have been advocated for perineal hernia repair, soft
tissue coverage, and wound closure; and for contribut-
and tarsus (peroneal nerve). Other muscles have been
 ing circulation to fractures, promoting bone healing.
used for hernia repair including the transversus
abdominis muscle for closure of diaphragmatic hernias,
and combating infection. Muscle-tendon units can be
the external abdominal oblique muscle for abdominal
transplanted to replace essential muscle units damaged
hernia repair, the internal obturator and superficial
or destroyed.
 gluteal muscles for perineal hernia repair, the tempora-
Myocutaneous flaps have enjoyed considerable
lis muscle flap for facial defects involving the canine
popularity in human reconstructive surgery because
of their versatility and potential ability to transfer large
orbit, the rectus femoris and cranial sartorius muscle
flaps for trochanteric ulcers, and semitendinosus muscle
skin segments in a single staged procedure. The limited
flaps for ventral perineal hernia repair and for creation
amounts of loose skin available and the limited number
of direct cutaneous arteries have supported the need
of an anal sling. Flaps composed of intercostal muscle,
diaphragm, sternocephalicus muscle, and sternothy-
for myocutaneous flap transfer in humans. In contrast,
roideus muscle have been used to correct strictures
the dog and cat have considerable amounts of loose
skin located over the trunk, and a number of direct
and defects of the esophagus. The author has used the
 sternothyroideus muscle for closure of entry and exit
cutaneous arteries are present for axial pattern flap
bullet wounds of the canine larynx. Muscle/fascia
development. In most cases, local flaps, axial pattern
flaps, and free grafts can be used without resorting to
strips from the biceps femoris or deep gluteal muscle
 myocutaneous flaps and the more demanding micro-
have been used as padding between the pelvis and
femoral shaft after femoral head and neck ostectomy.
vascular surgery occasionally used in humans to trans-
Muscles are capable of contributing additional circula-
fer them to distant locations.
tion to ischemic areas that are the result of trauma,
poor collateral circulation, or radiation damage.
MYOCUTANEOUSFLAPS
Muscle Flap Circulation
Development of a myocutaneous flap in the dog
and Classification
requires the presence of direct cutaneous arteries
exiting the muscle surface to supply the overlying
Individual muscles in the body have different vascular
skin. Secondary myocutaneous flaps have been inves-
supplies: Mathes and Nahai (1982) have developed a
tigated experimentally in dogs by suturing skin onto
classification system for muscles, based on their vas-
 an underlying muscle, which is later elevated and
cular anatomy. There are five major vascular patterns
transferred to the recipient site once circulation has
for muscles.
been established between the muscle and skin "island."
These secondary myocutaneous flaps have the major
Type I. One vascular pedicle. Type I muscles
disadvantage of requiring two-stage development and
can be elevated and pivoted on their
transfer.
dominant pedicle. Example: Rectus
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
483
femoris muscle based on the lateral
vascular anastomoses within the muscle occur when a
circumflex femoral vessels.
major artery connects with another without changing
 caliber. Choke anastomoses are the most common, and
Type ff. Dominant vascular pedicle(s) near the
refers to areas where arteries unite by means of a
origin or insertion of the muscle, with
plexus of two or more reduced-caliber arteries (arteri-
minor pedicle supplying the muscle belly.
oles). As the terminology denotes, blood flow is some-
Type Il muscles are likely to survive
despite ligation of the minor pedicles
what more restricted through choke anastomoses. For
during elevation of the muscle, based on
example, the angiosome adjacent to a dominant pedicle
is likely to survive after ligation of its segmental blood
the dominant vascular pedicle. Example:
supply via collateral circulation passing through choke
Cranial sartorius muscle, based on the
anastomoses. Sacrifice of the segmental blood supply
superficial circumflex iliac vessels.
to more distant angiosomes of a muscle is more
Type Ill. Two dominant pedicles, supplying
likely to result in muscle necrosis: perfusion through
approximately half the muscle belly.
the more distant choke anastomoses becomes increas-
Division of one vascular pedicle may or
ingly tenuous. However, for reliable clinical transfer,
may not compromise that portion of the
research is needed to confirm muscle flap survival
muscle supplied by the ligated pedicle:
after sacrificing selective vascular pedicles.
research is required to determine viability
 Eight muscle flaps for clinical use will be discussed
of individual muscles in this category.
in this chapter, including the latissimus dorsi muscle,
Example: Rectus femoris muscle based
external abdominal oblique muscle, caudal sartorius
on the caudal gluteal artery and vein
muscle, cranial sartorius muscle, temporalis muscle,
proximally and the distal caudal femoral
 flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, semitendinosus muscle,
artery distally.
and transversus abdominis muscle.
Type IV. Smaller segmental vascular pedicles 
supplying the muscle between the origin
Latissimus Dorsi Muscle
and insertion. Survival may be
inconsistent, depending on the vascular
The latissimus dorsi muscle is a flat triangular muscle
pedicles ligated: research is required to
overlying the dorsal half of the lateral thoracic wall in
determine viability of individual muscles
the dog; it is the broadest of the skeletal muscles, with
in this category. Example: Caudal
 the exception of the cutaneous trunci muscle. It begins
sartorius muscle based on a branch of
as a wide tendinous leaf from the superficial leaf of the
the saphenous artery and medial
lumbodorsal fascia associated with the spinous proc-
saphenous vein.
esses of the lumbar vertebrae and the last seven or
Type V. One dominant vascular pedicle
eight thoracic vertebrae. It arises muscularly from the
located at the insertion of the muscle,
last two or three ribs. Muscle fibers converge toward
the shoulder, and the cranial border of the muscle lies
with segmental pedicles entering near
under the trapezius thoracis muscle where it covers
the origin. The entire muscle is expected
the caudal angle at the scapula. The apical end of the
to survive based on the dominant
muscle encroaches upon the dorsal border of the deep
pedicle. Muscle survival, based on the
segmental vascular pedicles alone, is
pectoral muscle, ending in an aponeurosis medially on
 questionable and would require research
the triceps muscle.
to determine individual viability of a type
The thoracodorsal and lateral thoracic arteries
V muscle. Example: Latissimus dorsi
supply the dorsal and ventral portions of the latis-
simus dorsi muscle. Branches of these vessels emerge
myocutaneous flap based on the
from the muscle surface to supply a portion of the
thoracodorsal artery and vein.
cutaneous trunci muscle and the skin as short, direct
Preservation of muscle function and bulk will
cutaneous arteries. The thoracodorsal artery also sends
depend upon preservation of the blood supply as well
a large direct cutaneous artery to the skin dorsally
as muscle innervation. The term angiosome describes a
caudal to the scapula. This vessel joins the skin after
block of tissue (muscle or a given region, including
 passing through the craniodorsal portion of the latis-
bone, skin, fascia, etc.) that is supplied by a regional
simus dorsi muscle, caudal to the long head of the
artery and vein (venae comitantes). Within a given
triceps muscle.
muscle, there may be various angiosomes that are
The intercostal arteries also supply segmental
based on vessels supplying these specific areas. True
branches to the dorsal portion of the latissimus dorsi
FIG. 16-1 See legend on opposite page.
484
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
485
 muscle and overlying cutaneous trunci muscle. These
originates in the thoracolumbar fascia along the ilio-
branches perforate the latissimus dorsi muscle to
 costalis muscle. Ventrally and caudally, the aponeuro-
 supply the cutaneous trunci muscle and overlying skin
ses of the two components contribute to the external
as the proximal lateral cutaneous branches of the
rectus fascia, the extermal inguinal ring, and the pre-
intercostal arteries. The distal lateral cutaneous
pubic tendon. The crarnial branch of the cranial abdom-
branches of the intercostal arteries emerge below the
 inal artery supplies the middle zone of the lateral
ventral border of the latissimus dorsi muscle to supply
 abdominal wall and is accompanied by the cranial
the regional overlying skin (Fig. 16-1).
hypogastric nerve and a satellite vein. The deep branch
of the deep circumflex artery anastomoses with the
cranial and caudal abdominal arteries and is the main
Cutaneous Trunci Muscle
supply to the caudodorsal quarter of the abdominal
 The cutaneous trunci muscle is a derivative of the pec-
wall. It, too, is accompanied by a satellite vein and is
 toralis profundus and forms a thin leaf covering most
joined by the lateral cutaneous femoral nerve. This
of the dorsal, lateral, and ventral walls of the abdomen
versatile muscle flap is technically easy to elevate and
in the dog. It begins in the caudal gluteal region, with
transfer (Figs. 16-2, 16-3, 16-4).
muscle fibers fanming cranially and ventrally. It ends
in the axilla, where it is closely associated with the
uderlying latissimus dorsi muscle and the caudal
Cranial Sartorius Muscle
border of the deep pectoral muscle. The cutaneous
The cranial sartorius muscle is a long, flat, straplike
 trunci muscle causes the skin to shiver in response to
muscle, arising on the iliac crest and lumbodorsal
external irritants over the trunk. Circulation to the
fascia. It extends to the medial surface of the thigh to
cutaneous trunci muscle is from small muscular
 branches and direct cutaneous arteries supplying the
pass into the medial femoral fascia above the patella.
Vascular injections have demonstrated a single major
overlying skin. Anatomic studies demonstrated that
vascular pedicle present at the proximal one-third of
two to four short, direct, cutaneous branches of the
the muscle. This vascular pedicle is a branch of the
thoracodorsal artery perforate the latissimus dorsi
femoral artery and vein, and enters all muscle speci-
 muscle caudal to the border of the triceps muscle and
mens along its caudal border (Fig. 16-5).
supply the cutaneous trunci and overlying skin. The
subdermal plexus of the skin is closely associated with
the cutaneous trunci muscles. Surgically elevating the
Caudal Sartorius Muscle
skin and panmiculus musculature together, by under-
mining below this muscle layer, helps preserve their
The caudal sartorius muscle lies close beside the cranial
circulatory relationship.
belly on the medial surface of the thigh. It arises from
the bony ridge between the two ventral spines of the
External Abdominal Oblique Muscle
ilium. Distally, it runs over the medial surfaces of the
vastus medialis and stifle joint, where it forms an
 The extermal abdominal oblique muscle is a long, flat
aponeurosis that blends with that of the gracilis muscle.
muscle, with fibers directed caudoventrally. It consists
Vascular injections have demonstrated a segmental
of costal and lumbar components. The costal compo-
blood supply with a dominant vascular pedicle off the
nent originates segmentally from the fourth or fifth rib
saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein at the
through the thirteenth rib. The lumbar component
distal third of the muscle belly (Fig. 16-5).
HG. 16-1 (A, B) Resection of multiple ribs to remove a chondrosarcoma.
(C) The latissimus dorsi muscle reflected backward prior to placement into the thoracic defect.
au usu sasn sauoi ou soune au Kepoi 'de aosnu aul jo uoedde ot sod paap au ueds ot pasn sem ysau xae (a)
muscle alone, placed under slight tension during suturing, spans large defects quite satisfactorily.
(E) Postoperative view of the dog. Slight cavitation is noted, although clinically these patients have no issues breathing. Some
paradoxical movement of the muscle can be noted over the first few postoperative days.
 HG. 16-2 (A) llumination of an elevated external abdominal oblique muscle illustrating the cranial abdominal artery and vein.
(B) A 10 × 10-cm defect created in the ventrolateral abdominal wall.
(C) The overlapping base of the external abdominal oblique muscle flap is sutured to the dorsal border of the defect.
(D) Close-up view of the sutured flap base. Care is taken not to disturb the cranial abdominal vasculature.
(E) Closure is completed by suturing the remaining three sides of the muscle flap into the defect.
(F) Completion of the surgery. An access incision can facilitate the caudodorsal elevation of the external abdominal oblique muscle.
486
HG. 16-3 (A) Removal of a sarcoma involving the caudal third of the thorax in a cat.
(B) The large defect exposes the left caudal lung lobe and abdominal cavity.
(C, D) Unlike in Figure 16-2, The diaphragm was sutured to the cranial border of the internal abdominal oblique and transversus
muscle layer, thereby closing the abdominal cavity. Note the caudal access incision with the Weitlaner tissue retractor.
(E) The external abdominal oblique muscle separates from the underlying interabdominal oblique with minimal dissection.
(F) The muscle is pivoted into the surgical site.
487
488
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
G
FIG. 16-3 Continued (G) The muscle is sutured to the remaining thoracic wall and adjacent soft tissues.
(H) Completion of the surgery. The patient made a complete recovery.
FIG. 16-4 (A) Resection of sarcoma involving the left lateral
thorax and abdomen. (B) Diaphragm advancement to close the
thorax. (C) Forward rotation of the external abdominal oblique
C
muscle to close the lateral abdominal wall defect, without the
need of synthetic mesh.
Miscellaneous Muscle
abdominis muscle (large diaphragmatic defects) are
Flap Techniques
less commonly used in wound repair due to their loca-
tion and the relative infrequency of problematic
wounds in their arc of rotation. Nonetheless, these
The temporalis muscle flap (orbital defects), semitend-
techniques can be useful for those occasional defects
inosus muscle (upper hind limb and perineal defects),
in which woumd healing and closure are particularly
flexor carpi ulnaris (carpal defects), and transversus
challenging.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
489
HG. 16-5 (A) Elevation of the cranial sartorius
muscle. (B) Elevation of the caudal sartorius
muiscle.
Suggested Readings
patterm flap in a domestic short hair cat. J Fet Med Surg
5:241-244.
Liptak JM, Brebner NS. 2006. Hemidiaphragmatic recon-
Alexander LG, Pavletic MM, Engler SJ. 1991.Abdominal wall
stuction with a transversus abdominis muscle flap after
reconstruction with a vascular extermal abdominal oblique
resection of a solitary diaphragmatic mesothelioma in a
myofascial flap. Vet Surg 20:379-384.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 228:1204-1208.
Bennett D, Vaughn LC. 1976. The use of muscle relocation
Mathes SJ, Nahai F. (1982). Vascular anatomy of muscle: clas-
techniques in the treatment of peripheral nerve injuries in
dogs and cats. J Sm Anim Pract 17:99-108.
Clinicat Applications for Muscle and Muscutocutaneous Flaps,
Bentley JF, Henderson RA, Simpson ST. 1991. Use of a tem-
16-94. St Louis, MO: CV Mosby.
 poralis muscle flap in reconstruction of the calvarium and
Pavletic MM. 1990. Introduction to myocutaneous and
orbital rim in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 27:463-465.
muscle flaps. 1990. Vet Clin No Am 20:127-146.
Chambers JN, Purinton PT, Allen SW, et al. 1998. Flexor carpi
Pavletic MM. 1993. Pedicle grafts. In: Slatter DH, ed. Textbook
ulnaris muscle flap for reconstruction of distal forelimb
of Small Anirmat Surgery. 3rd ed., 292-321. Philadelphia, PA:
injuries in two dogs. Vet Surg 27:342-347.
WB Saunders.
Chambers JN, Purinton PT, Allen SW, Moore JL. 1990. Clas-
Pavletic MM, Kostolich M, Koblik P, Engler S. 1987. A com-
sification and anatomic categorization of the vascular pat-
parison of the cutaneous trunci myocutaneous flap and
terms to the pelvic limb muscles in dogs. I Arm Vet Res
latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap in the dog. Vet Surg
51:305-313.
16:283-293.
Chambers JN, Purinton PT, Moore JL, Allen SW. 1990. Treat-
 Peterson SL, Gourley IM. 1989. Temporal muscle fascial flap
ment of trochanteric ulcers with cranial sartorius and
for temporomandibular joint luxation in a dog. I Am Anim
rectus femoris muscle flaps. Vet Surg 19:424-428.
Hosp Assoc 25:186-188.
Chambers JN, Rawlings CA. 1991. Applications of a semi-
Philibert D, Fowler JD. 1996. Use of muscle flaps in recon-
structive surgery.
Vet
199:84-86.
18:395-405.
Furmeaux RW, Hudson MD. 1976. Autogenous muscle flap
Puerto DA,Aroonson LR. 2004. Use of a semitendinosus myo-
repair of a diaphragmatic hermia. Fet Pract 6:20-24.
cutaneous flap for soft-tissue reconstruction of a grade IIIB
Halfacree ZJ, Baines SJ, Lipscomb VJ, et al. 2007. Use of a lat-
 open tibial fracture ina dog. Vet Surg 33:629-635.
issimus dorsi myocutaneous flap for one-stage reconstruc-
Purinton PT, Chambers JN, Moore JL. 1998. Identification
tion of the thoracic wall after en bloc resection of primary
and categorization of the vascular patterms to muscles of
rib chondrosarcoma in five dogs. Vet Surg 36:587-592.
the thoracic limb, thorax, and neck of dogs. AM J Vet Res 
Hardy EM, Kolata RJ, Earley TD, et al. 1983. Evaluation of
53:1435-1445.
intermal obturator muscle transposition in treatment of
Sylvestre AM, Weinstein MJ, Popovitch CA, Brockman DJ.
perineal hermia in dogs. Vet Surg 12:69-72.
1997. The sartorius muscle flap in the cat: an anatomic
Helphrey ML. 1982. Abdominal flap graft for repair of
study and two case reports. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
chronic diaphragmatic hernia in the dog. I An Vet Med
33:91-96.
Assoc 181:791-793.
Tomlinson J, Presnell KR. 1981. Use of the temporalis muscle
Lesser AS, Soliman SS. 1980. Experimental evaluation of
flap in the dog. Vet Surg 10:77-79.
tendon transfer for the treatment of sciatic nerve paralysis
Weinstein MJ, Pavletic MM, Boudrieau RJ. 1988. Caudal sar-
in the dog. Vet Surg 9:72-73.
torius muscle flap in the dog. Vet Surg 17:203-210.
Lester S, Pratschke K. 2003. Central hemimaxillectomy and
Weinstein MJ, Pavletic MM, Boudrieau RJ. 1989. Cranial sar-
reconstruction using a superficial temporal artery axial
torius muscle flap in the Dog. Vet Surg 18:286-291.
490
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Latissimus Dorsi Myocutaneous Flap
Plate 84
DESCRIPTION
The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap simultaneously transfers both muscle and skin to close a variety of
defects within its arc of rotation.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) Under general anesthesia, the patient's thorax is completely clipped and prepared for surgery. The dog
underlying body mass. The forelimb is placed in relaxed extension, perpendicular to the trunk.
The dorsal flap border (A) is drawn wifth a marking pen from a point ventral to the acromion (1),
caudal to the border of the triceps muscle (below the origin of the thoracodorsal direct cutaneous artery)
(2), and extending to the level of the head to the 13th rib (3). The ventral border of the flap (B) extends
from the forelimb skin fold caudal to the lower triceps muscle's border (the lower third of the length of
the humerus) (4), and extends caudodorsally to the 13th rib, parallel to the first line (5). The
jesiop aut uof ot iapioq q yiet aut jo jaaal au susn Aq umep si de aul jo () apioq esopopne
and ventral flap lines.
(B) The ventral skin flap border is incised initially, and the isolated ventral border of the latissimus dorsi
muscle is elevated. The skin flap incision is extended, and a latissimus dorsi muscle flap of a width
equal to that of the overlying skin is elevated. As the muscle is elevated from the thoracic wall, the
proximal lateral intercostal vessels are isolated, ligated, and divided below the latissimus dorsi muscle to
complete the flap elevation. In this example, a bridge incision is created between the donor and
recipient beds to facilitate transfer of the flap wifhout partial tube formation.
(C) The flap is sutured into position. Penrose drains or closed suction units are used to obliterate dead
space at the donor and recipient sites.
COMMENT S
Careful preoperative measurements are necessary to ensure that the flap will satisfactorily cover the defect.
Note that the length of the flap decreases the more the flap is rotated. Although the latissimus dorsi
myocutaneous flap is thicker, less pliable, and less elastic than the adjacent cutaneous frunci myocutaneous
flap and adjacent thoracodorsal axial pattern flap, it is capable of extending down the forelimb to a variable
degree, depending on the patient's body conformation. The thoracodorsal axial pattern flap and cutaneous
trunci myocutaneous flaps are better suited for skin defects, whereas the latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap
with its greater bulk, is better suited for thoracic wall defects in which the simulfaneous reconstruction of
the chest with muscle and skin is highly desirable.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
491
Plate 84
492
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 85
Cutaneous Trunci
Myocutaneous Flap
D E SC R IP T IO N
The cutaneous trunci myocutaneous flap is similar in shape and design to the latissimus dorsi myocutaneous
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
(A) The general outline for elevation of the cutaneous trunci myocutaneous flap is identical to that for the
latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap (see Plate 84). However, elevation of this flap is confined to the
loose areolar fascial plane beneath the cutaneous trunci muscle
(B) The skin is incised down to the level of the cutaneous trunci muscle, in a fashion similar to elevation of
the latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap. Branches of the proximal lateral intercostal direct cutaneous
unp uisp pue  aan asnu sp snsse au jo anns aun hra (sua p) sa
flap elevation. A bridge incision is used in this example to facilitate placement of the myocutaneous flap
(dashed lines).
(C) Penrose drains or closed suction units are used at the donor and recipient sites to obliterate dead space
during flap transfer and recipient bed closure.
COMMENT S
Careful preoperative measurement is necessary to ensure that the flap will satisfactorily cover the defect.
Note that as the flap length is reduced, the more the flap is rotated. Although flap size and coverage are
similar to those of the thoracodorsal axial patfern flap, the author has safely developed longer thoracodorsal
axial pattern flaps in the dog, when necessary. Clinical experience, size of the flap required to cover the skin
defect, and the ease of flap transplantation should be considered when selecting a flap technique.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
493
Plate 85
494
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 86
Latissimus Dorsi Muscle Flap
DESCRIPTION
The latissimus dorsi muscle is used to cover defects beneath the skin (e.g., thoracic wall) within its arc of
rotation.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) In this clinical example, a lower thoracic wall mass requires surgical resection.
(B) The neoplasm is resected. The skin margins are carefully retracted to expose the latissimus dorsi muscle.
(C) In this example, optional surgical mesh is sufured over the margins of the thoracic wall defect.
(D) The elevated muscle flap is pivoted and sutured over the mesh. Simple interrupted sutures or double
loop patterns (far-far-near-near, far-near-near-far) are sufficient for suturing the flap in posifion. A
closed suction system is inserted prior to skin closure.
COMMENT S
Although a skin incision can be made over the muscle, parallel to its fibers, it is possible to expose the
muscle through small skin incision(s), depending upon the location of the defect being closed. In many
instances, the muscle can be exposed via the surgical approach required for removal of a neoplastic
condifion, provided that the skin can be retracted sufficiently to expose the muscle. Handheld retractors,
 self-retaining retractors, or large towel clamps can facilitate muscle exposure. An additional access incision
can be created if required.
Given its dominant thoracodorsal vascular supply, the muscle can be rotated into adjacent thoracic wall
defects. (Important note: In thoracic wall defects below the central body of the muscle, the terminal end of 
the muscle need not be detached from the terminal ribs. The dorsal and ventral muscle borders can be
developed and the"bipedicle"muscle flap advanced directly into the ventral defect. This simplifies closure
of the thoracic wall defect, reducing the amount of tissue dissection and operative time required to elevate
  e ss shn s s o s a s d nsd ps s
thoracic wall reconstruction. The intercostal vessels entering/exiting the muscle require ligation to mobilize
the muscle from the thoracic wall and overlying skin. Care must be taken to minimize trauma to the
overlying skin and to preserve collateral vascular channels. The latissimus dorsi muscle can be combined
with plastic mesh, adjacent composite rib flaps, or rib grafts to add rigidity to the reconstructed chest wall
after multiple rib resection. However, it has been the author's experience that mesh, bone grafts, and other
implants are unnecessary. The flap, sufured to the adjacent musculofascial borders of the defect, stretches
over the area. Sufured under slight tension, the flap covers thoracic wall defects in a trampoline-like fashion.
 Muscle edges are sutured to the adjacent muscle/fascial planes bordering the defect. Postoperatively, a
variable amount of (paradoxical) inward excursion of the flap can be seen during inspiration. It is self-
limiting, with minimal motion noted, within a few days after surgery. A shallow depression or concavity can
be seen at the flap site, but it is not recognizable in most patients after regrowth of the hair coat.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
495
Plate 86
B
D
496
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 87
External Abdominal Oblique
Muscle Flap
DESCRIPTION
The external abdominal oblique muscle flap has remarkable pliability and elasticity for closure of major
abdominal and caudal thoracic wall defects.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) With the patient under general anesthesia, the entire ventral and lateral abdominal wall is clipped and
prepared for surgery in standard fashion. In this example, a neoplasm involves the caudal thoracic and
adjacent cranial abdominal wall.
(B) In a medium dog, a paracostal skin incision is made from the level of epaxial muscles to the ventral
midline, 5.0cm caudal to the 13th rib. However, in this clinical example, the surgical wound serves as
access to the cranial portions of the muscle, while a curved access incision, cranial and parallel to the
flank, provides exposure to the caudal component. The fascial edges of the lumbar external abdominal
oblique are identified and divided ventrally and caudally, leaving a 1-cm margin of fascia along the
muscular edge. The lumbar external oblique is undermined, and the neurovascular pedicle, consisting of
branches of the cranial abdominal artery and cranial hypogastric nerve, and a satellite vein, are
identified craniodorsally, caudal to the i3th rib, and preserved. The dorsal fascial attachment is divided
and the lumbar external abdominal oblique muscle severed to the level of the 13th rib. The lumbar
external abdominal oblique muscular/fascial island flap, tethered by its neurovascular pedicle, is pivoted
 into an adjacent thoracic or abdominal wall defect, based on preoperative measurements.
(C) The inner fascial surface of the flap is sutured to the overlapped defect with 2-0 or 3-0 monofilament,
nonabsorbable suture material, using an interrupted mattress suture pattern. Care must be taken to
avoid compromise to the vasculature of the muscle flap during suture insertion. Closure of this layer is
important to prevent postoperative abdominal herniation
(D) The remaining edges of the flap are subsequently sutured to the borders of the defect in a similar
fashion. A simple interrupted suture pattern or a double-loop suture pattern (far-near-near-far, far-far-
near-near) can be used to suture the flap borders. A closed suction unit is most appropriately used to
manage dead space.
(E) The overlying skin and access incision are closed in routine fashion.
COM MENT S
The external abdominal oblique muscle, tethered by the dominant cranial abdominal arterial branches, can
stretch and pivot to a considerable degree. This island muscle flap may be particularly well suited for closure
 of ventral abdominal wall and caudal thoracic wall defects. In the pilot study investigating its potential
clinical use, the flap was capable of covering defects beyond the 10 x 10-cm full-thickness ventral abdominal
wall defects created in medium-sized dogs.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
497
Plate 87
D
498
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Caudal Sartorius Muscle Flap
Plate 88
DESCRIPTION
The caudal sartorius muscle, tethered by a saphenous vascular pedicle, has considerable mobility and can
extend as far distally as the metatarsal surface.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
use pepuns u Aains sog paredand pue padd si lal sean paaoau aue 'eisauisaue ienaual spun ()
A skin incision is made on the medial aspect of the thigh over the length of the caudal sartorius muscle.
The subcutaneous tissues are dissected to expose the underlying caudal sartorius muscle.
   n   sh on s     s si s a ()s
Aae peouay au uol aun araum panoasuen pue paei Aqnop are uaa snouaudes pepauu pue Arae
and vein. Care is taken to avoid damage to the saphenous vessels in the medial tibial region and more
proximally, where these vessels are intimately associated with the caudal border of the caudal sartorius
muscle.
(C) The muscle can be completely mobilized by transecting its insertion near the tibial crest, leaving the
saphenous artery and vein at the distal end of the caudal sartorius muscle as its sole blood supply.
(D) Tethered by the saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein, the island muscle flap can be
transplanted to the distal extremity by extending the skin incision and carefully freeing up the
saphenous vasculature.
(E) A closed suction unit is ideally suited to manage dead space prior to skin closure
COMMENT S
The saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein maintain the caudal sartorius muscle by reversal of
sartorius muscle can extend over the metatarsal surface. It has potential clinical use for distal tibial fracture
aq uen ye aay io de y uuoeai jo aqeden st h ieui sainins pasodxa oi aeraaos anss gos apod
placed over this exposed caudal sartorius muscle to provide epithelial coverage, if necessary. Angiography
prior to division of the saphenous artery and medial saphenous vein would be advisable before flap
extensive trauma could have compromised the cranial tibial artery and collateral sources of circulation.
Division of the saphenous vasculature from a previous medial surgical approach to the tibia or from
extensive trauma would preclude its effective use.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
499
Plate 88
500
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Cranial Sartorius Muscle Flap
Plate 89
DESCRIPTION
The cranial sartorius muscle, with its proximal base on the hind limb, can rotate into caudoventral
abdominal wall defects.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) The patient is anesthetized and the rear limb is clipped and prepared for surgery in standard fashion.A
skin incision is made on the medial aspect of the thigh, overlying the length of the cranial sartorius
muscle, extending proximally to the inguinal region. The subcutaneous tissue is dissected to expose the
underlying cranial sartorius muscle
(B) Muscle borders are defined by careful sharp and blunt dissection. The muscle is severed distally at its
tibial insertion and elevated from the underlying tissues to the level of the proximal vascular pedicle.
anu an huaua snes pen u o pad nu au on ap pae on un a jsn aes
caudally and proximally.
(C) The elevated muscle can be rotated up to 180 degrees into adjacent defects. In this clinical example, the
muscle flap was used for the repair of a chronic caudal abdominal hernia. Muscle borders are sutured to
regional fascial planes bordering the wound
(D) A closed suction unit is ideally suited to control dead space at donor and recipient sites.
COMMENT S
Given its base and arc of rotation, the cranial sartorius muscle may have its greatest potential use for repair
of prepubic tendon rupture when tissue frauma, retraction, and fibrosis preclude adequate reapposifion of
the tendon to the pelvis in the dog and cat. The cranial sartorius muscle may have additional use in the
repair of difficult femoral hernias. Similarly, the pectineus muscle tendon can be divided to mobilize this
short muscle for femoral hernia closure or reinforcemenf.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
501
Plate 89
502
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 90
Temporalis Muscle Flap
DESCRIPTION
The temporalis muscle flap has been described for closing orbitonasal defects (trauma, tumor resection) and
covers the muscle dorsally. The fan-shaped temporalis muscle resides in the temporal fossa and inserts on
the mandibular coronoid process. More superficial circulation to the muscle is provided by the superficial
caudal deep temporal artery and rostral deep temporal artery both arise from the maxillary artery and course
dorsally beneath the zygomatic arch where they arborize in the temporal muscle. All three arteries
anastomose, forming a rich vascular network wifhin the temporal muscle.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) In this example, orbital exenteration has been performed, with the skin incision extended caudally to
expose the temporalis muscle.
(B) This illustration highlights the two muscle bundles that make up the temporalis muscle, medial to the
zygomatic arch.
(C) The skin is retracted dorsally to expose the muscle, the flap is created approximately 20% wider than
 the width of the orbit to offset muscle contraction after elevation of the flap. The visible superficial
temporal artery is identified and protected during exposure and elevation of the flap. The muscle is
incised along the margin of the sagiftal crest and is elevated subperiosteally from the skull with a
periosteal elevator. Care is taken to preserve the deeper vascular blood supply. The sides of the flap are
developed parallel to the muscle fibers.The temporalis muscle fascia can be dissected from the
zygomatic arch to improve flap mobility.
(D) The flap can be rotated on its insertion and sufured into the margins of the bony/soft tissue defect.
 Holes may be drilled in the bony margins to facilitate suture placement.
COMMENT S
In brachycephalic dogs, the temporalis muscles do not meet on the midline; this area is devoid of
musculature. In dolichocephalic dogs, the left and right temporalis muscles join to form a middorsal sulcus.
temporalis muscle flap to reach the rostral margin of the orbital area can be difficult in some patients.
Although this muscle flap is not routinely used, ift can be helpful for problematic wounds or defects located
within its arc of rotation. A dorsally based flap has been described, but division of a portion of its blood
 supply does risk tissue ischemia and subsequent muscle necrosis/fibrosis.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
503
Plate 90
504
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Transversus Abdominis Muscle Flap
Plate 91
DE SC RIP T IO N
The transversus abdominis muscle can be elevated as a flap for closure of problematic defects of the
diaphragm.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Anatomic outline of the diaphragm and the adjacent transversus abdominis muscle layer. A muscular
pue aosnuu suupae snsiaasun aut go uod e sanddns Aae peuupqeoad aue o youa
can be incorporated into the flap during elevation. The dashed oval on the diaphragm represents the
area to be replaced; the adjacent dashed line overlies the site for elevation of the transversus abdominis
muscle flap.
(B) In this example, the flap is elevated in a caudal-to-cranial direction and folded forward to replace a
large section of the diaphragm. The flap is secured using 2-0 or 3-0 monofilament, nonabsorbable or
slowly absorbable suture materials, depending on the size of the patient. Simple interrupted sutures can
be preplaced when closing the more problematic dorsal area of the diaphragmatic defect.
COMMENT S
This flap is uncommonly required for closure of diaphragmatic defects. The author has used it on two
occasions to replace the right and left hemidiaphragm in long-standing chronic diaphragmatic hernias in
anssh suaoelpe pue useudep aut suaoaul eiseidoau jo saseo asoun u pasn aq uen osie lI 'ssop oml
structures. Anatomic studies (unpublished, Pavletic, Trout) highlighted the muscular branches arising from
the phrenicoabdominal artery. Its inclusion into the flap is added assurance that muscle flap circulation is
maintained.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
505
Plate 91
506
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 92
Semitendinosus Muscle and
Myocutaneous Flaps
DESCRIPTION
proximal gluteal artery supplies the upper or proximal"half" of the muscle, entering the proximal quarter of 
larger portions of the muscle will survive on a single vascular pedicle. In one case report, the entire muscle
and overlying skin segment survived as a myocutaneous flap based on the distal vascular pedicle for closure
of a soft tissue defect of the tibial region.
The proximal"half"of the muscle can be used for reconstructive surgical procedures involving the
 perineal area (ventral perineal hernia, reinforcement of the anal sphincter for incontinence, nonhealing
ulcers). The lower "half" of the muscle can be extended distally for problematic wounds of the adjacent
lower extremity. It is possible to develop a myocutaneous flap based on eifther the proximal or distal vascular
pedicle.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Outline of the proximally based semiftendinosus muscle flap (lef) and distally based myocutaneous
flap (right) with overlying cutaneous surface (dashed lines). To expose the muscle for the proximally
based muscle flap, a skin incision is made along the caudal border of the ischial tuberosity and
continued distally along the caudal two-thirds to three-quarfers of the length of the thigh. In this
example, the muscle flap (left limb) is elevated by dividing the lower third of the muscle belly. The
tendinous attachment to the ischium can be divided without compromising the circulation in order to
facilitate muscle mobilization. The outline of a distally based myocutaneous flap also is illustrated
(right limb).
(A2) The dashed lines highlight the cutaneous territory of the semitendinosus myocutaneous flap based on
the distal vascular pedicle. Note the width and length of the cutaneous territory approximates the
major width of the muscle belly.
(B) In this illustration, the elevated muscle is tunneled beneath the rectum and anus for closure of a
ventral perineal hernia. The muscle is secured to the ventral aspect of the anal sphincter muscle and
opposing perineal area.
(B2)  In this example, the muscle is cupped around the external anal sphincter to improve muscle tone in a
fecally incontinent patient. Note the muscle affachment to the ischial tuberosity has been divided to
improve flap mobility.
(C) The muscle has been divided distal to the ischial tuberosity and the cutaneous border of the overlying
skin island incised.
(C2) The myocutaneous flap is carefully elevated and rotated into a large defect below the caudal aspect of
knee, preserving the distal vascular pedicle.
COM ME NT
As noted, addifional studies are required to determine whether most, if not the entire, muscle can survive
on the proximal or distal vascular pedicle alone on a consistent basis. There are limited applications for the
muscle is a desirable feature.
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
507
Plate 92
C
A
C2
B2
508
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 93
Flexor Carpi Ulnaris Muscle Flap
DE SC RIP TION
The humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris is supplied by a vascular pedicle primarily from the ulnar artery
 and, to a lesser degree, the recurrent ulnar and deep antebrachial arteries.A caudal interosseous artery
enters the distal end of the humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris at the deep face of this muscle, near its
insertion on the accessory carpal bone. Branches of this artery run proximally and anastomose
intramuscularly with the descending branches of the ulnar and deep antebrachial arteries.The caudal
interosseous branch is capable of supplying circulation to a variable length of this muscle after division of
the proximal blood supply. The elevated muscle can be used to cover problematic carpal, metacarpal, and
required.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The skin is incised over the caudolateral aspect of the antebrachium, extending distally 1-2cm beyond
the accessory carpal bone. The underlying antebrachial and carpal fasciae are incised, exposing the ulnar
head of the flexor carpi ulnaris caudally, the ulnaris lateralis laterally, and the humeral head of the flexor
carpi ulnaris located between these two muscles. The distal tendon of the ulnar head is transected
distally and reflected to allow complete exposure of the humeral head proximally (arrow). The borders
of the humeral head are dissected and a myotomy is performed at the junction of the proximal and
middle third of the muscle. The borders of the muscle are carefully dissected free of the adjacent tissues
in a distal direction. Caution is warranted when approaching the deep surface of the distal tendon
where the caudal interosseous vascular pedicle enters the muscle. The dashed line denotes the site for a
potential "bridge incision."
(B) The muscle flap can be tunneled beneath interposing skin to gain access to the wound, or a bridge
incision can be created to faciliftate its placement into an adjacent defect, in this case a skin wound
overlying the carpal area. The flap is sutured into position.
(C) In this hypothetical example, skin was shiffed over the muscle flap. Alternatively, a free graft can be
applied over the surface of the muscle if insufficient skin is available for closure.
COMMENT S
The length of muscle capable of surviving on the distal vascular pedicle alone is not known. Based on
limited studies, over half is likely to survive without ischemic necrosis. This length, however, may be
may be aftempted, and partially excised intraoperatively if bleeding and discoloration (cyanotic appearance)
is noted. Altermatively, any compromised muscle can be trimmed later during postoperative assessment of
the muscle flap.
 Extensive trauma involving the distal muscle and caudal interosseous blood supply may preclude use of
this small muscle flap without Doppler ultrasound or angiography to assess the patency of this vital vascular
pedicle. This muscle flap is infrequently needed, but can be useful for ischemic wounds secondary to
radiation therapy or extensive trauma. With extensive skin loss, the viable muscular surface will serve as a
ns shl uo anss uonu jo uoog aun Aq pais Ansn 'pansse si asn aue go A jun
Myocutaneous Flaps and Muscle Flaps
509
Plate 93
17
Oral Reconstructive
Surgical Techniques
Introduction 512
PLATES
Plate 94: Mucosal Flaps 518
Plate 95: Palatoplasty: Bipedicle Advancement 519
Plate 96: Cleft Palate Repair: Mucoperiosteal Flap Technique  522
Plate 97: Palatine Mucosal Flap 524
Plate 98: Soft Palate/Pharyngeal Mucosal Flaps  526
Plate 99: Full-Thickness Labial Flap Closure of Oronasal Fistulas  528
Plate 100: Cartilage Grafts for Palatal Fistulas 530
Plate 101: Angularis Oris Mucosal Flap  532
511
512
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
for its ability to pass through tissues easily and its
tendency to resist suture cut-out. Monofilament suture
materials are preferred for their ability to glide through
efects involving the hard and soft palate (second-
the mucosal tissues with minimal drag. In most cases,
/ary palate) can be quite difficult to close success-
fully. The confined space of the oral and pharyngeal
the dog and cat. Although monofilament nylon and
 cavities limits visibility and surgical manipulation of
polypropylene are effective for closing palatal defects,
the tissues. The mucosal tissues vary in thickness and
a number of newer, slowly absorbed suture materials
io-amns, au ans ieno a u Aqemp
are practical alternatives.
strength of the tissues, based on relative collagen
Sutures should be placed beyond the 5-mm border
weave and content, can vary with the age and health
of the wound, since collagenase activity within this
status of the patient.
healing area also can increase the possibility of suture
The palatal tissues are continuously exposed to
cut-out. As a result, the author prefers to place sutures
 motion from lingual movement, breathing, mastica-
6-10 mm from the wound border (and a similar dis-
tion, and swallowing. This movement can result in
tance apart). Because the cut borders of oral mucosa
-isodde amins Sump premun mo ci Aouapual e aaeu
was performed under tension. Sutures can tear through
tion, an everting pattern is preferable to assure submu-
the mucosa, causing additional inflammation and
cosa-to-submucosa abutment for optimal healing. The
fibrosis. The inherent elasticity of the mucosal tissues
vertical mattress suture pattern is an excellent choice
declines with each subsequent surgical failure.
for its ability to resist dehiscence, evert the apposed
Consistently successful closure of palatal defects
borders, and minimally impair local microcirculation.
requires thoughtful planning before surgery.
The
In many cases, the author alternates vertical mattress
patient must be in good health and in a state of positive
sutures with simple interrupted sutures, since the
protein balance. Postoperatively, the nutritional needs
latter pattern can help stabilize the everted wound
 of the animal must be maintained to assure that delays
borders during the healing process.
in healing are avoided. Tube feeding of the newborn
It must be remembered that wound closure, under
patient is required until the animal is old enough to be
minimal tension, is absolutely critical to a successful
fed solid food by hand. The owner and veterinarian
surgical closure. Closure under excessive tension
will need to try feeding a balanced canine or feline diet
 will defeat the best suture material and pattern place-
by altering the size and consistency of the small por-
ment. Custom-fitted acrylic retainers have been advo-
tions offered and by developing an appropriate feeding
cated by some surgeons to protect a palate repair from
'sas Aq paid aq Ae ram er apas
postoperative motion and trauma. They may have
with the head tilted slightly upward. Some patients
some merit for the most difficult closures encountered.
may be able to eat and drink with little or no assist-
From the author's personal experience, most cleff
ance. Difficult patients may require prolonged tube
palate repairs do not require their use or the care
aq  saq oisos  osoyosg u
required to prevent food and particulate matter from
a practical alternative for maintaining proper nutri-
accumulating between the plate and underlying
tional intake for prolonged periods of time. Care must
ncision.
be taken to watch the patient carefully for signs of
 This chapter includes several techniques that can be
aspiration pneumonia or nasal impaction from food
used to close the more challenging congenital and
and particulate matter. The veterinarian may need to
acquired defects encountered.
clean the nasal cavity periodically, with cotton-tipped
applicators, salineflushes, and suction, with the patient
under anesthesia.
Cleft Palate
Wound closure requires meticulous atraumatic sur-
 gical technique. Surgical lasers may be quite useful for
optimal hemostasis and to minimize trauma during
 In the newborn puppy or kitten, palatal defects are
surgical closure of the wounds. Suture materials must
most likely to be hereditary. Although a number of
be selected that maintain their tensile strength for a
factors (nutritional, hormonal, mechanical, toxic) have
s e    a g  
been recognized as causes of palatal defects in humans,
amount of elasticity is preferred in order to adjust to
heredity is considered a major factor in animals and
the variable degree of motion most oral closures are
has been demonstrated in canine breeding studies. As
a result, dogs and cats with congenital palatal defects
reverse cutting needle is the author's preference, both
should be spayed /neutered.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
513
Veterinarians should always examine animals with
that older patients have stronger tissues (greater col-
congenital defects carefully: occasionally other anoma-
lagen content) that are better capable of holding
lies may be detected.
sutures compared to the pediatric patient. Moreover,
 In the human literature, there are a variety of tech-
in many cases seen, the relative width of the cleff
niques  for  cleft  palate  repair.  Successful  repair  in
narrows over time in relation to the remaining palatal
humans, not only requires closure of the defect for
tissues. As a result, there is more mucosa that can be
normal eating and drinking, but also selecting a tech-
mobilized to close the defect. Although some owners
nique that will give the child the best possibility of
would prefer earlier closure to minimize the need to
speaking normally. In veterinary medicine, however,
hand-feed and nurse the animal, the advantages that
successful closure is measured by resumption of
can be gained by delaying the closure to a later time
normal eating, drinking, and breathing. Except for
are most significant. The surgeon must keep in mind
extremely wide cleft palate defects, both the bipedicle
that the first attempt at closure is the best chance for success
flap technique and mucoperiosteal flap techniques can
in cleft palate repair.
be used to close most of the cases presented to the
Acquired palatal defects can be seen secondary to
veterinarian, without resorting to the more elaborate
trauma. Cats that fall from a height or are struck by a
techniques used in humans. Only these two proce-
vehicle can present with a split in the hard palate.
dures are described in detail. It must be noted that
Small fissures, a few millimeters wide, may seal with
both techniques, from the author's experience, work
a blood clot and heal without surgical intervention.
well for the "moderate-sized" gaps encountered. After 
pasolp isaq are pue leau jou Aeu sde 1apim Taaamo
using both procedures over the past two decades, the
within a few day of the injury. This can be accom-
author believes the bipedicle flap is easier to execute
plished with placement of a 22-gauge wire around the
 and currently is the preferred choice for most of the
root or base of opposite teeth in the midpalatal region.
cleft palate cases (congenital or acquired) managed
The wire can be placed beneath the mucosal layer of
(Fig. 17-1 and 17-2).
the hard palate and the wire ends gently twisted
There are differing opinions on the optimal time to
together until the bone gap is approximated. The
close a congenital cleft palate in small animals. Assum-
upper and lower dental arcades should be examined
 ing the patient is healthy, well-nourished, and free of
to assure proper occlusion is maintained.  The
respiratory infection (secondary to possible aspiration
mucosal borders can be sutured to complete the
pneumonia), the author prefers to close the defect no
closure. A several-day delay in repair can result in
earlier than 4-5 months of age. Earlier closures have
failure to compress the bony palate with a surgical
been advocated (64-12 weeks of age). It must be noted
wire. Under these circumstances, the use of the
HG. 17-1 (A) A defect of the secondary palate (hard palate and soft palate). Arrows denote the location of the lateral palate incisions.
(B) Closure using bilateral, bipedicle flaps; the soft palate was closed with a conventional two-layer closure.
514
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
FIG. 17-2 (A) Labrador with a cleft palate closed with a mucoperiosteal flap. (B) Rapid epithelialization of the open wounds was
noted within 10 days after surgery.
B
FIG. 17-3 (A) Infected, nonhealing oral defect secondary to canine tooth extraction. (B) Excision of the infected soft tissue and bone
bipedicle flap technique, illustrated in Plate 95 gener
impacting the hard palate (Fig. 17-3). Defects adjacent
ally is successful.
to the lingual surface of the dental arcade generally are
the easiest to close. Labial and buccal mucosa can be
advanced or rotated into the defect after removal of
Palatal Defects/Oronasal Fistulas
the interposing teeth. The central palatal area is more
problematic, especially for the larger holes in this loca-
Most holes involving the hard palate are the result of
tion. Mucosal/palatal transposition flaps can be used
destructive neoplasms, tumor resection with second-
in many of these cases. Additionally, a full-thickmess
ary dehiscence of the closure, tissue necrosis second-
labial advancement flap created perpendicular to the
ary to radiation therapy for neoplasms, electrical
facial axis can be used successfully to close many of
heating cord injuries, persistent openings after dental
the more challenging cases (Fig. 17-4). There is one
extraction, or the occasional handgun-rifle round
 report on the successful use of a lingual flap for closure
HG. 17-4 (A) Use of a full-thickness labial flap to close a traumatic defect of the hard palate. The adjacent teeth were removed and
the maxillary bone smoothed down with a Hall air drill to accommodate the labial advancement flap. The labial mucosa faces the
nasal cavity; the skin surface of the flap faces the oral cavity. The labial border was trimmed and the entire flap sutured into the 
defect.
(B) Completion of the closure. Note that the incised labial borders were sutured together, leaving a slit opening dorsally to
accommodate thebaseof the labial flap.
 ssn aa A pas aq uo ym aq A pnsno ioap le ra au rae sam g Aexe  aui ()
ou jl auoe hal aq Aeu ane au Aiaaeuaiv loajap leiqe suaselpe aul ot siapioq aun surnns pue de aul jo aseq snoauino
dermatitis has been noted.(See Plate 99.)
515
516
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Q
FIG. 17-5 (A) Diffuse squamous cell carcinoma involving the hard and soft palatal tissues. (B) Reconstruction with a full-thickness
labial advancement flap. (C) The labial defect created by the loss of the upper lip, was replaced with a local skin flap pivoted into the
area. It is advisable to consult with an oncologist to determine the best method(s) to prevent recurrence of oral neoplasms when
complete surgical margins are in question.
of an oronasal fistula in a cat. More recently, a carti-
labial advancement flap to reconstruct the caudal hard
laginous graft has been used to close small oronasal
and soft palates. A transposition skin flap was used, in
fistulas in cats. The angularis oris artery has also been
turn, to reconstruct the donor (upper labial) area: the
incorporated into a flap using the adjacent buccal and
cutaneous surface faced the nasal cavity with the oral
 lower labial mucosa for closure of problematic palatal
surface replaced by the labial mucosa.
defects.
 Major reconstruction of the soft and hard palate can
Suggested Readings
be problematic, and cases must be carefully selected to
assure successful long-term benefits for the patient.
Subtotal resection of a problematic maligmancy, fol-
Bryant KJ, Moore K, McAnulty JF. 2003. Angularis oris axial
lowed by major restorative surgery, would not be in
pattern buccal flap for reconstruction of recurrent fistulae
of the palate. Vet Surg 32:113-119.
the best interest of the patient unless adjunctive thera-
Cox CL, Hunt GB, Cadiere MM. 2007. Repair of oronasal
pies are able to provide better long-term control of the
fistulae using auricular cartilage grafts in five cats. Vet Surg
neoplasm. Figure 17-5 is an example of using the upper
36:164-169.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
517
Hammer Dl, Sacks M. 1975. The palate. In: Bojrab MJ, ed.
Robertson JJ, Dean PW. 1987. Repair of a traumatically
Current Techniques in Small Animut Surgery, 75-85. Philadel-
 induced oronasal fistula in a cat with a rostral tongue flap.
 phia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
Vet Surg 16:164-166.
Harvey CE. 1987. Palate defects in dogs and cats. Cormpend
Salisbury SK. 1990. Surgery of the palate. In: Bojrab MJ, ed.
Contin Ed Pract Vet 9:405-418.
Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 152-
Howard DR, et al. 1974. Mucoperiosteal flap technique for
159. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
cleft palate repair in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 165:352-
 Smith MM. 1996. Prosthodontic appliance for repair of an
354.
oronasal fistula in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Howard, DR. 1983. Palate. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Tech-
208:1410-1412.
niques in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed., 109-113. Philadel-
Wallace LJ. 1975. An altermate procedure for repair of cleft
phia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
hard and soft palate in the dog. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current
 Jurkiewicz MJ, Culbertson JH. 1995. Operatirve Techriques in
Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 85-91. Philadelphia,
Plastic and Reconstructioe Surgery: Cleft Palate Repair. Phila-
PA: Lea & Febiger.
delphia, PA: WB Saunders Co.
518
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Mucosal Flaps
Plate 94
DESCRIPTION
 advanced or transposed to close oronasal fistulas. One of the more common fistulas occurs after canine
tooth extraction.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Example of a chronic oronasal fistula after removal of the right upper canine in a dog.
(B) The alveolus of the canine tooth often is infected. Osteomyelitis is commonly associated with long-
standing cases, as a result of food, water, and debris entering this recess. Although the alveolus can be
curetted to remove debris and tissues lining the socket, a small osteotome and mallet can be used to
resect the entire area, including the gingiva (circular line),in order to assure healthy tissues remain
before closure with a mucosal advancement flap, outlined in the adjacent upper labial mucosa.
(C) The delicate mucosal flap is carefully undermined and advanced over the defect. Because the width of
the flap tends to contract upon elevation, the author recommends the flap be wider (by 25%-30%) than
the width of the defect being covered. Generally, 3-0 monofilament absorbable suture materials are 
used to secure the flap to the adjacent tissues.
COMMENT S
transposition flap also can be used successfully. It is important to emphasize the need to make the flaps
wider than the defect to ensure closure is achieved under minimal tension.
B
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
519
Palatoplasty: Bipedicle Advancement
Plate 95
Technique
DE SC RIP TION
A classic method of closing cleft palates is the use of bilateral, bipedicle advancement flaps, using the
available mucosal tissues of the hard and soft palates. The major palatine artery and vein are incorporated in
these bipedicle flaps to assure adequate circulation is present during this surgical maneuver.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Cleft palate, extending from the hard to soft palate. Closure is attempted after 16 weeks of age,
provided that the patient is healthy and well-nourished. Note the relationship of the major palatine
artery with the dental arcade. The nasal cavity should be inspected for impacted food or debris, using
(B) Two incisions are made along the lingual surface of the left and right dental arcades, creating two
bipedicle flaps, upon their elevation. A small, flat, periosteal elevator is used to separate the palatal
tissue from the underlying bone. Care is taken to avoid injury or division of the major palatine artery. In
this example, a scalpel blade was used to resect the epithelial borders from the soft palate defect.
(C) The nasopharyngeal mucosal surface of the soft palate is apposed with slowly absorbed simple
interrupted sutures. Suture bites should be approximately 8-10mm from the defect (mucosal border).
Prior to closing the oropharyngeal mucosal surface of the soft palate, release/relaxing incisions can be
made (if necessary) in the mucosa, medial to the tonsillar crypts (dashed lines).
A
B
C
二
520
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 95
(Continued)
(D) Closure of the oropharyngeal mucosal surface of the soft palate. Vertical mattress sutures can be
alternated with a simple interrupted pattern in the presence of tension.
(E) Closure of the hard palate defect with alternating simple interrupted and vertical mattress sutures.
Slowly absorbable monofilament suture material, that maintains its tensile strength for a prolonged
period should be selected (suture size: 3-0). Any small eversion gaps can be meticulously apposed with
4-0 simple interrupted sutures.
(F) Completion of the closure. The secondary defects created by the flap advancement will rapidly
epithelialize within 2 weeks.
COMMENT S
This bipedicle palatoplasty technique can work quite wellin the dog and cat, without resorting to more
 elaborate techniques that are reported in the human literature. Preservation of the major palatine artery is
critical to complete flap survival. Meticulous, atraumatic suture technique is essential to successful closure of
palate closure, caudal to the upper incisors (see Fig. 17-2). In general, these small defects cause no particular
problem to the patient.
D
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
521
Plate 95
(Continued)
The vertical mattress sufure is an effective tension pattern: eversion of the apposing flap borders is
important to assuring that collagen can link the two connective tissue surfaces of each flap together.
Inversion of the wound borders may result in failure, since the inward deviation of both epithelial borders
incisional"gaping"associated with the vertical mattress suture pattern used in this area. Tha author prefers
suture placement 8-10mm from the border of the defect for optimal holding power. Unlike other reports,
the author does not believe a two-layer closure is feasible in many patients, nor is it necessary. A single-
layer closure is quite satisfactory, provided that suture placement is precise.
These hard acrylic plates are wired to the dental arcade. While they may be useful in the most challenging
cases, the author has not found them to be necessary. Unfortunately, food and debris can accumulate
between the plate and surgical sife, possibly serving as a source of infection. In most cases, failure in cleff
palate closure is the result of wound closure under excessive tension, in an otherwise healthy patient.
small pieces of solid food (balanced diet) by hand. It is useful to consult with a veterinary nutrifionist should
se jo suis on aso pauoiem aa pinous siuen 'sse suoid ao ssanb aeip A
 pneumonia and treated accordingly.
better able to support suture placement. Moreover, as the patient grows and matures, the relative width of
the palatal defect may decrease, making closure easier.
Postoperatively, animals are fed small "balls"of canned dog food the day following surgery: dogs readily
swallow them whole effortlessly when fed by hand. They drink water in a normal fashion. An Elizabethan
collar is advisable, especially in the days following surgery: many patients will attempt to paw at their face,
likely because of the abnormal sensation in the mouth after tissue advancement.
Z lam sup si suaed aue e Aalans sae saep s uum panou ae anuansap punom go sase jso
hours after surgery, the author normally will discharge the patient and reexamine them 1 week later. Like
many procedures, the surgeon's best opportunity to successfully close a palatal defect is the first surgery.
Therefore, the patient must be well-nourished, in a state of positive protein balance, and healthy.
years, the author has found that the mucoperiosteal flap and this technique work well for the wider palatal
defects. For the simple, narrow defects, the bipedicle flap technique is preferable to the technically more
demanding mucoperiosteal flap. Veterinarians should remember that the length of the defect is of relatively
minor importance, compared to the width of the flap.
522
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 96
Cleft Palate Repair: Mucoperiosteal
Flap Technique
DESCRIPTION
The mucoperiosteal flap technique is an alternative method for closing defects of the hard palate. A medially
based hinge flap is folded over the palatal defect, with the oral epithelial surface facing the exposed nasal
cavity. The border of the flap is sutured beneath the opposing palatal tissue border, which is elevated as a
bipedicle advancement flap.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
 palatine artery.
(B)   After incising the palatal tissue with a no. 15 scalpel blade, a small periosteal elevator is used to
carefully elevate the flap, leaving the palatine vasculature intact.
(B2) A cross-sectional view of the elevated flap. Note the pedicle is continuous with the nasal mucosal/
periosteal surface lining the bone of the hard palate.
de suaauape aadiq e se paredaid are parap aue ro apis susoddo au uo sanss reneied aui ()
(C2) Cross-sectional view of the mucoperiosteal flap and bipedicle flap, prior to suture placement.
(D1) The mucoperiosteal flap is folded over the cleft, the edge of which is tucked beneath the border of the
opposing bipedicle flap. Absorbable, 3-0 PDS (polydiaxanone) sutures are used in this patient, using a
matfress pattern (or vest-over-pants).
(D2) A cross-sectional view of (D).
(E)
Completion of the hard palate closure. The soft palate is closed in a conventional two-layer closure,
discussed in Plate 95. Note in this example that two mucosal release incisions were made to reduce
tension on closure of the soft palate defect.
COMMENT S
the use of dual bipedicle palatal flaps and the mucoperiosteal flap, in combination with an opposing
bipedicle flap, have been similarly successful for the more challenging cleff palate defects closed to date. The
author feels that the mucoperiosteal flap is a slightly more demanding procedure. Complete elevation of the
bipedicle flap is essential in order to assure tension on the incision line is kept to a minimum.
 See Comments in Plate 95 pertaining to patient care.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
523
Plate 96
B
?
O
0
C
C
D
D
524
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Palatine Mucosal Flap
Plate 97
DESCRIPTION
The left and right palatine arteries course rostrally to supply circulation to a significant area of the mucosa
covering the bony palate. In select cases, a mucosal transposition flap, incorporating the major palatine
 artery, can be used to close small- to moderate-sized oronasal fistula within its effective arc of rotation.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The palatine artery originates caudal and medial to the third premolar. The flap outlined in this example
(dashed line) comprises two parallel incisions, one along the lingual border of the dental arcade and the
second along the midline of the palate. The flap width in this illustration is sufficient to overlap the
(width) borders of the oronasal fistula. The flap length is determined in the fashion noted in Plate 36,
The Transposition Flap (90 degrees). The shaded area of mucosa, interposed between the donor and
recipient sites, is resected to accommodate the palatine flap.
(B) Elevation of the flap. Care must be taken to avoid dividing or traumatizing the palatine artery and vein.
(C) Suturing of the palatine flap. It is highly desirable to have the flap overlap the bony border of the
oronasal fistula.The ridge of bone helps to support the suture line, reducing the possibility of wound
 dehiscence. The donor area is not closed. The exposed viable bone and periosteum will support
epithelial cell migration from the adjacent mucosal borders.
COMMENT S
   nae  s si   e e g  s d  a
without the need of major vessels. Effective use of the palatine flap depends on (1) preserving the integrity
of the major palatine artery and vein and (2) a small- to moderate-sized defect located within the flap's
effective arc of rotation.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
525
Plate 97
C
C
i0
526
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Soft Palate/Pharyngeal Mucosal Flaps
Plate 98
DESCRIPTION
Significant defects of the soft palate can result in problems associated with drinking and eating. Food and
jo gnsan e se aqissod aa jou Aeu uoeuondde joana Aien jeseu pue xueudoseu aul sasua uen ianem
mucosa. One clinical example is illustrated.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) This illustration demonstrates a congenital defect of the soft palate.
(B) The outline of a mucosal flap uses a portion of the soft palate. Flap dimensions should be approximately
10%-20% wider and longer than the dimensions of the defect in order to offset elastic contraction of
the flap and slight shortening associated with unfolding of the flap. The mucosal border of the opposing
side of the palatal defect is excised in preparation for flap application. Altermatively, the middle edge of
 this area can be"split"or divided with a no. 15 scalpel blade. This latter option separates the
paaai si esoonu peaureudoio go pasuduo 'de au go Apoq aun pue pasiou ae shapoq de aui ()
located along one border of this congenital defect. Care must be taken to minimize trauma to this
delicate flap. Fine-tipped iris scissors and small skin hooks are useful for elevation of this flap.
Absorbable sutures (3-0 or 4-0) are used to suture this oropharyngeal mucosal flap to the opposing
nasopharyngeal mucosal border.
determining dimensions of this mucosal flap.
with 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable sutures. The donor area is closed in a similar fashion, unless excessive
COMMENT S
Clinical signs are more subtle than in cleft palate patients, who have notable eating difficulties as kiftens or
puppies. Thoracic radiographs may be advisable to rule out aspiration pneumonia prior to surgery.
Meticulous dissection and atraumatic surgical technique are essential to successful closure of this
congenital defect. Tension on the closure sites should be kept to a minimum. Postoperatively, the patient is
given soft food for 2-4 weeks. Exercise is kept to a minimum during this time. Reexamination of the area
will require light anesthesia. Owners should be informed that closure of this and other oral defects can be
difficult; dehiscence of a portion of the closure site can occur in this dynamic body region.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
527
Plate 98
on
ono
528
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Full-Thickness Labial Flap Closure of
Plate 99
Oronasal Fistulas
DESCRIP TION
On occasion, insufficient labial mucosa, buccal mucosa, and palatal tissue is available for closure of oronasal
fistulas. Cats, in particular, lack the ample mucosal surfaces for the simple advancement closure techniques
employed with dogs. A full-thickness labial advancement flap can be created perpendicular to the length of
 the upper lip for direct advancement into oronasal fistulas.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) This is an example of an oronasal fistula in a cat.
(B) The width of the defect is measured rostrocaudally. The width of the flap equals this measurement.
and reduce the likelihood of incisional tension. Two full-thickness labial incisions are made and the
labial border is excised. The dental arcade and gingival tissue between the oronasal fistula and base of
the flap also are excised.
(C) Upon removal of the teeth and gingiva, the flap is advanced into the oronasal fistula. Inset: If additional
length is required, the labial border is preserved; if is then undermined and reflected upward. This
"unfolded" full-thickness labial flap is advanced over the oronasal defect.
(D) Absorbable sutures (3-0, 4-0) are employed to secure the flap into place.
(E) A notched defect is noted in the lip of the cat. See comments below.
COMMENT S
This technique results in creating a labial"notch"due to the sacrifice of a segment to close an oronasal
fistula. Note: the incised labial margins can be reapposed over the flap to reestablish continuity to the upper
lip if sufficient labial tissue is present (E, arrows). A slit or linear opening, dorsal to the apposed labial
margins, remains to accommodate the flap's base or pedicle (see Fig. 17-4).
At a later date, when healing of the flap is complete, the cutaneous pedicle can be carefully incised and
pausp) anson aun aalduos oi siapioq jesonu jeqen iepneo pue peuen pasodde aut oi panins aapa aul
line in E). The author has found this to be unnecessary, since this small healed opening creates no
             
 satisfactory cosmetic results without further surgery. This technique has been used successfully in dogs and
cats.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
529
Plate 99
080
530
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Cartilage Grafts for Palatal Fistulas
Plate 100
DESCRIPTION
Reported by Cox, Hunt, and Cadiere, a small cartilage graft, taken from the base of the pinna, can be used
sop euauadxa pue suunu u yoq pasn Angssans uaaq seu h saap reeed aue us yied o
uanbasans pue uoeau anssn uoeinuna aog uoid ao pioens anssi e suog aeen a
epithelialization over the developed granulation surface.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A, Az) Example of the area to harvest a flat piece of the conchal cartilage (scapha of the pinna) (arrow);
     an   n a e s    as
the oral defect of the caudal hard palafe.
(B)
overlying soft tissue of the hard palate.
(B)
 A small rostral and caudal incision can be used to facilitate placement of the carilage graft.
(B)
circumference of the defect.
(B4)
 One or two sutures (minimum) of 4-0 absorbable suture material can be used to secure the small
cartilage graft to the palatal tissues.
COM MENT S
Cartilage also can be harvested from the lateral ear canal (performing a lateral ear canal resection), although
the curvature of this tissue makes it more problematic to lie flat during its insertion into the defect. This
technique may be useful for small fistulous tracts (less than 1.5cm) without the need to resort to more
 ann se m as aa n saap re fn n si h as ins pe sidne assa
one case study, the cartilage graft failed, but closure with a second graft was successful. Placement of an
avascular segment of cartilage into a contaminated environment does run the risk of dissolution of this
tissue. Soft food is advisable during the healing process.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
531
Plate 100
A
B
B2
B3
532
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 101
Angularis Oris Mucosal Flap
DESCRIPTION
The angularis oris artery arises from the facial artery and courses superficially from the cranial border of the
masseter muscle to the ipsilateral commissure of the mouth. The pulse of the angularis oris artery can be felf
by inserting the index finger into the mouth, caudal to the oral commissure. The facial artery also gives rise
to the superior and inferior labial arteries, supplying the upper and lower labial tissues, respectively. Bryant,
Moore, and McAnulty have described the use of a mucosal flap, based over the angularis oris vessels, for the
closure of problematic palatal defects.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Territory of the angularis oris mucosal flap.
Inset: With the dog in lateral recumbency, a skin incision is created from the margin of the oral
retracted, exposing the angularis oris artery and vein. (A light source can be inserted into the oral cavity
(ae s luenol og ingasn aq Aeu osie aqoid saiddoa luad y siassaa aul aneunl no ,apuns, o
Two parallel incisions created dorsal and ventral to the angularis oris vessels extend through the
exposed subcutaneous tissue and buccal mucosa, forming the margins of the flap (dashed lines). These
incisions are extended to the caudal extent of the buccal pouch, at the level to which the angularis oris
vessels extend below the cranioventral border of the masseter muscle. This mucosal flap includes the
buccal mucosa to the level of the oral commissure. The flap may be"islandized"by incising the buccal
mucosal base of the flap caudal to the entry of the angularis oris vessels and carefully dissecting the
connective tissue to mobilize this island flap.
(B) In this illustration, the flap is being used to close a problematic palatal defect. A simple interrupted
suture paftern wifh slowly absorbable sutures is used to appose the flap margins to the defect. The
donor defect is closed by suturing the mucosal defect, followed by the overlying skin incision.
COMMENT S
gingival margin of the ipsilateral canine tooth or across the palate to the contralateral dental arcade. This
technique is one more option for the surgeon to consider, based on the size and location of the oral defect.
Oral Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
533
Plate 101
18
Foot Pad Reconstruction
Introduction536
Pad Laceration and Lesion Excision 536
Digital Pad Transfer 538
Metacarpal/Metatarsal Pad Transfer 538
Accessory Carpal Pad 538
Pad Grafting 538
Digital Flaps for Wound Closure  538
Fusion Podoplasty
7538
PLATES
        
            
Plate 104: Digital Pad Transfer 550
Plate 105: Metatarsal/Metacarpal Pad Transfer  552
Plate 106: Pad Grafting 54
Plate 107: Segmental Pad Grafting Technique 556
Plate 108: Fusion Podoplasty  558
535
536
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
foot requires restricting the cat to a more sedentary
existence in the house, ideally on soft surfaces to mini-
mize trauma to the cutaneous transplant. In large
The foot pads of the dog include the digital pads,
dogs, amputation of the involved limb has been per-
I metacarpal pads, and metatarsal pads. They are
formed when there was no viable option for pad
capable of supporting the weight of the dog over a
replacement (Fig. 18-1).
variety of surfaces. The epidermis of the pads is
In providing a durable pad surface to the affected
1800μm thick, considerably greater than the 25- to 40-
 limb devoid of foot pads in large dogs, three potential
μm thickness of the hairy skin.
 options exist: microvascular transfer of a digital pad
The epidermis of the digital pads is elevated in a
from another foot or free grafting of digital pad tissue
series of conical papillae. Secondary conical papillae
from another foot. Each technique has potential advan-
are noted within each conical structure. This conical
 tages and disadvantages.
aneins ,prshue, yanot e sapraoid aneyns Areinded
for weight bearing, whereas the underlying pad
cushion serves as a shock absorber. Comprised of sub-
cutaneous adipose tissue and collagenous and elastic
PAD LACERATION AND
fibers, the resilient pad cushion has the ability to com-
press, expand, and conform during activity on uniform
LESION EXCISION
or irregular surfaces. No other cutaneous surface can
 substitute completely for this highly specialized pad
The thick corneal pad is susceptible to abrasive and
structure.
shearing forces during ambulation. The feet also are
The center of gravity in the dog is located immedi-
Exposed to sharp objects that may result in penetrating
 ately behind the shoulder girdle, resulting in a greater
wounds, lacerations, or shearing wounds.
force-to-body weight ratio on the front pads. The
 Freshly lacerated wounds can be lavaged, debri-
maximum vertical force on the front pads approxi-
ded, and closed primarily. Grossly contaminated or
mates the body weight of the dog, whereas the vertical
-aseueu pumom uado anmbai Aeu spumom paipaju
force on the hind limbs is 0.8 times the body weight.
ment for a variable period of time prior to closure.
Longitudinal pad force is 10 times less than vertical
Foot pads have relatively poor
Supioy-amns,.
force. The front pad contact times can be as much as
power." Sutures can pull out of the dermal-corneal
1.5 times greater than that of the corresponding hind
tissues during ambulation. The displacement of the
limb pads.
underlying pad cushion can further stress any suture
To date, options for foot pad replacement have
line. As a result, 2-0-sized suture materials, employ-
focused on transposing or advancing digital pads to
o ,sana, aen wm sas ssa iniaa s
areas where their placement will provide a durable,
pad tissue, are best employed to appose pad lacera-
weight-bearing surface. Careful dissection of the
tions in medium to large canine patients. A heavily
phalanges via a palmar or plantar incision may enable
padded foot bandage, possibly with a metallic or
the surgeon to replace metacarpal or metatarsal pad
plastic Mason metasplint, is advisable to blunt
defects (resulting from injury, tumor excision, or
impact and minimize digital cushion spread beneath
abnormal weight bearing secondary to musculoskele-
the incision in order to prevent wound dehiscence. It
tal injuries) with one or more digital pads. Two
is strongly advisable to protect the healing pad for
digital pads can be employed to reconstruct the entire
radond amsse dpau ol syaam c Apaeurxondde
 metacarpal or metatarsal pad. With loss of the digital
healing. In general, sutures can be removed in about
pads from trauma or disease, it is possible to advance
2 weeks, barring healing complications (Fig. 18-2).
and rotate the surviving metacarpal or metatarsal
On occasion, extensive damage or loss of flexor
pad over the end of the exposed metacarpal or meta-
tendon support of the digits can result in abnormal
tarsal bones to provide a satisfactory weight-bearing
weight bearing. Foot pad ulceration may be noted,
surface.
especially in the larger, active dog. Successful fusion
Complete loss of all foot pads of the forelimb or
podoplasty has been reported under these circum-
hind limb in the dog is considerably more serious,
stances. Similarly, this technique can be used for
since no adjacent pad tissues are available for cover-
severe interdigital pyoderma cases unresponsive to
age. Skin, as a pad substitute, generally lacks the dura-
therapy. This technique entails removal of all skin
bility to withstand the daily physical abuse normally
folds between the digits and metatarsal/metacarpal
sustained by foot pads in all but the smallest veteri-
pad of the affected limbs, followed by suture apposi-
nary patients. In cats, successful skin coverage of the
tion of the bordering pad edges.
HG. 18-1 (A) Extensive vehicular trauma to a canine paw. Complete loss of all digital pads. (B) Note loss of the metatarsal pad. A
一
HG. 18-2 (A) Circumferential skin loss of the hind paw in a young Dalmatian, secondary to vehicular trauma. Note partial avulsion
of the metacarpal pad. (B) Close-up view of the foot. Only a portion of one digital pad survived. (C) A full-thickness mesh graft was
used to resurface the circumferential skin defect. The displaced metacarpal pad was sutured into its original position. Restoration of a
functional limb was achieved.
537
538
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
DIGITAL PAD TRANSFER
necessary. However, freshly severed digital and meta-
carpal/metatarsal pads have the potential to be grafted
 omto the limb. Pad-grafing options are summarized in
Digital pads tethered on a vascularized cutaneous
Plates 106 and 107.
pedicle can be transplanted, within their arc of rota-
The two-staged procedure noted in Plate 106 is
tion, to defects on weight-bearing surfaces. This is
technically demanding (Fig. 18-5). The pad is pre-
most useful when portions of the metatarsal or meta-
carpal pads are lost. Similarly abnormal weight
served on a temporary vascular recipient site while the
wound is being prepared for later flap transfer. This
bearing as a result of limb trauma may require posi-
 technique has the main advantage of providing a thick
tioning a digital pad over an ulcerated area.
A ventral incision for removal of the first and second
subcutaneous layer to replace the pad cushion; this
-ueia e ot uoeidde ped poap Aq paaauoe aq ouue
phalanx is preferable to a dorsal incision, thus ena-
bling immediate placement of the flap into its new
ulation bed. However, small pad grafts (Plate 107)
have the potential advantage of preserving remaining
position. The veterinary surgeon will find that pads
toe pads by taking small segments without necessarily
heal more slowly than other skin closures. Partial
dehiscence may be noted, but the sutures can easily be
sacrificing a digit for harvesting a larger single pad
replaced. A heavily padded bandage with external
graft. Grafts are ideally placed on surviving elements
 support is required to promote healing in this weight-
of the metacarpal/metatarsal pad cushion.
bearing area (Fig. 18-3).
DIGITAL FLAPS FOR
METACARPAL/
WOUND CLOSURE
METATARSAL PAD
TRANSFER
Closure of distal extremity defects, secondary to
trauma or tumor resection, can be problematic due to
Loss of the digital pads from trauma or disease may
the unavailability of loose, elastic skin (Fig. 18-6).
require repositioning of the metacarpal or metatarsal
Tumor resection involving the digits and interdigital
pad to provide a durable weight-bearing surface to the
area is particularly challenging. Centrally located
limb. The destroyed digits are amputated, and a
interdigital masses may be resected with adequate sur-
portion of the distal metacarpal/metatarsal bones may
gical margins, leaving sufficient skin to close the defect
be resected to permit proper metacarpal/metatarsal
and refashion a supportive toe web (Fig. 18-7). Resec-
 pad positioning over the resultant stump. This proce-
dure can result in a fully functional limb despite the
masses may necessitate wider resection. In many of
loss of all digits (Fig. 18-4).
these cases, the healthy skin along the lateral and
palmar/plantar aspect of one digit, including the pad,
pue uonnassip mjare paarasand kiages aq Aeu
ACCESSORY CARPAL PAD
removal of the phalanges creates a digital flap for
closure of the defect. This technique also can be useful
The small accessory carpal pad has been used to cover
for closure of skin defects involving digits 2 or 5, using
the stump of the front limb, when amputation was
digital flaps created from toes 3 or 4 respectively (see
necessary, at the level of the proximal metacarpal area.
Plates 102 and 103). The pad tissue usually is placed
Depending on the amputation site, the pad and mobile
in a non-weight bearing location on the paw, but
skin can be advanced, rotated into position, or incor
closure of the defect is effectively accomplished (Fig.
porated into a transposition skin flap to cover the ter-
18-7 and 18-8).
minal end of the extremity. Significant shortening of
the limb limits use of the extremity in ambulation, but
may assist the animal in balance or rising from a
FUSION PODOPLASTY
resting position.
Chronic pododermatitis is the result of an overall
PAD GRAFTING
failure to control the underlying condition. In most
cases, the primary pathogen is Staphylococcus aureus,
 Complete traumatic loss of the pads of a foot presents
but it may include secondary infections from Proteus
aq Aeu uonndue :op e on waqoid juesynais e
spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and E. coli. Other causes
C
HG. 18-3 (A) Chronic ulcer secondary to trauma. Abnormal weight bearing contributed to metatarsal pad ulceration.
(B) Debridement of the ulcer. (C, D) Resection of the entire third phalanx. (E) Application of the digital pad after surgical removal of
thephalanges.
539
FIG. 18-4 (A) Loss of digits of the hind paw secondary to immune-mediated vasculitis (see Fig. 6-17). (B) Resection of the
[eed anbai Aeuou slp [eua aul paoasau aram sauoq ledieoeiau pasodxa au jo spua leisi aul () 'paq uoeinuena
ans ie ped aui () paueqo sem qu euoung v dunis eunual au iaao ped ledeoeiauu aul jo suawaoueapy (a ') uooas
removal.
540
sm suaed aui med au sureus aim e ot Aepuos sped leaip pue iesieieiau aut jo papnuap med seau hat (a 'v) s-al '
immediately referred to the hospital by the patient's veterinarian. The pads were immediately placed in chilled saline and neomycin,
creatinga5%solution.
(C, D) The pads were separated and the digital cushions resected.
pauuaiapaid e ui alpsnu loun snoaueno aut ot painns aiam sped saoejns lau uane ot pasoui aiam stea ped paddns aui (a)
location to accommodate future elevation of the denuded paw.
(F) A tie-over dressing to immobilize and protect the grafted pads.
541
FIG. 18-5 Contirnued (G) Two parallel skin incisions were made cranial and caudal to the graft bed 7 days after application.
(H) The bipedicle flap incorporating the graft bed was undermined below the hypodermis. Skin incisions were extended to a length
Haaot painns aram siapioq punom pue us Suisodde au ajap med aun atepouuooe ot suains
(1) Cotton padding was applied between the elevated limb and abdominal wall, followed by a layer of elastic adhesive tape (Elastion,
Johnson & Johnson)y.
(J) One week after application, the pedicles were divided in stages (one-half every 2 days). Completion of the division process.
(K) Close-up view of pad grafts reimplanted to the hind paw. The outer corneal pad layers separate, revealing the germinal
epithelium.
(L) Epithelium expands over the interposing granulation tissue.
542
M
FIG. 18-5 Continued (M) Redundant scar tissue was resected approximately 6 weeks after completion of the pad transfer, which
aligned the cornified pad surface for optimal weight bearing.
reimplantation of severed metatarsal and digital pads using a bipedicle direct flap technique. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 30:539-547.)
HG. 18-6 (A) Vehicular trauma to a canine paw, with destruction of the central digital pads. (B) Excision of the granulation bed and
exposed ends of the second phalanges. (C) Closure. Note that digital pads 2 and 5 were re-epithelializing and eventually formed a
functional weight-bearing surface.
543
544
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
1010:53AN
1010:54AM
FIG. 18-7 (A) Resection of the central two toes due to neoplasia.
appearance.
(C) Wide resection of a soft tissue sarcoma. Resection of the lateral and plantar aspect of the adjacent digit was not required to obtain
surgical margins. The phalanges were dissected free of the resultant digital flap. The flap was transposed into the defect, completing
the closuire.
may include allergies, mycoses, parasites, irritants,
and conservative surgical management. Fusion podo-
neoplasia, metabolic disease, neurological disorders,
plasty refers to the obliteration of the interdigital web
or autoimmune disease. The skin can appear as thick-
and palmar /plantar cutaneous space between the met-
ened, inflamed, and ulcerated. Fistulous tracts may be
atarsal/metacarpal pad and digits. Fusion podoplasty
noted, along with a serosanguinous to purulent
also has been used in cases where permanent flexor
discharge.
tendon injury has resulted in digital pad irritation and
 Fusion podoplasty is considered for those cases of
ulceration secondary to abnormal weight-bearing by
end-stage pododermatitis refractory to both medical
the dog (see Plate 108).
Foot Pad Reconstruction
545
B
HG. 18-8 (A) Recurrent soft tissue
sarcoma referral. (B) Wide excision of the
mass. (C) Closure was accomplished
using the lateral digital skin and pad
C
surface.
Suggested Readings
Gourley IM. 1978. Neurovascular island flap for treatment of
trophic ulcer in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:119-125.
Hutton WC, Freeman MAR, Swanson SAV. 1969. The forces
Barclay CG, Fowler JD, Basher AW. 1987. Use of the carpal
exerted by the pads of the walking dog. I Srm Anirm Pract
 pad to salvage the forelimb in a dog and cat: an altermative
10:71-77.
to total limb amputation. J Am Arirm Hosp Assoc23:527-532.
Liptak JM, Dermell WS, Rizzo SA, et al. 2005. Partial foot
Basher A. 1994. Foot injuries in dogs and cats. Compend
amputation in 11 dogs. I Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 41:47-55.
Contin Edu Pract Vet 16:1159-1175.
Pavletic MM. 1994. Foot salvage and delayed reimplantation
Basher AW, Fowler JD, Bowen CV, et al. 1990. Microneuro-
 of severed metatarsal and digital pads using a bipedicle
vascular free digital pad transfer in the dog. Vet Surg
direct flap technique. I Am Arim Hosp Assoc 30:539-547.
19:226-231.
 Read RA. 1986. Probable trophic pad ulceration following
Basher AW, Fowler JD, Bowen CV, et al. 1991. Free tissue
traumatic denervation: report of two cases in dogs. Vet
 transfer of digital foot pads for reconstruction of the distal
Surg 15:40-44.
limb in a dog. Microsurg 12:118-124.
 Swaim SF, Bradley DM, Steiss JE, et al. 1993. Segmental paw
Bradley DM, Scardino MS, Swaim SF. 1998. Construction of
pad grafts in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:2161-2170.
a weight-bearing surface on a dog's distal pelvic limb. J Amt
 Swaim SF, Garrett PD. 1985. Foot salvage techniques in dogs
Anim Hosp Assoc 34:387-394.
and cats: Options, “"Do's" and “"Don'ts". J Am Anim Hosp 
Bradley DM, Shealy PM, Swaim SF. 1993. Meshed skin graft
Assoc 21:511-519.
 and phalangeal fillet for paw salvage: a case report. J Am
Swaim SF, Lee AH, MacDonald JM, et al. 1991. Fusion podo-
Anim Hosp Assoc 29:427-433.
 plasty for the treatment of chronic fibrosing interdigital
Bradley DM, Swaim SF, Alexander CN, et al. 1994. Autoge-
pyoderma in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:264-274.
nous pad grafts for reconstruction of a weight-bearing
Swaim SF, Milton JL. 1994. Fusion podoplasty to treat abnor-
surface: a case report. J Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 30:533-
malities associated with severed digital flexor tendons.
538.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:137-144.
 Fowler JD, Miller CW. 1990. Microvascular technique: appli-
Swaim SF, Riddel KP, Powers RD. 1992. Healing of segmen-
0iiz day paw a/ Aiains uoonnsuosat u uoes
tal grafts of digital pad skin in dogs Art I Vet Res 53:406410.
546
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 102
Digital Flap Technique:
Major Digital-Interdigital Defects
DESCRIPTION
The digital skin and pad can be salvaged to close problematic defects involving the paw. In this case
example, the cenfrally located neoplasm is resected where it overlies digit 3 and the adjacent toe web
associated with digit 4 (see Fig. 18-7).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
The dashed line represents the area of resection.
removal of the first, second, and third phalanges. In this example, the small band of skin (dashed lines)
 is resected to facilitate placement of the flap.
u ou pasodsu st 't hp go ped pauoene au ym anssh snoauenn ieueidyiid pue ienael au ()
large surgical defect.
COMMENT S
This is a remarkably simple and effective technique for closure of surgical defects of the paw secondary to
fumor resection. The lateral skin and aftached pad surface of digit 4, uninvolved with the neoplasm, nicely
transposes into the surgical defect. Surgical margins around any neoplasm will depend on the underlying
(base) surgical margins as well as the cutaneous perimeter obtained. The surgical perimeter and base of the
surgical specimen should be marked with India ink and submitted for histopathlogical examination to assess
the surgical margins. (See also Plate 103.) Having this flap available for closure can give the surgeon
confidence that the defect, secondary to tumor resection, can be largely or completely closed.
Dogs can have a functional limb with two or fewer toes (i.e., no digits; see Plate 105), contrary to
statements in the older veterinary literature. However, a dog may favor the leg to a variable degree,
especially during the first few weeks postoperatively: owners should be made aware of this probability prior
to surgery. Bandage protection of the area may be necessary over a 2-3 week period to assure healing is
complete.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
547
Plate 102
548
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 103
Digital Flap Technique: Major
Defects of Digits Two or Five
DESCRIPTION
The uninvolved portions of the third or fourth digit, adjacent to a neoplasm involving digits 2 or 5, can be
used to close the surgical defect created. Portions of the adjacent metacarpal or metatarsal bone can be
resected, if needed, to achieve surgical margins (see Fig. 18-8).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Neoplasm involving the dorsolateral surface of the second digit. Dashed lines signify the area of
excision, including a portion of the second metacarpal bone.
ae pp pe ae go saueud a ip pu au go uod suanepe pue yp puas a go uas (a
carefully dissected and resected to preserve circulation to the remaining digital skin and pad.
(C) The skin and toe pad of digit 3 are pivoted into the surgical defect and sufured to the adjacent
cutaneous borders.
COMMENT S
As also noted in Plate 102, digital flaps rely on salvaging the skin and digital pad tissues that are not
ns aui sqeua ansoi punom og aee anss go ainos s lue ssanond sseasp aue u paao
to resect tumors more aggressively, with the confidence that wound closure can be reasonably achieved in
this problematic area. Dogs can have a functional limb with two or fewer toes (i.e., no digits, see Plate 105),
although the dog may favor the limb to a variable degree, especially during the first few weeks following
Aue pioae oi iapio ul Aragins oi nojd Aqissod sut jo aieme apeu aq pinous siaumo Aialins
misunderstanding. Bandaging for a 2-3 week period is useful in helping to assure that healing occurs
without complication.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
549
Plate 103
550
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 104
Digital Pad Transfer
DESCRIP TION
Digital pads tethered on a vascularized cutaneous pedicle can be transplanted within their arc of rotation to
pads are lost. Similarly, abnormal weight bearing as a result of limb trauma may require positioning a digital
pad over an ulcerated area (see Fig. 8-3).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A no. 15 blade is used to incise around the circumference of the nail bed. The third phalanx is carefully
dissected out and disarticulated.
saueud pu pue puos an oi ansodxa ue oi aeuns us suapun au uo apeu si uoisiu u (a)
(dotted line).
(C) The surgeon should limit dissection to the immediate periosteal surface area. Care is taken to preserve
surgical area can improve tissue dissection.The circumferential access incision for excision of the third
phalanx is sutured closed.
these structures. The foot is placed in a bandage reinforced with a Mason metasplint until suture
sp s-e Aaaa paueuo are suds podns pue aepueq au ianei saam e Kianeuxidde reoa
COMMENT S
A ventral incision is preferable to a dorsal incision, thus enabling immediate placement of the flap into its
new position. The veterinary surgeon will find that pad healing is slower than other skin closures. Partial
dehiscence may be noted, but the sutures can easily be replaced. A heavily padded bandage with external
e lueaa-uiam su u lueau aod on panba s poddns
Foot Pad Reconstruction
551
Plate 104
D
552
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Metatarsal/Metacarpal Pad Transfer
Plate 105
DESCRIPTION
Loss of the digital pads as a result of trauma or disease may require repositioning of the metacarpal or
metatarsal pad to provide for an appropriate surface for weight bearing (see Fig. 18-4).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Severely damaged or necrotic digits (A) are resected, as shown in (Az). The wound is managed in
preparation for eventual pad transfer.
(B) Metacarpal or metatarsal bones are partially resected to permit advancement of the respective
metacarpal or metatarsal pad.
(C) The metatarsal or metacarpal pad is sufured into position with 2-0 monofilament, nonabsorbable
Kains iane syaam e ot dn ioy as iesins au papoid o padde si aaepueq paouau y'sanns 
COMMENT S
Reduction in bone length also helps to prevent "bottoming out,"in which bone deeply penetrates the 
cushion of the transplanted pad, increasing the likelihood of ulceration and discomfort.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
553
Plate 105
A1
554
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Pad Grafting
Plate 106
DESCRIPTION
Complete traumatic loss of the pads of a foot presents a significant problem to the dog: amputation may be
necessary. However, several digital and metacarpal/metatarsal pads have the potential to be grafted onto the
limb. The following is a case summary (see Fig. 18-5).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Individual foot pads in this case are separated (doted lines; A). The pad cushion is excised down to the
dermal layer of the avulsed or harvested digital pad or metatarsal/metacarpal pad (Ay). The pads are
incised to permit their placement flatly onto the proposed bed (As, A4). Each pad is sutured onto the
cutaneous trunci muscle after surgical removal of the overlying skin.
apis aut oi dn joog panju aut jo juawaeid Aq pauuaap si yeo au iog paq suandioau Aenoduan aul (a)
of the patient (direct flap technique). A tie-over dressing is used to secure the graft for 7 days.
(C) In 7 days, a bipedicle flap incorporating the graft is elevated (see Plate 35). The injured foot is
ppp si apad yoea jo geu auo 'shep tt un saapa sh oi panns pue de aue yeauaq pauood
(every 2 days), beginning with the ventral pedicle. Divided segments are sutured to wound borders.
(D) Several days after application, the hormy pad layer will separate from the underlying germinal
bandage reinforced with a Mason metasplint until a thick stratum corneum forms. In time, a leather or
nylon hunting boot may be employed for protection. Redundant tissue may be excised to reposifion the
COMMENT S
This two-staged procedure is technically demanding. The pad is preserved on a temporary vascular recipient
uad jo aeupe u a s anuuan s insun de on paedand uiq si punom aun aum as
a thick subcutaneous layer that replaces the pad cushion, which cannot be achieved by direct pad
options for foot salvage include: (1) the microvascular transplantation of a digital pad from another foot and
(2) the graft of a digital pad from another foot, in those cases in which the technique demonstrated is not
feasible.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
555
Plate 106
A3
556
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 107
Segmental Pad Grafting Technique
DESCRIPTION
Small, rectangular segments of digital pad epithelium can be harvested as free grafts to reepithelialize large
defects of the metacarpal or metatarsal pads. Development and successful use of this technique was reported
by Bradley et al. (1994).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The digital pads of uninvolved feet can be used to harvest small pad grafts.
(B) Segmental pad grafts are harvested as small, 10- to 15-mm long, 5- to 10-mm wide grafts, depending
0h pasn st (st io it ou) apeia lediers y 'paiaaos aq ot joajap aut jo azis pue sop aut jo azis aut uodn
incise and elevate the grafts. Sutures can be used to approximate the donor defects.
ea jo aneuns peuap luuaao au suaaon si uousno ped ou jeu anse on paoadsu si yea yoeg ()
graft. A suture is placed in each graft prior to application.
(D) Example of a hind-limb injury, with loss of digits and loss of the outer portion of the metatarsal pad.
anssh uoeinua Aq panaaon ane ped iesieneau aue o iae uosno aut go suuan lunss
(E) Segmental pad grafts are sutured to the prepared granulation bed. A nonadherent dressing with
ointment is secured to the graft area with skin staples or sutures, followed by application of a firm,
reinforced, protective bandage.
   a pou aa  da e g e sm e er ()
 margins. The outer, horny layer of the graft will begin to soften and separate from the underlying,
 regenerative epithelium.
COMMENT S
Pad grafting for reconstruction of the metacarpal/metatarsal is best considered when all the digits have been
lost. Small segmental grafts from viable digits do permit coverage of large defects of the important
metatarsal/metacarpal pads, without the need to sacrifice an entire digif. However, multiple small wounds
are created in several digits with this technique. The larger segmental grafts aligned along the perimeter of
e uado au ua go po se e se nuda ped pe ansse dia un pop a
 pnm an  a pn  nm   m pd (
epithelium.) As noted, it is preferable to apply the grafts over the vascularized remnant of the pad cushion
which has the resiliency to absorb the forces a foot is subjected to during normal activity. It can take several
weeks before these epithelial islands coalesce and, in turn, reform the thick durable pad surface. During this
time, the area necessarily needs to be protected wifth padded bandages and splints.
An alternative to this technique would be to sacrifice a single digit and graft the pad surface onto the
recipient area. If one or more intact digits are present, the phalanges of one or two toes can be resected and
the resultant digital flap(s) substituted for the missing metatarsal/metacarpal pad (plate 104): this is a
 preferable altermative to pad grafting.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
557
Plate 107
00
558
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 108
Fusion Podoplasty
DESCRIP TION
 pyoderma (intertrigo) that has failed to respond to medical therapy. All four paws may be involved: for these
patients, the forepaws may be operated on first, followed by the hind paws 1 month later.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A1, 2)  After surgical preparation of the paws, a marking pen (Securline [Gentian Violet] Surgical Skin
Marker, Precision Dynamics Corp., San Fermando, CA) is used to outline the areas that require
resection. On the palmar/plantar surface of the paw, the anterior border of the metacarpal or
metatarsal pad is excised along with the interpad skin fold. Skin (2-4 mm) is preserved along the
lateral and medial margins of each nail bed. Skin excisions are adjusted so that opposing interdigital
 a  a  s    n   e s s
at the midpoint of each digital pad.
(B)
 Afer excision of the diseased interdigital and palmar/plantar interpad folds is performed, opposing
pad margins are carefully trimmed with a scalpel blade to assure accurate edge-to-edge suture
alignment.
(C, D) The dorsal surface of the paw is usually sutured first, followed by closure of the palmar/plantar
surfaces: skin to skin, lateral to medial digital pad borders, caudal digital pad borders to anterior
border of the metacarpal/metatarsal pad.
placed in the interpad defect prior to closure of the palmar/plantar surface, with the ends of the
drain segment exiting through a small stab incision in the skin, lateral and medial to the anterior
border of the metacarpal/metatarsal pad. Two centimeters of the drain are exposed on each side and
recovery of the patient.
C OMMENT S
Although this procedure is infrequently used, it is invaluable for those patients with end-stage intertrigo of
the paws. Electrocautery is required to help control hemorrhage when resecting skin with chronic pyoderma
and fibrosis. Bandage care is critical to a successful surgical outcome. A metasplint (Carpal Splint, Kirschner
Medical Corp., Timonium, MD; Metal Splints, Surecraft, Upton, MA) is applied to the outer bandage to
reduce pressure and movement at the closure sites. Fiberglass casting materials (Scotchcast Plus, 3M Health
Care, Neuss, Germany; prefabricated casting material—C-Splint, Johnson & Johnson Orthopedics,
Raynham, MA) also may be fashioned into a custom-made protective splint.
During the first week, excessive drainage may warrant daily bandage changes: absorbent pads or
Broad-spectrum systemic antibiotics are advisable. Topical gentamycin ointment or silver sulfadiazine
ointment may be used if a Pseudomonas infection is noted postoperatively. Chlorhexidine swabs may be
used to clean the surgical area prior to bandage reapplication. During the second and third weeks of
bandaging/splinting, changes usually can be decreased to every second or third day. The drain is removed in
expensive and time consuming to perform. If all four paws are involved, it will take a minimum 2-month
time investment.
Foot Pad Reconstruction
559
Plate 108
A1
A
19
Major Eyelid
Reconstruction
Introduction 562
The Eyelids 562
PLATES
Plate 109: Lip-to-Lid Procedure 564
Plate 110: Oral Mucosal Graft onto Skin Flap 568
Plate 111: Third Eyelid-Skin Flap Reconstruction of the Lower Eyelid  570
561
562
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
THE EYELIDS
There are numerous surgical procedures employed
Lesions involving the eyelids may be excised and
 to remove damaged and diseased segments of the
dlosed directly when less than one-third of the eyelid
upper and lower eyelid. A number of articles and oph-
margin is involved. The lateral canthal ligament can be
thalmology textbooks discuss these procedures. The
divided to relieve eyelid tension during direct closure,
techniques available for extensive loss of this structure
if necessary. Cryosurgery and thermal destruction of
are more limited. This chapter covers three specialized
eyelid tumors have been used with variable success in
reconstructive techniques less commonly employed in
place of surgical excision.
veterinary surgery for major eyelid reconstruction,
Extensive wounds involving the cutaneous surface
 including the mucocutaneous subdermal plexus flap
of the eyelid can be successfully closed with local
(lip-to-lid procedure), a combined mucosal graft/
pedicle grafts. Skin flaps alone, however, are inade-
transposition skin flap technique, and a third eyelid-
quate for reconstruction of eyelid losses that include
skin flap technique.
the palpebral conjunctiva, umless the remaining con-
C
D
FIG. 19-1 (A) Lip replacement of the right lower eyelid. Elevation of the labial flap. (B)Resection of the lower eyelid and creation of a
bridge incision for placement of the composite labial flap. (C) View of the flap, 2 weeks postoperatively. Note the prominent
(arrow).
Major Eyelid Reconstruction
563
HG. 19-2 Close-up view of lip-to-lid transplant (From Pavletic
MM, Nafe LA, Confer AW. 1982. Mucocutaneous subdermal
plexus flap from the lip for lower eyelid restoration in the dog. ∫
Arm Vet Med Assoc 180:921-926.)
junctiva can be mobilized to line the flap's dermal
 To bypass the serious drawbacks involved with
surface upon transfer. This can be accomplished by
major eyelid reconstructive surgery, the author also
simple undermining and advancement of the adjacent
has developed the lip-to-lid procedure whereby a
conjunctival margins or by using conjunctival flaps
portion of the upper lip is used to replace full-thick-
from the opposing eyelid. A variation of the latter
ness lower and or upper eyelid defects (Figs. 19-1 and
technique is the full-thickness cross-lid flap. The lower
19-2).
eyelid is considered a suitable donor site for large
 Plate 111 outlines the use of the third eyelid flap as
upper eyelid defects. However, the use of the upper
a mucosal surface on which a local skin flap can be
eyelid for lower lid reconstruction is less desirable
 applied for lower eyelid restoration.
because of potential compromise to the vital function
the
1addn
eyelid normally serves for corneal
protection.
Free oral mucosa and nasal mucosal grafts, includ-
Suggested Readings
ing a thin layer of nasal septal cartilage, have been
successfully used as a conjunctival substitute to recon-
struct eyelids. The mucosal grafts are generally trans-
Hunt G. 2006. Use of the lip-to-lid flap for replacement of the
lower eyelid in five cats. Vet Surg 35:284-286.
planted onto a local pedicle graft, and the resulting
Pavletic MM, Nafe LA, Confer AW. 1982. Mucocutaneous
composite flap is transferred to the recipient site after
 -osat paa iamot o d au uoy de snxald euapqns
the mucosal graft "takes." As a result, the potential
tion in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 180:921-926.
hazards associated with upper eyelid "sharing" proce-
Moore CP, Constantinescu GM. 1997. Surgery of the adnexa.
dures are avoided. More recently, the third eyelid has
Vet Clin No Am 27:1011-1066.
been used as a conjunctival substitute for loss of the
Schmidt K, Bertani C, Martano M, et al. 2005. Reconstruction
 of the lower eyelid by third eyelid lateral advancement and
 lower eyelid, with a skin flap used to restore its cutane-
local transposition cutaneous flap after "en bloc" resection
ous surface (Plate 111)
of squamous cell carcinoma in 5 cats. Vet Surg 34:78-82.
564
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 109
Lip-to-Lid Procedure
DESCRIPTION
A mucocutaneous subdermal plexus flap from the upper lip can be used to replace the entire lower lid after
extensive trauma or tumor excision. It can be modified for upper eyelid reconstruction.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The proposed full-thickness lip incisions are drawn with a marking pen at a 45- to 50-degree angle to a
line passing through the medial and lateral canthi.
(B) Elevation of the full-thickness lip flap exposes the mucosal surface. Reference incision lines slightly
diverge to avoid accidental narrowing of the cutaneous pedicle. Gauze pads beneath the lip will support
it when incising the lip margin.
(C) The oral mucosa is carefully split at a level sufficient to replace the missing lower lid conjunctiva. The
cutaneous pedicle is carefully dissected from the oral mucosa and underlying structures, beneath the
platysma muscle. Care must be exercised to avoid traumatizing the pedicle's vital subdermal plexus, to
avoid severing any underlying facial structures, and to avoid the development of an unnecessarily long
cutaneous transfer pedicle.
(D) The oral mucosal defect is apposed with a buried suture pattern using 3-0 absorbable sutures.A bridge
incision (dashed line) is used to connect the donor and recipient beds for suture placement of the
transfer pedicle. Undermining of the mucosal border of the flap should be avoided to prevent circulatory
compromise.
 Major Eyelid Reconstruction 
565
Plate 109
B
C
566
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 109
(Continued)
with a buried, interrupted sufure pattern using 4-0 absorbable sufures. Lastly, the cutaneous surface is
sufured with a simple interrupted pattern. The cutaneous recipient bed is closed to complete the
transfer. Folds and skin puckers should be left alone to avoid vascular compromise to the graft in this
first stage.
(F) In 4-6 weeks, the surgeon has the option of removing the cutaneous transfer pedicle and closing the
 defect by simple apposition of skin edges.
(G) An optional second-stage revision procedure will improve cosmetic results. Second-stage revision can
be simultaneously used to re-establish a more normal"eyelid" border in the event of partial necrosis or
excessive thickness of the outer lip margin.
COMMENT S
Defects limited to the cutaneous layer of the eyelid are best restored with skin flaps. Eyelid replacement with
a labial flap is reserved for wide, full-thickness defects if more conservative options for closure are
unsuitable. The lip flap is a composifte mucocutaneous subdermal plexus flap. Skin, oral mucosa, and
portions of the orbicularis oris and buccinator muscles are used to replace the full-thickness loss of the lower
eyelid. Unlike a subdermal plexus flap lined with conjunctiva or a free mucosal grafft, the lip graft has a
central muscular layer, thus giving more normal thickness and natural rigidity as an eyelid substitute. In
addifion, the wide mucocutaneous junction and hairless lip margin serve as a natural buffer zone between
the cornea and the hairy skin.
The blood supply to the oral mucosa is from numerous arterial and venous anastomoses between the
cutaneous subdermal plexus and the submucosal capillary network. Care must be taken to assure
maintenance of adequate perfusion pressure to the terminal portion of the flap by using meticulous,
atraumatic surgical technique, avoiding unnecessarily long grafts (cutaneous transfer pedicles), avoiding
anssh jo puauanend poap supiae siakei snoauin pue iesonu ieno sea au umaq luuupun
forceps to the outer mucocutaneous border, and creating lip flaps with slightly diverging incisions to avoid
accidental pedicle narrowing. No effort should be made to remove"dog ears"or tissue folds during graft
procedure can be used in 4-6 weeks to improve the cosmetic results.
 During elevation of the flap, care must be taken to avoid accidental injury to underlying structures,
including the facial vein, parotid duct, and buccal nerve.
A right angle or T extension of labial mucosa can be included with the labial flap for simultaneous
o uog oi panbai aq ianel Aeu annpanoid esans puosas  'para iaddn aue jo suod go ueoisn
mold this larger graft for optimal cosmetic and functional results.
Major Eyelid Reconstruction
567
Plate 109
二
G
568
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Oral Mucosal Graft onto Skin Flap
Plate 110
DESCRIPTION
The upper lip and cheek are excellent sources of mucosa for reconstructive surgical techniques requiring this
unique epifthelial surface. Mucosa can be grafted onto a local transposition flap that can be rotated to the eye
 defect 1 week after surgical graft application.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
preparation for a mucosal graff. The dashed line shows an altermate position for upper eyelid
reconstruction.
ue u di aut piou ot pasn aq uen sainins Aeis aoeuns jesoonuu shl asodxa ot paeai si du iaddn aui (a)
elevated position; skin hooks or towel clamps also may be used. A mucosal graft is elevated from the
upper lip in this example. The graft is prepared in a fashion described for full-thickness skin grafts
(Plate 64). A no. 15 scalpel blade is used to elevate a premeasured segment of mucosa. It is advisable to
harvest slightly larger grafts than what is measured: mucosal grafts can contract (shrink) considerably
upon elevation. Minimize the amount of underlying tissue by keeping the scalpel blade close to the
submucosal surface during graft elevation. Metzenbaum scissors can be used to trim any tissue adhered
to the submucosal surface of the graft, as discussed in the section on skin grafing (Plate 64).
au ym anens iep s,de aun o udde on od paus sh ge pesonu pdand 'uu a (
(4-0 or 5-0) absorbable sutures.
(D) The flap is replaced in its donor bed for 4-7 days.
(E) The flap is re-elevated and placed in the donor defect after tumor removal. Borders of the mucosal graft
are sutured to the borders of the remaining conjunctiva with 4-0 absorbable sutures. Completion of the
closure, using 3-0 to 4-0 nonabsorbable skin sutures.
COMMENTS
 For complete eyelid reconstruction, this technique or the lip-to-lid procedure (Plate 109) can be employed.
 The lip-to-lid procedure has some tactical advantages over mucosal onlay grafts of the transposition flap.
with additional tissue bulk provided by the orbicularis oris and buccinator muscles. Moreover, the mucosal
border of the lip-to-lid transfer is more mobile than the adherent mucosal graft transfer discussed in this
plate. This technique can be used for mucosal graft transfer to other significant mucosal defects (e.g.
prepuce, nasal cavity). Mucosal grafts can be employed for preputial reconstruction when simpler penile
coverage techniques have failed.
Major Eyelid Reconstruction
569
Plate 110
570
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Third Eyelid-Skin Flap
Plate 111
Reconstruction of the Lower Eyelid
DESCRIPTION
This is an alternative technique for lower eyelid reconstruction, using a portion of the third eyelid as a
conjunctival replacement, in combination wifth a local transposition skin flap reported by Schmidt,
Bertani, et al.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Example of a malignant neoplasm involving the lower eyelid
(B) Full-thickness excision of the entire medial half of the lower eyelid.
(C) A no. 15 scalpel blade can be used to facilitate resection of the outer conjunctival surface of the third
eyelid. Elevation of a 90-degree transposition flap.
op aui su snoauno sasepe pue paa p ae go  pesrop aui on panns si de aui (a)
area was sufured in routine fashion.
(E) Example of the same technique used for restoration of the lateral half of the lower eyelid. This requires
 mobilizing and advancing the third eyelid laterally.
COM MENT S
The third eyelid flap can be used to replace the medial or lateral half of the lower eyelid. No adverse effects
a asn dau o paad aq ues Auue e ssnau  ant su ym paodai aram
palpebral fissure to its normal size.
Hair should be periodically trimmed near the dorsal flap margin to prevent irritation to the cornea.
Major Eyelid Reconstruction
571
Plate 111
C
20
Nasal Reconstruction
Techniques
Introduction: Nasal Anatomy 574
Traumatic Wound Management  574
Neoplasia 576
Neoplasms and Surgical Margins  576
Nasal Reconstruction Options 577
PLATES
Plate 112: Septal Coverage Using Cutaneous Advancement Flaps 584
Plate 113: Bilateral Sulcus Flap Technique  586
Plate 114: Septal Resection Technique 588
Plate 115: Alar Fold Flaps  590
Plate 116: Musculofascial Island Labial Flap
592
Plate 117: Cantilever Suture Technique 596
Plate 118: Labial Mucosal Inversion Technique  600
573
574
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION: NASAL
ANATOMY
AC
The external nose of the dog consists of a fixed bony
 case and a moveable cartilaginous framework.
Muscles connected to the cartilage component permit
the dog and cat to move the external nose in response
to various smells and tactile stimuli. The flattened
apical portion of the nose is called the nasal plane
(planum nasale); the central groove between the nos-
trils is the philtrum.
 The bony nasal aperture serves as a support frame
-81 [eseu [eiaiel pue [esiop aeies leseu au 10]
HG. 20-1 Frontal view of the nose (nasal planum),
ments provide support to the dominant dorsolateral
demonstrating the rolled (lateral) alar cartilages (AC), central
nasal cartilages. The flexible extermal nose is composed
of several individual cartilages, including the paired
planum (C), sulcus (S), and philtrum (P).
 dorsolateral and ventrolateral nasal cartilages, paired
accessory cartilages, and a singular cartilaginous nasal
septum. The ventral part of the septal cartilage is the
vomeronasal cartilage. A membranous nasal septum
less, pigmented epithelial coverage etched with polyg-
onal-shaped indentations or grooves: replication of
connects the immovable caudal cartilaginous nasal
this surface and underlying cartilage framework can
septum to the mobile rostral septum described.
be difficult or impossible to achieve in a practical
There are three interconnected nasal meatuses in
the dog, including the dorsal meatus, middle meatus,
fashion, as compared with the human.
and ventral meatus. The common nasal meatus is a
With the exception of controversial cosmetic ear-
 cropping and tail-docking procedures advocated for
longitudinal, narrow space on either side of the nasal
septum: it is coextensive with these three meatuses.
some breeds of dogs, many veterinarians have reserva-
The nasopharymgeal meatus is an extension of the
tions about performing surgery strictly for cosmetic
ventral nasal meatus.
 purposes, unless there are other benefits to the patient
 The nasal cavity and external nose is supplied by
in correcting a given defect. The attitudes of dog
 an extensive capillary network, in turn supplied by an
owners also vary on the subject of cosmetic surgery.
intercornecting network of arteries and veins. This
Many owners take particular pride in their pet's
extensive collateral circulation helps maintain a blood
appearance. Some owners/breeders seek out cosmetic
supply to these tissues despite significant trauma.
surgery to improve the appearance of their pet for dog
Similarly, it is this outstanding circulation that enables
show competition. Other owners simply are disturbed
the surgeon to manipulate these tissues during recon-
or shocked by the cosmetic outcome of a given surgery,
 despite the fact that patient function and comfort have
structive surgical procedures with less risk of ischemic
necrosis.
been restored or maintained. In this chapter, different
 In general descriptive terminology, the external
techniques are presented as options to help improve
 nose can be named according to specific anatomic
function to the nose while closing a given defect with
the hope of achieving a more reasonable cosmetic
regions: the central nasal region between the nostrils
or central planum, the lateral nasal or rolled alar carti-
outcome in a single surgical procedure.
lages, and the lower rostral base of the nostril or sulcus
(Fig. 20-1). The external nose is a highly specialized
TRAUMATIC WOUND
functional structure that contributes significantly to
the general cosmetic appearance of the dog. There is
MANAGEMENT
large areas of this tissue lost from trauma or surgical
Lacerations and superficial abrasions occasionally are
resection. Reconstruction of the human nose second-
noted in the dog and can be managed with basic
ary to trauma or tumor removal may require a single
wound management techniques. Shearing wounds,
surgical technique or multiple surgeries to optimize
usually secondary to vehicular trauma, generally are
the cosmetic outcome for the patient, depending upon
unilateral injuries from the patient tumbling to one
the extent of the defect. The dog, however, has a hair-
side during impact from behind, driving the patient's
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
575
rostrolateral facial area into the pavement. Manage-
simply reapposing the labial mucosa may not suffi-
 ment of these wounds includes control of hemorrhage.
ciently stabilize the nose, resulting in its lateral dis-
surgical debridement, and treatment of any infection
placement. As discussed in Chapter 15, stabilization
 present. Minor wounds can heal by second intention
can be facilitated by placement of absorbable anchor
with basic care. More extensive wounds, which often
sutures through one palatine fissure and into the
 include the rostral upper lip, may require additional
exposed nasal septal cartilage, before passing the
surgical intervention for optimal cosmetic and func-
straight needle through the opposite foramen and into
tional results. Regional skin can be undermined,
the oral cavity (Fig. 15-3). Two sutures are placed in
advanced, and sutured to the nasal mucosal and cuta-
this fashion and tied once lavage, debridement, and
neous epithelial tissue which compose the border of
hemostasis are achieved. Once tied, the labial mucosal
the defect. Alternatively, a compound upper labial
laceration is closed with a simple interrupted or con-
advancement flap can be employed for simultaneous
tinuous suture pattern. Although uncommon, trauma
closure of that portion of the rostral (full-thickness) lip
to the nasal cartilage can result in membranous scar
and nasal planum destroyed (see Plate 72).
tissue obstruction of the nasal opening caudal to the
Blunt frontal impact can result in the upward dis-
framework of the nasal cartilage. In one case referred
placement of the nose, with subsequent tearing of the
to the author, a canine patient could not breathe
underlying connective tissue attachments and adjacent
n ru e ssa 'sso si qno
labial mucosa. Minor avulsion wounds may be
approach to gain access to the ventral nasal meatus.
esosnu leqel pasmae au Sumns Aq paseu
 os  pao sm rsan ass r
around the upper incisors (see Plate 69). More exten-
tubular plastic stents through the common nasal
sive avulsion wounds can result in the upward dis-
meatus, secured to each common nasal meatus with
placement of the nose, labial tissues, and facial skin:
sutures for approximately 2 weeks.
HG. 20-2 (A, B) Nasal planectomy in the dog. The nasal
mucosa is directly exposed to the external environment, and
cosmetic results are considered poor. (C) Nasal planectomy for
squamous cell carcinoma results in a skeletal or "Phantom of
the Opera" cosmetic outcome. The exposed nasal mucosa was
periodically inflamed as a result of its external exposure to the
environment.
576
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
NEOPLASIA
NEOPLASMS AND
SURGICAL MARGINS
 Neoplasms involving the nasal planum are occasion-
ally encountered in small animal practice. Squamous
Limited tumor excision, simply to achieve optimal cos-
 cell carcinoma is one of the most common neoplasms
metic results and facilitate closure, likely will result in
in the dog and cat. Tumor resection can be accom-
tumor recurrence within weeks after surgery. A 10- to
(-0z ) A1amsn ro 1asl 'adiess Aq pausd
 20-mm margin around a well-demarcated growth may
pue sasen ioalas u uondo ue aq Aeu Adea uonepe
can be discussed with an oncologist or radiation thera-
patients, although highly invasive tumors may neces
pist. Computer-aided tomography may be useful to
sitate wider margins of healthy tissue to assure their
better define the extent of tumor invasion. Depending
complete removal. This basic principle of cancer
on the location of the tumor, it is possible to remove
surgery, however, must be tempered with avoiding
tumors completely, yet preserve portions of the nasal
unnecessarily aggressive excision of all tumors regard-
planum to "reconstruct" the nose for better functional
less of their type size, location, and classification.
and cosmetic results. It also is possible to use portions
Tissues excised should be submitted for histopatho-
of the rostral upper lip to replace areas of the nasal
 lbgical examination to assure that neoplastic cells do
planum (Fig. 20-3). It is not necessary to simply resect
not extend to the surgical margins of the specimen.
the neoplasm and accept the less functional and less
Additional resection of tissues and/or alternative
attractive cosmetic result obtained by complete nasal
cancer therapy options would be indicated under
planectomy (Fig. 20-2).
thiese circumstances.
C
FIG. 20-3 (A) Expansile granulomatous mass (benign) involving the left alar cartilage area. (B) Complete resection of the lesion.
(C) Upward rotation of the remaining nasal cartilage, recreating the left nostril. (D) Closure of the skin defect. Mild asymmetry is
present from loss of the alar tissue. However, the owner was pleased with the cosmetic result and functional outcome of the patient
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
577
NASAL RECONSTRUCTION
suturing of the labial mucosa to the nasal cartilage
OPTIONS
ring after nasal planectomy. Following this, the labial
borders are folded rostrally, inverting the labial
Skin Flaps
mucosa, thereby partially covering the nasal opening.
Segments of the lip are resected to reestablish the
midline of the upper lip. The net result of this surgery
An advancement flap from the dorsal muzzle can be
 is the creation of a mucosal antechamber for the nasal
placed over the exposed nasal septum, improving the
cavity, surrounded by pigmented labial tissue. Cos-
cosmetic appearance of the patient while protecting
metic results are reported to be better than those
the nasal mucosa from irritation secondary to expo-
achieved by nasal planectomy alone (Plate 118).
sure (Fig. 20-4). See Plate 112.
Bilateral Alar Cartilage Flaps
Sulcus Flaps
Centrally located tumors involving the external nose
Aeu sdeg uogisodsuen aloue aanaap-oe 'ieurs 'paned
 can be widely excised. If the rolled alar cartilages are
be used to replace the central nasal planum after resec-
not involved in the disease process, each alar promi-
tion of lesions restricted to this area (Plate 113).
nence can be carefully contoured with a scalpel blade
pivoted, and sutured together. The smaller external
nasal silhouette created results in a better cosmetic
outcome compared to complete planectomy. Moreo-
ver, the nasal mucosa is recessed and better protected
Stenosis of Reconstructed
aseures, [esiop siut jo uogeano Aq amsodxa wonj
Nasal Openings
shelf (Fig. 20-5). See Plate 115.
Significant gaps or loss of nasal mucosa can result
in narowing of the reconstructed nostrils. Accurate
Musculofascial Island Labial Flap
aligmnment of nasal mucosal tissues with the skin or
adjacent mucosal tissues used in nasal reconstruction
In the event that complete planectomy is required for
can reduce this postoperative complication. In mild
0l pasn aq ues dil raddn juase!pe aut 'Teaouai rouml
cases of nasal stenosis, scar tissue may be resected and
 partially reconstruct the canine nose. An incision, 3 or
the nasal openings enlarged, apposing the available
4 cm caudal and parallel to the rostral labial border, is
skin and mucosa. In cases of severe stenosis, mucosal
made through the entire thickness of the lip. The cuta-
 grafts can be used in an attempt to create a new epi-
neous and mucosal surfaces are carefully excised,
thelialized opening (see Welch and Swaim 2003).
leaving the terminal 3cm of skin, mucosa, and associ-
ated labial border. This musculofascial labial flap and
and sutured into position. The remaining skin and
Selective Resection of Nasal
 labial tissues are reapposed to complete the procedure.
Septal Tumors
Partial removal of the epithelial surfaces enables the
surgeon to bury the pedicle beneath the skin. Although
not identical to the original nose, the cosmetic appear-
In some cases, neoplasms may primarily involve the
nasal septum of the external nose. An alternative to
ance, judged by frontal and side views of the patient,
is improved. Moreover, recreation of the dorsal nasal
complete nasal planectomy would be selective exci-
shelf further protects the nasal mucosa (Fig. 20-6). See
sion of the nasal septum for those smaller tumors
without clinical evidence of extensive infiltration of the
Plate 116.
planum (Plate 114). An incision can be made to elevate
the dermis and epidermis of the central planum,
thereby gaining exposure of the septum for wide exci-
Labial Mucosal Inversion
sion. The elevated planum is resutured at the comple-
Technique
tion of tumor removal. As a result, the external cosmetic
 appearance of the nose can be maintained; loss of the
An alternate technique for improving nasal mucosal
septum causes no notable respiratory problems (Fig.
protection reported by Gallegos et al. (2007), uses
20-7).
FIG. 20-4 (A, B) Squamous cell carcinoma, requiring complete
nasal planectomy. (C) Complete excision of the external nose
and rostral lip. (D) Initial closure with bilateral labial
advancement flaps. (E) Simple restoration of external septum
using an advancement skin flap. The redundant skin margins
were sutured to the nasal mucosa, creating the appearance of
the alar folds. (F, G) Postoperative outcome. The patient had
no recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma when followed for
over1year.
578
HG. 20-5 (A) Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower nasal planum.
(B) Wide resection of the mass: the alar fold flaps were not involved in the neoplastic process and were preserved.
(C) The epithelial border of each alar fold was resected, followed by suture apposition.
(D) Final losure using bilateral labial advancement flaps.
(E, F) Postoperative views of the patient. The alar folds created the semblance of an external nose while protecting the inner nasal
mucosa from exposure. No recurrence of the neoplasm after l year.
579
HG. 20-6 See legend on opposite page.
580
HG. 20-6 (A, B) Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum and adjacent lip.
(C) Wide excision of the neoplasm.
(D) Creation of a nasolabial island flap from the left labial tissue.
(E) Transposition of the island of labial tissue over the dorsum of the nasal opening, creating a "protective awning" to the recessed
nasal mucosa. Closure of the labial defect using the remaining available labial tissues.
have improved the cosmetic appearance in this patient. The owner was quite pleased with the results.
/5）
C
D
HG. 20-7 (A) Septal carcinoma.
(B) Dorsal elevation of the external nasal septum as a flap.
(C) Skin hooks and self-retaining retractors enables the surgeon to
expose the nasal septum several centimeters in a rostral-caudal
direction.
(D) Completion of the surgical resection, with realignment of the
external septal flap.
(E) The flap was resutured to its original position. Cosmetic and
functional results were excellent, despite the extensive intranasal
surgery performed.
581
582
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Cantilever Suture Technique
maxilla resection: technique and results in two dogs. Vet
Surg 36:669-674.
Hammer DL, Sacks M. 1975. Clefts of the primary and sec-
 Rostral maxillectomy can result in a loss of nasal car-
ondary palate. In: Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techrigues in Small
tilage support, with drooping of the nose postopera-
Animat Surgery I, 75-84. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger.
tively (Fig. 20-8). Breathing through the deviated
Holt D, Prymak C, Evans S. 1990. Excision of tumors in the
nasal vestibule of two dogs. Vet Surg 19:418 423.
external nose becomes difficult or impossible. A
Pavletic MM: unpublished data.
"cantilever" suture technique, developed by the
 Rogers KS, Helman RG, Walker MA. 1995. Squamous cell
author, can be used to elevate the nose (Fig. 20-9). See
carcinoma of the canine nasal planum: eight cases (1988-
Plate 117.
1994). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:373-378.
Ruslander D, Kaser-Hotz B, Sardinas JC. 1997. Cutaneous
         
Suggested Readings
19:1119-1126.
Welch JA, Swaim SF. 2003. Nasal and facial reconstruction in
a dog following severe trauma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Evans HE, Chrisensen GC. 1979. Miller's Anatoy of the Dog,
39:407415.
 2nd ed., 507-511. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Withrow SJ, Straw RC. 1990. Resection of the nasal planum
Gallegos J, Schmiedt, CW, McAnulty JF. 2007. Cosmetic
in nine cats and five dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
rostral nasal reconstruction after nasal planum and pre-
26:219-222.
C
FIG. 20-8 (A, B) Rostral maxillectomy for fibrosarcoma; closure using the labial mucosa. (C) Wide resection resulted in collapse of the
lower support of the external nose, causing its ventral deviation postoperatively. The patient is functional, although nasal breathing
was significantly impaired.
D
HG. 20-9 (A) Maxillectomy for a fibrosarcoma with subsequent ventral deviation of the external nose. After completion of the
 maxillectomy, the patient was placed in sternal recumbency.
(B) Creation of an accesstunnel in the nasal bone for the cantilever sutures using a 1 /l6-inch Steinman pin.
uou suaueouou oo jo spuens omi jo asessed atee ot apaau sjuapody aane-gt ue jo as )
(D) Creation of small stab incisions in the lateral nasal cartilage. These stab incisions are used to facilitate passage of the cantilever
sutures through the external nasal cartilage.
au ynorut passed si aipaau aui uoisiui qers aeiieo leseu au ino paping pue us aun yeauaq aipaau iuiens aul jo aessed (a)
opposite stab incision and directed back to the original skin incision.
is closed to complete the procedure. Note the slight dimpling of the lateral alar cartilage as a result of the suture embedding below
the epithelial surface.
583
584
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 112
Septal Coverage Using Cutaneous
Advancement Flaps
DESCRIPTION
Complete nasal planectomy, usually secondary to wide tumor resection, results in exposure of the nasal
of mucosal irritation secondary to exposure.A dorsal midline, single pedicle advancement flap can be
advanced over the septum to improve cosmetic results and help protect the otherwise exposed mucous
membranes and exposed cartilage surfaces.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) After complete nasal planectomy, a 10- to 15-mm-wide advancement flap can be incised in increments
of sufficient length to stretch forward and downward over the nasal septum (dashed lines). Slightly
diverging incisions are used as the flap is incised progressively.
(B) The terminal end of the flap is sutured to the lower cutaneous border created after nasal planectomy
Fine 4-0 monofilament sutures are used to atraumatically secure the flap into position. The dermal
surface of the flap usually contacts the rostral edge of the nasal septum. Note that redundant skin folds
are created lateral to the flap affer advancement.
(C) The remaining skin folds are sutured to the edges of the mucosa exposed affer nasal planectomy. The
crescent folds of skin simulate the curve of the resected lateral nasal carilages to improve the cosmetic
and functional outcome after complete nasal planectomy.
COM MENT S
Simple flap advancement, and the skin ridges created, help cover the remaining nasal septal cartilage and
exposed mucosa after resection of the nasal planum. Use of this technique in part depends on the
availability of skin for mobilization as a single pedicled advancement flap. The cosmetic improvements can
be quite favorable compared to the classic"Phantom of the Opera"or skeletal appearance of dogs and cats
after planectomy. Partial coverage of the mucosa can decrease damage to this delicate epithelial layer from
until suture removal.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
585
Plate 112
586
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Bilateral Sulcus Flap Technique
Plate 113
DESCRIPTION
Selective resection of lesions confined to the rostral septal region can be closed with two small transposition
flaps, using the left and right "sulcus"regions, along the lower borders of the common nasal meatus.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) A lesion confined to the rostral aspect of the septal region is prepared for surgical resection.
(B) After resection of the lesion, two 10-mm flaps are outlined (dashed lines) of sufficient length to reach
separated in order to avoid compromising circulation entering the pedicle of each sill flap.
(C) Each flap is rotated dorsally and sutured into posiftion with 4-0 monofilament sutures.
(D) The shared medial borders of each flap are carefully sufured. An anchor suture may be placed along the
lateral border and secured to the adjacent septal mucosa, if necessary. The donor site of each flap is
closed directly.
COMMENT S
these flaps are small and their capillary circulation fragile, meticulous, atraumatic surgical technique and
Aneoia eare iennssen riu e s s ano ieudo ue ag assa ae juaid anns inga
surgical laser unit can be very effective in minimizing hemorrhage. Postoperatively, an Elizabethan collar
 should be used to protect the delicate flap from rubbing and pawing by the patient. Provided that tissues are
viable, small areas of dehiscence can be reinforced with additional sutures.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
587
Plate 113
588
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 114
Septal Resection Technique
DESCRIPTION
There are occasions in which neoplasms, such as squamous cell carcinoma, are confined to the rostral nasal
 septum without infiltration of the nasal planum. It is possible to elevate the central planum as a dorsally
based flap, thereby preserving this tissue while gaining access to the isolated lesion.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The dashed line represents the site for incising the central nasal planum.
 o   d a g as  n     si  p a (s
o) anss pu go ure sns e m pnasan si l iendas go juas pass a (
minimum). The mass is submifted for histopathological analysis.
(D) When hemorrhage has been controlled, the flap is resutured into position using a simple interrupted
suture pattern.
COMMENT S
With the use of a self-retaining retractor, aggressive excision of the cartilaginous nasal septum can be
normal. As discussed, the number one priority is obtaining adequate surgical margins around the neoplasm.
This flap technique should be considered when it is apparent that the tumor is confined to the septum but
 has not invaded the rostral nasal planum. Like other nasal surgical procedures, hemorrhage can be
significant; smaller patients in particular may be candidates for a transfusion. A laser surgical unit may help
minimize this surgical complication. An Elizabethan collar is used to protect the area from self-mutilation for
approximately 2 weeks.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
589
Plate 114
590
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Alar Fold Flaps
Plate 115
DESCRIPTION
Nasal planectomy generally is reserved for the removal of invasive tumors. The lateral nasal cartilage or alar
folds are not involved in the disease process in some cases. In this example, a subtotal planectomy is
performed and a "nose"is fashioned from the lateral cartilages to improve cosmetic results and help shelter
the exposed nasal mucosa from irritation secondary to environmental exposure.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Outline of resection of a malignant tumor.
(B) Complete resection of the rostral lip, philtrum, and nasal planum. The alar folds, not involved in the 
resection.
(C) The folds are rotated upward, the cut ends of which are sufured together.
(D) The dorsal borders of the alar folds are sutured to the adjacent cutaneous border. The dashed lines
represent the sife for bilateral full-thickness labial advancement flap incisions.
(E) The bilateral advancement flaps of the lip are sutured together in three layers: mucosal, musculofascial,
and cutaneous surfaces independenfly. Note the dorsal mucosal borders of the labial advancement flaps
 are sutured to the mucosa along the gingival border.
(F) The skin incisions are sutured to complete the procedure.
COMMENT S
This is one option for creating some semblance of a pigmented nose for the dog. It must be stated that
obtaining surgical margins is a priority in cancer surgery and should not be sacrificed at the expense of
obtaining a more satisfactory cosmetic outcome. However, indiscriminate removal of tissues in the absence
of clinical judgment is unsatisfactory. Computer-aided tomography may be useful to help define the limits of 
Nasal discharge should be expected: cleaning with moistened, cotton-tipped applicators should be gentle
and minimized during the first 10-14 days after surgery.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
591
Plate 115
00
592
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Musculofascial Island Labial Flap
Plate 116
DESCRIP TION
With extensive tumor invasion, the nasal planum and rostral upper labial tissues may require wide resection
to achieve adequate surgical margins. Adjacent labial tissue can be used to reconstruct the nasal defect.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The dashed lines represent the limits of surgical removal of a neoplasm, which has extensively invaded
the nasal planum.
(B) Resection of the entire nasal planum and rostral labial area.
(C) A full-thickness incision is made approximately 3-4cm from the rostral border of the remaining (leff) lip
in this clinical example. The dashed lines define the area where the skin will be dissected free of the
underlying musculofascial pedicle. The arrows signify the similar site for mucosal resection
(D) A musculofascial flap is created with a terminal island of labial epithelium (skin, labial margin, labial
mucosa).
sproq us Aen jesu pasodxa an sao paneid pue piemdn panenoi si de pueist pesenonsnuu au ()
are trimmed to create a symmetrical labial island, prior to suturing the opposing cutaneous borders (3-0
monofilament, nonabsorbable sutures). The flap's labial mucosa is sutured in a similar fashion, using
absorbable sutures. The musculofascial pedicle is covered by the advancing facial skin.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
593
Plate 116
594
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 116
(Continued)
(F) Bilateral full-thickness labial advancement flaps are created (dashed lines) to close the labial defect.
(G) Mucosal borders (lip to gingiva, lip to lip) are apposed with absorbable sutures; skin is sutured with
nonabsorbable sufures. The middle musculofascial layer of the lips also can be sufured to further
minimize the risk of postoperative wound dehiscence.
(H) Completion of the closure. The transplanted lip now covers a single, large, common nasal opening.
COMMENT S
The island labial flap creates a protective "canopy"over the nasal mucosa and exposed cartilage borders.
There is a more natural appearance both in frontal and side views of the patient. The bilateral labial
advancement flaps can be trimmed of redundant skin and mucosa in order to give a more natural rostral
curvafure to the recreated lip. Otherwise, the reconstructed lip will be somewhat wider and straighter than
the original labial silhouette. This is a somewhat minor cosmetic consideration.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
595
Plate 116
596
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 117
Cantilever Suture Technique
DE SC RIP TIO N
 Rostral maxillectomy can result in the ventral collapse or drooping of the nasal cartilage. This downward
en jesu aul aneaana on anns ssa panq e susn Aq jaso aq uen joagap ieoung pue
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A1, 2) Rostral maxillectomy for an oral neoplasm, with subsequent closure, using the upper labial mucosa.
Loss of this tissue support can result in significant ventral deviation of the nasal cartilages.
(B)
 Downward deviation of the nasal cartilage is assessed upon completion of rostral maxillectomy.
determine the severity of the nasal cartilage deviation. Those patients with pronounced deviation are
candidates for this technique.
(C)
A midline skin incision, 3-5cm long, is made over the muzzle, rostral to the medial canthus of each
eye. The skin is undermined and retracted to expose the bone. Self-retaining retractors will facilitate
exposure.
(D1,2) A small (1/16 inch) Steinman pin is inserted into a Jacobs pin chuck. The pin is driven below the
silhouette of the nasal bone to the opposite side, as illustrated. A 16- or 18-gauge needle is placed in
the hole, serving as a guide for the threading of 0 or 1 monofilament polypropylene suture strands. A
long, straight cutting needle is preferable. One or two sutures may be employed, depending on the
size of the patient.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
597
Plate 117
D
D
D2
598
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 117
(Continued)
(E)
A 1-cm incision is made through the epifhelial surface of each lateral cartilage, as illustrated. The
illustration shows the general course of the cantilever suture.
(F)
A close-up view of the nasal cartilage. The straight needle is passed beneath the epithelial surface and
guided out of the lateral cartilage incision(the left incision in this example). The needle is redirected
across the nasal cartilage and out the opposite incision. The straight needle then is directed back to
 the original midline incision.
(G)
 The first throw of a surgeon's knot is used to help assess the most appropriate tension to apply to the
cantilever suture before completing the knot.
(H)
The dorsal incision is closed. The lateral nasal cartilage incisions do not require sufure closure. The
cantilever suture recesses into cartilage below the epifhelial surface, partially collapsing these access
incisions.
COMMENT S
This technique can be quite effective in elevating the nasal cartilage. However, tightening the suture will
create a depression or dimple in the lateral nasal cartilages. Although this could be avoided by making
deeper access incisions, there is greater purchase of cartilage by using the technique illustrated. An
 Elizabethan collar is advisable during the first 10-14 days after surgery.
In one clinical case, the dog struck his nose several months later, resulting in a small amount of ventral
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
599
Plate 117
600
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Labial Mucosal Inversion Technique
Plate 118
DESCRIPTION
Gallegos et al. (2o07) reported a labial mucosal technique for closure of defects involving the nasal planum
 and adjacent rostral labial tissue in two dogs. The technique involves inverting the labial mucosa by suturing
the adjacent labial mucosal borders around the circumference of the resected nasal cartilage. This is followed
by apposition of the opposing labial margins. The infolded or inverted mucosa forms a recessed
antechamber to the nasal cavity.
SURGICAL TECHNIOUE
(A) Resection of the extermal nose and adjacent labial tissue.
(B) The adjacent labial mucosal borders are secured with sutures to the circumference of the incised edge of
the remaining nasal cartilage. The curved arrows denote the elevation of the incised labial mucosal
margins toward the dorsal midline. The asterisks identify the final location of the incised edges of the
lower labial area. See (C).
(C) The labial mucosa sufured around the circumference of the nasal cartilage border. Note a portion of the
labial margins is resected (brackets): this will allow for apposition of these opposing cut surfaces to
reestablish the labial midline beneath the nasal area. An incision also is created in the labial mucosa
from the left to right side: the solid line represents the midpoint (M) of this mucosal incision. The
dashed lines represent the location where this mucosal incision will fold on itself (curved arrows).
Absorbable sufures are used to secure this mucosal incision. The closure of this mucosal incision will
separate the oral and nasal compartments.
(D) The opposing (excised) labial borders are sutured together in two layers (mucosa, skin), completing the
procedure. The faint dotted line represents closure of the mucosal incision described in (C). The
pigmented labial margin borders the mucosal antechamber to the nasal cavity.
COMMENT S
The procedure reportedly provides a befter cosmetic resulft than nasal planectomy alone, alfthough other
reconstructive techniques (in this chapter) also are available to improve functional and cosmetic results. The
folded labial margins create a labial mucosal antechamber, cloaking the nasal cavity. This provides an
elliptical labial opening, protecting the delicate nasal mucosa from direct exposure to the external
environment.
Nasal Reconstruction Techniques
601
Plate 118
A
M
21
Cosmetic Closure
Techniques
Cosmetic Considerations 604
Causes of Scars  604
Minimization of Scarring
604
PLATES
Plate 119: Scar Concealment
608
Plate 120: W-Plasty 610
Plate 121: Dog Ear: Surgical Correction  612
603
604
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
COSMETIC
the wound minimizes the size of the epithelialized
scar. In contrast, those processes that impede contrac-
CONSIDERATIONS
-eau lan jeaida ambai jey spumom u tmsai uo
tion to complete the closure. Epithelialized scars lack
C urface scars generally are considered secondary in
the properties of normal skin. Moreover, in fur-bearing
importance to the successful closure of a wound.
animals the poor cosmetic results are highlighted by
The veterinarian is frequently relieved when a large
the hairless patches that form, especially in animals
open wound finally is covered with an epithelial
that lack a dense hair coat. Gaping wounds are more
surface and considers the final product, in relative
likely to form visible epithelialized scars unless accu-
terms, superior to the original wound. Today, most
rately approximated to minimize the width of the
owners are aware of the advances in human cosmetic
wound. In some cases, it may be more practical to
surgery. More individuals expect a higher-quality sur-
resect scars upon completion of healing by second
gical "product" for the money spent on their pet.
intention to improve functional and cosmetic results
 Owners naturally take great pride in their pets' appear-
(Fig. 21-1).
ance. Breeders and trainers of show dogs wish to
conceal scars and blemishes that detract from their
canine and feline investments. Even the less particular
Scar revision is easier to perform after second
owners occasionally judge the overall quality of a
intention healing is complete and regional inflam
surgery by the visible component: the quality of the
mation has subsided.
closure.
 Scar excision is followed by accurate apposition
The author has not been a proponent of cosmetic
of the healthy skin bordering the defect.
surgery in animals for the sake of cosmetics alone.
 However, the veterinary surgeon should know how to
minimize scarring and optimize cosmetic results when
MINIMIZATION OF
 surgery is required to close a wound, excise tumors, or
SCARRING
remove unstable scars. Indeed one of the greatest
 achievements of a surgeon is the successful restoration
of function to a damaged area without leaving a visible
Surgical Technique
scar as a reminder
Meticulous atraumatic surgical technique helps to
minimize scarring. Not all wounds closed by accurate
CAUSES OF SCARS
approximation remain as thin scars. The elastic retrac-
 tion of skin borders under tension may result in wider
All wounds heal, to a variable degree, by scar tissue,
scars. Meticulous use of subcuticular patterns can help
and owners must be advised of this inevitable result.
offset elastic retraction. W-plasty (Plate 120) and
The surgeon has the potential to modify the size and
Z-plasty (Plate 17) in humans also can position a major
severity of the scar and mask its presence. A basic
 component of the scar into a neighboring skin fold or
understanding of the causes of excessive scar forma-
crease, thus hiding its presence. Alteration of the angle
'ssaoid sut ,lonuos, diau on Aressasau si uo
of incision relative to tension lines also reduces visibil-
As noted in Chapters 2 and 3, open wounds can
ity of the resultant scar. Relieving skin tension periph-
heal by wound contraction and epithelialization. Ini-
eral to a wound can help offset widening of the scar
tially, elastic retraction of skin edges and severe tissue
after primary closure. Carefully placed bandages can
trauma can make accurate assessment of the wound
be used to protect the healing closure from external
 difficult. As inflammation and swelling subside, the
trauma or tissue disruption.
auL qua1edde anou si Amjut au jo apnuaeu ann
subsequent decrease in skin tension enables wound
Suture Considerations
contraction to proceed. If sufficient skin peripheral to
the wound is available, centripetal advancement of
skin over the defect proceeds over the first 6 weeks.
Suture patterns and suture materials and their dura-
Thereafter, the remainder of the opern wound must
tion of implantation can influence the severity of the
close primarily by epithelialization. In veterinary med-
scar. This is particularly true for the external skin
icine, wound contraction is largely a beneficial response
sutures. Finer-diameter suture materials enable the
when loose skin is present to promote myofibroblastic
surgeon to use greater numbers of sutures for meticu-
contraction. Full-thickness movement of the skin over
lous skin apposition. Everting suture patterns (e.g-
HG. 21-1 (A, B, C) Retriever with multiple fragile scars, as a result of vehicular trauma. This large scar (arrows) was overlying the
rightshoulder.
(D, E) Several weeks after healing, scars were resected, and normal fur-bearing skin was apposed using a buried intradermal suture
pattern followed by simple interrupted sutures (3-0 monoflament nylon). Improved cosmetic results were achieved, although
the smaller suurgical scars.
605
606
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
vertical mattress suture pattern) are preferable to pat-
for skin apposition in animals. Although a controlled
terns that invert skin edges. Inverted scars create
study comparing cosmetic results is lacking, closure
shadows in areas with sparse hair growth. Similarly,
appears to be adequate for routine surgical use.
improperly placed sutures that fail to sufficiently sta-
Optimal apposition, however, still is best achieved by
bilize skin borders can result in inverted skin edges or
suturing by hand.
undesirable "stair stepping," in which one skin border
When feasible, skin incision and subsequent closure
is elevated above the opposite skin edge. In thicker
perpendicular to the direction of hair growth will
skin, split-thickness suture placement through the
cover the resultant scar more effectively. While this is
 opposing dermal borders can accurately align skin
likely to be irrelevant in breeds with dense and long
margins and limit this displacement of cutaneous
 hair coats, it is more important in patients with short 
margins.
hair coats because they tend to show scars much more
Early removal of sutures (within a week) reduces
readily. In some cases, access incisions to underlying
the likelihood of suture tract inflammation. The use of
body structures can be "hidden" by placing them into
 a fine (3-0 to 5-0) subcuticular pattern in combination
a less visible site.
with smaller-diameter skin sutures (3-0 to 5-0) pro-
vides an excellent means of supporting the skin. Alter-
nate sutures are removed, beginning after day 5 in an
Suggested Readings
uncomplicated wound. Skin tapes used to support
Grabb WC, Smith JW. 1979. Plastic Surgery. Boston: Little,
 metic surgery are not particularly well suited for use
 in small animals. Carefully placed bandages, however,
Brown and Co.
Swaim SF. 1980. Surgery of Traumatized Skin: Management and
can provide added protection to the wound, if neces-
Reconstruction in the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia: WB
sary. Skin staples and surgical glues have been used
 Saunders.
608
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Scar Concealment
Plate 119
DESCRIP TION
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) When feasible, closure of wounds perpendicular to hair growth can reduce the visibility of the resultant
scar.
(B) In comparison, the linear scar from wound closure parallel to the hair growth pattern is more likely to
be visible.
(C) Incisions can be placed in a less discermnable area. Example: A medial arthrotomy incision is less visible
compared to a lateral incision overlying the knee. Carefully undermining and retracting of the skin
border still permits lateral arthrotomy.
COMMENT S
Posifioning of the scar depends upon the laxity and elasticity of the skin, local skin tension, and the shape of
optimize the cosmetic outcome.
Cosmetic Closure Techniques 
609
Plate 119
610
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
W-Plasty
Plate 120
DESCRIPTION
W-plasty is a means of breaking a linear scar into a zigzag design, thereby reducing its visibility.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A W-plasty template is created from X-ray film, plastic, or metal. The general outline and measurements
of the W-plasty template are illustrated. Equilateral triangles (60-degree angles) can be used for the
sake of simplicity.
(B) A fine-point marking pen or a toothpick inserted in a vial of gentian violet or methylene blue dye is
 paso are suad usoddo es al go saproq au apisino anedan at go auno au mp oi pan
 in the form of Ammon's triangles to prevent"dog ears."
(C) A no. 11 or 15 scalpel blade is used to incise along the outline.A fine subcuticular pattern, 3-0 to 5-0,
can be placed in the deep dermal surface in the center of each flap for initial apposiftion.
(D) Simple interrupted skin sutures (3-0 to 5-0) are placed in each flap to complete the closure.
COMMENT S
W-plasty has been reported to reduce scar expansion postoperatively by aligning the new zigzag scar, in
part, with skin tension lines. Its use is most applicable for cosmetic scar revision rather than primary closure.
proper execution of the w-plasty procedure, which requires a degree of skin laxity
 Cosmetic Closure Techniques
611
Plate 120
612
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Dog Ear: Surgical Correction
Plate 121
DESCRIPTION
"Dog ears" are skin puckers or folds that occasionally form at the end of incisions or at the base of skin
flaps. This bunching of skin usually is the result of closing the sides of the wound at too great of an angle. A
dog ear also can result when one side of the ellipse is longer than the other, resulting in redundant skin (on
one side) at the end of the incision. It is occasionally desirable to remove these skin folds for optimum
cosmetic results.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Fusiform defects with a 4:1 length-to-width ratio rarely form dog ears upon closure.
(B) This is an example of excision of a dog ear formed by closure of an incision ending at a great angle. Two
simple options for elliptical excision (Bi, B2) of the redundant fold are illustrated. The dashed line
denotes redundant skin excised.
juepunpai si uoisiu aul jo apis ao uaum sunsan sea sop e jo uonaon jo aldexa ue si siui ()
compared to its opposing skin border. The dashed line denotes redundant skin to be excised.
COMMENT S
Many dog ears flaften without surgical excision. Thin, elastic skin is less prone to dog ear formation
compared to thicker skin, especially over the back and cervical area in the dog. For symmetrical fusiform
 defects, a length-to-width ratio of 4:1 is reported to prevent dog ear formation. The terminal portion of a
fusiform defect can be tapered to minimize skin bunching. However, adherence to such a ratio, in many
instances, would create unnecessarily long incisions compared to closure and selective excision of any dog
ear(s) that might form. As noted, short fusiform defects in thin, elastic skin may not result in dog ears. Dog
asnduon Aoen pioe on sapio un ae gal isaq ane iasu uodn de e jo aseq aui je wog jeun sia
of the pedicle graft from attempted removal. If they fail to flatten upon healing of the surgical area, surgical
excision can be undertaken later.
Cosmetic Closure Techniques 
613
Plate 121
HHHE
B2
+
22
Preputial Reconstructive
Surgery
Introduction  616
Surgical Conditions
616
Surgical Techniques
625
PLATES
Plate 122: Preputial Ostium Enlargement  632
Plate 123: Preputial Ostium Reduction 634
Plate 124: Preputial Advancement Technique
636
Plate 125: Phallopexy  640
Plate 126: Urethral Reconstruction for Subanal Hypospadias  642
Plate 127: Preputial Urethrostomy Technique 644
615
616
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
INTRODUCTION
cinomas, papillomas, transmissible venereal tumors,
melanomas, and perianal gland tumors. Similarly,
The prepuce is a tubular sheath of skin (parietal
tumors of the penis may extend to the prepuce or form
1 layer) lined with mucosa (inner visceral layer) that
a mechanical impediment to normal function of the
 covers a portion of the penile shaft (pars longa glandis,
prepuce and penis. Biopsies are a necessary compo-
bulbus glandis). The mucosal layer reflects off the
nent to the diagnosis and management of these
bulbus glandis, forming a fornix, as the mucosa covers
conditions.
Congenital and acquired anomalies of the prepuce,
the external penis to the urethral orifice. The skin is
firmly attached to and continuous with the ventral
however, are occasionally noted. This chapter will
 abdominal skin, forming a sling to support and protect
discuss surgical correction of persistent frenulum, phi-
mosis, paraphimosis, hypospadias, and preputial
the penis from trauma and exposure. The cranial
1-3 cm of the prepuce protrudes forward from the skin
urethrostomy.
reflecting off the abdominal wall. The preputial orifice
normally allows for the unimpeded extrusion and
retraction of the penile shaft.
Persistent Frenulum
The preputial muscle, located in the hypodermis, is
an extension of the cutaneous trunci muscle; it attaches
A condition commonly seen in miniature poodles,
to the cranial and dorsal aspect of the prepuce. The
 primary function of this muscle is to draw the prepuce
cocker spaniels, and Pekingese, persistence of the
forward to cover the glans penis after erection.
 penile frenulum may also be seen in other breeds. The
'soop isou ui Aaqnd Aq samidnu Aieuou umnuan
The primary source of circulation to the parietal and
viscerai layers is from the external pudendal artery
This membranous tissue band connects the ventral
 and dorsal artery of the penis. The visceral layer also
penile shaft to the ventral mucosal surface of the
is supplied, to a lesser degree, by the artery of the bulb
prepuce.
The frenulum can prevent extrusion of the penis
of the penis.
during physical examination. During penile erection,
 Based on its anatomy and blood supply, the prepuce
presence of the frenulum restricts extrusion of the
is easily elevated from the abdominal wall for reloca-
tion. Similarly, a central preputial incision can be used
 penis and its ventral bowing. Persistent frenulum can
contribute to urethral prolapse on rare occasions (Fig.
to expose the penile shaft without compromising cir-
 22-1). Persistent frenulum is easily remedied by cuting
culation to this structure.
the band with a pair of scissors under light sedation.
Bleeding is normally minimal.
SURGICAL CONDITIONS
Phimosis
The prepuce is susceptible to trauma, although direct
trauma from automobile accidents and bite wounds,
for example, are relatively uncommon from the
Phimosis refers to the stenosis or narrowness of the
author's clinical experience. Foreign bodies also are
 preputial orifice (ostium), preventing extrusion of the
quite rare, although migrating awns, seeds, or frag-
penis. (In some cases, dogs may have a small penis
ments of plant material reportedly can imbed in the
relative to the prepuce: this is not phimosis if the penis
preputial cavity, causing a purulent or hemorrhagic
can be manipulated out of the preputial orifice unim-
discharge. Complete examination of the prepuce and
 peded.) The most common cause of phimosis is a small
penis can be accomplished by careful retraction and
preputial orifice (congenital or acquired secondary to
Examination through the orifice. In some cases, a
trauma or neoplasia). There are occasions in which
narrow vaginal speculum, otoscope, or forceps may be
neoplasms can partially obstruct the preputial orifice,
used to better visualize the preputial cavity. In more
 including mast cell tumors and carcinomas (Fig. 22-2).
problematic cases, a midline preputial incision can
 On occasion, penile tumors or growths may preclude
facilitate examination and surgery of the penis and
extrusion of the penis, despite a normal preputial
preputial lining. Balanoposthitis is common in male
opening (Fig. 22-3).
Sujrapun ue se saipoq uala1oy xseu Aeu pue ssop
 Basic management of phimosis is enlargement of
cause of this condition.
the preputial ostium. Obstructive lesions involving the
Like other anatomic structures, neoplasia is occa-
 preputial orifice require removal. Penile masses nor-
 sionally encountered, including mast cell tumors, car-
mally require surgical removal.
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
617
1412:37PH
112:38PM
1412:38PM
[euaan au qou auad yo uoesisan () ieuu si supaaa snosis ym uosap adus (a) ssdenoid eain jo uoeun
prolapse was managed by laser resection and closure with 5-0 absorbable sutures, using a simple interrupted suture pattern.
Filamentous hair at the tip of the prepuce,
The surgical removal of the cranial preputial pro-
wrapping or adhering to the exposed
trusion to remove a tumor usually does not result
 penile shaft. Preputial discharge can serve
 in significant penile exposure or paraphimosis.
as a gluelike substrate.
2.
Small preputial orifice that entraps the
penile shaft.
Paraphimosis
3.
 Chronic exposure and drying of the penile
surface, causing a friction or drag effect
 In humans, paraphimosis refers to the strangulation of
on the outer skin surface of the preputial
orifice. The prepuce also may be thin and 
the glans penis due to retraction of the narrow inflamed
foreskin. In veterinary medicine, paraphimosis is
flaccid, contributing to this condition.
 defined more broadly as the inability of the penis to
Adjacent or underlying scarring (secondary
4.
retract into the prepuce after its extrusion from the
to trauma or caudal abdominal surgery)
 preputial ostium. There are several causes of paraphi-
that restricts preputial coverage of the
mosis including the following.
 penile shaft.
119:59AM
B
phimosis. (E, F) Resection with a carbon dioxide laser was followed by surgical closure.
618
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
619
intermittently protrude thereafter. The exposed penile
mucosa rapidly dries, with loss of its normal lubricat-
ing properties. In turn, the skin surrounding the prep-
utial orifice literally is dragged inward as the penile
shaft attempts to retract (Fig. 22-4B, C). In some cases,
long-term lubrication (Quadritop Ointment [nystatin,
neomycin sulfate, thiostrepton, triamcinolone aceto-
nide], Butler Animal Health, Dublin OH) and prompt
penile replacement into the preputial cavity (over a
period of one month) by an attentive owner may allow
the desiccated mucosal surface to recover, with resto-
ration of natural lubrication. If this therapy fails,
surgical advancement of the prepuce, with preputial
ostium enlargement (if necessary), can correct this
HG. 22-3 Transmissible venereal tumor in a 6-year-old
mild variety of paraphimosis. A second surgical option
German shepherd, impairing penile extrusion. Surgical
is phallopexy.
debulking was followed by vincristine chemotherapy.
Although uncommon, pelvic trauma or restrictive
surgical scars beneath the prepuce (abdominal scar
after cystotomy as an example) may result in inade-
quate penile exposure. Division of the scar followed
by preputial advancement is required to correct this
Underdeveloped prepuce (congenital) or
cause of paraphimosis (Fig. 22-5). If the preputial
5.
a so s r oe si a
preputial tissue loss secondary to trauma
can be performed at the time of preputial advancement
or surgery.
(Fig. 22-6).
6.
Ineffectual retractor penis muscle. (The
Additional penile coverage (1 or 2cm) can be
author is not convinced this is a
obtained by excision of the ventral margins of the
significant factor contributing to
preputial orifice, creating a slinglike extension of
 paraphimosis.)
penile coverage. Reciprocally, dorsal enlargement of
the orifice will be required. Care must be taken to
uod a oi wmgso jenndard au jo smoneu juaaaid
The author does not believe shortening or imbricat-
ing the preputialis muscle is either necessary or
that it can potentially entrap the penis.
useful in the correction of paraphimosis. Preputial
Phallopexy, first described in the horse, is another
viable surgical option that has been reported to be
advancement alone can correct most of these cases.
-d shu shop un sisodered aeu un aaaa
There are other options to correct paraphimosis
(below) that do not involve "corrective surgery" of
cedure entails creating a scar between the dorsal penile
the preputialis muscle.
shaft and less mobile dorsal preputial surface via a
dorsolateral preputial incision (see Plate 125). It may
 be used in place of, or in conjunction with, preputial
Of particular concern is the entrapment of the penis
advancement, depending upon the severity of the case.
secondary to a marginal preputial ostium. Penile erec-
Partial penile amputation, as an alternative option,
tion or traumatic swelling of the extruded penis may
is usually considered if other surgical procedures fail
occur with a small or inelastic preputial orifice, creat-
to completely cover the penis. In most cases, only the
ing a "rubber band" effect on the penile shaft. Venous
terminal portion of the penis, anterior to the os penis,
and lymphatic outflow is restricted: progressive swell-
would require resection. Intermittent bleeding may be
 ing will collapse the arterial and venous circulation.
expected for 5-7 days postoperatively.
Without prompt intervention, penile infarction/necro-
 Major preputial reconstruction has been attempted
sis follows (Fig. 22-4A).
with the use of mucosal grafts and utilization of the
Most cases of paraphimosis do not result in penile
adjacent ventral abdominal skin. These techniques are
necrosis. Smaller dogs, in particular, can present with
multistaged procedures that require considerable cost
paraphimosis despite a seemingly normal preputial
and effort to perform. A more practical approach is to
jeqmauos readde Aeu qeaus enndaid au huuado
use one or more of the techniques discussed above to
thin and flaccid, with the penis protruding. The penis
improve penile coverage followed by, in many cases,
Ae jnq Xmop inouim paseda Ainuu aq uen
partial penile amputation (if necessary). In severe
1310:02AM
C
FIG. 22-4 (A) Strangulation necrosis secondary to paraphimosis.
damaged penile mucosa.
nm Aaeo endaid au un paeidau Aenueu aq pinos stuad au ndad au sussaduos us pioe uut au anon ()
times a day over the next month was curative. The owner was instructed to replace the penis every time it extruded. If conservative
therapy failed, surgical correction would have been performed.
FIG. 22-5 (A) Scar tissue between the base of the prepuce and abdominal wall as a cause of paraphimosis. The dog had previous
cystotomies for bladder stones.
(B) Division of the scar. A midline cystotomy was performed to remove stones, followed by preputial elevation and advancement.
620
G
HG. 22-5 Continued (C) Aggressive elevation of the prepuce and penis for advancement.
(D) After preputial elevation, the base of the prepuce is grasped and advanced to determine its new forward location.
(E) Resection of the skin in preparation for preputial advancement.
(F) Intradermal, monofilament nylon sutures were used to secure the prepuce to the fascia of the external abdominal oblique muscle.
(G) Closure of the skin incision, completing the surgery. The preputial orifice was normal diameter and required no corrective
enlargement.
621
G
HG. 22-6 See legend on opposite page.
622
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
623
HG. 22-6 (A) Penile mucosa desiccation secondary to long-term exposure.
(B) Note the delineation between the unexposed and exposed penile mucosa.
(C) A dorsal "release" incision and closure was required to enlarge the preputial orifice.
(D) Following preputial enlargement, the prepuce was advanced.
(F) Resection of skin to accommodate the prepuce.
(G) Following securing the cranial base of the prepuce to the external abdominal oblique muscle, the skin incision was closed to
complete the procedure.
cases, penile amputation with a scrotal or prescrotal
urethrostomy is a viable option to consider.
Hypospadias
Embryologically, hypospadias is a failure in fusion of
the urogenital folds, resulting in the premature involu-
tion of the interstitial cells of the developing testes. The
loss of androgen production results in incomplete
masculinization of the external genitalia. It has been
reported to be most common in the Boston terrier,
although the author has seen it in a variety of breeds,
including large breed dogs (German shepherds,
mixed-breed dogs, Newfoundlands). It is exceedingly
rare in the cat (Fig. 22-7). Undescending testicles and
im suy u padan uaq aae saoue jen
FIG. 22-7 A rare example of hypospadias in a black domestic
one report in the veterinary literature of a renal aplasia
long-haired cat. The cat had a history of recurrent urinary tract
Aeun aeaq pio-uo-g ue u wiuro pue
infections due to the proximity of the abnormal urethral orifice
incontinence also has been reported in the dog: this has
au Suiseaioui Aq paioaioo Aeonins sem stui 'snue au oi
not been noted by the author to date.
distance between these two structures.
Hobson et al. (1978) have described five basic areas
 no a s ha e  m 
hypospadias: glandular, penile, scrotal, perineal
(subanal), and anal. Of these forms, subanal urethral
openings are the greatest concern due to the high inci-
dence of lower urinary tract infections. An abnormal
meatus involving the glans or penile shaft (Fig. 22-8)
[apiu ue se paou aq Ae pue uoom si
finding. More extensive changes of the external geni-
 talia can be seen with the other forms of hypospadias,
with incomplete formation or agensis of the penis and
prepuce (Fig. 22-9). A dog with a scrotal or lower
perineal urethral meatus essentially urinates in a
fashion similar to patients that have had a scrotal or
prescrotal urethrostomy. As noted, a urethral meatus
adjacent to the ventral anal margin is exposed to fecal
FIG. 22-8 Example of penile hypospadias in a Dalmatian.
一
D
 FIG. 22-9 (A) Hypospadias in a Newfoundland. (B) Note the urethral opening at the level of the ischial arch. (C) Resection of the
rudimentary penis and prepuce. (D) Closure of the surgical defect. (E) Close-up view of the urethra. Note the two separate incisions
required to castrate thisdog.
624
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
625
e shuad a go ug aadun au aon () ue au moq Aepan eae leaud au un speds () ii- 
prepuce.
contamination, and recurrent bacterial cystitis is com-
caine block may be considered. However, because of
monly seen in these patients (Fig. 22-10). Castration is
the extreme penile swelling and circumferential tension
recommended at the time of corrective surgery for
of the preputial orifice, a quick cut with sharp scissors
hypospadias (Fig. 22-11).
or a scalpel blade may be used to provide immediate
tension relief. The lubricated end of a Bard-Parker
scalpel handle may be partially inserted between the
penis and preputial orifice to protect the penile shaft
SURGICAL TECHNIOUES
when a scalpel blade is used. In general, a 10- to 20-mm
incision will release the circumferential tension. The
Preputial Urethrostomy
exposed penis can be treated with topical lidocaine to
Techniques
reduce local discomfort. K-Y lubrication can be applied
to the penis to permit its replacement into the prepuce.
Conservative management for paraphimosis includes
In the event of penile necrosis involving the penis at
the level of the preputial fornix, the preputial urethros-
the application of ointment to prevent desiccation of
tomy technique is an alternative to prescrotal or scrotal
the exposed penis; systemic corticosteroids also may
be considered to reduce edema. Topical 50% dextrose
urethrostomy (see Plate 127). The urethral end, after
amputation, is anastomosed to the adjacent preputial
also may be used as a hyperosmotic agent to reduce
mucosa. Use of a ventral midline preputiotomy inci-
edema after performing the preputiotomy. Cold com-
sion will greatly facilitate this surgical technique (Fig.
Ae nq 'uams aseaiap diay o pasn aq Ae sassaid
22-12).
not be well tolerated by the patient without the adjunc-
tive use of analgesics and sedatives.
The penis is assessed for viability; extensive necro-
Emergency Enlargement of the
sis usually is associated with a deep purple to black
Preputial Orifice: Paraphymosis
appearance to the entrapped penile shaff. However,
hemorrhage, venous stasis, and a motled appearance
In those cases of paraphimosis with lymphatic and
m, aaneanasuon e junem Au hus aad au jo
circulatory compromise to the penis, immediate
and reassess" approach over the next 5-7 days. In
enlargement of the prepuce may be accomplished with
many cases, even dramatic swelling of the penile shaft
a ventral or dorsal incision (a ventral incision is the
 can resolve, provided that extensive tissue necrosis is
easiest to perform). Sedation or the use of a local lido-
not present. Patchy areas of mucosal necrosis on the
FIG. 22-11 (A) German shepherd with urethral opening immediately below the anus.
(C) Completion of the inverse tube.
(D) The skin margins were advanced over the tube flap, completing the procedure.
(E) Abdominal view of rudimentary penis. A smallarea of irritated epithelium was resected. (From Pavletic MM. 2007.
Reconstruction of the urethra by use of an inverse tubed bipedicle flap in a dog with hypospadias. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 23l:7l-73.)
626
(C) Carbon dioxide laser resection of the necrotic penile segment. (D) Anastomosis of the urethra to the preputial mucosa. (E) Closure
of the preputial mucosa. Closure of the skin completed the proced ure. (From Pavletic MM, OBell SA. 2007. Subtotal penile
amputation and urethrostomy in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:375-77.)
627
628
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
V uouu puonas Aq le Aieu anems annad
Phallopexy
urinary catheter may be required if swelling has
obstructed the urethra.
Pallopexy was originally reported for use in equine
Extensive necrosis of the penis is managed by
patients. In dogs, a dorsal penile mucosal incision is
partial penile amputation. Note: Although the prepu-
-u esoon [enndard qesrop leordian e ch pamins
tial shortening surgery has been advocated for dogs
sion in a position to maintain permanent caudal trac-
undergoing partial penile amputation, it has not beer
tion on the penile shaft (see Plate 125). There are
insufficient case numbers to determine whether phal-
sary. Urine passes through the prepuce unimpeded,
without irritation of its mucosal lining.
lopexy or preputial advancement is the superior pro-
cedure. These two techniques also may be combined
 in more challenging cases.
Permanent Enlargement of the
Preputial Ostium
Surgical Management of
Hypospadias
Permanent treatment of phimosis or paraphimosis
normally requires enlargement of the preputial orifice.
Surgical management of hypospadias depends upon
A dorsal incision of approximately 10-15mm is made
the location and severity of the anomaly. Incomplete
through the entire thickness of the prepuce. The inci-
formation of the penis, prepuce, and scrotum is
sion can be increased in small increments until the
common, and the abnormal urethral opening will vary
penis can be easily extruded. The skin is sutured to the
in location. The testicles are usually located beneath
 apposing mucosa with 4-0 absorbable sutures, thereby
separate skin or scrotal pouches divided by a rudimen-
ou ,padeus-aid, ro remue pauad e a
tary band of mucosal epithelium between them. If the
If an emergency ventral preputiotomy incision was
urethral opening is located anterior to the ischial arch
performed prior to this procedure (see above), it may
(scrotal or prescrotal area), the patient can urinate rela-
be sutured at this time (see Plate 122).
tively normally, in a fashion similar to a dog with a
scrotal or prescrotal urethrostomy. If the urethral
opening is located in the perineum, a variable degree
Ventral Preputial Ostium Closure
of urine scalding may be expected. If the urethral
to Improve Coverage to
opening is immediately below the anus, ascending
urinary tract infections are fairly common and may
the Penile Tip
 necessitate creation of a urethral tube extension using
 the available hairless skin and uroepithelium present.
 If 1-2cm of additional ventral penile coverage is still
This procedure will divert urine ventral to the anus,
required despite aggressive preputial advancement,
thereby reducing the potential of fecal contamination;
the mucocutaneous junction of the ventral preputial
local skin irritation will be noted from urine contact to
orifice can be resected: the mucosa and skin are sutured
the adjacent skin unless the area is kept groomed and
together to give better ventral penile coverage.
cleaned. Topical antibiotic ointments may be used to
However, a reciprocal dorsal preputial incision is
control occasional bouts of dermatitis.
required to enlarge the prepuce, as discussed above
Many articles advise removal of the rudimentary
(Plate 123). Ventral preputial closure also can be used
penis and prepuce at the time of castration. Presence
in a dog with an excessively large ostium.
of these tissues may be a source of irritation to the dog.
However, in many cases, these tissues cause no
problem and their removal is not mandatory. Castra-
Preputial Advancement: Coverage
tion, however, is advisable.
of the Chronically Exposed Penis
Ventral Diversion of the Urine
Preputial advancement is accomplished by creating a
Stream in the Male Dog
U-shaped incision anterior to the cranial base of the
prepuce and advancing the prepuce in a more cranial
position. There are a few key points that need to be
Although rare from the author's experience, male dogs
followed for successful used of this surgical technique.
may inad vertently urinate on their front legs (unpub-
(See Plate 124.)
lished data). This usually is the result of the anatomic
 Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
629
 FIGURE 22.13 (A) Preputial ostium in a standard poodle. The dog constantly urinated on his left front limb and lower thoracic wall,
at the level of the xiphoid process.
(B) Excision of the mucocutaneous junction of the upper half of the preputial ostium. Absorbable interrupted sutures (4-0) are used to
close the mucosa, followed by the skin.
(C) Partial closure of the ostium is followed by enlarging the ostium ventrally, using a midline ventral incision of sufficient length to
allow normal extrusion of the penis.
(D) The V-shaped notch created by this incision is closed by suturing the individual mucosal and cutaneous borders separately. The
urine stream will strike the closed dorsal ostium site, curving or rerouting flow in a ventral or downward direction.
conformation of the patient's trunk and prepuce. A
after resection of the mucocutaneous junction in a
prominent dome-shaped thorax and unusually ele-
fashion noted in Plate 124. Absorbable suture (4-0) is
vated (tucked-up) abdominal wall can result in the
 used to appose the preputial mucosa and skin. Recip-
urine stream exiting the prepuce, striking the lower
rocal enlargement of the preputial ostium is performed
thorax and /or forelimb. This condition is problematic
by incising the ventral midline of the ostium suffi-
for the patient and owner, necessitating bathing the
ciently to easily extrude the penis. The mucosa and
urine-soaked area after each urination.
skin are sutured in the fashion discussed in Plate 122.
Surgical diversion of the urine stream can be accom-
As a result, the urine stream strikes the closed cranial
plished by altering the preputial ostium. The cranio-
 preputial ostium, with the stream diverted ventrally
dorsal 50%-60% of the ostium can be closed side-to-side
(Fig. 22-13).
630
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
surgical modification of the preputial ostium in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc [in press].)
Suggested Reading
Pope ER, Swaim SF. 1986. Surgical reconstruction of a hypo-
plastic prepuce. I Am Arim Hosp Assoc 22:73-77.
Proescholdt TA, DeYoung DW, Evans LE. 1977. Preputial
 Ader PL, Hobson HP 1978. Hypospadias: a review of the
reconstruction for phimosis and infantile penis. J Am Anim
veterinary literature and a report of three cases in the dog.
Hosp Assoc 13:725-727.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:721-727.
 Sarierler M, Kara ME. 1998. Congenital stenosis of the prepu-
 Booth HW. 2003. Penis, prepuce, and scrotum. In: Slatter D,
tial orifice in a dog. Vet Rec 143:201.
ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., 1531-1541.
Schumacher J. 1999. The penis and prepuce. In: Auer JA,
 Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier Sciences.
Stick JA, eds. Equire Surgery, 546-547. Philadelphia, PA:
Fowler JD. 1998. Preputial Reconstruction. In: Bojrab MJ, ed.
Saunders.
Current Techriques in Small Animal Surgery, 4th ed., 534-
 Smith MM, Gourley IM. 1990. Preputial reconstruction in a
537. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1493-1496.
Hobson HP. 1990. Surgical procedures of the penis. In: Bojrab
Somerville ME, Anderson SM. 2001. Phallopexy for treat-
MJ, ed. Current Techniques in Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed.,
ment of paraphimosis in the dog. I Am Anin Hosp Assoc
423-430. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger.
37:397400.
 Pavletic MM. 2007. Reconstruction of the urethra by use of
 Suann CJ, Kormey FD. 1983. Surgical treatment of paraphi-
 an inverse tubed bipedicle flap in a dog with hypospadias.
mosis in a pony. Car Vet I 1l:341-342.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 231:71-73.
Pavletic MM, O'Bell SA. 2007. Subtotal penile amputation
and preputial urethrostomy in a dog. JArm Vet Med Assoc
230:375-377.
632
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Preputial Ostium Enlargement
Plate 122
DESCRIPTION
 Enlargement of the preputial orifice or ostium is normally performed to correct phimosis and those cases of
 paraphimosis where the size of this orifice is marginal.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A, Az) Cranial and lateral views of the preputial orifice. The dorsal midline incision is created in smal
increments; the penis is extruded after each progressive incision to assure the penis can easily
enter/exit the ostium.
(B, B2) The penis can be extruded and replaced without difficulty into the prepuce.
 hueann 'sanins aqeqosqe oi ym pannins ane siaproa iesoon pue us susoddo aui ( ")
permanent V-shaped notch.
COMMENT S
 In those urgent/emergent cases of paraphimosis with penile entrapment, the ventral ostium is more
assessable for temporary emergency enlargement by creating a linear incision using blunt-tipped scissors. A
scalpel blade also can be used, but insertion of a lubricated Bard-Parker scalpel handle inside the ostium is
advisable, providing a protective shield to the enlarged penis. Provided that the penile viability is
maintained, permanent ostium enlargement is performed as illustrated above.
 Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
633
Plate 122
B
B
C
634
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Preputial Ostium Reduction
Plate 123
DESCRIPTION
Ventral reduction in the size of the ostium is used for two purposes: correction of an excessively large
ostium to prevent penile exposure or to create a ventral sling cover in conjunction with preputial
enlargement of the orifice is required (Plate 122).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A, Az) Lateral and frontal view of the ostium and exposed penile tip.
(B, B2) Excision of the ventral "third"of the mucocutaneous junction of the ostium.
(C, C) Apposition of the mucosal surface with absorbable 4-0 sutures.
(D, D) Closure of the cutaneous margins.
COMMENT S
 Partial ventral closure of the orifice alone, as a primary treatment for paraphimosis, must be done with
 caution: should the dog have an erection, strangulation of the exteriorized penis is possible. Intraoperatively,
the penis is extruded after surgically manipulating the ostium to help assure this orifice is the appropriate
size. The author normally reserves this technique as an adjunct to preputial advancement to gain an
 additional 1-2cm of coverage of the penile tip, with reciprocal enlargement of the dorsal portion of the
ostium. As noted, phallopexy (Plate 125) also is a surgical option to consider for those challenging cases of
paraphimosis.
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
635
Plate 123
B1
B2
C
C
D1
D2
636
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Preputial Advancement Technique
Plate 124
DESCRIP TION
Preputial advancement is the most common surgical technique employed for managing paraphimosis.
to preputial advancement is a modification of the Bolz phallopexy technique, described in Plate 125.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Example of paraphimosis.The surgeon can initially assess preputial advancement by grasping the
(B) A curved incision is created from this cranial point in a caudal direction: the width of the curve will
created anterior to the base of the prepuce and extends caudally a few centimeters along the junction of
the prepuce and ventral abdominal wall. The skin within this area (dashed lines) is resected.
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
637
Plate 124
638
Plate 124
(Continued)
O uoen piemiou io pans Aeapi ane iapioq uys pisiou aut on padde sanins Aeis io soou us ()
the undermined prepuce. The prepuce is undermined and the lateral incisions extended to facilitate
 the preputial cavity 1-2cm from the ostium. (It is the author's experience that overcompensation does
not create a problem.) Three or four nonabsorbable (monofilament nylon or prolene) or slowly
absorbable sutures are used to secure the cranial dermal border of the prepuce to the extemal
hind limbs can be manipulated (flexed and extended) to assure penile coverage is complete. The
remaining incision can be closed with an intradermal suture pattern.
(D) This is followed by closure of the skin with a simple interrupted suture pattern (3-0 or 4-0).
COMMENT S
the legs in a neutral to slightly extended position to promote penile extrusion. Unless this is done, the
surgeon may underestimate the forward advancement required to properly cover the penis.
The entire penis and prepuce can be completely elevated from the abdominal wall without compromising
 id andad a sueaaa u aissae ar  un sns peu sns pinom s un 
advancement.
dermal surface of the advanced preputial border to the extermal abdominal oblique muscle fascia. Otherwise,
the elastic skin of the abdomen can stretch, negating the penile coverage gained by this surgical technique.
Securing the lead dermal border of the prepuce to the abdominal wall dramatically reduces tension on the
skin anterior to the point of advancement.
correct paraphimosis. Preputial advancement alone can correct paraphimosis without the need to operate on
Aessnau pou si aosn sndand an go undu iins 'snd ads anu un s
 If, after maximal advancement, there is persistent exposure of the penile tip, the ventral border of the
preputial ostium can be closed to improve ventral coverage. Reciprocally, a small dorsal incision can be
   s s  a a o a
Partial penile amputation is considered only in those cases where preputial advancement, ventral ostium
closure, and/or phallopexy (alone or combined) cannot adequately cover the penis. In this case only a
portion of the penis, anterior to the os penis, normally requires removal.
 Preputial advancement can be problematic in small dogs with a prominent dome-shaped thorax.
Preputial advancement over the more dorsally "tucked"abdominal wall of a dog can result in the urine
stream striking the lower curvature of the caudal thorax. This can be remedied by closure of the dorsal
 ostium, described in Fig. 22-13. Under these circumstances, phallopexy (Plate 125) may be a better surgical
alternative in patients with this body conformation.
displaced too far caudally in the preputial cavity. The fear is that urine irritation will cause balanoposthitis.
From the author's clinical experience, this is not a cause for concern. The mucosal lining of the prepuce
routinely tolerates urine exposure. Preputial shortening, advocated in some textbook articles after partial
 penile amputation, is considered unnecessary.
Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
639
Plate 124
640
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Phallopexy
Plate 125
DESCRIP TION
 Phallopexy creates a permanent adhesion between the inner preputial lining and adjacent penile surface to
prevent recurrent paraphimosis. It may be used as an alternative to the preputial advancement technique
discussed in Plate 124, depending upon the severity of the condition.This is based on the technique
published by Somerville and Anderson (2001).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A)
 A 2-4 cm incision is made along the junction of the prepuce and dorsal body wall, approximately
retaining retractors are inserted to facilitate visualization.
(B)
 A 1.5- to 2-cm incision is created along the dorsal midline of the preputial cavity beginning 3 cm
caudal to the preputial ostium: a 5-mm strip of mucosa can be resected to facilitate suture placement.
To expose the dorsal penile surface, the penile shaft can be exteriorized through the preputial orifice.
It may be possible to exteriorize the penis through the preputial access incision created. (It is the
author's experience that if is easier to exteriorize the penis through the preputial access incision
 created.) Once exposed, a superficial reciprocal penile incision/mucosal strip is created approximately
2 cm from the tip of the penis.
(C)
A trial interrupted suture (3-0 or 4-0, slowly absorbable) is placed at the anterior aspect of the
can be exposed, the dorsal preputial incision can be extended caudally, and the penis resufured to a
more caudal portion of the dorsal preputial incision. If complete exteriorization of the penis cannot
be performed manually, several (6 to 8) interrupted absorbable sutures are used to appose the dorsal
(D, E) Closure of the preputial mucosa is followed by closure of the cutaneous access incision, completing
 the surgery. Castration can be performed prior to or after phallopexy.
C OMMENT S
This is a variation of the Bolz phallopexy technique used to treat paraphimosis in horses. Somerville and
Anderson (2001) reported that the dorsal preputial wall is less mobile than its ventral counterpart, possibly
adns aou si enuann auad aun jeu pnou osie Aai xadoud nn oue iaaq e luoid
ventrally. The author has found, however, a ventral phallopexy is easier to perform using the basic
midline of the glans penis to avoid injury to the urethra. The penile mucosal incision is sutured to the
ventral preputial mucosal incision used to expose the penis.
Somerville and Anderson (2001) expressed concern that excessive penile retraction could result in urine
pooling with secondary balanoposthitis. The author's experience has indicated this potential complication
does not occur, and the risk of this problem has been grossly overstated (or perpetuated) in the veterinary
literature. It is for this reason that preputial shortening after partial penile amputation is unnecessary.
 Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
641
Plate 125
C
642
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 126
Urethral Reconstruction for
Subanal Hypospadias
DESCRIPTION
Perineal (subanal) hypospadias predisposes patients to recurrent ascending urinary tract infections.
Reconstruction of a urethral extension can separate the terminal urethra from the anal orifice, dramatically
reducing bacterial contamination and secondary cystitis.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Illustration of perineal (subanal) hypospadias.
(B) Insertion of a Foley catheter, approximating the diameter of the terminal urethra. The circumference of
the urethra can be calculated by multiplying the diameter of the intact urethra times 3.14 (π). (If the
terminal urethra is 15mm in diameter, then the circumference is 47.1mm.) The arms of the U incision,
in this example, would be 47.0mm apart, with the curvature of the U incision dorsal to the urethral
orifice. Incisions are extended ventrally 4-7cm, depending on the size of the dog.
(C) The skin is gently undermined and folded inward: the opposing skin borders are sutured with a series
 of simple interrupted absorbable sutures (3-0, 4-0). The upper portion of the U is sutured, creating a Y
closure.
(D) The outer skin borders are advanced and sutured over the"inverse urethral tube."
COMMENT S
removed as tissue edema subsides (3-5 days as a suggested guideline). Premature removal of the Foley, in
face of postoperative tissue swelling, can impair normal urination. Long hair should be trimmed around the
oriface to help prevent future irritation from urine contact with the adjacent skin.
 Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
643
Plate 126
644
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Preputial Urethrostomy Technique
Plate 127
DESCRIPTION
Penile amputation secondary to trauma or disease will dictate the location of a urethrostomy. In those cases
of penile resection at the level of the preputial fornix, anastomosis of the terminal urethra to the preputial
mucosa can result in a simple and effective permanent urethrostomy. Urine exits the preputial ostium in a
steady stream, eliminating urine irritation and scalding occasionally noted with prescrotal urethrostomies. A
mucosal lining.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
the os penis in this example.A carbon dioxide laser may be used to reduce hemorrhage.
(B) The terminal urethra is sutured to the caudal border of the preputial mucosa. Absorbable suture (4-0 or
5-0) is used for the anastomosis. (It is also possible to anastomose the terminal urethra via a small
circular incision created in the adjacent preputial mucosal surface.)
(C) Continuation of the suturing of the urethra to the preputial mucosa. (Note: If tension is noted during
anastomosis, a release incision can be made cranial to the anterior base of the prepuce: this facilitates
(pasoo aq uen uosou aseaai aun uaduon uodn 'anndand au go suauaneidsp epne au 
(D) After anastomosis, the preputial access incision is closed, first by closure of the mucosal layer.
(E) The cutaneous preputiotomy incision is closed completing the procedure.
COM MENT S
The preputial cavity serves as a satisfactory conduit for urine passage from the urethrostomy site.
Postoperative use of a urinary catheter may not be necessary, unless postoperative swelling at the
anastomotic site is noted, resulting in straining to urinate wifth secondary urinary bladder enlargement.
 Preputial Reconstructive Surgery
645
Plate 127
C
D
E
23
Miscellaneous
Reconstructive Surgical
Techniques
Omentum 648
Scrotum 649
Tail Fold Intertrigo (Screw Tail)  650
Vulvar Fold Pyoderma
1651
Closure Options for Defects of the Pinna 657
PLATES
Plate 128: Omental Flap Options 658
Plate 129: Scrotal Flap Technique 660
Plate 130: Caudectomy for Tail Fold Intertrigo 662
Plate 131: Episioplasty  664
Plate 132: Closure Options for Select Pinnal Defects  666
647
648
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
This chapter was designed to introduce surgical
Closure of problematic abdominal hernias
 techniques that fail to fit neatly into the standard
 Closure of diaphragmatic defects
 Omentalization of prostatic, hepatic, and
of this atlas. The omentum and scrotum, and their
 potential uses in reconstructive surgery, are described.
pancreatic abscesses and cysts
Surgical management of tail fold and vulvar fold inter-
Omentalization of abcesses and cysts
trigo are also discussed. Lastly, simple flap options for
within the abdominal cavity
 pinnal defects are discussed.
 Omental overlay of gastrointestinal
incisions
Omental overlay of urinary bladder to
OMENTUM
prevent adhesions and leakage
Omental flap transfer for thoracic wall
An understanding of the basic anatomy of the
defects
omentum is useful for determining how best to
 Thoracic omentalization for pleural
mobilize this tissue for wound closure. The omentum
effusion
is subdivided into the greater and lesser omentum.
 Omental overlay of the caudal esophagus
The greater omentum (epiploon or omentum majus) is
a lacy apron extending from the greater curvature of
Closure of feline indolent axillary wounds
the stomach to the level of the urinary bladder. It
Closure of problematic external wounds
covers the intestinal tract ventrally and on the sides.
The greater omentum appears to be a single layer,
The omentum can reach most areas within the
but is actually is a double peritoneal sheet (that
abdominal cavity and outer abdominal wall (Fig. 23-1).
reflects or folds back on itself distally). It is com-
The omentum in some patients may not reach the
posed of connective tissue and streaks of fat that sur-
caudal aspects of the abdominal and pelvic cavities
round fine arteries passing through this tissue. The
without surgically lengthening this tissue. Similarly.
 omentum is nearly transparent due to its thinness.
lengthening procedures are required for transferring
The greater omentum is further subdivided anatomi-
the omentum to the anterior thoracic and axillary
cally into a large bursal portion and a smaller splenic
areas. (See Plate 128.)
and veil portion.
 The omentum can be useful for closure of problem-
The bursal portion of the omentum attaches cranio-
atic defects by improving (donating) circulation to
ventrally to the greater curvature of the stomach. Dis-
ischemic or compromised tissues. For example, a
tally, it reflects on itself and returns to the region dorsal
chronic radiation burn, lacking circulation, would
to the stomach. The ventral layer and the deeper dorsal
potentially benefit from a muscle or omental flap. Each
layer can be separated by gentle manual traction.
can provide a source of circulation to the area, not only
Between these two surfaces is a potential pocket or
to improve healing but to potentially serve as a vascu-
cavity called the omental bursa or lesser peritoneal cavity.
lar surface for skin graft application. The major limita-
Except for this large constant opening, the epiploic
tion in using omentum is its relative fragility and lack
foramen, the omental bursa is a closed pouch. The
of "bulk" for closing larger defects. Overextension of
epiploic foramen is bounded ventrally by the perito-
the omental flap can result in circulatory compromise
neum covering the portal vein and dorsally by that
to the more distal portion of this tissue. However,
covering the caudal vena cava.
within its normal arc of rotation or advancement, the
The splenic portion of the omentum is also referred
omentum can be gathered or folded to improve its
bulk for defects involving the abdominal wall or dia-
the left extremity and caudal margin of the left lobe of
phragm. Synthetic mesh can be used for added
the pancreas.
rigidity.
In thoracic wall reconstruction, the latissimus dorsi
muscle flap is superior to the use of Marlex mesh
Surgical Applications
and omentum, based on the tissue bulk provided
and simplicity of elevation and transfer Nonethe-
 The omentum has been used for the following surgical
less, omentum and mesh can be used in those cases
in which the use of this muscle is not possible.
applications
Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
649
HG. 23-1 (A) Omentum elevated out of the abdominal cavity through a midline laparotomy This mobile tissue can be used for a
variety of problematic wounds within its normal arc of rotation.
(B) Resection of the caudal thoracic wall for osteoscaroma in a 2-year-old golden retriever. A portion of the diaphragm attached to
Aaeo oipesout aut osui pue usexqdeip au yanorut passed aq ues wnuauo au Aisea moy ahon papasai sem soun aut
SCROTUM
The scrotum is a multilayered tissue enveloping the
testicle; each testicle is separated by a connective tissue
septum. The septum blends with the abdominal fascia
 dorsal to the testicles. Residing beneath the thin scrotal
skin is the dartos, a layer comprising connective tissue,
elastin fibers, and smooth muscle. Smooth muscle con-
traction of the dartos layer draws the testicles closer to
the abdominal wall. Around each testicle is an outer
parietal tunic and the visceral tunic enveloping the
testicle. The cremaster muscle, derived from the inter-
nal abdominal oblique muscle (or occasionally the
transversus abdominis muscle) inserts on the parietal
FIG. 23-2 Scrotum with enlargement secondary to a large
vaginal tunic at the level of the testis. Contraction of
Sertoli cell tumor. Note the capacity for the scrotum to stretch
the cremaster draws the testicles closer to the body
to underlying expansile masses.
(Fig. 23-2).
The principal blood vessel to the scrotum is the
external pudendal artery. The cremasteric artery arises
cent inner thigh. Matera et al. (2004) describe the use
from the femoral or deep femoral artery. The scrotal
of the scrotal skin for closure of similar cutaneous
arteries run along the cranioventral surface of the
 defects, after its dissection from the underlying dartos
testis, superficial to the common vaginal tunic. The
layer (see Plate 129). The elevated skin can be advanced
perineal branches of the external pudendal artery
or transposed into adjacent cutaneous defects.
supply the scrotum, in part. The draining veins follow
The surface area of the scrotum varies in the male,
the same course in reverse.
depending on the age of the dog, the size of the testi-
cles, and the variable effects of gravity. The scrotum
has a tendency to shrink after castration, whereas the
Surgical Application
scrotum tends to have a greater surface area in the
intact male dog. The author also has used the scrotum
 The scrotum has been described in humans as a simple
 for local wound closure on a limited basis, leaving the
advancement style flap for closing defects of the adja-
dartos attached to the overlying skin surface.
650
 Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
TAIL FOLD INTERTRIGO
skin-cleansing solutions and topical antibiotic agents
by pet owners may palliate this condition in assessable
(SCREW TAIL)
areas, ventral tail fold pyoderma is often impossible to
maintain in this fashion (Fig. 23-3).
 Intertrigo (skin fold dermatitis) is an inflammatory
"Screw tail" is a descriptive slang term for the cork-
condition associated with skin creases or depressions.
screw-like deviation of the tail most commonly seen in
Deeper creases or folds have a natural tendency to
 English bulldogs. On occasion, it can be seen in French
accumulate moisture; skin-to-skin contact can create
bulldogs, pugs, and Boston terriers. This condition
local irritation contributing to the formation of pyo-
also has been called "ingrown tail." In some cases, the
derma. While diligent conservative treatment with
ventral skin fold can be several centimeters deep when
1610:34AM
0:35AI
FIG. 23-3 (A) Tail fold pyoderma and severe ventral deviation of the tail over the anus.
(B) After amputation of the tail via a dorsal T incision, firm traction of the skin fold and the tail helps remove the ventral fold. The
u po aens lea au in paaue  sem aso stu ui pig us au uoasa an aads in pasun si snue au ot iesp uss
deviated tail.
(C) Note the depth or surface area of this ventral fold and the large mat of hair that accumulated in this cutaneous trough.
Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
651
VULVAR FOLD PYODERMA
The infolding of the vulva below the adjacent skin
surface may be of a congenital or acquired nature.
Hypoplasia of the vulva may result in its recession
 deeper to the adjacent skin. Slight angular deviation of
the vulva also has been noted in conjunction with
hypoplasia. The recessed vulva in turn can result in
moisture accumulation and dermatitis. Bacterial infec-
tion normally follows this sequence. Most cases of
vaginal fold pyoderma are acquired in nature. Subcu-
taneous fat accumulation dorsal to the vulva stretches
the skin to a variable degree with the assistance of
gravity. The redundant skin drapes over the vulva
(Fig. 23-6). Urine scalding and moisture accumulation
HG. 23-4 Dorsal skin folds occasionally present with
secondary to chronic dermatitis perpetuates the pyo-
intertrigo. Topical medical therapy can be attempted to control
derma. In long-standing cases, the skin lateral and
this condition, unlike many of the ventral skin folds seen in
ventral to the vulva also may appear to be thin, hair-
 less, and somewhat shiny due to long-standing derma-
these patients.
titis. The upper thighs may contact each other, creating
another crease for frictional contact and dermatitis.
Although many dogs with this condition do not
present with a bacterial cystitis, vulvar fold pyoderma
may be a source of recurrent urinary tract infections in
assessed by the insertion cotton tipped applicators.
The deformed tail can take a ventral bend that partially
some canine patients. Surgery is considered the accept-
able standard for correcting vulvar fold pyoderma
 or completely covers the anus, further contributing to
(Fig. 23-7).
the problem. Intraoperatively, the dorsal surface of the
 deep skin fold can adhere firmly to the undersurface
Neoplasia of the vulva is occasionally noted in older
of the deviated coccygeal vertebrae, making surgical
dogs, including squamous cell carcinoma and mast cell 
 resection of the inverted skin fold a greater challenge.
tumors (Fig. 23-8). Most of these neoplastic conditions
do not present as typical vulvar fold pyoderma.
 On occasion, the dorsal tail fold(s) also may develop
 intertrigo, but it is more amenable to conservative
treatment (Fig. 23-4).
When in doubt, biopsy.
 Clinical signs of tail fold intertrigo usually include
the dog rubbing or scooting its rear on the floor or
carpeting. The owners may note a foul odor around
Tumor enlargement and ulceration is often associ-
the tail base or note fecal accumulation beneath the
ated with the vulva, rather than the skin dorsal to this
distal tail segment.
structure. Partial or complete vulvar resection can be
performed in these cases, with care taken to identify
and preserve the urethral tubercle. Owners are warned
Surgical Correction
that local urine scalding is a possibility, in part depend-
ing on how the patient squats to urinate (Fig. 23-8).
Standard textbooks normally show one or two basic
Postoperatively, the fur should be trimmed to reduce
approaches to caudectomy for tail fold intertrigo: a
moisture accumulation and facilitate cleaning the area
dorsal linear incision over the tail or the creation of a
after urination. Commercially available disposable
horizontal elliptical incision around the entire tail area.
'asodmd siu rog juaaau are sadim Aqeq
Following amputation of the tail anterior to the initial
point of coccygeal deviation, the skin fold and redun-
dant skin is resected. Preservation of the major dorsal
Surgical Technique
skin fold enables the surgeon to create a semblance of
a short symmetrical tail with satisfactory cosmetic
Surgery is focused on removal of the redundant skin
results (Fig. 23-5). The author's preferred approach is
and the area of intertrigo using connecting inverted U
described in Plate 130.
("Dutchman's pants," inverted horseshoe) incisions.
一
FIG. 23-5 (A) A typical case of tail fold intertrigo.
(B) A skin incision caudal to the large anterior dorsal fold of the tail is followed by a central incision directed caudally, forming a T
incision. The T incision simplifies dissection around the deviated tail segment, followed by its amputation with bone-cutting forceps.
The ventral skin fold is resected.
(C) Following control of bleeding vessels with electrocautery and ligatures, the dead space can be closed with the application of
absorbable sutures. Note the elevated tail fold.
dunis tet ious e jo uoisn aun Sueao uoisiui [euaa aut ot painns s! pioy paieaala au (a)
652
一
C
(B) Traction of the skin rim dorsal to the vulvar fold, demonstrating the chronic dermatitis.
(C) Resection of the excessive skin and subcutaneous fat.
(D) Because of the mismatch in the paired curved incisions, the skin was closed with two dorsal lateral incisions. Note the lower
thigh incisions: a small amount of skin was removed ventral and lateral to the vulva bilaterally, creating a "thigh tuck." This
maneuver slightly separates the thigh skin and improves skin aeration ventral and anterior to the vulva, where chronic moist 
dermatitis also is noted.
653
FIG. 23-7 (A, B) Vulvar fold pyoderma can be overlooked, unless an effort is made to lift and retract the overlying skin.
'Us aul moiaq paou iey snoaueinoqns ssaxa aut jo [eaowan Aq pamooy st us suepunpau aut jo uoisixg (a ')
654
E
G
HG. 23-7 Continued (E) The dorsal midpoint of the vulva is lifted to the dorsal skin border. Sufficient skin was removed to prevent
recurrence of the skin fold. Absorbable interrupted sutures are used to close the defect, followed by simple interrupted skin sutures.
(F) An additional amount of caudal thigh skin is resected below the vulva, creating a "thigh tuck.
aul jo ainsodxa paaondun eana aui moaq uoeedas ius moy aon g-e aint un suaed auueo aul oi aseo sun anedo ()
chronically inflamed skin below and anterior to the vulva.
6.55
FIG. 23-8 (A) Squamous cell carcinoma involving the vulva with the patient in sternal recumbency for this photograph.
(B) A second case example of squamous cell carcinoma, with the patient in dorsal recumbency.
D shajaid oune aul paaiasad st eded lean au us uuote pue eana au jo uoasan ae suaed aul jo ma (a ')
perform this particular surgery with the patients in dorsal recumbency.
656
Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
657
 Removal of redundant subcutaneous fat is impor-
Campbell BG. 2004. Omentalization of a nonresectable
tant for correcting this condition and facilitating
uterine stump abscess in a dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
closure (Fig. 23-6). The lateral skin incisions can be
224:17991803.
Evans HE, Christensen GC.1979. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog,
extended below the lower vulvar margin. A small
467-471. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
amount of skin can be resected at this location to create
Friend Ej, Niles JD, Williams JM. 2001. Omentalisation of
 a  s  m ,' t, e
tissues for those patients in whom chronic dermatitis
Hill TP, Odesnik BJ. 2000. Omentalization of a nonresectable
extends ventral and cranial to the vulva. Care must be
uterine stump abscess in a dog. J Sm Anim Pract
41:115-118.
taken to avoid excessive skin resection dorsal to the
Hoelzler MG, Bellah JR, Donofro MC. 2001. Omentalization
vulva (Figs. 23-6C, D and 23-7F, G). Wound dehiscence
of cystic sublumbar lymph node metastasis for long-term
secondary to excessive tension can create a perineal
palliation of tenesmus and dysuria in a dog with anal sac 
defect that can be quite difficult to close (Plate 131).
adenocarcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1729-1732.
Hosgood G. The omentum—the forgotten organ. Physiology
and potential surgical application in dogs and cats.
CLOSURE OPTIONS FOR
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:45-50.
Jerram RM, Warman CG, Davies ESS, et al. 2004. Successful
DEFECTS OF THE PINNA
 oesta Aq isopnasd sad e ro puaan
a dog. N Z Vet J 52:197-201.
Johnson MD, Mann FA. 2006. Treatment for pancreatic
Pinnal skin defects secondary to tumor resection or
abscesses via omentalization with abdominal closure
trauma can present a closure challenge to the veteri-
versus open peritoneal drainage in dogs: 15 cases (1994-
narian. In some cases, veterinarians may consider
2004). I Amt Vet Med Assoc 228:397-402.
ou   a no sd o j n
LaFond E, Wierich WE, Salisbury SK. 2002. Omentalization
 of the thorax for treatment of idiopathic chylothorax with
constrictive pleuritis in a cat. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc
However, the loose skin around the base of the ear
38:74-78.
 provides a donor area for a variety of transposition
Lascelles BDX, Davison L, Dunming M, et al. 1998. Use of
flap options.
axillary wounds in 10 cats. J Sm Anim Pract 39:475-480.
 Lascelles BDX, White RAS. 2001. Combined omental pedicle
Surgical Technique
grafts and thoracodorsal axial patterm flaps for the recon-
struction of chronic, nonhealing axillary wounds in cats.
Vet Surg 30:380-385.
Plate 132 demonstrates several options for closing
Ross WE, Pardo AD. 1993. Evaluation of an omental pedicle
defects involving the pinma. Flaps are especially useful
extension technique in a dog. Vet Surg 22:37-43.
for defects involving the lower half of the pinna,
Smith BA, Hosgood G, Hedlund CS.1995. Omental pedicle
although some flaps are capable of covering large
used to manage a large dorsal wound in a dog. I Sm Arin
Pract 36:267-270.
areas of the pinnal surface, depending on the length of
White RAS, Williams JM. 1995. Intracapsular prostatic omen-
the ear for a given patient.
talization: a new technique for management of prostatic
abscesses in dogs. Vet Surg 24:390-395.
Williams JM, Niles JD. 1999. Use of omentum as a physio-
logic drain for treatment of chylothorax in a dog. Vet Surg
Suggested Readings
28:61-65.
Omentum
Scrotum
Bray JP, White RAS, Williams JM. 1997. Partial resection and
Evans HE, Christensen GC. 1993. The urogenital system. In:
Miters Anatomy of the Dog, 494-558. Philadelphia, PA:
omentalization: a new techmique for management of pros-
tatic retention cysts in dogs. Vet Surg 26:202-209.
Saunders.
Bright RM, Birchard SJ, Long GG. 1982. Repair of thoracic
Matera JM, Tatarunas AC, Fantoni DT, et al. 2004. Use of the
wall defects in the dog with an omental pedicle flap. I Armt
srotum as a transposition flap for closure of surgical
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:278-282.
wounds in three dogs. Vet Surg 33:100-101.
Bright RM, Thacker HL. 1982. The formation of an omental
 pedicle flap and its experimental use in the repair of a
Tail Fold and VufvarFold Pyodermas
diaphragmatic rent in'a dog. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc
 Bellah J. 2006 Tail and perineal wounds. Vet Clir No Am
18:283-289.
36(4):913-929.
Brockman DJ, Pardo AD, Conzemius MG, et al. 1996.
White RAS. 2003. Surgical treatment of specific skin disor-
 Omentum-enhanced recons truction of chronic nonhealing
ders. In: Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animat Surgery, 3rd
wounds in cats: techniques and clinical use. Vet Surg
ed., 39-42. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
25:99-104.
658
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Plate 128
Omental Flap Options
INTRODUC TION
The omentum is a thin, lacy, mesothelial membrane with a rich capillary and lymphatic network. In
reconstructive surgery, the tissue can be mobilized to close body wall defects and facilitate the
revascularization and closure of problematic wounds. The omentum is essentially an anatomic purse, wifth
the epiploic foramen serving as the opening into the omental bursa. The dorsal and ventral surfaces of the
omentum can be unfolded and divided to increase its length, enabling it to reach more distant areas of the
patient.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) The surgeon's view of the omentum through a midline laparotomy.
(B) Stage 1: The omentum is lifted upward and cranially, exposing the dorsal surface of the omentum.
Scissors are used to divide its dorsal pancreatic attachment. A few small branches of the splenic artery
are ligated during this maneuver.
(C) This first-stage maneuver doubles the length of the omentum.
(D) Stage 2: Further lengthening can be accomplished by creating an inverted L incision using scissors,
e sa p  os a on pn  an go ais  a  
ligated during this maneuver. The initial incision crosses one-half to two-thirds of the width of the
sheet, completing the stage 2 extension of the omentum.
COMMENT S
The omentum has been used for decades to close and reinforce defects in the abdominal cavity, adjacent
 abdominal wall, and diaphragm."Omentalization" has become a code word for packing omentum into
abscesses or cystic cavifies to obliterate dead space: the omenfum also provides an alternative source of
also assists in the control of infection. Most intra-abdominal and abdominal wall defects can be closed
without lengthening the omentum. The omenfum may be of sufficient length for advancement into the
thoracic cavity and pelvic canal, without stage 1 lengthening. This can be performed if the intact omentum is
B  l s q   m e   o  a  n p
reconstruction using a synthetic mesh. This technique is considered inferior to the use of the latissimus dorsi
num spid aosnu au inq iae ae u ann rae an go ds au oi anp de aosn
the need for mesh reinforcement.
 Stage 1 extension of the omentum can be performed with little likelihood of significant circulatory
compromise. Further lengthening (stage 2) includes the added risk of circulatory compromise since collateral
distant body regions. When tunneled beneath the skin to reach the recipient area, care must be taken not to
compress or overly stretch this delicate tissue: collapse of the capillary circulation will result in omental
necrosis.
Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
659
Plate 128
660
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Scrotal Flap Technique
Plate 129
DESCRIPTION
The surface area of the scrotum varies considerably in individual dogs. In older intact males, the scrotum can
be advanced as a flap into adjacent problematic skin defects. The vascular supply to the scrotum is derived
from the collateral cutaneous blood supply perineal branches of the external pudendal artery, and
cremasteric artery. The ventral scrotal artery and dorsal scrotal artery anastomose to supply the overlying
scrotal tissue. These vascular branches course along the cranioventral surface of the testis, superficial to the
common vaginal tunic. Branches of the scrotal artery can be identified and preserved during flap elevation.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Ventral view of the scrofum and adjacent inguinal area. A skin defect is noted lateral to the scrotum.
(B) Close-up view of the scrotum and adjacent cutaneous wound. An incision is made at fthe adjacent base
of the scrotum. To preserve circulation, at least one-quarter of the circumference should be preserved.
Preservation of vascular branches supplying the scrotal tissue also is desirable. In this illustration, the
small area of skin interposed between the flap and wound bed (large dashed lines) can be excised to
facilitate scrotal advancement.
(C) Progressive elevation of the scrotal flap. The dartos and fascia can be carefully dissected from the scrotal
skin if necessary to improve flap advancement and coverage of the skin defect.
(D) Completion of the closure.
COMMENT S
The use of the scrotum as a source of skin for wound closure has been reported in the human literature.
surgeon direct access to each testicle. This technique should be kept in mind when a problematic wound
 Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
661
Plate 129
662
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Caudectomy for Tail Fold Intertrigo
Plate 130
DESCRIPTION
 English bulldogs, French bulldogs, and Boston terriers occasionally present with a somewhat fixed, deformed
can be used to assess the depth of this fur-lined crease: occasionally, ift is several cenfimeters in depth. The
deviated tail can cover the anus, making routine defecation problematic and cleansing of the area difficult
Dogs offen present with a history of scooting secondary to the dermatitis; owners may note an unpleasant
odor as a result of the debris accumulation and bacterial infection.
an luouai () pue aqaaa jesoon puouqe aun suoasan (t) je panap Aud si Aanins
preserved to fashion a new tail silhouette.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) A T incision is created caudal to the cranial skin fold at the base of the tail (dashed lines).
exposure of the coccygeal vertebrae anterior to the point of tail deviation. A Carmalt clamp can be
directed beneath the tail to protect the underlying dorsal rectal wall
(C) Bone cutters are then used to cut directly through or between the exposed vertebra. (Alternatively, some
surgeons will use a scalpel to divide between individual coccygeal vertebrae.) Electrocautery is normally
used to control bleeding vessels: vascular clips or ligatures may be used for larger vessels.
(D) With successful division of the vertebra, the loose terminal tail segment is grasped wifth forceps. Firm
traction is applied in a dorsal direction; this facilitates eversion of the invaginafed or recessed ventral
cutaneous fold. Metzenbaum scissors can be used to undermine and mobilize the ventral skin fold. A
curved incision is made at the ventral base of the tail fold (dashed line), completing the resection of the
tail and ventral skin crease.
(E) After resection of the tail and associated ventral skin folds, the area is lavaged and examined for any
remaining bleeding vessels prior to closure. Absorbable sufures may be used to close dead space prior
skin sutures are used to complete the skin closure. The large preserved cranial skin fold forms a
prominent peak, giving the semblance of a short, symmetrical tail.
COMMENT S
As noted, several textbooks advocate complete removal of the entire tail and associated folds. Preserving the
large cranial fold achieves a pleasing cosmetic tail silhouefte that better represents the appearance of the
breed. During amputation, care is taken to avoid deeper dissection that may perforate the dorsal rectal wall.
Dividing the tail with bone cutters is notably faster than attempting to dissect between individual vertebrae
with a scalpel blade.
 Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
663
Plate 130
664
Episioplasty
Plate 131
DE SC RIP TION
Episioplasty involves the resection of the redundant skin fold and subcutaneous fat dorsal and lateral to the
vulva. It is commonly performed in the management of chronic dermatitis (intertrigo), which forms in the
 skin crease created by the overlapping skin. In some patients, the skin infection promotes lower urinary tract
infections.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) General outline of the episiotomy (dashed line).A purse-string sufure is used to prevent fecal
contamination. The ends of this suture can be looped around the base of the tail and held with needle
holders or hemostats. This serves as a visual reminder to remove the purse string when surgery has
been completed. (Use of a purse string may also be recorded on the anesthesia sheet as an added
reminder to remove this suture at the completion of the surgery.)
(B) The dorsal midline border of the vulva is grasped with forceps and elevated to determine the
appropriate point for relocating the vulva. The scalpel blade can be used to nick or mark the skin at this
point. Two curved incisions are created: the dorsal incision encompasses the mark created; the second,
smaller, curved incision is created dorsal to the vulvar midline. The two incisions arc downward; the
dorsal incision is curved inward to meet the ventral incision. The hatched area can be resected to draw
the thigh skin ventral to the vulva apart. The resultant "thigh tuck" will reduce dermatitis associated
with skin contact at this level (arrows denote area of skin contact)
 It is important to remove the exposed redundant subcutaneous fat dorsal to the vulva prior to closure
of the surgical site. Electrocautery is used to control hemorrhage. (The author also has found the carbon
dioxide laser useful in resecting this redundant skin and subcutaneous tissue.)
(C) Absorbable intradermal, interrupted sutures are used to appose the cutaneous margins, followed by a
simple interrupted skin sufure pattern. Note how the skin resected (hatched area in B) creates slight
skin traction, thereby reducing skin contact (dermatitis) below the vulva and inner thigh area (arrows).
(D) Completion of the surgery is folowed by removal of the purse-string suture. Sutures are normally
removed 10-14 days postoperatively.
COMMENT S
Standard textbook articles fail to address the dermatitis that is occasionally noted below and anterior to the
vulva, especially in the larger dogs. Removal of a small amount of skin (B above) can separate the inner
thigh skin enough to better control the intertrigo occasionally noted.
Excessive removal of skin dorsal to the vulva can, in turn, create excessive tension on skin closure.
Wound dehiscence in the perineal area can result in a problematic defect due to the relative lack of mobile
skin.
The interrupted, intradermal suture patterm provides an added measure of security when closing the skin
 Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
665
Plate 131
666
Atlas of Small Animal Wound Management and Reconstructive Surgery
Closure Options for Select Pinnal
Plate 132
Defects
DESCRIPTION
Ninety-degree transposition flaps can be used to close a variety of cutaneous defects involving the pinna of
the dog and cat. The various flap options illustrated should be kept in mind for closure of problematic skin
 defects involving this structure.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
(A) Dorsal view of two transposition flap options to close defects involving the rostral and caudal border of
  dap 'aap aa e o a an o y a  pa  sd a d a
length and conformation of the pinna.
(B) Examples of two additional transposiftion flap options, rostral and caudal to pinnal defects. The body of
the flap can be folded, cupping a defect that involves both cutaneous surfaces of the pinna.
(C) In this example, a transposiftion flap is used to resurface a large skin defect involving the pinna. (Note
that the auricular axial pattern flap can be used to resurface the majority of the pinna. See Plate 57.)
(D) Pinnal defects can be tucked beneath the adjacent skin using a bipedicle or single pedicle flap technique
 aedde ur anun de us ioap yus,e go u e si su 'us ey saee au u
weeks, the base(s) of the flap can be incised in a staged fashion and sutured to complete the transfer. In
this illustration note the dotted line denotes the potential to create a"second" flap to close the
opposing surface of a pinnal defect. The first flap would overlap the border of the cartilaginous defect to
assure its revascularization prior to the staged elevation of this second smallflap.
COMMENT S
Flap coverage depends on the location and size of the pinnal defect. There is ample skin around the
perimeter of the ear to facilitate local flap elevation and transfer. Larger flaps used in closure occasionally
become edematous postoperatively, and the increased weight of the flap can cause the ear to occasionally
sag. Over a few weeks, swelling resolves as circulation improves. Keep in mind that the skin flap can be
thicker than the original cutaneous surface of the pinna requiring coverage. Hair growth also will vary.
Nonetheless, preserving the pinna is cosmetically more pleasing to the owner than resection of a large
segment of the pinna. In smaller mast cell tumors, excision of the underlying cartilage border may provide a
suitable base margin; the defect, in many cases, can be closed with a local transposition flap.
 Miscellaneous Reconstructive Surgical Techniques
667
Plate 132
Index
t = table
Advancement flap (Continued)
Aquasorb, 91
f = figures
single pedicle, 309, 310f, 318p-319p
ARDS (acute respiratory distress
p= plates
as tension relieving technique, 243, 244f
syndrome), 162
V-Y, 309
Arrector pili muscles, 4, 7, 8f
Aerosol, 62
Arrow wounds, 208-212, 210f
Abdomen
Air-powered projectiles, 197, 197f
management of, 211-212, 213f, 214f,
bite wounds, 168-169
Alar fold flaps, 590p-591p
215f
projectile injuries, 207, 207f, 208f, 209f,
Algicell, 94
Arteries, involved in axial pattern flaps,
213f, 214f
Algidex AG, 94
358, 364t-365t
Abdominal wall reconstruction, 489
Alginate dressings, 87-88, 87f
Artificial skin, 28
Abrasion, 33t
Alkalis, chemical burns from, 182-183,
Aspiration, of seromas, 151
Abscess, 20, 139, 141-143, 141f-143f
184f, 185t
Autocrine action, of cytokines, 18
Absorptive dressings, 85-88
Allevyn, 86
Autolytic debridement agents, 64-67
alginate dressings, 87-88, 87f
Allograft, 404
advantages of, 64
hypertonic saline d ressings, 88
Aloe vera, 67, 70
hydrophilic pastes and powders, 67
polyurethane foam, 85-86, 86f
Alpha-blocking agents, for frostbite, 192
wound gels, 65, 66f, 67
Accessory carpal pad, 538, 540f
Amnion dressings, equine
Avulsion, 33t
Access windows, in bandages, 100-101
Analgesics, for burn wounds, 178
Axial pattern flaps, 357-401
Accuzyme Ointment, 63t
Anal sacs, 10
ca udal auricular, 365t, 396p-397p
Acell Vet, 95
Anastomoses
caudal superficial epigastric, 358,
Acemannan, 65, 67, 71
choke, 483
359f-361f, 364t, 370p-371p,
Acid burns, 182-183, 183f, 185t
true vascular, 483
382p-383p
Acidosis, in burn patients, 176
Anemia
cranial superficial epigastric, 358, 364t,
Actinic radiation burns (solar radiation
in burn patients, 176
366f, 384p-385p
burns), 170, 228, 648
effect on wound healing, 130
 cutaneous arteries involved in, 358,
Actisorb,94
Angiogenesis, 11, 21-22
364t-365t
Active drains, 54-58, 54f-57f, 55t, 59f
Angiosome, 483
deep circumflex iliac, 358, 370p-371p
Acute respiratory distress synd rome
Angularis oris mucosal flap, 516,
dorsal branch, 364t, 386p-387p
(ARDS), 162
532p-533p
ventral branch, 24f, 364t, 367f, 368f,
Adaptic dressing, 85
 Antecubital wounds, bandage trauma
d169-d069d689-dg89
Adherent dressings, 83-84
to, 135
facial, 468p-469p
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
Antibiotics
flank fold flap, 358, 390p-391p
wet-to-dry dressings,65,83-84,84f
for bite wound infection, 170, 178-179
genicular, 358, 366f, 392p-393p
Adnexal re-epithelialization, healing by,
skin grafts and, 404
guidelines for flap development,
41-42, 42f
systemic (prophylactic), 139
364t-365t
Adriamycin, extravasation of, 133f
topical, 74-75, 178-179
island arterial flaps, 358, 366f, 367f
Advancement flap
Antimicrobial dressings, 93-94
lateral caudal, 365t, 400p-401 p
bipedicle,309,310f, 320p-321p
hydrogel dressings, 90
lateral thoracic,365t,378p-379p
polyhexamethylene biguanide
omocervical, 364t, 374p-375p
description of, 308, 309
(PHMB) impregnated sponges,
 planning, 358
labial, 438f, 439f
83,88, 94
reverse saphenous conduit flap, 358,
full-thickness labial for lower lip,
Antiseptic solutions, topical, 73
365t,368f,394p-395p
456p-457p
chlorhexidine diacetate, 73, 73f
right-angle design, 358
full-thickness labial for oronasal
 povidone-iodine solution, 73
secondary,358, 369
fistulas, 514, 515f, 516, 516f,
Tris-EDTA, 73
skin position and, 372p-373p
528p-529p
Antivenom,224-225
superficial brachial, 364t,80p-
full-thickness labial for upper lip,
Apinate dressings, 87-88
superficial temporal, 365t, 398p-399p
454p-455p
Apocrine sweat gland, 8f, 9, 10
thoracodorsal, 24f, 144f, 358, 362f-363f,
nasal reconstruction,577,578f,584p-585p
Aquacel, 94
364t, 370p-371p, 376p-377p
699
670
Index
B
Bite wounds (Continued)
Burrow's triangles, 318p
Bactigras, 85, 94
head and neck, 161f, 162f, 165-166,
 Butorphenol, for burn wounds, 178
Balanoposthitis, 616
166f
Ballistics
orthopedic injuries, 169
C
interior and exterior, 193, 200-201
spinal trauma,169
CAAPF. See Caudal auricular axial
terminal, 193, 201-203, 202f
thorax, 167-168, 167f
pattern flap (CAAPF)
Balsam of Peru, 63t
retention of fractured teeth,167,167f
Cadexomer iodine, in dressings, 94
Bandages
snakebite, 224-225, 224f, 226f
Calgitrol, 94
access windows, 100-101
systemic effects, 162
Caliber, bullet, 194
change frequency, 97
wild animals, 160-161
Cantilever suture technique, for nasal
composition, 82-99
Bleeding, along wound edge, 45
reconstruction, 582,596p-599p
primary layer, 82-96
Blood islands, 11
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 182
secondary layer, 97-98
Blood supply (circulation) cutaneous,
Carboxyhemoglobin, 182
tertiarylaye,98-99,98f,99
262p, 483, 566p,574, 660p
Carra Sorb M, 65
displacement, preventing, 99
Body brace, 102, 104, 106f, 124p-125p
CarraVet, 65, 66f
friction saddles, 99, 114p-115p
Bolz phallopexy technique, 636p, 640p
Cartilage grafts for palatal fistulas, 516,
tape stirrups, 99, 112p-113p
Bone,exposed,46,48,48f,15153,
530p-531p
 pressure points and
152f-154f
Castor oil, 63t
 padding dos and don'ts, 112p-113f
 Bony prominences
Casts, 101
padding under external splints, 102
pressure sores and, 216-221
Caterpillaring, tube flaps, 356p
pipe insulation protection
protection of, 102, 112p-113p, 217, 221
Caudal auricular axial pattern flap
technique, 230p-232p
Boot, protective, 108
(CAAPF), 317,365t, 396p-397p
reinforced (splints and casts), 101-102,
Brachycephalic facial fold surgery, 445,
Caudal sartorius muscle flap, 485, 489f,
103f-105f
476p-477p
498p-499p
role of, 82
Brown recluse spider bite, 133, 225
Caudal superficial epigastric axial
secondary layer, 97-98
Bruise, 33t
pattern flap, 358, 359f-361f,
application of, 97-98
Buccal rotation technique, 458p-459p
364t,370p-371p,382p-383p
thickness of, 97
Bullets, 193f, 194-195, 195f, 196f. See also
Caudectomy for tail fold intertrigo,
securing by tie-over technique, 100
Gunshot wounds
650f, 651, 652f, 662p-663p
spica, 82f, 102, 104f, 105f, 116p-117p
exploding, 199-200
Caustic agents, chemical burns from,
techniques
fragmentation, 202,203, 206
182-184, 183f, 184f, 185t
 basic application for extremities,
migrating, 208, 209f
Cavitation, in projectile injury, 201,
110p-111p
Burns, 170-181
202f, 203
for skin lap,101,10
 assessment of thermal injury, 177-178,
for skin grafts, 410f, 411, 414-415
177f
169
te-over, 100
axial pattern skin flap for, 360f
Cellulitis, 139, 140f, 141
thickness of, 97
chemical, 182-184, 183f, 184f, 185t
Cellulose dressings, 96
Basement membrane, 4, 7
classification, 171-172
Cephazolin, 404
BB projectiles, 197, 197f
clients, communication with, 173
Cervical collars, 108
Bears, bite wounds from, 160
contact, 171, 171f, 172f
Cervical-pharyngeal abscesses, 141, 142f
Bercaplermin, 65, 68
debridement, 179-180, 180f
Chalone,23
Bioactive dressings, 94-95
aggressive, 180, 180f
Cheilopexy for drooling, 443, 445,
chitosan dressings, 95
conservative, 179-180
478p-479p
collagen (extracellular matrix
delayed primary closure of, 40f
Cheiloschisis. See Clef lip repair
bioscaffold) dressings, 94-95
electrothermal, 27f, 184, 186-187, 187f,
Chemical burns, 182-184
Biobrane, 95
188f
callses, 182, 185t
Biodress, 91
epithelialization of wound, 24f
management, 182-184, 183f, 184f
Biological creep, 288, 289f
escharotomy, 179
Chemotherapeutic agents, wound
Biological tourniquet, 243
fluid and electrolyte problems, 175-177
healing and, 129-130, 130f
Bioscaffolding dressings, 95
acidosis, 176
Chinese finger-trap knot, 55
Bipedicle advancement flaps, 309, 310f,
anemia, 177
Chitosan
320p-321p, 519p-521p
hyperkalemia, 176
dressings, 95
Bipedicle distant direct flap (pouch)
hypernatremia, 175
in topical wound care products, 65, 67,
flap, 348p-353p
hypokalemia, 176
68
Bite wounds, 160-170
hyponatremia, 175-176
Chlorhexidine acetate
hemorrhage and blood loss, 162, 168
oliguria, 176
in dressings, 94
infection, 169-170
overload syndrome, 176
as topical antiseptic, 44, 73, 73f
initial patient assessment, 161-162,
fluid therapy for, 174-175
Chlorhexidine ointment, 74, 75
161f, 162f
fluid resuscitation formulas, 175
management, 162-165
friction/abrasion, 173f
63t
definitive, 163, 165
healing by adnexal re-epithelialization,
Choke anastomoses, 483
exploration of wound, 163, 164f,
41-42
Chondroitin sulfuric acid, 4
165
infection, 178
Chondrosarcoma, 484f
temporary care in critical patient,
initial wound management, 178
Chronic wounds, 130-131
162-163
nutritional support, 177
Circulation, skin, 10-13, 11f-14f
uncapping of puncture wounds,
 pathophysiology, 173
 cutaneous arteries, 12, 13f, 14f
163, 165
radiotherapy-associated, 189, 189f
middle (cutaneous) plexus, 1l, 12f
overview, 160
solar (actinic) radiation and, 187, 188f
subdermal plexus, 11, 1lf, 12f
rabies, 170
surface area, estimating, 173, 174, 174t 
superficial plexus, 11, 12,12f
regional considerations, 165-169
topical agents, 178-179
Circumanal glands, 9
abdomen, 168-169
types of burns, 170
Clean-contaminated wounds, 33, 34, 35f
extremities, 164f, 166-167, 167f
wound closure options, 180-181
Cleansing agent, definition of, 62
Index
671
Cleansing solutions, for wounds, 74, 74f
Curagel, 91
Diapers, use on large exudative
Clean wounds, 33, 34, 34f
Curasalt, 88
wounds,98
Cleft lip repair, 442, 444f, 470p-471p
Curasol Gel Wound Dressing, 65
Diaphragm, bite wounds involving.
Cleft palate, 512
Curasorb ZN, 87
168
Cleft palate repair, 512-514, 513f-514f
Curity Conforma Gel, 91
 Diaphragm defects, transversus
mucoperiosteal flap technique,
Cutaneous adnexa, 7-10, 8f
abdominis muscle flap for,
522p-523p
glands, 9, 10
504p-505p
 palatoplasty: bipedicle advancement
hair, 7, 8f, 9
Digital flaps for wound closure, 538,
technique, 519p-521p
Cutaneous asthenia, 14-15
54.3f-54.5f
Closure. See Cosmetic closure
Cutaneous trunci muscle, 10
major defects of digits two or five,
 techniques; Wound closure
Cutaneous trunci muscle flap, 485
548p-549p
Coat color, after clipping, 9
Cutaneous trunci myocutaneous flap,
major digital-interdigital defects,
Collagen
492p-493p
546p-547p
deposition in wound healing, 22-23,
Cuterebra sp.,71, 72f
Digital pad transfer, 538, 539f,
138
"Cut-out" of sutures, 276p
550p-551p
physical therapy effect on, 138
Cytokines, 11, 18-19
Dirty and infected wounds, 33, 34, 38f
remodeling, 27-28
Distant flap techniques, 337-356 
of skin dermis, 4, 6, 14-15
D
delay phenomenon, 342
strcture of, 22
Dartos, 649
direct flaps
synthetic, 28
Debridement
bipedicle (pouch) flap, 348p-353p
in topical wound care prod ucts, 65, 67,
adherent dressings, 83-84
description of, 338
68f, 71
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
single pedicle (hinge) flap, 339f,
in wound contraction, 26
wet-to-dry dressings, 83-84, 84f
340f,344p-347p
Collagenase, 21, 23, 27, 63t, 64
autolytic, 44,84,85,92
indirect flaps
Collageneous tissue dysplasia, 14
benefits for wound healing, 21
delayed tube flaps, 338, 341f, 342,
Collagen (extracellular matrix
biologic, 44, 71, 72f, 73
354p-356p
bioscaffold) dressings, 94-95
bite wound, 165
description of, 338
Collagen Hydrogel, 65
burn wound, 179-180, 180f
Dog ears, surgical correction of,
Collamend, 71
aggressive,180,180f
612p-613p
Collar
conservative, 179-180
Doughnut rings, 221
cervical, 108
enzymatic,44, 63-64,63t, 64f
Doxirubicin, extravasation of, 133
Eizabethan, 105-106, 107f, 108
hydrotherapy, 83
Drainage
Collodion, 62
layered,45
of bite wounds, 165
Colony-stimulating factor (CSF), 19
maggot debridement therapy, 71, 72f, 73
of seromas, 151
Composite dressing, 95
mechanical, 43, 44, 83-84
Drainage systems, 52-61
Compression injuries, 33
adherent dressings, 8-84
active drains, 54-58, 54f-57f, 55t, 59f
Congenital disorders, skin, 14-15
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
passive drains, 52-54, 52f-54f
cutaneous asthenia, 14-15
hyd rotherapy, 83
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
_epitheliogenesis imperfecta, 15
non-selective, 83
systems, 58, 60f, 61
Connective tissue growth factor
wet-to-dry dressings, 83-84, 84f
Draining tracts, 144f-148f, 145-146, 149,
(CTGF), 18, 19
wound irrigation, 83
150f
Contaminants, removal from wounds,
non-selective, 44, 83
dermal sinuses, 146, 149, 150f
45-46, 46f, 47f
selective, 43, 44, 64
foreign bodies and, 145-146, 146f,
Contaminated wounds, 33, 34, 36f
surgical,43,44-45,64,65,83,84
147f-148f
Continuous intradermal suture pattern,
topical products
 nasal dermoid sinus cyst (NDSC), 149
for tension relief, 276p-277p
autolytic agents, 64-67
Dressings, 82-96
Contraction. See wound contraction
enzymatic agents, 63-64, 63t, 64f
categories, 82-96
Contracture. See wound contracture
maggots, 71,72f, 73
absorptive dressings, 85-88
Contusion, 33t
wound irrigation, 83
alginate dressings, 87-88, 87f
Convita, 70
Debrisan, 71
hypertonic saline dressings, 88
Corticosteriod use, effect on wound 
Decubital ulcers. See Pressure sores
polyurethanefoam,85-86,86f
healing, 129
Deep circumflex iliac axial pattern flap,
adherent dressings, 83-84
Cosmetic closure techniques, 603-613
358,370p-371p
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
calises of scars, 604, 605f
dorsal branch, 364t, 386p-387p
wet-to-dry dressings, 83-84, 84f
dog ears, surgical correction of,
ventral branch, 24f, 364t, 367f, 368f,
miscellaneous dressings, 94-96
612p-613p
388p-389p,390p-391p
antimicrobial dressings, 93-94
minimizing scarring, 604, 606
Defatting skin grafts, 424p
bioactive dressings 94-95
scar concealment, 608p-609p
Degloving injury, 33t, 414f
cellulose dressings, 96
W-plasty, 610p-611p.
Dehiscence, 153-155, 155f, 156f
chitosan dressings, 95
Coyote, bite wounds from, 160
Delayed primary closure, 39, 40f
collagen (extracellular matrix
Cranial sartorius muscle flap, 485, 489f,
Delayed tube flaps, 338, 341f, 342,
bioscaffold) dressings, 94-95
500p-501p
354p-356p
liquid dressings, 95
Cranial superficial epigastric axial
 Delay phenomenon, 342
silicone dressings, 95-96
pattern flap, 358, 364t, 366f,
Dermal releasing incision, 268p-269p
spray-on dressings, 95
384p-385p
Dermal sinuses, 146, 149, 150f
 moisture-retentive dressings and
Cream, definition of, 62
Dermatitis, radiotherapy-associated, 189
occlusive dressings, 88-93
Cremaster muscle, 649
Dermatomes, 405, 413f, 426p-427p
hydrocolloid dressings, 9lf, 92,
CSF(colony-stimulating factor),19
Dermatosparaxis, 14
92f, 93f
CTGF (connective tissue growth factor),
Dermis, 4, 6, 6f
hydrogel dressings, 90-91, 91f
18, 19
Desoxyribonuclease, 63t
vapor-permeable films,93, 94f
Cultures, of bite wounds, 170
Desquamation, from radiotherapy, 189,
wet-to-wet dressings, 88-90, 89f,
Curafil Wound Gel, 65, 66f
189f
J06
672
Index
Dressings (Continued)
Epitheliogenesis imperfecta, 15
Facial reconstruction (Continued)
nonadherent (low adherent)
Eschar, 40f, 134, 172f, 173f, 177, 178,
inverse tubed skin flap,
dressings, 85, 85f
180f
464p-467p
cost factors, 96
Escharotomy, 179
lip fold pyoderma, surgery for, 434f
designer, 83
 Esmarch's principles of wound
lower labial avulsion repair, 435f,
functions of, 82
 management, 32t
446p-447p
ideal, properties of, 82
Everting suture patterns
lower labial lift-up technique,
interactive, 83, 91, 92
for minimization of scarring, 604, 606
460p-461p
moisture transmission values of, 88
for oral surgery, 512
oral commissure advancement, 440f,
practical considerations, 96
Evidence-based medicine, need for, 61
441f, 442-443, 445f, 474p-475p
securing unstable, 91
External abdominal oblique muscle
overview of, 434
with skin staples, 99, 105f
flap, 485, 486f-488f, 496p-497p
rectangular resection technique,
with tie-over technique, 100, 100f,
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 6-7
452p-453p
101f
Extremities
rostral labial pivot flaps, 472p-473p
for skin grafts, 411
axial pattern flaps, 361f-363f, 366f,
skin flap for upper labial and buccal
term, usage of, 82
368f, 378p-381p, 392p-395p
replacement, 468p-469p
topical agents compared to, 82-83, 88
bandaging techniques
upper labial avulsion repair, 436f,
wound, 82
 basic bandage application,
448p-449p
Dry-to-dry dressings, 84
110p-111p
upper labial pull-down technique,
Duoderm, 71, 92, 92f, 93f
Elasticon platform, 114p-115p
462p-463p
Schroeder-Thomas splint,
wedge resection technique,
E
118p-121p
450p-451p
ECM (extracellular matrix), 6-7
spica bandages/splints, 116p-117p
 Far-far-near-near suture pattern, for
Edema
tape stirrups, 112p-113p
tension relief, 276p-277p
burn wound, 175
bite wounds, 160f, 164f, 166-167, 167f
 Far-near-near-far suture pattern, for
effect on appearance of wound size, 235
distant flap techniques, 337-356
tension relief, 276p-277p
 pulmonary, in electrical injury, 186,
 exposed bone from shearing injury,
FGF (fibroblast growth factor), 18, 19
187
151-153, 152f, 153f
Fibracol, 94
reducing with hypertonic saline
foot pad reconstruction, 535-559
Fibrin, 7, 20-22
dressings, 88
free grafts, 406f-408f, 410f, 412f-414f
Fibrinolysin, 63t
ECF (epidermal growth factor), 18, 19
local flaps, 310f-311f, 313f, 316f
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 18, 19
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS), 14
muscle flaps for closure, 498p-501p,
Fibronectin, 7, 20-23, 26
Elapids, 224
506p-509p
Fibroplasia, 22-23
Elase, 63t
myocutaneous flaps, 492p-493p 
Film dressings, 93
Elastic fibers, 4
projectile injuries,200f, 201f, 205f
Fistula. See aiso Draining tracts
Elasticon, 98, 98f, 99, 99f
release incisions for wounds, multiple,
definition, 146
friction saddles, 99, 114p-115p
270p-271p
oronasal, repair of, 514, 516
Elastic wraps, 98-99, 98f, 99f
Exudative wounds
cartilage grafts, 516
Elbow
absorptive beads and powders, 70-71
full-thickness labial flap, 528p-529p
hygroma, 221-222, 223f
bandages for
mucosal flaps, 518p
pipe insulation protection for the
diapers as outer layer, 98
Flail chest, 168
elbow (PIPE), 230p-232p
secondary layer, 97
Flank fold flap, 358, 390p-391p
Electrical injuries, 184, 186-187
dressings for
Flaps. See also specific locations; specific
cauuses, 184, 186, 187f, 188f
alginate, 87
technigues
management,187
dry-to-dry, 84
axial pattern flap, 357-401
Electrolyte problems, in burn patients,
hydrocolloid, 92
delay phenomenon, 342
175-177
polyurethane foam, 85-86, 86f
distant flap techniques, 337-356
acidosis, 176
wet-to-dry, 83, 85
eyelid reconstruction, 562-571
hyperkalemia, 176
Eyelid reconstruction, 561-571
guidelines for,369
hypernatremia, 175
lip-to-lid pr0cedure, 562f, 563, 563f,
local flaps, 307-335
hypokalemia, 176
564p-567p
hyponatremia, 175-176
oral mucosal graft onto skin flap,
218-219, 221
Electromagnetic field treatment, 76
568p-569p
muscle, 482-489, 494p-509p
Electroporation, 186
third eyelid: skin flap reconstruction
myocutaneous, 482, 490p-493p,
Elizabethan collars, 105-106, 107f, 108
of lower eyelid, 570p-571p
506p-507p
Endocrine action, of cytokines, 18
for oral reconstruiction, 512-516,
Envenomation
518p-529p, 532p533p
snakebite, 224-225, 224f
Facial axial pattern flap, 468p-469p
for radiation wounds, 190-191
_spider bite,225
Facial reconstruction, 433-479
relaxing incision for tension relief,
Enzymatic debridement agents, 63-64,
anatomic considerations, 440, 442
284p-285p
63t, 64f
brachycephalic facial fold surgery,
survival, 308
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), 18, 19
445, 476p-477p
Flexipore, 86
Epidermal papillae, 4
buccal rotation technique, 458p-459p
Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle flap, 488,
Epidermalpegging，4
cheilopexy for drooling, 443, 445,
508p-509p
Epidermis, 4, 5f
478p-479p
Fluid therapy for burns, 174-175
Epiploic foramen, 648, 658p
cleft lip repair, 442, 444f, 470p-471p
 fluid resuscitation formulas, 175
Episioplasty, 664p-665p
full-thickness labial advancement
Foot pad reconstruction, 535-559
Epithelialization, 23, 24f, 25, 28
technique
accessory carpal pad,538, 540f
failure of, 134-135, 135f
lower lip, 456p-457p
digital flaps for wound closure, 538,
healing by adnexal re-epithelialization,
upper lip, 454p-455p
543f-545f
41-42, 42f
goals of, 434
 major defects of digits two or five,
second-intention healing, 39-41
labial/buccal reconstruction with
548p-549p
Index
673
Foot pad reconstruction (Continued)
Genicular axial pattern flap, 358, 366f,
Hematoma, 151, 168
major digital-interdigital defects,
392p-393p
HemCon Dressing, 95
546p-547p
Gentamycin ointment, 74, 75
Hemimandibulectomy, 442, 445f, 474p
digital pad transfer,538,539f,
Glands, cutaneous, 8f, 9-10
Hemorrhage
550p-551p
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 7
bite wounds and, 162, 168
fusion podoplasty, 538, 544,
Graft expansion, 413f,428p-429p
internal, 168
558p-559p
Grafts. See also Free grafts
Hemothorax, 167-168
metacarpal/metatarsal pad transfer,
for burn wounds, 180-181
Heterograft, 404
538,540f, 552p-553p
cartilage grafts for palatal fistulas, 516,
Hinge flap, 338, 339f, 340f, 344p-347p
overview, 536
530p-531p
mucoperiosteal flap technique, for
pad grafting,38,54f543f 554p-555p
pad grafting, 538, 541f-543f, 554p-557p
palate defects, 522p-523p
segmental technique, 556p-557p
for radiation wounds, 190-191
Hobbles, tape, 105
 pad laceration and lesion extension,
Granuflex, 92
Homograft, 404
536, 537f
Granulation tissue
Honey, as wound-care product, 68, 70
Foreign bodies
appearance of, 21, 22f
Horizontal mattress suture pattern, for
draining tracts and, 145-146, 146f,
chronic, 23, 28, 132
tension relief, 276p-277p
147f-148f
early, 21
H-plasty, 309, 318p
removal from wounds, 45-46, 46f, 47f
embedment in wound dressings, 85
Hyaluronan hydrogel, 90, 91
Forelimb fold flap, 334p-335p
as indicator of tissue viability, 43
Hyaluronic acid, of skin dermis, 4
Free grafts
infection of granulation beds, 404
Hydrocolloid dressings 91f, 92,92f,
antibiotic use with, 404, 411
over exposed bone, 46, 48f, 152, 153f,
93f
bandaging technique, 410f, 411,
154f
Hydrogels
414-415
problems with formation, 132-133, 132f
dressings, 90-91, 91f
classification of, 404-405
promotion of viable, 46, 48
for wound management, 65, 66f, 67
defatting, 424p
restrictive in indolent wounds, 135, 137
Hydrophilic pastes and powders, 67
degloving injuries and, 414f
_species variation in, 28
Hydrosorb, 86
dermatomes, 405, 413f, 426p-427p
Granulex, 63t, 64f
Hydrotherapy
description, 404
Greyhounds, 234
for burn wounds, 179, 179f
graft expansion, 413f, 428p-429p
Growth factors, 11, 18-19
as mechanical debridement, 83
graft thickness,405
Gunshot wounds
Hygroma
intraoperative considerations, 409
air-powered projectiles, 197, 197f
description, 221-222
mesh graft, 405
ballistics
fistulous tracts, 148f
examples of, 408f, 410f,412f-413f
interior and exterior, 193, 200-201
Penrose drain use, 148f, 222, 223f
with expansion units,428p-429p
terminal, 193, 201-203, 202f
surgical resection, 222
with scalpel blades, 430p-431p
diagnosis and management, 204-208,
Hyperbaric oxygen, 76
partial-coverage, 405
204f-209f
Hyperkalemia, in burn patients, 176
pinch graft, 405, 407f, 418p-419p
exploding bullets, 199-200
Hypernatremia, in burn patients,175
 preservation by refrigeration, 409
infection of gunshot wounds, 203-204
Hypertonic saline dressings, 88
punch graft, 405, 406f, 416p-417p
legal considerations, 212, 214
Hypodermis, 10
recipient bed for, 404
overview, 193-194
Hypokalemia, in burn patients, 176
sheet graft, 424p-425p
 centerfire and rimfire cartridges,
Hyponatremia, in burn patients,
split-thickness skin graft harvesting,
193, 193f
175-176
426p-427p
kinetic energy of projectiles,
Hypospadias
stamp graft, 405,422p-423p
193194, 203, 205206
description, 623, 623f, 624f, 625, 626f
strip graft, 405, 420p-421p
 projectile caliber and design, 194-196,
surgical management, 624f, 628,
Friction saddles, 99, 114p-115p
195f, 196f
642p-643p
Frostbite, 191-193
projectile components, 194, 194f
Hypovolemia, 130
assessment, 191, 192f
shotguns, 197-199, 198f-201f
Hypovolemic shock, 168
management, 191-193
overview,191
H
Full-thickness labial advancement 
Hair, 7, 8f,9
lamin Hydrating Gel, 65,68
technique
 color after clipping, 9
IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1), 18
lower lip, 456p-457p
growth after free graft, 405
Immune mediated vasculitis, 143, 144f,
for oronasal fistulas, 514, 515f, 516,
growth rate and pattern, 9
540f
516f, 528p-529p
surgery prep and, 44
Impairment injuries, 214-216, 215f, 216f,
upper lip, 454p-455p
vibrissae,9
217f
Full-thickness skin grafts, 405, 424, 568p
Halsted's principles of surgery, 32t
Incision, 33t
Fungal infection, 143, 144f
Hare-lip. See Cleft lip repair
Indolent "pocket” wounds, 135, 136f,
Fur. See Hair
Head and neck
137-138, 137f
Fusion podoplasty, 538, 544, 558p-559p
axial pattern flaps, 374p-375p,
Infection
396p-399p
abscess, 139, 141-143, 141f-143f
G
bite wounds, 161f, 162f, 165-166, 166f
bacterial cellulitis, 139, 140f, 141
GAGs (glycosaminoglycans), 7
impalement wounds, 214-216, 215f,
of bite wounds, 169-170
Gastrosplenic ligament, 648
216f
of burn wound, 178
Gauge, shotgun, 197-198
local flaps
fungal, 143, 144f
Gauze
advancement flap, single pedicle,
of granulation beds, 404
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
310f
of gunshot wounds, 203-204
reducing adherence to wound, 84
transposition flap, 312f, 314f
as wound healing complication,
wet-to-dry dressings, 83, 84f
muscle flaps for closure, 502p-503p
138-139, 140f-144f, 141-143
Gel
projectile injuries,206f,207f,208
Inflammation, signs of, 21
definition, 62
Heating pads, contact burns from, 170,
Inflammatory phase, wound healing.
hydrogels, 65, 66f, 67, 90-91, 91f
171, 171f, 172f
19-21
674
Index
 Inhalation injuries, 181-182
Labial/buccal reconstruction with
Marjolin ulcer, 131
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), 18
inverse tubed skin flap,
Mason metasplints, 101
 Integrins, in wound healing process,
464p-467p
Mast cell tumor
2023, 26
Labial mucosal inversion technique,
 axial pattern flaps for closure, 363f,
Integument. See Skin
577, 580f, 600p-601p
366f
Interferons, 19
Laceration
labial, 439f
Interleukins, 19
definition, 33t
phimosis secondary to, 618f
Interpolation flap, 309, 317, 328p-331p
foot pad, 536, 537f
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 7,
 Interrupted intradermal suture pattern,
Lands, of rifled barrel, 193, 212
19, 20, 22
for tension relief, 276p-277p
Laser therapy, 76
 Mattress sutures
 Intertrigo. See Pyoderma; Tail fold
Lateral caudal axial pattern flap, 365t,
presuturing technique for skin
intertrigo; Vulvar fold
400p-401p
stretching, 288, 296p-297p
pyoderma
Lateral thoracic axial pattern flap, 365t,
Intracell Gel, 65, 67
378p-379p
 Maturation and remodeling phase, of
Intracrine action, of cytokines, 18
Latissimus dorsi muscle flap, 483, 484f,
wound healing, 27-28
Intrasite Hydrogel, 65
485,494p-495p
Maxorb Extra Ag, 94
Intussceptive growth, 26
Latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap,
Mechanical creep,6,155,24,8
Invacare Hydrocolloid Dressing, 92
490p-491p
Mechanical debridement
loban, 93
Lavage, 46, 46f, 47f
 adherent dressings, 83-84
Iodine. See Povidone-iodine 
Legal issues, with projectile injuries,
dry-to-dry dressings, 84
lodosorb, 94
212, 214
wet-to-dry dressings, 65, 83-84, 84f
Irritating drugs, perivascular injection
Lesser peritoneal cavity, 648
hydrotherapy, 83
of, 133, 133f
Leukocytes, role in wound healing, 20
non-selective, 83
Island artril f
Lidocaine, application to gauze, 84
wound irrigation, 83
Island labial flaps, 577, 580f,
Limbs. See Extremities
Medications, effect on wound healing
592p-595p
Liniment, 62
129-130, 130f
Lip fold pyoderma, surgery for, 434f
Medifl, 65, 71
Lipoma, skin stretching from, 289f 
Melanocytes, 4
Jackson-Pratt Active Drain System, 54,
Lip-to-lid procedure, 238p, 564, 565f
Menu of surgical techniques, 236p-240p
54f
Liquid dressings, 95
Merocrine sweat gland, 9
Jelonet, 85
Live yeast cell derivative, 70
Mesh graft, 405
J-Vac closed drainage system, 54f, 57f
Local flaps, 307-335
examples of, 408f, 410f, 412f413f
advancement flaps, 308, 309
with expansion units, 428p-429p
K
bipedicle,309,310f, 320p-321p
with scalpel blades, 430p-431p
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), 18, 19
labial, 438f, 439f, 454p-455p,
 Metacarpal/metatarsal pad transfer,
Kinetic energy of projectiles, 193-194,
456p-457p
538, 540f, 552p-553p
203, 205-206
nasal reconstruction, 577, 578f,
Microwave irradiation, 76
 Kollagen, 71
584p-585p
MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases), 7,
K-Y Jelly, 44
single pedicle, 309, 310f, 318p-319p
19, 20, 22
caudal auricular axial pattern flap
Moisture-retentive dressings, 88-93
L
(CAAPF), 317
Moll's glands, 9
Labia
donor sites, 308-309
 Morphine sulfate, for burn wounds,
cleft lip repair, 442, 444f, 470p-471p
interpolation flap, 309,317,328p-331p
178
full-thickness labial advancement 
length of, 308-309
Mouth
technique
overview of, 308-309
 electrical burns of, 186, 187f, 188f
for closure of oronasal fistulas, 514,
rotation flap, 309, 332p-333p
reconstructive surgery (See Oral
515f,516, 516f, 528p-529p
transposition flap, 308, 309
reconstruction techniques)
lower lip, 456p-457p
forelimb fold flap,334p-335p
 Mucoperiosteal flap technique, for
upper lip,454p-455p
45 degrees, 326p-327p
palate defects, 513, 514f,
labial/buccal reconstruction with
labial/buccal reconstruction with
522p-523p
inverse tubed skin flap,
inverse tubed skin flap.
Mucosal flaps, for palatal defects, 514,
464p-467p
464p-467p
514f, 518p, 524p-525p
 labial mucosal inversion technique,
90 degrees, 308,
, 311f-314f, 316f,
 angularis oris mucosal flap, 516,
577, 580f, 600p-601p
322p-325p
532p-533p
lower labial avulsion repair, 435f,
Lotion, 62
soft palate/pharyngeal mucosal flap,
446p-447p
Lower labial avulsion repair, 435f,
526p-527p
lower labial lift-up technique,
446p-447p
Mueller Tape Remover, 99
460p-461p
Lower labial lift-up technique, 460p-461p
Muffler burn, 172f
musculofascial island labial flaps, 577,
Lyes, chemical burns from, 185t 
Muscle flaps, 482-489, 494p-509p
580f, 592p-595p
Lysosome stabilization, 129
caudal sartorius muscle, 485, 489f,
oral commissure advancement, 440f,
498p-499p
441f, 442-443, 445f, 474p-475p
M
classification, 482-483
rectangular resection technique,
 Macrophages, role in wound healing.
cranial sartorius muscle, 485, 489f,
452p-453p
20-21
500p-501p
rostral labial pivot flaps, 472p-473p
Mafenide, 179
cutaneous trunci muscle, 485
skin flap for upper labial and buccal
Maggot debridement therapy, 71, 72f, 73
description of, 482
replacement, 468p-469p
Malnorishment, effect on wound
external abdominal oblique muscle,
uper labial avulion repar,436f,
healing, 128-129, 128f
485, 486f-488f, 496p-497p
448p-449p
Maltodextrin, 65, 67, 71
flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, 488,
upper labial pull-down technique,
Mammary glands, 10
508p-509p
462p-463p
Manuka honey, 70
latissimus dorsi muscle, 483, 484f, 485,
wedge resection technique, 450p-451p
 Margination, of leukocytes, 20
494p-495p
Index
675
Muscle flaps (Continued)
Nu-Gel, 65, 90, 91
Palate defects, repair of. See Oral
semitendinosus muscle, 488,
Nutritional support, effect on wound
 reconstruction techniques
506p-507p
healing, 128-129, 128f
Palatine mucosal flap, 524p-525p
temporalis muscle, 488, 502p-503p
Palatoplasty: bipedicle advancement
transversus abdominis muscle, 488,
technique, 519p-521p
504p-505p
Oasis, 95
Panafil, 63t
Musculocutaneous flaps. See
Obesity, effect on skin laxity
 Panniculus muscles, 10
Myocutaneous flaps
Occlusive dressings, 88-93
Papain-urea (debridement agent), 63t
 Musculofascial island labial flaps, 577,
hydrogel dressings, 91
Paracrine action, of cytokines, 18
580f, 592p-595p
Occlusive tapes, 98
Paraphimosis
Myocutaneous flaps
Qintment, definition of, 62
causes, 617, 619, 620f
cutaneous trunci, 492p-493p
Oliguria, in burn patients, 176
strangulation necrosis second ary to,
description, 482
Omental bursa,648, 658p
620f, 627f, 628
latissimus dorsi, 490p-491p 
Omentum
surgical management, 619, 620f-622f,
secondary, 482
anatomy, 648
623
semitendinosus muscle, 506p-507p
omental flap options, 658p-659p
phallopexy, 619, 628, 640p-641p
 surgical applications, 648, 649f
preputial advancement technique,
N
Omocervical axial pattern flap, 364t,
619, 621f-622, 628, 636p-639p
Nasal anatomy, 574, 574f
374p-375p
 preputial orifice enlargement,
Nasal dermoid sinus cyst (NDSC), 149
Opsite,93
emergency, 625, 628
Nasal neoplasia, 312f, 575f, 576, 577,
Opsite Incise Drapes, 93
 preputial orifice enlargement,
578f-583f, 588p, 590p, 592p
OpSite Spray, 95
permanent, 628, 632p-633p
 Nasal reconstruction techniques,
Oral commissure advancement, 440f,
preputial ostium reduction, ventral,
573-601
441f, 442-443, 445f, 474p-475p
628,634p-635p
alar fold flaps, 590p-591p
 Oral reconstruction techniques,
Parkland formula, 175
bilateral alar cartilage flaps, 577, 579f
511-533
Parotid duct, 442
cantilever suture technique, 582,
angularis oris mucosal flap, 516,
Passive drains, 52-54, 52f-54f
596p-599p
532p-533p
Patient positioning, for wound closure,
labial mucosal inversion technique,
cartilage grafts for palatal fistulas, 516,
247, 252p-253p
577, 580f, 600p-601p
530p-531p
Patient presentation, wound
musculofascial island labial flaps, 577,
eft palate, 512-514
 management and, 32
580f, 592p-595p
left palate repair: mucoperiosteal flap
PDGF (platelet derived growth factors),
septal resection technique, 577,
technique, 513, 514f,
18-19
588p-589
522p-523p
 Pedicle grafts. Seealso Local flaps
skin advancement flaps, 577, 578f,
full-thickness labial flap closure of
axial pattern flap compared, 358
584p-585p
oronasal fistulas, 514, 515f, 516,
width of, 308
 stenosis of reconstructed nasal
516f, 528p-529p
Pellet projectiles, 197, 197f
 openings, 577
mucosal laps1451f,
Penetrating wound, 33t
sulcus flaps, 577, 586p-587p
overview, 512
Penis
traumatic wound management,
palatal defects/ oronasal fistulas, 514,
amputation, 619,623, 628
574-575, 575f
514f-516f
frenulum, persistent, 616, 617f
Nasal septal resection, 577, 588p-589 
palatine muicosal flap, 524p-525p
necrosis secondary to paraphimosis,
NDSC (nasal dermoid sinus cyst), 149
palatoplasty: bipedicle advancement
620f, 627f
Necrosis of skin, 45, 155, 156f
technique, 513, 519p-521p
Penrose drains
Neoplasia
soft palate/pharyngeal mucosal flap,
description and use of, 52-54, 52f-54f
axial pattern flaps for closure, 363f,
526p-527p
draining tracts from retained, 146,
366f, 368f
 suture materials, 512
148f
chemotherapeutic agents, wound
Oronasal fistulas, repair of, 514, 516
placement errors, 54
healing and, 129-130, 130f
cartilage grafts, 516
retrieval of retained drain, 53
digital, closure after resection of, 538,
full-thickness labial flap, 528p-529p
for seromas, 151
544f, 546p-549p
mucosal flaps, 518p
Pentoxifylline, for frostbite, 193
labial/facial, 310f, 437f, 439f, 440f,
Oropharyngeal mucosal flap,
Perforating wound, 33t
441f, 443f, 445f
526p-527p
Perianal glands, 9
muscle flaps for closure, 484f, 487f, 488f
 Orthopedic injuries
Perivascular injection of rritating
nasal, 312f, 575f, 576, 577, 578f-583f,
bite wounds, 169
drugs, 133, 133f
588p,590p,592p
exposed bone, 46,48, 48f, 151-153,
Persistent frenulum, 616, 617f
palatal, 514, 516, 516f
152f-154f
 Phagocytosis, by macrophages, 20
preputial, 616,618f, 619f
Orthoplast, 102
Phallopexy, 619,628, 640p-641p
surgical margins, 576
Osteosarcoma, 445f
Pharyngeal mucosal flap, for palatal
vulvar, 651-656
Overload syndrome, in burn patients,
defects, 526
Neovascularization, 21-22
176
Phimosis
Nerve growth factor (NGF), 18
Oxygen, hyperbaric, 76
causes, 616, 618f, 619f
Neutralizing agents, 183, 185t 
Oxymorphone, for burn wounds, 178
surgical management, 618, 618f,
 Neutrophils, role in wound healing, 20
632p-633p
Ninety-degree transposition flaps, 308,
P
PHMB (polyhexamethylene biguanide)
311f-314f, 316f, 322p-325p
Padding, dos and don'ts of, 112p-113p
impregnated sponges, 83, 88,
nasal sulcus, 577, 586p-587p
Pad graing,384f5f55455
94
for pinnal defects, 666p-667p
segmental technique, 556p-557p
Phototherapy, 76
Nitrofurazone, 74, 75
 Pad laceration and lesion extension,
 Pico-tesla electromagnetic field
Nonadherent (low adherent) dressings,
536, 537f
treatment, 76
85,85f
 Pad reconstruction. See Foot pad
Pilonidal sinuses, 146, 149, 150f
Nu-Derm, 87,92
reconstruction
Pinch graft, 405, 407f, 418p-419p
676
Index
Pinna
 Preputial reconstructive surgery,
Pyoderma (Continued)
 closure options for defects of, 657,
615-645
neoplasia and, 651, 656f
666p-667p
Preputial urethrostomy, 625, 627f,
surgical technique for, 651,
transposition flap for closure of, 315f
644p-645p
653f-656f, 657, 664p-665p
Pipe insulation
Preputiotomy, 625, 627f
Pyothorax, 167, 167f
pipe insulation protection for the
Pressure sores, 216-221, 217f
elbow (PIPE), 230p-232p
classification, 218, 219f, 219t
Q
use to pad Elizabethan collar, 107f,
management, 218-219,220f, 221
Quadritop Ointment, 619, 620f
108
postoperative care, 221
Quills, porcupine, 225, 227, 227f
Pivot flap. See also Rotation flap
prevention, 218
labial, 439f
Presuturing, skin stretching and, 288,
R
rostral labial, 472p-473p
296p-297p
Rabies, 161, 170
Plasminogen activator, 21, 22
Prickle cell layer, skin, 4
Radiation injuries, 187-191
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, 7
Primary capillary network, 11
causes, 187-190, 189f, 190f
 Plastic drapes, use to maintain
Primary closure, 37
management, 190-191
dressings and bandages, 93
delayed, 39, 40f
Radiotherapy
Platelet derived growth factors (PDGF),
Prisma, 94, 95
complications of, 187-191, 189f, 190f
18-19
Procollagen, 23
megavoltage, 188-189
 Platelets, role in wound healing, 20
Projectile injuries, 193-214 
orthovoltage, 188
Pneumothorax, 167-168
air-powered projectiles, 197,197f
Recluse spider bite, 225
Pocket wounds, 135, 136f, 137-138,
arrow wounds, 208-212, 210f
Reconstructive surgery
137f
management of, 211-212, 213f, 214f,
footpad, 535-559
Pododermatitis, fusion podoplasty for,
215f
preputial, 615-645
538,544,558p-559p
ballistics
Rectangular resection technique,
Podoplasty, fusion, 538, 544, 558p-559p
interior and exterior, 193, 200-201
452p-453p
 Polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB)
terminal, 193, 201-203, 202f
Regranex, 18-19, 65, 68
impregnated sponges, 83, 88,
diagnosis and management, 204-208,
Relaxing/releasing incisions, 243, 244f
94
204f-209f
for bipedicle advancement flap
Polymem Silver, 94
exploding bullets, 199-200
320p-321p
Polytracin dressings, 94
fragmentation of bullets, 202, 203, 206
"hidden" dermal, 268p-269p
Polyurethane films, 93
infection of gunshot wounds, 203-204
for indolent wounds, 136f
Polyurethane foam, 58, 85-86, 86f
legal considerations, 212, 214
multiple for extremity wounds,
Porcupine quills, 225, 227, 227f
migrating projectiles, 208, 209f
270p-271p
Pouch flap,348p-35
overview,193-194
to reduce flap tension, 284p-285p
Povidone-iodine
 projectile caliber and design, 194-196,
technique, 266p-267p
cleansing solution, 43-44, 73
195f, 196f
Replicare Hydrocolloid Dressing. 92
topical ointment, 74, 75
projectile components, 194, 194f
Restore Hydrocolloid Dressing, 92
Prepuce
shotguns, 197-199, 198f-201f
Retention sutures, 278p-279p
anatomy, 616
Proliferative phase, of wound healing.
Reticular (precollagen) fibers, 4
examination of, 616
21-26, 22f, 24f, 27f
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage, 168
surgical conditions, 616-625
epithelialization, 23, 24f, 25
Reverse saphenous conduit flap, 358,
hypospadias, 623, 623f, 624f, 625,
fibroplasia and collagen deposition,
365t, 368f,394p-395p
626f
22-23
Rib fracture, 168
paraphimosis, 617, 619, 620f-622f,
 neovascularization: angiogenesis,
Robinson sling, 108
623
21-22
Rodesian ridgebacks, pilonidal sinus in,
persistent frenulum, 616, 617f
wound contraction, 25-26, 27f
146, 149, 150f
phimosis, 616, 618f, 619f
Protective devices
Roman sandal knot, 55
surgical techniques
body (side) brace, 102, 104, 106f
Rostral labial pivot flaps, 472p-473p
 hypospadias management, 628,
cervical collars, 108 
Rotation flap, 309,332p-333p
642p-643p
Elizabethan collars, 105-106, 107f, 108
 Rounds. See Bullets
phallopexy, 628,640p-641p
slings, 108
Rule of nines, 173
preputial advancement technique,
tape hobbles, 105
628, 636p-639p
Proteoglycans, 7
 preputial orifice enlargement,
Pseudo-healing, 25
Saddle, Elasticon, 99, 114p-115p
emergency, 625, 628
Pulmonary edema, in electrical injury,
Santyl, 63t
 preputial orifice enlargement,
186, 187
Sarcoma
permanent, 628, 632p-633p
Punch graft, 405, 406f, 416p-417p
 axial pattern flaps for closure, 366f,
preputial ostium reduction, ventral,
induction of wound contracture and
368f
628, 634p-635p
epithelialization, 405, 406f-407f
facial, 443f
preputial urethrostomy, 625,627f,
Puncture wound
muscle flaps for closuure, 487f, 488f
644p-645p
definitions, 33t
Scar epithelium, 25
preputiotomy, 625, 627f
penetrating, 33t
Scars
ventral diversion of urine stream in
perforating,33t
breaking linear scar with W-plasty.
male dog, 628-629, 629f-630f
uncapping of, 163, 165
610p-611p
Preputial advancement technique, 628,
Purilon, 90
causes of, 604,605f
636p-639p
 Purse-string suture for drain anchoring
concealment, 608p-609p
Preputial muscle, 10, 616, 619
55
dog ears, surgical correction of,
Preputial orifice (ostium)
Pus, 20
612p-613p
enlargement, emergency, 625, 628
Pyoderma
excision of 138, 139f, 140f
enlargement, permanent, 628,
lip fold, 434
minimization of scarring, 604, 606
632p-633p
vulvar fold
surgical techniques, 604, 610p-611p
reduction, ventral, 628, 634p-635p
description, 651
suture considerations, 604, 606
Index
677
Scars (Continued)
Skin (Continued)
SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich
strength, 27
subdermal plexus, 11, 1lf, 12f
in cysteine), 7
as wound healing complication, 138,
superficial plexus, 11, 12, 12f
Spica bandages, 82f, 102, 104f, 105f,
139f, 140f
congenital disorders, 14-15
116p-117p
 Schroeder-Thomas splint, 102, 103f,
cutaneous asthenia, 14-15
Spica splint, 102, 105f, 116p-117p
104
epitheliogenesis imperfecta, 15
Spider bite, brown recluse, 133, 225
security band application, 122p-123p
elasticity, 4, 6, 6f, 10
Spinal trauma, with bite wounds, 169
function, 4
Splints, 101-102
Scotchcast, 101
laxity, 234, 242f
bandaging under, 102
Screw tail, 650. See also Tail fold
structure, 4-10, 5f
Schroeder-Thomas, 102, 103f, 104,
intertrigo
cutaneous adnexa, 7-10
118p-123p
Scrotum
glands, 9,10
 spica, 102, 105f, 116p-117p
anatomy, 649
hair, 7, 8f, 9
Split-thickness skin graft
 enlargement secondary to Sertoli cell
dermis, 4, 6, 6f
harvesting, 426p-427p
tumor, 649f
epidermis,4,5f
revascularization, 12
scrotal flap technique, 660p-661p
extracellular matrix, 6-7
Sponge, polyhexamethylene biguanide
 surgical application, 649
hypodermis, 10
(PHMB) impregnated, 83, 88,
Seasorb-Ag, 94
panniculus muscles, 10
94
Sebaceous glands, 7, 8f, 9, 10
thickness, 6
Spray-on dressings, 95
Secondary xial pattern flap,357,358,
Skin "directing," 246, 246f, 282p-283p
Squamous cell carcinoma
369
Skin expanders, 290f, 293-294,
labial/facial, 310f, 440f, 441f
Secondary closure, 38f, 39
293f-294f, 302p-305p
nail bed, 131f
Second-intention healing
 Skin flap. See also Flaps
nasal, 131f, 575f, 588p
failure to heal by, 132-138
bandaging techniques for, 101, 102f
palatal, 516f
epithelialization failure, 134-135,
for upper labial and buccal
vulvar, 656f
135f
replacement,468p-469p
Stamp graft, 405, 422p-423p
indolent "pocket" wounds, 135,
Skin graft. SeeFree grafts
Stent, 280p-281p
136f, 137-138, 137f
 Skin staples, to secure dressings, 99,
Stirrups, tape, 99, 112p-113p
perivascular injection of irritating
105f
Stratum basalae, 4
drugs, 133, 133f
Skin stretchers, 288-290, 290f-292f, 293
Stratum cornium, 4
 problems with granulation tissue
application of, 298p-299p
Stratum cylindricum, 4
formation, 132-133, 132f
substitution for presuturing
Stratum germinativum, 4
wound contraction failure, 134
300p-301p
Stratum malpighii, 4
process, 39-41
for tension relief, 242, 245f, 246-247,
Stratum papillare, 6
Seed grafts. See Pinch graft
274p-275p
Stratum reticulare, 6
 Semiocclusive dressings, 86
Skin stretching, 287-305
 Stratum spinosum, 4
 Semitendinosus muscle flap, 488,
kit, 290f
 Stress relaxation, 6
506p-507p
natural examples of, 288, 289f
Stretching skin. See Skin stretchers; Skin
 Semitendinosus myocutaneous flaps,
physiology of, 288
stretching
506p-507p
presuturing,288,296p-297p
Strip graft,405,420p-421p
Serine proteases, 7
skin expanders, 290f, 293-294,
Stromal tissue, 7
Seroma, 150-151, 222
293f-294f, 302p-305p
Subcutis. See Hypodermis
Serpins, 7
skin stretchers, 288-290, 290f-292f, 293
Subdermal plexus, 1l, 11f, 12f
Sertoli cell tumor, scrotal enlargement
application of, 298p-299p
Subdermal plexus flap, for eyelid
 secondary to, 649f
substitution for presuturing
procedure, 562,564p-567p
Shearing injuries, 32-33
300p-301p
Sugar, as wound-care product, 68, 70
Sheet graft, 424p-425p
Skin tension
Superficial brachial axial pattern flap,
Shivering, 10
assessment of, 39-41
364t, 380p-381p
Shotguns, 197-199, 198f-201f
effects on wound closure, 250p-251p
 Superficial temporal axial pattern flap,
Side brace. See Body brace
lines of skin tension, 243, 248p-249p
365t, 398p-399p
Silicone dressings, 95-96
patient variations in, 242, 242f
Surgery principles, Halsted’s, 32t
Silvadene, 179
surgical considerations, 242-243
Surgical debridement, 83, 84
Silvasorb, 94
tension relieving techniques, 241-285
Surgical margins, neoplasia and, 576
Silvercel, 94
viscoelastic properties of skin,
Surgical tape, 98, 99
Silver ions, in dressings, 87, 94
246-247
Surgical technique menu, 236p-240p
Silver-lon CA, 94
Sliding flap. See Advancement flap
Surgilav, 46, 47f
Silver sulfadiazine ointment, 74, 74f, 75,
Slings, 108
Suture patterns
179, 181, 404
 Small intestinal submucosa (SIS), in 
buried "tacking" sutures for seromas,
Single pedicle advancement flap
dressings, 95
151
(SPAF), 309, 310f, 318p-319p
Smoke inhalation, 181-182
mattress sutures for presuturing
nasal reconstruction, 584p-585p
Snakebite, 224-225, 224f, 226f
technique for skin stretching
Single pedicle (hinge) flap, 338, 339f,
Sof-Foam, 86
288, 296p-297p
340f, 344p-347p
Sofra-Tulle, 85
for oral reconstruction surgery, 512,
Sinus, 146
d leson eauieueed o
520p-521p
526p-527p
tension relieving techniques,
syndrome), 162
 Solar (actinic) radiation, burns from,
276p-277p
Skin,3-15
187, 188f
continuous intradermal, 276p-277p
artificial, 28
Solvents, for adhesive tape, 99
far-far-near-near, 276p-277p
circulation, 10-13,11f-14f
Sorbsan Silver, 94
far-near-near-far, 276p-277p
cutaneous arteries, 12, 13f, 14f
Sorbsan, 87
horizontal mattress, 276p-277p
middle (cutaneous) plexus, 11,
 SPAF. See Single pedicle advancement
interrupted intradermal, 276p-277p
12f
flap (SPAF)
vertical mattress, 276p-277p
678
Index
Sutures
 Tension relieving techniques
Transposition flap (Continued)
 braided, nonabsorbable sutures and
(Continued)
 third eyelid: skin flap reconstruction
draining tracts, 145
V-Y plasty, 258p-259p
of lower eyelid, 570p-571p
for foot pad surgery, 536
walking suture technique, 272p-273p
forelimb fold flap, 334p-335p
for minimization of scarring, 604, 606
Z plasty, 246, 260p-265p
45 degrees, 326p-327p
for oral reconstruction surgery,512
multiple Z-plasties, 264p-265p
for indolent wounds, 136f, 137f
Sweat glands, 8f, 9, 10
technique option 1, 260p-261p
labial/buccal reconstruction with
Systemic inflammatory response
technique option Il, 262p-263p
inverse tubed skin flap,
 syndrome (SIRS), 162
Tertiary wraps (bandages), 98-99, 98f,
464p-467p
99f
in nasal reconstruction
T
TGF-α (transforming growth factor-
bilateral alar cartilage flaps,
Tail
alpha ),18, 19
586p-587p
amputation for tail fold intertrigo,
nasal sulcus, 577, 586p-587p
650f, 651, 652f, 662p-663p
), 18, 19
90 degrees,66p-667p,308,311f31f,
bandaging technique, Elasticon
Thigh tuck, 653f, 655f, 664p
316f, 322p-325p, 577,
 platform, 114p-115p
 Third eyelid: skin flap reconstruction of
586p-587p
lateral caudal (tail) axial pattern flaps,
lower eyelid, 570p-571p
for palatal deects,514,516,51,
400p-401p
 Thoracic wall reconstruction, omental
524p-525p
 Tail fold intertrigo
flap use in, 648, 649f, 658p
for pinnal defects, 666p-667p
caudectomy for, 650f, 651, 652f,
Thoracocentesis, 167-168
as tension relieving technique, 243,
662p-663p
 Thoracodorsal axial pattern flap, 24f,
244f, 246
dinical signs, 651
144f, 358, 362f-363f, 364t,
Transversus abdominis muscle flap,
description, 650-651, 650f, 651f
370p-371p, 376p-377p
488, 504p-505p
Tape
Thorax
elastic wraps, 98, 98f, 99, 99f
bite wounds, 167-168, 167f
definition of,18
solvents for removal of, 99
impalement wounds, 215
indirect and direct, 169
surgical, 98, 99
projectile injuries,204f,207-208,f,
nasal, 574-575
Tape hobbles, 105
214f
Tripeptide copper complex, 65, 67-68
Tape stirrups, 99, 112p-113p
 Thrombospondin, 7
Triple antibiotic ointment, 74, 75, 404,
Teeth, retention in bite wounds, 167,
Thromboxane A, 186
411
167f
Tielle, 91
Tris-EDTA,73
Tegaderm, 71, 87, 92, 93, 94f
 Tie-over dressing/bandage technique,
Tropocollagen, 23
Tegapore, 71, 87
100, 100f, 101f, 142f
Trunk
Telfa pads, 85, 85f
Tissue inhibitors of matrix
axial pattern flaps, 359f, 360f, 363f,
Temporalis muscle flap, 488, 502p-503p
metalloproteinase (TIMP), 7,
366f-368f, 370p-371p,
Tenascin, 7
19, 20, 27
376p-377p, 382p-391p
Tensile strength, of healing tissue, 27
Tissue (skin) expanders, 290f, 293-294,
bandaging techniques
Tension injuries, 33
293f-294f, 302p-305p
body brace, 124p-125p
Tension lines, 248p-249p
Topical wound care products, 61-75
Elasticon saddle, 114p-115p
Tension relieving techniques, 241-285
absorptive beads and powders, 70-71
muscle flaps for closure, 494p-497p
geometric patterns to facilitate wound
antimicrobial agents, 74-75, 75f,
myocutaneous flaps, 490p-491p
closure, 256p-257p
178-179
as source of donor skin, 234-235
circular closure, 256p-257p
antiseptic solutions, 73, 73f
Trypsin, 63t
crescent closure, 256p-257p
autolytic debridement agents, 64-67
Tube flaps, 338, 341f, 354p-356p
elliptical closure, 256p-257p
for burn wounds, 178-179
 delay phenomenon, 342
rectangular closure, 256p-257p
definitions, 62
Tumbling, tube flaps, 356p
triangular closure, 256p-257p
enzymatic debridement agents, 63-64,
patient positioning techniques, 247,
63t, 64f
U
252p-253p
Ulceration
relaxing/releasing incisions, 243, 244f
73
decubital ulcers (See Pressure sores)
"hidden"dermal, 268p-269p
natural products, 68-70
footpad, 536, 539f
multiple for extremity wounds,
overview, 61-62
radiotherapy-associated, 189, 190f, 191
270p-271p
wound-cleansing solutions, 74, 74f
Ultrasan, 65
to reduce flap tension, 284p-285p
wound-healing enhancers, 67-68, 68f,
Uncapping of puncture wounds, 163,
technique, 266p-267p
69f
165
retention sutures, 278p-279p
Tourniquet, biological, 243
Undermining skin, 242, 246,254p-255p
skin "directing” for maximum
Tourniquet use, 149-150
Upper labial avulsion repair, 436f,
coverage,246,246f,282p-28p
Trachea, bite wounds to, 161f, 162f, 166
448p-449p
skin stretchers to offset incisional
 Transforming growth factor-alpha
Upper labial pull-down technique,
tension, 245f, 273p-274p
(TGF-α), 18, 19
462p-463p
stent, 280p-281p
 Transforming growth factor-beta
Urethral prolapse, 616, 617f
tension suture patterns, 276p-277p
(TGF-β), 18, 19
Urethrostomy, preputial, 625, 627f,
continuous intradermal, 276p-277p
 Transmissible venereal tumor, phimosis
644p-645p
far-far-near-near, 276p-277p
secondary to, 619f
Urinary bladder matrix (UBM), 95
Transposition flap
Urinary bladder submucosa (UBS), 95
horizontal mattress, 276p-277p
for burn closure, 40f
Urine stream, ventral diversion in male
interrupted intradermal, 276p-277p
description of, 308, 309
dog. 628-629, 629f-630f
vertical mattress, 276p-277p
examples, 311f-316f
undermining skin, 242, 246, 254p-255p
eyelid reconstruction
V
viscoeleastic properties of skin,
 oral mucosal graft onto skin flap,
Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
utilizing,245f, 246-247,246f
568p-569p
systems, 58, 60f, 61, 78p-80p
Index
679
Vacuum drains, 54-61, 54f-57f
Wound care products (Continued)
Wound contraction (Continued)
 advantages over Penrose drains, 55
 mechanical stimulants, 76
time limit on, 134
instructions for pet owners, 55t
selecting appropriate,76
as wound healing complication, 138,
 noncommercial active drain systems,
topical, 61-75 
139f, 140f
58
 absorptive beads and powders,
Wound contracture, 26, 41, 48, 127, 134,
retro-flushing to clear obstructions, 55
70-71
138, 140f, 181
for seromas, 151
antimicrobial agents, 74-75, 75f
Wound dehiscence, 153-155, 155f,
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
antiseptic solutions, 73
156f
systems, 58, 60f, 61, 78p-80p
chlorhexidine diacetate, 73, 73f
Wound edges, bleeding of, 45
VAC (vacuum-assisted closure)
povidone-iodine solution, 73
Wound gels, 65, 66f, 67
systems, 58, 60f, 61, 78p-80p
Tris-EDTA, 73
Wound healing, 18-28
Vapor-permeable films, 93, 93f
autolytic debridement agents,
complications, 127-156
Vascular bed, promotion of viable, 46,
64-67
chemotherapeutic agent use,
48
 hydrophilic pastes and powders,
129-130, 130f
Vascular endothelial growth factor
67
corticosteriod use, 129
(VEGF), 18
wound gels, 65, 66f, 67
draining tracts, 145-146, 145f-148f,
Vasculogenesis, 10-11
definitions, 62
149, 150f
Velpeau sling, 108
enzymatic debridement agents,
exposed bone, 151-153, 152f-154f
Venom
63-64, 63t, 64f
failure to heal by second intention,
snake, 224-225, 224f
maggot debridement therapy, 71,
132-138
spider, 225
72f, 73
general considerations, 130-131
Vertical mattress suture pattern
natural products, 68-70
hematomas, 151
for oral surgery, 512, 520p-521p
aloe vera, 70
hypovolemia and anemia, 130
presuturing technigue for skin
honey and sugar, 68-70
improper nutritional support,
stretching, 296p-297p
live yeast cell derivative, 70
128-129, 128f
for tension relief, 276p-277p
overview, 61-62
infection, 138-139, 140f-144f,
Vesicants, chemical burns from, 185t
wound-cleansing solutions, 74, 74f
141-143
Vet BioSISt, 95
wound-healing enhancers,67-68,
scarring and wound contracture,
VetWrap, 98, 98f, 99, 99f, 149-150
68f, 69f
138, 139f, 140f
Viability of tissue, assessment of, 43, 45
Wound classification, 33-34
seromas, 150-151
Vibrissae,9
age of wound, 34
tourniquet use, 149-150
Vi-Drape, 93
clean,33,34,34f
wound dehiscence, 153-155, 155f,
Vigilon, 91
clean-contaminated, 33, 34, 35f
156f
Vipers, 224
contaminated,33, 34,36f
cytokine regulation of, 18-19
Viscoelastic properties of skin, 245f,
dirty and infected, 33, 34, 38f
failure to heal by second intention,
246-247, 246f
Wound closure
132-138
Vitamins, effect on wound healing, 22,
geometric patterns to facilitate closure,
epithelialization failure, 134-135,
129
256p-257p
135f
Vulvar fold pyoderma
circular closure, 256p-257p
indolent "pocket" wounds, 135,
description, 651
crescent closure, 256p-257p
136f, 137-138, 137f
neoplasia and, 651, 656f
elliptical closure, 256p-257p
 perivascular injection of irritating
surgical technique for, 651, 653f-656f,
rectangular closure, 256p-257p
drugs, 133, 133f
657,664p-665p
triangular closure, 256p-257p
 problems with granulation tissue
V-Y plasty, 258p-259p
options,35-42
formation, 132-133, 132f
delayed primary closure, 39, 40f
wound contraction failure, 134
W
healing by adnexal
golden period, 34
Walking suture, 24f, 246, 272p-273p
re-epithelialization, 41-42, 42f
phases of, 19-28
Waltzing, tube flaps, 356p
primary closure, 37
inflammatory phase, 19-21
Wedge resection technique, 450p-451p
secondary closure, 38f,39
 maturation and remodeling phase,
Wet-to-dry dressings, 65, 83-84, 84f
second-intention healing, 39-41
27-28
Wet-to-wet dressings, 88-90, 89f, 90f,
patient positioning for, 247,
proliferative phase, 21-26, 22f,24f,
179
252p-253p
27f
Wild animals, bite wounds from,
selecting technique for, 42-43, 48-49
species variation in, 28
160-161
 skin tension effects on, 250p-251p
Wound irrigation, as mechanical
Wolf, bite wounds from, 160
steps, 43-49
debridement, 83
Wound
debridement, 44-45
Wound management principles,
age, 34-35
 prevention of further
31-49
care products, 51-79
contamination, 43-44
age of wound, 34-35
classification,33-34
removal of foreign debris and
Esmarch's, 32t
definition of, 18
contaminants, 45-46, 46f, 47f
patient presentation, 32
dehiscence, 153-155, 155f, 156f
selection of closure method, 48-49
terminology,32-33, 33t
healing, 18-28
vascular bed, promotion of viable,
wound classification, 33-34
 management principles, 31-49
46, 48
clean, 33,34, 34f
Wound care products,5179
wound drainage, 46
dean-contaminated, 33, 34, 35f
drainage systems, 52-61
Wound contraction
contaminated, 33,34, 36f
active drains, 54-58, 54f-57f, 55t,
of burn wounds, 181
dirty and infected, 33, 34, 38f
59f
cellular events of, 25-26
wound closure
passive drains, 52-54, 52f-54f
dinical considerations, 26
options, 35-42
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
failure of, 134
selecting technique for, 42-43,
systems, 58, 60f, 61, 78p-80p
hydrogel dressings and, 91
4849
hyperbaric oxygen, 76
second-intention healing, 39-41
steps, 4349
680
Index
Wound module, 21
Y
Z plasty, 246, 260p-265p
Wound size, effect of edema on 
Yeast cell extract, 70
multiple Z-plasties, 264p-265p
appearance of, 235
technique option 1, 260p-261p
W-plasty, 6i0p-611p
Z
Zimmer dermatome, 413p, 424p, 426p
X
Zinc, effects on wound healing, 129
XCell, 96
Zonas tape, 98
t0t 'e1souax
Xerofoam, 85